THE REFLECTIONS ON THE XXVIII PROPOSITIONS TOUCHING THE DOCTRINE OF THE
TRINITY, In a LETTER to the Clergy, etc. maintained, against the Third Defense
of the said Propositions.

By the same Hand.

1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus.

Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

The REFLECTIONS upon the XXVIII PROPOSITIONS, etc. maintained.
THough there is nothing in the third Defense of the 28 Propositions, etc. that
can (as far as I can perceive) enervate the least Objection that is urged in my
Letter; yet because the Doctrine therein maintained tends to subvert the
Foundation of the Christian Religion, by introducing a Plurality of Gods, I
cannot but think my self in Conscience obliged to show the Vanity of those
Pretenses that are urged in its behalf, especially since the Defender's writing
with so great an Assurance of his own Performance, and so much contempt of the
Reflections, may have some influence upon some weak and prejudiced Readers.

Had the Author designed a just Defense of the Doctrine of the Trinity, he
should have taken notice of what is said against it in general, but more
especially of what is urged against the real Trinitarians, wherein he is
equally concerned with them, and not only of those additional Absurdities of
his own Hypothesis. Therefore I shall now set down his Opinion, both as I find
it in his Propositions, and in the Defenses of them, and then show the weakness
of his Notions, either with new Arguments, or at least with enforcing those
that were mentioned in my Reflections.

The Defender in his Propositions asserts, That there are three Eternal and
necessary Divine Beings or Substances, each of which has unlimited Power,
Wisdom and Goodness; and that so many Men or Angels are not more expressly
distinguished in Scripture, as different Persons or Substances, Prop. 16, 17.
And page 8. of the second Defense; I do affirm the Son and Spirit to be
absolutely perfect Beings, in reference to the Perfections of their Nature,
they are all boundless and Infinite; So page 10. The Father's Existence being
without a Cause, does not make him to have another sort of Nature from that of
the Son and Spirit, which may be a necessary Nature and uncreated, and
constituted of all the boundless Perfections of which the Nature of the Father
consists, abstracted from the consideration of the manner of his Existence: and
in the same Page, The Divine Nature (speaking of the Nature of each) does
comprehend all Perfections. So page 11. An Essence of the same Kind, though not
the same numerical One. So that here are three divine eternal necessary Natures
or Essences, as different as three Human or Angelical Natures; which at first
sight appear as much to be three Gods as three human Natures to be three Men;
which is a revolting to Polytheism or Plurality of Gods, except he can show
that either two of these Divine Natures are not Gods, or that these three
Divine Natures are but one God. We will therefore see what he says to these
two Points.

1. He says, that the Name of God is used in more senses than one in Scripture.
In the highest Sense the Father alone is God; he is the only Independent, the
only True, the only Good and Great, and Self-existent God. The Son and Spirit
have a right to the Name of God, next to that which is appropriated to the
Father; they depend on him with an entire dependence, both for their Being and
continuance in Being. But is not this inconsistent with what is said before,
because it is first to assert, that the different Ways or Manners of having
their Natures does not make any difference in their Natures, the second and
third are as truly Divine as the First; and then in effect to suppose it does,
because the Father has several Perfections the others are incapable of? To this
he replies, the Perfections the Father has above them belong immediately to his
Existence, not to his Nature: but what is Existence abstracted from the Nature
that exists, but a Chimera? If the Nature did not exist, it would not be a
Nature. To say such a Nature exists, is to say, it is not only in our
imagination, but really or in act: To make the Existence of a Nature a distinct
thing from the Nature that exists, and to suppose it to be the Subject in which
the Attributes or Perfections of Independance, and being the first Original of
all things, do exist, is to suppose it a Substance, because we have no other
Idea of a Substance, but that it is a Subject in which Properties exist, which
would be to make two distinct Substances in God; his Nature that exists, and
the Existence of his Nature abstracted from the Nature. What is the Existence
of God the Father, but the Existence of the Nature of God the Father, except he
exists distinct from his Nature? And consequently, if Self-existence be so
great a Perfection, it shows that the selfexistent Nature of the Father is
more perfect than the not self-existent Nature of the Son.

But suppose Self-existence, which is Existence of the Father, belongs to the
Existence of the Father, (which by the way is only supposing Existence to
belong to Existence); yet Self-existence, as I observed in my Letter, is only a
Perfection as it supposes necessary or independent Existence, and all those
Perfections that belong to a necessary or self-existent Nature: so that
Self-existence barely considered in it self, abstractedly from those
Perfections, notwithstanding his denial, is no more a Perfection than any other
way of having Existence, if that way supposes the same Perfections. As suppose
there was some Matter self-existent, and some other Matter not self-existent,
and the Nature of the one were not any way different from the Nature of the
other, would they not be both equally Perfect? and a parcel of Guinea's made of
the One, be as good as a parcel of Guinea's made of the other? Or how could it
be possible (they being alike for Weight, Color, Duration, etc.) to
distinguish them? And if it be so in lower Natures, the reason is the same in
the highest Natures. But however, to carry the Simily as high as we can:
suppose a Human self-existent Father had two Sons, who had all the Perfections
of Human Nature, and did as necessarily and independently exist as He; there
can be no reason assigned, but that they would be Men in the highest Sense, and
as absolutely perfect as the Father. He says, in page 44. of the first
Defense, That if a Human Father could be supposed to be Self-existent, and that
his Sons had the now mentioned kind of Dependence upon him, (viz. as the Light
on the Sun) the consequence must be, that their Nature is short of the
Perfection of their Father's Nature, notwithstanding the many Properties they
agree in: which is owning, that Self-existence and Independence belong to the
Nature, and that therefore the Nature of the Father is different from the
Nature of the Son and Spirit, whose Natures are short of the Perfections of the
Father's Nature, and consequently their Natures are not Divine, because the
Divine Nature contains all Perfections; but theirs want those that not only in
themselves are the greatest and most excellent, but the want of which is (as he
says page 7.) an abatement of all other Perfections: And if the Father's
Nature is independent, and the Son's and Spirit's dependent, it shows they have
different kinds of Nature, as different, nay as opposite as Dependent and
Independent.

But what can be a more staring Contradiction, than that Beings that do
eternally and necessarily exist, and are Almighty, yet notwithstanding this
have not a Power to keep themselves in Life and Being, no not a Moment, and yet
at the same time have a Power inherent in themselves from all Eternity, to give
Life and Being to all things whatever; which also do entirely depend on them
for the continuation of the same? It is a contradiction to say a necessary
Nature is dependent, because a necessary Nature is that Nature which contains
in it self the formal Reason why it cannot but be: but a dependent Nature is so
far from having any thing in it self that makes it necessarily exist, that it
not only owes to another its Existence, but hourly depends upon another (having
no Power in its self) to continue it in Existence; which is the dependence of a
Creature, not of a Creator: Is not a dependent Creator as great a Contradiction
as an independent Creature? And did ever any but our Author join necessary
Existence and Dependence together? How can they, as I intimated Sect. 62.
having necessary Existence, be said more to depend on the Father for their
continuance in Being, than the Father on them? since they as necessarily and as
eternally exist as he, who can no more hinder theirs, than his own Existence;
nor could he more forbear emaning them from all Eternity, than existing
himself. And if his Existence was without a Cause, his emaning must be so too,
since the one was as necessary and eternal as the other: In created Beings all
necessary Emanations have the same cause as the Beings from whence they emane;
but God having no Cause of his Being, his necessary Emanations must have no
cause also. And consequently eternal and necessary Existence, as I observed in
the same Sect. 62. is as great a Perfection as Self-existence, since one is
without a Cause as much as the other; nay, there can be no difference between
them; for if the Father is self-existent, the Emanations that issue forth from
him must be so too, since they are emanatory Substances, which were not
produced by the Will and Power of the Father from nothing, but they emaned from
something; which since there was nothing else to emane from, must be the
Father's self-existent Substance, to which it was essential to have Emanations,
and consequently they have the same Existence as the Substance in which they
existed when they emaned; nor could their emaning make them lose their
Self-existence. But more of this hereafter.

But he says they depend on the Father for the continuation of their Being, as
the Streams on the Fountain, or the Rays on the Sun; But there is no material
Substance that depends upon another for its Existence or continuance in
Existence; all Matter is equally old, and has subsisted ever since the
Creation; and Generation and Corruption is nothing but Matter according to the
Laws of Motion changing its Shapes and Figures: and therefore such Similies are
not to the purpose, because we are not speaking of any supposed Form or Figure
of the Son and Spirit, but of the Existence of their Substances, viz. whether
they have them by any third way different from both Creation and
Self-existence. As to the Streams depending on the Fountain, it is no more than
this, that if the Water did not issue out of the Ground, it could not run along
the Ground; if it did not bubble up in the Fountain, it could no more flow to
the next Place, than if it stopped there it could flow to a third: but this does
not make one part of the Water give being to another part, or continue it in
Being; it is the same Body of Water which was in the Fountain that is now in
the Streams. And as to the Rays, they no way depend on the Sun for their Being
or continuance in Being, except the Sun by a creating Power makes them to
exist, and by the same Power continues them in Existence: If the Rays are (as
some imagine) parts of the Ether set in motion by the Sun, they no more depend
on the Sun for their Being or continuance in Being, than the Sun does on them;
but if they emane from the Body of the Sun, they have the same cause of their
Being and continuance in Being as the Sun it self, because they like unto all
other necessary Emanations, were parts of the Body whence they emaned, and
consequently have the same Origin as the Sun it self. And if the Sun had been
self-existent, they, because parts of it, would have been so too: nor would
their emaning destroy their Self-existing, or any ways cause them then to
depend on the Sun for their continuance in Being; since the least Substance is
as much a Substance as the greatest, and consequently equally able to subsist
by it self; so that notwithstanding his altogether unlike Similies it is
evident, if the Son and H. Spirit are Eternal and Necessary, they are as
self-existent and independent as the Father; and consequently Gods in as high a
Sense as he, who if he were not a necessary Being would not be independent nor
self-existent, and consequently those three must go together: but if their
Natures are dependent and not self-existent, they are so far from containing
all Perfections, and being as truly Divine as the Father's, that they are truly
created Natures, or from no-beings made to be, and like all such Beings (as I
observed Sect. 62.) in God they live, and move, and have their Being.

I said Sect. 62. If the Persons have the same unlimited Perfections, tho the
manner of their getting them was different, this would not cause any inequality
between them: to which he answers it would; that is, in reference to their
manner of Existence, though not in reference to their mere Essence. But if
there is not only a different manner of their getting their Essences, but their
Essences when gotten exist after a different manner, (which he must mean, or
else contradict himself and agree with me) it is impossible they should have the
same kind of Nature, because to exist is common to all Natures: it is the
different manner of Existence that makes the difference between Natures; and
consequently a Nature that has a more excellent manner of Existing, will be a
more excellent kind of Nature. And therefore if the Natures of the Son and
Spirit had not only a different way of having their Existence, but do exist
after a different manner; their Natures or Essences must be of different kinds
or sorts: But if they exist after the same manner, though they have different
ways of coming by their Existence, there can be no inequality or difference
between them.

I asked Sect. 63. How the Father could be greater than the Son and Holy
Spirit, and be the only Good when they have the same, that is, unlimited Power
and Goodness: he answers, they have unlimited Power, but not the same, which
is, since the Father's Power exceeds theirs, to suppose that there is some
Bounds and Limits of their Power, and consequently theirs is an unlimited
limited Power and Goodness. He further adds, That the Son's Power is not as
great as the Father's ad intra, because he could not beget the Father, as the
Father begat him: But it being a Contradiction to suppose the Son could beget
the Father, and Contradictions being (as he observes, page 50.) Objects of no
Power, cannot be Objects of Divine Power; therefore it could be no diminution
to the Son's Greatness, that he could not beget the Father who always was in
Being: though upon supposition that the Son always was in Being, it is equally
a Contradiction to say, That the Father gave him a Being. But if it were an
essential and necessary Perfection of the Father's Nature, to beget or emane
two Sons, and the Son and Holy Spirit are not capable to emane Sons; it shows
there is a mighty Difference in their Natures, or that they want some
Perfections that is necessary and essential to the Nature of the Father, nay,
which belongs (as he observes, page 13.) to every Creature, where he makes this
remark, That if there is not a Creature but can communicate his Nature; what a
Boldness is it to affirm, That the infinite Creator cannot do the like? He that
has planted the Ear, shall he not hear? and he that has formed the Eye, shall
he not see? He that has given a Generative Power to the meanest of Creatures,
shall he not have the same Power himself? etc. So that by his Argument, to deny
to the Son and Spirit a Power to multiply their Species as the Father does, is
to deny to the infinite Creator (since each is the infinite Creator) a
Perfection the meanest of Creatures have.

As to the Father's being called the only Good by our Savior, There is none
good but God; that Phrase (says he) signifies the Father's being the Original
and Fountain of Goodness, which he may be, though not the only perfect Good: He
refers to Grotius, but Grotius speaks of the Goodness of God, as the Fountain
of Goodness in Creatures. But if the Streams be as perfectly good as the
Fountain, it would be very false to say, the Fountain is the only Good. I shall
only apply to himself, which he justly (Prop. 11.) says concerning the other
Trinitarians, If such a Liberty as this in Interpreting Scripture be allowable,
what Work may be made with Scripture? Besides, if the Son and Spirit are, as he
says, necessary and eternal, they must be as much the Original and Fountain of
Goodness, as the Father himself who is so, because he is the eternal and
necessary Being.

The notion of Three necessary eternal Beings is in it self sufficiently
absurd; for the meaning of a necessary eternal Being, is a Being which in the
Nature of things, and our conceptions concerning them, could not but be or
exist: it was impossible it should be otherwise, because it implies a
contradiction that any Being or Person should now be, if either it had not been
from all Eternity, or were not produced from that which was from Eternity; for
of nothing comes nothing: but it was not necessary there should be more than
one such Being, because one such Being, since he is all-sufficient, is in all
Reason sufficient for it self and all other Beings whatever; and if one is
sufficient, two or more cannot be necessary; for that implies this
Contradiction, That one is sufficient and not sufficient, another is necessary
where one is Allsufficient.

As the supposition of three necessary perfect Beings is in it self absurd, so
it is more absurd to say, that two of these necessary perfect Beings want some
Perfections; because necessary perfect Beings cannot want any Perfections.
There was, it is true, an eternal necessity that some Being should exist of it
self, or without a Cause, and have all Perfections; yet there could not be any
necessity of another Being which should want any of those Perfections the first
had; for it is as much as to say, that it was eternally necessary there should
exist a Being in some respects imperfect, that is, an imperfect God; nay, not
only imperfect, but useless and superfluous. And therefore it must be absurd to
suppose it should be necessary and essential to the Divine Nature of the
Father, to have two Natures to emane from him, which though they are supposed
to be each Almighty and All-sufficient, yet must be as needless to himself or
to any Creation, as he is All-sufficient for both; and who can serve for no
other end, than to rob Him of that Honor, Power, Dominion, Glory, Praise,
Adoration, Love, etc. which without those Emanations he would wholly enjoy to
himself, and which he can now only share with two others; so that nothing can
be a wilder Notion, than of one God emaning two Gods.

If it be not contrary to Reason there should be more than one necessary Divine
Nature; I demand a Reason why the Heathens were blamed for believing a
Plurality of such, since there can be no reason assigned for above one, which
will not equally hold for as many or more than they worshipped; all which but
one they supposed were not self-existent, but emaned Gods. And if they were
without excuse for worshipping more than one God, it must be plain by the Light
of Nature what that one God is; otherwise the generality of Mankind could not
distinguish between Theism and Polytheism. And does not the Light of Nature
demonstrate, that one God is but one eternal necessary Being? And can it be
supposed that the Scripture should so severely condemn the Heathens as sinning
against the clearest Light of Nature, in adoring more than one; and at the same
time require the Christians upon pain of eternal Damnation, to worship three
eternal necessary Natures? which is to make the Holy Scripture to contradict
not only the Light of Nature, but it self; and let him if he can produce any
one Argument against a plurality of Gods, which will not equally hold against a
plurality of Divine Natures. There are none that have wrote against Heathenism,
but have thought the Impossibility of more than one necessary Nature, a
Demonstration against the Plurality of Gods; and consequently they supposed it
most evident, that there can be no more but one such Nature, because they use
it as a Medium (which ought always to be clearer than that which is proved by
it) to prove the Existence of but one God.

I shall only instance one Authority which may be instar omnium, and that is
Grotius de verit. relig. Christ. The first Attribute of God (says he in the
beginning of that excellent Book) is, that he is one God and no more. This is
thence collected, that he is that Being which is necessarily and by himself;
for whatsoever is necessarily or by it self, is not considered in Kind, but as
it is in Act: but if you suppose more Gods, then you will find nothing in each
of them, why any of them should necessarily be, and no reason why there should
be rather two than three, or ten than five: Add hereunto, that the multiplicity
of singular things of the same kind, proceeds from the fecundity of Causes, by
reason of which fewer or more things are brought forth; but God has no Origin
nor Cause. So that this great Man is contrary to our Author in every thing. 1.
In supposing it impossible there should be more than one necessary Being. 2.
That more than one such necessary Being would infer more than one God; and that
God could not out of the Fecundity of Causes multiply his Kind. 3. Whatever had
a Cause or Origin, could not be God. 4. That there is no difference between
necessary Being, or Being by it self, or without a Cause; they are really one
and the same with Him, and so they are with all that have writ on this Subject:
They suppose God self-existent or without a Cause, because he is necessary and
eternal. They never make use of our Author's admirable distinction, page 50. of
having necessary Existence from another, and necessary Existence from one's
self.

He asks me page 48. whether I think that God can be the necessary Cause of
nothing; or whether the Perfection of his Nature does not determine Him to do
what is best, or to do what he in his infinite Wisdom knows fit to be done? To
which I answer, That the Question between us is not what the Perfection of his
Nature does determine him to; but what the Perfection of his Nature is? whether
three perfect necessary Natures or one only? which is questioning whether the
Unity of God be a Perfection or not. Whatsoever is necessarily in God must
contain the highest Perfection, otherwise it would not be essential to his
Nature: but God being in his own numerically one Nature, absolutely and
infinitely Happy and Perfect, two other Divine Natures cannot be in Him, or
(which is all one with our Author) emane from him necessarily, because they can
add no Perfection great or little to Him, who in his one Nature contains all
Perfections whatever. He and they together can be no more Good, Powerful, Wise,
than he is alone: He alone is All-sufficient, and two other such Natures can
make him no more. Therefore it must be directly contrary to the Nature of God
and highly injurious to his Honor, to suppose his Nature necessarily to emane
two Persons, who must be needless ad intra to God himself, and as useless ad
extra as God himself is All-sufficient. But if God gave a Being freely to the
Son and Holy Spirit, because he in his infinite Wisdom knew it fit to be done,
they are no more necessary Beings than all other Beings which God also
produced, because he in his infinite Wisdom knew it fit to be done, or that the
Perfection of his Nature did determine him to what was best; and consequently
they as all others continue in Being, because God's Wisdom thinks it best. But
to say that God acted otherways than so, that is necessarily, in producing or
causing the Son and Holy Spirit to exist, who are as distinct and different
from Him as two Men are from all other Men, is either to make him act without
understanding, or else to act contrary to his Mind: for Necessity only takes
Place where Thoughts are wholly wanting, or else the Power to act or forbear
acting according to the Direction of Thought. But if God did not give them then
Beings, neither as necessitated, nor because he in his Wisdom thought fit,
(which our Author calls necessarily) he could not (there being no middle way)
give them their Beings at all, or be the Original or Cause of them; and
consequently they having no Origin or Cause, must be as much without a Cause,
or self-existent, as the Father and the same necessity (if I may so say) that
made the Father to exist, must make them exist. And the Father, upon
supposition that they necessarily eman'd, can be no more the Original of them
than of his own Nature, because the same Necessity that made his Nature exist,
made it emane: It was as essential to it to emane, as to exist; and
consequently the emaning Natures must be as self-existent, and independent as
his own Nature, since they no more depend on him for Existence, or continuance
in Existence, than his own Nature does. Which very thing would the Defender
seriously consider, it would make him abate of his confidence in his
Hypothesis. But more of this hereafter.

2. Now I shall remind him, that tho the Design of his Propositions is to prove
the Doctrine of the Trinity is not contradictory to natural Reason, yet they
(as I observed, Sect. 64.) directly destroy the Unity of God, which is the
second Point I am to examine: and that we may be assured there are not three
Persons or Divine Natures in the Godhead, he affirms, Prop. 13. That the
Godhead, or GOD in the highest Sense, can be but ONE NUMERICALLY, and therefore
the Oneness so frequently affirmed of him in Scripture, is a numerical Oneness:
and in his Answer to the Consid. (to which he refers me) he says page 23. That
the Name of GOD in Scripture is ever to be understood in the absolutely highest
Sense. How could an Unitarian in more direct Terms deny a Trinity? What he
urges in behalf of the Trinity is page 17. where he says, The Holy Scripture
does abundantly declare the Unity of God, but no where distinguishes of Unity,
nor says of what Nature that Unity is which it ascribes to God. But is not this
directly contradicting Prop. 13. where he declares of what Nature or sort the
Unity of God is, to wit, a numerical Unity; and page 22. That the Name of God
in Scripture is ever to be understood in that highest Sense? And indeed it had
been very absurd to suppose the Scripture did frequently inculcate that God is
one, and yet not let us know in what Sense he is one, except it be obvious to
common Reason what that Oneness is, to wit, one eternal absolutely perfect
necessary Being. It Is most certain that when we ascribe any thing to God as a
Perfection, we ascribe it in the highest Sense, and consequently the Oneness of
God must be taken in that Sense. I desire to know what will destroy the Unity
of God, if every thing Treble in him will not do it, as three Natures with
three unlimited Powers, Wisdoms, Goodnesses.

But he pleads, they are not three Gods, because there is an immediate Union in
their spiritual Substances: But I say, no Union whatever can make three, each
of which is one God, to be but one God; because it is first saying, each is one
God, and then denying it by saying, all three are but one God; so that it
cannot without a manifest Contradiction be said, that while each remains one
God, they can any way be united into one God: for three of the same kind will
be thrice what one of the same kind is. If Union make them one God, it must
either identify them by making them one and the same God; and consequently
there can be no real distinction between them, or it must make none of them God
by making them parts of God, which by Union compose one God. For we have no
other Idea of Composition, but of one thing being made up of several, which by
being united constitute that one; and which whether material or immaterial we
cannot conceive, but as parts of the thing they constitute. For since each is
not the whole, it must be only a part of the whole, whatever our Author page
54. says to the contrary. I would willingly know why they are not as much three
Gods, though supposed substantially united, as if they were not united, since
each has in himself distinctly from the others all the Perfections of the
Divine Nature, and they could have no more if they were separate. It is as much
Idolatry to adore three united as three ununited Gods, since in both Cases you
equally rob God of his Honor, by paying it to two numerically diverse and
different Gods: And being Substances, they are in their Natures capable of
subsisting apart from one another.

He page 53. misrepresents what I say concerning Union, as though I argued
against the bare possibility of their being united, and not of their becoming
one God by Union, while each remained God distinct from the others: and then
makes a long Harangue about Mystery, in which he says, if he do not seriously
cry Mystery, I know what I know of him.

But however to do him the fuller Justice, I will mention what he further says
concerning this Union. In his first Defense, page 19. He says, They are as
much one with one another, as they without the most apparent contradiction are
capable of being one. A Heathen would not have scrupled to have said as much of
his Gods. But he goes on and says, They are much more than specifically one:
but then it is evident they cannot be so much distinguished as so many Men or
Angels which are but specifically one. But he will not allow that they are
identified or numerically one, (p. 53.) but if we cannot apprehend any Medium
between numerical and specifical Oneness, then in professing to believe it, we
profess we know not what. But I suppose he will say at this turn, as he does in
his second Defense, page 26. Well, suppose this! Is it impossible for a thing
to be of which we sorry Mortals have no Idea? I say no, by no means; but with
humble Submission he is a very sorry Mortal that requires us to believe Words
without any Idea's annexed to them. But let our Author say what he will, he has
still a Simily to help him out. This Medium between specific and numerical
Unity, is as great a Unity as that between the Sun, its Splendor, and the
Light of both: But those must be either different or the same thing; if
different, though of the same Kind, there can be but a specific Unity, or if
the same, a numerical Unity. If by the Light he means a thin Collection of
minute Particles, as he, page 58. defines it, then he supposes the Splendour to
be a second Sun, emitting a small sort of active, subtle and piercing
Particles: but if by Light and Splendour he means those Idea's those Particles
cause in us, he cannot distinguish between Splendor and the Light of the
Splendour, because Splendor is but a greater degree of Light caused by those
minute Particles in a greater Quantity, or more directly striking our Eyes; so
that his Simily is every way faulty.

But because in his often repeated Similies about the Sun, its Light and Heat,
he supposes somewhat in the Sun, or which does exist by emaning from it,
analogous to our Idea's of Light and Heat; I told him, Sect. 69. That though
there is in the Sun a Power to produce in us Heat and Light, as well as Pain
and Pleasure, yet there are no such Sensations or Qualities in the Sun, which
though (page 57.) he argues against, yet he says the very same thing; but lest
his Reader should perceive it, he calls the Effects (which when one pretends to
talk Philosophically, is very improper) by the Names of the Causes, and will
not say that Heat is caused by, but that Heat is a close Collection of minute,
subtle, active, piercing Particles, and Light a thinner Collection of them.
But do Clothes and Exercise by causing Heat, Produce a Collection of such
Particles? Why do they not sometimes produce Light, which is but a less close
Collection? But in arguing thus, he grants all I would have, viz. That there
are no such Qualities in the Sun, or emaning from it: but the Sun being a Body
in perpetual Agitation, there are minute Particles flowing from it, which by
their Figure, Texture and Motion, alter the Figure, Texture and Motion of some
of the smallest parts of our Hands and Eyes, and thereby produce in us Light
and Heat, which are as much mere perceptions as Pain and Pleasure. And I say
again, there has not been any Book writ these late Years on this Subject, but
what proves there is nothing in Matter, besides Bulk, external Figure, and
internal Configuration of its minute Parts, which by their Motion produce in us
Heat, Light, Color, Sound, Taste, etc. But enough of this.

Our Author says in his first Defense, page 20. That outwardly and in reference
to the Creation, they [the three Divine Natures] are perfectly one and the same
God, as concurring in all the same external Actions, though in relation to one
another there is a real distinction between them. But if there is no
distinction between them in respect of the Creatures to whom they are one and
the same God; why do the Trinitarians worship them as numerically different
Gods? for if they adored them as the same God, it would be as impossible to
worship the one and not the other, as to worship and not to worship the same
God. But can there be a real and not a real distinction between them? The
reason he gives why the three Divine Natures are but one God, is as surprising
as the thing it self; it is because they concur in all the same external
Actions: But if each is God, does it not suppose three concurring Gods? Can one
and the same God be said to concur with himself? Is it not directly agaisnt the
Honor of the Father, who is God in the highest Sense, to suppose him but a
concurring God? It is in a manner ungodding him, since we cannot say then that
we owe more than the third part of our Being, Preservation and Happiness to
him. For to attribute them wholly to him, would be robbing the other two who
equally concur with him, of what is their due: and no Action can be wholly
attributed to one, which jointly belongs to Three. But if it be injurious to
each Divine Nature to ascribe to it but a Third of those Benefits we receive;
it must be injurious to say they concurred in conferring them. But if he says
each wholly does all external Actions, then he contradicts himself in supposing
each concurs; for he that wholly does an Action, can never be said to concur in
doing it. And if the Father be the Original of Mankind, there cannot be a
second and third Original, except Men can have as many Origins. A second
Original is as great nonsense as a Second First, and a first Original is no
more Sense than a First First: But I refer the Desender to my Letter, from
Sect. 77, to 83. where I have handled this Point more fully. By this time I
believe it is evident to an impartial Reader, that nothing our Author has
affirmed of the Son and Holy Spirit does abate of their being Gods in the
highest Sense, or make them one and the same God with the Father; and
consequently there cannot be a more open and grosser Polytheism than his
Hypothesis of three eternal and necessary Divine Natures. But,

The Defender is not content with asserting three such Natures, (which one
would think sufficiently absurd) but he also runs into a Number of
Inconsistences concerning the Manner of the Existence of two of these Natures
in making them such, and yet not self-existent, or from none; but that they had
their eternal Beings from another. Now as it is evident that whatsoever is
self-existent is eternal, because there is no Author or Cause of its being; so
it is as evident, that whatsoever is not self-existent, but has received its
Being from another, or has been caused to be, cannot be from Eternity; because
to receive a Being, or to be caused to be, supposes the Non-being to precede
Being. They must once not be, otherwise they were not capable of being caused
to be; and consequently they could not always have been in being or from
Eternity. What can be a more manifest Contradiction, than that that which had
ever been, should once be caused to be? or that that which had been from all
Eternity, should from not-being be produced, caused or emaned into Being? Or
must not that which is emaned into being, sometime or other begin to be? Or can
that which has a Beginning be from Eternity, which necessarily supposes no
Beginning? For we have no Idea of any thing being from Eternity, but that it
had no Origin. But our Author, page 46. says, That the Son and Spirit had an
Origin. And Prop. 6. The Father is the Original of all other Beings, in which
the Son and Holy Spirit are comprehended. So that we must (if we can) believe
that two necessary Natures had an eternal Origin or Beginning; and that they
have been caused to be, tho they have always been. It Is as great a
Contradiction to say, that that which has had an Origin has been from Eternity,
as that that which will have an End shall last to Eternity: And if what has had
an Origin, can be from Eternity, Creation, which is but giving an Origin to
things, may be from Eternity. And why might not God cause a thing to be
voluntarily as well as necessarily from Eternity, since in both Cases Being is
equally bestowed? And every Being that is not without a Cause, (as God the
Father alone is) must have a Beginning; for there is no Medium between having
Being from none, and from some one: and what has Being from some one, must once
be without Being, and so have a Beginning. And if God be Eternal because he is
Self-existent, by parity of Reason, what is not Self-existent cannot be from
Eternity: Eadem est ratio contrariorum, is as undoubted a Maxim as any
whatever; so that nothing can be more evident than that, To have an Origin or
Cause, or not to be self-existent, and to be from Eternity, are inconsistent.
And if they are inconsistent in themselves, whatever Terms you express them in,
they will be still inconsistent. Whence it favors (to say no worse) of great
prejudice, and fondness of an Hypothesis, that when a thing is a Contradiction
in some Terms, to seek out others to hide the Contradiction.

But our Author is so unhappy in his Attempt, that the very Terms he makes use
of, (viz. To have Existence from God by way of necessary emanation) contain in
themselves a direct Contradiction: for whatsoever substantial Being or Nature
emaneth from another, must before its Emanation exist some way or other in the
Nature it emaneth from, otherwise it is impossible to emane from it, but it
must emane from nothing, which is the very same as Creation: For every Nature
must either emane from nothing, or from the Nature in which it preexisted. But
to suppose a Nature to exist by emaning, is to suppose it did not exist before
its Emanation, and consequently could not emane from another Nature, but from
nothing: Except it first emaned from the Nature and afterward existed; which
puts me in mind of a certain Poet, who introduces Adam in great haste going to
be created. So that if the Son and H. Spirit did not exist before their
Emanation, it is impossible they should emane from God, otherwise than that God
by the voluntary exercise of his Divine Power emaned them from nothing; and
consequently they could not emane or issue forth (as he Prop. 15. terms it)
from the Divine Nature. But if the Son and Holy Spirit did exist before they
emaned, they did not exist by Emanation, but were self-existent as the Nature
of the Father. Upon my asserting of which, Sect. 58. he answers page 47. But I
say with as great assurance, that whatsoever Substance emanes from another,
must owe its existence to that other; and the contrary is a manifest
Contradiction, but to whom I know not except to himself. But I must beg leave
to dissent and tell him, that all Substances whatsoever owe their existence to
God, and not to the Substance they emane from; and that all Generation,
Emanation, or Procession in created Beings, is only the different Forms and
Figures which the various Coalitions of Matter, according to the Laws of
Motion, do produce: and consequently whatever Substance emanes from another,
however it may be modified by it, does not owe its Existence to it, but is as
old as the Creation it self. And by Parity of Reason, whatsoever emanes from a
self-existent Substance, does not owe its Existence to the Substance it emanes
from, but is as self-existent as that Substance. Though to exist by emaning
except from nothing, be, as has been shown, nothing less than a Contradiction;
yet our Author tells us, page 18. it is a very presumptuous Conceit, and in the
second Defense, page 25. an intolerable Presumption not to conclude it
possible. Though he further says, we have a clearer Idea of it than voluntary
Creation; yet all the Idea he gives us of it is, That it is a more excellent way
of existing than that of Creation.

But before I proceed in the Examination of his Hypothesis, it will be
necessary to obviate an exception he takes at my using words taken from
material Substances, in discoursing of Spiritual ones; which is a most
frivolous exception, because it is impossible to be avoided, since we have no
Ideas, and consequently no words to express them in, but what we have from
sensible or material Objects, and the operations of our Minds about them, as is
fully demonstrated in Mr. Lock's Essay of Human Understanding: And it is
sufficiently evident from Holy Scripture it self, which that we may understand
it, represents God with Face, Eyes, Hands, Bowels, back parts, Motion from
Place to Place, etc. and so Spirits are described as Standing, Falling down,
etc. and in a Word, so are all other things relating to spiritual Beings. But
this exception is very strange from one whose Hypothesis is built chiefly upon
Emanations, which is a Word borrowed from Matter, and signifies those minute
Parts or Effluvia's of Matter which flow from Bodies: and his Hypothesis makes
the whole, or the one Divine Essence, either to emane from it self, or to be
divisible, and have parts emane from it; or else what he says is wholly
unintelligible.

The first Argument I made use of, Sect. 57. to show it impossible the Son and
Spirit could emane from the Father, was, That they being both infinite
Substances, and as such being equal; to suppose two Infinites to emane from
one, is to suppose twice as much to emane from a Being or Substance, as the
Being is. To which he answers, I change his Phrase, Beings whose Perfections
are unlimited, and who have all they can have without a manifest Contradiction;
which Phrase by the way, is not to be found in his Propositions. But why might
not I call them infinite Substances, since twice in his Propositions by way of
Explication, he calls them Substances, and every where talks of the Union of
their Substances: and page 56. of his third Defense, defines Person by
Substance? And it is evident, that if the Substances do not emane, the
Perfections that subsist in them cannot emane; and if the Perfections are
infinite or unlimited, the Substances cannot be finite or limited: and page 8.
he expressly says, The Son and Holy Ghost are all boundless and infinite. But
where is the Difference between Infinite and his own term unlimited? Does not
the one signify without Bounds, as the other without End? and the Argument will
equally hold with the one Term or the other. Therefore I have no Reason to
change those Terms, nor did I injure him in using them. But that all Infinites
are equal, is as evident as that there is an inequality between Finite and
Infinite: for if one Infinite were less than another, there must be some bound
or end of that Infinite, which would be to make it Finite; wherefore for two
Infinites to emane from one, is to say, twice as much emanes from a Being as
the Being is. Nay, if the Son and Holy Spirit were both but one Infinite, to
suppose them to emane from but one other Infinite, is to suppose the whole
Infinite to emane from it self; but if their Nature each of them is as truly
Divine and Infinite as that of the Father, they must each of them be equal to
him, and consequently cannot emane from him. Can two Suns (which is a more
proper Simily for equal Natures, than the Sun and the Rays) emane from one Sun?
Would it not be to suppose twice as much to emane from the Sun as was in it?

The Defender upon better thoughts, though I did not make use of his Phrases,
thus replies, Be he pleased to take notice, that there is nothing in this acute
arguing, except he means by infinite Substances, Substances of an infinite
bigness. He might as well have said, To be and not to be was a Contradiction
only in Substances of infinite bigness; for the Reason is the same, of what
Nature or sort soever the Substances be, provided they were capable of emaning:
Because the Argument does not depend upon a Being having Bigness or Quantity,
but upon the equality of Beings that emane from one another: For let an equal
number which has neither Matter nor Bulk emane from an equal; does not the
whole Number emane from it self? So substract an Hour from an Hour, and see
what becomes of the first Hour. So that if the Nature of the Father emanes from
it self an infinite and boundless Nature, it must wholly exhaust the Nature of
the Father, which is but Boundless and Infinite. But to suppose two such
Natures to emane from him, is to suppose twice as much to emane as the Father's
Nature is. It is (as I observed Sect. 59.) dividing one infinite Substance into
three infinite Parts. To which he replies, How does our Author already run
Taplash? But I will not therefore forbear replying, and I answer, No doubt it
is a horrid Contradiction so to affirm: but how rank does this smell of the
gross thing called Body? his Mind runs altogether upon material Substances,
which alone, I say, have Parts to be divided into. Then he goes on to
demonstrate, that an infinite Spiritual Substance cannot be divided into
infinite Spiritual Parts; which is the absurdity, or if he pleases, the Taplash
I am condemning as the immediate consequence of his Hypothesis. For what
difference can we perceive between one infinite Nature emaning out of it self
two infinite Natures, by which it so far parts with them, as they become two
distinct and diverse Natures from it, as distinct and different as so many Men
or Angels, and one infinite Nature divided into three infinite Parts? And by
our Author's leave we not only attribute Parts to Matter, but we are forced to
do so to every thing (whether Finite or Infinite) we can in our Minds add to
and abstract from, which we cannot but conceive as Parts. So we say that
Numbers and Duration, and Space though Infinite, have Parts. And the sober
Enquirer, in his View of the Considerations, page 92. owns that conceptible
parts in the Deity no Man can avoid: And if neither the whole Divine Nature nor
a part of it emaned from it self, it is a Contradiction to our Idea's, that any
thing should emane from it: What is a Contradiction in those Terms, will be so
in any other.

But to gratify our Author as much as possible, we will express his Doctrine in
the softest Terms we can, viz. one self-existent, eternal and necessary Nature,
which alone is first in Nature, not in Time, whilst it remains such, being not
subject to any alteration whatever, becomes necessarily and eternally, three
eternal and necessary Natures, two of which are not selfexistent. Or in other
words, one immutable God necessarily and eternally becomes three Gods of the
same Nature, but not three self-existent Gods: which though they are monstrous
Contradictions in themselves, and to our conception of but one God; yet our
Author is so happy as to be able to tell us how this is done, namely, by
Emanation, whereby two of these Natures issued forth (as he terms it) from the
self-existent Nature. And though each of these Natures is equal to the Nature
from whence they emaned; yet the emaning Nature is not capable of the least
Diminution: Though one would think to have two Natures to emane from one single
Nature, so as to be distinct and different in Number from it, must be a
diminution to that Nature, since it has two Natures by emaning them from it
self less than it had. But if the Nature of God is indivisible, and
consequently no part nor any thing of it can emane; nothing can be more evident
but that all other Natures, because not self-existent, must be produced from
nothing. But he says, page 13. There is not a Creature that generates another
of the same kind, but may be properly said to communicate its own Nature, and
yet notwithstanding forgoes not its own individual Nature, nor any part of it.
But by his leave every generating Creature does part with some of its
Substance, (which he may call Nature) whereof the Foetus is formed, and which
by Accession of Nourishment grows at length to be a Nature or Substance equal
to its Parent. But in the divine Generation the Son and Spirit have their whole
Beings and Natures from the Father's Nature, and not by accession from without,
but all at once, and from all Eternity. So that for the Father to communicate
his Nature to each of them, whose Natures are equal to his, would be doubly to
annihilate himself.

For a Nature to multiply its kind, is a sign of Defect and Weakness in that
kind of Nature: for the same Reason that makes it capable of Propagating, makes
it subject to Corruption and Dissolution, because it supposes it divisible and
subject to augmentation and diminution, which Beings in their Nature immortal
are not; and therefore what can be more absurd than to argue from Beings that
are divisible, and for that reason alone capable of Generation or Emanation, to
Beings that are indivisible, and consequently not capable of having Emanations
flow from their Substances? I know none in his Senses ever supposed so gross a
thing of finite Spirits as propagating their kind: however some Men take the
Liberty not only to suppose it of God himself, but that he acts therein
necessarily as inanimate Beings do; nay, they suppose it to be one of the
highest and most essential Perfections of his Nature, which I conceive to be
most absurd, as well as a most high Affront to the sole infinite Majesty of
God; and it carries this in it, that it necessarily infers not only a
Plurality, but an Infinity of Gods: For if God does not constantly and
necessarily multiply Divine Natures, he has lost a Perfection which they say is
essential and necessary to his Nature; which change cannot happen in the Nature
of God, but if (as the Sun successively emits an innumerable company of new
Rays) he does from Eternity to Eternity produce new Natures, they must needs be
infinite in Number. But if he says God is eternally emaning into Existence the
Son and Holy Spirit, it is so far from being true, that they were eternally
begotten or emaned into actual Being, that they never will be, so, though the
Father is in doing it from Eternity to Eternity, by a continued successive
Generating. But how can they that were, as he says, boundless and infinite from
Eternity, be capable of any farther Production? And every new or farther
Production must be as infinite and boundless as each of them.

Having thus fully (as I suppose) shown the impossibility of the Father's
issuing forth Emanations from his own Nature, I shall be the shorter in my
Remarks upon his Answers.

I said, Sect. 59. upon Supposition that the Son and Spirit are necessary
Emanations, I cannot see how they owe their Origin more to the Father, than the
Father to them, since they are all three of a Substance, which is
self-existent; Which is (he says) very surprising, and as much as to say, that
the Root no less owes its Origin to the Tree, or the Rays to the Sun, than vice
versa. As to his Simily from the Sun, I have sufficiently spoken to it already.
As to that about the Root and the Tree, it is evident (not to mention that the
Tree cannot owe its Origin to the Root, because it is part of the Tree) that
the Trunk and Branches do not owe their Origin to the Root, but are all visibly
in the Seed, which by Nourishment received from without, do equally increase to
their designed Bulk. But to make it any ways parallel, Suppose a selfexistent
Root to emane necessarily from it self (without any new Matter added to it) two
Trunks, each of which is as big as the emaning Root; would not the Substances
of all three be self-existent, since they are all three of the self-same
self-existent Substance; and consequently one can no more owe its Origin to
another, than the self-same Substance can owe its Origin to it self?

In the same Section I said, Whatsoever [Substance] proceeds from another, must
first be in it, except it can be in it and proceed from it at the same time.
Upon which he asks, Whether the Rays are not as old as the Sun? or whether all
Thoughts must be younger than Minds, because they have their Original from
them? As to the first, I grant the Rays are as old as the Sun, and the reason
is, because they have the same Origin as the Sun; yet they cannot be in the
Sun, and emane from it at the same time. As to the second, Whether Thoughts are
younger than Minds, it is not to the purpose, because we are discoursing of
Substances, and of substantial Emanations; which if he supposes Thoughts to be,
how many Substances would be created and annihilated in a Minute? But however,
to answer his Question, All Thoughts must be younger than Minds, because
Thoughts are Operations of the Mind, in conceiving and comparing Idea's
together, consequently Minds must be before Thoughts. But though all Thoughts
must be younger than Minds, because they owe their Origin to the Mind, as being
mere Operations of the Mind; yet the Powers or Abilities that are essential to
the Mind, must be as old as the Mind, because they do not owe their Origin to
the Mind. Here he blames me for calling Emanation a Separation, and says, That
Distinction, Separation and Difference, are several things. I suppose most of
the Trinitarians think Distinction and Difference to be so, because their Books
are full of Distinctions without Difference. He further says, That tho the Son
and Spirit proceed from the Father, yet they are still in him, and ever have
been in him. But to emane from, to issue forth and proceed from, and yet still
to be in, are Contradictions in our Conceptions. And our Author, Page 45. makes
emaning from, and kindling, the same. But what is kindling, but separating the
Parts of any thing one from another, by a violent rapid Motion? And what is the
Emanation of the Rays, which he so much insists on, but their separation from
the Body of the Sun?

In the next, Sect. 60. he wholly mistakes the Argument, and then wanders to
God's Decrees; which is nothing to the Purpose, in a Discourse of substantial
Emanations.

Upon my saying, Sect. 63. What greater Absurdity can there be, than that
Beings which have infinite Perfections, should want some? Besides a long
Harangue about Infinite, he answers, It is no monstrous Business to imagine,
that a Being which has not every Perfection, may have those it is possessed of,
in the highest degree. To which I reply, that it is monstrous that a Divine
Nature which he owns contains all Perfections, should want some Perfections,
and those the chiefest: Or that Natures, that are, as he says, boundless and
infinite, should not have infinite Perfections; which is to make them (to use
his Word) unlimited in Essence, but limited in the Perfections of Essence, as
wanting the greatest; the want of which abates, (as he says, page 7.) and
consequently bounds their boundless Perfections. Nor can they have in the
highest Degree those Perfections they are possessed of, as unlimited Power,
Wisdom and Goodness: For if the Father be the only Wise, the only Good, and
greater than the Son and Spirit, they have not those Perfections in the highest
Degree, nor are they (as I have already proved) unlimited. God cannot
communicate any of his Attributes, without communicating all; because he cannot
communicate any, without communicating his Divine Essence, in which (as all
Properties do in a Substance) they inseparably exist. And if God communicate
his Essence, he must communicate with it his Selfexistence and Independency,
which are also inseparable from his Essence.

I must now beg leave to transcribe my Sect. 68. that the Reader may the better
see whether it contains so GROSS A CONCEIT, and such BEASTLY STUPIDITY, as our
Author, page 55. charges it with. -- If they, the three supposed infinite
Substances, are more than one, they cannot be Infinite, because being
Substances of the same Sort, they must be bounded and limited one by another.
If the Substance of the Father be every where, How can the Substance of the Son
be every where too, at the same time, and after the same manner? For if Beings
can be in the same Place at the same time, in the same manner as they must be
if they are of the same sort, it is impossible to distinguish them; because we
have no other mark of distinction between Beings, but that they cannot be in
the same Place, at the same time, in the same manner.

I hope our Author will grant that two Numbers will determine one the other,
because if they did not, they would be one and the same: and consequently
whatever things we predicate two or more of, they must bound one another,
otherwise they could not be two: what makes them two, must necessarily limit
them; so that two Infinites are a plain Contradiction, because nothing can be
Infinite which is determined: but if they are two, they must be determined,
otherwise they would not be two but one and the same. One Infinite cannot
contain or comprehend another Infinite; if it did, it would be the same and not
another; therefore that other must determine it: What is not all of the same
kind, and so is singular, must have bounds or limits, otherwise it would be
all; and this is so very plain, that should a Man in any other Case affirm more
than one Infinite of the same kind, he would scarce be thought to be in his
Senses. Who was ever so ridiculous as to assert more than one Infinite Space,
more than one infinite Duration? yet neither Space nor Duration are corporeal
Substances. To suppose two infinite Spaces or Durations, must we not
necessarily suppose an end or limit to one, before the other can commence? To
suppose two Infinites of the same sort, is to suppose an infinite addition to
that which is already Infinite; therefore it is very evident that whatever
Nature or sort a Being is of, if we conceive more than one, we cannot conceive
any of them as Infinite; nor can we believe that the three Persons are (as he
supposes) as different as so many Men or Angels, and yet believe that each of
them can be after the same manner every where, because holding both, is to
believe them distinct and not distinct, different yet the same. And this must
necessarily be, as long as we have no other marks of Identity and Diversity,
but that Beings cannot be after the same manner, in the same Place, at the same
time: If our Author had any other marks of Identity and Diversity, he ought to
have discovered them before he was so free of his obliging Expressions. If
there can be more than one Infinite of a sort, there can no reason be assigned
why there may not be an infinite Number as well as two or three; so that it
would not be absurd: to suppose an infinite number of Spaces, Durations, etc.
And if more than one infinite Being can be every where, an infinite Number may
as well be every where; and by parity of Reason a vast Number of finite Spirits
may be in the very same Space as contains one, which our Author very roundly
supposes, and says, They that do not suppose it have no manner of Notion of
what they believe. But Mr. Lock (whom I never heard charged with beastly
stupidity, or of having no Notion of what he says) in his Essay of Human
Understanding, Chapter Identity, speaks thus: We have Idea's but of three sorts of
Substances; first God, second finite Intelligences, third Bodies. Though these
three sorts of Substances do not exclude one another out of the same Place, yet
we cannot conceive but that they must necessarily each of them, exclude any of
the same kind out of the same Place, or else the Notions of Identity and
Diversity would be in vain. There could be no such distinction of Substances or
any thing else from one another.

And if other Authorities after this great Man were not needless, I might add
the Learned Cusanus, who Lib. 3. de mente, says, Impossible est plura esse
Infinita, quoniam alterum esset in altero finitum. There cannot be more than
one Infinite, because the one would make the other Finite. And another Learned
Author says, Quicquid actu est infinitum, ei nequit dari mensura. Deus est actu
infinitus, nequit ergo ei dari mensura qua mensuretur. At si plures essent Dei,
unus esset mensura aliorum, and sic nullus eorum esset infinitus. There can be
no measure of that which is actually infinite: God is actually infinite,
therefore there can be no measure of him. But if there were more Gods than one,
none of them would be Infinite, because they would be a Measure one to another.
Therefore his three Divine Natures being (as he supposes) every way united to
one another, cannot but be a Measure to one another. And the greater part even
of the Trinitarians the Modalists, look upon our Author's Doctrine of three
infinite Natures, as a notorious Contradiction.

But the Defender to prove his assertion asks, How can God be in those Spaces
filled with Body? or how can Body and Soul be in the same Space? Which
Questions I thought I had prevented, by adding -- Beings of the same sort after
the same manner: but that he says, can be only for a Blind. To which I shall no
otherwise reply, than by putting him in mind of the Proverb, There are none so
blind as those that will not see. However by the by, it is a pretty-way of
answering Arguments, to tell his Reader, That that wherein the Strength of his
Argument lies, can be only for a Blind, page 55. But this Argument holds not
only in Substances of all sorts, but in Modes and Properties; as for instance,
more than one with infinite Power is a Contradiction; because infinite Power
necessarily supposes Supreme Power, which because all delegated Power is
contained in it, comprehends all Power. And since our Author, page 61. has a
distinct Notion of a Being absolutely Perfect, and Beings of unlimited
Perfections; I desire to know what Idea's he has of three having each of them
supreme or unlimited Power over the Universe? Is it not first asserting that
one has it, then denying it by saying another has it? The Christians of the
first Ages thought it an unanswerable Argument against the Heathens, that there
could not be more than one God, because there could not be (supreme Power being
indivisible) more than one that could enjoy it. How easily could the Heathens
have retorted this Argument upon the Christians, had they held with our Author
more Natures than one, each with supreme or unlimited Power: So that if the
Father has all or supreme Power, it is evident the Power of the Son can be no
other than a delegated subordinate Power, and consequently not unlimited and
infinite; and the Reason will equally hold for all other Divine Perfections: So
that by what has been said it appears, that to suppose more than one Divine
Nature, is to make God a Finite and limited Nature with Finite and limited
Perfections, which is in a manner as dishonorable to God, as to deny he has
any Being at all.

But our Author is not content with what he says here, but page 58. after a
long Dialogue of his own framing, (where he makes a Man of my Headpiece (as he
phrases it) not hesitate at replying that Space is a real nothing, and a great
many silly things besides) he charges me with prodigious, monstrous
Presumption, in drawing most confident conclusions from Premises that are
unspeakab^y above the reach of human Understanding -- and with Folly and
Madness in the Liberty I take with the most profoundly adorable Deity (he
should have said Deities.) In answer to which, and all his harangue concerning
Mystery, and the difficulties page +6) about Eternity, etc. which a Polytheist
might as well make use of for a Million of Gods, or a Papist for
Transubstantiation, or any other Contradiction though never so palpable; I
shall only ask our Author, Are Infinity and Eternity mere empty Sounds without
Idea's annexed to them? If they are, why does he use such words? If they are
not, is it not possible to join other Idea's to them, which are manifestly
inconsistent with them? which if he has done, then all his
Common-place-Harangue will not make them consistent. To what end is such an
Harangue? except he will say, there is no knowing a Contradiction from a
Difficulty. Or must a Man be obliged to solve all the difficulties in Nature
and Metaphysics, before he can have a Right to tell him, that he is chargeable
with as gross Contradictions, as to be, and not to be. For though our Idea's of
Infinity and Eternity are not complete and adequate, (as perhaps our Idea's of
few other things are) yet as far as they reach, they are as distinct and clear
as any other; otherwise we could not demonstrate that there is an infinite
eternal Being, of which we have as great a certainty as of any Mathematical
Demonstration. Our Idea of Infinity consists in a supposed endless Progression
of the Mind, which is still adding on to those large steps it first takes:
Whatever besides the Inexhaustibility of the Subject, puts a stop to the Mind's
adding on, is directly contrary to our Idea of Infinity. As for instance,
suppose you join a beginning to infinite Duration, you thereby necessarily put
a stop to the Mind's adding: and therefore our Author's assertion of an eternal
Beginning or Origin, is as plain a Contradiction as To be, and Not to be
eternal. So in adding one Infinite to another, you put a stop to the
progression of the Mind concerning the first Infinite; because instead of
adding on, the Mind has actually past over one Infinite, and is viewing
another. To add two Infinites together, is (as Mr. Lock says, Chapter Infinity,.
20.) too gross an absurdity to be confuted. What is it then to suppose three
Infinites, and those two every way closely united to one another? In this case,
which way soever the Mind turns it self, its Idea of Infinity is destroyed;
their Continuity or Union every way terminating one another.

So that at last all the monstrous prodigious Presumption I am guilty of, is,
in owning the weakness of my Understanding, the shortness of my Idea's, and
consequently the narrowness of my Belief, in not giving assent to what appears
to be a Contradiction to the Unity and Infinity of the Divine Nature.

I hope by this time the Reader is satisfied, that the 68th Section in my
Letter, did not deserve those hard words the Defender was pleased to bestow
upon it. Had I asserted (as he does, page 52.) the Infinity of Quantity, I had
deserved some such Compliments. But I must excuse him since I find what he
there says is too true, that he understands nothing of Infinite, and that it is
an amusing confounding word for his Brains; which, all Unitarians must think,
is some excuse for his asserting the Son and Holy Spirit to be all Boundless
and Infinite, as page 8.

I said, Sect. 70. As there can be no Inequality, such as he supposes between
infinite Beings; so we cannot pay a lower degree of Honor to the Son and
Spirit than to the Father, without supposing an infinite distance between them.
For as long as we pray to each as having necessarily inherent in himself
infinite Power, Wisdom, etc. our Devotion terminates in each, we give each the
same Divine Honor. To which he says, p. 58. This is a very false Charge, for
we heartily acknowledge that all the Honor we pay to the Son and H. Spirit,
ought to be ultimately terminated in the Father; and I am sure he cannot think
otherwise of those he calls the real Trinitarians, because their Hypothesis
necessarily obliges them so to believe, whatever the Hypothesis of the others
does. But the Holy Scripture is so express upon this Point, that I should think
no Christian should find it hard to believe it, no, tho there were no oother
Text but this for it, viz. -- That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow
-- to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.

We will now first set when it can be said, that the Honor we give a Person is
not for his own, but for the sake of another on whom it ultimately terminates;
and then examine whether it be such an Honor which the Trinitarians give to
the Son and Holy Spirit.

The Honor we give a Person, does not ultimately terminate on him when it is
not for any inherent Quality in himself, but for the sake of some Power, Trust
or Office that is received from another, and which he holds during the Will of
that other. Thus we pay Honor to a Viceroy, a Judge, a Magistrate, because
they are the Image, or some way represent that Person who endued them with
Power. Whatever Honor or Deference we pay such Persons, it still terminates in
the Supreme; it is for his Sake and to his Honor: And the Reason is, because
such Persons, how much soever they may be advanced above their Fellow Subjects;
yet in respect of the Person that advanced them, they have no Power at all, but
are mere Ministers and Servants. So our Lord Christ, tho he is highly advanced
as a Reward of his perfect Obedience above all his Fellow Creatures; yet in
respect of God he is a mere Minister and Servant, wholly impotent, can (as he
says) do nothing of himself: and the Reason why the Honor given him in
Scripture is not for his own sake, but for the Glory of God the Father, is,
because it is a delegated Honor, God has made him a Prince and Savior, giving
him all Power after his Resurrection: or because (as this Text says) God has
highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name. And there is no
instance in Scripture where any Honor, Glory, Power and Dignity is ascribed to
Christ, either by himself or any Man or Angel, but is expressly given to him
either as a Man, or as the free gift of God to a Man. And it is more than
probable, that this is so done, lest it should administer occasion to People to
terminate their Worship on him, as a Divine Nature, with all Perfections
necessarily and eternally inhering in him. It would be absurd, if he had such a
Nature, not to worship him for himself ultimately; except an eternal and
necessary Divine Nature is not to be worshipped for its own sake, which would be
to say, that the Father is not to be worshipped ultimately for the sake of his
Divine Nature. The Honor that does not terminate on the Person, is never given
to the Creator but to the Creature: and of this Nature is that Honor or
Worship we give to those Gods or supreme Powers which are the Deputies or
Representatives of the most high God: which Worship does not ultimately
terminate on them, because what they have they have from God, and hold it only
during his Pleasure: What then can be a stronger Argument that the Son is not
God than this, that the Honor we are obliged to pay him, does not ultimately
terminate in him but in another? If any thing were strange from our Author,
this would be, that he that is God is not to be worshipped for his own sake, or
that a supreme Being must not have supreme Honor.

But let us now see what sort of Worship it is which the Trinitarians pay to
the Son. They, of whatsoever Denomination, are so far from honoring the Son
for the sake, and to the Glory of God the Father, that in their public Prayers
and Liturgies, they give him equal Honor with God the Father; and both Papist
and Protestant Trinitarians in their damning Creed make them equal, and declare
that none is before nor after another, none greater or less than another, the
Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal. Which equality is as much to the Glory of
God the Father, as it would be to the Glory of a King to have his Subjects set
up two others with equal Power and Majesty. Therefore I wonder with what
assurance our Author can deny, that the Trinitarians have 3 Objects of supreme
Worship: and he himself in this Treatise is for giving Divine Worship to the
Son and Holy Spirit; and Divine Worship can be no other than Supreme, and
consequently must terminate in the Person to whom it is given. Nay, he cannot
terminate his Worship more in one than in another, since all three are (as he
says) one and the same God with respect to the Creatures.

All that our Author can say is, that it is to the Honor of God the Father,
because they depend on him; but the more dependent he supposes them, the more
absurd it is to pay the same Honor to a dependent, as he does to the
independent Being. But their dependence, since he makes them necessary Beings,
is Independence: And because our Author is much taken with Similies, I shall
oblige him with one that is more parallel than that of the Sun and Rays.
Suppose (for there has been such a thing in Nature) one Man born with, and
growing out of the side of another, who was a distinct Man, though necessarily
united to him, which was manifest by their discoursing one with another. Now in
this instance, we have one intelligent Substance emaning from another; yet this
did not make him owe his Being or continuance in Being to the other, since they
had the same cause of Being and continuance in Being, on which cause both were
equally dependent, and not one upon the other: nor did the Honor and Respect
Men paid the side-man terminate in the other; for in honoring the one, they no
way honor the other. The Parallel is very easy and natural: for as the two Men
depended on the same Cause, and therefore the emaned Man was no way obliged to
the other; so God's Nature having no Cause, his supposed Emanations must be as
much without a Cause; for what is necessary to the Nature, is as much without a
Cause as the Nature it self: therefore they could no more be obliged to God for
their Divine Natures or their being Gods, than God is beholden to himself for
his own Nature; since there was the same necessity of his emaning them as of
existing himself, and consequently they are as independent as he and therefore
have a right to be worshipped ultimately without reference to him, who can be
no more said to give them that right than to give it himself. So that if our
Author's Hypothesis be true, there are two Divine Natures or Gods, who enjoy
all the Rights of their Godheads by as good a Title as the most High God
himself; which if they are not three Gods in the highest Sense, it is
impossible to imagine what are three Gods, and as such it is too notorious that
all Trinitarians worship them. And tho they may with the help of Distinctions,
without any difference, deny and wrangle about the plainest Contradictions; yet
it would be in vain to deny matters of Fact, since it is evident they have
three Objects of supreme Worship, each of which they adore apart one from the
other; which is either owning three Gods, or else owning themselves guilty of
wilful Idolatry, in paying Supreme Worship to what they do not believe to be
God.

The reason why it is so necessary a Duty to believe the Unity of God, is,
because we ought to have but one Object of supreme Worship; whoever has more,
destroys that Unity, and is guilty of Idolatry: For it is most evident that if
the having one Object of Supreme Worship, be the adoring of one God or supreme
Being; the having three such Objects and the adoring each singly and by
himself, is the Worship of three Gods. And in this point, whether it be lawful
to have more than one Object of supreme Worship, turns at present the whole
controversy between the Trinitarians and Antitrinitarians. This was the Point I
chiefly insisted on in my Letter; and this is what I still desire a serious
answer to: For our Author's answer is a plain denial of Matter of Fact in their
Worship, and a condemnation of those that so worship.

But to return, let the Relation between the Divine Persons be what it will,
that is wholly ad intra, without any respect or reference to Creatures, who
being equally obliged to each for their Beings and all the Blessings they do
here or shall hereafter enjoy, (which are the things they ought to pay the
highest Adoration for) ought to pay to each the highest; and consequently not
worship one for the Sake of the other, but each for his own sake. And this is
evident from this farther Reason: For suppose (as we very well may, if there
are three Divine Natures) that two of them no way concerned themselves with
human Affairs, and that our Happiness or Misery no way depended upon them,
there would be no reason why we should give them Divine Worship; but we ought
to give it to him wholly from whom we have our Being, and expect our Happiness:
and for the same Reason, if we are equally indebted to each, Justice and
Gratitude will oblige us to pay to each equal acknowledgment, and to terminate
our Devotions no more on one than on the others. And I challenge him to produce
any Text of Scripture where there is any ground laid for the Worship of God,
but it will agree to him that has unlimited Wisdom, Power and Goodness, etc.
necessarily and eternally; and who bestows upon us our Life and Happiness: and
what Worship we exhibit to God is certainly for his own Sake, and ultimately
terminates in him. Thus if there be the same Reason for terminating our Worship
on the Son as on the Father, it is absurd to do otherwise.

Nay, were the Trinitarians consistent with themselves, they ought to pay a
thousand times more Acknowledgments to the Son than to the Father, since the
Benefits they receive from the one, so much exceed the Benefits they receive
from the other. For suppose one should owe to two Persons, to whom he was
otherwise equally obliged, an immense Sum, without payment of which he must for
ever suffer the Miseries of an intolerable Imprisonment: would he not owe
almost infinitely more to that Person who not only freely and generously
forgave him himself, but even voluntarily paid to the other, though with loss
of his Life by an ignominious and painful Death, whatsoever their common Debtor
owed him; to whom he was no further obliged than for accepting the full
Satisfaction of him that became his Surety. The application to the Father and
the Son is very easy. As to the Father's sending his Son, if the Son were not
his Subject, and so he could command him, it could amount to no more than the
Father's being willing to receive and accept of the Satisfaction the Son was as
willing to pay in the stead of the Debtor.

But let us suppose the Father, Son and H. Spirit as equal in Nature, so also
equally obliging to us, and therefore each of them deserving from us our whole
Hearts and Souls, which it is impossible for us to give to more than one: we
must wittingly and willingly by bestowing them on one, either commit Sacrilege
against the other two, or else by dividing them, give each but a Third of that
which is wholly due to each of them, which would be Sacrilege against all
three. These are the Mischiefs of our Author's Scheme of Religion, which it is
impossible for him to avoid, but by owning with the Unitarians, that there is
but one eternal necessary Nature, which is to be loved and honored infinitely
above all, and all others as his Creatures, but for his Sake and for his Glory.

And now let the Reader judge what great reason our Author has to triumph and
insult over his Antagonist, as he does all along, but more especially p. 62,
63, 64. where amongst other things he says, he cannot but suspect, it is the
increasing or upholding of a Party, etc. which has very much the ascendent of
the Love of Truth. How may the Learned Socrates shame the self-conceited
Dogmatizers? How much rather would I be modest Socrates, than a Christian who
so leans to his own or his Party's Understanding? Our Author is a little
unlucky in so much mentioning Socrates, who chose rather to embrace Death than
our Author's beloved Hypothesis of more than one Divine Nature, though that was
the Religion of his Country and of the World: but I cannot blame him that sets
up for more than one such Nature, (which appears to be contrary to the clearest
Reason, as well as the most express Scripture) for condemning others for
leaning upon that Guide, which the one God has obliged them to follow, their
own and not others Understanding. As to his suggestion of our having other
Motives, not the Love of Truth, in opposing him, it is as groundless as
uncharitable. For what design but the Love of Truth is it almost possible for a
Man to have in defending a Doctrine, the doing of which exposes him to be
ruined by Penal Laws, and which is worse, makes him an Object of the Aversion
and Detestation of all Sects? But since our Author has given me the occasion, I
shall presume to ask him, how he can, not only own the Churches Faith, the
Athanasian Creed, but (if he is of the Clergy) solemnly subscribe to it, and
devoutly read it with all its damnatory Clauses, when it asserts but one
Substance, one Uncreate, one Eternal, etc. and affirms the Holy Spirit to
proceed from both the Father and the Son? the contrary of all which he asserts
in his Propositions, and makes God the Father to have two Sons, both issuing
from him by way of Emanation: and consequently the Son is not (as contrary to
all Creeds as well as the Scripture) God's only Son.

But I shall conclude, only adding, that as it is contrary to the Genius of
Religion, and is the way to eternize Errors, so it betrays a mean and low
Spirit, to embrace an Opinion for the sake of a Party though never so
venerable. And for my part, as I have been taught to call no Man Master but
Christ, so I will own no other Name but that of Christian, and not of any
distinguishing Party or Sect; and therefore will be chargeable with no
controverted Doctrine further than what I expressly own; and that I do the Unity
of the Nature of God, which is certainly of all Doctrines the most fundamental;
and which I have abundantly shown from the Consideration of his Essence, his
Attributes, his Works, and from the Duty and Worship we owe him.

POSTSCRIPT.
AND now I am at leisure to bestow a word or two upon my pert Adversary the
Enquirer, who in an Advertisement to his View of the Considerations, charges me
presently with a double deplorable Impotency; and that for no other reason, but
saying the Enquiry being so fully examined by an abler Hand, I shall only
observe, etc. but instead of answering and showing the weakness of those few
Observations I added, he only vents his spleen in studied Raillery, and
contemptuous Expressions. But it is usual for Men highly conceited, when their
weaknesses are exposed, to grow angry. And I find the calm and sober Enquirer
not exempt from the same Infirmity. He says, I rave in my Dream in supposing he
makes Parts in God, or three inadequate Gods. And for reply says, I appeal to
that little Sense he has left himself, whether Power alone be God exclusively
of Wisdom and Goodness? Then, adds he, it is an inadequate or a notcompleat
Notion of God, and then by his profound reasoning not eternal. But is not this
disowning and owning three inadequate Gods? For where is the Difference between
three inadequate Gods, and three each of which is God, and yet none of them is
God in a complete and adequate Sense? And if the Father alone be no more God,
than Power alone exclusive of Wisdom and Goodness, he must certainly be God in
a very inadequate Sense: for neither Power, exclusive nor inclusive of Wisdom
and Goodness, is God, but all three Properties of the Father, who could not be
said to be eternal, except he had not only Power but all the Divine Attributes.
I wonder with what assurance he can deny, that his Hypothesis makes three
inadequate Gods; since he says, page 47. When you predicate the Name of God of
any one of them [the Persons], you herein express a true but inadequate
conception of God? Now if you predicate the Name of God of every one of them
singly, and then add them together in one Number, I appeal to the Enquirer's
great Sense, how far short that comes of three inadequate Gods And he further
adds in the same Place, As the Body is the Man not excluding the Soul, and the
Soul the Man not excluding the Body, so each is God not excluding the others;
which at best is but making each to be God but in part, as the Body or the Soul
is but Man in part; though with this difference, that each of the three Persons
is but the third of God, when the Body or the Soul is the Moiety of the Man.
For each of these conceived by it self, are (as he words it, page 51.)
individual Essences; but conceived together, they are the entire individual
Essence of God. Which I aver is destroying the Godhead of each, since each can
be no more God, than the Third of an Essence can be the entire Essence it self.
And whether this is not making parts and composition in God, I refer the Reader
to what I have said, page 12. And this notion was by the Ancients counted a
kind of Sabellianism, vid. Petav. Adden. ad Tom. 2. de Trin. page 866. and it
was by some of the Fathers called Atheism, Id. L. 1. de Tr. C. 6.. 3. as
observed by an Answer to the Animadversions on the Dean of P. etc. page 164.
And it is, by the acknowledgment of his own Party, Blasphemy against God the
Father, whom they all own to be God in the most perfect Sense; and who, if he
were not so, the addition of the other two would not make one God in the most
perfect Sense; because he could not communicate to his Son and his Holy Spirit,
those Perfections he had not in himself. But to do him Justice, he seems, page
48. to be ashamed of this Notion, and says, That the Father is the only true
God, but withal adds, THAT neither excludes the Son nor Spirit from being the
true God. [Not to take notice of the Contradiction, that the Father is the only
true God, and yet others are the true God as well as he.] This is directly to
destroy his Hypothesis, and is asserting what, page 6. of his Enquiry, he says,
no Man that considers with ever so little Intention and Sincerity will offer
at, namely, That they are three and one in the same respect: for if the Father
be the one only true God, and all three but the same one only true God, the
three and the one are the same in all respects whatever; and there can be no
more difference between them than between the self-same God and himself. So
that if each single Person be God but in an inadequate Sense, the Trinity must
be so too, because that is no more than what each Person is, the true God. And,
p. 78. of the View, he is forced to own that the Father is God in the most
adequate and perfect Sense of the Word, and consequently all three can be no
more. Thus the three and the one are the same in the same respect: and if there
is more in the three in any respect whatever, than in the Father, it must
either be a Perfection or an Imperfection; if a Perfection, the Father is not
God in the most perfect sense of the Word; if an Imperfection, then the Father
is God in a more perfect Sense than all three together. But I will say no more
on this Point, since I have in my Letter fully proved that neither Son nor Holy
Spirit can be the same God with the Father, and consequently if there is but
one God, the Father is that one God exclusively both of Son and Spirit.

I cannot but remark, that this calm Enquirer has no fixed or certain Faith of
what the three are, which he says, are in the Godhead. Sometimes he is no more
a Trinitarian than those he writes against, supposing the three in the Godhead
are Wisdom, Power and Goodness: sometimes he is a Modalist, as, page 48. where
he says, Father, Son and Holy Ghost are each the true God, because each of them
communicates in the Godhead, which is the Cant of the Modalists; and is as much
as to say, the Father, Son and H. Ghost communicate in the Godhead, or in
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Sometimes he talks like a Realist, in supposing it
possible, though not certain, that the three are three individual Essences; and
this last seems to be his more settled Opinion, because he talks so much of the
mutual Complacency and delicious Society that is between them. Which is to make
God a collective Name of several intelligent Beings conversing together. Which
Notion as to one part of it well agrees with that of the old Pagans; who as
well as our Author could not think a Divine Being absolutely happy in it self;
or (to use his expressions) had no gustful Idea of a happy State in mere
eternal Solitude, therefore did suppose a delicious Society of Gods, solacing
one another with everlasting Harmony, and mutual Complacency into highest
Delectation: but as to the other, they could never suppose this delicious
Society, each of which was one God, to be still but one and the same God.

He says, His (meaning me) confidently taking it for granted on all Hands, that
all Infinites are equal, shows his little compass of Thought, and how
unacquainted he is with the Difficulties of a Controversy, wherein yet he will
be so overmeddlesom, Qui pauca respicit* etc. But who so bold as --? I
challenge him to produce any one that ever supposed somewhat more than
Infinite, which must be, if Infinites are unequal: and if one Infinite be less
than another, the less would cease to be Infinite, by having a bound or end put
to it. And there would be no Difficulty (which he there hints at) in supposing
unequal parcels of Matter to be divided each into infinite Parts, if they could
be divided into unequal Parts. But I would willingly know, whether it is a
Finite or an Infinite Inequality that is between Infinites. But I have spoken
sufficiently of this Matter already, and so I have of necessary Emanations.

He says of me, He did not need when he writ, to have abandoned all Logic and
common Sense, that would have told him, Relata sunt simul natura. But why that
Reflection on me, except it be that,. 55. (which is the only Place he can mean)
I expressly say, Relatives cannot exist but at the same time? If I had asserted
a First in Nature in contradiction to Time, I should have had as little Honesty
as he supposes I have Sense, in making use of a distinction of which I had no
Idea; nor can they who use it, explain to others what they mean by it. And now
having taken notice of all his Flurts and Misrepresentations, I take leave of
him as civilly as he of me. Good Night Mr. Enquirer.

But now having (as I suppose) sufficiently maintained my Reflections, I shall
address my self to the Reader, and mind him, that not only the Real and Nominal
Trinitarians differ one from another, but the Real among themselves, as these
two Authors I have been considering, and the Nominal among themselves; and
every one is dissatisfied with all other Explications besides his own, as
contradictory, absurd, or unintelligible, and inconsistent with either the
Unity or the Trinity: and they attack one another with Arguments borrowed from
their common Adversary the Unitarian, which every one counts valid against the
rest. Whence I cannot but remark, how wonderful the Power of Prejudice and
Education is, whereby it comes to pafs, that though they cannot reconcile their
Father-God, and Son-God, and Holy-Ghost-God, with the Unity of God; and though
both Scripture and Reason do most expressly and clearly assert, that there is
but one only God the Father of all; yet they cannot quit their inveterable
Doctrine. And though the Nominals plainly perceive the Realists guilty of
Polytheism, yet they join with them in the same Form of Worship, wherein they
adore equally with them three Divine Persons under distinct and different
Characters, each by himself as one entire perfect God. And though the
Ignoramus-Trinitarians cannot satisfy themselves with any explication, yet they
think themselves still obliged to profess in words a Doctrine they cannot in
their own Minds make consistent with it self. But I shall ask these Gentlemen,
whether God requires impossibilities of them, or whether it is possible for
them to believe what they cannot apprehend but inconsistent with, and
contradictory to it self; or whether the Christian Religion, which all grant is
plain and easy in its Fundamentals, as suited to the simplicity of the bulk of
Mankind, can chiefly be built upon a Doctrine so unintelligible, that the most
Learned Men of that Persuasion for above Thirteen hundred Years, have in vain
labored to make it intelligible and consistent with it self; and sober Men
esteem it as vain an attempt as squaring the Circle, or finding out the
Philosophers-stone, etc?

But since my present Business has been with the real Trinitarians, I shall
conclude with an Argument of Athenagoras a most Learned Writer of the second
Century, in his Apology for the Christians to Marcus Antoninus. Which being
urged against a Plurality of Gods, is as strong against a plurality of Divine
Natures, Essences, etc. And it seems to be but an abstract of what I have more
at large said against my Adversaries; which I quote not for his Authority, but
for the Reason of it. Translated into English it runs thus:

Pray consider (says he) the Reasons why we affirm, that from Eternity there
was but one God the Creator of the Universe. If from Eternity there have been
two or more Gods, either they are united in one and the same Essence, or each
of them has a distinct Essence to himself. But for them to exist in one and the
same Essence, is impossible; for though they should be one in their
denomination of Gods, yet as begotten and unbegotten they must be different:
seeing what is begotten resembles its Parent, whereas the unbegotten is like
nothing, being neither made of, nor for any thing. But if it should be said
that many Gods are one, as the Hand, Foot, and Eye are but Parts of the same
Body, Socrates will tell you, that what is compounded of and divisible into
Parts, is both made and corruptible: But God is uncreated, impassible, and
undivisible, therefore not consisting of Parts. But if every one has a distinct
Existence, where shall the other or the rest be, whilst he that made this World
surrounds and governs the Creatures which he formed? If the Architect of this
Earth (which is of a Spherical Figure, enclosed within the Celestial Orbs) be
over his Works, and rule them by his Providence; what Place shall we assign to
another God? Not in this World, for it belongs to another; nor over the World,
for he that made it, is above it: And if he be not in the World nor over the
World, where can he be above the World or God? Is it in another World? If so,
then he is nothing to us that governs not our World; nor can his Power be
great, being confined to a certain Place. If therefore he is neither in nor
over this World, nor any other, (for there is no other, seeing all Parts of the
Universe make but one World, whereof the entire extent is filled by its Maker)
therefore he is no where, for there is no Place for him. But supposing him
somewhere, pray to what purpose? plainly to none at all, etc. It will be said,
perhaps to provide for us; but certainly he cannot provide for those he has not
made. It follows therefore that if he created nothing, nor provides, nor can be
confined to a Place; there is no other God at all, but one from Eternity, the
only Creator of the Universe.

FINIS.
A REPLY TO The Second Defense OF THE XXVIII PROPOSITIONS, Said to be wrote in
Answer to a Socinian Manuscript.

BY The AUTHOR of that MS. no Socinian, but a Christian and Unitarian.

Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDC XCV.

A REPLY to the SECOND DEFENSE of the XXVIII Propositions, said to be wrote in
Answer to a Socinian Manuscript.
SIR,
I NOW find by Notice in the Gazette, that your Learned and Worthy Friend,
whose Name you concealed from me, is the Lord Bishop of Gloucester. He has
published an Answer (which he calls, A Second Defense of his Propositions) to a
private Manuscript, which he calls Socinian. Which MS. to excuse his not
publishing it, he tells his Reader he had returned to you, and had it not by
him, nor a Copy of it. He says he collected the Substance of it: I believe
what he thought the Substance; but how shall the Reader judge of that? since as
a great Master tells us, The Context, the Style, and the Phraseology of an
Author must be well considered by one that means to understand him perfectly.
But it seems he was not willing to lose an Opportunity to expose a Heretic,
though he strained Civility in so doing. In the mean time, my MS. gave occasion
to increase the Number of his explanatory Propositions. But after this farther
Explanation of his Explanation, he is as obscure as ever, though that (to deal
ingenuously) is rather his Misfortune than his Fault; for there are some things
which will never be explained while the World stands: such as necessary and
eternal Emanation, Divine Fecundity, the Difference between Order of Time and
Order of Nature.

One thing, before I begin my Reply, let me acquaint you with: I am advised to
pass by whatever does not concern the Cause, to bear the Imputation of affected
Poedantry, Ignorance and Arrogance. Contemptuous Charges enough to exercise the
Patience of a well-compos'd Man, and urge one of my Make to take out Letters of
Reprisal; at least by way of Self-defence, to say something like that of Tully,
Non video in hac mea mediocritate ingenii quid despicere possit Antonius. But I
will submit my Resentment to my Adviser, as obedient Sons are wont their Faith
to their Mother; and that not only for the Reason aimed at by my Friend, but
also out of Respect to my Adversary, (and therein I shall please you) whom I
believe to be as you character him, one of the most deserving of his Order. But
yet I beg leave to tell you, that I do not hold my self obliged by this
Promise, to forbear exposing the Weakness of an unconcluding Argument, or
setting two contrary Sayings to stare one another in the face: but from all
Revilings, from foolish Words, designed to lessen his Lordship's just Esteem, I
shall religiously forbear. If I sprinkle Salt, it shall not grieve his Person.

P. 1. of the Defense, etc.] whereas I had affirmed that the Trinitarians had
in vain tried their Strength against the Unitarians; his Lordship answers,
There Is no doubt of it, if their Adversaries may be Judges. I now affirm it, if
the Trinitarians themselves be Judges; for the Modalists will not allow the
Hypothesis of the Realists, and the Realists despise theirs: and then again,
the Ignoramus, or Mystery-trinitarians, esteem the Methods taken by both these
Parties, not only vain and fruitless, as to the refuting the Unitarians; but
also dangerous, and likely to overthrow their own great Article; while both
these Parties join, and with full consent condemn the Ignoramus-trinitarians,
who press the Belief of a Trinity in the Godhead, but cannot say what is meant
by it. What the modern Unitarians have taught in their late Tracts concerning
this controverted Article, some or other of their Adversaries teach as well as
they. For example, the Unitarians have taught, that if by Persons are meant
Relations, Capacities, or Respects of God to his Creatutes, then there may be
more Persons than 3 in the Godhead; because God has the Capacities, Respects
or Relations of a Judge, of an Oeconomus, or Provider, etc. They have taught,
that a Mode or a Posture cannot be a Person; that a Mode cannot be in God,
because Modes are changeable, and God is not. They look upon it as an
inconceivable Extravagancy, to fancy that God in one Mode or Posture, begat
himself in another; and breathed forth his Self, by the help of his begotten
Self, in a proceeding third-Self: And as to all these things, Dean Sh -- k, Mr.
H -- w, and the Bp. of Gl. have the same Sense as the Unitarians. The
Unitarians have taught, that there are not 3 Persons in the proper Sense of
that word, not 3 distinct Essences, Natures, Spirits, Minds, or intelligent
Beings, in the Unity of the Godhead; but that it is downright Tritheism to say
it, and equally idolatrous with the Polytheism of the Heathens. Dr. S -- th
teaches so likewise; Dr. Wallis is of the same Opinion; and the famous Bps. of
Worcester and Sarum, who will not declare plainly their own Sense, both declare
against this. The Unitarians have taught, that that Article, which is proposed
to be believed as necessary to Salvation, is capable of being explained; and
that it is very unjust, not to say ridiculous, to require Men to believe words,
whereof no certain Signification can be given: Now if Dean Sherlock, with all
the Realists, and his Friend Dr. South, with all the Modalists, were not of the
Mind of the Unitarians in this Point; would they, think you, take such Pains to
explain the Article, each after his own particular Manner? Whatsoever single
Affirmation you arraign the Unitarians upon, upon the same you arraign a
Majority of Trinitarians. For I think I may reckon, that no one of the three
chief Divisions, is equal to the other two. In short, the Majority of the
Church must be guilty of Heresy with the Unitarians, or the Unitarians must be
Orthodox with them. Thus, I think, I have justified that Censure, The
Trinitarians have in vain tried their Strength against their Adversaries; and
that not those Adversaries, but even the Trinitarians themselves being Judges.

His Lordship seems angry that I should be amazed at his distinguishing between
Intelligible and Comprehensible: But that I have since considered the
Necessities which a good Man may be put to, in the Defense of a bad Cause, I
should be more amazed at his Lordship's Defense of that idle Distinction. I
have many things to say in answer, but because I hear you are not pleased with
this fruitless Contention, I will wave it; and only tell you, that since his
Lordship sent me to the Dictionary to learn that comprehendere signifies
something that intelligere does not, I put that Labor on one of my Children,
and I Will take his word, that the metaphorical Signification of comprehendo, is
just the same with intelligo.

P. 6. l. 9. his Lordship has an obscure Period; in which, if there be any
Meaning, it must be this, That he holds it possible to understand the Manner
how Three are One; else he would not have offered at an Explication of the
Doctrine of the Trinity agreeable to natural Reason. And what Account has he
given of the Manner? why, in pr. 15. of 21. but 22. of 28. he declares, that
there is an UNCONCEIVABLY close, and inseparable Union in Will and Nature
between them, [the 3 numerically distinct Persons.] And is this all he knows of
the Manner how they are one? i. e. after such a Manner as cannot be known nor
told? Well! those Sophists (in rebuke of whom Socrates professed, all that he
knew was, that he knew nothing) were not so unreasonable as to make the
Inconceivableness of the Manner, wherein a Doctrine might be true, a Proof that
they knew the Manner in which it was true.

I said, that Three are One is not true in a Sense disagreeable to Reason: The
Explication which he gives how 3 are 1, is disagreeable to Reason, and
therefore not intelligible, not comprehensible, not true. The latter part he
answers with his usual Distinction, Though intelligible, yet not therefore
comprehensible: But I pray him to tell me, why a Prop. not disagreeble to
Reason, should not be capable of being completely understood, when it is
completely revealed.

I said, 2. He that understands the Truth of a Prop. understands the Manner in
which it is true, etc. I now apply it thus: He that understands the Truth of
this Prop. There are three Persons in one God, understands the Manner how that
can be, or the Sense in which it is true; and if he does not understand the
Manner or Sense, then, let him pretend what he will, he does not understand the
Truth of the Prop. and if not understanding the Manner or Sense how the Prop.
is true, he professes to believe it; then it is manifest he takes it on
Authority, believes it in deference to others.

Prop. 2. That Being which wants any one Perfection, cannot be absolutely or
infinitely perfect. Upon this I observed this Consequence, That Christ was God
only in a metaphorical Sense. Nor shall he ever be able to avoid the
Consequence; for the strict Sense of a Word or Phrase is the proper Sense of
it; and every Sense besides the strict and proper, is metaphorical.

Prop. 4. God the Father alone [strictly speaking] is a Being absolutely
perfect, because he alone is selfexistent; and all other Beings, even the Son
and H. Ghost, are from him. He seems to allow my former Censure: I now observe,
That his Hypothesis is unluckily built on vain Distinctions. Indeed he could
tell me, that Intelligible and Comprehensible was an old Distinction, and very
common; but now he brings forth one, which is wholly new, which no Man ever
used before him. It is this: ABSOLUTELY PERFECT in the stristest Sense, and
ABSOLUTELY PERFECT with reference to the Nature of a Being. Of which (to be as
free with him as he with me) I can make no better Sense than this; That a Being
which has all the Perfections of its Nature, may in some sort be said to have
all Perfections without Restriction, all whatsoever. That a Magistrate may be
said to exercise all Power without Limitation, when he exercises all that was
delegated to him. But if one Being can be more absolutely perfect than another,
I would fain know why one cannot be more omniscient, more omnipotent than
another; more infinite, more eternal, both a part post, and a part ante. If a
Man would study to restrain a word of some Latitude, he could not do it more
effectually than his Lordship has restrained the Predicate perfect, by the
Adjunct absolutely. Supposing the word Perfect may be taken in a stricter and a
looser Sense, yet the Phrase absolutely Perfect, cannot possibly admit of any
other Sense -- Having all Perfections. Every Man understands this Term
absolutely so as to imply, that nothing more than what thereby is, can be
predicated of the Subject. But if this Distinction must pass in this
Controversy against the common Sense of Mankind; then let the equivocating
Jesuits, who were formerly content with very childish Salvo's, to take off the
Infamy of a Lie, learn the way of distinguishing, worth a Volume of their old
mental Reservations, when the Treason they solemnly disavow, is unluckily
discovered.

Prop. 9. A Being which has all the Divine Perfections that are capable of
being communicated, may be properly said to be essentially GOD upon the account
of those Perfections, or to be endued with the Divine Nature. It seems I was so
rude as to call this a gross Prop. contrary to Sense and Reason, and to all
that the Proposer had rationally advanced before; nay, I was so perverse as to
prove it by Induction of Particulars. I refer to my Animadversions. His
Lordship here complains, 1. That I used too many words: but the Nature of the
Argument required them. 2. He tells me, he had no such Expression as, DERIVES
it self from God: But he has a bad Memory; for in his 3d Prop. he says, It Is an
Abatement of a boundless Perfection, not to be originally in him who has it,
but DERIVATIVELY. 3. He affirms that I am a little injurious, in representing
him saying, that the Son and H. Ghost have only SOME Perfections; whereas I
ought to have represented him as saying, that they have all that are capable of
being communicated. But I Will justify it, that I ought to have represented him
as I have done; for it is my Business to expose, not to cover the Weakness of
his Arguments, and I have not misrepresented him; for if the Son and H. Spirit
have not absolutely all Perfections, then they have but some: But how comes it
to pass that they have no more than they have? That Is nothing to my Purpose,
let him look to that. Incapacity to be greater, cannot surely make a rational
Being as great as the greatest. I come next to consider how his Lordship has
answered 4 Questions which I put.

1. Does the Divine Nature comprehend all Perfections, or can it want one or
two of the chiefest, and be still the same Divine Nature? To this, thus he;
Self-existence is a Perfection relating immediately to the Father's Existence,
not to his Nature or Essence. I reply, that this is not answering the Question,
but a very sorry shuffling it off; for let the Perfection of Self-existence
belong to what he pleases, yet I hope it is a Perfection; and if the Divine
Nature comprehends all Perfections, that Nature which does not comprehend all,
must not be the Divine Nature. 2. If Self-existence (as he teaches) relates
immediately to the Father's Existence, and (as he seems to mean) be but as good
as no Perfection; yet to be first Original of all things, and Independent, must
relate to his Nature, or none of all the rest relate to his Nature. The Nature
of a Being is that by which he is, that which he is: and if you abstract from
the Divine Nature, Independence, and being the first Original of all things,
you do not conceive God to be that which he is. 3. Even the Manner of God's
Existence (as his Lordship once phras'd it) belongs to his Essence; nay, it is
the very fundamental Notion of a God. Whatever Excellencies you ascribe to a
rational Being without self-existence, you raise him not above the Character of
a most excellent Creature; nay more, you cannot ascribe infinite Perfections to
any but the Self-existent God: For his Lordship grants, that the Perfections of
all other Creatures are in them but derivatively, and by being so, receive
Abatement. But if he can make these two things consist, I will give him this
Gift, he shall never be able to contradict himself while he breathes. 4. Though
he will not allow Self-existence to belong to the Essence of God; yet he says,
that it speaks a more excellent Manner of Existence, peculiar to the Father. I
argue then, If the Father does exist after a more excellent Manner than the
Son; then he is a more excellent Person than the Son, and has a more excellent
Nature: even as created Adam (it is his Lordship's Simily) is more excellent
than any of the Sons of Men. And if the more excellent Nature of the Father be
not another sort of Nature than the less excellent Nature of the Son, who can
help it? But then I Will tell him, that One absolutely perfect God with all
Perfections; all and every, Self-existence, Being the first Original, and
Independence not excluded; and his 2 Gods not absolutely perfect, but as
perfect as 2 Gods can be, that are not absolutely perfect; is a Dream, which
would make sport for any Man, that has not more Reverence for his Virtue than
his Reasoning.

But his Lordship is positive that the Nature of the Son may be a necessary
Nature, and uncreated, for all that I can object, or he has said: Well! I will
try that; I object that the Nature of the Son is not said to be necessary or
uncreated in Scripture. He offers no Reasons why it should be thought so; I
will produce some why it should not. 1. Because there can be but one
numerically necessary Existent: Dr. Cudworth, tho'a Trinitarian, could not but
own this, p. 200. The true and proper Idea of God, is a Being absolutely
perfect: absolute Perfection includes in it all that belongs to the Deity, and
is that alone to which necessary Existence is essential, and of which it is
demonstrable. The Nature of the Son cannot be uncreated, because there can be
but One numerical uncreated Nature. Indeed the Athanasian Creed pronounces,
The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate, the H. Ghost uncreate: but the Compiler
did not believe it; for he determines, not Three uncreate, but One uncreate.
His Lordship hints sometimes, that the Nature of the Father, Son, and H. Ghost
is specifically the same; sometimes that it is closely, inseparably,
unconceivably the same: but he constantly teaches, that their Natures are
numerically distinct: and now if every one of them is uncreate, it undeniably
follows, that there are 3 numerical, distinct, uncreated Natures: But this
methinks he should scarcely venture to assert, if it be but out of Reverence to
the Athanasian Creed, how much soever he may be tempted to trespass upon
evident Principles of Reason. 2. Neither the Son, nor the H. Ghost, is a
necessary Nature; because a necessary Nature must be also self-existent, and
independent. That Being which exists necessarily, could exist from no other:
but the Son exists from the Father, therefore does not exist necessarily. He
will say, The Son exists from the Father by eternal necessary Emanation; what
that is, I shall presently enquire: I argue on, If a Being could exist
necessarily, then it would not depend on God for its Existence; but the Son
(according to his Lordship) does depend on the Father for his Existence,
therefore he does not exist necessarily. If the Nature of the Son were
necessary, as is the Nature of the Father, no reason could be assigned why the
Father should not as much depend on the Son, as the Son on the Father. In
short, two necessary Natures there cannot be: but if there were, they would
both be independent.

To my 2d Question, he bids you, Sir, read again what he said to the former; I
have done so, and find I have not censured these words: God the Father's
Existence being without a Cause, does not make him to have another sort of
Nature, from the Son and H. Ghost.] Here it is implied, that the Nature of the
Son, and of the H. Ghost, had a Cause; whereas the Nature of God had none: Will
not this pass for a sufficient Character, to distinguish them as different
Natures? I Am sure, no two different Natures which he can name, do differ half
so much as a Nature that had a Cause, and a Nature that had not. And then
again, To have a Cause, and to be uncreated: if that be not a Contradiction, I
am satisfied he may talk backward and forward securely.

My 3d Question, Can a Being that depends on God, be properly said to be
essentially that God on whom it depends? He answers, Such a Being can be
properly said to be essentially that God in one Sense, but cannot in another;
i. e. can have an Essence of the same kind, though not the same numerical One.
But by his favor, an Essence of the same kind, can at most but make a Being to
be a God, not make him to be that God, on whom himself depends. If a Being can
be that God which depends on another; and that very God also, on whom himself
depends, then such Being may at once be Two Gods; and so the Second Person in
the Trinity is the Father that caused the Son to be, and the Son that was
caused by the Father. Thus by his Lordship's Answer to my 3d Question, it
appears he holds the Three Persons to be One God, as having an Essence of the
same kind; but to be Three numerical Gods. And to make his Polytheism look as
heathenishly as possible, he says, p. 19. that the individual Nature of the
Father, is not a Divine Nature more truly than that of the Two other Persons.
And then Self-existence, Being the first Original, and Independence, signify
much.

His Lordship makes the same Answer to my 4th Prop. as he did to my 2d; i. e.
he has answered it already. What can be more extravagant than this Fancy, on
which the Weight of more Hypotheses than one depends; viz. that Angels exist by
voluntary Creation, but the Son and H. Ghost by necessary Emanation? It Is
common with the Trinitarians, to use these Terms, Generation, Emanation,
Procession: it is common also with the most eminent of them to acknowledge, that
it is a difficult Thing to understand, a dangerous Curiosity to enquire, a bold
Presumption to determine, wherein these Terms differ: and the Reason is, (though
they are ashamed to own it) because they know not what they would have their
Terms signify.

In common speaking we know what is meant by To generate or beget, To emanate
or flow from, To proceed, To go or come forth: but those Terms cannot be
applied to the Father, Son, and H. Ghost, in that natural obvious Sense; why
then should they be applied to them at all, when no Man can distinctly say what
they are to signify? It Is granted we have not an adequate Conception of God;
there may be something in his Nature, whereof we have no just Idea: but that
which we cannot understand, how can we talk of? How can we form Propositions of
Things out of the reach of our Knowledge? But by this one particular Term
EMANATION, his Lordship will venture to say, This is what is meant, A more
excellent Way of Existence than by Creation; and to his Term Emanation, he adds
this Epithet Necessary: so then, the more excellent Way of Existence than by
Creation, is necessary Existence; and so it is: but then the Son does not
necessarily exist. That Being which could not but be, ever was; and that Being
which ever was, could be from no other. But because his Lordship is wont
sarcastically to deride my Arguing, (who am indeed an obscure and unlearned
little Fellow) though for ought he knows, I may equal the very great Abilities of
that DYING MARTYR (yet a Trinitarian to my Knowledge) who starves, to the
Reproach of this Nation; to whom the envious Jovian allowed the Praise of
Mediocrity: I shall therefore seek a little shelter from Authority; that his
Lordship may not renounce his Senses, if any Man of Sense be of his Mind. The
Author I am going to quote is Dr. Cudworth, a good Man, and very near of his
Lordship's Make too; who in his Intellectual System, contradicts his own and
his Lordship's Hypothesis, as plainly and liberally as heart can wish; p. 210.
Self-existence and necessary Existence, are essential to a perfect Being, and
to none else. But his Lordship teaches, that the latter, and not the former, is
essential to a perfect Being; and that the Son is absolutely perfect (though not
in his strictest Sense) without Self-existence, and that the Self-existence
which belongs to the Father does not belong to his Essence: though he who can
separate Self-existence from the Father's Essence, may with as much Reason deny
the Existence of his Essence; for the Father is as certainly self-existent, as
he is existent.

Cudworth again, p. 726. Nothing could exist of it self from Eternity,
naturally and necessarily, but that which contains necessary and eternal
Self-existence in its Nature. I am apt to believe, this Author put in that
Phrase of it self to save an Emanation or two: but it will not do it; for he
constantly makes Self-existence and necessary Existence inseparable
Perfections. And p. 748. he speaks full and home against his own and the Bp. of
Gloucester's Tritheism, in these words: Though it be certain that something did
exist of it self necessarily, from all Eternity; yet it is certain likewise,
that there can be but one such thing, Necessity of Existence being essential to
no more. Now if Necessity of Existence be essential but to One, I pray, Sir,
what will become of his Lordship's necessary Emanations? Cudw. p. 764. Because
something did certainly exist of it self from Eternity unmade, therefore also
is there actually a necessary existent Being. The Doctor proves the necessary
Existence of a Being, from its Existing of it self from Eternity; i. e. from
its necessary Existence, as I had done before. Let the Reader judge if it be not
a good Argument.

P. 13. his Lordship says, A Creature communicating its Nature, does not forgo
its own individual Nature, [but neither does he communicate his own individual
Nature] nor any part thereof. Here I beg his Pardon; for the Creature does
forgo a part, a seminal part thereof; the bodily Substance of the Foetus is by
the wonderful Providence of God, made from the bodily Substance of the Parents;
and as far as the bodily Substance of Men may be called their Nature, they
waste their Nature, to produce their like. How Souls are produced, he says not,
neither I. But hitherto he has not offered any thing to make me retract my
Assertion; That we have no other Notion of the word Communicate, but to impart
or give; and what one Person does impart or give, of any essential and singular
thing, THAT himself has not, but he has it to whom it is given. Who questions
the Power of God to generate his Like? He made Man in his own Likeness, endued
him with rational Faculties, with noble Excellencies of Mind: but the
Unitarians do not see, how God can communicate all his infinite Perfections;
for that is to communicate himself, to beget himself, to multiply himself;
which deserves a harder Name than I can give it.

Prop. 10. There seems to be no Contradiction, nor the least Absurdity in
asserting, that God is able to communicate every one of his Perfections, except
those of Self-existence, and being the first Original of all things.] Against
this, I did affirm, (and see no Cause I have to retract) that for the same
Reason, as Self-existence, and being the first Original of all things, are
incommunicable; for the very same, Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness were
incommunicable also: and to make good this Affirmation, 'twas proper for me to
declare why the former were incommunicable, that the Reader might judge wherein
the latter were not so likewise, for the Reason alleged. All that his Lordship
has to offer, is, that I attempt to prove a self-evident Principle: but that is
not so great a Fault I hope, as to attempt to prove an evident Contradiction;
such as, That two Persons have all Perfections necessary to essentiate a
perfect God, though they have not absolutely all Perfections; That God the Father
has more Perfections than are necessary to essentiate a perfect God; That the
Father who has more, and the Son and H. Spirit, who have just so many
Perfections, as are necessary to essentiate a perfect God, are still all Three
of them but One God. But supposing I have used in re non dubia argumentis non
necessariis, in a plain Case needless Arguments; yet he cannot charge me to
have obscured the self-evident Principle: but I defy his Lordship, to
illustrate his Obscurities. I proceed in my Defense, Whereas it is very absurd
and contradictious to suppose more than One self-existent; so it is equally
absurd and contradictious to suppose more than One infinitely powerful, wise,
and good Being. And by equally I mean, as evidently so. Nor am I the only Man
that will say this, as I shall prove presently; tho'he pretends to be sure of
the contrary, and civilly tells me, I cannot think so, let me say what I will.
I make him but this temperate Return; I will suspect his Understanding sooner
than his Veracity. I said farther, that Infinite Power, Infinite Wisdom,
Infinite Goodness go together, and may all of them as well as either of them,
be in all Beings whatsoever, as well as in more Beings than one. He replies,
that this as much needs to be proved, as that which it is brought to prove; and
that my only Answer is like to be, It must be taken on the Authority of my Lord
of Canterbury. But then by my Lord of Gloucester's Favor, I am not the only
Man that will say, more than One infinitely powerful, is as absurd as more than
One self-existent. And if the Judgment of that Lord of Cant. (which he passes
with unbecoming Contempt) is of no value, I will laugh at the Man who thinks to
credit his Discourse with the Authority of Athanasius, or the Nicene Fathers;
Men moderately skilled perhaps in brangling Philosophy, amused with mysterious
Platonism, and full of themselves: whereas the Name of TILLOTSON shall be ever
blessed, if sound Learning and wondrous Modesty, true Piety and just Moderation
do not grow out of fashion and esteem. To that Passage I cited out of his
Sermon on 1 Timothy 2. 5. my Lord of Gloucester thinks it enough to answer, that
he had not the Sermon by him, and I had not distinguished his words. A fair
Answer! I will now cite them in a distinguishing Character. P. 13. Absolute
Perfection is the most essential Notion which Mankind has always had of God,
and necessarily supposes Unity; it is essential to the Notion of an absolutely
perfect Being, that all Perfections be united in him: to imagine some
Perfections in one, and some in another, [i. e. in God the Father, which are
not in God the Son] is a Contradiction to the most natural and easy Notion Men
have of a God; i. e. that he is a Being, in whom all Perfections do meet and
are united. Now had his Grace been a Prophet, he could not more directly have
pointed his words against the Hypothesis of the 28 Propositions. And if his
Grace was so honest as to believe the Truth of what he affirmed, why may not I
who have said the same things in other words, believe what I have said? That
odious Insinuation to the contrary, must needs reflect hardly upon his
Lordship, rather than on me; for I will be his Proselyte, if the major Part of
the Trinitarians do not believe with me, that it is equally absurd and
contradictious, to assert more than One infinitely powerful Being, as to assert
more than One self-existent Being: Nay, amongst the Trinitarians, there is one,
a late eminent and worthy Writer; who in his Intellectual System, p. 652. l.
19. teaches thus: The genuine Attributes of the Deity, namely, such as are
demonstrable of an absolutely perfect Being, are not only not contradictious,
but also necessarily connected together, and inseparable from one another. For
there could not possibly be one Thing infinite in Wisdom only, another Thing
infinite only in Power, and another Thing only infinite in Duration, or
eternal; but the very same Thing which is infinite in Wisdom, must needs be
also infinite in Power, and infinite in Duration. That which is infinite in any
one Perfection, must needs have all Perfections in it. Thus are all the
Perfections of the Deity, not only not contradictious, but also inseparably
concatenate. In the very next Page Dr. Cudworth farther asserts, That there is
nothing in the genuine Idea of God, and his Attributes, but what is
demonstrable of a perfect Being, and that there cannot be the least either aded
to that Idea, or detracted from it, any more than there can be any thing added
to, or detracted from the Idea of a Triangle, or of a Square.] Whence it
follows unavoidably, that the Son and H. Spirit can no more be omnipotent than
self-existent, independent, and first Originals; if they have one infinite
Perfection, they have all; if they want one, they want all: and if Three
distinct Beings have each of them all infinite Perfections, they are Three Gods
in the highest Sense.

Prop. 11. It seems evident from H. Scripture, that the Son and H. Spirit have
all Divine Perfections but those two, such as unlimited Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, and unspotted Purity. Here his Lordship notes, that in my
Animadversions I said, Unspotted Purity was but the Perfection of a Man or
Angel, not an infinite Perfection of a God. And here I say again,
notwithstanding what he has said to the contrary, that even Saints made
perfect, and Angels that never fell from their blessed Estate, are unspottedly
pure; he will not deny it, and yet they are not Gods: he will not assert that
they are, and therefore unspotted Purity is the Perfection of Saints and
Angels, not the infinite Perfection of a God. As to his Reproach, so frequently
cast upon me, that I have a large Stock of Confidence; I reply, If my Discourse
is reasonable, my Confidence is just.

I excepted, as I justly might, against his Lordship's Expression, It SEEMS
evident from Scripture that the Son and H. Spirit have all Perfections but two.
My Reflection, on which he descants, but thought not good to set down, was
this: That which does but seem evident, is not really so; and that which is
evident, does more than seem so. What he excepts, and my Reply thereto, I Am not
willing to trouble the Reader with, and therefore I omit it, and proceed.

In my Animadversions, I wished he had cited some of the plainest Texts, from
which he thinks the Son and H. Spirit have all Perfections but two. He now has
cited; What! plain Texts? no such matter, but naked Texts, without taking
notice of the Account already given of them by the Unitarians: and then with a
faint stroke of Rhetoric, says, This Text does at least seem to speak Christ
infinitely powerful, and that seems to speak him infinitely wise, etc. But I
tell him, no, not one of the Texts alleged does so much as seem to speak his
Sense to an impartial Reader: for sometimes what he supposes said of Jesus
Christ, is not said of him, but of God his Father; and what is really said of
the Lord Christ, does only prove him to be more honorable than his Brethren,
but still leaves him inferior to his Father. I will give one Instance of each
Remark: His Lordship affirms, that the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 1. ver. 10,
11, 12. expressly applies (he means in the strict literal Sense) some Verses of
the 102d Psalm to the Son of God: I affirm he does not; To prove my Negative, I
premise, 1. That those Verses, if then extant in that Epistle, did not seem to
Clemens Romanus, (the most ancient Father we have) who lived in the first
Century, to be so applied; neither to Aquina in the 13th, nor to Deodati in the
last Age. The two last were Trinitarians. 2. Allowing those Verses genuine as
we have them, the Account given by the Unitarians is most agreeable. 3. Setting
aside those two Considerations, yet it is most manifest that the 10th Verse, as
applied to the Son of God, was not so intended by the Divine Author: for ver.
2. the Author says, God the Father made the Worlds; and if he should, v. 10.
ascribe laying the Foundation of the Heavens and the Earth to the Son, then he
contradicts himself in the same Chapter. If his Lordship should say the Text
tells us, God made the Worlds by his Son; I reply, That Is not enough for his
Hypothesis; it will not therefore follow that the Son has unlimited
Perfections, Infinite Power, etc. but rather the contrary.

He cites Romans 9. 5. to prove the Knowledge and Wisdom of Christ to be Infinite,
without taking notice of the different Pointings, and consequently Readings,
mentioned by Erasmus and Curcelleus; and other Observations given in the Answer
to Mr. Milbourn: and besides, does not fairly read the Text as it is even in
our English Translation. To prove the Power of Christ to be limited, and not
infinite, I cited Mat. 26. 53. where he says to Peter, Think thou that I
cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve
Legions of Angels? His Lordship answers, There Is no Necessity it should be
implied in these words, that Christ had not Power to deliver himself without
praying to his Father. If so, would it not then be a Mockery to pray to his
Father for that which he had in his own Power before he prayed for it? He
pursues his Answer thus: Greater Works are recorded of Christ, without any
mention of his praying for Ability to do them. If I studied to nick him with
his own Raillery on me, here I might ask, Who told him so? and what were those
greater Works? It Is certain Christ had not before he prayed for it, that Power
for which he prayed. Well! but (says his Ldp.) Christ's Power being originally
from the Father, he took all Opportunities of giving the Father the Glory of
what he did. If he designs this to prove Christ's Power infinite, he has very
ill luck at Argument; for this is a fair and full yielding up the Cause. To
give Glory to the Father for the Works which he did, signifies no less than to
acknowledge he did them, not by a Power of his own, but by a Power communicated
from the Father, and for which he praises the Father; which are the Characters
of a dependent finite Being. His next Remark is still more against himself,
viz. when Christ thus said, that he could have obtained Legions of Angels by
Prayer, he thought fit to declare in the Ears of his Enemies, how dear he was
to God, though they hated him. The dearer one is to God, the greater must be his
Power; but he that is dearest, acts by a borrowed Power; and that may perhaps
be greater than we can imagine, but cannot be infinite. To rivet his Pleadings
against himself, he is pleased to add, that Christ did industriously conceal
the highest Sense in which he was the Son of God. This is a most weak Conceit;
and if Chrysostom was the Author of it, his Ldp. is as much beholden to him as
Ajax was to Hector for the Sword wherewith he stabbed himself. If Christ
concealed the highest Sense wherein he was the Son of God, then it is very
disingenuously done of the Trinitarians to pretend to prove that highest Sense
from any Words of Christ; and if the Words of Christ do not deliver that Sense,
I am afraid it will be found, that the Apostles did as industriously conceal it
as their Master; for the Words of Christ are indeed strained when interpreted
this way, but not more than the Words of the Apostles for the same Purpose. And
if Christ concealed that highest Sense from his Enemies, he also concealed it
from all others; for those Discourses which were industriously framed to
conceal it from Men not disposed to believe it, could not sufficiently reveal
it to Men disposed to believe it.

Prop. 12. It Is intolerable Presumption to conclude, etc. Here his Ldp. is
pleased to disown the Grammatical and Natural Signification of his Censure, in
that angry Phrase intolerable Presumption: He does not mean by it a Presumption
that should not be tolerated. But if I let him take sanctuary in his Meaning,
it shall be upon condition, that he will excuse my having displayed the odious
Consequences of his Words taken in their proper Signification. By intolerable
Presumption, he meant a most high Presumption; and he will still say, that to
conclude, there is no way of being immediately from God but by Creation, is a
wonderful Boldness. I will leave it with the Reader, whether it be not a
greater Boldness for any Man to determine, there is a way of being immediately
from God, besides by Creation, when neither do the Scriptures speak of, nor can
the Reason of Man apprehend any such; which though he does not positively
determine, yet he builds upon it. I admire and honor him, that he would not
persecute when it was in his Power. I had affirmed, that necessary Emanation
was a thing whereof we have no Idea; which not being able to deny, he asks, Is
it impossible for a thing to be whereof we have no Idea? Is God bound to give
us Idea's, of what he can or has produced? I answer to the first, It is
possible. To the second, God is not bound to give us Idea's of what he can or
has produced; but then we are no ways concerned, nor can we reason or discourse
about those things whereof we have no Idea's: Therefore it is high Presumption
to affirm this or that concerning them; but to impose such Affirmations on the
Faith of others, is the raging Madness of a persecuting Spirit, which it is the
Honor of his Ldp. to detest. But what he seemed but just now afraid to assert,
here he makes no Scruple to assert: We have (says he) a clearer Idea of
necessary Emanation than of voluntary Creation. Of voluntary Creation we have
this Idea: God of his own Free Will, and by his Almighty Power, did out of
nothing bring into being all things that now are. His Ldp. understands the
Terms, and believes the thing: Let him, if he can, tell me as distinctly what
Idea he has of necessary Emanation. Will he explain it by eternal Procession? I
reply, That which was from all Eternity cannot be imagined to proceed from
another, without reversing the certain fixed Sense of words. He says, that
necessary Emanation is the Word of the Fathers, and a better cannot be found
out, to express what is intended by it: and I tell him, no Man could ever yet
intelligibly declare, what is intended by it. His Ldp. bids as fair as any Man
for it, when he calls it a more excellent Way of existence than by Creation;
which, till it be explained, how shall we judge whether it be so or no? If there
be, which I know not; there may be for ought he knows, a more proper Phrase for
it.

P. 27. his Ldp. quotes Lines from my MS. Papers; he quotes right, but I
omitted two words, I would have that Period read thus: That some thing should
NECESS ARILY and ETERNALLY come from God, which wants some Perfection that God
has, is A. T's prodigious Supposition, under the Name of Necessary Emanation.
Now whereas I endeavored to display the Absurdity and Impossibility of this in
some few Questions, his Ldp. seems to agree with much of what I would infer;
only merrily taxes me for giving Reasons for things so plain they need none:
which is a mortifying Stroke to me; for he takes such care of giving no Reasons
for what he says, that I shall never have an Opportunity to be revenged on him.
But in the Conclusion of the Page he tells me it is Nonsense to talk of God's
begetting infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness: I grant it, just such Nonsense
as it is to talk of begetting an infinitely powerful, wise, and good Being.

As for his Lordship's metaphysical Distinction of Priority of Time, and
Priority of Nature whereby he would defend his 13th Prop. it is a dark Riddle,
and a tempting Subject for Sarcasm: but out of Reverence to his Ldp. all I
shall say is, that it is a Distinction that can explain nothing, nor can any
one explain that. We know what is meant by Priority of Time, and Priority of
Excellence; if Priority of Nature be neither of these, it is an empty word,
devised, I believe, with a bad Design; but used now by those that are
themselves deceived by it.

P. 30. his Ldp. is pleased to undertake the Defense of an Instance: Which, he
says, he gave in this mentioned Prop. of an Effect every whit as old as the
Cause of it; namely, of the Sun the cause of Light: In which, if there be any
Possibility of Truth, then we must add new Significations to words, and acutely
distinguish between Causes, by the Force of which other things are effected,
and Causes which have no Causality in them; between Effects which are effected
by their Causes, and Effects that are self-existent. For that 2 and 2 make 4,
is not more evident, than that Causes, by the force of which other things are
effected, are older than their Effects; and that Effects that are effected by
their Causes, are later than their Causes. He may as well make one and the same
Body, to exist in more places than one, at one and the same time. Thus Miracles
are confined to no particular Church nor Age; only there is this Difference,
Christ and the Apostles wrought Miracles to confirm their Doctrines, but with
the modern Teachers the Doctrines themselves are the Minacles. To what I
objected against this his coexisting Cause and Effect, the Sun and its Light,
he gives me an Answer he meant for sacetious: He could find in his Heart to
grant me, that the Sun was not the Cause of that Light, which was created
before the Sun. I thank him: But upon second Thoughts he will not grant me
that, l. 23. No, not for all the Book of Genesis: He might have spared the Book
of Genesis; he may use me as pleases. He knows the Sun is the Cause of Light by
his Eyesight: He might as well say, His Head is the Cause of his Heel by his
Feeling. I say, the Sun and Light, which together began to be, could not one be
the Cause of the other; but God the Cause of both, at the same time, and in the
same manner of Causality. His Lordship quotes a Scrap from my Papers, and makes
me, by mangling my words, talk Contradictions: but my reasoning was, what I
have said, that if the Sun and Light did begin to exist in the same Point of
Time, then the one cannot be the Cause of the other; for that thing which is
the Cause of another, must be in respect of time before that other whereof it
is the Cause.

That I may not omit any thing his Lordship thinks material, I am obliged to
take notice, that in his first Defense of his Propositions, p. 19. he tells the
Reader, His Explication speaks as great an Unity between them [the Persons,] as
is between the Sun and its Splendour, and the Light of both. Which in very plain
English, sounds thus; between the Sun and its Light, the Light of the Sun, and
the Light of the Sun's Light. But that he may not pretend I misrepresent him,
let the Reader take his Discovery in his own Terms; 1. Here Is the Sun, 2. The
Splendor of the Sun, 3. The Light of the Sun, 4. The Light of the Sun's
Splendor. After the Reader has mused a while on the distinct parts of his
Lordship's Similitude, let me recall to his Mind his Lordship's Notion of One
God absolutely perfect in the highest Sense; and of Two, each of which is God,
but not absolutely perfect in the highest Sense, yet as absolutely perfect in a
lower Sense as two, each of which is God, can be; who are not absolutely God in
the highest Sense: and then let me ask, whether there is any thing in any other
Hypothesis more apt to make Sport for Heretics? In truth, had I not a greater
Reverence for his Lordship's Virtue than his Reasoning, I should not slip the
Occasion of diverting my Friend.

Whereas I have told him, that the two Propositions he boasts of, for
contradicting Arianism and Socinianism, do also contradict some of their
fellow-Propositions; I now prove it by Induction: If the Son and H. Spirit do
necessarily and eternally exist, then they are as self-existent, as
independent, as pure Originals as God the Father; if they necessarily and
eternally exist, then the Father as much emanates from, and depends upon them,
as they emanate from, and depend upon him; so that his Hypothesis does not more
contradict Arianism and Socinianism, than it contradicts it self. Heathenish
Doctrines by their Inconsistency, meet the Fate of Rome Heathen; suis and ipsa
Roma viribus ruit. I may now tell his Ldp. he has no way to expose me but by
exposing my Argument: but it is much easier to play with Expressions by chance
ambiguous, than to answer Arguments.

Upon my Remark to his 15 Prop. he asks, Who are they that determine any Notion
to be true, while they cannot conceive it to be so? Why, Sir, in general they
are the Trinitarians, but in particular and more especially his Ldp. he is the
Man; for does he not expressly determine in this very Prop. that there is an
unconceivably close Union between them [the supposed 3 Persons?] Therefore
unless he can conceive an unconceivable Notion, or doubt of that which he
determines to be true, he is notoriously guilty of determining that Notion to
be true which he cannot conceive to be so. I grant him, there may be a stricter
Union between God and Christ than we know of; but here I am bold and fixed,
there can be no such Union between them, as contradicts the Notions he has
implanted in us. According to him, the 3 Persons are 3 distinct Beings, and
there can be no distinct Being without its distinct Nature; so 3 distinct
Beings are 3 distinct Natures, and 3 distinct Natures continuing so, can never
become one single Nature: what Union soever there is between them, I wonder the
Trinitarians should so constantly amuse their Readers with that unsuitable
Comparison of Soul and Body in Union; for it is plain, that in their Union, they
are that one thing which neither of them can be in a State of Separation.

Prop. 16. Such an Union as this between them being acknowledged by us,
together with the forementioned entire Dependence of the Son and H. Spirit
upon the Father, the Unity of the Deity is as fully to all Intents and Purposes
asserted by us as it is necessary or desirable it should be.] The End for which
the Unity of the Deity was ever asserted: What does he mean by this very odd
Phrase? My Sense is, that it is asserted because it is true; and that the
Consequence of its being true, is this; the Service of our whole Hearts is
therefore due to him alone, and our lower Respects to other Objects, according
as his Word, and our own Reason directs us: but we cannot both to God and
Christ pay the Service of our whole Hearts, notwithstanding their Union in Will
and like Natures: For if we love one Master with our whole Hearts, we have no
Affections left for any other, but as he shall direct us; and he cannot direct
us to love another equally with himself. Unity of Nature, or 3 Beings united in
1 Nature, is no better nor worse than 3 Beings in 1 Being, 3 Natures in 1
Nature, 3 and not 3 in the same respect, which is a Contradiction if any thing
be so.

Upon his 17 Prop. I had told him he was an Ismaelite Trinitarian, whose Hand
is against all the Heads of Trinitarian Expositors. To this he replies, It Is
false. But since he deals so bluntly with me, I will, 1. Set down some of his
Contradictions, not consequential, but broad Contradictions. 2. Not to be
wanting in the least to the Vindication of my Censure, I will plainly show,
that I said no worse of his Lordship upon the account of his Hypothesis, than
he himself had said before of himself.

The first of his 28 Prop. is this, The Name of GOD is used in more Senses than
one in H. Scripture: but in his first Def. p. 23. speaking of Perfections
necessary to essentiate a God in the absolutely highest Sense, he has these
words; Which the Name of God is ever to be understood in in the H. Scripture.
In the same Def. p. 17. he affirms, that H. Script. says not of what Nature
that Unity is, which it ascribes to God. But Prop. 13. of the 28. he says, The
Oneness so frequently affirmed of him in Script. is a numerical Oneness. In his
second Def. p. 13. he says, The individual Nature of the Father is not a Divine
Nature more truly than that of the Two other Persons. But Prop. 15 he says,
Each of them has a Right to the Name of God, in a Sense next to that, in which
it is appropriated to the Father. This Contradiction he is in love with, it
often occurs. P. 10. of 2d Def. distinguishing between Perfections which he
makes to belong to the Father's Existence, and Perfections which belong to his
Divine Nature or Essence, he contends that the Son and H. Spirit have all the
Perfections of the Divine Nature, as well as the Father: But p. 23. of first
Def. he observes, that Athanasius, S. Basil, Greg. Nazianzen, and S.
Chrysostom, with several of the Latin Fathers, interpret those Words of Christ,
MY FATHER IS GREATER THAN I, to have been spoken not of his Humanity, but his
Divinity; and himself gives his Judgment to their Sentence. Prop. 16. of the
28. he affirms it to be evident from H. Script. that the Son and H. Spirit have
unlimited Power, etc. which also he allows, 2d Def. p. 10. to be an essential
Perfection: but 2d Def. p. 24. he acknowledges that the Power of Judging the
World, was a Power committed to Christ, not as Man, and not essentially in him.
Prop. 17. he determines, that they [the 3 Persons] are always spoken of in
Script. as distinct Beings or Persons, according to the proper Signification of
this word, both from the Father and from each other; nor are so many Men or
Angels more expressly distinguished as different Persons or Substances, by our
Savior or his Apostles, than the Father, Son, and H. Ghost are. But 1st Def.
p. 20. he says, They are outwardly, and in reference to the Creation, perfectly
One and THE SAME God, as concurring in all the fame external Actions. I hope
the Reader will allow me at least, that these Instances do sufficiently prove,
that his Lordship's Hand is against one of the Heads of the Trinitarians, I
mean himself. That it is also against all the other, he will excuse me the
Labor of proving by a tedious Induction of Particulars; for Prop. 17. of the
21. he affirms, that his Explication is the best and easiest way of reconciling
those Texts; which according to the other Hypothesis, are not reconcilable, but
by offering extreme Violence to them. Here he prefers his Hypothesis
indefinitely to all other Hypotheses. Here Is no Restriction, no Exception. Nay,
in the Conclusion he doubts not to pronounce, that the many Explications of the
adorable Mystery, have had little better Success than to make Sport for the
Socinians.

My Animadversion on his 18 Prop. I have a better Opinion of, since I saw his
Answer, than when I first penned them. However, I shall examine a few Lines: P.
37. l. 30. How can he say (says his Ldp.) that Jesus Christ desired not Divine
Honors to be paid to him? except he mean it when he was on Earth. I mean as a
plain Reader would imagine, that Christ desired not any Divine Honors to be
paid him, either in one State or other; meaning by Divine Honors such as are
due to him that is by Nature omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent: but if we
mean by Divine Honors, such as agree to him that could do nothing of himself,
that judges as he hears, and has all Judgment committed to him by the Father
that sent him, that all Men should honor the Son even as they honor the
Father that sent him; I agree that such Divine Honor is due to the Son. Divine
Honor in the former Sense, the Son himself forbad to be paid him, even after
he should leave the World and go to the Father, Joh. 16. 23. At that day ye
shall ask me nothing; verily, ver^^y, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shaell ask
the Father in my Name he will give it you: and ver. 26. At that day ye shall
ask in my Name. I think he does not well to take no notice of the Account which
the Unitarians give ^^ that Text. Will he build so great a Duty as is the
worshipping of another besides one, with the Worship due only to the One God,
upon the Interpretation of the Particle as; which, he cannot deny, does in
several places of Scripture import, not an Equality in the things spoken of,
not the just Measure and Nature of the Duty enjoined, but the Necessity of it,
and some Similitude, which it bears to what was beforementioned? To love our
Neighbor as our self, is not to be understood equally with our self; for that
is impossible, and contrary to the very Principles of Humane Nature; for omnes
sibi melius esse malle quam alteri: but we should do the one as certainly as we
do the other. It is but just and equal, that the great and only God be honored
with all the Powers and Faculties of our reasonable Natures; and that Jesus
Christ be honored with an Honor next to that. He says, Christ is not God in
the highest Sense; therefore say I, the highest Honor is not to be paid him.

I said upon his 19th Prop. that the Socinians are not willing to confess, that
the Honor of the Father is as muoh taken care of in his Explication, as they
do wish it were. He answers, Sure they will not say, that their own Hypothesis
does give more Honor to the Father, than THAT which speaks him the Author of
all that the other Persons either have or are. I reply, Yes, they will; because
it is more honor to be the voluntary Author of what the Son and H. Spirit have
and are, (as the Unitarians hold) than to be the necessary Author [or indeed no
Author] as his Ldp. holds.

Upon my saying, that it is not our Duty to think as honorably as we can of
any Person, but God the Father Almighty; his Lordship answers, He meant by as
honorably as POSSIBLY we can, as honorably as LAWFULLY we can. Dr. S -- th
made Dean Sherlock pay dear for this Evasion; but I will not write after that
furious Example, preserving my Respects to his Lordship: All I say is, His Ldp.
is a well-meaning Man; and in 20 other places, where his Words sound
tritheistically, and contradictorily, I believe he meant honestly.

P. 40. From that Text, I will not give my Glory to another, his Lordship
argues, that the Son of God is not a Creature; as if God had said, I will give
my Glory to no other but my Son: But it is a plain and good Consequence, This,
[taking the Words in an universal Sense] because God will not give his Glory to
another; therefore no other, no not the Son, is to be worshipped with that
Honor which is due to the Father.

As to my Animadversion on his 20th Prop. he appeals to you, my Friend, to
judge. Every Man that reads will judge, and some will be biased by one
Prejudice, and some by another; and some may chance to examine diligently, to
consider freely, and to judge impartially: among this latter sort of Readers, I
fancy I may have the most Friends; but the other I fear are all his.

Prop. 21. he says, His Explication agrees well with that of the Nicene Fathers
and Athanasius.] I grant it of what some of them have said in diverse places of
their Works, concerning the Trinity: but it is nevertheless true, that in other
places it disagrees with what that Council and Saint have taught. For you must
know, Sir, that even they are not all of a piece; but sometimes Orthodox,
sometimes Heterodox; and often need the Assistance of a candid Reader, to
interpret them according to a pretended sound Meaning, quite contrary to the
Grammatical Sense of their words. As for his agreeing with them, I wonder which
of the Ancients ever taught, That 2 Beings which depend on God, are as almighty
as the God on whom they and all things depend: I wonder which of the Ancients
found out the two Senses; in one of which, the Son and H. Ghost were each of
them essentially God, and in the other not. I question whether there be any
such Stuff among the Schoolmen; but if he can produce me the Father who has
fallen into this particular Weakness; that, Though the Name of God is used in
more Senses than one in H. Script. yet the Name of GOD in H. Script. is always
to be understood in the highest Sense; I will never question but he has
Antiquity on his side, whether any Truth and Sense or no.

As for his Compliment, that he knows not whether there be more of Arrogance
than Ignorance, or Ignorance than Arrogance in the Remark, about Credit from
the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers; it looks as if it was borrowed from Dr. S
-- th, it has the Air of his impatient Opiniativeness, but does not at all
become the better Nature of the Bp. of Gloucester. But he finds I am a sort of
an Adversary, that would not permit him to treat me otherwise. And how did I
compel him to treat me (as he suspects he has done) with too much Freedom? Why!
I took a Liberty with him: But, Sir, you can assure him, that when I composed
my MS. I knew not who was the Author of the 21 Propositions, and could not
dream they should have been printed: my Aim was only to let you (then my very
new Acquaintance) privately know my private Judgment. I am none of your
Proselyte, nor no Man's else. I profess sincerely, I fell into what I hold
touching the Trinity, by freely thinking and seriously considering, what I
occasionally met with, here and there, now and then.

To conclude, I thank his Lordship for his good Wishes; and I do really
believe, now he has vented his Anger, that he is sincere in them: for which I
make him this Return: I heartily wish all Good to him, as I ought upon many
Accounts; 1. In general, because he is a very worthy and good Man. 2. In
particular, because he hates Persecution. 3. Because he has not only sworn to
the Government, but looks upon King William, who gave him his Preferment, as
our Deliverer, not Conqueror; our just and lawful King, and no Usurper. But I
cannot thank him for his Advice: He would have me think it possible, that those
Opinions, which I take for most evident, and most necessary Truths, may be
gross and dangerous Errors. Why! my Opinion is, that the Being of God, and the
Reasonableness of H. Religion, are most evident and necessary Truths; and no
Man living shall persuade me to that Modesty, as to think it possible for these
to be gross and dangerous Errors. Again; He would have me believe that I may be
mightily mistaken, when I am most confident: Indeed this Piece of Advice has
not so ill a face as the other, but his Lordship might have spared it; for I
will not be most confident, but when the Truth is most plain and evident. I am,
Sir, Yours.

FINIS.

