FOR ENGLANDS Information, Reformation, great Joy, Peace, and Consolation; And
for her great Honor, and Exaltation, and for the great Shame, Contempt and
Terror OF THE TVRK, the POPE, AND THE DEVIL, And all the WORKERS of EVIL.

The Labor of the Righteous tends to Life; the Righteous is an Everlasting
Foundation, and Righteousness will in time exalt a Person, and in due time
enable him for to exalt a Nation, when it may be in a Weak and Low Condition.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

FOR ENGLANDS Information, etc.
IN these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign His
Majesty of Great Britain, great things are to be done and brought about for the
Glory, and the great Glory of the God of Heaven; for the Credit of his Holy
Gospel, for the great Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the
great Exaltation of our Royal Sovereign His Majesty of Great Britain, above all
Heathen Popish Kings, Priests, Princes, and Emperors in the World; that so many
Nations may be freed from Slavery, and throughout the whole World there may be
great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity, which will be brought about in these days of
the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign; but not by the Wisdom and
the Power of Mortal Men, but by the Wisdom and the Power of the God of Heaven;
but he has stirred me up for the Glory of his great Name, to have his Enemies
brought to shame, and his Anointed, His Majesty of Great Britain, and the
Church of England, throughout the whole World, to great Honor, Renown, and
Fame; for to make use of the Wisdom, the Power; and the Strength of Men, but
not to trust to any of them. In these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of
our Royal Sovereign, will the Righteous Flourish, and in his days there will be
abundance of Peace; so that Righteousness will run down like a mighty Stream,
and Truth and Peace will kiss each other: so that His Majesty's Royal Throne
will be established in Righteousness, and the Workers of Iniquity, the Seed of
Evil Doers, the Children of Disobedience, who are Unbelieving Jews, Brutish
Atheists, Wicked and Bloody Papists, and Rebellious Dissenters; and Sectaries
will be afraid and ashamed to come into His Majesty's Royal Presence; so that
His Majesty's Royal Court will be the most Holiest Court in the World, and
these sinful and divided Kingdoms, that have for a long time been vexed and
perplexed with Contentions and Divisions, will become the most Renowned
Kingdoms under the Heavens, for Unity, Peace and Concord, for Piety and Virtue,
for Wisdom, Power, and Strength, for Honor, Riches, and great Glory; so that
in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, we shall
soon become the Wonder and the Glory of the World, the Crown of Kingdoms, the
Desire and the Delight of Nations, the Joy of the whole Earth, and the City of
the Great King; who can and will give us every good thing that is suitable and
seasonable, profitable, comfortable, and advantageous, for the great Honor and
Exaltation of his Anointed, His Majesty of Great Britain, and for the great
Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of many Kingdoms; which will bring great Joy and
Triumph to the Church of England, and great Shame, Contempt, and Terror to the
Turk, the Pope, and the Devil, and all the Workers of Evil; to him that
believes, all things are possible, though to the Eye of Sense and Reason, it
may seem very difficult; that which is above Nature will be brought about by
him, that is partaker of the Divine Nature, and that without having a Sword in
the Hand, or Men or Money at Command. Man's Extremity it is Gods Opportunity for
to help a Person, a Family, a City, and a Kingdom; when that many Wise, Strong,
Rich, and Learned Men, may be at a stand, for to bring Order out of Confusion,
Light out of Darkness, Good out of Evil, and Peace out of Trouble; then the
Lord of Hosts, who has all Power in his own Hand, and all Men and Angels at
Command, knows when, how, and by whom, he pleases for to make bare his Arm,
though it be by a weak and an unlikely Man: for his Arm is very long, and very
strong; and that his Enemies will know in these days of the Gospel, and in the
Reign of our Royal Sovereign, to their great shame and overthrow.

Religion, It is not a business of Discourse, as many have made it, to no
purpose; but it is a business of the highest Nature, and the greatest Conquest;
it will enable a Man for to deny himself, and to enjoy himself in the want of
many things; and in the enjoyment of all things, the greatest Freedom is the
freedom of the Mind, the greatest Liberty is the liberty of the Will, the
greatest Power is over Sin and the Devil, and the greatest Victory, Victory
over the World; for to live above the World, while one lives in the World,
above the Profits and Pleasures of this World; for the World passes away and
the things thereof, but he that does the will of God abides for ever: Now this
is the Will of God, That all the Sons and the Daughters of Men, should believe
in his Son, who is the high and mighty One; King of Kings, and the only Ruler
of Princes; who does from his Throne behold all the Dwellers upon Earth: What
they are, and who they are that be for him or against him, in these days of the
Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain:
Who are they that be against him, who is altogether lovely, or can be against
him? Worthy to be desired and admired by all, and to be beloved above all, and
more than all; because that he is the chiefest of Thousands, and of Ten
thousands, of Men or Angels; be they never so Wife, Strong, Rich, and
Honorable. By him, and for him, it is that Kings do Reign, and in the World
remain; he sets them up, and keeps them up for his own Will and Pleasure; they
are not set up and kept up for the Will and Pleasure of the Pope, nor the
Church of Rome; neither have they any power for to Oppose, Depose, and to
Dethrone them when they please, nor as they please. Therefore well might our
late Royal and Gracious King demand, and demand again, by what Power, and who
gave them that Power, for to Try, Examine, Judge, and Condemn him, who was
their Right and Lawful Sovereign? They had not their Power from God nor good
Men, but from the Pope and the Devil in Hell, who in them did dwell. The Church
of Rome has too many Children among the Dissenters and Sectaries in England;
from her they did learn for to take away the Life of our late Royal and
Gracious Sovereign. The Pope and the Devil in Hell would have all Men to Rebel,
but not in Grace and Virtue to excel: But the time is come, that in these days
of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, that all the Workers of
Iniquity, the Seed of Evil Doers, the Children of Disobedience, will be ashamed
and confounded for what they have done. For that God, who is most Great and
most Good, most Wise and most Strong, to whom Vengeance does belong; though he
be slow to Anger, yet is he great in Power: Who has stirred me up for to engage
with him, for to make known his mind, what he will have done in the Reign of
his Anointed and our Royal Sovereign: He will have Inquisition made for the
Blood of his Servants that has been slain, by the Turk, the Pope, the French
King, and the King of Spain; and for that precious and innocent Blood of his
beloved Son, Holy Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs; and for that late Martyr and
worthy Knight, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. All these have been unworthily and most
cruelly put to Death, by unreasonable, bloody, and deceitful Men; such as
unbelieving Jews, brutish Athiests, wicked and bloody Papists, and rebellious
Dissenters and Sectaries. These be they that will neither Reform nor Conform,
but daily against the Church of England storm: But they be not so many and
great, but a Man of Wisdom and Courage will bring them down to His Majesty's
Royal Feet: For by Divine Wisdom he will so procure them, that it is not the
Devil that can secure them: And by Divine Power he will prepare Work to be
managed by them, that have Power in their Hand, and Men and Money at command,
that they may be subdued both by Sea and Land. The right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass, when he does make bare his Arm; for his Arm is
very long and very strong, and that his Enemies shall know to their great shame
and overthrow. The right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass, above
the Wisdom, the Power, and the Strength of Men. The right Hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass when he will, and by whom he will; above the
Wisdom, the Power, and Strength of all the Angels in Heaven. The Lord of Hosts
can make use of Angels or Men, to make known his Mind in the World; but he will
not put trust in any of them. He can use them or refuse them; he can work with
them or without them: The greatest work that ever was done, it was by the
Wisdom of the Father and the Son, not by the Wisdom and Power of Angels or Men;
and that was the Creation of the World and the Redemption of Man. With whom
took he Counsel when he laid the Foundation of the Earth, or found out a Ransom
for lost Man? His right Hand and Holy Arm did work the greatest Salvation; he
laid Help upon one that is mighty and willing to save unto the uttermost, all
that come unto him: He is not willing that any should miscarry, but that all
should come to the knowledge of him. But the Church of Rome and the Pope of
Rome, don't care how many do miscarry, and how few comes to the knowledge of
him, who is the Wisdom of his Father, the Brightness of his Glory, the Express
Image of his Person: who does uphold all things by the Word of his Power; for
by him were all things created that are in Heaven and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities
or Powers: All things were created by him and for him; he is before all things,
and by him all things consist; all Persons and all Nations; for he is the most
Royal Head, over all Men and Angels: He is the Firstborn from the Dead, that
in all things the might have the pre-eminence, because he was and is most
worthy; but not the Pope, who is most unworthy: but they that exalt themselves,
shall be abased, but they that humble themselves, will be exalted. As before
Honor goes Humility, so Pride goes before a Fall. The Lord he knows the
Proud afar off; he knows them, not to assist them, but to resist them; and that
many times by weak and unlikely means. He has showed Strength with his Arm, he
has put down the Mighty from their Seat, the Proud, and the mighty Angels; and
so he will in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, the Turk, the Pope, the French King,
and the King of Spain, and all the Enemies of his Gospel, that will not conform
and reform to the Protestant Religion, as it is established in the Church of
England; which does teach the Sons and the Daughters of Men to know the True
God and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent; for there is no Name under Heaven
whereby Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, Male or Female, High or Low, Rich or
Poor, can be saved, but by him, who is the Rock of Ages, and the Fountain and
Foundation of all true Honor and Happiness. It is Man's greatest Wisdom to know
him, so as to be reconciled to him, to be made one with him, and to abide in
him; and it is Man's greatest Honor to serve him, who is the Lord of Life and
the King of Glory; and it will be Man's greatest Happiness to enjoy him, in
whose Presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose right Hand are Pleasures for
evermore, that are abiding, satisfying, lasting, and everlasting. As for the
Honors, the Riches, and the Pleasures of this World, they be uncertain and
deceitful, not satisfying nor long lasting. There is a Vanity in the things of
this World, and many times great Trouble and Vexation with them. The best
improvement of time in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign, it is to improve the Mind with Graces that are Divine; then will a
Man's Fruit be better than Gold; for to Revive, Refresh, Counsel, Comfort, and
Strengthen Fellow Members, Fellow Soldiers, Fellow Laborers, Fellow
Travelers, and Fellow Citizens in the Wilderness of this World. In Man's
greatest Extremity God has found out a Remedy; for it pleased the Father, that
in his Son, his beloved Son, who is Heir of all things, that in him should all
Fullness dwell; Fullness of Merit, Fullness of Spirit, Fullness of Wisdom, to
direct them that believe in him; Fullness of Power to protect them that own him
and appear for him, and Fullness of Grace and Glory to reward them that be
Fruitful and Faithful to him in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of
our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain; that among all People, in
all Nations, there may be a free Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace. Let all
that can Pray, Pray that all Jews, Turks and Infidels, all Atheists, Papists,
Dissenters and Sectaries, would all endeavor with one Heart and Mind to know
the True God and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent; and as with one Shoulder to
serve him, and with one Mouth to praise him, as they do in the Church of
England. Then will all Strife, Contention, and Wars cease; and then throughout
the whole World there will be great Joy, Prosperity and Peace: That this may
be, the God of Peace has continued the Gospel of Peace from Generation to
Generation, that throughout the whole World there may be a general Reformation.
For a long time the Lord of Hosts, in these days of the Gospel, has sought for
a Man among the Wise, Godly, and the Learned of the Land, that should stir up
himself to engage with him and for him, to make known his mind upon so Noble a
Design, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind: but when the great
and the mighty God, the Searcher of all Hearts, sees that among the Sons of
Men, most are Self-seekers, Men-pleasers, Lovers of themselves more than Lovers
of God, the King our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain and the
Church of England; it is no wonder that the Lord does then make bare his Arm,
and manifest his Wisdom and Power in Man's Weakness, that all the Glory may
redound to him, and that no Flesh should Glory before him. It is a wonder to
me, and to many may be, that the Lord of Hosts should stir me up for to engage
with him and for him, in so high and honorable a Work, who am most unworthy,
and least unable; but my Self-sufficiency it is from Gods All Sufficiency;
though I am Weak he is Strong, though I am Poor yet he is Rich, and very Rich;
because he can scatter all my Fears, break all my Snares, resolve all my
Doubts, and supply all my Wants; that can pardon all my Sins, that be many and
great, and heal all my Diseases, both in Soul and Body. What can be not do?
What will he not do for them that do trust in him, before the Sons of Men? and
more than in any of them: For though the Sons of Men may be used, yet they are
to be no further trusted, than they be faithful to the God of Heaven, to his
Majesty of Great Britain, and to the Protestant Religion. When I was resolved
to engage with the God of Heaven in so Noble a Design, for to make known his
Mind in time, I did not consult with Flesh and Blood, not with my own Ease and
Safety, but I did labor to deny my self, and overcome my self, that I might
the better lay out my self in his Service, whose Service is perfect freedom,
and his Work and Reward it is most Honorable. Therefore whatever any of the
Sons of Men do lose in denying themselves, in overcoming of themselves, and in
laying out themselves, in the Service of God, they will be great Gainers in the
work of God. It is high and great Honor, for any of the Sons of Men, to work
with the God of Heaven, for to make known his mind, in time, for the great
Honor and Exaltation of a Kings Person, and the great Joy, Peace, and
Prosperity, of many Nations. The humble, the God of Heaven does condescend to
teach many things in secret, that are to be made known in due time, for the
good of the Public. There is no man born for himself, but every man is born
for the Public Good. To be good, and to do good unto the Sons of Men, does
most resemble the God of Heaven, who is good, and does good, and is never weary
of doing good; both to many persons and many Nations; nay, to all Persons in
all Nations, that do desire and endeavor to Know, Fear, Love, Serve, and to
Honor him, in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign. Let the Wise, Godly, and the Learned of the Church of England,
consider if it be not time for the Lord of Hosts for to make a man strong for
himself and his Anointed his Majesty of Great Britain; when that too many have
made themselves strong for this Party and that Party, for this Opinion and that
Opinion, against the God of Heaven, his Majesty of Great Britain, and the
Church of England; but what will they get but Shame and Confusion: for they
will be brought down, and that with a Witness, and that without having a Sword
in my hand, or Men, or Money at command: Religion does not teach men to be
Clowns, Fools, Traitors, nor Madmen, as too many have been, against the
Protestant Religion, his Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of England:
But Religion teaches Men to be wise and faithful, to know how to keep the Peace
in their own Persons; and to be very Valourous and Courageous, for the great
Honor of God, the King and Nation, in their Place and Generation. It is a
great Vanity for the Sons and the Daughters of Men, for to make a noise about
Religion, for this Party and that Party, for this Opinion and that Opinion, to
the great shame and Reproach of the Protestant Religion, and the Church of
England; and much Trouble, but no Profit, Comfort, or Honor, to our Royal
Sovereign his Majesty of great Britain. The great Contentions and the needless
Disputings that many have made about Religion, and the Power of Godliness, it
has tended not to Edification, Reformation, and the Consolation of Persons and
Families; but it has tended to the great Shame, Condemnation, and Desolation of
many Persons and Families in England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, to the
wounding of the Body, and to the Dishonor of the Head. The Power of Godliness,
that has been so much contended for by them that have made separation from the
Church of England, and yet not well understood nor practiced by many of them,
it will enable Men to be of a meek and a quiet Spirit, a humble and a thankful
Spirit, a cheerful and a contented Spirit, and a wise, faithful valourous and a
courageous Spirit, in the service of God, and for the great Honor and Glory of
God; for the credit of his Holy Gospel, for the great Honor and Renown of the
Protestant Religion, for the great Exaltation of the Lords Anointed his
Majesty of great Britain, for the great Joy and Triumph of the Church of
England, and for the great Peace and Prosperity of many Kingdoms. The Power of
Godliness, it will enable Men to live Conquerours in the World, and to die
Conquerours over Sin, Death, Hell, and the Devil, and all the Workers of Evil,
and that without making a noise about Religion, for this Party or that Party,
or for this Opinion or that Opinion: Yea, without making of many Words, or
having the Voice much heard. The Power of Godliness it is the Power of Faith,
and the Power of Faith it is the Power of the great and mighty God, which will
enable a Man to overcome much Evil in his own Person, and to procure Peace and
Prosperity to a Nation, by understanding the mind of the God of Heaven, and by
making of it known in time, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of
Mankind. The Power of Faith, which is the Power of God, it is not the Power of
the Sword; for the Gospel, which is the glad Tidings of Salvation, was never
purchased or settled by the Sword of Man, but it was purchased by the Blood of
him who is God and Man in one Person, who is the Savior of all Men, but
especially of them that believe in him, and make an Improvement of him, who is
the chiefest in Heaven. Happy be they that make him the Chiefest in their own
Souls, for they that find him, find Life; and will obtain favor of the Lord:
but they that hate him, love Death. The Power of Faith is the Power of God, and
not the Power of the Sword; then let all that handle the Sword Perish with the
Sword, in these Gospel days, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, that do
take it up in an Unlawful manner, and to an Unlawful end, that do take it up to
hinder the Spreading of the Gospel where it is not, or the Success of it where
it is; that do take it up without the Command of Authority, and do use it
against the Persons in Authority, for to undermine and overthrow the Protestant
Religion, and his Majesty of Great Britain; in these Days of the Gospel, and in
the Reign of our Royal Sovereign. Let not any despise the day of small things,
for by Might and portrait of Charles II Carolus jj Rex
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE Power, trusting to an
Arm of Flesh, as Carnal Wisdom, Power, and Strength, shall not any prevail; not
the Turk, nor the Pope, nor the French King, nor any that do Assist him against
the Protestant Religion, his Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of
England, but against all Carnal Wisdom, Power and Strength, will the Lord of
Hosts prevail, in this Day of his Power, for the Glory of his great Name, to
have his Enemies brought to Shame, and his Anointed his Majesty of Great
Britain, and the Church of England, throughout the whole World, to great
Honor, Renown, and Fame. Who knows the Wisdom, the Power, and the Strength of
that Man, whom Almighty God has made strong for himself, with himself, and in
himself, who has all Power in his own hand, and the whole Creation at Command.
What can he not do, what may he not do, what will he not do, in his Generation,
for the great Honor of God, the King and Nation? Even that which many Wise,
Strong, Rich, and Learned Men have not done in many Generations; and why,
because that they be too apt to trust to their own Wisdom, Power, and Strength,
more than in the Lord Jehovah, in whom is Everlasting Strength, Everlasting
Wisdom and Power, Everlasting Peace and Joy, and Everlasting Honor and Glory:
When this great and mighty God does stir up a Man for to engage with him and
for him, to bring Glory to his great Name, his Enemies to great Shame, and a
King and Kingdom to great Honor, Renown and Fame, he does not tell him that
Men and Money shall be sufficient for him, but that his Grace shall, and his
Spirit will; which is better then Strength or Weapons of War, or Silver or
Gold: All things, are not to be compared to the Wisdom, Power, and Strength of
the Spirit of God working in a Man, and working for him: It is not in the Power
of Wise, Strong, Rich, or Learned Men, for to order their Thoughts, to compose
their Mind, to frame any Noble Design, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity
of Mankind: And the Reason is, because the way of Man is not in himself: It is
not in Man that walks, for to direct his own steps, much less to order his
thoughts; but the steps of a good Man, and so his thoughts, are ordered by the
Lord, and he delights in his way; for the way of the Lord is Strength to the
Upright: but Destruction shall be to all the Workers of Iniquity, because that
their trust is in Carnal Wisdom, Power, and Strength. The Hope of the Righteous
is Gladness, because they trust in the Lord, who is the Creator of Heaven and
Earth; but the Expectation of the Wicked, of all the Workers of Iniquity, shall
Perish, because that they do put too much trust in Mortal Men, who are sinful
Creatures, and soon turned to Dust. The Lord of Hosts, when he pleases, can,
and will, and does, make use of Angels and Men, to make his mind known in the
World; yet in point of trust, he charge his Angels with Folly, and puts
not trust in his Saints; for the Heavens are not pure in his Sight, how much
less Man that is born of a Woman, and the Sons of Men, that are but as Worms?
For what is Man, that the great and mighty God should be mindful of him, or any
of the Sons of Men; that he should regard, when that Man in his best Estate in
this World, is but Vanity: therefore all be exhorted to cease from putting too
much Trust and Considence in Men, whose Breath is in their Nostrils: For
wherein are they to be accounted of? No farther nor no longer, than they be
faithful to the God of Heaven, to his Majesty of Great Britain, to the
Protestant Religion, as it is Established in the Church of England, in these
Days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign: Woe be unto the
World, because of Offenses; not only woe be unto unbeleving Jews, brutish
Atheists, and wicked and bloody Papists: But woe be to all them that be a
Knowing People, and a Proud, Stubborn, and Rebellious People, that have made
Religion a business of Discourse to no purpose; by contending for this Party
and that Party, for this Opinion and that Opinion; to the great Shame and
Reproach of the Protestant Religion, and the Church of England: Who by their
Pride have made Separation, Separation has caused great Contentions, and
Contentions sad Divisions, and Divisions great Disorder and Confusion, both in
Church and State; to the great Trouble, Contempt, and Grief, both of
Magistrates, and Ministers: so we, that might have been the Glory of Kingdoms,
and a Terror to our Enemies; our Contentions and Divisions, have made us a
Terror to our selves, and a Shame to our Enemies, and whence comes this, but
from that Stubborness and Rebellion that is in most against the Government,
both in Church and State; as if it was unlawful to obey them, whom the most
high has set over us; although we are commanded from the Word of Truth that
every Soul should be subject to the highest Powers: for there be no Powers but
of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of God, therefore they that do resist
the Powers, resist the Ordinance of God, and they that do so resist, will
expose themselves not only to Condemnation, but to great Damnation: What am I
among the Sons of Men, that the great and the mighty God should stir me up to
Engage with him, for to Reprove, Rebuke, and to Condemn, so Stubbourn and
Rebellious a Generation, that has too long disobeyed him and our Royal
Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain? What am I? Am I not by Birth,
Education, and Trade, inferior to many, and by Nature, as bad as any? Am I not
little in the Eyes of the World, and less in my own Eyes? But he that is mighty
has magnified me for high Use and Service: He has Enabled me to be Partaker of
the Divine Nature, which is high Honor, and great Favor; therefore let the
Righteous be glad, and the Humble be thankful; but let all the Workers of
Iniquity, the Seed of Evil doers, the Children of Disobedience, who are
Unbelieving Jews, Brutish Atheists, wicked and bloody Papists, and Rebellious
Dissentors and Sectaries, that will not Conform and Reform to the Protestant
Religion, as it is Established in the Church of England, be ashamed; which
would have all the Sons and the Daughters of Men come to the Knowledge and the
Enjoyment of the true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent; which would
have all Men to be of one mind, to speak the same thing, and to Live and Love
as Brethren, as Members of one Body, Governed by one Royal Head, who is the
Lord of Life, and the King of Glory: Who will in these Days of the Gospel,
Wound and Confound all his Enemies, that make Strife and Contentions and
Divisions, to weaken his Body; to the Provoking of him, who is the Head of his
Church: who will break all his Enemies with his Iron Rod, and Dash them in
Pieces like a Potters Vessel, that will not submit unto his Gospel, which is
the glad Tidings of Salvation, and the Scepter of his Grace; by which he will
be known in all Paths and Places to be the Creator of Heaven, the Earth, and
the Sea: Therefore in these Days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, let all Heathen and Popish Kings,
Priests, Princes, and Emperors in the World, be Wise, and all the Judges of the
Earth be instructed for to serve the Lord with Fear, and to rejoice with
Trembling, and to kiss his Son, who only can deliver from Wrath to come,
before he fall upon them; and there be not any that can deliver: For it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the ever-living God, who is and will be
a consuming Fire to all the Workers of Iniquity, if that they will not learn to
be Lovers of Righteousness, and to know when and how for to bring forth the
Fruits of Righteousness; which is Humility, Self-denial, Heavenly-mindedness,
and Zeal for Gods Glory, for the Credit of his Holy Gospel, for the great
Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great Exaltation of His
Majesty of Great Britain, for the great Joy and Triumph of the Church of
England, and for the great Peace and Prosperity of many Kingdoms. Now is the
Axe laid unto the Root of the Tree, therefore every Tree that brings not
forth good Fruit, such Fruit as is suitable and seasonable, profitable and
comfortable, for the Honor of God, the King our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty
of Great Britain; such Fruit as may revive and refresh the City of God, which
is the Church of England: Such Trees will flourish in the Courts of Gods House,
and bring forth Fruit in Old Age; but barren and unprofitable Trees, that have
a name to live and are dead; that have called themselves Saints but have acted
like Devils incarnat. Under pretense of Religion many have acted Rebellion and
Treason: These Trees, many have been cut down, and more will be cut down, for
cumbering of the Ground. There is a time and a season for every purpose under
the Sun, that is suitable and seasonable, warrantable and lawful to be done;
but there is no time in season or purpose, lawful for unreasonable, bloody and
deceitful men; for to fire Houses, and to ruin Men, Women and Children; for to
endeavor from time to time to undermine and overthrow the Protestant Religion,
His Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of England: as the Workers of
Iniquity, the Seed of Evil Doers, the Children of Disobedience, the Enemies of
the Gospel and of the Protestant Religion, have endeavored formerly and
lately: Witness the Spanish Invasion in 1588. Since that the
Gun-powder-Treason. And of late a Damnable and Bloody Plot, which should have
been Acted in 1678. against the Kings most Sacred and Royal Person, to the Ruin
of many Thousands in the Nation: but the God of Heaven who does daily watch
over his Majesty's Royal Person and the Nation, will bring all the Workers of
Iniquity, of a sudden to great Shame and Confusion. Is not Destruction to the
Wicked, and a strange Punishment to the Workers of Iniquity? Evil shall slay
the Wicked, and they that hate the Righteous shall be Desolate, if that they
will not learn to cease to do Evil, and learn to do well, and Endeavor in
Grace and Virtue to Excel; for it is a great Madness and Folly for any of the
Sons of Men, to be Actors and Factors for the Pope, and the Devil in Hell,
against England's Royal Church and State, for to Rebel. Did ever any harden
themselves against the God of Heaven and Prosper? What got Sisera, Jaben,
Pharaoh, Saul, and Proud Haman? Were they not brought to Shame and Confusion?
For they became as Dung upon the face of the Earth: so let all that be Enemies
to the God of Heaven, to His Majesty of Great Britain, and to the Church of
England, perish; but let them that love the God of Heaven, and delight to
Honor the King, our Royal Sovereign, be like the Sun that goes forth in his
Might; that may give a greater and a better Light; for the great Joy and
Comfort of many Persons, and the great Peace and Prosperity of many Nations: As
Evil Men and Seducers, the Workers of Iniquity, and the Seed of Evil Doers, do
what they can, that the Times may be the worse for them, and many the worse for
the Times; so good Men, who are true Believers, the Lovers of Righteousness,
must learn to be Workers of Righteousness, and to bring forth the Fruits of
Righteousness; that so the Times may be the better for them, and many the
better for the Times: The Righteous Lord, who is most Wise, and most Strong,
meets him that Rejoices, and Works Righteousness, to Encourage and Assist
him, or them; because that he knows that there be many that will Oppose and
Resist them. The Lord does many times meet the Workers of Iniquity, but not to
Encourage them, but to Confound them, and to Destroy them, if that they will
not in these Gospel Days, cease to do Evil, and learn to do well, then they
will be above the fear of Death, or the hurt of Death; then they will live in
the Fear of God, who is most good, and die in his Favor who is most great; who
has Heaven and Earth, and all things in them at Command, to Reward them that be
Faithful and Fruitful, in their Generation. They that do Labor that their last
work may be best, will in their last Days have the greatest Joy, Peace, and
Rest: And though the work of Faith, and the labor of Love is not many times
Regarded by the Sons of Men, yet is it always Regarded, and will be fully
Rewarded by the God of Heaven, who knows the Nature of it, and the worth of it,
that it is more precious than Gold, and more worth than all the Crowns and
Secpters in the World; because it will purify the Foulest Heart, Strengthen
the Weakest Memory, and Comfort the Saddest Spirit, that is an Idle Faith that
is not a Working Faith; Faith works by Love, and Love is stronger then Death,
and that is a Dead Faith, that does not produce Purification in the Heart, and
Enable a Man for to Endeavor the Information, the Reformation, and the
Exaltation of a City and a Kingdom, and that without making of many Words, or
having the Voice much heard. Men are to be Vallued and Esteemed by all Men, for
their Wisdom and their Learning, for their Power and their Strength, for their
Honors and their Riches, for their Great and High Places, but most of all, for
their Rich Graces, for their Faith, that works by Love; because it is a Wonder
working Grace, a Victorious and a Glorious Grace: it will not only work Wonders
in a Man, in Changing of him from Nature to Grace, and from Grace to Glory, but
it will Enable a Man to prepare High and Honorable Work, Pleasant Profitable
and Delightsom Work, for the great Honor and Exaltation of a Kings Person, and
the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of many Nations. What I have affirmed, for
the great Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great
Exaltation of His Majesty of Great Britain, for the great Joy and Triumph of
the Church of England; and for the great Peace and Prosperity of many Kingdoms,
it is as good as Confirmed already; for Divine Faith, which is the Gift and
Power of Almighty God, it is the Evidence of things not seen, and the Substance
of things hoped for. As a Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, and the
Glory of the Man; so a Wise, Faithful, Valorous, and a Couragous Man, is a
Crown and a Glory to a King and Kingdom, he is a Crown and a Glory to the God
of Heaven, he is a Crown and a Glory to all the Faithful Ministers of the
Gospel in the Nation; because that he puts to his Seal, that God and his Word
is true, and their Doctrines so far as they agree thereto: He Crowns their
Labors with Success, the Church of England with great Honor, Renown and Fame,
and he Crowns all them that be Enemies to the Gospel, and the Protestant
Religion, to His Majesty of Great Britain and the Church of England, with great
Shame: Such a Man ought to be minded and regarded by the Wise, Godly, and the
Learned. The Glory of this Noble Design, that Divine Wisdom and Power has
Enabled me for to make known in time, it is not to be given to any Mortal Men,
not to Wise, Strong, Rich, or Learned Men, when they have done all what they
can, no nor to the Angels in Heaven, but let all People praise the Lord of
Hosts in all Nations, for his great Wisdom and mighty Power, for his Right Hand
and Holy Arm has gotten himself the Victory, and will get himself the Victory,
over all his Enemies both at home and abroad; for the Glory of his great Name,
to have his Enemies brought to Shame, and his Holy Church throughout the whole
World, to great Honor, Renown, and Fame, that so in these Days of the Gospel,
and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign His Majesty of Great Britain, many
Nations may be freed from Slavery, and throughout the whole World there may be
great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity; this Noble Design, which Divine Wisdom, and
Power has Enabled me for to make known in time, for the great Joy, Peace, and
Prosperity of Mankind, it is by John Varney a Member of the Church of England,
and a Subject to His Majesty of Great Britain; but such a Subject that the God
of Heaven has Honored among the Sons of Men for to Engage with him, and for
him, in high and Honorable Work, Pleasant, Profitable, and Delight some Work,
Victorious, Glorious, and Crowning Work, that has not yet been done by all the
Parliaments that have been since England has Enjoyed a King. There is not any
of the Sons of Men, under the Canopy of Heaven, that has that Right and Title
for me to Dedicate this Book unto, as our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great
Britain, because that the Lord of Hosts has stirred me up for to Engage with
him; he has made me strong in the Inward Man, for his own great Glory, and the
great Honor, Renown, and Exaltation of his Anointed our Royal and Gracious
Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, who has been a King of many Sorrows
and Cares, but I shall Endeavor with Divine Wisdom and Power, which is better
than Strength, or Weapons of War, or Silver or Gold, to set a work the Wisest
and the Learned in the Land, that our Royal Sovereign in these Days of the
Gospel of Peace among the Sons of Men, may be the greatest and the best of
Kings that ever did sway a Secpter, or wear a Crown: The God of Heaven has
given me that Wisdom and Power, for to understand his mind, and to make it
known in due time, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind; that so
many Nations may be freed from Slavery, and throughout the whole World, there
may be great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity in these Days of the Gospel, and in the
Reign of our Royal Sovereign. The God of all Wisdom, Power, and Strength will
make short work, but it will be quick and Powerful work, Victorious and
Glorious work, over all his Enemies both at Home and Abroad; that so his
Gospel, which is the Glad Tidings of Salvation, may Run and be Glorified where
it is not, and may Flourish where it is; that so his Wisdom, Power, Name and
Way, may be more and more known upon Earth, and his saving Health among all
Nations; that so the People may praise him, yea, that all People may praise him
with new Obedience, then will the Earth bring forth great Increase, and among
all Nations in these Days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign, there will be a free Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace: The
Righteous Lord may seem to be slow, to make good his Promises, but he is very
sure, the Vision it is for an appointed time, but he that shall come, whom the
most Wise God will send, will come, and will not tarry, but will make his way
and break his way against much Opposition and Contradiction, against much
weakness and many Infirmities: He that gives Strength to conceive, will give
Power to bring forth, he that gives Wisdom to Understand his mind, will give
Power, to make it known in due time. The Lord of Hosts knows when, how, and in
whom to arise, like a mighty Man, to set a work many Wise, Strong, Rich, and
Learned Men, that have their Wisdom, their Power, their Strength, their Honors
and Riches, their great and high Places from him; that so they may Act for him
in a high manner, and to a Right End. It is High and Honorable Work, that the
God of Heaven has stirred me up for to Engage with him, and for him, and it
will prove to His Majesty of Great Britain, and to the Church of England,
Pleasant, Profitable, and Delightsome Work, and over many Nations, Victorious,
Glorious, and Crowning Work: It will Crown the God of Heaven with much Glory
among the Sons of Men, and his Anointed, His Majesty of Great Britain, with
great Honor and Power over them; over all Heathen and Popish Kings, Priests,
Princes, and Emperors in the World, because that he is most worthy of that
Honor Day by Day, from all Men both High and Low, from all Men both Rich and
Poor, from all Men of all Degrees, in all Paths of Land and Seas. Therefore let
all them that be Subjects and Servants to our Gracious King, in England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, strive each in their places to Honor him; for
many will live to see, that in these Days of the Gospel, that our Royal
Sovereign will be the Chiefest and most Renowned Emperor in the World, and over
the World, because that he has the greatest right unto it, and is most fittest
for it: for there is no Emperor or King under the Heavens that is so great a
Defender of the Faith, and the Faithful, as His Majesty of Great Britain is
under God: As for the Turk, the Pope, the French King, and the King of Spain,
they are not fit to be Emperors in the World, in these Days of the Gospel;
because that they be Enemies to the Gospel, which is the glad Tidings of
Salvation. They that be Enemies to the Gospel, are Enemies to the God of
Heaven, to the Protestant Religion, to our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of
Great Britain, and to the Church of England. And as they be not fit to be
Emperors in the World, because they be Enemies to the Gospel; so they will
never be Emperors over the whole World, because that their Subjects are both
Fools and Salves: but our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain, has
the greatest Right to be Emperor in the World, because that under the God of
Heaven, he is the best, and the greatest Defender of the Gospel: And he is most
fittest to be the Chiefest Emperor over the World, because that his Subjects do
Enjoy the greatest Liberty, and are Men of the greatest Wisdom, Courage, and
Nobility. This should have been Discovered before now, by the Wise, Godly, and
the Learned; and it might have been Recovered by them that have Power in their
hand, and Men and Money at Command; and his Royal Majesty would not have had so
many Loyal and Faithful Subjects Destroyed, nor his Kingdoms so much Treasure
Wasted and Consumed, as has been by Unreasonable, Bloody, and Deceitful Men:
but the Right Hand of the Lord will find out all his Enemies, both at Home and
Abroad. A Noble Design well Discovered in time, is half Recovered, for the
great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind: Well may it be said that Divine
Wisdom is better than Strength, or Weapons of War, or Silver or Gold, or all
things to be desired, is not to be Compared unto it; because it will Enable a
Man, for to Declare in time, what may be done, what will be done, and what is
to be done, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of a King and Kingdom: It
is Wisdom that dwells with Prudence, and finds out Knowledge of Witty
Inventions. Wisdom it is Profitable to Direct, and it will a Man safe Protect
from many Dangers, that the Workers of Iniquity, the Seed of Evil Doers, the
Children of Disobedience, are daily subject unto. Therefore whatever Wisdom,
Power, Courage, or any Grace, any Subject in England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, has Received from the God of all Wisdom, Power, and Strength; it does
become them so to Prove and Improve them, that they may tend for the Glory of
the Most High, and the great Honor and Renown of Englands Royal Majesty. It
has been a great Shame to the Church of England, and to this Renowned Nation,
for to consider how many have made a noise about Religion, for this Party and
that Party, for this Opinion and that Opinion; about the Power of Godliness,
and the Power of Faith; and have not made it appear for the great Honor and
Renown, the great Peace and Prosperity of Englands Royal Church and State.

The Power of Faith, it is not in making of many words, or in taking up the
Sword, that is made by Mortal Men. But the Power of Faith, it is the Power of
God, making use of the Word of God, which is the Sword of the God of Heaven,
which is sharper than any Two-edged Sword made by Men: Because it is Piercing,
even to the dividing a sunder, of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints, and
Marrow, and is a descerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Hearts of all the
Sons and Daughters of Men, that are, that have been, or ever will be in the
World. This Word of God which is the Word of Life; and the Sword of the Spirit,
it will Prevail, when that the Traditions, the Inventions, and the Lying
Wonders of the Church of Rome shall fail: The Word of God abides for ever,
therefore that shall prevail, when that all Unbelieving Jews, Brutish
Atheists, Wicked and Bloody Papists; and Rebellious Dissenters, and Sectaries,
that do trust to Carnal Wisdom, Power, and Strength; to this Party or that
Party, to this Opinion or that Opinion; to their Estates or their Swords, their
Hearts shall fail: Therefore in these Days of the Gospel of Peace, and in the
Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain; Let all that handle
the Sword, perish with the Sword; that do not use it in a right manner, and to
a Right End; that do not use it, for the Glory of the great and Mighty God, who
is a Man of War and the God of Peace; and for the Credit of his Holy Gospel,
which is the glad Tidings of Salvation, and for the great Honor and Renown of
the Protestant Religion, for the great Joy and Triumph of the Church of
England, for the great Exaltation of His Majesty of Great Britain, and the
great Peace and Prosperity of his Kingdoms in these Days of the Gospel, which
is the Day of Gods Power; and the great manifestation of his Patience, Wisdom,
and Glory. Let not any despise the day of small things: For by Carnal Wisdom,
Power, and Strength, shall not Unbeleiving Jews, Brutish Atheists, Wicked and
Bloody Papists, and Rebellious Dissenters, and Sectaries prevail; but against
all these will the Lord of Hosts prevail; and that when he please, and by whom
he please: As it is the Prayer of the Ministers of the Gospel, so it ought to
be their great care in these Days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, for to mind what they Sow in Weakness,
in whom the Great and the Mighty God does Raise in Power, or else they do but
Undervalue their own Labors; and Encourage their Adversaries: For it is not
enough for the Ministers of the Gospel, to Preach the Word of God, in Season,
and out of Season, but they ought to mind who has Believed their Report; and
to whom is the Arm of the Lord Revealed: For his Arm is very long, and very
strong; and that his Enemies will know in these Days of the Gospel, and in the
Reign of our Royal Sovereign; to their great Shame and Overthrow. The Great and
the Mighty God, that gives Life to a Worm, can give Power to a Man, to make all
his Enemies throughout the whole World to Tremble; And that without having a
Sword in his Hand, or Men, or Money at Command.

Therefore as my Heart is Engaged for the God of Heaven, so it is Enraged
against all them, that do Slight and Undervalue his Holy Word, and Question his
Mighty Power: By the Power of God I am what I am; and will Labor to do what I
can, that his Name and Works throughout the whole World may be known to be most
Glorious; and His Majesty of Great Britain's Royal Person; Crown, and Kingdoms,
most Renowned and Famous among all, and above all, Heathen and Popish Kings,
Priests, Princes, and Emperors in the World.

If ever there was a time for to manifest the Power of Faith, for the great
Honor and Renown of England's Royal Church and State, it is in such a time
when that too many do Question the Truth of it; and few brings forth the Fruit
of it, which is Love and Obedience to God and Man.

Great is the Power of Faith, that does enable a Mortal Man, to have Power with
the God of Heaven, to get Power from him, and to Act with Power for him, and
that in the worst of times, and before the best of Men; in these Days of the
Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain:
That among all People, in all Nations, there may be a general Reformation.
Throughout the whole World; there must be but one Religion; and that is the
Protestant Religion, as it is Established in the Church of England; for it is
the true Religion, because it does hold forth and declare the knowledge of the
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent: without Believing in him, and
willing to be Ruled by him, there is not any of the Sons and Daughters of Men,
that can be Saved.

As for the Church of Rome, her Children cannot Learn true Religion; because
their Teachers are False Prophets, and Deceivers: Instead of Consolation, they
do many times meet with Condemnation; and instead of Salvation, they be Exposed
to great Damnation: When the Blind Lead the Blind, they do fall into the Ditch:
When the People are Ignorant, and their Teachers not Sound in the Faith, there
cannot be a true Church, nor a good State: The Church of Rome, will in these
Days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of
Great Britain, be soon brought down; because that they stand upon a Sandy
Foundation, as Tradition, and Lying Wonders: And their Trust and Considence it
is in an Arm of Flesh, which is Carnal Wisdom, Power, and Strength, which has
Decieved many, and will Deceive them. What says the Lord, whose Word shall
stand and prevail, when all their Wisdom, Power, and Strength, their Pride and
Glory shall fail: Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the Man, that trusts in Man,
and makes Flesh his Arm; Cursed be the Turk, the Pope, the French King, and
the King of Spain, and all those that do use their Wisdom, their Power, and
their Strength, to hinder the Gospel, in any Nation, that it should not prevail.

The Jews, that do slight the Gospel, and deny Christ, cannot be Saved, but by
looking up upon him, whom they have Pierced and Crucified: The Proud Turk,
cannot be Saved by his Mahomet: It must be by the Gospel which does hold forth
Jesus Christ, who is the Lord of Life, and the King of Glory; who is ready and
willing in all Nations, to save Sinners, that will deny their own Carnal
Wisdom, Power, and Strength; he will give them Divine Wisdom, Power, and
Strength; which will Enable them that do Enjoy it, for to Understand the mind
of God, to do the will of God, and to Enjoy the Favor of the Everliving God,
which is better than Life, or all the Delights of this World: Because that the
Church of England has kept the Word of Gods Patience, he will keep her in the
hour of Temptation, which is come to try all Nations, in these Days of the
Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain:
Great will be the Peace, and the Prosperity of the Church of Christ, throughout
the whole World: For the Lord will Judge among al Nations, by his Word and
Spirit; and will Rebuke all them that will not submit to the Gospel of his Son,
which is the only means that the Wisdom of the Father has appointed for the
Saving of lost Man; so that they that have trusted to their Wisdom, their
Power, and their Strength, will beat their Swords into Plow Shares, and their
Spears into Pruining Hooks: For Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation;
neither in these Days of the Gospel, shall they learn War any more, as they
have done; but great will be the Joy and Triumph, of the Church of England:
Great will be the Honor and Exaltation of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of
Great Britain: And great will be the Peace and the Prosperity of many Kingdoms.
So that in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, many Nations will be freed from
Slavery, and throughout the whole World there will be great Joy, Peace, and
Prosperity: This I Declare, but not by my own Wisdom and Power, nor by the
Wisdom and Power of any Mortal Men, but by the Wisdom and Power of the God of
Heaven, who does all things in Heaven, and in Earth; according to the Counsel
of his own Will, and that when and by whom he will; that so all the Glory may
Redound to him, and that no Flesh should Glory before him.

This great and mighty God, who is the Searcher of all Hearts, and has the
command over all Spirits; who can speak Peace, when he please, and by whom he
please, to a Person, or to a Nation, has stirred me up to Engage with him, and
has given me Wisdom, Power, and Athority, from his Word and Spirit, for to
understand his mind, and to make it known in due time, for the great Joy,
Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind.

Had any one have promised to give me Ten Thousand Pound, for to Engage in so
Noble a Design; I should not have Ventured my Life, Endangered my Liberty, for
to Engage in a Business of so High a Nature, that I have neither President,
Example, or Encouragement, from Wise, Strong, Rich, and Learned Men; though it
tends for the great Honor, Peace, and Prosperity of them: But having an eye to
the Recompense of Reward, which is the Crown of Life; that Crown which will
never Rust, when all the Honor and Glory of this World, will be laid in the
Dust: I have Ventured my Life, Endangered my Liberty; and have Exposed my self
to many Losses, Crosses, and Reproaches; to be Blamed, Shamed, and Condemned by
many Men, for Engaging with the God of Heaven, for to make known his mind, for
the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind. But that God that has
Encouraged me, and Assisted me in well doing, will Protect me and Reward me in
due time for well doing. They that can deny themselves, and overcome
themselves, for to lay out themselves for his sake and the Gospel, will in this
World receive a Hundredfold of Joy, Peace, and Comfort, and in the World to
come Eternal Life; which they will want, that be afraid or ashamed to own him,
and to appear for him, in the worst of times, and before the best of Men: They
that deny him before Men, he will them, before his Father and Holy Angels in
Heaven: But they that Confess him here, he will them there: The time is come
that the God of Heaven will not be Slighted and Mocked by the Sons of Men, as
he has been too long and too much by many of them; as by Unbelieving Jews,
Brutish Atheists, Wicked and Bloody Papists, and Rebellious D^ss^n^ers and
S^staries: But as in these Gospel Days they w^^l not Know, Fear, Love, Serve,
and Honor him, he will be Honored upon them; in bringing of them to great
Shame and Consusion, as many have sound, and more will find, if that they will
not Cease to do Evil, and Learn to do well; but they that will Honor the God
of Heaven, he has promised to Honor them, in this World, sometimes it may be
with Honors, Riches, and a long Lise; but in Heaven it will be with all that
have been Faithful and Fruitful, for the great Honor of God, the King and
Nation, in their Generation, in this Life, he will Reward them in Heaven, with
Glory, Immortallity, and the Crown of Life.

The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, both to behold them, and to
uphold them, for his Eyes run too and fro throughout the whole Earth; to show
himself strong in the behalf of them, whose Heart is perfect toward him; to
Assist them, to Counsel, Comfort, and Strengthen them, and to Defend them; and
to Punish and Wound them that do Offend them, that do Slight and Undervalue
them, that be as dear unto him, as the Apple of his Eye: They be his Peculiar
Treasure, his Crown and Glory, his Portion, and his great Reward, though the
Men of this World sees no Excellencies or Beauty in them, yet by them that be
most Wise, they be Counted Excellent Persons; for they be the Salt of the
Earth, the Light of the World, the City on a Hill; they be Men of great
Ability, and Nobility; for Nobility, they have the Creator of Heaven and of
Earth, to become their Reconciled Father, his only and beloved Sons, who is the
Lord of Life, and the King of Glory, their Elder Brother; the Holy Ghost, their
Counselor, and Comsorter; Angels their Lifeguard, the best of Kings and
Queens, their Royal Nurses, Ministers their Servants, and the Devil and all
Wicked Men their Slaves: Do I say Ministers their Servants, are not all the
Angels in Heaven, Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who are
and shall be Heirs of Salvation: So that great is the Honor of the Sons of the
Most High, though they be Slighted and Undervalued in this World by the Workers
of Iniquity: Who can tell what great things the God of Heaven has laid up for
them, whom he has provided so many to Honor and to Wait upon; some to Ennoble
them, some to Counsel and Comfort them, some to Guard and Regard them, some to
Provide and Nourish them, many to serve and to wait upon them.

He that has given them his Son, who is the High and Mighty one, the Chiefest
of Ten Thousands, will he not with him freely give them all things that shall
be most suitable and seasonable, Profitable, and Comfortable, and Advantageous
for their Comfort in this Life, and their Happiness in a better.

In this World, the Wisdom, the Power, the Honor, and the Glory of the Heirs
of Heaven, the Members of Christ; does not well appear, because that their life
is hid with Christ; but when he shall appear who will appear, with his Mighty
Angels, and in his great Glory; then what will become of them that know him
not, and have not Obeyed his Gospel, they will be Punished with Everlasting
Destruction, from the Presence of this great Lord, and from the Glory of his
Power: But then he will be glorified in his Saints, and admired of all them
that believe; for he will Change their Vile Bodies that have been upon Earth,
and make them like unto his most Glorious Body, which is more Glorious than the
Sun in the Firmament; to be for ever with him, in whose Presence is fullness of
Joy, and at whose Right Hand are Pleasures for ever more in this World.

A true Believer is a Man of Wonder, because he has the Devil and the World
under his Feet, and Christ in his Heart, who is the Hope of Glory and the Crown
of Glory, to them that Believe in him, and make an Improvement of him: And as a
true Believer is a Man of Wonder many times to himself, so sometimes the God of
Heaven will make him a Son of Thunder, against the Turk, the Pope, and the
Devil, and all the Workers of Evil, against all that do Slight and Undervalue
the Word of God, and Question his mighty Power. It is not Men, nor Angels, but
the God of Heaven, that has made me a Wonder to my self, a Terror to his
Enemies, and a Crown and a Glory to all them that be Faithful to him, to our
Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, to the Protestant Religion, and
to the Church of England.

The God of Heaven is no Respecter of Persons, he that loves Truth, and
works Righteousness, will be Accepted, and Rewarded; but all the Workers of
Iniquity will be Ashamed, Confounded, and Destroyed.

He is not a Righteous Man, that is not a Humble and a Holy Man, a Wise and a
Faithful Man, a Valourous and a Courageous Man, in his Generation, for the
great Honor of God, the King and Nation. For Men to want these Graces, they
will be found Unacceptable to the God of all Grace, Unprofitable to them that
want Grace, and Uncomfortable to themselves in every State and Condition; but
to have these Graces in Truth, and to produce their Fruit, will Procure and
Secure Men in the Favor of the God of Heaven, and of the Wise and Mighty
Angels in Heaven, and of all them that be faithful to the God of Heaven, to the
Protestant Religion, and the Church of England.

Would Men be Wise, Strong, Rich, and Honorable Persons, most Excellent
Persons, more Precious than Gold, or the Gold of Ophir; they must labor to get
and to keep a Sound Heart, which is the Life of the Flesh; a Wholesome Tongue,
which is a Tree of Life, and Righteous Lips, which are the Delight of Kings. He
that Loves Pureness of Heart, for the Grace of his Lips, the King will be his
Friend: The Heart of the Wise, teaches his Mouth, and adds Learning to his
Lips: The Wise in Heart shall be called Prudent, and the Sweetness of the Lips
Increases Learning: The Wise shall Inherit Glory, but Shame will be the
Promotion of all them that do prefer the Pleasures of Sin, that lasts but for a
Moment, above the Gain of Godliness, that lasts for Ever: Godliness it is great
Gain, and will bring Men to great Fame, that be Faithful to the God of Heaven,
to his Anointed our Royal and Gracious Sovereign, His Majesty of Great
Britain, to the Protestant Religion, and the Church of England.

To Fear the God of Heaven, and to Honor the King, His Majesty of Great
Britain, it is true Religion, which is taught in the Church of England.

There is no Place, Calling or Condition, that will Honor Men, if that they be
not Careful to Honor God, and our Royal King in them: For whatever Honors
and Riches that Men do get, if that they do not Honor the God of Heaven, and
His Majesty of Great Britain, their Honors and their Riches will prove
uncertain, and their Lives will prove uncomfortable: But if that Men will do
that Worthy thing, as to know when, and how, for to Honor the God of Heaven,
and our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, in this World, it will
bring them to great Fame, and in Heaven with Holy Angels for ever to Remain.

If there be Joy in Heaven at the Conversion of a Sinner, how much more ought
there to be in the Church of England, when this Sinner shall bring forth the
Fruits of Righteousness, for the Glory of the great and Mighty God, for the
Credit of his Holy Gospel, for the great Honor and Renown of the Protestant
Religion, and for the great Exaltation of His Majesty of Great Britain, which
will bring great Joy and Triumph to the Church of England, and great Peace and
Prosperity, to many Kingdoms.

They that would bring great Honor to the God of Heaven, and to His Majesty of
Great Britain, must get a Sound Heart, and to get a Sound Heart, Men must
Labor to get a Sound Faith, which is more Precious then Gold, and does require
more Wisdom, Power, and Skill to Prove it, Improve it; and to know when, and
how for to Manage it, than it is to Sway a Scepter, and to Rule a Kingdom; and
more Honor than it is to wear any Earthly Crown. This I declare, that no
Subject whatsoever should Desire or Covet after the Growns and Scepters of
Kings and Princes in this World; but if that Men will Covet after a Crown, let
it be an Immortal one, which the Righteous Judge will give to all Faithful
ones; for those that be Faithful to the Death, he will give the Crown of Life:
That Crown which will never Rust, when all the Glory of this World, will be
laid in the Dust.

A Sound Faith is more Precious then Gold, or the Gold of Ophir, because it
will purify the Foulest Heart; it will in time make a mean Man Honorable, a
Poor Man Rich, a Weak Man Strong, a Sick Man Well, and a Dying Man Happy; which
all the things in this World cannot do: Divine Faith, which is more Precious
than Gold, it is the Gift and Power of the great and mighty God, it is not in
the Power of any Mortal Men, to give it to their Nearest and their Dearest
Friend: Parents cannot give it to their Children, nor Ministers to their
People, but the Lord gives it when he will, and to whom he will, in the use of
those Means, that he has appointed, and the Church of England has Ordained, and
that is hearing the Word of God Preached. Divine Faith, which is more Precious
then Gold, comes by Hearing, but not for Hearing: Hearing the Word of God is
the Instrumental Cause, but our Savior is the Original: Therefore he is
worthy, for to have the Honor and the Glory of the Actings of every Man's
Faith, because that he is both the Author and the Finisher of it: And though it
is not in the Power of all the Ministers of the Gospel in London, or in
England, to beget a Spark of Faith, where it is not, yet it ought to be their
great care to take notice where it is wrought; and to Countenance and Encourage
that Person that has it for to bring it forth, because that it is such a Spark,
that it will in time break forth into a Flame, for the Glory of Gods great
Name; and to put the Turk, the Pope, and the Devil, and all the Workers of
Evil, to Shame: and to bring His Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of
England, throughout the whole World, to great Honor, Renown, and Fame: And
that without having a Sword in the Hand, of Men, or Money at Command; without
making a Noise about Religion, without making of many Words, or having the
Voice much heard: As Divine Faith is a High and Honorable Grace, because it is
the Gift and Power of the Great and Mighty God; so it will Enable a Man for to
prepare High and Honorable Work, Pleasant, Profitable, and Delightsom Work,
Victorious, Glorious, and Crowning Work, that will try the Wisdom, and the
Skill, the Valor, and the Courage of many Wise, Strong, Rich, and Learned Men,
what they can do, and what they will do, in these Days of the Gospel, and in
the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, for the great Honor and Renown of the
Protestant Religion, for the great Joy and Triumph of the Church of England,
for the great Exaltation of His Majesty of Great Britain, and for the great
Peace, and Prosperity of many Kingdoms; that so many Nations may be freed from
Slavery, and in the whole World, there may be great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity:
Faith that is true, works by Love, and Love seeks not her own, but the great
Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of many a one in Court, City, and Country. As the
God of Heaven is a Wonder-working God, a Victorious, and a Glorious God; so
Divine Faith, which is more Precious than Gold, is a Wonder-working Grace, a
Victorious, and a Glorious Grace: That Grace which will Enable a Man for to set
a-work the Wisdom, and the Power, of the God of Heaven, will Enable him to set
a Work the Wisdom, and the Power of Martial Men: Great are the Noble Acts
Recorded in Holy Writ, that Gods Worthies have done by the Power of Faith, not
by the Power of the Sword; by the Power of Faith, which is the Power of the God
of Heaven: Men of Renown have Subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, Obtained
Promises, Stopped the Mouths of Lions; out of Weakness were made Strong, have
waxed Valiant in Fight, and turned many to Flight.

Divine Faith, which is more Precious then Gold, will Enable a Man to be as
bold as a Lion, stronger then Samson, and Wiser than the Devil, in the
overcoming of Evil, and the doing of Good, in his Generation, for the great
Honor of God, the King and Nation; but the want of so Excellent a Jewel as
Divine Faith, which is a Supporting and a Comforting Grace, will make all the
Workers of Iniquity throughout the whole World to Tremble, for all their Carnal
Wisdom, Power, and Strength; it is not said, that a Man shall Overcome the
World, by his Wisdom, Power, and Strength, but by his Faith, by Beleiving in
the Son of God, and owning of him, and appearing for him. It is by Faith I
stand, and by Faith that I do Understand, the Mind of the God of Heaven, what
is to be done, among the Sons of Men, the Wisest and the Chiefest among them,
in these Days of the Gospel, for the great Honor and Renown of the Protestant
Religion, for the great Joy and Triumph of the Church of England, for the great
Honor and Exaltation, of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain,
and for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of many Kingdoms.

To Write and to Speak the same thing again and again, it is needful, when it
is Suitable and Seasonable, Profitable, Comfortable, and Advantageous to a
Person, a Family, a City, or a Kingdom. In these Days of the Gospel, and in the
Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, it will be known,
who are Sons of the Church of England, and who are Sons for the Church of
England; many may be Sons of the Church of England, that be a Burden and
Reproach to the Church of England; but to be a Son for the Church of England
does Imply to seek the Good and Welfare of the Church of England, the Peace,
and Settlement of the Church of England, the great Joy, and Triump of the
Church of England, which will bring great Honor and Exaltation to His Majesty
of Great Britain, and great Peace and Prosperity to his Kingdoms. There is a
Generation among the Sons of Men, that have a Name to Live, and are Dead, that
be pure in their own Eyes, but yet not Cleansed from their Iniquities; these
are too Wise for to say our Saviors Prayer and the Church of England's Prayer,
because they have been so long Ruled by the Prince of the Air, who Rules in the
Children of Disobedience, and is Active with them in all their Treasons: These
have made the Church of England Black, with Reproaches cast upon her; but she
is Comely in her Graces before the God of Heaven, and in her Carriage before
Wise and Understanding Men; but before them that be more Nice then Wise, she is
Despised in their Eyes. But in these Days of the Gospel, the Lord who is most
Wise, and most Strong, will make it appear, who be for him or against him, and
his Anointed our Royal and Gracious Sovereign.

The Lord whose Wisdom is unsearchable, and his Power unresistable; is a
Wonder-working God, the Wonders that he has wrought for his Children, when they
have been Sold and Bought, is to be Admired and Remembered by all Persons, in
all Nations. How was the Jews sold and bought to be destroyed by that wicked
Haman and flattering Courtier? But what did he get but shame and confusion, for
he was taken in his own Net, did fall into his own Pit, and his violent
Dealings came down upon his own Pate; for he was hanged upon the same Gallows
that he built for faithful and honorable Mordecai. What got the Spanish
A^ad^, and the Gunpowder Traitors against Englands Royal Church and State?
Were they not ashamed, confounded, and many destroyed. O that men would praise
the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works unto the children of
men. How many times has the Lord of Hosts saved and delivered England again and
again, when that they have been sold and bought to have been destroyed, by the
Pope, the French King, and the King of Spain: But the God of Heaven does Night
and Day watch over and defend this Nation, to bring the Enemies of his Gospel
to them and desolation, that will not conform and reform to the Pretestant
Religion, as it is Established in the Church of England.

For a long time the Turk, the Pope, the French King, and the King of Spain
have kept many Nations in slavery for the Devil and their own lust: But the
time is come, that in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign, will their Wisdom, their Power and Strength, their Honors and
Riches, their great and high Places, be soon laid in the dust; but for the
great Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great Joy and
Triumph of the Church of England, for the great Peace and Prosperity of many
Kingdoms, will His Majesty of Great Britains Crown and Kingdoms flourish among
all Nations, while there is a Generation: So that the God of Heaven will bless
the Earth with great increase; and among all people in all Nations there will
be a Free Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace.

It becomes all the Ministers of the Gospel, all wise, strong, rich, and
learned men, that will prove themselves faithful to the God of Heaven, to His
Majesty of Great Britain, to the Protestant Religion, and to the Church of
England, for to countenance and encourage this Noble Design, that Divine Wisdom
and Power has enabled me for to make known in time, for the great Joy, Peace
and Prosperity of Mankind. Let the man be what he will, or whom he will, whom
the great Great and the Mighty God does stir up to engage with him, for to make
known his Mind, for the great Honor and Exaltation of a Kings Person, and the
great Peace and Prosperity of many Nations; that Man ought to be minded and
regarded by the Wise, Godly, and the Learned: because that his Work is high and
honorable Work, pleasant, prositable and delightsom Work, and will prove
victorious, glorious and crowning Work; it will Crown the God of Heaven with
much Glory among the Sons of Men, and our Royal Sovereign His Majesty of Great
Britain with great Honor and Power over them, over all Heathen and Popish
Kings, Priests, Princes and Emperors in the world.

That this may be done and well done, let all that do profess the Protestant
Religion, that can pray, pray for the long life, and prosperous, and victorious
Reign of our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain; that the Lord would
enable him to be as Good as Great, and keep him at all times, and in all
places, as the Apple of his own Eye; the Lord deliver him always out of the
hands of unreasonable, bloody and deceitful men; for all men have not Faith
that do profess it^ Let all pray that the Lord would by his wisdom and power,
establish his Majesty's Royal Throne in Righteousness; and enable his Royal
Majesty to be a Terror to all the Workers of Evil, and a Praise to them that
do well. Let all pray that the God of Heaven and Earth would bless his Boyal
Majesty with all temporal, spiritual and eternal Blessings; and when this
mortal life of his shall be at an end, that the Lord, who is most great, and
most good, would give him an everlasting Life, and a glorious and unmortal
Crown in his own Kingdom: Let all that can pray, pray that the Lord would bless
our Royal Sovereign in all his Royal Relations; th^^ the word would ennoble
them to be true and fruitful Branches of the most Royal Vine, that they may
slourish in the Courts of Gods House, and bring forth such Fruits as will be
most suitable and seasonable, pleasant, profitable and comfortable to
themselves and others: Let all that can pray, pray that the Lord who is most
wise, and most strong, would bless our Royal and Gracious Sovereign with wise
and faithful Counselors; that the Lord would counsel them with his Holy
Spirit, and enable them to be the Repairers of our Breaches, and the Restorers
of our Paths to dwell in: It is the Blessing of the Lord that does make rich,
and it is his Blessing that does make weak and unlikely means effectual; but
without his Blessing, neither Wisdom, Power, Strength or Counsel, can be
succesful. Let all that can pray, pray that the Lord would bless our Royal
Sovereign with a wise, godly and learned Clergy; the Reverend Bishops, and all
the Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments; the Lord make them more and
more faithful unto him, to our Royal Sovereign (...) Majesty of Great Britain,
to the (...) and to the Church of England: To this end, the Lord bestow a
double portion of (...) upon them, and grant that they may (...) of their
Labors, the salvation of many Souls, which will be the Joy of Angels, and a
Crown to their Ministry. Let all that can pray pray that in these days of the
Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great B^^^ain,
the Lord would bless all people in all Mations with truth of grace, strength of
grace, and increase of grace. Let all pray that can, that the Lord would raise
up those that are fallen into the mire of Sin, and that he would be pleased to
strengthen them that do stand in the good old way of Piety and Honesty, as it
is taught in the Church of England. Let all pray, that in these days of the
Gospel, the Lord would forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers, and
turn their hearts: That he would be pleased to have mercy upon all men, that so
his Mercy, and Wisdom, and Power may be more and more known upon earth, and his
saving health among all Nations; that so among all people there may be a
general Reformation, which will bring great Joy, Peace and Consolation; And to
his Majesty of Great Britain, and to the Church of England great Honor and
Exaltation. Let not any despise the day of small things, for what I have made
known in much weakness and many infirmities, against much opposition and
contradiction, I know that the God of Heaven will raise it with great power,
for the glory of his great Name, for the credit of his holy Gospel, for the
great honor and renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great joy and
triumph of the Church of England, the great honor and exaltation of his
Majesty of Great Britain, and the great peace and prosperity of many Kingdoms;
which will be brought about in the days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our
Royal Sovereign. Cryout and shout thou Inhabitant of Zion, thou Church of
England, for great is the Holy One of Israel, in the midst of thee, to counsel,
comfort and to strengthen thee in thy troubles, and to bring thee to great
honor and glory: So that all thy Enemies that have been incensed against thee,
will be ashamed and confounded, if that they will not Conform and Reform to the
Protestant Religion, as it is established in the Church of England, which is
for Unity, Peace and Concord the best; which would have all the Sons and the
Daughters of Men to live in the fear of God, and to die in his favor; then
they will not be afraid to die, nor ashamed to live: but their last works and
days will be best.

It is high and honorable work, pleasant, prositable and delightsom work; it
is victorious and crowning-work: That the God of Heaven has stirred me up for
to engage with him in this day of his power, for the glory of his great Name,
for the credit of his holy Gospel, for the great honor and renown of the
Protestant Religion; for the great joy and triumph of the Church of England,
and the great peace and prosperity of many Kingdoms.

It is such work, that the French King with all his Men and Money has not done,
cannot do, nor knows how to do: And why, because his Wisdom is Foolishness, and
his Strength is Weakness to bring it about; his Wisdom and his Strength will
deceive him, and all that trust to their carnal wisdom, power and strength in
these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign: Their wisdom
is foolishness, and their strength is weakness, who are not careful to make
themselves strong in the Lord, in the Lord Jehovah, and in the power of his
might.

O great is the power of Faith, that does enable a mortal man to know that his
wisdom and strength is in the Immortal God, and to get wisdom and strength from
him, to be useful and serviceable for him in his Generation; for the great
Honor of Him and the King; and the peace and prosperity of many Nations.

O great is the power of Faith, that does enable the Sons of Men to be most
useful and serviceable both in Church and State; and that in the worst of
times, and before the best of men. It is the power of Faith that does enable
the Sons of Men for to have power with the God of Heaven, to get power from
him; and to act with Power, for the great Honor of him, and the King, and the
great Peace, and Prosperity of his Kingdoms. What I have done, can do, or shall
do, by the Power of Faith, which is the Power of God, in this Noble Design,
which I have made known in time, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of
Mankind; I would have all Wise, Strong, Rich, and Learned Men, give all the
Glory to the God of Heaven; because all Glory is due to him, both from Man and
Angels: And that continually the Lord, who is most wise, and most strong, knows
when an I how for to make bare his Arm, and to send forth his Light and Truth,
to shame and condemn all unbelieving Jews, brutish Athetsis, wicked and bloody
Papists, and rebellious Dissontors and Sectaries, that do style and undervalue
his Word of Truth, and will not believe in the God of Truth; but do live too
many of them, as if there was no God that made them, and that there is not any
that can save them. But as the Lord, who is most Great and most Good, is able
and willing to save unto the utmost all that come unto him, be their sins never
so great and many; so he will punish unto the uttermost all that will not come
unto him in these days of the Gospel for salvation.

Understand O ye Heathen, and ye ^believing Jews, and ye brutish Atheists, and
ye ^cked and blood-thirsty Papists, and ye rebellio^^ Dissentors and Sectaries,
when will ye learn to be wise, to fear, love, serve and to honor him, and to
know him who gives unto all men their being: He that planted the ear, shall he
not hear; he that formed the eye, shall he not see us? He knows that all things
that are wrought in secret, will be made known in public, for Light will
discover Darkness; and the Lord that made man, does not only know all men's
hearts, but all their thoughts, what they tend to, and what will be the end of
them; The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they stumble;
but the way of the Lord is strength to the upright, because he makes him his
hop^, his trust, his joy and delight.

Let not any in these Gospel-days question whether there be a God that made the
Heavens, the Earth and the Sea, and all things that in them be; because that he
gives life, and breath, and being unto all the Sons of Men, and takes it away
when he please from any of them; the Lord will be known throughout the whole
World to be God, by his Judgment upon the Wicked who, are his Rod, for to
punish his Children that walk contrary unto him: He that chastises the
Heathen, shall not he correct? Yes, he will correct them whom he loves most,
that they may serve him best. God had only one Son without sin, but not any
without suffering; our Savior did learn obedience in the things he suffered:
not as he was God, there could be no obedience desired or required of him; but
as he was man, in taking upon him our Nature he learned Obedience; for he took
upon him the form of a servant, and made himself of no reputation, for to bring
the Sons and the Daughters of Men that do believe in him, to great honor and
exaltation. Our Nature, it was his great humiliation, that the Son of God
should become the Son of Man; it is the highest mystery and the greatest
humility. But why was this done? That so the Sons of Men might become the Sons
of God, and Children of the Most High: And if children, heirs of God, and
joynt-heirs with Christ: Which privilege, it is so high, that though the
Angels in Heaven do continually admire it, they will never enjoy it; for our
Savior did not take upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham:
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only beloved Son, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish but have everlasting life.

To this end he obeyed his Fathers will, and for his love to the Sons of Men,
he humbled himself to advance them; he became poor, to make them rich; he
under-went his Fathers Frowns, that they might enjoy his Smiles: he became a
Curse, that they might enjoy the Blessing; he did wear the Crown of Thorns,
that they might wear the Crown of Glory: he died a shameful and a painful
death, that they might enjoy a happy and a blessed Life.

And has he done so much for the Sons of Men, let not any of them think any
thing too much to do for him; but let them all be willing to be any thing, to
be nothing, so he may be all: Let him rule in them and over them, who can best
counsel, and comfort, and strengthen them, honor, protect, and reward them:
The Angels in Heaven rejoice and praise God for his love to the Sons of Men, in
finding out a Ransom for them; but the fallen Angels have not any to pity them,
but they be reserved in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the Great day;
And then all must give Account what they have done in this World, whether it be
good or evil.

The good Angels rejoice and proclaim Glory to God in the Highest, and on earth
peace, good will toward men: But no Worship or Adoration is due to them, much
less to pray to Saints Deceased. We are to praise God for the benefit and the
comfort we have from Angels and good Men, and from any of his Creatures.

Let all the Sons and the Daughters of Men therefore praise the Lord Day by
Day, for Righthand Mercies, for Left Hand, for Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal: But above all, for Jesus Christ the Foundation and the Fountain of
them all. Let them praise him every Day for their Creation in due time, for
their Redemption in the fullness of time, and their Preservation time after
time. Let them praise him for the Means of Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, and for hopes of Glorification.

In these Days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, too many
that have made Separation from the Church of England, have proved wandering
Stars, and then blazing Stars, and at last falling Stars. How has many of them
boasted of Church Privileges, of Gospel Ordinances, of strong Assurance, and
of great Revelation; and of a sudden, like a Morning-cloud, have vanished away,
and come to nothing: But the path of the Just is as the shining-light, that
shines more and more unto the perfect Day. The Church of England has her fixed
and real Stars, which unbelieving Jews, brutish Atheists, wicked and bloody
Papists, and rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries, and know not well where they
are, nor who they are; but they are known to the Most High, and from him they
will give the greatest and the clearest Light in the darkest Night of trouble
and affliction that does befall many Persons, and many Nations.

Husbandmen love to see and to enjoy Fruitful Fields, Fruitful Vineyards, and
Fruitful Gardens: And the God of Heaven loves that they that know him, and do
own him, should be Fruitful in Good Works; for herein is he much glorified,
that the Sons and the Daughters of Men should bring forth much Fruit, such
Fruit as is suitable and seasonable, profitable and comfortable in their
Generation, for the great honor of God, the King and Nation.

As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so be they that be Fruitful
among the Sons of Men: They may be black with Reproaches cast upon them, but
they be comely with good Graces wrought in them.

Every true Member of Christ is a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a Fountain
sealed from the world; but it is in the World. The men of the World will
condemn many that do profess Religion, for they love their own, and will not
quarrel, contend, and slight one another so much as they that be for this
Party, and that Party; for this Opinion and that Opinion, and all against the
Church of England. It has been want of love to God and to Fellow Members, that
has caused so much Strife and Contention, Sedition and Rebellion for about
Forty years; that it has been only the Lords mercy that we have not been
confounded, nor consumed long before now: But shall we still provoke the Lord
to anger, who is most Great and most good; will he not provoke us to anger,
even to the shame and confusion of our own Faces, if that we will not Conform
and Reform to him, and to the Government of the Church of England. Has not the
Church of England Enemies enough from the Church of Rome to Encounter withal?
But must she be slighted and undervalued, vexed and perplexed by them that
should readily and willingly assist her, but not in the least resist her? What
ever Wisdom, Power, Courage, or any Grace any Member has received in the Church
of England, they ought to prove it, and improve it, and to know when and how
for to manifest it, for the great peace and prosperity of the Church of
England; and not to make a noise about Religion: to be the Head of this Party,
or that Society, that is divided from the Church of England: This is that which
makes Mutiny and Confusion, it argues too much self-seeking, and will prove
unto many self-undoing.

As all the Members of the natural Body act for the good of that Body; so all
the Members of the Church of England ought for to act for the great Honor,
Peace and Prosperity of the Church of England; or else they be not for her, but
against her. The mighty God, who is most Great and most Good, will plead thy
Cause O Church of England; therefore let the Tu^k, the Pope and the Devil, and
all the Workers of evil, combine and design to undermine and overthrow the
Church of England, they will be deceived, confounded, and for ever ashamed. The
Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannul it? And his hand is
stretched out, and who shall turn it back? Is not destruction to the wicked,
and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? Therefore let not any Envy
or Fret at the prosperity of the Wicked; but rather let them be pitied: For if
that they do not bring forth good Fruit in due season, they will soon be cut
down like the Grass, and wither as the green Herb: But the Salvation of the
Righteous is of the Lord, he is their Strength in the time of trouble, he will
help, save, and deliver them, because they trust in him; but the Transgressors
will be destroyed together, the end of the Wicked is to be cut off; the Lord of
Hosts has broken the Staff of the Wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers: For
Babylon the Glory of Kingdoms, the Beauty of the Chaldees Excellency, will be
as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O
Lucifer, Son of the Morning! How art thou cut down to the ground which did
weaken the Nations! The Lord of Hosts will rise up against Babylon, and cut off
from them what he has promised, the Name and Remnant, and Son and Nephew, says
the Lord. He who smote the people in wrath with a continual Stroke; He that
ruled the Nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hinders. Then this Proverb
will be taken up against the King of Babylon, and many will say, How has the
Oppressor ceased, the golden City ceased; that made the world as a wilderness,
and destroyed the Cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners:
Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming; it stirs up
the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it has raised up from
their thrones all the kings of the Nations; all they shall speak and say unto
thee, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us? thy pomp
is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy Viols: the worm is spread
under thee, and the worms cover thee; for thou have said in thy heart, thou will ascend into heaven, thou will exalt thy throne above the stars of God,
thou would ascend above the heights of the clouds; thou would be like the
most high: Yet thou shelt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit;
they that see thee, they shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee,
saying, Is this the man that made the world to tremble, that did shake kingdoms?

The Lord of Hosts, who is most wise, and most strong, will punish the World
for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquities: He will cause the
arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the
Terrible. And when the Lord has performed his whose Work upon Mount Sion, and
on Jerusalem, he will then punish the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and
the glory of his high looks. Shall the Axe boast it self against him that
heweth therewith? Or shall the Saw magnify it self against him that shakes
it: As if the Rod should shake it self against them that lift it up: Or as if
the Staff should hit up it self as if it were no wood. Cannot the Potter do
with the Clay as he please? As the Clay is in the hands of the Potter, so are
all men in all Nations in the hands of the Lord of Hosts, to rule and overruled
them at his will and pleasure: Therefore let all the Inhabitants of the World
fear him, let them tremble at his presence; who has placed the Sand for the
bound of the Sea, by a perpetual Decree, that it cannot pass it, though the
Waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet
can they not pass over it. And shall the Workers of Iniquity, the Seed of evil
Doers, the Children of Disobedience, the Enemies of the Gospel, rage and fret,
and combine and design to undermine and overthrow the Workers of Righteousness;
those that be faithful to the Protestant Religion, and to his Majesty of Great
Britain, and the Church of England; but it will tend to their own shame and
confusion? For the Righteous will slourish, but Destruction will be to the
Workers of Iniquity; though they may make a Covenant and Agreement with Death
and with Hell, when the overflowing Scourge shall pass through, that it may not
come unto them; but they will be deceived, because they have made Lies their
Refuge, therefore their Covenant with Death shall be disanulled, and their
Agreement with Hell shall not stand: When the over-slowing Scourge shall pass
through, then they shall be trodden down by it: From the time that it goes
forth it shall take them, for morning by morning will it pass over by day and
by night: And it will be a vexation unto the Workers of Iniquity, the Enemies
of the Protestant Religion, and of the Church of England, only to understand
the Report thereof. Let not any be Mockers and Scoffers, and say, Where is the
Promise of his coming? least their Bands be made strong; for behold the Lord,
who is most wise and most strong, most gracious, and most glorious; who has
been for a long time much provoked, being slighted and undervalued by
unbelieving Jews, brutish Atheists, wicked, bloody, and deceitful Papists, and
rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries: He comes out of his place to punish the
Inhabitants of the Earth, for their Iniquity; for though the Lord, who is most
great, has his Throne in the highest Heavens, yet when he pleases, for his
peoples ease, he can come into the lowest heart; for to make the Enemies of his
Gospel throughout the whole World to smart: therefore Fear, and the Pit, and
the Snare, are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth: It shall come to pass that
he who sleeth from the noise of the Fear, shall fall into the Pit, and he that
comes out of the midst of the Pit shall be taken in the Snare, when he arises
to shake terribly the Earth: Therefore let all that be wise of heart, that
would be secure, enter into the Rock of Ages for safety; let them humble
themselves for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his most Excellent
Majesty; for the losty looks of men will be humbled, and their haughtiness
bowed down; for the Lord thy God, O Church of England, will be exalted in the
hearts of men, for his wonderful works and great mercy toward them: But they
that have not made the Lord of Hosts, in these days of the Gospel, their strong
Hold and City of Refuge; what will they do in the Day of Visitation, and in the
Desolation which shall come from far? To whom will they slay for help? And
where will they leave their Glory? Who will in such a day as this is plead for
Baal, for Idol-worship? Or, who will undertake to uphold Babylon? Babylon is
fallen by Gods Decree, who does foresee how all things will be. The time is
come, that Babylon shall fall suddenly, and all the graven Images of her Gods,
and the Idols will be utterly abolisht: They that will plead for Baal, let them
be put to death; if he be a God, let him plead for himself. What says the
Lord, who is the true and the ever-living God, who is to be feared and served
by all people in all Nations. Learn not the way of the Heathens, and be not
dismayed at the Signs of the Heavens; for the Heathens are dismayed at them:
For the Customs of brutish Atheists and foolish Papists is vain; for one
cutteth a Tree out of the Forest, the work of the hands of the Workman with the
Ax; they deck it with Silver and with Gold, they fasten it with Nails and with
Hammers that it move not, they are upright as the Palm Tree, but speak not;
they must needs be born because they cannot go: therefore let not any be afraid
of them, for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good; they
have Mouths but they speak not, Eyes have they, but they see not; they have
Hands, but they handlenot; Feet have they, but they walk not, neither speak
they through their Throat: They that make them are like unto them, so is every
one that trusts in them. But let them that fear the true and ever-living God,
trust in him, and he will be their Help and their Shield; he will encourage
them in well-doing, and reward them for well doing, both in this World, and in
a better: But the Workers of Iniquity, and Seed of Evil Doers, the Children of
Disobedience are Confounded, by their Graven Images; for their Molten Image is
Falsehood, and there is no Breath in them: They are Vanity, and the Work of
Errors, in the time of their Visitation they shall perish, the Portion of
Jacob is not like them, for he is the Former of all things, and Israel is the
Rod of his Inheritance; the Lord of Hosts is his Name. The Lord of Hosts has
his Battle Axes and Weapons of War, whereby he can, when he pleases, and with
whom he pleases in the day of his Power break in Pieces the Nations, and
destroy Kingdoms; break in Pieces the Horse and his Rider, and the Chariot and
his Rider: The Lord has broke in Pieces both Man and Woman, both Old and Young;
he has broke in Pieces both the Shepherd and his Flock, the Husbandman and his
Yoke of Oxen, both Captains and Rulers, the Lord has done it and will do it:
They that walk contrary unto him, that will not Labor to Know him, so as to
Fear, Love, Serve, and to Honor him, he will walk contrary unto them, so as to
Wound them and Confound them.

Put your selves in Array against Babylon, all you Wise, Strong, Rich, and
Learned Men, that be Faithsul to the God of Heaven, to his Anointed our Royal
and Gracious Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, to the Protestant
Religion, and to the Church of England: Put your selves in Array against her
round about, all ye that bend the Bow, or handle the Sword, shout at her, spare
no Arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord thy God, O Church of England;
who is most great and most good, most gracious, and most glorious: Shout
against her round about, for it is the vengeance of the Lord, who is most wise,
and most strong; therefore take vengeance upon her: As she has done, do unto
her; set ye up a Standard in the Land, blow the Trumpet among the Nations;
prepare the Nations against her, call together against her the Kingdoms;
appoint a Captain against her; prepare against her the Nations, with the Kings
of the Medes, the Captains thereof, and all the Rulers thereof, and all the
Land of his dominion: The Land shall tremble and sorrow, for every purpose of
the Lord thy God, O Church of England, will be performed against Babylon, to
make the Land of Babylon a Desolation without an Inhabitant. In these days of
the Gospel many will see it and be glad, and rejoice; the mighty men of Babylon
will forbear to sight, because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance
of his Temple: Babylon, which is the Church of Rome, has been a golden Cup,
that has made all the Earth drunken, the Nations have drunken of her Wine,
therefore the Nations are mad. You that do truly fear and love the true God,
flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his Soul, that they may
not be cut off in her Iniquity; for this is the time of the Lords vengeance,
who will render unto her a Recompense; for her Judgment reaches unto Heaven,
and is listed up even unto the Skies; therefore the Lord whom thou have mocked
and provoked with thy Images and Idols, have laid a Snare for thee, O Babylon,
to be taken and destroyed, because thou have striven against him who is most
wise, and most strong; who will render unto Babylon, and to all her
Inhabitants, all the evil that they have done in Zion, in the Church of Christ
throughout the whole World: Therefore will thy young men, O Babylon, fall in
the Streets, all thy Men of War will be cut off in this day of the Lords power,
and the most proud will stumble and fall, and not any will be able to raise
them up. The Lord of Hosts is against thee, O Babylon, O Church of Rome, whose
Day is come when Iniquity shall have an end: What says the Lord, whose Word
will stand and prevail, when the Church of Rome, and the Pope of Rome's Pride
and Vain Glory will soon fail. Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and
take off the Crown, for the Pope of Rome must come down, and all that will
undertake to uphold his Crown: Exalt him that is low, our Royal Sovereign his
Majesty of Great Britain, who has been a King of many Sorrows and Cares; but
the time is come, that our Royal Sovereign is to be a King of more Joys and
less Fears than any of his Majesty's Predecessors have enjoyed before him; and
it will be well that his Majesty's Successors may enjoy the like after him. As
the Lord will exalt them that be low, that be meek and humble, so he will abase
them that be high, who are proud and stubborn, that have high thoughts of
themselves, and low thoughts of him. Is it not the Turk, the Pope, and the
French King? But they will know, that the Most High is above them, and has the
greatest power to set up and to pull down when he will, and whom he will;
therefore Babylon, the Church of Rome, will become heaps, a dewlling place for
Dragons, an astonishment and an hissing, without an Inhabitant. What says the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the Daughter of Babylon, that she
is like a Threshing-floor, it is time to thresh her, for the time of her
Harvest shall come, and will not tarry. The Lord will give great joy, rest and
peace unto thee, O England, Scotland, France and Ireland, and unto all those
Nations that do profess and enjoy the Protestant Religion; but he will disquiet
all the Inhabitants of Babylon, all that be in league or in love with the
Church of Rome, where ever they be, or wherever they are. A Sword is upon the
Chaldeans, says the Lord, who is most wise, and most strong, and has all power
and powers in his own hand; and upon the Inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her
Princes, and upon her Wisemen: A Sword is upon the Liars, and they shall dote;
a Sword is upon her mighty men, and they shall be dismayed: A Sword is upon
their Horses, and upon their Chariots, and upon all the mingled people that are
in the midst of thee, O Babylon, and they shall become as Women: A Sword is
upon her Treasures, and they shall be robbed: A Drought is upon her Waters, and
they shall be dried up; for it is the Land of graven Images, and they are mad
upon their Idols: but the time is come, that the Lord will do Judgment upon the
graven Images of Babylon, and her whole Land will be confounded, and all her
slain shall fall in the midst of her; for the Lord will punish Bell in Babylon,
and will bring forth out of his mouth that which he has swallowed up; And the
Nations shall not slow together any more unto him; yea the Wall of Babylon
shall fall, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Neighbor Cities
thereof, says the Lord; so that no man shall abide there, neither shall any
Son of man dwell therein, but the wild Beasts of the Islands shall dwell there,
and the Owls shall dwell therein; but it shall be no more inhabited for ever,
neither shall it be dwelt in from Generation to Generation: Then the Heaven and
the Earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for Babylon; for the Spoilers
shall come unto her from the North, says the Lord, who is slow to anger, but
he is great in power; and that Babylon the Church of Rome will know to her
great shame and overthrow: Though Babylon should mount up to Heaven, and though
she should forrisie the height of her strength; yet she shall fall and never
rise more. Woe be to them that go down to Egppt for help, and stay on Horses,
and trust in Chariots, because they be many, and in Horsemen because they be
very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, and seek unto him
who is the Lord of Hosts, strong and mighty in Battle, who can and will help
and deliver them that trust in him, when all outward means fail. There is no
King saved by the multitude of an Host; a mighty man is not delivered by much
Strength: An Horse is a vain thing for safety, neither can he deliver any by
his great Strength. The Egyptians are Men and not God, and their Horses Flesh
and not Spirit; therefore they that trust unto them, when the Lord shall
stretch out his Hand, and make bare his Arm, both he that helps shall fall,
and he that is helped, shall fall down, and they all shall faise together;
therefore woe be to the rebellious Children, all unbelieving Jews, brutish
Atheists, wicked, bloody and deceitful Papists, and all proud Dissentors and
Sectaries; that take Counsel, but not of the Lord, who is most wise, and most
strong; and that cover with a Covering, but not of his Spirit, that so they may
add sin to sin. Woe unto them that be wise in their own Eyes, and that seek Deep
to hide their Counsel from the Lord, before whom the Darkness and the Light are
both alike; and yet they say, Who seeeth them, and who knows them? Understand
O ye brutish Atheists, and ye Fools, when will ye be wise? He that teaches
Man knowledge, shall not he know? The Lord knows the thoughts of Wisemen,
that they be vanity, that all People in all Nations may know the true God,
whose Dominion it is from Sea to Sea, and from one end of the World to the
other: He will proceed to do a mavelous Work and a Wonder; he that gives
Understanding to the simple, does many times cause the Wisdom of Wisemen to
perish, and the Understanding of the Prudent to be hid. He turns wise Men
backward, and makes their knowledge foolish; he leads Counselors away
spoiled, and makes the Judges Fools; he loses the Bond of Kings, and girdeth
their Loins with a Girdle: He leads Princes away spoiled, and over-throweth
the mighty; he removes away the Speech of the Trusty, and takes away the
Understanding of the Aged: He puts down the Mighty from their Seat, and does
many times exalt the Humble and the Meek. He gives Power to the Faint, and to
them that have no Might: He increases Strength; he discovers deep things out
of Darkness, and brings out to Light the shadow of Death: He increases the
Nations and destroys them: He enlarges the Nations, and straiteneth them
again: He takes away the Heart of the Chief of the People of the Earth, and
causes them to wander many times in a Wilderness where there is no way: They
grope in the dark without light, and he makes them to stagger like a drunken
man. He breaks down, and it cannot be built. Again, He shuts up a Man, and
there can be no opening. He with holds the Waters, and they dry up also: He
sends them out and they overturn the Earth when he pleases. With him is
Wisdom and Strength; the Deceived and the Deceiver are his: If he cut off and
shut up, or gather together, who can hinder him. He sits upon the Circle of
the Earth, and all the Inhabitants before him are as Grashopers. He stretches
out the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent to dwell in.

Therefore let all the Sons and Daughters of Men learn to know, fear, love,
serve, and to honor this great and mighty God, whose Wisdom is unsearchable,
whose Power is unresistable, whose Goodness unexpressible, and whose Love is
unchangeable; and according to his Power, so will his Anger and his Wrath be,
against the seed of evil doers, and the workers of Iniquity. Who can or will
say that there is not a God that made the World and don't govern the World?
Have ye not known? Have ye not heard? Has it not been told you from the
beginning? Have ye not understood from the Foundations of the Earth, that the
Everlasting God, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is
weary?

There is no searching of his Understanding, even the Youth shall faint and be
weary, and the Young men shall utterly fall; but they that wait upon the Lord
will renew their Strength: they will mount up with Wings as Eagles, they will
run and not be weary, and walk and not faint. Let who will glory in their
Wisdom, Power, and Strength, in their Honors, Riches, great and high Places; I
will glory in my Weakness and Infirmities, and in my Insufficiency; that I that
have nothing, comparatively, and am nothing seemingly, yet from Gods
All Sufficiency I have Wisdom, Power and Strength for to understand his Mind,
for to make it known in due time, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of
Mankind, in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign,
his Majesty of Great Britain: Who will rise up for me against Evil Doers? Or
who will stand up for me against the workers of Iniquity? Unless the Lord, who
is most Great and most Good, had been my help, my Soul before now had dwelt in
Silence; but the Lord of Hosts has been with me, and is with me as a mighty
terrible One.

Therefore they that be incensed against me for engaging with him, for the
glory of his great Name, for the Credit of his Holy Gospel, for the great
Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great Joy and Triumph of
the Church of England, for the great Exaltation of his Majesty of Great
Britain, and the great Peace and Prosperity of many Kingdoms: they will be
ashamed, if not confounded. Let all praise him for their Wisdom, their Power,
their Honors, their Riches, their Great and High Places: Let all praise him
daily for their Health, their Strength, their Liberty; for their Food, their
Raiment, their Habitation; and for the Peace and Prosperity of their Friends
and Relations; yea, of their very Enemies: And praise him for all Losses,
Crosses and Reproaches, for they will work for the good of them that love God;
for God had great love to the Sons of Men, when they were Enemies unto him.

To this end the most Wise God, who is the God of Love and Peace, has sent and
continued from Generation to Generation his Gospel, which is the glad Tidings
of Salvation: That so among the Sons of Men and the God of Heaven, there might
be a great and a lasting Reconciliation.

God is Love, he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him: He that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen; how can he love God whom he has not
seen?

It is Love to the God of Heaven, and to the Sons of Men, that has enabled me
to deny my self, to overcome my self, and to lay out my self in so noble a
Design; as for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind; as for the
great Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion; for the great Joy and
Triumph of the Church of England; for the great Exaltation of our Royal
Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain; and for the great Joy, Peace, and
Prosperity of many Kingdoms.

They that will be willing to engage their Heart, Soul, Strength, Will and
Affection, in the Service of God, he will give them Wisdom, Power, and Strength
to make them able. As the Lord does by his own Wisdom and Power rule, and
overruled all Nations as one Man; so he can with the same Wisdom and Power,
with one Man, when he please to make bare his Arm; for his Arm is very long and
very strong, and that his Enemies will know; the Turk, the Pope, and the Devil,
and all the workers of Evil, to their great shame and overthrow; and that in
these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty
of Great Britain.

The Lord thy God, O Church of England Reigns, be the People never so
Impatient, he whose Dominion it is from Sea to Sea, and from one end of the
World to the other. Therefore let the Righteous rejoice and be glad and shout
for joy of heart; but all the workers of Iniquity, the seed of Evil Doers, the
Children of Disobedience, will be ashamed and confounded, if that they will not
Conform and Reform to the Protestant Religion, as it is Established in the
Church of England, when the Lord, who is most Great and most Good, does enable
a Mortal Man for to understand his Mind, to have done what is remarkable; he
will enable him to make it known in due time, that it may be recordable. Wise
Men lay up Knowledge till a fit time; and he that has Knowledge spares his
Words till a fit season; and a Man of Understanding is of an excellent Spirit;
that knows what, when, and how that may be done, which tends for the great
Honor, Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of a King and Kingdom.

How much better is it therefore to get Wisdom rather than Gold, and
Understanding above choice Silver; because it will give unto them that do
embrace it, an Ornament of Grace, and a Crown of Glory. How forcible are right
Words, but what does Arguing reprove, to contend for this Opinion and that
Opinion: It has been a great shame to the Protestant Religion and the Church of
England. They that believe will be saved, but they that will not labor and
endeavor to believe in the Son of God, who became the Son of Man, will be
ashamed, confounded, and at last destroyed: For there is no other remedy for
Man's Recovery but by obeying the Gospel.

Therefore consider what so great a Prince as the Lord of Life, and the King of
Glory, has done for the Sons of Men: Let all fall in love with him; for if
Unbelieving Jews and Brutish Atheists, and Wicked and Bloody Papists, and
Rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries, do not endeavor to love him, who is
altogether lovely, their condition is sad for the present, and worse for the
future; but I hope that in these Gospel-days, and in the Reign of our Royal
Severaign, his Majesty of Great Britain; that Jews and Gentiles will come into
one Fold; and that all People in all Nations, will know the True God, and Jesus
Christ, so as to love, serve, and to honor him: For the Lord has promised, and
he will make it good; for to give unto his Son the Heathen for his Inheritance,
and the uttermost Parts of the Farth for his Possession. And who knows but that
the time is come, that in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our
Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain, it is to be done: This high and
honorable work, this pleasant, profitable, and long desired work, this
victorious, glorious, and crowning work, that will crown the God of Heaven with
much glory among the Sons of Men, and his Majesty of Great Britain, with great
Honor and Power over them, over all Heathen Popish Kings, Priests, Princes,
and Emperors in the World, that will not submit to the Gospel and the
Protestant Religion, as it is taught in the Church of England: That this high
and honorable work may be brought about by the Lords Anointed, his Majesty of
Great Britain; the God of Heaven has stirred me up in time to make known his
Mind, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind: Therefore let the
Righteous rejoice, all that be faithful to the God of Heaven, to his Majesty of
Great Britain, to the Protestant Religion, and to the Church of England; but
let the Wicked tremble, and all the workers of Iniquity be ashamed; for in his
Majesty's Reign will the Righteous flourish, and in his days there will be
abundance of Peace; so that Strife, Contention and Wars, in these Gospel-days
will cease, and throughout the whole World among all People there will be a
free Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace: Therefore let the Heavens rejoice,
and let the Earth be glad; let the Sea roar and the fullness thereof; let the
Fields be joyful, and all that is therein; then shall all the Trees of the Wood
rejoice, for the Lord who is most wise and most strong comes, he comes to
judge the Earth: He will judge the World with Righteousness, and the People
with his Arise and shine thou Church of England, thy Light is come, the Glory
of the Lord is risen upon thee, to bring thee to great Honor and Exaltation;
and the Whore of Babylon, the Man of Sin, and the Church of Rome, to great
Shame and Desolation for her Idolatry and Abomination, for her Lies and
Fornication, for the Blood of the Saints that she has slain: Her time is come
to be brought down with shame, but the Lord will have mercy upon Sion, upon his
Church throughout the whole World; the time to favor her is come, so that
great will be the Joy and Triumph of the Church of England; great will be the
Exaltation of his Majesty of Great Britain, and great will be the Peace and and
Prosperity of many Kingdoms.

Let not any despise the day of small things, for that God that speaks peace to
a Person, can enable a Person to make known his Mind, for the great joy, peace,
and prosperity of many Nations. Return, Return, O backsliding Children
therefore, and remember from whence you are fallen, and do your first work; for
it was better with you than them: Even since the Dissentors and Sectaries, left
off to be wise and to do good; they have been the occasion of shedding too much
Blood: They left off to be wise, when they made Separation, which has caused
Division, Contention, Sedition and Rebellion: They left off doing of much good,
ever since, they have refused to say the daily Prayers of the Church of
England, which Prayers are suitable and seasonable, profitable and comfortable
for all Persons in all Nations; they tend very much to inform the Ignorant, to
Reform the Disobedient, to Comfort the Weak Christian, to Resolve the Doubting,
to Raise up those that be fallen, and to Strengthen them that do Stand, if they
be but well used and practiced; but these Prayers have been slighted and
undervalued by them who are too much like many of the Children of Israel, who
was a proud, froward, and stubborn Generation; Children that could talk of
Faith, but the Lord told them, They had not Faith; for they moved him to
Jealousy with that which is not god, they provoked him to Anger with their
Vanities: But what says the Lord, who has all power in his own hand, and the
whole Creation at command; he told them that he would move them to Jealousy,
with those which are not a People; he would provoke them to Anger with a
foolish Nation. And has not our Contentions and Divisions about Religion caused
the Lord to afflict us and to scourge us, with a foolish and ignorant People,
even the Papist? They that provoke the Lord to Anger, he will provoke them to
the shame and confusion of their own Faces.

The Children of Israel did so far provoke to Anger the Lord, who is not easily
provoked, that he did hide his Face from them, and would see what their end
would be: And has not the Lord justly hid his Face from the Dissentors and
Sectaries for a long time, to see what their end will be: How they will quit
themselves like Men. They can talk like Men and walk like Men, but they have
acted, too many of them, like Children, Fools, and Madmen; but their own
wickedness will correct them, and their backsliding will reprove them: for the
Backsliders in heart will be filled with their own foolish ways, they will lie
down in sorrow. And have not the Dissentors and Sectaries, experience enough,
that have made Separation from the Church of England, what it is to backslide
from the Worship of God, from the Word of God, from the Prayers of the Church,
which tends to Edification, Reformation, and Consolation; and from the ways of
God, whose ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all his Paths Peace; and from the
Yoke of Christ, whose Yoke is easy and his Burden Light. And what have they
got unto themselves, but great Shame and much Confusion? When Israel did cast
off the thing that was good, the Enemy did pursue them. So since the Dissentors
and Sectaries have cast off the good Prayers of the Church of England, which
are profitable and comfortable; the God of Heaven has made their Friends as
Enemies to pursue them: For if a man's ways please the Lord, he will make their
Enemies to be at peace with them or with him, but if they do not, God will make
their Friends their Enemies; nay, the great and good God, who is the best
Friend, will become unto them that do provoke him, the worst Enemy.

They that walk contrary unto him, he will walk contrary unto them, and will
punish them seven times more; he will heap mischief among them, and spend his
Arrows upon them. And who will have pity upon thee or bemoan thee? Art thou not
gone backward, O Dissentor, since thou have broken thy Covenant with the Lord,
in not endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace? And
have not you broken your Covenant with Men, O Rebellious Sectaries, in taking
away the Life of our late Royal and Gracious Sovereign; therefore the Lord has
framed Evil against you, and devised a Device against you. Unless that you do
return every one of you from your Evil Ways, and make your Ways and your Doings
good, the Lord will bring an everlasting Reproach upon you, and a perpetual
shame, which will not be forgotten: Nay, the Lord will make you Sick in smiting
you, in making you desolate, because of your sins, if you will not turn unto
him, in conforming to the Government of the Church of England: But I shall pray
for the Dissentors and Sectaries, as the Apostle St. Peter prayed for Simon,
That they would repent of their Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thoughts of their hearts may be forgiven them: For I am afraid that too many
of them may be in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity; for not
keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace: but the Lord give them
true Repentance, which will take off the greatest stain, and bring the Soul
into the Favor of God. Again, Have not the Dissentors and the Sectaries, by
their falling from the Church of England? Have they not weakened her and
grieved her? Have they not reproached and persecuted her both with their
Tongues and their Hands? Have they not encouraged and strengthened the Papists
against her, who are unreasonable, bloody, and deceitful men? But the Church of
England, according to our Saviors Counsel, prays for her Enemies, Persecutors,
and Slanderers, that the Lord would turn their hearts and have mercy upon all
Men; that the Lord would be pleased to give to all Nations, Unity, Peace, and
Concord; that the Lord would give us all Hearts to love and dread him, and to
live after his Commandments. And if this had been done, the Dissentors and the
Sectaries would not have fallen from God to displease him, and grieve one
another, as they have done; but they can condemn all but themselves; but the
God of Heaven has stirred me up for to reprove, rebuke, and to condemn them,
that they may condemn themselves, for slighting the Prayers of the Church of
England, and trusting to Prayers of their own making and framing, which are too
many of them, neither agreeable to the Word of God, nor made by the Spirit of
God; as the Prayers of the Church of England are: they be suitable for all
Persons, for all Times, and all Conditions; they be such Prayers that the God
of Heaven has heard and answered, and does hear and will answer them that put
them up to him in a right manner, and to a right end. For the hearing and
reading the holy Word of God, will not profit any, unless they do mixed it with
Faith; no more will the Prayers of the Church of England. This is the
excellency of these Prayers, that they are not so plain as profitable and
comfortable; for all both high and low, rich and poor, and young and old. Were
they but well put in practice, they would soon inform and reform the World,
that lies and lives in ignorance and disobedience: From all evil and mischief,
from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the Devil, from everlasting wrath and
damnation, it becomes all wise men to pray that the good Lord would deliver
them.

Never more crafts and assaults of the Devil, never evil more and mischief done
and committed, than by too many of them that have slighted, undervalued, and
scorned these Prayers: From all blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory, and
hypocrisy; from envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitablness, it becomes
all the Sons and the Daughters of Men that would be good, and do good, to pray
that the good Lord would deliver them from these sins: But do not these sins
too much abound among too many of them that have made Separation from the
Church of England? Who are more ignorant and prouder than many of them? Where
is there greater Hypocrisy, Envy, Hatred, and Malice, than among too many of
them? But if they will not conform and reform to the Government of the Church
of England in due time, the Lord will not only leave them, but he will laugh
at them when Distress and Anguish comes upon them; as Desolation and
Destruction as a Whirlwind; then they may call upon the Lord but he will not
answer them; they may seek him early and yet not find him, because they have
slighted and hated knowledge, which would have men to depart from evil and to
choose the fear of the Lord; as without knowledge the mind cannot be good; so
without obedience the knowledge is not good, for they that do flight and
undervalue the Word of God, and the Prayers of the Church of England, they will
eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their Devices; for the
turning away of the simple will slay, and the prosperity of fools destroy them:
but who so hearkeneth unto the Lord, and keeps in the good old way, will dwell
safely, and be quiet from the fear of evil.

From Fornication and all other deadly Sins, and from all the Deceits of the
World, the Flesh and the Devil.

It becomes all that would be saved, to pray that the Lord would give them
power against them, and victory over them; for the hearts of all men are
deceitful, and the best of men are subject to fall into the worst of sins: But
there is a generation of Men that will not say the Prayers of the Church of
England, but will take liberty to sin, that Grace may abound; but from such Men
the good Lord deliver me: From Lightning and Tempest, from devouring Fire, from
Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, from Battle and Murder, and from sudden Death,
the good Lord deliver all that do desire and endeavor to fear, love, serve,
and honor him.

It becomes all wise and faithful Christians to do what they can to prevent
Judgments and to remove them, and not by Contentions and Divisions to hasten
them, and to bring them upon us, when that they that profess the Gospel of
Peace, by their Pride, Envy, and Hatred, are ready to devour one another. It
does provoke the God of Heaven to send great and heavy Judgments to Amaze,
Confound, and Consume and Destroy one another. Was there ever such a Plague and
such a Fire as was in London 1665, and 1666; I hope it will never be forgot;
nor the Popish late Plot in 1678, against his Majesty's Royal Person, and to
ruin many Thousands in the Nation; but blessed and praised be the God of
Heaven, who does daily watch over his Majesty's Royal Person, and the whole
Nation. Therefore let all that do profess the Gospel, learn to live in Love and
Peace, to be of one Mind, and to speak the same thing; for this is the best way
and the soonest way, that the Name of God may be more and more known upon
Earth, and his saving Health among all Nations; that so the People may praise
him; yea, that all People may praise him with new obedience; then will the
Earth bring forth great Increases; and among all Nations there will be a free
Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace.

Let all them therefore that love the Lord, be joyful in the Lord; let them
servet he Lord with gladness, and come before his Presence with a Song; for the
Lord is a great God, and a great King, above all Gods. The Sea is his, and he
made it, and his Hands prepared the dry Land. Therefore let all People in all
Nations worship and fall down before the Presence of this great Lord, Maker and
Possessor of Heaven and Earth, and kneel before him, for he is the Lord our
God, and we are the People of his Pasture. Therefore let us go into his Gates
with Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise. Let all People in all
Nations be thankful unto him, and speak good of his Name; for the Lord is
gracious, his Mercy is everlasting, and his Truth endures from Generation to
Generation. Therefore let all the Sons and Daughters of Men praise his great
and glorious Name, from the rising of the Son, to the going down of the same:
Let every thing that has Breath praise the Lord, for his Greatness and
Goodness; for his Name is most excellent, and his Glory is above the Heavens.
As this great and mighty. God stirred me up in time to make known his Mind, to
prevent much Ruin to Mankind; that so among all Nations, there may be a general
Reformation; then let all Dissentors and Sectaries, readily and willingly,
conform and reform to the Government of the Church of England; which will
encourage many Atheists, Papists, Jews, Turks, and Infidels, to be in love with
the Protestant Religion, as it is established in the Church of England.

A Friend loves at all times, and a Brother is born for Adversity; and the
Wounds of a Friend are better than the Kisses of an Enemy: God in Man, and God
with Man, will bring about great and wonderful things; not only for the great
Honor and Exaltation of a Kings Person, but for the great Joy, Peace, and
Prosperity of many Nations; and that without making of many Words, or having
the Voice much heard. Pleasant words they be as a Honeycomb, sweet to the Soul
and health to the Bones. And as Ointment and Perfume does rejoice the Heart, so
does the Sweetness of a Man's Friend by hearty Counsel in these days of the
Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign his Majesty of Great Pritain.
All unbelieving Jews, bruirish Athiests, wicked and bloody Papists, and
rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries, will be ashamed and confounded, that have
not improved their time to know and to understand the great Mystery of
Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, who was justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World by many, both Jews
and Gentiles, and is received up into Glory; and there is preparing a place for
them that do believe in him, and appear for him; but he will pour contempt upon
all them that will not know and obey him, who is the Lord of Life, the King of
Glory, the Prince of Peace, the Captain of Man's Salvation, the Son of
Righteousness, that can and will heal all their Diseases, and pardon all their
Sins that come unto him; and well he may, because he is the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the wonderful Counselor, the Lord of Hosts, who is strong
and mighty in Battle; that can readily and easily, by weak and unlikely means,
confound and consume the Enemies of his Gospel, that do slight and undervalue
him; be they never so many, be they never so great: But he will not break a
bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, till it bring forth Judgment unto
Victory. It is not a thing of indifferency, but it is of absolute necessity,
for the Sons and the Daughters of Men, the Wisest, the Strongest, the Richest,
and the Learned, and Poorest among them, for to believe in the Son of God;
for whosoever believes in him, whether they be Jew or Gentile, has
everlasting Life begun in them; but they that will not believe and obey him,
will not see Life, but the Wrath of the ever living God abides on them.
Condemnation or Salvation, will be the lot and portion of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, that ever have been, or over will be in the World. O that
none might miscarry, because the Lord has laid help upon one that is mighty,
both able and willing to save unto the uttermost all that come unto him, and he
will in no wise cast out; for God the Father sent not his Son, his beloved Son,
into the World, that he should condemn the World, but that the World through
him might be saved. Therefore he that believes in him is not condemned, for he
has the witness in himself, but he that believes not is condemned; and there
is not any that can be a witness for him or them, but all their works and
duties will be witnesses against them. This made the Apostle St. Paul, that
great and eminent Saint, count all his Righteousness, Works and Learning, to be
loss and dross in comparison of that excellent, most profitable, and
comfortable knowledge that he found in Christ.

The fruit of the Righteous is a tree of Lise, and he that wins Souls is
wise; and they that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for
ever and ever.

This is a high and honorable work, pleasant, profitable, and delightsome
work, victorious, glorious, and crowning work, that will crown the God of
Heaven with much Glory among the Sons of Men, and our Royal Sovereign, his
Majesty of Great Britain, with great Honor and Power over them; over all
Heathen and Popish Kings, Priests, Princes, and Emperors, that so many Nations
may be freed from slavery, and throughout the whole World there may be great
Joy, Peace, and Prosperity.

It is sad to consider how that too many do make themselves poor and miserable
in the service of the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and that how few do
readily and willingly, and cheerfully engage in the service of the God of
Heaven; whose service is perfect freedom, and his work and reward is most
honorable. They do well that do love their Enemies, that do often feed them
and relieve them; for the Lord does make his Son to shine both on the Evil and
on the Good; and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust. To do good to all
Men it is commendable, but to do good to the Household of Faith, it is most
profitable, and will prove most comfortable. A Friend loves at all times, but
a true and a faithful Friend may be so much displeased, as not to manifest his
Love at all times. Joseph loved his Brethren when he stormed at them, spoke
roughly to them, put some of them in Prison, and caused Simcon to be bound
before their Eyes: But as after Storms and Tempests the Sun does shine most
clearest, so after great and long Trials, Troubles and Afflictions, Deliverance
will be the sweetest, both to a Person, a Family, a City, and a Kingdom. Let
not any therefore despise the day of small things; let not any slight and
undervalue the small beginnings of Grace in themselves or others; for a spark
of Grace well proved and improved, will break forth into a flame, for the Glory
of Gods great Name; and to bring a King and Kingdom to great Honor, Renown and
Fame. The greatest Tree was a Plant, and the Wisest the Strongest, the Richest
and most Learned Man was a Child. They that have truth of Grace, let them
labor to grow in Grace, by improving the means of Grace which the God of
Heaven has appointed, and the Church of England has ordained; for they that do
labor to grow in Grace, will have increase of every Grace, and so will grow in
the favor of God and good Men, and of the Angels in Heaven: They that have
truth of Grace and do improve it, will have increase of Grace, and will never
lose it, but will know when and how for to use it in the worst of times, and
before the best of Men: for the Glory of the most High, and the great Honor
and Exaltation of Englands Royal Majesty. Were there as many Nations, as many
Worlds as there be Men, there is a way to subdue them, for the Glory of the
great and mighty God, for the Credit of his Holy Gospel, for the great Honor
and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great Joy and Triumph of the
Church of England, for the great Exaltation of his Majesty of Great Britain,
and the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of many Kingdoms; and that is by daily
getting Wisdom, Power, and Strength from him, who gives to the whole Creation a
Being; which Divine Wisdom, Power, and Strength, will enable a mortal Man to
prepare high and honorable Works, to be managed by many Wise, Strong, Rich,
and Learned Men; that have their Wisdom, their Power and Strength, their
Honors, Riches, great and high Places, from the God of Heaven. The Lord is a
high and strong Tower, and a Shield to all them that trust in him. Great
Deliverances gives he unto his King, and shows Mercy to his Anointed, to
David and to his Seed for evermore: And who dare say, that our Royal Sovereign,
his Majesty of Great Britain, is not of the Seed of David Spiritually; the Lord
who is most great and most good, has known his Soul in Adversity, and did bring
him to his Throne in great Peace and Prosperity. The King trusts in the Lord,
therefore through the Mercy of the most High, he will not be moved, but the
right Hand of the Lord will find out all his Enemies; he will find out all them
that hate him; he will make them like a fiery Oven in time of his Anger; the
Lord will destroy them in his Wrath, and the Fire will devour them; but the
King our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain, will rejoice in the
Strength of the Lord; yea, how greatly will he rejoice in his Salvation; the
Lord has given him his hearts desire, and has not denied him the request of
his Lips, but has given him liberal Blessings, and has set a Crown of pure
Gold upon his Head. He asked Life of thee, and thou Lord of Life has given it
him, when he was pursued by unreasonable, bloody, and deceitful Men; for which
let all People in England, Scotland, France, and Ireland; and in many other
Nations, praise God, and be very thankful. The Lord, who has wonderfully
preserved his Majesty's Royal Person, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity
of many Nations, and has set him and sent him as a Blessing among his People;
make him glad with the light of thy Countenance. Remember him, O Lord, with the
favor of thy People, and visit him with thy Salvation; that he may see the
Felicity of thy Chosen, and rejoice in the Joy of thy People, and glory with
thine Inheritance, in thine everlasting and most glorious Kingdom, when this
mortal Life will be at end: The Lord preserve him both at home and abroad, both
by Land and Water; that so he and his throughout the whole World, may bear the
greatest sway, while time and all things under the Sun does pass away: Make
known in time this noble Design, for the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of
Mankind; by John Varney, a Member of the Church of England, and a Subject to
his Majesty of Great Britain; but such a Subject that the God of Heaven has
honored among the Sons of Men, for to engage with him, for to bring about such
high and honorable Work, pleasant, profitable, and delightsome Work,
victorious, glorious, and crowning Work; for the great honor and renown of his
Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of England; which has not yet been
done by all the Parliaments that have been since England has enjoyed a King.

Shall the Church of England, which is the Spouse of Christ, bring forth
Princes, each one resembling the Children of a King, and she sit in the Dust,
slighted and reproached by her Enemies, both at home and abroad? This ought not
to be, this must not be, but the Sons of the most High must appear for her
readily, willingly: and cheerfully. As our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of
Great Britain, has been the greatest Prince in the World for suffering, so I
shall endeavor in these days of the Gospel, by the power of Faith, which is
the power of God, that he may be the greatest King and Emperor in the World,
and over the World, for Wisdom, Power, and Strength, for Honor, Riches, and
great Glory; so that those Nations which have paid Tribute to the Church of
Rome, to their great loss and shame, will be glad to pay Tribute to the Church
of England; for the great Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, and the
great Exaltation of his Majesty of Great Britain; because it will be for their
great Joy, Freedom, and Gain: so that the way of the Lord will be known more
and more upon Earth, and his saving Health among all Nations. So that the
People will praise him, yea, all People will praise him with new Obedience; so
that the Earth will bring forth great Increase, and among all People in all
Nations there will be a free Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace. Let every
Man continue in that honest, and lawful Calling, which Divine Providence has
placed them in: for it is unsuitable and uncomely for the Ministers to follow
the Tradesmans Calling, or the Tradesman the Ministers Work, as too many have
done in these days of the Gospel, to the great shame of the Protestant Religion
and the Church of England. There is no Place, Calling, or Condition, that will
honor Men, if that they be not careful to honor God and our Royal King, his
Majesty of Great Britain, in them. And when that the God of Heaven does indue
any Man with Divine Wisdom and Power, for to understand his Mind, what may be
done, and what is to be done, for the great Honor, Peace, and Prosperity of a
King and Kingdom; let that Man make it known in time to that Minister whom God
has set over him, and the Minister to the Bishop whom God has set over him, and
the reverend Bishop, in due time and season, to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, whom the God of Heaven, under him, has made, among the Sons of Men,
Supreme over all Persons and Causes: But if that Man be not minded and regarded
by the Wise, Godly, and the Learned, whom the most Wise God does enable in
time, for to make known his Mind, to prevent much Ruin to Mankind; then the
Wise, Godly, and the Learned, are guilty of those Troubles and Judgments that
comes both upon themselves and the Nation; and they may call and cry unto the
God of Heaven, to help to deliver them, but he will not regard them, because he
will help, save, and deliver them when he will, and by whom he will. Every good
and perfect Gift is from above, from the Father of Lights, in whom is no
variableness or shadow of turning. Both the preparation of the Heart, and the
answer of the Tongue, it is from the Lord. Therefore let the Man be what he
will or whom he will, whom he does indue with Wisdom and Power, for to
understand his Mind, to do his Will, and to enjoy his Favor in his Calling;
let not that Man leave his Calling suddenly nor unadvisedly, but let him prove
and improve his Graces in his Calling, till that Authority whom the God of
Heaven has set over him commands him from it. I have been very backward and
very unwilling to have my mind made known in print, and I have been much
discouraged thereunto, but true Valor will take Encouragement from
Discouragement. That which does require it, and puts me upon it, to have it
done, in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our Royal and Gracious
Sovereign, it is the Glory of the great and mighty God, the Credit of his Holy
Gospel, the great Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, the great Joy
and Triumph of the Church of England; the great Exaltation of our Royal
Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain, and the great Shame, Contempt, and
Terror of the Turk the Pope, and the Devil; and all the Workers of Evil; that
so many Nations may by freed from slavery, and throughout the whole World there
may be great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity. This is the Lords doings, who is great
in Counsel and mighty in Power, whose Arm is very long and very strong, though
he does make use of a weak and unlikely Man; therefore let it be mavelous in
the Eyes of them that be most wise.

I hope that our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain, will
countenance, encourage, and set forward this Noble Design, that Divine Wisdom
and Power has enabled me, for to make known in time, for the great Joy, Peace,
and Prosperity of Mankind. As for the great Exaltation of his Majesty's Royal
Person, and the great Joy, Peace and Prosperity of many Nations. Great has been
the Trials and Troubles of the Church of England, from her Enemies, both at
home and abroad; so great will be her Joy, her Triumphs, and Victory over her
Enemies, both at home and abroad: for the Lord will restore Health unto thee,
and will heal thee of thy Wounds; therefore fear thou not, nor be dismayed, for
the Lord who is most Great and most Good, will save thee from afar, and thy
Seed from the Land of their Captivity; and thou shall be in Rest and Quiet, and
none shall make thee afraid; for the Lord who is most wise and most strong is
with thee, to save thee; though he should make a full End of those Nations that
Worship Idols and Graven Images, yet will he not make a full end of thee, but
he will correct thee in Measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished;
therefore sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the
Nations; Publish ye Praise, and say, O Lord save thy People, the Remnant of
Israel, the Remnant of England, the Remnant of London, after such devouring
Wars, a wasting Pestilence, and Consuming Fires; for the Lord who is most great
and most good, he kills, and he makes alive, he wounds and he heals, he casts
down and he raises up, a Person, a Family, a City and a Kingdom, when he will,
and by whom he will. The Lord that scattered Israel, has scattered England, and
wounded London; for is there any Evil in the City, but the Lord has done it, by
inflicting of it, and permitting of it; for the Workers of Iniquity, the Seed
of Evil doers, the Children of Disobedience, are Gods Rod, and Gods Sword, to
punish his Children when they walk contrary unto him: but as the End of the Rod
is to be burnt, so the End of the wicked is to be cut off; they are such Chaff
that the Lord knows when and how to scatter them; and such Briars and Thorns,
that he can when he please, with much Ease consume them. Who ever hardened
themselves against God, and prospered? What got proud Pharaoh with his Six
hundred chosen Chariots, and all the Chariots of Egypt, but sudden ruin and
destruction? What got Sizera with his Nine Hundred Chariots of Iron, but
shameful ruin and destruction? For himself was killed by a Woman, and his Army
of a sudden routed and destroyed? What got Sennacherib, that proud King of
Assyria, who did insult and reproach against the living God, and the good King
Hezekiah, but in one Night it pleased the Lord to send his Angel, who did
destroy a Hundred fourscore and five Thousand of his Men, almost two Hundred
Thousand; a great Army! but yet not Power and Strength enough to withstand one
Angel. And when the proud King departed and came to Nineveh, as he was
worshipping his Idol-God, he was killed by two of his Sons: they that should
have been his best Friends, were his worst Enemies. What got Ambitious and
Proud Haman, who plotted and contrived the destruction of many Thousands of the
Jews, but the ruin of himself and all his Posterity; for both he and his Ten
Sons were Hanged for such Treachery: But yet the workers of Iniquity, the Seed
of Evil doers, the Children of Disobedience, are not afraid nor ashamed to
combine and design to destroy the Righteous, although the Righteous Lord, who
is most Wise and most strong, does defend them, and will Wound and Consume them
that do offend them. What says our Savior, who is the Lord of Life and the
King of Glory? It were better that a Millstone were Hanged about the Neck of
unbelieving Jews, Brutish Athiests, wicked, bloody, and deceitful Papists, and
rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries, than to offend the least Member that does
believe in him; because they be as dear unto him as the Apple of his Eye: they
are his purchased, ransomed, and redeemed ones, they are his chosen and beloved
ones: They are the travel of his Soul, and for them he has prepared both a
Kingdom and a Crown, which is immortal and unchangeable; but there is not any
of the Sons and the Daughters of Men that can merit or purchase it, in what
they can do or suffer; therefore say unto the righteous, be what they will,
where they will, and whom they will, that it will be well with them. It will be
well with them here in their worst condition, and under their greatest Trials,
Troubles, and Afflictions, but it will be better with them hereafter, for Eye
has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor the Heart of Man is not able to conceive,
what God has laid up for them that love him; but woe unto the Wicked, unto all
the workers of Iniquity because it will go ill with them, they will have the
fruit of their own doings, of their own works, and not the fruit of Christ's
merits and purchase, because they do slight and undervalue him, and will not be
ruled by him, who is the wisest Counselor, the best Comforter, and the
greatest Suporter; who is a present help in time of trouble: But the Wicked the
Seed of Evil doers, the Children of Disobedience, the Workers of Iniquity, the
Enemies of the Gospel; do many times fall into trouble, and their Friends leave
them, the Devil hates them, and God forsakes them; but whosoever they be that
hearkeneth unto the Lord so as to abey him, will dwell safely, and be quiet
from the fear of Evil: much more from the lust of Evil: but for the Workers of
Iniquity, the Seed of Evil doers the Children of Disobedience, though Hand join
in Hand, they will not be unpunished; but many times Transgressors, and the
Workers of Iniquity are destroyed together. What got the Spanish Armado, whom
the Pope called the Invincible Armado, presuming no power could with-stand
them, much less overcome them? But it pleased the Lord, who is most great and
most good, to help his Handmaid, Elizabeth Queen of England (of Blessed
Memory) that they was so, in giving her a Victorious and a Glorious Conquest
barer'd and scater'd, so defaced and disgraced, that they will never recover
while they be a Nation. And that Men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
and for his wonderful works unto the Children of Men; when that the Enemies of
the Gospel do what they can to destroy them: But though they should dig as deep
as Hell, from the Eye of Men, yet the Eye of God does always see them. What
got the bloody Papists, the Gunpowder Traitors by combining and designing to
undermine and overthrow, with one blow, Religion, Laws, and Liberty, Nobility,
and Gentry. Yea all the Royal Family? But it pleased the Lord, whose Wisdom is
unsearchable, to help the King; to understand the Traitors Treason, and to give
that Wisdom to his Majesty's Royal Grandfather; King James of England, of
famous Memory, that his Friends did Admire him, and his Enemies was Confounded
by him; for he soon apprehended the Plot, and gave speedy order for the
discovering and securing of the Traitors, which was soon done, and they brought
to their deserved shame and ruin; for they were taken in their own Nets, did
fall into their own Pits, and there violent Dealings came down upon their own
Pates. The Lord who is most wise and most strong, will not cast away a perfect
Man, neither will he help the Evil doers, but Evil doers will he cut off; but
they that wait upon the Lord will inherit the Earth. In these Gospel days, and
in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign his Majesty of Great Britain, great will be
the Peace of the Church of Christ, through the whole world; but especially in
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland: therefore many will come and Sing in
the Right of Sion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for
Wheat and for Wine, and for Oil, and for the Young of the Flock and of the
Herd; and their Soul shall be as a Watered Garden, and they shall not Sorrow
any more at all as they have done; then will the Virgin rejoice in the Dance,
both Young Men and Old together; for the Lord will turn their Mourning into
Joy, and will Comfort them, and will make them Rejoice from their sorrow; and
it will come to pass, that like as the Lord has Watched over his People, to
pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict;
so will he Watch over them, to Build and to Plant; and he will gather them out
of all Countries whither he has driven them in his Anger, in his Fury, and in
great Wrath; and the Lord will bring them again unto his Holy Place: to worship
him in a right Manner And he will cause them to dwell safely, and he will be
their God, and they shall be his People; and the Lord will give them one heart
and one way, that they may fear, love, and serve him; for ever, for the good of
themselves and of their Children after them: And because the Sons and the
Daughters of Men do too often forget to remember their Creator, Redeemer, and
Preserver, he will make an Everlasting Covenant with them, that he will not
turn away from them to do them good, but he will put his fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from him; yea the Lord will rejoice over them to do
them good, and will plant them in his Land with his whole heart, and with his
whole soul assuredly. For as the Lord who is most wise and most strong, has
brought great evil upon his people for their rebellion, so will he bring upon
them all the good that he has promised, that so they may be humbled and
reformed; for the goodness of God should lead men to repentance, but not unto
disobedience: He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. All men under the Heavens are bound to know their Creator,
so as to fear him; but there be many of the Sons and the Daughters of Men, that
will labor to know him, so as to love, serve, and to honor him; which will
prove most comfortable to themselves, and most profitable to others. Let the
man be what he will, or whom he will, in these days of the Gospel, and in the
Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, in whom the Lord of
Hosts does arise, his Enemies shall be scattered, and they that hate him shall
flee before him, as Wax melts before the sire, so will all the workers of
iniquity at the presence of the Lord; but the Righteous shall be glad and
rejoice for a long time: The Church of Rome, the King of Spain, and the proud
French King, has endeavored to undermine and overthrow the Protestant
Religion, His Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of England; but the time
is come, that they are to know, that they are to be brought very low, if that
they will not Conform and Reform to the Protestant Religion, to the Nine and
thirty Doctrines of the Church of England.

There is no man worthy to be a Minister of the Gospel in England. Scotland,
France and Ireland, that does or should oppose, gainsay, or preach against any
of the Nine and thirty Doctrines of the Church of England: The Enemies against
the Church of England are many both at home and abroad, but I shall endeavor
by the power of Faith, which is the power of God, for to do what I can to
overthrow them as one man, and to set a-work they that have power in their
hand, that they may be subdued both by Sea and Land; that so the people may
know the true and the everliving God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent: then
will the Earth bring forth great increase, and among all people in all Nations,
there will be a free Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace. The Lord who is
most Great, and most Good, knows when, how, and by whom he pleases, for to
speak peace to a Person, a Family, a City, and a Kingdom, and when he speaks
peace to his People, to any of his Saints, let them not turn again to Folly,
but let them renew their Obedience, and double their Diligence: The Lord will
satiate the Soul of the Priests, of his Ministers, with Fatness, and the people
with his Goodness; surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that Glory
may dwell in our Land. Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other: Truth shall spring out of the Earth,
Righteousness shall look down from Heaven, yea the Lord will give that which is
good; so that our Land will yield her Increase: Righteousness will go before
him, and set us in the way of his Steps. The Lord who is most Great and most
Good, will be known by his Judgments and his Mercies, for he is a God that
judges the earth; for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him all men's
Thoughts and Actions are weighed.

That our Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain, may be willing to
countenance, encourage, and set forward this Noble Design, that Divine Wisdom
and Power has enabled me to make known in time, for the Glory of his Great
Name, and to have his Enemies brought to shame: His Royal Majesty will find
that many Princes and Nations will assist him; and that, which is more than all
them, the God of Heaven, who has all Power in his own hand, and the whole
Creation at Command, will in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our
Royal Sovereign, make bare his Arm, and manifest his Wisdom, Power, and
Strength, to bring down the Turk, the Pope, the French King, and the King of
Spain, that so many Nations may be freed from slavery, and throughout the whole
World there may be great joy, peace and prosperity. Sing unto the Lord thy God,
O Church of England, for he has done excellent things; this is known in all
the Earth, for among the Gods there is none like unto him, there is not one
that can do as he has done: Say to them therefore that are of a fearful Heart,
be strong, fear not, for the True and the Everlasting God, will come with
vengeance and rebukes upon his Enemies; but with great recompense and rewards,
will he come and save, and deliver his People, that wait upon him, and put
their trust and confidence in him; therefore cry out and Shout thou Inhabitant
of Sion, thou Church of England, for great is the Holy one of Israel, in the
midst of thee, for to bring thee to great honor, renown and fame, and thy
Enemies to great shame.

Behold the Whirlwind of the Lord goes forth with fury, a continuing
Whirlwind; it will fall with pain upon the Head of the Wicked; the fierce
anger of the Lord will not return, until he has performed the intents of his
Heart, in these latter days; many will see it, and consider of it, thy God, O
Church of England, is my God, thy cause is my cause, thy troubles have been my
greatest trouble, and thy Enemies are my worst Enemies I have laid to Heart
more the troubles of the Church of England, and of his Majesty of Great
Britain, than the Death of a Wife and seven Children; I have laid them more to
Heart than all the trials, troubles, losses, crosses and reproaches, that I
have met withal from my Youth, to this present time: I have laid them so to
Heart, that many will be made to smart, that have endeavored to undermine and
to overthrow the Protestant Religion, his Majesty of Great Britain, and the
Church of England. I have laid them so to Heart, that many will be made to
smart, that will not conform and reform to the Protestant Religion, as it is
established in the Church of England. When the Lion Roars, all the Beasts of the
Field tremble, the Lord has not been much minded, nor regarded, by his
Judgments of Plague, Fire and Sword; but he will be minded and regarded by a
still Voice, by inabling of me for to make known his mind, for the terror of
Evil doers; the Voice of the Lord is powerful, the Voice of the Lord is full of
Majesty; the Voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars; yea the Lord breaks the
Cedars of Lebanon: The Lord thy God, O Church of England, who is most great and
most good, will be known to be the True and Everlasting God among the Sons of
men; for by terrible things in Righteousness, will he answer them. For a long
time the Lord has holden his peace, he has been still, and refrained himself,
but now will he cry like a Traveling Woman; he will destroy and devour at
once, and that without making of many words, or having the Voice much heard:
The time is come that in these Gospel days; and in the Reign of our Royal
Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain, that the Lord of Hosts will go forth
as a mighty Man: he will stir up jealousy like a Man of war; he will cry, yea
Roar; but he will prevail against his Enemies, as the Turk, the Pope, and the
Devil; and all the Workers of Evil. Who knows the power of Gods anger?
according to his fear, so is his wrath; for he is terrible out of his Holy
places; therefore tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the
presence of the God of Jacob: tremble therefore all you Heathen and Popish
Kings, Priests, Princes, and Emperors in the World, that do slight and
undervalue the Word of God, and question his mighty power; tremble therefore
all you unbelieving Jews, Brutish Atheists, wicked and bloody Papists, and
rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries, that have not made the Word of God your
Rule, nor his Spirit your Guide, nor his Glory your Aim. Tremble therefore all
you Earthly and Carnal-minded Men, you Self-sekers and Men-pleasers, Lovers of
your selves more than Lovers of God, your King and Country. Tremble all you
that have a Name to live, and are dead; that have called your selves Saints,
but have acted like Devils Incarnate against the God of Heaven, the Protestant
Religion, his Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of England: but let the
Righteous be glad, and rejoice all ye that do truly fear God and Honor the
King; and are faithful to the Protestant Religion. This Noble Design, that
Divine wisdom and power, has enabled me to make known in time, it will be as a
handwriting upon the wall against all the Enemies of the Gospel, both great
and small; so that many will fall in love with the Protestant Religion, and
will be ready and willing to serve, and to honor his Majesty of Great Britain,
both at home and abroad.

Light is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the upright in Heart, ye
that love the Lord, hate Evil; for he preserves the Souls of his Saints, he
delivers them many a time out of the Hands of unreasonable, bloody, and
deceitful men, that lie in wait for to destroy them: Therefore rejoice in the
Lord ye Righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness; for the
Lord who is most good, is most great, therefore is greatly to be praised, and
to be feared above all Gods; therefore let all wise, strong, rich, and learned
Men, declare his Glory among the Heathens, and his wonders among all People;
for honor and Majesty are before him, strength and beauty is in his Sanctuary;
therefore let all People in all Nations learn to know the true and the
everlasting God, and to worship him as they do in the Church of England, with
Reverence and with a holy Fear: They that fear the Lord, who is most great,
will love him because he is most good; and they that love him, will delight in
him; and he will give them the desires of their Hearts, and that is truth of
Grace, strength of Grace, and increase of Grace. It is commendable, and will
prove very profitable and comfortable to the Sons and Daughters of Men, for to
delight in the Word of God; so that it may richly in them dwell; then their
sleep will be sweet, and they will have great Joy, Rest and Peace, that Peace
which passes the understanding of Men and Angels, to declare what it is; it is
the Peace of God, which is better felt then expressed: that peace which the World
cannot give, nor take away. They that do enjoy much of God, must lay out
themselves much for him, in these days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our
Royal Sovereign, his Majesty of Great Britain. That Man which will make his
graces to appear for the great honor of God, the King, and Nation; He must
charge to the Front and to the Rear, he must charge and charge again, and that
with might and main, that (...) the Turk, the Pope, and the Devil, and all the
Workers of Evil, to shame; and that without making a noise about Religion, for
this Party, or for that Opinion, without making of many words, or having the
Voice much heard; without having a Sword in the hand. A Christian Soldier that
is engaged in holy War, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, must quit
himself like a man; and when he has done all, for to stand by the power of
Faith, which is the power of God in man, the power of God for man, and the
power of God with man. Who knows what is in the Womb of a Day, or in the Heart
of a man? Not any but the God of Heaven, who can when he will, and by whom he
will, bring Order out of Confusion, Light out of Darkness, Good out of Evil,
and Peace out of Trouble; for the great Honor and Exaltation of a Kings
Person, and the great Peace and Prosperity of many Nations: As the highest
Member under the God of Heaven, does give Protection for the Safety of the
meanest Member in the Church of England; so sometimes the meanest Member with
the God of Heaven, may give Direction for the great Honor, Exaltation, and
Consolation of the Highest in the days of the Gospel, and in the Reign of our
Royal Sovereign His Majesty of Great Britain: Cursed be that Man that dare lift
up his hand against the Lords Anointed, by Sea or by Land, against the Lords
Anointed, whom the Most High has made Great in Place, and Enriched with his
Grace: Is it not the Prayer of the Church of England for His Majesty of Great
Britain, that the Lord would hear him in the day of trouble, and send him help
from the Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Sion: For his Majesty can have no
such Help as from the Sanctuary, nor no such Strength as out of Sion: The God
of Heaven has promised, whose Promises are all Yea and Amen in Christ: That the
Deliverer shall come out of Sion, which shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob:
But Sion, which is the Church of Christ, throughout the whole World, and the
Church of Christ in England, Scotland, France and Ireland, must not look for
the Deliverer of Sion to come in greater Pomp than the Savior of Sion came:
but he that shall come, whom the God of Heaven will send, will come, and will
not tarry; for the Tree will be known by his Fruit: for he will purify the
Sons of Levy, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the
true and everliving God, who is most Great and most Good, an Offering in
Righteousness, which will be pleasing and exceptable to him: The Stone which
the Builders refused, is it not become the Head-stone of the Corner? This is
the Lords Doings, who is Great in Counsel and Mighty in Power, therefore let it
be mavelous in the Eyes of them that be most wise. And let not any despise
the Day of small things; for as the Lord of Hosts is above all, so he is more
than all, and can be with all, in all, for all, or against all, when and by
whom he please: for as his Wisdom is unsearchable, so his Power it is
unresistable, though the Instrument he may use among wise, strong, rich, and
learned men, may be mean and contemptible. But ever since that I have been
precious in the Eyes of the most great and glorious God, I have been
honorable; therefore I have not coveted after Silver or Gold, Houses or Lands,
Offices or great Places; but I have labored and coveted to get and to keep, to
prove and to improve, Rich Graces, that so my Fruit may be better than Gold,
and may do more good for the Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for
the great Exaltation of His Majesty of Great Britain, and the great Peace and
Prosperity of many Kingdoms, than an Army of Men, or thousands, or ten
thousands of Gold or Silver has done: I have no grace but what I have received;
so I have none to be proud of; I have not received any, but what I have
labored to improve; so I have not any to be prodigal with: the least grace
which I have received from the God of all grace, I do esteem it above all the
Honors and Riches in the World; because that true Grace it is abiding,
satisfying, lasting, and everlasting: but for the Honors, the Riches and
Pleasures of this World, they be short, they be not abiding, satisfying, nor
long-lasting: therefore they that would have Grace, which is Heavenly Treasure,
to thrive in their Soul, they must value and esteem it above Silver and Gold.
To be made Partaker of the Divine Nature, it is high Honor and great Favor.
The Righteous shall be glad in the Lord, because they trust in him; and all the
upright in heart will glory. Salvation comes not from the Mountains, nor from
the Hills; not from wise, strong, rich, and learned men, but from the Lord, who
made the Earth and the Heavens, and that when and by whom he will; that all the
Glory may redound to him: for his right Hand and holy Arm has the pre-eminence
over all persons in all Nations. Let them shout for joy and be glad that favor
my Righteous Cause; yea let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified,
which has pleasure in the Prosperity of his Servants; and my Tongue shall
speak of his Righteousness, and of his Praise all the day long; for he has
done mavelous things. All the Ends of the Earth that have not seen, will see
the Salvation of God: He makes Wars to cease unto the End of the Earth. He
breaks the Bow and cutteth the Spear asunder, and burns the Chariots in the
fire when he pleases, and by whom he please, in these days of the Gospel, and
in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign His Majesty of Great Britain. They that
trust to their Chariots and Horses will fail, but they that trust in the Lord
Jehovah, in the use of Means, and above Means, will prevail. There is a River,
the Streams thereof will make glad the City of God, which is the Church of God
throughout the whole World: For one fair Flood does send abroad such pleasant
Streams apace to refresh the City of our God, and to wash his Holy Place. Is
not the Mighty God in Sion? Go walk about, and go round about her, tell the
Towers thereof, mark ye well her Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that ye may
tell it to the Generation following; for God, who is most wise, and most
strong, is with her, and is known in her Palaces for a Refuge; She is Beautiful
for Situation; the Joy of the whole Earth is Mount Sion, and the City of the
great King. The Kings of the Earth in these days of the Gospel, and in the
Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain; they will admire
her Wisdom, Power and Strength, her Honors, Riches and great Glory.

Shall Deliverance be at hand, and the Church of England at a stand? Shall
there be a Well of Water near Hagar, and she weep and be in distress? Who has
heard such a thing? who has seen such things? Shall the Earth be made to bring
forth in one day? Or shall a Nation be born at once? For as soon as Sion
traveled she brought forth, before her pain came, she was delivered of a
Man-child. Shall the Lord, who is most Wise and most Strong, bring to the
Birth, and not cause to bring forth; or cause to bring forth, and shut the
Womb, says thy God: No it will not be, for in these days of the Gospel, and in
the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, the God of
Heaven has many Sons and Daughters that are grown up, and many to be brought
up, and more to be brought forth in the use of the Means of Grace which he has
appointed, and the Church of England has ordained; but all the Children of the
Most High that are brought up, and grown up, and to be brought forth; all is to
be in opposition to the Turk, the Pope, and the Devil, and all the Workers of
Evil; which will tend very much for the Glory of the Great and Mighty God, for
the Credit of his holy Gospel, for the great Honor and Renown of the
Protestant Religion, the great Joy and Triumph of the Church of England, the
great Exaltation of His Majesty of Great Britain, and the great Peace and
Prosperity of many Kingdoms.

O that the Sons and the Daughters of Men were wise, for to make an Improvement
of the Wisdom and Power of the God of Heaven, which is better than Strength or
Weapons of War, or Silver or Gold. As for the Wisdom that is in the World,
among unbelieving Jews, brutish Atheists, wicked and bloody Papists, and
rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries, it is foolishness, and does many times end
in madness; for where Envy, Strife, and Contention is, it brings forth too
often Sedition and Rebellion: But the Wisdom that is from above, it is pure and
peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits;
without partiality, and without hypocrisy: but where Pride, Envy, Strife, and
Contention is, there is Confusion and every evil Work. Now a good man and a bad
man will be known by their Fruits; for of Thorns men do not gather Figs, nor of
a Bramble-bush gather they Grapes; but every Tree will be known by his own
Fruit. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that
which is good, that which is suitable and seasonable, prositable, comfortable,
and advantageous to many Persons and Families in a City, and in a Kingdom. But
an evil man, who is a wicked man, out of the evil treasure of his heart,
brings forth that which is evil, to the great hurt and undoing of too many
Persons and Families in a City and in a Kingdom.

It is commendable for the Sons of Men, the wisest, the strongest, the richest,
and the most learned among them, for to have always their heart to be
Inditing of a good Matter, and their Tongue to be as the Pen of a ready Writer;
that that so they may declare the thing that they have framed, for the great
Honor and Renown of the King our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great
Britain, and the great Joy, Peace and Prosperity of his Kingdoms.

How welcome should, because how Beautiful are, the Feet of him that brings
good Tidings, that publishes Peace; that brings good Tidings of good, that
says unto Sion, the Church of England, Thy God Reigns: Awake, awake, put on
thy Strength, O Zion, put on thy Beautiful Garments, O Church of England, shake
thy self from the Dust, from the Reproaches that thy Enemies have cast upon
thee: Loose thy self from the bands of thy Neck, for thou shall break forth on
the right hand, and on the left, and thy Seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and
make the desolate Cities to be inhabited; in Righteousness shall thou be
established; thou shall be far from Oppression, for thou shall not fear, and
from terror, for it shall not come near thee, so as to hurt thee; the Sons of
them that have afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all that
despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the Soles of thy Feet: And thy
Enemies shall call thee, O Church of England, the City of the Lord, the Zion of
the Holy One of Israel. Sing O Barren, thou that did not bear, break forth
into Singing, and cry aloud thou that did not travel with Child; for more are
the Children of the Desolate, than the Children of the Married Wife, says the
Lord: Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, with the City of London, and be glad with her
all ye that love her; Rejoice for Joy with her, all ye that have mourned for
her; for the Lord will extend Peace to her like a River, and the Glory of the
Gentiles like a slowing Stream; then shall ye suck and be satisfied with the
Breasts of her Consolations, with the Means of Grace which God has appointed;
for he will give unto thee, O Church of England; more and more Teachers after
his own heart, which shall feed his people with Knowledge and Understanding; so
that they shall milk out and be delighted with the abundance of thy Glory.

And when you see this, you that are full of Fears and Doubts what will become
of Zion? What will become of the Church of England? Your Hearts shall rejoice,
and your Bones shall flourish like an Herb; for the Hand of the Lord, the Power
of the Lord, will be known toward his Servants, and his Indignation toward
his Enemies. The Nations that know not thy God, O Church of England, who is the
true and the ever-living God, will be ashamed and confounded, for all their
Wisdom, their Power and Strength; they shall lay their hand upon their Mouth,
their Ears will be deaf, they shall lick the Dust like a Serpent, they shall
move out of their holes like Worms of the Earth, they shall be afraid of the
Lord our God, and shall fear because of thee, O Church of England: The Lord
will be terrible unto thy Enemies, he will famish all the Gods of the Earth,
that men may worship him, every one in his place, even all the Isles of the
Heathen: then the rejoicing City that dwelt carelessly, that said in her Heart,
I am, and there is none beside me; how will she become a Desolation, a place
for Beasts to lie down in; every one that passes by her shall hiss and wag his
head: for the Pope of Rome, who is the Whore of Babylon, and the Man of Sin,
will become the Man of Sorrow: for the Lord will pour Contempt upon them that
have poured Contempt upon his Word and Sacraments; as all unbelieving Jews,
brutish Atheists, wicked, bloody and deceitful Papists, proud Dissentors, and
rebellious Sectaries have done: But if that they will not learn in these days
of the Gospel to be humbled and reformed, they will be ashamed and confounded.
Fear not, O Land, but be glad and rejoice, for the Lord, who is most wise, and
most strong, will do great things for thee, O England, for thee O London, above
other Nations; for as thou have had great sorrow and misery, so thou will have
great honor and prosperity: The time is come in these days of the Gospel, and
in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great Britain, that for thy
shame the Lord will give thee double Honor, and for Confusion thou shall
greatly Rejoice, everlasting Joy shall be unto thee: Thou have drunken deep of
the Cup of Gods Anger, but thy Enemies, they that hate thee, O Church of
England, will drink the Dregs of it: Be glad then ye Children of Zion, and
rejoice in the Lord your God, for thou shall be no more termed, Forsaken, for
thou shall forget the shame of thy Youth, and shall not remember the Reproach
of thy Widow-hood any more, for thy Maker is thine Husband, the Lord of Hosts
is his Name. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee, O Church of England, is
mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with Joy, he will rest in his
Love, he will joy over thee with Singing; and the Gentiles shall see thy
Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory; for thou will be as a Crown of Glory in
the hand of the Lord, and as a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God: For as a
young man marries a Virgin, so will thy Sons marry thee; and as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride, so will thy God rejoice over thee: Therefore ye that
make mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem, the City of London, a Praise in the
Earth: Praise the Lord O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Zion, for he has
strengthened the Bars of thy Gates, he has blessed thy Children within thee; he
makes peace in thy Borders, and fills thee with the sinest of the Wheat: He
shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; He
has not dealt so with other Nations, and as for his Judgments they have not
known them: Praise ye the Lord that be wise, for it is good to sing Praises
unto our God; for it is pleasant, and praise is comely: For great is our Lord,
and of great Power, his Understanding is insinite; he lifts up the meek with
much ease, when they be brought low, he casts the wicked down to the ground,
when they be so proud as not to know him, and so high as not to fear him. O
that all the Sons and the Daughters of Men in these days of the Gospel, and in
the Reign of our Royal Sovereign His Majesty of Great Britain, would learn to
be wise, and to know those things that do concern their Everlasting Peace,
before they go hence and be seen no more; for Time flies, and Man daily dies:
there is not an Hour in a Day, but many have their Breath taken away. All flesh
is grass, and as the flower of the field, the grass withers, the flower
fades, but the Word of thy God, O Church of England, shall stand for ever;
Heaven and Earth will sooner fail, than one Tittle of Gods Word. Where the Word
of a King is, there is Power, but how much more where the Word of the
everliving God is, when it is set on by his Spirit, which is a Spirit of Power,
of Might, and of Majesty? It is a meek and a quiet Spririt, an humble and a
holy Spirit; and it is the highest, loftiest, and most noblest Spirit; it is
such a Spirit that it will enable them that will be ruled by it, for to attain,
retain, maintain, and proclaim that which is most noble, excellent, and
advantageous, for the great Honor, Peace and Prosperity of a King and Kingdom:
Let all People in all Nations rejoice in him that made them; let the Children
of Zion be joyful in their King: The Lord shall Reign for ever, even thy God, O
Church of England, unto all Generations; therefore praise him all ye Nations;
let every thing that has breath praise the Lord: Praise him for his mighty
Acts; who can express the Noble Acts of the Lord, they are so many and great?
Not men or Angels: His wondrous Works in the Land of Ham, and fearful things by
the Red Sea: The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
works; the Lord is great, and greatly to be Admired and Adored; he is clothed
with Honor and Majesty, who covers himself with Light as with a Garment, who
stretches out the Heavens like a Curtain, who lays the Beams of his Chambers
in the Waters, who makes the Clouds his Chariot, who walks upon the Wings of
the Wind, who makes his Angels Spirits, his Ministers a flaming Fire; who laid
the Foundations of the Earth, that it should not be removed for ever; the Lord
of Hosts is his Name.

To be much in meditation of him will be sweet to the Soul, and health to the
Body: I will be glad and rejoice in the Lord as long as I live, I will sing
praise to him while I have my being; for he has redeemed my Life from
Destruction, and has Crowned me with Loving Kindness and tender Mercies; who
satisfies my Mouth with good things; so that my Youth has been renewed as the
Eagles: Well may my Soul therefore bless the Lord, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name: Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not any of his
Benefits; who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and heals all thy Diseases: The
Glory of the Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord will rejoice in his Works;
the Lords Throne is in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all: Therefore
bless the Lord ye his Angels that excel in Strength, bless ye the Lord all ye
his Hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure; bless the Lord all ye his
Works in all places of his Dominion.

Is it not in vain for the Church of England, for to pray, O God make speed to
save us; O Lord make have to help us; and do not mind and regard when and by
whom he will do it by whom can do it when he will, so he will do it by whom he
will; and not when and by whom Wise, Strong, Rich, and Learned-men please; the
meaner and weaker the Instrument is, whom Almighty God does use, the greater is
the Sin of them that do him slight, under-value, and refuse. Long may the
Church of England look for Peace, and meet with Trouble; look for Health, and
meet with Disappointment; when she is not careful to mind the Day of her
Visitation. Shall the Stork in the Heaven know her appointed time, and the
Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming? And
shall not the Servants of the Lord understand his Mind, so as to endeavor to
prevent his Judgments? Are they not counted wisemen that have the Law of the
Lord with them? But are not such wisemen many times dismayed, ashamed, and
taken, when they do reject the Word of the Lord, and rely upon the Traditions
and Inventions of Men's making and framing, which are neither agreeable nor
suitable to the Word of God, which is the Word of Life and of Power? What
wisdom is in such men then, that wisdom which will deceive them? Who is so
blind as they that should see most, and deaf as they that should hear best? Is
there no Balm in Gilead, is there no Physician there? Doubtless there is: Is
not the Lord, the Lord Jehovah, in whom is Everlasting Strength in Zion? Is not
her King in her, and for her, and with her? Why then is not the health of the
Daughter of Gods people recovered? Is there not any that stirs up himself to
take hold of the true and everliving God, as they ought and should do;
therefore has the Lord, who is full of Wisdom, Power, and Strength, hid his
Face from us: And by reason of our many great and grievous Sins, we have all
been very much afflicted and consumed? But where is the man that lays it so to
heart, as to stand up in the Gap, to make up the Hedge, so as to turn away Gods
Wrath, that for a long time has burned like Fire against England, Scotland,
France and Ireland: Who can stand before the Lord, who is most great, and most
good, when once he is angry; does not the Mountains quake at him, and the Hills
melt? And is not the Earth burnt at his Presence, yea the World, and all that
dwell therein, when he pleases? Therefore the Wicked and all the Workers of
Iniquity, the Seed of Evildoers, the Children of Disobedience, the Enemies of
the Gospel, and the Protestant Religion, will be ashamed, confounded, and at
last destroyed, if that they do not in time humble themselves under the hands
of the Great and Mighty God, who is Possessor and Commander of Heaven, the
Earth, and the Sea, and all things that in them be. The Righteous shall rejoice
and be glad, but the Sinners in Zion, in the Church of England, will be afraid:
Fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites already: Who among the Sons of Men in
the Church of England, that can dwell with Devouring Fire? Who among them can
dwell with Everlasting Burnings? He that walks Righteously, and works
Righteousness; that speaks uprightly; he that despises the Gain of
Oppression, that slacketh his hands from holding of Bribes; that stops his
Ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his Eyes from seeing of Evil; he shall
dwell on high, his place of Defense shall be the Munitions of Rocks; in time of
Famine he will be fed; Bread shall be given him, his Waters shall be sure, he
shall see the King in his Beauty; he will behold the Land that is very far off:
But what will become of them that serve graven Images, and boast themselves of
Idols? they will be ashamed and confounded in these Days of the Gospel, if that
they do not loath and forsake them. In these Days of the Gospel, the Lord who is
most great, and most good, most wise, and most strong, is very angry, and has
been for a long time with this Generation; but most of all with the Ministers
of the Gospel throughout the whole Nation, for not minding and regarding who
has believed their Report, and to whom the Arm of the Lord is revealed; for
his Arm is very long, and very strong; and that his Enemies the Workers of
Iniquity will know in these Days of the Gospel, to their great shame and
overthrow. Ought not the Ministers of the Gospel to mind what they sow in
weakness, in whom the Great and the Mighty God does raise in Power, or else
they do but undervalue their own Labors, and encourage their Adversaries, who
labor to undermine and overthrow the Protestant Religion, His Majesty of Great
Britain, and the Church of England. What have the Ministers of the Gospel to
mind? Who ought they to mind more than that man whom the Lord of Hosts has made
strong for himself and his Anointed; when that too many have made themselves
strong in Parts against him, and our Royal Sovereign, His Majesty of Great
Britain? But what will they get but shame and confusion, for they will be
brought down and that with a witness. Though it is not in the power of the
Ministers of the Gospel to beget so Renowned a Grace, as precious Faith where
it is not; yet ought it to be their great Care to countenance, encourage, and
take notice of that person in whom it is wrought; because it is such a spark,
that it will in time break forth into a slame, for the Glory of Gods great
Name, and to put the Enemies of the Gospel to shame: It is high and honorable
Work, that the God of Heaven has stirred me up for to make known his Mind, for
the great Joy, Peace and Prosperity of Mankind. And I have endeavored to deny
my self, to overcome my self, and to lay out my self, in so noble a Design; I
have ventured my Life, endangered my Liberty, and have exposed my self to many
Losses, Crosses, and Reproaches, to be blamed, shamed, and condemned by many
men: But I had rather be condemned for doing well, though I do it not so well
as I should do, by the Sons of Men, than to be condemned by the God of Heaven,
for not making known his Mind, as well as I can do: The Lord is merciful, and
will pass by many Weaknesses and Infirmities of his Children; but he is just
and righteous, and will punish severely them that be rebellious and
disobedient: They that know their Lords will and do it not, will have stripes
enough; for though the Lord be slow to anger, yet is he great in Power: They
that do slight and under-value me, it is not so much me, as they do the Wisdom
and the Power of the Almighty, who works with me, and in me, and for me, for
the Glory of his great Name, for the Credit of his holy Gospel, for the great
Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great Exaltation of His
Majesty of Great Britain, above all Heathen and Popish Kings, Priests, Princes,
and Emperors in the World; which will bring great Joy and Triumph to the Church
of England, and great Peace and Prosperity to many Kingdoms; which will be
brought about in these days of the Gospel, in spite of the Turk, the Pope, and
the Devil, and all the Workers of Evil. It is the Power of Faith, which is the
Power of God, that does set a-work the Powers of the Soul, and the Powers of
the Soul set a-work by the Powers of Heaven, will be enabled to prepare high
and honorable Work, pleasant, prositable and delightsom Work, victorious,
glorious, and crowning Work, to be managed by the Powers of the World, for the
Glory of the most High, and the great Honor and Renown of Englands Royal
Majesty: That all Strife, Contention and Wars throughout the whole World may
cease; that so among all People in all Nations, there may be a free Trade,
great Joy, and a lasting Peace.

The Religion of the Church of Rome must not be Countenanced, Encouraged, or
Tolerated among the Sons of Men, in any Nation, City, Town, or Corporation,
under the Canopy of Heaven, because it is a Religion full of Deceit, and
throughout the whole World the greatest Cheat: It is a Religion that is an Idle
Fowl, that does at once pick the Purse, and damn the Soul: It is a Religion
managed with all the Crafts of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; therefore
it is a Religion full of Pride, Vain glory, Hypocrisy, and Treachery: It is a
wicked Religion, because it makes them that Conform to it, to be seven-sold
more the Children of the Devil than they were by Nature. All the Sons and the
Daughters of Men are bad by Nature, but the Religion of the Church of Rome
makes Men worse by Practice: But, God so loved the World, that he has sent the
Gospel of his Son, which is taught in the Church of England, that Men might be
turned from a state of Nature, into a state of Grace; and from the power of Sin
and Satan, into the Glorious Liberty of his Children; which is to enjoy Power
against Sin, and Victory over the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and all the
Workers of Evil. But the Religion of the Church of Rome makes her Children
Servants to Sin, Slaves to the World and the Devil, and Enemies to their own
Souls; and so being hardened in Sin by Custom and Practice, they are not afraid
nor ashamed to Combine and Design from time to time, to undermine and overthrow
the Protestant Religion, His Majesty of Great Britain, and the Church of
England: But for ever blessed and praised be the God of Heaven, who to
Admiration, from time to time has watched over this Nation, that it has not by
unreasonable, bloody, and deceitful Men, been brought to Desolation; but no
thanks be to them that have made a Separation, for they have done what they can
to put a Sword into our Enemies hand: By their Pride and Contention, Sedition,
and Rebellion, many have turned Atheists and Papists; so that the Church of
Rome has been strengthened and encouraged from our Selves. Ever since the Church
of Rome has made Shipwreck of Faith and of a good Conscience, and has preferred
their Traditions, Inventions, and lying Wonders, above Gods Commandments, which
is the Rule of Faith and Manners; their Religion has been an abominable
Reproach unto Christ and his Gospel: They do profess Christ, but they do deny
him, because they will not be ruled by his Word, nor have him rule in them by
his Spirit: They do mock Christ in their Sacraments, and persecute him in his
Members; so that the Religion of the Church of Rome is a bloody Religion,
upheld by Tyranny and Oppression: The Blood that the Church of Rome has caused
to be shed in the World from time to time, by Wars, Treachery, and Cruelty; is
more than there be men in England, Scotland and Ireland: And yet the Church of
Rome, the Mother of Harlots, that Scarlet Whore, is not satisfied; but the
Righteous God to whom Vengeance does belong, though he be slow to Anger, yet is
he great in Power; therefore he will give her Blood to Drink, because she is
worthy: The Day of thy Calamity, O Church of Rome, is at hand; that so many
Nations may be freed from Slavery, and throughout the whole World there may be
great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity. For thy Pride and Vainglory, thy Formality,
Hypocrisy, and Treachery, the Misery that will come upon thee, makes have:
Therefore Cry and Howl you Inhabitants of Rome, for Antichrist must come down;
and all those that will uphold his Crown: to that end the Lord of Hosts, who is
Strong and Mighty in Battle, who has all Power in his own hand, and the whole
Creation at command, has stirred me up to engage with him, to stir up all the
Kings and Princes in the world that will own him, to bring down his Implacable
Enemies that be against him, as the Turk, the Pope, the French King, and the
King of Spain, because they be Enemies to his Gospel, and his Children, who are
as dear unto him as the Apple of his Eye, because they be his purchased,
ransomed, and redeemed Ones, they be his justified, sanctified, chosen and
beloved Ones; they be his choice Jewels, and his great Treasure: As for the
Workers of Iniquity, the Seed of Evil Doers, the Children of Disobedience, the
Enemies of his Gospel; who be unbelieving Jews, brutish Atheists, wicked and
bloody Papists, and rebellious Dissentors and Sectaries, they be but Lumber and
Cumber in the world, till they do Conform and Reform to the Lord of Life, who
is the King of Glory, and the Prince of Peace; who knows when, how, and by whom
he please, with much ease, to bring great Peace and Prosperity to a Nation, as
to a Person; happy be they that live to him, and live for him; they will live
for ever with him; they will be in his Favor, in whose Presence is Fullness of
Joy, and at whose Right Hand are Pleasures for ever-more. It is a great
Privilege to be in the Favor of an Earthly Prince; but it is the highest
Honor, and the greatest Safety to be in the Favor of the God of Heaven, who
is the Lord of Life and the King of Glory.

A man may want Money sometimes to help himself, when he may be rich and strong
in Faith to help others. A man may want Money to Trade with men, when he may be
rich and strong in Faith, to engage with the God of Heaven, for the Glory of
his great Name, to have his Enemies brought to shame, and His Majesly of Great.
Britain, and the Church of England, throughout the whole world, to great
Honor, Renown, and Fame: True Faith, which is more precious than Gold, will
make a man seeming poor, to make others really rich; and it will enable a man
to make himself in the world of no Reputation, to bring others to great Honor
and Exaltation: Let all that want so rich a Jewel as precious Faith, labor to
get it from the Lord of Life, in the use of those means that he has appointed,
and the Church of England has ordained; and they that have it, let them labor
to prove it, and improve it, because it will innoble the Mind, and enable the
Mind to frame some noble Design, and to bring it about in due time, for the
great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of Mankind. It has been want of Faith and Love
to God, our Brethren, and Enemies, that has caused so much Strife and
Contention, Sedition, and Rebellion; which has brought great Disorder and
Confusion from time to time among Mankind: But the God of Wisdom and Power
knows when and how for to bring among the Sons of Men, in many Nations, Order
out of Confusion, Light out of Darkness, Good out of Evil, Peace out of Trouble
in the worst of Times; and by the weakest of Means: that Strife, Contentions,
and Wars throughout the whole Earth may cease: All People in all Nations must
strive to live in Love and Peace, because God is Love, who is the Creator of
all Men, and the Preserver of them.

That this may be done, and well done, the Gospel, that brings Glad-tydings
of Salvation, must Run and be Glorified, where it is not, and must flourish
where it is; that so they that do not know the true God, and Jesus Christ whom
he has sent, may labor to know him; and they that know him, let them labor
to love him; and they that love him, let them labor to keep his Commandments,
because they be not grievous, but most pleasant, profitable, and comfortable:
But the Traditions of the Church of Rome are burdensome, unprofitable, and
uncomfortable; they do deprive Kings of their Privileges: And that is the
greatest Freedom, which is the Freedom of the Mind, and the greatest Liberty
which is the Liberty of the Will, and the greatest Power which is over Sin, the
World, and the Devil. The Church of Rome is too cruel to her Children, because
she will not let them enjoy the Jewels more worth than three Kingdoms: And that
is a sound Heart which is the life of the Flesh; a wholesome Tongue which is a
Tree of Life, and righteous Lips which are the Delight of Kings; but to lie,
slatter, and dissemble, is the Church of Rome's Religion. The Lips of Truth
will be established for ever, but a lying Tongue is but for a moment. Times may
be so bad, and so sad, that many may be brought into such great straights, that
they cannot tell how to live well by their Estates, or their Trades, by their
Houses or Lands, or Offices, or great Places; but in the worst of Times that
can come, the Just shall live by his Faith, because it is more precious than
Gold: In time of Famine he will be fed, in time of Plague he will be hid, in
time of War he will not fly, in time of Fire he is provided for all Eternity;
when the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat, and the Earth, and all the Works that are therein shall
be burnt up, then the Just and Righteous have an Inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them.

Faith that works by Love, will enable the Sons and the Daughters of Men to
bear much, to suffer much, to want much, and to enjoy much, and to do much good
in their Generation; for the great Honor of God, the King, and Nation; they
that can love the God of Heaven for himself, will serve him for his Kingdom;
and they will know that the God of Heaven loves them, but not for what they
have done and suffered, but he loves them for his Son, and for what he has done
and suffered: They that do love God for Christ, and the Lord Christ as God and
Man in one Person, will find that the Father and the Son will manifest
themselves unto them; and by their Spirit will revive, refresh, counsel,
comfort, and strengthen them in every State and Condition, under every Trial,
Trouble, and Affliction, that the Sons and the Daughters of Men are exposed
unto in the Wilderness of this World. The God of Heaven, who is most Great and
most Good, most wise, and most strong, is Love, and he that dwells in Love,
dweleth in God; and God in him; which will enable a man to bring about great
and wonderful things, for the great Honor and Exaltation of a Kings Person,
and the great Peace and Prosperity of many Nations.

Man's loving of God, who is most good, is a Fruit of Gods loving of him,
though he be very bad, but not the Cause: Gods Love to Man is free, he don't
deserve it, neither can any of the Sons and Daughters of Men merit it by all
their Works and Duties: Man's love to God is a Duty, the God of Heaven does
require it, because that he is most worthy of it, to be beloved above all, and
more than all: They that love the God of Heaven most, will serve and honor him
best; and they that honor him, he will them; to some he does it in this World,
with Honors, Riches, and a long Life; but to all that be faithful and fruitful
in good Works, such works that be pleasing to him, and profitable to others; he
will honor in his own Kingdom with Glory, Immortality, and the Crown of Lise.

O Great is the Power of Faith, which is the Power of the God of Heaven, which
does enable a weak and an unlikely man for to prepare high and honorable Work,
pleasant, profitable, and delightsome Work, Victorious, Glorious, and Crowning
Work; to be managed by many Wise, Strong, Rich, and Learned Men, for the Glory
of the Great and Mighty God, for the Credit of his Holy Gospel, for the great
Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion, for the great Honor and
Exaltation of our Royal Sovereign his Majesty of Great Britain; above all
Heathen and Popish Kings, Priests, Princes, and Emperors in the World: so that
we shall become the wonder of the World, and a wonder to our selves; the Desire
and the Delight of Nations, the Joy of the whole Earth, and the City of the
great King, for Unity, Peace and Concord, for Piety and Virtue, for Wisdom,
Power, and Strength; and for Honors, Riches, and great Glory; which will be
brought about in these days of the Gospel, but not by the Power of the Sword
made by Men, but by the Power of Faith, which is the Wisdom and Power of the
God of Heaven: Therefore Glory be to God most high, great Joy, Peace,
Prosperity, and good will toward Men on Earth, Glory and great Glory from all
Men and Angels; to the most High: Great Honor and Renown, great Joy, Peace and
Prosperity, is for Englands Royal Majesty: Therefore with Angels and
Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven, the glorious Company of the
Apostles, the goodly Fellow-ship of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs,
the Holy Church of Christ throughout the whole World; let us all laud and
magnify, praise and glorify the God of Heaven, the Father of an infinite
Majesty, for his unspeakable Love and innumerable Mercies, from time to time
bestowed on Mankind, for the sake of his beloved Son, our blessed Lord and only
Savior Jesus Christ, who ever lives and ever loves, and will take great
Delight and Pleasure to reward them that be Wise, Faithful, Valorous and
Courageous to the end: But they that draw back unto Perdition, and unto the
Church of Rome's Tradition; his Soul will take no pleasure in them: but they
that honor him he will honor them, not only before Mortal Men, but before
his Father and Holy Angels in the highest Heavens. Therefore Glory and great
Glory be to him; and great Honor and Renown to England's Royal King, our
Gracious Sovereign Charles the Second, by his Grace and Favor, his Majesty of
Great Britain, above all Heathen and Popish Kings, Priests, Princes and
Emperors in the World; that so all Strife, Contention and Wars throughout the
whole World may cease; and among all People in all Nations there may be a free
Trade, great Joy, and a lasting Peace.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHat the God of Heaven has promised in time for the great Joy, Peace, and
Prosperity of Mankind, it will be brought about in due time; for all his
Promises are true and faithful, every one more precious than Gold, or the Gold
of Ophir: The Crown of Glory is in a promise; them that be faithful to the
Death will he give the Crown of Life. The God of Heaven promised to send his
Son, and in the fullness of time he did come, who is, and was, and ever will be,
the chiefest of Ten thousands in the highest degree; and in these days of the
Gospel the Lord will give unto him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for his Porfession; for the Glory of his great
Name; to have his Enemies brought to shame, and many Kings and Kingdoms, to
great Honor, Renown, and Fame. To him that believes and knows he believes, all
things is possible to be done that is lawful, commendable, and most honorable
under the Sun. By what Divine Wisdom and Power has enabled me for to make known
in time for the great Honor and Exaltation of his Majesty's Royal Person, and
the great Joy, Peace, and Prosperity of many Nations; the Reader that is
Ingenious, may learn to be good, and to know when and how for to do much good
in his Generation; for the great Honor of God, the King, and Nation; and that
in the worst of times and before the best of Men; and that without making of
many words, or having the voice much heard. These days of the Gospel are times
that will try the Wisdom and the Skill, the Valor and the Courage of many
Wise, Strong, Rich, and Learned Men, what they can do, and what they will do,
for to bring about that noble Design, that Divine Wisdom and Power has enabled
me to make known in time, for the Glory of his great Name, for the Credit of
his Holy Gospel, for the great Honor and Renown of the Protestant Religion,
for the great Joy and Triumph of the Church of England; which will bring great
Peace and Prosperity to many Kingdoms; which is to be brought about in these
days of the Gospel, for the Glory of the most High, and for the great Honor
and Exaltation of Englands Royal Majesty; that so many Nations may be freed
from Slavery, and throughout the whole World there may be great Joy, Peace, and
Prosperity. The great and the mighty God, who is most Wise and most Strong,
does what whatsoever will, in the Heavens above and in the Farth beneath; and
that when he please and with whom he please: and that many great and mighty
Kings have found.

I shall name but two or three, and that is King Pharaoh, King Belshazzar, and
that great King Nebuchad-nezzar, who in the midst of his Glory, and in his
Royal Palace of Babel, that he built for the House of the Kingdom, who was
boasting of his Power, and the great Honor of his Majesty; while the word was
in the Kings Mouth, a Voice came down from Heaven, saying, O King
Nebuchad-nezzar; to him it was spoken that his Kingdom was departed from him,
and that he should be driven from Men, and that his Dwelling should be with the
Beasts of the Field, and that he should eat Grass as the Oxen; and seven times
should pass over him, until he did know that the most High bears Rule over
the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them unto whomsoever he will; the very same
hour was this thing fulfilled upon Nebuchad-nezzar, and he was driven from Men,
and did eat Grass as the Oxen, and his Body was wet with the Dew of Heaven,
till his Hairs were grown as Eagles Feathers, and his Nails like Birds Claws:
and when the term of Seven years was accomplished, which from the God of Heaven
was prefixed; at the end of those days did Nebuchad-nezzar lift up his Eyes
unto Heaven, and his Understanding was restored unto him: Then did he give
thanksunto the most High, and praised and honored him that lives for ever,
whose Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion and his Kingdom is from Generation to
Generation; and before him all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as
nothing: and according to his will he works in the Army of Heaven, and among
the Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay his Hand, nor say unto him,
What do thou? Therefore he is to be feared above all Gods, because that he is
a Wonderworking God, a Great and a Glorious God; who can work Wonders in a Man
and with a Man, either for or against a City or a Kingdom; for his Works are
all Truth, and his Ways Judgments; and those that walk in Pride he is able to
abase: but the Meek, Humble, and the Lowly, does he delight in, among the Sons
of Men, and will bring them in due time to great Honor and Glory in his
Kingdom of Heaven.

I am a Friend and a Lover of all them that are not Enemies unto themselves, as
all Unbelieving Jews, Brutish Atheists, Wicked and Bloody Papists, and
Robellious Dissentors and Sectaries are, and that will not Conform Reform to
the Lord of Life, who is the King of Glory, and the Prince of Peace, whose
Service is perfect Freedom, and his Work and Reward is most Prositable, most
Honorable, most Comfortable, most Satisfying, Lasting, and Everlasting.

What Divine Wisdom and Power has enabled me to make known in time for Englands
Information, Reformation, great Joy, Peace, and Consolation, and for her great
Honor and Exaltation, it is by John Varney, a Member of the Church of England,
and of the City of London, a City, that has been a City of Renown, and will
come to greater Honor, Renown and Fame, in his Majesty's Royal Reign, than any
City under the Heaven, is or has been since England has enjoyed a King.

September 27th. 1679.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 41 line 16, read in this World; p. 46 l. 28, for martial men r. mortal
men; p. 95 l. 11, f. make known, r. made known; p. 103 l. 24, f. the Lust of
Evil, r. the Hurt of Evil; p. 104 l. 17, f. And that Men, r. O that Men; p. 105
l. 8, f. Right r. Height; p. 142 l. 39, f. and that will not Conform Reform, r.
that will not Conform and Reform.


