A True and perfect NARRATIVE Of the late Terrible and Bloody Murder of Sir
Edmondberry Godfrey;

Who was found Murdered on Thursday the 17th. of this Instant October, in a
Field near Primrose-Hill.

WITH A full Account of the manner of his being Murdered and in what manner he
was found.

ALSO, The full Proceedings of the Coroner, who sat upon the Inquest, etc.

With Allowance.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings
most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1678.

A true and perfect Relation of that Horrid and Bloody Murder committed upon
the Body of Sir Edmondberry Godfrey.
SIR Edmundberry Godfrey's Death being the sad occasion of this Narrative, and
the Subject of most peoples Discourse: I shall (to prevent any false or
surreptitious Stories that are usually carried abroad about things of this
nature) give the Reader this true and impartial account thereof.

On the 12th. of this instant October, being Saturday, about Nine of the Clock
in the Morning, Sir Edmundberry Godfrey went out of his own House in
Greens-lane in the Strand about his Occasions: And was seen not long after near
Marybone, but then supposed to be going home; and was at one of the
Churchwardens of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields about some business
at twelve of the Clock the same day: But so it was, that he came not to his own
House that night, according to his usual Custom, nor gave any notice to his
Servants of any business that he had to hinder his returning that night. And
from that time till Thursday the 17th of the same Month about, six a Clock at
night, no tidings could be heard of him (although all earnest and diligent
Inquiries and Searches were made for him) At which time his Dead Body was found
dead in a Ditch upon the South side of Primerose-hill near Hampste^d. The
occasion of his being found was this: One Promley a Baker, and Waters a
Farrier, both of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, having an occasion to
go to the House, commonly called the Whitehouse near Primerose-hill; and going
over the Field where the Body of Sr. Edmundberry lay, saw, as they thought, a
sword and Belt, and a stick and a pair of Gloves lying together hard by the
Hedge-side, but they went not near to meddle with them, supposing they had
belonged to some person that was gone into the Ditch to ease himself. And when
they came to the White-house, they told John Rawson (the man of the said House)
that they had seen a Sword and belt, and a Pair of Gloves and Stick lie in that
place: Whereupon John Rawson asked them, why they did not bring them thither:
They told him they did not know but there might be some Body hard by to own
them: Rawson told them again; That there had been several Soldiers thereabout
this Week a Hedghog-hunting, and it may be (said he) some of them may have left
them behind them.

After some further Discourse, Rawson agreed to go with the two men to the
place, and if they found the things there, then, Rawson was to give them a
Shilling to Drink, and was to take the things to his own House, till some body
came thither to own them: and thereupon they went together to the place: When
they came there, they found only a Belt and a Scabbard, and a Stick, and a pair
of Gloves, but no Sword: which as Rawson was stooping to take up, he thought he
saw some thing like a Man in the Ditch hard by, and so going to the Ditch,
there they saw a Man lying, as they supposed upon his Belly, with a Sword run
through him, and the point appearing about Seven or Eight Inches above his back:
Upon this, they went immediately to the Churchwarden of the Parish, to give him
an account of it; but he being Sick, sent them to Mr. Brown's the Constable,
who presently taking with him several Neighbors and Housekeepers, went to the
place where the Body lay: Which was in a dry Ditch upon the South side of
Primerose-hill, about two Fields distant from the White-house: The Posture in
which he lay was this, he had a Sword run into him just under his left Pap,
which came out upon the Right side of his back, about Seven or Eight Inches,
one of his Hands being doubled under, on which he seemed to Lean, the other
Hand lying upon the bank, his Hair Chamlet Coat being turned up over his Head;
his Hat and Perriwig being among the Bushes over his Head, but no Band nor
Cravat could be found about him; although when he went from Home, he had a
large Laced Band on.

The Constable and the rest that were with him, being about a dozen, having
taken good notice of the manner of his lying, caused him to be removed, the
Sword drawn out of his Body; concerning which Sword it is observable, that the
point of it which came out at his back was covered all over with blood, and
that part which was in his Body was black, without any blood upon it.

The Constable having caused the Body to be removed to the White House, and
knowing it to be the Body of Sir Edmondberry Godfrey, he caused his Pockets to
be searched, and found in one of them, in one Paper six Guineys, and in another
paper four broad pieces of Gold, and a half Crown; and in the other Pocket two
Rings, whereof one was a Diamond, one Guiney, and four pound in Silver, and two
small pieces of Gold, and one Ring he had upon one of his fingers: His Pocket
Book (in which he used to take notes of Examination) being only missing.

One Friday the 18th of this instant, Mr. Cooper the Coronor of Midlesex,
impannel'd a Jury at the White-House to inquire about the occasion of the death
of the said Sir Edmondberry: and two Chyrurgions, (having been first Sworn)
viewed the Body in the presence of the Coronor and the Jury; and found two
wounds about it, which one of the Chyrurgions searched with his Probe; and
found one of them not above an inch deep, the Probe going against one of his
Ribs; but the other being a little below the left Pap, went quite through the
Body: his Face was of a fresh color, though in his life time very pale,
somewhat swelled, and a green circle about his Neck, as if he had been
strangled, his blood being settled about his Neck, Throat, and the upper part
of his Breast: The Chyrurgions having viewed the Body, delivered their
Judgments, That the wounds they found about him, were not the cause of his
death, but that he was suffocated before the wounds were made. And that which
may fully persuade any person of the truth thereof, is, That there was not one
drop of blood to be found in the place where he lay, nor the least appearance
of any such thing; though the Ditch was dry, and it might have been easily
seen, if there had been any. Another thing was, that the very bottom of the
soles of his Shoes were as clean as if he had but just come out of his own
Chamber, which was an evident sign that he was carried thither.

A third thing very remarkable, is, That one of the Jury affirmed, That a
Servant of his Mothers (who is owner of the ground where the Body lay) with a
Butcher and two Boys, made a very strict and narrow search in all parts of that
ground for a Calf that was missing, upon Monday and Tuesday last, and at that
time there lay no dead Body, Belt, Gloves, Stick, or other things there.

Now because several false Reports have gone abroad, tending to the Dishonor
of this worthy Deceased Knight, as though he had been discontented about some
Moneys owing by him to the Parish, and upon that account should make himself
away: The Relator thinks good to testify to the World, That to his own
knowledge Sir Edmondberry lent to the Parish above 300 l. without Interest, a
good part of which is yet unpaid, so palpable an untruth it is, that some
wicked persons have spread abroad about him. But it is no wonder that those
inhumane Wretches that have taken away his life, should go also about to blast
his Reputation.

One thing more I cannot omit to mention, having received it from the mouth of
one of the Churchwardens of the Parish where he lived, which is, That Sir
Edmondberry not long ago gave him an hundred pound to bestow upon such poor
People in the Parish as he knew were in want: Neither wa^ that the first time
that Sir Edmondberry had employed him in works of that nature, having often
made him the distributer of his Charity, because he did not desire the applause
of men for it. This without all doubt proceeded from so remarkable and so
sincere a piety, That though it may be commended, I am afraid it will scarce be
imitated.

FINIS.

