THE HISTORY OF ALL RELIGIONS In the World: From the Creation down to this
Present Time.

In Two Parts.

The First containing their THEORY, and the other relating their PRACTICES;
Each divided into Chapters, by the several Heads, or Common Places of Divinity,
Viz. The Object of Religious Worship, the Place, the Time, the Persons
Officiating, the Manner, and the Parts of Worship, etc.

With Various INSTANCES upon Every Head.

To which is added, A Table of HERESIES: AS ALSO A Geographical Map, Showing in
what Country Each Religion is Practiced.

Written in a different Method from anything yet published on this Subject.

By William Turner, M. A. and Vicar of Walberton in Sussex.

-- Every man unto his God -- What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon
the God, Jon. I. 5, 6. LONDON, Printed for John Tunton, at the Raven in
Jewen-street; And are also to be sold by Edm. Richardson in the Upper Court in
Scalding-Allay, near the Poultrey-Church. 1695.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, ROBERT Lord Bishop of Chichester.
My Lord,
IT cannot be improper, certainly, for one of your Clergy to make an Address of
this Nature to your Lordship, and upon a Religious Theme too. If the Office be
any one's it is yours, upon Approbation to vindicate (as it lies in your way)
the honest Essays and Exercises of those which are under your Discipline.
Permit it to go into the world under your Lordship's Name, and leave all the
Defects and Imperfections upon the Author's Score: It Is enough to me, if the
Substance of it be pretty tolerable. We are no Angels, but a kind of degenerate
Spirits dressed up in Flesh and Blood, and acting here a while according to
those Organs, and Faculties, and Advantages we are supplied with, in the
Service of our Great Creator and Redeemer.

My Lord,

Upon a Survey of all Churches in the World, I think, we of this Church and
Nation, are as happy as any People under the Sun; except only in one thing,
that we neither Know, nor Value our own Happiness: A Vertigo, and Spirit of
Giddiness, has possessed the Nation of late years, which makes our Heads turn
round upon our Shoulders, and our Hearts unquiet and discontented within us. We
have Excellent (both) Doctrine and Worship, and as good a Class of Bishops and
Clergy; and as much Learning, Piety and Prosperity as any Church within Ken.
Notwithstanding, would to God a Pencil were drawn once more over those Lines
which administer any Occasion of Objection; that if possible, our Light may
shine clearer, and our Beauty be more inviting to all Beholders; and our Luster
so convictive to our Adversaries, that we may have no Occasion of Disputing,
but the Comfort and Praise of Believing, and Living and Loving like Christians.

May your Lordship go on, as you have begun, to preside over this Diocese with
a Gravity of Admonition, Exemplariness of Conversation, and Integrity of
Discipline, till it shall seem good to the Almighty, who placed you here, to
remove you hence, either to Heaven, or a Better Station upon Earth; Which is
the hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Obedient Son, and Humble Servant, W. Turner.

TO THE READER.
THat I may satisfy a little, the inquisitive humor of the Age we live in, I
have somewhat to say upon the design of this Book, partly for my own
Vindication in the Writing of it, and partly for the encouragement of others in
the reading it. It Is too well known that the Variety which appears in Religion,
has contributed no small matter to Skepticism and Atheism and Impiety in the
World; but by virtue of what Argument, I know not; for I am confident, had men
but a full prospect of the Case, and would use their Brains to purpose, and
pause soberly upon the whole Scheme, and compare one Religion with another,
they would find themselves in a short time straitn'd with this Dilemma, that
they must be Religious, or singular in the World; they must betake to some
Church or other for Sanctuary, or turn out of the common Society with Mankind:
And to be of no Religion at all, is the ready road to the storms of Conscience,
the reproaches of the World, and the indignation of Heaven. A perfect Atheist
is fit for no place here, but Bedlam. If they find a necessity of being
Religious, here is their choice: All the Religions in the World met together at
a general Rendezvous; let them be examined fairly, impartially, freely and
fully; we fear no Muster; Christianity is Examination-proof: And as for the
subordinate Sects and Branches it is divided into, neither will that make any
terrible Objection; the Essence is the same in every part; It Is true Blood runs
through all the Veins; all the Members of the Man are Human, tho some are
weaker than others, some more distempered than others; here a Scab, and there
an Impostume, or Gout, or Cramp, or Palsy, or something to make an apparent
difference, and distinguish it from the rest. If Men had but half as much Skill
in Spirituals, as they have commonly in telling Money, and discerning Coyns, or
in choosing Cattle, and buying Lands, the best Religion in the World would not
go so long a Begging, as it does. But this is not all, I am to tell the Reader,
that I have not Cited all my Authorities; that would have been a Task with a
witness, in such a work as this is; for it is all Collection from the beginning
to the end; but I was not very incurious in my Reading: Some Authors I have
been a gross Plagiary to, where they served for my purpose, particularly Dr.
Cave in his Primitive Christianity, and Mr. R^c^ut, and the Reverend Dr.
Addison, etc. whose writings I have squeezed into an Epitome, and prevailed
with them to speak in my Method and Order, tho, for the most part, in their own
words; and I hope I shall never be charged with Felony for what I have done.
The particular uses which the following Tables may serve to, are many. The
Ingenious Reader will start some (not contemptible) Notions all the way he
goes. I will suggest none; but leave every man to improve his Intellectuals, as
well as he can. And if what I have done, may do any good to any one Reader, I
shall not be more unhappy than some others that have writ before me. Read with
Candor, and excuse my Defects with what Alleviations the Case is capable of,
and I am sure, if thou art not wanting to thy self, here are Materials enough
to build some excellent Meditations upon. Had I had the freedom of access to a
good Library, and more leisure from my necessary Cares and Business, I had done
better; but it is such as was consistent with my Orb, and no Wise man will
expect more. I have only one thing more to request before I conclude, and that
is, that as I am my self as Catholic in my (both) Faith and Charity (as
Catholicism is Lawful and Commendable) so I would to God our Western Christians
would take a full Survey of Christendom, and try (what they can) to comprize
within their Creed and Litany, and Charitable Communications and Communion all
the Subdivisions of the Greek Church, and do (what in them lies) to enlarge the
pale, and promote the Gospel amongst Jews and Mahometans and Pagans, and
accomplish the Number of that Holy and Blessed Society that our Savior Jesus
is making provision for in the other World; and then Come Lord Jesus, Come
quickly.

But especially that they would hasten to Unite among themselves; and to that
end, lay aside their deep Prejudices and Passions, and ambitious Emulations, to
make room for the reception and entertainment of the Gospel of Peace, and not
suffer those opprobrious Distinctions of Sects and ^chisms, which have been now
a long time despitefully hit in our Teeth, any longer to feed upon Christianity
in the Substance. It will not surely be very long, but the Trumpet will Sound,
and the World ring of our Master's Coming; methinks some of the bright Rays of
his Last Advent are darted into our Hemisphere already; the World begins to
shake and stagger, with a variety of Commotions in several material parts of
it; but how unready are we to meet him, when he Appears!

Reader, You will pardon me, if you find that I have not, in every common place
kept close and regular to my Primitive Design and Intention. Sometimes my
Information failed me, sometimes my Memory, and sometimes my Care and Leisure;
and to confessing enuously, in some cases I could not persuade my self to
account the Pagan Superstitions worthy a solid and industrious Remark; there is
so much Chaos and ridiculous Intermixtures and Nonsense, that I thought it
would rather Affront, than Oblige an Ingenious Reader to present him with much
such unprofitable Stuff But I have not willingly passed over any thing without
Observation, which I thought might serve to any good purpose, either of
^^easure or Profit And let no body object to me the uselesness or easiness of
writing Collections; it is much more difficult, than Spinning out our own
Notions upon the slock of our (mere) Natural Reason, or Mother-Wit; but and if
this Argument satisfy not, I will offer a very fair Proposal to my Adversarys,
let them heartily pardon me for doing no worse, or show publicly to the World
that themselves can do better; by either of which ways they shall oblige me,
but in doing neither, they will hardly escape the guilt of becoming obnoxious
themselves.

To conclude I value not the Opinions of those Men, whose either Intellectuals
are faulty, or Minds corrupted; and yet (which is the mischief and misery of
it) there is ever and every where the greatest plenty of these; I dread only
the Censure of Wise and Good Men; but yet there are so few of them, that I
think, upon that score also I am pretty safe; and the more, because they are
Men of the greatest Candor and Ingenuity, the slowest to pronounce a Censure,
the easiest to excuse, and the readiest to forgive. Into the hands of these men
I willingly commit my self, in the company of these men I am most delighted: I
wish my Readers may be all such, either Antecedently or Consequently; which is
the hearty desire and prayer of the unworthy Author,

Your Christian Friend And Humble Servant W. T.

Postscript.
SInce I first engaged in this little Work, I made use of one Notion, which my
Observations in it furnished me with, as an Argument to Attack the Anabaptists
with, viz. The general Consent, and almost Universal Practice, not only of all
Christendom, but all the World, Jews, Gentiles, Mahometans, Christians, of all
Sects, Protestants, Papists, Greeks, Armenians, Muscovites, Mengrelians,
Indians of S. Thomas, Abissines, etc. in using time out if mind for hundreds of
years, in places distant thousands of Miles, some solemn initiating Ceremony at
the first Admission of Children (not yet Adult) into the Society and Communion
of their Religion. I first objected this to several private Members of the
Anabaptists Congregation; every one of which confessed ingenuously they could
not Answer it, but referred it to one of their Teachers about 20 Miles distance
from me: To whom at last I wrote very plainly and briefly, desiring, in humble
Terms, a Solution of the Argument, if it were possible. His Answer, which was
prolix enough, was yet very unsatisfactory; he offered no reason to solve the
Difficulty, tho I had urged it with some briskness, and backed it with the
Authority of Vincentius Lirinensis, Quod semper, quod ab omnibus, quod ubique
etc. But told me, that many other usages were as Universal as that, which I
would not yet allow to be derived from any Divine Institution; to which I
Answered in short, That if he would name but one, and prove it, I would retract
my Opinion. This I wrote, and sent to him, and have frequently called upon his
friends for an answer, but have not received one Line from him to this day; and
tho he has, since that time, passed by, very near my House, yet he did not so
much as call upon me. This, in short, by way of Advertisment, to show the
usefulness of this Book.

An INDEX.
Note, That under Each of the following Heads is inserted (in distinct
Paragraphs) the TENANTS of every Religion.

PART I.
1. OBject of Divine Worship Page 1 2. Places of Divine Worship Page 6 3.
Respect to the places Page 12 4. Dedication of the places Page 16 5. Priests
and Church Officers Page 19 6. Qualiflcation of Chapter Officers Page 29 7.
Ordination of Chapter Officers Page 33 8. Sacred Vestments Page 37 9. Holiness of
Church Officers Page 42 10. Maintenance and Privileges of Chapter Officers Page 47
11. Persons making up the body of the Assembly Page 52 12. Times of public
Worship Page 56 to 100 1. Weekly or Monthly. 2. Uncertain and unfix'd,
contingent. 3. Annual (or Yearly.) 1. In March, 2. In April, 3. In May, 4. In
June, 5. In July, 6. In August, 7. In September, 8. In October. 9. In November,
10. In December, 11. In January, 12. In February.
4. More than Annual.
13. Peoples Reverence in Divine Service Page 100 14. Rule of Worship Page 103
15. Parts and Order of Divine Worship in general Page 111 to 131 1. Secret and
Private. 2. Public.
16. Particular parts of Divine Worship Page 131 1. Prayer Page 131 2. Praises,
Psalms, etc. Page 136 3. Sacrifices Page 141 4. Washings, Purifications Page
146 5. Teaching, Instruction Page 150 6. Sacraments, Vows Page 154 7. Fasting,
Mortification Page 163 8. Feasting page 168
17. Church Discipline, Excommunication Page 171 18. Marriage, Divorce Page 176
19. Funerals Page 181 20. Courts Ecclesiastical Page 187 21. Sects and Schisms
Page 192 to 196 1. In general. 2. In particular.
22. Jewish, 1. Sadduces Page 196 2. Pharisees Page 199 3. Samaritans Page 203
23. Christian, 1. Eastern. Greeks Page 207 Muscovites Page 210, 225 Melchites,
etc. Page 243
2. Western. Papists Page 254 Protestants, etc. Page 273

24. Mohammedan. 1. Turks, etc. Page 205 2. Persians Page 206
25. Heathen. 1. Pythagoreans Page 303 2. Platonicks Page 304 3. Peripateticks
Page 305 4. Cynicks Page 306 5. Stoics. Page 307 6. Epicureans Page 308

PART II.
Note, That under Each of the following Heads is inserted (in distinct
Paragraphs) the PRACTICES of Every Religion. Knowledge of God Page 309 Love of
God Page 313 Affiance in God Page 315 Obedience to his Laws Page 317 Love and
Reverence to his Name, Word, etc. Page 319 Praying unto God Page 328 Praising
of him, Psalms, etc. Page 334 Fear of God alone Page 341 Heavenly mindedness
Page 343 Frequency and Diligence at Church Page 346 Catechizing Page 351
Frequency and Devotion at Sacraments Page 356 Confession, Mortification,
Absolution Page 366 Zeal Page 370 Moderation Page 373 Purity, Sincerity Page
377 Perseverance Page 380 Observation of the Sabbath Page 383 Discipline Page
387 Self-Denial Page 389 Justice, Honesty Page 393 Love to the Brethren Page
397 Love to Enemies Page 402 Love to the Souls of others Page 406 Care of their
bodies, Hospitals Page 408 Unity and Peaceableness Page 415 Obedience to Civil
Governors Page 419 Good Parents Page 422 Good Children Page 427 Good Husbands
Page 432 Good Wives Page 434 Good Masters Page 439 Good Servants Page 440 Good
Ministers, Pastors Page 443 Good Parishioners, People Page 447 Laboriousness
Page 450 Humility Page 459 Contempt of Wealth Page 458 Government of the Tongue
Page 461 Sobriety of Apparel Page 464 Temperance in meats Page 468 Temperance
in Drink Page 472 Chastity Page 475 Patience in suffering Page 488 Domestic
Worship Page 492 Toleration of all Religions Page 497 Last words of dying men
Page 500 Occasions of Conversion Page 504 Miraculous Testim. to Christianity
Page 508 Ceremonies in Greeting Page 512 Fidelity in Trusts Page 516 Marriage
and Divorce Page 519 Frugality Page 529 Dancing Page 533 Games Page 537 Saints
Page 541 Pilgrimage Page 552 Angels Page 554 Atheism, Irreligion Page 557
Superstition Page 559 Monks, Monasteries Page 567 Colleges, Schools Page 571
Premonitions of Death Page 575 Charms, Spells Page 579 Apparitions, Obsessions
Page 581 Oracles, Divination, etc. Page 585 Rewards and Punishments future Page
590 In what Countries each Religion is practiced Page 604 Mother Tongues of
Europe Page 608 Graces at meat Page 610 Forms of Excommunication Page 615
Creeds Page 621 Commands Page 631 Burials Page 656 An Appendix containing a
Table of Errors, Heresies, etc. Page 655
THE HISTORY OF ALL RELIGIONS In the World, etc.
PART I.
1. Object of Worship, and Religious Veneration or Esteem.
Jewish.
THE Jews worship only one God, Jehovah, Eloim; without any distinction of
Persons, yet acknowledging a Messiah; although the Books of the Old Testament,
which they own for Canonical, do in several Texts sufficiently evince a Trinity
of Perons, especially Genesis 1. verse 1. (...) h. e. Dii creavit. and afterward
mention is made of God, -- the Word, -- and Spirit of God. And in the same
Chapter, Let us make Man, in the plural number.

The Messiah they expect yet to come, though 1. All the Promises of his coming
are fulfilled. 2. All the Prophecies accomplished. 3. All the Types are
answered. 4. His Doctrine sealed with 1. Miracles. 2. Holy Lives of its
Professors. 3. Patient Sufferings and Martyrdoms. 4. The Accomplishment of his
Prophecies or Predictions.
5. Themselves are a living Evidence and Monument of his Indignation, and their
own unbelief, as having lost their 1. Country. 2. Kingdom. 3. Temple. 4.
Sacrifices. 5. Genealogies.
6. They have been often deceived with mere Pretenders, and disappointed. 7.
Sybills and Heathen Oracles have given Testimony hereto.


Next to God they highly reverenced the Prophet Moses.

R. Samuel Bar Nahman says, When Moses in writing the Law came to those words,
Let us make Man, etc. He cried out, Lord of the World, why do thou give Men
occsion of mistaking in thy most simple Unity? And the Lord answered, Write
thou, Moses; and let him that desires to mistake, mistake. Menasse ben Israel.

Christian.
The Christians acknowledge One Only God, Maker of Heaven and Earth, but with
distinction of Persons, viz. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Concerning which, as a judicious and very Reverend Author of the Church of
England is pleased to ^^^ress himself; There are three distinctions in the
Deity; of which, because the Scripture speaks in the same manner, as we usually
do of so many distinct Persons; therefore since God is pleased so to accomodate
the Mysteries to our Understanding, as to speak of them in that manner, it is
both allowable and commendable in us to call them Persons. But he would have us
keep only to what the Scripture has revealed about them, without intermixing
with them, any of those unscriptural Notions, which some Divines and Schoolmen
have added to them to explain them. John Lord A. B. of Cantenbury, in his
Sermons concerning the Divinity, etc. of our Blessed Savior.

God is One, numerically One; more One, then any single Man is One; If Unity
could suscipere magis and minus: Yet God is so One, that he admits of
Distinction, and so admits of it, that he still retains Unity. As He is One, so
we call him God, the Deity, the Divine Nature, etc. As He is distinguished, so
we call Him Trinity, Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In this Trinity
there is One Essence, Two Emanations, Three Persons, or Relations, Four
Properties; innascibility, or inemanibility, to generate, (proper to the
Father;) to be begotten, (proper to the Son;) to proceed, (proper to the Holy
Ghost;) Five Notions, innascibility, to beget, to be begotten, to be breathed
out, to breath. Mr. Hales Conf. of the Trinity.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans believe in, and worship one God, Eternal, Almighty, Maker of
Heaven and Earth. And that Jesus Christ was conceived by the breath of God, in
the Womb of the Virgin Mary. That Jesus is a great Prophet, but not the Son of
God. That he wrought Miracles, and foretold to the Jews, the coming of Mahomet,
under the Name of the Comforter. M. de Thevenot, That Jesus would come and
judge the World, etc. Idem. They Invocate the Saints, Idem. Acknowledge Seventy
Angels, Guardians to every Musulman. The Turks are for Mahomet.

Ancient Heathen.
The Ancient Heathens worshipped One Only God, supreme above the rest, who was
therefore called, (...), frequently by Homer, etc. But they had many other
Gods, or Idols, subordinate, which they paid equal Worship and Adoration to;
making no distinction considerable between them in their Divine Honor. There
were, 1. (...), Greater, Celestial Gods, Eternal; of these the Greeks reckoned
Twelve, Jupiter, Juno, Saturn, Apollo (the Sun,) Diana (the Moon,) Mars,
Mercury, Minerva, Neptune, Pluto, Vulcan, Venus. The Romans added, Vesta,
Coelus, Ops, Bacchus, Hercules, Ceres, Janus. 2. Deastri, Dii Minores, or
Medloxumi, Reporters, and Transporters, from Men to Gods, from Gods to Men; as
Summanus, President of the Manes. Consus, the God of Counsel. Pan, the God of
Sheperds. Averruncus, who kept Corn from smut. Agonius, Priapus, Proteus,
Aeolus, Momus, Hebe, Carmenta, etc. Mali Genii, Furiae, Parcae. 3. Ridiculous
things, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Serpents, Elements, Plants, the Devil himself;
nay, St. Hierom says, the Pelusiani worshipped Crepitum Ventris; and the
Egyptians, Priapum, or Penem. 4. The Unknown God, to whom they built an Altar
at Athens, lest whilst they gathered so many Gods together, they should leave
out any. Varro computed to the number of 30000 Gods.


In Scripture are mentioned, 1. The Golden Calf. i. e. The Egyptians Apis. 2.
Teraphim, i. e. Talismanical Engines. 3. Moloch. The Amonites, Saturn. 4. Baal,
i. e. The chief Idol, viz. of Phoenicia. 5. Adramelech and Anamelech, of
Sepharvaim. 6. Ash^troth, the Sidonians Moon, or Queen of Heaven, Jer. 7.44. 7.
Dagon, the Philistines Jupiter. 8. Succoth Benoth, the Babylonians Venus. 9.
Nergal, a Fire which the Persian Magi kept in honor of the Sun continually.
10. Rimmon, the chief Idol of Damascus. 11. Nebo, a God of the Chaldeans. 12.
Amisa, Nisroch, Nibchaz, Thamuz.


Modern Heathen.
In China, a Three-Headed Idol. Some call him, Chin-hoan. In Guinea, and the
East Indies, they greet the New Mood with horrible roarings, and strange
Gestures of Adoration. Also, they worship a Bird called Pittoie, spotted as
with Stars, and crying like a Bull. Also the Devil.

The Chingulaes in Ceilon, worship at this day,

1. Ossa Polla maupt Dio, the Creator of Heaven and Earth. 2. Buddou, the
Savior of Souls, who went to Heaven from Pico Adam, a high Mount, where they
show the print of his foot. 3. Gerehah, ( i. e. the Planets,) Nine in Number,
reckoning the Dragon's Head and Tail. 4. Devils.

In the North of Lapland, they worship the Sun, Moon, and Devils, and
whatsoever they see first at break of day, etc.

In Indolstan the Bramins describe their God with a thousand Hands, Eyes, and
Feet.

The Hindoes believe God to be Omnipotent; that he can cause Rain, Thunder,
etc. That he needs not to be prayed to.

Many Indians, a Cow; (Apis:) Some, Elephants, Horses, etc.

The great Prophets of the Hindoes, are Peremael and Westnon, viz. Bremaw,
Breman, Ram, Permiver.

Of the Chinese, Confucius.

Of the Persees, Zortoose, (Zoroaster.)

In Persia are still Guehers, who worship the Fire; some call them Gaurs.

The Bannians use a tripartite Thread hung about their Neck, to denote the
Trinity. Sir. Th. Herbert.

Diabolical.
The Magicians, Witches, Conjurers, etc. worship the Devil professedly, who
appears to them often in diverse Shapes, viz. 1. Of a black Man, etc. 2. A black
Dog. 3. A Cat. 4. A Rat. 5. A Hedg-hog. 6. A black Toad. 7. A Fly, etc. as may
be seen in the several stories related by Glanvil, etc. 8. In shape of a Goat.
Delrius. 9. Sometimes in disguise of an Angel of Light, as in the case of Dr.
Dee, under diverse feigned Names, as Madisni, Vriel, Gabriel, etc. Dr. Dee's
Actions with Spirits.

I love you, said one of the Spirits, to Dr. Dee, now you talk of God, ibid.

2. Places of Divine Worship.
Jewish.
1. THeir own Houses, Hills and Groves, Genesis 22.2.

2. A Tabernacle, which was, 1. Moveable, 2. Temporary, to signify the Church
Militant.

3. A Temple fixed and permanent, to signify the Church Triumphant; wherein
consider,

1. Its Site, viz. 1. On Mount Sion. 2. On Mount Moriah. 3. On Mount Calvary,
in opposition to the dark Groves of the Heathens.

2. Consider its parts; First, the Atrium, or Court,

1. Of the Priests; where was, 1. The brazen Altar. 2. Lavers to wash the
Priests Sacrifices.

2. Of the People, or outward Court; or Solomon's Porch, built about with
Porches for rainy Weather. This was after Solomon's time divided into 1. The
Men's Court; Here was an Ascent with steps, where the Songs of degrees were
sung. 2. The Women's Court; here was the Corban, inscribed with (...) the
initial Letters of Prove. 21.14. or the like.

2. The Sanctuary, where was, 1. The Incense Altar in the middle, sprinkled
once yearly by the High Priest. 2. The Tables, with the twelve Leaves and
Candlesticks.

3. The Holy of Holies; wherein consider,

1. The Contents. 1. The Pot of Manna. 2. Aaron's Rod. 3. The Tables of the
Testament.

2. The Cover, (the Propitiatory or Mercy-seat) overlaid with Gold at each end,
whereon stood a golden Cherub with Wings stretched out; from between which, as
from an Oracle, God gave Answers.

4. Synagogues, Parish-Churches; Here was Praying and Preaching, Men apart from
Women. 480 in Jerusalem. Some add Pros^uchae.

Christian.
1. Houses, upper Rooms, Acts 1.13. Acts 2.46. 1 Cor. 11.18, 20. Sometimes
Woods and Forests, and Caves; for 200 years or more. Vid. Origin. contra Cells.
l. 4. Arnob. l. 3.

2. Temples, wherein consider. 1. The Form oblong, like a Ship, Constable. Apost. 2.
The Situation, Eastward generally. Tertul. 3. The Parts.

1. Vestibulum, (...), the Porch, adorned sometimes with Cloisters, Cisterns,
Fountains of Water, Marble Pillars for Penitents.

2. Narthex, the lower part next the great Door.

3. Navis, (...), here stood the Ambo, or Pulpit, where the Scriptures were
Read or Preached. Also Pastophoria, the Pews.

4. (...), or (...), The Chancel, separated from the body of the Church by
Rails, (cancelli) only for those who were in Holy Orders. [Only at C. P. the
Emperors were permited to enter there to offer, and so back again.] Here were,
1. the Altar, anciently of wood. 2. the Bishop's Chair, or Throne, at the upper
end. 3. (...), the presbyters seats on each side the Throne.

5. Adjoining to the Chancel on each side were, 1. Diaconicon, the Sacresty or
vestry, for vessels and garments. 2. Prothesis, where preparation was made for
the Sacraments, and the offerings laid up.

Note. The Abyssins Temples are dark, as the Jewish Synagogues, for devotion.

Absis was the upper part of the Quire, where penitents by immposition of hands
were absolved.

Note. 1. The Temples were at first plain, afterward peace and plenty coming
in, more cost was bestowed.

2. No Images in the Temples for 400 years at least. The Council of Illiberis
forbad pictures in the Church. And Epiphanius finding a picture in the Church
of Anablatha, rent it, and gave it away for a winding sheet.

3. The Altar was placed commonly at the East end, but at Antioch VVestward;
say some. Others, that it was in the midst of the Church, divided with rails,
from the rest, called Presbyterium, because appointed chiefly for the Priests,
drawn with curtains at certain times of the Divine service. Bishop Jewel out of
Chrysostom. August. Eusebius.

Mohammedan.
Mosches, or Meldgid, called also Dgemii; for the most part four square, but
larger in length, then breadth, with three Balls and an Half Moon on the Tower.

The Parts, 1. A Portico. 2. A Minaret, or Tower by the side, with a Balcony
all round on the Top. 3. The Body very plain, with 4 bare walls: Only a Niche
on the South wall for the Keble. 4. A Pulpit. 5. Mats on the floor. 6.
Almshouses adjoining to them commonly, called Imaret. 7. Cisterns of water;
Mahomet the 3d his Chapel in C. P. has all the floors covered with mats and
fine Turkey Carpets, his Tomb in the middle. 8. Lamps often. Seven principal
Mosques upon 7 Hills in Constantinople, the most stately is that of Sultan
Soliman; 700 in Fez, in one of which are 900 Lamps. No images, or pictures, of
men, women, or beasts. 23000 Mosques in Caire, great and small. M. de Thev.


Ancient Heathen.
1. Hills and Groves. For they held Temples unlawful, because their Deities
could nor be confined within walls. Man's breast is a Temple well pleasing to
God. Demosth. The whole world is a Temple for the Sun. Alex. ab Alex.

2. Temples. Wherein Consider, 1. The form. Some round, some oblong, some
open-roofed. 2. The situation. Eastward; and, the windows opening Eastward to
let in the Sunbeams. 3. The Parts.


I. (...) the porch; here was, 1. An Altar for sacrifices. 2. Sphnyx's image
sometimes.


2. Basilica, the body of the Temple; here was; 1. An Altar for incense. 2.
Porticus, Isles on the sides, where they fixed their vows, and did worldly
business. 3. Tholum, in the Top, where they hung pictures and dedicated spoils.


3. Adytum, to which only Priests might come: here was, 1. An Altar for
incense. 2. Delubrum, the place, where the Idol stood: or as some say a place
to wash in. Adjoining to the Adytum were,


1. Sacrarium, a Sextry, where were beds for the people to sit at feasts.

2. Donarium, where the gifts offered to the Gods, called Anathema, were
placed. The old Persians had no Temples, but offered on the Tops of Hills. The
Pantheon at Rome was round and open at the Top, (...).

1.
The Romans had no images for many years; because Numa taught, that God was a
pure spirit, etc.

2. Images were first of clay, then of metals, Gold, etc.

Modern Heathen.
The Chingulayes in Ceylon, have Pagodaes, Temples, some of exquisite work, of
hewn stone, engraven with images and figures; others of later building, only
of clay and sticks, and no windows; some tiled, some thatched: Some one story
high, some two; of these are three sorts;

1. Vehars, belonging to the Buddou God.

1. The form, foursquare, like a pidgeon-house. 2. The Furniture, Images of
men, cross-leg'd, with yellow coats (like the Gonni Priests) their hair
Frizled, and their hands before them like women.
2. Dewals, belonging to the other Gods.

3. Covels, or Jacchoes, belonging to the Diautaus to Devils; built by private
persons, who are themselves Priests. In these two last are painted sticks,
Targets, bills, arrows, spears, swords, images of monstrous shapes. Cap. Knox.
In some places are Gold and Jewels.

The Inhabitants of Guinea lay their Idols, and offer their Sacrifices in
Woods, before great Hollow Trees.

The Persees call their Temples Eggarees.

The Bannyans Pagods are commonly under the Bannyan Trees, ( Arbores de Rays,
i. e. de radicibus; or as others call them, ficus Indicae. Sr. Th. Herb. Trav.
The Indians have in all their Pagods an Oval flint-stone, which they fetch from
Ganges, and worship as a God; perhaps because they have heard that a circle is
the most perfect of all figures. Tavernier, part 2. l. 2. c. 5. The Mexicans
call their Temples Teucally, i. e. God's House; built of great stones in the
fashion of Snakes tied one to another; on the top a fine pillar wrought with
small stones as black as jett; on the top of the pillar, battlements, etc.

Diabolical.
The Place of meeting, which the Devil appoints for witches, etc. Is usually on
some common or the middle of a Green. Glanvil. Dr. Dee. had all his actions
with spirits (or most of them) in his study; and in his study or Oratory, 1. A
stone, or stones, brought him by a spirit, called from its use a Shew-stone,
sometimes Principal stone, first Sanctified stone; a Crystal, etc. In which a
person qualified might see apparitions and hear voices. And in it was often to
be seen a Curtain, or Veil, as if the stone it self were some personated
sanctuary. 2. A Holy Table, (which is now preserved and to be seen in Sr. Tho.
Cottin's Library.) 3. A Carpet. 4. Table-Cloth. 5. Cushion. 6. Candlestick. 7.
Taper.


I make no Question, but the Devil in all these things had a respect to the
Ceremonial law especially. Dr. Mer. Casaub. pref. to Dr. Dee's Actions with
spirits. In New England the witch meeting was in a field near Salem. Cotton
Mather.

3. Respect to places of Worship.
Jewish.
1. None but the High Priest entered into the Holy of Holies, and he but once a
year.

2. None but the Clean were to enter into the sanctuary. And therefore on the
pillars was writ, Let no stranger enter into the Holy place.

3. Whosoever fled to the Temple, and there laid hold upon the Horns of the Altar
(if guilty only of casual murder) might not be taken thence. Ex. 21.14. 1. Kin.
2.28.

4. No man was to carry any vessel through the Temple.

5. The Synagogues had such inscriptions as these, This is the gate of the
Lord, the righteous shall enter into it. Prayer without attention is like a
body without a Soul. Silence is commendable in time of prayer.

6. The Rulers made such Canons, as these; 1. That no man should go into the
Temple with a staff. 2. Or with his shoes on. 3. Or till they had wiped the
dust off from their feet. 4. Or come with money tied up in a purse: Or use a
scrip, or bag-purse. 5. Or spit in the Temple. 6. Or use any irreverent gesture
there, but go gravely to the place, where they were to stand, and neither sit,
lean, or lie, but stand only: (that being a praying posture.) Dr. Lightfoot.


Christian.
1. They came into the Churh, as into the palace of the Great King, with fear
and Trembling. Chrysostom. Ep. ad Hebr. c. 9.

2. They used to wash their hands, before they entered. Idem. Hom. 52. in Mat.

3. Emperors left their guards behind, put off their crowns, laid down their
arms; when they went to Church. Dr. Cave Prim. Christian.

4. They carried themselves there with the most profound silence and devotion.

The Choir of the Armenian Church (at Egmasin) was hung round with Venetian
Tissue of Gold; the pavement of both Choir and body of the Church spread with
Tapestry, for they all put off their shoes, before they go into Church. Nor do
the Armenians kneel, as in Europe, but stand all the while upright. Mons.
Tavernier. l. 1. c. 3. The Abyssins have no seats in their Churches, for they
neither sit nor kneel; but always stand at Divine service, according to the
Ancient Canons, which the Greeks and Russes also observe to this day, as
believing it more becoming the reverence due to the place, and more proper for
attention, then to sit. Job Ludolphus, Hist. of Ethiop. chapter 6. To prevent
weariness the Abyssins have little Crutches to lean upon, which when they go
away, they leave in the Church-proch. Idem. If any out of weakness sit down
upon the ground, the Deacon, even in the midst of prayers, commands them, Eb
Tarber, Tanse, you that sit down, rise. Nay, such is their reverence toward
their Churches, tho at this day poor, low, dark buildings, thatcht with straw
or reed, when they approach near them in their Travels, they alight off their
Mules, and walk on foot till they are past them. They also put off their shoes,
and never spit on the pavement. Idem.

Muscovites will not make water in the Churchyards.

The Muscovites stand all the service time, and are bare in the Church; only
the Priests have their Skufia, or caps on, which were given them at
consecration. D. of Holstein's Ambass.

If a dog enter into the Church, they sweep, incense and purify it with holy
water after him. They sweep often after a stranger.

Mohammedan.
1. The Mahometans put off their shoes, when they enter into their Mosques, and
take them again at their coming out; or else they must carry them in their hand.

2. They wash their feet, and so enter their Mosques, and as they begin their
devotions, they first stop their Ears, and secondly, fix their Eyes, that
nothing may divert their thoughts; then,

3. In a soft and still voice utter their prayers, wherein are many words most
significantly expressing the Omnipotency, Greatness, Eternity, and other
Attributes of God.

4. Casting themselves low upon their faces sundry times, and then
acknowledging that they are burdens to the Earth, and poison to the air; but
after all, comforting themselves in the mercies of God through the Mediation of
Mahomet.

After entering, they bow to the Keble, a notch on the South-wall, toward
Meccha. In some places Bismillah (i. e.) In the name of God, is writ over the
door. M. de. Theven. By their discipline women may not enter, because of their
often pollutions, and Eve's sin Ross.

Ancient Heathen.
1. Only Priests did go into the A^ytum. 2. Only the clean might enter into
their Temples. Therefore on Aesculapius his Temple was writ, Esse d^^et sastum,
sacri qui limina Templi Ingreditur. They washed in the (...), before entrance.
3. The Egyptians set Harpocrates image in the entrance of the Temple to
signify silence. The Priests of the Eumenides called Hesychidae, from their
silence. 4. The Romans proclaimed silence to the people by a Crier, in these
words, Favete linguis. So did the Greeks. 5. If any came to the Altars to take
sanctuary, it was unlawful to take him thence. Rausan. 6. They used to give
Oaths in the Temples for determining controversies. 7. The Lacedamonians drove
dogs out of the Temples, as unclean Creatures. Pinge duos angues, sacer est
locus. 8. None might go into the Temple of Ceres that was guilty of any fault.
9. None might walk into the Temple of Apollo Pythius; to do so, was death by
the law of Pisistratus.
Modern Heathen.
In Ceilon, no woman having her natural infirmities upon her, may approach near
the Temples; nor men, that come out of the Houses, where such women be.

The Hindoes or Indians, both men and women, before they go to their Devotions,
which is very frequently, wash their bodies; and ascribe a kind of Divinity to
certain Rivers (especially Ganges) whither they flock daily in Troops to wash
themselves.

In Bengala all are bound to enter barefooted into their Temples. Ross. In Pegu
they wash their feet at the door, and by lifting up their hands to their heads,
salute the Preacher first, and then the Sun. Idem. In Egypt Sow-herds are
forbid the Temples. Idem. In Mexico none might enter into their Toucally,
except the Priests and such noble personages who at their entry would offer
some man to be sacrificed to those slaughter-houses of the Devil. Purchase.

If any of the Virgins that belonged to the Temple in Mexico, were found
dishonest, they were put to death without remission; saying, she had polluted
the House of their God. Idem.

Diabolical.
The Witches at their first arrival at their Place of Worship, do Courtesy and
due Obeisance. Glanvil.

The Place is Holy, said one of the Spirits to Dr. Dee, in one or more of his
Actions with them. Actions with Spirits; p. 366.

In those places of the East Indies, where they worship the Devil, they build
Pagods, or Meschits, for him, which they perform a Sacred Respect to.

4. Dedication of Temples, etc.
Jewish.
1. THE Tabernacle was Consecrated, by anointing with the anointing Oil, Exodus
40.9. 2. Lighting the Lamps. 3. Burning sweet Incense. 4. Offering burnt
Offerings, etc. Hereupon a Cloud covered the Tent, and the Glory of the Lord
filled the Tabernacle.

2. The Temple was Consecrated, 1. By a great Assembly of the Elders, etc. 2.
Feasting. 3. Sacrificing an innumerable multitude of Sheep and Oxen, etc. 4.
Praises and Prayers, 1 Kings, 8.

Christian.
1. They Consecrated (in Constantine's time) the Temples with, 1. Singing of
Hymns and Psalms. 2. Reading and Expounding the Scriptures; Preaching,
Orations. 3. Holy Sacrament. 4. Prayers. 5. Liberal Alms to the Poor. 6. Great
Gifts to the Church. 7. Expressions of mutual Love. And, 8. Universal
rejoicing. Dr. Cave.


* Heathen Temples converted into Christian Churches were Consecrated by
placing a Cross in them. Vid. Cod. Theod.

The Anniversary Feast Day in remembrance of the Church built by Constantine in
Jerusalem, was kept afterward constantly, Sept. 14. for eight days, with much
pomp and confluence of People. Dr. Cave.

Hence our Wakes (Encaenia.)

Mohammedan.
The Grand Seignior gives pieces of Stuff, which is brought to him from the
Kiaabe (or Holy House) at Mecha, with which it was covered round, these Stuffs
being offered by the Grand Seignior, and other Princes, to that place. -- These
the Grand Seignior (when they are old) sends to hang up in new Mosques, which
serves for a Consecration. M. de Thevenot.

Three Balls, or a Star and an half Moon, are generally the distinguishing Mark
or Ensign of all the Mohammedan Mosques.

In Vienna, upon the Spire of S. Stephen's Steeple there stands a Cross, and
half Moon; which the City promised should be done, when Soylman the Magnificent
besieged the City, upon condition he would not batter the Church, which he had
an intention to do. Dr. Edw. Brown's Trav.

Ancient Heathen.
They Consecrated their Temples thus.

1. The Aruspices drew certain Ribbonds about the Floor, and strawed the plot
of ground with Flowers. 2. Soldiers carried Boughs into it; and 3. Vestal Nuns
followed, leading Boys and Girls in their Hands, and sprinkled the place with
Holy Water. 4. Then a Pontifex and Praetor followed, who purged the Floor, by
leading about it a Sow, a Ram and a Bull, and there Sacrificed them, and Prayed
to the Gods to bless that holy place. 5. By drawing some Ropes, they pulled
down the first Stone, setting it with wedges of Gold and Silver, the Aruspex
crying out -- Ne temeretur opus faxo, alirove, in aliud opus destinato.
Hence their Encaenia, solemn Feasts, at their Devoting of their Temples to the
Worship of some Idol God.

Modern Heathen.
I confess, I have not yet met with any thing in my reading to fill up this
Section, but am willing to leave a void space for the Reader to fill up at his
leisure, for his own Use; for I cannot be induced to think, but they generally
use some Ceremony for this purpose, tho perhaps our Travelers finding the
Structures erected, and peradventure long before their Arrival into the
Countries, might see nothing of it, nor make enquiry about it.

Diabolical.
Delrius tells us out of a French Book of Florimund Raimunds, a Senator of the
King's, in the Court of Bordeaux, that an old Woman Tried in that Court, A.
1594. for Witchcraft, confessed of her own accord, That, being a Girl, she was
enticed by an Italian Man, on the Eve of S. John Baptist, at Midnight, to go
with him into a certain Field; where the Italian marked out a Circle on the
ground with a Beech Wand, and muttered certain words over, which he read out of
a black Book, and presently upon it, a great black Goat stood by them, with
great Horns, attended with two Females; and by and by a Man came in Priests
Habit, etc. Mag. Disq. l. 6.

5. Priests and Church Officers, their Distinction and Office.
Jewish.
1. The High Priest, whose Office was, 1. Peculiar to himself, as to enter into
the Holy of Holies once a year, upon the Propitiation day. 2. Common with other
Priests.


He had his Suffragan, or Sagan.

2. Inferior Priests; whose Office was, 1. To burn Incense, and Offer
Sacrifice. 2. To sound the Trumpets for War and Assemblies. 3. To slay the
Sacrifices. 4. To instruct the People. 5. To Judge of the Leprosy.


David divided the Company of Priests into 24 Orders, who were to serve in
their turns by lot, 1 Chro. 24. the chief of every Rank was called Summus
Sacerdos.

3. Levites, in David's time divided 1. Into Treasurers. some Gershonites. 2.
Judges and Overseers. some Cohathites. 3. Porters. some Merarites. 4. Singers.


In Moses time they bore the Tabernacle and Vessels, etc.

4. Prophets.

1. Extraordinary Seers.

2. Ordinary Expositors of the Law, which no later times were,

1. Wise men, Pharisees, wise above the Text of the Law; taught Traditions,
(...).

2. Scribes, (not the Writing-Masters) but Doctors of the Law, who were to
Write, Read, and Expound the Law of Moses.

3. Disputers, who taught Allegories, and the Mystical Senses of the Text,
called (...) Darshanim, and their Homily Midrasch.

Note, the Firstborn of all the Tribes were to manage Religious Affairs, 'till
the Levites were chosen in their room, Exodus 13.2.15.

Christian.
I. (...), Consecrated to the more proper and immediate acts of Worship. These
were

I. Bishops; usually chosen out of the Presbyters, distinct from, and Superior
to Presbyters, (as Blondid and Salmasius confess) about the latter end of the
Second Century. Consider

1. Their Office, viz. To Teach and Instruct the People, to administer the
Sacraments, Excommunicate, Absolve, to preside in the Assemblies of the Clergy,
to ordain inferior Officers, to call them to Account, to Suspend, etc. to urge
the observance of Ecclesiastical Laws, to appoint indifferent Rites, to inspect
and provide for those of their Charge.

2. Order. 1. Chorepiscopi, Suffragan or County Bishops; Vicarii Episcopi,
where the Diocese was large, in imitation of the Seventy Disciples, for so many
they were at first.

2. (...), Visitors, Rural Presbyters, who were to go up and down the Country
to correct what was amiss.

3. Archbishops, Metropolitans in every great City, who were to Ordain, or to
Ratify Elections of Bishops, once a Year to Summon the Bishops under them to a
Synod, to enquire, direct, admonish, suspend, determine, etc.

4. Metropolitans, Honorary, or Titular, without any real power, yet taking
place of other Bishops.

5. Patriarchs, Primates.

2. Presbyters, who were to Preach, Baptize, Consecrate the Eucharist, assist
the Bishop in public Administrations: These were, 1. Clerici Superioris loci,
Antistites in ordine secunde, Presbytens of every great City, who were a kind
of Ecclesiastical Senate, Counselors and Assistants to the Bishops in their
Government, and had Seats of Eminency (in the Churches) next the Bishop's
Throne.

2. Ordinary Presbyters.

N. B. They did not usually exercise the Power conferred by Ordination upon
them in any Diocese, without leave from the Bishop.

3. Deacons, who were to attend at the Lord's Table, where the People met every
Lord's Day to offer for the Poor. Hence they have used to deliver the
Sacramental Elements to the People: also to Preach and Baptize: Assistants to
the Priest, as he to the Bishop; the number in any one place, not above Seven.

1. Archdeacon, the Eye of the Bishop, chosen out of the Deacons, to inspect
all parts of the Diocese.

2. Subdeacon, who assisted the Deacons, waited at the Church Doors, ushered
in and brought out the several Orders, Catechumens, etc.

2. (...). Vid. Page 25.

Mohammedan.
1. Musti, i. e. Interpreter of the Alcoran, who is as High Priest, attending
only Matters of Faith and Religion.

He is Head of the Church, and decides all Questions in their Law.

2. Cadilesquiri Talismani, i. e. Doctors of the Law, resident at C. P. or
where the Prince pleases. These are, as it were,

Patriarchs, They examine the Cadis of diverse Provinces. These also call the
People to Prayers among the Turks.

3. Mulli, qu. Bishops; who place and displace Churchmen at pleasure.

4. Nuderisi, qu. Suffragans, who are to inspect the Cadis.

5. Cadis, Judges, to punish Offenders, there is one in every City.

6. Naipi, Young Judges, or Candidates for the Office.

7. Hogi, who write Books, and teach Sciences.

8. Calfi, who read unto them that Write.

9. Sosti, Young Students, or Novices in the Law. Some add

Sophi, Singers of Psalms, etc.

Ancient Heathen.
1. Pontifex Maximus, the highest of the Chief Priests, who was to appoint the
Ceremonies belonging to the Worship of the Gods.

2. Flamen, or High Priest, who was named according to the Gods whom they
served, as Hamen Martialis, Hamen Dialis, Humen Quirinalis, etc.


3. Priests, 1. Of Cybele; Curetes, Corybantes, Galli. 2. Of Ceres and Bacchus;
Fratres Arvales, who offered Sacrifices (Ambarvales Hostias) and Judged about
the bounds of Fields. 3. Of Mars; Salii, who were to keep the Ancile. 4. Of
Pan; Lupercales, etc. 5. Of Jupiter; Druids, in use amongst the Gauls.


Curiones, were Parish Priests, or Curates, Two for a Curia; Fifty Curiae in
Rome; over these was Curio Maximus.

4. Priestesses of Vesta, Vestal Virgins, Six or Four in number, who were to
attend the Sacrifices of Ops, or Bona Dea, and to keep a Fire continually
burning, for the safety of the Empire; as God has set Stars in the Firmament
for the good of the World.

Modern Heathen.
1. The Persees have 1. A Dostoor, or High Priest, who seldom appears openly;
but when he does, is much Reverenced. 2. Daroes, or Harboods, inferior
Priests, who are by their Law to dwell near, and abide much in their, Eggarees
(Temples) to give Advice unto any that shall repair unto them.


2. In Guinea the Priest is called Fetissero.

3. In Ceilon the Priests are of three Orders;

1. Priests of the Buddon-God, which live in the Vehars (Temples) proper to
that God. These are, 1. Tirinaxes, Superiors. 2. Gonni.

2. Koppuhs, Priests to the other Gods, who are to offer in the Temple Dewal,
boiled Rice, and other Victuals to the Idol.

3. Jaddeses, Priests of the Spirits (Diautdu^) who serve in the Covelt
(Temples) built at their own charge. They visit the Sick, when sent for, and
offer a red Cock to the Devil.

4. In Japan, Bonzaes, fifteen or twenty to a Pagod.

5. In Fermosa, Inibs, Priestesses (only Women), who offer Prayers and
Sacrifices in a most extravagant and obscene manner. Mandilslo.

6. In the Philippine-Islands their Priests are mostly Women, Sorcerers. Rosse.

7. In Pegu, Talapoi.

Diabolical.
Dr. Dee, in his Magical Transactions made use of one Edward Kelle, whom he
calls his Seer, or Skryer; afterward his Son, Arthur Dee; who in a round
Stone, (or consecrated Crystal,) saw, and heard all the Shapes, and Figures,
and Voices of the Magical Apparitions.

It Is hard to give a distinct Account of all those Persons which the Devil
makes use of, in a more than ordinary manner, for the promoting of his
Interest, and doing Service to him. We shall mention some of the chief.

1. Magicians, by 1. Stones, as Dr. Dee. 2. Rings, as Excestus. 3.
Optic-Glasses. 4. Riddles, or Sieves. 5. Figures. 6. Dreams, etc. 7. Charms,
Spells, etc.


2. Common Witches and Wizards, who have Communication with their Familiar
Spirits.

3. Fortune Tellers, Prognosticators, Astrologers.

Jewish.
1. Nethinims, from (...) to give, because given to the Service of the Temple.
Their Office was.

1. to hew Wood. 2. Draw Water.
These were Gibeonites.

2. Viri Stationarii, (...), who were to stand by, during the Oblation, and to
carry the Gift for the rest of the People.

They serve in their courses, of which there were twenty four.

Some mention Archi-synagogus, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue.

N. B. Dr. Lightfoot says, There were Seven Readers appointed in their
Synagogues, who when the Angel of the Church, or Minister of the Congregation,
called them out, did read.

Now to every Synagogue belong six. Officers.

1. The Summas, or Sacristan, who keeps clean the Synagogue, and trims the
Lamps. 2. The Pernas, who provides the Wine given to the Youth, at the entrance
and end of their Sabbaths and Festivals. 3. Mari-catab, who folds, and unfolds
the Law, etc. 4. He who bears the Law in Procession through the Synagogue. 5.
The Elhaim, who touch the two Staves of the Law, called the Trees of Life, on
which the Law is rolled, when carried. 6. The Chesau, or Precator. Dr. Addison.
Christian.
2. (...), Inferior Ministers, or Subordinate Officers.

1. Acoluthus, who was to attend the Bishop, as a Witness of his Life: or, as
some say, to set up Lights at the reading of the Gospel.

2. Exorcist, who was to attend the Catechumens and Euergumeni, and rehearse a
Form of Prayer over them, in the out-parts of the Church, the People in the
mean while praying within; also to Catechize.

3. The Reader, whose Office was to stand near the Ambo, and read the Portions
of Scripture.

Julian the Apostate was one.

4. Ostiarii, to keep the doors of the Temple, and shut out Heretics, Jews,
Gentiles.

Some add Fossarli, Overseers of the Grave, Cantores, Laboratores, etc.

5. Deaconesses, who were to help Women at Baptism; to visit and instruct
Women, etc.

Such were Phoebe, and Olympias, in C. P. etc.

This is all out of Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity.

A Parallel between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government of the Romans.

A Justice of Peace a City, a Bishop.

A Proconsul, a Province, Archbishop.

A Lieutenant, a Diocese, a Primate.

The Emperor, the Empire, Christ Jesus.

N. B. St. Hierom accounts a Bishop and Priest all one. ad Tit. c. 1.

And Clem. reckons but three degrees of the Clergy, viz. Priest, Deacon, and
Minister. Clem. Ep. 2. de Conc. Di. 3.

Mohammedan.
The Director of their Prayers, who (among the Turks) is called Imam; but among
the Persians, Pichnamaz; he says the Prayers, and makes the rest say them, and
therefore he always stands foremost, that the rest behind may see what he does.

Se^thi, as the Turks call them, or Seriffi, as the Moors, are such as descend
from Mahomet.

Amongst the Persians their Spiritual Officers are, 1. The Sedre, who is chief
in Spirituals, and sometimes promoted to be Eatmad Doulet, i. e. Chief in
Temporals. 2. Scheik el Seilo^, i. e. Sheik of the Law. 3. Cadi. Both these are
named by the King, and Judge of Controversies.


These two last decide all Points of Religion, and make all Contracts,
Testaments, and other public Deeds; Judges of Divorces, and all civil
Processes. M. de Thev.

Among the Turks and Persians are,

Muezim, qu. Sextons that call to Prayers from the tops of the Minarets; some
call them Talismans.

Choza, Elders which execute the Service, and Preach.

Modecis, the Governor of an Hospital.

Antippi -- On Friday in the midst of the Temple, in a place thirty steps high,
read something of the Life of Mahomet; after which,

Two little Boys sing certain Prays. After which one of the Antippi, with a
Lance and Scimiter, exhorts to defense of Religion.

Ancient Heathen.
1. Duumviri (afterward 10, then 15.) appointed by Tarquin Superbus, to keep
and interpret the Books of the Sibylls; and especially of Cumana, (which were
preserved in a stone Chest in the Capitol) and to oversee the secular
Solemnities.

2. Soothsayers.

1. Augurs, who did in a high Place, with a crooked Staff, (lituus) limit a
space in the Air, to observe the flying of Birds, or chirping (tripudium) and
thence to foretell things to come. 2. Aruspices, who did inspect the Entrails of
Beasts sacrificed, for the same intent. 3. Auspices, qu. Avispices.
The College of them was at first 3, afterward 4, then 9, and at last 15.
Their Office was to consult the Gods in doubtful cases, offer Sacrifices, make
Prayers (Effata) etc. never concluding upon less than Two Signs,

3. F^ciales, whose Office was to offer Peace, or proclaim War, by casting upon
the Enemies land a bloody Lance, or turning a Ram loose into their borders:
Upon the Conclusion of a Peace to offer a Hog for Sacrifice, (praying that
whosoever broke the Articles, might perish, as that Hog;) upon breach of Oath, to
offer a Hog for Sacrifice. The High Priest among them was called Pater patratus.

4. Aeditui kept the Temples and Keys.

5. Pope, Victimarii, assisted in the Sacrifices.

6. Epulones were Overseers of the Feasts.

7. Preficae, Women that wept for the Dead.

8. Vespae disposed of the Urns of the dead.

Modern Heathen.
In Siam, in the City of India, are above 30000 Ecclesiastics under the
direction of the High Priest of the grand Pagod of the City of India.

Mandelslo, 200 Bonzes, says Tavernier.

In Guiney the Priest is called Sofo. Idem.

In China are four Orders of Religious Men, whereof some are clad in black,
some in white, and some in gray. Idem.

Each of these Orders has its General, called, Tricon; and he, under him, his
Provincials, who make Visitations.

In Virginia the Pagan Priests were clothed with Garments of Skins, and their
Hair cut like a Comb on their Crowns. Rosse.

Their Chief Priest was adorned with Feathers and Weasels Tails; and his face
painted as ugly as the Devils. Idem.

The Priest of the Gaurs in Persia is called Cazi.

In Tunquin the Bonzes wear a Necklace of an hundred Beads, very big, and made
of Wood; in their Hands they carry a Staff, headed with a Bird of varnished
Wood. Tavernier.

Diabolical.
5. Enthusiasts, such as the Fanatic Priests among the old Heathens, who gave
the Responces of the Oracles.

6. Possessed Persons, Daemoniacks, such as are mentioned in the Gospel.

7. Sorcerers, black Witches, as some call them.

8. Exorcists, or white Witches, as some will have them.

7. Common Juglers.

8. Empiricks, Quacks, such as Paracelsus.

Concerning all which I have not much to say; for I care not to search deep
into the Mysteries of this confused and dark Religion: Nor if I had more
knowledge in it, should I think fit to communicate the Secrets of it to public
View.

6. Qualifications required in Church Officers.
Jewish.
1. THE High Priest must be of the Line of Aaron's Firstborn.

The Firstborn being Priest in every Family till that Time.

2. Priests of the second Order were to be of the rest of Aaron's Posterity.

Both of them, (Priest, and High Priest) must have no Blindness, Lameness, flat
Nose, superfluous Member, broken Foot or Hand, broken stones, crook'd Back,
blemish in his Eye, Scab, Scurf, must be no Dwarf.

3. Levites were to be of the Posterity of Levi.

4. Nethinims -- of the Race of Gibeonites.

Christian.
1. Archbishops chosen out of the Bishops; given to Hospitality, apt to teach,
not given to Wine, no Strikers.

2. Bishops, 1. Out of the Priests. 2. Blameless, no Brawlers. 3. The Husband
of one Wife. 4. Vigilant, not covteous. 5. Sober, not greedy of lucre. 6. Of
good behavior, patient, no striker. 7. Ruling their House well; not a Novice;
of good Report.


3. Bishops and Priests, often chosen out of the Monks.

They must be, (according to the Apost. Can.)

1. Not twice married. 2. Nor having a Concubine. 3. Nor Marrying a Widow; or a
Harlot, or one divorced; or a Handmaid; or a Stage Player; or a Brother's
Widow; or a Brother's Daughter; or two Sisters. 4. Nor guilty of Fornication,
or Adultery. 5. Nor serving in Suretyships. 6. Nor that has cut off his
Privy-Members. 7. Nor perjured. 8. Nor a Thief. 9. Nor a Soldier. 10. Nor
Symoniac. 11. Nor Demoniac. 12. Nor lately converted from Heathenism.
N. B. The Muscovite Priests hold themselves obliged to be in a State of
Matrimony, before they take Orders; and are to Marry a Maid, not a Widow, nor
of a scandalous Life. For which they cite 1 Timothy 3.

The Abyssines are much of the same opinion.

4. Deacons must be, 1. Grave. 2. Not double-tongued. 3. Not given to much
Wine. 4. Not greedy of filthy Lucre. 5. Blameless. 6. Husbands of one Wife. 7.
Ruling their Children and own houses well.


N. B. None, who had any Heretics or Infidels in his Family, was to be admitted
to the Office of Bishop, Priest, or Deacon. Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 18.

Mahometism.
1. Mufti's are to be Wise, and worthy Men, and of a sincere Life, according to
their Law. They may Marry.

2. Cadies are to be of sufficient skill, and good Life.

Ancient Heathen.
1. Flamines Majores, were to be chosen out of the Nobility.

The Flamen Dialis must 1. Be Married. 2. Not Married twice. 3. Not give Fire
out of his House. 4. Be Trimmed only by a Freeman with Brass Scissars.


2. -- Minores, out of the Commons.

3. Curiones were to be, 1. Fifty years old. 2. Of a Life unspotted. 3. Of a
Body unmaimed.


4. Galli (the Priests of Cybele) were to Geld themselves with a Fish-shell.

None Freeborn were to be of this Office.

5. Duumviri were chosen out of the Patricii, or Nobles.

6. Augurs in Servius Tullius's time, were to be of the Patricii; afterward
others were added out of the Commonalty.

7. The Priests of Bellona were to offer up a Victim of their own Blood.

Among the Druids, upon the Death of any of the Chief Priests, whosoever was
exalted in Dignity amongst the rest, was chosen by Suffrage.

Modern Heathen.
In Ceylon none were made Tirinaxes, but persons of Noble Birth, well Bred, and
Learned.

The Koppuhs also were taken from amongst the Hondrews (the Nobles.)

The Priests of the Buddou God might not, 1. Lay their hand to any manner of
work. 2. Nor Marry. 3. Nor touch Women. 4. Nor eat more than one Meal a day,
(unless Fruit, Rice and Water.) 5. Nor drink Wine,


If they Marry, they must lay down their Order

The Koppuhs are to wear clean Cloths and wash themselves, before they go to
their Service.

The Priests of the Buddou God will eat any manner of Flesh, that is Killed for
them; but will have no hand in the Death of it. Knox.

In Siam the most Learned and Accomplished are chosen, who are to vow Chastity,
during their Priesthood. Mandelslo.

In China the King Elects the General according to his Merit. Idem.

Among the Samodyes, He that is eldest is their Priest. Rosse.

In Sumatra the Priests are tied to nourish their Hair, and have smooth Faces
like Women; they gild their Teeth; and are burnt in Pitch, if they have carnal
Commerce with a Woman. Idem.

Diabolical.
A Gentleman of Norimberg had a Crystal, which had this Virtue; If he had
desired to know any thing past or future, that concerned him, or any other, (in
most things) let a young Boy ( Castus, one that was not yet of Age, etc.) look
into it, he should first see a Man in it, so and so apparelled, and afterward
what he desired.

N. B. No other but a Boy so qualified, could see any thing in it. This
Crystal became very famous in those parts; yea, some learned Men came to it,
to be satisfied in doubtful Points, and had their Questions resolved. Yet at
last it was (deservedly) broken in pieces by Camerarius his Friend. Dr. Mer.
Casaubon out of Camerarius his Proem to Plutarch de Oracul.

Some specious Qualifications may sometimes be required; but the Devil does not
insist on them always in good earnest. Edward Kelly, who was Skryer to Dr. Dee,
was, 1. A known Conjurer in Lancashire, forced to fly out of his Country for
Necromancy. 2. Often Drunk. 3. Often in Passion. 4. Revengeful, furious, and a
very disorderly Person, as Dr. Dee himself confesses; taxed as a Felon, for
coining of Money, etc.


7. Ordination of Church Officers.
Jewish.
1. PRiests were thus consecrated; 1. They must put their Garments on. 2. Be
presented unto the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle. 3. Washed with Water. 4.
Offer up certain Sacrifices, whereof some pieces were put into the Priests
hands. 5. The tip of the right Ear, the Thumb of the right Hand, the great Toe
of the right Foot, were to be sprinkled all with the Blood of a Ram. 6.
Anointed, The High Priest with a costly Chrism poured on him. The second
Priests only with this Oil mixed with the Blood of the Sacrifice. 7. All this
before the Congregation. 8. They were to stay in the door of the Tabernacle
seven days.


2. Levites, were consecrated by imposition of hands. Numb. 8.24.

The Levites were 1. Initiated at a month old. 2. Consecrated at 25. 3. Entered
upon the ministration at the age of 30. 4. Continued till 50.


Ancient Christian.
Here observe.

1. The persons ordaining, viz.

1. Bishops ordained all orders undr Bishops. 2. All the Bishops of the
province present or consenting ordained the Bishop. The Metropolitan
confirming, him.
2. The Approbation of the parsons ordained.

The People of the place at all Ordinations were, 1. Present; and 2. Ratifying
the Action with their Consent and Approbation; it being seldom or never done
without their Presence and Suffrage, v. Constit. Appl. l. 8. c. 4. Cypr. Ep. 68.

To this end the Bishop used to propund, and publish the Names of them who took
Holy Orders, beforehand, that the people might interpose, if they had any
thing to object.

When the Ordination was more remote, or private, they were then to bring
Testimonials.

3. Examination. They examined their fitness, enquired severely what had been
their course of life from their Youth, etc. v. page 30.

4. The Age of persons to be ordained, 1. Bishops were to be, 35 at least.
Photius. (...), App. Constit. l. 2. c. 1. 2. Priests were to be 30 at least.
Council. Neoc. c. 11. Conc. Agd. 3. Deacons were to be 25. 4. Deaconesses 40.


5. The Ceremony of lifting up the Hands, which was a Ceremony used at Athens,
and in some of the State of Greece, in Election of Magistrates. And amongst the
Jews, there was 1. (...), Consecration, viz. of Bishops, Priests and Deacons.
2. (...), Blessing; Hands being laid on them only, as in Absolution of
Penitents: Thus Subdeacons, etc. Readers and Deaconesses were set apart.


Mohammedan.
1. The Mufti is chosen by the Sultan.

2. The Cadi's, or Judges, are first examined by the Cadilesquiri, or Doctors
of Law; and if they are found sufficiently qualified, in respect of their
conversation and skill, they are Sworn to do Justice, and give Account of their
Charge, when called to it.

3. All the Inferior Orders of the Priests are chosen by the People. Purchase.

Ancient Heathen.
The Flamines were created by the People (Comitiis Curiatis) at their
Parish-Meetings, or Courts.

(...). Hesiod. Oper. etc. p. l. 436. Si hoc in ministro requirit Hesiodus, ut
Juvenem bobus praeficere noluerit, quanto minus Ecclesiasticis and rebus
publicis praeficeret. In Notis.

Shaving of the Head was used by the Babylonian, Priests; as also of the Beard.
Rosse.

And the Egyptians. Idem.

Modern Heathen.
The Tirinaxe's in Ceylon, were made by the King.

The General, or Tricon in China, is nominated by the King.

The Superiors and Guardians in the Monasteries are nominated by the
Provincial.

In Pegu, the Talipan is carried first about the Streets on Horseback, with
Pipes and Drums; then upon Men's Shoulders to his House. Rosse.

In Mexico, the Priests were all Anointed, and were their Hair long, for they
never cut it. Idem. and Purchase ex Acosta.

The Monks of China are shaven.

Diabolical.
Dr. Dee tells us, That in this Method he Consecrated his Son Arthur, to the
Office of Seeing and Skrying, from God, and by God's Assignment.

1. I brought the Child to the Holy Table, being in Order of the Furniture
thereto belonging.

2. I set before him the Stone in the Frame, (my first Sanctified Stone.

3. And caused him, on his Knees, to say the Prayer which I made.

O Almighty Everlasting God, have pity on my Father, John Dee, and on me Arthur
Dee. Quicken, Instruct, etc. Vid. Dr. Dees's Actions with Spirits. A. 1587.
Apr. 15.

4. And I also prayed to the Child's hearing, other Prayers to God for the
purpose in hand.

8. Sacerdotal, etc. Vestments, or Distinctions.
Jewish.
1. THE Garments of the High Priest;

1. In his ordinary Ministration.

1. Linen Breeches next his Skin.

2. A Linen Coat over that.

3. A Girdle embroidered, of Linen, Purple, and Scarlet.

4. A blue Robe, with 72 Bells of Gold, and as many Pomegranates, purple and
blue, upon the Skirts.

5. A Linen Ephod, wrought with Gold, Purple and Scarlet, girded with a
curious Girdle: On the Shoulders two fair Beryll Stones, with the Names of the
12 Tribes engraven thereon.

6. A Linen Breast Plate, wrought with Gold, Purple and Scarlet, fastened to
the Ephod with Gold Chains. On this were 12 Stones, with the Names of the 12
Tribes.

Here also was the Vrim and Thummim.

7. A Linen Miter, 16 Cubits, wrapped about his Head.

8. A Gold Plate, tied with a blue Lace to the Front of the Miter, whereon was
writ, Holiness to the Lord.

2. In his Extraordinrry, viz. when he entered into the Holy of Holies.

And then 1. The Linen Breeches, 2. Linen Girdle, 3. Linen Coat, 4. Linen
Miter, were all white.


2. Inferior Priests had Breeches, Coat, Girdle, Bonnet, all Linen.

3. Singers (who were Levites) used Linen Garments.

Christian.
Concerning the Garments of the Christian Clergy, Authors differ.

1. That they wore a white Garment, seems plain, from 1. S. Hierom. --
Episcopus, Presbyter and Diaconus and reliquus Ordo Ecclesiasticus in
administratione sacrificiorum candida Vest procedit. B. Jewel.

2. S. Chrysostom. who speaking to the Clergy, says, -- This is your dignity,
your Garland, not that you walk through the Church in white Apparel, etc. Idem.

2. S. Hierom says, "They -- of the Church at Bethlehem, used no difference in
Apparel.

S. August. to his Clerks, -- Let not your Apparel be notable.

Pope C^lestia I. says -- Discernendi sumus a plebe, Doctrina, non vest.

3. It was decreed by Pope Eusebius, -- Sacrificium Altaris non in Serico
panno, aut tincto, quisquam celebrare praesumat, sed in puro lineo ab Episcopo
consecrato. Karrauz.

4. Diaconi -- Dalmaticis utantur, and pallis linostimis. Can. 6. Council. Romans
Idem.

Dalmatica signifies a Coat with Sleeves, also a Priest's, or Bishop's outward
Vest, Cope, Surplice. Dr. Littleton.

Palla, a Pall, a short Garment like a Cloak with Sleeves, called a Pall-Coat,
not reaching very low.

The Papaes, or Greek-Priests are always clad in black, and wear a black Cap,
with a List of white Cloth about it, and a piece of black Cloth fastened to it
within, which hangs down upon the back. -- They wear long Hair. M. de Thevenot.

Christians of S. John wear long Hair, and a little Cross of Needle Work.

The Abyssine-Priests always carry a Cross abroad with them, which is almost
all the distinction which they have. Job Ludolph.

The Hungarian-Priests wear Purple. D. Browns.

When the Muscovite-Clergy walk in the Streets, they have a Staff (Posok)
forked at the end, in the form of a right Angle, which serves for a Crosier.
They wear no Rings, lie on no Beds, wear no Drawers or Shirts of Linen, but of
Flannen. Their ordinary Habit a black Cassock, etc. D. of Holst. Emb.

The Armenian Patriarch at Ispahan, at Service-time, had a Cope of Cloth of
Silver, with Flowers, of Gold, beset with great Pearls, and a Miter of the
same, covered with round Pearls. Idem.

Mohammedan.
The Mullies, or Moolaas, are distinguished only with their beards, which they
wear long -- this in the Mogul's Country.

The Dervishes use a very mean Apparel, on their Heads a Cap of white Felt,
much like our Night Caps.

The Cadilescher is clothed in Chamlet, Sattem Silk, Damask or Velvet, of
seemly color, as Russet, or Tawney; and of purple-coloured Cloth with long
sleeves. Their Tulipan on their head is very great, sharp in the midst, of
Purple or Russet Color, thicker and deeper than others; their beards great:
they ride on Geldings, with Purple Foot-clothes fringed; and when they go on
Foot, they go slowly, to represent a Gravity. Purchase.

Ancient Heathen.
1. The H. Priest of Jupiter wore a White (...) (Albogalerws) figured with
wingech Thunder, of (...) Round Form, without which he might not go out of his
House.

Also he wore a Purple Gown, called Trabea, mixed with Scarlet.

2. The Priests of the Supernal Gods wore Purple, as did also the Augurs in
performing of their Office.

The Persian Priest used no Vestments, but a Tiara for his Head, clothed with
Myrtle.

3. The Priests of Pluto were clothed in Black Hence the Priests of Baal are in
Scripture called, (...), Pullata vest induti. Pagnin.

4. The Priests of Ceres wore White Garments and Shoes: Alba decent Cererem,
vestes Cerealibus albas
Sumite --
Ovid.

At Hierapolis were 300 Priests, who ministered all in White, with their Hands
covered, and sacrificed twice a day; with singing and musical Instruments, if
to Juno; but to Jupiter with none. Rosse.

Their H. Priest wore purple, and a Golden Mitre. Idem.

The Arabians were clothed with Linen, Mitres and Sandals.

Modern Heathen.
In Ceilon, the Tirinaxa's and Gonni have both the same Habit, viz. a Yellow
Coat, gathered together about their Waste, which comes over the left shoulder,
girt about with a Belt of fine Pack-thread; their heads are shaved and bare;
And they carry in their hands a round Fan, with a wooden handle to keep off the
Sun. Capt. Knox.

The Herboods of the Persees is usualy with a yellow Scarf, and thin Turbant
on his Head. Sr. Th. Herbert.

In Calicut at Sacrificing a Cock to the New Moon, the Priest was Attired in
Lawn, with a sharp Silver Knife in his hand, his Arms and Legs after the
Morisco Mode, with Bells, or round Siler Plates Jingling. Idem.

In Siam the Ecclesiastics have their Crowns shaved, and wear Yellow Linen
Clothes. Mandelslo.

In China all the Religious Men are Clothed in Serge, but distinguished by
colors, black, white, and a dark gray: the General is clothed in Silk. Idem.

Among the Samodyes the Priest has a white Garland on his Head, and Ribs and
Teeth of Fishes, of wild Beasts, hanging about him. Rosse.

In Mexico a Crown of Rich Feathers, Golden Pendants, etc.

Diabolical.
It is not to be expected, that Satan should distinguish his chief Ministers,
or Agents in this Mock-Religion, by any visible or external Badg; That were the
way to discover, and expose them to shame and punishment, and to destroy his
own cause. Nor can I tell, whether they have any Note of Distinction among
themselves in their own Society. But I remember, Mr. Glanvil relates out of the
confession of one or more Witches, that sometimes the Devil had assembled them
by Night in a Church, and himself in the habit of a Minister, apparelled in
black, with a little band, preached to them out of the Pulpit.

Delrius also speaks of a Man in Sacerdotal habit and ornaments at a Midnight
Assembly of Witches See before in the Chapt. of Dedication of Temples, etc.

In Amboyna there is not a Master of a Family that has not a Vesture
extraordinary, and a Ring carefully kept in the House, for a perpetual
Testimony of his Alliance to the Devil. Mandelslo.

Holiness of Priests, etc.
Jewish.
1. The High Priest might not, 1. Mourn, i. e. express his Mourning, 1. By
uncovering his head. 2. Renting the Garment, to wit, from the bosom downward,
for any of his dead Kindred. 2. Nor marry a Widow, or Divorced, or a Harlot. 3.
Nor go in to any Dead body. 4. When he entered into the Holy of Holies, he must
make atonement by sacrifice for himself, his house and the people. 5. His
daughter playing the whore, must be burnt.


2. The Priests Inferior might not 1. Mourn for other, than Father, Mother,
Son, Daughter, Brother, Sister that had no husband. Nor, 2. Drink wine, or
strong drink, when they were to go into the Tabernacle.


3. Both High and Low were in their uncleaness to abstain from ministration,
under penalty of cutting off,

If defiled.

1. By Leprosy. 2. A Running Issue, 3. Touching any thing unclean, creeping
thing, etc.
In such a case they were to cleanese themselves by washing their flesh with
water: And were accounted unclean until the Evening.

Christian.
The Reader is desired to excuse me for inserting these Remarks somewhat
improperly here, which I did, because I wanted room elsewhere.

The Armenian Archbishops live only upon pulse. M. Tavernier l. 4. c. 10.

The Armenian Priest, if he has swallowed a drop of water in the morning, must
not say Mass. The Bishops never eat flesh or fish above 4 times in a year.

As well Monks as Priests amongst the Armenians, when they are to say Mass,
must remain 5 days in the Church, without either going to bed, or touching any
thing, with their hands, unless the spoon wherewith they eat their meat: Nor
must they spit or blow their noses. The next 5 days after saying Mass, they
must eat nothing but Eggs without butter, or Rice with water and Salt. M.
Tavernier. l. 4. c. 10.

The Armenian, who designs his Son for Priesthood, carries him to the Priest,
who puts the Cope upon him; this ceremony is repeated several times in several
years, till he come to be of age to say Mass. After the fourth time of putting
on the Chasuble or open Cope, they marry him; for all marry once, but if they
marry again, they must give over saying Mass. At 18 years of age they are
capable of saying Mass. Afterward the Archbishop or Bishops invest him with
all the habits of a Priest: After which he goes into the Church and departs not
for a whole year, being altogether employed in the service of the Church. The
Priest who is married, after saying Mass must not return home to eat or drink
or lie with his wife, for 5 days. M. Tavernier. l. 4. c. 10.

The Muscovy Priest, that has known his wife the night before, or kissed a
dead body, or been at the interment of any, may not communicate next day.

If a Muscovy Priest marries a wife, that has been defiled, he must lose her
or his Priesthood; and for this end search is made the first, night of marriage.

The Muscovite Priest, that lies with his wife in Lent, is suspended for a
year. D. of Holstein's Emb. Travels.

He must be the husband of one wife, and one of good life. Upon his being a
widower, he administers the Sacrament no longer. Idem.

The Clergy among the Indian Christians now marry but once, the Laity twice.
Sr. Th. Herb.

The Greek Priests neither shave nor cut their hair, but wear it as long as it
will grow; and many of them have thick heads of hair; but those that have
least, receive most refreshment here. Dr. Brown's Trav.

Mohammedan.
Among the Mahometan-Priests, the Dervices are, accounted the strictest, whose
Holiness consists especially in 1. Their Washing. 2. Their Garments. 3. Beards.
4. Prayers, etc. 5. Singing. 6. Dancing. 7. Voluntary Mortifications and
Hardships.


Concerning which, see more up and down in this Book.

As for the other Orders, most of the highest Pretenders to Devotion, are
guilty of much Hypocrisy, as will be spoken of in its due place.

Ancient Heathen.
1. The Priest's Garments were to be pure, and clean from Spots.

Puraque in Vest Sacerdos. Virg. l. 12.

The Old Babylonian-Priests shaved their Heads and Beards.

2. They were to be clean themselves.

1. Free from Murder, etc. 2. Sober and Temperate.
The Egyptian-Priests were sparing in Diet, to a wonder: They abstained from
Flesh and Wine, eat little Bread, refused Eggs and Milk, used only Oil and
Herbs; Fasted three days. Text. They wash thrice in the Day, and twice in the
Night.

The Persian Magi used no Food, but Flour and Herbs.

The Indian Gymnosophists used only Apples or Flour.

3. Chaste.

The Priests of Cybele were to make themselves Eunuchs.

Some used a Stone to castrate themselves with.

Others, as the Hierophante of the Athenians, drank Hemlock for the same
purpose.

Women that were to initiate, strewn their Bed with Vine-Leaves.

They were to abstain nine Days and Nights at least, from all Uncleanness,
before Sacrificing.

Perque novem noctes Venerem, tactusque virorum, In vetitis memorant.

I am of Opinion, That he who comes to do Sacrifice, or meddle with the Laver,
or have the charge of Divine Service, must be Holy, not for a set Time, or
number of Days, but all his Life. Demosth. in Orat. contr. Timocr.

In case of Pollution they were to wash their Hands.

Bapte, the Priestesses of Cotytto at Athens, were washed in hot Water, before
admission to her filthy Sacrifices, called Orgia.

Modern Heathen.
In Siam the Ecclesiastics are very exemplary in their Lives.

1. They are to be Learned. 2. Vow Chastity; but in case of Inability to keep
their Vows, may quit the Priesthood. 3. They are prohibited the Company of
Women, on pain of being burnt alive. 4. Are to say Service regularly Morning
and Evening. Mandelslo. 5. They go still barefooted, and in poor Clothes.
Rosse. 6. Outwardly they are very modest, and never seen to be angry.
Tavernier.
In Paria, Guiana, and Debaiba, the Priests are Stoned, or Burnt, if they marry
against their Vow of Chastity. Rosse.

Diabolical.
Here is little Holiness to be expected, unless in Disguise and Hypocrisy; and
in such a way when it serves for his Interest, the Devil can insist upon
Holiness too.

For he shifts his Qualifications according to his Scene. He commonly requires
in Magicians Curiosity, in Witches Malice, in Enthusiasts Superstition: In all,
so much Impiety as may null their Christian Profession, and make void their
Baptismal Vows: And if it may be, an express Retractation of Them, and a New
Covenant made and signed between Him and Them.

10. Maintenance, Respect and Privileges of the Clergy.
Jewish.
1. THE Priests had for Maintenance;

1. Cities and Suburbs.

2. First Fruits.

1. Of Trees; i. e. the Fruit of the Fourth Year, the three first Years not
being gathered.

2. Of every Year's Increase, viz. First Fruits.

1. In the Sheaf, in the beginning of Harvest.

2. In two Wave-Loaves, in the end, at Pentecost.

3. Of the Dough, a twenty fourth part.

4. Of the Threshing-Floor, a sixtieth part. Some gave a fortieth part. The
Phariseer between the thirtieth and fiftieth.

5. Of Men, to be redeemed with 5 Shekels of Silver.

6. Of Beasts, which were to be Sacrificed, and their Flesh to be the Priests.

3. Sacrifices, Deuteronomy. 18.1, 2.

4. Tithes.

1. From the Levites, viz. a tenth part out of the Tithe paid to them, after
the First Fruits of the Threshing-Floor were paid, called the Ti^^^ of Tithes.

2. A Second Tithe, paid in kind, or in Money, a fifth part being added: So
that what was 10 in 100, in kind, changed into Money, was 12 in 100.

5. Privileges.

The Whole amounts to a Sixth Part. Scaliger.

2. The Levites had

1. Tithes.

2. A Share in the Sacrifices and Love Feasts. For,

The Second Tithe was brought to Jerusalem, and there a feast made for Priests
and Levites. Every third year 'twas spent at home on Levites, Fatherless,
Widows.

Christian.
1. In the first ages nothing probably, but, 1. The common contributions at
their usual assemblies: Every one giving according to their ability or
devotion. 2. The offerings made out of the improvement of their lands. The
first fruits being partly offered at the Church, partly sent home to the
Bishops and Presbyters. Apost. Can. 3.4.


The care of all which was committed to the Bishop or President. Ibid. Can. 41.
and by him disposed of, for the use of, 1. The Clergy. 2. The Poor. 3. The
Church necessities.


2. Afterward, times growing better, there were fixed Revenues, houses and
lands settled. Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5. Where mention is made of possessions
belonging to the whole body or community of Christians, e. g. Houses and
Gardens, etc.

3. In Constantine's time, a portion was assigned to the Church, 1. Out of the
Tributes of every City, which were yearly paid into the Exchequer. 2. The
Estates and inheritances of Martyrs dying without children, or banished. 3.
Salaries out of the public Corn. 4. The Emperor gave liberty to the bounty of
people, which former Emperors had restain'd. 5. He exempted the Priests from
all Civil Offices.


At this time the Laics, among the Indian-Christians, pay their Decimae, their
Tenths. Sir. Tho. Herbert.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans give their Priests, 1. Honor and Respect. My Author says,
that himself found much respect among the Hindoes and Mahometans, because they
looked upon him, as a Padre; and also with the Mogul himself, who when he came
first before him, bid him, by one of his Grandees welcome thither, and bid him
ask any thing of him, and he would give it him, etc. M. de Thevenot. 2. A
Comfortable maintenance, and that freely, without grudging.


The Mulaes have great Salaries.

Purchase says, the Priests have stipends allowed by the Emperors, but so
little, that they often use writing of books and handy-crafts for their living.

So soon as the Gr. Seignior perceives the Mufti, he rises up, advances some
steps, and salutes him very respectfully.

By the Mahometan's law it is not lawful to put a Mufti to death. M. de.
Thevenot.

Even Christian Priests and Monks and Jewish Rabbis are exempted from paying
Karadge or contribution yearly to the Grand Seignior. Idem.

The chief Temple in Fez has 200 ducats a day for revenue. Rosse.

Ancient Heathen.
1. The Priests had,

1. Tithes, not for themselves only, but for Sacrifices also, and common uses.

The A^^^nians dedicated their Tithes for Divine Sacrifices, and common
benefit. Diog. Laert. lib. 1.

Plautus makes mention of Tithes paid to Hercules.

Xenophon says, Of every litter of Pigs, one was due to the Priest, that when
he pleased to offer to the Gods, he might not want a Sacrifice. de Rep. Laced.

The Sabeans offered the Tithes of their Spices, to the Idol Sabis.

Cyrus, at the taking of Sardis, sequestered the Tithe of the Spoil to Mars and
Pallas.

2. First Fruits.

The Hyberborei (Northern People) sent their First Fruits to Apollo at Delos.
Plin.

The Druids are wont to be absent from War, neither do they pay Tributes; they
are exempt from Warfare, and have immunity of all things. Coes. (...). Bell.
Gall.

The Pontifex Max. might ascend the Capitol in his (...), which none else might
do.

(...) was he to render an account of any of his Actions.

1. The Pontifex Max. not subject to the Magistrate. 2. The Flamen Dialis might
for that day protect any Malefactor that escaped to him. 3. Augurs, though
convict of heinous Crimes, yet were not punished, or put out of Office. 4.
Vestal Virgins never walked abroad, but with an Iron Scepter in their Hands,
and whatsoever Malefactor met them fortuitously, escaped Punishment.
Modern Heathen.
The Persees at this day pay Tithes to their Priesthood.

The Behedin (or Laymen) pay to the Distoore, or chief Priest; and in his
Absence, to the Her-^ood, or Priest; or lastly, to the Daroo, or Churchmen,
spiritual Officers amongst them.

The Bramens in the East Indies take what they please of the Offerings made to
the Idols; pick out of the funeral Ashes what Gold and Silver they can find;
are much respected in Malabar, never hurt by Enemies in War, as other People
are. M. de Thev.

The Koppuhs in Ceylon enjoy a piece of Land that belongs to the Dewal, where
they Officiate; and that is all their benefit, unless they steal somewhat that
is dedicated to the Gods; and therefore they follow Husbandry and other
Employments. Knox.

The Priests of the Buddou God enjoy great Revenues of Church Lands, without
paying Scot or Lot, or Taxes to the King: And wherever they go, the People
bow down to them; but themselves bow to none. They have the honor of carrying
the Tallipot (a broad Leaf for shelter) with the broad end foremost; and have a
Matt, with a white Cloth upon a Stool laid for them, wherever they come, to
sit upon. Honors used only to the Kings besides. Knox.

Diabolical.
The Devil promises lavishly to his Factors, as he did to our Savior; all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glory of them; but his golden Mountains are
often as vain in their Effects, as Aesop's pregnant teeming Mountain in its
product.

Dr. Dee and Kelly, after all the encouragement given them in quest of the
Philosophers Stone, died poor; and we seldom see Wizards or Witches rich; and
it is well for us, that the God of Heaven is pleased to limit Satan in the
distribution of the unrighteous Mammon; for were he permitted to give freely,
and as he list, to such profane Wretches, a great part of the World would soon
be charmed with the Temptation, and as certainly fall to dancing after his
Pipe, as the Children of Hammel in Germany (130 in number) followed him in the
Habit of a Musician, and were never seen more.

11. Persons making up the Body of the Assembly.
Jewish.
1. PRiests, who had a Court by themselves, where was the brazen Altar and
Laver, called, Atrium Sacerdotum.

2. People.

1. Proselytes, 1. Foedoris, of the Covenant, who submitted to the whole
Mosaical Pedagogy, called by the Rabbis (...) 2. Portae, of the gate, Deuteronomy,
14.21. who were tied only to Noah's seven Commandments; these dwelt among the
Jews, whence called, (...) incola. Such was Naaman the Syrian, the Eunuch,
Cornelius, and those Act. 2.5. (...).


2. Unclean, viz. by legal Pollutions; who (together with Strangers had a Court
by themselves in Herod's Temple, parted from the rest by a Stone-wall bearing
this Inscription, (...).

3. Excommunicated by Niddui, viz. put out of the Synagogue, for they were
allowed to be at Divine Service.

Note, Where ten Israelites are met together, there ought to be a Synagogue. A
Proverb.

4. The clean Communicants, 1. Men. in the outward Court, called otherwise
Solomon's Porch; 2. Women. in the outward Court, called otherwise Solomon's
Porch; in the midst of it was a brazen Scaffold for the King, 2 Cor. 6.13. it
went round about the Temple, divided perhaps in Jehoshaphat's time into the
Men's and Women's Court, between which was an ascent of fifteen degrees.


Ancient Christian.
1. Clergy. 2. People.
1. Catechumens.

1. (...), i. e. more perfect, well nigh ready for Baptism. These stayed to the
very last end of the first Service.

2. (...), who stood amongst the Hearers, and departed after the Lessons;
accounted yet as Heathens, yet instructed in the Rudiments of Religion. Note,
1. They were shy of imparting Mysteries (or, as Basil, Dogmata,) to them; and
this especially to make them eagerly desire the Privileges of the Faithful; for
this was part of the Form used in public Service. Let us pray, that the most
gracious and merciful God would hear the Prayers of the Faithful. Chrysos. Hom.
2. c. 1. ad. Cor. 2. At first they were instructed privately at Home, by
Persons deputed on purpose; then in the Congregation, where they were present
at some part of Divine Service, especially Sermons. 3. The Time for Catechizing
was different; the Apostolical Constitutions appoint three years ordinarily.


2. Penitents.

1. (...), Such as wept and lamented, as Candidates to be received into the
Order of Penitents: They stood usually in a squalid and mournful Habit in the
Church Porch, begging the Prayers of the Faithful. 2. (...), who stood in the
upper end of the Narthex, heard the Scriptures, and departed with the
Catechumens. 3. (...), The Prostrate, who stood next the Pulpit, (or
Reading-Pew) and after Service ended, fell down before the Bishop, who,
together with the Congregation, falling down, and making Confession on their
behalf, raised them up, and laid his hands upon them, and they departed with
the Catechumens. 4. (...), Such as stayed with the Congregation, and joined in
Prayer and Singing, but not in the Sacrament.
-- Yet they were afterward Advanced to be

3. (...), Faithful Communicants, who had been Baptized, Confirmed, and
admitted to the Lord's Supper, having approved themselves by the long train of
a stricct and pious Life.

Mohammedan.
Only Men; for they permit not Women to enter the Mosques, lest they should
distract Men from their Devotion.

And besides, They do not believe that Women go to Heaven; and hardly account
them rational Creatures.

Yet in some Mosques they have Apartments by themselves, with a, kind of
Pannels of Plaster (as high as the Cieling) with holes through. M. de Thevenot.

Every Busurman is bound to resort to Prayers five times daily, except he have
some lawful impediment; and if not, yet at one to be well washed; to which
purpose they have innumerable Bathes in Turkey. Purchase.

Only the chief sort, on the Weekdays, the Poor being excused; not so on
Fridays. Id.

The Women enter not the Mosques, but on Fridays, at Nine a Clock, or at
Easter; and then in a Terass apart, where they may see, and not be seen; except
the Wives and Mothers of the Chief of the place.

They abide there 'till Midnight, continually Praying, with strange Motions,
and strong Cries. Idem.

Ancient Heathen.
Let not a Woman enter into the public Temples, who has been caught with an
Adulterer. Demosth. Orat. contra Neeram.

Hither likewise may be referred the Remark made before, viz. That all
Irreligious and Profane Persons were driven away with a, Procul este, profani,
etc.

Modern Heathen.
Among the Modern Heathens, though it be difficult to give a particular
Account, because of their multitude and variety; yet it is easy to conclude,
That their Assemblies are made up of their respective Priests, and Officers,
and People.

In Mexico, and Peru, are Priests, Officers, Boys and Virgins, trained up for
the Service of the Temple, and living upon the Revenues of the Temple, and
these in some places many in number, together with the common People. Purchase
out of Acosta, etc.

Amongst these, some are under Instruction, some Penitents, some Confessors,
(Men and Women Confessors) etc. Idem.

Diabolical.
The Witches Tried at Salem in New England, 1692. affirmed, That they form
themselves into Assemblies, much after the manner of the Congregational
Churches, consisting of Officers and People, etc. Cotton Mather.

12. Times of Worship, 1. Weekly, or Monthly.
Jewish.
1. THE Sabbath, or Seventh-Day. It began at Six a Clock the Night before.
Observe,

1. The Preparation, which began at Three a Clock in the Afternoon, called the
Sabbath-Eve, by the Evangelists (...), by the Ancient Fathers, Coena pura.

It was proclaimed formerly by Trumpets, of late by Sextons.

On this Day it was unlawful, 1. To go above a quarter of a Days Journey,
(three Parsath, whereof Ten make a Days Journey.) 2. For Judges to sit on
Causes, upon Life and Death. 3. For Tradesmen to work, Except Shoemaker, Except
Taylers, Except Scribes.



And they only half the Day.

The Wealthiest did help to forward Business.

2. The Sanctification. Herein they were so Superstitious, that 1. Some Jews
(at Tiberias) began the Sabbath sooner, because dwelling in a Valley, the Sun
appeared not so soon to them as to others. Others, (at Tsepphore, a City upon a
Mount) kept the Sabbath longer, because the Sun continued longer. 2. They would
dress no Meat on this Day. 3. Nor Kindle any Fire. 4. Nor roast an Apple, chop
an Herb, climb a Tree, resist an Enemy; and on this account became a Prey to
their Enemies, in the times of Antiochus and Pompey.


2. Mondays, in remembrance of Moses's returning from Mount Sinai.

Thursdays, in remembrance of his going up to the Mount for the Law.

3. New Moons, the first Day of every Month commonly. On this Day they 1. Heard
the Word, 2 Kings 4, 23. 2. Abstained from Merchandise. 3. Offered Sacrifices,
Numb. 28.11.


Christian.
1. Saturday (the Jewish Sabbath) was in great Veneration, especially in the
Eastern parts, honored with all the public Solemnity of Religion, out of
compliance with the Jews, who were loath to part with it.

On this Day were public Prayers, reading the Scriptures, celebration of the
Sacraments. Vid. Athan. Hom. de Sement. Idem. Hist. Eccle. l. 6. c. 8.

Fasts were prohibited on this Day.

Ordinary Works allowed; yet so as might consist with their public Worship;
for the Lord's Day was still preferred before it. V. Athan. Hom. de Sem. and
Synod. Laod. can. 29.

But in the West it was kept as a Fast; yet at Milan as a Festival; for St.
Ambrose dined on no other Days in the Week, but Saturday and Sunday: Yet at
Rome, out of compliance with the Custom there, Fasted as they did. Aug. ad
Janu. Ep. 118.

Probably the reason of keeping this Day East, was the Opinion which the
Ancients had, viz. That the Apostles Fasted on Friday and Saturday.

The Council of Illiberis Ordained, That the Saturday-Festival was an Error,
Can. 39. which ought to be corrected, and kept as a Fast.

2. Sunday, so called by Justin Martyr, and Tertullian, and in the Imperial
Edicts of the first Christian Emperors. Afterward the LORD's Day.

1. On this Day they stood at Prayers, to put them in mind of Christ's
Resurrection from the Grave, and their own from Sin. V. Justin M. and Tertul.
ex Ireneo.

The Council of Nice required a constant Uniformity in it.

2. They deposited somewhat for the use of the Poor.

3. All of us that live in City or Country, meet together in one place. Just. M.

Three Days absence from Church, was punished with Suspension from Communion.
Con. Ill. Separate Assemblies Anathematized. V. Conc. Gang. can. 4.5. Conc.
Antioch. c. 5.

4. In times of Persecution they met before Day. Plin. Ep. ad Traj. They had
Nocturnal Convocations. Tertul. ad Vx.

Christians therefore called in scorn, a Skulking Generation. Min. F.

5. -- Kept in with great Expressions of Joy.

Fasting accounted unlawful. Tertul. de Coron.

Constantine and Theodosius M. and Jun. etc. Forbad Courts of Judicature, Suits
at Law, demanding Debts; -- all public Shows; -- pleasures of all Sights,
opening of the Theaters, his own Birthday or Inauguration on the Lord's Day.

2. Wednesday and Friday. Vid. postea.

Mohammedan.
Friday the Mahometan-Sabbath; because on that Day Mahomet was Proclaimed King
or Emperor, and solemnly so Created; and withal, to distinguish his Fellowers
from the Jews and Christians.

They call this Sabbath of theirs Glumaagun.

Others say, Mahomet was born on this Day.

Ancient Heathen.
The Ancient Heathens, ( Greeks and Romans) had no Weeks, but divided their
Months into 3 parts; the Greeks into so many Decads; the Romans into Kalends,
Nones and Ides.

The Kalends of every Month were dedicated to Juno.

On the Kalends of every Month Regina Sacrorum (the Wife of Rex Sacrorum)
Sacrificed a Porker, or Lamb, to Juno.

Melchiades (Pope) appointed, That none of the Faithful should keep a Fast on
Sunday, or Thursday, because those Days the Pagans celebrated, as it were, an
Holy Fast. Carranz. Sum. Decr. Melchiad. Pa.

Modern Heathen.
1. In Ceylon, Wednesday and Saturday are the chief Days; when People that have
any business with the Gods, come and Address themselves to them; i. e.

1. To pray for Health, or help in some weighty Matter, War, etc.

2. Or to Swear concerning any weighty Matter in Controversy.

2. In Guinea and the East Indies, Tuesday is their Sabbath; on which Day they
forbear Fishing and Husbandry.

And the Palm-Wine which they get that Day, must not be sold, but given to the
King, who bestows it on his Courtiers to drink at Night.

3. The Hindoes, or Indians, observe thursday as their Sabbath.

4. The Bannyans observe a Monday-Sabbath. Sir Tho. Herb.

5. In Tunquin, the First and Fifteenth Days of the Month are their more
especial Holy Days, celebrated with a mighty Chiming of Bells, doubled Prayers,
Sacrifices. Tavern.

In New-Spain, every Twentieth Day, which was the last of their Month, Men were
Sacrificed, Rosse.

In Pegu, every Monday (New Moon) is Festival.

And in Goa, every New Moon.

Diabolical.
The Witches have their stated Times of Worship, (Sabbaths.)

Joannes de Vaax Stabulensis Monachus, inter alia recitabat indicendae
Congregationis (ita n. vocabat) Statos, condictos dies, ubi nocte intempesta ad
destinata loca sodalitas comparebat, etc. Mart. Delr. Disq. Mag. l. 5.

Glanvil says, They commonly meet by night, and before their departure, the
Devil appoints the Time and Place for the next Meeting.

Some are of Opinion, That when the Cock crows, the Solemn Meetings of Witches
are dissolved; and this perhaps grounded upon the crowing of the Cock in the
Gospel, when Peter denied our Savior. Dr. Casaubon.

I will visit you at the fourth hour, after Dinner, said one of the Spirits to
Dr. Dee, in the close of one of his Actions with them.

Florimundus de Remundis refert apud Bardigalenses capitulum generale per
Sortilegos indici solere, diebus Mercurii and Veneris Mensis cujuslibet, ita
enim confessos Sortilegii criminis reos. M. Delr. Diso. Mag. l. 5.

13. Festivals unfixt, and contingent.
Jewish.
NEW Moons were all of them Festivals among the Jews, on which, as on the
Sabbaths, People repaired to the Prophets for Instruction, 2 Kings 4.23. Nor
was it lawful to buy or sell upon these Days, Amos 8.4.

Now their New Moons are but half Holy Days; for in the Morning they go to
their Synagogues, the rest of the Day they spend in Eating, Drinking, and
Gaming. The Day before they use to Fast; when they first see her, they utter a
Benediction, and leap three times toward her, wishing their Enemies may come
no nearer to hurt them, than they are to hurt the Moon. Rosse.

Feast of Dedication. Vid. alibi in hoc libro.

Christian.
Commemorations of the Martyrs, called by the Christians Natalitia, or
Birth-Days. Concerning which observe these things. 1. The place, at the Graves
of the Martyrs, in their Coemeteria, Cryptae, (or Grots) distant from their
Church.

2. Antiquity. Eusebius mentions the Church of Smirna's keeping Polycarp's
Festival, who died A.C. 268.

3. Strictness. In Constantine the Great's time, they were to be kept very
strictly, by command. It was looked upon as a point of Profaneness, to be
absent.

4. Manner. They were kept with Hymns, Sermons, Prayers, Orations, Oblations of
Gifts, Sobriety, Devotion, Sighs, Tears, (for this purpose they had set
Notaries, to take the Acts, Sayings, and Sufferings of the Martyrs.) To these
add,

Feasts, (...), Common Banquets, to which every one contributed, and brought
something, out of which they gave a share to the Poor.

5. Abolition. Degenerating into Excess, and Profaned with Markets, they were
cried down by the Fathers.

6. Time. Once a Year, on the Day of their Martyrdom. For they had Registers
kept of the Days of their Passions. Dr. Cave, Prim. Chri.

Here (though not very properly) I cannot forbear to add, That Dr. Brown tells
us, when he was at Dresden, in Misnia, Dr. Luther's Holy Day was kept there.
Br. Travels, p. 169.

Mohammedan.
Zinez in Turkey, the Grand Seigniors Birthday.

Ancient Heathen.
1. The day of Apotheosis, or the Consecration, when any Illustrious Man was
enrolled into the number of Gods. 2. Dies Natalitius, or Birthday, celebrated
anciently by every Persian. 3. Encaenia, or the Feast of Dedication, in use
among the Greeks. Vid. Gyrald. lib. 17. Histor. Deorum.
Modern Heathen.
1. The King's Birthday, which is kept at Deyly (in tho East Indies) five
days, with great Pomp at Court, the Palace covered all over with Paviolions of
rich Stuffs, precious Stones, Gold, Silver; decked Elephants, Presents made to
the King; Trifles given by him, Feasting, Bonefires, Dances, Dice, etc. The
Mogul himself weighed in a Balance, etc.

I was told, (says my Author) That a Banian of Deyly played so deep at Dice
last Festival, that he lost all his Money, Goods, House, Wife and Children; at
last, he that won, gave back the Wife and Children, but no more of the Estate,
then to the value of an 100000 Crowns. M. de Thev. See the second Book;
Frugality.

2. The Chinese celebrate their Birth-days very solemnly, a fortnights time
spending the days in Pastime, and the Nights with Feasts. Sir Th. Herbert.

The Gaurs have thirty Holy Days in honor of their Saints, which they keep
very strictly, no Man daring to work. Especially their Prophet's Birthday is
celebrated with an extraordinary Pomp, and giving of large Alms. Tavernier l.
4. c. 8.

There is one day in the Year, when all the Women of every City and Village
meet together to kill all the Frogs they can find in the Fields; and this by
the command of their Prophet, who was one day much annoyed with them. Idem.

Whenever there is an Eclipse of Sun or Moon, the Indians break all their
Earthen Pots and Dishes in the House, which makes a hideous noise together. And
commonly Multitudes run to the River Ganges to wash themselves, throwing Meats
and Sweat-meats to the Fish; the Bramins attending on them. Idem.

14. Times of Public Worship, Two Yearly;
1. In Nisan, March, etc.
Jewish.
1. PRincipal;

1. The Passover, which began Nisan the 14th, and ended the 21st. Consider,

1. The Preparation.

1. Taking a Lamb out of the Flock ( Abib the 10th,) if Sheep or Goats, for
each House one; The Lamb, 1. A Male. 2. Of the first Year. 3. Without blemish.


2. Cleansing the House and Vessels from Leaven two or three days before.

3. Searching after Leaven with a Candle in all the Rooms, etc.

4. Burning and Cursing the Leaven.

* Note. Eating of Leaven in any of the seven days, was punished with cutting
off from Israel.

2. The Celebration; 1. Slaying the Lamb in the Evening, between one and two a
Clock. 2. Offering it between two and three. 3. The Company between ten, and
twenty, meeting together, and roasting it. 4. Blessing the Cup and Bread. 5.
Dividing among the Guests. 6. Eating it with, 1. bitter Herbs, and those Herbs,
2. dipped in Sauce; and all 3. without Leaven; using also, 4. in the posture of
Travelers, standing first, afterward lying, or leaning. 7. To a Child
(asking, what means this Service?) Answering at large, by way of Declaration or
Annunciation. Vid. Exodus 12.26. Also Godw. Antiq. 8. Washing the Feet of the
Guests. 9. Sprinkling the Door-posts which the Blood. 10. Eating all the Lamb,
breaking no Bones. 11. On the Second Day, Offering a sheaf of the First Fruits
of Harvest, Lev. 23.10. for 'till then, they might not reap.


1. The Lamb was killed in the Court of the Temple. 2. Was eaten in their own
Houses in Jerusalem. 3. The First and Last Days were Holy Convocations. 4. Only
the Circumcised might eat.
Ancient Christion and Muscovite.
1. Principal.

1. Easter; wherein Observe, 1. The Antiquity. From the first Ages. The
Muscovites keep it now, and call it Wellikoiden. 2. The Time of keeping it.


1. The Asiatic Churches, on the first day of the first Month, which always
began with the Appearance of the Moon, mostly answering to our March, the Day
of the Jewish Passover. Thus did the Churches of Asia the less, called
Quartodecimans; because they kept Easter on the 14th. day, after the (...) of
the Moon.

Pleading the Example of the Apostles, particularly S. John, Polycarp, etc.

Polycrates pleaded the Example of S. Philip.

2. The Western Churches, on the Lord's Day, following the Jewish Passover;
Pleading likewise Apostolical Tradition.

The Procedure of the Controversy this.

1. The Bishop of Rome would impose their Custom on the East. 2. Polycarp comes
to Rome, to confer with Anicetus about it, who agreed not, yet part fairly. 3.
Pope Victor renewed the Quarrel, threatening to Excommunicate the Eastern
Churches. 4. Irenaeus, and others of his Party, reproved the Pope for it. 5.
The Asian Churches went on, 'till Constantine Summoning the Council of Nice,
which Ordained, That it should be kept universally on the Lord's Day.
3. The Preparation, The Eve, or Vigils of Easter, was kept with Pomp,
Watchings, multitudes of lighted Torches in Churches, and private Houses, so as
to turn Night into Day, as a Forerunner of that Great Light, The Sun of
Righteousness. Nazianz.

4. The Celebration of the Day it self.

It was spent in Works of Mercy and Charity to the Poor.

Constantine used to arise early this Day to bestow rich Gifts all over his
Empire.

His Successors -- released Prisoners. etc.

It was called, The Holy and Famous Passover, Queen of Days, Festival of
Festivals. Naz.

Mar. 25. Blagauescenia Priziste bogorodice; or, the Annunciation of our Lady:
a Feast of the Muscovites. D. of Holst. Emb. Trav.

Mohammedan.
Persian-Azar. Thirty One Days.

N. The Turkish Year consists of 354 Days, divided into 12 Months.

Their several Months begin at the several Moons.

The Turks have their Easter too, which they call Biram. Vid. postea.

The Feast of Neurous, i.e. New-years-day, is kept in March, when the Sun
enters Aries; (so at Azmer, in the East Indies) with Ornaments in the Palace,
much Pomp, a Fair in the Seraglio, by Ladies of the Court, Feasting, Dancing of
Quinchenies, (Women and Maids of a Cast of that Name, having no other
Profession but Dancing;) Presents from, and to the King, and M. de Thev.

Turk's Chaabanai, Twenty Nine Days.

My Author accounts this also as a Feast of the Heathens in the E. Indies.

And so also in Persia say others, who call it Nauras

Ancient Heathen.
Mar. 27. Quinquatria. Minervas Birthday. Now the Salary (Minerval) was paid
to the Masters. It lasted 5 Days.

On the last Day, ( Mar. 23.) was the Tubilustrum, a Lustration of the Sacred
Trumpets.

25. Hilaria. Matris Deum festa.

28. Megalesia.

Modern Heathen.
The Chinese keep their New-Years-Day in March, every Man striving to exceed
others in the Fancy of their Pageants, and adorning their Doors with
Paper-Arches and Images, all Night with Lanthorns and Lights. Sin Th. Herb.

Neurous, New-Years-Day, a Feast in the East Indies. M. de Thev.

In Tunquin, every beginning of the Year, they celebrate the Memory of those,
who in their lifetime have done any noble Action; reckoning in that number
those that have been so hardy as to Rebel against their Princes: and this with
a very great Solemnity. Tavernier.

When the Moon is at the full in March, the Indian Idolaters keep a Solemn
Festival for their Idol, which is in form of a Serpent, for nine days; every
Morning worshipping the Idol, and the Maids dancing about it for an hour, to
the noise of Flutes and Drums; after which they eat and drink, and are merry
till the Evening, when they worship and dance about their Idol again. M.
Tavernier.

2. In Ijar, April and May.
Jewish.
10. A Fast. Eli, the High Priest, dies, with both his Sons; the Ark is taken.
Scaliger. 23d. Day of Ijar was ordained a Festival for the expiation of the
Tower of Jerusalem, by Simon Mac. 1 Mac. 13. Simon takes Gaza. Scal.

28. A Fast. Samuel, the Prophet, dies, and is lamented by all the People.
Scal.

Ancient Christian.
Apr. 10. Palm Sunday, which the Muscovites celebrate with a Procession, to
represent out Savior's entrance into Jerusalem; Thus it was A. C. 1636.

1. The great Duke and Patriarch set out first.

2. Many Priests followed in Copes and Surplices, with Crosses, Banners, and
Images upon long Poles; some singing, others casting Incense among the People.

3. Goses, (the Duke's Merchants) Clerks, Secretaries, Nobility and Gentry,
with Palms in their Hands, etc.

4. The great Duke, with his Crown on his Head, Supported by the Two Principal
Counselors of State, led the Patriarch's Horse, covered with Cloth, and made
to represent an Ass.

5. The Patriarch rode upon him, being himself attired, with a round white Cap
on his head, of Satin, beset with rich Pearls, and about it a very rich Crown;
a Cross of Diamonds in his right hand, wherewith he blessed the People, who
received his Benediction with bowing of their heads, and making Crosses.

6. About fifty little Boys, most clad in red, put off their Cassocks, and
scattered them along the way: Others had pieces of Colth about an Ell square,
of all Colors, which they laid on the ground, for the Great Duke and Patriarch
to pass over.

This is the same all over Muscovy. D. of Holst. Ambassador's Travels.

Apr. 17. was their Easter Day, 1636. Celebrated, 1. With selling and sending
Eggs of all colors to one another. 2. Killing each other at Meeting, with
these words, Christos wos Chrest, i.e. Christ is risen; the Answer is, Wosten
wos Chrest, i.e. He is Risen indeed. 3. Devotions at Church. 4. Feasting,
Drunkenness, etc. Id.


See afterward under the Title of the Feasts of the Greck Church.

Wasnescenia Christova, Ascension-Day, a Feast of the Muscovites also.

Mohammedan.
Persian Onzon, Thirty Days.

This Month is called, Ramadan, as being the Month of Lent; which they begin
the first day the Moon appears, which they watch for upon Hills at Night.

Upon notice, Ramadan is proclaimed all the Town over by public Proclamation,
and firing a Gun.

All the Minarets are set round with Lamps every Night.

Days are turned into Nights, and Nights into Days; for all day long they
sleep, and at Night walk the Streets to Coffee-houses and Revels.

In the Day they may not eat, drink, smoke Tobacco, nor touch their Wives, till
the Moon appear again at Night; which the Muezims, calling to Prayers, tell
them from the tops of the Minarets.

The Ramadan falls back every year eleven days.

Some observe this very strictly, some not at all.

The Punishment for drinking Wine in the Ramadan, is, to have scolding Lead
poured down the Throat; and it has been sometimes done. M. de Thevenot.

Turks-Romezan, Thirty Days.

Ramazan the 21st. is the feast of the death of Aly, on which day they go in
Procession through the Town, with Standard, Horses lead, Trophies, a black
Coffin, etc. Prayers, etc. Idem.

The Priest in blew Habit (the Persians Mourning) reads for two hours, and
curses them that killed Haly, and the People answer with Sobs and a doleful
Voice, etc. D. of Holst. Emb.

Ancient Heathen.
Apr. 1. Veneris Sacrum, with Flowers and Myrtle.

Thargelia -- to Apollo and Diana.

5. Megalesia, -- to the Mother of the Gods.

9. Cerealia. People run up and down, with lighted Torches in their Hand, in
remembrance of Ceres, running up and down the World to seek her Daughter
Proserpina.

15. Fordicidia, vel Fordicalia, de Forda Bove.

18. Equiria in Circ. Max. -- and the burning of Foxes.

21. Palilia. Agonia altera.

23. Vinalia priora -- to Jove and Venus.

25. Rubigalia -- lest the Corn should be smutted. (hiRogation Week.)

26. Latinae Feriae.

27. Apaturia -- to Venus, which lasted three days.

28. Floralia -- which lasted three days. The Rites used, very obscene and
infamous, running naked, etc. The Whores called together by a Trumpet.

30. Larentalia.

May 9. Lemuria, -- three days, kept by Night. At this time they flung Beans
about the Houses, to drive away the Goblins.

Moderh Heathen.
Petusahan on the 26th of Sheruar or April, a Festival of the Persees, kept in
Commemoration of some monthly Benefit. Sir Th. Herb.

In May the Feast of Vitzliputzli was observed in New Spain, with carrying the
Image of the Idol richly adorned in Procession, with Music, and many
Ceremonies, and Sacrisicing of Men. Rosse.

In thie Month also, in the same Country, was kept the Feast of Penance and
Pardon, in which a Captive was sacrificed. Rosse.

This is a kind of Lent, celebrated thus; The Priest came out with a Flute of
Earth, sounding it toward East, West, North, and South, putting his Finger in
the Air, then taking up the Earth, and eating it; all that were present doing
the same; weeping, falling flat on the ground, invocating the Darkness and
Winds not to forsake them, or else to take away their Lives: Thieves,
Murderers, and Adulterers being in great dread, while the Flute sounded, which
lasted ten days, attended with eating Earth, praying every day to God, the
Creator, the Sun, etc. with Sighs, Groans, and Tears, Procession, Offerings,
etc. Purchase.

3. In Sivan, May and June.
Jewish.
2. PEntecost, or the Feast of Weeks. Consider,

1. The Time, viz. the 50th day after the Passover, their Harvest being bounded
with these two Feasts.

Note, The next Sabbath after the (...) (the second day) of the Passover, was
called (...), the second (...), etc.

2. The Celebration. At this Feast they offered two Wave-loaves, as an
Eucharist for their Harvest finished.

3. The Name; The Hebrews call it Schebungoth.

Now they keep two Holy Days at Pentecost, because they know not which is the
true day. They produce their Law twice, and by five Men they read so much as
concerns that Festivity. They strew their Houses, Streets, Synagogues, with
green Boughs, and wear green Garlands, to show that all Places about Mount
Sinai were green, when they received the Law; they eat that day white Meats of
Milk, to show the whiteness and sweetness of the Law. They make a Cake or Pie,
having seven Cakes in one, to signify the seven Heavens into which GOD
ascended from Mount Sinai. Rosse.

23. A Fast. They left off to bring the Firstborn, and First Fruits to
Jerusalem in the days of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat. Scalig.

25. A Fast. Rabban Simeon, Son of Gamaliel, R. Ismael, R. Hanania the second,
is slain by the Highpriests. Idem.

27. A Fast. R. Hanina, Son of Tardion, is burnt, together with the Book of the
Law.

Ancient Christian.
Whitsunday. Observe,

1. The Occasion, or End, viz. The descent of the Holy Ghost.

2. The Time. Fifty days after Easter.

3. The Antiquity. V. Act. 2. and 20. v. 16. It Is mentioned by Irenaeus, V.
Just. M. Qu. 115. by Tertullian, de Idol. c. 14.

4. The Name; so called from the Light of the Holy Ghost, etc. Also from the
white Garments given to the Baptized on this day, (this day and Easter being
the stated times for Baptism) in token of the purity of Life they engaged in,
worn till next Sunday, (the Octave, called Dominica in Albis.)

Note. Pentecost signifies sometime the whole fifty days between Easter and
Whitsunday, all which time was allowed for Baptism.

5. The Works and Offices; Baptism, Reading over the Acts of the Apostles,
Prayers standing, Fasting forbidden all the fifty days. Dr. Cave's Primitive
Christianity.

Chiestuie Swetaga Ducha; Pentecost, or sending of the Holy Ghost, a Feast of
the Muscovites also; who observe,

The Feast of the Trinity the next day after.

Mohammedan.
Persian-Ajar, Thirty one days.

Biram, or Easter, immediately succeeds the Ramadan. viz. The great Bairam,
which lasts three days, beginning with the first appearance of this Moon.

In it they forgive all their Enemies, thinking they have made a bad Easter, if
they keep any Malice in their Heart.

It is the greatest Festival the Turks have; celebrated with Swings in the
Street, to toss People in the Air; with Vocal and Instrumental Music.

When they meet any of their Acquaintance in the Streets, they kiss, and wish
mutually a good Easter.

Ancient Heathen.
May 15. Mercatorum dies Festus.

21. Agonia. Now, as some say.

23. Vulcani feriae. Vulcan's High Priest performed divine Service to Maia.

Jun. 1. Marti Sacr.

Jun. 3. Bellonae Sacr.

Jun. 7. Piscatorii Ludi.

Modern Heathen.
From May 9. till May 19. in Acosta's time, was kept the Feast of Tezcalipuca,
called Tozcolt, in Mexico; of which before.

Yatrum, a Feast of the Persees, kept on the 26th of Mahar, or May.

4. In Tamuz, June and July.
Jewish.
17. A Fast. The Tables of the Law broken. This day the Jews account unlucky,
not only because of the Tables being broken, but the Siege begun upon this day
by Nebuchadnezzar.

The three whole Weeks following, viz. in the Dog Days, the Jews abstain from
Flesh and Wine, and undertake no hard Work. Alsted.

Epistemon burns the Book of the Law, put his Statue in the Temple. Cessat
(...). Scaliger.

This Fast of Moses's breaking the two Tables; the loss of their daily
Sacrifice; Setting up Idolatry in the Temple; The second Siege of the City, (on
the 17th of Thamuz, our June) lasts till the 10th of Ab, and is kept with a
strict Idleness. Dr. Addison.

See more on the fifth day of Ab.

They avoid all great Business on these days, and Schoolmasters will not beat
their Scholars. Rosse.

Ancient Christian.
Because the Ancient Christians observed so few Holy Days, rather than leave
this Section quite vacant, I shall set down some Remarks and Censures of
Eminent Persons, made upon the Abuses of Festivals in these latter Ages

The Sixth General Council of Constantinople ordained, That the whole Week,
after the Day of our Savior's Resurrection, should be thus Celebrated.

-- Christians must go constantly to Church, rejoicing in CHRIST with Psalms,
and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; and give their minds to the reading of Divine
Scriptures, and cheerfully enjoy the Holy Mysteries: For so (says the Canon)
we shall rejoice, and rise together with CHRIST. But by no means let there be
any Horse-Races, or Public Shows, on the aforesaid days. Conc. Con. 6. Genesis
Can. 66.

Card. Bellarmine, in one of his Sermons, delivers himself to this purpose.

I cannot verily (good Hearers) explain by Words, with how great grief of mind
I behold, in how perverse and diabolical manner Holy Days are celebrated in
this our Age; how far perverse Men have obscured and defiled their Picus
Institution, with their corrupt manners, may be understood by this, That to
Strangers, and those who are ignorant what manner of Festivals these are, from
those things which they may see every where done, they may seem to be not the
Feasts of God, but of the Devil, and even the Bacchenalian Revels themselves.
Yea, verily, when, I Pray, are more Sins committed, than on Holydays? When are
there more Sumptuous Feasts kept? When more Lascivious Songs heard? When
Bowling-Allies and Taverns more frequented? When are there more execrable kinds
of Plays, Scurrilities and Fooleries? When are there more Dances, in most
places, to the Sound of the Harp and Lute, than on these Days?

Mohammedan.
Persian-Harizon, 30 Days.

On the Feast of St. John Baptist, in Fez, they make Bone-fires. Rosse.

July 16. A. C. 622. was the time of Mahomet's Flight, and the Hagyra, or
Epoche, of the Mahometans.

Ancient Heathen.
Jun. 20. Summani Sact. ad Circ. max.

25. Crowned Ships carried Banquets over Tyber.

Jul. 1. Migrationes ex adibus in alienns aedes.

Jul. 9. Ancillarum festum.

Jul. 11. Ludi Apollinares.

5. In Ali, July and August.
Jewish.
1. A Fast. Aaron, the High Priest, died. Scaliger.

5. On the fifth of Ab, the Jews sit on the ground, read Jeremiah's
Lamentations, bewail the loss of Jerusalem, and for ten days live severely,
abstaining from all Delights. Dr. Addison.

Ninth day of the fifth Month, was a Fast held in respect of the City and
Temple burnt; first by Nebuchadnezzar, secondly, by Titus, on the same day;
which the Jews do yet observe with a strict Penance, going barefoot, sitting
naked on the ground, reading some sad History of the Bible, and the
Lamentations of Jeremiah three times over. Sam. Purchase. Also it was decreed,
That the Fathers should not enter into the Land of Judea. The same Author out
of Scaliger.

From the first to the tenth Day, they abstain from Flesh, Wine, Shaving,
Bathing, Marrying, Pleading, and all Delights. Ross.

18. A Fast. The Evening Light was put out in the Days of Ahaz. Scal.

Ancient Christian.
The same Cardinal, in the procedure of his Discourse, goes on.

-- Who knows not that Holy Days are after the same manner as Churches,
Chalices, and Priest's Garments, Consecrated and Dedicated to GOD, and to be
spent in no other than Holy Works? Which of you, if you should see any one
enter into the Church with incredible boldness, and use the Consecrated
Garments, instead of Profane, the Temple for a Tavern, the Altar for a Table,
the Corporals, or Altar-Clothes, for a Table-Cloth or Napkins, eating in the
Sacred Patines, and drinking in the Chailces; which of us would not tremble?
Who would not cry out? And now we behold the most Solemn, the most Famous, the
most Sacred Holy Days, -- which should be spent in Prayers, Meditations,
reading holy Things, in Hymns, and Psalms, etc. to be profaned with
Sacrilegious Dances, Morises, Caperings, Feastings, Drinking Matches,
Uncleanness, Scurrilities; and yet no Body trembles, no Man is moved, no Man
wonders. O Immortal GOD! What part has Righteousness with Unrighteousness?
What Fellowship has Light with Darkness? GOD with Belial? What has the
merriment of the Flesh, to do with the gladness of the Spirit? What the
Solemnities of GOD with the Feasts of Bacchus and his Crew? What! Those Days
wherein we ought to please GOD most; shall we on them more provoke Him to anger
with our wickedness! On those days in which the Spirit is to be fed and
recreated; shall we in them more overwhelm him with Wine and Uncleanness? etc.
What a madness is this! What infernal Furies affright us out of our wits?
Bellarm. Conc. 6.3.19.

Mohammedan.
Persian. Temouze, Thirty one Days.

Zoulidge 10. Bairam Adgi, or little Easter, for the Pilgrims of Mecha.

Ancient Heathen.
Jul. 25. In this Month, red Dogs were Sacrificed to the Canicula.

Jul. 28. Neptunalia.

Aug. 1. Boedromia.

Aug. 13. Dianae Sacr.

The Servants (Men and Maids) Holiday.

In Elul, August, September.
Jewish.
17. A Fast. The Spies that brought an ill Report upon the Land, died.

22. Xylophoria. On this Day it was the custom for every one to carry Wood to
the Temple, to maintain the Fire at the Altar. Purchase, out of Josephus, de
Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 17.

Ancient Christian.
Sept. 1. The Muscovites celebrate the first Day of their New-Year, deriving
their Epoche from the Creation of the World, which they believe to be in
Autumn: accounting it to the Year (1692. of CHRIST) 7200. Years from the
Creation, according to the Opinion of the Greek and Eastern Church. Voyages and
Trav. of the D. of Holst. Amb. p. 14.

Their Procession on this Day consisted of above 20000 Persons, viz. the
Patriarch, 400 Priests, all in pontifical Habit, carrying many Banners, Images,
and old Books open, coming out of one Church, and the Great Duke, his
Chancellors, Knez and Bojares out of another place: The Patriarch with a Mitre
on his head, and a golden Cross in his hand, beset with Diamonds, gives it the
Great Duke to kiss; which done, the Patriarch Blesses him, and all the People,
wishing them all Prosperity in the New Year. Idem.

Sep. 8. The Feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Mother of GOD, kept by the
Muscovites.

Sept. 6. The Manifestation of CHRIST on the Mount.

Sept. 13. The Assumption of the Mother of GOD.

Both Feasts of the Muscovites.

Mohammedan.
Persian. Ab. Thirty One Days.

Maharrim, the first day (which my Author makes to answer to July 15th.) is
Aaschoor, or the Feast of the death of Imam Hussia, a mournful Festival, and
lasting 10 days; in which time they wear black, no Man shaves, go not to the
Bagnio's, debauch not, abstain from their Wives: during these 10 days the Gates
of Paradise are open for Mahometans, who die then. M. de Thev.

The People black all their Bodies, go naked about the Streets, crying Hussein,
Hocen, Hocen, Hussein, 'till they foam at the Mouths, etc. Tavernier.

Turkish First Month, Muharrem ai, Thirty Days.

The Ramjam of the Mahometans, or Lent, begins the first New Moon of September,
and continues that whole Moon, viz. 30 days.

The last day of their Lent they consecrate to a day of mourning for their
deceased Friends.

See in the Month Remezan before.

The next day after Lent, they go to the Mosquits, to hear some part of the
Alcoran. Vide Fasting.

Ancient Heathen.
Aug. 17. Portunalia. 18. Consualia. 20. Vinalia secunda. 21. Vinal. Rustica.
Mysteria Magn. 23. Vulcanalia in Circ. Flam. 25. Opiconsivae. 27. Volturnalia,
sive Vortumnalia. v. Oct. 28. Harpocratis Fest. 29. Volcanalia. Sept. 15. Ludi.
V. KL. qui Romani and Magni.
Modern Heathen.
Medearum, a Feast of the persees, kept on the 16th. of Deh or August.

7. In Tisri, or Ethanim, September, October.
Jewish.
TIsri 1. The Feast of Trumpets, Lev. 23.23. Numb. 29.1, 2, 3. in Civil Account
New-Years-day.

1. This was New Moon, and Feast of Trumpets.

2. They offered Sacrifices for the Feast, for the New Moon, and the daily
Sacrifices.

3. They blew Trumpets from Morning 'till Night, Psalm. 81.3. Either.

1. To make New-Years-Day more remarkable; or in remembrance, 2. Of the Ram
Sacrificed for Isaac; or, 3. The giving the Law on M. Sinai; or, 4. The
Resurrection.
10. The Day of Atonement, Lev. 23.27. Jejunium Kipparim, the Jews long day. On
this day the High Priest entered into the Holy of Holies, and, 1. Offered for
himself a young Bullock, for a Sin-Offering, and a Ram for a Burnt-Offering,
washing himself with Water. See Book the 2d. Confession. 2. Took of the
Congregation two He-Goats, letting one of them escape into the Wilderness;
disburthening the Sins of the People on him; Sacrificing the other, together
with a Ram.


15. The Feast of Tabernacles, Schenopegia, which lasted seven days, Leviticus
23.48. On these Days, 1. They made Booths, and lived in them, in Streets, or
the tops of Houses, with Citron, Palm, Myrtle, Willow. 2. Every Man carried a
load of Boughs in the Morning, which load was called Hosanna. 3. On the next
day they compassed the Altar 7 times, with Palm-Boughs in their hands, in
remembrance of the overthrow of Jericho, crying out Hosanna. Hence Dies
Palmarum. 4. They Offered 70 Bullocks of these 7 Days; 13 on the Is It. etc. to
signify the diminution of the 70. 12 on the 2d. etc. to signify the
diminution of the 70. 11 on the 3d. etc. to signify the diminution of the 70.
Nations, 'till the Messiah subdued them. 5. (...), or Dies Palmarum, or Hosanna
Rabba, was the seventh day of the Feast, on which 1. They read the last Section
of the Law, and began the first, left they should seem glad, that it was ended.


2. They brought store of Water from the River Shiloah to the Priest, who with
Wine poured it on the Altar, and sang Isa. 12.3. With Joy shall ye draw Water
out of the Wells of Salvation. Vid. John 7.38.

23. Gaudium Legis, or Festivitas Legalis, a Feast in remembrance of the Law,
when the last Section is read, and at the same time the Law is begun again;
that the Devil (say they) may not tell GOD, That Israel is weary of the Law.
Dr. Addison.

Ancient Christian.
Sep. 14. Vzemirna wozdui senja Chresta, or the Exaltation of the Cross, a
Festival of the Muscovites.

Bishop Latimer, in a Sermon of his to the Clergy, delivers himself in this
manner.

"Do ye see nothing in our Holy Days? of the which very few were made at first,
and they to set forth Goodness, Virtue and Honesty. But sithence, there is
neither mean nor measure, in making new Holy Days: As who say, This one thing
is serving GOD, to make this Law that no Man may work. But what do the People
on these Holy Days? See you nothing, Brethren? If you see not, GOD sees: GOD
sees all the whole Holy Days to be spent miserably in Drunkenness, Glossing,
Strife, Envy, Dancing, Diceing, Idleness, and Gluttony. Thus Men serve the
Devil; for GOD is not thus served; albeit ye say ye serve GOD. -- The Devil
has more Service done unto him in one Holy Day, than on many Working-days. --
Rich Men flow in delicates; -- the Poor may not work, unless they will be
cited, and brought before our Officials. Were it not the Office of good
Prelates to consult upon these Matters? -- Ye shall see, my Brethren, you shall
see once, what will come of this winking.

Mohammedan.
Persian Eiloul, 30 Days.

Some time after the Feast of Hussein and Hocen, the Persians celebrate the
Feast of the Camel, in remembrance of Abraham's Sacrifice; for they say it was
a Camel, and not a Ram, which was sent to reprieve Ishamel (not Isaac).
Tavernier.

Turkish Sepher ai, 29 Days.

Sept. 20. i. e. Forty Days after Aaschour in a Feast called Serten, i. e. dead
body; because, say they, the Head of Hussia being cut off, was of it
self-joined to the body 40 days after: kept with great rejoicing, Alms, not
shaving the head from the first of Aaschour (by some) till this of Serte. M. de
Theu.

Ancient Heathen.
Sept. 30. Epulum Minervae.

Meditrinalia,

On this day they tasted the first New Wine.

October. 1. Pyanepsia, seu Panopsia Apoll

10. Oschophoria, i. e. Ramalia, Feasts at Athens, instituted by Theseus, when
he returned Mourning from Creet, upon Intelligence of the decease of his Father
Aegeus, in which the Noblest Youths carried Vine-branches into Minerva's Temple.

Jewish.
8. In Marchesuan. October, November.
7. A Fast. They plucked out the Eyes of Zedekiah, etc.

Ancient Christian.
I came my self (says the aforesaid Bishop) to a place, sending word over
night to the Town, the I would preach next day (a Holy Day); When I came, the
door was fast locked: I tarried there half an hour, or more; at last the Key
was found, and one told me, "Sir, this is a busy day with us, we cannot hear
you; it is Robin Hood's Day: the Parish are gone abroad to gather for Robin
Hood. My Rochet was fain to give place to Robin Hood's men, a Traitor and
Thief! Bp. Latimer's Sermon.

Cardinal Pool, in his Platform of Reformation, ( A. 1555.) here in England,
requires the Bishops to preach every Sunday or Holyday. Dr. Burnet's Hist. of
the Reformation.

The Council of Trent requires Arch-Presbyters, Parish-Ministers, and all that
had Cure of Souls, either by themselves, or if hindered by any lawful
impediment, by others (fit persons) to feed the people committed to their
charge with wholesome words according to their own and their Capacity upon
Holy Days, and Solemn Festivals, etc. Decr. Sess. 4. Conc. Trid.

A second Head of Cardinal Pool's Reformation was, For the putting away of all
FeAsting in the Festivities of the Dedication of Churches. Dr. Burnet's Hist.
of the Reformation.

Mohammedan.
Persian-Techrion el-avel, 31. days.

10th day of Rebiulewel is kept the Feast of Omar Reschdgiade, in honor of an
Illustrious Miller. M. de Thev.

12th day of this Moon Mahomet's Birthday is celebrated, by lighting Lamps
round the Minarets.

Turkish-Rebiulewel ai. 30. Days.

In the morning the Grand Seignior goes to the New Mosque, where he causes
Sweet Meats and Sherbet to be brought from the Seraglio, and after Prayers, all
eat and drink of them. M. de Thev.

On this day the Poets make Sonnets in the praise of Mahomet, which they
rehearse publicly, and are rewarded accordingly; and Boys (in Fez) carry Wax
Torches to School, which they light before day, and let them burn till
Sunrising, all this while singing Mahomet's Praise. Candles are on this day
presented to the King, of incredible height and bigness, who that night hears
all the Law read. Ross.

Ancient Heathen.
Oct. 28. Mysteria minora. 29. Libero Sacr. Nov. 1. Jovis Epulum. Anthesteria,
seu Bacchanalia.
Sr. Thomas Herbert in his Travels in the E. Indies thought he found some
remainders of this Festival in Casta, as he guessed by the dress, mimic frisks,
and nightly pastimes the women practice. There they covered themselves with
skins, adorned their heads had tresses with Ivy, in one hand holding a leaved
Javelin, and Cymbals of brass or Timbrels in the other, attended by many boys
and girls, rambling like distracted people up and down, and striving to rend
the air with their continual clamours. Sr. Tho. Herbert.

Modern Heathen.
Homespet amadum, a feast on the 30 of Spindumu'd or October.

Jewish.
9. In Chisleu; November, December.
Chisleu. 25. The feast of Dedication, (...), in remembrance of the Dedication
of the Altar, (appointed by Judas Macchabeus.) as also of their deliverance
from Antiochus and his Idolatry.

Vid. 1. Macc. 4.59. Joh. 10.22.

It lasted seven days.

28. A fast. Jehojakim burnt the Roll, which Baruch wrote from the mouth of
Jeremy. Scal.

Ancient Christian.
Nov. 21. Vedenia priziste bogorodice, or the oblation of the Blessed mother of
God. A Festival of the Muscovites.

Mr. Hales of Eaton, in one of his Sermons, complains we bring the Church and
Kitchen together; for when we celebrate the memorial of any Saint, Apostle,
Martyr, do we not call this solemnity their Feast, and accordingly solemnize it
with excess of cheer? Stultum est nimia Saturitate honorare velle Martyrem.
Hierom. The Ancient Ethnics were wont to celebrate their (...), feasts of
Sobriety and fasting in the honor of their Drunken God Bacchus; upon the like
fancy Christians appoint Feasts in the honor of Temperate Saints. The Church
of Rome to this, lap the relics and ashes of Saints in silk and costly stuff,
and shrine them in silver and gold; whereas when the Saints themselves were on
Earth, and their bodies living Temples of the Holy Ghost, they would have
thought themselves much wronged, if any such costly ornaments should have been
employed about them. We think, that God and the Saints are like us, and taken
with such things as please us. Machiavel, in the life of Castruccio Castracano,
a Gentleman of Luca, tells, that he delighted much in often feasting; and being
reproved, answered, If feasting were not a good thing, men would not honor God
and the Saints so much with it. Lo, here the natural consequences of
Church-Feasts! It is an Apology for Luxury --

-- It was a Custom in the Church in sundry places, for all young and old, upon
the Vigils of the Martyrs, to come together by Night, and meet in Churchyards;
and Eat and Drink on the Tombs of the Martyrs. Vigilantius reproved it; and
justly, for nox, vinum, Mulier, etc. Night, Wine and Women, etc. This put S.
Hierom into a fit of Choler; by common consent this Custom was laid down.

Mohammedan.
Persian Techrion-el ilani, 30 Days.

26 of this Moon at Night, Mahomet's Ascension to Heaven from the Alboraoh, is
celebrated as a great Festival.

Turkish Rebiul ahhir ai, 29 Days.

Ancient Heathen.
Nov. 15. Ludi Plebei. 24. Brumalia. Dec. 1. Fortunae muliebris fest. 3.
Posidonia. 5. Faunalia. 11. Alcyonii dies. 14. Brumalia and Ambrosia.
Modern Heathen.
Medusan, a Festival of the Persees, kept on the 11th of Adebese, or December.
This, as all the other is kept in memory of the Creation, or monthly benefits.
Sir Tho. Herb.

10. In Tebeth; December, January.
Jewish.
8. A Fast. The Law was written in Greek in the days of K. Ptolomy. Darkness
for 3 days over the world. Scal.

4. Fast; for turning the Bible out of holy Hebrew into profane Greek. Dr.
Addison.

9. Our Masters have not written the Cause why this Day was marked for a Fast.
Scal.

10. A Fast. Jerusalem was besieged by the King of Babylon. Idem, and Dr.
Addison.

Ancient Christian.
Dec. 25. Rosostua Christoua, the Nativity of Christ, a Feast of the Muscovites.

Epiphany, Christmas Day, (...). Naz. Orat. 38, Observe,

1. The Time. In January, on Epiphany-day, probably in the East. Clem. Alex.
says, (...). So Lydiat. in Emend. Temp.

Upon Advice from the West-Churches, they changed it to Dec. 25.

S. Chrysostom Sermon. 31. Tom. 5. says, it was not above 10 years, since in
that Ghurch (Antioch) it began to be kept on that day, and offers several
reasons to prove that to be the day.

S. Ambrose Sermon. 13. Length of nights had possessed the whole day, had not the
coming of Christ shined gloriously in the very shortness of days, etc.

S. August. Our Lord was born on the eighth of the Calends of January, when the
days begin to lengthen. Aug. in Psalm. 132. et de Trin. l. 3. c. 5.

So Orosius on the 8th of the Kal. of Jan. Oros. l. 7. c. 2.

S. Bernard. Christ was born in the winter. Bern. in Not. Dom. Ser. 3. So
Nicephorus, Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 12. Chemnitius, Genebrard.

So the Arabian, Persian, and Syriac Churches. Mr. Greg. Notes and Obs.
Soaliger, H. Broughton, Jacob Capella, Alsted, say Sept. or October.

2. The Antiquity: In the 2d Century it is mentioned by Theophilus Bishop of
Caesarca.

Next, by the Decretal Epistles: but those suspected.

Next, by Nicephorus, H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 6. Who tells of Dioclesian burning a
whole Church of Christians assembled to celebrate that Festival.

Dr. Brown in his Travels says, the Festivity of Christmas is observed at
Vienna, much after the same manner, ceremonies, and solemnity, as in Italy. p.
152.

Jan. 6. Epiphany, properly so called, from the appearance, 1. Of the star. 2.
The Trinity at Christ's baptism. 3. The Divinity at Cana.


Jan. 6. Bose Jaulenia, or Chreschenia, Epiphany: A Festival of the Muscovites.

At Vienna the old Custom of choosing K. and Qu. was observed: Count Lesly
happened to be King, the Emperor laid the Cloth, and the Empress filled out
wine, etc. Dr. Brown's Trav. p. 152.

Mohammedan.
Persian Ranon el-avel, 31 days.

On Christmas-Eve, in Fez they eat Sallads of green Herbs. Rosse.

Turkish-Dgiamazil ewel, 30 days.

Ancient Heathen.
Dec. 17. Saturnalia, proper to men: lasting 3 days. To which were added
Sigillaria, to make up 7 days.

At this Festival they had Feasts, Dancing, filthy Sonsg, New-years-gifts
(Strenas.) The Heads of Slaves were covered with a Pileus, as a Symbol of
Liberty; and attended by their Masters.

Dec. 19. Opalia and Saturnalia.

The Druids at the End of the Year Offered Oke-branches to Jupiter, crying,
Come to the Oke-branches, the New Year.

Dec. 21. Angeronalia, Angeronae Deae. Macrob. Herculi and Cereri de Mulso.
Idem.

22. Feriae Laribus dicatae. Compitalia. Ludi Laribus.

23. Feriae Jovis. Larentinalia. Plut. Var. Ovid.

24. Juvenalis dies, Octavus Saturn. additus. Suet. unde and Juvenales ludi.

Jan. 1. Jani and Junonis.

Gamelia Junoni.

8. Sacrificium Jani.

9. Agonalia.

11. Carmentalia, a Feast dedicated to Evander's Mother, Solemnized with the
recital of Prophetic Verses.

12. Compitalia, Solemnized in Streets and Highways, where the Heads of Poppies
and Onions were Offered up to the Lares, instead of Infants, which had been
Offered before, till prohibited by Junius Brutus.

Modern Heathen.
The Saxons called December Giuli, from the Conversion of the Sun, and increase
of the Days, from Giul, a Wheel, in Gothic: And in the old Runic Fasti, their
Feast was signified by a wheel; which lasted 12 days, whereon they Feasted, and
sent Presents one to another, and offered Sacrifice to the Sun, to express
their Joy for the Return of the Sun. Dr. Stillingfleet.

11. In Sebat, January, February.
Jewish.
5. A Fast. The Elders dye that were the Equals of Joshua the Son of Nun. Scal.

23. A Fast. All the Israelites gathered together against Benjamin; because of
the Harlot and Idol of Micha. Scal.

Ancient Christian.
Sr. Matthew Hale had for many years a particular Devotion for Christmas day;
and after he had received the Sacrament, and been in the performance of the
public worship of that day, he commonly wrote a Copy of verses on the honor
of his Savior, as a fit expression of the joy he felt in his Soul at the
return of that glorious Anniversary. There are seventeen of those Copies
printed, which he writ on several Christmas days. Dr. Burnet, in his life.

Feb. 1. Ignatius Bishop and Martyr. A Popish Festival.

Feb. 2. Stratenia Gospoda Boga, Candlemas-Day, a Feast of the Muscovites,
Papists, Protestants, etc.

With the Papists, upon this day is a Procession in memory of that procession
which Joseph and Mary made to the Temple: This Feast was instituted in the time
of Justinian, upon a great mortality which then happened, and Candles this day
are carried with great solemnity, to show that our light should shine before
men; that Christ, who was this day presented in the Temple, is the true light
of the world; and that like wise Virgins, whereof Mary was the chief, we should
have our lamps ready.

Feb. 10. William Confessor.

Mohammedan.
Persian Kanon elsahi, 31.

Feb. Turkish Dgiamazil ahhir, 29 Days.

Ancient Heathen.
Jan. 13. Tibicines habitu muliebri Vrbemlustrabant. Plut.

Jan. 15. Carmentalia relata, et Porrime et Postverte.

Jan. 24. Circa hoo tempus, Sementinae Feriae, non state quidem, sed indictae.

29. Equiria in Campo Martio.

31. Sacra deis Penat. qui Patrii et Vrbani dicti sunt.

Feb. 1. Lucaria.

Elaphobolia

Diane sacra, a cervis dicta.

Feb. 13. Fauni festum et Jovis.

15. Lupercalia, the solemnities of Pan; wherein,

1. A dog and two goats were offered.

2. Two Noblemen's Sons were to have their foreheads dipped in milk and dried
up with wool.

3. The youths must laugh, and cutting thongs out of the goat skins, must run
naked through the streets (their privities only covered) and strike all they
meet; especially young wives, to help concepcion and safe Travel.

12. In Adar; Febuary, March.
Jewish.
7. A Fast. Moses our master died, who rests in peace. Scal.

9. A Fast. The School of Sammai and the School of Hillel began to contend
amongst themselves. Idem.

13. A Festival. Nicanor is slain. Scal.

Adar. 14 and 15. Purim, or the Feast of Lots. Esth. 9.21.

Instituted by Mordecai, in remembrance of the Jews deliverance from Haman,
before whom lots were cast daily for destruction of them.

On these two days, they read the book of Hesther, and at the mention of Haman
beat with fists and hammers upon the benches and boards. Otherwise they spend
the time in Bacchanal riots and excess: for (as Dr. Addison tells us) they have
a rule, that at this time they should drink, till they cannot distinguish
between- Cursed be Haman, and Blessed be Mordecai, which are expressions in the
service of the day.

Ancient Christian.
Mar. 1. S. David's Feast is celebrated especially by the Inhabitants of Wales,
whose Tutelar Saint he is reputed to be, and accordingly is put in the Popish
Calendar.

Mar. 7. Tho. Aquinas, a St. of the Roman Catholics.

Mar. 12. S. Gregory the Great. Pa. Romans

Mar. 17. S. Patric Bishop celebrated in the Popish Church.

Mahometans.
Persian Chaabat 28. or 29.

4th. Day of this Moon, they have prayers in their Mosches till midnight: and
then return home and feast.

This Festival is because of the Lent, which comes two months after.

Turkish Redgeb ai. 30. d.

Mar. 1. Called by the Persians Scheual, the Persians solemnize a feast which
they call Chummehater, in memory of Haly's taking possession of the estate of
his Cousin and Father in-law Mahomet.

Mar. 3. Another called Tzar Schembesur, i. e. the 4th sad Sabbath, because,
say the Persians, it is an unlucky day: on this day they shut their shops, work
not, put away no money, lest they should do nothing else all the year after,
swear not, nor make any debauches.

Ancient Heathens.
Feb. 18. Quirinaliorum Stultorum Feriae.

Fornacalia indicta deae Fornacali.

Sacra Feralia, diis Manibus.

19. Deae Mutae.

20. Charistia, i. e. Sacra Cognatorum, when Relations met, and bestowed gifts
mutually.

21. Terminalia.

27. Equiria in Campo Mart.

Mar. 1. Matronalia, or the Women's Saturnals; foemineae Calendae, The day on
which anciently the Sabine Dames decided the Battle between their parents and
husbands. On this day the more dainty women sat at home in great chairs richly
adorned, receiving gifts, etc.

In Romulus's time the year began on Mar. 1.

14. Equiria altera, apud Tyberim, vel si aquis increverit, in Caelio Monte.

Annae Perennae. Parricidium, viz. Jul. Caesaris.

Modern Heathens.
Houly, a Feast at full Moon in February, kept in the E. Indies (in Caboul)
with great devotion, the Pagods filled with people, who come to pray, and make
their oblations there, clothed in red, visiting their friends in Masquerade,
dancing by companies in the streets to the sound of Trumpets; those of the same
tribe eat together, and at night make bonefires; ended with a child shooting
arrows to the figure of a Giant, to destroy him; i. e. a Giant killed by
Crutchman (God.) M. de Thev.

Meduserum A feast of the Persees kept the 15 of Fez'e or February, in memory
of some monthly benefit.

Jewish.
1. The Sabbatical year, every Seventh year. To signify that they and theirs
were the Lord's.

1. On this year they did not till the ground.

2. They discharged their Debtors, and released the Debts.

And this to teach them,

1. To depend on Providence.

2. To mind them of Adam's fruitful Paradise.

3. To mind them of the Everlasting Sabbath, peradventure to commence from the
7000th Year.

(...) Eliae. dict. ex Talm.

2. Jubilee, from (...) Ram's Horn, or Trumpet, Josh. 6.4. or Jubal, Genesis 4.21.
Every Forty Ninth Year.

On this Feast,

They, 1. Restored Lands to the first owners.

2. Released Servants.

3. Preserved the Tribes distinct.

4. It served for computation.

5. They were put in mind of our Spiritual Jubilee under Christ, by whom we are
restored to our Land of Canaan, and released of our Servitude, and this
signified too by the sound of the Gospel. Zach. 9.14.

As in the Babylonish Captivity; so in the Dispersion since Christ, they keep
no Jubilee. Rosse.

3. Liver, without ceasing, denoted by the Fire continually burning upon the
Altar. Lev. 6.12. And again, Holiness becomes thine House for ever. And again,
Pray without ceasing.

Ancient Christian.
In imitation of the Jewish, Pope Bonifiace 8th, instituted A. C. 1300. the
Popish Jubilee to be observed every 100dth year: which Clement 6th, abridged to
every 50th. year.

Ancient Heathen.
Amongst the Greeks.

1. Olympia; Games, instituted by Hercules in Honor of Jupiter, celebrated
every Fifth year, or 50th Month, by 1. Running. Five Exercises. 2. Leaping.
Five Exercises. 3. Quoiting. Five Exercises. 4. Wrestling. Five Exercises. 5.
Hurling. Five Exercises.


The Conquerors reward was a Crown, with the Branch of an Olive Tree.

Amongst the Romans.

2. Lustrum, The Purgation of the City by Sacrifice every fifth year; at which
time the Censors went out of their Office, and the Fee-Farm Rents were paid;
and then they Sacrificed a Sow, a Sheep, and a Bull in the Field of Mars, to
atone the Gods, and purge the City.

3. Ludi Seculares, called also Tarentini, from a place in Rome: Celebrated
every 100th year, lasting three days, in honor of Diana and Apollo. The Young
Virgins and Men were wont at this time to sing Hymns ( Poeanas) to Apollo. D'
Assigny.

The Fire of the Vestal Nuns, among the Greeks first, and afterward the Romans,
seems derived from the Mosaic Institution.

The old Africans also, whose chief Gods were the Sun and Fire, kept Fire
continually burning on their Altars. Rosse.

Modern Heathen.
Tozcolt, a kind of Jubilee in Mexico, in Honor of Tezcalipuca, kept in
Mexico, when there was given full Indulgence and Pardon of Sins. In this day
they did Sacrifice a Captive, which resembled the Idol. Purchase.

Every Twelfth Year, in the City of Quilecare, (in Malabar) is a Jubilee kept
to the Honor of their Idol, in which the King of that place, on a Scaffold,
covered with Silk, before the People, washes himself Prays, and having cut
off his Nose, Ears, Lips, etc. at last cuts his own Throat, as a Sacrifice to
his Idol. His Successor is bound to be present, and to act the same Tragedy on
himself next Jubilee. Rosse.

The Pyree of the Persees in the E. Indies.

In Persia they had many Pyree (or God-Fires) not made of common Combustibles,
as Wood, Straw, Coals, etc. nor blown by any Bellows, etc. but kindled with
Lightning, or a Burning-glass, etc. Some to this day remaining above 1000 years
(as some say) unextinguish'd. Sir T. Herb.

15. The Peoples Reverence in Divine Worship.
Jewish.
WIth what Reverence the Jews were required to perform their Prayers and
Public Service anciently, may be collected out of Sacred Scripture.

Now they Pray Girt, standing upright, Face Jerusalem-wards, with Hand on the
Heart, and Head stooping, abstaining strictly from Belching, Yawning, Spitting,
Breaking Wind, etc.

Before their Synagogue they have an Iron fastened, to make clean their shoes,
according to Solomon's counsel, keep thy foot, when thou go into the House
of God: When they enter they put off their pantastoes. Exodus 3.5. at entrance
they pronounce some part of David's Psalms, and must enter with fear and
trembling. Purchase.

See more in the chapter of Respect to places of Worship.

Ancient Christian.
They were required.

1. To come to Church;

1. In comely apparel, with a grave pace, silence, chaste body and mind. Clem.
Alex. pad.

2. To use a modest voice, order, reverence in prayer. Not to throw about their
prayers with a wild and confused voice, or disorderly prattling. Gypr.

3. Men with their heads bare, as ashamed to look up to Heaven.

4. Women covered. Tertull. de Virg. veland.

5. Hands lift up to Heaven (a posture common to both Jews and Gentiles, etc.)
and expanded in form of a Cross. Tertul. de Orat. c. 11. Apol. c. 39.

6. Kneeling most usually.

7. Standing on Lord's days; sitting ever held rude, etc.

Tertullian falls heavy on some, that clapped themselves down upon their seats,
as soon as ever prayer was done, and downright charges it as against Script.

8. Praying toward the East. Either because that

1. Was the most excellent part of the Creation.

2. Paradise was in the East. Basil. Constable. App. l. 2.

3. Or in resp. of Christ the Son of Righteousness. Clem. Alex. strom. l. 7.
Athan. etc.

9. Standing usually at Sermon-time: None sitting but the Bishop and Prsbyters.
Optat. de schism. Donat. l. 4.

Except. In some Transmarine Churches (perhaps Western) the people had seats.
Aug. de Catech. ruaib.

It was part of the Deacons office to call on the people. (...), in respect of
body and mind. Chrysostom. de incomp. dei not. Hom. 4. et Liturg. Gr.

10. Especially at the Gospel; A general custom

Sozomen wonders at the Bishop of Alexand: that he did not rise up at the
Gospel, a thing (says he) which I never saw or heard in any other place. Hist.
Eccl. l. 7. c. 19.

Philostorgius says of Theophilus the Indian Bishop, that amongst other
irregularities he corrected in those Churches, this was one, sitting at the
lessons out of the Gospels. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. n. 5.

Constantine M. which Eusebius. was making a Panegyric before him in his
Palace concerning our Savior's Sepulcher, would not sit down, and when
Eusebius besought him to sit upon his Throne, yet would not; and when Eusebius
in compliance would have broken off and done, he called on him to go on, and
when besought again he would still stand.

11. People were forbid to depart till after the blessing. Conc. Aurel. c. 22.

Mohammedan.
1. The Mahometans, after coming into Church, say, softly (or aloud, if they
please) I will imitate that Imam in what he does.

2. Next, they put their hands upon their shoulders, and say, Allah ekber, i.
e. God is great.

3. Then lay their hands one over another, upon the Navel, and say softly some
Prayers to themselves.

4. They still keep their face to the Keble.

5. At the end of every Prayer, prostrate themselves on the ground, and cry,
Allah ekber.

At Sabahnamaz, they prostrate 8 times.

At Noon 20 times.

At the Quindy, 16.

At the Akschamnamaz 10.

At the Yatzinamaz 24.

6. They never prattle, nor talk in their Moschs; but carry themselves with
great Reverence.

7. They turn neither this way nor that way, whatever may happen. M. de
Thevenot.

Ancient Heathen.
The people were obliged both among the Ancient Greeks and Romans, to a grave
Comportment, all profane and rude persons being driven away. And when any
Sacrifice was offered, both the Priest and People, that offered, laid their
hands on the Altar, to signify their free consent and heartiness of Devotion.

Modern Heathen.
In the Becar (a Province of the East Indies) when the people come to their
Pagods, having taken directions from their Bramens, they anoint their bodies
with Oil, and say their Prayers, and depart. M. de Thou. -- But first they
present their Oblations to the Idol. Idem.

The Persians are covered on their Heads all day long with their Shasks, not
excepting the presence of their King, nor their set times of Devotion. Sir Tho.
Herbert.

16. The Rule of Worship.
Jewish.
1. (...).

Moses, The Prophets, The Psalms. H. Scripture, Hammi-kra. Reading.
2. (...). viz.

(...), A Secondary Law, consisting in Traditions for many Years unwritten, or
dispersed without Order, till after our Savior's time, and then by Rabbi Juda
reduced to Aphorisins, which afterward became of great Authority with all the
Jews. The Book is called Mischna, i. e. (...): Its parts are as follows.

1. Zeraim, of Fruits and Seeds, etc. 2. Moed, of Fasts. 3. Naschim, of Women,
Divorces, Diseases. 4. Nezikim, of Losses. 5. Kodaschim, of Sacrifices and
sacred things. 6. Tahoroth, of Purifications. Hotting.
Their Religion is contained in the Old Testament and Talmud. M. de Theven.
For, say they, Moses was not with God on M. Sinai 40 Days and 40 Nights, to
keep Geese. Purchase.

Canons also were made by the Sanhedrim, and varied in several Generations,
about the Times of Morning and Evening Service, the Number of Prayers to be
said daily (which at last grew to be 18), etc. Dr. Lightfoot.

To study and read the Bible is a Virtue and not a Virtue; i. e. a small
Virtue; but to learn their mischna, or Talmud-Text, is a Virtue worthy Reward;
and to learn Gemaram (the Complement of the Talmud) is a Virtue so great, that
none can be greater. Purchase ex Tract. Banamaziah.

Ancient Christian.
1. H. Scripture. Our pious Fathers fetched their Weapons against the Heretics
out of no other Armory than the Scripture: Augustine against Patilianus the
Donatist says, Let not these words be heard among us, I say, or you say; but
let us rather say, Thus says the Lord: Jerome says, whatever things are
asserted as delivered from the Apostles, without Scripture-Testimony, are
smitten with the Sword of God: Ambrose to Gratian the Emperor, Let the
Scriptures be asked, says he; Let the Apostles be asked; Let the Prophets be
asked; Let Christ be asked. Jewel's Apol.

I adore the fullness of Scripture; Let Hermogenes's School show that it is
writ; if not writ, let him be afraid. Tertul.

2. Traditions.

Of which Tertullian speaks in these words:

I will begin with Baptism, where coming to the Water, we testify before the
President, That we renounce the Devil, his Pomps and his Angels; then are we
thrice dipped, answering somewhat more than Christ commanded in his Gospel: The
Sacrament of the Eucharist, which our Lord instituted after Supper, we partake
of in our meetings before the Day arise; we think it wickedness to fast, or to
pray kneeling on the Lord's Day; we kneel not from Easter till Whitsuntide^:
Whenever we go forth, or come in, or whatsoever we are conversant about, we
sign our foreheads with the sign of the Cross: And if you do require a Law of
Scripture, for these Observations, you will find none: Tradition will be
alleged as the Author, and Custom the confirmer of them. de Coron. Mil. c.
3.4.

Vincentius Lirinensis says, he many a time, and with much industry and
attention, enquired of Holy and Learned Men, how he might, by a certain general
and regular way, discern the Truth from Falsehood, etc. and he always received
this kind of Answer: First, by the Authority of the Divine Law; and, secondly,
by Tradition of the Catholic Church: Because, says he, tho the Scripture be
perfect, and more than sufficient for all things, yet by reason of its height,
it is diversely interpreted: Let us endeavor to hold that which has been
believed every where, always, by all. Vin. Lirin. Commonit c. 1, and 3.

Mohammedan.
Mahomet distinguishes the Law into,

1. Written, viz. The Alcoran, so called from Al, this, and Koran, Reading, of
124, Azoaras, or chapters.

On the Cover of which they write, Let none touch this, but he that is clean.

Their Liturgy is in the Arabian Tongue, not understood by many of the common
people.

The Priests never touch their Alcoran without an Expression of much outward
Reverence.

So the people at seeing or hearing of it read, show much attention, affection
and reverence.

The Alcoran written in Heaven, and sent in the month Ramadan.

They lift it to their heads, before they read it.

It has no method, or order in it.

2. Unwritten, viz. the Suna, or Assonna, Traditions, whereof Bochari has
published 7275 Titles or Apothegms.

Most of the Mahometans do firmly believe them all, called therefore Populus
Sunae.

N. B. They receive the Decalogue of Moses, and cause it to be observed by all.
M. de Theven.

Ancient Heathen.
1. Written.

The Romans had the Books of Sibylla Cumana, kept by a College of 8 Pontiffs,
with a Chief, whose Office it was to regulate all the Ceremonies, relating to
the Worship of the Gods. Galtruch.

What Rites of Sacrifices and Worship were to be observed, were not only
diligently prescribed in the Laws of Sacrifices, but by the Oracle of Apollo
enjoined to be observed with much Accuracy. Not. Com.

2. Unwritten.

The Druids of Gaul held it not lawful to commit their Verses (of which they
had a great number, containing the mysteries of their Discipline) to writing,
Caesar. Comment.

Modern Heathen.
1. The Hindoes, or Indians, call the book of their Law, Shest^r, (or the book
of their written word) which has been transcribed in all ages, ever since the
first delivery of it, (not long after the Creation, as they say) by thee
Bramins, out of the which they deliver Precepts unto the people: Viz.

1. Thou shall not kill any living creature, etc. 2. To observe times of
fasting, and hours of watching. 3. About Festivals, etc. 4. To take their food
moderately, etc. 5. Help the poor as far as possible. 6. Not to tell false
Tales. 7. Not to steal. 8. Not to defraud. 9. Not to oppress.
2. The Persees, in their book of Religion, have these Precepts; the book
called Zundawastau:

1. To have shame and fear ever with th^^.

2. To consider, whether what they take in hand be good or bad, commanded or
forbidden.

3. To keep their Eyes and hearts from coveting what is another's, and their
hands from hurting any one.

4. To have a care always to speak the Truth.

5. To be known only in their own businesses, and not to enquire into, and to
busy themselves in other men's matters.

6. Not to entertain any other Law, besides what they have delivered to them
from their Prophets. M. de Thevenot.

3. The Indian Bramins call the books of their Religion Bets; which are four in
number, which they say God sent to them; and that they are the Keepers. M. de
Thev.

The Gaurs have a large Book in three parts, relating to Salvation, Dreams, and
Physic, in a language which themselves scarce understand, but by the help of
other Books. M. Tavernier, l. 4.

Diabolical.
The Devil is very cunning, a notable Politician. S. Paul knew him so, and
therefore uses many words to set out his Frauds. His Interest and Subtility are
the only Rules he goes by: And he Attacks all persons, he has to deal with,
according to their Genius. Exempl. g. Balaam a false Prophet, by Apparitions;
Dr. Dee a Mathematician, by Magical Devices; our Savior, by sacred Scripture;
the obstinate Jews, by a false Messiah (a Barcocab.) Enthusiastical Persons, by
Revelations, Dreams, Fancies; Learned Men, by Curiosities; the Religious, by
Superstitions, etc.

17. The manner of calling Assemblies.
Jewish.
THE Jews Sounded Trumpets formerly.

Also they rung the great Bell Migrepha.

Now, about five in the Afternoon, the Doorkeeper of the Synagogue knocks at
their Doors with a Hammer, warning them to repair to Evening Prayer. Rosse.

Ancient Christian.
At first, certainly, the Christians by agreement among themselves, appointed
the Day and Hour beforehand, and conveyed the notice thereof by word of Mouth.

Pancirollus refers the Invention of Bells to Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, about
the Year of Christ 400. But he rather changed the use of them to religious
purposes. Dr. Holid. on Juv.

In Cyprus the Greeks are called to Church in the Morning, by one or two a
Clock, by the striking on their Door with a Hammer; the Clerk uttering these
words; Christians go to Church. Taver. l. 2. c. 2 p. 81.

The Musccvites have no Bells in Steeples, but in a certain Engine or Machine
near the Church, in the Churchyard; and are for the most part so small, that
few of them are 150, or 200 pound weight. They toll them at beginning of
Service, and at the elevation of the Chalice. The Rope being fastened not to
the Bell, but the Clapper, they easily Chime many together.

The Abyssines have no Bells of Brass, or mixed Metal; but a kind of hollow
Vessels made of Wood, Stone, or Iron, more for noise than delight to the Ear.
Job Ludolph. Salmuth, etc.

They have two great Bells in the Convent of Niamoni, in the Isle of Chio. The
Turks allowing them to Christians no where else: -- There are little ones in
every Village. M. de Thev.

I passed by a Church in Ispahan, where hearing a great noise, I went into it;
the noise was made by striking with a great Stick upon a Deal-Board, that was
hung up, which the Armenians are forced to make use of instead of Bells; the
Persians not permitting them to make use of any. D. of Holst. Amb. Trav. p. 208.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans are called to Church five times a day by a Crier, by a Crier,
bauling aloud Alla, Allah, Allahu.

The Turks call Etchmeasin in Persia, (the Seat of one of the
Armenian-Patriarchs) the Church with Bells; for they are used here, and no
where else in Turkey, except in Moldavia, Valachia, Mount Athos.

The Muczim goes up to a Minaret at every Mosque, and stopping his Ears with
his Fingers, he sings, and cries these words with all his force, Allah ekbar,
etc. i. e. God is great, God is great, -- is great, -- great; show that there
is but one God, show that Mahomet is his Prophet, come and present your selves
to the Mercy of God, and ask Forgiveness of your Sins: God is great! God is
great! God is great! God is great! There is no other God, but God. M. de Thev.

This they do five times a day, and on Friday six.

The Faquirs, or poor Mahometan-Voluntiers, the have many Disciples, call them
together, when they assemble, by the Sound of a Horn, or the Beat of a Drum. M.
Tavernier, Par. 2. l. 2. c. 2.

Ancient Heathen.
The Persians did call an Assembly before Daylight, says Strabo, (...), with
the sound of a Bell. l. 15.

The Priestesses of Bona-Dea at Rome, were called to the Service by a Horn.

Upon the Festival of Dame Flora, the Rabble, and idle Strumpets were called
together by the sound of a Trumpet.

Modern Heathen.
In Pegu, the Talapoi Summon the People to Church, by sounding a brass Basin.
Packet broke open, Vol. 2.

In Mexico, they awaked the People to Service with a Trumpet.

The Bannyans are called to their Idolatrous Devotions, to their Pagods under
their Trees, with the sound of a little Bell. Sir Tho. Herb.

In some parts of Java, particularly Bantam, they use Drums instead of Bells,
which they beat with a Bar as big as a Weaver's Beam; and sometimes brass
Basins. Mandelslo.

In Siam, their Pagods have Steeples and Bells. Tavernier.

Upon tolling of the Bells they rise to Prayers, about 4 it. the Morning, which
they repeat again toward Evening. Idem.

In Tunquin also, they have Bells. Idem.

In Gilolo and Amboyna, they bring their Demon, or Nito, to a conference, by
the sound of a little Tabor (called Typha) and with lighted Candles, and Words
of Conjuration. Packet broke open. Vol. 2.

Diabolical.
In Amboyna, to have conference with the Devil, whom they call Nito, they
assemble to the number of 20 or 30, and call upon him with the beat of a little
Drum, consecrated to this use, which they call Typha, Mandelslo.

In New England, 1692. at Salem, one G. B. was reported by some of the
Witnesses, for Summoning other Witches to a Sacrament, with the sound of a
Trumpet; who failed not from all Quarters to go toward the appointed place of
Meeting, soon after the Sound. Cotton Mather, in his Wonders of the Invisible
World.

18. The Parts and Order of Divine, or Religious Worship. Domestical.
Jewish.
1. PArts of Divine Worship, Domestical, Daily.

Daniel prayed thrice a day, and praised GOD; -- and it was his manner so to
do, Dan. 6.16.

David prayed at Morning, and Evening, and Noon; -- Night and Day, even in his
Bed, making it swim with tears.

Anna served the Lord in the Temple with Fasting and Prayer, Night and Day,
Luke 2.37.

GOD appointed a Lamb to be offered for a daily Sacrifice, Morning and Evening.

He that eats Bread with unwashen hands, sins as grievously, as he that lies
with a Whore. The Saying of R. Ase.

Ancient Christian.
The Christians in Egypt continued all the six days in Devotion so earnestly,
that they forgot to take their Food from Morning 'till Night. Sozom. l. 6. c-
18. ex Phil. Jud.

The People of Edessa would not be terrified from their often Meetings, through
the fear of Death threatened to them. Ruffin. l. 2. c. 5.

1. At rising they met together, and betook themselves to Prayer. Chrysostom.
Hom. 1. de Precat.

This was done by the Master of the House, unless some Minister of Religion
were present.

Certainly they read some portion of Scripture, etc. Dr. Cave.

They had set Hours for Prayer, (V. Cypr. Clem. Alex. de Orat. Dom.) viz. the
First, Third, and Sixth.

2. About Noon, before Dinner, some part of the S. Scripture was read (and the
Meat being set on the Table) a Blessing was solemnly begged of GOD. Dr. Cave.

Theodosius, Junior; (Emperor) would not taste any Meat, or eat a Fig, before
he had first given Thanks, and set it apart with the sign of the Cross. Idem.

3. When at Dinner, they sung Hymns and Psalms, a custom which Clem. Alex.
commends. Paedag. l. 2. c. 4. p. 165. Chrysostom greatly pleads for it, to be
used at ordinary works, at meals, after meals; as an excellent Antidote against
Temptations, in Ps. 41. Tom. 3. Cypr. Ep. 1. p. 7.

4. Every time they took the Cup to drink, they made the sign of the Cross, and
called upon Christ, Nazianz.

5. Dinner ended, they prayed, Basil. Ep. ad Greg. Tom. 3. p. 46.

6. Before going to bed, they prayed again, the whole family.

7. At midnight they rose to pray, and sing Hymns, Clem. Alex. paed. l. 2. c. 9.

This was very ancient, proceeding from their Nocturnal Assemblies, in
persecution; Afterward left off, as inconvenient; yet it continues in
Monasteries.

8. Concerning Catechizing, vide alibi.

They read Scripture diligently, prayed frequently, and sung Psalms alone; Vide
Sub. Tit. particul.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans are obliged by their Religion, to pray five times every day.

Most of them are careful to pray at least 3 times, and in the Mogul's
Country, generally 5 times; and they make a conscience of it, from the Mogul
himself, upon the Throne; to the poor Shepherd that attends upon his flock
abroad: But they endeavor commonly to say their Prayers in Church; and if not
there; they do it in their houses or fields.

Ancient Heathen.
In every family there were so many little statues of Wood, etc. placed about
their Lares, as were Sons in the House; and when any one was out of his
childhood (at 16,) he hanged the Bulla, which he then left off, about the Neck
of the child's statue: Servants also had statues of Wool or Hay.

The Romans had La^es, or Household Gods, and Faci, or Chimneys for them; and
the ordinary people observed the Ludi Compitalitii, Plays and Dances in the
streets, in honor of them.

The Romans gave their Tables great Reverence, accounting them sacred, by
laying on of the Saltsellers, and the Images of the Gods, Arnob. 2. adv. Gent.
p. 87.

The Druids procure public and private Sacrifices, Caes. de Bell. Gal.

Alexander Severus had in his private Chapel the Image of Jesus Christ
(amongst other Deities and Heroes) to whom he paid adoration every morning,
particularly, for that Precept, Quod tibi non vi^ sie^i alteri, ne feceris.

Modern Heathen.
The Chingulaes in Ceilon, besides their public Temples, have private
Chapels, little Houses, like Closets, in their Yards, not above 2 or 3 foot
big sometimes, but built upon a Pillar, 2 or 3 foot from the ground, wherein
they place certain Images of the Buddou (or Savior God), that they may have
him near them; and do testify their Love and Service to him, by lighting up
Candles and Lamps in his House, and laying flowers every morning before him,
Capt. Knox Relat. of Ceil.

In Guinea and the East Indies, they daub with a kind of Chalky Earth, for
their Morning Devotions, View of the Engl. Acq. in Guinea, etc.

The Tunquinese adore 3 things in their Houses, the Hearth of their Chimney
made of 3 stones, an Idol called Tiensa, Patroness of Handicrafts, and Buabin,
which they implore when they I go to build an House, Tavernier.

Diabolical.
1. Acts of Unbelief, Distrust, Despair, Dishonor to God, etc.

2. Injustice, Uncharimbleness, Wrath, Evil Speech, Adultery, Uncleanness,
Lying, profane Swearing, Cursing, Covetousness, Pride, Discontent, Curiosity,
etc.

3. Idleness, Intemperance, Gluttony, Drunlaenness: And, in a word, all neglect
and remissness in governing the Heart, and Tongue, and Actions; in subduing the
Lusts and Pass^^ns.

Yet in the Indies they use certain Ceremonies and Sacrifices; as do also
Magicians, Spells and Invocations, etc.

19. Ecclesiastical Worship.
Jewish.
1. THey sounded the Trumpers every morning at the opening of the Court-Gates,
particularly of the Gate of Nicanor, to call the Levites, and Stationary Men to
their Desks and Service, and the people of Jerusalem to the Temple: Also they
rung the Great Bell Migrepha.

2. They offered Sacrifice in the Temple-Service twice a day.

3. They read the Law twice. The Master of the Synagogue called out one of the
Seven Readers, appointed for the Service of the Synagogue: Gave him a Book to
read: He read standing, in honor of the Law.

4. The expounded the Law, and made Discourses to the people.

Teaching and Instruction was always performed fitting, Dr. Lightfoot.

5. They had Prayers 4 times a day.

6. Stationary men were appointed by course to be always attending the Service
of the Temple, lest they should want a Congregation (as Deputies of the
people;) for the Daily Sacrifice was the Sacrifice of all Israel: And therefore
it, being impossible that all Israel should be present, these were chosen
Representatives.

Christian.
1. The Roman Service, for 400 years thus; out of stilling. Orig. Brit.

1. The Epistle, out of St. Paul only, Walasrid. and the Pontifical Book,
Strabo.

2. The Gospel.

3. The Sacrifice.

In Celestine's Time,

1. The Epistle,

2. The Gospels,

3. The Psalms, or Antiphonae, made out of them, the whole Choir singing each
Verse alternatim, Walaf. Strabo, Microlog.

4. Responsoria, or proper Hymns, Anthems ( i. e. one singing, and the whole
Choir answering.)

5. The Sacrifice: No Creed, No Sermon, till Leo's Time.

2. The Gallican Service, Ibid.
Morning, 1. Lessons.

2. Hymns.

3. Psalms of St. Hierom's Translation, with Gloria Patri, at the end, in Latin.

4. Between the Psalms,

1. The Deacon did silentium indicere.

2. The people privately on their knees fell to their private Devotions.

5. A concluding Collect, Collecta Oratia, the Lord's Prayer commonly.

1. The Creed, appointed by the 3 Council of Toledo.

2. Prophetical Lessons: Three Books being laid on the Altar, viz. of the
Prophets, Epistles and Gospels, Greg. Turon.

3. The Sermon, immediately after the Gospel.

4. The Sacrifice in which Service were,

1. Confession of sins, Apdogia, a particular Enumeration of sins, Suscipe
confessionem meam, Domine.

2. Prefaces and Collects, Contestatio, showing our fitness to praise God at
all times.

1. A particular Collect for the Day. 2. A Commemoration out of the Dypticks.
3. Another Collect, post Nomina. 4. Another, Ad Pacem. 5. A Preface relating to
the Saint commemorated. 6. Concluded with a Trisagion. 7. Another relating to
the Consecration. 8. A devout Prayer for benefit by the Sacrament. 9. A Collect
for the Occasion, ended with the Lord's Prayer. 10. A Conclusion for the Day,
11. A Benediction for the people. 12. A Collect after the Eucharist. 13. A
short Thanksgiving, Stilling fl. ex Card. Bon. rerum Liturg. l. 1. c. 12.
Mohammedan.
Their Liturgy is in the Arabian Tongue, not understood by many of the common
People, yet is repeated by the Moolaas, or Priests, and also by she common
People.

The Mahometans also rehearse the Names of God and of Mahomet certain times on
their Beads, as the Papists do their Prayers.

The Devout Mahometans, in a solemn manner assemble in their Mosquits or
Churches, where by their Moolaas (upon Fridays) some selected parts of their
Alcoran are publicly read unto them; which their Moolaas never touch without
an expression of much outward Reverence.

And then they deliver some precepts out of it.

Purchase thus describes their Method,

1. They Wash.

2. Go with a Sober pace to the M^squit.

3. In the Mesch it they all turn their Faces Southwards (toward Mecha, as the
Jews toward Jerusalem.)

4. The Meizin (or Sexton) stands up, and reads that Psalm, which before he had
cried to them in the Steeple.

5. Every one stands up holding his Hands fastened to his Waste, and bow their
Heads to their Feet with great Reverence, and without stirring.

6. Then the I^am reads a Psalm aloud, the Meizin (as the Clark) answering.

7. This ended, they fall on the ground, and say, Sabau Alla, Sabau Alla, Sabau
Alla, God have Mercy, etc. abiding Prostrate till,

8. The Imam sings again his Psalm, and then they rise.

This they do four or five times.

9. The Meizin with a loud voice Prays God to Inspire the Christians, Jews,
Greeks, and all Infidels to return to their Law, all kneeling; and then with
his hand lift up crying, Amin, Amin.

10. They touch their Eyes, or wipe them with their hands (as blessing
themselves, and bring their hands over their Face, they depart. Out of Menavius.

On Friday at nine of the Clock, the Priest Preaches to the People, out of the
Life of Mahomet; after which, two little Boys stand up, and sing certain
Prayers: Which ended, the Priest and all the People, with a low Voice, sing a
Psalm; and then for half an hour, they cry, Illah, Illelah, i. e. There is but
one God.

After all this, one of the Antippi, out of the high place (30 steps high)
shows to the People a Lance and Scimiter, with Exhortation to use their Swords
and Lances in defense of their Religion, Purch.

Ancient Heathen.
The Order of the Roman-Heathen Service, out of Gal^^uchius.
1. A choice was made of the Animals, proper to the Gods. A Buck for Mars; a
Horse and Bull for Neptune; a He-goat for Bacchus; Cows for Ceres and Juno;
She-goats for Diana; young Kids for Faunus, etc.

2. They examined the Sacrifice, whether it had any Blemish or Spot.

3. They Lustrated, 1. The Sacrifices. 2. The Utensils. 3. The people present;
who if they had any denatural default, were driven a way by the Herald, crying,
Procul este profani.


4. The Priest took a himp of Burnt Corn, or Meal, mixed with Salt and Water,
(called salsa fruges, or mold salsa, or Libum Adoreum) and cast it upon the
Victim.

5. They killed the Victim, and if it were an Holocaust, burnt it all in the
Fire; otherwise, part was reserved for the Priest, and part for them that gave
it.

6. While the Beast was laid upon the Fire, the Officers held their hands upon
it, and Prayed with the Priest.

7. Then they poured Wine into the Fire.

8. They Danced round about the Altar, and sung Hymns.

9. The Herald called upon the Priest, Age quod Agis.

Modern Heathen.
The Chingulayes in Worshipping the Planets,

1. Make Images of Clay, deformed, horrible in shape, some with Tusks, some
with Horns, etc.

2. Set victuals before them; and when they do it, in case of sickness, they
breing the Sick Man, and lay him before them all the while.

3. They use Drums, Pipes, Dancing all Night and Day, at least while the
Ceremony lasts.

4. They throw the Images into the Highway, and the Victuals are eaten by
Attendants and Beggars.

In Worshipping the Devils.

1. They build a new House in their Yard, like a Barn, very slight, covered
with Leaves, and Adorned with Branches and Flowers.

2. They bring some Weapons or Instruments out of the Pagods, and lay them on
Stools at one end.

3. They use Drumming, Singing, Piping and Dancing.

4. They give away the Victuals to the Drummers, Pipers, Beggars and Vagabonds.

In Worship of the Supreme God,

1. Observe, they seldom do it, but when lesser Devils fail.

2. They prepare an Offering of Victuals ready dressed (one dish always a red
Cock.)

3. They carry this Sacrifice into the Woods, and lay it down to the Honor of
their great Idol.

4. There are Men before the Offering in an horrible disguise (like Devils)
with Bells about their Legs, and Doublets of a strange Fashion, Dancing and
Singing, to invite, if possible, the God himself to come and eat of the
Sacrifice.

5. The Sick Person, on whose account this Service is performed, is all the
while present, Cap. Knox.

In Guinea, and the East Indies, they use neither Form nor Method in their
Devotions: But every one makes a God after his own Fancy, Author of the view of
the Engl. Acquis. in Guin. and E. Ind.

On Festival-days the Felistero having, 1. Set a Table in the Marketplace; 2.
He places a seat upon it, and sits thereon. 3. He Preaches. 4. The Women
offer him their Infants, whom he sprinkles with Water, in which a live Snake
swims, wherewith he likewise besprinkles the Table. 5. He then utters certain
words very loud. 6. He strokes the Children with some kind of Colors, as if
giving his blessing. 7. He himself drinks the Water. 8. The People clap their
hands, and cry I on, I on, and so he dismisseth the Assembly, View of the Engl.
Acquis. in Guinea, etc.


Diabolical.
Delrius tells us of some Semblance of Mass used at the Witches Meeting, and a
kind of Sacrament, Disq. Mag. l. 6.

Glanvil tells us of,

1. Kissing the Devil's Breech.

2. Renouncing their Baptismal Covenant,

3. Giving Soul and Body to him.

4. Promising to observe his Laws; and to do mischief, and to keep secrets.

5. Signing the Paper wherein these Articles are contained with an O or Cross,
which they make with Blood out of the fourth Finger of the right hand.

6. Calling him Robin; or saying, O Satan, give me my purpose.

7. Doing courtesy to him.

8. Anointing themselves with Oil which the Spirit brings them.

9. Permitting the Devil to suck them in the Poll, or elsewhere, to suck their
Blood once in 24 hours.

10. The Devil promising to them to live gallantly, having pleasure of the
World, for so many years; that they shall want nothing, Clothes, Victuals, nor
Money.

11. Giving Six Pence, and vanishing with the paper.

12. At their solemn Meetings (upon the way) saying, Thout, Tout, a Tout,
Throughout and about.

13. After Meeting, and due courtesy done, and other service -- they have a
cloth laid on the ground, etc.

14. Wine, Cakes, Rost-meat, Drink, etc.

15. The Devil sits at the upper end of the Table.

16. Uses some words before meat.

17. Bidding the Guests welcome.

18. Plays upon a Pipe, or Cittern.

19. The Name of God or Jesus not mentioned at their Meetings.

20. Giving them power to bewitch persons; either by,

1. Baptizing a Picture of Wax, etc. The Devil saying, I Baptize thee with this
Oil: The Witches saying, A Pox on thee, Ill spite thee, etc. The Devil himself
being Godfather: Or,

2. Giving an Apple, Dish, Spoon, etc. Or,

3. By a Touch, or Curse, etc.

21. Sometimes they have Carnal Copulation together at such Meetings.

22. The Devil leaves an ugly smell at parting.

23. They use such words as these at parting; A Boy, merry me^t, merry part.

24. As they return homewards, Rentum Tormentum.

In short the Devil keeps to no order; is no where constant to himself: In
Popish Countries can be Papist, in Turkey, Mohammedan; and adapt himself to the
Humor of his Disciples.

The Order of the Jewish Service in Barbary, out of Dr. Addison.
Jewish.
1. THey spend some time in the Meditation of the Divine Attributes.

2. They repeat to themselves, Numb. 24.5. How goodly are thy Tents, etc. And
Psalm. 26.8. O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house, etc.

3. They lay the right hand on the heart, and bowing their Bodies toward the
Chest wherein the law is kept, they begin the public Service,

1. With Psalm. 5.7. As for me I will come into thy house, in the multitude of
thy mercies, etc.

2. After the appointed course of the Psalms, they have Two Lessons; the first
out of the Law, the second out of the Prophets.

3. They Pray, 1. Standing. 2. Girt. 3. With the Head bowed. 4. Their Face
toward Jerusalem. 5. Their hands on their heart. 6. Uttering their Prayers in a
sort of plain Song. 7. Without Spitting, or Belching, etc. 8. At Confession of
Sins using Prostration, and showing a great sense of their own vileness. 9. At
pronopuncing of Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God, etc. they jump up three times.


Ancient Christian.
The Order of the Divine Service amongst the Primitive Christians, out of Dr.
Cave.
The manner various: commonly thus --

1. They began with Prayers probably; v. Tertul. Apol. c. 39.

2. Read the Scriptures. The Quantum, arbitrary.

The Apost. Constitut. appoint two Lessons.

S. Clemens Epistle to the Corinth.

Hermas's Pastor.

The Writings of S. Ephrem,

Read in some places, after Holy Service.

3. They sung Hymns and Psalms, vid. post.

4. The Presbyters and President of the Assembly preached, and made
Exhortations, one after another.

5. Prayers were made for Catechumens, Penitents, Possessed, etc. according to
their respective Capacities, the Persons in every rank departing as soon as the
Prayer that particularly concerned them was done.

1. The Catechumens departed. 2. The Penitents.
The Deacons crying aloud, (...), in Lat. Ite, missa est.

6. The Faithful only, (the Catechumens, gone, and the Doors shut,) proceeded
to the Lord's Supper, wherein they 1. Prayed for all states of Men, etc. 2.
Gave the kiss of Charity. 3. Prayed for the Consecration of the Eucharist. 4.
Received the Elements. 5. Made their Offerings.


7. They Admonished, Censured, Absolved, etc.

8. They concluded with a Blessing.

Afternoon.

Note, They had public Prayers and Sermon to the People in the Afternoon.
Chrysostom. Basil, Augustine, make sufficient evidence of it.

9. The People stretched out their right hand, the left hand being put under
it, Cyril.

10. During the Administration they sung Psalms ( Psalm. 33. constit. Apost.)
and Hymns.

11. Concluding with Prayer and Thanksgiving

12. Saluting each other with a Kiss of Peace (Signacula Orationis) Tertull.

Ancient Heathen.
The Order of their Service out of other Authors, D'Assigny, etc.
1. The Priest washes hands in pure Water.

2. He leads the Sacrifice to the Altar.

3. Before they offered to Jupiter, they offered Praoedancae Hostia (some
preparatory things) to the Daemones, or Angels, that they might intercede for
them to the God.

4. If these appeared unlucky, they offered others, succedancae Hostiae.

5. The Priest offered a set Form of Prayer to Janus and Vesta.

6. He marked the Beast with his Knife from head to tail, and if he appeared
unruly, they let him go, and took another.

7. Laid upon his head and back the mola salsa, mixed with Frankincense.

8. -- Tasted a Cup of Wine.

9. -- Caused the Assistants to do the like.

10. -- Poured the remainder of the Wine between the Horns of the Beast.

11. Took from that place a few Hairs, called prima libamina, and cast them
into the Fire.

12. Commanded an Officer to kill the Beast.

13. The Assistants flead him, lighted the Wood, etc.

14. The Sooth-sayer, with a long Knife, turned the Bowels up and down, to
observe them, and tell his Judgment upon them; for they might not touch them
with their hands.

15. The Priest cast some Frankincense in the Fire, with some Wine.

16. The Priest taking that part of every Member which the Officers had cut out
into a Blatter, called Lanx, or Discus, did litare, i. e. cast them into the
Flames, to appease the God.

17. While this was doing, the Priest, and the Person that gave the Victim, did
jointly make their Prayers to the God, with their hands upon the Altar.

18. Then they, with the Assistants, went to Feast, upon the Remainder of the
Sacrifice, singing the Praises of their God.

19. After the Banquet, they returned to the Altar, and cast into the Flames
the Morsells of Meat that were left, with the Tongue, and some Wine.

20. They returned Thanks to the God for the Honor of sharing with him in the
Victim.

21. At Rome, they concluded with Prayers to Janus and Vesta, the Tutelary Gods
of the Empire.

N. B. At the beginning, the Herald called to the People, Favete linguis.

Afterward, to the Priest, Age quod Agis.

Jewish.
Their Order of Service in Rome, Venice, Worms, Mentz, Frankfort, etc. at this
day, out of Mr. Rosse.
1. THey wash, and scrape their Shoes.

2. They enter the Synagogue with great Reverence, bowing toward the Ark.

3. Are tied to a set Form of Prayer by Book.

4. The People answer, Amen, Though their Liturgy be in the old Hebrew, which
the People genearlly understand not.

5. They utter diverse brief Benedictions, and after them some short Prayers.

6. Instead of Sacrifices (because banished from Jerusalem) they read the Law
concerning Sacrifices, etc. with some Expositions thereof out of the Talmud.

7. They pray, in particular, for the re-building of Jerusalem, and their
return thither; with great vociferation and rejoicing.

8. They read a long Prayer, collected out of the Psalms, and 1 Chronicles. 30.

9. They conclude, with singing those words of Obadiah, v. 17, 18, etc.

Other Songs also they sing, much to this purpose.

When they say, Hearken, O Israel, the LORD, our GOD, is One LORD, they turn
their heads to the four Corners of the World.

When they say, Isa. 6.3. Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. they leap three times.

10. They utter an execrable Prayer against the Christians.

11. They pray for Peace, bowing to the Right and Left, and depart backward out
of the Synagogue, looking to the Ark.

Ancient Christian.
The Order of Divine Service, out of Ignatius.

1. On Sunday is a public meeting out of both City and Country, where are
read (as time will permit) the Prophets and Apostles: The Reader having ended,

2. The Pastor or President makes an Exhortation.

3. Afterward we all rise up, and offer Prayers;

4. Then is brought Bread, Wine and Water.

5. Then the Pastor, according to his Abilities, offers up Prayers and
Thanks-givings, the People saying, Amen.

6. Then Distribution is made; and,

7. By the Deacon sent to such as are absent.

8. The Wealthier-contribute, if they will; which deposited, with the Pastor,
is to be given to the Poor.

The Order of Divine Service, out of Tertullian.

We come together into the Congregatign, that we may, as it were, with an Army,
besiege God with our Prayers.

1. We Pray for the Emperors and their Ministers.

2. We are Assembled for the reading of the Divine Scriptures.

3. There are also Exhortations.

4. Castigations, and the Divine Censure: And Judgment is passed with a great
deal of weight and authority, as among those who are certain of the presence
and inspection of God, etc.

5. Every one brings some small piece of money to the Chest, if he can, one day
in a Month, or when he will; for no man is compelled, but gives freely.

6. This is, as it were, a pious Depositum for the feeding and interring of the
Poor, for boys and Girls destitute of Estate and Parents; also for such as are
aged; such as have suffered Shipwreck.

The Order of Divine Service in Muscovy, out of the D. of Holstein's Embassad.

1. The whole service consists of certain Chapters out of the Bible, Psalms,
and the Athanasian Creed.

2. Whereto they add a Homily out of S. Chrysostom.

3. And certain Prayers, which they sing, much in like manner as Antiphonaes
are Sung, saying ever and anon, Gospodi Pommilui, (Lord have mercy upon me)
which the People repeat three times, making the sign of the Cross.

4. The Priest goes up to the Altar, reads S. Basil's Liturgy, and takes the
Sacrament himself, but gives it to none else.

Modern Heathen.
The Bannyans in Devotion to their Pagods under their Trees; 1. Receive an
Unction, and Sprinklings of sundry colored Powders, etc. 2. Pay their Tithes
and Offerings. 3. Repeat their Orisons. 4. Make Processions. 5. Sing, and
perform may Mysteries, etc. Sir Tho. Herb.


The Siamites use abundance of Lights before their Pagods in time of Service:
They likewise Incense them, and adorn them with Flowers and precious Stones.
Mandelslo.

At Banerous in India, when the Pagod was opened,

1. Four Bramins came with a Censer, each of them followed by a rabble of other
Bramins, that made a hideous noise with Drums and Trumpets, etc.

2. The two eldest sang a Song; the People singing in a Tune and playing, with
every one a Peacock's Tail, or such like Flabel, to keep the Flies off from the
Idol.

3. Half an hour after the beginning of this Music, two principal Bramins made
a great noise three times with two little Bells, and a kind of Mallet knocked at
the Pagod-door.

4. This done, the Pagod was opened, and the Idol Ram to be seen, the People
falling upon the ground, with their hands on their heads, prostrating three
times.

5. Then rising up, they threw great quantities of Nosegays and Garlands to the
Priests, with which the Priest touched the Idol, and restored them again.

6. Before the Altar stood a Bramin, holding a Lamp of nine Wicks lighted in
his hand, on which he cast Incense: Then the Pagod was shut, and the People
departed. Tavernier.

1. Particular Parts of Divine Worship, and 1. of Prayer.
Jewish.
Observe,

1. THE Orators, or Persons praying. The Priest, as Speaker for the People; the
People by way of consent and communion with the Priest.

2. The Times or Seasons. There were 4 hours of Prayer daily observed in the
Temple. There are now but three in the Synagogues. Dr. Addison.

3. The Place, 1. The Temple. 2. The Synagogues. 3. Private Places.


4. The Form.

All in Form, of which there were 18 in number, belonging to their Liturgy, in
our Savior's time. Dr. Lightfoot.

Their Prayers now are very many, and therefore they run them over, in Hebrew
Rhimes, etc. Purchase.

5. The Gesture.

They pray standing, with their Loins girt, and their Bodies bowed a little,
and their Faces toward Jerusalem; at Confession of Sins using prostration; and
at Praises extraordinary jumping up, as at those words, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God of Sabbath, as is said before. Dr. Addison.

Rosse adds, Laying their hand on their heart.

They hold it a great sin in praying, to belch, yatch, spit, or break wind,
because they hold the Angels to be there present. Rosse.

They believe, That whosoever says heartily Amen, hastens their Redemption.
Idem.

Ancient Christian.
The Method and Order of Divine Service among the Indian Christians, out of Sir
Tho. Herbert.

1. They Assemble cheerfully.

2. Shut their Eyes at Entrance.

3. Salute the Priest with humble Reverence, who resalutes them by lifting up
his hands and eyes.

4. The Priest, at a set Hour, begins Prayers; seldom exceeding two Hours in
the whole Exercise.

1. Making a brief Confession. 2. The People assenting in an Unanimous Amen. 3.
Expounding some part of Scripture; during which their Attention, Looks and
Silence is commendable. 4. Singing an Hymn.
5. At parting out of the Church, re-saluting the Priest, who ceases not to
elevate his hands, 'till all the People are departed.

N. Every first Sunday in the Month, the Priest reads a Homily, writ, as they
say, by the Apostle, or some of his Disciples.

The Order of the Armenian-Service, out of M. Tavernier, l. 1. c. 3.

1. They put off their Shoes, and enter into Church.

2. When they hear Mass, they sit with their heads covered, all the
Service-time, except at the Elevation of the Host; for then they take off their
Bonnets, and kiss the Earth three times.

3. There was ( viz. at the Church in Egmiasin) upon the Altar a Cross, with
Six Candlesticks of Gold; and upon the Steps to the Altar, four Candlesticks of
Silver, five foot high.

4. After they had sung several Hymns, the Patriarch seated himself in a Chair,
covered with Silk-Tapistry, four Archbishops sitting with their backs to a
Pillar at his right hand. The Service was solemnly performed by an Archbishop,
with two Bishops on each side.

5. When the Archbishop had made certain Prayers, he gave the Book, wherein he
had read the Gospel, to the Patriarch, Bishop, and People, to kiss; at last,
many kissed the Patriarch's hand, etc.

In Muscovy, all say their Prayers, either standing or kneeling; for they have
neither Seats nor Benches in their Churches: The late Great Duke, who was much
given to Devotion, lay all along upon the ground, when he said his Prayers. D.
of Holst. Ambassad. Trav. p. 102.

Note; I liked one thing that I saw, both at Strasburgh and here, ( viz. at
Frankfort) that at the end of Prayers, a considerable interval of silence was
left, before the conclusion, for all People's private Devotion. Dr. Burnet's
Letters.

Mohammedan.
The Turks pray 5 times a day, concerning which they have many Traditions, some
necessary, some of counsel and decency. e. g.

1. In noon and afternoon, prayers to be read with a low voice; in the morning
and at night with a loud voice, if an Imam be present, else it is indifferent.
2. The men lift up their hands to the tip of their Ears, the women to their
Jaws. 3. Accompanying the Imam which a low voice; in all he does, imitating. 4.
Prostration, touching the ground with forehead, Nose, etc.
These things make the Prayer Null, 1. Talking, laughing, or weeping loud at
Prayer, unless at the mention of Paradise or Hell. 2. Scratching 3 times in one
place, passing before the Imam without prostration, turning their face from the
Keble, advancing the space of two Ranks, beginning the Prayer when the Imam
begins another, a mistake in reading, saluting any willingly. 3. They may not
pray in the habit they commonly work in. 4. Nor before the fire, yet they may
by a Candle or Lamp.


The Expiation for a fault of Inadvertency, is Prostration.

Ancient Heathen.
1. The persons praying, viz. Priests and others, etc.

2. Times and Seasons: At Sacrifices publicly.

3. The place: At the Altar, and in the Temples.

4. The Form: A verse out of a Book. Theag. lib. de diis. v. Not. Com.

The Gentiles read their Prayers out of a Book, before their Sacrifices; Ne
quid praepostere dicatur. Alex. ab Al. l. 4. c. 17.

They often began thus, Dii Deaeque omnes, etc. i.e. O all ye Gods and
Goddesses, etc.

5. Gesture: They Prayed standing to the Superior Gods, sitting to the Inferior.

6. The Matter: At public Sacrifices they Prayed that the God would accept
their Offering, and be bountiful and pleasant, etc.

At other times they put up odd Petitions, as,

Juno Verenda, concede Fratrem occidere, etc. Eurip. in Phaen.

Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri. Horat.

Plato Advised, That whatsoever Hymns or Prayers the Poets composed, should be
first showed to the Priests, lest they should err.

Modern Heathen.
In Slam the Religious Orders are tied to rise at Midnight to pray to their
Idols. Rosse.

In Goa they pray to the Sun and Moon, etc. and to the first thing they meet
with in the morning, tho a Goose or an Ass, and all the day after, they Pray to
it: But a Crow they cannot abide. Idem.

About Jemena in Bengala, they use to Pray naked in the Water, and to do
Penance, by lying flat on the ground, kissing the Earth, holding up their
hands to the Sun, and turning themselves about 40 times. Idem.

See more of this in the Second Part of this book, under the Title of Prayer.

Magical.
Ad illum (viz. Cacodaemonem) complicatis genibus supplices accessistis. Mart.
Delrio and Sebast. Michael in Pneumalog. refer. exemplar sententiae latae
Avinioni Anno. 1582.

Glanvil says, they call the Devil sometimes Robin, and pray to him, O Satan,
give me my purpose.

Dr. Dee in all his Actions with Spirits, tells us, that he always went to
prayer (not to the Devil professedly) but to God. Oravimus ad Deum, ejus
implorabamus auxilium: And in the end of his Action he concludes with a short
Thanksgiving to God.

Omnis Spiritus laudet Deum nostrum, unum and trinum. Amen.

Nay the very occasion of his falling into this Magical Delusion, next to his
Mathematical Studies, is supposed to be, his earnest Prayer to God for Wisdom,
such Wisdom as he was ambitious of. Dr. Casaubon.

2. Praises, Psalms, Hymns.
Jewish.
THere were 3 kinds of Musical Persons among the Jews: 1. (...), that played
upon Musical Instruments. 2. (...), or (...), that sung with the Voice. 3.
(...), that joined Vocal and Instrumental Music together, Alsted. Encycl. N.
2630.


The Song of Miriam, was uttered, (...), with alternate Melodies, says Philo
Jud. de vit. Mosi. l. 3.

The President of the Essenes standing up, sung an Hymn, composed in praise of
God, and after him did others, (...), in their Orders, in convenient manner;
and when they came unto the Close of the Hymns, (...), Id. de vit contempl.

The Hallel was sung over at the Passover, from Ps. 113, to Ps. 118.

The 92d Psalm on the Sabbath Day, Psalm 9.4. every Wednesday, Dr. Light.
Templ. Serve. p. 59, -- 139.

Ancient Christian.
Hymns and Psalms were accounted a considerable part of Divine Worship, Dr.
Cave, vid. Plin. l. 10. Ep. 97.

They were either Extempore, or set.

The Council of Laodicea ordered, That no Psalms of private composition should
be recited in the Church, Can. 59. also that a Lesson should be interposed
between every Psalm.

In this Duty all the Congregation bore a part, joining together: Afterward the
custom was to sing Alternatim, course by course, answering one another, Theod.
Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 24. who says, it was first brought in by Flavianus and
Diodorus, in the Chapter of Antioch in the Reign of Constantine; but Socrates
says, by Ignatius, who in a vision had heard, etc. Socr. Eccl. H. l. 6. c. 8.

Pliny says, the Christians did secum invicem canere.

Theodosius Junior, rising early every morning, with his Sisters, did together
interchangeably sing Psalms of Praise. De Orig.

They Sung Hymns and Psalms at Dinner; a custom which Clem. Al. commends,
Paedag. l. 2. c. 4. Chrysostom greatly pleads for it, to be used at ordinary
works, at meals, after meals, as an excellent Antidote against Temptations, in
Ps. 41. Tom. 3. Cypr. Ep. 1. p. 7.

S. Augustine says, we have the precept and example of our Savior Christ and
his Apostles for singing in our Assemblies, Orig. Brit.

Also he says, the Customs of Churches were very different about these
matters. In the Churches of Asric, he says, they confined themselves to the
Prophetical Hymns, for which they were upbraided by the Donatists, as too grave
and formal; but he allows singing for one of the solemn parts of Divine
Service, with which he joins reading the Lessons, Preaching and Prayer, either
aloud by the Bishop, or in common, by the Deacons giving notice, Ibid.

Hymns of the Church, Just. Mart.

Hymns proving the Divinity of Christ. Eusebius.

Hymns of Nepos, Idem.

Hymns of St. Ambrose, S. Hilary, Prudentius, generally used.

Te Deum, attributed by Archbishop Usher, to S. Nicclius Bishop of Triers, A.
D. 535. or of Lions, 567.

Gloria Patri, used anciently in the Eastern Church, Basil: in the Gallican
Churches at the end of every Psalm, Cassian: at Rome mostly after the
Responsoria, Walafr. Strab.

Singing in Ambrose's time, taken into use at Millain, and the Western
Churches, upon occasion of a Persecution under Justina, Valentinian's Mother.

Augustine commends Athanasius his plain distinct singing, like reading.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans have several ways of praising God, viz. by Singing, Music,
Dancing, etc. according to the different Sects which are among them, but the
most pleasant is that of the Dervises, with Flutes, Drums, Dances,
Vocal-musick, reading of the Alcoran and exposition of it: Concerning which see
afterward in the Chapter of Saints.

See more in the Practical Part in the Chap. of Praising God.

Ancient Heathen.
Observe,

1. The Matter and Contents.

Callimachas writing a Hymn to the praise of Apollo, begins thus,

None so skilful an Artist as the famous Apollo,

He Is skilled in Song, and skilled in Archery;

A Prophet He, and great Physician too;

He Mortals taught to build, Apollo loves Architecture, etc.

Orpheus observes the same method, viz.

1. Declaring the Virtues of the Gods. 2. Praying that they may be brave and
happy, and give a blessed end to their Banquets.
2. The Form.

They had three Stanzaes, or parts.

1. Strophe, sung in turning from the East to the West. 2. Antistrophe, in
returning from the West to the East.
3. Epode, Sung while they stood before the Altar; for they used to Dance in
this manner, whilst they Sung the Hymns, about the Altar.

3. The time:

Always when the Persians Sacrificed, a Magus Sung a Hymn.

The Arabian Priests were bound to spend their time in singing Hymns, and
rehearsing the Acts of their Gods. Rosse.

N. Plato (l. de leg.) advises that whatsoever Hymns or Prayers the Poets
composed, they should first show them to the Priests, lest they should ask evil
things for good.

Greg. Naz. says, Julian the Apostate, in imitation of the Christians, did
appoint among the Heathens, (...), a Form of Prayer to be said in parts.

Modern Heathen.
Among the Samodies, the Priest in his Divine Service does not Sing, but Howl,
and that so long, till he become like a Madman, and then falls down, as if he
were dead, but rises again, orders five Deer to be Sacrificed, and then
thrusts a Sword half way into his belly, still singing or howling rather, etc.
Rosse.

Among the Indians Old and Modern, dancing to the Idols, is accounted part of
divine Worship. Idem.

In Goa, when they Sow, Mow, go to Sea, and when the Women lie in, and when
they return from Sea, they feast their Idols with Music, and other Solemnities
14 days together. Idem.

In Narsinga their Idol is carried yearly in Procession, with Virgins and
Music going before. Idem.

In Florida they worship the Sun and Moon, with dances and songs, howling,
feasting and cutting of their Skins.

Diabolical.
Profane, wanton Songs, which vitiate and corrupt the minds of men. Chrysostom
(in Ps. 117.) calls them, (...).

Delrius in his Magic Disquis. makes mention of Multae Jubilationes,
Saltationes, commessationes, compotationes, et ludi in honorem ipsius
praesidentis Beelzebub. l. 5. Sec. 16.

Mr. Glanvil tells us, 1. At going to meeting, they go singing -- Thout, tout a
tout, throughout and about. 2. At their Feasting, the Devil plays on a Cittern
or Pipe. 3. At parting, the word is, -- A Boy! merry meet, merry part! 4. In
their Return, they cry, Rentum Tormentum.


Doctor Dee in his Actions with Spirits used frequent Thanksgivings; for
instance, when by the help of one of his Spirits he had found three of his
Books, which had been burnt the 10th of April before, I fell (says he) upon my
Knees, with great thanks-yielding to the God Almighty, Act. with Spirits, p.
418.

3. Sacrifices.
Jewish.
THE Oblations of the Jews (according to Purchase his Relations, and Theol.
Discov. of Asia, etc.) were,

1. Sacrifices.

1. Burnt-Offerings: Consumed by the perpetual fire upon the Altar, being that
which God miraculously sent down from Heaven to consume Aaron's Sacrifice:
Nadab and Abihu were stricken with a revenging fire from God, for using other:
Vide Lev. 1. 2. Meat Offerings: Made of fine flour, without Honey or Leaven,
and with Oil and Incense on the Altar, or Drying Pan, or Oven, or Caldron, Lev.
2. part whereof was sacred to the Lord, by fire; part for the Priests. 3.
Peace Offerings: The Fat and Kidneys whereof were to be burnt (the Fat and
Blood being universally forbidden them to eat) the breast and right shoulder
was the Priests: The rest went to the Sacrificer, to be caten the first or
second day, or the third day burnt with Fire, Lev. 3, and 7. 4. Sin Offerings,
viz. for sins of Ignorance of the Priest, Prince, People, etc. vide Lev. 4, and
6. 5. Trespass-Offerings, viz. in case of contempt, when the sin was done
willingly, Lev. 6. To these were adjoined Prayers and Praises with musical
instruments and voices. 6. Offerings of Consecration, proper to the Priests,
vide Lev. 6.10. 7. Of Purification, as of a Woman after Childbirth, Lev. 12. or
a Leper, Lev. 13, and 14. or for unclean issues of Men and Women, c. 15. 8. Of
Expiation on that Feast Day so called, Lev. 16.
Add to these, 1. The Lights. 2. Incense every morning and evening, on a golden
Altar, whereto the Priests only had access, with such perfume as is prescribed,
Exodus 30.


2. Gifts.

1. According to the Law.

1. First Fruits, of Man, of Beasts, of the Earth. 2. Tithes, to the Levites,
to the Priests, the Temple, a 3d. year's Tenth.
2. By Vow.

3. Of Free Will.

Now the Jews content themselves with reading the Precepts concerning
Sacrifices; comforting themselves with Hos. 14.3.

Ancient Christian.
Cyprian severely chides a rich Widow of his time, who came to the Sacrament,
without giving any thing to the poor man's box, did partake of others
Offerings, not giving any thing of her own, de Oper. and Eleemos.

Concerning the Oblations of the Primitive Christians, we may observe, 1. That
Bread and Wine was ordinarily Offered every Lord's Day, by all the men and
Women, Carranz. in Sum. Dec. Fabia. Pa. 2. That the Offerings of them who did
not Communicate, were not to be accepted, Id. Sum. Eliber. Conc. c. 28. 3. That
none were to receive these Offerings, but the Bishop, or his Substitute, upon
pain of being Anathematized, Conc. Gangr. c. 8. 4. That the Oblations were to
be distributed by the Bishop, according to the Necessity of the Faithful,
Carrauz. Sum. Decr. Urban. Pap. 12. qu. Res Eccl. 5. That of the Oblations of
the Faithful, or the Revenues of the Church, one part was to be allowed to the
Bishop, two parts for Church Repairs, and the Poor, and one for the Clerks, or
Clergy, according to their Merits. Idem. Sum. Decr. Simpl. Pa. 6. That the
offerings of such as did not receive the Lord's Supper, as did oppress the
Poor, as laid violent hands upon themselves, were not to be accepted. Idem, etc.


So also of such as had delivered up their Children to be Baptized by
Heretics. Idem.

7. That Oblations were not to be made in Lent. Idem.

Mohammedan.
The Mohammedan Pilgrims, in commemoration of Abraham's Sacrifice, offer upon
the Plain, near Medina, 400000 Sheep, on the Day of the little Bairam. M. de
Thev.

Ancient Heathen.
1. Obs. the kinds of Sacrifices.

1. Humane Sacrifices were offered to Saturn, in Carthage, etc. To Jupiter,
Apollo, Mars, Neptune, Bacchus, Juno, Diana, Pallas, Mercury, Moloch, etc.
Amongst the Romans, Scythians. Cauls, Egyptians, etc. And some Indians now. 2.
Beasts and Birds, etc. 1. White, to the Supernal Gods. 2. Black, to the
Infernal.

2. A Bull to Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Neptune, Luna, the Heroes.

A Ram to Mars and Jupiter. A Horse to Sol and Mars. A Do to Minerva and Pan.
A Lamb to Juno and Faunus. A Dove to Venus. A Sow to Ceres and Cybele. A Hog to
Sylvanus. A Cock to the Lares. A He-Goat to Bacchus.
The Women prostituted their own Bodies to Venus, at her Temple, for the use of
Strangers.

They must all be, 1. Of Fair Color. 2. Free from blemish. 3. Not used to
Labor. 4. Such as they had received no profit from.


They chose proper Garlands to adorn the Men, Sacrifices, Altars, Vessels, e. g.

In the Service of Bacchus, Myrtle.

Ceres, the Oak.

Hercules, Poplar.

Apollo, Laurel.

They chose proper Fuel for the Altars.

Myrtle for Venus.

Ash for Mars.

Oak for Jove, etc.

Natalis Comes tells, of Vengeance inflicted for improper Fuel, out of
Pausanias, etc.

They used proper Seasons of Service.

In the Morning, to the Spernal.

In the Evening, to the Infernal.

Proper Places.

On the Plain, to the Terrestrial.

On Hills, to the Supernal.

In Grots and Caves to the Infernal.

Modern Heathen.
The East-Indians offer Sacrifice (some of them) to the Sea; and generally to
the Idol in their Pagods, M. de Thev.

In Guinea, etc. if the Fishermen have not a good draught, they present a Piece
of Gold to the Priest, to reconcile them to the frowning Saint, who with his
Wives makes a kind of Procession through the Streets, smiting his Breast,
clapping his hands with a mighty noise, 'till he come to the shore, where they
cut down Boughs from certain Trees, and hang them on their Necks, playing on
Timbrels; then the Priest turns to the Wives, and expostulates with them, and
throws Wheat, and other things into the Sea, as an Offering to the Fetisso.
View of the Engl. Acqu. in Guinea, etc.

In Pegu and Bengala, the Idols are honored with Lights continually burning
before them. Rosse.

In Goa, they wash in a Cistern, near the Idol, and offer Rice, Eggs, etc. Idem.

The Gaurs, Kids, Hens, Pigeons.

In Malabar, they Sacrifice Flowers and Cocks to their Idol.

In Narsinga, the Pilgrims offer Gold, Silver, and Jewels to their Idol. Idem.

In Virginia, they offered Tobacco, etc.

In Mexico, etc. Men. Idem.

Diabolical.
Witches give their Soul and Body to the Devil.

And permit the Devil to suck their Blood, once in 24 hours.

And destroy the lives of as many as they can, in Devotion to the Devil.
Glanvil.

In Amboyna, they offer him Meat and Drink, and light a Wax-Candle in a certain
place of their Houses; and if he comes not, they eat most of the Consecrated
Meat themselves. Mandelslo.

The like they do in Ceylon. Capt. Knox.

4. Purifications, Washings, etc.
Jewish.
PUrification by Water, was long in use with the Jews, though not Sacramental;
therefore they expected it at the coming of the Messiah, John 1.25. They
questioned not his Baptism, but his Authority. Godw. Antiq.

To make a Woman-Profelyte of the Covenant, was required Purification by Water
and Oblation, viz. two Turtles, or Pigeons; to a Male-Profelyte Circumcision,
together with Purification and Oblation. Idem.

Purification was used, 1. To Males, before Circumcision. 2. To
Women-Proselytes of the Covenant. 3. To Women after Childbirth, as the Law
requires, Lev. 12. but with this difference among the Modern Jews, That after
the birth of a Daughter, the Wife retires for 66, or 70 Days, her Husband not
being permitted to touch her Finger, or Clothes, or cut in the same Dish, or
drink in the same Cup with her, 'till she has been washed, etc. Dr. Addison. 4.
To Churches, Vessels, etc.


Ancient Christian.
Hither may be referred the Baptism of Christiaus, which is a kind of
Purification; though we have spoken of it before, in the Chapter of Sacraments;
as may also the Lord's Supper, in which the Souls of true Believing
Communicants are purified in the Blood of Christ, that Lamb of GOD, which takes
away the sins of the World. This is that Fountain which was opened on purpose
for sin, and for uncleanness; which purifies more than the Refiners fire, or
the Fuller's Soap.

But ordinarily, Repentance is the Christian's purification, and that which
disposes and makes us meetly qualified for the Ordinances beforementioned;
both which are but declarative of this, and supposed in the Judgment of
Christian Charity, both in Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Other Purifications have been added in succeeding Ages, by the Papists
especially; as,

1. Purification, or Dedication of Churches, by Praying, Sprinkling the Walls
with holy Water, and a bundle of Hysop; the Clergy and People going about and
singing, the Bishop knocking the Door with his Crosier, saying, Lift up your
heads, O ye gates, etc. Then entering in with three Servants, wishing Peace
three times to the House, then on his knees to the Altar, and praying, whilst
the Clergy without sing the Litany, who afterward carry in the Relics of the
Saint to which the Church is Dedicated. The Walls are painted; Salt, Water,
Ashes, and Wine are exercised, and mixed, into which the Bishop having dipped his
Thumb, makes the sign of the Cross on the Altar, Walls, Pavement, offers
Incense, blesses the Church, Preaches, etc. all enter the Church singing, etc.

2. Of Altars; by going about them 7 times, and sprinkling them with Water and
Hysop 7 times, having first made 4 Crosses, on the 4 Horns of the Altars.

3. The Putinae, the Corporal, Chalice, Linen, Pix, Fonts, Crosses, Images,
First Fruits, Holy Water, Salt, Churchyard, Bells, Easter-Tapers, Chests,
wherein the Relics of the Saints are kept, etc. And these Purified or
Consecrated with Prayers. Washing, Crossing, Ancinting, Incense, etc.

Mohammedan.
The Turks have two kinds of Ablutions, 1. Gousl, viz. a general washing of the
whole body, after lying with their Wives, Nocturnal Pollution, Urine, or any
Unclean Thing touching them. 2. Abdest, viz. only of the Hands always before
Prayers. 3. After easing of Nature, they wash their Hands, etc.


To this end they have commonly near the Mosques, Baths for the Gousl, and
Fountains for the Abdest.

The manner thus; 1. They look toward Mecha, and wash the Hands three times. 2.
The Mouth and Teeth three times. 3. The Nose three times. 4. The Face three
times. 5. The Arms to the Elbow. 6. The Head rubbed from the Brow to the Poll.
7. The Ears within and without. 8. The Feet three times.


In washing they are to say -- Bismillah -- i. e. in the Name of the Great God,
and praise to God, the God of the Mussulman Faith, M. de Thevenot.

Ancient Heathen.
1. Men were thus purged, after they had touched a dead Body, or entered into an
unclean Place, before admitted to the Altar; They sprinkled their Head with a
wet Olive or Laurel dipped in Water and Salt, and made prayers to the God.

Spargit and ipse suos Lauro rorante Capillos,
Incipit and solita fundere voce preces.
Ovid. l. 5. Sometimes they used Sulphur and Fire made of Pine-wood, to perfume
the Person, Place or Vessel, etc.

When any sacrificed for his own purgation, after a wickedness committed, a Pig
was slain, and his Hands washed in the Blood.

In these Lustrations they used, 1. A Trine Aspersion. 2. Looking toward the
East.


2. Fields of Fruit, when purged, the Hostia was carried three times about the
Field.

Terque novas circum foelix eat Hostia fruges. Virg. l. 6. 3. Sacrifices were
washed with Water and Salt.

Modern Heathen.
An incredible concourse of People come from all parts of the Indies, in
Pilgrimage, to Chrysobacra, in the Province of Halabras, to visit the Pagods
kept there very carefully; but before they approach that place, (which they
look upon to be holy) they throw themselves stark naked into the River Ganges,
to be purified, -- supposing that Adam and Eve were created there, M. de
Thevenot. Trav. l. 3. c. 39.

This in order to prepare themselves for some Feasts, ibid.

In the Province of Telinga the Idolaters use frequent washings; Men, Women and
Children go to the river, as soon as they are out of Bed; the Rich have water
brought to them. When Women lose their Husbands, they are brought thither by
their Friends; and they who are brought to Bed, use the same custom, as soon
almost as they are delivered, idem. -- When they are come out of the water, a
Bramen dawbs their Forehead with a composition of Saffron and white Saunders.
-- They must never eat, unless they be washed.

The Bannyans wash often, to purify themselves from sin, Sir Tho. Herbert.

At Tanasseri also sometimes 100000 Indians go naked into Ganges, and bowing
their Bodies, with their Hands throw the water aloft, as an offering to the
Sun, Sir Tho. Herbert.

Diabolical.
The Witches at their meetings use to anoint themselves with Oil, which the
Devil brings them.

5. Teaching, Instruction, etc.
Jewish.
MOSES has of old, such as preach him, being read in their Synagogues every
Sabbath day, Act. 15.26.

Esdras appointed that the people should meet three times in the Week, to be
taught the Law, viz. the Sabbath, Mondays and Thursdays; and three days the
rather (say some) because in the Desert of Sur the people wandered three days
without water, i. e. (say they) without the Law.

Ancient Christian.
Justin Martyr says, that the word was read and preached for the space of an
hour every Sabbath day, at one meeting, Apolog.

Tertullian says, there was not any holy meeting, wherein they were not fed
with Divine Sermons; and if the Pastor were sick, or necessarily hindered, the
Deacon read a Homily, Mayer Chapter Cat.

1. The Primitive Christians at their Assemblies read the Scripture, St.
Clements's Epistle to the Corinthians, Hermas's Pastor, the Writings of St.
Ephrem, etc.

The Quantum Arbitrary, according to their opportunity, etc.

2. Upon the Scripture read before, the President of the Assembly, with the
Presbyters, gave expositions and exhortations to the people.

-- Then (after the Gospel read) let the Presbyters one by one exhort the
people, not all at once, and after all, the Bishop, as is fit for the Master to
do, Constable. App.

Greg. Nyssen excuses his brevity, because of the discourses made before.

They had moreover Sermons in the Afternoon. Chysostom in a Homily on this very
subject ((...), Hom. 10. ad Pop. Antioch.) commends them that came to Church
after Dinner, -- in greater numbers, -- to hear the Divine Laws.

St. Basil, St. Augustine, etc. frequently refer to those Sermons, which they
had. preached in the Mornings.

In Antioch it was usual for a good part of the year to have Sermons every day,
Chrysostom.

Origin every day, and as it were extempore, made Sermons to the People.
Casaubon. His Sermons were lively, but short, seldom exceeding an hour, J. H.
in the Life of Orig.

The Abyssins have neither Preaching nor Hymns; but only Liturgies and
Homilies, and several Portions of Scripture read. Ludolph. Yet for the younger
sort they have Catechizing. Idem.

The Muscovites (no, not their Monks and Priests) cannot give any reason of
their belief; because they have not the word of God preached unto them: And
therefore the Patriarch suffers them not to dispute of Religion, nor enquire
into that of Foreigners, D. of Holstein's Emb. Trav.

Those who are to profess the Muscovite Religion, are sent for six weeks into a
Monastery, where the Monks Instruct them, and teach them their Prayers, the
manner of Honoring the Saints, of doing reverence to the Images, and making
the signs of the Cross. Idem. The Protopope of Morum with others, were deposed
and Banished, for offering to preach.

Mohammedan.
Mahometans, when they teach publicly, hold a drawn Sword in their hand.

Mutewakelus (a Mahomet Emperor) Prayed and Preached before the People.

Muhtadis Billa, sat Preaching to the people every Monday and Thursday, having
a Book always before him, Hotting. ex Elmas.

On Friday nine a Clock the Imam preaches in a pulpit two hours together,
either declaring the Miracles of Mahomet, or exalting the Faith of the
Mahomcians, or rehearsing fabulous Tales to terrify the bad, or inveighing
against the Blasphemers of Mahomet, Christ and the Saints, exhorting to Alms,
saying over the Commandments of the Law, Sa. Purchase.

Ancient Heathen.
A great number of youths assemble to the Druids for the Cause of Discipline,
who are in great honor with them, Caes. de bell. Gal. being moved by such
rewards ( viz. privileges of the Druids); and of their own accord many come
together into this Discipline, and are sent by their Neighbors, and Parents;
there they are said to learn a certain number of Verses: Some stay twenty years
in the Discipline, Idem.

The Ancient Theologues, amongst the Egyptians, instructed their Scholars in
like manner, Towerson.

Modern Heathen.
In Madagascar, I saw one (who was certainly their Priest) getting up a Tree,
and speaking to the people, for above half an hour; but not one of us
understanding their Language, I know not what discourse he made to them; nor
yet what difference there is between their priest and people, save that I
observed, they carried at the end of a Cane, a piece of Cow's Tail, and that
one of them suffered the Nails of his two fore-fingers to grow to the length of
Eagles Claw's, Mandelslo's Trav. p. 207.

Ortelius mentions a strange custom among the Tartars, that their Priests on
high Trees preach to them; and after Sermon, besprinkle their Auditors, with
Blood, Milk, Earth and Cow Dung mixed together, Rosse.

In Pegu the peoples Alms are brought to the preachers in the pulpits, whilst
preaching, Idem.

In Mexico the priests did preach on some Festival days to the people, Idem.

Diabolical.
The Devil uses several ways for the instruction of his Scholars.

1. Sometimes he is seen to go in a visible shape through the Country (as in
Sweedland, A.D. 1669. and 1670) and appearing daily to the people, working upon
the weaker sort by presenting them with Meat and drink (not Spiritual Manna.)

2. Sometimes he assembles his Disciples in a Church by night, and appears to
them in the Habit of a black man, with a little-Band, instructing them out of
the pulpit, Glanvil.

3. Sometimes at his night-meetings, he exhorts them to observe his Laws, to do
mischief; and promises, they shall want nothing, Cloths, Victuals, nor Money,
Idem.

N. B. The Name of God or Jesus Christ is never used, or mentionen'd at their
Meetings: But yet where it may serve for his purpose, the Devil can pray and
preach too, and that exceeding well, Vide Dr. Dec's Actions with Spirits: and
Quote Scripture readily, S. Matthew. c. 4.

6. Sacraments, Vows.
Jewish.
1. CIreumcision, called a sign, Genesis 17. a Seal, Romans 4.11. Observe,

1. The Time; the 8th day precisely.

1. That a Sabbath might pass over it. 2. Or to show that God is not tied to
Sacraments in the Salvation of persons. 3. Or, that it might be out of its
legal uncleanness, its blood, Lev. 22.27. c. 12.2, 3.
2. The penalty for Omission, viz. Cutting-off, by bodily Death probably, or
Excommunication.

3. The manner. The Jews, 1. Bathe the Child often, to take away the filth. 2.
Bring it to the Synagogue in Parade, with several Boys, one bearing a Torch of
12 lights; 3. Another a dish of Sand, to throw the Prepuce into: Another the
Circumcisang instrument (of wood, stone, iron, etc.) also oil, rags, etc. a
Cordial Sometimes. 4. The Baal-berith gives the Child to Mohel, etc. See more
in Book Second.


2. The Passover.

See before in the Chapter of Times of public Worship, Festivals, etc.

Some Jews will not suffer the Women to make clean the House (in preparation
for the Passover) because (they say) Talkativeness is so natural to that Sex,
that they cannot perform the Office with so great silence, as is required. Dr.
Addison.

Ancient Christian.
1. Baptism; wherein observe,

1. By whom it was administered; 1. By the President. Just. M. Antistes. Tertul.
the Bishop. Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrn. Tertul. de Bapt. S. Hierom says it was so in
his time: Sometimes the Bishop began, the Prosbyters carried it on. 2.
Presbyters and Deacons, Tertull. Philip Baptized. 3. A Man Orthodox. Cyprian
with 87 African Bishops more (in Con. Carth.) was for rebaptizing persons
baptized by Heretics. 4. Lay-unordained persons in case of Necessity, as
Tertull. Hierom, etc. positively asserts and Conc. Illibar. rectified the
custom, with this proviso, that if the person lived, he should have
confirmation from the Bishop, for they account none could be saved without
Baptism by Water or Blood (Font or Martyrdom.) 5. Women never allowed to
baptize, unless among Heretics. 6. Athanasius's case, viz. Baptizing when a
Boy, was rare.


2. To whom; 1. Infants, v. Irenaeum, Tertul. Orig. Cypr. etc. 2. Adult, after
they had been Catechized, and given account of their proficiency to the Bishop.


3. When; 1. All times alike, at the first; afterward, 2. From Easter or
Whitsuntide; whence dying to sin, etc. 3. Clinici, in case of Sickness or
Death, any time.


4. Where; 1. Where was Water. Just. M. 2. Ponds, Springs, Rivers, etc. Tertul.
3. Baptisteria, near, or in the Church; these were large, with a partition for
Men and Women.


5. How; 1. With great nakedness and simplicity. 2. Afterward, there was
Catechizing; the Catechumen sat with his Face toward the West; hands stretched
out, interrogated, insufflated, anointed, immersed 3 times, anointed again, and
clothed with a white Garmen.


Confirmation.

Infants when adult, Adult Persons a little after Baptism, were brought to the
Bishop, and anointed sometimes ( viz. if they had not had Complete Baptism,
vid. Con. Aurant.) always confirmed by imposition of Hands, with devout
Prayers, that the person confirmed might grow in Grace, and be enabled to
perform the Vows of Baptism.

Lords Supper. Observe,

1. The Persons administering, viz. the President only, Tertul. de Coron. Mil.
c. 3. who consecrated the Deacons distributing, Just. Mart. Apol. 2.

2. The Communicants;

1. At first, the whole Church.

2. As Christians multiplied, and a more exact Disciplines grew necessary, the
Faithful only, Catechumens and Penitents being excluded, scandalous persons
debarred.

Persons sick, or on just causes absent, had some little pieces of the
Consecrated Bread dipped in the Cup carried to them usually by the Deacon,
sometimes by any other person.

3. Persons dead, i. e. such as lapsed and died suddenly, to show that they
died in the Communion of the Church.

This abrogated by the Council. Carth. 3. and Trull. 1.

4. New Baptized Infants, commonly.

3. The Time.

1. What days; Every Lord's Day, besides other Days, and especially Saturdays,
on which all the Churches in the World (except Rome and Alexandria) used to
celebrate this Sacrament. Socrat. l. 5. c. 22.

2. What time of the Day?

1. Our Savior at Night. 2. When the Apostles did, is doubtful. 3. Tertullian
says, at Supper, tempore victus. 4. In the Morning, before day. Plin. l. 10.
Ep. 97. And Cyprian pleads for the Morning. ad Cecil. Ep. 63.
This Custom obtained generally, except in some places of Egypt. Socrat. l. 5.

3. How often? vid. post.

1. At first, every day, as often as they came together for Public Worship. We
receive the Eucharist every day. Cypr. de Orat. Dom. So S. Ambrose says of his
Church at Milan. So S. Hierom of Rome.

In the East, the custom wore off sooner. S. Basil speaks of four times a Week.
Lord's Day, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday; besides Festivals.

2. Afterward, once a Week, three times a Year, etc.

4. The Place where; 1. Our Savior in a House, at the Jews Passover. 2. The
Apostles in an upper Room, set apart for Church Service. 3. In Times of
Persecution, on Mountains, Crypt^, Tombs of Martyrs, etc. 4. When Temples were
built, at the Eastend of the Church; on a Table of Wood or Stone, senced in
with Rails. Out of this place they were forbid to Communicate, Laod. Cone. Can.
58. unless in great necessity.


5. The manner. After the Service of the Catechumens

1. They offered all somewhat.

2. Out of the Offerings (which the Pastor laid upon the Altar) the Bread and
Wine for the Sacrament were taken, viz. common Bread; no dispute then about
leavened or unleavened Bread.

3. Hence also, probably, they had Provisions for the Agapae, where Rich and
Poor feasted together. At ^^^st, probably, before the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.
Every one took his own Supper. Afterward, in Chrysostom's time, it was after
the Sacrament: for they fasted till the Sacrament.

4. The Elements being prepared, 1. The Deacon brought Water to wash the
Bishop's and Priest's hands. I will wash my hands in Innocence, v. Constit. Ap.
l. 8. 2. They Deacon cried aloud, Mutually embrace and kiss each other (this is
the holy kiss) when thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, etc. 3. They prayed
for universal Peace, wholesome Weather, Kings, etc. See the Form. Consist.
Apost. 4. The Minister and People mutually saluted; saying, Priest. The Lord be
with you. People. And with thy Spirit. Pr. Let us give Thanks unto the Lord.
Peop. It is meet and just so to do.



5. The Minister rehearsed the Prayer of Consecration, giving Thanks for the
Death, Resurrection, etc. of the Son, etc. for admitting them to those
Benefits; praying for a closer Union. Ending with the Lord's Prayer.

6. The Minister cried, (...). Ans. There is one Holy, one Lord. J. Chapter

7. They exhorted to participation by a Hymn, Come, Taste and see, that the
Lord is good. Cyril.

8. The Bishop, or Priest, Sanctified the Elements. See the Form in S. Ambros.
de Sacram. l. 4. c. 5.

9. They brake the Bread, delivering it to the Deacon, and he to the
Communicants; then the Cup; the Wine mixed with Water. For Infants and wealt,
the Bread dipped in Wine was given.

10. The posture was various, in Dionys. Alezander's time, standing. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 9.

11. The People stretched out the right hand, the left hand being under it.
Cyril.

12. During the Administration they sung Psalms ( Ps. 33. Constit. Apost.) and
Hymns.

13. Concluded with Prayer and Thank sgiving.

14. Saluted each other with a Kiss of Peace, (signaculo Orationis. Tertul.
Enlogiae) pieces of Bread sent to Catechumens etc.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans used Circumcision after the 8th. Year, when the Child is able
to make confession of his Faith, where, lifting up his Finger, he speaks these
words:

There is but one God, and Mahomet his Prophet, one God, and equal Prophets.

After Circumcision ended, they Feast three days together, and then they carry
the Circumcised to a Bath, with great Pomp, and then home again, presenting him
with gifts.

Circumcision not commanded in the Alcoran.

The Women are not circumcised, but only use the words.

When any Christian abjures his Faith, and is circumcised, they are led through
the Town with great honor and rejoicing, and exempted from Taxes and Tributes.

Yet the Moors of Egypt circumcise their Daughters, cutting off some of their
Nymphae M. de Thev.

The Old Arabians circumcised at thirteen years of age, Rosse.

In Mexico the Priests washed the Newborn Children, and let them blood in the
Ears, Rosse.

Ancient Heathen.
In answer to Circumcision and Baptism.

The Heathen Romans (every Citizen) gave notice of the birth of their Children
to the Prefects of the Treasury in the Temple of Saturn, upon the Ninth day for
the Male, the Eighth for a Female, (but the Tenth amongst the Greeks) upon
which day (called therefore Dies Lustricus, and Nominalia) the Child was
Purified, Named.

They accounted the Child in danger till the seventh day past.

The supposed Goddess of the day, was called Nundina.

The Grecians on the fifth day had their Midwives to carry the Child, and run
about a fire made for the purpose, for the purification of the Infant, and
consecrating of it to the Household Gods. This day was called (...), Dr. Holyday
on Juvenal.

Modern Heathen.
The Inhabitants of Ceilon dedicate a Cock to the Devil (by way of Vow) in case
of sickness, Capt. Knox.

The most Ancient Historians tell us, that the Egyptians were the first that
instituted Circumcision, or else learned it from the Ethiopians; thence it came
to be used among the Cholchi, Phenicians and Syrians, Ludolph.

They of Alnajah circumcise with sharp Stones; and Epiphanius quotes the
Homerites for the same custom; from whence came the Abyssinians, Idem.

The Troglodytes, Nigrites and other innumerable Nations use it for
cleanliness, or for generation (as conducive to it) or because they have a
longer Praeputium, idem.

Among the Abyssins, Egyptians and Arabians even the Women are circumcised; and
the most impudent about the Cape of Good-hope, who yet prostitute themselves
for a small matter to the Seamen. My Author wonders, that only in Africa and
Asia the Women should have such extuberances, as have need to be cut off, idem.

O Bandaron, O Uncircumcised, is as great a Reproach among these Women, as O
Arel, i. e. O Incircumcised, amongst the Jewish Men, idem.

Among the Bannyans the Priests, Children and Merchants (i. e.) Bramins and
Bannyans in Baptism anoint with Oil, and cleanse with Water: the prophaner
sort, (Men of War and Manufactures) have only Water with the point of a Pen
opposed to their Foreheads, Sir Th. Herb.

Diabolical.
The Witches renounce their Christian Baptism, and suffer the Devil to pour
Water upon them, and take another Feigned Name in their Fictitious Baptism,
Mart. Delrio Disq. Mag. l. 5. Sec. 16.

Also for a Pledge, they give a Fragment of their Garments, and write their
Names, or make their Marks with their own Hands, in the Book of Damned
Reprobates, ibid.

Some offer the Sacramental Bread to the Devil.

Also the Wizard or Witch in some secret part of the Body, has a kind of a
Dug, which the Familiar Spirit at certain seasons sucks; thereby receiving some
service, and peradventure infusing some malignant virtue and power into the
Witch; which serves as a kind of Sacrament to them for the conveyance of
continual nourishment, Glanv. Consid. on Witches.

Dr. Dee, when his Son Rowland was sick, ready to die, made a Vow (if God
should restore his Son) to eat but one meal on Saturdays, etc. Act. with Spir.
p. 10. vid. post. cap. de Jejun.

Mr Mather tells of a Diabolical Sacrament in Bread and Wine, Wonders of the
Invisible World.

7. Fasting, Mortification, Penances.
Jewish.
THE Fasts of the Jews are,

1. Public, which are many, concerning which we have given account already in
the Monthly Festivals; save only that we omitted one which is kept in the Month
of Tizri (or September) for the death of Gedaliah, Jer. 41.2.

2. Private, as

1. On Mondays.

The reasons of which see before in the Chapter of weekly times of Public
Worship.

2. Thursdays.

Which are kept only by the Devouter Sort.

The general rule in all their Fastings is to forbear Meat and Drink till the
Stars appear; but in this they are palpably carnal, relying upon the very doing
of the Work, Dr. Addison.

Some fast on the 10th of March, because Miriam died that day, and the People
wanted Water in the Desert.

Some on the 10th of April, for the death of Eli and his two Sons, and the loss
of the Ark.

Some also on the 18th for the death of Samuel.

But the Only Fast, that God commanded them, was that upon the Day of Expiation.

The manner of keeping their Fasts is,

1. By abstaining from all Meats and Drinks, till the Stars appear.

2. Reading no passages in the Bible, but such as are mournful, as the
Destruction of Jerusalem, Jeremiah's Lamentations, etc. Rosse.

Ancient Christian.
Lent, Quadragesima, so called, either because at first it lasted forty hours,
viz. from 12 of the Clock on Friday till Easter-Sunday morning; or because
afterward it was extended to forty days; at last to 3, 6, 7 weeks.

It was observed in the First Century.

It was kept (especially the last week of it) with great stictness,
mortifications (all Process and Inquiry into criminal Actions and Corporal
Punishments suspended) Acts of Prayer, Abstinence, etc. In other parts of Lent
they fasted till the Evening, in the last week till Midnight or Cock-crowing,
vid. Zonar. in Synod. Tom. 2. part 1. p. 1.

The last week, called Hebdomada Magna, on which they Fasted, Watched, did
Alms, suspended Suits at Law, shut the Tribunal Doors, set Prisoners free, Dr.
Cave.

The Sinner, when he began to mislike himself, i. e. to be penitent for his
wicked life, for that he had offended God and his Church, came first unto the
Bishop and Priests, as unto the Mouths of the Church, and opened to them the
whole burden of his Heart; afterward he was by them brought into the
Congregation, and there made the same confession before his Brethren; and
further was appointed to make satisfaction by open Penance; which Penance being
duly and humbly done, he was restored again openly unto the Church, by laying
on of Hands of the Priests and Elders, Bish. Jewel out of Beatus Rhenanus.

Fasts on Wednesdays and Fridays, Jejunia Quartae and sextae Feriae, (
stationes, because they kept close to them as to their Guard) celebrated with
reading, and expounding Sripture, Divine Service, Sacraments, and fasting till
three a Clock, in remembrance of Christ Betrayed and Crucified.

Mohammedan.
Ramazan is the name of the Mahometans Lent, which continues thirty days,
during which they eat nothing in the daytime, but when night comes, all Meats
are indifferent, but Swines-flesh; yet they abstain from Wine and Women.

The last day of Lent, they consecrate as a day of Mourning to the memory of
their deceased Friends, when many of the meaner sort seem to make a most bitter
lamentation, and then at night they fire an innumerable company of Lamps and
other Lights; and when burnt out, the Lent is ended.

The day after their Ramjam, the most devout assemble at their Mosquits, and
hear some parts of the Alcoran.

Ancient Heathen.
1. The Galli were such Priests as gelded themselves.

2. At Hierapolis the Pilgrims were to sacrifice a Sheep, to kneel and pray
upon the Fleece, to lay the Head and Feet of the Sheep upon their Heads (to
crown themselves) to drink cold water only, and sleep on the ground till their
return, Rosse.

3. The Hierophantae, among the Athenians, were such Priests, as castrated
themselves with the drinking of Hemlock, that they might live more chaste in
their Office, Text. Offic.

4. The Priests of the Egyptians were sparing in their Victuals to a wonder,
abstaining from Flesh and Wine; and seldom eating Bread, lest they should
overcharge their Stomachs; only Oil and Sallad-herbs were their common food;
not so much as tasting Eggs or Milk; enduring sometimes a three days fast, Idem.

5. The Persian Magi used no other food than Meal and Herbs, Id.

6. The Indian Gymnosophists fed upon Apples or Flour, Id.

Apollonius Tyaneus abstained from Bread and Flesh.

Archimolus and Moschus (Sophisters of Aeli) drank Water and ate nothing but
Figs all their life, Id.

On the Festivals called Nephalia, the Ancient Greeks abstained from Wine,
whence they gave them their name Diamastigosis, See the Second Part.

Modern Heathen.
An Indian Faquir intending to invent a new Spell of Devotion, resolved to
measure with his Body, the whole extent of the Mogul's Empire, from Bengala as
far as Caboul, i. e. from S. E. to N. W.

The Pretext for so doing, was, that being present at the Feast of Houly, he
had a kind of Novices to wait upon him and serve him: At the beginning of his
journey he laid himself out at full length, on the ground upon his Belly; and
marking it, and so rising up again, to walk it; and so down and up again
continually. This was performed punctually; and he made a Cosse and half a day,
i. e. three quarters of a League; so that at the years end he was got no
farther than the utmost bounds of the Province of Halibas: but was loaded with
Charity all the way, M. de Theven.

In the Pagod Chitanagar, on each side of the Wall, is a square hole, and in
the middle of the thickness of it, a long Iron Screw, entering perpendicularly
into the Wall like a Bar: The Irons served to fasten Ropes to, for supporting
those who performed voluntary Penance for seven days, Idem.

The Bramins shun Pleasure, drink Water, Sir Tho. Herbert.

The Gentiles in the East Indies are great Fasters, and none of them let a
Fortnight pass without it; and then they fast 24 hours: A great many of them
will fast six or seven days; and they say there are some that will fast a whole
Month, without eating any more than a handful of Rice a day; and others that
will eat nothing at all, only drink Water, in which the Root Criata^ has been
boiled. When a Woman is at the end of one of these long Fasts, the Bramen goes
with his Companions to the House of the Penitent, and beats a Drum, and permits
her to eat and return home, M. de Thev. l. 3. p. 82.

Diabolical.
While I was thus requesting God, Edward Kelly made a Vow of Penance, during
his Life never to eat his Supper, or Evening-Meal, on Satdr days, Dr. Dee's
Act. with Sp. p. 334.

The Witches in New England kept Fasting-Days.

8. Feasting, etc.
Jewish.
FEASTS, Twofold.

1. (...), upon the Remainder of a Sacrifice.

2. (...), Compotatio, etc.

Concerning which, observe,

1. The Preparation. They Saluted, Kissed, washed the Guests Feet, by a
Servant; anointed the Head and Feet.

2. Carriage at Table.

1. The Master consecrates a Cup of Wine thus: Blessed be Thou, O Lord our God,
the King of the World, which createst the Fruit of the Vine.

2. He tastes the Cup, and passes it about the Table.

3. Breaks the Bread, and holding it in both hands, blesses it thus: Blessed
be Thou, O Lord our God, the King of the World, which bring forth Bread out
of the Earth.

Thus on Festivals; at other times they blessed the Bread alone.

4. After eating, and good Discourse, the Master, or some Guest, began thus:

Let us bless Him, who has fed us with His own, and of whose Goodness we live.

All the Guests answered;

Blessed be He of whose Meat we have eaten, and of whose goodness we live.

Then the Master proceeded:

Blessed be He, and blessed be His Name, etc. annexing a long Prayer, in which
he gave thanks, 1. For present Food. 2. Deliverance out of Egypt. 3.
Circumcision. 4. The Law.


And Prayed, 1. For the People Israel. 2. The City Jerusalem. 3. Sion, the
Tabernacle of His Glory. 4. The Kingdom of David's House. 5. The coming of
Elias. 6. That God would make them worthy of those Days, and the Life of the
World to come.


Then the Guests answer: Fear the Lord, all ye his Saints, for there is no
lack, etc.

Afterward he blessed the Cup, as before, and then drunk round.

And, lastly, they sung a Hymn.

Their gesture was lying on Beds.

They sent Portions to the needy.

Ancient Christian.
The Christian-Feasts, used in Primitive Times, were called Agapae, or
Love Feasts.

The manner thus:

1. They prayed to God, before they ventured upon His Creatures.

2. Ate but what sufficed Hunger, drank no more than consisted with sober and
modest Men, and fed so, as remembering they were to rise at night to worship God.

3. When they had done, they sung Psalms, either of their own Composure, or out
of the Holy Volumes.

4. And as they began, so they ended the Feast with Prayer.

5. And then departed with the same care to preserve their Modesty and
Chastity; so that they appeared not so much to have Feasted at Supper, as to
have fed upon Discipline and Order. So Tertullian.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans have a kind of Easter-Feast, which they call Bayran, which
lasts three days, in which they enjoy all sorts of Pleasures.

They have also great Feasting at the Circumcision of their Males.

They observe diverse Festivals. Rosse.

Ancient Heathen.
The Romans, after Sacrificing, went to Feast upon the remaining part of the
Beast, singing the praises of their God: After the Banquet, they did return to
the Altar, and cast into the Flames the Morsels of Meat that were left, with
the Tongue, and some Wine, and then did return thanks to the God for the honor
and advantage of sharing with him in the Victim. This ended, they concluded
with Prayers. D Assigny upon Galir. p. 26.

At their ordinary Feasts, they had Libationes.

To retrench the Expenses of their Feasts, and oblige them to Frugality and
Moderation, there were several Laws enacted amongst the Romans, called Leges
Sumptuariae, concerning which more may be seen in A. Gellius, Macrobius, etc.

The order and manner of their Feasts was thus: 1. As to the time; it was
commonly at Supper. 2. Water was brought to wash with.


Modern Heathen.
In Tanquin, they keep I casts commonly all Day and Night; their most esteemed
Meats are Colt's Flesh; and Dog's Flesh; most of their Dishes are relished with
a kind of Birds-nest, which gives them a taste of almost all sorts of Spices.
They conclude commonly with Comedies and Fireworks. Tavernier.

Diabolical.
At the Entertainments which the Devil makes for Witches by night, Glanvil
mentions Wine, Cake, Roast-Meat, Drink, Dances, Music.

And the Devil at Meeting, bids them welcome.

9. Church Discipline, Excommunication.
Jewish.
Observe here,

1. THE Causes of Excommunication, 1. Among the old Jews, were only 1.
Leprosy. 2. Touching the Dead. 3. An Issue.
2. Among the Modern Jews are added, 1. Scandalizing a Master, though dead. 2.
Reviling a public Minister of Justice. 3. Calling a Freeman a Slave. 4. Not
appearing at the Consistory, etc. 5. Undervaluing a single Precept. 6. Not
doing what is appointed. 7. Keeping what may hurt another, as a Hiring Dog,
broken Scales. 8. Selling Land to a Gentile. 9. Witnessing in a Heathen Court,
against a Hebrew. 10. A Priest Sacrificing, and not giving the rest of the
Priests their due. 11. Working on the Fore-noon, before the Passover. 12.
Pronouncing the Name of God carelessly, or with an Oath, or in lofty
Hyperbolical Terms. 13. Causing the Vulgar to profane it. 14. Computing times
out of (otherwise than their Forefathers in) the Holy Land. 15. Causing the
Vulgar to eat holy things out of holy places. 16. Causing the Blind to stumble.
17. Hindering the Vulgar in any Command. 18. A Priest Sacrificing a torn Beast.
19. Killing a Beast with a Knife, not yet tried by a Rabbi, etc. 20. Moroseness
and backwardness to learn. 21. Associating with a Wife, after himself has
Divorced her. 22. A wise Man, or Rabbi, of ill Fame. 23. Undeservedly
Excommunicating another. 24. Profaning the Festivals.



2. The Kings, or Degrees; 1. Niddui, the lowest. 2. Schammatha. 3. Cherem.


Concerning which, see in the Second Book.

Ancient Christian.
Observe,

1. What Crimes. All public in themselves, or made known to the Church, after
private admonition.

The greatest Temptation was to Idolatry; committed, 1. By Exposing the
Scriptures, called Traditores. 2. Actual Sacrificing, called Thurificati. 3.
Purchasing a Warrant from the Magistrate to execute them, called, Libellatici.


2. What Penalties; viz. Spiritual Excommunication for 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 20, 30,
years, sometimes for their whole Life, according to the Offense.

Clergymen forfeited their Ministry: And tho upon repentance admitted to
Communion, yet but as Laymen.

Abstineri (...), etc. Anathematizari. (...) Anathematizari.
Are all Synonymous terms signifying Excommunication.

3. What manner.

1. Reproofs and Exhortations were used in the Assembly.

2. The Censure was passed; not always in a formal manner, the Fact being
notorious, and the offender, ipso facto, excommunicate.

The Excommunicate appeared in a sordid habit, with a sad Countenance, a head
hung down, tears in their Eyes, standing without at the Church-doors, (never
suffered to enter in) falling down to the Ministers as they went in, and
begging the Prayers of all good Christians, making open Confession of their
Faults. This was to satisfy, 1. The Church of their Repentance, and for the
Scandal. 2. God; by acknowledging the fault, and beging pardon.


4. The time of Penance ended, they addressed themselves to the Governors of
the Church for Absolution; their repentance examined, and found sincere, they
were openly readmitted by imposition of hands: The party kneeling down between
the Bishop's knees (or the Presbyters in his Absence) the Bishop laying his
hands on him, and blessing him.

The Penitent was now received with acclamations of joy (sometimes weeping) for
his Recovery, to the Lord's Supper, etc.

The set time of Penance was remitted in case of Death, Persecution, many
Offenders, Dignity, Age, etc.

4. The Persons Excommunicating; 1. The public Congregation, the people.
Cyprian. 2. The Elders, President, Tertull. 3. The Majores Natu presiding in
the Church, Firmilian. in a letter to Cyprian. 4. Only the Bishop, Conc.
Illiber. can. 32. or, 5. The Presbyter or Deacon in necessity, Ibid. and Cypr.
6. In the Decian Persecution, a public Penitentiary.


Martyrs gave sometimes Libellos to mitigate the Penance.

Mohammedan.
The Mahometans have none, but punish by Civil Magistrates.

Yet their Dervices do undergo voluntary Penances, far exceeding the Romanists
herein, putting such massy Fetters of Iron upon their Legs, as that they could
scarce stir with them, and then covered with blew Mantles (the Color of
Mourners) going as fast as they are able, barefoot many miles together, upon
the hot parching ground in Pilgrimage, to visit the Sepulchers of their Saints,
suffering and waiting for their Recompense in that better life to come.

Once in their lives they are obliged by their Law to go one Pilgrimage to
Mecha: Which is thus; All the way they sing Verses of the Alcoran, bestow
Charity, etc. Two days before they arrive at Mecha they strip naked, and
continue so 8 days, and go round the Kiaabe 7 times, Praying, with an Imam
before them.

Ancient Heathen.
Corn. Cethegus, and Qu. Sulpitius ( Roman Priests) were put out of Office; the
one, because he let fall the Apex (which the Priests carried) in Sacrificing,
from his Head; the others, because he did not place the Entrals of the Victim
aright.

The Druids, if any person, private or public, (engaged in Controversy) will
not stand to their determination, they forbid them the Sacrifices, Caesar de
Bell. Gall. They sit in a Consecrated place, whither all come for the hearing
of Controversies. The persons thus suspended were accounted impious and
execrable: All men shunned their company.

The Unclean were driven away from Sacrifices by the Herald, crying, Procul
este profani.

Vestal Virgins, becoming incontinent, were bound alive, carried on a Bier,
through the Forum, with great silence and horror; set on a Ladder, by which
she descended into a Cave (where was prepared a Bed, a burning Light, a little
Bread, Water and Milk): the Ladder drawn up, the Cave's Mouth was filled up
with earth, either that such an offender might not be honored with burning, or
that being a Consecrate Virgin, she might dye, as it were, of her own accord,
says Plutar.

Modern Heathen.
In the East Indies, when a Man or Woman has committed a sin, that makes them
be expelled the Cast (as if a Woman had lain with a Mohammedan) she must, in
order to be readmitted, live upon no nothing else for a certain time, but the
grain that is found amongst Cow Dung, M. de Thev.

10. Marriage and Divorce.
Jewish.
1. MArriage, Concerning the Marriage of the Ancient Jews, I refer my Reader to
Sacred Scripture.

The Barbary-Jews admit not any unmarried Sect among them. Concerning their
Marriages observe, 1. Whom they marry. One of their own Tribe. 2. When. Their
Daughters often are betrothed at ten Years of Age, and if Rich, married when
young. 3. How. 1. The first visit is short, to prevent disparagement, if it
succeed not.


2. In case of liking, Presents are sent.

3. Articles are drawn up particularly even 'till it come to the Night-dress.

4. A Dowry is made by the Man.

5. The Woman is affianced, i. e. given to the Man, by some near Relation.

6. For eight Days, the Woman uses Bathing.

7. On the Marriage-Eve, she is put, by two Matrons, into Tabila, a Cistern of
cold Water, (not a Hair above Water;) when she comes out, her Hair is neatly
dressed up.

8. On the Marriage-Day, they put on their Wedding-Robes, retire to their
private Devotions, and then to the Synagogue-Service.

9. Then returns he to his Bride, sitting in a Chair, having a Virgin on each
hand, puts the Kedusim, or Wedding-Ring, on her Thumb, or any Finger of her
right Hand, calling Witnesses.

10. The Rabbi says a Prayer.

11. After Prayer, having blessed, and tasted a Glass of Wine, he gives it to
the Bridegroom, who breaks it in remembrance of the destruction of the Temple.

12. The Bridegroom takes off the Bride's Veil, gives her the right hand, sits
down by her, discourses a while, retire into the Lodging-Room, wherein are two
Beds on the Floor, to one of which the Bridegroom betakes himself, after the
Tokens received, Deuteronomy. 22. and a certain short Mystical Prayer used.

13. For eight days they Feast, Neighbors come and pray with the Man, the
Woman being allowed these eight Days for Purification; the Man sees her not,
but at meal-times.

14. At a woman's first meeting her husband, she walks thrice about him; and
the man once about the woman.

2. Divorce; concerning which, and more concerning Marriage, see in the Second
Book.

Ancient Christian.
None could lawfully Marry, till they had first advised with the Bishop and
Clergy, and obtained their leave (probably to secure them from Marrying with
Gentiles) v. Tertull. de Monog, c. 11. etc ad Vx. l. 2. c. 2.9.

Pope Calixtus first Prohibited Matrimony between those that were near akin (
consanguineos, of the same Blood) such as the Laws of God, of the Emperors,
Greek and Roman, admitted to the Inherirance, Carrauz. in Decr. Calixti Pa.

Christians were forbid to Marry with Infidels, Idem. Sum. Elibert. Conc. c.
15.16, 17.

S. Jerome speaks of sponsalitius annulus, upon Job c. 8. and on Isa. 3. and
Beda calls it, sincera fidei signaculum, on Luke c. 5. Hom. 40.

Pope Euristus, in his first Epistle to the African Bishops, shows in what
manner Christian Matrimony ought to be Celebrated, Viz.

1. Let a Wife be sought, and betrothed by the Parents that are next to her, (a
Parentibns Propinquioribus:) [ i. e. I suppose, Father, Grandfather, etc.]

2. Let her be blessed in a Priestly manner (as the custom is) with Prayers and
Orations by the Priest.

3. Let her be kept and attended by the Brideman and Bride-maid; and for two or
three days let them be at leisure for Prayers, and preserve their Chastity,
that good Children may be generated, and they may please the Lord in their
Actions; otherwise (says he) account them rather Adulteries, Lewdness, or
Fornication, than Wedlock, Carrauz. in Decr. Eucaristi Pa.

Mohammedan.
The Turks may have three sorts of Wives; lawful Wives, Wives of Kebin, and
Slaves.

1. The first are thus Married; 1. The Man agrees with the Maid's Parents for
her Dowry. 2. The Cady, with two Witnesses, writs down the agreement. 3. Before
the Celebration the Imam blesses the Marriage. 4. On the day, the Bride muffled
up, is led to the Bride-groom's House to Feasting and Music, etc.


They may have four Wives.

For Wives of Kebin, less ceremony serves.

Divorces are thus;

The Husband goes before a Cady, and says, I part with her, for three times;
allowing her a Dowry, if he Divorce her wrongfully, nor may she Marry again
till after four Months.

Ancient Heathen.
A Soothsayer and Witnesses were present at Marriages; the one to give token of
good luck ( e. g. a Crow, because one dying, the other lives without a Mate,)
the others (Signatores) to Seal the form of the Contract.

They gave the Bride Golden Coin in a Charger, which some think was stamped,
with the Resemblance of the Bridegroom, or Bride, or both, Dr. Holyday on Juv.
p 114.

They betrothed with a Ring, Et digito pignus fortasse dedisti, Juv.

Pliny says, the Ring was of Iron. Tertullian and Marcell. Donatus, of Gold.

They gave the Guests Wine, cakes at their Departure, Dr. Holyday.

The new Bride and Bridegroom, sacrificed a white Hog, perhaps, to signify the
fruitfulness of Marriage,

Divorces allowed among the Romans, to one person 8 times: beyond that number
was accounted Adultery, v. Mart. l. 6.

Aut minus, aut certe non plus, tricesima lux est,
Et nubit decimo jam Telesina viro.
Quae nubit toties, non nubit, Adultera lege est.
Modern Heathen.
In the East Indies they Marry their Children very young; and in the Province
of Baglana, Celebrate the Marriage, and bed the Children much sooner, than in
many places of the Indies, viz. at 8 or 10 years old.

A Gentile Marries at any age, and cannot have several Wives at a time,
provided he Marries a Maid, and one of his own Cast.

Many Ceremonies are to be seen at their VVeddings: At certain times in great
Towns 500 or 600 are Celebrated in a day; and nothing to be seen in the
Streets, but enclosures at the front of the Husband's House, made with Poles or
Canes, covered with Tapestry, etc.

Before the Wedding, they make a Cavalcade through the Town, with Music and
much Pomp; then a Bramen having said some Prayers over both, puts a Cloth
betwixt the Husband and the Wife, and orders the Husband with his naked Foot
to touch the naked Foot of his Wife, and that compleats the Marriage, M. de
Thev.

In Negapatan (in the East Indies) the Priest, with a Cow and Man and Woman
together, go to the Riverside, where the Bramen mutters over a short Prayer,
links their Hands about the Cows Tail, forces the Beast into the River (having
first poured upon them his Holy Oil) where they go as far as they can with the
Beast, and then returning to shore, their hands are united, and they Married.

Diabolical.
In Amboyna, they (who worship the Devil) at Marriage, use no Ceremonies; for
the parties being agreed, the Bridegroom's Father carries a Present of some
Toys to the Bride, and the Bride's Father makes a Feast, at which they have
Music, of Tabors and Lologo, or Dances in the Honor of Nito; and so
consummate the Marriage, which they break with the same facility they
contracted it; for the Wives leve their Husbands upon the least discontent,
and the next day they Marry another, Mandelsto.

Funerals.
Jewish.
ABraham buried Sarah in a Cave, Genesis 23.

Saul was buried in a Grove, or under an Oak, 1 Cor. 10.

They used also burning of their Dead, 1 Samuel 31.12. Amos 6.10.

Their common Epitaph is, Let his Soul be in the bundle of Life, with the Rest
of the Just, Rosse,

They used to Mourn for the Dead, etc.

At present among the Jews in Barbary the way is thus;

1. A Jew being sick, a Rabbi is sent for, who, 1. Draws up an Envoy of his
Estate. 2. Takes account of his Debts. 3. Provides for the Payment. 4. The
remainder is disposed; 1. In a double Dowry to the Wife, (to what was
promised.) 2. In Alms to Orphans. 3. In Alms to Widows. 4. In a Legacy to the
Synagogue and Holy House, (i. e.) the Temple expected at the coming of the
Messiah.



2. When like to Die, he confesses his Faith, and in the short Oration is
recommended to mercy.

3. Is Buried within the Natural day after departure, the Corpse being washed,
and if rich, in Rose Water, Orange-flowers, etc. put in a clean shirt, drawers,
and a strip of Linen, and after all, in a very white sheet and Cossin.

4. The Relations stir not abread for seven days after interrment.

5. The Corpse is carried by four persons to the place of Burial.

6. At the Grave some certain parcels of Divine Service are said, Dr. Addison.

See more in the Second Book.

Mr. Rosse relates other usages, as covering the face, tearing a piece of their
Garments.

Bowing the Thumb.

Stretching out the other Fingers.

Casting a shell after the Corpse.

Casting grass over their Heads.

Changing their Seat 7 times in the Synagogue.

Going barefoot 7 days.

Burning Candles 7 days, etc.

Ancient Christian.
In the Funerals of the Ancient Christians I Observe,

1. That one of the nearest Relations shut the Eyes of the person Deceased. So
S. Augustine says concerning his Mother; Premebam Oculos ejus.

2. Sometimes to comfort themselves in the Affliction they Sung Psalms
together, as in the forecited instance of Monica's Funeral. S. Austine tells
us, Euodius took a Psalter, and begun to sing, to whom all the House answered,
I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, etc. Upon which many Brethren, and Devout
Women gathered together, and joined with them, See also Dr. Cave.

3. When the Corpse was brought to the Grave or Sepulcher, and there laid down;
Prayers were said, vide Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 12.

4. Orations were often made in commendation of the Party Deceased, with
Exhortations to the People, to imitate so good an Example.

5. They were not always careful for costly Funerals, or embalming of their
Corpse, or choice Monuments, as S. Austine says, in these respects, his Mother
took no thought, Nec mortuos coronamus, Min. Faelix.

6. They also carried Lighs burning before the Corpse, signifying, they were as
Champions, etc. Dr. Cave, out of S. Chrysostom.

Note, 1. Eutychianus Papa statuit, ut Martyrs cuni Dalmatica aut Colobio
Sepelirentur.

2. Cerei in Coemeteriis non incendantur. Conc. Eliber. c. 34.

3. Ne Foeminae in Coemeteriis pervigilent, ne sub obtentu Orationis Scelera
committantur, Ibid.

Mohammedan.
1. After Death of any, the People fall a howling loud.

2. Friends come in, and weep in singing doleful tones with them, praising the
Deceased thus, He loved me so well, gave me plenty of every thing, etc. and the
rest say the same.

Sometimes they hire Mourning women.

3. They wash the Corpse, shave off the Hair, burn Incense about him, to scare
away ill Spirits; wrap him up in a Sheet.

4. Pray to God to be merciful to him.

5. Put him into a Coffin or Bier, covered with a Pall, which is Green for a
Scherif, Red for a Soldier, etc. with a Turbant overthwart it, etc.

6. Carry it to the Burying place, the Priests going before, saying Prayers;
then the Friends, Women crying like mad.

7. Put it in the Grave, and leave the Women to make lamentation.

The Persians place the Body Westward.

Burying-places always without the Town.

They use Tombs of Marble-stones erected, Epitaphs as we, M. de Thev.

Mahomet the Third lies buried in the midst of a Chapel at C. P. about fifty
foot square, with four high small round Towers, about which are small round
Galleries of Stone, from which the Priests call to service: His Tomb, a great
Cossin of Marble, about five foot high, at the end covered with a Hearse-cloath
of Gold, his Turbant standing at his Head, and two great Candles of Wax, three
or four yards long, in gilded Candlesticks, the one at his Head, the other at
his Feet, never burning, but standing for show.

Round about his Tomb are Tombs for his Wives and Children.

In another Chapel at C. P. lies buried Sultan Selim with his 37 Children
about him; his Grandfather.

In another, Amaruth (his Father) with 45 Children; only Emperors and Bassaes:

Thus others are buried in Fields, with Marble Stones at the Head, another at
the Feet.

Ancient Heathen.
The Romans burned the Bodies of the Dead, that the Soul might be purged in
Fire, before it ascended to the Stars, Quintil. Declam. 10.

Yet they excepted from this burning, the Bodies of Traitors. Tyrants. Killers
of their Masters. Feloes de se. Young Infants.


The four first, as profane; the Infants, as needing no purgation.

The Grave of an Infant, was called Suggrundium; of others Bustum.

The Egyptians and Persians used not burning.

At Funerals, were used Orations, Sword-plays, and Feasts, and a Doal among the
Romans.

The Romans first buried in their private Houses.

To bury in the City was forbidden by a Law, Hominem mortuum endo Vrbe nei
sepelito, neive urito; in a Roman Edict it was prohibited to burn the Dead
within two miles of the City.

The Rich were buried in their own Suburbane Fields, where stately Monuments
were erected on the sides of the public ways, as of the Via Flaminia; (the
ground, for so many Feet, consecrated.)

The Poor at Puticulae, so called from the little Pits or Graves.

Among the Lacedaemonians, and in some parts of Greece, and at last in Rome it
self, Burial was admitted within the City.

Lastly it was admitted in the Temples.

Amongst the Druids, whatever was dear to Great Persons, whilst living, was
sent to the Fire after them, when dead, viz. Living Creatures, Servants or
Clients, Caes. de Bell. Gall.

Vide plura in Part Secunda.

Modern Heathen.
In the East Indies, the Ceremony of Burying differs according to Places.

In some places, they carry the Body clothed in goodly Apparel, sitting in a
Chair, with the beat of a Drum, with the attendance of Friends and Relations;
and after the usual ablution, the Body is surrounded with wood; and the Wife,
who has followed in Triumph, has her Seat prepared there, where she places
her self, singing, and seeming very desirous to die; a Bramen ties her to a
Stake, in the middle of the Funeral Pile, and sets fire to it; the Friends pour
Odoriferous Oils into it.

In other places the Bodies are carried to the Riverside, put in the water,
and washed, and then the Wife holding her Husband on her Knees, and
recommending her self to the prayers of the Bramen, she desires him to set fire
to the Pile.

In some places they fill deep Pits with combustible matter, and throw the Body
in; and the Wife, after she has sung and danced, to show the firmness of their
resolution; and sometimes the Maid-slaves throw themselves after their
Mistresses, to show their Love.

In other places, the Husband is interred with his Legs across, and the Wife
put into the same Grave alive; and when the Earth is filled up to their Neck,
they are strangled by the Bramens.

The Woman being burnt with all their Ornaments of Gold, Silver, etc. the
Bramens pick up all that is precious out of the Ashes; none else being suffered
to touch them: But the Mohammedan Governors endeavor to suppress this
Barbarous Custom, M. de Theven.

They believe that when People die, they go into another World, and will have
occasion for many of the same things they use here.

Courts.
Jewish.
1. ECclesiastical, the Synagogues, Mat. 10.17. the end of them was to put a
difference between things Holy and Unholy, Clean and Unclean, and to determine
Controversies: It was a Representative Church, Mat. 18.16. Tell the Church.

They had Power of Excommunication, which was of three Degrees;

1. Niddui, putting out of the Synagogue, Joh. 9.22. It prohibited the Person
for 30 days, more or less, 1. Society with any, within four Cubits. 2. Eating
and Drinking with any. 3. Use of the Marriage Bed. 4. Shaving, Washing.


It allowed him, To be at Divine Service. To teach and be taught. To hire
Servants, or be hired.


2. Cherem, Anathema, done in public, with Curses and Candles.

3. Schamatha, Maranatha, Excommunicatio in Secreto Nominis Tetragrammati, an
Excommunication to Death, 1 John 5.16.

The President herein was the High Priest, next his Sagan.

2. Civil. 1. The Sanhedrim, from whence was no Appeal.

The Place; the Paved Chamber of the Court of the Temple, Joh. 19.13.

The Judges, 71 in number, out of every Tribe six, except Levi, and out of that
but four, Junius.

2. The Lesser Consistory; Twofold; 1. Consisting of 23 Aldermen; two at
Jerusalem, (one at the Door of the Court before the Temple, the other at the
Door of the Mount of the Temple) and in most Cities one, kept in the Gates. 2.
Of 3 Aldermen, erected in lesser Cities, in the Gates.


These sat not on Lise and Death.

Ancient Christian.
It is not to be expected, that the Primitive Christians could have any Civil
or Political Courts, having as yet got no Civil Power or Government into their
hands, till the time of Constantine the Great: And as for the Ecclesiastical,
neither could that be so regular and complete, as might be desired. For though
we read of the Synod of the Apostles, Acts 15. Roman, Caesarian, Gallick,
Pontick, Ostroenick, Asiatick, Arabic, etc. before the Reign of Constantine
the Great; yet no General Council till then, viz. A. Chr. 325, kept at Nice,
called Oecumenick, or General, as afterward, at Constantinople, Ephesus,
Chalcedon, and two more at Constantinople; all which are universally
acknowledged; and these were 1. Called by the then present Emperor. 2. They
were free for all Bishops, Priests and Deacons. (I think I am in the right, for
at Nice there was an infinite number of all Degrees of Ecclesiastics, Bishops,
Priests and Deacons.) 3. They took upon them the Censure of Doctrines and
Practices. 4. They had power of inflicting Penalties, of Suspension,
Deposition, Excommunication.


The Civil Government was various, according to the Places and Countries: But
whatever it was, the Ecclesiastical Persons bore a part of the burden in many
places; the Common People often making application to them in cases of
difference; as St. Augustine frequently complains, that he was overcharged
with the trouble of Arbitrations between his Neighbors, etc. It being
expected, that they who were the Messengers of Grace and Peace, should be both
skilful and willing to promote Peace among their Neighbors.

Mohammedan.
They who have place in the Divan are, 1. Visiers. 2. Cadilesquers. 3.
Beglerbegs. 4. Nischangi, viz. the Keeper of the Seals. 5. Defterdais, or
Treasurers. 6. Many Secretaries, or Clerks. 7. Capigi Basha, and Chiaux Basha,
keep the Door.


All Persons of any Quality, Country, Religion, may be heard here.

The Grand Vizier sits as Judge.

A Trial shall not last above four or five Hours at most here. M. de Thev.

The Musti sits with the King every Day in Judgment, except Friday, when the
King sits alone. Rosse.

Persons here plead their own Causes. Tavern.

Divano, a Court near the Emperor's, or Grand Seignior's Palace, or Seraglio,
where the Visior Basha, and other Basha's sit in Council, with Beglerbegs, etc.
It Is held four Days a Week, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday: At the Rising of
the Court, the Grand Vizier informs the Sultan of all their Proceedings, who
seldom impugnes what they have Decreed.

Ancient Heathen.
At Rome, the Assemblies for Public Affairs were, 1. Concilia, when there was
a Select Number met together. 2. Comitia, when all the People were called to
the Meeting; and these were either, 1. Curiata, sc. Parish-Meetings; Rome being
at first divided into 30 Curiae, or Parishes, where all met; all the Comitium
(or Hall of Justice) for Election of Magistrates, Confirmation of Wills, etc.
All gave their Votes as private Men. 2. Conturiata, where the people met
together in Centuries, to give their Votes, according to their Estates. The
City being divided into six Classes, by Servius Tullius, the first, of those
who were worth above 800 Crowns, the second, above 100, etc. In these
Assemblies the plurality of Votes carried the choice. The Chief of each Century
was called Centurio, who had his Vitis, or Rod of Command. Here were chosen the
first Consuls, Censors, Pretors, Proconsuls, Tribunes, etc. Crimes also against
the Public Weal, as Treason, etc. were tried here. 3. Tribuata, viz.
Assemblies of the Wards or Quarters of the City, kept in the Field of Mars, or
Capitol, or Circus Flaminius; when the other Courts were not permitted to
assemble, either by reason of unlawful Days, or Ominous Signs, etc. Galtruch.



But the highest Court of all was the Roman Senate, first elected by Romulus,
to assist in affairs of State, in number at first 100, then 200, at last 1000,
all above 20 years old: they always met in some Temple, twice a month, to
consult about public concerns, Idem.

Modern Heathen.
In Bantam, the Magistrate of the Town sits in Judicature in the Court of the
Paceham, from 4 or 5 in the Evening, till Night; the Plaintiff and Defendant
appearing both in person, and pleading their own Cause, Mandelslo.

In Japan there is no Lord, nor indeed any Citizen, nor Merchant, but may put
his Vastals and Domestics to Death, he himself being the Judge; but to others
Justice is administered in the Emperor's Name, Idem.

In Fermosa there is no Lord that has a Superiority over the rest; yet in
every Village is a kind of Senate of 12 men, aged about 40, who invite all the
Heads of Families to meet in one of their Pagods, to confer about business,
where the Magistrate proceeds not by Authority, or Force, but Reason and
Eloquence; and when one speaks, all the rest are deeply and strictly silent,
not a Cough to be heard, Idem.

In China, to discover Criminals, the Judge takes a List of all the Houses, and
divides them into Tens, setting a Bill on every tenth house, enjoining them to
discover such of their Decad as have committed such Crimes, upon pain of being
respousible for the same Crimes, etc. Idem.

Diabolical.
In Amboyna, the way for deciding of Disserences, or other matters of
importance, is this: 1. They put water into a Dish. 2. They cast in Gold,
Earth, and a Leaden Bullet. 3. They dip in it the end of a Musquet-Barrel, the
point of an Halbert, Sword, Knife, etc. 4. They give of the Water to him who is
suspected guilty. 5. They give him his Oath, Mandelslo.


Schisms and Sects.
Jews.
1. (...), Karrei, Sadduces, who adhered only to the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets: so called from Sedek Justice, as Beda, Epiphanius, and Lyra think; or
from one Sadock, the first Author (as Burgensis,) who lived under Antigonus
Sochens, Successor to Simeon the Just.

2. (...), Hasidei, such as Voluntarily performed some things, which the Law
required not. I suppose the same with the Essei, or Esseni, a kind of Monks,
Lovers of Solitude: others, Rechabites, without any woman, any money, Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 5. c. 17. they lived in common, went in White.

(...), Pharisees, who were equally zealous of H. Scripture and Talmud, (or
Traditions) or rather preferred these before the other. These were the Issue of
the Hasidei.

Hemerobaptistae, Ceremoniarum Magistri, Dr. Littleton.

The Pharisees were so called from their daily washing, Ross.

Tho Scaliger says, Daily washing was used by all the Jews; and at this time
in Palestine many do it; not once a day, but often, as do also the Mahometans,
Purchase.

3. (...), Samaritans, who acknowledged only the Pentateuch of Moses, and to it
added several Pagan Rites, using Mount Gerizim for the place of worship.

Herodiani, so called, either because Soldiers of Herod's Court, or because
they boasted Herod for the Messiah.

Gaulonites, the Disciples of Judas the Galilean Hotting.

Nazarites,

Rechabites, etc.

Christian.
1. Eastern, or Greek.

1. Greek, strictly so called. 2. Muscovites and Russians. 3. Melchites, or
Syrians. 4. Georgians, or Iberians. 5. Nestorians, or followers of Nestorius.
6. Indians, or Christians of S. Thomas. 7. Jacobites, from Jacob, Disciple of
Eutyches. 8. Copties, or Egyptian Christians. 9. Armenians, so called from
their Country. 10. Abassins, or Ethiopians. 11. Maronites. 12. Some add
Sabaeans, or Christians of S. John, owning his Baptism only. 13. Circassians,
or Sarcashes much the fame with Armenians and Georgians.
2. Western, or Latin.

1. PAPIST. Dominicans. Jesuits, or Franciscans. Thomists. Scotists.
Jansenists. Molinists, or Quietists.

2. PROTESTANTS. 1. Lutheran. 2. Calvinist. 3. Independent. 4. Anabaptist. 5.
Quakers, etc.

Mohammedan
Are divided into

1. Turks, whereof some follow, 1. Abuhanife. 2. Chasibie. 3. Malike. 4.
Dudzahime. 5. Ahmed, etc.


All which agree in Fundamentals, but differ in Morals and Ceremonies.

Hottinger names other Sects, as Horrineans, Kavamites, Habibean, Habaecideans,
etc.

2. Persian, who are for Mortis Hale, as the Turki are for Mahomet.

They interpret the Law more perfectly and divinely. Their Grand Festival is
the Feast of Hocen and Hussein, Morden.

Mr. Grimstone in his Addition to Knolles, makes mention of 4 Orders of
Religious men among the Turks, differing in Habit and Ceremonies.

1. Dervises, the strictest Order, living in contemplation; but Hypocrites.

2. Terlaques.

3. Kalenders.

4. Huquiemales, which last are very vicious and wicked Impostors, deceiving of
the common people.

Mr. Ricaut tells of several Sects of Mahometans, As. 1. Haictates.

2. Cuph-Messahites.

3. Eshrakites, etc.

Heathens,
In respect of Religion, were as diverse as the Countries which they inhabited:
Every Nation having peculiar Deities, and Rites of worship, e.g.

1. Aigyptians. Of which already up and down in the Book. 2. Persians. Of which
already up and down in the Book. 3. Grecians. Of which already up and down in
the Book. 4. Romans. Of which already up and down in the Book. 5. Gauls. Of
which already up and down in the Book. 6. Britains. Of which already up and
down in the Book. 7. Saxons, etc. Of which already up and down in the Book.
Especially the Philosophers were divided into, 1. Pythagereans. 2.
Peripateticks. 3. Cynicks. 4. Stoics. 5. Platonicks. 6. Epicureans.


Whose particular Sentiments in Religion, see afterward.

Modern Heathens,
Are likewise diversisied, according to the number of Countries, where they
inhabit, Tribes or Castes, and sometimes Families and Persons.

1. In respect of Countries:

Into, 1. Laplanders, etc.

2. East-Indians, and they again, according to the Provinces, 1. Ceilon. 2.
Lahors. 3. Goa, etc. 4. America, etc.


2. In respect of Tribes or Castes, as in all (in the East Indies) 84, agreeing
in the same Religion, but each having a several Trade and Ceremonies.

1. Bramens, who profess Doctrine, and so do their Children.

2. Catry, or Raspoutes, who profess Arms, and their Children the same.

3. Soudr, or Courmi, Ruddery, Tillers of the Ground, tho some carry Arms.

4. Ouens, or Banians, all Merchants, Bankers, etc:

Anciently these four were all: now are added,

5. Colis, Cotton-dressers.

6. Tcherous, Travelers Guards.

7. Pollanquin-bearers, called Govillii.

8. Periaves, Curriers.

9. Halalcour, Cleansers of Office-houses, least esteemed.

10. Baraguy, who damn the yellow color, and in the morning put white on their
Foreheads, other Castes put on Red, etc.

Fletchers, Hammer-men, Public Wenches, Dancers and Baladines, make up other
Castes, M. de Thev.

All the Castes go to Prayers together, but worship what Idol they please: Some
carry the Idol along with them.

Jewish Sects.
1. Sadduces.

1. Rule of Faith.

2. Articles of Faith.

Tenets.
Nothing is to be admitted but what is expressed in the Letter of Moses (and
the Prophets also, say soffie) but our Savior alleges only Moses against
them, Exodus 3.6. Mat. 22.32.

1. There are no Angels;

2. Nor Spirits: They denied Spirits altogether; for they held God to be
Corporeal, Lyra. Only such created spiritual Natures as Angels, and the Souls
of Men. Dr. Pearson.

3. Nor Resurrection of the Dead.

4. Nor Providence, Hotting.

5. That the soul died with the Body.

6. They couped up God in Heaven, without all beholding of Evil.

Abraham Zacuth calls them Epicures. The Scriptures they interpreted in their
own Sense; nor regarded they the words of the wise mon, i. e. Pharisees: They
were of the Ancient Careans, or Karraim, but not of those which now are so
termed; which, as Zochath confesses, confess the Resuriection and Reward.
Scaliger affirms, by the Testimony of Philip Frederick, 2. Christian Jerp, who
had great familiarity with these Karraim at Constantinople, and had been often
in their Synagogues, that they differ nothing from the other Jews, but in
rejecting Traditions, and are far more honest and faithful than the Rabbanim,
of whom they are no less hated for their Integrity, than for rejecting
Tradition. S. Purchase.

Rosse adds, that they denied Fate or Destiny also, and asoribed all to man's
Free Will.

History.
Sadduces, (otherwise called Mineans) from Sadok, the first Author of the
Heresy; whose Fellow-Scholar was Baithos, of whom came the Baithoseans: So
says Abraham B. David, in his Historical Cabal. Antigonus said, Be ye not as
Servants which minister to their Prince, on condition to receive reward. Sadok
and Baithos asked him of this thing; and he answered, That they should not put
considence in the Reward of this Life, but in the World to come: But they
denied his words, and said, We never heard any thing of the World to come: For
they had been his Disciples, and they dissented from him, and went to the
Sanctuary of Mount Gerizim, where the Princes were, Sam. Purchase.

They upbraided the Pharisees, saying, The Tradition is in the hand of the
Pharisees, to vex themselves in this World, whereas in the World to come they
have no reward. Antigonus his words are in the Treatise Aboth, -- Be ye not
Servants, which minister to a Prince, to receive of him reward; but be ye as
Servants, which minister to their Prince, with this condition, that they
receive no reward, but let the fear of God be upon you, Idem.

Baithos and Zadok had a diverse Family, but held the same Opinions.

The Baithoseans ministered to Baithos in vessels of Silver and Gold.

The Sect of the Sadduces was diminished, if not worn out, after the
destruction of the Temple, till An. 4523, or thereabouts. And A. D. 755, one
Anan and Saul his Son revived that Doctrine, because he had received his
expected promotion to the Degree of Gaon, i. e. Doctor; he wrote Books against
the other Jews, Purchase.

Buxtorf says, "That there are Karraim in Poland, Syn. Jud. c. 2. And Leo
after says, There are several of them in Barbary, Idem.

Godwin derives their name either from (...) which signifies Justice, or Sadoc
the first Author of the Heresy, who lived under Antigonus Sochoeus, and was
his Scholar, brought up as a Pharisee, Jewish Antiq.

2. Pharisees, Essens, and Hasideans.
Pharisees, their Tenants and Traditions.
1. Prayer.
THEY Prayed (...), often and long: Thrice a day was ordinary; at 9, 12, and 32
Clock. Yea their Progenitors ( Chasidim, Assideans) divided the day into three
parts, whereof one was bestowed on Prayer, the next on the Law, and the third
on their Work, Dr. Hall.

2. Grace at Meat.
Their very Disciples, if they had forgot to give thanks, were taught to return
from the Field to the Board, to say Grace, Idem.

3. Divine Service.
The Decalogue must be read once a day of every man; others twice: -- without
moving Eye, Hand, Foot; -- in a clean place, free from any Excrement, and four
Cubits distant from any Sepulcher, Idem.

4. Fasting.
They Fasted twice a Week, in earnest, Monday and Thursday.

5. Penances.
They beat their Heads agains the Walls, as they went, till blood came, (whence
one of their seven Pharisees is called Kizai, a Pharisee Drawblood) they put
Thorns in their Skirts, to sting themselves; they lay on Planks, Stones,
Thorns, etc.

6. Holiness
They would not converse with any Different Religion, Samaritans, etc. and for
fear, they washed at their return home.

They washed before they ate, Mark 7.3. the more Zealous washed the whole body.
They washed their Cups, Pots and Tables. They washed their Hands cubitaliter,
Theophi.

Vowed Continency for 8 or 10 Years.

Paid Tithes of all, Mint and Cumin.

Over-kept the Sabbath, would not stop a running Vessel, lay an Apple to the
Fire, quench a a Burning, knock on a Table to still a Child, nor Rub, Scratch
in public, etc.

Enlarged their Phylacteries, and these must be in right Lines in the whole
Parchment, of the Hide of a clean Beast.

Made a Wooden Spit of Romegranate, to Roste the Passover.

To Avoid Idolatry; if an Image were in the way, they went about; or if they
could not so, they ran; or if a Thorn should light in their Foot near the
place, they would not kneel to take it out, left they should seem to do
Reverence, but sit down.

They hated the Presence, Fire, Fashion, Books of a Gentile, of a Samaritan,
Dr. Hall.

They attributed all things to Fate; that there is no Herb on the Earth, which
has not its Planet in Heaven: If the Soul had done evil, it was adjudged to
perpetual Prisons; if well, it had an easy return to Life by Transmigration:
That God judges according to the plurality or paucity of Merits or Demerits.

Seven sorts of Pharisees, according to Godw. Jew. Antiq.

1. Pharisaus Sichemita.

2. Truncatus; that upon pretense of Meditation, would searce draw his Foot
from the ground.

3. Impingens; that to avoid seeing a Woman, would wink, and run his head
against a wall.

4. Quid Debeo facere and faciam? Luke 18.

5. Mortarius, wearing a Hat like a Mortar, to look only downward of forward.

6. Ex Amore. See the next page, Godw. ibid. 7. Ex Timore. See the next page,
Godw. ibid.
Pharisees, their History.
Pharisees, from Phares, to divide; or Parash, to expose to public view; or
Parash, to Expound.

They were a crafty and subtle generation of Men, and so perverse even to
Princes themselves, that they would not fear, many times, openly to Affront and
oppose them, Dr. Cave, out of Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 17. c. 3.

Much Affected and Esteemed of the Populace, Id.

Therefore Alexander Jannaus, when he lay a dying, advised his Queen, by all
means, to comply with this fort of men, imputing his own miscarriages to the
Offenses he had given them, Id. ex eod.

Infinitely proud and insolent, surly and ill-natured, hating all mankind but
themselves, censuring all who were not of their way; greatly Zealous to gather
Proselytes, and then making them not more Religious, but more fierce,
censorious heady, twofold more the Children of Wrath; discriminating
themselves from the Herd by Long-Robes, broad Rhylacteries, large Fringes, long
Prayers, frequent Easting, domure Looks, a whing Tone, etc. Idem.

They were an improvement of (...) 1 Mac. 2.42. Those that voluntarily
performed somethings which the Law required not; who divided themselves from
the rest of the Profane World, which did not as they did; nay, from the Asidei
themselves, who performed as much as they, (but did not think themselves or
others obliged by Law to do so.) And therefore were (...) Pharisees, Separaters
from other Men: Not an Order settled by Law; but only a Sect, of which some of
all Orders of men were; and indeed a prevailing Sect, taken up by most of the
chief Men of the Nation; the Elders in the Sanhedrim, and Rulers in the
Consistories, therefore called, (...), Dr. Hammond. Annot. on Luke 14.1.

Hillal and Sammai were two chief Masters amongst them of Diverse Sects.

The Jews reckon 7 kind of Pharisees.

The Essenes were divided into,

1. Cloisterers, Collegiates.

1. Married. 2. Continent.
2. Eremites, solitary Persons.

The 7 Kinds were,

1. Siehemitoe, which measured Piety by Honor and Profit, as the Sichemites,
which for the Marriage of Dinab would be Circumcised.

2. Nacphi, which lifted not their Foot from the ground.

3. Kisai, draw-blood, which would smite their head to the wall, to draw blood;
and shut their Eyes, that they might not behold a woman.

4. Makehobathi, that stood on their own Perfection; the word signifies, what
is my sin?

5. Meduchia, which went low and stooping.

6. The Pharisee of Love, which obeyed the Law for Love of Virtue or Reward,
Abraham's Pha.

7. Of Fear, or Job's Pharisee, which obeyed for fear of Punishment.

Essees, so called from a word which signifies Rest, or Silence, Sealiger.
Essoei, qu, (...), Phil. Jud.

Pliny, l. 5. c. 17. places them on the West of the Dead Sea, above 4000 in
Number; avoiding Riches and Pleasures as sins; not Marrying, but instructing
the Children of others; not meddling with War or Merchandise: Neither Swearing,
nor Lying; their Society such, that one Garment, one House, one Food, Treasury,
one getting, spending, one life served to them all, Purchase. Oil and Neatness
they Shun, yet wore always a white Garment; they worshipped toward the East,
given to the Study of Physic, ascribing all things to Fate, Offering inanimate
Sacrifices (as Pythagoreans) and given much to silence, keeping every seventh
week a Pentecost, careful to preserve the Names of Angels, Rosse.

3. Samaritans, Nazarites, Rechabites.
Samaritans.
1. Name and Distinction.

SO called from Samaria, the Country where they dwelt, and the place where
they worshipped; for their Temple was on Mount Gerizim. Of these were four
Sects, Dositheans, Sebueans, Essens, Gorthens.

2. Original.

Manasses, Brother to Jaddus, the High Priest in Jerusalem, being Married to
Sanballat the Horouite's Daughter, by reason of Nehemiah's charge of putting
away their strange wives, being forced either to put away his wife, or not be
Priest, got leave of Sanballat to build a Temple on Gerizim (a Hill in Samaria)
whither many Apostate Jews fled, together with Manasses their High Priest.

3. Errors.

1. They, as well as the Sadduces, rejected Traditions and other Scripture,
save the Pentateuch. 2. They denied also the Resurrection, but held that there
was Angels. 3. Sacrificed at the Temple on Mount Gerizim. 4. Allowed no
Commerce with the Jews, John 4.9. (being Excommunicated in Secreto nomine
Tetragrammati, by Ezra and Nehemiah; so that they should have no part in the
resurrection.)
Nazarites.
1. Name.

These were Votaries. Numb. 6. So called from (...), to separate.

2. Office.

They separated themselves from, 1. Wine, Strong-drink, etc. 2. The Dead. 3.
The Rasour.


3. Distinction.

Some were Nazarites, 1. For Life, as Sampson, John Baptist, etc. 2. For 30
days, as Absalom, Paul, Acts 21.24. 3. Mystically, as Christ, Mat. 2.3.


Rechabites.
We have little, account of them, save only out of S. Scripture, Jer. 35.2, 3.
etc. Viz. That they were so called from Rechab, their Father; that they neither
did, 1. Drink Wine, nor 2. Sow Seed. 3. Nor build Houses. 4. Nor Plant
Vine-yards. 5. But lived in Tents all their days, like strangers.


Ossens.
Ossent are added by Epiphanius, which seem to be derived from the Essens, but
they Worshipped Angels, Col. 2.21. And the Sun, called thence, Sampsaeans, one
of whose chief Doctors was one Elxai in the time of Trajan, who taught
Aequivocation, forbade Praying to the Eastward, detested Sacrifices,
acknowledged a She-holy Ghost, etc.

Mohammedan Sects.
Turks.
1. The Turks pretend that Aboubeker was the lawful Successor of Mahomet;

Omar, Successor of Aboubeker,

Osman of Osmar:

Aly of Osman:

Whom the Persians execrate the Memory of

[Some reduce the difference of Turks and Persians to these 4 Heads: 1. A
different Explication of the Alcoran. 2. Diversity of Saints. 3. Diversity of
Miracles. 4. Diversity of Mosques and Ceremonies.]


3. The Turks are called Sunni, because they follow also Counsels of Devotion,
besides the commands of their Law, M. de Thev.

4. They call to Prayers from the tops of Twoers.

5. In praying, the Sunni hold their hands one over another upon the stomach.

6. Among the Turks, for a Christian to dispute with them about matters of
Faith, is punishable by Death, M. de Thev.

Persians.
The Religion of the Persians is the same in substance with that of the Turks;
tho no Nations in the world hate one another more than they do, on the account
of Religion; they look on one another as Heretics.

1. The Persians hold, that Aboubeker, Omar and Osman, were but so many
Usurpers of Aly; that Aly was the Lawful Successor of Mahomet, and actually
succeeded him: that Aly was the first of the Twelve Imams, whom they much
honor, and who succeeded one another; of whom the last called
Mahomet-Nekedy-Sahabzemon ( i. e. Mr. of the times) was snatched out of the
hands of those who would have killed him, and translated as Enoch and Elias,
and that he will also come at the Day of Judgment, to force the world to
embrace the Faith of Mahomet; that Jesus Christ shall be his Leutenant, and
that he will marry.

This is the great point of difference between the Turks and them, M. de Thev.

2. They have translated the Alcoran into the Persian Tongue, with an
Interlineal Translation, word for word: for Turks and Persians both believe,
that that book cannot be explained in any other Language, but Arabic.

3. They think it enough to follow the commands of their Law, and therefore
call themselves Schiai, tho the Persians sometime follow some of the Counsels,
Idem.

4. In Persia they call to Prayers three times a day, from Terrasses, not
Towers; viz. at Morn, Noon, and Sunset; and no oftener on Friday.

5. The Schiai hold not their Hands on their Stomachs at Prayer, but lay down a
little gray stone before them, which they always carry about them, and every
time they Prostrate, lay their Foreheads on that Stone made of the Earth of
Keebela; where Hussein, the Second Son of Aly. was killed.

6. Persians will not eat what a Christian has touched, nor suffer a Christian
to come into their Coffee-houses, or Bagnioes, accounting them Megdis, i. e.
impure: They break a Pot wherein a Christian has Drunk. They hate Turks no
less, but dare not tell them so, M. de Thev.

7. They will suffer Christians to dispute with them about matters of Faith.

Eastern Christians.
Greeks.
Present State.
1. THey are Poor. 2. Ignorant. 3. Oppressed by the Turk, to whom they pay
every Man 4 Lyon-Dollars, i. e. 16 Shillings per Annum.
Brierwood says, Their Tribute is a fourth part of their Increase, and a
Sultany (7 s. 6 d.) for every Poll; and also they are obliged to speak no thing
against Mahometanism.

Formerly their children were decimated, and made Janissaries.

Order of the Patriarchs.
1. Patriarch of C. P. 2. -- of Alexandria. 3. -- of Antioch. 4. -- of
Jerusalem.
When they all meet, they kiss each other's hand.

1. The Patriarch of Alexandria is over Egypt, Aethiopia, Arabia, The Indies.


2. The Patriarch of Jerusalem is over Palestine.

3. The Patriarch of Antioch is over Cilicia, Mesopotomia, Syria, Phoenicia,
Cyprus.


The Patriarch of Constantinople is over 73 several Churches, according to Mr.
Smith, Heraclea, Thessalonica, Athens, Lacedemonia, Larissa, Adrianople,
Tornobou, Johanna, Monenbasia, Methynna. Phanarion, Patrus, Proconesus.


And all confirmed by the Grand Seignior.

Georgians, or Iberians.
1. Most of them so ignorant, they hardly know the Principles of their
Religion. 2. The Clergy much oppressed by the Nobles; Bishops and Priests used
as Servants, by the Prince and Nobility.
The Prince's Will is their Law; no Judges, nor admission of Witnesses. The
Estates, and Persons of the Subjects, are at the disposal of the Prince, etc.

The Prince of the Georgians, in a Letter to Pope Urban VIII. 1629. says, The
Faith has been kept pure among them since Constantine the Great: Also, That he
allowed a Chapel to the Missionaries of Rome, that they might pray for him.

The Patriarch of Constantinople sends Kaloyrs often into Iberia, to encourage
them in their Enmity against the Pope. F. Avitabolis, in a Letter from Goris in
Iberia, or Georgia, 1631. From whence my Author (F. Simon) has the following
Account, etc.

Sir Tho. Herbert says, No fewer than 40000 of Georgians and Sarcashes,
inhabited about Spahawn and Schyraz; but little better than Captives, being
forcibly ttansplanted thither. Poor Souls (says he) hearing that we were
Christians, they flocked about us, and wept to see us.

Mengrelians.
1. They are accounted by Galanus of the same Belief, mostly, with the
Georgians; only, 2. They live on the Mountains, and in the Woods, and
therefore, 3. Are a wilder and wickeder sort of People, than the Georgians. 4.
They inhabit Colchis, or Mengrelia, which is part of Armenia; and therefore
much difference is not to be expected between the Mengrelians, and Armenians,
or Georgians.
Muscovites.
They agree mostly with the Greeks in Faith, Rites, and Ceremonies.

Every House has its Saint pictured, and hung up on the Wall, with a little
Wax-Candle before it, which they light, when they say their Prayers.

The Picture of the V. Mary, and S. Nicholas, their Patron, are in great
Veneration amongst them.

The sign of the Cross is the ordinary Preface to all their Civil Actions.

They have a Patriarch at Mosco.

Three Archbishops at Rosthon, Sudal, and Grand Novograde; Bishops at Wologda,
Resan, Sudal, Twer, Toboleska, Astracan, Casan, Plescou, Columna, etc. All
chosen out of the Body of their Monks.

They force no Man's Conscience: hate the Papists.

Nestorians.
1. They are a Sect of the Chaldeans, or Syrians.

2. They Reverence Nestorius, as their Great Patriarch, and Invocate him in
their Prayers.

3. Their present Patriarch to whom they are subject, is called the Patriarch
of Babylon, who has Jurisdiction over 300000 Families. Pet. Stroza de dogm.
Chald. 1617.

4. Under Pope Julius III. they chose one Simon Jusacha, Patriarch, who resided
at Caramit, in Mesopotamia: next

Abdiesu, Metropolitan of Saba, who at Rome recanted some Books which he had
writ in favor of Nestorianism: He was at the Council of Trent.

Ahacballa, a Monk of St. Pachome.

Denha Simon, who left Caramit, to reside in Zeinalbech, in the uttermost
bounds of Persia, submitting to the Patriarch of Babylon.

Simon.

Elias, who sent a flattering submissive Letter to Pope Paul V. upon his
request; wherein he represents the differences between the Nestorians, and
Romans, only Ceremonial.

But since they have broken Faith, etc.

Indians of St. Thomas.
1. One Sect with the Nestorians. 2. Subject to the same Patriarch, whose
Jurisdiction reaches as far as India. 3. The Chaldeans, who live at Goa,
Cochim, Angamala, etc. all Nestorians. 4. The Pope of Rome has sent many
Emissaries to them; much violence, and many arts have been used, especially by
Alexis de Meneses, made afterward Archbishop of Goa, and Patriarch of the
East: A College was set up at Cangranor, 1546. for instructing children in the
Ceremonies of the Latins, another for the Chaldean Language, etc.
In fine, they became Subject to Rome, and continue so to this day, for ought I
can learn.

Sabeans, or Christians of St. John.
M. de Thevenot gives account of them about Bassora, in the East Indies, but
says, They are more Gentiles than Christians. One of them, who turned Roman
Catholic, confessing, They were partly Jews, part Turks, part Christians, and
part Gentiles. Mr. de Thev. vid. postea.

Cophties.
1. So called from Coptus, the Metropolis of Thebais formerly, or Egophtia,
Egypt.

2. Their Country Language is Arabic, the Coptic Tongue is in their Offices.

3. Cophties, All Monophysites, etc.

Abyssins, All Monophysites, etc.

Armenians, All Monophysites, etc.

Jacobites, All Monophysites, etc. i. e. They will not acknowledge two Natures
in Christ, for fear of acknowledging two Christ's.

4. They are subject to One, who calls himself Patriarch of Alexandria and
Jerusalem, and Successor of St. Mark, who has Jurisdiction over

Both Aegypts, Nubia, and Abyssinia.

5. Upon him depend Eleven Cophty-Bishops, viz.

Of Jerusalem, Behnese, Atsih, Film, Moharrah, Montfallot, Sijut, Abutig,
Girgium, Negade, Girge.
And the Metropolitan of Abyssinia.

6. Next Bishops, are Arch-Priests, many in number.

7. Next Priests, Deacons, Readers, Chanters.

So ignorant, they have scarce a Man among them fit to be a Patriarch; and so
poor, they are scarce able to raise a Sum of Money to give the Basha for his
Admission.

They have many fabulous Stories about our Savior's Life; as that an Angel
brought him Victuals in his Minority. M. de Thev.

Armenians.
1. Scha-Abas, King of Persia, his Victories over the Armenians, has almost
ruined this Church, says F. Simon, which others deny. 2. The Patriarch of
Armenia had his Seat lately at Egmiathin. 3. They still retain the Names of
some Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, and Monasteries. 4. Many Armenians are now
in the Communion with the Church of Rome. 5. They are all Monophysites. 6. They
agree mostly with the Jacobites, except some Ceremonies. Their Mass is in the
Armenian-Tongue. 7. They reject the Council of Chalcedon. 8. They are Subject
to two Patriarchs, each called Patriarch of Armenia, and have 400000 Villages
under them. 9. The Curates and Bishops succeed, qu. by Inheritance. 10.
Armenians in Ispahan, not inconsiderable for number.
Jacobites.
Properly so called, are such as live in Syria and Mesopotamia, about 40000
Families, of which some are Latiniz'd, and some not; these last have two
Patriarchs, one at Caramit, the other at Derzapharan.

The Patriarch of the Latiniz'd Jacobites resides at Aleppo, and depends on
Rome.

They Communicate with Leavened Bread.

Abyssins of Ethiop.
1. So called from Abassia, i. e. Ancient Ethiopia.

2. They are Subject to one Bishop, sent from the Patriarch of Alexandria, who
resides at Cairo.

3. John Bermudas, made Patriarch of Ethiopia at Rome, at the request of the
Abyssins themselves; most know what became of him, viz. Banished.

4. One David, who called himself Emperor of the greater and -- Ethiopia, wrote
a Letter to Pope Clement VII. protesting Obedience.

5. Their Language is a Chaldaic (used in their Liturgies) much differing from
the Vulgar Chaldiac. F. Sim.

A great Country, seven Months Travel in circuit: The King, and all the People
of the Cophtie Religion. M. de Thev.

Purchase says no: They call themselves Chaldeans. Sam. Purchase.

Maronites.
1. So called from Maron, (as they pretend) an Abbot, whose Life Theodoret has
writ, who lived in the beginning of the Fifth Century; whom they all Saint in
all their Offices.

2. Their Patriarch resides in the Monastery of Cannabin, on Mount Libanus,
called Patriarch of Antioch.

3. They are entirely submitted to the Church of Rome; and a Reformation is
made in their Offices, Discipline, etc.

4. The Maronites, of a sweet Temper, but inconstant; their Women very modest.

5. They disclaim the Error of Monothelism. F. Sim.

The Maronites at Damascus so poor, that when I was there, their Curate had
been in Prison a long while, for three Piasters. M. de Thev.

N. B. They are of late fully reconciled to the Church of Rome. F. Simon.

Doctrines common to all the Eastern Churches.
1. THey refuse to own the Bishop of Rome, as Universal Bishop.

2. They pray for the Dead.

3. Yet they deny Purgatory.

4. They observe Saturday.

5. They abstain from things strangled, and Blood.

Not out of respect to the Mosaic Law, but Apostolic Decree; and they rebuke
us for laying that Decree aside. Ludolph.

The Abyssins also, from the shrunk Sinew. Lud.

6. They believe not the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son.

7. They buy and sell the Sacraments, and drive the Bargain with much eagerness.

8. The Priests are generally poor and ignorant; yet the Patriarch of Abassia
is reported (by one that describes the River Nilus and the Abass, Emp. p. 54.)
to be excellently skilled in Divine and Humane Learning. F. Simon. Ludolphus
denies it.

(8) The pure Orientals deny Transubstantiation. The Latiniz'd not so.

9. They kneel not in their Churches, but lean on Crutches, or stand.

10. They have a Candlestick with three Candles, representing the Trinity:
Another with two Candles, to signify the two Natures of Christ.

11. In giving the Blessing, they make the sign of the Cross, from the right
hand to the left.

12. Maids show not themselves before Marriage, nor a long time after; no, not
to their Relations, and go not to Church, for fear of being seen. M. de Thev.
but this is not equally affirmed of all.

13. They have four Lents in the Year.

1. The first, six Weeks before Easter, till Easter Day. The Muscovites 7
Weeks. 2. The second, fifteen days before S. Peter, and Paul's day, 'till that
day. 3. The third, from August the first, 'till Assumption-day, i. e. fifteen
days. 4. The fourth, from the first Sunday of Advent, 'till Christmass-day.
During the three last Lents, they may eat Fish and Oil; but in the first
neither; nor any thing that has Blood, but only Herbs and Shellfish. M. de
Thev. But I find not this certainly affirmed of the Abyssins.

14. They Fast twice (besides) in seven days, upon the fourth and sixth
Holy Day. Job Lud. l. 3. The reason of which was by Tzagazaab (an Abassian)
said to be, for that the fourt day the murder of Christ was concluded upon, and
the sixth it was executed; according to what many of the Ancients taught. But
others believe, These two Fasting-days were taken up in imitation of the
Ancient Jews. Ibid.

15. The Greeks, Armenians, Russians, and other Oriental Christians, begin the
Year from the Calends of September, as supposing that the World was created at
the time of the Autumnal Equinoctial. Ibid.

Their Year consists of Twelve Months, each Month has thirty days.

To every three years they add five days, to every four, six days, to supply
the Solar year. So that their Feasts happen on the same days with ours,
according to the Julian Account. The Feast of the Nativity is Celebrated the
same day with us, viz. December. 25. their 28. ibid.

26. The Grecians, Armenians, Russians, and especially the Abyssinians, not
only permit their Priests to Marry, but soonest prefer the Husbands of Wives;
insomuch, that the nearest way to preferment among them is to Mary, Idem. l. 3.
c. 7.

Proper Doctrines and Vsages. Baptism, Chrism, etc.
Greeks.
1. Mysteries, viz. Six.

1. Baptism, viz.

1. They present the Child at the Church Porch, to receive the blessing of the
Priest.

2. The Priest there seals the Child, i. e. crosses him on the Forehead,
Mouth, Breast; recites a Prayer, and waves him in his Arms, in form of a Cross,
elevates him, and dismisseth him.

3. He blows three times on the Child to dispossess the Devil.

4. Pours Water in form of a Cross, in token of peace with God.

5. Takes the Child out of the Gossip's Arms (of which they never have but one)
and makes the sign of the Cross with Oil on the Forehead, Breast. Reins,
saying, (...) -- (...) -- (...).

6. He next dips it 3 times in water, and looking toward the East, says, The
servant of God is Baptized in the Name of the Father, Amen, Of the Son, Amen,
etc.

N. Their Gossips or Compatri commence a great Friendship, and fancy that they
cannot mix consanguinity.

2. Chrism,

Tho joined with Baptism, is different from it, grounded on 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.

On Good Friay the Archbishop, or Bishop consecrates the Oil.

It is made of Xylobalsamum, Echinanthes, Myrrh, Xylocatia, Carpobalsamum,
Laudanum, and other Gums and Spices, F. Simon.

They defer Baptism till the 3d, 4th, 6th, 10th, 14th year.

3. Eucharist.

1. For preparation, they distribute Panem Benedictum, ((...)) the parts of
Bread which remain of the Consecrated Loaf: These they carry home to such as
cannot come: These, they say have power to remit Venial Sins.

2. In the Chancel, on a Table, is a Loaf set in this form.



3. This the Priest Signs three times, using these words, In the remembrance of
our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ.

4. He strikes a small Lance several times into the Loaf, saying by parcels, As
a Lamb before his Shearers; etc.

5. Cuts a piece for himself, lays it by the Patina, thrusts his Lance into the
Bread again, with other words, cuts a second part, forms it like, saying In
honor and memory of our blessed Lady Mother of God, and perpetual Virgin Mary,
through whose Prayers, O Lord, accept this Sacrifice to thine Altar.

6. Then cuts out more pieces in memory of John Baptist, Moses, Aaron, Peter,
Paul, Basil, Gregory Cosma, Damianus, etc. And Lastly, a ninth in honor of S.
Chrysostom, whose Liturgy is read that day: (The 9 parcels, in reference to the
9 Hierarchies of Angels.)

7. Then follows the Offertory for the Living, every Christian Prelate, and the
particular Bishop that Ordained the Priest, especially those who paid for that
Mass; the Founders of the Church, the Parents and Friends of those which paid
for the Mass.

8. The Priest lifts up a Silver Star over the Bread; saying some short
Prayers, goes from the place of the Offertory, reads the Epistle and Gospel for
the day; returns, covers the Bread and Wine, sets it on his Head, carries it in
Procession through all the Church, the People bowing, making Crosses, throwing
infirm persons in the way.

9. The Apostles Creed is recited, the Veil taken off, Air moved over the Bread
with a Fan (signifying the breath of the Spirit) etc.

10. The words of Consecration are used -- In the same night, etc.

11. Then this Prayer, Lord, who in the third hour did send thy Holy Spirit,
graciously take it not away from us, but grant it to us, Lord, make clean our
Hearts within us, (with some short Soliloques) which Prayer is repeated three
times, with the head bowed down.

12. Then the Priest raising himself, says, Lord hear my Prayer; and lifting
up his hand by way of Blessing, adds, Make this Bread the Holy Body of Christ.
Amen.

13. Here the Consecration being finished, he goes on, Thou art my God thou art
my King, I adore thee piously and Faithfully.

14. Then covering the Chalice, he elevates it, and the People worship it.

15. The Priest sups three times.

16. Those who intend to Communicate; first go to the bottom of the Church,
there to ask forgiveness of the Congregation in these words, (...). The Answer
is, (...).

17. It is their custom to conserve the Sacrament for the use of the Sick, Haec
ex D. Addison.

They gave the Sacrament to the Children at Baptism.

Believers not to be forced to the Sacrament.

They carry the Sacrament to the Sick without Torches.

Keep it in a Box, and hang it on a Wall.

They hold, tha the Sacrament Consecrated on Holy Thursdays is most
Efficacious, F. Simon.

They use Unleavened Bread.

Administer in both kinds, Christ. a Jelinger.

Greeks, out of Dr. Addison.
4. Priesthood,

Is accounted a Mystery for its Power and Energy, 1 Cor. 4.1.

Of this there are these Orders.

1. Anagnostes, who reads the Hymns (which are Sung) and the Prophets of the
Old Testament.

2. The Psaltes, who sings the Psalms of David.

3. Lampadarios, who trims the Lamps.

4. Deacons and Subdeacons, who read the Epistles and Gospels.

5. Secular Priests, who can all read and write, yet few skilled in the
School-Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew, or Philosophy (all books being counted
Unlawful, but such as treat of Divinity and a Godly Life.) They are called
Papa's.

They cannot Marry a second time, who, when Widowers, wear Caps turned up with
white, with a fall hanging down on their backs; but this is often forfeited,
and cut off by the Bishop for some sin.

6. Religious Priests, Kaloirs, from (...), Monks Encloistered, professing
Chastity, and obedience, of the Orders of S. Basil, besides which they have no
other.

Their Habit, A long Cassock of Course Cloth, of Camels Color, with a Cap of
Felt or Wool, made to cover the Ears, with a black Coul, called (...).

They abstain from Flesh all their Life. Some more strict (called (...)) take
nothing else, but Bread and Water; but these are commonly Anchorites, several
dwell on Mount Athos: Their Hair long.

Their Services are very ridiculous and prolix. Every day in Lent they read
over the Psaltar once; and at the end of every 4 Psalms say, Gloria Patri, etc.
with 3 Metagnai, (or (...)) bowing or kissing the ground 3 times. At the end of
every 10 Psalms 40 Metagnai; which every Kaloir does 300 times every 24 Hours,
unless sick, and then his Priest must do it for him. The one half of these are
performed the two first hours of the Night, the other half at midnight, before
they arise to Mattins, which begin 4 hours before Day.

Out of some Monasteries they send (...), Messengers to collect Contributions,
who stay out five years, begging the Charity of good People; some of which,
being Temperate, live long: I knew one 119 years old; his Father lived but to
80, his Grandfather to 158.

Several Monasteries on Mount Athos, where the Kaloirs, 6000 in number, work in
such Employments, as they are best skilled in.

Every Monastery has its Library, but disorderly ones; few books, but of
Divinity; few choice ones of them: Nor one Book (they say) varying from the
Doctrine of the 7th Council, nor any writ by such as they call Heretics.

Bells in all Monasteries.

The Kaloirs here commonly, of good, simple, godly Lives.

Greeks, out of F. Simon.
1. The Churchmen accused of Simony.

2. They observe not the age required for Episcopacy and Priesthood.

3. They take several Orders at one time.

4. He is commonly chosen Patriarch, that gives most to the Grand Seignior:
Besides, the Patriarch buys the Voices of the Bishops that Elect him. The
Patriarch makes himself amends when he makes Bishops, and they again, when they
make a Papas, (selling Orders and Cures) and they again, the poor people.

5. Monks, abstain strictly from Flesh, tho engaged by no Vow, but Custom.

They sleep not above 4 hours, some but two.

They go to prayers in the Church thrice a day.

(1.) Some Monks, called (...), who eat in the same Refectory, use the same
Exercise, have nothing singular in their Habit; yet some are (...), who profess
a more perfect way of living; many in number.

Others are, (...), who lead not so perfect a Life.

(2.) Some (...), who live as themselves please.

1. They buy a Cell, and necessaries for a Monastery. 2. The Yeoman of the Cell
provides Bread and Wine. 3. They betake to business, are bound to no duty. 4.
At Death they leave all to their companion.
(3.) Some Anchorites, who cannot work, nor discharge the duties of the
Monastery; yet have a mind to live in Solitude; and these,

1. Buy a Cell, with a piece of Land, etc.

2. Go to the Monastery only on Holy Days, having no hours appointed them for
Prayer.

3. Some, with leave of the Abbot, leave the Monastery, and retire for
Meditation and Prayer; the Monastery sending them, once a Month, provisions to
live upon.

4. Some hire a Vineyard near the Cell, and feed on the Grapes: Some on
Cherries, on Beans; some Transcribe Books.

6. Nuns; They,

1. Are of S. Basil's Order, under an Abbess.

2. As strict as the Monks, in Fasting, Praying, etc.

3. Their Confessor, some old Virtuous, Neighbor Monk, who says Mass, etc.

4. Their Habit, a Cloak, of plain Woollen-Cloth, Arms and Hands covered to the
Fingers ends.

5. Their Head shaven; a several Cell and Lodging for each.

6. The Rich have a Maid, or young Girl, which they bring up in Devotion.

7. They work with their Needles, make Girdles, which they sell to the Turks.

N. B. Some say, these at C. P. are Widows, aged, under no Vow, all their
customs consisting in wearing a black Veil on their Head, declaring that they
will Marry no more, living commonly at home, minding their Huswifery, Children,
etc. having more Liberty than before.

5. Confession.

Confession is enjoined 4 times a year to persons of leisure: Once a month to
the Priests and Religious: Once a year to laboring people, viz. before their
Great Lent. To sick people as an ease for spiritual Diseases.

Repentance is defined a sorrow of heart for sin, of which a man accuses
himself before a Priest, with a firm Resolution to correct the Errors of his
past Life by that which is to come, and with intention to perform what shall be
enjoined him by his Pastor for his Penance.

Their Argument for Confession: The Priest cannot release, unless he know what
to release.

Their Penances are, Prayers, extraordinary Alms, Fastings, Visiting Holy
Places, etc.

The Priest exhorts thus: Behold the Angel of the Lord is at hand, to take thy
Confession; see that thou conceal no sin, for fear of shame; for I also am a
man and sinner, as thou art.

To Penitents guilty of mortal sin, is administered the Sacrament of (...), or
the Oil of Prayer, done by the Bp. and 7 Priests, by pure Oil and Prayer, viz.

The Priest dips some Cotton on the End of a stick, anoints the Penitents in
form of a Cross, on the Forehead, Chin, each Cheek, Back and Palms of the
Hands, and then recites a Prayer.

The same with the Papists Eztream Unction.

6. Marriage is forbidden after the burial of the Third Husband or Wife,
because, say they, it comes under the Notion of Polygamy.

Divorces are easily granted, and the man allowed to take another Wife, and
perhaps afterward recalled, and the man enjoined to reassume his former Wife.

About C.P. and Smyrna, and great Cities, in imitation of the Turks in
Retirement, and suffer them not to be seen by the Bridegroom, till unveiled,
after they are married.

The Islander Greeks of the Archipelago, dancing promiscuously, men and women
together, often make Protestations of Marriages together, and then break them;
which if they do, the Old Mothers, by Witchcraft, ((...)), tie the man from
marrying with any other, till an agreement be made.

In Romania (or Ramali) the Turks have frequently married with Greek women
Christians, till 1672, when the Patriarch of C. P. complained to the Mufti, and
put a stop to it.

The Priest marries them with a Ring, they have also a Godfather and Godmother,
who present themselves before the Papa's, and hold a Garland of flowers
interlaced with Orpine over the heads of the couple, pray, turn round, drink
together, etc. break the glass; saying, so may the Bridegroom break the
Virginity of the Bride. M. de Thevenot.

Muscovites.
1. Eight Days after the Child is born, he is brought to the Church Porch,
where the Priest receives the Child.

2. Tells the Witnesses their Duties; namely, To teach him how to know God and
Christ, etc.

3. After some Prayer, plungeth the Child three times over head and ears, in a
tub of warm Water; holding it necessary that every part of the Child be dipped;
using these Words, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

N. They hold all to be damned that die without Baptism.

They Re-baptize Apostates.

The Duke of Holstein's Ambassador faith, 1. The Child is crossed on the
Forehead. 2. Blessed thus, The Lord preserve thy coming in, and going out. 3.
Nine Wax-Candles are lighted cross the Font, which is in the middle of the
Church. 4. The Godfathers are Incensed. and the Water Consecrated. 5. A
Procession is made about the Font three times, 6. The Child is Named, the
Godfathers interrogated, the Devil exorcised, and the Child baptized. See more
in the Second Book.


Georgians.
1. A Priest reads many Prayers over the Child, going on to the end, without
Baptizing the Child.

2. After reading, the Child is stripped, and the Godfather Baptizeth the Child,
without saying any other Words than what was said by the Priest.

3. With Baptism, they also administer to Children, Consumation, And the
Eucharist.


4. The Priest alone is accounted the true Minister of Baptism; without him
it is null.

If the Child dies before Baptism, the Mother's Baptism is sufficient to save
the Child.

5. They are not very pressing to receive Baptism.

6. They Re-baptize such as return after Apostasy. F. Simon.

M. Tavernier says, Virgins brought up in Nunneries to study, after some time,
Profess, Baptize, and apply the Holy Oils, as well as any Bishop, or
Archbishop, l. 3. c. 9. p. 124.

Mengrelians.
They are so Ignorant, that they know not so much as the Words necessary to
Baptism.

They administer Baptism in the same manner as the Georgians.

Sometimes, to render the Baptism more solemn, they baptize with Wine.

A M. S. Relation, attributed to Father Zampi, a Theatin, tells us the manner
is thus:

1. When a Child is first born, the Priest only anoints it with Oil, and signs
it on the Forehead with a Cross, and no more is done for two Years.

2. Then they dip it in hot Water, and anoint it all over, and give it Bread,
that has been blessed, to eat, and Wine to drink.

This seems to be the old way of administering Baptism, Confirmation, and
Eucharist together. F. Simon.

Two or three days after the Woman is brought to Bed, the Priest comes, mumbles
over a few Prayers, and anoints the Mother, and the Infant, which they believe
to be the best Baptism in the World. Tavernier. l. 3. c. 10.

Indians of St. Thomas.
They own but three Sacraments, viz. Baptism, Orders, and Eucharist.

In one Church were different Forms of Baptism.

A great many, especially the Poor, and -- in Words, are never Baptized, us
wanting Money; yet these go to Church, and receive the Sacrament.

After Baptism, they anoint with an Unguent made of Indian-Nuts, without
Benediction. F. Simon.

They Baptize commonly at the Fortieth Day, if the Parent desire it not sooner:
They sign the Forehead with the sign of the Cross, and then wash all over with
Water. Sir Tho. Herbert.

Christians of St. John.
They Baptize only in Rivers, and upon Sundays; their way thus: 1. They carry
the Infant to Church. 2. The Bishop reads Prayers over the Child. 3. They carry
it to the River, with a Train of Men and Women, go up to the Knees in Water;
the Bishop prays, sprinkles the Infant three times, in the Name of the Lord,
first and last of the World, etc. Tavern.


Maronites.
At Baptism they bless the Water, by saying a great many Prayers, warm it, and
then dip, or sprinkle three times.

Also, they anoint the Head, Breast, and whole Body, from Head to Foot, before
Baptism.

Also, afterward they have another Unction, for Confirmation. F. Simon.

Armenians.
I found in one of their Churches only the Priest and his Cloak, an aged Woman,
who had brought the Child, and a young Man, aged about 18, who presented the
Child to be Baptized.

1. The Priest prayed.

2. Asked the Godfather several Questions.

3. All went into the Sacresty, where the Font was, like a Trough, half an Ell
long, and a quarter broad.

4. The Priest consecrates the Water, and puts holy Oil into it, and plunges
the Child naked into it, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

5. Pours Water three times on his head, and afterward all over his Body.

6. He crossed the Child on the Forehead with Holy Oil.

7. The time of Baptism is at 8 days old. D. of H. Ambass.

Cophties.
They acknowledge Seven Sacraments.

1. Baptism, thus Administered, about the 40th. Day.

1. A Mass is celebrated after Midnight, with many Prayers.

2. They Sing for some time, the Deacon carrying the Children to the Altar, to
anoint them with Holy Oil; then they say, The Children are new Spiritual Men.

3. Then they begin to Sing, and the Children are anointed a second time, with
the sign of the Cross thirty seven times, (which serves for Exorcisin.)

4. They continue to Sing, the Women making a loud noise, in token of Joy.

5. The Priest draws nigh the Font, blesses the Water, pours Oil into it, in
the form of a Cross.

6. With one hand he takes the Child by the right Arm, and left Leg, and with
the other hand by the left Arm, making a kind of a Cross with the Limbs of the
Child, which they cloth in a little white Garment. All this while the Priest's
reading and singing, and the Women crying, or howling.

7. The Priest breaths three times in the Child's Face, that he may receive the
Holy Ghost.

8. He gives it the Communion, by dipping his Finger in the Chalice, and
putting it in the Child's mouth.

9. They light Tapers, and make a Procession, and sing in the Church.

10. The Deacons carrying the Children in their Arms, the Priests going before,
and the Women following, with cries and howling.

N. They use Circumcision also: They baptize themselves every Year in Lakes and
Rivers. F. Simon.

Abassines.
They use Circumcision, as well as Baptism; but not with any signal Ceremony or
Commemoration; for it is done privately by some poor Woman, without any
bystanders, not so much as the Father himself; and this, not upon the score of
Religion, but as a custom of the Country, like Incisions of the Face in
Ethiopia and Nubia, and boaring the Ears among the Indians. Ludolph. out of
Claudius, K. of Ethiop. Confession.

They repeat the Ceremony of Baptism every Year, upon the Feast of the
Epiphany. Idem. ex Godigno.

Their Ceremonies and Order of Baptizing are thus; out of Ludolph.

1. Of Adult Persons: For they have frequent occasions of Baptizing Heathens.

1. They read Psalm 52. 2. Perfume the Person with Frankincense, and enquire
his Name. 3. Use certain Prayers, the Deacon often exhorting the People to join
with the Priest. 4. Anoints several parts of the Body with Oil, and lays his
hand on his head. 5. The Neophytes lifting up their right hand, and looking
toward the West, abjure Satan as the Prince of Darkness: and then lifting up
their hand to the East, make a kind of Vow to Christ. 6. To the Priest,
reciting over the Creed, they answer, I do believe. 7. They are again anointed,
and several parcels of Scripture read. 8. Oil being poured into the Basin, in
the form of a Cross, after some Prayers rehearsed, the Neophytes, conducted by
the Deacon, to a Pool before the Church-door, are by the Priest plunged over
head and ears, saying, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. 9. Men help the Men, and Women, Women, out of the Pool, called thence
Susceptores. 10. Being anointed again, they are clad with a white
Under-garment, and a red Over-garment, to signify the Blood of Christ, and
presented with Milk and Honey, and called Sons of Baptism.
2. Of Infants, who are Baptized (Males before the Fortieth, Females before the
Eightieth Day) Godfathers and Godmothers answering for them, and the Child's
Tongue moistened with the Priest's Finger, dipped in the Chalice.

Russians, Muscovites.
1. They Communicate but once a Year; commonly on a Fasting-Day: If on a
Sunday, they eat no Flesh after it.

2. They admit but Three at a time.

3. The Priest asks the Communicants, If they be clean from Sin?

4. The Communicants stand, whilst the Priest prays, with their Arms folded
one within another, and the Priest delivers to them a Spoonful of Bread and
Wine, tempered together; saying, Eat this, Drink this; This is the true Body,
and true Blood, etc.

5. Then he delivers Bread by it self, and Wine mingled with Water, to
represent the Water and Blood, that issued out of our Savior's side.

6. They admit Children of 7 Years to this Sacrament. F. Simon.

7. The Bread is leavened, with a Cross on it.

Abyssins.
They receive, some Weekly, some Monthly, but always at Church; Fasting, and
toward the Evening on Fasting-Days. They never spit that Day on which they
receive.

In crowded Churches, Priest, and Sub-Priest, Deacon, and Subdeacon, all help,
and read.

Several Prayers at the use of several Vessels, and variety of Actions: Some
bring Offerings, Bread, Oil, etc. to be distributed to the Poor.

They administer in both Kinds, to both Clergy and Laity; and have been very
angry with the Latins, for denying the Cup to the Laity. Lud.

They admit not the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or real presence; but when
the words of their Liturgy are objected, e. g. Lord, now lay thy hand upon this
Dish, bless it, and Sanctify it, that so thy Body may be made Holy therein.
And again, Convert this Bread, that it may become thy pure Body, which is
joined with this Cup of thy most precious Blood, etc.

They answer, Retzitze nagare vet; i. e. It Is a nice business: Or, Mastar vet;
i. e. it is a Mystery. In short, one Gregory, (a Native of Abyssinia) told my
Author (Ludolphus) That his Country men were not so scrupulous. Ludolph.

They use Loaves, signed with a Salteir Cross, thus laid upon an arched Chest,
in which the Ancients laid the Martyrs Bones, or Sacred Relics: Besides which,
they have a Dish and Spoon, unleavened Bread, one Loaf only, Raisin-Stones
steept in Water for Wine.

Georgians.
1. They Consecrate in wooden Chalices.

2. They give the Communion to Children, when dying.

3. Others at Age, receive but seldom.

4. They carry the Sacrament to the Sick, without Light or Attendance.

5. On some Holy Days, the Priests together assist at the Mass of the Bishop,
who gives them the Sacrament in their hands, and they themselves carry it to
their Mouths.

Christians of St. John.
1. They use Flour, kneaded with Wine, and Oil.

2. They use no other form of Consecration, then only some long Prayers, to
praise and thank God, at the same time blessing the Bread and Wine, never
making mention of his Body and Blood.

3. The Priest takes the Bread, and having eaten some of it, distributes the
rest to the People. M. Tavern. v. post.

Mengrelians.
The Papa's of Mengrelia, keep the Eucharist in a little bag of Leather or
Cloth, which they tie to their Girdle, and carry it about them, whithersoever
they go, to be made use of upon occasions, when they are to give the Viaticum
to the Sick.

Yea, they give it to others, Men or Women, to carry, etc.

Armenians.
1. They use leavened Bread. 2. They mingle no Water with their Wine. 3.
Consecrate in wooden and earthen Dishes. 4. Give the Communion to Children; and
at Weddings, to the Married couple.
3. They never Communicate without singing and playing on great Cymbals, called
Hambarzon, D. of Holst. Emb.

But now, says Tavernier, they spare no cost to adorn the Choir and Altar; you
tread upon rich Carpets, etc. From the Body of the Church, to the Choir, is
usually an Ascent of 5 or 6 Steps.

Nestorians.
They consecrate in leavened bread.

They put into their bread salt and oil, using a great many prayers.

Indians.
1. They Communicate on Holy Thursday, and other Festivals.

2. They use no other preparation, then coming to the Sacrament fasting; Others
say,

3. They consecrate with little Cakes made with oil and Salt; which the Deacons
and other inferior Churchmen baked in a Copper vessel, singing several Psalms
and Hymns whilst they were a baking.

And when they are ready to Consecrate, through a hole in the floor of that
little Tower (wherein they baked) they let the Cake, in a little basket made of
leaves, slide down upon the Altar.

4. Their wine is only water with dry grapes infused.

5. He that serves at Mass wears a Stole over his ordinary clothes, tho no
Deacon.

6. The same has always a Censer in his hand, and says almost as many
prayers, as he that Celebrates.

Cophties.
1. They never Communicate in private places. 2. The Priest at Communion breaks
the bread in form of a Cross, and puts it into the wine, eating 3 morsels, and
drinking 3 spoonfuls. 3. They consecrate in leavened bread; which they call
Baraca, ( i. e. benediction) before consecration, and Corban (or Communion)
afterward. 4. They use little loaves, as big as a Crown piece, whereof they
bake many the night before the Liturgy, and at the end of Mass distribute them
to those who have been present. 5. They use not Tavern-wine (as profane) but
private, or water with raisins infused. 6. They never confess, or Communicate,
but in Lent. 7. They Communicate in both kinds. 8. They give wine in a spoon.
9. They give the Communion to children after baptsim. 10. Vanslebio reports,
that at the Elevation of the Host, they knock their breasts, cast themselves on
the ground, make the sign of the cross, and move their cap a little. F. Sim.
Maronites.
1. They consecrate with unleavened bread; tho probably this but of late, since
their submission to Rome.

Abyssins.
1. The Abuna, Papas, or Metropolitan, Consecrated by the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and sent out of Egypt: They take Ordination many times with Tears
in their Eyes, by reason of the Turkish Vexations.

Their only Qualification is only to be able to read Arabic. The Fathers of the
Society tell us of a sad tool, in their time, a Miller.

Of these there are Four of equal Power and Dignity.

No Bishops, nor Archbishops.

2. Icegue, the Governor of the Monks.

3. Comos, Overseers of the principal Churches.

4. Depterat, or Canons, who look to their Music.

5. Nebrat, or Dean.

6. Kasis, or Priest.

7. Sub-priest.

8. Deacon.

9. Subdeacon.

All carry a Cross in their hands.

Georgians.
They Confess twice in their Life.

1. At Marriage. 2. Death,
Their Confession is in three or four words.

Muscovites.
Before the Sacrament they Confess in the midst of the Church, before an Image,
all their Particular Sins; at every sin expressing remorse, and promising
Amendment.

Absolution is granted, with the Assignation of certain Penances, as, saying
Gospodi Pomilui several times; making several reverences before the Saints;
abstaining from Women for a time; standing at the Church-door; using of Holy
Water, which the Priests Consecrate on Twelfth-day, and not to be had of them
for nothing: this water they think, has the virtue to cleanse them from all
their sins. D. of Holstein's Emb. Trav.

Ahassins
Account confession one of their seven sacraments.

But they neither confess the number, nor the particular species of their sins,
but cry in general; I have sinned, I have sinned; absan, absan. Insomuch, that
when the Roman Priests pressed them to particular confession, they never
acknowledged any more then three, if they had been guilty, Homicide, Adultery,
and Theft. The offender is absolved in few words, together with some gentle
stripes upon the side with an Olive Twig: but for those great crimes before
mentioned, they are many times severely scourged. Ludolph. The Metropolitan
sometimes hears confession, and upon a heinous crime rises up, and after a
sharp rebuke, cries out, Have thou done this! Do thou not fear God? Go to,
let him be scourged 30 or 40 times. Tellez.

One to avoid a sharp and open Absolution, desired to be heard in private; to
whom the Metropolitan, How! shall not thy sins be made manifest at the last
days, before all the world? Tell therefore what it is: Confession being made,
that it was stealing Oxen; the Offender being present, he was constrained to
restore the Oxen, and undergo a severe penalty beside, Ludolph.

Armenians.
When an Armenian confesses, e. g. Robbery, Murder, etc. the Confessor tells
him, God is merciful, etc. But if eating Butter on a Friday, or day of fasting
-- Oh! a grievous Crime, and severe Penances enjoined for it; as fasting
several months, refraining six months from his Wife, M. de Thevenot.

The Priests give Absolution indifferently for all sins, F. Sim.

Extreme Unction is not administered till after Death, and commonly given only
to Priests.

Georgians.
If they have no Children by their Wives, they divorce from them; by permission
of the Priests, and marry others.

So also in case of Adultery and Quarrelling.

Muscovites.
They forbid Polygamy, as also Fourth Marriages by Succession, as also marriage
of two brothers to two sisters, and of Godfathers and Godmothers.

Young men and maids may not see one another, nor speak together before
marriage; or make any promise by word or writing, D. of Holstein 's Embaessad.
Travels.

See more in the second book.

Indians.
They were married by the first Priest they found.

Abissines.
Polygamy is tolerated by the Civil Magistrate, but not allowed by the Church:
and such as marry more than one, are prohibited from the Holy Sacrament.
Alvarez tells of his own knowledge, that his Host at Dobarra had 3 Wives, and
by them 37 Children, for which he was not admitted to Church Communion, till he
had put two of them away.

Their Kings have many Wives and Concubines; the Laws of their Church and
Nation not agreeing well together.

Marriages of Kindred forbidden, even to distant degrees; for the Ethiopians
wanting Terms of Distinction, call all (one another) Sisters and Brothers. Thus
a Churchman may not marry his brother's Wife, but a Lay-person may.

No Marriages but such as are approved by Divine Authority are honored with
Sacerdotal Benediction; nor those publicly in the Church, unless they be such
Clergymen to whom the Hallelujah is sung.

Other people are married at home, or before the Church-doors.

All secular persons may throw off the Yoke when they please, and do often upon
light causes, by determination of the King's Judges, Job Ludolph. l. 3.

Armenians.
They marry their Children very young, sometimes promise them as soon as born,
and often marry them at 7 or 8 years old; bur tho the Priest perform the
Ceremonies then, yet they defer the consummation till the usual time, M. de
Thev.

The Priest brings them near the Altar, reads several Prayers, blesses the
marriage, by holding a Wooden Cross over them, joining their hands and heads
together, yet so, that the Bride's Head touches the Bridegroom's Breast; then
they communicate; afterward the Priest casts Rose Water upon them, and ties a
Scarf about the Bride's Right Hand, by which the Bridegroom leads her, D. of
Holst. Emb.

Maronites.
They make no publication in Church of marriages, before the solemnity.

They go to any Priest to marry them.

They marry sometimes under the age of 12 or 14.

They suffer not two brothers to marry two sisters, nor the Father and Son to
marry Mother and Daughter, F. Simon, out of Daudini the Jesuit.

Mengrelians.
Young maids out of the Nunneries are allowed to confess, baptize, marry, and
perform all other Ecclesiastical Functions, which I never knew practiced in any
other part of the World beside, Tavernier, l. 3. c. 10.

The Bishop dissolves marriages when they please, and then marry again, after
they have sold the first, if they are not married to their fancy, they take
another for a time, and pay her, as the Turks do. Idem.

Faith and Vsages.
Greeks.
2. Of their Faith and Vsages, etc. Divine Service, Prayer.
THey have 4 Liturgies, viz. One of S. James, 5 hours long, used once every
year; -- of S. Chrysostom, to be read almost every day in the year; -- of S.
Basil, and of S. Gregory.

They use Pictures, and burn Lamps before them, Perfume them with Incense;
begin and end their Prayers with Bowings, and Crossing before them: But abhor
all Carved Images.

They Pray to Saints; and thus teach their Children, and privately Pray
themselves morning and evening. All Holy Lady, Mother of God, Pray for us
sinners: All Celestial Powers of Angels and Archangels, Pray for us sinners:
Holy John, Ptophet and Forerunner and Baptist of our Lord Jesus Christ, pray,
etc. Holy Orthodox Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs, and all Saints, pray, etc. O
Sacred Ministers of God, our Fathers, Shepherds and Teachers of the World,
pray, etc. O Invincible and Indissoluble and Divine Powers of the Reverend and
Life-giving Cross, forsake us not sinners.

The precepts of their Church require them to pray at the times of the Liturgy
morning and evening, on the Lord's day and other Festivals. Also to pray for
Kings, Patriarchs, Bishops, and all Souls departed in the Catholic Church; and
for all Heretics, etc. That they may return, before their passage from this
Life.

Indians of S. Thomas.
They go daily to Church, to read the Liturgy aloud in the Chaldaick Tongue:
But they do not think themselves obliged to rehearse it elsewhere, nor have
they any Breviaries for saying it in private.

In some places, Mass is said but once a year; in others, scarce once in six,
or seven, or ten years, F. Simon out of Menes's Memoirs.

They have no Images; only the Cross they Honor much.

Georgians.
The Churchmen do not daily say their Breviary, but one or two only say, and
the rest listen.

Abyssins.
Their whole Divine Service is compleared by the Sole Administration of the
Sacrament, and reading some few broken parcels of the New Testament; for they
neither use Sacred Hymns, nor Preaching, Ludolph.

Cophties.
They have a Book of Homilies taken out of the chief Fathers,

They Worship Images (yet have no Statues) by Kissing Burning Lamps before
them, with the Oil of which they anoint the Sick.

1. On Saturday-Even, after Sunset, the Priest attended by his Ministers, goes
to Church, to sing Vespers, about an Hour; those who are present, sleep
afterward in Church, or smoke Tobacco, or drink Coffee, etc.

2. Two hours after Midnight they say Matins, and afterward Mass, to which
many resort.

3. When they enter the Church, they take off their Shoes, kiss the ground near
the door; then draw near the Archpriest, kiss his Hand to receive his blessing.

4. If the Patriarch be present, and do not Officiate, he sits on a Throne,
with a Copper Cross in his hand, which the People kiss.

3. After the Gospel, they read somewhat out of the Book of Homilies, for
Explication of the Gospel; and that is instead of Preaching, F. Simon out of
Vansleb.

Most of these Ceremonies are common to other Orientals.

Maronites.
1. They go to Church at midnight to sing their Matins. 2. At break of day they
say their Lauds. 3. Before Mass, they say their Teiree, after their Sixth. 4.
Their Nones they sing after Dinner. 5. Vespers at Sunset. 6. Their Compline
after Supper, before bed.
Every Office is composed of a Preface, of two, three, or more Prayers, with a
like number of Hymns betwixt them.

They have proper Offices for Holidays, Lent, Moveable Feasts, etc. F. Simon.

Melchites.
They have Translated their Greek Euchology or Ritual into Arabic.

They Paraphrase in their Translations. Hence their supposititious: Canons of
the Council of Nice.

Muscovites.
On Sundays, and their Festivals, they go 3 times to Church, Morning, Noon and
Night; and are standing and uncovered at the time of Divine Service.

They hold no Adultery, but Marrying another man's Wife.

Armenians.
Their Office is performed in the Armenian Tongue, a rough Language, and but
little known. The People have much ado to understand their Liturgy.

They have the whole Bible Translated into Armenian, from the Septuagint, since
the time of S. John, Chrysostom. F. Simon.

They have a Service Book, and besides that the chief books amongst them, are
of Gregorio of Stat, used instead of Homilies, P. Ric. Esquire;

Christians of S. John
Hold Women to be unclean, that it is not available for them to go to Church,
Tavernier.

Cophties.
An Appendix.
When they sing the Passion, and come to the mention of Judas, all the People
cry Arsat, i. e. Horned Beast, Cuckold.

When they read of Peter cutting off Malchus's Ear, they say, Asia boutros, i.
e. well fare Peter, as applauding him for the Act, M. de Thev.

Greeks.
2. Fasting.
THo Greeks have Four Fasts; stated and solemn.

1. Forty days before Christmas.

2. The great Lent before Easter.

3. The week after Pentecost; grounded on Acts. 13.3.

4. The fourth begins Aug. 1. and is a preparatory to the Grand Festival, the
Assumption of our Lady. Besides which, Lesser Fasts, in keeping of which, with
distinction of Diets, they are very strict; and are much offended at the
English and others, because they neither use Fasting, nor reverence the sign of
the Cross. If a person be sick to Death, who with Broth or an Egg might
recover, they say, it is better to Die, than eat and Sin, P. Ricaut, Esquire;

They abstain from Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Fish; eating only Fruits, Pulse, with
a little Wine and Oil. The Monks never taste Wine or Oil, unless on Saturdays
or Sundays; Wednesdays and Fridays they abstain from Flesh, Butter, Cheese, but
eat Flesh. I say nothing of their Private Fasts, or Lent, F. Simon.

Muscovites.
They differ little from the Greeks herein, having four Lents Yearly, during
which they eat no Butter, Eggs or Milk; only the first week serves as Carnaval;
afterward they eat no Fish but on Sundays.

Armenians.
They have many Fasts published on Sundays, kept most strictly.

Account it a sin to eat Hare's Flesh, as being an unwholsom, unlucky and
melancholic creature, and the Female Monthly unclean and menstruous, P. Ric.
Esquire;

They abstain from Blood, and the Strangled. So scrupulously addicted to Fasts;
that to hear them speak, one would think their whole Religion consisted in
Fasting, F. Simon.

They end their Lent on Holy Saturday, by eating Butter, Cheese, Eggs; but eat
on Flesh till Easter Day, M. de Thev.

Abissins.
Fasting Days are by none more exactly observed.

Not that they abstain from some meats, and gluttonize upon others; for that
they look upon that as a mockery of Fasting. They keep themselves whole days
together without either Food or Drink, even till Sunset of the third Evening.
Others abstain the two Holy Days of the Passion-week.

The Monks use greater extremities, by which means they not only mortify, but
destroy.

Besides, they Fast twice a Week, on the fourth and sixth day, Ludolph. l. 3.

They make their Lent fifty days long.

Maronites.
Their Fasts differ much from ours.

1. In Lent they eat not till two or three hours before Sunset.

2. Fast not in Ember-week, nor Vigils of Saints.

3. Eat no Flesh, Eggs, or Milk on Wednesdays, Fridays, till Noon: Afterward
they eat freely.

4. Fast 20 days before Christmas; Monks longer.

5. At the Feast of S. Peter and Paul, and the Assumption of the Blessed
Virgin, they Fast a Fortnight. F. Simon.

Cophties.
They have four great Fasts, 24 Days at Christmas, 60 at Lent, 31 at
Pentecost, 15 in August. F. Simon.

Christians of S. Thomas.
They eat Flesh on Saturdays, and if they failed one Day in Lent and Advent,
they Fasted no more. F. Simon.

Christians of S. John.
They neither Fast, nor do any Penance. Taver.

Greeks.
3. Feasting and Rejoicing, etc.
THey begin their Year in September, with great Jollity.

Take a cheerful Spirit for a good Omen.

1. Easter, which is their grand Feast; at which time if they meet with their
Acquaintance, within three days of the Feast, they Salute them with these
words, (...), Christ is risen: The Answer is made, (...), He is risen indeed.

And so they kiss three times, once on each Cheek, and on the Mouth, and so
depart. P. Ricaut.

Upon Easter-Eve, the Abyssins, Jacobites, Georgians, Maronites, and Greeks (at
Jerusalem) all, except the Latins, conjoyn in the Celebration of that
Imposture, of fetching Fire from the Sepulcher; the Turks deride, yet throng to
behold it. All the Lamps in Church are extinguished; when they often compassing
the Sepulcher in a joint Procession, are fore-run, and followed with Savage
clamours of the People, (the Women whistling) and frantic behaviors, fitter
for the Feasts of Bacchus; extending their bare Arms with unlighted Tapers. At
length the chief Bishops approach the Door of the Sepulcher; but the Ethiopian
Priest first enters, without whom, they say, the Miracle will not fadge; who,
after a long stay, returns with the Sacred Fire, supposed, at his Prayers, to
burst out of the Sepulcher; At this confusedly they fire their Lights, and
snatching them one from another, strive who should convey it into their
particular Chapels, thrusting the Flame into their Clothes and Bosoms, kindling
therewith all their Lamps, unlighted with other Fire 'till that Day
Twelvemonth. G. Sandys's Trav. l. 3.

The Holy Fire of the Greeks, Armenians, etc. is performed with so much
confusion, that you would think certainly you were in Hell with a Legion of
Devils. M. de Thev.

2. Of S. John the Abstemious, kept only by the Kaloirs and Religious.

3. Of S. John the Evangelist's Translation into Heaven, grounded upon that
Text; If I will, that he stay, etc.

They tell very fond Stories of their Saints, especially Cosma, Damianus, and
S. George.

For Canonizing of Saints, they have testification by 1000 Witnesses, and
Examination in a full Synod.

They are very excessive in their Feasts. P. Ricaut.

Armenians.
The Eve of Holy Cross, they go to the Churchyards, weep, and pray for the
dead, eat, and drink Wine.

Baptism of the Cross, is a Festival which the Armenians keep, in commemoration
of the Baptism of our Lord, on the Day of Epiphany, according to the old
Calendar, which they follow; plunging after several Prayers, a Cross into
Water, whereof all strive to take their shares in Pots. M. de Thev.

They keep S. George's Day.

On Easter Day, by break of Day, the Priests say Mass, confess, and administer,
after which it is lawful to eat flesh. They have four other Feasts, Christmas,
Ascension, Annunciation, and especially S. George's. Tavernier.

Indians of St. Thomas.
Our three chief Festivals they celebrate: The first of July also they
commemorate the Martyrdom of S. Thomas. Sir Tho. Herbert.

Muscovites.
The Muscovites observe, 1. The Annunciation of our Lady, March 25. 2.
Easter Day. 3. Pentecost. 4. New-years-day, Sep. 1. 5. Nativity of the Mother
of God, Sep. 8. 6. The Manifestation of Christ on the Mount, Sep. 6. 7. The
Assumption of the Mother of God, Sep. 15. 8. Exaltation of the Cross, Sep. 14.
9. The Oblation of the Mother of God, Nov. 21. 10. The Nativity of Christ, Dec.
25. 11. Epiphany, Jan. 6. 12. Candlemass-day, Feb. 2.


Of all which mention is made before.

Abyssines.
On their January 11th. (our 6th.) in the midst of their Summer, and the Feast
of Epiphany, they commemorate our Savior's Baptism; the Clergy beginning the
Solemnity before the dawn of the Morning, with loud and cheerful Hymns: The
King, with all the Nobility, the Metropolitan, with his Clergy, Noble with the
Plebeian, old and young, thronging into the Rivers and Ponds, before Sunrise,
plunging and diving over head and ears, craving of any of the Priests, as they
meet them, a Blessing; and being answered, God bless thee, or God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, bless thee.

But this is turned into a kind of Sport, rather than a pious Festival; the
young Men leaping and dancing, and swimming, and ducking one another, and
filling the neighboring Fields with whoopings and hollowings. Ludolph.

In their Thanksgiving-Solemnities, they have their singing Priests (Dabetra)
with very harsh Voices; use Instruments of the Egyptian manner, Cymbals,
Morrice-bells, Kettle-Drums; Skipping and Dancing, as if they would make the
Floor ring again, which they call exulting and clapping hands to the God of
Jacob, and praising God upon the Harp, and Organ, and Cymbal. Idem.

Nor is this so much to be admired, if we know that in some places among the
Latins, the Feast of the Body of God was celebrated with a Harp, and Dancing.
Idem.

They observe the Feasts of the Annunciation, Nativity, Circumcision, Baptism,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, Pentecost.

Sabeans, or Christians of St. John.
I shall give an account of these by themselves, as being part Christians, part
Turks, part Jews and part Gentiles; out of Monsieur de Thevenot Itin. Orient.
Ind. and Mons. Tavernier in his Persian Travels.

1. Most of the Sabeans are Goldsmiths, very Poor, and very Ignorant; they
live in Bassora, Dgesire, Harviza and Souster, in Chusistan belonging to the
King of Persia: They have but two Books, and them made lately, though they say,
in the days of Adam, their old ones burnt by Mahometans.

2. They retain Baptism in remembrance of S. John's Baptism, performed only on
Sundays in running Water, In the Name of the ancient, Mighty Lord God, who
knows all that we do before the Light of the World: Thrice besprinkling the
Head of the Infant, and thrice dipping it into the River, and thrice rehearsing
the same words: And this is all their Ceremony; and this reiterated every Year
for the space of five days by Old and Young, Male and Female; and at Marriage
the Bridegroom and Bride are baptized again: Yet they say, Christ is the Spirit
and Word of the Eternal Father.

3. As to Marriage, The Minister takes an Oath from the Bride, that she is a
Virgin; and afterward the Minister's Wife searches her; then they are both
baptized, and set Back to Back, and the Minister says some Prayers over them;
this is all the Ceremony. Ministers and Laity may have two Wives, but the
Ministers ever a Maid at Marriage.

4. As to the Eucharist, They say only some Prayers over the Host, which is
made of Flour kneaded with Wine and Oil, their Wine drawn from Grapes steeped
in Water and pressed.

5. As to Orders, They have superior and inferior Ministers, but use no great
Ceremony in Consecration; a Minister says some Prayers over him who is made
Minister, and that is all: Children succeed to their Fathers, if sixteen or
seventeen Years of Age; or in defect of Sons, the next of kin.

6. Gospel they have none: All their Service consists in some Prayers, and in
Communicating, as before is said: They say, Christ left twelve Apostles to
preach.

7. On Sundays they work not: They highly honor the Cross, and sign themselves
with it.

8. Three Festivals they have yearly (their Year consisting of 366 days, i. e.
twelve Months and six days.)

1. At New Year, which lasts three days in memory of the Creation.

2. At the beginning of the fourth month, three days, in memory of St. John.

3. At the beginning of the seventh month, five days, in remembrance of our
Savior's being Baptized by St. John: They are all baptized during these five
days. This Feast is called Pendgia.

9. No other Saints they acknowledge but S. John, S. Zacharias, S. Elizabeth
and S. M. Magd. They acknowledge Jesus Christ but S. John's Servant, born of a
Virgin, Crucified, etc.

10. No Purgatory, but a Heaven and Hell, viz. A narrow Passage for the Wicked,
guarded with Lions and Bears, which will devour them, etc. The Good go the same
way, but over these Beasts, straight to Paradise.

11. No Meat they eat of, but killed by a Sabean; all other is unclean.

12. Therefore their Ministers are always their Butchers, who put on white
Drawers, a Rope for a Girdle, a white Shirt girt with it, a white Turban, a
white Napkin about their Neck (like a Stole) and another rag for a Fillet: Then
they wash (e. g.) the Feet and Beak of the Pullet they are to kill, because it
eats and often treads on unclean things; then they kill it, saying, In the name
of the Merciful God may this be Blessed to those that eat it. Sheep and Fish
they wash not, accounting their Food, Grass and Water, not unclean things.

13. They will not Drink in a Vessel wherein one, not a Sabean, has drank.

14. They abhor the Blew Color, because the Jews in Malice (knowing that
Baptism was to destroy their Law) when St. John was baptizing Jesus, threw
Indico into Jordan to spoil the Water, etc. from thence God cursed, this blew
color. Others say, Dogs Ordure is used in dying of this color. N. B. M.
Tavernier says the words at Baptism are, Beesmebrad er Rabi, Kaddamin, Akzeri,
Menhal el genuat Alli Kouli Kralek, i. e. In the Name of the Lord, first and
last of the World and of Paradise, the High Creator of all things: That the
Bishop reads Prayers over the Child in Church before the Baptism, and in the
River at Baptism, while the Godfather plunges the Child three times all over;
and then to Feasting.

Papists.
1. Doctrines, according to the Council of Trent.

I (N.) do with a steadfast Faith believe and profess all and every Point
contained in the Symbol of the Faith, that the Holy Roman Church does use, viz.
To believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; of all things
visible and invisible: And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of
God, and born of the Father before all Worlds; God of God, Light of Light, True
God of True God; begotten, not made, of the same Substance with the Father, by
whom all things were made; who, for us Men, and for our Salvation, came down
from Heaven; was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
Man; was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate; suffered and was buried; and
rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, and ascended up into
Heaven; sits at the right Hand of the Father; and he shall come again with
Glory to judge both the Quick and the Dead; of whose Kingdom there shall be no
end; and in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds from the
Father and the Son; who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and
glorified; who spoke by the Prophets, and one Holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church; I confess one Baptism for the Remission of Sins, and I expect the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to come. Amen.

I do most steadfastly admit and embrace the Traditions of the Apostles, and of
the Church, and all other Observances and Constitutions of the same Church.

I do likewise admit the Holy Scripture, according to that Sense which our Holy
Mother the Catholic Church has holden and does hold, unto whom it does
appertain to judge of the True Sense and Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures;
neither will I ever understand nor interpret the same otherwise, than according
to the uniform consent of the Fathers.

I do also profess, that there be truly and properly Seven Sacraments of the
New Law, and necessary for the Salvation of Mankind (although they be not
necessary for all Men) viz. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme
Unction, Orders and Matrimony; and that these Sacraments do give Grace; and
that of them Baptism, Confirmation and Orders, cannot be reiterated without
Sacrilege.

I do also receive and admit all the received and approved Ceremonies of the
Catholic Church, in the Solemn Administration of all the aforesaid Sacraments.

I do embrace and receive all and every of those things, which in the Holy
Council of Trent have been defined, and declared touching Original Sin and
Justification.

I do profess also, that in the Mass is offered unto God, a true, proper, and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the Quick and Dead; and that in the most Holy
Sacrifice of the Altar, there is truly, really and substantially the Body and
Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that
there is made a Conversion of the whole Substance of Wine into the Blood; which
Conversion the Catholic Church does call Transubstantiation. I do also
confess, that under either kind only is received Christ, whole, entire, and the
True Sacrament.

I do constantly hold, that there it Purgatory; and that the Souls which be
there detained, are helped by the Prayers of the Faithful.

Also, that the Saints, who reign together with Christ, are to be worshipped,
and called upon; and that they offer up Prayers to God for us; and that their
Relics are to be worshipped.

I do most steadfastly affirm, that the Images of Christ, of the Mother of God
always Virgin, and of other Saints, are to be had and received, and that due
Honor and Reverence is to be given to them.

I do affirm, that the Authority of Indulgencies, was left by Christ in the
Church, and that the use of them is very behooveful to Christian People.

I do acknowledge the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, to be the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches; and do promise and swear true Obedience to
the Bishop of Rome, who is the Successor of St. Peter Prince of the Apostles,
and the Vicar of Jesus Christ.

All other things defined and declared by the Holy Canons and Ecumenical
Councils, and chiefly by the Holy Council of Trent, I do undoubtedly receive
and profess.

And also all contrary things, and whatsoever Heresies condemned, rejected and
accursed by the Church, I likewise do condemn, reject and accurse.

This True Catholic Faith, without which no Man can be Saved, which now I do
willingly profess and hold, I the same I. N. do Promise, Vow and Swear to hold,
and confess most constantly, by God's help, entire and uncorrupted, even to the
last end of my Life; and to procure, as much as shall lie in me, that my
Subjects, or those of whom I shall have care in my Office, shall accordingly
teach and preach the same: So God help me, and these Holy Gospels of God. Dr.
James Library Keeper of Oxford, out of Lewis de Grenado 's Sp. Doctrine.

2. Vsages, and Ceremonies, and Traditions.

1. In public Prayers, they use the Latine-Tongue.

2. In the Commandments, they make the First and Second One, and divide the
Tenth into Two.

3. They distinguish Sins into, 1. Mortal; by which only, they say, the
Commandments are broken: which are, 1. Pride. 2. Covetousness. 3. Leachery. 4.
Anger. 5. Gluttony. 6. Envy. 7. Sloth.


2. Venial: Not contrary to the end of the Commandments; i. e. to Charity; e.
g. an idle Word; an officious, or jesting Lie, stealing of a Pin or Apple, etc.
not killing, but disposing to mortal Sin.

4. They say, it is possible, necessary and easy, by the assistance of God's
Grace, to keep all the Commandments.

5. That mortal sin is remitted by, 1. Hearty Penance. 2. Contrition.


6. That venial sin is remitted by, 1. All the Sacraments. 2. Holy Water. 3.
Devout Prayer, etc.


7. The punishment Of mortal sin, is Hell for ever.

7. The punishment Of venial sin, is Purgatory.

8. That there are six Sins against the Holy Ghost.

1. Despair of Salvation. 2. Presumption of God's Mercy. 3. Impugning the known
Truth. 4. Envy at others known good. 5. Obstinacy in Sin. 6. Final Impenitence.
9. That there are four crying Sins.

1. Wilful Murder. 2. The Sin of Sodom. 3. Oppression of the Poor. 4.
Defrauding VVork-men of their Wages.
10. There be three principal Counsels of Christ, to his Church.

1. Voluntary Poverty. 2. Perpetual Chastity. 3. Obedience to another's will,
in all that is not Sin.
11. There be six Commandments of the Church, principally.

1. To hear Mass on all Sundays and Holy Days; if opportunity serve. 2. To
Fast; 1. Lent. 2. Vigils commanded. 3. Ember-Days (and Fridays, by custom of
England.) 4. To abstain from Flesh on Saturdays.
3. To confess our Sins at least once a Year. 4. To receive the blessed
Sacrament at least once a Year, and that at Easter, or thereabouts. 5. To pay
Tithes to our Pastors. 6. Not to celebrate Marriage on times prohibited, viz.
from the first Sunday of Advent, 'till Twelfth-day be past; nor from
Ash Wednesday, 'till Low-Sunday de past.
N. B. It Is a mortal Sin to break any of these Commandments.

12. There be Seven Sacraments.

1. Baptism, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc.

Observe. 1. The Minister; 1. The Priest ordinarily. 2. A Layman, or Woman, in
case of necessity.


2. The Effects.

1. Remission of Sin, Original and Actual. 2. A Spiritual Character in the Soul
for ever.
3. Sponsors;

One Godfather, and one God-mother, since Trent C.

4. Ceremonies.

1. The Priest breaths on the Child's face. 2. Sign of the Cross on the Breast
and Forehead. 3. Putting Salt in the Child's mouth. 4. Spittle laid on the Ears
and Nostrils. 5. Anointing on the Head, Shoulders, Breast. 6. White Chrism
given to the Child. 7. A hallowed Light given to it.
2. Confirmation.

Observe, 1. The Form;

I sign thee with the sign of the Cross; I confirm thee with the Chrism of
Salvation, in the Name of the Father, etc.

2. The Matter; Oil mingled with Balsn, blessed by a Bishop.

3. It Seals, or gives a Character.

4. The Time; at seven years old.

5. The Ceremonies; 1. A blow on the Cheek. 2. One Godfather, or God-mother.


3. Eucharist.

Cons. 1. The Matter; wheaten Bread, and Wine of the Grape, with a little Water.

2. Disposition in the Receiver; Confession of Sin, being in a State of Grace.

3. The Laity Communicate in one kind.

4. Penance. Consider,

1. The Form. I absolve thee from thy sins, in the Name of the Father, etc.

2. The Parts.

1. Contrition. 2. Confession. 3. Satisfaction.
1. Contrition is a hearty sorrow for our Sins, proceeding immediately from the
Love of God, and joined with a firm purpose of Amendment.

2. Attrition; from the fear of Hell, or punishment, or filthiness of sin, or
spiritual damage from sin.

This, with Sacramental Confession and Absolution, will remit sin.

A dying Man, in mortal sin, if he cannot have a Priest, must have Contrition.

3. Confession must be Short, Diligent, Humble, Confounding, Sincere, Entire.


4. Satisfaction is the Sacramental Penance enjoined by the Priest at
Confession. Also, Voluntary Prayers, Fasting, Good Works, Sufferings.


By which Satisfaction is made for temporal punishments, due sometimes to sin,
after forgiveness.

Indulgencies, viz. The superabundant Merits of Christ, and his Saints, applied
to our Souls, by the grant of the Church.

5. Extreme Unction.

1. The matter of it is Oil, blessed by a Bishop. 2. The Form. By this
anointing, and his own most pious Mercy, let our Lord pardon thee, whatsoever
thou have sinned by thy seeing, etc. 3. The Effects. 1. Spiritual Comfort. 2.
Remission of venial sin, and the relics of sin. 3. Corporal Health, if
expedient.

6. Holy Order. Concerning which, observe,

To whom it belongs, viz. Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons.

Inferior Orders are, Acolyte, Lector, Exorcist, and Porter.

7. Matrimony. Concerning which, observe,

1. Who may Marry.

1. Only the Laity. 2. Persons not akin by collateral Consanguinity or
Affinity, to the fourth degree; or at all in the right Line: but the Church can
dispense with all, except Brothers and Sisters.
13. There are four Cardinal Virtues; Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance.

14. Seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost; Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude,
Knowledge, Piety, and the Fear of our Lord.

15. Twelve Fruits of the Holy Ghost; Charity, Joy, Peace, Patience,
Longanimity, Goodness, Benignity, Mildness, Fidelity, Modesty, Continency,
Chastity.

16. Seven works of Mercy; To feed the Hungry, give drink to the Thirsty,
cloth the Naked, to harbor the Harbourless, to visit the Sick, to visit the
Imprisoned.

17. Seven works of Mercy spiritual; To give Counsel to the Doubtful, to
Instruct the Ignorant, to Admonish Sinners, to Comfort the Afflicted, to
forgive Offenses, to bear patiently the Troublesome, to pray for the Quick and
Dead.

18. Ceremonies of the Mass.

1. Ornaments of the Priest,

1. Amiss, or Linen Veil, representing the Veil on our Savior's Face.

2. The Albe, signifying the white Garment which Herod put on.

3. The Girdle, signifying the Cord by which he was bound in the Garden.

4. The Maniple, the Cord which bound him to the Pillar.

5. The Stole, the Cord by which he was led to be Crucified.

6. The Upper Vestment, the seamless Coat of Christ, and also the Purple
Garment.

2. The Altar, representing the Cross; with its Appurtenances.

1. The Chalice, the Sepulcher of Christ.

2. The Patine, the Stone rolled to the Door of the Sepulcher.

3. The Altar-cloaths, Corporal and Pall; the Linen in which the Body of
Christ was shrouded.

4. The Candles on the Altar, the Light which Christ brought into the World.

3. Gestures.

1. Coming back three steps from the Altar, and humbling himself before he
begins again; the prostration of Christ in the Garden.

2. Bowing again at the Confiteor, to provoke Humility and Contrition in the
People.

3. Beating his Breast at mea culpa, to teach Humiliation.

4. Ascending to the Altar, the Priest kisseth the middle of it; because the
Altar signifies the Church, kissing Peace and Unity.

4. Parts.

1. Introite, the entrance into the Office, after the Priest's coming to the
Altar; which is repeated twice.

2. Gloria Patri added to it.

3. Kyrie Eleison.

4. Gloria in excebsis.

5. Oremus.

6. The Collect, viz. a Sum of the Epistle and Gospel.

7. The Gradual, the holy degrees of Penance.

8. The Tract, viz. two or three Versicles betwixt the Epistle and Gospel, sung
with a slow, long, protracted Tone, between Septuagesima and Easter (in place
of the Gradual) because a time of penance and mourning.

9. The Gospel read at the North-end of the Altar; to signify that Satan's
Kingdom (seated in the North, Jer. 1.14.) is destroyed.

4. Gestures again,

1. Signing the Book with the Sign of the Cross.

2. Priest and People sign themselves with the Cross in three places, viz.
Forehead, Mouth, and Breast.

3. The first Offertory, of Bread and Wine mingled with Water.

4. The Priest washing the ends of his Fingers.

5. Silence a while.

6. Elevating the Voice in saying the Preface.

7. The Canon, the most sacred, essential part of the Mass, read with a low
Voice, signifying the sadness of Christ's Passion,

8. Beginning the Canon with bowing of the Head.

9. In the midst of it kissing the Altar, and signing the Host and Chalice
thrice, with the sign of the Cross.

10. Signing the Offerings again five times.

11. After Consecration, kneeling and adoring.

12. Elevation of the Host and Chalice.

13. Signing again the Offerings five times, to signify Christ's five Wounds.

14. A nomination of the Dead, to whom the Sacrifice is applied.

15. Elevation of the Voice again, in saying, Nobis quoque peccatoribus.

16. Signing the Host and Chalice, three times again, to signify the three
Hours which Christ hung on the Cross.

17. Uncovering the Chalice, and signing it five times with the Host, to
signify the rending the Veil of the Temple, etc.

18. Pater Noster, said with a loud Voice, to signify the seven Mystical
Words, spoke by our Savior, with a loud Voice, on the Cross.

1. Father, forgive them, etc. 2. To day shall thou be with, etc. 3. Behold thy
Mother; Woman, behold, etc. 4. My God, etc. 5. I Thirst. 6. Into thy hands,
etc. 7. It is finished.
19. Laying down the Host upon the Corporal, and then covering the Chalice
again, to signify taking Christ down from the Cross.

20. The Priest is silent for a time, to signify our Savior's Rest in the
Grave.

21. The Host divided into three parts; his Body broken, and divided into
Hands, Side, and Feet.

22. Signing the Chalice three times again, with a particle of the Host, and
raising his voice, saying, Pax Domini, etc.

23. Putting a particle of the Host into the Chalice, to signify the reuniting
of our Savior's Body and Soul.

24. Saying aloud, Agnus Dei, qui, etc.

25. Pax; or, Kiss of Peace given before Communion.

26. Ite, missa est, The Host is offered, Mass ended, etc.

27. The Priest lifts up his hands, and blesses the People.

N. The Missal is the Book, wherein the Mass is contained.

19. The Office of our Lady; concerning which, observe, 1. The Book, in which
it is contained, the Primer. 2. The Parts. 1. Hymns. 2. Psalms. 3. Canticles.
4. Antiphones. 5. Versicles. 6. Responsories, 7. Prayers.
3. The Time, viz. seven Hours several. The time of our Savior's Passion. 4.
The Contents.


1. Matins and Lauds; a Commemoration of his Bloody Sweat, and binding in the
Garden, etc.

2. The first Hour; his being led through the Streets at Jerusalem, with the
Indignities, etc.

3. The third Hour; whipping, crowning with Thorns, etc.

4. The ninth Hour; drinking Gall and Vinegar, dying, etc.

5. The Evening-Song; his taking from the Cross, etc.

6. The Compline; his Burial.

20. Festival-Days.

1. Of Christ.

1. His Nativity, Christmas.

2. -- Circumcision, New-years-day.

3. -- Epiphany, Twelfth-day.

4. -- Purification, the Presentation of Christ, etc. Before Mass of that Day,
the Church blesses the Lights for the whole Year, and makes a Procession, with
hallowed Lights, in the hands of all the Faithful.

5. -- Transfiguration.

6. -- Resurrection, or Easter Day, from Oriens, the East.

7. -- Ascension.

8. -- Corpus Christi-day, in honor of the real Presence.

The Eucharist, on this Feast, during the Octave, is exposed to be adored, in
all the principal Churches of the World, and great Processions are made in
honor of it.

9. -- Four Sundays of Advent.

10. -- Septuagesima, Sexagesima, Quinquag. Quad.

11. Passion-Sunday, to prepare us for the approaching Passion.

12. Palm Sunday; on which Day the Church blesses Palms, and make a Solemn
Procession, the People bearing Palm-branches in their hands.

13. Dominica in Albis, Low-Sunday, the Octave of Easter Day; because on that
Day the Catechumens were solemnly divested in the Church of their white
Garments.

2. Of our Blessed Lady, viz. 6. The Conception, Nativity, Presentation,
Annunciation, Visitation and Assumption of our Blessed Lady.

3. Pentecost or Whitsunday.

4. Trinity-Sunday.

5. Other peculiar days.

1. The Feast of St. Peter's Chair at Antioch, viz. his installing there.

2. Of his Chair at Rome, viz. his Translation from Antioch, etc.

3. Of S. Peter and S. Paul together.

4. S. Peter ad vincula, Acts 12.

5. Michaelmass; a Church on that Day in Rome, was Dedicated to S. Michael, by
Pope Boniface.

6. The Apparition of S. Michael, he appearing on Mount Garganus; where, by his
own appointment, a Temple was Dedicated to him.

7. All Saints, to beg the Patronage of all together.

8. All Souls, to pray Souls out of Purgatory.

9. Ashwednesday; the Priest blesses Ashes on this day, wherewith he signs the
People with a Cross on their Foreheads, saying, memento, homo, remember Man;
that thou art dust, and to dust, etc.

10. Mandy Thursday, in memory of our Lord's last Supper, when he washed his
Disciples Feet; So called from Mandatum Novum do vobis, the beginning of the
Antiphon. The Bishops on this day begin the Ceremony of washing the Peoples
Feet.

21. Good Friday, Add two Holy Rood-days, viz. Invention and Exaltation.

12. Three days of Tenebrae before Easter.

13. Rogation-week, a week of public Prayer and Processions, for the
temperateness of the weather, etc. from Rogo, etc.

14. Quatuor Tempora, Ember-weeks.

21. Orders of Monks, or Friars, whose Officers are, Prior, Provincial and
General, etc.

1. Monks of St. Basil, who abstain from Flesh, of which not many in the Church
of Rome; but many in the Greek Church.

2. Austine Friars, or Eremites, or Friars Mendicants, viz. The First Order.

Other Branches of them are,

1. Monks of S. Hierom, in Spain, especially. Their Robe a white Cassok under a
Tawny Cloak.

2. Carmelites, or Jacobines, or white Friars, from the Color of their Habit.

3. Friars of S. Cross, Crouched Friars; their Robe is watchet, and in their
hands they carry the Figure of the Cross.

4. Dominicans, or Friars Praedicant, who are to Preach the Gospelin all parts
of the World; called also Black Friars, from the Color of their Habit, and are
the third Order of Friers-Mendicants.

3. Benedictines, whose Habit is a loose black Gown, reaching to the Ground,
with a hood of the same, an under Garment of white Woollen, and Boots on their
Legs.

Other Branches,

1. Monks of Clugnia, from Clugny in Normandy.

2. Carthusians, from Carthusia, a Town in Dauphine; They Eat no Flesh, live by
couples, labor with their hands, watch, pray, and never meet together, but
upon Sundays.

3. Monks of Cisteaux, so called from a place in Burgundy, called by us, white
Monks (as the common Benedictines, black Monks.) from their Habit, which was a
white Cassock, girt with a woollen Girdle, the rest black.

4. Celestines, from Celestine the 5th, etc.

4. Franciscans, from S. Francis of Assis in Spoleto, who profess absolute
Beggary, are to carry no money about them, nor more Victuals than will for the
present serve for themselves and brethren. The chief branches of them are,

1. Minors, from their humility.

Cordeliers, by the French, from the knotty Cord which they use for a Girdle.

Gray Friars, by the English, from the color of their upper Garment.

These are the fourth and last of the Friars Mendicants.

2. Minims, who keep always a true Lenten Fast, unless in sickness; their Robe
is a Dark Tawny, with a Hood of the same hanging to the Girdle.

3. Capuchins, from their Cowl, or Capuch, who are to spend all their time in
prayer; generally thought to be the most devout of all.

5. Jesuits, neither simply Lay, nor Priests, nor merely Secular, nor Regular;
but all together; who are to vow not only Poverty, Obedience and Chastity, as
the rest, but Mission; i. e. to go upon command of the Pope, or General, on any
hazardous business, without demanding a Reason.

6. Oratorians, founded by Ph. Nerio, all priests, who were to preach
diligently the lives of the Saints, and other heads of practical and moral
Duties.

7. Anchorets, the severest of the Recluse, kept in a close place, are to dig
their Graves with their Nails, ill clad, and worse dieted.

22. Orders of Nuns, Nonnae Moniales.

1. Of S. Clare, called also Minorites, or Minores, who vow Poverty and
Virginity, go barefoot, feed meanly, etc.

2. Gf S. Briget, (who was Qu. of Swedeland:) These cohabit under the same Roof
with Friars, yet are prohibited coming to one another but upon spiritual
occasions: The Confessor shrieves them through an Iron Grate, by which his
Lodging is parted from the Lady Abbess's Dr. Heylin.

See more of these Religious Orders in Alex. Rosse; as also of all the
Christian Orders of Knighthood; for I love not Actum agere.

Dominicans, Franciscans.
Dr. Burnet speaking of Beru, says, Those two famous Orders, that had
possessed themselves of the esteem of those Dark Ages ( about 20 years before
the Reformation) were engaged in a mighty Rivalry. The Dominicans were the more
Learned; they were the eminentest Preachers of those times, and had the Conduct
of the Courts of Inquisition, and the other chief Offices in the Church in
their hands. But on the other hand, the Franciscans had an outward appearance
of more severity, a ruder habit, stricter Rules, and greater Poverty; all which
gave them such advantages in the eyes of the simple multitude, as were able to
balance the other honors of the Dominican Order. In short, the two Orders
were engaged in an high Rivalry; but the Devotion toward the Virgin being the
prevailing Passion of those times, the Franciscans upon this had great
advantages. The Dominicans, that are all engaged in the deence of Thomas
Aquinas's Opinions, were thereby obliged to assert, that she was born in
Original Sin; this was proposed to the People by the Franciscans, as no less
than Blasphemy, and by this the Dominicans began to lose ground extremely in
the minds of the People, who were strongly prepossessed in favor of the
immaculate Conception, Dr. Burnet's Letters, p. 31. edit. 1680.

Dr. Stillingfleet distributes his Discourse upon the Divisions of the Roman
Church into Considerations.

1. Of the Pope's Usurpations, under pretense of Universal Pastor, whereby he
may depose Kings, etc.

2. Of the Effects, doubting not to prove, that the Pope's Usurpation has
caused more Wars, Bloodshed, Confusion, etc. in Christendom, than all other
causes put together, have done since the time it was first changed, e. g.
Constantine the first opposed Philippics Emperor. Gregory the 2d. taking away
the small remainder of the Roman Empire, from the Emperor Leo the 2d, in Italy,
etc.

3. Of the Schisms, etc. Sometimes 2, sometimes 3 several Heads at one time.
Bellermine in his Chronol. confessing 26 several Schisms, Onaphrius 30; whereof
some lasted 10, some 20, one 50 years. I need not insist (says he) on the more
ancient, between Cornelius and Novatianus, Tiberius and Falix, Damasus and
Vrsinius, Bonifacius and Eulalis, Symachus and Laurentius, Bonifacius and
Dioscorus, Sylverius and Vigilius, etc. Those of most continuance were A. D.
821. between Formosus and Sergius, Benedict 9, and Sylvester 3.

Regulars, Seculars.
4. Of the Differences in matters of Government; e. g. between the Regulars and
Seculars, as to matters of Episcopal Jurisdiction (even here in England) the
Mendicant Friars or Monks, being exempted by the Pope; the Jesuits difference
with the Secular Priests (in Q. Elizabeth's Reign) proceeded to a Separation
each from other, about the Authority of Arch-Priests; and they continually
charged each other with the guilt of Horrible Schism. The Jesuits opposition to
Bishops Authority, e.g. between Palafox. Bishop of Angelopolis in America, and
the Jesuits.

Differences of Papists.
Lastly, Of Matters of Doctrine, between the Dominicans and Jesuits, the
Thomists and Scotists, the Jansenists and Molinists.

Their Differences (adds the aforecited Author) are not confined to their
Schools, no, not about the immaculate Conception; the Thomists being against
it, the Scotists, Occam and Franciscans for it: John de Montesovo was convened
first before the Faculty of Sorbon, and his Doctrine (against the immaculate
Conception) condemned, and he forced to appeal to Rome, and then to fly into
Spain, etc. Dr. Stillingfleet 's Idolatry of the Church of Rome

Jesuits and Molinists.
There being a great Indifferency in Italy as to Learning and Religion both,
and the Country being much improverished by the Ascendency of the Clergy, and
the People being Sick with the Observation of these things, the Proposal of a
new Remedy was easily received. Michael de Molinos a Spaniard, of an opulent
Family, who had entered into Priests Orders, but not beneficed, of an exact
course of Life, addicted to Mystical Divinity, (a Mysterious way of Devotion,
first set out by Cassian, afterward by St. Bernard, Denis the Areop. Thauler,
Rasbrachius, Harphius, Suso, Tho. a Kempis, S. Teresa, Walter Hilton, F.
Cressy, out of F. Baker's Papers) considering a Man in a threefold State,

1. Animal, or Imaginative, where the Devotion is weak and variable.

2. Rational, where the Reason forces the Will, and the Acts of Religion are
dry.

3. Contemplative, in which the Will is so united to God, and overcome by that
Union, that in one single Act, it loves, adores, and is resigned up to God,
without any weariness, or multiplicity of Acts; upon which follows a secret Joy
and Acquiescence in the Will of God. Contemplation being nothing else but the
silent and humble Adoration of God, that arises out of a pure and quiet Mind.
All the common methods of Devotion being but steps to this State of Perfection:
To this end the Rosary, Breviary, etc. are generally laid aside. Molinos wrote
a Book called Il Guida Spiritual^; because Men may be deceived herein without a
Guide; This Book writ in Italy, gave offense to the Regulars, but especially
the Jesuits: This Book was published first A. 1675. with Approbation of the
Archbishop of Rheggio, General of the Franciscans, F. Martin de Sparsa the
Jesuit, etc. Molinos was hereupon received into Acquaintance and Favor with
Cardinal Coloredi, Ceceri, Petrucci, Cassanata, Azolivi, Carpegna, and Cardinal
d'Estrees; the last was the most Zealous to advance his Design. The Pope
himself lodged him in an Apartment of his Palace; many Priests came to consult
him, and all the Nuns, except those which had Jesuits for their Confessors,
began to lay aside their Rosaries, etc. and gave themselves to Mental Prayer:
Upon this the Jesuits and Dominicans began to be alarmed at the Progress of
Quietism, Molinos and his Followers are given out to be Heretics and
Quietists; Books writ against them; Molinos and two hundred of his Friends
clapped up by the Inquisition, among whom were Count Vespiniani and his Lady, Don
Paulo Rocchi, (Confessor to Prince Borghese) Cardinal Petrucci, etc. and the
Pope himself, in the single Quality of Benedict Odeschalci, was secretly
examined by that Court, etc. See more in Dr. Burnet 's Letters, and the
Supplement to them.

Ambrosian and Roman Office.
As for the Devotions of this place (Milan) I saw here the Ambrosian Office,
which is distinguished from the Roman, both in the Music, which is much
simpler, and in some other Rites: The Gospel is read in a high Pulpit at the
lower end of the Quire, that so it may be heard by all the People; though this
is needless, since it is read in a Language that they do not understand: When
they go to say High Mass, the Priest comes from the high Altar to the lower end
of the Quire, where the Offertory of Bread and Wine is made by some of the
Laity. Dr. Burnet 's Letters.

Hither may be referred the difference of their Divine Service in England
formerly, Secundum usum Sarum and Bangor, etc.

Protestants.
1. Lutherans.
1. Their Doctrines.

IN most Points they agree with the Calvinists, as may be seen in their
Confessions; except, that they hold that Christ is consubstantially in the
Sacrament; and some of them agree not with the Calvinists in the Point of
Absolute Predestination, nor in the Abolition of Saints days, etc.

2. Discipline and Worship.

1. They retain Bishops; but shorten their Revenues, in Germany, Denmark,
Swedeland, but not in England.

2. They use Forms of Prayer, Kneeling at the Sacrament generally; keep some
Holy Days of Saints, in many places use Instrumental Music.

particularly, 1. In Swedeland.

1. Their number of Parish-Churches are 42000, all covered with Copper.

2. In all of them there are Organs, in some two or three pair; and Bells in
all their Churches.

3. There are in that Kingdom 64 Provinces, 12 or 14 Bishops, one Archbishop,
residing at Vpsal.

4. The Bishop, with all the Priests of his Provinces, hears Causes, and
Excommunicates.

5. Their Elders are for Life, and their Office to take care of the
Church-repairs, and the Poor.

6. Two or three Chaplains belong to every Church, at least.

7. Three times a day they go to Church, except on Fasting-days, for then four
Ministers preach successively, and the People go not out from Morning till
Night; their Order of Service thus,

1. The Morning for Servants, when there is 1. A Psalm sung. 2. A Prayer in
Form, and a Psalm again. 3. The Chapter wherein the Text lies, read. 4. A Psalm
sung again, viz. some Epistle of Luther's translated into Hymn. 5. The Sermon,
of an hour long. 6. A Psalm again.


2. The middle Service, for Masters of Families, etc. in which there is the
same order as before, except, that the Text is taken out of the Gospel, and the
Gospel read before the Altar.

For they have an Offering every Lord's day, and a Sacrament after the second
Sermon; the People coming to Church on Saturday to be prepared for the
Sacrament, and receiving a Ticket, for which they pay a Fee.

3. Their last Service is from one till five a clock.

All their Weddlings are in Church. Mr. Derick Reins a Native.

2. In Livonia, an Inland adjoining to the Baltic Sea, now under the King of
Swedeland;

1. Its Government is by an Archbishop residing at Riga, and Bishops (or
Superintendants) at Revel, etc.

2. Their Doctrine is according to the Auspurg Confession.

3. Their Knowledge and Devotion very little, and mixed with much Superstition
and Sorcery; for there is hardly a Village, but has a Church and Minister, and
yet the People so poorly instructed, that it may be said, Baptism excepted,
they have not any Character of Christianity; they very seldom go to Sermons,
and never almost communicate, unless forced and driven to it by other
occasions. D. of Holstein 's Ambass. Travels into Muscovy, etc.

3. In Germany.

1. Their Government is by Bishops and Superintendants, etc.

2. Their Doctrine differs a litlte but not in the substantial part of it, as
may be seen in the Harmony of Confessions.

3. They have a Sermon every day (says Dr. Brown) at Hamburgh, as in other
Lutheran Cities. In his Travels, p. 176.

4. They retain Pictures in their Churches. The Lutherans at Frank ford have
built a new Church, called S. Catherines, in which there is as much Painting,
as ever I saw in any Popish Church; and over the High Altar is a huge carved
Crucifix, as there are Painted ones in other places of their Church, Dr.
Burnet's Letters.

5. At Strasburg they bow when they name the Holy Ghost, as well as the Name of
Jesus, Idem.

6. I was in their Church, says the Reverend Author, where, if the Music of
their Psalms pleased me much, the Irreverence in singing (it being free to keep
on, or put off, the hat) did appear very strange to me, Idem, ibid.

7. They have not (as Strasburg) the same Ceremonies, that the Lutherans of
Saxony have, which Mr. Bebel, their Professor of Divinity, said, was a great
Happiness; for a similitude in outward rites might dispose the ignorant People
to change too easily, ibid.

8. The Lutherans, for the greatest part, retain their Animosities almost to an
equal degree, both against Papists and Calvinists, ibid.

9. The Lutheran Churches are handsome, and their Pulpits exeraordinary Noble,
and richly set off, as I observed through all Saxony, Noremberg, and where they
are Masters of the places, etc. Dr. Brown's Travels.

In the Palatinate, the Order of their Service is thus, as I received it from
the hand of one Herman Graff^ing of Keysart Lautern, a Native of the Palatinate.

On Sundays, Morning-Service.

1. On a Sledge in the Porch is notified what Psalms are to be sung.

2. When they are come into Church, the Clerk begins to sing, the people all
joining with him presently, every one having his book, and the Scholars
generally being taught at School to sing by Notes, the melody is pleasant.

3. The Minister prays in the book, one prayer, concluding always with the
Lord's Prayer.

4. Then follows a short Hymn, to this sense; O God, that art our Father
through Jesus Christ, give us thy Spirit in general, that may lead us into the
Truth, hear us in this hour; Open the mouth of thy Servant, that the word may
be pure, and freely explained: O Lord, graciously open our hearts and ears,
that we may hear it with all diligence, and keep it truly, so that we may
plentifully declare thy praise.

5. After this Hymn is sung, the Minister prays in short Extempore, with
respect to his Sermon.

6. Next, he preaches, and after he has divided his Text, and disposed his
Sermon into parts (which he does without book, the Minister being bare, or
using only a Cap upon his head, but the people covered) He makes a short
Prayer, and exhorts them to attention and charitableness to the poor, etc. the
people all standing up, and putting off their Hats: Whereupon the people sit
down again, and he proceeds on with his Sermon, and the Churchwarden goes
about from Pew to Pew with a long Staff, and a Purse and Bell at the end of it,
to gather the Alms; and this is done every Lord's Day, and the Purse laid upon
the Communion Table.

7. Then the Minister prays again, concluding with the Lord's prayer.

8. After which they sing another Psalm, and conclude with the Blessing.

Afternoon-Service.

1. At one a clock, the Bell rings, and calls to Catechism, which is begun with
a Psalm, and prayer, and concluded with a prayer also, the minister in the
rehearsal of it standing before the Communion Table.

2. Then the Bells ring again for the Evening-Service, which is much what in
the same manner with the Morning-Service.

Note, that in some Churches they have Organs, in others none.

Lutherans of the Palatinate.
On Weekdays they have Prayers every Morning, and in some places Morning and
Evening; their Order thus,

1. They sing as on Sundays, taking the Psalms before them in order as they go;
one day the 1st, and 2d, Psalms, the next the 3d, and 4th, etc.

2. The Minister Prays in short.

3. He reads a Chapter out of the Old Testament, and another out of the New.

4. He reads a Form of Common Prayer (one single Prayer) for all necessities,
Emperors, Magistrates, etc. by Book (the People all the while lifting up their
hands closed together) concluding with the Lord's Supper.

5. He ends with the Blessing.

Note, 1. In some places they have Prayers on Wednesdays; in others on
Wednesdays and Fridays.

2. Every first Wednesday in the Month is a Prayer-day, the Shops being shut,
and no body daring to work till after Sermon.

3. The Lord's Supper is administered in some places monthly, in others
quarterly: The Posture standing; notice is given before hand, and the Minister
goes with the Churchwarden from House to House a Fortnight before to examine
them of their fitness; and the day before, he gives a preparation Sermon, and
puts Interrogatories to the People, taking a kind of Confession from them, and
requiring their Answer, Yes.

4. At Baptism, the Midwife holds the Child, the Godfather and Godmother
standing by, whilst the Minister takes water out of a Basin on the
Communion Table, and sprinkles it on the child, In the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost.

5. On Whitsunday, they sing one of Luther's Hymns, to this purpose,

Now we beseech thee, Holy Ghost,
Through Faith thou will us keep,
That when this world we shall depart,
In thee, Lord we may sleep;
Kyrie Eleison.
Thou, the true Light, enlighten us,
Let us know thee alone,
Who in our Father's Country, have
Thy mercy to us shown;
Kyrie Elison, etc.
It consists of two such Stanzaes more, each concluding with Kyrie Eleison.

2. Calvinists.
1. Their Doctrines and Discipline.

They hold absolute Praedestination; Ordinatination by Priests; appoint Synods
at stated times and places; are for the assistance of Lay Elders in the use of
the Ministry; condemn Diocesan Episcopacy, and all significant Ceremonies,
Lent, days of Saints, the Cross in Baptism, together with all unnecessary
impositions; the use of Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism, and the
Government of Bishops, without the Assistance of Presbyters, Mr. Ric. Baxter.

2. Their Worship and Usages.

1. In the Canton of Zurick;

1. Their Morning Service.

1. In the morning on Sundays, they begin with Grace, Peace, and Mercy from
Almighty God, be at all times with us miserable sinners. Amen. And then in a
certain Form, Pray for the Magistrates, Burger-master, Persecuted Churches,
sick and afflicted and distracted Persons (about which the Minister is allowed
to enlarge his Prayers) concluding always with the Lords Prayer.

2. The Minister kneels down, having laid his Book on the Pulpit, Prays in
silence for himself, as the People also do.

3. He delivers his Sermon by Heart, as they are all enjoined to do.

4. In case of Wedding he publishes the Banns thus, These following (Honest)
persons, etc. but in case of scandalous unchastness, the word [Honest] is left
out.

5. If any be Dead that week, the Minister names them, praises God for their
deliverance out of this Thraldom into everlasting Joy, advising them to be
watchful, etc.

6. Next follows a short general confession of sins, I poor sinful wretch, etc.
and after that, a Prayer for the Sabbath, all Kings and Estates of Christendom,
the Cantons of Switzerland, etc. concluded with the Lord's Prayer.

7. The Minister turning toward the People, says, For God's sake remember
always the Poor, in your Alms; Pray constantly one for another; Pray to God for
me; which I also will do for you; (tho this only the Lord Antistes is used to
say,) and after the Administration of Holy Baptism, and the Christian Hymn is
finished, to the praise of God, depart in peace: And the grace of God be with
you.

8. After this, the Minister goes down from the Pulpit to the Font, to Christen
the Children, if there be any to be Baptized.

9. Then the chief Chanter, with his Scholars, begins a Psalm (taking the Book
of Psalms in order before them throughout in the year) the whole Congregation
of men, Women and Children following, with distinct Voices, and a most
Melodious Harmony.

N. B. Young Ladies and Gentlewomen learn of their Minister to sing and play on
Virginals, but are forbidden Dancing.

2. Their latter Morning-Service begins

At Nine a Clock, with a short Form, much what as in the former
Morning-Service, and then Sermon; and last of all, with a short Confession of
Sin, and Prayer for God's Mercy, and the Lord's Prayer, and another pretty long
Form of Prayer, he concludes, adding, Pray continually, etc. depart in peace.

On Sunday-Mornings they always preach on one of the Four Evangelists; their
Sermons are an hour long, or near it: Heathen Authors seldom mentioned, and the
Primitive Fathers but sparingly: The Text expounded out of the Hebrew or Greek
Originals: mere Morality preached, is sharply censured by the Chapter, or Synod.

3. Their Noon-Service.

1. The Minister uses the same Form of Prayer, as he used before the Sermon in
the Morning, concluding with the Lord's Prayer, etc.

2. He rehearses the Ten Commandments, and the Apostles Creed, concluding them
with a Collect.

3. Then either continuing in the Pulpit, or going from Pew to Pew, according
to his discretion; over against the Font, (which is placed near the Quire) he
examines the Children and Youths, even 'till they are capable of the Lord's
Supper, or 'till Marriage in some places, out of the Tigurine-Catechism; or
takes an account of several Lessons out of Holy Scripture, which he had
assigned them before.

4. Then out of the Pulpit he makes a Paraphrase, or Explication of the
Questions he asked.

5. At last, he concludes with a Prayer, -- O merciful God, -- who preparest
Praises to thy self, out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, etc. Concluding
with the Lord's Prayer.

At this Service the Parents are bound to be present, under pain of Censure and
Rebuke of the Minister, or Consistory.

4. Their Evening-Service, (for they have Service four times a day) consists,
1. Of a Form before the Sermon, for themselves, for the Catholic Church, etc.
2. A silent Prayer, as in the Morning. 3. A Sermon. 4. A Form, consisting of a
Collect, the Lord's Prayer, and another longer Form, with Pray constantly, etc.
and depart in peace; as before.


Besides these Services, which are all for Sundays, they have also Forms of
Prayer for every Day of the Week, Morning and Evening, and Sermons every Day.
On Saturdays, in the Evening, as well as Sundays, at Noon, they examine the
Catechism, and have a peculiar Form of Prayer for that purpose; so likewise for
the Fasts and Festivals appointed; as the Day after our Savior's Nativity,
New-year-day, Easter-Monday, Ascension-day, Pentecost, the Day of
Church-Dedication; and extraordinary occasions, as War, Victory, Plague,
Murrain, etc.

Their Baptism is thus;

1. The Minister begins with saying, In the name of God, Amen. If ye (the
Godfathers and Godmothers) desire that this Child be baptized in the Baptism
of our Lord Jesus Christ, say, Yea.

2. Then after an Exhortation, he proceeds to pray for a Blessing upon the
Child, in a pretty long Form,

3. He reads the Gospel, Mark 10. concluding thus: Praise be unto God, he
forgives us all our sins through his Son. Amen.

4. After a short Speech to the Sureties, he rehearses the Creed, and calls
upon the Sureties to pray for such a Faith for that Child, saying, Our Father,
which art in Heaven, etc.

5. He asks the Sureties, If they will, according to their utmost power, and as
necessity may require, be instrumental to, and assist in the Education of the
Child, etc. The Sureties answering, Yea.

6. The Sureties name the Child; the God-mother holding the Child over the
Font, whilst the Minister pours three handfuls of Water upon his Forehead,
saying, N. N. I baptize thee in the Name of God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. Amen.

7. The Minister blesses the Child in these words; God grant unto thee, that as
thou art now besprinkled with clean Water, thou may likewise appear before
God in the last day, with a pure and undefiled Conscience, and so to be
eternally saved.

N. B. Baptism is never administered privately, but at time of Publick-Service,
the first opportunity after the Birth.

The Godfather, in the Church, presents a piece of Gold or Silver to the
Nurse, and if a Female-Child, to the God-mother also; if a Male, the God-mother
to the Godfather.

Every year they send New-years-gifts to their God-children; which some
continue to do, 'till they are of Age for the Lord's Supper; and some 'till
Marriage.

On their Birthday, yearly, they use to feast their God-children, and give
them grave advice.

None are to be Christened without Sureties.

Their Administration of the Lord's Supper, thus;

1. The Minister uses a grave Exhortation concerning the intention of the
Sacrament.

2. The People confess their Sins, and pray for pardon; as after the Sermon.

3. The Antistes behind the Table, with an Archdeacon on either hand (if there
be so many) says with a loud Voice, In the name of God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.

Archdeacon answering, Amen.

Antistes. Let us pray: O Almighty, etc.

Archdeacon. That which is now read is contained in 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, etc.

Antistes. Praise be unto God.

Archdeacon, on the right hand, And Peace on Earth.

Antistes. Good Will toward Men.

First Archdeacon. We praise thee, we magnify thee.

Second Archdeacon. We worship thee, we honor thee.

Antistes. We render thanks for thy great honor and benefits, O Lord God,
Heavenly King, Father Almighty.

First Archdeacon. O Lord, thou only begotten Son, Jesus Christ, and thou, O
Holy Ghost.

Second Archdeacon. O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, thou that
take away the Sins of the World, etc. -- and so on with an alternate voice to
the end of that Hymn.

4. The First Archdeacon reads part of the sixth Chapter of S. John's Gospel.
Thus speaks the Lord Jesus; Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes
in me, has everlasting life. I am the bread of life, etc. Concluding with --
Praises and thanks be unto God; He forgives us all our sins, according to his
holy word. Amen; (which is said by the Antistes.)

5. The Antistes, and the Archdeacons, alternately rehearse the Creed, as they
did the Hymn before.

6. Then follows an Exhortation to the Examining themselves, ending thus;
Wherefore kneel down, and pray.

7. Then the Ministers kneeling about the Lord's Table, (and the People either
standing, or kneeling,) say the Lord's Prayer.

8. The First Archdeacon says, Lift up your hearts unto God, and say with
Devotion; O Lord, Almighty God, etc.

9. The Antistes afterward says, Hear now with Devotion and Faith, how Christ
Jesus did celebrate his holy Supper, etc. Jesus on the night in which he was
betrayed, took Bread, etc.

Here the Antistes takes the Bread, breaks it, eats a Morsel, and gives the
rest to the first Archdeacon, who reaches the same to the other Ministers
about the Table.

Afterward, when he comes to those Words, [He took also the Cup] he takes a
Cup, and having drank of it, gives to the first Archdeacon, as he did the
Bread, and he to the Ministers, and they to the People: a Reader, from the
Pulpit, in the interim, reading the Lord's Speech concerning the Supper,
beginning at S. John 13.1.

10. Then the Antistes, and Archdeacons, alternately say;

Antistes. Rise up, and let us render Praise and Thanks unto the Lord.

First Archdeacon. I will praise thee, O my God, etc. This Hymn consists of
14, or 15 Responses.

11. They read alternately the 113 Psalm, which was wont to be read at the
Passover.

12. Lastly, follows an Exhortation, with a Consolation and Benediction, and a
short Collect, concluding thus;

For God's sake, remember the Poor, always in your Alms; pray constantly one
for another. And after the Christian Hymn be ended, (which concludes the
Solemnity,) Depart in peace, and the Grace of God be with you.

Note, 1. Their Bread is unleavened, made in a broad square Cake, thin almost
as Paper, white as Snow, by the chief Sexton only of their great Minster
Church. 2. They use wooden Cups in Imitation of the Primitive Simplicity. 3.
They receive in their Seats (the common People) sitting or standing.
Their Discipline.

1. The Ministers are obliged to call such, as they know to have committed
Notorious Crimes, or to be inflamed with Hatred and Passion (some Weeks before
the Administration of the Sacrament) into their Closets, or before the
Churchwardens (according to their Discretion) to admonish and warn them, and
declare to them, that if they do not repent, etc. the Sacrament will prove to
them not an Earnest of God's Favor, but of his Just Wrath and their Damnation,
etc.

2. Those that will not be reconciled to their Enemies, shall not be admitted
to the Sacrament.

3. Yet Excommunication is never formally practiced in the Church of Zurick;
but instead thereof, the Ministers are commanded by the Higher Power, and by
the Synod, to rebuke and warn notorious Sinners both publicly and privately;
and if they continue, after their third Warning, in their Ungodliness (as
Swearing, Drunkenness, etc.) then they are to inform the Governors and
Presidents of the respective Counties of that Canton, who issue Warrants for
apprehending of them and putting them in Prison; where they are fed with Bread
and Water until they become other Men, at least in outward behavior.

4. But as to Fornicators, Adulterers, Thieves, etc. there needs no such
warning of the Ministers; for such, upon Conviction, are apprehended by the
Subordinate Magistrate, and punished accordingly.

5. Blasphemers are, without any Mercy, put to Death.

6. No Gentleman (or Lady) of what Quality soever (except a Forreigner) dares
communicate in a colored or modish Apparel, but in a modest black Suit, with a
black Cloak, a Bonnet, and a Band: The Women are to use always to Church only
Black, without Laces, Gold, Silver, etc.

Their Matrimony.

1. The Minister, after Sermon, and the ordinary Service ended, coming down
from the Pulpit, with his Back toward the Quire, and his Face to the People,
kneeling on the lowest step, says, In the Name of God, Amen. This is to let
you know, that these two honest Persons N. N. here present, intend, etc. If
therefore any Person, etc.

2. After a short silence, and none protesting against the Marriage, he reads
the Gospel, Matt. 19. v. 3, etc. adding, Believe these words of God, and
consider that God has joined you together in the blessed State of Matrimony,
etc.

3. With his right hand taking the right hands of the Bridegroom and Bride, he
asks, N. Desire thou for God's sake to take N. for thy Wife in Holy
Matrimony? Then say Yea. And in like manner he asks the Bride.

4. He binds their right hands together, saying, This ratify God the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

5. Then taking off his right hand, he says, Thou Husband ought to
maintain, protect and love thy Wife, as Christ loved his Church, etc. And thou
Wife, to love, and to obey thy Husband, Head and Master, etc. and afterward to
both together.

6. Then after an Exhortation of the People to Prayer, bidding them say after
him, O Almighty God, who in the beginning of thy handy-works did create a Man
out of the dust of the ground, etc. Our Father, etc. he Blesses them, and bids
them depart in Peace.

Observe. 1. No Minister dares marry any of another Parish, without a License
and Approbation of his Pastor.

2. -- Nor without consent of the Parents.

3. -- Nor without Publication in Church some Sunday morning.

4. If Parents will not give their free consent, both Parents and Persons are
to be cited before the Matrimonial Court (consisting of the Antistes, or
Archdeacon, and the prime of the Clergy, etc. sitting at Zurick every week)
where, if the reason alleged be Immoralities, the Marriage is stopped; but if
smallness of Portion or Jointure, it is declared valid.

5. No Divorce, except in case of Adultery, or one of the Parties turning
Papist, and repairing to a Cloister or Monastery.

6. The Bride, during the Solemnization of the Marriage, and some days after,
both in the Church and at home, wears a Chaplet or Garland, made of Marjoram,
Rosemary, etc. and embroidered with wreathen Gold and Silver Laces, and set in
Pearls and Granates, etc. as a Token of her Virginity and Innocence. But if
with Child before Marriage, by a strict Law it is forbidden; and the
Bridegroom, instead hereof, is fined to pay a considerable Sum of Money into
the Matrimonial Court.

Their Funeral Service.

1. The Relations and Friends are invited to come between three and four a
Clock afternoon.

2. At that precise time, the Men place themselves without the Door of the
House, standing on rows against the Walls; the Women in the Mourning-house, etc.

3. Then the People who are invited come, and joining their hands to some of
the nearest Relations, say, The Lord comfort you in your Affliction; and then
turn back and join in some row.

4. The Corpse presently after four a clock is carried to the Grave, the People
going into Church.

5. Then the Minister in the Pulpit, or at the Font, says, Dearly Beloved in
Jesus Christ whereas the Almighty and Merciful God has taken out of this
Thraldom, and called to his Fatherly Mercy and Glory our dear (Brother, etc.)
N. N. and you have been pleased to accompany him to the place of Burial --
wherefore the nearest Relations N. N. (naming them) of the Deceased, render you
their most humble Thanks, etc.

6. Then he concludes with a pretty long Prayer, wherein he gives Thanks to
God, for delivering this their fellow-member out of the Thraldom of this
Transitory Life, and having, through Christ, made him partaker of his
Everlasting and Heavenly Kingdom, etc. and so ends with a Benediction.

7. Every one makes some silent Prayer by himself, and then every one goes to
his own home.

Note, 1. A Son or Daughter Mourns two years for their Parents, in wearing
black Apparel and a Bonnet: The Parents one year for a Child. 2. Those that are
dead-born are buried in private, without this Service. 3. Feloes de se, by the
Hangman in a place appointed for Malefactors. Mr. Werndly 's Liturgia
Tigurina.
2. In France.

1. Their Doctrine is contained in the 40 Articles of their Confession of
Faith, and agrees with that of the Church of England.

2. Their Government was Presbyterian; and tho they humbly confessed that Form,
not the same which was instituted by Christ and his Apostles; yet they conceive
it not altogether contrary to the intention of Christ; their circumstances not
permitting them to have that which is truly Divine and Apostolical. They are
not against Episcopal Government.

3. They have a Liturgy; Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and also Marriage, are
celebrated with a set Form.

4. They have a large Catechism, of which they give an Exposition on Sundays in
the afternoon.

5. Their way of Worship is thus, for the Morning.

1. The Reader reads some Chapters. 2. -- Calls for some Psalms to be sung. 3.
He reads the 10 Commandments. 4. The Minister in the Pulpit reads out of the
Common Prayer Book one sentence of Scripture, with a short Exhortation to the
People. 5. Then follows a Confession. 6. Then the Minister calls for a Psalm.
7. Afterward a short Prayer in a Form left to his own liberty, which is always
the same, except on extraordinary occasions. 8. A Sermon. 9. The Minister Prays
again out of the Book, for about a quarter of an Hour, viz. for forgiveness of
sin, for all Princes, especially their own, and the Royal Family, for the
Ministers of the Church; and in especial manner, for those that are dispersed
under the Tyranny of Antichrist; and lastly, for the present Assembly. 10. They
conclude their Prayers with the Lord's Prayer. 11. Then they Rehearse the
Creed, and sing a Psalm, most commonly the 117. and dismiss the People with the
Blessing, Numb. 6.24.
The Afternoon Service is the same, except that instead of Reading the
Commandments, they Sing them.

6. They receive the Lord's Supper standing; during the Administration,
Chapters are Read, and Psalms Sung, till the Holy Ceremony is over; and then,
instead of the 117th Psalm, they sing the Song of Simeon, kneeling.

7. Baptism is administered in the Church; and the People strictly forbid to
depart till the Solemnity is over. The Father promises to take care of his
Child; but the same is required of a Godfather and Godmother.

8. No Marriage is solemnized without an antecedent Publication of the Banns.

9. They say Prayers in their Families, which they conclude with the Lord's
Prayer, Creed and Blessing, morning and Evening.

10. They bless their Meat in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

11. They Excommunicate all scandalous and notorious Offenders, and admit them
not to the Sacrament, till after a public Confession, Mr. Janmard Vic. of
Arundel in Sussex.

3. In England.

I need not to say, what their Doctrine, Discipline or way of Divine Worship
is; the Assemblies Catechism giving a sufficient Account of their Doctrine, and
the Directory of their Discipline and Worship.

And besides this Book being in the English Tongue, primarily and chiefly for
the use of Englishmen, it will not be hard for any Englishman to inform
himself by a personal acquaintance and conversation with them.

4. In Scotland.

1. Their Doctrine is mostly agreeable to that of the English, except that they
hold the King inferior to the Church, and consequently may be Excommunicated;
which, I think, (for I would slander no party) is peculiar to them, and
Fathered upon their Politics.

2. Their Worship, thus, 1. A Psalm, two or three Verses. 2. A Prayer. 3. A
Text and Sermon. 4. A short Prayer. 5. A Psalm, with Glory to the Father, Son,
etc.


5. In New England.

1. For morning. 1. A Prayer. 2. The Sermon. 3. A Psalm. 4. A conclusion, with
Prayers for the sick, etc.
2. Evening. 1. A Psalm. 2. A short Prayer. 3. The Sermon. 4. A Prayer pretty
long. 5. A Psalm again. 6. A conclusion by way of Prayer and Benediction, etc.

They have Sacraments every Month once.

APPENDIX.
COncerning Differences in the Church of Geneva, Dr. Burnet tells us -- The
middle way that Amirald, Daille, and some others in France took, in the matters
that were disputed in Holland, concerning the Divine Decrees, and the extent of
the Death of Christ, as it came to be generally followed in France: so it had
some Asserters both in Geneva and Switzerland, who denied the imputation of
Adam's sin, and asserted the Universality of Christ's Death, together with a
sufficient Grace given to all Men; asserting with this, a particular and free
Decree of Election, with an Efficacious Grace for those included in it: These
came to be called Vniversalists; and began to grow very considerable in Geneva:
Two of the Professors of Divinity there being known to favor those Opinions;
whereupon those who adhered strictly to the opposite Doctrine, were inflamed,
and the Contention grew to that height, that almost the whole Town came to be
concerned, and all were divided into Parties: But tho the Party of
Universalists was considerable in Geneva, it was very small in Switzerland,
therefore some Divines there, that adhered to the old received Doctrine, drew
up some Articles, in which all these Doctrines were not only condemned,
together with some speculations that were asserted concerning Adam's
immortality, and other qualities belonging to the state of innocence; But
because Capel and some other Critics had not only asserted the Novelty of the
Points, but had taken the liberty to correct the reading of the Hebrew, etc.
They condemned all Corrections of the Hebrew Bible, and asserted the Antiquity
of the Points, or at least of the Power and reading according to them, obliging
all such as should be admitted tot he Ministry to sign, sic sentio; so I
think. Thus at Bern, Zurich and Geneva, Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Independents.
The Tenets of the Independents, are as follow.

1. They hold, That particular Churches, associated for personal Communion, are
of Divine Institution.

2. That particular Churches ought to have a proper Exercise of Discipline
amongst themselves.

3. That none but free Consenters should receive the Sacrament, nor be related
to the Pastor, as his Flock.

4. That the rest should live, as Catechumens, in peace.

5. That the Church of England is no True Church.

6. That Parish-Churches are no True Churches.

7. That Parish-Ministers are no True Ministers, if Ordained by Diocesans, and
not chosen by the People.

8. That Ministers and People must gather Churches, that are purer, and set up
purer Discipline; whatever Rulers say, or do, or themselves suffer by it.

9. That no prohibition of the Magistrate will warrant a Minister to forbear
his Office. Mr. Rich. Baxter.

Mr. Rosse, and others, give a larger account of their Opinions, but these
being all that they have of late Years contended for, and being of late, at
least in part, reconciled to the Presbyterians, I forbear to ascribe any more
to them.

Anabaptists.
Their Doctrines are, as follows.

1. They condemn Infant Baptism.

2. They condemn Tithes, and forced Maintenance of Ministers.

3. They allow not, as lawful, Swearing before a Magistrate.

4. They condemn Magistracy it self, as unlawful among Christians.

5. They say, That humane Learning is unnecessary in a Minister.

These are commonly professed by them to this that: They who would know more,
may read Mr. Rosse, Paget, etc. I forbear at present to tax them with the
Doctrine of Community of Goods, and some other Doctrines; which, as the case
now stands with them, are laid asleep, and not asserted or owned by them.

Quakers.
1. Their Tenets.

1. They deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God; but yet grant them to be an
holy Declaration of the Word of God, and of the Rule and Guide in Matters of
Salvation.

2. They hold, That the Spirit which leads into all Truth, is the great
Evangelical Rule of Holy Living.

3. That Christians ought now to expect inward Revelation from the Spirit of
God.

4. That Forms of Prayer are not to be perpetuated in the Church.

5. That Baptism, by Water, is not Christ's Ordinance.

6. That the Lord's Supper is unnecessary to the Regenerate, because Christ is
come to them, viz. by his Spirit.

7. That Swearing before Magistrates is unlawful.

8. That all persons inspired may preach, though Mechanics.

9. That Errors and Vices do un-minister Men.

10. That the Jewish-Sabbath, being a Type of Spiritual Rest, under the Gospel;
we are not now bound to any set Day, yet to some time of Divine Worship. W.
Penn, Esquire;

See more in Mr. Rosse's View of all Religions, etc.

2. Their Divisions.

In England they are divided, especially in two Parties; such as follow Mr.
Mead, who is accounted the most rational and moderate, and such as adhere to
Mr. Penn. In Pennsilvania we have had lately an account of greater Divisions;
some of them being charged by others, with damnable Heresies and Doctrines of
Devils, etc. in a Book entitled, The Plea of the Innocent, etc.

I take them for a Branch of the Old Anabaptists, which sprung up in Germany,
upon the Reformation, though they made no appearance in England, 'till the time
of our Civil Wars, about the Year 1644. and then were assisted (at least) by
some Priests of the Popish Seminaries, in disguise; as were also several other
Sects, which then sprung up amongst us. See Du Moulin's Philan. Angl. etc.

Mahometans.
1. Creed.

The first Chapter of the Alcoran is, as it were, the Mahometan's Creed; and
it is called the Mother of the Book, containing the Words of Mahomet; for the
rest are all delivered as the Word of God, he being induced as Speaker. Which
first Chapter is this Sense:

In the Name of God, gracious and merciful: Thanks be unto God, the Lord of the
World, merciful, pitiful Judge at the Day of Judgment. We pray unto thee; we
trust in thee: Lead us into the right way, the way of them whom thou have
chosen, not of them with whom Thou art angry, and of the Infidels.

Out of the Alcoran may be collected more of their Faith, as thus:

1. God is One, necessary to all, incorporeal, neither begetting, nor begotten;
the Creator, long-suffering, searcher of the Heart, true; that he has no Son,
needs nothing.

2. That Christ is the Son of Mary, (the best of Women) the Prophet of God,
begotten by the Spirit of her, in the shape of a Man: Christ was not slain by
the Jews, but one like him.

3. Their Law is to be propagated by the Sword: Of the twelve Months, four are
to be consecrated to this warfare; they that refuse it, lose their Souls. The
Unbelievers, taken in War, that will not turn, must be killed, or made Slaves.
It Is not lawful to dispute about the Law.

4. God made the World, and disposed the seven Heavens, and afterward Man,
like unto himself, and breathed into him his own Soul (a portion of it.) That
the Angels being commanded to do reverence to Adam, Beelzebub refused, and was
therefore damned.

5. There is a Paradise and Hell, but of sensual Pleasures and Torments.

6. Mahomet is the Seal, and last of the Prophets; to whom it was lawful to lie
with all Women, even Aunts and Kindred, etc.

7. There shall be a Resurrection, proved by the story of the 7 Sleepers, who
slept 360 Years.

2. Moral and Judicial Precepts and Prohibitions:

1. Prohibitions.

1. Abstain from Swines-flesh, Blood, that which dies alone, and that which
has the Neck cut off.

2. From Wine and Women, more than their own Wives or Women.

3. Working on Friday, at Prayer-time.

4. Games of Chesse, Scails and Tables.

5. Marrying with Men or Women, of another Law.

6. Marrying with Mother, Daughter, Sister, Aunt, Niece, Nurse, etc.

7. Swearing rashly, and For-swearing.

8. Usury, Lying, Injustice, etc.

2. Precepts Affirmative.

1. Pilgrimage to Mecha.

2. Belief in GOD and Mahomet.

3. Marry and Fight, for the increase of Religion.

4. Giving wealth to the Poor; Men, Slaves, Birds, Dogs.

5. Praying five times a Day.

6. Keeping Lent, one Month in the Year.

7. Obedience to Parents.

8. Keeping Friday Sabbath; cum multis aliis.

Mohammedan Sects.
1. Turks ( or Arabians.)
1. THE Turks pretendc that Abouleker was the Successor of Mahomet, making his
Genealogy thus; Mahomet.

1 Abouleker. 1 Omar. 1 Osman. 1 Aly.
2. The Turks are called Sunni, because they follow also Counsels of Devotion,
besides the Commands of their Law. M. de Thev.

3. They call to Prayers from the tops of Towers.

4. In Praying, the Turks hold their hands one over another upon their Stomach.

5. Among the Turks for a Christian to dispute with them, is a Crime punishable
by Death.

6. The Turks make God the Author both of Good and Evil.

7. The Turks say, the Law is Eternal.

8. The Turks teach, that God shall be visible to blessed Souls in his Essence.

9. The Turks say, Mahomet, when he received his Alcoran, was carried by the
Angel Gabriel Body and Soul into God's presence.

10. The Arabians pray five times a day.

2. Persians.
1. The Persians leave out of Mahomet's Succession the names of Abouleker, Omar
and Osman, affirming them to be Usurpers only, and no rightful Successors to
Mahomet; that Aly lawfully and actually succeeded him; making the Genealogy
thus, Mahomet. 1 Aly.
which Aly (say they) succeeded Mahomet both in his Doctrine and Empire, and
married also Mahomet's Daughter, who was also the first of the twelve Imams,
and whose Interpretation of the Law they embrace as the Truest, and whose
Sepulcher they visit, as the Turks the other three.

2. The Persians call themselves Schiai, because they think it enough to follow
the Precepts of their Law; though sometimes they follow some of the Counsels
too.

3. In Persia they call to Prayers three times a day, from Terrases not Towers.

4. The Schiai in Praying hold not their hands on their Stomach, but laying
down a little gray stone, which they always carry about them, every time they
prostrate, lay their Foreheads on that stone (made of the Earth of Keebela,
where Hussein the second Son of Aly was killed.) M. de Thev.

5. The Persians will suffer Christians to dispute with them about matters of
Religion.

6. The Persians make God Author of Good only.

7. The Persians say, only God is Eternal.

8. The Persians say -- he is visible only in his Effects and Attributes.

9. The Persians, -- that he was carried only in Soul.

10. The Persians pray but three times a day, Morning, Noon and Night; no, not
upon Fridays.

The Persians have translated the Alcoran into the Persian Tongue with an
interlineal Translation word for word; for Turk and Persian both believe, that
that Book cannot be explainted in any other Language but Arabic.

Subordinate Sects.
Dervises.
THey go about begging Alms in the name of Aly.

They wear two Sheepskins, dried in the Sun, the one hanging on their Back,
the other on their Breast; the rest of their Body naked; their whole body
shaved, Head bare, Temples burnt with a hot Iron; Rings with precious Stones in
their Ears; and a knotty Club in their Hand.

They are desperate Assassinates, Robbing and Murdering on occasion.

They eat of an Herb called Asserad or Matslach, which makes them Mad, cutting
and slashing themselves, which makes them more reverenced.

On Friday after their Devotion, they drink of Asserad, and Sing and Dance
about a Fire like mad, etc.

See more in the sequel of this Book.

Imailer.
The Imailers, or Religious Brothers of Love, have for their Habit, a long Coat
of a Violet color, without Seam, girt about with a golden Girdle, at which
hang silver Cymbals which jingle as they go.

These, with a Book in their Hand of Love-Songs, go about Singing, and receive
Money for their Songs, and are always bare-headed, wearing long Hair, which
they curl.

They are worse than Beasts in their Lusts, sparing neither Women nor Boys.
Rosse.

Calender.
The Calenders profess porpetual Virginity, and have their own peculiar Temples
or Chapels.

They wear a short Coat of Wool and Horse-hair, without Sleeves.

Their Hair is short; Felt-hats on their Heads, from which hang Tufts of
Horse-hair about a hand-breadth.

They wear Rings in their Ears, and about their Necks and Arms; and in their
Yard an Iron or Silver Ring, whereby they are forced to live chastely.

They go about reading certain Rhimes or Ballads. Rosse.

Torlaques.
The Torlaques are clothed as the Dervises, but wear also a Bears-skin instead
of a Cloak,

They go bare-headed, and shave; anointing their Heads with Oil against the
Cold; and burn their Temples against Defluxions.

Their Life is Beastly and Beggarly, begging in every corner, Robbing and
Plundering in desert places, by a Pretense to Palmestry, picking silly Women's
Pockets whilst they are looking in their Hands, etc. Given to Sodomy and all
Uncleanness.

They have commonly an old Man with them, whom they worship as their Prophet,
who, where they cannot get Money, prophesies Destruction against the House, on
purpose to terrify, etc.

Other Promiscuous Sects.
There are many other Sects among the Mahometans, concerning which I can meet
with no distinct and sufficient Information: Nor is it a matter of any great
Moment, if I give but a defective account of them, being as Inconsiderable for
their Worth as our Highway-men or Gypsies amongst us; excepting that some of
them are more Innocent and Charitable: However it be, they are by Profession
Religious.

Some going naked, except their Privities, Summer and Winter, cutting and
slashing their Bodies to show their Patience.

Some professing Poverty, enjoying nothing. Some professing Abstinence, Eating
and Drinking little. Some professing Perpetual Silence, etc. Some professing
Solitude, avoiding all Society. Some professing Revelations, Visions, etc. Some
professing Contemplation, with Feathers on their Heads. Some professing
Obedience, with Rings in their Ears. Some professing Voluntary Servitude, with
Chains on their Necks and Arms. Some professing Hospitality, giving Pitchers of
Water to the thirsty Traveller.
Some dwell at the Graves of the Dead, living on what People will give them.

Some are Antinomians, affirming that there is no use of the Law, but that Men
are Saved by Grace.

Some are for Traditions and Merits, addicting themselves wholly to Meditation,
Prayer, Fasting, etc.

Some affirm, a Man may be Saved in any Religion, and therefore make no scruple
to go into Christian Churches, to sign themselves with the Cross, and
besprinkle themselves with Holy Water. Rosse.

Ancient Heathens.
Pythagoreans.
1. THeir Author was Pythagoras, who set up a new Philosophy in Italy, about A.
M. 3513. V. C. 213.

2. Their Dogmata, or Religious Sentiments.

1. They held, that Souls were Immortal. 2. They asserted a Metempsychosis or
Transmigration of Souls. 3. They maintained a strict Conjunction amongst
themselves, and a Community of Goods. Vossius. 4. They abstained from eating of
Flesh and Beans. See Hierocles. 5. Their first Lesson was to learn to be
silent.
Platonicks.
1. Their Author was Plato (Suavissimis ille Socratis Cygn^s, says the Learned
Vossius) who was born A. M. 3623. V. C. 322. who set out his Philosophical
Studies with an admirable Eloquence, and excelled in all kind of Learning.

2. Their Dogmata.

1. That there was one Supreme God; but besides him two sorts of Gods, to whom
they ought to do Sacrifice, Demons and Heroes. 2. That there was an Idea, which
he made to be a fifth cause. 3. That the World had a Beginning. 4. That the end
of Philosophy was, to be made like unto God. 5. That there was a Pre-existence
of Souls. Max. Tyr. 6. That Knowledge is only Remembrance, ( viz. of what our
Souls knew in their State of Preexistence.) 7. That an Injury is not to be
returned. 8. That God is not to be prayed unto. 9. That Images are to be
dedicated to the Gods.
Peripateticks.
1. Their Author was Aristotle, that Prodigy of Wit, who (if ever any Man) had
Nature at his beck, Plato's Scholar and Adversary, and Alexander's Tutor; born
as Stagyra, A. M. 3670.

2. Their Dogmata.

Here, I confess, I have little to say, Aristotle being a great Philosopher,
but little Divine, having an Eagle's Eye in the Disquisation of Nature, but a
very Buzzard in Spirituals; insomuch, that it would tempt one to Father Religio
Medico upon him.

1. He held, that the World had no beginning. Cicero 1. Tusc. 2. Yet that the
Gods were the Governors of it. Cicer. de Not. De. 3. That the Soul was (...),
a continual and everlasting Motion. 4. Sometimes he makes, 1. The Mind God,
etc. 2. The World God, etc. 3. The Heat of Heaven God, etc.
5. That all things, which are according to Nature, are Good; those which are
contrary, are Evil; that Riches were Good. 6. That Virtue is to be desired and
valued above all other things.
Philosophers.
Epicureans.
1. THeir Author was Epicurus, born at Athens, A. M. 3711.

2. Their Dogmata, or Sentiments were, 1. That all things had their beginning
from Atoms, by a Fortuitous concourse of them. 2. That all things were governed
by Fate and Fortune. 3. That God neither troubled himself, nor others with any
business. 4. Yet that the Nature of the Gods was so excellent, that it should
of it self allure a Wise man to a Religious Veneration. Cicero. 5. That Souls
perished with their Bodies, Vossius. 6. That Sense was the Rule, by which we
ought to make a Judgment of things. 7. That our Felicity consists in Pleasure.


Cynicks.
1. Their Author was Antisthenes, who was Master also to Diogenes.

2. Their Sentiments.

1. That there were many Popular Gods; yet but one Natural, the maker of all
things. 2. That the end of Cynicism was, Vivere ex Virtute. 3. That Impiety was
to be avoided, Frugality to be embraced. 4. That men were to be bluntly
rebuked.
3. That Filthy things were to be expressed in their own Names (without regard
to modesty.) Cicero Offic.

Stoics.
1. Their Author was Zeno Citticus, born A. M. 3790.

2. Their Sentiments.

These differed not much from the Cynicks, and had some Communion with the
Academicks.

1. They placed Happiness in Virtue alone. 2. They commended A^st^mium much;
Ze^^ himself being a Pattern of that Virtue, by which he is said to have lived
without Sickness to the ninetieth year of his Age, Vossius. 3. They wore long
hair, from whence that Phrase in Juvenal, Crine Stoicus.
Some of the Stoics thought all should be burnt to Ashes, and then would
follow an immediate Restoration of all things.

AN APPENDIX.
Concerning the Vaudois.
1. THeir History. A considerable part of Italy, especially the Seven Provinces
of Liguria, Aemilia, Flaminia, Venctia, The Alps, Cottian, and Greek, and
Rhetia (whereof Milan was the Capital City), were governed by a Lieutenant of
their own. Here the Gospel being planted, flourished in S. Ambrose's time, and
so continued down to the Reformation; save only that sometimes by the Embassies
and Arts, Threats and Promises of the Church of Rome, their Pastors were
prevailed with to make Retractations, and submit themselves for a while to the
Papal Yoke. But they soon started back again, and the whole body of the people
were never entirely reduced to this day: Yet bitterly reproached, and
spitefully represented to the World, and confounded with the Manichees,
Cathari, and the worst of Heretics, on purpose to derive the greater Odium,
and stroke of Persecution upon them.

2. Their Names. At first they were called Patarines, from a place called
Patria, or Pataria; where, upon a difference with their Neighbors, they were
feign to say Mass by themselves; afterward Subalpini from the Country,
Waldenses from Valles, Waldenses from Waldo, being an Eminent Man, and one that
had translated the Scriptures into a Known Tongue, and probably many of his
disciples joining themselves to this Church. Lions, the place of their abode,
gave them the Name of Poor People of Lions, etc. Albigenses.

3. Their Country. First Italy, and the Country of Piedmont, Lombardy, France
and Bohemia, whither they fled for shelter in the times of persecution, about
A. C. 1200. England, etc.

4. Their Doctrines.

1. The Church of Rome is an Assembly of ungodly men; not the Church of Christ,
but the Whore in the Revelation. 2. All sins reign in that Church. 3. That
themselves are the true poor in Spirit, who suffer for the Faith, etc. The True
Church of Christ. 4. That the Eastern Church does not value the Church of Rome.
5. They despise all Ordinances and Statutes of the Church, as being too many
and burdensome. 6. The Prelates are the Scribes and Pharisees. 7. None in the
Church ought to be greater than other. 8. None ought to kneel to a Priest. See
thou do it not. Rev. 9. Tithes are not to be given to Priests; nor the Clergy
ought not to enjoy any Temporal Possessions, Prebends, Regalia, etc. 10.
Neither Land nor People ought to be divided into Parishes. 11. They condemn
Monasteries, all the Sacraments of the Church of Rome. 12. They were against
Swearing, etc. But these are accounted to us, by Authors of the Roman Church,
with so much malice and confusion, that it is not easy to believe any of their
Reports. They had indeed a mixture of Error with their substantial Truths;
which is capable of Apology.
5. Their Conduct of Life. They were orderly and modest in their manners and
behavior; avoiding all Pride in their Habits, wearing neither very rich
Clothes, nor over mean and ragged ones; they kept up no Trade to avoid Lies,
Swearing and Deceit; but only lived by the Labor of their hands, as
Handy-crafts men and Day-labourers; and their Teachers were Weavers and
Tailors; they did not heap up Riches, but were content with Necessaries; they
were also very Chaste, sparing and very temperate in Eating and Drinking; not
frequenting Taverns or Alehouses; nor going to Balls or other Vanities,
abstaining from Anger; when they workt, they either Learned or Taught; and
therefore Prayed but little: They Hypocritically went to Church, Offered,
Confessed, Communicated, and heard Sermons to catch the Preacher in his Words.
[Observe, this Character is given them by an Adversary, an Inquisitor, who
wrote in the 14th Century.] In like manner their Women were very modest,
avoiding Backbiting, Foolish Jesting, and levity of Words, and abstaining
especially from lies and swearing; not so much as making use of the common
Asseverations, In truth, for certain, etc.

6. Their Worship and Behavior, from the aforesaid Anthor.

They kneel down upon the ground, before a bench, or the like, and continue
thus in all their Prayers in silence, as long as one might repeat a
Paternoster 30 or 40 times, and conclude their Prayers by repeating the word
Amen several times; and this they do every day very Reverently, amongst those
of their own Persuasion, without the company of any Strangers, before noon,
after noon, and at night when they go to bed; besides some other times, as well
in the day, morning and at night; they say, teach, nor have any other Prayer
besides Our Father. They do not look on the Salutation of the Angel to be a
Prayer, nor the Apostle's Creed; and say that these were introduced by the
Church of Rome, not by Christ. However they have drawn up a short draught of
the seven Articles concerning the Godhead, and as many concerning the Human
Nature, the Ten Commandmants, and the seven Works of Mercy, which they say and
teach, and boast much of them, and readily offer themselves to Answer to any
one that demands of them a reason of their Faith. Before they set themselves
down to Table, they bless it, saying, Bless the Lord. Lord have mercy upon us,
Christ have mercy upon us; Lord have mercy upon us Our Father, etc. After
which, the Eldest of the Company says, in the Vulgar Tongue, God who blessed
the 5 barley Loaves and 2 Fishes in the Desert before his Disciples, bless this
Table, and that which is upon it (and then make the sign of the Cross) in the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Amen. And when they rise from Table,
after Dinner, or Supper, they give Thanks thus, the Eldest in the Vulgar Tongue
repeating the Doxology, set down in the Revelation, Blessing and Glory and
Wisdom and Thanksgiving, Honor, Power and Might, be ascribed to God alone, for
ever and ever, Amen. And then adds, God render a good reward, and a plentiful
return to all those who are our Benefactors; and the God who has given us
Corporal food, vouchsafe us also the Life of his Spirit; and God be with us,
and we with him always. Amen. Also when they bless the Table, and when they
return Thanks, they fold their Hands together, and lift them up toward Heaven.
And after Dinner, and they have returned Thanks and Prayed, as before, they
Preach, Teach, and Exhort according to their way and Doctrine.

They who would know more, may read Archbishop Usher, Morland, Dr. Allix, out
of whom I have in great have Extracted this short Account; rather to give an
edg, than satisfy the Appetite of my Readers.

Place these Two Leaves before the 2d Part.
THE HISTORY OF ALL RELIGIONS In the World, etc. PART II.
1. Knowledge of God.
Jewish.
MAimonides acknowledges God to be incorporeal and incomprehensible. Dr.
Tenison.

Esdras appointed the People to meet three times a week to be taught the Law;
because in the desert of Sur they wandered three days without water, i. e. the
Law. Ross.

Christians.
S. Augustine was inflamed with a desire of Wisdom by reading Ciccro's
Hortensius; That Book (says he) changed my Affections, and turned my Prayers
to thy self, O Lord, and made an alteration in my wishes and desires: All vain
hope grew low in my esteem on a sudden, and I longed for the Immortality of
Wisdom with an incredible heat of mind. -- How did I burn, my God, how did I
burn with a desire to fly from Earthly things to thee, and I knew not, what
thou would do with me, for with thee is Wisdom. -- I was delighted with this
alone in that Exhortation, that he did mightily excite me with that Discourse,
and inflame me, that I should love, seek after, and attain, and hold fast, and
embrace, not this or that Sect, but Wisdom it self, whatever it was: And I did
burn, and this only cooled me in so great a heat, that the Name of Christ was
not there: For this Name, through thy Mercy, O Lord, I had sucked into my
tender Heart with my Mother's Milk --, and whatsoever was without this Name,
tho Learned and Polite and True, did not wholly Ravish me, August. l. 3. Conf.
c. 4.

Felix Africanus, Bishop, and his Associates, chose rather to give up their own
Lives in the Dioclesian Persecution, that the Copies of the New Testament.

Origin, when a Child, was very inquisitive into the hidden meaning of the
Scriptures, and even tired his Father with asking questions; and afterward
never went to Meals, never to Sleep, without some part of the Scripture read,
Dr. Cave.

John, an Egyptian Confessor, whom Eusebius saw and heard, tho his Eyes were
out, and his Body mangled, would repeat any passages out of the Old and New
Testament; whom I supposed, says he, to be reading in a Book; till coming
near, I was struck with great Admiration, Idem.

Theodosius the younger could exactly repeat the Holy Scripture in any part,
Idem.

Nazianzen ptofesseth, he had willingly renounced all other things for the sake
of this Book, Idem.

Gildas has scarce one Paragraph in his Epistles unstored with Texts of
Scripture, T. Jones.

K. Alphonsus read over the Bible 14 times, with Commentaries, such as his Age
afforded.

Mr, Bradford never went to bed without his Book. Fox, Martyrol.

Heathens.
The more I study the Nature of God, and inquire what he is, the less I find:
The Saying of Simonides to Hiero of Syracuse.

Know that it is the greatest Point of Religion about the Immortal Gods, to
have right Opinions of them, that you may know that they are, and that they
govern all things well and righteously, and that we ought to obey them, and
acquiesce in all things that they do, etc. Epict. c. 38.

Muscovites.
There are a great number of Monasteries, both for men and women in Muscovy of
S. Basil's order; but they have this common with all the Muscovites, that they
can hardly write and read: Not one in ten can say the Lord's Prayer, much fewer
the Creed and Commandments, D. of Holstein's Emb. Travels, p. 105.

Persians.
The Audience being over -- The King (of Persia) again sent for Lalin, Marriage,
and Father Raphael, and after a short discourse, having dismissed all but F.
Raphael, he fell into a Dispute with him touching the Unity of the Divine
Nature, the necessity of one Prophet, and how Mahomet was the Seal and Crown of
all the Prophets: He seemed to admire that the Franks, who had the reputation
of being People of Wit, and Discretion, could think that Jesus Christ was a
God. Tavernier's Collection of several Relations, etc. p. 28.

Papists.
The Venetians are generally ignorant of the matters of Religion to a scandal,
and they are as unconcerned in them as strangers to them. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

The great Libertinage that is so undecently practiced by most sorts of People
at Venice, extends it self to the Clergy, to such a degree, that tho Ignorance
and Vice seem the only indelible Characters, that they carry generally over all
Italy, yet those appear here in a more conspicuous manner, than elsewhere. Idem.

One of the chief Ornaments of Venice was the famous Young Woman that spoke
five tongues well, of which the Latin and Greek were two; she passed Dr. of
Physic at Padua, was a person of such extraordinary Virtue and Piety, that she
is spoken of as a Saint; she was of the Noble Family of the Cornaro's, Idem.

2. Love to God
Christian.
From Syria even to Rome, I fight with Beasts, by Land, by Sea, Night and Day,
bound with 10 Leopards (a guard of Soldiers,) -- would to God I might enjoy
the Beasts prepared for me; who, I wish, may make quick dispatch with me; whom
I will allure to devour me speedily; and if they will not, I will even force
them. -- Pardon me, I know what is best for me. Now I begin to be a Disciple of
Christ. -- Let Fire, Cross, and Troops of violent Beasts, and all the torments
of the Devil come on me, that I may enjoy Christ. Ignatius, in his Journey to
Rome.

My Love is crucified. The saying of Ignat.

Two Loves make two Cities; the Love of God makes Jerusalem, the love of the
World makes Babylon: Let every on ask himself what he Loves, and he will find
of what place he is a Citizen. Aug. on Psalm 64.

He loves thee less, O Lord, who loves any thing with thee, which he does not
love for thee. Idem. in Conf. l.

He that Loves not, does not labor; for all labor is difficult to them who do
not love: Only Love is ashamed of the name of Difficulty. Ibid.

The Love of God is never idle: Operatur enim magna. Greg. in Ho.

Our Soul is not more present, where it lives, than where it loves: Vbi animat,
quam ubi amat; unless you suppoe it to be more there where it is bound by
necessity, than were it is carried freely, Bern. de Praecep.

Love of God.
Prior Deus dilexit nos, Tantus, tantum and gratis, tantillos and tales. Bern.

If you would be presently cleansed from Vices, enkindle in your self the Fire
of Divine Love; if you have perfectly tasted the sweetness of the Divine Love,
you will not care for temporal sweetness. Rabanus in quod. Sermon.

Wretched I, how much ought I to love my God, who made me, when I was not;
Redeemed me, when I was miserable! For I was not, and he made me of nothing;
not a Stone, not a Tree, not a Brute; but he would have me to be a Man; he gave
me Life, Sense, Discretion; brought me out of Exile, Redeemed me out of
Bondage, called me by his Name, that his Memorial might be always with me; he
anointed me with the Oil of Gladness, with which himself was anointed; that I
might be anointed from the Anointed, and called a Christian from Christ.
August. de Sp. and An.

I have loved thee, O lord, not with a doubtful, but certain Conscience: Thou
have smitten my Heart with thy Word, and I have loved Thee. The Heavens and the
Earth, and all things therein, cry unto me, that I should love thee. Neither do
they cease to speak unto All Men, that they may be inexcusable. Idem in l. Conf.

If Souls please thee, let them be loved in God, for they also are Mutable, but
fixed in Him; they are established, otherwise they would go and perish;
therefore let them be loved in Him, and draw them, with thy self, to Him, as
many as thou can, and say to them, Let us love Him, let us love Him; He made
these things, and He is not far off; for He did not make them, and go away; Sed
ex illo, in illo sunt. Ibid. l. 4. c. 12.

Do not hide from me thy Face: Let me dye, truly let me dye, that I may see it:
Moriar, ne moriar, ut eam videam. l. 1. c. 5.

What art thou to me? Have Mercy on me, that I may speak. What am I to thee,
that thou should command me to love Thee? and if I do it not, should be
angry with me, and threaten me with great miserys? Is it not a small thing, if
I should not love thee? Alas for me; tell me by thy Mercies, O Lord, my God,
what Thou art to me? Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation. Speak so, that I may
hear, etc. Ibid.

Galeacius Caracciola, Marquess of Vicum, the Pope's Nephew, upon his parting
with his Friends and Family, his Lady and Children weeping and crying, and
himself going to Geneva, as an Exile, had these words, Let them be accursed,
that prefer all the pleasures of this World, to one Hours Communion with Jesus
Christ. Anonym.

Joachimus Curaeus, a German Physician, in the close of his Life, spoke thus;
Come Lord Jesus, and let all that love thee say, Come; and he that loves thee
not, let him be Anathema Ma^anatha. Thou know, I love thee; with thee I
shall be the beginning of this New-year. Mel. Adam.

Affiance in GOD.
Jews.
THE Jews still pray for the re-edifying of the Temple (with a still Voice,
that none can hear) in these words: Let thy will be before thy Face, O God our
Lord, Lord of our Fathers, that the holy House of thy Temple may be restored to
our Days; and grant us thy Will in thy Law. And afterward, rising, with great
Joy and Clamor, they sing a Prayer of Praise in hope thereof; and sitting down
again, they read a long Prayer, gathered here and there, out of the Psalms, and
some whole Psalms, and part of 1 Chronicles. 30. And lastly, the last words of
Obadiah, v. 21. The Saviors shall ascend into Mount Zion, to judge the Mount
of Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the Lord's. Which they speak in hope of the
Destruction of the Christians, and their own Restitution; they proceed,
singing, And God shall be King over all the Earth; in that day, God shall be
One, and his Name One, as it is written in thy Law, O God, hear Israel, God, our
God, is One God. And this word, (...) (One,) in the next Prayer they repeat,
and resound for half an hour together, One, One, One, etc. Looking up to
Heaven, and turning to the four corners of the World. Purchase.

Christians.
Luther, in great spiritual trouble, having writ about the Walls and Tables in
his Study, in great Letters, VIVIT, (He is alive) to a Friend, dedemanding of
him the Reason, replied, Christ is alive, and if he were not, I would not
desire to live one Hour longer. Dr. Bolton, in his Sermon.

Mahometans.
They look upon themselves as obliged to perform the inward acts of Faith; and
account all Actions without Faith, as sins, without any Merit. F. Simon.

They commend nothing so much, as Trust in God, owning him for their only
support. Idem.

Heathens.
M. Antonius gave God thanks for his Assistance in the Government of his Will.

The Southern Americans, when they go to Wars, carry their Gods along with
them, and ask Counsel of them for all Affairs. Rosse.

Obedience to His Laws.
Jews.
IN every Synagogue the Book of the Law is kept within a Chest, written on
Parchment, in great Characters, and carried to and fro on two Staves, fastened
to each end of the Parchment: The Book (which is the Pentateuch) is wrapped in
Linen, and covered with Silk, Velvet, or Tissue: The two Staves are called the
Trees of Life. When the Praecentor brings forth the Book, they all sing Number.
10.35. Let God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered, etc. After some Anthems
are sung, one comes and kisses the Clothes in which it is wrapped, and with a
loud Voice blesses God, who has chosen them before all others, and given them
a Law. Then the chief Singer reads a Chapter, and the Book is kissed again;
after that elevated on high, the whole Congregation shouting, This is the Law
that Moses gave to Israel. When the Book is wrapped up again, all, both Young and
Old, kiss it, touching it only with their two Fingers. And while it is carried
back again, they all sing again, Return, Lord, to the many Thousands of Israel.
Numb. 10.36. Mr. Rosse.

Obedience to the Divine Laws.
Muscovites.
SOme Lutheran Divines in Sweden and Livonia, have made it a Problematical
Question, Whether the Muscovites were Christians or not? The Danish Gentleman,
who published the Embassy he was sent upon, into Muscovy, from Frederick the
Second, gives the Muscovites a very true Character, in two Lines, when he says;

They are subtle, overreaching, humourous, self-willed, obstinate, insolent,
and impudent, regulating their Reason according to their Power; that they have
shaken hands with all Virtues, to run themselves into all manner of Vice. D. of
H. Ambass. Trav.

Ceylan.
A witty Man of Ceylan, and a good natural Philosopher, called Alegamma Motiar,
having conversed with the Jesuits, and desiring to be a Christian, desired to
know what Jesus Christ had done, and left in Writing; and having read over the
New Testament, with that heed and study, that in less than six Months there was
hardly a Passage, which he could not repeat; after which he desired to turn
Christian, because he found their Religion such as Jesus Christ had taught; but
only he wondered, That they themselves did not follow his Example: for that he
never yet could find by his reading, that Jesus Christ ever took any Money of
any body; but that they took all they could get, and never Baptized or Buried,
unless they were well paid; but tho he started the Question, he was Baptized
and became a Sedulous Converter of others, Tavernier, Part 2. l. 3. c. 3,

Love and Reverence to his Name, Word, etc.
Jews.
THe Jews to show their Zeal for the Law of God, wear the Zizith or Fringe,
which is a square piece of Linen Cloth (or Silk, etc.) with Fringes, worn next
the Shirt, hanging down on the breast or Shoulders, etc. and account the right
wearing of it, a keeping of the whole Law; and ascribe as many miracles to it,
as the Papists to the Cowl of S. Francis. Women never wear it, Dr. Addison.

They have also scrowls of Parchment, Phylacteries, Tephillim, written with
several sentences of the Law, and tied on the forehead and left-arms, Idem.

They have a great veneration for the Law ( viz. the five Books of Moses) never
reading it, or taking it out of the Chest, but on Monday, Thursday and
Sabbath Day; -- After the Elevation of it, and its return from Procession, and
being put in its coverings, all the Males in the Synagogue kiss it in order, as
the Papists do the Pax. Idem. When they kiss it, they bless God for it, Rosse:

Tho the Jews (in Barbary are not forbid the reading of the Bible; yet the
Vulgar upon pain of Excommunication must acquiesce in the sense of the Masters;
this was told as a Secret by R. Aaron ben Netas. Dr. Addison.

The Pentateuch is divided into 52 Sections, that so it may be read over in a
year. See more in Mr. Rosse.

Swearing by God is a sussicient cause of Excommunication with the Modern Jews.
Dr. Addison

Christians.
Nazianzen severely chides his dear Friend Greg. Nyssen, that rejecting the
Holy Scripture (the most excellent Writing in the World) which he was wont to
read both privately and publicly, he had given himself to the study of
foreign and profane Authors, Dr. Cave.

Augustine ( Conf. l. 3. c. 5. and l. 7. c. 21.) complains that at his first
reading of the Sacred Scriptures, he despised them for the simplicity of their
style, not comparable to the Eloquence of Tully; but afterward being
unsatisfied with Tully and Plato, greedily set upon S. Paul's Epistles, and
thereupon became inflamed with a Love of Divine Studies; yet in the reading of
Cicero, he was not pleased, because he could not find the name of Christ there.

Blesilla, a devout Widow, weak and sickly, was never found without a Bible in
her hand, Hieron.

Olympia Fulvia Morata, born at Ferrara, in a Letter to the young Princess of
that place, she says -- (after getting out from the Idolatry of her own
Country, etc.) It may seem incredible to you, what a change the Lord then made
upon my Spirit, that former aversion I had to read the Scripture -- was then
turned to have it as my greatest delight and pleasure in the World, etc. Anonym.

Chrysostom having Preached many Sermons against Swearing at Antioch, the
people being weary, asked him, when he would leave Preaching? To whom he
Answered, when you leave Swearing: Would you have the Plaster taken away
before the wound be Cured?

Ancient Heathens.
Pythagoras (if he be the Author) in his Golden Verses, and Isocrates, etc.
advise us to revere or be afraid of an Oath.

Mahometans.
Mahomet the great, promising to his Soldiers the Spoil of Constantinople,
swore by the Turks great Oath, By the Immortal God, and by the 400 Probhets, by
Mahomet, by his Father's Soul, by his own Children, and by the Sword wherewith
he was girt, Knolles.

Persians.
The Persians are mightily addicted to ill Language and Cursing; but they never
Blaspheme God; for is they should hear one Swear, or with themselves at the
Devil, they would cry out in astonishment, is not that fellow a fool, to give
himself to the Devil, and renounce Paradise? All their Oaths are, Ser-azire-sha
(by the King's beloved Head) or Erva Pigumbir, (by the Spirit of the Prophet.)
I remember, once at Galata, walking with some of the French Ambassadors
Servants, we saw two Turks at Cuffs: In the end after 1000 curses on one side,
the other replied no more than this, I wish thy Soul may have no more repose in
Paradise, than the Hat of a Frenchman has in this world; alluding to our
putting them off so often, M. Tavernier, l. 5. c. 14.

Armenians.
At Egmiasin the Archbishop took the Book, wherein he had read the Gospel, and
gave it the Patriarch, Bishops, and all the people to kiss. On the one side of
the Cover of that Book, are two Relics Enchased, which are covered with
Crystal, M. Tavernier, l. 1. c. 3.

Persians.
The Duke of Holstein's Ambassador in his Persian Travels, tells us. -- Whilst
I was viewing one of their Schools or Colleges, one of the Regents, who read
public Lectures, perceiving that I had caused to be Engraven on a Cane, which
I had for a walking-staff, in Arabic, Bismi Alla, rahman rachim, i. e. In the
Name of the Merciful God which shows Mercy; -- he desired me to bestow it on
him, promising to give me a better: but finding some difficulty, he cut out the
word Alla (God) and put it in a clean paper, saying, the name of God should not
be on a staff thrust in the dirt.

Muscovites.
Tho in their quarrels they seldom break out into horrid Oaths and
Imprecations, yet upon Trivial occasions, especially in their dealings, they
stick not to swear at every word, and have incessantly in their mouths their Po
Chrestum (by Christ) making the sign of the Cross at the same time. Perjury is
severely punished, first cruelly whipped, then banished D. of Holstein's Emb.
Trav.

Amonst the Tartars, when a person is dangerously ill, the Moullah comes with
the Alcoran, which he opens and shuts three times, and lays it to his Face, and
upon recovery, it is attributed to the Alcoran, M. Taver.

Mahometans.
The Mahometans never mention the Name of Christ, but with high Reverence and
Respect.

In naming the name of God, they must bow, and add, -- Most high, blessed,
mighty, etc. -- Of Mahomet, they must add, -- May God augment his Graces. -- Of
other Messengers, -- God is satisfied with them. -- Of Other Doctors -- May the
mercy of God rest upon them.

The great Mogul himself would speak most respectfully of our Blessed Savior
Christ, says my Author.

If the Mahometans find a bit of Paper in the the way, they take it up, and put
it in some place of a Wall, because the Name of God is, or may be written in
it: So that the holes of the walls are always to be seen stuck full of them;
for the same reason, they use no Paper when they go to ease themselves: Yet for
all this Reverence they swear by the Name of God at every turn, and speak not
three words without an Vllah, i. e. by God, M. de Thevenot.

A sight, it is no less strange, than ridiculous, to behold the Honor they do
unto the Camel at his return unto Constantinople, which carried their Alcoran
(amongst a Caravan of many thousand Pilgrims, toward Mecha) crowding about
him, as led through the streets, some pulling off his Hairs, and preserving
them, as Relics, some kissing, others with his Sweat besmearing their Eyes and
Faces; and at last cutting him into little gobbets, and giving thereof to eat
to their Friends and Families, Sandy's Trav. l. 2.

Modern Heathens.
The Bramins forbear Swearing and Blasphemy. Sir Th. Herb.

The Japanese's hate Calumniators, Swearers and Gamesters. Mandelslo.

The Gaurs, when they put any one to their Oaths, Swear them before their
Sacred Fire, for which they have a very great Veneration. M. Tavernier.

Reverence to God's Name, Swearing, etc.
Jews.
THE Jews permit not their Children to use the name of God till seven years
old, that they may retain a greater Veneration for that Holy and Reverend name;
and therefore the first Salutations of Children are plainly, May you have a
good day, I wish you a good Sabbath, etc. Dr. Addison.

The Esseans account every word they speak, of as much force, as if they had
bound it with an Oath; and they shun Oaths worse than Perjury; for they account
him a Liar, who needs to call God to Witness. Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.

Christians.
(...) -- For how (says St. Chrysoston) is it not Absurd, that a Servant
should not dare to call his Master by name, or bluntly and ordinarily to
mention him; yet that we slightly and contemptuously should in our Mouth toss
about the Lord of Angels? -- How is it not Absurd, if we have a Garment better
than the rest, that we forbear to use it continually; but in the most slight
and common way to wear the Name of God? Dr. Barrow 's Sermon.

How grievous Indecency is it, at every turn to Summon our Maker, and call down
Almighty God from Heaven, to attend our Pleasure, to vouch our idle Prattle, to
second our giddy Passions, to concern his Truth, Justice, Power, in our trivial
Affairs. Idem.

What Presumption is it, with unhallowed Breath, to vent and toss that Great
and Glorious, Holy and Reverend, Fearful and terrible Name, of the Lord our
God, the Great Creator, the Mighty Sovereign, the Dreadful Judge of all the
Word? what Name which all Heaven with profoundest Submission does adore: which
the Angelical Powers, the Brightest and Purest Seraphim, without hiding their
Faces and reverential Horror, cannot utter or hear; the very thought whereof,
should strike an awe through our Hearts, the mention whereof should make any
Sober Man to tremble? Idem.

A good Man should (...), and exhibit (...). Idem ex Clem. Al.Strom. 7. etc.

Chrysostom preached many Sermons to the People of Antioch against Swearing;
but they being weary of the Subject, asked, when he would leave off Preaching?
To whom he answered, When you leave off Swearing: Would you have the Plaster
taken away before the Wound be cured? Calamy a Fast-Sermon.

The best way to attest the Truth of what is spoken, is to call God to Witness;
this is the Form of Swearing which we Christians use. Athan. Apol. ad Constant.
Imp.

St. Chrysostom says, It was customary to come into the Church, and to Swear
upon the Communion Table, taking the Holy Gospels into their hands, Dr. Cave.

St. Basil exhorts them that had Sworn rashly, or in unlawful cases, to
Repentance; appoints Perjured Persons Banishment from Communion eleven Years.
Idem.

Vegetius ( de Re Milit. l. 1.) a Heathen Author, living in the time of
Valentinian Jun. sets down this as the Military Oath of the Christians -- By
God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and the Majesty of the Emperor. Idem.

Novatus taking his Followers Hands, wherein they held the Sacramental Elements
-- caused them to Swear by the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
they would not desert him. Eusebius.

Pope Pius appointed forty days Penance with Bread and Water (and seven Years
following) for a Perjured Person that was Free; three Forties (or Lents)
Penance and lawful Holy Days for him that was bound. Carrauz. Decr. Pii Pap.

If any Swear by God's Hair, or Head, -- if in Orders, let him be deposed; if a
Layman, Excommunicated, etc. Idem, ibid.

Dr. Tailor to the Bishop of London, degrading him, -- When the Bishop
(according to the Formality) should have struck him on the Breast with his
Crozier, and his Chaplains dissuaded him from it, because he would strike
again: Yes, said he, by St. Peter will I, for it is the Cause of Christ. And
again, to Mr. Bradford the same Doctor relating the Story, told him, I have
f^ightned the Bishop of London, for that his Chaplains thought I would have
struck him, and by my Troth, quoth he, (rubbing his hands) I made him believe I
would do so indeed. Fox's Martyrol.

Papists.
Bishop Bonner swore frequently by God, by St. Mary, by St. Augustine, by the
Blessed Sacrament, Allhallows, by my Faith, Troth, Ibid.

Common Swearing among the Papists a venial Sin. Aug. de Clavasio.

Mahometans.
Vallahi or Tallahi ( i. e. by God) a usual Form of Swearing among the
Mahomitans. About ten years ago, an Arabian, well known to me, Ahmed Ibn Ali, a
Suliensian, was reproved by the Famous Golius for Swearing, took it well, and
gave thanks for reducing him from that Pernicious and Damnable Custom.
Hottinger.

Ancient Heathens.
(...). An Oath is a most dreadful thing. Arist.

Reverence an Oath. [(...)] Pythag. aur. Carm.

The best way of observing an Oath is, if you neither use it frequently, nor
rashly, nor in common matters, nor for the amplification of Speech, nor
confirmation of a Relation, -- but in things necessary and solemn, and when
there is no other way to procure Credit, etc. Hierocl. in Curm. Pyth. vid.
Isocr. ad Demonic. Sect. 30.

With the Scythians the Swearer's Punishment was loss of his Estate; with the
Persians Bondage; with the Grecians cutting off the Ears; with the Romans
throwing down a steep Rock. Anon. With the English now, Payment of one Shilling.

Praying unto God.
Jews.
THE Jews (in Barbary) resort to Prayer thrice every day in their Oratories:

1. At Sunrising -- for two hours together, which is called Tephillah Sabarit,
or Morning Prayer.

2. About three a clock in the Afternoon, which is called Tephillah Minscha, or
Evening Prayer.

3. After Sunset, which is Tephillah arvit, or Night Prayer. These two last
Services are not (both of them) above an hour long. Dr. Addison.

They pray also to the Angels in their Retirements, for the necessary
Evacuations of their Body, thus, Most Holy, and most Glorious Ministers of the
most High, I beseech you keep, preserve and help me; wait till I come in and go
out; for this is the Custom and way of all Men. Idem.

There is an Univesal Agreement among them, that they ought every day to say
over a hundred Benedictions, viz. At washing in the Morning 23, at entrance
into the Synagogue six, at putting on the Zizith one, at putting on the
Tephillim one, at every one of the three Offices in the Synagogue eighteen,
three after Dinner, two before Night, at going to sleep two, and as many at
Dinner and Supper. Idem.

The Pharisees spent one quarter of the day in Prayer. Dr. Hall.

Christians.
St. James the Just went daily to the Church, and there kneeling on the
Pavement prayed, so that his Knees became hard and brawny as Camels. Dr. Cave
out of Eusebius.

Nazianzen says, his Mother Gorgonia prayed so often, that her Knees were hard,
and did as it were stick to the Ground. Idem.

The Barking of Dogs, the Bellowing of Oxen, the Grunting of Hogs, pleases God
better, than the Canting of Luxuriant Clergymen. Hibernic. ex August.

Thou did afflict me with Pain of the Teeth, and when it was so great that I
could not speak, it came into my Mind, to admonish all my Friends present to
Pray for me unto the God of all Health: And I wrote this in Wax, and gave it to
them to be read: As soon as we had kneeled down, the Pain went away. -- I was
amazed, I confess, my Lord, my God, for I had never found any thing like it in
all my Life. August. l. 9. Conf. c. 4.

Constantine the Great caused his Image in all his Gold Coins, Pictures and
Statues, to be represented as a Person Praying, with Hands spread abroad, and
Eyes lift up to Heaven. Dr. Cave.

Mr. Ignatius Jurdaine Merchant, was wont for many years, even to old Age,
Winter and Summer, to rise between two and three a clock to his private
Devotions, continuing there till six, and then proceeded to Family Duties.
Clark.

Myconius sending in a Letter to Luther, that he was Sick, not unto Death, but
unto Life; Luther wrote to him again, that he prayed that he and others his
Friends might survive him, and that he might not be left alone with his dry,
exhausted and wearied Body, to combat with Devils here below, -- Hoc peto, hoc
volo, and fiat voluntas mea. Amen. which accordingly came to pass, for Myconius
recovered of his Consumption, and lived six years after: Insomuch that Justus
Jonas says of Luther, Potuit quod voluit, Fuller 's Lives.

Persians.
The Persians never undertake any thing, but they pronounce the Bismilla, (in
the name of God, and sometimes say Behnam ohuki namesch herez Tzanehafr, i. e.
in his Name, who is the Refuge and Protection of Souls: They express a great
Attention and Devotion in their Prayers. I have seen them in their Metschid at
Ispahan, when they had their Eyes so fastened on the Ground, or lift up to
Heaven, that they would not take any notice of one. D. of Holst. Emb. Trav. p.
279.

Mahometans.
The Mahometans or Infidels of Indostan or East India; whatever Impediments
they have at home or abroad, they constantly Pray five times every day, viz. at
six, nine and twelve in the Morning, and three and six in the Afternoon. The
Mogul, the Prince himself, does so, and the meanest Shepherd that waits on his
Flock in the Field; and if they can, they perform their Devotions in their
Moschits or Churches. Most go to Prayers every day, at least to those of Noon,
Quindy and Akscham.

A Mohammedan told a Reverend Divine of England, Resident of the Great Mogul's
Court, -- There was, said he, a most Devout Mussel-man, who had his Habitation
in a great City, where Mahomet was zealously professed, who for many years
together spent his whole days in the Mosquit, not minding the World at all, so
that this Family was become very Poor ready to Famish. -- He leaves them one
morning in this low Condition, takes a solemn Leave of his Wife and Children,
resolving for his part to go and Pray and Dye in the Mosquit, if no Relief
came, and leaving his Family to Famish at home. But that very day there came to
his House a beautiful young Man, (as he appeared) who gave to his Wife a
considerable quantity of Gold, bound up in a white Napkin, telling her, that
God had now remembered her Husband, and sent him his Pay for his Constant Pains
in Devotions -- etc. Her Husband, at his return at night, brought nothing --
but a little Grit or Sand, which he opened to show, and it was all turned into
precious Stones, etc. the seventh part of which he gave to the Poor; (for said
he) a Musselman is very Charitable -- Adding, If we do not forget God, he will
not forget us. This Story seems Incredible, but it is related by the nameless
Author of Indost. and E. Ind.

The Moors (about Fesse) in the beginning of any Labor or Journey, looking up
to Heaven, with a low Voice say, Bismillah, i. e. in the Name of God. Morden.

In passing by one another, they say -- Salem alleque, Peace be with thee; at
the hearing of one Sneeze, -- God be your Keeper. Idem.

The Moors Pray five times a day, first about Noon, second, about three a
clock, third, at Sunset, fourth, a little within Night, fifth, a little before
day in Winter. Idem.

When the Mahometans mount on Horseback, Play or Eat, -- they say Bismillah.
M. de Thev.

In some parts of Cathay the Monks Pray on strings full of Nut-shells. Rosse.

Chinese, Papists, Persians and Muscovites, in Praying, use Beads, though not
all, nor always.

The more Puritanical sort of Turks have a Tesbuch, a kind of Chaplet, or
String of Beads, consisting of 99 Beads, upon each of which they repeat certain
words out of the Alcoran. Tavern.

In Ceylon also they pray on Beads. Rosse.

Gaurs.
The Gaurs, when they pray, tie a Handkerchief about their Mouths, as if they
were afraid their words should mix with the Air, and receive any impurity. M.
Tavern. l. 4. c. 8.

Persians.
The Persians cannot say their Prayers when they have any Gold about them;
Idem. l. 5. c. 10. and therefore they never wear Jewel, or Ring of Gold,
because it would be troublesome to pull 'em off, and lay them up so many times
a day.

Muscovites.
They, in their Prayers, consider the Virgin Mary, the Evangelists, Apostles,
and an infinite number of other Saints, not only as simple Intercessors, (as
the most intelligent affirm) but also as Causes and Co-operators of their
Salvation. There is no Muscovite but gives his Saints, and their Images, the
honor due only to God. D. of Holst. Ambass. Trav.

Abyssines.
They pray for the dead, e. g. Remember, Lord, the Souls of thy Servants, and
our Father, Abba Matthew, and the rest of our Fathers, Abba Salama, and Abba
Jacob, etc. And again; Remember, Lord, the Kings of Ethiopia, Abreha, Atzbeha,
Caleb, and Gebrak Meschah, etc. Release, O Lord, our Fathers, Abba Antony, and
Abba Macarius, etc.

From whence it may be fairly Justified, That they admit Purgatory; which yet
in words they constantly deny. But through Simplicity and Ignorance, they are
not constant to themselves; for at another time they implore the Intercession
of the same Souls. Job Ludolph.

Armenians.
The Armenians pray not for the dead, imagining, that 'till the general Day of
Doom, they are without either Joy or Torment. Sir Tho. Herb.

So soon as the Armenians discover the Mountain Ararat, they kiss the Earth,
and lifting up their Eyes to Heaven, say their Prayers. M. Taver. Book 1. c. 4.

Calvinists.
Corderius taught his Scholars to pray twice or thrice every day, besides their
Prayers at rising in the Morning, and lying down at Night; and also, constantly
at Meat: And, moreover, advised them sometime to retire by themselves, to
secret Prayer. Corder. Collo.

Papists.
Margaret of Valois, not long since Queen of France, built her a Chapel,
provided her Chaplains, and large Endowments for them; that so, perpetually,
day and night, every hour successively, without intermission, by some one or
other, there might intercession be made to God for her, unto the World's end;
(a thing which her self had little thought of in her lifetime, as having other
business to think on.) Mr. John Hales.

Formosa.
After the Priesttesses (Juibs) have fed heartily on the Offerings, they
proceed to Prayer, which is long, joined with several distracted motions of the
Eyes, 'till falling to the ground, they make dreadful cries and shrieks; then
lie immovable on the ground extended, saying, in this posture the Gods
communicate their mind to them; then they get up to the top of the Pagod, and
walking from one end to the other, pray again; them strip stark naked, show
their privy Parts to their Gods, striking them with their hands, then call for
Water to wash themselves, in the Face of the Congregation. Ibid.

Jews and Greeks.
Neither Jews nor Greeks use the posture of Kneeling in Prayer.

Praising of Him, Singing Psalms, etc.
Jews.
THE Jews, at the pronouncing of Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, jump up three
times. They begin their public Service with the Psalms, Ps. 3.7. etc. Dr.
Addison.

Christians.
S. Augustine says, We have the Precept and Example of our Savior, and his
Apostles, for singing in our Assemblies. -- And he says, The custom of
Churches were very different about this Matter. In the Churches of Africa, (he
says,) They confined themselves to the Prophetical Hymns; for which they were
upbraided by the Donatists, as too grave and formal: But he allows Singing for
one of the Solemn Parts of Divine Service; with which he joins Reading of
Lessons, Preaching and Prayer, either aloud by the Bishop, or in common, by the
Deacons giving notice. Dr. Stilling. Orig. Sacr.

Pliny reports it, ( l. 10. Ep. 97.) as the main part of the Christians
Worship, that they met together before Day, to join in singing Hymns to Christ,
as God. Dr. Cave.

Concerning Singing, see more in Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation, Fox's
Martyrol. Dr. Jackson's Notes on the O. T. Calvin's Instit. Strabo, Walafride,
The Christian's Companion, etc.

Chrysostom says, That one may be said to sing, (...), though all sing after
him, so that the Voice comes, as it were, from one Mouth. Hom. 36. in 1 Ep. ad
Cor. p. 487.

Athanasius commanded the Deacon to read the Psalm, and the People to answer;
For his Mercy endures for ever. Apol. de Fug. p. 717.

Sozomen says, They who were skilful, were Praecentors, and that the multitude
(...), l. 5. c. 19.

In the constitutions Apostol. it is adjoined, that one should sing the Psalms
of David, and that the People should sing after the ends of the Verses, (...),
l. 2. c. 57.

S. Basil says, In his time they did (...), -- And then permitting one to
begin the Melody, (...). Ep. 63. ad Cler. Neoc.

S. Austine, speaking of the time when he was Baptized of Milain, concludes
thus: -- How much did I weep at thy Hymns and Songs, being sharply moved with
the sweet Melody of thy Church! Those words flowed into my Ears, and thy Truth
melted into my heart, and thence bubbled up an Affection of Piety, and my Tears
run, and I was well-pleased therewith. l. Conf. 9. c. 6, 7.

How the same S. Augustine was passionately moved to Grief and Indignation
against the Manichees, in reading the fourth Psalm, v. l. Conf. 9. c. 4.
wishing that they might have been privately present, to have seen him reading,
himself not knowing that they were present, etc. And how also, he was angry
with himself for past Faults; and all others that loved Vanity.

Theodosius Junior, rising early every Morning, together with his Sisters,
interchangeably sung Psalms of Praise. Dr. Cave.

S. Hierom, speaking not of the Universal Church in Solemn Assemblies, but what
the Companies of solitary Virgins are wont to do of their own accord, says; --
In the Morning, at 3, 6, 9 a Clock, at Evening, and at Midnight, they sing
Psalms, only on Sundays, they went into the Church. Bullinger's Decads.

Sometimes they had Dances in their Churches, and Chapels of the Martyrs.
Theodor. l. 3. c. 22.

Praise, Thanksgiving.
Protestants.
THE Protestants in England, and Holland, and Germany, (in some places) use
Organs. In the Canton of Bern, they use Trumpets in singing Psalms. Conr.
Werndly Liturg. Tigur.

The Lutherans in Swedeland, etc. have Organs and Bells in all their Churches.

Mangi.
The Sick here vow to offer their Blood to their Idols, if they recover; to
which also they Sacrifice Rams with black Heads; which, with spiced Drinks,
they eat, with singing and dancing. P^^quet broke open. Vol. 2.

Cathay.
The Tartars here, place their Idols at the entrance of their Tents, and to
them they offer the primitiae of Milk, Meat, Drink, and the Hearts of Beasts;
all which they place before their Silken and Felt-Gods all Night, and eat in
the Morning. Packet broke open, Vol. 2.

Tunquin.
The King of Tunquin, after the Solemnities of his Inauguration, takes his time
to go and give thanks to his false Deities, for his coming to the Crown, when
the Moon first changes; shutting himself up for the first Week with the Bonzes,
and living in common with them, with a great deal of Frugality: During which
time he visits the Hospitals, gives orders for the building a Pagod, etc.
Tavern. Col. of Relat. etc.

Armenians.
The Armenians sing and play on Cymbals, while the Communion is Administered. D.
of Holst. Amb. Travels. p. 208.

After Dinner they go to Church, where they sing certain Hymns. Tavern. l. 1.
c. 4. p. 18.

Mahometans.
After Perfuming of their Head, Beard, and Turbant, with a Fumigation of Lignum
Aloes, the Mahometans lift up their hands on high, and cry Elmendela, i. e.
Thanks be to God. Tavern.

Ac^^et VIII. Emperor of the Turks, upon Tidings of a Peace made with the
Christians at Buda, with a number of Janissaries, and others, in great
Magnificence, went to the Church, to give thanks to his Prophet Mahomet.
Knolls. p. 1269.

Moors.
The Moors (about Fez) On the finishing a work or Journey, say, Ham der illah,
i. e. Thanks be unto God. Morden Geogr.

The Mahometans, at perfuming their Beards, cry, Illemed Illah, i.e. God be
thanked, Tavernier.

When they meet a Friend upon the Road, they say, El ham dillah al salam tipsi,
i. e. God be praised that I see thee well, Idem.

Among the Moors some of their Religious Santoes (much more horrible than the
Dervises) clothed as the Dancers, and have Felt-caps, as they; pray oftener,
viz. On Tuesdays and Thursdays, about 10 or 11 a Clock at Night. All meet at
the call of him who goes to the Tower, sing some Verses of the Alconan, which
they often repeat, so that they have enough to last them till day, clapping
hands, playing on Drums and such Instruments: About the middle of their Singing
they rise upright, and put themselves into a ring one behind another; he who is
chief sings some Prayers aloud, the rest answer Allah, i. e. God; making, at
every time, a low bow, and this with such straining, without intermission, and
such bending of their Body, that they look like Men Possessed; especially at
the latter end, when the Drum beats faster, and the rest say Allah to every
stroke of the Drum; so that they foam like mad-dogs; some void Blood at the
Mouth: This lasts about half an hour; but toward the end they say nothing hut
Hou, i. e. He, as wanting strength to say Allah. Then they rest, sing other
Prayers; and toward the end start up again, and begin their sweet Music; and
this three times: I have often been stunned with this at Rusetto. In their
Processions you always see some of these Fools foaming at the Mouth, and with
Eyes shut, pronouncing the word Hou, having a man on each side to support them
from falling and they who can keep longest in that ecstasy, are the greatest
Saints. M. de Theven.

Americans.
The Americans used to sing the Devil's Praises, to dance about Fires, which
they made in honor of him, Rosse.

In Virginia they Worshipped with Praying, Singing and Offerings, and Dancing
about Fires, with Howling and Rattles, beating the ground with Stones, Offering
of Tobacco, Deer-suet and Blood on the Altars, Idem.

French Protestants, Dutch, etc.
I have observed before, that the Protestants of France, the Germans, and they
of Zurick and Switzerland are noted for their pleasant singing of Psalms; which
is to be imputed generally to the care taken in setting them to School to Learn
singing by Notes, as well as Reading; and methinks their example might provoke
us to emulation herein: The time and money would be better spent by Parents and
Children, than in some of those little Fancies, which our Gentry account
Breeding. It would look more like a Masculine and Christian Prudence to
consecrate our joy and Music to the purposes of Religion, the Beauty of
Holiness, and the Honor of our Maker and Redeemer; than to spend (as we
commonly do) all our stock of Art and Mirth upon sensual Amors and
Entertainments; And to make this exercise more smooth and melodious, let every
one learn to read, and carry his book with him to Church, and let the Psalms be
notified (as in the Palatinate on the Church-door) beforehand, or else the
Congregation accustomed to a certain small number of Psalms, which the people
may as easily get without Book, as the Maids and Children do Ballads and
Penny-Songs. And tho I have often pleaded for the Lawfulness, and even
usefulness of Organs, yet methinks since they suppose a weakness and want of
help for that Devotion, and Vocal is commonly preferred before Instrumental
Music, I could wish our Vocal might be so sweet and excellent, if possible, as
to shame all Organs out of Churches.

Abassines.
I had almost forgot to have mentioned the Abassines here, who (as I have said
before) have in their Festival Solemnities their Singing Priests, Cymbals,
Morrice-bells, Kettle-drums, Singing and Dancing and Skipping, as if they would
make the Floor ring again, and clapping Hands to the God of Jacob. See the
Greeks Feasting.

Fear of God alone.
Jews.
THE Old Testament gives us several Examples of the Jewish Zeal in this
respect, which I shall not trouble my self to enumerate in this place: So does
the Apocrypha, especially the story of the seven Sons. Josephus also seems to
bid pretty fair for a consideration under this head, I mean, him whom Vespasian
carried along with him Captive from Palestine, and who is the author of the
History of the Jewish wars. But as for the Modern Jews I have little to say; to
their own master they stand or fall.

Christians.
Cyprian commends Cornelius for taking the Bishopric of Rome upon him, when
Decius the Emperor had threatened heavy severities to the Christian Ministers,
and would sooner endure a Corrival in the Empire, than a Bishop at Rome.

Maris Bishop of Chalcedon -- to Julian the Apostate upbraiding him with his
blindness; I thank God (says he) who has taken away my sight, that I might
not behold such a wretch as thou art.

Vettius Epagathus desiring leave to plead the Christians cause (seeing them
dragged before the Judgment seat) was thereupon seized himself by the
president. Dr. Cave.

Poland.
In Poland the Gentlemen and Nobility, when the Gospel is read in the Churches,
draw their swords, in token that they are ready to defend it with their lives.
S. Clark.

Muscovites.
One Juan Neronou, a Protopope of Casauskey, not long since began to inveigh
against the honor done to Images, charging those who did worship colors and
wood with Idolatry: But the Patriarch soon degraded him, and shut him up in a
Monastery upon the river Wolga. D. of Holstein's Emb. Trav.

They tell of one Sudatworets Philip Metropolite, who lived in the reign of the
Tyrant John Basilouits, and grew famous for the remonstrances he made to that
Prince of his wicked life; the Tyrant troubled thereat, sent him into a
Monastery from Moscou: but from thence he made his pen do, what his tongue
could not, and from time to time represented the Judgments of God to the eyes
of the Great Duke so pressingly, that the other not able to endure any longer,
sent one of his servants to strangle him; the Executioner found him ready
enough to dye, with this desire only, that instead of strangling with a Cord,
he would run him with a knife into the heart: which he accordingly did. The
Monks of the Monastery put him into the Catalogue of Holy Martyrs. Idem.

Heavenly-Mindedness.
Jews.
NEither can I here give the Modern Jews any Panegyric; (their garments seem
rather to smell of the field, and their devotions appear too gross and
scandalous, and their lives spotted with covetousness:) and as to the ancient
Jews, the history of them is so full and authentic in sacred scripture, that
to repeat it over here, were but Actum agere. Only this I must needs confess,
by their hundred benedictions which they are to rehearse every day, as for the
Crowing of the Cock, the appearance of the morning, the putting on their
Clothes, washing themselves, eating, drinking, for every particular dish
brought to table, etc. they seem to aim at a perpetual and constant Tenor of
Devotion; and if it be more than washing the outside of the platter, it is well:
but this is certain, their hopes creep upon the Ground, and to this day they
expect a Messiah that shall restore the Terrene Kingdom to Israel.

Christian.
Nazianzen says, his sister Gorgonia did not more seem to be good, then really
strive to be so, that she left nothing to the Prince of this World, but
transferred all into the safe Treasuries above; leaving nothing to the Earth,
but her body; changing all for the hopes of a better life: bequeathing no other
Riches to her children, but an excellent Pattern. in laud. Gorg. Orat. 11.

Domitian the Emperor enquiring, and upon search finding out the Nephews of
Judas, the brother of our Lord, of the Race and Posterity, which he desired to
extirpate, asked what possessions they had? They told him, they had between
them 39 Acres of Land, to the value of about 9000 Pence, out of which they paid
him Tribute, and maintained themselves with their own hard labor, showing him
their hard and callous hands: Then asking further of Christ and his Kingdom?
They answered, his Empire was not of this World, but Heavenly and Angelical, to
take place at the end of the world, when he should come with Glory to Judge both
Quick and Dead, etc. Whereupon the Emperor despising them on account of their
meanness, let them go without any severity showed to them, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 20.

Origin refusing the maintenance of others, Sold his Books to one that was to
allow him four Oboli a day; the day he spent in laborious exercises and tasks,
the most part of the Night in study, always remembering that of our Savior, not
to have two coats, nor to wear shoes, nor anxiously to care for the morrow.

Clemens Alex. speaks against -- Ivory Hafts, or garnished with Silver;
Ivory-Tables; Lamps of the Goldsmiths making; and Ivory Bed, or Couch; Purple
Carpets, etc. Paedag. l. 2. c. 3.

Give us this day our daily bread, i. e. says Gregory Nyssen, not Delicacies,
Riches, Purple Vestures, Golden Ornaments, Pearls, Jewels, Silver Vessels,
Marble Pillars, Silk Carpets, Choirs of Music, etc.

Renounce the Devil and all his works, the pomps and pleasures, etc. i. e. The
sights, and sports of the Theater, and such like Vanities, Cyril.

Tertullian tells his Adversaries, all the Plagues God sent in this World,
could not hurt them, because they had no other concernment in this world but as
soon as they could, to get out of it, Ap. c. 41.

Hierom tells of Marcella, that she lived so, as always believing she should
immediately die; and never put off her Garments, but it put her in mind of her
Grave and Winding Sheet.

Tertullian tells of a Christian Woman, possessed by the Devil at the Theater;
and being asked, how the durst enter into a Christian Woman? He made Answer,
that he found her on his own ground.

Papists.
S. Francis renounced the World; and when a Priest to whom he offered it, would
not take his Money, he cast it away, and entered into a Vow of perpetual
Poverty, Baker's Chron.

S. Francis Sales speaking of Cordial and Mental Prayer, advises thus; --
Begin all thy Prayers, mental or Vocal, with the presence of God; keep this
Rule without exception; and in short time thou will perceive, what profit thou
shall reap by it. And again, having finished (says he) this mental Prayer,
take heed lest thou give thy heart a jog; lest thou spill the Balm, which thou
have received, etc. keep thy self silent for some time, and fair and softly
remove thy Heart from thy Prayers to thy worldly business. Introd. to a Devout
Life.

Frequency and Diligence at Church.
Jews.
BEfore the Sun go down, the Women kindle their Sabbatarian Lights; which is an
old Custom observed by Persius, Satyr 5. The reason is, because the first Woman
extinguished the Light of Man by her Disobedience. Rosse.

The Jews make haste to the Synagogue, but go backward and slowly home. Dr.
Addison.

In Jerusalem are said to have been 480 Synagogues. Purchase.

The Jews are rather too Precise in their Preparation for the Synagogue than
too Remiss; they Pray in order thereto betimes in the Morning; for the earlier
the Orison, they think, the more acceptable to God. It Is their common saying,
In Winter they raise the day, in Summer the day raises them. Some rise early
every Morning to lament the Ruins of Jerusalem: It is a general Tradition among
them, Heaven-gates are shut up at night, after midnight they are opened, and
the noise of opening them awakens the Cocks, and the Cock ought to awaken us to
Prayers by his crowing; and in their public Liturgy they give thanks for this
good Office of the Cock. On Sabbath-mornings they creep under the Counterpane,
when they put on their Shifts, that the beams of the House may not be privy to
their Nakedness: Before they go to the Synagogues, at leaving their Apartments,
they bow their Heads moderately in Lamentation for the Temple: They use all
needful Evacuations; they wash; make haste to the Synagogue. Dr. Addison.

Christians.
Chrysostom ( Hom. 56. Tom. 1.) says of the Church at Antioch, that they would
set aside all Affairs at home, to come and hear Sermons at Church: -- That it
was the Honor of the City (not their rich Suburbs, brave Houses, and gilded
Dining-rooms) but a diligent and attentive People; that it was his great
Encouragement to see such a famous and cheerful Concourse, a People so well
ordered and desirous to hear. Dr. Cave.

Origin in his Sermons, reproved no fault so much, as Absence from Church.

The Primitive Christians had several Sermons in the same Church Morning and
Afternoon.

The Swedes have three Services every Sunday. The Switzers likewise a daily
Sermon.

Jacobites.
The Jacobites in Socotera Island have Altars in their Churches, which they
enter not, but stand in the Porch. Rosse.

Armenians.
The Bells all rang about midnight, and every one rose to go to Church: I
believe it was more than usual, because it was Shrove-tide; for both the Office
and the Missa were concluded before break of day. Says M. Tavernier concerning
the Armenians in the Convent of St. Stephen's, l. 1. c. 4. p. 18.

Lutherans.
The Protestants in the Palatinate have two Sermons on Sunday, and every first
Wednesday of the Month one.

Heathens.
At Hierapolis none, who had looked upon a dead Corpse, or in whose House any
had died, might be admitted into the Temple for thirty days. Rosse out of
Lucian.

In Siam every King of the Country is bound to erect a Temple, with high
Steeples and a multitude of Idols. Idem.

At Jagrenate in India is a great Pagod, where the Arch-Bramin keeps his
Residence, wherein is a great Idol called Resora, with two Diamonds for his
Eyes, and one about his Neck, the least of which weighs about forty Carats;
Bracelets about his Arms, sometimes of Pearls, sometimes of Rubies: The
Revenues of which Pagod are sufficient to feed 15 or 20000 Pilgrims every day;
which is a number often seen there, that Pagod being the greatest place of
Devotion in all India; it maintains above 20000 Cows: That which makes it so
Rich, is the vast Alms that are continually bestowed by so incredible a
Multitude as comes from all parts. Tavernier, Part 2. l. 3. c. 9.

Greeks.
The Greeks in Cyprus upon Sundays and Holydays rise between one and two of the
clock in the Morning to sing Matins; for which purpose there is a Clerk that
goes from Door to Door, and knocks with a Hammer to wake the People, and then
cries out with a loud Voice, Christians, go to Church. Tavernier, l. 2. c. 6.
p. 81.

They seem to me scarcely excusable from a Capital Sin, that build or adorn
Churches and Monasteries with immoderate Expenses, when so many living Temples
of Christ are Poor, etc. Erasmus.

Muscovites.
The Muscovites go thrice to Church on Sundays and Festivals, to Mattins
(Sasterim) before day, to the Obedny at noon, to Vespers or Wadschemi in the
Evening: They stand all the Service-time, or kneel, incessantly bowing before
the Images, etc.

Whereas in my former Impression of these Travels I said, that in the City and
Suburbs of Moscou there were above 1500 Churches and Chapels; and John Lewis
Godfrey, Author of the Archontologia Cosmica, thinks that number incredible: I
must needs acknowledge that I was much mistaken, and now affirm for certain,
there are above 2000, for no Lord but has his private Chapel, nor any Street
but has many of them, though most of Wood, and very small ones, but fifteen
foot square. D. of Holstein 's Embass.

Indian Christians.
The Indian Christians, though heir Churches are low and ill furnished, yet
they are neat and sweetly kept, matted, and without painted (which the Greek
Churches abound with.) They assemble cheerfully, and at their entering shut
their Eyes, the better to contemplate the Exercise they come about, with their
own Unworthiness: Kneeling they look toward the Altar, near which the Priest
is seated; him they salute with humble Reverence, who returns his Blessing with
the uplifting of his Hands and Eyes. Sir Thomas Herbert.

Mexicans.
In Mexico were thirteen Temples. Purchase.

Mahometans.
In Fez are 700 Mosquits, some garnished with many Pillars and Fountains of
Marble; each Temple has a Priest to say Service, and look to the Churches
Revenue. Rosse.

Tunquinese.
In Tunquin the great Cities have several Pagods, and hardly a Town or Village
but has one; and for every Pagod at least two Bonzes and two Says; but some
Pagods maintain forty Bonzes and as many Says. Tavernier's Collect.

Pegu.
In Pegu they are magnificent in their Pagods, having some of beaten Gold; in
the Varella or Temple of their King there are three of Silver, and one of Massy
Gold, in the shape and proportion of a Man, etc. Packet broke open, Vol. 2.

Circassia.
They have one thing remarkable, that they never enter their Churches, till
they resolve to have off Vice; that is, till after forty years of Age; after
which time they rob no more. Ibid.

German Protestants.
Those of the Palsgrave's Country had each Sunday two Sermons (the absent first
admonished by the Clergy, the next time the Civil Magistrate was called to
help.) Those of Geneva -- in the Churches of their Cities every Sunday four
Sermons: Those of Breme -- three, of which one was Catechetical. Mr. Hale 's
Letter from the Synod of Dort to Sir D. Carleton L. Embass.

Papists.
What meant sundry Ancient Councils, as the Eleventh of Tolet in Spain, yea
even of Trent it self, to -- enjoin frequent Preaching, calling for more than
any Man almost is able to perform? Anonym.

Catechizing.
Jews.
COncerning the care which the Jews now take in Catechizing their Children, see
afterward, under the Title of Good Children.

Christians.
8. Clemens praises the Corinthians, that they took care to admonish their
young Men, to follow things modest and comely; and exhorts them to instruct the
Younger, to make their Children Partakers of the Discipline of Christ. Dr. Cave.

Constantine's first and greatest care toward his Sons, was, to secure the
Happiness of their Souls, by sowing the Seeds of Piety in their Minds; which he
did partly himself, by appointing Religious Tutors for them; and when he had
taken them into a Partnership of the Government, by private Admonitions, or by
Letters giving them Counsel, etc. This was always the first and chief Point,
That they should prefer the Knowledge and Worship of GOD, the Great King of the
World, before all other advantages, yea, the Empire it self. Idem.

Nazianzen commends his Mother, that not only she her self was brought up under
a Pious Education, but conveyed it down, as a necessary Inheritance to her
Children: Gorgonia being well seasoned with her Instructions and Example; for
she reclaimed her Husband, educated her Children and Nephews, in the ways of
Religion, while she lived; and left this as her last Charge and Request, when
she died. Idem.

The Order of Catechizing in the Primitive Times, is thus delivered, by Mr.
Gabriel Towerson, etc.

1. When any desired to become a Proselyte, inquiry was made, not only into the
Life of the Catechumen, but of those who brought him.

2. Upon Admonition, and a promise of Reformation, he was admitted into the
Rank of Catechumens, by Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, and so passed over to
his Instructor, in a private School, or Auditory.

3. The Catechist entertained him with a long Narration of the Story of the
Bible, from the Creation, to the Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection of our
Savior, etc. closing with the last Jugment, and an Admonition to beware of
False Teachers, and of being scandalized at the ill Lives of some Christians:
The Catechist all this while standing; though S. Austin would have had it
changed into a sitting Posture, to prevent weariness.

4. After this, they were taught particular Points, as of Faith, etc. Then
admitted to the Lessons, and the Expositions of them in public; and lastly, to
the Prayers of the Catechumens.

5. After two, or more Years, they gave up their Names and Petitions to be
Baptized, usually before Easter, and then plied with earnest Exhortations to
Repentance, Fasting, and Prayer.

6. The Apostles, and next the Bishops, were Catechists; afterward the Office
was devolved on others; as Cyprian appointed one Optatus, one not of the
Clergy; Augustine, one Deo-gratias, a Deacon; Demetrius, Bishop of Alexandria,
made Origin, at eighteen Years a Catechist of that Famous School.

In a Synod held at Clovershow, or Clyff, under Cuthbert, Archbishop of
Canterbury, A. C. (...). it was ordained, That those Priests, who did not as
yet understand the Creed, and the Lords Prayer, should both learn themselves,
and teach them to others in the English-Tongue. Spe^m Council. p. 242. Can. 10.

By Canons given under King Edgar, A. C. 967. care was taken, That Children
should be taught their Paternoster, and Credo, by their Parents; else, when
dead, not to be buried in Consecrated Ground, or thought worthy to receive the
Eucharist. Ibid. p. 447. Can. 17.22.

Much the same thing, and in the same words is enjoined amongst the
Ecclesiastic Laws of K. Knute, a. 1032.

A. C. 1548. Archbishop Cranmer compiled a Catechism, dedicates it to the
King, and in his Epistle, complains of the great neglect that had been in
former times, of Catechizing. Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Reformation.

It was the Observation of the Learned King, that ever sat on the English
Throne, That the Cause of the Miscarriage of our People into Popery, and other
Errors, was their ungroundedness in the Points of Catechism. Therefore his said
Late Majesty, gave public Order. for bestowing the latter part of the LORD's
Day, in Familiar Catechism. -- For my part, I have spent the greater half of my
Life, in this station of Holy Service; I thank GOD, not unpainfully, not
unprofitably: But there is no one thing, whereof I repent so much, as not to
have bestowed more Hours in this Public Exercise of Catechism; in regard
whereof, I could quarrel with my very Sermons, etc. Bp. Jos. Hall, Ep. Ded. to
the Old Relig.

Geldria.
One of the Deputies of Geldria, to show the Force of Catechizing, told, That
amongst them, a Minister, who at his first coming to his Living, found all his
Parishioners Papists, so that he must Preach to the Walls, etc. But by going to
their Houses, and expounding the Grounds of Religion, within a Year, he gained
them all to Church. Mr. Hales Let. from Dort, to Sir D. Carleton.

Helvetia.
One of the Helvetian Deputies declared, That with them, all Persons before
Marriage, were to be Examined by the Minister, else their Marriage was to be
deferred. Idem.

A Catechism answering in bare Texts of Scripture, was desired by the
Remonstrants, at the Synod of Dort, to gain Anabaptists, etc. Idem.

Palatinate.
In the Palatinate, in Sundays at one a Clock, the Bell rings duly, to Assemble
the young People together at Church, in order to be Catechized; where Persons
grown up to Men and Women, submit themselves willingly to Catechetical
Instruction, and aged Persons disdain not to give their Presence. The Ordinance
is attended with Psalms and Prayers.

Protestants of France.
The Protestants of France have a large Catechism, which they expound on
Sundays, Afternoon.

Papists.
The Papists have their Catechism likewise, and Catechizing used amongst them.
See afterward, under the Title of Discipline.

Frequency and Devotion at the Sacrament.
Jews.
THey embrace Circumcision for a Sacrament of Divine Institution, and a Sign
and Seal of the Covenant, seldom deferring it longer than the eighth day; doing
it sometimes at home, the Richer in the Synagogue. The chief Officer, or
Circumciser, is Mohel; the Godfather is called Baal-berith, who receives the
Child at the Synagogue-Door, with this Acclamation; Blessed is he, (the Child
or Elias) that comes, and holds the Child to the Mohel, who gives GOD thanks
for this Sacrament given to Abraham: Whilst the Foreskin is taking away, the
Father thanks the Lord, that he gave Abraham a heart to fulfill the Law of
Circumcision, and preserved him to see this his Son circumcised. When he has
done, the Mohel prays that the Child may live to see his Sons thus initiated;
may keep the Law, and do good Works. Then he taking a Cup of Wine, and blessing
God, for creating the Vine, and giving it an exhilarating Virtue, dips the
little Finger of his left Hand thrice in the Wine, and lets it drop in the
Child's mouth, and having tasted it himself, reaches it to the Congregation.
After which, the Mohel gives GOD thanks, that he has Sanctified the Child in
the Womb, and has brought it to the Foederal-Sacrament, etc. Then he takes the
Infant from the Baal-berith, and delivering it to the Father, gives it a Name,
praying for him, etc. Dr. Addison. I forgot to tell, that at the Baal-berth's
giving the Child to the Mohel, is sung Deuteronomy. 15.

They are not peremptory about the precise time of eight Days: I knew one Jacob
Israel Balgara, born in Spain, Circumcised in Barbary, in the fortieth Year of
his Age. They are careful not to delay the first occasion of being Circumcised.
The negligence of Parents herein, is liable to Excommunication. If a Child die
before the eighth day, it is Circumcised at the place of Burial, with only
giving it a Name, etc.

In the celebration of the Passover, they run home from the Synagogues at
Even, where they have in one Dish three Cakes, in another a roasted Leg of Lamb,
with an hard Egg; in another, Pap, and spiced Wine, and diverse Fruits; in
another, Lettice, Parsley, etc. Rosse.

Christians.
Serapion having lapsed, and on his Deathbed desiring Reconciliation, and the
Sacrament, and none being willing to communicate with him, he sent his Boy to
the Pastor, who being also sick, sent the Eucharist by the Boy; after he had
re-received the Sop, he immediately died. Dr. Cave.

Calvinists.
A Gentleman of no mean rank, being a Candidate of Divinity, and assisting at
the Administration of the Sacrament, while he was holding the Cup, fixed his
Eyes upon a Gentlewoman, who was betrothed to him: She, some days after, at her
Father's House, asked him the Reason: He told her, because he had almost a
fancy to drink her Health. Whereupon she began to hate, and utterly detest him;
and the Matter being spread abroad, he was taken Prisoner, and some Weeks after
Condemned and Beheaded. Werndley, in his Liturgia Tigurina.

Heathens, Gaurs.
The Gaurs in Persia, at the Birth of their Children, practice something like
our Baptism; for some days after the Child is born, they wash it with Water,
wherein certain Flowers are first boiled, and during that dipping, the Priest,
who is present, makes certain Prayers. If the Child dye without that washing,
they do not believe, but that it goes to Paradise; but the Parents shall give
an account for their neglect, because the washing increases his Favor in the
sight of GOD. M. Tavern. l. 4.

Armenians.
The Armenians always Communicate at their Marriage, and during the
Administration, they Sing, and play on certain great Cymbals. D. of H. Emb.
Trav.

Those aged Persons, that Communicate not once a Year, and Children dying
unbaptized, are not buried in the Churchyard. Idem. p. 208.

Muscovites.
Those Muscovites, who receive the Sacrament, prepare themselves by
extraordinary Mortifications, for eight days, eating nothing but a hard kind of
Bread, and drinking nothing but Water and Quas, which is so sour, that it
wrings the Belly, and brings to Death's door, and make their Confession. Such
as have taken an Oath lately, in any Lawsuit, or committed Murder, or any
heinous Sin, are debarred 'till death. There are but few, that neglect to
receive the Sacrament at Easter.

Sacraments.
Muscovites.
THE Muscovites think Baptism the only Door through which a Man must enter into
Christ, and so into Paradise. They Baptize their Children as soon as born; if
weak, at home, if well, at Church. The way thus: 1. The Priest receives the
Child at the Church-Door from the Godfather and God-mother, crosses and
blesses him, saying, The Lord preserve thy going out, and coming in; receives
Wax-Candles, uses Incense, etc. 2. Makes a Procession about the Font 3 times,
with the Godfather, etc. the Clerk going before with the Picture of S. John,
the Priest reading in the interim, etc. 3. The Godfathers give the Child's
Name in Writing, which the Priest puts on an Image upon the Child's breast,
saying over certain Prayers. 4. He asks the Godfathers, if the Child believe
in God the Father, Son, and H. Ghost. 5. All turn their Backs upon the Font, to
show their horror for those three Questions that are to be asked afterward,
viz. If he renounced the Devil, his Angels, and his Works? To which the
Godfathers answer three times, and spit so often on the ground. 6. Then they
face about, and the Priest asks, If they will bring up the Child in the true
Greek Religion. 7. He Exorcises the Child, by putting his hand on him, and
blowing three times cross, and saying, Get out of this Child, thou unclean
Spirit. 8. He cuts off a little of the Child's hair, puts it in a Book, dips
the naked Child three times in the Water, In the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. 9. Puts a corn of Salt in the Child's mouth, crosses it on the
Forehead, Hands, Breast, Back, with Oil, puts a clean Shirt on him, saying,
Thou art as clean as this Shirt; hangs a Cross about his Neck, to be kept 'till
Death. D. of Holst. Emb. Trav.


Modern Heathens.
The Baptism of the Persees, in East India, is thus:

So soon as one is born, the Daroo is called upon, who delays not, but being
instructed in the precise time of his Nativity, calculates his Fortune; the
Daroo gives the Name, the Mother assenting to it: This done, they haste
together to the Eggaree, where the Priest puts a little Water into the Bark of
a Tree, the Name of which is Holme, the place it grows in Yezd, not far from
Spahawn (a Tree that Zertoost blessed, a Tree which, they say, yields no
shadow.) The Water out of this hallowed Rind, being pured upon the Infant, a
Prayer is then made, that it may be cleansed from all impurity. -- At 7 years
of Age the Child is Confirmed by the Daroo, and taught to say his Prayers over
the Fire (but with his Mouth and Nostrils covered, lest his sinful Breath
offend the Deity;) after which he drinks a little cold Water, chaws a
Pomegranate-Leaf, washes in a Tank, clothes his Body with a fine Shuddero,
reaching to his Waste; ties a Zone of Cushee about his Loins, woven with Inkle
of the Herboods making, (which he wears ever after,) and after a short Prayer,
that he may never prove an Apostate, but continue a Fire-Worshipper; that he
may eat no Man's Meat, nor drink any Man's Drink, but his own; he is ever after
reputed a Believer. Sir Tho. Herb. Trav. into Persia.

Concerning the Bannyans, see in the First Book, Chapter Sacram.

Amboyna.
In Amboyna, (though Worshippers of the Devil) they Circumcise at Twelve, or
Thirteen Years of Age, etc. Mandelslo.

Sachion.
In Sachion, the Tartars dedicate their Children to their Idols; and on
Festival-Days, Sacrifice Rams for their Childrens Preservation. Rosse.

Guinea.
In Guinea, the Priests besprinkle their Infants, (after Sermon) with Water,
wherein a Newt does swim. Rosse.

Loango.
In Loango, Circumcision is used. Idem.

And in Madagascar also, and Jucatan.

Armenians.
The Armenians thus Consecrate and Administer the Sacrament.

1. They set the Consecrated Bread on the Altar.

2. The Archbishop reads the Mass for the Ceremony.

3. At reading the Gospel they light abundance of Wax-tapers.

4. After the Gospel, several of the Noviciates take Sticks in their hands,
about 5 Foot long, at the end whereof are Latten Plates, with little Bells
hanging about them, which when they are shaked, sound like Cymbals.

5. Other Noviciates hold a Copper Plate in their hands, hung about with Bells,
which they strike one against another, and at the same time the Ecclesiastics
and Laity sing together indifferent harmoniously.

6. All this while the Archbishop has two Bishops on each side of him, who
are in the room of a Dean and a Sub-dean.

7. By and by he goes and unlocks a Window in the Wall on the Gospel side, and
takes out the Chalice where the Wine is.

8. Then with all his Music, he takes a turn about the Altar, on which he at
length sets down the Chalice, saying certain Prayers.

9. With the Chalice in his hand, and the Bread upon the Chalice, he turns
toward the People, who presently Prostrate themselves upon the ground, beat
their Breasts, and kiss the Earth, while the Archbishop pronounces, This is
the Lord who gave his Body and Blood for you.

10. Then he turns toward the Altar, and eats the Bread dipped in the Wine: For
they never drink the Wine.

11. He turns toward the People with the Bread and Chalice in his hand, and
they that will receive, come one after another to the bottom of the Choir, to
whom he gives the Bread dipped, as before. The bread is without Leaven, flat and
round, about as thick as a Crown, and as big as the Host of the Mass, being
Consecrated the day before by the Priest; whose Office it is, M. Tavernier, l.
4. c. 9.

They never put Water in their Wine. When they come to the Communion, the
Archbishop or Priest says these words, I confess and believe that this is the
Body and Blood of the Son of God, who takes away the sins of the World, who is
not only ours, but the Salvation of all mankind. He repeats these words three
times, the people saying after him word for word, ibid.

They give the Communion to Children of two or three Months old, which the
Mothers bring in their Arms, tho many times the Children put it out of their
Mouths again, ibid.

They never administer in Lent, for then they never say Mass, but on Sunday
noon, which they call Low Mass; at which time they never see the Priest, who
has a Curtain drawn before the Altar, and only reads the Gospel and Creed
aloud.

The Armenians Baptize infants on Sunday, except in danger of Life; the Midwife
carrying the Infant to Church, where the Bishop or Priest plunges it naked in
the water, and returns it to the Godfather, going on with his Prayers, and
twists a double string, one of white Cotton, another of red silk, (signifying
the Blood and Water, which flowed from the Body of Christ) about the Child's
neck; then he anoints the Child, and crosses it in the several places where
the Oil dropped, saying, I Baptize thee in the Name of Father, Son and Holy
Ghost. The Forehead, Chin, Stomach, Arm-holes, Hands and Feet are anointed. The
Patriarch makes this Oil every year on the Eve of our Lady in September, after
a small Lent of eight days, of several fragrant Flowers and Aromatical Drugs;
but the principal is called Balassau-Jague, or flower of paradise. When it is
made, two bottles are sent to all the Convents of Asia, Europe and Africa. When
the Ceremony of baptism is over, the Godfather returns home with the Infant in
his arms, and a Taper of white wax in each hand, attended with trumpets, drums,
haut-boys, which go before to the parents house, where the Godfather delivers
the child to the mother, she prostrating her self before the Godfather, and
kissing his feet, he her head; the minister names the child according to the
Name of the Saint of that day in their Almanac: Afterward they Feast. The
poorer sort carry the Child to Church on the Weekdays, without any Ceremony,
with Tears in their Eyes, pretending it to be sickly, and like to die, and so
make no Feasts at all. If Women lie in 15 or 20 days before Christmas, they
often defer till the Festival; then in all the Cities and Villages where the
Armenians live; if there be any river or pond, they spread 2 or 3 Flat-bottom'd
Boats with carpets to walk upon; and in one of them set up an Altar, and in the
Morning by Sunrising all the Armenian Clergy of that Town or City and Parts
adjoining, get into the Boats in their Habits, with the Cross and Banner, dip
the Cross in the Water 3 times, and every time drop the Holy Oil upon it; then
plunge the Infant, and anoint him 3 times, saying, I Baptize, etc. The King of
Persia is many times present at the Ceremony, when performed at Ispahan, riding
on Horseback to the side of the River, with all his Nobility, M. Tavernier l.
4. c. 11.

Bohemians.
-- Neither are we alone in this use ( viz. of kneeling at the Lord's Supper)
the Church of Bohemy allows and practices it, Dr. Hall.

Gilolo and Amboina.
The Inhabitans here Circumcise by only slitting the Prepuce with a Cane
provided for that use, Packet broke open, vol. 2.

Persia.
The Persians dedicate their Children to their Saints, Ibid.

Sanchion.
In Sanchion there are several Monasteries of Idols to whom they Dedicate their
Children, and on Festivals Sacrifice Rams for their preservation, ibid.

Circassians.
The Circassians Baptize and Circumcise, and indeed are composed of both
Christians, Mahometans, Jews and Idolaters, ibid.

Loango.
They are Idolaters and Circumcise, ibid.

Guinea.
In Guinea the Priest sprinkles young boys with Water, in which a Newt swims;
they also use Circumcision, ibid.

Madagascar.
In Madagascar they are Circumcised, ibid.

Mexico.
The Mexicans have among them a kind of Baptism, viz. cutting the Ears and
Members of young Children, washing them presently upon their birth, and putting
a Sword in the Right Hand, and a Target in the left; this for Kings and Noble
Men's Children: But to the Children of the Vulgar they put the marks of their
Callings; and to their Daughters Instruments to Spin, Knit, and Labor. Purchase.

Confession, sorrow for Sin, Mortifications, etc. Absolution.
Jews.
AT the Feast of Expiation or Atonement, every morning during the Feast, they
thrice repeat this Confession, O Lord, thy People have sinned, etc. Instead of
a proper Sacrifice (because they want a place) every Father of a House takes a
Cock, and waves it three times about his Neck, etc. About the middle of their
Service, they make an interruption, and two by two step aside in the Synagogue,
and confess their Sins, each to other; he that Confesses, turns his Face
Northwards, and with great seeming Contrition, bows his Body, beats his Breast,
and readily submits his back to such stripes as his Friend will inflict, who
yet never exceeds the Number of 39. Dr. Addison.

Ancient Heathen.
Diamastigosis was a great Solemnity among the Lacedaemonians, of which
Tertullian makes mention in his Apolog. etc. and Philostratus in the Life of
Apollonius Tianaeus; in which young Gentlemen were beaten with Scourges before
the Altar.

Papists.
The Papists are bound to Confession at least once a year, at, or near Easter,
and to receive the Sacrament, and to undergo the Penance Assigned them by the
Priest; after which Penance the Bishop goes to the Church-door, where the
Penitent lies Prostrate on the ground, saying, Come ye Children, hearken unto
me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Then he kneels and Prays for him,
admonishes him; brings him into Church, where he cuts his Hair and Beard, lays
aside his Penitential Robes, puts on clean Clothes, and receives the Lord's
Supper, Rosse.

Abassines.
The Abassines, being of a soft and mild disposition, for the most part, so
soon as they have committed an offense (that is notable) presently run to their
Confessors, and confessing, that they have sinned, desire to receive the
Communion for the quiet of their Consciences. Ludolph.

Some of the Abassine Monks have invented several ways of Afflicting their
Bodies; as for example, To stand whole days together in cold Water. To gird
their Loins with a heavy Chain. To feed only upon Pot Herbs and Roots. To
thrust themselves into the Clefts of Trees, and upon their closing again, to
suffer themselves to be buried alive. Jo. Ludolph.


Armenians.
I staid at the Three Churches (Egmiasin) with the Patriarch three hours, and
while we were discoursing together, in came one of the Monks of the Convent,
who had not spoken to any person whatsoever in 22 years, by reason of a
Penance, that was imposed upon him: Never did Man appear so meager and
deformed; but the Patriarch sent for him, and by his Authority Commanded him to
break silence, which he did by speaking at the same time, M. Tavernier, l. 1.
c. 3.

Mahometans.
Some Santoes in Egypt go stark naked, many of whom I have seen, without the
least rag to cover their Nakedness, in Winter or Summer: And suffer their Hair
to grow, as long as it can, for greater mortification: Go often to dine with
the great Men of the City, which is accounted a Blessing to the House; but very
Lascivious; many Women kissing their Priapus with great Veneration, M. de Thev.

Some eat Serpents, Idem.

A Santo at Caire had a Turban, as broad as a Millstone, weighing half an
hundred weight: The weight of his Turban made him walk very softly, Idem.

Heathens.
In Narsinga and Bisnagar Pilgrims resort to a certain Idol, either with their
Heads bound, or Ropes about their Necks, or Knives sticking in their Arms and
Legs; which Limbs, if they Fester, they are accounted Holy. When their Idol is
carried in Procession, Pilgrims strive to be crushed to Death; and when their
Bodies are burned, their Ashes are kept as Holy Relics. Some of them cut their
Flesh in pieces, and stab themselves with Knives, to the Honor of this Idol.
Rosse.

In Ceylon or Zeilan some go on Pilgrimages a thousand Leagues, eighteen Miles
whereof they wade up to the middle in dirty stinking Water, full of
Blood-leeches, and seven Leagues they clamber up a steep Mountain by the help
of Nails and Thorns tied together; and all this to visit a Stone on the top of
this Hill, having in it the print of a Man's Foot, who (they say) came thither
first to instruct them in Religion: Near the Stone is a Springing water, in
which they Wash, then Pray, and with sharp-pointed Instruments cut their Flesh,
and draw Blood, thinking thereby all their Sins are pardoned, and God pleased.
Idem.

In New-Spain on the Feast of Penance and Pardon, when they Sacrificed a
Captive, after much Adoration, they took up Earth and eat it, desiring Pardon
for their Sins, and bringing Rich Presents to their Idol, and Whipping
themselves on the Shoulders: On this day much Meat is presented to the Idols,
and then to the Priests, who five days before had eat but one Meal a day. Idem.

The Southern Americans, at an Eclipse, Fast; the married Women scratch their
Faces, and pluck their Hairs; the Maids draw Blood with sharp Fish-bones;
supposing the Sun to be angry with them. Idem.

The Gaurs in Persia preserve Cows-piss, and compound it with a Water, which
they cause them to drink who have committed any Sin, after they have been at
Confession for it: They call it the Cazi's Water, which Urine ought to be
preserved forty days, with an Infusion of Willow-bark and certain Herbs. When
any Person is confessed, if it be a Crying Sin, the Party is to stay ten days
in the Cazi's House, and not to eat or drink but what the Priest gives him. And
in order to Absolution, the Priest strips him naked, and ties a little Dog to
his right great Toe, which he leads with him about the Cazi's House, wherever
he goes, sometimes a whole day, sometimes longer, as the Crime is: In that
Posture he desires the Cazi to Purify him. The Priest answers, the Dog must
Purify him, not he. After which he pours the Water seven times on his Head,
then gives him a Draught to drink; and so he is absolved: Afterward he Feasts
all his Friends at the Cazi's House. But the Women and Maids are shrifted by
the Cazi's Wife. M. Tavernier, l. 4. c. 8.

Zeal.
Jews.
BRethren, says St. Paul, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is,
that they might be Saved; for I bear them record, that they have a Zeal of God,
but not according to Knowledge, Romans 10.2. And the Apostle himself was a Zealot
of the same kind before his Conversion, -- Concerning Zeal persecuting the
Church of God. And the Sect he belonged to, was notoriously guilty that way;
none warmer in the blind Pursuit of Religion than the Pharisees: And yet we may
trace the same fiery Humor conveyed down to following Ages and Generations;
witness their perpetual Hatred and Persecution of the Christian Church, their
obstinate Adherence to their Devotions in the Siege of Jerusalem, their Zealous
Attempts to return to the Holy Land, and re-build the Holy City, etc. and this
all in spite of Miracles and Judgments, enough to convince them of their
Folly, if they were not absolutely blind and hardened.

Scaliger tells us of an Order of Men among them called (...), Mourners, that
once a year, on the ninth day of Ab, were allowed entrance into Jerusalem by
Adrian's Edict, which (as Benjamin an Hebrew Author relates) give Tithes of all
which they possess to the Wise Men, always sitting in the School, and to the
humbled Israelites which lament Sion, and bewail Jerusalem. These dwell in
Caves or ruined Houses, Fasting all the days of their Life, except on the
Sabbaths and Festivals, beseeching Mercy continually at the Hands of God.

Christians.
The Martyrs at Thebais, multitudes having been executed every day with all
imaginable Cruelties, Sentence was no sooner passed against one Party, but
others came, presented themselves before the Tribunal, confessing themselves
Christians, and received the Sentence with Joy. Dr. Cave.

When Servetus condemned Zuinglius for his Rashness, his answer was, In aliis
mansuetus ero, in Blasphemiis in Christum non ita.

Samodies.
Here the Priest, who is the eldest of the Family or Tribe, in Divine Service,
instead of Singing, Howls till he fall down as one dead; rising again, orders a
Sacrifice of five Deer; then thrusts a Sword half way into his Belly; with
several other Illusions, and Tricks of Sorcery. Packet broke open, Vol. 2.

Mexicans.
The Town of Mexico was great, and had thirteen Temples, in each of which were
many Idols of Stone of diverse Fashions, before whom they Sacrificed Men,
Doves, Quails, and other things, with great Perfumes and Veneration. -- Some
years they Sacrificed, as was thought, fifty thousand Men. S. Purchase.

Mahometans.
The Turks are very Zealous for their Religion, which they endeavor to
propagate all over the World. M. de Thevenot.

The Asian Turks are greater Zealots: I knew at Smyrna a Reverend Preacher
amongst them, who had many Pupils, who was so great a lover of his own Sect,
that he hated all Mankind beside; and stuffed his Sermons with Invectives
against Christians, till at last chidden by the Officers of the City: Yet his
Pride hardly abated, for when on his Mule's back, with his Followers on foot,
he made all Western Christians whom he met with accidentally, to alight, and
attend, whilst so Holy a Man passed by. P. Ricaut Esquire; in his Present State of
the Greek Church.

Heathens.
In Mexico they burnt Incense before their Idols every Morning, Noontide,
Evening, and at Midnight, and this with much Reverence; and then they beat
themselves, and drew Blood with sharp Bodkins. Rosse.

In Jucatan, in their Idolatrous Processions, they wound themselves, and offer
themselves cheerfully for Sacrifices. Idem.

Tunquinese.
It is a thing almost incredible, what a vast number of Sacrifices the King
sends to the Temples of his false Gods (at his Inauguration) to be there
offered to the Idols. The number of Beasts is said to exceed an 100000, besides
the value of a Million in Panes of Gold, Tissues, and Silks to adorn the Idols;
and Orange-coloured Calicuts for the Bonzes, and those that attend the Service
of the Pagods; and a vast number of pieces of blue Calicuts for the Poor that
are kept in the Pagods. Tavernier 's Collection of several Relations, etc.

Moderation.
Jews.
A Moderation in reference to the Ceremonial Law, especially when the Moral
came into Competition with it; and sometimes even in reference to the Judicial,
seems frequently in Scripture permitted and practiced: Circumcision sometimes
neglected, and the Passover, and Sacrifices, etc. the Shewbread eaten by
others than Priests; and an immoderate Zeal for Oblations, New Moons and
Sabbaths, sharply reproved, when the weightier things of the Law were
neglected. Vid. Psalm. 50. Isa. 1. Hos. 6.6. I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice,
etc. Mie. 6.6, 7, 8. As if the Almighty were about to retract those very
Ceremonies which himself had instituted, when he saw the People dote so fondly
upon them, as to forget or not duly mind the more solid and substantial parts
of Religion.

Christians.
When I come to Rome, I Fast on the Sabbath; when I am here, I do not Fast. So
St. Ambrose at Milan tells St. Augustine; which Judgment of Ambrose, Austine
says, he looked on as a Heavenly Oracle, viz. To whatever Church you come,
observe the Custom of that Church, if you would avoid giving Offense to others,
and taking it from others. Dr. Stillingfleet.

The Non-observance of indifferent things commanded, when there is no apparent
Contempt or Scandal, does not involve a Man into the Guilt of Sin; for the
ground of the Magistrates Command, is only in point of Contempt and Scandal,
and for preserving Order in the Church; for to command or obey, in reference to
these things, from any Opinion of the necessity of them, (and therefore the
only ground of observing them) is to show that we are not guilty of the Power
commanding, or of Scandal to others. Idem. Tota igitur religio ect in fugiendo
scandalo and vitando contemptu. Whitaker, Contr. 4. qu. 7, c. 2.

They do not bind, if Contempt and Scandal be removed. P. Martyr de leg. Eccl.

Hooper, who had raised a Difference about Garments, writ twice to Ridley about
the time of his Persecution and Imprisonment; who writ him an answer, as soon
as he could convey it; in which he declared, how entirely he was knit to him,
though in some Circumstances of Religion they had formerly jarr'd a little: It
was Hooper's Wisdom and his own Simplicity that had divided them, every one
following the abundance of his own Sense: But now he assured him, that in the
Bowels of Christ he loved him in the Truth, and for the Truth. Dr. Burnet 's
History of the Reform. etc.

The Popish Cantons have made Laws, that it shall be Capital to any to change
their Religion; and on a set day every year they go all to Mass, and the
Masters of Families Swear to continue true to the State, and firm in their
Religion, to their Lives end: And so they pretend to punish their falling into
Heresy with Death and Confiscation of Goods, because it is a Violation of the
Faith, which is so solemnly Sworn. But on the other hand, in the Protestant
Cantons, such as turn, are only obliged to go and live out of the Canton; but
for their Estates, they still preserve them, and are permitted to sell them.
One cannot but observe more of the merciful Spirit of the Gospel in the one,
than in the other. Idem -- Letter from Zurick.

Mahometans.
They give excellent Rules for bridling the Passions, and shunning of Vice, e.
g. If thou would have Hell shut its seven Gates, take heed thou Sin not with
thy seven Members, viz. Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Hand, Foot, Belly, Privities,
(which last they dare not name. F. Simon.)

They believe, a good Life in all Religions will bring a Man to Paradise; which
would seem to destroy their Principle of forcing all to their Religion, did
they not affirm the Musselmen are all in a higher and more excellent Paradise
than the best of the rest of the World. Anonym.

Ancient Heathens.
Socrates, at a Pompous Solemnity, when a great deal of Gold and Silver was
carried along, cried out, How many things are there, which I do not Covet! He
went commonly barefooted, and his Feet were much hardened. His Wife used to
observe of him, that he commonly went out, and returned home with the same
Countenance; he made no boast of his Learning, but nather Ignorance, professing
himself to know nothing: And when injuriously he was cast into Prison, he made
no Supplication to his Judges; and the last day of his Life discoursed much of
the Immortality of Souls, and with the Poisonous Cup in his hands, with which
he ended his days,) spoke thus, That he was not haled to Death, but was
ascending up to Heaven.

The same Socrates, to a Man crying out that he should dye, if he were not
revenged upon him; made answer, Let me dye, if I make not thee my Friend.
Hierocl. Frag.

Pegu.
The Talapoi in Pegu, are not angry at those, who change their Opinions to
Christianity, if their Lives be afterward Pious and Regular. Packet broke
open, Vol. 2.

Cathay.
The Tartars in Cathay oblige none by force to be of their Religion. Ibid.

Purity, Sincerity.
Jews.
THe Examples of true Israelites in Sacred Scripture are so obvious to every
Christian Reader, as well as others, that there is no need of Repetition here.
I shall therefore only tell you what remark is made upon them at this day.

Tho some idle Jews have used a scandalous compliance with the Rites of other
Nations, with the Papists turning Papists, and joining themselves to a Crucifix
and Rosary, as well as to the Zizith and Tephillim; yea, some have entered with
Holy Orders: Yet the Barbary Jews will not so much as eat of Meat dressed by
one of a different persuasion, nor drink in the same Cup after a Christian or
Moor, till it be washed, Dr. Addison. -- And this they do, notwithstanding they
hold, That the Law of Nature is only Obligatory to all mankind; and to those
who observe this Law they promise the World to come (Eternal Life;) tho
reserving to themselves a greater Glory than others. Idem.

Christians.
It were needless to make instances of Sincerity or Purity in Christians, their
Holy Lives, their resplendent Graces, their great and extraordinary Sufferings
being an abundant proof thereof, even in the Judgments (sometimes) of their
Enemies; who by this means have been Converted and brought over, not only to a
good Opinion of the Persons, but the Religion too. And tho it must be
confessed, that all which has glistered amongst them, was not pure Gold; yet
neither was all paint and dissimulation. The Letters in some are too plain and
Capital to be misconstrued to Hypocrisy: And tho the Infirmities of Nature have
sometimes shaded the brightness of their Virtues; yet I doubt not, but in many
the Heart (as in the Case of Archbishop Cranmer) has been preserved entire
and inviolate.

Zurick.
The public Justice of the City is quick and good, and is more commended then
the private Justice of those that deal in Trade: a want of sincerity is much
lamented, by those that know the Town (Zurick) well. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Rome.
For one that studies antiquities, pictures, statues, or music, there is more
entertainment for him at Rome, then in all the rest of Europe; but if he has
not a taste of these things, he will soon be weary of a place, where the
Conversation is always general, and where there is little sincerity or openness
practiced, and by Consequence where Friendship is little understood. Idem.

Heathens.
Socrates would say, That it was the most compendious way to Glory, if every
one would take care to Be, what they would be thought to Be, Cic. Offic. 2.

The Bramins hate to touch a Pot or Cup with their Mouth, but rather pour their
Liquor in at a distance; eat nor drink with Men of other Religions, use
washings much, touch no unclean thing, Sir Tho. Herb. Trav. into Persia.

The Persees seldom feed together, lest they participate one another impurity;
each has his own Cup, so as if any of his own Cast chance to use it, the
other washes it three times, and forbears it a while after. Idem.

In Mexico, and other parts of America, they Sacrificed Men sometimes to the
Sun, and used to open the Breast, and pull out the Heart, and offer that
Principally, and then to throw it to the Idol. The Inferior Priests in the
interim holding the Legs, Arms and Head of the Sacrificed wretch, whilst his
Heart was taking out. Idem.

The Merchants, who had a peculiar God and Festival day; when they Sacrificed a
Man, they gave him first for nine days Divine Honor, and offered his Heart
about Midnight to the Moon, as Mistress of the Waters, or by way of gratitude
for her light, Idem.

The Gaurs drink Wine and eat Swine's Flesh, if of their own breeding and
feeding; but are very careful lest their Hogs eat any Ordure; for if they have
devoured any nastiness, they are strictly forbid to eat them. They never pare
their Nails, so that if by way of disgrace or any misfortune they are
constrained to cut their Nails, or Hair; they carry that which they cut off, to
some place appointed without the City for that purpose. M. Tavernier l. 4. c. 8.

If at any time a Hair fall on their Cloths, those Cloths must be washed in
Cows-piss.

Perseverance.
Jews.
IT is observed of the Jews, That they adhere obstinately to their Religion;
and very rarely have we any instances of Converts to Christianity; which is
imputed chiefly to the care they take in the timely Education of their
Children. When Titus Vespasian came against them to Jerusalem; rather than
profane their Festival, they exposed themselves, unanimously, to the danger of
the Enemy. Private Persons among them, (as one here in England, falling into a
Jakes on the Sabbath Day) have through an obstinate Perseverance in their
Superstition, run the hazard of their lives.

Christians.
Victorinus, a Rhetorician at Rome, a Man of great Note and Fame, who had
obtained the honor of a public Statue, but a zealous Pagan, upon reading
Scripture, turned Christian, which he told privately to Simplician, who would
not believe him, unless he would testify it also in the Public Church: To
which, at first, he answered with some scorn; -- What! Are they then the Walls
that make a Christian? Afterward, becoming sensible of his Fault, and
gathering courage, afraid lest Christ should deny him, if he should refuse to
confess Him, came to Simplician, and said; Come, let us go into the Church, and
I will now become a Christian. He did so, and was Instructed and Baptized; and
being to make the accustomed Confession, the Ministers offered him the liberty
of Privacy, (as to those who were of a bashful temper,) which he refused,
making Confession before all the People. Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 2.

One Blandina (in the French Persecution under Aurelius) a good Woman, yet of
whom the Church was afraid, how she should hold out, because of the tenderness
of her Body; and Education; when she came to it, though plied from Morning
'till Night, with all kind of Racks and Tortures; she bore up with invincible
Courage, refreshing her self, ever and anon, with these words; I am a
Christian, and no Evil is done by us. Her Tormentors gave over, and wondered,
That a Body, so broken, should be able to breath.

The Britains, in the time of Austin the Monk, would not renounce their Hen
Fydh (old Faith) counting Popery an Innovation then, and therefore stoutly
resisted all that Austin said. Th. Jones, of Oswestree.

John Rodolph Stadler, a Clock-Maker of Zurik, who had been five Years in the
King of Persia's Service, and growing weary of being so long among Infidels,
was desirous to return into his own Country; but desiring his Majesty's leave,
had 400 Crowns promised him to stay two Years longer. But this prevailed not;
for he got the German Ambassadors to interceed for him: In the mean time his
House was broke open in the night, and the Thief killed; for which he was
Condemned to dye; with this proviso, That if he would be circumcised and turn
Mussulman, he should be pardoned. Most of the Lords solicited him very much to
change his Religion, at least in show, and for a time, and promised him
advantages: Twice he was brought to the place of Execution in the Maidau, in
hopes the horror of death would oblige him to renounce; but his constancy
could not be shaken. He told them, that the King's favor should never make him
lose that which Jesus Christ had done for him, in redeeming him from Eternal
death by his blood, etc. The Augustine Monks and Carmelites endeavored all
they could, to make him profess himself Roman Catholic; but all in vain; at
last he was delivered up to the Relations of the Deceased, and at 3 blows
struck down to the ground. 1637: D. of Holst. Emb. Trav. p. 208. and M.
Tavernier l. 5. c. 4.

Armenians.
M. Tavernier cites several examples of the constancy of the Armenians in
maintaining their Religion against the persecutions of the Mahometans, as of
one that went to the Cadi, saying, Sir you know, that some years since I turned
Mohammedan, now I come to declare before you, that I have repented of denying
the Savior of the world and embracing your wicked law, proceeding to
blaspheme. Mahomet, for which he was cut in pieces. l. 4. c. 14.

Mahometans.
A Gentleman of Quality and a servant to the Mogul, would needs be baptized,
and become a Christian, whereupon the King sent for him, and by promises and
threats, strongly attempted to turn him again to Mahometanism (for a trial of
his constancy) but he replied to the Mogul, that he was most willing to suffer
any thing in that cause, that the King could inflict, and as for the rewards
proffered, he would not accept of any thing, to forsake his said Religion:
whereupon the Mogul wondering at his constancy, told him, that if he could have
frighted him, or brought him from his new Profession, he would have made him an
example for all Waverers; but perceiving his resolution, with a reward
dismissed him. Anonyn. Author of the Manners of Indolstan, etc.

Observation of the Lord's Day, or Sabbath.
Jews.
IN the days of Mattathias, Father of Judas Maccabeus, 1000 were murdered
without resistance, 'till by him they were better advised.

Before that time, Ptolomey captivated Jerusalem and the Jews, both by this
advantage, viz. their superstitious strictness in observing the Sabbath: So did
Pompey afterward.

They cavilled with our Savior's Disciples, for plucking and rubbing a few
Ears of Corn on that day, when they were hungry.

A Jew fell into a Privy at Maidenburg, 1270. on the Sabbath; and another at
Tewksbury, 1220. and were, the one by the Bishop of the place, the other by the
Earl of Glooester, constrained to abide the Christian Sabbath: the latter of
them died in his stinking Superstitious Devotion.

They Fasted that Day 'till Noon; their Sabbath Days Journey was not above 2000
Paces, by the Institution of Barachibas, Simeon, and Hellis, Rabbis.

The Sacrifices, and accustomed Rites of the Sabbath are mentioned Number. 28.
Lev. 23, and 24. where we may read, That the daily Burnt-Offering, and
Meat Offering, and Drink Offering, were doubled on the Sabbath, and the
Shewbread renewed, etc. Sam. Purchase, Theolog. Disq. of Asia, Africa, etc.

Dr. Addison tells us, That amongst the Jews in Barbary, every Sabbath is
observed with three Feasts, and four Offices; that all the Afternoon of Friday
is usually taken up in Preparation, as washing, trimming, pairing the Nails,
whetting the Knives, etc. the Office of the Sabbath-arrit (Eve) is very long.
They have Garments designed only for the honor of the Sabbath, for which they
urge Isa. 58.13. Thou shall honor Him. And how can thou do it in thy every
days vile Habit?

They excite their Devotion, by repeating such Sentences as these:

-- Prepare to keep the Sabbath, and rest from all the Work.

Provide the choicest Diet for the Day.

Prepare good Wine, Flesh and Fish.

Speak nothing, but what may cause Mirth.

If all things necessary are provided, thou art Praiseworthy.

Come with a good appetite.

Cover the bed decently.

A certain Rabbi says, That he who merrily passes the Sabbath, has
whatsoever he will ask of God, as it is written, Delight thou in the Lord, and
he shall give thee thy hearts desire.

They sleep a good part of the Sabbath morning; and much indulge their Genius
on that day; observing strictly three Banquets. They are forbid to fast longer
than the sixth hour, because thou shall call the Sabbath a delight.

He that purposely fasts on the Sabbath, must fast the next day after, to do
Penance.

After Dinner the Rabbis have thought fit to study, or read sacred Writ;
because (say they) the Sabbath once complained to God for lack of a Meet
Companion, and God answered, Israel shall be thy Companion; for on the Sabbath
they shall learn the Law, etc. Dr. Addison.

Esseans.
The Esseans are more severe than any other, in observing the Sabbath; for they
do not only abstain from dressing of meat (which they dress the Evening before)
that day, but also they may not remove any Vessel out of its place, nor
satisfy the necessities of nature. Josephus de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 7.

The Talmud expressly speaks, for no other Reason was the Temple at Jerusalem
destroyed, but because the Jews observed not the Sabbath aright.

Though a Man have an hundred Maids, or the command of a Thousand Servants, yet
he himself ought with his own hands to do something in honor of the Sabbath;
and so we read in the Talmud, that Rabbi Casdam cut the Pot Herbs, R. Joseph
clave the Wood, R. Sira kindled the fire, R. Nachman swept the House, and
covered the Table. Dr. Addison, Present State of the Jews in Barb.

Christians.
The first Observation of the Christian Sabbath was more by the Providence and
Design of God, than the Apostles own Inclination, Joh. 20.19.

The second was performed volutarily, Joh. 20.26. So afterward upon the Day of
Pentecost (being the first day), Act. 2.1. Act. 20.7. Rev. 1.10.

(...) Just. Mart. Apol. 2.

Country work, about Husbandry, Vintage, Sowing, Mowing, Threshing, etc. is
prohibited by the Council of Arles, Conc. 3. Can. 21.

Fasting is forbid, Conc. Caesar August. Vid. Carrauz. Sum. p. 119.

S. Augustine declares himself frequently against Dancing on the Lord's Day.
Hearing, or pleading of Causes on the Lord's Day is prohibited, apud Gratian.
Adrian. p. c. 15. q. 4. item Conc. Ephesians. and Conc. Tarracon, etc.

Judges Riding to Assizes is reproved very gravely, by Gattaker, in his Sermon,
called, God's Parley with Princes, p. 13.

Concerning God's Judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, see Mr. Mayer, on the
Church-Catechism; also the Practice of Piety, and my Book, called, The
Christian's Companion.

The whole Week is Sanctified by this Day, and according to my care of this, is
my Blessing on the Rest. Dr. Hall.

To the same purpose, Judge Hale remarked upon himself, That according to his
Devotion on the Lord's Day, he prospered in his Affairs the Week following.

Modern Heathens.
I came to the place where my Company Encamped; they waited only for a Billet
from the Customer, to be gone; but it could not be had that Day, because it was
Friday, and the Customer (who was a Mohammedan) observed that Day with great
exactness. M. de Thev. Travels into the Indies, l. 3. p. 77.

In Guinea, The Heathens forbear on their Sabbath (which is Thursday) Fishing
and Husbandry; and the Palm-Wine, that is got that day, must not be sold, but
offered to the King, who bestows it on the Courtiers to drink at Night. View of
the Engl. Acqu. in Guin. and the E. Ind.

On this Day, in the Marketplace, on a Table three yards high, whose flat
cover is made of straw and reeds interwoven; they place many Rings, which they
call Festiloes or Gods, and within them set Wheat, Water, and Oil, for their
Gods, whom, they imagine, devour it. Ibid.

Discipline.
Jews.
THe Jews still enjoin Circumcision under its old Penalty, Genesis 17. viz.
Cutting off; Yet they are not peremptory about the precise time ( viz. Eight
days after the birth.) I knew one Jacob Israel Belgara, born in Spain, coming
afterward to Barbary, 1667, Circumcised in the 40th year of his Age. Dr.
Addison.

Christians.
I called to mind a passage of a Letter of Cornelius, that was Bishop of Rome,
after the middle of the Third Century, preserved by Eusebius in his 6th Book,
chapter 43. There were 46 Presbyters, 7 Deacons, 7 Subdeacons, 94 of the inferior
Orders of the Clergy among them; also 1500 Widows, and other Poor, maintained
out of the public Charities, Dr. Burnet's Letters.

When Philip the Emperor would have gone into Church on Easter-Eve, to Prayers,
the Bishop of the place would by no means suffer it, till he had made
Confession of his Sins, and passed through the Order of Penitents, being guilty
of great sins; and the Emperor very willingly submitted to it, Eusebius. l. 6.
Some think, this was rather Philip Governor in Egypt.

Theodosius the Great, for his barbarous Slaughter of the Thessalonians, was by
S. Ambrose suspended, brought to public Confession, forced a severe Penance
for eight Months together. Prostrations in the Church, tearing off his Hair,
beating his Forehead, watering his Cheeks with Tears, etc. crying out (as
David) My Soul cleaves unto the dust, quicken thou me according to thy word,
After which he was Absolved, and restored to Communion. Theodor. H. Eccl. l. 5.
c. 15.

A Public Penitentiary, (an Holy, grave Presbyter) was appointed to take
Confessions of those sins which persons had committed after Baptism, and by
Prayers, Fastings, Mortifications to prepare them for Absolution. This
continued some hundreds of years, till Abrogated by Nectarius (S. Chrysostom's
Predecessor in Constantinople) upon occasion of a Woman complaining, that
during her time of Penitent Exercises in the Church, she was tempted to Folly
by a Deacon: This was done by the Advice of Eudemon, most Bishops following his
Example, Dr. Cave.

The Clergy of Venice have a very extraordinary sort of Exemption, and are a
sort of a Body like a Presbytery, independent of the Bishop: The Curates are
chosen by the Inhabitants of every Parish, and no Noble Venetian is suffered to
pretend to any Curacy, thinking it below their Dignity. There is a sort of
Association among the Curates for Judging of their common concerns, and some of
the Laity of the several Parishes assist in those Courts, so that here is a
real Presbytery. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

I wondered at two Discourses that I heard at one Church (in Milan) at the same
time, in the Afternoon; for there were two Bodies of Men set down, in different
places of the Church, all covered; and two Laymen, in ordinary Habits, were
entertaining them with Discourses of Religion, in a Catechistical Style: These
were Confrairies; and those were some of the more Devout, that instructed the
rest. This, as I never saw any where else, so I do not know, whether it is
peculiar to Milan, or not. Idem.

Cathay.
The Tartars here punish the breach of their Traditions, with Death or a Penal
Sum of Money; tho in Trifling matters, as touching the Fire with a Knife,
meddling with young Birds, etc. which are forbid. Packet broke open, vol. 2.

Presbyterians.
Amongst the Presbyterians, the Minister or Presbytery may not Excommunicate
without the consent of the Church, nor for any faults, but sins of Perverseness;
and after admonition; nor for private sins, but those which are public and
scandalous; nor for the Sins of others (as Bishop Auxilius Excommunicated a
whole family for the Master's Offense alone) but for his own. Rosse.

Self-denial.
Jews.
IN nothing scarce did the Pedagogy of the Mosaic Law approve it self to be an
excellent Institution, more than in this, that the whole drift and tendency of
it was to break the Jewish Nation off from their own Wills, and bring them to
an humble dependency upon the will of God: And accordingly we find, the Devout
Persons that were among them, deny themselves mightily in the Observations of
the Mosaic Rites, in the distinction of Meats, of Days, of Garments, in their
Solemnities of the Ordinances of Circumcision, Passover, Purifications,
Sacrifices, etc. And to this day they are superstitiously Zealous and Obstinate
in bearing the reproach of an accursed People, and adhereing still to their old
Religion, in despite of all the Evidences that are produced in the World, to
prove all the Shadowy part of it null and void.

Papists.
At the Inauguration of the Roman Popes, the Master of the Ceremonies leads the
way into S. Gregory's Chapel, and burns some straws over a Candle, repeating 3
times, Sic transit gloria mundi, Camerar.

Daniel, Archbishop and Elector of Mentz, in a little peculiar Book of Prayers
which he had wrote, -- Life is short, Beauty deceitful, Money fluent, Government
hateful, War destructive, Victory doubtful, friendship deceitful, Old Age
miserable, Death happiness, the fame of wisdom Eternal. Idem.

Mahometans.
When they pray to God for any thing, they are to resign themselves to his
will; and say, O my God, I beg of thee not to grant what I ask, if it be not
for my Good. F. Simon.

Calvinists.
He that has learned to displease himself much, has made a good proficiency
in Christianity- Calvin.

The Marquess of Vicum in Italy, that for his Religion, relinquished his Native
Soil, the Wife of his Bosom, his dear Children, his great Riches, and took upon
him a voluntary Exile at Geneva, to serve his God according to his Faith and
Conscience, that he might die in Peace, and save his Soul, was a very
remarkable instance of Self-denial.

Indians.
Some of the Indian Faquirs live in little pitiful Huts, near their Pagods,
where they have once in 24 hours Victuals bestowed upon them for God's sake.
Some will retire into Huts near their Pagods, where there is but one hole to
let in the light, and will stay there, according to the height of their
Devotion, sometimes 9 or 10 days together, without either eating or drinking; a
thing which I could not have believed, had I not seen it. My Curiosity carried
me to see one of them, with the president of the Dutch Company, who sent a Spy
to watch night and day, whether any body brought him any Victuals; but he could
not discover any relief the Faquir had, all the while sitting upon his Bum like
our Tailors, never changing his posture above 7 days together, not being able
to hold out any longer, by reason that the Heat and stench of the Lamp was
ready to stifle him. There are other sorts of Penance out-doing this, which
might be thought incredible, were there not so many thousand witnesses thereof,
e.g.

One, over whose head several years have passed, yet he never slept day nor
night: When he finds himself sleepy, he hangs the weight of the upper part of
his Body upon a double Rope fastened to the Bough of a Tree; and by the
continuance of this posture, which is very strange and painful, there falls a
humor into their Legs, which swells them very much.

Another, night and day, Summer and Winter carries his Arms above his Head,
which causes certain Carnosities to breed in his Joints, that he can never
bring them down again: His hair grows down to his waste his Nails are as long
as his Fingers; his nakedness is all the year long exposed to heat and rain,
and stinging of Flies: For he has no use of his hands to rid himself.

Another stands on one foot for several hours in a day, with a Chafing Dish in
his hand, offering Incense to his God, and all the while fixing his Eyes upon
the Sun.

Another sleeps without ever resting his Arms; a great torment certainly.

Others have their arms flagging down upon their Shoulders through weakness,
being dried up for want of Nourishment.

Some in a posture quite contrary to the motion and frame of Nature, keep their
Eyes always turned toward the Sun: Others fix their Eyes perpetually on the
ground, never so much as speaking one word, or looking any person in the Face,
etc. There is an infinite variety of them.

In City and Country they go all as naked as they came out of their Mothers
Womb: And tho the Women approach them to take them by the Fingers ends, and to
kiss those parts, which modesty forbids to name, yet shall you not observe in
them any motion to Sensuality at all; rather quite contrary, seeing them never
to look upon any person, but rolling their Eyes in a most frightful manner, you
would believe them in an Ecstasy. Tavernier, Par. 2. l. 2. c. 6.

Justice and Honesty.
See Care of the Bodies of others.
Jews.
THE Jews in case of Meum and Tuum, have a cheap and compendious way of
proceeding, and determining what is Right and Wrong, by a Juncto of Sabios or
Masters. Dr. Addison.

Ancient Christians.
Nazianzen reports of his Father, That though he went through great Offices of
State, yet he made not one Farthing's addition to his own Revenue; though he
saw some before his Eyes, that with Briarius laid hold on the public
Treasures, and therewith filled their own Coffers.

St. Austine says, He knew a Man (probably himself) who having a Book offered
him to be sold, by one that understood not the Price of it, at a very small
Under-rate, took the Book, but gave him the full price according to its just
rate, a great deal more than the Seller asked. De Trin. l. 13.

It was Pliny's Testimony to Trajan ( l. 10. Ep. 97.) -- The greatest Fault
that they (the Christians) are guilty of, is, that they use harmlesly to meet
to worship Christ, and at those Meetings to bind themselves, by a Sacrament (or
Oath) that they would not do any Wickedness, that they might be firmlier
obliged not to commit Theft, Robberies, Adulteries, not to falsify their
words, or to deny any thing wherewith they are entrusted, when it was required
of them.

A Woman, that industriously made her self to Miscarry, was adjudged to ten
years Penance.

Infant-killing (by a Law of Valentinian Emperor) was made subject to the same
Penalty with killing an adult Person.

The Punishment of Willful Murder (by St. Basil's Rule) was twenty years
Penance. -- In Tertullian's time perpetual Penance, not to be absolved by
Death. Dr. Cave 's Prim. Christian.

Georgians.
In Georgia, a Thief is acquitted, paying Sevenfold what he has stole, two
parts to the Party robbed, one to the Judges, and four to the King. If he has
not wherewith to satisfy, he is sold; if the Product do not yet equal the Sum,
his Wife is sold; and if that will not do, his Children. Tavernier, l. 3. c. 9.

Muscovites.
There is no Craft or Cheat, but the Muscovites make use of it, rather to
circumvent others, than to prevent being deceived themselves. -- Yet they make
Conscience to retain what is paid them more than their due, and return what
they have received by mistake: But they think it no Sin, in their Dealings, to
surprise those who Trade with them, giving this reason, That the Merchant is to
make his Advantage of the Wit and Industry God has bestowed on him, or never
meddle with Traffic. Accordingly, when some Muscovites found themselves
overreached notoriously by a Dutch Merchant, they desired better acquaintance
with him, looking upon him and applauding him for a very Ingenious Man, hoping
to get some Secret out of him. D. of Holstein 's Amb. Trav.

And because Cheating cannot be exercised without Treachery, Lying and
Distrust, they are marvellously well versed in these Qualities; as also in the
Lectures of Calumny; which they commonly make use of against those, on whom
they would be revenged for Theft, which among them is the most enormous of all
Crimes, and the most severely punished. Idem.

Such as cannot pay their Debts, are first put into the Sergeants House till a
further time; if he pay not then, he is carried to Prison; every day brought
out, and beat upon the Shin-bone by the common Executioner, with a Wand, for a
whole hour together; and then to Prison again, till next day, etc. And this
upon all sorts of Persons, Subjects or Foreigners, Men or Women, Priests or
Laics. Idem.

Abassines.
See afterward, under the Title of Care of Men's Bodies.

Mahometans and Indians.
By the Laws of India, they imprison for debt and hang fetters on them. Many
times they will sell their persons who are the Debtors and wives and children
into bondage, when they cannot satisfy their debts. The Hindoes are so very
just in their dealings, that if a man will put it to their Consciences to sell
the Commodity as low as they can, they will deal honestly and squarely with
him. But if a man offer them much less then the price, they will presently say,
what do thou think me a Christian, that would go about to deceive thee?

The great Mogul will himself sit as Judge in matters of Consequence that
happen near him. They proceed in their Trials Socundum allegata and probata.

They punish Theft and Murder with death, and what kind of Death the Judge
pleases to appoint: Some are hanged, beheaded, empailed and put on stakes,
torn in pieces by wild Beasts, killed by Elephants, stung with Snakes.

No Malefactors lie above one night in prison: Sometimes not all, but are
speedily brought upon trial and so to Execution.

The Mahometans are prohibited by their Alcoran, to lend Money upon Usury; and
with them it is a very great Sin, and they are very careful to abstain from it;
yet some of them make such Bargains, as differ little from Usury. M. de
Thevenot.

Sultan Amurat disguising himself, would go sometimes to a Baker's Shop and buy
Bread; and sometimes to a Butcher's for Meat; and one day a Butcher offering to
sell Meat above the Rate which he had set; he made a sign to the Executioner,
who presently cut off his Head. Idem. -- He beheaded two in one day for
Smoking Tobacco.

I saw a Man, who sold Snow at five Deniers the Pound, receive -- Blows on the
Soles of his Feet, because his Weight was not exactly full.

Another having sold a Child a double worth of Onions, and the Officers of the
Market meeting this Child, and finding that he had not enough, went to that
Man, and gave him thirty, blows with a Cudgel. Idem.

The Chinese punish Murder and Theft with Death. Sir. Tho. Herb. Their Justice
is Severe, their Prisons strong, and Executions quick.

Persians.
It was ordinary with Scha-Abbas King of Persia to go incognito into the
Markets, and examine their Weights and Wares, and punish the Guilty severely.
One day at Ardebil, he caused to be put into a red-hot Oven a Baker, who
refused to sell Bread to the Poor, under Pretense of keeping it for Abbas and
his Soldiers. He caused a Butcher to be hung by the Back upon his own Hooks,
for that he found his Weights too light. D. of Holstein 's Amb.

Japon.
The Japonese punish all manner of Theft with Death, Tavernier's Collect. p. 4.

Love to the Brethren.
Jews.
THE Jews have such a care of one another, that they never suffer any of their
Communion to want long, but make Collections in their Synagogues for such as
are in any Poverty or Distress; and this with as much care for their Reputation
and Credit as may be.

Christians.
See how these Christians love one another, the Proverbial Remark of the
Heathens, Tertull. Ap. c. 39. Fraternity was a word much used by Christians in
those times.

Heathens, accused Christians for having privy marks on their Bodies, whereby
they fell in love with each other at first sight. Min. Fell.

They never met, but they embraced and saluted mutually with a Holy Kiss, not
only in their own Houses, but at their Religious Assemblies.

It was common with the Primitive Christians, to send the Eucharist from one
Church to another, though differing in some little Circumstances; also from
House to House, and from Country to Country; which pieces of the Eucharist they
kept in some decent place of the House, against all Emergent Occasions, to
fortify their Faith, and increase their Kindness; yea, and as some think, to
entertain their Friends with before every Meal, etc. But by the Laodic. Synod
this was abolished ( Can. 14.) and the Eulogie, pieces of Bread which remained
of the Peoples Offerings, solemnly blessed by the Bishop, appointed in their
room, -- to be sent to Catechumens, and up and down to Towns.

Sozomen says, that Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine, having spent his own Estate
first in pious and charitable Uses; he afterward dispensed the Goods of the
Church so freely, till the Guardian charged him with Lavishness; yet he
remitted nothing of his accustomed Bounty: At last all being spent, a Stranger
on a sudden comes into the Steward's Lodging, and delivers into his Hand a
great Purse of Gold, without discovering who sent it, or who it was that
brought it. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 27.

Palladius tells of Macarius, a Presbyter and Governor of the Hospital at
Alexandria, that he coming to a rich Virgin in the City, but Covetous and
Uncharitable, told her, that a parcel of Jewels, Emeralds and Jacinths of
inestimable value were lodged at his House, but which the Owner was willing to
part with for 500 pieces of Money, and advises her to buy them; she gives him
the Money, entreated him to buy them for her: Afterward she coming to see them,
he takes her into the Hospital, shows her first the Jacinths (the Lame, Blind
and Cripple-women) in one Room, then the Emeralds (the Men) in another Room.
The Woman blushed, and was troubled to think, that she should be haled to that,
which she ought to have done freely for the Love of God. Hist. Laus. c. 6.

Fabiola, a Room Lady, sold her Estate, dedicated the Money to the uses of the
Poor, built an Hospital (and was the first that did so) she carried the
Diseased in her Arms, on her Shoulders, washed and dressed their filthy Sores,
and prepared them Food and Physic. Hieron. Epitaph. Fabiole ad Ocean.

Placilla Empress, Wife to Theodosius Jun. used to visit the Sick in the
Hospitals, give them Food and Physic, taste their Broths, attend at their
Beds, wash their Cups, etc. Theod. H. Eccl. l. 5. c. 18.

Deogratias, an old Bishop of Carthage, sold all the Plate of the Church for
Ransom of Captive Christians, lodged them in two large Churches, visited them
continually day and night, with Physicians attending on him. Vict. Vtic. de
pars. Vandal. l. 1.

In a terrible Plague at Alexandria, the Christians boldly ventured to visit
daily, instruct and comfort the Sick Brethren, till themselves expired and died
with them. Eusebius. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 22.

Purabolani were Officers to attend the Sick in Alexandria, a kind of
Clergy-Physicians.

Mahometans.
The Mogul does continually relieve many poor People.

Solomon the Second built the Morestan, a lovely Hospital for Pilgrims, of all
Religions, at Damascus. M. de Thev.

At a fair Mosque in Golconda, about four in the Afternoon is a Dole of Bread
and Pilau to all the Poor that come. Tavernier's Trav. Ind. p. 64.

Mutewacelus, a Turkish Chalif, had a Counselor so unmindful of Humane
Frailty, that he was wont to say, Mercy was a Weakness in Nature, and
Liberality Folly. Hottinger ex Elmac.

The Chinese sometimes will lend Money to be repaid them in the other World.
Sir Th. Herb.

Indians.
A Bramin coming to Patua, assembled all his Tribe together, demanded of them
2000 Roupies, and 27 Else of Calicut; they excused themselves because of their
Poverty; whereupon he vowed neither to Eat nor Drink till they had brought it:
With this resolve he climbs a Tree, sits in the Fork between the Boughs for
several days. The noise of this coming to the Ears of the Hollanders, where we
were, we set Sentinels to watch whether it were true or no, -- which he did for
30 day together; on the 31st, the Idolaters fearing to kill one of their
Priests, clubb'd together, and brought him the Roupies and Calicut; so soon as
the Bramin saw the Money and Cloth, he came down, upbraided those of his Tribe
for want of Charity, distributed all the Roupies among the Poor reserving only
five or six for himself; the Cloth he cut into little pieces, and gave away,
keeping only to himself enough to cover his own Nakedness. After which he
disappeared of a sudden, and no body knew what became of him, though diligent
Search was made after him. Tavernier, Part 2. l. 3.

Friendly Pairs.
Jewish.
David and Jonathan.
Christian.
St. Peter and St. Mark.
St. Paul and Timothy.
Gregory Nazianzen and Basil.
Cranmer and Cromwell.
Heathen.
Hercules and Telamon.
Pylades and Orestes.
Theseus and Perithous.
Love to Enemies.
Jews.
THE Jews, at the Feast of Tabernacles, profoundly curse the Christians,
desiring, That God would smite them, as he did the Firstborn of Egypt. And
though this direful Prayer be not found in the Liturgy, Printed at Venice; yet
I am sure, it is in the Machsor, of the Cracovian Impression. Dr. Addison.

Purchase tells us, out of Munster, That it is one of their Negative Precepts, If
any of the Seven Canaanitish Nations, shall come into the hands of a Jew, he
ought to slay him. Purchase.

Sooner than they would endure, that the Gentiles, (whom they curse and revile
in their daily Prayers) should have any part with them in their Messiah, and be
counted Coheirs thereof, they would Crucify 10 Messiahs; yea, if it were
possible, would put GOD himself to death, with all the Angels and Creatures
else, though they should therefore undergo a thousand Hells. Luth. in Mi. 4.1,
2.

Christians.
Athenagoras principally uses this Argument, to prove the Divinity of the
Christian Religion, viz. Loving Enemies. Leg. pro Christian.

Nazianzen, then Bishop of Constantinople, lying Sick, a young Man came to his
Bed's feet, with Tears, begging his Pardon, confessing, That he was the Person
Suborned to Murder him: The Bishop prayed for him, wishing no other
Satisfaction, but that he would forsake is Heretical Party, and turn Christian.
Vit. ejus per Greg. Presb.

Paul, the Martyr, going to Execution, prayed for Christians, Jews, Samaritans,
the very Judges that condemned him and the Executioner that was ready to cut
off his Head. Eusch.

S. Mamas, the Martyr, treated the Soldiers sent to take him, with the best
Supper her had. Dr. Cave.

Pachomius, a Heathen Soldier, in the first times of Constantine, turned
Christian, upon observation of the Christian's Liberality to the Army, when
almost Famished, and became an Anchoret. Idem.

In a Famine and grievous Plague, under Maximinus in the East, the Christians
were famed for their care for the Poor, and Sick, and dead Bodies.

Mahometans.
It is not lawful for the Mahometans to convert any Lands to Sacred uses,
except they have first with their own Sword, won it from the Enemies of their
Religion; and therefore Selym the Second, intending to build a magnificent
Temple, College, Monastery, and Almshouse, at Adrianople, brake his League
with the Venetians, and wan Cyprus from them, that he might endow the same with
maintenance. Purchase.

Papists.
The Papists every Year curse and damn all Heretical Princes and People in
their Solemn Service; they exempt likewise Children from Obedience to their
Parents, and Subjects from Allegiance to their Sovereigns, upon that score.

Mahometans, Heathens.
At Surat, the Ambassador's Servant, his Cook, being one day drunk, in his way
met the Governor of Surat's Brother, as he was riding to his House; the Cook
made a stand, made at him with his Sword, calling him, Now thou Heathen Dog. He
replied civilly, in his own Language, Ca-ca-ta, i. e. What say thou? The Cook
answered with his Sword, was seized, disarmed, imprisoned; upon the
Ambassador's hearing of it, he sent to the Governor's Brother, to signify,
That he came not thither to countenance any disorderly Person, and therefore
desired him to do with him what he pleased. Upon which he presently sent him
home, without doing him the least hurt; but who was the Heathen Dog at this
time?

Care of the Souls of others.
Jews.
I Question not, but the Jews have a zeal for their Brethren, which they show
most of all, when any of them are in danger of being brought over to
Christianity, or any other Religious Communion.

Christians.
We Christians, pray to GOD night and day, not only for our selves, but for all
Men, and for the safety of the Emperors themselves. Cypr. pass. vit. ejus annex.

Justin M. tells the Jews, that they prayed for them. Dial. cum Tryph.

They prayed for the Gnostics. Iren.

Pamphilus the Martyr used freely and readily to bestow Bibles (dearer in those
days, than since Printing was Invented) on those that were willing to read
them. Hieron. adv. Ruff.

Chrysostom maintained many Presbyters and Monks in Phoenicia, at his own
charge, to instruct the Heathens; and procured a Law from Arcadius, Emp. for
pulling down the Pagan Temples, and when many of them were wounded and slain
for their pains; he encourages them to go on, and promises (though himself
then in Banishment, and his Incomes poor) that their former Pensions should be
paid them. Theod. Hist. Eccl.

What care S. John took for the Soul of a young Man (entrusted with a Bishop)
and afterward turned High-way-man, vid. alibi.

What care and pains Monica took for the Conversion of her Husband Patricius,
vid. Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 9. as also for her Son Augustine, vid. ibid. c. 10.

Serapion (called Sindonites, because he never wore but one poor Linen
Garment) sold himself to a Gentile Player, that served the Theater, with whom
he lived, and underwent the meanest offices, 'till he had converted him, his
Wife, and whole Family to Christianity, who upon their Baptism, restored him to
Liberty; whereupon he freely returned them back the Money which he had
received, as the price of his Servitude, which, by mutual consent, was given to
the Poor. Coming afterwarks to Lacedaemon, he sold himself to a principal Man
of that City (that was a Manichee, but otherwise a good man,) and served him
two Years, as his Slave; 'till he had brought that whole Family off from that
pernicious Heresy; and for his kindness, was afterward respected as a Brother
or Father. Pallad. Hist. Laus. c. 83. in Vit. Serap.

Origin tells Celsus, That some of the Christians had peculiarly undertaken to
go up and down to Towns and Villages, etc. to convert others, often wanting
convenient Accomodations for their pains. Orig. contr. Celss.

The Lady Bows, afterward Lady Darcy in the North, gave about one Thousand
Pounds per Annum, to maintain Preachers, where there were nor any means for
them, (such as Mr. Baines, Mr. ( Dyke, etc.) Clark's Lives.

Love to the Souls of others.
Armenians.
THE Revenue of the Armenian Patriarch is 600000 Crowns, or thereabouts; for
all the Armenian-Christians, that are above fifteen Years of Age, ought to pay
him yearly five Sous; and though many pay him not, by reason of their Poverty;
yet the Rich supply that defect, who sometimes pay him two or three Crowns a
head. But this Money does not stay in the Patriarch's Pocket: Nay, he is
sometimes behind hand; for he is engaged to relieve the poor Armenians, who
have not wherewithal to pay the Carage, (the Annual Tribute imposed by the
Mohammedan Prince;) otherwise, necessity would force them to become Mahometans;
and they, their Wives and Children, would be sold; which the Grand Patriarch
labors all he can no prevent. M. Tavern. l. 1. c. 3.

Protestants.
Fox thus reports of Bishop Hooper: -- Twice I was at his Palace at Worcester,
where, in his Common Hall, I saw a Table spread with good store of Meat, and
beset full of Beggars, and poor Folk; and I asking his Servants what it meant;
they told me, That every day their Lord and Master's manner was, to have
customably to Dinner, a certain number of poor Folk, of the said City, by
course, who were served by four at a Mess, with whole and wholesome Meats; and
when they were served (being before examined by him, or his Deputies, of the
Lord's Prayer, Ten Commandments, and the Articles of their Faith) then he
himself sat down to Dinner, and not before. Fox Mar.

Chinese.
In Quinsay, in a walled Park belonging to a Monastery, the Monks fed 4000
living Creatures, of diverse kinds, out of their Charity to the Souls of Noble
Men, which (they believed) were entered into the Bodies of these Creatures.
Rosse.

Care of their Bodies.
Jews.
THe Jews have no Beggars, such as go from house to house; tho (in Barbary)
many indigent persons. With great insulting they upbraid the Moor and Christian
with their Common Beggars. Their way of Releiving the poor is.

1. By Copies of the Law bought and laid up in the Synagogue, till the buyer's
family, or any of them be in poverty, and then sold for their use.

2. By Legacies of dying persons. For none dye safely, say they, who bequeath
not something to the Corban.

3. Contributions, out of which they raise portions, and provide for Orphans.
And to avoid Sophistication, the poorer females are provided for by lot; those
on whom the lot falls, are first placed in marriage.

4. Private Alms on Fridays and Holy Days.

5. By Kibbus, or letters of Collection from Synagogue to Synagogue Dr. Addison.

Christians.
Cyprian gave especially to the Presbyters and Deacons of his Church to provide
for the poor. Ep. 5.

Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth, testifies of the Church of Rome, that they
administered very liberally to the necessities of other Churches, as well as
their own. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 23.

Chrysostom tells of the Church of Antioch, tho the Revenues of it were small
in his time, yet besides its Clergy, besides strangers, Lepers and Prisoners,
it daily maintained above 3000 Widows and Maids. Hom. 67. in Matt.

Cyprian, upon his turning Christian, sold his Estate to relieve the wants of
others, and could not be Restrained from it, by persuasions or considerations.
After his entrance on the Ministry, his doors were open to all comers; from
whom no Widow ever returned empty; to the Blind he would be a Guide to direct
them; a support to the Lame; a defense to the oppressed. Vit. ejus and Paul.
Diac.

Caesarius, S. Basil's Brother, made this short Will, I Will that all my Estate
be given to the poor, Basil. ad Sophron. Ep. 84.

Nazianzen says, His Father gave not only the Surplusage of his Estate to the
Poor, but even part of what he reserved for necessary uses.

-- Of his Mother, That an Ocean of Wealth would not have filled her
unsatisfyed desire of doing good: That he often heard her say, if lawful, she
could willingly have Sold her self and Children, to expend the Price on the
Poor.

-- Of his Sister Gorgonia, That she was immensely Liberal, her gate open to
every stranger, her Estate common to the Poor, and as much at their need, as
every one's is to himself. Orat. 19.

Abassines.
Amongst the Abassines, Homicides are delivered up to the next of Kin to the
Party Murdered; at whose free will it is, to Pardon the Malefactors, sell them
to foreign Merchants, or put them to what death they please: If the Homicide
escape unknown, all the Neighborhood are obliged to pay a Fine. Job Imdolph, a
custom still used in Persia.

Ancient Heathens.
Every one of us is encompassed round with many circles, some less, some
greater, etc. In the first are those things which belong to our own Body; the
second comprehends our Parents, Wives and Children; the third Uncles, Aunts,
Grandfathers and Grandmothers, Nephews, etc. The fourth the rest of our
Relations; then those of our own Tribe and Society; next our Neighborhood and
Nation; the last and greatest is that of Mankind. Hierocl. de Quest. quomodo
utend. sit cognatis?

Chinese.
A particular Judge in every City appointed for the Poor, the first day of his
Office Publishes an Order, that all who have any Children Lame, Sick, etc.
should come by a certain day, and make their cases known; if able, they are put
to Learning, or a Trade; if not, to Hospitals, where they are brought up at the
King's Charge: None are permitted to go abroad. The Blind are not accounted as
unable for work. Mandelslo.

Cambaia.
Here they redeem Birds and Beasts appointed to be slain, and carry sack Birds
to the Hospital, and redeem Malefactors appointed to be Slain, and sell them
for Slaves. Rosse.

Musecvites.
Their good Works (which they believe Meritorious) are building of Monasteries
and Churches, and giving Alms; besides which, they do nothing whereby a Man may
Judge of their Faith by their Works. D. of Holstein's Emb. Travel. No Muscovite
almost, but as he goes to Church, or about his occasions, buys Bread, to
distribute among the Poor. Idem.

Chinese Heathens and Mahometans.
Few or no Beggars are found in China; for a young beggar has the Whip; the
Old, Lame and Blind are provided for in the Hospitals. Sir Th. Herbert.

The Baniams (or Priests of the Indians, Hindoes) have Spittles to recover lame
Birds and Beasts.

Rich Men among the Hindoes build large Sarraas or Houses for Lodgings, where
any Travelers may find House-room and use it freely: others make public
Wells, and Tents for public use: others maintain Servants, who continually
attend upon the road-ways, and offer unto Passengers Water for themselves and
Beasts.

The Mogul Relieves many poor People.

A Musselman will give the 7th part of his Estate toward the relief of the
Poor.

It Is one of Mohomet's five Precepts, -- to give yearly to the Poor the
fortieth part of their substance. M. de Thevenot.

Some of the Mahometans in their Lifetime relieve the Poor with their Goods:
And others at their Death leave great Estates for the Founding of Hospitals,
building of Bridges, Kirvanseraies (Inns for the Caravans) bringing water to
the Highways, etc. others at their Death give their Slaves Liberty. They who
want Purses, employ themselves in mending Highways, filling the Cisterns by
the Road with Water, showing Travelers the Foard, for God's sake; refusing
Money, when offered: Some buy Birds to set at Liberty, others leave considerable
means to Bakers or Butchers to distribute meat amongst so many Dogs and Cats.

Sultan Amurath, seeing a Man one day stop at the corner of a Street in
Constantinople, to dine on a piece of Bread and bit of Roast, which he had
bought hard by, and hold his Horse (that was loaded with goods he had to sell)
by the Bridle; he ordered the Horse to be unloaded, and the load put upon the
Master's Back; obliging him to continue so all the while that the Horse was
Eating a Measure of Oats. M. de Thevenot.

At the chief Temple in Fez the Priest takes charge of the Poors money and
Orphans, and deals to them Corn and Money every Holy Day. Rosse.

Milan.
The Hospital at Milan is a Royal Building; I was told it had 90000 Crowns
Revenue: The old Court is large, and would look noble, if it were not for the
new Court that is near it, which is 250 foot square, and there are three rows
of Corridors or Galleries all round the Court, one in every Stage, according to
the Italian manner, which makes the Lodgings very convenient, and gives a
Gallery before every Door. It is true, These take up a great deal of the
Building, being ordinarily ten or eight foot broad; but then here is an open
space, that is extreme cool on that side where the Sun does not lie; for it is
all open to the Air, the Wall being only supported by Pillars, at the distance
of fifteen or twenty foot one from another. In this Hospital are not only
Galleries full of Beds on both sides, as is ordinary in all Hospitals, but
there are also a great many Chambers, in which Persons, whose Condition was
formerly distinguished, are treated with a particular Care. There is an
Out-house, which is called the Lazarette, that is without the Walls, which
belongs to this Hospital, it is an exact quarter of a Mile Square, and there
are 360 Rooms in it, and a Gallery runs all along before the Chambers, so that
as the service is convenient, the Sick have a covered Walk before their Doors:
In the middle of this vast Square there is an Octangular Chapel, so contrived,
that the Sick may, from all their Beds, see the Elevation of the Host, and
Adore it: This House is for the Plague, or Infectious Fevers, and the sick that
want a free Air, are removed hither. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Naples.
The Annunciata is the greatest Hospital in the World; the Revenue is said to
be 400000 Crowns a year: The number of the Sick is not so great as at Milan:
Yet one convenience for the Sick I observed in their Galleries, which was
considerable, thar every Bed stood as in an Alcove, and had a Wall on both
sides. -- The young Children they maintain, are so many, that one can hardly
believe the numbers they boast of; for they talk of many thousands, that are
not seen, but are at Nurse. Idem.

Venice.
At Venice are seventy three Rich Hospitals. St. Clark.

Dutch.
The Tuehthuis or Raspelhuis (or House of Correction for Debauched young Men)
in Amsterdam has, at the entrance of the Gate, two Lions bridled (a proper
Emblem) with this Inscription, Virtutis est domare quae cuncti pavent. They who
are put in, are forced to work and get their Bread with hard Labor. I saw
those who rasped Brazil, having a certain Task set them every day, work so
hard, that being Naked and in a sweat; and the Dust of the Brazil-wood flying
upon them, they were all over painted of a beautiful red Color. -- They told
us, That some that were committed to their Charge, and not to be brought to
work by blows, they placed in a large Cistern, and let the water in upon them,
placing only a Pump by them for Relief, whereby they are forced to labor for
their Lives, and to free themselves from Drowning. One we saw put into a narrow
Dungeon, and kept from Meat. Some are put into this House for a longer time,
some for a shorter. -- This may seem severe to many, yet is not comparable to
that which is reported to have been used formerly at Colen, in the White-Tower,
where such Youths that were not otherwise to be reclaimed, were shut up; the
height and thickness of the Walls secured them from escaping, or from their
Complaints being heard; near the top was placed out of their Reach, a Loaf of
Bread, the last remedy against Starving, which while their bold necessity
forced them to reach at, they executed their last sentence upon themselves, and
miserably brake their own Necks.

Somewhat like the Raspelhuis is the Spinbuis for the young Women who live
loosly, are taken in the night, or can give no Account of their Living. Here
they are bound to make Lace, Sew, or Employ their time perpetually in some
honest Labor. Those of the better sort are permitted to have Chambers apart;
in one large Room I saw about 100 of them, and some very well dressed and fine,
which was an unexpected sight to me, and would sure be more strange in France
or England.

The Weeshuis, or Hospital for Children, where there are 600 Orphans carefully
looked after and well Educated.

The Dolhuis is for such as are delirous, Mad or Melancholic.

The Gasthuis for the Sick, is large and has a great Revenue.

The Mannenhuis for Old Men, and such as are no longer able to labor toward
their own Support.

Besides all these, there are great Sums of Money Collected for the Poor, so
that there is not a Beggar to be seen in the Streets. And upon all appointments
of meeting at the Tavern, of elsewhere, and upon many other occasions,
whosoever fails to come at the exact time, forfeits more or less to the use of
the poor. Dr. Brown's Travels.

Unity and Peaceableness:
Jews.
THe Jews, as to their Principles, ever came short of the Christians in this
respect; it is true, they were obliged to Love one another: But that Precept was
not backed and enforced with such advantageous Arguments to them, as to us.
Nevertheless their Divisions and Quarrels among themselves have not been very
Notorious, above other People: And in case of strife between Neighbors, it is
their custom, between their Vespers and Nocturns, whilst they stay in the
Synagogue, to endeavor a Reconciliation; and he that cannot prevail with his
Neighbor to be Reconciled, goes to the Common Prayer Book, and shutting it,
knocks upon it with his Hand, saying, Any Kelao, I conclude the business, i. e.
I leave off Praying, til my Adversary be reconciled; which accordingly is done.
Purchase.

Christians.
The Christian Religion reconciled Jews and Gentiles.

When Novatus (or Novatian) had made a disturbance in the Church of Rome
(concerning receiving the Lapsed into Communion) Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria
writing to him, tells him, it is better to suffer any thing, than that the
Church of God should be rent into pieces, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 45.

Cyprian says, He that Rents the Unity of the Church, destroys the Faith,
Disturbs the Peace, Dissolves Charity, and Profanes the Holy Sacrament. De
Unit. Eccl.

How passionately Sollicitous Constantine the Great was for composing the
Arrian Heresy, Vid. vit. cjus l. 2. c. 64. and Theod. H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 11.

When perverse and unquiet Persons raised Debates and Contests about the Sea of
Constantinople. Gregory Nazianzen (then Bishop of the place) stood up in the
midst of the Assembly, told the Bishops, how unfit it was, that they, who were
Preachers of Peace to others, should fall our among themselves: He begged of
them, by the Sacred Trinity, to manage their Affairs calmly and peaceably; and
if I (says he) be the Fonds that raises the storm, throw me into the Sea, and
let these storms and tempests cease: I am willing to undergo, whatever you have
a mind to; and tho innocent and unblamable, yet for your peace and quiet, am
content to be banished the Throne, and to be cast out of the City: Only
according to the Prophet's Counsel, be careful to love Truth and Peace, and
therewith freely resigned his Bishopric, tho legally settled in it. Vit. Greg.
Naz. per. Greg. Presb.

S. Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople (after Greg. Naz.) having refuted
those petty Cavits which his Adversaries had made against him adds, But if you
suspect these things of me, we are ready to deliver up our place and power to
whomsoever you will; only let the Church be preserved in Peace and Unity. Hom.
11. in Ep. ad Ephesians.

Who is there among you (says Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians) of
that generous temper, that compassionate and charitable disposition? Let him
say, If these Schisms and Contentions, this Sedition has arisen through my
means, or upon my account, I will depart, and be gone whither soever you
please; only let Christ's Sheepfold, together with the Elders placed over it,
be kept in peace.

Irenaus to Pope Victor (about Easter) tells him, that Bishops in former times,
tho differing in the Observation of it, yet always maintained an entire Concord
and Communion one with another, Eusebius.

When Polycarp came to Rome from the Churches of the East, to treat with Pope
Anicetus about Easter, and other Affairs, tho they could nor satisfy-each other
about the Controversy, yet kissed and Embraced each other with mutual
Endearments, and Received the Holy Communion together. And Anicetus gave
Polycarp leave to Celebrate the Eucharist in his Church. Vid. Innocent. dict.
Ephr. Sir.

Muscovites.
The Muscovites sottishly and insolently command Ambassadors to be uncovered
first, and by force take all advantages over them, and are uncivil to
strangers; and not complaisant amongst themselves. At Nice-novogrod the
Chancellor's Steward coming to see us, the Ambassadors invited him to Dinner;
but when they were to sit down, the Pristaff would take place of him: --
Whore's Son and Dog were the mildest of their Terms for half an hour and
better, -- At last, by entreaty of the Ambassadors were reconciled. D. of
Holstein's Emb. Trav.

They are much given to Quarrelling and Railing one at another, but seldom
Fight, unless with Fists and Switches. And tho they forbear Cursing, Swearing
and Blaspheming, yet their railing expressions (even of Parents and Children
mutually) is such as cannot be expressed without horror. Idem.

In Persia.
At Ispahan, Aug. 28. 1637. The Augustine Friars came to entreat the
Ambassadors to honor them with their presence next day at the Celebration of
the Feast of S. Augustine their Patron; the same favor they desired of the
Muscovian Poslanick, Alexci Savinouits, as also of an Armenian Bishop, and the
English Merchants, who tho of a different Religion, and that in Europe they
would have made some difficulty of it, -- Yet live like Brethren and true
Christians, among their common Enemies. D. of Holstein's Emb. Travels, p. 204.

Modern Heathens.
The Bannyans are no Swaggerers, no Roysters; they abhor Domineering and
Fighting; yea, suffer themselves to be fleeced by any Man, rather than resist
or shed Blood by breach of Peace, or making the least Opposition: They love no
Tumult, no Innovation; are content to submit rather than govern, and wish all
were of their Mind; that is to say, morally Honest, Courteous in Behavior,
Temperate in Passion, Decent in Apparel, Abstemious in Diet, Industrious in
their Callings, Charitable to the Needy, Humble, Merciful, and so Innocent, as
not to take away the Life of the silliest Vermin, and no marvel, for so they
might dislodge their Friends of a peaceful Mansion; for they verily credit the
Passage of Souls into Beasts. Sir Tho. Herb. Trav. into Persia.

Obedience to Civil Governors.
Jews.
THE Jews of late Ages have been found Flexible to any Civil Government, though
in former times not so: For beside the Insurrections made in our Savior's and
the Apostles times, 48 years after the Destruction of Jerualem, they made the
City Bethoron to be their chief City, and rebelled by the Persuasion of
Ben-chocab (Son of the Star Numb. 23.) 200000 in number, but received such a
Slaughter (as themselves tell the Story) that the Blood reached to the Horses
Mouths, etc. In the time of Trajan, they rebelled again in Egypt and Cyrene,
under Luke their Captain, and many thousands of them were destroyed, Dion says
220000. Afterward under a Pseudo-Moses in Arabia, rebelling again, they were
again destroyed. Purchase, Alsted, etc.

Christians.
The Christians obey the Laws that are made, and by the Exactness of their
Lives, go beyond that Accuracy which the Law requires of them. Just. Mart. Ep.
ad Diogn.

Are there any more devoted to you than we, who Pray for the Happiness of your
Government, that according to Right and Equity, the Son may succeed his Father
in the Empire? etc. Athenag. leg. pro Christian.

Tertullian says, Though they refused to pay the Taxes rated upon them for
Maintenance of the Heathen Temples, yet for all other Tributes they obeyed. Dr.
Cave Prim. Christ.

Muscovites.
No People in the World have a greater Veneration for their Prince than the
Muscovites, who from their Infancy are taught to speak of the Czar, as of God
himself, witness their submissive Forms of Speaking, the Honor to see the
Brightness of the Eyes of his Czarick Majesty; -- only God and the Czar knows
it. -- All they have belongs to God and the Czar. D. of Holstein's Emb. Trav.

Inhamban.
The King of Inhamban is much reverenced by his Subject, by whom he is served
upon the Knee; and when he Coughs or Drinks, all those that are about him make
such a Shout, that the Town rings of it. In one particular they differ from
most Nations else, which is, That such as are admitted into his Presence are
bound to sit down; it being the greatest Favor to stand. Dr. Heylin.

Japanners.
In Japan, if any Prince or Great Lord makes a Feast for his Friends, at the
end of the Feast he calls his principal Officers, and asks them if there be any
that has so much Love for him, as to kill himself before the Guests for his
sake. Presently there arises a Dispute among them, who shall have the Honor;
and whoever the Prince is pleased to name, rips up his Belly with a Crik, which
is a kind of Dagger, the point whereof is poisoned. Tavernier's Relation of
Japon.

The Mogul's Subjects, if sent unto any place of Employment, shave not their
Heads, nor cut their Hair, till they return; to show their Discontent while out
of his sight.

When the Mogul sends his commands by Papers to any of his Governors, they
well accompanied, go out to meet the Messenger; as soon as they see the
Letters, they alight from their Horses, fall down on the Earth, and take them
from the Messenger, and lay them on their Heads, and carry them to the place of
public Assembly to be read.

They that are near the Mogul, attend constantly to see him, when he exposes
himself for that purpose in a Balcony, as usually he does three times a day:
When they see him, they cry out -- Live, O Great King; or, O Great King, Health
and Life. And his Subjects will do any thing he bids them, as for a Father to
kill the Son, etc.

The meaner sort to their Superiors use these abject and lowly ceremonies of
Reverence, by putting their right Hand to the Earth.

The Turks are Loyal to the Prince, whom they highly reverence, and blindly
obey. M. de Thev. -- They are not seen to betray their Prince, nor turn to the
side of the Christians.

They give good Precepts of Subjection and Loyalty; for instance, That it is
never lawful to kill their Prince, nay, nor to speak ill under pretense, that
he is a Tyrant. F. Simon.

The Bannyans in East India are content to submit rather than govern, and wish
all People were of their Mind. Sir Tho. Herb.

The Chinese Honor their Mandarins, Reverence their Chiams, little less than
adore their King, Idem. No Subject has recourse save by Petition, Idem. --
Scholars and Merchants are more honored than Men of War: No People in the
World more honor their King than they; for they suppose him too Glorious to
look upon; they obey his Will in every thing; fill his Exchequer yearly with
above 1000000 Crowns; call him -- Lord of the whole World, Son of the Sun,
Beauty of the whole Earth. Nor do any express more filial Respect to Parents
than they; Marry not without their Consent, etc. Idem.

Good Parents.
Jews.
RAbbi Jose, a Wise Man and Mechanic, viz. a Skinner, had eight Sons, to all
which the Jews attribute the Praise of Wisdom. Hottinger.

A great reason of the Jews unshaken Adherence to their Faith, is, That they
are timely and deeply grounded. They make use of that Rule of Solomon
frequently, Catechize a Child in the way he should go, etc. The Parents
strictly forbid their Children all Conversation with Mohammedan Children; suffer
them not to use the Name of God till seven years of Age; teach them to read, by
casting two or three Letters on a smooth Stone or Board at first; to write, by
giving them a Draught of very large Letters on a fair Paper, with a thin Paper:
The Mothers Breakfast their Children with somewhat Sugared or HOney'd, saying,
As this is sweet to thy Palate, so let Learning be to thy Mind; bidding the
Child use no filthy words at School, because God loves clean Lips; not spend
his time idly, etc. Dr. Addison of the Jews in Barbary.

Christians.
Luther was very lovingly affected toward his Children, and gave them liberal
Education; he kept in his House a Schoolmaster to train them up in good Arts
and a Godly Life. When he saw Magdalen his Daughter ready to die, he read to
her Isaiah 26.19. concluding thus -- My Daughter, enter thou into thy Chamber
with Peace, until the Indignation be over-past; I shall e're long be with thee;
for God will not permit me to see the Punishments hanging over the head of
Germany; and upon this wept plentifully; but in public attended the Hearse
without a Tear. Fuller's Lives.

In Holland at Amsterdam, the Parents that are able and rich enough contrive it
so, that when their Sons are Extravagant and Masterless, the Officers seize
upon them, and carry them into the Tuchthuis, where they are not forced to any
hard Labor, but kept in till they see sufficient signs of their Amendment. Dr.
Edw. Brown's Travels.

Mr. Julines Herring's Wife, having thirteen Children -- caused them to learn
the Proverbs of Solomon by heart; and ever before the Father corrected them, he
endeavored to convince them of their Sin against God, and sought by Tears and
Prayers for God's Blessing upon that means for their good. Clark's Lives.

It is a surprising thing, to see so much Learning as one finds in Geneva, not
only among those whose Profession obliges them to Study, but among the
Magistrates and Citizens: And if there are not many Men of the first Form of
Learning among them, yet every one almost here has a good Tincture of a
learned Education; insomuch, that they are Masters of the Latin Tongue, they
know the Controversies of Religion and History, and are generally Men of good
Sense. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Muscovites.
A Muscovite may sell his Son, and alienate him for his own Advantage; but they
seldom come to such Extremities, and had rather see their Children Starve at
home than suffer them to go out any where to Service: Sometimes for Debt they
make over their Children to their Creditors. D. of Holstein's Emb. Travels.

The first thing the Muscovites teach their Children, is, to make their
Reverences and Inclinations to the Images. At Ladoga, I lodged at a Woman's
House, who would not give his Breakfast to a Child she had, who could hardly
either stand or speak, till he had first made nine Inclinations (or Bows) to
the Saint, and as often, as well as he could pronounce it, said his Gospodi,
(Lord have Mercy upon me.) Idem.

Persians.
The Persians put their Children very young, either to Work, or to School, to
learn to Write, Read, and Cast Account. Their Metzid or Mosquits, where they
say their Prayers, serve also for Schools. No City but has as many Metzids as
Streets; every Street being obliged to maintain a Metzid, with a Molla, or
Professor or Principal, and Calife, which is the Regent, belonging to it. Idem.

They have also Universities ( Medressa) and Professors Mederis, at Ispahan,
Sohiras, Ardebil, Meschid, Tabris, Caswin, Kom, Jescht, Schamachie, etc. with
Revenues from such Provinces as pay no Taxes to the King, for the teaching of
Mathematics, Eloquence, Poetry; Natural and Moral Philosophy, Law and
Medicine. Idem.

Chinese.
The first Lectures they make to Youth, are those of Compliments, whereof there
are whole Books. Mandelslo.

Indians.
The Bannians accustom their Children betimes to fly Idleness; and instead of
permitting them to play in the Streets, as we generally do, they teach them
Arithmetic, which they are so perfect at, that without making use of either
Pen and Ink, or Counters, but only of their Memories, they will in a moment
cast up the most difficult Account that can be imagined. Tavernier, Part 2. l.
2. c. 3.

Turks.
The Turks are not much given to Contemplation Learning, yet are careful to
breed up their Children, and to be Instructed; for the which there are many
Schools, where they read their Laws, to the end they may serve in their
Mosques, or be able to Govern the Commonweal. Knolles.

Persians.
The Persians seldom see their Infants, 'till past four Years of Age; from
which, or Twenty, they learn to Ride and Shoot; also, to fair meanly, lodge
hard, watch, till the ground, and be content with small things. Sir Tho.
Herbert.

Heathens, Japan.
In Japan, they bring up their Children with extraordinary Indulgence and
Mildness, never beating, and very seldom chiding them, considering that they
are not yet come to the use of Reason; and for this reason their Children at 7,
8, or 9 Years of Age have more piercing Wits, and are more Searching, and
Inquisitive, and Brisk, than our Youth at Seventeen or Eighteen. Mandelslo's
Trav. p. 157.

Siam.
In Siam, the Inheritance is divided equally to the Children, except the
Eldest, who has some advantage; at five or six Years of Age; they are put to
the Ecclesiastics to Write and Read, and be Instructed in Religion: the
Parents, in the mean time, very seldom seeing them; afterward to a Trade; or,
if Ingenious, continued in their Studies, to fit them for the Priestly
Function, or some other Employments, which among them are bestowed according to
Merit, not Money, Idem. p. 104.

Tunquin.
In Tunquin, when they put forth a Child to learn Sculpture, Painting,
Goldsmith's Work, etc. before they let him Work, they set him upon an Altar,
and Sacrifice to the Idol Tiensa, which is the Patroness of Handicrafts, to the
end she may infuse into the Lad Wit and Aptness to learn. Tavern. Coll.

Good Children.
Jews.
KIng Josiah, Timothy, etc. Hopeful from their Youth.

At Five Years old the Children go to School, are Five Years learning the
Pentateuch, at Ten are put to learn the Mischna, and some choice Parcels of the
Talmud; at Thirteen, they receive the Passover, and are purified, and now are
answerable for their own Faults: And at this Age, by way of Question and
Answer, there are no Youth under Heaven can give so good account of their
Religion, as the Jewish. Dr. Addison.

They are usually girt, as soon as their Bodies will endure it; and never go
ungirt to the Synagogue: ungirt, unblest. Idem.

Christians.
Origin, when a Child, was mightily inquisitive into the recondite meaning of
the Scriptures, even tiring his Parents with asking Religious Questions
comforting his Father in Prison with Letters, and hardly forbearing to offer
himself to Martyrdom. Dr. Cave.

Mr. Tho. Cartwright, in his younger Years, has risen many times in the Night,
to seek out places to pray in. Clark's Lives.

Mr. Arthur Hildersam, of Papist-Parents, was converted by Mr. Desborow, his
Schoolmaster, and fitted for Cambridge by thirteen Years of Age. Idem.

Mr. Rich. Sedgwick, when a Schoolboy, living with an Uncle; -- when the rest
of the Family were at their Games and Dancings, he would be in a Corner
mourning; his Uncle at first imputed it to Bookishness, and rebuked him for it;
but at last, perceiving the Truth of the thing, began to hate him, cast him out
of his Family, saying, A Puritan should never inherit his Land. Idem.

Mr. Julines Hering, born in Montgomery, educated first in Shropshire, next
removed to Coventry, when at School, was noted for his diligence in reading the
Scriptures. -- On Play-days, he, with two or three more School-Fellows, would
pray together, repeat the Heads of their Catechism, with the Sermons which they
heard last Lord's Day. Idem.

Mr. Herbert Palmer, esteemed Sanctified even from the Womb; at the Age of four
or five Years, he would cry to go to his Lady-Mother, (Sir Tho. Palmer being
his Father) that he might hear somewhat of GOD. When a Child, little more than
five Years old, he wept in reading the Story of Joseph, and took much pleasure
in learning Chapters by heart: He learned the French-Tongue almost so soon as
he could speak: He often affirmed, That he never remembered the Learning of it:
By his Discourse, he could hardly be distinguished from a Native Frenchman:
When at the Latine-School, at vacant hours, when others were at play, he was
constantly observed to be reading studiously by himself.

Dr. W. Gouge, at School, continually studious. even at Play-hours, was even
then conscionable in secret Prayer, and Sanctifying the Sabbath, much grieved
at the Sports and Pastimes used too licenciously on that day.

Mr. Tho. Gattaker, often chid by his Father, from his Book.

Mr. Jer. Whitaker, when a Schoolboy, would frequently go in company 8 or 10
Miles, to hear a Warming-Sermon, and took Sermon-Notes, and was helpful to
others in repeating them, etc. -- Though his Father often, and earnestly
endeavored to divert him, yet, when a Boy, he was unmovable in his desires to
be a Minister. Clark's Lives.

Archbishop Usher, at ten Years old, found himself wrought upon by a Sermon,
on Romans 12.1. I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, etc. About the
same time he was moved to a more conscientious observation of the Lord's Day,
by reading some Notes taken from Mr. Perkins's Works: then also he read
Augustine's Meditations, with frequent weeping. Idem and D. Bern.

King Edw. VI took Notes of such things he heard in Sermons, which more nearly
related to himself, Hist. of Reform.

Queen Elizabeth wrote a good hand, before she was four Years old, and
understood Italian. Dr. Burnet, Ibid.

Mrs. Marg. Corbet, Daughter of Sir Nathanael Brent, (Warden of Merton College)
when about 14 Years of Age, wrote Sermons with dexterity, and left many Volumes
of such Notes, writ with her own hand. Clark.

Mrs. Elizabeth Wilkinson, was from her Childhood very docile, took much pains
in writing Sermons, and collecting special Notes out of Practical Divines. When
I was about 12 Years old, (says she, in a Narrative written with her own
hand,) upon reading in the Practice of Piety, concerning the happy Estate of
the Godly, and the miserable condition of the wicked in their Death, and so for
ever unto all Eternity, it pleased the Lord so to affect my heart, as from that
time, I was wrought over to a desire to walk in the ways of God.

Sir Tho. More never offended his Father, nor was ever offended by him.

Olympia Fulvia Morata, an Italian, born at Ferrara, bred at Court there with
the Young Princess, the Duke's Daughter, of a singular Spirit for Learning,
could both Write, and speak Elegant Latin and Greek, in her very young years,
etc. Anon.

Mahometans.
The poor Hindoes, though they have not above five Shillings a Moon for their
Labor, yet will impart at least half that little to their Parents, when in
want. Anon.

The Great Mogul, though he esteemed the whole World as his Vassals, would
sometimes be one to help to carry his Mother in a Palankee upon his Shoulders.
Idem.

Persians.
Parents non honorantes brevis aevi sunt. Sir Tho. Herb. out of Homer.

Amongst the Ancient Persians, Children from the fifth Year of their Age, to
the twentieth, used little other exercise (says Herodotus) than to ride the
Horse, Shoot, and speak Truth. Sir Thomas Herbert.

Chinese.
The Chinese marry not, without their Parents consent, leave their Childrens
Names to them, honor them, be they never so mean; relieve them be they never
so poor; at their death express all symptoms possible of Duty; in white Linen
mourn seldom less than two or three Years.

Mahometans.
It is observed, That the Children of Mahometans have a particular Tenderness
to them that brought them into the World; nay, it is sometimes so great, that
they will rather starve themselves, than suffer their Parents to want. Mandel.
Trav. p. 61.

Persia.
In Persia, the Children go to School betimes; Persons of Quality have Tutors
at home, so that they stir not abroad till 18, unless a Hunting, etc. And
therefore are very modest. Tavern.

Good Husbands.
Jews.
AMongst the Ancient Hebrews, we find Abraham to Sarah, Isaac to Rebecca, Jacob
to Rachel, discharging well the Duties of Husbands to their respective Wives;
that which looks most like a blemish in these Examples, and of others that
lived after them in the Jewish Economy, is their marrying of many Wives, a
Point very obscure, yet connived at and seemingly permitted for the time, and
continued still in use among the Jews, and accounted as one of their chief
Privileges: For they believe, That a Man may take as many Wives as he can find
with Meat, Drink, Clothes, and the right of the Bed. But because Polygamy is
clogged with inconveniences, which an ordinary Eye may foresee consequent upon
it, they are not now adays very fond of the Practice.

Christians.
In Venice, the Wives are bred to so much Ignorance, and they converse so
little, that they know nothing but the dull Superstition on Holy Days, in which
they stay in the Churches as long as they can, and so prolong the little
liberty they have, of going abroad on those days, as Children do their Hours of
Play. They are not employed in their Domestic Affairs, and generally they
understand no sort of Work; so that I was told, that they were they insipidest
Creatures imaginable; they are, perhaps, as vicious as in other places, but it
is in them downright lewdness; -- without any preamble, or preparative,
downright heastliness. -- The Italians, by their excessive caution, want the
true delights of a Married State. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Ancient Heathens.
Socrates is recorded to hear with much Patience, not only other cross
accidents in his Life, Affronts, Reproaches, Injuries, but also the
perverseness of his Wife Xantippe, her railing Words, abusive Behavior,
throwing the Chamber Pot upon his Head, over-throwing the Table, when he had
invited his Philosophical Guests to Feast with him; insomuch, that she herself,
gave this Testimony of him, That she never saw him change Countenance for any
thing that befell him, but used still codem incedere vultu, to go out, and
return home with the same evenness of Spirit, and pleasantness of Face.

Heathens.
In the Moluccaes, they have Officers, who at break of Day, go about the Town,
and with the beat of a Drum awake the People, and exhort the Masters of
Families, to remember their Matrimonial Duties, Mandel. Trav. p. 130.

Moluques.
What is mentioned before about the Office of beating a Drum every Morning at
break of Day, I find observed by another Traveller, with only this addition,
That they account it their public Interest, that the Inhabitants should
multiply. Pac. broke open, Vol. 2.

Good Wives.
Jews.
THE Rabbis have taught the Jews in Barbary, against the time of Childbirth,
to draw Circles in the Chamber of the Woman with Child, and on the Doors within
and without, and Walls, and about the Bed, inscribing every Circle with Adam,
Chava, Chutz. Lilis; i. e. Adam, Eve, Begone Lilis. Lilis was (as they say)
Adam's first Wife, but disobedient and undutiful; and therefore was, upon her
speaking the Most Holy Name, rapt up out of his sight, into the Air; and tho
afterward pursued by three Angels, who overtook her at the Red Sea, she
refused to return, pleading, That she was created in the same manner as Adam
was, and therefore she would not be Subject; but that she was to destroy the
Male-Children for eight Days after the Birth, and Females for Twenty, The
Angels finding in her a shrewd resistance, dismissed her on this condition,
That she should spare those Infants, where she saw their Names written: And to
this Time the Jews use to write the three Angels Names, in a Table or Parchment
(Senei, Sanfenoi, Saumangeloph,) and to hang them for Amulets, about the
Children's Necks. The meaning of Adam, Eve, Chutz, Lilis, is, That if the
Mother bring a Boy, God would not give him a scolding, undutiful Wife, as Lilis
was, but one like Eve. Doctor Addison.

Christians.
My Mother being given to my Father of GOD, became not only his Helper, but
also his Leader and Captain, both by Word and by Deed, drawing him to the best
things; and albeit, in other things it were best for her to be subject to her
Husand, for the right of Marriage; yet in Religion, and Godliness, she was not
afraid to show her self his Mistress. She (being a Christian Woman, and he an
Infidel) watched, fasted, sung Psalms, and prayed for her Husband, and was
careful for him: She converted her Husband; she converted others; she brought
up her Children in the Fear of GOD; her Husband entrusted her with the disposal
of his Money to the Poor. Greg. Nazianz. of his Mother's help to his F. Bp. of
Nazianz.

S. Augustine, speaking of his Mother Monica, says, That she served her
Husband as her Lord; and that she endeavored what she could, for the winning
of him to the Faith: That she patiently sustained the Injuries of the Bed; and
though Patricius was of a hot and choleric Temper, yet she never made
resistance to him in his Anger, neither in Word or Deed; but sometimes, when
she had an opportunity, in his calm Humors, she would give him an account of
what she had done, and the reasons for it. She would often gravely admonish
other Women for laying open the Faults of their Husbands, in Familiar
Discourses with one another; and let them know, that she had a Faculty beyond
them, in escaping scratched Faces and Quarrels, under a Husband of a much
rougher Spirit than theirs; that it was never heard, or known by any sign, that
Patricius had ever beaten his Wife, or Monica ever quarreled with her Husband.
Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 9. At last she begat him to the Faith.

Queen Katherine, ( Henry the Eighth's Wife) used to work with her own hands,
and kept her Women to work with her. Dr. Burnet.

Queen Anne Boleyn worked with her own hands; the last time Months of her Life,
gave 1400 l. to the Poor. Idem.

Bern.
About Bern, the Wives, even of the chief Magistrates, look into all the
concerns of the House and Kitchen, as much as the Wives of the meanest
Peasants. Idem.

Japoners.
The Women live retired, and are very faithful to their Husbands; the Emperor
having put to death one of his Lords, in hopes to enjoy his Wife, who desiring
time to consider upon it, shut her self up in a Room with her Children, and
sending her Servant with a Paper to the Emperor, set the Chamber on Fire, and
burnt her self, etc.

Persians.
The Persian-Women are seen by none but their own Husbands; are very idle in
their own Houses, not so much as looking after any thing of Housewifry; spend
their time in taking Tobacco, going to the Baths, wearing the best Clothes,
bringing Collations; have many Slaves, whom they use to rub their Arms, Legs,
Thighs, 'till they fall asleep in their voluptuous Prison. M. Tavern. l. 5. c.
14. Opposita juxta se posita magis clucescunt.

Muscovites.
As soon as the Wedding is over, the Woman must resolve to live a retired life;
seldom giving visits: and because they are much given to Wine, and have lewd
Tongues, and sometimes pleasure a Friend; no wonder, if sometimes they are
soundly cudgelled by their Husbands. But I cannot say as Barclay, in his Icon
animorum, that they take unkindness, if not beaten. D. of Holst. Ambass. Trav.

Madagascar.
In Madagascar, the Fidelity of Wives to their Husbands is remarkable and
exemplary, and the Men think it no disparagement to take their Advice; and
because they have two Wives commonly, or more, he has most compliance for the
more Aged. Mandelslo.

Armenians.
The Armenian Wives never speak to their Husbands, but only nod; never dine
with them; are seldom seen by them, always rise before day. See Chapter of
Marriage.

Indians.
The Husband dying among the Indians, the Wife can never Marry again; so that
as soon as the Man is dead, the Wife retires to bewail her Husband, shaves off
her Hair, lays aside her Ornaments of Apparel; and all the rest of her Life
after, lives slighted and despised, and in a worse condition than a Slave, in
the same House where she was Mistress before: For this reason, and because the
Bramins flatter them with a hope, that whilst they are in the midst of the
Flames, Ram will appear and reveal wonderful Visions to them, and that they
shall revive again with their Husbands in another World, with more honor and
advantages; they choose to be buried alive with their Husbands. Those who
cannot get leave of their Governors to be burnt, spend the rest of their lives
in doing Penance, and in works of Charity, sitting upon the Road to boil
certain Pulse in Water, and give the Liquor for the use of Travelers; others
sit with Fire always ready to light their Tobacco; others vow to eat nothing
but the undigested Grains in Cow Dung. When the Governor finds no Porsuasions
alter the Woman's resolution (his Secretary making sign that he has received
the Coin) in a surly manner gives the Woman leave, bidding the Devil take her
and all her Kindred. Having got this leave, their Music begins to strike up,
and away they ding to the House of the deceased, with Drums beating, and Flutes
playing before them; and Women following with loud Congratulations and Songs,
in honor of the miserable Creature that is going to dye. I have seen Women
burnt three several ways, in Guzerat and Bengala, etc. Tavern. Trav. p. 2. l.
3. c. 9.

Good Masters.
Jews.
ABraham, the Father of the Faithful, and the Glory of the Jewish Nation, as he
performed the part of a good Master, having that excellent Elogium bestowed
upon him by GOD himself, That he would command his Children and Family, after
him, and instruct them in the Fear of the Lord. So he had a Servant both Pious
and Faithful, that discharged the Trust put in him, delivers his Message, prays
for a Blessing upon his Undertaking, gave thanks for his Success, and this all
in a Momentous Affair, the procuring a Wife for his young Master Isaac. Genesis 24.

Muscovites.
The Muscovites are generally very severe to their Servants, and use the Cudgel
upon a small cause; but especially the Great Dukes have been wont to lash their
Physicians, looking on that Art as infallible formerly, etc. A German
Physician, that had one time disappointed the Czar's expectation in the cure of
the D. of Holstein, his Kinsman, came with a tattered Garment, his Hair hanging
over his Eyes and Face, to the Duke's Chamber, creeping on all four to his
Bedside, told him, That he was not worthy to live, etc. A Kuez being present,
kicked him on the head, and drew Blood: The Physician perceiving favor in the
Great Duke's Countenance, said confidently to him, Great Prince! I know I am
your Slave, but be pleased to give me leave to say, That I am only yours: I
know I have deserved death, and should think my self happy to receive it at
your hands, but it troubles me to be affronted by this Knez, etc. For which he
had a Present of 1000 Crowns, and the Knez a good Cudgelling. D. of H. Am. Trav.

Heathens.
In the Island Fermosa there is so great an Equality of Condition, that they
are yet ignorant of the Names of Master and Servant; yet they render great
Honor one to another, and express a great respect and submission to one
another; not upon the score of a more eminent Dignity, or Wealth, but Age:
which is so Considered, that a young Man is obliged to go aside (to make way
for an Old Man) and turn his back to him, till he be passed. Mandelslo's Trav.

Good Servants.
Jews.
TO pass over here in silence the Example of Abraham's Servant spoken of
before; Joseph is the next most remarkable instance in Scripture, Faithful both
to God and his Master, even in a case where his Mistress was the Rival, and his
own Flesh (doubtless) no Friend or Assistant. The Story of Daniel and the three
Children is well known, who at the same time served God and their Masters with
an Obstinate Integrity, and stoutly resisted, and safely evaded the Attacks and
Attempts of their and fraudulent Adversaries.

Ancient Christians.
S. Augustine tells us of an old Servant-maid, that had carried his Grandfather
upon her back, when he was a Child; and therefore for her. Age and excellent
behavior, was afterward much respected by her Master and Mistress, who
thereupon committed to her charge the care of their Daughters: She was, says
S. Augustine, Religiously severe, and soberly prudent in teaching and
restraining them; For she would not allow them to drink so much as water,
except at Meals, tho never so thirsty; fearing an ill Custom, and adding a
wholesome word, You now drink water, because you have not Wine in your Power;
but when you come to have Husbands, and be Mistresses of Cellars and Boutiques,
you will scorn Water, but still have the custom of Drinking. By this means she
so restrained their tender Appetites, that they did not so much as desire any
thing that was not decent; but notwithstanding, Monica, S. Augustine's Mother,
being employed, sometimes to fetch Wine, by her Parents, out of wantonness used
to sip a little out of the Flagon, till at last she could drink almost a full
Cup without breathing; the old Maid came and caught her and with bitter
insulting upbraided her, calling her a Wine-bibber, which so pricked and
provoked her, that presently she saw the illness of the Act condemned the
custom, and left it off. Confess. l. 9. c. 8.

Hindoes, Heathens.
They serve for 5 sh. a Month, which is paid usually the next day after the
change, beforehand: They stand usually to be hired in the Marketplace, If their
Salary be not paid exactly at the time, they will be gone; but if bidden to
provide themselves of other Masters, they will not stir, but serve out their
time to an hour.

They keep within call of their Masters, and will not stir without leave.

Japan.
In Japan the Departure of great Lords is commonly attended by the Voluntary
Execution of 20 or 30 Vassals or Salves, who rip up their Bellies, and dye with
their Masters; this they are obliged to by Oath, and it is done partly by way
of acknowledgment of the particular kindness which their Lords had for them;
having acquainted their Lord, that they are willing to be obliged to Sacrifice
themselves in that manner, when accasion shall require, they entertain him with
a short discourse to this purpose.

Most mighty Sir, you have many other Slaves and Servants, of whose Affection
and Fidelity you are assured; who am I? Or what have I deserved? That you
should honor me with your favor above any of the rest? I resign up this Life
to you, which is already yours, and promise you, I will keep it no longer than
it shall be serviceable to yours.

Then with a Bowl of Wine (which is the most Religious Ceremony they have among
them) they Confirm their Oaths, which thereby become Inviolable. Mandelslo, p.
142.

But it is for the most part Slaves weary of Life, that offer themselves so
freely to Death.

Good Ministers and Pastors.
Jews.
IT Cannot be reasonably expected, that I should have much to say upon this
point, save what we meet with in Sacred Scripture, which I refer my Readers to.
Nothing material has occurred to me in my reading, concerning their Modern
Doctors.

Christians.
Here is so spacious a Field to walk in, that the plenty of matter rather makes
a confusion in my thoughts, than conduces to order and method. The Fathers of
the Church, the many Ecclesiastical Doctors of the East and West, of the
Lutheran and Zuinglian Denomination, of the Dutch, French, and especially
English Church, so famed for Learning, Courage, Devotion, Writings, Labors,
Sufferings, etc. Are so obvious to every Reader; that I shall rather choose to
say little or nothing, or next door to nothing, than begin so long a Catalogue,
and not go through with it to some degree of Perfection; which to do, would
require a pretty large Volume; only a little, for Orders sake, take these two
or three short touches which, I believe, will be so far from satisfying a
Reader of an eager appetite, that I shall both begin and end, displeased my
self.

In the Church of Milan, S. Augustine says, he heard Ambrose every Lord's Day
Preach; Bishop Ridley Preached every Holy Day and Sunday, Bishop Latimer twice
a Week.

S. Austin would never purchase Houses nor Lands, nor any other Possessions for
his Church, -- And they who knew his mind, sold their Lands, and gave Austin
the Money, -- Being persuaded, that the good Bishop would bestow it on Pious
uses, and not in making new Purchaces for enriching of his Church. -- Be often
refused the Inheritances offered to his Church, thinking it fitter they should
go to their Lawful Heirs. F. Simon, ox Possid. in vit. Aug.

S. Austin admitted no Clerk into his Church, till first he had disposed of all
his Goods, either in favor of the Poor, or by Sale: He was for having all
Clerks really Poor, in imitation of the Apostles, and for living altogether in
common on the Revenues of the Church. F. Simon in his Hist. of Eccl. Reven.

Luther, when his Friends dissuaded him from going to Worms, at a Disputation
then held between the Papists and Protestants, lest they should burn him, as
they had John Husse, he said, if I knew there were so many Devils in Worms, as
tiles on the Houses (did I hear it were like to go ill on our side) in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ I would go thither.

Calvin at the 28th year of his Age wrote his Institutions, at his Death his
Inventory amounted not to more than 60 pound, taking into the Account his
Library.

Miles Coverdale Bishop of Excester, Preached every Sunday and Holy Day, and
most commonly read twice in the week a Divinity Lecture. Was hospitable, sober,
humble, suffered none to abide in his House, who could not give account of his
Faith, and lived not accordingly. Clark.

In Q. Mary's Days he was by K. Christian of Denmark's means dismissed out of
Prison, went into Germany, Preached at Burghsaber; upon the Queen's Death
returned, but tho much sued to, would not accept of his Bishopric again, but
continued in London, Preaching the Gospel, as a private Minister, whilst
strength would permit, and Died, Anno. aetat. 88.

Mr. R. Greenham Preached twice on the Lord's Days and Catechized, Preached on
Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday; on Thursday he Catechized; on Friday he
Preached; on the weekdays in the Morning as soon as he could well see,
drenching his Shift with Sweating; twice a day he Prayed in his Family; after
Sermon he took account of his Servants; rising at 4. a Clock Winter and Summer
to his Studies: -- Disliked Martin-mar-Prelate (a Book) as tending to make Sin
Ridiculous, not Odious; laid the charge of the Schism between Conformists and
Nonconformists, on either or neither side, etc. died at 60. Clark. -- That
Saint of ours, so called by Jos. Hall Bishop of Norwich.

Tunquin.
The Bonzes in Tunquin Beg for their Living; and are not like the Bonzes in
other Kingdoms, who beg Alms as it were their due: These on the contrary use
all the modesty and humility, that may be, never taking more than is needful
for them: And if they have any thing to spare, they give it to the Poor Widows
and Orphans, that cannot get their Living. Tavernier's Collect.

Zurich.
The Clergy (of Zurich) if they subsist plentifully, they labor hard; for they
have generally two or three Sermons a day, and at least one; the first begins
at 5 a Clock in the morning. At Geneva, and all Switzerland over, there are
daily Sermons, which were Substituted upon the Reformation from the Mass; but
the Sermons are generally too long, etc. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Pegu.
The Talapoi in Pegu give the People a Sermon, when they come to Church, and by
their exemplary Lives, preserve to themselves a good reputation. Paquet broke
open, vol. 2.

They Condemn and Preach against the Offerings the Commonalty make to the
Devil; they go barefoot, live in Woods and Deserts, eat but once a day; they
meddle not with Points of Doctrine, but insist on points of Morality and good
Works; the Piety of their Lives gives them great Honors after their Deaths.
Ibid.

Siam.
The Clergy of Siam are regular and exemplary in their Lives, they Preach to
the People on Festivals; it is burning alive to have to do with Women; in every
Temple there is a Convent of Priests to say daily Prayers morning and evening.
Ibid.

Cambodia.
It is thought here a horrid Sacrilege for the Clergy to intermeddle with
temporal Affairs. Ibid.

Mexico.
The Priests exercise daily 4 times; at midnight, morn, noon and Sunset,
lashing themselves with knotted Cords, drawing Blood upon themselves with
knotted Cords, drawing Blood upon themselves with Bodkins, Preaching to the
People at some Feasts. Purchase.

Good Parishoners, or People, to their Priests.
Jews.
I Have already in the former Part, signified the Allowances made to the Priest
and Levite, under the Law, by Divine Ordinance; and have not much more to add
here, save that, first of all, the People were generally very Just in paying
their Tithes; and some of them proceeded so far, as to make a Decimation of
their least things, their Mint and Cummin, lest they should not reach the
Exactness of the Law. Secondly, That when they made any Address to the
Prophets, they commonly brought their Presents along with them, as Saul to
Samuel, 1 Samuel 9.7. and Naaman to Elisha, 2 Kings 5.5.

Christians.
Alsted, as I remember, cites the Ancient Chronicles for it, when he tells us,
That about the same time that Constantine the Great ordered Tithes to be paid
to the Clergy, a Voice was heard, as it were from Heaven, Nunc venenum infusum
est Ecclesiae, which I relate not, as if I were of that Opinion that Tithes are
not due; but I fear the Payment in kind has ill Effects.

The Clergy were so well maintained in the Primitive Times, by the frequent
Contributions of the People, that Ammianus Marcell. says, they lived like
Pritices. Ammian. Marcell, l. 27.

St. Chrysostom was forced to make a whole Sermon (...), etc. i. e. against
them that envied the Clergy, Dr. Cave.

Also, He describes at length the sad State of Bishops, and other Churchmen,
since the Church enjoyed fixed Revenues, because they forsook their
Employments, to sell their Corn and Wine, and to look after their Glebes and
Farms; besides much of their time was spent in Lawsuits. He wishes that he
might see the Church in the State that it was in, in the Times of the Apostles,
when it enjoyed only the Charity and Oblation of Believers. F. Simon Hist. of
Eccl. Rev. -- out of Chrysostom. Hom. 86. in Mat. St. Augustine was of the same Mind.
Ibid.

In the Universities of Bern and Lausanne are maintained Professors; the one
for the German Territory, which is the Ancient Canton, and the other for the
New Conquest, which is the French; in the former are about 300 Parishes, in the
latter about 150. But in the Benefices on the German side, the ancient Rights
are preserved so, that some Benefices are worth 1000 Crowns; whereas in the
Pais de Vaud the Provisions are set off as Sallaries, and are generally from
100 to 200 Crowns. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Heathens.
In Siam the Estaites of Persons of Quality are ordinarily divided into three
parts; one to the King, one to the Ecclesiastics (they defraying the Charges
of the Funerals,) and the third to the Children. Mandelslo's Trav, p. 104.

In Pegu their Preachers are still Preaching and Begging; their Alms are
brought to them in the Pulpits whilst they are Preaching. Rosse. The People
drink the Water, wherein the Preachers wash themselves, accounting it Holy.
Rosse.

In Mexico the Revenues of the Priests were great. Rosse.

The Southern Americans have their Priests in great Esteem, making use of them
as their Physicians, and therefore they are very Rich; for they have all the
Goods of him whom they cure. Idem.

In Siam, the Bonzes (or Priests) are highly reverenced, as well at Court, as
among the People: The King himself has such a Value for some of them, as to
humble himself before them. Tavernier, Part 2. l. 3. c. 18. Some of them live
by Alms, others have Houses with good Revenues.

Protestants.
At Zurich the Dean and Chapter are still continued as a Corporation, and enjoy
the Revenues which they had before the Reformation. Dr. Burnet 's Letters.

The Bishop of Coire has yet reserved a Revenue of about 1000 l. Sterling a
year. Ibid. 50 or 60 l. is the common Sallary of a Geneva Minister.

Papists.
One that knew the State of this Kingdom well, assured me, that if it (viz.
Naples) were divided into five parts, upon a strict Survey, it would be found,
that the Churchmen have four parts of the five; which he made out thus, They
have in Soil above half of the whole, which is two and a half; and in Tithes,
and Gifts, and Legacies, they have one and a half more; for no Man dies without
leaving a considerable Legacy to some Church or Convent. Ibid.

Pegu.
The Talapoi in Pegu live by the Alms of the People, and preserve a great
Veneration to themselves by their exemplary Lives. Packet broke open, Vol. 2.

Siam.
The Revenues of the Temples, the Charity of the People, and the Donations of
the Nobility, maintain the Clergy in Siam. Ibid.

Loango.
In Loango they will rather die than touch any Meat their Priests forbid them.
Ibid.

Mexico.
There did continually reside in the great Temple (of Vitzliputzli in Mexico)
5000 Persons, which had their Meat, Drink and Lodging; the Temple enjoying
great Revenues and diverse Towns for its Maintenance. Purchase.

Laboriousness.
Jews.
RAbbi Johoschua Ben Hananiah, was so intent upon the Law, that he had no time
to spend upon his Body, or washing his Garments: Hence the Jews derive that
Scoff of the Emperor Trajan's Daughter, Fine Wisdom in a Foul Vessel: To which
he is reported to make answer, Wine is not kept in a Vessel of Silver or Gold,
but in a Cask only, -- Sed in testaceo tantum. Hotting.

Ben Azay, because he was mightily addicted to the Study of Learning, would not
Marry a Wife. Menasse Ben Israel.

Christians.
Origin is recorded to be a Man of indefatigable Labor and Industry, and so
studious and inquisitive after Learning, that he soon became too hard for his
Teachers.

Tertullian was taken up night and day in reading and expounding the Scriptures.

St. Augustine tells us, he went sometimes to discourse Ambrose, but still
found him so busy at his Study, that being unwilling to interrupt him, he
returned back without speaking to him.

Bid was wont to say, that there was so much Work to do, in so little a time,
that he would not lose any of it; and that as for Pleasures, we must only touch
them with the tops of our Fingers, as we do Honey, for fear of surfeiting on
them.

Erasmus, in a Letter to Paracelsus, says, -- For some time now I have neither
had leisure to take Physic, nor be Sick, nor Die; I am overwhelmed with so
many Toils of Studies.

Bishop Latimer every Morning ordinarily, Winter and Summer, rose at two a
Clock to his Studies. See his Life.

Bishop Jewel was so Industrious, that he hid himself the greatest part of the
day in his Study, and so recalled his Senses from exterior Objects, that
Chrysippus-like he had need of a M^^^ssa to put him in mind of his Meat. See
his Life.

Mr. J. Gregory of Christ's-Church, Oxon, for diverse years together, studied 16
hours in 24, with much Appetite and Delight. See his Life.

Muscovites.
No Muscovite, of what Quality soever, but he sleeps after Dinner; about Noon
most Shops are shut up, the Merchants or their Apprentices sleeping at the
Door; no speaking with Persons of Quality at that time more than at Midnight.

Idleness seems to be bestowed on the Muscovites (a barbarous People) as their
Portion. D. of Holstein 's Emb. Travels, p. 60.

They are naturally so much inclined to Idleness, that it were impossible to
bring them to take any Pains, but by the Whip and Cudgel: Those who are
Freeborn, if Poor, will sell themselves, with their Family, for a small matter
for Slaves. Idem.

Protestants.
Vrsin had these Verses writ upon his Study door,

Amice, quisquis huc venis,
Aut agito paucis, aut Abi,
Aut me laborantem Adjuva.
In English,
My Friend, or whosoe'er thou art,
Dispatch in short and so depart:
Or to my Studies Help impart. Melch. Adam.
Papists.
Alphonsus Tostatus, a Spaniard, wrote so many Commentaries on Sacred
Scripture, and other things beside, before the fortieth year of his Age, that
some have reckoned three Pages (in Folio) for every day of his Life: Insomuch
that it is said of him,

Hic stupor est Mundi, qui Scibile discutit omne. Buzier, Flosc. Hist. and
Leigh in his Religion and Learning. Tostatus learned all the Liberal Sciences,
without being taught, and writ in the Forty years he lived, as much as most in
that time can read; and yet at the same time was Counselor to the King,
Referendary Major of Spain, and Professor of Philosophy, Divinity and Law, in
Salamanca. Auth. of the Educ, of young Gentlemen.

Bonaventure wrote the Bible over with his own hand, etc. J. S.

Aquinas, when a Child, would not rest without his Book; was always studious,
seldom seen to Laugh; when others were at their Merriment, he was Meditative;
insomuch that at Supper with King Lewis of France, whilst the rest were making
Merry, he fell into a deep Meditation, and forgetting himself, struck the
Table, saying, That now the Manichees were foiled, Nunc conclusum est contra
Manichaeos.

Mahometans.
Avicenna (born at Bochara) at Ten years of Age understood Humane Sciences and
the Alcoran, and went through the whole Encyclopedia by Eighteen; during which
time he slept not one whole Night; and in all that time minded nothing but
reading: In any Difficulty he went to the Temple and prayed. Hotting.

Humility.
Jews.
THE Jews of Barbary entertain no Thoughts of Merit, but hold that all Rewards
proceed from God's bounty. Dr. Addison.

In their Prayers they commonly stand, but bowing their Heads.

Christians.
Constantine the Great, when one told him how Happy he was, whom God had
thought worthy of so great an Empire, and reserved a much better Kingdom for in
Heaven; he was highly offended, and advised the Man not to talk so any more,
but rather turn his Praises of him, into Prayers for him, that both here and
hereafter he might be accounted worthy to be reckoned amongst the Servants of
God. De vit. Constable.

Nebridius, a Roman Gentleman, Cousin German to the Empress, and Play-fellow
and School-Fellow with the young Emperors, yet was no whit swelled with Pride,
reflecting upon others with a surly look (though in the vigor of his Youth)
but rendering himself amiable to all, reverencing the Princes, and condescending
to others.

Placilla the Empress, used in her own Person to visit the Hospitals, cure the
Lame and Sick with her own Hands, to prepare and give them their Provisions,
Cooking and providing Victuals for them. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 18.

St. Hierom says of Paula a Roman Lady, that she carried her self with so much
Lowliness, that whoever had seen and not known her, could not but have mistaken
her for the meanest of the Maids that waited on her; she always seemed both in
Clothes, and Voice, and Garb, and Gate, the least and most contemptible of all
the rest. Dr. Cave, Prim. Christ.

Cyprian determined from his first entering upon his Bishopric, not to adjudge
any thing by his own private order, without the Counsel of his Clergy, and the
Consent of the People. Ep. 5. p. 13, 14.

Nazianzen reports of his Father, (a Bishop too) that his Humility consisted
not in his Dress, but in the Constancy of his Mind; not in the hanging down of
his Head, or the Softness of his Tone, or the Demureness of his Look, or the
Gravity of his Beard, or the Shaving of his Head, but in the Frame and Temper
of his Soul, being as Humble in his Mind, as he was Sublime and Excellent in
his Life: And when no Man could arrive at the Perfection of his Virtues, yet
every one was admitted to a Freedom of Converse with him. Both in his Garb and
Diet he equally avoided Pomp and Sordidness; and though a great Restrainer of
his Appetite, would yet seem not to do it, lest he should be thought plainly to
design Glory to himself, by being needlessly singular above other Men. Orat. 19.
in laud. Patr.

Eusebius relates of some of the Confessors under the Persecution of M.
Aurelius, that though for their Testimony of the Truth, which they had born at
the Dearest Rate (on this side Death) though they had been frequently thrown to
wild Beasts, exposed to Fire, and the Remains of Wounds and Violence were
visible all over their Bodies, yet would not be called Martyrs, but with Tears
begged the Peoples Prayers that they might perfect all by real Martyrdom. Hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 2.

Dr. John Reinolds -- as Learned as any Man in the World, as Godly as Learned,
as Humble as Godly. Car. in vit. Ric. Capel.

Mr. Ric. Capel could refuse Honors, as Musculus did, and contented himself
with plain and mean things, Idem.

Cajetan, the Flower of the Cardinals, would never be in his Silks and
Braveries, but kept his old Fashions to his dying day.

Mclancthon wouldnot disdain to do that, which his meanest Servants would
scarce put their hand to. Ibid.

John Duns Sctus, Doctor Subtilis, who was of Merton College Oxon, had these
Verses made upon him,

Doctor Subtilis, nomen Subtilia donant,
Quem vestis vilis, pes nudus, corda coronant.
In English.
A Subtle Doctor, of a Subtle Wit,
Brave Heart, vile Raiment, and with naked Feet.
Leigh's Relig. and Learn. Luther calls himself a Sack of Worms-meat, a lump of
Earth, a bundle of Wickedness, an unworthy Minister of the Gospel.

Mahometans.
They praise Humility, that is, esteeming others more than themselves. F. Simon.

The Persians and Turks are of that bad Humor, rather to build new Houses,
than to repair old ones. -- The Custom is grown to that height, that the
Children will not live in their Parents Houses after their decease. M.
Tavernier.

Armenians.
The Armenians on Mandy-Thursday perform the Ceremony of the Washing of Feet:
They all come to Church, where the Priest washes the right Foot of the Men, and
the left of the Women, and makes thereon the Sign of the Cross, with Butter
consecrated to that purpose: And this done, he is cast into a Chair by twelve
Men, who rasse him up into the Air, with Exclamations of Joy, keeping him there
till he promises to treat them with a Dinner. D. of Holstein 's Embass.

Papists.
Dunawd being consulted at Bangor, what should be done about the Entertainment
of Austin the Monk sent from Rome, advised them, -- Give him the meeting, and
regard his Messages, if he be a Man of God: But how may that be known? said
they: You know what our Savior says, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly,
etc. If so -- it is likely he belongs to Christ; If with state and distance he
thinks to reduce and overawe you, you are to defend the Liberties of your
Church, etc. which last took place; for observing him to be guilty of
Haughtiness, they labored to contradict all that he said. Th. Jones of
Oswestree.

Cromwell, in Henry the Eighth's time, of a Blacksmith was made an Earl (and had
the Garter given him) Lord Privy Seal, Lord Chamberlain of England, Lord
Vicegerent, Master of the Rolls, yet afterward forsook by his Friends,
(except Cranmer) insulted over by his Enemies, attainted without making his
answers, (which Counsel he had been the Author of against Pool's Mother before)
in a Letter concluded thus, Written with the heavy Heart, and trembling Hand of
your Highness's most heavy and most miserable Prisoner, and poor Slave, Tho.
Cromwell. -- And underneath, Most Sacred Prince, I cry for Mercy, Mercy, Mercy.
Dr. Burnet.

Contempt of Wealth.
Vide Self-Denial.
Jews.
THE Jews are very Covetous and great Usurers.

Christians.
Trypho, the Jew, tells Justin Martyr (by way of reproach) that the Christians
foolishly undervalued and threw away all the Enjoyments and Advantages of this
World. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 308.

When Agbarus, the Toparch of Edessa, Offered Thaddeus (one of the 70
Disciples) great Sums of Gold and Silver for the pains he had taken, and the
great things he had done amongst them, he refused them with this Answer, To
what purpose should we receive good things from others, who have freely
forsaken and renounced our own. Eusebius. H. Eccl.

Quintianus, the President under Decius the Emperor, asking Agatha the Virgin
Martyr, why she descending of such rich and illustrious Parents would stoop to
such low and mean Offices; she Answered, Our Glory and Nobility lies in this,
That we are the Servants of Christ, Sim. Metaphr. Sermon. Martyr. ad diem Feb. 5.
Tom. 1.

Origin, when he might have lived upon the Estate of others, Sold his Library
to one, who was to allow him 4 Oboli a day; the day he spent in Tasks and
Exercises, a great part of the night in Study; always remembered that of our
Savior, not to have two Coats, not to wear Shoes. Dr. Cave Prim. Christ.

Papists.
S. Francis's Story is well known, who having a design to renounce the World,
and Offering his Money to a Priest, who refused it, cast it presently away, and
put himself under a Vow of perpetual Poverty. S. Francis Sales says, he Loved
Poverty above all things, and called it his Mistress.

Muscovites.
The Muscovites spend but little in Housekeeping: It Is not above Thirty Years
ago, that even their Lords were Lodged in very poor Wooden Buildings: Their
Hushold-Stuff is suitable to their Lodgings, consisting only in three or four
Pots, and as many Wooden or Earthen Dishes. Some have Pewter, but very few, but
there is not any Silver. They know not what Scouring means; even the Duke's
looks little better than the Tavern-Pots. The better sort hang their Rooms with
Mats; have few Feather-beds, but Mattresses, or Chaff, or Straw; sometimes lie
upon their Clothes on a Bench or Table. D. of Holstein's Emb. Travels.

Mahometans.
Their Dervises relinquish the World, and spend all their Days in Solitude and
Retiredness, expecting a Recompense; undergoing very sharp Penances, crying out
continually in such Expressions as these, -- God Almighty look upon me, I love
thee; I Love not the World, but I Love thee, and do all for thy sake, -- After
this Retirement they will rather choose to Famish, than stir from their Cells,
and therefore are Relieved by the Charity of others.

Banians.
The Goeghy (a Sect of them) are forbidden by their Law to be Proprietors of
any thing; they live in Woods, like Hermits, nothing about them but a Linen
Cloth to hide Nature, wherever they sit down, they throw Ashes on their Head,
speak to no body by way of Salutation, or Petition: If nothing be given them,
they feed on Roots an Herbs; never Command their Servants to do ought.
Mandelslo.

Ancient Heathen.
When a great deal of Gold and Silver was carried along in a Solemn Pomp before
Socrates, he cried out, Quam multa non Desidero! How many things do I not
covet! He commonly went barefoot.

Anacharsis to Hanno sends greeting. A Scythian covering is my Clothing; the
thick Skin of my Feet, my Shoes; the Earth my Bed; Hunger my Sauce; I eat Milk,
Cheese and Flesh. You may come to me, and find me contented, if you please; but
for those gifts, with which you are delighted, bestow them either on your
Citizens, or the immortal Gods. (For he valued not Money at all.) Cicer. Tusc. 5.

Many despise Riches, who being content with a little, are pleased with a
slender diet and raiment. Cic. in Laelio.

Government of the Tongue.
Jews.
THe Esseans were much addicted to silence.

Christians.
I am of Opinion with S. Gregory, when justly accused of a Fault, Humble thy
self, and confess that thou deservest more, than the Accusation laid upon thee;
if falsely accused, excuse thy self meekly, denying thy self to be guilty; for
thou owe that reverence to Truth and the Edification of thy Neighbor: But if
after all this, men continue to accuse thee; vex not thy self, nor strive to
get thy excuse admitted: For having done thy duty to Truth, thou must do it to
Humility. S. Fr. Sales.

We scorn to live upon any terms, by which we must be forced to maintain our
Lives by lies and falsehoods, Just. M. Apol. 1.

It is enough for a good man, either by way of Affirmation or Denial, to give
this assurance, (...), I speak truly. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.

Some of the Ancient Fathers held all Swearing unlawful.

S. Basil Exhorts all vain Swearers to repent; appoints eleven years suspension
from the Sacrament for Perjury: False Accusation before the Church to be
punished with Suspension; if proved, but not revealed in due time, with two
years suspensision; tho the person was guilty, yet if not proved sufficiently,
with five years: False Accusation of a Minister, Bishop, Priest or Deacon, with
Suspension perpetual.

Greg. Thaumaturgus durst never call his Brother Fool, etc.

Narcissius, Bishop of Jerusalem, being falsely accused by three Malicious
Fellows, who accused him with sad Imprecations upon themselves, all three of
them were, in process of time, overtaken with the same Judgments they wished
upon themselves. Vid. Pontan. Bellaria, etc. Item. D. Cave Prim. Christ.

Muscovites.
Railing and Insolent Language was Prohibited to the Muscovites by the great
Duke upon pain of Whipping; and if offered to persons of Quality, a Fine of
sometimes 2000 Crowns; but the People are so addicted to it, that the Order is
for the most part ineffectual. D. of Holstein's Emb. Trav. p. 60.

Papists.
The Nuns of Venice have been under much scandal for a great while; -- Chiefly
those of S. Zachary and S. Lawrence, where none but Noble Venetians are
admitted, and where it is not so much as pretended, that they have retired for
Devotion, but that they might not be too great a Charge to their Family. They
are not Veiled, their Neck and Breast is bare, and they receive much Company;
but that which I saw, was in a public Room, in which there were many Grills
for several Parlours, so that the Conversation is very confused; for there
being a different Company at every Grill, and the Italians speaking generally
loud, the noise of so many loud Talkers is very disagreeable.

The Nuns talk much and very disgracefully, and allowed themselves a liberty in
rallying that other places could not bear. Dr. Burnet's Let.

It Is said of Th. a Kempis, that when he was in Company with others who were
discoursing of Secular Matters, he sat still silent, but when any Religious
Subject was started, he was warm and Fluent. See his Life.

Mahometans.
They declaim most against Slander, and Backbiting, and Censurings even when
true, if of things hidden; as that such a Person is Dead in Unbelief, or
deserves Hell, unless expressly mentioned by the Prophet, as the Devil,
Abuhasel, Abugehel. F. Simon.

Tunquinese.
In the Kingdom of Tunquin, either at their ordinary Meals, or upon foam
Festival, they account it a great piece of manners to be silent; or if they
have a desire to Discourse, they always allow the Eldest the honor of
beginning, bearing a great respect to them that are Aged: But the youngest at
the Table is never permitted to begin their Discourse. Tavernier Collect. of
Relat, etc.

Japannese.
In Japan Lying is punished with Death Packet broke open, vol. 2.

Ancient Heathens.
Anacharsis, a Barbarian came out of Scythia to Athens, to look for a Wise Man;
but finding none, was resolved to search all Greece, -- at last having found
one Myson, in a poor Town called Chenes, whose business was to look to his
Family, Till the Ground, Educate his Children, was satisfied, -- (...), i. e.
he admired mightily the quietness of the Man's works, and the sparingness of
his words. Max. Tyr. diss. 15.

Sobriety in Apparel,
Jews.
THE Apparel of the Jews in Barbary, at this day, is thus: First, a brimless
Cap, of black color, (to distinguish them from the Moors, who wear red);
ship-shoes, Linnen-Drawers, and Vest; over which they put a loose Garment,
called a Ganiphe; that is, a black square piece of course hair Stuff, closed at
the cross Corners, and all round it, is a large Thrum. Dr. Addison.

Christian.
It is not enough for a Christian to be chaste and modest; he must appear to be
so. Tertul. de Cult. Foem. l. 2. c. 13.

Two ends of Clothing, Honesty and Necessity.

Another end, -- Distinction of Sexes, and Degrees. Clem. Alex.

Such Women, as cannot otherwise gain upon their (unbelieving) Husbands, may,
if their Husbands require, go a little more Trim and Neat. Idem.

Tertullian changed his Coat for a Cloak, not when he firs turned Christian,
but when made Presbyter of Carthage; called therefore by him Sacerdotis
habitus. Pallium being the proper Habit of Philosophers among the Greeks, and
of the stricter sort among the Christians, whether Clergy or Laity, especially
Clergy. Dr. Cave.

The Garment that we should wear, ought to be mean and frugal, not curiously
wrought with diverse Colors, the Emblem of Craft and Deceit; but white, to
signify our Simplicity and Truth. Clem. Alex.

Cyprian observed a due Decorum in his Garb, keeping a just distance between
Slovenliness and Superfluity.

Chrysostom commends Olympias, (a Woman of great Birth, and Estate, and Piety)
for the incredible modesty and meanness of her Attire, not much better than
that of the poorest Beggar; having nothing in her Garb or Gate, that was
feigned or gaudy, elaborate or artificial.

Against Painting and Beautifying the Body.

Let them who have a mind to it, glory in the Flesh, we are under the profession
of Humility: all Glory is vain and swelling, especially from the Flesh. A
Christian may glory in the Flesh, but when it is torn in pieces, for the sake of
Christ, that the Spirit may be crowned; not that it may prove a Snare to
attract the Eyes and Sights of Young-Men's ungovernable Passions after it, etc.
Cyprian.

Obj. It Is acceptable to our Husbands.

Answ. 1. Every wise and good Man cannot but like his Wife better without them:
Every Husband is a rigid Exactor of his Wife's Chastity. If he be a Christian,
he will not require any such feigned Beauty; if a Gentile, let her do what she
can, he will suspect her to be naught. Tertull.

2. The loose delicate Arts come too near the Practice of lewd wanton
Prostitutes; Birds and Beasts are content with their own natural Beauty and
Colors; Woman only, as if inferior to them, thinks her self so deformed, as
that there is need to repair the defect by external, bought and borrowed
Beauty; Children-like, they admire every thing that is strange and gaudy; they
show themselves to be Women that have put off shame and modesty, and whosoever
calls them so, shall do them no wrong, as carrying the very signs and
representations of it in their Faces. Clem. Alex.

3. These additional Arts are a bold and sacrilegious Attempt, and an high
contempt of God; that is to reform what God has formed. -- That such a one
has cause to fear, least when the Day of Resurrection comes, He that made
them, should not know them, etc. And then he brings in the Densor of the World,
thus speaking: This is none of my Workmanship, nor this my Imdge and Likeness.
Cyprian.

Theodoret tells of his own Mother, That when young, having a Distemper in one
of her Eye s, which had baffled the Physicians, she went to one Peter, near
Antioch, famous for Miracles, of a very Severe and Ascetic Life; she, to render
her self the more considerable in his Eye, put on her richest Robes, Pendants,
Chains of Pearl, etc. The uncomplemental Man severely checked her, with a
comparison drawn from an unskilful Bungler, going about to correct a Picture
made by an excellent Artist; and not without much importunity would grant her
Errand. In fine, she went away with a double Cure, of Body and Mind. Hist.
Relig. c. 9. in vit. Petri.

Clemens Alex. compares such Women to the Egyptian Temples; without, Splendour
and magnificent Groves, rows of Pillars, Walls set off, with Stones of several
Countries, Carved, etc. The Temples garnished with Gold, Silver, Amber, etc.
within, behind the Curtain, a Cat, a Crocodile; So Women trimming themselves
with Gold, Curling their Hair, Painting their Faces, blacking their Eyes,
coloring their Locks, etc. within, a lustful Ape, a crafty Serpent. etc.

Nazianzen says, his Sister Gorgonia used no Gold to make her Fine, no yellow
Hair, ordered into Locks and Curles, -- No loose transparent Garments, no
Luster of Stones and Jewels, no Arts of Painting, etc.

Clothe your selves with the Silks of Honesty, the fine Virtues of Piety, the
Purple of Modesty, and being thus beautified and adorned, God himself will be
your Lover. Tertull.

Mahometans and Hindoes.
They never Pride it in any New Fashion: The Habits of highest and lowest are
the same, which they never alter; pure white fine Callico-Lawn is the bravery
of the highest, which they wash every day. The Women are Habited somewhat like
Men; they of the greatest Quality are Adorned with many rich Jewels.

Temperance in Meats.
Jews.
THe Pharisees Fasted on Mondays and Thursdays, as has been noted before, in
remembrance of Moses going up, and returning from Mount Sinai, etc. Concerning
which we have spoken already in the first part of this Book, in the Chapter of
Fasting.

Christians.
Our Food and Diet should minister to Health and repair the Weakness of Nature.
Basil.

Our Nourishment ought to be simple and easy, subservient to the two main ends
of Life, Health and Strength. Clem. Alex.

Nor are we less to take heed of Gluttony, contenting our selves with a spare
Diet, and such only as is necessary, not giving way to the Infinite and
unsatiable cravings of a nice and intemperate Appetite, which will have a
thousand pretenses to defend it self. -- (...). Justin Mart.

Clemens Alex. reckons up the Inconvenience of Excess -- viz. wasting the
Estate, ruining the Body, impairing the Health, Debauching the Stomach,
deflouring the taste, begetting an ill habitude and temper, sowing it with the
Seeds of all diseases, dulling the mind, preparing it for the entertainment of
any Vice, etc.

S. Cyprian, in an Epistle to the Priests and Deacons ( Ep. 7.) advises them
to eat and drink sparingly, that they might be watchful unto Prayer.

S. Hierom advises Leta, to give her Daughter such a thin and mean Diet, that
after Meals, she might be presently fit either to read or sing Psalms, Ad Let.
Tom. 1.

The Council of Laodicea ( Can. 53.) forbade them light and ludicrous Actions,
as leaping and Dancing, enjoining them to Dine and Sup gravely and modestly, as
Christians.

Julian, Emperor, being about to raise War, and squeeze the Christians, sent to
S. Basil (his fellowstudent formerly at Athens) for 1000 l.; he returned
Answer, That it was not to be expected there, where he had not Provision before
hand for one day; -- That his greatest Dainties were a few Pot Herbs, a piece
of Bread, and a little sour Vapid Wine. Basil. Ep. 208. Tom. 3.

Chrysostom commends Olympias, that she had taught her Stomach to receive only
so much Meat and Drink, as was enough to keep her alive and in Health.

Alcibiades, afterward Martyr, had accustomed himself to a very rigid and
sordid Course, rejecting all sorts of Food, but Bread and Water; this before
and after he was in Prison, which had an ill influence upon others; whereupon
Attalus, one of the most Eminent of those famous Martyrs, the day after his
being exposed the first time in the Amphitheatre, had it Revealed to him, That
Alcibiades did amiss in refusing the good Creatures of God, and giving scandal,
etc. upon which he laid aside his singularity. Eusebius out of the Letter of
the Churches of Lions and Vien in France to those in Asia. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
3.

Luther says of himself, I lose too much time by invitations to Feasts here in
this City; I know, Satan has such a hand in it, that I may not deny it, and
yet it does me harm to accept the Courtesy. And again, My Converse with my
Friends (which I use to call a Feeding of my Corpse) does very badly steal away
a great part of my time. Fuller's Lives.

Muscovites.
Those who take Tobacco in Muscovy (by reason of their Excess in it, and doing
hurt by it, etc. Burning their Houses, and Infecting their Images with a
stinking Breath) are by order of the great Duke to have their Nostrils slit, or
be whipped, as we have often seen done. D. of Holsteins Emb. Trav. p. 62.

They are not acquainted with our delicate Meats and Sawces; their ordinary
Food is course Meal, Turnips, Coleworts, Cucumbers, Salt-fish and Pulse: Their
year has more Fasting-days than Flesh-days. Idem.

Their Monks are very Austere, living only on Salt-fish, Honey, Milk, Cheese,
Herbs, Pulse, especially Flesh and Pickled Cucumbers. There are many Auchorets,
who build Chapels upon the Highways, and live in Woods like Hermits,
subsisting only upon Alms given by Travelers. Idem.

Papists
Hugucchio, a Captain, lost two Towns, because he would not break his Meal, Mr.
Hale.

Mahometans, Turks.
The Turks abstain from Hogs-flesh, (except some Renegadoes, of no Religion)
from Frogs, Tortoises, Snails. Vide prox. Cap.

Sultan Amurath prohibited Tobacco; took off a Shop-keeper's Head, for selling
some to himself (when disguised.) M. de Theven.

The Turks make no sumptuous Feasts, and it is never heard in Turkey, that a
Man has undone himself by Housekeeping: A small matter contents them; and a
good Cook in that Country would have but a very sorry Trade: They have no
Sawces, but what one may learn at first sight. Idem.

Persians.
The Persians seldom make above one set Meal a day of Flesh; and if they make
another Meal besides, it consists mostly of Butter, Cheese and Fruits. D. of
Holstein's Emb. Trav.

At their Feasts the first things set on the Table, are, a Pipe, Tobacco, and
dish of Coffee. Taver. l. 5.

The Bannians, not much unlike the Old Pythagoreans, feed only on Herbs, and
Meats made of Milk: Which one would hardly believe sufficient to sustain
Nature. Job Ludolph. Some will eat Fish, and no living thing else.

The Hindoes of Indostan, eat no Kine, from a great esteem which they have of
them.

Scha-Abbas King of Persia made a Law, that none should Smoke Tobacco, upon
Penalty of having his Nose and Lips cut off. A Merchant not knowing of this
Order, came into his Army to sell Tobacco, who was set on a heap of Fagots, and
he and his Tobacco Burnt together. D. of Holstein' s Emb. Travels.

Cambaio.
In Cambaia they are much addicted to Fasting and Almsgiving, Rosse.

The Southern, Americans in their Lent Fasts, abstain from Women and Salt, Idem.

In Paria, Guiana and Debaiba, when their Gods are angry with them, they
macerate themselves with Fasting. Idem.

The Gaurs abstain five days in a year from Meat, Fish, Butter and Eggs; and
three other days they Fast altogether till Evening. M. Tavernier, l. 4. c. 8.

Temperance in Drink.
Jews.
THE Sobriety of the Ancient Jews may be gathered out of Sacred Writ; Jacob's
Vow (Bread and Raiment) Elias's Provision on the Banks of Cherith, Daniel's and
the three Childrens Pulse and Water, Hagar's Bottle, the Israelites Springs out
of the Rock, and their drinking out of the Rivers, as they traveled toward
Canaan, etc. do sufficiently attest the Sobriety that was sometimes used among
them. The single Miscarriages of Noah and Lot are no great Prejudice to the
Cause. I find nothing remarkable in the Modern Jews, that deserves any mention
in this place; save only that sometimes (as I have mentioned before) they
account it no Sin to drink away their Reason, and almost Senses too.

Christians.
Continence, wherever it is, will at first sight betray it self; leanness of
Body, and that paleness which is the Fruit of Continency, evidence a Christian
to be a Champion for the Commands of Christ. Basil. Suf. disp. Interr. 17.

(About Zurich --) notwithstanding their neighborhood to the Switzers,
Drinking is very little known among them. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Paul the Hermit, St. Anthony, St. Hierom, Pasroclus, drank Water; Alcippiades
Martyr, Water with Salt; Amodeus the Spaniard, Simeon of Antioch, Sisinnius the
Monk, Serapion, Nicolaus Totlentinas, Maxentius the Abbot, etc. all drank Water.

Ancient Heathens.
Pittacus made a Law, that whosoever committed any Crime when Drunk, should be
punished double. Laert.

Solon make another, That if any Prince were taken Drunk, he should die for it.
Idem.

Plato's Suppers were Frugal to a Proverb: He despised delicate Banquets and
sumptuous Feasts, being himself content with his Academical Olives, and Bread
and Water. Text. Offic.

Zeno drank Water instead of Wine, and by his own Example invited his Scholars
to Temperance, insomuch that it became a Proverb, More Sober than Zeno. Idem.

M. Cato gives this Testimony to Julius Caesar, that one only of all (unus ex
omnibus) came Sober to overthrow the Commonwealth. Idem.

Muscovites.
In Novogorod there is an Anniversary Devotion, to which many Pilgrims come;
some are sure to come early and be Drunk with Aqua-vitae before public
Service: One told me, he saw a Woman got so Drunk there, that coming out of the
Tent, she fell down, and fell asleep, naked as she was in the Street in the
daytime; which gave occasion to a Muscovite, who was also Drunk, to lie down
by her, and having made use of her, to fall also asleep in sight of many
People, who having made a Ring about them, only laughed at the Posture they
were in, till at length an old Man conceiving a Horror at the Spectacle,
covered them with his own Garment. D. of Holstein's Emb. Trav.

There is no place in the World, where Drunkenness is more common than in
Muscovy, among all, Ecclesiastics and Laics, Men and Women, Old and Young.
The Muscovian Ambassador, sent to Charles King of Sweden A. C. 1608. forgetting
his Quality and Business of his Master, took so much Strong-water the night
before he was to have Audience, that the next day being found dead in his Bed,
they were forced to carry him to his Grave, instead of conducting him to
Audience. Idem.

I my self, as I went to Novogorod 1643. saw some Drunkards coming out of an
Alehouse, some without Caps, others without Shoes, or Stockings, some without
Wastcoats, and only their Shirts, having pawned the rest of their Clothes: One
I took notice of above the rest, who came out without his Kaftan and in his
Shirt, but meeting with a Friend by the way going to the Tippling house, he went
along with him, till he had left his Shirt behind too. I asked if he had been
robbed of his Shirt, he answered, Ju but fui Matir, Mind thy own Business: He
returned to the House, and came out stark naked. Idem.

Heathens.
Among the Hindoes of Indostan, the word for a Drunkard signifies a Madman.

Persees.
In Guzurat the Persees abominate Drunkenness; he who guilty must undergo a
very severe Penance, or quit their Communion. Mandelslo.

Siam.
He that drinks Wine in Siam, is stoned to death. Rosse.

Persians.
The Persians take the Juice of Opium in Pills, which heats their Brains, and
makes them talk ridiculously: Also they make a Drink of boiled Poppy-seed,
which they call Kokemaar, to make themselves merry. They have another Drink
called Bongue, very bitter, made of the leaves of Hemp and some other Drug,
which makes them shamefully foolish and ridiculous. Tavernter, l. 5. c. 18.

Zeilon.
The Idolaters in Zeilon drink no Wine. Anonym.

Mexico.
The Priests of Mexico drink no Wine, and sleep little, because most of their
Exercises are in the night. Purchase.

Chastity.
Jews.
FOrnication, Adultery, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Pride of Apparel, etc. are so
far from being in request amongst the Jews (in Barbary) that they are
scandalized at the frequent Practice of these Sins in Christians. Dr. Addison.

Christians.
The Chastity of the Primitive Christians appeared in these particulars,

1. They would not Marry. Justin Martyr says, There were many Christians in
his time, who for Sixty or Seventy years kept themselves incorrupt.

It Is very easy to find many amongst us, both Men and Women, who remain
unmarried even in old Age. Athenag. leg. pro Christian.

Yet this without the Obligation of an Oath of perpetual Virginity.

2. When they did Marry, -- it is for no other end, but the bringing forth and
bringing up of Children, -- As Husbandmen Till the Ground with respect to the
Crop at Harvest. Just. Mart.

3. They seldom married twice. Chrysostom's Mother at forty years old had lived
twenty years a Widow.

Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierom, Athenagoras, etc. did inveigh bitterly against
second Marriages, as little better than Adultery.

The ancient Canons (as Zonaras tells, in Can. 7. Conc. Neocesar.) suspended
such as married twice from the Communion a whole year.

The Council of Laodicea requires, That they should spend at least some small
time in Penance, in Fasting and Prayer, before they be received to the
Communion.

The Canons of the Apostles appoint, That whoever after Baptism engaged in
second Marriages, is rendered incapable of any Degree in the Ministry. Can. 17.

Note, Digamy is 1. Two Wives at once. Note, Digamy is 2. One after the Death
of another. Note, Digamy is 3. One after Divorce. Of this some understand the
Canons. Note, Digamy is 4. They shunned all Occasions, etc.
1. Going to Feasts, etc. Cyprian severaly chides with some Virgins for being
present at Weddings, where they laughed freely, could not but hear loose
Discourses, see uncomly Carriages, feed upon Luxurious Dishes, all which must
needs, not only kindle, but add Fuel to the Fire. De Discipl. and had. Virg.

Constantine made a Law, That Matrons should not be forced on the account of
Debt to appear at public Tribunals. Cod. Theod. l. 1. Tit. 10. l. 1.

St. Hierom does as much commend some whom he knew, who always kept at home on
Festivaldays, to avoid the Crowd and Gazes of the People. De Virg.

The Council of Laodicea forbids all Christian Men using the same common Baths
with Women. Can. 30.

Photius says, Justinian the Emperor made it a sufficient cause of Divorce,
and loss of Dowry, for a Woman to Feast or Bathe in the Company of Men, without
her Husband's leave.

Cyprian would not have Ecclesiastic Persons, and professed Virgins, sleep
near one another, nor dwell together in the same House: He commends Pomponius
for suspending the Deacon and others for such Familiarity, and ordered, That
they should not be absolved till after a sufficient Repentance, etc.

(...), were Women brought in as Domestic Assistants to Ecclesiastic Persons;
especially such as were sent up and down to preach the Gospel: -- Neither Wife,
nor Concubine, but Attenders.

The Council of Antioch ( A. 272.) under Aurelian Emperor, condemns Paulus
Samosatenus, with his Presbyters and Deacons, for keeping these introduced
Women, with horrible Inconveniences, Suspicion and Scandal.

St. Basil writes to a Presbyter seventy years old, to abstain from the Company
of a Woman he used to dwell with, to avoid Scandal.

The Council of Nice forbids the same, and universally the whole Clergy to have
any Woman near them, unless Mother, Sister, Aunt, or such of whom there could
be no Suspicion. Can. 3.

Honorius Emperor, prohibits by a Law any Clergyman whatsoever to keep company
with these ( Extraneae) strange Women, limiting their Converse and Cohabitation
within the very same Relations, as the Nicene Canon. Cod. Theod. l. 16.

Bishops were to be deposed, that entertain or cohabit with any Woman
whatsoever, Relation or Stranger. Synops. Basil. l. tit. 1. c. 41.

St. Augustine would not cohabit with his own Sister. Textor.

Domestic Marriage not openly made in the face of the Church, were accounted
no better than a State of Adultery and Fornication. Tertull. de pudic. c. 4.

Their Ears they stopped against all loose and idle Songs, filthy and obscene
Discourses; their Eyes they shut against all uncomely Objects, wanton Pictures.
Clem. Al.

Gorgonia, when she lay under an acute and most dangerous Distemper, yet
resused to have any Physician come near her, as blushing that any Man should
see or touch her. Nazianz.

2. Dancing and Music.
The Fathers generally inveighed very bitterly against them.

None may Dance but the Daughter of an Adulteress; but she who is Chaste, let
her learn her Daughters Prayers, not Dances. Ambros.

What Modesty can there be, where the Dancers shrick and make a noise together?
Idem.

Where the Timbrels sound, the Pipes make a noise; the Harp chatters, the
Cymbals strike together, what fear of God can there be? Hierom. in libr. contr.
Helvid.

Where wanton Dancing is, there the Devil is certainly present: for God has
not given us our Legs to dance, but that we should walk modestly, not skip like
Camels; but if the Body be polluted by dancing impudently, how much more may
the Soul be thought to be defiled? The Devil danceth in these Dances. Chrysostom.
Hom. 49. in Mat.

Men and Women together entering into common Dances, having delivered their
Souls to the drunken Devil, wound one another with the pricks of unchaste
Affections: Profuse Laughter is practiced, and filthy Songs, meretricious
habits inviting unto Petulancy are there used. Laughest thou and delightest
thou thy self with an arrogant Delight; when as thou ought to pour out Tears
and Sighs for what is past? Singest thou whorish Songs, casting away the Psalms
and Hymns thou have learned? Do thou stir thy Feet, and caper furiously, and
dance unhappily, when as thou ought to bend thy Knees to Prayer? Basil, in
Orat. contr. Ebr.

Tzegedin cites several other Testimonies of S. Augustine, etc. and Councils
and Canons against it. De Choreis.

5. They rather chose to suffer Torments and Death, than the violation of their
Chastity.

Domnina, and her two Daughters, Bernice and Prosdoce, whom Chrysostom
commends, who being eminent for Beauty and Virtue, were sought for as a Prey to
Lust, under the Diocle sian Persecution, desired of the Soldiers leave to step
out of the Road for some private occasion, which granted, they went and threw
themselves into a River. Chrysostom. Hom. 51. de S. Dom. Bern. etc. Prosd.

Eusebius tells of the Wife of the Prefect or Governor of Rome, a Christian,
sent for by Maxentius, who was passionately enflamed with the love of her; the
Officers broke into the House, to the terror of her Husband: She begged only
so much time, as that she might a little dress and adorn her self; so she
retired into the Chamber, caught up a Sword, and by a fatal stroke left nothing
for the Messengers but a dismal Spectacle.

Origin chose rather to commit Idolatry, than Fornication; though that too was
his Enemy's Act rather than his own; they hailing him up to the Altar, and
thrusting the Frankincense into his hand. Dr. Cave.

6. They accounted Uncleanness an heinous sin; and amongst all the sins that
were punished sharply in the Ancient Church, Adultery was one of the chief.

Marcion being found guilty of lying with a Virgin, and therefore thrown out of
the Church, betook himself to one Cerdon, a Master-Heretick, and espoused his
Doctrines.

The Punishment for Adultery was perpetual Penance all a Man's Life, and scarce
admission to Communion at the Hour of Death; 'till Pope Zephyrianus, A. C. 216.
ordered the Penance for a shorter space of time; which offended the Afric
Churches; Tertullian inveighs bitterly against it, as a thing unfit in it self,
and an Innovation in the Church.

The Council of Ancyra, A. 315. set Adultery at 7 Years Penance. Can. 20.

The Council of Illiberis decreed, for the second Fault, perpetual penance, not
to be absolved at Death.

S. Basil, in his Rules of Discipline for Amphilochius, sets Fornication at 7
Years Penance, Adultery at 15.

His Brother, Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, sets Fornication at 9 Years Penance,
Adultery, and all other kinds of Uncleanness at 18, yet giving liberty to
Spiritual Guides to contract, etc.

Justin M. gives an instance of a Woman, that had lived lewdly with her
Husband, but Repenting, and Reforming, became strictly chaste and sober, and
would have persuaded her Husband to do the like; but he obstinately refusing,
it begat a quarrel, and that quarrel at last became the Matter of public
cognizance; and was an occasion for Justin Martyr to write that excellent
Apology for the Christians. Apol. p. 41.

Theodosius, provided by a Law, That no Woman should marry within a Year, at
least, after her Husband's death, and ratified it by a double Penalty, Note of
Infamy, and loss of Dowry, and whatever her Husband had bequeathed to her.

Muscovites.
The postures of the Muscovites in Dancing, and the insolence of their Women,
are infallible marks of their bad inclinations. We have seen at Moscou, both
Men and Women, come out of the public Brothel-Houses, stark naked, and incite
some young People of our Retinue to naughtiness, by their filthy and lascivious
expressions. D. of H. Ambass. Trav. p. 60.

Yet Adultery is looked upon as a Sin unpardonable. A Polander turning Greek,
to marry a Muscovite Beauty, being forced to take a Journey into Poland, his
Lady, in his absence, made a shift to be otherwise supplied, and had a Child;
but fearing her Husband's displeasure, retired into a Monastery, and was
shaved. Her Husband would fain have got her out again, and pardoned the
offense, but it would not be permitted; it being, according to their Theology,
a Sin against the Holy Ghost, not to be pardoned in this, nor the other World.
Ibid.

Mahometans.
The Law of Mahomet allows four Wives to any, and as many Concubines as they
please: The Great Mogul is said to have four Wives, and a thousand Concubines;
yet had but six Children: yet the Mahometan-Priests, and some others, content
themselves with one.

Sultan Coob-Surroo, one of the Mogul's Sons, a Prince of a lovely Presence,
had but one, which accompanied him in all his straits; for in his younger Years
he had been tempted to Rebellion. Anon.

The Turks, in their Bagnio's, separate Men from Women.

The strict Votaries of that Religion marry not at all. It Is observed, those
Mahometans who have most Concubines and Wives, are most jealous; and will not
suffer their Wive's Brothers, or Fathers to come to them, except in their
presence.

Honest Women, of reputed Chastity, will not at any time be seen, but by their
Husbands: but if they are found Incontinent, their own Brother's Hands shall be
first against them, to take away their Lives, rather than they shall not be
punished.

In Indolstan is, notwithstanding, a free Toleration for Whores; who are
enrolled, before they can have liberty to keep such a House. Some of them
appear before the Mogul, singing wanton Songs, playing on Timbrals, etc.

Heathens.
The Hindoes take but one Wife, and are not jealous as the Mahometans, who have
many; suffering their Wives to go whither they please. Their Widows cut their
Hair, and live as Creatures, neglected by themselves and others; some are
ambitious to dye with honor in their Husband's Funeral pile, and she that is
thus resolved, never starts back, but goes singing to her Death; and although not
bound, yet never offers to stir out of the Flames.

The Persees in Indostan have but one Wife, who likewise is permitted to go
abroad.

The Mogul one day found one of his Eunuchs kissing one of his Women, -- Put
her in a hole in the Ground up to her Head; there she died in torment, parched
with the Sun, after she had lain a Day and a Night, crying out, -- Ah! my Head,
etc. The Eunuch, in the same place, in her sight, was cut in pieces.

The Women of Deyly are handsome, and the Gentiles very chaste; insomuch, that
if the Mohammedan Women did not by their wantonness dishonor the rest, the
Chastity of the Indians might be proposed as an Example to the Women of the
East. M. de Thevenot, -- Trav. l. 3. c. 25.

The Persian Women, when they go abroad, veil their Faces. Sir Th. Herb.

The Persees severely punish Adultery and Fornication. Mandelslo's Travels.

Haron Wathic Billak, a Turkish Chalif, killed himself with immoderate Venery.
Hottinger.

Armenians.
One Marriage, a Deputy from the King, and French Company, for Trade with
Persia, at Zulpha, by the means of an old Woman, Mother of one of his Lacqueys,
having debauched an Armenian Girl, whom he kept privately to himself; so soon
as it was noised abroad, all the Armenians were scandalized at it, and sent to
seize the Bawd, to punish her, by their Laws, as she deserved. Marriage fled out
of his Lodgings to her Assistance; -- but seeing the People in an Uproar, and
finding the Stones to fly too thick about his Ears, he was forced to seek his
own safety; was threatened by the Armenians to be complained of to the King of
France, and ever after looked upon with Scorn and Contempt. Tavernier's
Collection of several Relations, etc. p. 36.

Japonites.
In Japon, Adultery is only punished in the Women; Deflouring and Ravishing of
Virgins in the Persons of the Criminals, and the next of Kin too. Idem. p. 4.

Here the Women live retired, and are very faithful to their Husbands. Ibid. p.
4.

The Emperor having put to death one of the Lords of his Court, out of hopes to
enjoy his Wife; she fearing Violence, besought the Emperor to give her time to
consider, which was granted for some few days; at the end whereof she shut her
self up in a Room with her Children, and after she had delivered a Paper to one
of her Servants, to carry to the Emperor, she set the Chamber on fire, and
burnt both her self and her Children. The Emperor met with nothing else in the
Paper but Reproaches of his Tyranny, and Attestations of Joy from the Lady,
that she had the opportunity to sacrifice her self to the memory of her
Husband. Ibid.

Lutherans.
At Bern, the third Adultery is punished with Death, which is also the
punishment of the fifth Act of Fornication; of which, I saw an instance while I
was at Bern: for a Woman, who confessed her self guilty of many Whoredoms, and
designed to be revenged on some Men, that did not furnish her liberally with
Money, was upon that account condemned and executed: the manner was solemn; for
the Advoyer comes into an open Bench, in the middle of the Street, and for the
satisfaction of the People, the whole Process was read, and sentence was
pronounced in the hearing of all: the Counselors, both of the great and lesser
Council, standing about the Advoyer, who after Sentence took the Criminal
gently by the Hand, and prayed for her Soul; and after Execution, there was a
Sermon for the instruction of the People. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Papists in Florence.
I was much scandalized to see Statues with Nudities here, which I do not
remember to have seen any where else in Churches. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Bengal.
In Bengal, Adultery is punished, by cutting the Nose, yet is very common.
Packet broke open, Vol. 2.

Siam.
It Is burning alive for the Clergy in Siam to have to do with Women; but those
that cannot contain, may quit the Priesthood, and be absolved from their Vow of
Chastity. -- There are also Nunneries of old Religious Women, situate near the
Temple, that they may be present at the Offices and Prayers there. Ibid.

Patana.
The Mahometans in Patana judge Fornication no Sin, but Adultery is capital;
yet the Delinquent may choose the manner of Death, and a near Relation must be
Executioner. Ibid

Moluques.
Polygamy among the Moluques, is lawful, and Adultery unpunished. Ibid.

Japanese.
The Ecclesiastics in Japan make a vow of Chastity so strictly to be observed,
that the least breach of it is punished with the most cruel Death imaginable,
fixing them in the Earth, up to the middle in a Road, and all the vulgar
Passengers are to strike him in the Neck with a wooden Saw, which makes him
three or four Days expiring: -- But think them not Chaste for all this, for
they are allowed the use of Men and Boys. Ibid.

Yet one Sect of the Ecclesiastics are allowed to marry. Ibid.

Fermosa.
Adultery, Theft and Murder, here are accounted no Crimes; the only Sins being
their covering their secret Parts at set-times; to wear Silk, when they should
wear Cotton; not to have destroyed Children in their Mothers Womb, who cannot
lawfully bear a Child at 30, or 35 Years of age, Ibid.

Chinese.
In China, Polygamy is lawful. Ibid.

Candin.
In Candin they prostitute their Wives, Sisters and Daughters to Strangers, in
honor of their Idols. Ibid.

Circassia.
They seem to adore a Goats-Skin, which at the Funeral of the Chief Lords of
each Village, is set up at its entrance. The Privities they cut off, and cast
against the Wall, and if they stick there, they worship them. Ibid.

Madagascar, etc.
In Madagascar, the Lower-Ethiopia, etc. they allow Polygamy. Ibid.

Mexico.
Some of the Priests in Mexico, to preserve their Chastity, slit their Members
in the midst, and do an hundred things to make themselves Impotent, lest they
should offend their Gods. Purchase.

Paria.
In Paria each Man is allowed as many Wives as he lists, at least, as he can
maintain, tho they never have the Maiden-heads of any; Prostituting them the
first Night to the Piaco's (Priests) or to their appointment, who for small
matters turn over that drudgery to Strangers: Nor do they at any time think
their Guests welcome, unless they will do the Office of Men to their Wives,
Sisters, etc. S. Clark.

Patience in Sufferings.
Christians.
There were Six Methods of Execution Ordinary in the Primitive Times.

1. THE Cross. Upon this the Christians Hung, till starved with Hunger, or
dispatched by Birds, or wild Beasts. S. Andrew continued two whole Days on the
Cross, Preaching the Gospel all the while. Timotheus and his Wife Maura, after
many other Torments, hung nine Days, before they completed their Martyrdom.

It was the peculiar Punishment of Slaves, Traitors, and the vilest Malefactors.

S. Peter, and some Egyptian Martyrs were hung with their Heads downwards.

Constantine took away the use of the Cross.

2. The Rack, Equuleus, because the Man was Horsed upon the Engine by Ropes,
and Skrews and Pullies; a long board was on the Top of it. Besides which, there
was Catasta, a Piece of wood like a little Scaffold, that the Torments might be
more conspicuous: In both of them were ungulae (pinchers of Iron) with sharp
Teeth, to pull the Flesh by Piecemeal.

3. The Wheel, sometimes with Iron Pricks* on which the person bound was
whirled about with a Violent Distortion. Thus suffered Felix Presb. Fortunatus,
etc.

4. Burning, designed for Villains, etc.

5. Throwing to wild Beasts, Bears, Leopards, Lions, etc.

6. Condemning to the Mines, where was toyling, beating with Clubs, binding
with Chains, lying on the Ground, Nakedness, the Heads half shaved (like
Slaves,) a mark in the Face, the right Eye pulled out, the left foot disabled
by cutting of Nerves, the Estate forfeited. etc. To which add, 1. Scourging
with Rods (Plumbate) having Leaden Plummets at the ends. 2. Beheading, etc,


Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, being first dawbed with Honey, was exposed to Wasps
on a Pole, in the Sun.

Some were put into old Ships, and turned out to Sea, the Vessels being first
set on fire: Thus an Orthodox Presbyter under Valens the Arrian Emperor was
served.

Concerning the Patience of the Primitive Christians, Observe,

1. When sought for by Persecutors, they cared not to escape: So Polycarp
refused to Fly, tho into the next House. Cyprian Commends some Confessors, whom
he wrote to in Prison, that when often desired to go out of Prison, they would
not.

Himself did withdraw from Carthage, when sent for to Suffer at Vtica, that
when he did suffer, he might Suffer at Carthage, where he was Bishop, a thing
which he earnestly wished for; and it was granted him.

2. They Offered themselves. The miscrable Creatures ((...).) do verily
persuade themselves that they shall surely be Immortal, and Live for ever; on
which account they despise Death, and many of them voluntarily Offer themselves
to it. Lucian de Mort. Peregr. Tom. 2.

I am quite tired out in Punishing and Destroying the Galileans (called here by
the Name of Christians) according to your Commands, and yet they cease not to
offer themselves to be slain: Nay, tho I have labored both by fair means and
threatenings to make them conceal themselves from being known to be Christians,
yet can I not stave them off from Persecution. Tiberianus President of
Palestine to the Emperor Trajan. Apud Vsser. Append. Ignat.

O unhappy People, if you have a mind to dye, have you not Halters and
Precipices enough, to end your Lives with, but you must come hither for an
Execution? Arrius Antonius Proconsul of Asia, to the People, etc.

Ignatius -- Oh! that I might come to those wild Beasts, etc.

Origon, when a youth, could hardly be restrained from running into danger.

3. They gave thanks to their Enemies for Condemning them.

A Christian takes it as a favor, to dye for so good a cause. Tertull.

As for us, they (our Persecutors) do us no harm, Death does but the sooner
send us to God. Clem. Alex.

When Lucius, one of the primitive Martyrs, for speaking for one of the
Christians, that he had very hard measure, was Condemned forthwith, he heartily
thanked his Judge for it, that by this means he should be delivered from such
unrighteous Governors, and be sooner sent home to his Heavenly Father. Just. M.

4. They bore up with quietness and composure.

By reason of our strange and wonderful Courage and Strength, new Additions are
made to us; for when the People see Men with infinite variety of Torments torn
in pieces, and yet maintain a Patience unconquerable, and able to live out his
Tormentors, (what the truth is) that the consent of so many, and the
perseverance of dying persons cannot be in vain: Nor that Patience it self,
were it not from God, could hold out under such Racks and Tortures; Thieves,
and men of a Robust Body, are not able to bear such tearing in pieces; they
groan and cry out, and are overcome with Pain, because not endued with a Divine
Patience: But our very Children and Women (to say nothing of our Men) do with
silence Conquer their Torments; nor can the hottest fire force the least groan
from them. Lactan.

By the force of such Arguments Justin Martyr turned Christian, from being a
Platonic Philosopher. Ap. 1. p. 50. I thought, says he, with my self, that it
was impossible such persons should wallow in Vice and Luxury, etc.

Hence Porphyry calls the Christian Religion, (...).

The Heathen in Min. Felix styles the Christians men of an undone, furious and
desperate Party, M. Fell. p. 7.

M. Antoninus Emperor, imputes this Courage to mere Stuborness. l. 11. s. 3.

Staupitius told Luther, concerning his Behavior, that the first three years
he did all things according to the utmost Rigor, and that would not do: The
next three, he did all according to the Laws and Councels of the Ancients, and
that would not hit: In the last three years, he did all according to the Will
of God, and yet neither would that succeed; and then he was fain to be content
with what he could have. Clar. in vit. Capell.

Japon.
In Japon there have been Children from ten years old to a dozen, who for sixty
days together have endured to have their Bodies fastened to the Cross, half
Burnt, half torn in pieces, while the Executioners forced them to Eat, on
purpose to prolong their Lives in Misery; and yet they would not renounce the
Christian Faith, which they had embraced. Tavern. Collect. etc. p. 10.

Domestic Worship.
Jews.
THey account themselves bound to say an hundred Benedictions (of which see the
particulars in the Chapter of Praying to God) every day.

Christians.
Gaspar Colinius Admiral of France, used to rise very early, and then putting
on his Nightgown, and calling his Servants about him, went to Prayer with
them; then he set time apart to hear the Deputies of the Churches, and other
businesses: Each other day in the fore-noon he had a Sermon Preached before
him, after which he returned to his business till Dinner; which being ready,
his Servants came in, and there the Admiral standing by the Table, and his Wife
by his side, one of David's Psalms was Sung, and a Blessing craved upon the
Meat; which Course he did not only observe at his own House, but every day in
his Camp, without intermission; when the Cloth was taken away, he presently
rose, and standing with his Wife by him, either himself or Chaplain returned
thanks. At Supper time the like was done, both with Prayers and Psalms: And
because he found it hard to get his Servants together at Bedtime, because of
their various Employments, he caused them all to come in presently after
Supper, where after a Psalm, he went to Prayer with them. Sam. Clark.

Bishop Ridley, when at the Manor of Fullham, read daily a Lecture to his
Family, at the Common Prayer; beginning at the Acts of the Apostles, and so
going through the Epistles of S. Paul: Giving to every Man that could read, a
New Testament, hiring them besides with Money to learn by Heart certain
Principal Chapters, but especially Acts 13. And often he read Psalm 101. Fox
Martyrol.

-- Ere I can have sat (at my Study) to weariness, my Family, having now
overcome all Household Distractions, invites me to our Common Devotions; not
without some short preparation. Dr. Jos. Hall concerning himself.

Ancient Romans.
The Games called Ludi Compitales, were Instituted among the Romans, in honor
of their Lares, or Household Gods. Galtruch.

Gilolo and Amboina.
The do no work, but first they consult the Devil, and are of opinion, That no
ill comes from any other Being, and therefore that they ought to prevent it by
Sacrifice to him; which they are very observant of, even in their Houses.
Paquet broke open, vol. 2.

Banda.
Banda is Mohammedan, and the People there are so Religious, that they never do
any thing till they have Prayed in the Morning. Ibid.

Formosa.
In Formosa each House has its Oratory, where all that is there spent is
Offered to the Gods by the Women of the House. Ibid.

Iucatan.
In Iucatan they had in their Houses Images made like Bears, which they
Worshipped as their Household Gods, with Singing and Incense. Rosse.

Goa.
In Goa most of the Gentiles (heads of Families) dress their own Victuals
themselves; first they sweep the House, then draw a Circle, and confine
themselves in it, suffering none to enter, for then all would be Profaned, and
the Cook would throw away what he had dressed; the Victuals are divided into 3
parts, the first for the Poor, the second for the Cow of the House, the third
for the Family. Thevenot.

In Goa they Pray to the first thing they meet with in a Morning, tho a Goose
or Ass, and all day long they Pray to it. Rosse.

Ancient Tartars.
They Worshipped the Sun, Stars, Fire, Earth and Water, to whom they Offered
the First Fruits of their Meat and Drink every Morning, before they eat and
Drink themselves. Rosse. So do the Tartars of Cathay now.

Peguians.
In Pegu they feed the Devil every Morning with Baskets of Rice, that he may
not hurt them that Day. Idem.

Indian Heathens.
In Fermosa every house has a particular place appointed for the Devotions of
the Family, where they invocate the Gods, and where the Women make their
offerings of what is spent every day in the house: But in case of Sickness or
other misfortune, they call the Inibs to do that Service. Mandelslo's Travels.
p. 172.

Indian Christians.
The Indian Christians read two chapters at home, one out of each Testament.
Sr. Th. Herbert.

Malabar.
In Malabar the King of Calecut eats no meat till it be first offered by his
Priest to his Idol. Ross.

Mahometans.
There are but few who go not every day to Prayers, epecially those of Noon,
Quinday and Aksham, for many perform the other two at home. Nor does traveling
excuse them; for when they know that it is the Hour of Prayer, they stop in the
Fields near to some water; they draw water in a tinned Copper-pot (which they
carry always purposely about them) then do the Abdest, spread a Carpet on the
Ground, without which they never Travel, and say their Prayers upon it, M. de
Thevenot.

They have Chaplets also which they often say, for the most part have them in
their hand, whether at home or abroad, etc. Idem.

Persians.
There are some amongst them, who pray with such Violence at their own Houses,
that they put themselves out of Breath, and many times fall down in a Swoon. --
One of my Neighbors at Schamachie was so earnest in his Devotion, that having
said his Prayer very loud, and pronounced with all his might above fifty times
the word Hakka (God) he at length could not pronounce it without a great deal
of difficulty, and at last his Voice quite failed him. D. of Holstein 's Emb.
Trav. p. 279.

Benjans.
They never go out of their Houses till they have said their Prayers.
Mandelslo's Trav. into the Indies, p. 57.

Persees.
The Persees of Guzurat have no Mosques, but make use of some Room in their
Houses to do their Devotion in, which they do sitting without any Inclination
of their Bodies. Mandelslo's Trav. p. 60.

In Amboina they take in hand no business, be it never so mean, nay not so much
as piercing of a Tree, to draw Terry, till they have done their Devotions to
the Devil. Idem.

Toleration of all Religions.
Jews.
AMong the Jews we find in our Savior's time Pharisees, and Sadduces, and
Herodians, and Pagan Romans, all exercising their own Religion; the Synagogues
open to People of different Opinions, and liberty of Prophesying seems to be
allowed for some time even to the Christians themselves. vid. Acts 13.15, etc.
I need not speak of the Nazarites and Rechabites tolerated among them in
ancient times, who yet were distinguished from the common Israelite by peculiar
Ceremonies and Usages. The case of the Gibeonites was extraordinary, their
Liberty procured by Craft, and turned into Servitude; being made Hewers of
Wood, and Drawers of Water for the Congregation, and for the Altar of the Lord.

Christians.
The Muscovites give a Free Toleration to all Religions, and live very quietly
with the Lutherans, and those of the Reformed Religion; but they have so great
an Aversion to the Roman Catholics, that they would never grant them liberty
in Muscovy. -- In the first War of Smolensko they would not entertain Catholic
Soldiers, A. C. 1627. The late King of France proposed a Treaty for Commerce,
between the French and Muscovite, and for a Church where Mass might be said;
but it was denied; nay, in the Treaty they made with us, for our passage into
Persia, it is an express Article, That we should not take any Roman Catholics
into our Retinue. D. of H. Ambass. Trav. p. 108.

They suffer all Nations to live amongst them, as Calvinists, Lutherans,
Armenians, Tartars, Turks, and Persians; excepting none but Jews and
Roman Catholics. Idem.

The King of Poland, several Papists Ecclesiastical Sovereigns in Germany, the
Venecians in their Grecian Islands, all give liberty of Conscience.

In Rome it self the Pope tolerates several Popish Churches, differing in
Ceremonies from one another, and all abundantly from that called the Roman
Church, yet agreeing in doctrine, having public liberty without exceptions.

In Germany, the Lutheran Churches scarce in any Two Cities have the same
Ceremonies; Nurimburg and Leipsig having almost as many as the Papists, and yet
they differ in them: Hamburg has fewer: And Strasburg none at all. Their
differing in Circumstantials makes no breach of Charity: At the same Communion
some receive sitting, some standing.

The Three Religions are tolerated at Frankfort. Dr. Burnet.

The Three Religions have their exercises successively the same day in the
Church of the Concord at Manheim, the Calvinists first, the Lutherans next, and
the Papists last. Idem in his letters Dr. Edw. Brown in his Travels.

In two Cantons, Appeuzel and Glaris, both Religions are Tolerated, and are
capable of equal Privileges, and in some Bailiages belonging to Bern and
Friburg, both Religions are so equally Tolerated, that in the same Church they
have both Mass and Sermon; -- On one Sunday Mass begins and Sermon follows; the
next Sunday Sermon begins, and Mass follows, etc. Dr. Burnet 's Letters.

Mahometans.
The Mogul Tolerates all Religions, and speaks well of all. So does the great
Turkish Emperor.

Among Mahometans Liberty of Conscience is allowed; agreeable to an Azoara in
the Alcoran, which declares, that none are to be dissuaded from the Religion
they Sucked from their Cradle. Sir Th. Herbert.

In Negapatan likewise any Religion is Tolerable, and Virgil's Omnigenumque
Deum Monstra, seem to be Translated hither. Idem.

In Goa are Christians, Jews, Mahometans and Heathens. Rosse.

In the Philippin Islands are Christians, Mahometans and Pagans. Idem.

In Sumatra and Zeilan are Moors, Christians and Pagans. Idem.

In Egypt Christians have their Churches, Jews their Synagogues, and Mahometans
their Mosques, of which last there be four sorts, differing in their Laws,
Liturgies and Ceremonies. Idem.

The Coast of Coromandel is furnished with Various Religions, Christian,
Mohammedan and Idolatry; of the first there are two sorts, those of S. Thomas,
that are of the Greek Church, and the Europian Christians.

The Last Words of Dying Men, etc.
Christians.
LVther ended his Life with these words: -- Lord, I render up my Spirit into
thy Hands, and come unto thee: And again, Lord, into thy Hands I commend my
Spirit; thou, O God of Truth have redeemed me; being asked by Dr. Jones if he
died in the constant Confession of that Doctrine which he had preached; he
answered, Yea, which was his last word.

Olympia Fulvia Morata to her Husband, -- Tota sum laeta, I am all joyful, but
now I know you no more. Anonym, -- once, a little before her Death, awaking out
of Sleep, with a cheerful Countenance she said, I have now got a sight in my
Rest, of a most excellent and pleasant place, shining with an unexpressible
Light and Brightness; -- But through weakness could say no more. D. Melch. Adam.

Mr. Carter ended his Life with this Doxology; The Lord be thanked. Clark's
Lives.

Erasmus breathed out his Soul in these Ejaculations; Mercy, sweet Jesus: Lord,
loose these bands; how long, Lord Jesus, how long? Jesus, Fountain of Mercy,
have mercy upon me, etc. Fuller's Lives.

Leo Jude, who died at Tigure, 1542. concluded thus, Huic Jesu Christo, etc. i.
e. To this my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, my Hope, and my Salvation, I
wholly offer up my Soul and Body; I cast my self wholly upon his Mercy and
Grace, etc. Ibid.

Andrew Willet, a little before his death, repeated the 146th. Psalm, and said
it was a most sweet Psalm; by and by rising out of a Trance, to his Wife,
crying out, he said, Let me alone, I shall do well, Lord Jesu; and so departed.
Anonym.

Robert Bolton, in a Quartane Ague, after meditating on the Four last Things,
desiring to be dissolved, in the pangs of death he breathed out, -- I am now
drawing on apace to my Dissolution; hold out Faith and Patience, your work will
quickly be at an end; he died, aged 60. Anonym.

William Whately, in Sickness, comforted himself with Ps. 41.1, 2. whilst a
Friend was praying with him, lifting up his Eyes, and one of his Hands, in the
Close of the Prayer he gave up the Ghost, aged 56. Idem.

Ant. Walleus called his Family, and exhorted them to the fear of God, then
took his leave, and fell asleep, never thoroughly awaking, till on the Lord's
day, at 11 a Clock he expired, aged 66. 1639.

Hen. Alting, the day before his death sang Psalm. 130. with great Fervency; in
the Evening blessed his Children, and exhorted them to fear God, and to
persevere in the Truth of the Gospel; and so died, aged 57. A. 1644.

Fred. Spanhemius, having preached his last Sermon at Easter, upon Phil. 3.24.
Who shall change our vile Body, etc. he prayed for his Family and himself, and
in the Close of his Prayer died, 1649, aged 49.

Philip de Mornay, Lord of Plessis Marley, being sick of a continual Fever,
often said, I fly, I fly to Heaven, and the Angels are carrying me into the
Bosom of my Savior. -- I know that my Redeemer lives; I shall see him with
mine Eyes, and I feel, I feel what now I speak; he died, aged 74.

Mr. John Bruen, of Stapleford, in Cheshire, Esquire; the Morning before his Death,
said, -- I will have no Blacks, I love no Proud nor Pompous Funeral, neither is
there any cause of Mourning, but of rejoicing rather, in my particular.
Immediately before his Death, -- Lifting up his Hands, he said, -- The Lord is
my Portion, my Help, and my Trust, his blessed Son Jesus Christ is my Savior
and Redeemer, Amen. Even so says the Spirit unto my Spirit; therefore come,
Lord Jesus, and kiss me with the Kisses of thy Mouth, and embrace me with the
Arms of thy Love; into thy Hands I commend my Spirit; O come now, and take me
to thy self. O come Lord Jesus, come quickly. O come, O come, O come; and so
died, aged 65, A.C. 1625.

Mr. Will. Perkins, to a Friend, praying for him, said, -- Pray not for the
mitigation of my Torments, but for the increase of my Patience; he died, aged
44. A.C. 1602.

Edw. Deering: -- As for my Death, I bless God, I feel so much inward Joy and
Comfort in my Soul, that if I were put to my choice, whether to die or to live,
I would a thousand times rather choose Death than Life; if it may stand with the
Will of God; he died, A.C. 1576.

Melancthon to his Son-in-law, Dr. Bucer, asking what he would have, answered,
Nothing but Heaven, and therefore trouble me no more with speaking to me.

I have delivered more upon this subject in a former Book, called The
Christians Companion.

Mahometans, and Heathens.
A great Solider, in eminent favor with the Great Mogul, a Mohammedan Atheist,
upon a wound, proving Mortal, by the occasion of a Hair plucked off his Breast,
about his Nipple, in wantonness, by one of his Women, when a dying, said, --
Who would not have thought but that I who have been bred so long a Soldier,
should have died in the Face of my Enemy by a Sword, or Lance, or Arrow, or
Bullet, or by some such instrument of Death? but now am forced to confess, That
there is a great God above, whose Majesty I ever despised; that needs no bigger
Lance than a Hair to kill an Atheist, a Despiser of his Majesty; and so
desiring, that those his last Words might be told unto the King his Master; he
died.

The Dervise that gave his sense of the Apparition at Medina (mentioned in the
Chapter of Miracles, etc.) died with those Words in his Mouth, if my Memory
fail me not: O thou Woman with the Book in thine Hand, have Mercy upon me.

Heathen Ancient.
I am not haled to Death, but am ascending up to Heaven. The last Words of
Socrates, with the Mortal Cup in his Hand.

Socrates (said Mr. H. Bullinger) was glad when his death approached, because
he thought he should go to Hesiod, Homer, and other Learned Men, whom he should
meet with in the other World; then how much more do I enjoy, who am sure, that
I shall see my Savior Christ, the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
all Holy Men, which have lived from the beginning of the World? These, I say, I
am sure to see, and to partake with them in Joy. The Words of Dying Bullinger.
See more in Erasmus' s Conviv. Religios.

Cicero in his Dialogue concerning Old Age, introduces Cato Major, speaking
thus:

If any God should grant me leave to grow young, and cry like an Infant in my
Cradle again, I would utterly refuse it: nor would I be willing, as one that
has run his Race out, to be called back from the Goal, to the beginning again.
For what Profit has Life? or rather what toil has it not? But whether it has
or no, certainly it gluts or satisfies; for I am not minded to lament that I
have lived, which many, and they Learned Men have often done, nor do I repent
my Life; because I have so lived, that I think I was not born in vain; and I
depart hence, as out of an Inn, not from my Home. -- O famous day, when I shall
go to that Assembly and Council of Divine Souls, and depart out of this Rout
and Sink!

Occasions of Conversion.
Jews.
EVE Cohan was converted by ocasion of reading the New Testament, which she
found in the Chamber of her Dancing Master in Holland; but being threatened and
ill-treated by her Mother upon it, married her Master, came over into England,
and was baptized at London about half a score Years ago.

Discoursing once with an Italian Jew concerning the Conditions of Rome, he
began with great assurance to tell me, That at Rome great Wonders were to be
seen; as a Man that could make his God, make and unmake Sins at his pleasure,
etc. closing up his Discourse with a deep Protestation, That if he were a
Christian, the Vices and Doctrines of Italy would strongly tempt him to disown
that Name. Dr. Addison.

Christians.
Matthias Vessenbechius, a Lawyer, Student at Lovain, converted by seeing the
Sufferings of a poor Godly Man of that place. Ex Melch. Ad.

Francis Junius being at Lions, escaped an imminent Death; upon which, being
somewhat awakened to a Sense of Divine Providence, he desired to read over the
New Testament, of which himself gives this Account -- When I opened the
New Testament, I first met with St. John's First Chapter, In the beginning was
the word, etc. I read part of it, and was presently convinced that the Divinity
and Authority of the Author did excel all humane Writings; my Body trembled, my
Mind was astonished, and I was so affected all that day, that I knew not what I
was. Thou wast mindful of me, O my God, according to the multitude of thy
Mercies; and calledst home thy lost Sheep into thy Fold, and from that day he
wholly beat himself to pious Practices. Anonym.

Bishop Vergerius was converted, by occasion of seeing Fr. Spira in his misery;
or as some say, by reading a Protestant Book, with an intention to confute it.

S. Augustine gives us the Story at large of his own Conversion in his Book of
Confessions, and imputes it partly to the reading of Cicero's Hortensius, to
the Prayers of his Mother Monica, and her continal Admonitions; the Preaching
of S. Ambrose, but especially to the Discourse of Pontilian, and his relation
of the Life of S. Anthony, which so stirred up his Passions, that immediately
he burst out into Tears, retired into the Garden, opened his Testament (at the
direction of an Angel, as he thought, crying, Take up and read) and hit
presently upon that Text, Romans 13.12, 13, 14. Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 7, 8. Justin
Martyr was converted by seeing of the Martyrs.

Maronites.
-- Sometimes before was arrived there (at Suratte) a Merchant of Aleppo, who
had run himself out at heels, and of a Maronite Christian was become a Roman
Catholic, in hopes to patch up his fortune; being in truth a mere Counterfeit
and Hypocrite; for these Levantine Christians seldom change their Religion, but
upon some Motive of Interest; and when they have got a good Sum together, they
presently whip back again into their own Country; and for a small piece of
Money obtain Absolution of their Patriarch; -- among many others, I will only
mention one Franciscan, called Paulus Stella, coming with 400 Crowns (or
thereabouts) in his Pocket, for his Subsistence; a Maronite smelt him out, and
under the pretense of giving him the honor of his Conversion to the Catholic
Religion, never left him till he had sucked him dry, and turned the Chanel of
his Money: This Maronite Merchant, whose Name was Chelebi, showed himself very
zealous for the Capuchins; and he had reason enough; for the Capuchins of
Aleppo had been very serviceable to him, and had helped him in his Affairs,
when they were at the lowest ebb. They were overjoyed at his Arrival at
Suratte, and gave out immediately, that it was he that had given them Money for
the building their House and Church; but when I came to look over my Accounts,
I found that the Money that had paid for the Ground, and a good share of the
building came out of my Purse; Father Ambrose having promised that I should be
reimbursed at my Return to Paris; but I never heard more of my Money, nor
indeed did I ever look after it. Tavernier's Collect. of several Relations,
etc. p. 37.

Papists.
Bruno, Born in Collen, and Professor of Philosophy in Paris, about the year of
Christ, 1080, being present at the Singing of the Office for his
Fellow-Professor now Dead (a man highly reputed for his Holy Life) the Dead
Corpse suddenly sits up in the Bier, and cries out, [I am in God's just
Judgments eondemned]. These words were uttered three several days; at which
Bruno was so affrighted, that a man held so pious was Damned, began to think,
what would become of himself, and many more? Therefore concluding there was no
safety for him, but by forsaking the World; betook himself with six of his
Scholars, to a hideous place for dark Woods, high Hills, Rocks and wild Beasts,
in the Province of Dauphiny, near Grenoble, and there built a Monastery, having
obtained the ground of Hugo Bishop of Grenoble; the place called Carthusia,
whence his Monks took their Name. Rosse's view of all Relig.

Jews.
R. Hakkunas Ben Nehunia was converted by occasion of the Miracles which he
saw. -- I am Hakkunas, one of them that believe, and have washed my self with
the Holy Waters, and walk in those right ways, being induced thereunto by
Miracles. Hortinger out of Suidas, etc.

Elias Levita, before his Death, became a Christian, and with thirty more Jews
received Baptism, (but upon what occasions or inducements I cannot learn.) A.C.
1547. Alsted.

Diverse kinds of Testimonies, Miraculous, to Christianity.
Jews.
1. PRomises and Prophecies and Types in Sacred Scripture.

2. Satan in Possessed Persons and Daemoniacks, What have we to do with thee
Jesus, thou Son of God, etc. The Devil answering the Sons of Scevi in the Acts,
Acts, 19. etc.

3. The Jewish Nation, as it is at this day, dispersed through all the World,
and dissolved in all the most material parts of its Economy, without a Legal
Succession of Priesthood, without Genealogies, without Temple, without
Sacrifices, Holy Land, Holy City, Holy Altar, Holy Oil; and in a word, without
any Government in Church or State.

4. All their Attempts to regain their own Land, and rebuild their own City
wonderfully frustrated; especially in the times of Julian the Emperor, Ammian.
Marcell. l. 23.

5. All their pretended Prophets and Saviors discovered in a most shameful
manner, and convicted of Imposture and Deceit; especially the ignominious
Delusion of Barcocab, which the Jews lament to this day.

6. To which may be added the Abstinence and Preaching of John Baptist, and the
Miracles of our Blessed Savior.

As also those mentioned by Josephus, relating to the Destruction of Jerusalem,
e.g. in the Feast of Weeks, before Vespasian came against Jerusalem, the
Priests heard a Man walking in the Temple, and saying, with a wonderful
Terrible Voice, Come let us go away out of this Temple, let us make haste away
from hence! etc. Josephus.

Roman.
The Image of a Virgin with a Child in her Arms, about the Sun, seen at Rome;
Three Suns seen; Augustus forbidding himself to be called Lord; his releasing
30000 fugitive Slaves; a Comet; a Fountain of Oil running all day; Oracles
silenced. Alsted.

Christian.
1. The Miracles done by the Apostles and Primitive Christians, etc. which
continued in the Church for two or three hundred years after our Savior,
amongst the last Recorded, this is one mentioned by S. Augustine, at the Aque
Tibilitanae. Projectus, the Bishop bringing the Remains of the Martyr Stephen,
in a vast Multitude of People, a Blind Woman desiring to be brought to the
Bishop, and some Flowers which she brought, being laid on those Relics, and
after applied to her Eyes, to the wonder of all she received Sight; As also,
when the Bodies of S. Gervasius and Protasius were dug up, and Translated to
Ambrose's Church at Milan, not only such as were vexed with unclean Spirits
were healed, but also a certain noted Citizen that had been blind many years,
enquiring into the Reason of so much Tumult and Rejoicing among the People, and
being told the Cause, leaped for joy, and desired his Guide to bring him
thither; whither when he was brought, he begged leave to touch the Bier with
his Hankerchief; which he no sooner had done, but immediately his Eyes were
opened, and the fame thereof spread abode, and Praise given to God; and Justina
the Mother of Valentinian the Emperor, was restrained from her purpose of
Persecuting S. Ambrose, etc. Gratias tibi, Deus meus. Aug. conf. l. 9.

2. Other Miracles of later Date, which it would be too tedious to enumerate,
and perhaps not very easy to distinguish the true from feigned.

Mahometans.
1. The Vision at Medina, A.C. 1620. Sep. 20. At midnight a great Tempest fell
with Clouds and Thunder, afterward in the clear Sky these words in Arabic
Characters, Oh! why will ye believe in lies? Between two and three a Clock in
the Morning, there appeared a Woman in white, compassed about with the Sun,
with a cheerful Countenance, and a Book in her Hand, and over against her were
Armies of Turks, Arabians, Persians, etc. in Battle-Array, ready to Fight with
her, but she keeping her Station, only opened her Book, and the Armies fled
away; and presently all the Lamps about Mahomet's Tomb were put out, and a
murmuring Wind heard. This lasted three Weeks: the Ancient Pilgrims of
Mahomet's Race were amazed; only one of their Derysses took upon him to
Interpret it, and suffered Death for his boldness. Knowls's Turkish History.

Bengal.
2. A Jugler of Bengala (a Kingdom famous for Witches) brought an Ape before
the Mogul, who being willing to please himself with some Tricks, etc. gives the
Ring of his Finger to a certain Boy among many present to hide, the Ape going
presently to the Boy that hid it: This with many more feats being done; at last
this came strangely into the King's mind, There are, says he, many Disputes
about the True Prophet, we for Mahomet, the Persians for Mortis Hale, the
Hindoes for Bremaw, etc. The Persees for Zortoost, the Jews for Moses, the
Christians for Christ; adding more, to the number of twelve; writing the Names
on twelve several Scrolls, and putting them together, the Ape put his Paw
amongst them, and pulled out the Name of Christ: This was done a second time.
-- Then Mahomet Chan, a great Nobleman of that Court, calling it an Imposture
of the Christians (tho there were none present,) desiring to make a third
Trial, put eleven of the Names together, reserving the Name of Christ in his
hand; the Ape searching as before, pulled forth his Paw empty, and so twice of
thrice together. The King demanding a Reason for this, was Answered, that
happily the thing he looked for was not there; he was bid to search for it; and
then pulling out those eleven Names, the Ape in a seeming Indignation, rent
them; then running to Mahomet Chan, caught him by the Hand, where the Name of
Christ was concealed, which delivered to him, he opened the Scroll, and so held
it up to the King, not tearing it as the other. The Mogul took the Ape, gave
his Keeper a Pension to look to him, calling him the Divining Ape. Nothing else
followed upon this Wonder. The Author believes this Story to be true, hearing
it often confirmed to him by diverse Persons who knew not one another, and were
of diverse Religions. Anonym.

Narsinga, etc.
3. A.D. 1277. Myrangee an Atheist conquered Narsinga, and all the Regions
about Meliapora, and one year going about to hoard up his Rice and Grain in a
Chapel which the poor Christians used at that time to Pray in daily; the poor
People with all submission entreated him to refrain; but that provoked him to
more Profaneness: he commanded them to worship him. Next Night, in an
affrighting Vision, the Apostle approaches (S. Thomas the first Planter of the
Gospel among the Indians) threatening, and with an Iron Whip proffering to whip
the King; who suddenly awakened, relented and besought the Christians to pray
for him, and himself helped to purge the Chapel, and satisfy for his
Sacrilege. Sir Tho. Herb. Travels, etc.

Egypt
About five Miles from Cair, there is said to be a place, which every Good
Friday shows the appearance of the Heads, Legs, Arms, etc. of Men and Children,
as if rising out of the Ground, to a very great Number, etc. Stephen du-Pleis,
a Sober discerning Man, says, he saw and touched diverse of the same Members.
S. Clark.

Ceremonies in Salutation, Greetings, etc.
Jews.
THE Jewish Salutation consisted in these following particulars: 1. They bowed
the head, Genesis 24.26, 48. and chapter 43.28. Exodus 4.31. 2. They kissed one
another, 1 Samuel 20.41. So Judas also perverted this Kissing to a traitorous
purpose, vid. 2 Samuel 15.5. but this was used only to them of the same Sex, Men
with Men, and Women with Women, as we find the Custom afterward translated to
the Christians. 3. They wished them Peace, as that which comprehended all other
Blessings in it. Peace be unto you. Is it Peace? Peace be to this House. 4.
They often invited them to eat Bread, and drink Water, and sometimes to tarry
all Night; as Genesis 19.2, etc. 5. They offered Water to wash the feet of their
Guests, as a refreshment to them after they had been tired with travel in those
hot Countries, Genesis 18.4, etc.


Christians.
The Ancient Christians adopted most of these Usages into their common
Salutations; but in process of time they have varied according to the manners
of the several Countries they have lived in; according to the old Rule of
Civility, Cum fueris Romae, Romano vivito more.

There is (in Geneva) an universal Civility, not only toward Strangers, but
toward one another, that reigns all the Town over (Zurich) and leans to an
Excess: so that in them one sees a mixture of a French openness, an Italian
exactness: there is indeed a little too much of the last. Dr. Burnet 's Letters.

The Women here, not only do not converse familiarly with Men, except those of
their near Kindred, but even in the Streets do not make any returns to the
Civility of Strangers; for it is only Strangers that put off their Hats to
Women; but they make no Courtesies: and here, as in all Switzerland, Women are
not saluted, but the Civility is expressed by taking them by the hand. Idem.

Mahometans.
They uncover not the Head, but only lay the hand upon the Breast, and bowing a
little, they say, Selah meon Aleicom, i.e. Peace be with you: and he that is
saluted answers, Aleicom esselam ut eahmet ullah, i. e. Peace be with you and
God's Mercy also. M. de Thevenot.

The Persians never uncover their Heads, but bow, and lay their right hand on
their Breasts; when they come in the Company of their Betters, they fall upon
their Knees to set themselves upon their Heels. They are full of Compliments,
which they call Travexed. M. Tavernier, l. 5. c. 14.

As we were riding in the City (Buda) diverse of the common Turks murmured that
we should ride, where they went on foot. But I was pleased to see many Turks to
salute Seignior Gabriel the Emperor's Courier in our Company, and to take his
hand, and put it to their foreheads. Dr. Edw. Brown 's Travels.

Persians.
A Mile nearer Spahawn, the Vizier, the Sultan of Spahawn, Meloyembeg, and
Hodgenazar the Armenian Prince, in a Cavalcade of about 4000 Horse, and
innumerable Foot, came out to meet us; the Highway for two Miles full of Men,
Women, Children, and Banyans, who all saluted us with Hoshomody Soflowardy, the
better sort with Hoshgaldom, Sottogaldom, i.e. Welcome, welcome, Heartily welcome.
Sir Tho. Herb.

Mogul's Country, Indolstan.
1. The Meaner sort to their Superiors -- put their right hand to the Earth.

2. Their Familiars in intimate Salutation -- take one another by the Chin, and
cry -- Father, or Brother; using good Wishes, as God give you health. Ans. The
same health God give you: I wish you the Prayers of the Poor, I wish one good
after another to come to you every quarter of an Hour.

3. The Better sort, when they entertain you, -- rise up to you, bow their
Bodies, and then entreat you to sit with them.

The Goeghy (a Sect of Banyans) never speak to such as pass by them, nor give
them the time of the day; nay, they will not answer those that speak to them,
out of a Persuasion, that being consecrated to their God Bruin, they should
defile themselves by speaking to other Men. Mandelslo's Travels into the
Indies, p. 56.

Chinese.
Above all, the Chinese exceed in this Point, The first thing they teach their
Youth, is Salutation; and have whole Books writ upon it. If a Man has but once
seen a Person, he is obliged to salute him, and this is not done with the Hat,
but closing the left hand and putting it into the right, and both to the
Breast, with a low inclination of the Head, with Protestations to confirm what
is expressed by Gestures, etc. Idem.

Tunquin.
Among the Tunquinese, it is not the Custom, to ask one another, How they do?
but, How many Measures of Rice he ate far his Dinner? and, whether he ate with
an Appetite? This is a general Custom among all the Idolatrous Indians, unless
in the Dominions of the Great Mogul; where they ^at not Rice only, but Bread;
and there they ask in Civility, How much Rice they boiled? and, How much Meal
they baked for Bread? Tavernier 's Collect. of Relat.

Fidelity, Treachery.
Jews.
THE Treachery of the Jews has been one great Reason of the unkind Usage they
have met with from Christians, and their frequent Expulsions from Country to
Country; as at Trent for crucifying a Child, and poisoning Wells; so likewise
in Hungary, etc. for the like Misdemeanors. In Curland for a Murrain, as was
suspected, raised by Jewish Exorcisms among the Cattle; but intended, as was
said, a Plague to the People, etc.

Christians.
The Christian Principle, and the Practice of good Christians is well known in
this respect. Yet sometimes we have instances of gross Perfidiousness; as in
the case of Vladislaus, K. of Hungary, who by instigation of the Pope's Legate,
had broken League with Amurath the Turkish Emperor, who [upon his crying out,
Are these, O Christ, the Leagues which thy Servants have Sworn to by thy Name?
If thou art a God, Avenge the Injury.] got the Victory over him, and carried
the King's Head on a Spear, etc. Alsted.

Papists.
Henry 7th. Emperor, was so Devout, that he would pray and weep whole Nights
before a Crucifix, which he carried with him, and received the Sacrament daily;
upon which occasion he died by a Minorite of Florence, that gave him the Host
Poisoned. Alsted. Hist.

John Husse and Jerome of Prague were burnt alive, after a Promise of
Safe Conduct, granted by the Emperor, and the Axiom enacted, That Faith is not
to be kept with Heretics.

Russians.
The Muscovites are generally false and perfidious, not regarding their words;
but studying to overreach or cozen all they can: insomuch, that being in other
Countries, they strive to dissemble their own. S. Clark.

Romans.
I love Treachery, but hate Traitors, said Augustus Emperor, to one that
boasted of his Merits ( Rhymitacles King of Thrace, who had revolted from
Antony to him.) Camerar.

Heathens.
Brennus King of France, overwhelmed a Maid, that had betrayed Ephesus to him,
with Bracelets and Necklaces, the Reward of her Treachery. Idem.

The Julian Law assigned the same Punishment to Sacrilege and Treachery;
placing the one the very next step to the other. Vlpian. l. 7. de Offic.
Procons.

Mohometans.
Solomon, The Turkish Emperor, contrary to his Promise, commanded the
Betrayers of Buda to be slain. Camerar.

The same Solomon promised his Daughter for a Reward to him that would betray
the Isle of Rhodes; but when the Christian Traitor challenged his Promise with
a large Portion for Matrimony; the King brought his Daughter out in very costly
Attire, with a Vides me stetisse promissis, you see I am as good as my word;
but withal commanded him to be flead, and put on a Bed of Salt; or his Daughter
would not be a fit Match, except for a Mussulman, whose Skin was Circumcised
and clean from Baptism. Idem.

One of the Dervises pretending to ask an Alms of Bajazet the Second,
desperately assailed him with a short Scimiter hid under his hypocritical
habit. Knolles, p. 463.

The like they had attempted against his Father in his Youth, etc. and in our
days Mahomet the Great Vizier Passa was murdered by one of these Dervises.
Idem.

The Mahometans, but especially the Hindoes, are very faithful to all their
Engagements; insomuch, that if they be assaulted at any time, they will rather
die in defense of their Trust than forsake it, and those that entrust them in
time of their need.

Marriage and Divorce.
Jews.
THE manner of proceeding in Marriage, is set down Methodically in the first
Book; what was omitted there is to be related here.

After the Dowry made by the Bridegroom upon the Bride (of which but half the
Sum is usually given to Widows, as to Virgins) follows Affiancing -- in these
words, Behold, take her after the Law of Moses. The Man replies, Be thou unto
me a Wife according to the Law of Moses and Israel.

Their Dowry-bill according to the usage of the Jews in Barbary, is thus.

Upon the Sixth of the Week, the Fourth of the Month --, in the Year --, of the
Creation of the World, according to the Computation which we use here at
Arzila, a Town situate on the Seashore of Barbary, the Bridegroom Rabbi --
the Son of R. -- said unto the Bride-wife -- Daugter of R. -- Merchant in
Alcazar; Be unto me a Wife according to the Law of Moses and Israel; and I,
according to the Word of God, will worship, honor, maintain and govern thee
according to the manner of Husbands among the Jews, who do faithfully worship,
honor, maintain and govern their Wives: I also bestow upon thee the Dowry of
thy Virginity, amounting to 50 Shekels, which belong unto thee by the Law, and
moreover thy food, raiment, and sufficient necessaries; as likewise the
Knowledge of thee according to the Custom of the Earth.

This Bill is given into the Custody of the Bride.

Upon putting the Kedusim or Ring on the Bride's Thumb or Finger, the Rabbi
says, Thou art married or sanctified to this Man with this Ring, according to
the Law of Israel: And after that a Prayer, such as, Blessed art thou, O Lord
our God, who have created Mirth and Gladness, the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Charity and Brotherly Love, Rejoicing and Pleasure, Peace and Society; I
beseech thee, O Lord, let there suddenly be heard in the Cities of Judah and
Streets of Jerusalem, the Voice of Joy and Gladness, the Voice of the Bride and
Bridegroom; The Voice of Rejoicing in the Bride-chamber is sweeter than my
Feast, and Children sweeter than the sweetness of a Song.

The Bridegroom before going to Bed, uses this mystical Orison --

Blessed art thou Adonai, our God, King of the World, who planted the
Walnut-tree in the Garden of Eden, the Brook of the Valleys; Suffer not a
Stranger to enter into the Sealed Fountain, that the Servant of our Loves may
keep the Seed of Purity and Holiness, and may not be Barren; Blessed be thou
Adonai, who have chosen us in Abraham and in his Seed after him.

During the time of the Bride's Purification they feast, and send Girdles one
to another. They keep their Summer-Weddings in Bowers and Arbours; and the
Guests at the first entrance of these Bowers, say, Baruch Habba, Blessed is he
that comes. -- The Bridegroom takes a raw Egg, which he casts at the Bride,
thereby wishing her an easy and joyful Childbirth. Dr. Addison.

According to the Barbary-Jews, a Man may take as many Wives, as he can find
with Meat, Drink and Cloths, and the right of the Bed. Polygamy being accounted
as one of the chiefest Privileges conferred by Divine Prescription; yet they
are not very fond of its practice.

Divorces are granted amongst them; a Copy of their Bill of Divorce -- is thus
--

Upon the -- day of the Week -- of the Month -- and Year of the Creation of the
World, according to the account which we Hebrews use at Tituan, in the Kingdom
of Fez, governed by the Puissant Muley -- I Joseph-Ben-Rabbi -- have desired of
mine own accord, without any Compulsion, to cut off, divorce, dismiss and cast
thee out; Thee, I say, Thee, my Wife Fatima, the Daughter of Rabbi-Ben -- which
have been my Wife heretofore; but now, I cut thee off, divorce, dismiss and
cast thee out, and be thou cut off, etc. and be at liberty, free, and Mistress
of thine own self, to go and marry whom thou have a mind to; and let none be
refused for my Name, from this day forward for ever, and this shall be to thee
a Bill of Divorce, and the Epistle of taking away, according to the law of the
twelve Tribes.

The Difference of Wives and Concubines.
1. Wives were by Matrimonial Patent, or Dotal Covenant; Concubines, without
such Ceremonies. 2. Wives were Governesse of the Family: Concubines as
Servants, only claiming a Right to the Bed. 3. The Wives Children had a Right
to the Inheritance; the Children of Concubines received Portions. Dr. Addison.
The most ordinary cause of Divorce among the Muscovites, at least pretense, is
Devotion, loving God better than their Wives when a humor takes them to go
into a Monastery. Barrenness is another cause. D. of Holstein's Emb. Trav.

Muscovites.
The way of Marriage among the Muscovites is this, the Parents having agreed,
1. The young Man sends to his intended Bride a furred Coif, a pair of Buskins,
a Cabinet with Jewels, a Bag for Night-Cloaths, a Comb and Looking-Glass. 2.
Next day the Priest comes with a little Silver Cross, with two Lads, carrying
lighted Torches, or Wax-Candles, blesses the two Lads, and then the Guests. 3.
The young Couple are set at Table, the two Lads holding a piece of Taffata
between them. 4. The Suacha dresses the Bride's Head, brings a Looking-Glass,
and the young Couple join their Cheeks, and smile one upon another; the two
Suacha's in the mean time throwing Hops upon them. 5. They are led to Church;
where, 1. They are blessed, by holding Images over their Heads: 2. Are three
times asked their Consent (by the Priest, who takes the Man by the Right Hand,
and the Woman by the Left at the same time) whether they love one another as
they ought to do? 3. All the Company join Hands, and the Priest sings Ps. 128.
the People answering. 4. A Garland of Rue is put on their Heads, and then is
said, whom God has joined, etc.



Modern Heathens.
In Angola they marry not at all. Sir Tho Herbert.

Amongst Bannians the Children are married at seven and ten Years old; and this
is certain, if an Infant die unmarried, his Parents procure a Virgin (with some
Dinaes of Gold) to be his Bedfellow or Wife for one Night; to avoid the
Reproach of dying unmarried. Sir Tho. Herbet. -- They hate Polygamy, therefore
cry out upon the Mahometans, as People of an impure Soul. Their way of Marriage
is thus: The Boy rides about the Town, attended with such little Ones as can
ride, robed with Jewels, Scarfs, etc. one day; the next, the Bride, with a like
Train of Virgins, no less richly attired; the Bridegroom and Bride, known by
their Coronets: the Ceremonies are ended with Kettle-Drums, Trumpets, Pageants,
etc. the Bride has no Money-Portion (which they hold contemptible) only some
Jewels and Dinaes of Gold, which they are that day attired with: afterward a
Fire is interposed to signify their heat of Affections, a Silken String
circles both their Bodies; then a Linen Cloth is put betwixt them, to show
they were unknown to one another before; then the Bramin blesses them, and
wishes them as fruitful as a Cow; the Cloth is torn away, the String untied,
and then they are one another ever after. Sir Th. Herb.

The Bannians affect no second Marriages, Idem.

The Persees distinguish their Marriages into five Orders, thus: 1. Shaulan,
which is a marrying of two young Children; the virtue being, That if either
die, they go to Heaven. 2. Chockorson, which is a second Marriage. 3.
Codesherahasan, when the Woman is her own Chooser. 4. Ecksan, when a dead Body
(not married before) is married to one alive. 5. Ceterson, when having no Sons,
a Man adopts his Daughter's Son, etc. The Ceremony is this.


A Midnight the Daroo (or Priest) enters the House, (for they wed not in
Churches;) and finds the Bride and Bridegroom placed upon a Bed together;
opposite to each two Churchmen stand with Rice in their Hands, (the Emblem of
Fruitfulness) when first one lays his Forefinger on the Bride's Forehead, and
asks if she be willing to take that Man to be her Husband; who saying Yea, the
like rite or question is by the other Priest made to the Man; who after the
like answer promises to infeoffe her in a certain number of Dinaes; to which
the Bride replies, she and all she has are his; the Priest thereupon throws
Rice upon their Heads, praying, that they may multiply as Rice: The Woman's
Parents give the Dowry, and eight days are usually spent in Jovial merriment.
Sir Th. Herb. Trav. into Persia.

The Bannians in Calicut exchange their Wives: Here not only Husbands, but
Wives are allowed Polygamy.

Persians.
The young Man and Maid see not one another before Marriage (which is also
observed in Muscovy,) The Bridegroom (not the Bride) gives a Dowry, which is
sent to the Mistress before Marriage, or promised to be paid in case of
Divorce; the Kasi (Ecclesiastical Judge) or Molla contracts them by Proxies,
and marries them in the Name of God, of Mahomet, and of Aly, giving them a
Certificate of the Marriage; and this in private, perhaps in some Field, for
fear of Sorcery. Presents are sent to the Bride, of Pendants, Bracelets, etc.
she is conducted on Horseback, -- With Music, etc. to the Bridegroom's House,
where a Feast, Poets, Books, Discourses of Morality are provided for their
Entertainment; if the Bridegroom find his Bride broken up to his Hands, he may
lawfully cut off her Nose and Ears, and turn her away. If any one of the
Company is not there next day precisely by the hour of Dinner, he is laid upon
a Ladder set against a Wall, with his Head downwards, and whipped on the Soales
of his Feet with a rolled Handkercheif. D. of Holstein 's Emb. Trav.

At Aleppo the Kadi makes and dissolves all contracts of Marriage. M.
Tavernier, l. 2. c. 2. p. 59.

In Fermosa the Bridegroom, after he has sent the Dowry by a Relation to the
Bride's House, goes the next night, and without Company or Light, or sight of
any one, creeps by stealth into the House, and so into the Bride's Bed, where
the Marriage is secretly consummated; and for some time continues to do so,
never seeing one another in the day time unless in some remote place, for they
live not with their Wives, till 40 Years of age. Mandelslo.

In Bengala their Marriages are made in some Water, wherein the Priest and the
married Couple hold a Cow and Calf by the tail, and pour water upon it; then
the Priest ties the married Persons Clothes together, and surround the Cow and
Calf, and so the Ceremony is ended; the Priest has for his Fee the Cow and
Calf, the Poor some Alms, and the Idol some Money. Rosse.

In Malabar the King will not converse with his new-married Wife, till one of
the chief Bramines has had the first Night's Lodging with her. Idem.

In Narsinga the chief Priest dispenses with Marriages at his pleasure; and
when he gives License to the Woman to marry again, he seals it with a hot Iron
on her Shoulder. Idem.

Mahometans.
In Fez they marry in the Church. Rosse.

The Tartars buy their Wives; and in regard there are abundance of poor young
Men, that have not wherewithal to buy, they never mar at all. M. Tavernier, l.
3. c. 13.

Gaurs.
The Gaurs are permitted to have five Wives, if they can maintain them, nor is
it laudable to repudiate any, but in case of evident Adultery, or that she turn
Mohammedan; besides the Husband must stay a whole year, to see if she will
repent or no; and upon confession of her fault, after three Years Penance,
they are remarried.

As to the Ceremony of Marriage, the Priest asks before Witnesses, if they both
consent; then taking a little Water, he says a few Prayers over it; and then
washing both their Foreheads, he pronounces certain words, and rhere's all.
They Marry not within the third degree. M. Tavern. l. 4. c. 8.

With one of their Wives only they are to Lie, at least two Nights a Week,
Friday and Saturday, and she always goes before the rest. When the Women have
the custom of Nature upon them, they lie in the Fields, and have Meat and Drink
brought them every day; and when they are free, they send a Kid, Hen, or
Pidgeon for an Offering; after which, they go to the Bath, and then invite some
few of their Kindred to some small Collation. Idem.

Armenians.
Amongst the Armenians the Mothers often agree upon Marriages for their
Children, at two or three years old, sometimes before they are Born, before
either Party have seen each other, or the Fathers and Brothers know any thing
of it: Upon the Fathers Approbation, the Mother of the boy, with 2 Old Women
goes to the House where the Mother of the Daughter Lives, and Present her with
a Ring from the Boy; the Boy appears afterward, and the Priest reads something
out of the Gospel, as a blessing upon both Parties; after which they give him a
sum of Money, according to the quality of the Father of the Girl; this done,
they present the Company with Drink: And this is called a Betrothing. After
this giving of the Ring, tho it be 20 years after, before they are Married, the
Boy is bound yearly upon Easter Day to send his Mistress a New Suit of Clothes
with suitable Trimming. Three days before Marriage, the Boy's Parents prepare a
Feast, and a New Suit of Cloths for the Girl; at length the Boy on one Horse,
and the Girl on another, sumptuously Harnessed, with Bridles and Saddles of
Gold and Silver, if the Parents be Rich, set out from the Virgin's Habitation,
the Bridegroom going before with a Veil of Carnation Tiffany on his Head, or
else with Gold and Silver Network, the Meshes whereof are very close, that
reach below the Stomach; he holds in his hand one end of a Girdle 3 or 4 Else
long, and the Bride that Rides behind, holds the other: She is also covered
with a large White Veil, from head to Foot, that spreads also a good way over
the Horse; under which, as under a large White Sheet, the Bride is so hid, that
nothing can be seen but her Eyes. Two Men walk on either side the Horses; and
if they are Children of 3 or 4 years old, there are 3 or 4 Men to hold them in
the Saddle; for so young they Marry: A great Train of People follow, with
Tapers in their Hands, as if going in Procession; Drums, Trumpets, Haut-boys,
etc. Attending to the Church-door: When alighted, the Bridegroom and Bride
still holding the Girdle in their Hands, advance to the Foot of the Altar,
where they lean Forehead to Forehead; the Priest laying his Bible on their
Heads, instead of a Desk, a weight sufficiently heavy, as being a thick
ponderous Folio: Then the Minister, commonly a Bishop or Archbishop, reads the
Service, very much like ours, demanding, Will thou have such a one to thy Wife?
To thy Husband? To which they Answer with a Nod of the Head. After the
Matrimonial Benediction they hear Mass, and so return to the Daughter's
Habitation, where the Nuptials last three days, the Women Drinking more than
the Men. The Man goes to bed first, the Woman pulling off his Breeches, tho she
does not lay aside her Veil till the Candle is out. Let it be what time of the
year it will, the Woman rises before day. So that there be some Armenians, that
in 10 years after, they are Married, never saw their Wives Faces, nor never
heard them speak. For tho her Husband may speak to her, and all the rest of her
Kindred, yet she never answers but with a nod. The Women never eat with their
Husbands; but if the Men Feast their Friends, the Women Feast theirs the next
day. Tavernier l. 4. c. 12.

Mexico.
In Mexico the Bridegroom and the Bride stood before the Priest, who took them
by the hands, asking if they would Marry: Understanding their will, he took a
corner of the Veil, wherewith the Woman had her Head covered, and a corner of
the Man's Gown, which he tied together on a Knot, and so led them thus tied to
the Bridegroom's House, where after the Wife had gone seven times about a Fire
kindled on a Hearth, they sat down together, and the Marriage was contracted.
Purchase.

Sclavonia.
In Sclavonia they rarely permit their Women to Marry, till they are 24 years
of age, nor the men till they are 30. S. Clark.

Mahometans.
Marriage is to be sought, say the Turks, for Procreation, not Lust; the fit
time is about 25 years of Age, it is to be Celebrated with Prayers and Praises
and modest shamefulness; and they ought to learn each other to read, if either
party be ignorant; but now it is degenerate from the ancient Simplicity; for if
a Man likes a young Woman, he buys her of her Father, and then Inrolls her in
the Cadi's Book, the Marriage following with all Bacchanal Solemnities. The
Father gives only some small pieces of Houshold-goods with her: When he
dislikes any of his Wives, he sells them, or gives them to his Men-slaves. They
sit not at Table with their Husbands, but wait and serve them; and then they
Dine by themselves; not admitting any man into their Company above 12 years
old; and they never go abroad without leave, except to the Bath, and on
Thursday to Weep at the Graves of the Dead: They rise to their Husbands, and
stand while they are in presence. Nor is any part of their Body to be seen by
any man; only the Brother may see the Sister, but not the Husband's Brother:
And for this cause they are kept closely mewed up, and not suffered to buy and
sell. Purchase.

Frugality.
Jews.
THE Ancient Hebrews used a Frugality in the Simplicity of their Fare, Bread
and Water, etc. as may be seen in the Lives of the Patriarchs, and Prophets; at
most Bread and Flesh, and sometimes Milk, Wine or Oil, etc. In their Apparel,
the Skins of Beasts, Cloth of Camels Hair, Girdles of Leather; in their
Buildings, Utensils, Entertainments, etc. Yet without doubt in process of time,
they, as other People, grew lavish and profuse in their Expenses; for which
they are sometimes smartly reproved by the Prophets, especially Isaiah, c. 3.

Christians.
Our Savior Christ gave his followers both Precepts and an Example of
Frugality, in taking up with so mean Provision himself, of Lodging, Diet,
Raiment, and Retinue; and giving strict Orders after his Frugal, tho Miraculous
Treats, that the Fragments should be gathered up, and care taken that nothing
might be lost. The Sacraments which he Instituted for the use of his Church,
both of them consisting of Elements, which are (...) (easy to be procured, and
not chargeable) are an Evidence of the same thing. It were an endless task to
enquire into the Frugal Lives of the Ancient Christians: Ecclesiastical Story
abounds with Examples. Anonym.

Ancient Heathens.
The Old Romans had theit Sumptuarias Leges, which set bounds to their
Expenses, especially in Feasting and Entertainments, and Officers called
Epulones to over-see all the Sacred Banquets.

The Heathen Worthies are often represented Clothed with Skins of Beasts.

Cato Major, when Old, and after his Consulship and Triumph, never used any
Garment above the value of 100 Denarii, and for his Food 30 Asses served him a
day.

Augustus the Emperor's Daughters wore Garments of their own Spinning.

With the Massilians, a Woman's greatest Portion was not above 100 Aurei.

Yet notwithstanding in following Ages as they grew prosperous and rich, they
grew extremely Lxurious and Profuse; concerning which, they are taxed very
sharply by the Satyrists of the times; especially Juvenal.

Turks.
The Turks, tho they often Game, yet it is always for nothing. M. de Thev.

The Chinese delight excessively in all sorts of Game, and when they have lost,
care not, tho they stake Wives and Children, whom they willing-part with, till
they can Redeem them. Sir Tho. Herb.

Japon.
It Is a Capital Crime among the Japonese to play for Money. Tavernier's Collect.
etc. p. 4.

Heathens.
In Fermosa, Gaming, whether that which depends upon Chance, or requires Skill,
is Capital, if it be for Money. Mandelslo.

Muscovites.
The Muscovites spend but little in Housekeeping. See before in the Chap. of
Self-denial.

Christians.
Sir Thomas More's Father would never let his Son have any Money, but when he
wanted any thing, he should ask for it; and by that means (says Sir Thomas) I
could not furnish any Vice or Fleasure; nor knew I what Unthriftiness or Luxury
meant. Author of the Education of Young Gentlemen.

Russians.
In Muscovy all the Subjects are appointed what kind of Apparel, especially of
what Color, etc. they shall wear, by their Czar or Emperor.

Papists.
Dr. Burnet in his Letter, dated from Rome, 1685. says, That the present Pope
was so Frugal, that the Expense of his Table did not amount to a Crown a day,
tho this (says he) is indeed short of Sisto the 5th, who gave order to his
Steward never to exceed 25 Bajoicks, that is 18 Pence a day for his Diet.

Switzers.
When Estates are sold among the Switzers, the fifth part of the Price belongs
to the Public, and all the Abatement the Bailiff can make is to bring it to a
sixth part; this they call the Lod, (from Alodium) only there are some Lands,
that are Frank-lod, which lie not under this Tax; but this falling only on the
Sellers of Estates, it was thought a just Punishment, and a wise Restraint on
ill Husbands of their Estates. Dr. Burnet's Letters.

Mahometans.
The Turks generally hate that Lightness in Apparel, Speech, Gesture, etc. used
of the Christians, whom for this cause they call Apes and Goats, likewise they
are not Sumptuous in their private Buildings: Yea, detest the Christains for
their Excess and Superfluous Expenses that way: What, say they, do these Pagans
think they shall live for ever? -- and the like moderation they use in Diet,
etc. Purchase, out of Septemcast.

Papists.
Augustinus Chiessius, a Banker at Rome, at the christening of his Son,
entertained Leo the 10th. upon the River Tibris, and all the Foreign
Ambassadors and City Nobles, with curious Fare, dished out in costly Plate, and
on the change of every Service, all the Meats, Plate and all, were cast into
the River, and new supplied Mr. Jo. Hales.

Dancing.
Jews.
THAT Dancing was used among the Jews, is evident from the example of David,
who used it in the Divine Worship, being girded with a Linen Ephod, and dancing
before the Ark. 2 Samuel 6.14.

Christians.
Christians must not go to Weddings, and (balare vel saltare) bleat or dance,
but sup or dine chastely as becomes Christians, Conc. Laod. c. 52. habit. A. C.
364.

The Universal Council of Constantinople, etc. forbid Dancing, especially at
Weddings. Alsted.

Concilia Choreas damnant, ut Basiliense, C^rthaginense, quartum; Agathense,
etc. and Docreta prohibent: lege institutum Zachariae, cause. 26. q. 7. can.
Siquis, etc. De Conciliis, lege distinct. 34. can. Presbyteri, and de
consecratione, did. 1. can. Qui die. and do Cons. did. 5. can. Non Oportet.
Steph. Tzeged. Loc. commun. p. 438. who quotes also S. Augustine, contra
Petilianum, c. 6. and in Psalm. 32. and S. Chrystom. Hom. 56. sup. Genes. and in
Matthew. 14. etc. Marlorat (in Matthew. c. 14.) Calvin (in Matthew. 14.) etc.

In another Table Tzegedine cites against Dancing the Councils of Laodic.
Agath. Ilerdian, Altisiodore. Besides Canons ( de quibus cause. 26. q. 7. can.
Siquis. Also lib. 3. Decr. Gregorii. can. Cum decorem, etc. and Libr. 3.
Clementinarum. Tit. 14. c. 1.) as also Philosophers, Plato in Protagor. l. 17.
Cicero pro Murena, Aemilii Probi in vit. Epaminondae; and in another Table,
Pet. Martyr. Erasmus, Pelican, Calvin, Aristotle, Seneca, Macrobius,
Sallustius, Plautus, Pollux, etc. Pope Clement the 5. Innocent the 3. etc.

Waldenses, or Vaudois.
The ancient Vaudois made mixed Dancing to be a Breach of all the Ten
Commandments.

Papists.
Cardinal Bellarmine inveighs very bitterly against it, and cites the
Authorities both of Greek and Latin Fathers as on his side. Conc. 6.3.19, 20,
21.

Angel. de Clavasio is full upon the point. Quem vide, p. 55. where here he
makes common-Dancing to be a mortal Sin.

The Titular Bishop of Geneva (S. Fr. Sales) is very biting, but at last
concludes, that they are like Mushrooms, the best are bad and dangerous, (at
least) nothing worth. Sale 's Introd.

Protestants.
Dr. Tully speaking of pulick Dances and Stage Plays, advises every Christian
to forbear them, till such time as they are purged by some happy hand from
their Faults and Corruptions. Enchir. c. 18.

Before I came into Hungary I abserved no Shadow or Show of the Old Pyrrhical
Saltation (or Warlike way of Dancing) which the Heydukes practice in this
Country: They dance with naked Swords in their Hands, advancing, brandishing
and clashing the same, turning, winding and elevating, and depressing their
Bodies with strong and active motions, singing withal unto their measures,
after the manner of the Greeks. Dr. Brown's Trav. p. 10.

Mahometans.
That the Mahometans use Dancing, even in their Religious Worship, is observed
in this Book afterward, under the Title of Saints.

Ancient Heathens.
The same is observed of them likewise in the former part of this Book; so
likewise of the Modern Heathens.

Ancient Christians.
Sometimes they had Dances in their Churches and Chapels of the Martyrs.
Theodor. l. 3. c. 22.

Modern Christians.
By way of Appendix.
Cardinal Borromeus says, when he was a young Man at the University, he and
his Companions prevailed with one of their Professors, a grave and prudent
young Man, to go with them to a Ball; who having observed, -- etc, told them,
It was an invention of the Devil to destroy Souls. Author of the Educ. of young
Gentlemen.

Nothing does more dissipate the Spirits than the ravishing harmony, dancing
and charms of Ladies. M. de Rhodez.

Dancing and Cards are connived at in Strangers, not permitted to the Citizens
of Geneva themselves. Anonym.

The Abissines in their Festival Solemnities use Music and Dancing, and some
of the Latin Church celebrate Corpus Christi-day with a Harp and Dancing. See
concerning the Feasts of the Greek Church in the former part of this Book.

Modern Heathens.
It Is common with the Idolaters of several Nations to celebrate their Festivals
with Dances, etc. as with the Mexicans.

Games.
Christians.
TVrnaments in Germany were first used at Magdeburg, A. 635. by the Emperor
Henry, Sir-named, the Fowler; who coming from the War of Hungary, exceedingly
satisfied with the Nobility, would oblige them to exercise themselves in
handling their Arms, and managing their Horses; and therefore instituted these
Sports. -- No new Nobility, none Guilty of High Treason, no Oppressor of Widows
and Orphans, none Born of Parents whereof one was of base Extraction, no
Heretic, Murderer, Traitor, no Coward that had run away from the Battle, nor
indiscreet Person, that had given offense to Ladies by word or deed, were
admitted to this Honor, nor above one of the same Family at a time. Princes
came into the Lists with four Squires apiece, Counts and Barons with three, a
Knight with two, a Gentleman with one. At the Hour and Place appointed, he that
had a desire to break a Lance, came to the President's Lodgings to have his
Name written down; which was done in the presence of three Heralds, to whom the
Champion delivered his Helmet and Sword; and after he had been at Confession,
presented himself in the Lists with one or more Squires, etc. The Horses were
to be without fault; So also the Caparisons and Furniture, such as gave no
Offense; Their Saddles equal, etc. And after the Justs were ended, every Man
repaired to the President of his Nation, to wait for the Sentence of the
Judges: And he that deserved the Prize, received it either from the hand of
some Lady, or from the Prince that gave it. -- These Pastimes were afterward
disused, either for the Emulation they begot between Princes and Nobles, or by
reason of Wars; or perhaps because many brave Men lost their Lives in these
Encounters; as Henry 2d. King of France; and at Darmstadt, A. 1403. at the 23d.
Turnament that was held in Germay, the Gentlemen of Franconia and those of
Hesse, drew so much Blood, one upon another, that there remained dead upon the
place 17. of the former, and 9 of the latter. Dr. Brown 's Travels, p. 175.

Ancient Greeks and Romans.
Concerning the Olympic Games of Greece, (at which they met from all Parts of
the Country) and the Pastimes of Rome, take this short Scheme; and for further
Information, See Godwine 's Antiqu. and Galtruchus 's History of the Heathen
Gods, with Mar. D'Assigny 's Notes.

Plays were 1 Public,

1. To oblige the People: As, 1. Gymnic Fights. 2. Horse-Races. 3.
Chariot-Races. 4. The Butchery of Gladiators. 5. The Naumachias, or fight of
Ships. 6. Hunting of Bleasts.


2. In honor of the Gods: As, 1. The Olympic Games. 2. The Pythian. 3. The
Isthmian. 4. The Nemaean. 5. The Gymnic may be here added also.


Here also may be considered all those which are taken notice of in the former
part of this Book: As, Ludi Megalenses. Ludi Apollinares. Cereales, Capitolini.
Seculares, Taurii. Florales, Votivi, etc.


2. Private: As, Latrunculi, the Play at Chesse. Tali and Tessarae, Dice. Pila
or Sphara, the Ball. Discus, the Quoite. Harpastum. and Halteres, throwing the
Bar, etc. Petaurum, the Wheel. Trochus, the Top. Par and Impar, Even and Odd,
Children Plays.


Note, That at such Games especially, as were instituted in honor of the Gods,
they began and ended with Sacrificing to the respective Divinities. Galtruch,
l. 3. c. 6.

Christians.
Lyra out of Hostiensis reckons up Nine Circumstances, all deadly Sins; for
which he Condemns the Game of Dice. Lyra ad Praecep. 7. Expos. 3. Concerning
which, as also concerning Quoites, Bowling, Tennis, Cards, Tables, Chesse,
consult Gattaker, in his very learned Treatise, of the Nature and Use of Lots;
who cites many Testimonies of Authors, Laws, and Canons concerning them; and
determines very judiciously of the Use of them. Concerning Hunting, Vid.
Council. Agathense, Epaunense, Decret. Nicolai Papae -- Episcopi ab omnium
bestiarum vel volucrum venatione penitus alieni, etc. D. 34. C. 1.

De Spectaulis Theatri, Vid. Augustini Confessiones, and Carruzae Sum. Council.

Mahometans.
Alamin, a Turkish Chalif, mightily addicted to Drink and Gaming; when Bagdad
(the Seat of the Empire) was besieged by Taher, his Brother Almamon's General,
was playing at Chesse, (Ludo Schachico) and being admonished about it, made
answer Let me alone; Jam enim apparuit mihi contra Cutherum famulum Schamat;
(i. e. perplexum esse Regem:) and at last being worsted in the Siege, made his
escape by swimming over into a Garden, wherein he ended his Life with a Stab.
Hottinger.

Mutazzus, another Chalif, given over to Drink and Chesse, having first
abdicated the Chalif-ship, died afterward in a Cave, where neither Meat nor
Drink was allowed him for three days. Idem.

Muhammed Abu Abdalla, Muhtadis Billa, forbid the use of Wine, Singers and
Jesters; commanded Fortune Tellers to be banished; and drove away Lions and
Hunting-dogs. Idem. See more in the Chapter of Frugality.

Saints.
Jewish.
NOt to mention Abraham, whom they boasted with a loud voice for their Father,
nor the rest of the Patriarchs and Prophets; they have other Rabbis or Doctors
of a later Date; which they have a mighty Veneration for. As,

1. Simeon the Just, or Hazzadik, 312 Years before our Savior.

2. Sadoc, his Successor, who lived under Antigonus Sochaus; and who gave Name,
as some think, to the Sadducees.

3. Baithos, who was his Fellow-Scholar, and gave Denomination to the
Baithoseans.

4. Hellel and Sammai, Doctors of the Pharisees.

5. Judas, a Galilean, from whom came the Galileans or Gaulonites; whose
Doctrine was, That only God was to be accounted their Lord and Prince.

6. Rechab.

7. Elxai, a Rabbi of the Ossens; esteemed by his Followers a secret Virtue or
Power, etc.

8. Marthus and Marthana, two Women of the same Stock, Successors of Elxai, and
Heirs of his Honor, worshipped in Iturea, and about the Dead Sea for Gods.
Purchase out of Epiphanius.

The Sampseans had Elxai and his Posterity in such honor, that if they went
abroad, the People would gather up the Dust of their Feet for Cures, as also
their Spittle; and used them for Amulets and Preservatives. Idem.

9. Simon, of whom the Simonians.

10. Cleobins, of whom the Cleobians.

11. Dositheus, of whom the Dositheans, a Sect of Samaritans.

12. Gortheus, Masbotheus, etc. of whom the Gortheans and Masbotheans, etc.

To these may be added many others, which they had in great esteem: As,

13. Rabbi Akkiba, famous for his Wisdom, for his 24000 Scholars, and for his
long Life.

14. R. Schelomoh Jarchi, a Frenchman.

15. R. Nathan Baal Aruch, who wrote the Talmud Lexicon.

16. Rambam, so called from the initial Letters of R. Mosche Barmaimon.

17. Aben Ezra, that wrote upon the whole Bible.

18. R. David and Mosche Kimchi, Brethren, and learned Grammarians.

19. R. Joseph Molchu, Burnt at Mantua, for endeavoring to persuade his
Religion upon Charles the 5th, and other Great Persons, etc.

Papists.
Amongst the Papists are many Canonized for Saints; and to give a List and
History of them all, would take up a Volume: I shall therefore only give my
Reader a short Scheme of some of them, with the particular Virtues and Offices
appropriated to them.

Places.
S. James, for Spain.
S. Denis, for France.
S. George, for England and Germany.
S. David, for Wales.
S. Patrick, for Ireland.
S. Peter and Paul, for Rome.
S. Ambrose, for Milan.
S. Mark, for Venice.
Three Kings, for Colen.
Arts.
S. Gregory and S. Catharine, for Scholars.
S. Luke, for Painters.
S. Cosmus and S. Damianus, for Physicians.
S. Eulogius, for Smiths.
S. Crispin and Crispianus, for Shoe-makers.
S. Guiman, for Tailors.
S. Guare, for Potters.
S. Eustachius, for Hunters.
S. Magdalen and S. Afra, for Whores.
Diseases.
S. Sebastian and Roch, for the Plague.
S. Flaccius, for the French Pox.
S. Petronella, for the Fever.
S. Wolfgang, for Contractions.
S. Mark, for Sudden Death.
S. Valentine, for the Falling Sickness.
S. Margaret, for Childbirth.
S. Leonard, for Captives.
S. John and Benet, for Poison.
S. Anastasius, for the Headache.
S. Otilia, for Sore Eyes.
S. Apollonia, for the Toothache.
S. Blase, for the Neck.
S. Erasmus, for the Belly.
S. Briccius, for the Privities.
Cattle.
S. Wandline, for Sheep.
S. Eulogius, for Horses.
S. Pelagius, for Kine.
S. Antony, for Swine.
Fruits, etc.
S. Judocus, for Fruits.
S. Urban, for Wine.
Elements.
S. Agatha, For the Fire.
S. Nicholas, for the Sea.
S. Valesian and S. Theodore, for Tempests.
Besides these, they have innumerable others; All the Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors; Monks, Hermits, Nuns, as many of them at least as were Eminent in
their Generations for real or pretended Excellencies; as S. Antony, S. Giles,
S. Christopher, S. Fabian, S. Dominick, S. Francis, S. Ignatius Loyala, etc. S.
Gertrude, S. Bridget, S. Clare, S. Winifride, etc. As the Pantheon served the
old Romans for all the Gods, so the Papists have converted the same to the
Service of All Saints, under the Name of S. Mary. And because they are so many,
that there could not be allowed particular Churches and Days for them;
therefore in that Church on the First of November is celebrated the Memory of
them all together.

When I was in Britain, I saw S. Thomas ( Becket's) Tomb laden with innumerable
Jewels, and of very great Value, beside a great deal of Wealth. Erasmus.

Muscovites.
1. S. Nicolas is their Great Tutelar Saint; which is the same (I think) with
him they call Nicholas Sudatwiritz, who has writ certain spiritual Treatises;
for whose Memory the Muscovites had so great a Veneration, that not long since
they lighted Wax-Candles before his Picture, for which they had built a
particular Chapel in the great Street at Moscou, which leads to Twere-gate;
but 'twas destroyed lately by Fire. D. of Holstein 's Emba. Trav.

2. S. Anthony, of whom they say, that he came from Rome into those parts, down
the Tiber, and cross the Sea upon a Millstone, and so to Novogrod, where they
show the Millstone to this day; that by the way he bargained with certain
Fishermen for the first draught of Fishes, which proved to be a chest full of
Priests Vestments to say Mass in, Books and Money, belonging to the Saints; and
that afterward he built a Chapel there, in which they say, he lies interred,
and that his Body is there to be seen, as entire, as when he departed this
world. Travels of the D. of Holstein 's Embass. p. 38.

They have an infinite number of Saints besides. The Priest at Baptism assigns
every Child a particular Saint, whose Image he delivers to the Godfathers, and
charges them to oblige the Child, when he is come to years of discretion, to
have a particular Devotion for his Patron. Idem.

Those who commit Sins deserving Excommunication, are obliged to have their
Saint taken away, even out of their Churches, as well as their Persons. Great
Persons and rich Merchants adorn their Images with Pearls, and other precious
Stones. Idem.

All Muscovites look upon them as things so necessary, that without Images they
cannot say their Prayers; which, whenever they do, they always set Wax-Candles
before their Saint, and look steadfastly upon him. Idem.

At first coming into a House the Guest always looks for the Saint, with a Jest
le Boch? i. e. Where is the God? And then he makes a very low reverence to it,
with a Gospodi Pommilui, i. e. Lord have mercy upon me; and then turns to the
Guests. Idem.

Armenians.
1. S. Gregory.

2. A Princess, -- That came with 40 Virgins of Quality to visit S. Gregory,
whom afterward an Armenian King caused to be thrown into a Well of Serpents,
where she lived 14 Years, and received no harm; and from that time to this
(they say) that Serpents that breed thereabouts are not hurtful. Monsieur
Tavernier. l. 1. c. 4.

There is a Church dedicated to her in Egmiasin. Idem.

Abissinians.
The Abissines reckon up nine Monks, or Religious Persons more famous than
others, that came out of the Roman or Greek Empire, probably out of the
Neighboring parts of Egypt, who seated themselves in Tygra, and there erected
their Chapels; but their Names were all changed, except that of Pentaleontes;
they are numbered in this Order:

1. Abba Aragawi, otherwise called Michael, of whom one of their Poets thus:

Peace be to Michael, Aragawi named,
Wisdom his Life, his Death true Prudence famed,
With him was God, the Holy Three in One;
To all those Saints an Everlasting Crown.
Why by their Prayers true Concord did enjoy,
That they might Arwe 's Kingdom quite destroy, i.e.
The Serpents; for the Ethiopians worshipped a Serpent as supreme.

2. Abba Pantaleon. 3. Abba Garima. 4. Abba Alef. 5. Abba Saham. 6. Abba Afe.
7. Abba Likanos. 8. Abba Adimata. 9. Abba, or otherwise called Abba Guba.
There are to be seen still the Cells, where these Holy Men sequestered
themselves; by the names of Beta Pentaleon, Saint Pentaleon's House, etc.

Besides these there are several other Great Doctors, who have higly merited
for propagating the Christian Religion; as also many Martyrs, frequently
celebrated by the Ethiopians and Copticks in their relgious Panegyricks.

But as to their Saints, they relate of them several things extraordinary and
incredible; as,

The removing Mountains.

Appeasing the rage of tempestuous Seas.

Raising the Dead.

Causing Water to spring out of Rocks.

Walking over Rivers.

Riding upon Dragons and Lions, as on Horses.

Giving their whole Raiment to the distressed.

Living three whole days on three little Dates, or one little dry Biscuit.

But none more Renowned for his Sanctity, then Gabra-Menfus-Keddus, or the
Servant of the Holy Ghost; in honor of whom, they keep a Holy Day every Month.

Next to him is Tecla Haimonot, or the Plant of Faith, who restored the
Monastical way of living in Ethiopia, about A. C. 600. Job Ludolph's Hist. of
Ethiopia. Concerning this Man, mention is made in their Church Registers thus.
Remember, Lord, the Soul of thy Servant Tecla Haimonot, and all his Companions.

No less esteemed is Eustathius, another Abbot of theirs, etc. Idem.

Mahometans.
The Mahometans, especially the Persians, have many Religious, or rather
Superstitious Santoes amongst them.

1. Some, who go stark naked. Vid. Sorrow for Sin.

2. Some, who eat Serpents.

3. Some, who wear great Turbans, etc.

4. Some, who spend whole Nights in Praying and Singing. v. Praise.

5. The most noted are the Dervises, who live in Common, and have their
Superiors as our Religious; mean in their Apparel, wearing on their Heads a Cap
of white Felt, like our Night-Caps: Every Tuesday and Friday they make a Dance
(pretty pleasant to see) in a great Hall (which is their Mosque) the middle
whereof is railed in square, leaving a space all round for them that are
without: within the Enclosure is the Keble, where are two Pulpits, joined
together on a Footstool; into the one goes the Superior, turning his Back to
the South, and his Vicar into the other; over against them at the other end of
the Hall, without the Rails are the other Dervises, playing on Flutes and
Drums; after some Prayers sung together, the Superior reads a little of the
Alcoran, explained in Turkish: then the Vicar a few words of the Alcoran in
Arabic, which serve as a subject for the Superior to make a Discourse upon
afterward in Turkish; after Sermon the Superior and Vicar, and the rest of the
Dervises take two turns about the Hall, while one sings some Verses of the
Alcoran in a pleasant tone; after that all their Instruments play in consort,
and then the Dervises begin their Dance; they pass before their Superior,
salute him humbly, then making a Leap, fall a turning round with their naked
Feet, their Left Foot serving for a spindle; they turn without weariness, though
sometimes old Men; this is done to the sound of Drums and Flutes. The Author of
this Dance was one Hezreti Mewlana, a Derviso, reckoned a Saint among them. M.
de Thev.

Many other sorts of Santoes they have, -- Enough in Egypt, to man out several
Galleys. Idem. -- Formerly a Turkish Basha, sent several of these lazy Lubbards
to the Galleys, for the Turks have no such great Esteem for them.

Dead Santoes are interred upon the Highways and on Bridges; and when the
Moors find any of their Sepulchers, they ask leave of the Saints within to go
that way. The chief of the dead Santoes in Egypt is -- Sidi Ahmet el Bedoni,
buried at Meniteganir, in the Isle of Delta in Egypt, near Rosetto, where
People that come to the Fair on July one 9th, pray at his Grave, and perform
his Devotion. This Saint, they say, never knew Woman, only lay with his own
She-Ass. They say also, that a certain Basha offering to take away his
Privileges, the Saint entreated him; but not prevailing, he turned up his Cap a
little, that the point might incline to one side; Thou will not then (said he
to the Basha) let me enjoy my Privilege; the Basha answered, No: This was done
three times; his Cap and the Basha's Castle turning still side-ways: till at
last the Basha in a great fright assured him, that he would preserve his
Privileges, Idem. At the Fair yearly, they say, he delivers three Slaves out
of Malta. M. de Thev.

Certain Mohammedan Saints.
Sheh Mahomet, a mad Man of Aleppo; Vid. Oracles, etc.

Sheh Boubae, another mad Man, Vid. Ibid.

Scidibattal, a Saint in Natolia.

Chederles, (another S. George, according to the Legends) one who killed a
Dragon, delivered a Virgin, etc. He has a Temple at Theke Thoi, the chief City
of Capadocia, etc. for Travelers.

An old Woman, having a Dog with her in her Pilgrimage to Mecha, ready to die
for thirst, made Water in her Hand, and gave it to the Dog; whereupon she heard
a Voice, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; and at the same time was
caught up Body and Soul into Heaven.

Sedichasi (in signification) a Holy Conqueror.

Hetsempettesh, -- The Pilgrim's Help.

Asclik Passa, -- A Saint for Love-matters, and in case of Barrenness.

Van Passa, -- For Concord.

Scheyk Pasia, -- For Trouble and Affliction.

Goi or Muschin, or Bartsckin Passa, -- For Cattle.

Any one that has extraordinarily lived, is accounted a Saint after death.
Purchase. But above all, the Mahometans Honor

Mahomet, -- among the Turks, and Hanite, a Commentator.

Mort is Haly, -- Among the Persians, their great Prophet and Patron, also
Hussan and Hossein his two Sons, and more of Haly's first Successors, to the
number of twelve in all: as also,

Schich Sofi, the Institutor of their Sect, and Tsafur Saduk.

Bannyans.
The Bannyans invocate holy Men, famed for Virtue; each Sect has its peculiar
Saint.

In Wars the Cutteries or Radicaes only call upon Bemohem; -- The rich upon
Mycasser, he Poor upon Syer; the Laborers upon Gunner; the Married upon
Hurmount, etc. Sir Tho. Herb.

Persees in the East Indies.
Zertoost is their chief Saint or Prophet, who is said to be taken up into
Heaven, from whence he brought the Zundavastaw (or the Book of their Law) in
his Left Hand, and Celestial Fire in the other. Sir Th. Herb.

Persians and Muscovians also devote their Children newly born to some Saint.

Chinese.
The Chinese have several Pausaos or Saints, especially three;

Sichia, Founder of all the Religious Orders.

Quanina, a Female Saint, third Daughter of K. Tzonton; who having made a Vow
of Chastity, and being pressed by her Father to Marriage, was shut up in a
place, and employed in carrying Wood and Water, and weeding a great Garden.

Neoma, a third She-Saint also, who retired into an Island to avoid Matrimony,
etc. Mandelsto. Some account Confusius the chief.

Indians.
The Idolatrous Indians worship Ram, Permissar, Peremael, Westnon, etc. whether
as Gods, or great Saints, it is hard to say.

They have also an infinite number of Faquirs, or Volunteer Penitents, who are
reputed Saints. Tavernier. They are quite naked Summer and Winter, lodge on the
Ground, have Ashes spread under them as a Carpet, or Mattress. See more in
Tavernier's Travels, par. 2. l. 2. c. 6. See Self denial.

Pilgrimage.
Jews.
I Do not know, that the Jews use any Pilgrimage; but certainly they have a
great respect to Jerusalem and the Holy Land, and contrive as well as they can
to approach near it in their Old Age, that they may have the less Journey to go
at the resurrection; being of Opinion, That there will be the general
Rendezvouse of all mankind.

Papists.
I need not say much of the Pilgrimages of the Papists, it being sufficiently
known to be much used as a point of Penance or Voluntary Worship among them,
Meritorious and Expiatory of sin.

Gaurs.
The Gaurs (the Relics of the Ancient Persians) have their principal Temple
four days Journey from Kerman, where their Chief Priest Resides, whither they
are once in their Lives obliged to go in Pilgrimage. M. Taver. l. 4. c. 8.

Indians.
The Crews of Faquirs many times join together to go in Pilgrimage to the
principal Pagods and public Washings on certain days, used in the River
Ganges. Idem. Par. 2. l. 2.

The most Celebrated Pagods in India are Jagrenate, Banarous, Matura, and
Tripati. To the first of which (on one of the Mouths of Ganges) resort daily an
incredible number of Pilgrims, who bestow vast Alms upon it; the Priest Taxing
them according to their Ability, before he suffers them to Shave, or wash in
Ganges. The Pilgrims have Victuals distributed there to them every day. Idem
Par. 2. l. 3. c. 9.

All the Idolaters under the Dominion of the Great Mogul, and other Princes,
both on this side, and beyond Ganges, at least once in their Lives go on
Pilgrimage to one of the Pagods aforementioned: Not one by one, but whole Towns
together; the Poor that go a great way are supplied by the Rich, who spend very
freely in such Acts of Charity: The Rich in Pallekies or Chariots, the Poor on
Foot, or upon Oxen: Carrying their Idols, in respect to the Great Ram-Ram, in a
rich Palleky, covered with Tissue of Gold and Silver, etc. the Bramins also
distribute flabels to the most considerable, the handles whereof are 8 foot
long, plated with Gold and Silver; the flabel it self being 3 foot in diameter,
of Tissue likewise; adorned round about with Peacock feathers to gather more
wind, and sometimes with bells to make a tinkling. Six of these are usually
employed to keep off the flies from their God, the better sort taking it by
turns. Idem. par. 2. l. 3. c. 13.

Mahometans.
The Turks to Mecha in whole Caravans, from several parts of the world, but
most numerous from Cairo, go in Pilgrimage; and when devotion is to begin, the
H. Priest, assisted by all the people belonging to the Law, spends night and
day in saying of prayers and performing the necessary ceremonies. On the
seventh day all the Pilgrims are assembled before the Sheck's Text, who appears
at the Entrance of it, and standing on a low stool that may be seen by those
that are distance, puts a period to their Devotion, by praying and blessing
them with these words, -- That God would enable them to return in peace, as
they came thither. The Grand Senior sends a Tent and Carpet yearly, and all
Mohammedan Princes some present. Idem.

Mexico.
Mexico was a City of most Devotion in all India, whither they Traveled from
many places far distant in Pilgrimage. Purchase.

Angels.
Jews.
I Have said already, that the ancient Sadducees denied the Existence of
Angels: The Pharisees did not.

The Modern Jews allow of them, asserting some to be good, some bad; that there
attend on particular Persons, a good Angel on the Right Hand, a bad one on the
Left, which take and give Account of their Actions to God. Dr. Addison.

Besides, they hold a distinct Order of Angels, entrusted with the care of the
whole Jewish Nation: and that every Governor has an Assisting Angel. Idem.

Christians.
Angels are acknowledged by Greeks, Muscovites, Papists, Protestants, etc.

It is wont to be said, The strange presages of Mind, and warnings in Dreams;
wonderful effects in Men snatched away, and Mountains and Buildings removed and
demolished by Power Invisible; real Apparitions to many Men at once;
Predictions of Oracles; Confessions and Exploits of Wizards and Witches, do by
Natural Argumentation prove the Existence of Angels. -- If these be Tales, then
the Faith of almost all mankind is called in question; the manifest proofs at
public and solemn Trials (in Lancashire, etc.) with which our undoubted
Records abound, are despised. These Stories have been believed by Socrates,
plotinus, Synesius, Dion, Josephus, Pomponatius, Cardan, etc. Not Idiots in
Philosophy. Dr. Tenison against Hobbs. p. 62.

Mahometans.
The Mahometans tell many and strange Stories of Angels, as, that Gabriel made
the Spots in the Moon, with his Wing, by flying by it; that Michael shall weigh
Men's Souls in a Pair of Scales at the Second Sound of the Trumpet, that at
Israphel's first sounding of the Trumpet, all Men and Women shall Dye and
Revive again, etc. F. Simon, etc.

Ancient Heathens.
The Pythagoreans and Platonists called the Middle Kind between the Immortal
Gods and Men, Demons or Angels: Who were a kind of Aetherial or Aerial Heroes,
but sometimes they distinguished them into those that were nearest to the
Immortal Gods, and those that were furthest off: The former they called Heroes,
and the last good Demons. Marcil. in Pythag. Carm.

Hesiod calls them, -- (...), Clothed with Air.

Hierocles calls the Heroes Angels, (...). Hierocl. in Pyth. Carm.

If once thou think, says Maximus Tyrius (speaking of Socrates's Demon)
there are no such Beings, thou must Proclaim War against Homer, and Renounce
Oracles and Prophecies, and disbelieve Credible Reports, and declare against
Dreams with their Interpretations, and at last bid adieu to Socrates. Max. Tyr.
Disser. 26.

Siam.
They holy that each Man has two Spirits waiting on him, a good and bad. Rosse.

Tartars.
They feed Spirits, by casting Mare's-milk into the Air, or pouring it on the
ground. Paquet broke open, vol. 1.

Christians of St. John.
They believe that Angels and Devils are Male and Female, and beget Children.
That the Angel Gabriel is the Son of God, Engendered upon Light. That he had a
Daughter called Souret, who has two Sons. That he has several Legions of
Demons under him, who are instead of Soldiers, and others that are his
Officers of Justice, whom he sends from Town to Town, and from City to City to
Punish the Wicked. Taver. l. 2. c. 8. p. 92.

Atheism, Irreligion.
Soldania.
If that Maxim (universum genus humanum -- colit Deum vel falsum) fail any
where, here (in Souldania) it may; for during the time I staid amongst them, I
saw no signs of any knowledge of God, (the Law of Nature scarce being observed)
no Spark of Devotion, no Symptom of Heaven or Hell, no place set apart for
Worship, no Sabbath for Rest. Sir Tho. Herbert Trav. into Persia.

Indian Theers.
There are a Sect of Indians called Theers, who are neither Pagans nor
Mahometans, for they have no Religion at all: Their whole Employment is
Scouring of Wells, Sinks, Common-Shoars, and Privies, Fleaing dead Beasts, and
Executioners. They are an Abomination to the rest of the Indians, who are to
wash and purify -- after touching them. Mandelslo's Travels, p. 61.

Fermosa.
The Inhabitants of Fermosa have very little, if any Religion; yet they have
Pagods and Priestesses, and believe the Immortality of the Soul. Idem. -- and
Prayers and Sacrifices.

Cape of Good Hope.
Of all the People that ever I saw in all my Travels, I never saw any so
hideous, nor so brutish as the Comaukes, and those of the Cape of Good Hope,
whom they call Cafres or Hosentoles; when they speak, they make a noise with
their Tongues, like the breaking of wind backward, hardly speaking
articulately; covered (the Rich) with Skins, the Poor with nothing but a nasty
Rag about their Privities; when they bring forth a Male-Child, the Mothers cut
out his right Stone, and presently give him Water to drink, and Tobacco to eat;
this is to make them swifter to run: for they will catch a Roe-Buck running.
They neither know what belongs to Gold nor Silver; and for Religion, they have
none among them. Tavernier Part 2. l. 3. c. 26. Neither Men nor Women are
ashamed to show their Nakedness; for indeed they are but a sort of Human
Beasts. Idem.

This place (the Cape of Good Hope) furnishes me with an Observation, that I
have not before met with; i. e. that there are Nations which have no Notions of
a Deity, nor any footsteps of Worship and Adoration. Anonym.

Pegu and Siam.
The common People in Pegu and Siam, offer Sacrifices to the Devil.

Papists.
John King of England, having received an Overthrow in France, said in great
Anger, Nothing has ever prospered with me, since I was reconciled to God and
the Pope. Baker 's Chron.

The same King being on a time a Hunting, and afterward opening a fat Buck,
said, -- See, how fat he is; and yet I dare say, he never heard Mass. Idem.

Julius Caesar Vanin, Suffered as an Atheist. Dr. Tenison.

Superstition.
Jews.
THE Jews are very Superstitious, and much addicted to little Observations.

Gaurs.
The Gaurs eat no Hares, because they have their Monthly Purgations, like
Women. For the same reason they never eat Mulberries, believing that they
partake of the Nature of Women and Hares.

If when they Comb their Hair or Beards, any one Hair happens to fall upon
their Clothes, those Clothes must be washed in the Stale of a Cow or Ox, to
purify them again; If they touch any Ordure or Nastiness, they must wash in
the same Urine. If a Priest meets a Dead Corpse on the Highway, and chances to
see it, he is obliged to wash in Cows-piss. M. Tavernier, l. 4. c. 8.

Indians.
One Tribe of the Idolatrous Indians are so superstitious, that they carry
their Oval Flints (representations of their God) about their Necks, and thump
them against their Breasts, when they are at their Devotions. Idem. Part. 2. l.
2. c. 5.

Japonese.
The Great Dairy of Japon, so soon as he is Crowned by the Bonzes, who are the
Priests and Lawyers, is then no more to expose himself to the light of the
Moon, nor to shave his Head, or cut his Nails. Tavernier's Collect. p. 2.

There is no Nation under Heaven, more fearless of Death, or more inclined to
Cruelty. If any Prince or great Lord makes a Feast for his Friends, at the end
of the Feast he calls his principal Officers, and asks them, If there be any
that has so much love for him, as to kill himself before the Guests for his
sake: presently there arises a dispute among them, who shall have the Honor;
and whoever the Prince is pleased to Name, rips up his Belly with a Cric, which
is a kind of Dagger, the point whereof is poisoned. This Custom is also
practiced upon the Death of their Masters, or when they lay the Foundation of
any Palace; for they are so superstitious as to believe, that these Victims are
necessary to render both the Owners of the Buildings and the Habitation
fortunate. Idem. Relat. of Japon, p. 4.

Papists.
It may seem superfluous to say any thing of a People, whose Superstitions are
so well known to the Protestants; notwithstanding take these few Stories from
Dr. Burnet. --

I heard (says he) a Copuchin preach here (at Milan) it was the first Sermon I
heard in Italy, and I was much surprised at many Comical Expressions and
Gestures, but most of all with the Conclusion; for there being in all the
Pulpits of Italy a Crucifix on the side toward the Altar; He, after a long
Address to it, at last in a forced Transport, took it in his Arms, and hugged
it and kissed it; but I observed, that before he kissed it, he seeing some Dust
on it, blew it off very carefully; for I was just under the Pulpit: He
entertained it with a long and tender Caress, and held it out to the People,
and would have forced Tears both from himself and them; yet I saw none shed.
Dr. Burnet 's Letters.

(In Lausanne and Bern) one sees a Heat and Bigottry beyond what appears either
in France or Italy: Long before they come within the Church-Doors, they kneel
down in the Streets, when Mass is a Saying in it. The Images also are extreme
gross; in the Chief Church of Solotoura, there is an Image of God the Father,
as an old Man, with a great black Beard, having our Savior on his Knees, and a
Pigeon on his Head. Here also begins a Devotion at the Ave-Mary Bell, which is
scarce known in France, but is practiced all Italy over; At Noon and at Sunset
the Bell rings and all say the Ave-Mary, and a short Prayer to the Virgin; but
whereas in Italy, they content themselves with putting off their Hats; in
Switzerland they do for the most part kneel down in the Streets; which I saw no
where practiced in Italy, except at Venice, and there it is not commonly done.
Idem.

The Devotion that is paid to this Saint (Antony) all Lombary over, is
surprising: He is called by way of Excellence, Il Santo, and the Beggars
generally ask Alms for his sake: but among the little Vows that hang without
the Holy Chapel, there is one that is the highest pitch of Blaspemy, that can
be imagined, Exaudit (speaking of the Saint) quos non audit and ipse Deus, he
hears those, whom God himself does not hear. Idem.

Guinea.
In Guinea, they hold it a Sin to spit on the Ground. Anonym.

Mexico.
In Mexico they held it for an Ominous Token, That some Religious Man or Woman
had committed a Fault, when they saw a Rat or a Mouse pass, or a Bat in the
Idol-Chapel; or, that they had gnawed any of the Veils; and then began to make
inquisition, and discovering the Offender, put him to Death. Purchase.

Within this great Circuit of the Principal Temple were two Houses, like
Cloisters, the one opposite to the other; one of Men, the other of Women. In
that of Women, they were Virgins only of 12 or 13 Years of Age, which they
called the Maids of Penance; they were as many as the Men, and lived chastely
and regularly, as Virgins dedicated to the Service of their God. Their charge
was to sweep and make clean the Temple, and every Morning to prepare Meat for
the Idol and his Ministers, of the Alms the Religious gathered. The Food they
prepared for the Idol was of small Loaves, in the form of Hands and Feet, as of
March-pane, etc. These Virgins had their Hair cut, and then let it grow for a
certain time, they rose at Midnight to the Idol's Mattins, which they daily
celebrated, performing the same Exercises which the Religious did. They had
their Abbesses, who employed them to make Cloth of diverse fashions, for the
Ornaments of their Gods and Temples. Their ordinary Habit was all white,
without any work or color. They did their Penance at Midnight, sacrificing and
wounding themselves, and piercing the tops of their Ears, laying the Blood
which issued forth on their Cheeks, and after bathed themselves in a Pool which
was in the Monastery. None were received into this Monastery, but the Daughters
of one of the six Quarters, named for that purpose: and this Procession
continued a Year, during which time their Fathers and they had Vowed thus to
serve the Idol, and then they might Marry.

The other Cloister was of Young Men, of 18 or 20 Years old, with Crowns
shaven, living poorly and chastely, ministering to the Priests Incense, Lights
and Garments, sweeping the Holy Place, bringing Wood for a continual Fire that
still burned before the Altar. Besides these, there were other little Boys,
that decked the Temple with Boughs, Roses and Reeds, gave the Priests Water to
wash, Razours for Sacrificing, and went with such as begged Alms, to carry it;
When they came where Women were, they carried their eyes to the ground, not
daring to behold them. They had linen Garments, and went into the City 4 or 6
together to beg Alms, and if they got none, they might go into the Cornfieldsd,
and gather what they needed.

There might not above 50 live thus together; they arose at Midnight, and
sounded the Trumpet to awaken the People. They watched by turn, that the Fire
might not go out: At Midnight, Morning, Noon and Night, they gave the Censer to
the Priest; and after Midnight-Service they retired into a secret place, where
they sacrificed and drew blood with Bodkins from the Calves of their Legs, with
which they rubbed their Temples and under their Ears; and afterward washed in a
Pool appointed for that end. Purchase.

Ancient Heathens.
The Tartars have their Religious Votaries and Monasteries, amongst which there
is an Order called Senscin, which eat nothing but Bran steeped in Water. Rosse.

Modern Heathens.
The Chinese have many Monasteries; Monks, who are shaven, wear Beads, are
present at Funerals, are bound to Celebacy, whilst Monks, and to Pray two hours
together before Day. Of these are four sorts, distinguished by four Colors;
black, white, yellow, russet: They have also their Priors, Provincials, and
General; who is carried on Mons Shoulders in an Ivory Chair, and is clothed in
Silk. Their maintenance partly allowed by the King, partly got by begging, etc.

They have also Nuns, Hermits, Consecrated Hills, etc. Rosse.

The Religious Orders in Siam are so strict, that it is Death among them, to
speak to a Woman; they feed on Rice only, and Herbs, which they beg from Door
to Door; They must not buy nor sell, nor take Rents; They are tied to rise at
Midnight to Prayers; they go barefooted, and in bare clothes. Idem.

In Japan, They have multitudes of Cloisters and Colleges. Idem.

In Ceylon are many Monasteries of yellow Monks shaven, and still praying on
Beads, who have their Processions in great Solemnity, with Dancing and Music.
Idem.

Mahometans.
In Natolia, near the Sepulcher of a certain Saint, is a Convent of these Monks
(viz. Dervises) being above 500, where once a Year is kept a general Meeting of
this Order, about 8000, over whom their Superior, called Assambaba, is
President. Idem.

Christians.
The Original of Monachism is attributed to S. Paul the Hermit, and S. Antony.
Egypt was first filled with Monks, next Syria, Pontus, and the Lesser Asia.
They of Egypt and Syria retain the Name of S. Antony, they of Pontus and the
Lesser Asia the Name of S. Basil, who brought from Egypt, into those parts, the
Rule of S. Antony. S. Athanasius coming to Rome, and publishing the Life of S.
Antony, many in Italy embraced that kind of Life. Their Employment was Prayer,
Reading, and manual Labor; Bishops sometimes drew Monks into the Clergy; but
ordinarily they were but part of the people, and their Revenues only what they
got by Labor, and a share in the Poor's Alms; and people gave them private
Alms, that they might pray to God for them. They came at first to the
Parish Church, afterward were permitted a Priest of their own. Hence came
their separate Churches, the Monks performing all Ecclesiastical Functions;
Hence the Disputes between Bishops and Monks, hence Deeds of Cessions,
Donations, Charters, etc. F. Simon.

Armenians.
Among the Armenians each Patriarch (for they have Two) has 47 Archbishops,
and every Archbishop has under him 4 or 5 Suffragans, with whom he lives in a
Convent, where there are several Monks under their Jurisdiction. So soon as
they have said their Mass, which is generally done an Hour after day, they all
go to work, and to dig and delve for their Living. Monsieur Tavernier, l. 1. c.
3.

Ten Leagues from Erivan, Northward, is a great Lake, and in that Lake an
Island, and in that Island a very fair Convent; the Monks whereof live so
austerely, that they never eat Fish or Flesh, above 4 times a year; neither do
they speak one to another, but upon those 4 days; The rest of the Year they
feed only upon Herbs; which they gather out of the Garden; for, say they, it is
not fasting to eat either Butter or Oil. Their Bread is brought them from the
Neighboring Villages; and the Island is replenished with all sorts of
excellent fruits. Ibid.

On the one side of the Lake, near to Erivan, is a large Plain, wherein there
are 6 Monasteries, one of them entirely hewn out of the Rock, with Pillars to
sustain it: The Armenians call this Church Kickart, the Turks Guieurghieche;
that is, See and Away. Therein (according to the Tradition of the Armenians) is
kept the Lance wherewith our Savior's side is pierced. Ibid.

All the Armenian Convents stand near a great Village. Idem, l. 1. c. 4.

Georgians.
They have more Religious Houses for Women than for Men. If a Virgin grows up,
and happens to be handsome (to prevent her being stolen, and sold into Turkey,
Persia, etc.) the Parents put them young into Nunneries, where they apply
themselves to study; wherein, if they attain to any Proficiency, they usually
stay as long as they live. After that they profess, and when they come to a
certain Age, baptize, and apply the Holy Oils. Tavernier, l. 3. c. 3.

Muscovites.
There are a Great Number of Monasteries, both for Men and Women of S. Basil's
Order; but they have this Common with all the Muscovites, that they can hardly
write and read; not One in Ten can say the Lord's Prayer, much fewer the Creed
and Commandments. D. of Holstein's Embass. Trav. p. 105.

Papists.
Of all Sects in the World, none more abound with Monasteries and Nunneries,
than that of the Roman Catholics; concerning which, because I was so brief in
my Account of the Popish Religion in general, I shall give a more particular
Scheme in this place, of all the Religious Orders and Societies in that Church,
referring my Reader for a fuller Description of them, to Mr. Rosse's View of
All Religions.

Note, That Hermits were so called from the Desert (Eremus) where they lived.

Anchorets from (...), i. e. living apart.

Monks from (...). being alone, solitary.

Mandritae from Mandre, Caves or Holes.

Troglodites from (...), Caves.

Nonnae, Moniales, from the Egyptian word Nonnus, or the Greek (...), meditari.

1. Of S. Antony. 2. Thabennesii. 3. Of S. Basil, (...), 4. Of S. Hierome. 5.
Of S. Augustine. 1. Eremites. 2. Canon Regulars.
6. Of S. Benedict. 1. Cluniacenses. 2. Camaldunenses. 3. Vallis-Vmbrenses. 4.
Montelivitenses. 5. Grandimontenses. 6. Cistertians. 7. Bernardines. 8.
Celestini. 9. Gregorians. 10. Gerandinenses. 11. Monks of Cassinum. 12.
Sylvestrini. 13. Carthusians. 14. Monks of S. Ant. of Vienna. 16. Humiliati.
17. Premonstratenses. 18. Gilbertines. 19. Cruciferi. 20. Crucigeri. 21.
Hospitalers of the Holy Ghost. 22. Trinitarians. 23. Bethlehemites.
7. Mendicants. 1. Augustinians. 2. Carmelites. 3. Predicants. 4. Minorites.
8. Dominicans, Predicantes, Predicatores. 9. Franciscans. 1. Minorites. 1.
Observantes. 2. Conventuales. 3. Minemini. 4. Capuciani. 5. Collectanei. 6.
Amadeani. 7. Reformati de Evangelio. 8. Chiacini cum barba. 9. De portiuncula.
10. Paulini. 11. Bostaini. 12. Gaudentes. 13. De Augustinis. 14. Servientes.
2. Clarissae, from S. Clara, for Virgins. 3. Penitentes, for Married People.
10. Servants of St. Mary. 11. Jesuiti. 12. Monks and Nuns of S. Bridget. 13.
Of S. Katherine. 14. Of S. Justina. 15. Eremites of S. Hierom. 16. Canons of S.
Savior. 17. Albati. 18. Fratricelli. 19. Turlupini. 20. Canons of S. George
21. Mendicants of S. George. 22. Mendicants of S. Hierom. 23. Canons of
Lateranee. 24. Order of the Holy Ghost. 25. Of S. Ambrose ad nemus. 26. Minims
of Jesu Maria. 27. Poor Pilgrims. 28. Order of Indians. 29. Society of Divine
Love, or Theatins. 30. Paulini Gastalini. 31. Jesuits. 32. Capellani, Cellarij,
Clavigeri, Forficiferi, etc.
Orders of Knighthood.

1. Johannites of Jerusalem, (Hospitallers,) A. C. 1099. Hospitallers of
Rhodes. Knights of Malta. 1529.
2. Templers. 3. Teutonicks, Marians. 4. Of S. Lazarus. 5. Of Catatrava. 6. Of
S. James, Compost. 7. Of the Holy Sepulcher. 8. Gladiatores. 9. Of S. Mary of
Redemption. 10. Of Montesia. 11. Of Valle Scholarium. 12. Of the Annunciation.
13. Of S. Maurice. 14. Of the Golden Fleece. 15. Of the Moon. 16. Of S.
Michael. 17. Of S. Stephen. 18. Of the Holy Spirit. 19. Of the Gennet. 20. Of
the Crown Royal. 21. Of the Star. 22. Of the Broom Flower. 23. Of the Ship. 24.
Of S. Michael. 25. Of the Holy Ghost. 26. Of Christian Charity. 27. Of S.
Lazarus. 28. Of the Virgin Mary in Mount Carmel. 29. Of Orleans, or Porcupine.
30. Of the Golden shield. 31. Of the Thistle. 32. Of Anjou. 33. Of St.
Magdalen. 34. Of Bretaign, or of the Hermine and ears of corn. 35. Of the
Golden-Fleece. 36. Of the Carter. 37. Of the Bath. 38. Of S. Andrew, or the
Thistle. 39. Of the Lilly, or Navarre. 40. Of S. James of the Sword. 41. Of S.
Julian, of the Pear Tree, or Alcantara. 42. Of the Band, or Red Scarf. 43. Of
the Dove. 44. Of S. Savior and M. Real. 45. Of the Looking-glass. 46. Of Jesus
Christ. 47. Of D' Avis.
Of the Dragon, S. George, the White-Eagle, Elephant, Seraphims, Sword-bearers,
S. Gall. etc.

Colleges, Schools, etc.
Jews.
THE Jews have had many Colleges; (not go speak of those mentioned in
Scripture, Naioth and Gibeah, Bethel and Jericho,) since the destruction of
Jerusalem their most famous have been Jabne, or Jafne, three Miles from Joppa,
Tiberias (or Tzephorias) Soran and Pumbedith. Hottinger.

Persians.
There are many Mandresaes (Colleges) all over Persia. D. of Holstein's Embass.
Trav. into Musc. Tartary, etc. p. 159.

The Persians in their Colleges observe this way, the Student Reads two or
three lines, and the Doctor Expounds them; then another Reads two or three
more, and rises up, till the Doctor has expounded them, and bids him sit down
again. Their Books are mostly the Works of Kadgia Nesir, some of Aristotle, the
Almagestes of Ptolomy which they call Magesti, some of Euclide, some of
Archimedes, the Optics of Ebne, Heister, Galen (Galenous they call him)
Averroes ( Abonalt, or great Father Hermes Trismegistus (Ormous.) Their chief
Historian is Ronze el Zapha, who wrote a Chronology from the Creation, very
Fabulously, saying, the World was Inhabited by Devils before the Creation, etc.
Taver. l. 5. c. 11.

The Persians call their Colleges Medrese, where there are a great number of
Scholars bred up at little Charge, out of the Legacies left to the
Foundations: They allow them a Chamber without Furniture, themselves providing
a Coverlet and Mattress for themselves: They have no certain Masters, but
sometimes learn of one, sometime of another, seldom of the Monderes (Principal)
who is generally the greatest Block-head of them all: But there are several
others in every good Town that Teach the Sciences, to purchase Honor to
themselves; who are therefore liberal to get many Scholars, to publish the
Wisdom of their Akroom or Doctor. Tavern. l. 5.

Mahometans.
There are two stately Colleges in Fez for Professors in Diverse Sciences.
Rosse. Also 200 Grammar Schools.

About the Walls of their Mosquits are diverse Pulpits for their Readers, who
begin their Lectures shortly after break of day in the Summer: They read after
Sunset; Mahomet's Law and Moral Philosophy are read: To the winter Lectures
large Revenues are allowed, Books and Candles. Rosse.

Heathens.
In New Spain they had Schools and Seminaries. Idem. and Purchase, etc.

Mahometans.
Near Belgrade the Grand Vizier has Built a Metreseck, or College for
Students; I saw a Student Habited in Green, and wearing a Turbant with four
Corners, which is a peculiar distinction. Dr. Brown's Travels.

Idolatrous Indians.
The Bramins have a kind of University, in a City, which is called Benarez,
where they make all their Exercises in Astrology, and where they have Doctors
that Expound their Law, which they very strictly observe: But in regard they
are so great a Number, and cannot all come to Study at that University; they
are all very ignorant, and consequently very Superstitious: Those that go for
the most refined Wits, being the greatest Sorcerers. Tavernier, l. 3. c. 3.

Tunquin.
The Tunquinese have a very great inclination for Learning, and apply
themselves to their Studies with diligence and success; for that they cannot be
advanced without it to the Offices and Dignities in the Kingdom; by Learning I
mean the Knowledge of the Laws of their Country, Mathematics, Astronomy, (to
which all the Orientials have a great Inclination) Music and Poetry, Comedy
and Tragedy. To obtain Nobility in your Youth by Learning, you must pass
through three degrees, of the Syude, by close studying eight years, and a
rigorous Examination; and this qualifies for the Office of a Notary, Proctor,
etc. The Doucan, by studying Music, Astrology and Poesy five years; The Tansi
by spending four years more in Learning the Chinese Character to such a number
of Words. The last Examination is made in the great place, within the enclosure
of the Palace of Tunquin, which is a stately Marble structure There the King is
present, Princes and great Lords of the Court, the Manderim for Learning, and
all the Tansies; and many also from distant Provinces come to the Solemnity:
Some have asserted extravagantly, that sometimes there are 30 or 40000 Students
present at this Examination; but I cannot learn that the number ever exceeds
3000. Eight days are spent in Examination which is performed upon nine
Scaffolds, built like an Amphitheatre. The eight days being passed, they all
appear again upon the same Scaffolds, where in the View of all the World, they
who faultered in their Examinations, are dismissed as unworthy of any
Employment; the rest are honored with a Vest of Violet Satin, which they
presently put on, and then take upon them the name of Tansies. Then they have
given them a list of the Towns and Villages, where they are to receive the
Rents which the King allows them, some more, some less, To which places when
they come, the Inhabitants meet them with all sorts of Music, and a gilded
Branquar carried by eight men; where they divert themselves for three Months,
and then return to Court to Instruct themselves in the Affairs of the Kingdom,
and King's House, and fit themselves for the D^^^nity of a Mandarin. Tavernier
's Collect. of several Relat.

Saracens.
About the year 1000, the Saracens had a famous Academy at Babylon, wherein the
Sorences, especially Astrology and Physic were I aught. Hotting.

Christians.
Under Valentinian the Emperor, Students were not permitted to stay after 20
years of age, lest the Splendour and Vanities of the City should tempt them to
forsake the Service of their Country. Five or six years time was allowed them
there, and no more. Antiq. of the British Churches.

Cardinal Pool, Arch bishop Granmer (and since them Dr. Marshal of Lincoln
College in Oxon.) were of Opinion, that they who are designed for the Clergy,
should be Educated from their Infancy, in the Cathedrals, or with some Pious
and Learned Divines; and so inured to a good Life.

I wish our Universities were not detective in that point of Education, which
Ladies call Breeding and Accomplishment; a Fault incident to all Schools of I
earning; yea, Athens it self. Plutarcho Taste) the longer they stayed there,
the greater Clowns they proved. Auth. of the Educ. of Young Gentlemen.

Halor and Schalholt Bishops Sees, with Petty Schools, in Iseland. Dr. Heylin.

Premonitions of Death.
Jews.
THE most remarkable Instances of this kind among the Jews we find in sacred
Scripture, first in the case of Aaron's Death, which is foretold to Moses,
Numb. 20.24. Next in the case of Moses, which was revealed by God to himself,
Number. 27.12, 13. and thirdly, of Elijah's discovered beforehand to the
Prophets, both of Bethel and Jericho, 2 Kin. 3.3, 5. etc. I say nothing of the
Communication of God, made of his recret Purposes concerning the Judgments he
had decreed against Offenders, as the drowning of the old World, the
Destruction of Sodom, etc. the drownning of the Egyptians, the punishment of
the Israelites by War, Plague, Famine; the Earth swallowing up Corah, Dathan
and Abiram, etc. nor lastly the Death of our blessed Savior, presignified by
Types, Prophecy, and Christ's own Doctrine.

Christians.
In the first place I will propound an Instance, relating to my self and
Family; my Wife being a sickly Person, after two Daughters, was brought to Bed
of a Son, which she seemed to be pleased with it, as being a Male, and comely,
and of a healthful Complexion; to whom I offered this Admonition at the first
Nativity of it, that it was mortal, and she would do well to remember it. The
Child fell sick, we heard a knocking at the door; my self, Wife, Maid, and some
Neighbors, no Body being there, after some time the Child died.

S. Augustine, upon the Incursion of the Vandals into Africa, to a Convention
of his Clergy, said, -- That he had prayed to God, either to deliver his People
from the Calamity, or grant them patience, or take him out of the World, that
he might not see the Miseries of his Diocese; adding, That God had granted him
the last, and he presently fell sick, and died in the Siege of his own Hippo.
In vit. S. Aug.

Upon Cyprian's first Entrance into Carubis (the place of his Banishment) it
was revealed to him in a Dream or Vision, that upon that very day Twelve-mouth
he should be consummate, which accordingly fell out; for a little before the
time prefixed, there came suddenly two Apparitors to bring him before the new
Proconsul Galcius, by whom he was condemned, as having been a Standard Bearer
of his Sect, and an Enemy of the Gods; whereupon he was condemned to be
beheaded, a Multitude of Christians following him, crying, Let us die together
with him. Flavel ex Pamelio in vit. Cypr.

St. Augustine tells of his Mother Monica, that when they two together in their
Chamber at Rome, near to the Banks of Tyber, had very sweetly discoursed
together of the Joys of Heaven, and the Vanity of this World; she made answer,
My Son, as to me, I am delighted with nothing here; why I should stay, and what
I have to do here any longer, I know not; my hope of this World being gone.
There was one thing, for which I desired to continue here for some time, that I
might see thee a Catholic Christian before I died: God has bestowed this upon
me and more, viz. To see thee his Servant, and to see thee despise Earthly
Felicity, what make I here, Within five days after this she fell ill of a
Fever, of which she died on the ninth day, aged 56 Years, when Augustine was
36. Lib. Conf. 9. c. 10.

The same Augustine (in his Epistles) says, That on that very day whereon
Jerome died, he was in his Study, and got Pen, Ink and Paper, to write
something of the Glory of Heaven to Jerome; suddenly he saw a Light breaking
into his Study, and a sweet smell that came unto him, and this Voice he thought
he heard, O Augustine, what do thou! Do think to put the Sea into a little
Vessel? When the Heavens shall cease from their continual motion, then shall
thou be able to understand what the Glory of Heaven is, and not before, except
thou come to feel it, as now I do.

Amyraldus gives us this well-attested relation of Lewis of Bourbon, that a
little before his Journey from Dreux; he dreamed that he had fought three
successful Battles, wherein his three great Enemies were slain, but at last he
himself mortally wounded; the Event was remarkable; for the Maresohal of St.
Andree was killed at Dreux, the Duke of Guise at Orleance, the Constable of
M^nmorancy at St. Denis, a Triumvirate, which had sworn the ruin of those of
the Religion, and the destruction of that Prince; at last he himself was slain
at Basack. Flavel, (...). p. 254.

Dr. Stern (in his Dissert. de mort, p. 163.) says of Mr. Usher of Ireland, a
Man of great Integrity, dear to others by his merits, and his Kinsman in Blood;
that being asleep about four of the Clock the day before he died; a Matron, who
died a little before, and whilst living was dear to Mr. Usher, appeared to him,
and invited him to sup with her next night, he at first denied her, but upon
her importunity at last consented, and that very Night he died. Idem.

L. Chapter J. Hales had some secret presages of his Death, saying, That if he did
not die such a day, he should live a Month longer; and he died that very day
Month. Dr. Burnet in his Life.

The Lady Ware's Chaplain (Mother-in-Law to the late Earl of Rochester) dreamt
that such a day he should die; but having almost forgot it till the Evening
before Supper, there being thirteen at Table, according to a fond conceit, that
one of these must soon die; one of the young Ladies pointed to him as the
Person: he remembering his Dream, fell into some disorder, saying, He was
confident he was to die before Morning. It was Saturday-night, and he was to
preach next day; he went to his Chamber in perfect health, sat up late,
prepared his Sermon-notes, and next Morning was found dead. Life of the Earl of
Rochester.

Heathens.
Suetonius (in the Life of Julius Caesar) tells us, that the might before he
was slain, he had diverse Premonitions thereof; for that night all the Doors and
Windows of his Chamber flew open; his Wife also dreamed that Caesar was slain,
and that she had him in her Arms. The next day he was slain in Pompey's Court,
having received 23 wounds in his Body.

Socrates told Crito his familiar Friend, that three days afterward he should
die; for he saw in his sleep a very beautiful Woman, who called him by Name,
and uttered such a Verse of Homers; Tertia to Pythiae Tempestas laeta vocabit,
i. e. The third pleasant Storm shall place thee at Delphos; (where Apollo's
Oracle was) and accordingly Plato says, it came to pass.

Charms, Incantations, Amulers, Spells.
Jews.
THE only Spells the ancient Jews used by Divine Institution or Permission were
so Sacred and Effectual, that they might not be profaned by a prostitution of
them to common and trifling things, such were the Name Jehovah (Tetragrammaton)
the Blood of the Paschal Lamb sprinkled on the Side-posts, and the upper
Door-post of their Houses, Exodus 12.7. the presence of the Ark, Josh. 6.4. etc.

But in Porcess of time, the Religion it self being corrupted, and the People
depraved in their Lives and Manners, the Superstition of their
Insidel-Neighbours crept in; and the Rabbis grew extremely fantastical about
the Literal part of Scripture and seem to have fallen into a very dotage about
the mysteries of Words and Phrases, as is obvious to any one that shall read
their Writings, or acquaint himself with the Lives and Practices of the Modern
Jews.

Christians.
The first things that we meet with like Charms or Amulets amongst the
Christians, were the name of Jesus, Acts 19.13. the sign of the Cross, the
Relics of the Saints; afterward they have been multiplied exceedingly: Some
parcels of Scripture, especially St John's Gospel; the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; Consecrated Water, Salt, Bells, Roses, Swords, agnus Dei's,
etc. have been added.

The Jews use the Zizith for an Amulet against Sorceries, and Preserver from
Dangers; some superstitious Christian Women in Hierome's time wore Parvula
Evangelia, or short Sentences of the Gospel to the same purpose; and the
Papists at this day permit the wearing about their Necks the beginning of S.
John's Gospel. Dr. Addison.

Modern Heathens.
In Monomotapa they punish nothing more severely than Witchraft, Adultery, and
Theft; using no Prisons, but punishing delinquents, as soon as apprehended. Dr.
Heylin.

The Laplanders deal much in Magic and Witchcraft, and Winds to Sailors, that
navigate those Seas. S. Clark.

The Livonians, Greenlanders and Tartars, are much addicted to Sorcery.

The Chinese also, and Inhabitants of Guinea; some of the most ignorant and
vulgar Chinese invoke the Devil, and use Incantations.

So do the Mexicans, and Natives of America.

Many in Guinea and the East Indies wear Rings (made by the Fetissero for Gods)
next their Bodies for Preservatives. View of the Engl. Acquis. in Guinea, etc.
Rosse says, they put into these Rings Wheat, Water, and Oil, for their God to
feed upon.

In Gilolo and Amboina, their Demon (Nito) often appears to them in the shape
of a Man, giving out his Oracles; whom they bring to a Conference with the
sound of a Tabor, etc.

Apparitions, Obsessions.
Jews.
DR. Stern alleges several Instances of Scripture, e. g. Samuel appearing unto
Saul, and the Conference betwixt them; (tho the most Judicious Divines are of
opinion, that it was not Samuel, but Satan in Samuel's likeness, that
appeared.) As also the Letters sent to Jehoram by Elijah, after Elijah's
Translation into Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 21.12. Compared with 2 Kings 3.11. Dr. Stern,
Dissert. de Mort.

Christian.
The Abissins are of opinion, that now there are no Witches or Magicians in the
World. Ludolph.

Moses and Elias appeared together, and had Conference with our Savior upon
the Mount, Matt. 17.3. Nor is there any reason to question the reality of the
Apparition, or think it to be any more than a Phantasm, but very Moses and
Elias themselves, for they came to be Witnesses, etc. Flav. (...).

Augustine relates a memorable Story which fell out at Milan, where a certain
Citizen being Dead, there came a Creditor, to whom he had been indebted, and
unjustly demanded the Money of his Son; the Son knew the Debt was satisfied by
the Father, but having no acquittance to show, his Father appeared to him in
his Sleep, and showed him where the Acquittance lay. Aug. in lib. de cara pro
mortuis agenda.

Marsilius Ficinus having made a solemn Vow with Michael Mercatus (after they
had been pretty warmly Disputing of the Immortality of the Soul out of the
Principles of their Master Plato) that whether of them two Died first, should
appear to his Friend, and give him certain Information of that Truth; Ficinus
died quickly after M^rcat^^ being early in the Morning very intent on his
Studies, heard a Horse Riding by with all speedy and observed that he stopped at
his Window; and therewith heard the Voice of his Friend Ficinus, crying out a
loud. O Michael, Michael, vera, vera sunt illa, i. e. O Michael, Michael, those
things are true. Whereupon he suddenly opened his Window, and espying
Marsilius upon a white Steed, called after him, but he vanished out of his
sight; he sent therefore presently to Horence, to know how Marsilius did, and
understood that he Died about that hour he called at his Window. Flavel out of
Dr. More, who cites it out of Baronius.

Much to the same purpose is that so famous and well-attested Story of the
Apparition of Major George Sydenham, to Capt. William Dyke, both of
Somersetshire, attested by the worthy and learned Dr. Tho. Dyke, and by Mr.
Douch, to whom both the Major and Captain were intimately known. The sum is
this. The Major and Captain had many disputes about the being of a God, and the
immortality of the Soul, in which points they could never be resolved tho they
much ^ought for and desired it, and therefore it was at (...) fully agreed
betwixt them, that he that died first, should the Third night after his
funeral, come betwixt the hours of 12 and 1, to the little house in the Garden
adjoining to Major Sydenham's house at Dulverton in Somersershire. The Major
died first. The Captain awaited at the time and place appointed for his Major,
but no appearance. About six weeks after the Captain and Dr. Dykes went to
Eaton, and lay again in the same Inn, but not the same Chamber as before, at
Dulverton. The morning before they went thence, the Captain staid longer than
was usual, in his Chamber, and at length came into the Doctor's Chamber, but in
a Visage and Form much differing from himself with his Hair and Eyes staring,
and his whole Body shaking and trembling; whereat the Doctor wondering, demanded
the cause. The Captain answered, I have seen my Major, if ever I saw him in my
Life, I saw him but now: This morning (said he) after it was light, some one
came to my bedside, and suddenly drawing back the curtains, calls Cap, Cap,
(the term of familiarity, used by the Major to the Captain) to whom I replied,
what, my Major! To which he returned, I could not come at the time appointed,
but I am now come to tell you, that there is a God, and a very just and
Terrible one, and if you do not turn over a new leaf you will find it so. The
Captain eat little, and seemed to have these words sounding in his Ears
frequently, during the remainder of his Life; and often related it, but with
trepidation and horror. Flavel ex Sadducismo Triumphato, 2d part, p. 183.

Modern Heathens. Ceilan.
The Chingulaes in Ceilon confess, That their Country is so full of Devils and
evil spirits, that unless they should adore them, they would be destroyed by
them. Capt. Knox.

I my self (says my Author) have often heard the Devil with an audible voice
in the night, very shrill, almost like the barking of a Dog: The very dogs
trembling and shaking, when they hear it. The voice is suddenly gone, and heard
in another place. The people use to answer at such times, Beef-eating slave be
gone: Be Damned; out off his Nose: Beat him a pieces. Idem.

1. Signs of being Possessed with them; are, 1. Running mad into the woods. 2.
Scrieching, roaring. 3. Being speechless. 4. Shaking and Quaking. 5. Dancing,
Talking idle. 6. Treading on the fire and not being burnt.


2. Causes (as they think) of it are, 1. Breach of promise made to the Devil.
2. Eating some fruit or Betel-leaves dedicated to the Devil. Which dedication
was only (or mostly) to prevent stealing or giving. C. Knox.


Guinea, etc.
In Guinea and the E. Indies (they say) the Devil appears sometimes like a
black dog; and sometimes answers without any visible appearance. View of the
Engl. Acquis. in Guinea and the E. Indies; and Mandelslo 's Trav. p. 214.

Japan.
In Japan in the Fotique at Tenchday, if Fame speak truth, Satan oftentimes
made an Apparition. Sr. Tho. Herbert.

Amboyna.
In Amboyna they assemble 20 or 30 together to consult with the Devil, whom
they call Nito; and who appears often to them in the shape of an ordinary
person, and pronounces his Oracles. Mandelslo.

Oracles, Soothsaying, Divination, Prophesying.
Ancient Jews.
THere were four several ways, by which the Divine Will was made known to the
Ancient Jews and their Neighbors,

1. By Dreams as in the Case of Abimeleck Genesis 20.3, 6. of Laban, Genesis 31.24.
of Jacob, Genesis 31.10, etc. of Joseph. Genesis 37.5. the Butler and Baker in
prison, Pharaoh, the man in Gideon's host, Solomon, Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar, etc.

2. By Vision, where the man was rapt into an Ecstacy, his spirit suspended
from all sensible communication with the body, and entertained with
supernatural light; as in the case of the prophets, etc.

3. By Vrim and Thummim, an Oracle, resulting from the letters engraven upon
the H. Priest's Pectoral, to which the Jews in all important Doubts resolved.

4. By Thunder and a voice from Heaven. Author of the lively Oracles, etc.

Images made to the stars (according to the Chaldeans) had a faculty of
foretelling future things; -- which is an exact description of the, (...), or
Talismans so much in request among the Heathens (such as the Palladium of
Troy;) they are by the Jews called David's Bucklens, and are much of the same
nature with the Teraphim.

Ancient Christians.
Amongst the Christians, tho God has sometimes revealed his will by Dreams, as
to Joseph in the case of the Blessed Virgin and the Child Jesus (and
afterward, though no Christian, to the wife of Pilate) and in aftertimes to some
of the Fathers and Primitive Christians, (as S. Cyprian, if he be not too
fanciful, had many of them;) and sometimes by vision, as in the instance of S.
Paul, etc. sometimes too by a voice from Heaven; yet the only ordinary way they
expected a resolution of their doubts from, was the sacred Scriptures, as a
sure rule and word of Prophecy. 2. Pet. 1.19.

Ancient Heathens.
That Oracles were in great request among the old Pagans is notorious, as well
as Divination and Prediction. Concerning all which observe.

1. Of Oracles. That they were not only given to those that made inquiry, and
propounded a Question. The answer was made by the Priest of the place, who lay
hid in some Cavity, and upon pretense of inspiration, with some odd praeludium
of noise or tone, with respect to their own humors, or the will of their
Prince, they made their answers; not without much ambiguity and imposture. The
most ancient were that of Jupiter Hammon in Libya, and of Dodona in Greece:
Afterward we read of the Oracle of Pythia and Delphos, as the most Eminent;
The Prophornium, that of Amphiareus, the Branchidae in Milesia, and the Sabaeum
in Phocis, etc. They were much Enriched with Presents.

2. Of Divination, that there were several Kinds thereof, as inspection into
the Intrals of Beasts; observation made upon the feeding of Birds, and the
Flight of the Fowls in the Air, etc.

3. Prediction, sometimes by Priests, sometimes by Sibylls.

Mahometans.
They account mad Men as Oracles and Saints, whose Souls are in Heaven, talking
with God; and if such strike or rob them, they take it in good part, saying,
They shall have good Luck after it. They erect stately Monuments over their
Graves, as at Aleppo, over the Grave of one Sheh Boubat, who being mad, went
always naked, where to this day are Lamps burning day and night, and many
Dervise^ there maintained, to look to his Sepulcher, and to receive the
offerings of such as come every week out of Aleppo. Purchase.

The same account they make of one Sheh Mahamed, a mad Man, yet living in
Aleppo, going naked with a Spit on his Shoulder. Idem.

By the Law of Mahomet Soothsayers are imprisoned, and yet in Fez are many of
that Profession. Rosse.

Persians.
The Persians are very inquisitive after the time to come, consulting the
Astrologers like Oracles: the King has always two or three by him, to tell him
the good and bad hour. There is an Almanac (called Taouim) fold every year in
Persia, containing the Longitudes and Latitudes of the Planets, the
Conjunctions and Oppositions, etc. is fold of Predictions about Wars, Sickness,
etc. directs when to put on new Clothes, to let Blood, Purge, Travel, etc. to
which they give great credit. Others, to know the success of their Affairs, go
to a Moulah, who opens the Alcorah, and tells them the issue of the business,
muttering over some strange Words; as one told a Gardener, He should get by an
Ox, which he was to buy; but quite contrary, the Ox died on his Hands within
three days. They use a sort of Divination, called Rambe, by even or odd, the
Masters whereof, called Ramals, keep Shops on purpose to delude the People.
They have also Interpreters of Dreams. Tavernier, l. 5. c. 14.

New England.
We have been advised by some Credible Christians, yet alive, That a Malefactor
accused of Witchcraft as well as Murder, and Executed in this place Boston)
more than 40 Years ago, did then give notice of -- An Horrible Plot against the
Country of Witchcraft, and a foundation of Witchcraft then laid; which if it
were not seasonably discovered, would probably blow up all the Churches in the
Country, and we have now with horror seen the discovery of such a Witchcraft;
an Army of Devils broke in upon the place, etc. Cotton Mather 's Wonders of the
invisible World.

Mexicans.
Cortez (the Spaniard) drawing near to Mexico, Matezuma (the Emperor) feared
saying, These are the People, which our Gods said, should come and inherit this
Land. He went to his Oratory, and there shut up himself alone, abiding eight
days in Prayer and Fasting, with Sacrifices of many Men, to assuage the fury of
his offended Deities. The Devil bids him not to fear, and that he should
continue those bloody Rites, assuring him, That he should have the Gods
Vitzliputzi and Tesoatlipuca to preserve him; saying, That Quezalouatle
permitted the destruction at Chololla, for want of that bloody Sacrifice.
Purchase.

Modern Heathens.
The Chingulaes, in case of Sickness, to know what God or Devil is the Author,
hang an instrument (like a pair of Sizers) used to cut Betel-nuts upon a
Bow-string; and holding the Bow at both ends, repeat over the names of the Gods
and Devils; and when the name of him that afflicted them is mentioned, the Iron
on the String swings. Capt. Knox.

In Guinea and the East Indies, when the King sacrifices, the Fetissero comes
to a Tree, and in a heap of Ashes there provided, sticks the branch of a Tree,
and drinking out of a Basin, spouts it upon the Branch, and then dawbs his Face
with the Ashes: after which, the Devil out of the Tree gives answer to the
King's Questions. View of the Engl. Acquis. in Guinea, and the East Indies.

They have in Guinea certain Trees in great Veneration, and consult with them,
as with Oracles. Rosse.

In Angola and Congo they are much addicted to Divination by Birds. Rosse.

In Jucatan they caused Boys in hollow Images to answer the Peoples Petitions,
as if God had spoke to them. Idem.

The Priests in South-America learn Physic and Magic, when young, being shut
up two Years in Woods; all which time they keeep their Cells, see no Women, nor
eat Flesh; they are taught by their Masters in the Night. Idem.

Some West Indians at this day, by fuming their Heads over the smoke of
Tobacco, will fall into a Trance for four or five Hours, and foresee what
Ships are making to their Ports, though several days of, and report where the
Vessels then are, when they awake. Packet broke open. Vol. 2.

In Gilolo and Amboina, they bring their Demon (or Nito) to conference with a
Tabor, VVax-Candles, and words of Conjuration; he appears to them in the shape
of a Man, all their actions are preceded, by consulting the Devil. Ibid.

Rewards and Punishments future, according to the Jews.
Jews.
I Need not here declare what the Sentiments of the ancient Jews before our
Savior's time were; it shall su^fice to tell what their Opinion is in the
present Age, as Dr. Addison has informed us in his Present State of the Jews
in Barbary.

1. They say, that all Souls were created together, and placed in a certain
Region, whence the several Bodies in their proper times are furnished, as they
are ready to receive them; and if the Souls offend in this State, they are sent
into infirm Bodies for a Punishment; and this Pre-existence they found on
Eccles. 4.3.

2. Souls are conjoined with Bodies, which is an Imprisonment, like Birds in
Cages.

3. Afterward they are separated from the Body to a Temporal State of
Happiness or Unhappiness, wherein they continue till the final Sentence.

4. At last, they are disposed of into a State of Eternal Duration; yet,

5. They hold a Purgatory to be in Hell, from whence they can never be
delivered, but by the virtue of the Kaddish, a Prayer repeated once a day, for
the space of a year by some surviving Relation.

6. They generally hold, that none stays there above a Twelvemonth.

7. If any one's Sins are too great or many to be purged, the Soul by
Transmigration is to finish its Penance in another Body, and so on in a Third,
-- Fourth, -- Fifth, -- Sixth, -- till it come to a Seventh, where it finds
rest.

Heaven eternal. 1. The State of Pre-existent Souls. 2. Of Souls conjoined with
Bodies. 3. The Temporal State of Souls Separated from Bodies by death till the
day of Judgment. 4. A years Purgatory. 5. The Soul not purged in transmigration
to other Bod^^^. 1. Body. 2 Body. 3 Body. 4 Body. 5 Body. 6 Body. 7 Body. Rest.




They hold, That they which are not of their Religion, (if found disobedient to
the Law of Nature, I suppose my Author means) shall suffer a total Perdition of
their Being; themselves are liable only to a lesser Happiness.

Both Jews and Moors are of Opinion, That the Infernal Torments shall have an
end, and that the fallen Angels shall be then restored to Mercy.

They place the Consummation of the World in a Restoration of it to that Beauty
and Order it was at first designed.

They say the Resurrection shall be only out of the Holy Land, whither all that
are buried in other Countries must uncessantly roll through the dark Caverns of
the Earth; and to avoid this trouble, they endeavor, when old, to return to
Palestine.

Four Privileges of the Jews.

1. The Land of Canaan. 2. The Law of Moses. 3. The Gift of Prophecy. 4. And
the Resurrection.
Mahometans.
An Account of them, as communicated to us: By F. Simon, out of a Book of
Mahometanism, written by a Modern Doctor of that Religion, according to the
Doctrine, generally received and approved by most good Men in and about
Constantinople.

1. After Death and Burial, two of the greatest Angels, Munzir and Nekir, come
and ask the Person what Belief he has concerning God, and the Prophet, and the
Law, and the Kible (what side one is to turn to in praying to God: The Just are
to answer: Our God is he, that has created all things: Our Faith is the
Mussulman, and Orthodox Faith; and the true direction of our Prayers is the
Kible.

Unbelievers not knowing what to answer, are condemned to suffer great Pains.

2. At the general Resurrection, the Good before their entering into Paradise
shall drink of certain Fountains, so that they shall never thirst again.
Mahomet's Fountain for him and his Sect shall contain as much space of Ground
as one can travel in a Month: On the brinks of this Fountain shall be as many
lavers, as Stars in the Firmament, the Water sweeter than Honey, and whiter
than Milk.

3. Their Paradise is thus described: 1. It Is all full of Musk. 2. The
Buildings of Gold and Silver Bricks. 3. All sorts of Delicious Meats are there.
4. Their Clothes never wear out. 5. What any one desires, comes ready dressed
to their Hand. 6. None subject there to sleep, or other Necessities of the
Body. 7. Divine and Celestial Women and Virgins, free from all Incommodities.
8. They who once enter, never come out again.


4. Their Hell-thus.

1. Unbelievers shall be Eternally with Devils. 2. They shall be Tormented with
Serpents bigger than Camels, and Scorpions bigger then Mules: With Fire also,
and scalding water. 3. When burnt, and turned to a Coal, God shall raise them
again for fresh Torments; and so never to end.
5. Believers dying without Repentance are to be disposed of by God, according
to his good pleasure, some of them are pardoned, others to expiate by their
sufferings, till released, and admitted to Paradise.

Mahomets Paradise
A River of Water.

Honey.

Wine.

Milk.

God appearing on Fridays.

Fruits Delicious.

Dgennet Zlar. i.e. Virgins of Paradise, with black Eyes, white Bodies, always
young never exceeding 15 red Cheeks

Young Boys to attend, with Vials of Liquors, Fruits, and Fowls Clothes of
Green, or Scarlet, Silk and Gold

Araf. i.e. A Place for them who have done neither good nor evil.

The 6th. Gate through which they that fear shall enter Paradise.

5. Gate 6. Gate. 7. Gate. Gate of Hell. 2. Gate.

Selzaboul, a River of which when they have drunk, after their sins are
consumed, they go to Heaven.

Zacon. a Tree of whose frut they eat, which shall burn in their Bellies like
fire.

Chains of 70 (...)

A Well of scalding water of which they drink.



* Purchase tells out of Bellonius, That there is in Paradise, a Tree which
shadows it all over, and spreads her Boughs upon the Walls, the Leaves of pure
Gold and Silver, the Name of God and Mohomet writ on each Leaf.

That if one of those Virgins of Paradise should come forth at Midnight, she
would enlighten the World as much as the Sun: If she should spit into the Sea,
all the Water would become sweet.

That Gabriel keeps the Keys of Paradise 70000 in Number, each 7000 Miles long.

That there is a Table of Admant 700000 days Journey long and broad, with Seats
of Gold and Silver about it, to Feast on.

Ancient Heathens.
Socrates held, That the Souls of Men were Divine, and had two ways to go, when
separated from the Body; the wicked Excluded from the Communion of the Gods;
the Good and Chaste went again to the Gods, from whence they came. Cic. 1. Tusc.
and de Acad.

Heathens Ancient, Greeks, Romans.
1. For Punshment, They assigned a place called Tartarus; concerning which,
consider,

1. Its Name. Tartarus, quia Multae ibi (...) sive perturbationes. Not. Com. l.
3. Erebus, ab (...) Tenebrae.

2. Its Antiquity. Most Ancient, Coetaneous with the Night, and the confused
matter of the World. Aristoph. in Avibus.

3. Its Situation, viz. As far distant from the Earth, as Earth from Heaven.
(...). Hesiod. A piece of Iron would be ten days in falling to it.

4. Its Description.

1. Walls of Brass, a Gate of Iron, with many Bars.

2. Rivers, four in Number: which Styx runs round Hell nine times. ( Dict. qu.
(...), Odiosus.) Styx, Acheron, Phlegethon, Cocytus.

3. Officers of several kinds.

1. The God, Plutus. 2. The Judges, three, Aeacus, Minos, Rhadamanthus. 3. The
Ferriman, Charon. 4. The Porter, Cerberus, 5. The Destinies, Parcae, Clotho,
Lachesis, Atropos. 6. The Furies, Eumenides.
4. Punishments, various, rolling a Stone up a Hill, drawing Water with a
Sieve, etc.

2. For reward of Virtue, They assigned a place in the Elysian Fields, or among
the Stars, or in the Retirements of Heaven among the Gods.

Many of those, who suspected their Souls to be Eternal, as if they were to
pass straight to Heaven, laid violent hands on themselves, as Cleanthes and
Chrysippus, Zeno and Empedocles: Of the Romans, Cato Vticensis, who taking it
ill, that Pompey was vanquished by Caesar, stabbed himself with his own Sword,
having first read Plato's Phaedon concerning the Souls immortality. Textor ex
Lactant.

CAMPI-ELYS II.
Lethe Fluvius, de quo bibebant animae ante discessum, viz. Metempsychosin. Huc
ad omnimodam voluptatem transferebantur animae post Purgationem in Tartaro.

Tartarus.

Ixion. Sisyphus. Tantalus.

Orcus. Aello. Ocypete Celaeno Belides.

Dice Nomia. Eyrene.

^ora. Harpyae Morpheus. Nox.

Judices Pluto. Proserpina. Parcae.

Minos Rhadamanth^s. AEacus.

Eumenides. Dirae

Clotho. Lachesis Artropos.

Al^^^o. Megae^. Tisiphone Chimaera.

Cerberus

Cocytus

Phiegethon

Styx.

Acheron

Charon.

Mors



Modern Heathens.
The Persees believe the Metempsychosis, or passage of Souls into Beasts; e.g.
the Souls of Drunkards or Epicures, into Swine; the Lustful and Incestuous into
Goats and Dogs; the Dissemblers into Apes, Crocodiles and Foxes; the Lazy into
Bears; the Wrathful into Tigers; the Proud into Lions; the Blood-thirsty into
Wolves, Ounces, and Snakes;the Perjured into Toads, etc. But the Souls of Good
Men, Abstemious, Pitiful and Courteous, into Kine, Buffaloes, Sheep, Storks,
Doves, Turtles, etc.

Touching the last Judgment, they hold it shall be more dreadful than the
other; the Moon will look as Red as Blood; the Sun will shed his light like
purling Brimstone; after which will follow an universal flashing with Fire, and
loud Thunders; then a flaming Redness will overspread the Heavens, and the
four Elements shall maintain a dreadful Fight, so long and so fiercely one
against another, that at last all will be resolved into a dreadful confusion;
the Souls of such as were good Men, Ruddery (one of their Prophets) is to
transport into Heaven; the wicked must Perish; but the Bodies of both rise no
more; being too incredulous of the Resurrection. Sir Tho. Herbert's Travel into
Persia.

Siam.
In Siam they believe that the Good are rewarded, and Wicked punished: That the
World shall stand 8000 years, and then be burned to Ashes, whence shall come
forth two Eggs, and out of them one Man and one Woman, who shall replenish the
Earth again. Rosse.

Pegu.
In Pegu they believe Transanimation, that some Souls shall live in Carnal
Pleasure after Death, some in Torment, some Annihilated: Also multitudes of
Worlds succeeding each other; that this World has been Governed by Four Gods
already, who are gone; the fifth not yet come, after whose Death the World
shall be burned, Idem.

Magor.
They also hold Transanimation of Souls. Idem.
As do also the Tartars in Cathay.
Cambaia.
Here also they are so Superstitiously Pythagoreans, that some of their
Religious Orders are afraid to Kill a Gnat or Worm. Idem.

They will not drink their Water cold, left they should slay the Soul of the
Water, which they think is quickened by boiling. Idem.

They are afraid to tread upon Ants, and will eat no Eggs, lest there should be
Blood in them.

Malabar.
These People also are Pythagoreans, and hold, not only the Immortality and
Transanimation of the Souls of Men and Beasts, but a kind of Divinity in
Elephants, Kine, etc. Idem.

Japan.
In Japan they believe diverse Paradises, to which every peculiar God carries
his own Worshippers; to obtain which, many drown themselves, some cut their own
throats, or break their Necks; some in narrow Holes receive breath only by a
Cane, and so continue Fasting and Praying, till they die. Idem.

They have a Feast, in which they burn a multitude of Candles at their Doors,
and walk all night up and down the streets to meet the Souls of their Friends
lately departed, before whom they set Meat and Drink, and invite them to their
Houses, that in their three years Journey to Paradise, they may not faint for
want of Provision. Idem.

Some say, they hold a Transmigration, as do also the Chinese, etc.

In Canada (in America) they believe, that their Souls shall ascend into the
Stars, and go down with them into a Paradise of Pleasure. Rosse.

Christians of St. John.
They believe there is no other future World, but where Angels and Devils, the
Souls of Good and Bad reside. That in that World are Cities, Houses and
Churches; and that the Evil Spirits have also Churches, where they Pray,
(Singing and Rejoicing upon Instruments, and Feasting as in this World.) That
when any one lies at the point of Death, 360 Demons come and carry his Soul to
a place full of Serpents, Dogs, Lions, Tigers and Devils. The Soul of a wicked
Man is torn in pieces; of a just Man, creeps under the Bellies of these Beasts,
into the Presence of God, who sits in the seat of Majesty to Judge the World.
That there are Angels also, that weigh the Souls of Men in a Balance, who
being thought worthy, are admitted immediately into Glory. M. Tavernier l. 2.
c. 8. p. 92.

Gaurs.
The Priests of the Gaurs have several Books full of small Pictures in
Watercolors- ill done, representing how the several sins of Men shall be
Punished in Hell, especially Sodomy, which they abominate. Idem. l. 4. c. 8.

If any of them fall sick, they hire poor People to go and find out Adders,
Serpents, Lizards, Toads, Frogs, Crey-fish, Rats, Mice, and above all Cats, and
Kill them, which they reckon in the number of those good Works, that Comfort
the Souls of the Deceased, believing that the Devil makes use of these
Creatures to Torment the Damned. ibid.

Tunquin.
The Tunquinese generally believe a Transmigration of Souls, especially the
followers of Chacabout; and say, that they who endeavor to fulfill the Law, but
fail in any point, shall wander in diverse Bodies for 3000 years, before they
enter into Happiness; that they who have perfectly obeyed the Law, shall be
rewarded without any change of their Bodies; that Chacabout himself had been
Born ten times before he enjoyed the Bliss which he possessed; not having in
his first Youth been Illuminated with that Knowledge which he afterward
attained. Tavernier's Collect.

Bramins.
They believe Heaven and Hell, but say, that none shall enter before the
Universal Judgment. -- But they believe also the Metempsychosis.

Here follows a Geographical Map, showing in what part of the World Each
Religion is practiced.

EUROPE Christian. Mahomet. Idolatry Heathen.

Christian Mahom. Heathen. Idolatry.

AFRICA. Heathen. Mahomet. Idolatry Christianity

Heathenism and a few. Christrians.



A Table showing the particular Kingdoms and Countries where each Religion is
practiced.
Christianity.
1. WHolly,

1. In Europe; 1. In Great Britain and Ireland. 2. France, Spain, Portugal,
Holland. 3. Germany, Swedeland, Denmark. 4. Poland, Russia, etc.


2. Asia; 1. Russia (except between Pahora and Ob, and some parts of Peruvia,
which are Idolaters. 2. Circassia and Mengrelia, along Meotis on the Euxin Sea,
from Tanais Eastward, to the River Phasis. 3. Georgia, a Province. 4. M.
Libanus in Syria (yet under the Turk.)


3. Africa. -- No where wholly, except Abissinia.)

2. Mixed.

1. In Europe. In all the Turkish Dominions, betwixt Danube and the Sea, in
compass 2300 Miles, i. e. From Buda, West, Ragusa, East, to the North of
Europe, and the Isles of the Aegean Sea.

Conditions of their Toleration are, 1. A 4th part of their Increase. For
Tribute. 2. A Sultany for every Poll. For Tribute. 3. Speaking nothing against
Mahomet. For Tribute.


2. In Asia, mixed with,

1. Mahometans; in 1. Natolia. Armenia. 2. Syria. Mesopotamia.


2. Idolaters, 1. In the South of India. 1. Contau. 2. Cranganor. 3.
Choromandel.
2. In the Philippin Isles. 3. Ormus, the Bay of Persia. 4. Ceilan. Japonia.


3. In Africa.

1. In Abassia, a Country as big as Germany, France, Spain, and Italy.

2. in Egypt, about 50000, with Mahometans.

3. In Congo Angala. with Idolaters.

4. In Tangier and Septa (near the Straits) a few.

5. In the Isles of Madera. Canaries. Cape de Verde. S. Thomas.

4. In America.

1. New England. 2. Virginia, etc.
Mahometism.
1. In Europe. In all the Region betwixt Tanais and Boristhenes, along M^otis
and the Euxine Sea; tho with a Toleration of Christians, viz. In Constantinople
20 Christian Churches. In Thessalonica 30, and but 3 Mosques.

2. In Asia. In Natolia, Syria, Armenia, Mesopotamia, etc.

3. In Africa. In Egypt, Abassia, Tangier, etc.

Heathenism.
1. In Erope. In Lapland, viz.

1. Lappia, 900 Miles Circumf. 2. Scricfinia. 900 Miles Circumf. 3. Biarmia.
900 Miles Circumf. 4. Corelia. 900 Miles Circumf. 5. North of Finmarck. 900
Miles Circumf.
2. Asia. Part of Russia, between Pechora and Ob.

The East Indies.

3. Africa. Congo and Angala.

4. America. Almost wholly.

1. Christians Possess a sixth part of the earth 2. Mahometans Possess a fifth
part of the earth 3. Idolaters. Possess 2 thirds, or near it of the earth
Or thus,

Divide the World into 30 Parts.

The Christians have 5 Mahometans 6 Idolaters. 19
Christians are to Heathens, but as one to six. Brierw. Enqu.

Lutheranism, In Germany, Denmark, Swedeland, Britain, Poland, Hungary in part,
etc.

Calvinism, In Geneva, Bern, Zurich, Basil, Schaffawsen, Glaris and Spenzel,
and the Upper Palatinate in part, Poland, Britain, France and Hungary in part,
etc.

Popery, In Italy, Spain, Portugal, Flanders, France, Poland, Hungary, in part,
etc.

Greek Religion, In Bulgaria, Greece, Dacia, Sclavonia, part of Poland, all the
Isles of the Adriatic, Jonian, and Aegean Seas, all Asia Minor, (except Cilicia
and Isaurus) and the Countries lying about the Euxine Sea and Palus Maeotis.

Muscovites, In Russia, etc.

Abassines, In Ethiopia Superior.

Circassians, In Tartaria Deserta, viz. from the Cimerian Bosphorus, and the
Fens of Maotis toward the East Shores of the Euxine Sea, for the space of 500
miles, and reaching 200 miles North.

Mengrelians, in Cholchis (in Turcomania.)

Georgians, in Iberia (in Turkey likewise.)

Armenians, in Turkey, and Armeniaminor, and Cilicia.

Copties, in Egypt, about 50000 in number when last counted.

Maronites. on Mount Libanus; i. e. from Sidon in Phoenicia to Smyrna in
Coelo-Syria, 700 miles in compass.

Melchites are subject to the Church of Antioch, the greatest sort of
Christians in all the East.

Jacobites, in Syria and Mesopotamia, about 40000 Families.

Christians of S. John, very numerous at Balsara and the Villages thereabouts,
at Souter, Despoul, Rumez, Bitoum, Mono, Endecan, Calafabat, Aveza, Dega,
Dorech, Masquel, Gumar, etc. In all which places are above 25000 Families.
Every City or Village they Inhabit, has a River running by it. M. Tavernier,
l. 2. c. 8. p. 90.

I could not but take notice, how these Eastern Parts of Europe abounded with
Christians of the Greek Church beyond my expectations, etc. in Graecia, Turkish
parts of Dalmatia, Croatia, Rascia, Bosnia, Servia, Thracia, etc. Dr. Brown.

The Mother-Tongues of Europe, etc.
1. GReek, used now,

1. In Greece. Except Epirus and the W. of Macedon.

2. In the Isles of the Aegaean Sea.

3. Candy and the Isles.

1. Eastward to Cyprus.

2. Westward to Corfu.

2. Latin.

3. Irish, in Ireland and Scotland.

4. British, in Wales, Cornwall and Britain of France.

5. Cantabrian, in France and Spain, near the Ocean and the Pyrene-hills.

6. Arabic, in the steep mountains of Granata (Alpaxarras.)

7. Finnick; in Finland and Lapland.

8. Dutch, in Germany, Low Countr. Denm. Swedel. Norw.

9. Cauchian; in East Frisland.

10. Slavonish, in Poland, Bohemia, Moscovy, Russia, etc.

11. Illyrian, in the Isle of Veggia, on the East of Istria.

12. Epirotick, in the mountain of Epirus.

13. Hungarian, in the greatest part of Hungary.

14. Jazygian, in the North of Hungary.

15. Tartarian, Amongst the Precopenses, between Tanais and Boristhenes.
Brierwood. Enq.

As for the other parts of the world it is impossible to enumerate all the
several languages; Clemens Alexandrinus believed, there were 70 sorts. Pliny
tells a strange thing, that when Dioscurias a City of the Colchi flourished by
relation of Timosthenes, it held 300 Nations of different languages; and that
afterward the Romans were forced to make use of a 130 interpreters to manage
their affairs in the same place. And besides all the Nations of the world are
not yet known; for if it be true, what I have been told by several mariners,
that upon the Coast of Africa the languages vary at every 15 or 20 German Miles
distance; it will follow that one quarter of the World contains more languages
then all the rest, by reason of the innumerable number of Nations which are
cherished within the bowels of so large a Continent. Job Ludolph. Hist. of
Ethiop. chap. 16.

I went to a Church at Bitchka, where the minister prayed and preached; and tho
there were a very good linguist with me, who spoke Sclavonian, German, Turkish,
Vulgar Greek, and Italian; yet could he make nothing of it, or find any
affinity in it with any other language he knew. A specimen hereof is set down,
by Megiserus, of the Lords prayer in that language. Mi attyanck by vagy as
meniegbe, megh Szentel Tesseck az te newed, etc. (Quaere, whether this were not
the Jazygian.) In the like manner we were confounded with the Language of
Albania, on the North of Epirus and West of Macedonia. Dr. Brown's. Travels.

Graces at Meat.
Jews.
THat Graces or Benedictions were used at meat among the Jews, is plain, from 1 Samuel 9.13. where it is said, That the people did not eat until he came, because
he was to bless the Sacrifice. And also from the Example of our Savior Christ,
Mat. 14.19. He blessed, and brake, etc. Mat. 26.26. Mar. 6.41. Luke 9.16. etc.

Besides, the Essaeans before they eat, always give Thanks, and no Man may eat
any Meat till this Prayer be made unto God; likewise when dinner is ended, they
pray again; for both before and after, they give Thanks to God, the Giver of
all. Joseph. of the Wars of the Jews, Book 2. Chap. 7.

Christians.
If you please, I will rehearse to you a Hymn, which S. Chrysostom sets out
with wonderful Praises in a certain Homily; not disdaining also to interpret
it. Bessed God, who feedest me from my Youth, who gives Meat to all Flesh, fill
our Hearts with Joy and Gladness, that having plentifully what is sufficient,
we may abound in every good Work, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with
thee, and the Holy Ghost, be Glory, Honor, and Empire, for ever. Erasm.
Conviv. Religios.

A Grace after Meat.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, Glory to thee, O Holy One, Glory to thee, O King;
because thou have given us Meat: fill us with Joy and Gladness in the Holy
Ghost, that we may be found acceptable in thy Sight, and not be ashamed when
thou shall render to every one according to their Works, Amen. Erasmus in
Relig. Conv. ex Chrysostom. in Matt. Hom. 56.

Thou that give Food to all Flesh, grant that we may receive this Food with
thy Blessing; thou, Lord, have said, that if we drink any thing that is deadly,
if we call upon thy Name, it shall not hurt us: Thou therefore, who art Lord of
all Power and Glory, turn away all evil and malignant quality from our Food,
and whatever Pernicious Influence it may have upon us. Dr. Cave, out of
Tertullian.

In Switzerland the Children are obliged to rehearse the Lord's Prayer before
and after Meat. Conrad Werndly. The French Protestants bless their Meat, in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Abissines.
They always read Prayers both before and after Meals; a thing, that some of
our Courtiers are in a manner ashamed of; who will hardly tarry to hear a short
Grace. Here (in Abissinia) you shall have the whole Psalter repeated at their
great Feasts, without any incovenience to the Guests: for he, whose office it
is, distributes to every one a part. The King, and they that are accustomed to
it, know their proper time; the larger Psalms are divided among more, the short
ones to only one; and thus by several the whole Psalter is read, as it were in
a Moment; for the Psalter is made use of by all; neither have they any other
Book for daily Prayer. Job Ludolph. l. 2. c. 12.

Armenians.
They were all (the Dishes) set down upon the Ground before the Patriarch, who
then prayed, and gave thanks. Mons. Tavernier, l. 1. c. 3.

Mahometans.
They say always before Meat their Bismillah, i. e. In the Name of God. After
Meat, -- They give thanks by a Handillah, i. e. God be praised; and afterward
they wash their Hands. M. de Thevenot.

Eat nothing which has not before been blessed. Purchase out of the Alcoran.

Heathens.
In Guinea, and the East Indies, at their Eating they Consecrate their first
bit and draught to their Fetisso, wherewith they besprinkle it. View of the
Engl. Acquis. in Guinea, and the East Indies.

The old Heathens, when their Mensae Secundae were brought in, had their Boni
Eventus, i. e. (...), poculum: a Cup by way of Sacrifice, or Oblation to their
good Genius. Pontanus and Dr. Holyday out of Camerarius. -- So in the beginning
they had their Libatio.

Persians.
We sat at dinner, ( viz. at the King of Persia's Court) about an hour and a
half; and then the Cloth being taken away, there was warm Water brought to wash
their Hands; which done, the Lord Chamberlain cried aloud, Suffer Hakine, Scahe
douletine, Kasiler Kuwetine, Alla Dielum, i.e. Make us thankful for this
repast, prosper the King's Affairs, give his Soldiers, and Servants Courage;
this we pray thee, O God, whereto all the rest answer their Alla, Alla. Grace
being thus said, they rose up, and went out of the room one after another,
without speaking a word, according to the custom of the Country. Our Mehemander
came also to tell us, that we might withdraw when we pleased, as we immediately
did, making a low reverence to the King. Duke of Holstein 's Embassad. Trav.
into Muscovy, etc. p. 204.

Malabar.
The King of Calecut eats no Meat till it be first offered by his Priest to the
Idol. Rosse.

Virginia.
The Pagans in Virgina, instead of saying Grace at Meat, used to fling the
first bit into the Fire. Idem.

By West-Virginia and Florida, when they eat, drink, or sacrifice, they used to
throw up into the Air toward the Sun (their Idol) some part of their Food.
Idem. The like is reported of New Spain.

Chinese.
The Chinese burn Amber at the end of their Feasts, by way of Incense.
Tavernier, par. 2. l. 3.

The Indians drink of the Water of Ganges out of Devotion, at the end of their
Feasts, accounting it sacred. Idem. par. 2. l. 3. c. 14.

Tunquin.
The Tuquinese wash their Hands, their Mouths, their Face, before they sit
down. Tavernier's Collect. of Relations, etc.

Ancient Heathens.
(By way of Appendix to what was said before) It was usual for both Ancient
Greeks and Romans at every Feast to make their Libations, or Offerrings to
their Gods, as Lovers to Venus, Soldiers to Mars, etc. and also to Men,
especially such as they were obliged by; Princes. etc. So in the times of
Augustus his Preferments, it was decreed by the Senate, That the People should
usually swear by his Genius, and in all their Banquets should sacrifice for his
Safety. Alsted. Encyclop. l. 16. p. 2173.

Lutherans.
Amongst the Lutherans the Woman of the House does ordinarily say Grace instead
of the Men. Dr. Brown 's Trav. p. 169.

Magicians and Witches.
Mr. Glanvil tells us from the Confession of some Witches, that at their
Night-Meetings, when the Cloth is laid, and the Devil set down at the upper end
of the Table, he uses some words before Meat.

Jews.
The Jews spreading their Hands over the Bread, say, Blessed art thou, O Lord
God, King of the World, who bring Bread out of the Earth; then over a Cup of
Wine, -- Blessed, etc. who have made the Fruit of the Vine; over Water no
Blessing; the 23d Psalm is set before them at Meal time, and they have
Multitudes of new Graces, if any better Dainties be set before them. Purchase.

Forms of Excommunication.
Jews.
The Degrees or Kinds of Excommunication are;

1. THE Niddui the lowest sort, as some think, a separation, or casting out of
the Synagogue for about thirty Days, during which time the Party was not to
come within four Cubits, either of Man or Woman, nor to dress or trim himself,
as at other times, yet admitted to instruction and divine Service: -- Might be
more severely punished, his Son might be denied Circumcision, his Dead not
buried, according to the Contumacy of the Person Excommunicated.

The Form was this: N. Let him be excommunicated.

2. The Shammatha (the same with Maranatha, as some think) Mr. Seldom thinks,
it is the same with Niddui.

This was a total Exclusion from the Church, a blotting them out of the Book of
Life, and not permitting them the least Communion in things of public
Religion; and the word Shammatha they interpret the Coming of the Lord to take
Vengeance on the Excommunicate: It was never pronounced but when the Offender
became desperate.

3. The Cherem, when the Offender within 30 days gave no sign of Amendment.
This was so dreadful and direful in our Savior's time, that many principal
Jews, who believed on Christ, durst not confess him for fear of it. See the
Form.

By the Decrees of Cities, and Command of the Holy, we Anathematize, adjure,
exterminate, excommunicate, curse and execrate, God being willing, and his
Church, by the Book of the Law, by the 600 Precepts therein written; by the
Anathema, with which Joshua anathematized Jericho; by the Curse wherewith
Elisha cursed the Young Man; by the Curse wherewith Gehezi cursed his Boy, and
by the Excommunication with which Baruch excommunicated Merozi; and by the
Excommunication which R. Jehuda, Son of Jehezkiel, used in this matter; and by
all the Anathemata, Imprecations, Curses, Excommunications, and Exterminations,
which have been made from the time of our Master Moses; and since by the name
of Acetheriel; Jah, the Lord of Hosts; Michael, the great Prince; by the name
of Mittatron, whose name is as the name of his Master; by the name of
Sandalipon, who ties the bands of the Lord; by the name of the 42 Letters; by
his name, who appeared to Moses in the Bush; by the name with which Moses
divided the Sea; by the name I am what I am; by the mystery of the name
Tetragrammaton; by the Scripture that was written upon the Tables; by the name
of the Lord of Armies (Sabath) the God of Israel, sitting upon the Cherubim; By
the name of the Spheres and Circles and Living Creatures, Saints, and
Ministering Angels; By the name of all the Angels which wait on the most High
God;

Every Israelite and Israelitess, who willingly and knowingly violates any of
those laws which are now denounced to be observed, Let him be Cursed of the God
of Israel who sits upon Cherubim.

Let him be Cursed by the Bright and Glorious name, which the High Priest in
the day of expiation expresses with his mouth; Let him be Cursed by Heaven and
Earth; Cursed from Almighty God, Cursed of Michael the great Prince; Cursed of
Mittatron, whose name is as the name of his Master; Cursed of Acetheriel; Jah;
the Lord of Hosts; of the Seraphim and of the Orbs, of the Holy Animals and
Angels, who wait before the most High God of Israel in Holiness and Purity.

If he was born in the month Nisan, which the Angel Vriel, as the Prince of the
Classes under which it is, governs; Let him be Cursed of him, and all his
Order; and if in the month Ijar, which the Angel Tzephaniel governs, let him be
Cursed of him and all his order, etc.

Let him be Cursed of the 7 Angels set over the 7 weeks, and of all their order
and helping power; Let him be Cursed of the 4 Angels which govern the 4 Seasons
of the year; Cursed of the 7 Palaces; Cursed of the Princes of the Law, by the
name of the Crown, and the name of the Seal. Let him be Cursed of the great
God, strong and Bright; Let him receive Confusion for his embraces. Let him
fall with swift Ruin. Let God, the God of Spirits, put him under all Flesh. Let
God, the God of Spirits lay him prostrate to all flesh. Let the wrath of the
Lord and Violent whirlwind fall upon the head of the wicked. Let the Destroying
Angels run upon him. Let him be Cursed in every thing that he puts his hand to.

Let his Soul depart in Terror; Let him dye of the Quinsey; Let not his breath
come or go. Let him be smitten with a fever, Dryness, the Sword, Rottenness,
the Jaundise.

Neither Let him be delivered from them before Destruction. Let his sword enter
into his own heart. And let his Bows be broken. Let him be as the dust before
the wind, and the Angel of the Lord scattering them. Upon him shall rest all
the Maledictions written in the Book of this Law; and the Lord shall blot out
his name from under Heaven. Also the Lord shall separate him for mischief out
of all the Tribes of Israel, to all the Curses of the Covenant written in the
book of this Law.

But you who adhere to the Lord your God, are all alive this day.

He that blessed Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Moses and Aaron, David and Solomon,
and the Prophets of Israel, and those who are Pious among the Nations, let him
bless all this Holy Congregation, except the man that has violated this
Anathema. and so let it be his will and Decree. Amen. Dr. Addison Prsent state
of the Jews in Barbary.

N. B. Samaritans were Excommunicated by sound of Trumpet and Singing of the
Levites. Ross.

Christians Greek.
A Form of the Greek Excommunication.

If they restore not to him that which is his own, and possess him peaceably of
it, but suffer him to remain injured and damnifyed, Let him be separated from
the Lord God Creator; and be Accursed and Unpardoned, and Undissolvable after
Death, in this World and in the World to come. Let Wood, stones and iron be
dissolved but not They. May they inherit the Leprosy of Gehazi; and the
Confusion of Judas; may the Earth be divided, and devour them, like Dathan and
Abiram; may they Sigh and Tremble on Earth like Cain, and the wrath of God be
upon their Countenances; may they see nothing of that for which they labor;
and beg their bread all their days; may their works, possessions and services
be accursed; always without effect or success, and blown away like Dust. May
they have the Curses of the Holy and Righteous Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob; of the 318 Saints who were the Divine Fathers of the Synod of Nice, and
of all other Holy Synods. And being out of the Church of Christ, let no man
administer unto them the things of the Church, or bless them, or offer
sacrifice for them; or give them, (...), or the blessed bread; or Eat, or
Drink, or Work with them. And after Death, let no man bury them, in penalty of
being under the same state of Excommunication. For so let them remain until
they have performed what is here written. Paul Ricaut Esquire;

Abissine.
A Form of Excommunication among the Abissines.

And let him be accursed by Addirion, and Actariel, by Sandalpkon and Hadarmel,
by Ansiciel, and Patchiel, by Seraphiel and Zeganzael, by Michael and Gabriel
and by Raphael and Meschartiel; and let him be interdicted by Trantzeviv and
Haweheviv, He is the great God; and by the seventy names of that great King;
and on the behalf of Tzortak, the great Ensign-bearer, etc. Job Ludolph. l. 3.
c. 5.

They, as the Jews, think to tertify with uncouth and harsh words. Idem.

Mr. Ross says, that in answer to the Degrees of Excommunication among the
Jews, the Greeks had their, 1. (...). 2. '(...). 3. (...). The Latins had
their, 1. Abstenti. 2. Excommunicati. 3. Anathemata.


N. B. Mr. Ricaut tells us, that among the Greeks Excommunication is granted
upon light occasions, and is either expressive of the party with his name and
condition, or indenfinite of any person guilty of such crime: Yet it is of high
esteem and dread among them: For they relate as sad and various stories of
Judgments befallen the Excommunicated, dying so, as if they were still
nourished in the Coffins, and haunted the Countries; as we do of witches.

Apostates are not received into the Church among the Greeks; unless they have
first sought it earnestly with tears, and signified their desire by forty days
fasting with bread and water, and continual prayer night and day.

Those few Christians, that after Apostasy to Turcism return, do confess with
extreme danger of dying for it. P. Ricaut Esquire;

Western Christians.
In England we have several degrees or kinds of Censures, as.

1. Minor Excommunicatio, exclusion from the Lord's Supper.

2. Major Excommunicatio, exclusion from the Society of Christians, not only in
spiritual duties, but in temporal affairs; and this if it continue 40 days, is
pursued with the King's writ de excommunicato capiendo; and then to prison
without bail.

3. Anathematismus (for obstinate Heresy) done by the Bishop Dean and Chapter.

4. Interdictum, a prohibition of all Divine offices, Christian burial,
sacraments, etc.

5. Public Penance, the delinquent standing in the Church Porch, with bare
head, bare feet, in a white sheet and a white rod in his hand, and c. See more
in the present state of England, part. 2d.

Creeds.
Modern Jews.
Art. 1. I Believe with a true perfect faith, that God is the Creator (whose
name be blessed) Governor and Maker of all Creatures, and that he has wrought
all things and shall work for ever.

Art. 2. I believe with a perfect faith, that the Creator (whose name be
blessed) is one, and that such an unity, as is in him, can be found in no
other; and that he alone has been our God, is, and for ever shall be.

Art. 3. That the Creator is not Corporeal, nor to be comprehended with any
bodily properties; and that no bodily essence can be likened to him.

Art. 4. That the Creator is the first and last, and that nothing was before
him, and that he shall last for ever.

Art. 5. That the Creator is to be worshipped, and none else.

Art. 6. That all the words of the prophets are true.

Art. 7. I believe with a perfect faith, that the prophecies of Moses (our
master may he rest in peace,) were true, that he was the Father and Chief of
all the wise men that lived before him, and shall live after him.

Art. 8. That all the law, which at this day is found in our hands, was
delivered by God himself, to our master Moses (God's peace be with him.)

Art. 9. The same law is never to be changed, nor any other to be given us of
God (whose name be Blessed.)

Art. 10. That God (whose Name be Blessed) understands all the Thoughts and
Works of Men: As it is Written in the Prophets, He fashions their Hearts alike,
he understands all their Works.

Art. 11. That God will recompense good to those that keep his Commandments,
and will Punish those who transgress them.

Art. 12. That Messiah is yet to come, and although he retard his coming, yet I
will wait for him, till he come.

Art. 13. That the Dead shall be restored to Life, when it shall seem fit to
God the Creator; whose Name be Blessed, and Memory Celebrated world without
end. Amen.

The Creed Dr. Addison presents us with out of Sepher Ikkarim, or Book of
Fundamentals, put in writing by Moses Ben Maimon a Corduba Jew, A. D. 1104. And
tho not set down in their Service Book, yet they begin their Mattins with it,
and utter it with a hollow tone different from the other Service.

Christians.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord;

Who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost,

Born of the Virgin Mary,

Suffered under Pontius Pilate,

Was Crucified, Dead and Buried, he Descended into Hell.

The third day he rose again from the Dead;

He ascended into Heaven,

And sits on the Right Hand of God the Father Almighty:

From thence He shall come to Judge the Quick and the Dead.

I Believe in the Holy Ghost,

The Holy Catholic Church;

The Communion of Saints;

The Forgiveness of Sins;

The Resurrection of the Body;

And the Life Everlasting. Amen.

This is commonly ascribed to the Apostles, as the first Compilers; but by
general Confession and Testimony of Ecclesiastical Writers is very Ancient;
Saving that those words (He Descended into Hell) are not of so old a Date; the
first place it being found in, being the Church of Aquileia, in the Fourth
Century. Dr. Pearson.

Gaurs.
1. I Believe in God, maker of the World.

2. That he sent Ebrahim zer-ateucht, his Prophet, Son of Azer (a Carver by
Trade) and Doghdon (who upon the appearance of an Angel, overspreading her Face
with a Celestial Light, Conceived the Prophet aforesaid.

3. That the Birth of this Child was known by Astrologers, and told to the King
(Nebrout) who thereupon caused all the Women with Child, through all his
Domininions, to be slain.

4. That this Child laughed, so soon as he was Born, because he was to Triumph
in the Hearts of the People.

5. That the Father in fear confessed to the King, the King going about to slay
the Child with a Sword, his Arm was dried up immediately: That the Child being
thrown into a Fire, turned it into a Bed of Roses.

6. That some of this Fire is still preserved, and is worthy of great
Veneration.

7. That the King devising new Torments, was at last stung to Death with Flies,
and all that would not kiss the Prophet's Feet, and submit.

8. That this Prophet, under Scha-glocktes, (the Succeeding Prince) was cast
into a Bath of melted Silver, but coming out safe, all received him as a
Prophet, and called him Zer-Ateucht, i. e. washed in Silver.

9. After this the Prophet was never seen more.

10. That he will have three Children.

11. The first Ouchider to be born of a Virgin, who shall come into the World,
and cause his Father's Laws to be received by Preaching and Miracles.

12. The Second, Ouchiderma, who shall be conceived in like manner, who shall
assist his Brother, and convince all the World, by causing the Sun to stand
still 10 years.

13. That the 3d. called Senoict-Hotius conceived by the same Mother, shall
come with more Authority, than his two Brothers, and shall perfectly reduce all
People to the Religion of their Prophet.

14. That after these things shall be the Universal Resurrection, when all
Souls in Paradise or Hell shall return to take possession of their own Bodies;
that then all Mountains and Minerals being melted, shall fill up Hell, and
destroy mansions of the Devils.

15. Afterward the World shall be levelled, and made Habitable, and men shall
have their Apartment in it, according to the good which they did; but their
chief delight shall be in beholding and praising God, and Ibrahim their
Prophet. M. Tavernier, l. 4. c. 8.

They say also, That before the Resurrection, those that are in Paradise do not
behold the face of God; no, not the Angels themselves, except only one, who
always attends upon God, to receive and execute his Commands: That God will
have pity upon the Damned, and that they shall go into Paradise, as having
suffered enough already for their Sins. Idem.

Indian Idolaters.
I Believe one only Almighty God, and only Wise, Creator of Heaven and Earth,
who fills all places with his Presence (by some called Primissar, by others
Peremael, others Westnon, others Ram, etc.) that this Ram was the Son of a
Potent Raja, called Deseret, and the most Virtuous of all his Children, his
Wife's name Sita, both Banished with a Brother Lokeman; but passing through a
Wood, Ram being in pursuit of a Bird, his Wife Sita was Ravished by Rhevan, (a
kind of Deity also) that all the Creatures were employed in Searching for Sita,
who at last was found by a Monkey that had leaped over the Sea, in Rhevan's
Garden, who Saluted her in Ram's Name, and presented her a Ring, and with Fire
with which some of Rhevans Servants would have burnt him, the Ape set Fire on
Rhevan's Palace, and thereupon leapt at one Jump over the Sea again, and
brought greeting from Sita to Ram; who thereupon, by the guidance of the Ape,
raised Forces, and went over, and rescued his Wife. Hereupon Rhevan spent all
the rest of his Days like a poor Faquir, and gave original to that Order.

I believe that departed Souls are according to their Lives ordered to inhabit
another Body: The Souls of the wicked into Asses, Dogs, Cats, etc. Of the Good
into Cows, or potent Rajaes.

That if a Man Die with a Cows Tail in his Hand, he is happy. M. Tavernier,
Part. 2. l. 2.

The People of Formosa.
I Believe the World to be Eternal.

The Soul to be Immortal.

And future Rewards and Punishments, according to our good or evil deeds.

That the passage to the other World is over a narrow Bridge made with Canes,
from which the Wicked fall into a nasty miry place; there to abide for ever,
the Good go to a Mansion of Pleasure.

That there are several Gods, Tamagisahanch, in the South, who presides over
the Generation of Mankind, from whom all good to Body or Mind proceeds; that
his Wife Taxank-punda, when it Thunders, chides with him for not sending Rain;
Sariachsingh, in the North, who destroys all Benefits bestowed on Mankind; that
both these are to be Prayed to.

That there are two Gods of War, Talafula and Tapaliape, to be invocated only
by the Men. Packet broke open, vol. 2.

Siamites.
I Believe that one Supreme God Created the Universe, and Governs the World.

That there are several other Gods Subordinate to him.

That the Soul is Immortal.

That on its separation from the Body, it passes to Eternal Happiness or
Misery, after various Transmigrations.

That good Works will save a Man.

That this Religion was received by Immemorial Tradition, from the Saints now
worshipped by them as Deities. Packet broke open, vol. 2.

Peguians.
I Believe, that the Chief of the Gods (who has several Gods under him) is the
Author of all the Good that Mankind enjoys; but that he leaves to the Devil the
disposing of all Evil; and therefore a greater Veneration is due to him than to
God; All Men naturally taking more care to appease a powerful Enemy, than be
grateful to an obliging Friend.

That good Works are more conducive to Eternal Hppiness, than Faith.

That a man may be Saved in any opinion, so his Life be Pious and Regular.

That five principal Sapans, or Holy Days, are to be kept.

1. Sapan Giacchi, the Pilgrimage of the King and Queen, in Grandeur.

2. Sapan Carena, in Honor of their great Idol.

3. Sapan Segienon, in Honor of other Idols.

4. Sapan Daiche, when the King and Queen throw Rose Water at each other, and
all the Nobility wash them out of a Pot of the same, and none can pass the
Streets without having Water thrown at him out of the Windows.

5. Sapan Donan, when a Race is performed by Boats in the Kings and Queens
presence, as they Pass to Meccao.

Tunquinese.
Of these there are three Sects, The Author of the first is Confutius, whose
Creed is as follows.

I Believe that man is composed of two Parts, the one fine and subtle, the
other material and gross; when Man Dies, the subtiler part goes into Air, the
gross stays in the Earth; that the 7 Planets are to be Adored; but especially
these Gods Rauma, Betolo, Ramonus, and Brama, and Satisbana by the Women; as
also the Heavens by the King and Mandarins.

The Author of the Second Chacabout, followed by the most part of the meaner
People, has taught them thus. --

There are Ten Commandments; (which see afterward) a Transmigration of Souls;
That they who would be Religious, must renounce the Delights of this Life, be
Charitable to the Poor, overcome their Passions, and give themselves up to
Meditation: That there are ten distinct places of Joy and Torment, the Torments
proportionable to the Offense, and without any end. The Imperfect shall wander
in diverse Bodies 3000 years; the Perfect go immediately to Bliss.

The Author of the Third Sect, is that of Lanthu, a Chinese, a great Magician,
who taught, that his Mother carried him in her Womb 70 years, without losing
her Virginity; he exhorted the Grandees to build Hospitals in all Cities:
Agreeing much with Chacabout in Doctrine. Taver.

Mahometans.
I Believe, 1. That there is but one God, and that there is no number in him.

2. That Mahomet is the Messenger of God; the most excellent, and last of all
the Prophets. That the Christian Religion was to Cease at his Appearance.

3. That Jesus Christ was a great Prophet Inspired by the Spirit of God.

4. That God is a Being of great Perfection.

5. Angels are Executioners of God's Commands, without Sex, different in
Dignity, and appointed to several Offices, as well in Heaven as Earth.

6. Good and Evil only happen, because God has Fore-ordain'd them, having writ
on a Table from all Eternity, things that are, and are to be.

7. There shall be a general Resurrection of the Dead: But before that,

1. Anti- Mahomet must come.

2. Jesus shall come from Heaven to Kill him, and Establish Mahometanism.

3. Gog and Magog, etc.

4. A Beast is to come out of Meccha.

5. All Living Creatures shall Die, Hills fly into the Air, the Heavens melt
and drop upon the Earth.

Then shall God renew the Earth, and raise the Dead, naked; but Saints and
Prophets clothed and carried by Angels to the Empyrean Heavens.

8. The Bad shall suffer Hunger, Thirst, painful Sweating, etc.

9. The Pains of the Wicked shall be proportioned to their Merits; but shall
not last above 50000 years.

10. That at the day of Judgment S. Michael with be a Balance, shall weigh the
good and bad Actions of Men.

11. They, whose good Deeds outweigh their Bad, shall go to Paradise.

12. There is a particular Judgment at Death, to distinguish the Mussulman from
Unbelievers. F. Simon out of a Mohammedan Dr.

Ancient Heathen.
I Believe in one Supreme God, who presides over all the rest, who sees and
Governs all things, in all places.

And in as many more Inferior Gods, as our Magistrates and Laws shall require
us to believe in.

That the Law of Nature and Reason is the ordinary Rule of our Manners.

And the Laws of the Nation. -- Of our Religigious Worship.

That our Souls are Immortal, and shall survive our Bodies.

That they who have defiled themselves with Vice, their Souls at Death shall be
secluded from the Society of the Gods, and be tossed about the Earth; but they
who have lived well and honestly, and have imitated the Lives of the Gods, the
Souls of these Men shall go to the Stars or Gods, from whence at first they
came.

This is extracted especially out of Cicero and Somn. Scip.

Diabolical.
Their Creed is nothing but a Reverse of the Orthodox Faith; an open
Profession, or secret Practice, contrary to the Truth; which must needs be so
pregnant with Blasphemy, that it will not be safe to exhibit a Copy of it to
common View.

The Bannyans.
I Believe that a God of Immense Power Eternal and Provident, in the beginning
Created the whole World; that he made the first Man (by Name Pourous) and for
his Society Created the first Woman (Parconty) both so innocent, that they
would not cut any thing that had a Sensitive Life, but fed upon Herbs and
Fruits; that from them sprung two couple of Boys, Bramon, Cuttery, Shuddery and
Wise; the first a Priest, the second a Warrior, the third a Merchant, the forth
a Peasant, which Peopled the four Parts of the World; but upon their Impiety,
the World was Destroyed by a Deluge: That afterward, upon Mount Meropurbatea,
God gave the Shaster to Bremaw in Clouds, and Lightning for a rule of Living.

Mr. Hobbes's.
I Believe that God is Almighty matter; that in him are three Persons, he
having been thrice represented on Earth; that it is to be decided by the Civil
Power, whether he Created All things else.

That Angels are not Incorporeal Substances, but preternatural Impressions on
the Brain of Man, that the Soul of Man is the Temperament of his Body; that the
very Liberty of Will in that Soul is Physically necessary; that the Prime Law
of Nature in the Soul of Man is Self-Love; that the Law of the Civil Sovereign
is the only obliging Rule of Just and Unjust; that the Books of the Old and New
Testament are not made Canon and Law, but by the Civil Powers; that what is
written in these Books, may be denied upon Oath in times of Persecution.

That Hell is a tolerable condition of Life, for a few years upon Earth; to
begin at the general Resurrection; and that Heaven is a blessed Estate of good
Men, like that of Adam before his Fall, beginning at the general Resurrection,
to be from thence-forth Eternal, upon Earth, in the Holy Land. Dr. Tenison.

Precepts or Commands.
Mohammedan.
THeir Law is divided into eight Precepts or Commandments.

1. There is but one God, and his Prophet Mahomet. 2. Children must be Dutiful
to their Parents. 3. Neighbors must Love each other. 4. They must Pray five
times every day. 5. A Lent of thirty days is to be kept every year. 6. They
must be Charitable, and give Alms to the Poor. 7. Every one must Marry by
twenty five years of Age. 8. They must abstain from Murder. Packet broke open,
vol. 2.
F. Simon makes Five Articles, thus, 1. There is one God. 2. Mahomet is his
Messenger. 3. They must be exact in Prayers and Almsdeeds. 4. -- And in the
Fast of Ramazan. 5. -- And in their Pilgrimage to Mecha.


Bannyans.
Their Moral Law has eight Commandments, most of which agree with the Seven
which R. Solomon says, Noah taught the World, in his time; called Noah-Cady.

1. Thou shall not destroy any living Creature, for thou and it are both my
Creatures. 2. Thou shall not sin in thy five Senses, Eyes not beholding Vanity;
Ears stopped in hearing Evil; Tongue uttering no Filthiness; Pallat hating Wine,
Flesh and all live things; Hands abhoring all things defiled. 3. Thou shall
duly observe set times of Devotion, as Praying, Washing, Elevation,
Prostration, etc. 4. Thou shall not Lie, nor Dissemble. 5. Thou shall not be
hard-hearted, but helpful to others. 6. Thou shall not Oppress, nor Tyrannize.
7. Thou shall observe certain Festivals, and Fasting days. 8. Thou shall not
Steal. Sir Tho. Herb. Trav. into Persia, out of their Shaster.
Persees.
1. For Behedens, or Laymen.

1. Cherish Modesty. 2. Cherish Fear. 3. Premeditate what you are to do; if
bad, reject it; if good, etc. 4. Let every day's object move to thankfulness.
5. Pray daily to the Sun, and nightly to the Moon.
2. For the Herboods, Daroos, or Priests.

Besides those of the Beheden, which they are to observe, 1. Be constant to the
form of Worship in the Zundavastaw. 2. Covet not what is another man's. 3.
Abhor Lies. 4. Be not worldly minded. 5. Learn the Zundavastaw by rote. 6. Keep
your selves free from Pollution. 7. Teach the Laity how to Comport themselves
in Adoration. 8. License Matrimony. 9. Be frequent at Church. 10. Forgive
Injuries. 11. Upon pain of Life Eternal believe in no other Law; and neither
add to, nor diminish from it.


3. For the Distoor or Pope.

Besides the two former Tables, he must, 1. Not touch any thing Profane,
without washing after. 2. Do every thing for himself with is own Hands, as
Cooking, Sewing, etc. 3. Receive the tenth of what the Laity pos- 4. Avoid
Vainglory, and exercise Acts of Charity. 5. His House must adjoyn to the
Church; that he may go and come, and be often there, without being taken notice
of. 6. Wash more frequently, and use purer Food, and refrain his Wife's company
during her Pollution. 7. Be well skilled in Judicial and Natural Phillosophy,
as well as in the Zertoost (of Religion) the three several parts of the
Zundavastaw. 8. Use a moderate Diet. 9. Fear none but God. 10. Tell every Man
his Offenses. 11. In Visions distinguish betwixt Good and Counterfeit, and give
right Judgment. 12. When God in Mercy communicates his Goodness to him by
nightly Visions, to admire his Mercy, and keep them secret. 13. That the Pyree
be ever kindled till Fire destroy the Universe, and that he pray over it. Sir
Tho. Herbert.


Ancient Heathens.
The Twelve Tables of the Greeks and Romans.

1. Of Religion.

1. Approach the Gods chastely, use Piety, lay aside Riches, etc. Opes amovento.
2. Let no body have any Gods by himself, nor introduce New and strange Gods,
without public consent, etc. 3. Let things sacred and private remain always
so. 4. Let nothing controverted be assigned to sacred use. 5. Let him that is
disobedient forfeit his Head. 6. Have no Controversies upon Holy Days, etc. 7.
Observe the Customs of the Family and Country. 8. Keep the Temples built by
thy Fathers; have Groves in the Fields, and Seats for thy Household Gods 9.
Account him a Parricide, that shall steal any thing sacred, etc. 10. Let the
Divine Punishment of Perjury be destruction, Humane Disgrace. 11. Perform thy
Vows devoutly. 12. Let no one destroy Sepulchers, nor bring in strangers.
2. Of Laws and Magistrates.

1. Let The Safety of the Commonwealth be the Supreme Law.

2. What the people shall command last, let that be ratified.

3. Let Senators have the same Right with men of Valor, Champions.

4. Encroach upon no ones Privileges.

3. Pass Sentence of Death upon no Roman Citizen but in the greatest Court.

Let Sunset be the last Season.

7. Let Governments be just, and modest Obedience paid to them, etc.

3. Of Judgments.

4. Of Private Power.

5. Of Marriages.

6. Of Homicides.

7. Of the Administration of Affairs.

8. Of Bearing Witness.

9. ('It Is uncertain, of what.)

10. Of Sanctuary-Laws.

11. and 12. are unknown also.

See more in Alsted, Encyclop. p. 1982, etc.

Tunquinese.
Chacabout, a certain Hermit, and Founder of a certain Sect in Tunquin, and
followed by the most part of the meaner people, has enjoined his followers to
observe 10 Commandments.

1. That they shall not kill. 2. Nor Steal. 3. Nor defile their Bodies. 4. Nor
Ly. 5. Nor be unfaithful in their words. 6. That they shall restrain their
inordinate Desires. 7. Do Injury to no Man. 8. Nor be great Talkers. 9. Nor
give way to their Anger. 10. That they shall labor to their utmost to get
knowledge. Tavernier's Collect.
I might here present my Reader with more Creeds and Commands; but these, I
think, are enough to satisfy the curiosity of moderate Inquirers.

Burials.
Jews.
THE ancient Jews had their Sepulchers in their Gardens, 2 Kin. 21.18. Matt.
27.60.

The Barbary Jews at this day in their Burials use this Order.

1. They wash the Corpse of the poorer sort in common Water; of the Rich in
Water of Roses, Orange-Flowers, etc.

2. They put it in a Shirt, Drawers, a Stripe of Linen, white Sheet and Coffin.

3. The Corpse is carried by four to the place of Burial, in this order; first
the Priests, next the Relations, next the Invited Neighbors.

4. As they go, they all sing the 49th Psalm, Hear this all ye People, etc. and
if it last not to the Grave, they begin it again.

5. At the Grave ten Rabbis or old Jews say over some parcels of Divine
Service.

6. The Relations stir not abroad for a week after, unless upon some
extraordinary business, (and then without Shoes) Neighbors come, to the House
to pray with them;

7. Their mourning Habit is a black Gantphe, the same Clothes they wore, when
the Party died. Dr. Addison.

8. Their common Epitaph is, Let his Soul be in the bundle of Life, with the
rest of the Just. Amen, Amen. Selah. Rosse.

Ancient Heathens,
In the Funerals of the Ancients, there were these following Officers.

1. Libitinarii, such as had, the oversight of all things necessary.

2. Pollinctores, who had the Office of anointing the dead Bodies.

3. Custodes Cadaverum, who attended the Dead till they were carried to the
Funeral Fire.

4. Vespillones, of Sandapilarii, such as commonly carried out by Night the
meaner sort, and they were clothed commonly in white.

5. Designatores, such as did marshal every Man according to his place.

6. Praeficae, Women-Mourners, that went before the Corpse, singing a doleful
Song (to invite others to Sorrow) which was called Naenia; as some would have
it, from the noise which is made in weeping.

7. Vstores, such as burnt the Bodies of the Dead.

Among the Romans burying in the Earth was first used, then Burning, till A.C.
200.

Trumpets used at the Funerals of the Rich.

Pipes at poorer Funerals.

The Order of Burials was thus:

1. The Body was washed and anointed: the Rich with costly Ointments, such as
Amomum yielded, which was a Shrub growing in Armenia, and the Eastern parts,
from the use of which, in enbalming the Dead, some think the word Mummy is
derived.

2. The Body was decently covered, and laid upon a Bier, and placed ready to be
carried forth.

3. A Coronet of Flowers was set upon it.

4. Wax-Candles also were carried before it to the Funeral Fire.

5. In the Funerals of Honorable Persons there went before the Corpse in order
many Chariots, according to the number of Progenitors (such as were famous) and
on each Chariot a Bed with an Image of one of them.

6. Before all these went, the Lictores, carrying the Fasces (the Rod and Axe)
with such Ornaments as belonged to the Office of the Person deceased.

7. To preserve the Ashes and Bones from mixing with the Ashes of the Wood,
with which it was burnt; they wrapped the Body in a Sheet, made of a kind of
Flax, called Asbestinum, which is of that nature, that it is not consumed, but
is only cleansed by the Fire.

8. They gather the Ashes and Bones, and put them in Pitchers or Pots, ( Vrnae,
Vessels of four Gallons and a half a piece) made sometimes of Earth, and
sometimes of Brass.

9. They placed the Vrns of the better sort in stately Vaults, belonging to
great Families.

10. The time of the Funeral was the Eighth day for Burning, and the Ninth for
Burying.

11. The Fire (Bustum) was quenched with Wine; the Bones being gathered
together, were sprinkled with Wine, and washed with Milk till separated from
the Ashes, and then perfumed, and put into the Urn, and buried.

12. At the Funerals of great Persons there were Ludi, called Novendiales.

13. There were Suppers.

1. Coena feralis, a sorry one, usually sent in by the Friends of the Dead, and
dressed by Coquus Nundinalis (as Plautus calls him) and cast into the Funeral
Fire to the Dii manes, and burnt with the Body. 2. (...), a Drinking prepared
for those that come from the Funeral back to the House of Mourning. 3.
Silicernium, (...), this was set down at the Grave. 4. Epulum Novendiale, the
more solemn Entertainment. Dr. Holyday, Illustr. on Jav. and Persius.
14. They strewed Flowers on the Sepulcher, and planted them on the Graves; and
this sometimes yearly.

Modern Heathens.
The Funerals of the Bannyans in East India are of the old stamp, burning the
Corpse to Ashes in a holy fire compounded of all sorts of costly Woods and
Aromatic Spices; the Wife also (in expectation to enjoy her Husband amongst
incomparable pleasures) invelops her dainty Body with the merciless Flames, for
which affection she obtains a living Memory: The reason of which custom was,
the spite of former Wives, in poisoning their Husbands, which gave occasion to
their Prince to make such a Law, That the Wife should be burned with the
Husband; as Sir Tho. Herbert in his Travels, tells us out of Aelia, and St.
Hierome.

In Angola they bury thus; the Dead is washed, painted, apparrell'd, and laid
to sleep in a spacious Dormitory, his Armolets, Bracelets, and voluntary
Shackles accompany him; they circle the Grave with Mimic Gestures and
Ejaculations, concluding with the Sacrifice of a Goat. Sir Th. Herbert, and
Rosse.

The Persees put the Body into a Winding Sheet; as they go to the Grave, the
Kindred beat their Breasts all the way, but with little Noise, till they come
within fifty or an hundred paces of the Burial-place; where the Herbood meets
them, usually attired with a yellow Scarf, and on his Head a thin Turbant; the
Bearers carry the Corpse upon an Iron Bier (for Wood being Dedicated to the
Fire, is forbid) to a little shed, where, after some mysticks acted, they hoise
it up to the Top of a Round Building, about 12 Foot high, and 80 in circuit,
flat above, and open to the Air, and expose the Carcass to the Sun, and
Ravening Birds. Sir Th. Herb.

Lucian in his discourse de Luctu has this observation;

The Greeks burn,

The Persians bury,

The Indians Besmear with hog's grease,

The Scythians eat, or hang upon Trees,

The Egyptians powder, (with salt and spices to preserve from putrefaction.)

The Romans Embalm,

The Gangetiques drown,

The Narsingans immure,

The Brachmans expose to birds,

The Bactrians to dogs, etc. Sir Tho. Herb. Travels.

The Gowhers (Heathens in Spahawn) put their dead upright in a hollow Tree.

The Indian Christians thus,

1. The Priest is sent for to pray; and administer the Eucharist, (if desired.)

2. The sick takes a long Farewell of wife, children, etc.

3. The Survivors rather joy, then mourn.

4. The Corpse is washed and wrapped in clean linen.

5. Friends carry it to the grave, and place the head West, with respect to
Jerusalem, or else local Paradise.

6. Five days after they visit the family, feast and fast, as we accustom.
Idem.

The Inhabitants of Casta in E. Ind. place the Carcass in a deep, long, narrow
Gave, or else between two walls built on purpose; where the simple Relict
immures her self voluntarily, and dies by famine. A most formidable death! Idem.

The Inhabitants of Japan in mourning wear white. Idem.

The Chinese,

1. Wash, perfume, and apparel the Corpse with his best clothes.

2. Cover his Head, and set him in a chair.

3. The wife and Children come in and kiss him, according to their Seniorities,
and Kindred also, kneeling down, and kissing the dead man's hand, with
ejaculations, beating their breasts, and tears.

4. The Third day Coffin him, Cover him with silk, and set up his picture.

5. For 15 days the Corpse rest; the Priests feast, offer sacrifice, burn
incense.

6. The Widow and Children mourn for 3. years, not seen to joy in any thing.

In like manner the Inhabitants of Japan invocate their Mannadaes.

Muscovites.
1. When the sick is departed, the Relations stand about the body, and excite
one another to bemoan him, asking the Deceased, why he would die? Were his
affairs in a good condition? Did he want meat and drink? Was not his wife
handsome or young enough? Or not faithful to him? etc.

2. They send a present of Beer, Hydromel and Aqua-vitae to the Priest, that he
may pray for the Soul, etc.

3. They wash the Body, put on a clean Shirt, and new Russia-Leather Shoes, and
lay him in the Coffin, with his Arms Cross the Breast.

4. The Coffin (made of the Trunk of a Tree) is covered with a Cloth, or some
Coat of the Deceased, and carried to Church, with this Solemnity and Order.

1. First the Priest carrying the Image of the Saint, assigned the Deceased at
Baptism.

2. Next, four Virgins, next akin, filling the Air with horrid Cries, and
keeping time in their Elevations, and Cadencies one with another.

3. Next the Corpse, carried by six Men, the Priests incensing it all the way,
to keep off evil Spirits, and withal singing Psalms.

4. Lastly, Kindred and Friends, but disorderly, with every one a Wax-candle in
his Hand.

5. At the Grave, the Coffin is uncovered, the Image held over him, certain
Prayers said, with these words often repeated, -- Lord look upon his Soul in
Righteousness; the Widow continuing her Lamentations, with the same questions
mentioned before.

6. They Kiss the Corpse, or the Coffin; and the Priest puts a piece of Paper
between his Fingers, which is a kind of Testimonial, or Pass for his
Admittance into the other World, signed by the Patriarch, etc. and Sold by the
Priest.

The Form thus,

(We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed (the Patriarch, or Metropolitan) and
Priest of the City of N -- do make known and certify by these Presents, that
the Bearer of these our Letters has always lived among us, like a good
Christian, professing the Greek Religion; and tho he has committed some Sins,
yet he has confessed the same, and received Absolution, and taken the
Communion, for the Remission of his Sins; -- has Honored God and his Saints;
-- has said his Prayers; and Fasted on the Hours and Days appointed by the
Church; and has carried himself so well toward me his Confessor, that I have
no reason to complain of him, nor to deny him the Absolution of his Sins. In
witness whereof we have given him the present Testimonial, to the End, that
upon sight thereof, S. Peter may open to him the Gate of Everlasting Bliss.

This done, the Coffin is shut up, and put in the Grave, with the Face
Eastward: They Mourn forty Days, and Feast on the third, because then the Face
is disfigured; on the second, because then the Body begins to Putrify; and on
the twentieth, because then the Heart Corrupts. Some build Huts over the Grave,
and cover them with Mats, because the Priest, Morning and Evening, for six
Weeks, Prays over the Grave. The D. of Holstein's Embas. Travels,

Lutherans.
The Lutheran Women Mourn in White. Dr. Brown's Trav. p. 169.

Tartars.
When a Sick Person lies dangerously ill, they send for a Moullah, who comes
with the Alcoran, which he opens and shuts three times, saying certain Prayers,
and laying it upon the Sick Person's Face; if the Sick Person recover, it is
attributed to the Sanctity of the Alcoran, and the Moullah is Presented with a
Sheep or Goat. If he die, all his Kindred meet, and carry him to the Grave,
with great Testimonies of Sadness, crying continually, Alla, Alla. When he is
Interred, the Moullah mutters certain Prayers over the Grave, and is paid for
his Pains according to the Wealth of the Heirs. For the Poor he generally
spends three days and three nights in that Exercise; for the Rich he as usually
spends a Month, never stirring all the while from the Grave, and sometimes
seven or Eight. M. Tavernier l. 3. c. 13.

Circassians and Comanians.
At their Funerals, the near Relations or Friends of the Dead cut their Faces,
and some other parts of their Bodies with sharp Flints; others Prostrate
themselves upon the Ground, and tear their Hair; so that when they return from
the Burial, they are all of a gore Blood: However, notwithstanding all this
Affliction, they never Pray for the Dead. Idem. l. 3. c. 12.

Gaurs.
When the Gaurs are Sick, they send for their Priests, to whom they make a kind
of Confession; whereupon the Priests enjoin them to give Alms, and other good
Works, to gain Pardon of their Sins. They neither Burn, nor Bury; but carry the
Corpse without the City, to a Walled place, where are abundance of Stakes about
7 or 8 foot high, fixed in the Ground, and tie the Dead Corpse to one of the
Stakes, with his Face toward the East: The People falling to their Prayers,
till the Crows come, (which those Coemeteries draw to them.) If the Crow fasten
on the right Eye, they believe the Person to be happy, and for joy, give large
Alms, and make a Feast in the Field; but if upon the left Eye, they return home
sad, without speaking to one another, give no Alms, nor Eat, nor Drink. Idem.
l. 4. c. 8.

When a Man is just breathing his last, they put the Mouth of a Dog, to the
Mouth of the Person Dying, and cause him to Bark twice in that posture, that
the Soul of the Deceased may enter into the Dog, who, they say, will deliver it
into the hands of the Angel appointed to receive it. When any Dog dies, they
carry him out of the City, and Pray to God for the Carrior. Idem.

Armenians.
When an Armenian Dies, the Mordichou (one whose Office it is to wash the Dead)
fetches from Church a Pot of Holy Water, puts in into a great Vessel of Water,
in which he puts the Corpse and washes it; then they dress it with a new white
shirt, breeches, wastcoat, bonnet, put it in a linen Sack, carry it to Church,
with every one a Taper in their hand: there the Priest says certain prayers,
sets up lighted Tapers round the Corpse, and so leaves it all night. Next
morning the Bishop or Priest says Mass, and then carry the body before the
door of the Bishop's house, where the Bishop comes forth, and says a prayer
for the soul of the deceased, then 8 or 10 of the poorer sort carry the body to
the Churchyard, the Priests Singing Dirges all the way, till the body is let
down into the grave, the Bishop throwing 3 handfuls of Earth into the grave,
saying, from Earth thou came, to Earth thou shall return, and stay there till
our Lord comes. Their feasts afterward for Priests and poor are chargeable for
7 days together, believing no soul departed can be saved without it. Tavernier
l. 4. c. 13. If a slave dies, the Master writes a note, let him not grieve, I
make him free.

In Mexico,
The Pagans buried their dead in gardens, or on mountains; sometimes they
burned the body, and if he was a great man, they killed his chaplain, and his
officers to attend him, and buried his wealth with him, that he might not want
in the other world. Ross.

The Priest used to attire himself at these funerals, like a Devil with many
mouths and glasseyes, and with his staff stirred and mingled the ashes. When the
King died, the Priests were to Sing his Elogies, and to sacrifice 200 persons
to serve him. Idem.

Armenians.
When we were at Breakfast, news came that a certain Bishop was dead, in his
return from the three Churches; whither he was sent by the Patriarch, to gather
certain duties due from the Villages. Immediately the Archbishop rising from
Table, with all his Assistants, and having made a prayer for the dead, sent a
Bishop and six Monks to fetch the Corpse; who returning a little after midnight,
the body was presently laid in the Church upon a Carpet spread upon the ground,
with the face turned toward the Altar: In the mean time a great number of
Wax-Tapers were lighted, and all the rest of the night two Monks watched by
turns to pray for the dead. The next morning early the Archbishop the Bishops
and all in Religious orders said the Office for the dead, which lasted half an
hour; and at the end of the Mass they brought the Corpse to the Altar, so that
they made the feet of the Corpse to touch it. Then they took off the linen
cloth that covered his head, at which time the Archbishop anointed him in six
places with holy oil, saying certain prayers every time. Then they covered him
again and said other prayers which lasted half an hour. Then they carried the
Corpse out of Church with Grosses and Banners, and every one a Taper in his
hand. As the Corpse passed by, one of the Bishops put a paper in his right hand,
containing these words, I came from the Father, and I return to the Father.
Being brought to the grave, upon a little mountain near the Covent, and set
down, they said other prayers which lasted a quarter of an hour. In the mean
time a Bishop going down into the grave, took away all the stones, and made the
place smooth; after which the Corpse was let down wrapped in a large linen sheet.
Then the Bishop according to the Custom, raised his head a little higher than
his feet, turning his face to the East. Which done, the Archbishop and
Assistants took every one a handful of Earth, which the Archbishop blessed and
gave it to the Bishop who strewed it over the body. Then the Bishop coming out
again, the grave was filled up. M. Tavernier l. 1. c. 4. p. 18.

Nestorians, Armenians, and Jacobites.
At Bagdat, if a Christian dies, all the rest come to his burial, and returning
home, find a supper prepared to welcome them: the next day they return to the
grave, pray for the deceased; and the third day there is a dinner for all
comers and goers. Sometimes there will be a 150 persons at a burial. They
repeat the same Ceremonies for the 7th 15th 30th and 40th days afterward:
having a great veneration for the dead, for whom they pray too often. This
feasting is so costly, that the poor often sell their Children for their debts.
Tavernier l. 2. c. 2. p. 86.

Persians.
Among the Persians, when a Patient lies dangerously ill, a Fire is made upon
the Terass of the House, to give the people notice to pray for him: when dead,
the House rings with Cries and Lamentations, especially of the Women who tear
their Hair, and show such Antic Postures, that a Man would think them
possessed; in the midst of their telling what worthy Acts he has done, etc.
then the Casi is informed, who answers, -- Serchoama Salamet bashet, i. e. May
your Head be in safety; he seals a License to a Mourderchour, to take the Body,
and wash it in a House, built on purpose near a running Water; then come a
great number of Moullahs with long staves (having thin Iron or Latten Plates at
the ends) wrapped about with Taffata, tearing their Throats, with crying Allah,
Allah, Allah, repeating nothing else, and dancing sometimes on one Foot,
sometimes on another; the Clothes of the deceased belong to the Mourderchour;
all that meet the Bier, proffer their Shoulders to help to carry: If a Person
of Quality be buried, all his Horses are bridled and saddled, and one carries
his Turban, another his Scimiter, another his Bow, Arrows, Buckler, etc. Their
Graves are six Foot long, six deep, and two wide, wherein they lay their Bodies
with their Faces toward Mecha: if a rich Man, he is buried with Turbant,
Scimiter, Bow and Arrows, and Victuals set before him; the Moullahs go to the
House, and eat, and are paid there for their singing and bawling, etc.
Tavernier, l. 5. c. 20.

Abissines.
The Dead Body is,

1. Well washed.

2. Fumed with Incense, and wrapped up in proper Garments.

3. If of noble extract, laid on a Bier, (covered with a Bull's Hide.)

4. Carried to the Grave, laden with Crosses, Censers, and Holy Water, and this
with a very swift pace.

5. Set down before the Grave, whilst a certain Paragraph out of St. John's
Gospel is a reading.

6. After this the Body being sprinkled with the Water, is not let down, but
thrown into the Sepulcher.

-- When Marcus, the eldest Son of Susneus the King, was buried, they sounded
forth, -- Marcus is dead, Hallelujah.
Marcus is dead, Hallelujah, etc.


And this they repeated so often, and so loud, that the Fathers sent from Rome,
and then but newly arrived in Aethiopia, were astonished, not knowing whether
the Aethiopians rejoiced or lamented. Job Ludolph. l. 3. c. 6.

Indian Christians.
1. The Surviver rather rejoices, then seems to mourn.

2. The Corpse is washed, and wrapped up in clean Linen.

3. When it is carried to the Grave, the Head is laid West, with respect to
Jerusalem, or the Local Paradise.

4. Five days after Friends visit the Family, and Feast and Fast with them, as
with us they use to do. Sir Tho. Herbert.

Mahometans.
The Turks commonly bury by the Highways, yet their Tombs are not ordinarily
splendid, consisting only of a Stone, erected at the Head and Feet; yet some
set up Stones, of two, three or four Yards high; some have a Turbant carved
upon the Stone, at the Head, and others set up two Pillars of Stone; some
proceed farther, and raise the Sepulchers (as with us) and afterward place two
Pillars upon them, one at the Head, another at the Feet. At Seopia I saw fair
Ones after this manner, and two Sepulchers in one of them; but the best way I
observed in these parts, ( Larissa and Thessaly) is by building a Pavillion
supported by four Pillars. As we traveled from the South from Jagodna to
Servia. I saw on the side of a Hill, a large Turkish Tom, about four Yards
long, and a square place covered by it, which the Chiause told me was the Tomb
of one of their Saints, and accordingly performed his Devotions at it, and at
other places; on Thursday-night and Fridays I observed the Women to visit to
Sepulchers, and pay their Devotions at the Tombs of their deceased Friends. Dr.
Brown 's Travels, p. 50.

Thebans.
Amongst the Thebans none might build him an House, before he build himself a
Sepulcher to be buried in.

Dutch.
The Synod at Eleven a Clock, went to the Funeral of Henricus ab Hell; the
solemnity was no more but this; some of the chief of the Town, with the whole
Synod, (of Dort, I suppose) went to the House where he died, accompanied him to
the Church, laid him in the Grave, and went home again, almost in as little a
time as I have told it you. Mr. Hales 's Letter to Sir D. C.

Tunquin.
The Tunquinese at their Entertainments use great store of Artificial
Fireworks; they set upon the Tombs of the Deceased good store of Victuals and
Comfitures, out of a Belief that the Dead are better for them; for their
Priests keep them in that blind error for their own advantage, and so well
order their business, that there is nothing left by Morning. The same is
practiced by the Chinese at Batavia, where they have a place without the Town
to bury their Dead, which puts me in mind of this story: Their Burying-place
lying in the walk of the Soldiers, when they saw the Provant on one of the
Tombs, they took it away to their Guard, and there feasted themselves; the
Chinese Priests that usually came about Midnight to take away the Victuals,
finding themselves several times bereaved of their Expectations, and suspecting
the Soldiers belonging to the Holland Garrison; first, complained to the
General and Council; but that not taking effect, they resolved to poison both
the Meat and Drink, to prevent the like fraud for the future. This took so good
effect, that afterward many of the Dutch Soldiers being poisoned, deterred the
rest from any such Licorish Attempts. Tavernier's Collect, etc.

Calvinists.
Concerning the Funeral of the Calvinists, see before in the former part.

Papists.
They have a peculiar Office for the Dead in Purgatory, which some perform
every third day, some every seventh, some the 30th, some the 40th day, others
the 50th, others yearly; but note, that no Mass must be said for the Dead on
Festival days, except the Body be present. Incense may be be burned for the
Living, but not for Dead. The Corpse may not be brought into the Church whilst
Mass is saying for the Living, but must be set in the Church Porch till Mass be
done, and the Mass for the Dead be begun, in which Mass the Kiss of Peace must
not be given, because there is no Communion between us and the Dead. Their
Order is thus: 1. The Corpse is washed and anointed. 2. It Is carried to Church
the Bearers by the way resting three times, to signify Christ's resting in the
Grave. 3. Holy Water and Frankincense is put into the Grave, to keep out evil
Spirits, etc. 4. He is buried with green Bays, to show the Immortality of the
Soul. 5. With the Face upward, and his Feet toward the East, to show his
Expectation of Heaven, and his readiness to meet Christ in the Resurrection
(from the East.) Note, 1. Every Christian buried out of the Church or
Churchyard, has a Cross set at his Head, to show that he was a Christian. 2.
Clergymen in Orders are buried in the habit of their Orders. 3. All are wrapped
in Linen, because Christ was so. 4. Some also in Sackcloth, to show their
Repentance. 5. Anciently the names of Holy Men were registered in Scrolls or
folding Tables, called (...), Dypticks, which words the Latin Church retained [
Dr. Holyday on Juven. p. 173. says, The Dypticha were two Tables, containing
the names of especial Persons, some alive, and some dead; some Virtuous, some
Vicious, -- Read in time of Divine Service amongst the Primitive Christians for
the determent of bad, etc.] and the Bishops kept them, and publicly read them
in time of Divine Service, to show that the Just shall be had in everlasting
remembrance. 6. Prayers for the Dead are only for such as are in Purgatory, i.
e. who died in Venial Sins, unrepented of. 7. There is neither Gloria in
excelsis, nor Hallelujahs used in the Office for the Dead. Mr. Rosse, out of
Aleninus, etc.



Roman.
The Roman Catacombs are without the Walls of the Town, according to the Law of
the twelve Tables, yet they seem to run under it, viz. vast Caves in the Rocks,
made use of as Repositories of dead Bodies, where they were thrown, and there
putrified (putuerunt) thence called Puticoli, where the meanest sort of the
Ronan Slaves were laid. Dr. Burnet's Letters, who discourses upon them at large.

Guinea.
In Guinea they bury Gods of Straw with their Dead, that they may accompany
them in the other World. Packet broke open, Vol. 2.

Mexico.
The Priests in Mexico interred the Dead; the places where they buried them
were their Gardens and Courts of their own Houses; others carried them to the
places of their Sacrifices -- in the Mountains; others burnt them, and after
buried the Ashes in the Temples. They sung the Funeral Offices like Responds,
often lifting up the dead Body, with many Ceremonies; at these Mortuaries they
did eat and drink; and if it were a Person of Quality, they gave Apparel to
such as came; the Friends saluted the Person, as if he were living; for a King
or Lord, they put some Slaves, Cook, Butler, etc. to death with him, to serve
him in the other World; they give him Ornaments also; the Obsequies continued
ten days, etc. Purchase out of Acosta.

Guiana.
In some parts of Guiana, when the Flesh of the Dead is worn off by
Putrefaction, they hang up the So^leton in the Chamber or House where the Party
died, decking the Scull with Feathers of diverse Colors, and hanging Jewels and
Plates of Gold about the Arm and Thigh-Bones. S. Clark.

A Table of Heresies and Errors, or at least, different Opinions from what is
asserted in the Column of Orthodoxy.
Orthodoxy. Heresies and Errors. THere is One God. ATheist (Diagoras,
Theodorus, etc.) There is no God. Julius Caesar Vanin suffered as an Atheist.
Polytheists (Pagan), There are many Gods. Gnostics, Two Gods. Marcionites, Two
Gods: one maker of the World, bad, the other good. Manichees, Two Gods, One
good, (...); the other bad, (...). Valentinus, Thirty Gods, or (...), divided
into several Syzygiae. Basilides, One Chief Power, (...). Without Body Parts,
Passions. Anthropomorphites, With a body' parts and passions, as a man.
Meletonii, With a body, etc. Mahometans, Of a Corporeal Essence with a Soul.
Hobbes, God is Almighty matter. Who created the World, viz. Heaven and Earth of
nothing, and all things therein. Aristotle, The World was Eternal. Hermians,
Seleucians, Matter was coeternal with God. So the Muggletonians say of Earth
and Water. Carpocrates, Cerinthus, Simon Magus, Saturninus, Menander,
(Archontici,) God did not make the World; but Angels, in number 7; the
Offspring of Abraxas; without leave from God. Basilides, Those 7 Angels made
365 Heavens. Marcionites, The World was too base a thing for God to create.
Manichees, The substance of the good God was distributed by crumbs among the
creatures. Luciferiani, Priscillianists, The Devil made the world; for it lies
in wickedness. Familists, God by them made the world. Epicurus, The world was
made by a Fortuitous concourse of Atoms. Hobbes, Whether God created all things
else, is to be decided by the civil power. And formed Man of Earth, with a
Reasonable Soul. Manichees, Priscillianists, The Devil made man (his body only,
I suppose they mean.) Patriciani, The Devil made our flesh, which may be put
off by violent Death. Paterniani, The Devil made the lower parts of man, which
may be used to sin. Priscillianists, The soul was made of the same substance
with God. Luciferiani, The soul was raised out of the flesh. Jews in Barbary,
All souls wore created together, and put in a certain Region, etc. Hobbes,
Irenaeus, That man at his first creation was imperfect. Rules all things by his
Providence. Epicureans, The world is too base for God to look after. Aristotle,
Certain Angels are entrusted with the Government. Cyprian, God has committed
the Government of the world to certain Celestial Powers. Stoics, Manichees,
All things are Ruled by Fate and Fortune. Bardesanes, All things are Ruled by
Fate. Jews in Barbary, Every man has Two Angels, one good and another bad,
attending him. Colarbas, The Generation and Life of man is in the 7 Planets.
Familists, All things are Ruled by Nature, not ordered by God. In the Godhead
are 3 Persons. Marcellians, Luciani, The Trinity is an Extension of the Deity.
Hobbes, Is but a threefold Representation of God. Noetians, Praxeneans,
Hermogeneans, There are 3 in the Godhead, but not 3 Persons. Sabellians, 3 in
Name only. Gnostics, Marcionitos, Valentinians, More Gods, yet not 3 Persons.
Syreni, Tritheites, Eunomeans, 3 Gods, or Spirits, or Principles, not
distinguished only, but divided also. Macedonians, Franciscans, 2 Gods, Father
and Son, Old and New. Seleucians, 1 Person. Armenians, Anastasius, Emp.
Apollinarians, A Quaternity. Servetus, There is no distinction of Persons in
God. Jews, Turks, Montanists, Deny the Trinity: so likewise the Muggletonians.
Blandrat, Alciat, Christians in worshipping 3 Persons, worship 3 Devils. Lord
Herbert denied Jesus Christ to be a Person in the Godhead. Alogiani,
Samosateni, (...) ( John* 1.1.) does not signify a Person, but the purpose of
God the Father to make the world, and send Christ. Antitrinitarians, Polonian
Arians, Socinians also, Deny the Trinity of Persons. The Father. Servetus,
There is no real Generation in God. Muggletonians, God the Father was a
Spiritual Man from Eternity, but in time produced a Natural Body. Theaurau
John, It Is nonsense to say God is the Father of us all. Jesus Christ the Son of
God. Arrian-dadeians, Christ is the Father's Servant. Arians, Not truly or
naturally the Son of God, nor of the same Substance with the Father. Servetus,
Christ was but a Figure of the Son of God. By Eternal Generation. Photiniani,
Servetiani, (Nativitarii) the Son always was, but not Son till Born of the
Virgin. Eunomians, Samosatenians, say the same. Francis Ker, Christ was not
God, till after his Resurrection. Pelonian Arians, The Eternal generation of
the Son is against Truth and Reason. Very God. Carpoorates, Cerinthians,
Ebionites, Mat. Hammant, Turks, Socinians Jews, Eunomians, Impugned Christ's
Divinity. Agnoite, Christ's Divine Nature was ignorant of some things.
Nestorians, Christ became God by Merit, not by Nature. Catabapt. (some)
Blandrat, Christ is not the true God. Of one substance with the Father.
Macedonians, Christ is not of one Substance with the Father. Anomoei, Not like
the Father at all. Acatiani, Semi-Ariani, He is like the Father, (...).
Aeriani, He is like the F. (...). Very Man of a Humane, Body. Saturninus,
Marcionites, Eutychiant, Cerdoniani, Manichees, Archontici, (Phantasmatici.)
Christ was Man but putatively. Apellitae, Christ took an Etherial Body of the
Stars. Valentiniani, (Menno) A Spiritual and Celestial Body, by the Virgin
Mary, as by a Channel. Apollinarians, Christ's humanity is consubstantial with
the Father. Vbiquitarii, Christ's Body, humanity, is every where. Servetus,
Christ's Body was compact of three uncreated Elements. Aphthartodo^itae,
Christ's Body was not corruptible; but immortal as soon as he took it. And
reasonable Soul. Eunomians, Arians, Christ had a humane Body, but not Soul.
Apollinarists, Christ had a humane Body, but not Soul; or if Soul, not Mind.
Valentinus, Christ had a carnal Soul. Theopaschites, Christ had a Body, but not
Soul. God and Man in one Person. Eutychians, Dioscurus, Severites, Christ had
but one nature, compounded of Divine and Humane. Arephali, Theodosiani, Christ
had not the properties of both natures. Nestorians, The word and Flesh were
united in one Person, as two Friends in love. Apollinarists, The word was
changed into Flesh. Conceived by the Holy Ghost. Monothelites, Christ had but
one Will. Theodorus Mesechius, The word is one thing, and Christ another. Born
of the Virgin Mary Ebionites, Carpocrates, Theodosius, Christ was conceived by
Man of Humane Seed. ex Viri coitu. Valentinians, Anabaptists, Familists, Christ
took the Flesh of the Virgin Mary, qu. by a Channel. Armenii, Christ had an
incorruptible Body from the first moment of Conception. Nestorius, The Virgin
Mary was not (...). Socinus, Christ's Incarnation is against Reason. Hoffman,
God took Flesh of himself. Mennonists, Denied Christ to be born of Mary.
Antimarians, Denied Mary's Virginity, as did also Cerin hus and Helcidius. Pure
from all Sin. Jews, Christ was a Violater of the Sabbath Law, etc. Marcionites,
Christ dissolved the Law, Prophets, and all the Works of God. Saturnians,
Christ came into the World to destroy the God of the Angels. Mat. Hamant,
Christ was a sinful Man, and abominable Idol. Leon. Vairus, Christ was a
Veneficus, a common Poisoner of Men and Women. Our only Savior. Barcocab,
Moses Cretensis, False Messiahs of the Jews. Arminius, Christ died sufficiently
for all, but not effectually for any particular Persons. Socinus, Christ did
not satisfy for us, but obtained power for us to satisfy for our selves.
Simon Magus, False Saviors. Called himself the Holy Ghost. Called himself
greater than Christ. Menander, False Saviors. Called himself the Holy Ghost.
Called himself greater than Christ. Montanus, False Saviors. Called himself
the Holy Ghost. Called himself greater than Christ. Manes, False Saviors.
Called himself the Holy Ghost. Called himself greater than Christ. Mahomet,
False Saviors. Called himself the Holy Ghost. Called himself greater than
Christ. David Geogre, False Saviors. Called himself the Holy Ghost. Called
himself greater than Christ. Noetus, called himself Moses, and his Brother
Aaron. One Mother Jane, is the Savior of Women, said Postellus the Jesuit.
Saturnius, Desider, Burdegal, Eudo de Stella, etc. False Christ's. Was
crucified, dead, buried. Cerinthus, Jesus was not Christ. Manichees,
Phantasmatici, Cerdonites, Eutychians, Christ suffered not truly, but in
appearance only. Familists, The Incarnation and Passion of Christ is to be
understood Allegorically. Sabellians, Serverus, Basilides, Armenii,
Apollinarij, (Patri-Passians Theopaschites,) The Godhead suffered. So also the
Muggletonians. Islebius, Andreas Musculus, Christ suffered in his Humanity and
Divinity both. Petrus Antioch. The whole Trinity was crucified. Manichees, The
very Devils hung upon the Cross. Muhamedeus, Not Christ who escaped through the
Roof of the House, but Judas the Traitor was crucified in the shape of Christ.
Socinus, Christ died for the Infirmities of our Nature. Descended into Hell.
Liberatores, Christ descending into Hell, the damned souls believed, and were
delivered. Papists, Christ went into Lake Limbo, to loose the souls of our
Forefathers. Carlisle, Christ descended not into Hell at all. Banister, Christ
in Hell endured the very Torments of the Damned. Rose again the 3d day. Jews,
Hamant, David George, Deny the Resurrection of Christ. Cerinthus, Christ shall
Rise, is not yet Risen. Swenkfeldians, Christ after his Resurrection was so
Deified, that he is merely God alone. Ascended into Heaven. Jews, etc. Hamant,
Christ is not ascended. Ket, Christ's Humane Nature is not ascended, but is in
Judea, gathering a Church. Montanists, Cataphrygians, Carpocratians, Christ in
soul only ascended. Papists, Christ at his Ascension carried with him the souls
of those he delivered out of Limbo. Germ. Divines, Christ carried with him the
souls and bodies of those he raised out of their Graves. Brentius and
Vbiquitaries, Christ's body, after his Ascension, now is every where. Thence he
shall come to judge the World. Atheists, Manichees, There shall be no general
Judgment. Origenists, Catabaptists, All the Devils and Damned in Hell, shall
after some time be saved. Turks, Those Devils, etc. that in Hell cry for mercy,
shall be saved. Familists. The wicked shall not be judged, but die as Bruits.
Coppinger and Arthington, said Will. Hacket was come to judge the World, and
themselves were his Angels. Papists, Beside Christ, the Pope is Judge of Quick
and Dead. Cerinthus, Papias, Origenes, Justinus, Nepotiani, Adamantii,
Chiliastae, assert, Christ shall Reign on the Earth 1000 years after the
Resurrection. So Apollinarii, Victorinus, Tertullian, Irenaeus, Lactantius.
Jews, Before the Judgment, there shall be a Golden Age to the Godly. Hutistes,
Take upon them to prefix the very day and hour of Christ's coming to Judgment.
The H. Ghost is truly God. Macedonians, Tropicks, Arians, The Holy Ghost is a
Creature or Power Celestial, created by God through the Word. Effrontes, The Holy
Ghost is a bare Motion, inspired by God into the Mind. Samosatenus, Photinus,
Socinus, Servetus, Turks, Ochinus, Lombard, Ket, Hamant, Brownists, (some)
Pneumatomachous likewise, saying, the Holy Ghost is not God, but God's Love or
Virtue, whereby he works i^ his Children. Hierax, Melchisedec was the Holy
Ghost. Sim. Magus, His Helen was the Holy Ghost. Franciscan, S. Francis was the
Holy Ghost. Helehe, The Holy Ghost was a Woman, and the natural Sister of
Christ. Grecians, Russians, The H. Ghost proceeds from the Father, but not from
the Son. Tritheists, The H. Ghost is inferior to the Father; as the Arians say,
he is not inferior to the Son. Mankind is by Nature corrupt, and guilty of
Original sin. Saturninus, Some men are naturally good, tho some bad.
Carpocratians, (some of them) they were every way as innocent as Christ.
Adamites, They were ever way as innocent as Adam before his Fall. Jews,
Carpocratians, Familists, Flatly deny Original sin. Pelagians, Adam's sin hurt
not his posterity. Albanenses, There is no Original sin, if their Adversaries
report truly of them. Jack-a Leyden, No Original sin. Papists, The Virgin Mary
was free from sin Original. Council Trent, Concupiscence is no sin, but
proceeds from sin, and inclines to sin. Manichees, Original sin is another
substance within us, so that Man is not voluntarily, but necessarily driven to
evil. Socinus, There is no Original Sin (i. e.) Concupiscence and Deformity of
Nature in us. Contracted by natural generation from Adam, and justly, we being
in his loins when he fell. Florinus, Blastus, Hermogenes, Therefore God is the
Author of sin. Valentinians, Original Sin comes From the Devil. Apollinarians
Original Sin comes From Nature. Pelagians Original Sin comes By Imitation.
Familists Original Sin comes By Imitation. Arminius, All men are received into
the Covenant of Grace, and all freed from Orinal Sin. So that now we have no
will to good of ourselves. Pharisees, Sadduces, Pelagians, Donatists, Papists,
Anabaptists. Man has no free will to Good. Lawr. Valla, Man has no Power to
move his Body to outward things, nor his Mind to sin. Hobbes, Liberty of will
in the Soul is Physically necessary. Socinus. There is a Free will to Goodness
in us. Arminius, A Natural Man can (by using the gifts of Nature rightly)
obtain saving Grace, etc. Nor sufficient Knowledge of our Duty. Montanists,
said, They knew more than the Apostles of Christ, Socinus, No man by the Light
of Nature can have any Knowledge of God. Yet God requires holiness. Carpocrates,
A Vicious Life will appease the Evil Angels. Basilides, Ex^oll'd a civil
Righteousness up to the very Heavens. Viz. That we worship him alone. Angelici,
Adored Angels; so did the Jews, and Pythagoreans, and Platonists. Armenii, The
Cross. Helcesaitae, The Water, and some Women akin to Helceseus. Greeks, The
V. Mary, and Pictures. Collyridiani, Offered bread to the Virgin M. Papists,
Saints. Pagans, Men, under the Names of Jupiter, Saturn, etc. Persians, A
Dragon. Syrians, A Fish and Pigeons. Egyptians, An Ox, Calf, Cats, Vultures,
Crocodiles. Turks, Mahomet. Americans, The Devil, under the name of Zemes, and
Tanto, and Cendir. Hakem, President of Egypt, a Mohammedan, would be called God;
and was so by a servant of his, Darareus, who told him, he had got 16000
Disciples; viz. who would call him God. Cuscans and Peruvians; Viracocha; i.e.
the Creator of Heaven and Earth; (Vaspu) i. e. Wonderful; and the Sun and
Stars, and Author of Rain and Thunder; and Pachacuma and Macamoca; i.e. the
Earth and Sea, and Rainbow, high Trees, etc. Dragons, Bears, Tigers, etc.
Mexicani, -- Vitzliputzli, viz. Idolum quoddam. Muggletonians, decry all
outward Worship. Quietists, do the same, and call to that which is Inward and
spiritual. Clancularii, professed no Religion with their mouth, but kept it in
their heart. According to his Word and Will. Pettaloronchiae, put the Finger in
the Mouth, to appease God with silence. Tascodrongitae Spirituales, put the
Finger in the Nose, to show their Ardency in Prayer. Nudi-pedales, Went
barefoot. Collyridiani, Used to carry about Bread in Honor of the Blessed
Virgin. Papists, In Procession carry about the Sacrament on Horseback, the
Pope being carried on in a chair of Gold on the shoulders of 6 or 8 Noblemen.
By praying to him. Messaliani, Euchitae, Euphemite, Psalliani, Martyriani, were
constantly Devoted to Prayers, but idle. Agonyclitae, Would not Pray kneeling,
nor prostrate, but only standing. Beghardinae, Beghinae, No need of Prayers and
Fasting. Prodiciani, Brownists, Reject the Lord's Prayer, and all set Forms.
And praising him. Arnheim Church, sing the Prophets and their own Hymns. And
fasting and abstinence. Cerdon, Marcion, Saturninus, Carpocrates, From flesh
and marriage. Tatianus, From Flesh, Wine and Women. Manichees (the Priests did
so, yet in Fasts had plenty and variety of Fruits, spices, Liquors, etc.
Severus, From Wine, Women and Marriage. Gnostics, Aerians, Priscillianists,
Apostolicks, Hierarchites, Valentinians, Marriage is not Lawful (or meet)
whoredom is: so say the Armenians; Apostolici and Encratitae from Marriage and
Riches. Turks, Jews, Polygamy is Lawful: so likewise say the Hermogenians, and
Ochinites. Valesii, Castrated themselves. Nicolaitans, Sim. Magus, Woredom is
Lawful. Papists, They which are of spiritual Kindred, may not marry. Papists,
admit none into the Clergy that are married, unless they will be first
unmarried. Vigilantian admit none into the Clergy that are married, unless they
will be first unmarried. Bishops, admit none into the Clergy that are married,
unless they will be first unmarried. Origin, Tertullian, Catharans, Henricians,
none should marry twice. And Montanists, of whom Tertullian was one: so
Athenagoras Hierome, Nazianzen, Origin. Ossens, compel People to marry.
Manichees, Forbid marriage to the Electi (Priests.) As God has revealed his
Will in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. Circumcellians Burnt
the Holy Scriptures. Archontici, rejected most of the Old Testament, and
substituted the Apocrypha in its room. Basilides, Carpocrates, Valentinians,
Manichees, Severians, Catabaptists, Marcionites, Apelles, rejected the Old
Testament (for the most part:) so the Socinians. Ebion, allowed only S.
Matthew's Gospel, called Paul an Apostate. -- Sadduces, only the Pentateuch.
Muscovites rejected the 4 last Books of Moses. Samarites, all but the Law and
Prophets. Nicolaitans. Anabapt. Psalms. Some Rabbis, Anabapt. Job. Porphyry
rejected Daniel. Sebastian Castellio, Canticles. Manichees, Severites, Acts.
Marcion, all the Epistles, except to Tim. and Titus. Althemerus, Epistles of
James and John. Wigandus, John's first and second Epistles, and Jude. Card.
Cajetan, Epistles of James, and to the Hebrews; Two last of John and Jude.
Heshusius, and Luther (at first), Revelations. Valentinians allowed only John.
Marcion, only Luke. Tatians, only the Acts. Jews, Mat. Hamant, Reject all the
New Testament. Pope Leo, called the Gospel a Fable. Anabapt. Familists,
Quakers, Deny the Scripture to be the word of God. Hobbes, The books of the Old
and New Testament, are not canon, unless made so by the civil power. Jacobus
H^estratus, He is an Heretic that cleaves to the Scriptures. Sadduces,
Familists, The Fathers, under the Law, understood nothing but a Temporal
Happiness. The only sure Rule of Faith and Manners. Jews Assert Their Cabala.
Turks Assert The Alcoran. Manichees Assert Their Mysteries. Archonticks Assert
Their Symbonia. Scythians Assert -- Jobelea. Papists Assert -- Decret. and
Tradit. Enthusiasts, Familists, etc. Assert -- Fancies and Pretended Revelat.
Hobbes Assert -- Law of the Land Quakers Assert -- Dict. of the Spirit To be
interpreted according to the Analogy of Faith. Pharisees, Papists, Severians,
The Scripture may be Expounded, how ye list: Are a Ship-mans Hose, etc. a
Leaden Rule. Servetus, S^enkfeldians, Valdesius, Familists, Moranus,
Libertines, Quakers, Anabaptists, Reject written Commentaries on Scripture, and
Interpret according to their own Light of Reason. Origenists, Libertines,
Familists, Interpret according to the Allegorical sense, for the most part.
Thomists and Monks, On every Scripture will have an Analogical, Allegorical,
Historical and Moral Exposition. Brocardus, Morelius, Will have a mystical and
Prophetical Exposition. Cardinal Crusanus, As the Church alters, so does the
Interpretation of Scripture. Joh. de Wassalia, The Scriptures are too hard for
any mortal man to Interpret. Jews, Interpret according to the Expositions of
their Rabbis. Papists, According to the Expositions of the Church: i. e.
Traditions, Fathers Popes, Councils. But the Ceremonial Law being Abolished.
Jews, Ebion, Cerinthus, Armenians, Familists, etc. The ceremonial Law is not
Abolished. So said also Blastus and Florinus. So also the False App. and
Serdonites, and Nazarites. Sabbatarians, Traskites, The 7th day Sabbath is
still to continue, being Natural, Moral, etc. And Judicial Laws. Brownists. We
are tied to all the Judicial Laws of Moses. Ph. Stubbs, To some, if not to all.
The Moral Law obliges all Manichees, The Old Law came from the Prince of
Darkness. Isleb. Agricola, Antinomians, The Law is not to be preached, nor the
conscience of sinners to be terrified. Banister, It is utterly unlawful for the
Elect, to think, speak, or hear of the ^ear of God, which the Law preaches.
Glover, a Brownist, Love is come in place of the 10 Commandments. Almaricus,
Moses's Law continued till Christ; of Christ, till Almaricus; of the Holy
Ghost, till the End of the World. Which yet no mere man can keep Perfectly in
this Life, but are all guilty. Manichees, Catharists, Novatians, could not sin,
so much as in Thought. So the Jovinians also. Donatists, were so perfect, they
could justify other men. Pelagians, need not say, Forgive us our Trespasses.
Marcionites, were as pure as Paul and Peter. Tatianus and Spirituales, boasted
the Gifts of the spirit, and condemned others. Beghardi-ine, hold Perfection
here, no increasing in grace. Anabapt. Familists, Quakers, men may perfectly
keep the Law of God. So says Socinus also. Papists, Pharisees, men may do more
good works than God commands, viz. of Supererogation. Some more, some less.
Stoics, Pelagians, Jovinianus, all sins are equal. But are Justified by Faith
in Christ Phariseess, We are Justified by external Righteousness. Sim. Magus,
-- His fair Helena. Turks, -- Pilgrimage to Meccha, or Kissing Mahomet's
Sepulcher. Valentinians. -- Labor of their Hands and good Works. See
afterward. Turks, Erasmus, Galeatus Martius, -- Living according to Nature. So
said Lampatius. Anabapt. Turks, false App. in Asia, -- Works without Faith.
False App. at Jerusal. Ebion. Russians. Papists, -- by Faith and Works. Mat.
Hamant, -- God's mere mercy, not Christ's merits. Osiandrists, We are Justified
by the Essential Righteousness of Christ dwelling in us. Attended with good
works. Atheists, Aetians, Basilidians, Circumcellians, Machiavillians cast off
all Virtue, Grace, Godliness. Simonians, To practice good Works, is a yoke too
Heavy. Libertines, When Justified, a man may live as he list. Carpocratians, A
Vicious Life will appease the Evil Angels. See before. Valentinians, Archontici
( Gnostics) Spiritual Men (as themselves) please God by their knowledge.
Natural men by their Bodily Labor. Material men are incapable of Salvation. To
help us herein God has appointed in Church Catholic, Jews, Donatists,
Papists, Graecians with the Russians, Anabaptists, etc. Brownists, Confined the
Church to themselves, the Donatists to Africa. Invisibles, The Church of Christ
is Invisible. The word to be preached. Phrygians, Montanists; Messalians,
Enthusiasts; Anabapt; Familists, Swenkfeldians, Brownists, Barrowists,
Muggletonians, Condemn the outward ministry, and depend on Revelations.
Libertines, Preaching is no ordinary means leading to the Knowledge of the
Truth. By Ministers lawfully authorized and qualified, Anabaptists, Familists,
etc. Due Election is not necessary. Familists, None but Elders in the Family
may be Ministers. Russians, None twice married. Papists, None married.
Acephalians, Quakers, Pepuzians, Women may be Deacons, Ministers and Preachers,
Bishops. And maintained by their callings. Anabaptists, Quakers, Brownists,
Freemen, Reject Tithes. And Two Sacraments only to be adminstred by them.
Papists, Seven Sacraments are appointed, whereof Baptism may be administered by
women, as well as men, in necessary cases. Marcionites, Pepuzlans, Private
persons may baptize. Geneva Presbyt. A Lay-Elder may give the Cup in the
Sacrament. Puritans, Doctors may not administer the Sacraments, but only teach.
Eutychites, Quakers, Swenkfeldians, Ascodryptae, Reject all Sacraments. Baptism
a sign of our Profe^sion. Nazarens, were circumcised as Jews, baptized as
Christians. Jacobites, Are crossed upon their Arms, foreheads, etc. instead of
it. Manichees, baptize none. Anabaptists, None till of grown Age. As also
Pelagians, Henricians, Heracleans, None till adult. Sweemerian Anabap.
Servetians, Familists, None till 30 years of Age. Barrowists, Brownists, None
who are the children of profane Parents. Marcionites, None that are married;
only single persons, Widows, etc. Cataphrygians, baptized dead bodies.
Marcionites, baptized the living for the dead; i. e. for the behalf of the
dead. Chrysostom. Papists, baptize Bells, etc. Novatians, Papists, Re-baptize
those which are baptized by Heretics. See after. Flagelliferans, Baptism by
Water is ceased, baptism of voluntary blood, by whipping, is come in its place.
Origenists, Baptism by fire is the true baptism. Effrontes, shaved their
foreheads, till they bled, and then anointed them with Oil. A Seal of our
Regeneration. Montanists, Novatians, Russians, All that die before baptism are
undoubtedly damned. Messalians, sins past only are put away by Baptism.
Pelagians, Jovinians, all sins are put away by Baptism. Papists (Thomists)
Orig. only are put away by Baptism. Banisterians, Baptism is no more than
common Washings. Hierachites, Children belong not to Heaven, because they have
no merits by spiritual Warfare. 2. The Lord's Supper, whose outward Signs are
Bread and Wine. Eucretites, Tatians, Severians, used no Wine. Aquarii,
Hydroparastites, used water. Montanists, Cataphrygians, used bread and blood
(some say man's seed.) Artotyrites, bread and Cheese. Manichees, bread and
man's seed administered in one kind. Muscovites, Donatists, Albanenses, bread
and wine, and warm-water. Gnostics, An Infant, begot in their promiscuous
Embraces, beat in a mortar, seasoned with Honey and Pepper, etc. and then
devour it, calling it their Passover. Epiph. The things signified, are the
Body and Blood of Christ, taken by the godly Receiver. Messalians, Familists,
The Sacraments are but ceremonial bodies, which may be used in obedience to
Magistrates. Mat. Hamant, They are not necessary in the Church of God. Papists,
They confer Grace ex Opere Operato, and are absolutely necessary to salvation.
The Priest may receive for the Absent and Dead. Banisterians, There will be a
time, when we shall need no Sacraments. Russians, Gave the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper to babes and infants, and dead bodies. Lutherans, Synusiasts,
Vbiquitarii, Christ's body is corporally taken by every Communicant, the Bread
and Wine being consubstantiated. Symbolists, Figurists, Signisicatists, The
Faithful at the Lord's Supper receive nothing, but bare signs. Marcus, The Wine
is converted into Blood. The efficacy of which depends not on the Worthiness of
the Ministers. Donatists, Novatians, Agrippiani, Origin, Petilians, Cyprian,
Apostolicks, Henricians, Rebaptizantes, All denied wicked men to be Lawful
Ministers, and most of them Rebaptiz'd, such as were before Baptized by
Heretics. Anabapt. Familists, Independents, Wicked Ministers cannot Preach
truly and duly, as they ought. Disciplinarian ( Puritans) condemn all Ministers
that Preach not. Sabbatarians, condemn all that hear not Preaching Ministers
every Sabbath. Brownists -- all that Communicate with a blind or dumb Ministry.
Rhemists, -- That hear Heretics Sermons, tho True. Albanenses, The sacraments
lose their Efficacy, if given by wicked Priests. For the Church may Err.
Papists, It cannot, for its Head (the Pope) is Infallible. Donatists,
Familists, It is pure. And general Councils to be gathered by Princes may Err.
Papists, Emperors and Kings are but the Pope's summoners. Beza, etc. Private
persons may call Assemblies. Muscovites, since the 7th General Council, neither
Prince nor Pope may call a General Council. Papists, They cannot Err, the Holy
Ghost is directer to them. But the due Administrat. of the Word and Sacraments,
are sufficient marks of the visible Church. Papists, Unity, Universality,
Antiquity, and Succession, etc. are the signs. Brownists, Administration of the
Word Sacraments and Discipline, are. If performed in a known Tongue. Ossens,
Prayed in a strange Language, which they Learned of Alexus their Founder.
Marcosians, At the ministration of Baptism, used certain Hebrew words, etc.
Turks, Perform all their superstitions in the Arabian Tongue. Jacobites, Use a
Tongue unknown to the Vulgar. Russians, Use a mixture of the Greek and
Sclavonian in their Liturgy. Papists, Have divine service, prayers, sacraments
in Latin. To preserve them from contempt, God has appointed Bishops and
Pastors. Anabaptists, Contobabdites, Apostolicks, condemn all Bishops and
superiority amongst Men. Acephalians, Would submit to no Bishops. Aerians, make
Bishops and Priests all one (equal.) Jesuits, made a Law for the Abrogation of
Episcopal Jurisdictions. Disciplinarian ( Puritans) Are against Archbishops and
Bishops, etc. of large Jurisdiction. To Excommunicate obstinate Offenders.
Paulicians, Condemned all censures Ecclesiastical. Pelagians, Heretics (too
otherwise sound) may be Ecommunicated for private Errors. Papists,
Excommunicated Kings, Dead men, etc. whole Kingdoms. S. Bernard, Flies.
Apostlicks, All that were married. Brownists, Whole Cities and Churches.
Barrowists, Kings. Erastus, denied Excommunication as inherent in the Church's
power. And Absolve them being Penitent. Montanists, Novatians, Meletius,
Anabapt. Germ. Barrowists, Melchior, Heffman, All that sin after Baptism, are
Reprobate. Who also may appoint ceremonies in the Church not Repugnant to God's
word. Papists, The Pope may alter the Sacraments, etc. Familists, Brownists,
Disciplinarians, The Worship of God should be simple; Christians are free, etc.
Melancthon and the Adiaphorists, Held the Customs and Constitutions of the
Church of Rome to be indifferent things. God has appointed the Civil
Magistrate Albanenses, Manichees, Fratricellians, Flagelliferies, Anabaptists,
Familists, Condemn Magistracy; or assert, That it is founded on Grace. Yet the
Familists profess Love and Obedience to all kind of Magistrates. Freemen,
Asserted that they were freed from Obedience to Magistrates, Taxes, Tithes,
etc. And the King as supreme; Papists, The King's Supremacy extends not to
Popes, Priests or the Church. Disciplinarians of Scotland, Princes must be
subject to the Church. Who by administration of an Oath. Esseis, Albanenses,
Anabaptists, Quakers, Swearing before Magistrates is unlawful. Which ought to
be unviolate and sacred, without dissimulation of the Truth. Basilidians,
Priscillianists, Helchisaites, Familists, Henricians, To avoid Persecution,
will swear and forswear. Jesuits, etc. Sciti and Cagi, (Turkish Priests) To
promote the interest of their own Church and damnify the adversary, will
equivocate and forswear. Familists, Hobbists, Libertines, men may outwardly
profess what they will, if their Hearts be sound. And inflicting corporal
Punishments on Offenders. Manichees, Donatists, Anabaptists, None for any
Offense is to be put to Death. Familists, For Sins of the second Table men may
be put to Death, not for Errors in Religion. And the exercise of the Sword,
which he bears not in vain, Manichees, Lactantius, Lud. Vives, etc. Anabapt.
Familists, Erasmus, doubted, or denied War to be Lawful. Muggletonians,
Christians using the steel, are ignorant of Christ, and enemies of his Gospel.
May maintain each one's properties. Manichees, Esseis, Pelagians, Apostolicks,
Fratricellians, Anabaptists, Familists, Nudipedales, would have Christians
Goods common. They who are predestined to Life. Pelagians, Predestinates,
Familists, etc. The Doctrine of Predestination, is a licentious and dangerous
Doctrine. Armenians, God predestinates on foresight of our Faith and Obedience.
After Death immediately, (a debt due to sin) the Soul is made happy in the
enjoyment of God. Pelagius, Socinus, If Adam had not sinned, yet he had died.
Berylliani, Soul and Body both dye, till the Resurrection. So the Arabici,
(...). Psucho-pannuchites, Held that the Soul sleeps in the Grave with the body,
till the Resurrection. Manichees, Corpocrates, Held a Transmigration of Souls,
etc. viz. That they might sin in other bodies. Tertullii, wicked men's souls are
turned into beasts or Devils. a Tertulliano. Mahometans, salvation consists in
carnal pleasures. Muggletonians, The soul of man is mortal, as well as the
body. Armenians, Regenerate men may, and do fall Finally, and may sin against
the Holy Ghost; no assurance being possible in this Life, without special
Revelation. And at the Resurrection shall be United to the body, and both
eternally blessed. False Apostles, Basilides, Carpocrares, Valentinus, Cerdon,
Manes, Familists, Hieracites, Salvation belongs only to the soul, there being
no Resurrection. Muggletonians, Holy men, when glorified, shall have new bodies
and souls given them, of the very same Nature with God. The Wicked shall be
turned into Hell for ever and ever. Atheists, There is No Hell. Familists, --
but in the consciences of men in this Life. Origenists, Cacabapt. etc. All the
most wicked, yea, Devils, after some time, shall be saved. Papists, believe a
Purgatory; viz. a temporary punishment. Socinus, Death Eternal is only a
perpetual continuance in Death, or Annihilation. Muggletonians, No Devil but
the spirit of man's unclean Reason, and cursed Imagination. False Prophets
Samsei, Prognostici, Foretold things co come, etc. Barcocab, A Jewish Prophet,
who pretended to be the Star that was to arise out of Jacob. Theaurau John,
Another False Jewish Prophet, who called himself Priest of the Jews. Mahomet,
The False Prophet of the Mahometans. John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton,
pretended to be the Two Last Witnesses, and Prophets of Christ, sent to seal
the Elect and Reprobate. Apostates, etc. Aquila Ponticus, first a Christian,
next a Gentile, last a Jew. Lucian, Julian, Francis Spira. Gross Heretics.
^hetorius, Lampetius, Allowed all Heresies, thought none out of the Truth.
Veritas Simplex. Error Multiplex.

Synonyma Hereticorum, etc. Historia.

VAlentiniani, Gnostici, a Valente quem Epiphanius (...) appellat, qui Vixit
sub Antonino Pio, at Philosophiae Operam dedit Platonicae, Pythagoricae, and
Aristotel. Christianus vero factus fastidivit simplicilatem Doctrinae de Deo,
Trinitate, etc. Episcopatum igitur sperans, cum repulsam tulisser, portentosae
illius haeresis author excitit. Hotting, vid. Dan. p. 34. Tertul.

Marcionitae, quorum author fuit Marcion Ponticus, cognomento Nauclerus, qui
Cerdonis fuit Discipulus, and Stoicae Philosophlae addictus. Idem.

Menandriani, a Menandro Samaritano, Simonis Magi Discipulo, quorum communia
habuit dogmata. Imo (ut Epiphan.) (...). Idem.

Cerinthiani, Merinthiani, Pseudapostoli; fuit enim Cerinthus Pseudapostolor.
Princeps, qui primus Justiciariam controversiam movit, ipsique Petro Joppae
restitit.

Helcesaitae, Hierachitae, ab Hieracha, Aegyptio, Patria Leontopolite,
nuncupati.

Samosateniani, Pauliani, Paulistae, a Paulo Samosat. Episc. Antioch.

Manichaei a Mane ((...), August.) qu. manni (...), fundens, ut Discipuli came
nuncuparunt, in tres sectas divisi,

1. Catharistas, mundatores. 2. Macarios. 3. Manichaeos speciarim.
Novatiani, Cathari, a Novato, Afro. Exteri Scriptores, Gazaros perperam
appellant.

Chiliastae, Millenarii, a Cerintho Judaizante, qui opiniones suas ex
Talmudistorum de Regno Messiae disputationib. petijt.

Note, 1. Cerinthians meant an Earthly, Sensual Kingdom, the Restoration of
Jerusalem and the Temple.

2. The FF. etc. meant a Sabbath of 1000 Years in honest pleasures and peace,
after 6000 of labor; the Author whereof, says Eusebius, was Papias, a weak
man.

Ariani, ab Ario, Natione Lybe, Presbytero in Be^calo Ecclesia in Alexandria,
sententia ejus fuit, Christum neque suisse Deum, neque aeternum, sed Creaturam,
excellentem quidem, and caeteris dignitate praestantiorem, ab eo variae sectae
ortae sunt: sed praevaluerunt

Semi-ariani, (sive Acatiani ab Acatio Caesareae Palestinae Episcopo) dicentes,
Christum Patri non esse (...), consubstantialem; sed (...), similem Essentis.

Photiniani, a Photino Sirmii Episcopo, Idem docuerunt cum Samosatenianis.
Marcelliani a Marcello, Idem docuerunt cum Samosatenianis. Luciani a Lucio
Episcopo, Idem docuerunt cum Samosatenianis. Donatistae a Donato, Docuerunt, 1.
Se nulla Magistratus Authoritate reprimandos. 2. A Catholicis baptizatos ipsi
rebaptizabant. 3. In homines a sua secta alienos vi and armis saevierunt.
Montenses Romae dicti, Docuerunt, 1. Se nulla Magistratus Authoritate
reprimandos. 2. A Catholicis baptizatos ipsi rebaptizabant. 3. In homines a sua
secta alienos vi and armis saevierunt. Circumcelliones per varios mortes
seipfos necantes, Docuerunt, 1. Se nulla Magistratus Authoritate reprimandos.
2. A Catholicis baptizatos ipsi rebaptizabant. 3. In homines a sua secta
alienos vi and armis saevierunt.
Macedoniani, (...), a Macedonio, C.P. Episc.

Priscillianistae, a Priscilliano Hispan. quorum dogmata permixta sunt cum
Gnosticorum and Manichaeorum.

Nestorius fuit Episc. Constantinop. homo superbus, in exilium ejectus,
putredine tandem consumptus est and lingu^ vermibus exesa. Theodosius voluit
Nestorianos appellar^ Simoniacos.

Eutyches fuit Archi-mandrita C.P. sive Abbas; superblae and superstitionis
Monasticae plenus, homo arrogans, ab eo Acephali, Agnoeiae, Jacobitae, Armenii,
Monothelitae, etc. Severitae, Julianistae; and a loco Contobabditae, and
Angelistae.

Huc usque in 6 primis Centuriis.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewenstreet.
THE First and Second Volume of the French book of Martyrs, published in
English with her Majesty's Royal Privilege. Price 20 s.

The Tigurine Liturgy, published with the approbation of Six Reverend Bishops.

Dr. Burthogg's Essay upon Reason, and the Nature of spirits, dedicated to Mr.
Lock. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Works of the Right Honorable Henry late Lord Delamer, and Earl of
Warrington, containing his Lordship's Advice to his Children, with about 32
Original Manuscripts, written with his Lordship's own hand. Price bound 5 s.

Malbranch's Search after Truth, complete, in Two Volumes, in Octavo. To which
is added the Author's Defense against the Accusations of Monsieur de la Ville;
also the Life of Father Malbranch, of the Oratory at Paris; with an Account of
his Works, and several particulars of his controversy with Monsieur Arnaud,
Dr. of Sorbon, and Monsieur Regis, Professor in Philosophy at Paris. Written by
Monsieur Le Vassor, lately come over from Paris: both Volumes done out of
French from the last Editition, by Mr. Sault, Author of the New Treatise of
Algebra: both Volumes 10 s.

Bishop Barlow's Genuine Remains, containing near an hundred distinct subjects,
Theological, Philosophical, Historical, etc. Published from his Lordsship's
Original Papers, by Sir Peter Pett, Knight. Advocate General for the Kingdom of
Ireland. Price bound 6 s.

A Detection of the Court and State of England, during the 4 last Reigns, and
the Interregnum; consisting of secret Memoirs, etc. with Observations and
Reflections; Also an Appendix, discovering the present state of the Nation; in
two Volumes; by Roger Coke, Esquire;. Price bound 8 s.

Casuistical Morning Exercises, the 4th Volume; by several Reverend Divines in
and about London. Price bound 6 s.

The History of all Religions in the World, from the Creation, down to this
present Time, in Two parts; the first containing their Theory, and the other
relating their Practices. By W. Turner, M. A. and Vicar of Walbe^ton in Sussex.
Price 6 s. bound.

The Tragedies of sin contemplated in the Fall of man, the Ruin of the Angels,
the destruction of the Old World, the confusion of Babel, and conflagration of
Sodom; by Stephen Jay, Rector of Chinner in Oxfordshire. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Heads of Agreement assented to by the United Ministers, price 4d.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Brand, written by Dr. Annesley, price 1 s.

A Treatise of Fornication, by W. Barlow, Rector of Chalgrave.

The Divine Captain Charateriz'd, in a sermon Preached by Edmund Hickeringal,
Rector of All Saints in Colchester.

Practical Discourses on sickness and recovery, in severral sermons as they
were lately Preached in a Congregation in London, by T. Rogers, M. A. after his
recovery from a sickness of near two years continuance.

Early Regligion, or a Discourse of the Duty and Interest of youth. The second
Edition. Price 1 s.

Fall not out by the way, or a persuasion to a friendly Correspondence between
the Conformists and Nonconformists, in a Funeral Discourse on Genesis 45. 24.
occasioned by the desire of Mr. Anthony Dunwell, in his last Will. All 3
written by T. Rogers, M. A. Price 1 s.

The Mourners Companion, or Funeral Discourses on several Texts, by John
Shower, price 1 s. 6 d.

Mensalia Sacra, or meditations on the Lord's supper, by the Reverend Mr. F.
Crow, late Minister at Clare in Suffolk, price 1 s.

A Practical Discourse on the late Earthquakes, by a Reverend Divine, price 6 d.

Triunity, or the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity asserted in a Discourse on 2
Cor. 13.14. by Isaac Mauduit, Mininister of the Gospel, price 6d.

An earnest Call to Family Catechism and Reformation, by a Reverend Divine,
price 6d. or 50 for 20 s.

Comfort for Parents mourning over their Hopeful Children that dye young, by T.
Whitaker, Minister at Leeds in Yorkshire.

The 3d Edition of the Life and Death of the Reverend Mr. John Elliot, who was
the first Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians in America; with an Account of
the wonderful success which the Gospel has had amongst the Heathens in that
part of the World. Written by Cotton Mather, price 1 s.

A new book of Trade, entitled Panarithmilogia, by W. Leibourn, Author of the
Cursus Mathematicus, price 4s. 6d.

Gospel Truth stated and considered, by the Reverend Mr. D. Williams. The
second Edition, price 1 s.

The Trials of several Witches lately Executed in New England, published by the
special Command of his Excellency the Governor of New England. The third
Editition, price 1 s.

Advertisement.
About 26 years ago a Design for Recording the most Remarkable Providence and
events, etc. that have happened in this present Age, was under serious
consideration among some Reverend Divines in England and Ireland; which motion
was principally set on foot by the Learned Mr. Matthew Pool, Author of Synopsis
Criticorum; but before any thing was brought to Effect, the persons to have
been employed, had their Thoughts diverted another way. Nevertheless there was
a Manuscript then written, wherein the Subjects proper for this Record, and
some Rules for the better managing a Design of this Nature, are described. In
this Manuscript are many Remarkable Things related and asserted, which else
vhere are not to be found. The first Proposers of this Design having laid it
aside, a Reverend Divine of the Church of England was prevailed upon to begin
this difficult Work, which he has been perfecting many years: and for the more
effectual carrying of it on, has Received Materials and Informations from
several Eminent Persons. And that nothing may be wanting to render the Work
complete, (which it is supposed will consist of 300 sheets) Proposals and
Specimens, giving a full Account of this Undertaking, will speedily be published.


