A SERMON PREACHED at the First GENERAL MEETING OF THE GENTLEMEN, and others in
and near LONDON, Who were Born within the COUNTY of YORK.

In the Church of S. Mary-le-Bow, December. 3. 1678.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill: And William Rogers, at the Maidenhead over against
S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1679.

Imprimatur, Guil. Jane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domest.

Feb. 25. 1678/9.
To my Honored FRIENDS and COUNTRYMEN, Mr. Hugh Frankland, Mr. Leonard
Robinson, Mr. Abraham Fothergill, Mr. William Fairfax, Mr. Thomas Johnson, Mr.
John Hardesty, Mr. Gervas Wilcockes, Mr. George Pickering, Mr. Edward Duffeild,
Mr. John Topham, Mr. Jam. Longbotham, Mr. Nathan Holroyd,
Stewards of the Yorkshire Feast.
GENTLEMEN,
THIS Sermon, which was first Preached, and is now published at your desires, I
dedicate to your Names, to whose prudence and care the direction and management
of this First general Meeting of our Countrymen was committed: Heartily
wishing that it may be some way serviceable to the healing of our unhappy
Differences, and the restoring of Unity and Charity among Christians,
especially those of the Protestant Reformed Religion.

Gentlemen, I am Your affectionate Countryman and humble Servant, Jo.
Tillotson.

A SERMON PREACHED At the first general Meeting of the Gentlemen, and others,
in and near London, who were born within the County of York.
JOHN 13. 34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another;
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: By this shall all men know
that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
AS the Christian Religion in general, is the best Philosophy and most perfect
Institution of Life; containing in it the most entire and complete System of
moral Rules and Precepts that was ever yet extant in the World: so it
peculiarly excells in the Doctrine of Love and Charity; earnestly recommending,
strictly enjoining, and vehemently and almost perpetually pressing and
inculcating the excellency and necessity of this best of Graces and Virtues;
and propounding to us for our imitation and encouragement the most lively and
heroical Example of kindness and charity that ever was, in the Life and Death
of the great Founder of our Religion, the author and finisher of our Faith,
Jesus the Son of God.

So that the Gospel, as it has in all other parts of our Duty, cleared the
dimness and obscurity of natural light, and supplied the imperfections of
former Revelations; so does it most eminently reign and triumph in this great
and blessed virtue of Charity; in which all the Philosophy and Religions that
had been before in the World, whether Jewish or Pagan, were so remarkably
defective.

With great reason then does our blessed Savior call this a new Commandment,
and assert it to himself as a thing peculiar to his Doctrine and Religion;
considering how imperfectly it had been taught, and how little it had been
practiced in the World before: A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love
one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: By this shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

I shall reduce my Discourse upon these Words under these six Heads.

First, To enquire in what sense our Savior calls this Commandment of loving
one another a new Commandment. Secondly, To declare to you the Nature of this
Commandment, by instancing in the chief Acts and Properties of Love. Thirdly,
To consider the degrees and measures of our Charity with regard to the several
Objects about which it is exercised. Fourthly, Our Obligation to this Duty not
only from our Savior's Authority, but likewise from our own Nature, and from
the Reasonableness and Excellency of the thing commanded. Fifthly, The great
Example which is here propounded to our imitation; as I have loved you, that ye
also love one another. Sixthly and Lastly, The Place and Rank which this
Precept holds in the Christian Religion. Our Savior makes it the proper badge
of a Disciple, the distinctive mark and character of our Profession; By this
shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
I. In what sense our Savior calls this Commandment I.
of loving one another a new Commandment? Not that it is absolutely and
altogether New, but upon some special accounts. For it is a branch of the
ancient and primitive Law of Nature. Aristotle truly observes that upon grounds
of natural kindred and likeness, all men are friends, and kindly disposed
toward one another. And it is a known Precept of the Jewish Religion, to love
our Neighbor as our selves.

In some sense then, it is no new Commandment; and so St. John, who was most
likely to understand our Savior's meaning in this particular, (all his
preaching and writing being almost nothing else but an inculcating of this one
Precept) explains this matter, telling us that in several respects it was, and
it was not, a new Commandment, 1 John 2. 7, 8. Brethren, I write no new
Commandment unto you, but that which ye had from the beginning, that is, from
ancient Times: But then he corrects himself; Again, (...), but yet, a new
Commandment I write unto you. So that though it was not absolutely new, yet
upon diverse considerable accounts it was so, and in a peculiar manner proper to
the Evangelical Institution; and is in so express and particular a manner
ascribed to the teaching of the Holy Ghost, which was conferred upon Christians
by the Faith of the Gospel, as if there hardly needed any outward instruction
and exhortation to that purpose, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. But as touching brotherly love*
ye need not that I write unto you, for ye your selves are (...), divinely
taught and inspired to love one another.

This Commandment then of loving one another is by our Lord and Savior so much
enlarged, as to the Object of it, beyond what either the Jews or Heathens did
understand it to be, extending to all mankind, and even to our greatest
enemies; so greatly advanced and heightened, as to the Degree of it, even to the
laying down of our lives for one another; so effectually taught, so mightily
encouraged, so very much urged and insisted upon, that it may very well be
called a new Commandment: for though it was not altogether unknown to mankind
before, yet it was never so taught, so encouraged; never was such an
illustrious Example given of it, never so much weight and stress laid upon it,
by any Philosophy or Religion that was before in the world.

II. I shall endeavor to declare to you the II.
Nature of this Commandment, or the Duty required by it. And that will best be
done, by instancing in the chief Acts and Properties of Love and Charity. As,
humanity and kindness in all our carriage and behavior toward one another;
for Love smooths the dispositions of men, so that they are not apt to grate
upon one another: Next, to rejoice in the good and happiness of one another,
and to grieve at their evils and sufferings; for Love unites the in erests of
men, so as to make them affected with what happens to another, as if it were in
some sort their own case: Then to contribute as much as in us lies to the
happiness of one another, by relieving one another wants, and redressing their
misfortunes: Again, tenderness of their good name and reputation; a proneness
to interpret all the words and actions of men to the best sense; patience and
forbearance toward one another; and when differences happen, to manage them
with all possible calmness and kindness, and to be ready to forgive, and to be
reconciled to one another; to pray one for another; and if occasion be, at
least if the public good of Christianity require it, to be ready to lay down
our lives for our brethren, and to sacrifice our selves for the furtherance of
their Salvation.

III. We will consider the Degrees and measures III.
of our Charity, with regard to the various Objects, about which it is
exercised.

And as to the negative part of this Duty, it is to be extended equally toward
all. We are not to hate or bear ill will to any man, or to do him any harm or
mischief; Love works no evil to his neighbor. This much Charity we are to
exercise toward all, without any exception, without any difference.

And as to the positive part of this Duty, we should bear an universal
good will to all men, wishing every man's happiness, and praying for it as
heartily as for our own: And if we be sincere herein, we shall be ready upon
all occasions to procure and promote the welfare of all men. But the outward
acts and testimonies of our Charity neither can be actually extended to all,
nor ought to be to all alike. We do not know the wants of all, and therefore
our knowledge of persons, and of their conditions, does necessarily limit the
effects of our Charity within a certain compass; and of those we do know, we
can but relieve a small part for want of ability. Whence it becomes necessary,
that we set some rules to our selves for the more discreet ordering of our
Charity; such as these: Cases of extremity ought to take place of all other.
Obligations of Nature, and nearness of Relation, seem to challenge the next
place. Obligations of kindness, and upon the account of benefits received, may
well lay the next claim. And then the Household of Faith is to be peculiarly
considered. And after these, the merit of the persons, and all circumstances
belonging to them, are to be weighed and valued: Those who labor in an honest
calling, but are oppressed with their charge; those who are fallen from a
plentiful condition, especially by misfortune, and the providence of God,
without their own fault; those who have relieved others, and have been
eminently charitable and beneficial to mankind; and lastly, those whose visible
necessities and infirmities of body or mind, whether by age or by accident, do
plead for them: All these do challenge our more especial regard and
consideration.

IV. We will consider our Obligations to this IV.
Duty, not only from our Savior's Authority, but likewise from our own Nature,
and from the Reasonableness and Excellency of the thing commanded. This is the
Commandment of the Son of God, who came down from Heaven with full Authority to
declare the Will of God to us. And this is peculiarly His Commandment, which he
urges upon his Disciples so earnestly, and so as if he almost required nothing
else in comparison of this. Joh. 15. 12. This is my Commandment, that ye love
one another: And verse. 17. These things I command you, that ye love one
another. As if this were the end of all his Precepts, and of his whole
Doctrine, to bring us to the practice of this Duty. And so St. John, the loving
and beloved Disciple, speaks of it, as the great Message, which the Son of God
was to deliver to mankind, 1 John 3. 11. This is the Message which ye have
heard from the beginning, that ye should love one another. And ver. 23. This is
his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ,
and love one another, as He gave us Commandment. And chap. 4. v. 21. This
Commandment have we from Him, that he who loves God, love his Brother also.

But besides the Authority of our Savior, we have a precedent obligation to it
from our own Nature, and from the Reasonableness and Excellency of the thing it
self. The frame of our Nature disposes us to it, and our inclination to
Society, in which there can be no pleasure, no advantage, without mutual love
and kindness. And Equity also calls for it, for that we our selves wish and
expect kindness from others, is conviction enough to us that we owe it to
others. The fulfilling of this Law is the great perfection of our Natures, the
advancement and enlargement of our Souls, the chief ornament and beauty of a
great mind. It makes us like to God, the best, and most perfect, and happiest
Being, in that which is the prime excellency, and happiness, and glory of the
Divine Nature.

And the advantages of this temper are unspeakable and innumerable. It freeth
our souls from those unruly, and troublesome, and disquieting Passions, which
are the great torment of our Spirits; from Anger and Envy, from Malice and
Revenge, from Jealousy and Discontent. It makes our minds calm and cheerful,
and puts our souls into an easy posture, and into good h^mor, and maintains us
in the possession and enjoiment of our selves: It preserves men from many
mischiefs and inconveniences, to which enmity and ill will do perpetually
expose them: It is apt to make Friends, and to gain Enemies, and to render
every condition either pleasant, or easy, or tolerable to us. So that to love
others, is the truest love to our selves, and does redound to our own
unspeakable benefit and advantage in all respects.

It is a very considerable part of our Duty, and almost equaled by our Savior
with the first and great Commandment of the Law. It is highly acceptable to
God, most beneficial to others, and very comfortable to our selves. It is the
easiest of all Duties, and it makes all others easy; the pleasure of it makes
the pains to signify nothing, and the delightful reflection upon it afterward
is a most ample reward of it. It is a Duty in every man's power to perform, how
strait and indigent soever his fortune and condition be. The poorest man may be
as charitable as a Prince; he may have as much kindness in his heart, tho his
hand cannot be so bountiful and munificent. Our Savior instanceth the giving
of a cup of cold water, as a Charity that will be highly accepted and rewarded
by God. And one of the most celebrated Charities that ever was; how small was
it for the matter of it, and yet how great in regard of the mind that gave it?
I mean the Widow's two mites, which she cast into the Treasury: One could
hardly give less, and yet none can give more, for she gave all that she had.
All these excellencies and advantages of Love and Charity, which I have briefly
recounted, are so many Arguments, so many obligations to the practice of this
Duty.

V. We will consider the great Instance and V.
Example which is here propounded to our imitation; As I have loved you, that
ye also love one another. The Son of God's becoming man, his whole Life, his
bitter Death and Passion, all that he did, and all that he suffered, was one
great and continued proof and evidence of his mighty love to mankind. The
greatest Instance of love among men; and that too but very rare, is for a Man
to lay down his life for another* for his Friend; but the Son of God died for
all mankind, and we were all his enemies. And should we not cheerfully imitate
the Example of that great Love and Charity, the effects whereof are so
comfortable, so beneficial, so happy to every one of us. Had he not loved us,
and died for us, we had certainly perished, we had been miserable and undone to
all eternity.

And to perpetuate this great Example of Charity, and that it might he always
fresh in our memories, the great Sacrament of our Religion was on purpose
instituted for the Commemoration of this great love of the Son of God, in
laying down his life, and shedding his precious blood for the wicked and
rebellious Race of mankind. But I have not time to enlarge upon this noble
Argument as it deserves.

VI. The last thing to be considered is the VI.
place and rank which this Precept and Duty holds in the Christian Religion.
Our blessed Savior here makes it the proper badge and cognizance of our
Profession; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one
another. The different Sects among the Jews had some peculiar Character to
distinguish them from one another: The Scholars of the several great Rabbis
among them had some peculiar Sayings and Opinions, some Customs and Traditions
whereby they were severally known: And so likewise the Disciples of John the
Baptist were particularly remarkable for their great Austerities. In allusion
to these distinctions of Sects and Schools among the Jews, our Savior fixes
upon this mark and character, whereby his Disciples should be known from the
Disciples of any other Institution, A mighty love and affection to one another.

Other Sects were distinguished by little Opinions, or by some external Rites
and Observances in Religion; but our Savior pitcheth upon that which is the
most real and substantial, the most large and extensive, the most useful and
beneficial, the most human and the most Divine quality of which we are capable.

This was his great Commandment to his Disciples, before he left the World:
This was the Legacy he left them and the effect of his last Prayers for them;
And for this end, among others, he instituted the Sacrament of his blessed Body
and Blood, to be a lively remembrance of his great Charity to mankind, and a
perpetual bond of Love and Union amongst his Followers.

And the Apostles of our Lord and Savior do upon all occasions recommend this
to us, as a principal Duty and Part of our Religion; telling us, That in Christ
Jesus, that is, in the Christian Religion, nothing will avail, no not Faith it
self, unless it be enlivened and inspired by Charity; That Love is the end of
the Commandment, (...), the end of the Evangelical declaration, the first Fruit
of the Spirit, the spring and root of all those Graces and Virtues which
concern our duty toward one another: That it is the sum and abridgment, the
accomplishment and fulfilling of the whole Law: That without this, whatever we
pretend to in Christianity, we are nothing, and our Religion is vain: That this
is the greatest of all Graces and Virtues, greater then Faith and Hope; and of
perpetual use and duration, Charity never fails.

And therefore they exhort us above all things to endeavor after it, as the
Crown of all other Virtues; Above all things have fervent Charity among your
selves, says St. Peter: And St. Paul, having enumerated most other Christian
Virtues, exhorts us above all to strive after this, And above all these things
put on Charity, which is the bond of perfection. This St. John makes one of the
most certain signs of our love to God, and the want of it an undeniable
argument of the contrary: If a man say I love God, and hates his brother, he
is a liar; for he who loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God whom he has not seen? This he declares to be one of the best evidences
that we are in a state of Grace and Salvation, Hereby we know that we are
passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren.

So that well might our blessed Savior choose this for the badge of his
Disciples, and make it the great Precept of the best and most perfect
Institution* Other things might have served better for pomp and ostentation,
and have more gratified the Curlosity, or Enthusiasm, or Superstition of
mankind* but there is no quality in the World which upon a sober and impartial
consideration is of a more solid and intrinsic value.

And in the first Ages of Christianity, the Christians were very eminent for
this Virtue, and particularly noted for it; Nobis notam inurit apud quosdam, it
is a mark and brand set upon us by some, says Tertullian; and he tells us that
it was proverbially said among the Heathen, Behold how these Christians love
one another. Lucian, that great scoffer at all Religion, acknowledges in
behalf of Christians, that this was the great Principle which their Master had
instilled into them* And Julian* the bitterest Enemy that Christianity ever
had* could not forbear to propound to the Heathen for an example the charity of
the Galileans, for so by way of reproach he calls the Christians, who (says he)
gave up themselves to humanity and kindness; which he acknowledges to have
been very much to the advantage and reputation of our Religion: And in the same
Letter to Arsacius, the Heathen* High Priest of Galatia* he gives this
memorable Testimony of the Christians* that their Charity was not limited and
confined only to themselves, but extended even to their Enemies; which could
not be said either of the Jews or Heathens: His words are these, It is a shame,
that when the Jews suffer none of theirs to beg, and the impious* Galileans
relieve not only their own, but those also of our Religion, that We only should
be defective in so necessary a Duty. By all which it is evident that Love and
Charity is not only the great Precept of our Savior, but was in those first
and best Times the general practice of his Disciples, and acknowledged by the
Heathens as a very peculiar and remarkable quality in them.

The Application I shall make of this Discourse shall be threefold.

1. With relation to the Church of Rome. 2. With regard to our selves who
profess the Protestant Reformed Religion. 3. With a more particular respect to
the occasion of this Meeting.
First, With relation to the Church of Rome: I.
Which we cannot choose but think of, whenever we speak of Charity and loving
one another; especially having had so late a Discovery of their affection to
us, and so considerable a testimony of the kindness and charity which they
designed toward us: such as may justly make the ears of all that hear it to
tingle, and render Popery execrable and infamous, a frightful and a hateful
thing to the end of the World.

It is now but too visible how grossly this great Commandment of our Savior is
contradicted, not only by the Practices of those in that Communion, from the
Pope down to the meanest Friar; but by the very Doctrines and Principles, by
the Genius and Spirit of that Religion, which is wholly calculated for cruelty
and persecution. Where now is that mark of a Disciple, so much insisted upon by
our Lord and Master, to be found in that Church? And yet what is the Christian
Church but the Society and Community of Christ's Disciples? Surely in all
reason, that which our Lord made the distinctive Mark and Character of his
Disciples, should be the principal mark of a true Church. Bellarmine reckons up
no less then fifteen marks of the true Church, all which the Church of Rome
arrogates to her self alone: But he wisely forgot that which is worth all the
rest, and which our Savior insists upon as the chief of all other, A sincere
Love and Charity to all Christians* This he knew would by no means agree to his
own Church.

But for all that, it is very reasonable that Churches as well as particular
Christians should be judged by their Charity. The Church of Rome would engross
all Faith to her self; Faith in its utmost perfection, to the degree and pitch
of Infallibility: And they allow no body in the world, besides themselves, no
though they believe all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, to have one grain
of true Faith; because they do not believe upon the Authority of their Church,
which they pretend to be the only foundation of true Faith. This is a most
arrogant and vain pretense; but admit it were true, yet in the judgment of St.
Paul, though they had all Faith, if they have not Charity, they are nothing.

The greatest wonder of all this is, that they who hate and persecute
Christians most, do all this while the most confidently of all others pretend
to be the Disciples of Christ, and will allow none to be so but themselves.
That Church which excommunicates all other Christian Churches in the world, and
if she could, would extirpate them out of the world, will yet needs assume to
her self to be the only Christian Church: As if our Savior had said, Hereby
shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye hate, and excommunicate, and
kill one another. What shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? thou empty
and impudent pretense of Christianity!

Secondly, With relation to our selves, who profess II.
the Protestant Reformed Religion. How is this great Precept of our Savior not
only shamefully neglected, but plainly violated by us? And that not only by
private hatred and illwills quarrels and contentions in our civil conversation
and intercourse with one anothe; but by most unchristian divisions and
animosities in that common relation wherein we stand to one another, as
Brethren, as Christians, as Protestants.

Have we not all one Father? has not one God created us? And are we not in a
more peculiar and eminent manner Brethren, being all the children of God by
faith in Jesus: Christ? Are we not all members of the same Body, and partakers
of the same Spirit, and Heirs of the same blessed Hopes of eternal life?

So that being Brethren upon so many accounts, and by so many bonds and
endearments all united to one another, and all traveling toward the same
heavenly Country, why do we fall out by the way, since we are Brethren? Why do
we not, as becomes Brethren, dwell together in unity? but are so apt to
quarrel, and break out into heats, to crumble into Sects and Parties, to divide
and separate from one another, upon every slight and trifling occasion.

Give me leave a little more fully to expostulate this matter, but very calmly
and in the spirit of weekness, and in the name of our dear Lord, who loved us
all at such a rate as to die for us, to recommend to you this new Commandment
of his, that ye love one another: Which is almost a new Commandment still, and
hardly the worse for wearing; so seldom is it put on, and so little has it
been practiced among Christians for several Ages.

Consider seriously with your selves, ought not the great matters wherein we
are agreed, our Union in the Doctrines of the Christian Religion, and in all
the necessary Articles of that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints; in
the same Sacraments, and in all the substantial parts of God's worship, and in
the great Duties and Virtues of the Christian life, to be of greater force to
unite us, than difference in doubtful Opinions, and in little Rites and
circumstances of Worship, to divide and break us?

Are not the things about which we differ, in their nature indifferent, that
is, things about which there ought to be no difference among wise men? Are they
not at a great distance from the life and essence of Religion, and rather good
or bad as they tend to the peace and Unity of the Church, or are made use of to
Schism and Faction, then either necessary or evil in themselves? And shall
little scruples weigh so far with us, as by breaking the Peace of the Church
about them to endanger our whole Religion? Shall we take one another by the
throat for an hundred pence, when our common Adversary stands ready to clap
upon us an Action of ten thousand talents? Can we in good earnest be contented
that rather than the Surplice should not be thrown out, Popery should come in?
and rather than receive the Sacrament in the humble but indifferent posture of
kneeling, to swallow the Camel of Transubstantiation, and adore the Elements of
Bread and Wine for our God and Savior? and rather than to submit to a set Form
of Prayer, to have the Service of God performed in an unknown Tongue?

Are we not yet made sensible, at least in this our Day, by so clear a
Demonstration as the Providence of God has lately given us; and had not He
been infinitely merciful to us, might have proved the dearest and most
dangerous Experiment that ever was: I say, are we not yet convinced, what
mighty advantages our Enemies have made of our Divisions, and what a plentiful
harvest they have had among us, during our Differences, and upon occasion of
them; and how near their Religion was to have entered in upon us at once at
those wide breaches which we had made for it? And will we still take counsel
of our Enemies, and choose to follow that course to which, of all other, they
who hate us and seek our ruin, would most certainly advise and direct us? Will
we freely offer them that advantage, which they would be contented to purchase
at any rate?

Let us, after all our sad experience, at last take warning to keep a steadfast
eye upon our chief Enemy, and not suffer our selves to be diverted from the
consideration and regard of our greatest danger by the petty provocations of
our Friends; so I choose to call those who dissent from us in lesser matters,
because I would fain have them so, and they ought in all reason to be so: But
however they behave themselves, we ought not much to mind those who only fling
dirt at us, whilst we are sure there are others who fly at our throats, and
strike at our very hearts.

Let us learn this wisdom of our Enemies, who though they have many great
differences among themselves, yet they have made a shift at this time to unite
together to destroy us: And shall not we do as much to save our selves?

-- fas est and ab host doceri. It was a Principle among the ancient Romans, a
brave and a wise People, donare inimicitias Reip. to give up, and sacrifice
their private enmities and quarrels to the public good, and the safety of the
Commonwealth. And is it not to every considerate man, as clear as the Sun at
Noonday, that nothing can maintain and support the Protestant Religion amongst
us, and found our Church upon a Rock, so that when the rain falls, and the
winds blow, and the floods beat upon it, it shall stand firm and unshaken? That
nothing can be a Bulwark of sufficient force to resist all the arts and
attempts of Popery, but an established National Religion, firmly united and
compacted in all the parts of it? Is it not plain to every eye, that little
Sects and separate Congregations can never do it? but will be like a Foundation
of sand to a weighty Building, which whatever show it may make cannot stand
long, because it wants Union at the Foundation, and for that reason must
necessarily want strength and firmness.

It is not for private Persons to undertake in matters of public concernment;
but I think we have no cause to doubt, but the Governors of our Church
(notwithstanding all the advantages of Authority, and we think of Reason too on
our side) are Persons of that Piety and Prudence, that for Peace sake, and in
order to a firm Union among Protestants, they would be content, if that would
do it, not to insist upon little things; but to yield them up, whether to the
infirmity, or importunity, or, perhaps in some very few things, to the
plausible exceptions of those who differ from us.

But then surely on the other side, men ought to bring along with them a
peaceable disposition, and a mind ready to comply with the Church in which they
were born and baptized, in all reasonable and lawful things, and desirous upon
any terms that are tolerable to return to the Communion of it: a mind free from
passion and prejudice, from peevish exceptions, and groundless and endless
scruples; not apt to insist upon little cavils and objections, to which the
very best things, and the greatest and clearest Truths in the world, are, and
always will be liable: And whatever they have been heretofore, to be
henceforth no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness of those who
lie in wait to deceive.

And if we were thus affected on all hands, we might yet be a happy Church and
Nation; if we would govern our selves by these Rules, and walk according to
them, peace would be upon us, and mercy, and on the Israel of God.

Thirdly, I shall conclude all with a few 3.
words, in relation to the occasion of this present meeting. I have all this
while been recommending to you, from the Authority and Example of our Blessed
Savior, and from the nature and reason of the thing it self, this most
excellent Grace and Virtue of Charity, in the most proper Acts and Instances of
it: But besides particular Acts of Charity to be exercised upon emergent
occasions, there are likewise charitable Customs which are highly commendable,
because they are more certain and constant, of a larger extent, and of a longer
continuance: As the Meeting of the Sons of the Clergy, which is now formed and
established into a charitable Corporation: And the Anniversary Meetings of
those of the several Counties of England, who reside, or happen to be in
London; for two of the best and noblest ends that can be, the maintaining of
Friendship, and the promoting of Charity. These, and others of the like kind, I
call charitable Customs, which of late years have very much obtained in this
great and famous City. And it cannot but be a great pleasure and satisfaction,
to all good men, to see so generous, so humane, so Christian a disposition to
prevail and reign so much amongst us.

The strange overflowing of vice and wickedness in our Land, and the prodigious
increase and impudence of infidelity and impiety, has of late years boaded
very ill to us, and brought terrible Judgments upon this City and Nation, and
seems still to threaten us with more and greater: And the greatest comfort I
have had, under these sad apprehensions of God's displeasure, has been this,
that though bad men were perhaps never worse in any Age, yet the good, who I
hope are not a few, were never more truly and substantially good: I do verily
believe there never were, in any Time, greater and more real effects of
Charity; not from a blind superstition, and an ignorant zeal, and a mercenary
and arrogant and presumptuous principle of Merit, but from a sound knowledge,
and a sincere love and obedience to God, or, as the Apostle expresses it, out
of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

And who, that loves God and Religion, can choose but take great contentment to
see so general and forward an inclination in People this way? Which has been
very much cherished of late years by this sort of Meetings: and that to very
good purpose and effect, in many charitable contributions disposed in the best
and wisest ways: And which likewise hathtended very much to the reconciling of
the minds of men, and the allaying of those fierce heats and animosities which
have been caused by our Civil confusions, and Religious distractions. For there
is nothing many times wanting to take away prejudice, and to extinguish hatred
and illwill, but an opportunity for men to see and understand one another; by
which they will quickly perceive, that they are not such Monsters as they have
been represented one to another at a distance.

We are, I think, one of the last Counties of England that have entered into
this friendly and charitable kind of Society; Let us make amends for our late
setting out by quickening our pace, that so we may overtake and outstrip those
who are gone before us: Let not our Charity partake of the coldness of our
Climate, but let us endeavor that it may be equal to the extent of our
Country; and as we are incomparably the greatest County of England, let it
appear that we are so, by the largeness and extent of our Charity.

O Lord, who have taught us that all our doings without Charity are nothing,
send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift of
Charity, the very bond of Peace, and of all Virtues: Without which whosoever
lives, is counted dead before* thee Grant this for thy only Son Jesus
Christ's sake.

Now the God of Peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will; working in you
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, a Learned Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy: By Dr.
Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity-College in Cambridge.

To be sold by Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill.


