ARTICLES OF PEACE Concluded and Agreed between his EXCELLENCY the WORD
BELLASYSE, His MAJESTY'S Governor of His City and Garrison of TANGIER IN
AFRICA, etc.

AND Cidi Hamet Hader Ben Ali Gayland, PRINCE OF VVEST-BARBARY, etc.

The second of April, 1666.

Printed by Command.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh; Anno D^^. 1666.

Articles of Peace concluded and consirmed by His Excellency, John Lord
Belasyse, Baron of Worlaby, Captain General of all the Forces belonging to His
Majesty of Great Britain in Africa, viz. Admiral of His Royal Navy on the
Coast of Barbary, and Governor of the City of Tangier, etc. on the behalf of
His Sacred Majesty, Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, etc. with the most Excellent Cidi Hamet Hader Ben Ali Gayland, Prince
of West Barbary, Arzilla, Alcassar, Tituan, Sally, etc. and in all his
Dominions, from this day in which it is made. Dated the second of April, 1666.

I. THat from this day, and for ever, there shall be a firm and true Peace, and
no satisfaction shall be demanded by either party, for any former injury, which
has been done to either party before this day.

II. It is agreed by both parties, that they of Tangier shall have all that
Field that does begin from the Jews River, running as the Line is marked out,
unto the River Ticeros of Old Tangier; in which Line they may Sow what they
please, but may not Plant Trees nor Vines, nor make any Fortifications nor
Trenches, nor any thing like unto it great or small.

III. That in case they of Tangier shall want Wood, and his Excellency the
General giving advice thereof unto his Excellency Cidi Hader Gayland, he shall
be obliged to provide Guards, whilst they are cutting and carrying the said
Wood into Tangier; and his Excellency the General of Tangier, shall be obliged
to pay the said Guards for their assistance.

IV. That all Boats and Vessels of both parties may enter, and go forth, Trade,
and Commerce, in the Ports of either parties, and go in and out as they please
without any Pass.

V. That at whatsoever time his Excellency the General of Tangier shall have
occasion for any kind of Refreshment, Cows, Sheep, Hens, etc. advising his
Excellency Cidi Hador Gayland, or whomsoever shall govern in his place, he
shall provide the same, his Excellency the General of Tangier paying the
accustomed Rates and Prizes of the same, together with the charge of conducting
them to Tangier.

VI. That after the day of the date of this Agreement there shall be no new
Fortifications built without the Lines, understanding thereby that this shall
not obstruct the repairing of such Fortifications as are already built, nor the
finishing such as are begun; nor maintaining and keeping the Line as now it is.

VII. Whatsoever person shall fly from either party to the other, having
committed Thefts, or other Misdemeanors, they shall be apprehended, secured,
and delivered over to be punished according to their deserts; and in case they
have stolen any thing, it shall be restored to the Proprietors.

VIII. That whenever any Cafiles shall come to the City of Tangier, exceeding
the number of Ten Horses, they shall wait at the place appointed, whilst they
shall enter the City, but Ten at one time, and unlading their Burdens and
Goods, they shall go forth of the City again: And that none shall enter into
the said City with any Arms, except they be Gentlemen. And if any person shall
offend or affront any one of the contrary party, they shall be punished
according to the Laws and Merits of the Fact.

IX. It is agreed on the behalf of the Excellent Cidi Hamet Hader Gayland, that
the Boats of Tangier, shall fetch Stones for the use of the Mold, wheresoever
they please, from Cape Spartel unto the Eastermost point of the Bay of Tangier.

X. That his Excellency Cidi Hader Gayland shall be obliged to assist the City
of Tangier, with all his Forces against any Christian Enemy that shall offer to
Land or Attack the same.

XI. And for as much as His Majesty of Great Britain has been graciously
pleased to accept of the Amity and good Will of his Excellency Cidi Hamet Hader
Gayland, and does esteem the Grant of the Field abovementioned; He does
therefore grant unto his said Excellency Cidy Hader Gayland, Two hundred
Barrles of fine Powder, in manner and form following, ( viz.) Fifty Barrels to
be delivered upon the signing of these Articles; and fifty Barrels at the end
of Three Months; and so at the end of every Three Months Fifty Barrels of
Powder, so long as the Peace shall last.

XII. And for as much as there are many Strangers Boats which go and come to
the City of Tangier, in which, for the most part, Englishmen are interested, it
is agreed, That no Boat coming to, or going from Tangier, shall be seized or
made Prize by any of the Boats of the Subjects of the said Cidi Hader Gayland,
being within the Point called in the Spanish, Fehod Se^^; and by the English,
the Point on this side Jews River; and the Point that makes the Bay of Tangier,
toward the Levant, called in Arabic, Taefe Almana^.

XIII. It is agreed on the behalf of his Excellency the General of Tangier,
that in case his Excellency Cidi Hader Gayland, shall have occasion of the
assistance of any of the Ships belonging to the English Nation, against his
Enemies, they not being in Amity with England, the said Ships being in the Bay
of Tangier, shall assist him in all they can; but in case it shall so happen,
that the said Enemies of Cidi Hader Gayland, shall be in Amity with England,
then the said Ships, nor any of the English Nation, shall not be obliged to
assist the said Cidi Hader Gayland, either by Land or Sea.

XIV. That all Merchants, Subjects to the said Cidi Hader Gayland, shall have
equal Justice in recovering their Debts, and that this shall be so understood
of both parties on either side.

All these Articles confirmed and adjusted by both parties in Tangier, the 2d.
of April, 1666.
These Articles of Peace have greater advantages attending them, for the future
security and improvement of Tangier, then those concluded by the Earl of
Tiveot; in these particulars following,

FIrst, This Peace is perpetual, his for six months only.

Secondly, We are to have assistance from his Forces, against all Christian
Enemies, who shall attempt any thing upon Tangier.

Thirdly, We are to have all Provisions out of his Countries, Wood, etc.

Fourthly, We have no Guards imposed on us by Gayland, which was a great
encumbrance to the Garrison, and for which my Lord Tiveot paid 500 l. per
annum, to maintain the said Guard.

Fifthly, We have Stones for carrying on the Mold; We pay the same quantity of
Powder annually, as my Lord Tiveot did; and have ground granted without our
Line of double value.

Sixthly, All Strangers Ships or Boats who repair to Tangier, are to be
protected from the Moors Boats within three Leagues distance from the City.

FINIS.

