THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE ASSIZES Holden at
Kingstone-upon-Thames, FOR THE County of Surry. Which began on Monday the 7th
of this Instant March, and ended on Thursday the 10th following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murder,
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the Number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be Whipped.

But more particular of the Trial and Condemnation of Margaret Osgood of the
Parish of St. Olives Southwark, for the horrid Murder of her Husband, on the
21th of July last, for which horrid Fact she was found Guilty of Treason and
Murder.

THe First we shall here give you an Account of, is the aforementioned Ma^garet
Osgood, for the horrid and bloody Murder of her Husband, committed in St Olives
Parish in the Borough of Southwark the 21th of July last. The defense she made
was thus, That by his extravagancy he had brought her to Distraction, and so
desperate she was under that sense, that she had several times attempted her
own en^ by violence and was not capable of her actions when she did commit that
horrid Murder on him; but her confession and the Evidence against her
contradicting that Apology she was brought in Guilty of Treason and Murder.

The next was one John Ashlock, for stealing a Watch and three pieces of Gold,
a Meddal and other things from his Master who lives at Stoake near Guilford,
and by a favorable prosecution found not guilty.

The next were Abraham Priverly and Robert Mason, who were found Guilty of
Petty Larceny only.

After those one Robert Hood was Arraigned for the Felloniously taking away of
some pieces of Ribband out of the Shop of one Mr. Wallis in Southwark, in
October last; of which he was Convicted, the said goods being valued at 15 l.

Then Richard Wilson took his Trial for a Burglary, he was committed in
February last, three Witnesses were possitive that the ^d of February last, he
had broke into the House of one Turner in Bandy-legg-walk in the Park in
Southwark, and carried thereout several suits of Apparel which were found upon
him for which he stands Convicted.

Four or Five former Convicted Criminals were brought to the Bar, and produced
the Kings Pardon for all former Crimes.

The next was Edw. Bowmar, charged for the killing one Collins in Kent-street
January last, The Evidence against the Prisoner was, that a Quarrel happening
betwixt him and the party deceased, the Prisoner took up Stones and Coals,
which he did throw at the party deceased, one of which having hit him on the
Head, did mortally wound him and was the occasion of his Death; the Prisoner
did not deny the fact, and was brought in guilty of Chance-medley.

James Steward, and Ann James, were Arraigned for a Felony, The proof against
them was, that on the 21th of August last, one Andrew Brittle living in
Bermondsey, leaving his Door fast locked when he went out, did in short time
return, and found the same open and several Clothes to the vallue of 20
shillings and five shillings in money stolen thereout, and making enquiry of
the Neighbors, the Prisoners were described to him, and upon pursuit about
nine days after did apprehend them, and found some of the Goods that were
stolen upon them. Their defense was, that they being Washer women, the Linen
he Challenged, was brought them to be washed, but failing, in produceing the
Parties that brought it, they were found Guilty.

The next were the said Ann James, Jane Steward, together with one Edward
Turner, who on the first of September last, were charged upon suspicion to have
broke into the dwelling House of one Thomas Stainton in Barnaby-Street, and
stealing thence several wearing Apparel, and Linen to a considerable vallue.
The proof was thus, that the same day the said Edward Turner had broke into the
House of one John Moulsworth, for which he was also Indicted, and Convicted,
The Evidence being, that he was Actually taken in the Fact, he for his defense
only offerred, that he had money due to him from one John Simons that lived
there, and that this Simons told him, he then should have it, if he would go
with him home and stay there, till he had carried some Goods to the
Pawn-brokers, to raise moneys on, and going with him accordingly, the said
Simons left him in that House where he was apprehended, but this being but only
a pretense, and one silver Cup, of 30 shillings vallue, one Amber Necklace, and
other things belonging to the said Moulsworth, were found upon him, as also
several Picklock-Keys, who with one of them, did open the Door of that house
after locked and upon Evidence that all three were seen together at the said
Staintons House, they were all Convicted for the former, and Turner alone for
the latter Felony.

William Trickler a Whelewright, surrendered himself to Justice, and took his
Trial for the suspected Murder of his Wife. The Evidence against the Prisoner
was, that on the ninth day of September last, he being in drink, was heard to
quarrel with her, and also assaulted her with a Spade, in so violent a manner,
that some of the blows were heard to a Neighbors house near to them, of which
bruise in two days time she died, yet the Coroner endeavoring to stifle the
matter, attributed her death rather to her infirmness (being of a weak
Constitution) than her Husbands strokes, although the contrary appeared very
fully by those who saw them, for which return the Choroner was fined ten pound,
the Prisoner made small defense for himself, yet meeting with a merciful Jury,
he was brought in Guilty of Manslaughter only.

William Ablo; who had been formerly in Newgate, Abel Hammersly, Alice his
Wife, and Thomas Savioury, were Arraigned for a Robbery committed on the 25th
of November last, the proof was absolute, that the said Abbot, Abel Hammersly,
Thomas Savioury, did Rob a Wagon on the day beforementioned, and carried away
several parcels of Silk, to the vallue of 100 pounds, for which they were
Convicted, they not being able to offer any thing material for their Defense,
only Abbot refused to plead, produceing the Kings pardon for all offenses and
therefore prayed the Judge would not take away his Life since the King had saved
him, but the Judge told him, the King knew not of this Crime, therefore if he
would not plead, he should be pressed to death, whereupon the Statute being
read, he then pleaded not Guilty.

Jo. Price was Arraigned for breaking into the House of one Thomas Rowland, and
stealing thence, a Campaign-Coat and other things to the vallue of 30
shillings, the Evidence was very full, and his defense little, the Goods being
found upon him, yet brought in Guilty to the vallue of ten pence.

Michael Dixon a Vintner in Greenwich, and one Henry Pits, were both Indicted
upon suspicion of a Robbery, the Evidence was thus, that one Thomas Aldersey on
the 28 of June last, was Robbed between Greenwitck and Kent-street, of a Watch,
Ring, Sword, and about 13. shillings in money, and other things of a
considerable vallue, by one Fowler, since deceased, and that soon after, this
Robbery, the said Dixon and Pits were seen in Fowlers Company, Dixon using
several Compliments to him, as if of great Acquaintance; the said Dixon for
defense said, that Fowler was his Acquaintance, and lodged often at his House,
but never knew of any wrong he had done to any one person, also affirmed, that
after this Robbery the said Aldersey had, or might have often seen Fowler and
have apprehended him if he would, and also produced several Neighbors to
satisfy the Judge and Jury, of his Conversation and honest demeanor, and
thereupon were both acquitted.

William Wire and John Bradshaw were Arraigned for a Felony, the proof was,
that they in September last, did break into the dwelling house of one William
Tanner, in the day time, and stealing thence several parcels of Woollen-cloth,
which they disposed of, and afterward were apprehended, and it being now
proved against them, they were both found Guilty of the Felony.

There were in all eleven persons received Sentance of Death. Margaret Osgood
sentensed, to be burned alive. Richard Wilson, Ann James, Jane Steward, Edward
Turner, William Wire, John Bradshaw, William Abbot, Abel Hamersly, Thomas
Savioury, and one Mary Trot formerly Reprieved, condemned to be hanged.

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet. 1681.


