portrait of Reverend Mr. Edmund Trench In simplicity and Godly sincerity M^^
Doule pinx^ R White sculp^ The Reverend Mr. Edmund Trench.

SOME Remarkable Passages IN THE Holy Life and Death Of the late Reverend Mr
Edmund Trench; Most of them drawn out of his own DIARY.

Being Dead, yet Speaks, Heb. 11.4.

LONDON, Printed by T. Warren, for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three
Crowns in Cheapside; and Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

TO Sir Thomas Roberts, Bt. AND Mr. Thomas Trench, Merchant.
IT did not need any long Dispute with me to whom I should present this Account
of the Reverend Mr. Trench's Life, drawn from his own Breviate of it; when I
considered not only your Relation to him, (the one by Marriage, the other by
Blood;) but that extraordinary peculiar Affection to you both, which his Diary
so frequently abounds with large Expressions of. How great a share had you in
his kind and sollicitous Thoughts! And how constantly were any Events that
concerned your Welfare, the matter of his Prayers or Praises in his holy
Retirements! I have indeed designedly left out those Passages, wherein he
declares his Judgment of you, though some of them were otherwise very fit to be
inserted, as expressive of the low Opinion he had of himself. For though there
could be no suspicion of Flattery in 'em on the part of the Dead; yet I know
the most deserved Praises are dangerous to the living. And I am too desirous of
your imitating your excellent Brother in that Humility (which was one of the
most amiable Excellencies that adorned his Life,) to do any thing that might be
prejudicial to your improvement in that Grace, which (as he would often
observe) should be the distinguishing Badge of our Relation to our blessed
Master. That you may still live to answer more fully the Character he gives,
and the great hopes that he had conceived of you; That the stock of Prayers
which he daily laid up in Heaven, may descend in yet richer Returns on your
selves and Families: That you may still follow him more, in Copying out that
admirable Description of our Savior's Life, Acts 10.38.
That he went about doing good: That you may improve the considerable
Advantages you are entrusted with for that blessed purpose; That thereby you
may increase the number of so bright Examples of goodness in a degenerate Age,
and become the singular Ornaments of your Christian Profession in it, is the
hearty Prayer of

Your affectionate humble Servant, J. Boyse.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT IS not without the Contrivance of exquisite Wisdom, that the Penmen of the
Holy Scriptures have recorded so many Observable Passages of the Lives and
Deaths of several Eminent Saints. For (besides that there is something in the
Historical Part of the Bible so grateful to our Natural Curiosity, as more
easily engages our Attention and Delight in the perusal of it:) We should be
too ready to think these Sacred Oracles deliver to us an impracticable Idea of
Piety and Holiness, if we did not behold the accurate Impression of its
Doctrines and Precepts insl^^^p'd on the Temper and Actions of those that
embrace'd 'em. But those amiable living Patterns of Religion sensibly reproach
our Defects as inexcusable, encourage and quicken our Endeavors, and inflame
us with a holy Emulation, to equal, or outdo 'em. There is indeed one peculiar
advantage in that relation of the Lives of good Men, which the Holy Scriptures
contain; that we are sure their Actions are represented with all plainness and
simplicity. The curious Pieces drawn by those inspired Painters, owe none of
that native Beauty and Luster they appea^ with, to the arbitrary favor of
their Pencils, which as faithfully present to our view those Defects and Spots
which showed 'ent to be the Children of Adam. as those fairer Lineaments and
Stroke of the Divine Image, which evidenced thim to be the Sons of God. But
next to the Memoirs of holy Men recorded there there are none in which we can
have greater assurance of impartiality, or may expect to find not only their
Actions, but even the secret Springs and Motives (...) them more faithfully
laid open, than in those penned by themselves: Especially when those that keep
Diaries of their own Lives, are not only Persons of solid Judgment, but of that
remarkable Humility and Integrity that may command belie from all that know
'em. On both these accounts this ensuing Breviate of the Reverend Mr. Trench's
Life does recommend it self. 'Twas penned by him in the times he set apart for
the strictest Self-reflection. I need say nothing to persuade any that had the
happiness to converse with him, how exactly his own Motto was engraven on his
Words as well as Actions; In simplicity and godly sincerity. And even for those
that knew him not, I am confident there are so lively Characters of Sincerity
that appear in these Papers themselves, as will abundantly satisfy all that
read 'em, that in writing them he sat to himself, and drew a naked and
undissembled Portraicture of his own Soul. And though I doubt not be intended
'em only for his own use, or his near Relations; yet they are too precious
Remains of that excellent Soul, and too capable of being publicly useful to
the interest of Religion, to be so confined. The Truth of Christianity has been
proved by the clearest Arguments that the nature of the Subject can require;
and vindicated against the most plausible Objections of the numerous Infidels,
or (as they would now be called) Deists of this Age. But methinks the lives of
such eminent Professors of it, are a considerable Addition to the strength of
those Arguments, and carry with 'em more sensible Evidence of its Truth. That
Revelation must sure needs be from God, which (...) those that embrace it into
so Godlike a temper, and raises 'em to so glorious a Resemblance and Imitation
of the Divine Life. And here those that own the Principles of Christianity may
in this Glass easily learn to distinguish betwixt its viral power, and that
dispirited dead Image of it so common in the World. It evidently appears from
this account of his Life, that those two Essential Branches of our holy
Religion, Love to God, (venting it self in a constant and devout intercourse
with him through a Mediator) and Love to Men (inflamed by the peculiar Motives
the Gospel presents, and expressing it self in the most affectionate and
^^alous endeavors to do them the greatest and most lasting good) were the very
Constitution and Frame of his renewed Nature, and the daily Pulse and Breath of
his Soul. O with what attractive Glory would practicat Christianity shine and
render the Christian Church a fair Model of the heavenly Society, were such
Instances of its admirable sanctifying Influence as common as those Votaries it
has gained from Custom and Interest. But I would especially propose his life as
a Copy for those of his own Profession to write after: They may from him learn,
that those only are fit to undertake so awful a Trust as to watch over the
Souls of others, who are diligently careful to observe and regulate their own.
In him there was a rare mixture of the Graces that should adorn both the
contemplative and active part of a Minister's life. And few have I known to
whom that Character of Ministers (which he used to draw from their being called
Angels, did more exactly agree: For his time was truly divided betwixt
beholding the Face of his Father in Heaven, and ministering to the Heirs of
Salvation on Earth. There was no color for taxing him with those faults that
are of late become the common reproach of too many of the Clergy, Ambition and
Avarice. He was so far from aspiring to great Preferments, that he would
thankfully have accepted of the meanest Cure, wherein he might have had the
opportunity of doing good to Souls in a public Station, which his strong
Inclinations to peace made him (perhaps too earnestly) desirous of.

Indeed if ever Humility inclined to a culpable excess, it was in him; For to
that we must impute it, that so eminent a Light was for so many Years confined
to a dark Corner, which was fitter to shed its diffusive Beams in a far larger
Orb. And so far was he from prostituting his Profession to serve a secular
Interest, that having enough of his own to subsist on, h^ never received one
Farthing on the score of his unwearied Labors; but on the contrary, laid out a
considerable Sum yearly in good Books and other ways of Charity among the
People he Preached to; and contributed liberally out of his own Purse, t^ such
young Ministers as had but a scanty and discouraging Allowance. I confess, A^
are not capable of imitating him herein ^^ but methinks such Examples should
upbraid those Clergymen that not only see^ Ecclesiastical Dignities, with the
sam^ mean and sordid Arts that others do Secular ones; but so often by
Pluraliti^^ enrich themselves at no less cost than the neglected betrayed Souls
of the People (An abuse too foul for any specious color to hide the deformity
of it; and so gro^ that it could not escape the Complaints (...) the packt
Council of Trent; and it is ^ shame that our Convocations have never done any
thing to reform it.) He on the contrary was as liberal of his Purse as (...)
his Pains, to promote that Interest of his blessed Master, which was far dearer
to him than any that he could call his own. And indeed the admirable Success
which both his, and worthy Mr. Brand's Ministry, (who was for some Years his
Neighbor in those parts of Kent) met with, as endeared by their large and
generous Cha^^ty, has often made me wish, that more ^^ous Gentlemen would
devote their Sons to that Sacred Function, who are able to give 'em such
Estates as shall free them from the necessity of dependence on their People,
and capacitate them to recommend their Insiructions by their Alms. As ^ur
Savior's Miracles of Mercy in healing men's diseased Bodies, prepared 'em to
receive him as the compassionate Physician of Souls: So when his Ministers are
capable to relieve the Necessities of others, their Charity insinuates into the
^earts of their People that affectionate Veneration for them, as gives all
their holy ^ounsels the greater Authority and Efficacy. There is but one thing
more I shall take notice of concerning him, and that is, ^is great Temper and
Moderation in re^erence to those modern Controversies that ^ive made so great a
noise in the Reformed Churches; And I do it the rather, be cause the Reader may
wonder to find litt^^ or no mention of 'em in the following Breviate of his
life. But though few perhaps d^ more thoroughly understand 'em, yet no^^ that ever
I converst with, spoke more sparingly of them. He looked on that violet Zeal
which the most express about 'em, as feavourish preternatural heat that on^^
preyed on the vital fervor of practice Religion. But when he declared his
Judgment to his Friends that desired it, professed his concurrence with such as
ende^vour'd to reconcile the contending Parti^ by avoiding the harsh extremes
of either and particularly his great esteem of the p^cisick Writings of that
eminent Ligh of his age, Mr. Baxter, to whom he own himself more indebted for
solid and use^^^ knowledge, than any other whatsoever, th^^ he had read the
most celebrated of t^^ French as well as English Divines, an^ had a particular
value for the Writings Monsieur Daille, and Dr. Isaac Barrow And now I shall no
longer detain the Render from the perusal of his Life, than (...) desire he may
read it with a serious desig^ to transcribe into his own, whatever he sh^^ find
in it worthy of his imitation.

Edmund Trench
March 10. 1684. My Father's Motto and my own.
2 Cor. 1.12. In Simplicity and Godly Sincerity.

Phil. 1.21. To me to Live is Christ, and to Die is Gain.

Phil. 3.8. I count all things but dung, that I may win Christ.

Rarius de dogmatibus Christus disseruit, saepius, immo vero ubique and semper
de vivendi sinceritate.

Vivere bis, vita posse priore frui,
Ampliat aetatis spatium sibi vir bonus.

THE Title of Angel, sometime, given to Ministers, should mind 'em of imitating
those Glorious Spirits, as far as may consist with the Frailties of flesh and
blood, dividing their time betwixt beholding the Face of their Father in
Heaven, and Ministering to the Heirs of Salvation.

About 15 Years ago I wrote some Passages of my former Life, and have since
occasionally added more. Present Afflictions occasion many and frequent
Reflections on what I am, and what I have been: my Papers afford me some help,
and may be more useful laid together; therefore I design the Sum of what I have
written, and what further shall occur fit to be remembered. The Ends I aim at
(as I formerly noted 'em) are,

The Glory of God's free Grace in and through Jesus Christ my dearest Lord and
Savior, the sole Foundation of my Hope and Comfort.

The Shaming and Humbling my self, that have so often, and do so heinously
offend so good a God, and so merciful a Redeemer.

The prevention of future Relapses by the remembrance of God's great Favors so
undeservedly multiplied.

The promoting of perseverance and growth in all manner of holy Conversation
and Godliness by the Meditation of my past Follies, and the review of my
thoughts, and resolves about my own Duty and Happiness in times of great
affliction, and the approaches of Death to others, and seemingly to my self
also.

The furthering of Hope, and Peace, and Comfort, and Joy in such Seasons as
they may be most necessary and useful.

All through the Assistance of the Spirit of Grace, which I most humbly and
earnestly implore.

Some Things of those from whom I descended, for my Imitation and Encouragement.
MY Grandfather was Edmund Trench, a younger Son of John, a Norfolk Gentleman,
Converted about the 16th Year of his Age to the Faithful Service of God, by the
Labors of Mr. Furnace, noted for Piety and Painfulness in those parts. By his
Godly humble Conversation when his Master a Grocer in Norwich failed, he was
recommended to two Brothers whose Name was Cock, of chief Rank in that City,
who entrusted him with the management of their Trade in Stuffs at London. He
abundantly answered their Expectation, and at length became their Brother, by
Marrying the youngest of the three Daughters of Mr. Mowre, a Pious and Prudent
Citizen of Norwich, and a Partner in the considerable Trade they drove, (the
two Elder being their Wives before.) Many Years he enjoyed a large Portion of
the Divine Blessing, thriving in his outward Estate, loved and honored by his
Fellow Servants, rejoicing in diverse hopeful Children, and above all, walking
before God in Health and Holiness with great delight in his Service, and great
assurance of his Favor. But as he would say, he found at last, He was not in
Heaven. He was exercised with many losses (some very great) in his Estate,
Sicknesses and Deaths in himself and nearest Relations, Doubts and Fears about
his Eternal Condition, and, which were most grievous to him, horrid and
blasphemous Thoughts and Suggestions. All these with Melancholy were more
troublesome in his Old Age. Yet he persisted in his holy Course, exercising
himself continually to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and
toward Men; constant in secret, private and public Prayer, reading the Holy
Scriptures by himself, and Expounding 'em in his Family, Catechizing his
Children and Servants, examining 'em about and repeating for their use the
public Labors of his Mionister, most just and equitable in his Trade and all
his Dealings, and eminently Charitable in helping others according to their
several Wants. And God greatly blessed his Example and Instructions for the
version and Consirmation of some Souls, especially those nearest to him. At
length, in a good old Age, 83 Years and a half, he rested from all his Labors,
and entered the Invisible World of Glorious Spirits, June 7. 1658. His Good Name
lived long ater, and is not yet dead among such as had to do with, or heard of
him. My Grandmother survived almost 11 Years, a constant Professor of
Religion, and, I hope, sincere Practifer also: she followed, March 16.166,
almost 90 Years old.

Of their Children, four only attained to Years of Discretion, whereof two
Danghters were Married to Caldwell Furrington, and Tho. Bewley of London,
Merchants; both happy before I was Born, as was likewise the Younger Son, dying
about 18.

Edmund the Eldest was Born July 8. 1608. always towardly, addicted to
Seriousness, Study, and Piety in those Years that incline to Play and Folly. He
answered his Parents faithfulness in his Education with early goodness, owing
(as far as I could understand) a new birth to those from whom he received a
natural. In the 18th Year of his Age, from the care of his Schoolmaster Mr.
Augur, he was sent to Sidney-Colledge in Cambridge, and committed to Mr. --
Dugard, a Pious, Learned, and Painful Tutro. He grew in Grace and Learning,
happily escaping many Temptations, and frustrating the Designs of some
Superiors woe would have debauched a Puritan as they called him, though he was
still sufficiently conformable to the established Ecclesiastical Orders. He
performed his Exercises and proceeded Batchelour and Master with credit, and
obtained an excellent report from his Tutor, and from the Master of the
College, Dr. Ward. While he lived under 'em he was log exercised with a
troublesome Distemper which many unpleasant means did not remove. How humbly
and patiently he bare, and how excellently he improved so tedious an
Affliction, I learnt to my comfort and encouragement from many of his pious
Letters among my Grand-father's Papers. They were sure a lively Picture of his
Soul, which knew not how to dissemble at any time, much less when so sensibly
under the hand of the heart-searching God. They flowed with holy resignation to
his Will, quiet submission to his afflicting hand, earnest desires to
understand his mind, to grow still more humble and patient, and dead to this
World, and better prepared for another. They abounded with thankful Expressions
for their care, cost and pains, and especially to God for supporting under and
making better by the troublesome returns of his Disease, not without admirable
Expressions of Hope and Joy in the Love of God in Jesus Christ, witnessed by
his Spirit, by such a happy Temper and Deportment for many Years before he
found relief, he was doubtless better quality'd to do the Will of God in his
following Health, and to suffer with such wonderful patience, submission and
rejoicing, the grievous complication of Diseases that was for some time the
forerunner of his Death. A while after he was Master of Arts, on due
consideration, advice, and prayers, he studied Physic some time at Paris, and
took the Degree of Doctor at Bourges. When returned to England he Married Mary
Eldest Daughter of Samnel Middlemore, Merchant of London, [a very Pious,
Charitable Man in his Life, which he closed with a bountiful Gift to the
Company of Cloth-workers, for the Annual Relief of 20 Poor in Coals, Cloths,
etc.] He dying after his Wife, when his Children were Young, committed 'em to
Sir John Wollaston, and Mr. Thomas Burnell: The Daughters were happy in the
faithfulness of the latter, and in their Religious Education under his Wife
their Poius Aunt. The Elder, Mary, was Married to my Father, August 14. 1639.
she then past the middle of her 17th. (Born Jan. 24. 1622.) he entered on his
32d Year. The Younger, Susan, was afterward the Wife of Sincere and Humble Dr.
Roger Drake.

My Father was Faithful according to his enlarged Duty as a Husband, and after
as a Father to my self and five other Sons (besides one Still-born) and three
Daughters, careful for our Souls and Bodies, sparing for nothing needful in
Temporals, or Spirituals; exceeding loving and tender, and yet never that I
could see or hear mourning for the Death of any, though he left but 3 behind.
Having done his Duty wherein he was sufficiently follicitous, he cheerfully
acquiese'd in what pleased God. In his Education he was much helped by his true
Yoke Fellow our good Mother, who though she had hard Travail to bring some of
us, (particularly my self) into this World, yet traveled much more to fit us
for a better. Through her assistance he followed his Practice with more leisure
and comfort. His Employment was considerable, and which he more rejoyc't in,
his success. He was eminent for faithfulness to all that had recourse to him,
frequently visiting, deliberately considering their Cases, watchfully observing
the turns of their Distempers, and accordingly with great care and judgment
varying his Prescriptions. His tender sense of their Souls greatly inclined him
to discourse with and advise his Patients as Spiritual Physician, but he was
often forced to forbear in dangerous cases, because he found by experience the
Sick were apt to judge themselves past help when he spoke to 'em of another
World, their Spirits sinking, and Remedies proving less effectual. In all his
Practice he was generously free from Covetousness, not using any Tricks to
increase it, nor unworthily seeking to, or humouring his Patients, weary of
numerous though profitable Visits, and industriously speeding their Recovery,
prescribing no more than he judged needful, and frequently refusing Fees which
even his Patients thought he might as well have taken. He was still the same
sincere plain-hearted Man, free and open without Deceits and Tricks in his
Calling and all other Affairs. And sure he was the more Blessed of God;
otherwise considering he was no Politician, apt to believe the best, and trust
as if others were as far from dissembling as himself, he could not have lived
and brought up his Children as he did, nor, his Losses considered, left such a
Competence to his Widow, and them. He constantly persever'd in those good ways
into which he was entered by his Parents, and when they grew old and very
infirm, he made it more his business (...), and that even when gray Heirs grew
upon himself, and his own Distempers increast the dissiculty of complying with
others. About 50 he was troubled with the Stone, from which God's Blessing on
his own Endeavors relieved him. But then about 8 Years before his Death, he
fell into an incurable Jaundise, accompanied for a while with a Scirrbus in his
Liver, frequent troublesome Itchings, Aguish Shiverings of long continuance,
little and disturbed sleep, violent Fits of the Colic, great Appetite with ill
Digestion, and other very troublesome Symptoms. He bare all with exemplary
Patience and Contentment, never that we could perceive repining at such severe
Dispensations, nor ever praying for their removal, nor yielding, though
importuned, to have one Day set apart to seek on his behalf. When we wished him
a good Night in his Fits, he would reply, It should be good because it pleased
God. He would rarely let any stay a Night by him, affirming, He was not alone,
but the Father was with him. And with the Father he sometimes enjoyed more
Heavenly Communion, which yet was not constant and long as his Peace and Hope
were; they hardly admitted any interruption, but he generally longed to be
Dissolved and to be with his God and Savior, and spoke thereof often with
delight.

In the Year 65. when the Plague began to rage (the Weekly Account amounting to
about 3000) the importunity of Friends drew him with us to Dr. Drake's in
Burnham, 2 Miles short of Maidenhead, where yet he was more in Reading,
Meditation and Prayer. He expressed a still greater sense of the Love of God in
Christ, and of his truth and goodness in afflicting him. He professed his Soul
more established thereby with a powerful Conviction of all Creatures Vanity,
and raised to more vigorous actings of a realizing Faith in holy Heavenly
Meditations, That the sweetness and prosit thereof in his Retirements were
such, that he feared the return of his usual Employment, and should be afraid
of losing his wearisom affliction, without great assurance that Health should
be as spiritually advantageous as Sickness; professing his constant Judgment
that the least Progress in Grace and Holiness was greater matter of Joy, than
the greatest Affliction of Sorrow. He judged it very unbecoming a Christian for
Sense so far to prevail against Reason and Faith, as to raise any considerable
Averseness from drinking of that Cup which his Sovereign Lord and tender Father
most wisely prepared for his good. Accordingly he desired his Friends to show
their Love in praying for a progressive sanctified Improvement of his
Sufferings, and not for their Removal, and wished 'em comfortably to believe
there was no such harm in affliction as we are apt to imagine. The Fire of
London removed him first to an House near Stepncy, and soon after to another in
Crouched-Friars, where he cheerfully expected his deliverance by Death. 1669.
he grew consident of its approach. Aug. 14. being his Weddingday, he rejoiced
with some Invited Friends, affirming it the last he should live on Edrth.
October he spoke of his sensible Decays as Tokens of his near desired Rest.
About the middle of December he caused his Will to be new drawn, ordering
particularly that Clause to be inserted, That he commended his Soul on good
Evidence into the hands of God, adding, that he left us much less than the
World imagined, but he hoped God's Blessing with it, having never wronged any
Man of a Penny. A Day after (14 before he died) when I was discoursing of his
dissolution, he said, He could appeal to God through his infinite goodness,
that since his Youth he had walked before him with an upright heart, never
wasting his Conscience with any gross sin, that he comfortably believed his
Regeneration by the Holy Spirit and saving Interest in his dearest Savior, and
had accordingly enjoyed a constant Tranquillity of Mind, not without some short
and seldom more ravishing Joys. He then renewed his often repeated Charge of
loving and serving God, being dutiful to our Mother, and helpful to our little
Sister, which yet he said, he did not doubt of, and to our great comfort
Blessed my self and Brother, blessing God also for us. Perceiving his
Distempers and sore Mouth to increase, he took a solemn leave of my Mother,
telling her with Joy, he was going to his God, and her God, and that 'ere long
they should meet to part no more. After which he bid us not expect to hear much
from him, but believe his mind still the same. Accordingly he persisted,
bearing patiently his grievous pains, yet saying little, though enough to
signific his uninterrupted hope and joy till Friday 31. ^^^^mb. 1669. when
after some imperfect Words, but 2 hours before, of ^^ath, and Christ, and
Pardon, his Spirit returned to his Heavenly Father, and instead of a New-Year
on Earth, caused a glorious Eternity in Heaven. (...) lives still in the
honorable Re^^^^rance of such as knew him, ne^^^ mentioned, to my knowledge,
with reproach; often with Elogies of his Piety, Sincerity, Ability, and
Faithsulness, as a Man, a Friend, and a Physician. Some (I doubt bad
themselves) commended his Goodness, acknowledging the common (though I think
unjust) reproach of his Calling could not be fastened on him.

O may I by the help, and to the Glory of Divine Grace, imitate such excellent
Examples, and not degenerate from 'em, but serve God with all my might,
according to my Father's Symbol, In Simplicity, and godly Sincerity. My
Grandsather was a Pattern of Humility and Meckness, and yet of Resolution when
there was a Cause; of great Charitableness in Word and Deed, especially to his
Relations who had great Sums from him, which yet his Children did not want. He
was likewise an eminent Instance, that Doubts and Fears, and horrid Suggestions
may infest the truly, yea the excellently Good; and that great Losses and
Crosses in Estate and Kindred may consist with God's especial Favor. My Father
set me a bright Example of Integrity and Plain-heartedness, of Content and
Rejoicing under heavy Afflictions, of affectionate Faithfulness in all his
Relations, and of conscientious Diligence in his particular Calling; and he was
an encouraging Instance of a Divine Blessing on such as seek first the Kingdom
of God and his Righteousness, and cast their Care on him in well-doing; his
Estate having been preserved and increased though great hazard and losses
without worldly Policy. Both led and engaged to Earliness and Constancy in
God's Service, secret, private, and public; to a faithful discharge of every
Office of Love to all they had to do with, to a sober, righteous, and godly
Life, in hope of a future satisfying everlasting Felicity.

From such I entered on my earthly Pilgrimage, October. 6. 1643. about 5 in the
Evening, after my Mother had been 3 Days in painful dangerous Travail. I was
born with a great Wound in my Head, supposed by a blow of a great boss'd Bible,
as my Mother came out of Church: That was healed, and afterward many Diseases
and hurt in my Childhood, both Thigh-bones dislocated together: Afterward an
Arm broken, well set, no harm remaining. During my tender years, I was my
Parent's immediate Care in London and Hackney, from whom, and my good
Grandfather, (whose Diversion I often was) I wanted not Instruction, Example,
and Encouragement; and so far I seemed to answer their Endeavors, that they
delighted much in me. But I well remember, and thou, O Lord, much more,
abundance of Wickedness I was guilty of, Disobedience to Parents, indulging my
Appetite to excess, taking or stealing what was not allowed; quarrelling
especially with my next Brother Samuel, whom I should have born with,
considering his woeful Affliction by the King's Evil; Pride in Apparel, or what
Abilities and Acquirements I had; Envy, mispence of Time in Romances, Plays,
idle Stories, etc. too much play and lying. All aggravated by so many and great
Mercies and Means, such singular Love and Light, that I have often thought my
Sins more heinous than theirs that I have seen going to Execution: They were
never so engaged, never enjoyed such helps as I. Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
according to thy great goodness, and blot out my Transgressions, for my
Savior's sake.

Toward the end of my 15th Year, I was sent to Cambridge with Mr. Samuel
Jacomb, and by him placed in Queen's College, under the Tuition of Mr. Andrew
Paschall: There I got the Love and good Report of my Tutor and others, but was
far from deserving it: I made a shift to do the Exercises required, but woefully
neglected my Studies; sadly addicted to Tennis, Cards, and other expensive
forbidden Sports, to reading Romances, Plays, and smutry Poets; and at length
more entangled with had Company, especially in the absence of my studious and
loving Chamber-fellow, (afterward Sir J. K. an eminent Lawyer of the
Inner Temple, taken off when rising in Riches and Honor.) By them I was drawn
once and again to Gluttony and Drunkenness, Swearing and Cursing, and at last
to making (as they called it) indeed to stealing of Hankerchiefs, Knives,
Books, or what else we could lay our hands on. This was a common shameless
practice: and suffering thereby from others, I thought I might right my self.
It was God's goodness that I went no farther, having been tempted to go with
'em to naughty Women, which (my Inclination considered) I wonder I never did.
Blessed be God who still restrained me, till my Chamber-fellow leaving the
College, and some other Obstacles being happily removed, when I was most in
danger: My Father who suspected nothing, but thought too well of me, thought
sit for other Reasons I should remove to Oxford: Thither I went toward the end
of 1660, to Magdalen-Hall: Before that Year expired, I proceeded Batcheler,
which to Doctors Sons (at least the eldest) was then permitted at 12 years
standing: Performing the usual Exercises on that occasion, I was unexpectedly
engaged among some who were too excessively debauched for me. they stirred in
me some abhorrence, as bad as I was, and drove me to better Acquaintance, and
God cast me on such as were not only of a better temper, but really Pious, for
whom I think my Parent's tincture had in some measure prepared me. I thought
such Company would please them, and (praised be God) it soon grew pleasant to
my self also. By their Converse especially, and reading good Books (though I
also heard the best Ministers) those good Principles were awakened, which my
Parents had sown, and they soon became vigorously active for Repentance and
sruitful Obedience. I reslected on my Sins with shame and sorrow; I often
confessed and bewailed 'em before God with bitter Anguish and detestation: They
soon turned my langhing into weeping, my usual cheansulness into a very
sorrowful medancholy, and filled me with Self-abhorrence, Dread, and Horror.
In such a Condition I continued, though mercifully supported a long time,
getting by degrees more gleams of light and intervals of Hope and Comfort. The
Sin that was most troublesome to undo, was my taking (as before) several Things
from others: I thought Restitution my Duty, though I thought I might take as I
did to right my self. St. Auslin's saying, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum, struck me like Tlmnder, and I had no rest till I parted
with all, even with what I had from them that had wronged me. But shame and
inconsideration betrayed me to a course that afterward increased my trouble: I
wrote to one too guilty himself, and that had made me worse: He professed
Repentance, and readiness to assist and imitate me in Restitution: and upon his
repeated Engagements, I sent him all I could think of, not my own in kind or
value, and then was quiet as to that matter: [How his Friend served him, you will
hear anon.] As to other Faults, my way was plain: I left off every course of
Sin and Folly, those defended Games which had so wasted my time, sine and
fashionable Clothes, and all bad and vain Company. I grew constant in secret
and public Duties of Religion, and conversed with and imitated those I thought
most strictly good. God's Service was my Design, doing good my Work, and in
order thereto, I grew more and more inclined to the study of Divinity, and had
more delight in the beginning thereof. Many Favors I received from God, among
which a lignal Deliverance of my Chamber-fellow Mr Foley, and my self, ought
not to be forgotten: Washing in the River, h^ who could not swim, desired me to
hold him by the Hair, which while did, swimming with my other Arm: we were
gotten out of our depths, so that at length seeking for ground, we both sunk
under water; my escape seemed easy, but then I lost him therefore I clasped as
I could his middle with my right Arm, and so made a shift to reach the
Shallows. God gave me strength, and kept him, tho his Head was under water,
from laying hold or struggling, which might have destroyed us both. To thee, O
Lord, the traise; To us thankfuliness in a fruitful I^se.

After almost two Years abode at Oxfor, I left that University also, being sent
about 7 Months after to Leyden by my good Father, who was willing I should
study Physic. Before I went, I understood his unfaithfulness whom I had
trusted to right those I had wronged; and left with a better Man more than I
could think due to any, except those my self righted.

In Holland I enjoyed good Company, good Ministry, and my more intimate
Converse with P. C. was useful: We only were together in a Dutch Papist's
House, where he labored exceedingly under great Terrors and Sorrows for Sin;
having many bitter Pangs and long Agonies, with plenty of Tears and Cries:
which the Papist taking notice of, charged our Religion as uncomfortable. I
helped him as I could: He recovered by degrees, yet not fully till after our
return to England. My Affection increased with his Scriousness, deadness to
this World, and vigor for a better, with the Thought whereof he seemed wholly
taken up. His Friends and himself at length inclining to his Marriage, at their
desire, I recommended him to a Gentlewoman wished to me: He was not then
accepted, but afterward revived his Suit, and by other help obtained her. I
refused to act farther, being dissatisfied with that change of his Company,
Garb, and Carriage, etc. that followed his Father's death, and his own remove
to Grey's-Inn. I had Reason to be glad, I did no more: for having obtained the
Gentlewoman, (who proved desirable, so inclined to Virtue, that he professed he
must be very faulty, if she proved not very good.) He brought her to
Lincoln's End Fields, engaged her in vain Company, carried her to Plays,
Entertainments, etc. I lovingly though plainly represented his Faults and Duty,
and prayed for him not without appearance of Success; he removing into the
Country and living more restrainedly. But he grew strange to me, and I have
some reason to fear the worst. Thou, O Lord, hear and help, and recover out of
the Snare of the Devil. Keep me (though believing the best) from considence in
Man, and from making of Matches, seeing one, of whose Piety I had such
assurance, has so grossly failed; and let all make me more humble and watchful.

I saw at Leyden and other places, (notwithstanding their reformed Discipline)
reason enough to love my own Country still better; and therefore my inclination
to Divinity still continuing, though I had made some progress in Physic, after
about a years absence, I returned, 1664, continuing with my Parents at London,
till the Plagve and Fire for awhile removed us. Midsummer, 1688, we came to
Crouched-Fryars, and with my Brother was happy in comforting and diverting my
Father, till we were Witnesses of his blessed Departure.

He left beside my self, dear Brother Thomas, born Apr. 14, 1648. We always
loved, and can hardly remember any quarrel between us. The youngest Sister
Sarah also survived, born May 23. -- May we see her Newborn; May I do my Duty
to promote it!

Soon after my Father's death, I was seized by a Feavourish Distemper,
accompanied with Hypochondriac winds, etc. which continued, and enforced
serious Consideration: I found in my self a great change; Prayer and Reading
had above 7 Years been my constant practice: I was temperate in Meats, Drinks,
Apparel, etc. I hope truly humble; scrupulously careful to do no wrong, losing
rather. I gave the Poor constantly the 10th, and of late the 7th part of my
Income. Oaths and Curses which once and again I had been guilty of, I long
since abhorred, and could not hear without trouble. Yet I was dejected, that
though I had pleased and rejoiced my Parents, I had not been in all things so
complying as I should; and yet more, because I had not so diligently improved
my Time for God as I might; I hope I heartily repented, denying my self, and
bearing Inconveniences for my good Mother, and resolving on greater Diligence
in doing and getting good. I was likewise anxious whether Restitution were
certainly made for the wrongs I had done in Cambridge 10 Years before; and
determined to enquire and do what was further requisite. I was sensible of the
kindness of this Affliction in the aforesaid search and resolves, and in a
farther change of my Temper, growing more meek, humble, and charitable: I felt
more my own vicious Impotence, and the necessity of Divine Grace, as being,
having, and doing nothing good, but as the Spirit makes me every moment.

Before I recovered from this Sickness, I was forsaken by my thoughts of
Conforming (to the established Church, by submitting to the Terms imposed on
Ministers) to which I had been sufficiently inclined by the Reasons and
Examples of several pious and judicious Persons. The formidable Horrors of my
Conscience, the dread of their return by reason of some doubts I could not well
remove, determined me rather to a private Life, which I desired to render as
useful as I might.

[ I remember when I was one Day discoursing him about Ministerial Conformity,
he told me, 'Twas the Declaration of Assent and Consent to all things contained
in, and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, and the Form and manner of
Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, that he chiefly stuck
at, and could not think that Declaration could be sincerely made by such whose
Judgments disapproved so many Things in those Two Books, as his did: And he was
the more confirmed in his Aversion to so ensnaring a Declaration, by observing
several others of his Acquaintance that had made it, (though under the same
dissatisfaction with himself, concerning several Things contained in these
Books) by giving it a looser Construction than he thought the Words capable of,
to become less strict and conscientious in other Duties of Religion, than they
had been before: Which visible declension from their former seriousness and
circumspection, he was afraid might flow from their having too far suffered
their Judgment to be swayed and biased by their Interest, in a matter of so
great Importance.]

Hackney, Sept. 10. 1670.

I returned from Deal after 3 Days stay with my dear Brother going to Aleppo: I
parted sadly with one so dear in the strictest bands of Love and Nature; yet we
encouraged our selves in our good God, whose Favor we had so experienced
together, and hoped we should still enjoy when so far asunder. I desired all
might make me more long and labor after, and prepare for Heaven, where Friends
part not bitterly any more, and where God is All in All for ever.

Hackney, October. 11. 1670.

I grew ill of a Quartan Ague, as it quickly proved: My Prayers were for
Christian Patience and Wisdom to bear the worst, and make a good Improvement of
all, that God might be glorified, my self and others bettered, and Christ more
comfortably in life and death Advantage.

June 20. 1671.

Trying Enfield-Air, for removing my Ague, I rode into the Chase, and being
among the Trees thoughtful and careless, my Horse by a great and sudden start,
turned me first on his Crupper, and ere-long on the ground; yet only tore my
Clothes among the Trees and Bushes. I was forced to walk back to Coz.
Farrington's, in the heat, which turned my expected Cold into a violent Sweat.
I desired thankfully to remember that Preservation in such apparent danger, and
to be sensible of God's good Providence, as often as I ride, and no such danger
appears; and to be still as careful to perform, as I was ready to resolve and
vow.

Hackney, Apr. 22. 1672.

Scorbutic Pains and melancholy Fumes much discomposed me, though I had no
more Ague-fits, etc. Yet they were not so much my trouble, as the Diseases of
my Soul: My Prayers were for more Grace, that I might not relapse, but grow my
self, and make others also more holy; that my Charity might be greater, the
Defects thereof pardoned; that my own Sins might lie heavier, and Afflictions
lighter: -- Ure, seca, Domine, modo non in aeternum.

July 26. 1672.

Melancholy Fumes exceedingly disturbed and unsitted my Mind for any Service: I
doubted I should live useless, and apprehended God was taking the forfeiture of
those Parts and Abilities I had abused. I prayed for Health, and Powers, and
Opportunities to serve God, and be useful to Men, vouching the sincerity of my
Heart; yet presently retracting, having found it so deceitful, and beseeching
Mercy and help for my Savior's sake.

Though urged, and on some accounts disposed to Marry, I chose rather to
continue single, because I feared such a change would rather hinder God's
cheerful faithful Service; I should have less Time, less Money for good Uses,
and not be in a capacity to embrace some mean Opportunity of serving God in
Public, like what some had, who could not go farther than my self. I appeal to
God, begging his Blessing according (as I hoped) to the uprightness of my Heart.

December. 30. 1672.

I was, I hope, truly desirous of being useful, and endeavored by several ways
to help our own Family toward Heaven: I was sensible of the Duty and Comfort
thereof, and was excited by what I heard of Bishop Wilkins, from such as
visited him when he was entering on Eternity.

He had no anxious Thoughts about his everlasting Condition, which (as he said)
many others better than himself had; He approved his own Moderation and the
Establishment of the Church of England, only wished some Things amended, and
the Management in the Hands of good and prudent Men. He regarded not his
Universal Character, which had much empair'd his Health; but when spoken to
about a Latin Version of it, desired not to be troubled about it, professing
his Comfort and Joy, that since his Promotion to Chester, he had encouraged and
furthered Preaching of Christ.

My Prayers were that I might not be negligent in my own Sphere, but act to the
utmost of my Power for my Lord's Glory, and my own Comfort.

Hackney, March. 24.

I was strangely troubled on a small occasion; a Friend having some discourses
of a good deceased Bishop S. -- and it being judged expedient to make 'em
public, I delivered 'em to a Bookseller, who having Printed one without
License, was afraid to Sell it. I was not concerned however, knowing the
Discourse inoffensive to my Superiors. But I was quickly troubled that I did
not my own Work, nor as I would be done to, Publishing what the worthy Author
had kept private, and without their leave that had right to it, (as possibly
some had) and occasioning others to break the Laws in Printing without License.
I endeavored to calm the Storm, but it raged the more, till I could neither
wake nor sleep, talk nor cat in quiet; nor was it laid till I took off and made
away the Impression, and returned my Friend the other Writings. I desired to
learn how constantly I depended on God, and without his good Providence, should
daily break my peace, and destroy my self: And I resolved, since so small a
Failure had cost me so dear, I would be more watchful against all Degrees of
Sin, and do nothing without more Deliberation and Prayer.

Hackney, April 10. 1673.

By a Letter from the Lord Drummond, Son to the Earl of Perth, written at the
request of my dying Friend Mr. Patrick Drummond; I had some account of his last
Hours, full of Heavenly Expressions, concerning the Love of God, and of
affectionate Prayers for his Friends, and particularly for my self; Which, O
Lord, answer! About 18 or 19 Years before, the Calamities of his Country having
driven him up to London, where he was well entertained by my Uncle Bewley, to
Teach his Son; I likewise was a with his Care, and he considently (...) I would
study Divinity: and though my Inclination and Carriage afterward, especially
at Cambridge, (...) my Friends and self judge he was mistaken; yet he persisted
in the same Opinion, and lived to rejoice with my self in the Event. May my
dear Friend's Memory be sweet and useful as to my self, so to his other
Friends, and particularly to that Lord, who savored me with this Account. My
Friend was wont to express a great Honor for, and Hope of him, especially for
Religion. May he still exceed himself, honor God, and be useful in his
Country; and do the more good, because (alas) so many do none, or worse. O that
God would change them, and make more great Persons Great and Public Blessings,
for our dear Savior's sake.

Hackney, May 22. 1673.

I had groaned many Days under great trouble of Mind, occasioned at first by
some discourse about Sacrilege, and a Story of Dr. Holdsworth, who hearing one
express great hopes of good from the long Parliament; he replied, He would have
none expect it, since Parliaments so sacrilegiously alienated Church Lands. I
think I had heard as much formerly without being concerned, but now I
immediately apprehended, If the Alienation were sinful, so was the detention;
and thence I might become guilty of Sacrilege, if I should enjoy an Estate
taken long since from the Hospital of St. Bartholomew the Less, in Smithfield,
bought by my Father at above 20 Years purchase, after diverse preceding
Alienations, and left by him after my Mother's Life to me.

My Terrors increased by reading about Sacrilege, the Forms of ancient
Dedication, with Curses, etc. Of his se^^^^ ^^ion in ^^fer^^^^ to this ma^ter;
see afterward.


Thence Conscience ran backward, examined the material Passages of my Life,
racked me with tormenting Scruples about Matters of Meum and Tuum, and sill'd
me with frightful Representations not only of my quondam Cambridge
Sinful-follies, but of my following Actions, for Father and Self, (in reference
to the forementioned Estate:) So that I was strangely jealous I had some way
done amiss, though very consident that since my Repenting and Restoring (1661. 12
Years before) I had ever studiously and scrupulously endeavored to do as I
would be done unto. Nor could I six on any particular Failure, unless on
selling two Horses last Year Of this also afterward.
. Then I questioned whether my Attempts to satisfy such as I had wronged
(while at Cambridge) had succeeded; and St. Austin's Saying, Non remittitur,
etc. made me tremble. I also feared I had profaned the Lord's Supper: and when
on search I began to hope I had not, I charged my self with rash presumption,
in thinking of so high and holy a Calling (as the Ministry) which such base
former Sins would disgrace. My Perplexities were lamentable: I had recourse to
God by Prayer, though not sufficiently frequent and fervent; and I consulted
his Word and Servants.

I could not find it was any Sin for me who had sinned so much, and perhaps
hardened some, to endeavor the reclaiming of others: I found great Sinners had
been (after Conversion) used by the Holy God as chosen Instruments of his
Grace; and remembered many late Examples guilty of Sins materially equal, if not
greater than mine, whom yet God blessed with eminent Success and Comfort.

My fear of disgracing Religion seemed very unreasonable; the Sins known to
few, very few and far off, so many Years since repented of and forsaken! and my
Conversation (though needing manifold pardon from God) having long gained too
favorable a Repute among Men. Therefore though most unworthy to be honored by
God, to do him any Service toward the Salvation of any poor Creature; yet I
could not but think it lawful, yea my Duty to endeavor it to the utmost of my
Capacity and Power; and thereon resolved to reject and resist such Suggestions
as Temptations to Sin against my Duty.

[As to the Restitution wherein his Friend had so unworthily disappointed him,
he here sets down all the Particulars wherein he could remember any wronged,
and by whom he had made Restitution in all more than double the value, and in
most much more, and thus concludes.]

Thus for less than 4. l. at the utmost value, I paid with a great deal of
shame and trouble about 15 l. and I gave 20 l. extraordinary to the Poor. I
would all that wronged me knew I forgave them, though none made me
Satisfaction, except 3 l. from one that desired to be concealed, were on that
account.

Some Advantage I found by my Troubles in this Affair.

1. I found much Pride within me, and was hereby made base and vile in my own
Eyes, and willing to be so in others.

2. I minded too much what was less needful, and these Distractions drove me to
the Essentials of Religion, and made me mind them more.

3. I was more convinced of my own Impotency and Nothingness, and of my
constant dependence on God for Duty and Comfort: I found Reasons and Arguments
nothing till God enabled me after another manner to apply them.

4. I was more sensible of the Necessity and Use of Prayer.

5. I understood better the condition of the Scrupulous, that their Troubles
were not to be slighted as proceeding from Weakness and Folly; but to be
tenderly managed: and that the withdrawings of the Spirit are something beside
Melancholy, though that may be joined with them.

6. I was warned byall to walk more circumspectly, that I might not provoke my
Heavenly Father thus to chasten me: and instead of Controversies, especially
about small and mysterious Matters, to study more the practical Life of Faith
in nearer Communion with the blessed Fountain of Holiness, Peace, and Joy.

My Scruples about the Horses I sold had as little grounds as almost any other.
I repeated my Charge to those that sold them, to speak truth, neither denying
nor using any means to conceal any Fault: Only I doubted I was not sufficiently
careful to have the Buyers acquainted with all I knew my self. It being the
Rule of an Heathen, Tully; Ne quid omnino quod venditor novit, emptor ignoret.
Yet I could not learn the Buyers were damaged, nor say they paid too dear; and
good Men laughed at my Scruples, professing themselves would do as I had done.

[How happy were civil Societies, if all acted in their Contracts with so
strict and conscientious Justice! The comprehensive Rule of Righteousness
between Man and Man, delivered by our Savior, Matthew 7. ver. 12. includes this
of Tully as one branch of it. What a vile Reproach is it then to the Christian
Profession, that so many thousands that make it, should in their Dealings fall
short of the Rules of Justice laid down by an Heathen Moralist.]

As to the danger of Sacrilege, which gave the first Alarm, old Evidences
showed, that about or above 130 Years before 1673. Ducats belonged to the
little Hospital of St. Bartholomew in West-Smithfield, and was Leas'd by the
Master and Brethren for 10 l. per annum, and some Money toward Repair of their
Church, and Relief of their Poor. The Result of my Reading, Consideration and
Prayer, was to this effect:

1. The first Alienation did not appear to be Sacrilege; i. e. A stealing or
converting to their own use what was Sacred, lawfully set apart to God, nor yet
robbing of the Poor.

2. There wanted Evidence of a right Dedication to God, directed and accepted
by him. To pass by the Censers of Corah, etc. Number. 16.16, 17.37, 38. if not
hallowed at first by particular Divine Appointment: yet afterward as a
Monument of their Sin and Punishment, there were express Commands, or at least
sufficient general Directions which regulated the separating of Things to God;
and what was set apart agreeably to such Warrants, was sacred, and belonged to
God indeed. Thus Tithes, Cities and Suburbs for the Priests and Levites under
the Law were holy, (if not the former with Houses and Glebes for Ministers also
under the Gospel) and so were the First Fruits, and other commanded and
directed Offerings. But Histories make it doubtful whether what was separated
in those dark times, was according to any sufficient Divine Warrant and
Direction; or rather from the cheating Extortion of covetous Priests, and the
superstitious Errors of ignorant Laics, without Scripture-Rule or End; too often
it is to be feared not more acceptable to God, than what he forbad of old, the
hire of a Whore, or the price of a Dog.

2. Alienations were excessive, contrary to the common good; Therefore though
they had been otherwise regular, not allowed, and consequently not accepted by
God. He bounded Dedication of old, and it was not lawful to exceed the measure
in what he most expressly required. When the People had offered enough for the
Tabernacle, they were forbid to bring any more. Levi was to have no
Inheritance, only Dwellings with Fields so many Cubits round. The Reasons of
such Commands hold, clearing and strengthening the Law of Nature, and Statutes
of Mortmain, etc. against excessive Alienations to religious or charitable
Uses; and for translating what was superstitious, noxious, and therefore
unlawfully separated. Such seems to have been our case. The Clergy excessively
supernumerary and debauched, and as excessively endowed; Though not an hundred
part of the Kingdom, yet having, as was computed, a fifth, (nay, as some, a
fourth part or more) of the prime Lands thereof. Such vast superfluous Revenues
might be judged rather a provocation of God, than an acceptable Dedication to
him: and therefore ought to be removed into a righter Channel. Hence they that
alienated such Lands, might not dread those terrible Curses inserted in the
dedication of them, or otherwise thundered out against the Alienators thereof.
If God had bid 'em curse, or in some cases from Superiors or Parents, 'twere
dreadful. But when such Curses proceed from Error, are unjust and
uncharitable, Prove. 26.2. like a restless Bird flying fearfully away; the
causless Curse, as if afraid to come near the Innocent, shall be far off, never
hurt; therefore should not be superstitiously regarded.

2. If any of those Lands were unlawfully alienated, and Restitution therefore
a Duty: they that ordered and acted were the Persons bound to it; or they being
long dead, My Lord Bacon (as I remember) thought that following Parliaments
were concerned; not particular Persons, who may lawfully possess what was at
first unlawfully alienated upon prescription, purchase, etc. Judge. 11. with
Deuteronomy. 2. Though the Israelites were not to meddle with the Moabites or
Ammonites, nor to have any of their Land for a Possession; yet having taken a
large Country from the Amorites, of which they had dispossessed the other,
Jephtha justified the keeping of it against the claim of the King of the
Ammonites, (and it seems of the Moabites also, (or at least confederate with
them) by a threefold Plea: 1. That the Country was taken from Sihon and his
Amorites, and not from the Moabites or Ammonites. 2. They gained it in a just
War approved by God, Josh. 13.24. 3. They had long enjoyed it, toward 300
years, the round Sum mentioned.

I thought I might make the like defense.

This Estate belonged to Sir Stephen Scot's Heirs, after various preceding
Alienations by Purchase, Descent, etc.

2. 'Twas purchased by my Father in the simplicity of his heart at a full
Price; and if I survived my Mother, would fairly descend to me.

3. It had been enjoyed toward 140 Years, since taken from the Hospital, a
larger prescription than usually required to consirm Estates; Possessiones five
privatae sive publicae praescriptione longi temporis confirmantur. Else there
would be no end of Scruples, Contention, and Confusion.

3. Restitution was made in full measure by King Edward the Sixth, the Hospital
advanced to a better Condition, and the Church to a Parish Church.

Weaver's Funeral Monuments. The Hospital of little St. Bartholomew in West
Smithfield, for the Poor and Diseased, founded by Raherne first Prior, and
Founder of the Priory of Great St. Bartholomew, to be governed by a Master and
Eight Brethren Priests; (as Speed, black Canons) for the Church, and Four
Sisters, to see the Poor served, valued at the Suppression at 305 l. 6 s. 7 d.

Speed agrees, naming the last Prior Balton for a great Benefactor.

Stow 's Survey. Hospital of St. Bartholomew valued at the Suppression, 1539.
31 of H. 8. at 305 l. 6 s. 7 d. Restored 1546. by King Edward the Sixth, with
the Messuages of Gilt-Spur-Street, Burton-Street, Peter-Key, Old Fish-Street,
and St. Bennet, Hulda Limehurst, in Stepney, besides very large Collections
from the Citizens, so that it was New-built 1553. since much augmented.

So that whatever was the first Dedication, besides all to be said for the
excessive Alienation of Mortmains, and yet more for retaining after so long a
Prescription, seeing the Church was restored, if not continued to the Parish,
and in 7 Years the Hospital also Rebuilt, and better Endowed out of King
Edward's Estate, and by his Influence: I thought I had no occasion to scruple
the enjoyment of Ducats, if it should descend to me: as many better than I,
enjoy without scruple Estates, for which they have not so much to say.

Hackney, March 31. 1674.

My Days were checkered with Duties and Failings, Hopes and Fears, Joys and
Griefs: My Desires, and, I hope, sincere Endeavors, were for stronger
Resolutions, more vigorous and lively Affections, ardenter Love, and sweeter
Joy in a holy dependence on, Resignation and Obedience to my God, that I might
through Grace write down more matter of Praise and Joy in perpetual well-doing;
for my dearest Savior's sake.

Hackney, July 28. 1674.

I had in some sincere manner (I hope) served God, and still mourned after a
public Opportunity in any tolerable Circumstances, on such terms as I could
come up to, like what I heard some (though straiter than I) enjoyed. I was
willing to take Episcopal Orders, if I could have had them; but did not think
'em absolutely necessary to occasional Preaching under some public Minister,
which I would have rested and rejoiced in; an useless life being very
burdensome. I thought God called me to serve him as I could: I had enough of
such Testimonies as the Bishops usually required. I was far from slighting the
solemn Investing Rite, very ready to seek it of them, when judged attainable
and expedient in my Circumstances. I had likewise observed it ordinary in the
Universities to Preach long without Orders as Probationers, etc. and
accordingly thought my self obliged not to refuse any inoffensive opportunity
of doing good by Preaching, where it was wanted, particularly for our aged
Vicar Mr. Timpsion, who greatly needed help, and had sometimes no better than
mine.

Hadley, December. 11. 1674.

Having on repeated Invitation taken a Journey to Glastenbury near Cranbroke in
Kent; I had there proposed for a Wife, Mrs. Bridget Roberts, Daughter to the
Lady of that Name. I was little (if at all) affected with the Honor, nor was
the Portion so great as I had been tempted with elsewhere: But there was
desirable assurance of Piety, Humility, good Temper, Industry, and Frugality,
and withal a fairer Opportunity of inoffensive Usefulness than had yet offered
in my Circumstances.

[After some account of his Courtship, and the Remora's he met with, but at
last overcame in it, he adds.]

Tuesday, October. 5. 1675. we were Married in Glaslenbury-Chappel, my self at
the end of my 32d. Year, my Wife not 18. by Mr. Monckton Vicar of Brenchly, Sir
Thomas giving her, her Mother, other Brother and Sister, and a few besides
present. I praised God who had enabled us to follow him our Ruler, Guide, and
End; and had at length cleared our way, and brought us into that near relation.
I prayed it might be sanctified and improved to the great ends which I hope we
sincerely aimed at.

All this while I endeavored, not without some sinccess, that others might be
the better, not the worse for me.

May 29. 1676. Glastenbury.

On my return, I set about doing good in the Family and Neighborhood, having
seriously considered my Duty to God, my Superiors, and others, and likewise
their Circumstances among whom I was then to live.

The Family and others accustomed to the old Chapel at Glastenbury, being two
Miles or more from the Church, prejudiced against the established Worship, and
the next Minister, the Vicar of G --, especially Th. a drunken impertinent Sot,
that distasted many conformable enough, and made 'em approve more private Help.
I still dealt openly as I had done before Marriage, declaring my desire of more
public Service, readiness to read Common Prayer, almost all, going sometimes
to the neighboring Churches, and joining in the Liturgy; and letting them know
my practice of Communicating, and that kneeling. I drew none to our private
Meeting, but blamed such as came from good Ministers, professing I would not
keep up a separate Congregation, but only while it appeared expedient help for
such as were so ill provided. I proceeded with more Confidence and Comfort,
because I had no trouble, nor heard of any dislike from the more conformable
Neighbors, and was more confirmed in the moderate course I had taken by the
impotent Censures of some uncharitable Persons. My Prayers were to know my
Duty, and do it, pleasing God, though I displeased Man.

Glastenb. Sept. 20. 1676.

[He here gives some Account of some Scruptes about his Wife's Portion,
occasioned by a Report of her great Grandfather dying in Debt, and the clear
Satisfacti^^ ^e attained upon an exact Enquiry into that Affair.]

I was also thankful for God's Assistance in doing good, for Health and
Eyesight, Love, and Kindness in my Relations, Success of my Affairs,
mirigating, shortning, and sanctifying Troubles, etc. My Prayerers were for
Increase of Grace and Comfort, for more of the true Christian Spirit of Love to
all, even to the Unjust and Unkind, that Love might be the commanding frame and
temper of my Soul.

Glastenb. July 5. 1677.

Troublesome censorious dividing Spirits had occasioned more thoughts of those
unhappy Controversies about Forms, Ceremonies, Church Government, etc. And I
was still more satisfied, even when most serious, that the bitter extremes of
Dissenters, (as well as of rigid Conformisis) were very displeasing to God:
That Spiritual Pride, narrow-spirited mistakes, and grievous wresting of the
holy Scriptures, were the evil roots of unchristian Divisions and real
Schisins: I was much troubled at such Uncharitable and Love-killing Principles
and Practices; yet had cause to be thankful that there was more Light and Love
amongst those that came to the Meeting at Glastenbury, which I still
endeavored to increase.

I thankfully hoped I had not been wholly unfruitful, and owned God's very
gracious Dealings in all my Afflictions in many respects, particularly for
regarding my Weakness, removing one trouble before another came, and supporting
under all.

Again, Praises for comfortable Converse, Success in my Affairs, some progress
in getting and doing good, and a life of Love, in some measure, according to
God's Ordinance, with my Dear for two Years past.

Glastenb. Sept. 22. 1679.

I was awakened the beginning of the Year by apprehension of greater
Afflictions which I attempted to prepare for: I found I thought matter for
Praises, in what I had been and done, to be sure in many Favors for Body and
Soul, which I was concerned more thankfully to improve. I was several times
still more affected with the increasing woeful Effects of Church-Divsions. I
thought (and think still) I might appear to God, his Word was my Rule for
Peace, which by Study and Prayer I endeavored to understand; but I could not
judge concurrence with narrow-soul'd unreasonable Enemies of Peace, any other
than Conspiracy against it. I therefore openly and honestly disowned and
opposed the uncharitable sinful Courses some took: My Desires, Prayers, and
Endeavors were, that Professors might have more sound Knowledge and Humility,
and walk in the good ways of Catholick-Truth, Love, and Peace. My Praises
flowed from freedom from unpleasant Extremes, from unt^^ard Wranglings about
little Things, and from losing holy Love, and the Vitals of Religion in
unchristian irrational Heats about the less necessary variable Circumstances
thereof. The mischief of such Courses grew daily more and more evident, and
accordingly my Resolutions against them: I was again and again thankful for
many other continued and increased Favors, especially for my Faithfulness and
Success in doing Good.

[It was a little before this time that the good Providence of God happily
brought me into his Acquaintance and Converse, being invited to Preach once a
Lord's Day with him to the People that met at Glastenbury, which I continued to
do for near a Year: And therefore can give a better Account of what these
Expressions in his Diary refer to. He was fully satisfied with his own practice
in Preaching to that Auditory, which generally consisted of Persons not only
very serious in their temper, but free from any of those uncharitable Heats
that accompany a narrow Zeal for a Party. They were indeed drawn to attend his
Ministry, because as they had but too just reason of dissatisfaction with the
neighboring Parish-Ministers: so they soon found other Impressions made on
them by his judicious and affectionate Discourses, which yet derived still
greater Efficacy from an eminently holy Conversation, and particularly from his
large Charity in furnishing all poor Families thereabouts with Catechisms, and
other good Books, and his unwearied Care in visiting them, to examine their
Proficiency in the knowledge and practice of serious Religion. And be durst not
throw off that Ministerial Work wherein God blessed him with so eminent Success,
to avoid some Men's weak and groundless charges of Schism and Separation: But
thought the Salvation of Souls that needed better help than they were provided
for in public, preferable to the observation of those Ecclesiastical Canons
which excluded so many faithful and laborious Ministers from being employed in
the Parish-Churches, of whose continued Labors, he thought there was an
apparent necessity. For though the public Clergy was almost supernumerary, yet
there were but few in comparison who seemed to have any due sense of the weight
of the Pastoral Charge, and too few that had Qualifications of Learning and
Piety requisite for it. But on the other hand, he was greatly troubled at the
Extreme which he thought those Dissenters run into, who avoided all Communion
with the Parish-Churches: and to express his dislike of what he thought an
uncharitable temper in them, he often (as you will read anon) communicated in the
next Parish Church, and was troubled to find that several whom he thought truly
good Men, should so warmly censure him for it. Nay, he was so extremely tender
of prejudicing the Interest of Parish-Churches, that though he durst not
condemn those of his Brethren, who formed distinct Congregations, to which they
administered the Lord's Supper, and all other Ordinances, though without
renouncing occasional Communion with the Parish-Churches; yet he was so
earnestly desirous of an Act of Comprehension, that might ( by restoring
Discipline in Parish-Churches, and giving Ministers access to them on such
easier terms as his Judgment could comply with) lay the foundation of a happy
Union; that he resolved rather to wait longer for it, than do any thing to make
the breach wider, by going further than constant Preaching, which he looked on
only as a necessary help, and no real hindrance to the true Interest of
Religion in the Parish-Churches. And often freely declared so much to those
that there attended his Ministry.

Having made so long a Digression, though necessary, to clear the sense of
these Passages in his Diary, (by which it fully appears with what Deliberation
and sincerity he acted in these matters;) I shall before I close it, subjoyn
one Instance of the admirable Influence his Example and Persuasions had to
promote Religion in the Family and Neighborhood of Glastenbury: For the Heir
of it, Sir Thomas R -- being but then newly come to Age, did at his desire, (
to engage his Tenants the more effectually to the study and practice of
Religion) call together their Servants and Children every Lord's Day, after the
Afternoon Sermon, and himself Catechized them. This I have often observed with
great Satisfaction, and as I am sure the mention of it is no dishonor to his
Quality or Years; so I wish that so memorable an Example of early Zeal for
Piety, may draw others to an Imitation of it. Such familiar Instructions would
be more readily and thankfully embraced by their Inferiors, from those on whom
their Secular Interest depends, and whom they are sure nothing but
compassionate Charity to their Souls, can prompt to so much condescension. But
to return to Mr. Trench's Diary.]

Glanstenb. May 24. 1680.

I had been Abused, Censured, and Slander's, Faithfulness and Plain-dealing had
hard returns: But my Duty was comfortable, though against the stream; I had
Witnesses of my Integrity above and within, and in the considence thereof was
plain and free with the injurious Party, to whom I still returned Good for
Evil, Prayers, and Services for many and cruel Wrongs. The Guilty at length
expressed a great and sorrowful sense of what was past, asking God forgiveness,
and his unworthy Servant, and promised what had flown out in Passion against
Truth, should be rectified, and my Innocence cleared. I was still praising God
who enabled me to do my Duty, against such cutting Provocations, and gave me so
much kindness, where I less expected it.

Glast. Jan. 1. 1681.

Thankful acknowledgments of continued Goodness to me and mine, especially for
any Sincerity and Diligence in increasing my own and others Knowledge, Love,
and Obedience; Breathings after more and more Holiness, That by any means I
might be more like my Heavenly Father, more faithful in endeavoring his Glory,
and the good of men, and more happy in success.

Prayers for constant Assistance were quickened by the sudden sinking and dying
of an old Acquaintance, Mr. S -- who was commonly very cheerful, full of
comfortable consident Expressions of Resignation to and trust in God, and of
unconcernedness for and elevation above lower temporal matters: Yet on the
Death of a Friend and Wife, all failed, and he soon sunk and died. What need to
please and seek to God continually, that he may keep us strong in himself and
the power of his might.

Glast. July 10. 1682.

I complied to stay at Glast. though solicited by other Friends to be nearer
them, with hearty Prayers to be more laborious and successful for their good,
particularly Sir Th's., whom I had great reason to love. I had comfortable
hopes of my own Sincerity, but not without trouble for my sluggishness and
wandering Thoughts. I reflected on the prime of my Health and Briskness, not
improved as became me for God, acknowledging it just I should not be honored
to do him any considerable Service, and begged pardon and strength of Body and
Soul, and good success, For his infinite unaccountable Mercy and Goodness in
our dearest Savior.

Glast. May 28. 1683.

I found several Notes of my own Sincerity, and with more considence:
Distractions were my trouble, against which my Prayers were still directed.

I had designed to receive the Sacrament in Cranbroke-Church, not from fear,
for which there was then no occasion: but from sense of Duty, and trouble for
the neglect thereof. I had been for it, and often declared my Judgment.

But the vehement Aversion and disswasion of several good Men had kept me from
doing it there: But I was at length satisfied I ought not to please them
therein, but to obey the Commands of Christian Unity, Communion, and Love; to
perform a Duty, and partake of a Privilege sadly neglected, and take away that
Offense which forbearance would six before some who mistakingly cry out against
Offense, when through their own Faults displeased.

My Body had continued very crazy, Lungs sensibly heated and swelled by the
Catarrh, notwithstanding many means: but God sent me to London, made my Friends
urge me to better advice, and blessed what was prescribed, especially Milk
variously prepared and mixed, with quick and strange success. Wishes were for an
Heart more drawn and warmed by Divine Goodness and Love.

My Work at Glastenbury drawing to an end, my Conscience witnessed that I had
endeavored to promote the Essentials of Religion, not our unhappy Differences,
with as little appearance of Schism or Faction as I could.

Brenchley, Nov. 20. 1684.

Our 6th Son was Bapitz'd and named Thomas, by Mr. Monkton, our Minister at
Brenchley: I hoped he had not only the Token, but the saving benefit of the
Covenant, praying he might live, and faithfully embrace it for himself.

Brenchley, July, 5. 1685.

This Day I received the Sacrament, renewing my Covenant with my God, who is my
All. I converse little with Men, but enough to see and hear of many lamentable
sinful Distempers. Lord make all better, and keep such as profess greater
Purity, from impure Heats and Mistakes, and from doing Evil under pretense of
Good.

July 21.

I endeavored as I ought to be affected with the Sins and Sufferings of so
many.

My Thoughts have been frequently of God, and my Discourses with several as I
had opportunity: I hope they would have been better, if less disturbed by
bodily indisposition, which still clouds my Head. O for a better Head and Heart
to glorify my good God and Savior, in doing and suffering whatever pleases
him.

Brenchly, October. 7. 1685.

Being entered into the 43d. Year of my Life, I reflected on my carriage toward
God and Man, what I had been and done in the World; and what grounds I had to
hope for a better: The Result whereof I write for future use, I hope without
partiality. God grant I may yet write better.

I am unfeignedly willing to know the worst of my self; I think I have good
ground to hope I have found the benefit of an early and sincere Dedication to
God by my good Parents, and of their careful Education and frequent Prayers,
and the many other Spiritual Advantages I enjoyed.

I am pretty well assured that I have chosen God for my Portion, Rest, and
Happiness; and that I prefer not the Profits, Pleasures, and Honors of this
World, before him. I desire no more thereof than is needful for his Service,
heartily desiring and seeking first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness,
and expecting other things in due subordination.

I have, I hope, heartily, humbly, and thankfully accepted the Lord Christ, as
offered in the Gospel to be my Savior on his own terms, to save me from my
Sins, to sanctisie me by his Word and Spirit, to rule me by his Laws, and so to
justisie and save me from Guilt and Punishment for ever.

I have been and am greatly troubled that I did not earlier return unto God:
The Sins of my Youth and my Relapses since, are the grief of my Soul, which I
would wash away, if possible, with my own blood: It cuts my Heart that I
forsook them no sooner, and that my following Life has not been more fruitful.
Yet I hope, I have been and am sincere, keeping my self through Grace, from my
own Iniquity, and living in the practice of the contrary Duties.

I am heartily willing to comply with God in all things, and to live in the
daily practice of all those holy, heavenly, spiritual Duties of Heart and Life,
which my God requires: I am very sorry that I perform them no better: and yet I
hope I am not defiled with great or reigning Sin, but am prevailingly his
faithful Servant.

I long for nothing more than, nothing so much as more Fixedness of Mind on
God, more Constanoy, Cheerfulness, and Success in his blessed Service.

I unfeignedly desire, and, through Divine Assistance, resolve to persevere and
grow still better, notwithstanding all Difficulties, and against all
Temptations, to think of and act according to Matthew. 10.37, 38, etc. and Luke
14.26, 33. That whatever it cost, I will so run, that I may obtain the Crown,
forgetting those things that are behind, and pressing forward toward the mark
for the price of our high calling of God in Christ Jesus. But thou, O Lord,
forsake not me, that I forsake not thee.

I am in love with that Love which our Lord set us such an Example of, and made
the distinguishing Character of his Disciples. My Charity, I think, is large
and extensive, according to his Will; but especially I have loved and do love
all good Men as such prevailingly; They are to me the Excellent of the earth,
in whom, (as to Men) is all my delight. The Divine Image affects and draws me
wherever I find it, notwithstanding differences in little Things: And my Love
is real and fruitful according to my Ability: My Heart and Hands are open as
Objects and Occasions offer.

I have been and am very careful to wrong none, having long since righted those
I did.

I have soon forgiven when provoked; yea seldom, very seldom retained any
Grudge against any: I have returned Good for Evil, where I deserved well, and
yet suffered much ill; and where I have deliberately refused to comply with
any, it was because I thought it my Duty for their good: I have been watchful,
Self should not prevail under shadow of being concerned for God. I have no
Enemies whom I do not heartily pray for, and am not ready to do good to.
Praised be God, these Duties of Loving, Giving, and forgiving, were not and are
not difficult.

I have been affected, and desire to be more with the Condition of the Church
of God, the Sufferings of so great a part thereof, and especially the Sins that
deserved them. My Prayers have been and are, That God would Refine and not
Destroy; That he would diffuse that Wisdom from above, which is pure and
peaceable; That he would revive the power of Godliness, humbling the Guilty of
our Divisions, and uniting in Christian, Catholic Love.

I have conscientiously considered my Duty to the Magistrate, and accordingly
have been careful to obey all his Laws, unless contrary to the Laws of God: And
I thought it became me to understand his Will not in the worst, but in the best
sense his Words would bear; remembering that an erring Conscience will not clear
me if I disobey any lawful Command.

I have been little inquisitive about the Magistrate's Duty, but careful to
know my own: My enquiry was not, Whether he did well to Command, but, whether I
might lawfully Obey? Though he impose unnecessary Burdens beyond his Authority,
(which is for Public Good;) yet Compliance may be my Duty from Humility, Love
to Peace, and that I may not offend, but respect God's Vicegerent.

I have considered the Veneration due to those in Authority by reason thereof,
however they be otherwise defective; and the Subjection that must be ever
continued, though the Laws of God forbid Obedience, and accordingly resolved
never to partake in Rebellion, though for the best Religion, and most valuable
Liberties; but to be still subject not only for Wrath, but, for Conscience Sake.

I have often frequented the Public Authorized Assemblies, and joined in the
established way. of Worship, not to avoid Civil or Ecclesiastical Censures, not
for any worldly Interest; but from sense of Duty, and a just persuasion, after
many Thoughts and Prayers, in which I am still more confirmed, that I was more
obliged to do so by the Laws of God, and abundantly warranted by the Example of
our Savior and his Apostles. I have been still more confident, as I considered
the State and Practice of the Primitive and other Churches, and looked, I
think, impartially into what is opposed by Dividers.

Praised be God, I am still well satisfied that I am not involved into so much
as any consent to Sin. I reflect with comfort on my moderation about small or
doubtful matters, and on my warmth against the Antichristian Spirit of
Incharitableness, Hatred, Rage, and Malice.

I admire God's Infinite goodness in the way of Salvation, and am greatly
troubled that I am no more affected with the amazing Mercy and Benignity of my
Heavenly Father, with the stupendous Charity, Condescension, and Sufferings of
the Son, and with the wonderful Patience, Long-suffering, and Kindnoss of the
Holy Spirit. I desire and long to know and love, admire and praise, spoak and
act more and more to the utmost of my power, for the Glory of the
Incomprehensible Trinity, which has so condescended to Save such an abominable
wretched Creature.

I find it most difficult to get and keep an Heavenly Frame without
Distraction: I am often discomposed by worldly Concerns, vexed by the Sins and
Weaknesses of others; and too easily diverted from my Studies, Meditations, and
Prayers, by vain, impertinent, unsuitable, and unseasonable Thoughts: I labor
and groan under them as my great Burden and Sin, and strive alas too
ineffectually against them. What would I give, yea, what would I not give, do,
or suffer, that my Soul were fixed on God; that I could serve him without
Distraction? That my Studies, Meditations, and Converse with God in his Word,
Prayer, and Praise, were more free from wandering, more affectionate, spiritual
and heavenly? Yet I Am sure I long and desire to labor more effectually that
God may sill and possess my Soul; that his holy enjoying Service, (the perfect
Happiness of Heaven) may be more and more begun on Earth. I value and breath
after the Divine Image as the greatest good, esteeming, and desiring to be rid
of Sin as the greatest Evil; and Heaven is therefore most amiable, because
there I hope to be wholly freed from Sin, and to serve and enjoy my God and
Savior in sinless Holiness.

O Lord help me to do as I profess, promise, and bind my self; That my
Conversation may be more in Heaven: That thy Will may be more done by me on
Earth, as it is in Heaven! That I may more comfortably hope and long to be in
Heaven! And, O remember thy Churches and Children, and the whole World; Let my
concern for them all be more according to thy Will, more pure and intense for
thy Glory. Amen, for our Lord Jesus sake.

My worldly Circumstances are not without Difficulties and Temptations;
considerable Losses I have had, yet continued giving largely to the Poor: My
Children dying, I did not think it my Duty to increase my Estate. I have now
Two likely to live, and may have more; so that my Charge rises, when what
should maintain it falls. I resolve to cast my Care on God in well-doing, to
exercise my self more than ever, to keep a Conscience void of offense,
impartially to study and do my Duty, and pray continually.

Brenchley, October. 23. 1685.

My Practice has in some measure answered my renewed Resolutions; I have
employed my time better, prayed harder, and endeavored when called abroad to
do some good, by good Discourse, when I thought it seasonable, and by making
peace. God has comforted me in the kindness of Friends; His Spirit, I hope, is
with me: May I more abundantly find it, as I am called to do or suffer, for my
Jesus's sake!

Brenchley, Feb. 25. 168^.

I hope I continue in God's Service, though alas with many Failings till I was
hasted to London and Hackney, the 5th. where I had an happy issue of an Affair,
which evidently threatened much trouble and loss: I could not but give somewhat
considerable to some that were indeed great Losers. My God, I trust, will
remember me for good, and capacitate me to give more.

Thursday, the 18th. Mr. Samuel Barton, Fellow of Corp. Christi College in
Oxford, married my Sister Sarah; O may they be faithful to God and one another,
according to their Duty: May he find a comfortable Opportunity for Public
Service, of which alas I still continue incapable. I have been lately urged,
and again considered my Scruples (as to the terms of Conformity) but cannot yet
see my way: If I labor under involuntary mistakes, God will ( I hope) pardon
and remove them.

Brenchley, May 1. 1686.

April 26. Our younger Child Thomas died at the end of a Convulsion-Fit, about
an Hour long, etc. May we more practically believe we must also die, and not
cease preparing for it, till we come to desire it, and live in the constant
joyful expectation of Eternity: We are many ways shamefully faulty that we do
not: Pardon and help us for thy Mercies sake. Amen.

Brenchley, May 29. 1686.

On the 23d. I solemnly remembered my Savior's Passion, and renewed my Covenant
with God through him; My Prayors and Vows were principally for increase of
Holiness in Heart and life. God graciously made use of a mean Affliction, (as
others count it) to quicken both the Day following; so that the past Week my
Watch has been more constant, my Recollections more frequent, at least every
Evening: And I sind to my comfort my Converse both with God and Man, has been
in some good measure, (if I mistake not) according to the Gospel. I have had
many Refiections on God's manifold Goodness, many Abhorrings of my own sinful
Vileness: I desire my Actions, and (as God pleases) my Sufferings may be
answerable, that I may glorify him more on Earth, and help others to do so;
and become very ready and willing to serve him better in Heaven. Amen for my
Savior's sake. I praise God, I have lived this Week also as the former; My
Soul has been daily first and last with God: My Thoughts have very frequently
returned unto him, and my Time has been improved with some diligence for his
Glory. My Converse with others and in my own family, has in some measure
expressed the sense of those great Things that ought always above all to be
minded. My Prayers and Resolves have been and are for constancy and progress.
Amen, for my Lord Jesus sake.

June 12.

I hope I am still getting nearer Heaven; I have continued my Converse with
God, and endeavored to quicken others with my self to his blessed Service.
Afflictions are much abated, but not my Fervor. O may Love be an abiding
Principle thereof, acting me with Vigor and Constancy for the Glory of God,
and the good of all with whom I have to do. Amen, for my Lord Jesus's sake.

June 19. 1686.

Praised be God, I have endeavored another Week to speak, and think, and act
for him: His Mercies further engage me daily.

Jyly 3.

I have thought often daily of God and Heaven, and often prayed that I might please
him better, and be more sit to be with him there: But I have not been so
serious and warm, and earnestly desirous of getting and doing good as I was
before, and yet I was last Lord's Day at the Sacrament: I hope God knows that I
desire nothing in comparison with Holiness, that I may be at a greater distance
from the Desilements of Sin, and have deeper and more abiding Impressions of
his purifying Light and Love, and be more constant and successful in
communicating thereof to others. I proceeded not so successfully in my Studies
as I would, and I think sometimes have. I hope to pray and strive that I may be
and do better. Impertinent Discourses, (the too common bane of Converse) have
been my trouble. May I be able to oppose them with Christian Prudence, and to
perfume every Place and Company with somewhat truly good; for his sake, who
purchased and pleads for Grace to help in time of need.

July 10.

An indisposed Body and several incumbring Diversions have hindered me from
serving God as I would; yet I hope my main design has not been wholly neglected.

I was faithful to two Persons in dealing plainly with them about some matters
that had occasioned several to speak evil of them. But I was so with abundance of
tenderness, and therefere cannot but think one of them blameworthy for the bad
return he made. My Conscience bears me witness, I did what I did merely from
sense of Duty, having great reluctances; which only fear of God, and the love
he commands to my Fellow Servants, overcame.

July 17.

I endeavored to serve my good God, of whose kindness I have still more
experience; but alas I have wanted that warmth and pleasure I have sometimes
had: I long and desire to labor for it more than ever.

July 31.

I want the Aids of the Holy Spirit, because I doubt I do not seek and labor
for and with them as I ought: I walk heavily, yet I hope in the right way. O
for more Grace, or rather for better improvement of what I have, that I may
have more; for Jesus's sake!

Aug. 7. and 14.

To the like purpose.

My Watch has not been so constant, nor my Converse so useful as it should;
Less prositable Discourses and books have taken up too much time: I am not
prepared as I would for the Lord's Day approaching. I need and beg pardon, that
I delight no more in the more spiritual heaqvenly Duties and Studies, and am as
desirous, (O may I be as laborious) to do better; for, etc.

Brenchley, Aug. 31.

I have not been what I would, yet I hope I am in the way to be what I wish, in
Heaven. O may I be much better on Earth! To Morrow I design to take a Journey
with my Brother, etc. O may I be able to reflect with comfort at my return on
what I was and did.

Sept. 21.

God's Goodness accompanied me in my Journey, shined in Relations Loveliness,
and Love, preserved my Family, and has brought us together in safety. May all
be crowned with increase of Holiness and fruitful Gratitude, etc.

October. 16.

Four Fits of a Tertian Ague had much weakened and iudisposed me; God then took
it off, and I seem recovering my former State of Health: I thought of Death
with little or no fear, and hope I should have been happy if I had died, though
now my Reflections are not so comfortable. I have sometimes thought I was
beyond what I wrote: but now I am down again. Bodily indisposition dulls me;
But why is not my Soul more vigorous? Had I complied with the Holy Spirit, and
conversed with God as I ought, I might have had more of his comforting,
strengthening Influences and helps. I desire to qualisie my self for them by a
far better improvement of all Aids vouchsafed. Help, heavenly Father, for thy
Son's sake, Amen.

Nov. 8.

Our Seventh Son was Baptized and Named Edmund; May we and ours be still more
our God's, agnizing his Supreme Right, and living more in the lively sense and
active acknowledgments thereof. Amen; for, etc.

December. 11.

My God has continued to engage me by his kindness to my whole Self and ours,
and to our Relations who are so pleasant and useful to us. I have proceeded in
my course of Duty, but alas too heavily without such Diligence, Life, and
Cheerfulness, as become so excellent a Service. I desire to be what I wish, and
to endeavor with all my might: When shall I write that I am and do so? Lord,
help me to help my self! and suffer me not to forfeit the Aids thou
vouchsafest. May I improve 'cm all with greater watchfulness, alacrity, and
success! And may I do my utmost for all that I am concerned to help; for, etc.

December. 31.

The 25th I remembered my Savior, and renewed my Covenant at the Holy Table,
and before and after have taken some pains in his Service, sincerely (I hope)
desiring and endeavoring to please him my self, and to help others to join
with, yea, exceed me. May I still do better, and in the revolutions of Time,
think more of, and prepare better for Eternity. Amen; for, etc.

Brenchley, Jan. 29. 1687.

I hope I have been crawling upwards, though somewhat unevenly, and attempted
to do good as I had occasions to converse with Men, and prepared my self, (at
least sometimes, for Visits, that they might be useful, and not, as alas, too
often lost in Impertinences. Many come and partake of what I customarily do in
my Family on the Lord's Days, after public Service. I may not exclude 'em,
though uninvited. I hope, and pray, and endeavor, that God may honor me to do
their Souls some lasting good. I am sensible of God's goodness as to my private
Concerns and public Circumstances, and desire Heart and Life may be
answerable; for my Savior's sake. Amen.

I have been also disturbed with the Extremes of some censorious Dividers; I
have no Enmity against the Men, but can by no means approve their ways, nor
concur as I am desired with 'em.

Apr. 25. 1687.

I have been doing my Duty, to the wearying and wasting of my flesh, I have
been twice feasted by my Lord at his Table, I hope not without some advantage.

May 16.

The different Opinions, and especially the very indecent heats of good Men, to
which the present liberty gave vent, were no small disturbance to me. And,

July 2.

I desire to lay to heart the Condition of the Church of God; the woeful
neglects of Christian Love in all Parties, and the strange furious Heats that
prey on the vital fervor of Religion, provoke God, and threaten destruction.
Pity and help, O Lord; for vain is the help of man.

July 20.

[Speaking of a very deep and cutting Affliction that had often returned.] I am
far from entertaining hard thoughts of God; I heartily submit to his Sovereign
Pleasure: I acknowledge his Justice might be far severer; and I am sensible of
abundance of Mercy, and that I want Thankfulness, which I often beg of him. I Am
still more consirm'd in the ways of Love that I have chosen, and abhor
Love-killing Principles and Practices in all Parties.

October. 6.

Ending the 44th Year of my earthly Pilgrimage, I reviewed what I wrote, October.
7. 1685. and found my Apprehensions of my own Condition much the same. I have
continued taking pains in my Studies for the Service of Souls, to the wearying
if not wasting of the Flesh; yet my Spirit has not attained the frame I wish:
impertinent Thoughts, wandering Imaginations, inordinate Affections, are my
great and culpable Troubles. When shall I sind and be able to write better! God
grant that I may, whatever I suffer for it.

December. 31.

I have been much perplexed between repeated Messages from Hackney, and others
as unexpected from Ashford; and such Considerations as Reason and Religion
suggest about our designed remove; I was very faulty in suffering 'em to hinder
in such a measure my Converse with God, and my Comfort, Peace, and Joy therein;
that a Sacramental Communion 25th, afforded so little sweetness and benefit,
that I received no more from the infinite Fountain, ascended no higher toward
him, and had not much larger Communications from him. O Lord, forgive and help,
that my better Obedience and farther participation of a Godlike nature, may
praise thine infinite Benignity, and sill my Mouth and Heart with a warmer
sense of all thy Favors, and with more suitable Expressions: Especially I pray
that my Thoughts may be contented, and Labors fastened to present Duty; that
without needless projecting for the future, I may do what appears necessary
now. Let the Year that is now to begin, be better improved than any past: Let me
live as apprehending I may die before it ends; that if I should survive it, I
may reflect how I sill'd it with God's fruitful Service, and rejoice in hope,
that at length Time will be ended, and therewith the too too many failings of
my Duty and Comfort. Amen; for my dear Savior's sake.

Troubles without, and especially Failings within, have much indisposed me for
Duty and the Sweets thereof: yet when lately ill, I had no great fears, but
could think with calmness of a future state, and hope I shall prepare better
for it, and for my Afflictions that may befall me in my passage.

March 31. 1688.

I hope I have not departed from God, though I fear I have got but little
nearer to him: I have persevered with some painfulness in my Studies, and
endeavored to embrace Opportunities of doing good according to the Abilities I
have acquired, and as seemed consistent with that regard that should always be
had to the great Things of Christianity, and the furthering thereof in the ways
of Love and Peace. Such has been my Aim in my frequent Thoughts and Attempts to
leave this place.

Apr. 28.

I have continued studying, praying, instructing my Family and others, but with
many distractions, not only from our unsettled Condition, but likewise from
other Accidents and Circumstances which occasion trouble, and threaten loss: I
lament that I am so much affected by 'em, and that the greater concerns of
Eternity, (the sense whereof should have been more awakened and strengthened by
the solemn remembrance of my Lord and Savior at his Holy Table, the 15th and
22d.) do not more effectually divert my Thoughts and raise my Mind. Lord, pity,
pardon, and help: Direct yet where I may serve thee better, and do more good
than ever. Make me especially useful to my Children as they grow capable of
learning and loving their Duty, that I may have more of the pleasure that I
most desire, see more of thy restored Image in others, and feel it in my self.
And O remember thy Churches, particularly in these Nations; Guide and prosper
in the ways of Holiness and Peace, that walking in the fear of the Lord, and in
the comfort of the Holy Ghost, they may be edified and multiplied. Amen; for,
etc.

I have been afflicted, but I have been also sustained, and I hope raised to a
more abiding warmth and watchfulness in God's blessed Service. Hitherto he has
helped me in all troubles; I will still trust him, and endeavor my Carriage
may prove that my Trust is not presumption. I have been affected with others
Sufferings and our common danger. May my Prayers and Labors be still more
vigorous, and my Praises also for all his Goodness.

July 2.

I have endeavored to discern the mind of God in those Afflictions wherewith
he has pleased to follow me; I have searched my Heart and reviewed my Actions.
I still see cause to wish that I had more readily embraced all Opportunities of
doing good, and more effectually improved them. My Faults toward God have been
Defects in Affection and Devotion, in Resignation and Dependence, etc. for
which Yesterday I begged pardon, when I commemorated his Death, who purchased
pardon for the Penitent; and I as earnestly petitioned for those more powerful
Assistances, that may more effectually determine me to all my Duty, and enable
me to delight in it.

To Morrow I may see my Mother, Brother, etc. O may our Converse be still more
holy and useful, that we may have stronger hopes of meeting in Glory. Amen;
for, etc.

July 25.

Yesterday I returned from Hackney, having had a pleasant Converse with my
Mother, Brother, and other dear Relations and Friends, and our pleasure was
not, I hope, without some profit, though not so much as I hoped. Growing
Wickedness and approaching Sufferings we could too easily discern, and were in
some measure affected with. We desire, and O may we strive more effectually to
know and do our Duty how difficult soever; and Lord, pity, pardon, help and
increase thy People, and prepare us for thy blessed Will in all things; for our
Lord Jesus's sake. Amen.

Aug. 6.

The 3d. my Mother came to us, and we may be longer together than we are like
to be again on Earth. May our Discourses speak our sense hereof, and further
our preparation for that blessed state, where parting of Friends will be no
trouble.

Sept. 26.

I Yesterday assisted at the Fast in Horsmonden, and being indisposed in Body,
and having too many Distractions in my Mind, I fear lest I spoke unadvisedly in
Prayer; and yet my Head is so disturbed, that I cannot recollect in what words
I expressed my self. I have begged pardon of God, and the prevention or removal
of offense, if any were taken, and resolved as Opportunities offered to be
better prepared, as God shall enable by Prayer and Meditation. I am even forced
to remove to Cranbroke, from which yet I cannot but be averse, particularly for
fear of discord with --. Lord, direct us not to neglect Holiness for Peace, nor
yet to violate Peace through mistakes about Holiness. Amen; for, etc.

October. 11. 1688.

Last Week we removed from Brenchley to Cranbroke: Praised be God I came away
desired at both Places. I had the blessing of the Poor I left, and the thanks
of the public Minister, for furthering his Work, and promoting Union among his
People. Lord, make me more useful here, direct in Difficulties, support under
Afflictions, and enable in all to honor thy Majesty, and effectually to
promote the Salvation of others with my own. Amen; for, etc.

Nov. 29.

[ He largely relates what past between him and Mr. B. the Minister at
Cranbroke, to whom he offered to Preach once a Day gratis, and read
Common Prayer in the Afternoon: (So desirous was he of any Opportunity of
Service in the public Churches.) But the Offer being refused, on reasons there
mentioned, be adds;] I then told him, I must Preach once a Day at home, that I
might not be useless, and that I might do good to some who would not hear him
or Mr. W.

[ On the other hand he refused to countenance a N. C. Minister there, as on
other accounts; so principally for his binding his People against all Communion
with the est ablish'd Parish-Churches.]

About this time as he was passing the Yard, to take Horse at a Neighbor's
House, whom he had been to visit, his Foot slipped, and occasioned a slight
scratch on the Skin of his Leg: He was not at first apprehensive of any danger,
and though he rode home, which was seven Miles, immediately upon it, and walked
the next Day at least four more, his Leg did not at all complain: But soon
after taking cold, and his Body being always infirm, this slight hurt was
irritated and inflamed to that degree, that he was forced to call in the help
of able Surgeons. But, alas, it defeated all their Skill, for it mortified
so often, and affected so many other parts, that what with the pain it brought,
and the troublesome and grievous Incisions and Operations it obliged him to,
after it had first prostrated his strength, and emaciated his Body; at length
it extinguished that life, from which we might have hoped for so many great and
good things, if it had pleased God to continue it. His patience and submission
was all the while most admirable and exemplary.

Being almost worn out with the Miseries which the frequent Operations of the
Surgeons put him to:
He wrote these as the last words in his Diary, with a very weak and tr^m^^ing
hand, as the Writing and Letters too evidently show.

Cranbroke, Feb. 19. 1689.

I have been above two Months under the Chirurgeon's hands for a sore Leg and
Thigh. Pains have been sometimes very great; Relapses from Fevers, etc.
several; Apprehensions of Death frequent: I have not, I think, been impatient;
I have been without anxious Thoughts of Eternity; and willing, if God pleased,
to leave my Body, but ^ixedly desirous not to continue in it, unless I be and
do the better for this Affliction. Twice as my ill Circumstances permitted,
(...) viewed the Account of my self, Oct. 7. 1685. and still hope it is not
false.

Of all Men, I could think only of Mr. --, betwixt whom and my self there was
any unkindness, but I think none sinful on my part. I was advised against
meddling with him on that Subject, because I could not see it was my Duty, and
it might do more harm than good.

Lord, pity me in my wearisom Condition, help me according to thy great
Goodness; Refine me for thy better Service on Earth, or perfect in Heaven.

Of his Carriage under his tedious and languishing Pains, the following
Character gives a brief Account: to which I shall only add, That his Patience,
(s^ Grace that Heaven gives us no occasion to exercise,) having had its perfect
work on Earth, especially under an Affliction of so long continuance: He was
(happily as to himself) dismissed from his Labors and Sorrows, and entered into
his everlasting Rest, March 30. 1688/9.

To this Account of his Life given from his own Breviate; it may not be amiss
to annex the Character given of him by Mr. Ch -- that Preached his Funeral
Sermon.

I know the usual Flattery of Funeral Orations, and the ill use that is
sometimes made of them, when the Person is of no extraordinary worth to deserve
them. But very excellent Persons, whose Lives have been very bright and
exemplary, should not fall without being taken notice of. And as it is a piece
of Justice to the Dead, so of useful Charity to the Living to commemorate their
Remarkable Virtues and Graces, that Survivers may be persuaded and encouraged
to Go and Do likewise. And such was this great Man. I am indeed on many
accounts unsit to give a just Character of him: As by reason of mine own green
Years; so also because I had not the happiness to be acquainted with him till
the last seven Years of his life. But I shall say nothing of him, but either on
my own Observation, or from that short Breviate of his Life, Penned by himself
for his own use.

[ And here after some Account of him from the Breviate, which it is needless to
repeat, because the Reader will meet with it more fully there: he proceeds.]

He had before inclined to the study of Physic, and gained so much Skill as
made him very useful to his poor Neighbors when sick. But as one of the
Fathers said concerning Tully, He could not find the Name of Jesus there: And
therefore laid those Books aside, and applied himself to that more sweet and
sublime study of Divinity. Herein in a few Years he exceeded and out-stript
most of his Age: God had given him a large Soul, in a weak and crazy Body. He
was Master of a quick discerning solid Judgment joined with an active Fancy,
which rarely meet together. He was indeed a living Library and walking Study,
and carried about a vast Stock of Learning with him. And God had given him
large measures of Grace to improve his great Abilities for the good of Souls.

With what warmth and Affection, with what apposite Expressions, and ( I had
almost said) unimitable Fluency of Sacred Oratory would he pour out his Prayers
before God! with what tenderness and compassion did he invite and urge Sinners
to Repentance! How clearly would he explain the deepest Mysteries of
Christianity, and what weighty Arguments did he use to persuade to a belief and
observance of its holy Doctrines and Rules! His daily Family-Exposition of the
Scriptures, which for many Years he used Morning and Evening; I have often
thought equal for Accuracy and Instructiveness, to most Commentators. He took
all Opportunities that his own Weakness and Family-distractions, or public
Confusions would allow for his public Labors: And he never omitted Preaching
from House to House by private Visits and Christian Conferences. His Master's
Work was constantly upon his Heart, and he readily embraced all Opportunities
for it. The Sick and Poor were sure of his Company, and he familiarly
condescended to the meanest Capacities for their good. He was as willing to
instruct poor Cottagers in the way to the Kingdom, as those of an higher rank
and degree. He perfumed every place where he came with his savoury Speeches and
heavenly Discourse: His Words dropped as the Dew, and distilled as the Rain; And
his Heart was stilled with such a sense of Divine Love, that the holy
Breathings of it flowed forth among all with whom he converst.

Thus he was in his Ministerial Capacity. And his Life and Actions were
answerable to his Doctrine and Discourses.

I need not say how pleasant a Relative he was, how dutiful as a Son, how
indulgent as a Husband, how prudent and affectionate as a Father. Nor need any
Man tell me how pleasant and faithful he was in his Friendship. He had all the
ingenuity and endearing Obligingness that belongs to such a Relation. He had in
himself those four Characters in eminent degrees, which he was often wont to
say he wished for in a real Friend; Piety, good Nature, Fidelity in
Admonitions, and Reproofs, and a Readiness to Communicate Notions and
Experiences, for the increasing holy Light and Heat.

I must pass over many Things worthy to be remembered, and shall only mention
some particular Virtues and Graces, which were the peculiar Ornaments of his
Life.

He give remarkable Instances of his Piety and Devotedness to God, by his
constancy and frequency in Devotion. He took all occasions for Prayer by
himself and with others, was habitually prepared for this sweet and prositable
Exercise of Religion. Few ever complied more with the Scriptural Command of
Praying always, and without ceasing: This holy Incense was always prepared for
the Altar, though the sweet perfume was not always ascending to Heaven. He
observed the Lord's Day with a religious strictness, keeping it as a holy Rest
to God in the public and private Exercises of Worship, with as little
diversion as possible.

He diligently instructed his Inferiors, by Catechizing and serious
Exhortations. He expressed a warm Zeal against Sin wherever he found it; and
his prudent, calm, and seasonable Reproofs were greatly enforced by the
blamelessness of his own Example. In such Instances his Piety shone in a bright
attractive Light.

His Meekness and Moderation toward those that differed from him, deserves
next to be remembered. Though none was more fervently zealous about the great
Substantials of Religion; yet none were more cool and temperate about those
circumstantial Differences that have occasioned such unhappy Breaches among us.
He abhorred all consorious Heats, and I never knew him more heartily angry
against any, than against the Broachers of narrow love-killing Principles, of
what Party or Persuasion soever. He was zeasous for Peace and Love, as well as
good Works; of a truly healing and catholic Spirit. He was himself
dissatisfied with some Terms of Ministerial Conformity: But yet he encouraged
faithful Parochial Ministers with his ordinary Presence and Communion, and
never censured those that were satisfied in what he scrupled, but kept up an
entire Friendship with many of very eminent note to the very last. Nunquam de
dogmatibus Christus disseruit, sed saepe, and ubique, imo semper de vivendi
sinceritate; was a Sentence often in his Mouth and upon his Heart, written in
the first Leaf of his Breviate, and (as I remember) of his common Preaching
Bible. If Men feared God and wrought Righteousness, he loved them heartily,
however different in Judgment about Matters less necessary and important.

His Humility was also very remarkable; He was clothed with it as with a
Livery and honorable Badge to discover his Relation to his humble
condescending Savior, as I remember he used to interpret that place, 1 Pet.
5.5. Though he was justly esteemed by those that knew him as an Oracle of
Learning that had not many Superiors; yet had he low undervaluing, (not to say
injurious) Thoughts of himself. 'Twas this indeed that has proved an
unhappiness to the Church of God, his Humility having stified many excellent
Discourses that might have been of public use, and made him too willing to
consine his Life and Labors to an obscure Corner.

His Charity was very singular and exemplary: He devoted the 10th, and for many
Years the 7th part of his Estate to Charitable Uses; Neither did he stint
himself to, but often exceeded even these large proportions. He was peculiarly
prudent in manageing his Alms to the best advantage; endeavored at the same
time to save the Bodies and Souls of Men too, by the same act to supply their
temporal Wants, and promote their spiritual Welfare. How often have I known him
visit the Poor, examine their Provisions, and deal out his Bounty with a free
and liberal Hand. And still he mingsed good Counsel with all his Alms, and
affectionately persuaded to serious Piety, which had often a very commanding
abiding Influence. He spent much pains and cost in instructing poor Children in
the Principles of Religion, in giving Bibles and other good Books, exacting a
diligent perusal, and frequently calling them to an account of their
Proficiency. He had many other secret ways of Charity, (as largely appears by
his private Accounts,) for which he courted not the Applause of Men, but is now
rewarded by his heavenly Father.

I shall only farther mention his Patience and entire Resignation to the Will
of God. For some Years before his Death, God visited him with very sore
Afflictions of different natures: But he bore them all with a great sense of
his Fathers hand, and did not charge his Providence foolishly. His last
Sickness was occasioned by a fall, which caused a small Wound, (or rather
Scratch) in his Leg, neglected by himself at first, but meeting with an insirm
distempered Body, at last proved dangerous and destructive. But yet under all
the excessive Tortures of his Pain, and frequent lancings of the Surgeons,
he still expressed great Patience; adn when at any time the extremity of his pain
forced him to cry out, he checked himself, expressing his fears of dishonouring
God by impatience, and blessed his heavenly Father that worse was not inflicted.
Nor did he by peevishness disquiet those about him, but was thankful to every
one that did any necessary Offices for him, was pleased with every thing that
was done, readily condescended to every Proposal and Advice of the Physicians.
He Preached in his Chair and in his Bed: affectionately exhorted all that
attended on him, to the serious practice of Religion, and suited his Counselfs
to the particular Circumstances, (as for as he knew them) of all that visited
him. He died with connortable hopes of Happiness, and often told me from the
very beginning of his Sickness, that he had no tormenting fears of Death: That
though he could have wished he had been more watchful and useful, yet he hoped
he had been sincere, and trusted that for Christ's sake all his Sins were
forgiven. That though he had not Raptures and Transports, yet he had a constant
peaceful Calm which continued to the last moment of his Life. And for some
Wecks before he died, he longed to be dissolved, and earnestly desired, if God
saw good, that he might be with Christ.

Thus lived, thus died this eminent Saint: And now what remains, but that we
take the Apostle's Counsel, as applied to this Occasion, Phil. 4.9. Those
things which ye have both learned and received, and heard, and seen in him, do
ye likewise; And as the God of Peace was with him, so he will be with you, in
Life, in Death, and to Eternity.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and Jonathan Robinson.
THere is lately published, A complete History of the Acts, Decisions, Decrees,
and Canons, of those Famous National Councils of the Reformed Churches in
France. Wherein are contained, 1. A most faithful and impartial account of the
Rise, Growth, Perfection, and Decay of the Reformation in that Kingdom, with
its fatal Catastrophe upon the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, in the Year
1685.2. The Confession of Faith and Discipline of those Churches. 3. A
Collection of Speeches, Letters, Sacred Politics, Cases of Conscience, and
Controversies in Divinity; determined and resolved by those grave Assemblies.
4. Many excellent Expedients for preventing and healing Schisms in the
Churches, and for re-uniting the dismembered Body of divided Protestants. 5. The
Laws, Government, and Maintenance of their Colleges, Universities and
Ministers, together with their Exercise of Discipline upon delinquent Ministers
and Church Members. 6. A Record of very many Illustrious Events of Divine
Providence relating to those Churches. The whole Collected and Composed out of
Original Manuscript Acts of those Renowned Synods. A Work never before Extant
in any Language. In two Volumes.

A Defense of the Catholic Faith, concerning the Satisfaction of Christ:
Written Originally by the Learned Hugo Grotius. And now Translated by W. H. A
Work very necessary in these Times for the preventing of the Growth of
Socinianisin.

Mr. Richard Baxter's Paraphrase on the Psalms of David in Meter, with other
Hymns. Left sitted for the Press under his own Hand.

A Discourse of Earthquakes; By R. Flemming, Author of the Fulsilling of
Scriptures.


