Loyalty Protesting against Popery, AND Phanaticism Popishly Affected.

BEING A SERMON Preached on the Fifth of NOVEMBER, 1682. At St. Olave's
Hartstreet, London.

By WILLIAM WRAY, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Honorable John Lord Berkley
Baron of Stratton.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683.

A SERMON Preached November V. 1682.
GENESIS XLIX. 6. O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret; unto their Assembly,
mine Honor, be not thou united. The whole Paragraph. Ver. 5. Simeon and Levi
are Brethren: Instruments of cruelty are in their Habitations.

Ver. 6. O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret; unto their Assembly, mine
Honor, be not thou united: for in their Anger they slew a man, and in their
self-will they dug down a wall.

Ver. 7. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it was
cruel; I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.


THIS Chapter contains the sum of Jacobs dying Prophecies, concerning the
Fortunes of his Sons, in aftertimes; how they should be the Heads of Tribes,
what the Lots of their Posterity should be, and what especially Remarkable
should betide each of them, in the Land of Promise. And these are called Jacobs
Blessings, wherewith he blessed every one of them. -- v. 28. But we must take
the Term in a very lax sense, if we reckon Simeon and Levi's sentence here in
the Text, into the Number of Blessings: which is a smart Reprimand in the
beginning, and a downright Curse in the close. To which we may either answer,
that they are Blessings in the General, and that one Exception should not
invalidate the Rule: or that the Original (...) signifies either to Bless or
Curse, and that (...) is here a Job 2. 9.
Genus and includes both: or lastly, that the Prophecy is ambiguously
delivered; and what in the Letter appears a Judgment, in the Accomplishment
proved somewhat of a Blessing. The Menace is, that God should divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, and so it came to pass; For upon the
Dividend, the Tribe of Simeon had no particular lot of their own; but possessed a
Canton of Judah's Portion, the Overplus and spare-part of their Inheritance,
Josh. 19. 1, 9.
which was too large for their Number, till the entire Conquest of the
Amalekites in Hezekiah's time; and then they enlarged their Borders 1 Chronicles. 4.
ult.
by entering into their Possessions. Notwithstanding the Jews report that the
Simeonites were Targum Hierosol.
all along a scattered people; being commonly Scribes or Paedagogues, and so
dispersed among the other Tribes. And then upon the Tribe of Levi, the Prophecy
was fulfilled exactly, though much to their Advantage. For Levi had no Part nor
Inheritance Deuteronomy. 10. 9.
with his Brethren; and it was well for him that he had not; for the Lord was
his Inheritance. And his Posterity being chosen to the immediate Service of
God, the Administration of Holy things, they had the Tenths of the whole Land,
beside many other Offerings and Perquisites, assigned them for that Duty. But
though God was so Merciful to fulfill the prediction in a gracious sense,
especially on Levi's part; yet undoubtedly it was intended by the good old
Patriarch, as a tart Reproof of those his Sons inhumane Treachery, and bloody
Massacre of the Sichemites; an account whereof you have at large in the 34. chapter
which, to ease you of trouble, I shall here transcribe.

Jacob, having broke off the Yoke of a Triple Apprentiship under Laban his
Father-in-law, was upon his Return unto the Land of his Kindred, as Genesis 31. 13.
God had commanded him. And, after several Adventures, being come safe to the
desired Canaan, he pitched his Tent at Shalem, and there chapter 33. 18.
bought a piece of ground of Hamor the King of the Country, whereupon to build
an Altar, to offer Sacrifice for his safe Arrival there. During their stay,
Dinah, Jacobs daughter, went abroad chapter 34. 1.
to visit, and acquaint her self with, the Daughters of the Land, whom Prince
Shechem the Son of Hamor espied, liked, and deflowered: and thereupon solicited
the King his Father, to treat with Jacob upon a Marriage; which he did,
proposing Genesis 34. 6.
a free Correspondence, that they might match into each others Family, that the
Israelites would take the Country for their Home, and settle, and get
Possessions in it, and that they might peaceably Dwell and Trade together.
Shechem backed ver. 11.
the King, proffering them to make their own Demands for a Dowry, and that
whatsoever they would ask, he would make it good. The sons of Jacob, that
studied rather to be Revenged than Reconciled, dissembled their Heart-burning
and Resentments, by a half-complyance: only objecting a Case of Conscience, and
that they could by no means make Matches with them, because they were men of a
different Religion: but if the Sichemites would consent to be as They were,
take the Sacrament of their Covenant, and every Male of them be Circumcised, as
God commanded Abraham, they chapter 17. 10.
gave their Faith to agree to their Propositions, to give their Daughters to
the Sichemites, and take the Sichemites Daughters unto them, and to dwell and
become one people with them. These Terms pleased Hamor, but the Prince
especially; who was eager to have the Match succeed upon any score: and to show
his zeal, he deferred not, but took the Ritual mark upon him presently; and the
next business was to persuade the People (after their Princes example) to do so
too: to which end they insinuated that the Israelites were peaceable
good-natured men, and men of Fortunes; that the Land was large enough to hold
them; that Entertaining them would both enrich and fortify it; and that the
only condition they stood upon, was a certain Ceremony, that every Male among
the Sichemites, would submit to be Circumcised, as they all were. The people
being over-perswaded, partly by their Reasons, but more by their Authority,
universally consented, and took the bloody sign (ominously so to them) into
their flesh.

Thus these poor Credulous Wretches, being betrayed into the snare, and rendered
incapable, for the present, either to Fight or Flee, lay at the mercy of a
Provoked enemy, Impotent and Defenseless; neither capable of offending others,
nor saving themselves. Simeon and Levi took the Advantage of their own Treason
and the Sichemites folly, and while they were sore, with each man his Sword in
his hand, they came upon the City, and slew all their Males, the King, the
Prince and the whole Royal line not excepted: and thus they rescued their
Sister from her Ravisher. And to accomplish their Revenge, they plundered their
Houses, drove off their Cattle, and carried their Wives and little ones captive
into their own Tent. At the News of which Treacherous and bloody Doings, their
Father Jacob was heartily ashamed and grieved; and could not forbear to let
them know so, saying unto Simeon and Levi, these Traitors, Murderers and
Regicides, Ye have troubled Genesis 34. 30.
Me, to make Me to stink among the Inhabitants of the Land: Which Horrid story
he could never forget, nor be reconciled to, to his dying day. Simeon and Levi
are Brethren: Instruments of cruelty are in their Habitations. O my soul, come
not thou into their secret; unto their Assembly, mine honor, be not thou
united. -- Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and their Wrath, for it
was cruel. These were his last thoughts, his Deathbed Remembrance, of that
Days work. And indeed there are so many Circumstances, both base and bloody,
attending it, as render it most dishonourably and barbarously wicked. In
summing up whereof, give me leave to draw a Parallel, so far as it will reach,
between the Conspiracy of the Text and that of the Day.

I must confess the story is too modest for the Occasion; but who can help it,
since there is scarce any Age, any History, either Sacred or profane, that will
afford a Match for it? But to bring the Instances as near together as we can,

1. Let us compare the Circumstances of the Persons, the Conspirators, on both
sides.

Simeon and Levi were Hamors guests, though not his Subjects; being admitted
upon Courtesy to sojourn in those Quarters: and it was very ingratefully done
to violate the Laws of Hospitality, and fall foul upon him that had so
befriended them. The Provocation indeed was great, and almost invincible;
though it appeared to have been rather a Matter of Infirmity than Design: the
offender offering all the Restitution that could be, either for the Damsels
Honor or his own. And if this was not sufficient to make them Friends, they
should, for these Reasons, have been generous enemies at the least. Thus stood
the case with the Conspirators in the Text.

But for those of the Day, they had the Bonds of Nature upon them as well as
Gratitude: They were Natives and Subjects, and the Kings of England their
Nursing Parents, under whose benign Beams they drew their first Breath; at
whose Care they were brought up secure from the hands of (such as themselves)
Blood-thirsty and Cruel men, and by virtue of Their Laws, estated and confirmed
in their just Rights and Inheritances. Thus they did eat their Bread at the
charge of the Government, That was their Protection, and they sat safe under
their own Vines, and under their own Figg-trees. But that is not all.

They did not only enjoy the Influence of a Royal Providence, in Common with
other Subjects, but had the Advantage of singular kindnesses, which, such as
deserved better, neither did, nor were capable of receiving. Legal Mulcts were
taken off, and all arrears remitted, that they were behind hand for their
obstinacy and disobedience in the foregoing Reign. They were admitted to Court,
taken into Favor, employed in Trusts of State, and preferred to Honors, as if
they had rather been men of Merit, than Law-breakers and Malefactors. These
were the Simeonites, the Lay-Conspirators of this Day.

But for the Sons of Levi, they were Tenants at Will to the Government for
their Lives. There were Sanguinary Laws in force against them, and every hour
they lived, was upon Mercy and by Permission. And yet from the first of that
Kings Reign, to the happy Discovery, here they lived, here they had their
Freedom, here they enjoyed the benefit of the Law, and (though all their Lives
were forfeited) not one of them felt the smart of it. That if Suspension of the
Laws, if Remission of penalties, if pardon of unrepented faults, if Reward
above and without Merit be Princely favors, and such as double the Subjects
natural obligations to Obedience and Loyalty; then these were the Men, equal to
any in the world, that stood accountable for these engagements; for there were
none of them that were not beholden to the King, either for their Lives, their
Fortunes, their Liberties, or undeserved Courtesies and preferments; and many
of them were engaged for all. And yet these unthankful Miscreants conspired
against their King, their Friend and Benefactor, and sought his Life to whom,
in more than one respect, they owed their own. Neither could they, with the
Israelites, pretend any Provocation, of weight enough to turn the scale so
beladen with good turns, or so much as give a just occasion of offense upon the
even square, all considerations of Royal favors being laid aside. Here was no
deflowred Virgin in the case, but the contrary; and all that could be pretended
was, that Spiritual Whoredom was not tolerated, nor Religion made a Prostitute
to the Lust and Wantonness of Men.

2. That which Blackened the faces of the sons of Jacob, was their Falsehood and
Treachery. The Business was made up, the Terms agreed, the Conditions on the
Sichemites part performed, and the Sacred Rite of Circumcision was made the
Sacrament of this Civil Contract. But contrary to the Faith of their Word and
Promise, contrary to the Articles of the League, Sacred to all the World; they
violate the Covenant, break the Alliance, and Murder Those whom they had bound
themselves to defend.

And the Obligation of every Subject to be True to his King and Country, is no
whit inferior to the most Solemn Contract, whether he take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy or no? It Is that which Nature and the Bonds of Society
oblige him to: It Is that which every Christian has solemnly Sworn in his
Matriculation Oath, to Renounce the Devil and all his works: the Devil, that
Arch-Conspirator against the Throne of God: and all his works of Darkness; and
certainly Treason and Rebellion have a prime place in that black Catalogue, in
spite of an Index expurgatorius.
Italian sponge. Another branch of that Initiation Oath, is, to keep Gods holy
Will and Commandments; And Honor thy Father and thy Mother, stand in the Front
of the Second Table. That to Plot and Rebel, is actually to renounce our
Baptism, and to abjure Christianity, as well as Civil Allegiance, in two main
Articles of that Covenant.

And indeed, other Oaths from Subjects to their Prince, would be very
impertinent, if either the Law of Nature or Religion would hold us: they being
more proper Ligaments of mutual Friendship and correspondence between Equals or
strangers, and where there is no such Relative duty naturally owing. That
there is as much Perfidiousness in Disloyalty, though we have never been put to
an Oath, as if we had sworn a Thousand; For the Oath makes not that a Duty
which was not so before, but only serves to convince him that takes it, and
make him sensible that it is so, and the more conscientious to perform it. So
that the Conspirators of this Day were no less Perfidious than Simeon and Levi,
no not they who never took the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, it being a
Principle of their Religion not to take them.

But here is not only the Breach of Faith to answer for, but Clandestine
Treachery. They surprised their Allies and Confidents unawares; and having
betrayed them into a state of Impotence and Security, murdered both the
helpless, and those that were at Peace with them. Josephus informs us farther,
De Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 19.
that it was at a time of extraordinary Festivity, and probably upon the
Occasion of this new Alliance; that it was in the Night too, when all
Jealousies were hushed, and when weary of the Pleasures of the Day, the
Sichemites had fearlesly given themselves up to a profound Repose: so essential
is it to Treason, not only to be False, but Cowardly and Base.

I have hated the sins of unfaithfulness, says the Psalmist, Bluntly and
Pathetically: and certainly there is no sin so detestable as Treachery is, nor
any sinner in all the Sacred History, that has the like infamous brand upon
his Memory, as Judas has, who kissed and Betrayed his Master: to whom that of
our Savior was no less severe than kind, Friend wherefore art thou come? Which
is very applicable to the Occasion: for, Lord, who suspected our Roman Judas's?
who had injured them? who had provoked them? or who was at Enmity with them?
nothing but the foreknowledge of their Principles, and the experience of their
former Villainies, (could at such a time, under so gracious a Prince, of so meek
and gentle a Disposition, and so particularly kind to them) have persuaded any
sober Man, to suspect them beforehand, or to believe them Traitors when
discovered; such Reason had the Government, from its own tenderness and
indulgence toward them, to be secure, and hope well of them. But this is the
Time for such Devils to do their work in, according to the example of their
Master; who sowes his Tares in the Field, and sends his Firebrands into the
Harvest, when men sleep and think no harm: and it is his Principle and Temper to
Damn and confound those that are most his Friends. That this Conspiracy was
Night-work, contrived in an Abyss of Darkness, managed in the bowels of the
Earth, carried on with all the Arts of secrecy, and that it was
circumstantiated with all the Formalities of a Cursed Treason, I need not tell
you, for the History is no less notorious now, than the Plot was once a secret.

3. These Sons of Jacob, to put a good Face upon the Matter and prevent
suspicion, pretend Religion and a point of Conscience; that they could not
converse freely with the Sichemites, till they were Circumcised; when, in
truth, they could not conveniently Murder them till then. And who could have
mistrusted these men of Perjury, that had such tender Consciences? who could
have imagined but that they were Saints in their Morals, that were so
scrupulous about a Ceremony? Nay, but who would think that the Sons of the
Patriarch should profane the Sacramental Badge of their Profession, the Seal
of the Promises, the most Sacred Rite of the Religion of that Age, and
impiously pervert it to the ends of Treason and Bloodshed, and by the same
Symbol adopt the Sichemites into their Fraternity, and mark them out for
Murder? I believe the stratagem was a Novel in that Age, though it be grown
stale in ours. No man now almost has a design to drive, but Religion and
Conscience are of the Plot. These are the Procurers to our Lusts, and Factors
for our Covetousness, and Suborners of a Poll when we have a mind to be
Popular. We defraud or belie our Brethren and forswear our selves; We clamor
the Church and slander the Government; we speak evil of Dignities, and murmur
against our Betters; we Confederate and Associate, Conspire and Rebel, Murder
Kings, and take possession of their Thrones and Lands, and yet come off
cleverly and with Applause, by putting all upon the score of Religion and
Conscience: And, being fortified with these Charms, there is nothing so Sacred
that we dare not Profane, nor so Horrid that we dare not do.

Doubtless the Papists first taught the Reformation this Religious Juggle: For
they have all along consecrated their Devilish Practices by these Glorious
Names. The Church's interest is the center of their Religion, and their
Consciences turn upon the same Pin: that every thing is Pious, Conscientious
and Meritorious that makes for the Cause; and there is no sin with them like
ill-luck and miscarriage.

Oh, the Work of this Day had been a Blessed Work; the Traitors, Saints; and
the Day a Red lettered Holy Day, as long as ever the Date of the Roman Calendar
had lasted, if things had but gone merrily on for a few hours longer, till the
fatal Thunderclap had gone off, and struck the Church and Kingdom dead at a
Blow!

And then for drawing in a Sacrament to serve a purpose, there are no
Simeonites no Levites in the World like them. Have you not heard of an Emperor
dispatched with the Eucharistical Cup? and of a certain Pope suspected to have
been so served by the Consecrated Host? Nay does not the Sacrament it self in
their Notion, flesh them in Cruelty, and teach these common God-eaters, to
devour, and suck the Blood of Men? The Present Instance seems to whisper
somewhat like it: For the Conspirators first hardened themselves with the
Transubstantiated Elements, and then, like Judas, big with the Devil and
Malice, went on boldly, as far as Gods providence would let them, with the
Execution.

4. The last thing I shall observe in this Tragedy, is the concluding Act,
their impartial cruelty in the Execution. The King, the Prince, the People, all
the Men of the City that were within the reach of their Fury, were offered up a
Propitiation to their Revenge, for Shechem's Folly: and all the Females seized
on to make satisfaction for one single Dinah's Virginity. And the Histories of
France and Ireland will inform you, how the Papists there, like Simeon and Levi
or the Wild Indians, have Run a Muc, and murdered all that were not of the
Italian Shiboleth and Complexion. But the most accursed of all their exploits
that ever they did, or designed to do, was this Project of the Powderplot: That
they should conspire against a King, not their enemies but their Own; a King
that studied their Friendship, (and had like to have paid for it too;) a King
of their own Religion, or of that Religion which they profess and ought to be,
a Christian; and with him the Royal Branches, the hopes of the Succession; the
Nobles and Judges of the Land, the Fathers of the Church, the Representatives
of the People, the Government, the Strength, the Religion of the Nation, to
Confound them all in a Moment, that they might never see, nor live to ask who
hurt them; This was the greatest Masterpiece of Treason, that ever the
Reprobate Wit of Man projected. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; and
their Wrath, for it was cruel.

We can make no better Application of this, than what Jacob did of the
Treachery of his Sons, O my Soul come not thou into their secret; unto their
Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united. Which is both a Protestation against
their Wicked Proceedings, and a Desire that he might never be concerned in the
like, and that what was past might not shamefully reflect upon his Honor, nor
be charged unto his Account. And I believe we are willing to be thought, in
respect of the Papists, of the same mind that the Patriarch was in respect of
his Sons. I suppose few of us are of the Romish Clubs, or frequent Wild-house
to Cap Treason at the Jesuits Gossipings. Popery is so justly Detestable among
us, that we care not how little we have of the Company of such as profess it.
And it would be well if we were as irreconcilable to their Councels, as we are
to their Persons: and equally enemies to their Designs, as to their Religion.
They can never hurt us, except we play booty, and help to do it our selves:
Which They are so well convinced of, that they despair of our Ruin any other
way: And the last Trick that with any hopes of a probable success they can Play
upon us, is to fit us for their own Turns, and wind us into the Conspiracy
against our selves. And that either by Poisoning our Principles, or turning the
edge of our Practices against one another.

First, They have a design upon our Principles, and to make us the Heretics
they are pleased to call us, and such as they are Themselves. For what they
believe distinct from other Christians, is commonly erroneous and dangerous.
The Supernumerary Articles of the Trent Conventicle have almost every one a
Plot in them, either to destroy others, or to advance themselves. But their
Politic Creed, which serves to keep up the State and Grandeur of Holy Church,
is most fatally Pernicious; tending to the subversion of all Christian
Monarchies in the world: The Articles whereof are such as these:

That the King is the POPE's or the PEOPLE's Creature; for it is indifferent to
their great Machiavels the Jesuits, whose he be, so he do but belong to either;
Take him whole, or divide him, or how you please, so that God, to whom alone he
belongs and is accountable, may have the least share in him.

That the Pope if he be a Heretic, and the People of a Tyrant, may depose him:
They being Judges whether he be so or no. That it is as much as his Crown is
worth for either of them to call him so. That is supposing him a Heretic, or
no friend to the Roman Cath. Interest.


But if the People contend to have him all to themselves, the Jesuit's a fair
chapman, and will rather give up the Spiritual interest of the Chair, than
dispute it: that if the People do but depose him, be it for Tyranny, be it for
Heresy, nay be it for Popery, or suspicion of Popery, do but depose him, and
he is contented.

If the Presbytery put in for a share, and pretend an Interest in the Religious
part of him, the Jesuit will give them leave to Excommunicate him; to deliver
him to Satan, to do any thing with him that may but lessen him, and help to
bring down his Crown and Honor to the Dust.

Nay their Creed is so far for the Right and Property, or rather the
Prerogative of the People, that it gives you to believe, that if Kings
mismanage their Trusts, if they Traitorously invade the Liberties and Lives of
the Subjects, it is the peoples duty to call them to an account, to judge them
if they know how to catch them; and if not, that then it is free for every man
to kill them where he finds them; and that it is good State-Divinity to appoint
Rewards for so doing, as well as for killing Bears and Wolves, and destroying
the Vermin of the Country.

These Principles, howsoever they have been Transcribed by the Northern
Evangelists, with the last horrid improvement, owe their first draught to the
Jesuit's Pen. These were Machinations forged for the subversion of the
Protestant Religion; by Mining its main Fort, the Civil Government, and lopping
the Power of Kings, the Defenders of our Faith.

But to their shame be it spoken, there are too many Protestants, affectedly
Fond of that Character, who are thus Jesuited: Whose Souls are in their secret,
who think their Thoughts and Councels, and are of their very Judgment, as if
the same Numerical Genius, the Soul of a Traitor inspired them both. And yet
with what zeal do they declaim against Popery? with what Indignation and scorn
do they expose the Pope and his Jesuits, and serve the Inquisition upon them in
Effigy at certain solemn Times? How do they Curse the Hellish Conspiracy of
this Day: and do all that Good Subjects ought to do and more, to signify their
Abhorrence of it? But for all this, Ye are Friends, Sirs, and why fall ye out?
why, but because ye envy their Plots, but because ye are for a Monopoly, and
spite any body to be Traitors like your selves.

Lord! what haste do they make from Rome, and what a distance do they keep in
all things else? Episcopacy is voted Antichristian, because it is the Government
of that Church; and so it was of all the Churches in the world, before Popery
was known, either Name or Thing. The Liturgy is cried down for a Mass Book
Translated, because it is a Form; and they choose rather to talk to God in
extempore blasphemy, than address themselves in sober words and sense, if they
be composed to their hands. Ceremony is all exploded upon this Account; and one
party refuse good manners to God, because the other is Superstitious. In most
matters of mere Opinion, that are not of the very Essence of Faith; they
endeavor to think as far from Papists as it is possible, and in some Points
even to falsehood and absurdity. Nay, they have much ado to believe their Creed
for fear it should be Popish: and because the Church of Rome scrue the Article
of the Holy Catholic Church too tight, they either leave it out, or however
seem as if they knew not what to make on it. And it is strange that while they so
industriously shun them in all things else, they should thus concur in that
which is most Abominable and wicked.

Some of the most Moderate and Wisest of the Papists, distinguish between the
Court and the Church of Rome, and renounce the Former, though they adhere to
the latter: for however they approve of their Religion, they can by no means
dispense with their Maxims of State: upon the account whereof, the Order of
Jesuits is as hateful and Obnoxious unto them, as it is to us; their cursed
Principles going more against the grain of Nature and Conscience, than all
their Religious Fopperies and Superstitions. But who would think that men of
delicate and demure Consciences, should be Papists in the worst sense? That
they should abhor Popery, and espouse Jesuitism? which is to swallow down the
rank gob, and only nauseate the Luscious Kickshaws. And such are the Phanatick
Antimonarchists of this Age; they are Papists, the worst of Papists, Jesuits
in temporalibus, and if that be not a fine forwardness in Ordine ad
Spiritualia, let the world judge.

But Secondly, The Spirit of Jesuitism has not only poisoned the Principles,
and so fascinated the Judgments of many Protestants, that they are of their
Council, and think Treason in common with them; But we are so bewitched as to
be Papist's Instruments, Tools of the Faction, and to contribute to the
Management of their Plots against our selves; like Changelings, we suffer our
selves to be practiced upon, and conform our Actions to the Roguish ends that
they direct them. They study to divide us, and we are divided; They Clap their
hands, and we Quarrel; They shove at the Government, and we Rebel, and lend
them a helping hand; They are Mining at the Foundation of our Church, and the
hands of a Legion of Sects, are Pecking at her Outworks and Battlements;
Finally, they Forecast the Mischief, and we Blunder on to the Execution.

And for all this good Service, the Papists are beholden to their Phanatick
Friends; those trusty Jobbers, that never fail to do their Masters at Rome a
good turn, as far as Faction, Sedition, Rebellion (the embroilment of the
Church and State) will go. And yet, with a demure Impudence, they dare to brand
their Protestant Fathers and Brethren of the Church of England with the
character of Papists and Popishly affected; Terms more properly bestowed at
Home. Why? Do they frequent Mass? Do they receive the Sacrament in one kind? Do
they worship the Host, bow down to Images, or pray to Saints; and all this in a
Language as little understood by themselves as by the Roman Idols? Do they tear
their Bibles for confuting their Errors, or lay them aside to make way for
Tradition? Do they pin their Faith upon the Pope's Infallibility, and make the
Vicar as great a God as his Lord? Is Purgatory one Article of their Creed, and
Transubstantiation another? Do they go to the Mart for Pardons and Indulgences,
take Leases of their sins for Term of Life, and hire the Prayers and
Supernumerary Merits of others, to Bribe Heaven to receive them when they are
Dead? Nay, is not their Doctrine as Ap^stolical as the Creed, and their Worship
pure; reformed not only from the Gross Superstitions of Popish Paganism, but
from those Tollerabiles ineptiae, that our Blessed Reformers (Martyrs
afterward) in K. Ed. 6. his days, were forced to dispense with; and yet scorned
the Name of Papists as much, and deserved it as little, as our modern
Sticklers? Where Is the Popery then, is it in their Religion, or in their
Morals? Are they Papists because they are Loyal to their Prince, and Obedient
to his Laws; and, to their eternal Honor be it spoken, were never justly
Attainted for being otherwise? Is it Popery to Assert the Government against
Politic Innovators, and to stand up for the Divine prerogative of disposing
Thrones and Kingdoms, that it may be kept Inviolate? Are they Papists because
they are tender of their Consciences, and dare not suffer them to be overruled
by Civil prudentials, and Reasons of State? because they will not give their
Voices against the Laws of Nature and Religion, nor consent that they should be
superseded by the Arbitrary Dictates of Machiavillians and Atheists? because
they will not forfeit their Christianity to keep out Popery, nor go to Hell to
forestal an Inquisition? If this be Popery, may the Loyal Sons of the Church of
England be such Papists ever.

But are they Papists indeed? why then, Satan's Kingdom is divided against it
self. For with whom do Papists dispute? at whom do they rail? against whom do
they Conspire, but the Church of England, the most impregnable Fort in the
world against them? Alas! our petty Sects and Factions are our Weaknesses, and
the Champions of Rome are so far from Levelling their Artillery against them,
that they connive at them, they indulge them, they make them more, in hopes to
enter at them, one day, as through Breaches; such poor defenses are they
against the Roman Adversary. But they that are so forward to fix the Papist
upon others, ought certainly to consider how easily it may be returned upon
themselves: Though it is the trick of some Artists at Law, to make themselves
Plaintiffs when their Cause is naught.

I shall not Catechize them out of the forementioned Romish Creed; but only ask
them what they say to their refusal of Oaths and Tests, such as were
particularly intended for the proof of Loyal Protestants, and the Detection of
Romish Bigots? What say they for themselves that take them with private and
equivocal Restrictions, which Papists might do as well as they? What do they
answer to their communicating with the Church in her Service and Ceremonies,
and receiving the Sacrament according to the Established form and Rites, upon
extraordinary occasions to serve a Turn; and then excusing their Disobedience,
with a Pretense of Conscience, at all other times, when neither their own, nor
the Interests of the Faction do oblige them?

But to compound the business once for all: Let them draw any tolerable Scheme
of Popery, with all its material Discriminations from the common Christianity,
and if any part of it prove a Mark upon the Church of England; and if, in the
main, it do not blacken the Dissenters from it ten times more, I dare be bold
to say we may yield the Cause, and give them leave to call us as many Papists
as they please.

But who sees not what eminent service is done to the Roman interest, by this
foul Aspersion? that any thing, but Mere Charity, would suspect them to be
Emissaries or Pensioners for their pains. For is not this the way to bring
Popery into Reputation, by making it the Character of so many Pious, Learned,
and Loyal Men, who indeed abhor it; and cannot demonstrate that they do so,
better, than by serving God in the Reformed, Established Way? Will it not
enhance the price of their Errors and Superstitions, to give it out to the
World that the most Judicious and knowing men in it, have a good Opinion and
think well of them? Is not this a notable expedient to put a creditable Gloss
upon a piece of Jesuitism, by persuading people that the Church of
England-worthies equivocate and dissemble; and whatsoever they Write,
whatsoever they say, whatsoever they protest and swear to the contrary, yet
that they are Papists at the Root? and thus by foisting in the forged Authority
of so many great and gallant men, they teach others to Lie, Dissemble and
Forswear themselves in things of the greatest moment, and warrant them so to
do, by the pretense of the most Authentic precedents.

Again, they cannot but know what Advantage an oversized Computation gives to a
Party; because it is a Trick of their own, and every day practiced; to boast of
Numbers to make themselves look Formidable and their enemies little. And does
it not make the hearts of the people shrink, and their heads hang down, and
their hands grow feeble, to hear of French Armies, Spanish Pilgrims, Black
bills, Irish Ruffians, Domestic Cutthroats, and that over and above, the
Church of England-men are Papists. and will Treacherously surrender both
Themselves and the Cause upon the first Parley? What a mighty encouragement
would this be to the Romish Faction, to consider that they have the Governors
both in Church and State, the Court, the Nobility, the Gentry, and a great list
of the Commonalty too on their side? (for all that are Loyal to the Church and
Government have the Brand upon them) and that nothing remains unconquered but a
few divided scatterings; how, I say, would the Conceit of such an Interest
embolden them to attempt their long-intended wickedness, of Blood and
Slaughter; But that they know us better than to Trust us, in spite of any
thing that the Malicious Rhetoric of our Foul-mouthed Incendiaries can persuade
them to?

Lastly, This is as probable a way as could be thought on to palliate the Odium
of that Religion; to conclude Popery under the Notion of Indifferency, and to
harden the World into a Belief that there is no such danger in it as was
suspected: Will not bandying it about at this wild rate be the way to lose it?
and will not the formidableness of it wear off by such frequent and familiar
handling? I am sure that Popery and Phanaticism have a certain Kindred that
has met with this Courteous Fortune, to be discounted from the Catalogue of
sins, by some of its Friends, for no other Reason, but the loose and
Impertinent Application of it; and that, by Name, is Schism. For thus it is
argued by a Doughty Advocate: The Church of J. O. Plea for Non-Con.
Rome call the Greek Church Schismatic, and the Greek Church return the
Schismatic upon the Church of Rome: the Church of England make the Romish
Church the Schismatic, and the Church of Rome charge the Schism upon the
Church of England: Again, the Church of England calls her Dissenters
Schismatics, and the Dissenters think the Church to be Schismatics from them:
and so we have called one another Schismatics round; and then he infers,
Therefore Schism is but Vox, and praeterea nihil, nothing but a mere noise and
Nickname which every Party casts upon all them who are not of their Society.
Thus this horrid sin, which the Church for many hundred years accounted
Damnable, is, by the petulant use of the Word upon Light and unjust occasions,
become a irivial and indifferent thing. And what else do you think, will be the
effect of making the Charge of Popery so common, especially where it is so
falsely and abusively applied?

Thus you see what a Confederacy there is between a Jesuitical and a Fanatic
Spirit; and how the Popish Intrigues against the Church and Government are
carried on, and most likely to be perfected (if at all) by a Faction, miscalled
a True Protestant party, amongst our selves. And I am persuaded that the most
Rational fears of Popery at this day are such as the Multiform Fanaticism of
this Age, has roused and conjured up in the minds of sober, thinking men.

And here I must outrun the Text, to pursue the Traitor a little farther.
'Twas Jacob's desire, that as his Soul was unspotted, so his Honor might never
be stained with the Sichemites blood; and doubtless he had his wish: For Simeon
and Levi were such puisny Traitors as to confess the Fact, and take the Guilt
upon themselves. But the crafty Brotherhood have a Reach beyond them: They do
the Deed, and lay the Brat at their Father's door: They assert the Treacherous
Principles, and push on the Designs and Interests of the Roman Faction; and to
clear themselves, Pasquil their Royal and Ghostly Parents, with the infamous
name of Papist, as if it were an Indelible Character upon the English Monarchy
and Hierarchy.

And indeed all the notorious Villainies they have from time to time been guilty
of, have evermore been thus shamm'd upon the Patriarch's score. When they
Conspire against the Government (O monstrous Solecism!) the King is proclaimed
the Traitor: when they rebel, and make the Land drunk with its own Blood, who is
the Murderer but He? When they usurp an Arbitrary jurisdiction over the
Persons, Lives and Fortunes of their Fellow Subjects to plunder, sequester, and
kill at their Pleasure, who is the Tyrant but the King? he is Apprehended,
Arraigned, Sentenced, Murdered for those very Crimes that they committed. And
who can reflect soberly upon these things, and not bless himself with Jacob, in
the Text, O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their Assembly, mine
Honor, be not thou united?

To Conclude: You all pretend an irreconcilable Aversion to Popery, and I
believe you hate it. For shame then scorn to be Trepan'd and led away by that
detested Faction. Your Honor's at stake, and it you have any sparks of the
Patriarch's Heroism, make a generous protest against Popery and all its
Interests; suffer not your selves to be drawn into the service of the Party
blindly, to work their wretched ends, and to accomplish the sordid and
disgraceful wickedness for them. Are you not ashamed to be Bubbled out of the
Reputation of Wise and Understanding men; and to be ranked in the Notion of
Tools and Cullies? Are you not ashamed to be subject to the Magisterial Nod of
the men you hate, and to slave and foul your fingers in their dirty drudgery?
There Is not a Faction among us but is in Vassalage unto Rome, and serves the
Pope with a blind Obedience; our Sects and Divisions are all managed by Popish
Counsel and Conduct: and the Wooden horse with a belly full of Plots and
Treasons, is a burden prepared for the Dissenters shoulders; They shall have
the Pains, the Shame, and the Hazard; while Papists look on, and only wait the
success, that they may sieze the Prize.

Therefore for the sake of our King and Country, for the sake of the Protestant
Religion, and for our own Interest and Honor's sake, let us abjure Popery and
Phanaticism at once: Let us Honor and Obey the King, and Renounce all
Traitorous and Disloyal Principles; Let us resolutely adhere to the Communion
of the Church, and keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; and so
cheat our Adversaries of those Advantages, that they both Seek and Reap by our
Divisions: Let us not reproach the Church, with the undeserved Character of
Popish or Popishly affected, and thereby Consecrate the Cursed Appellation; but
(ascribing it where it is only due) let it carry its deserved Odium along with
it, as long as Popery has either Being or Remembrance in the World: Let us pray
for the Grace of God, that our Souls may never be of their secret; and by
living Holy and Virtuous lives in all Godliness and Honesty, engage the Divine
Protection on our side, that, unto their Assemblies we may never be united.

Finally, to express our Abhorrence the more Emphatically, why may we not take
up the Patriarch's Imprecation; since it is so Modest a Curse, not of the Men,
but of their Inhumanity? What Devout Son of the Church? what Loyal Subject of
the Government, can hold his Indignation and forbear to say, Cursed be all
Jesuitism, whether it be the Spawn of Tybur or the Tweed; Cursed be all
Clandestine, underground Treason, and barefaced aboveboard Rebellion; Cursed
be Popish-Plots, and Phanatick Associations: Cursed be their Anger, for it is
fierce; and their wrath, for it is cruel?

But Blessed, for ever Blessed, be the Lord who has not given us over as a
prey unto their Teeth. That our soul is escaped as a Bird out of the snare of
the Fowlers, the snare is broken and we are escaped. Our help is in the Name of
the Lord who made Heaven and Earth; To whom be Glory, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

