ZELINDA: An Excellent New ROMANCE. Translated from the French of Monsieur De
Scudery. By T. D. Gent.

Nos haec novimus esse nihil. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for James
Magnes and Richard Bentley, in Russel Street in Covent Garden near the
Piazza's, Anno Dom. 1676.

THE PREFACE.
THe World is grown as unconscionable to Us men of Wit, and Parts, as greedy
House-Wives to poor Costermongers; though they have never so much Trash for a
little Money, they must have a Cast into the Bargain; a Prologue, or a Preface:
and they expect Wit in them too, though there is none any where else. This
extortion was a while gratified, but the Nine Sisters are so beggered with the
Maintenance of their Multiplicity of Gallants, that the insatiable Critic must
take downright Railing, for Wit: And I should but imitate my betters, if I
raked in the honored ashes, and recited the little failings of my ingenious
Predecessors, those renowned and never to be forgotten Authors of Amadis de
Gaul, the Knight of the Oracle, Bevis of Southampton, and Unfortunate Jack. --
Or I might with others tax the impudence of my Contemporary Scriblers, for
pretending so audaciously to Wit and Poetry, when none has more confidence or
less merit then my self. -- No! I am for Peace and Policy; Controversies and
Disputes among Divines, make Tub-Preachers and Atheists; -- Enquiries, Answers,
Replys and Rejoynders between Doctor. N. and Doctor. S. concerning each others
Practice, exposed the failings of both to Vulgar contempt, and raised the
repute of Quacks and hedge Doctor: while Will. Pen and the Anabaptist were
hurling Fire and Brimstone at one another in Aldersgate Street, Muckleton
damned them both over a Pot of Ale. I say, let the green Faggot-sticks of
Poetry cling together in the band of Amity, and inspite of the fierce Critics
puffing, they may Hiss, Pipe on, and be Courted, while he blows his Nails: But
when the intestine fire of Envy dissolves the Union, by giving light and
pleasure to others, they consume themselves. I think this is a good simile now.
-- Let us conceal each others Faults, and be great; and let not him that is
found out, and justly condemned, discover all the rest to save himself, like a
faint-hearted Padder. -- -- Why should the Tailor call the Miller a Thief. --

Booksellers too are grown such Saucey Masterly Companions, they do even what
they please; my friend Mr. Bentley calls this Piece an excellent Romance; there
I confess his Justice, and Ingenuity. But then he styles it a Translation, when
(as Sancho Panca said in another Case) it is no more so then the Mother that
bore me. -- Ungrateful to envy his friends Fame! Though Sir Martin fetch his
Plot from Prester John and the Stingies, Warner will manage all. -- But I write
not for Glory, nor Self-Interest, nor to gratify Kindness, nor Revenge; Now
the impertinent Critical Reader will be ready to ask, for what then? For that
and all other questions to my prejudice, I will borrow Mr. Bays's answer, and
say, Because -- I glad Sir, I will not tell you. -- I desire to please but one
person in the World, and (as one Dedicates his Labors and Heroes to Calista,
another to Urania, etc.) at the feet of her my adored Celia, I lay all my
Giants and Monsters: to any other Censurer I say,

Non vides id Manticae quod in tergo est.

But to her I Bow, her favor I Implore; and to her Sentence I submit, as
becomes her,

Admirer and humble Servant, T. D.

Errata.
PAge 2. l. 15. for unwritting r. uniting. p. 6. l. 21. for for, r. from. p. 7.
l. last, for or, r. of* p. 16. l. 14. for I injured, r. I believe. p. 26. l.
15. for required, r. injured. p. 34. l. 8. for not unreasonable, r.
unreasonable. p. 39. l. 15. for with, r* which. p. 44. l. 16. leave out this.
p. 47. l. 20* for see, r. she. p. 49. l. 12. for resolved, r. reserved*

ZELINDA; A ROMANCE.
IN the time when Spain was divided, not only amongst several Kings, but diverse
Nations; the Goths, the Moors, and the Spaniards, having each of them a Share:
Arragon was ruled by one, who in the midst of those Wars that troubled his
Neighbors, had just abilities enough to keep his own Subjects in Peace; and
was Famous only for being the Father of him, who is the Subject of this
History. His Wife after having brought him one Son, dyed: At the same time the
Duchess of Barcellona, a Young and Beautiful Princess, had newly lost her
Husband, though he was already old. His Council thought it very necessary* he
should have more Heirs then one, for his own as well as his peoples Security;
and therefore in behalf of all his Subjects, desired him to choose a Wife to
his likeing, either in his own, or his Neighbors Dominions. The Beauty of this
Duchess was well known further then Arragon; and besides that in Policy, the
occasion was not to be let slip of unwriting to his Kingdom so considerable a
Town as Barcellona; the Kings own inclination made him conceive that Policy the
better. Though Rosalava had great Beauty, she had yet more Wit than Beauty, so
that being already absolute; nothing less then a Crown could have tempted her
to think of a second Marriage; but having an only Daughter as well as he an
only Son; She thought this Ma^ch would not make herself only Queen of Arragon,
but her Daughter too, and that she could not be blamed, if being in the midst
of ambitious Neighbors, she secured her self by a way so advantageous and
Honorable. She easily then consented, instead of Duchess of Barcellona, to be
called the Queen of Arragon; where she was received with the usual joy and
Magnificence upon such occasions: Being Young, Agreeable and Discreet, She soon
governed her Husband, and consequently the Kingdom. Now no business of
Importance was done without her Consent, whose Satisfaction was the Kings only
care; but this great authority she made use of most, in that design of Marrying
her Daughter to the Prince, which she was much more desirous of, since she knew
what kind of one he was like to be. Alcidalis was born so propitiously, and
with so many natural advantages; That being a Kings Son, was the least
considerable: He had a Beauty which won the Hearts of all that saw him, a Wit
in his very Childhood not to be equalled, and a greatness of Mind that made
every body respect and fear him: The first years of Alexander were not more
Miraculous than his; and there was not a day in which he did not say, or do
something to the astonishment of all about him. Those that pretended to skill
in Phisognomy, by looking on his Face, foretold glorious and incredible
actions; and they that took surer measures by those he had done already,
foresaw the Crown of Arragon would prove too little for such a head: The Queen
observed his Perfections better than any body, and therefore grew extremely
Fond of him, and impatient to bring about her Daughters happiness; which she
thought consisted less in being Queen of Arragon, than Wife to Alcidalis. But
how slightly soever we speak of Fortune, we must allow hers to be the only
Wisdom, and consequently count our own but folly* Her designs are laid so far
off, and carried on by ways so impossible to be perceived, that they never fail
to succeed in spite of all our endeavors to the contrary; and she allows us
sometimes to throw in her way our vain oppositions only to have the pleasure of
making then so: Thus far she dallied with Rosalva but ^e^o^ving to be at length
too har^ for he^* brings from another Country ^ young Child, who though both a
stranger and an Orphan) was to ruin all the designs of this powerful and
politic Queen. The Prince of Tenara of a family in Calabria, so Illustrious,
as formerly to have given Kings to Naples and Sicily, had so considerable an
Estate newly fallen to him in Arragon, that he resolved to take himself
Possession of a Right which was a little disputed* and loving his Wife
extremely, who was as fond of an only Daughter they had about six years old,
they could not think of parting; and therefore transported their whole Family
to Arragon, where they were received by the King and Queen with all the
civility and kindness due to Strangers of so great Merit and Quality. But soon
after the Prince of Tenara grew sick of a disease that in a few days ended
him, and left his afflicted wife in so dispairing a condition, as made her not
only willing, but likely to follow him. She received from the Queens kindness,
(who began to love her,) all the comfort and assistance which either her
afflictions, or affairs were capable of: The Queen had always liked her, but
since this misfortune, Pity increasing her affection, she loved her tenderly.
Fate seldom ravishing our joys from us, till we have set upon them the highest
value, or rather we never prize them enough, till the danger of their being
lost makes us do it too much: She lodged her in her own Palace, and took such
care to be perpetually, with her that she seemed to miss a part of her self
when they were asunder. However, all this indulgence of the Queens, (enough to
have cured her of any other Disease) only allayed this, by making her bear it
with less despair and impatience: And yet nevertheless, her Husbands death,
with the sad circumstances of time and place, was so great a blow, and made so
deep an impression, that all the Queens care and kindness was unable to
preserve her from a dangerous Sickness; which proceeded for want of Sleep and
Nourishment. The Queens trouble was proportionable, who besides her Grief for
the loss of such a friend, was not a little concerned to see two such fatal
accidents happen in her Dominions, to a Family newly come to dwell there.
Physicians were conjured to use their utmost endeavors; but although they did
so, her Disease was too strong for their strongest Remedies; and therefore her
own Judgment as well as theirs, giving the fatal warning, she resolved to quit
the World with as much tranquillity, as that dear pledge she left in it would
allow her, which sure could not be great, when she reflected upon the age and
place she left her in; An Infant in a strangers Country: While Camilla's
thoughts were thus sadly employed, the Queen once asking her how she* did? She
gently looked up upon her, and taking her by the hand, kissed it several times
before she was able to speak a word; but at last told her she was very sensible
of the obligations she had to so indulgent a Queen that since she enquired of
her health so kindly, she would presume to tell her, that though she knew death
so near, it was not her greatest apprehension, and that her Daughters helpless
condition was the reason why she could not but leave the World uncomfortably;
and therefore begged leave to manage to the best her few remaining hours, by
easing her self of a heavy burden, and pouring out or her own breast into the
Queens her dearest and most tender thoughts: She told her she should thank
Heaven for giving her leave so soon to follow the Prince her Husband, if she
were only sure the present she now made her would be acceptable; a present of
all she held dear and precious in the World: Then having dried her eyes of
tears which those last words had drawn from her, she went on to assure her that
amongst all her miseries, she could scarce think Fortune her enemy, that had
brought her to the honor of such a Friendship, by a journey which she should
think prosperous, were it not for her Lords death, though it proved her own
too, since her kindness, was a Jewel she could not pay too dear for, and the
only thing in the World she valued: But was more comforted with the hopes of
her Daughters succeeding her in that, then in all the Fortunes she left her;
and therefore conjured her to look upon her always as the dying present of one
she esteemed, and not disdain to prove a Mother to the Daughter of a friend,
whom she should think in that better provided for, then in the two
Principalities she was Heir to. And then her death would not be unwelcome,
since not unhappy; for Zelinda, who by this change would have the advantage, of
being Bred by a Queen every way so extraordinary: Having said this, she took
from under her Pillow a little Box of Jewels, which for her Daughters sake she
had always taken care of, and accordingly now put into the Queens hands.
Camilla's afflicted condition, and the manner she expressed it in, were both so
moving, that the Queen had not been able to refuse her request, though sure of
its fatal consequence. She threw her Arms about her, and assured her she
received her present with joy, and upon condition she should never revoke it,
which she hoped her recovery would give her leisure, though not unkindness to
do: That from that moment she reckoned her self to have two Daughters, between
whom she should no more distinguish than Twins, of which she did not despair to
have her a Witness: This cured Camilla's mind, though not her body, and made
her life easier, though not longer; for two days after she left the World with
that Cheerfulness which the Queens promises gave her; and the Queen capable of
no comfort but the hopes of performing them. Thus we see Zelinda in less then
three Months become a perfect Orphan, by burying both her Parents in their
Graves, whose Inheritance they came to enjoy; We see her but six years old, in
a strange Country, a thousand Miles from her own; and what is yet worse in the
absolute power of one who was in time to prove her greatest enemy, and the
cause of all her Miseries. But none are so safe as those in the hands of
Fortune, who never fails such as rely upon her either by choice or necessity:
She took into her charge this distressed Orphan, and so ordered this disastrous
beginning, as to make it a means of setting her in the Throne of two mighty
Kingdoms. Zelinda was the most perfect creature Heaven ever made; her Person
was as miraculous as her life, and this Story, though very natural in every
other part, is incredible where it speaks of her. Since the Sun went round the
World he never saw so exact a Beauty, and in this Beautiful body, there was a
Wit above the imagination of ours, and such a one as no other body but hers had
been worthy of: In the age when others scarce spoke Words, she spoke Sense, and
such as might have become any mouth. At her Birth all the Stars were agreed to
contribute their best influences; And she appeared so Divine a thing, as one
could not but imagine her fallen from Heaven by a Miracle: She was so naturally
inclined to Good, that doing it, in her was scarce a Virtue; and it was not in
her power, at least not without great self-denial, to avoid the practice of all
things commendable; If we could look into the minds of the most extraordinary,
we should not find them so faultless as their lives; and though their virtue at
last gets the better, it is a victory like those in Civil Wars by which they
must needs suffer, since their Resolutions are no more their own, then the
inclinations that opposed them. But in this perfect Creature, Virtue reigned by
Birth, and not by Conquest; and therefore she could never fail of doing well,
while she did what she liked best: Besides these perfections which are to be
described, those Names, Charms, and Secret graces, which make us love so often
we know not why, Zelinda possessed in such abundance; that she was the general
inclination of every man and woman. All her motions were so agreeable, that no
others Beauty was half so Charming, and in her gentle Voice there was something
like Enchantment. Perhaps this is not all that might be, but it is certain, all
she deserved cannot be expressed, and it will be easily much imagined that where
there was so much, there must be a great deal more. And since, Madam, by this
Description she appears so very like you, I had as good confess ingenuously,
that in the story there were so many remarkable things of her, that though I
minded it extremely, I could never have drawn so good a Picture if you had not
sat before me. These were the Arms with which Zelinda was to be victorious, and
there needed no other, since they were enough to Conquer* Alcidalis, who would
easily conquer the rest: She was received into Court with so general a joy,
that it seemed an Omen of her future Greatness there, of which she then took
possession. The Queen who thought her self incapable of any comfort since her
Mothers death, found the contrary whenever she was with her, and the Kings
affections scarce knew a difference between her and his only Son.

Alcidalis and Zelinda, were of that Age in which Painters represent Cupids,
and had all the agreeable Beauties, the greatest Masters in that Art could give
them; Their Charms were so equally taking, though extremely different, and
their very childhood was so extraordinary, that none saw them without
concluding them Born for one another, and each had been an unparalled wonder
of the World, if it had not seen them together. Indeed though they had the
hearts of all that saw them, they could never have been loved equally to their
Merit by any but themselves; no Souls but their own being capable of a Passion
great enough to deserve theirs. Accordingly the God of love, intending to make
his power remarkable by showing it in persons so extraordinary, settled it in
their hearts so very early, that they felt it long before they knew it, and
were not suffered to pass in quiet that first part of life, which Nature seems
to allow undisturbed by Passions: Thus the first sight of Zelinda wrought the
same effect upon Alcidalis which it was wont to do upon others, and he made
some impression upon the heart of Zelinda, which she had never felt before. The
Queen in pursuance of her great design, had bred up this Prince with all the
artifice imaginable, that might incline him to love her Daughter. His first
prattling was taken advantage of, that he might be used to call her his Mistress:
he was daily brought to see her, and those about him still took all occasions
to commend before him either her Face or Fashion. But his inclinations were not
the same with the Queens, he that had Softness and Complaisance for all the
World, seemed to want it only for her Daughter, and was no where so constrained
as in her company: Whether his high Spirit disdained to be thus given away
without his own consent, or that his Stars, which brought him into the World,
for Zelinda gave him a natural aversion to whosoever would usurp that place
they had designed her. But from the first moment she came to Court, and was by
the Queen made her Daughters Companion, his mind appeared immediately changed,
he was perpetually in the Dutchess's apartment, and no where so well pleased as
there. Love to introduce himself easily into our souls, at first comes always
accompanied with Delight and Beauty; and makes no show of violence or Cruelty,
till he knows himself Master of the place, and too strongly fixed to fear being
dispossessed. At first these young lovers felt his power in nothing, but an
extreme pleasure in seeing one another, and then such a sweetness mixed with
joy, spread it self about their Countenance, that it was very visible their love
made them appear more lovely. Zelinda had still then been like others of her
age, but now began to be more lively; and Alcidalis when he saw her, was so gay
and agreeable, that it looked as if he had reserved for her company some
particular Grace, and the best of his humor. In that innocent age they enjoyed
a pleasant tranquillity of mind for some Months, in which they were much
happier, then in many more that followed.

But their passions increased daily with their understandings, and Love became
so powerful, that he quickly made himself be both felt and understood;
Alcidalis now grew more thoughtful then ordinary, and when Zelinda was absent,
with an unusual sadness paid dear for the pleasure of having seen her, there
was no sport for him in any diversions, but those he took with her, for seeing
her was his only pleasure; or if any thing else was not indifferent to him, it
was talking himself, and hearing others talk of her. That heart which even from
his Childhood was set upon conquering the World, now has no hopes nor thoughts
but of gaining Zelinda; or if sometimes those of his former ambition return, it
is but with design of rendering himself more worthy of her, by laying at her
feet as many Crowns as she deserved. When ever she quitted the room, he was as
if fallen from Heaven, and next to her company he loved none best. When alone
(which for her sake he was often) he was perpetually reflecting upon all her
words and actions; and having considered them the several ways, they were
capable of being turned, drew from them accordingly either hopes or fears; then
remembering his own expressions of kindness, was never satisfied with himself;
sometimes he thought he was too timorous, sometimes too bold, and remained
always at last as much displeased with himself, as pleased with her: He begun
by degrees to give over all those recreations he was wont to be fond of,
Hunting, which he loved best, became a dull thing to him when she was not
there, and if he still minded his Exercises, it was but to appear more
agreeable to her: In a word, he considered Zelinda as if there had been no Body
in the World besides.

Love on the other side had got into the heart of Zelinda, but had not made so
great a progress; whether it were that fearing her high spirit, he durst not
make himself known to her at first, or that she being the younger by two years,
was less sensible of that passion: Yet she was not altogether unconcerned, for
when ever she saw the young Prince, she had more care of her beauty and dress
than ordinary; she loved the Countess the less, because she was designed for
him, and every little respect that out of decency he paid her, took somewhat
from the satisfaction of the fair Zelinda. Yet as she had a Soul, generous,
resolute, and infinitely sensible, and by consequence capable of none but
passions of the same nature, the merit of Alcidalis formed in it an affection
as fair and perfect as it self.

Love between Persons of so eminent quality (like fire upon a Beacon) is so
impossible to be concealed, that it is seen a great way off. The affections of
Alcidalis and Zelinda was soon observed by all the World, and a great many
perceived they were in Love one with another, before they discovered it
themselves. In the beginning when Childishness made their actions less
observable, though they saw one another with great joy, no body thought there
was any other Love between them, then that of the innocent diversions they took
together. But as by degrees Zelinda grew more serious, and Alcidalis began to
show himself master of a judgment fit to govern his Fathers Kingdom, and a
courage capable of conquering any other. There was scarce any body in the whole
Court, but judged their Souls to be united by so strong a passion, that it
would be almost an equal difficulty to part'em from their bodies, or from each
other. The Queen who was politic beyond her Sex, and designed nothing so much
as marrying her Daughter to Alcidalis, was the earlyest jealous of Zelinda's
beauty, and consequently the first that took notice of this amor; But having a
great confidence in her Interest, and more in her self, she thought they at
last would be the only Sufferers, and feared no stubborn resistance from minds
so tender.

In the mean time the beauty of Zelinda increased daily; and though it dawned
but a while ago, now shone with such light and luster, that she seemed to
proclaim open War against the Queen, and all her designs. On the other side the
young Prince sensible of his birth and parts, began to be weary of living under
the slavery of a Governor, and the conduct of a Woman. That heart great and
Royal by Nature, when filled with Love, disdained any other Empire but
Zelinda's; He began to carry his inclinations for her a little more openly, and
favored none but such as she recommended: He run at the Ring only in her
colors, all his motto's spoke of her, and he was so proud of her Chains, that
he hated all the World should not see them; There were none who in their hearts
did not favor their affection. The Queen soon began to fear she had dallyed
too long with a flame so fatal to all her purposes, and which now required her
utmost care and endeavors to extinguish it: Yet she resolved to try violent
remedies at last; and strove by all fair means to win upon the disposition of
Alcidales, which she perceived to grow less tractable to her every day than
other: She used all the Arts she could to Eclipse the beauties of Zelinda, and
to advance those of her own Daughter, whom she daily instructed, both what to
say and do, never suffering her to appear but with pomp and luster But Zelinda
trusting still to Nature, whom she had been so much obliged to already,
neglected by her self, was more admired by others, and without any Pearl but
those of her teeth, or any Rubies but those of her lips, and such other Jewels
as a waiting Woman Muse, dresses a Poetical Mistress in, out-shone the other,
though adorned with all the glories of the East; so much the wealth that Heaven
bestows, Ecclipses whatever the Earth can lend her Favorites.

The Queen seeing the danger of their continuing any longer in the same place,
and dispairing of all other ways to interrupt their increasing affection,
resolves to try if absence (though it be the greatest torment of a settled)
might not prove the cure of a growing inclination: And to that purpose, under
pretense of some indisposition, desires leave of the King her Husband to pass
two or three Months in Catalonia, and having gained his consent, she commanded
all things to be in readiness for her journey, and said, she would have none
attend her but the Ladies. This news extremely surprised our Lovers, who had
never felt the sting, and been only acquainted with the sweets of Love, and
except some few apprehensions for the future; which makes but slight
impressions in minds so young, and full of confidence, their joy had been
without trouble, and their inclination without the least check. Alcidalis was
most concerned, or at least could worst dissemble; there was nothing he would
not have attempted to divert this journey, and a thousand extravigances past
through his imagination about it, but seeing the time drawn on, and the Queens
resolution invincible, he resolved, at least not to let Zelinda part without a
full and open declaration of his passion for her, which till then, (though all
his actions continually proclaimed to her) his words had never presumed to
offer the least hint of: Whether it were that he wanted confisidence, or
thought it needless to declare a passion that none could ever hide. The last
night being come, he went on the Queens side; where, after some time, he found
an opportunity of entertaining Zelinda alone, it was the first minute that ever
Alcidales knew what fear was. He attempted once or twice to discover his
passion; but having not resolution enough to go on, was fain to turn his
discourse to something else, and though at other times he was the gayest Man in
the World, near Zelinda he was then the most perplexed. But at last his heart
beating, and his color perpetually changing, he with a confused and trembling
voice, said: I do not doubt Ze-Linda; But that you know I love you but; how
well, after I have said all I can, must still be left to your imagination: I
tell you this, that if you find me killed by your absence, you may know the
nature of your loss* though your Journey be composed but of a few days to the
rest of the World; they will to me seem many Years, and may perhaps outlast me.
If you consider me and your self, you will find the one too Charming to give a
moderate affection, and the other incapable of a weak impression: From the
first moment I saw you, my passion was at the same height, that time, or
favors ever advanced any other to: And since every Look, every Word, every
Motion of yours has added somewhat to it; whilst I was a Child, I could not
express it to you; and since I never durst; and now I tremble only in saying, I
adore you; and if I read not suddenly, something favorable in your eyes for
me, I shall soon want the power to let you know the greater part of that I have
to say. At those words, she who had till then kept her eyes upon the ground,
looked gently up at him; Alcidalis seemed to have received a new life, and thus
continued. Though inclination be but a blind guide; I must needs confess my
self infinitely fortunate, in that which led me to adore the incomparable
Zelinda; in whom I hourly discover such eminent perfections, as may change even
an Aversion to its contrary: Judge then what a passion I must have conceived
for her, since it was so advantagiously born, and has been so continually
improved: I confess freely, Humility is a virtue that you alone have made me
acquainted with, I ever thought the whole world too narrow for me; but now I
think my self, and that world infinitely below you; I know the last thing that
you consider in me, is my Quality; If I possess any thing worthy of you, it is
my heart, which I offer to you; and which I can say with confidence, to be
Great and Generous enough to merit a place in yours. I would not praise it
thus, were it any longer my own: But now I think advantagiously of it, as I
must ever do of all things that belong to you. It never had but two designs,
whereof the first, and that which entertained its Childhood, was the Conquest
of the World: But since it has been more aspiring, and more reasonable, it has
desired Zelinda. Here he stopped, and waited for her answer, who in the condition
she was in, had much a do to get out these few words. Sir, I am so astonished at
a diseourse of this nature from you; and to find the eyes of the whole Court
upon us, that I desire you will give till my return to make you an answer:
Which I beg of you to believe, I wish may he very sudden: Every body observed
somewhat extraordinary between them, but the Queen especially, whom their
Conversation made very uneasy; she rose from her place, and Smiling upon
Alcidalis* said, Sir you entertain Zelinda so seriously and with so much
concern in your face, that I doubt you have had some little quarrel; if it be
so, make me Judge, and i will see her do you reason before she goes. Alcidalis
having overcome the first difficulty of declaring his Passion to Zelinda, was
impatient of being interrupted, so that without almost looking toward the
Queen; he answered her carelessly* Madam I injured Zelinda so just, that i^ she
had required me, I would yet desire no Judge but her self, and what quarrel
soever we have, I shall still have a worse to them that go about to part us.
This sharp reply was observed by all the Court; but the Queen who was concerned
at it* seemed lea^^ to mind it, and changed the Discouse. The next morning
Zelinda was hurried away before Alcidalis could spea^ to her, and left him in
the first great affliction he ever knew; it was all as great to her, and more
insuppor^able, in that she was forced to disgui^^ her sense of it, and cover
also with a cheerful Face a discontented Mind, hiding her misfortune in public
with as many Smiles, as she lamented it in private with Tears.

Of all the troubles that love brings with it, absence is one of the most
sensible, there are some violent; some sharper pains, as that of jealousy, but
none so hard to bear; and that so oppresses all sort of vigor.

She was no sooner gone, but Alcidalis shut himself up in his Chamber, threw
himself upon the Bed; wherewith a storm of Sighs, and a Sea of Tears, he
grieved for her, rather as dead then Absent; not considering that love takes
ever back with Interest the joys be lends, and lets few of his Debtors rest so
long as he had done him: Having continued seven or eight days without seeing
any but the King, and him as seldom as his duty would permit, he resolved to
follow Zelinda, and rather Perish in an attempt toward happiness, then tamely
expect a certain death from her absenc^* After Hebrius one of the most famous
Rivers of Spain, has past along the Walls of Saragosa (as if there were nothing
else worthy of him in Arragon) he takes the way of Catalonia, where receiving
in his passage many rivolets, to make his entry more stately into the Sea; he
comes at last within half a League of Tortosa: The Country he waters is very
Fruitful, and full of Trees, which is the more agreeable, in that the rest
consists of dry naked Places, and Mountains scorcht up by the heat of the Sun,
fifteen Leagues from his Mouth. He passes through a Valley two Leagues long,
and proportionably broad on both sides, encompast with Mountains: Those of
Catalonia keeps it from the North-Winds, so that it is always Green, and the
Inhabitants never feel that Winter, which they see continually upon the
neighboring Hills: 'Twas in this Paradise that Zelinda past her Purgatory; and
where the Palace of the Queen stood; She alone was sad where all nature
appeared to smile; and lost hourly that luster, which every thing there abouts
seemed to have borrowed of her; The absence of Alcidalis troubled her
continually, and her Melancholy was not confined to the present, but had
likewise some presages of the ills to come, she saw her Fortune, and her self,
and Alcidalis more dear then both, in the power of the Queen; She considered,
that though the courage of the Prince was great, and his love greater, his
Authority was yet but weak. That he would never be suffered to despise the
Country of Barcelonia, which fortune offered him so opportunely with the
Queens Daughter: To Marry an Orphan, and a Stranger, who had no Fortune, no
Support, but afar off, that he alone would not be able to resist the commands
of the King, the good of the Kingdom, and the designs of the Queen, who
governed both, that whilst they were Children, though all favored their
affection, yet none approved their Marriage: That many looked upon her already
as an enemy of the State, and the Torch that was sooner or later to set the
whole Kingdom on a Flame: These, and such thoughts continually tormented her,
and the further she looked into the future, the more terrible her prospect
grew. One day above the rest, as she was walking with the Queen in an extreme
thick Wood, she slipped from the company, attended only with one Maid, 'twas no
small ease to her to have the liberty of venting her Grief; which at other
times she almost doubled by dissembling, and reflecting on various Accidents of
her life, what she had already suffered, and what she was hourly threatened
with: Her Melancholy possessed her so entirely, that without thinking of the way
she found her self by the Banks of Hebroes: The Charms of so delightful a
place, the sweetness of the Air, and the pleasure she took in being alone,
invited her to continue her walk; but fearing the Queen might wonder at her
absence, she stopped when the noise of a Horn, which seemed not to be far off,
made her turn her head toward a Neighboring Mountain, where she saw as she
thought, two men closed, and falling together from a Rock; but upon a second
view, she found it was a Bear and a man; when immediately on the place from
whence the other fell, she saw a young man very well Horst, leap down after
them, the strength of the Horse, the address of the Horseman, or the Fortune of
both, was such, that they took no hurt; he immediately kills the Bear at one
stroke, with his Javelin, and saves his friend. This generous Action so
surprised Zelinda, that she was almost angry that any but Alcidalis had done
it: But he that was on Horseback came toward her, and past the River in a
place where it was Fordable. She began to think it was Alcidalis, but not being
perfectly assured; she asked her Woman if she knew that Gentleman; who answered:
Madam, a far off we might have known him by his Action; but now we may see it
is the Prince. As he came nearer, astonishment, fear, and joy, all at once, so
seized Zelinda, that she could not readily find words to receive him with, The
Prince who had a longer time to prepare himself, though not without some
disorder, said; Madam, you are not to wonder at any confidence, from a man that
is already guilty of that, of having declared he loves you; your last words
gave me an impatiency, that turned every hour of your absence into an Age, and
I had been unworthy of your return or answer, had I been able longer to expect
either: What I said then, was but what I must always think, and if it were ever
Criminal, am come to tell you, I am still Impenitent. Sir said she, if you will
give me the leisure to make you the answer I promised you, when I left
Saragosa: Then (finding her self Blush, and that he perceived it) she went on
thus: This Color that rises in my Face, proceeds rather from that I am going
to say somewhat I never did before, then from a thought that I do therein any
thing against my honor, I know not whether it be always a shame for a Maid to
own she loves, but if ever it were excusable, sure it is in me. I will not say
that my Stars, or your eminent Qualities forced me to it; those are pretenses
that any one may use; I will only urge such as are more peculiar to my case. I
loved you Alcidalis before I knew it was a fault, and conceived an affection
for you before I was capable, of those Laws that forhid it to our Sex. None can
blame me for giving entrance to a Passion, which I seemed rather to have found
there, then received into my heart, and which has been so long here; that I can
no more remember its Birth more then my own. The first inclination I ever had,
was for you, and self love so early, and so natural in all the world, came to
me later, then my friendship for Alcidalis: My Reason (which appeared not in a
great while after) found it so well settled that it almost looked like rebellion
to attempt any thing against it; besides it seemed so innocent, and so just,
that she rather endeavored to strengthen, then oppose it, I say all this to
excuse it both to you and myself, and to make you know that the soul the freest
from weakness, and most reasonable in the World, might have been surprised, as
mine was: If you are pleased that I love you, thank not me, but Heaven that
would have it so. If you are at all obliged to me, it is only for owning of it
to you: Thus, though I had not the power of extinguishing my affection, I had
certainly that of concealing it, I could have dissembled it all my life time,
or as most of our Sex do, have shown it you by little, and little; after
having made you long desire it; were it not unreasonable or unworthy either of
you or me: It would never he time to discover it; but one the contrary, if it
be only such as Zelinda ought to have for Alcidalis. Why should I not from this
Minute, give him the joy of knowing, and being assured of it. I tell you then I
love you Alcidalis. and though I say it with Blushes, I do it without shame, I
accept that heart which you gave me; which I esteem a Treasure far beyond the
Crown you promised with it, I am pleased, to find all the qualities of your
mind truly Royal; but I could wish your Birth were less so; for I fear Fortune
to take that Crown away, which is the thing I least esteem in you, will rob me
one day of all the rest. I see from this hour all the Misfortunes that threaten
me, I know your love will cause the hatred of the Queen, but she that has to
her own the heart of Alcidalis can fear nothing: I will resist all with a
resolution that shall amaze you; and since Heaven decreed I should have
affection, I will accompany it with such a Virtuous Constancy, that what is
ordinarily reprocht in my Sex, shall be in me esteemed, and wondered at.
Alcidalis from the very first Minut she began, had still hearkened to her as
one whose fate depended on her Discourse, finding it much more to his advantage
then he durst have hoped, was so far from being able to express his joy, that
he even wanted words for an acknowledgment: But after a while coming to
himself, and finding her that followed out of sight, he put one knee on the
ground; but as he began to speak, the Queen appeared near; the thickness of the
bushes having hid her approach, so that he arose again as soon as possible.
Zelinda was extremely troubled to be so unluckily surprised: And said, Sir, you
will I fear have cause to repent this unnecessary humility. Madam, said he, I
do already, but it is only that 'twas no earlier adrest: Whilst they were
talking the Queen advanced, and Alcidalis coming up to her, she received him
with a Countenance so gay, and full of satisfaction, that Zelinda her self
could do no more. After the first Complements were over, the Prince having told
her how the Chase bringing him within seven or eight Leagues, he thought
himself obliged to kiss her hands; the Queen seemed to thank Fortune, for
having conducted him so near her. But Sir, said she, I believe you are already
paid for all the trouble you have given yourself, for its to be imagined the
favor that Zelinda granted you just now, was not inconsiderable: Since you
thanked her upon your Knees for it, as we saw; truly it made me not know you at
first, and I thought it had been some of your Servants, but I am very glad it
was none but yourself who received that satisfaction: Pray let us know what it
was, that we may partake in your Good-Fortune, and thank her with you. Zelinda
did not grow red upon this, because she had continued so, since her discourse
with Alcidalis, and fearing what the Queen said, might surprise him; women's
Wits being ever readiest on such occasions; she answered and said. Madam, I was
asking Alcidalis some News of Saracosa, he (who without doubt, was thinking of
his Hunting) did not answer me, I then reproacing him with his heedlesseness
and Silence, he kneeled to me of a sudden, and thought by other excess of
Civility to repair the neglect he had showed in not replying sooner to what I
said. 'Twas very civil in him, said the Queen, and because you believe the
Prince is thinking of his Hunting still, you have taken care to answer for him.
Zelinda seeing the Queen press her so hard quitted the Discourse. But Alcidalis
perceiving the pain she was in, came to her assistance as she had done before
to his, and began a relation of some little indisposition, the King had
suffered in her absence, so that the Discourse was quite changed. The good
humor Zelinda had put him into, made him entertain the Queen with infinite
compliance, and address himself more then formerly to her Daughter. But our
young Lovers were not cunning enough to deceive her; she perceived the
alteration and concluded the gayety of Alcidalis, and the respect he treated
her Daughter with, to be but effects of some obliging assurance he had obtained
from Zelinda, and from that moment took the resolution of parting them. The
Prince went the next day to Saragusa, whether the Queen was forced to return
eight days after, this absence was much more supportable to him then the
other, for he had in it the comfort of knowing he was beloved by the person in
the World he most esteemed, they past some Months so well, and with such
Tranquillity, that Alcidalis could almost have forgot there was a happiness
beyond it.

But there is a fatal point which nothing can ever pass, and fortune is
sometimes as weary of the joys of Lovers, as of the weight of Empires, the
highest happiness has this fault that its then nearest its end. This was sure
the only cause of all the misfortunes that persecuted so innocent an affection:
The assurance that Alcidalis had of Zelindas kindness, made him live with more
discretion, and more fear of displeasing the Queen, then ever he waited on her
Daughter oftener, and converst less with Zelinda, she who from her Childhood had
been ever serious, began to be more and more so* to see and speak to the Prince
with great Caution and respect, and do all things that might make their
affections less suspected; but this discretion, as it did ever between Lovers,
come too late, the Queen who could not be deceived, with much care, secrecy and
diligence, gave order for the executing a design which she had in hand, as
those which are in a place with their enemies* secretly undermine, for the most
part fear least of all the ruin they must sink into, and live in security
whilst men dig Graves under their feet; so our Lovers not imagining what was
contriving against them, enjoyed a perfect Tranquillity, and if they apprehended
any mischief from the Queen, they neither apprehended it so great, so sudden,
nor in that dreadful manner it was to befall them. Four Months after the Queen
came back from Catalonia, she took an occasion to in the beginning of the
Spring to return, giving no notice of any such intention, till the day before.
Alcidalis and Zelinda were so surprised, that they had scarce leisure to take
leave one of the other, as the Prince was expressing to her, the Grief he left
her with. Sir, said she, Remember you promised me, never to complain or fear
the combination of the whole World against you, whilst I was for you: Minds
assured one of another, like Martyrs in the midst of all their Sufferings, have
still their thoughts fixed together with joy, on their reward to come, we shall
meet again, and even in absence, our Memories shall make our past Satisfactions
ever present to us, and our imagination shall entertain us with those to come:
At that word she took a Ring from her fair hand; and bad him keep it with her
heart. Alcidalis received it with all the joy his own was capable of, and was
almost in love with the sad occasion* that drew so obliging a Discourse from
her; then taking another of the same inestimable value, since it came from him,
he gave it her with the same words, at which they parted with as much Grief as
ever they had met with Joy: Tears stole down both their Faces, which both
strove to hid from each other, as ashamed of such a vulgar mark of Sorrow in so
Transcendant a concern. The Queen went away next Morning, and staying but one
day at her own house, she pretended to have received some News from Barcellona,
which obliged her to go thither, leaving her Daughter with a great part of her
Train: She took only Zelinda with her, who imagined there was somewhat
extraordinary in it; but was not able to comprehend the reason; so that knowing
not what to fear, she feared every thing: The Queen spent the remainder of that
day in seeing the Town, and the magnificent reception that was made for her;
the next morning she was told that a Vessel bearing her own Name, which she had
built not long ago, was newly come into the Port, there was then an hundred
Vessels in the Port of Barcellona, which so soon as the Queen appeared, saluted
her with all the Guns, so that for a while there was nothing to be seen but
Fire and Smoke, the Ships being hid with a Cloud of their own making, they soon
made themselves heard in a sound of Trumpets and Howboys: The Music and all
the Naval Pomp, together with the sight of that Element, which at first seises
the Eyes and Minds of all the World with Admiration, could not in the least
divert Zelinda; her, heart presaged those ills at hand, she had so long
foreseen. The Queen put her self into a Boat, to go and see this Vessel, and
took Zelinda with her and some few Servants; She found in the Vessel, the
Captain and his Wife, with whom she shut her self up a while, which extremely
increast the jealousies of Zelinda, she looked toward Spain with Tears in her
Eyes, and began to despair of seeing it again: An hour after, the Captain and
his Wife came out of the Cabine, and told Zelinda, the Queen expected her
there, her Blood straight Froze in her Veins, and she grew so Pale, that she
seemed rather her own Ghost then her self; the Queen shutting the door upon
her, thus began. Though it be a long time Zelinda since we lost both; you the
best Mother in the world, and I the best Friend; Neither the affection that I
had for her, nor the last words she recommended you to my care, with shall ever
be forgotten: And had these former considerations been wanting, your Beauty,
your Wit, and Discretion, would have since obliged me to it. Having Bread you
up so long, and having found all these Qualities that gained her my affection,
shineing in you with more Luster: I were unreasonable had I not the same
Friendship for you, that I professed to her. Then say I have done more for you
then ever she asked of me, she only desired me to love you as her Daughter, and
I have loved you like my own; my Daughter lost the Title of an only Child from
the day your Mother dyed. Since when I have considered you both as equally my
own, and consequently none of your actions or concerns have been indifferent to
me, so that you may imagine it is impossible but I must have taken notice of
that passion which your Beauty (though without leave) has raised in the heart
of Alcidalis: I have been no less then your self in pain for the injury it
might do you. You know how little assurance there is in the the words of men of
his age and condition; both which gave him a license to deceive and falsify
his Promises: Be your own Judge, whether his affection can ever be any
advantage to you, you see how many reasons oppose it, and should it ever come
into his power and yours, you are too just, too grateful, to take him from the
Daughter of one you are so much obliged to. I know your Virtue Zelinda, but as
great as it is you cannot hinder the Prince from seeing you, nor the World from
Talking of it; your Virtue may avoid the ill, but cannot escape the noise; I
know the prejudice such reports are to those of your Sex, and particularly the
discontent they give those of your Scrupulous Virtue: I thought it then my duty
to lead you out of this difficulty, and that it was now high time to fulfill
the Promise I made your Mother. The Prince of Tarentum is Wise, Virtuous, and
Valliant, one of the most considerable Princes in Italy; He has by his Letters
and Ambassadors, made addresses to me, that he might have you in Marriage; I
would never acquaint you with particulars till all was settled* and the
business ripe for Execution. I hear he expects suddenly to lay at your Feet
his Person, and Dominions; the Captain of this Vessel left him fifteen days
ago, and obliged himself in as many more to bring you to him, according to my
Orders, Diligence and Secrecy for some reasons which I cannot yet let you know,
are very important to this Affair, therefore you must go away immediately, and
without any Train. I doubt not but this your good nature finds some trouble in
this sudden parting, but though the Sea separate us for a while, nothing shall
divide our affections; and I hope one day to see you with a Luster and
Magnificence, which shall recompense the private condition you leave us in* and
sure you ought to be glad, you are returning into a Country where you shall
find your Fortune, your Friends, and the place of your Birth. But although it
were not your inclination, it is enough that I will have it so: Besides the
power of a Queen; I claim also the interest of a Mother in you: Consent then
willingly to a thing (which beside that it is a thing very just) is also no
less necessary; in following readily what I counsel you, and perhaps command
you, you will show that Modesty that you owe to your self, and a respect no
less due to me: At these words she embraced her; pretending she would not take
a formal leave of her, lest it should too much soften both their hearts, she
left the Cabin.

Sorrow, Rage, and Indignation, so overwhelmed the mind of Zelinda, that for a
while she was neither able to speak nor move, so that she remained in the
condition the Queen left here in* Which yet was the happiest she found her self
in for many Months, since the greatness and suddainness of her misfortune, took
from her all sense of it for the time. All our faculties are so limited, that
they are only capable of moderate Objects* too much light blinds us, a great
noise makes us deaf* great Joys oppress our Senses. After having been without
any sign of life for half an hour, her Spirits began to return, and with them
her Fear, her Love, and all the passions of a troubled Mind; Her life came back
to her in such a company that she hated it; her first thought was that of
throwing her self at the Queens Feet, in hope to change her Cruel purpose; but
she was gone, and the Ship so far advanced, that one could hardly see the tops
of Houses of Barcelona, she turned her eyes that way, and reflecting on what
she left, and what she was going to: And having seriously weighed them a while,
she turned her self toward those that accompanied her with a Countenance more
cheerful and Serene then ordinary: and seeming to have received some
satisfaction from the consolation they gave her: See went to Bed, and entreated
them to leave her to her Rest: Fear and hopes are the two contrary winds of
Souls, which never cease, and there is no tempest, whereof one or other of them
is not the Cause: The present is but a point, and would be inconsiderable to
us, if one or other of these passions did not give us some feeling of the
future: Zelinda thought that Fortune had placed her below her own power of
helping, or harming farther: And so was in that fatal Tranquillity wherein men
neither fear nor hope, but expect the end of their Misfortune, with that of
their lives, In all these Miseries, she had not that of trying several
remedies, which is commonly the greatest pain of the unfortunate. Having well
considered what she would do, and knowing it could not be long e're she should
be freed from her afflictions, she past the night in thinking how Alcidalis
would receive the News of her loss: And though she was infinitely grieved to
part with him, she had some satisfaction when she thought of the eminent proof
it, would give him of her love, and resolution. The Captain of the Vessel
(besides that she was then their charge) had a particular esteem of Zelinda*
having known her at Court; as soon as they thought she was awake they went into
her Chamber, and asked her what she would eat, she answered that not only she
would not eat then, but that she would never eat more; this reply amazed them
extremely; but they concluded she was relapsed into her former Melancholy, and
a little Time, a properer Remedy, then any discourse. Three or four hours
after, finding that she called no body, they returned, and employed all
Prayers, and persuasions to make her receive a little Nourishment; to which she
answered only with a Sullen silence, and a Beheaviour so cold, and so resolved,
that she scarce seemed to have heard them: They left her this second time, but
began to apprehend some Tragical event of this strange resolution. The next
night they came again with a Niece of theirs, who was of the same age with
Zelinda, and kneeling to her, begged her to have a care of her life, with as
many Tears, and as much earnestness, as if they had asked their own of her, but
all in vain; so that they retired, and left her to her self. Three days past
thus whilst neither Prayers, Tears, or Persuasions, could prevail with Zelinda
to speak one word; but the fourth day these good people with their Niece, came
to make their last attempt: And desired her not to be her own Murderer, and
commit a Cruelty upon a Person so excellent, as even the rudest Barbarians
would both spare and Worship: Zelinda having hearkened a while to their
Discourse, fetched a deep Sigh, and rising from her Seat, showed her self plain
to them* which made them the better perceive the extremity she was in; in the
Beautifullest Face in the World, they beheld a frightful Image of despair and
approaching Death, and somewhat that gave at once horror and pity; having
looked round upon them all, she thus broke the Silence, she so long had kept.

My Friends, you ask of me a thing, that only you can give me, you would have
me live, and I would willingly obey; but have resolved never to come alive upon
the Shore of Italy, and here I swear it once more, to the Gods above, by Fire,
and Light, and to those below by the Ghosts of my Ancestors: My life is then no
longer in my power, it now depends on your carrying, or not carrying me to
Italy; be not then my Murderers, you to whose care I was committed. The Duke
of Tarentum expects me, he has never seen me, you have here your Niece of my
Age and Stature, and not unlike me in the Face; you may put her in my place,
and so at once advance her Quality and Fortune in the World, and save me from
the greatest Misfortune I know how to fear; it is true you will deceive the Duke
in giving him another then was promised him, but could you bring me to him in
the condition, and weakness I am now, she whom I would persuade you to give
him, would much better resemble that Zelinda he has heard of. The Duke will
sure be happier in a Wife that will receive, if not meet his love, then in the
forced Possession of another, who upon serious consideration has preferred her
Grave to his Bed. But it is not me he aims at, since he never saw me, it is the
Duchy of Otrante that he desires, and I give it this minute to your Niece,
with the Quality and Name of Zelinda, and call to Witness the same Gods I have
so lately Sworn by, that none shall ever know the contrary from me, and that I
never will repent of it. The Queen I know commanded you to carry me where he
expects me, but you will do her better service in obeying her Will, than her
Words; an^ can you think if she were here now and saw the condition I am now in
and knew the resolution I have no^ taken: That she had not rather s^^ me safe
in any part of the World then to seed me dead into Italy; d^^ she command you
to put me alive ^^ dead into the hands of the Prince ^^ Tarentum; do not you
believe she d^signed my Happiness and Advancement in this Marriage, and that
she w^^ had so great a care of my Fortu^^ would have a much greater care ^^ my
Life: When I am dead and ^^ the World shall reproach the Que^^ with this
inhumane Cruelty, ^^ not she say she was most Innoce^^ in that she did not know
my Mi^^ my Aversion to the Match, and last of all my Desperate Resolution: May
she not justly lay the whole fault on you, but what need you give her any
Account at all; This Vessel is your own where ever Wind or Waves have passage
you may go. Then taking out a little Box the Queen had left her, where all the
Jewels of her Mother were, she continued.

These Jewels are of infinite Value, the Queen cannot make you a greater
Present; except she gives you Barcelona. Take them, and give me nothing in
return, but my Life and Liberty; and since Liberty it self, is more then all
the Riches of the World, I shall acknowledge my self still your Debtor; too
many would kill the Innocent Zelinda, for half the Wealth I offer you to save
her: I buy a good Virtuous Action of you, at a Price able to engage many men in
the the most Barbarous: If you make a scruple of disobeying the Queen, you
ought to have an horror for the death of an Innocent; will you rather choose
to destroy one of her Friends, then to break one of her commands; If you are
afraid of her displeasure or wrong, you should consider, that shortly Alcidalis
will be greater in Arragon then she, who will seek you all over the World, and
bring you to a severe account for my Life, and Person: But if all these reasons
should not prevail, I conjure you by the Friendship you have professed to me, by
the compassion you showed but now, by these Tears, and all that is dear to you,
to deliver me from this Distraction I am in, your sudden resolution will
double the Obligation, and incline me to believe, that you were disposed to it
more through your generous Pity of my afflicted innocence, then any other
consideration: But if neither my Prayers, nor Tears, nor Offers, can prevail
with you: This Tongue that has pleaded my Cause so unsuccessfully, shall never
speak again, and death in a short time will give me that Liberty which you
refuse. Then she showed them all her Jewels, which Charmed their Eyes, as much
as her Discourses had done their Ears, so that they were no longer able to
resist that double violence: The Captain was a Souldierly man, and very Brave,
who had run through diverse Fortunes without ever making his own: He thought now
was the time or never, so that straight computing how many Vessels he might set
out with a good part of that Wealth he saw; immediately all Zelinda had said to
him appeared unanswerable, he thought himself oblidged in Honor to relieve so
Lovely and Injured a Princess: Besides, that he might one day restore her to
Alcidalis, and receive from him as great a recompense, as he had done for her.
He was a great while without speaking, so that Zelinda fearing his Silence,
proceeded from his irresolution, doubled her entreaties, till at last he
yielded, and vowed to obey what ever she commanded: She engaged to go into a
Monastery, and never to leave it without his consent: Zelinda was so overjoyed
at this deliverance from the Prince of Tarentum that she a while forgot she was
also separated from Alcidalis; this satisfaction soon restored her to Health
and Beauty; but they let her appear as little as possible; and their Niece
Crimina was every day instructed to Personate Zelinda; when she had her Lesson
perfect, they Landed her in Italy; though Zelinda saw all things go very well,
and that the Captain and his Wife were very zealous to have this design
succeed; yet her heart began to beat when she saw Land, and was extreme
impatient, till Crimina was settled with the Duke, that she might be gone: Not
to expose the false Zelinda at first, to the eyes of too many People, under the
pretense of some small Indisposition, they made her to be carried in a Chair,
into the very Palace, and under the same pretense avoided seeing much Company,
till she had confirmed her self in the Mien and Person of a Princes; so that
she let none see her when she could well avoid it but the Duke; who though he
did not find in her that Prodigious Beauty that had made so much noise, was
very well Satisfied with her, and attributed her Alteration partly to her
Indisposition, partly to her Voyage, and allowed somewhat for the Extravagance
of Report, which is ever in Extremes. The Captain and his Wife having received
very considerable Presents, took their leave of the Duke, and put to Sea,
pretending an Impatience they had to give the Queen an account of their happy
Voyage. Zelinda stayed all this while in the Vessel, and when she saw the
Captain and his Wife Aboard, pressed them to Hoyst Sail, and shed as many Tears
of Joy at her leaving Italy, as she had of Sorrow at her quitting Spain: But
what avails it, the unhappy to escape one Misfortune; or what Sanctuary is
there for these whom Fortune is resolved to Persecute; all the earth is subject
to her Empire, but the Sea seems to be particularly under her Dominion, it is
there she excercises her Power most Tyrannically; and most Treacherously,
enriching her Favorites with the Spoils of the Industrious: Yet as if there
were nothing more to be feared, Zelinda thanked Heaven, and being on an Element
the most deceiptful of the four, among people she could expect nothing farther
from, having nothing more to bribe them with. She imagined her self as secure
as if she had been in a Palace, and in the midst of her Friends: They made
toward Sardignia, where the Captain designed to leave Zelinda; with a Sister
of his, till he could find an opportunity to restore her to Alcidalis; they had
Sailed three days with a Fair Wind, when two hours before the Sun set, he upon
the Watch, from the top of the Mast, cried he saw three Sails making toward
them; Men live no where with so little security, as upon that Element, The
Water, Earth, Air, and Fire, are all Enemies of those that are at Sea; but Men
most of all, and there is nothing that one Vessel apprehends so much, as the
Meeting of another; not long after they looked again, and they saw the Tops of
three Sails, which seemed not to be above three Leagues off; an hour after
they came more in View, so that they knew them to be Pirates. Our Captain
commanded his men to Hoist all their Sails and run for it: The next Morning as
soon as it was broad day, they perceived the Pirates were aside of them, and
within six Miles, so that if they gained upon them in the Morning
proportionably to what they had done in the Night before, they judged that by
Noon they would be within Cannon-Shot; those that were in the Vessel were a
little apprehensive, the fearful took themselves to Crying and Howling, the
most resolved, to their Arms: And the most reasonable, concluded, that neither
the one nor other were to any great purpose; Though the Captain had experience
enough to know that he could not Defend himself long, yet he chose rather to
die like a man of Honor, then to yield and loose that Wealth he was so lately
and so luckily possessed of. In this Alarm and general confusion, Zelinda alone
was not astonished, and whilst others feared for their Goods, and their
Liberties, she to whom all these things were indifferent, thought only for
preserving her Honor: After having thoroughly considered the danger she was in,
and the remedies it was capable of; She shut her self into her Chamber with the
Captains Wife, where the first thing she did, was to throw all her Ornaments
into the Sea, least they should discover her, then cutting off the Finest Hair
in the World, she Wept a while in the consideration of what Fortune had reduced
her to; but at last she called for a Suit of the Clothes of the Captains, and
Disguised her self and Sex. In the mean time the three Vessels which they knew
belonged to the Coast of Africa, came within Cannon-Shot of them, and
Discharged a Gun, to see if they would Strike Sail, but finding they did not,
but pretended to defend themselves, when they came within convenient distance
they gave them a Broadside: those of the Vessel did the same, but with a very
different success* for doing no harm at all to the Enemies, they had their Mast
and two of their Sails Shot in pieces, their Vessel extremely Shattered, and
many of the Soldiers killed; at this noise Zelinda came out of her Chamber,
and put her self among the foremost, hoping that she should by that means
either be killed the sooner, or disguise her self the better, the Combat was
so unequal that it was impossibie it should last long, and all the resistance
they were able to make, could not hinder the Pirates from Boarding the Vessel;
where after they had killed ten or twelve of the most Resolute, and amongst the
rest the Captain, the Seamen threw down their Arms, and yielded to Mercy The
Captain of these Vessels was of the Kingdom of Barca, the people of it are very
Barbarous, they drive no Trade at all, what we call Robbing, they call Gaining
from the Enemy, and whatever they purchase with their Blood, they count still
the bravelier, and most Honestly gotten; and would be ashamed of any other
Title to it. This man being the most powerful in his Country, Valliant and
Skillful in Sea Affairs, was a long time the Terror of all the Coasts of
Greece and Italy, he had Mercy, and Generosity more then his Country, or indeed
his Profession allowed of, naturally and without knowing they were Virtues: As
there are in the North, some Veins of Gold as perfect as those in the Indies,
though not in so great quantity. So nature in all Climates does produce now and
than an extraordinary Genius, which she instructs and cultivates her self, and
indues with all imaginable perfection without help of Art. As Orcantes (for so
this Pyrate was called) was looking over his Captives and the Prize he had
gotten. The Majesty and Beauty that shined in Zelindas Face, compelled him to
ask her who she was, she answered she was a Spaniard, and her name was Zelidan,
Nephew to the Captain of that Vessel, he had taken, that she wished her self
with him, and esteemed him happy to have preserved his Liberty with the loss of
his Life: She said this with a mien worthy of a better Fortune, and with an
assurance more usual in the Conquerours then the vanquished, her Constancy, her
Courage, prevailed more on the Generous Disposition of the Captain, then all
the mean Submission of the rest, he was charmed with the Greatness of her Mind,
and Beauty of her Person, and desired her to be of good Courage, since she was
fallen into the hands of one, who made Slaves of none but such as deserved to
be so. That for himself he sought Glory more then Gain upon the Sea, and took
more pleasure to give Liberty, then to make Slaves. That he left the rest of
the Prize to his Soldiers, and desired only Zelidan for himself, and that the
first brave Action they were in, should be his Ransom. And Sir, said he, If
the advantages of your Mind, answer those of your Person, I shall soon be more
a Captive to your Worth, then you are to my Arms. Zelinda, who expected nothing
of this nature from a Barbarian, and a Pyrate, was almost as much amazed as he
was pleased; and the loss of Liberty, as a Slave to Orantes, was so much more
supportable then it would have been to her* as Wife to the Prince of Tarentum,
that she began to bear it with some sort of satisfaction. She thought there was
no misfortune but to be given to another, nor no Happiness but to be Married to
Alcidalis: All things else were indifferent to her. And so her great Soul
worthy of the Empire of the World, submitted to her present condition with less
concern then the meanest Seaman that was taken with her. But Zelidan for so we
must hereafter call her, besides that Heaven had given her all Advantageous
Qualities, both of Mind and Body, was endued with all those Graces, which
almost insensibly create Love and Respect, born to command and not to obey: She
soon got the ascendant over her new Master, the Slaves, Soldiers, Seamen, all
loved her so well, that she Governed absolutely, in the Vessel where she was
Prisoner; seeing the kindness Orantes had for her, she judged that it would
turn to Love, if once she were discovered; and then his inclination (which else
would be of great advantage to her) would be infallibly her ruin* She took all
the care imaginable to conceal her self continually exercising her Courage, and
all these Qualities that her Sex is least capable of. They past all that Summer
without ever landing, but to take in Fresh Water, in which time the new Zelidan
signalized himself on all occasions: There was no Vessel taken where he was not
the first Aboard* so that the Pirate found no difficulty to pay him the full
esteem and friendship he had promised: The Winter coming on, and the Sea
growing fuller of fears, then hopes even for Pirates themselves, they laid up
their Vessel in the first Port of Barca: Orantes gave Zelidan his Liberty with
a great many Complements, and professions of perpetual Friendship: He desired
to bring him to Court, saying he would show the King the Richest Prize he ever
took upon the Sea. In the mean while Alcidalis who was informed of the Queens
whole proceeding, believed Zelinda in the Arms of the Prince of Tarentum, and
thought her capable though not of loving, yet of suffering another, the
generous resolution of starving her self to death, which Zelinda was ready to
have executed, Alcidalis was not able to imagine: But after he had given some
time to a helpless and a most speechless sorrow, he lost all fear, all respect,
together with his hope, and had no other though but that of Revenging himself
immediately upon the Queen, or of forcing Zelinda from the Arms of the Prince
of Tarentum. But at last his Body being unequal to the violent Agitations of
his Mind, he fell into a Feavour, accompanied with such Raving Fits, as all
that knew their true cause, had reason to believe he would never outlive them;
he was in a short time without any strength, and which was happiest for him
without any thought at all: thus Fortune can mock at all our Purposes, and
confine him a whole Month to his Chamber; Who threatened straight to search the
whole World for Zelinda. A Feavour, Love, and Jealousy, which are certainly the
greatest ills of Mind and Body, raged at once in Alcidalis, every one of them
with their most desperate Circumstances: So that each seemed incurable and
altogether unsupportable: But at length contrary to all expectation he
recovered, but with his Health, his Grief, his Love, and all cares returned; so
that without staying till he was perfectly recovered, or making any one
acquainted with his design, he stole out of Saragosa, and going a by way to
the Kingdom of Valentia, he embarked at the nearest Port, and past over into
Italy: Where he hoped to see Zelinda, which expectation was all the Happiness
he was capable of in her absence; The false Zelinda had better Fortune then the
true one, and her designs better success, she had, as observed, a moderate
Beauty, and that kind of understanding that gives us cunning and subtility for
the Affairs of the World, seeing what a dangerous business she had undertaken,
she endeavored all she could to gain the Prince her Husbands Heart, and so
fortify her self against all accidents: He was of those years wherein men
begin to feel the approaches of Old Age, and to be somewhat less confident of
themselves, and where the most reasonable and best deserving cannot hope to be
loved by Women, but out of gratitude or duty: So that the Beauty, Conduct, and
Kindness, of his Young Wife, gained him entirely: As we are never so fond of
Flowers, as in the beginning of the Spring, or toward the end of Autumn; the
first for their Novelty, and the others because we think we shall see them no
more: So the pleasures of love are at no time so dear to us, as in the
buginning of our Youth, and the approaches of our Age: It is so great and
unexpected a Happiness for an Old Man to be loved, that there is no folly they
are not capable of in that condition, but the knowledge they have of
themselves, scarce suffers them ever to be firmly persuaded of it. The Duke was
no sooner in love, but he became Jealous; That passion which in other Countries
is an accidental effect of love, is there inseparable from it* they conclude
there cannot be a great desire, without a great fear. Love and Jealousy are
Twins with them, and ever born together. Were it then the excess of kindness,
the Air of his Country, or his own natural distrust, or that he had heard
somewhat concerning Alcidalis, that had caused that effect; his Jealousy
arrived to that height, that he never thought her safe but when she was with
him, and even then had scarce patience she should be seen by any eyes but his
own. She who for another reason cared not to be seen much, easily complied with
his Humor, and told him she loved all the effects of his Passion equally, that
his very fears were agreeable to her since they were marks of his Love: That
her greatest content was to procure his, that in having him, she thought she
had all the World, and cared not if she was shut up for ever on these Terms.
He receives these offers of hers with great joy, and made use of the Liberty
she gave him to take away all hers, so that cutting off daily somewhat of her
Attendants, and of a great Palace, which before she had the freedom of, he
reduced her to four or five Rooms, and a few necessary Servants, as the Duke
gave her many marks of his Jealousy, he also gave her some of his Love. And
strove to make her Prison as agreeable to her as possible, there was no part of
the World that did not contribute its greatest varieties to her Closets. Art
and nature seemed to strive which should most adorn her Retirement. And she
saw all things she could wish, but men, and those she saw only out her Windows.
The Duke bought the Lustiest and Handsomest Slaves that could be found which
(to divert the Malancholy which must needs attend such a solitude) he caused to
be taught to Fence, Ride, run at the Ring, and all the exercises of the
Nobility, by the best Masters of Italy; these were called the Slaves of the
Duchess, thrice a Week they were brought into a Court all strewed with Sand,
where they did all their Exercises: The Duke had two designs in this, one of
diverting his Duchess, and the other of making her despise all men; by letting
her see in Slaves, the same Qualities which are admired in people of the
highest Birth, and most advantageous Education. Alcidalis at his coming into
Italy, was informed of all this, and judged that no Quality would so soon
introduce him, as that of a Slave to the Duchess; he communicated his designs
to his Gentleman, who had always attended him; who Disguising himself like a
Merchant, went to the Officers that had the Government of the Slaves, and
exposed to sale Alcidalis; who having all the Qualities necessary in a very
eminent degree; was soon Bought, and so one of the greatest and most
accomplished men in the World, became a Slave: A while he was fain to learn of
them he might have taught* and seeming to learn every day somewhat of his
exercises; he in a short time so advanced, that he was admired of all the
World; if he were challenged to run, Wrestle, Fence, or Ride, he was so
constantly successful, that at last he seemed but to be invited to so many
Victories: There was no Prize that any one, or number of his Companions, durst
dispute with him: Yet among all the commendations he obtained, he felt a secret
shame in himself, that his Victories were gained only over a few Slaves, for he
had a heart as Generous as that Prince, who scorned to Run with any but Kings,
though he did all things with an incomparable Grace, it was with so much
neglect and contempt of what he was about, that it was no hard matter to see
his thoughts were somewhere else: When ever he entered the Lists, for the
Divertisement of the Duchess, he came the first, and went away the last; In
all his exercises he had his Eyes and Heart fixed upon the Window, he thought
she stood at. For the Jealous Duke had so contrived it; that she could see
without being seen: What Mistakes and Errors are not men capable of, the most
Faithful Lover upon earth adores now a Beauty he has never seen, Sighs before
her, and gives her at his eyes his heart: And being born a Slave to Zelinda,
has blindly sold himself to another: Alcidalis who had been remarkable amongst
the most accomplished Princes, was easily so among these Slaves. The first day
she saw him, his Beauty, and the Graces that accompanied all his Actions,
attracted the eyes of the Duchess; afterward he gained her esteem, and then
her admiration; and having considered how thoroughly she thought she saw in his
Mine and Courage, somewhat worthy of a Nobler destiny, and much above his
present Fortune: She took notice how fixtly he looked up at her Window, of the
Paleness and Sadness of his Face, which all the applauses continually given him
were never able to change for a Minute: All this together gave her at first
Pity, then Curiosity, and at last Love.

One Night as this Illustrious Slave went out of the Palace of the Duke, in a
dark Passage he felt himself pulled* by one, whom by that light he could only
perceive to be a Woman; who taking him aside, said, Clariantes, (for that was
the name he chose to be called by in this Disguise) If you are as truly Brave
as you appear, come to morrow morning at two a Clock to the foot of the
Greek-Tower, there you shall be put in a way of being the Happiest man living:
She said this in great haste, and left him, without staying for his answer. But
this was enough to set his Thoughts a work: Since Fortune began to persecute
his love, this seemed to him the first Moment she began to remit of her usual
Rigor; he made no question but this Message came from Zelinda, since to make
him Happy was in the power of none but her: Yet whether it be that men so
extraordinary hold some little intelligence with their destiny, or that the
unfortunate entertain hope but Coldly, which has so often deceived them: he durst
not be confident of his good Fortune, but expected the hour she had assigned
him, successively agitated by Impatience, Hope, and Fear. The time so much
longed for being come, as soon as it was dark he came to the foot of the Tower,
which was an old Building which entered some fifty Foot into the Sea; Alcidalis
came in a small Fisher Boat, which having fastened to the Wall, he attended the
success of his Adventure an hour before any body came to him: His Mind all the
while no less tossed between Hope and Fear, then the small Vessel he was in by
the Waves of the Sea: Passions which though they are very contrary, are very
often together; the Wind was so high, that there was small hope the Rope that
held the Boat would endure much longer, so that every Minute he imagined it
would break; at last, as he began to despair of his expected Happiness, and
entertain the dismalest thoughts the Night, the Sea, and rising Storm could
furnish him with; he heard a noise from the top of the Tower, which he answered
to, and immediately something fell into his Boat, which he soon perceived to be a
Ladder of Rope: Alcidalis then gave himself entirely into the Arms of a
deceitful hope, and was confident he should once more behold his unfortunate
Zelinda: which made him slight all dangers, and run up the Ladder as fast as he
could have done the easiest Stairs in the World; when he was at the top, he
found a Window open, and a Woman who gave him her Hand, and without saying any
thing, brought him through a great many turnings into a Closet, the Richliest
Furnished that ever he had seen, lighted with three Lamps of Gold: He perceived
then she was the same Woman had spoke to him before in the dark Passage; then
putting all things together, he concluded she came from Zelinda, and had now no
fear but that of not staying long enough with her: He had a thousand several
and some contrary Passions at once in his Mind, which cannot be represented on
Paper, since the Soul of man, and amongst them, only the Lovers, is capable of
such confusion: He was for an hour in the stillest Silence imaginable, but at
last he heard, as he thought, the tread of a Woman, and the noise of a Key, to
which turning his Head about, he saw a Door open, and the same person enter who
gave him her hand at the Window; who Smiling upon him, said, Clariantes, I do
not doubt but you will pardon me for having made you wait thus long, and
confess the Honor you are going to receive, an abundant recompense for all you
have suffered. The Prince thanked her; and desired she would inform him a
little what this Honor was she meant; She paused a while, and then replied,
Were I not by the Greatness of your Mien and Courage, sufficiently assured of
that of your Mind, I should not venture to let you know your good Fortune thus
at once, lest excess of joy should overpower your Spirits; but it is to be
supposed a man of your Merit can never be surprised at his good Fortune,
whatever it be; know then, that you are now in Zelinda's Closet, and shall
immediately be brought into her Chamber; the Duchess has taken notice of your
good Qualities, and finding nothing amiss in you but your Fortune, is resolved
to better that her self; and to that end desires your acquaintance: On your
part see you make good use of this occasion, and show as much Discretion and
Conduct hereafter, as you have hitherto shown Courage and Generosity. Having
said this, she led him into the Dutchesses Chamber. How strangely are our Minds
wrought upon? Alcidalis, whom death it self would not have discomposed,
trembles in a place where he knew there were none but Women; that heart which
would have encountered a world of Enemies without fear, melts at the imaginary
approach of the only person upon earth he loves, and knows himself to be
beloved by: The Chamber had just the light that such affairs required, which
was not much; the shame and disorder of a Young woman unpracticed in the Thefts
of Love, made her conceal her self so much, that had Alcidalis been less
prepossest then indeed he was, he could not easily have found his mistake: He
immediately fell upon his Knees to her, and after a few words confusedly
uttered, and worse followed, he stopped in the middle of his Discourse;
Amazement, Joy, and Love seized him so in an instant, that half* beside-himself
he let fall his head upon the Bed of the young Princess, who lifting it up with
her hand, brought him a little to himself; but a consciousness of his disorder
kept him still in it, so that he could only say at last,

Zelinda, Heaven has had some pity on the unhappy Alcidalis, and once before I
die given me a sight of those perfections I would have dyed to have seen; my
love is still the same, and I am not the less yours for your being another;
the Tyranny of Fate may force our Persons out of our own disposal, but hearts
are given by themselves alone, and sure what is unjustly taken, we justly may
recover. Here his Sighs interrupted his Discoutse, and as he would have
continued it, they heard a great noise in the Palace, which she that was
entrusted came out of Breath to tell them it was the Duke, and that he was
already on the Duchess Side: Who, good man, far from thinking what had
happened, had designed to spend two or three days in Hunting; but whether it
were Love, or Jealousy, or that he thought, that for being less expected he
should be the more welcome to the Duchess; he returned the very day, and the
first thing he did, came to visit her. I hate him for coming so unseasonably;
for I would fain have seen what reply she would have found to a Discourse she
so little comprehended, and less expected; and had I made the Story, Alcidalis
should have made him -- what the Duchess pleased: But as things were, there
was no staying any longer, and the Lady that brought him, in all haste
conducted him to the same Window he came in it. Seeing and detesting this last
Treachery of Fortune, he had more mind to precipitate himself, then to make use
of his Ladder of Ropes, and had done it, but for the hope of Climing up by it
another time. The sweetness of that thought persuaded him to live a little
longer, but with many rash Vows and deep Imprecations, not to survive such
another Jilting trick; and brought him safe, and unobserved to his Lodging; for
the Dukes unexpected arrival had raised all from sleep, and put the Court in
such Confusion, that they ran against each other as if it had been at
blind-mans-Buffe: (a Recreation much used at Courts in that Age, and not yet
wholly disesteem'd.) To save the trouble of making doleful Speeches* and avoid
the danger of speaking untruths, or worse then he did, I will not presume to
relate exactly how often Alcidalis Sighed, Tumbled, and Rouled in his Bed,
sometimes Railing at, and sometimes wheadling Fortune; or whether he tore his
lovely Hair, which in a thousand Curls adorned his spreading Shoulders; for he
being then under the qualification of a Slave, had no attending Esquire to hear
and discover his Soliloquies. But let the ingenious Reader imagine, after a
long and passionate Courtship of so Beautiful a Lady as Zelinda, if he was
Kneeling by her Bed, ( the Altar of Love) pressing her soft Palm, laying his
amorous head on her panting Breast, in the height of ecstasy, just at the
Minute of fruition, (for doubtless they had been naught together, if the Dukes
coming had not prevented them) how it would stir him to be disappointed: And
then let him please his fancy with Speeches suitable to his own Humor. -- Here
some Romantic Zealots may perhaps accuse me of a gross mistake, in supposing a
Prince so subllmely Virtuous as Alcidalis is Uncharacterized, could be guilty of
the common Failings of meaner persons: But I refer my self to the Impartial
Judgment of this ripe-witted Age, whether that Lover is not most perfect,
whose Passion has no Limits (maugre the Cruel examples of Amadis de Gaul, that
flower of Chivalry, and all the Rabble of obsolete Heroes) but in persuance of
its design, which is enjoyment one way or other, whatever is pretended to the
contrary; tramples all danger, or reason under Foot; I Will believe it granted,
and proceed to my Story. -- The same excess of kindness, or Jealousy rather,
which hurried the Old Duke from his Country diversions, hastened him to the
Chamber of his Trembling Duchess; who received him with most extraordinary
marks of unusual Tenderness, the better to palliate her Error; often renewing
her strict Embraces, with a melting voice, she said,

My Dearest Lord! The only joy of my Life! Are you well? Are you in my Arms? Oh
speak! and confirm me that I am not yet in a Dream -- No, Dear Madam! answered
the over joyed Duke, it is no Dream; or if it be, it is so ravishing to me,
that I could be contented it should never end: But what, my dear Zelinda, has
so much discomposed you? Your heart pants and struggles, as if it were weary of
its Seat, and sought for shelter in my Breast -- Oh Sir, she replied, receive
it kindly then! and let it ever dwell there, that it may no more be frighted
with your absence. Your coming wakened me from a dreadful Dream; a great Buck,
me-thought, assaulted you in a* dark Thicket, and was just ready to goar your
Majestic forehead with his Horns; Ha! Horns, cried the Duke, (starting as if
his evil Genius had appeared) Heaven avert the Omen! If your presence had not
disturbed my busy Fancy, certainly the Dream had gone one, says she, and I had
dyed with apprehension -- Be comforted, Madam! says the recollected Duke,
Dreams are but faint reflections of those last thoughts, which employed the
imagination when sleep surprised the Active Senses; so when the Glorious Sun
forsakes our Hemisphear, a Rosy glimmering lighr still guilds the Clouds. Ah
Sir! I will never consent that you shall leave my Arms, cried the passionate
Duchess, for if your precious life should be destroyed, how wretched would the
unfortunate Zelinda be! Repeating her Caresses with such exquisite Artifice,
and seeming Fondness, that the Duke, believing himself most egregiously Happy
in a Kind and Faithful Spouse, when her heart was all that time inventing new
Curses for him, committed all his cares to a sound sleep; which Age, and a
little forced exercise to retaliate his Ladies kindness, soon brought upon him.

The next day was solemnized with more then usual Sports, where Alcidalis,
swelled with joyful hopes, performed such extravagant Deeds of Agility and
Strength, as I dare not particularize, lest the incredulous Reader should
distrust the truth of all the rest. The Duke unable to make good returns of
Love two nights together, shut up his Exchequer, and as an uncivil Debtor that
cannot Pay, avoids the sight of his obliging Creditor; he stole away as
abruptly to his Country House in the Evening, as he had come from thence the
Night-before; leaving a Letter to inform and comfort the poor Duchess, with
plentiful assurances of a speedy return; adding, that he feared to bid her
Farewell, lest her Grief should betray him to a weakness misbecoming a Prince.
She had observed his close manner of retiring, and gladly gave him opportunity
to Cheat himself, while he thought to deceive her: but could not read his
Consolatory Epistle, without downright Laughing -- Old Age, Flannell, and
Brandy, said she, farewell! and immediately calling Florella, (for that was the
Lady of her intrigue) sent her to Clariantes; concealing still from her, that
it was the Prince Aleidalis, (whose Name and Actions the Court was well
acquainted with) and resolving to continue his mistake of her for the true
Zelinda; ordered, that when he came, there should be no light at all in her
Chamber. Florella found him walking where he had received the former Summons,
and failed not to deliver the second Challenge; nor he to repair immediately to
the place appointed. Now Fortune seemed to fix her unsteady Wheel; Smooth and
Gentle, as a Frozen River, did the Sea appear; and the amicable Moon, an
indulgent cherisher of all Exploits of Love and Art, (like a well-wishing
Procurer with a dark Lanthorn) from behind a sable Cloud, displayed just light
enough to lead him on, and not betray him. Swift as a sealed Dove, and as blind
too with his Passion, he mounted to his Heaven, the Window, and in one moment
more prostrated himself at the Shrine, the Bed of his Saint. Like a gay plumed
Phoenix, wrapped in perfumes, and languishing in Flames of Love, she lay; yet
trembled like a new yean'd Lamb upon a sheet of Snow, with eagerness of fierce
desire. After his first assault of Kisses on her melting Hand, his Tongue got
liberty to cry, Ye Gods! do I again behold the fair Zelinda? (a very pertinent
Question, for it is to be remembered there was no Light) then overcome with
ecstasies of joy, his head sunk gently on her downy Breasts, which proudly
swelled to welcome so desired a Guest, and meet his burning Kisses; while with
her tender Arrms, more White then Alpine Snow, she kindly pressed him closer!
Oh my adored Zelinda, (he panting cried) to which she Ecchoed softly with a
Sigh, Oh my much loved Alcidalis! I had been too happy had I been only thine.
-- Here their Speech was Smothered with reiterated Kisses and Embraces, till
urged by opportunity, and stimulated with greatness of delight, with a
respective Boldness he continued -- Why was the unfortunate Alcidalis permitted
to see such dazzling Glories, and hope for such unexpressible bliss, as Gods
would quit again their Heaven for, -- and not -- En -- j --! There with a Balmy
Kiss, she put a period to his Words; and with a pretty kind of obliging
violence, she checked his wandering hands, while he pursued his purpose thus --
If my adored Princess thinks my Sufferings yet too inconsiderable to merit her
esteem, if cuitting the powerful Charms of approaching Sovereignty, and
forsaking an indulgent dying Father, to wear the despicable Garb, and do the
mean* Offices of Common Slavery, deserve no Pity; invent new Chains, Tortures,
Deaths, and see how readily I will embrace them for Zelinda's sake -- Too much,
too much already, replied the cunning yielding Duchess, has my beloved Prince
endured -- But -- But! -- But what! cried the impatient Alcidalis -- But you
are another, you perhaps would say: Ah Madam! were you not first mine? were
you not Basely, Treacherously Ravished from my Arms? And if a Thief has Robbed
me, shall not I seize my Treasure where I find it? -- Concluding with a close
embrace, -- Go, ye are an unkind naughty man, said she -- and I wont love --
you indeed -- if -- you offer -- Sighing, and gently striving to defend, what
she had rather have dyed then keep -- What, oh powerful opportunity! may not be
effected by thy assistance? How sweet a recompense did the mistaken Alcidalis
think he had, for all his pains! and what a full revenge on Fortune for her
Jilting Tricks, while he lay dying in the Arms of his supposed Deity! -- But oh
the shortness, and uncertainty of humane felicity! Who would not think the
tired Duke now taking large Arrears of sleep, for his last nights Disturbance!
Who would believe, he should so soon a second time molest these Lovers! Yet so
it was; for in the height of all their Bliss, Florella almost Breathless with
her haste, rushed in; casting back such frightfull Looks, as if some ghastiy
Phantasm had pursued her; and by the Blazing light of a great Wax Taper which
she brought, discovered to the surprised Alcidalis, the false Zelinda; and e're
he could discharge his Senses, from the Amazement that object raised, she
increased it by crying out, The Duke! The Duke was privately returned, and just
entered the Palace: which truth their ears immediately confirmed, by the hasty
Footsteps which they heard. -- The Duchess, Pale and Trembling, had not power
to speak, but with up-lifted Hands and Eyes, seemed to implore the assistance
of Alcidalis; while Florella, whose Senses were more at liberty, threw a loose
Robe and Head-Tyre of the Dutchesses on Alcidalis, hiding his Face as much as
the Dress would permit. Scarce was this done, when the Duke entered, clasped
him in his Arms, and spoke the kindest things a doting Husband could invent, to
oblige the best Wife in the World: To which he dared make no reply; but
Florella freed him from that trouble, telling the Duke, a sudden Toothache,
got by a cold she took the preceding night, made speaking extremely
troublesome; and swelled her Face so, she dared not expose it to the Air, lest
it increased her Malady. Alcidalis took the hint, and began to Groan so
Lamentably, it put his Grace into such mortal apprehensions of her danger, that
it was hard to judge who was in the greatest perplexity, He, the Prince, or the
Duchess, who lay quaking under the Bed-Cloathes, like a Child frighted with
the Tale of Raw head and bloody Bones. Death was the least punishment the
Lovers could expect, if they were discovered. A hundred times did Alcidalis
resolve to force his Passage over the Dukes feeble Body: But the consideration
of the Dutchesses danger, as a Woman in distress, though her imposture had much
incensed him, diverted all those thoughts to a Generous resolution of freeing
her, or sharing in her destiny. Thus Affairs stood, when Fortune seemed weary
of tormenting them, and gave some prospect of hope, for the Uxorious Duke would
himself be the Messenger to call the Physicians; which gave all hopes of
setting things right 'ere he returned; but their Joy vanished like a swift
reflection of the Sun cast from a moving Looking-glass; for the blind Queen,
whose sole delight consists in Tantalizing those that trust her, thrust them
the next Minuit on the very brink of Ruin. The Duke unable to leave his Dear
Zelinda without a Kiss, found a strange unusual Roughness on his Chin, and
surprised with a sudden fit of Jealousy, surveying him the same instant from
Head to Foot, imagined his dimensions six times as big as his Zelinda's (for
Passion blinds the Understanding, as some Diseases cheat the Sight) and rending
off the Head-Dress, saw not only a man, but his Slave Clariantes, whose
extraordinary valor had made him worthy of his particular knowledge. --
Immediately running out, with loud Exclamations of Treason, Treason! the Guard
repaired to his aid; when his back was turned, you may think Alcidalis was not
idle, but casting off that faetal Robe, with a bravery of Spirit which never
forsook him, he prepared, though unarmed, to dispute his Life* But e're he
went, turning to the Duchess who was almost drowned in Tears, Madam, ( says
he) if extravagancy of Passion, had not wholly seized my Reason with my Senses,
your Deportment, so contrary to her strict and spotless Virtue, had assured me
you were not the ncomparable Zelinda; but if you give me not some account of
that excellent Princess, by all the Gods I swear! to unvail your imposture, and
expose you to the just Cruelty of the deluded Duke, though my death accompany
your Infamy. -- Ah Sir, ( said the deplorable Duchess) can you with such
extreme rigor pay my excess of Love? ungrateful man! the too happy Zelinda
(since so esteemed by you) lives in the Isle of Sardignia; it was to save her
life, I consented to become a Duchess -- It Is not, Cruel Prince! to the care
of my own safety you owe for this discovery, for with your self, you take from
me all desire to live: But to preserve your Life, (notwithstanding all your
unkind contempt) ten thousand times dearer to me then my own. I once more tell
you, your too happy Zelinda lives yet in Sardignia; in obedience to her own
desire, attended thither by my Father. Shortness of time forbids to tell you
more: Now leave me to the severity of an incensed Jealous Husband; but when you
think of my failing, remember the Cause, and pity me. -- Here the noise of the
Dukes return stayed her Speech. Alcidalis had dyed in her defense, so graceful,
and so moving was her grief, but hopes of seeing the true Zelinda banished all
other sentiments. With Courage, even to rashness, he cast himself amidst the
Guard, and got safely off; for their too much have, (the Mortal enemy of most
designs) brought the Guard (...) with so little light, that in the Confusion it
was not difficult to pass without being discerned. The enraged Duke entering,
found his Duchess standing in that very Dress and Posture he left Clariantes,
only the Head-Tyre he had disordered, was again put on, and by the advice of
Florella (who was old excellent at sudden Shifts) she was so placed. Strait he
cries out to his Guard, There! There behold the audacious Traitor! take him,
seize him, away with him to Tortures; let him be 100 Years dying. The Guard
seeing none but the Duchess, like Statues stood without motion; The Duke
stormed, Vowed all were in the Plot, and should dye together; but first that
Villain Clariantes: Andrunning at the Duchess with his Drawn Sword, had
certainly killed her, if Florella's shriek at his first motion, had not made
her start aside. Yet she escaped not without a Wound in her Side, which
together with her fright, cast her on the Bed in a swoun: and by the falling
off of her Head-Tyre, showed the Duke what he had done. -- He did not (as some
would expect) search round the Chamber, and the Palace for Clariantes, but
wholly submitted to his Uxorious Love; which like an impetuous Tide, bare down
his Anger, Faith, and Reason; seeing his dear Duchess Bleeding, and as he
thought breathing out her Soul by his accursed hand, he threw himself at her
Feet, beat his Head against the Ground, tore his Hair, and rooted up his Comely
Beard (hold! let me not lie neither, perhaps Beards were as much out of Fashion
then, as now, and consequently he wore none; I would not have Posterity imposed
upon in matters of such weight; truth will go through the World.) But I am sure
he called himself a thousand thick sculled Ophes, Jealous Cox-combs, Villains,
Murderers, and turning to his Guard, begged them to Dispatch him, for he was a
Tyrant, not worthy to live but among Beasts; from entreaties he proceeded to
commands, and threats; but seeing them reverse their Faces, and hang their
Heads at his strange Proposition. Why, said he, will you be cruel to your
Prince? and deny him the only favor he ever begged from you, or that you can
grant? I have most inhumanely pierced my own soul, what safety can you hope
from me? My hearts blood stains the Floor, and I can gaze upon it without dying;
can you expect Justice from such a Monster? Gods! Why do I desc^^d to Petition
so poorly, for what is in my power. Oh my Zelinda! the Blossoms that enriched
the early Spring, and with their fragrant seent perfumed the gentle Southern
Wind, were not so sweet, nor half so Beautiful as thee: 'twould undo the vast
Universe to purchase so rich a Jewel as I have rashly thrown away -- What ean
my hated Carcass, this dull Clod of earth do in the World, when my Sun that
gave it warmth, and life, lies here Eclipsed? Fool! Fool! Fool! that I am --
Then he cast himself again on her Body, and striving in vain to find some signs
of life, cried out, Zelinda! Zelinda! She Is gone; -- for ever, for ever gone.
-- if thy injured soul is yet hovering in the ambient Air, as sure it is loath
to go far from so rich, so beautiful a Cabinet, let it behold the Sacrifice I
offer for its Peace. -- Starting up, he endeavored to cast himself on his
Sword, but was prevented, and by the Physicians and Chyrurtgeons who were then
arrived, the Duchess was recovered from her swoun: and her life assured, if no
new accidenr prevented their care. -- The Duke begged a thousand pardons for
his folly, and stirred not from her Bed till she was Cured; -- binding himself
with many vows, never to be Jealous again; nor did I ever hear of any farther
difference between them; therefore I will leave them, with the same farewell
people give their departed Friend, who dyed with a Lord have mercy upon me in
his Mouth, (though he lived impiously) doubtless they are Happy. --

Oh Woman! Woman! thou dark abyss of Subtilty; it is easier to trace a wandering
Swallow through the pathless Air, then to explicate the crafty wyndings of thy
Love, or Malice: Thy swift excuses, and evasions, still like the Hydra's Heads
increase: As Wizzards, in a moment you are transformed to various Shapes, and
when the injured Friend, or Husband, thinks to crush a Serpent that has
poisoned all his Health and Peace, strait in the form of a Dove-like innocence
you Baffle and Betray his justest Rage. Angels would emulate the perfect Glory,
and the Blessed estate of man, were he not subject to the subtle Snares of your
frail deceiving Sex*

The Reader ought to pardon this Satyrick excursion to the Author, who has been
more Injured by Woman, then e're the Duke or Alcidalis was. -- That Prince, it
may be concluded, soon found his Gentleman which lay incognito receive his
commands; and taking his Jewels, repaired immediately to the Sea side, where a
Ship being just ready to leave the Port, (for that must never be wanting to a
Hero upon the Ramble) without asking whither she was Bound, they went Aboard,
and soon lost sight of that unfortunate Coast. With a prosperous Wind let them
proceed, while we return to the distressed real Zelinda, whom we unkindly left
in man's Habit, under the name of Zelidan, in a strange place, at Barcha in
Africa. By the favorable assistance of that same generous Pyrate Orcantes,
that gave her liberty, she obtained a Passage for Spain; and without meeting
any extraordinary adventure, safely landed at the same Port of Barcelona, from
whence she had been forced away by the contriving Jealous Queen. -- The sight
of that Fatal place, presenting all past Fortune freshly to her Memory,
oppressed her Breast with Sighs; which Tempest was allayed by a shower of
Crystal drops from her fair Eyes; Ah Alcidalis, said she, if you do still
preserve your vowed affection for the faithful Zelinda, what reason will she
have to glory in her Sufferings? Here she paused a while, pleasing her self
with that delightful thought; but on a sudden breaking silence, she went on; --
No! wretched Zelinda, no! never hope such Blessings were ordained for thee;
doubtless the Authority of a King, and Father, managed by the insinuating
artifice of the Prudent designing Queen, the interest of State, and the
Beauties of the too charming Princess, to which add his belief of my being
Married to the Prince of Tarentum, have prevailed, and he is now for ever
chained to the embrace of that fortunate Princess. -- Die! die Zelinda! let not
the imperious Queen insult ore thy Distress. Already was her hand upon her
Sword, when Heaven, that never quite forsakes the Virtuous, inspired her with
more reasonable thoughts -- That death was the extremest refuge of the
miserable; and might safely be deferred as a remedy always in her power, since
no earthly Tyranny could compel the Wretched to live longer then they pleased,
if they had courage enough to die. -- She pleased her self with the fancy, that
to die in his sight (which she vowed if he were false to her) would extract
remorse, and pity from him; so much does Love misguide the Judgment of the
most prudent, that even in death they cheat themselves with vain hopes of a
future satisfaction they can never be sensible of. -- In this humor she posted
toward Saracusa, but near the Gates was stopped by a great press of people?
some driving Beasts of Carriage, laden with variety of Goods; others carrying
on their backs, those whom Infancy or Age rendered incapable to assist
themselves; as if they fled from the fury of some Foreign Invader, or from the
mercilcss rage of a devouring flame. Loud Sighs, and doleful Groans, were all
the answers she could gain to her enquiry of the cause; long use of Arms, and
Virile exercise, had added much to her courage, in which she naturally
outstriped her Sex: That (with a determined purpose to behold the reason of
this Consternation) carried her through the smoking bloody Streets, which were
strewed with dead and mangled Bodies (the sad marks of a Civil War) strait to
the Palace, amidst a thousand Swords, and other Instruments of Death. -- There
she beheld the Gates shut, and the Queen and Princess out of a large Window,
with begging Eyes, Hands, and Voices, in vain striving to infuse compassion
into the enraged Rabble, who roared incessantly, Give us our King! restore us
our Prince! down with the Murderers Zelidan not knowing the occasion of their
Mutiny, nor enquiring now, but led by a generous principle of assisting the
distressed, made her way through the Crowd, beckoning with her hands (for their
noise made all speech useless) for silence, and liberty to pass; having
attained to their Front, she faced them; and turning up her Beaver, showed them
a Countenance which never failed of gaining a respect from the most Barbarous:
The Grandeur of her Mien, and the Majestic sweetness of her Eyes, soon
converted their confused Bauling to a silent admiration: which she, whose
greatness of Spirit was ever present in the extremest' danger, strait improved
to the advancement of her design, the relief of the besieged Queen and
Princess. Bowing her body then, with a charming resistless Grace peculiar only
to her self, thus she harangu'd them. --

Valiant Soldiers! and most worthy Citizens! whose Valor and unquestioned
Loyalty have still been the support and glory of your own, as well as the envy
of all neighboring Princes; whose free born hearts with joy submit to all
decrees that bear the stamp of unbribed Justice; why are those shining Weapons
brandished now against weak Women? against your undoubted lawful Queen? that
used to strike a Trembling horror in your boldest Foes? -- Are you injured in
your Trade? are your due Liberties restrained? -- Behold your good; your
gracious Queen, ready to offer, nay entreat you to make your own Conditions.
Behold Majesty, in the form of an humble suppliant; have you the hearts of men,
and look on this without being moved to duty and submission? -- Had your Wives
and Daughters been ravished, your Estates given for a prey to the Insolent
Soldier, had your Friends been lawlessly Imprisoned, nay put to cruel
undeserved deaths, (all which the great Gods forbid!) the desolation of your
City, and killing of each other would be no recompense: Look round about you,
behold your yet burning habitations, see how scattered Limbs and torn Bodies
pave your Streets; look how the destracted people fly those Buildings which
the fire has spared, as if some deadly Plague possessed them, or the licentious
Sword of a Barbarous Foe were at their backs. -- Will you convert your stately
Rooms to Graves? your City to a Desert? and your sacred Temples to noisome
Denns for Woolves? and base Receptacles for Batts and Owls shrieking Harbingers
of Death? -- Go on! let every neighbor hide his Treacherous Dagger in his
Friends heart* consume each other bravely! and leave your Wives and Children a
miserable Prey to the next Invader, that will vouchsafe safe to seize and drive
them to perpetual Slavery. -- I that am a stranger, cannot without Tears of
Compassion foresee that desolation which you seek; my heart bleeds, and an
universal horror runs through all my Veins;- if you are injured, my life shall
be sacrificed to your satisfaction. -- Methinks I see a noble Indignation in
your eyes, and a true remorse in Blushes rise upon your Cheeks; how generous,
how becoming does it look! Oh make haste to perfect your Repentance; let not
future Chronicles deliver to succeeding Ages, the Saracusans Swords were
stained with the Slaughter of Poor, forsaken, helpless Women: But follow me to
Safety, Wealth, and Honor: All that love their Liberty, their Countries Peace,
and the Honor of the great Gods, follow me! -- Then casting her self from her
Horse, with her drawn Sword she began to lead them off. -- When one, that
sought his particular Advantage from the general Ruin; that had fomented the
Rebellion, as some set Houses on fire, to Steal with more advantage and safety;
cried out, Companions! Friends! and Brothers! whither are you going, like
Beasts to the Sacrifice? And what is this bold impertinent Stranger that dares
-- There Zelidan put a full stop to his Seditious Oration, and his Life
together, by a thrust which pierced his heart: An Action which might have
branded her with rashness, (so boldly to hazard the Fury of a yet discontented
Multitude) but the Success justified its Prudence; (in such extremes no middle
paths are safe) for without a murmur all the rest followed her, marching over
his body she had killed, to the Marketplace; where with another Speech, she
sent them pacified to their several houses; -- and by one of the most
understanding, was informed, That the long absence and supposed loss of
Alcidalis, and the late death of the King, were charged as Crimes upon the
Ambitious Queen; and the Commonalty stirred up by some discontented Spirits,
had sought revenge by force of Arms: which caused that dreadful noise and
destruction which he so happily had stopped. Scarce was this information
finished, when a Messenger from the Queen entreated, That by his presence at
the Court, he would assure that Life and Honor he had so generously reprieved.
The joy Zelidan conceived to find the Prince absent, and as she believed
constant to his Vows, (for the nimble faith of Lovers keeps equal pace with
their wishes) obtained an easy Pardon for all other injuries, and hastened her
to the service of the Queen: whom she found with the Princess her Daughter, and
all the Train that distracted time would allow, ready to receive her in the
first Court. The troubled thoughts that filled their Breasts at their meeting,
darted through their trembling Eyes, and in unsettled colors spread themselves
upon their Cheeks; though the causes were different, and a secret to all but
themselves. Zelidan (maugre all her goodness) could not see the fatal
instrument of her sorrows; without some strange emotion in her heart; nor could
the Queen behold Zelidan, (whose believed residence at Tarentum, and her
disguise, secured Zelinda from the most prying eyes) notwithstanding her
Prudence, and experienced conduct, without displaying to the strict observer,
some symptoms of that passion which had newly seized her: For the little
audacious God of Love, had hovered still round Zelidan, and while he appeased
the mutinous Rabble, began a new and more dangerous insurrection in her Breast;
sending from every word and action of this charming Amazon, a Golden Arrow to
her heart, which her present Dangers, nor the Grief for her yet scarce
breathless Husband, could defend her from. But the constraint she imposed upon
her self, in striving to conceal her Passion, exposed it more openly,
especially to Zelidan, who marked it with much satisfaction: hoping from thence
an opportunity of a full and innocent revenge. -- In short, the amorous Queen
received him as a Messenger of Happiness from Heaven: What recompense, (said
she) Illustrious Stranger! can we offer you, to whose miraculous Relief we owe
our Lives, and all we have to give? If the sacred powers could admit a Rival in
their worship, our adoration to you were a just debt. Madam, answered the
seigned Zelidan (bowing with a profound Reverence) to your own unequalled
Virtues you owe your safety, and I the glory of my success; had not my
indulgent Stars sent me to your aid, the Gods had by some Miracle preserved in
you the brightest Ornament of their Creation. (Many fine things were said on
this occasion, for they were both excellent at reparties and rejoynders, but my
treacherous memory has lost them: Besides, I believe the repetition would be as
tedious to the Reader, as to my self; therefore I Will on to the matter, which
was thus.) Zelidan was treated with all the Magnificence and Honor, gratitude
and love could invent: and failed not by her discreet conduct, to settle a
perfect correspondence again between the Court and City; but her thoughts were
still hankering after Alcidalis; purposing after a little rest, and what light
she could get by enquiry, to guide her on, -- to search the World, till she
found him. -- The Queen gave every hour new marks of her Passion, and sought
occasion of discovering it more plainly to Zelidan; who by all returns his
different Quality would petmit, added Fuel to augment the Flame: And by the
Sighs and Torments he observed her suffer, (for her great heart was loath to
make the first address; and he as positively determined, as he had good reason
not to ease her by making the first Courtship) received some compensation for
her former injurious treatment. The poor Princess was as unable to defend her
self from the assault of this Victorious Amazon, as the Queen, and with
deepresentment observed her Mothers Passion. Thus did the feigned Zelidan
revenge, what the true Zelinda had endured: Love and Jealousy, was the
business of the Court; and the Queens supposed Marriage with Zelidan, the
discourse of the City. For the blind fears, or unreasonable wishes of the
inconsiderate Multitude, always anticipate the intentions of their Princes;
transforming their very supposed thoughts into Acts, which receive their
public censure, or applause, e're they have Being. The Queen observing how
carefully Zelidan declined all occasions of being attaqu'd, resolved to push on
her destiny, by a naked Declaration of her Love. In pursuance of her intention,
having commanded her Attendants to convenient distance, while Zelidan was
leading her in a walk of Oessamine, whose interwoven Branches made so thick a
Shade, that the Sun in its Meridian strength and luster could not pierce them;
with the gentle pressings of his hand, reiterated Sighs, and speaking looks,
having strove in vain, to prevent the shame of a plainer discovery, at last
with broken interrupted Language, thus she spoke; --

Is it possible, that the owner of so many accomplishments as wait on the
Illustrious Zelidan, should be insensible of that noble Passion, which is to
others the very cause of all hrave Actions, and the great reward at which they
aim? has Love, that reigns over all the World besides, no power in our Court?
or is there no Object worthy of your Sighs? casting her eyes on those of
Zelidan, which were fixed on the earth, she paused, and in a restless Agony
waited his Answer: which he had just began, when a Gentleman, whose earnest
business might well warrant his rude interruption of their Privacy, relieved
him, by crying to the Queen, Save your self, Madam! Save your self by sudden
Flight, the Rebellious Citizens are again in Arms, and Headed by a desperate
Stranger, like an impetuous Torrent that has o'reflowed its Banks, are rouling
to the Palace, overthrowing all opposition with their resistless Fury. Justice
and Liberty is Ecchoed through the Streets, but Blood and Mischief is their
aim. E're his unwelcome Message was finished, the scattered Courtiers came
thronging about the Queen, and Zelidan, like frighted Chickens seeking shelter
from the ravenous Kite. He strait attended the Queen into the Palace* assuring
her by the way, That his sw^^^ victory or death, should evince the great desire
he had to serve her. And staying not for her answer, (which doubtless, would
have been, That if he had any respect to her safety, he should preserve it in
that of his own; for her fate was so inseparably linked to his, that she could
not survive his death; or some such obliging thing) snatched what Arms he
soonest found, and ran to the Palace Gate, followed by a small, but resolute
Company of faithful Servants to the Queen. The Princess, who till then had
smothered her Passion for Zelidan in the narrow limits of her Breast,
despairing of success against a Rival, which Duty forbad her to oppose; and
seeing what she prized dearer then her soul, hasting to apparent death; took a
Sword from the nearest Attendant, and followed Zelidan, hoping some Fatal Blow
would in his sight end her hopeless Passion, with her life. The brave Stranger
(for so his Acts declared him) that led on the Citizens, conquered all
opposition; till Zelidans arrival put a cheque to his growing victory. With an
undaunted Mien she met him, and by her resolute Action, gave proof of a Courage
far above her strength; but the invincible Alcidalis (for he it was) who had
before conquered her in her own Province of Love, found but small danger from
her Arms. He received her first charge on his Shield, and by several marks
taking her for Zelidan the famous Stranger, and as he thought pretender to his
Crown; cried out, If thou will be a King, go Reign among the shades! and boast
thou dyedst by the hand of Alcidalis. At the beloved name of Alcidalis, Zelidan
endeavored to retreat, and discover her self; but in vain, for with such
fierce Blows he pursued his Speech, that she fell Breathless at his Feet. The
unhappy amorous Princess, striving with her feeble Arms to defend the fallen
Zelidan, notwithstanding all Alcidalis could do to preserve her, fell a
deplorable Sacrifice to the incensed Rabble, and dyed embracing of Zelidan. The
Queen, who from a Window beheld all this Action, at first lamented not the
death of her Daughter; but considering her as a Rival, Sacrificed all
sentiments of Nature to the satisfaction of her jealousy. But seeing her
beloved Zelidan Bleeding on the ground, extremity of Grief made her so
insensible of all other considerations, that she was about to precipitate her
self from the Window: But hope, which is the last thing that leaves the
unfortunate, made her still think it not impossible to recover him. She was
running out to that purpose, when Alcidalis, now a complete Victor, was entering
the Palace: with all the submission of a Pious Son, he met her; and declared,
He would take all for Enemies, that failed to render her the Honor due to the
Widow, and Mother of their King. Without staying, or answering him at all; but
with an upbraiding look, (where Rage and Compassion strove for Superiority)
which seemed to call him a thousand Cruel Murthereres; she abandoned her self
wholly to the impulse of her Passion, and casting her body on those of Zelidan
and the Princess her Daughter, she divided her Kisses and Lamentations between
them: 'Till excessive sorrow, like a Tyrannical Usurper, seized and oppressed
all her Vitals: By its sad weight reducing her to a state as deplorable, and
void of life, as theirs whom she grieved for. Never had Love and Grief a
greater Sacrifice then here, nor misery more powerful Arguments to gain
compassion from the most obdurate hearts: (here is a large Field for the Author
to expatiate on the vicissitude of humane things; but the Gentle Reader would
think him very inhumane, nay in my Conscience accessory to their Murders, if
he suffered three of the most Illustrious Persons in the World, to lie
neglected on the ground, and dye for want of careful attendance, while he was
showing his Commonplace Wit; therefore he hastens to their relief, with
resolution to save them all if he can:) Alcidalis took the Queen in his Arms,
while others performed the same service to the Princess and Zelidan; conveying
them to their several apartments; the uncertain Multitude, that some few
Minutes before breathed nothing but death and damnation against them; now
followed them Houling and Groaning. All the Arts and strength of Physic were
diligently applied, which restored some weak symptoms of life in Zelidan; and
those were carefully Cherished; but the unfortunate Princess was irrevocably
dead. The Queens Swouning being only the effect of a vehement surprising
Passion, death soon was beaten off, and his pale spreading Ensigns rufled up by
her returning Senses: But life came accompanied with all those killing Griefs
that waited on its exile, which like the envyed Favorites of some weak unhappy
Prince (for forrows soon insinuate themselves into the hearts affection) raised
new Commotions among the souls discontented faculties, and the oppressed
Senses, (those necessary Subjects and support of Life) which were like to prove
as fatal as the former; had not the News of Zelidans hopeful Recovery repressed
their Violence, by the removal of the cause. -- Weak as she was, she caused her
self to be removed to his apartment. -- But, Gods! what a universal amazement
seized the Queen, and all the Attendants, to find their Champion was a Woman?
For so her swelling Breasts declared, which by undressing her, the better to
apyly their necessary aid, were discovered. Her Senses in a little time* were
perfectly restored; and 'twas difficult for the most curious observer to
determine, whether the Queen or Zelinda (for so we must call her, now shes
discovered) was in the greatest confusion; after they had a long time gazed
upon each other, the Queen finding in the transformed Zelidan, the well known
Beauty and Mien of the persecuted Zelinda; lifting her eyes to Heaven cried
out; I yield! just Gods, I yield to my inexorable destiny! Ab Zelinda! thy
injuries have been too well revenged. -- Having said this, ever Zelinda could
answer, she retired. Love being now wholly exextinct, Nature resumed her power,
and carried her to the apartment of the Princess, where with such moving
passion she deplored her loss, that the most inssible were forced to sympathize
with her. The News of Zelidans Transformation, flew straight through the
Palace, and the extraordinariness of the change, raised a* Curiosity in
Alcidalis to behold her, for he had not heard that it was Zelinda. The
Messengrr he sent to obtain that liberty, entered her Chamber, just as one was
going from her to entreat the favor which he sought. The Prince full of shame
for his Victory over a Woman, hastened to beg her pardon; When he entered, his
Attendants respectively withdrew to the furthest part of the Room. Neither the
Paleness her loss of Blood had planted on her Cheeks, nor their long
separation, could hinder the discovery of the true Zelinda at first sight: --
So perfectly had love engraven her Image in his heart. What Pen can describe
the Violence of their differnt Passions which then Tyrannized in this Princes
Breast? Shame and grief for wounding her he prized above his Life, and joy that
she survived, and was in a place where he was now sole Master* and able to give
and receive the highest proofs of a mutual, unalterable Love, (like meeting
Tides, whose opposed forces change swift running* Streams a while into a fixed
Calm) reduced him to a state of insensibility: -- Without Speech or motion, he
beheld her* Such ecstasies are the usual effects of sudden Joys or Grief; the
heart being surprised, and oppressed with unexpected Events, all the Vital
Spirits crowd so fast to its assistance, that they often cause that ruin
Nature sends them to prevent. As some, whose Animal Spirits are obstructed, and
as it were smothered by the indigested Vapors, which from the Stomach fume
into the Brain, and a while deprive them of the benefits of Life, (as
interposing Clouds obscure the Suns luster) retain their Senses, but want power
to employ them; such the present State of Alcidalis was, he knew what he ought
to speak, and act, but the greatness of his Love, and violence of his desires,
took from him all ability of utterance; till Zelinda, whose condition much
resembled his, fearing his silence proceeded from some change in his affection,
thus began. --

Is this the kind reception Alcidalis gives the unfortunate Zelinda? do all the
dangers I have past, and all my constant Love, merit this cold return? Great
Gods! have you preserved me from so many various Deaths, to perish here? here
in the only Haven, where I had deposited my last hopes of assured safety? Oh
Alcidalis! let thy Sword give me a speedy and more welcome death then thy
disdain! -- Here casting himself on the Bed, and embracing her, he could get
out no more but, Oh my dearest Zelinda! and was relapsing again into his former
ecstasy; which overcoming, with much difficulty he proceeded. --

Your safety and your love (my adored Zelinda!) are blessings too great to be
received at once, with less concern: Since your loss, in blindness to all other
objects of delight, I have wandered ore the World; pardon me, if I could not
meet the first appearance of my Glorious Sun, without amazement. Give me, ye
Divine Powers! proportioned strength to bear my Happiness, lest like a starving
man, while I too greedily receive it, that hastens my death which only can
restore my fainting life. -- Then do you yet love me? (cried the overjoyed
Princess;) and will the King, keep those vows which Alcidalis made to the then
Happy Zelinda? -- For ever! for ever! (answered the transported Alcidalis) the
enjoyment of my adored Zelinda, is more then ten thousand Empires. -- Ah Sir,
(said she) but interest of State. -- State! (cried Alcidalis) my Zelinda is all
all to me, I would not thank the Gods for a Crown, but to lay it at her Feet.
Then turning to the Attendants which had now filled the Room, (impatience of
beholding their long lost Prince, bringing them thither from all parts) raising
his voice, he cried out: He is a Traitor, and the Mortal Enemy of Alcidalis,
that will not kneel and Petition the excellent Zelinda to be his Queen; whose
Beauty and Virtues, merit the Empire of the Universe. The Gods (to whom I pay
all reverence) shall never, but by death, Divorce me from thy Arms. -- Were I
Racked to ten thousand pieces, as every part of a broken Mirror presents an
entire face, in every part of Alcidalis, would appear the bright Image of my
adored Zelinda.

Then they renewed their Embraces and mutual Vows; asking and answearing twenty
several Question^ at once. She related all her Adventures from her departure
from Barcelona till that instant: which Alcidalis requited with his Story, how
he sought her in Italy, (but omitted his intrigue with the Duchess of
Tarentum) and at Sardignia, where meeting the News of his Fathers death, the
preservation of his Crown hastened him to Spain; But with a resolute
determination to employ all his new power, in search of Zelinda: How, near
Saracusa, by some faithful Nobility to whom he made himself known, and who
received him with marks of unexepressible satisfaction, he was informed of the
Actions of Zelidan, his interest with the Queen, and his supposed design of
Marrying her, and usurping the Crown. This gave Honor a while the pre-eminence
of Love, and led him in the Head of those Friends the shortness of the time
could get together, to this mistaken Revenge, and real Happiness. --

The Queen* notwithstanding all the submissive importunity of Alcidalis* and
all the assurances of Power and Honor he could give her, would not be diverted
from a resolution she had made, of retiring to a Religious House, there to pass
the remainder of her now hated life.

After the Funeral of the Princess her Daughter was with all Ceremonious, Pomp
celebrated she performed her Vow, and was accompanied to the place of her
retirememt, with a Magnificence becoming that Solemn occasion.

To that solemnity immediately succeeded the Coronation, and Marriagof Alcidalis
and Zelinda.

The day with all imaginable Circumstances of an universal joy was finished.

After which, Gentle Reader! (I may safely call you so now, for I am sure you
are tired as well as I) you may suppose the long-wished night are riv'd, though
very lazily in the Opinion of the King and Queen: And you may suppose their
impatient Love hastened them to Bed; And what followed, you may suppose too, if
you please; for I have more Civility then to speak what I think: but as the
most Ingenious Sir John Suckling said.

What is this, who can tell?
But I believe it was no more,
Then thou and I have done before.
With Bridget and with Nell.
I have naturally so much kindness for Lovers, that I will without further
disturbance leave them to their private Banquet; and if no other Pen raises
them, they shall lie there till Dooms, day.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by James Magnes, and Richard Bentley, in
Russell-Street, near the Piazza's.
GOds Revenge against Murder, Fol. Bacons Natural History, Fol. Nostra damus
Prophesies, Fol. House of Mourning, Fol. Fodinae Regalis, Fol. Dr. Whitby of
the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, in Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet, in 8o.
Plato's Apology of Socrates and Pheodo, or of the Soul, in 8o. Burnt Child
dreads the Fire, 4o. Natural History of the Passions, in 8o. (...) Garden
Drollery, in 8o. ^^angers Letters, in 8o. ^ipsious of Constancy, in 8o. Dr.
Tailors Psalter, in 12o. Bishop Andrews Devotions, in 12o. Colets Devotions, in
12o. Thomas a Kempis, in 24o.
Plays*
Tartuffe, or the French Puritan. Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom.
All Mistaken, or the Mad Couple: English Monsieur. Andromicha. The Tragedy of
Nero. Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph, a Masque at Court Acted by Persons of the
Highest Quality, frequently. The Mistaken Husband. Sophonisba, or Hannibal's
Overthrow.

