A COMPENDIOUS DISCOURSE ON THE EUCHARIST.

WITH TWO APPENDIXES.



OXFORD, Printed in the Year M.DC.LXXX.IIX.

The CONTENTS.
A Brief Account of the Modern Doctrines concerning the Eucharist. Four
principal modern Opinions concerning the Eucharist. 1. Virtual presence.. 1. 2.
Real presence aliquo modo. 2. 3. Real presence with the symbols by
Consubstantiation. 3. 4. Real presence with the symbols by Transubstantiation.
Observations touching these Opinions. 4. 1. Observation, That both the third
and fourth Opinion hold an Oral reception of Christ's Body by all Communicants.
5. 2. Observation, That the fourth Opinion affirms, 6. 1. A Symbol of Christ's
Body remaining after consecration; viz. all the sensibles of the Bread. n. 1.
2. These Symbols in the Church'es language, not unusually to have had the
denomination of Bread. n. 2. 3. These Symbols to have several things predicated
of them not agreeable to Christ's Body. 3. 4. These Symbols to be as signs of
Christ's Body, sacramentally present; so of it as formerly broken on the Cross.
n. 4. 5. Christ's Body also as sacramentally present to be a (...) (or
memorial) of the same Body as formerly on the Cross. n. 5. 3. Obs. That the
difference between the third and fourth Opinion is not great. 7. 4. Obs. That
the third and fourth Opinion affirm not Christ's Bodily presence in the
Sacrament after so gross a manner as is objected to them. 8. 5. Obs. That no
Argument drawn from sense or seeming contradiction can be valid against the
third and fourth Opinion. 9. 6. Obs. That those of the third Opinion, and some
also of the second, condemn not the fourth as holding a thing impossible or
unfeasible. 10. 7. Obs. That Communion with the fourth Opinion is unjustly
rejected whilst retained with the third. 11 8 Obs. That the Doctrine of the
second Opinion is very varying, dubious, and obscure. 12. Where is discussed
13. 1. Whether they hold any real, substantial presence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist. Several quotations out of them, wherein they seem to maintain it.
Other quotations wherein they seem to retract it. 14 And diverse Arguings of
theirs against the third and fourth opinion, which seem to overthrow it.
2. Whether they hold such presence to the Symbols, or only to the Communicant.
16. Several quotations, wherein they seem to deny such presence to the Symbols.

Where Whether they hold Christ's Body present to the soul only, or also to the
body of the worthy receiver. Some other sayings, wherein they seem to imply
such presence to the Symbols. And the testimony of Mr. Thorndike expressly
declaring for it.



An A^count of the Doctrine of Antiquity touching Christ's presence in the
Eucharist. 17. That the Arguments equally urged out of the Fathers for their
not holding Transubstantiation, disprove not their holding of a Corporal
presence (at least after some other manner) with the Symbols. 18. As
Theodoret.. 19. 1. Gelasius. 2. Ambrose. 3. St. Austin. 4. Other quotations out
of Blondel. 5. And others. 6.
Arguments that they hold corporal presence. 20. Because they affirm a change
of the Elements into Christ's Body. n. 1. A miraculous change. n. 2. Offering
the Body of Christ as a Sacrifice before communicating. n. 3. Using Adoration
before communicating. n. 4. Holding an Oral manducation of Christ's body. n. 5.
Answers of the Reformed to these Arguments. 21. Concerning the change of the
Elements. n. 1. Concerning the miraculousness of the change.. 22 Concerning its
being a Sacrifice. 23. Concerning Adoration. 24.
Replies to these. 25. The doctrine of the Fathers concerning it as a
Sacrifice. 26. That the sacrifice on the Cross is the only sacrifice that by
its own virtue takes away sins. n. 1. Yet is the Eucharist a true and real
sacrifice. n. 2. Testimonies out of Card. Bellarmin, C. Trent and, Mr. Mede n.
3. 4. Of the Fathers, that it is a sacrifice expiatory. n. 5. Of Dr. Tailor. n.
6.
Digr. The omission of the da^^y Oblation in the Reformed Churches. 27. The
Fathers say that it is an Oblation of the same Body which was crucified. 28.
Reply concerning Sacrifice. 29. Reply concerning Adoration. 30.
The Roman qualifications concerning Adoration.. 31. Suppose Transubstantiation
an error, yet Adoration lawful, if a corporal presence; and if no corporal
presence, yet their Adoration no idolatry.. 32. An account of the variance in
the doctrine of the Eucharist in later times. 36. In the Eastern Church.. 37.
In the Western Church.. 41.
Reflections upon the former narration.. 43. 1. Corporal presence then the
common opinion. 2. All Councils since the 2d. of Nice unanimously deciding
corporal presence with the symbols. 44. And that not by way of Impanation.. 45.

Councils excusable in so strictly determining the manner of Christ's presence
in the Sacrament.. 48. In what sense they impose it as an Article of faith. 49.
Obedience due to such decisions. 51. The objection of a contrary persuasion of
conscience considered. 52. Objection of non-certainty considered. 53. The
objection of the fruitlesness of supposed corporal presence considered. 54.
App. I. The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the Substantial
presence and Adoration of our Lord in the Sacrament: with a Vindication of Two
Discourses on that subject printed at OXFORD. App. II. Animadversions upon the
Reply to the Two former Discourses.
A DISCOVRSE on the EVCHARIST.
Four principal Opinions concerning the Eucharist.
COncerning the Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, there are
Four chief Opinions among Christians.

The First, That it is Present to the Worthy or Faithful Reeciver, in all the
Efficacy and Benefits thereof (either as it suffered, raised again) by a
communication to us of Christ's Spirit, whereby we are vivificated, united, 1.
Virtual Presence.
and incorporated into him. Et nullus hic miraculo dandus locus est cum sciamus
qua ratione Christus Caenae suae adsit, nimirum Spiritu vivificante,
spiritualiter and efficaciter, -- ut ipsius divinitas possit nos vivificare and
in nobis habitare, oportuit corpus ipsius pro nobis frangi in Cruce, etc. atque
hanc fractionem and effusionem fide a nobis apprehendi, ut hac fide insiti
corpori ipsius, caro ipsius, sanguis ipsius effecti, possimus fieri participes
justitiae and vitae ipsius, atque ita aeternum domicilium divinitatis. --
Spiritus sanctus nos cum Christo conjungens, etiam longissime distantia
secundum locum copulat multo arctius and propius quam in uno loco posita
conjunguntur. This opinion seems not to put any real or substantial Presence of
Christ's very Body and Blood in the Eucharist, or worthy Receiver, but a real
participation of all the benefits thereof, by his Spirit communicated to the
faithful Receiver of the consecrated symbols of his Body.

Second Opinion goes beyond this, or at least seems so (for I must confess I do
not well understand it, 2. Real Presence, aliquo modo.
and we shall look more into it anon) and affirms a real Presence of Christ's
Body, not only in its virtue, but in its very substance; but in this, not after
a natural or carnal, but spiritual, manner; not to all, 1
but only to the worthy Receivers. To them, (i.e.) to their Souls and Spirits,
by the susception of Faith, and not to their Mouth or their Body. Again, to
them, but not to the symbols at all; or if in some sense to these (as Mr.
Hooker, l. 5. s. 67. says, they really exhibit, but not contain in them, that
which with, or by, them God bestows), yet not ante usum, or before the act of
Receiving. Neque enim mortis tantum and resurrectionis suae beneficium nobis
offert Christus, sed corpus ipsum in quo passus est and resurrexit, says Calv.
in 1 Cor. 11.24. and these following quotations are found in his Instit. l. 4.
c. 17. But how these high expressions, where he opposes the Zuinglians, agree
with those diminutive, where he opposes the Lutheran and Romanist, I know not.
Neque enim mihi satisfaciunt qui dum communionem cum Christo ostendere volunt,
nos Spiritus modo participes faciunt praeterita carnis and sanguinis mentione.
Quasi vero illa omnia de nihilo dicta forent, carnem ejus vere esse cibum, etc.
non habere vitam nisi qui carnem illam manducaverit, etc. Quoe omnia non posse
aliter effici intelligimus, quin totus [Christus] Spiritu and corpore, nobis
adhaereat. -- Then quoting Ephesians. 5.30. he says, Apostolus sermonem exclamatione
finit; magnum (inquit) istud arcanum! ver. 32. Extremae ergo dementiae fuerit
nullam communionem agnoscere cum carne and sanguine Domini, quam tantam esse
declarat Apostolus, ut eam admirari quam explicare malit, -nullum locum
relinquo huic cavillo, quasi dum fide percipi Christum dico, intelligentia
duntaxat velim concipi. -- Manducatio non est fides, sed ex fide consequitur.
-- panem quem frangimus communio est, etc. neque est quod objiciat quisque,
figuratam esse locutionem. -- Hoc est Corpus Meum rem significatam vere
exhibet. -- Facti participes substantiae ejus, virtutem quoque ejus sentimus in
bonorum omnium communicatione. And of the Lutherans, he says, Si ita sensum
suum explicarent, dum panis porrigitur annexam esse exhibitionem corporis quia
inseperabilis est a signo suo veritas, non valde pugnarem.. 24. In answer to
those who objected, Se rationi humanae ita addictum esse, ut nihilo plus
tribuat Dei potentiae (in the matter of the Eucharist) quam naturae ordo
patitur and dictat communis sensus, he says, Ego hoc mysterium minime rationis
humanae modo metior, vel naturae legibus subjicio. -- Humanae rationi nihilo
magis placebit (that which he affirms) penetrare ad nos Christi carnem, ut
nobis sit alimentum-In his paucis verbis ( i. e. of the Doctrine of the
Eucharist, as he states it), qui non sentit multa subesse miracula, plusquam
stupidus est; quando, -- nihil magis incredibile, quod res toto coeli and
terrae spatio dissitas ac rimotas in tanta locorum distantia non tantum
conjungi, sed uniri, ut alimentum percipiant animae ex carne Christi. See the
place in him, -- Porro de modo si quis me interroget, fateri non pudebit,
sublimius esse arcanum, quam ut vel meo ingenio comprehendi, vel enarrari
verbis queat. I cannot but ask here (tho I digress), seeing this great Doctor
of the Reformation in such a good mood, what if any should say, Christ's Body,
presently after Consecration, is with the Symbols after the same inexplicative
and miraculous manner, as he makes it with the Soul, and so together with them
is received from the Priest? (See what he himself says favorable to this, in
that place quoted before, -- Si ita sensum suum, etc. quia inseperabilis est a
signo suo veritas, -- And. 33. Atque haec est Sacramenti integritas, quam
violare totus mundus non potest, carnem and sanguinem Christi non minus vere
dar^ indignis, quam electis Dei fidelibus: simul tamen verum est, non secus
atque pluvia super duram rupem decidens, effluit, etc. And before, Aliud est
offerri, aliud recipi, -- I ask, Are the Bread and Christ's Body offered apart?
Why not together? And if they be together when Offered, why not together
before?) What can he reply from any argument of Sense or Reason against it?
Will he plead a possibility of Christ's Body being really present to one
definite substance in such a place (namely, the Soul); and an impossibility of
its presence to another substance, the Bread or Wine? Or, himself thus granting
it in general present after an inexplicative or inconceivable manner; if any
other should name some particular way unexplicative (i. e. fully), how can he
possibly disprove it by any way of Reason, since he grants this matter above it
(now it is granted by him above it, because implying in it something which to
Reason seems, but which is not contradictory) but only by God's Word and plain
Revelation? As for example, If he can show the Scriptures somewhere to say,
That Christ's Body is there present, but not joined with the Signs.

2 I might add to these of Calvin, 2
the Confession of Beza and others, when they were desirous to accord the
matter with the Lutherans (which you will find quoted by Bishop Forbes, Euch.
l. 1. c. 1. s. 13. related by Hospin. Hist. Sacram. part altera, p. 251.
Fatemur in Caena Domini non modo omnia Christi beneficia, sed ipsam etiam Filii
Hominis substantiam, ipsam inquit veram carnem, etc. and verum illum sanguinem
quem fudit pro nobis non significari duntaxat, aut symbolice, typice, proponi
tanquam absentis memoriam, sed vere ac certo representari, exhiberi and
applicanda offerri, adjunctis symbolis minime nudis, sed quae (quod ad Deum
ipsum promittentem and offerentem attinet) semper rem ipsam vere ac certo
conjunctam habeant, sive fidelibus, sive infidelibus proponantur. Jam vero
modum illum quo res ipsa, (i.e.) verum corpus and verus sanguis Domini cum
symbolis copulatur, dicimus esse symbolicum, sive sacramentalem, sacramentalem
autem modum vocamus, non qui sit sigurativus duntaxat, sed qui vere and certo
sub specie rerum visibilium repraesentet quod Deus cum symbolis exhibet and
offert nempe (quod paulo ante diximus) verum corpus and sanguinem Christi: ut
appareat nos ipsius corporis and sanguinis Christi praesentiam in coena
retinere and defendere, and si quid nobis cum vere pits and doctis fratribus
controversiae est, non de re ipsa, sed de praesentiae modo duntaxat, qui soli
Deo cognitus est, and a nobis creditur, disceptare etc. Hold they not here the
presence of Christ's body cum symbolis? Lastly Mr. Hooker, 5. l. 67. sect.
affirms even of the Sacramentaries and the first opinion, that those who read
their books, shall find; that they grant the holy mysteries instrumentally both
to make us partakers of that grace of that body and blood which was given for
the life of the world; and besides also to impart unto us in true and real, tho
mystical, manner, the very Person of our Lord himself, whole, perfect, and
entire. Thus much now of the second opinion, to which I shall return by and by.

opinion goes yet farther than the second, and (moved by the expressions partly
of Scriptures, 3. Real presence with the symbols by Consubstantiation.
['tis said that Luther Epist. ad Argentinenses acknowledges se valde propensum
fuisse in eam sententiam, quae in Eucharistia nihil praeter panem agnoscit, and
conatum totis viribus hoc asserere, sed non potuisse satisfacere Scripturis
quae contra objiciebantur,] comparing Matt. 26.26. and 1 Cor. 11.24. etc with 1
Cor. 11.26, 27. [eateth this bread,] partly also of the Fathers, who many times
also call it bread after consecration,) affirms a real presence of Christ's
body with or under the signs; meaning by them, the substances of the bread and
wine still remaining after consecration. Making (if we take the moderatest
stating thereof; for see what Cassander consult. art. 10 p. 81. quotes
Melancthon and some others, at some time before the reformed opinion, to have
held; Asserimus cum Christo Domino corpus Christi non modo esse in, cum, sub
pane, sed quod panis sit corpus Christi ipsum, itaque unum cum ipso
praedicatione identica;) the meaning of [hoc est corpus meum] to be, not hic
panis manens adhuc panis, ipse etiam est corpus meum; but, hoc, quod continetur
sub pane consecrato, est corpus meum; making the article [hoc] supponere
confuse (to use Bellarmin's terms) pro eo quod continetur sub pane; as the 4th
opinion makes it supponere confuse, pro eo quod continetur sub speciebus: and
to show the understanding of those words [Hoc est corpus meum] after this
manner to be very proper, they exemplify in some like ordinary phrases. So, de
dolio vini recte dicimus, hoc est vinum, speaking only of the thing contained;
so, de marsupio pleno pecuniis recte dicitur, hae sunt pecuniae: so,
demonstrando vestes sub quibus est Petrus, we say, hoc, or hic est Petrus. Nam
abstrahentium non est mendacium.

Now some hold this conjunction of Christ's body with the elements ante usum in
mensa, presently after consecration; others (perhaps the better to avoid
pretenses of adoration, or of reservation of the Sacrament) only in the use and
act of receiving in ore fidelium. Again some (to make this presence seem more
certain, and more conceivable) holding an ubiquity of Christ's body; not only a
presence then and there, but always every where, by reason of its hypostatical
union to the ubiquitary Deity; only (lest we may say, we receive it as well
(then) in all other bread) stating, that tho it is ubique, yet non posse ubique
capi, sed solum in ea re quam Christus ad hoc instituit.

fourth opinion yet transcends this (except in the point of ubiquity,) and
affirms the real presence of Christ's body with, 4. Real presence with the
symbols, by Transubstantiation.
or under the signs, meaning by them only the accidents, or properties, or all
that is any way to be perceived by sight or any other sense, of the bread and
the wine; which accidents they affirm still to remain, but holding from the
most proper sense (as to them seems) of the solemn words of the Institution,
Hoc est corpus meum etc, a Conversion of the substance of them into the body
and blood of our Savior; conversio totius substantiae: Conc. Trid. sess. 13.4.
c. Which seems to be so punctually expressed, because (of those who all held
Christ's corporal presence) some there were, that held the substantial form of
bread changed, but not the matter; others the matter, but not the form: others
again that held no total substantial conversion of the bread at all, but an
impanation or hypostatical union of Christ with the bread, whereby it became
his body, ( corpus Christi non carneum but panaceum,) such as there was with
the humane nature in his incarnation; saying, panem a Christo fieri corpus
suum, non mutando vel destruendo panem, sed assumendo ad personam suam. Now
this conversion of the substance was thought fit in latter times to be
expressed by the word Transubstantiation, as a diminutive to conversion. For
whereas conversion of the bread might be understood either of it with all its
properties and accidents, or only of the substance thereof, and not of the
rest, therefore to express this distinctively, the word Transubstantiation was
used. Primi authors hujus sententiae finxerunt conversionem physicam simplicem
panis and vini in corpus and sanguinem Christi, quam posteriores Romani and
Scholastici defendere ut possint, manentibus accidentibus panis and vini,
commenti sunt (...) seu Transubstantiationem. Casp. Peucerus hist. page 527.
Compare with Transubstantiation that expression of the Greeks in their answer
to Claudius Cardinal of Guise: [ Credimus panem in Christi corpus etc ita
mutari, ut neque panis neque substantiae ipsius accidentia maneant, sed in
divinam substantiam transelemententur,] and Transubstantiation says the least
of the two. But here note, that tho Councils have defined a conversion of the
whole substance, yet since such a conversion there may be many several ways,
(see those reckoned up in Field Append. to 3. lib. 17. cap.) the particular
manner they have no way determined, and the Roman Doctors remain in their
opinions divided. Fatemur, says Dr. Holden de resol. fid. 2. l. 4 c. hujusmodi
supernaturalis conversionis substantialis modum nos penitus latere etc. and
Bellar. in his recognit: lib. Euchar. after his discoursing of conversion
adductive and productive etc, concludes: -- Quicquid sit de modis loquendi,
illud tenendum est, conversionem panis and vini in corpus and sanguinem Domini
esse substantialem, sed arcanam, and ineffabilem, and nullis naturalibus
conversionibus per omnia similem etc. Whilst the third opinion therefore
interprets our Savior's words of the Institution thus, Hic panis continet sub
se corpus meum, or, hoc quod continetur sub pane est corpus meum; the 4th
says, Hic panis per conversionem est, or fit, corpus meum, or, hoc quod
continetur sub specie panis est corpus meum: the one holding the substance of
the bread to be transient, the other permanent.

note, 1. That both this third and fourth opinion hold an oral reception,
Observations touching These opinions.
by all communicants, even the unworthy, (according to 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.) of
the very body and blood of Christ, tho by the last not at all to their benefit,
but greater condemnation. Which I note here, to show that no complaint upon
this account can be raised against the fourth opinion, third.

Note 2ly, concerning the 4th opinion, that tho it makes the whole compositum
ex materia and forma to be changed, aggregatum ex subjecto and accidente; 1
and tho it makes the thing signified really present, yet it (as well as the
other opinions) allows a sign not only of the inward grace and spiritual
nourishment of the soul obtained thereby, but also of Christ's body remaining
after consecration distinct from the thing signified; namely, all that of the
bread and wine which is perceived by sense. But so, that under this sign is
contained the thing signified, it being figura non nuda, sed veritati suae and
substantiae conjuncta, signum rei praesentis, sed rei invisibilis, (lest any
should think the sign needless.) Hence the Church-hymn, allowed and recommended
by Dr. Tailor, p. 331. Sub duabus speciebus* signis tantum and non rebus,
latent res eximiae; Conc. Trid. 13. sess. 3. c. says, Hoc esse commune
Eucharistiae cum aliis Sacramentis, ut sit symbolum rei sacrae, and visibilis
forma invisibilis gratiae, by which forma visibilis (as Bell. expounds it 4. l.
6. c.) is meant the species of the elements, not the body of Christ. So Bell.
Euchar. 2. l. 15. c. Etiam post consecrationem species panis and vini sunt
signa corporis and sanguinis Christi, ibi revera existentium: and 3. l. 22. c.
Accidentia remanent, quia si etiam accidentia abessent, nullum esset in
Eucharistia signum sensibile; proinde nullum esset Sacramentum. So Estius:
Eucharistia constat ex pane tanquam materia quadam, partim transeunte* partim
remanente; transeunte quidem secundum substantiam, remanente vero secundum
accidentia, in quibus tota substantiae vis and operatio nihilominus perseverat.
Hence they allow of that expression of Irenaeus, where he says; Eucharistiam
ex duabus rebus, terrena and coelesti compositam esse: and S. Gregory's; In hoc
mysterio summa imis sociari, terrena coelestibus jungi; unum ex visibilibus and
invisibilibus fieri.

2 Nay further they allow, that these appurtenances of bread may have in some
sense (in reference to former matter contained under them, and in as much as
still substantiae ipsius omnem operationem retinent,) and have often had, the
name of the substance, granting them to be called so after consecration by the
Fathers, (hence they reject not that expression of St. Austin, Panem consumi
comedendo,) by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27; nay, by our Savior, Mat. 26.29.
Mar. 14.25. Of these signs they predicate many things, which they allow by no
means to be said of Christ's body; and ordinarily the same things of these
accidents of bread, which the 3d. opinion says of the substance: See Blondel
acknowledging this p. 215. so sapere, digeri, nutrire, comfortare corporaliter
etc they apply to these accidents, affirming singulari miraculo tam operationes
panis etc quam proprietates subsistere and conservari absque natura. And to
Theodoret and some other Fathers, that say, after consecration the nature of
Bread remains, they grant thus far, naturales vires and proprietates remanere,
and think this sufficiently clears the Fathers meaning. Now what is this but
tantum non to affirm consubstantiation, and close in with the 3d. opinion?
(which methinks much reflects upon those who, very charitable to the one,
maintain so great a feud against the other). So frangi dentibus, digeri,
comburi, rodi a brutis animalibus, and whatever other things may be named
(excepting only those attributes which indicate the presence of Christ's Body
to or with the species, whilst integrae) all, or at least the more modest of
them (no Council having decided any thing in this matter) apply only to the
accidents, not to Christ's Body. Bellarmin (who, bolder than some others, uses
some expressions of Christ's Body being capable of such things per accidens,
improprie, in specie aliena) says, Christus vere in Sacramento existit, sed
nullo modo laedi potest, non cadit in terram, non teritur, non roditur, non
putrescit, non crematur, illa enim in speciebus istis recipiuntur, sed Christum
non afficiunt; licet species ipsae sint conjunctae cum Christo, Euch. l. 3. c.
10. and the conclusion of that Chapter is, in propria specie Christus haec pati
non potest. And good reason to say this, because these accidents are held ad
suppositum Christi non pertinere, neque in illo inhaerere; see Estius Sent. 4.
Did. 9. Sect. 3. Ob. 4. and Bishop Forbes de Euch. l. 1. c. 4. s. 9. Now in
affirming of Christ's Presence to them in some abuses of these Signs, (tho
since his Body is voluntarily present, and sine ulla sui laesione desinit esse,
sicut ante consecrationem ibi non erat, whether it may not in such cases be
withdrawn, I think none can say, and the Roman Doctors are divided about it.
See Forb. Euch. l. 1. c. 4. s. 9. Blon. p. 212. yet) I see no great cause of
offense, since as the Cardinal well says in the same Chapter, ipsa divinitas
nonne ubique est praesens, and tamen non sordescit in sordibus, non crematur in
flammis, nec putrescit in putrescentibus rebus.

3 Again, 3
as these species are acknowledged by them Signs of the Body, in one sense
present, so of the Body in another acception, or mode not present; namely a
Memorial of the Body and Blood of Christ, as it was broken and shed upon the
Cross, Signa corporis Christi ut sacramentaliter praesentis; and signa Corporis
Christi ut in cruce immolati. Thus they are called a Memorial or a
Representation of the Passion, in the Scripture Phrase; see 1 Cor. 11.25, 26.
and therefore may be also in the Church's. In which respect also the Fourth
Opinion allows the name of type, antitype, similitude* figure, etc. not only
before, but after Consecration proper to them. Veteres quando hoc sacramentum
dicunt signum esse and figuram, non negant ibi esse verum Christi corpus, sed
intelligunt non ibi esse in propria specie, sc. ut conversans in mundo, patiens
in cruce. Nay yet farther they say, ipsum corpus and sanguis Domini, ut sunt
sub illis speciebus, signa sunt ejusdem corporis and sanguinis ut fuerunt in
cruce. For Eucharistiam (take it for the signum and signatum, which signatum is
invisible in the Eucharist, both together) they hold to be signum, symbolum,
representationem, memoriale, typum, etc. mortis seu passionis Christi; seu
carnis and sanguinis, ut illa suffixa, ille effusus est visibiliter in cruce:
For Corpus Christi ut sub speciebus panis. (being idem quoad substantiam, but
not idem quoad qualitatem, nor eo modo in Eucharistia quo fuit in cruce) non
est vere, sed representative corpus in cruce. And this it is also by reason of
the visible species, since it self not perceivable cannot be representative.

4 And this which they say here, methinks, seems not unreasonable (by which
also they accord many sayings of the Fathers, which else would contradict what
the same Fathers say in other places, which Dr. Tailor, p. 311. passes over
with saying, it is their fault or forgetfulness) notwithstanding what Dr. Tailor
has said against it, p. 317, etc. where he first urges, that idem non est
simile. Resp. but tho these are supposed idem in substance, yet in all the
qualities and modifications thereof, as Dr. Tailor himself grants, p. 20. the
same Body to be crucified and eaten in several manners of being. And what more
ordinary than for a Body or Man at one time to be said to be like or unlike
what he was at some other time? Secondly, If I well understand him, he urges
the absurdity of making an invisible and glorified Body, the sign of a visible
and humbled. Resp. But they making the Body, as in the Eucharist, a sign or
representment of it as upon the Cross, do not divide or abstract it from the
species of Bread, as he does; (for indeed how can a thing invisible be a sign
in respect of Men, who discern all by their Senses; and indeed none can know
when such a sign is, or is not), but say, Corpus, as Sacramentally present, sub
illis speciebus, is a sign or symbol of it, as it was once upon the Cross.
Secondly, Tho they say the Body in the Sacrament is the same with that
glorified, yet is it not in the Sacrament, but only in Heaven, as glorified;
see Dr. Tailor, p. 20. Now, I say, why not as well the manner several from what
it is in Heaven, as from what it was on the Cross? But however this be
concerning the Body of Christ being a type, figure, or symbol of it self; I
think the fourth Opinion is no more necessitated, in answer to the Fathers, to
affirm any such thing, than the second or the third; since these expressions of
the Fathers are in show arguments (and are so used by the first Opinion)
against the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament [see Dr. Tailor, p.
319. The Sacramental Body is a figure and type of the Real], which Real
Presence both the 2d. and 3d. Opinions maintain. And if here you say, they are
good arguments against real Presence with the Signs, but not with the Receiver;
This seems to me to be said gratis, and without reason, since the real Body is
no less invisible, if with the Signs, than if with the Receiver only; and we
usually say, that something we see, is a Sign of the Presence of another thing
we see not, tho they be both together; as Breathing is a Sign of Life, Smoke of
Fire present, tho not seen: the same may be said of Similitude; as a Vizard,
resembling a Face, may be truly said a Similitude, when the Face is under it.

5. But if the 2 d. and third Opinions, notwithstanding that both of them hold
Christ's Body really present in the Eucharist, ordinarily say of the Bread and
Wine, that they are Signs and Figures, both of the Body as then present, and
also of it as it was formerly on the Cross; and thus satisfy the Fathers (tho
the first Opinion denies they satisfy them); the same thing says the fourth
Opinion of the species of the Bread and Wine, remaining, that they are symbols,
figures, etc. which species they affirm singulari miraculo to have, as all the
operations and proprieties, so much more all the significations of the Bread
and Wine. And because Dr. Tailor instanceth in some sayings of St. Austin, of
the Sacrament being signum Corporis, etc. to which he disalloweth their
answers, and says, p. 310. That it is so evident, that that Father was a
Protestant in this Article, that it were a strange boldness to deny it; and
upon equal terms no man's mind in the world can be known: Yet things, I
believe, out of that Father will not be so clear for his side, as is pretended,
if first he will grant, that St. Austin held (as much as himself does, or at
least as others of the second Opinion) Real Presence; and secondly, if such
expressions (as these which follow in St. Austin will prove, that he held this
real Presence of Christ's Body with the elements or signs; namely, that saying
Conf. l. 9. c. 13. Tantum memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri desideravit; unde
ex quo altari] sciret dispensari victimam sanctam, qua deletum est chirographum
quod erat contrarium nobis, qua triumphatus est hostis etc. and that saying
Conf. 9. l. 12. c. where he says of the consecrated elements or Eucharist; cum
offeretur pro ea, posito cadavere juxta sepulchrum, sacrificium pretii nostri:
-- which he says of the Eucharist before communicating, but surely would not
say but of Christ's body, not of bare bread. And that saying contra adversarium
Legis and Prophet. 2. l. 9. c. where writing against an Heretic that denied,
and urged many absurdities in the Old Testament, he says, Eat plane iste retro
cum suis similibus sociis, qui dixerunt, Durus est hic sermo, etc. Jo. 6. Nos
autem audiamus and intelligamus duo Testamenta in duobus filiis Abrahae etc. --
Sicut Mediatorem Dei and hominum, hominem Christum Jesum dantem carnem suam
nobis manducandam, sanguinemque bibendum fideli cord atque ore suscipimus,
quamvis horribilius videatur, humanam carnem manducare, quam perimere, and
humanum sanguinem potare, quam fundere. And elsewhere; Adhuc in Sacramento spes
est, quo in hoc tempore ( i.e. till the day of judgment) consociatur Ecclesia,
quamdiu bibitur quod de Christi latere manavit. -- Contra Faustum 12. l. 20. c.
See the places quoted p. concerning Christ's body received also by the wicked.
-- Lastly, that saying in comment. Psalm. 98. (with the Reformed, 99.) upon
those words 5. ver. Adorate scabellum ejus, which we translate, Worship at his
footstool, where alluding to terra scabellum pedum meorum, Isa. 66. he goes on;
Invenio, quomodo sine impietate adoretur terra scabellum pedum ejus, suscepit
enim [Christus] de terra terram; quia caro de terra est, and de carne Mariae
accepit carnem; and quia in ipsa carne hic ambulavit and ipsam carnem jam
manducandam nobis ad salutem dedit, nemo autem carnem illam manducat, nisi
prius adoraverit, inventum est quem-admodum adoretur tale scabellum pedum
Domim; ut non solum non peccemus adorando, sed non adorando peccemus. [Which
matter some think he borrowed from S. Ambrose upon the same Psalm and text de
Spiritu Sancto, 3. l. 12. c. Adorate scabellum pedum ejus. Itaque per scabellum
terra intelligitur- per terram autem caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in
mysteriis adoramus, and quam Apostoli in Domino Jesu adorarunt.] Like to this
are many other sayings of S. Austin. Psalm. 48.33. -- 21. And Ep. 120. ad
Honorat. 27. c. expounding that in 21. Psalm. 29. v. Manducaverunt and
adoraverunt omnes divites terrae, he says, and ipsi [divites] ( per divites
terrae, says he before, hoc loco superbi intelligendi sunt,) adducti sunt ad
mensam Domini, and accipiunt de corpore and sanguine ejus, sed adorant tantum:
non etiam saturantur, (alluding to 26. v. edent pauperes, i. e. humiles, says
he, and saturabuntur,) quia non imitantur. Here he says, the wicked do adorare
that which they receive de mensa Domini; but it is certain they may not adore any
thing else, however consecrated or sanctified, or whatever it represent, but
only the real body and blood of Christ. [But of Aderation more fully
afterward.] In which sayings of his we find the real body of Christ in mensa,
in altari, in ore manducantium, (not only in cord,) in the oblation (which was
before communicating) adored before manducation; and therefore I think it is
plain, as S. Austin held with the second opinion the real presence of Christ,
so with the 3d and 4th opinion the real presence in mensa or Altari with the
elements, or the signs. Now, I say, if these two things be granted once, I do
not see what thing that Father can say in any place, of the bread and wine
being symbols, figures, etc, of Christ's passion, or of Christ's body that was
crucified; etc, which thing the 4th opinion may not say of the species of the
bread or wine being so. Thus much of the 2d note, that the 4th opinion, as well
as the other, after consecration makes a sign remaining, and distinct from the
thing signified, of which signs many things are predicated, which cannot be so
of Christ's body.

third as contrary to the Scripture and reason, 1.
by supposing a sense in it, which the third, I mean the moderater party
thereof, does not own; whereas, their sense well understood, their difference
seems not so great. For thus Bellarm. de Euchar. 3. l. 19. c. argues against
it: Hic panis triticeus non est corpus Domini, (but who is there says it is?)
fieri enim non potest, ut una res non mutetur, and tamen fiat alia, esset enim
ipsa, and non esset ipsa: but at last, when he takes into consideration the
instance whereby the third opinion explains it self; that, as of a barrel of
wine we say, Hoc est vinum; so we say not of the bread, but that contained
under it, Hoc est corpus Domini, (even as the fourth opinion says, Hoc est
corpus Domini, of that which is contained under the species of bread.) He has
little to say against their tenent, in respect of the expression of Scripture,
or evidence of reason, his arguments from which (3. l. 22. c.) seem of little
moment, but (see the end of 19. c.) flies to this ward; licet in verbis Domini
esset aliqua ambiguitas, tamen sublata est per multa Concilia Ecclesiae and
consensum Patrum. And so do many of the Schoolmen; see the quotations in
Blondel de Euchar. 12. cap. and cocerning this proposition, Potuisse Deum
efficere ut in Sacramento vere adesset corpus Christi cum pane, and si hoc
fecisset mysterium, futurum fuisse facilius and minus miraculorum in se
continens. Bellarmin says, Aliqui negant, alii concedunt; res ad fidem non
pertinet, ( i. e. of the possibility of this,) neque de eo est nobis cum
haereticis controversia. de Euchar. 3. l. 23. c.

2. Indeed the difference is not much, when as one says, hoc est corpus meum
quod continetur sub accidentibus panis; the other, hoc quod continetur sub
substantia panis, (of which the former men grant a possibility;) and when as
the fourth opinion denies panis to remain after consecration, not because
corpus Domini cannot possibly be sub pane, which the third opinion affirms, but
because panis cannot be corpus Domini, in which the third opinion agrees with
them: yet corpus Domini sub pane, the fourth opinion admits not, the better to
accord with Antiquity, who affirm the bread consecrated to be, to be made, to
be changed into, Christ's body, which mutation of it into another, they think
cannot consist with its being the same as it was before; but the bread
remaining as formerly, only Christ's body now with, or under it, tho it may be
thought to suit well with the words of Institution, yet they canceive agrees
not so well with those expressions of the Fathers; this interpretation arguing
a change indeed about the bread, but not a change indeed of the bread: and
perhaps I may say, to follow the closer the words of Institution, of which, tho
the Lutheran sense be not improper, as is showed in the former instances, yet
the sense that the fourth opinion gives of them, tho perhaps encountering more
difficulties, seems more proper: whilst in it the article Hoc no way includes
or involves any other substance besides corpus meum. As we may say, it would
also be yet more proper, if the article Hoc no way involved any foreign
accidents, (as in the sense of the fourth opinion it does,) but those belonging
to our Savior's body. So, to say hoc est vinum, is more proper when it is
covered with no other substance or accidents but its own, than when it is said so
of it hid within a barrel or other vessel.

3. Thus much of the distance between the third and fourth opinion. As for some
incommodious explications and expressions used by some of the third opinion; as
that of the ubiquity of the Manhood by reason of its union with the Deity, with
which the Lutheran opinion has no need to defend its self against the
Transubstantialist, who grants a possibility of Christ's bodily presence; and
that, of the bread's being properly called Christ's body in the words of
Institution, from the bread's being united with it, because the Son of God is
properly called man from the union of the Humanity and Deity in the person of
Christ; as they are liable to much exception, so are they unnecessary, since
the third opinion is justifiable without them.

manner of Christ's real presence with the signs, physica or locali (i. e.) ad
modum corporum sensibili praesentia, or inclusione. 1.
Thus says Conc. Trid. sess. 13.1. c. Neque enim haec interse pugnant; juxta
modum existendi naturalem Salvatorem nostrum in coelis assid^re ad dextram
Patris, and nobis substantia sua adesse praesentem sacramentaliter, ea
existendi ratione, quam etsi verbis exprimere vix possumus, possibilem tamen
esse Deo, cogitatione per fidem illustrata, assequi possumus. etc. Bellarm. de
Euchar. 1. l. 2. c. 3. l. 5. c. 10. c. and elsewhere in that treatise. Christum
non esse in Eucharistia ut in loco, vel ut in vase, aut quod sub aliquo velo,
sed eo modo ut panis prius; sed non ita ut accidentia panis inhaereant Christi
subtantiae; non coexistere aut commensurari loco; non esse, ita ut habeat
ordinem ullum ad corpora circumstantia; non esse sensibile, visibile,
tangibile, extensum; non adesse mobiliter, extensive, corporaliter, as we
understand this word to exclude, not naturam, but modum corporis. See many like
expressions concerning it quoted by Blond. 10. c. p. 321. out of Romanists.
That nothing belonging formerly to the substance of the bread etc can be
attributed to it; as to be white, round, etc, but only words that signify its
presence, as contineri, manner sub speciebus, sumi in Eucharistia, ore recipi,
etc. Dr. Holden p. 316. Verum and reale corpus Christi profitemur esse in hoc
Sacramento, non more corporeo and passibili, sed Spirituali and invisibili,
nobis omnino incognito. Spirituli, i. as opposed to corporali, but by no means
as opposed to reali, which neither the second opinion will tolerate: therefore
that 8th Canon Conc. Trid. sess. 13. [Siquis dixerit Christum in Eucharistia
exhibitum spiritualiter tantum manducari, and non etiam sacramentaliter, and
realiter, anathema sit,] by the second opinion cannot be censured.

2. The same expressions the Lutherans have (which you may find in the pacifick
Discourses of Bishop Davenant, Morton, Hall, etc, (see Davenant adhort. ad
pacem Eccles. cap. 11.) lessening the difference between the several parties of
the Reformed, but by the same reason may be also urged as lessening that
between the Reformed and Romanist) Christum adesse signis; but invisibiliter,
intangibiliter, etc. Again (about oral manducation), recipi quidem ore etc.
Therefore do they as others detest the Capernaitan error.

3. See what Bishop Forbes says de Euchar. 1. l. 28. s. Nemo sanae mentis etc.
Urged in Discourse concerning the Rubric of the Eng. Lit.. 48. Hear likewise
what Bellarmin confesses in recogn. operum, p. 81. (upon some men disallowing
his conversion not productive, but adductive; saying, non esse vere
conversionem sed translocationem, which Dr. Tailor also presses p. 269.)
namely, Quod conversio and transubstantiatio pertineant ad panem, non ad corpus
Christi; Quod corpus Christi nec translocari dici potest, cum neque deserat
locum suum in coelo, neque incipiat esse sub speciebus, ut in loco, sed ut
substantia sub accidentibus, remota tamen inhaerentia. -- Quod per
consecrationem Eucharistiae non producatur de novo, sed praexistat etc. -- Sed
quicquid sit de modis loquendi, illud tenendum est, Conversionem panis and vini
in corpus and sanguinem Christi esse substantialem, sed arcanam and
ineffabilem, and nullis naturalibus conversionibus per omnia similem, and quam
solus Deus facere potest, qui solus in totam entis naturam absolutam potestatem
habet. And if we may believe Dr. Tailor, (in the place sorequoted, p. 269.270.
and see the same in Blondel, p. 197. etc.) that, by conversion or
Transubstantiation the Romanists mean only a local succession of Christ's body
into the place of bread, and nothing to be produced but a new ubi or
presentiality, whilst it is only made present where it was not before, (a thing
which, excepting that clause [into the place of bread] himself cannot deny,
unless he says, Christ is no more really present in the time of the Sacrament,
than out of it) tho perhaps some terms may seem to be used unproperly, yet the
difference and cause of offense is made still less: it being then only about
the place of the presence of Christ's body; for as for annihilation or ceasing
to be of the bread, this is granted possible to be done, and if not done, an
error no way dangerous.

4 Those therefore who dispute against the two last Opinions, as professing
such gross things (as I have showed above) they expressly reject, beat the Air,
and have no Adversary, at least not Councils; nor the moderater and modester
party of their Writers, with whose Concessions only, the desirous of Christ's
Peace ought to debate matters of difference; but if they say such gross things
follow naturally from their professed Tenants, tho these Consequences be denied
and renounced by them; here, to preserve their Charity toward the Defenders of
the Fourth Opinion, I must put them in mind of that Rule which Daille has so
much enlarged upon (in his Apology for the Separation of the Reformed Churches
from that of Rome, printed in English, c. 9. and in his Letter to Monsieur de
Monglat, in Answer to Chaumonts Remarks upon his Apology, p. 15, 16. and in his
Considerations upon Chaumonts Reply, p. 31, etc.) to preserve Charity toward
the Defenders (being Brethren of the Reformaon) of the Third Opinion. He in
these places says, That, tho Adoration of the Sacrament should necessarily
follow from the Lutheran Tenent of Christ's Presence with the Signs (as Bishop
Morton says it does, De Pace Eccl. p. 9.); again, Tho a Destruction of the
Human Nature of Christ necessarily follows from the Lutheran Tenent of the
Ubiquity thereof (as he himself confesses it does); again, Tho the Destruction
of the Trinity of Persons should necessarily follow from the Tenent of the
Greek Church, denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son (as he
quotes many of the Schoolmen to affirm it does) yet, since these opinions
destroy, or oppugn to, such principles or Fundamentals (for the destruction of
which only (see his c. 7.) a Separation of Communion may be made), par ses
suittes, and non par ses theses: c' est a dire qu' elle induit cette ruin,
mais ne la pose pas. And since such men still hold the Principle, and utterly
deny and renounce such a Consequent of their error (he says) none ought to
impose or impute such a Consequence unto them; or for it separate from their
Communion. Neither may one (then) impose upon the Fourth Opinion the
Consequential Contradictons or Absurdities thereof; or for these Desert their
Communion. But of this Rule of Daille's more anon, when we come to Adoration.

fifth place for the Third and Fourth Opinion; That, Mat. 26.26. 1 Cor. 10.16.
-- 11.27, 29. Ephesians. 5.30, 32, 1
etc. whether that (which is opposed to qualify these Texts) 1 Cor. 11.27, 28.
be taken only for all the sensibilia of Bread, as the Fourth; or also for the
substance of Bread remaining together with Christ's Body, as the Third Opinion
will have it; the Mystery of the Sacrament to be Miraculous and Supernatural,
and Incomprehensible (which also the Second Opinion pretends to hold) no
Arguments drawn from Sense, or natural Reason, or also from any Rules of
Contradiction, can be of any force to confute them.

2 For first, for the matter of Sense, they affirm it not to be deceived at
all, but truly to discern its proper object; every thing sensible in the
Eucharist remaining after Consecration, as before it; and the Presence of
Christ's Body (whatever it is there) being invisible, intangible, etc. As for
that Argument ordinarily made against the Fourth Opinion, from the position of
the Accidents, which are discerned by sense, to the position of the Substance,
which in the ordinary course of Nature they accompany (as, It has the usual
color, taste, etc. of Bread, therefore it is Bread:) it is granted good, where
intervenes no supernatural or miraculous effect, revealed unto us by the
Scriptures. Good therefore was that Argument of our Saviors, Lu. 24.39. Handle
one, and see, etc. And that of the Apostle, 1 Jo. 1.1. That which we have
heard, which we have seen, etc. Good, that of the Fathers from these and
suchlike places, against the Marcionites, to prove, Christ had no
fantastical, but a true Body; and Good still, tho the Marcionites had
pretended a Miracle: because such pretended Miracle was not provable from
Scripture, but the plain contrary, as appears in the forequoted Texts. But such
Argument were not good, if one should argue from the outward appearance, touch,
etc. that the Angels, that came and talked, and eat and drank with Abraham, and
also led Lot out of Sodom, were Men: because the Scripture has told us they
were Angels. In which cases it consists well (notwithstanding what Dr. Tailor
says, p. 169.) with the Justice and Goodness of God, to be angry with us for
believing our Senses, or our Reason, whenever he makes known to us such
Mysteries contrary to the ordinary experience of Nature.

3 But then you will say, the Scripture has revealed unto us no miraculous or
supernatural effect in the Eucharist, and therefore an Argument from our Senses
here stands good. The Third and Fourth Opinion contend mainly, that it has.
You see then, till this is decided (of which anon) no Argument from Senses is
to be heard; and after this is cleared, it needs not be urged. The same which
is said of Arguments from Sense, may be said of Arguments from seeming
Contradiction. For tho this Proposition be willingly granted, That whatever
truly contradicts cannot be effected Potentia Divina; (not naturally, nor
supernaturally;) so that there is no place of pleading to make two
contradictories good, by urging Miracle: Yet this general Rule is utterly
useless to us in any particular Controversy, unless we know first what things
truly contradict. Now a contradiction is only when the same thing is denied of,
or removed from it self, as this, [a Man is not a Man] or this [a Man is white
and not white], where the formal contradiction being resolved, is, [whiteness
is not whiteness]. Now such plain apparent contradictions, none, having the use
of Reason, will make or maintain; it being one of the primest principles of
Reason, Impossible est idem esse and non esse. Therefore where we find
Contradictions in terminis (a thing not unusual with Orators, to make the
acuter expression) these terms are taken in several senses, by those who
propose them; one term not signifying the formal essence of the thing. So those
Contradictions in terminis observed by Dr. Tailor p. 14, 15. to the Roman party
[as corpus incorporeum, cruor incruentus,] if the terms be took in several
acceptations, will be no formal Contradictions; as if cruor be taken for the
substance of Blood, incruentus for the color and other accidents usually
accompanying, but (as the Proponents suppose) possibly separable from, the
substance. So, if corpus be taken for the substance of a Body, and incorporeum
for extension in a place, etc. which the Proponents conceive not essential, but
accidental, to a Body: else, if corpus incorporeum taken in any sense be a
Contradiction, so will the Apostle's corpus spirituale be; for in the
predicament of substance, incorporeum and spirituale are made the same.

4 But tho not plain and formal Contradictions, yet virtual, I grant, many may
and do make, whilst they take those things to be diverse, which are the same:
as if quantum or extensum be the same with corpus; or rather, extensio with
corporeitas (as Rivet affirms it is, but the Romanist denies) then corpus
non-extensum will be a Contradiction. To know then, what truly contradicts, and
so is Potentia Divina unfaisible, or unseparable, we must know exactly, what
things are the same, what different.

1. First, we must perfectly discern all the accidents of any thing from the
essence of it, not only what accidents are ordinarily separated, (for this will
have no place where a supernatural effect is urged,) but what are potentia
divina separable. For that all things separable are actually in the course of
nature separated; or that every thing not essential is sometimes locally
disjoined from the essence; or that nothing can be done by miracle, which
nature never works; who can justify? Now by what means any can know this, I
much wonder.

2. Secondly, since the Essence also of all creatures is composit, not simple,
we must discern all the parts of its essence one from another, and then know in
which of those essentials or constitutives the essence of the thing more
chiefly consists; so that this removed, the name of the thing can be no longer
retained. For note, that a thing may be said to be the same still, even tho
some part of the essence thereof be changed, or removed; if that wherein it
more formally consists, still abides; as a man or a ship is still the same, tho
much of the matter of both of them be altered. Now if these things no man can
exactly know, then to say, all things are possible to God except what
contradicts, is as much as to say; Every particular thing that can be named to
us, is, for any thing we know, (without revelation to the contrary), to God
possible. Methinks some such thing appears from Dr. Tailor's concession, p.
240. Let it appear that God has affirmed Transubstantiation, and I for my part
will burn all my arguments against it, and make public amends. (See Disc.
conc. Rubric. of the Eng. Lit.. 20.) Where the Doctor prefers Revelation to all
arguments against it.

3. Lastly, for the seeming contradictions which are objected by Dr. Tailor p.
207. I see not but that a many of them may be as well urged to disprove the
world made of nothing; the resurrection to every one of the same body when one
is fed on, or feeds on another; the Trinity; or the Incarnation; etc; (for
note, that if such are to be accounted no true contradictions, in respect of
the Trinity, because this is clearly revealed; neither are they in respect of
Transubstantiation, or Consubstantiation, tho it be not revealed,) nay to
disprove the ordinary Philosophical axiom [anima est tota in toto, and tota in
qualibet part,] which soul, if tota in capite, and tota in pede, is
consequently tota in two places at once: the same may be said of Angels, and
must much more of the simple essence of God, of whom also is believed, that the
self same nature is totally in three real distinct persons, yet without any
division or multiplication of it self; ( miratur hoc men's humana, et quia non
capit, fortasse non credit- says St. Augustine, Epistola 3. ad Volus.) but our
Savior also, who never departs from heaven on the right hand of the Father
till his second coming to judgment, ( Act. 3.21.) yet has often appeared here
on earth to many, several times to St. Paul. A many of them to disprove a
Camel's passing through a needles eye; or our Savior's body passing through a door
unopened, (for many bodies to be in one place, is as well absurd, as one to be
in many;) but especially, the multiplying of the five loaves to feed so many
thousands, which doubtless might as well have bin multiplied to feed all the
world, at any distance, and this without applying an attribute of God,
Ubiquity, to them. See how the Doctor has prosecuted this business of
Ubiquity, p. 214. 217. etc. 231. A many of them to disprove the substantial
presence of Christ's body (and not only by the effects, influence, or virtue
thereof,) to the soul of the faithful receiver, in so many several places,
which thing seems to be affirmed by the second opinion: and the Socinians,
Remonstrants, Zuinglians, all that hold only the first opinion, charge such
contradictions and absurdities upon the second opinion, as well as those do
upon the third and fourth. Now any one contradiction found in the second
opinion is as irreconcilable to truth, as many; and if there were no seeming
contradiction in it, why fly they also to modus ineffabilis and plenus
miraculis? (see before p. 3.) And indeed, what can be more contradictious, than
for a finite body to be present, not only in its effects, but substance, to
another body; and yet not be present there, after any manner of presence,
neither of a Body, nor of a Spirit; neither definitively, nor
circumscriptively, nor repletively? (See what the Doctor says to that effect,
p. 218.) But if you say it is there modo ineffabili, and think this objection
answered by it, then why may not others excuse their seeming contradictory
expressions by modus ineffabilis? Methinks, setting aside divine revelation,
for matter of reasoning, those who grant se nescire modum quomodo est praesens,
should likewise confess se nescire modum quomodo non est praesens; for if by
their reason they comprehend not the manner, how Christ's body is there,
neither can they by their reason discover, but that that particular manner,
which they oppose, may be the manner of his being there.

Note, that the third opinion denies not the possibility or feisibility of the
4th, but only disputes the fact; 1.
but says, there is no divine revelation that shows, that it is his pleasure so
to do; therefore the chief blame that is laid by them upon the abettors of the
fourth opinion, is, that it, in so much doubt and uncertainty of the manner of
Christ's Presence, should be obtruded on the world, prejudicially to the
tenants more probable, as an article of faith. See Harmon. Confession. Judicium
Theol. Wirtemb. quoted by Bishop Forbes. Credimus omnipotentiam Dei tantam
esse, ut possit in Eucharistia substantiam panis and vini vel annihilare, vel
in corpus and sanguinem Christi mutare; sed quod Deus hanc suam absolutam
potentiam in Eucharistia exerceat, non videtur esse certo verbo Dei traditum,
and apparet veteri Ecclesiae fuisse ignotum. See Chemnit. exam. Conc. Trid. de
Transub. Sed dicat quis, Quare ita contendamus, an substantia panis in
Eucharistia vel remaneat, vel non remaneat, cum thesaurus Eucharistiae sit non
panis naturalis etc. sed vera and substantialis praesentia, exhibitio, sumptio
corporis and sanguinis Christi etc? Respondeo. Nullo modo pari momento censemus
panem, and corpus Christi. Et Lutherus semper dixit, se in tota hac
disputatione magis spectare praesentiam corporis Christi in coena, quam
praesentiam panis. Sed quia Transubstantiatio pro articulo fidei sub poena
anathematis proponitur, necessario contradicendum est etc. See Bell. Euchar. 3.
l. c. 11. In hoc valde distinguuntur Lutherani a Calvinistis; Calvinistae enim
Transubstantiationem sceleratam esse haeresin, and rem prorsus impossibilem;
Lutherani dicunt esse possibilem, and non pugnare aperte cum fide; unde magis
reprehendunt Catholicos, quod Transubstantiationem faciunt articulum fidei,
quam quod eam defendant.

2. Yet some there are of the second opinion, who dispute not the supernatural
possibility of it, (see Calvin de vera Christianae pacificationis ratione,
joined to Rivet's animadv. on Grot. 11. c. Quasi vero hic de Christi potentia
disputetur, -- Rerum omnium conversionem fieri posse a Christo, nos quoque
fatemur. -- Quaerendo quianam possit Christus, frustra se fatigant; cum haec
una cognitio sensus omnes nostros in se continere debeat, quidnam velit:) and
who grant a possibility of many of those particulars maintained by the 4th
opinion; as that, the same body may be in many places; accidents persist
without a subject etc. which things some others again make to involve a
contradiction. See many testimonies to this purpose numbered up by Bishop Forbes
de Euchar. 1. l. 2. c.

Lastly, Some of the Second Opinion there are, that hold the Fourth Opinion
more agreeable to our Savior's words, than the Third. See Bishop Forb. l. 1.
c. 4. s. 5. Longius consubstantiatorum quam Transubstantiatorum sententiam a
Christi verbis recedere ( i. e. I conceive, as they take the Third Opinion to
affirm ipsum panem esse corpus Domini, for this seems much more unreasonable,
than, Hoc quod continetur sub specie panis est corpus Domini) sive litera
spectetur, sive sensus, affirmat R. Hospin. hist. Sacr. part altera, p. 7.
etc. Calviniani communiter. See Calvin ( Instit. l. 4. c. 17. s. 20.) where,
speaking of some of the Lutherans affirming proprie loquendo panem esse corpus
Christi, he argues, that consequently they must say panem esse Christum;
because totus Christus offertur in coena; and then concludes, intolerabilis
autem Blasphemia est sine figura Praedicari de elemento corruptibili quod sit
corpus. -- Again ( s. 30.) inveighing against Lutherans -- Ubiquity he says,
Papistarum tolerabilior vel saltem magis verecunda est doctrina. And see
Judicious Hooker, Eccl. Pol. l. 5. s. 67. how indifferently he behaves himself
between the two Tenants of Consubstantiation and Transubstantiation, censuring
them both, only as Opinions unnecessary and superfluous, and p. 361. saying of
the later (the Transubstantialists) that they justly shun some Labyrinths of
the former (the Consubstantialists) but yet that the way which they take to the
same Inn is somewhat more short, but no whit more certain. See likewise Spalat.
Rep. Eccl. l. 7. c. 11. n. 6. Fateor neque Transubstantiationem neque
Ubiquitatem haeresin ullam direct continere, etc.

Fourth Opinion as Heretical, etc. (for such also there are), Seventhly,
Observe, That for the most part those of the Second Opinion hold the Third
(notwithstanding the near alliance it appears to have with the Fourth) no ways
Heretical, or (tho erroneous) destructive of any fundamental or prinpal Article
of Faith (unless by some Consequences renounced by those who hold the Third
Opinion) and therefore giving no just cause of any separation of Communion from
any such. Credere quod caro Christi ubique est, quod in pane est, and oraliter
manducetur, idque etiam ab impiis, stipula and palea est, Par. in 1 Cor. 3. See
many quotations in Bishop Forb. Euch. l. 1. c. 4. See likewise Daille's Charity
in the place, quoted before in the end of the Fourth Observation, p. 16.
notwithstanding those dangerous Consequences of the Third Opinion, of
destroying Christ's Humanity by Ubiquity, and of Adoration by presence with the
Elements. See Bishop Hall's, Davenant's, Morton's Discourses De Pace
Ecclesiastica. How far can men bend, when they have a good mind to it? See
particularly Bish. Hall, p. 73. Res apud utrosque eadem, etc. At last he brings
in the Decree of the Synod of the French Protestants at Charenton; in which the
Lutherans are received to their Communion, as agreeing with them in omnibus
verae Religionis principiis Articulisque fundamentalibus. See Disc. conc. Rub.
of Eng.. 12.
How well therefore the same men can refuse Communion with those of the Fourth
Opinion, supposing the falsity thereof, or asperse it with the name of Heresy,
etc. I see not; and perhaps the more moderate do not refuse, nor quarrel with
it for this: But the thing they blame is Adoration, or the imposing their
Transubstantiation on others as an Article of Faith (of which anon): to which
purpose Daille, in his Answer to the Remarks made by Chaumont on his Apology,
p. 20. has these words (after vindicating Beza and Calvin from holding any
real Presence of Christ's Body in the Signs) Mais bienque nous ne croyons pas
etc. Although we believe no such Presence in the Signs, yet we esteem not that
Belief so criminal, as that it obliges us to break off Communion with those
who hold it, as it appears by our tolerating it in the Lutherans. So that had
the Church of Rome no other Error than this, we voluntarily accord her to have
given us no sufficient cause of Separation from her. What is that Faith of Rome
then which I alleged as a sufficient cause of Separation? (then he names this)
l' Adoration de l'Ostie. Thus he.

Four Opinions about the Eucharist; give me leave now to reflect a little upon,
and search more strictly into the Second Opinion; which I think is the Tenent
of many of the Church of England. Concerning which I do not well understand,
How it must not either fall into many of the difficulties and seeming
contradictions of the Third and Fourth Opinions, or slide back into the sense
of the First, the most intelligible and perspicuous indeed, but (thought by the
rest) too much diminutive of this tremendum Mysterium, this ineffable Mystery.

Concerning the Second Opinion.
Now let us consider this Second Opinion, first concerning its affirming or
denying the real or substantial Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Celebration of the Eucharist. Next, concerning its affirming or denying such
Presence in or with the Signs. As to the former; the phrase of real Presence,
if we mean by it only presence in something real, may be used by those who deny
substantial presence. For if Christ be present to us (in the Eucharist,) in the
benefits of his Passion, in his Grace, in his Spirit, he is present to us in
something real, tho not in the reality of his Person. But they, going beyond
all these, even the last of them also, the presence by his Spirit, (see before
p. 2. neque enim mortis tantum etc, -- neque enim mihi satisfaciunt etc.)
affirm a real and substantial presence (for indeed what can real presence of a
substance, such as body and blood is, be but substantial presence?) even of
that body which suffered upon the Cross for us: which presence they clearly
contradistinguish to presence by effect, influence, virtue, grace, or an
uniting of our bodies with Christ's body by the same Spirit abiding in both,
(by which way things furthest distant (if we call this presence) may be said to
be present to one another, as long as there is any thing between them, that
immediately touches or informs both: so the head may be said to be present
to the foot, the Saints in heaven to those on earth, the West to the
East Indies: so the substantial presence of Christ's body and blood may be
affirmed, as well as here, when ever there is any communication of his Spirit,
as in Baptism; and as properly as the Bread which we break, and the Cup which
we bless here, so the Water, that is (then) poured on us, may be said to be the
communion of the body and blood of Christ): these manners of Presence therefore
they count not enough to satisfy the Scripures, and Tradition. Therefore they
speak of Eucharistical-presence as a great mystery, Ephesians. 5. wrought by God's
omnipotence after a manner ineffable, or incomprehensible to man's reason.
Lastly, as far in substantial or real presence they seem to go as any, either
the third or fourth opinion; in that they question not the matter of that
presence, (the which the other affirm,) but the manner; which whilst the others
guess, some after this, some after that manner, they will guess nothing at all
of it; (by which they are free from any objections;) and well, modestly,
prudently this: only if such would not so peremptorily condemn the conjectures
of others, (as perhaps some of them do not.) See for what I have now said
(besides the quotations before, p. 2. in the relation of this second opinion)
many places in Dr. Tailor, the very Title of his book, wherein Spiritual must
be took in such a sense, as not to deny real; and of Christ, must be understood
of the Body and Blood of Christ: For this he says often in the Book, namely,
p. 7. see p. 20. where, in answering some hard sayings of the Fathers, etc. as
if the same Body that was crucified, was not eaten in the Sacrament, he says,
That Proposition is true, if we speak of the eating of Christ's Body in the
same manner of being [for it had one manner of being on the Cross, and another
in the Sacrament] But that Body which was crucified, the same Body we do eat,
if we speak of the same thing in a several manner of being, etc: Christ's Body
therefore is in the Sacrament, not only in its operation, but being; tho after
another manner of being than it was on the Cross. And what Dr. Tailor says,
methinks, answers several arguments brought afterward by himself out of the
Fathers against real presence under, or with, the symbols, see p. 311. Non hoc
quod videtis, etc. see p. 288. They that do not confess the Eucharist to be the
Flesh of our Savior, etc. See p. 5. where he will have spiritual presence to
be particular in nothing, but that it excludes the corporal, and natural
manner, etc. See Arch B. Laud, See Disc. concerning the Rub. of the En. Lyt..
14, 15.
p. 286. where he says, The worthy Receiver is by his Faith made Spiritually
partaker of the true and real Body and Blood of Christ, etc. And Arch B.
Cranmer (as the Arch B. quotes out of Fox, p. 1703.) confesses, That tho he
was indeed of another opinion, and inclining to that of Zuinglius, yet B. Ridly
convinced his judgment, and settled him in the point.

2. Add to these Bishop Hall, quoted before; Res apud utrosque eadem, rei tamen
ratio diversa, etc. utrosque he means Lutheran, but the Consequence is as good
for the Romanist. See the same opinion of A. Spalat. and Bishop Forbes, quoted
hereafter. Lastly, in the new Liturgy provided for Scotland, in the
Administering the Sacrament, the former words or comment [Feed on him in thy
heart by Faith] are left out, according to the first Common Prayer Book of Edw.
VI. and also the Form in the Missals; perhaps, as being a Diminutive of this
great Mystery, in which is maintained another, a more real eating and
participation of Christ's Body, than that by Faith alone. As likewise there are
added in the Prayer of Consecration these words (agreeable to the first Book of
Edw. VI. and the Forms of all Antiquity; only those run not, ut nobis sint, but
ut nobis fiant corpus, etc.) [So bless and sanctify with thy Word and Holy
Spirit these thy Gifts and Creatures of Bread and Wine, that they may be unto
us the Body and Blood of thy most dearly beloved Son] which seem to tend to the
same purpose: and upon Bucer's exceptions at them, in his Censura in ordine
Eccl. c. 9. were by the Second Reformers of the Common Prayer Book cast out.
Now in these passages above recited (if I well understand them) the Presence of
Christ's Body is as fully and properly affirmed by these, as by the Lutheran or
Romanist; only all the difference is; not about the Presence, whether carnally
or spiritually, substantially or locally, after the manner of other Bodies, or
not locally or substantially; but about the subject only, to which present, (as
Mr. Hooker well observes) whether to the worthy Receiver only, or also to the
elements or signs; or if present to the signs, whether not some other way
present to them, than either Cousubor Transubstantially. Whereas therefore the
Lutheran and Romanist dispute the manner, whether our Savior's Body be
Consubstantially or Transubstantially with the signs; the other Reformed and
these dispute the manner, whether with the signs, or only with the Receiver (or
also whether with the signs, not by the forenam'd, but some other unknown way)
but in its presence with the worthy Receiver all agree, and one affirm it as
much as another.

3. But now if one should affirm Christ personlly or substantially present to
the Receiver, another only virtually present, in his Grace, Spirit, etc. it is
plain, that here a difference between them is not in the manner of the
presence, but in the presence it self. So the first Opinion, tho affirming a
virtual presence, is said to deny the real presence, or any mystery in the
Sacrament.

affirming the substantial or personal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, as
to the third and fourth Opinion. But now, I confess, I do not see how this does
consist with many other things which they say. See Dr. Tailor, p. 15. But we by
the spiritual real presence of Christ, do understand Christ to be present as
the Spirit of God is present in the hearts of the Faithful, by blessing and
grace, -- p. 107. by says and blessing, -- and this is all which we mean,
beside the Tropical and Figurative presence, p. 21. They (the Romanists) say,
that the spiritual and the virtual taking him in virtue or effect, is not
sufficient, tho this is done also in the Sacrament. See p. 218. where, after
showing, that Christ's Body is in the Eucharist, neither circumscriptive,
definitive, nor repletive, (the only three ways that are conceivable of being
in a place) he says, his Body is there figuratively, tropically,
representatively in Being, [might not he say, or in reallity? now
representatively only, in respect of reallity, is the same with not really,]
and really in effect and blessing: but this is not a natural, real, being in a
place, but a relation to a person. I suppose he means, but Christ's Body in
Heaven having a relation to a Communicant on Earth in some effect and blessing.
Add to these, what he says p. 120, 121, That we under the Sacrament of Bread
and Wine receive Christ's Body no more really, than the Israelites did in the
Manna, Rock; Cloud, etc. both in a diverse Sacrament, says he, but in all the
same reallity: whatsoever we, the same they did eat. Surely this then argues
only a virtual presence thereof, not a substantial; because Christ's Body or
Flesh was not then as yet assumed. See likewise p. 276, 277. See p. 7. where he
quotes the Fathers, that whatsoever they speak of the Eucharist, they affirm
also the same of the other Sacrament, Baptism, etc. quoting out of St. Austin,
"that we are made partakers of the Body and Blood of "Christ, when in Baptism
we are made Members of Christ, etc. therefore (whatever may be answered to the
Fathers, of which more anon, yet) his opinion is, that Christ's Body is no more
really present in the Lord's Supper, than in Baptism, etc.

2. I find B. Forbes, tho holding neither Consubstantiation nor
Transubstantiation, yet much censuring, out of Spalat. and others, these two
diminutive comparisons of the Lord's Supper, de Euch. l. 1. c. 1. s. 26, 27.
Falso etiam asseritur, haud aliter nos Corpus Christi in Eucharistia comedere,
quam Patres veteris Testamenti, etc. and s. 27. Perperam etiam asseritur, res
easdem esse Christum in Baptismo induere, and ipsius carnem ac sanguinem in
Caena sumere, etc.

3. I will add to these of Dr. Tailors, an expression of Dr. Hammond's Pract.
Cat. where he speaks of the Eucharist, -- God bestows the Body and Blood of
Christ upon us, not by sending it down locally for our Bodies to feed on, but
really for our Souls to be strengthened by it. As when the Sun is communicated
to us, the whole Bulk and Body of the Sun is not removed out of its Sphere, but
the Rays and Beams of it, and with them the Light and Instuences are really and
verily bestowed and darted out upon us. Thus he. As therefore not the Body of
the Sun, but only the Beams thereof, can be said to be really and locally here
below; so, I conceive the Doctor means, that not the very Body of Christ, but
the virtue and efficacy thereof only, are really here present to the worthy
receiver. If so, you may see how Mr. Hooker differs from him in the same
simile, (in the quotation set down above, p. 50.) where he says, not only by
effect and operation, as the influence of the heavens is in plants, beasts,
men, etc, which they quicken etc.

4. Lastly, I do not see, how this their opinion of substantial Presence
consists with many of those objections made by them against the third and
fourth opinion; as that in particular of the impossibility of the same body to
be in many places at once, which objection opposes not the modus, but any
presence substantial whatsoever? But if on the other side, in good earnest, a
real substantial Presence be affirmed by them; tho in (wisely) not expressing
any particular manner, as others do, they both avoid the arguments, which
perhaps might be made against it, and have advantage to make some against
others; yet I see not, but that, from their affirming in general such a
Presence, they must incur many of the same difficulties with the third and
fourth opinion. If they say substantially present, but they mean not to the
elements, but to the receiver, and that to his soul, not to his body; yet if
they affirm it as much, or as far present to the soul, as the other does to the
signs, (as Mr. Hooker says, they differ only about the subject, not the
presence,) do not the same objections, absurdities, etc, concerning Christ's
Body, being both substantially in Heaven and in the place where the Communion
is celebrated, with which they afflict the others for making it present with
the signs, return upon themselves, for making it present with the receivers?
For if it be possible, that the body of Christ, now sitting at the right hand
of God in heaven, can notwithstanding this be present in our soul, or in our
heart, so may it under, or with the bread; unless we say, that we affirm not
that real presence to the soul, which they do to the bread. But then our
writers must not say, that we differ only about the manner, or the subject of
his Presence, but the Presence it self also.

5. If they say, substantially present; but they mean spiritually, not
naturally, or not corporally, so says the Romanist, i. e. not with the usual
accidents or qualities always accompanying (where no supernatural effect) the
nature or essence of a Body: but if they will extend, spiritually so far, as
that it shall imply Christ's body to be there, substantially or really, yet not
quoad naturam or essentiam suam, or not quoad corpus, this is by a distinction
to destroy their thesis.

6. Again, if they say, substantially there present, but not locally, so says
the Lutheran and Romanist, i. e. circumscriptive, or by such commensuration to
place as bodies use to have; but if they will extend locally so far, as that
they understand Christ's body to be there by no manner of ubi at all, (see Dr.
Tailor p. 218.) not so much as ubi definitive, so that we may truly say it is
hic, so as not ubique, or alibi where no communion; what is this but to affirm,
it is there so, as that it is not there?

7. If they say substantially present, by reason of the same Spirit uniting us
here on earth as members to it in heaven; besides that thus Christ's body is no
more present in the Eucharist, than in any other ordinance or sacrament,
wherein the Spirit is conferred; such presence is properly of the Spirit, not
of the body; unless that which (being finite) is only in heaven (as they
affirm) may not rightly be said to be really and substantially absent from what
is on earth. Now if these seeming-impossibilities and contradictions we
acknowledge, and fly to the incomprehensibility and inexplicableness of the
mystery; all that I reply is, that we must indulge the same privilege to
others, allowing that a thousand contradictions of theirs may be as soon true,
as only one of ours.

8. But if at last we plainly interpret our real and substantial presence by
Christ's being present (in corporal absence) to the worthy receiver in all the
benefits and effects thereof, we slide back into the first opinion, differing
only from them in expression; and then what need we speak any more of
omnipotency for such presence, or make any thing miraculous in the Sacrament?
what incomprehensibleness in this, when (as Bellarmin expresses it) all that
we say is, That per fidem apprehendentem Christum in coelo and manducantem
sacramentum or signum corporis sui, participamus omnia bona Christi? What mean
(then) those gradations of reception, not only of bare signs, nor of the signs
and the benefits applied by faith; but also of the very body and blood of
Christ? In tanta locorum distantia penetrat ad nos Christi caro, says Calvin,
ut nobis sit in cibum. Instit. 4. l. 17. c. 10. s.

real Presence cast some of the Reformed ( Apol. pro confessione sua, p. 256.)
said the Zuinglian opinion was simplicissima, and ad idololatriam
omnemevitandam in hac materia inprimis necessaria: and quae a Calvino and
illius ^^quacibu^ dicuntur manifestam in se continere tum vanitatem, tum
absurditatem; and ex isto font emanasse ingentem illam idololatriam etc. (...)
The same say the Socinians. See Volkelius.

And I think Rive^, in his controversies with Grotius, is of the same opinion
with the Remonstrants, at least much differing from Dr. Tailor's; for that
saying of the Conc. Trid. [Sacramentaliter praesens Salvator noster substantia
sua nobis adest], allowed in some sense by the Doctor, he maintains to
contradict. Quia quod sacramentaliter praesens est, says he, non est
substantia sua praesens, nec contra. Animad. p. 85. And again, ( Examen: p.
45.) Si corpus Christi non est in Sacramento quantitative (i. e.) corporally,
or secundum modum corporis, non est omnino; quia corpus Christi ubicunque est
quantum est, aut non est corpus. Indeed I have often wondered, seeing that
something more than they willingly grant, seems necessarily to follow upon it,
why so many of the reformed writers remain not content with a virtual presence,
which is maintained by them to be sufficient for salvation, but concur so much
in asserting a real and substantial. I guess; not only the punctual and fixed
expressions of the Scriptures, (as the words of Institution, in so many
relations thereof, not only in the Gospels, but in St. Paul's Epistle to the
Corinthians, being so unvariably observed; besides the expressions 1 Cor.
11.27, 29.) and the authority of the Fathers (who so often call it tremendum
mysterium,) and the stream of Tradition, to have as it were necessitated them
to it; but also the authority of Calvin not a little to have moved them, who
was a great Leader to our reforming Forefathers.

Again, him I suppose to be induced to it, as from the former reasons, so from
a desire to reconcile several parties of the then early begun Reformation, and
to moderate and temper the former, Lutheran and Zuinglian, quarrel. Of whom
therefore Bishop Forbes observes; Quod sua doctrina super hac re (as it seems
here also of the doctrine of others of this second opinion) erat maxim
incerta, and dubia, atque lubrica. -- Et dum nunc his, nunc illis gratificari
studuit, haud pauca male sibi cohaerentia scripsit. de Euchar. 1. l. 1. c. 6.
sect.

second thing; its affirming; or denying, the real or substantial presence of
Christ's body with the signs, and that, ante usum. And this I think to be
generally denied by the 2d. opinion, (tho I see not with what reason they can
deny a possibility thereof, since they grant such a presence with the worthy
receiver.) See Mr. Hooker 5. l. 67. s. p. 359, The real presence of Christ's
most blessed body and blood is not to be sought for in the Sacrament, but in
the worthy receiver of the Sacrament. -- The Bread and the Cup are his Body and
Blood, because they are causes instrumental, upon the receipt whereof the
participation of his Body and blood ensues. For that which produces any
certain effect, is not vainly or improperly said to be that very effect,
whereunto it tends. This he speaks in behalf of the Scripture-expression,
saying of the elements, This is my body and my blood: because we receive by
these instruments that which they are termed. See Dr. Tailor, p. 14. By
spiritual we mean, present to our Spirits only: that is, says he, so as Christ
is not present to any other sense but that of faith, or Spiritual susception.
Where (to digress a little) I wonder why he and some others (so Dr. Hammond
says, [ for our souls to be strengthened etc] quoted before) do not say; that
Christ's body is substantially present to the bodies of worthy receivers, as
well as to the souls, (yet perhaps they deny it not); for tho the body of
Christ be only spiritually there, yet may a spirit be present to a body, for
our souls (spirits) are so. And we say in the Liturgy, The Body of Christ
preserve thy body and soul to everlasting life: And, Grant us gracious Lord so
to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood, that our
sinful bodies may be made clean by his body, and our souls washed through his most
precious blood etc. And the Fathers therefore called the consecrated elements,
from their vivifical influence on the body, according to Jo. 6. symbola
resurrectionis. See Grot. Annot. ad Cassand: p. 21. Sic and corpora nostra
percipientia Eucharistiam jam non sunt corruptibilia, sed spem resurrectionis
habentia. Irenaeus. Neither see I any reason for Rivet's expression: Corpus
Christi affi^it corpus per animam. Nor for that of Dr. Tailor, p. 131. if he
means, that the Soul receives Christ's body more immediately than the Body
does. For tho without faith, which is an act of the soul, Christ's body is not
received, at least, received, profits not; yet where faith is, Christ's body
is received as well, and as immediately by our body, as by our soul, and
nourishes and vivifieth equally (but spiritually) both. See what Bishop Forbes
says, Euchar. 1. l. 1. c. 27. s. Verum Christi corpus non tantum animae, sed
etiam corpori nostr^, spiritualiter tamen, hoc est, non corporaliter,
exhibetur, and sane al^o ac diverso nobis and propinquiori modo, licet occulto,
quam per solam fidem. -- Fides, qua proprie Christi caro in Eucharistia
spiritualiter, hoc est, incorporaliter manducatur, non est ea sola, qua
Christus creditur mortuus pro peccatis nostris etc, ea enim fides
praesupponitur etc. sed ea fides est, qua creditur verbo Christi dicentis, Hoc
est corpus meum. Credere enim Christum ibi esse praesentem etiam carne
vivificatrice, and desiderare eam sumere; nimirum hoc est spiritualiter and
recte eam manducare in Eucharistia. Sect. 25. Proinde male docetur a multis
Protestantibus, hanc praesentiam and communicationem per fidem effici. -- Fides
magis proprie dicitur accipere and apprehendere, quam praestare. Verbum Dei and
promissio, cui fides nostra nititur, praesentia reddit quae promittit, non
nostra fides. It Is not faith that confers Christ's body, tho by the faithful it
is only worthily, or (as they say) only received, but received equally, and
immediately both by the soul and body: whether this body of Christ be disjoined
from, as they think, or conjoined with the elements, yet, whilst this second
opinion seems to hold no presence at all, to, or with, the signs; but to the
receiver, they only making the signs to be (as well as I can understand them)
after consecration sanctified instruments, upon receipt of which by those who
believe, God gives the other, the body and blood of his Son; as also in Baptism
upon receiving the water, God gives the Spirit; yet I say, some other
expressions of theirs seem not so suitable to such a meaning, and may easily
cause a mistake in the unwary reader; and why they use them I cannot tell,
unless it be to imitate the phrase of the words of Institution, and also of the
Fathers. See Dr. Tailor, p. 7. After the Minister has consecrated the bread
and the wine, the Symbols become changed into the body and blood of Christ in a
Spiritual, real manner. May we then say, that the Baptismal water after prayers
etc is changed into the Spirit, in a spiritual real manner, because that is an
instrument, upon using of which the Holy Spirit is conferred? So p. 21. The
question is not, whether the symbols be changed into Christ's body and blood or
no, for it is granted; but whether this conversion be Sacramental and
figurative, or natural and bodily, etc. So p. 265.266. Before consecration it
is mere bread, but after consecration it is verily the body of Christ, truly
his flesh, and truly his blood. Yet if we enquire, how he means that the bread
is so, surely he means only this; that upon receiving, or at the same time that
we receive the bread, suffering only an accidental mutation (as he calls it) of
condition, of sanctification, and usage, at the same time Christ's real body is
received, but not in, or joined with, the bread at all, by the faithful. The
expression is strangely differing, methinks, from the meaning thereof.

But especially see such full expressions in his Great Exemplar, 3d. part. disc
-- 18. p. 109. in the former Edition, sect. 3. where amongst other things he
says, It is hard to do so much violence to our sense, as not to think it
bread; but it is more unsafe, to do so much violence to our faith, as not to
believe it to be Christ's body -- (Again.) He that believes it to be bread, and
yet verily to be Christ's body, is only tied also by implication to believe
God's omnipotence, that he who affirmed it, can also verify it. And if we
profess we understand not the manner of this Mystery, we say no more, but that
it is a mystery etc. (See the place.) Strange expressions! when the thing
required to be believed is this: That Christ's body is no way present to the
bread, neither by the bread being any way changed into it, nor joined with it;
but only it given and present to the faithful, upon the receipt of this
sanctified bread.

Now would any discourse of the waters of Baptism, by which the Spirit is
received, on this manner; It is hard to do so much violence to the sense, as
not to think it water, but it is more unsafe to do so much violence to our
faith, as not to believe it to be the Spirit, etc. Would not he rather explain
himself, that the one is not the other; but the one received, by God's free
gift, upon the receiving of the other?

real or substantial presence of Christ's body thus granted (if I well
understand them) by the second opinion to the worthy receiver, but denied to
the symbols, or signs: Whether Antiquity affirmed Corporeal Presence, and
whether this, to the worthy Receiver only; or also to the Symbols upon
consecration.
let our next Quaere be; what may be the opinion of Antiquity (which is of
great moment with all obedient Sons of the Church) in this matter. Where,
supposing it granted by all, that the Fathers also held the real presence as
much as those of the second opinion do: it remains only to be examined, whether
they held this real presence not only to the worthy receiver, but also to the
Symbols, and that, ante usum: which if they did, if their judgment is not to be
submitted to, at least their followers are to be excused.

1. And note here, first, before I proceed further, That the a^guments usually
urged out of the Fathers, for their not holding T^ansubsta^tiation, disprove
not the^^ ho^ding of a Corporal Presence (at least after some other manner)
with the Symbols.
that I enquire here only after the tenent of the Ancients, concerning a real
or substantial Presence of Christ's body with the outward signs: but whether
they maintain it cum pane remanente or transeunte; whether by Con -- or
Tran-substantiation; or whether some of them affirmed the one, some the other,
(for it is not necessary that, either in Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation,
they must all go one way,) or some also a several way from both, I meddle not.
And indeed I am apt to believe, in so high and difficult a mystery, before such
particular manners so punctually discussed, and before the determination of any
Council concerning them, a likelihood of some variance in their opinions.

2. And therefore when as some of their Testimonies affirm the nature of the
Bread after Consecration to be changed, Ambr. de Mist. init. c. 9. speaking of
this Sacrament, Benedictione etiam natura ipsa mutatur (i. e.) miraculously;
Others, the nature of the Bread after Consecration to remain still; I can
neither altogether embrace the Answer (for making Antiquity unanimous) of some
Protestants to the first, That by the change of Nature, etc. is meant only an
accidental change of its now sanctified condition and usage, for so we say
(urges Dr. Tailor, p. 271.) a man of a good nature (i. e.) disposition, and
that it is against our nature, (i. e.) our custom and affection: etc. See the
like concerning the word [substance] in Blondel, in answer to a Latin Father,
p. 179. notwithstanding what Dr. Tailor says p. 324. nor the answers of some
Romanists to the second, that by the nature of Bread remaining, is meant only
the remaining of the natural accidents, or the properties of Nature, or
species, or natura exterior, not interior substantia, (tho it is always to be
remembered, that the fourth Opinion, in holding not only the outward
appearance, color, and figure, of the Bread to remain, but all other
properties and sensibles thereof; and besides these, all the operations
whatsoever, which agree to the substance, as corporally nourishing, etc. by
miracle to remain to these accidents, and that without any communication unto,
or dependence upon the Body of Christ, but existent by themselves; do indeed
tantum non hold also the substance it self to remain, (see Obs. 3. p. 24.) and
methinks differ too little from the third Opinion, to make such an abhorrence
as some Protestants entertain of the one, in comparison of the other). Neither
will I justify that Apology made by Bellarmin for such a forced interpretation
(see de Euch. l. 3. c. 24.) concerning St. Austin, and ( c. 27.) concerning
Theodoret, namely, because otherwise such a Father will be made repugnare
apertissime Cyrillo, Ambrosio, Nysseno, Epiphanio, Chrysostomo, etc. his
Cotemporaries, or also his Masters. For why may not some of them differ in
something concerning the manner of so high a Mystery (of which some of the
acutest of the Roman Writers confess, there was no manifest evidence either
from Scripture or Reason) before things were yet fully discussed and determined
by the Church? Therefore neither need I undertake here a Confutation of those
Arguments, that are brought out of Fathers or ancient Lyturgies against
Transubstantiation, in which the Bread is affirmed to remain after
Consecration, if these also be not against (or do establish) Consubstantiation;
or at least a substantial presence some other way of Christ's Body to the
symbols (either Bread, or the species of Bread) presently upon Prayer or
Consecration of these Elements. Which thing, were it once granted by the second
Opinion, the necessary consequents thereof with reference to practice (of which
more anon) are such, that the contests between Consubstantiation and
Transubstantiation would quickly vanish.

Now I think it will appear, that many of those most evident authorities that
are urged against Transubstantiation, yet confirm Consubstantiation: and so
destroy as well the Tenent as of the fourth, so of those of the first and
second Opinion, who use them against the fourth. As for example; The comparing
of the Incarnation and the Eucharist, (i.e.) the being of the Bread together
with the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, as of the Humane Nature with the
Divine in the Incarnation, against Eutyches about the time of Conc. Chalcedon:
(tho the same comparison before Eutyches is made by Justin Martyr, and that in
confession of this great mystery to a Heathen Emperor,) as it seems to make
against a change of the Bread, so, to confirm the substantial and real presence
of Christ's Body with the Bread.

Theodoret in Eranist. Dial. 2. p. 87. not fully set down by Dr. Tailor, 1
p. 321. runs thus, as you fin it also quoted fully in Blondel,
esclaircissement sur l' Eucharistie, p. 59. -- Eran. (the Eutychian) Qui
appellas donum quod offertur ante sacerdotis invocationem? Orthod. -- Cibum ex
talibus seminibus -- Eran. post sanctificationem vero quomodo haec apellas?
Orthod. Corpus Christi and sanguinem Christi: Eran. Et credis te corpus Christi
and sanguinem percipere? Orthod. Ita credo. Eran. Sicut ergo symbola Dominici
corporis and sanguinis alia sunt ante sacerdotis invocationem, post
invocationem vero mutantur, and alia funt; ita Dominicum corpus post
ascensionem in Divinam substantiam mutatum est. Orth. Retibus quae ipse
texuisti captus es. Neque enim signa mystica per sanctificationem recedunt a
sua natura; manent enim in priori substantia and figura and forma, and videri
and tangi possunt sicut prius. Intelliguntur autem ea esse quae facta sunt, and
creduntur, and adorantur, ut quae illa sint quae creduntur. Confer igitur
imaginem cum archetypo, and videbis simil tudinem. Illud enim corpus [i. e.
post ascensionem] priorem habet formam and circumscriptionem, and ut semel
dicam, corporis substantiam. Immortale autem post resurrectionem, and immune a
corruptione factum est, sedemque a dextris adeptum; and ab omni creatura
adoratur, quia Domini-naturae corpus appellatur. Here the later part (which is
omitted by Dr. Tailor) shows Theodoret to believe, the consecrated Elements to
contain, and someway to be made Christ's Body, as well as to remain what they
were formerly; and to be adored, as being indeed, what they are believed to be.
Which adoration, I hope, cannot be due to Bread. Theodoret therefore, at the
least, held Consubstantiation. But had Theodoret not held Christ's Body present
with the Bread, instead of the later part [intelliguntur etc.] he might more
readily have destroyed the Supposition of the Eutychians (namely, the mutation
of Bread into the Body of Christ) in denying Christ's Body to be there at all,
either with or instead of the Bread. Besides this, the Doctor joins another
place, out of Dial. 1. p. 18. On which (having not quoted the words perfectly)
he descants thus [ the words are not capable of an answer, if we observe that,
he says, there is no change made, but only Grace superadded, in all things
else the things are the same. Thus he]. But the passage in the Author is this:
Orthod. Salvator noster nomina permutavit, and corpori quidem, id quod erat
symboli nomen, imposuit: symbolo vero quod erat corporis. -- Eran. Vellem
permutationis nominum causam ediscere. Orthod. Manifestus est scopus iis, qui
Divinis mysteriis sunt initiati. Volebat enim eos qui Divinis mysteriis
participant, non attendere naturam eorum quae cernuntur; sed, per nominum
mutationem, mutationi, quae ex gratia facta est, fidem adhibere. Qui enim
corpus natural frumentum Jo. 12.24. and panem Jo. 6. apellavit, and vitem
rursus seipsum nominavit, is visibilia symbola corporis and sanguinis
appellatione honoravit; non naturam mutans, sed naturae gratiam addens. Where
the Author plainly affirms a change (tho not of the nature of the Bread, yet)
in the Sacrament, upon Consecration [mutationi fidem adhibere] namely, by
Christ's Body then being there, and, as there, Adored. And for his not speaking
more plainly of the manner thereof; in the first Dialogue, he says, Mystice
mystica dicta sunt. -- And in the second, Aperte dicendum non est; very simile
est enim adesse aliquos mysteriis non initiatos. All therefore that Theodoret
says consists well with Consubstantiation, and necessarily includes a real
presence. But neither do I see that which Dr. Tailor much presses, p. 322.
That Theodoret's answer, supposed to speak in the sense of the
Transubstantialists of the properties only, would have been insufficient; since
they also affirm, naturam symbolorum externorum panis non mutari, and eo modo
in Eucharistia esse duas naturas impermixtas: Whereas the Eutychian asserted
our Savior to have Flesh only in Apparition, and devoid of all the properties
thereof: Nasci enim and pati, and mori indignum esse Deo.

But suppose the Eutychian still pressed the substance of the Flesh, at least,
to be changed, as that of Bread in the Eucharist; yet if there were a
Transubstantiation in the Eucharist, I hope it will not follow necessarily,
that there must be one too in the Incarnation (as Dr. Tailor p. 320. would make
men afraid) unless there be also Revelation of the one, as well as of the
other; for a potentia ad actum, is no good arguing: And for the potentia too,
it follows not, If that one Creature may be changed into another, therefore a
Creature may be changed into the Creator; or e contra, (i. e.) Christ's
Humanity into his Divinity. Thus much for Theodoret.

2. Concerning that of Gelasius, quoted by Dr. Tailor, p. 324. [That the
Sacraments of the Body, etc. are a Divine-thing, yet cease not to be the
substance or nature of Bread and Wine] In the same place the same Author says,
mutari Panem Spiritu Sancto perficiente in substantiam Divinam. And see him by
Blondel. p. 70. reckoned amongst the Authors that hold the Elements to be
changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, in his sixth Proposition. This
therefore at the least will amount to Consubstantiation, like Theodoret's.

3. Concerning that noted place of St. Ambrose, De Sacram. l. 4. c. 4. quoted
by Dr. Tailor, p. 306. the words are these, Si tanta vis est in sermon Domini,
ut ea incipiant esse quae non erant (he refers to Ipse dixit and facta sunt)
quanto magis operatorius est, ut sint quae erant, and in aliud commutentur.
Here the true natural meaning seems to be (as Bellarmin observes) ut quae erant
sint, answering to the former [quae non erant incipiant esse] (i. e.) ut quae
erant maneant quamvis mutata. As in another Treatise, De Myster. init. c. 9. he
says, non minus est novas rebus dare, quam mutare naturas. And in the same
Chapter, out of which the former Testimony is taken, are also these words,
Panis iste panis est ante verba consecrationis: ubi accesserit consecratio de
pane sit caro Christi. But suppose him to hold no change here of the substance
of the Bread, yet must he mean some real change effected by God's Omnipotence,
beyond the Bread's being changed from common to a sacred use; and this such, as
puts the substantial presence of Christ's Body at least with the Bread; since
he supposes a miraculous operation some-way upon Nature. But this shall be
cleared more anon.

4 That Saying of St. Austin's Sermon to the New-Baptiz'd, recited by
Fulgentius, Baptism. Aethiop. lat. cap. and Bid in 1 Cor. 10. Quod vidistis
panis est and calix, quod nobis etiam oculi renunciant; quod autem fides vestra
postulat instruenda, panis est corpus Christi, and calix est sanguis. In this
later clause, that at least the Body of Christ is affirmed substantially
present with the Bread; see what I have said Observe. 2. And consider also his
moving the doubt in the same place, since Christ was now ascended in Body into
Heaven, quomodo est panis corpus ejus; and calix, vel quod habet calix, quomodo
est sanguis ejus? where he answers, -- ista fratres ideo dicuntur Sacramenta,
quia in illis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur. Quod videtur speciem habet
corporalem; quod intelligitur fructum habet spiritualem. By which [aliud
intelligitur] if he meant only the benefits of Christ's Body and Blood shed
upon the Cross, which are received in the Sacrament, surely he would have said
[ est fructus spiritualis, and not habet fructum, etc.] but this word
intelligitur and non videtur is frequently used by him, concerning Christ's
Body, tho present with the Sacrament; because the symbols only, and not It, are
present there to the sight or senses. Tho we are to understand It to be there
also, as appears out of many other places of St. Austin, quoted before.

5 Let there be added to these, those many quotations in Blondel ( c. 4. prop.
1, 2, 3.) out of the Fathers, and ( c. 21.) out of the ancient Lyturgies and
Missals, of the Eucharist after Consecration called Bread; and of something
said of the signs or symbols, not agreeable to Christ's Body. As for this
later, since the Transubstantialists, as well as the rest, affirm symbols after
Consecration, distinct from the Body (see Obs. 2.) I see not how it makes
against any Opinion. As for the former, as long as it can be showed, that the
Fathers with that they called Bread hold a substantial presence (some way or
other) of our Savior's Body, if the Answer of the Transubstantialists (set
down before) misinterpret their meaning, yet at the most, such a term will but
prove Consubstantiation, which opposes not our Position.

6 As for that Proposition, so usual in the Fathers, that the Bread is Christ's
Body, [press'd by some Protestants, as inconsistent not only with Trans -- but
Con-substantiation, and the words of Bellarmin, quoted in this behalf by them,
Euch. l. 3. c. 23. Si Dominus ait, hic panis est corpus meum, necessario
sequitur, ut aut falsa sit Domini sententia, si nimirum proprte panis
materialis dicatur esse corpus Domini, quod aperte implicat contradictionem;
aut panis sit corpus non proprie, sed figurate, quod volunt Calvinistae; aut
denique panis, non manens panis, sed benedictione mutatus, sit corpus Domini,
quae est sententia Ecclesiae Catholicae. Whereby it seems to follow, That if
the Fathers accord not in the sense of it with the Transubstantialist, they
must with the Calvinist; and the Schoolmen also brought in to oppose it, see
Blondel p. 155.] I answer, this Proposition, Hic panis est corpus meum, as it
is diversely explained, seems proper enough to be used by any of the Three
Opinions. First, by those who hold a substantial conversion (for indeed at
least some of those Fathers who use this phrase, yet seem clearly to hold a
substantial conversion (as I shall show anon); and the same Fathers, who say,
that the Bread is the Body of Christ, say the Bread is so by a change) for it
may be interpreted thus; Hic panis consecratus (i. e.) mutatus per
consecrationem est Corpus Domini. Panis denoting the former matter, or the
terminus a quo. Such a Speech is not unordinary upon a sudden change, see Exodus
7.12. where Aaron's Rod is said to devour the Magicians Rods: Aaron's Rod (i.
e.) turned into a Serpent, devoured, etc. See somewhat like this, ver. 19, 20,
21. where the Water already turned into Blood, ver. 20. notwithstanding is
called Water afterward, ver. 21. And they could not drink of the Water of the
River; the Water (i. e.) now turned into Blood. See the like Joh. 2.9. [And
when the Ruler of the Feast-had tasted the Water that was made Wine] (i. e.)
had tasted the Wine made of the Water. But more especially here may such a
denomination be made, than after other changes, because there remains, even in
the Transubstantialists opinion, still something (namely, all that which is any
way sensible) of the former substance.

But 2ly, the same proposition may as well be used by those who hold a
Consubstantiation of Christ's body with the bread still remaining: not taken in
such a sense, whereof Bellarmin and the Schoolmen say, that it plainly
contradicts; but in the more qualified and moderate sense, set down. 3. As
pointing at vessels filled with several liquors, we ordinarily say, This vessel
is wine, that beer etc. or, hic purpuratus est Rex; So the proposition, Sub hoc
pane est corpus Christi, into which the Lutheran resolves it, is as remote from
contradiction as the proposition, sub specie hujus panis est etc, the
resolution of the Transubstantialist.

3ly. The same proposition may bear only a figurative sense, like that, I am
the vine, or, I am the door; and this in relation to some real effect, which it
signifies to be produced by it. So we may say, This bread is my body, (i. e.) a
figure, sign, representative thereof, but not only so: But, this bread is my
body, (i. e.) by, or with, or upon the receipt of this bread, by his mouth, to
the worthy communicant in his soul is exhibited or given at the same time my
true and real body: or in Dr. Tailor's words, p. 266. After consecration and
blessing (i.e. of the bread etc,) it is really Christ's body, which is verily
and indeed taken of the faithful in the Lord's supper. Thus he. The words are
ambiguous, but I guess by the rest of his book, that he means by [it is] not
the bread is, for he holds Christ's real body not present to the bread or
symbols, but only to the spirit of the worthy receiver of the sanctified bread,
(see p. 65.) but that which the souls of the faithful receive, whilst with
their mouths they receive the hallowed bread, is Christ's real body. Which
sense of the proposition, this bread is my body, does not seem to conform so
strictly to the words, as either of the former do; because the body, in this
3d. sense, has not so near a relation to the bread, as in the other.

This last interpretation is granted by all the other, as Hooker observes; for
all grant a presence of Christ's real body to the soul: but more also is
affirmed by them, as the other expressions of the Fathers will clearly evince,
who make (whether by Consubstantiation, or Transubstantiation, or some other
way) some miraculous effect upon consecration of the elements, whereby Christ's
body becomes really and substantially present together with the substance, or
at least with the properties, of the bread; with which miraculous effect either
of the former interpretations well consists, but not the third; since they
utterly deny either any substantial or any other way miraculous change about
the symbols.

7. So for the quotations made by Blondel, cap. 12. and by Dr. Tailor, p. 104.
of many Schoolmen and Doctors of the Church of Rome, even since the decision of
Councils confessing Transubstantiation not clearly provable from Scripture or
reason; amongst which see the concession of Bellarmin himself in his Answer to
a Lutheran urging these Schoolmen as on his side, de Euch. 3. l. 23. c. Tho all
these affirm the same Transubstantiation clear from Fathers and Tradition; yet
for this also, if you will, I will suppose it not clear from an unanimous
consent of Antiquity, i. e. in such a manner that none of them held rather
Consubstantiation. Perhaps the quotations in Dr. Tailor p. 285. may have
something in them to this purpose, but for want of books I cannot examine in
what sense they are spoken, excepting that of. P. Lombard. Of whom it is not
amiss to give you some account: because, as Dr. Tailor truly says, it was his
design to collect the sentences of the Fathers in certain heads or articles. He
therefore, after many sentences of the Fathers recited to that purpose,
concludes the 10. did. (immediately precedent to the words quoted by the Dr.)
thus; Ex his aliisque pluribus constat, verum corpus Christi and sanguinem in
altari esse; imo integrum Christum ibi sub utraque specie; and substantiam
panis in corpus ( i. e. some way or other) vinique substantiam in sanguinem
converti. (The like is said before 9. did. li. B. A malis sub Sacramento (sci.
sub specie visibili) caro Christi de Virgin sumpta and sanguis pro nobis fusus
sumitur.) After this follow the words quoted by Dr. Tailor: wherein he doubts
of the manner of the conversion of the bread, whereof he names three several
ways; One, ibi substantiam panis and vini remanere, and ibidem corpus Christi
esse; and hac ratione dici, illam substantiam (i.e.) panis, fieri istam (i.e.)
corporis; quia ubi est haec, and est illa. This opinion he rejects, saying, sed
quod non sit ibi substantia, nisi corpus and sanguis Christi, ex praedictis and
subditis aperte ostenditur. Yet note that he writ before Conc. Lateran. A
second way he names is, sic substantiam converti in substantiam, ut haec (i.
e.) panis essentialiter fiat illa (i. e.) corporis Christi; i. e. that that,
which was the substance of the bread, is afterward not annihilated, but
becoming the substance of Christ's body: of this he discourses B. C. and
answers an objection against it. The 3d. way he mentions ( litera D.) is, panem
sic transire in corpus Christi, ut ubi erat panis nunc est corpus Christi, and
substantia panis and vini redigitur in nihilum: and of these two last he says,
definire non sufficio; and see him, notwithstanding this [definire non
sufficio] numbered by Blondel among the first Transubstantiators, p. 212. and
see what Calvin says of him, Inst. 4. l. 17. c. 13. s. Judge then whether the
second opinion had any reason to make use of such a quotation; and if I may
advise you, trust not me, nor others, in our citations, but, if you can,
consult the authors, and see the context. Yet in general I answer. All this
makes nothing for the first or second opinion, or against our present
proposition: because what those Roman Doctors say, is spoken of
Transubstantiation only in comparison to the third opinion, which they supposed
might contest with it for Scripture-evidence, not to the first or second, (by
the third I mean, the remaining after consecration with Christ's true body not
only the properties, but the substance of the bread,) whilst mean while they
affirm, against the first and second opinion, the true substance of Christ's
body (some way or other) with the elements, from Scripture it self to be most
clear and evident. Therefore Mr. Blondel's saying in the title of that chapter,
that they confessed the expositions of Protestants compatible with the words of
the Gospel, and St. Paul, is true indeed; but it is only of some Protestants
(namely the Lutherans) of another persuasion than he, or Dr. Tailor. See Dr.
Tailor p. 104. where he confesses these Authors to be for Consubstantiation
only, and the being of Christ's natural body (tho they deny the body to be in
the Eucharist modo naturali, as Dr. Tailor cannot but know) together with
natural bread. Yet indeed they cannot be said to be for consubstantiation
neither, since transubstantiation is their tenent also, whilst they profess
themselves to acquiesce in the Church'es determination, but this not from
conviction of Scripture or reason, but evidence of tradition.

Arguments that they held corporal presence with the symbols.
tho supposed to against. Transubstantiation, yet if they put
Consubstantiation, or some other manner of Substantial Presence of Christ's
Body with the consecrated elements, prejudice not at all our present proposal
set down p. 33. I proceed to confirm it. And this,

1. Their firming change of elements to Christ body.
First, from that usual prayer in the consecration of these elements in all
Liturgies and Missals, (of the antiquity of which anon,) ut Deus Spiritu suo
dona sanctificet, faciatque ea corpus and sanguinem Filii sui. Blondel p. 469
confesses this phrase not only in the modern forms, but in all the other
ancient Liturgies, c. 21. yet is this phrase laid aside in the forms of the
Reformation. Instead of which our English has these words: Hear us O Merciful
Father, and grant that we receiving these thy creatures of bread and wine,
according to thy Son our Savior's holy Institution, in remembrance of his
death and passion, may be partakers of his most blessed body and blood etc. but
no prayer that those elements may be made his body and blood.

And from those ordinary expressions in the Fathers, whereby is signified not
only the real body and blood of Christ to be received in the action or
communication of the Sacrament; but the bread and wine to be, to be made, to be
changed into; of them to be made Christ's body and blood, not by the virtue of
worthy receiving, but by the virtue of the consecration (preceding the
receiving,) quae fit Dominicis verbis, (therefore these in no Liturgy omitted,)
and invocatione Divini nominis. See many of these expressions in Blondel, 4. c.
4, 5, 6, 7, propos. and Cassand. consult. art. 10. The Fathers calling the
Eucharist Christ's body when in altari, when in manibus Sacerdotis, ( hoc ipsum
corpus Magi habuerunt in praesepi, nos in altari; illi in ulnis Mulieris, nos
in manibus Sacerdotis, etc. Chrysostom.) which shows, that what presence they
held of Christ's body in the Sacrament, they held it ante usum, with the
consecrated elements, and not only with the worthy receiver. These two
expressions, to be reverenced for antiquity, I find in S. Ignatius Bishop of
Antioch An. Dom. 71. his Epistles, (I mean those Epistles free from the
paraphrase allowed by Archbishop Usher and Dr. Hammond, (one in Ep. ad
Philadelphicos. Si quis schisma facientem sequitur, regnum Dei non haereditat.
-- Stude igitur una Eucharistia uti; una enim curo Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
and unus calix in unionem sanguinis ipsius, unum altar, and unus Episcopus cum
Presbyteris etc. the other in Ep. ad Smyrnaeos: Quid enim juvat me quis, si me
laudat, Dominum antem meum blasphemat, non confitens ipsum carniferum (who said
also, secundum videri ipsum passum esse before this) afterward it follows; ab
Eucharistia and oratione recedunt ( Theodoret dial. 3. quotes it, oblatione
recedunt) propter non confiteri Eucharistiam carnem esse Salvatoris nostri Jesu
Christi pro peccatis nostris passam, quam benignitate Pater resuscitavit.
Contradicentes ergo huic dono Dei, perscrutantes moriuntur; conferens autem
esset ipsis diligere, ut resurgant.

Secondly, From their affirming such a change of the elements, as was
miraculous; miraculous in such a manner, as that, after the words of
Consecration, with, made of, or instead of, the substance of the Bread, etc. is
the substance of the Body of Christ; that Body which was born of the B. Virgin:
Some of them at least affirming it such a change, as that the substance or
nature of Bread cease to be; and saying, that our senses, for this matter,
were not to be trusted; in whom are found also some of the modern phrases of
the Catholics and Schoolmen. I will set you down some of them: Aquam aliquando
mutavit in vinum, etc. and non erit dignus cui credamus quod vinum in sanguinem
transmutavit? Quare cum omni certitudine corpus and sanguinem Christi sumamus,
Nam sub specie panis datur ibi corpus, and sub specie vini datur sanguis.
Cyril. Hieros. Benedictione etiam natura ipsa mutatur ( natura, i.e. of the
Bread and Wine) -- sermo ergo Christi qui potuit ex nihilo facere, quod non
erat; non potest is, quae sunt, in id mutare, quod non erant? Non minus est
novas rebus dare, quam mutare, naturas. Ambr. -- Sermo Christi immutat quando
vult instituta naturae, applied to the Eucharist, as if something in Nature is
there changed, Ambr. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 4. -- Haec tribuit, virtute
benedictionis in corpus suum, rerum, quae videntur, i.e. panis and vini naturam
mutans. Greg. Nyss. -- Invisibilis sacerdos visibiles creaturas in substantiam
corporis and sanguinis verbo suo secreta potestate immutat. -- Ante quam
invocatione sui nominis consecretur, substantia illic est panis and vini, post
verbum autem Christi corpus and sanguis est Christi. Quid mirum autem si ea
quae verbo creare potuit, possit creata convertere? etc. -- Caesarius Arelat.
quoted by Blondel p. 69. -- Ne ergo consideres tanquam nudum panem and nudum
vinum; est enim corpus and sanguis Christi, secundum ipsius Domini verba;
quamvis enim sensus hoc tibi suggerit, tamen fides te confirmet, ne ex gustu
rem judices. Hoc sciens and pro certissimo habens, panem hunc, qui videtur a
nobis, non esse panem etiamsi gustus panem esse sentiat, sed esse corpus
Christi, etc. Cyr. Hier. Carech. 4. Mystag. Here observe, that the presence of
Christ's Body is applied not only to the Receiver, but to the Elements; else
why should the Fathers press the mistakes and errors of sense about the
Elements? For what Protestant warns his Scholars of a fallacy of their senses
in the Eucharist? -- Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 83. Credamus ubique Deo, nec
repugnemus ei etiamsi sensui and cogitationi nostrae absurdum esse videatur
quod dicit -- quoniam ergo ille dixit, Hoc est corpus meum, etc. Number vides
panem? number vinum? number sicut reliqui cibi in secessum vadunt? absit, ne cogites:
quemadmodum enim si cera igni adhibita illi assimilatur, nihil substantiae
remanet, nihil superfluit; sic and hic puta, mysteria consumi corporis
substantia, Chrysostom. Hom. de Euch. in Encoeniis. -- Forte dicas, aliud video,
quomodo tu mihi asseris, quod Christi corpus accipiam; quantis probamus
exemplis, etc. -- Panis iste panis est ante verba Sacramentorum, ubi accesserit
consecratio, de pane fit caro Christi. Ambr. Besides these, methinks two
passages in Dr. Tailors Book (tho not urged by him to such a purpose) one p.
320. of the Eutychians, using this principle or argument (now all proof
proceeds a notiori ad minus notum) that in the Sacrament the Bread was changed
into Christ's Body, to prove that so the Human Nature might be into the Divine;
And another p. 343. of Averroes his saying, That the Christians Eat their God:
Do show, that a substantial change of the Bread into Christ's Body, was not so
rare an Opinion in the Church in ancient times. They also use words very
emphatical for to express such a change of the Bread; see them set down in
Blond. p. 156. in Dr. Tailor p. 267. The Greek Fathers, (...). The Latins,
conversio mutatio, transitio, migratio, transfiguratio. And they prove the
possibility of such a change (as they suppose) made in the Elements, from God's
Omnipotency; and from several instances of other changes; but all such, as they
conceive miraculous, done by the Power of God in the Old Testament, and by our
Savior in the New. Among which instances these are very usual, The Creation,
with a Word, of all things at first out of Nothing; Than which how much easier
to change the Nature of things already in being? The Rod of Moses changed into
a Serpent. The Water of Nile into Blood. The fetching Water out of the Rock.
The dividing of the Red Sea, and of Jordan. Eliah 's word bringing Fire from
Heaven. Elisha 's making the Iron to swim. Our Saviors changing Water into
Wine (a frequent instance.) Our Savior's preternatural Conception of a pure
Virgin; comparing this union of Christ and the symbols (for the fourth Opinion
also holds something of the Bread remaining with Christ's Body) with the
Incarnation, with the change of the Bread that our Savior eat into his Body by
Nutrition; with Angels appearing to men in bodily shapes; with man's being
regenerate, made a new creature, partaker of the Divine Nature, Flesh of
Christ's Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, by the Spirit. Which last, tho some
Writers ( Blond. c. 4. s. 8. prop. 17.) bring in as a Diminutive of the
pretended change of the Sacramental elements, yet St. Paul calls it a great
mystery Ephesians. 5. and St. Austin, a greater effect of Gods power than the
Creation; and Chrysostom (in Joh. c. 3. v. 6. that which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit) says, Formatio primi hominis and mulieris ex latere ejus; Helisaei
preterea miraculum, qui ex sundo ferrum revocavit; transitus Judaeorum per
rubrum mare, piscin^e ab Angelo commotio; mundatio Naaman Syri a lepra in
Jordanc; haec omnia generationem and purgationem futuram, tanquam in figura,
permoustrarunt. Lastly, with the change of our Bodies that shall be at the
Resurrection.

They urge some difficulties about it, not incident to a change only of
sanctification, as for example; Nyssen. Catech. Orat. c. 37. Cum solum illud
corpus, quod Deum suscepit, hanc gratiam acceperit -- ut per communionem
immortalis nostrum factum sit particeps incorruptionis, oportet considerare,
quomodo fieri queat, ut cum unum illud corpus assidue per totum orbem tot
fidelium millibus impertiatur, totum cujusque per parts evadat, and in seipso
totum permaneat. Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerdotio, speaking of the Sacrament, O
miraculum -- qui cum Patre sursum sedet in illo temporis articulo omnium
manibus pertractatur ac se ipse tradit volentibus illum accipere. They forbid
enquiring after the quomodo ( nunquam in tam sublimibus rebus (quomodo) aut
cogitemus aut proferamus. Cyr. Alexand.) and frequently exhort the people to a
firm belief, without any doubting of the truth thereof. Epiphan. Anchorat. p.
60. (bringing it in for a simile, How Man may be Gods Image) says of the
Eucharist, Videmus aequale illud non esse, nec simile, non susceptae carnis
imagini, non divinitati ipsi, quae videri non possit, non membrorum lineamentis
ac notis. Illud enim rotundum est and sensus expers; and nihilominus ex gratia
pronunciare voluit; Hoc meum est, hoc. Neque quisquam est, qui ei sermoni fidem
non adhibeat (for so in their giving It, the Priest anciently said Corpus
Christi, and the Communicant answered Amen. Ambr. de Sac. l. 4. c. 4. Apost.
Constable. l. 8. c. 20.) Nam qui verum illum, (i.e.) sermonem, or Christum, esse
non credit, a gratia and salute prorsus excidit, verum quodcunque tandem
audierimus, aut crediderimus, ipsius esse credimus, etc. -- As B. Forbes also
notes de Euch. l. 1. c. 1. s. 27. That the Faith more properly required at the
receiving the Sacrament, is, ea fides qua creditur verbo Christi dicentis, Hoc
est corpus meum: credere Christum esse ibi etiam carne-vivificatrice
praesentem. Of which S. Austin says, Creed and manducasti.

Considering the foresaid passages in the Fathers, methinks I miss some candor
in Mr. Blondel, (if perhaps he intended to make a history of the Fathers
opinions in this matter,) that whereas he is so punctual in the 8th. propos. of
the 4th. cap. he is so remiss in the 6th. especially in not taking notice of
the miraculousness the Fathers held in the change, and their recourse to
omnipotency for it; as likewise of some other things I shall mention anon. See
for the truth of the things I have said in this Section, the authorities quoted
by Blond. 4. c. 6. prop. and more at large in Bellarmin's whole 2d. book de
Euch. or in 4. sent. 11. did. 1. and 3. sect. But if you desire more perfectly
to inform your self, (because quotations are but short pieces dismembered from
the context, and glosses are made upon them according to the interest of the
writer that selects them;) spend an hour or two in a public library, and read
more specially these, Ambros de mist. initiand. 9. c. -- De Sacr. 4. l. 4. and
5. c. where also you shall find the Canon of the Mass not differing from the
present, in any thing of those which the Reformed dislike in the present Mass,
save in one, where the elements, but before consecration, are called figura
corporis Christi. See Cyril Hieros. catech. mystag. 4. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in
Matt. -- Greg. Nyss. orat. catech. 36, 37. c. -- Eusebius. Emyssen. or the
supposed author quoted in Blond. p. 69. sermon. 5. de Paschate, de corpore
Domini. Now that you need not fear lest you should take in the testimonies of
some age by the Reformed disallowed; know that Mr. Blondel holds no doctrine of
Transubstantiation to be maintained till after the 10th. age; no alteration of
doctrine about the Eucharist till after (in the Eastern Church) the 7th; in the
Western Church, the 8th. age; no change of language and expression, till, in
the Eastern Church, the 6th; in the Western, the 7th. So that any author for
the first 600 years may be securely quoted; and therefore in the present Canon
of the Mass, which is granted by Protestants to be the same as in Gregory the
Great's time, all things are acknowledged conformable to the doctrine of
uncorrupted Antiquity. And whatsoever expressions concerning the Eucharist are
made by that Constantinopolitan Council under Constantine Copronymus in the
East, and by that of Francfort under Carolus M. in the West, are by Mr. Blondel
held orthodox. See therefore those passages in the one, Blond. p. 38. Ainsi
l'image d'icelui (i.e. the Eucharist) est saint, come estant deifee per
certain sanctification de grace: and -- ainsi son bon plaisir a este, que par
l'entremise du sacrificateur, qui fait l'offrand en transportant ce qui est
commune a ce qui est saint, le pain de l' Eucharistie come image non mensongere
de sa chair naturelle sainctifiee par l'anvenement du Saint Esprit, devinst
corpse divin -- And in the other, Blond. p. 411. Car le mystere du sang and du
corpse du Seignieur ne doit pas maintenant estre dit image, mais verite etc. and
p. 412. Christ n'a pas dit ceste est l'image de mon corpse; mais cecy est mon
corpse etc. whether they do not argue such a change of the elements, as the
Reformed will not assent to, and the presence of Christ's body (whatever it is
in the Eucharist) to be with the Symbols.

3. Offering the body of Christ as a Sacrifice before communicating.
3. From their offering to God the Eucharist as a Sacrifice, before their
communicating it as a Sacrament, with giving such attributes, and imputing such
operations unto it, as seem plainly to evince, that whatever presence of
Christ's body there is (and real the second opinion says it is) in receiving
the Sacrament, to the worthy communicant, the same the Ancients conceived to be
to the signs, when offered to God as a Sacrifice; neither, supposing Christ's
body not accompanying the symbols, do such attributes seem agreeable to
Symbols. See those Epithets in the ordinary Canon of the Mass, (allowed by
Blondel to have nothing in it, qui ne s' accord a l' Escriture, au sens, a la
raison, and au tes-moignage de l'antiquite: p. 453.) In S. Ambr. de Sacr. 4. l.
4. c. etc. In Cyril. Hieros. catech. mystag. Hostia pura, sancta, illibata,
immaculata, panis sanctus vitae aeternae, calix salutis perpetuae, etc. called
by Chrysostom, Hom. 24. in 1 Cor. and others, Sacrificium terribile and plenum
horroris, tremenda mysteria. The author Eccl. Hierarch. 3. c. 3. p. Pontifex,
quod hostiam salutarem, quae supra ipsum est, litet, se excusat, exclamans, Tu
dixisti, Hoc facite etc. S. Aust. Conf. 9. l. 12. c. Cum tibi offerretur pro ea
[matre] sacrificium pretii nostri, juxta sepulchrum posito cadavere. Idem, de
Spiritu and litera 11. c. Dei cultus in hoc maxim constitutus est, ut anima
non sit ei ingrata. Unde and in ipso verissimo and in singulari sacrificio
Domino Deo nostro agere gratias admonemur. etc. This is in those words where
the Priest says, Let us give thanks to our Lord God, and the people answer, It
is meet and right so to do. De civ. Dei. 10. l. 20. c. Cujus rei Sacramentum
quotidianum esse voluit Ecclesiae Sacrificium. Contra Faust. 20. l. 18. c.
Christiani jam peracti Sacrificii memoriam celebrant sacrosancta oblatione and
participatione corporis Christi. Where is affirmed an oblation of the same
body, of which there is participation. See the expressions of the Fathers in
the same manner, of the very body of Christ offered in the Eucharist as
received, quoted in the Controvertists. See Bell. de Missa 1. l. 15. c. sect.
S. Andreas. -- Ambr. Christus offertur in terris, cum corpus ejus offertur. --
And in 1. c Lucae Cum sacrificamus Christus adest, Christus immolatur.
Chrysostom. 24. Hom. in 1. ad Cor. Pro victimarum and pecorum caede seipsum
offerendum praecepit. In Ep. Heb. 17. Hom. In multis locis offertur, non plures
Christi, sed unus ubique Christus, hic and illic plenus existens; unum corpus,
non multa corpora. Conc. Nic. (which Protestants pretend all obedience to) 14.
can. Pervenit ad S. Concilium, quod in locis quibusdam Presbyteris Sacramenta
Diaconi porrigant. Hoc neque regula, neque consuetudo tradidit, ut hi qui
offerendi Sacrificii non habent potestatem, his, qui offerunt corpus Christi,
porrigant. And in the Acts of that Council there is a notable passage also,
part of which Calvin has urged, as making for his cause; Inst. 4. l. 1^. c.
36. s. Huic malo (i.e. prosternere sese homines coram pane, ut Christum illic
adorent) proculdubio voluit obviare Nicaena Synodus, cum vetuit nos humiliter
attentos esse ad proposita Symbola. Thus much only he. But I will give you the
place more full, as I find it quoted in others. Ita etiam hic in divina mensa
ne humiliter intenti simus ad propositum panem and calicem, sed attollentes
mentem fide intelligamus situm in sacra illa mensa agnum illum Dei tollentem
peccata mundi incruente a Sacerdotibus immolatum, and pretiosum ipsius corpus
and sanguinem vere nos sumentes credere haec esse nostrae resurrectionis
Symbola etc. Observe, situm in sacra illa mensa agnum illum Dei. See likewise
their expressions, as of the body of Christ as received as a Sacrament, so
offered as a Sacrifice for salvation and remission of sins for the living, and
for the dead, in Bell. de Miss. 2. l. 2. c. sect. Secundo. Justin. in dial. cum
Tryphone dicit Sacrificium vaccae quod offerrebatur pro elephantiacis fuisse
figuram Eucharistiae, quae offertur pro expiatione peccatorum. Hieron. in
comment. in Tit. 1. c. Si Laicis imperatur, ut propter orationem abstineant se
ab uxorum coitu, quid de Episcopo sentiendum est, qui quotidie prosuis
populique peccatis illibatas Deo oblaturus est, victimas? Aug. Civ. Dei, 20. l.
25. c. says, Sacrificium pro peccato offerri in Ecclesia usque ad diem
Judicii, sed non ulterius. Chrysostom. in Act. Hom. 21. Non frustra oblationes p^o
defunctis fiunt, etc. -- Non simpliciter (i.e. to no purpose) Minister clamat
pro his qui defuncti sunt in Christo, and pro his qui illorum memoriam faciunt.
Quid dicis? In manibus est hostia, and omnia proposita sunt been ordinata;
adsunt Angeli, adsunt Archangeli, adest filius Dei; cum tanto borrore astant
omnes; astant illi (i e. ministri) clamantes (as before, offerimus pro his qui
defuncti etc) omnibus silentibus; and putas simpliciter haec fieri? (i. e. pro
defunctis.) Igitur and alia simpliciter, and quae pro Ecclesia and quae pro
Sacerdotibus offeruntur, and quae pro ubertate ac multitudine? absit. I have
written this at large, that you may see the custom of St. Chrysostom's times
concerning the oblation of this Sacrifice, the Prayers etc attending it, not to
be varying from those we find in the Missals or Liturgies, either the
pretended-ancient, or modern.

And see Bloudel, p. 378. the Conc. Constant. using the same expression,
offrent pour le salut du corpse and de l'ame la vray image de Christ. -- And the
Conc. Franckfort, p 407. Qu'elle est faite invisiblement par l'esprit de Dieu;
consacree par le Prestre invoquant dieu, portee par les mains Angeliques sule
haut Autel de dieu. (the words in the Mass) and que par elle les peches sont
remis, qu' elle ne peut ni accroistre ni diminuer: (as Images are etc.) For
these things, Calvin ( Instit. 4. l. 17. c. 11. s.) after he had as much as
might be mitigated the sense of Antiquity, confesses, veteres quoque illos
alio hanc memoriam detorsisse, quam institutioni Domini conveniebat; quod
nescio quam repetitae aut saltem renovatae immolationis faciem eorum coena prae
se ferebat, and excusari non posse, quin aliquid in actionis modo peccaverint.
Imitati sunt enim propius Judaticum Sacrificandi morem, quam aut ordinaverat
Christus, aut Evangelii ratio ferebat. And indeed it is somewhat strange, that
the Fathers are made in the matter still not to differ from the Reformed; but
in their language, in their ceremonies confessed to concur with the Catholics.
This using by the Ancients of the Eucharist as a Sacrifice before
communicating, I find not Dr. Tailor to take any notice of, which yet methinks
makes much for their conceiving a real presence with the signs; concerning
which is our present discourse.

4. From their Adoration and also Invocation of the body of Christ on the
Altar, 4. Using adoration before communicating.
or with the Symbols; I say, not adoration of Christ's body, or Christ as in
Heaven in the act of communicating, (which is all owned by those of the first
and second opinions, tho I think only practiced by the Church of England) but
adoration of Christ's body as present with the Symbols, before communicating:
And such to have bin the practice of Antiquity, I think will appear from many
passages in the Fathers.

See Clem. Apost. Constable. l. 2. c. 61. Diaconi absoluta oratione, alli oblationi
Eucharistiae sint intenti, ministrantes corpori Domini cum timore, alii etc.
And afterward, accipiant Dominicum corpus, and preciosum sanguinem, gradatim
cum pudore ac timore tanquam ad Regis Corpus accedentes. -- Nazianz. Orat. de
obitu Gorgoniae, speaking of his sick Sister in the Nightime going to Church,
and praying before the Altar, to be cured, he says, Ad Altar cum fide
procumbit, eumque qui super illud colitur magno cum clamore obtestans, etc.
After these, I pray you read over again those quotations, about Adoration, of
St. Austin and St. Ambrose Obs. 2. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in 1 Cor. Hoc corpus etiam
jacens in praesepi reveriti sunt Magi -- and cum multo metu ac tremore
adorarunt. Imitemar ergo vel barbaros nos coelorum cives, etc. -- Tu autem non
in praesepi vides, sed in Altari non foeminam eum tenentem; sed sacerdotem
vides astantem, and spiritum cum magna copia (perabunde) proposita
supervolantem, etc. (greater excitations of Reverence) nos ergo ipsos
excitemus, and formidemus, and long majorem quam illi barbari ostendamus
reverentiam, etc. -- Non enim Angelos, nec Archang elos, neque Coelos, sed
ipsum eorum ostendo Dominum. Vidisti quemadmodum quod est omnium
praestantissimum and maxim honorandum, vides interra: neque solum vides, sed
etiam tangis, sed etiam commedis, etc. Hom. 61. ad Pop. Antiochen. Si pura sunt
vestimenta adora and communica. -- In Ephesians. Hom. 3. he calls it sacrificium
quod illi stupent and venerantur Angeli. -- So Hom. 83. in Mat. Angeli videntes
horrescunt, neque libere audent intueri propter emicantem inde splendorem.

Se the former Quotation, p. 98. The places are frequent in Chrysostom, where
he speaks of the presence, and adoration, and trembling of Angels, at these
Sacred Mysteries. This for Adoration; but see him also for Invocation: Hom. 41.
in 1 Cor. Non sunt enim haec temere excogitata (he speaks of Praying and
Offering the Eucharist for the Dead) neque frustra little, qui decesserunt, in
divinis mysteriis meminimus, Et pro ipsis accedimus, rogantes agnum propositum
qui mundi peccatum tulit; sed ut inde eis aliqua sit consolatio, etc. And see
Hom. 21. in Acta Apostol. where he makes this special presence of our Lord a
time of more acceptable audience, -- Domino praesenti dum mors illa p^rs^^itur
and horrendum Sacrificium, Et ineffabilia Sacramenta. Nam quasi sedente Roge
quicunque voluerit perficit, ut autem surrexit quicunque dicit frustra dicit.
Ita and nunc, quamdiu proposita fuerint mysteria, etc. See the place, -- and
afterward, sicut quando Regum trophaea statuuntur, -- dimittuntur qui sunt in
vinculis per illud tempus, ubi autem transierit hoc tempus qui nihil assequutus
est nihil obtinet, ita sane and hic. A place I think much worth the noting, why
at the time chiefly of the celebration of the Mysteries all manner of
Invocations were made. See a kind of Invocation, Dionys. Areop. or the Author
Eccl. Hierarch. c. 3. par. 3 O divinissimum and sacrosanctum Sacramentum
dignanter aperis obducta tibi operimenta significantium signorum, and perspicue
nobis fac appareas, etc. And see for Adoration what Mr. Blondel quotes of the
same Chapter for his calling them symbols, Blond. p. 88. le president de chooses
sacrees setient debout devant les tressaintes symboles -- and tout le Clerge se
leve devant les tressaints symboles, comme devant Christ.

See Theodoret in the place quoted before, p. 74. You may find it likewise in
Blondel p. 59. Signa mystica intelliguntur ea esse quae facta sunt, ( i. e. by
Consecration) and creduntur and adorantur, ut quae illa sint quae creduntur.
See that place of St. Hierom. in his Preface to Theophilus Alexand. upon the
Translation of his Epistle quoted Blond. p. 56. where speaking of the Utensils
of the Altar, the Chalices, etc. he says, que ne peuvent estre dits n' avoir
point de saintete, mais que par la societe du corpse and du sang du Seigneur ils
doivent estre venerez de mesme necessite, que le corpse and le sang.

Lastly, See that Constantinopolitan Council under Constantine Copronymus,
quoted by Blondel for Orthodox in the matter of the Eucharist, yet held they
Worship due to the Eucharist (which they called the only true Image of Christ)
because this by Divine Consecration is Deificatum, and made Divinum Corpus; tho
they affirmed any Worship given to any Artificial Image of our Savior, or to
any Human Form, to be Idolatry. I will set you down the words somewhat higher
than where Blondel begins them. -- In talem igitur blasphemiam and impietatem
cadentes pudore suffundantur, atque aversentur seipsos and talia facere (i. e.)
depingere Christum desinant; Neque hi solum qui faciunt, verum etiam qui falso
nomine factam and dictam ab ipsis Christi imaginem veneratur. See for what
follows Blond. p. 378. Exultent and laetentur, Et liberate linguae fruentur,
quicunque veram Christi imaginem sincerissima mente sacientes desiderant and
venerantur and ad salutem animi corporisque adferunt, quam (imaginem) ipse
Dominus noster Deus summus sacerdos tradidit suis sacerdotibus, etc. It Is
probable, that the used ^en^ration of the consecrated symbols was urged before
this Council to countenance that given to Images. And the Council says
something afterward, that the Eucharist had no humane shape, lest Idolatry to
other humane shapes of Christ might have been countenanced by it.

But the Assembly in the West at Franckfort, opposing the worship of Images,
and practicing that to the Eucharist, together with the Conc. Nic. 2 dum.
affirmed the Eucharist to be not an Image of Christ's body, but his true body.
See Dr. Tailor p. 316; The words of type and image in the question of the Holy
Sacrament were disliked by the Assembly at Franckfort; because, if the
Sacrament were an image, as they of Constantinople said, then it might be
lawful to give reverence and worship to some Images. Thus he. Whence it
follows, that all the three Councils agreed in this, the veneration of the
Eucharist. Add to this, what is said by the Doctor p. 343. that in Averroes's
time, who lived about A. Christi 1000. Christiani adorabant quod comedebant,
(tho not in such a gross sense as the Philosopher understood those words,)
which Adoration what reason the Doctor has to restrain to some mistaken souls
of Averroes's acquaintance only, I know not. See likewise Tail. p. 279. where
that of St. Austin, contra Faustum 20. l. 13. c. Propter Panem and Calicem
nonnulli nos Cererem and Liberum colere existimabant, argues the Christians
worshipping of the Eucharist. Neither does St. Austin's, ritu nostro
amplectimur, say any thing contradictory to it: only if not to the Catechumeni,
much less to the Heathen, did the Fathers use full explanations of this
ineffable mystery.

August. in Psalm. 33. concione 1. Nondum enim erat sacrificium corporis and
sanguinis Domini, quod norunt fideles, quod sacrificium nunc diffusum est toto
orb terrarum. Conc. 2. Quomodo ferebatur in manibus ejus? quia cum commendarit
ipsum corpus suum and sanguinem suum, (i.e. in his last Supper,) accepit in
manus suas, quod norunt fideles etc. See the quotation out of Epiphanius, p.
93. Where he says, Hoc meum est, but names not corpus. This frequent in St.
Austin, and others. But what need of such disguising the business, if all the
catechumeni, fideles, or unbelievers were to know, was only in plain language,
that the consecrated Bread was signum corporis sui, to the worthy receivers of
which sign God communicated all the benefits of his Passion. Thus much of their
adoration of Christ in the Symbols, of which Mr. Bloudel in his fourth chap.
which gives a history of the Fathers doctrine, takes no notice.

5. From their holding not only a Spiritual, 5. Holding an oral manducation of
Christ's body etc.
but an oral manducation of the body and blood of Christ, and it to be received
not only by the good but wicked; which necessarily infers its presence with the
Symbols. Austin mentioned before p. 123. Cum dantem carnem suam manducandam
sanguinemque bibendum fideli cord atque ore suscipimus. Cyprian 5. sermon. de
lapsis. speaking of those, who after having denied Christ come to the
Sacrament, says; Vis infertur corpori ejus and sanguini; and plus modo in
Domini manibus atque ore delinquunt ( i. e. in receiving,) quam cum Dommum
negaverunt. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in Matt. Quare non oportet esse puriorem, tali
fruentem sacrificio? Quo Solari radio non splendidiorem manum carnem hanc
dividentem; os, quod igni Spirituali repletur; linguam, quae tremendo nimis
sanguine rubescit! And in 1 Cor. 11.17. Reus erit corporis. -- he says, Risus
intempestivus, urbanitas, and facetiae exitio plenae, feastings, etc, and haec
facis Christi mensa exceptus, illo die quo dignus es habitus, qui ejus carnes
lingua tangeres. -- Manum tuam expurga, and castiga linguam and labra, quae
ingressus Christi fuere vestibula, etc. S. Gregory in 4. lib. Dialog. (in whose
time Mr. Blondel cap. 17. grants there was yet no alteration concerning the
doctrine of this Sacrament,) Est quidem in peccatoribus and indigne sumentibus
vera Christi caro, and verus sanguis, sed essentia, non salubri efficientia:
See concerning S. Austin's opinion p. 132.

From Christ's body and blood being held in the hands of the Priest of the
communicants, (for the use of putting into their mouths is, tho ancient, yet
somewhat later than the times of those Fathers we mention) from their exceeding
care, that no part thereof should fall to the ground etc. that it should not be
seen by the heathen, or the catechumeni, I suppose lest their weakness should
have some disesteem thereof. Basil. de Spiritu Sancto 27. c. speaking of many
Traditions not published in writing from the founders of Christianity, but
secretly conveyed, says, Pulchre quidem illi, nimirum docti, arcanorum
venerationem silentio conservari, Number quae nee intueri fas est non initiatis.
Qui conveni^bat horum doctrinam publicitus circumserri scripto, Horum doctrinam
(i. e.) the Consecration, Prayers, etc. in the celebration of the Eucharist.

Add to these, the same honor and reverence continued to the Eucharist, as to
the body of Christ, in their reposition and reservation of some part thereof
after the communion ended, to be distributed, when need was, to the sick etc,
(or also to be communicated another day (as in some time of Lent) even in the
Church. See Conc. Constable. 6. in Trullo Can. 52.) See for this reservation the
Testimonies of Antiquity gathered in the Controvertists; as in Bell. de
Eucharistia l. 4. c. 3. See S. Austin's Sermon to the new-Baptiz'd. In Fulgent.
Bapt. Aethiop. ult. cap. and Daille on it Answ. to Chaumont p. 42. and the
confession of Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. s. 39. Sed enim qui sic faciunt (i. e.
Sacramentum repnunt) habent veteris Ecclesiae exemplum fateor verum in re tanta
and in qua non sine magno periculo erratur, nihil tutius, quam ipsam veritatem
sequi. True, if we certainly knew it: But when every Writer pretends his
Doctrine to be the Truth (For who tells us, that himself lies?) nihil tutius
quam Ecclesiae consuetudinem sequi, that so we may not forsake the Truth.

five Considerations from which we gather the Fathers to have held a
substantial presence of Christ's Body with the Symbols, Answers of the Reformed
to these Arguments. 1. Concerning the change of the Elements into Christ's Body.
something is said both by Mr. Blondel and Dr. Tailor, and others; but what
seems to me no ways satisfactory.

To the first, second, and third, they say, (but I would wish you to peruse
their own Books, lest their Answers may receive some wrong by my relation, or
something in them more considerable be omitted by me,) they say then, that
where the Fathers say, 1. That the Bread after Consecration is the Body of
Christ. 2. That of the Bread by Consecration it made the Body of Christ. 3.
That after Consecration it cease to be Bread. 4. Or, That it is not only
Bread. 5. That the Nature and Substance of Bread by Consecration is changed
into Christ's Body, etc. they mean a only: 1. Is a sign or Sacrament of Christ's
Body; or his Body in Sacrament; or (as Dr. Tailor p. 266) the Bread is verily
the Body of Christ, truly his Flesh, and the Wine truly his Blood] (How?) by a
change of condition, of sanctification, and usage. 2. That of Bread is made
[the Sacrament] of his Body. 3. That it cease to be Bread, i. e. common
Bread. 4. That it is not only Bread, by reason of the Grace of Consecration
added to its nature. 5. That the nature of it is changed from simple Bread to
pain benit, or Sacramental Bread; and that it acquires a new essence, i.e. the
essence of a Sacrament.

See such solutions in Blondel, p. 64. etc. in his Margin, and p. 222, 224. So
in his Explication of the Canon of the Mass, p. 452. See likewise p. 470. where
it petitions, ut (oblatio) fiat nobis corpus and sanguis dilectissimi filii tui
Domini nostri Jesu Christi, he expounds Corpse etc. en Sacrement. Again where
it, ut quotquot ex hac Altaris participatione sacrosanctum Filii tui corpus and
sanguinem sumpserimus, etc. he interprets prendrons [le Sacrament du]
sacro-sainct corpse de ton fills, qui est ce mesme sacro-sainct corpse en
representation and signification, (where note also, that he holds not any
substantial presence of Christ's Body to the worthy Receiver, in which thing
those of the second Opinion I think will not consent to him.) Lastly, they say,
That, by change of the Elements, the Fathers mean no more than an accidental
Sacramental conversion; a change of condition, of sanctification and usage, and
efficacy; as a Table (by consecration) is changed into an Altar; a House into a
Church; a Man into a Priest; as the Water of the River into the Laver of
Regeneration. See this in Dr. Tailor p. 270. and the like in Blondel, p. 472.
Bref par tout ce pain est apelle saint de mesme que le calice, la table, la
palatine, sont apeller saints, Ascavoir entant qu'ils servent a une usage
saint, etc. without any presence of Christ's Body either to them or instead of
them. See Blond. p. 156, 157, 174, etc. Tailor p. 266. Now tho (as it appears I
think above) the expressions of the Fathers, for such a change of the symbols,
as that, after Consecration, the substance of Christ's Body is there with them,
are so full, as it is hard to say such a thing more plainly than they do: Yet
that they are not in such a sense to be understood, they urge many things.

B First, That we must not interpret them so as to make them contradict
themselves, or one another. See Blond. p. 158, 232. Then they show, that the
same Fathers, that use these high expressions, yet cease not to call the
Elements, even after Consecration, images, figures, types, similitudes, signs,
sacraments of the Body, etc. representations, memorials, exemplars, symbols,
Corpustypicum, and symbolicum, and mysticum. See many more Blond. c. 4. prop.
8. and Tailor p. 313. and p. 290. where that expression of Tertullian is much
stood upon ( adv. Marcion. l. 4. c. 40. -- Professus itaque se concupiscentia
concupisse edere pascha ut suum (indignum enim fuit ut quid alienum
concupisceret Deus) acceptum panem and distributum discipulis, corpus suum
illum fecit, Hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est, figura corporis mei. Figura
autem non fuisset nisi veritatis esset corpus. Caeterum vacua res, quod est
phantasma (as Marcion contended Christ's Body was) figuram capere non posset;
and say, that they are Christ's Body, not proprie, but aliquo modo etc. g Now,
idem non est simile: the sign cannot be the very thing signified by the sign;
nor the type (figure) the prototype, or the truth. See Tail. p. 318. Blond.
207.210. d Especially these places of S. Austin are much insisted on by them,
23. Ep. ad. Bonifacium. Si enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum,
quarum Sacramenta sunt, non haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac
autem similitudine plerumque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo
secundum quendam modum Sacramentum corporis Christi corpus Christi est,
Sacramentum sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi est; ita Sacramentum fidei (i. e.
Baptism) fides est. -- Sicut de ipso Baptismo Apostolus, Consepulti, inquit,
sumus Christo per Baptismum in mortem; non ait, sepulturam significamus; sed
prorsus ait, consepalti sumus: Sacramentum ergo tantae rei non nisi ejusdem rei
vocabulo nuncupatur. So in Psalm. 33. Concio. 2. Ipse se portabat quodammodo,
cum diceret, Hoc est corpus meum. z. In Psalm. 98. upon those words in St. John,
Verba quae locutus sum vobis spiritus est and vita. -- Spiritualiter
intelligite, quod locutus sum; non hoc corpus quod videtis manducatisri estis,
and bibituri illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt, qui me crucifigent; Sacramentum
aliquod vobis commendavi, spiritualiter intellectum vivificabit vos. Etsi
necesse est illud visibiliter celebrari, oportet tamen invisibiliter intelligi.
De doctrina Christiana 3. l. 16. c. -- Si praeceptiva locutio est aut flagitium
aut facinus vetans, aut utilitatem aut beneficentiam jubens, non est figurata;
si autem slagitium aut facinus videtur jubere, aut utilitatem and beneficentiam
vetare, figurata est. Nisi manducaveritis, inquit, carnem filii hominis, and
sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Flagitium vel facinus
videtur jubere, figura est ergo praecipiens Passioni Domini esse communicandum,
and suaviter atque utiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro ejus
crucifixa and vulnerata sit.

e To these they add some other places of St. Austin, wherein he says the
unworthy Communicants receive the Sacrament of Christ's body, but not his Body;
which argues the body at least not present with the Symbols. Such that tract
26. in Johan: Qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus,
proculdubio n^c manducat ( Spiritualiter in my book) carnem ejus, nec bibit
ejus sanguinem, licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus Sacramentum
corporis and sanguinis Christi; sed magis tantae rei Sacramentum ad judicium
sibi manducat. And tract. 59. where he says of the Apostles and Judas: Illi
manducabant panem Dominum, ille panem Domini, contra Dominum. I find likewise
urged by some, two places out of Chrysostom: One out of 20. Hom. in 2. Corinthians.
that he there prefers the poor as being reipsa or ipsummet corpus Christi,
before the Sacrament, or corpus Christi in Altari: but searching the place, I
find (and so may any that please to peruse it) the comparison not to be at all
between the poor and corpus Christi in altari, but between the poor and altar,
quia capit corpus Christi. Another, out of 11. Hom. in Matthew. of the opus
imperfectum; where it is said, vasa sanctificata etc, in quibus non verum
corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis ejus continetur. Words plain enough, but
none of S. Chrysostom's. See Bell de Euch. 2. l. 22. c. and Erasmus his Preface
to that work. To which Dr. Tailor's reply, p. 308. no way satisfies me, it not
following, that because they happen to be inserted among S. Chrysostom's works,
therefore he must be esteemed a good Catholic that writ them: which rule
should it generally pass, the Protestants would have much the worse by it.

There are urged also by them two places out of the same book of S. Ambrose,
which here we have made much use of against their tenent. The one place, de
Sacr. 4. l. 4. c. Vinum and aqua in calicem mittitur, sed fit sanguis
consecratione verbi coelestis, ( i.e. by the words, Hoc est corpus meum,
pronounced by the Priest.) Sed forte dices, Speciem sanguinis non video. Sed
habet similitudinem. Sicut enim mortis similitudinem sumpsisti, ( i. e. in not
seeing any crucifixion of him in the Sacrament,) ita etiam similitudinem
pretiosi sanguinis bibis, ut nullus horror cruoris sit, and pretium tamen
operetur redemptionis. The other places, 6. l. 1. c. where the Father makes a
recapitulation of things formerly said. Sicut verus est Dei Filius, -- ita vera
caro, quam accepimus. -- Forte dicas, quomodo vera? qui similitudinem video,
non video sanguinis veritatem. Primo dixi tibi de sermon Christi, ( i. e. the
words of Consecration, Hoc est etc.) qui operatur, ut possit mutare and
convertere generalia instituta naturae. Deinde, ubi non tulerunt sermonem
Christi discipuli ejus, (Jo. 6.52. How can this man give us his flesh to eat?)
ne igitur plures hoc dicerent, veluti quidam esset horror cruoris, sed maneret
gratia redemptionis: ideo in similitudinem quidem accipis Sacramenta, sed vere
naturae gratiam virtutemque consequeris.

. These things they strengthen with the Conc. Constant. under Constant.
Copronymus calling the Eucharist the Image of Christ's Body; and Christ's Body
(...), not (...), see Tail. p. 313. Blond. p. 378. etc. and with the inference
of the 2. Conc. Nice, in their refuting the Constant. Conc. where they say,
Demittentes quidem mendacium quadantenus veritatem contingunt confessi divinum
fieri corpus panem.

^ At si imago corporis est, non potest sane fieri divinum Corpus, urged by Mr.
Blondel p. 385. therefore, The Fathers likewise making it imago, figura, etc.
by this deny it to be Corpus Divinum.

l Again, with the Form of the Canon of the Mass, which they say plainly makes
for them against substantial Conversion.

m For in it both before the words of Consecration, there is an Oblation made
of the Elements, and that pro Ecclesia Catholica; and pro peccatis, etc. See
that Prayer; Suscipe sacrosancte Pater, and -- Te igitur clementissime Pater --
both before the Consecration (not to be denied says Bellarmine, and veteres
Patres passim idem tradunt, says he, i. e. that the Creatures of Bread and
Wine in the Eucharist are offered to God: see him de Missa l. 1. c. 27.) and
there they are called dona sancta, sacrificia illibata, etc.

^ And likewise some of those Expressions and Forms of Oblation, which are made
after Consecration in the Roman Canon, are put before it in some other
Liturgies.

x Again, after the Consecration many expressions are found in the Roman Canon
no way suting to the presence of Christ's real Body: As the praying, that God
would accept these Offerings, i. e. accept of his Son, say the Romanists, (as
if he were at any time not acceptable,) accept them as he did that of Abel's,
Abraham's, Melchisedech's Sacrifices, (says Blond.) on bruts, on inanimez; a
fit comparison to Christ his Son! That God would command them perferri per
manus St. Angeli tui in sublime Altar suum, in conspectu, etc. i. e. the Body
of our Savior to Heaven; where it is continually. And in other Liturgies, as
that of St. James, they being called Bread and Wine, and the Fruits of the
Earth, after Consecration; and particularly, in that Form set down in the
Apost. Constable. l. 8. c. 17. where after the words of Institution rehearsed (by
which words they are supposed to be Consecrated) it follows -- Rogamusque Te ut
benign respicere digneris super haec dona proposita in conspectu tuo, and
complaceas tibi in ipsis in honorem Christi tui; Et mittas S. Spiritum super
hoc sacrificium testem passionis Domini Jesu, ut ostendat hunc Panem Corpus
Christi Tui, and hunc Calicem Sanguinem Christi Tui, ut qui eum percipiunt,
etc. See much more to this purpose in Blondel, from p. 454, to 467.

miraculous instances by which the Fathers use to illustrate the change of the
Bread into the Body of Christ, Mr. Blondel p. 315, Concerning the
miraculousness of changes.
seems to deny the Fathers to have acknowledged any miracle at all in the
Eucharist, saying, ou est le Pere, qui dit que les symboles soyent changes
miraculeusement? (which I am astonished at, and the rather, when presently after
he says, that Chrysostom and others ont considere l' Eucharistie comme un
object plein des merveilles,) and then he urges Aug. de Trin. l. 3. c. 10. as
if that he denied all miracle in the Eucharist. I looked diligently upon the
place; and I found nothing at all there advantageous for Mr. Blondel to this
purpose. St. Austin falls into a discourse there, that there are several things
de materia corporali, quae tamen ad aliquid divinitus annuntiandum nostris
sensibus admoventur: And these, either natural; where, amongst others, he
instances in Jacob's Stone, which he Consecrated. Or, which are made by Men,
and these, vel aliquantulum mansura, sicut potuit Serpens ille aeneus exaltatus
in Eremo; vel peracto ministerio transitura; sicut panis ad hoc factus, in
accipiendo sacramento consumitur. Then adds he -- sed quia haec omnibus nota
sunt quia per homines fiunt (as the brazen Serpent and the Bread used in the
Sacrament are things made by Man) honorem tanquam religiosa possunt habere,
stuporem tanquam mira non possunt; he goes on, itaque illa quae per Angelos
fiunt, quo ignotiora, eo mirabiliora sunt nobis, etc. All he says then is,
That the Bread, or brazen Serpent, have no wonder in the substance or matter of
them, for men make them both. Now who affirms any miracle in any thing that is
visible in the Eucharist? The miracle is in that which is invisible, the
presence of Christ's Body with the signs.

But could any justly argue from hence, That the Cure of the Man by looking on
the Serpentine figure of Brass was not miraculous; because St. Austin says, the
Brass or Figure shapen by Man had nothing miraculous in it, but was known and
ordinary?

Having cleared this passage of Mr. Blondels, now to go on: I say, for those
miraculous instances, they endeavor to qualify the matter, in saying;

^ That some of them are only accidental mutations, not substantial; as, the
bringing Water out of the Rock by Moses; Fire from Heaven by Elijah; Iron made
to Swim on the Water by Elisha, etc. See Mr. Blondel p. 165.

r Or becoming new creatures and members of Christ by Regeneration, (a
comparison in the Fathers which the Reformed make much use of, see Blond. p.
100.) But if you still press upon them the miraculousness of these mutations,
tho accidental, they answer;

s That some of those instances argue another or greater change, than any party
will allow of, in the Eucharist, and what proves too much proves nothing. See
Tailor p. 347. 274. 278.

t That the effect produced by the instrumency or upon the receipt of the
consecrated Elements in the Eucharist is miraculous, and no way proportioned to
the natural qualities of them; as also the efficacy of the water of Baptism,
and the real mutation which it causes in the soul, is supernatural.

n And lastly, that some of the same miraculous mutations are applied to
Baptism, (for which chiefly a passage in Ambrose de Sacram. 2. l. 3. c. is
quoted,) and other sacramentals or rituals of the Church: which Sacramentals
the Fathers also illustrate by the change made in the Eucharist, and affirm
such change to be in the one as in the other. See for this Blond. p. 165. 316.
101. etc. Tail. p. 276. See Calvin Instit. 4. l. 17. c. 14. s Patres hic quoque
(i.e. in Baptism) mirificam conversionem statuunt, cum dicunt ex corruptibili
elemento fieri spirituale animae lavacrum. See Daille's first Reply to Chaumont
p. 30. etc.

r Add to these that it may be said, that the second Opinion, in affirming the
Substantial Presence of Christ's Body to every worthy receiver, affirms a most
miraculous effect in the Eucharist, (tho this not having any reference to the
signs,) and therefore seems to concur with these testimonies of the Fathers, as
professing in the Eucharist a work of God's Omnipotency.

chapter As to the third, that of the Fathers using and offering the Eucharist
before communicating as a Sacrifice etc. Tailor takes much notice of it,
Concerning a Sacrifice.
but Mr. Blondel says 4. c. 9. prop. that they celebrated or offered it only
as a memorial, image, representation, antitype of the Sacrifice upon the Cross;
and then heaps up many testimonies, where the Fathers call it by these and the
like names.

Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, and that before communicating,
Concerning Adoration.
(which seems to pinch closer than any of the rest,) I find them to say little
or nothing with any close application to the testimonies brought out of the
ancients.

1. In general they say; Christ may be worshipped when we receive the Eucharist
or Symbols of his Body, (for which practice Daille (in the Reply to Chaumont)
quotes and allows of the Church of England,) but Christ as sitting at the right
hand of God in Heaven, not as in his body there present. See Calvin, de
Christianae pacificationis ratione p. 50. Fateor certe Christum, ubicunque
simus, esse adorandum, in coena vero cum se nobis fruendum offerat, rite aliter
recipi nequit, quam si adoretur. Sed hoc quaeritur, sursumne an deorsum
respiciat nostra adoratio? Quum in coelesti gloria resideat Christus, quisquis
alio se convertit ejus adorandi causa, ab ipso discedit. And Instit. 4. l. 17.
c. 37. s. In coena adoratio ea est legitima, quae non in signo residet, sed ad
Christum in coelo sedentem dirigitur.

To the same purpose writes Dr. Tailor p. 343. and quotes St. Austin as
speaking of such Adoration. So Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Idolatry, 67. s.
Our Church adores Christ in the Sacrament, (as it signifies an action, in which
certainly Christ is) not Christ's body locally present under the shape of the
Elements. Thus he. But this worshipping of Christ in the Sacrament, as it
signifies an action, in the end of the Section is explained to be only this:
That we in that time and place, when and where he is eminently represented by
the Priest, and offered to God for us ( i.e. rerepresentatively,) do worship
him, ( i. e. as being according to his humane nature only in heaven. See 66. s.)

But I find some expressions in some of them, when shaping answers to the
Fathers, (tho I do not well understand them, therefore I shall set you down
their own words,) as if they did allow of something more, namely of adoring
Christ as someway there present; present both to the worthy receiver, and to
the Mysteries or Symbols. Of which Dr. Tailor thus-in answer to that saying of
Ambrose, [ Adorate scabellum etc. Per Scabellum terra intelligitur, per terram
caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in mysteriis ( i. e. the Eucharist or Symbols)
adoramus; and quam Apostoli in Domino Jesu adorarunt,] We worship etc. (says
the Doctor,) for we receive the mysteries as representing and exhibiting to our
soul the flesh and blood of Christ. So that we worship it [ he means the body
or the flesh of Christ] in the sumption and venerable usages of the signs of
his Body: but we give no divine honor to the signs. And thus Daille (2d. Reply
to Chaumont p. 29.) in answer to the places of the Fathers: Il' y a une enorme
difference enter [adorer le Sacrament] and [adorer Jesus Christ au Sacrament,
ou es mysteres] Le second signify ou Adorer Jesus Christ, en communiant a son
Sacrement (ce que nous faisons volontiers, piusque nous le croions Dieu) ou
Adorer Jesus Christ, qui est present au Sacrement, ascavoir par foi dans le
coeur des communians; and en mystere dans les signs, come la chose signifiee
est present en celle qui la signify. Les Peers ne disent and ne font que le
second; and ceux de Rome commandent and pratiquent le premier.

And thus Rivet ( Annot. and Animadv. p. 92.) in answer to the same Father: --
Propriam adorationem deberi vero Christi corpori, quod nobis est nunc (...) and
sola mente percipiendum, nemo pius negabit. So in Bishop Andrews Resp. ad
Bellarm. Apolog. 8. c. I find in Answer to the Fathers sayings urged by the
Cardinal, this: -- Recipe Christum in Eucharistia vere praesentem, vere and
adorandum statuit: rem sc. Sacramenti; at non. Sacramentum; terrenam sc.
partem, ( ut Irenaeus,) visibilem, ( ut Augustinus.) -- Nos vero and in
mysteriis carnem Christi adoramus cum Ambrosio; and (non id, sed) eum, qui
super altar colitur. Nazianzen's saying: -- Nec carnem manducamus, quin
adoremus prius, cum Augustino. Et Sacramentum tamen nulli adoramus. But here I
am left in the dark, whether Christ may be adored as corporally present with
the Symbols (the res visibilis) and that before communicating. See what he
says concerning this Presence, in what is quoted out of his first cap. before.

Lastly, I will set down what AP. Spalato, and Bishop Forbes say, who speak
plainly, and I suppose in this are allowed by the Church of England; since they
seem here to maintain only her opinion of the real presence of Christ's very
body, not to the signs, but to the worthy receiver only: tho of Bishop Forbes
his opinion see more hereafter. Thus therefore they: see Forb. de Eucharist. 2.
l. 2. c. 8. and 9. s. Quod ad adorationem hujus Sacramenti attinet: quum qui
digne sumit S. Symbola, vere and realiter corpus and sanguinem Christi in se
corporaliter (modo tamen spirituali, miraculoso, and imperceptibili) omnis
digne communicans, (is the worthy communicant to worship, but not the unworthy,
because Christ's body is there present to the one, but not to the other?)
adorare potest and debet corpus Christi quod recipit; non quod lateat
corporaliter in pane, aut sub pane, aut sub speciebus and accidentibus panis;
sed quod quando digne sumitur panis sacramentalis, tunc etiam sumitur cum pane
Christi corpus reale, illi communicationi realiter praesens; ut inquit Archiep.
Spalat. Repub. Eccl. 7. l. 11. c. Again: An Christus in Eucharistia sit
adorandus, Protestants saniores non dubitant; in sumptione enim Eucharistiae
(ut utar verbis Archiepiscopi Spalat.) adorandus est Christus vera Latria:
siquidem corpus ejus vivum and gloriosum, miraculo quodam inexplicabili, digne
sumenti praesens adest; and haec adoratio non pani, non vino, non sumptioni,
non Comestioni, non signis, sed ipsi Corpori Christi immediate per sumptionem
Eucharistiae exhibito debetur and perficitur.] Here these seem to allow an
Adoration of Christ, as present in the Sumption of the Sacrament; but not of
him before, as present with the Symbols.

2. Of those of the third Opinion, who hold Christ's Body present with the
Symbols, yet some deny Adoration of this Body so present lawful; upon such
grounds as are also urged in subsidiis by Calvin and his Followers, namely,
because Corpus non jubet se adorari in Eucharistia. See Calv. Inst. l. 4. c.
17. s. 35, 36. An res erat nullius momenti Deum hac forma adorare, ut nihil
nobis praescriberetur? Cum de vero cultu ageretur, tanta levitate fuerat
tentandum, de quo nullum usque verbum legebatur? Qui sacramenti adorationem
excogitarunt eam a seipsis somniarunt, citra scripturam, ubi nulla illius
mentio ostendi potest. So Rivet. Exam. Animad. Grot. Christus nullibi jussit,
ut eum in sacramento adoraremus; nec legimus Apostolos, cum eis exhibitum fuit,
accubitum. mutasse in adgeniculationem. So others; in Eucharistiam Christum
esse non ut adoretur, sed ut manducetur: Others, non esse idem corpus Christi
and Christum.

But yet some of them grant Adoration, not of the Sacrament; but of Christ
present with it, lawful in usu Coenae; or at such time as they grant him to be
present with the symboles. And some of the Calvinists object against the
Lutherans, That the lawfulness of Adoration is a necessary Consequent upon
their Tenent of Christ's presence with the symbols; see de Pace Eccl. sent.
Mort p. 10. And note here, that whereas the Lutherans generally are said to
renounce Adoration; it is meant, not of the renouncing of the Worship of Christ
in the Sacrament, which some allow, but of the Worship of the Sacrament.

3. All generally acknowledge, That the consecrated Symbols are to be used with
Reverence and Respect, as Holy things. Therefore Rivet says of the Fathers,
and of some Lutherans, Annot. and Animadv. p. 92. Voluerunt (quod and de
Theodoreto sentiendum) ad sacra signa percipienda, cum reverentia esse
accedendum, propter Dei potentiam.

4. Lastly, They all contend, That the Symbols may not be Worshipped for Christ;
or, as being Christ; or, with the Worship due to Christ: And if they be, That
it is Idolatry, i. e. Worshipping a Creature for the Creator: Which Worship of
the Symbols for Christ, they object to the Church of Rome. And this is all that
I can find said by them concerning the ancient practice of Adoration: The
fourth thing we Considered.

Answers to the former points seem to me (at least the most part of them) very
unsatisfactory; and if you please to review them, as I have placed the Letters,
to avoid Repetition, I shall as briefly as I can propose to you my Reasons.

For these Replies.
To that then which is said in their Answer to the first Argument [from the
Letter a to b] it may be Replied: That taking some other instance by which is
signified only a representation or similitude; as this Proposition, when the
Apostle says 1 Cor. 10. The Rock is Christ: If any one, to explain only this
similitude or representation, should make such expressions as the Fathers use
concerning [This is my Body;] as [Christ was made of the Rock] or [The Rock was
changed into Christ, etc.] they would be judged very improper and absurd. That,
that Party will not admit of such interpretations of the Fathers meaning (so
seeming contrary to this expression) in other places quoted by them against the
Romanists Reply to their Answer to the first Argument out of the Fathers, as
namely, in that of S. Austin quoted hereafter. Non hoc corpus quod videtis,
etc. Where, it being answered, that [non hoc] was exclusive to the qualities
then accompanying it, not to the substance; Daille (in his second Reply to
Chaumont p. 45.) says, c'est nous tenir pour des Enfans que de nous vouloir
payer de tells desfaits.

But especially such interpretations seem more unreasonable from any of the
second Opinion, who hold the substantial Body of our Savior (not altogether
absent in the Eucharist, but) most certainly present, tho by a miraculous and
ineffable manner, to the worthy Receiver; and therefore hold also a possibility
of its being present with the Symbols; and yet will force these plain
expressions of the Fathers, that de facto it is so, to another sense.

But (of whatever constructions these Speeches may be thought capable) I think
the miraculousness of the change of the Elements alleged by them, and the
Adoration of Christ, as being with the Signs, before Communicating, practiced
(of which more by and by) will put the meaning of those phrases of the Ancients
out of doubt.

In Answer to what is said from [b] (meaning of those phrases of the Ancients)
to [d] as a necessary reason of such interpretations, I must entreat you to
read over again what I have written in the second Observation, p. 6, 7, 8, etc.
Where I have showed, what little reason those of the second Opinion, who hold a
real presence, have to move such an Objection, p. 8. But secondly, I think
there it is sufficiently cleared also, that the expressions of the Symbols,
being a sign, image, type, figure, etc. of the Body, as then present with them;
or of the Symbols or Body it self then Sacramentally present, being a type,
figure, etc. of the Body as it once suffered on the Cross, do well consist with
the substantial presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, with the Symbols;
and with the miraculous and supernatural mutation (which is affirmed by the
Fathers) of those Symbols in part into that very Body. In part, I say; for a
total change, of all that is visible or sensible of the Elements into the Body
of Christ, none affirm; but that after Consecration still a sign remains
distinct from the thing signified. For this is willingly yielded, that what is
changed into the Body can be said no longer a sign or symbol of it. But yet,
supposing a total change, two other Propositions may still be true:

1. That those symbols, after Consecration or that change, are figures, etc. of
Christ's Body.

2. That after Consecration, that body into which they are changed, in that
manner in which it is there existent, is a figure, etc. of it self, as after
another manner once existent upon the Cross. Hence, take any of those Fathers
who use the highest expressions concerning this mutation, as, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Greg. Nyssen, etc. yet do they as familiarly use the words also of
sign, sacrament, figure, etc. in some of those senses above, as any other.

Now since both these; That of the Elements being changed into Christ's Body,
and that of their remaining signs, as properly understood, are no way
incompatible: The excuse of using some violence upon the one phrase, namely
that of mutation (which Mr. Blondel confesses p. 155, in appearance plus
favorable a l'opinion de Rome) to accord it with the other, namely that of type
and figure, etc. is taken away. For to be figure or sign, in respect of what
remains unchanged, whether it be the substance of the Elements, or only their
properties or species, well consists with a true change of the rest into
Christ's Body, if the species only remain; or with a miraculous change of
Christ's Body to be joined with, or contained in, the Elements, if the
substance of them still remain. But such a miraculous change into Christ's Body
no way consists with the Elements being only a Sacrament or sign thereof,
without any real presence with them of that Body into which they are said by
Omnipotency to be changed. For now where is there any such miracle showed about
the Symbols? Where any mistake or misinformation of the sense beholding them?
And if any contend, that they are called figures, etc. in some Texts of the
Fathers, with exclusion to the presence of Christ's Body; Resp. It Is with
exclusion not to any real presence of this Body, (as the second Opinion will
grant, who affirm it really present to the worthy Receiver,) nor to any real
presence with the symbols; but only to some manner of the presence thereof;
namely, as It was when Crucified.

That this Answer may seem the more warrantable, I refer you to Dr. Tailor, p.
20. who there used it in another matter. This of the Father's Language: But the
next Ages after the Fathers (the Seventh and Eighth Age) proceeded contrary to
the Reformed, in their judgment of the sense of Antiquity; rejecting the words
of Figure and Image (as opposed to a real presence,) and abetting the
miraculous change. See Anastasius, Damascen, the Second Nicene Council in the
East, that of Francfort in the West, following the former expressions of Nice,
as quoted in Blondel, p. 365. Tho I suppose they denied not, Figure, and Image,
and real Presence, taken in several respects well to consist together. And
indeed, supposing that the Fathers were all of one mind in this obscure
mystery, and that they held all what the third or fourth Opinion pretends they
did; yet so many several things considered in the Sacrament [ Christ's Passion,
or his Body as on the Cross, commemorated; Christ's Body, as present with the
Signs, offered as a Socrifice to the Father; and then sed upon by the
Communicants: The Symbols meanwhile only visible, and nothing besides; used in
this sacred action as Signs, Figures, and Similitudes, not only of Christ's
Body as present in one manner, but of It not present in another, (namely, as it
conversed in the World, and suffered for us); these Symbols Offered likewise,
and Eaten, as well as the Body] must needs produce diversity of Expressions;
now looking one way, now another, according to the thing to which they relate;
the like variety to which I know not whether any other subject in the world is
capable of.

In that place of Tertullian, Figura corporis (according to what is said
before, and in Obs. 2.) argues not, that Tertullian held not verum corpus to be
together with panis, the Figure. Which seems to be his opinion, by his saying
before [fecit panem corpus suum]; which panis was in the Old Testament (tho
this much opposed by Marcion, who denied the Old Testament, and all the types
and relations thereof to the New) also (as Tertullian shows presently after
this) a Figure of Christ's Body; and by that phrase after [non capit figuram],
and by his expressions elsewhere concerning it, That, ad uxorem l. 2. c. 5. Non
sciet Maritus quid secreto, ( i. e. the Eucharist) ante omnem cibum gustes? and
si sciverit, panem, non illum, credit, esse, qui dicitur. [If this be an
assertion, and not (as Junius thinks it is) an interrogation rather, referring
to Infanticidium Apol. c. 7.] And that de Idol. c. 7. Semel Judaei Christo
manus intulerunt, isti quotidie corpus ejus lacessunt; speaking of the
Eucharist. And that adv. Marcion. l. 1. c. 14. At ille quidem (i. e. Christus)
nec aquam reprobavit Creatoris, etc. -- nec panem, quo ipsum corpus suum
repraesentat, ( i. e. praesentem reddit, if we may interpret it by the same
sense of the word in l. 4. c. 22. Itaque jam repraesentans eum, i. e. Deus
Christum) Hic est Filius meus; utique subauditur, quem repromisi repraesentans,
(i. e. praesentans).

To g]. How the same in some sense may be said, to be like or unlike it self,
see before. But, there being two things in the Sacrament; and something
remaining after Consecration, which is not the Body of Christ, but the Symbol
thereof, etc. None say, that Christ's Body in the Eucharist is the Image, or
sign, figure, or similitude of it self, as in the Eucharist: But either, that
the Symbols are signs, figures, etc. of the Body; or, the Body, as in the
Eucharist, a figure, etc. of the same Body as Crucified.

To [d] that S. Austin held a real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist,
those of the second opinion I think will not deny. That he held this its
presence in the Eucharist to be with the symbols also before communicating, I
think is clear from his other sayings quoted p. 38, etc. The words, immediately
before those here quoted, are, Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in seipso,
and tamen in Sacramento omni die populis immolatur, nec ubique mentitur qui
interrogatus, eum responderit immolari. Si enim Sacramenta etc. From this it
seems plain, that St. Austin speaks of the Eucharist, as signifying Christ's
immolation on the Cross, and so it is rightly said, not properly, but secundum
quendam modum, or quodammodo, the Body of Christ as the Body was in that manner
existent. And thus Paschasius answered this place above 800 years ago.

But it is capable also of another answer, (and so some other places like it,)
That by Sacramentum S. Austin (there) means the symbols: That corpus Christi
may be predicated quodammodo of the sign thereof, (whether it be the substance
or only the species of the bread,) namely, after such a manner as the
Consubstantialists say, Hic panis est corpus meum. And thus Algerus answered
this place against Berengarius, before any Council had decreed
Transubstantiation. Lastly, S. Austin instanceth in Baptism; that the Apostle
says in it, consepulti sumus, because Baptismus sepulturam significabat: but
none may lawfully conclude from hence, that S. Austin held Baptism only to
signify grace, and not to confer it; neither therefore may he, that the
Sacrament of the Eucharist only signified Christ's Body.

To [z] 1. The place in Psalm 98. Since S. Austin speaks here of eating it;
worthy receiver to partake and eat that very substantial body which suffered
for them upon the cross, can make no use of this place. Now for this I must
remember you again of Calvin's expression: -- Neque enim mortis suae tantum
beneficium nobis offert Christus, sed corpus ipsum in quo passus est. And see
what Dr. Tailor says p. 20. 2. Note, Austin elsewhere (as in Psalm. 33. upon
those words, Accedite ad eum and illuminemmi; and contra Faustum 12. l. 20. c.)
says as plainly the seeming-contrary to this: Judaei de crucifixo tenebrati
sunt, nos manducando and bibendo crucifixum illuminamur. -- Et nunc bibimus
quod de Christi latere manavit. 3. Nemo autem carnem illam manducat nisi prius
adoraverit, which shows either Christ's very flesh in the Eucharist, or
adoration of another creature for the flesh of Christ. 4. Berengarius, quoting
this place, Non idem corpus, (i.e.) in propria sua specie, accompanied with the
natural qualities of flesh and blood; Non in specie mortali and visibili, ut
aderat tunc praesens discipulis suis, sed alio modo impassibiliter and
invisibiliter se habens. Neither does Daille's Reply (in his 2d. answer to
Chaumont p. 45.) move me, [that when corn is first sown, and cared, and
threshed, and so ground, and molded into bread, we may with the same reason
maintain, that the eater of this bread eats not the same corn that was threshed
etc, because its now changed in its qualities,] because this alteration about
our Savior's body, as it is invisible, impassible, etc in the Eucharist, is
much more strange than that he instanceth in. But that all such expressions, as
we make this to be, are not improper, see the Apostles 1 Cor. 15.37. Thou
sowest not that body that shall be, i. e. with such and such qualities and
ornaments as it shall come up, tho it shall be idem numero corpus in the
resurrection; and so flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven,
tho flesh otherwise qualified shall inherit it: for our Savior's glorified
body had flesh and bone. Luk-24.39. And see St. Austin's discourse upon these
places, Ep. 146. where, to reconcile caro possidebit, and caro non possidebit
etc, he says, caro secundum substantiam possidebit, caro autem, cum secundum
corruptionem intelligitur, non possidebit. And so for the wheat sown: Non quod
triticum, says he, non erit ex tritico; sed quod nemo seminat herbam,
stipulam, etc, cum quibus ista semina exurgunt.

5. Lastly, the same phrases are found in other Fathers, whose opinion perhaps
is more clear than S. Austins, that the same body that was crucified is in the
Sacrament received: as in S. Ambrose comment in Luc. l. 8. urged by Daille 2d.
Rep. to Chaum. p. 331. and in S. Hierom. in Ephesians. 1. cap. where he thus on 7.
verse. Dupliciter vero sanguis Christi and caro intelligitur: Spiritualis illa
atque divina, de qua ipse dixit, Caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere
est potus: and nisi manducaveritis carnem meam, and sanguinem biberitis, non
babebitis vitam aeternam; vel caro and sanguis, quae crucifixa est, and qui
militis effusus est lancea. Juxta hanc divisionem, and in sanctis ejus
diversitas sanguinis and carnis accipitur; ut alia sit caro, quae visura est
salutare Dei, alia caro and sanguis, quae regnum Dei non queant possidere. But
here he means [alia] in quality only, as is showed before. This distinction of
Christ's flesh in S. Hierom Dr. Tailor qualifies thus, p. 10. That Body which
was crucified is not that Body which is eaten in the Sacrament, if the
intention of the Proposition be, to speak of the eating it in the same manner
of being. But [that body which was crucified is the same we do eat] if the
intention be, to speak of the same thing in several manners of being and
operating; the same answer the Doctor gives here I conceive fits this place of
S. Austin. To the place (de doct. Christiana) flagitium or facinus can appear
only in the Capernaitan conceit of eating it (as I mentioned but now in the
answer given to the last place urged by Berengarius) in propriasua specie as
accompanied etc. see p.

Therefore the Father means only that the text was not so to be understood.
But supposing that it is indeed Christ's very body we receive in the Eucharist,
yet what flagitium, what horror, can any apprehend in it, as he receives it
after another manner of being, impassibiliter, invisibiliter se habens, under
the visible species only of bread and wine? As for that the Father says
afterward, that the locution is figurata, and inculcates only a memorial of the
Passion etc. it is very true, tho Christ's very Body that suffered on the Cross
be granted to be present also in the Eucharist; because it is not in the same
manner present, and in its Eucharistical presence relates to the other: for
which see what is said (that I may not often repeat the same things) before, in
the 2d. Observation. p. (...) -- and below [of the sacrifice of the Eucharist
being a representative or commemorative in respect of that of the Cross] p.
(...) yet in this place S. Austin seems to speak, not of the manducation of
Christ's body made more particularly in the Eucharist, but extrasacramental and
in general; as by faith it may, and is to be done at all times by us in a
spiritual manner; and as our Savior's auditors might have eaten it at that
very time, when he made this Sermon to them. Therefore it is worth the marking
that what in some verses of this Chapter he expresses by feeding, in others he
promiscuously denotes by believing, on him. See Jo. 6.35, 40, 47, 64, compared
with 50, 53, 54, 57.

To these places that follow quoted out of S. Ambrose, I answer to the first.
That there are two ways to understand similitudo sanguinis or cruoris; either
similitudo, non cruor (or veritas cruoris) or similitudo, non species (or
exterior apparentia cruoris), lest there should so arise some horror from it.
Now that the Father opposes not the similitudo to exclude cruor or veritatem
cruoris, his assertion before puts out of doubt, vinum and aqua fit sanguis
Christi, and sanguis not in figura or sacramento, but verus sanguis, as appears
in the latter place quoted. Which assertion occasions the objection. His
meaning therefore is, Bibimus similitudinem etc, ne sit horror, sed sub qua
similitudine continetur, licet non videatur, veritas. To the 2d. place, vere
naturae gratia and virtus may be understood either virtus and gratia sanguinis,
either simul cum natura sanguinis or sine natura sanguinis. But if it be taken
this latter way, then the Father after such high expressions will be made to
assert in earnest no more than a Zuinglian, and this interpretation will never
consist with what goes before, [vera caro and veritas sanguinis sicut verus
Filius and sermo Christi mutans generalia Instituta naturae,] upon which an
objection being raised [ non video sanguinis veritatem, therefore there seems
to be there in the Cup no such thing,] he that makes the Father to deny, under
similitudo, veritatem sanguinis, makes him in his answer to grant the
objection, and reverse his former positions.

To [e] I will first set you down for an allay some other places in S. Austin,
expressing carnem and sanguinem Domini to be received by the unworthy: and then
you will better digest the common answer to these places. Contra Donatistas 5.
l. 8. c. To illustrate (against them) that -- Is nullo modo facit, ut Baptismus
bonus non sit, aut ut omnino Baptismus non sit, quisquis eo sive quia in
haeresi, sive quia in pessimis moribus vivit, non legitime utitur, he brings in
a simile from the Eucharist. Indigne quisque sumens Dominicum Sacramentum non
efficit, ut quia ipse malus est, malum sit; aut, quia non ad salutem accipit
nihil acceperit. Corpus enim Domini and sanguis Domini nihilominus erat etiam
illis, quibus dicebat Apostolus; Qui manducat indigne, judicium sibi manducat
and bibit. In Matt. 11. Sermon upon those words, [Qui blasphemaverit in
Spiritum sanctum, non habebit remissionem in aeternum,] to illustrate Christum
non intendisse omnem sed quendam blasphemantis in Sp. S. reatum, he brings that
saying Jo. 6. Qui manducat meam carnem etc. in me manet. Upon which, Nunquid
(says he) etiam illos hic poterimus accipere, de quibus dicit Apostolus, quod
judicium sibi manducent and bibant, cum ipsam carnem manducent, and ipsum
sanguinem bibant? etc. -- Sed profecto est quidam modus manducandi illam carnem
etc. quomodo qui manducaverit in Christo manet: -- quem modum utique ipse
Christus videbat, quando ista dicebat. Sic igitur and in eo quod ait, Qui
blasphemaverit -- 162. Epist. against the Donatists; Tolerat ipse Dominus
Judam: sinit accipere inter innocents discipulos, quod fideles noverunt,
pretium nostrum. Et. 163. Traditorem suum, qui jam pretium ejus acceperat,
usque ad ultimum pacis osculum inter innocents secum esse perpessus est.
Lastly, see those quotations p. 10, 11, and especially that, where he says,
^ivites terrae (i.e. superbos) accipere de corpore and sanguine Christi,
adorare, manducare, etc and this [adorare] is such, as he allows to no (other]
creature, as you may see in his discourse upon adorate scabellum: which
adoration also being before manducarion, it sufficiently infers S. Austin's
belief of the presence of Christ's body with the symbols before communicated.

This qualification premised; the common distinction in answer (which was given
of old, before any Conciliary decree concerning Transubstantiation, and also is
set down in Conc. Trid. 13. Sess. 8. c.) is this. Quosdam accipere Christi
corpus Sacramentaliter tantum, as the unworthy receivers; yet in which
Sacramental sumption is the true body of Christ, tho not the fruit and
efficacy, and benefit thereof, as to them that received, but hurt and judgment;
(as the same good nourishment is received by the sick and healthful stomach,
but as the one is fed, the other is damaged by it;) quosdam Spiritualiter
tantum, qui voto illum coelestem panem edentes, fide viva (quae per dilectionem
operatur) fructum ejus and utilitatem sentiunt; quosdam Sacramentaliter simul
and Spiritualiter; as the worthy receivers of it who, by the Sacramental
reception, as well as Spiritual, partake more the virtue thereof, than the only
Spiritual receivers, (but of this more anon,) as also the wicked incur more
judgment by their unworthy reception of it, than were it only of the bare
representative thereof, they thus being in a higher manner rei corporis Christi
in the Apostle's expression 1 Cor. 9. Now S. Austin means, non manducant corpus
Domini Spiritualiter.

But if it seem still to some S. Austin's opinion, that the wicked do no way at
all receive the very body, but only the sacrament thereof, as understood only
as representing it: Yet I see not (with submission to better judgments) that it
must necessarily infer, that he held not Christ's true body's being before
present with the symbols, and offered to the wicked, but only it, by ceasing to
be there, (for his body is only voluntarily present, and perhaps only in such
cases as this may desinere ibi esse, sicut ante consecrationem ibi non erat,)
not to be received at all by the wicked, as many hold it not to be devoured
together with the consecrated elements by beasts etc, neither in specie
propria, nor aliena. See before. And Estius gives it the place of an argument,
4. sent. 9. distinct. 3. sect. Peccator magis est Deo abominabilis quam animal
brutum, multo minus igitur peccator sumit Christi corpus. To answer which he
holds the opinion contrary to the others; namely, that a brutis animalibus
etiam sumitur non secundum propriam speciem, sed secundum species Sacramentales.

And see Dr. Field, Append. to the 3d. book 17, 18. c. quoting out of Waldensis
Tom. 2. de Euchar. 19. c. That many, who affirmed the bread to be changed into
Christ's body, yet held, when unworthy men came to communicate, the body and
blood of Christ to cease to be present; and when a wicked man is to receive it
the substances of bread and wine to return etc, why might not S. Austin's
conceit be the same?

To [], besides that two Councils not long after (one in the East, another in
the West) opposed that of Constantinople in this matter of the Sacrament, (see
hereafter:)

I can say only this, that (...) as opposed to (...) must not be taken in such
a sense, as that upon consecration the elements are not made divinum corpus, or
adoration not due to it. For these two things that Council affirms, as well as
image and corpus (...) not (...); and for this the Council of Nice that
followed, said of those Fathers of Constantinople, that huc illucque se
jactantes, inconstantia and minime firma omnia sua dogmata asserunt. But why
may not Image here, and (...) be opposed, not to the verity of Christ's body in
the Eucharist after some manner, but only to its being there as formerly on
earth, that is, after a natural manner? for it is not in the Eucharist (...);
and the Eucharist so (by other Fathers) is called only an Image of it. And why
might not the Council of Nice mistake the sense of this Council in one point,
as well as Mr. Blond: p. 411, grants that of Franckfort did misunderstand it in
another?

To [m], see what is said to [g]. -- To [l] (which seems more material than the
rest,) with which I shall consider also [ch] their Reply to the 3d
Consideration about Sacrifice:

First I say, if there be found so much, not only in the ancient Missals but
those now used, Concerning the Sacrifice of the Eucharist.
that makes against any substantial conversion of the elements into Christ's
body; and if the offering the Eucharist therein as a Sacrifice, is only
commemorative of that upon the Cross, (in which sense the Reformed also allow a
Sacrifice,) without involving any special presence of Christ's body with the
elements; how comes it to pass, that only the fourth opinion retains still the
same forms (for the things which are here objected) that were used in St.
Ambrose's days? (or if only used in the time of Gregory the Great, yet then
they grant there was yet no corruption in the doctrine concerning the
Sacrament) against whose modern tenants these forms make so much, and that all
the other three opinions have made new forms to themselves, and rejected the
old? which they plead are so favorable unto them? In doing which things Luther
is said in the beginning of his book de abroganda Missa to object to himself;
Magnum est certe tot saeculorum consuetudini, tantae multitudinis sensui,
tantorumque Authoritati reluctari. -- Tu solus sapis? totne errant universi?
tanta saecula erraverunt? Again, how can we more justify their reverence to
Antiquity than in this thing, that they have not taken the boldness to correct,
or change, or note in the daily and Public Service, what makes so much against
their present opinions?

Now to come closer to the matter, and to speak a little more fully, 1. (in
answer to ch) in what sense the Eucharist is now or was anciently used as a
Sacrifice; that that which follows may be more cleared by it, and that you may
see whether there may be so just cause for that clamor that is made against it,
as injurious and derogating from the Sacrifice upon the Cross:

Fathers, The opinion of the Fathers concerning it.
so by those of the fourth Opinion, That the Sacrifice made on the Cross is the
only Sacrifice that by its own virtue takes away Sins; and that there is no
need of any more Sacrifice for Sin; i. e. for making full satisfaction, and
paying the due debt for Sin; that therefore the Sacrifice cannot, nor need not,
to be iterated in this respect, for then must Christ often have suffered, etc.
see Heb. 9.25, 26, 28. see Heb. 10.10, 12, 14, 18. That therefore the Sacrifice
of the Eucharist is no new or diverse Sacrifice from that of the Cross, no
suplement or completement of it, but only representative or commemorative of
it; applying (see the manner more explained hereafter) unto particular men the
remission purchased thereby, as also all other fruits and benefits thereof.
Which application, as it is said to be obtained by Christ's present
intercession now in Heaven, by Faith, by Prayer, by the Sacraments, etc. (in a
several way) without any suspicion of a diminution or injury done thereby to
the merits of the Passion; so may it as safely be attributed to this continual
Sacrifice of Christians, the Eucharist. For this, see Conc. Trid. s. 22. c. 1.
Dominum nostrum in coena novissima Dilectae sponsae suae Ecclesiae visibili
(sicut hominum natura exigit) reliquisse sacrificium, quo cruentum illud semel
in cruce peragendum repraesentaretur, ejusque memoria in finem usque saeculi
permaneret, atque illius ( i. e. of the Sacrifice of the Cross) salutaris
virtus in remissionem eorum, quae a nobis quotidie committuntur, peccatorum
applicaretur. And so chapter 2. Cujus oblationis cruentae fructus per hanc uberrime
percipiuntur. See Estius sent. 4. d. 12. s. 12, 13. Dum patres sacrificium
crucis unicum and singular sacrificium Christianorune esse dicunt, intelligunt
quod propria virtute Deum placat, quale non est sacrificium missae, utpote
habens vim suam omnem ex sacrificio in cruce peracto. -- Nam incruenta seu
mystica oblatione corporis and sanguinis Christi (ex doctrina Ecclesiae) non
hoc agitur ut per eam paretur precium, quo redimantur peccata; sed ut
applicetur pretium unico illo crucis sacrificio comparatum nobis ad remissionem
peccatorum and ad caetera salutaria dona consequenda. Quare sicut unicum illud
sacrificium crucis non tollit vim baptismi and altorum sacramentorum quibus
renovamur, sanctificamur, a peccatis purgamur; imo si^ut non derogat efficaciae
illius oblationis and orationis, qua adhuc Christus in coe^is continuo
semetipsum pro nobis sistit, and offert patri and continuo pro nobis
interpellat; ita nec tollit incruentam oblationem sacrificii missae aut
quicquid derogat ejus virtuti. See the like said in Bellarm, de Missa l. primo,
c. 25. Fatemur sacrificium crucis vim sempiternam habere ad sanctificandum,
etc. atque inde non esse opus alio sacrificio crucis, aut ejusdem sacrificii
crucis repetitione. -- Negamus autem inde sequi, non posse sine crucis Christi
injuria multiplicari sacrificia repraesentantia sacrificium crucis, and ejus
fructum nobis applicantia. Nam si ita esset -- Efficeremus omnia sacrificia
testamenti veteris fuisse peracta in injuriam crucis Christi. -- In hoc est
totus error adversariorum, quod sibi falso persuaserint, nos tribuere missae
vim remittendi peccata sine ullo ordine ad sacrificium crucis, -- Or, quod
Missa vim habeat expiandi peccata sine crucis sacrificio, -- sed sacrificium
missae applicat fructum sacrificii crucis. See Dr. Holden de Resol. Fid. l. 2.
c. 4. Propitiatorium quidem est hoc sacrificium; sed non eo modo quo
sacrificium crucis; puta in redemptionem generis humani: sacrificium enim
crucis adeo sufficiens est and abundans, ut nec altero, nec hujus iteratione
nobis ullatenus opus sit, in ratione redemptionis. Quapropter vi solius missae
sacrifien nihil meretur nobis Christus, sed per illud nobis applicantur (sicut
and per sacramenta) fructus meritorum Christi per immolationem suam sanguineam
acquisiti. Haud igitur docet nos divina and catholica fides sanctum hoc
sacrificium missae, ut distinctum (si tamen absolute distinctum) a sacrificio
cru is, de se peccata remittere, gratiam augere, justificationem afferre, etc.
An autem sit hoc sacrificium absolutum an relativum solummodo (nempe
commemorativum, representativum, significativum,) est Theologicarum
litigationum materia.

See Cassand. Consult. de Sac. Corp. and Sang. Chr. and de iteratione per
totum. Some places of which you may find quoted by Bishop Forb. l. 3. c. 1. s.
21. and many of the like out of other Authors, set down in that Chapter to
which I refer you for them.

Non igitur hic novum est sacrificium; nam and eadem hic est hostia quae in
cruce oblata fuit, ( i. e. the Body and Blood of Christ) and commemoratio in
mysterio sacrificii illius in cruce peracti, and continuati in coelis
sacerdotii and sacrificii Christi in imagine representatio; quo (sacrificio)
non efficitur nova propitiatio and remissio peccatorum, sed ea, quae semel
sufficienter in cruce facta est, nobis quoque efficax esse postulatur. Christ
making such an Offering unto the same purposes of his Body here on the Altar by
his Substitutes, as is by Himself now in Heaven made of the same Body: It being
victima perennis and perpetua quae semel oblata consumi non potest. So de
iterat. -- in sacra hac action pro vivis and mortuis, etc. offerri dicitur
quando non solum pro iis oblata commemoratur, verum etiam solenni prece pro iis
omnibus efficax and salutaris esse postulatur, -- And after, sacrificium non
modo Eucharisticum, sed etiam propitiatorium dici posset, non quidem ut
efficiens propitiationem (quod sacrificio crucis proprium est) sed ut eam jam
factam impetrans, quomodo Oration propitiatoria dici potest. See Fr. a Sanctae
Clara on the XXXI. Article of the Church of England, [sacrificium Missae] non
est propitiatorium primo, quia hoc competit sacrificio in cruce, licet been per
se, and quasi secundo per applicationem sacrificii cruenti and per
commemorationem ejus; adeo ut ratio propitiationis originaliter sacrificio in
cruce competat, and illinc seu illius virtute huic. Ut etiam recte notavit
Canus in locis l. 12. c. 12. ubi dicit; Satis esse ut vere and proprie sit
sacrificium, quod mors ita nunc ad peccati remissionem applicetur ac si
Christus nunc moreretur; ubi rationem propitiationis applicationi mortis
Christi tribuit. Et ad eundem sensum citat Gregorium [in seipso immortaliter
vivens iterum in hoc mysterio moritur:] mors igitur incruenta in altari
virtutem suam derivat a morte cru^nta in cruce -- and in hoc sensu hoe
sacrificium est imago and exemplar alterius in cruce, unde omnis salus
radicaliter emanavit. Nulla prorsus hic erit difficultas cum doctioribus
Protestantibus, etc. Thus he; where also he says, that in the later words of
the Article (sufficiently vehement) s^sobrie intelligantur nihil agitur contra
sacrificia missae in se, sed contra vulgarem vel vulgatam opinionem de ipsis;
scilicet quod sacerdotes in sacrificiis offerient Christum pro vivis and
defunctis in remissionem paenae and culpae, adeo ( i. e. in such a manner) ut
virtute hujus sacrificii ab iis oblati, independenter a crucis sacrificio,
mererentur populo remissionem, etc. But this vulgata opinio, as no Church
maintains, so neither can it (without a high breach of Christian charity) on
any Church be charged. See Champney de Vocat. Minist. against Mason, cap. 17.
page 704, etc. of whom only delivering the common Doctrine of the Roman Church
Dr. Fern acknowledges, That he makes wide difference between the Sacrifice of
the Eucharist, and that of the Cross; and indeed comes to that which we allow
in the Eucharist as it is a Sacrament (see his Exam. of Champney p. 324.) but
yet (p. 346.) he grants the Fathers to have Offered the Sacrifice of the Altar
(as they called it) which was the representation of Christ's Sacrifice, for the
Dead, for an Impetration of all that Mercy, Redemption, and Glory for them,
which was yet behind. And (p. 354.) he says, we have Christ's warrant and
appointment -- sacramentally here below to represent his own Oblation upon the
Cross, and by it to beg and impetrate what we or the Church stand in need of.
Where, in the Celebration of the Eucharist, he plainly involves, not only a
communication of Christ's Body and Blood, but also a Representation of the
Sacrifice of the Cross, and this Impetratory of Blessings for our Brethren
absent, and not only for our selves Communicants. -- See Bishop Forbes, l. 3.
de Eucharistia c. 2. s. 2, 3, 4, 5. -- Missam -- Sacrificium propitiatorium
sano sensu dici posse, recte affirmant Romanenses moderatiores, Non quidem ut
efficiens propitiationem and remissionem peccatorum, quod sacrificio crucis
proprium est, sed ut eam jam factam impetrans -- And s. 5. -- omnes saniores
Romanenses, quicunque tueantur sententiam de modo verae and realis praesentiae
corporis Christi in Eucharistia, agnoscunt oblationem sacrificii missae
incruentam ab illa una cruenta quae facta est in cruce, omnem suam vim and
efficaciam haurire proinde ut Sacramenta novi Testamenti. Which may also, I
conceive, in some manner be said of the Oblation of Himself by our High Priest
now in Heaven, Heb. 8.3, 4, he not paying the price of our Redemption there
now, but formerly upon the Cross.

See in Blondel c. 4. prop. 9. the Testimonies of Eulogius Alex. and of
Chrysostom in Heb. Hom. 17. The later (not fully set down by him) I will
transcribe you, -- upon Heb. 9.25. Quid ve^o? nos enim quotidie offerimus?
offerimus quidem, sed ejus mor^em revocamus in memoriam; and ipsa una est non
multae. Quomodo una est non multae? quoniam semel fuit oblata, illa illata fuit
in Sancta Sanctorum. Hoc est figura illius, and ipsa illius; eundem enim semper
offerimus; non nunc quidem alium sed semper eundem; quamobrem unum est
sacrificium Propter hanc rationem quoniam multis in locis offertur, multine
sunt Christi? nequaquam. Sed unus ubique Christus, qui and hic est plenus and
illic plenus, unum corpus. Quomodo ergo multis in locis oblatus unum est corpus
and non multa corpora, ita etiam unum est sacrificium. Pontifex noster ille est
qur illam Obtulit hostiam quae nos mundat. Illam nunc quoque offerimus quae
tunc fuit oblata, quae non potest consumi, hoc fit in recordationem ejus quod
tunc factum est; hoc enim facite inquit in mei recordationem: non aliam
hostiam, sicut Pontifex ( i. e. the Levitical High Priest) sed eandem semper
facimus, vel potius hostiae sen sacrificii facimus recordationem.

2. Yet do they both affirm the Eucharist to be a true and proper Sacrifice;
(see quotations hereafter.) In ipso verissimo and singulari sacrificio, spoken
of the Eucharist by St. Austin. True and proper, not as it denies, or is
opposed to Sacrifice relative to, or commemorative or representative of,
another Sacrifice; namely, the Sacrifice of the Cross. For the same Sacrifice
may be truly such, and yet commemorative. For says Bellarmin, Sacrificia
veteris Testamenti fuere commemorationes postea futuri, and tamen fuerunt illa
vetera in severe and proprie dicta Sacrificia, de Missa, l. 1. c. 15. sec. quod
autem; (and so St. Austin in the saying quoted hereafter, Christiani jam, etc.)
joins oblatio corporis Christi with celebratio memoriae sacrificii peracti. And
those among the Romanists; who hold it not sacrificium aliquod absolutum, but
relativum, or commemorativum; yet affirmed to be verum and proprium. See Forbes
l. 3. c. 1. s. 12, 13, etc. See Mede Diatr. on Mal. Its one thing to say, that
the Lords Supper is a Sacrifice ( i. e. a proper one,) and another to say,
Christ is properly sacrificed therein. For there may be a Sacrifice which is
the representation of another, and yet a Sacrifice too. And that not in a
metaphorical but a proper sense, sect. 5.

Again, true and proper; not as if there were exactly found in it all the
properties of other Sacrifices, as the word Sacrifice is taken more strictly
for a Slaughter-Offering; for the mactation or occision of some thing that has
life, whereby it is put to some pain and suffering. To this says Estius, sent.
4. d. 12. s. 12. Non sequitur Christum non immolari in altari quia nihil
patitur. Est enim haec immolatio mystica, and talis qualis Christo nunc
Competere potest. And again, s. 13. hoc sensu ( i. e. as immolatio was taken by
the Fathers for mactatio offerendi causa facta) non vera sed mystica tantum ab
iis agnoscitur immolatio in altari, quam vocant immolationem incruentam. Or,
for the destruction and consumption of any thing at all tho inanimate (about
which are many curious disputes touching the consumption of the elements or of
Christ's Sacramental being, etc, to make this of the Eucharist bear the more
resemblance to other Sacrifices, methinks to little purpose, since in some
thing ( i. e. in some mactation) they grant a difference in it from them all,
therefore why not here also say, est immolatio mystica, and talis qualis
Christo nunc competere potest: See Bishop Forbes his censure of such contests,
3. l. 1. c. 12. s.) Nor yet true and proper, as if it had all other properties
of that of the Cross besides mactation, or were propitiatory even in the same
manner as it, as is shown before; for, that only, not this, propria virtute
Deum placat.

But true and proper, in as much as it, by commemorating, and representing
again to God that bloody Sacrifice on the Cross, and offering to God the very
same Sacrifice taken passive, (i.e.) the same body of Christ that was once
sacrificed and slain on the Cross, procures (by way of impetration, as other
Sacrifices also anciently did, not by any new merit or satisfaction) from God
grace, and repentance, and remission of sin, (by the merits of the passion
which are then applied to us,) and other blessings Spiritual or temporal, to
those who come to God cum vero cord and recta fide, cum metu and reverentia
etc: coming short therefore in nothing of the true and proper Sacrifices of the
Old Testament, but that, as to the visible Symbols, it is an oblation of things
inanimate; but in this also it resembled of old by the Sacrifice of a perfecter
Priesthood, i.e. of Melchisedech, offered unto God. See Bishop For bes 3. l. 1.
c. 4. sect. Patres magno consensu (qui non est spernendus) affirmant
Melchisedech panem and vinum non tantum protulisse and exbibuisse Abrahamo ad
alendum exercitum, sed Deo primum, quem praeclarissimae victoriae authorem
agnoscebat, usitato modo obtulisse and libasse: ac proinde and Christum, eujus
ille figura fuit, in institutione Eucharistiae ut Sacerdotem idem egisse, i. e.
of Melchisedech. Which, that the Fathers generally held to have bin a true and
proper Sacrifice, and to have bin by Melchisedech offered to God; See Bishop
Forbes 3. l. 1. c. 4. sect. Patres magno consensu etc. where also 6, 7, sect.
he urges the concessions of Mason de minist. Ang. 5. libro 3. c. -- and of
Bishop Morton, de Euchar. 6. l. 3. c. 1. s. Note that I said, this Sacrifice
procures or obtains from God remission of sin etc by way of impetration, as
also our Prayers do, not by an immediate conferring of it, as it is in the
Sacraments.

For, as Cassander says, Sacrificium species est orationis, quare non inepte
etc. p. 199. Et hoc modo sacrificare, est preces and gratiarum actiones ad
impetrandam virtutem illius perennis victimae propositae (i. e. on the Altar)
Deo Patri offerre. p. 198. and p. 208. Hic offertur in imagine and mysterio;
cum extermis precibus and interna fide, and devotione, Sacerdos hostiam illam
unicam nomine totius Ecclesiae Deo Patri sistit, and per eam -- Sacrificium hoc
laudis, and fidei and devotionis gratum and acceptum esse postulat.

3. And so Bellarm. de Missa 2. l. 4. c. Sacrificium proprie orantis and
supplicantis est, and ad orationem juvandam adhibetur. -- Again, Sacrificium,
quod est quaedam oration (ut sic dicam) realis, non verbalis, proprie
impetratorium est. Thus much that the Eucharist was counted a proper and true
Sacrifice. Which also the Council of Trent affirms, but this in general only,
not applying this notion any way to the particular fancies of controvertists.
And tho as it is thus described, to some the name of Oblation may seem more fit
for it, yet besides the style of Sacrificium, and immolation in all antiquity,
and the lively representation that is here made of the Sacrifice on the Cross,
it differs much from all other, called Oblations, in this; That it is (in the
judgment of the Fathers, and those of the fourth opinion) that ever remaining
victime of that which was once sacrificed by a mactation, and the very same
with it, which can be said of no other oblation whatsoever. -- I would entreat
you to read Mr. Mede's discourse on Malach. 1. and 11. wholly tending to show
the Eucharist to be now the Christian Sacrifice; and that not in a
metaphorical, but a proper sense, p. 513 where he shows also that according
to the true nature of a Sacrifice, it is oblatio and epulum foederale; such as
were of old (not every offering consecrated to God, but) the
burnt-sin-peace-offerings; and that the difference of the matter and manner of
offering etc hinders not, that these now should be truly a Sacrifice, no more
than the differing of the Christian Sacraments from theirs of old (in which was
effusion of blood, as that of the Circumcision, or of the Passover) hinders,
that these now should be true Sacraments. p. 505, 506. That the viands also of
the Christian Feast even in the Primitive times were (as it is in other Federal
Sacrifices) made God's by Oblation; and so eaten of, not as of man's, but of
God's, provision. That Malach. 1.11. is alleged to this by those in the age
immediately succeeding the Apostles, Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, after them by
Tertullian, Cyprian, etc. p. 472. That mention of (...) Oblation and Altar, is
made by two that lived before the Age of the Apostles was quite expired, (when
they speak of the Christian Service) Clemens and Ignatius. See Clem. ad Cor. p.
52. and debemus omnia rite and ordine facere quae Dominus praestitutis
temporibus peragere nos jussit (oblatione scilicet,) and alia munia obire, (and
that he speaks of this oblation done in the Eucharist by the Priest, may
probably be gathered from what follows,) neque temere vel mordinate voluit ista
fieri, sed statutis temporibus and horis; ubi etiam and a quibus peragi vult
ipse, excellentissima sua voluntate definivit, ut religiose omnia etc. -- Qui
igitur praefinitis temporibus oblationes suas faciunt, accepti and beati sunt,
Domini enim mandata sequentes non oberrant -- Summo quippe Sacerdoti sua munera
tributa sunt, Sacerdotibus locus proprius assignatus est, etc. -- Laicus
praeceptis laicis constringitur, -- unusquisque vestrum -- cum decore intra
praescriptum ministerii sui canonem se contineat -- Sic D. Ignatius ad Smyrn.
Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam
esse caruem Servatoris nostri etc. And -- Nullus sine Episcopo aliquid operetur
eorum quae ad Ecclesiam pertinent. Firma Eucharistia reputetur, quae sub ipso
est etc. Non licitum est sine Episcopo neque Baptizare, neque agapen facere.
And Epistola ad Ephesians. Vos beatifico conjunctos (Episcopo) sic ut Ecclesia Jesu
Christo, Jesus Christus Patri -- Nullus erret, si quis non sit intra Altar,
privatur pane Dei. Si enim unius and alterius oration tantam vim habet, quanto
magis ea quae Episcopi and omnis Ecclesiae? Which words imply (says Mr. Mede,
p. 494.) that the Altar was the place as of the bread of God, so of the public
Prayers of the Church: -- That the Ancients believed our Blessed Savior
himself to have made such an oblation at the Institution of this holy rite,
when he took the Bread and Cup into his sacred hands, and looking up to heaven
gave thanks and blessed: p. 514. -- And to have done the same in this his new
Passover, which the Jews did in theirs, who made such an oblation to God of it
first as being a Sacrifice. -- That some such thing may be gathered from many
Scriptures: From Luke 22.20. evidently implying, that the bloody Sacrifices of
the Law, which with their meat -- and drink offerings were rites of an old
Covenant, and that this succeeded them as the rite of the new: p. 513. From
Matt. 5.4.23. which precepts the Church ab initio applied to the Eucharist; not
thinking that our Savior would enact a new law concerning Legal Sacrifices, as
which he was presently to abolish. p. 520.

From Act. 2.42. where Prayers and (...) are joined with the Eucharist, or
fraction of Bread; and which shows, that the joining of the solemn Prayers of
the Church with the mystical Commemoration of Christ in the Sacrament, took its
original from the Apostles times; (...) signifying the Communication of the
Eucharist, as the Vulgar and Syriack Transtation have it. But for this, see Dr.
Hammond on this Verse, who makes (...) here to be the People's bringing and
presenting of the Bread and Wine, and Fruits of the Earth, etc. Part of it to
be Eaten in Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice; and the rest to be distributed
amongst the Poor. See Ver. 44, 45, 46. p. 493, 494. Yet more plainly from 1
Cor. 10.21. You cannot be partakers, etc. where these two Tables imply contrary
Covenants: now here the Table of Devils is so called, because it consisted of
Viands Offered to Devils, see ver. 20. whereby those, that Eat thereof, Eat of
the Devil's Meat: Therefore the Table of the Lord is likewise called his Table,
not because, the Lord ordained it, but because it consisted of Viands Offered
to him; in the same manner as the other of those Offered to the Devil, p. 519.
-- And therefore that he knows not, why St. Paul Heb. 13.15. and St. Peter 1
Epist. 2.5. in the Sacrifices mentioned there, may not be understood to speak
of the solemn and public Service of Christians, wherein the Passion of Christ
was Commemorated, p. 487.

4. Lastly, He allows all the benefits and effects, whether propitiatory or
impetratory, by the Ancients attributed to this Sacrifice; granting the Prayers
of the Church to have been Offered to the Divine Majesty through Christ,
Commemorated in the Symbols of Bread and Wine, as by a medium, whereby to find
acceptance: -- and the representation of the Body of Christ in this Christian
Service to have been rightly used, as a Rite, whereby to find Grace and Favor
with God. Only the presence of Christ's real Body with the symbols in it, he
acknowledges not. See p. 499, 500, 501.

5 The Fathers also affirmed it to be, and Offered it as a Sa^rifice, not only
Eucharistical, or Latrentical, but also Expiatory or Propitiatory (in the sense
abovesaid) for the Remission of Sins; and Impetratory of all sorts of Benefits,
not only Spiritual, but Temporal; and both these, for all persons (according to
their several capacities) not only for those present receiving the Sacrament,
but for all those for whom this Oblation is made, tho absent, tho deceased. In
Euchristia sacramenti susceptio soli sumenti prodest, ut autem est sacrificii
consummatio, prodest illis omnibus pro quibus oblatum est sacrificium. For
wherever they held Prayers beneficial, they held this Oblation or Presentation
to the Father of the Body and Blood, and this solemn commemoration (and
repetition as it were) of the precious Death, of his dear Son, for such
persons; much more, as being the most effectual and moving kind of Petition
that can be made to him. And therefore remembrance of the absent, or deceased,
at the Altar, namely, when this Sacrifice was Offered, was more especially
desired than in other ordinary Devotions. Non ista mandavit nobis (says St.
Austin of his Mother) sed tantunmodo memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri
desideravit. ( Confess. l. 9. c. 13.)

For this, see (if you please) the Collections of Places in the Fathers, in the
Controvertists. See Bellarm. de Missa, l. 2. c. 2, 3. See the quotations set
down before. See all the Liturgies unanimously according in this Form:
Offerimus tibi pro peccatis, pro omnibus Fidelibus, vivis atque defunctis, pro
Ecclesia Catholica, etc. pro pace, pro copia fructuum, etc. See Bishop Forb. de
Euch. l. 3. c. 2. s. 12. Sacrificium autem hoc coenae non solum propitiatorium
esse pro peccatorum, quae nobis quotidie committuntur, remissione, etc. sed
etiam impetratorium omnis generis beneficiorum, etc. licet scripturae diserte
and express non dicant. Patres tamen unanimi consensu scripturas sic
intellexerunt, etc. and Liturgiae omnes veteres, etc. and s. 15. Nos inre certa
and clara diutius immorari nolumus.

6 Lastly, See Dr. Tailor in his Great Exemplar, p. 3. dise. 18. on the
Sacrament, sect. 7. There he says, -- The Eucharist is a commemorative
Sacrifice, as well as a Sacrament; in both capacities the benefit next to
infinite. -- Whatsoever Christ did at the Institution, the same he commanded
the Church to do, etc. and Himself also does the same things in Heaven for us,
etc. There he sits an High Priest continually, and Offers still the same One
perfect Sacrifice ( i. e. still represents it, as having been once finished and
consummate) in order to perpetual and never-failing events, And this also his
Ministers do on Earth -- as all the effects of Grace -- were purchased for us
on the Cross, but are applied to us -- by Christ's intercession in Heaven; so
also they are promoted by acts of Duty, etc. that we, by representing that
Sacrifice, may send up, together with our Prayers, an instrument of their
graciousness and acceptance. -- As Christ is a Priest in Heaven for ever, and
yet does not Sacrifice himself afresh; (nor yet without a Sacrifice could he be
a Priest;) but by a daily ministration and intercession represents his
Sacrifice to God, and offers himself as Sacrificed; so he does upon Earth by
the Ministry of his Servants. He is Offered to God, i. e. he is by Prayers and
the Sacrament represented, or offered up to God, as Sacrificed; which in effect
is applying of his Death to the present and future necessities of the Church,
etc. -- It follows then, that the Celebration of this Sacrifice be in its
proportion an Instrument of applying of the proper Sacrifice to all the
purposes which it first designed. It is ministerially and by application an
instrument propitiatory, it is Eucharistical, it is an act of Homage and
Adoration, it is impetratory, obtaining for the whole Church all the benefits
of the Sacrifice which is now applied, etc. -- And its profit is enlarged, not
only to the persons Celebrating, but to all to whom they design it, according
to the nature of Sacrifices and Prayers, and all such solemn Actions of
Religion. Thus much Dr. Tailor, conformably to the judgment of the Church in
all Ages, and practice in her public Liturgies. See the same in Medes Diatrib.
upon Mal. 1.11. And it is worth your labor to see the Alterations concerning
this matter which have been lately made (I suppose by some of the most prudent
and learned Fathers of the English Church) in the new Liturgy provided for
Scotland, tending much to the vindication of the use of the Eucharist by way of
Sacrifice. In the Prayer for the whole State of Christ's Church are put in
these words [We commend especially unto thy merciful Goodness the Congregation
which is here Assembled in thy Name to Celebrate the Commemoration of the most.
precious Death and Sacrifice of thy Son, etc.] Where [and Sacrifice] is added
de novo. But the rest of the words are found in the former Common Prayer Book
of Edw. VI. Again, in the Prayer of Consecration, whereas it is said in all the
former Liturgies [to continue a perpetual memory of that his precious Death
until his coming again.] it is added here [Death and Sacrifice until etc.] But
chiefly after the Prayer of Consecration, and before the administering of the
Sacrament to the Communicants, you may find interposed (after the manner of the
first Books of Edw. VI.) a Prayer (as it is there called) of Oblation (in which
Prayer of the Missal which follows the Consecration,) the beginning of which
Prayer is left out by our later Liturgies, and the rest transported to after
the Sacrament received (beginning thus, O Lord, our Heavenly Father, We thy
humble Servants, etc.) perhaps on purpose lest it might bear any show of the
former solemn offerings of the Eucharist (before communicating it) to God as a
Sacrifice in those words (which are not found in the common Liturgies) in the
beginning of the Prayer [ We thy humble Servants do celebrate and make here
before thy Divine Majesty, with these thy holy Gifts, the Memorial which thy
Son has willed us to make, having in remembrance his blessed Passion, mighty
Resurrection, and glorious Ascension, etc. -- And we entirely desire thy
Fatherly Goodness, mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of Praise, etc.
Beseeching, etc. that we and all thy whole Church may obtain Remission of our
Sins, and all other benefits of his Passion.] -- The Romans Miss. has it: Unde
and memores, Domine, nos servi tui ejusdem Christi Filii tui Domini nostri tum
beatae Passionis, nec non ab inferis resurrectionis, sed and in coelos
gloriosae ascensionis offerimus praeclarae majestati tu^e de tuis donis ac
datis, hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immaculatam, etc. See, if you
please, these prudent reformations, or perfectings of the former English
Liturgy ( i.e. that prepared for Scotland,) and many more (which I omit) noted
in a Scotch Book called Laudensium autocatacrisis (from p. 100 to 114,) and
censured for their agreement with Popery, i. e. Indeed for their conformity
with the former practice of the Church Catholic.

Oblation of this Christian Sacrifice is confessed to have always been part of
the public Service of the Church (contained in the Second Service thereof, The
Onassion of the Daily Oblation in the Reformed Churches.
) and to have been daily, or at least at all times of solemn Prayers, and on
the days of God's public Worship, everywhere made and celebrated (tho there
were few or no Communicants, except him who Officiated,) for those many
beneficial ends abovementioned, which the Church conceived noncommunicants
also to receive from this precious Offering. See the proofs in Medes Diatrib.
upon Mal. 1.11. p. 484, 493. That the public Prayers of the Church were always
joined with the mystical Commemoration of Christ, in the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood: And that this was no after-invention of the Fathers, but took its
original from the Apostles times, and the very beginning of Christianity. See
the like Testimonies in Mr. Thorndyke of Christian Assemblies. See Calvin's
expression to the same purpose, Instit. lib. 4. c. 17. s. 44. Quae de
Sacramento hoc hactenus disseruimus abunde ostendunt, non institutum ideo
fuisse, ut semel quotannis acciperetur, idque persunctorie (ut nune communiter
moris est) verum quo fiequenti in usu Christianis omnibus esset, ut frequenti
memoria passionem Christi repeterent, etc. -- Talem fuisse Ecclesiae
Apostolicae usum, Lucas in Actis commemorat; quum fideles ait perseverantes
fuisse in doctrina Apostolorum, communicatione, fractione panis, and
orationibus; sic agendum omnino erat, ut nullus Ecclesiae conventus fieret,
sine verbo, orationibus, participatione coenae, and eleemosynis. Hunc and apud
Corinthios fuisse institutum ordinem, satis ex Paulo conspicere licet; and
multis postea saeculis in usu fuisse constat etc. This he speaks indeed with
reference to the peoples daily or frequent communicating; but if this will not
be had, what excuse is there in the meanwhile of the Priests omitting the daily
or frequent oblation thereof, useful for so many purposes, besides that of the
communion; used in all former times even where the people were negligent to
receive? See S. Chrysostom's saying, p. 78. Quid vero? nos non quotidie
offerimus? and Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Ephesians. Frustra habetur quotidiana oblatio, cum
nemo sit, qui simul participet. Frustra, i.e. comparatively, non tam fructuose.
Hieronym. in Tit. 1. c. says; Sacerdotes -- quotidie pro peccatis populi ac
suis sacrificare. August. contra adversar. leg. 1. l. 20. c. Ecclesia immolat
in corpore Christi sacrificium laudis, ex quo Deus Deorum locutus vocavit
terram a Solis ortu usque ad occasum. -- Ep. 86. Sacrificium laudis (meaning
the Eucharist) ab Ecclesia toto orb diffusa diebus omnibus immolatur. -- Ep.
23. Christus semel in cruce immolatus omni die in Sacramento populis immolatur.
See the quotation p. Quotidianum esse voluit sacrificium. Ep. ad Januar. quoted
by Calvin. ib. alibi -- Nullus dies intermittitur, quo non offeratur; alibi
Sabbato tantum and Dominico; where it appears this oblation at least, tho
people more seldom communicated it, was made once a week every Lord's day;
(used still to this day by all other modern Churches. Eastern and Western:) How
comes it to pass then, I say it with grief, that such a sacrifice for such
precious ends is ceased only to be continually offered in the Churches
Reformed? If they agree also in the same notion of sacrifice with antiquity,
why have not their public prayers and intercessions, after the confessed
manner of all the ancient and modern Churches of God, the efficacious
assistance of this sacrifice? I desire it may be seriously considered, whether
this be not a defect in their public Service much to be laid to heart (in the
daily loss of such an allowed-most-effectual means of Address to God Almighty)
by all the followers of the Reformation. You will pardon me this digression.

Fathers held; That in this Sacrifice, (the representation of that of the
Cross, The Fathers say that it is an oblation of the same body which was
crucified.
and beneficial to us only by its virtue,) is an oblation made of the very same
Body and Blood of Christ, which our High Priest also himself now offers in
Heaven, (which is prevalent with his Father also in reference to his former
sufferings, neither that oblation in heaven, nor this upon the Altar paying the
price of our Redemption; but used for an application of the price paid for
several sinners for the actual remission of sins daily committed.) Again, the
same body now offered that was offered upon the Cross, tho not in the same
manner, (i.e.) by mactation; and therefore being in such respect more properly
Sacrificium (as one expresses it) passive sumptum pro sacrificato noviter
nobis applicato, quia in illo continetur Corpus Christi quod fuit vere
sacrificatum in unico illo sacrificio crucis, yet with a representation also of
that sacrificing of it, in the blood being here severed and offered apart from
the body. So that I may say, a little altering Cassander's words, Consult. de
sacrificio corp. p. 196. Veteres in hoc mystico sacrificio (Cassand. [non tam])
tum peractae semel in cruce oblationis, cujus hic memoria celebratur [quam] tum
perpetui sacerdotii, and jugis sacrificii, quod quotidie in coelis sempiternus
Sacerdos offert, rationem habuerant, cujus hic imago per solennes ministrorum
preces exprimitur. Neither is there any more incongruity that Christ's true
body and blood be here offered, and yet this be done also in commemoration of
his body offered upon the cross, than that his real body (which those of the
second opinion maintain) be here partaken of by the worthy receiver, and yet
this also done in commemoration of the same body given for us upon the cross.
See for the Fathers holding an oblation in the Eucharist of the true and real
body of Christ, the places quoted out of them, before. See likewise Bishop
Forbes 3. l. 1. c. 10. s. Dicunt etiam saepissime Sancti Patres in Eucharistia
offerri and sacrificarripsum Christi corpus, ut ex innumeris pene locis
constat; sed non proprie and realiter omnibus sacrificii proprietatibus
servatis, sed per commemorationem sacrificii (crucis.) -- Et per piam
supplicationem qua Ecclesiae ministri, propter unius illius sacrificii
perpetuam victimam (so they call Christ's body remaining still after
sacrificed) in coelis ad dextram Patris assistentem, and in sacra mensa modo
ineffabili praesentem Deum Patrem humillime rogant, ut virtutem and gratiam
hujus perennis victimae, Ecclesiae suae, ad omnes corporis and animi
necessitates efficacem and salutarem esse velit. Where note also, that either
Bishop Forbes his opinion (tho he opposes Transubstantiation) is, That
Christ's body is present with the symbols before communicating, (tho this is
not so clearly professed by him in 1. l. 1. c. see the 7. sect. there, and
rather the contrary intimated in 2. l. 2. c. 8, and 9. sect.) or else here he
seems to contradict himself, in these words especially, in sacra mensa modo
ineffabili praesentem; for this ceremony of oblation upon the table is before
communicating. To which add those words of his 3d. Book 2. c. 13. sect. where
Bishop White, showing how the Eucharist might be said to be a sacrifice here,
non solum ratione precum and actionis gratiarum, (which is the common
solution,) sed and ratione Eucharistiae ipsius, both quia elementa externa
panis and vini consecrantur and ad Dommi cultum deputantur etc, and also quia
corpus and sanguis Christi praesentia animae fide and pietate pastoris and
populi, qui haec mysteria percipiunt, Deo offeruntur and sistuntur. Bishop
Forbes censures that expression with a nimis jejune hoc dictum; but who will
say more, must affirm a presence of it with the symbols. See likewise his
quotation out of Nazianzen 2. l. 2. c. 8. s. See 1, book. 1. c. 26. s. Christi
corpus reale nobis cum pane exhibetur.

Fifthly, tho the oblation of the body and blood of this Son of God in the
Eucharist was always presumed to be in its self most acceptable unto the
Father; yet in respect of those who or for whom it is offered, the same thing
by the Ancients was conceived of it, as of all other prayers, that it is
sometimes accepted by God for them, sometimes again not; namely, if they be
such as are otherwise unreformed in their lives, and unworthy of God's favors.
Again, that sometimes more, sometimes less benefit is received by it, according
to the several preparation or indigence of the Suppliants, or also the good
pleasure of the divine dispensation; as also that of the cross, tho infinite in
its value, and offered for all, is beneficial for some, not others; and as
Christ's intercession in heaven is still continued for our several necessities,
though one single act thereof (had it so seemed good to the divine ordination)
had bin supersufficient for the obtaining for all, for ever, all benefits
whatsoever. Hence are those Prayers in the Liturgies concerning this oblation
after the words of Institution pronounced: supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu
respicere digneris, and accepta habere, sicuti accepta habere dignatus es
munera pueri tui justi Abel etc. and jube haec perferri per manus S. Angeli tui
in sublime Altar tuum: and in some Liturgies after the words of Institution
pronounced, Fac Domine panem istum corpus Filii tui, or something to this
purpose.

All which Petitions (if they are not to be thought part of the Consecration of
these Elements) are to be understood to be made, with reference not so much to
the thing Offered, as to the Offerers; That God would accept it from them, for
them, them for it; and confer on them the benefits and fruits thereof. As if I
said; Respice pro nobis, -- fac nobis, -- Jube proferri pro nobis, etc. Cassan.
in Consult. art. 24. p. 208. Haec non ad ipsam hostiam corporis Christi in se,
sed ad offerendi modum qui prece, fide, devotione constat, referenda sunt;
videlicet quia sacrificio omnia non dignitate rei oblatae, sed offerentis
animo, aestimantur.

These five things well considered, I think first an Answer to (ch) is
sufficiently made; it appearing, that as the Fathers in this Sacrament held a
Commemoration in this Sacrifice of that upon the Cross, so an Oblation
nevertheless of the real Body and Blood of Christ; which two are showed before
well to coexist.

To (); To Concerning the Form of the Mass
First, This Objection methinks presses also the Objectors (and therefore they
must help to answer it,) for they do not allow it a commemorative Sacrifice
before, but only after Consecration and Sanctification of the Elements: Which
Consecration therefore they neglect not; neither I think will they grant those
Epithets, that in this first Oblation are given, any way to belong to simple
and common Bread.

Secondly, That the Bread and the Wine in the Eucharist is Offered to God, none
deny; even none of those who hold a real presence of Christ's Body: nor that
the Symbols after Consecration remain with, and are Offered with the Body of
Christ, else there could be no visible Sacrifice at all there; nor that many
things are and may be said in Liturgies (after Consecration) of the Symbols as
well as of the Body; and that also they are called by the name of Bread, Gods
Creatures, etc. See what is said of this before.

Thirdly, That in the primitive times, (at least when at this Solemnity by much
people much provision was brought in for the relief of the Poor,) an Oblation
in the first place might be made to God of them, as of the People's Alms and
Thanksgivings for his Blessings, it is very probable, (which Offertory before
the Communion is retained also in the English Liturgy, and in that prepared for
Scotland;) also many new Texts added to those formerly read, in the time of the
Offering, that are very expressive to this purpose. Which addition is taken
notice of, and censured, in the Book called Laudensium Autocatacrisis (p. 101.)
as directly (says it) in a literal sense carrying to a Jewish Oblation.
Likewise, whereas the Rubric of the former Common Prayer Book orders only,
that such Alms be put in the Poor Man's-Box, this new one enjoineth, that the
Deacon shall reverently bring the said Basin with the Oblations therein, and
deliver it to the Presbyter, who shall humbly present it before the Lord, and
set it Upon the Holy Table. See Cassand. Consult. art. 24. p. 194. who ranks
the several Offices in the Canon thus: Symbolorum consecrandorum oblatio;
oblatorum consecratio; mortis Domini commemoratio; gratiarum actio; pro communi
omnium salute supplicatio; (which last St. Ambrose and St. Austin were of
opinion was a prescribed Form left by St. Paul to all Churches, in the
Celebration of this Sacrament, according to what is said in 1 Timothy 2.1.)
Sacramentorum distributio and participatio. And p. 202. Primum populi
oblationes Deo commendantur; Der nomen invocatur; symbola oblata verbis Domini
consecrantur; mors Domini commendatur; vivorum and mortuorum memoria agitur;
pro tota Ecclesia and totius orbis incolumitate Deo preces offeruntur. This is
the Order, he says, of the present Roman Service. Again p. 207, of the same
Service he says, Primum sacrificii and doni nomine intelligitur sacrificium
populi quod consistit in pane and vino, -- deinde est sacrificium corporis
Christi, etc. And see Bishop Forbes l. 3. c. 1. s. 9. Panis Eucharisticus Deo
consecratur; quia de profano seu non sacro sacer fit; Deo specialiter dedicatur
(ut constat ex rebus factis and verbis dictis circa ipsum) ideo negari non
potest quin Deo specialiter offeratur; fit igitur ibi quodammodo sacrificium
panis, etc. This Offering up of the Bread and Wine prepared for the Sacrament
is also expressly appointed in the new English Liturgy; where, after the
Oblation made of the Alms, the Rubric says, and the Presbyter shall then ( i.
e. together with the Alms) Offer up, etc. the Bread and Wine prepared for the
Sacrament upon the Lord's Table, etc. -- Thus the Bread may be said to be
Offered as a Sacrifice of Alms, and Praise, and Thanksgiving for God's good
Creatures, etc. or as some portion of it is then Dedicated. Bellarm. de Missa,
l. 1. c. 27. In omnibus Liturgiis, seu Graecis seu Latinis, quantumvis
antiquis, pars actionis est oblatio rerum consecrandarum. This being, as I
conceive, for the intentions but now mentioned.

But Fourthly, To go a little further; since it must be granted from what is
said above, That the Fathers in some part or other of this Service make an
Oblation of the real Body of our Lord; and since (again) its manifest, that the
same expressions are used in the Oblations made before, as in those after the
words of Institution pronounced; and the Offering mentioned in these there is
tending to all the same ends and purposes, whether Propitiatory, Impetratory,
or Eucharistical (as you may see by comparing the Prayers before, Suscipe
Sancte Pater, etc. and Te igitur Clementissime Pater, etc. with the Prayer
after the words of Institution -- unde and memores Domine, etc.) From these two
things therefore I think it follows, That all these Prayers and Service (before
as well as after) refer to the same Sacrifice and Oblation of the Body and
Blood of our Lord: It being most improbable, that the same or the like
expressions would be used of that which they conceived only Bread, and
(afterward) of that which they conceived to be Christ's real Body, if the
former was used as a distinct Oblation without relation to the later. The
action therefore of this Oblation is only preparatory in the precedent Prayers,
according to that expression in one of them, Benedic hoc sacrificium tuo sancto
nomine praeparatum; consummate in that following -- unde and memores etc.
offerimus, etc. Offertur panis non ut sacrificium perfectum, sed ut inchoatum
and perficiendum, says Bellarm. de Missa l. 1. c. 27. Therefore the chief
purpose of the Prayers before seems to be Consecratory and Benedictive of the
Symbols, rather than Oblatory, tho in them the Oblation is mentioned. So they
begin with Petition, Suscipe hanc hostiam, etc. quam offero, i. e. quam
oblaturus sum pro etc. or cujus oblationem praepare; according to which is that
following offerimus deprecantes etc. after which is said Veni sanctificator
benedic hoc sacrificium praeparatum etc. -- and -- Te igitur clementissime
Pater rogamus uti accepta habeas and benedicas haec dona, haec sancta
sacrificia illibata; Sancta illibala, i. e. post benedictionem; and after this,
quam oblationem tu Deus benedictam facere digneris, etc. But after the
Institution, follows a consummated Oblation. And indeed in some Liturgies we
find no Oblation at all made. I mean in this kind, pro peccatis, pro Ecclesia,
etc. till after the words of Institution and Consecration completed; see
Constable. Apost. l. 8. c. 17, 18. See Chrysostom. Liturg* offerimus tibi etc. pro
requiescentibus in fide etc. -- super oblatis and sanctificatis pretiosis donis
Dominum rogemus ut benignus Deus noster dimittat nobis divinam gratiam etc.
after the Consecration finished. And, there being no controversy amongst them
about the matter of the Sacrament we cannot doubt the intentions in all the
Liturgies are the same. Then therefore follows a consummated Oblation in a more
singular manner, -- unde and memores Domine, nos servi offerimus Majestati tuae
de tuis donis hostiam puram etc. and the prayers following are for God's
acceptance of their Oblation, not for benediction; not benedicta facere, but
accepta habere, and jube perferri per manus etc. And then, lastly, follow other
prayers, with reference to the worthy communicating of his Body. For note, that
as some petitions (first for benediction, and then for acceptance) there are
with respect to the Eucharist as an oblation; (which oblation is joined also
with those prayers;) so other prayers there are with respect to it as a
sacrament, and the communication to us of Christ's Body to be performed
afterward. And to this may aptly be applied that Prayer made in some Liturgies
after the words of Institution, Fiat nobis corpus Christi tui, i. e. to us
communicating thereof to all the spiritual effects and benefits thereof.

5. But fifthly, one thing ordinarily taken for granted [That our Savior's
words of Institution are (I do not say the chiefest part of, but) the whole and
only consecration; so that this is neither begun by any Prayers before these,
nor continued by any after them,] is a thing very disputable; Whether in the
opinion of the Ancients, from whom we have received these Liturgies, they were
so thought to be: and it has bin a contest between the Greek and Roman Church
of later times. See Bishop Forbes his discourse about it de Eucharistia 2. l.
2. c. 1, 2, 3. sect. and Cassand. consult. art. 24. de iteratione, p. 202 Both
who say, that it is the safer opinion to place it in both, and that veteres
Latini utriusque pariter and invocationis sive precis and Dominicorum verborum
mentionem faciunt in consecrandis mysteriis.

And that passage of Damascene and of Epiphanius in 2. Nicen. Conc. act. 6.
tom. 3. that Basil called the Symbols antitypa only before, not after
consecration, whereas he calls them so after the words of Institution, but
before Fac istum panem corpus etc. shows, that they in those times conceived
the consecration partly at least to be in these following words. And Basil
himself says Invocation was used by the Church as well after as before the
Evangelical words, tanquam multum habens momenti ad mysterium. See Basil. de
Spiritu S. 27. c. where speaking of the authority of unwritten Traditions,
amongst many others, he names the forms of the Liturgies; Invocationis verba
cum conficitur panis Eucharistiae and poculum benedictionis, quis sanctorum (
i. e. of the Apostles) in scripto nobis reliquit? Nec enim his contenti sumus
quae commemorat Apostolus aut Evangelium; verum alia quoque and ante, and post,
dicimus, tanquam multum habentia momenti ad mysterium, quae ex traditione,
citra scriptum, accepimus. Consecramus autem aquam Baptismatis, and ex quibus
scriptis? nonne a tacita secretaque traditione? etc.

Now this being supposed, that other prayers besides our Lords words bear some
part in the consecration, many of the objections made will be of no force: some
of which also may be and are used as arguments to confirm this tenent.

1. To [n] it is answered, To n.
first, that this matters not, if true; because as much, tho not the same, is
said in the Roman form, before the words of Institution. Therefore to no
purpose were it, to alter some and not the rest which is as opposite to their
opinion.

2. That no alteration is made of the ancient form for the things objected,
they being found placed in the same order in the Ambrosian Liturgy, de sacram.
4. l. 4. c. by which unquestioned-ancient form you may find Bellarmin to defend
the Roman Missal in all the chief objections made against it, in his 2. l. de
Miss. 24. cap.

To [x] an answer may be collected out of what is said above in the 5th
consideration, To x.
and out of what was but now said to [a.]

Now to their Answer to the second argument of the Fathers. To [t] I say: To t.
Reply to their answer to the 2d. argument out of the Fathers.
but the Reformed deny the change of any accident at all in the bread, (of the
change of which bread in something or other the Fathers speak, and that before
communicating,) and all the change they allow (save only relative) is in the
communicant ex pacto or promissione divina upon receipt of the bread.

To [r], see the answer which is made p. And we not unusually compare things,
when (not only in some other things they are incomparable, To r s.
but) in the reason of the comparison one far transeends, or is transcended by
the other. Which may be said also to [s].

To [t] I grant both in Baptism and the Eucharist to be a miraculous or
supernatural effect wrought upon the soul of the worthy receiver; To t.
to which such miraculous instances wrought by God's omnipotency may be not
unfitly applied. But besides this effect acknowledged in general; first, in
Baptism it has bin a question, (and undecided for any thing I know by any
Council,) Whether the Baptismal water contineat aut conferat gratiam, per
virtutem aliquam creatam ( i.e. upon the benediction thereof) quae illi insit,
and qua effectum gratiae operetur; or, quia divina virtus illi ad producendum
gratiae effectum certo and infallibiliter ex Christi promissione assistit, ut
habeat rationem causae sine qua non: (i. e.) that God immediately by himself
and not by the water gives such grace, whenever the water washes a sinner. Now
tho the later opinion is the more common, yet some of the Fathers at least are
thought to incline to the former, which makes a great miracle wrought not upon
the Baptized only, but upon the water. See Chrysostom. (who is quoted by them for
his high expressions concerning Baptism as well as concerning the Eucharist) in
Johan. Hom. 25. Ex quo Jordanis alveum ingressus est Christus non amplius
reptilia animarum viventium, sed animas rationales and spirituales aqua
producit. And Hom. 24. upon c. 3. -- Unless a man be born of water -- Si quis
interroget, quomodo ex aqua? rursus ego illud, quomodo ex terra, ( i.e. in
man's first generation?) nam quemadmodum terra inanimata etc divina voluntate
ad tanta miracula producenda vires accepit; ita spiritu and sensibili aqua
omnia haec admirabilia and humanam cogitationem excedentia facile exoriuntur.
-- Nunquam aqua Baptismi purgare peccata credentium posset, nisi tactu Dominici
corporis fuisset sanctificata. And Cyril. Alexand. in Joann. 2. l. 42. c. Sicut
viribus ignis intensius aqua calefacta non aliter quam virtute ignis urit; sic
aqua virtute Spiritus sancti in se suscepta abstergit peccata. And Estius 4.
sent. 1. d. 5. s. Haec sententia est probabilior si nudas quasdam Patrum
sententias, ut sonant, attendamus. Now, suppose the Fathers to be of this
opinion, they might well apply the same instances and expressions to Baptism
for this supernatural infused virtue into the water, as they do to the
Eucharist for the supernatural mutation of the elements, without any diminution
at all to the miraculousness of this effect. This for Baptism.

2. In the Eucharist there is pretended to be, besides the supernatural effect
wrought upon the communicant by Christ's body, a miraculous conversion also of
the elements into that his body* Now that the Fathers used those miraculous
instances of God's omnipotency, to illustrate a miraculous change made not in
the communicant, but also in the elements, and to prove not a presence of
Christ's body simply in the Eucharist, but a supernatural mutation of the bread
(some way or other) into it, I think is both plain (if you please to review the
places I quoted out of them) from their clear language, applied to the
elements, not to the communicants; and very consonant to the other arguments
which are drawn out of them, to show their Tenent of the real presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist before communicating.

Again to [u] that they held this change in the elements of the Eucharist much
otherwise than that in the Waters of Baptism, To u.
tho both some way miraculous, seems plain; in that, tho in Baptism Grace and
the Spirit is bestowed, and then we are also incorporated into Christ, etc. yet
say they not of the Water of Baptism from this effect thereof, that it is the
Spirit; or is turned into the Spirit; neither says the Apostle, that in
unworthy receiving it, we are guilty of the Spirit; as in the other he says,
guilty of the Body. Neither was there ever such a veneration, or reservation of
it, such a care that none should be spilt, or fall to the ground, as of the
consecrated Elements; which shows, that tho they imagine some miracle in both,
yet a much different and transcendent one in the second.

To ph. Reply to their Answ. to the 3d Arg. out of the Fathers concerning
Sacrifice.
since the real presence of Christ's Body, that now is in Heaven, with the
worthy Receiver, is as great a Miracle, as that other with the Symbols; it is
strange, why those allowing the one so strongly oppose the other; unless
perhaps this be to avoid Adoration. -- Concerning the Reply which may be made
to their Answer to the third Argument out of the Fathers, see (before) the
Reply to [l]

fourth Argument out of the Fathers, Adoration: Reply to their Answ. to the 4th
Arg. out of the Fathers concerning Adoration.
The heads of what they say (see before) as well as I can understand them are
these; a That the Symbols are to be used with a due reverence and respect, as
things consecrated to a sacred use. b That Christ may be worshipped also in
receiving of the Eucharist, as he is now in Heaven sitting at the right hand of
God. g But not as present in the Eucharist, because no Divine command for any
such thing, and because he is there ut manducetur non ut adoretur; he saying
there, Take eat, not take worship. a.
Or yet further, That he may be worshipped as present (or who is present) by
Faith in the hearts of the Communicants; b.
or also really present, g.
as others say, to the worthy Receiver; and who is present also in the Symbols
after that manner as the thing signified or represented may be said to be
present in that thing which signifies it. d.
d That the Fathers, in the places quoted out of them, speak either of a
reverence due to the consecrated Symbols of our Savior's Body, or also of
Adoration of our Savior, or of his Body in some of the foresaid manners or
intentions, but not as really present with the Symbols.

z That these may not be worshipped for Christ's Body, z
etc. That if they be, it is flat Idolatry [e]. e.
That those of the fourth Opinion do worship them for Christ, or for his Body.

Of these [a] and [b] are granted. To [g] First, Reply to a. b. To g.
I suppose a Precept in general, to worship Christ; and the whole Christ to be
there wherever his Body is; it being never severed, not when it lay in the
Grave, from the Divinity.

And therefore (as Daille grants out of St. Austin's Apology, c. 10.)
l'humanite de Jesus Christ est vrayement and proprement, adorable. I find
Calvin indeed somewhat boggle at it, Inst. l. 4. c. 17. s. 35. where bringing
in this arguing, Si corpus est and anima and divinitas sint una cum corpore,
quae jam divelli non possunt, igitur illic adorandus Christus, he says, Primum
si sua illa, quam obtendunt, concomitantia ipsis negetur quid facient? -- Quis
sanus and sobrius Christi corpus Christum esse sibi persuadeat? But there is no
Body that says, that Christ's Body is Christ; but that it being no more since
his Passion (for Christ dies no more, Romans 6.) a dead Body, but having the
Soul joined with it, as likewise ever since the Incarnation having its
Hypostasie, or subsistence from the Deity joined with it, therefore where the
Body is, there is totus Christus. But yet suppose Christ's true Body in the
Sacrament apart, I hope Calvin will allow a superior worship to be given to it,
properly due to no other Creature. Let then such be the worship we here speak
off.

2. Next; Affirmative precepts (such as this is of worshipping Christ) do not
oblige to every time and place; but if they are unlimited and general, they
warrant the lawfulness of our practice of them in any time or place. Nor is
there need of any partiticular command in respect of these ( i. e. places or
times) without which we may not obey them. See Discourse concerning Adoration,
etc. p. 1.

3. But then again: This is seriously to be considered, concerning affirmative
precepts; That they do oblige for some time and places, positis debitis
circumstantiis; else they would not oblige at all. Now, Suppose Christ's Body
really present in the Eucharist, and that with the Symbols, (as the Lutheran
believes,) what fitter time to Adore, than when we receive from him the
greatest Love and Mercy that can be showed to Mankind, the Communion of his own
Flesh and Blood to us? And what fitter place than in a Church, wherein usually
we receive it? and when, and where no impediant circumstances can be alleged?
Let therefore the omission of such worship be lawful, with Daille's
qualifications, (Reply to Chaumont p. 66.) Purveuque cette omission ne proceed
ni de haine ni de mespris ni de non chalance ni d'aucune autre mau-vaise
disposition de esprit: Yet how the Lutheran (considering his persuasion) is
acquitted from some of these in his omission (at such time) of Adoration, I see
not. And Daille himself, in his Apology, c. 9. p. 66. seems to maintain the
necessity, in such time of this Duty, supposing a real presence. Si le
Sacrament -- est en sa substance le corpse de Christ, etc. il est evident qu' on
le peut and qu'. on le doit adorer; attenduque le corpse de Christ est un suiet
adorable.

Now, if the Body of Christ be a subject adorable to the Romanists, so it is to
the Lutherans. And see St. Austin's saying to this purpose before: Non solum
non peccamus adorando, sed non adorando peccamus. And what man is excused from
blame, who appearing in the presence of his Prince, to receive from him the
Donation of his Lise or Liberty, etc does not at such time give unto him his
due Honor, tho by no Law obliged at all times to do it?

To [d] First, its plain from the places quoted, That by the Fathers in the
Eucharist not only an inferior reverence was given to the Symbols, but also a
divine worship to Christ. Else St. Austin, if speaking of an inferior
reverence, would not have asked the question, To d.
Quomodo sine impietate adoretur terra? since the Creature is well capable of
some inferior veneration. Nor would S. Ambrose say; adoramus illam carnem, quam
Apostoli in Domino Jesu adorarunt: nor S. Chrysostom, quam in praesepi
adorarunt Magi, etc. hence is that answer excluded, that they speak of, A
reverent usage of the Symbols.

2ly. It Is plain, that they worshipped not only the omnipotent Deity of Christ,
but his Humane nature or substance as there present.

3ly. Present not only to the worthy receiver, but on the Table, on the Altar;
which they worshipped as there, before their receiving it. As appears by --
Illum, quisuper Altar colitur. -- Adducti sunt ad mensam Domini, and accipiunt
de corpore and sanguine, sed adorant tantum etc. -- Imitemur vel barbaros etc.
Tu non in praesepi vides, sed in altari. -- Non Angelos, sed Dominum ostendo.
-- Si pura sunt vestimenta, adora and manduca. -- Rogantes Agnum propositum (i.
e.) on the Altar, etc. see the former quotations. Therefore those answers serve
not, of worshipping him as really present to the receiver, or present in men's
hearts by faith.

Neither does that help any thing (which I do not well understand) of
worshipping Christ (which must be with divine worship) and that before
receiving, as representatively present in the symbols, (he in reality not being
there.) Which thing (first whether it may, or may not be done) is unappliable
to the Fathers, who express themselves, to adore the very flesh (not its figure
or representation) as present on the Altar; that flesh as now on the Altar,
which the Apostles adored in Domino Jesu, and the wise men in the Babe, in
praesepi; and non Angelos, says Chrysostom, neque Archangelos, neque Coelos,
sed ipsum eorum ostendo Dominum. Is signum corporis Domini, which thing, only,
they say, he showed, above Angels?

Now to examine the answer it self a little; whether such a thing may lawfully
be done. And here I will first set you down Bellarmin's reply to such an
answer, given by Pet. Martyr to that place of Nazianzen, [eumque qui super
altar colitur magno cum clamore obtestans] who said, Coli quidem Christum
super altar, sed coli in symbolo, sicut in symbolo significatur. To which the
Cardinal; vel est ipse revera in symbolo illo, vel non est; si est etc. si non
est; ergo licet saltem coram symbolis procumbere, and ibi Christum licet
absentem adorare; ergo licet imagines Christi venerari, etc. or rather Christum
in imagine ipsius adorare. And does, not this warrant divine adoration of
Christ's Body and Blood as some way present there, and that before
communicating, to be lawful, and that to all opinions whatsoever, if only they
hold the Sacrament a sign of Christ's Body? And then why says Daille, (who
gives this answer for the Fathers adoration,) that the Lutherans worship of the
Body of Christ in the Eucharist, if there it be not, is vain, and inutile and
tomb par maniere de dire dans le neant? Reply to Chaumont p. 63. Would it be
in vain in a Lutheran, and was it not so in the Fathers? And is it without
reason then that which Calvin says, de Christiana pacificatione 11. c. Cum in
coelesti gloria resideat Christus, quisquis alio se convertit ejus adorandi
causa, ab ipso discedit? which is most true, if Christ be only in heaven: he
that worships Christ or his Body there where he confesses it is not, nor any
thing else (relating to it) that is capable of such a worship as he gives,
seems to me to have no object at all of his worship. For divine worship suits
not to the sign; and there is nothing else there (in his opinion) to give it
to. To worship Christ as there, must be to worship something there as him: we
worship Christ upon the Altar, i. e. we worship Christ in Heaven, upon the
motive of something representing him upon the Altar, is too sorc'd a paraphrase
of the Fathers expressions.

To [z] it is granted. To z.
To [e] namely, that those of the fourth opinion, To e. Concerning idolatry
imputed to the Roman Church, Whether the Roman Church worship not Christ as
corporally present in the Sacrament, but (by holding Transubstantiation) the
Sacrament instead of Christ: and whether all such worship however qualified be
idolatry?
contrary to the practice of the Fathers, worship not only Christ that is
present, corporally present, with the symbols, but (by holding
Transubstantiation) the very substance of bread in stead of Christ, and that
all such worship (however qualified) is idolatry; much is to be said, and
rather because Monsieur Daille an eminent man (in his Apology for the Reformed
Churches, lately published in English) has singled out this point from all the
rest, upon which chiefly to ground a necessity of separation from former
Church, and of excusing the separaters from Schism.

Now to make way for what I have to say; first I will premise some concessions
of Monsieur Daille's, who has very diligently argued this point, and then some
concessions (on the other side) or qualifications (in their adoration) of the
Transubstantialists; by both which I conceive the heavy imputation of
committing idolatry, that is laid upon them, may be much lightened.

1. First therefore Daille grants (which yet I do not press so much, because he
says such things, Mr. Daille's Concessions.
as because in reason no man can say otherwise) an enorme difference (as he
calls it) between worshipping Christ or the body of Christ in the Sacrament, and
worshipping the Sacrament; (see 2d. Reply to Chaumont, p. 29.) and this, tho we
mean the first of worshipping his Body as really present in, or with, the
Symbols.

2. Of which worship of Christ as present, he holds that it is not idolatrous
at all, because it has no direction to any object now-adorable; but (to use
his own words) seulement vain and iuutile and tombant par maniere de dire dans
le neant, s'abusant en ceci seulement que par erreur elle cherche cet objet and
pense l'embrasser la, ou il n' est point. 1. Reply to Chaumont, p. 63. See
likewise 12. c. of his Apology, where he says, "Had the Church of Rome obliged
us only to adore Christ in the Sacrament, they had not by this tied us to
worship any creature. So he says 1. Reply. p. 20. Bienque nous ne croions pas
cette presence du corpse de Christ dans les signs, neant-moins nous n' estimons
pas, que la creance en soit si criminelle, qu' elle nous oblige a rompre avec
tous iceux, qui la tiennent -- de facon que si l'eglise Romain n' eust en
aucune autre erreurque celle la, nous accordons volontiers qu' elle ne nous
eust pas done un suffisant suiet de nous separer d'auec elle, come il paroist
de ce que nous la supportons es Lutheriens. Quell est donc la cause de nostre
separation d'auec elle? l'adoration de l' hostie etc.

3. He holds, that Adoration follows necessarily the tenent of the presence of
Christ's body in the Eucharist. Quant au droit; and qu' on le peut and qu' on
le doit adorer, attenduque le corpse de Christ est un suiet adorable. Which
shows Adoration to be rightly grounded on Christ's corporal presence, be it
after what manner soever, that of the Romanist, or that of the Lutheran; for le
corpse de Christ est suiet adorable. Apol. 9. c.

4. He resolves Apol. 10. c. the Jews worshipping before the Ark or footstool
Psalm. 99.5. and Psalm. 132.7. into worshipping God as especially present there
upon the Ark; symbolum praesentiae Dei, as Rivet calls it, or between the
Cherubims ver. 1. And if we compare [adorate scabellum] there, as the Vulgar
read it, with [adorarunt vitulum,] Exodus 32.8; to worship the true God of
Israel in the Calf is judged idolatry, to worship the same God before the Ark
or between the Cherubims, none.

5. So he grants Apol 11. c. That when our Savior was on ^arth, a Disciple's
giving divine honor upon mistake to another person much resembling him, would
be no idolatry; so supposing the consecrated Host truly adorable, should one
see one exposed on the Altar that happened not to be consecrated and worshipped,
neither would such a person be guilty of idolatry. So he pronounces him
blameless, that should give the honor and service due to his true Prince to a
subject, whom being very like he took for his Prince. See concerning Adoration,
p. 11.

The same thing I conceive it is in apparitions. Had S, John Rev. 22.28. taken
the Angel for God appearing, (as some think he did, but the Angel quickly
rectified his mistake,) and so given him divine honors, such as Abraham and
many other Saints in the Old Testament gave to the Lord appearing, this had bin
far from an act of idolatry in him. So had Mary Magdalen, as she took our
Savior for a Gardener, worshipped a Gardener like apparrelled etc for our
Savior, it had bin no idolatry.

But says Daille, should any worship the Sun for Jesus Christ, as S. Austin
mentions some that did, or the Virgin Mary for a Goddess, as the Collyridians
are said to have done, these will be guilty of high Idolatry. I add further;
Should any worship not only an image, but (which Dr. Hammond has observed in
his Treatise of Idolatry, sect. 47.) any glorified Saint or Angel, by giving
any of God's attributes to them; as, the knowledge of the secrets of men's
hearts, and of all other passages in this lower world, and the ability likewise
of working miraculous effects as they please; and both these, not from God's
communicated, but their own original, power; and should address his prayers to
them, as fancied such by him; this man will certainly be an idolater.

Now the reason Daille gives in the same 11. chapter Apol. why in this
worshipping the creature for God or Christ, some are idolaters, some not, [by
Idolaters, I mean sinful and formal idolaters, as some call them; for note,
that it is no otherwise in idolatry than in other sins, there may be a material
act or real adultery without fault; suppose another man's wife conveyed into
the husbands bed instead of his own, as Leah was once into Jacobs: so the real
killing of his neighbor without any guilt; suppose by the miscarrying of some
instrument a man is using in his vocation: and here an ignorance of such a
fact, without any faulty error in the judgment, or obliquity of the intention,
excuses the sin:] Daille's reason therefore for distinguishing guilty idolatry
from that which materially may also be called so, is, not the good intention to
worship only him who is truly God or Christ, or the opinion and belief they
have, that the subject they worship is truly such, (for this (as he in that
Chapter, and other Writers copiously express) is common to the worst of
Idolaters;) but the error or ignorance of the judgment, from which flows this
mistaking. practice, as that is only affected and culpable, or innocent and
excusable. Of which thus he, in that Chapter, J' avoue, que l'ignorance excuse
la ( i. e. in this very matter of Idolatry) ou elle est involuntaire, quand le
suiet, que nous mesconoissons, est tellenent cache etc. mais la, ou l'ignorance
d'un objet proceed non de l'obscurite and difficulte de la chose, mais de la
malice, ou de la negligence de l' homme, alors tant. s'en faut, qu'elle excuse,
etc. So he says, those that worshipped the Sun for Christ were unexcusable,
because l'ignorance de tous ces gens estoit visiblement affectes and
voluntaire, nee de leur vice seulement, and non de l'obscurite des chooses qu'
ils ignoroient. Therefore also afterward upon this reason as he excuses him,
that should have worshipped one resembling our Savior, or an unconsecrated
Host, etc. because non sa passion ou sa non chalance avoit cause cette
mesprise, etc. So he blames the Romanist, mistaking and worshipping the
Sacrament for Christ, because l'erreur vient tout enliere de leur passion, and
non d'aucune chose qui soit horse d'eux.

6. Mr. Daille grants (which I have touched before,) That as we may not reject
the Communion of any, for every erroneous Tenent, when it offends against no
principal or fundamental point of Religion, see Apol. c. 7. so we may not
reject it for Errors, tho destructive of a Principle, (see Apol. c. 9.) if it
do this, not immediately and directly, but by some consequences thereof which
consequences also are renounced, and the Principle still maintained by those
who hold the error. [Tho if you desire my opinion of this: First, I see not how
any can hold a Principle, and yet hold a contrary Tenent that directly and
immediately opposes it; for no man is so sottish, as to hold two things
directly contradictory the one to the other: See what he says for this, when
pressed by Chaumont, in his second Reply, p. 81. So then, when any one's Tenent
opposes the Principle (which also he holds) by some consequence it must be,
and not be, point blank; Secondly, I see not, but that if one holding the
Principle hold also another Tenent, which by a consequence clear and manifest
to others; tho not to him, ruineth the Principle, such an one is to be rejected
etc. as if he denied the Principle. And thirdly, The judgment of the clearness
of such consequences, private men must leave to the Church and her Councils:
Esse two men, as interessed and prepossessed, ordinarily pretend
contradictories both to be clear. For example: If the Lutheran Tenent of the
ubiquity of Christ's humanity, or the Greek Tenent of the Holy Ghost not
proceeding from the Son, should seem to a General Council, the one, by a clear
consequence, tho not acknowledged by the Party, to ruin Christ's true humane
nature; the other, to destroy the Trinity: Such ought to be separated from as
men not discerning this consequence, only from a some way culpable and affected
ignorance. See what Daille says of this, Rep. 2. p. 82, 83.] But (to return to
Daille) therefore (says he) tho Adoration should follow upon the Lutheran
Tenent of Christ's presence in the Eucharist, yet if they acknowledge no such
consequence, or practice no such thing, we may not for their error abhor their
Communion. In which I may advance one step farther (with Daille's good leave,)
that, should the Lutherans also acknowledge the consequence, and practice such a
thing as Adoration of Christ as corporally present in the Eucharist; yet for
this neither is their Communion refusable: Because such Adoration opposes no
Principle; but is at the most but vain and inutile, according to Daille's own
judgment, quoted before.

Observe here also from this Proposition of Daille's, That he holds a duty of
separation from the Communion of the Church of Rome, because of their
worshipping the Eucharist, tho they should not enjoin it to any; because we
ought not to Communicate with any such, who acknowledge and profess a Doctrine
or Practice clearly repugnant to a Principle, as he contends the Roman
Adoration is. As for the other cause of Separation, the enjoining this Practice
upon men contrarily persuaded, we shall speak to it anon. Thus much for Daille.

The Roman Qualifications concerning Adoration.
Next, To see what qualifications the Transubstantialists make concerning their
Adoration.

1. First, After Consecration, they affirm not Christ's Body to be there alone;
but the Symbols also to remain with it. This is showed before.

2. They affirm the Symbols capable of some reverence, as being holy things;
but not at all of divine worship, as being Christ's Body, for they are distinct
from it. See Cassand. Consult. de Ador. Euch. -- Quae adoratio non ad ipsum
signum quod exterius videtur, sed ad ipsam rem and veritatem, quae interius
creditur, referenda est; quamvis and ipsi signo, cujus jam virtus intelligitur,
tanquam religioso and sacro, sua veneratio debeatur. See Forbes his Testimony
of them, l. 2. c. 2. s. 9. In Eucharistia mente discernendum esse Christum a
visibili signo docent Romanenses, and Christum quidem adorandum esse non tamen
sacramentum; quia species illae sunt res creatae, etc. Neque satis est quod
Christus sub illis sit, quia etiam Deus est in anima tanquam in Templo suo, and
tamen adoratur Deus non anima; ut ait Suarez Tom. 3. Qu. 79. Art, 8. disp. 65.
sect. 1. See Spalat. l. 7. c. 11. n. 7. Nam neque nostri ( i. e. Romanists)
dicunt species panis and vini, hoc est accidentia illa esse adoranda, sed
dicunt corpus Christi verum and reale, quod sub illis speciebus latet, deberi
adorari.

Lastly, See Bellarm. de Euch. l. 4. c. 6. Species illae neque excellunt aliis
sacramentis, imo sunt inferiores omnibus, cum sint pura accidentia, neque
adorari possunt. Again, c. 29. Neque ullus Catholicus est qui doceat ipsa
Symbola externa per se and proprie esse adoranda cultu latriae, sed solum
veneranda cultu quodam minori qui omnibus sacramentis convenit. Where also he
says, those Lutherans, that hold Christ adorable in the Sacrament, only modo
loquendi a Catholicis dissentire. And whereas many are offended, see Tailor, p.
366. that he puts in [per se and proprie] and holds the Adoration of Christ
aliquo modo pertinere ad Symbola: Yet 1. This is no stating of the Church in
any Council. 2. Nor an universal Doctrine of the Roman Doctors; see Forbes l.
2. c. 2. s. 11. Sententia ista Bellarmini plurimis Doctoribus Romanensibus
displicet. 3. He does afterward such up again, or suspend what he had said
before, in the conclusion, where he says, Quicquid sit de modo loquendi,
status quaestionis non est nisi, an Christus in Eucharistia sit adorandus cultu
latriae. 4. Lastly, If examined close, the matter is not great, for he says
only, that we worship Christ in the Eucharist, vested with the Symbols, as a
Disciple worshipped him on Earth, his Divinity clothed with Humanity, and that
again clothed with Garments, without making in the act of his Worship a mental
separation of his Humanity from his Clothes, or of his Deity from his Humanity.
When yet, says he, ratio adorandi ( i. e. with supreme Adoration) non erant
vestes, imo nec ipsa humanitas, sed solum divinitas. So then; at the worst he
affirms no more Worship due to the Symbols in the Eucharist, than to Christ's
Garments, when he was on the Earth.

3. They deny also any Divine Worship due to the substance of the Bread, as
well as to its species, or symbols: which substance of Bread many of them at
least hold, to be changed, both for form, and also matter; that is, to be
annihilated, and nothing at all thereof to remain. Catholici cum negent, says
Bellarmin, panem in Sacramento remanere, quomodo possunt asserere (...) De
Euch. l. 4. c. 29. Perperam (...) ( i. e. the Tenent of it, says Forbes)
Romanensibus a plerisque Protestantibus objicitur, and illi idolatriae
crassissimae etc. insimulantur; cum credant panem consecratum non esse amplius
panem etc. l. 2. c. 2. s. 9. -- Tilenus there quoted s. 10. Tametsi hi panem
(ex sententia Protestantium) adorant, non tamen panem adorandum esse dictitant.
They deny any Divine Worship due to Bread; i. e. to any thing which whilst they
affirm to be Christ's Body, they acknowledge also to be Bread (as those, who
worshipped the Sun for Christ, or the Molten Calf for the God that brought them
out of Egypt, affirming these still to be the Sun, and a Molten Calf) for they
hold it impossible, and involving contradiction, That the Bread, remaining
Bread, should also be the Body of Christ; and much urge the Lutherans for
saying, Hic Panis est Corpus meum.

Therefore also they say, That should they worship Bread for the Body of
Christ, they should be the greatest Idolaters in the World. But yet this, I
conceive, they say not; That should they worship Christ's Body as being under
the accidents of Bread, and yet indeed not his Body, but the Bread it self be
still under those accidents; that so also they should be the greatest Idolaters
that ever were. For this their very Adversaries, less partial to their cause,
yet will not say of them. Nor do they say it of themselves; for Bellarmin,
speaking of one mistakingly Adoring an unconsecrated Host, says, Adoratio ex
intention potissimum pendet: Quare qui [talem] panem adorat, quod certo credat
non esse pa^^m, sed Christum, is proprie and formaliter Christum adorat, non
panem, de Euch. l 4. c. 30. Thus much that (...) taken in this sense, not that
de facto they do worship, but that also they hold a worship of the Bread,
cannot justly be objected to them.

4. They use the phrase indeed of worshipping the Sacrament, and that speaking
of Divine Worship (which phrase also is used by the Ancients,) see Conc. Trid.
Sess. 13. c. 5. Omnes Christi fideles pro more in Catholica Ecclesia semper
recepto, latriae cultum, qui vero Deo debetur, huic sanctissimo Sacramento in
veneratione exhibeant. But by it they mean, the worshipping, not of any thing
visible or sensible in the Sacrament, nor of any substance invisible, that is
not Christ, (for these they expressly make incapable of any such worship,) but
only the body of Christ present invisibly, impassibly, etc, after the manner
described before, not of the Sacrament as it implies the signum, but only the
significatum, then there also really present.

See therefore that expression of Conc. Trid. (now quoted) explained, both by
the reason immediately following, Nam illum eundem praesentem in eo adesse
credimus, quem Pater aeternus introducens etc dicit, Et adorent cum omnes
Angeli, Heb. 1. and most clearly in the following Canon, to which the Anathema
is affixed, for those who denied such adoration to be due, Can. 6. which runs
thus; Si quis dixerit in sancto Eucharistiae sacramento Christum unigenitum Dei
filium non esse cultu latriae etiam externo adorandum etc, Anathema sit. This
is observed by Father Paul, in his history of that Council, 4. l. page 343. The
manner of speech used in the 5th point of doctrine, saying, That divine worship
was due to the Sacrament, was noted also for improper; since it is certain,
that the thing signified or contemed is not meant by the Sacrament, but the
thing signifying or containing; and therefore it [ i.e. the manner of speech]
was well corrected in the 6th Canon, which said, that the Son of God ought to
be worshipped in the Sacrament: Observed also and pressed by F. Sancta Clara, (
Enchiridion of Faith, Dial. 13.) "Its true (says he) that in the 5th chap. the
Fathers say, that the Sacrament is to be adored; but here in the Canon they
speak more strictly, and the reason in the Chapter is the same, nam illum
eundem Deum etc. And elsewhere (3d. dialogue) he shows where the expressions
differ (for which he names, besides this place, the 2d. Canon of 6. Sess.
compared with 7. chapter,) Our obligation to be to the Canon not the Chapter; *
because the chapter rather declares the doctrine to be defined, than contains
the definition it self, neither is framed in the style of Conciliary
definitions with Anathema's; and * because the Council of Trent it self does
seem to put a difference between these two, ( Sess. 14. c. 3. of Extr. Unction,
haec sint quae etc.) in making a further Commination for violation of the
doctrines of the Canons than of the Chapters. Observed also by Grot. in his
Apolog. Rivet. discussio p. 79. where also he notes Bellarmin's forequoted
passage, that the controversy between the Catholics and Lutherans was only in
modo loquendi, in saying, the Sacrament, or Christ in the Sacrament, was to be
worshipped; and to this nothing is replied by Rivet, and it appears that that
indeed is said by them which Daille wishes. Apol. 12. c.

See Dr. Holden de resol. fidei 2. l. 4. c. In hoc sacrosancto Eucharistiae
sacramento Christus unigenitus Dei filius cultu latriae adorandus est, and this
is all (says he) that in this matter is fide Catholica credendam. See Dr.
Tailor, Liberty of Prophecy, 20. s. 16. n. Now it is evident that the object of
their Adoration ( i.e. the Romanists) that which is represented to them in
their thoughts, their minds, their purposes, (by which God principally, if not
solely, takes estimate of humane actions) in the Blessed Sacrament, is the only
true and eternal God hypostatically joined with his holy Humanity, which
Humanity they believe actually present, under the veil of the Sacramental signs.

Add to this, that the same argument Daille, Apol. 9. c. urges to prove, that
we may not worship the Sacrament because Christ is in it; namely this, that
Christ is in the faithful as in his Temple, yet may we not adore the faithful:
the same they urge to the same purpose. See the former quotations out of
Suarez, p. 200. Now if Mr Daille say, that the word Sacrament cannot properly
be applied to only Christ's Body, or the thing signified, abstracted from the
Sign, I shall accord willingly; but then we must accuse the Church of Rome, not
of an erroneous tenent for this, if she expound to us her orthodox meaning, but
of an improper expression.

And for that which he says 1, Reply. p. 22. That if the word Sacrament in the
Council of Trent signified nothing besides Jesus Christ formally and precisely,
then we might affirm que le sacrament est la aut haux cieux a la dextre de
Dieu; I answer that [precisely] is to be taken, as, tho not involving besides
Christ any other subject, yet including besides Christ the manner of his
presence, which is not natural in the Sacrament as it is in the Heavens.

5. Therefore also they ground adoration (a thing Card. Peron much insisteth
upon in his reply to King James) not on Transubstantiation, (tho both
Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation involveth it, so that either of these
posita ponitur adoratio,) as if sublata Transubstantiatione tollitur Adoratio,
but on real presence; which in general is agreed on by the Lutheran, together
with them. Which adoration they affirm due with all the same circumstances
wherewith it is now performed, tho Christ's Body were present with the symbols,
neither as under the accidents of bread as they say, nor under the substance of
bread as the Lutherans say; but, after some other unknown manner distinct from
both: and if they were convinced of the error of Transubstantiation, and of the
truth of the presence of the sabstance of the bread unchanged; yet, as long as
not confuted in the point of real presence, would they nevertheless for this
continue to adore the self same object as now in the self same place; namely
the body of Christ still present there with the symbols, and therefore there
adorable, tho present after another manner than they imagined.

See the arguing of Barnesius a Romanist, Forbes 2. l. 2. c. 12. s. Corpus
Christi ibi est cum pane vel permanente vel transeunte, uno vel alio modo etc,
per consequens non est idololatria adorare Christum ibi in Eucharistia realiter
praesentem. See in Conc. Trid. 13. s. 5. c. the reason immediately following
the requiring of adoration: Nam illum eundem Deum praesentem in eo (sacramento]
adesse credimus, quem Pater introducens etc.

If therefore the Church enjoins these three 1. to believe Christ's corporal
presence in the Sacrament, 2. to believe Transubstantiation, for the manner of
that presence, 3. to adore Christ as being there present; it follows not that
she enjoins the third in order to the second, but may only in order to the
first, as it being (without the second) a sufficient ground thereof. As is
observed in the former Discourse of the Eucharist.

S^^^ose Transubstantiation to be an error, ^e^ Adoration lawful, if corporal
presence true.
These considerations premised, 1. Therefore now suppose Transubstantiation an
error; yet if the tenent of corporal or real presence (as held by the Lutherans
or others) be true, the same adoration is no way frustrated, but still
warrantable, and to be continued.

Suppose Cornoral presence an error, yet their Adoration no Idolatry.
2. Suppose not only Transubstantiation, but real presence an error; suppose
the Bread after consecration to remain in substance. unchanged, and our Savior
after no manner at all present corporally; yet I do not see (after the
foregoing concessions and qualifications well weighed, especially that wherein
they profess adoration not of the Sacrament, or any part thereof, but of Christ
in the Sacrament) how the adoration of Christ, as present there and that as
under the accidents, and in the room of the substance of the bread, (tho I have
showed that such a quatenus is required of none in their adoration) can amount
to idolatry; which to show

1. First, compare this mistaking worship of the Transubstantialists with any
other granted idolatries of the Heathens, Jews, or Christians; and we shall
find no instance of any, the subtlest idolatry, that ever was, but in its guilt
or error much differing from this. The most subtle of Idolatry Heathen, I think
is that, (as it is expounded by Maximus Tyrius, dial. 39. mentioned in Dr. Ham.
Idol. 17. s.) that they bestowed their worship only on the Gods to humane eyes
invisible, and used Images only as signs and tokens of their honoring them,
and helps of their infirmity to remember them etc. Of Jewish Idolatry, was that
of worshipping the true God in the golden Calf, and those other set up afterward
in 'Dan and Bethel. Of Christian Idolatry, I find these mentioned: that of
worshipping the B. Virgin for a Goddess, of the Sun as being Christ, of Saints
or Angels, (if ever any such worship were, for I find only such a case put in
Dr. Hammond, Idol. 47. s.) communicating God's attributes unto them, (as is
expressed above p.) of Omniscience, Omnipotence, which thing makes indeed not
one but many Gods.

But as for the first of these, the Heathens, whatever respect they gave to the
Images, it is certain the Gods they worshipped were, not one and the true, but
many and false; whilst they grossly and stupidly erred (even Tyrius amongst the
rest) in many of the Divine Attributes; tho also, as Dr. Hammond says, the
actions of the many were very unlike. Tyrius his speculations. As for that of
the Jews, Dr. Hammond's opinion is, sect. 34, 35, 36. that they worshipped not
God only, but the Idol-calf also, as, upon Aaron's Consecration animated and
inspirited by God, (as the Heathen also conceited of their Idols,) and so
fitted to supply Moses's place, and go before them and be their Conductor; and
the same is to be thought of Jeroboam's Calves, see 1 Reg. 12.28. As for that
of the Christians, those who worshipped the Sun for Christ were not excused by
their good intentions, because most wilfully and groundlesly mistaken in their
judgments; in which I shall show the Transubstantialists not to run parallel
with them. The worshippers of Angels, as such, err also grossly in the Divine
Attributes; but no such thing is imputed to the Transubstantialists.

2. Again, These Idolaters generally in their worshipping, when they took such
a visible thing to be God, they denied it not to be the thing still. They
affirmed the Images, the Calves, the Sun they worshipped, to be Calves, and
Gold, to be the Sun and Images still, without supposing them to be annihilated,
and God (not misunderstood by them in any of his Attributes) to be instead
thereof. An Error therefore only like theirs would it be, If any in the
Eucharist should acknowledge the Bread to remain, and worship that Bread, no way
supposed altered, for his Christ: Which none do; or if they do, they are
confessed by all to be Idolaters.

3. But yet further; These Idolaters in worshipping a Creature for the Creator,
grossly imagined in their blind Judgments a thing no way possible: And God not
only was not, but could not be, such a thing as they supposed; but a Creature
may be the Body of our Lord; and many of those, who deny Transubstantiation,
yet grant a possibility thereof: And when we worship the true Body of our Lord,
it is a Creature we Adore, tho by the Hypostatical Union to the Deity, it is
capable of such Honor. So that in all the Idolatrous Worships that can be
named, tho their intentions might be good, in directing their Adorations only
to what they thought the true God; yet were their Judgments incomparably beyond
the Transubstantialists culpably and stupidly ( Romans 1.22, 23.) erroneous to
think so. And extremely were they also mistaken (from which the
Transubstantialists are granted most clear) in many of the Divine Attributes
and Properties.

4. But now in the last place: Suppose that the Israelites did in no manner
direct their worship to the Calf, but only to the God of Israel, as supposed by
them, after some peculiar manner, there present; or suppose, that they held the
Calf no more to be there at all, but the God of Israel under the outward
appearance thereof: So likewise, That the Christians worshipping the Sun, held
first a Transubstantiation thereof into the Body of our Lord: Yet will it not
follow, That if their worship thus qualified would still be Idolatry, therefore
the Transubstantialists Adoration is so, because (according to Mr. Daille's
fifth Concession), from the probability or unreasonableness of the grounds and
motives of our persuasion, the like practice is, or is not Idolatry.

For, as the Israelites Adoring God as present after a peculiar manner in the
Golden Calf was Idolatry; So the Israelites Adoring God as after a peculiar
manner present or dwelling between the Cherubims, or upon the Ark (called his
Footstool) was not so. Or, to instance in mistaking worships: Tho the
Israelites worshipping God as peculiarly present in the Calf, when as there was
no such matter, was Idolatry; yet the Lutherans worshipping Christ (suppose
they did it) as present after a peculiar manner in the Eucharist, tho indeed he
be not there, is not so; but only an Adoration vain and inutile tombant en
neant. Again, tho the Christians worshipping the Sun for Christ, tho supposed
by them not the Sun, but Christ, were Idolatry; yet when our Savior was on
Earth, a Disciple's worshipping a mere man, very like him, for him, would not
be so. See Daille's reason for it in his fifth Concess. Why then is the
Transubstantialist an Idolater in his Account? See c. 11. of his Apol. because
l'erreur de ceux etc. vient tout entiere de leur passion, and non d'aucune
chose, qui soit horse d'eux. Here therefore lies all the trial of their
Idolatry; Let this be disputed, this judged of by indifferent persons. For
this, let what is said before in this Paper be well considered; and what shall
be said by and by.

Adoration on real presence (whatever becomes of Transubstantiation,) the
mistake of this ground ( i. e. of real presence) will be excusable in them;
for, in the Lutherans it is so. But suppose the ground of their Adoration be
the Tenent of Transubstantiation; yet after a granted possibility thereof, the
Tradition of Antiquity, in Exposition of the Scriptures concerning the
Eucharist, so much favoring (some way or other) a substantial conversion; and
in after times, when this point grew to a debate, the Decision of Councils (the
first of which was before A.D. 800. Conc. Nic. 2.) for such a conversion; if in
some of them, not the same Transubstantiation, yet as strange; the reception of
such Decisions by the succeeding Ages of the Church Universal ( Eastern,
Western,) till Luther's time, (and since his time the affirming still in
general of a Corporal presence with the Symbols, by a considerable Party of the
Reformed, I mean the Lutheran) (of the reasonable obligation of private
Judgments to which Determinations and Practices of the Church in matters
divine, I have discoursed elsewhere.) These motives; I say, (however Daille
passes over them in that 11. cap. with a light foot, reducing all to a laseule
authorite du Pape and de son Concile, and Dr. Tailor the like p. 346.) will
sufficiently show, that their mistake is not un erreur, qui vient tout entiere
de leur passion, and non d'aucune chose qui soit horse d'eux. Surely no practice
can be idolatry, where is no malignant or heretical opinion of God or our
Savior: but such corporal presence is not in Daille's, nor Transubstantiation
in many other Protestants opinion. See before.

2. Compare we this mistaking worship of the Transubstantialist with those
mistakes mentioned in Daille's 5th. concession, which, tho worshipping of the
mere creature for Christ, yet are excused by him from idolatry; and we may find
it no less excusable than they.

For tho this has not the same reason drawn from sense, i. e. a corporal
similitude; yet it has another (supposed) strong enough to ground such
practice upon, i.e. divine revelation, as interpreted by Ecclesiastical
authority. Tho indeed the mistake of the Transubstantialist is not so much as
ones mistaking of a thing like Christ for Christ, because he worships nothing
visible at all, nor any thing invisible wherein those accidents which he sees
do inhere; but only supposes Christ's body present, where his sense can no way
sufficiently inform him (since salvis phaenomenis this presence is possible)
when it is absent.

3. Lastly, compare we this mistaking worship of the Transubstantialists with
that of the Consubstantialists, and I think we shall find no reason to accuse
the one of flat idolatry, whilst the other of inutility or vanity only; or to
charge the one with a bad consequent (which they renounce) of their erroneous
tenent, (as that consequent is, [that they adore a piece of bread,] from that
tenent of theirs, that the bread is annihilated and Christ's Body instead
thereof, notwithstanding they hold the principle, that no mere creature may be
worshipped) whilst we absolve the other from them, as long as they cease to own
them, and hold the principle they oppose. See Daille's 6th. concession.

Transubstantialist and Lutheran, agree. 1. That Christ is corporally present.
2. That he may be worshipped. 3. That no other object there but He may be
worshipped; not bread, nor any other mere creature. 4. That nothing visible in
the Sacrament is He, or his Body; which is present only invisibly, without any
thing visible inhering or appertaining to it as the subject thereof. They
differ only about the manner of the presence of this invisible substance. The
one says it is there together with the bread; the other says there instead of
the bread, and the bread away; a thing also possible, for any thing we know.
The one says, he is there under both the substance and accidents of the Bread;
the other, there under the accidents only of the Bread.

Now whilst both worship the same object in the same place, and veiled with the
same sensible accidents; yet the one adoring him as being under the substance
of Bread (he not being there) are freed from any Idolatry in such worship; the
other adoring him as being under the accidents of Bread (he not being there)
are made idolaters. Why so? since they say and profess, that if his Body be not
there under those appearances, but the same substance still under them which
was formerly, they confess it a creature, and renounce all adoration of it.
Whereas therefore it is objected, that the substance of bread only being in
that place where they suppose Christ's Body and not any bread to be, therefore
in worshipping the thing in that place, they worship bread; this were a right
charge, if they affirmed that they worshipped the substance, that is in that
place under such accidents, whatever it be: but this none say; but that they
worship it only upon supposition that it is Christ's Body and not bread, and
that for this supposition they have rational grounds. Now saying that they
worship it, because it is so; is saying, if it be not so they intend no worship
to it. And this worship is like theirs, which Bishop Andrews says was rendered
by some formerly out of fear of a some-way defective consecration, Si es
Christus, te adoro; Resp. ad Apol. Bell. 1. c. Again, whereas it is objected,
that a good intention excuses not idolatry, for so the Sun-worshippers,
suppose they held a Transubstantiation, and thought Christ to be instead of the
Sun, and should say, Si es Christus te adoro, would be no idolaters: this would
be true, were their good intention founded upon an excusable and unaffected
ignorance. But notwithstanding their intention and supposition it remains
idolatry still: not because whilst thinking to worship Christ there, they de
facto worship only what is the Sun; but because they have no reasonable motive
to imagine such a thing, as that Christ is there, and by consequence so to act
upon it; which the Transubstantialist pleads he has. This clearly appears, in
that, should Christ be worshipped by them, not, as being instead of the
substance, but as being under the substance of the Sun, idolaters still they
would be; yet none argue thence, that the Lutheran, in adoring Christ under the
substance of the bread, is so.

Reformed writers concerning this Transubstantiatory idolatry, it is either not
at all, or but faintly asserted by them. See Dr. Hammond of Idol. sect. 64, 65,
66. where tho he does not excuse it from being material (tho perhaps not in
them formal) idolatry, yet he grants it to come much short of the Idolatry of
the Heathen, (contrary to the quotations he makes out of Costerus, sect. 62.)
and how far excusable, ignorance, and that founding it self upon the word of
God mistaken, may make it, he says he will not determine; and that he will
hope, that it may be far from being irremissible to him, who has reformed his
other known sins, and for all known and unknown is truly humbled. And indeed
those writers must either allow it to be such a gentle Idolatry, as that the
practice thereof died in, and it neither particularly confessed, nor repented
of, yet excludes not from salvation; or else they must damn all those who lived
in the visible communion of the Church Catholic for five or six hundred years
by their own confession.

Here the same Dr. Tailor, that speaks so vehemently against it, in Real
Presence p. 341. parallelling there (tho not proving it) the grosness and
culpableness of the Roman, with that of the Heathen idolaters: Yet in his lib.
of Prophecy 20. s. 16, 17, 18. n. speaking on this manner; That the Romanist
giving worship to no undue object, as the Heathen did, and if they thought
Christ not present, being so far from worshipping Bread in this case, that
themselves profess it idolatry to do so; this is a demonstration, that their
soul has nothing in it that is idololatrical. -- That idolatry has so great a
tincture and residency in the will, that from thence only it has its being
criminal, [I suppose he means, from the will, as by its perverseness someway
against reason, blinding the judgment.] That the will of the Transubstantialist
has nothing in it, but what is a great enemy to idolatry: and nihil ardet in
inferno nisi propria voluntas. -- That a divine worship is given also by them
only to Christ; but they differ and mistake infinitely in the manner of his
presence. -- Whilst all agree that the Divinity and the Humanity of the Son of
God is the ultimate and adequate object of divine adoration, incommunicable to
any creature whatsoever; and they, before they venture to pass an act of
adoration, believe the bread to be annihilated, or turned into his substance
who may lawfully be worshipped: and that they who have such thoughts, are as
much enemies of idolatry, as they who understand better etc. -- For their
motives to such opinion, that they have a divine revelation; whose literal and
grammatical sense, if that sense were intended, (he omits, that they also
gather this sense from Church Tradition,) would warrant them to do violence to
all the Sciences in the circle; that Transubstantiation being openly and
violently against natural reason, is no argument to make them disbelieve the
Trinity etc, with as much violence to the principles of natural and
suparnatural Philosophy, as can be imagined to be in the point of
Transubstantiation.

See Spalato Rep. Eccles. 7. l. 11. c. Respondeo (says he) me nullum
idololatricum crimen adoratione Eucharistiae, si recte dirigatur intentio,
agnoscere. Qui enim docent panem non esse amplius panem, sed corpus Christi,
illi profecto panem non adorant, sed solum ex suppositione ( i.e. that his Body
is under the species instead of the bread) licet falsa, (Bishop Forbes adds 2.
l. 2. c. 9. s. non tamen haeretica, aut impia, vel direct pugnante cum fide)
Christi corpus vere adorabile adorant. See Bishop Forbes 14. sect. where
showing the Greek and Eastern Church, as well as the Roman, to use it, he
concludes; Quis ausit omnes hos Christianos idololatriae arcessere and damnare?
As for the concessions of Roman writers, of the grosness of their idolatry
beyond any heathen, (that is, further than any of their adversaries will charge
it upon them,) if the bread should happen to remain, (if this be their meaning,
and not rather, that [if they ex professo worship bread]), they labor to
advance it the higher, the more to show the impossiblity that such an error,
for so many hundred years, in the universal Church of Christ, assisted by our
Savior to the end of the world, and the pillar of truth, should be
entertained; thinking the greatness of this, if a crime, a good argument of the
Christians innocence therein: whilst perhaps in some smaller matter she might
be liable to a mistake.

An account of the variance in the doctrine of the Eucharist in latter times.
Thus much in answer to the former replies. Now to show you yet more fully the
reasonable motives a Christian may have, of submission to the doctrine decided
by Councils concerning Transubstantiation, or corporal presence of Christ's
Body with the symbols, and consequently to the practice of Adoration, which
Daille grants du droit to follow from the other; (so that that tenent being
excusable, this practice is: nay, the omission of the second in one persuaded
of the first, would not be blameless:) I will in the last place give you a
short account of the progress of the doctrine of the Eucharist, after the more
primitive times, and so conclude this Discourse.

Blondel, that there was no difference in, nor any alteration of, this
doctrine, till in the Eastern Church after 700. A. D. -- in the Latin Church
after 800. See 15. c. and 18. c. Therefore in Gregory the Great's time, who
flourished Ann. 600. there was yet no change. Now he it was, that put the last
hand to the Canon of the Mass, which is now used in the Roman Church. See
Chemnit. exam. 2. part. p. 828; and see Dr. Field of the Church, Append. to 3.
lib. p. 188. where out of Durand's Rationale he says; That Ambrose out of the
ancienter Liturgies having in some things enlarged and perfected a form, called
afterward The Ambrosian Service, and Gelasius Bishop of Rome likewise composed
another, Gregory and the Church of Rome entertained Gelasius his form, Gregory
having first added, detracted, changed, some things therein; (where note, that
Bellarmin de Missa 2. l. 19.20. c. tells the story a little otherwise, and
says, out of Diaconus, That Gregory Gelasianum codicem coarctavit, -- and out
of Gregory himself, Ep. 73. lib. 7. se restituisse in Missa antiquas
consuctudines, and sustulisse quaedam quae postea irrepserant; but then he is
noted by Diaconus and others, to have added de novo to the Canon only those
words, [diesque nostros in pace tua disponas;]) and the other Western Churches
still continued to use the Ambrosian Service: that Charles the Great afterward
forced these Churches to leave off the Ambrosian Service, (tho in Millain it is
used to this day,) and to use all one form, that of Gregory.

Now this Gregorian form, imposed for uniformity by Charl. M. is verbatim the
same with that now in use; as Bellarmin proves ibid. from Alcuinus. And others,
who living before 800. and in Charles the Great's time, writ Expositions on the
Canon of the Mass, as now it is. But no alteration of the doctrine ( Daille
says) was before 800. and Charles the Great and his Council at Franckfort
assembled 794, who used this form, are reckoned by him orthodox; therefore also
if any change were made by Gregory, or the times after him, before Charles, (of
which for the Canon, I find none alleged,) yet those times being orthodox, it
could be no change prejudicial to truth.

Again: The Gregorian Form, as now, agrees in the chief matters with that form
set down by S. Ambrose, de sacram. 4. l. 5, 6. c. expressed also by Mr. Blond.
in the Margent 21. c. Therefore Bellarmin in 2. de Missa 23, 24. c. justifies
many things objected against the modern Canon, by showing them to be in that
set down by S. Ambrose 200 years before Gregory: and this form again S. Ambrose
alleges ex antiquo ritu Ecclesiae. Accordingly these men also seem to justify
the present Canon of the Mass, if it be rightly understood. See Mr. Blondel's
conclusion, after he has commented on the meaning of the modern Canon, Qu' y
at'-il (says he) en tout cela, qui ne s' accord, a l'escriture, au sens, a la
raison, and au tesmonaige de l' Antiquite, cap. 21. p. 453. And p. 457. he
says S. Gregory's Liturgy is en substance une mesme formulaire avec celuy, qui
est en usage entr' eux.

So Dr. Field being engaged in the maintaining that Proposition, [ That the
Church before Luther, tho of the Roman profession, were of the Protestant
Religion] (excepting some only, that then maintained the modern Popery)
justifies the Canon also, then and now used: even those passages thereof; of
praying for the dead; and those words in this prayer, des illis locum
refrigerii, lucis, and pacis: and, of the commemoration of Saints, and that
clause in it, quorum meritis, precibusque concedas, ut in omnibus protectionis
tuae muniamur auxilio, (which merits, methinks, he interprets very well and
orthodoxly,) and thus concludes his discourse concerning it: It appears by
that which has bin said, that the Canon of the Mass, rightly understood, has
not, includes not in it, any such points of Romish religion, as some imagine;
but in sundry, yea in all the capital differences between us and them of the
Roman faction, witnesses for us, and against them. Append. to 3. l. 220, 221.
etc. Is it not lawful then, now as heretofore, for a Protestant in opinion to
frequent the Roman Service; especially the Mass, and then to adore etc, for so
did their Ancestor -- Protestants before Luther's time? for all did so. And if
it be said, that so we must now live under an obligation also to the Conc.
Trident. so did they to the Lateran etc, after the four first Councils; or if
not they to those, why we more to this?

Fathers before 700, or in the Canon of the Mass, for authentical, and may
rationally adhere to them; and that this Canon much favors the Roman opinion,
we have some prejudice, in that whilst others urge many arguments out of it,
for their own side, against the other; yet, they only, whom we say it confutes,
retain it entire: and those, whom, as they plead, it favors so much, have
rejected it.

time, when, after long peace in the Church about this matter, controversy
began first to appear in the world, concerning the doctrine of the Eucharist;
which by all, both Romanists and Protestants, is agreed to be after A. D. 750.
in the time of the Council of Constantinople assembled by Constantinus
Copronymus, and of the 2d. Nicene Council that followed after Copronymus's
decease. At that time, the contest about the lawfulness of Images in Churches
etc (which were then very frequent) being on foot, this Constantinopolitan
Council called together by the Emperor, who vehemently opposed Images, amongst
other things, declared; That they acknowledged only one true venerable Image of
Christ, chosen by him to perpetuate his memory amongst us etc, namely, that of
the Eucharist. See 2. Conc. Nic. Act. 6. tom. 3. and what I have said of it
before.

These expressions falling from this Council concerning the Eucharist, were
presently resented and opposed, first by Damascen, then by 2. Coucil. Nice,
called the 7th General Council, assembled not long after the other ( Copronymus
being now dead) under the Empress Irene: who; against the other, urged, That
our Savior said not, Sumite, edite imaginem corporis mei, but, Accipite,
edite, Hoc est corpus meum; and affirmed, neque Dominum, neque Apostolos, neque
Patres, incruentum illud Sacrificium, quod a Sacerdote offertur, imaginem
dixisse, post sanctificationis consecrationem, (but the consecration by them
probably is imagined to extend beyond the words of Institution, see before.)
verum ipsum corpus and sanguinem: and accused the former Council of
contradicting it self; nunc quidem sanctum and notabile nostrum sacrificium
imaginem sacri corporis Christi, nunc autem sacrum and divinum corpus
asserentes.

This Council in the East, was then opposed again by the Council at Franckfort
assembled by Charles the Great in the West; which Council mainly disliking
Images, and seeing (as Dr. Tailor conjectures) that if the Sacrament were an
Image then it might be lawful to give reverence and worship to some Images,
(which argues the practice then of worshipping the Sacrament) took part in this
thing with the Conc. Nic. tho in other things they opposed it, and censured the
Constantinopolitan expressions of the Eucharist, much what in the same
language, as that of Nice did. See Blondel 17. c. page 411.

Here you see the first controversy; and it, not so much about substantial
conversion of the elements, as about the real or substantial presence of
Christ's very body; denied by the Constantinopolitan Council, (if that of Nice
perhaps mis-understood them not;) affirmed by Nice and Franckfort. The
innovation of Doctrine, * says the Romanist, began in the Constable. Council: (
Primi (says Bellarm.) qui veritatem corporis Domini in Eucharistia in
quaestionem vocabant erant iconomachi etc. de Euchar. 1. l. 1. c.) * says the
Protestant, began in 2. Conc. Nic. by Damascen, and others; see Blondel 15. c.
But as for the Conc. Francf. he contends, that tho it was dangerous in its
expressions, yet, was in its opinions orthodox; and inveighed against that of
Constant. upon a misunderstanding of their meaning. To reflect a little upon
this matter; you may observe, 1. First, that the Constant. conc. tho speaking
somewhat more diminutively of the Eucharist than the other, yet seems to say
more than any Protestant will allow, as is showed before.

2ly. That it was an Assembly of Bishops, called together by that Emperor that
caused the Patriarch of Constantinople to be scourged; assented to by no
Patriarch: which thing is objected against it by the Conc. Nice, Act. 6. tom.
1. in these words; Quomodo autem magna and universalis, in quam neque omnes
consenserunt, and reliquarum Ecclesiarum praefecti non admiserunt, sed
anathemate eam devoverunt? Non habuit cooperarium (ut haec quae nunc
celebratur) Romanum Papam, neque illius Sacerdotes, neque per Vicarios, neque
per provinciales literas, quemadmodum fieri in Synodis debet. Quinetiam neque
concordantes habuit Orientis Patriarchas; Alexandrinum, inquam, Antiochenum,
and urbis sanctae suminos Pontifices, neque cum illis etiam inystas and
sacerdotes.

Thus Conc. Nice. But the same things are affirmed by the historians of those
times; as also, that this Copronymus was opposed for demolishing images in
Churches by the Constantinopolitan Patriarch, whom he shamefully abused; and
his Father Leo Isaurus excommunicated for the same cause by Gregory the 3d,
Bishop of Rome. Besides this, to lessen the esteem which may be had of it by
the reformed, I might name the 15. and 17. Canons thereof. Whereof the 15th
runs thus, Si quis non confitetur sanctam semper Virginem Mariam quavis
visibili and invisibili creatura superiorem, and cum sincera fide ejus
intercessiones, tanquam quae libertatem apud eum, qui ex se genitus est, Deum
habeat, non postulaverit; Anathema. And the 17th Canon not unlike, Si quis
sanctorum etc. -- intercessiones non petierit, utpote qui libertatem apud Deum
habeant, secundum Ecclesiasticam Traditionem, pro mundo intervenire; Anathema.
Which Canon, tho it is noted by the Second Nicene Council ( Act. 6. Tom. 6. post
hanc editionem suam, etc.) to have been left out in some later Copies of the
Acts of this Council (those times growing on after this Synod from opposing of
Images to destroying of Relics, and denying of Saints Intercessions (a thing
not disallowed by the Reformed,) and of calling them also by the name of Saints
[See the Authors quoted by Mr. Mede, Apostasy of later times, p. 131, 135,
etc.]) tho the Council is cleared from any such Decrees, both by Mr. Mede, p.
137, and by the whole Body of their Acts examined by the Second Nicene Council,
their severe Antagonists; Yet it is clear, that it was one of the ultimate
Definitions of that Council, since it is found, not in the first framing only
(as Mr. Mede would have it, p. 135.) but in that first Edition of their Acts,
which was subscribed by all the Council (as appears in the Conclusion of Act.
6. Tom. 6. of the Second Conc. Nic.) and which accordingly the Nicene Council
undertook to refute, as not the first Draughts, but the Ratified Acts of that
Synod.

3. That the Council which reversed its Doctrine of the Eucharist, was General,
and Confirmed by all the Patriarchs.

4. And lastly, That the Council of Francfort also, tho it might in something
mistake the meaning of the Council of Constantinople (for which I will not
contend with Mr. Blondel; for so perhaps did they of Nice too misunderstand
it,) yet perusing the Doctrine of Nice, Censures not it at all, a far greater
(if an) error; but almost in the same phrase with it, Blames the other of
Constantinople, saying; The mystery of the Body and Blood of our Lord was not
now to be called Imago, but Veritas; not Umbra, but Corpus.

Which word, and other expressions, that they imported not less than those of
Nice, may be shrewdly presumed from Mr Blondel's Concession ( c. 18. p. 415.)
That within a few years after this Council followed a Change in the
Eucharist-Doctrine in the West; a change, i. e. to this Tenent of Corporal
presence. Now all those things well weighed, let any one judge between the
Constantinopolitan Council, and those two that followed, who are more likely to
be the Innovators: or whose Determination a good Subject of the Church, not so
able in such high Mysteries to guide himself, ought rather to adhere and submit
to.

Damascen and the Council of Nice, The state of the Greek Church since these
Councils.
has been owned, and embraced ever since, even to this day, by the Greek
Church, without any opposition to it; and that not only as being theirs, but
the Tenent also of all the Greek Fathers before this Councll, which also are
frequently by them quoted for it. See this confessed by Mr. Blondel c. 16. p.
399, 400. Le Concile de Nice 2. a impose une tacit loy aux Grecs posterieurs;
Their adherence ever since to the Doctrine of Nic. Conc. 2
qui ont jusques a nos jours revere ses decrets de parler a sa mode; and de
renoucer (so he is pleased to say, but they pretend the contrary) en imitant
ses fautes, au style de la plus venerable antiquite. And then he reckons up
their Writers since (both ancienter, and more modern) concurring in this
opinion; naming amongst the ancienter, Theophylact and Euthymius. See Sandys
West. Relig. p. 233, 234. who confesses the Greeks to agree with the Romanists
in Transubstantiation, Sacrifice, and the whole Body of the Mass.

See Dr. Potter, Char. Mist. sect. 7. p. 225. where he says, In the opinion of
Transubstantiation, the later Greeks seem to agree with the Romanists; and
justifies what he says by many quotations in the Margent. See Forbes l. 1. c.
4. s. 2. who himself opposing Transubstantiation, yet, after many Authorities
given, concludes that Section, Certum est recentiores Graecos a
Transubstantiationis opinione non fuisse, neque etiamnum esse, omnino alienos;
hosce autem omnes Christianae pietatis cultores, haereseos aut erroris
exitialis damnare, magnae profecto audaciae and temeritatis esset. So l. 2. c.
2. s. 14. Graeci Venetiis viventes and reliqui omnes Graeci, etiam adorant
Christum in Eucharistia, and quis ausit omnes hos Christianos idololatriae
arcessere and damnare?

To give you some of the Grecian expressions since this Council. See
Theophylact, (who lived in the Ninth Age) in Mat. 26. Non enim dixit, Hoc est
Figura, sed hoc est Corpus, ineffabili enim operatione transformatur, etiamsi
nobis videatur panis. And in 1 Cor. 11. expounding those words, non dijudicans
Corpus Domini, he says, Si certiores essemus quisnam and quantus sit ille qui
nobis in conspectu adjacet, i. e. in Altari, nulla ferme rei alterius open
indigeremus, etc. So speaks Oecumenius on the same place.

Euthymius in Mat. 26. Quemadmodum supernaturaliter assumptam carnem
deificavit, si ita loqui liceat; ita and haec ineffabiliter transmutat in ipsum
vivificum corpus suum. -- See the Answer of the Grecians to the Cardinal of
Guise, quoted before, and by Blondel p. 400. and the Answer of Jeremiah,
Patriarch of Constantinople, to the Lutherans (who in their beginnings sought
the support of the Grecian Communion, c 10.) which Answer also may show them,
in the manner of Christ's presence to differ, as from the Calvinistical, so
also from the Lutheran Tenent; Multa in hac part de nobis referuntur, quae
nobis nullo pacto probari possunt. Ecclesiae igitur sanctae illud judicium est,
in sacra coena, post consecrationem, panem in illud ipsum corpus Jesu Christi,
vinum in illum sanguinem virtute Spiritus sancti transire and immutari. -- Non
tanquam corpus illud sursum translatum de coelo iterum descendat (blasphemum
enim hoc est,) sed -- transformatis and transmutatis gratia Spiritus sancti and
ejusdem invocatione speciebus, -- ipso quidem pane in verum corpus Domini, vino
autem in verum sanguinem transeunte and immutato. Again, -- illud ipsum verum
corpus Christi sub speciebus fermentati panis continetur. It Is plain here, that
as they hold corporal presence, so not by way of Consubstantiation, but
Transmutation.

As for those passages in the Florentine Council, between the Greeks and Latins
about this point, as it is there named, de divina panis transmutatione, (which
the Pope was so earnest to have had then accorded between them; but the
Graecians, much worsted in the Controversy concerning A Filioque, had no mind
to enter into any further Disputes,) it was not whether this Transmutation was,
or after what manner it was, but by what words, or in what place of the Prayers
it was made; as appears by those words in that Council, following the Pope's
proposal, -- de Panis autem transmutatione Latinis quaerentibus cur Graeci post
Dominica verba -- Accipite and manducate etc. quibus verbis Sacramentum confici
dicitur, hac etiam utuntur oratione -- and fac panem quidem hunc Honorabile
corpus Christi tui etc. ex sancto tuo Spiritu transmutante: Responderunt Graeci
etc. After which it follows, quibus quidem quatuor quaestionibus dissolutis;
therefore that which was proposed in the fourth Question, was in this their
Answer spoken to; but they only answered concerning this matter of the words of
Consecration; afterward the same Questions being repropounded, its said, they
answered to the fourth as before. Yet this answer being given only by some
particular persons sent to the Pope, it is said, that after this their answer,
Summus Pontifex petiit, ut de divina panis transmutatione, quae quidem quarta
quaestio fuit, in Synodo ageretur; as likewise he desired afterward that they
would treat of the three rest, and leave out that, calling it amongst the rest
quaestiuncula, which he would not have said, had the Greeks denied
transmutation. I have insisted the longer on this passage, because some have so
mistaken it, as to think transmutation, as affirmed by the Romanists, so denied
by the Greeks; whenas amongst many errors by the Greeks imputed to the Roman
Church, yet none about the Eucharist was ever objected.

Now consider, if Transubstantiation, or substantial conversion, were an
innovation brought into the Church about the Conc. Lateran, under Innocent 3d.
or, as some say, later; How comes it to pass, that we find the same opinion,
or, if any difference, an opinion seemingly as much or more absurd, in the
Greek Church also, who are not discovered to have had any controversy about the
Eucharist amongst themselves, since that 7th, which was the last General
Council that they allow of. See Conc. Flor. 6. sess. Nor could receive any
infection from the Western Church, after the breach made between the two
Churches; which began not long after the 2. Nic. Conc. in the 9th age, and was
at its height in the 11th. age, long before the Lateran Council.

The Agitations in the Western Church after these Councils.
Thus much of the Greek; now to see what was done in the Western Church. Here,
after the first agitation and stirring of the doctrine of the Eucharist by the
Councils of Constantinople, Nice, and Franckfort, a rose some questions and
doubts about it, and began a more curious and particular inquisition to be made
into it; as (amongst other things) Whether that which was received in the
Eucharist, was, or was not, that very Body of our Savior, which was born of
the Vngin Mary, and which suffered on the Cross? some then moving questions
about it, and doubting of, or also denying it.

For settling men's minds: the first that I can find to have written more
punctually on this subject, for the corporal presence, is Paschasius, (of whom
Bellarm. says, (de scriptor. Ecclesiasticis,) Hic author primus fuit, qui
serio and copiose scripsit de veritate corporis and sanguinis Domini in
Eucharistia, contra eos qui eam in dubium revocarunt; but of whom Blondel 18.
c. says, he was the first in the Western Church that altered the doctrine of
the former times.) Against him, and on the other side, writ (says Blondel
ibid. and Dr. Tailor, p. 328.) Amalarius, and Rabanus, and Johannes Scotus,
Erigena, and Bertram: but the Romanists, I think, acknowledge only Johan. Erig.
(of whom Bellarm. says, primus in Ecclesia Latina de hac re dubious scribere
coepit, whose writings were afterward condemned in Conc. Vercellensi, A Dom.
1050, 165 years before that of the Lateran,) and Bertram, (of whom Estius
says, tecte admodum atque id sine successu contra doctrinam Catholicam
scribere coepit.) As for Amalarius and Rabanus, you may inform your self out of
their writings (one writing de officiis Ecclesiasticis, the other de
institutione Clericorum,) concerning their opinion.

Out of Amalarius de Ecclesiast. offic. l. 3.34. c. I find Bellarmin quoting
these words for his side: Hic credimus naturam simplicem panis and vini mixti
verti in naturam rationabilem, sc. corporis and sanguinis Christi: And Archb.
Usher in Jes Challenge p. 75. making him by his doting questions (what, after
the eating thereof, should become of Christ's Body,) the first occasioner of
the innovation (as he calls it) in the doctrine of the Eucharist. Meanwhile his
questions show what opinion men had then, that they received the very Body of
Christ.

But the two chief it seems are Paschasius and Bertram, which Bertram also had
some followers, as elsewhere, so here, in England; as appears by what Osbert
says, (who in Lanfranck's time writ the life of Odo, who lived in the 10th
Age); Hoc fere tempore, i.e. in Odo's, quidam Clericorum maligno errore seducti
asseverare conabantur, panem and vinum, quae in altari ponuntur post
consecrationem, in priori substantia manner, and figuram tantummodo esse
corporis and sanguinis Christi: and by the Saxon writings of Aelfrick, who
flourished in the latter end of the 10th Age; which writings you may see at
large in Foxes Martyrol, Henr. 8.1540, quoted by Dr. Tailor p. 330. and by
Archbishop Usher, Jes. chall. p. 77. who there shows many passages of his to be
verbatim translated out of Bertram, whose expressions methinks are somewhat
obscure, of the bread being truly after its hallowing turned into Christ's Body
ghostly or spiritual, not into that in which he suffered.

Afterward in the 11th. Age, when the opinion opposing corporal presence, as it
was never very openly maintained, so now was almost laid aside, and sunk of it
self, without the interdict of any Council, appeared Berengarius, a stout
reviver and open abetter of it; who at first is said to have held the Lord's
Body present in the Eucharist, only ut res significata in suo signo, but
pressed by many adversaries, and much persecuted for his doctrine, was
afterward brought to recant it, and to acknowledge a real corporal presence.
But then presently began to be agitated new controversies about this real
presence; whether it was together with the bread also remaining entire and
unchanged? and what mutation the Elements underwent by consecration? When arose
some who maintained only a conjunction of Christ's body with the bread; others
a kind of Impanation of Christ, of which something is said before; non quia
panis vertatur in carnem Domini, sed quia assumatur a verbo; ex quo sequitur
panem esse corpus Christi, sed non humanum, neque carneum, sed panaceum, and
long diversum ab illo quod de Virgin sumptum est. Haec duo corpora posse
tamen dici unum, quia unus Christus est qui utrumque assumpsit. Others there
were, that held a mutation only of part of the bread into Christ's body, namely
that portion received by the worthy communicant, not the rest, lest the wicked
also might seem to partake of it, which they thought most improbable.

Of some of these opinions are named to be Berengarius himself, after his first
recantation, or at least some of his followers; of such also Rupertus, and
others; and perhaps Aelfrick (mentioned before) might have such conceit of
Impanation. And Mr. Blondel (in his 16. and 19. chapters) would persuade us,
that this also was partly the opinion both of Damascen and Paschasius, and
others of the former times.

Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, Guitmundus, Algerus, and generally the
writers following those times, Anselm, Peter Lombard, Bernard, Hugo, and
Richardus de Sancto Victore, etc, who all writ before the Council of Lateran.
By these opposite Authors abovenamed is every corner of the ancient Fathers
writings sought into; the same places then quoted, as now they are by the
Romanists and Protestants; one side pressing much their words of miraculous
change etc. The other, those of image, type, figure, etc, and the same answers
as now, returned then by both sides. If you please to look into Bellarmin's 2d.
book de Eucharist. he often makes use of the answers of these ancient Authors,
to what is urged by the Protestants: and says, if they bring the arguments of
their Forefathers, Bertram, Berengarius, etc, we return the answers of ours,
Paschasius, Algerus, etc. Amongst these disputes a corporal presence, and also
a substantial conversion of the elements, prevailing; yet some (again) there
were also that allowed such a conversion in the form of bread only, not the
matter: Durand's opinion, and some others, affirmed e contra a change of the
matter, but not of the form; which opinions were opposed by the ordinary stream
of writers.

Now as these controversies arose, or grew to any height, so several Councils
since Nicen. 2. for the settling and preserving of the Churches peace and quiet,
have bin in several Ages assembled. The corporal presence was decided against
Berengarius by five several Councils (see Blond. 20. c.) before that of Lateran
under Innocent 3. A substantial conversion of the elements determined by the
Lateran (whether also by those before it, more anon,) and many others following
it: A conversion of the whole substance of them stated more expressly in the
Tridentine Council. Notwithstanding which Synodal determinations from time to
time, there have not wanted those successively, who have taught contrary to
their decrees. See Blond. 20. c. p. 441. as Petrus Bruise, and Henricus his
disciple, Petrus Waldo from whom the Waldenses and Albigenses, John Wicklif,
(whom John Hus his disciple followed not in this point,) etc: but these very
rare; and their disciples most what some vulgar, not the learned, until the
times of Luther.

Reflections upon the former narration.
Now concerning this narration of the passages of the times after 2. Conc. Nice,
and that of Franckfort, observe

1. That tho the other doctrine was much easilier credible, as more agreeing to
humane reason, yet that, that of Paschasius and his followers was the common,
and the most prevalent, not only in the Eastern (showed before,) but also in
the Western Church: 1. Corporal presence then the common opinion.
and this not only after, but before, and when Paschasius writ; See what he
says lib. de verb. instit. Sacramenti. -- Quamvis ex hoc quidam de ignorantia
errent, nemo tamen est adhuc in aperto qui hoc (i.e. Christ's corporal presence
in the Eucharist) ita esse contradicat, quod totus orbis credit and confitetur.

For Paschasius writ before either Johan: Erigena, or Bertram: and when Bertram
writ otherwise, it was tecte admodum and sine successu, as Estius notes of him.
And Osbert (quoted before) says only, Quidam Clericorum seducti etc. And this
more appears, in that, when Berengarius afterward showed himself afresh for
that opinion, all the Church Governors unanimously resisted him; so that there
is not one Bishop found to have consented to his opinion, and the Authors who
oppose him much object the singularity of his tenent to him. Guitmund. 3. l.
Notissimum est hoc tempore, priusquam Berengarius insaniisset, hujusmodi
vesanias nusquam fuisse. -- And Laufranck in his last Book against him:
Interroga universos, qui Latinae linguae nostrarumve literarum notitiam
perceperunt; interroga Graecos, Armenios, seu cujuslibet nationis quoscunque
Christianos, uno ore hanc fidem (which he maintained against Berengarius) se
testabuntur habere: and he himself (as Lanfranck reports of him) called the
opinion opposed by him, sententiam vulgi.

The Historians likewise of those times relate Berengarius his, as a new and
singular tenent. See W. Malmsbury, 3. l. de gestis Anglorum. Observe likewise,
that no Councils, after Nice and Franckfort, determining any thing in this
point, for the space of about 300 years before the times of Berengarius, argues
the Church not much afflicted with open contentions in this matter: that when
they did determine any thing, it was not before that the Fathers, by several
writers pro and con, had bin much searched and examined: that tho many Councils
called about it, yet they differed not in their judgments, but exactly agreed
one with another, and still condemned the same side, without its finding a
party (tho smaller) in any of them to patronize it.

substantial presence of Christ's body with the symbols (which (as I have often
said) is the main business to be agreed upon by all these Authors and Councils,
All Councils since the 2d. of Nice unanimously deciding corporal presence with
the symbols.
) before the Lateran Council: so that tho some contest there may be between the
Lutheran and Catholic about the persuasions of these times concerning
Impanation, and the remaining of bread in part at least after consecration; yet
none can there be between the Calvinist and Catholic concerning those times
holding corporal presence with the symbols, and consequently concerning
Adoration; for this the Calvinist must grant to be the judgment of these
Writers and Councils abovenamed, beginning at Nice until the Lateran.

Blondel in c. 16, 19, 20. p. 397, 431, 441, affirms both Damascen and
Paschasius, And that not by way of Impanation, as Blon. affirms of the former
part of those times.
and the other Authors, that held corporal presence till the beginning of the
12th Age, and Councils, till the Lateran, not to have held Transubstantiation,
or substantial conversion of the elements, but only a certain union or identity
between them remaining still in their former substance, and the natural body of
Christ, by the inhabitation of the Deity in, or its assumption of them, which
he calls impanation: There are many things which to this may be replied.

1. If it were as he says, yet since it warrants the main business of corporal
presence with the Symbols, and Adoration, what relief can Mr. Blondel's or the
Protestant-cause receive thereby? Again, since such impanation differs very
much from the Lutheran Consubstantiation; (see what Blondel confesses to this
purpose p. 436, and 400. And it is clear enough also from Paschasius his
assertions set down by Blondel p. 423, which no Lutheran will subscribe to;)
and it is a tenent, if well considered, much more absurd than that of
substantial conversion, or Transubstantiation, (which he says succeeded it in
these later times;) as it making Christ to have two bodies by union
hypostatical; one Carneum, in his assuming humanity; and another Panaceum, in
the Sacrament: And these two bodies again identified by the same Person of the
Deity present to both, etc. (see it examined by Bellarmine, as one Rupertus his
opinion in the 12th Age, and the absurdities thereof displayed in l. 3. de
Euch. c. 11, 15.) I say, that to prove such to have been the opinion of
Antiquity, which makes as much against Protestants as the present does, and is
more incommodious than the present, does not only no way patronize their cause,
but also help to excuse their Adversary.

2. Algerus, one of Berengarius his Opposites (in his first Book de Sacr. c.
6.) calling it novam haeresin suo tempore exortam and absurdissimam, and there
confessing it: This argues it very unlikely to have been the common opinion
until his Age, as is affirmed; unless we will make him mistake the opinion of
those Writers and Councils immediately before him.

3. Tho Mr. Blondel does not, yet Dr. Tailor acknowledges concerning
Paschasius in particular, that he held and writ for a substantial change; see
p. 328. And comparing Mr. Blondel's quotations out of Paschasius p. 423, with
those p. 432, I see not any thing brought to prove the contrary. Bishop Forbes
l. 1. c. 4. s. 1. says, Bertram in his Preface clearly affirms, that some in
his time held that which is since called Transubstantiation. Who could this be,
but Paschasius, and others, whom he opposed?

4. Again, The expressions of these Authors, who are said to hold no
substantial conversion of the bread, etc. are ordinarily such as these:
Damascen. Panis vinumque per invocationem and adventum Spiritus sancti
supernaturaliter transmutantur in corpus and sanguinem Christi, and non sunt
duo, sed unum and idem. -- Pasch. Licet figura panis and vini hic sit, omnino
nihil aliud quam caro Christi and sanguis post consecrationem credenda sunt,
(see many more gathered by Bell. de Euch. l. 3. c. 20. which it will be tedious
here to set down.) Now these expressions show them to have held a conversion or
transmutation, beyond Consubstantiation, wherein the element becomes not
locally joined, but the same with Christ's body; and if perhaps they (or some
of them) by such expressions should not have intended such a conversion of the
bread, as that nothing thereof should afterward remain, but a conversion into
Christ's body only in Rupertus his sense, quia per hypostaticam unionem fit
corpus Christi, as Bellarmin interprets him in his Recognitions; yet it seems
plain, that they held (beyond the tenent of the Lutherans) such a physical
change in the substance and nature thereof, as that it could not afterward be
truly called bread; tho some diversity of phrase there might be, in what no
Council had yet so punctually decided.

5. And this is more confirmed by the Opinion of the Greek Church; who, if
Damascen and the Nicene Council, whom they follow, held no conversion of the
Bread in its nature or substance, how come they to hold it? and about
Transubstantiation, to nourish no difference at all with the Latins? See the
quotations before. Surely, in that Answer they gave to the Cardinal of Guise
(quoted in Blondel p. 400.) where they say, neither substance nor accidents of
Bread to remain, but all to be transelemented into the substance Divine, some
change they would intimate much diverse from the Lutheran (with whom they could
not agree in this point) and not much abhoring from the Roman Opinion:
excepting only that the Roman is the more moderate.

presence in the Eucharist with that of the Incarnation, and of the Divinity,
in such manner infusing it self into the Bread, as once into our Nature, found
in these Authors, as likewise in the Fathers; either they meant only, that the
Bread in this infusion was turned by the Divine Omnipotence into the Lord's
Body (as the Catholick's say) or something more gross; if they held the Deity
thus to contract a new hypostatical union with the Bread, whereby it properly
becomes his Body: So that the crime, that their posterity in this is accused
of, will be only, that they are less absurd than their Ancestors. Thus much for
those Authors before the 12th Age.

Lateran) wherein Berengarius was Condemned, understood a substantial
conversion of the Bread in the Eucharist, notwithstanding what Blondel says (
c. 29. p. 439, etc.) I think is also plain enough. In the Roman Council
Assembled an. 1078. wherein Berengarius last recanted, the words are these: Ego
Berengarius cord credo panem etc. -- substantialiter converti in veram and
propriam and vivificatricem carnem Domini, etc. In the former Roman Council,
an. 1060. tho the words of the Recantation are, Ego Berengarius anathematizo
eam haeresin, quae astruere conatur panem post consecrationem solummodo
Sacramentum and non verum corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi esse: Yet, that the
Council meant the Bread to be Christ's Body, not whilst being, but by ceasing
to be Bread, methinks is sufficiently vindicated by what Lanfranck (one of it,)
and Guitmund, and Anselm (contemporaries,) say of this Council, as I find them
quoted by Bellarm. de Euch. l. 3. c. 21. -- Lanfran. de Corpore Domini to
Berengarius, -- Nicolaus Papa comperiens te docere panem vinumque altaris post
consecrationem sine materiali mutatione in pristinis essentiis remanere etc.
praecepti tradi scripturam tibi; i. e. the Recantation named before. Guitmund
l. 3. De Corpore Domini, speaking of the same Council says, Panem in corpus
Christi substantialiter converti, non sicut delirat Berengarius corporis Domini
figuras tantum esse and umbras, aut intra se latentem Christum tegere,
universalis Ecclesiae consensione roboratum est. Anselm (tho I grant, it is not
necessary to understand this to be spoken of the former Council,
notwithstanding semper abhorruit some way involves it) Panis substantiam post
consecrationem in altari superesse semper abhorruit pietas Christiana, nuperque
damnavit in Berengario, and. But Anselm dyed an hundred years before the
Lateran Council.

Besides the force of these Testimonies; it is not probable, that in the
eighteen years space that interceded between these two Councils, the Judgment
of the Church in the later should be so much altered, and that without any
noise or opposition from the former.

strictly determined the manner of corporal presence; Councils excusable in
determination of the manner of Christ's presence in the Eucharist.
which many pious men have wished that the Church had rather left undefin'd;
permitting to every one the liberty of their private conjecture; and only
imposing silence on all to forbear curious disputes: Yet we may consider, That
the same we say concerning this point of the Eucharist, is said by Sectaries
concerning Decisions of Councils in any other point, wherein they differ from
her Judgment. So she is (by several) complained of, for her too much curiosity
and punctuality in the mystery of the Trinity; in her addition a Filioque; in
concluding that hard and long-disputed point of Rebaptization, etc.

That not private men, but the Church her self, is meetest to judge what is fit
to be determined or not determined by her. That curious disputes may indeed
easily be prohibited, but once on foot, will never be actually laid, but still
multiply into new controversies, till something (most probable) is settled by
just Authority. That as there were then on foot some opinions very destructive
and diminutive to this ineffable Mystery, (as Berengarius his first Doctrine);
so others again very extravagant, (as that of Hypostatical union of the Deity
to a new Breaden Body.) That these Councils did no more in this, than other
Councils from time to time have done in very subtle (only if much controverted)
matters; in not silencing the Disputants, but (as became a Judge confiding in
the Holy Spirit's assistance) determining the point as seemed to them truest.

That these Councils in this point (after all things had been for a long time
more exactly debated, and sifted, than in former Ages, before giving any
sentence thereon) in their decision followed the words of our Savior, Mat.
26.26. in their simplest meaning, and the commonest phrase of the Writings of
Antiquity (tho some Fathers in their judgment perhaps differed from the rest)
i. e. conversion, or transmutation, taken in the strictest sense. That, if we
restrain the Church from determining any thing, where Scripture seems ambiguous
(tho the testimony and exposition of Antiquity perhaps in the same point is not
so) her decisive Authority, in matters once controverted, will be made void;
because so often is Scripture ambiguous, i.e. (by several men severally
understood:) And in matters not controverted, it is needless.

That there comes (...) more Peace to the Church by such a definition; and no
danger to Christians from this thing defined, if an Error: [supposing still
corporal presence a truth, from which also follows Adoration;] because it is
only a purely speculative mistake, and no point of practice depending on it.
Lastly, That in the general acknowledgment of so much obscurity and
uncomprehensibleness of this mystery, as the Church has less light to judge of
the exact manner thereof, etc. so have others less grounds to contradict her
Judgment.

Article of Faith now, which was not so heretofore; which is much objected by
some Reformed; In what sense they impose it as an Article of Faith.
(see Chemnitius quoted before. Sed quia transubstantiatio (says he) pro
articulo fidei sub paena anathematis proponitur necessario contradicendum est,
etc. See Dr. Tailor p. 331. Before the Lateran Council, says he,
Transubstantiatio non fuit dogma fidei, as Scotus says; and how it can be
afterward, since Christ is only the Author and finisher of our Faith, and
therefore all Faith was delivered from the beginning, is a matter of highest
danger and consideration. Thus he.) I think it is sufficiently answered, and
the offense thereof taken away, in my notes of Infallibility; so that I need
say little here.

Only this. First, They make this point of Transubstantiation no more an
Article of Faith, than their other Decrees; to which they require assent under
Anathema, as they do to this. For example: It Is made no more an Article of
Faith by them, than this is, De Bapt. Can. 1. Baptismum Johannis non habere
eandem vim cum baptismo Christi. But if the Church may not be permitted to make
(thus) new Articles of Faith, she may not, to make any new determination not
formerly made; nor to enjoin people to believe or assent to any thing which
formerly was not enjoined nor believed.

But to explain the business a little: We must know; That all Divine
Revelation, any thing in God's Word, whatever, is eo nomine an Article or point
of Faith; and that as Article of Faith is taken for dogma verum, and so
credible, for a divine truth which is creditable, or which may be most surely
believed. So what Dr. Tailor says is most true; such it is, not only after
Decreed by a Council, but at least from the time of our Savior and the
Apostles; and nothing at any time (thus) an Article of Faith, which is not so
always. And thus, far doubtless was it from Scotus his thought, That
Transubstantiation at the Lateran Council began to be a divine truth, when it
was not so before. But, as Article of Faith is taken for dogma necessario
credendum, for a divine truth necessary, when known to be so, to be believed,
or not opposed: So a divine truth may be an article or object of my Faith to
day, which was not yesterday. So he, who (by what means soever) knows that
something is said in Scripture, which he knew not yesterday, may be said to
have to day a new article of his Faith, or a new point no way to be opposed or
denied, but assented to, and believed by him.

dogma fidei before, and at such a time to begin to be so, the meaning is, That
is is now a dogma fidei, or object of Faith necessary to be believed, which it
was not before [necessary to be believed;] not for the matter thereof; as if
the actual knowledge and faith thereof were absolutely necessary to Salvation;
thus a few points only (some think not all those of the Creed) are necessary;
and nothing thus necessary at any time, that is not always so; but necessary ex
accidenti, because we have a sufficient proposal thereof, that it is a divine
truth. Not that the error in, or ignorance of, such a point, even after such
proposal, does derogate from our having absolutely necessary faith, any more
than it did before; nor that, in disbelieving or dissenting from it, we are
more defective in the necessarily salvifical principles of divine truth; but
that we are defective in our obedience to and acceptance of divine truths made
known to us by the Church, as some way conducible to Christian edification, to
the peace of the Church, or to some other good end.

Therefore the duty she requires to many of her decisions, is not so much an
actual knowing of them, as the not denying, opposing, contradicting them, when
made known to us. Therefore, for example, should any one, after the definition
of the Tridentine Council, thereupon, hold John's and our Savior's Baptism to
have in every thing the same virtue and effect; such a one, whilst not knowing
this definition of the Council, is excusable in his error, supposing it be not
contracted from any careless neglect: or if it be so contracted, yet he is not
guilty thereby of a point of infidelity, as concerning necessary faith, but
only of the sin of negligence.

Neither when the Church requires the belief of Transubstantiation, hence does
it follow, that she says, the belief thereof is necessary to salvation; but
that she thinks it fit, for some good ends of Christian edification, not to be
opposed: and therefore Suarez his confessing, that to believe
Transubstantiation is not simply necessary to salvation, quoted by Archbishop
Laud p. 287. methinks well consists with the Church's determining it, tho the
Archbishop, there, thinks according to the Roman principles it is otherwise.
And, as Bellarmin says, there are many things in Scripture, which tho they are
necessario credenda quia scripta sunt, yet are not scripta quia necessario
credenda; so may I say of Church- definitions.

Neither upon this may we collect, that she is tyrannical in abridging the
liberty of men's judgments, if the belief of the points she determins be not
necessary for salvation; but only, if no way at all beneficial to be known. For
the wilful opposing of which, if we afterward incur her Anathema's which
exclude from heaven, thus we miss of salvation, not for want of necessary
faith, but obedience; she Anathematizing us not for an error, but a vice, (i.
e.) a causlesly disturbing her peace, and resisting her authority.

Should any one, after the Apostolical Synod and Decrees, Act. 15. (some of
which were about matter of small account, yet not without good reason
commanded, for a season at least to be observed,) have resisted their
Injunctions in the matter of blood and things strangled, holding it still
lawful, notwithstanding such prohibition, to eat those things; such an one
doubtless, notwithstanding the levity of the matter, would justly have incurred
the Church'es censure, and without repentance bin liable to damnation; not for
want of any faith necessary thereto, but of due submission and obedience to the
decrees of a just Authority.

obedience to these Councils in such their decisions, Obedience due to such
decisions.
see what I have said in my Notes concerning that subject; and in those, of the
obligation of not acting against conscience; where I think it is sufficiently
evidenced, that we are bound to submit at least to all such points, where we
are not certain of the contrary, as especially in this by most-confessed-
ineffable mystery we can little pretend to it, considering what has bin said
in this paper. But indeed such a submission will be found either a duty to all
the Churches decisions, or to none. For if we obey only so many of her Canons
as we in our judgment think truth, rejecting the rest; our submission is not to
her authority deciding, but a yiedling to the verisimility of the thing decided.

Again; such a submission, is either a duty to all Councils, (I mean, which are
in their authority equal,) or to none; upon the same reason. For, for us to
judge first of the orthodoxness of a Council, which is appointed to direct us
what is orthodox, what a preposterous thing is it? And if we go to this play
once, to receive only so many Councils, as we like of their doctrines; then, as
the Lutheran only admits of six Councils, the Calvinist of only four; so the
Eutychians now in Asia, upon as good grounds, (I mean as to any obligation to
their Authority,) do admit only of three Councils. Again, the modern Nestorian
of two only; lastly, the modern Socinian of none at all.

Objection that may be made here; What if a man's conscience be persuaded that
the contrary to the Councils decree is evident in the Scriptures? The objection
of contrary persuasion of Conscience considered.
[as what if one think, that the Church in the Tridentine Council enjoins
adoration, not to Christ, but to the Symbols; or, that the worshipping of
Christ, as corporally present in the Sacrament, is flat idolatry; which is much
urged by Daille as a sufficient ground for a discession from the former Church;
see the latter part of 8. c. of his Apology, p. 55.] I have answered in those
Notes before-named. I will only here retort it:

Suppose an Eutychian, Nestorian, Ariam, plead the same excuse for dissenting
from the ancient Councils, (for, I hope, he will grant some of them may be
persuaded in conscience as they profess.) If he answer, such persuasion of a
conscience wilfully misinformed, and refusing the guides God has appointed to
instruct it better, excuses them not from the guilt of heresy: I reply,
neither will it in this point excuse the other, especially for the business of
corporal presence, if they be found to go against the stream of present and
former Church, (from whom we ought in all humility to receive the exposition of
ambiguous Scripture,) and to make therefrom a causless division. If the Church
may enjoin men nothing that is against their conscience, and nor in these exact
obedience; all heresy must be tolerated, and the Nicene Creed is a tyranny. But
if you say, they may use their Anathema's in greater matters, but in these
smaller niceties may not thus domineer over men's consciences, (a thing Daille
accuses the Tridentine Council of, 7. c. 40. p.) I answer: Who shall judge,
what is small, what is great, but those who decide also the matters both small
and great? But let him search Antiquity, and see if small matters have not also
undergone their Anathema's. He confesses they have, and therefore is liberal
to blame both. 7. c. 38. p.

objection advanced yet higher; That men may not obey such a decree, not only
when it is against conscience, Objection of non-certainty considered.
but when they have thereof so much as a doubting conscience, especially in a
matter of such high consequence, as Adoration is, (which follows upon holding a
corporal presence) which to give to any object, without certainty that it is
adorable, they say is utterly inexcusable. Ce n' est pas assez d'en auoir
quelque opinion. Il' en fault estre certain. Daille 11. c. 94. p. Upon these
premises no man can choose but doubt, and quod dubitas, ne feceris. Tail. p. 340.

1. In answer to this also, see what I have said at large in those notes.
Indeed the rule is good, where doubt of sinning is only on one side, not on
both; only on the side of doing, but not on the side of omttting also: and when
we are certain in omitting the thing, we sin not. But the case is otherwise,
wherever our Mother the Church enjoins us the doing of a thing; for here is
no security of not sinning, if we do it not. Again, if Christ be there
corporally present, as she says He is, Daille says, It Is our duty to adore
him: and, as to give adoration to an object not adorable; so to deny it to one
adorable, is both, sin. I may retort then with more reason, quod dubitas (if
you doubt only, and are not certain of the contrary) ne omittas, where the
Church and your lawful Superiors enjoin you to do it. For, as reasonable as
this proposition is, quod dubitas ne faciendo pecces, ne feceris; so reasonable
is the other, quod dubitas, ne omittendo pecces, ne omittas.

2. Again, Mr. Hooker's reason methinks has as little force as any of these,
to encourage any in a non-submission to the Church's judgment; who, in his 5.
l. 67. sect. 363. p. discourses thus. That, "there being three several
opinions in the matter of the Eucharist, (he joining the Two first in this
Paper in one) "we may safeliest cleave unto that, which has nothing in it but
what the rest do all approve and acknowledge to be most true. But you may find
the Archbishop Laud sect. 35. p. 286. in his refutation of a like argument
brought by the Romanist, [namely, that it is better to be of that Church, in
which all Churches agree salvation may be had,] mentioning this very argument
about the Eucharist, and rejecting it as insufficient. And indeed were it any
way valid, it would follow; when, of diverse opinions, some affirm less, some
more; a prudent man ought always to side with the least, because this is
affirmed by all: which I think is a dangerous assertion, especially in
Religion, To believe, and do still with the least.

let to keep any from assenting to a corporal presence, Obj. of the
fruitlesness of supposed corporal presence considered.
or substantial conversion; because such Presence (if it be) is pretended to be
utterly unbeneficial and fruitless, and since Nature does nothing in vain, much
less does the Author of it. See Mr. Blondel (in his 10. c.) and Dr. Tailor, (
sect. 3. p. 28 etc. and p. 46.) much pressing this upon these three reasons. 1.
Because any pretended effects of the Eucharist must be granted to be attainable
without it, by a spiritual reception of Christ etc. (See their writings.) 2.
Because the unworthy receiver must be granted to be partaker of it (the
substance of Christ's Body) as well as the worthy; and this without enjoying
the least benefit thereof. 3. Because our Savior has decided this point, John
6.63. declaring to the Capernaites (mistaking his sayings, as if he meant to
feed them with his flesh, by virtue of which once eaten by them they should
afterward live for ever) That his flesh, if they should eat a piece thereof,
would profit them nothing for any such purpose.

1. First note, concerning this Objection, in respect of the former reason;
that it presses as much the second as the third and fourth opinion, who affirm
the worthy receiver to partake not only virtually, (as the first says,) but
really also Christ's Body; but to what end this? since the other, i. e. Christ
received by faith, supplieth all the effect desired or pretended, according to
John 6.40, 47. and St. Austin's saying, creed and manducasti?

2. Now for an Answer to it in reference to both the reasons, I might
transcribe you Bellarmin's, in Eucharist. 3. l. 9. c. which to me seems very
satisfactory. Read it at your leisure. The effects of the Eucharist, such as
are alleged by Blondel out of Peron, Namely, a more strict and entire union
and conjunction of us to God; the increase of grace and charity in us; the
sowing in us the seed of immortality, and a resurrection of our decaying
bodies, etc. are not affirmed to be wrought in us by the corporal presence of
our Savior, as after a physical or irresistible manner, but as by a proper
instrument appointed by God for such effects upon such a disposition of the
receiver. Therefore neither are these effects necessary to corporal presence,
i. e. that corporal presence cannot be without them; for so it is in the
unworthy communicant: neither again is corporal presence absolutely necessary
to such effects, i. e. that they cannot be at all without corporal presence;
for so they are in the faithful before communicating, at least in some
imperfecter degree.

3 But these concessions we have now made (if this be all they contend) will
never argue the substantial or corporal presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharist to be a thing superfluous or void of effect: 1. Because in God's
appointing several instruments for conveying the like benefits to us, the
arguing that one does, will never prove the other does not the like. 2. In the
like effect being wrought by several means, the one may produce it in a far
more advanced degree than the other: So Aquinas p. 3. q. 80. art. 1. says,
Before inducit effectum sacramenti, ipsa sacramenti susceptio, quam solum
desiderium: Yet sometimes the desiderium serves the turn. 3. Because from a
thing proved useless sometimes, or to some persons from some incapability of
the subject, etc. it follows not, that it is so altogether, and to others: As,
it follows not, that such a Diet not nourishing, or also hurting a languishing
stomach, therefore does not profit to a sound.

To illustrate it a little in our present subject. By Baptism, or also by Faith
and Repentance before Baptism, or the fervent desire of Baptism (when it cannot
be had) we are regenerated and united to Christ, and made members of his body;
yet will any therefore say, that in Baptism we enjoy as much a communion of the
body and blood of Christ, as in the Eucharist? Or that the Eucharist is
inutile? Therefore, has Christ given us also the symbols of his body in vain?
Therefore, do we possess no more of his grace and goodness by believing and
receiving also the Sacrament of his body and blood, than only by believing on
him? But the, if receiving him spiritualiter by Faith and sacramentaliter, be
better than spiritualiter only; why may not sacramentaliter and coporaliter, be
also better than sacramentaliter only? Who can demonstrate it, That the
faithful receive no more benefit (from the Divine good pleasure) by faith, and
the body of our Lord substantially present, than he should by faith; and the
body only typically present; since all depends on God's good pleasure? Why may
it not be his will, to confer the complement of our union with him, and the
perfection of grace and charity in us, and the last seal of our immortality and
incorruptibility in us, not by the receipt of the symbols of his body, but by
his very body united and joined to our souls and bodies; and yet not these to
all that receive it neither (because it acts not physically or irresistibly)
but to the worthy?

Calvin (as he is very inconstant in his expressions concerning this Sacrament)
seems to hint something to this purpose, Instit. l. 4. c. 17. s. 9. s. 11. Quae
omnia non posse aliter effici intelligimus quin Christus totus spiritu and
corpore nobis adhaereat, that we may be membra corporis ejus, ex ossibus ejus
and carne ejus, magnum istud arcanum Ephesians. 5. -- and s. 11. Quo (i. e.)
exhibitione sanguinis and corporis ejus primum in unum corpus cum ipso
coalescimus; deinde participes substantiae ejus facti, in bonorum omnium
communicatione virtutem quoque sentimus. See B. Forbes l. 1. c. 1 s. 26, 27.
much to this purpose; Prisci fideles ante Christi incarnationem carnem Christi
spiritualiter edebant in manna and rebus aliis figuratam, and sufficienter pro
statu Oeconomiae illius ad salutem. -- 1 Cor. 10. Sed nihilominus, per
communicationem carnis Christi in Eucharistia, multo altius and solidius nos
Christianos incorporari Christo, quam priscos fideles qui spiritualiter tantum
seu per solam fidem carnem Christi manducabant, credidit semper Ecclesia
Catholica -- nos cum edimus eundem Christum fide quidem utili, sed fide rei
praesentis, quae actu ipso and non sola spe, nobis cum pane exhibetur, modo
tamen ineffabili etc. c^rtum est per manducationem mysticam corporis Domini, --
nos multo efficacius and before, sublimius and augustius, strictius and
arctius corpori and sanguini Christi uniri, quam perilla (i. e. verbum, fidem,
baptismum, etc.) Quam ob causam Hoc sacramentum dicitur per excellentiam
communio; quia scil. hunc modum per manducationem mysticam Christus instituit
long efficacissimum perficiendae unionis and conjunctionis quam arctissimae
inter sese and membra sua, etc. I conclude therefore, that very transcendent
may the effect of this corporal presence of our Savior be, beyond a spiritual
and symbolical only; as the effect of a spiritual and also symbolical in the.
Sacrament is granted to be more than of a spiritual only; tho the virtue
thereof by God's good pleasure be obstructed and denied to the unworthy; even
as his blood shed on the Cross, and given for all, yet is not effectual or
beneficial to many.

To the 6th Chapter of St. John's Gospel. Supposing, for the present, Tailor
and others contend for, That our Savior speaks only of a spiritual feeding on
him by faith, and not of the sacramental at all: Yet as the Doctor will grant,
that this Chapter contains in it nothing prejudicial to our attaining some
benefit by receiving the sacrament and the symbols of Christ's body therein,
tho it is most true of these symbols, that they of themselves profit nothing,
as to confer on us an eternal life, without the participation also of the
spirit of Christ communicated only to believers: So I return, that it contains
nothing in it prejudicial to our obtaining some benefit from the sacramental
receiving of our Savior's very flesh: Tho it is most true also of this very
flesh, that received alone without the spirit, as it is by all the unworthy
communicants, it does help nothing at all to make a man live for ever. The
whole passage in Joh. 6. seems to be thus: When our Savior had told the
Capernaites, upon occasion of their boasting how Moses gave them Manna to eat,
that (much beyond those Manna-eaters that were dead) he, whosoever should eat
the flesh of the Son of man, should live for ever; they conceived his meaning
to be, that whosoever could get a piece of his flesh and eat it, should by virtue
thereof for ever be preserved in life: And this seemed to them so unreasonable
and so barbarous a thing, either that he should any way feed them with his
flesh, or that they that fed with it should by the strength and force thereof
live for ever, that they forsook him and his doctrine: Upon which he instructs
them further in this mystery, as it seems to me to this effect: 1. That they
should not eat his flesh at all, in such a manner as they imagined, i. e. in
its natural condition; but that he should ascend up to Heaven, where he was
before, and so that his flesh with him; see ver. 62. upon which ascent the
Spirit should come upon all true believers, which Spirit should give them this
life; see Joh. 7.38, 39. 2. That his flesh (if eaten then, or whenever it
should be eaten in such manner as he should communicate it to them) could give
them no life alone, or by its own virtue, but only by his Spirit (which is the
fountain of life eternal) joined with, and accompanying his flesh; and that not
to all receiving his flesh, but to the believer of his words; which words
therefore in the close of ver. 63, when believed in, he calls spirit and life;
i. e. conferring the Spirit, from which is received that life. See ver. 63. --
wherein, that you may the better understand the usual expression of this
Evangelist, see Joh. 4.14. and 7.38, 39. where the Spirit (signified in both
places by water) is declared to be the fountain of life eternal.

And now it is high time to leave of to tire you with a Discourse, the more
tedious because entangling it self with the Writings of so many others. Now (to
conclude) I pray the good Lord, To preserve you, or any other, that reads it,
from being moved or persuaded by any thing erroneous therein: And may he make
the shame of any thing that is said amiss here by me (tho, he knows,
unwittingly, yet I may not say innocently) to fall upon me; and open your
Understanding to see all my Defects; that so, if this my Endeavor in this
History of the Eucharist (intended chiefly to make men, tho of another
persuasion, yet more charitable at least to the Doctrine of our Forefathers,
which they have left) can do no good, it may do no hurt; but that Truth may
ever prosper, prevail, triumph. Blessed be his holy Name for ever. Amen

FINIS.
Appendix I.
The Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the substantial Presence, and
Adoration, of Our B. Savior in the Eucharist asserted: With a Vindication of
Two Discourses on that subject, Published at Oxford, from the Exceptions of a
Sacramentary Answer, Printed at London.
I. THE former Part of the Answer, Combating Transubstantiation, is foreign to
the Oxford Discourses, treating of the Real Presence, and Adoration, of our
Lord in the Eucharist: Therefore, tho liable to material exceptions (such are
false and perverted quotations, long since detected and exposed; Romantic
Stories, impertinent if true; fallacious Arguings, and wretched Calumnies,
industriously contrived to deceive and incense the Populace;) yet, It shall be
neglected, and our Animadversions commence at Part 2. c. 2. where the
Minister's Reflections are professedly applied to the Treatises.

II. Page 44. l. 14. All which the Doctrine of our Church implies by this
Phrase, is only a Real Presence of Christ's invisible Power and Grace, etc.

A Presence of Grace and Power only, i. e a real absence of our Lord's body and
blood, from both the Eucharist and worthy Communicant, was indeed professed by
the Puritan Party, which exclaimed against Archbishop Laud, Bishop Mountague,
and others, for maintaining a substantial Presence: From whose Clamor and
Impeachment these Learned Prelates vindicated themselves, not by that easy and
complete way of disowning the Doctrine, and interpreting their Expressions and
Sentiments to intend a presence of Grace and Power only (which obvious Reply
would have silenced, if not appeased, the Faction); but by justifying their
Tenet to be what the Church of England held and prescribed.

A presence of Grace only, can import no more than a bestowing of Grace or
benefits without the thing beneficial or gracious: But, that the Church of
England, by her Heads or eminentest Members (from Q. Elizabeth's time to the
Return of Char. II.) owned this Zuinglianism for her Faith, is from no
authentic act, that I have perused, yet evident.

1. Not evident from the XXVIII Article (tho the Answerer affirms so much): For
that Article neither does, nor was intended to, contain any thing inconsistent
with a substantial Presence; tho it condemns Transubstantiation. To ratify
this, I need allege against this Minister a Witness no better qualified then
Dr. Burnet (because produced as very credible in this case by this Man in p.
58.) who says -- it was thought to be enough to condemn [in this Article]
Transubstantiation, etc.

2. Not evident from the Communion-Office, as the same Historian relates Hist.
Ref. Part 2. p. 390. It was proposed to have the Communion-Book so contrived,
that it might not exclude the Belief of the Corporal Presence: For the chief
Design of the Queen's Council was to Unite the Nation in One Faith, and the
greater part of the Nation continued to believe such a Presence; thereupon, the
Rubric -- is left out. And indeed had we not this uncontrolable testimony out
of that very Author, who would fain have been set up in Churches (as the Old
Fox's Monuments) yet, as much might be collected from the Office it self: that
nowhere excludes the substance, or limits the Communion of the Body and Blood
of Christ to Grace and Power; which it must do before it can countenance the
Answerer's tenet. Surely, any Person, not extremely prepossest, will sooner
interpret these Passages, -- The Communion of the Body, etc. -- We Spiritually
eat the Flesh of Christ, etc. When the Minister delivers the Communion, -- The
Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. (omitted in the Answer) -- Take, eat, etc.
We thank God that he does vouchsafe to feed us with the Food of the most
precious Body, etc. The Bread, that we break, is a partaking of the Body of
Christ, etc. I say, an unprejudiced Man will sooner understand these
expressions as including a substantial presence, than a signifying only the
power and grace of Christ's Body and Blood. How could they then take them
otherwise who believed a corporal presence, and, till the last years of Edw.
VI. scarce ever heard that the words were capable of any other sense?

3. Not evident from the Catechism: In which the Church of England is so far
from teaching her Children a Presence of Grace only, that she plainly instructs
them to believe a substantial Presence. Does she not, as it were, dissect the
Eucharist into its parts, acquainting them that it consists of an Outward part
or sign, Bread and Wine; of an Inward part or thing signified, the Body and
Blood of Christ, etc. and then demands, What are the Benefits (or effects of
these Parts,) whereof we are partakers thereby, i. e. by the Body and Blood of
Christ? Now if she design by body and blood of Christ the benefits only of
them, then her Question runs thus; What are the Benefits, whereof we are
partakers, by the Benefits which are the inward Part of the Lord's Supper? A
Question too ridiculous to be proposed by any person of sobriety, much less fit
for a Church to put in her institution of Christians. If then the Catechism may
be explicated literally, (as one would imagine a Catechism ought,) the Church of
England both believes and teaches a substantial Presence. Agreeable hereto is
Bishop Ken's Exposition, licensed 1685, by Jo. Battely, Chaplin to the
Archbishop of Canterbury. -- O God incarnate, (says the Bishop,) how thou can
give us thy flesh to eat, and thy blood to drink; how thy flesh is meat indeed
etc. How thou, who art in Heaven, art present on the Altar, I can by no means
explain, but I firmly believe it all, because thou have said it; and I firmly
rely on thy love, and on thy Omnipotence to make good thy word, tho the manner
of doing it I cannot comprehend. -- Here, in expressions very fervent, and
becoming a Christian Pastor, he instructs the people of his Diocese to believe,
that God incarnate gives them his flesh to eat etc. Next, that, tho in Heaven,
yet the same God incarnate is present on the Altar. 3ly. That the manner of
this Presence, whether in or with the elements, is inexplicable. Lastly, that
the love and omnipotence of the same God are relied on to make good that
Presence, whereof the manner is incomprehensible. Now, if God incarnate were
present on the Altar, at the same time he is in Heaven, by grace and influence
only, his flesh would be neither present on the Altar, nor given us to eat. No
more mystery, nor incomprehensibilitty could be discerned in his Eucharistical,
than in his Baptismal presence; neither would there be such need of
extraordinary love and omnipotence to perform his promised presence in this,
more than in any other, Religious ceremony, wherein all grant his presence to
be only gracious. Nay, the whole paragraph were no better than a devout and
solemn delusion. Nor am I prevailed-on to alter my thoughts concerning this
Bishop's present faith (would he do himself, his Order, and Christianity that
right as to profess it frankly and clearly) by any retractation or correction
published in the Edition of his Book 1^86: That amounting to no more than a
denial of Transubstantiation, not of a substantial Presence: whereby I am
perfectly confirmed, that by inexplicable, incomprehensible manner, was
intended the manner of the Flesh's being present, not whether it were present
or no, and that it was this he could neither explain nor comprehend. To proceed
further: in evincing affirmatively, that the sense of the aforesaid Article,
Office, and Catechism was a substantial presence, the supremest and most
authentic Interpreters, that have appeared since the creation of the present
Church of England may be produced.

Elizabeth, the Parent of modern Prelatick Protestancy. This Lady professed the
Catholic Religion in her Sister's Reign; and, when she obtein'd the Crown, was
with difficulty persuaded to alterations in Religion, as was long ago told the
world from other intelligence, and lately from Jewel's etc Letters perused by
Dr. Burnet in his Ramble. In particular, She owned the Real presence to the
Count of Feria and others, and commended a Preacher for asserting it on
Goodfriday 1565. A Real presence, I say, She patronized, and such a one, as was
owned by the ancient Fathers, and had bin believed in the Church of England
since the conversion of that Nation; believed without either check or
interruption till toward the setting of Edward the 6. when Zuinglianism seems
to have bin introduced: Now if She professed a substantial presence, and if
She, that authorized the Liturgy and Articles, did not do it till after she had
fluxt them of whatever was malignant to a substantial presence, (to accommodate
them to the majority of the Nation that with her self were so persuaded,) sure,
She intended they should be interpreted as her Self and the Most both thought
and professed. Can the genuine sense of the words be both a Substantial
presence and a presence of Grace only? Could a Nation in a moment believe by
the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, spoke at the delivery of the Sacrament to
them, was meant on the one day that his Body was verily, and indeed, and in
substance (if this be more) given to them, and the next day understand by the
same words, that the Body of our Lord was not verily, and indeed, nor in
substance, but only in figure and benefit exhibited? especially when they heard
the imposer of such passages declare for the former sense, saw her delete what
opposed it, and retain the self same language the Catholic Church, their true
Mother, used in all times, to convey her faith to their Minds? Whereupon,
considering these things, together with the miniated copy of Articles etc, seen
by Dr. Burnet; considering I say that the chief Pastoress had authority
according to the Doctrine of Lay-Supremacy to impose, and according to Dr.
Burnet's deleted copy did impose, her Judgment to be assented- to and
subscribed by the whole Clergy etc. we may truly conclude, not only as some
have done, that the chief Pastors of the Church, but that the whole Church,
Head and Body, Queen, Clergy, and People, did then disapprove of [or dissemble
about] the Definition made in King Edward's time, and that they were for Real
presence.

2. Her Successor, King James I. either understood the Article and Liturgy in
the same sense according to the attestations of Bishop Andrews and Casaubon;
or, where has the Church of England published, that she holds a substantial
presence, as those Learned Persons say she often has? either no where if not
here; or with contradiction to what is here, if elsewhere; because the proper
sense of the Article and Liturgy cannot be both a substantial, and but only a
gracious, presence. But that Part of the Catechism, which concerns the
Sacraments, and which was composed by Dr. Overal in this King's Reign,
determins the dispute as to this Prince's faith: for, tho the Catechism (as
almost any sentence) may be wrested, yet, it cannot be rendered, without
absurdity and passing for a mere cheat, in favor of any other, than a
substantial presence: And Bishop Cosin's doctrine is some argument, that Dr.
Overal, his Patron and Master, did mean no other.

3. As to King Charles the First, if we may gather his judgment from either
Books, published by his command, or Sermons preached before him, He adhered to
that Faith in this point, which all his Christian Ancestors had professed. Out
of such Books and Sermons we present the Reader with two Instances, so full to
our design, that if they can be eluded so may a Demonstration. The former is in
Archbishop Lawd's Conference with Father Fisher, a Book highly esteemed by that
Excellent, tho calamitous, King. -- And for the Church of England nothing is
more plain, than that it believes and teaches the true and real presence of
Christ in the Eucharist, unless A. C. can make a Body no Body, and Blood no
Blood, [ but unless Grace be a Body, and Benefit be Blood, Dr. St. and the
Answerer can make a Body no Body etc.] etc. The other is in Dr. Laurence's
Sermon before the King (Charles I.) p. 17, 18. -- As I like not those that say,
He is bodily there, so I like not those that say, His Body is not there;
because Christ says it is there, and St. Paul says it is there, and the Church
of England says it is there, and the Church of God ever said it is there, and that
truly, and substantially, and essentially, etc. For the Opinion of the Sons and
Successors to this Prince, concerning a substantial presence etc, it is out of
question I presume. What then we add, is, That either all these Heads, and the
Church of England, believed the same, or she has a miserable Faith, wherein no
Head, since Queen Elizabeth produced Her, durst either live or die.

It were a diffidence in this Proof, or an affront to an intelligent Reader, to
offer him a Protestant nubes Testium, as a further confirmation in this matter;
for then we must recount to him almost all their Fathers from their Primitive
times, throughout a Century at least that this Religion has endured, even the
celebrated names of Bishop Pomel, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Overal,
Archbishop Lawd, Bishop Buckeridge, Bishop Hall, Bishop Forbes, Bishop Field,
Bishop Montague, Archbishop Bramhal; Bishop Cosins, Bishop, Gunning, etc. Dr.
Cowel, Dr. Pocklinton, Dr. Heylin, Mr. Sutton, etc. omitting many now alive or
dead since 1660. several of which have bin already alleged in the Treatises we
defend, and have received either no answers, or such as be insufficient, as the
following Examination of them will manifest.

Here I must observe, that this Learned Person [Mr. Hooker] is drawn in only by
a consequence, and that no very clear one etc. Mr. Hooker says, that besides
partaking of the grace of that Body and Blood etc, the holy mysteries impart
unto us even in true and real, tho mystical manner, the very Person of our
Lord, whole, perfect, and entire. His Body and Blood are in that very subject,
whereunto they give life, not only by effect or operation, even as the
influence of the Heavens is in plants etc, but also by a far more divine and
mystical kind of union etc. Now the Inference, the Oxford Discourses make, is;
That Mr. Hooker believed by Real Presence more than a presence of Grace only,
even a substantial presence: for a presence of Christ's person, whole, perfect,
and entire, with either the worthy receiver or the elements too, cannot
possibly be resolved into grace only; because where the Person of Christ is,
there his Natures are substantially present, they, since the incarnation, being
inseparable from it. Is it not easy then to deduce, what the Discourser did,
from the passage cited? Can any other be drawn from that judicious Man's words?
This Answerer says the real Presence imports no more than a real presence of
Power and Grace. Mr. Hooker says the contrary, and tells us what that more is,
which it imports, the Person of Christ, and that all the question is, Whether
the subject wherein Christ resides, be the Receiver only, or the consecrated
Elements also? To reconcile Mr. Hooker and the Answerer, it will be necessary
then for us to understand by Mr. Hooker's more than Grace, Grace only; and, by
the Person of Christ, a Person without any Nature or Substance Humane or
Divine. But how does our Answerer escape this pinch? truly, with due respect to
Mr. Hooker, and some tolerable satisfaction to the Objection: for he prudently
collects other passages, whereof some say as much as the quotation, and none of
them are contradictory thereto, nor affirm the Real presence to signify no more
than a presence of Grace. Nothing but this will clear the difficulty, and so
much as this demonstrates the most judicious Protestant so weak as to
contradict himself.

Page 62. l. 8. He (Bishop Andrews) utterly excludes all defining any thing as
to the Manner of Christ's Presence, etc. Bishop Andrews does not decline
defining that our Lord's Body is substantially present; but the manner how this
substance is present he waves defining. Again, unless that Bishop believed a
substantial presence, he believed one by so much less true than ours, as the
substance or person of a thing is nearer to it, or a more proper predicate of
it, than its qualities and effects are. Thirdly, unless this Prelate makes the
Eucharistical Presence no more real than the Baptismal (which neither he nor
any Father ever did) the Allusion to Baptism is short of the Minister's
purpose. Lastly, The Bishop's saying, Christ's Body, as Glorified, is not
present in the Eucharist, does not in the least oppose a substantial presence.
Who, that believes a substantial Presence, thinks Christ to be in the Eucharist
as in his glory? This however, they all say, That the very same substance which
is Glorified, which was Born, and Crucified, is present in that Sacrament, and
that its Eucharistical manner of existence is different from what it either
had, or has, elsewhere. If then Bishop Andrews testimony stand good for a
substantial presence, Casaubon's, and King James's (I.), and consequently the
Church of England's, are assured on the same side; and we may renew, and
augment that King's wonder, That not only a Stranger to, but a Minister of, the
same Church, should be so inadvertant as not to remember, or so presumptuous
(if he do) as to deny, what his Own Church of England has so often, and so
evidently, asserted.

Page 64. l. 4. -- Nor can we make any other judgment of the Archbishop of
Spalato, etc. The Answer to Spalato's testimony is grossly extravagant. If this
Bishop be earnest against unworthy Receivers of the Sacrament, Is then our Lord
substantially absent according to him? One would think, that has perused St.
Paul's words, 1 Cor. 11.29. and heard of Mr. Thorndyke's Comment on them; that,
from the Bishop's earnestness against unworthy receiving, he should rather
believe a substantial presence; reprehending the impiety the more zealously,
because he discerned our Lord's Body to be where it is, not where it is not. If
this Bishop own a spiritual, imperceptible, and miraculous presence, does he
thereby disown a substantial presence? Sir, These stupid Consequences will not
pass now adays, at least not amongst Adversaries, whatever they do with your
Party.

Ibid. l. 26. -- But he does not say, that Christ's natural Body, etc. Here
Archbishop Laud's testimony is rejected by a flat denial of what that great Man
has, if not in terminis, in effect said (for to quote with approbation is as
much as to say). Does he not cite Calvin, that Christ does not offer us only
the Benefit of his Death and Resurrection, but the Body it self, in which he
suffered and rose? Is not Bishop Ridly also produced by him, saying, That in
the Sacrament is the very true and natural Body of Jesus Christ, even that
which was born of the Virgin Mary, which ascended into Heaven, which sits at
the right hand of God the Father, etc.?

Ibid. l. 30. -- The same must be said of Bishop Hall, etc. The quotations out
of Bishop Hall, Bishop Mountague, and Bishop Bilson, are plain for a
substantial presence; and if undiscerned by the Answerer, to be so, surely not
his faculties, but prejudices, and the Post he has undertaken to defend, are
blamable. If any such matter as a substantial presence were observable in
Bishop Andrews's words, Why not in these Authors? Why not in Bishop Hall's and
Bishop Mountague's expressions; whereof the one uses the same, and the other
terms equivalent? -- Res apud utrosque cadem, -- with Calvinists and Lutherans.
-- The thing is yeilded-to on either side. -- On the Catholic and Church of
England side. But the Lutheran and Catholic side yields to no other thing than
a substantial Presence. The thing (the object) is not the same with them and
us, if Calvinists and the Church of England, by the Body of Christ, mean Grace
only.

I ought not to pass over etc. But why is Bishop Forbes's testimony past over
so unconcernedly, and, instead of an Answer to his assertions, an obloquy left
on his Name, involving the whole Family of Reconcilers? Did he not in that
passage write his thoughts? Was his intention only a palliating or recommending
of Error and Idolatry, not a retrenching the opinions and unjustifiable
aggravations of those that affect extremes, and through rage desert truth? I
always conceited the aim of that wise and moderate Person, and of other
Accommodators, to have bin the undisguising of Doctrines, and a representation
of them in their proper lineaments and habit; but not a betraying of truth to
purchase a wicked peace. Henceforward therefore, if this Minister be regarded,
whenever we hear a man speak of reconcilement, we must double our guards, and
apprehend treachery. But where was the Bishop's conscience, and respect to
piety if, according to this Minister, to cement a rotten Union, he condiscended
not only to relinquish his Faith, but also to establish an inexcusable
Idolatry; for his words assert both a substantial presence on the holy Table,
and an Adoration of our Lord's body there present: The presence he means is
such a one, of which the more orthodox Protestants do not doubt, which the Holy
Fathers very often mention, and which the Puritans, grossly erring, rejected:
but the rigider Protestants reject a substantial, not a gracious, presence, so
that the Bishop's sense will admit of no other evasion, besides his being of
the Pacifick tribe, which is, it seems with this Minister, if not in
maledictionibus, of no authority. Thus this impartial Friend to truth, whilst
he should weigh the arguments, considers the personal qualities of an Author;
and is carried for or against those, as these affect or displease him.

l. 1. -- For Bishop Tailor, I cannot acquit our Author of a wilful
prevarication etc. Nor I the Answerer of folly, for meddling with what he can no
better discharge. His business is to show either that Bishop Tailor had written
no such passage, as was cited out of his works, or that his words were
perverted from their literal sense by the Discourser: for to allege out of the
same, or another Book, sentences contradictory thereto, will expose the Bishop
indeed, but satisfies not the difficulty; for the Discourser no where
undertook, that Dr. Tailor has not said and unsaid (acording to the custom of
Protestants and Wits,) but that he has said what, with any candor, is incapable
of any other meaning than is imposed in the Oxford Treatises. Bucer's advice to
P. Martyr, -- ut Dogma sacramentarium ambiguis loquendi formulis involveret,
and Dr. Taylor's boastings and practices are too notorious to be insisted-on;
or for us to expect from so inconstant, artificial, and confident a Writer,
other than that according as his humor or circumstances engaged, he should
sometimes deliver himself plainly, sometimes in affected and intricate terms,
and never scruple contradicting himself, so he might procure a present relief,
when reduced by his cause or indiscretions to a strait. This Reply, to this
Minister's Answer to Dr. Taylor's testimony, will serve for what was returned
page 49. 50. to Calvin's and Beza's Authorities. If other places contradictory
can be picked out of their Writings, yet that will not manifest, that they, in
the sentences cited, intended not a substantial presence. But where does Calvin
say, solum beneficium non corpus ipsum, the proposition contradictory to neque
tantum beneficium sed corpus ipsum? Is it not of this Proposition that
Archbishop Lawd says; -- Nor can that place by any art be shifted, or by any
violence wrested, from Calvin's true meaning of the Presence of Christ in and
at the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist. -- The Archbishop was a Puny in
evasions, and of a feeble spirit; for, what his acuteness could not contrive,
and his courage durst not attempt, this Minister has discovered and adventured
to perform, even to shift off and wrest this place, by some that say nothing
different, and by others that say nothing contradictory.

And now I am afraid his cause will be desperate; unless Mr. Thorndike can
support it. The same course is taken to answer Mr. Thorndike, as was followed
to dismiss most of the precedent, viz. endeavoring to oppose Mr. Thorndike to
himself: this practice how useful, and how frequently used, soever it be by the
Answerer as wondrous sufficient, yet is rejected by him in parallel cases; and
he takes that liberty he disallows to such as have equal right to it with
himself. Yet how will this rare controvertist vindicate Mr. Thorndike from
approving Idolatry, if he deny that learned Man to hold a substantial presence?
for, what can be more express for Adoration of our Lord in the Eucharist than
his words are? I do believe that it [adoration] was practiced and done in the
ancient Church. -- I know the consequence to be this, that there is no just
cause why it should not be done at present, etc. Whatever notion therefore Mr.
Thorndike had of our Lord's presence, certainly he maintained the presence of
such a Body as was adorable, and that the adoration practiced in the Catholic
Church was not Idolatry.

Whether the Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning the Real Presence,
was, from Queen Elizabeth 's days till the Restoration of the last King, for a
substantial, or but gracious, Presence; and having amply demonstrated, that a
substantial Presence was its faith, and that as well its Article,
Communion-Office and Catechism, as its supremest Governors, and most dignified
and learned Doctors, are peremptory and full in the case, for which the
Discourses contend; one chief Design of them is secured and defended and by
this Minister's confession several points are gained: as, 1. That of all men
living, the genuine Sons of the Church of England ought not to press us with
such contradictions wherein their own opinion is equally involved. page 41. l.
18. 2. That it is no less a contradiction for Christ's Natural Body to be in
several places at the same time by the Church of England's mode of Substantial
Presence, than by the Church of Rome's; which add's only the Manner of that
Substance being present, viz. Transubstantiation: the repugnancy being in the
thing it self, not in the manner of it. Therefore the Philosophical Maxim, of
the impossibility of one Body's being in many places at the same time, must not
by Church of England-men be relied-on, nor urged in the Dispute between us.
page 44. l. 4. Besides, we obtain 3ly, That the genuine Sons of the Church of
England ought neither to impeach Catholics of Idolatry, nor, in taking the
Test, profess we are Idolaters, since, according to their faith, our object is
right, and there where we believe it to reside. Should they charge the whole
Church with Idolatry for worshipping Jesus Christ substantially present in the
Eucharist, which they both believe and practice? Does not the same reason
compel them to affirm Adoration follows their own Doctrine, and therefore ours,
which forced Bishop Morton to say it followed the Lutheran? 4ly, Their
deference to the certainty of sense must be adjusted with ours, and Miracles
must not be confined to its sphere. 5ly, Such language as this Minister uses
must be forborne, and his blasphemous Ironies receive the same detestation with
them as they have with as. For instance, Pref. p. 6. l. penult. That the
Council of Lateran gave the Priests power of making their God: for Church of
England Priests (if true Priests) have the same power with the Catholic. But
neither pretend by Sacerdotal consecration to make the substance of Christ's
Body, but only to invoke the Holy Ghost to effect by its Almighty power, that
the substance of our Lord's glorified body, which now exists gloriously in
Heaven, may also exist Sacramentally on the Altar. Is this making their God?
The Lateran Definition de Fide Catholica, and the Council of Trent informed
this Minister what part, by Christ's institution, not their gift (as this man
imposes,) the Priest has in the consecration, if he had not bin willing to
forget or mistake it for vile purposes. Again, p. 75. l. 8. That the Popish
Real Presence is a mere figment, and their Mass to be abhorred rather than
adored. Such putrid falsehoods and conceited nonsense will be very indecent in a
genuine Church of England man's mouth, not only because of his Defender, but of
his Faith too. For such a one to tell us of adoring the Mass, and that He
abhors it, and accounts our Real presence a figment, is both absurd, and
impious. But this is the result of a Gallican vagary, and of learning the
Doctrine of the Church of England from Hugonotal conversation, Tales and
Fathers. Page 72. l. 1. That the alterations which have bin made in our Rubric,
were not upon the account of our Divines changing their Opinions etc. Tho it
signify little whether the Alterations in the Article and Liturgy, and the
Disgrace of the Rubric, were or were not from a change of opinions, so long as
the Doctrine of the Church was changed; tho, this I grant may well be, and the
other not, according to the gloss of subscribing, not with assent, but for
peace; and, tho too, it is a strange casualty for Divines, remarkable for
resolution and famous for immutability, to flit their sentiments as ordinarily
as the Moon does her appearances; yet the Proof brought, that those Divines did
not imitate Cranmer in compliance and submission of judgment to the present
Possessor of White Hall, is no more than an heap of this Minister's conjectures
stamped with the superscription of a Rational account: when as Dr. Heylin, equal
to Dr. Burnet in abilities and industry, and incomparably more honest than that
perfidious Fugitive, reports; that the changes were made, lest in excluding a
carnal Presence they [the Divines sure] might be thought to reject such a Real
presence, as was defended in the writings of the Ancient Fathers. -- Nor is the
design of reconciling Parties inconsistent with a change of opinions. A
comprehension-affair may be pursued by Real Presence-men, as well as
Zuinglians. As to the Copy of Articles perused by Dr. Burnet, and out of him
mentioned page 58. we say again that it ought to be concluded from that rased
Monument rather that the Divines did, than did not, change their Opinions; for
he, that reverses a subscription voluntarily, is likelier to have altered his
resolution, than to have retained it; especially, when induced to expunge, what
had bin agreed on, by an Authority, whereto by the Principle of Lay-Supremacy,
lately assumed by the Prince, and submitted to by themselves, their judgments
were to conform, and whose sentiments in Religion they were to believe and
profess. For Queen Elizabeth had by a dreadful example just then told the
world, (as after she had like to have done in the Lambeth-Articles-Affair,)
that She would not hear the Church, but (tho a woman) be heard by it in matters
of Faith; and would neither consult with, nor follow, but control and
prescribe-to Convocations in causes of mere Religion. Had She not refused to
hear the voice of the whole Clergy in her first and the last Canonical
Convocation? In a Convocation acting agreeably not only to the institution of
Christianity and rules of the Catholic Church, but of all other Convocations
that ever were in the Nation, (unless a few in Hen. 8. and Edw. 6. time); in a
Convocation acting according to all Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil then in force
in this Kingdom, and representing the Church of England by Law established. How
then could its Declaration be illegal, as the Reflecter on the Historical Part
of the Fifth part of Church Government p. 82. will needs esteem it? What? could
the Queen under a penalty justly prohibit them the use of that Authority both
Christ, and the Laws of the Land, had settled on them alone? If this were not
tyranny, where shall instances of it be found? But that Reverend and Catholic
Assembly understood both its own power and duty better than so, and despising
the temporal terrors, that only a Tyrant in that case would threaten, and a
Persecutor execute, discharged it self with constancy, as became men entrusted
with the souls of the Nation, tho deprivation were the reward of their
Confession. Her new and parasitical Ministers understood then what they must
do, and that for that very end She had raised them up, even to think, and act,
at her appointment.

conjectures, wherewith the Answerer strives to blanch over a soul defection
from the Catholic faith, we will relate how we apprehend Religious affairs
were managed. At Edward the Sixths coming to the Crown the Doctrine of the
Church of England was a substantial Presence; the manner of that Presence was
Transubstantiation: but, through the Ambition and Avarice of Governing Parties,
some quickly began to contest and forsake this Faith; vet by degrees; rejecting
first the manner, and afterward the Presence; being assisted in this Apostasy
by a few, and opposed by most of the Clergy and Laity; hence, tho there were
Assemblies and deliberations had, yet, no Canonical determinations passed, or
are extant, unless such approbations may be deemed Synodical, that were
obtained by terrors and deprivations of many the most eminent Bishops and
dignified Ecclesiastics, for relucting at what derogated from Christian Truth
and Church Authority. All was done by the conduct and influence of the evil
Spirit, and neither Scripture nor Antiquity rightly consulted or observed; only
herein the diligence and craft of those destroying Reformers must to their
eternal infamy be owned, that they distinguished points immediately obstructing
their gain, and licentiousness, from others more indifferent, rejecting chiefly
such as debarred them from spoiling the Church, and gratifying their sensual
appetites. Thus, as superstitious, or idolatrous, prayer for the Faithful
deceased, (that Chanteries, the Mass, that the furniture of Altars, etc, might
be alienated) came to be reformed: thus, the Sacrament of Penance, solemn
Fastings and Celibacy of Priests, etc, (that both Clergy and Laity might
indulge themselves, as their lusts suggested, in luxury and impenitence) fell
to the ground. Not truth, nor any consideration of Christians either at home or
abroad, but libertinism and filthy lucre were then the rule of this
unjustifiable Reformation, wherewith the majority of Christians, as well of
England as of the whole world, could not choose but be, and actually were,
scandalized. But how should better come of Cranmer's intermedlings? It was that
Cranmer, who for flattery, lust, inconstancy, ingratitude, treason, and most
damnable Hobbism, utterly pernicrous to the being of a Church, deserves the
invectives and execrations of all Posterity.

Elizabeth, other Circumstances are to be considered, why some of the Godly
innovations under Edward the Sixth were not revived. For first, She was rather
of her Father's than Somerset's Religion; believed and practiced Invocation of
Saints; approved of Images in Churches; was no Admirer of Clerical Marriages;
nor yet very fond of her new Power of Supremacy (given her by Protestants, that
she might requite them with a Church and a Creed), much less of that foreign
Drug, Zuinglianism; professing on all occasions her firm adherence to a Real
Presence. However, to fortify the weakness of her Title, that had been
Questioned by Catholics, and Condemned by Protestants, she was persuaded to
restore the Schism begun, and assume the Supremacy extorted, by her Father;
but, for alterations in other points merely Doctrinal, Protestants do confess
her somewhat resty, resenting her tepid proceedings with warm Contumelies, and
most virulent reproaches; which shows, that her pleasure, security, or
interest, not their extravagances, was the measure whereby Religion was settled;
and that Conscience did a little, tho Policy more, influence transactions. She
qualified the Title, but not the Power or Use of Supremacy, extending it as far
as either her Father or Brother had done. She did perhaps desire to unite the
Nation; but, I suppose, it was in that Faith she held, and the majority of the
Nation with her, otherwise she was put upon a very odd method of Union; it
being easier to bring a few to close with what is settled, or least removed from
it, than to convert a majority, from an old established Religion, to embrace
the contradictory novelties of a few. Thus she settled her Religion, and
whatever (like Jeroboam) she devised out of her own heart; and it continued,
without any visible alteration, by Authority, till the Return of Charles II.
when Protestants being about to repair what their Brethren had endeavored to
demolish, the Puritans at the Savoy-Conference 1661, amongst other cunning
demands, whereby both the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England were
undermined, inserted the restoring of the Black Rubric into favor: but were
answered, that It was not in Queen Elizabeth's Liturgy, nor confirmed by Law,
nor needful. However, that wealthy Faction's obliging importunities, or
pretense of mighty satisfaction that it would give to Dissenters, overcame, if
not the Clergy, yet a potent Favorite; and so with a few emendations, too
slight as some, sufficient as others thought, to save the Church's Doctrine,
this goodly Henoticon stole into the Liturgy. Stole into it, I say, if with the
connivance of any, yet with the scandal of the best, of the Clergy; who, on all
occasions, expressed their dislike of it, as truly inconsistent with their Faith,
and without that effect, either of gaining other Sectaries to their promiscuous
Communion, as was pretended, or stilling their clamors and disgusts against
kneeling at the Communion. And this, I am persuaded, is the most impartial and
exactest account, that matter of fact yields of the English giddiness,
tossings, and variations in matters of Religion.

Page 77. l. 21. Now these [Exceptions against founding an Article of Faith on
a Philosophical Maxim] being most of them founded on the former mistaken Notion
of the Real Presence, etc. That the Discourser's Notion of the Real Presence
was the same the Church of England has asserted is evidenced; the Minister's
Replies therefore are unsatisfactory; and it was rightly inferred from the high
Expressions used by the Members of that Communion concerning the Eucharist (as,
that it is an ineffable Mystery, full of Miracles; incomprehensible to, not to
be measured by, sense or reason, etc.) that they believed something in it
seemingly [this word was omitted by the Transcriber] opposite to humane reason.
But whether the word were omitted or no; Not to be agreeable to human Reason,
to captivate the mind, to be incomprehensible to men's wit, to do violence to
the Principles of Natural and Supernatural Philosophy (Protestant language
concerning this Sacrament and other Mysteries,) are not far short of opposite
and coutradictory to human Reason: So that a Revelation, clear and evident,
must be submitted-to, according to Calvin and Bishop Tailor, tho it agree not
with Reason, tho it propose something incomprehensible, and which does violence
to it. Neither is it a manifest contradiction, that a Natural Body should be in
more places than One at the same time; but manifestly no contradiction, as all
that know the Rules of Opposition must confess. That the same Body should be in
a place, and not in that place at the same time, is a contradiction. But this
is a Proposition very wide from the other: To be and not to be, is not
equivalent to that, To be here and elsewhere too: whereby the failure of what
the Answerer writes against the second Observation p. 80. l. 14. is manifest:
For, there may be such things as perfect contradictions known to us, and yet
all that seems to be so to some, upon severer scrutiny may prove not so to
them, or to sharper Judgments. The instance is before us; Even to this very
Minister that seems a contradiction which is none. The utmost force of Nature,
much more of Omnipotence, is not so easily comprehended, as confident (who
commonly are the least experienced and adverting) men boast: The more we
enquire into them, the more sensible shall we be of the narrowness of our
knowledge, and shortness of our faculties; especially, when we reflect how
modestly persons of vast experience, of very capacious and improved intellects,
such as Bishop Forbes, etc. have spoken in the same case, That we are unable,
in all oppositions, to discern the true distance, and whether it amount to a
real contradiction or no; and therefore God may do, what may seem to us
impossible, as well by his ordinary, as absolute, Power. Whereupon, in points
abstruse, where there appears seeming contradictions on the one hand, and a
Revelation on the other, this consideration, attended by a just deference to
infinite Power, ought to move us to captivate our understandings, and neglect
the objections, from nature and reason, being joyful to exert the humility of
our Minds, and to demonstrate, we measure not the immense Majesty of our
Creator by our selves, his worthless potsherds. This thought, so becoming a
Creature, doubtless instructed Dr. Tailor and others, to promise their assents
to a plain Revelation, notwithstanding any pretended Contradictions from Sense
or Reason: Not because they fancied there could be no such Revelation, but
because they knew themselves incompetent Judges of possibility; and believed
God can do what man may conceit unfeasible, whilst more conceited men (what
Pride is this!) will protest he cannot.

Page 83. l. 10. -- If by Zuinglianism he means, etc. a mere Commemoration,
etc. Were we inclined to judge of this Minister's opinion, concerning the
Eucharist, by his Jewish method of expounding the nature of it in general, p.
1. he must pass with us for a Socinian; One that believes the Eucharist to be a
mere Commemoration. Did the Passover contain or confer Grace? Was it more than
a memorial of the Israelites Deliverance out of Egypt? And what Scripture does
he produce, that tells him clearly, that the Eucharist contains or confers
Grace, or it only, without our Lord's substance? Nay further, to convince him
of his imprudence (to speak no harsher in so heinous a miscarriage) in
preferring the Synagogue before the Church for his Guide in explicating a
Christian Sacrament, p. 5. l. 20. Does he not in plain terms conclude for this
worse sort of the Sacramentary Heresy elsewhere disowned? His words are, -- So
was this Holy Eucharist established upon the Analogy which we have seen to the
Paschal Supper, whose place it supplies, and whose Ceremonies it so exactly
retains, that it seems only to have heightened the design, and changed the
application to a more excellent Remembrance. What is this else, but the
refinedst Zuinglianism, but that very Socinianism which in this 83d page is not
allowed? But if this Minister think such a collection from one period too
rigorous and captious, I may challenge him to show any other sense can be put
on it, or on the whole parallel for six or seven pages, drawn between the
Paschal Lamb and the Lord's Supper. We meet with no more than Remembrance,
Commemoration, showing the Lord's Death, and not a syllable of grace or
benefit; and indeed his parallel, without straining, would not reach thither. A
Socinian might have composed, and may subscribe, that Introduction, without any
injury to his erroneous sentiments concerning the Eucharist. These are the
dreadful consequences of immoderate heats against a Doctrine, which we confute
because we hate.

Ibid. l. 14. -- If by Zuinglianism he understands such a Real presence etc.
nor shall we be ashamed to own it etc. Why not? seeing what he owns is at best
but the Sacramentary Doctrine. A Doctrine disowned by the genuine Sons of that
Church wherein he is a Minister, and by the Church it self never countenanced,
till the Puritan Sect prevailed in it. A Doctrine novel, and therefore without
Ground in either Scripture or Fathers. A Doctrine said to begin with the
curiosities of Erigena, (Sunt and aliae quae vocum novitatibus desectantes,
unde sibi inanes comparant rumusculos, contra fidei Catholicae veritatem
dicunt, viz. quod Sacramenta Altaris non verum corpus and sanguis sint Domini,
sed tantum memoria very corporis and sanguinis ejus. Hin^m. in L. de Praedest.)
a vagrant Buffoon in the 9th, and revived and retracted by Berengarius in the
11th Age. Broacht again by Carolostadius, or Oecolampadius, as some say, or by
Zuinglius, a Spirit black or white (he knew not which) suggesting it in a
dream, as himself says. [ But surely 1 Cor. 10.16. is literally for this
creditable Doctrine:] so far from being so, that it is literally against it, if
Bishop Cosins, cited below, had the gift of interpreting. This Answerer must
not think himself able to conclude from that Scripture, Our Lord's Body is
communicated by Grace, but with much more reason, I will collect, that its
Substance is communicated also; inasmuch as the communication of a Body is more
likely to imply the communication of its Substance with the attendent
properties, than of these without it.

Page 84. l. 8. I will close this Discourse with a plain and familiar example:
-- A Father makes his last Will etc. This familiar example does not accord with
Bishop Cosin's Doctrine, Hist. Trans. p. 43. where he writes, -- We do not say,
that in this holy Supper, we are partakers of the fruit only of the Death and
Passion of Christ, but join the ground with the fruits which accrue to us from
it, asserting with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread, etc. yea, in that same
substance which he assumed in the Virgin's Womb, and which he carried to
Heaven, in this only differing from the Papists, that they believe this eating
and conjunction to be made corporally, we not in any natural or corporal
manner, but yet as truly as if we were naturally or corporally joined to
Christ. -- How different is this Doctrine from what the Minister would
inculcate by his Allusion? tho indeed that allusion, if pursued, will convey us
directly to a substantial presence: for the Will is never perfectly
accomplished, nor obtained, till the Son have Seisin and corporal possession of
the Land bequeathed; that is, the substance as well as title of it. Now the
Promise of giving his Body is our Lord's Will, or corresponds to the written
Instrument, but the actual giving of his Body to us (as St. Gregory Nyssen, [
Qui sua potestate cuncta disponit, non ex proditione sibi impendentem
necessitatem, non Judaeorum quasi praedonum impetum, non iniquam Pilati
sententiam expectat, ut eorum malitia sit communis hominum salutis principium
and causa; sed consilio suo antevertit, and arcano sacrificii genere, quod ab
hominibus cerni non poterat, seipsum pro nobis hostiam offert, and victimam
immolat, Sacerdos simul existens and Agnus Dei, ille qui mundi peccatum tollit.
Quando id praestitit? cum corpus suum Discipulis congregatis edendum and
sanguinem bibendum praebuit; tunc aperte declaravit Agni sacrificium jam esse
perfectum. Nam victimae corpus non est ad edendum idoneum si animatum sit:
quare cum corpus edendum and sanguinem bibendum Discipulis exhibuit, jam arcana
and non aspectabili ratione corpus erat immolatum, ut ipsius mysterium
peragentis potestati collibuerat; and anima in illis erat in quibus eadem illa
potestas illam deposuit. S. Greg. Nyss. in prima Orat. de resur. Dom.] and St.
Augustine. [ Ferebatur enim Christus in manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum
corpus suum, ait, Hoc est corpus meum. Ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus
suis. S. Aug. concione 1. in Ps. 33.] affirm, he did it to his Disciples in the
Institution of the Eucharist) answers the entering on the Estate. The former
renders us but Heirs; this, Inheritors also.

For the doctrine of the Church of England [against Adoration] we shall need go
no further than the Rubric etc. If the present Church of England, in
compliance with the black Rubric (this Minister's only public evidence, such
as it is, against both a Substantial presence and Adoration) must be concluded
to deny Adoration, from its beginning it did not so; and in 1660 it could not
be said, the Church of England by Law established condemns Adoration; no Test,
no Rubric, was then extant, no Penal Laws (whereto the establishment as well
as original of their Church is to be ascribed) constraining any man to
subscribe with, or without consent, a villainous slander upon the whole Church
of God, upon the Lutherans and themselves too, till the Return of King Charles
II. and since, the contrary has bin both said, printed, and practiced by the
genuine Sons of the Church of England, who regarded the Rubric no more than the
rest of that communion do the Fasts, and other ceremonies, enjoined them by the
same Liturgy.

Now to this I shall at present only say, That the Supposition being absurd
does not admit of a rational consideration etc. Here he asserts it impossible
for Christ's body to exist, or to be present, except in the circumstances, and
clothed with all the ordinary properties of a Body, and consequently must
disbelieve, not only that the bodies of Saints at the Resurrection shall
neither marry, nor be given in marriage, not need nourishment etc, but be as
the Angels impassible etc. and so either deny a Heaven, or admit a Mohammedan
Paradise; but also question our Lord's resurrection, the stone unrolled from
the mouth of the Sepulcher, and his entrance into the room the door being shut,
and besides, censure St. Paul's Spiritual body as absurd. Could our Lord's body
rise from the Grave through a Stone, and enter a close Room ad modum corporis? If
not, then this Answerer must either retract this passage, as an affront to
Faith, or, Socinian-like, reject the Scripture testifying this, because absurd
to his low and impure conceptions: but if it could, and did, then where are our
Minister, and his vain Philosophy? If he has known some admitting the
Supposition, That our Lord's Body may be present, and not after the ordinary
sensible manner of Corporal presence, and yet resolving against adoration of
it, such oppose what this man concedes in the first Supposition, unless he
grant adoration due to the corporeal manner of Christ's presence, and not to
Christ himself.

I presume it was then in the times of Popery; for since the Reformation, I
have shown before, that she always held the contrary, [ viz. That our Lord's
presence in the Eucharist is not adorable.] In the most flourishing Protestant
times, an adorable presence was believed and professed by Bishop Andrews, deputed
by the Head of the English Church to declare her sentiment in this matter; He
is not therefore to be considered as a private Doctor or Bishop, but as the
mouth of the Church, and presumed to know, and neither to falsify nor oppose,
her Doctrine or practice. How came this Man to more skill and authority in
expounding the Doctrine of the Church of England than that very learned Bishop?
Did King James II. depute you to expound it? What reason do you assign, why I
must discredit Bishop Andrews, and acquiesce in your exposition? I cannot
foresee how you can prove your self more honest, more able, more authentic,
than that extraordinary Bishop was. But, what does that accurate
Plenipotentiary publish? Does he fence and seek subterfuges, as dreading or
blushing to tell his thoughts? No, his expressions are with assurance and
perspicuity. He proclaims to the world that the King [James I.] believed and
adored our Lord truly present in the Eucharist, and, we [Church of England-men]
with Ambrose adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries; and with Austin we do
not eat the flesh without first adoring it. Did Bishop Andrews speak true, or
did he not? If he did, then the Answerer speaks what is false; if he did not,
why may we not reject a Protestant Minister's testimony, when such a Bishop's
is so tardy? What adoration Protestants render to the Divine Majesty in their
other Religious offices, we are not at leisure to enquire; but, that in this of
the Eucharist, the Bishop, and King, and consequently their Church, adored the
Flesh of Christ, is to any one of modesty and candor undeniable. They adored as
St. Ambrose and St. Austin adored; which was just in the same manner, and in
the self same degree, as the Catholic Church adores at this day. Those Fathers
gave sovereign worship to the Flesh, to the natural flesh of Christ,
substantially present in the Eucharist, and Hypostatically united to his Soul
and Divinity: Our Dispute then with this Minister is about the adoration of
Christ himself, if about the adoration of his Flesh, unless his Natures and
Person be separable.

Page 89. l. 17. -- But is he sure the Bishop meant so? [i. e. that Bishop
Tailor meant, we worship the Body or Flesh of Christ.] Yes, He is sure that
Author meant the Flesh of Christ: 1. Because the same Bishop ( Real Pres. p.
144.) says, We worship the Flesh of Christ in the Mysteries exhibiting it to
our souls. 2. Because the Action it self is not adorable; the words then must
either intend the flesh of Christ, or, What do they signify? What is it the
Bishop worships in the venerable usages of the signs? Not the signs; yet,
Divine Honor is given, given then either to nothing, or to the flesh of Christ
in the mysteries. 3. Because the Bishop is, considering St. Ambrose's
testimony, for adoring the flesh of Christ in the mysteries; and waving the
usual refuges of the testimony being spurious, or a Rhetorical flight, etc. he
acknowledges that his party worships as St. Ambrose did. Certainly then they
have the same object, pay the same service, and at the like solemn occasions,
i. e. sovereign adoration to the flesh of Christ in the mysteries, for this St.
Ambrose undoubtedly performed. And what if this Bishop (according to his native
constancy) in another book recede from this, was it therefore none of his
thought when this was written? Can his dictating contrary elsewhere alter the
sense of what was said long before?

Since I have read of a Protestant Minister etc. Very faithfully translated!
The Minister was permitted (says the Answerer) to exercise the functions of his
Ministry as before. It Is false, says the Margent, He was not to preach any
thing against the belief of the true Church, nor to celebrate the Supper. Thus
the Man's Margent confutes his Text, and his Translation quarrels with the
Original.

Ibid. l. 17. -- As for Bishop Forbes, and the Archbishop of Spalato, it is not
to be wondered, if men that had entertained the design of reconciling all
Parties, were forced to strain sometimes a little further than was fit, etc. An
Answer very solid and very charitable. For first, is not this a concession,
that these Protestant Bishops allowed adoration, or, what was the little
further than was fit that they were forced to strain? Next, here is another
retreat to the Pacifick Humor, to evade passages out of these Authors, not
proposed as terms of agreement, or abatements to be yielded, or winkt at in
order to an union, but as certain truths, justly maintained by the one side,
and perversely denied by the other: the Quotations are true, and they are
conclusive, but now the end, and so the authority, of the Authors must come
into contempt, and their design overthrow their evidence. But what? Is
committing and defending Idolatry (as they do, if this man be in the right) in
them but straining a little more than is fit, and in us a crime never to be
sufficiently aggravated?

Will he himself allow every thing to be the Doctrine etc. The Discourser
allows that to be the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, which she, not which
any private Doctor without her allowance, declares to be so; and supposes, tho
not Bishop Tailor, yet Bishop Andrews and King James to be of like authority,
with the genuine Sons of the Church of England, as a Council is with us. The
reason is; because the Head of the English Church has all that Spiritual Power
any Ecclesiastical person or persons ever challenged or exercised in England,
and may delegate it, as the King did to Bishop Andrews in this case.

If the Minister had told us where St. Thomas, Paludanus, and Catherine, assure
him, it is Idolatry to Adore an unconsecrated Host through mistake, we might have
understood what species of Idolatry they had esteemed it, since Protestants
have lately discovered a damnable, and a saving sort, of Idolatry; for, if of
the later kind, the danger incurred by an invincible mistake is inconsiderable.
However, this we may learn thence, That those Doctors did not hold either the
substance, or accidents, of the Host unconsecrated Adorable; nor did Adore
either of them in an Host consecrated; but something else that by Consecration
became present in the Eucharist: unless we can imagine they had there two
objects adorable; or made Christ, and what remained after Consecration, but one
thing.

The Minister had dealt more ingenuously too, if he had named the several of
our Writers that make our Adoration a worse Idolatry than any Heathens were
ever guilty-of; because the Person, to whom that is imputed, is abused, if all
be true the Answer to Dr. More tells us, p. 47. viz. That the Doctor mistook
Costerus his Ground of confessing at such a rate, and moreover foisted in
Transubstantiation which is not there: Costerus arguing only thus; If the true
Body of Christ be not in the Eucharist, Christ has dealt unworthily with his
Church, failed of his engagements to lead her into all truth and holiness; and
on the contrary, seduced her, by his own words, to a fundamental impiety;
whereupon he could not be a true Christ, and she must have worshipped not only a
true object where it is not, but an Impostor also, and an object absolutely
incapable of such Honor; because Christ must then be, not only a mere
Creature, but as Mahomet or Satan, one of the worst of Creatures.

Ibid. l. 8. For the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, I find it thus clearly set
down in the Council of Trent, etc. We understand why he chooses to give our
Doctrine out of the Chapter rather than out of the Canon. It is not his way to
represent our Points with the right side outward; but, if He will be so equal
as to accept of such answers as himself has often give, the mist, he raises
before his Reader's Eyes, will be quickly dispelled: For, if the sixth Canon of
the same Session may interpret the fifth Chapter, the illusion is escaped; if
it may not, why has he so often vexed us with Replies of the same nature which
he despises? His translation too of the Chapter is not accurate; and, tho I
discern no great advantage got by this ill version, yet his whole carriage in
this controversy is so unhandsom, that I fear I ought to complain rather of
his sincerity than Learning. Is quin exhibeant rendered well, ought to give?
Or, Neque enim ideo minus est adorandum quod fuerit a Christo D. ut sumatur,
institutum, done rightly into for it is nevertheless to be adored, because it
was instituted by our Lord Christ, that it might be received? This is not the
sense of that Clause, but rather thus; It is not the less to be Adored, tho it
were instituted by our Lord Christ to be Received. This to show the Minister's
Translating Talent. Now for his Arguing; That (according to this Council) is to
be worshipped which Christ instituted to be received. Right; He instituted that
his Body, Sacramentally existing, should be received, and this the Council says
may be worshipped. -- And in which they believe Christ to be present. False.
Not it, wherein Christ is present, but Christ, present in it, is that the
Council says may be Adored.

But, Sir, to expostulate with you a while for your treacherous method: Why did
you pick out the chapter, and not the canon, to show our undoubted Doctrine?
Were you not aware there was such a canon, wherein our Faith was contained as
undoubtedly, and more precisely, even above the cavil and misunderstanding of
either the Malignant, or those they seduce? Was it because you would have been
deprived of a convenience to delude your People; the complex and ambiguous
terms, Sacrament or Host (as you fondly express our Doctrine) there affording
you no fallacies? The canon does exclude all your pretenses, that we Adore the
symbols or species with Divine worship, which you would insinuate by your
calling our Adoration, an Adoration of the Sacrament or Host: Tho these terms,
as Mr. Thorndike observes, suggest to such as make not cavilling their
business, no other than the adoration of our Lord in the Sacrament. Did you not
peruse, what is written from. 11. to. 17. in the 2d. Treatise, on purpose to
vindicate our Doctrine from Dr. Taylor's and Dr. Stilling feeet's comments, and
prevent such tricks as you now play? Will no Answers satisfy you, no cautions
retrench your exorbitances, but still such wild and malicious and seigned
notions must be repeated by every little smatterer in Theology, as if never
exposed by us; and all this to ingratiate with the vulgar, grow famous, and
obtain pluralities, Sine-cures, and Dignities, for such service against Popery?
Are you ignorant that a Council may express it self less or more distinctly, or
obscurely, concerning a point, without derogating from either its authority or
infallibility, as serving in the one and failing in the other, unless whatever
is determined by authority or infallibility must be equally perspicuous, (is
Scripture so?) and all their chapters as exact as their creeds? When you
remember the Canon, are you remorseless for writing, that this Assertion -- by
adoring the Sacrament, no more nor other is intended than adoring Christ in the
Sacrament, must pass for a private opinion, not a Catholic assertion? Where
does the Discourser seem to grant the Church's expression improper? Does he not
on the contrary tell you, that Soave and all humble Sons of the Church are
obliged to take Ecclesiastical language, as well as Christian sense, from her,
i. e. that her expressions with her interpretations are proper, tho in your
mouth, attended with your perversions, they become a snare? How many
Ecclesiastical phrases has the Church bin constrained to proscribe through this
pravity of seducers, that employ her orthodox terms to maintain or convey their
impieties? That the Word is of like substance to his Father, that our B. Lady
is the Mother of Christ, are sentences capable of a sound sense, and might be
used without suspicion or offense till the Arians and Nestorians mis-imploy'd
them. Thus it is with adoring the Sacrament or Host, the Church. and Catholic
Doctors have rightly used these expressions, and we all understand them
accordingly; but in England, where they are wrested to purposes the Church
never dreamed of, we justly except against them, and choose to deliver our
selves so, as shall be most secure from calumny. When therefore you contest
with us, either take our terms in our sense, or you beat the air.

As to Cardinal Palavicini's words, they amount to this only; that we are not
to withold Adoration to a while, whereof only out part is sovereignly
adorable, till the several parts exist separately; for if so, we shall never
adore our Lord; they do not import, that in adoring the whole, we give
sovereign worship to the species, or own them to have any motive for, or to be
the end of, such Adoration: for we do not allow so much to our Lord's Humanity
abstractedly considered, much less to his Garments or the Sacramental veils.
Wherefore if by Sacrament and Host, this Answerer would mean what the Church
does, the res Sacramenti, our Lord sacramentally existing, we join issue with
him, that it is our undoubted Doctrine, That the Sacrament or Host is adorable;
but if he intends otherwise, (as we have too much occasion to conclude he
does,) the Council in the very chapter cited by him, corrects his corruption of
our Doctrine, in adding to this purpose for her reason of adoring the Sacrament
-- in the Sacrament That is adored, wherein there is an innate motive or
excellence why we should worship it, and which therefore alone can be the
object and end of our worship; for at this it aims in adding, -- For we believe
the very same God present in the Sacrament, of whom, at his introducing into
the world, the Father says, Let all the Angels adore him. So that this wise
and ever to be received Synod, as it were foreseeing that men would arise
speaking perverse things, prudently acquaints us with its sense of adoring the
Sacrament as soon as it had declared that it may be done, strait pointing to
whom the worship is directed, and on whom terminated, on him that is in it, non
on it that signifies and conceals him.

I have fully shown this new fancy to be neither the Doctrine of the Church of
England, nor etc. Having granted the first three Protestant concessions, he
stands at the fourth upon a pretense, that he has already refuted the
Authorities whereon it is founded; which is untrue, as is manifest above, where
this Champion's achievements are displayed, and reversed: and besides, to back
this fourth Proposition, new Authorities are annexed from Bishop Cosins,
Archbishop Bramhal, and Monsieur Daille, to which he is mute, retiring from
them without the least notice or reflection.

So that then with this limitation his [5th] Proposition that the Lutherans
adore] I presume may be admitted etc. If the Answerer adhere to what he
concedes p. 87.93. ( i.e. in the first Supposition, and third Protestant
concession) in consequence of their opinion, they all ought to adore, if they
do not; and Chemnitius agrees as much, saying, No man denies it [adoration,]
but such as with the Sacramentaries deny or doubt of the Presence of Christ in
the Supper.

We are ready to admit it [the 6th Concession, That the belief of a Real
presence is not so criminal as to oblige them to break communion,] always
supposing, that the belief of it had not bin pressed etc. Then the Protestants
have generally mistaken their business in spending their raillery hitherto, not
on the mischief of imposition, but chiefly on the erroneousness of our tenets,
and enormity of our practices, as both very destructive to salvation; and
Dissenters do well to insist on the heinousness of injoyning, as a term of
communion, what they can discern to be no better than humane inventions. If the
belief of a Real presence be no such pernicious corruption, neither can
Adoration that follows upon it: how then can the imposition of such
inconsiderable things outweigh in guilt a rupture of Catholic communion, and a
violation of charity, together with all the deadly sins of Fanaticisin and
enmity, springing from division and looseness? The points are almost harmless
and indifferent (our Adversaries confess;) but if imposed as a necessary
Article of communion, and the disobedient anathematized, then the Church may be
defied, and the belief and practice become so criminal, as to justify a
separation (suppose of one Minister) from all Christians. So that when the
Faith and customs of the Catholic Church give no color for a Schism, the
exercise of her Authority may; and she becomes as an heathen or a publican, for
requiring such to hear her, whom our Lord has declared shall be accounted so
for not hearing her: and she must either relax her Discipline, enlarge or
contract the conditions of her Society as every individual shall demand, (tho
they neither think nor live as she prescribes,) or become schismatical. If
private Christians must be Arbiters, what shall, or shall not, be terms of
Catholic communion, why may not some as justly recede from the Church, because
she does not, as others because she does, impose terms, whereat these have a
pique, and wherewith those are pleased? the Novatian, Donatist, and Luciferian
charge against the Church was, That its communion was promiscuous, and
Latitudinarian. The Accusation was false; yet they were right in this, that
there are certain terms of Christian communion, which are indispensably to be
submitted to by all that will be members of the Catholic Church; tho all the
terms, they accounted such, were not so, and not themselves but the Church was
to distinguish. But here the strictness of communion is our sault, and
comprehension would make either no Sectaries, or them mexcusable. However, from
Daille's granting, that if the Church of Rome had obliged her children to
worship Christ in the Sacrament, she had not obliged them to worship a
creature, we conclude she did not impose Idolatry, because it is certain she
never obliged them to worship any thing in the Sacrament but Christ, so that
neither for her Faith, nor the imposition of it, was her communion to have bin
broken; unless it were unlawful for her to impose the worshipping of What is no
creature, which is God.

I cannot see what his cause would gain by it, [the certainty of the six
Concessions.] The advantage gained by these concessions is considerable;
because, thereby the Dispute is reduced to narrower and certain bounds, and so
many Objections prevented, as also Opponents silenced, (such as hold a
substantial presence surely;) that I see not what the Conceders have further to
allege against Adoration. Can they plead we want a due object, occasion,
precept, or president to adore? All then but Zuinglians (a few of the latter
brood of Protestants) are on our side, and these by the so much greater
suffrage of Christendom are convicted of obstinacy in resisting so credible a
judgment.

This it is true the Papists -- affirm etc. In a kind fit we are allowed by this
liberal man to affirm a sign to remain in the Eucharist after consecration,
distinct from the thing signified; but then he speedily retracts so much as
will make his concession a cipher. For tho we affirm, That nothing can
outwardly and visibly signify in any Sacrament, but what is perceivable by some
sense or other; and next, That whatever is perceivable by any sense, together
with all the natural properties, remains unchanged in the Eucharist; And 3ly.
That we consecrate in the same elements wherein our 0203 069 Lord instituted
the Sacrament: yet, because in defiance to Tradition, Reason, Revelation, and
the universal profession of all times and Churches, till Luther arose, we
cannot believe that the same thing can be substantially Bread and Flesh; and
because we cannot think that substance to be there, which sense cannot tell us
is there, and Scripture etc assures us is not there; therefore this Minister
denies ours to be such a symbol as our Lord instituted, and (to be brief)
declares it really nothing. Thus nothing must be an object of sense, and all
that is symbolical in the Eucharist must be the substance of the Elements,
which no sense can immediately perceive.

Page 97. l. 32. This is indeed a sort of new Divinity. I always thought etc.
Alas! That People should be so disrespectful, as not to conform their Notions
to this Answerers; and so rude, as to write Divinity wherein he is not versed.
But Old Divines reply, The incivility or oversight is not in them, but in this
Minister, who mounts the chair, when he should be in a lower Form; and will
needs be scribbling controversy, before he has stayed a due season in his
Study. For, to their knowledge, the word Sacrament has a manifold sense, and is
a complex term, used therefore variously, with respect to the subject of which
Authors treat; just as they do Christ, Emanuel, etc. sometimes signifying by
them God alone, sometimes Man, sometimes both. Whereupon Bishop Bramhall, and
Mr. Thorndike, tho more knowing, are less nice than this Minister, and without
scruple admit the word Sacrament to be capable of more than one sense; which
might have protected the former part of the Assertion from derision, as the 6th
Canon of the 13th Sess. of the Council of Trent does advance the other part
[viz. that by worshipping the Sacrament Catholics understand worshipping Christ
in the Sacrament] beyond a private (which the Man concedes) to a Catholic
Assertion, which he is loath to yield. How shall we assure Protestants
concerning our Faith, if a Canon of the Council of Trent; so sacred and
authentic amongst us in matters of Faith, be refused? Here Is a Canon
accurately publishing what all the Members of the Catholic Church must
assent-to and profess; and yet, lest he be deprived of the opportunity of
slandring us, this Minister will not resolve, that we believe as it prescribes.
Hard is our case, since neither our selves, nor our Divines, nor yet our
Councils, must be regarded; but any silly conceited Sectary shall be better
able to tell what we believe than we our selves, or those that guide our Souls.
What we do not hold, that is our Faith; and what we do believe, that is not our
Faith, according to our Adversaries; and why so? if not, that their false
Accusations may continue, and improve an odium on us, and delusion amongst the
Multitude.

I must then deny his Assertion, [viz. That the ground of our Adoration is
Christ present, not present after this or that manner.] The Answerer will have
the 3d Assertion capable of being taken two ways, passing the one, and opposing
the other. But what if they be coincident? If Christ be the object of our
worship, (as seems, tho saintly, to be granted under the 2d. Assertion,) then a
Real presence of him, and not the manner of that presence, is the ground and
occasion of our adoration, without any regard whether He be solitary, or
attended by another substance. Christ, we say, not the manner of existence in
the Virgin's womb, in a Manger, on the Cross, in the Grave, in Glory, or in the
Eucharist, is the motive and object of our worship. For, if any one manner of
existence were our inducement to adore, when that ceases, we should owe no
adoration: whereupon, it must necessarily follow, that we should as much adore,
if Consubstantiation were, as now Transubstantiation is, the mode of Presence
we believe: because, this is not the presence it self, but a circumstance of
it, not at all considered in the act of adoring, neither as object which, nor
as reason why, we adore. Or thus, to Jesus Christ existing substantially in the
Eucharist we direct our adoration, without respect to the coexistence or
absence of any other substance; for if we worshipped him upon the account that
another substance is, or is not coexistent, we must condemn worshipping in
either our selves or the Lutherans, which we do not; they worshipping with a
belief, that another substance is, we, that no other is there. Whereupon, as,
if no substance of the elements remains after consecration, they are only
mistaken in their faith, not in their worship, only misbelieve, do not commit
Idolatry; so, if the substance do remain, this will only affect our persuasion,
not impair our adoration; we err about a creature, we do not idolize it. Nay,
were our worship directed to Jesus Christ as alone, and so confusedly, or in
general, to the whole substance of the Eucharist, and it should chance to be
true, that our Lord is not the only substance present under the species; yet
hence a just charge of Idolatry could not be drawn against us: because the
precise object of our worship is not any created substance, but the divine
person of our Redeemer; and the other concomitant substance, whatever it may by
accident, does intentionally no more share in the honor we pay, than would the
Scarlet Robe, should our Lord have bin adored (instead of derided) therein. He
that adored him at the pillar stripped, and in the common Hall arrayed in's Mock-
Regalia, without an actual distinction of his garments from himself, had the
same object of his piety.

I must tell him, that the adoration of those among the Lutherans -- is
infinitely more excusable than theirs, [the Catholics.] And this, Good Man, he
is forced to assert, not out of prejudice, but by the cogency of some reasons!
The Reader will admire his assurance, if he weighs his arguments. As first,
because we Catholics violate sense, which the Lutherans preserve entire. Now
to wave both the impertinence and falsehood of this leading Reason, as
intimating that we violate sense, and that either the nature or heinousness of
Idolatry depends thereon; it is enough to quash it, to affirm, that the Lutherans
violate sense as much as we. Do they not believe the Body of our Lord present
with the Bread? Do not our senses tell us, as experimentally, there is no flesh
present, as they do, that Bread is there? He that says there are ten men in a
Room, where sense informs there are but five, must needs treat sense with as
much violence, as he that says there are but five, when ten are seen. The
violence done to sense therefore (if any be done,) and so the inexcusableness,
is equal on the Lutheran, to that on our side. We descend to his next Reason:
the former part of it viz. that the Lutherans are right in their Object,
himself has overthrown in's 89th page if he approve what he cites out of Dr.
Tailor. For the Lutheran object is a non Ens, if Jesus Christ be not
substantially present; and if He be not in ours, how can He be in their
Eucharist? since our Priesthood, whereon all grant his being there in some sort
depends, is more undoubted, valid, and canonical, than theirs: they deriving
Sacerdotal Orders from a Presbyter's Ordination, (which all Antiquity, and
Prelatick Protestants in their seuds with Presbytery, and by their present
practice in ordaining such Ministers anew, damn not only as spurious, but as
null,) we from Episcopal legitimately communicated. If then the Lutherans be
right in their object, much more are we. Have we not more assurance that our
Lord is there, and He only is there? We run therefore a less risque of missing
him than they. The other part of his 2d. Reason seems to be an Ignoratio
Elenchi, (the common Fallacy employed by Protestants, and this Minister
especially, in this dispute, to amuse and deceive his Reader): for, if I
comprehend him, he proceeds on this ground; that we hold the substance of the
Bread to be the material, of which the Body of Christ is made; whenas we
believe nothing like it. Our Doctrine is, that by Sacerdotal consecration the
substance of our Lord's Body, which now resides in Heaven, and shall enjoy that
glorious condition till his second Advent, becomes however existent also under
the species of Bread and Wine in a Spiritual manner, and that the substance of
Bread and Wine wholly ceases to he under those species as before consecration
it was: but further notice our faith takes not of the Breaden substance,
whether it be annihilated, or how it ceases. If the Breaden substance be
absent, then we do not adore that substance for Christ's body which is not his;
and if it be present, we do not adore it, unless we can be supposed to adore
what we think not of, or what we think to be nothing, or to believe and adore
two substances of one Body, and be said to direct our devotion another way, at
the same time we, with the strictest abstraction aim at the substance, assumed
by the eternal Word in the Virgin's womb, and now and ever personally united to
it. If we should worship the Eucharist whether there be a Substantial presence
or no, then we might well pass for Bread-worshippers, if our Lord were not
substantially present; but worshipping not so loosly at random, nor without a
solid supposition of a substantial presence, demonstrates, we do direct our
piety to our Savior only, never reflecting on what either ceases or remains of
the elements, so as to make them partners or rivals with him in our Duty. The
truth of the 5th Catholic Assertion is then evinced: our worship is as
excusable as the Lutherans, and the new auxiliary Reasons drawn up p. 102. l.
ult. to oppose it afresh are indeed nothing to the purpose; and moreover, the
former of them is false too. We can be sufficiently sure of due consecration;
and anathematizing Dissenters does not alter the excusableness of our worship.
If our worship be of the same nature with the Lutheran, and have as good
grounds, the imposing of it adds not one jot of guilt to it, whatever it do to
the imposers. The Answerer then ought to have totally assented to the 6th
Catholic Assertion, for the same sound reason which moved him to grant it true
of the Lutherans, that their Object is right, ours being certainly as true, or
the same with theirs; and if we mistake the substance of Bread, they worship
nothing, for Christ. We worship no Host, i.e. neither any substance that ever
was, or is, a breaden substance; nor yet the symbols, but only Christ
sacramentally existing, who never was, nor can be, a Wafer, nor made of either
the substance or accidents of Bread. How then can we possibly mistake what is
not Christ for Him, unless the Christ born of the ever-blessed Virgin be not
Christ? Perverse therefore is the parallel of our worship to that of a
Manichee's fancying Christ to be made of the Sun's substance: this, in that
Heretic, was both groundless and impossible; whenas ours is quite another
sentiment, and founded on motives clear and infallible: so far different in the
thing, as the substance born of our Lady is from that of the Bread or the Sun;
so far unlike in the ground, as the fiction of a single Persian impostor is
less credible than express Revelation, and the constant Tradition of the
Catholic Church.

Chaff is served up p. 106. to show more difference between Us and the
Lutherans, than a Trans and Con amount to. So zealous is this Polemic Divine to
reduce Christians to an amicable temper, that he exceeds the bounds of
discretion and reverence, not only to his own Party, and the Noblest Nations of
Christendom, but also to his Prince. For whilst He and others labor for Peace,
this man (like seditious Love) represents them irreconcilable. His first reason
here is already exposed. There is either no, or an equal, violence done to
Sense by Us and the Lutherans. His second Reason is as faulty as his first; if
we are at defiance with any Texts that call the Eucharist Bread, are not the
Lutherans at as much defiance with those that call it Flesh and our Lord's
Body? for both it cannot be, substantially Flesh and substantially Bread. To
his third Reason, viz. That the words of Institution afford occasion of
inferring a Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, we reply, and as plain
an one, That the Eucharist is Christ's Body, and that Bread is substantially
absent: and other thoughts cannot enter our minds, till it appear to us
possible and revealed, that the same thing can remain perfect Bread and yet be
truly the Flesh of Christ; which resolves into being Bread, and not being Bread
at the same time. His last Reason of the Symbols, is of the same worth with the
rest; and the impertinent application of his own mistakes refuted in our note
on p. 96. No Sacrament, no substantial presence of Christ, no sacerdotal
Consecration are after all left to the Papists (as He in his fret will needs
interpose instead of Catholics). To what straits does his petulant acuteness
drive us? In what a poor condition are we left by this meek and compassionate
Minister? What does he omit (tho trifling, foreign, indecent, false, or
impious) that may detract from the excellence of our Religion, and represent us
inexcusably erroneous and wicked?

Does he believe the Corporal Presence in the way of Transubstantiation, etc.
He does: What then? O then, they must with him stand and fall together. A
terrible case! For then he cannot Adore on the account of the Corporal
Presence, but he does on the account of Transubstantiation. Wisely concluded!
His Argument runs thus: If with Catholics, Transubstantiation and Corporal
Presence stand and fall together, then they Adore on the account of both: But
with Catholics these stand and fall together; Therefore they Adore on the
account of both. The Consequence is denied.

Ibid. l. 27. The first Ground [why Catholics believe Christ substantially
present and Adorable in the Eucharist] is Divine Revelation; for which our
Author offers the two usual Instances, etc. The same Instances are offered for
Ours, as the Lutherans produce for their corporal presence: If they be not so
defeated of them by Zuinglian Expositions as to be inexcusably culpable in
their Faith and Worship, no more are we, were this first our only ground. And
did not this Minister confess p. 107 to this effect, that the Lutheran Doctrine
was deducible from our Lord's words? Now their Faith and Ours is only
circumstantially different; that Text therefore that tells them, must needs
inform us, of a substantial presence; tho of both Consubstantiation and
Transubstantiation it cannot.

As to his vapor, That he has shown above how false a foundation both the
words of Institution and the 6th of St. John are to a corporal presence;
reviewing his first Chapter, Part 1. I find him there raving against
Transubstantiation, as if those Scriptures did not countenance it; and withal
laying about him, as such do who are in an Error, with so much confusion,
impertinence, rudeness, absurdity, and prevarication, as if Pryn were
transmigrated into him: But as his performance against Transubstantiation is
ridiculously weak, and an often refuted Plea, published to swell a Pamphlet; so
it is either nothing at all to a corporal presence and Adoration, or fights as
fiercely against all Christians (but the Sacramentaries) as against us. To what
he adds about sense and reason, certain contradictions, Principles of Nature,
and Universal Sentiments of all Mankind; It Is an absurd cant, and a detestable
insolence, for him to exclude us (the most of Christians, who preserved and
propagated all Law and Learning for many Centuries) from sense and reason, from
all skill in contradictions and principles of Nature, and from the universal
sentiments of Humanity. What an amazing infatuation and transcendent pride
possess this man! He had had nor Letters, nor Religion, nor Liberty, nor yet
Being, but for the Professors of our Faith; and yet the ungrateful man repines
even that we have the last and meanest of these.

These are great words indeed; but I wonder who ever heard before that a few
miserable Synods, etc. With such impotence and revilings are Councils treated
by a Minister; and thus the second Ground of our Faith and Service (whereon the
first also in some sort depends, both as to which is a Revelation, and what it
is; She being both the Promulger and Expositor of Revelations:) the Church's
Conciliary Definition and Command, is lighter than Air, and as contemptible,
with this Protestant, as is the most trivial act of the smallest Corporation.
The Dignities which he is not afraid to vilify, are Councils, so numerous and
comprehensive, so lawful and accepted, that for many Ages not one Bishop
dissented from them in this case. Was not the Doctrine of the 2d Council at
Nice professed by that at Frankfort? Went not the Nicene Fathers so far, that the
Answerer says, they carried-on Transubstantiation? Surely then they held a Real
presence, Pref. p. 6. Here we have then above six hundred Eastern and Western
Bishops concurring in the Belief of a Corporal presence and Adoration in the
Eighth Age: And the Occasion of their declaring the Doctrine of the Church at
that time was not that any one did really question that Faith (for Erigena was
then unborn) but some new language had been used by the Iconoclasts, in their
discourses of the Adoration of the Eucharist, that was both suspicious and
dangerous. Nor can one Prelate be named, who did not accept of the Declarations
of these two Councils in this matter. All Christians then believed a Real
presence, and all Adored. What our Answerer means by particular Prelates I
cannot penetrate, for no Council consists of other. Unless he would insinuate,
that there wanted Delegates from some National Churches, or that some Patriarch
or Pope did not concur with these two, or the other held in the Eleventh Age
against. Berengarius; all which yet were held by either the Pope in Person, or
by his Legates, and were received by the whole Western Church, and at length by
Berengarius himself. Councils these later were far greater than any Protestant
Synod ever was or can be, unless it were that at Dort, consisting of at least
two Bishops. When ever did an Hundred Protestant Bishops convene in One
Assembly, as there did Catholics against Berengarins? A Convocation of a
matter of Twenty-six at the most deserves certainly the character of a
Miserable Synod better than a Council so much greater, and wherein the Bishops
not only of two (...), but of many Kingdoms appeared. Nor were these (...) any
more Parties than was the First at Nice, or the Apostolical One at Jerusalem.
To say they were, is as gratis said as if Eutyches had spoken so of that at
Chalcedon. And whatever reason this Minister can give, why the Councils against
Berengar shall be esteemed Parties, the very same shall the Judaizers,
Nestorius, and Socinus, as strongly urge to show the Synods condemning their
Opinions to be Parties also. So he may seem to say something, this Man heeds
not what he writes; tho what he publishes, instead of enervating the authority
of the Councils concerned about a Corporal presence alone, does as vigorously
attack that of Councils in general. But how could our Councils be Parties, when
they Defined no otherwise than they had received from Fathers both Greek and
Latin, that had written the same both Synodically and as particular Doctors?
How could they be Parties, when they Defined just as all Christians (One single
Berengarius, and some perverted by him, excepted;) then believed and professed?
Who refused their Determinations? If they had not an universal Presence of
Prelates, yet the general acceptance of their Decrees is equivalent to it, and
demonstrates their Doctrine, without peradventure, true; unless every Christian
may in so great a point of Faith fail, and the Gates of Hell prevail over the
Promise of our Savior, and be more powerful than the conduct of the Holy
Spirit; which leads, if not the chiefest and most, yet some Christians into all
truth, even to the end of the world. There is neither error nor opposition in
the Formulary professed by Berengarius; the difference between them is no
disagreement in Doctrine, but only a condemning the different errors of that
unhappy Man. That of Nicholas II. established a Real presence against the first
error of Berengarius, which was what the Sacramentaries now hold. The Sense
wherein the Council intended, and St. Lanfrank explains it, is Orthodox, and
owned at this day. That under Greg. VII. defined Transubstantiation against the
second error of Berengarius, which was Consubstantiation. This is told our
Adversaries by our Divines; particularly by the Cardinal de Sacr. Euch. l. 3.
c. 21. as the Form it self, cited by the Answerer in's Margent p. 111. had done
his Reader, if he had not shamefully fallify'd it, by omitting both the word
substantialiter, and others of singular moment. We shall convict him of his
wilful Fraud, if in two Columns we annex, what Berengarius professed, and what
this Man says he did.

BERENGARIUS his Profession in the 6th Council at Rome under Greg. 7. 1079.
Lup. pars quinta. p. 312.
The Form entire. Ego Berengarius cord credo, and ore confiteor panem and
vinum, quae ponuntur in Altari, per mysterium sacrae Orationis and verba nostri
Redemptoris substantialialiter converti in veram and propriam ac vivificatricem
carnem and sanguinem Jesu Christi Domini nostri, and post consecrationem esse
verum Christi corpus quod natum est de Virgin, and quod pro salute Mund.
oblatum in cruce pependit, and quod sedet ad dextram Patris, and verum
sanguinem Christi, qui de ejus latere effusus est, non tantum per signum and
virtutem Sacramenti, sed in proprietate Naturae and veritate substantiae. Thus
Berengarius professed.

The Form as mutilated by this Minister. Confiteor panem and vinum -- converti
in veram ac propriam carnem and sanguinem I. C. D. N. and post consecrationem
esse verum corpus Christi, -- non tantum per signum and virtutem sacramenti,
sed and in proprietate Naturae, and veritate substantiae. This speaks of a
conversion, but of what kind it says not. Thus the Minister castrates the
Profession made by Berengarius.

Does the true Form mention nothing of the manner of the conversion in the
Eucharist? Does it not say as clearly, as if written with a Sunbeam, that it is
a substantial conversion of bread and wine into that body and blood which were
born of the Virgin etc? If this be not, not only a corporal presence, (which
serves our purpose,) but also transubstantiation, (which this man would
suppress,) we must despair of producing expressions intelligible and
satisfactory to our Adversaries in any matter. But how can we wonder at this
corruption and palpable untruth, when we consider it was necessary to sustain
many others industriously written by this Answerer in this very Pamphlet. Such
is the Hyperbole in his Praef. p. 6. That Transubstantiation was unknown to the
Church for above one thousand years, when not only Paulus Diaconus about 774.
relates these words of St. Greg. 1. Praescius conditor nostrae infirmitatis, ea
potestate, qua cuncta fecit ex nihilo, panem and vinum aqua mistum, manente
propria specie, in carnem and sanguinem suum, Spiritus sui sanctificatione
convertit. Strabus Auctor Glossae ord. in Gloss. cap. 11. prioris ad Cor. Nos
incerta relinquentes, quod ex authoritatibus certum est, profitemur, sc.
substantiam panis and vini, in substantiam corporis and sanguinis Dominici
converti: modum vero conversionis nos ignorare non erubescimus fateri. Quae
autem remanent de priori substantia accidentia, sc. color, sapor, forma,
pondus, nec ipsum corpus Christi afficiunt, nec in eo fundantur. This Divine
lived about 840. and asserts Transubstantiation, and the separate existence of
the Accidents; separate, I say, not only from the former substance, but from
the Body of Christ, so as not to affect it, or be supported by it. And
Stephanus Eduensis also, about 950, writes, Oramus ut oblatio panis and vini
transubstantietur in corpus and sanguinem Christi. I say, not only these
Writers prove, that Transubstantiation was known to the Church before a
thousand years after our Lord's birth, but many more, in Centuries precedent to
these, might be produced. As St. Ambrose himself in the 4th Age, l. De iis qui
initiantur mysteriis, c. 9. says, etiam benedictione natura ipsa mutatur. His
co-temporary St. Greg. Nyss. uses the same expression, as does too the Ancient
Sermon de coena Dom. amongst St. Cyprian's Works, cited and much relied-on in
the 9th Age, as both very ancient, and very orthodox. It says, the Bread given
by our Lord to his Disciples, changed not in effigy, but natura, was by the
omnipotence of the Word made Flesh. Nay, our Answerer, that he may consist with
himself, within a few lines confesses; that a Monk was laying the foundation of
it in the 7th Age; which Monk did not speak so highly of the Eucharist as St.
Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Ambrose, or St. Chrysostom had done long before him, as
may easily be discerned by such as please to compare their expressions: and
besides, it is ridiculous to fancy such did not believe a substantial presence,
(the point in hand,) who are taxed to be founding or erecting the
superstructure of Transubstantiation. He goes on confessing against himself,
that a General Council carried on Transubstantiation in the 8th, and another
Monk (the great Protestant eyesore Paschasius) formed it into a better shape in
the 9th century; yet all this while the Founders, the carriers-on, those that
furnished features and drapery, never heard of what they were designedly at
work about. Nay, tho some of the Agents were General Counselors, and even
General Councils themselves, i.e. the whole Church was in a plot against truth
and piety, and was ignorant of the conspiracy. This Minister was resolved to be
absurd beyond imitation.

Again, such another Hyperbole is what he says of Peter Lombard, in the Margen
of this 111th p. for the Master often professes, that the substance of the
Bread and Wine is turned into that of Christ's Body and Blood, and only the
manner of that substantial conversion is in question with him, as also with his
commentators, Scotus, Durand, and many others mis-quoted Pref. p. 7. of which
falsities ignorance (if it were in fault) cannot excuse him, since either the
Authors themselves, or the Letter printed 1665, discovering these amongst 150
false or wrested quotations in Dr. Taylor's Disswasive, might so easily have
informed him. As to the irreverent Descants on the Great Council, celebrated at
Lateran by the most learned and prudent Innocent 3. it is observed; That when
the deposing Power must be imputed to us as an Article of our Creed, then that
Council is obligatory, and Mr. Dodwel has proved it so; but when it defines
Transubstantiation, then the Canons are surreptitious, and a Papal contrivance,
and Du Pin may be found in the Margen. One while that Council enters the Stage,
conferring power on the Pope to dethrone Kings, and on Priests (as if there had
bin no Priesthood before that Council) to make God. Another while, all this was
forced upon the Fathers of that Synod, or published as their Act, without their
privity, by a pragmatical and intriguing Pope. What would the man be at? Is his
Arrogance content with no less than confirming and rescinding General Councils
arbitrarily?

As to the point of Antiquity, I have already fully discussed it above etc. I
suppose he means from p. 24. to 32; where we may find indeed much passion
against Transubstantiation, but we are not so short-sighted as to confound it
with corporal presence, the thing here in discussing. And for the Fathers
referred to by the Discourser, where shall we find the Protestant Answers to
St. Ambrose, de iis qui init. Mist. c. 9. to St. Hilary, St. Cyril. Alex? Are
these spurious too? Are not those ascribed to St. Ambrose, Eusebius Emisenus,
sermo de coena Domini, the Epist. of the Presbyt. of Achaia concerning St.
Andrew's passion, much more ancient than either Paschasius in the West, or
Anastasius Sinaita in the East? Were they ever excepted against as containing
Doctrine disagreeable to that of the Church, tho, through the negligence of
Transcribers, the true Authors of them be not very certain? It is not a Book's
being attributed, by a mistake, to a wrong Author, but its containing
suspicious Doctrine or false Relations, and being fathered on eminent Names to
pass it with authority in the world, that chiefly subjects it to the censure of
Apocryphal. But why should a doubt concerning the Author of such Books elude
the testimony fetched from them, when St. Ambrose in a Book unquestioned, and
others more ancient, coeval, or not much juniors to the questioned pieces, as
St. Gandentius, St. Remigius, etc, write as fully for not only a corporal
presence, but also Transubstantiation.

This Ground [the universal Doctrine and Practice of the later both Eastern and
Western Churches till Luther's time] is not certainly true, and if it were, yet
certainly it is nothing to the purpose. It Is certainly true, if the whole may be
determined to be on that side, where all the members of the Church are, for
whosoever denied this Faith of a corporal presence was ipso facto an Heretic
in opposing an Article so weighty, and so solemnly declared and required of all
the faithful, in at least ten Councils before Zuinglius dreamed. But the
Apostates from a corporal presence were indeed very few before, and, of those
few, scarce one was in being at, Luther's revolt, he also continuing a bitter
enemy to the Sect that soon grew upon him. If true, it is certainly to the
purpose, whilst this is true, That all Christians to a man cannot miscarry in
such a considerable part of Religion as the Eucharist is, which they daily
frequented, and the belief of which real Presence in it was by many ways
continually inculcated and confirmed to them. Such an unanimous and
comprehensive Tradition does at least demonstrate the novelty and falsehood of
Zuinglianism. What Article in our Creed can have a stronger external motive
than universal consent? And as to the perpetuity of it, other Articles have bin
sooner and longer, and by more numerous Factions opposed than it. For of those
who have raised debates about the Eucharist the least part are they who denied
a substantial Presence, the other quarrelling either about Transubstantiation,
or Communion in both kinds, or some other matter, yet all the while confessing
a real Presence. Well, to let the Reader understand more fully the seriousness
and judgment of this Minister; the Argument esteemed impertinent, and ridiculed
by him here, is this.

The Authority equi-valent to that of any General Council is a solid Ground of
Faith; but the unanimous profession of all Christians in the last Ages is an
Authority equivalent to that of a General Council, therefore that unanimous
profession is a solid Ground of Faith. The Major is owned by all such
Protestants as submit their judgments to the Authority of such Councils as
condemned Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Origin and the Monothelites,
assenting to their Definitions as the true sense of Divine Revelations, and
reciting some of them even in their Creeds. The Minor is founded on not only
Protestant concessions, but also their Definition of a true Church; that it has
the Word of God rightly preached, and the Sacraments duly administered; according
to this character then, if all preached corporal presence, it could not be an
error in all, and so not in any, unless there were no true preachers, and
consequently no Church, in some times extant. Now if an unanimous profession
cannot be erroneous, it is doubtless equal to the Authority of any General
Council, and also very pertinently pleaded as a solid ground of Faith; for
whatever can declare a Divine Revelation infallibly, is so.

Page 115. l. 30. If we did acknowledge this [5th Ground, That since Luther's
time no small number of Protestants etc acknowledge a real and adorable
Presence, etc,] yet it seems we are mistaken etc. It seems rather that you are
extremely conceited, who contend against as well the first, chiefest, and best
Protestants, and the genuine Sons and eminentest Superiors in your own Church,
as the Catholic Church; and all through that proud pretense, that your Sense,
Reason, and expositions of Scripture and Antiquity, how wild and unsound
soever, are absolutely certain, and not, as we know them to be, mere
presumptions. Is not this an advancing of your self as a standard of truth and
science, and a requiring (what you so vehemently decry in the Catholic Church,
and shun in your self) submission of all judgments to your Fancies? The
Protestant owning of a substantial Presence is not said to be a ground for our
believing Transubstantiation; but yet it is an argument against other
Protestants for that Faith of a corporal presence, which is common to some of
their party with us; and also animates us to persist in it, since those, who
have quitted our communion, and relinquished our faith in other matters,
discern so strong Motives to retain this, that (tho very willing) they cannot,
without violence to their consciences, renounce it.

It is confessed by the greatest men of their Church etc. A forgery. Our great
men make the contrary confession; and if any of them seems to speak toward
what this Minister feigns, it is with respect to Transubstantiation, not a
corporal presence; particularly Scotus, misquoted Praef. p. 6. That most subtle
Doctor (as has bin often answered to this most impudent objection) lays it
down; That the Points discussed by him in his 4ti Did. 11. q. 3. do all intend
to maintain, That the Body of Christ is truly in the Eucharist; because to deny
that is plainly against Faith, for it was expressly, from the beginning of the
Institution of the truth of Faith, that the Body of Christ is contained there
truly and really. -- And afterward in his Reply to Objections, fixing on
Transubstantiation as the manner of the substantial presence, he adds; And if
you demand why the Church chose this so difficult a sense [i. e. of
Transubstantiation being the manner] of this Article, when the words of
Scripture may be rendered in a sense easy, and as to appearance truer concerning
this Article. To this Objection he returns: I say that the Scriptures are
expounded by [the direction of] that Spirit by which they were composed. And so
it is to be supposed, that the Catholic Church has interpreted by the same
Spirit by which the Faith was delivered to us, viz. taught by the Spirit of
truth, and therefore she chose this sense because it is true. For it is not in
the power of the Church to make that true or not true, but of God the
Institutor; but the Church directed herein, as it is believed, by the Spirit of
truth, has explicated the sense delivered [to Her] by God. -- Now it is evident,
that the Schoolman is here speaking of Transubstantiation, not of the corporal
presence: next, that he says, not the facility or appearance of a sense to be
that designed in Scripture, is to be regarded in Faith, but the declaration of
the Church, in whose custody the traditive sense of Scripture, i.e. what God
intended, not what we surmise, is deposited, and by whose mouth the Holy Spirit
speaks. Lastly, that the Declaration of the Church is for Transubstantiation,
therefore this must be concluded to be the proper sense of Scripture, tho that
Scripture sound never so plausibly for some other sense. Our Adversaries
persevering in an imposture with so much pertinacy and immodesty, extorts this
tedious Repetition. All we shall further remark upon it, is; that it yields
this Minister a very wholesome Instruction how to interpret Scripture, not by
Jewish customs, nor Rabbinical Deliriums, not by the superficial notices of
sense, or vain Maxims and cheating suggestions of Science falsely so called, but
by the Guidance of the Church, assisted with the Holy Spirit; for of these two
Directors in expounding Scripture this M^nister seldom has regard: whilst
Catholics enquire of the Church what sense the Holy Spirit chiefly designed,
and without hesitancy adhere to that she gives, whether it be literal or
mystical: because our Lord's promise of assisting the Church, and leading her
into all truth, is so absolute, that we think we may as justly distrust his
being the Messiah, as be jealous of his Fidelity or Providence in acquitting
himself of this engagement. Should we not be suspicious, if without
apprehension, nay with perfect firmness and security we did not acquiesce in
her expositions? And how many of those, who have leaped from this Rock and
committed themselves to the conduct of a Private spirit, are now carried away
by the wind of Socinianism, Judaism, Mahomatism or irreligion; whilst we, that
stand on it, have not only the same Faith still, but cannot possibly fail by
misbelief.

It is undeniable that their Interpretation of those words [of Institution]
destroys the certainty of sense etc. If he mean our interpretation of a
corporal presence, then he contradicts what he thrice told us, that the
Lutherans do no violence to sense: but if he mean the Interpretation of
Transubstantiation, his observation is wide of the point contested. But in both
meanings it is false; for we derogate from sense not in the least, and if we did
in one-case, in obedience to Faith, (whereto we think sense may as justly be
captivated as the understanding), that will not infer, we may in another,
destitute of such a revelation, till a particular premise can support an
universal conclusion. The Fallacy and Ignorance of this importunate Argument,
so often brought, and so often bafled and exposed, must certainly be used by
these men merely to deceive the People. As to the Paradox of Miracles being
discoverable by sense only, we refer this Minister to Calvin, Bishop Forbes,
and many other, Classic Reformers, for correction, who esteem them stupid that
disclaim the Eucharistical Miracles; and truly by sense we discern none there.
How then, by your favor, came they to discern Miracles in the Eucharist? But,
what? Was there no miracle in the conception of our Lord? What sense acquaints
men with it? That he was a Man we might know by sense, but that he was
miraculously conceived, only Revelation not Experience assures all besides his
Mother. To pass this, how comes it to be collected, that if one of the
evidences of the truth of Christianity cannot be had, strait our certainty of
the truth of Christianity is destroyed? Tell me I pray, were Miracles its sole
evidence? Were accomplishments of Old Testament-prophecies none, or uncertain?
Had all Believer's miracles before they assented? Did none believe with
certainty, but such as had Miracles to attest what was tendered to them? What Is
become of the Beatitude, Blessed are those that have not seen (a miracle,
Christ risen,) and yet have believed [on the credible relation of others, and
because it was foretold he should rise, etc.]? If the performance of something
in Nature, otherwise than any created Power uses, or can do, I say, the
performance of it by Power Divine be a Miracle, and that such a performance may
be effected in spiritual as well as sensible affairs, the knowledge of which may
and must be attained, if it be had, by an information not sensible, then the
confining of Miracles to be objects of Sense is exploded. Having thus
overturned two of his Observations, his Arguings from them vanish as do all
other Bubbles.

No Papist can have any Reason to believe Transubstantiation to be true, but
because he reads those words of holy Scripture, etc. A Papist has the same
Reason to believe Transubstantiation, tho he cannot read at all, as the first
Christians had before the Gospels were written, or a blind man has now. The
mistake of Dr. Stillingfleet, Tillotson, Tenison, this Answerer, and others,
insisting so eagerly and obstinately on the Authority of Sense, grows (if it be
not an Artifice) perhaps from their taking the Maxim, Nothing is in the
Intellect which was not before in the Senses, absolutely; as if the only
Conveyer of Notices to the Mind were the Senses; or no thought had its birth
there without an external promter; whenas (to omit the ill consequences etc. of
the later) there are other means of acquainting the Intellect without the
concurrence of the Senses; as by Good and Bad Spirits, etc. Now these either
convey always the same Notices, as the Senses, or they do not; if they do, then
the Mind must ever judge with the Senses; which is against experience: If they
do not, how comes the Intellect to determine against the Notices of Sense: e.
g. in the Magnitude of the Sun? Surely it neglects the information of Sense,
either upon some other more powerful motive and overruling remonstrance than
Sense has given, or arbitrarily; but whether way soever it goes, the Maxim is
rejected, and the Mind, it is clear, does not find it self obliged to determine
in all cases as Sense deposes. Sense then is no Judge, but only a conveyer of
Intelligence to the Judge, according to which Intelligence (we confess) that
Judge is to censure and resolve, except when better Intelligence from Reason or
Revelation be interposed, and arrest such a Judgment. Now Sense informs a
Catholic Mind (that has so much Learning as to read, which Protestants think
few have, they are so ignorantly educated), that the words of Institution are
in that Book the Church tells him are the Gospels, and neither Reason nor
Revelation countervening this Notice, a Papist judges with certainty according
to the deposition of the Senses; but when a Papist desires to proceed further,
and would understand not only that there are such words, but also what is that
very meaning, not which may be put upon them, (wherein his sense and reason may
assist him), but which the Holy Ghost intended, and the Church holds, then he
relies not on his senses or reason only, because he knows the sentiments of Men
to be very different, as amongst themselves, so from the Church's and Holy
Spirit's; and if he might rely on his own, so might others, and consequently
collect opposite truths from their discordant conceptions. Wherefore, he
resorts to that hand which reached out to him the words of Institution as Gods
word, to give him also their true meaning, which he receives, and professes
without demur or fear. And thus Papists arrive at all saving-truth; thus they
attain Unanimity, and learn not only to think, but speak the same thing; whilst
the minds and language of all Sectaries, who pretend to follow sense and reason
only in their Interpretation of Scripture, are at wars and Babilonish. For,
private Spirits are many, and are Dissenters; but the Church, the Holy Spirit
is but One, and at Unity with it self. And, thus, I suppose, not our, but the
Minister's, culpable ignorance is apparent.

But let us quit this Reflection; etc. Content, If he would not hasten to new
untruths. Where is it confessed, that we have neither command, nor example, in
Holy Scripture for Adoring our Lord in the Eucharist? If there he any command
for Adoring our Lord at all, there is for Adoring him in the Eucharist: For,
once Adorable and he is always and everywhere Adorable, in what condition or
circumstances soever; and special injunctions or instances are not of necessity
to warrant or oblige us to Adore. St. Austin knew there was a command, or he
would not have said in Psalm. 98. Peccemus non Adorando. Again, tho we confess
that Defects may possibly happen, yet who grants them to be infinite or
difficultly avoidable? Is it not rather difficult (considering the Caution of
the Church) that any defects should chance, which are destructive to the
Eucharist? Can we not have a moral certainty the Priest has the Orders to which
he pretends? Do not our Senses inform us, as to both the matter and Form of the
Sacrament, and the serious application of the one to the other? As to the
intention, it is true, it is deemed necessary (will the Minister profess that
none is needful to the performance of a Religious Action?) but what degree or
sort of intention, is a Question in the Schools; some Divines requiring more,
some less. Of the later kind, if he please, the Reader may view what Contenson
writes of it, Theolog. Mentis and Cordis, l. 11. p. 1. Diss. 2. Append.. 2.
etc. -- It is undoubtlingly to be asserted, says this Modern Divine, that an
Intention of seriously performing the External Rites, amongst Christians
counted Religious, suffices for the validity of a Sacrament; and, that being
observed, no retention nor perverseness of the Minister's Intention does void a
Sacrament. This Position he confirms by many Authorities, and concludes them
with that of the Council of Trent, Sess. 14. Cap. 6. Can. 9. where that Holy
Synod declares the Sacrament not to be performed, if a Priest act in Jest, etc.
inferring thereupon, that the Council understood by an Intention of doing what
the Church does, not (as this Minister) of doing what the Church intends, but a
doing with external seriousness what the Church prescribes. Which inference he
inforces by Cardinal Palavicini's Reflection on that Passage of the Council,
par. 2. l. 12. c. 10. -- From these last words, any one reading them may
conjecture, that the Opinion of Catherine and other Divines, thinking a Will in
the Minister to act seriously suffices for, and that only Jesting (which the
Receiver of the Sacrament may discover) does obstruct, the accomplishment of a
Sacrament, was not expunged. According to this Doctrine then, the Consecration
of the Eucharist does not depend on the Priest's believing Transubstantiation,
or secretly intending to Consecrate, etc. but only on an external intention to
do seriously what the Church injoins, which is very discernable to the
Attendants by the Priest's exterior actions and deportment. How many therefore
of the Answerer's Dangers and Defects are blown away? And if Adoration may at
any time be paid to our Lord in the Eucharist, it may ordinarily be so, without
any scruple, by Catholics.

Appendix II.
ANIMADVERSIONS upon the Reply to the two Discourses concerning the Adoration
of our B. Savior in the Holy Eucharist.
SOME time ago were printed in OXFORD Two Discourses, the one concerning the
Alterations in the Church Service of the Church of England; the second,
concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist. The Design whereof was to show the incertitude and inconstancy of
the Church of England in her Doctrine and Practices. [Whence it will follow,
That none can trust or rely upon her Authority, nor safely either believe or
practice according to her directions.] Of both these the Author took these two
Articles as a manifest and sufficient instance. But because there is nothing so
true, against which somewhat may not be spoken, there have bin opposed to these
two Discourses, an Answer, printed at London; and a Reply, at Oxford: neither
of them taking much notice of the Author's intention, but spending their
learning chiefly about Transubstantiation, I cannot say altogether from, but
not much to, the purpose. Both of them also declare their own opinions to be
against the Real presence of our Savior's body and blood in that holy
Sacrament, and thereby acknowledge themselves members of the modern or present
Church of England, and consequently minister another argument of the
inconstancy and weakness of that Church. And so let them do. But that they
should persuade us, that the ancient Church of England and her best writers
were of the same judgment, cannot be performed; it being both against their
express writings, and the judgment generally of their new Church, as of Baily,
Prin, Hen: Hickman, and as many as have written to justify the Puritans against
the Church of England, who all accused the Antipuritans (as Heylin, Laurence,
Pocklinton, and the rest) to have bin Popishly affected: as also did the
pretended Reformers, (in their Doctrine forsaking Calvin, and embracing
Zuinglius,) who upon this ground, amongst some others, refused to communicate
with those of the Church of England, (tho of late they denied not to admit the
Lutherans.) To these Reformers the new Church of England-men have bin pleased
(for reasons well enough perceived) to join themselves. Neither is there any
thing considerable in the one, which is not in the other, of these writers. The
Answerer seems to have more learning, the Replier is better at cavilling and
mockery, and had it not bin to show this talent, he needed not to have troubled
the world with a new Book. He says indeed it is in defense of their quarters;
but for this, who is bonae, who malae fidei possessor, we appeal to the
judgment of our pious and munificent Founders; who will one day declare whether
they designed their bounties for them, who hold it not lawful to pray for them,
who frustrate their chief intention, count them Idolaters, and members of a
false Church.

It was long deliberated, whether it were worth the labor to take any public
notice of these Pamphlets. It was said; that they were so crudely, negligently,
and uncandidly written, that no man of parts, learning, or true piety, could be
misled by them: That the Discourses (notwithstanding these oppositions) remain
not only unshaken and unviolated, but much confirmed and justified, when so
many persons (both at London and Oxford) can find no other besides these weak
and insignificant exceptions against them, tho they take the liberty to say
what they please, even to the defamation of their own Church: That, every thing
said against another writing, (as there is nothing more easy than to
misrepresent, change, cavil, etc, even against truth it self,) however called,
is not an Answer. St. Austin complained of his Adversaries the Pagans, (who
writ against his Books, de civit. Dei l. 5. c. 27.) Facile est cuiquam videri
respondisse cum, qui tacere noluerit. Quid est loquacius vanitate? quia ideo
non potest quod veritas, quia si voluerit etiam plus potest clamare quam
veritas etc. The Vulgar, for whose palats these discourses seem cooked, (who
make themselves Judges of the most difficult controversies, whereof they are
least capable,) pronounce against him who replieth not speedily; and is of his
side who is not silent: That our Author's writings carry with them such
evidence and satisfactoriness, by the perfection of their d sposition, style,
learning, arguing, etc, (which every ingenious Reader sees by experience,) that
we need not fear to suffer those already printed to pass without a vindication,
or to publish those, which as yet remain with us, without alteration.

But because care is also to be taken for young men, for such as are doubting,
or weak in the faith, and especially for such as in sincerity seek after the
truth, and may be deturned from it either by the craftiness, or confidence, of
its Adversaries: and because we would not be altogether wanting to our duty, or
leave the defense of the Truth to her self, we have taken this course to print;
1. A short Treatise many years ago written, of the great controversy concerning
the Eucharist, wherein in a manner the whole opposition of the Answer and Reply
is prevented, and both the truth and diversity of Opinions concerning the
presence of our Lord in the Sacrament plainly laid open to such as are desirous
to know it. 2. Two Appendixes; the first against the Answerer, proving
copiously and manifestly, That the Ancient and Learned Divines of the Church of
England did acknowledge, as their writings every where set forth, some real and
substantial presence of our Lord, such as is ascribed to them by the two
Treatises. The second chiefly aims at as plain and easy an Explication of the
Doctrine of the Church in this great mystery as we can; and to remove the
prejudices and offenses which the Replier, with others of the new Zuinglian
Church of England pretend against it. And tho the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church has bin so often manifestly proved against their exceptions, yet do
they continually repeat the old Objections; insomuch that we have no hopes to
do good to them, nor to any such as take delight in insolence and scoffery (the
most obvious and trivial sort of wit, the daughter of uncharitableness, and
mother of libels, and all sort of scurrility) against those, who endeavor
themselves to follow, and manifest to others, the true and undoubted Church of
God, and way of salvation.

And they, who for this pious endeavor are mocked and scorned, ought not to
make returns in the same nature, (than which nothing is more easy to him that
takes liberty of saying what he pleases,) but possess themselves in patience;
considering, that their condition were very much to he suspected, if they were
not thus treated; for these are Indices of a righteous cause, and tracks of
their Predecessors. And indeed; what less can they expect, who (according to
their duty to the holy Catholic Church, their Prince, and Nation,) spend
themselves and their time to reduce their countrymen (for whose sake, as S.
Paul for the Jews, they are ready to sacrifice their lives, and all they have)
out of the most horrible and fatal sin of Schism to the Unity of the Church?
out of the dangerous principles of disobedience and sedition, to a just and due
submission unto their own Prince: and out of popular and rebellious Persuasions
and suggestions to an establishment of a firm and grounded peace a and unity of
the Church and Nation.

Natural body, and there is a Spiritual body: Concerning the Real presence of
our Lord in the Eucharist.
the same body under several proprieties and conditions. The Natural we call
that, which enjoys the same qualities wherewith it was created, and, as the
Natural Philosophers treat of it; such are dimensions, figure, weight,
impenetrability, circumscription by place, motion, sensibility, and the like.
But the same body, quit of those conditions, and now spiritualized, is under
far different proprieties, even those which belong to Angels and Spirits, to
whom they become (...), pares or aequales, as becoming one Church and economy
with them. Those we may best conceive by the histories in the Scripture of the
apparitions of Angels, or, if you please, by our own Souls; which, tho
penetrating every atome of the Body, and communicating to it all its powers,
yet is but one in the whole; and yet in every part is it wholly, whether the
body be bigger or lesser, mutilated or entire, neither parted, diminished, or
doubled, nor yet many but the same soul wholly in every part. For it is not in
the body, as in a place; except we (as this Replier seems) bring in
Cartesianism, and confine the soul to the glandula pinealis; or if, as is most
consonant to his principles, to some one atome of it, (contrary to the doctrine
of all Christian Philosophers,) and the virtue and efficacy of it only
communicated to the other parts of the body. So a Spiritual body (however this
be hard to conceive by imagination, in this state accustomed to sensation and
materiality) has no certain dimensions, figure, weight, sensibility, or
alteration, nor circumscription by place, but as it self pleases to discover
it self. So besides the examples of the Angels, our Lord appeared and
disappeared, continued and vanished, passed through gross bodies, and the like, as
himself pleased. Now from circumscription by place (or an ambient body) arises
naturally an impossibility to be in several places at once. Naturally, I say,
because by the power of God even this quality, as well as the rest, may be
separated from the natural body, as it was by his all-powerful wisdom freely
given unto it. It seems to me little less than blasphemy to say, That the
Allmighty power, which at first created a natural body with such properties,
cannot also suspend the actions of those Properties, or conserve the subject
without them; it being the same as saying, that He cannot work a Miracle; all
Miracles being a superseding his own rules which he established against all
other Natural, but not against his own Divine, Power. And, why not suspend
locality, a relative property belonging to the Body, as a Member of the
Universe, as well as weight, or motion, which seem more absolute and
intrinsecal to the nature of the body? Why cannot he contravene to one Rule as
well as to another, especially when there is no contradiction? As there is none
in this case of our Lord's presence in the Eucharist, as both our Author and
all Catholics affirm, notwithstanding the Repliers shuffling to fasten such an
Opinion upon him. To be here and not here, may be a contradiction; but to be
here and there, is none. But what more contradiction is it, than that five
Loaves carried by a little Boy should feed five thousand men, and much more
remain than was at first; a Miracle preparatory to this of the Blessed
Sacrament. And without penetration of Bodies (which granted, introduces the
possibility of a Body's being in several places) how can a Camel pass through the
Eye of a Needle, which yet is possible with God; as is what our Lord says of
himself, when upon Earth, that he was also in Heaven, Jo. 1.18.3.13.7.34.

But as a Spirit is not at all confined to place, so nothing hinders why it may
not coexist with Bodies in distinct places, by which alone we know its being in
several locations, (tho indeed it is in no location at all in proper speaking,
contrary to what our Replier affixeth to Catholics), as Elisha's Spirit went
along with his Servant; and St. Paul's joy'd in beholding the orderly carriage
of the Colossians; and the Evil Spirits also (a whole Legion possessing one,
one Spirit inhabiting almost every atom of his Body), and the blessed tutelar
Angels continually behold the face of God in Heaven, as well as attend their
charge upon Earth. Whereby it seems, exempt from the conditions of Bodies.

So then Catholics say, That the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ is not now
under the properties of a natural body; nor is it necessary that it should be
locally any-where, nor heavy, nor subject to motion, passibility, or the like.
And when Catholics say, that our Lord's natural body, or that he is corporally
present; they mean, That his body, even that natural body received of the B.
Virgin (for he has no other) is really, truly, and inde^d present, and given
to us, in the Eucharist; but not so corporally, i. e. with those properties of,
or as a natural body, (for corporally and locally are not the same, as our
Replier everywhere stumbles,) but as spiritual, and being now glorified: yet
therefore not as dead (an irreverent expression, to say no worse, of the
Replier) but yet as given, and having suffered for us; even in the same manner
as himself, our blessed High Priest, continually Offers it up to the Father
for us.

Again, Note, That the bestowing and receiving of the benefits of our Lord's
Passion is giving somewhat real, but that real is not his body and blood, nor
in proper speaking are those the benefits of his body and blood (for then they
could not be received without the body and blood, whereas now they are,
according to our Replier, accidents without a subject, and effects without a
cause), but of his passion and sufferings. And therefore our Savior declares
the use and benefit of his body and blood by eating and drinking, which are not
compatible to the benefits of his passion by any metaphor, or similitude
whatsoever. And therefore the Second Edition of the English Common Prayer Book
leaves out these words, The body and blood etc. and only says, Take and eat
this [Bit of Bread and Sup of Wine] in remembrance that Christ died for thee,
and feed on him in thy heart by Faith with thanksgiving. And the first Edition
of the Catechism says, Fidem esse os animae, quo cibum hunc plane divinum and
salutis juxta and immortalitatis plenum, and Spiritus Sancti gratia
communicatum recipimus. Faith is improperly said to receive (except in the
sense of those Protestants who take it for application of Christ's personal
righteousness to us:) but what resembles eating and drinking in or by Faith, or
what actions of Faith correspond to them I cannot imagine.

But our Savior represents his body unto us under the notion of meat and its
effects, particularly the Manna, whereunto he compares it. Such are, 1. To
conserve, nourish, advance, restore in us what by worldly conversation, and the
like, is decayed and weak'ned; and to strengthen us in our Spiritual life and
estate, as the Food it self was Spiritual. 2. By uniting us to the Food, (Flesh
of his Flesh, Bone of his Bone) (contrary to the Manna and natural meat, which
receive life from the nourished) it makes us partakers of his Life, which being
immortal and glorious, renders ours such also. And 3. Other Food being either
inanimate, or having a Life inferior unto, and differing from ours; this Body
of his is become superior, more Divine than ours, and is a quickening Spirit.
And therefore we should receive his Body and Blood after the manner of natural
bodies (which the Capernaites and our sensual Doctors can apprehend) it would
profit us nothing, as to the great effects promised by our Receiving in the
Eucharist. And these effects are true and real (not notional or imaginary, or
by Faith only apprehended), yea much more than the Manna. Faith being an assent
in the understanding, is quite different from enjoyment in the will and
affections. And Faith, i. e. a believing either that our Lord was the true
Messiah, or Messenger from the Father (for else he could not be the true Bread
which came down from Heaven), or that this, which is given us, is the real Body
of our Savior (for else it would be only common Bread), precedes the
Receiving, yet is not any part of it, much less the enjoyment of any of the
effects of it. Again, If eating by Faith (whatever it signifies) be all that is
meant in the Eucharist, how comes it to be preferred before the Manna, which
was a continual Miracle, and daily exercise of their Faith? And why would our
Lord suffer so many of his Followers to go away from him, when he might in so
few words have informed them of the Truth without a Metaphor? Why should he use
such sublime and spiritual expressions, repeating it to be his body and blood,
that it came down from Heaven, that he would give it for the life of the world,
etc. and not once explain the meaning of those, to them, obscure phrases? And
if the Church Catholic, and even the Church of England till the last of King
Edward VI. had not conceived some great Mystery, why would she keep the words
so obscure, and really, as they suppose, improper, of the Institution so
precisely, even till the Church of England made the breach, and by the
Expressions different from the whole Church, professed her self not to be a
Member of it? But of this sufficient is said before, and in the Reformation of
the Church of England, from. 148. Wherefore the Catholics, speaking of the
real presence of our Lord, mean^, the very essence, substance, the very thing
it self is there present, taken, and eaten by us; and not only the benefits of
his Passion believed by us. And in the Church's sense we use in this Discourse
the words really, really present, etc. and yet not naturally, locally, or any
other manner of its being according to the qualities of a natural body.

England, by their spiritual, by Faith, mystical, eating (which they sometimes
also call Sacramental) intend a sense contrary and opposite to eating the
natural body of our Lord spiritualized, and that is all the eating they
acknowledge. The Catholic Church also uses the same word spiritual in
opposition to real, or sacramental; meaning thereby the reception of some
spiritual grace or increase of it. As the Fathers in the Wilderness did eat the
same meat ( Manna and the Rockwater) spiritually, in as much as these were
Types of spiritual things under the Gospel, by receiving whereof they also
obtained the graces of Gods Spirit. And this spiritual reception of Grace is
not only in the Eucharist, but in all the other Sacraments, in all actions of
Devotion and Piety, and all manner of well-using Grace once given. But this is
not all the Sacramental receiving, tho contained in it. So that there are two
manners of receiving Grace, and our Savior: 1. Spiritual only, which our
Replier says is all. 2. Spiritual and real, or Sacramental; because proper to
the Eucharist. The real without the spiritual profits nothing, yea it is also
damnable. For except a man come to the Eucharist well prepared, i. e. by
Mortifications, Devotions, Acts of Religion ( i. e. in a state of Grace) he
eats and drinks condemnation to himself. The spiritual receiving without the
real profits indeed, but neither so much, nor in such manner, as when they
are joined both together: For spiritual receiving is of more Grace upon
well-using the former, is only in general, and in the inner man; therefore
difficultly discerned, and more subject are we to be deceived in it. But real
receiving (as all other Sacraments) is instituted to help the weakness and
imperfect discernment of our spiritual and internal condition by the visible
signs of invisible Grace therein bestowed. The spiritual eating gives us a
right and title to Grace, but the other is the very instrument of conveying it.
Also in that, Grace is given according to the measure of the Receiver's
disposition; and that Grace also which is of the same nature with those
dispositions. But in the Sacraments are given new and peculiar Graces; as in
Baptism, the forgiveness of all sins already committed, and admission into the
Church of Christ, and all the rights and benefits thereof: So in the holy
Eucharist, there is conferred also forgiveness of sins, and a nearer
incorporating us into our Lord himself more intimately, and consequently a more
certain hope and confidence of eternal life; by receiving himself into us, who
is now become a quickening Spirit unto us, working by his body received (the
seed of immortality) all things necessary or useful to our happy progress
thither. Be pleased therefore to consider; Whether they, who acknowledge no
other than a spiritual receiving, do not either quite evacuate the power and
efficacy, or at least diminish much and weaken the force of this divine
Sacrament? And also, that whoever they are, who endeavor to subject or reduce
Religion to the Rule of Reason, do not in effect deny and despise the wisdom of
God declared in the mystery of our holy Religion?

Catholics trouble not themselves to reconcile Religion to Philosophy. Their
endeavor is to understand the true sense of what God has revealed; and to
this purpose they make use of all the helps which others do, but principally
depend upon what the Church Catholic and her Doctors from time to time have
received and declared; i. e. how they, to whom our Lord committed his
Mysteries, have from the beginning believed and delivered that charge delivered
unto them; how the practice has interpreted the Law; and how the Holy Spirit,
by his Instruments the Clergy of the Catholic Church, has continued it down
to their time. Nor do they regard what either private interpretation, or what
Philosophy, or Principles framed by men's understandings out of their
experience or frame of Languages suggest. They leave these to them, who affect
to diminish the unfathomable knowledge communicated to us by God in his
Revelations; to Arians, Socinians, Latitudinarians, and other Doctors of
Sensuality. But the true sense of things revealed being settled, they argue and
reason thereupon as much as they please, according to rules natural to the
Understanding, and perfected by the Art of Logic. The Rules and Artifice of
Reasoning, I say, they use and approve; but such principles as are observed out
of Nature and her operations, they subordinate to Faith. So that in strict and
proper speaking, they do not oppose Faith to Reason, but only to Philosophy.
For if the intellect be rasa Tabula, it can argue from nothing (tho Arguing and
Reasoning be its chiefest work, to which it is naturally directed) but what it
receives from without, either by the Senses, and information of others, or by
Revelation, [except (which is very rare) that God by himself, or a good Angel,
immediately illuminates the Understanding (as in foretelling things future or
absent), or by means of some representation received by the Imagination]. Now
tho the expression, notification, and apprehension of things revealed, is
indeed conveyed to us in words comprehended by sense, yet the thing signified
is not discovered by the ordinary notions of sensual knowledge, but by the Word
and Spirit of God revealing it; which does not only represent more objects to
the understanding, but also enlightens the faculty, and enableth it to discern
spiritual things as much clearer than Nature teaches, as a man can better
discern by the light of the midday Sun than by the glimmering of the Moon; or
in a clear air than in the thickest mist. The outward sensible Word is of men,
and according to humane speech; but the internal Word is known to us only by
Jesus Christ, who by these ordinary sounds (the Holy Spirit concurring with
them) conveyeth to us the great and otherwise incomprehensible mysteries of our
salvation; which are therefore trampled on and despised by the worldly wise,
who reduce all our knowledge to, and measure it by, sense and reason.

So then, it is not reason which the Catholics oppose, but the principles of
reasoning taken from Aristotle, experience, humane testimonies, vain
Philosophy, and the like. To all which we prefer those propositions of that
most Sacred Religion first discovered by our Lord Jesus Christ in his personal
conversation here on earth, and after his departure continued and propagated in
and to his Church by his holy Apostles, and their Successors, to the end of the
world. Nor can it be said that these propositions or principles of Philosophy
are more rational than those de fide, any more than the principles of one
Science are more rational than those of another. As for contradiction of faith
upon the account of sense, (which in effect amounts to the denial of faith,) it
has bin so often and clearly answered, (particularly in the preceding short
Discourse,) that it seems needless to repeat it. In short, sense teaches us
not that this is (v. g.) bread or a stone, for this is an action of assent or
judgment, (whether in the imagination or intellect it mattereth not,) which
affirms or denies most frequently as it is accustomed without consideration;
and erreth not, except where it too hastily assents against a truer
Proposition; i.e. such a Proposition, whose truth is dcelared by or from a more
certain Principle. As ordinary understandings conceive the Diameter of the Sun
to be no more than of 3. foot, (their sense so informing them,) or that this is
bread, which seems such: Yet are both these errors controlled, the one by
Demonstration, the other by the infallible Word of God in his Church.

present Church of England, agreeing with the pretended Reformed, and
contradicting their own Predecessors, accuse the Catholic Church of Idolatry
upon three accounts. 1. For worshipping God before an Image. 2. Using toward
God the mediation and intercession of the B. Virgin, Angels, and Saints. And 3.
For adoring our B. Lord Jesus Christ in the Holy Sacrament. We here speak of
the last.

1. Adoration consists partly in internal, partly external, actions. The
external are for the most part the same in all Religions, Christian or Heathen;
and are the effects and demonstrations of the internal: the sentiments and
affections of the Soul either naturally or out of custom thus expressing
themselves. Only true Religion has reserved Sacrifice as appropriated only to
the most High God, and to no creature whatsoever. But the Heathen do not
observe this. We shall not speak of it here.

2. All actions of Adoration must be either to God, or a creature, and the
internal actions or intention are those which determine the external to the one
or the other. Nor does, nor can, any one know by the external actions, whether
God or the creature be worshipped but by some external and declared
interpretation of the intention. Therefore no man ought to judge of another
man's adoration without such interpretation; and he that does so, sins.

3. Whoever gives the worship due to God unto a creature; or, whoever in his
devotions gives or attributes that to a creature which belongs to God only, is
guilty of Idolatry, as taken in a large sense. The worship due to God consists
in acts of faith, [believing whatever he has, or does reveal, and by that
regularing the understanding,] of hope, [trusting in Him alone both for the
things of this and the other world, by this regulating the will,] and of
charity, [loving God above all things, and all other things for His sake, by
this regulating the affections.]

4. Almighty God may be worshipped in all places, and at all times. but it is
required to worship him when we come into his presence, and where are performed
actions more solemn, and appropriated unto him.

5. The person of our Lord Jesus Christ is to be worshipped with the worship due
to God alone, because he is God blessed for ever: and the rather, because he is
a person only as the humane nature is assumed into the person of the Son of
God. Neither is he to be worshipped as here or there, but there is an obligation
to worship him in the Eucharist; because he has both by himself and his Church
declared him to be there present. And tho he were not there present, yet is the
Adoration, being by the intention directed to Him alone, and not to any
creature present or absent, an act of devotion, and acceptable to him. And they
who call this Idolatry, commit a very great sin; depriving our Lord of his
honor, condemning his whole Church of Idolatry, and consequently acknowledging
that he had no Church upon earth; making themselves judges of their brethren;
and imputing to them a sin which they utterly abhor, yet which cannot be known
but by their own confession.

But, say they, The Church in the Council of Trent has declared, that we ought
to worship the holy Sacrament. (Sacramentum.) To which (tho so often answered)
we say, that this word Sacramentum has three significations: 1. It is taken
for the thing signified only, res Sacramenti, the body and blood, or person of
our Lord; and this is to be worshipped with Divine worship. 2. For the signs,
species, or visible accidents, to which no other worship is due besides that
reverence which belongs to the instruments of holy worship. 3. For both the
sign and thing signified together; and thus understood the Sacrament is not
properly said to be worshipped, tho improperly it may; because part of it, the
res Sacramenti, is to be worshipped: and that which belongs to the principal
part is ordinarily attributed to the whole; as a man understands, thinks,
argues, etc, tho these be only the actions of the Soul. The like distinction
serves also for the word Host (Hostia), which these writers seem to lay as a
stumbling block before the ignorant. For it is sometimes used for the outward
signs, species, or whatever is visible before consecration, and is not to be
worshipped; sometimes for the Lord himself, as in Ephesians. 5.2. who alone in proper
speaking is to be worshipped. But having occasion, by God's blessing, in
convenient time to speak more copiously upon this subject, we shall here add no
more.

Doctrine of the Catholic Church in this great mystery: sufficiently also, we
hope, to instruct them who intend their salvation, who are not desirous a lie
should be the truth, nor prefer their own uncertain conjectures against God's
Church. Whom also we seriously admonish to beware of those teachers, who debase
and lower the great grace and mercy of God communicated to us by our Lord, (who
is made unto us wisdom as well as justice and sanctification,) by debasing it
to their own fancies, which they call reason: as did all the ancient Heretics
and Mahomet himself, that great false Prophet. To take away all mystery out of
Christian Religion, is to vilify it, and to abolish the virtue of faith and
advancement of the understanding, and thereby also of piety and devotion. For
it is no wonder, that those sublime and holy passions or operations,
experienced by devout persons, are by such people ridiculed, to say no worse.
For if the Heroical acts of Faith are denied and despised, it must needs
follow, that those great favors bestowed by God upon his best servants must
neither be enjoyed, nor credited.

But omitting these matters, let us proceed to examine some such few particulars
in the Replier's Discourse, as seem to contain something considerable. For it
would be too much abusing the Reader's time and patience to discover or
reprehend all the errors of that Pamphlet, wherein I know not if there be any
one period that is not obnoxious.

first Chap. containing nothing of consequence, we will take notice of the
second, which seems to be to purpose. Our Author's chief design was to show the
Alterations of the Church of England, after her departure from the Church
Catholic, both in Doctrine and Practice, taking this one Article as an
instance in both. In this chapter the Replier takes notice of these
alterations; and tho he would gladly deny them, yet is it a thing so manifest,
that he rather thinks fitting to diminish them, and notwithstanding the
alterations, to affirm that the Church of England never changed.

Little alterations he calls them, and yet says they are the terms of her
communion. Nothing certainly is little in the Church'es forms, especially in
our most venerable and solemn worship, and the very chiefest and most important
service of God, even the only holy sacrifice of our Religion, and admitting us
to, and feeding us at, his own Table: not little that Article, upon which they
chiefly justify their departure from the Church, and by which they continually
keep their subjects in disobedience unto, and alienation from, Her: not little,
which contains the terms of the Church'es communion; so that he who assents not
to these, however differing (in their several seasons,) i.e. he that did not
believe the Real presence at the first setting forth the Common Prayer Book,
and he that did believe it at the second, was holden as excommunicate. Not
little, to the disobedience whereof such severe Penalties were imposed both by
Acts of Parliament, and Canons of 1603. Again, if so little, why would they for
them change those of the Ancient Church, except it were for an extreme itch of
separating from God's Church? the formality and essence of Schism.

Ib. This design is impertinent. No, it was the very primary intention of the
Author, as is plain enough. But admit the Church of England has wavered in her
Doctrines, (as our Author proves irrefragably,) it follows, that she disclaims
the authoritative conduct of her subjects, by whose doctrines (except they
submit to so many changes) they can never be secure: and they who do change,
cannot keep the unity of the faith which themselves alter: but are more like to
children, unconstant, uncertain, hurried about with every new blast of
doctrine, as a powerful person of a different persuasion or interest pleases
to command. This is not the end, for which our Good Lord ordained the Clergy
his Successors. In the beginning of King Edward VI. Reign, at the framing of a
new Common prayer book, was asserted the Real presence of the body and blood of
our Lord in the Eucharist, (as has already, and (by God's assistance) shall be
more showed by and by.) In his latter end, this doctrine was changed to
Zuinglianism. In Q. Elizabeth's time both were joined in the form of the
Liturgy, but the declaration against Real presence was omitted; which, in the
Rubric in 1661, was licked up again. Likewise also the Catechism was changed.
In King Edward's time the Eucharist was expressed in Zuinglius's notions; which
in Q. Elizabth's time were omitted, and in King James's time those for a Real
presence inserted. The Articles also were new modeled: the first that I can
find were, toward the later end of King Edward, against the Real presence. Q.
Elizabeth altered them again, leaving out those things seeming to her
scandalous, and against the Real presence. And indeed the Articles were not
framed to declare the true doctrine of Religion, according to the word of God
interpreted by the Catholic Church, but for avoiding diversities of opinions
[amongst themselves] establishing some sort of consent, and healing the
increasing ulcers amongst the teachers of the newly changed Religion. Again,
why does she punish Dissenters? since her self dissents frequently from her
self, and consequently has taught that which is false. So who can have
confidence, that in believing her faith, or obedience to her commands, he
endangereth not his salvation. Even at this day the Replier and his party teach
contrary to the former learned men of their own Church, and by their own
practice confirm this accusation against their Church.

Adore the Elements.] Either the Replier knows that all Catholics declare,
(which none but God and themselves can disprove) that they detest the adoration
of any creature, and of the Elements in the Eucharist, and then he voluntarily
calumniates them: or he does not know it; and then why will he undertake to
confute them, whose Doctrine he does not understand? The same absurd error of
local presence of our Lord he every where goes about to confute, which the
Catholics disdain as well as the Zuinglians.

How impertinent to urge out of the Rubricks etc.] What new kind of answering
is this, so frequent in the Replier! It is very unreasonable, yet proper to,
and frequent with this Replier, that he should teach his Adversary what to say.
It is an easy matter to answer what himself suggests, but not so usual to
propose what he would confute. But to say somewhat to this also; the Homilies
are not quoted, because they are of no authority, having bin set on soot (even
as some of their own Bishops, disputing against the Puritans, have owned) only
pro tempore, and to serve a turn. And what say the Articles of them, but that
they contain wholesome and pious doctrine necessary for those times? But do not
they also contain some not pious, wholesome, or orthodox? The authorized
Catechism is clear enough for the Catholic Doctrine, as is proved, Appendix I.
but he means Nowel's Puritanical Catechism; as also Bradford, and Hooper; of
whom we know nothing but what Fox (a man of no authority) reports from
themselves. He also is angry that Cranmer is not consulted, a man whose
character is truly set out in App. I. as may be showed in due time. For the
present let it suffice, that we think him of no authority; as neither is
Burnet. But is not the Replier in difficulties, when he can find no Patrons but
such as these?

The Church of England has always held a Real presence, so far as a real
participation implies one.] But if there be no real participation of his Body
at all, as this Replier afterward every where confesses, but only of the
Benefits of his Sufferings, then by his own confession there is no Real
presence. But this being the main point of the difference upon which this
Replier insists; let us search a little deeper. I say then, 1. That in the
beginning of the pretended Reformation under Edw. VI. the Doctrine of the
Church of England was, That our Lord's Body and Blood were really (by really, I
mean, essentially, substantially) present in the Eucharist. This is plain by
the words of Consecration, and delivery of the Sacrament, where the very form
of the Catholic Church was kept, only with the addition of such words as more
effectually concluded it. The Catholic form is, Corpus Domini Nostri Jesu
Christi custodiat animam tuam in vitam aeternam. The English was, The body of
our Lord Jesus Christ (which was given for thee) preserve thy body and soul
into everlasting life. When the Common prayer book was sent into Scotland, this
Form was re-introduced, and the other addition refused; which kindled a mighty
flame in Scotland, they apprehending it to be Popery, as appears by Baily's
Ladensium autocatacrisis. Now it cannot be imagined that the Liturgy-makers
should translate the words of the Mass, and yet intend to give them a quite
different signification, without giving any notice of it to the people: That
the people, who had bin brought up to understand the real body of our Lord by
corpus Domini -- custodiat animam tuam -- the next day should, hearing the same
words in English, understand only the real benefits of Christ's passion, and
not understand at all how these benefits could be eaten or given by the Priest,
or how they were given for (rather than to) the people, as neither how they
should preserve the Receiver's body. Truly our Author and the Catholics have
too great a kindness for the Church of England, than to impose upon her such an
abominable prevarication, sufficient to drive away all men from her communion.
But if the words were so to be understood, and no alteration intended, why
should they in the next edition, within so few years, alter them after another
manner, and quite different intention? But of this by and by. 2ly, I say, that
before the death of King Edw. VI. they altered their doctrine from a Real
presence of our Lord's body, to real effects or benefits of his Passion, or
somewhat like it, if yet they acknowledged any benefits at all: for in the
first it was, preserve thy body and soul etc, which was a real benefit; but in
the second, is none, but, Do this in remembrance of Christ's sufferings, and
feed on him etc, but what benefit or benediction is received, is not expressed;
for they altered all things in the Liturgy which might any way countenance the
benefits of real presence. They kept indeed the words of Consecration, but gave
over the handling the Chalice, Patin, etc, so that they left the words, without
application to any matter, that every man might understand them as he pleased.
Which was also the reason why they omitted the words of delivery, substituting,
Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in
thy heart by faith with thanksgiving. This, what? individuum vagum, or perhaps
nothing, if nothing consecrated, as it seems; or perhaps something, but they
know not what, as not being resolved of that point, but only that it was not
the real body of our Savior. This appears also by the Rubric, by the
Articles, and Declaration, all which are set down plainly by our Author, chapter 1.
The 3d Alteration was made by Q. Elizabeth, at her coming to the Crown. For she
being, as is noted, zealous for the Doctrine of the Real presence, and diverse
of the Clergy then Genevized against it, they made another change, leaving out
many things as the second had done out of the first, and some things
established in the second, particularly the Rubric, and the Declaration in the
Article; but in the words of delivery joining both forms together. So that it
was dressed for all palates, whether according to the simplicity and sincerity
of the Gospel, I judge not. But those of the Church of England, who were less
infected with Geneva, considering these things, broached a new opinion; That
the Body of our Lord was indeed really in the Eucharist, but not with the
Symbols, but to the Receiver only: and hereby indeed they salved the words of
the form, but whether effectively, and according to truth, I refer you to the
first of these Appendixes. In King James's time there seems not to be any
considerable alteration, save that there was added in the Catechism a few
questions concerning the Eucharist, entirely conformable to this Doctrine of
the Church of England: which distinguishing the benefits from the thing
received, they say that the Body of our Lord is there truly and indeed, and
translate it, vere and revera. How realiter and revera differ, I know not; as
neither why the Replier should applaud the Church of England for not using the
word really, which rather seems a confession of her guilt of Schism: inasmuch
as in those doctrines, wherein she agrees with the Catholic Church, she
chooses to abstain from her terms. The 4th Alteration was in King Charles I
time, in the Book of Common Prayer sent down into Scotland, wherein most things
were reduced to the first edition of King Edward VI. but was most barbarously
defamed by the Presbyterians there for Popery. But Archbishop Lawd did not
intend any Popery; but vainly imagined to settle a Church, near to, but not
conformable with the Catholic Religion, which was impossible; it being not a
plant planted by our Lord, but of his own policy, and therefore was to be
rooted up; or a branch torn from the Vine of the Catholic Church, and
therefore dead and unfruitful. The last Alteration was at the Return of King
Charles II. wherein was a contrary course endeavored, a complying with the
Presbyterians; a business somewhat plausible, but not according to Religion.
Then was brought in the Rubric against the Real presence. And tho (as I have
heard) the Clergy at that time made great opposition, yet when by an Higher
Power it was established, they all submitted to, and embraced, it.

The Church has always held a Real presence, so far as a real Participation
implies one.] It is most certain, that if the Body of our Lord be really
received it is also really present. But the Replier owns not a real
participation of the Body of our Savior, but a figurative one, of the benefits
of his Passion; and those not really, but by faith only, which is only of
things revealed, and things not enjoyed: besides, the reception is oral only,
and not of the benefits or effects, but of the bread and wine, after which
follows a feeding by faith, which is properly spoken neither of the symbols nor
the benefits. That the Church of England never acknowledged any other presence
is false, as has bin showed both in the precedent Discourse and Appendix; and
if these testimonies be not sufficient, he shall have as many more as he
pleases. But see his Instances p. 14. how a real reception may be of a thing
really absent; He that receives a Disciple, receives Christ. But this is not a
really true, but a figurative, expression; signifying, that he who receives a
Disciple, shall be esteemed and rewarded as if he received Christ himself. The
Disciples received the Holy Ghost really, if (as some Doctors think) the Holy
Ghost descended upon them; if only the graces of the Spirit, (as is more
ordinarily said,) it was only a figurative speech, and no real reception. A man
receives an inheritance when he receives the writings, livery and seisin, etc.
but here is nothing really received but the writings, or some other thing,
whereby the inheritance is conceived to be given not properly, but by common
custom, and vulgar manner of speaking, grounded upon positive laws, or mutual
compact. A Prince receives a Kingdom really, if he be present in and to it;
but if any other way, he receives it not really. It is no news that the word
(receive) is sometimes used figuratively, and in diverse manners, but the word
(really) is not figurative, nor being applied to receive suffers it to be taken
figuratively. And so the Church has always understood it, i. e. both that
receiving and the received were true, and real, and not figurative only: and it
is hard to conceive that our Lord in the last and most solemn mystery of his
whole life should make use of so dilute and improper an expression.

Page 5. It is easy to assign good reasons for the Alterations]. Be it easy;
neither himself, nor any else (that I have seen), have given such good reasons.
He refers us to Dr. Burnet, Foxes and Firebrands, etc. dirty Pools which
himself also had fished already, and found nothing. It Is said first, That it
was not thought fit to cast off Superstition all at once. Superstition then
that ancient Form was, which notwithstanding had remained so many hundred years
already, and the whole Church for all that time was guilty of Superstition: But
the new Form (established by a few partial, or also ignorant persons) was void
of Superstition. But if they changed the former because of Superstition, what
made them so often change the other? Heresy? But how came it to pass, that
they tolerated Superstition so long? Must ill be done, that good may come of
it? But why would Q. Eliz. introduce Superstition again when once ejected?

Again, it is said, That the Alterations were lawful, because not against
Scripture, and in that the Subjects ought to acquiesce, not regarding the
prudence of the Changes; for which the true reasons are only guessed, but
political ones may be seen in Burnet, etc. It seems the Reformers guided
themselves, not by Religion, but Policy; an evil ingredient in Church Matters.
But neither indeed were they either political, expedient, or lawful. For
certainly it was not good policy, 1. To introduce such a division into the
Nation, which at the beginning raised Commotions and Civil Wars in several
parts of the Kingdom. 2. To introduce Antimonarchical Principles, and such
Opinions as manifestly oppose the Kingly Government: By unhinging their
Consciences, and diminishing the Power of the Clergy, [which as long as it was
incorporated into the rest of the great Body of the Church, did, and would
always have been able to maintain the Power of the King;] and setting up the
Power of the People, making them Judges of matters of Religion, thereby
exempting them from the Government of the Clergy, by whom they might be, and
were kept in Obedience to God and their Sovereign. No^ were the Alterations
lawful, because not made by the lawful Ecclesiastical Magistrates, or agreeable
to the rest of God's Church, but an erecting an Altar against an Altar; a
Sacramentary Zuinglian Table against the Altar of God in his Holy Church; and
consequently made a breach upon the Unity of the Church, and exposed those who
consent to them to the great wrath of Almighty God, and hazard of their own
Salvation.

Another Argument of the Change of the Doctrine, was the Omission of diverse
Ceremonies, very significant of, if not necessary unto, the perfection of this
Sacrament. As first, The omission of taking the Bread, or Patten, into the Hand
of the Consecrator; being in it self an application of the words of
Consecration to the matter proposed. To this the Replier says, That the Nature
of the Action implies the Ceremony of the Handling the Patten and Chalice:
Therefore more the shame of them who made it not necessary, but left it
indifferent. Then, 1. The omitting of them denies a Consecration. I say, If
that Ceremony was omitted, or not enjoined, it is very probable, that neither
was Consecration intended, or believed; which secondly, to be the intention of
the Framers of the second Liturgy is very likely, because they omitted the
words, The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ; as also because they changed the Form
into, Take and eat this, individuum vagum, something or nothing, Consecrated or
not-Consecrated. Tho indeed our Replier's Opinion seems to dislike the word
this, and thinks it should rather be these Benefits, which neither can be
eaten, nor consecrated, nor require any symbols. But he says these Ceremonies
were practiced by diverse, but he instanceth only in Bishop Jewel. Mr. Rastal's
testimony he groundlesly denies. For we know, that in the late times, till it
was re-commanded by the Rubric, few practiced it, or indeed regarded it as a
thing of Consequence. Which doubtless was the reason of that Command in the
Margin; it was recalled into use, because disused; and the Replier's Reason
insufficient.

P. 6. Gloria in Excelsis Deo, and Benedictus qui venit] are two Hymns; the
first placed in this part of the Mass (as is commonly said) by St. Telesphorus,
the Ninth Bishop of Rome from St. Peter, and was the Congratulation of the
Angels for the Lord's coming into the world; as the Benedictus was for his
Triumphant Entry into Jerusalem; both most properly applied to the beginning of
this Office, as rejoicing for his coming to be present upon the Altar. Such
universal, ancient, solemn parts of God's Service were not omitted by chance,
nor would they have been so, had they not contained an Argument against the
new-devised Absence of the Lord from his people.

The Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus] was not anciently called the Trisagium, but
Hymnus Angelicus and Victorialis. The Trisagium, was Sanctus Deus, Sanctus
fortis, Sanctus immortalis; not so much used in the Western as in the Eastern
Church, which was sung when the Priest approached the Quire, v. Menardum. To
which some add after fortis, some after immortalis, Qui Crucifixus es pro
nobis. And they (as most of the Asiaticks) who applied the Hymn to our Savior,
meant no harm; but they who attributed it to the Trinity (as the
Constantinopolitans and the West generally) condemned it. But this only obiter,
as also that concerning the Receiver's answering Amen; which as our Author
proves by irrefragable testimonies (were it worth the pains to vindicate them)
not to have been an answer to a Prayer, but an acknowledgment of our Lord's
Presence there. We will add notwithstanding what we find in St. Ambrose's
Works, l. 4. c. 5. de Sacramentis, Non otiose, cum accipis, dicis, Amen. Jam in
Spiritu confiteris quod accipias corpus Christi. Dicit Sacerdos, corpus
Christi, and tu dicis Amen, i. e. verum est. Quod confitetur lingua teneat
affectus.

The omission of these words [these Holy Mysteries] might be purely accidental]
And might not be so. For they have a signification contrary to the Opinion of
the Reformers, and all other deniers of the real presence of our Lord; nor can
they find any mystery in taking, eating, a Morsel of Bread, and a Sup of Wine,
and remembering our Lord's death and sufferings; and then by faith feeding upon
him not received: This perhaps is a mystery, for I do not understand it.

P. 7. No fault with the second Form] Faulty enough certainly, because contrary
to the former Book (which to prove was the Author's chief intention), and
consequently from that of the Church of Christ. 2. Because either nonsense, or
to most unintelligible, either what is meant by this, or by feeding on our
Savior's benefits by Faith.

P. 8. These words -- that these thy Gifts and Creatures of Bread and Wine may
be to us the Body and Blood of thy dear Son, in the Reformation of the Liturgy
were left out, because manifestly owning a real change; and were not restored
in Qu. Elizabeth's Liturgy. For She (probably) could not examine all the
Alterations by her own self; and her Bishops, being inclined to Zuinglianism,
did not willingly restore any thing against their own Opinion. Afterward
Archbishop Laud restored it in the Scottish Liturgy. For which he was severely
censured by Baily's Laudensium Autocatacrisis. This being, as he says, a
notable Argument for Transubstantiation; at least for the real presence to the
Receiver it was. Tho it is most certain, the Archbishop did not incline to
defend Transubstantiation, but only the real presence to the Receiver,
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, mis-understood by that
Puritan.

Page 10. Dishonestly or ignorantly worded.] False. They are natural
Deductions, or rather Propositions almost verbatim taken out of the
Declaration; whereas those the Replier (after his new way of answering) would
rather have them modeled into, are Nonsense.

Page 11. Calvin and Beza are mentioned, because by them were the English
Reformers much directed; tho our Author does not ty himself up to speak only of
the Church of England-men. The Author makes use of Conciliators, as being less
biassed, and therefore better disposed, to understand the truth, and obliged by
their design to a more accurate examination of the Doctrines of both parties,
and a more strict declaration of them; as being assured to be opposed by both
parties. Mr. Thorndike, he says, had in this matter opinions of his own,
agreeable neither to the Catholic, nor Church of England. The like he says of
our Author p. 1. I am afraid the fault is not in the object, but the organ; his
endeavor to blast so learned a person, shows him to have bin rightly quoted by
our Author. But why should I spend more pains to vindicate the opinions of the
Doctors of the English Church, which is sufficiently performed in the
discourse, in the History of the English Reformation from. 148, and by the
Discourse here newly printed, and the first Appendix to it.

Page 12. The quotations out of Dr. Tailor are most true; but if that Doctor
was not constant to himself or his own opinion; or if by forget fullness he
speaks one thing in one place, and otherwise ^n another; or if he did not
thoroughly understand the difference, and therefore vented many undigested and
incoherent notions, (as he seems to most men to have done;) what is that to us?
May not we make use of the good wheat, because tares are mingled with it? Yet I
do not remember that he any where sustains, (as our Replier does,) that the
Protestants may use the same terms as the Catholics, and yet in a quite
different sense. But are we come in this great question, to may use the terms
of the Church in a quite different notion than Antiquity and the Church has
and does still use them? but let them use them as they please, only they should
give notice of their meaning, and tell the world that their words are like
Jacob's, but their intention like Esau; and so plainly confess their heresy,
and not seek to coyer it with such sorry fig leaves.

Page 13. Of those (to say no worse) irreverent expressions of our receiving
the dead body and dead blood of our Lord, let the Replier and his Capernaits
enjoy the honor: we content our selves to believe and know, that our Lord (in
this Sacrament) is become to us a quickening Spirit. How our Lord's body now
glorified is received by us, as representing his death and sufferings, is
sufficiently declared in the precedent Discourse. Let it suffice here, that we
receive it by the hands of his Priests, united to him in this office, as
Himself offers it to the Father, the only true and acceptable sacrifice, in
the heavenly Temple; and whereof, we invited to God's own Table, are partakers,
as of the Sacrifice of peace and reconciliation. The same body, which was
immolated whilst upon earth, remains (tho now glorified) till the end of the
world; when they that pierced, or deny, or disbelieve his words, shall with
shame and everlasting remorse look upon him.

Page 14. There is as great a difference, (especially concerning the real
presence of our Lord) as the Catholics charge them with all. Those, truly
called, Protestants assert Consubstantiation. The Zuinglians or Sacramentaries
(to whom our Replier joins himself) no real presence of our Lord's Body at all,
but of the benefits only of his Passion. The Church of England and her Doctors
say, that the body and blood of our Lord are really, and not only by the
benefits and effects, received by us. These things are plainly said in the
former Discourse. What is the meaning of our union and communion with Christ's
glorified body, and how this is, or can be performed or imagined according to
our Repliers and the Zuinglian Scheme, I confess I cannot understand; how
according to the Catholic doctrine, is explained before. Tho I know also the
Zuinglians do pretend to such benefits, and all others, tho they do not
expressly own a real presence.

Page 16. So much for the use of the word Really.] He has blundred a long time
upon the notion of Really; how it signifies, how used, how it may be used by
the learned etc. as if the word used so many years by the Church, should stand
or fall to his maybees, and sorry conjectures: at length he says, a thing may
be really present two ways; Physically, and Morally. Where ranks he a Divine
presence, a Spirtual presence, besides many other sorts of presence? A physical
presence is a local presence.] Not, if we speak of a spiritual body; not, if we
speak of a miraculous presence, effected by the power of Almighty God. A Moral
presence is called Sacramental.] This is a confession of his own novel, and
therefore of a suspicious interpretation. The Church used sacramental for real,
as opposed to receiving by faith, as is said before. But what is it to be
morally present, if not that a moral entity, (as grace, holiness, etc,) are
present? The benefits of our Lord's Passion are present to, and enjoyed by, us;
but what is this to the real true presence of his Body? But neither are these
benefits given us in the Sacrament, but only are apprehended of us by faith. In
sum, this Replier seems to flutter, as if he were fast limed; partly, by the
constant doctrine of the Church, and a desire to seem no Zuinglian. Wherefore
he heapeth up such a parcel of insignificant words, and distinctions, that it
is lost time to examine them. There is a real presence of a body which is always
local.] This is false, as is showed before. There is also a spiritual and
virtual presence.] Distinct from real and moral? Spiritual we acknowledge as
before, but this is real, and not virtual only; and what is virtual, if not the
effects of our Lord's Passion? What are all these to the real presence of our
Lord's body, the only question?

Page 17. At last he sits down with this conclusion; that if rightly understood
it is not material what Adverbs we use; we may say it is really, essentially,
corporally present.] I had thought it had bin the custom, and necessary to
express the Church'es doctrine in her own words, and not to have used the known
words of the Church in an arbitrary signification. This is facere quidlibet ex
quolibet; or a most horrible equivocation, mental reservation, or material
elocution; with which at another time he will raise much dust; not remembering
his own doctrine, that we may put what signification we please upon usual
words; a salvo, which at once takes away all veracity, and the use of language.
I am weary of this confusion as well as himself, and therefore he sums up all
thus. The Papists always acknowledge a local presence.] The contrary whereof is
true. For the Papists never acknowledge a local presence of the body of our
Lord in the Eucharist. And we Protestants (whatever term we use) mean only a
spiritual and virtual presence, and explain the term (whatever it be we make
use of) to that effect.] Is not this making the real presence of our Lord only
figurative, and Zuinglianisme? Answ. No.

Page, 18. For we do not hold that we barely receive the effects and benefits of
Christ's body; but we hold it really present, in as much as it is really
received, and we put in actual possession of it.] Well then, the Body of our
Lord is really present and received. Answ. No. Whatever we say, we mean only a
virtual presence.] Which is indeed only a figurative presence, and is owned by
the Zuinglians and Figurativists; and which the Replier, seeking to avoid,
really condemns; as the Church has done in those two or three, who in the
course of so many centuries, set abroach such or the like opinion. Let the
Replier also take notice, that Zuinglius does not deny eating by faith, or in a
mysterious and ineffable manner, by which mist of words the Replier in vain
thinks to pass for orthodox.

Page 20. Stumble.] No, it is the Replier's cavil. The Rubric says not, as he
pretends, a true natural body cannot be etc but, it is against the truth of a
natural body to be etc, which is not very good sense, (we not knowing what a
false natural body is,) except the meaning of it be, that this Proposition, A
natural body can be in several places, is not true, which is the very same
which our Author says.

Ineffable mystery.] The Replier dare not deny that the Divines of the Church
of England, as well as those of the Catholic Church, acknowledge the presence
of our Lord in the Eucharist to be a mystery: but says, they acknowledge our
union with Christ to be a mystery; which is not opposite to the other, tho
indeed it is too mysterious to know how this Union follows from his Doctrine.

Opposite and contrad^ctory.] To persuade the Reader that our Author allows
contradictions to he true, he leaves out the word seemingly, as also. 21. which
seems to us to include a contradiction. Take notice therefore, that no
Catholic affirms, That God can make two contradictories to be true, and that
there is no contradiction in their doctrine of the Eucharist. But they believe
it to be plainly revealed by our Savior's own words, and St. Paul's. (v.
foregoing Discourse, p. 18.)

Page 21. The doctrine of the Trinity does as much violence to Philosophy as
Transubstantiation.] But Transubstantiation is a contradiction.

Page 25. Bishop Andrews's famous saying, (which the Replier would falsely
translate or interpret;) The real presence which we hold, is as real as the
corporal which the Papists hold. Which Proposition is both false in it self,
and falsely fathered upon Bishop Andrews. For they who believe only a figurative
presence, believe not so much as they who believe a real also. For it is to
say, That he who believes a real absence, believes a real presence.

Page 27. Marg. Christ was made in all things like to us.] In his Incarnation,
that we might be made like to him in his glorification. In his Incarnation a
natural body, with the like imperfections, sufferings, etc. in his
Glorification a spiritual body.

The Heavens must contain him.] The word is not contain, but receive him. That
his body, which is not now endowed with natural properties, but spiritual, is
in Heaven, no Catholic denies, for that would be against the Creed. But they
say, that he is both in Heaven, and in the Eucharist: or else what needs all
this discourse about his being in several places at once.

Page 28. Would he not wonder that St. Austin.] Our Author's quotation out of
St. Austin, de cura pro mortuis, is true and pertinent. Our Replier himself p,
29. seems not to dare affirm, that a Spirit cannot be in several places or
ubi's: but if it be a contradiction, S. Austin needs not enquire; if not a
coutradiction, neither is it for a spiritual body to be so. So that it matters
not, whether the Martyrs bodies are spoken of by St. Austin. Nor does the
quotations brought by our Replier out of St. Austin Ep. 57. ad Dardanum, nor
that of Tract. 31. in Johan. in the least contradict the doctrine of the
Church. But that in Tract. 30. in Joh. is perfectly against the Replier. For
after that S. Austin had said, that our Lord was in diverse places (in heaven
and earth) in his life time, by the omnipotence of Almighty God; he says, that
homo, indeed, secundum corpus in loco est, and de loco migrat; and cum ad alium
locum venerit, in eo loco, unde venit, non est. He speaks here of men in this
natural state, which is most true, if no miracle interposed; but concerning our
Savior he had said before, that he was whilst upon earth in heaven also by the
power of God.

Page 29. A contradiction for a body to be locally in one place, and really
received in another.] What the Author says is most true; what the Replier
substitutes, is neither the Author's, nor common, sense. But it is most
certain, that to say the real substantial body of our Lord is only in heaven,
and the same body to be really received upon earth, is as much a contradiction
as to say; the natural, essential body of our Lord is really in several places;
which is none at all.

Thus have I with very great taedium justified our Author against the Replier;
what remains, is either repetition of what is said before, or concerns the
subject of Adoration; concerning which, if it please God to continue our
strength, we shall not be long in his debt.

Corrigenda and Addenda.
Page line. 11. 20. p. 54. 72. 18. 28. to body. 28. 2. dele (in the quotation
set down above p. 50.) 34. 35. Obs. 3. p. 13. 51. 28. p. 49. 50. the places.
52. 14. before, p. 35. 54. 4. dele p. 123. 54. 23. opinion p. 69. 64. 13.
Christus non jubet. 71. 6. etc. See p. 60. 71. 19. observation p. 19. 21. cross
p. 75. 80. 17. taken passively 87. 23. quotation p. 48. 108. 19. of Suarez p.
105. 110. 24. above, p. 102. 129. 33. there confuting it 133. 1. comes more
peace 148. 13. Bishop Poinet.


