A SERMON Preached before the KING, UPON THE Nineteenth of March, 1670/1.

BY JOHN Lord Bishop of CHESTER.

Published By His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, for SA: GELLIBRAND, at the Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1671.

A SERMON Preached before the KING UPON The Nineteenth of March, 1670/1.
ECCLES. 12. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
THis Book does contain a Philosophical Disquition concerning a state of
Happiness; wherein the Wise man does particularly discuss each of those
Subjects, which according to the various opinions and tempers of men, are
believed to have any pretense to it.

The precedent Verse (as I have formerly showed) does contain the Conclusion of
the whole matter; The chief inference and result from all the former Debates
and Enquiries; wherein he asserts, That every man's true happiness does consist
in being religious, In fearing God, and keeping his Commandments.

And though this Conclusion had been sufficiently proved by great variety of
Arguments, in the foregoing Discourse; yet he thinks fit here in the close of
all, to back and enforce it with one Argument more; which above all others is
most apt to make deep impression upon the minds of men; and (if any thing can)
to persuade them to the Duties of Religion: And that is the consideration of
the last Judgment, in the words of the Text, For God shall bring, etc.

That which I intend from these words, is to prove, against the Infidels and
Scoffers of this Age, The Reasonableness and the Credibility of this great
Principle of Religion, concerning a future state of Reward and Punishment.

Though the Principal Evidence for this do depend upon Scripture, especially
the New Testament, where it is said, 2 Timothy 1, 10.
That life and immortality is brought to light by the Gospel. Yet in a point of
so great moment and consequence as this is, it is not to be imagined, that God
should have left himself without a witness to all the Nations of the World, but
that all men should be endowed, with such natural Capacities and Notions, as
being improved by Consideration, will afford sufficient evidence for the belief
of this great Fundamental Principle.

As for such men, who live under the sense of Guilt, whose Interest it is that
there should be no future account, It cannot be otherwise expected from such,
But that they should be willing to dis-believe this. And from hence it is, that
some of the Ancient Philosophers have employed their Learning and Subtilty, to
dispute themselves into some kind of doubts and uncertainty about it. And yet
the generality even of these have been forced to acknowledge it much more
probable than the contrary. And as for the Vulgar sort of people, who are
guided by the more simple dictates of Nature, These have in all Ages and
Nations submitted themselves to this Doctrine, and professed a firm belief of
it. And though Vulgar Opinion be but a very bad Topic about such matters as
may gratify men in their ease and sensual appetites; yet in such other
Opinions as are cross to their Worldly Interests, it may argue such things to
be from some natural impression upon their minds, which they must believe, and
cannot otherwise choose.

The Arguments I would make use of to this purpose, may be reduced to these
three general Heads:

1. From the suitableness of this Principle, to the most natural Notions of our
Minds.

2. The Necessity of it, to the government of men's Lives and Actions in this
World.

3. The Necessity of it, for the vindication of Divine Providence.

1. I begin with the first: The suitableness of it to the most natural Notions
of our Minds, and those kind of Impressions which belong to us, as we are
Reasonable Creatures. We see by experience, that all other things (so far as we
are able to judge) Minerals, Plants, Beasts, etc. are naturally endowed with
such Principles, as are most fit to promote the perfection of their natures in
their several Kinds. And therefore it is by no means credible, that Mankind
only, the most excellent of all the other Creatures in this visible World, for
the service of whom, so many other things seem to be designed, should have such
kind of Principles interwoven in his very Nature, as do contain in them mere
cheats and delusions. And therefore whatsoever those things are, which the
generality of Mankind, especially the most wise and the most considerate part
of them, do agree in, ought to be allowed for highly credible; otherwise it
must follow, that we are framed with such kind of Faculties, as in our most
cautious exercise of them, are more likely to seduce us, and expose us to
Error, than to direct and lead us to the Truth.

But I shall endeavor to manifest this more particularly, by these three
Considerations.

1. This Principle is most suitable to the general Apprehensions of Mankind,
concerning the nature of Good and Evil.

2. To those natural Hopes and Expectations which the generality of good men
have, concerning a state of future Happiness.

3. To those natural Fears and Expectations, which the generality of wicked men
are possessed with, concerning a future state of Punishment and Misery.

1. This Principle is most suitable to the general Apprehensions of Mankind
concerning the nature of Good and Evil. All men heretofore have agreed, that
there is such a Thing as the Law of Nature, whereby things are distinguished
into Good and Bad; according to which, the Actions of men are determined to be
either Virtuous or Vicious. And as the one of these, does in the essence of it
imply Comeliness and Reward; so does the other denote Turpitude and Punishment.
These things being implied in the very definitions of Virtue and Vice. And from
hence it will follow, That as there is some Superior Power who has put this
Law into our Natures; so will he take care to enforce the observance servance
of it, by rewarding and punishing men accordingly. This being implied in the
nature of a Law.

If there be nothing in the naked essence of things that makes them to differ,
but what does merely arise from Custom and Positive Laws; why then Custom and
Law would be able to render it a very virtuous and commendable thing for a man
to be ungrateful, a breaker of Compacts, a false Witness, a Perjured person;
which is so monstrous a Position, that the common Reason of Mankind will abhor
it upon the first proposal. Nothing is more obvious, than that there is a
universal desire amongst men, of seeming honest: The most impudent and
profligate Wretch being loath to be esteemed to be, what really he is. The very
Sin of Hypocrisy, so general amongst men, does give a large Testimony to the
Beauty of Goodness, and the Deformity of Vice. Nor is there any account to be
given, why there should be impressed upon the nature of men such a value for
the one, and dislike for the other, if there were not in the things themselves,
something suitable to those contrary affections.

We see by experience, that there is such a kind of Rest and Acquiescence in
the mind, upon the discovery of Truth, and the doing of Virtuous Actions, as
belong to natural Bodies, when they are in their proper places: Which may argue
these things to have some peculiar suitableness to the Soul of man, and that
the opposites to them do offer violence to some natural Principle belonging to
it.

2. This Principle is most suitable to those natural Hopes and Expectations
which the generality of good men have concerning a state of future Happiness.
From whence does arise that Confidence and Courage, whereby those of meanest
Quality and Abilities (if otherwise Virtuous persons) can support themselves in
their sufferings for that which is good: Which does necessarily suppose in them
a strong, and even a natural belief and persuasion of such a future state,
wherein their sufferings shall be considered and rewarded.

Besides that, there is a natural desire in all men, after a state of Happiness
and Perfection. And if we consider the utter impossibility of attaining to any
such condition in this life, This will render it highly credible, That there
must be another state wherein this Happiness is attainable: otherwise Mankind
must fail of his chief End, being by a natural Principle most strongly inclined
to such a state of Happiness as he can never attain to. As if he were purposely
framed to be tormented betwixt these two Passions, Desire, and Despair; an
earnest Propension after Happiness, and an utter incapacity of ever enjoying
it. And, which is yet more considerable, The better and the wiser any man is,
the more earnest desires and hopes has he after such a state of Happiness. And
if there be no such thing, Not only Nature, but Virtue likewise must contribute
to make men miserable; Than which, nothing can seem more unreasonable to those
who believe a Just and a Wise Providence.

3. This Principle is most suitable to those Fears and Expectations which the
generality of wicked men are possessed with, concerning a future state of
Misery. Witness those natural suggestions of Conscience in the worst of men,
that upon any wicked action (though never so private) are oftentimes startling
of them, with the apprehensions of another Judicature and Tribunal, before
which they shall be called to an account for their Closest sins. All that
secret regret, and those inward smitings, Laniatus and Ictus, which are so
often felt in the Minds of men, upon the commission of any great sin, do argue
some common intimations, even in the Light of Nature, of another Judgment after
this life, wherein they shall be accountable for such Actions, which men do not
punish or take notice of.

And these natural Fears do usually seize upon all kind of men promiscuously,
even those who are most Potent, who by their own Wills can give Laws to
Nations, and command mighty Armies, yet cannot they avoid these Checks and
Lashes of Conscience, but that they will seize upon them, and shake them, as
well as the poorest meanest Subject. Nor can such as are most obstinately
wicked, who with their utmost study and endeavor, apply themselves to the
suppressing and disbelief of these Notions, so wholly stifle them, but that
they will be continually rising up in their Minds, and pursuing of them.

Now as there is no man whatsoever, that is wholly freed from these fears of
future misery after death, so there is no other Creature but Man, that has any
fears of this kind. And if there be no real ground for this, then must it
follow, That he who framed all his other Works with such an excellent
congruity, did yet so contrive the Nature of Man, the most noble amongst them,
as to prove a needless torment and burden to it self.

If it be said, That these Notions may proceed from such Principles as men have
derived from Institution, and the Teaching of others, and do not imply a
Necessity of any such Natural impressions.

To this it may be answered, That it is sufficient to denominate them Natural
Notions, if they have such a suitableness to the Minds of men, as makes them to
be generally owned by all those who apply their thoughts to the consideration
of them. And that they have such a natural suitableness, may appear, Because
Institution cannot so easily eradicate these notions, as it can fix them. Now
if the mere teaching of others were it self sufficient to impress these
Notions, without any such peculiar congruity in the things themselves, It would
be as sufficient to deface them again: Especially considering the advantage on
this side, from that natural repugnancy we have, against any thing which brings
disquiet to our Minds. And nothing is more troublesome in this kind, than the
Fear which follows upon Guilt.

But now, though there have been several men, of no mean Abilities, in several
Ages, who have made it their business to root out of the Minds of men all such
troublesome notions about a future state, endeavoring to persuade themselves
and others, That as there was a time before they were born into the world, when
they were not; So at their dying, or going out of it, they shall exist no more.
And yet, though it be their interest to believe this, though they make it their
study and business to persuade themselves and others to it; It may reasonably
be doubted, whether ever yet, there has been so much as one person that has
hereby become absolutely free from these Fears: But for the most part, Those
who would have them esteemed vain and imaginary, without any foundation in
Nature, These are the persons who are most assaulted with them.

Hi Sunt qui trepidant and ad omniafulgere pallent. So powerful and
unconquerable are these impressions, and therefore natural.

2. The second Reason I proposed to speak to, was from the Necessity of this
Principle, to the right government of men's Lives and Actions in this world, and
the preserving of Society amongst them.

Nothing can be more evident, than that the Human Nature is so framed, as not
to be regulated and kept within due bounds, without Laws; and Laws must be
insignificant, without the Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, whereby men
may be necessitated to the observance of them. Now the temporal Rewards and
Punishments of this life, cannot be sufficient to this end; and therefore there
is a necessity, that there should be another future state of Happiness and
Misery.

All the Rewards and Punishments of this life, are to be expected either from
the Civil Magistrate, who by virtue of his Place and Calling is obliged to the
duty of distributive Justice: Or else from Divine Providence, according to that
most usual course which we find by experience to be observed by Him, in his
dispensation of these Temporal things. Now neither of these can afford
sufficient Motives for the government of Men's Lives and Actions.

1. Not all that may be expected from the Civil Magistrate, Because there may
be many good and evil Actions, which they cannot take notice of; And they can
reward and punish only such things as come under their cognizance. And if this
were the only restraint upon men, it could be no hindrance from any such
Mischief or Villainies which men had the opportunity of committing secretly. Nor
would it extend to those who had Power and Strength enough to defend themselves
from the Law, and escape the penalty of it, but that such might without any
kind of check or fear, follow the inclinations of their own Appetites. Nor
would it afford any remedy in the case of such wicked Magistrates as should
invert the order of their Institution, proving Terrors to well-doers, and
Encouragers to those that do ill.

2. Not all that may be expected from Common Providence; For though it should
be granted, that according to the most usual and general course of things, both
Virtuous and Vicious Actions are rewarded and punished in this life; yet there
may be many particular cases which this Motive would not reach unto; namely all
such cases where a man's Reason shall inform him, that there is far greater
probability of safety and advantage, by committing a sin, than can be
reasonably expected, (according to his experience of the usual course of things
in the world,) by doing his duty. Suppose the case of the three Children, or of
any others called to Martyrdom, who may be threatened with torments and death,
unless they will blaspheme God, and renounce their Religion, If it appear to
them very probable, suppose a hundred to one, that upon their refusal, Their
Persecutors will really execute what they threaten: And if on the other side it
appear very improbable, suppose ten thousand to one, that they shall not be
delivered by a Miracle: In such cases, it is not to be expected that the
consideration of the ordinary course of Providence in the dispensation of
Rewards and Punishments, should be sufficient to restrain a man from any kind
of Blasphemy or Villainy whatsoever.

But the thing I am speaking to, will more fully appear, by consideration of
those horrid Mischiefs of all kinds, that would most naturally follow from the
denial of this Doctrine.

If there be no such thing to be expected as Happiness or Misery hereafter, Why
then the only business that men are to take care of, is their present
well-being in this World; There being nothing to be counted either Good or Bad,
but in order to this. Those things which we conceive to be conducible to it,
being the only duties; and all other things that are cross to it, being the
only sins. And therefore whatever a man's Appetite shall incline him to, he
ought not to deny himself in it (be the thing what it will) so he can have it,
or do it without probable danger.

Suppose it be matter of Gain or Profit he is disposed to, if he can cheat or
steal securely, this will be so far from being a fault, that it is plainly his
duty, Because it is a proper means to promote his chief End.

And so for other cases of Anger, Hatred, Revenge, etc. according to this
Principle, a man must take the first opportunity of satisfying these Passions,
by doing any kind of mischief to the persons he is offended with, whether by
false Accusations and Perjury; or (if need be) by poisoning or stabbing of
them; provided he can do these things so, as to escape the suspicion of others,
and Humane Penalty.

Now let any man judge, what Bears, and Wolves, and Devils, men would prove to
one another, if every thing should be not only lawful, but a duty, whereby they
might gratify their impetuous Lusts, if they might either perjure themselves,
or steal, or murder, as often as they could do it safely, and get any advantage
by it.

But these things are so very obvious, and undeniable, that the most profane
Atheistical persons do own the truth of them. And upon this, they are willing
to acknowledge, That Religion and the belief of another life, is a very politic
invention, and needful for the well-governing of the world, and for the keeping
men in awe, from the doing any secret mischiefs. Which (by the way) is a
concession of no small advantage to the honor of Religion, considering that it
proceeds from the greatest professed Enemies to it. Whereby they grant, that it
is fit these things should be true, if they are not; or at least that it is
fit, that the generality of men should believe them to be true. And though they
themselves pretend to believe otherwise, yet are they not so far out of their
wits, as to be willing that those with whom they converse, their Wives, and
Children, and Servants, should be of the same opinion with them, Because then
they could have no reason to expect any safety amongst them. What security
could any man have of his Estate, or Honor, or Life, if such with whom he is
most familiar and intimate, might think themselves at liberty to do all the
secret mischiefs to them, that they had opportunity to commit?

But there is one thing more, which those, who profess to dis-believe this
Principle, should do well to consider; and that is this, That there is no
imaginable reason, why (amongst those that know them) they should pretend to
any kind of Honesty or Conscience, because they are wholly destitute of all
such motives as may be sufficient to oblige them to any thing of this nature.
But according to them, that which is called Virtue and Religion, must be one of
the most silly and useless things in the world.

As for the Principle of Honor, which some imagine may supply the room of
Conscience, This relates only to external Reputation, and the esteem which we
have amongst others; And therefore can be of no influence to restrain men from
doing any secret mischief.

From what has been said, it will follow, That those who have any regard to
their own safeties, ought to abandon all kind of society with such pernicious
persons, who according to their own Principles, must take all opportunities of
doing any mischief to others, which they are able to effect, with any advantage
to themselves.

Now if this be so (as I have proved), that the nature of man is so framed, as
not to be effectually persuaded and wrought upon, without the consideration of
such a future state. If it be necessary to put in everlasting motives, as the
Sanctions of that Law, by which the Humane Nature is to be governed; This must
render it highly credible, that there is such a state. Because it must needs be
very unworthy of God, to conceive of Him, that he has contrived the nature of
one of his best and most noble Creatures, after such a manner, as to make it
incapable of being governed without falsehood and deceit.

3. The third and last Argument I proposed to speak to, was from the necessity
of this Principle to the vindication of Divine Providence. Nothing is more
universally acknowledged, than that God is Good and Just. That well-doing shall
be rewarded, and evil Actions punished by Him. And yet we see that his
dispensations in this life are many times promiscuous and uncertain; so that a
man cannot judge of love or hatred by all that is before him. The worst men are
sometimes in the best condition. If in this life only we had hope, 1 Cor. 15.
19.
we should be of all men the most miserable, says the Apostle, speaking
concerning those primitive times of Persecution, when the better any man was,
the more was he exposed to sufferings.

Now the greater Uncertainty there is as to the present Affairs in this world,
By so much greater is the Certainty of a future Judgment.

What could be a greater disparagement to Divine Providence, than to permit the
Calamities and Sufferings which good men undergo in this world, many times upon
the account of Religion, to pass unrewarded; and the many Mischiefs and
Prophanations, which wicked men take the advantage of committing, by their
Greatness and Prosperity in this world, to go unpunished?

What great glory would it be, to preside over this Material World, Stars and
Meteors, Sea and Land, Plants and Beasts, to put these things into such a
regular course, as may be suitable to their natures, and the operations for
which they are designed; and in the mean space to have no proportionable
regard, either for those that reverence the Deity, or those who contemn Him?

It Is very well said to this purpose by a late Author, Amyraldus.
That not to conduct the course of Nature in a due manner, might speak some
defect of Wisdom in God: but not to compensate Virtue and Vice, besides the
defect of wisdom, in not adjusting things suitably to their qualifications, but
crosly coupling Prosperity with Vice, and Misery with Virtue, would argue too
great a defect of Goodness and of Justice. And perhaps it would not be less
expedient (says he) with Epicurus, to deny all Providence, than to ascribe to
it such defects. It being less unworthy of the Divine Nature, to neglect the
Universe altogether, than to administer Human Affairs with so much Injustice
and Irregularity.

And therefore it is necessary for the vindication of Divine Providence, that
there should be a future state and day of Account, wherein every man shall be
forced to acknowledge, that verily there is a reward for the righteous; Psalm,
58, 11.
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.

I crave leave for a word of Application, and I have done. If this be so, it
will concern us then to enquire,

1. Whether we do in good earnest believe this, That there shall be a future
state of Reward and Punishment, according as men's Lives and Actions have been
in this world. If not, why do we profess our selves to be Christians? Why do we
not renounce the Articles of our Creed? Nay, why do we pretend to any Religion?
Nothing can be more false and unworthy, than in a solemn and religious manner
to own that in our outward Profession, which we do inwardly dis-believe and
deny.

2. Do we at any time seriously consider this? and revolve upon it in our
minds? Do we bethink our selves, what our own condition is like to be at that
time, what preparations we have made for it, what grounds we have for hope?
There cannot possibly be any greater stupidity, than for a man to be slight and
careless in a business of so great moment. It Is the want of believing and
considering this, that is the chief cause of all the viciousness and disorder
in the world.

3. What impression does the belief and consideration of this make upon our
hearts and lives? Does it stir up in us, vebement desires, and carefulness of
mind in preparing for that time? If a man were to be tried for his life at the
next Assizes, How would his thoughts be taken up about his defense, what answer
he should make, what the main plea is which he should insist upon, by what
evidence it might be strengthened and cleared up? He would as soon forget to eat
his meat, or to go to bed, as to let a business of this nature slip out of his
mind.

There is nothing more hard to be restrained, than the Impetuous and wild
Exorbitances of Youth; And yet such persons would not, durst not indulge
themselves, according to the ways of their own hearts, and the sight of their
eyes; If they did really believe and consider, that for all these things God
would bring them to judgment. Eccles. 11. 9.


The business of Religion, must therefore be above all other things of greatest
consequence to us, because it is the only means to secure us, as to our future
conditions. The affairs of this life are but of short continuance, and full of
uncertainty: And therefore it is not much material what a man's condition may be
in that respect. But there is another state and time which will more nearly
concern our care; and that is the great day of Account. And till a man has in
some measure provided for this, he cannot live comfortably, or sleep quietly,
or have any solid peace in his mind; but must upon every serious reflection be
continually haunted with frightful apprehensions about his everlasting
condition.

It Is scarce credible that any man should be so sottish, as to think, he shall
escape dying: and when we do come to depart out of this world, It will then be
no advantage to us, that we have had Riches, or Honor, or Power. These things
will then vanish away, as to our Possession of them; and the Remembrance of
them may prove a torment to our thoughts, rather than a comfort; especially if
we have reason to suspect, that these things were our portion in this life, and
may be reckoned upon as our good things which we have had already. Certain it
is, that they will render our Accounts the more difficult: For to whom much is
given, of them much shall be required. We must be answerable not only for our
doings, but for the fruit of our doings. Jet. 17. 10.
All the sins, or evil consequences which have been occasioned by our
Miscarriages, shall be set upon our score.

And if these things be so, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12.
What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness,
looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God. If any thing can
prevail with men to live soberly, Tit. 2. 12. 13
righteously, and godly in this present world, It must be from the
consideration of that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the Great God, our
Savior Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

