THE Son of Perdition REVEALED,

By the brightness and light of the Son of God in his Saints: And the Preachers
of his Light within, and their Doctrines and Principles (concerning the
mysteries of God and the weighty things of Salvation, Vindicated and Cleared,
from the Reproache^ Slanders and Calumnies cast upon them by the spirit of
Satan and Antichrist, which has largely appeared in one Joseph Wright, (who
esteems himself one appointed by the Flock of Christ for a Defense of the Truth
of the Gospel) as is apparent in his Book entitled A Testimony for the Son of
man and against the Son of perdition; etc. which he has given forth against
them that preach the Light within.

But herein his Pride, Insolency and Impudency are Reproved, and his bundle of
Errors, Blasphemies Confusions and Slanders (in his book against the Light and
the Children of it) Discovered.

And the eternal Truth in its own clearness (touching many weighty Principles
of the True Religion) made manifest, for the satisfaction of the people, and of
all that are doubtful.

By the Light of the Son of God in his Servants, Geo. Whitehead and Edw.
Buroughs.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1661.

A Table of the Chief Heads of the following Discourse.
1 COncerning the Light within, Christ's coming in the flesh, and dying for all
men. 2 Concerning the Nature and State of Christ, of the soul of man, and of
the Saints partaking of the Divine Nature. 3 Concerning the Resurrection from
the dead. 4 Concerning that Light in the Consciences of people, which the
Preachers of the Light within appeal to, and the subject of their Exhortations
by which men are converted and edified. 5 Concerning Ordinances. 6 Concerning
Quaking and Trembling. 7 Concerning the sufficiency of the Light, and the
Anointing within, to teach all that do believe. 8 Concerning meeting together,
and silent waiting upon the Lord, with somewhat about Back-sliders, and the
spirit that acts them. 9 Concerning Humility and Unity. 10 Concerning
destroying the Whore, discovering secrets and sufferings, etc. 11 Concerning
the Word of God, and the Scriptures, and the Word and the Writings truly
distinguished. 12 Concerning the Infallible Teacher, and that it is the Spirit
of God that gave forth the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures.
The Epistle to the Reader.
FOR as much as it has pleased the God of Truth and Righteousness, most
gloriously to appear in these last days in the hearts of his people, according
to his promises of old, who has said, That he would exalt his Mountain upon
the top of all Mountains, and his House should be established, and his Kingdom
should be set up spiritually in the Hearts of the Children of men; and he has
promised to dwell in men, and to walk in them, and write his Law in their
Hearts, and put his Spirit within them, and they should be his People, and he
would be their God, and he alone would be their Teacher and Comforter, and his
Day Star should arise in their Hearts, and the Light of his Glorious Gospel
should shine in their Consciences.

These things has the Lord promised, and he is a fulfilling of them in these
our days in and amongst his People, Blessed be his Name for ever, for he has
opened the eyes of the blind and caused them to see, and Light is risen out of
obscurity, and darkness is passing away, and the Light of the Day, even of the
Day of God is approached nigh unto his People, and Life and Immortality has he
brought to Light in his People, by the Light of his Glorious Gospel which
shines in their Hearts; and they are become the Temple of the Holy One, and his
Habitation is with them, and his Promises are fulfilled and fulfilling
abundantly this Day; our Eyes have seen, our Ears have heard, and we have
tasted of the Word of Life which is revealed in us, and these things we cannot
but bear witness of, and testify concerning them unto all the world that they
may partake with us of that heavenly virtue, and be satisfied therewith for
evermore, through faith in Christ Jesus, and receiving of him to dwell in them,
that they may not be reprobates, for all in whom Christ is not, are reprobates,
as it is written in the Scriptures of Truth.

But notwithstanding, though the Lord has promised these things, and is now
fulfilling of them amongst us to his Glory and Honor: yet that adversary the
Devil and Satan, does not cease to make opposition against this good work of
the Lord, if it were possible to prevent and stop the purpose of the Almighty
in his proceedings of fulfilling his promises unto his people; and it is not
unknown through these parts of the world, how many and diverse kinds of
oppositions the Devil has made through his Children against the Work of God;
What woeful Persecution of these late rears has been brought forth upon the
Innocent people in whom the Lord is fulfilling his Promises? What cruelty
exercised? What reproaches and slanders uttered? And what obstructions and
oppositions has been made of these late years against an Innocent people, it is
hard to be expressed; every City and Town and Country must bear witness of that
cruel Persecution and hard dealing that has been exercised upon the Innocent
people, and for no other end, but for Truth and Righteousness fake, and from
no other cause, but from the enmity of the seed of Wickedness in the ungodly
world, for the end to oppose and stop the work of the Lord, and these things
are so, God, and Angels, and Saints, do bear witness.

And also the opposition has been great against the work of the Lord, not
only by outward open opposition and persecution through profane and cruel
men, but also by the Professors of Religion of our age, even of such as have
cried, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we, and such as have
professed Ordinances, Churches and Fellowships, and that have thought
themselves to be men of Wisdom and Conscience, even such as these have lift up
their hands against the Lords Work, and have consulted and imagined mischief
against the Lords interprize; for as the profane World have persecuted by
cruel reproaches and abuses, Imprisonments and unjust dealing as aforesaid; so
also have the professors and wise men of this Generation Preached, and Prayed,
and written Books, and published their principal Reasons and Arguments against
the Way of the Lord, and all this in the opposition to the Work of the Lord; an
evidence hereof is manifested by Joseph Wright in his Testimony for the Son of
Man, (so called) in which Book he has fully opposed and gain said the Truth
of the Gospel, and the People bearing witness thereunto, amongst whom the Work
of the Lord is blessed and prosperous, yet has he partly out of Ignorance, and
partly out of malice, set himself in opposition against the work of the Lord,
and against his Truth and people as aforesaid.

And his said Book occasionally coming to my hand by a Friend of mine, in the
fourth month last as I remember, and I looked into the Book and read some part
of it over, and did fully observe the current of the matter contained in it,
and the drift and intent of the Spirit of the Author, and in my Meditations
upon the same I found his work composed and made up of such kind of ingredients
as these following.

First, Ignorance. Secondly, Malice. Thirdly, Lies and Slanders. Fourthly,
Contradictions. And fifthly, Downright opposition to the Truth.

I say, a certain composition I found in his Book made up of all these
mixtures, which he had published to the world.

1 His Ignorance was apparent to me, in as much as he had in some things
mistaken, and placed such and such things upon Account against us ignorantly,
and then seemed to confute them, and give his Judgment against us thereupon,
and this merely upon mistake through Ignorance, fasly supposing we held such a
thing, which indeed we held not, and so flying out against us in Judgment upon
his ignorance and mistakes.

2 His Malice was apparent, in as much as he had slandered us, and belied us
without good Ground and Cause at all, having perverted our words and meaning in
many things, and placed things against us, deeply charging of us without any
sound Reason at all rendered by him, but merely (as to me does appear) upon his
own malice and hatred, purposely to render us odious to the World and to our
enemies, which must needs be out of malice and emnity, and not out of love and
Gentleness to inform us better, and convert us if we had been in error; But I
found him to be so far from that Spirit of love and good will toward us, that
he has taken every occasion he could, and also made occasions falsely, to
traduce us and to reproach us in the sight of our Enemies, as it were on
purpose to enrage the Spirit of the ungodly world to destroy us.

3 His lies and slanders were apparent in such an abundant manner throughout
his Book, that every page almost had some contained, even as great reproaches
and accusations as well could be, as if we were Heretics, deniers of Christ,
having familiar Spirits, Witches and what not; Such kind of lies and slanders
as these I found a very great number in his Book; it is true, I have not
accounted them in particular, but made a guess at the whole sum, which I
suppose may be above 200 of Lies, Slanders, Callumnies, falsereproaches,
Back-bitings, Bitter words and such like.

4 His Contradictions were apparent throughout his book in diverse particulars,
sometimes saying thus and so, and sometimes quite contrary, sometimes accusing
us of one occasion, and some time accusing us of a contrary; And thus his
contradictions were made manifest, as in our Answer is at large discovered, as
the Reader may observe.

5 His downright opposition to the Truth was apparent, in as much as
throughout his book he has opposed the very Truth of the Gospel, as
particularly the Light of Christ which every man in the World is enlightened
withal; and concerning Quaking and Trembling, and concerning the anointing and
the sufficiency of its Teaching, and concerning destroying the Whore, the Word
of God and Scriptures; all these things cum multis aliis, etc. he has opposed
and gainsayed directly or indirectly; and thus as is made manifest in this
following Answer, his whole work is compounded of such mixtures and ingredients
as aforesaid, as every impartial man may judge.

Well, upon my further Considerations of his Book, I found he had subtly
directed the current of his matter so as it might be taken notice of to be an
eminent Work, as he thought, and yet not so to be taken notice of, as if he had
directed it immediately is opposition to us called Quakers; for I found not that
name once mentioned in all his Book, and yet implicitly he had directed it to
us, for his intent was I discovered to be against us, by that word so often
scornfully rehearsed To the Preachers of and to the Light within all men, etc.
And by diverse other things I found that his Book was intendedly against us; and
also that his said Book well deserved an Answer from us, that the malicious
intent thereof might be diverted, though many other Considerations presented
themselves in my mind at my first looking into his work, as 1. The
unreasonablenesse of the time of its bringing forth and publication to the
world, (thought I) is this a time and fit season for us and them to fall into
contention one with another, and to oppose each other, to the end, to
discourage and dishearten each other in the sight of our public Enemies, who
stands ready themselves to devour us both, and by all means seeks occasions
against us, and to ruin us both, if it were possible, who does account us as
two parties of their greatest adversaries, and are persecuting and imprisoning
of us as one in opposition to them, and would be glad to see us destroyed; and
it being thus with both us and the Baptists (so called) thought I again how
unseasonable this man's work is at this day, to fall to reproach us and traduce
us in the fight of our Enemies, thus opposing of us with tooth and nail, giving
thereby occasion both to his and our enemies to mock at us and laugh us to
scorn, rejoicing to see us whom they count their Enemies falling together by
the ears, and as it were tearing one another; this I knew would be a great
occasion to them against us both in such a season as this, when as it would
have been more meet to have encouraged one another and strengthened one another
in the way of Truth and Righteousness, and to have been helpful to one
another in our afflictions and sufferings, esp^cially in the things wherein we
do agree, against the common open profaneness, and idolatry, and persecution
which abounds at this day in the world, that we might have been a rejoicing one
to another as Brethren in Truth, seeing we are both a suffering People at this
day, and accounted Brethren by our Enemies, rather then a cause of affliction
and grief, and greater tribulation one to another, as this same J. W. had
endeavored in his Book to be the occasion of; this and such like was my
considerations, upon which I concluded the unseasonablenesse of the time of
publication of his Book, and the folly and weakness of its Publisher.

2. I considered the error and ignorance of the man, in respect of the subject
of his matter as stated by him and prosecuted, which is this, against and in
opposition to the Light within, many times rehearsed oppositely and scornfully
to the Preachers of and to the L^ght within all men, making this the subject
matter of his opposition, as if it were the greatest heresy that could be,
that any should preach up a Light within, and this I found he had set himself
to oppose with might and main; and this I found to be the principal Subject of
his Treatise, because of which I considered the great ignorance of this man
that would appear upon such a subject in such great opposition against it,
whenas no one Truth is more full and clear throughout the whole Scriptures,
then this Doctrine of the Light within, both in the old Testament and the new;
as first of all, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 14. where Moses the servant of God did preach
to a^l Israel in general, both good and bad, the word that was nigh them in
their hearts, and be exhorted them to bear that word that was within them, and
to do it, and this word was in every one of them, to which Moses did exhort
them to hear it and obey it and thus its manifest that Moses was a Preacher of
the word of God, and his light within men.

Again Jer. 31. God promised to make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, I
will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and they
shall know Me (says the Lord) from the least of them to the greatest, and they
shall need no more, every man to teach his Neighbor, but the Law in their
inward parts, and his Spirit within them should teach them; And thus it is
plain, the Prophet Jeremiah was sent with a Message of God, to Preach the
Promise (to wit) the Spirit of God put in the inward parts, and his Law written
in their Hearts; and thus was he a Preacher of the Light and Law of God within
men; And David said, Thy Law is within my Heart, Psalm. 49. Again Luke 17.20,
21. When they asked Jesus Christ concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, he said, The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you; and in diverse other places his Parrables
signified, That the loast Groat was within, and that the Pearl was within, and
that the Seed of the Kingdom of God was sown in their Hearts, Mat. 13.19. and
Romans 10.18. By all which and many other places it is an evident truth, that
Jesus Christ and the Apostle Paul were Preachers of the Kingdom of Heaven
within men, and of the Seed of the Kingdom which was sown in their Hearts, and
of the Word of God within in the Heart; and so it may be said, Christ was a
Preacher of Light within, for he told them of his Word abiding within them,
John 5.38. and they had not the love of God in them, 42. verse. John 14.20. And
Christ said, I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you, and if my words
abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will; and thus it is as clear as the Sun at
noon day, that Christ was a Preacher of the Spirit, and of the Light, and of
the Word, and of the love of God within men.

Again, the Apostles preached the same, 2 Cor. 13. Chap. and the fifth, Jesus
Christ is in you says the Apostle except you be reprobates and Phil. 2.13. It
is God that works in you, said the Apostle, and Col. 3.16. Let the word of
Christ dwell in you, and 1 John 2.14. And the word of God abides in you, and
verse 24. Let that abide in you which you have heard from the beginning, and
Ephesians 3.20. according to the power that works in us, and 2 Timothy 1, 14. The
Holy Ghost which dwells in us, and 1 John 4.12. God dwells in us, and his
love is perfected in us; and thus throughout the whole current of Scripture I
might bring multitudes of proofs; the Apostles were Ministers and Preachers of
the Light within, the word of God within, the Love of God within, the Holy
Ghost within, Christ within, yea and God within the Saints; yea, if this will
not serve to prove that it is the Ministry of Christ Jesus to preach the light
and word of God within men, I should yet bring many more proofs out of the
Scriptures to manifest that Christ and his Apostles preached the Light within
men, not only in the Saints but in unbelievers; take one Scripture more, 2
Cor. 4.6. The Light has shined in our hearts to give us the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God; and thus it is clearly proved out of the
Scriptures against J. W. that the Prophets Christ and the Apostles were
Preachers of the Light and Truth and Spirit within; And when I considered at
large this same subject of his whole discourse, it appeared somewhat strange to
me, that any reasonable man should draw up such a Subject to make a whole Book
of opposition against it, like as it he had never read Scriptures, seeing he
had thus stated his matter intendedly against us called Quakers, thinking by
steering such a course be should confute us in some errors, whenas its fully
manifest that he has steered his course in direct opposition to the Scriptures
and the Truth therein contained; and therefore we may conclude of his ignorance
and error, who has thus justified the Truth of our Principles and Doctrines
while he has thought to oppose them and confute them as errors, and so
overthrown himself.

3, I considered concerning returning an Answer to his Book, and I found it
meet that it should be answered, for the end to clear the way of Truth from his
false and foul aspersions, which were made up by whole groces in his Book, and
also least he should glory and vaunt himself in his solly, as if none were able
to answer him, nor to detect him of falsehood, though I was not hasty in falling
aboard upon him, and that for diverse reasons. First, because my occasions were
then very many and weighty, and that of far greater moment to be prosecuted
then to leave them for answering of him. 2. Because I saw no great occasion of
present have to fall upon him and to detect his unworthy work, for as to my own
particular I could have let his Book have passed without an Answer, and all his
Lies, and Calumnies, and Falsehoods passed without hurt to our particulars, for
we are satisfied in the Truth of our way thousands of us blessed be God,
notwithstanding all men's opposition. 3. Because I would not willingly and
hastily have given our public enemies occasion to mock and scorn at us while
they beheld us as it were tearing one another, and contending one against
another, to the weakening of our selves and strengthening of them; nor should I
but upon this occasion have appeared public in this manner against any
suffering people, for it has ever been my quality to comfort the afflicted and
sufferers rather then to add affliction to them; but upon this occasion, I am
forced to with-stand the insolency of Io. Wright, to reprove his lies and
slanders, and that publicly to the view of the world, and it could not well be
avoided, so upon these reasons with some others the Book lay by me diverse
weeks, till at last I have taken it under hand, for I have heard a report of
some boasting amongst J.W. his Brethren, as if his Book could not be answered,
but he had confuted us so, and so highly, unanswerably, and its said by some
that he was a whole year or more in bringing forth the said Book, whereby it is
proved a Monster, and being brought forth its now imperfect and effects not the
end propounded by its Author; well upon these reasons at my first spare
opportunity I have looked through his Book, and a dear friend of mine while I
was absent hence in the work of the Lord elsewhere, begun the work for me, and
has answered a part of it, and it is published with no other end nor intent
but only to discover the Truth and to reprove falsehood, and if it prove
effectual to any as to inform them to a distinguishment between Truth and
Error, to discern the difference between the one and the other, and if any be
edified in the Truth hereby, I have my end and desire, and if it shall work
(through the Spirit of God) any conviction in the heart of our adversaries, and
if Io. Wright shall see what he has done, and repent, my end is fulfilled, but
if not I am satisfied in what I have done, finding it to be my duty to send
forth this Answer in pursuit of, and to detect J.W. his slanders and
reproaches, errors and contradictions.

And now I must commit the serious Reader to the grace of God, and to the
Spirit of sound Judgment, that thereby he may read and weigh the one and the
other, and that he may justly Judge by the rule of equity and Scripture proof,
the difference of the controversy, and the Right, Truth, and Justice of the
one, and the error and falsity of the other, that he may be edified in this
matter, for the end that he may follow Truth and Righteousness as it is
discovered to him, and deny deceit and falsehood where ever he shall meet with
it; And thus I shall leave the Reader to the serious view of the whole matter,
as hereafter it follows.

London the 9th. day of 7th. month 1661. Being a true friend to all that love
Truth and Righteousness, and one that loves his Enemies. Edward Buroughs.

A Preface. To the People called Anabaptists who are herein concerned, for the
clearing of the Truth to them and others who scruple concerning it or the Light
of it within.
FRIENDS,
WHat a sad thing is it, that you that profess the Name of Christ and to be his
Flock, should be so unwise, and show your selves so indiscreet and irrational,
as to discover such a spirit of bitterness and enmity (especially in this day
of Trial both of you and us) against such as are conscientious toward God in
what he has made known (though in Judgment differing from you) as here that
spirit of enmity and malice is plainly discovered, in what has proceeded from
it in this Book, called, A Testimony for the Son of Man, etc. Subscribed by one
Joseph Wright, who it appears, is accounted no mean man amongst you, for he
accounts himself so nearly related to you, whom he calls The beloved Flock of
Christ, (who are the People called Anabaptists which he intends) that he says,
he has been appointed by many of you (though unworthy) for a defense of that
Truth of the Gospel which you profess; but if you were in the Truth of the
Gospel, you would not have appointed such a Reviler and Insolent man for a
defense of it, nor of you in it, as this Jos. Wright has clearly discovered he
is, as is clearly manifest in his Reviling, Reproaching and Slandering such as
he calls Preachers of and to the Light within all men, whom his Book is
contrived against (he intending the suffering People called Quakers, who own
and walk in the Light of Christ in them) against which Light he has also so
greatly manisted his enmity, as if he could not contain his Malice, nor these
many sad Aspersions and black revilings in his Book, which he has produced
from the Spirit of Antichrist and Blasphemy in him; and though he has appeared
in his Pride, Presumption, and boasting Spirit, and as one appointed by you for
an eminent defender of your way, as if he were some wonderful Champion and
great Warrior, yet by the Light which he has reproached is he discovered, and
his weakness and folly made manifest, and he seen to be as feeble a Warrior
and Child of Babylon as ever formed a Weapon, or lifted up a hand (so publicly
as he has done) against the Israel of God; and if you were in Gods fear and
true humility, and well considered your own state, and the state of such as are
reviled by this your Defender, you would not own nor suffer such Babylonish
Bratts, and dirty frothy stuff to proceed from amongst you, as this said Book
of J. Wrights, considering these things.

First, These are Suffering times, which both you and we are in, and how
especially we are liable to suffer for our Consciences, in our obeying that
Testimony committed to us, not only by men's reproaches, but also by Acts of
cruelty and Persecution inflicted upon us, because we cannot deny the Lord in
what we are persuaded he requires of us.

2. Such Revilings and Reproaches as J. Wright has spread forth against us in
the sight of our Persecutors, tend rather to add affl^ction to us, and to stir
up our Persecutors in cruelty against us then otherwise; Seeing that he has so
much accused and reviled us under the names of workers of Wickedness,
forerunners of the man of Sin, Liars, Blasphemers, Deluders, with many more
reviling names, which falsely and unjustly he has cast upon us, chiefly for
Preaching up the Law and Light within men, which is the Light of Christ; and in
all his matter there is no just evidence against us, wherein he has manifested
himself as a partaker with the persecuting Generation who smite against us with
the fist of wickedness, which his work tends to encourage and strengthen, whilst
he is smiting with the tongue like the wicked (who shoot their Arrows against
the Righteous) and casting out his mire and dirt upon such as fear the Lord and
walk in his Light.

Thirdly, If you truly weighed your own state, and minded the rule of equity in
your own Consciences, To do to others as you would be done by, you would not
spread abroad such reviling Books and bundles of confusion as tend to cause
others to suffer who are concientious toward God in what they know, knowing
that in these times, if you be true to your own Principles, you are liable to
suffer also for your Consciences, by such as would assume to themselves a power
to be Judges in matters of Conscience and Religion, though they dare not own
themselves to be infallible in their Judgments notwithstanding.

Fourthly, Considering how many have opened their Mouths, and published their
Books and Pamphlets against us, and how little all their work has effected or
brought forth against us, and how we have in the testimony of a good Conscience
been made to trample upon and discover our enemies works, which have so often
been brought to naught; this might have hindered this untimely and monstrous
birth of J. VV's from coming abroad, which though he has been a long time a
bringing it forth, it must be turned back into the pit of Darkness and belly of
Confusion, where it was conceived, though it appears he was so conceited in his
work, and impudency and pride was so high in him, that he thought to prevail
more then the rest of his Predecessors, who were of the Dragons Army, that have
opposed the Truth before him, and that his work would have been more effectual
then any besides, that has been brought forth against us; but herein is he and
all that believe him and his work deceived, for both the weakness, confusion
and falsehood of his matter is easy to see by any unprejudiced persons who have
but common sense and reason; for he has not only, openly and falsely reviled
us, whom the Lord has delivered out of darkness into his Light and Life made
manifest in us, but also he has set himself to oppose and revile the Light of
Christ in all men, and has done what in him lies, to keep all people at a
distance from Christ who is the true Light, as one not willing that Christ
should have any room to dwell, either in his people or in any upon earth; for
this Jos. Wright who says he has been appointed by many of you for a defense
etc. in his Epistle to you (whom he calls the beloved flock of Jesus Christ) he
writes To all them that call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, who sits
at the right hand of God the Father in the Heavens, out of every man on earth,
(he says) and to such wishes blessings, riches of grace, etc. wherein you
that own this J. W. as a defense of Truth may note first how absolutely he has
set himself against Christ and the Truth, who herein has gone about to limit
or divide the Holy One from his People and members, (as also further appears in
his following matter) and whose Doctrine tends to keep all out of the Faith of
the true Church, and so in the reprobate state, contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, who says, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the
Faith, prove your own selves, know you not your own selves how that Jesus
Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates; so that he that knows not that Jesus
Christ in him is out of the Faith, and so a reprobate, and much more he that
preaches to keep all from knowing Jesus Christ in them while on earth. 2. And
in that J. W. has accounted Christ as he is at the right hand of God the
Father, not to be in any man, but out of every man upon earth, he has gone
about to separate the Saints from the right hand of God, and so has discovered
himself both ignorant of Christ and of the Fathers right hand, and of the
Kingdom of Heaven in the Saints; for they that are come to Christ, and to know
him in them, they are come to the Fathers right hand, and being Christ's sheep
none shall pluck them out of his Fathers hands. 3. Also about this thing has
J. W. confuted himself, for he has acknowledged that blessings, glory, and
praises are to be ascribed unto the only wise God throughout all ages in the
Churches, by his only Son Jesus Christ, which plainly implies that then Jesus
Christ must be in the Churches, or how should praises be given by him in the
Churches to the only wise God, or how should any glorify or praise the only
wise God by Jesus Christ unless he be in them. Also after this J. W. has thus
told people of Jesus Christ, being out of every man on earth, he has set
himself to oppose the light of Christ (in all men) who is the true light that
enlightens every man that comes into the World.

For in his Epistle, he tells of giving you a description of one (viz. error
and delusion) that is most dangerous, and that which he has chiefly written
against, is Preaching the Law and Light within, and also accounts it a sad
Principle of the Spirit of Antichrist, which now (he says) runns about
preaching up the Law or Light within; as also he accounts this Doctrine, Gross
Darkness, and so warns you against it: As also he says, There has risen up a
most pernicious stratagem of Satan, whereby to delude the Children of God and
men, it is a Teaching up the Light within all men, and he calls them that are
in unity with that Principle, the Messengers of Antichrist, and that a Doctrine
of Antichrist, and a device of Satan, and charge us with detestable
blasphemies about it, etc.

So that this Jospeh Wright, has not only showed himself against Christ's
being in his People, but also he has sought to keep men from his Light in
them, as one that would shut up the Kingdom of God against men, that they might
not enter into it; and so he has uttered forth his Rage and Blasphemy against
the Light of Christ, and his Law in men, who is come a Light into the world,
that whosoever believes in him, may not perish but have eternal life, whose
Law and Light it is that we Preach; and Christ told the Pharisees, That the
Kingdom of God was within them, Luke 17. Though they were wicked men, and
sought to shut up the Kingdom of God against others, as this J. VV. has done,
in his foaming out his own shame, and uttering his rage and folly against the
Light within, so that he might as well have reviled Christ, and said, that he
Preached up a delusion, and a most pernicious stratagem of Satan, and a device
of Satan, as so charge us for Preaching those things that are agreeable to the
Doctrine of Christ; And yet note that notwithstanding all this man's raging
against this Doctrine of the light within all men, and his reviling it as
delusion, and a most pernicious stratagem of Satan, and gross darkness, he
has (in page 165) distinguished the Light which is in us and all men, from the
spirit of darkness, as accusing our speaking to be not from the Light within
all men, nor from the light within our selves, but from the spirit of Darkness,
etc. Which though he has falsely accused our speaking, yet he has hereby truly
Employed, that there is a light in us, and all men that is opposite or contra-to
the spirit of Darkness; and thus he bewrayes his own confusion and folly about
the Light of Christ in all men, one while to rail so bitterly against it and
the Doctrine of it, as the most pernicious delusion, stratagem of Satan, and
gross darkness; another while so intimately to grant to a light within all men
(which leads to speak truth) as opposite to the spirit of Darkness; As also in
page 16, 20.28, 29.41. This Joseph Wright says, That the Light within, is no
other then the work of the Law written in the hearts of the Gentiles, Romans
2.14, 15. And then he says, It is evident that these Preachers, are Preachers
of the Law, not of the Gospel, etc. See what gross darkness and confusion this
man is in, who cannot distinguish between the Law of God within and the work of
it, counting the Law or light within the work of the Law, like as if he had
said, that the Law of God within is the work of the Law within, when as the
work of the Law is that which is effected by the Law, as distinct from the Law
it self, as much as a conviction or convincement is distinct from that which
convinces; and we in owning the Law of God and its work within, do not deny
the Gospel nor Christ as we are accused, no more then the Apostle did, when he
went not about to make void the Law, but to establish it, as it was to be
obeyed and fulfilled in the Faith of Christ, in whose hand is the Righteous
Law, that manifests sin, and witnesses against it, and this was the Covenant
that God promised, to put his Laws in the mind, and write them in the hearts,
Heb. ^. And said the Apostle, Romans 2.13, 14. For not the hearers of the Law are
just before God, but the doers shall be justified; and this he brings as his
reason; For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves,
which show the work of the law written in their hearts, etc. Herein he does not
go about to destroy the Light or Law, or the work of it within, nor to render
it a delusion, nor a sad Principle of Antichrist, nor a most pernicious
stratagem of Satan (as J. W. has done) but owns and vindicates it, and those
that through Faith attained unto its righteousness, which the Jews by works out
of the Faith did not. So let any Rational or Indifferent man Judge, whether
this J. VV. has not in effect accused the Apostle Paul, and the Prophet
Jeremiah and others, with Preaching up a most dangerous delusion, a sad
Principle of Antichrist, gross Darkness, and a most pernicious stratagem of
Satan, etc. seeing that he has thus reviled the Law and light within, and the
work of it in the heart [mentioned in Romans 2 15.] under these terms; and thus
has he manifested the Malice and Rancor of his Imbittered Spirit against the
light and Law of Christ, and work of it in the Hearts, and so has showed
himself an enemy to the Covenant of God, which was to Jews and Gentiles, Isa.
42.6. Jer. 31. and so instead of giving a testimony against the Son of
Perdition, he has absolutely appeared in his work; and after his so much
Blasphemy against the light in all men, and our Preaching of it up, he is made
to confess to the light in us and all men, as a differing thing from the spirit
of Darkness, [as in page 165.] It should seem that when he writ that, he had
forgotten his former revilings against the light in all men.

Thus you who are called Anabaptists, may see the Bruitishnesse and Confusion
of this unworthy man, who has been appointed by many of you for a defense, as
he says; and what credit or profit will this work be unto you, though he set
up himself as a Teacher of the Churches of Christ; and in the same Epistle that
he writes to those he calls the Beloved Flock of Christ, that are in the Faith
and Fellowship of him, according to his Glorious Gospel, when he has bidden
them beware of hearkening to Preachers up of the light, He says, But if you
shall not be warned, I have as to this done my duty, your blood will lie upon
your own heads.

So you may here see what a Teacher of the beloved Flock of Christ (that are in
the Faith and Fellowship of him) this Joseph Wright is, to lay the same words
upon them that concerned the Jews that blasphemed, and opposed themselves
against the Truth when Paul spoke to them, Acts 18.6. As if the beloved Flock
of Christ that are in the faith had not yet taken warning, but might be guilty
of their own blood, as Joseph Wrights words do imply; and yet this Flock is
both in the Fellowship and Faith of Christ; was there ever such absurdity and
confusion as this!

And further, you may take notice, how that after Joseph Wright has so much
reviled and blasphemed the light within, he has willingly manifested himself
an open enemy to the light and the Doctrine of it, where, in his Epistle to the
Reader, he has laid down these words, viz. Although we have both preached and
printed against this device of Satan, and have born witness very much against
this delusion, yet so simple are some, both People and Teachers as to rank us
with them, as copartners and such as are espoused to that Doctrine which
teaches up the law or light within all men, etc. but the Lord knows it, and so
shall you one day, if you shall not believe it now, that to entertain such a
Doctrine would be to commit a Rape, not only upon our very consciences, but
also upon our meanest principles; and it is no small grief to us to bear the
least tittle of their Inventions, neither do we preach or practice any thing at
all as from them, etc. These are Joseph Wrights very words, wherein you may see
what presumption and Impudency has appeared in him against the law and light
and such as preach it, as one that is vexed and grieved that ever any should
repute him as a co-partner with such as preach and own the the Law or Light
within; and so like a Hypocrite and man-pleaser, he has appeared as one that
would get in favor with those that are enemies to the Law and light within, by
his exclaiming against it and them that own it; though in page 165. he has
implicitly confessed to the light within all men as contrary to the spirit of
Darkness, and thus all may see this man's wickedness and confusion; And you who
have owned him as your Teacher, or a defense of your way, may be ashamed of
him, and it is a shame and disgrace to your profession, that ever such dirty
stuff and absurdities should proceed from amongst you, as this J. VV. who has
been so much set up amongst you, has uttered forth against the Truth and them
that live in it; who though he pretends to lay down our own Principles (who
Preach and own the light within) as if they were sufficiently known to be ours
both by our words of mouth and Books, yet many things has he charged against
us as ours, both as to Principles and matters of fact, which he neither
mentions the Authors of, nor the Books of ours by which they were asserted; and
thus in the greatest part of his accusations and charges against us has he
dealt deceitfully, (like him who is the Father of lies and liars, who when he
speaks a lie he speaks of himself) and not as a rational man, and in very
many things he has absolutely wronged our Principles and Practices, and
charged as apparent falsehoods upon us as ever was, as hereafter is made
manifest to the shame of him that was the Author of the said lying Book
(called A Testimony for the Son of man, etc.) and the shame of all such false
Spirits as own him in his work; We see that God has appeared in Judgment
against you and your way, and a line of confusion is come over you, since that
so many of you (especially of your Leaders) have set themselves in their envy
and malice against us who are in the Power of Truth; what do you think that
spreading your railing and false Books against us will gain you favor from the
profane world, and be any means to rescue you from persecution, or suffering
under the powers of the earth? Do you think to save your selves by reviling the
Innocent, as some of the Leaders in your way have gotten themselves out of
Prison by swearing contrary to Christ's Doctrine after they have been imprisoned
for denying to swear, Witness Jer. Ives, who openly swore to get himself out
of prison after he had written against swearing, for which some of them called
Quakers openly witnessed against him; also diverse others of the Baptists did
swear for fear of suffering, as also the said Jer. Ives and John Tombs, and Hen
Den, (who have long been Teachers) did divulge their deceitful stuff in their
books for swearing, as those that sought to betray the simplicity of God in
others of their brethren, who were more conscientious then themselves, who
could not with a safe Conscience swear, though some through the deceit of their
Teachers were diverted from the Truth in their own consciences.
(when so many of our friends were in prisons for refusing to swear for
Conscience sake to Christ) And not only so, but several of them who have long
been reputed eminent in your way, have (like Men-pleasers) written to vindicate
swearing and oaths, as treacherous men both to God, to their own Consciences,
and to his Innocent and Conscientious people, such as you have reviled and
bespattered with reproaches (in the Book here answered) who would be loath to
be so treacherous to God and their own Consciences, as many in your way have
been, whatever we suffer either from you or from the persecuters in the same
envious spirit which is among you; And yet this know, that we had not published
this against any of you, had we not had that great occasion given us by this
piece of wicked work which Joseph Wright (your Defender) has brought forth,
wherein we who preach the Light of Christ within, are not only slandered and
bespattered with his lies and calumnies as men, but also the Truth of God which
we are in and suffer for, is blasphemed, belyed, and perverted, even in the
sight of our enemies; in vindication whereof we were necessitated to give this
forth, and to deal thus plainly with your Principles which are published by
your pretended Defender, otherwise we could have been silent as from meddling
with you in this kind, for it is no pleasure to us to bestow so much labor
upon such a heap of confusion and absurdities as I. VV. his work is, nor to
upbraid you with your confusion and weakness in what you profess, especially
since you are as in a suffering state, and like to suffer (as we are) if you be
true to your Principles, and conscientious toward God in what you know or
profess; but you may see the urgent occasion given against us and the Truth,
for what we do in this thing. And though I.VV. does not name the word Quakers
by name, yet it is all one as if he had done it, whilst he so often in general
words upbraids such as preach the Light within; for we called Quakers are known
to be the people he all along so peevishly smites against, seeing that we are
known so generally to own and preach the Light within as the Saints of old did,
and in that Light of Christ in us we see Light, and therein are as a City set
upon a Hill which cannot be hid, and are in that Truth and Life which will
outlive our opposers and persecuters, and do know that power manifest in us
which out-shines all the dead and empty forms, professions and traditions of
all who are out of the life and power of godliness, and in that has the Lord
given us strength and the spirit of understanding to see beyond, and to stand
over our opposers, and the envy and subtilty of the Serpent in such as rise up
in Judgment against us.

Glory to our God for ever and ever.

And now we come to some of the heads of Joseph Wrights matter in charge
against such as preach the Law and Light within.


CHAP. I. Concerning the Light within, and Christ's coming in the flesh and
dying for all men.
J.W. his first charge is in these words, viz. The first thing I lay to thy
charge whosoever thou art that preachest up the Light within men, requiring all
People to mind the light which is within them, is this, That thou do deny
that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, and denyest Jesus Christ come in the
flesh, and thy spirit is the spirit of Antichrist etc. And the first proof for
his charge is in these words, viz. 1. Because in all thy preaching, teaching,
and declaring, thou never makes mention of Christ's dying for the sins of the
world, nor that he tasted death for every man, thou art altogether silent in
this Doctrine of Christ's dying for man in the body of his flesh, etc. And his
second proof is in these words, viz. 2. Because as is thy word of mouth, even
so is thy writings, for amongst them all and in them all there is not one line
which teaches that Christ did dye for the sins of the world, and freely laid
down his life as a ransom for sinners, etc.

Answer, As his charge is universal against all that preach up the light
within, it is both false and slanderous, as also all his proofs for it, so that
he might as well have said, that the light of Christ in all men, and the
Doctrine of Christ which directs to it, does deny Christ and his coming in the
flesh, when as on the contrary, all who truly own and believe in the light of
Christ-in them, by it they come to be led to the knowledge of Christ from
whence it comes, and to the power of his death and the virtue of his life,
which none can truly know but as they are led by the light of Christ within,
which gives the Knowledge of the Glory of God, and of those things that are
freely given to us of God, and Christ said believe in the (...)t that you may
be children of the light, John 12.36. Did Christ herein deny himself or his
coming in the flesh, as falsely J. VV. accuses all that preach the light
within; and in that we are included in his proofs as never mentioning Christ's
tasting death for every man, either in our Preaching or writings; in this he
has notoriously belyed us, as thousands may witness against him, who have
heard us both Preach up and contend for the free Grace of God to all men, and
thereby that Christ tasted death for every man, and dyed for all men, and gave
him self a ransom for all to be testified of in due time, Heb. 2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6.
2 Cor. 5.14. 1 John 2.2. Which also as a testimony against J. W. in many of our
Books, vindicate the free Grace of God in Christ to all men, and his dying for
all, as in a Book Entitled, The Voice of Wisdom, by G. W. page 12. and at
large in a Book Entitled, Rusticus ad Accademicos, by S. F. in both which
Priest Danson is answered, and his pleading against Christ's death for all men,
and his free Grace to all confuted; as also in a Book called, A brief
Discovery, by G.W. as in many more Books of ours, the free Grace of God to all,
and Christ's dying for all men is declared.

Also J. W. his third Proof for his said charge against all that Preach the
light within, is as false as his former, where he lays down these words (to
wit) Thou do not gather men and women into Communion with Christ by Faith,
teaching them to believe in Jesus Christ, etc.

Which thing he himself, who has openly opposed the light of Christ in all
(and counted the Doctrine of it a stratagem of Satan) is guilty of, and not we
that own the light; for it is the light that brings into communion with God and
his Son Jesus Christ, for they that say they have fellowship with him, and walk
in Darkness, they lie and do not the truth, but they that walk in the Light,
are in the true fellowship and faith, and know the Blood of Christ to cleanse
them from all sin: Also J. VV. his charging us with gathering by works and not
by Faith, in warning all people to look to the light within, and such as
receive this Doctrine, with being as ignorant as heathens and absolute
infidels; in this has he slandered us, and showed himself to be an Infidel,
who sees not the light within, (...) owns it, for the Infidels were such as in
whom the God of the World did blind their minds from seeing the light of the
Glorious Gospel, which shines in the heart, and gives the knowledge of the
Glory of God to them that believe in it, and so works without Faith we deny,
but the works that are wrought in the Faith and in the light we own; and though
J. W. has so much warned people from looking to the light within, as that
which must bring them to reconciliation and justification, yet in pages 124.
and 125. he has contradicted his matter against the light within, for there he
speaks of being set free and justified by performing the condition of the
second Covenant, as Repentance, Faith, and Gospel Obedience which those that
have sined may perform through the assistance of Gods Spirit, etc. as also he
says, so far forth as Persons come to be in Covenant with Christ, and are
enabled by him to walk according to his direction, so far are these said to
have Christ formed in them, that is, to be brought into a blessed destate of
freedom from the guilt of sin, of freedom from the power and dominion of sin,
of assurance of redemption from the first death, and of deliverance from the
second, and so by Christ to be Entitled to Eternal Life, etc.

Now how should those who have sinned perform the condition of the second
Covenant, through the assistance of Gods Spirit, or come into the True Faith
and Gospel obedience, and to know Christ formed in them, unless that Gods
Spirit or Light be known or owned within; and if those that have sinned, may
come to this state of Faith and Obedience, and freedom from the guilt and power
of sin by the Spirit of God, then a measure of this Spirit or light is given to
all men without exception, seeing that the sinners themselves are not exempted
from it, according to J. W. his own words; and thus has he grossly confounded
himself in his own, while railing against the Preaching up of the light within,
and another while, confessing to the Spirit of God or light even in the wicked.

J. W. his fourth Charge is thus, (viz.) Thou which Preachest that all men
should mind the light which is within them, do deny the Christ of God which
dyed at Jerusalem, because thou have said to me, when I have made as large a
confession of Christ as I now have done, that I am ignorant of Christ, etc.

Answer, What a silly Reason is this, against those that Preach that all should
mind the light within; as if he had said, that because he has made a large
confession of Christ, therefore he is not ignorant of him; when as the Devil
who favors not the things of God, has been made to confess Christ, and many
do confess Christ in words, as largly as J. W. and yet are ignorant of him, and
of the Power of his death and Sufferings, as J. W. is whilst he shows him self
an enemy to the Light of Christ which we own; and we do not deny either the
coming of Christ, or his suffering in the flesh, as we are falsely accused by
this reviler; neither do we deny Christ's reconciling of the world, nor teach
any thing contrary to that of Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.19. as J. W. has implicitly
accused us; for we know and Preach reconciliation through Christ's death, and
Salvation through his life, whose life is the light of men, and this is not any
establishing of our own Righteousness, as falsely we are accused; neither are
we strangers unto the Doctrine of Justification by the Grace of God through the
redemption that is in Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation
through faith in his blood; but how are any justified by the Grace of God,
whilst they deny the light within; for is not the light of Christ within the
free gift of his Grace, which has appeared to all men, and which by his
Righteousness has come upon all men, Romans 5.18. Titus 2.11. Which
Righteousness is received where the light of Christ within is obeyed, and he
thereby made known to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood; and we who
are come to own this in the true Faith, are come to self-denial, and to deny
self-righteousness, contrary to J. W. his false accusations against us who
Preach the light within.

Who also says in his twelfth page, But self must be denied and self
righteousness, which is of the Law, yea, when men have done all whatsoever they
are commanded, they are to say, with humble hearts they have done but what was
their duty, etc.

Answer, What an Ignoramus is this man, who puts no difference betwixt
Self-righteousness which is to be denied, and the doing whatsoever we are
commanded, which is our duty, as if he had said, in denying self-righteousness,
you must deny your duty, or that self-righteousness is men's duty, when as that
which brings men to do their duty to God in obeying his commands is of God; and
though man as in the Servants state may abase and humble himself, yet that
Principle of Faith which brings him to do his duty, is to be esteemed of, and
as in that he lives, he comes to be reckoned among the Faithful and profitable
Servants of Christ, who become his Friends through faithfulness, and Christ
said unto such, I call you no more Servants but Friends, and this is further
then the unprofitable Servants state.

And whereas J. W. charge such as strangers to justification by Faith in the
Blood of Christ, who say, That so far as the creature is brought out of the
filth of this world, and to leave sin, so far only is he justified before God,
etc. As also he tells of a poor sinner standing justified before God, and of
God justifying the creature, while it is in its sins, in its blood, page 14.

Answer, Herein has J. W. showed himself ignorant of justification before God
by Faith, and of the state of justification, for the Creature is not justified
as a sinner, nor in that state wherein it is in the filth of the World, and in
its blood, but as it is made just in Christ, being justified from sin and
ungodliness, and not in sin, and justified from those things from which it
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, and it is not the hearers of the
law that are just before God, but the doers that shall be justified; So this
justification is not without sanctificaon, as deceivers do falsely imagine a
justification of men, when they are in the filth of the world, contrary to the
Apostles Doctrine, who said to the Corinthians, But ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. So that he did not deny following the light or
Spirit of God within, as in reference to man's justification, nor Preach up a
justification of men when they are in the filth of the world, and in their
Blood as J. W. has done, who notwithstanding, has in page 124. owned a
justification by performing the condition of the second Covenant, through the
assistance of Gods Spirit, and that so far forth as persons are in Covenant
with Christ, and are enabled to walk according to his direction, so far are
they in a blessed estate, as in page the 125. and is not that blessed estate
and freedom from the guilt, power and dominion of sin, and assurance of eternal
Life and a justified estate (supposes J.W.) How has he confounded him self in
these things who has also granted that they that believe are taught to be
holy, as he which has called them is holy, and to be holy in all manner of
conversation, because it is written, be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am
holy, 1 Pet. 1 14, 15. Lev. 19.2. How then are any justified while they are in
the filth of the world in their sins and in their blood? Thus all may see what
gross absurdity, confusion and ignorance this J. W. is in; who also says, The
humble do see themselves in a lost and undone estate by reason of sin, which
they and all the world are guilty of finding themselves under the curse of the
law, etc. What falsehood and confusion is this, when as those that are truly
humble are taught of the Lord, and freed from the guilt of sin, according to
this man's own confession, and the humble and contrite heart is a Sacrifice to
God, and not to be reckoned under the guilt of the worlds sin, nor under the
curse of the Law, as this J. W. has falsely accused the humble, who are of
contrite Spirits whom God regards.

Also J. W. has accused such as followers of the Romish Synagogue, and as
being Messengers of Satan, who Preach up the light within, saying, that they
lead all such as follow them from Christ to themselves, setting up themselves,
etc. As also he says, They set up that which is indeed the darkness of this
world, the traditions of men, the Doctrines of the Romish Harlot, page 21.

Answ. What an absurd and foolish slanderer is this man, who distinguishes not
between the Light within men, and the men themselves, when as they who truly
preach the Light of Christ within do not lead them from Christ to themselves,
but to that which is not of themselves, that they may come to deny themselves,
as he has taught, and this we own, which is no setting up of strife, nor of
the darkness of this world, neither is it any Tradition of men, or Doctrine of
the Romish Harlot, as impudently and falsely J. W. has charged against such as
preach the Light within, and so has manifested himself to be one of them who
put Light for darkness, and darkness for Light, unto whom Woes belongs, Isa.
5, 20. and the more he strives against the Light the more he confounds and
splits himself against the Rock, who having confessed that what we preach is
the work of the Law in the hearts, Romans 2.15. and as much as that there is a
light in us and all men, contrary to the spirit of darkness, and now charge
us with setting up the darkness of this world, and the Doctrines of the Romish
Harlot; what gross darkness, confusion and blasphemies has he here uttered
forth; if J. W. his heart were not filled with envy and malice, he would not
show himself thus impudent in his folly and confusion.

CHAP. II. Concerning the nature and state of Christ, and the soul of man, and
the Saints partaking of the divine nature; and how J.W. has confounded
himself, and showed his blindness about these things.
JOseph Wright's words, viz. Thou art a Deceiver, for thou say not that the
flesh and bones, humane soul and spirit of that man which was born of Mary the
Virgin, is the Christ; but thou making no mention of the humane nature, that
which thou call the Christ is the seed, spirit, or light in that man that
was born of Mary, p. 23, 24. etc.

Answer, That which we own to be the Christ is the same that the Apostles and
true Believers owned; to wit, That Jesus Christ our Lord was made of the seed
of Abraham and David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God
with Power, according to the spirit of holiness by the Resurrection from the
dead, and the seed which the promise is to is Christ, and the last Adam was
made a quickening Spirit, and the Lord is that Spirit, set Rom^ 1.3, 4. ^ Cor.
15.45. Gal. 3.16. 2 Cor. 3.17. Was the Apostle Paul a deceiver for speaking
these things (supposes J. W?) which are the same things we speak, though he
count us D^ceivers, and is not this seed or spirit which is Christ, in them
that believe?

Yet J. W. has confessed That it ought not to be denied, that the Spirit of
Holiness in that person which was born of the Virgin Mary is the Son of God by
eternal Generation, etc. Why then has he judged any to be deceivers for
confessing that spirit (or seed) to be Christ; and we confess Jesus Christ to
be come in the flesh, is it then improper to say the seed which is Christ came
in the flesh, and was in that person that was born of the Virgin Mary, seeing
that as he was so manifest in the flesh he was the true Christ, without any of
J. W. his blind distinctions, who after he has granted that the spirit of
holiness in that person is the Son of God by eternal Generation, he says,
that the humane nature also of that person is the Son of God by temporal
Generation, and yet there are not two Christ's but one, etc. Did you ever hear
such Doctrines as these, which are all one as if he had said that the Spirit of
Holiness and humane nature are both one, or that Divine and humane are both
one, when as they are two distinct things, that which is humane is of the
earth, as the first man was, as Humane is of Homo, which comes of Humus the
ground, of which man was made, (as (...), i.e. Humanus, (...), Terra, aut
Humus,) but that which is Divine is from above, as Christ is, who is Lord from
Heaven; Now though this Christ in time took part of that which the Children
had, viz. flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. yet we never read that Humane nature is
Christ, nor that the flesh and blood is Christ by temporal generation; for to
assert that is all one as to say that Christ (who is Lord from Heaven) took
upon him Christ in time, (but Christ in the flesh we read of and own) neither
do we read in the Scripture that the soul of Christ is a humane soul, for is
not his Soul divine and immortal? What, is humane and immortal both one? Or
has he two Souls in one body or person of such differing kinds? And if the
humane nature be Christ, and all mankind be of the same substance with Christ
according to that nature, as J. W. says, page 116. Then it follows that the
humane or earthly nature of all mankind is Christ, and then they that would
know Christ and be saved by him, they must own their earthly (or humane) nature
to be Christ or the Son of God, and look to be saved by it; did ever the
Apostles preach such a Christ as this? they that cannot see J. W. his ignorance
of Christ his nature, soul and spirit, they are in gross darkness. Now though
we deny J. W. his unscripture-like (and blind) distinction, from which it
follows that either there must be two Christ's in one person, or else that
humane and divine are both one, which no ingenuous person will own; and though
we deny his vainly imagining a humane or carnal Christ like himself, yet still
we own the true Christ according to the Scriptures, who according to the flesh
was of the seed of Abraham and David, and according to the Spirit is declared
to be the Son of God with power by the Resurrection, and that he was the word
which was made flesh and dwelt in the Disciples, John 1.14. (...), and his
death as concerning the flesh, and his Resurrection and Ascension according to
the Scriptures of Truth we own, and that he is Glorified with the Father in the
same glory which he had with the Father before the world began, and as in that
state his nature, body, soul, and spirit are spiritual, divine, and immortal,
at the right hand of power, for as he had power to appear in the
transfiguration, and after his Resurrection to appear in diverse forms, and
amongst the Disciples when the doors were shut, John 20. so now he being
glorified with the Father in that his transcendent glory, he is in a further
state then in the days of the flesh, when his body was subject to hunger,
cold, or other sufferings upon earth; and he is not to be supposed to be like
unto corruptible man, or a Christ of the same substance with sinful polluted
men, though he be the same Christ still, the same to day yesterday and for
ever, not divided, and is the same that descended into the lower parts of the
earth, who is ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things
with his fullness, who has said, that no man has ascended up to Heaven but
the Son of man which came down from Heaven, which is in Heaven, John 3.13. Ephesians.
4.9, 10. Psalm. 68.18.

J. VV. says p. 27. what do they less then say I am Christ, which say I speak
to the Light in thy Conscience which shall eternally witness me; what mean
they by this word me, which they say is eternally to be witnessed, is there any
thing that is eternally to be witnessed but the eternal God and his Son Jesus
Christ?

Answ. If J W. did not know what we mean, that is, to be eternally witnessed
(as appears he did not) then he should not have judged us with directing people
unto our selves (or with saying we are Christ) therein he has judged us
falsely, for that which is eternally to be witnessed is Christ who speaks in
us, Mat. 10.20. 2 Cor. 2.17. and 4, 5. and 13.3. who may speak in his own name,
and such as would stop his mouth from speaking where he is manifest, are of
Antichrist.

And also J. W. his accusing us with not confessing that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, and with only saying he is come into our flesh, etc. These are
as false as the rest of his slanders against us, and therein has he
contradicted himself, for before he accused us for saying that Christ is the
seed, spirit, or Light in that man which was born of Mary; what then, do not we
confess Christ come in the flesh, and must we deny Christ come in our flesh?
Then seeing that Christ come in the flesh is a general word not only including
that body which he took upon him in the womb of the Virgin, but also the flesh
of all his people, who are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone,
Ephesians. 5.13.

And the following of the Light within thereby to attain unto Righteousness,
does not at all render the death of Christ in vain, as J. W. imagines, for the
Saints in walking in the Light knew the blood of Christ to cleanse them from
all sin, and purified their souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, 1
Pet. 1.22. 1 John 1.7. And this was not any making of the death of Christ in
vain, but by the Light or Spirit of Christ a witnessing the end fulfilled in
them, for which Christ suffered, that they might live unto him; and how should
any hear Christ in all things, Deuteronomy. 18.15 Acts 3.22. (as J. W. says) unless
they follow the Light of Christ within, for which preaching J. W. in his rage
has called us men of Belial, p. 30. so what gross ignorance and confusion is
he in! And as for Christ's saying if the Light that is in thee be darkness, how
great is that darkness, Mat. 6.23. This has relation to that state where the
eye is evil, where that is supposed to be the Light which is darkness, upon
which their supposition (who were in that state) Christ spoke these words, for
the Light of Christ is the same that ever it was, and in it self is
unchangeable, though in some it shine in darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not. And as for those that spoke not according to the word of
whom its said, it is because there is no Light in them, Isa. 8.20. which J. W.
also alleges, They were such as walked in darkness, unto whom there was no
morning, as the Hebrew word signifies, (...) for many speak contrary to the
word, that are reproved by the Light of Christ in them as J. W. may see his own
guilt thereby if he be not past feeling) and yet such are come short of the
morning, for the Light shines in darkness among such as are not led by it to
the morning, nor receive Instruction from it. And note further, that though
this J. W. has so much set himself against the Light within, and does not own
it to be in all, yet in page 108 he has confessed That the old ungodly World
that were destroyed by the flood of waters would not be turned by the strivings
of Gods Spirit, but refused that grace that was so affectionately tendered to
them, etc. Wherein to his own confusion he is made to confess to the Truth;
for then if the old ungodly world had the Spirit of God so striving with them,
and the Grace of God so tendered to them, what ignorant men are they that deny
the extent of the Grace of God, or the Light of Christ now to the world, and
will not own it to be in the ungodly, nor that they should look to or follow it
in them now? What, was not the old World as wicked as the World now is, or is
the Grace of God or his Mercy now, less then it was to the old World?

J. W. in page 110. says of Christ, It is he that has two distinct natures in
one entire person, no person else has the like in him, in him only dwells
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, in no man besides him dwells the godhead
in any measure bodily, etc.

Answ. Yes, the Saints were made partakers of the Divine Nature also, and such
received of the fullness of God in Christ grace for grace, and God has
promised to dwell and walk in his people, John 1.16. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16.
and can that state be attained by any, and nothing of the Divine Nature be in
them? Is God in his People and his Nature divided? What gross confusion is
this Baptist in, and notwithstanding his denial of the Divine Nature being in
Believers; In page 111. he says, that all men in respect of their substance of
spirit soul and body, and Christ in respect of his humane nature (as he calls
it) are one, yet in respect of his Godhead are not one, etc. what then, has
not the soul of the Righteous any of the Divine Nature in it? How then has it
its immortality? Is any thing immortal that has not of the Divine Life or
nature in it? And are not they that are joined to God one spirit? What
blindness is this J. VV. in, who also after he has denied that nature which
is in Christ to be in any man else, ( viz. the Divine nature) he has in pages
113. and 146. accounted that the Divine Nature is the spirit of holiness (or
that they are one) so that in his denying the Divine Nature to be in any except
Christ, he has denied the spirit of holiness to be in the believers, from
which it follows that none of the believers are Christ's, and that Christ has
no flock, for he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, so all that
reads this may see how this Baptist has gone about to shut Christ his Nature
and Light or Spirit out of all people, (not only unbelievers but Saints) and
how his Doctrine tends to keep all people in darkness from Christ his Divine
Nature and Spirit. And so this Baptist in telling of two distinct natures in
the person of Christ, ( viz. the spirit of holiness or Divine Nature, and the
humane nature) and calling each of these natures the Son of God (though he own
them to be two distinct natures) as in pages 24. and 10. and 111. and 113. what
he has said herein is all one as if he had said that there are two Christ's in
one person, when as Christ is but one, and is the same yesterday to day and for
ever, glorified with the Father in the same glory which he had before the world
began, and this Christ is in the Saints, and the same spirit of holiness which
raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in them, so that the Divine Nature is
not excluded out of them, as this Baptist has often employed; and no where do
we read in Scripture that that nature of Christ which has been free from
hunger and cold ever since his Resurrection, is a humane (or earthly) nature
according to this man's words, who has showed himself both ignorant of Christ
and his nature, (as now glorified with the Father) which is of an immortal or
spiritual being, or kind.

Joseph Wright says, p. 116. That the flesh, soul and spirit of all men, and
the flesh, soul and humane Spirit of Christ is of one substance.

Answ. Oh gross darkness and error, to imagine that the flesh and soul and
spirit both of all men and Christ are of one substance; what then, is the soul
and spirit made up of flesh? If they be of one substance then must the soul dye
with the body, and then where is its immortality? And why is the Spirit a
distinct thing from the flesh, and a body without the Spirit dead? And further,
how are all mankind of the same substance with Christ, when as the substance of
Christ never sinned, but thou J. W. say, ye are unclean because ye are
propagated in unclean lust, what are you of the same substance with Christ or
of his nature, (who is in a glorified state in immortality and eternal glory)
when you are so propagated and are unclean; thou art yet unclean and exceeding
sottish, or else thou would have been ashamed to utter such confusion and
folly as thou have done; as also after thou have asserted that all mankind are
of the same substance with Christ, thou have told us, p. 121. That man became
like the Devil by sin (as thou say the Hebrew word may be rendered) which is
as much as if thou had said, that that which is like the Devil is of the same
substance with Christ, showing thy self wholly ignorant of Christ, and of his
substance, and flesh, which is not suffered to see corruption.

And further, in pages 128, 131, 132, 134, and 58, 59. it may be observed how
thou put afar off the state of the Church, or believers being conformed to
the Image of the Son of God, that he might be the firstborn among many
Brethren, (as in Romans 8.29.) which thou put afar off as to be attained, but
at the Resurrection of their bodies from the graves, (which thou tells of) and
then (thou blindly say) Christ will give himself unto it, (viz. unto his
Church) and make it like glorious with his own glorified humane nature, and
then the Church shall resemble her head, etc. Herein have thou perverted both
that Scripture of Romans 8.29, 30. and that of Ephesians. 5.25, 26.27. for the Apostle
does not put that cleansed and glorious state of the Church (wherein they were
made conformable to the Image of Christ) afar off till after death as thou have
done, for the Saints were come unto the Church of the firstborn, and knew
Christ born in them, as he is the firstborn in many Brethren, (...), and who
he justified, them also he glorified, Romans 8.30. and Christ gave himself for
his Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, and present it to himself
not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5. Now does not the Church resemble her head when she is
brought into that state of purity for which Christ gave himself, which refers
to the time past; its not said there, that he will give himself (as in the
future Tense) so to cleanse his Church at the Resurrection of the bodies out of
the graves, as thy words imply, who also to prove that the Believers partaking
of the Divine Nature in this Life is but in part, bring Romans 7.25. With my
mind I serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the Law of sin, wherein thou
have employed that the Apostle was not freed from serving the Law of sin while
he was in this Life, (what a sad life would thou make Paul to live?) and so
like the deceivers and blind guides have put freedom from sin afar off till
after death, that the bodies shall be raised out of the graves, and when that
shall be thou know not, when as the Apostle passed through the warfare and
attained to the victory over sin, and the Law of the spirit of life in Christ
did make him free from the law of sin and death, which sometime had ruled in
his members, and he could say before his decease, I have fought the good fight,
etc. though several times he condescended to several states or conditions below
his own, as he did to the Romans, and others, and became as weak to the weak,
and as one under the Law to them that were under the Law, etc.

And thou say, p. 139. That humane nature by personal conjunction with the
Divine Nature, being become so spiritual, that it may be truly said The last
Adam, that is, the created substance in Christ's person is now made into a
quickening spirit, etc

To which we say, how then is all mankind of the same substance with Christ (as
thou said before) what are they all quickening Spirits, or is the Humane Nature
of all mankind a quickening Spirit? Can thou not distinguish betwixt that
which is Humane (or from the earth) and a quickening Spirit? What gross
absurdity have thou herein employed? And what a vast difference would thou
make betwixt Christ and his Nature (now when he is in a glorified states
further then in the days of his flesh) as if he were become a quickening
Spirit which is divine, but there is a nature in him that is Humane, so the
Nature of the quickening spirit is of the earth (according to thy words) as the
first Adam was, and so thou can not distiguish betwixt the first Adam and the
second, though the first Adam and his Humane Nature is of the Earth, but the
second and his Nature and Image is Divine and Heavenly according to himself who
is Lord from Heaven, whose state is glorified, spiritual and immortal, wherein
that which was mortal, which in time he took upon him, is swallowed up of life
and immortality, and he (as Glorified with the Father before the world began)
made higher then the Angels, though they be ministering Spirits.

And whereas thou J. W. countest it Blasphemous, and of Antichrist, to think
that any part of man, Spirit, Soul or Body is of the Divine, Eternal and
uncreated Substance, etc.

To that we say, Is not that wherein the Soul has its immortality of the
Eternal Life or Substance? else whence had the Soul its Life and Immortality,
and what is it in it self? For shall not the Soul if saved from the power of
sin, be eternally in the feeling and enjoyment of the Love of God? And if not
so saved, shall it not Eternally be under a sense of his Anger? And was not man
made in the Image of God, and had the Breath of Life from God in him whereby
his Soul lived? Was not that Image and Life Immortal? And whereas thou seem
to admit of a Perfection that Believers may attain unto, and yet says, that
the perfection of God and of the Divine Nature of Christ, is of a different
Nature from the perfection of man, etc. This is as blind a business as thy
former, denying the Divine Nature to be in any but Christ; for there is no true
perfection of Holiness that the believers attain to, but what they have in God
and Christ according to his Divine Nature in which they partake of in him, who
has exhorted the Saints to be Perfect, as their Heavenly Father is Perfect,
that they might be Holy in all manner of conversation; so that thy sinful
Doctrines (which are for sin the term of Life) do tend to make the commands
and Work of Christ of none effect.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Resurrection, and J. W. his silly reasoning and vain
conceits about it.
ANd as concerning the Resurrection from the dead, we do not say that the
Resurrection is past with us, as J. W. in page 63. does falsely accuse us, for
we are in him who is the Resurrection and the Life, and by whom comes the
Resurrection from the dead, John 11.25. 1 Cor. 15.21. and we are against those
that in saying the Resurrection is past, have gone about to destroy (or do
overthrow) the Faith of some, 2 Timothy 2.18. for through Faith many are in the
way to attain to the Resurrection of the just; and so according to the
Scriptures we do own a Resurrection both of the just and unjust, and that some
shall come forth to the Resurrection of Life, which they that abide in the Faith
until death shall attain to, and others to the Resurrection of Condemnation
which is their portion who believe not in Christ, who is the Resurrection and
the Life, wherein the Righteous shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, but
the wicked shall rise to shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2, 3. And why does J. W.
count it absurd, as in pages 54, 55. that the Seed of God should be sown in one
condition and raised in another; seeing the Apostles words are plain to that
effect, for that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die; and does not
that Seed suffer in man by corruption, before it be raised in incorruption, and
is it not the Seed of God that is sown in weakness and raised in Power, and
every Seed shall have its own Body, and what is it God gives a Body to as it
pleases him but the Seed? And what Seed is that is raised in incorruption,
Glory and Power, but the Seed of God? before which state of the Seed be
attained to, the Seed is known in suffering in death and in corruption, though
in it self it be incorruptible; for it could not be said it shall be quickened,
unless after it be sown it dye; and in respect of its being sown, in weakness
and dying, (as to them in whom it is sown, who are not redeemed into the state
of the second Adam) its said to be sown a Natural Body, as also there is a
Natural Seed, or Seed of Abraham according to the flesh, that this Seed of God
takes hold on or takes upon it; but in respect of its being raised in Power and
Glory, it is Spiritual and Immortal, as being beyond that state in which it is
sown in weakness, which states none comes truly to know, but as they come into
death with the Seed, and to be raised up by the Spirit that raised up Jesus
from the dead, which spirit where it dwells does quicken the mortal bodies, and
does bring into the likeness of Christ's Glorious Body, and as many as are dead
with Christ shall live and appear with him in Glory, and witness the Body of
their lowness made like unto his Glorious Body, whose they are, and such who
come to the Resurrection of the Just, and to see the mortal Body which was dead
because of sin, quickened by the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, shall come
to witness that of Hosea 13, 14. fulfilled, for they shall come to be ransomed
from the Power of the Grave, and redeemed from death, as the Seed comes to live
and reign, which cannot be holden of death nor kept in the Grave, but is the
destruction of the Grave; and this the Prophet witnessed when he was delivered
from the power of the Grave, and his soul brought out of the Pit, by the sides
whereof the Graves were set; And why says J. W. in page 60. as that arising
which Christ through the Faith of the Operation of God, is not the Resurrection
from the dead, nor the state of perfection which the Faithful unto death shall
obtain? etc. What do not they that rise with Christ rise from the dead? And was
not that the Resurrection from the dead that Saint Paul desired to attain to?
Phil. 3.11. Are not all men in sin dead? And do not they that rise with Christ,
rise out of sin, seeing the Saints that had been dead in trespasses and sins,
when they were quickened and raised in Christ, they were come to live in him
with whom they shall live, who first knew what it was to die with him, or to be
baptized into his death, for the dead in Christ shall rise first; and is not
that a state of perfection, where there is a Resurrection in Christ, from sin
and the death which came in by it? For is it not sin that caused the
imperfection? And that the Resurrection from the dead, is a raising of man from
the dead in every part wherein he is dead by reason of sin, and to live in
every part wherein he lived before he sinned, (to wit) to be alive in Spirit,
Soul and Body, as in page 66. Who denies that? For because of sin, death has
come over man in every part, both over spirit, soul and body; so that where man
is raised out of sin by Christ, who is the Resurrection and the Life, his
Spirit is quickened that it can rejoice in God, and his soul is raised up out
of death, that it can magnify him who is the Savior; and if Christ be in you,
the Body i^ dead because of sin, and the same spirit that raised up Jesus from
the dead shall quicken the mortal Body, and the Creature it self thereby comes
to be delivered into the Glorious liberty of the Sons of God; so that the
Resurrection of the whole man ( and of every man in his own order, 1 Cor. 15
23) over whom death and the Grave had dominion we own, and do not take a part
of it for the whole, as falsely J. W. accuses us; But whereas J. VV. imagines
that the Redemption of the Body spoken of in Romans 8. Which the Saints groaned
traveled and waited for is not to be enjoyed till the Natural and visible
bodies of men shall be raised out of the Graves, as in page 65. and 53. and 55.
This is like the rest of his vain Imaginations and foolish dreams about the
Resurrection and other things, for this would suppose that that Redemption of
the Body from the bondage of Corruption [which Saint Paul and other Saints so
many hundred years ago did travel, and wait, and hope for in their suffering
state] is not yet attained, which would render their Faith, Hope and Travel
ineffectual; and what then was that bondage of corruption, and that suffering
under which the body suffered, and from which they waited for redemption, is it
some bondage or suffering that the Saints so long deceased both were in their
days (and are yet) in suffering under, if they be not yet attained to the
redemption of the body, which so long since they traveled for, as this J. VV.
ignorantly seems to imply, which his reason is like his saying, that God is
declared to be the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, because their bodies which
are dead shall live again, when as he was their God, because they lived with
him and were in him, and were in the bosom of the Father, who is not the God of
the dead but of the living; And as for that of Job 19.25, 26, 27. Which he
mentions, where Job knew his Redeemer living, and that he should stand upon the
Earth, and that in his flesh he should see God; whom (said he) I shall see for
my self and mine eyes shall behold, etc. After this Job knew his hope herein
fulfilled, when he said to the Lord, Chap. 42. I have heard of thee by the
Hearing of the Ear, but now mine eyes sees thee. Now it is not to be supposed
that Job did either see or expect to see God with bodily or carnal eyes, for
who so imagines, they must suppose God to be visible like themselves, and not a
Spirit, nor an immortal invisible being, who is to be seen spiritually and not
carnally, who is in that immortality and Glory with no man (as mortal) can
approach to or behold with that which is mortal: and what silly reasoning is it
for J W. from that of Rev. 20.4. to Query What part of man is it which is
capable of being beheaded; Is it not the Body? Therefore the bodies lived, etc.
When as that of Rev. 20.4. speaks only of the Souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and the Word of God; so that his reason is
as if he had said, that because the souls of them that were beheaded lived,
therefore their Bodies when they were beheaded lived, when as the souls and
that which was beheaded are spoken of as distinct things ( viz.) the Souls of
them that were beheaded; so that where the Scripture mentions the souls, as
including the whole man or men, as Genesis 46.27. which J. W. cites, this will not
prove his absurdity; and the like reason for his dream about the bodies has he
in page 70. from Luke 16. of the rich man's being tormented, which torment (he
says) is to be understood to be upon the body of the rich man, from his desire
that Lazarus might be sent to dip his finger in Water, to cool his tongue, a
part of his Body, etc. Wherein I.W. shows himself both ignorant of Parables
and mysteries, wherein he has employed, as if the rich man's body was then in
hell when he was so tormented; when as Christ says, The rich man dyed and was
buried, and speaks that of Lazarus and the rich man, as in the time past; and
then where was that Hell out of which he that was in it could see Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom, betwixt Abraham and which Hell there was a great gulf fixed?
And what was it in the rich man then that let him see Abraham and Lazarus a far
off? Did he see them when he was in Hell with bodily eyes, yea or nay? And as
for I. W. his Comparison, page 55. of the Wheat arising out of that very Seed,
and that very Kernel which was sown, even so (says he) shall it be in the
Resurrection from the Dead, the Natural and Visible bodies of those that
believe in Christ, although they shall not be raised as they are sown, yet they
shall be raised out of the Grave, etc. This is contrary to Job. 7.9. and 1 Cor.
15.37. and this his Comparison does not parallel his matter intended and
asserted, unless he can prove that the Bodies of all that are deceased or die,
are so reserved, and their substance remain in the Earth or Sea where they die,
as the Wheat that is sown which brings forth its own Body, which absurdity no
rational man will believe, though herein he has contradicted himself, for the
same grain of Wheat that is sown, is not that Body or Ear that grows forth; and
said the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.37. Thou sowest not that Body that shall be, though
every Seed shall have its own Body, which who knows the mystery of the
differing Seeds, they come to know the Body of each, which are of the Nature of
those Seeds they belong to; and there is also a Natural Body and a Spiritual
Body which are distinct things, as there is a first man and a second man which
differ; and so there are Terrestial Bodies, and Bodies Caelestial which are
discerned, and the state of each distinguished, where that Body which is
Spiritual, which differs from that which was Natural is discerned and seen; and
this is hid from all blind and empty Professors, who are in their Dreams and
Imaginations, imagining that they shall see God with their Carnal or Visible
Eyes, and by such imaginations have in the long night of Apostasy blinded the
simple, and begot them into a blind Faith and Hope, which stands not in the
Power of God, nor the Seed which is Christ which is risen to destroy, and to
root out the evil Seed which has been sown in the night by the envious one,
whose work they are in that oppose the good; and where proves J. W. by
Scripture that man that was made of the dust of the Earth, had not in his Body
dyed or returned to dust, had he not transgressed, as in page 61.? Must not all
things return to their Center? For shall not the Bodies of the Just return to
dust, who are redeemed from Transgression and washed from sin by the Blood of
Christ? What was that death that Adam dyed in the day he eat of the forbidden
fruit, seeing that his Body lived hundreds of years after that?

CHAP. IV. Concerning what we appeal to in men, and the Subject of our
Exhortations: And J. W. his gross Lies and Slanders against us about these
things.
WHereas J. W. has accused us of Fearful Blasphemy, for speaking to the Light
in the Conscience, or to the Seed of God in men; Which (says he) supposes,
that that which they call Christ has done Iniquity, else why do they say
Repent repent, with exhortations to depart from sin, etc. So that he says,
They reprove Christ, exhort Christ, council Christ, yea they say they speak to
that of God in the Conscience which shall eternally witness; so that they Teach
God, reprove God, counsel God, Oh horrible blasphemy, thus far J. W. page 98.
etc.

Answer, What abominable falsehoods and gross mistakes are these against us; for
as we are manifest in men's consciences in the sight of God, so we appeal or
speak to his Light in them as our witness, which bears Testimony to what we
say, and do not make that Light the subject of our exhortations or reproofs,
but the Creature that is to be turned to Christ and his light within, neither
is the Light ever reproveable or guilty of any evil, but that which
transgresses it; And this light we appeal to as our witness for the Truth,
even in the wicked who rebel against it, and we are a good favor to God even in
them that perish. And so his charge against us, as not Preaching to the
Creature man, when we appeal to the Witness of God in men, is exceeding false
and foolish; For cannot men appeal to any thing as a witness for Truth and true
Judgment, but they must make it the Subject which they reprove or appeal
against? What gross ignorance is this J.W. is in! And is not the Truth where
ever it is Preached manifest to that of God in men's Consciences, and in our
speaking or appealing to the light of Christ in men's Consciences, we do not
suppose that Christ is saved by our Preaching, nor that he is in a fallen
condition, as impudently this Baptist has accused us in page 99.

And whereas he seems so much to be offended, that any Doctrine or Ministry
should be directed to the Seed of God in man, or that Salvation should be
tendered to that, he has manifested himself wholly ignorant of the Seed of God
in that state as a Seed; For do not the Promises of God belong to the Seed, and
when the Spirit of Promise moves any true Witness to declare them, are they
not to be directed to the Seed which they belong to? should the Prophets mouths
have been stopped when they Prophesied to the Seed? And Christ as he has Power
to lay down his Life which no man takes from him, so he has Power to take it
again, John 10.17, 18. and to raise up his own Life or Seed in his People; Did
not his own Arm or Power bring Salvation to him? Isa. 63.5. And where he is
manifested in that Power in his Saints, may he not speak through them to his own
in others where manifest in a less measure? And did not Saint Paul travel till
Christ was formed in the Galathians? Gal. 4.19. And what ignorance is it in J.
W. to deny (in page 106.) that Christ Preached to the Spirits when they were in
Prison? Seeing that when he was quickened by the Spirit, he Preached to the
Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. As also he was promised to open the Prison
Doors, and bring forth the Prisoners out of the Prisonhouse, and he it is that
says to the Prisoners, show your selves.

And J.W. in p. 141. has further charged absolute falsehoods upon us, in saying
as that the creature man is not the subject of our blessings, but a supposed
seed, and that the subject of our curse (he says) is not the creature man
consisting of spirit, soul and body, but a contrary seed, likely the Devil,
etc. These are as wicked and false as his accusing us, that when we exhort to
perfection we never intend that the creature man with all the helps he can lay
hold on, either is, can, or ought to be perfect, as in pages 145, 146, 149.
when as on the contrary we affirm that the creature man as he comes into the
seed of God, which the blessing is originally to, which is perfect, and to be
in the nature and life of it, therein he partakes of the blessings which are in
that seed and grows unto a perfect man as the Saints did; and on the contrary,
as men or Creatures are joined to the evil seed, and servants to the Devil, so
they become subjects with the Devil of the curse and anger of God which they
treasure up to themselves, and this is no emboldning man on in his sin, nor
advantageous to Satan, (as he says) p. 141. And we neither exhort God nor
Christ to perfection, nor make them the subjects of our exhortation, as J. W.
in effect has accused us; who but an impudent malicious man would have charged
such wicked lies, absurdities and blasphemies upon us as he has done? Are
these the fruits of the Baptists spirit? Sad is that peoples state that have
appointed this Jos-Wright for a defense unto them, or their way, as he accounts
himself, and poorly are they defended by him.

CHAPTER V. Concerning Ordinances, and J. W. his idolatry and falsehood about
Water Baptism.
ANd whereas in pages 33, 42, and 158. thou J.W. have accused such as do preach
the Light within, with denying Baptism in water, prayer, and laying on of
hands, and with reproaching and despising the Ordinances of the new Testament,
and with calling prayer and laying on of hands carnal, etc.

To this we lay, thou have grosely slandered and impudently belyed us in these,
as in many other things, for both prayer, laying on of hands, and other
ordinances, as they are performed in the Power of God by the leadings of his
Spirit we own; but where such things are done out of the Power or leading of
that Spirit in men's wills, they are but formal, dead and empty, and as such to
be denied; and the one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. which the outward was but as a figure
of we witness; And further note how thou have contradicted thy self in pages
159. and 160. thou have accused us for laying on of hands, and for praying once
in thirteen days at least, with such as are inclinable to our Principles, how
then do we reproach and despise prayer and laying on of hands, as in general
terms thou have accused us? how art thou confounded in thy malicious
accusations, which confusion is a fruit of thy envy? for where envy is there is
confusion; and whereas thou art pleading for the Baptism of Believers in water,
as an ordinance of great authority, and as being appointed to signify the
burial and Resurrection of Christ, and the fellowship of true believers in his
death, and that it consists not in the bare putting away the filth of the
flesh as the Jewish Baptisms did, Heb. 9.9. and that the effect of it is
greater then the effect of those legal washings, and thy proof is, 1 Pet. 3.21,
22.

Answ. In thy Epistle to the Churches thou counsellest them not to discourse
this Spirit about the Authority of Ordinances, (meaning the spirit of such as
preach up the Light within) and in thy other Epistle to them that so preach,
thou pretendest as if thou would not be disputing about Ordinances when the
difference is about the substance, yet now in contradiction to thy former
counsel and pretense, thou have disputed about the authority of Water Baptism,
which thou applaudest as thy great Ordinance, as if there were more efficacy in
it then the bare putting away the filth of the flesh; how have thou discovered
thy lying spirit and confusion of Babylon, one while to counsel others, and to
pretend not to discourse about Ordinances, and then afterward to contend for
them as thou have done, though to little effect or purpose, they that cannot
see thy falsehood and folly herein are stark blind; and that of 1 Pet. 3.21.22.
thou have absolutely perverted it, for it does no^ prove your Baptism in Water
to have more in it then the Jews washings or baptizings, Heb. 9.9. for there
is mention of the Baptism that saweth, which is not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience, which the outward
water or washing is mentioned as a figure of, for there is a plain distinction
betwixt the inward Baptism that saves, and the outward washing or putting away
the filth of the flesh; and the true believers in Christ are come further then
that which is but the sign or figure, or does but signify Christ's burial,
Resurrection, or their fellowship in his death, for they are come to be
baptized into his death, and to be raised in his life by that Spirit which has
baptized them, which is the substance wherein the signs and shadows are ended,
which Christ through his death and suffering made way for men's Redemption out
of, and abolished the Law of Commandments by which these outward shadows and
figures which related to that state that was under the Law were upheld, where
the possession of the holy Seed which is the substance, was not attained to,
and the use of such outward Baptisms or shadows (by any of the Apostles for a
time) does not prove them of force by a Law, since Christ fulfilled them and
abolished the Law of them, Ephesians. 2.15. Col. 2.14.20. and through suffering made
way for a further, more glorious and living dispensation then that wherein the
signs, shadows or figures were upheld by a Law. And where proves J. W. that
outward Baptism in Water does signify or resemble Christ's death, burial, or
Resurrection, as he has employed? We hope he will not say that Believers dye in
outward Baptism and are buried three days in the Water, as Christ was in the
Earth; so that Water Baptism when it was practiced by a command from heaven as
John did, it had rather a resemblance or signification of the state of
Believers and their inward washing, then of the state of Christ in his
sufferings and Resurrection. And where J. W. as a proof for his Water Baptism,
brings Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. We are buried with him by Baptism into death, etc.
In this he has contradicted himself; for before this Baptism in Water was but
to signify the Burial and Resurrection of Christ, and the fellowship of the
Saints in his death, and therefore it could not be that Baptism by which they
were buried with Christ into death; so all may see what Idolatry he is in about
Water, and how he is mudled in his confusion, though he (without just cause) is
offended that we should count their Baptism a carnal empty shadow or low thing
that God is gone out of, though it be both true and apparent enough, since they
make such an Idol of it, and practice it without either immediate command from
Heaven, or motion of Gods Spirit for it, but only do it by tradition and
imitation from the use of it in the time of the Churches Infancy, when peoples
minds were not redeemed out of such things. And as for Christ's sending the
blind man to wash his eyes in the pool of Siloam, who when he had washed came
seeing, John 9.6, 7. This is no proof for your plunging or baptizing People in
water, though J.W. thou have brought it for thy proof, so that thou have but
herein discovered thy idolatrous Spirit; and for all thy Baptism in Water thou
art yet blind, thy eyes are not opened, though thou have had more of thy body
outwardly washed then thy eyes.

And further in p. 39. and 40. Joseph Wright says, That Baptism in Water in
the Name of Jesus Christ is unto the Repentant Believer the way of Salvation,
because Christ has walked therein to make it so, etc. and that as the sinner
comes to be washed in his body with pure water, so he comes to be sprinkled in
his heart or spirit with the blood of Christ from an evil conscience, and to
prove it he cites Heb. 10.22.

Answ. Here it may be seen how this Baptist goes on in his Idolatry, and what a
great Idol he has made of Water Baptism, to account it the way of Salvation,
and so he has set up another way for Salvation then the true Ministers did,
for Christ is the way of Life and Salvation, and the Rock from whence comes the
water of Life, which sprinkles the heart from an evil Conscience, and this is
not a carnal or visible Element of the world; so that this Baptist in preaching
up water Baptism to be the way to Salvation, he would limit Christ and his
salvation, as if none were in the way of salvation, but a company of Baptists
or such as are plunged by them in outward Water; and so if that water-Baptisme
be the way of Salvation, then it is Christ, (but this is another Christ then
the true Apostles preached, so that this Doctrine herein must needs be
Antichristian) from which also it follows that those that would know the way of
salvation and come to Christ, they must go to the Baptists for Christ and
Salvation, which if their Water Baptism be it, then they can make Christ, and
make a way of Salvation, and then in such places where there is not outward
water enough to be found to plunge people in over head and ears, there they
must want salvation if then Water Baptism be it; and if the sinner comes but to
be sprinkled from an evil conscience, when his body is washed in outward water,
and that be the way of cleansing a heart from an evil conscience, then it seems
that all men's consciences are evil but the Baptists; And thus he has
discovered his absurdity and gross Idolatry, as one that never knew the way of
Salvation, nor that living water which cleanses the heart from an evil
conscience, nor that one Baptism of the spirit which the Saints preached, by
which they were all baptized into one body, which is the substance, wherein the
antitype, and end of shadows, and figures, and how far they reached, is seen
and manifested; and J.W. thy doctrine of Idolatry tend more to strengthen the
Papists in their way for the Popish mass then theirs who preach up the Light
within, though thou have charged such a Preacher of the Light with denying the
bread which is eaten in that you call the Lords Supper to be made of Corn, or
the Wine that is drunk to be the fruit of the Vine, as in Page 48. but him whom
thou have so accused, thou have not discovered by name, nor where he spoke it,
for there is none that truly owns and Preaches the light within, that will say
that outward bread which is eaten in that called the Lords Supper is not made
of Corn, or deny the outward Wine that is drunk to be the fruit of the Vine;
But this we know, that the Lords Supper is a mystery which you who live in
deceit and iniquity, (who are doting about outward shadows, as bread, and
wine, and water,) never came to eat or drink at, but only they who are come to
the Lamb of God that takes away sin, and to the marriage Supper of the Lamb,
who says, behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and
open to me, I will sup with him and he with me, and here at this supper that
bread and that fruit of the Vine is received in the Paradise of God, which is
not outward, changable, nor carnal; and to this Supper, Drunkards, Malicious
persons and Liars cannot come; and wherein page 47. thou judge such as preach
the Light within, for their reward to have the mist of darkness reserved for
ever; In this thou have but discovered thy self to be in the gall of
bitterness, and in the enmity of him who is the Father of Lies, whose work
thou art in, against the Light and the Children of it, and that will be thy own
reward which thou have judged others with, unless thou repentest; more of thy
folly and confusion about these carnal things which thou art doting about might
be mentioned, which at present are omitted, but thou have discovered thy self
sufficiently already, as one that never knew the way of Salvation, nor the
cleansing of thy heart from an evil conscience, for all thy Baptism in water,
which thou have accounted the way of Salvation and cleansing, though others of
you Baptists have openly said, (as some did at a Dispute in Southwark) there is
no stresse for Salvation upon Water Baptism, nor is it of necessity for
Salvation; and thus you confound your selves, and thy confusion and idolatry as
much appears touching these things thou have busied thy self about, as any that
ever opposed us.

And let all that read this further mark thy confusion, and see thy deceit in
thy so absolutely judging us for the mist of darkness for ever, and giving
such a final sentence of condemnation upon us as if there were no hope of
Salvation or remedy for us, when as in thy Epistle to us thou have told us,
thou shall only receive a sober Antagonist, or else expect our renouncing our
error, repenting, believing, and obeying the Gospel. Now if either of these (
viz. either a sober Antagonist, or repenting, believing, and obeying the
Gospel) be to be expected among us, then there remains some hope of Salvation
for us, and that we are not given up for destruction, or for the mist of
darkness for ever, as thou have judged us, without any restriction (or
exception) and thus all may see what an unjust Judge thou art, and how thou are
spoiled in thy wicked ends and designs, and what an irrational man thou art so
absolutely to judge them for the mist of darkness for ever, whom thou have
expected to believe and obey the Gospel (if not a sober Antagonist) or at least
wise thou have pretended it; truly its high time for thee to repent, for thou
art far from the Life of the Gospel, or its faith and obedience, who
notwithstanding have accounted us more proud then others for judging or
reproving, yet in such a high degree have set thy self to be a Judge, as to
judge such as preach the Light within, for the mist of darkness for ever,
(though thou have pretended to have an expectation of Repentance, Faith, and
Obedience from such as thou have so judged. And you Baptists were wont to
exclaim against others for judging, though now you can so peremptorily judge
such to be rewarded with the mist of darkness for ever, who do both preach and
own the Light of Christ within, which they that follow shall not abide in
darkness but shall receive the Light of Life. The Lord open your eyes, who
have been deceived and misled by such blind guides and defenders as J. W. is,
that you may escape out of their snares, and come out of the darkness and
confusion wherein they have led you, that you may know the Light of the Truth
to open your understandings, and to guide your feet into the way of Truth, and
the path of the just, which is the shining Light that shines more and more
until the perfect day, in them that believe and obey the Light of the Lord and
his Truth in them.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Quaking and Trembling.
THe next particular observable is about Quaking and Trembling, and about this
J. W. makes a great stir, with several vain stories, And in p. 154. He says,
It is a woeful visitation, for it does not come with a still soft voice, but
with Earthquakes, and rending the Rocks, putting the poor creature into a woeful
condition; for oh what quakings and shakings, tremblings and fearings, what
pulling and dragging is at that time, as if the very heart must be pulled out,
and all the bowels torn in pieces, and one limb rent from another, and when the
unclean spirit has pronounced such woes terrors and judgments as long as he
thinks fit, which by them is called Hell, then the said Spirit speaks peace to
them, etc. And also say that this Spirit speaks with a vocal voice in the
bottom of the bellies of them that a^e possessed therewith, burrying the
creature up and down with motions revelations and commands, etc.

Answ. To all which we answer, J. W. has here showed not only ignorance of
the works of the Lord and his ways, but hatred and malice against them, and
has uttered many reviling words against that which he knows not, and if he had
lived in the days of old when the Servants of the Lord quaked and trembled,
and roared out because of the terror of the Lord that was upon them, what
would he have said, surely no less of them then he has done of us at this
day, and would have called it an unclean spirit, and a woeful visitation and
condition; and therefore we shall first prove out of the Scriptures that there
was such a thing as trembling and quaking and roaring out even as men
distracted among the Servants of the Lord in generations past, and then shall
vindicate such a thing in these our days upon this reason; That God and his
works and discoveries are the same in this age according to the manifestation
of his power amongst his People as ever they were; So dreadful was the
appearance of God that Moses saw, that he said I exceedingly fear and quake,
Heb. 12.21. and David roared out by reason of the disquietnesse of his heart,
and his heart panted, and his strength failed, and there was no foundnesse in
his flesh, nor any rest in his bones, Psalm. 38. and his flesh trembled because
of the Judgments of God, Psalm. 119.120. And its said, while I suffer the
terrors of the Lord I am as a distracted man, Psalm. 88.15. And Ezra said, I
rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked off the hair of my head, and of my
beard, and sat down astonished, and there were assembled unto me every one that
trembled at the words of the God of Israel, Isa. 9.3, 4. And Jeremy also said
that he trembled, and his bones did shake, and he was like a drunken man, Jer.
23.9. And the Prophet Habakkuk said, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the
voice, rottenness entered my bones, and I trembled in my self, chap. 3.16. and
St. Paul was among the Corinths in much trembling, and exhorted the Saints to
work out their Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. And thus it is
manifest throughout the Scriptures of both Old and New Testament, that the
Saints and Servants of God did tremble and were astonished, and were as
distracted persons, and there were earthquakes among them, and rending of the
rocks, and quakings, and shakings, and tremblings, and fearings, (as J. W. his
words are) and the appearance of the Lord was wonderful, and wrought wonderful
effects and operations upon them, though this same J. VV. seems ignorant of,
like as if he had never read the Scriptures, though in place elsewhere he
speaks highly of them yet it is manifest he is not in that Truth and Power of
God which they declare of, but is a scorner and reviler, and one with the
profane wretches that believes not the Truth of the Scriptures but scorns at
the work of God, and such as tremble and quake at his words, whom he regards,
Isa 66.

And seeing that the Scriptures do thus plentifully prove such an operation, as
quaking, and trembling, and trouble, and terror, through the manifestation of
the Power of God, we cannot but for the name of the Lords sake vindicate the
same operation in this day, as that same Power is manifest amongst People; And
it is the Power of the Lord, not the spirit of witchcraft or uncleanness, as
J. W. blasphemously affirms, but we know that thousands in these our days have
been pierced to the heart by the word of the Lord, and have been smitten in
their Consciences, and been made to cry out, and roar, and tremble through the
disquietnesse of their hearts, and have been brought as low as Hell, even to
the sides of the Pit, and to know their bones broken as David did, and they
have lain disconsolate for many days, and yet the Lord has after this raised
them up into peace, and joy, and comfort, and blotted out their transgressions,
and washed them away by the blood of Jesus, and has restored comfort for
mourning, and the spirit of praise for the spirit of heaviness according to
his promises; so that were not J. W. a man more ignorant and malicious then a
man of Knowledge and good Conscience, he would never presume to have vented
such malicious and railing terms against us, for and because of the self same
operation of the Power of God amongst us, as is so largely demonstrated by
examples throughout the Scriptures, so that he has not only reviled us at
this day, but also the Saints of God in former ages, so declaring himself to
the world, to be ignorant of the Scriptures and of the Power of God to
Salvation, and a Blasphemer against both. And his Reason to prove it an unclean
Spirit that leads them to tremble is, because some have stripped off their
Clothes, and gone naked for a sign, etc.

To which we Answer, By the same reason he might as well have said, that was an
unclean spirit that led Isaiah the Prophet to put off his shoes, and walk
naked and barefoot as a sign and wonder upon Egypt, when as it was the Spirit
of God that moved him to that work, Isa. 20. and Saul also when he went to
Naioth, and the Spirit of God was upon him and prophesied, and he stripped off
his Clothes and lay down naked all the day, and all that night, wherefore it
was said, is Saul also among the Prophets, 1 Samuel 19.23, 24. And thus J. W. may
see the error of his own judgment, who has condemned that Spirit to be
unclean, which led Isaiah and Saul to go naked, by his censuring such now as
are led by the same Spirit, but against his reproachful tongue we do vindicate
such a thing in it self, and that the Spirit of the Lord is not limited, but
may lead some at this day to the same thing, though if any do such a thing in
imitation and deceit, we justify them not.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the sufficiency of the Light, and the anointing within
to teach all that do believe.
AGain the next thing observeable that we can digg out of his heap of Confusion
is, he charge us with dissimulation, that we never intended that every man
should be guided by the Light in them, though we Preach it up, and direct every
man to it as a guide, his Reasons for it are,

First, Because we intend to communicate a Teacher from without.

Secondly, Because we declare to men and women, that if they will but wait in
silence, they shall receive virtue and Life from us though they never see us
more, by which it appears (says he) that we intend to give a spirit to such as
adhere to our Doctrine.

Thirdly, Because when we take hold of the hands of men and women, yea, when we
have taken hold of the wrists of some, they have been taken with a trembling,
etc.

Fourthly, Because we are constantly visiting them that are inclining to our
Principles, etc.

Fifthly, Because we run up and down to spread our Doctrine, and by our
Printing such a multitude of Books to Teach men in our way, we cry down
Preaching (says he) and that we lay aside Gods Word, and set up our own word,
and that Gods Holy Scriptures we reject, and our own unholy Writings we exalt,
etc.

Sixthly, Because the Light which is in every man, does not lead us and our
followers to do those things we do, etc. page 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163.

Answer, To all these we Answer, That we do turn people to the Light of the
Spirit of God within them, and Preach the free Gift and Grace of God that he
has given to the Sons of men in order to their Salvation, and we acknowledge
notwithstanding all J. W. his Scornful and Ignorant Railings against us for
Preaching the light within, that we are sent of God, and it is our Message that
we have received to Preach to all the World, and that we are sent to turn from
the darkness to the Light, as the Apostle Paul, Acts 26.18. and this Light to
which he turned them, was not a visible Carnal Light without them, but an
Invisible and Spiritual Light that shone in their Consciences, and to this
Light Paul was sent to turn them, even to the light that shined in their
Hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. The light shined in their Hearts, that gave them the light
of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ, and the light of
the new Covenant, is the Light of the Spirit of God that shines in men's
Consciences, for God has said, I Will put my Spirit within them, and write my
Law in their Hearts, so that whosoever does Preach the new Covenant, must
Preach the light within; but of this about Preaching the light within, more in
another place, therefore here we pass it, and shall examine his fix feeble
Reasons, by which he would prove that we dissemble with people in Prrac^ing the
light within, and we never intend what we say, which is a notorious slander,
that shows J. VV. has neither wit nor good Conscience; for might not he as
well have brought all these his Reasons against the Apostles who Preached the
same Doctrine of the light within as we do now, for when Saint John said to the
Church, ye have anointing within you, and ye need not man to Teach you, but as
the same anointing teaches you, 1 John 2. might not J. W. as well have said
to him, John, thou do not mean as thou speak, but dissemblest with them,
for thou say, they have anointing (or light) within them, and they need no
man to teach them, but as that does teach them, and yet thou thy self art a
Teacher without them, and thou give exhortations to them by Declarations and
Epistles, and tellest them if they abide in the anointing that they have
received, and in Christ, they shall not sin; and though the Saints in former
Ages were thus taught by the anointing within them, yet they did constantly
visit one another, and prayed one for another as the annoting led them, but
had thou J. W. lived in their days, thou might have said, John, thou do
plainly declare that the anointing in the Saints will not do the business, as
thou scornfully say to us, but thou Communicate an unclean spirit, and thou
writest Epistles, and spreads thy Doctrine by Letters or Books, and the
Apostles run up and down from one Nation, Country and City to another; and what
need you do this, if the anointing within be sufficient to teach them; and if
it be sufficient, why does not every particular Saint do that which some do?
Why does not every one of the Christians go up and down Preaching as well as
some few of you Apostles? Thus and after this manner might thou J. W. have
reasoned against the Apostles and Saints as well as against us, and doubtless,
hadest thou lived in their days, thou would have said no less by them then
thou do by us, but this is to manifest thy own folly and weakness, who
cannot understand how the anointing dwells in the Saints and teaches them
into all Truth; and how notwithstanding they edify one another, and instructs
one another by words and writings; this same thing was true amongst the
Apostles and Primitive Christians and is true also at this day among us, though
thou objects against it, nay reviles and slanders the witness of the same at
this day, and this is thy ignorance and weakness, who art not worthy to be
named a defender of the Gospel of Christ, as thy works makes to appear.

And as for J. W. his saying as if we should say, They should receive virtue
and life from us, and that we intend to give a spirit, and of taking hold of
the wrists of some, etc. And that we lay aside Gods Word, and reject
Scriptures, and exalts our own unholy writings, etc. These are slanderous
accusations and malicious suggestions, as if we were Witches and such like; And
this is spoken by him with a tendency (as does appear) to enrage the spirits of
ungodly men against us; We do not say they shall receive Life from us, but if
they wait upon God in the Ministration of his Life and Spirit, they shall
receive Life from him, and sufficient instruction by his Grace and Gift within
them if they never see us more, and they shall receive the Spirit of Truth from
God, though we are made Ministers of the Spirit, which the Father gives to all
his Children; and as for our taking one another by the hands by way of kind
Salutation one of another, Why does he wickedly surmize against us for this
practice, but that out of the abundance of his malicious heart, his tongue
speaks fraudilently, as if we did bewitch people thereby; thus much he seems
to intimate by his reproachful expressions, that we intend by taking one
another by the hands to communicate a spirit, which is only his ignorant and
malicious suggestion; and as for our denying the Word of God and rejecting
Scriptures, we shall pass it here (only tell thee J. W. thou have slandred us)
and speak fuller to it by and by.

1. But concerning immediate teaching of God by the light and anointing within,
I would yet more fully explain, that I might be understood of all. First, We do
not affirm that every man in the world (to wit) unbelievers as well as
believers have received the anointing and spirit within them, so as they need
no man to teach them; for this is only proper to the Saints of God, who have
believed in and received Christ Jesus and his Spirit, that anointing which
teaches them all things, and leads into all Truth, and they abiding in this
anointing, they need no man to teach them but as it teaches, and this is the
new Covenant of God, and according to his promise, I will put my spirit within
them, and write my Law in their hearts, and they shall need no man to say, know
the Lord, but from the least to the greatest they shall all know me says the
Lord; But as we have said, this is only proper to the Believers and Sanctified
in Christ Jesus, and this state is not proper to the unbelievers in the world
in their state of unbelief, who rejects the Counsel of God, and refuses to be
taught by him and led of him, and quenches the Spirit of the Lord.

2. But though this state was promised by the Lord that his people should be
thus taught, and the Saints did in the Apostles days witness it, as in John's
Epistle before cited, and the Saints of God now in this age do witness the
same; Yet notwithstanding the Saints did and may edify one another, and build
up one another in the most holy Faith, and Comfort one another by advice and
Counsel, and instruction through declaring the Word of the Lord one to another,
and Ministering the Gospel of Christ and of his free gift one to another, as the
anointing within moves and teaches, this was the Saints practice in the days
of old, and is their practice at this day, for let none mistake us, as if any
were so taught of God by the anointing and Light within that they were thereby
incapable of, and freed from all good instruction, edification and counsel,
visitations and salutations of Love amongst them and one toward another, like
as if they were so taught of God as their state admited of carelessness, and
rejecting of love and exhortations one from another, we tell thee nay, but we
are so taught of God at this day as the Saints before us were by the light and
anointing within, which we have received from God, that always we are capable
of and willing to receive edification and counsel, and advice through the Word
of the Lord, and by his Spirit that dwells in us, and extends one to another by
good advice and counsel, consolation and comfort, so that these two do agree
(to wit) immediate Teaching by the anointing and light within us, and
exhortation and edification one of another by the same spirit and anointing
among us, and these two are not contrary one to the other.

3. Yet we do say, though the unbelievers have not so received the anointing
and spirit within them, as that they need no man to teach them, as the
believers have received it; yet the Gift of the Spirit of God and the light of
it is given to them, and manifested in their Consciences, and has its
operation of conviction and reproof, because of their unbelief and Iniquities,
and these needs to be taught without them, even turned and directed to this
same light within them, that they may believe in Christ Jesus, and wait upon
the Lord in it, thereby to receive the anointing and pouring forth of the
Spirit through Faith in Christ Jesus, that they may be also-taught of God as
believers and regenerate persons, and may need none to teach them, but as the
Gift and Grace of God within them, and such in the state of their unbelief,
have need to be Preached unto, that they may believe and be renewed, and
receive more of the Spirit and of the Grace of God in a greater measure, and
may come into Covenant with God, and be so taught of him, as not to need
another Teacher. And thus we have showed, First, That the Saints are taught of
God and they need no man to teach them, but as the anointing within them.
Secondly, That they are not so taught of God, as not to be capable to receive
advice and instructions one of another in the Lord. Thirdly, How the
unbelievers has the Light of Christ given to them, and yet has need of
teaching without them.

And thus I have answered and confuted that foolish charge of J. W. that we
dissemble by telling people the light within is the Teacher, and yet intends it
not, and have showed him that we do say, the Saints that are called and
regenerated, have received the spirit in that manner and measure, as that they
need no man to teach them but as the anointing, and the unbelievers have the
Gift of the Light of the spirit of God given to them, that it may teach them,
and therefore we preach the Gospel to them to beget Faith in their Hearts, and
that they may receive Christ and his anointing to Teach them and lead them into
all Truth: And now I shall proceed to the next thing observeable, which is
concerning our Meetings.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning meeting together, and silent waiting upon the Lord,
with something about back-sliders, and the spirit that Acts them.
J. W. says, An evil spirit is our Familiar, which we communicate to such as
adhere to our Doctrine.

And first he says, it appears by that humming and hollow sithing among us,
which is from the evil spirit.

Secondly, Our silent meeting is the direct Practice (says he) of such as have
familiar spirits, and to what end are our silent Meetings, but for the
communicating of our unclean spirits; for never did any of the servants of the
Living God hold meetings in silence, to meet and not speak one word; and such
Meetings are contrary to the practice of the people of God in all ages, and
they are gone aside after Satan, whose Doctrine they publish, and whose unclean
spirits they hold Assemblies in private to communicate. 3. He speaks of some
confession of some of our own Proselytes, that there came a Spirit into one of
them as he was going to reprove another, which did roar and make a terrible
noise in his belly; and another story or two he tells of some that has now
forsaken us, that a Spirit came into him that did make him quake and tremble so
exceedingly that he thought it would have tore him, etc. And another confessed
that there did a Spirit speak within her, bidding her leave her Kindred, etc.
Then he concludes this Chapter with a certain story us he calls it, of the sad
pranks the Devil played on one that thought himself perfect, pages 164, 165,
166, 167, 168.

Answ. 1. To all which we do Answer, That all these poor weak reasons asserted
does not prove his assertion, that we communicate an evil Spirit to such as
adhere to our Doctrine; the Assertion in its self is a lie, and a grievous
slander, published without the fear of God, and what sober men could imagine
that a Baptist Teacher, a defender of their Gospel, as he accounts himself in
his Epistle, should use such a weapon against us as so foul and gross a
slander as this is, especially at this day, when both he and we are in a
suffering state and condition from our adversaries, wherein we might rather
have comforted one another in our sufferings, then added to one another grief
and affliction by fighting one with another before our adversaries, that would
rejoice to see us both destroyed that they may glory over us; And as for that
humming and hollow sighing as he calls it, it is not from an evil Spirit as he
supposes, but rather occasioned by the Spirit of God which works according
to that Scripture, with groans and sighs that cannot be uttered, Romans 8. And
the Lord despises not the sighing of the poor, and the Saints groaned in
themselves; and had J. W. or his helpfellows in this his folly been as wise and
judicious as he would be accounted, he would rather have judged the deep sighs
that he speaks of had arisen from the work of Gods Spirit rather then from an
evil Spirit; for what would he have said of them in whom there was such groans
and sighs which could not be uttered, and that groaned within themselves (as in
Romans 9.) would not he have said these were from a familiar and evil Spirit;
and as for some being enabled at our Meetings, as he says, to speak two or
three hours, this he judges also to be from an evil Spirit; the Lord forgive
him and make him more wise, or else he can never inherit Eternal Life, that
thus judges it to be an evil Spirit by which the Servants of God are enabled to
speak his word even immediately without consultation or study; what would he
have said of Peter who so immediately inspired that he lift up his voice and
preached the Gospel in a wonderful manner, to the amazement of the Hearers,
being an unlearned man, and not used to large Orations, and this was not by
carnal study, nor of an evil Spirit, but even as the Spirit within him moved
him, Acts 2. and yet there were some at that day of J. W's Spirit who said he
was drunk, and the like, because the Spirit of God carried him out so
wonderfully in Declaration, and he says that it is done in these days by an
evil familiar Spirit; Oh J. W. thou Enemy of God, Repent, who have judged the
Spirit of God to be an evil Spirit; and of many of the Prophets of the Lord, it
is said that the Spirit of God came upon them at such and such times, and they
spoke to admiration, when as at other times it is possible they appeared weak
men; for says the Apostle, of our selves we can do nothing, but by Christ we
can do all things; of themselves they were weak, but of Christ strong and
mighty, and thus it is among us at this day, we are not ashamed of it, even
sometimes we are strong and mighty by Christ, and sometimes of our selves mean
and weak.

2. As for our silent meetings which J. W. has charged to be the direct
practice of such as have familiar Spirits, We say that this is a contradiction
to his last saying, who charged us with speaking too much in our meetings, and
now charges us with too much silence, this is direct contradiction, and
therefore how shall we escape the judgment of his slanderous reproachful
tongue, who accuses us for speaking sometimes too much and sometimes too
little; and also does assert that when we speak we do it by a familiar and evil
Spirit, and when we are silent that is by a familiar and evil Spirit too; Oh
thou Enemy of God how shall we escape thy cruel censures, it appears whether we
speak or be silent in our meetings it is not pleasant to thee, for thou art of
the Spirit of which Christ speaks, who said, John came neither eating nor
drinking, and yet that Spirit said he had a Devil, and Christ came eating and
drinking, and it said he was a winebibber, and the same Spirit is J. W. and his
fellows of, who say its by an evil and familiar Spirit that we speak, and its
by an evil and familiar Spirit that we are silent.

3. Our meetings are according to the mind of God and example of Gods people in
fornier ages, and they are for the end to wait upon God and worship him, and we
have the evident. Testimony of the Spirit of God in our own Consciences many
thousands of us, that the Lord God has been present with us in his heavenly
virtue, and power, and comfort, and Soul-refreshments in such our Meetings, and
that many a time have we found the Lord when we have been met together to wait
upon him, even to the satisfaction of our immortal souls, who has revealed his
goodness and his saving health unto us even in our meetings, and this the
Spirit of God witnesses to us, blessed be his name, notwithstanding whatsoever
J. W. or any such slanderous tongues can oppose in this case; and we have large
example in the Scriptures that the people of God met together in the same way
and manner as we do now, in private houses, and sometimes in the fields, and
sat sometimes long in silence, as Ezekiel. 3. The Children of the captivity they
sat together, and Ezekiel was astonished amongst them seven days, and at the
end of seven days, and not before, the word of the Lord came to him; and would
not J. W. have looked upon this silence to have been from an unclean spirit? and
Job that servant of God sat with his friends seven days and seven nights and
spoke not a word one to another; so that from hence it is proved that some of
Gods servants did sit in silence for a long time, neither do we read that the
Churches of Christ had always speaking and preaching amongst them when they
met together, though often they had, and thus we cannot but vindicate such a
practice in it self, and the scripture is plain for it, as in sitting together
in silence, and in that silence the Lords presence sweetly enjoyed, though yet
there are very few of our meetings in such silence as that some one or other or
more has not something given of God by way of Exhortation to the People or
Prayer to God, few meetings I believe wherein the Lord does not stir up the
hearts of some or other to mention his Name; so that we would be understood in
this, we plead not for silence in opposition to all speaking, nor can we plead
that of necessity some must speak, or else God cannot be worshipped, though
there is no such thing amongst us as brain-study or knowledge beforehand that
we shall speak, or what we shall say, like the Diviners of this age, who makes
up their matter beforehand, and shapes it, what and how to say it before they
come among the People to whom they must say it, like Artists and Tradesmen,
this kind of way we reject as unprofitable to God-wards; yet if any have a
particular message ascribed to them of God to a particular People or Person,
which if any have, let them retain what God puts into their hearts and be
faithful to speak it; but the general way in which God leads us is this, 1. We
do know it is our duty by the persuasions of the spirit of God in our own
Consciences, and partly by the examples of Saints declared in scriptures, to
meet together at a convenient time and place, and so often as the wisdom of God
shall order for us, which dwells with us. 2. Being come together we are turned
to the Lord in our minds, to feel our peace, and joy, and comfort, and how our
conditions are to God-wards in our own particulars. And 3. if any amongst us
receive any thing from the Lord to speak of what his work is in them, and what
he has done for them, or by way of exhortation to administer comfort to others,
or by way of reproof to convince or convert others, or by way of praises unto
God for his mercies received, or in Prayer for what is wanted, I say if any
amongst us find ought of this from the Lord upon them, they speak it to others,
and its well-pleasing to God, and comforting one to another; but
notwithstanding if nothing of this be received from the Lord by any in a
meeting to declare to others, yet our peace and joy and comfort and Teacher is
with us, even the grace and Spirit and anointing of God that dwells with us, by
which every one is fed and refreshed in his own heart in the presence of the
Lord; and this is the manner and end and practice of and in our meetings, and
that its the practice of familiar Spirits to sit in silence, and for the
communicating of an unclean Spirit, and that none of the people of God ever did
thus, and that such a practice is not in the example of Scriptures, and that we
are gone aside after Satan, and publishes his Doctrine, and communicates his
unclean Spirit; these are six abominable ungodly lies uttered by J.W. in about
2 pages of paper, and therefore I cannot but exhort thee to Repentance, if thou
have not sinned the sin unto damnation, that thou may find mercy if it be not
too late; and thus much about our meetings, which are for the worship of God,
which I could not but vindicate in opposition to thy false assertions about the
same; and whether J. W. and his fellows be not themselves guided by an unclean
Spirit in slandering the Innocent, let the God of Heaven and Earth judge, and
Saints and Angels testify.

Concerning Back-sliders, and J. W. his stories.

4. As for the stories which he tells of, of one that did confess that a
Spirit made him roar, and of another whom he says is as a brand plucked out of
the fire, that a Spirit made him quake and tremble, and another who said that
the Spirit spoke with a vocal voice in her, and of another who thought himself
perfect, and the Devil wrought such strange things upon him, as in page 170,
171. These I look upon to be merely vain stories, seeing he has neither named
the Persons, nor the places, nor the time in which these things should have
been, and therefore I conclude them only vain stories and not worth answering,
nor spending much time about; for what manner of evil has not been said of us
within these ten years, the words of Christ have been plainly fulfilled upon
us, who said, they shall say all manner of evil falsely of you for my Names
sake, and among all manner of evil falsely spoken we reckon these stories of J.
W's; but as for such as he says are as brands plucked out of the fire, I
perceive he means such who sometimes have been amongst us and professed and
confessed to our Doctrines and ways, and yet afterward have turned from us,
we do confess such there may be, even such who may have tasted something of
the Power of the Lord and of his goodness to their souls, and have cried out
and trembled because of their iniquities, yea, and have been called out from
their Kindred, as he speaks, and yet some such have turned aside again to
vanity, and then have been ready to make Lies, and frame false reports, and to
tell them for their own advantage, to excuse their own revoltings, thinking to
defame us as so bad and so evil, that with a more credit to themselves they may
turn from us, and some such like persons has been J. W's informers, if he has
not invented the lies himself; And though there be such revolters and
false-hearted Hypocrites in the world, yet the way of the Lord and his Truth is
alike precious unto us, immutable and unchangeable, though Back-sliders walks
not in the way thereof, but seeks to asperse it when they turn aside from it;
but let such persons be marked, some such we do know, and they were wicked and
profane before they came among us, and coming among us, possibly were
convinced of their sins, and touched with judgment and sorrow for sin; but now
being turned from us again, they are more profane then ever, and the Devil is
entered again with the unclean Spirits worse then before, and their latter end
is worse then their beginning, as the Scriptures says of such, and some such as
these are J. W. his converts, and his brands plucked out of the fire, and such
to tell stories and he to publish them are suitable correspondents, but Truth
is over them both, and the way of the Lord is precious and prosperous,
notwithstanding all the malicious oppositions that is in the hearts of his
Enemies, whose Judgment is such, that they call Truth Error, and Error
Truth, and calls that the work of the Devil which is of God, and that the work
of God which is of the Devil, and the saying is true upon them, a foolish
People that have eyes and see not, hearts and understand not.

And whereas J. W. has been opposing the Light within, and both the Preachers
and followers of it, thereby proving himself to be neither Preacher of the
Light nor follower of it, and therefore neither Minister of Christ nor indeed a
Christian; for whosoever does not preach the Light and word of God within, is
no Minister of Christ, nor in the example of his Apostles, as is manifest at
large in this Book; and whosoever does not follow the Light of Christ within,
and walk by the Spirit of God which is a Light in the heart, is not in the new
Covenant, nor a member of the Church of Christ, and such a one J W. is directly
concluded to be from his own words, who has opposed such as preach and follow
the Light within, as if all such were in delusion; and he has denied that the
Light within is sufficient to lead to repentance from sin, and pardon of sin,
and to comfort in God for the soul; But he has found out one that does all
this, that shows sin, and that judges for sin, and that leads to mourn and
grieve for sin, and takes sin away, and blots it out, (to wit) the Devil, as he
says (if you will believe him) pray you do but observe his story, page 169.
and 170. He tells you there a large story (but he names neither the Person, nor
the place, nor time where and when it was, which we demand of him in his next)
of one that preached the Light within, as he says, that the Devil did so and
so with him, and that the Devil set all his sins that ever he had done in all
his Life before him, as if they had been written in capital Letters, then the
Devil laid them all to his charge and did judge him for them, and that the
Devil made him to mourn, and grieve, and weep, and made the tears come from his
eyes for his sins; this done, as J. W. relates, then the Devil took all his
sins from him, and said, I have blotted out all thy Transgressions, and the
Devil let him loose from all his bonds, and then the Devil commanded him to
tell what God had done for his soul, etc. Now let any sober man judge, that
has ever read the Scriptures' whether this be a likely story, for the
Scriptures say that it is God that sets man's sin in order before him, and it is
God that judges men for sin by his Spirit of Judgment, and it is he that
causes men to mourn and grieve for sin, and it is he that takes away their sins
and blots them out by the blood of Christ, and that loses man from his
iniquities and brings them to declare what he has done for their souls; and
its our Faith that it is God through his own Son that works all this, and not
the Devil, and the Scriptures say the same, Psalm. 50. Isa. 4.4. Dan. 9.24. John
5.27. 1 John 1.7. But J. W. his story is contrary, for he relates that its the
Devil that does all this, and by this you may judge of this story and the Truth
of it, and also do but observe the temper of J. W. his Spirit, and you shall
see through his Book he opposes the Light of Christ and the anointing within,
as if they were not sufficient for the effecting these things, but he has
found you one that can do these things, and who think you but the Devil, and
that can discover sin and condemn for it, and lead People to Repentance, and
take away and blot out Transgression, etc. He has brought you a story for the
proof of it which we believe he credits to be true, else he would not have
brought it for the proof of his matter, as he has very pertinently done as he
supposes; and further as his story goes, this Person that the Devil dealt thus
by when he would have preached the Light within, the Devil caused his mouth to
shut, that he should not preach it, etc. From which it follows, that the Devil
and J. W. are both of one mind, for J. W. opposes the Light within as the
Devil does, from which we have the more occasion to stand faithfully in
preaching the Light within, seeing both the Devil and J. W. do oppose it,
though afterward his story relates that the Devil made him preach what God had
done for his Soul; and if this be a likely story, let wise men judge; Oh the
Ignorance and Impudency that is fully manifest in J. W. that has given his
Faith to believe that the Devil convinces men of sin, and judges them for it,
and takes away their sin. Thus much in Answer to his story till his next
return, that we may know by him the Person and the place, in whom and where
these pranks of the Devil were acted, as J. W. says, and in the mean time it
rests upon him, that he has believed and reported better of the Devil then of
the Light of Christ Jesus and his Spirit in men, but it seems an unlike story,
for the Devil will not destroy his own Kingdom.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Humility and Unity, and the Infalliable testimony.
NOw I come to his fourth Chapter, the sum whereof is, that our proofs as he
calls them, does not justify our way and practice, which he says are in
number five; First, Our Humility. Secondly, Our Unity. Thirdly, Our Destroying
the Whore. Fourthly, Our discovering all Secrets. Fifthly, Our sufferings In
these pretended proofs, says J.W. like Goliath in his Armor in which we
rejoice, but he says, He shall be enabled to take this Armor from us, and
destroy us with our own Sword wherein we trust.

Answer, To which I Answer, First, Generally that I. W. has here mistaken the
matter, and stated the case for himself in such a form as his weak wit may
easily answer it, and so has as it were made a man of straw to fight with it;
for he is mistaken, we do not trust in our own strength, nor in these outward
signs and tokens which he has here laid down; for thus more fully I answer; we
are the people of God, of his chosen and elected Seed, and our proof, that we
are such is the infalliable Spirit of God in us, that he has given us that
bears infallible witness and evidence in us and to us that we are such; and
this is the witness, even the holy Spirit of the Father in which we trust; and
this witness is sufficient to us to prove us to be the people of God, and it is
the only evidence in which we trust; so that he has mistaken the matter, in
saying we trust in our Humility, Unity and Sufferings, thus he has imagined of
us, and then goes about to overthrow his own imagination; an excellent warrior
indeed, that can raise false objections to himself, and then confute them, and
think he has confuted us; but I tell him again, he has erred in his
proceeding, for we do not trust to any proof as infallible, saving the proof
and testimony of the Spirit of God that he has given us, for by that spirit we
know we are of God, and they that are of God hears us, and we are now the
Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; Thus much by way of
general answer; Now we come to Particulars,

First, As concerning Humility, J. W does absolutely deny, we are more humble
and free from pride then all others, either in the outward bodily habit, or
more secretly in the Heart; for the Romish Friars says he who are great
Adversaries to the Truth, they excel in Humility, and they will be justified
rather then thee for their Humility; and again a Hermit at Ickn^m near London,
he says is so, and so humble, neglecting of the Body, etc. Then he seems to
condemn us for superfluity, that our Trades, Dit and Garments are as other
men's, and the hair of our heads like women's, by which he says he sees we are not
more free from pride then other men; and as for pride of Heart, he says, It is
perceived by our countenance and by our Actions, for we neither fear God nor
Jesus Christ, we fear not the Judgments of God, but despises his Promises,
thou hardens thy self in thy wickedness, the holy Commandments and Precepts of
Jesus Christ thou contemns them, and calls them shells without kernels, empty,
carnal, lifeless, and thus we esteem the Promises of Life and Immortality, and
reject the Promise of the Resurrection, etc. and we do not receive man, he
says, for we do not acknowledge any Superior, thou will not put off thy Hat
nor bow thy body to any man, and neglectest Faith and Gospel Obedience, and thy
heart is too high to stoop to anything, whereby it should manifest Humility of
spirit, Faith and Obedience, by which it is manifest, thou art not more humble
but more proud then others, page 175. to 180.

Answer, First, Here is a whole pack of lies and falsehoods, reproaches and
slanders heaped up together, reproachfully cast upon us: for we glory not in
any thing we are, saving in the Lord that has made us what we are, we boast not
in our Humility, but that God has wrought it in our hearts in measure, and it
is in us a fruit of his Spirit, this we dare not deny, least we should deny the
Work that God has wrought; and as for the Romish Friars and Hermites of which
he speaks that are so and so self-denying, we make them no example to us, nor
are we of that spirit by which they are guided in their feigned practices of
Humility, though he compares us together; but yet their practices of feigned
self-denial may shame you Baptists, so called, who professes your selves to be
the only Church of Christ, and yet in days past, have been so proud and high,
that you thought you had never places great enough in the Nation, but exalted
your horn so high, that few but such as were of your Fraternity, were counted
by you worthy of any place or office, such was your pride in those days, and
arogancy (till it was time for the Lord to bring you down) both in Habit and
otherwise, that the very feigned Friars by their example might shame you, who
never came so far in truth of self-denial as Hypocrites have done in
feignedness; and as for our Trading, Diet and Garments, of which J. W. speaks,
they are according to Godliness, and Truth, and Righteousness, and according to
example of the Holy men of God before us; and so is our hair at which he
stumbles as if he would fall, and says, we are like Locusts, by it, that comes
out of the Pit, when as there is neither Command nor Example in Scriptures, how
often nor of what length any should cut their hair, but rather no example at all
for cutting it then otherwise; and was Sampson and Christ and Samuel, and many
others of the Servants of God, like Locusts of the bottomless Pit, that wore
long hair? How have thou unjust Judge and Hypocrite Judged the Servants of God
in thy haste and ignorance, by judging of us in the like case that they were
guilty of.

2. And as for the pride of our hearts with which we are so deeply charged by
J. W. we will rather lie under his false charge with patience, then give any
occasion of suspicion that we justify our selves; but yet I cannot but charge
him in this place with a foul high slander, for we fear God and Jesus, and
regards his Commandments and despises not his promises, nor hardens our selves
in wickedness, nor does not contemn the Precepts of Jesus Christ, nor the
precious promises of Imortality and the Resurrection, these are all absolute
falsehoods, and were not J. W. a person altogether impudent and given up to
hardness of heart, he would never thus grossly have belyed us, and these lies,
must be his only proof, for he can give no better testimony that we are proud
in heart; the Lord rebuke his lying tongue, its enough here only to deny his
lies, for most of the particulars are before spoken of, to wit, of the
Commandments and Promises of Christ, of the Immortality and the Resurrection;
but he goes on in his accustomed manner of falsehoods, and says, we acknowledge
not any superiors, and that we wholly neglect Faith and Gospel Obedience, and
that our hearts are too high to submit to anything of the Spirit, Faith and
Obedience, and that we have an eye of scorn and disdain; all which are lies,
and thus J. W. goes on, like as if he had devoted himself to tell a lies, and
studied to frame falsehood, seeing that every page which I have now under hand
carries in it number of lies, but he charges it to be the pride of our hearts,
because we will not put off our Hatts; This is false also as much as the rest,
for though we cannot put off our Hat is in Honor to any man's person, nor give
them flattering Titles of honor, yet this is not from the pride of our Hearts
our God knows, but from another ground as I could demonstrate, were it the
present case of controversy; But being brought by J. W. as a proof of this
matter, therefore now I p^sse it; so that his only proofs, that we are not
more humble, but more proud then others, which is his present assertion, is
poorly and weakly managed with Proofs and Arguments of absolute deceits and
falsehoods, who has not one better proof from his Pen then a lie to prove his
proposition; and thus I pass this particular, commiting him to the reward of
God, according to his work which must come upon him one day; and as for the
matter of our Humility, we commit the cause of that also to God, who judges
more justly then vain man.

Now I come to the second Particular of Unity, and J. W. says, Our Unity he
does absolutely deny, for Unity in the truth we have not but in Iniquity, for
we do not hold the Head Christ Jesus, and we are not in Unity, but in
confusion, we are not United unto Jesus Christ by Faith, and intimates that we
deny Jesus Christ his Person, and contemn his Ordinances, and trample his word
under their feet, and this do the Preachers of the Light within, in says he,
for (says he) We are not at Unity among our selves, but one Preaching one
thing, and another Prints the contrary; and he speaks of one that affirmed that
the Bread and Wine spoken of in Scriptures, appointed to be eaten and drunken
in remembrance of Jesus Christ is not Temporal nor External, but Spiritual and
Eternal; Another, he says, should Print that that Bread and Wine is common,
such as may be eaten by unbelievers at their Feasts, thus are we divided from
the Truth and one from another, says he, For some do hold that Bread and Wine
were to be received until he came, by which we understand until he come in us,
and thus the Preachers of the Light within are divided in Doctrine, because one
says, the Bread and Wine is Eternal; another says, it is visible and
Temporal; and one Teacher calls another Dog, and has disproved each other,
etc. page 183, 184, 185.

Answer, To all this I answer in opposition to his charge, we are in Unity and
Fellowship with the Lord in Spirit, and one with another in him,
notwithstanding J. W. his seeming detection as if it were otherwise, and his
charge is high, that we have not Unity in the Truth, but in Iniquity, and his
proof for it is like the proof of the former assertion (to wit) absolute lies;
for he says, we do not hold the head Christ Jesus, nor are United to him by
Faith, nor have any access by him, and that we deny him and his Person, and
contemn his Person, and trample his Word under feet; these are falsehoods
altogether, and by this means he proves his point, that we have Unity in
Iniquity, and not in the Truth; it is wickedly affirmed, and as wickedly proved
by one of Satan's Messengers, who has set himself to oppose the Lords Truth and
his People, and that by his Masters order, and in his Masters way, who was a
Liar from the beginning.

Thirdly, And now I come to his Charge, That we are not in Unity among our
selves, which he has proved according to his accustomed manner; For what if
some did say, though he names none, that Christ broke Bread and drank Wine with
his Disciples, Temporal and Visible Bread, and he also broke Bread and drank of
the Cup with his Disciples, which was Spiritual and Eternal and Invisible, and
these may be both affirmed without any contradiction, Christ did eat of the
Bread with his Disciples, which might be eaten at unbelievers Feasts, and
Christ did eat of the Bread with his Disciples which unbelievers could not eat
of, both these are true, and has no such weight of contradiction in them, as
J. W. ignorantly supposes; and what would he say of the Apostle Paul and the
Apostle John, the one says, God is a consuming fire, the other says, God is
Love; and of the Prophets, one of whom said, God is angry everyday, and another
said, there is no anger in God, would not J. W. had he lived in their days,
have said, the Prophets and Apostles were divided among themselves; and as for
some calling another Dog, and disowning one another, and yet are all Preachers
of the Light within, though he mentions neither the time, place, nor persons,
and therefore because in other cases he speaks so falsely, of which I well know,
therefore I may have jealousy, this is false also; But however, suppose a
deceitful person that never knew the work of Regeneration should speak of, ye
Preach of the Light within, may not he be called a Dog, and disowned, and yet
no division among us? for such are not of us, but contrary to us, and we are
only divided from them, and not among our selves; and had J. W. lived in the
Apostles days, what would he have said, when some of the Apostles withstood
others in some controversies, would not he have said ye are dissemblers, ye
have not Unity among your selves, but are in confusion, and so and so; and also
when some deceivers got up and Preached Christ and the Gospel, pretendedly for
filthy lucre, and for covetousness, and had the form of godliness, and were
sometimes conversant in the Churches, but the Apostles cried against them and
disowned them, though they were among the Churches, and Preached the Apostles
words; but were the Apostles therefore divided, and deceivers, and in
confusion, because of some such amongst them? Thou ignorant man, I tell thee
nay, no more are we, though Hypocrites may get the words of Truth from our
mouths, for such are not of us, but we are divided from them, though among our
selves in the Body of Christ of which we are members, we have Unity, Peace and
Fellowship with the Lord, and one with another.

CHAP. X. Concerning destroying the Whore, discovering Secrets, and sufferings,
etc.
NOw I come to the third Particular about destroying the Whore, which J. W.
says he denies we do, his Reason is this, because we were not instrumental in
Banishing the Popes Nuntio's, Legates and Jesuits, nor have we stopped the Popes
Pardons nor Indulgencies by our Preaching; and he says, when did we cause
Cross and Crucifix to be pulled down, and when was Bell, Book and Candle,
Monasteries and Popish Hierarchy demolished by us; then he speaks of our
running up and down and railing against the Ministers of the Nation, and giving
them reviling Language, and what we do in destroying the Whore, as if we would
turn people out of one way of wickedness into another as bad or worse, and we
delude the Whore more then any others, we bid her Repent, but withal, teaches
her to reject the Word of God, and to reject Christ and disobey the Gospel,
etc. pages 185, 186, 187.

Answer. To all this I Answer, The Whore is the false Church, not only the
false Church of Rome, as J. W. seems only to intimate, but the Whore is all
that has the name of Church, whether they be National or Congregated Churches
so called) that do not witness, nor can prove that they are lawfully married to
Christ, such whomsoever are the Whore, and against this Whore we are ^ent to
give our testimony against her by the Spirit of the Lord, in order to the
converting people from her, and to destroy her, which we know the God of Heaven
will effect by his Power in his own season; but he denies this, because we have
not banished the Popes Nuntio's, nor the Jesuits out of this Land, etc. By the
same Rule J. W. nor none of his Fellows, nor the Baptists are not themselves
the True Church, nor destroyers of the Whore as they pretend; and while we are
censured by them, not to be destroyers of the Whore, but one with her, or worse
then she, by the same reason they give that we are such, they themselves are
proved to be as bad as they say we are; For when did any of the Baptists banish
any of the Popes Nuntio's, Jesuits or Legates out of England, and when did
they stop the Popes Pardons and Indulgencies by their Preaching? And when did
they demolish Bell, Book and Candle, and Popish Hierarchy, and pull down Popish
Crosses and Crucifixes? If these be found Reasons alleged against us, that we
are not destroyers of the Whore because thereof, by the self same Reasons J. W.
and his Fellow Baptists are proved to be no destroyers of the Harlot, the false
Church, but as bad as she, and upholders of her.

Secondly, But is this the way to destroy the Whore by Banishing, killing and
destroying the persons of the Papists, and by laying violent hands on their
Crosses and Monasteries? etc. I say no, for the destruction of the Whore must
be by converting and turning people from her by found Doctrine, and by drawing
people by True Love from error and falsehood to Truth and Righteousness, and
not by killing and banishing, and doing violence to persons for their errors
sake; but it is manifest that the Baptists would destroy the Whore, the Church
of Rome, and all that differs from them in point of Religion on this wise, by
killing and banishing persons, and this is clearly manifest by his own words,
that they pretend to destroy the Whore by killing and banishing persons, which
is a Spirit of cruelty which lodges in their hearts against the persons of
people that differs from them, and it is the same spirit that is in the Whore
of Rome, that would bring forth the same practice if it had as great force; but
let me tell them this is not the way to destroy the Whore, but thereby they
rather prove themselves to be of the Whore (bloody and cruel) that drinks the
blood of the Martyrs and Prophets.

3. And whereas J. W. charges us with running up and down and railing against
the Ministers of the Nation, Hereby it is manifest that he takes part with the
false Ministry in opposition to us, and has joined himself to Baal, and has
charged us with deluding the Whore more then any others do, and if we turn any
from the National way of Worship, and from the Papists, and if any turn from
open profaneness to join with us in the way of the Lord, J. W. has concluded
such to be in a worse way of wickedness, and to be more deceived in that state
then if they were Papists, Idolaters, or common profane Persons, thus much his
words signify, for though (says he) we bid them repent, yet we teach them to
reject the Word of God, and Christ himself, as though Preaching Repentance were
a rejecting of the Word of God and of Christ himself, which is ignorance and
impudency in J. W. to affirm, who also does signify that such as turns from
common Idolatry and open profaneness to our way, are in a worse condition
with us then they were before; the Lord rebuke his ignorance as well as his
lies.

4. And we do know that our Testimony against the false Ministry in these
Nations has not been ineffectuall, but God has blessed our endeavors, and
converted many from the way of Error in Doctrine, Practice and Worship, to the
way of Truth and Righteousness, though J. W. reproachfully calls it running up
and down railing and cursing of the Ministry, which is like the rest of his
work, (to wit) falsehood; for we have given a blessed and a precious Testimony
against unrighteous ways, and not used cursed nor railing language, though we
have spoken plainly and not flatteringly to them, neither have we as some of J.
W's Brethren and Generation have done, cried against them, for the end that we
might dispossess their Persons and possess their Places, and Benefits, and
Tyches, and Hire; These things have we not done, though I could mention some of
the Baptists that have done it to my knowledge, like Hypocrites and
self-seeking persons, I cannot but speak plainly seeing I am provoked to it,
and to lay their own wickedness upon them, and let J. W. defend such if he
will, and he shall hear from me again.

5. Now I come to his fourth Particular about discerning of secrets, which he
says he denies, and that we do not discern the mystery of Christ his taking
away the sin of the world, nor the mystery and the secret of God manifest in
the flesh, etc. These mysteries we are ignorant of, though we can discern who
we have deceived by that spirit of Antichrist which guides us; and he speaks of
some that have been mistaken in some things, and thus he says, thy deceitful
dealing is seen, and the pride of thy heart, etc. page 188, 189.

Answ. As for discerning of Spirits, I do say it is the gift of God that God
gives unto his People, and there is such a gift in the true Church as
discerning of Spirits and secrets, and this same gift God has given some at
this day, but that we discern not the mystery of Christ Jesus nor of God
manifest in the flesh, this is J. W. his accustomed language, to wit of lies
and falsehood, which I sum up to the rest of his Lies; and as for our being
guided by the Spirit of Antichrist and deceiving others thereby, this is spoken
in his haste if not in his malice, and because he gives no proof for it, I
pass it with the Answer of a plain denial; And as for mistake of persons or
things which he imputes to us, suppose it be true which he says, yet this
proves us not to be dissemblers and deceived, as he concludes of us; for was
not the Apostle Paul who had the gift of discerning, sometimes mistaken, as
particularly in the case of the High Priest, and afterward said he wist not
that it was Gods High Priest; now J. W. would have charged Paul by the same
rule he charges us, that he was ignorant of the mysteries of Christ, and led by
the Spirit of Antichrist, and a deceiver and dissembler and deceitful dealer,
and that he had not the Spirit of discerning, but was proud in heart; Why?
because he mistook a Person, but such false judgment J. W. spends in his haste
and malice.

Now I come to the fifth Particular about sufferings, and J. VV. says, It is
not sufferings only which makes a Martyr, but the cause for which the
sufferings are; and he bids leave off boasting in our sufferings, for Romish
Priests though great Adversaries to the Truth, yet for sufferings they exceed
us, and we suffer many times as evil doers, and there is a Spirit in us that
waits but for an opportunity to make others to suffer; and he speaks of one
that has been threatened to be thrust out of doors by head and shoulders, and
says you will be as free to execute punishment whenever you obtain Power to
enable you to do it, etc. page 190, 191.

Answ. 1. As for sufferings we do confess that we are and have been a
suffering people under cruel persecutions even to death and banishment out of
the Dominions where some of us have lived, and such our sufferings have been
for the Name of the Lord, and for good Conscience sake, this the Lord himself
from Heaven bears witness of daily, and then what need we care for all J. VV.
says with his lying Spirit to the contrary; and some of our Friends have been
Martyrs, not because of their sufferings only, but for the cause for which
they have suffered, which is the direct cause of God and of a good Conscience,
and J. VV. is never able to prove the contrary, though we do not boast of our
sufferings as he falsely says, nor do we look upon our selves to be the People
of God, because we suffer, but we know we are the people of God and therefore
we suffer, and herein is Christ's words fulfilled upon us, who said, as they
have done unto me so shall they do unto you, and they shall speak all manner of
evil on you for my Names sake, and he that suffers as a Christian, it is a
Testimony to him that he is of God, and that his Persecutors are of the Devil.
2. As for the Romish Priests who have deeply suffered, though I will not say
for Truth and Righteousness sake, yet their sufferings are a shame to your
Generation, who cannot suffer for that which you call the Truth, as they do for
that which you call falsehood, and do not they here shame you, who can suffer
death for their Religion, but you Baptists that was lately tried by
Imprisonment, though at first many of you refused to swear as out of point of
Conscience, yet afterward the general part of you did deny your own
Principles, and did swear contrary to the command of Christ, and to what once
your selves professed, and for which you were imprisoned, and thus you proved
deceitful Persons, and Hypocrites, and such as would neither keep Conscience to
God nor Faith to men; and J. VV. himself came feebly off in this point as some
well knows, and so indeed he had need to plead that suffering is no good sign,
seeing he and his Brethren could not suffer, no not so much as the Romish
Priests, to their shame be it told, who were many of you in great confusion
about that very thing of Swearing, some of you holding against it, and some
writing for it, and suffering a while for refusing, and at last did swear, and
so made your selves a scorn to your Enemies, and proved your selves to be in
confusion, and treacherous to your own Principles and Consciences.

3. In that he charge that we suffer many times as evil doers, and not for
the sake of Christ and Truth, we charge him to prove this in his next, or else
silence shall be taken that he acknowledges himself to be a Liar and
Slanderer; and as for our waiting an opportunity to make others to suffer, this
is only his envious surmise; and for some threatening others, as he says, and
cursing them, having no better weapons; this I account like the rest of his
stories, not worth answering, though it is possible J. VV. judges of us by
himself, as if we wanted Power to execute what our wills could do; this I
verily believe is the state of him and his Brethren, for we have Power enough
according to the will of God, and out of his will desires no more Power, though
J. VV. wickedly suggests as if we would be cruel like himself, but this is but
his imaginations, and not worth heeding, for God has made us long-suffering
and patient toward all men.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the word of God and the Scriptures, and the word and
writings truly distinguished.
NOw I pass over to his fifth Chapter, as finding little to oppose between the
192. page and the 205. excepting half a score of Lies which I leave till J. W.
and I meet, which I hope may be in a good season; and his fifth Chapter
contains, Concerning the Scriptures and the word of God, and he charges us that
we deny the Doctrine of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the
word of God, and uses reproachful language concerning it, and speaks of one
laying the Bible upon the ground and setting his feet upon it, and we delight
to abuse the Scriptures, and are filled with rage against the Word of God, and
that we foam out disdain against the Scriptures, and then takes in hand to
prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God, etc. page 205.

Answ. 1. Here is a grievous charge laid down and managed in manner as
aforesaid, for it is utterly false that we use any reproachful language
concerning the holy Scriptures, neither ever have I known any of us ever set
his feet upon the Bible in contempt and abuse of the Scriptures, as he says,
though it is very true there was one Richard Stokes in the North of England
that was then an Anabaptist, (so called) and so yet for ought I know, that did
in contempt and scorn tread upon the Bible in the presence of many witnesses,
so it may be J. W. mistakes one of his own friends and thinks he is one of
ours, for it is not delightful in us to abuse the Scriptures, nor are we filled
with rage against the Word of God, nor do we foam out disdain against the
Scriptures, these things are utterly false.

2. This Testimony we have often given concerning the Scriptures, and here
again I give it upon this occasion; The Scriptures are writings in which are
contained many words of God, and may be properly called the words of God
declared by writing, and as they were given forth by the Spirit of God, and no
whit altered in Translation, they are a perfect Testimony of God, and his
works, of Christ, and his Salvation, and of the Experiences and Testimonies of
the Servants and holy men of God, and also in the Scripture is contained many
words of the Devil, and the words of wicked men, so that the Scriptures are a
true Testimony (as they were first given forth) of all these things, and we
believe that the Scriptures were spoken forth by the holy Spirit, as the holy
men of God were moved thereunto, and whatsoever is written ought to be believed
and received for Truth, and a true relation given by the Spirit of God; but the
Scriptures cannot properly be called the Word of God, for they are words and
writings, and admits of alteration and change, and therefore cannot properly be
called the word of God, but only a Declaration of the Word, and of that Truth
which lives and abides for ever, and which must be believed and practiced for
Salvation; and the Scriptures do say that the Word of God was in the beginning,
but the Scriptures began but to be written by Moses, which was many hundred of
years since the beginning, and therefore the Scriptures cannot be the word of
God which was in the beginning; Again the Scriptures do say that the Word of
God made the world, and lives, and abides for ever; but the Bible, the
Scriptures did not make the World, nor can abide for ever, but will pass away
as we see daily Books wears away, though the Truth therein declared of shall
abide for ever, and therefore the Scriptures are not the Word of God which must
endure for ever; and thus we do distinguish, and we would have all to do so,
between the Book (the writings) which are most properly called Scripture, and
that Truth, Salvation, Word of Life, and the things declared of in Scriptures,
the one endures for ever, the other not, the one is the Word of God, the other
a Testimony of it; and thus we distinguish, and yet not denying the Truth and
Life, and Salvation and Redemption, nor the Christ which the Scriptures speaks
of, but fully acknowledging that they are infinite and everlasting, and the
Scripture declare of these things but are not the things themselves; neither do
we deny to ascribe all lawful Dignity and Title and Reverence to the
Scriptures, but yet we cannot account them what they are not, nor give that
honor to them which God gives not, nor which he appointed them to receive,
though further we do acknowledge there is no other Gospel, nor way of Life and
Salvation, nor no other Christ for Redemption and Eternal Life, nor no other
Truth for substance but what is declared of in the Bible, which we do account
as I have said as it was given forth by the Spirit of God, to be a true
Testimony of all these things; this and such like Testimonies we have often
given concerning the Scriptures, yet still acknowledged Christ Jesus to be the
word of Eternal Life, he and no other, and yet this confession we make, not
contrary unto or to oppose, but according unto the Scriptures, and our
Testimony concerning the Scriptures is so well known both by word and writing
for these many years, that I need not here say much more in this case, only
that the Scriptures all along calls Christ the Word of God, and no where that I
know of in the Scriptures does it call it self the Word of God, but a
Declaration and a Treatise, Luke 1. Acts 1.

And whereas J. W. says, Is not the Truth expressed in the Scriptures eternal
and incorruptible? and what less then an Almighty hand has preserved that
Book? and this is devised deceitful Doctrine to teach all men to hearken to the
Light within them, thereby to turn away their minds from the Scriptures; And he
mentions that Scripture the words of the Lord, and every word of God are pure,
and the entrance of thy word gives Light, and my words shall not pass away,
and whosoever shall be ashamed of my words, etc. page 208, etc.

Answ. To all this I answer, why is J. W. so blind as to bring this in
opposition to us, as if he confuted us in something we held contrary to this,
when as it is nothing so, for we say the same as these Scriptures testify,
that the Truth expressed in the Scriptures is eternal and incorruptible, yet
the writings which are properly Scriptures will corrupt and change and alter,
and we do know the hand of God has been in preserving of that Book to this
day, and our benefit by the Scriptures are not the least of others, as I might
instance in diverse particulars, and we confess fully to the Truth of all these
Scriptures cited by him, and there is not any one of them opposite to us in any
thing that we hold; but why does he secretly here weave in his slander, as if
we did direct People to the Light within them, thereby to turn their minds from
the Doctrine of the Scriptures, which is utterly false, for we direct People to
the Light of the Spirit of God within them, not contrary to, or to make void
the Scriptures to them, but according to the Scriptures, and that they may come
to the fulfilling of them, and witness the Truth wrought in them whereof they
speak, and therefore his secret slander is turned out of doors; and further he
falls out in high terms, that God will punish such severely as do speak
against the Scriptures, and do disdain and reproach them, and that do add to or
take from them, and against such as do vent their rage against the Scriptures,
and tread them under their feet, as the Adversaries of Christ, the Preachers up
of the Light within do, says he, who are Blasphemers of God and his Truth,
when they cast the Scriptures on the ground, and call the Scriptures lifeless,
etc. page 212.

Answer, These Threatenings and Judgments do not belong to us, as not being
guilty of his charge, so let the judgment be to himself, for we are not
guilty, but he guilty of wickedness in charging us so falsely, like as if he had
given up himself to rail and accuse the innocent; for be it known to J. W. we
esteem as well and truly of the Scriptures as he does; And thus I count it a
sufficient answer to deny his false Charges, and to turn back his own sentence
to him again, God will punish him severely for his wickedness.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the Infallible Teacher, and that it is the Spirit of
God, and not the Scriptures.
NOw I shall proceed to J. W. his Proofs, That the Scriptures are an Infallible
Teacher of the Doctrine of Salvation, etc.

To which I Answer, this is a false assertion; for first the Scriptures as he
has confessed, are subject to change and alteration, and that which is so is
not infallible, for that only is infallible which admits of no change nor
alteration; but such are not the Scriptures (the writings) and therefore not
infallible, though it is always acknowledged the Truth and Way of Salvation
declared in the Scriptures are Infallible.

Secondly, This assertion seems absolutely to deny the Spirit of God and its
Teachings, which is given in the new Covenant unto all that believe, for God
has promised, I will put my Spirit within them, and pour it upon them, and
they shall need no man to teach them, but as that spirit teaches them; And the
spirit was promised by Christ that it should be given to lead into all Truth,
and be the Everlasting Comforter, and it is the spirit that quickens and
gives Life, and Sanctifies and Teaches to do the Will of God, all this the
Scriptures testify, and not as if the Scriptures were the Teacher, the
Comforter, the Leader, but the Scriptures say the spirit does all this; but J.
W. has accounted the Scriptures to do all, and accounts not of the Spirit to do
any thing, for he has hardly mentioned it in this case, and thus his folly and
weakness has appeared; in giving the Scriptures Authority above the spirit,
and as it were dis-throning the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, and
exalting the Scriptures in its place; but we say, that its the spirit that
works all things in order to man's Salvation, God works in us to will and to do
all good things by his spirit that he has given us, according to the
Scripture, and not contrary to it, for the spirit is Infallible which gave
forth the Scriptures, but the Scripture is changeable in translation and
interpretation, as we see by experience, and therefore not infallible; And
though J. W. say,

First, The Scriptures do make mention of all Works of Righteousness, which
ought to be observed by the sons of men.

Secondly, And the Scriptures do most severely forbid all works of wickedness
which ought not to be done.

Thirdly, And the Scriptures declare of the Promise of Peace and Happiness
which ought to be embraced.

Fourthly, And the Scriptures speaks of the punishment which God would inflict
upon sinners: Those are four of his Reasons page 216. by whith he would prove
the Scriptures to be the Infallible Teacher of Salvation.

Answer, Though it be true that the Scriptures do declare of every work of
Righteousness which ought to be done, and of works of unrighteousness which
ought not to be done, and of the Promises of God which ought to be embraced;
yet it is the spirit of God that teaches men to perform and observe that
Righteousness which ought to be done, and to deny that wickedness which ought
not to be done, and to receive the Promises of God; though I say, the
Scriptures declares of these things, yet it is the spirit of God that gave
forth the Scriptures that teaches and leads into these things that the
Scriptures speak of; and it is that spirit that is the infallible Teacher, and
the Scriptures are only a declaration of the things which the spirit is
infallibly to teach; and: as for thy fourth Reason, though generally the
punishment of sinners is declared in Scriptures, yet it were an easy thing to
mention particular punishments for particular people upon particular occasions,
which the Scriptures do not make mention of; for I am of that mind, that some
of his Fraternity are at this day under a punishment for their sin which the
Scripture makes no particular mention of, and if he scruple it in his next
return, J. W. shall have particular instance in our next reply; so that this
reason is partly true and partly false, also Deuteronomy. 28.61. it is signified that
there are Plagues and punishments for sinners which are not mentioned in the
Book of the Law; and as for thy 5, 6, 7, and 8, Reasons to prove the Scriptures
are an infallible Teacher, all of them are much like the former, and the same
answer in kind may be said, as thus, we acknowledge the Scriptures declares
sufficiently for Truth and Righteousness, and against deceit and
unrighteousness, and of the Promises of God, and threatenings for sin, etc. Yet
still this proves not the Scriptures in themselves infallable to teach
infallibly, but as I have said, it is only the Spirit of God that is the
infallable Teacher, into all that Truth which the Scriptures declares of, and
by the spirit men receives power to be the Sons of God, and to do his Will, and
not by the Scriptures; and thus we give the Spirit of God its prerogative and
privilege, and the Scriptures also what belongs to them, but we dare not give
that dignity to the Scriptures which belongs to the Spirit of God, thereby
abridging the Spirit of God of what belongs to it, and setting up the
scriptures in opposition to it, as J. W. has clearly done for want of
knowledge and understanding in the Mysteries of God: Again he says, The
Scriptures are very far in Authority and clearness before any spirit or light
in any mortal man in the world, page 218. Whereby he has clearly given more
dignity and authority to the Scriptures, then he has to the Spirit of God, and
so has set up the Scriptures above the Spirit, which is direct error, if not
Blasphemy, that he should say, any thing is far greater in Authority and
clearness, then the Spirit of God which dwells in mortal man, even in his
Saints; and thus the result of J. W. his Reasons and Arguments about
Scriptures, is a clear denial of the Spirit of God, and setting the Scriptures
above it; furthermore he says, Whatsoever does make manifest is Light, the
Scriptures does make manifest the Mystery of Salvation, therefore the
Scriptures is Light; Again he says, That the Scriptures are the more sure word
of Prophecy which Peter speaks of, which was as a Light which shined in a dark
place, and the Commandments of the Lord is Pure, and the Word is a Lamp unto
the Feet; Then he speaks of the powerful Operation of the Doctrine of the
Scriptures upon the Hearts of such as believe, which does convince and convert,
and turn from darkness to Light; and how can their Doctrine be from the same
inspiration which is against the Doctrine of the Scriptures? page 219, 220. 222.

Answer, Here Joseph Wright has jumbled some illiterate Logic, which may be*
proved false, as thus; the Scriptures (its true) does declare of the things
that ought to be done and believed, and the things that ought not to be done,
as to the general part of things; Yet there are many particular Actions and
things which the Scriptures do not make manifest, and we would have J. W. to
leave a little room and work for the Spirit of God, and not thus utterly to
reject it; for the scripture says, it is the Spirit that reveals the Things of
God and the Mystery of Salvation, and not the scriptures, viz. the writings,
and that sure word of Prophecy which Peter speaks of, that was as a Light
shining a dark place, was something more sure then the very words which Christ
spoke with his mouth to them, which were written by Matthew, and the light
which shone as in a dark place, to which they were to take heed, was more sure
to them then Christ's words which were written and were scriptures; and thus J.
W. may see his mistake and perverting of scriptures, if he will be but sober
and reasonable, and that the Commandment of the Lord is Pure, and the word is
a Lamp, we do not deny, but gives as full witness of, as J. W. can do, and
therefore he needs not cite these scriptures to oppose us, for its thy
malicious Spirit that opposes us not the scriptures, for we acknowledge to the
truth of these scriptures, by the Spirit which gave them forth, which is
greater then the scriptures; and as for the powerful operation of the Doctrine
of the Scriptures, it is not of themselves that they do operate in any, but it
is by the Spirit that gave them forth, which works in the Hearts of
Believers, to comfort and refresh with the Love of God, and it is the spirit
according to the scriptures that does convince and convert, and not the
scriptures without the Spirit, as J. W. would say; and it was the Gospel that
Paul Preached; that turned them from darkness to Light, and not the writings
which say, that the Gospel is the Power of God, and not the writings, and it is
mere ignorance in J. W. to intimate that our Doctrine is against the Doctrine
of the Scriptures, this I shall account amongst thy slanders, and it is not the
least of them.

And whereas thou flyest out high in high words against us, That we must
consider and leave our inventions, else sin will lie at our doors, and our
bloods will be upon our heads, etc. and there is no less then four lies in thy
last page, but these words are to thy self and not unto us, for we are not the
persons concerned, we follow not vain inventions, but we are saved out of our
blood through Jesus Christ; and for J. W. now to exhort us to repentance, when
as in page 47. he has given absolute judgment on us without limitation, That
the mist of Darkness is reserved for ever for us; This is a direct
contradiction which shows what spirit he has been guided by in all his work;
And thus we have searched and examined J. W's whole work from the beginning to
the end, and given an answer to the material parts thereof, saving that we have
not mentioned many lies and slanders which we have passed over, and do reserve
them till we come face to face, otherwise till our next reply; and what we have
written, we must commit to the judgment of the Spirit of God in all sober
persons, who may for their own edification, compare his work and ours together,
and truly weigh each of them in the balance of equity, and to the spirit of
found judgment, and to the Fear of the Lord all are committed and commended in
the reading and considering and judging of these things.

Last of all, for a final Conclusion for present, if it be supposed by J. W.
that this is not a sufficient Answer to his Book, I do propound unto him this
further, in order to the satisfaction of any sober persons, if any be doubtful
in this case; That first both of us may agree to appoint a convenient time and
place for a meeting to dispute it out face to face, that which yet remains in
controversy between us. 2. This being done, that all his Friends and ours that
are doubtful or desirous of such a thing, may have knowledge of it. 3. That in
such meeting no foul reflections, nor impertinences, nor bitterness of Spirit
be allowed on either part, but discretion and moderation. 4. I shall first take
in hand to prove a very great number of Lies, contradictions and falsehoods in
his Book. 5. Then I shall hear his Defense for himself, and his Objections
against any thing in ours, and answer them, and after this manner shall be our
proceedings, if we do meet; Its true, times and seasons are unsuitable for such
a meeting and work, yet rather then any Detriment should fall upon the Truth,
or the cause of preaching the Light within be endangered to harm, I am willing
to hazard the greatest adventure, hoping we may do such a thing if necessity
require, in that Wisdom and Prudence as may not offend any; This I shall leave
as my farewell to my Antagonist at this time, and thus seal up the whole sum.

E. B.

THE END.
ERRATA.
IN the 6. page of the Preface line 5. for contra. read contrary, in the 7^
page of the Preface line 27. for this work read his work, in the 2. page of the
book line 9. read we vindicate, l. 14. read and his pleading against free grace
to all confuted, p. 3. l. 29. for own while r. one while, p. 6. l. 31. for
strife r. self, p. 17. l. 29. for arising which r. arising with, p. 27. l. 9.
for then r. their, p. 31. l. 13. r, Ignorant of it, p. 48. l. 22. for receive
r. reverence, p. 50. l. 11. r. tell Lies.


