A Compendious View Of the late TUMULTS and TROUBLES In This KINGDOM, BY WAY OF
ANNALS For SEVEN YEARS: VIZ. From the beginning of the 30th, to the End of the
36th Year of the Reign of His late Majesty King Charles II. of Blessed Memory.

By J. W. Esquire;

-- Longa est Injuria: Longae
Ambages: Sed summa sequar Fastigia Rerum.
Vir. Aen. 1. London, Printed by Edw. Jones, for S. Lownds, over against Exeter
Exchange in the Strand, 1685.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Clarendon, Vicount Cornbury, and Baron
HIDE of Hindon: One of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
I Present your Lordship with a small Compendium of many Great and Strange
Revolutions; The Greatest, perhaps, that ever happened in England, in so short
a space of Time. A Tempestuous season, in which some Waves have dashed against
your Lordship, tho of so eminent a Character for Loyalty and Goodness. But when
Princes themselves suffer, it is the best Subjects Glory to suffer with them.
This, My Lord, was no New thing to your Lordship, who was, in a manner, born a
Sufferer for Monarchy, and whose Blooming Years had the Honor to share in the
same Exile with your King. It Is strangely fatal to consider, that those against
whom the disaffected Party made of late, the Lowdest outcry, were Old
Cavaliers: A Word almost forgotten, had not that Occasion brought it again to
Memory. It seems, there needs no more than to read the Faction backwards, and
one may see by their false Clamours, who were the Kings best Ministers and
Friends. 'Twas the true Honor and Allegiance of that August Assembly in which
your Lordship made one of the Better Part, that has Eternized the Fame of
Englands Baronage, and made it Glorious and beloved for ever. No will Posterity
forget a just Applause to the Illustrious Name of Clarendon, when they read it
in the List of those Truly Noble Peers, who in Duty to the Crown and Royal
Family, incurred the Angry Vote of a numerous, a Violent, and Over-daring
Party. Your Lordship being so far, and so honorably, concerned in the History
of these Times, it is my Ambition to take this Occasion to declare my self,

MY LORD, Your Lordships, Most Obedient Humble Servant, James Wright.

THE Preface.
THere are some Scandals so Gross, that the Bare Repetition of them is a
sufficient Refutation, and manifestation of their Falsehood. In like manner
some Actions are so unwarrantable to all men of Reason, that only to relate
them is to disgrace the Actors, and those Principles that occasioned such
extravagant behavior. Such I esteem the factious Tumults and Riotous
Proceedings, which of late Years have disturbed the Quiet of so many honest Men
and Loyal Subjects, to the Terror of this, and Amazement of all the Neighboring
Nations.

The Vehemence of which Revolutions did appear too like that of Naples in the
Year 1647. It Is true, these were not so sudden, nor altogether so Bloody;
which must be ascribed to the Almighty Power and Goodness of God, and the
Vigilant Prudence of His late Majesty of glorious Memory. We see what the Party
offered,

Not to mention the Street-Tumults; How like were the Riots at our Guild Hall
to those at their Church of the Carmelites? And to their tumultuous burning the
Gabellers Goods, I think I may, not unaptly, compair our burning the Pope, and
other Burnings. And to parallel their Massaniello, a poor Fisherman, but of
stupendous Authority, had not we also, a little Creature of as Low and obscure
Quality (bateing his assumed Cassok) who was as much adored, and I may say,
almost Deifyed by the Rabble.

I am heartily sorry and ashamed to think That the chief chief Disparity
between their Case and ours, will appear to the Disadvantage of the English.
For what the Neopolitans did, they were induced to on the sole Account of their
grievous and Intolerable Gabells; but we a free and happy People, became
Seditious, and so very unquiet, for no present Cause, but only future
apprehensions, and (as the Event has showed 'em to be) mere Chimaerical and
empty Fears.

But praised be God, Peoples Eyes begin to be open, and time has applied a
Collyrium that makes us see clearly through the Pretenses and Vmbrage that was
raised to serve a Faction. It is easy now to distinguish the stalking horse
from the Fowler that sculks behind. Which thing of late Years, many either
could not, or would not see, being inwardly as Purblind, as he was outwardly
that misled 'em.

And in this I think the Nation is not a little obliged to the Excellent Author
of the Observator; A person who may be compared to some Pictures, that are
placed too near the sight to discover their true value. I am confident that the
next Age, who will behold him at a more advantageous and impartial Distance,
will have a truer and far greater esteem of his Merits. I do not at all admire
(but think it extreme natural) that the Disloyal Party and their Adherents do
hate him with such a perfect hatred. How could they Possibly do otherwise to
one who discovers their Cheat, and puts 'em by from what they had been so long
designing, when they were arrived almost to the very Day of Execution.

The Subject of this little Book (most of which was Printed before His late
Majesty fell ill) is only to remember, in a short Abstract, what strange and
unwarrantable Proceedings have been within the space of Seven Years lately
past, with what Heats they were transacted, how Truth and Loyalty were run down
with noise and Cant, and how People were scared out of their Wits with such
Monstrous Legends, that had not we who are now alive seen it with our Eyes, who
would have believed it? Posterity will scarce credit the folly of their
Ancestors; or if they do, they will blush to think an Englishman could be so
far imposed upon.

The Memory of these things ought to keep People from Running upon the same
Shelves and Sands, where formerly we were in Danger to have perished.

He that would give a Punctual and Particular Account of all the Narratives,
Discoveries, Trials, Executions, Speeches, Votes, Accusations, Examinations,
Commitments, Tumultuous Elections, Petitions, Ryots, Libells, and Seditious
Attempts of all sorts, during the said time, must write a History more
Voluminous than Fox or Hollinshead. I pretend not therefore to observe all
particulars that happened in this space of time, but, only those which I
thought most Material, and of greatest Note.

What I have related, was set down every thing at the time when it happened.
Mere matter of Fact: without any Reflections, otherwise than as the thing it
self does reflect to the Dishonor of that Faction which has occasioned all
these past Troubles, and to the Glory of that God who has delivered us out of
the Danger.

I hope those who have been seduced and misled by Specious pretenses, into ill
Actions (as Charity bids me think there are many such) will by reflection on
the past, see, and abhor their Errors.

They need not blush to Repent and Confess such faults, which some of Note and
Quality have done already. Heaven is full of those that have been Converts; But
the Impenitent must fill another place, where it will be a Double Hell to
remember that they might once have received Grace and pardon, but refused it.

A BRIEF Historical Account Of the PUBLIC TRANSACTIONS During the 30th Year of
the Reign of KING CHARLES II. Anno Dom. 1678.
I Design, in the Method observed by Annalists, to commit to memory the Public
Transactions during the 30th Year of His Majesty's Reign; a Year which seems
remarkable, and to promise more than usual, since that number has been more
than once signal in the course of His Royal Life. In the 30th Year of this
Century (1630) He was Born; the 30th day of May completed the first day of His
Age; on the 30th day of January He began His Reign; in the 30th Year of His Age
(1660.) He was by the miraculous Providence of God, restored to the possession
of His Three Kingdoms after a long and barbarous Exile.

In the beginning of this Year we find the Parliament sitting; The King had
newly made a Speech to both Houses, the substance of which was; That for their
satisfaction he had made such Alliances with Holland as are for the
preservation of Flanders, and which cannot fail of that end, unless prevented
by the want of due Assistances to support those Alliances, or by the small
regard the Spaniards themselves must have to their own Preservation; That he
cannot suspect the want of assistance by reason of their repeated Engagements,
that a War, which must be the necessary consequence of those Alliances, ought
neither to be Prosecuted by halves, nor want such assurances of perseverance as
may give him encouragement to pursue it; that He had used all means possible by
a Mediation to have procured an Honorable and safe Peace, knowing how
preferable such a Peace would have been to any War; that this Kingdom must
necessarily own the vast benefits it has received by Peace, whilst its
Neighbors only have yet smarted by the War; but finding a Peace no longer to
be hoped for by fair means, it shall not be his fault if it be not obtained by
force; that for this reason he has recalled his Troops out of France, and
considered that we cannot have less Forces on our part than 90 Sail of Capital
Ships, and 30 or 40 Thousand Land-men, that he is contented that such Monys as
shall be given to these uses, be appropriated as strictly as they can desire;
that he has directed such larger dimensions for the Building the New Ships as
will cost him above 100000 l. more than the Act allows; that for repairing the
Old Fleet and buying Stores, etc. He has expended a great deal more than
200000 l. He has born the charge of a Rebellion in Virginia, and a New War
with Algiers; that he stands engaged to the Prince of Orange for his Neices
Portion; that he cannot be able to maintain his constant necessary
Establishments without the New Imposition on Wines be continued; that to remove
all sorts of Jealousies he has Married his Neice to the Prince of Orange,
thereby giving full assurances never to suffer that Princes Interest to be
ruined, if assisted as he ought to be, to preserve them; that he expects from
them a plentiful supply suitable to such great occasions, and that these
considerations being of the greatest Importance that ever concerned the
Kingdom, he would therefore have them enter immediately upon them without
suffering any other business whatsoever to divert 'em. Before the Parliament
proceeded to Answer this Speech, they Sat on part of the 30th of January the
Aniversary Fast, and then Voted 70000 l. for a solemn Burial of his late
Majesty King Charles I. and to erect a Monument for the said Prince of Glorious
Memory, the said Sum to be raised by a Two Months Tax, to begin at the
expiration of the present Tax for Building Ships. This, though in truth, an
Affair to which the Nation has stood obliged this 29 Years, yet being never
mentioned till yesterday, (when first moved in the House of Commons by my Lord
O-Brian Eldest Son to the Earl of Tumond, and whose Son lately had Married my
Lord Treasurers Daughter) seemed surprising.

The next Day being the 31 of January, the House of Commons in return to the
Kings Speech, presented their Address to His Majesty at White Hall, containing
thanks for his care expressed for the preservation and Encouragement of the
Protestant Religon in concluding a Marriage between his Niece and the Prince of
Orange, beseech him not to admit of any Treaty of Peace whereby the French King
shall be left in possession of any greater Dominion or power than is left him
by the Pyrenaean Treaty; that both on our parts and the parts of the
Confederates, no Ship nor Vessel may be admitted to come out of any Port of
France, but that the Ships and Men be seized and the Goods destroyed; that he
would please to provide that none of the parties who shall join in this
Alliance and Confederacy against France, depart from the said Alliance, till
the said King be reduced to the said Treaty; that neither we nor the
Confederates admit any Trade with France, or suffer any Goods to be Imported
from thence on pain of Forfeiture; that His Majesty in making such
Confederacies as necessary for attaining these ends shall never doubt of the
affections of the People: Lastly they renew their former protestations and
engagements to persevere in the prosecution of the said War, and when he shall
be pleased to Impart such Alliances and Confederacies to them in Parliament to
give such ready assistances upon all occasions as may bring the War to a happy
conclusion.

To this Address the King returned the following Answer in Writing, which was
read in the House of Commons the 4th of February. That he was not a little
surpised to find so much inserted there of what should not be, and so little
of what should; that his Speech was to both Houses jointly, and the return
ought to be from both; That in the Address of the 20th of May last you did
invite him to a League offensive and defensive with Holland against the French
King, and for the preserving the Spanish Netherlands, and upon his Declaration
of such Alliances assured such speedy assistances as may fully Answer the
occasion; that he has made such Alliances, yet finds no return but the Old
promises upon new Conditions, and so He may be used to Eternity should he seem
satisfied with such proceedings; that on the 28th of May last, he told you how
highly he was offended at the great Invasion of his Prerogative, yet you take
no notice of it, but add to your former ill conduct new Invasions; you desire
him to oblige his Confederates never to consent to a Peace till the most
Christian King be reduced to the Pyrenaean Treaty, a Determination fitting only
for God Almighty, since none but He can tell the terms of Peace who knows the
event of War; You desire him not to suffer a Ship of theirs to come from France
under pain of Confiscation, not excepting Allies, Prince, or Ambassadors (if
any among them); that he does not believe any Assembly of Men ever gave so
great and public a provocation to the whole World without so much as
considering to provide one Ship, Regiment, or penny toward justifying it; that
however if by your assistance he may be put into Arms sufficient for such a
Work, He will not be weary till Christendom be restored to such a Peace, that
it shall not be in the power of any one Prince to disturb it; that the Rights
of making and managing War and Peace are in His Majesty, and if you think he
will depart from any part of that Right, you are mistaken; the Reins of
Government are in his hands, and he has the same care to preserve them there,
as to preserve his own Person; he keeps both for his Peoples protection and
safety, and that if this House will encourage His Majesty to go further in
Alliances, you must consider of raising speedy supplies; for from the
consideration of those he must take his measures.

Some things of note however were done before the Supply was concluded; The
House of Commons took off all written Protections, which had been by some
Members granted to such as were not really their Servants, to an incredible
number; Voting no Protection allowable to any but their Menial Servants,
actually in Service, and that without a written Certificate.

And now was the Earl of Shaftsbury released from his Confinement in the Tower,
where he had been close Prisoner ever since last Spring, and restored to his
place in Parliament, having first made the following Submission at the Lords
Bar, Feb. 25. viz.

1. I do acknowledge that my endeavoring to maintain that this Parliament was
Dissolved, was an ill advised Action, for which I humbly beg pardon of the
Kings Majesty and this most Honorable House.

2. I do acknowledge that my bringing a Writ of Habeas Corpus in the Kings
Bench, was a high violation of your Lordships Privilege, and a great
aggravation of my former offense, for all which I beg pardon.

Subscribed, Shaftsbury.

The next Day he sat in the House of Lords.

On the 27. The City was not a little Alarmed with the French Kings taking of
Ghent, and the great danger of several other places of note in Flanders: That
Night were sent from London, 12 Companys of Foot for Ostend, followed the next
Day by the Dukes of Monmouth and Albermarle, the Earls of Mulgrave and
Plymouth, etc. most of which Lords soon after returned.

About a Fortnight after this, a Poll-Bill for raising Monys, past both Houses,
and presently after the Commons express their impatiency for a War, their
Transactions running in these Terms, March 14.

Upon several motions made for considering of the deplorable condition of the
Nation, resolved in a Committee of the whole House, That it is the opinion of
this Committee, that an Address be presented to the King, humbly to advise His
Majesty, that His Majesty to quiet the minds of his Loyal Subjects, and to
encourage the Princes and States, Confederates against the French King, would
be graciously pleased to proclaim and enter into an actual War with the French
King, and to give his Majesty assurances, that this House will constantly stand
by and aid His Majesty in the prosecution thereof with necessary and plentiful
suppplies and assistances, and that His Majesty will presently dismiss the
French Ambassador and recall his from France, and Niminghen.

Which Address was the next Day drawn up accordingly, and sent to the Lords for
their Concurrence, but never proceeded further.

Wednesday 27th of March, the Parliament was Adjourned by the Kings Order, till
the 11th of April, being the Week after Easter, the King having first Signed
the Poll-Bill, in which was a strict Appropriating Clause for the Money so
Levied to be applied to no use but the intended French War; also another Clause
Prohibiting: the Importation of any French Commodities for Three Years. Soon
after which the French King prohibited ours for Ten Years.

Thursday the 11th of April, the Parliament met again and Adjourned to the
Monday following, at which time, by the Kings appointment they chose a New
Speaker in the House of Commons, Sir Robert Sawyer one of the Kings Council
Learned, and a great Practicer in the Exchequer; and from thence Adjourned over
to Monday the 29th of April.

During these Intervals a strict Fast is kept on Wednesday the 10th of April in
London, and the Wednesday Fortnight following through England, to implore Gods
Blessing upon His Majesty and his Kingdoms, and for the averting of Gods
Judgments.

Monday the 29th of April the Houses met again, the King and Lords in their
Robes; My Lord Chancellor in a long Speech recited all the Addresses that they
had made in relation to a War with France, what the King had already done in
pursuance of the same, and joining an effectual League with the Confederates to
that end, and how ready the King was to pursue their desires, but that now he
discovered the Dutch were entering upon a Treaty of Peace with the French King,
and that without his consent or privity, and therefore His Majesty demands the
advice of his Houses how to proceed.

Monday following being the 6th of May, Sir Robert Sawyer excused himself in a
Letter, that he could not attend the House by reason that he was taken very ill
of the Stone, occasioned by his long sitting last Saturday; whereupon the Old
Speaker was again chosen and reinstated in the Chair. The same Day the King
returned a short Answer to an Address of the House of Commons, Voted on the
said last Saturday, which contained their humble Advice that he would forthwith
enter into the present Alliance with the Confederates, and an Actual War with
France, etc. To which, this Answer was read by one of the Secretaries of State,
viz.

C. R.

HIs Majesty having been acquainted with the Votes of the 4th Instant, is very
much surprised both with the matter and manner of them, but if His Majesty had
had Exceptions to neither, yet His Majesty having asked the Advice of both the
Houses, does not think fit to give any Answer to any thing of that nature till
he has a concurrent Advice of both Houses.

Among which mentioned Votes of the 4th Instant, beside the Advice abovesaid,
this was past by a majority of 16 Voices, That the late Leagues, made with the
States General of the United Provinces are not pursuant to the Addresses of
this House, nor consistant with the good and safety of the Kingdom.

In the mean time the Commons are not at all discouraged with this Answer, but
draw up an Address, and present it to the King at Whitehall, on Saturday, the
11th of May in the afternoon, containing Their humble thanks to His Majesty,
for demanding their advice, that accordingly they gave it, they beseech Him to
communicate to them His Resolutions thereupon, and whereas they conceive that
the Inconveniences, and Dangers which the Kingdom now lies under, might
totally, or in a great measure have been prevented in case His Majesty had
accepted of the Advice by them given in their Addresses of the 26 of May Last,
and the 31 of January. That therefore he would please to remove those
Counselors that advised him to give those answers which he did to the said
Addresses; that he would please to accept of this Petition in good part, as
proceeding form persons heartily devoted to him, etc. In fine, that he would
please to remove the Duke of Lautherdale, from His presence and Councils.

Which being read, the King immediately returned Answer in these few words
only, That he was much Surprised at the Extravagancy of their Address, and
unwilling at present to give it such a due Answer as it deserves.

On the Monday following the King past several private Bills, and then caused
the Parliament to be Prorogued till Thursday come Sevenight, being the 23 of
this instant May, by which means this Session which had been of a long
Continuance by Adjournment, was determined, and all Bills and business in
either House then Depending, defeated, and returned to the same State, as when
first moved. But withal such Bills as had been rejected, are now in a Capacity
of being moved again, which no Bill can be in the same Session, when once
rejected.

On the aforementioned Thursday the 23. of May, the Parliament met again, and
the House of Commons being sent for by the Black Rod, to attend His Majesty, in
the House of Lords, the King delivered His pleasure to this effect, That he is
resolved, as far as He is able, to save Flanders, either by a War, or Peace,
which way he sees most conducing; either ways, he thinks it convenient to keep
up His Army, and Navy, at Sea, for some time, till a Peace be concluded, but
leaves it to them to consider of Supplies for their Continuance, or Disbanding;
and in either case not to discourage so many Worthy and Gallant Gentemen, who
have offered their Lives and Service to their Country, and that in pursuit of
the Parliaments advice and Resolutions; That a Branch of His Revenue is now
expiring, another part of it is cut off by a Clause in the Poll-Bill; That he
has borrowed 200000 l. upon the Excize at their request, of all which they are
to consider; That he has no Intentions but of good to them, and His people,
nor ever shall; Desires they will not drive him into extremities, which must
end ill, both for them and Him, and (which is worst of all) for the Nation;
desires to prevent all disorders and mischeifs that may befall by our
disagreement; but in case any do, leaves it to God Almighty to Judge who is the
occasion of it; In fine, That he will not for the future suffer the Course and
Method of passing Laws to be changed, by taking together several matters in one
Bill.

This was immediately followed by a long, but excellent Speech, of my Lord
Chancellor, which tho something too large for the intended Brevity of these
Notes, must not be omitted: The substance therefore contained, That Holland is
become resolved to seek all occasions they can of coming out of the War, in
regard the Spaniards fail them; That the States to that end entered into a
League Offensive and Defensive with His Majesty, to obtain a Peace by force, if
it could not be had otherwise, which promised Success, till it was heard abroad
that this League, (the only thing by which His Majesty could oblige the
States) had been so ill understood at home as to meet with some very unfitting
and very undeserved Reflections; and that they understood there was a Resolution
of giving no Money till satisfaction first had in matters of Religion, which in
all Countries are the longest debates that can be entered upon, and at this time
should least have been stirred; and when they understood that the King had
received an Address, and had expressed His resentment of it, then they concluded
it was in vain to rely any longer on England, for England was no longer it
self: All sides began to wish for Peace, as well Spain, as Holland, and if the
Cessation now endeavored, be effected, no doubt but a Peace will follow: What
Influence that Peace will have, is uncertain; We have given no small
provocation to a Mighty King, it therefore concerns us to secure our selves, by
preserving Peace and Unity at home; he that foments Divisions now, does more
harm to his Country, than a Foreign Enemy can do; no fear of Arbitrary
Government can justify, no Zeal to Religion can sanctify such a Proceeding; He
minds them of the Late times, when Religion and Liberty were truly Lost by
being made a handle and pretense for Sedition; when Prelacy was called Popery,
and Monarchy Tyranny, etc. and can we now endure to see men break the Act of
Oblivion every day, by reviving the Memory of forgotten Crimes in new
Practices? Its worth Consideration whether we do not bring some kind of scandal
upon the Protestant Religion, when we seem so far to distrust the truth and
power of it, that after so many Laws past to guard it, and so many miraculous
deliverancies from the attempts made against it, we should still be afraid of
its continuance. Has not the Late Act made it impossible for the most
concealed Papist that is, to get any kind of Employment? As little reason there
is to be jealous of our Liberties, and Property. Can there be a greater
evidence of the Moderation of a Prince, and His tenderness of the Liberty of
the Subject, than to suffer, as he does every day, so much licentious and
malicious Talk to pass unpunisht? Search all Nations, through all Ages, and
show fewer greivances and less cause of Complaint, and a happier people than we
at are this Day. He proceeded then to the matter of the Revenue, to the same
purpose with what the King had said before, but enlarging, Tells em, The King
will no more accept a good Bill, how valuable soever, unless it comes in the
old and decent method of Parliaments; that the late way of tacking together, in
one Bill, several Independent and incoherent matters, seems to alter the whole
frame and Constitution of Parliaments; takes away the Kings Negative Voice in a
manner, forcing Him to take all or none; it takes away the Negative Voice too,
of the House of Lords by the same Consequence; It looks like a kind of
Defamation of the Government, and seems to suppose the King, and House of
Lords, to be so ill affected to the Public, that a good Bill cannot carry it
self through, by the Strength of it is own Reason and Justice, without being
helped by Clauses; it gives up the greatest share of Legislature to the
Commons: In fine, the same method of proceedings may be made use of against the
Commons, by the Lords; These Inconveniences the King is Resolved to abolish,
and has Commanded me to say to you State super vias antiquas. If this Session
do not repair the misfortunes, and amend the faults of the last, it will look
like a fatality upon the Nation. He whose house is destroyed by Fire would find
but little Comfort in saying the Fire did not begin by his means; but it will
be a perpetual Anguish to him to remember that it lay in his power to
extinguish it: And so concludes with strong persuasives to Peace, and a
Composure of all Differences.

Monday May 27. Resolved in the House of Commons, That the House taking into
Consideration the State of His Majesty's Affairs, and the great charge and
Burden that His Majesty and the Nation lies under by the Army now in Being,
are humbly of Opinion, That if His Majesty please to think fit to enter into
the War against the French King, this House is, and always will be ready to
support and assist him in that War; But if otherwise, That they will proceed to
the Consideration of providing for the Speedy Disbanding of the Army. The House
further Ordered, That the Members of this House who are of His Majesty's privy
Council, do acquaint the King with these Votes, and pray His Majesty's Answer.

To this, the King returned the following Answer, which was read in the House
of Commons, the next day; It contained, That the French King has made such
offers of a Cessation till the 27th of July, as His Majesty does not only
believe will be accepted, but will end in a General Peace; yet since that is
not certain, he does not think it prudent to dismiss either Fleet, or Army
before that time, nor does he think it will add much to the charge, in regard
the raising Money, and paying them off, would take up that time, were they to be
Disbanded as speedily as possibly: In the mean time he desires Money for their
subsistence, that as hitherto they have been the most orderly Army that ever
came together, they may be encouraged to continue so; And concludes with
reminding the House of the 200000 l. formerly mentioned in His Speech, which he
wants for His Household.

The next day of sitting, being Thursday the 30th of May, the Commons Vote
unanimously, That all Forces raised since the 29th of September last (except
those transported to Foreign Plantations) be forthwith paid off and Disbanded,
and that they Consider of a Supply for that purpose.

The last of May, being the first day of Trin. Term, Sir William Scroggs, at
that time Puisne Judge, in the Common Pleas, took his place in the Kings Bench
as Lord Chief Justice of England, to which he was preferred by the Kings
especial Favor, on the removal of Sir Richard Rainsford, who resigned a few
days before: And was Succeeded in the Common Pleas, by Baron Bartu; and
Sergeant Brampston promoted to his Place in the Exchequer.

June 4th the Commons Vote 200000 l. to be raised by a Monthly Tax, in Six
Months, after the Land Tax, now in being, be expired; with a Clause, That this
be for the Disbanding of the Army, by the end of this present June. The next
day they Voted the King 200000 l. more, Toward the Defraying the expenses of
the Fleet. Soon after which, the King sent them a Message by one of the
Secretaries of State, containing, That His mind was still the same with what he
delivered the 23 of May last, That the Army, and Fleet, ought to be kept up
till the expected Peace be concluded: He also recommended to their
Consideration, whether it were not dishonorable for him to recall His Forces in
Flanders, from those Towns which he had taken into His Protection, before they
could provide themselves of other Succors? Here upon they extend the time (as
to the Forces in Flanders) to the 27 of July.

Saturday, the 15th of June, The Commons Resolved, That after Tuesday
following, no motions should be made for any new Supplys of Money, till after
the Recess; nor any more private Bills brought, in, till after the said Recess.

The Tuesday following, the King sent for the Commons up to the Lords House,
and told 'em in a long Speech; That the season requiring a Recess by the middle
of next Month at farthest, it is convenient that we part fairly, and with a
perfect confidence of one another: Therefore he opens His Heart freely to them
in some particulars of nearest concern; That what he told 'em at the beginning
of this Session concerning a Peace, seems already to be determined, at least as
to Spain, and Holland, in which Peace His part will be not only that of a
Mediator, but also to give His Warranty in it: That Spain writes word, that
unless England bares the charge of maintaining Flanders, even after the Peace,
they will not be in a Condition to support it long; That to this end, it is
necessary not only to keep up our Navy at Sea, but to give the World some
assurance of being well United at home; That tho the House of Commons may think
such a Peace as ill a bargain as War, because it will cost them Money; yet if
they seriously consider that otherwise Flanders had been lost, perhaps by this
time, He believes they will give much greater Sums than this will cost, rather
than the single Town of Ostend should be in the French hands, and 40 of their
men of War in so good a Haven overagainst the Rivers Mouth; That we cannot but
be pleased to understand the Reputation we have gained abroad by having in 40
days raised an Army of 30000 Men, and prepaired a Navy of 90 Ships; Therefore
if they desire to keep up the Honor of the Crown at home, and look to the
safety of the Balance of Affairs abroad, and pursue the War of Algiers; if they
desire he should pass any part of His life in quiet, and all the rest in
confidence, and kindness with them and other suture Parliaments; if so, That
they must find a way, not only to settle for His life His Revenue as at
Christmas last, but also to add a new Fund of 300000 l. Per annum, upon which
he will pass an Act to settle 50000 l. upon the Navy and Ordinance; and shall
be also always ready to consent to all such Laws as they shall propose for the
good of the Nation: Then he reminds 'em to enable him to keep His word with the
Prince of Orange, in the payment of His Neices Portion, which is 40000 l. the
first payment being now due and demanded by him.

This Speech being ended, the Commons returned back and Voted His Majesty the
thanks of the House for His gracious expressions in His Speech. Yet nothing of
importance was done that day, but a Denial of the 300000 l. Per annum,
demanded; and not only so, but a motion being made for a Compensation on the
lost part of His Majestys Revenue by the Prohibiting Act, it was carried in the
Negative, Yeas 145, Noes 202.

Saturday the 22th of June, the Lords sent down the Bill for Disbanding, with
an enlargement of the time prefixed for one Month longer, to which the Commons
would not agree, but desired a Conference, at which to give their Lordships the
reasons why they could not consent to the alteration.

Monday the 25th of July, the Parliament was Prorogued to the first of August,
the King having then past the following Bills, 1. An Act for granting a supply
to His Majesty of 619388 l. 11 s. 9 d. for Disbanding the Army, and other uses
therein mentioned. 2. An Act for granting an Additional Duty to His Majesty
upon Wines for Three Years. 3. An Act to enable Creditors to recover their
Debts of the Executors and Administrators of Executors in their own wrong. 4.
An Act for Burying in Woollen. 5. An Act for Admeasurement of Keels and Boats
carrying Coals. 6. An Act for Reviving a former Act of the 13th of this King
chapter 2. for avoiding unnecessary Suits and delays, and for continuance of an
other Act of 22. and 23. Car' 2. chapter 10. touching intestates Estates, 7. An Act
for further Relief and Discharge of poor Prisoners for Debt. 8. An Act touching
Highways. 9. An Act for preservation of Fishing in the River Severn.

On which said first of August, they being again met, they were again Prorogued
over to the 29th Day of the same Month. Soon after that also there came out a
Proclamation, requiring a full Assembly at the said 29th Day. But in the mean
time the French being beaten from the Siege of Mons, by the English, chiefly,
under Command of my Lord of Ossery, on the part of the Prince of Orange, the
King Issued out another Proclamation dated the 8th of August, whereby reciting
the last Proclamation but in regard the State of Affairs abroad was altered
since then, he is pleased to Prorogue the Houses over till the first Day of
October next, requiring then a full Assembly; after this it was again Prorogued
to the 21st of October. In the mean time a Peace is concluded between France,
Spain, and Holland, and a Truce for some Months with the Emperor.

On Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, the 28th 29th and 30th of September
and first of October, the Privy Council sat twice a Day, The business a Popish
Plot; several were committed, and others examined, among whom Sir George
Wakeman Physician to the Queen, and Mr. Coleman belonging to Her Royal Highness
the Duchess of York: which said Duchess went with the Lady Ann, that very
Tuesday Morning to visit the Princess of Orange, designing a stay only of 14
Days. This Discovery of a Plot, opening every Day more and more, the aforesaid
Mr. Coleman, and Mr. Langhorn of the Temple, were committed close Prisoners,
with several others; their Studies searched, their Papers seized, and sent to
Whitehall. And now just before the meeting of the Parliament, one Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey a Justice of the Peace in Middlesex, a severe Enemy of the
Papists (as by some reported) was found Dead in a Ditch not far from Hampstead;
He appeared to the Coroners Jury to be strangled, though afterward his own Sword
was run through him, and so found, with Money in his Pocket. This was looked on
by the Town as a Confirmation of the abovementioned Plot.

On the appointed 21st of October, the Houses met: The Kings Speech contained
these words, and these words only concerning the Plot -- I have been informed
of a Design against my Person by Jesuits, of which I shall forbear any
Opinion, lest I may seem to say too much, or too little, but leave the matter
to the Law -- The Chancellor on the same Head had these Expressions. -- And
though His Majesty does in no sort prejudg the Persons accused, yet the strict
enquiry into this matter, has been a means to Discover so many other
unwarrantable Practices of theirs, that His Majesty has reason to look to 'em.
The Examination of this Plot and the concurrent Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey employed the Commons so assiduously, that toward the beginning of this
Session they sat whole Days, from Morning till late at Night. The Product was
a Fast Voted; the minutes and Votes of the House of Commons forbid to be
divulged; several Lords Committed, Bellasis, Arundel of Warder, Powis,
Stafford, Petre, Castlemain, etc. Soon after this came out a Proclamation,
appointing a Fast through all England, on the 13th Day of November. Thursday
the 31st of October, the House of Commons resolved, upon the Evidence that has
already appeared to this House, this House is of Opinion, That there has been
and is an Execrable and Hellish Design contrived and carried on by Popish
Recusants for Assassinating and Murdering the King, for Subverting the
Government, and for destroying the Protestant Religion by Law Established.

The same Day Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Buried. The Solemnity proceeded from
Bridewell to St. Martins in the Fields, 72 London Ministers Marching two and
two before the Body, and above 1000 Men in the same Order following after.

The next Day in pursuance of an Address presented to the King by the Commons
the Saturday before, came out a Proclamation, whereby all Papists, or such
reputed, be Banished 10 Miles from London and Westminster, to remove themselves
by the 7th Day of November, except Householders, and they to take the Oaths or
suffer the Penalties inflicted by Law. The same Day the Commons in Parliament
resolved, That an Address be made to the King, that the Trained-Bands of
London, Westminster, and Surry, be raised for preservation of His Majestys
Person, and the Parliament, during this Session.

On Monday the 4th of November, came out an Order of the King in Council,
proposing, That whoever can Discover any Officer or Soldier in any of the Kings
Guards, Horse or Foot, who has taken the Oaths and Test, and since turned
Papist, such Discoverer shall have 20 l. for every Man so Discovered.

Monday the 4th of November, It was moved in the House of Commons, that an
Address be made to the King, to remove the Duke of York from his Presence and
Councils; but the debate was Adjourned over to Friday next, at which time it
being again moved, the debate was again Adjorn'd over to Thursday following.
The next Day being Saturday the 9th of November, His Majesty went to the Lords
House in His Robes, and made a Speech to both Houses, Wherein after he had
returned them His most hearty Thanks for their very great and extraordinary
care for preservation of His Person in this time of Danger, He told 'em, That
he was as ready to join with them in all ways and means that may Establish a
firm security to the Protestant Religion, as their own Hearts can wish; and
this not only during His Life, but in future Ages even to the end of the World:
And therefore He is come to assure 'em, that whatsoever reasonable Bills they
shall present to be past into Laws to make them safe in the Reign of His
Successor, so as they intend not to Impeach the Right of Succession, nor the
Descent of the Crown in the true Line, and also as they restrain not any Power
or just Right of His Protestant Successor, such Bills shall find from him a
ready concurrence.

Soon after this came out another Proclamation, whereby all Roman Recusants,
and such reputed, were enjoined under the Penalty of the Laws to repair to
their own homes, and not to remove more than Five Miles from thence without
License; Excepted out of this Proclamation the Inhabitants of London and
Westminster.

Monday, the 18th of November; the House of Commons being informed that Sir
Joseph Williamson Secretary of State, had lately Countersigned several
Commissions for Roman Recusant Officers with a Non-obstante to the Oaths and
Test, he was by the said House Committed to the Tower. The next Day the King
sent for the Commons to attend him at the Banqueting House, and told 'em, That
though they Committed His Servant without acquainting him, yet He intends to be
freer with them, and acquaint them with His intentions, to release His
Secretary; which accordingly He did that Day.

About this time a Bill having been sent up from the Commons to the Lords
House, for Excluding all Popish Members to sit in either House of Parliament,
it was past in the said Lords House with some little alterations, and a Clause
in Favor of His Royal Highness; and the said Bill being sent back to the
Commons, it past there also November 21st, with the said alterations, but not
without some difficulty; for Sir Jonathan Trelauny and one Mr. Ash, being
heated in debate and words of reproach passing between 'em, Sir Jonathan struck
the other a cuff on the Ear, which being returned by Ash, over the Face, they
were both about to Draw, but this disturbance being at last quieted by the
Speaker, Trelauny was sent to the Tower, there to remain all this Sessions, and
Ash received a Reprimande from the Speaker.

About the same time came out an Order of Council, explaining the late
Proclamation whereby all Papists were Banished 10 Miles from London, not to
extend to Merchant strangers, and such Outlandish, who repair hither on the
account of Travail.

And now the Commons begin to look toward the Army again, resolving November
25. That it is necessary for the safety of His Majesty's Person, and
Preservation of the Government, that the Forces raised since the 29th of
November 77. be forthwith paid off and Disbanded; and for this the King
requires more Money.

In the mean time Oats (the great Discoverer of the Plot) accuses the Queen;
hereupon the King places a stricter Guard upon him than ever; but the Commons,
November. 29. order an Address to be made to His Majesty, That the said Oats be
freed from his restraint, attended by his own Servants, and that a competent
allowance be appointed for his maintenance; and that the Queen, with all her
Servants, and all Popish Recusants, or such suspected, be removed from
Whitehall.

Saturday, November. 30. the King had two Bills presented to him; one of which,
viz For Exclusion of all Popish Members to fit in either House of Parliament
(with a Clause in favor of the Duke of York) He past: The other, which was for
raising a third part of the Militia, to be in constant Arms for a time, He
refused; alleging, That that were to put the Militia out of his Power, which
thing He would not do, no not for one hour; but if the Parliament will assist
Him with Money for that purpose, He will take care to raise such a part of the
Militia as shall secure the Peace of the Government, and His own Person.

In the mean time, while these things are transacting in Parliament, one
William Staly, a Goldsmiths Son, a Roman Recusant, is Arraigned at the Kings
Bench Bar, found guilty, and condemned of High Treason, for speaking certain
words against the Kings Life, and accordingly was hanged and quartered at
Tyburn; but on Petition the King granted his Quarters to his Father; who
abusing the Kings mercy, buried him in Covent Garden Churchyard with too much
State and Ceremony; for which reason, by His Majesty's Order, his Quarters were
that very night taken up, conveyed to Newgate, and soon after set up on the
Gates of London. The same week that Staly was executed, Mr. Coleman was
arraigned and tried at the aforesaid Bar, and condemned of High Treason; The
Evidence was the aforementioned Oats, and one Bedloe, and his own Letters; but
both the aforesaid Trials being in Print, I shall take no farther notice of
particulars. The King gave back all Mr. Colemans Estate to his Wife and
Children, and his Quarters to be Buried.

Thursday, December 4 The Commons Impeacht the Lords Arundel of Warder,
Bellasis, Po^is, Petre, and Stafford, of Treason and other high Crimes and
Misdemeanors, severally; which several Impeachments were carried up by five
several Members of the House of Commons. Two Days before, the said Lords had
been found Guilty upon special Indictments to the same purpose by the Grand
Jury of Middlesex, before special Commissioners sitting at Westminster; but now
for some Reasons, those proceedings were waved, and it was thought more
effectual to proceed by way of Impeachment before the House of Lords in
Parliament.

Tuesday, December the 17th, Ireland, Pickering, and Groves, were Condemned of
High Treason as Conspirators in the Plot, but their Execution was respited for
some time. At the same time Whitebread and Fenwick were arraigned, but their
Trial put off till the 15th of January. And now some of the Members of
Parliament begin to accuse one another. December the 23d. Mr. Mountigue, Son to
the Lord Mountigue, and late Ambassador in France, now a Burgess for
Northampton, carries up five Articles against the Lord Treasurer; and Sir John
Earnly another Member of the House of Commons, accuses the said Mr. Mountigue
of holding a Correspondence with the Popes Nuncio at Paris.

In the mean time the Parliament sit incessantly; without Adjournment these
Hollidays, but only for Christmas-Eve and Christmas Day: requiring a full
appearance of all their Members, not disabled, as well Lords as Commons;
enjoining all in Town not to depart under strict penalties, and sending their
Messengers for all absent in the Country.

But it pleased the King on Monday the 30th of December to Prorogue both Houses
till the 4th of February following. Not long before which the Commons had given
more Money for the Disbanding the Army, but inserted a Clause in the Bill, for
the Money to be paid into the Chamber of London; which proviso would not pass in
the Lords House, and therefore the Bill remained abort. During this Interval
the Reports were various touching the next sitting: it being sometimes affirmed
that the Session was further Prorogued till the 25th of February, then again,
that the Parliament would certainly meet at the 4th of February, the Day first
appointed; till at last on the 24th Day of January, the King was pleased to
settle the variety of Rumor, and by His Proclamation, then published,
absolutely to Dissolve this Parliament, promising however to Issue out His
Writs for a New one by the 6th of March next following. Thus ended this
Parliament, having now been continued by several Prorogations and Adjournments
17 Years, Eight Months, and 17 Days, being first called on the Eighth Day of
May, Anno Domini, 1661.

With this great Turn I will conclude my Historical Observations on this 30th
Year of His Majestys Reign; a Year very remarkable if it were only on the
account of the Dissolution of this Parliament; but more especially for the
beginning of those Troubles and Combustions which lasted for so many Years
after, in Relation to the Plot.

Anno 31. Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1679.
IN further Prosecution of those matters discovered the last year, Green the
Cushion-man at Somerset House Chapel, Berry the Queens Porter there, and Hill
Dr. Goddens Man, were on the 10th day of Feb. tried at the Kings Bench Bar for
the Murder of Sir Edmunbury Godfrey: which three being convicted, chiefly, on
the Evidene of Miles Prance, a Goldsmith, were found guilty, and having on the
next day received sentence of Condemnation to be hanged for the said Murder,
Green and Hill were Executed accordingly at Tyborn, Feb. 21. But Berry was
reprieved for a Week longer, all three denying the Fact in as positive terms as
could be: the last dying a Protestant, of which Persuasion he had formerly been
before he entered into the Queens service.

About this time it was that Sir Joseph Williamson, quitted his Office of
Secretary of State, to the Earl of Sunderland.

To conclude, the Transactions of this Month, The King Directed the following
Letter to the Duke of York.

Whitehall Feb. 28. 1678.
I Have already given you my Resolves at large, why I think it fit that you
should absent your self for some time beyond the Seas; As I am truly sorry for
the occasion, so may you be sure I shall never desire it longer than it will be
absolutely necessary for your good and my Service: In the mean time I think it
proper to give it you under my Hand, that I expect this Compliance from you,
and desire it may be as soon as conveniently you can. You may easily believe
with what trouble I write this to you, there being nothing I am more sensible
of than the constant kindness you have ever had for me. I hope you are as just
to Me to be assured, That no absence nor any thing else can ever change me from
being truly and kindly Yours,

C. R.


And accordingly in pursuance of His Majesty's pleasure, within few days after
this, the Duke, Duchess, and Family, leave the Kingdom, and retired for a while
to the Hague, and from thence to Brussels.

And now the Parliament, which had been called according to the Kings promise
on the Dissolution of the last, meet at the appointed 6th day of March. The
Kings Speech contained, That in order to the uniting the minds of His Subjects
both to Himself and to one another, He had excluded the Popish Lords from their
Seats in Parliament; Caused the Execution of several men both for the Plot and
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; Disbanded as much of the Army as he could get
Money to do; Above all, That He has commanded his Brother to absent himself;
That so all color may be taken from malicious men of pretending any influence
of Popish Councils: That He proposes by this means to see whether the
Protestant Religion and the Peace of the Kingdom be as truly aimed at by
others, as they are really intended by Him; if so, they (the Members of
Parliament) will lay aside all private animosities, and employ their time upon
the great Concerns of the Nation; That he will not cease to make further search
into the Plot and the Murder of Sir Edmunbury Godfrey, for which he desires the
assistance of both Houses; That he has ordered the Penal Laws to be Executed
against Papists; Desires their assistance in raising Supplys for Disbanding the
Army and paying off the Fleet; and that they would some way make up the loss He
has sustained by the Prohibition of French Wines and Brandy, which turns only
to His prejudice, and the great advantage of the French; That it is necessary
to have a Fleet at Sea, since our Neighbors are making Naval Preparations;
That a Constant establishment might be made for the Navy; And concludes with
His earnest desires to have this a healing Parliament; Assuring them to defend
with his life the Protestant Religion and the Laws of the Kingdom, and expects
to be by them defended from the Calumny as well as Danger of those worst of
Men, who endeaver to render both him and His Government odious to His People.

The Chancellors Speech was chiefly a descant on the former heads; Reminding
the Two Houses as p. 12.
to the Plot, not to over do their Business, and that by being too far
Transported with the fears of Popery, they do not neglect the opportunities of
making sober and lasting Provisions against it; which (says he) are the only
hopes of the Papists, thus to see p. 14.
our Zeal outrun our Discretion, and that we our selves should become the
unhappy occasion of making our own Councils abortive.

The King and Lord Chancellor having ended their Speeches, the Commons returned
to their own House, and unanimously chose for their Speaker, Mr Seymour, who
had officiated in that Place in the last Parliament, who being the next Day
presented to the King, was refused; and the House Ordered to proceed to a new
Election; which notwithstanding was not made till Saturday the 15th of March,
on which day they chose Mr Sergeant Gregory, the said choice being on the
Monday following approved by His Majesty.

After this the Commons draw up an Address to the King for a Fast, in which
also the Lords Concur; and a Fast was appointed by Proclamation dated Mar. 28,
to be observed throughout the Nation on the 11th of April following.

A Committee being appointed to enquire into the manner of suing out the Earl
of Danby's Pardon, which upon search being not entered in any Office from the
Secretaries Office until it came to the Lord Chancellors, but dispatched in a
private manner, and so reported by the Committee, the House of Commons resolve
Mar. 24. That an humble Address be made to His Majesty, representing the
irregularity and illegality of the Pardon mentioned to be granted to the Earl
of Danby, and the Dangerous consequence of Granting Pardons to any persons that
lie under an Impeachment of the Commons of England.

They also desire of the Lords, that the Earl of Danby may be sequestered from
Parliament, and put into safe Custody; accordingly the Lords Order the Usher of
the Black Rod to take him; but upon search at his Houses both in Town, and at
Wimbleton, he could not be found; hereupon a Bill is Ordered to be brought in,
that Thomas Earl of Danby render himself to Justice by a certain day, or in
default thereof to be Attainted, which Bill was read twice and committed. In
the mean time the Lords had past a Bill in their House for banishing and
disabling the said Earl, which being sent down to the Commons for their
Concurrence, was by them rejected, as a Censure too favorable. They also Vote
an Address to be made to His Majesty, That the said Earl be not permitted to
reside in any of His Majesty's Houses of Whitehall, Somerset House, and St.
James's. Also another Address for a Proclamation to apprehend the said Earl,
and that no Subject presume to harbor or conceal him. In the mean time the
Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Danby was highly canvast at several
Conferences between the Lords and Commons, till at last on the 16th of April, a
Message is brought from the Lords House, to acquaint the Commons, That the Earl
of Danby had the last night rendered himself to the Usher of the Black Rod, and
is committed by their Lordships to the Tower.

On the same 16th of April, 4 of the 5 popish Lords in the Tower, who had been
on the 9th instant Impeacht, gave in their Answers in Person, viz. Powis,
Stafford, Petre, and Arundel; but the Lord Bellasis, being disabled by the
Gout, had his Answer received in Writing.

On the 20th of April, the King was pleased to declare to His Privy Council His
pleasure to dissolve them, and to constitute a new one, which for the future
should consist of the constant number of 30 Members, of which 15 to be certain,
viz. 1. The Archbishop of Canterbury. 2. Bishop of London. 3. Lord Chancellor.
4. One of the Chief Justices. 5. The Admiral. 6. Master of the Ordenance. 7.
Treasurer. 8. Chancellor of the Exchequer. 9. Privy Seal. 10. Master of the
Horse. 11. Lord Steward. 12. Lord Chamberlain of the Household. 13. Groom of the
Stole. And the two Secretaries. The other 15 elective at the Kings pleasure, 10
out of the Nobility, and 5 Commoners. Besides these, such Princes of the Blood
as shall be at Court; A Lord President, and a Secretary of Stotland, but these
uncertain. And according to this new Model, so many of them as were in Court
did the next morning, being April 21, meet in the Council Chamber, and were
there Sworn Privy-Counsellors. The same day His Majesty was pleased to acquaint
the two Houses with what he had done, and that He was resolved in all His
weighty and Important Affairs, next to His great Council in Parliament, to be
advised by this Privy Council.

After this, viz. on the 24th day of April, Nathaniel Reading, Esquire, was
Tried before my Lord Chief Justice North, and several other special
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, sitting in the King's Bench Court at
Westminster; His crime of which he stood indicted was for endeavoring to stifle
Bedlo's Evidence against the Popish Lords, or at least to lessen the same;
which being proved by the Oaths of the said Bedloe, one Wiggins his Man, and
one Mr Speak, which two last Bedloe had hid privately in his Chamber to
over-hear their discourse; he was found guilty; had Judgment to stand in the
Pillory for an hour in the Palace-Yard, Imprisonment for one year, and fined
1000 l. Which Sentence was accordingly Executed.

About this time it was that the Bishops of Ely, Gloucester, and Bath and
Wells, were accused for Papists, but the Accusation quickly fell, it being
discovered to be a malicious contrivance to blast their Reputation, and fix a
Scandal on the whole Order.

On the 25th of April the Earl of Danby, and Lord Bellasis appeared in Person
at the Bar of the Lords House; the Earl putting in his Plea, and the Lord
Bellasis his Answer. The next day the Lords Stafford, Arundel, and Powis,
appeared at the same Bar, and having retracted their former Pleas to their
Impeachments (which appeared insufficient to the House of Commons) put in their
further Answers to the same.

After this, on the last day of April His Majesty was pleased to send for the
Commons, to attend Him in the House of Lords, and acquaint 'em by the mouth of
the Lord Chancellor, That he was ready to agree to any Laws to secure Religion,
so the Descent of the Crown in the Right Line be not defeated, and therefore he
is willing that a Provision be made, First to distinguish a Papist from a
Protestant Successor, then to limit the Authority of the First in these
particulars, viz that all Church preferment may be conferred on Pious and
Learned Protestants; That there may not want a Parliament on the Kings Death,
but that the Parliament then in being, or the last that sat, should at such
time reassemble without any new Summons or Election; That during the Reign of
any Popish Successor, no Privy Counselor, no Judge at the Common Law, or in
Chancery, shall be put in, or displaced but by Authority of Parliament; That
none but Protestants be Justices of Peace; so also for Lord Lieutenants, Deputy
Leiutenants and Officers in the Navy, not to be put in or removed but by
Authority of Parliament; concluding that it is hard to invent any other
restraint to be put on a Popish Successor; yet if any thing else can occur to
the Wisdom of the Parliament whereby to secure Religion, and Liberty, without
defeating the Right of Succession it self, that His Majesty is most ready to
consent to it.

After the Consideration of this Speech had been Adjourned over from time to
time; It was at last Resolved on the 11th of May in the House of Commons in
defense of the Kings Person and the Protestant Religion, that they will stand
by His Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes; and that if His Majesty should
come by any violent Death (which God forbid) that they will revenge it to the
utmost upon the Papists. And according to this Vote they drew up an Address on
the 14th, with this varation in the form of Words, viz. We shall be ready to
Revenge upon the Papists, any violence offered [by them] to your Sacred
Majesty. The Words, by them, being neither expressed nor intimated in their Vote,
though essential and necessary to the Justice of the intended Revenge.

Further then this they took no notice of the Kings Resolution expressed in the
said Speech; but contrary to that Clause which related to the Succession, on
the 15th of May, they brought in a Bill to Disable the Duke of York to Inherit
the Imperial Crown of England, which being Read the first time on the said 15th
of May, was on the 21st read again and Committed to a Committee of the whole
House; yet the House divided on the Question. Yeas 207. Noes 123. But the
Parliament being soon after Prorogued, it never proceeded further.

In the mean time the two Houses of Parliament are very earnest in debating the
Methods relating to the Trials of the five Popish Lords in the Tower, and the
Earl of Danby; which last being on the third of May demanded, at the Bar of the
Lords House, whether he would rely upon and abide by the Plea of his Pardon,
returned for Answer, That being advised by his Council that his Pardon is good
in Law, he does insist upon his Plea, and desires that his Council may be
heard: With which their Lordships acquainting the Commons, they Order a return
to be made to their Lordships by the whole House in these words, on the 5th of
May.

My Lords, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, are
come up to demand Judgment in their own Names and the Names of all the Commons
of England, against Thomas Earl of Danby, who stands Impeacht by them before
your Lordships of High Treason, and diverse high Crimes and Misdemeanors, To
which he has pleaded a Pardon, which Pardon the Commons conceive to be illegal
and void, and therefore they do demand Judgment of your Lordships accordingly.

On the 6th of May it was ordered in the House of Lords, that Saturday next be
appointed for the Earl of Danby's Plea to be argued, and that the five Lords in
the Tower be tried this Day Sennight: With which Orders they acquainted the
Commons the next Day, and that their Lordships had appointed an Address to be
made to His Majesty to appoint a Lord Steward for the said Trials. The Commons
not well satisfied with these proceedings, desire that a Committee of both
Houses may be nominated to consider of the most proper ways and methods of
Proceeding upon Impeachments, according to the usage of Parliament. But the
Lords refused to agree to the Proposal as inconformable to the Rules and Orders
of proceedings of their House, which is and ever must be tender in matters
relating to their Judicature. Upon this Answer the Commons resolve ( May 9.)
That no Commoner whatsoever presume to maintain the validity of the Pardon
pleaded by the Earl of Danby, without the leave of this House first had; and
that the Persons so doing shall be accounted Betrayers of the Liberties of the
Commons of England. After this it seems that the Lords did recede from their
former resolution, for on the 11th of May, they acquainted the Commons by
Message, That they had appointed a Committee consisting of Twelve Lords, to
join with a Committee of the House of Commons to consider of propositions and
circumstances in relation to the foresaid Trials.

Which joint Committee of both Houses meeting, they dis-agreed about the
Bishops being present at the Trials. for the Lords having resolved in their
House, That the Lords Spiritual have a right to stay in Court in Capital Cases
till the Court proceed to the Vote of Guilty or Not Guilty: Hereupon the
Commons resolved on the other side to insist upon it, that the Lords Spiritual
ought not to have any Vote in any Proceedings upon Impeachments against the
Lords in the Tower. The two Houses seeming to disser on this point, the Bishops
thought to find out a Medium, and on the 16th of May, desired leave of the
House of Lords that they might withdraw themselves from the Trials of the said
Impeached Lords, with the Liberty of entering their usual Protestations.

But this did not satisfy the House of Commons, who on the 24th of May Resolve
that they cannot proceed to the Trial of the Five Lords before Judgment be
given on the Earl of Danby's Pardon, and in the point of the Bishops Voting in
Capital Offenses. For which they drew up Reasons, and the 26th of May delivered
the same to the Lords at a Conference: which being very large, and in print, I
shall here omit.

And in this posture did the Public Transactions in Parliament appear on the
27th day of May, at which time it pleased His Majesty to Prorogue both Houses
until the 14th day of August next.

About this time the King was pleased to remove Sir John Robinson from being
Lieutenant of the Tower, and confer the Place on Captain Cheek.

The Troubles in Scotland, which broke out in this Month, gave occasion of much
discourse, and no little alarm in England. They begun in the Barbarous Murder
of Dr. Sharp Archbishop of St. Andrews, on the 3d of May, as he was traveling
from Edinburgh to his own Residency; The Murderers were a company of Inveterate
Covenanters, who, in regard the said Bishop had been formerly one of their
Party, and now revolted (as they called his honest Reformation) bore him a most
immortal hatred, having attempted his Life several times before. But the
Assassins stop not at Murder, for soon after this they gather into a Body in
the Western parts of Scotland, and fall into open Rebellion and Treason; on the
29th, a Party of the Rebels well mounted and armed, came to Rugland, proclaim
the Covenant, and burnt the following Acts of Parliament, viz. The Act
concerning the Kings Supremacy. The Recissory Act (by which all the Mock-Laws,
made in the times of the late Anarchy, were repealed.) The Act for establishing
Episcopacy: And the Act appointing the Anniversary of the 29th of May They also
published an Insolent Declaration full of Treason, and the very Spirit of Scotch
Covenanters, commonly there called WHIGS: With such as these their Army
increased daily to such a considerable number, that the King Commissioned the
Duke of Monmouth as Generalissimo to suppress the Insurrection, which not long
after, with the assistance of the Loyal Gentry and Heretors of that Nation, he
did in one Battle; killing some, and taking several Hundreds of Prisoners; of
which some few being hanged, especially those who were more immediately
concerned in the Archbishops Murder, the rest were Transported.

But to return to London. On the 13th of June, Thomas White, alias Whitebread.
Provincial of the Jesuits in England, William Harcourt, John Fenwick, John
Gaven, and Anthony Turner, all Jesuits, were Tried at the Old Bailey, and found
Guilty of High Treason as Conspirators in the late Plot; The next Day Richard
Langhorn Esquire; a Barister of the Inner Temple, was Tried at the same Bar for the
same Crime, and being also found Guilty, all six had Sentence of Condemnation,
and were accordingly Executed; the five Jesuits on Friday the 20th of June, and
Mr. Langhorn on the 14th of July following; All departing this Life with the
greatest Protestations of Innocence, as to the Crimes Objected, as could be
possibly expected.

On the last Day of Trinity-Term, being the 9th of July, Sir Anthony Dean, and
Samuel Pepys Esquire; two Members of the present Parliament were on a long debate
let to Bail in the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, the Principals in a
Recognizance of 10000 l. a piece, and every one of the Bail 5000 l. They had
been Committed to the Tower, by Order of the House of Commons on the 20th of
May last; their Accusation Treason, Piracy, and Felony on the Stat. 31. El. 4.
And being on the first Day of this Term removed by Habeas Corpus into this
Court, the said Crimes were here charged against 'em in several Affidavits by
Scot and Moon; but it seems the Evidence not appearing so home as expected,
they were now Bailed, and so continued till the last Day of Hillary-Term
following, at which time they were Discharged on their own single Recognizance
to appear in Trinity-Term next without being brought to any Trial.

But now arrives the 10th of July, on which Day the King was pleased to
Dissolve the present Parliament by Proclamation, with a Declaration of His
Intention to call another on the 17th of October following.

On the 18th of July Sir George Wakeman Baronet, the Queens Physician, William
Marshal, William Rumley, and James Corker, Benedictin Monks, were Tried for
High Treason relating to the late Plot; the Evidence, Oats, Bedloe, and
others; But the Jury found 'em not Guilty, and they were discharged. Several
Libels hereupon flew abroad against my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, who
notwithstanding did sufficiently acquit himself from all aspersion in the
Judgment of sober People.

In August, the King fell dangerously ill at Windsor, upon the Intelligence of
which His Royal Highness came over Post to His Majesty; But it pleased God that
the King recovering His Health, to the great Joy of the Nation; The Lord Mayor
of London, with the Court of Aldermen, and a Train of 30 Coaches, and about 100
Horsemen, went on Monday the 15th of September to Windsor to Congratulate His
Majesty's Recovery, which Complement was as kindly received as handsomely
performed. On the Wednesday following the King, attended by His Royal Highness
and the whole Court, rerurn'd to Whitehall; that Night by the Lord Mayors
express Order there were Bonfires throughout the whole City for His Majesty's
return, as well to His former Health, as place of Residency. But it seems the
Duke of Monmouth having contracted the Kings Displeasure, on some account or
other, not commonly known, His Majesty was pleased to take from him his
Commission of Captain General, and for a time expel him the Kingdom; soon after
this the said Duke went over to Vtrecht, and at the same time His Royal
Highness returned to Brussels; But this last, it seems, without designs of any
long stay there, for on Sunday Night the 12th of October, His said Royal
Highness, the Duchess, and Family, arrived at St. James's, to the surprise of
some, and Joy of others.

The King having called a New Parliamenz, as he had formerly promised on the
Dissolution of the last, to meet on the 17th of October, He was now further
pleased to Prorogue it from the time appointed, to the 26th of January
following.

On the first Day of Michaelmas-Term, my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs took
occasion to make an Excellent Speech in the King's Bench Court, concerning the
many Scandalous Libels that had been Published against him since Sir George
Wakemans Trial, and acquittal; in which Speech he purged himself at large of
any Corruption and with a great measure of Courage declared, That he was
neither afraid nor ashamed to own what he had done; That the Impeachment of the
course of Public Justice by vulgar noise and clamor did not at all terrify
him to a Compliance with the Rabble, against his Conscience and Understanding,
nor to try any cause otherwise then according to the Evidence and the
probability and credibility it carries with it. Mr. Justice Jones and Justice
Dolbin spoke also to the same purpose, and appeared as Compurgators of the
Chief Justices Integrity.

Much discourse there was at this time, and many Narratives came out daily
concerning the Discovery of a New Plot which the Papists (was is said) had
contrived to lay on the Presbyterians. The chief Discoverer was one Dangerfield
alias Willoughby; Several were accused, and laid up as Conspirators; among
whom, the Countess of Powis, Mrs Celier, Sir Robert Payton, and Mr Gadbury.

The Effigies of the Pope in all his Pontificalibus, had been for several years
past solemnly burnt by the people, in the Month of November, yearly; but never
with so much Ceremony, as on the 17th of November this year, it being a Day
observed by some in memory of Queen Elizabeth. The Procession consisted of one
personating the Dead Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey carried on a Horse, with a
Bell-man to mind the People of his Murder, Priests in Copes with a large
Silver Cross, Carmelite, and Gray Friars, six Jesuits, and after them the
Waits, several Bishops, some in Lawn Sleeves, others with Copes and Miters on,
then six Cardinals, and after them the Pope on a Pageant with Boys and Incense
Pots, and other Ceremonious Pomp, behind him the Devils Representative; In this
manner they marched about five at night from Bishopsgate to the Temple-gate at
Chancery Lane End, attended with Thousands of People, at which appointed
station, they Committed the Effigies to the Flames of a very extraordinary
Bonfire, at which time the mock-Devil departed, and the Show ended.

On Thursday the 27th of November, The Duke of Monmouth arrived in the night
time at London, on whose return the Citizens expressed a mighty Joy by Bonfiers,
Fireworks, and Ringing of Bells all the next day and most part of the night.

In the mean time his Royal Highness with his Duchess and Daughter, attended
with a Guard and Retinue suitable to their Quality, made a Journey into
Scotland: Where being arrived, The Duke was at Edenborough on the 4th of
December, received and Complemented by the Privy Council of that Kingdom, with
abundance of Respect and Honor; The Lord Chancellor made a Speech in the name
of all the Council, to which his Royal Highness Answered in very affectionate
Terms, expressing his great satisfaction at the Civilities he had received
since his arrival in that Kingdom: And declaring his readiness to promote the
Honor and Service of the King, and the Interests of the Scottish Nation.

About this time great endeavors were used to procure a Multitude of Hands to
Petitions which were framing in London, Westminster, and several Counties, to
be presented to the King for the sitting of the Parliament on the 26th day of
January next according to the last Prorogation; which manner of Petitioning
being unwarrantable and tumultuous, the King was pleased, in Council Dec. 10.
to Order the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen to take care in their several
stations of His Majesty's Honor, and of the peace and safety of the City, and
not to suffer such persons that should sign such Petitions, or go about to
procure hands to them to go unpunished; but that they should proceed against
them or cause them to be brought before the Council Board to be punished,
according to a Resolution of all the Judges of England, 2. Jac. (which may be
seen. Cro. 2. part of Reports, fol. 37.) His Majesty was further pleased to
issue out His Proclamation dated the 12th day of December, containing, That
whereas he has been informed that diverse evil disposed persons endeavor in
several parts of this Kingdom to frame Petitions to His Majesty for specious
Ends and purposes relating to the public, and thereupon to collect and procure
to the same the hands and subscriptions of multitudes of His Majesty's
Subjects; which Proceedings being contrary to the Common and known Laws of this
Land, and tending to promote discontents among the People, and to raise
Sedition and Rebellion, His Majesty does therefore strictly charge and commad
all and every his loving Subjects of what Rank or Degree soever, that they
presume not to agitate or promote any such Subscriptions, nor in any ways join
in any Petition of that manner to be preferred to His Majesty, upon peril of
the utmost rigor of the Law that may be inflicted for the same.

At the same time His Majesty issued out another Proclamation, declaring His
Resolution to Prorogue the Parliament from the 26th of January to the 11th of
November next.

Notwithstanding the scope of these two Proclamations, the business of
Petitioning went forwards; several were perfected and delivered not long after,
one from London Subscribed with many Thousands of hands, others from, York,
Essex, Surrey, and Wiltshire, all which the King received but coldly, and as
appeared afterward, ineffectually, for on the 26th of January being the Day to
which the Parliament was Prorogued, His Majesty was pleased to make a short
Speech to both Houses, containing, That when he declared in Council His
Intention of putting off the Parliament to a time so remote as November, it was
not without mature Consideration; That he cannot be persuaded from any thing
that has happened since (in reference to Affairs within the Kingdom) to alter
or repent of that Resolution; That notwithstanding, considering the present
danger which threatens some of our Neighbors and Allies, He thinks fit to
appoint a day for their meeting again in April; yet the Distractions and
Jealouses at home are of such a nature, and so heightened and improved by the
malice and and Industry of ill men, that he is unalteablylos opinion that a
longer Interval of Parliament will be absolutely necessary for composing and
quieting of Men's minds; in order to which, he is afraid the most proper
Remedies would prove ineffectual without the assistance of some further time;
He resolves therefore that on the said meeting in April there shall be a
further Prorogation, unless the Condition of our Allies abroad do then require
our immediate assistance.

Hereupon he commanded the Lord Chancellor to Prorogue the Parliament to the
15th of April.

In the mean time Articles of high Misdemeanor were offered by way of Complaint
to the King and Council against the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, by Oats, and
Bedloe, who had formerly declared themselves unwilling to give any Evidence
against any Papists, or concerning the late Popish Conspiracy in any Court
where the said Chief Justice should fit as Judge. But the Prosecution of this
Affair soon fell, and the Cause never came to be heard, further than the Chief
Justices Answer.

In the beginning of Hillary Term, Sir Thomas Gascoigne, a Yorkshire Knight of
85 years of age, was Arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar in Westminster Hall, upon
an Information of High Treason in conspiring the Death of the King, and the
Subversion of the Government. He was afterward brought to his Trial at the
same Bar; the Jury were all Yorkshire Gentlemen, the Foreman, Sir Thomas
Hodson; The chief Evidence against him one Balron, who had formerly been Baily
of his Colepits, and one Mowbray, who had also belonged to his Family; but
their Testimony, it seems, not being of that Weight or credibility with the
Jury as some expected, they brought in their Verdict Not Guilty; whereupon the
Prisoner was immediately discharged.

We are now arrived at the end of the 31st year of His Majesty's Reign, a year
observable for many Revolutions, tho all concluding peaceably and well, through
the Mercy of God, and the Wisdom of our Superiors, the factious Rabble having
been never more ready for Combustion, since the late Wars of Cursed Memory.

Anno 32 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1680.
THE Conclusion of the last Year left his Royal Highness in Scotland, but the
beginning of this must be remarkable for his return to England; which healing
Action in the entrance, will, I hope, as a good Omen, prognosticate Peace and
Happiness to the King and Kingdom, during the rest of this Thirty second Year
of His Majesty's Reign.

On the 31 of January, the Duke acquainted the Lords of the Privy Council at
Edinburg, That he had received a Letter from the King, calling him very
speedily to Court; That though he did very cheerfully obey His Majesty's
Commands, and went with much joy to attend Him, yet he could not part from
their Lordships so soon without a great deal of Reluctance and Trouble, having
both at his reception, and during the short time of his abode there, met with
all possible demonstration of civility and kindness, both from the Nobility,
Gentry, and from the Representatives of the several Bodies of the Nation,
particularly from the Council, of which he had so just a resentment, that he
could not in all his life forget them, and should not fail upon all occasions
to meet their great kindness and affection shown him, with all the service he
was capable to do them; That he would acquaint His Majesty that He had in
Scotland a brave and loyal Nobility and Gentry, a regular Privy Council, and
the Judicatures filled with able Persons well affected to His Majesty's Service
and Interest; That he had observed the disaffected Party were nothing so
considerable as their Friends in England studied industriously to represent
them to be. He then recommended to the Council the settling of the Differences
between several Gentlemen of the Highlands, whom he had always observed to be
firm to His Majesty's Interest. The Lord Chancellor, in the name of the
Council, acknowledged the great happiness they had had in hi Presence, Conduct,
and Advice, and declared how much devoted they all were to the Service of His
Majesty and his Royal Highness; and that they could not express the great grief
they had to part so soon with him, to whose Council and Presence they owe so
many Advantages.

After this the Duke, Duchess, and all their Retinue, began their Voyage by Sea
for London, where he arrived at the Court Privy Stairs on the 24th of February,
about Three in the afternoon, not without all the due signs of Joy and Welcome.
There arrived at the same time from the Privy Council of Scotland, a Letter
full of Loyal Expressions to the Kings Service, with abundance of
Recommendation and Protestations for the Duke's Interest. Two days after his
arrival, his Royal Highness was attended by the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen,
Recorder, and Common Council of the City of London; at which time the Recorder
having in all their names Congratulated his safe arrival, they all kissed the
Hands both of the Duke and Duchess.

On the 11th of February, His Majesty was pleased to declare in Council, that
He had granted His Secretary Coventry leave to resign his Place of Secretary of
State; That His intention was to continue him however of His Council; And that
He had made choice of Sir Lionel Jenkins to succeed him in the Place of
Secretary, who was accordingly Sworn of His Privy Council that day, and took
his place at the Board.

Before the end of this Hillary Term, the Court of Kings Bench produced several
remarkable passages relating to the public. For besides the Trial and
Acquittal of Sir Thomas Gascoin (of which before) on the 9th of February,
Thomas Whitfield, John Smallbones, and William Laud, having been formerly
indicted for a Riot, in tearing a Petition which was some time since carried
about to get Subscriptions to it concerning the sitting of the Parliament,
being now tried for the same at the Kings Bench Bar, they were found Not guilty
of the Riot, and only Mr. Whitfield guilty of tearing the Petition; but what
offense that action did amount to, was not at that time declared by the Court.

About the same time several Booksellers were punished for publishing Seditious
and Scandalous Libels; but above all, the Sentence against Benjamin Harris, the
Publisher of the Weekly Domestic Intelligence, is most observable, who having
been Indicted, Tried, and found Guilty of Vending a Scandalous Libel, called,
An Appeal from the Country to the City, had Judgment on the last day of the
Term, To stand in the Pillory before the Old Exchange on the Tuesday following;
Imprisonment for One year, Three years Good behavior, and Fined 500 l. the
said Appeal to be burnt by the Common Hangman.

On the fifth of March His Majesty was pleased to issue out His Proclamation
against Highway-men, promising thereby the Sum of 10 l. to any one who should
discover any such, from the date of the said Proclamation until the second of
March following, which said Sum was appointed to he paid immediately on the
Conviction of such Robber, by the Sherif of the County; and to be allowed on
His Accounts.

On the ninth of March the King issued out another Proclamation against such,
who under a vain pretense of Honor, take upon them to be the Revengers of their
private Quarrels in Duels and single Combat, which ought not to be upon any
pretense or provocation whatsoever, strictly charging and commanding all his
loving Subjects of what quality soeve, hat they do not, either by themselves or
others, by Message, Word, Writing, or other ways, Challenge, or cause to be
Challenged, any Person or Persons, to fight in Combat or single Duel, nor
Carry, Accept, or Conceal any such Challenge or Appointment, nor actually fight
any such Duel, or as a Second or otherwise accompany or be assistant therein;
declaring further, That He will not grant His Pardon to any Person whatsoever,
that shall fight or be any way aiding or concerned in such Duel, where any
Person shall be slain or dye of his Wounds received therein, but will leave all
such persons to the utmost rigor and severity of the Laws; And that He will
not suffer or endure any person or persons to be or remain at Court who shall
presume to intercede for any person or persons offending against this
Proclamation, straightly charging and commanding, by the said Proclamation, all
persons whatsoever, who shall receive or know of any Challenge, sent, or
delivered, as aforesaid, forthwith to give notice thereof to some of the Privy
Council, or some Justice of Peace near the place, upon pain of His highest
Displeasure, and being left to the strictest rigor and severity of the Law.

On the 15th of April, being the day to which the Parliament was formerly
Prorogued, the King then absent at Newmarket, my Lord Chancellor, by Commission
under the Great Seal, Prorogued it further to the 17th of May following, the
Duke of York being present in the House. On the 17th of May it was further
Prorogued till the first of July.

And now it was that those Counties which had been lately so active in
promoting Petitions for the sitting of the Parliament, began to be ashamed of
such Actions, and to recant. The City of Westminster was the first, whose Grand
Jury by their public and formal Act, at their Sessions after Easter, disowned
the said Action of promoting Petitions, and charged it on certain Factious
persons unknown to them; this, and more to this purpose, they desired their
Steward, Mr. Withens of the Middle Temple, to represent in their names to His
Majesty, which he did soon after, and was Knighted for his Loyalty by the Name
of Sir Francis Withens. After this followed the like Addresses from the
Counties of Surry, Essex, Middlesex, and Norfolk, which last mentioned County
of Norfolk, had this further Acknowledgment in their Message, viz. Their humble
thanks to His Majesty for recalling the Duke from Flanders. To the same
purpose, ought not to be omitted what happened in my Lord Shandois his Case,
who having been elected by the Turkey Company of Merchants to go Ambassador to
Constantinople, and desiring His Majesty's Approbation, the King was pleased to
reply, That he having countenanced and been engaged in the Business of a
Petition about the Parliament (which His Majesty looked upon as derogatory to
His Prerogative, and tending to Sedition) He could not think him fit for this
Favor. Hereupon the said Lord desiring to be called into the Council of
Foreign Affairs at Whitehall, Apr. 26. did there humbly acknowledge to His
Majesty his fault in having been concerned in the said Petition, alleging,
That he was misled and drawn in, by being given to understand that that
proceeding was for His Majesty's Service; but that being since better informed,
he abhorred and disowned all such Practices, and humbly begged His Majesty's
Pardon for what was past. After which the King was pleased to receive him into
His Favor, and confirm his Election to the Embassy.

About this time it was, that a false and dangerous Rumor flew abroad, and was
spread about the Town, concerning a Black Box reported to be found, wherein was
said to be contained a Writing importing a Marriage or Contract between His
Majesty and the Duke of Monmouth's Mother; which report coming to the King's
Ear, He was pleased to Summon the Council to meet extraordinarily on the 26th
of April, in which He declared the said report to be altogether false, and that
He thought Himself obliged in Honor and Conscience to have the matter thoroughly
examined and searched into; In order whereunto Sir Gilbert Gerard (who was
rumored to have seen some such Writing) being called in, was examined in
Council (his Royal Highness, and all the Judges of the Courts at Westminster
being present) touching the truth of what was reported; To which he answered
upon Oath, That he never had any such Writing committed to his Custody, nor did
he know of any such thing, or had ever seen such Writing. To all which he also
subscribed his Name. His Majesty declaring He resolved to use all means
possibly to find out the Author of this Report. And accordingly a Committee of
Council did sit for a great while afterward to sift into the Business.

On the fifth of May, all the Judges of England, having been demanded their
Opinions, made their Report in Council, and declared for Law, That His Majesty
may Prohibit the Printing and Publishing of all News-Books and Pamphlets of
News whatsoever not Licensed by His Majesty's Authority, as manifestly tending
to the Breach of the Peace, and Disturbance of the Kingdom: And accordingly the
King issued out His Proclamation to suppress 'em, May 12.

On the 11th of May, being about the middle of Easter Term, a Bill of
Indictment of High Treason against the Lady Powis, was delivered to the Grand
Jury of Middlesex, who not being satisfied with the sufficiency of the
Evidence, after a long Examination, brought the Bill in, Ignoramus.

The storm of Hail that fell at London on the 18th of May about eleven of the
Clock in the morning, is not to be past without Observation; which though it
came not very thick, nor continued long, yet was of such note, that some were
measured above six Inches about; I saw many fall bigger than Pigeons Eggs, or
ordinary Walnuts, none less than ones finger end, and hard as Stones, till they
had lain a while. Several Rooks in the Temple Garden were beaten down from the
Trees and killed with this Hail, as so many Shot or Bullets.

On Wednesday the 19th of May, Richard Tasburgh of Flixton in the County of
Suffolk Esquire; was Tried at the Kings Bench Bar upon an Indictment of High
Treason in Conspiring the Death of the King, but upon a long Evidence to little
purpose, was found Not Guilty (the Jury never going from the Bar) and
discharged.

On Friday the 21 of May was brought to the same Bar, by Habeas Corpus, William
Viscount Stafford, who much complaining of his long Imprisonment, was informed
by the Court, That all the Judges had resolved upon mature Consideration, that
he being Impeacht of Treason in Parliament, he could not be tried out of
Parliament; and for the same reason also, it was out of the Power of this Court
to Bail him; That he, and the other Lords in the Tower were not within the
benefit of the late Act touching Habeas Corpus's; That the Court was sorry they
could not relieve him; and that there was no way for him to come to his Trial
but by the sitting of the Parliament.

The day following Sir Henry Tichburne, the elder Roper, and John Caryl Esquire;
were Bailed at the same Bar, though accused of High Treason; yet in regard
there appeared but one Witness against them ( viz. Oats) they were discharged
of their Confinement, upon Bail.

On the last day of the Term, the Lady Powis, Sir Robert Payton, and one
Bedingfield, were absolutely discharged of all attendance. The same day a Bill
of Indictment of High Treason was found and brought in by the Grand Jury of
Middlesex against the Lord Castlemain.

The Nine and twentieth of May, being the solemn Anniversary for the Kings
Birth and Restoration, past this year with the usual Church Service, and the
Joy of Bells, but without any Bonfires at night, all Bonfires, not only on
this, but any other day whatsoever, having been forbid (by order of the Privy
Council, April 7.) without License first obtained from the Council or other
Magistrates: Such Bonfires as of late, having been observed the occasions of
tumult and dangerous opportunities of Sedition: This day was also observed at
Edinburgh with great solemnity and triumph, Fifty old Men (the Number of His
Majesty's Age) attending the Ceremony, each having a Largess of 50 s. The King
and the Dukes Healths were publicly drank at the Market Cross, the Conduits
running Claret, and abundance of Oranges, Lemons, and Sweatmeats thrown abroad.

About the 10th of June arrived ill News from Tangier, the Moors on the 14th
past so straightened Charles Fort with their Siege, that the English Garrison,
being but 180 Men, under Captain Trelawney, resolved to quit it as desperate,
and fight through the Enemy, to the Town of Tangier; accordingly they laid a
Mine to blow it up after their departure, and passing through the Enemies Works
in the night (which Passage they found more difficult than expected) the whole
Army of the Moors were alarmed and came in upon them, killed near 150, cut the
Captain all to pieces, about 38 men escaping through. Henrietta Fort being also
at the same time lost to the Enemy.

On the the first day of Trinity Term, Mrs. Celier was tried for High Treason,
at the Kings Bench Bar, the Indictment run in the usual form as against the
rest of the Plotters; but the chief, (and indeed only) Evidence against her,
Thomas Dangerfield, being proved by Records then produced, so great and
infamous a Criminal, his Testimony was refused by the Court to be admitted, and
chiefly in regard he stood Outlawed of Felony, and Felony not being expressed in
his Pardon, she was therefore found Not Guilty; and Dangerfield himself
committed to custody, till he could find Bail to Reverse the Outlawry, to
Answer the Felony, and for his good Behavior; But within a few days after the
said Dangerfield producing a Newgate Pardon, whereby all Felonies were
Pardoned, and his name being found therein, he was discharged.

And now it was that His Majesty, in pursuance to what He had done in April,
and to remove all pretenses of the disaffected, in the Point of Succession,
published his Declaration, Protesting on the Word of a King, and the Faith of a
Christian, That He was never Married to Mrs. Bar low alias Waters, the Duke of
Monmouth's Mother, nor to any other Woman, besides the now Queen. Which
Declaration was on the 15th of June in this Trinity Term, Registered on Record
in the High Court of Chancery, all the great Lords of the Privy Council who
were present when His Majesty Declared and Signed the same, attesting the
Action upon their Corporal Oaths in open Court. The Lord Chancellor declaring
at the same time, That this Declaration is not enrolled here to receive any
augmentation of repute or force from this Court, for it cannot receive more
than it has already, but only to be preserved here as in a Repository or
Registry; and he doubts not but it will also find a more Noble Registry than
this, that is, the Hearts of all the Loyal Subjects of the Nation.

Other notable passages are to be Observed this Term: On the 22d of June, the
Lord Aston was brought to the King's Bench Bar in Order to his Trial, but the
Attorney General not being ready with the Kings Evidence, the Trial was put off
to the Friday following, on which Day the Court did not proceed to the Trial
for the same reason, and the Lord Aston was Bailed the next Day, to appear the
first Day of next Term. On the 23d of the same Month, the Lord Castlemain was
Tried for High Treason; the Evidence against him Oats, and Dangerfield; the
last of which though admitted to be Sworn, yet finding no credit with the Court
and Jury on the account of the Infamy of his many Crimes, the Verdict was
brought in Not Guilty, and the Prisoner Discharged. And this was because the
Stat. 13 of this King, requires two Lawful and credible Witnesses in Cases of
Treason, and Dangerfield being not esteemed such, there remained only one
Witness, viz. Oats.

Saturday the 26th of June, being four Days before the Term ended, the Grand
Jury of Middlesex came to the King's Bench Bar, and by their Foreman, Charles
Humphrevile Esquire; presented to the Bench a Petition Subscribed by 21 of them,
and desired my Lord Chief Justice to present it to the King, for the sitting of
the Parliament; but the Court refusing to Act in it, received it not. And the
said Jury were at the same time Discharged from further attendance. It is said,
that they had at that time some Bills and Presentiments before them against
several Persons for being Popish Recusants, in Order to their Conviction, all
which they would have found and presented in few Hours time, had they not been
Discharged; among the rest a Bill against the Duke of York brought into the
said Jury, and Promoted, and in some sort, attested by several Lords and
Members of Parliament, viz. Huntington, Shaftsbury, Gray of Wark, Brandon,
Russel, Candish, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Scroop How,
Sir William Cooper, Sir Thomas Wharton, John Trenchard Esquire; Thomas Thynn Esquire;
and William Forester Esquire; And note that the Proceedings of the Petition
abovesaid were disowned by another Grand Jury of Middlesex, who the same Day,
came in, and presented the Court with a Paper Subscribed by them to that
purpose, desiring the Court to take particular notice of their dissent to the
irregular Proceedings of the other Jury.

On the last Day of the Term several who should have been Tried about the'
Plot, were (in regard the Attorny-General had not Evidence sufficient against
them,) some Bailed, and some absolutely Discharged, by virtue of the late Act
of Habeas Corpus. 31. Car. 2. Among the first were Sir James Symonds, Edward
Peter's, and Needham, with several others who were reputed Priests; Mr. Howard,
Mr. Heveningham, both the Ropers, Sir John Gage, and young Langhorn, were
absolutely Discharged from their long Imprisonments, some having lain by it for
23 Months, and the reason of their Discharge was because Mr. Attorney General
declared that he had but one Witness against them. Sir Anthony Dean and Mr.
Pepys, were also at the same time absolutely Discharged from further
attendance. But one Holcroft a Conventicle Preacher having removed himself by
Habeas Corpus from Cambridge Goal, and appearing to be a very Seditious and
dangerous Person, and to be in Prison not only by Warrant of the Justices on
the Oxford Act, but also on 17. Car. a Capias Excommunicatum, was 2. c. 2.
remanded.

On the first of July, being the Day to which the Parliament had been formerly
Prorogued, it was further Prorogued, by Commission, to the 22d of the same
Month, the Duke of York being present in the House, and from thence to the 23d
of August.

Bethel (who had been one of the Committee of Safety in the late Times) and
Cornish, two reputed Phanaticks, had been chosen Sheriffs of London last
Midsummer for the Year ensuing, but appearing since incapable to bear Office in
any Corporation by the Stat. 13. Car. 2. Stat. 2. c. 1. a New Election was
appointed to be at Guildhall on the 14th of July, against which time they
capacitated themselves by receiving the Sacrament and abjuring the Covenant,
etc. As appointed by the said Act, and stood for a New Choice; against whom two
other Competitors appeared, Fox, and Nicholson; in so much that they came to a
Poll (a thing unusual) during which time a Rlotous Assault was Committed on the
Person of Sir Simon Lewis, one of the then Sheriffs, by Osborn a Draper and
others of Bethels Party; which being Represented to the King the same Night, by
the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs in Person, he Ordered a Commission of Oyer and
Terminer to be Issued out for Trial of the said Riot. They continued Polling
till Monday following, and from thence by Adjournment to Thursday, The King in
the mean time being entertained at Supper at Sheriff Lewis's House Tuesday July
20. On the 29th of July (and not before) the Votes were declared at a Common
Hall then Assembled at the Guild Hall, to stand thus

Bethel, 2276. Cornish, 2483. Box, 1428. Nicholson, 1230.
Whereupon the two first were declared lawfully Chosen with great Acclamations.
At the same time an Address was Presented to the Lord Mayor by Thomas Papillon
Esquire; in the Name of the Commons of the City, thereby Disowning all tumultuous
and disorderly Proceedings in their last Assembly, other than what might be the
effect of Emulation for His Majesty's Service, and the Preservation of their
own just Rights, desiring his Lordship to Represent the same to the King, and
that he would in their Names humbly beseech His Majesty that the Parliament
might speedily Assemble, To which the Lord Mayor Answered in a short Speech,
That he had not misrepresented any thing touching their last Assembly to His
Majesty; That their Address touching the Parliament might have been spared, in
regard the King had been pleased not long since to declare to him, and assure
him, That this Parliament should sit in November next; however that he would
not be wanting with all humility to lay the whole matter before him.

On the 23d of August, being the Day to which the Parliament had been
Prorogued, the Houses met, and were further Prorogued to the 21st of October
following; The King promising that they should sit then, and Publishing His
Proclamation to that purpose.

Several Remarkable Passages happened this long Vacation. As, the Death of the
Earl of Ossery, into whose Place of Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, Succeeded
the Earl of Feversham. The Death of Bedloe, one of the Evidence concerning the
Plot. Also the Prince Palatine Eldest Son of the Elector, being here in England
on a Visit to the King, he received News of the Death of his Father in Germany,
during his absence.

It was also during this Vacation that Elizabeth Celier before mentioned
Published a Narrative of her Trial and Sufferings; in which were some words like
Reproach to the Government, for which she was Tried, found Guilty of Publishing
a Libel, Fined 1000 l. to stand Thrice in the Pillory, Good Behavior during
Life, and her Book to be Burnt by the Hangman.

And now comes on the long expected 21st Day of October, and with it the first
Session of this Parliament. The Day before which The Duke and Duchess of York
began their Journey for Scotland, by Sea; The King Accompanying them as low as
Woolwich, and there Dineing with them on Shipboard. The same Day many Members
of both Houses, to the Number of 200 as reported, met in a kind of Caball at
Dinner at the Sun Tavern behind the Exchange. On the 21st the Kings Speech
contained, That He had during this long Prorogation made Alliances with Holland
and Spain; That He desired Money of them for the Relief of Tangier which had
already exhausted His Purse; That He would not have them meddle with the
Succession of the Crown in the Right Line, but proceed in the Discovery of the
Plot, and to the Trials of the Lords, etc. After this (the Chancellor making no
set Speech) the Commons returned to their own House, and unanimously chose for
their Speaker, Mr. Williams of Gray's Inn, Recorder of Chester.

One of the first things the House of Commons did, was to Purge their own House
of certain Members; Sir Robert Can, a Burgess for Bristol for having said there
is no Plot, but a Presbyterian Plot: Sir Francis Withins head Steward of
Westminster, and one of the Burgesses for the same, for having Declared himself
abhorrent to the late Tumultous Petitions for the Parliaments sitting. The
first of these was expelled the House, and Committed to the Tower; the other
only expelled; But both Ordered to receive their Censure on their Knees. And
several other Members were declared Guilty of the last mentioned Offense.

On the 30th of October, the King Published a Proclamation, promising His Pardon
to all that within two Months shall come in and make any further Discovery of
the Plot. And this was done upon an Address of Parliament.

In the mean time the Commons not satisfied in punishing their own Members who
had appeared against Petitioning for the Parliaments fitting, they take notice
of others who were without their Walls, and among the rest Sir George Jeffreys
becomes the Object of their Displeasure; who being Recorder of London, the
Kings Sergeant at Law, and Chief Justice of Chester, is for the pretended Crime
above specified, on the 13th of November Voted a Betrayer of the Rights of the
Subject, and an Address Ordered to be made to His Majesty to remove him from
all Public Offices. At the same time it was Ordered, that a Committee enquire
into all such Persons as have been advising or promoting the late Proclamation,
styled a Proclamation against Tumultuous Petitioning.

But about the same time a matter of much greater concern was thus managed. On
the 11th of November, was past in the House of Commons a Bill entitled, An Act
for securing the Protestant Religion, by disabling James Duke of York to
Inherit the Imperial Crown of England, and Ireland, and the Territories
thereunto belonging. Which Bill was on the 15th carried up to the Lords House
by my Lord Russel, attended by almost all the Commons, who gave a Hum at the
Delivery. They being departed it was read once, and being put to the Vote,
whether it should be read a second time, it was carried in the Affirmative, by
two Voices. On the second reading it was debated till 11 a Clock at night (the
King being present all the while) and then thrown out of the House by a
Majority of about 30 Votes; in which Majority were all the Bishops then
present, which were 14.

Several other matters were transacted in Parliament, of great moment, but in
regard the Daily Votes and transactions of the House of Commons, was by Order
of that House, daily made public in Print, I refer the Reader for Particulars
to what has been published, and in these Papers take notice only of some of the
most material Passages.

Among which, it may be observed that Mr. Seymour the late Speaker, and for
whose Election the Commons in the late short Parliament did very much stickle,
was now ordered to be Impeacht; and tho not at the same time, yet not long
after, Impeachments were Voted and drawn up against Sir Francis North Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir William Scroggs Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, Sir Thomas Jones second Justice of the said Court, and Sir
Richard Weston Puisny Baron of the Exchequer, for several pretended
Misdemeanors.

In the mean time William Lord Viscount Stafford, one of the 5 Popish Lords in
the Tower, was brought to his Trial on an Impeachment of High Treason. The
Trial began in Westminster Hall on Tuesday the 30th of November, being the next
day after the Term ended. Which Impeachment, and Evidence upon the same, was
managed by a Committee of the Commons. The Trial lasted for a Whole Week: and
The Evidence against him were Oats, Turberville, and Dugdale; Of the Lords who
sat upon the Trial (the Lord Chancellor being Lord High Steward) 31 pronounced
him not Guilty, and 55 Guilty. And accordingly Judgment was pronounced against
him on Wednesday the 7th of December. But his Execution was respited till
Wednesday the 29th of December, on which day he was Beheaded on Tower Hill,
protesting with his last breath his Innocence as to those Crimes of which he
stood Condemned.

It is observable, that Bethel, and Cornish, being then Sheriffs of London, and
having received the Kings Writ for the Execution of the said Viscount Stafford
by severing his Head from his Body, (according to the constant Course in such
Cases) had notwithstanding the Confidence to demur upon it, whether he ought to
be Beheaded, or according to the Common Judgment, hanged and quartered; and for
this they applied themselves to the two Houses of Parliament, To which the most
Honorable House of Lords Answered roundly, That the Kings Writ ought to be
obeyed: But the Commons by way of Concession, viz. That they were Content that
the said Lord be Executed by severing his Head from his Body only.

During these Transactions a Comet with a most Prodigious Stream of light
appeared in the West; the Star from which the Blaze proceeded was but small,
and when first discovered, appeared not much above the Horizon; but every night
afterward it appeared higher and higher in the beginning of the Night, and
consequently setting later and later, its Luster and magnitude also decaying.

I am neither able nor willing to make any Remarques on the Nature of these
Meteors; Or to say how far such noxious Exhalations may incline Mankind to
Mischief: And least of all will I pretend to Interpret whether this Finger of
the Almighty is thus seen in the Heavens to Point out Good or Bad Events. All
that I design is innocently to observe, and Remember the Naked Matters of Fact
as they happen, without disguize or Comment.

Two things more very observable happened before Christmas. One was, An
Address of the House of Commons presented to His Majesty on the 21st of
December, in answer to His Speech of the 15th, wherein he demanded, once more,
Supplies of Money for the defense of Tangier. The effect of the said Address,
was to deny (in as modest Terms as could be) all Supplies of Money for that
purpose; unless His Majesty would be pleased to pass a Bill to Seclude the Duke
of York from Inheriting to the Crown, and to enable the Protestants of this
Nation to Associate themselves for the security of the Protestant Religion, the
Defense of the King and Kingdoms.

The other was a most Remarkable Speech Spoke in the House of Lords by the Earl
of Shaftesbury, the King being then present, (at least wise so pretended and
Printed) which being full of Audacious and undecent Expressions, was by order
of the Lords House, burnt by the Common Hangman at the Exchange, and in the
Palace yard.

On the 4th of January His Majesty was pleased to send His Message to the House
of Commons, in Answer to their Address of December, 21. abovementioned, in
which Message He let them know, That he had received their Address with all the
disposition they could wish to comply with their reasonable Desires; but upon
perusal of it, he was sorry to see their thoughts so wholly fixed on the Bill of
Exclusion, as to determine that all other remedies for the Suppressing of
Popery will be ineffectual; That His Majesty is confirmed in His opinion
against That Bill by the Judgment of the House of Lords who rejected it; That
He thinks there remains nothing more for Him to say in Answer to the foresaid
Address, then to recommend to this House, the Consideration of all other means
for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, to which they have no reason
to doubt His concurrence, whenever they shall be presented to Him in a
Parliamentary way; And in conclusion, again, He urges them to the preservation
of Tangeir.

On the Friday following, being the 7th of January, the House entered upon the
Consideration of the said Message, and resolve, as the opinion of the House,
That there is no security or safety for the Protestant Religion, the Kings
Life, or the Well constituted and established Government of this Kingdom,
without passing a Bill for disabling James Duke of York to inherit the Imperial
Crown of England, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging; and that to rely upon any other means or remedies without such a
Bill, is not only insufficient, but dangerous: That till such a Bill be past
this House cannot give any Supply to His Majesty without danger to His
Majesty's person, Extreme hazard of the Protestant Religion, and
unfaithfullness to those by whom this House is entrusted: That all persons who
advised His Majesty in His last Message to this House to insist upon an opinion
against the Bill for Excluding the Duke of York, have given Pernicious Council
to His Majesty, and are Promoters of Popery, and Enemies to the King and
Kingdom: And as such they name George Earl of Hallifax, Henry Marquess of
Worcester, Henry Earl of Clarendon, against which, as also against Lewis Earl
of Feversham, and Laurence Hide Esquire; they Vote an Address to be presented to
His Majesty to remove them from all Offices of Honor and Profit, and from His
Majesty's Councils and Presence for ever. They further Vote and Resolve, the
same day, That whosoever shall herafter Lend or cause to be Lent by way of
advance any Money upon the Branches of the Kings Revenue arising by Customs,
Excise, or Hearth Money, shall be adjudg'd to hinder the sitting of Parliaments,
and shall be responsible for the same in Parliament.

On the Monday following, being the 10th of Jan. the King was pleased to
determine this Session, by Proroguing the Parliament to the 20th day of Jan.
then next following; at the same time passing only Two Public Bills, viz. One
about Irish Cattle, and One about Burying in Woollen. The House of Commons
were, it seems, aware of this Prorogation, and therefore that very morning the
first thing they did, after they were sat, and before the Usher of the Black
Rod came in, they Resolved, That whosoever advised His Majesty to Prorogue this
Parliament, to any other purpose then in Order to the passing of a Bill for the
Exclusion of James Duke of York, is a Betrayer of the King, the Protestant
Religion, and of the Kingdom of England, a Promoter of the French Interest, and
a Pensioner to France.

On the 13th of Jan. a Court of Common Council, being Assembled in London, they
ordered to be drawn up, and Presented to the King a Petition, setting forth,
That whereas, the Parliament had convicted one of the 5 Popish Lords in the
Tower, and were about to convict the other 4 of High Treason; That they had
Impeacht the Chief Justice Scroggs, and were about to impeach other Judges, and
all this in order to the preservation of His Majesty's Life, the Protestant
Religion, and Government; That they were much surprised to see the Parliament
Prorogued in the hight of their buisiness; That their only hopes were that this
was done only in order to bring such Affairs about again as were necessary to
the Settling the Nation: They therefore prayed that His Majesty would be
pleased to let the Parliament sit at the day appointed, and so to continue till
they had effected the great Affairs before them. To this effect were the words
of their Petition, which was further ordered to be delivered that night, or as
soon as may be, by the Lord Mayor, attended with the new Recorder George Treby
Esquire; and certain Members of the Court of Aldermen, and Common Council.

But before the said 20th day of Jan. arrived, the King was pleased by his
Proclamation bearing date at Whitehall, Jan. 18. to dissolve this Parliament,
and intimate His Royal pleasure and intentions to call an other to sit on the
21st of March following, at Oxford.

Not long after this, viz. on the 25th of Jan. the Earl of Essex, and other
Lords Presented to the King a Petition, setting forth, That whereas the Nation
and His Majesty's Person were in imminent danger from the Papists, unto which
no stop or remedy could be provided unless by a Parliament; That several
Parliaments being called and assembled, they were Prorogued and dissolved
before any sufficient order could be taken therein, etc. That His Majesty had
been prevailed with to call another at Oxford, where neither Lords or Commons
can be in safety, but will be daily exposed to the Swords of the Papists and
their adherents, the liberty of speaking thereby destroyed, and the validity of
their Acts and proceedings left disputable, the straightness of the place unfit
for such a Concourse of persons as now follows every Parliament, and the
Witnesses which are necessary to give Evidence upon the Commons Impeachment
unable to bear the charges of such a Journey, and unwilling to trust themselves
under the Protection of a Parliament, that is it self evidently under the Power
of Guards and Soldiers; They therefore pray that the Parliament may sit at
Westminster. This was subscribed, Monmouth, Kent, Huntington, Bedford,
Salisbury, Clare, Stamford, Essex, Shaftsbury, Mordant, Evers, P^get, Gray,
Herbert, Howard, Delamer.

About the same time the King was pleased to displace my Lord Sunderland from
the Office of Secretary of State, and to confer the said Office on my Lord
Conway: and several other Members of the Privy Council were then also altered.

And thus concluded the 32d year of His Majesty's Reign, observable for diverse
matters, but above all for the Transactions of the Lords in Parliament, who by
their Prudent and Judicious proceedings on the 15th of November, defeated the
industrious malice of the Dukes Enemies, by rejecting the Bill past by the
Commons for secluding him from the Succession of these Crowns, when they should
happen to fall to him by the old known Laws of Inheritance. Which action being
of such mighty Consequence to the Peace, or perpetual Trouble of this Nation,
and the Question being so happily settled, it being also a leading President to
many other healing actions which have happened since, let me once take leave to
break the concise Method which I at the beginning of these Notes propounded,
and remember in this place some Verses writ immediately upon that Transaction,
by a true Lover of his King and the Royal Family.

Glorious, and great Indeed! These these are they,
Who truly, thus, their noble Blood display;
And by the Soul which they this day have shown,
Make all the Laurels of their Line their own.
These are old Englands Peers, hearts that despise
To be o'reawd by Number and by Noise;
No, they are too Brave, too Loyal, and too Wise.
Thus did their mighty Ancestors combine
When Force misplaced the Crown from the right Line:
Thus they stood firm to Truth, and never failed
Tell the unblemisht Rose of York prevailed.
And must again that sad Dispute appear?
No, we are much too young for Plato's year:
Our Renowned Peerage will not have it so:
The Demigods, and Heroes Thunder NO.
What remote noise is this? Hark how it grows;
Nearer and louder now the Torrent flows.
All Europe shouts aloud: Spring-Tydes of Joy
Salute the British sle: Hark how they cry,
Fame now is yours, more from one Law refused
Than half the Numerous Laws ye ever used.
Anno 33. Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1681.
IN the beginning of this Year, City and Country were busy in the Election of
Members to serve in the next Parliament to be holden at Oxford. For the most
part the Old Members were chosen again. I shall give a short account of what
happened at London on this occasion, by which a guess or estimate may be made
of the Transactions elsewhere. The Election for that City was performed at
Guild Hall on Friday the 4th of February, and the choice which the Common Hall
fixed upon, were Sir Robert Clayton, Sir Thomas Player, Thomas Pilkinton, and
William Love Esquires; To which four, as soon as the Election was over, a Paper
was presented in the Name of the Citizens of London then Assembled in Common
Hall, containing a return of their most hearty thanks for their faithful and
unwearied endeavors, in the two last Parliaments, to search into and Discover
the depth of the Plot, to preserve His Majesty's Royal Person, the Protestant
Religion, and the well Established Government of this Realm, to secure the
meeting and sitting of frequent Parliaments, to assert our undoubted Rights of
Petitioning, and to punish such who would have betrayed those Rights, to
promote the long wished for Union of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, to
Repeal the 35. El. and the Corporation Act, and more especially for their
endeavors in promoting the Bill of Exclusion of James Duke of York: In fine
they conclude, that being confidently assured that they (the said Members for
the City) will never consent to the granting any Mony-supply, till they have
effectually secured us against Popery and Arbitrary Power, they resolve, by
Gods assistance to stand by their said Members, with their Lives and Fortunes.

After this another Paper was presented from the said Citizens, to the two
Sheriffs, requesting them, in the Name of all the said Citizens then Assembled
in Common Hall to return their grateful acknowledgment to the Earl of Essex,
and by him to the rest of the Lords, who presented the late Petition and Advice
to His Majesty.

In like manner, were the former Members of Parliament, again Chosen, in most
places; and in many, such Papers of Address presented to them, in their
respective Countries, as had been done by the Communalty of London to their
Members. Also, (contrary to the Old Customs of the Members Treating the
Country where they stood) now the Country in most places Treated them, or at
least every Man bore his own Charges.

About a Week before the Session, the King left London, and removed to Oxford,
appointing certain Companies of Foot, and Troops of Horse to keep Garrison in
the Meuse, during His absence. Many Members of the House of Commons, especially
those of London, went to Oxford accompanied, or attended, with the Cerimonious
Cavalcade of a numerous Train of Friends.

On the 14th of March, The King and Queen entered Oxford, Received and
Presented by the Mayor and Body of that City at the Eastgate, and from thence
attended with Acclamations and all sort of Demonstrations of Joy to
Christ-Church; The next Day, the Body of the University waited on Their
Majesty's, and received the Honor to kiss Their Hands, presenting at the same
time to the King a large Oxford Bible, and to the Queen, the Cuts belonging to
the History and Antiquities of the University, both Richly Bound.

The 21st of March being now arrived, and the Members of both Houses of
Parliament Assembled at Oxford, according to the Kings Writs of Summons, the
Lords sat in the Gallery at the Schools, and the Commons in the Convocation
House.

His Majesty's Speech, at the opening of the Sessions contained, That the
unwarrantable Proceedings of the last House of Commons were the occasion of the
Dissolution of the last Parliament; That as he will never use Arbitrary
Government, himself, so He is resolved never to suffer it in others; That
whosoever shall calmly consider the Proceedings in the last Parliament, may
perhaps, more wonder at His Patience so long, than that He grew weary at last;
That it is as much His Interest and care as theirs to preserve the Liberty of
the Subject, because the Crown can never be safe when that is in Danger; that
neither Liberty nor Property can subsist long when the just Rights and
Prerogatives of the Crown are Invaded, or the Honor of the Government brought
low and into disreputation; that He has called this Parliament so soon to show
that no Irregularities in Parliaments shall make him out of Love with them;
That the Just care they ought to have of Religion ought not to be so managed
and improved into unnecessary fears as to be made a Pretense for Changing the
Foundation of the Government; that He hopes the Example of the ill success of
former heats will dispose them to a better Temper; that they would not lay so
much weight upon any one Expedient against Popery, as to determine all other
are ineffectual; that they ought to remember that without the safety and
Dignity of the Monarchy, neither Religion nor Property can be preserved; that
He cannot depart from what he had formerly so often declared touching the
Succession, but to remove all reasonable fears that may arise from the
possibility of a Popish Successors coming to the Crown, if means can be found
out; that in such a Case the Administration of the Government may remain in
Protestant Hands, he shall be ready to hearken to any such Expedient by which
the Religion may be preserved and the Monarchy not destroyed; that therefore
they would provide for Religion and Government together with regard to one
another, because they support one another, and that they would make the known
Established Laws of the Land, the Rules and Measures of all their Votes, because
He is resolved they shall be His.

After this Speech the Commons returned to their House, and Chose for their
Speaker, William Williams Esquire; who had managed that Office in the last
Parliament. Who being the next Day presented, made a Speech to the King and
claimed by humble Address (as his Words were) The Ancient Rights of the Commons.

Nothing of extraordinary note passed till Saturday the 26th of March, on which
Day it was that the House of Commons were informed that the Lords had refused
to proceed upon the Impeachment of the Commons against Edward Fitz-Harris for
High Treason, but had directed that he should be proceeded against at the
Common Law; Hereupon they Vote, That this refusal of the Lords to proceed in
Parliament upon such Impeachment, is a Denial of Justice, and a Violation of
the Constitutions of Parliaments, an Obstruction to the further Discovery of
the Popish Plot, and of great Danger to His Majesty's Person and the Protestant
Religion: And further, they resolve, That for any inferior Court to proceed
against Edward Fitz-Harris, or any other Person lying under an Impeachment in
Parliament for the same Crimes for which he or they stand Impeached, is an high
breach of the Privilege of Parliament.

On the Monday following the Bill against the Duke of York was Read the first
time, and Ordered a second Reading: When on a sudden the King sends for the
Commons up to the House of Lords, and tells them, That He perceived heats
betwixt the Lords and them, and therefore He had Ordered the Chancellor to
Dissolve the present Parliament, which he accordingly did immediately.

The same Day the King left Oxford, and came to Windsor that Night; the next
Morning by Eight a Clock, to Whitehall.

Not long after this His Majesty was pleased to Publish in Print a Declaration,
to all his Loving Subjects, in which He set forth the Reasons which induced Him
to Dissolve His two last Parliaments, His reasonable desires which He had
proposed to 'em, with their unwarrantable proceedings in return; declaring
however that He is not yet out of Love with Parliaments, but that He will
frequently advise with them as His great Council, which He hopes ere long to
find in a better Temper; much to this purpose were the Contents of that
Declaration, which by His Majesty's Order in Council was appointed to be Read
in all Churches and Chapels.

About the same time all the Factious News, called Domestic Intelligence, and
Weekly Printed for Francis Smith, Ben. Harris, and Langly Curtis, were by Order
of Council (as reported) put down and silenced: And the abovementioned Francis
Smith a Notorious Libel Printer, was Committed to Newgate.

In Easter Term this year, Sir Francis Pemberton became Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, in the Room of Sir William Scroggs who had obtained a Writ of
Ease. Great Expectation there was to see what the Court would do in the Case of
Edward Fitz-Harris, and some Hesitation the Grand Jury of Middlesex (of which
one Mr. Godfrey, Brother and Heir to the late Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, was the
Foreman) made to receive the Bill of Indictment against him, in regard he had
been Impeacht by the House of Commons, till they were informed and satisfied by
the Court that all the Judges of England had the Day before met and resolved
upon that question, Nemine Contrad cente, that they might lawfully proceed in
the Trial notwithstanding the aforementioned Votes of the House of Commons;
after this the said Jury found the Bill, and Fitz-Harris was Arraigned at the
Bar on the last Day of April; he was thrice bid to hold up his Hand, insisting
upon the Impeachment in Parliament, but at last he held up his Hand and heard
his Indictment Read; which was for High Treason, expressed in a certain Writing
called The True Englishman, full of most horrid Expressions against the King,
as if he were a Conspirator in the Plot, and exciting the Nation to rise as one
Man against him, etc. To which Indictment he put into Court a Dilatory Plea,
against the Jurisdiction, alleging that he being Impeacht by the Commons in
Parliament, he cannot be Tried here, but this Plea not being under Councils
Hand was refused to be received; however the Court gave him time to consider
whether he would stand by such a Plea, in regard it might be fatal unto him in
case it should be Overruled; and assigned him for Council Sir Francis
Winnington, Mr. Williams, Mr. Pollexfen, and Mr. Wallop (as he desired) to
argue the said Point of Judicature next Wednesday, if he persisted in such
Plea. On the said Wednesday being the 4th of May the Prisoner was again brought
to the Bar, attended with His Council; at which time the Kings Attorney Sir
Robert Sawyer, entered a Demurrer to the Prisoners Plea, and insisted chiefly
on the manifest defect of form, in regard the Plea run that the said
Fitz-Harris was Impeacht at the late Parliament, at Oxford, de Alta proditione,
but does not say of what sort or manner of Treason, nor sets forth the
Impeachment at large, which a Plea ought to do, when it is to the Jurisdiction.
After this the Council of the Prisoner joined in Demurrer, but upon their
earnest motion, (though opposed by the Attorney General) time was given them to
next Saturday Morning to maintain the said Plea by Argument, if they can. At
which time it was argued largely by Williams, Winnington, Wallop, and Pollexfen
for the Prisoner, and by the Attorney General, the Solicitor, Sergeant
Jeoffreys and Sir Francis Withens for the King; the Kings Council, and also the
Court, declaring that they meddled not at all with the Privilege of the House
of Commons or Jurisdiction of the Lords in Parliament, which was not in the
Point (tho in truth the Council for the Prisoner would fain have put that upon
'em) but only as to the form of the Plea. After all the debate, which lasted
from, 8 till after 12 that Day, the Lord Chief Justice declared that the Court
would take a convenient time to consider before they gave their Judgment.

On the Wednesday following being the 11th of May, the Prisoner being again
brought to the Bar by the Lieutenant of the Tower, my Lord Chief Justice, in
the Name of the whole Court gave Judgment, and declared, That he and his
Brothers had Considered of the Plea, that they had also consulted with others
of the Judges, and that himself, Justice Jones, and Justice Raymond were of
opinion that the Plea was insufficient ( Dolbin doubting) the Plea was
therefore over ruled; and the Prisoner ordered to Plead over; and accordingly
he pleaded not Guilty, and alleging that a material Evidence on his part was
now in Holland, His Trial was put off till the first Thursday next Term, which
is the 9th of June.

On the 14 of May, being the last day but one of the Term, the Earl of Danby
was brought by Habeas Corpus from the Tower to the Kings Bench Bar, where by
his Council he urged hard that he might be Bailed, but the Court being
unsatisfied that they had sufficient Jurisdiction in his Case (he being
committed by Authority of Parliament, and, as it seemd, not being within the
benefit of the Habeas Corpus Act) he was remanded back to the Tower.

On the last day of Easter Term, Fitz-Harris was again brought into the Kings
Bench Court, to give Evidence to the Grand Jury upon a Bill of Indictment
against De Puy (who had been Groom of the Robes to the Duke) The Jury desired
that the Evidence might be given to them privately, But the Court overruled
that, and Fitz-Harris declared upon Oath (Publicly in Court) a great deal of
Scandalous stuff, not fit to be mentioned, relating to the Death of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, which the said De Puy had told him a little before the
Death of the said Knight; but all this Fitz-Harris spoke from De Puy's mouth:
Of his own knowledge he said only this, That the Earl of Danby coming down the
great Stairs at Winsor, he heard him say, that now he would make Godfreys heart
ache: To this he added, that De Puy told him presently after the Murder, that
the Earl had sent Godfrey on an arrant from which he would never return. Upon
this Evidence the Earl of Danby's name was inserted into the Bill of Indictment
against De Puy as accessory to the said Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and
the Bill was accordingly found against them both.

At the same time it was that the said Jury presented the Court with a
Petition, that they would intercede with the King for the sitting and
Continuance of a new Parliament.

During all this Easter Term, and many Months after, many Loyal Addresses
flowed to the King from all parts of England, full of Congratulations, and
nothing of that factious strain, which had almost rendered the very word
Petitioning to be scandalous; among these Loyal Addresses, that from Norwich
ran highest for the Kings Prerogative, and a little reflecting on the
exorbitances of the late Commons; but as if this were a notorious Scandal to
the Parliament, the Grand Jury of Middlesex above mentioned presented the same
as a public Libel; but this did not discourage the Loyal party who still
continued their Addresses. It would be tedious to name all, and how kindly they
were received by the King, who never suffered those who brought 'em, to depart
without some gracious mark of His Favor. Not so to those who took upon them in
their Petitions to direct His Majesty about the Calling and continuance of
Parliaments. To this Purpose its observable that the City of London were
divided in these matters, Part of them (being most of the Court of Aldermen,
and some of the Common Council) had drawn up a Loyal Address, in like manner as
the whole Borough of Southwark had done; this they Presented to the King at
Windsor by the Hands of Sir William Turner and Sir John Moor, with abundance of
Countenance and Favor: But another Party having composed a far different
Petition both for form and matter, and it being also the same Day carried to
Windsor by the Lord Mayor, one Alderman, and the Recorder, they were refused to
be admitted to the Kings Presence, but orderd to attend at the Council at
Hampton Court the Thursday following, where they received a Repremend from my
Lord Chancellor Finch (now newly created Earl of Nottingham.) At the same time
it was that the Leiutenancy of the City of London attended with their Loyal
Offers of their Lives and Fortunes; among these was Sir George Jeffryes the
Kings Sergeant, and late Recorder of London, with his Sword on, as one of the
said Leiutenancy.

On the 8th of June, in Trinity Term, was Dr. Oliver Plunket Tried for High
Treason at the Kings Bench Bar; the Evidence against him were all professed
Papists, (as said) and came out of Ireland: the chief matters Sworn against
him, That he was made Primate of Ireland by the Pope at the King of France's
recommendation, that upon that account he having engaged to do that King all
the Service he could, he had actually Levied among his Popish Clergy great Sums
of Money, therewith to introduce the French Dominion into that Kingdom, and
extirminate the Protestants. Upon this Evidence he was found Guilty.

The next day being Thursday the 9th of June, Fitz-Harris was Tried at the same
Bar for High Treason, the chief Evidence against him were, Everard, and Sir
William Waller; for the Prisoner appeared Oats and Colonel Mansell, and told a
long story, Scandalous in it self, but of no weight; My Lord Chief Justice
therefore (according to the Evidence which was home and clear against the
Prisoner) directed the Jury to find for the King, which being also the
directions of the other 3 Judges, the Jury after above an half hours
consultation, brought in their Verdict, Guilty.

Presently after this Trial Mrs. Fitz-Harris the Prisoners wife, and her Maid,
accused my Lord Howard of Escrick of the Contrivance of that Treasonable Libel
of which her Husband was Convicted; upon which accusation the said Lord was
committed to the Tower, on Sunday morning, June 12.

On the Wednesday following, being the 15th of June, Plunket, and Fitz-Harris,
were severally brought to the Kings Bench Bar, and received Judgment of
Condemnation as in cases of High Treason.

About this time it was that the King in Council was pleased to order a
Parliament to be called in Scotland on the 28th of July,

I must not forget, that on the last day of Trin. Term, a Bill of Indictment
against the Lord Howard being delivered in to the Grand Jury of Edmunton
Hundred, then serving in the Kings Bench, for the County of Middlesex, Sworn to
by Mrs. Fitz-Harris, and her Maid and some others, and the said Jury not
thinking the Evidence sufficient, they were about to indorse it with an
Ignoramus; when Mr. Ward, one of the Clerks of the Crown Office attending upon
them, withdraw'd it from before 'em. Of this action they complained to the
Court, but being told that the Attorney General might stop these proceedings as
he saw occasion, or words to that purpose, with which the Jury being nothing
satisfied, they went immediately and preferred a Bill of Indictment against the
said Ward to the July of Oswelston Hundred, then attending, for this
misdemanor; which Bill the said last mentioned Jury found.

On Friday the First of July, Dr. Oliver Plunket the Popish Primat of Ireland,
and Edward Fitz-Harris, were both Executed at Tyburn for the several Treasons
of which they were severally Tried and Condemned the last Term. Plunket in a
long Speech declared his Innocence, forgave his Enemies, and Prayed for the
King, Queen, and Duke of York. But Fitz Harris said very little, the substance
of what he had to say or discover, being by him delivered to Dr. Hawkins
Minister of the Tower, for his Wife; and therefore it is to be presumed that he
Dyed no Papist, in regard he had the assistance of a Protestant Minister, which
all Papists have been known to rerefuse on those occasions. His Discovery is
since Printed.

About this time several Factious People were committed to the Tower for High
Treason, namely, Rouse, Hayns, White, and one College, commonly called the
Protestant Joyner. But above all let it be remembered, that on July, 2. the
Earl of Shaftsbury commonly called, by way of Excellency, The Protestant Earl,
was before the Council at Whit hall (to which the King came from Windsor that
day on purpose) accused of High Treason, and for the same, committed to the
Tower; and his Papers seized.

At the Sessions at the Old Bailey, which followed soon after, the Earl of
Shaftsbury and the Lord Howard moved to be Bailed, but they were answered by
the unanimous opinion of the Judges, That it was not in the Power of that Court
to Bail out of the Tower.

At the same Sessions it was that a Bill of Indictment of High Treason, was
delivered to the Grand Jury of London, against College, commonly called the
Protestant Joyner, but the Jury (made for the purpose as is supposed) appeared
so partial and Arbitrary in their proceeding, that, notwithstanding the home
Oaths of several Witnesses, among which were Dugdale and Smith, two of the
great Evidence against the Plotters, and another who had been a Member of the
House of Commons, they brought in the Bill, Ignoramus. But another Bill being
exhibited soon after, to the Grand Jury at the Assizes at Oxford, against the
said College (part of the Treasonable Words and Matters being Transacted
there,) the Bill was found there, on the same Evidence which was rejected at
the Old Bailey. And in August he was Tried, Condemned and Executed at Oxford.

The Weather that happened this Summer was memorable for an extraordinary
Drought all over England, and also beyond Sea, all April, May, and June, and
some part of July; but about the beginning of July fell such plentiful Rains,
that the Ground, which in all parts was Scorcht up like the Highways almost to
a miracle became as fresh and Green again, as on May Day: Dayseys and the other
Flowers of the Spring appeared again toward the End of July; With Grass in
abundance in some places, and expectations of a second Hay-time to recompense
the want of the first.

On the 28 of July the Parliament sat in Scotland, where his Royal Highness
Presided as His Majesty's High Commissioner. At the opening of the Sessions the
Kings Letter was read, setting forth, That He had called them at that time to
advise of such things as may truly conduce to the security and Interest of that
Kingdom, and as an eminent Expression of His Favor, He has named his most dear
and most entirely beloved Brother James Duke of Albany and York to be His
Commissioner there, etc. After this the Duke made a Speech, Declaring the high
esteem he had of the great Honor and happiness the King had been pleased to do
him in making choice of him to serve as his Commissioner in that his ancient
Kingdom, since it shows to all the World the Goodness the King has for him and
Confidence he has in him, and capacitates him, not only to serve His Majesty
as becomes a Loyal Subject, but also to evince the real concern he has for the
good of that Kingdom and his readiness to serve it, and improve its Interest;
That His Majesty had commanded him to assure them, that he will inviolably
maintain and protect the Protestant Religion as by Law Established in that
Kingdom, and the Church Government by Archbishops and Bishops, That he will
maintain and allow the Properties and Rights of His Subjects according to the
due course of Law, and that he does expect that they will not be short of the
Loyalty of their Ancestors in vigorously asserting and clearing His Royal
Prerogative, and in declaring the Rights of His Crown in its natural and Legal
course of Descent. etc.

After this the Duke entertained the whole Parliament at a Splendid and Royal
Feast; The Lords by themselves, and the Commons by themselves at several Tables.

On the First of August, The Parliament returned a most Loyal and Dutiful
Answer to His Majesty's Letter, which Answer being so mighty full of true
Loyalty, it would be an Injury to abridge it in this place; every Line, every
word carrying the true and emphatical marks of gratitude and Duty: I therefore
refer to the Print. Also in pursuance and Confirmation of their Loyal
Affections, on the 14th of Aug. the Parliament past a Bill entitled An Act
acknowledging and asserting the Right of Succession to the Imperial Crown of
Scotland: By which they recognize and declare, That the said Crown is by
Inherent Right, and the nature of the Monarchy, as well as by the fundamental
and unalterable Law of the Realm, transmitted and devolved by Lineal
Succession, according to proximity of Blood, and that no difference in
Religion, no Law nor Act of Parliament can alter or divert the Right of
Succession and Lineal descent of the Crown to the nearest and Lawful Heirs, and
therefore they declare it High Treason, by Writing Speaking or any other manner
of way to endeavor the alteration, suspension or diversion of the Right of
Succession.

At the same time they past another Act ratifying all former Laws for the
security of the Protestant Religion.

On the 31st of August, Oats was by Order of Council expelled from Whitehall,
his Sallery taken off, and accused of Misdemeanors.

Great Numbers of Poor French Protestants, about this time, flockt over out of
France, to whom our King was so Gracious, as by Act of Council to declare His
Pleasure, that all His Officers and Magistrates should give 'em the same
Countenance and Favor with His own Subjects, That He would take 'em into His
Protection, That He would grant 'em His Letters of Denization, forthwith upon
their request, and That He would intercede with the next Parliament to obtain
for them an Act of Naturalization. He also granted very ample Letters Patents,
for Collecting Moneys all over England for their Relief, Dated the 10th of
September, this Year.

On Michaelmas Day (being the Customary Day for the Annual Choice of the Lord
Mayor of London) Sir John Mooor, an Addresser, was Chosen into that Office for
the Year Ensuing, though with a great and unusual opposition, by the Fanatic
Party. The New Sheriffs were Alderman Pilkinton, (a City Member in the two last
Parliaments) and one Mr. Shute, Which two New Sheriffs being employed to invite
the King to the Lord Mayors Feast, The King was Graciously pleased to accept of
the Invitation, and Declared, That He liked the Message, but not the Messengers.

This Summer the King was pleased to appoint under Him, certain Deputies, or
Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Affairs; to whom He delegated His Power to
dispose of all such Ecclesiastical Preferments which belong to His immediate
Patronage. The Names of which Commissioners were the Arch Bishop of Canterbury,
the Bishop of London, the Lord Radnor, Lord Hallifax, Lord Hide, and Mr.
Seymour. Note by the Common Law, the Lord Chancellor of England shall present
to all Churches in the Kings Gift which He has in Right of His Crown, under
the value of 20 Marks per annum. Fitz. h. N. B. Fol. 35. k.

At the Sessions for the County of Middlesex held at Hicks-Hall the Week before
Michaelmas Term, Sir George Jefferies (being then Chairman on the Bench)
required Goodenough the under Sheriff to alter two of the Panel, as the
Justices may do by the Stat. 3. H. 8. chapter 12. Which He refusing, the two High
Sheriffs were called, and not appearing they were Fined, each 50 l.
Notwithstanding that, the Recorder put in a Protest, that the Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex, were never bound to attend or appear in Person at
Hicks-Hall. After this the said Fine being Estreated, a Common Council in
London, Declared that they would stand by their Sheriffs and defend them
against any Suit of Law that shall be brought touching this matter, and that at
the Charges and Expense of the City.

At the Sessions for London held at this time, one Rouse being Charged with
High Treason, and a Bill of Indictment Exhibited to the Grand Jury attending
for that City, against Him, They found the Bill Ignoramus, after the same
manner as had been formerly done in the Case of College.

On the 24th of November, all the Judges of England sat with the Mayor and
Aldermen, by special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, at the Old Bailey, and the
Grand Jury being called and Sworn, of which Sir Samuel Barnardiston Foreman, a
Bill of Indictment of High Treason was delivered to them against the Earl of
Shaftsbury; The Evidence were all Examined in open Court, who all Swore very
full to the Treason (two of which Evidence were Turbervile and Smith) but the
Jury returned this Bill also Ignoramus, upon which the People gave a shout; The
Witnesses who gave Evidence against the said Earl, were assaulted by the
Rabble, and in such Danger of their Lives, that the Sheriffs were necessitated
to Guard them at Night as far as the Savoy, homewards. Several Bonfires were
made that Night in the City, at which several Riotous Actions were Committed.
In particular one Capt. Griffith living in Newgate-street, a Capt. of the
Trained Bands and a Common Councilman, coming home about 11 at Night, and
finding a Bonfire near his own Door, and endeavoring to oppose it, was knocked
down, wounded in the Head, and in danger of His Life: Others were seen about
the same time of Night to march through Warwick Lane, one of which had his
Sword drawn, crying no York, no Popish Successor, and at the same time crying
up a Monmouth, a Shaftsbury, a Buckingham; and thus they Proceeded till stopped
by the Watch at Ludgate.

On the 28th of November, the last day of the Term, the Earl of Shaftsbury, and
Lord Howard, prisoners in the Tower, were admitted to Bail in the Kings Bench,
the Earl of Shaftsbury had for his Bail the Lord Russel, Sir William Cooper,
Mr. Mountigue, and Mr. Charlton Himself was bound in a Recognizance of 3000 l.
and the Bail each in 1500 l. The Lord Howard was also Bailed in the same
manner. By Order of Council to the Lord Mayor, and from him to the Officers of
every Ward and Parish, all Bonfires and Bells Ringing were Prohibited that
Night.

The Act of Test which past in the Parliament in Scotland the last Sessions,
was the occasion of several Discontents and Emotions amongst the Fanatic Party
there. The Act enjoined a certain Oath or Engagement to be taken by all
Officers in Church and State, and Graduates in their Universities, to maintain
the Form of Government as now Established; which Test though explained and
qualified, was notwithstanding so contrary to the sense of the Factious Party
in that Kingdom, that several of their Ministers refused it, and some of the
Laity, among whom of greatest note was Archibald Campbel Earl of Argile, a Man
of such Turbulent behavior, that he was about this time Impeacht of High
Treason, and found Guilty: But being after his Conviction kept for some time a
Prisoner at Edinborough, he found means to make his Escape (into England as
some thought, where he harbored unknown) after whose flight his Arms were,
with all public Solemnity, reverst and torn, and such other marks of dishonor
denounced against him, as in such like Cases are, by the Customs of Scotland,
due to Traitors.

The Proceedings of the Justices of Peace for the County of Middlesex, at their
Sessions at Hick-Hall, before Hillary Term, were of note on diverse accounts;
First, They ordered by their public Act of Sessions dated the 13th of January,
that whereas the Constables and Church Wardens, etc. of every Parish and
Precinct within the said County, had been enjoined last Sessions to make a
Return the first Day of this, of the Names of the Preachers in Conventicles,
and the most considerable frequenters of the same within their several Limits,
which Order not being obeyed, but contemned by some, it was therefore by the
Justices then Assembled, desired that the Lord Bishop of London, will please to
direct those Officers which are under his Jurisdiction, to use their utmost
diligence, that all such Persons may be Excommunicated who commit crimes
deserving that Ecclesiastical censure, and that the said Excommunications may
be Published in the Parishes where the Persons live, that they may be taken
notice of, and obvious to the Penalties that belong to Persons Excommunicate,
viz. Not to be admitted for a Witness, or returned upon Juries, or capable to
sue for any Debt. And they further Ordered at the said Sessions, that the Stat.
1. El. and 3. Jac. be put in due execution, for the Levying 1 s. per Sunday
upon such Persons who repair not to Divine Service and Sermons at their Parish,
or some other public Church.

Also there was another Act of the same Sessions at Hicks-Hall, which bore Date
the 18th of January, with which the Justices of Peace attended upon His Majesty
at White Hall the same Day, and presented the Paper to His Royal Hands. It
contained, That they the said Justices, were sensible of their great Honor and
happiness in being the first who returned their humble and hearty
acknowledgment for His most Gracious Declaration, which being followed by a
multitude of Addresses from all Parts of the Kingdom, His Majesty has had a
full Discovery of His Peoples affections, and that his Enemies were neither so
numerous nor formidable as they were by some apprehended to be; That now as His
Majesty can have no cause to fear them, so they the said Justices hope He will
never be persuaded to trust them; That they are ashamed that they were not
likewise the first in expressing their Indignation against that most Execrable
and Traiterous designed Association, lately Discovered by His Majesty, which
certainly in the Judgment of all good Men may more corrupt the Blood of the
wicked Inventers than if they should be discovered and attainted by Law; That
the said Treason was not only against the King but the Monarchy, etc.

To this purpose were several other Congratulations or Addresses to the King
(some before, some after this of Middlesex,) viz. from Norwich, from Hereford,
from the Lieutenancy of London, etc. All which were a Second Edition of
Loyalty, or a New sort of Addresses circulating from most parts of the Nation a
Second time.

The Conclusion of this Year brought forth a Remarkable passage in the City of
London. Some unknown, but base and malignant hearted Rascal, had in the Night
cut, mangled, and defaced the Duke of Yorks Picture, which with the Kings (both
Nobly Painted) hung up in Guild Hall, as a signal Ornament to the City. Soon
after which Action, The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen Published in Print a
Declaration, In which protesting their deep Resentment of that insolent and
vilinous Act (to be abhorred by every good and Loyal Subject) and being greatly
concerned and desirous to find out the Author thereof, they therefore
unanimously Publish and declare, That whosoever can discover the Person who
Committed that Fact, the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen will not only acknowledge
the said Discovery as a most acceptable Service to the said City, but also pay
to such Discoverer the Sum of 500. l. upon the offenders Conviction. Dated the
27th of January, 33. Car. 2. and Signed Wagstaff.

In return to which Act of the City, his Royal Highness sent a Gentleman out of
Scotland to complement the Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and thank 'em for their
respect and Justice to his Cause.

Anno 34 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1682.
IN the beginning of this Year a most Barbarous and inhuman Murder was
committed on the Person of Thomas Thin of Longlect Esquire; a Gentleman of great
Quality and Note, both in City and Country. The Bloody Murderers were
Christopher Vratz, George ^oroski, and John Stern, all Forainers, and Servants
or Dependants on a Swedish Lord, called Count Coningsmark, which first named
three, suddenly coming up to Mr. Thirne's Coach, as he was passing in it near
the Haymarket on Sunday Night the 12th of February, one of them shot him into
the Body with Two Brace or Bullets. The Murderers were soon after apprehended
and Committed to Newgate. On the 28th of February they were Tried, found Guilty
and Condemned; and were most deservedly all Three Hanged, and one of them
Hanged in Chains on the Road not far from Mile-End.

In March, His Royal Highness Arrived out of Scotland, he Landed at Yarmouth on
the 10th, where he was Treated at Dinner by the Magistrates with all the
Ceremonies of Honor they could express; and from thence attended by the High
Sheriff of Norfolk, and a Train of the Neighboring Gentry to Norwich, where
again he was Nobly entertained by the public Magistrates with Banquets and
Bonfires, and lay that Night at the Bishops House; the next Day about 6 in the
Evening he arrived at New Market, where he was received by both their Majesty's
with all the Marks of kindness and affection, having been met several Miles out
of Town by the Noblemen and Gentlemen then attending about the Court.

The next Day being the 12th of March, the King was Presented at Newmarket,
with an Address of Abhorrency from the Artillery Company in Bristol, of which
sort of Address I made some mention toward the end of last year; yet because
the Association there mentioned, is more particularly daecipher'd in this from
Bristol than any formaer I have seen, I can not omit to observe, that the said
Loyal Artillery Company in Bristol did by their said Address Express from the
bottom of their Souls an utter Abhorrence of all Covenants, and Associations
whatsoever made against or without His Majesty's approbation, especially that
Treasonable one seized, in the Closet of the Earl of Shaftsbury, wherein the
securing the Protestant Religion and the defense of His Majesty's Royal Person
and Estate is made the pretense; but the subversion of the Established Religion,
and the final destruction of His Majesty and Lawful Successors, is the real
design, and this to be performed by devolving the whole power of His Majesty's
Crown and Scepter into the Major part of the Members of both Houses,
subscribing that Association (tho dissolved) without regard to their quality or
number, His Majesty's Guards, for the defense of His Royal Person, falsely
styled mercenary Forces and a terror to all the good People of the Land, His
Majesty's Royal Brother to be excluded and destroyed if he comes into England,
and all who shall oppose that Rebellious, accursed, hellish and unpresidented
Association are to be pursued to dedruction, tho in defense of His Majesty's
Title, concluding that they will assert and defend the Rights and Prerogatives
of His Majesty and Lawful Successors in opposition to all Unions and Societies
made to the Contrary, and that they cannot think that Man fit to be a
Representative in Parliament, who will not disown such Associations. These
words are contained in that Address, and by this President we see what good
Subjects abhor.

Not long after this the University of Cambridge sent their Vice Chancellor,
Dr. Coga, to wait on the King at Newmarket, with a Loyal Address of Abhorency;
at which time also the said Vice Chancellor waited upon the Duke, and in the
name of the said University, Wellcom'd him into England, acknowledging that by
his Royal Highness good Conduct, the Government of Scotland both in Church and
State is settled in Peace; and therefore they could by no means doubt, but that
under His Majesty his Royal Highness' s presence would have a great Influence
in effecting the same here in England, by which means all Great Britain being
joined in one, the Church of England, and Rights of the Crown, may for ever
flourish. To which his Royal Highness was pleased to Answer, after Thanks for
their kind Expressions, that he was very glad of this and all other occasions
to declare that he would ever stand by the Church of England as now established,
and countenance the Members of it, as having seen by experience that they are
the best Supporters of the Crown, and that he would use his Endeavors and
Interest for preservation of the Kings person, and the Government in the State,
and the Church of England, as now established by Law.

Several other Addresses also which were made to the King, had words in them
congratulating the Dukes return into England. And when his Royal Highness came
with His Majesty to London; His Majesty was on the 10th of April attended by
the Lord Mayor, the Recorder, and Court of Aldermen; who having paid their Duty
to the King, they went to St James's, where they waited upon his Royal
Highness, Congratulating his safe return into England, and to that his Palace.

Also His Royal Highness being Captain of the Artillery Company, was invited
and Feasted by that Company in London, Thursday in Easter Week.

One thing more ought not to be forgot, as well for the Dukes Honor, as the
gratitude of the Bishops in Scotland; That is, a Letter Subscribed by seven
Bishops there, and directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, soon after the
Dukes departure, and bears date at Edinbourgh, March 9th 1682. Setting forth,

That since his Royal Highness came into that Kingdom, they (the said Bishops)
found their case much changed to the Better, and their Church and order
sensibly releived and rescued, which next to the watchful providence of God,
they can ascribe to nothing so much as to his Royal Highness gracious owning
and vigilant protecting of them, who upon all occasions gave fresh instances of
his eminent Zeal against the most unreasonable Schism, which by renting
threatens the Subversion of their Church and Religion, and concerns himself as
a Patron to them in all their public and even personal Interests; That they
did never propose to his Royal Highness any rational Expedient which might
conduce to the relief or security of the Church, which he did not readily
embrace and effectuate; That the Peace and tranquillity of that Kingdom is the
effect of his prudent and steady conduct of Affairs; That the humors of the
wicked Phanaticks there, are much restrained from Dangerous eruptions upon
their apprehensions of his vigilance and Justice; And that they desire the said
Archbishop of Canterbury to make their dutiful acknowledgements to His Royal
Highness for all His Princely Favors to them, with assurance of their most
firm endeavors to serve him, and of their most fervent Prayers for His Temporal
and Eternal Happiness.

Subscribed, Alex. St. And. Arth Glascuens. Jo. Edinburgens. Ja. Gallouidiens.
Andr. Dunkelden. Geor. Erechin. Ja. Dumblanen.



About Easter, certain Persons (to the number of many Hundreds, as reported)
did design to meet at a public Thanksgiving Sermon and Dinner, pretended, for
Gods wonderful Providence in delivering and protecting His Majesty's Person,
the Protestant Religion, and English Liberties from the hellish and frequent
attempts of their Enemies the Papists, and Tickets of Invitation to this
purpose, were delivered abroad for a Meeting on Friday the 21st of April. Which
Meeting was by special Order of His Majesty in Council April the 19th
Prohibited and suppressed, in regard the appointing of public Fasts and
Thanksgivings is a matter of State, belongs only to His Majesty by His
Prerogative, and therefore such a Thanksgiving being appointed by the Subject,
His Majesty looked upon the same as an insolent Attempt in manifest derogation
of His Right, and of dangerous Consequence.

On the 3d of May, His Royal Highness left the Court at Windsor, in order to
His Journey into Scotland, from thence to fetch hither the Duchess, great with
Child. He went by Sea in the Gloucester Frigate, attended by several other
Vessels: In which Voyage the Dukes Ship striking on the Lemon-ore Sands in
Yarmouth Road, the Vessel was lost, with above 100 Men, but the Duke and
several others of the greatest Quality went off timely into a Yaut attending,
and arrived safely in Scotland: Where a little before had been an Insurrection
or Tumult of Apprentices at Edinborough, suppressed by the Soldiers, not without
Blood. About the same time another Tumult of Apprentices was begun at Dublin,
but quickly suppressed.

The Ensuing Easter Term yielded several passages of public note in the Kings
Bench Court at Westminster: The Earl of Shaftsbury had brought his Action of
Scandalum Magnatum against one Mr. Craddock, a Citizen and Mercer in
Peter-Noster-Row, for speaking some Words of the said Earl, importing him to be
a Traitor, which Action being laid in London, and the Defendants Council
showing that there was no likelihood of a fair Trial by a London Jury, by
reason that the Earl was not only Free of the City, but also of the Skinners
Company, of which Sheriff Pilkinton was Master, and that therefore the Jury
ought to arise out of some Neighboring County; to which the Court inclined,
and gave the Earl his choice of any County of England, but the Earl replying,
That he had rather lay down his Action than admit it to be Tried in any other
County, in regard most of them had put Abhorrences upon him; which positive
resolution of his did confirm the Lord Chief Justice in his Opinion of the
Earls confiding in a London Jury, and therefore ordered that unless he would
consent to Try it by a Country Jury, it should not be Tried in London;
whereupon the Earl discontinued his Action.

The like Rule was made soon after in the same Court between the said Earl and
Mr. Graham Principal of Cliffords Inn, against whom his Lordship had brought an
Action of Conspiracy, he having been appointed by the Kings Council to be
Solicitor in the Indictment against the said Earl at the Old Bailey. The like
Rule also in the Exchequer in Slingsby Bethels Case.

Also Wilmore the Ignoramus Foreman of Collidges Grand Jury, having conveyed
away a young Boy and sent him to Jamaica, a Writ de Homine replegiando was
brought against him, upon which Writ the Sheriffs of London making an
insufficient Return, and obstinately refusing to return Elongatus est, which
was the Return proper in this Case, they were both brought into the Kings Bench
upon an Attachment, where they received a severe reproof from the Court, and
were glad to submit, with assurance of better behavior for the future.
Hereupon Elongatus est being returned, a Capias in Withernam issued out against
Wilmore, to take him into Custody and detain him until he produces the Boy.

Nor was this fufficient, but the said Wilmore was on the 23d of May Tried at
the Kings Bench Bar upon an Information exhibited by the Attorney General, for
conveying away the said Boy being under the Age of 13, and unknown to his
Parents; and upon a full Evidence of the foul Fact, he was found Guilty by a
Kentish Jury, who never went from the Bar.

Really the London Jurys were at this time notorious to the whole Nation for
partiality. The foresaid Wilmore had been Indicted in the City for the said
Crime of Boy-stealing, but the Grand Jury there found the Bill Ignoramus. Also
one Harris Tried at Guild Hall, for dispersing a most wicked Libel was, against
a most apparent and home Evidence, and the Positive directions of the Court,
found Not Guilty, for which finding the said Jury could give no other reason
than their own Arbitrary Will. For such like Actions as these His Majesty was
pleased to Order the Attorney General to bring a Quo Warranto against the City
of London; of which more hereafter.

On the 27th of May, The Duke, Duchess and Lady Anne arrived at Whitehall,
having been met there by the King and Queen, who came from Windsor that
Morning, and were all entertained at Dinner that Day at my Lord Arlingtons at
the end of St. James's Park. But the King returned to Windsor that Night.

The next Day the King fell ill (occasioned as supposed by some Cold caught the
Day before) of which indisposition He recovered again upon breathing a Vein, in
a few Days, to the great Joy of all His Loyal Subjects.

On Tuesday the 6th of June, Captain Airs, the Pilot of the Gloucester Frigate,
late cast away when the Duke Sailed to Scotland, was Tried before Special
Commissioners of Seamen, and being found Guilty of that grievous loss, was
Sentenced by the said Commissioners to perpetual Imprisonment, and accordingly
was Committed to the Marshalsea. Vid. Stat. 13. Car. 2 Chapter 9. Art. 25.

About this time it was that the Conventicles in London, began to be disturbed
in good earnest, and the Statute put in Execution against them. On the 20th of
June, my Lord Mayor issued out his Orders to the Aldermen of all the Wards, to
Command the Constables of every Ward to be up on Sundays, and assist those who
should put the said Stat. in Execution against such as should resist, as it
seems, some had the Confidence to do the Sunday before.

Against the 24th of June, (the Customary Day for Electing Sheriffs of London
for the Year ensuing) my Lord Mayor Issued out his Summons to the several
Companies to appear at Guildhall, on the said 24th Day of June, for the
Confirmation of Mr. Dudly North (whom his Lordship had chosen for one,
according to Custom at the Bridge-House Feast) and for the choice of another
Sheriff. At the Day appointed a mighty Concourse of People Assembled in
Guildhall, before my Lord Mayor and Sheriffs fitting in the Hustings; there
were two Parties appeared in Competition, Mr. North and Mr. Box on the one
Party, and Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois on the other; but in their Polling
(which was managed by the now Sheriffs, Mr. Pilkinton and Mr. Shute) it was
observed that their Names were refused to be entered who Polled for the
Confirmation of North, and Election of Box; and on the other side it was said
that several Men's Names were entered who were not really present, or not duly
entitled to Vote; whereupon my Lord Mayor Adjourned the Court by Proclamation
to 9 a Clock June 27. and departed out of the Hall, not without some abuses
from the disaffected Party 30 notwithstanding which Adjournment the two
Sheriffs continued to Poll on till Night. The next Day being Sunday, admitted
of no business: But on Monday Morning my Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen, and
the two Sheriffs were sent for to appear before the King and Council, where the
matter being fully examined, the two Sheriffs were sent to the Tower: The
Warrant for their Commitment being Signed by 24 Privy Counselors.

On Tuesday the 27th of June, the Common Hall was again Adjourned over to
Wednesday the 5th of July.

Friday the 30th of June, the two Sheriffs abovementioned were brought by
Habeas Corpus to the King's Bench Bar, where they were admitted to be Bailed by
four Gentlemen of considerable Estate, themselves in 2000 l. piece, and the
Bail each in 1000 l. At the same time they pleaded Not Guilty to an Information
for a Tumultuous and Riotous Assembly in holding the Common Hall
abovementioned after it was Adjourned and the Assembly Discharged.

The Sheriffs being thus at liberty, met at the Common Hall on the 5th of July,
and notwithstanding that the Lord Mayor (being Sick) sent order by the Recorder
to Adjourn the Hall to the 7th followlowing, yet the Sheriffs and the multitude
proceeded in the Election, and declared their Choice of Papillon and Dubois: On
the 7th the Mayor and His Party met again at Guildhall, but some disputes
arising concerning the last Adjournment, four Lawyers were sent for to the
Court of Aldermen to argue the validity of the Thing, viz. Sir George Jeffreys
and Mr. Saunders for the Mayor, and Mr. Polexfin and Mr. Williams on the other
side; but coming to no Conclusion, the Court was Adjourned further to that Day
Sennight, being the 14th of July.

On the 13th of July, The King was pleased to Issue out an Order of Council in
these Words,

HIs Majesty having been Informed by the Lord Mayor and diverse of the Aldermen
of London, that the Disorders and Riots arisen in the City upon the Day
appointed for the Election of Sheriffs, have been chiefly occasioned by the
Proceedings of the Common Hall in an irregular way contrary to what has been
anciently accustomed; His Majesty by the advice of His Council has thought fit
for the better keeping of the Peace of the City, to direct and hereby to
require the Lord Mayor to maintain and preserve entire the ancient Customs of
the City, and for the better doing thereof, to take effectual Order, that at
the Common Hall to be held to morrow all Proceedings be begun anew, and carried
on in the usual manner, as they ought to have been upon the 24th Day of June
last.

This was Read the next Day in the Common Hall, but opposed by the adverse
Party with noise and Clamor, some crying out for the Stat. 16. Car. 1. chapter 10.
to be Read, wherein there is a Clause declaratory, that the Privy Council have
no Authority to examine, determine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattles of any of the Subjects of this Kingdom. But
this being thought not pertinent to this purpose, they proceeded; my Lord Mayor
declaring in the first place Mr. North duly Elected by him, and that he would
Pole for the other Three, viz. Box, Papillon, and Dubois and accordingly caused
Books to be fitted with three Columes only: In the mean time the Sheriffs (with
a Salvo Jure to their former Election of Midsummer Day) went on apart, and
Poled for four Heads. The next Day being Saturday the 15th, my Lord Mayor
declared Mr. Box duly Elected by the Majority of Voices in his Books, and
therefore North and Box to be Sheriffs for next Year. On the other Hand the Now
Sheriffs declared Papillon and Dubois to have the Majority in their Books; and
so the Pole ended.

On the 27th of July the Court of Aldermen Assembled, not without some
apprehensions of a Disturbance from the Factious: Two Companies were ordered to
be up at the Exchange that Day, and the Lieutenancy placed themselves in the
Gallery before the Room where the Aldermen sat, to keep off the Rabble from
pressing in; A great number were gathered into Guild Hall for an Answer to a
Petition, which they had formerly delivered to that Court, requiring that
Papillon and Dubois should be called forth to give Bond to serve for the two
Sheriffs of next Year. Some few of the chief of this Party being at last called
in, my Lord Mayor caused the following Paper to be Read to'em, as his final
Answer,

GEentlemen, this Court has Considered of your Petition, and will take care
that such persons shall take the Office of Sheriffs upon them as are duly
Elected, according to Law and the ancient Customs of this City; and in this
and all other things this Court will endeavor to maintain the Rights and
Privileges of the Chair and of the whole City; and wherein ye think that we do
otherwise, the Law must Judge between us.

With this Answer, the Lord Mayor commanded them in the Kings name to depart;
He also commanded Sheriff Pilkinton to go out and cause 'em to depart, which
Mr. Sheriff could not disobey, tho he himself and all that party were
dissatisfied with the Answer. And thus this matter rested at that time.

Wednesday 9th of Aug. the King, was pleased to send Sir Lionel Jenkins to
fetch the Privy Seal from the Earl of Anglesey, which was accordingly delivered
up. And in the beginning of Michaelmass Term following disposed to the Marquess
of Hallifax.

On the 15th day of August the Duchess of York was delivered at St. James's of
a Daughter, which was on the 16th day Baptized by the Bishop of London, and
named Charlotte-Maria. The Godfather was the Duke of Ormond, the Countesses of
Clarendon, and Arundel Godmothers. But the Infant dyed in less than 3 Months.

During this Long Vacation, Mr. Box, who had been chosen Sheriff to serve with
Mr. North, did think fitting to fine, rather than take upon him the Office.
Hereupon the Lord Mayor at a Common Hall held the 19th of September, proposed
the Electing of an other Sheriff in his place, which tho much opposed by the
adverse party, crying, no North, no North, no Election, etc. Yet the Lord Mayor
went on in the Election, and by the Majority of his party, Peter Rich Esquire; a
Lieutenant Colonel in Southwark, and twice a Burgess in Parliament for that
Borough, was chosen, and so declared; whereupon the Mayor dissolved the Court
and returned to his House. Notwithstanding which, the two Sheriffs continued
the Assembly, and put the question to their own party then remaining, (the
other side being departed with the Mayor) whether they would abide by their
former choice of Papillon, and Dubois, or not; and thereupon, (notwithstanding
that the Mayor sent 'em word the Court was dissolved, and required 'em to
depart) made a Pole, and then cast up their Books, and declared the said
Papillon, and Dubois Sheriffs Elect. But the next Morning my Lord Mayor and
Court of Aldermen waiting upon the King at Whitehall, gave a full account of
the Proceedings. Whereupon the two Sheriffs were sent for to the Council,
severely checked, and told that they had been Guilty of a High Misdemeaner; and
in fine dismissed upon good Bail to Answer to an Information for the same.

On the 28th of September in the morning, Mr. Dudly North and Mr. Rich, were
according to Custom, sworn Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, before the Lord
Mayor in the Hustings. At which time to prevent a Tumult a Company of the
City-Train-Bands were drawn up in Guild Hall. The 30th of September, the said
Sheriffs were presented by the Recorder in the Exchequer, and Sworn there, the
old Sheriffs giving up their Office at the same time.

But on Michaelmass day, being the Customary time for Election of a Lord Mayor
of London, the Faction Mustered their utmost Strength against Sir William
Prichard, the next in Course, setting up against him, not only Gould, but
Cornish, who had been Sheriff but the year before; and at the first appearance
Gould and Cornish had the Majority of Votes, till at last upon a long Scrutiny
and a thorough examination into the Capacity of the Voters, it was found that a
great number had appeared for them, who were not legally entitled to Voices
(no less as reported, than 60 of one Company viz. the Merchant Tailors) which
kind of people being struck out of the Number, it appeared that Sir William
Prichard had 2138 Votes, and Gould 2124. Whereupon on the 25th day of October,
Sir William was by the Court of Aldermen declared at Guild Hall Lord Mayor
Elect, and the usual Ceremonies then and there performed to him as such, with
mighty acclamations from all the Loyal party in London.

The 30th of October he was Sworn at Westminster; At which Solemnity some
Factious Companies refused to attend, as other years.

On the 6th of November (the 5th happening on a Sunday) the Rabble were so
unruly after the Bonfires, that they gathered together in a great number, at
least 1500. Crying a Monmouth, and knocking down such as they suspected, not to
be of their own Gang; and committing many other riotous actions in Cheapside
and thereabouts, till dispersed by my Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, assisted by some
of the Train-Bands, who took several of the Rioters, and committed them, some
to Newgate, some to the Counters. This occasioned a stricct Order of Council
November 10th. That no person whatsoever should presume to make any Bonfires,
without special Order so to do by the Magistrates. Which Order being vigilantly
observed by the Justices of Middlesex, and my Lord Mayor, who with the Sheriffs
rid up and down the Streets of London all Friday Night the 17th of November, No
Riotous Actions and Burning of the Pope was suffered that Night, as usual some
years past.

Afterward, at the Latter end of this Mich. Term, Mr. Williams and Mr. Wallop
Counselors at Law, moved in the Court of Kings Bench for a Mandamus to be
directed to Sir John More, and the Aldermen of London, to Swear either Gould or
Cornish into the Office of Mayor of London: but this Motion was looked upon as
ridiculous, and my Lord Chief Justice refused to give it the least Countenance,
such a Mandamus in the Disjunctive being a thing never heard of, and absurd in
it self.

This Term also it was, That by public Authority all the Weekly
Intelligencies, which hitherto were published every Day but Sunday, were
prohibited, and the Hawkers silenced.

On the 24th of November the great Cause was Tried at the Kings Bench Bar
between his Royal Highness and the late Sheriff Pilkinton, for these words
spoken of the Plantif, viz. He Fired the City, and is now come to cut our
Throats. This was the greatest Scandalum Magnatum that was, perhaps, ever
Tried; and the Words being proved by Sir William Hooker and Sir Henry Tulse,
Aldermen of London, the Jury found for the Plantiff, and gave 100000 l. Damages.

On the last day of the Term Pilkinton rendered himself, in discharge of his
Bail, a Prisoner in Execution; Into whose place of Alderman, was Elected Mr.
Sheriff North.

On Wednesday the 29th of November, Dyed at his House in St James's Park the
Illustrious Prince, Rupert Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of
Cumberland, etc. in the 63d year of his Age. After whose Death His Majesty was
pleased to confer the Constable-ship of Windsor-Castle on the Right Honorable
the Earl of Arundel.

On Monday the 18th of December, The Right Honorable Henneage Earl of
Nottingham, Lord high Chancellor of England, departed this Life: Into whose
Office Succeeded Sir Francis North, then Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, Sir Francis Pemberton, then Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench being
removed to be Chief Justice in the Common Pleas, and Sir Edmund Saunders of the
Middle Temple, made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

On St. Thomas's Day the Election began for Common Council Men in London, which
went generally for the Royallists, and accordingly at the first Common Council
that was held, it was carried by the Majority of Votes, That thanks should be
returned to Sir John Moor for his good Administration of the Office of Lord
Mayor last year; which was done accordingly.

Before I conclude this 34th year of His Majesty's Reign, I must observe that
this year was remarkable for the coming of Two very Extraordinary Ambassadors
to our Sovereign, never known before in England. One was from the Emperor of
Fez and Morocco, his name Hamet Ben Hamet Ben Haddu Ottor, a Man of great
Eminency in his own Country, as report says: His business about settling a Peace
with Tangier; much respected he was here, carest at Court, and at both the
Universities, and he seemed to express no less esteem for our Nation. But at
his return, upon what account I know not, he was reported to be received by his
Master with disgrace. The other Ambassador was from the King of Bantham, or
Surosoam, in the East Indies; His business about the East India Trade.

The end of this year was also remarkable for several new Titles of Honor, to
which His Majesty was pleased to promote several Eminent persons, who had for
their signal Loyalty deserved His Favor, viz.

1. The Duke of Ormond, Created a Duke of the Kingdom of England, but by his
old Title of Ormond.

2. The Marquess of Worcester Created Duke of Beaufort.

3. The Lord Norris Created Earl of Abingdon.

4. The Vicount Campden Created Earl of Gainsborow.

5. Conniers Lord Darcy Created Earl of Holderness.

6. The Lord Windsor Created Earl of Plymouth.

7. The Lord Townsend Created Vicount Townsend of Raynham.

8. Sir Thomas Thin Baronet Created Baron Thin of Warminster and Vicount
Weymouth.

9. Colonel George Leg Created Baron of Dartmouth.

10. The Lord Allington Created a Baron of this Kingdom, by the Title of Baron
of Wymandley.

11. Ralf Stawell Esquire; Created Lord Stawell of Somerton.

Also Colonel Churchill was Created Lord Churchill of Ay mouth in the Kingdom
of Scotland.

On the 20th of January departed this Life, in Holland, Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury; who had left this Kingdom some Months before, under the Imputation
of Treasonable Machinations, and sled for the protection of those States, to
whom he had formerly, when Lord Chancellor of England, applied the old Roman
Threat, Delenda est Carthago.

Anno 35. Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1683.
THe Horses of England are Famous on many Accounts, among others, for Racing:
It was upon this Consideration that the French King invited into France several
of our most Noted Racers, by exposing a Plate, or Prize, of 1000 Pistoles to be
run for before him, in the Plain d' Achere near St Germain en lay. And
accordingly on the 25th of Feb. S. N. the said Race was Run before the King,
Queen, and Dauphin, by several of our prime Horses, where the Duke of
Monmouth's Horse won: and was afterward purchased by the said King. Also that
King partly upon this account, was pleased at that time to countenance the
Honorable Bernard Howard Esquire; a younger Brother of the Duke of Norfolk, so far
as to allow him to come in his Coach within the Louvre, a Pre-eminence due only
to the Princes of the Blood and some few others of highest quality in France.

In March ill news arrived from the East Indies, importing the loss of the
great Town of Bantham to the Dutch; who under color of assisting the Rebel
Prince of Bantham against the King his Father, came with forces and seized upon
the Town, turning out the English there, to the great Damage of our English
Factory; who for a further weight to their sufferings, about the same time lost
their Ship Joanna, cast away at Sea, outward bound, and in her above 10000 l.

On Thursday the 22th of March, happn'd a sudden Fire at Newmarket, about 8 in
the Evening, which Consumed a great part of that Town; but by the Providence of
God came not on that side of the Way where the Kings Palace stood.

The Monday following, the King, Queen, Duke, and Duchess Returned to
Whitehall, where the Court continued till Saturday the 14th of April, on which
Day His Majesty and His Royal Court Departed to Windsor.

On Tuesday the 24th of April happened one of the most famous and Extraordinary
Exploits that was ever known in London. One Broom, Clark of Skinners Hall, and
Coroner of London, having a Latitat out of the Kings Bench in an Action upon
the Case at the Suit of Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois, against my Lord Mayor,
Sheriff North, and several Loyal Aldermen, the said Broom acquainting them with
the Writ, they all submitted to his Arrest, and went with him as Prisoners to
Skinners Hall, and there remained under his Custody till one a Clock at Night:
In the mean time 8 Companies of the Militia are raised by order of the
Leutenancy, and are posted all that Night in several parts of the City, to
prevent any Tumults which might happen on so new a thing as the Arrest and
detainer of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London; a thing never heard of
before, in the times of Peace. And it so happened that one Fletcher a Common
Sergeant of the Poultry Counter, having an Action of Debt upon Bond of 400 l.
against the said Broom, which Action had been entered the Week past, and Broom
acquainted with it, who promised to give Bail; but the Sergeant finding that
promise not performed, and perceiving him to act so Malipertly with the Chief
Magistrates of the City, he makes no further delay but Arrests his person in
Skinners Hall, and carries him forthwith to the Counter. Broom being thus gone,
and no body left in Charge of my Lord Mayor and his fellow Prisoners, they
demanded if there was any about the House that had any orders to detain 'em any
longer in that place, which being Answered in the Negative, they all departed
peacibly to their several homes.

On Tuesday the 8th of May was Tried at Guild Hall before my Lord Chief Justice
Saunders, the Great Riot committed last June at the Election of Sheriffs for
London and Middlesex. And this was upon an Information exhibited in the Crown
Office by Mr. Attorney General, of which I made mention formerly. Upon a full
Evidence, 14 persons were found Guilty, viz. The then Sheriffs Pilkinton, and
Shute, The Lord Gray of Wark, Sir Thomas Player, Cornish, Bethel, Jinks,
Goodenough, Deagle, Jekel, Freeman, Wickham, Keys, and Swinock. On the Last Day
but one of Trinity-Term they were all Fined severally, as follows; Pilkinton,
500 l. Shute 1000 Marks, Cornish, the same Sum, Lord Gray, the same, Sir
Thomes Player 500 Marks, Bethel, 1000 Marks, Jinks, 300 Marks, Deagle, 400
Marks, Freeman, 300 Marks, Goodenough, 500 Marks, Keys, 100 Marks, Wickham, 100
Marks, Swinnock, 500 Marks, and Jekel, 200 Marks.

On the 19th of May, being the last Saturday in Easter Term, Sir Patience Ward,
one of the Aldermen of London, was Tried at the Kings Bench Bar, upon an
Information of Perjury, for giving false Evidence upon Oath, in the Cause Tried
last Mic. Term, between the Duke, and Pilkinton. The Perjury was proved upon
him by the Oaths of several Aldermen and other persons of great Credit, among
which were two of the Jury that Tried the said Cause between the Duke, and
Pilkinton. Whereupon the said Sir Patience was Convicted and found Guilty by
the Jury; but the Judgment of the Court was respited till next Term.

The better part of the City of London both for Number and Quality, appeared
about this time very Loyal, and as an Instance of their Good Affections, it was
Resolved at a Common Council held at Guild Hall, May, 22. That whereas Sir
William Pritchard Knight, Lord Mayor of this City, was in a rude manner lately
Arrested at the Suit, or in the name of Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois, and
whereas it has been alleged by the said Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Dubois, that
the Action upon which the said Arrest was, was prosecuted at the Instance of
the Citizens of London, the Members of this Court to deliver themselves and the
said Citizens from this untrue imputation, do declare that they were not privy
or consenting to the said Action, or Arrest, and do disown and disapprove the
same.

And not long after Broom the Coroner was by the Common Council put out of that
Office, and made incapable of enjoying any place of preferment in the City.

Soon after, viz. on the 25th of May, was set up in one of the Niches of the
Old Exchange, a Curious Statue of King Charles the First, with this Inscription
underneath, cut in Marble,

EIKON ASILIK Serenissimi ac Religiosissimi Principis Caroli Primi Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensoris (Bis mar ^ris in
Corpore and in Effigy) Impiis Rebellium manibus ex hoc loco deturbata and
confracta A. D. MDCXLVIII. Restituta and hic demum collocata A. D. MDCLXXXIII.
Against the beginning of Trinity Term the Scaffolds in Westminster Hall, after
they had stood there and cumber'd the Hall for above Three Years, were by order
from my Lord Chamberlain, taken down and removed.

On Wednesday the 6th of June, was held a Common Council at Guildhall in
London, where all the Treasonable and irregular Acts of that Court in the Times
of Rebellion, were Repealed, and a Bill past in the said Common Council for
declaring and asserting the Ancient Rights of the Chair; by which Bill my Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen were restored to their negative Voice, which had
been taken away by an Act in the late Rebellious Times, and never questioned
before that. Also it was at this Common Council declared and Enacted, That my
Lord Mayor has sufficient and lawful Power of Choosing one Sheriff. And
accordingly my Lord Mayor did the next day declare his Choice at the
Bridg-House Feast, by Drinking to Mr. Alderman Daniel, as one of the Sheriffs
of London and Middlesex, for the Year ensuing.

On the first Tuesday in Trinity-Term, Judgment was given in the Court of
King's Bench, in the Quo Warranto brought last Trinity-Term against the City of
London, of which I made mention in the last Year; The Pleadings were large on
both sides. The chief Crimes on which this Writ was grounded were Two: For
exacting Tolls in their Markets illegally, and for framing and Printing a
scandalous Petition, wherein they charged the King with obstructing the Justice
of the Nation, by Proroguing the last Parliament. Whether these were sufficient
Causes of seizing their Liberties was argued pro and con by the Solicitor
General, and the Recorder, last Hillary-Term, and by the Attorney General, and
Mr. Pollixsin, last Term, very largely and elaborately: And now (my Lord Chief
Justice Saunders being Sick and absent) Justice Jones having concisely Summed
up all the Proceedings past, in a very pithy and solid Speech, gave Judgment,
and declared it to be the unanimous opinion of that Court, That the Liberties
and Franchises of the City of London be seized into the Kings Hands. After
which he Declared by the Kings express Order, That Judgment should not be
entered till His Majesty's Pleasure be further known.

Thursday the 14th of June, was held a Common Council in London, at which Court
the following Petition was Ordered to be Presented to the King at Windsor; it
was entitled the humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of
the City of London, in Common Council Assembled, It acknowledged their hearty
and unfeigned sorrow for the misgovernment of that City of late Years, which
occasioned a Quo Warranto to be brought against them and Judgment therein, That
they are deeply sensible and thankfully acknowledge the Kings great Favor in
not requiring Judgment to be immediately entered thereon; In this distressed
condition, they humbly cast themselves at His Royal Feet imploring His Princely
Compassion and Grace, begging Pardon for all Offenses, with most solemn
promises and assurances of constant Loyalty and obedience to His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, and of a regular Administration of His Government in that
City for the future; and humbly beg His Majesty's Commands and directions. This
Petition was carried and Presented by the Lord Mayor, and several Loyal
Aldermen and Citizens of London on Monday the 18th of June; After which my Lord
Keeper by the Kings Command Declared, That for the sakes of so many of the
present Magistrates and other eminent Citizens in London, who are of undoubted
Loyalty and affection to His Majesty's Service, His Majesty will show the City
all the Favor they can reasonably desire; In fine, That His Majesty requires
their Submission to these Regulations, That no Lord Mayor, Sheriff, Recorder,
Common Sergeant, Town Clerk, or Coroner of London, or Steward of Southwark,
shall be capable of or admitted to the exercise of their respective Offices,
before His Majesty shall have approved them under his own Sign manual; That His
Majesty's disapproving the Mayor twice, He may if he please nominate a Lord
Mayor himself; so also for Sheriffs: Nevertheless, the Election of these
Officers may be according to the ancient usage of the City, with some small
Restrictions, then specified.

On Wednesday the 20th of June, was held a Court of Common Council again at
Guild Hall; the Question being put whether they should assent and submit to His
Majesty's Order of Regulation, as above expressed, it was carried in the
affirmative by the Majority of 18 Voices. The Yeas being 104, and the Nays 86.

Toward the end of this Trinity-Term was discovered a Damnable Plot and
Conspiracy, carried on by those who call themselves True Protestants. Mr. West
of the Temple was first apprehended, examined, and Committed. And His Majesty's
Proclamation Dated the 23 of June, came out for the apprehension of others who
had Conspired against the Lives of His Most Sacred Majesty and his Royal
Highness, viz. Colonel John. Rumsey, Richard Rumbold Maulster, Richard
Nelthorp Esquire; Edward Wade Gent. Richard Goodenough Gent. Capt. Walcot, William
Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone; For the Discovery of any of which 100
l. was offered as a reward to the Discoverer. Also another Proclamation came
out not long after, Dated the 28th of June, For the Apprehending of James Duke
of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong Knight, and Robert Ferguson,
who were also fled; for the Discovery of any of which 500 l. was offered as a
reward to the Discoverer. The Crimes alleged in the said Proclamations are,
For Traitorously Conspiring to Compass the Death and Destruction of the King,
and His dearest Brother the Duke of York, to effect which they have held
several Treasonable Consultations, to Levy Men, and to make an Insurrection in
this Kingdom.

On the 2d of July, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
London, in a Body, waited on His Majesty in the Banqueting House, and Presented
him with their Address of Congratulation, Importing their thanks to Almighty
God for bringing to Light this impious and Execrable machination, designed for
the destruction of His Majesty's Royal Person, and of his dearest Brother James
Duke of York, and for the Destruction of His Majesty's best Subjects, and to
involve this and the future Generation in Confusion, Blood and misery, carried
on by Conventiclers and Atheistical Persons, etc. Which Address being
Graciously received by His Majesty, they then Waited on His Royal Highness, and
made their Complement to him on the same occasion. Soon after this, the Members
of the Middle Temple Addressed in the like manner, who thought themselves
concerned more than ordinary to show their Loyalty, in regard some of the first
Discovered Conspirators did unhappily appear to be of that Society. After which
almost innumerable Addresses on the same Subject flowed from all parts of the
Kingdom: At the same time also the Ambassadors and Ministers of Foraign Princes
Congratuled His Majesty in their Masters Names for His happy Delivery from the
Designed Assasination. The King of France also Published in His Dominions an
Edict or Proclamation for the Apprehension of those Four mentioned in our Kings
Proclamation of June the 28th, and proposed 500 Pistols for the Discovery of
each.

On the 12th of July was Tried at the Old Bailey the above mentioned Captain
Walcot, for this horrid Conspiracy, and upon a full and clear Evidence was
found Guilty of High Treason. The next Day the Lord Russel, eldest Son and Heir
apparent to the Earl of Bedford, was Tried for the same Treason, and upon a
clear Evidence given by the Lord Howard of Escrick and others, was found
Guilty. The same Day also, Hone and Rouse, were Tried and found Guilty of the
same horrid Crime. All which received Sentence of Death the next day from the
Recorder Sir George Treby, viz. the Lord Russel by himself, and Walcot, Hone,
and Rouse, together; but the Judgment was the same, to be drawn, Hanged, and
Quartered. During the Trial of the Lord Russel, 4 Companies of the Guards were
drawn into Smithfield, and there posted all the Day; two Companies of the
Trained Bands in St Bartholmews Hospital, and a Party of the Life Guard Waited
at the Gates of the Old Bailey, attending upon the Lord Howard.

In the mean time, viz. on Friday the 13th of July, about 9 of the Clock in the
Morning, a sad and desparate action was Committed on himself by one of these
unhappy Conspirators. Arthur Earl of Essex being a Prisoner in the Tower on the
account of this execrable Treason, was so far transported by the Devils
Temptations as to despair of all mercy, and during a short absence of them that
attended, to Murder himself, by Cutting his own Throat with a Raisour.

On Friday the 20th of July, Three of the foresaid Traitors were executed at
Tyburn, viz. Walcot, Hone, and Rouse, according to the Common Judgment in
Treason, Drawn, Hanged, and quartered. But the Lord Russel, by reason of his
noble Birth, had the favor from the King to have the Common Judgment mitigated
(tho he was against such mitigation (as is reported) in the case of the late
Vicount Stafford) and was on the day following, viz. Saturday the 21th of July,
Beheaded in Lincoln's Inn Fields. For which purpose a Scaffold was erected that
Morning on that side of the Fields next to the Arch going into Duke Street, in
the middle between the said Arch and the corner turning into Queen Street; 10
Companies of the Guards and a Troop of Horse were drawn up in the Fields at
that time, to secure the Peace against so vast a Concourse of People as
appeared there on that occasion. The Lord Russel was Beheaded by three strokes
of the Executioner, at half an hour after 10 in the morning.

On the same Day, the 21th of July, was assembled a Convocation of the
University of Oxford, in their Convocation House there; at which in a Solemn
and formal manner they Condemned 27 Propositions, as false, seditious, and
impious, and most of them Heretical and Blasphemous, infamous to Christian
Religion, and destructive of all Government, both in Church and State: Which
wicked Propositions were Collected out of several modern Authors, namely,
Buchanan, Milton, Hobs, Goodwin, Baxter, Julian, Protestant Reconciler, etc.
Which said Books were at the same time Ordered to be Burnt, and were Burnt in
the Court of the Schools of the said University.

On Saturday the 28th of July, being St. Anns, Day, about 10 in the Evening,
The Lady Ann second Daughter to his Royal Highness, was Married to Prince
George, Brother to the King of Danemark. Which Prince arrived at Whitehall, the
Thursday sennight before. The Ceremony of the Marriage was performed by the
Bishop of London, in the Presence of the King, Queen, Duke, and Duchess, with
most of the Great Personages of the Court. All That Night, and the next, the
Bells Proclaimed the Public Joy. And presently after they received the
Congratulations of all the Ambassadors and Public Ministers in Town. The like
also from the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, in their Scarlet.

Soon after which was published His Majesty's Declaration to all his loving
Subjects, dated the 28th of July, whereby was set forth a short Narration of
the Treasonable Conspiracy, as it has been lately discovered by undoubted
proof and the Confession of diverse of the Accomplices, for which happy
discovery His Majesty appointed by the said Declaration a Solemn day of
Thanksgiving to Almighty God, to be celebrated throughout the Kingdom, on
Sunday the 9th day of September next: and that the said Declaration be
publicly read in all Churches, as well on Sunday the 2d Day of September, as
on the Day of Thanksgiving aforesaid. The same Day of Thanksgiving was also
appointed to be observed in Scotland.

On Tuesday the 7th of August, Prince George was designed to be Installed
Knight of the most Honorable Order of the Garter, at Windsor; but the Ceremony
was put off to a further day; and on the First of Jan. following he was elected
into the Order at Whitehall.

Saturday the 25th of August, the Duchess of York, and Princess, visited
Bartholmew Fair, attended by the Earl of Clarendon, with several other Lords
and Ladies of the Court: not in State, but partly Incognito.

The Day for Election of Sheriffs for London and Middlesex, which of Course is
on the 24th Day of June, was this year adjourned to the 5th Day of September,
on which Day the Livery Men of the City being Assembled at Guild Hall, they
confirmed my Lord Mayors choice of Peter Daniel Esquire; and chose, to serve with
him, Francis Dashwood Esquire; Sheriffs for the year ensuing. At the same time Mr.
Deputy Ailworth was chosen into the Office of Chamberlain of the City of London
in the Room of Sir Thomas Player, removed. All which, with the other Elections
of Bridgmaster, and Ale-Cunner, was performed with the ancient gravity and
Moderation, and not at all with such Riotous and Factious heats and animosities
as of late years.

The 9th of September was Solemnized, according as it had been appointed, with
Thanksgiving in all Churches, for Gods Gracious preservation of His Majesty and
his Royal Brother from the late cursed Conspiracy of those that call themselves
True Protestants. Nor were those of the Communion of the Church of Rome
unmindful of this deliverance, but did also concur with His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects in expressing their Loyal Joy on the same occasion, and on
the same 9th of September did Celebrate in all their public Chapels at London
an extraordinary Service on this account.

In this Month the right Honorable Sir Francis North, Lord Keeper, was Created
a Baron of this Kingdom by the Title of Lord Guilford.

On Michaelmass Day, the usual time for the Election of a new Lord Mayor, the
Choice was Adjourned over for six Days longer; but before that Day came, the
King being displeased at the Delays of the City in not Signing the Particulars
by their Common Council formerly yielded, relating to their Charter, caused the
Attorney General to enter Judgment of Seizure in the Quo Warranto, which was
done on Thursday October the 4th; and thereupon His Majesty gave Sir William
Prichard His Commission to Execute the Office of Lord Mayor of London, during
pleasure; so also to the two new Sheriffs, Mr. Daniel, and Mr. Dashwood, all
which were Sworn with the usual Oaths. At the same time Mr. Jenner of the Inner
Temple was knighted by the name of Sir Thomas Jenner, and made the Kings
Recorder of London, in the Room of Sir George Treby, displaced.

About the same time it was that the Eminently Loyal Sir George Jeoffreys was
made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in the place of Sir Ed. Saunders,
who dyed last Term; And in the Common Pleas Sir Francis Pemberton being put
out, Sir Thomas Jones was made Lord Chief Justice there, in his Room. And Sir
Francis Pemberton practiced at the Common Pleas Bar as a Sergeant in the
following Term.

On Sunday the 7th of October, my Lord Mayor and the two Sheriffs appeared at
Guild Hall Chapel, as usually, in their Gowns and Chains; but none of the
Aldermen in their Gowns and Chains, but several of the Loyal Aldermen attended
in their ordinary habits, 16 of them being made Justices of the Peace by the
Kings new Commission, in which 8 Factious Aldermen were left out, viz. Allin,
Frederick, Laurence, Clayton, Ward, Shorter, Gold, and Cornish. But on Saturday
the 13th of October, The King sent a new Commission to the City, impowering the
abovesaid 16 Loyal Aldermen, together with 8 new Aldermen, viz. Sir Benjamin
Newland, Sir Benjamin Bathurst, Sir John Buckworth, Samuel Dashwood, (one of
the present Sheriffs) Charles Duncomb, Jacob Lucy, Peter Palavazine, and
Benjamin Thorogood, to act as Aldermen in their several Wards in the said
Commission mentioned. And accordingly several of them attended on my Lord Mayor
the Day following at Guild Hall Chapel, after the usual form and manner in
Gowns and Chains, and the next Week assembled in a Court of Aldermen, as
formerly.

On Saturday the 27th of October, Aaron Smith, who had given scandalous
Instructions to College at his Trayal at Oxford, and had also behaved himself
insolently at the said Trial, and who had been since Tried upon an Information
for the same, and found Guilty, was now brought to the King's Bench Bar, and
received Judgment for his said offense, viz. 500 l. Fine, to Stand in the
Pillory the Tuesday following at Westminster, and at the Old Exchange the next
Tuesday after; to be bound to his good Behavior for one Year; and Imprisonment
till this be performed.

Monday the 29th of October, being the next Day after Simon and Jude, is the
annual Solemnity of Swearing the Lord Mayor of London, in the Exchequer. And
accordingly this Year His Majesty having appointed Sir Henry Tulse by His
Commission to execute that Office during His Pleasure, he was after the usual
manner attended to Westminster by the Companies, did the usual Ceremonies in
Westminster Hall, made the usual Cavalcade in London, but without Pageants, and
Dined at Grocers-Hall, the other Companies Dining at their several Halls as in
former Years.

On the 5th of November, several Tumults and Riotous Actions being Committed by
the Rabble in and about London; especially upon the Sieur Citters, Ambassador
from the United Provinces, by assaulting his Coach and throwing into it several
Squibs, Stones and Firebrands, whereby his Lady, who was then with him, was
dangerously wounded; and Complaint hereof being made to the King in Council on
the 7th of November, His Majesty was pleased to order for the future. That no
Person or Persons whatsoever do presume to throw any Squibs or other Fireworks
in the Streets of London, or Westminster, or other place within the Weekly
Bills of Mortality, nor assemble together for the making of Bonfires: And the
Lord Mayor Aldermen and Justices of Peace in their respective Limits, are
required to take due care for the Performance of the said Order of Council.

In this Michaelmas-Term, Mrs. Celier, who had formerly stood in the Pillory,
and been Fined 1000l. for which she had lain a Prisoner in Newgate for several
Years, was now Bailed out, upon a Writ of Error which she had brought to
reverse all the Proceedings.

On the 22d of November, this Michaelmas-Term, Algernoon Sidney Esquire; (who had
been arraigned for High Treason on the 7th Instant) was Tried for the same, and
found Guilty at the King's Bench Bar; and on the 26th, being the Monday
following, he was brought to the said Bar and received Sentence of Death as
usual in the Cases of High Treason, and was beheaded at Tower Hill on the 7th
of December following.

On Saturday the 24th of November, The Duke of Monmouth came in voluntarily
about 5 at Night, and surrendered himself to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, having
before writ a very Submissive Letter to His Majesty, entirely resigning himself
to His Majesty's disposal. Hereupon His Majesty and his Royal Highness went
down to the Secretaries Office, where the Duke of Monmouth was, who showed
himself very sensible of his Crime in the late Conspiracy, making a full
Declaration of it; and having showed an extraordinary Penitence for the same,
and made a particular Submission to his Royal Highness for his misbehavior to
him, His Majesty and his Royal Highness received so much satisfaction, that
upon his Royal Highness' s desire and Mediation, His Majesty was pleased to
Pardon the said Duke, and order the Attorney General to stop further
Proceedings against him.

On the last Day of Michaelmas Term, six Prisoners then in the Tower for High
Treason, were Bailed, viz. the Lord Gerard Brandon, Mr. Booth, Mr. Trenchard,
Mr. Hamden Jun. Mr. Charleton, and Major Wildman, all which being accused for
Conspirators in the late detestable Plot, and but one Witness against them,
they were Bailed out in 2000 l apiece, and 1000 l their Sureties, except Mr.
Hamden, against whom there being a Bill of Indictment for High Misdemeaners, he
was bound in 10000 l. himself, and 5000 l. his Sureties.

On Thursday the 6th of December, one Johnson, a Cracktbraind Fellow, met the
King as he was walking in St. James Park, and laying his Hand on his Sword,
told His Majesty he had wronged him, and demanded satisfaction; but being
(seized by the Guards, and appearing to be Distracted, upon Examination, he was
tied Neck and Heels together for a while at the Guard Stables, and let go again.

On Friday the 7th of December, the Duke of Monmouth being fallen again into
the Kings displeasure for refusing to Sign what he had confessed upon his coming
in, was Banished the Court and expelled the Royal Presence. This was on the same
Day that Sidney was beheaded on the Tower Hill.

Friday, the 4th of January, the Lord Peter's who had lain a long time a
Prisoner in the Tower on the account of Oates's Plot, without being brought to
his Trial, departed this Life in his said Confinement. A little before his
departure the said Lord sent to the King a Letter, wherein he disowned in his
last Words, and upon his Salvation, the matters which he stood accused of.

About the middle of December this Year began a very eminent and extraordinay
Frost, it lasted without any considerable Intermission till the 5th of
February, during which time the Thames was Frozen over with a solid and
Contiguous Ice in all places above the Bridge, Booths built thereon, with
Thousands of People continually walking over, and Sliding; I my self walked over
at the Temple, and so all along the Channel to Westminster Stairs on the 9th of
January: Also on or about the same Day Coaches went over at Sommerset-House,
and at the Temple. In the Extremity of this Weather, the King granted His
Letters Mandatory, Dated the 4th of January, to the Bishop of London, to make a
Collection in all Parishes in London and the Subburbs of the same, for the
relief of the Poor, encouraging His Subjects to such a needful Charity by his
own Example, having ordered large Sums of Money to be Issued out of His Treasury
for that purpose, which Letters were Read in all Churches the two following
Sundays, and Collections made accordingly. On the 23d of January, being the
First Day of Hillary Term, the Lawyers went over the Ice from the Temple to
Westminster Hall, and back again, as familiarly as on the Land, some walked on
Foot, and some went in Coaches which carried People from the Temple Stairs to
Westminster for the same fare as by Land, and plied between those two places
(though not in so great Numbers) as the Watermen do in Summer. Abundance of
Booths were erected Cross between the Temple and Southwark in which place an
absolute Fair was held, for above a Fortnight, of almost all sorts of Trades,
and Printing Presses erected both for Letters and Pictures; a Bull Baited, a
Fox Hunted, and a whole Ox Roasted on the Ice over against Whitehall. Nor was
this Frost thus Wonderful only above the Bridge, but Booths were erected, and
People past over on the Ice, frequently in diverse places, below the Bridge.
And the Sea it self frozen for diverse Miles from the Shore, on the Coasts of
England, France, and especially Holland; Insomuch that for above a Fortnight no
Packet Boat or any other Vessel of Intelligence, could either come out of those
parts or go from hence.

Thus ends this Year, a Year of Extraordinary note in England, for the happy
Discovery of a Hellish Conspiracy against the Lives of his Sacred Majesty, and
Royal Highness, and against the Ancient Government of this Kingdom both in
Church and State, a Conspiracy contrived and carried on by Protestant
Dissenters, inveterate Calvinists, and old Common-wealths-men.

Nor was this Year less remarkable abroad, partly for the Death of Anna Teresia
Queen of France, and Alphonso King of Portugal; but above all for the
formidable and Bloody Descent of the Turks, into Hungary, Invited thither by
Count Tekeley, a Protestant Rebel against the Emperor. The Mahumetan Army
consisting of 150000 fighting Men, Horse and Foot, came before Vienna on the
9th of July, Commanded by the Grand Vizier in Person. The Emperor had retired
two Days before, and left the City under the Command of Count Staremberg, who
defended it bravely, notwithstanding all the Bloody Assaults and utmost
endeavors of the Enemy, till on the 12 / 2 of September, the Seige was raised,
in the highth of the Defendants Extremity, by the coming of the King of Poland;
who having joined with the Imperial Forces, Commanded by the Duke of Lorrain,
not only beat off and routed the Turkish Army, with vast Slaughter and no less
Booty, but pursuing his Blow, took from them the Fort of Barkan, and the City
of Gran (formerly called Strigonium) after it had been possessed by the Turks 78
Years. Which City had been formerly, before it was lost by the Christians, the
Metropolitan City of Hungary. To the Glory of the English Nation, some of our
Country Men were present at the Siege of Vienna, in defense of which they
Signalliz'd their Valor. In particular the Lord Landsdown, Eldest Son of the
Earl of Bath, whom for his extraordinary merits the Emperor created a Count of
the Sacred Empire: An Honor which the Ancestors of the Lord Arundel of Warder
had formerly attained in the defense of Strigonium.

One thing more, renders this Year remarkable, which was partly Domestic and
Partly Foraign. Tangier in Africa, being possessed by the Portugals, came to the
Crown of England with our now Queen Catherine, and having cost our King since
he had it, vast Sums of Money in defending it against the Moors, and also in
making the greatest part of a Mole there, which not being found so feasible, as
expected, the Charges very great and certain, the Expectation of any advantage
from thence very uncertain; His Majesty was pleased about the end of this last
Summer to commission my Lord Dartmouth, attended with about 20 Sail of Ships,
to go and utterly to demolish the said Town, Castle, and Mole at Tangier, to
choke up the Haven, and to bring off the Ordinance, and English Inhabitants to
England, sending the Foraigners to their several Countries, but first
compounding with every Man for his Ground, Estate, and Property in their
several Houses; all which was accordingly done in about six Months time.

Anno 36 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1684.
I Begin my Historical Collections this Year with an Occurrence of
Extraordinary Note, viz. the Bayling the Lords in the Tower, which, though often
moved for, yet could never be obtained till now. The Earl of Danbys Case was
argued this Hillary Term, and on the last Day of the Term, being February the
12th, the Judges in the King's Bench did severally give their Opinions and their
Reasons for the same, concluding all in one Judgment, That his Lordship ought
to be Bailed, and accordingly Bail was taken.

His Bail were The Duke of Somerset. The Duke of Albemarl. The Earl of Oxford.
The Earl of Chesterfield.

The other Lords being within the same Reason, were admitted to the same
Advantage; as also the Earl of Tyrone, who had lain Prisoner in the Gate House,
about the same space of time with those in the Tower. Their several Bail were

For the Earl of Powis The Duke of Norfolk. The Duke of Beaufort. The Earl of
Pembroke. The Earl of Peterborough.
For the Lord Arundal of Warder The Earl of Dorset. The Earl of Scarsdale. The
Earl of Bath. The Earl of Clarendon.
For the Lord Bellasis The Earl of Aylesbury. The Earl of Westmerland. The L.
Vicount Falconbridge. Sir John Talbot.
For the Earl of Tyrone The Earl of Roscommon. The Earl of Mount-Alexander. The
Earl of Carlingford. The Lord Annesley.

The Principal Lords were Bound in a Recognizance of 10000 l each, and their
several Bail in 5000 l each, upon Condition that the abovementioned principal
Lords do appear in the House of Lords the next Sessions of Parliament, and not
depart without leave of that Court.

On the same Day Mr. John Hamden received Judgment. He had been accused and
Committed for High Treason in the late accursed Conspiracy, but in regard,
there wanted the Circumstance of Two Witnesses against him, which is necessary
in all Cases of that nature, he was Indicted and Tried in the King's Bench
Court, this Term, and found Guilty of a High Trespass and Misdemeaner in
Conspiring to Levy War, etc. and now his Judgment was That he should pay 40000
l for a Fine to the King, and find Sureties for his good Behavior during Life,
and to be Committed till this be paid and done.

The Lord Brandon, Mr. Booth, Major Wildman, Mr. Charleton, Mr. Trenchard, and
some others who had been accused for being in the said Conspiracy, and had been
since admitted to Bail, were on this last Day of Hillary-Term, absolutely
discharged.

It is observable in relation to the late great Frost, That the extremity of
that Weather had made such a Mortality and Sickness (as I may call it) among
Fish, not only of fresh Rivers and Ponds, but even at Sea, that abundance of
Fish of almost all sorts were observed to dye of themselves, and float to
Shore; upon which account several Physicians of the Roman Catholic Religion,
having considered of the eating of Fish, they agreed that it must needs be
unwholesome; whereupon a general dispensation was granted by the Ecclesiastics
of that Party to all Roman Catholics for the eating of Flesh three Days in the
Week, viz. Sundays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays, all the Lent this Year: A thing
not known before.

Acts of Hostility being fiercely pursued this Spring between the French and
Spaniard, both by Sea and Land, His Majesty of Great Britain being concerned
on neither side, but at Amity with both, was pleased to Command by His
Proclamation Dated at Newmarket, March the 12th, That the Peace should be kept
inviolably on both sides, in all Roads, Creeks, and Ports of His Dominions, and
that all His Commanders and Officers should oppose themselves against any that
should assault any of the Ships of His Allies in any His Roads, Creeks, or
places under His Protection, etc.

On the 14th of April, Sir Leoline Jenkins obtained leave of His Majesty to
surrender his place of Secretary of State, and Sidney Godolphin Esquire; (now Lord
Godolphin) was Sworn Secretary.

On the 21st of April, James Holloway Merchant being out-lawed in Treason,
having been Indicted for the late Conspiracy and fled, was brought to the
King's Bench Bar: where the Attorney General declared to the Court, and the
Court to him, That if he thought he could make himself appear Not Guilty, the
King would wave his Attainder by Outlary, and he might stand a Trial by a Jury:
But he Declared That he could not undertake to make himself appear Not Guilty,
for he had confessed his Guilt to the King: Whereupon a Rule of Court was made
for his Execution on the 30th of the present April, on which Day he was
accordingly Executed.

On Saturday the 10th of May, Titus Oats was arrested at the Amsterdam
Coffee-House, in an Action of Scandalum Magnatum at the Suit: of His Royal
Highness the Duke of York, for calling the said Duke Traitor, and other
abominable Language. He was carried to Woodstreet-Counter, where he lay two
Days, and was then removed by Habeas Corpus to the King's Bench Prison. The next
Term he let Judgment go by default, and on the last Day of the Term a Writ of
Enquiry of Damages was Executed at the King's Bench Bar, where the Jury upon
hearing the Evidence gave 100000 l Damages.

About the beginning of May, the King was pleased to revoke and determine the
Commission (formerly granted to several Commissioners) for executing the Office
of Lord High Admiral of England, and to commit those Affairs to the Care of His
Royal Highness.

Also in this Month of May, a Noble and most Elaborate Statue of his Now
Majesty, in gray Marble, was erected on a Curious Pedestal of the same, in the
very middle, or Center, of the Old-Exchange, The Garb and Habit was that of a
Roman Caesar, The Workman that Cut it was Mr. Grinlin Gibbons, the most Famous
Statuary that England ever produced, and equal, if not Superior to the best of
Europe in this Age. This was performed at the charge of the Hamborough Company,
and Cost 500 l.

The Inscription on the Pedestal is, Carolo II Caesari Britannico, Patriae
Patri, Regum Optimo, Clementissimo, Augustissimo, Generis humani Delicijs,
Vtriusque fortunae Victori, Pacis Europae Arbitro, Maris Domino and Vindici,
Societas Mercatorum Adventur. Angliae Quae per CCCC jam prope Annos Regia
Benignitate floret Fidei intemeratae Gratitudinis Aeternae Hoc Testimonium
Venerabunda posuit. Anno Sal. Humanae MDCLXXXIV.

On the 28th of May, His Majesty was pleased to declair in Council at
Hampton Court, That he thought it fit, and for His Service, that his Royal
Highness should be present at the Meetings of the Council. And accordingly the
Duke Sat that Day, and continued so to do.

On Wednesday the 11th of June, Sir Thomas Armstrong was brought to London, and
committed to Newgate in order to his Execution, being Outlawd in High Treason.
He had been taken at Leyden in Holland, by Order of the States there, and
immediately brought to Roterdam, and Shipped away for England. There needed no
Trial of him, in regard he fled and was Outlawd, and did not yield himself
within a year, so as to have any benefit of the Stat. 5. E. 6. 11. Wherefore he
was Executed at Tyburn on the 20th of June, being a Friday; the same Day of the
same Month, and the same Day of the Week, on which the five Jesuits were
Executed in the same manner at the same place just five years before: His head
was set up on Westminster Hall between those of Cromwell, and Bradshaw; one of
his Quarters upon Temple Bar, two others at Aldersgate, and Algate, and the 4th
was said to be sent down to Stafford, for which Town he had been a Burgess in
Parliament.

On Thursday the 26th of June, His Royal Highness the Duke of York, being
Captain of the Artillary Company of London, did them the Honor to march in
their Head through the City to the Artillary Ground, and there Lead'em up in
Person, with mighty Joy and Acclamations.

On the 7th of July, the City of Durham, surrendered their Charter into the
Hands of their Prince, the Bishop of Durham, soon after which surrender He
granted them a new one, reserving to himself the Confirmation of their Mayor,
Aldermen, and Chief Officers, in like manner as the King had done before in
other parts of this Kingdom, Most Corporations having surrenderd and renewed,
about this time.

On the first of October was made a Review or Muster of His Majesty's Land
Forces on Putney Heath; a most Gallant Military appearance. The Horse that Day
consisted of the Three Troops of Guards, and of their Three of Granadiers, of
the Earl of Oxfords Regiment of Horse Guards, and the Lord Churchills Regiment
of Dragoons. The Foot were Two Batalions formed from the Royal Regiment of
Guards and their Granadiers; One Batalion from the Coldstream Regiment of
Guards and Granadiers; One Batalion from the Earl of Dunbarton's Regiment and
their Granadiers, and One from the Admiral Regiment. The total of Horse and
Foot which then Rendavouz'd were above 4000 advantagiously Trained and well
clad Men. All being that Day, commanded by the Earl of Craven. At which Review
both their Majesty's, and Royal Highnesses, were present with great
satisfaction.

About this time His Majesty was pleased to Dissolve the Commission formerly
granted, in the year 1681, to certain Commissioners to dispose of
Ecclesiastical Preferments, belonging to the Crown: So that the said
Preferments are now again in His Majesty's immediate disposal.

Sir William Prichard the late Loyal Lord Mayor of London, having this Summer
brought His Action upon the Case against Mr. Papillon, for causing him to be
Arested in the time of his Mayeralty, without any legal cause of Action (of
which I made mention in the last year) the cause was Tried before my Lord Chief
Justice Jeffreys by Nisi Prius at Guild Hall, on the 6th of Nov. And upon a
full hearing of the Evidence, the Jury found for the Plaintiff, and gave him
10000 l. Damages.

Other matters of Public Concern were transacted this Michaelmass Term.
Several Factious persons were convicted and Sentenced for Speaking Scandalous
and Sedicious Words of the Government; In perparticular Elias Best (commonly
called the Protestant Hop-Merchant) was fined 1000 l. to stand thrice in the
Pillory, and good Behavior during Life: Dalby, and Nicholson, two of Oates's
Men, for the like: and one Mr. Butler of Northamptonshire convicted upon an
Information for presenting and Reading to the Knights of the Shire chosen for
that County, at the last Election, a Seditious Paper of Address to them, from
some factious persons, for which he was fined 500 Marks, and good behavior
during Life. And to show What matters are too frequently transacted in
Conventicles, one Thomas Roswell a Conventicle Preacher at Redriff was this
Term Tried and convicted of High Treason, in speaking certain very foul and
Treasonable Words on the 14th of September last, in his Preachment at his said
Conventicle; but some questions arising in Relation to the form of his
Indictment, which being argued by Council on both sides, the Court took time to
advise of their Judgment till next Term, and before that arrived, the said
Roswell obtained His Majesty's Gracious Pardon. But as if this was not
sufficient to show the ill Principles of the Dissenting Party, about the same
time news arrived at London, of the most Barberous Act in Scotland that has
been heard of in many Years. Some desperate Rebels there, had in the Night
time affixed a most Villainous and Traiterous Paper on several Crosses and
Church Doors in that Country, and therein declared War against the King (under
the name of Charles Stuart) and published their Resolutions to kill and destroy
all those that serve and adhere to Him; in pursuance whereof they came on the
19th of November at Night (being about 36 Footmen and 16 Horsemen) to an Inn,
called Swine-Abby, 13 Miles from Edinborough, and there Barberously Murdered
two Gentlemen of His Majesty's Horse Guards, in their Beds, cutting and
mangling their Bodies, and carrying away with them several Pieces of their
Flesh.

Also this Michaelmass Term, on the 13th of November, Titus Oats was in the
Kings Bench Court indicted for Perjury, in Relation to Ireland's being in
London at that time the said Oats Swore to, at his Trial; to which Indictment
he pleading Not Guilty, the Trial was appointed to be next Term. After this at
the Sessions in the Old Bailey, December, 12th he was again Indicted upon an
other Indictment of Perjury, in Relation to his being Present at the supposed
Consult of the Jesuits at the White-Horse Tavern, and upon Not Guilty pleaded,
this also was appointed to be Tried in the Kings Bench. Court next Term: And
the Indictment was removed thither.

The Roads being this Winter extremely infested with Robbers, His Majesty was
pleased, on the 19th of December, to Order in Council, and declare His pleasure
for redress, That all His Officers of Justice and other His loving Subjects do
use their utmost Diligence and Endeaver for the apprehending all Robbers and
Highway Men; And for the Encouragement of such as shall apprehend any such
Offender, it was further Ordered, That such Person or Persons, who shall at any
time from the present, till the 19th of December, 1685, and after that day,
till His Majesty shall please to recall this Order, either by Proclamation or
His Order in Council, apprehend any Robber or Highway Man, and cause him to be
brought into Custody, shall within 15 days after his Conviction have a Reward
of 10 l. for every such Offender so apprehended and Convicted; And all Sheriffs
of the Respective Counties where such Conviction shall be had, are by the said
Order required, upon the Certificate of the Judge, or Two or more Justices of
the Peace, before whom such persons shall be convicted of such Apprehension,
and Conviction, to pay unto the Person or Persons who shall apprehend such
Offenders, the Reward aforesaid, within the i am aforesaid, out of His Majesty's
Moneys received by such Sheriff or Sheriffs in that County where such
Conviction shall be, which shall be allowed unto him or them upon his or their
accounts in the Exchequer: And all Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of
the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Baylies, and other Officers and persons
whatsoever, were required to take notice of the said Order, and to be aiding
and assisting in all things tending to the Execution of the same, as they
tender His Majesty's displeasure, and upon pain of being Proceeded against as
Contemners of His Majesty's Royal Authority.

This Christmas the restless and implacable Spirit of the Dissenters, appeared
again, by dispersing in several Places in and about London, a most Wicked,
False, and Treasonous Libel, relating to the Death of the Late Earl of Essex;
and upon strict search and enquiry after the Author, One Henry Danvers,
Commonly called Colonel Danvers, late of Newington in Middlesex, appeared to be
the man; but being upon the Discovery, fled, His Majesty was pleased on the 4th
of Jan. to command public Notice to be given, That whereas the said Henry
Danvers stands accused upon Oath of several Treasonable and Dangerous
Practices, and is fled from Justice, Whoever shall apprehend the said Henry,
and cause him to be delivered into safe Custody, that he may be proceeded
against according to Law, shall receive a Reward of 100 l. to be forthwith paid
by the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.

In the beginning of this Hillary Term, Sir Scroop How, one of the Knights of
the Shire for the County of Nottingham in the late Parliaments, appeared in the
Kings Bench Court, to Answer to an Information for words spoke against His
Majesty and Royal Highness, which being Read, he pleaded Guilty, confessed his
offense with much sorrow, and cast himself upon the King' s and Duke' s mercy:
To whom being the next Day introduced, he was upon his humble Submission,
received to Grace; upon which he acknowledged, that he owed to his Majesty's
Goodness his Life, and his Estate; and that he would for the future dedicate
both to the Service of His Majesty, and the Royal Family.

Thus ended the 36th Year of His Majesty's Reign, in a State of Tranquillity
and Peace, after so many Terrors, Disquiets and Tumults; the Remembrance of
which, as it Magnifies our present Happiness by Comparison of past Troubles, so
ought we never to forget to pay our due Applause, Love, and Veneration to the
Sacred Memory of our late Gracious Sovereign King Charles the 2d, who (under
God) has wrought this Blessed Change: A Change by which He rendered His
Subjects the most happy People of Europe, and himself the most Glorious and
Admired Prince of Christendom; who by a Conduct truly Royal, could reduce a
People Plunged, and almost overwhelmed in Confusion, into a Quiet not to be
expected, hardly to be hoped for; and by his incomparable Prudence assuage a
Faction blown up into a Tempest, more Violent and Deaf than Winds, and Seas. In
what Words, what Deeds, can we express a Gratitude equal to such a Merit?
Statues of Marble, and Tryumphal Arches may pay a lesser Debt of Veneration;
but for this Blessing, such are too poor acknowledgments. Let all True
Englishmen raise him a Better, a more lasting, and more Worthy Monument, a
Monument of Grateful Hearts: Let us Eternize His Glorious Name through all
Generations; Let our Applauses last for ever: But above all, let us express our
Love and Esteem for His Memory, by our unfeigned Loyalty, true Faith, and
Allegiance to His most Royal, and most Equal Brother, the Brother of His
Virtues, Our present Gracious Sovereign King JAMES the Second; whom God grant
long to Live and Reign over us, to the unspeakable Joy and Comfort of all His
Majesty's Good Subjects, and to the Confusion of His Enemies.

Note, that the year of our Lord in the running Title is to be supposed to
begin according to the Almanac, in January, and not on the 25th of March.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 15. l. penul. r. tacking. p. 59. l. 15. r. as was said. p. 69. l. 4. r.
Leoline. p. 113. l. 3. for, Bar. r. Court. p. 149. l. 20. for, Bar. r. Court.
p. 185. l. 17. f. Proceedings. r. Judgment.

THE TABLE.
A.
ADmiralty, Page 198 Addresses Loyal, 72, 115, 175 Ailworth Chamberlain of
London, 180 Aldermen of London changed, 183 Anglesey Earl, 153 Archbishop of
St. Andrews, barbarously Murdered, 53 Argile Earl, 129 Armstrong Sir Thomas,
200 Arundel Earl, 159 Association, 93, 138 Aston Lord, 80 Airs Captain, 147
B.
BAntham lost to the Dutch, 164 Bedloe William, 34, 64, 86 Bellasis Lord, 28,
45, 47 Best Elias, 203 Bethel Slingsby, 84, 91 Bishops, accused unjustly for
Papists, 47 Whether to sit upon Trials, 52 Bishops in Scotland, their Letter to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, 141 Black Box, 74 Bonfires forbid, 77, 157, 185
Box Ralph, 148, 152, 154 Bristol Artillery Company their Loyal Address, 137
Broom, Coroner, 165, 168
C.
CAmbridge University, Their Address 139 Can, Sir Robert, 88 Captain Cheek
Lieutenant of the Tower, 53 Caryl, John, 77 Castlemain Earl, 77, 81 Celier
Elizabeth, 59, 79, 86, 185 Clarendon, Earl, 95, 194 Coleman, Edward, 27, 34
College, Steven, 119, 120, 121 A Comet seen, 92 Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Preferments, 125, 202 Common Council in London, Loyal 167, 170
Conspiracy against the King and Duke Discovered, 173 Congratulation on the
Discovery, 175 Coningsmark Count, 135, 136 Conventicles, 129, 147 Conwey Lord,
99 Cornish Henry, 84, 91, 156, 158
D.
DAnby Earl, 43, 44, 45, 50, 51, 113, 114, 193 Dangerfield Thomas, 59, 79, 81
Daniel, Peter, 180, 182 Danvers, Henry, 206 Dashwood Francis, 180, 182 Dean,
Sir Anthony, 55 Declaration upon the Dissolution of the Two last Parliaments,
109 For a Thanksgiving, 179 De Puy, 114 Drought Extraordinary, 121 Durham City,
201
E.
Ambassador from Morocco, 160 from Bantam, 160 Essex Earl, 98, 177 Exclusion
Bill, 49, 89, 93, 94, 95, 99, 108 Expedients proposed, 47. 107
F.
FAsts, 11, 28, 43 Feversham, Earl, 86, 95 Finch, Lord Chancellor, his
excellent Speech in Parliament, 16, Dies, 159 Fish Dye, 196 Fitzharris, Edward,
107, 110, 112, 113, 117, 119 French Protestants come over, 124 Frost
Remarkable, 188
G.
GAscoigne Sir Thomas, 64, 65 Prince George of Denmark Marries the Lady Anne,
178 Elected into the Order of the Garter, 180 Godfrey Sir Edmundbury, 27, 29
Godolphin, Lord, 197 Goodenough, Richard, 126 Gold, Sir Thomas, 156, 158
Graham, Richard, 145 Sergeant Gregory, Speaker, 43
H.
HAil Storm, Remarkable, 75 Hallifax Earl, 95, 154 Hamden John, 186, 195 Harris
Benjamin, 69 Hide, Laurence, 95 Honors conferred, 160 Holloway, James, 197
Howard, of Escrick, Lord, 117, 118 How, Sir Scroop, 207 Humphrevile, Charles,
81
I.
JEffreys, Sir George, 89, 116, 182 Jenkins, Sir Leoline, 69, 197 Jenner, Sir
Thomas, 182 The five Jesuits Tried and Executed, 55 Ignoramus Juries, 118,
120, 126, 127, 146 Jones, Sir Thomas, 90, 182 Ireland, Pickering, and Groves,
35
K.
KIng Charles I. His Statue, and Inscription, 169 A Monument and Funeral Voted
for Him, 4 King Charles II. His Statue, and Inscription, 199 His Admirable
Prudence and Conduct, 208
L.
LAnghorn Richard, 55 Langhorn, Junior, 83 Landsdown, Lord, 191 Lauderdale,
Duke, 14 Lewis, Sir Simon, 84 London, Petition, 97 Address to their Members,
103 Loyal Address. 116 Lord Mayor of London Arrested, 165 The Act disowned by
the Common Council, 167 Loyal Lieutenancy of London, 116 Vid. Quo Warranto
M.
LOrd Mayor and Aldermen of London go to Windsor to Congratulate, 57 Arested,
165 Middlesex Grand Jurys. 82 Loyal Address, 130 Militia, 33 Monmouth Duke, 54,
57, 60, 74, 79, 80, 163, 185, 187 Moor, Sir John, the Loyal Lord Mayor of
London, 116, 125, 149, 159
N.
NEwmarket, Fire, 164 News Factious, silenced, 75 109, 158 North, Sir Francis,
90, 109, 181 North, Sir Dudly, 148 Norwich, Loyal Address, 115
O.
OSsery Earl, 86 Otes, Titus, 33, 124, 198, 203, 204 Oxford, the King and Queen
received there, 105 Parliament there, 105 University condemn 27 Propositions
Seditious and impious, 178
P.
PArliament. The long one Dissolved, 37 Another called at Westminster, 40.
Dissolved, 56. Another called at Westminster, 58. Sit. 87. Dissolved, 98.
Another called and sit at Oxford, 105. Dissolved, 108 Papists Banished 10 Miles
from London and Westminster, 29, 32, Not to remove above five Miles from their
homes, 31. Excluded from sitting in Parliament, 32, 33 Payton, Sir Robert, 59,
77 Papillon, Thomas, 85, 165, 202 Pemberton, Sir Francis, 109, 159, 182 Pepys,
Samuel, 55 Peter, Lord, 187 Petitioning in an illegal manner, 61, 62, 69
Pilkinton, Thomas, 125 158 Plot business, its beginning, 26 Plunket, Oliver,
116, 118, 119 Pope burning, 59, 157 Popish Lords Committed, 28, Impeacht, 35,
45, 47. Bailed, 194 Powis, Countess, 59, 75, 77, Prance, Miles, 38 Pritchard
Sir William, 156, 165, 167, 182, 202 Privy Council, 45 Proclamations, for a
Fast, 28, 43. Against Papists, 29, 31, 32. Against illegal Petitions, 62. For
Discovery, 88. Against Highway-men, 70, 205. Against Duels, 70 Against News
Pamphlets, 75. For Apprehension of Conspirators, 174. Of Neutrality, 196
Pretections of the Commons discharged, 8
Q.
QAarrel in the House of Commons, 32 Quo Warranto, London, 146, 170, 171, 172,
181
R.
RAces of English Horses in France, 163 Reading, Nathaniel, 46 Rebellion in
Scotland, 54, 204 Review of the Land Forces, 201 Rich, Peter, 154 Riots, 107,
157, 166, 184 Roswel, Thomas, 203 Rouse, John, 119, 126, 176, 177 Rupert Prince
Palatine Dies, 159 Russel Lord, 176, 177
S.
SAunders, Sir Edmund, 159, 182 Sawyer, Sir Robert, 11, 12 Scaffolds in
Westminster Hall removed, 169 Scotland, Rebellion there, 54, 204 Loyal
Parliament there, 121 Their Acts, 123, 128 Bishops there write to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, 141 Scrogs Sir William, 21, 58, 64, 90 Seymer,
Speaker, 43, 90 Shaftsbury, Earl, 8, 93, 119, 127, 128, 144, 161 Shandois,
Lord, 73 Sheriffs of London Committed to the Tower, 149, Bailed, Ibid. Shute,
Samuel, 125 Sidney, Algernoon, 185 Smith, Aaron, 183 Smith, Francis, 109
Staley, William, 34 Stafford, Vicount, 76, 91, 92 Statue of King Charles, 1.
169 Of King Charles 2. 208 Symonds, Sir James, 83
T.
TAngier, 78, 87, 93, 94, 191 Tasburgh, Richard, 76 Thanksgiving Meeting
Prohibited, 142 -- Appointed for the Discovery of the Conspiracy, 179, 181
Thin, Thomas, 135, 136 Titchburn, Sir Henry, 77 Trade with France Prohibited,
10 Treby Sir George, 176, 182 Tulse, Sir Henry, 184 Tumult at Edinburgh, 142,
at Dublin, 144
V.
VIenna, Siege and Relief, 190 Votes Printed, 90
W.
WAkeman Sir George, 27, 56 Walcot, Hone, and Rouse, 176 War with France,
promoted by the House of Commons, 5, 7, 9, 10, 12 Ward, Sir Patience, 167
Weston, Sir Richard, 90 Whitfield, Thomas, 69 Williamson, Sir Joseph, Secretary
of State 31, 32, 39 Wilmore, John, 145, 156 Withens, Sir Francis, 72, 88 Wi.
Williams, Speaker, 88, 107
Y.
YOrk, the Most Illustrious Duke, 30, 39, 40, 49, 57, 58, 60, 66, 68, 87, 93,
94, 95, 96, 132, 137, 139, 140, 141, 143, 146, 174, 198, 200, 201.
Some Books Printed for Sam. Lowndes over against Exeter-Exchange.
1. AN Introduction to the Old English History. Written by Robert Brady M. D.
Folio.

2. A general Chronological History of France, beginning before the Reign of
King Pharamond, and ending with the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, by the
Sieur de Mezeray, Fol.

3. Parthanissa, that most Famed Romance, the six Volumes Complete, by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Ossory. Fol.

4. Clelia, an excellent New Romance, the whole Work, in five Parts. Fol.

5. The Complete Horseman, and expert Farrier, Written by Thomas de Gray, the
5th Edition.

6. Saducismus Triumphatus, or a full and plain Evidence concerning Witches and
Apparitions, by Joseph Glanvil Chaplain in Ordinary to his late Majesty, with
some Additions by Dr. Moor, and Dr. Horneck, the 2d Edition.

7. Two choice and useful Treatises, the one Lux Orientalis, Written by Mr.
Glanvil; the other, A Discourse of Truth, by the Reverend Dr. Rust, Lord Bishop
of Bromer in Ireland, with Annotations on them both by Dr. More.

8. The Great Law of Consideration, Written by Dr. Horneck, the 4th Edition.

9. Papismus Regiae, potestatis eversor. Reverendus admodum Episcopus Lincoln.
Anglice Scripsit.

10. An Anatomick-Chirurgical Treatise of Glandules, and Strumaes, or
Kings-Evil-Swellings, etc. by John Brown one of His Majesty's Chyrurgions.

11. Paul Festeaus French and English Grammar, being the Newest and exactest
Method now extant for the attaining to the Elegancy and Purity of the French
Tongue, the Fifth Edition.

12. Claudius Maugers Letters, in French and English, the Second Edition, with
Additions.

13. The Mirror of Fortune, or the True Characters of Fate and Destiny.

14. The Situation of Paradise found out, being an History of a late Pilgrimage
unto the Holy Land.

15. Credulity, and Incredulity in things Divine and Spiritual, by Morick
Causabon, D. D. Prebendary of Canterbury.

16. The French Rogue, being a pleasant History of his Life and Fortune.

17. Cicero against Cataline, in four Invective Orations, Englished by
Christopher Wase.

18. China, and France, in Two Parts.

19. The Fire of the Altar, by Dr. Horneck, the 2d Edition.

20. Cambridge Jests, or Witty Alarms for Melancholy Spirits, the 2d Edition.

21. Idea Eloquentiae. Authore Joanne de Kerhuel. S. E. M.

An Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will be Published the next Term, these two
Books, ( viz.) A Complete History of England; etc. in Folio, Written by Dr.
Brady.

The Crucified Jesus, etc. Written by Dr. Anthony Horneck.


