AN ABSTRACT OF THOSE ANSWERS Which were given In the ASSEMBLY of the LORDS
in the High Court of PARLIAMENT, UNTO THE NINE REASONS, SENT UP FROM THE HOUSE
OF COMMONS, Against the VOTING of BISHOPS in PARLIAMENT.

Printed for N. Butter. 1641.

That Bishops ought not to vote in PARLIAMENT.




2 It is propter majus bonum Ecclesiae.

3 The Apostles unnecessarily put themselves to more hindrances, to work for
their livelihood, Act. 20. 24. 1. These. 2. 9. 2. These. 3. 8.

4 What hinderance can it be to their calling, that once in three years, when
they must necessarily attend the Convocation, they divide some part of that
short time to the attendance of Parliament?





2 The Bishop hopes they will give themselves wholly to that, and not to my
other Trade or Vocation.

3 Wholly, in a Moral, and not in a Mathematical sense, that will admit no
Latitude: Else, there might the same exception be taken against their just care
of provision for their household affairs.



H. 8.

2 So are they by the same Statute, because the Lords have declared, that the
Bishops vote here by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: And all Canons that
cross with those, are there abolished.

3 So are they by the same Statute, as thwarting the Kings Prerogative to call
Bishops by Summons to vote in Parliament.

4 So they are by the vote in the House of Commons, 21. Maii 1641. because are
they not confirmed by Act of Parliament.

5 This Argument was in a sort deserted by M. Perpoint, and confessed to be but
an Argumentum ad hominem.



are Pares, their Equals: And, as Bracton tells us, Par in Parem non habet
imperium. What has Canonical Obedience to do with a vote in Parliament,
declared in this Bill to be no Ecclesiastical, but a secular affair?

2 This Argument reaches not the two Archbishops, discharged in the Rubric
from this Oath; and therefore is no reason for the passing of this Bill.





2 Many Peers have been created for their lives only, and the Earl of
Surrey for the life of his Father, who yet voted in this House.

3 The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are chosen for one Parliament only,
and yet use their Legislative power. Nor will their being elected difference
their Cause; for the Lords use that power, in a greater Eminence, who are not
elected.

4 A Burgess, that has a Freehold but for term of life only, may vote and
assent to a Law in Parliament.

5 No such exception was ever heard of in the Diets of Germany, the Corteses of
Spain, or the three Estates of France, where the Prelates vote in all these
Points, with the Nobility and the Commons.





2 This may be said of all the Kings great Officers, of all the noble members
of both Houses, who may be conceived, as well as Bishops, to have their
expectances, and consequently to be deprived by this Reason of voting in
Parliament.

3 This Argument reaches not at the two Archbishops, and so falls short of the
votes, which are to be taken away by this Bill.



For they shall not vote as Judges in their own Cause, when they are legally
charged: And if they should vote, what were that to the purpose, when the
Lay-Peeres are still four to one? The Bishops (assisted with a double number
of Mitred Abbots, and Priors) could not hinder the Laws made against the Court
of Rome, the Alien Cardinals, and Prelates, the Provisors, the Suitors to the
Popes Consistory under Ed. 3. Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. much more may those emergent
exorbitances of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be soon curbed and redressed
in this inequality of votes between the Temporal and Spiritual Lords. So as
this Argument does not so much hurt the votes, as it quails the courage of the
Bishops, who may justly fear, by this and the next Argument, that the taking
away of their votes is but a kind of forerunner to the abolishing of their
jurisdiction.





2 There will be found Peers enough in the upper House to reform any thing
that is amiss in the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, although the 26. Prelates
should be so wicked as to oppose it: As there were found Peers enough in that
noble House, to curb the Court of Rome, and the Revenues of the Cardinals
under Ed. 3. To meet with the Provisors under Rich. 2. To put all the Clergy
into a Praemunire under Hen. 8. And to reform the Religion, 1. Eliz.
notwithstanding the Opposition of all the Bishops.





FINIS.

