THE Women's complaint AGAINST TOBACCO: Or, An excellent help to Multiplication.
Pespicuously showing the annoyance that it brings to Mankind, and the great
deprivation of Comfort and delight to the Female Sex, with a special and
significant order set forth by the Women for suppressing the general use
thereof amongst their Husbands, they finding that Tobacco is the only Enemy to
Pleasure and Procreation as they now plainly make it appear in this their
Declaration:

London, Printed in the Year. 1675.

The Women's Complaint against Tobacco.
AT a Sessions of Women lately holden at Gossips Hall; amongst the rest of
their grievances which were then debated of, this great question arose,
concerning the use of Tobacco: whether it was necessary that their Husbands
should take Tobacco or no? a two minutes silence was made, (which was a great
wonder) one more graver then the rest, begins to declare her self an utter
Enemy to Tobacco, in this manner.

Neighbors and Friends quoth she, I have been married to my Husband about
fourteen years, this Man has been all his time a great Smoaker, and to tell
you the truth I was never got with child by him but once, and that was so
feebly done, that I may boldly say it was not half gotten, though he is a Man
as likely as any of his Neighbors, and as for my own part I am sure I am not
in the least defective, but am as apt and fit for the work of generation as any
of my Neighbors, nay I may say as likely to be got with child as any Woman in
England, let the other be what she will, yet this Man cannot do the feat, and
the reason why it is not done, I must clearly impute to his smoking that
Infernal Indian Weed, which they call Tobacco, as for example. My next
Neighbor Mrs. Twattle, her Husband and she have been married but nine years,
and she has brought him nine brave lusty Children, well gotten Children, and
the reason is, because her Husband never takes Tobacco; this I think may be a
strong evidence that this filthy Weed is altogether destructive to procreation
and robs a Woman of that sweet natural delight, which she ought to receive from
her Husband or from some body else: Thus much I can testify of my self, which
I desire you would take into consideration, and proceed to further Judgment
according to your best knowledge.

This witty Oration so tickled the fancy and imagination of the rest of this
Female Assembly, that they could scarce forbear speaking all at once, but
silence was again commanded, but could not be obtained for a good while, at
length a handsome, comely, buxome Woman stands up, and desires to be heard, and
passes her sentence thus. Tobacco! O cursed Tobacco? I wish that Man had been
hanged that first brought thee over into England; for I have a pretty young Man
to my Husband, as you all know Neighbors; and by his countenance appears to be
a good Woman's Man, but I am sure it is I that find the contrary, I am sure I
have heard my Grandmother say, (but indeed she was old) that one Man was enough
for one Woman) but (O this damned Tobacco) I am sure I find it nothing so, for
I could dispense with two or three such Men as my Husband; Alas, what is once
in three Weeks? or once a Month for a young brisk Woman who could willingly
enjoy a Man every night; to be sure; if not a little in the day time? Well, if
this be the effects of Tobacco, I am resolved my Husband shall leave it off, or
I Will leave him off, and betake my self to some other Man, that shall take no
Tobacco, but shall refresh himself and me, sometimes at the Tavern with good
brisk Wine, and a good Dinner or Supper, and sometimes carry me to see a Play,
and sometimes cross the water to Spring-Garden, and there eat and drink well;
and when the Night comes he shall wait on me home to my Chamber, and there
briskly to supply the wants of a longing Woman, as it may be my self; all this
I will have instead of Tobacco, or else I Will want of my will; who can endure to
have a smoaky Chimny lie by her all night nay more then all this, the stinking
Brute must kiss you, thinking to satisfy you with that; for alas he can do
nothing else: For there is no Oil left in the Lamp, that is all wasted and
consumed by smoking, and fuming that stinking unnatural, destructive Devil,
Tobacco: O how I am transported with hatred and aversion toward this Weed,
when I call to mind how destructive it is to the precious Nature of Man, which
was made for the supply of us Women; and not to be spung'd up by Tobacco, whose
Original sprung from Hell, for the Devil (who thinks he never ensnares men fast
enough) invented this stinking dry Weed, that Men taking of it their mouths
will so stink, and their throats be so parched and scorched with the heat
thereof, that they must drink excessively to quench the inflammation thereof,
till at length they become drunk; then are they fit for all manner of
debauchery, which is the ready road to destruction. How say you Neighbors have
not I spoke divinely, I am confident that there is never a Woman here, but will
willingly set her Seal to the truth of these Objections, which I have here
experimentally declared before this worthy Assembly. And if it comes to my turn
to speak again I can yet say more on this subject, which may be as much
significant to the good and benefit of our Sex as what I have already spoken.

She having thus spoken they signified their assention by a general applause of
what she had declared: but still striving who should be next; there was a great
and terrible combustion amongst themselves: till at length a Doctors Wife
claimed the pre-eminence; saying, that she (from the experience she had learned
from her Husbands books) could discover and lay open unto them, the many and
injurious impediments that were occasioned in the body of Man by the poisonous
fume of the Tobacco: and how obnoxious it is to the Seminal; and luxurious
parts of those Men, that take delight in sucking in the venom of that dull
Leaf.

The rest hearing her begin thus learnedly were resolved to be silent a while,
and bridle their tongues, expecting that she would unfold some secret evil that
lay lurking in this broad Leaf of Tobacco: So she begun her discourse after
this skilful method.

Neighbors (quoth she) it has been my fortune to have been twice married; Yet
I must also let you know, that I am still but young in years, not surpassing
the age of thirty: I was married to my first Husband but three years, and then
he dyed; and in that time I had no child by him; nor half that satisfaction
from him, which a young Woman (as I was) might expect: but I knew no better
then; though I have had a large and comfortable experience since I buried him,
and married the Doctor; who is now my Husband by whom I have had six Children,
and all the delights which are due to the Marriage bed. I once took an occasion
to ask him what he thought might be the reason that I had no Children by my
former Husband, who in his life time appeared to be a likelyer Man then
himself: he made me this Answer, that he took too much Tobacco: For (says he)
Tobacco is of it self hot and dry, and destroys the Radical Moisture; Now I
hope you know what is meant by the Radical Moisture, for it is the seed in Man
which propagates and begets Children in women; Now that being wanting, those
Men are altogether unfit for procreation; and this vacancy of Nature is
occasioned by Men's smoking that base destructive Weed called Tobacco: Nay a
further account I can yet give you of it is operations; for reading lately in
one of my Husbands books I found it thus written, first in Latin;

Destrnctio generis humani Nicotiana: Semen radicale exaruit, Pericranio
venenum infundit; Sic vita humana perfecta. This I did not understand, but
reading on I found it thus Englished. The Weed Tobacco is the destruction of
humane Race, for it dryes up the Radical Moisture, and throws such poisonous
vapors into the Brain, that it sends many untimely unto their Graves.

This being heard they began to be weary of silence every one striving who
should give this Doctress the greatest applause: but she desired them to
forbear, for she had not finished her discourse; so then they again seated
themselves as before. Now says she, which of you all will suffer your Husbands
or Bedfellows, to take this cursed Tobacco that fills their heads full of
inflammations, conflagrations, proclamations, incendiaries, combustions, and
such like hard words, which sends them to their graves in the prime of their
age; Nay moreover it robs and deprives us women of that consolation and delight
which every young woman ought to enjoy in a full measure.

I say it steals away all those happinesses from us, even whilst our Husbands
are alive with us, and at last tumbles them over the perch as they call it, by
consumption Coughs, and such like languishing distemper.

At that they all unanimously cried out away with this cursed Tobacco, this
venomous Indian Weed, we do clearly vote it down to be a common and public
Enemy to Men, in robbing of them of their health and strength but a private and
secret Enemy to Women in robbing them of their pleasure and Delight. Silence
again was ordered by the grand Matron of the Assembly, who to tell you the
truth was well stricken in years, and yet she would very fain have had her vote
amongst the rest, but she was very gently and mildly prohibited by the younger
sort they very fairly alleging that there was enough of them to manage this
cause, whose warmer blood runs briskly through their veins, and truly it dos
altogether belong to us, for Tobacco could in no wise be injurious to her, whom
Time already had deprived of the enjoyments of mankind, but the harm it did was
to those who were capable of receiving the benefits of Nature, but were made
destitute thereof by reason of their sottish Husbands, who make Chimneys of
their throats and change their Teeth from their natural color to be as black
as the Chimney stock; it is we I say, that have just cause to make our timely
and most just complaint against this surfeiting, unnatural stinking Weed,
least in a few years we find a dissolution of mankind, and then I am sure the
World will soon be at an end, for we Women be we never so active, cannot
pleasure one another in that great work of generation, neither can we Multiply:
Poor Souls we shall be starved unless a speedy course be taken for the
extirpation and rooting up of this great and destructive enemy to our mournful
Sex.

The old Gentlewoman hearing these great reasons, did willingly give place to
the younger Dames, confessing the truth, that her dancing days were done, and
she cared no more for Man, then Man cared for her, but yet Girls quoth she, I
have a fellow feeling of your sad and languishing conditions; Well, well my
pretty Rogues stand up for your privilledges, I was young once and could as ill
dispense with a defective Man, as the briskest Dame in town, though I say it my
self, and truly my pretty Lambs, I must advise you to make the best use of your
time, and take away those things, and causes, which in any wise do obstruct or
hinder your delight and pleasure in this World: For truly, old age will quickly
come. Time to my knowledge has Wings, and flies away with a swift pace, O
methinks it is but yesterday since I embraced a pretty young Man a friend of
mine, when as alas it is now above twenty years since, yet I cannot forget the
sweet delight and pleasure I then received: In my Conscience Girls, if I should
talk of it a little longer, old bal'd pated Time would retreat, and I should
become young again; but O alas the Chollick now does gripe me, the Cramp does
draw my Limbs together sorely, Diseases encompass me round about, and I must
give way to younger heads to manage this great work of Women-kind, and when the
Bill is passed for the voting down of this filthy Tobacco, if I cannot put my
hand to it, to show my willingness and my well wishings to our Sex, I will put
one finger to it, and thus I will take my leave of you, finding my self
something faint, in speaking what I have said already, Ah this old Age, I say
it cannot be hid, be sure you vigorously proceed against this cursed Tobacco,
that is your open enemy, and so farewell.

With that they all gave her many and hearty thanks, for her good counsel and
advise, either of them being more sensible of the great injuries it did their
Husbands (and so consequently themselves) then she was, by reason old Age had
not yet overtaken them.

Now again, it was to be considered who should speak next, all of them still
having something to say and declare, though much to the same effect which had
been said already; till at length a nimble tongued Lass, desired that her
verdict might be heard, not doubting (as she told them) that what she had to
offer and propose, might be as significant and effectual to the business in
hand, as any thing that had been said and declared by any of them: for truly
she had the sense of fellow feeling upon her as much as the best of them,
though as yet not actually known the pleasures of Man: for (says she) I am now
upwards of seventeen, and by your selves you may know that a Woman in my
condition has a longing desire to be further satisfied concerning the enjoyment
of mankind.

They hearing her so violently urge upon this point, gave order that she should
be heard with great attention and diligence, not knowing but her aggrievances
might equally compare with their own, so they commanded her to speak as boldly
as her Sex and tender years would admit and allow of: so she declared her self
briefly after this manner. Neighbors (quoth she) I understand that the drift
of our present business is to disanul and make void this Weed Tobacco, and to
prohibit and forbid all mankind in general as well Batchelors as married Men,
from taking or smoking any more of it, from this time forward, and for
evermore.

Now the reasons that I shall infer upon my own account (for I suppose you will
expect that I should nominate some principal grounds) shall be these. I being
as yet a Virgin (though it may be contrary to my own will shall be afraid to
marry, fearing I should marry and tie my self to a Man that should take
Tobacco, and that I thereby should be deprived of those enjoyments and delight
which every Woman expects after Marriage: For you do all agree with me that
Tobacco is the great Thief that robs all our Sex of their natural pleasures:
The apprehension and fear of this Tobacco for ought I know, may be the utter
ruin and destruction, not only of my self, but of many thousand Damsels more,
for it may cause them never to marry, expecting no comfort nor consolation from
a smoaker: so that they will be forced to live and dye Maids as they call us,
then shall we be forced, as our great Grandmothers have left upon record, to
lead Apes in Purgatory; the sense of which torment I think is sufficient to
dissuade all Men from taking Tobacco, if they have any tenderness of hearts
toward us, and to persuade you the Governors of this honorable Assembly to
enact something so strong, that all Men may be afraid hence-forward to smoke
any more of that stinking weed: and that I leave to your wiser breasts to go
forward with; for you have been (as you have declared) sufficient sufferers by
your Husbands smoking this fuming and suffocating Indian Leaf. She having thus
ended they gave a general consent to what she had said to be very significant;
and now they proceed to make an order order for the prohibition of their
Husbands taking Tobacco, and thus they begun.

Imprimis, We do declare that our Will and Pleasure is, that no Man whatsoever,
Married or unmarryed, under the Age of fifty years old, (then started up a
young woman and said, pray let it be sixty) No, no, said she hold your peace, I
say no Man under the Age of fifty years old, shall at any time, or upon any
occasion whatsoever, take, smoke, or draw into his Mouth the smoke of that
cursed stinking Weed called Tobacco, for the grounds and Reasons
abovementioned, which are sufficiently known to our selves. Now if any Man
shall at any time he perverse, and will not obey these our orders; then it
shall be lawful for the Wife of such a man, to choose, and take unto her self,
a Friend, or Gallant, such a man as shall seem most pleasant in her Eyes: this
we do license and permit in case of the like default.

FINIS.

