AN Additional Discovery OF Mr. ^OGER L'ESTRANGE HIS FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE
Popish Plot: WHEREIN Dr. TITUS OATS, And the rest of the King's Evidences ARE
VINDICATED From the Aspersions cast upon them in that PAMPHLET. TOGETHER With
some New Observations upon the said Discovery, not heretofore Published. In a
Letter to Dr. Titus Oats, By B. W.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1680.

SIR,
I Having been lately presented by a Friend with a Pamphlet, entitled, A
further Discovery of the Plot, Dedicated to your self Doctor, by Roger
L'Estrange, and called the Second Edition: I have perused the same, and weighed
it seriously, and considering the Consequences thereof, as it is full of gross
Mistakes, Fallacies, Equivocations and Ironies, both in the Title Page and Body
of it; I have spent a few leisure hours to make my Observations upon it, which
I recommend to your better Judgment. In the Title Page is employed new Fact to
deceive the Reader, but the said Author's Subject is only his own fallacious
inferences of part of your Fact, as the Devil did by the Scriptures with our
Savior, for his own Ends. In the beginning of his Epistle to your self, as a
Theme to work upon, he sets up a man of straw, a spawn of his own brain by
charging you with saying, That you told him he was a Papist, and that he
reported you were a Fanatic, and upon this Foundation he frames his whole
discourse, good Gentleman, as he says, to discharge himself and you from those
two Calumnies (as he calls them) and as a proof of this assertion (if you will
believe him) he tells you, It was improved by a couple of Nonsensical and
Seditious Libels, which he names in his Pamphlet, as also give you the style
and character of the Author by hearsay, a small threadbare Solicitor in the
Old Bailey, which, as he says, often uses your name, and makes bolder with it
than stands with the Dignity of your Figure in the Government. It seems he
would monopolize the abusing of you; but this I take to be a much more unequal
coupling, than was by Doctor Wild between Monsueir L'Estrange and Strange Lee:
For whether or no there be any such Solicitor there, or if there be, that he
was Author of such things, or if he was, that it was with your privity or
knowledge, which is thereby plainly and strongly implied, but aspersedly and
groundlesly insinuated, is altogether uncertain, and I am satisfied will hardly
be found true by a packt Jury (to use his own Phrase) upon that Evidence of
his, and for the truth of it, I doubt he cannot find a Second.

Then the Author proceeds to tell you, he is reviled by being called a Papist,
a Lessener of the Plot, a Disparager of the King's Evidence, which he cannot
bear, but resolves either frankly to acquit himself, or sink under it, and I
appeal to your self and every impartial man, if by that Book he merits not the
latter, and also the same reward he allows due to his fellow Scribler, though
upon several Foundations, and I am sure the unerring Rule is, he that is not
with, is against.

I think the Author conceives he has done you Doctor no small honor, to make
you his Ghostly Father, and indeed it is enforced very vigorously by an
imprecation of his hopes of Heaven, and therefore he thinks you cannot without
breach of the Rules of Charity, but believe he is a true Son of the Church of
England. Indeed Doctor, I cannot foresee why you should doubt of the Veracity
of this Assertion, seeing you have it from the mouth of one that never brake
Faith with Man or Woman, nor ever betrayed any, unless you mean to have further
and more demonstrable Evidence before you lend him your belief; for in these
Cases I know you generally direct your Judgment by the infallible Rule of our
blessed Savior, that Trees must be known best by their Fruit (not their
Leaves;) if so, then give me your patience further to acquaint you with my
Sentiments of this his second Elaborate Work, and see what I can find how he
has made good his Title Page or his Assertion, and how good a Son Mr.
L'Estrange has proved himself thereby, to his Mother the Church of England.

He says, he is not without Bowels of humanity to men of other persuasions, but
I am persuaded one that dares not take upon himself to affirm he deserves such
a Title with that Epithet he challenges, yet would also allow them Bowels of
Christianity; but I know there are various degrees of Members in a true Church*
as Babes, and others of a stronger constitution, but I shall not determine by
his expressions which of them I take, the Author but leave that to more
discerning Judgments. He pretends to be mighty plain and open hearted to you,
for he tells you as a Friend, as he says, he has moxe Charity for a Moral
Pagan than twenty Hypocritical Christians. I shall not give you any trouble of
my thoughts, who this worthy Author means, either by Pagan or Christian, but
only assure you, if it were true, this is one of the main parts of his
Discovery in that Pamphlet, especially as to me, for indeed I have not learned
that distinction of a Christian before, but always from the Woes pronounced in
Scripture against Hypocrites, I took them not to be Christians.

This kind Author says, he has a natural Veneration for the Government, and
all that love it, the King's Loyal Witnesses, and Preservers of his Life, he
believes the Plot, as much of it as every good Subject ought, nay, and pawns
his Conscience (which doubtless is large) you do not believe more of it, for
all this give me leave to tell you Doctor, I am of a quite contrary opinion,
for I know you are of a sharper sight than to have your Judgment eclipsed with
a Fogg; yet truly upon the whole Scope and Matter of his Discourse in that
Pamphlet, I am satisfied he could not (though I know others do and would, and
know they ought) have afforded more than a natural veneration for all those
things; but I may tell you Doctor, though not the Author (lest I should be
offensive to hi^ natural Judgment;) That things of God (as I take this in a
great measure to be) are not to be rightly understood by mere natural men, and
in that capacity only he must herein be certainly apprehended, as may more
fully be deduced from his following Words, that he cannot believe what he does
not, nor cannot, as that Bedingfield is alive again, and what is this to you,
and what can rationally be deduced from it, but that a Crack-fart of the Nation
having stuffed it into his Fardel, without any privity of yours, for ought
appears, it must be made use of as a Reflection upon you, and truly this as
strongly Seconded by a Learned Instance of buttered Turnips, but it is a very
slippery one, and indeed as saucy as all the rest, and of as little moment with
men of sound understanding, because it plainly intimates your Evidence is as
little to be credited as that Assertion, but perchance his opinion may have
some influence upon those two sorts of Persons he appropriates to his Party by
these Words (our crafty Knaves and our foolish) but I hope of no other. But
when I came to consider of the Conclusion of that Paragraph (That where
Authority had passed a Sentence, there is no longer any place for Hesitation or
Demurr) and an hand of remark upon it by Capital Letters; I had been amazed,
but that I did awaken and rouse my self by calling to mind some Proverbial
Sayings, that there is none so blind as he that will not see, and that some
sort of Persons had need have good Memories, and the like; for this made me
conclude, that either the Author of that Pamphlet did not understand what he
had uttered in his unworthy Reflections upon you Doctor, or else he did not
consider that by this his Conclusion (which all sober men must agree to be
true) he had produced and published a full and sufficient proof against
himself, how he had thereby (I mean his Reflections) put an Affront not to be
forgiven or forgotten, not upon you alone, but upon His Sacred Majesty, the
Government, the Justice and Reputation of the Nation; In regard His Majesty
publicly in His Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament had so far owned
yours and others discovery of this damnable and hellish Plot, That He was
graciously pleased therein to declare His real satisfaction in it, and gave
them His Royal Assent and Direction to prosecute the same, which was followed
with an Eloquent one of the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor, and pressed
and forced with Cogent Arguments and Reasons, and in regard the House of Peers
had owned the same by their Votes, their Committing of Criminals therein, and
other their Proceedings thereupon, as also the House of Commons by their Votes,
their Addresses, their Impeachments, their Committings of Criminals therein,
and other their Proceedings thereupon; the Lord Chief Justice his joining with
the opinion of the then House of Commons, and his ready and cheerful committing
of Persons accused thereof upon your single Oath, his and other the Learned
Judges and Justices of the Peace in a Judicial manner proceeding against
several of the said Criminals, and the Verdicts of many Juries, consisting of
many Loyal Persons given upon yours and others Testimony, with much more of
this kind, which is so well and generally known, that I need not give my self
the trouble of writing, nor you of reading them, and truly Doctor, the
consideration of these things have given me ample satisfaction, and so I doubt
not but it will do every really true Christian Englishman, or else to me it
seems only strange.

But before this Author comes to his full Vindication, he must have another
fling at you Doctor, for he says he has a great value for your Function,
Employment and Charracter; what these are in his Equivocal meaning, no body
certainly can tell but himself, and you need not doubt but he well understands
himself, or at least he would have you and the world to believe so by his
Publishng it, for he still keeps the Staff in his own hands for to make himself
Judge; For he believes you as far as he ought, which according to true
enterpretation, is, that he dares not speak plain English, and has what ever
the Author says, too much of the French droll in him. I must confess I must
declare my self, not to have so much Christian Charity, as to belive all those
Characters the Author gives of himself; that is, I do not believe he is Friend
to downright dealing, but I can without Hesitation believe that he is a great
Friend to Liberty of Speech; to an easy Gloss an easy Companion, as much as
any man, or else he is much wronged: but then he tells you Doctor of your
calling him Rogue twenty times, for which he thanks you and forgives you; but
this is but a Copy of his Countenance, and used as a mere Shooing-horn to draw
on the like likewise of calling you Rogue I know its a Word you often use, and
its twenty to one you were right nineteen of the twenty if not all, but its not
to be taken in the Common sense of the Vulgar usage, to a man of vile and base
Actions; but as a differing Character of an Adversary to the truth of yours
and other's Evidence, in the great matter in question; and in that sense only
you so frequently use it, especially when your Zeal is too much provoked with
opposition, and I fear his hopes will fail him in your better acquaintance; for
I know if ever it may be it must be upon his amendment, and what hopes there is
of it that I see not.

For in his next Paragraph, he tells you barefacedly and shows it in plain
terms, how much he is your Friend, for he slights your Favor, and sets you at
Defiance, and all he has to ground it upon is, that Currs (as he calls them)
Hunt him and therefore he must Snarl at you, as if you Doctor were Confederate
with men, of whom and their Extravagant Actions, there is not one tittle of
Demonstration you were any way so much as Privy to: Indeed this Discovering
Mounsieur is very hardly put to it, to find a way to bespatter you; but I am
sure the Foundation is so invisible, that the Spots will never be seen, for he
would make the World believe, That because as he says, Another of his
fellow-Pamphleteers has Injured him, therefore you are blameworthy; and to
Vindicate himself, as he calls it, he has the Confidence upon Search and
Examination, of his fellow-Scriblers works to try the truth of that to reflect
upon you, but in which it does not appear in the least you are any way
Concerned; But I think you have more wit than to meddle with such matters, and
know how to spend your time to better advantage, both to the Public and your
self, than to be lead by a Will in the Wisp.

Now the Author leaves you Doctor, and invites his Reader; and here he begins
somewhat to unvail: For he tells him nothing so difficult as the Mystery of
this Detestable Plot, a Judgment of our sins, Augmented by our Follies; then he
shows him, how by the Difference between Believers, and Unbelievers, That truth
and Christianity are in Danger to be lost; then he Quarrels with his
fellow-Scriblers, and Compares it to the late times, and bids us have a care of
the same incantation over again; he tells him nothing was more Narrowly Sifted,
or more Vigorously discouraged than this Conspiracy. Reformation is the
business of Government, but if begun at the wrong end its Tumult. An Effectual
provision against the danger of the Romish Practices, will not serve their
turn, whose Quarrel is barely to the Name of Popery: If they cannot find
Popery, they will make it; For it is now new thing in a popular Outcry in the
matter of Religion, to have a State-Faction in the belly of it; and then again
compares it with the late times, and so Concludes that Paragraph. What an
Hotch-Potch Chimera is this, and as Foreign to the Case in hand, as the East
is from the West? What is the Scribbling of Pamphleteers, now there is no
Licenser (when it was altogether as bad, when there was one) or what is the
babbling at Coffe-houses to be regarded, or be thought to have any share in the
Prosecution of this Discovery? It Is bare matter of Fact, and not at all
Mysterious to men of understanding; and although as the truth of the Evidence
is, It does solely and Principally Center in the Roman Catholic Party, yet I
cannot with all the skill I have, with this learned Authors Assistance to boot,
understand wherein Religion is concerned in the least, especially, the
differences between the Church of England, and the Dissenters from it, as he
aims to enforce it. Nor is the question the same as to the Plot, you have
Discovered, nor the Transactions thereupon, nor in any Possibility can be
Paralelled with those of the late times; Nay I know some of the Roman Catholic
Religion, take it quite otherwise, for a person of Honor of that persuasion,
lately told me; That he believed, neither the King nor the Nation, would be
happy or safe until they were well rid of the Jesuits, and their King-killing
Doctrine, and I think with Mr. Strange his favor, it was not mannerly done of
him, to arraign the Judgments of the Representatives of the Nation in
Parliament, to say nothing was more narrowly Sifted, nor more Vigorously
discouraged (I conceive that was intended (encouraged) but mistaken by the
Printer) than this Conspiracy; for certainly had it been so, they would never
have made the neglect of it, a Considerable part of their Impeachment against
the Earl of Danby, and doubtless they did not make that without due
Consideration of such authentic proofs as they had before them, to make it
good.

And the Author of that Pamphlet, having thus by stating a Case, that is not in
the least the Case you Doctor have in hand, he draws a Conclusion Suitable to
it; That it might be useful, and find Credit upon its own Account; and then
giving an Encomium of himself, he casts off the Reader, and enters into the
Lists, with you again. In the beginning of his Book, the Author gave you the
allowance, of a Figure in the Government; But now he will make you as little as a
Cipher; he thinks you of so little understanding, that you by his Incoherent
Arguments are now persuaded out of your Senses, and of the reallity and truth,
of that Case you have with so much danger avowed and justifed, by, and with a
fictitious Case of his own making, and proved it by Fallacious Arguments: and
it is so far unlike yours Doctor, as instead of four feet, it does not go upon
one of them; and upon the Credence the Author has, of this supposed Conquest
over you in a great part, he proceeds to make it complete, and is resolved in
another Point, right or wrong, to stand fair in your Opinion, and that is; That
he is free from the Itch of Scribbling unless where his Genius tells him his Pen
may be of Public use, and where he is Prompted on by such an Incontinence of
a public Spirit as you find in your self, and he (Injured Gentleman) never was
but upon the Defensive part, and received no reply but reproaches (as he terms
them) of Popishly affected, or a Villifier of the Kings Evidence. Indeed this
Comparison of his is of the same Stamp, with the other, but Doctor you may well
pardon him, because he Pardoned you for calling him Rogue, and this is only out
of a great desire he has, to be esteemed like you in public Spiritedness, but
I am afraid his temper is more like Baals, that was only Sollicitous to die the
death of the Righteous, but I do not remember one Word of his living their
life. I think as to the matter in hand, I have had as much Experience of your
Actions, and as Seriously, and Impartially and Duly weighed them, as another;
but its very Probable the Eyes of Mr. L' Estrange, and my Understanding differ,
which may occasion from us, Various Inferences and Conclusions. Its true I have
observed you often to be earnestly Zealous for truth in the Fact that you have
Discovered, and against all Opposers of it, under what Circumstances soever;
but that you have in the least Promoted it, either for this or the other Party,
or against this or that Party, but only against particular Persons guilty,
Sparing none of what persuasion soever, that are within your knowledge, not in
the least by any overt Act yet occurrs to my knowledge, that you have any ways
made it your business, either to set up or pull down, or to make division
amongst Parties of differing Persuasions. I am sure it has not yet appeared to
be your business, but rather of an healing Temper, but how much it is that
learned Authors is Manifestly apparent, and he that runs may read it, besides
do but observe the different Foundations between you and him; For, Doctor, you
go upon occular and auricular Experiences, and he upon Coffee-houses
discourses, only seconded by a Report of the strenuous affirmation of a Lady,
and that by hearsay too, and then how naturally it follows that these malicious
Rumors (as he calls them) put upon himself, must needs promote and stir up him
to Vindicate you, that was not in the least concerned or named in it, nor
either wanted or craved his aid to defend you, however with Cause or without
Cause, he has no mind to part with you yet; not out of love to prove you no
Fanatic, but to other more Sinister Ends and Purposes, That is, to get a small
reward for his Pamphlet, and Vindicate the Papists, and crush the Phanaticks
(as he calls them) as I hope I shall plainly and Evidently demonstrate.

But now warmly clad with these wonderfully Erroneous Considerations that
encumbered his disturbed Brains, with the help of taking your Works to pieces;
he had now fallen under such a Conception from which the World might expectsuch
a product, as was expected from the Mountain; But you know that proved a Mouse.

Now the Author Glories in his Acquisition of Materials to defend you, and now
Magnifies his thoughts of his being armed to Suppress Popery; and is as sure of
his way as any blind man in Town, for he will as certainly hit it, as he that
takes the way to Oxford, to be the right and strait way to go to Canterbury.
When this Author has pleased himself with these Incomprehensible thoughts, by
your Clue as he says, he enters into the almost Inextricable Labyrinth of the
Plot, till he found out some Priests you pointed at, lurking in Holes like
Foxs, and then he could not forbear Publishing it to the Nation in his first
Edition of this Pamphlet, and all this upon your Credit, as he tells you. But
if this Author should fall under this misfortune that neither you Doctor, nor
any sober Wise man, should approve of his abortive births from his false
Conceptions, how can he make the Nation a Compensation for these abuses; as
without all Peradventure, the Case will appear to every one that considers
impartially the Plot it self, that it is not an Inextricable Labyrinth, but in
truth is pure and easy Matter of Fact, and the Essence thereof lies not at all
in any of those by-Circumstantials Mr. Roger has made use of (and as he says)
For his own ends, which is certainly true, for they are not in the least to the
Advantage of the Nation, the Governors or Government, the Protestant Religion.
nor the Kings witnesses, but in apparent and great dishonor to all.

In his next Paragraph, he cries out, what Innocence can Warrant against Envy
or Authority? protect when Le Strange comes to be arraigned as a Papist, for
showing the likeliest was to Extirpate Popery, and yourname cannot Protect him
in it? nay he tells you it is well if you can uphold your self, if this goes
on, and concludes, that none can fall foul upon that Discovery without Wounding
your Evidence. Now certainly had this Author as well believed the truth of this
reason, as he cannot but imagine others do, he would never under this Disguise
of Friendship to you Doctor, have undertaken thus publicly to Villifie you.
Alas he talks of Innocence, that is begging the question: I know not of any
that can be allowed him by any one in his right Wits, nor do I know nor never
heard, but from himself, that ever he did or could show any way that is likely
to extirpate Popery. I admire at his Confidence to adventure upon such a
subject to the people, which only and singly appertains to the Magistracy, and
I think he has cause to rejoice that he is not questioned for a Seditious
Pamphletteer, for that his Work in such a time as this is, which calls. for our
Union not division. He says, some call his book Jesuitical; for my part. I
think there is no man in his right Wits, that can Judge less of his Book, than
call the Scope and Drift of it, of a Jesuitical Stamp: but what is that to you
Doctor, does it therefore follow that because he has written a book deserves
that Censure, you must be accounted a Papist that was no way Privy to it? but
this Consequence is like the rest, but upon hard Pumping he has endeavored to
bring you in by Head and Shoulders; for he says he has your Word and Oath for
it, for you swear the Priests and Jesuits herd themselves amongst the
Non-Conformists; they deny it, and yet prove themselves in the Plot and
discredit the Kings Evidence. What Hocus Pocus is here? I am sure in no part of
your Evidence is it Sworn, they herd with Non-Conformists, nor have I yet ever
seen or heard any proof, that any Non-Conformists have proved themselves to be
in the Plot; or that any of them whatsoever, discredited any of the Kings
Evidence, but this must be accepted upon his Veracity, or else his strain of
Wit, by his Subsequent Querie; for thus the Author argues, if they Shelter not
themselves in Conventicles, and field-Meetings, to stir up Broyls in the
Government, What becomes of your Testimony? and none but Papists would oppose
the Ferretting them out. What he means, or what he would be at, If you know
Doctor, its well, but for my part I understand not the Sense of it; but because
you have proved there were some Jesuits, or their Agents sent into Scotland to
Facilitate their design, amongst the discontented Scots, if they could,
therefore all the Dessenters from the Church of England in England, are guilty
of the Plot; I am very Confident the meanest of Grammarian Schoolmasters in
England, would have whipped the dullest Boy he had under his tuition, for using
such a Nonsensical Argument.

In Confirmation of this, the Author further tells you, nothing can be clearer
according to your Evidence of Wright and others sent amongst the Scots, with
other Evidence, to that Purpose, and then says, all this will not serve to
Convince some of the Priests mingled with Fanatics, till the Pilgrims and the
Forty Thousand black Bills come to open their Eyes. This Author is in much
wrath, that every body does not wear his Spectacles; for I am fully assured
there is not a sober English Christian of what persuasion soever; except such
Sons of the Church of England, as he and God-dam-me Sons (that see no further
than the Churchyard) but do believe your Evidence in that particular, as fully
as your Words, or intention thereby extended. Then he concludes that Paragraph,
with a Clamorous acclamation. If these Infidels (I presume he means the
Dessenters from the Church of England) Have any Privilege for the Defaming
public Justice, and blasting the Kings Evidence, above other People, they
should, do well to produce it. But I am sure it would have been better done of
him, to have produced some Proof of the Slander, before he had aspersed the
Parties with it; I never heard of their guilt of the one, nor the other, but
from his Pen which I take to be as little Slander as his mouth. Then he
proceeds to tell you, he has read, considered and studied you, and what
wonderful things you have done for him in the Dark, and at length brought him
into the light; and when he hathlent you these Ironical Expressions, he comends
you in the same Dialect, and further tells you of his Sensibility of the
roundness of your Periods, the Luxuriancy of your Invention (where there is
Scope for it) the Frankness of your Style, and the Harmony of your C^^ceptions.
Indeed had it been your design Doctor, to have made your trade, of Living and
getting Dinners by Scribbling, or had those things which you have published in
Print, been otherwise than pure matter of Fact, to satisfy the Governors,
Government and People of the Nation; and limited and bounded to the nature and
quality of the thing in question, and in a great part in the nature of a
report; Its morally Possible you might as well have observed your Periods as
the Fault-finder; nay I can say it with some Assurrance, It is so in all
Impartial men's Judgments, all things duly considered; which answers may also
serve you for your Inventions, and Conceptions, for I know not of any such in
all your works; and doubtless those that do as well know you Doctor, and
understand you as Mr. Le Strange, are clearly of opinion, that had you Employed
your Genius that way, if it had been but in making a Play against your own
Mother, you might and would have come off with as much Reputation, made as good
Syllogismes, and had as pertinent Coherences as any that have undertaken or
performed the like; and for the Frankness of your Style, it being in the
pursuit of truth, Its very well known your Zeal for that, makes you no more
spare any one guilty, than you did the Author when you called him Rogue, which
he agrees, you did well in, as your apprehended him.

Then he tells you, This Epistle had been monstrous in any other age; but why
not in this (when its twice the length of the rest of his Pamphlet) is not
Discernable by any body but himself; then he tells you Knavery and Hypocrisy
were in Fashion, Thirty or Forty years ago. but spares the telling with whom,
therefore I cannot give it any particular answer, but must leave it with him
and his Acquaintance in those times; he says now the present Humor of France
runs upon Poisoning, the Enemies of our Government, altogether upon the Vein of
Plotting. Indeed that is too true, and the Plotters, as the Case is are of
several sorts, some have the Hellish and audacious Impudence to contrive his
Majesty's death by violence, his Magistrates, his Witnesses, the overthrow of
our Government, the extirpating of the Protestant and Introducing the Romish
Religion (so called;) and there are another sort which I apprehend, little
inferior to the other in the Consequence of it, who by their Poisonous
Principles and frothy Strains of wit, with their Paper-Squibs audaciously
traduce and fly in the Faces of the Governors and Government; and make nothing
of turning the Justice of the Nation into Ridicule both at home and abroad, and
instead of healings broach divisions amongst the dissenters from the Church of
Rome, thereby to give all advantage imaginable (according to your Evidence, to
weaken the Parties) to our professed Enemies, without the least just occasion,
or any other Rationally than to do that for our Adversaries, they themselves
could not effect, but by making us Fools, or Knaves, to one another.

Then this Author takes it Positively upon him to tell you Doctor, that he has
acquitted himself; That he is no Papist, and now he resolvedly undertakes so to
acquit himself of the charge upon him by you, and your Father, of his Reporting
you for a Fanatic. In my Opinion, if he does the one no more than he has done
the other, he might have spared his Labor; I fear if the matter had been true,
he will not give you any cause to thank him, for I do not remember one
authentic Proof, nor any other rational Argument yet produced by him, that he
is not a Papist unless such an Argument which he used that took upon him to
confute Bellermine, by telling him it was not so: Is it out of pure kindness,
or at your request he takes this pains for you? Truly, I think both alike, for
I verily believe, if the thing be true that he said, you do not esteem it such
a Scandal as you need to be vindicated from it, either by him or any one else;
but he says, your exhortation to Indulgence opened the mouths of some ignorant
people to that effect; I doubt not in this but you may take Mr. L'Estrange at
his Word, and keeping to Solomon's Rule, not to answer him in his own way, let
it pass as it is, and although you went no further than as an exhortation, Mr.
Roger has the Confidence to take upon him to instruct and to give Judgment
too. Then he exclaims against a persecuting Spirit, how this Coheres with the
precedent matter, it is a Riddle to me, and seriously I cannot fancy who or what
he means by it; certainly he dares not be guilty of so much Confidence, as
rather than he would not bespatter and traduce you, he will arraign the whole
Justice of the Nation, for if that should be his meaning (which to me seems
very obvious) I believe not ignorant but wise people would think he did not lie
under any aspersion, but rather take that Character already given him to be far
short of his true demerit; but I am sure the whole drift of his Pamphlet is for
causeless persecution, but blessed be God our Governors are of a more healing
spirit,

Now he tells you, that by this time you see what a Church of England man is to
trust to, when he (the true Son of the Church) is boxed on both sides, and then
he concludes that Paragraph with this Question, With what face shall any man
dare to charge him for a Papist, that has done so much for the Protestant
Religion, or a Fanatic, that has done so much for the Church of England? I
think it may be thus resolved, that if it be without cause, it must be with a
brazen face; but if the Party he means be one that can tell what the
Churchyard Wall is made of and not the Church, he may then lie open to all
sorts of Censures, especially when he has acted on all sides, as he puts the
Case.

The Plot indeed is represented to be triplicite, viz. against the King,
Government and Religion; but what question or distinction this Author will
make, we shall see anon, for there is his Diana; but that you Doctor, or any
other of the King's Witnesses in this case have in the least occasioned such a
question, is not in my apprehension to be deduced from any of your Evidences,
and I believe that no man that has ever heard, read of, or seen the Arts of
those Persons charged with that horrid Plot in any of their Massacres, either
at home or abroad, that ever they made any distinction of Persons that were
Dissenters from themselves in Doctrine or Practice: From what can it be
imagined they would have done it by, or in this Plot, or that they did so
intend by it, only to cut off the Members of the Church of England, and leave
the Dissenters from them, or only cut off the Dissenters, and leave the Members
of the Church of England, there is no shadow of color for it, and it is fully
proved by you to be intended general to all Dissentets from the Church of Rome.

Now like a knowing Son of the Church of England, Mr. L'Estrange acquaints you
how far he understands, and what is Religion, he fixes it in the Word
Government, in which, says he, is comprehended Regiment, Ecclesiastical and
Civil, and inclusively the Order of Bishops, and Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church, and then concludes positively, that that and no other is the Protestant
Religion designed in the Plot; and he thinks in his second Position he makes it
good, for he says, they (meaning the Dissenters from the Church of England) are
Religious and their name is Legion; and his third is as good as that, for
therein this Author affirms, they (the said Dissenters) are Christian Arbbs;
but the fourth goes beyond all, That it stands not with Common Sense for
Papists to plot the ruin of their own Auxiliaries, and this he lays at your
door, that it is against the Reason of your Depositions that they should
contrive their Destruction, when at that time they are making use of them to
destroy us, and then most abhominably Christian-like he briskly lets fly at the
Dissenters from the Church of England with a most Dismal Judgment, that Heaven
and Hell is as easy to be brought together, as to reconcile those People to
any terms of Piety or Civil Order, that corruptly style themselves Protestants.
I must confess here perchance the Author may apprehend he has the whip hand of
any one that will undertake to answer, in respect of the Law; but I think,
without offense, I may put you in mind of the Words of the Bishop of Donn in
his Preface to his Grand Exemplar, which are, That when it appears a Kingdom is
converted to Christianity, the Commonwealth is made a Church, Gentile Priests
are Christian Bishops, the Subjects Servants of Christ* the Religion turned
Christian, and the Laws of the Nation made part of the Religion, there is no
change of Government, but Christ is King and the Temporal Power his Substitute,
and is to promote obedience to him. Now I must confess I am, and I doubt not
but every really true Son of the Church of England, will be much more
inclinable to take Doctor Tailor for an Authentic Author in this Point of
Religion than Mr. L'Estrange (though he does not use the word Protestant) and
without all peradventure his Judgment is upon Truth, I mean the word of God,
which Mr. Roger altogether omits (to the great proof of his Sonship) and only
grounds himself in that case in my apprehension upon several and Vulgar Errors;
as first, I take it to be an undeniable Truth from our Savior and his
Apostles, that there is but one Religion, and not Legions, and that under two
Heads; 1. Loving God with all your heart; 2. Love our Neighbors as our selves;
unless it may be said that every Chimera of men's brains, or every Notion (as
the Author calls Religion) or every Form is a Religion. I am of opinion it is
Nonsense, and I cannot but concur with Dr. Tailor, that the Antiochian or
Christian Religion is the Religion, Catexochene, and what ever Forms in true
and due order to that are framed, doubtless they are praiseworthy, and ought
to be observed by all that Love the Kingdom of Christ (but yet I take it the
Form is improperly called a Religion) but for this Author that has the
Confidence to style himself the true Son, and would fain be esteemed the
Champion of the Church of England, to leave out the only Essential part of a
true Church, whose Foundation ought to be upon the Rock of Ages, and to place
it only in humane Laws, which as Dr. Tailor says, are but part, and only in
Substitution to that which is really true, is as I said before, to take the
Churchyard and all for the Church, or instead of commending the Vine to praise
the Hedge or Fence about it; for as Dr, Tayler's opinion is, the Temporal Power
is to be used primarily and principally to promote obedience to Christ, not to
its self, or any thing contrary to Christ's Doctrine, Practices or Precepts;
therefore to me it seems apparent that the Author has not done right to his
Mother, the Church of England, which makes me fear in regard the Fathers of the
Church seem to be of opinion against him in description of a Church: I conceive
it may without straining be rationally conjectured he was not suckled by his
Mothers milk, but by a Foster Nurse, otherwise certainly he would not have
omitted so Essentiala Worth of the Church of England, and the rather, for that
he might with ease have proved, That when the Body of this Kingdom began to
shake off that Spiritual Slavery imposed on our Ancestors by the Romish Yoke
they then lay under, the alteration that then was made by the Governors and
Government of this Nation, was the nearest and most agreeable by the Articles,
Cannons and Injunctions then agreed and established to the Apostolical Rule,
and pursuant to Dr. Tayler's Judgment therein, as they could; For that our
Religion should solely depend upon humane Law, it must be and may be as
changeable as that of which I am sure we and our Ancestors have had woeful
Experience, as by Repeals of Statutes for that purpose in the Reign of Queen
Mary, witness. Another Vulgar Error, I conceive him with some clearness gullty
of, is, in calling the Church of England the only Protestant Religion aimed at
in this Case by the Papists. Indeed I have heard once the Question was debated
amongst Persons of an higher Sphere than Mr. L'Estrange what the Protestant
Religion was, and it was thought fit to be left undetermined, and doubtless not
imprudently, for if we should make that the Basis of the Religion of the Church
of England, it would give our Adversaries the Papists a vast and inevitable
Advantage; for if History be in that Case to be depended upon, the Lutherans,
the Calvinists, etc. were before the Church of England, under the denomination
of Protestants, and I do doubt it will appear if it should be brought into
dispute, they differ in many and main Points; but then the Consequence would
inevitably follow, that we must be put to prove which is the true one, another
advantage the Papists would have (and which I have heard often made use of;)
That they (I mean the Church of Rome) are the Mother Church, and of many
hundreds of years before the Church of England, and doubtless they may be too
hard for us in that Point, if our Foundation begun only in Protestantism, but
in truth the Foundation of our Apostolical British Church, which is fully,
clearly and elegantly proved and made out (by the Learned and Judicious Author
of the Book entitled of the Heart and its right Sovereign) to be ancienter
than Rome's, especially here in this Nation by many Centuries of Years, and for
his saying, by your Evidence it appears the Fanatics (as he calls them) are to
be Papists Auxiliaries, and therefore its not rational they (the Papists) would
work their Ruin: It Is true according to the Common and Vulgar term, you in
your Depositions call it the Protestant Religion indefinitely; but why this
must not concern all manner of Dissenters from the Romish Church, I am sure
does not in the least appear, nor can any other thing rationally be expected,
but the extirpation of all Dissenters from them of Rome without distinction,
nor is it proved by you Doctor, the Jesuitical Party endeavored to make any
other use of them, but as all Conquerors do, to divide their Dissenters to
facilitate their intended Enterprise; if so, then his unchristian like Censure
must of necessity be unwarrantable and groundless. Dear Doctor, I must beg your
pardon for my prolixity upon this Paragraph, but finding this the Author's
Cornerstone, I could not pass it over slightly, being so really zealous for
the ancient British Apostolical Religion, that as God was heretofore pleased to
honor this Island to have the first Christian King, and a British Woman to be
Mother of the first Christian Emperor in the World, so to me the finger of God
seems plainly to point at, and show that in this latter Age he intends further
to honor this Nation with a King and Government, that will be his true and
real Substitutes to promote sincere obedience to his Son, and to bring us with
healing under one Shepherd, and all to be of one Sheepfold.

Then taking that forgranted, which is denied him; That the Protestant Religion
aimed at in the Plot, is the Established Religion of the Church of England; the
Author tells you, that you cannot be a Friend to the State without being one to
the Church too. This as I have said before, is but a begging of the Question,
and then he concludes from thence, that he that phancies you Doctor not
Canonical and Orthodox, supposes you build with one hand, and pluck down with
the other; here is begging Question upon Question to bring something out that
is no way applicable to you; for your business Doctor, has been solely and
only to acquaint the King and his Councils with matters of Fact, and leave the
building and pulling down to their Wisdoms, and not therein in the least to
concern your self as the Author has done in that Pamphlet too much.

Then he puts the Case the general way, and says, the Dissenters from the
Church of England cannot any way be ayding in a Reformation, but by their
Prayers and good Wishes upon pain of Sedition. It Is much such a man as Mr.
L'Estrange, who takes himself to be of such profound Parts and Knowledge,
should so much mistake himself, for certainly as men and Subjects under his
Majesty's Obeisance, they are as capable and legally of serving his Majesty in
any such Commands, as any other men or Subjects whatsoever.

I think his Case put, whether or no, and how far Protestants may unite, is
fully answered in the Solution to the last Paragraph, but what the Dissenters
to the Church of England, meeting and assembling as to Religious Worships, is
any way material to the Defense of his Majesty's Person or Government, or what
it signifies to the Plot I am to seek for, and what offense it is against Law,
I shall not presume to meddle with it, and I am assuredly satisfied in all
sober men's Judgments he would not have lost Reputation, if he had not shot his
bolt thereat so suddenly; but indeed much better fruit cannot well be expected
from one that has sucked in an Opinion, that he dares tell you Doctor, that
Religion is a Spiritual Notion; I think no man in his right wits will conceive
he knows what he says, and certainly Doctor, this Author will be extremely
Fortunate, if such Notions as he has uttered in that Pamphlet make not him
reputed and legally judged Seditious.

In the Conclusion of this large Epistle, in a Jeer and Scoff he tells you,
They are Wonderful things you have done, and would fain have you condescend to
believe, that he is persuaded you are yet reserved for more Wonderful things;
but on the other hand, I am persuaded he did not believe himself when he wrote
it, nor designed any body else should, if he could prevent it; but to his
shame, if he had any, his betters have done it, and notwithstanding his flurts
of your Name, being as famous to Posterity as your Virtue has rendered you to
the present Generation: It may be true that you have not that Stock of
Confidence he has, and to conceit your self without Personal Infirmities, and
I dare say, that in Justification of his Innocence in that particular, he will
not be so hardy or bold as to adventure to throw the first stone at you.

But he tells you Doctor again, that none in his right Wits should take you for
no Friend to the Church of England. I concur with him in it, and certainly had
he been in his, he durst not have taken the Confidence to have reflected so
much upon you, in regard by so doing he has much wounded and unworthily
traduced the Wisdom and Justice of the Governors and Government of this
Nation, for which he says, he has a Natural Veneration, by turning all their
Transactions in this Affair to mere Sophistical ridicule, then he tells you of
the Evidence you have made of the Intrigues in the late times, and now by the
Priests and Jesuits with Schismatics, and that you have given the Sectaries a
great blow, so that they have nothing to say why they should not be sifted with
all exactness imaginable. Doubtless it is as great a mistake of, and as foreign
and remote from the Scope and Drift of your Evidence, as is possible to be
supposed: For although the Jesuits and their Legates are for leaving no stone
unturned that may advance their Design in every or any particular of it, and to
that purpose, as much as in them lies, do endeavor to creep into Societies,
and all sorts of men: Yet must it therefore needs follow, that such Societies
or men are Confederate? It Is a remote and foreign Supposition, it is a mere
non-sequitur. Nevertheless, though I have not asked any of them the Question,
nor shall make it my business to open my lips to them further, or other than
truth will clearly warrant me; I dare be bold to say so much for them, that
there is not one Society or Sect whatsoever (called Dissenters from the Church
of England) but will with all true Zeal earnestly lend their helping hands to
find out and be purged from any such corrupt Member that may lurk amongst them,
and if that Author, or any other can further them, will well reward them.

Then Mr. Roger in his jeering and flouting manner, says, that after gleaning
up about 35 Priests in the whole, it was you that informed the Government where
they were to be had by Sholes. It seems he is very exact in keeping the Account
of their suffering Members, but whether out of pity or friendship to them, or
for Public Service, I leave the Doctor upon the whole matter to judge, but he
was too exact in charging you with that Information, for I am sure he neither
has or can prove to whom, nor when given, unless it must be taken for granted,
because he has said it, which really I cannot do, nor have any grounds to
persuade you, or any other to it. Then he asks some Questions, if it be not
true that the Plot goes on still? I am justified by the opinion of the
Governors and and Magistrates in the Nation to answer the Question in the
affirmative; his next is, if it be not true that we are all undone if it be not
disappointed? I must answer that affirmatively in part and negatively in the
rest, That is, all honest and loyal men and true Dissenting Christians from the
Church of Rome are but Papists and popishly affected, are not, but he making
the Answer and Construction of the Questions otherwise, and without color of a
true cause upon them, he draws this Inference, That it is a matter of absolute
necessity to fetch these Plotters out of their Holds: That is (to use his own
expression) he that winks may perceive Mr. L'Estrange his meaning, and of what
spirit he is of; That all such (guilty or not guilty) that are under the notion
of Dissenters from the Church of England must be destroyed as Plotters; but not
one word in all that his Pamphlet against any one Papist, Priest or Jesuit
elsewhere, for he seems to be satisfied their Number as to Sufferers is full:
Then his last Question is, If it be not true that whoever doubts of the truth
of this matter of Fact, or of the necessity of this way of proceeding, is
undeniably a Blaster of the King's Evidence, and a favourer of the Conspiracy?
I think I have fully demonstrated to you Doctor, why the Fact as he states it,
and would have it taken for granted, is not true, but altogether fallacious,
and shored up with untrue Glosses and Inferences for the by-end he drives at,
and therefore cannot in the least be apprehended to be any ground to judge him
that doubts it a Blaster of the King's Evidence, a Favourer of the Conspiracy;
but if Doctor you will take my opinion, and that with some clearness, I rather
judge the Author of that Pamphlet to be such an one, by wresting the
construction of your Evidence contrary to the words and meaning thereof. Then
he closes his long Epistle with desiring you Doctor to lay to heart what he
has writ, but I am glad to see you do not concern your self thereat so far as
it concerns you alone; then he desires you to cast your eye upon what follows,
which indeed is the Second Part to the same Tune, and then prays Heaven and
Earth to reward you, and that you may be as happy as he wishes you; I doubt not
but that you are happier already, and if you expect any further happiness by
others prayers it must not be by such sort of people of whom it is said their
prayers will not prevail.

He styles what follows, A further Discovery of the Plot drawn, he says, from
your Narrative and Depositions: It is certainly drawn out, but it is by violence
enough, and that by Foreign and remote Inferences and Conclusions: But what
ever there is further in that Pamphlet, but in truth it is no further Discovery
of your Discovered Plot, but of his own it is, and what that is, what I have by
my observations already made, to that of which part of this is in matter but
repetition, and of that of which I shall make to that which is new; I doubt
not, Doctor, but will give you full and Evident satisfaction. The Author tells
you, It must not be denied, the Kings Witnesses have done as much as men could
do to make out the truth of this Plot; so must it not be denied that the
Justice and Wisdom of this Nation, has improved all the Discoveries, by the
strictest Inquisition and Scrutinie imaginable, and done all Possible to
suppress it, yet it goes on with Confidence and vigor; as we have it from
those that wrought in the same Mire, till better light brought them to other
Measures (but to lay a Foundation for his next Fallacy) he tells you the Fact
lies in the Dark, and truly, Doctor, in my opinion it must and will do so,
unless we have better light to see it by than a Meteor. I do not Doctor at all
doubt of what the* Witnesses have done, and as little of what has been done by
the Justice and Wisdom of this Nation, for the finding out and suppressing this
hellish Plot. But I have before told you as in the case of the Earl of Danby
all was not done, that might and ought to have been done, or else the Commons
House of Parliament, did mistake in their Charge against him, which I think
becomes no man to presume.

But, Doctor, Mr. L'Estrange tells you that after all this Havoc made of the
Papists, the Coffee-House Discourse is the Plot goes on, as they that must be
presumed that know best say, but those on the Negative ask, if it will work
without hands, where are the Papists, in the Air, or under ground, or are they
Invisible? for as they a^e dispersed, besides the Terror that over awes them,
there are three Thousand Protestants to one Papist. Indeed, Doctor, I am in
admiration of his Confidence to call the just Proceedings of the Authority of
the Nation, an Havoc, he shows much of his natural Veneration to the
Government, and his true Sonship to the Church of England by it; and then he
lays a mighty stress upon the tatling at Coffee-houses; and indeed he has some
reason, for I perceive he has been much beholden to them, for matter and
Evidence, or otherwise he had been exceeding barren in both, and in all
Probability, I am apt to conjecture and not without ground, either he has lost
some Intimate (in the Havoc as he Scandalously terms it) or his Bowels of
Compassion, are strongly toward that Party, because he always expresses their
suffering with great reluctance, and his Negative Arguments which are for them,
are the strongest.

But now the Author again begins to lay his meaning more open, for (he says
they (meaning the Popish party) may be any where, and his reason is, he says,
Persons of great quality have told him they will endure all shapes, exercise
all Prosessions; they speak of one Jesuit cried work for a Cooper, another a
Shoemaker, others Read Coats. 'Its observed upon bringing the Plot to light
all the little French men with their Marionetts, and Puppit-Showes, vanished,
which gave Suspicion, they were Agents for the Faction. I do now, Doctor,
plainly preceive why he is so angry with you, for now it appears, much of his
loss this Discovery of this Hellish Plot has brought upon him, for it seems
these Persons were of his acquaintance, otherwise he could not have been so
well knowing of their hard Condition: and truly I think he may cry work for a
Tinker, for instead of stopping one Hole he has made many, but for the matter,
he not charging it upon you, I need not give you the trouble of answering it,
only let me observe this to you, that although at most the Author can and does
make no more of these Assertions but hear-says, and no body knows from whom nor
can well guess, for its not to be presumed that any Persons of quality (but
such as are in Prison for the Plot) use such Company, yet he takes it for a
granted truth and makes use of it to be a Groundwork for what follows, which
he tells you, Doctor, Shall be supported upon your Authority (for you still
must come in to help the Lame Dog over the Style) With respect to the validity
of your Testimony, and weight of your Observations, you having dived Deeper
into it than any other. Alas, poor Gentleman he is forced to speak truth
sometimes against his will, but his truths and Fallacies do not make good
Music, in wise men's Ears, no more than his Music did in Olivers, and I am
sure he has not; and believe he cannot make any further Discovery of this Plot
by any thing by you published; nay, its without all Contradiction, absolute
Nonsense, that a Discovery can be made out of a Discovery, for without all
Peradventure a Discovery must and does imply new Fact, otherwise its no
Discovery.

Then the Author tells you, That that part of the Design against his Majesty's
life broke to all Intents and Purposes; but we are beholden to you, for the
Discovery of other and further Plots in defaming the King and Government,
Subversion of our Established Religion and Disturbance of the Peace, so that
our Deliverance is but half done. I stand amazed with what considence he dares
write such things, but as the Proverb there is, is none so bold as blind
Bayard, for his so that our Deliverance is but half done, is his and none of
yours, and what you have done is merely making known matter of Fact, and that
long since and only as to one Plot. And besides, Doctor, had he considered the
whole truth of the Fact, as to that part of this Hellish Plot; That the same
hands attempted his Sacred Majesty's life Beyond Sea; That Is its strongly to be
presumed Mr. Killigrues man that was Murdered at Windsor on his Majesty's
Couch, was by the same hands, and intended his Majesty; That although the Gun
is taken that Pickering should have made use of for that purpose, yet neither
Coniers, nor his Dagger, nor the Ruffians, nor many others you have in your
Depositions charged, are, that the Contrivance was as well Beyond Sea as at
home, and that since your Discovery of, Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Balldron, Mr.
Jennison, Mr. Danger-field, and others (which daily come in) have severally
deposed that at several places and times, and by diverse Persons they have been
accosted to be hired to undertake to attempt it. Methinks the Consideration of
these things which have undeniable truths should make him Blush, for that by
broaching such Falsities amongst the Subjects to delude them, he may make them
neglectful and careless in the Preservation of his Majesty's life, in which
they have so much and great an Interest; but I only mention this, Doctor, as it
is to me a clear Demonstration of the Contrivance, and often repetition of the
Jesuits and their Parties; endeavoring to put in Execution, their hellish
Design against his Majesty's person whom God preserve. Then he repeats part of
your Narrative, wherein you, Doctor, as he says, mention some Circumstantial
Actions the Jeuites do, in order to the Facilitating this their impious Design;
which is, by making and Promoting differences between the King and his People,
and the King and Foreign Princes, and the like; and amongst the people in case
their Design as to his Majesty's life, took effect, that they might be ready to
rise up in Arms against one another; and then in a glorying manner the Author
tells you, We have found your Observations in these Particulars, so Punctually
true, that every Syllable is the matter now in Agitation (as thus,) not a Day
without a Libel upon his Majesty's Authority, belieing the Condition of his
Affairs, Endeavoring to create Distrusts and Jealousies amongst Foreign
Princes and States by false Intelligence, Animating and exciting turbulent
Factions, Anticipating Confederacies, Involving us in Blood upon a remote and
Undutiful supposition of the Kings Death, Sedition preached as well as Written,
our Conventicles both Instructed themselves, and Instructing others in the
Methods and Principles of Rebellion; this, he says, may Suffice for your
Judgment upon these things, which look liker a Revelation than a Conjecture. I
know not, Doctor, who the Author means by we; for my part, I think no man in
his right Senses can close with him in his finding, for as I said before, yours
are not observations but only matters of Fact, and those charged upon the
Jesuits and their Party. But if there are any such Libells holding forth those
particulars he mentions, but as much as his own, from any man or, from any
Society of men, I am very clear in my opinion with all humble Submission to the
Governors and Government, the Authors may well be suspected to promote the
Design, and may deserve to be called in question and punished for them,
according to their Demerits. And the rather as to him because he has the
boldness in Capital Letters, and of remark to call it,

A REMOTE AND UNDUTIFUL SUPPOSITION OF HIS MAJESTY'S DEATH.

If this be not a giving the lie to the Representatives of the Commons of the
Nation, affirming their Credit of yours and other's Evidence in that
particular, by their Vote; That if his Majesty (which God forbid) should dye a
violent Death, they would revenge it on the Papists, and this Concurred with by
the House of Peers; but these are such small and minute things in Mr. Le
Strange's Consideration, he can easily pass them by, as an Evident and
undeniable proof of his natural Veneration of the Government, and his true
Sonship to the Church of England. But as to the Preachings he talks of; (if
amongst those he means under the term Fanatics) when he can name the Persons,
I hope I may without offense say, the Persons charged or some body for them,
will give an answer, Satisfactory to the Governors, Government, and the world;
in the mean time I believe no man of understanding will Credit it upon his bare
and general Assertion.

And because Mr. L'Estrange, as may be supposed, did apprehend these things had
not been sufficient to finish his intended Fabric, and that his Pamphlet, he
makes some further repetition of part of your Preface to your Narrative, in
reference to the late Troubles: as, That the Jesuitical Party were the
Contrivers of the last War, by their known Diabolical Art of inslaming Parties
and Passions against each other, and addressing to the King; of his Majesty's
Royal Fathers unspeakable Sufferings, and barbarous usage: it was those brought
him to his end, stourished Swords and Trumpets over his dead Body; the Putney
Projectors were in most, if not all the Councils that contrived his ruin. What
broke the Uxbridge Treaty, but the Romish Interest and Policy? who contrived to
baffle all designs of Peace and Settlement to this Nation, Prosperity to his
Majesty's Family, but them? Milton was a known Frequenter of a Popish Club. Who
more forward to set up Cromwell, and crown him with the King's Crown than
Papists? his Government was contrived by a Priest, and Lambert, a Papist, for
above thirty years. From whence he concludes in this Point, he says, a man may
without loss of Honor believe you to be in a mistake. I could wish he Would
have given some reason for it, that he might have received a more full Answer,
than otherwise can be given to it; for although this is not, nor cannot be said
or deposed by you, as an immediate part of your Discovery of the present
damnable Plot, nor as any thing of your own knowledge, because all, or most of
it was done before you were born, or at least, able to judge of things, yet by
the access you had to the Jesuits Memoirs, when admitted amongst them, you
found those things (except the Addresses to the King) which made good those
Assertions; and you report it only as such, and yet with such demonstrable
Circumstances as might easily gain a credit, as to the truth of them, with any
man that is a Dissenter from the Church of Rome, and is not such a Son of the
Church, as Dives and his Brethren were (as they were lately proved by a Learned
and Reverend Doctor) who were not to be convinced but by an Angel, or some
immediate Revelation from Heaven; but as that was denied them, so I believe, it
will be these, since they will not believe that, which in my apprehension,
comes very near it: but in truth, to me it seems obvious and plain, that the
Author has made a very ample and full Discovery of himself in his said
Pamphlet, but not of you, Doctor, nor of any further Discovery of your revealed
Plot; for by his own showing, and as the truth is, you charge all our miseries,
mediately or immediately, upon the Papists, and he affirms you are mistaken.
Now on which side can it rationally be judged he is?

The next thing he charge in Fact, is in your Page 8. touching Blundel 's
teaching of Youth Treasonable Doctrines against His Majesty: Page 25. Ashby 's
sending new Messengers into Scotland to promote Commotions there, and inform
them of the Tyranny they lay under, by being denied Liberty of Conscience, not
to be procured without the Sword, by which means they should Weaken the
Presbyterian and Episcopal Faction, and you heard the Words, and two Messengers
were sent into Scotland with Instructions to carry themselves like
Nonconformist Ministers, to preach necessity of taking up the Sword, which you
saw dispatched. Now observe his several Inferences from hence; first says he,
take notice here is a Design for the Destruction of the King, and Embroyling of
the Government. I admit it him in terms and literally, but if he has any
equivocal or fallacious meaning I cannot. Secondly, he says, the pretense of
the Quarrel is matter of Liberty and Conscience; That is an absolute mistake
for it is but a circumstantial Engine so prepared and wrought by the Jesuits to
carry on their grand Design by dividing and weakening their opposing Party.
Thirdly, he says, it is to be promoted by Popish Emissaries in the Councils of
the Non-Conformists: It is the first time, and I believe cannot be seconded,
that ever the Non-Conformists had any Councils, and as to their being in the
Conventicles, as to the charge it is only by you said to be in Scotland; but
admit it in England too, It is not nor cannot be charged originally upon them,
but merely accidentally and contingently as the Jesuits and their Agents could
prevail, whereof I am satisfied if the Author could have found but half an
instance to make it good, it is not to be doubted with his Ingenuity he would
have stretched it to an whole one, if not more for the good of the Cause he
has so visibly by his Pamphlet espoused. Fourthly, he says, by making
Interests with the Separatists under Disguise of Teachers; This is answered in
the last. But fifthly, lastly, and remarkably, he says, That you charge none of
the Church of England. What yet more blindness? Was it possible for the Jesuits
and their party to carry on their several Designs in the late times, without
some of the Church of England-Members being concerned in it; he, nor any man
can say, that there was not Members of the Church of England on both sides in
those unhappy Wars. But by this you may plainly see what he drove at by saying,
You were mistaken as to those times: for he could not have otherwise come off
from his Assertion, that you charged not the Members of the Church of England,
though he assumes to say, He has perused and considered all your Works, as to
that particular; yet he has not rightly judged of them; and although it be
apparently the design of the Author to put a variance and division between
those that are Dissenters from, and those who are Members of the Church of
England: I know its none of yours, nor shall be mine; for I take the healing
way in that case best, and therefore shall not give any further Instances
therein than may serve to disprove him.

But Mr. Roger taking his mistaken Inference from thence for granted, he draws
as erroneous a Conclusion, yet very positively, That you have altogether
cleared the Church of England and her Sons, from the Calumny of being either
mediately, or immediately guilty of this horrid Plot. But as I said before,
Doctor, you have not in the least in the whole scope of your Discovery showed
your self partial, by charging, or sparing this, or that man, that is within
your knowledge guilty, because he is of this or that Party, or Faction, as may
plainly appear by what is aforesaid.

Then Mr. L'Estrange says, It must not be any longer a supposition, which you
have given Oath for: So that, says he, taking it for granted, there is such a
project on foot, the Papists are in the bottom of it, and its promoted by the
Sectaries; the question is, how the Government may discriminate the Protestants
from the Papists, being blended in their Interests, as well as in their
Councils, and not easily distinguished: but the legal Expedient is the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy; yet that will not do, for many Papists will take
them, and many that call themselves Protestants, will absolutely refuse them. I
agree it to be true, that what is judicially proved ought not, nor cannot be
esteemed a Supposition; but then it must, and ought to be taken literally, and
not with a strained or remote construction, contrary to the Deponents words,
intent, or meaning; for though it may be taken for granted there is such a
project on foot, and the Papists in the bottom of it, yet is it not to be so,
that the Sectaries promote it from any thing you have sworn, but that the
Jesuitical Party have endeavored to blow up Sectaries (so called) into a
division amongst themselves, and with others the dissenting Party from the
Church of Rome, thereby to lessen and abate the strength of them, is literally
agreeable with the words of your Depositions afore-cited by him, that thereby
they might weaken both the Presbyterian and Episcopal Faction, it is not in the
least to be questioned, or doubted, but that the Jesuits, or their Party, are
knowingly and willingly the Contrivers and Carriers on of this horrid Plot.

But that the Dissenters from the Church of England are in any part of it, is
both to be questioned and doubted, and the rather, for that neither by yours,
nor any others Testimonies is it so proved, nor from thence can be inferred,
without a violent, or at least, strange Construction: and for my part, I do not
at all know, or suspect that any one true Member of the Church of England, is,
or will in the least join with the Jesuitical Party in it; but do hope both
they and the Dissenters from them will unite to defend his Sacred Majesty, and
the Government from it. Then he tells you, The Law is general in that case,
there is no relaxation, the Law takes not notice of Honesty, but Obedience: and
this Rule, he says, holds in common as well to the Papists, as to the
Protestant Recusants: With something more to the same purpose; but truly, I
think, to very little purpose; for, as I take it, those Statutes he cites, are
by their Title, Preamble and Body, only and literally against the Popish
Recusants. For the Dissenters he talks of, or the greater part of them were not
then publicly in being, nor in the least mentioned in any of them, and if so,
I think they cannot be concerned. But that being under the construction of a
power above me, I shall not be positive in it, or determine it.

Then he rivets this, he thinks, by saying, But what if it be said, that it is
not the thing sworn, but the Oath it self that is scrupled at? This he tells
you, Doctor, is nice, and unhappy to those that are so strait-laced, and from
thence he infers, its dangerous to the Government, for it lets in all the
Priests and Jesuits in nature under that color; for they will all flow in
thither, (that is, amongst the Dissenters from the Church of England) for
shelter, and carry on their Designs without trial or danger. Is not this most
incomparable Juggling? he can blow hot and cold at his pleasure, an excellent
Artist; for observe, when he had some trouble of Spirit upon him for the
Papists Sufferings upon this Hellish Plot, and to take off the edge of the
Magistrate, and the opinion of the People, as to the further and severe
prosecuting of it, that there might not be any more havoc made with them, then
there was not a Papist to be seen, they were invisible; but now when the Tables
must be turned upon the Dissenters to the Church of England, then because of
some of the Dissenters scruplesomeness in Swearing, his Opinion is changed; for
now there is a great deal of danger he says; but if you will believe the Author
before, it must be of no body, or at least, so few, that they are not worth the
looking after, but one to three thousand, if so much; so here is Mr. Roger
against Mr. L' Estrange: and indeed I take the Author's Inference from hence to
be altogether foreign and remote from your words or meaning in your Deposition,
or the truth of the case; for though your Deposition in fact is true, and
common experience joins with you in it, that the Jesuits and their Party are so
active, that they will, if possible, thrust themselves into any Society of Men,
to try their skill in disturbance of Governments* and carry on their Design,
yea, even as well where there are Dissenters from the Church of England, as
where there are none; and according to what he said, equally safe to
themselves. Now to conclude all, he tells you, Doctor, It must be granted, that
either the Papists have a design upon the King, Religion and Government, and
advance it by acting the parts of Quakers, Anabaptists, Presbyterians and other
Sectaries, or not; and admitting your Deposition to be true, there can be no
security to this Government, without either dissolving all separate meetings,
or bringing in all Dissenters to this Legal Test, otherwise the Papists have
all sorts of liberty and security in herding themselves amongst Conventiclers;
where upon the beating of a Bush, it will be an even wager whether you start a
Jesuit, or a Fanatic; and in this case there is not much difference between
them, where the Jesuit plays the Fanatic, or the Fanatic the Jesuit: and then
says, if this main Assertion be true, there is no way of finding out the
Papists but by this Test; and Dissenters cannot choose but encourage the
Proposition, either they have Priests amongst them, or not; if they have, why
do they not the best they can to find them out; if not, why do they say they
have? Either they are influenced by the Jesuits, or not; if they be, why do not
they purge their Congregations? If not, why do they pretend they are, and so
set the Saddle on the wrong Horse? Either its possible to clear their
Conventicles of this dangerous mixture, or not; If so, why do they still
complain, and do nothing in it? If not, then there is no way to extirpate
Popery, but by rooting out Fanaticism; and then he calls to the world to judge
with what injustice the Orders and Rituals of the Church of England are charged
with a tincture of Superstition and Popery, when the Calumniators are tainted
with this Leaven: and then concludes, he is come to the bottom of the Popish
Plot. I am sure a blind man would be glad to see it; for I, that have both my
eyes, can neither see top, middle, nor bottom of what he promised, of a further
Discovery of your discovered Plot: and all he has said I take to be but a mere
groundless Phantasm; for in the beginning of his Pamphlet he undertook a
further Discovery of the Plot than you discovered; and could you, or any other
rational man have from thence expected, or looked for any thing else but some
new matter, and clearly made out, and evinced either by authentic Testimony,
or undeniable Arguments? but instead thereof he has spoiled three or four
Sheets of Paper, by stuffing them full of strained and wrested Constructions
of, and inferences from some part of your Depositions and Observations, many
manifest contradictions, and apparent mistaken Conclusions thereupon.
Nevertheless, to do him what right I can, perchance if you take not his
litteral expression, but his mystical meaning, I am persuaded you will go nigh
to judge, he has made, or really intended to make a further Discovery of a
Plot, but not the Plot you have discovered: for if you well and seriously
observe the subject matter of his Discourse and Arguments, and to what they
tend, and add to it the time when this Learned Piece came forth, and compare it
with the invented Plots of the Earl of Castlemain, Countess of Powis, John
Gadbury, Mrs. Celier, etc. I may easily suppose, Doctor, you may without any
great stress readlly conjecture with whom he conversed, for what Meridian this
elaborate Piece of his was calculated, and for whose use by its Image and
Superscription, but the All-mighty Providence having taken them in their own
Snares, both in those and other things has thereby plainly proved to the world
the manifest untruth of his Assertions; for although is be undeniably true what
you have deposed, that the Jesuits and their Agents endeavored to Work amongst
all Parties whatsoever, nay, and by his own showing, as he puts the case, they
may be as secure amongst the members of the Church of England, nay and more
than the Dissenters from the Church of England; for, although he says, because
many of the Dissenters will not take Oaths, therefore there the Jesuits etc.
may hide themselves; so also he says many of the Jesuits and Papists, will
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and so will the members of the
Church of England: if so, then what can hinder the Jesuits etc. to herd and
hide there? Into what Confusion has this Author brought us, if all his
Suppositions be true, but certainly had the Earl of Castlemain, the Countess of
Powis, John Gadbury, Mris. Celier and their accomplices been of Opinion that
their Security had lain amongst the Dissenters to the Church of England, they
would not have been so injurious to them, as to have endeavored to have turned
the Plot upon them, and besides its to all rational men a strange Proof against
this Authors Assertion in that particular; for if the Jesuits, etc. herd only
amongst Dissenters from the Church of England, and they had been their
fellow-Conspirators or Agents in the Plot; It could not be unknown to them, and
then certainly there had not been such necessity as they conceived, to go about
by desperate and false Oaths, to make them either Authors, Abetters or
Contrivers of the Plot; and does it not evidently and plainly Demonstrate the
Contrary? for had those Assertions been true this Author would have you,
Doctor, and the world believe in that particular, surely there had not needed a
Sham-Plot, to bring the Dissenters from the Church of England into the real
Plot, for had it been true it might have been proved by other means, but yet to
this day there is not one man of the dissenters from the Church of England,
come to my knowledge, that is either charged with, or detected of any such
thing; (unless the Authors bare word be to be taken for granted) so that though
the Jesuits and Priests have according to your Depositions endeavored to draw
them in, yet have they not prevailed, for what appears; so that for ought I can
preceive its undeniable that the Saddle was, and is upon the right Horse, and
then all his Queries of if's or not's fall to the ground, and needs not any
answer but what is before upon the like questions. But that the Dissenters from
the Church of England have Jesuits and Priests actually amongst them, does not
by yours or any other deposition, proof or experience whatsoever appear, there
is any, or if there be, that they have not wrought any Influence at all upon
them, or at least such an one as may from the Government, merit a total
Extirpation, which the Author strongly presses for, but I presume an healing
Plaster is better.

But he having been heretofore accustomed to Write new's-Books, thought his
book would not appear authentic or at least would not be vendable without an
advertisment annexed to it; which Advertisment is indeed as much to the
purpose, and Coherent to the Subsequent matter of his Pamphlet as comes just to
nothing, and truly he is so Ingenious as to tell you so, for he says in the
close of it that its Foreign to the Subject of his Pamphlet, but more
Accomodate to the Season. But for my part I think its Foreign to both, for it
is, that the Subjects right of Petitioning, has been of late in such manner
asserted, as if his Majesty had no right of refusing; and then answers it with
some Instances, from Edward the Third, to Henry the Eight, of Granting and
Refusing; I know not his Author nor I believe he did not, for that Assertion,
for if he had certainly he would have named him. But if any one did so he was
to blame, and was I suppose as much under a mistake as the Author is in his
Pamphlet, and the Subject matter of it; for I take it to be undoubred, that the
person or Power that may be petitioned to, has a power of granting and
denying: as for instance; if a Party of his friends should in a petition to his
Majesty set forth according to their apprehension, his merits by his Pamphlet
and pray a reward for him, his Majesty might refuse it, and on the other hand
if you, Doctor, and others by petition to his Majesty, should set forth how he
has traduced his Majesty, the Government and the Kings Witnesses in his said
Pamphlet, and pray that the same, and he, might be left to the Law to be
punished according to their demerits, the same might and would be granted; but
in regard he could not, or at least would not make a further Discovery of that
Damnable and hellish Plot Discovered by you; give me leave to tell you, if he
could have been convinced by any other Evidence, or Testimony, than Dives and
his brethren, how he might have done it, by publishing to the world, as the
truth is, that the singer of God has been in this Discovery of yours
throughout; for it cannot proved, be that you, Doctor, had the least advice or
assistance of any one man, to guide or help you to contrive the way you took,
and was to take, (and that with eminent danger and vast hazard, and great
difficulty) for the making your self Master of this Discovery in less than a
year.

That you had not the least advice or assistance of any one man to help you to
contrive the time, the way, and method how to publish this Discovery to
Authority, but came barely and nakedly to it; yea, and with a proof in your
mouth, from those you were to discover, you nor any one else should be credited.

That when many of the material measures you had proposed to your self, and
depended upon to make good, and for the manifestation of your Discovery (as
Coleman's latter Papers, Langhorne's Papers, the foreign Pacquets) were
removed, and you deprived of them, and by reason thereof barely stood as a
single Witness, and inevitable ruin and destruction ghastly and grimly staring
in your face, yet your Spirits were supported, and you not at all discouraged
from sticking to the truth. But then the Jesuitical Party being infatuated, and
raging with madness, must needs, to hide their Villainies, as all notorious
Sinners commonly do, by committing another Sin; so did they by committing that
barbarous and inhumane Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, which proved
otherwise than they designed it; for instead of suppressing the Discovery of
the Plot, it did, as it were give a new life to what you had delivered. Then
doubtless, moved by the same spirit you were, did not the then Representatives
of the Nation unanimously by their Votes testify their credit of your
Evidence? Then by the same hand apparently were sent in, to your assistance and
confirmation, Mr. Bedlow, Mr. Dugdale and many others, who have proved many
other particulars, and concurred in the general to a tittle with you.

That until you, and the rest of the Witnesses in this Hellish and Damnable
Plot, had been made use of at a public Trial, you did not converse, or
associate with one another, as can be proved by a multitude of authentic
Witnesses, so far as is provable in a negative; and I am confident cannot be
proved in the affirmative.

That not any two of you that are the King's Witnesses in that Plot, or any
part of it; were of any Familiarity or acquaintance, before your being engaged
in that business, and you all lived remote from one another; and although you
do not all swear to the same particulars, yet do concur in the whole, as to
the generality of the Plot.

That not any one of them but your self (who for some short time was under a
necessity to counterfeit your self a Papist.) These things, Doctor, I only
mention to put you in mind by what hand, you, as I conceive, have been
supported in this Discovery, and to show you according to my apprehension, what
improbability, nay, I may say, impossibility, there is, that this Discovery of
yours, of this Hellish Plot, is in the least any thing of an invention, or
contrived Design by you, but is pure matter of Fact, and of undeniable verity,
and not to be so slighted, as that invention of Beddingfields, being alive
again. All which I was prompted to, as I conceived as a Duty incumbent upon me,
upon and by the obligation of the Loyalty I truly owe to my natural Prince, the
real veneration I have for the Government and true Christian Religion, and
Justice of the Nation, the Cordial Love I have to my faithful Fellow Subjects,
and my professed and faithful Friendship to your self; and therefore keep up
your Spirits, and be not dismayed, or in the least discouraged; for it is my
opinion, and I hope not without good grounds, and presume I may with reverence,
and without offense say it (unless to the tender ears of some captious
Masquerade and strange Sons of the Church of England) that God will neither
forsake you, nor this Cause, but in despite of all opposition will therein
glorify himself, and in truth set up the Kingdom of his Son.

But give me leave to tell you my Judgment, that if this Author's Assertions
and Arguments

(...) Your Cordial Friend, B. W.

FINIS.

