THE HISTORY OF THE Revolution in Portugal, In the Year, 1640.

Or, An Account of their Revolt from Spain, And setting the Crown on the Head
of Don John of Braganza, Father to Don Pedro, the Present King, and Catharine
Queen Dowager of England.

Written in French by the excellent Pen of the Abbot Vertat, (Author of the
History of the Revolution in Sweden.) And done into English.

LONDON, Printed for Mat. Gilliflower, Tim. Goodwin, Mat. Wotton, Rich. Parker,
and Benj. Took. 1700.

The Introduction.
AMong the Principal Events of this last Age, none deserves our Attention more
than the Revolt of Portugal, in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Forty.
The Unanimity, Zeal, and Secrecy with which this Conspiracy was carried on for
a long time, between Persons of different Ages, Sexes, and Qualities; the
Ardour for recovering their Liberties, which animated them to encounter
Difficulties, in appearance insuperable; and lastly, the complete Success, and
the little Blood lost in the execution of this mighty Enterprise, makes it
truly admirable and surprising.

This small Fragment, as it were torn from the general History of the Times,
was written in French not very long since as an Essay by the Abbot Vertat,
since Author of the History of the Revolutions of Sweden; both which Pieces
have been received with the Applause of the Public. The Materials out of which
he has compiled this small Volume, are for the most part Portugal restaurado de
Menezes Caet. Passarel. Lusitania reparata de Macedo, Mercure Francois de
Renandot Siry, et Recueil de Relations extraordinaires.
Printed Accounts, Journals, Gazettes, and the Relations of Persons who were at
Lisbon when this Drama was acted. Most of these are indeed ill enough writ, but
have received a new Life and Luster since they have been touched by his
Incomparable Pen. I might, in this place, commend the Vivacity, Politeness, and
Fidelity with which this little Piece is writ; but I shall rather choose to give
the Reader a view of the State of Affairs which lead to that Revolution, which
is the Subject of it.

Portugal was first erected in the Year 1139. into a Kingdom by Alphonso I.
who, after he had defeated the Moors, refused to pay that Homage to Spain which
his Father had done. After him Alphonso III his Great Grandson, had Algarva
given him in Dowry with the Princess Beatrix, Daughter to Alphonso the Tenth
King of Castile, which still gives a Title to the Heir Apparent of the Crown.
Thus Portugal continued an Independent Kingdom, Governed by its own Princes,
till the Brave Sebastian unfortunately perished in the Battle of Alcazar, Aug.
4. 1578. without leaving any Issue behind him. The Cardinal Dom Henry, his
Great Uncle, succeeded to the Throne, whose Reign lasted but sixteen Months.
After his Death, diverse Princes and Princesses pretended to the Crown.
Catharine, Duchess of Braganza, Philip the Second, King of Spain, the Duke of
Parma, the Duke of Savoy, and Dom Antonio, Grand Prior of Crete, were all
descended from Dom Emanuel, Father of the Cardinal King, but in different
Degrees: There was only the Duchess of Braganza, and the K. of Spain in the
same Degree and nearest the Crown. Catharine was Daughter to the Infant Edward,
and Philip was Son to the Empress Elizabeth, both Children to Dom Emanuel. The
Grand Prior was only Natural Son to the Infant Dom Lewis, Second Son of Dom
Emanuel, but his Party gave out, there was a secret Marriage between that
Prince and his Mother. Catharine de Medicis, Queen of France sent a Deputation
to the States, to represent her Title as descended from Alphonso III. King of
Portugal, and Maud Countess of Bolonia. The Pope too put in, and drew an
Advantage from King Henry's dying a Cardinal; but all these Pretensions were
little considered. All were agreed, and the most able Lawyers had determined,
that the apparent Right was in the Duchess of Braganza, not only because the
Laws of the Kingdom exclude Foreigners from succeeding to the Crown; but
likewise by the Right of Lineal Descent, as Daughter of the Infant Edward,
whose Title could not be disputed by the Empress Elizabeth his Sister, Mother
to the King of Spain. And doubtless, this Duchess would have been acknowledged
as Queen of Portugal, had she had the Power necessary to assert her Rightful
Pretensions.

THE HISTORY OF THE Revolution IN PORTUGAL, In the Year 1640.
THE Spaniards had been near Since the Year 1581.
Threescore Years in Possession of the Crown of Portugal. Philip the Second,
King of Spain, after the Death of Henry Cardinal-King, had forced it from the
House of Braganza, by the help of a Formidable Army, the best Argument to
support a bad Title. This Kingdom was by degrees become a Province of Spain,
and the Portuguese seemed for ever to despair of shaking off their Chains. The
Great Men did not dare to appear in a Splendour suitable to their Rank, or
demand a due Respect, for fear of raising Jealousies in the Spanish Ministers,
at a time when the Consideration of a man's Wealth, Family, or Merit, were
enough to render him suspected, and expose him to ill Usage. The Gentry were
banished to their Country Seats, and the People oppressed with Excessive Taxes.

It was a Maxim with the Conde Duke d' Olivarez, First Minister to Philip the
Fourth King of Spain, That New Conquests ought to be exhausted. He knew very
well the Ancient and Natural Antipathy of these Neighboring Nations must needs
render the Spanish Government hateful to the Portuguese; and that Nation could
never tamely see all Places in the State filled with Strangers, or Fellows of
mean Extraction, whose only Merit was their entire Devotion to the Court. For
this Reason he thought the best way to establish his Master's Power, was, To
exclude the Nobility and Gentry from all Employs and Public Trust, and by
insensibly impoverishing the People, to leave them incapable of attempting any
Alteration in the State. Besides this, He judged it necessary to drain the
Kingdom of the Flower of their Youth, and the best who could bear Arms, and to
employ them in Foreign Wars, to prevent such Dangerous People from disturbing
the Repose of the Government.

This Conduct, which possibly might have succeeded, if it had been carried to a
certain pitch; being strained too high, had a quite contrary effect, which
proceeded partly from the Distress in which the Court was at that time, and
partly from the Temper then of the First Minister, naturally stiff and
inflexible. They began now to disregard all Measures with Portugal, disdaining
to use the ordinary Pretenses for raising Money on a People. In short, they
seemed more to exact a Contribution in an Enemy's Country, than a just
Imposition on Subjects. The Portuguese having nothing more to lose, and
despairing to see an end or mitigation of their Misery, as long as they
continued in their present condition, began now to think of freeing themselves
from the Severity of their cruel Masters, which they had ever esteemed
Usurpers, and intolerable Tyrants.

Margaret, Duchess of Mantua, governed Portugal at that time in Quality of
Vice-Queen; but this was but a glittering Title which the Court has given to a
very limited Power. The secret Counsels, and the great Management of Affairs,
were entrusted in the Hands of Moguel Vasconcellos, a Portuguese, who had the
Character of Secretary of State to the Vice-Queen, but was indeed an Absolute
and Independent Minister.

This Man received his Orders immediately from the Conde Duke, whose Creature
he was, with whom he had ingratiated, and made himself necessary by a singular
Art he had of drawing perpetually considerable Sums out of Portugal; and an
intrieguing Wit, which enabled him to accomplish his private Designs. He had
the Art of raising Feuds and Animosities among the Great Men of the Kingdom,
which He would craftily foment by his Favor, and affected Distinctions, by
which he was sure to please and engage those who received them, and to create
Spite and Envy in the rest. While these Divisions continued, he concluded all
was safe, persuading himself the contending Parties would be wholly employed in
satisfying their Resentments, and not have leisure to attempt any thing against
the settled Government.

There was no Man in Portugal besides the Duke of Braganza, who could give the
Spaniards the least Disquiet. This Prince was of a mild and sweet Temper, a
Lover of Ease; more a Man of Good Sense, than Quickness of Wit. In Business he
went to the main Point; and easily made himself Master of what he applied
himself to, but seldom cared for Application. Duke Theodosius his Father, a Hot
and Violent Man, had labored to infuse into him an Hereditary Hate to the
Spaniards, whom he looked on as Usurpers of a Crown which belonged to his
Family, and used all possible means to fill his Breast with the Ambition of
regaining his Right, and all the Heat and Courage which is necessary for so
Great and Hazardous an Enterprise.

Dom John had indeed imbibed the Sentiments of his Father, not to so high a
Degree, but in such a Manner as suited with his calm and moderate Temper. He
hated the Spaniards, but not so as to be in pain to revenge the Injury. He had
Ambition, and did not despair of re-ascending the Throne of his Ancestors; but
in this He did not show so much Impatience as Duke Theodosius had done; He
contented himself with a distant Prospect of a Crown, without hazarding the
Repose of his Life, and a certain Fortune, which was already the greatest that
could consist with the Condition of a Subject.

In short, it is most certain, if he had been precisely what Duke Theodosius
wished him, he had been less fit to obtain what he designed him for. The Conde
Duke observed him with so strict an Eye, that if his manner of Living had not
been entirely the Effect of his Natural Inclination, that vigilant Minister
would have soon descried it; and this must have been fatal to his Ease and
Fortune. The Court of Spain would never have entrusted him with so large a
Power, or suffered him to lead an unmolested Life in the Heart of his Country.

The most refined Politics could never have taught so wise a Conduct toward
the Spaniards, as the Bent of his Genius, His Birth, his Fortunes, his Title to
the Crown; but by the Laws of Politics it is ever a Crime to be Formidable.
This he knew well enough, and saw plainly there was but one way for him to
take: and this his Inclination, as well as Reason, led him to. There was but
one way to lessen his Offense, and that was to render himself less feared. To
this end he concerned himself in no manner of Business, and seemed wholly bent
on his Diversion and Pleasure. He acted very well this Part; and at
Villavveiosa, the Ordinary Residence of the Dukes of Braganza, there was
nothing but Hunting-Matches, Entertainments; and all those about him were a
sort of People proper to make the Pleasures of a Delicious Country relish. In
short; Nature and Fortune seemed to conspire; one to give him all the Qualities
proper for the present State of Affairs; and the other to dispose the State of
Affairs to display his Natural Qualities.

These did not shine enough to give the Spaniards grounds to fear he would
attempt to make himself King; but they appeared solid enough for the Portuguese
to hope for a mild and easy Government of themselves, should they re-place him
on the Throne of his Ancestors.

His Conduct did not give the least Jealousy, till a certain Accident alarmed
the First Minister.

The People of Evora being oppressed with new Taxes, and reduced to Despair,
rose; and, in the Heat of the Tumult, some of their Leaders began to exclaim
against the Spanish Tyranny, and declare publicly for the House of Braganza.
This Accident made the Court sensible how much they had mistaken their
Interest, in leaving so Rich and Potent a Family, whose Rights to the Crown
were so clear, in the midst of a Conquered Country.

For this Consideration the Council of Spain resolved to secure the Duke of
Braganza, or at least to send him out of Portugal. In the first place they
offered him the Government of Milan; which he refused, pretending his frequent
Indisposition; That he had not a sufficient Knowledge of the Affairs of Italy,
to acquit himself in a Post of so much Difficulty and Weight.

The Minister seemed to approve his Reasons, but looked out for some other
means to draw him to Court. The King's Marching to Suppress the Revolt in
Catalonia, was the Matter which afforded the next Pretense. Upon this Occasion
he writes to him to come at the Head of the Nobility of his Country, to join
the Troops of Castile in so glorious an Expedition, where the King Commanded in
Person. But the Duke, who had a just Suspicion of whatever came from Court,
soon discovered this Artifice, and excused himself from this Attendance;
pretending, That His Birth and Quality obliged him to an extraordinary Expense,
and his Fortunes were not in a condition to support it.

France and Spain were at that time engaged in a War, and the French Fleet had
been off the Coasts of Portugal; and this Occasion gave that Minister a fair
Color to cover his Design. It was necessary to appoint some General to Command
the Forces which were designed for the Defense of the Coasts, and preventing
the French from making a Descent. He sent the Duke therefore a Commission for
this purpose, which was so filled with Compliments, and entrusted him with so
unlimited a Power to increase or make alteration in all Garrisons, and dispose
of Vessels in the Ports at his Discretion, that by so absolute a Confidence he
seemed to deliver the whole Kingdom into his hands. But this fair Appearance
only concealed the Snare; and at the same time he sent secret Orders to Dom
Lopez Ozono, who Commanded the Spanish Fleet, to put into one of the Ports,
near where the Duke should happen to be, upon pretense of being driven in by
Stress of Weather, and then to invite him to some Entertainment, and when he
was Aboard to bring him into Spain. But Fate ordered Matters quite otherwise;
and the Spanish Admiral being surpised with a Tempest, lost several of his
Ships; and the rest were so dispersed, that he could not Land with them in
Portugal.

The ill Success of this Project did not dismay the Conde Duke; he imputed the
Duke of Braganza's Escape wholly to Chance and Fortune, concluding, That all
things must necessarily have answered his Desires, if Dom Lopez had arrived in
the Ports of that Kingdom according to his Instructions. And therefore he
invents a new Trick, and writes to that Prince in the most obliging manner he
could imagine, filling his Letter with the highest Expressions of Confidence,
as if he had been a Partner with himself in the Ministry and Government. In
this Letter he complains of the Misfortune of the Fleet, and how sensible he
was of the Loss they had sustained, at a Time when the Enemies were so
Formidable at Sea; That being unhappily deprived of the Naval Strength, which
should have guarded their Coasts, the King wished he would take an exact Review
of all the Forts and Harbors of that Kingdom, which might he exposed to the
Insults of the French. And with this he sent an Order for Forty Thousand Ducats
for the defraying his Expenses, and raising more Forces in case it should be
needful.

At the same time the Governors of the Citadels, most of which were Spaniards,
had secret Orders sent to secure his Person, when a favorable Occasion should
present, and send him into Spain.

The Duke of Braganza reflecting on these high Marks of Confidence; and how
little agreeable this was to the usual Conduct of that Minister, began to
suspect the Sincerity of his Intentions, which, in the end, caused the Author
to fall into that Snare which he laid for another. The Prince therefore writes
back to assure him, That He accepted with abundance of Joy the Command which
the King had given him; That He hoped by his Application, and Zeal for his
Service, he should justify his Choice, and show himself worthy of the Favor he
had so graciously conferred on him.

And now having a nearer Prospect than before of remounting the Throne of his
Ancestors, he made use of all the Power he was invested with to put his Friends
into all Posts and Employs where they might one day be useful to him. He
expended the Spanish Moneys in making of New Creatures; and when he visited the
Forts, it was always with a great Attendance, which made them despair of
seizing his Person.

The whole Court of Spain began to murmur that a Trust of so high a nature
should be lodged in him, the King only being privy to the Reasons of this
Conduct. Every one began to rail at the Conde Duke, as Allied to the House of
Braganza, urging, That it was the last Imprudence to make a Person General of
the Forces in Portugal, who had so great Pretensions to the Crown of that
Kingdom; That this was in effect to put him in a condition to assert his Title,
and turn his Arms against his Lawful Sovereign. This served only to confirm the
King in his Resolution, who approved the Design better when he found the People
did not discern the Secret of it. In the mean time the Duke of Braganza, by
virtue of his new Employment, traversed all Parts of Portugal; in which
Progress he laid the Foundations of his Restoration. His Equipage was
Magnificent, and drew the Eyes of the People wherever he came: He heard all
who came to him with great Mildness and Sweetness of Temper: He kept the
Soldiers from committing the least Disorder; frequently extolled the Officers,
winning them by all the Recompenses which were in his Power to bestow. His free
Deportment charmed the Nobility; all whom he received with obliging
Distinctions, according to their Merit and Quality: In short, he dispensed his
Favors wherever he came, and won more by Hopes of future Benefits than
present; and all who were about him began to esteem it the greatest Happiness
could befall them, that so noble a Prince should be restored to the Throne.

The Party who adhered to his Interest, omitted nothing which might conduce to
establish his Reputation. Among these, none labored more effectually than
Pinto Ribeuro, Comptroller of his Household, to set all Machines on work, and
form a Scheme for the Advancement of his Master. This Man had all the Qualities
proper for a Business of this nature; He was Active, Vigilant, had great
Experience in Business, and a violent Passion for the Restoration of the Duke;
doubtless flattering himself with the Hopes of having a large share in the
Ministry whenever he should bring this to pass. The Prince had in private
assured him, That he would lay hold of any Fair occasion to place himself in
the Throne, but was resolved not to hazard this at all Adventures, as a Man who
had nothing to lose; that he might manage the People, and Gain as many
Creatures as he could, provided himself did not appear to have any share in
what he did.

Pinto had for a long time labored with great Industry to observe who were
disaffected, and to increase the Number. For this purpose he privately raised
Murmurs against the present Government, sometimes railing against the
Government with a great deal of Warmth, at other times with more Reserve,
according to the Character or Humor of the Persons he was with. He would
frequently remind People of Quality of the Honorable Posts their Families had
formerly enjoyed when Portugal was governed by its Natural Princes. But nothing
exasperated the Nobility more, than the Summons which the King had sent them to
attend him into Catalonia. Pinto inveighed against this Expedition,
representing it as a sort of Banishment; urging, That they must not hope to
return without great difficulties; That besides a vast Expense, they must
endure the hateful Insolence of the Spaniards; That The Court of Spain had a
private Interest to destroy the Bravest Men, or expose them in all Places where
there was most Danger, and least Glory to be obtained.

If he happened to be among Citizens or Merchants, he exclaimed against the
Injustice of the Spaniards, who had ruined Lisbon and the whole Country of
Portugal, by transferring the Trade of the Indies to Cadiz; he entertained them
with nothing else but Discourses of the extreme Misery they were reduced to by
so Tyrannical a Government; extolling the Hollanders and Catalonians, who had
nobly delivered themselves. In the last place, he suggested to the Clergy how
they had violated the Privileges and Immunities of the Church: That the most
considerable Dignities and Benefices, which ought to be a Recompense to the
Merit and Capacity af the Portuguese, were bcome a Prey to Foreigners.

In Company of those whom he knew to be disaffected, he would ever turn his
Discourse to his Master's Humor and Manner of Living. Here he would complain
of that Idle Life in which he seemed to be buried, expressing his great Regret,
that the only Person who was able to remedy their Grievances, should show so
little Affection to his Country, or Concern for his Honors; and observing
these Discourses to make an impression on them, he pushed Matters so far, as to
flatter some with the Glorious Title of the Asserters of the Liberty of their
Country, raising their indignation at the ill treatment of the Spaniard, and to
give other Hopes of advancing their Fortunes by a Revolution.

In short, he managed the Temper of the People with so great Skill, that being
well assured of Diverse privately, he procured a Meeting of the Nobility, with
the Archbishop of Lisbon at their Head.

This Prelate was descended of one of the best Houses D' Acugna.
in that Kingdom; was a Man of Learning, an able Statesman, and beloved by the
People, but hated by the Spaniards, whom he hated no less, because they had
preferred the Archbishop of Braga, Dom Sebastian de Mattos de Noroguia.
a Creature of the Vice-queen, whom they had made President of the Chamber of
Opaco, and given a share in the Administration of Affairs.

Dom Miguel d' Almeida was one of the most cOnsiderable Members of this
Company. This was a venerable Old Gentleman, who had gained a mighty Esteem by
his Worth: He placed his Glory in preferring the Interest of his Country to his
Fortunes, and could not without Indignation see it enslaved by Usurpers. He
persisted in this sense his whole Life with great Bravery and Resolution, and
neither the Advice of his Friends, or the Entreaties of his Relations could
ever induce him to go to the Palace, or make his Court to the Spanish
Ministers. This Steddiness in his Conduct had created some Jealousy of him, and
determined Pinto to pitch on him to make his Declaration to, being well assured
he should not hazard any thing in making a Confidence with a Man of such a
Character, and one who was able to bring so great a Number of the Nobility over
to his Party.

Dom Antonio d' Almada, an intimate Friend to the Archbishop was there, and Dom
Lewis his Son; Dom Lewis d' Acugna, Nephew to that Prelate, and married to the
Daughter of Dom Antonio d' Almada, the Master of the Horse; Mello, Dom George
his Brother; Pedro Mendoza, Dom Rodrigo de Saa, High Chamberlain, and diverse
Officers of the Royal Family, whose Place were become empty Title, since
Portugal had lost her Natural Kings.

At this Meeting the Archbishop, who was naturally Eloquent, displayed the
calamitous State of that Kingdom; He represented to them, How Philip the
Second, to secure his Conquest, had destroyed an infinite Number of the
Nobility: That He had not spared the Church, witness the Famous Brief of
Absolution C^nestagio.
which he had obtained of the Pope for the Murder of Two thousand Priests and
Religious persons, whom he had put to Death to secure his Usurpation: That
since those Dismal Times, the Spaniards had not changed their Measures: That
they had taken off a great many Worthy persons for no other Crime, but their
Love to their Country: That no Man present had his Life or Estate secure to
him: That the Great Men were excluded from the Government, destitute of Employ,
and neglected: That the Church had been filled with a scandalous Clergy, since
Vasconcellos had bestowed Benefices as Rewards on his Creatures: That the
People were oppressed with Taxes; the Country wanted Hands to Till it, and the
Cities were desolate, being exhausted by those Forces which were sent into
Catalonia: That these Orders to Summon the Nobility under a Pretense, of
attending the King, was the last shift the Minister could use to take off the
Remains of those Gentlemen whom he conceived might be an Obstacle to his
pernicious Designs: That the least Misfortune which could befall them, must be a
tedious Banishment, and they must wear away their Lives in the Heart of
Castile, while new Colonies were possessed of their Estates at Home: That for
his part, in this deplorable state of Things, he should choose to dye, rather
than see the entire Ruin and Destruction of his Country, if he had not some
Hopes of so many Worthy Persons were not met together to no purpose.

This Speech revived in the Company the uneasy Memory of those Grievances they
had so long labored under. Every one was earnest to give some Instances of the
Cruelties of Vasconcellos; Some had lost their Estates by his Injustice, others
had been turned out of their Hereditary Places and Governments to make room for
his Creatures; diverse of them had for a long time groaned in Prison to satisfy
the Jealousy of the Spanish Ministers; some were concerned for the Loss for
their Fathers, Brothers, Friends detained at Madrid, or sent into Catalonia as
Hostages for the Fidelity of their Countrymen. In short, there was no one in
this public Cause who had not some private Injury to revenge. The Expedition
into Catalonia incensed them, and raised their Indignation to the last degree.
They saw plainly this did not proceed from any Necessity, which constrained the
Spaniards to make use of their Assistance, but a design of that Court to ruin
them by so long a March. These Considerations, joined with the Hopes of
Revenging so many Affronts as they had received, determined them, and made them
resolve to take all proper Measures to throw off a Yoke which they sound too
heavy to bear; and being deprived of all Hopes of mitigating their unhappy
Condition, they reproached their Patience as a Baseness and Meanness of Spirit,
and unanimously agreed there was a necessity of driving out the Spaniard, but
were divided what Form of Government they ought to prefer.

One part of the Company were for a Republic, like that of Holland; another
part were inclined to have a King; and of this Number some proposed the Duke of
Braganza, others the Marquess de Villareal, and others the Duke d' Aveiro, all
three Princes of the Royal Blood of Portugal, each delivering his Mind as his
Fancy or Interest led him. But the Archbishop, who was devoted to the House of
Braganza, dexterously using the Authority of his Character, made a Remonstrance,
not without some Vehemence; alleging, That the Choice of Government was not
Arbitrary: That they could not in Conscience break that Oath of Fidelity which
they had taken to Spain, except it were to do Justice to the Rightful Heir of
that Crown, which all the World knew was the Duke of Braganza; and therefore
they must resolve to acknowledge him as their King; or for ever remain under
the Dominion of Spain. In the next place he desired them to reflect on the
Power, the great Wealth, and the vast Number of Vassals of that Prince, on whom
one Third of that Kingdom depended; urging, They could never hope to drive out
the Spaniards, unless they had him at their Head; and that to engage him in an
Affair of this nature, they must offer him the Crown, whose Right was
indubitable, as being the first Prince of the Blood. From thence he passed to
his good Qualities, extolling his Prudence, Wisdom, and especially the
sweetness of his Temper, and his obliging Behavior. In short, he gave so happy
a Turn to this Matter, they all declared for him as their King, and agreed,
That nothing should be wanting that could engage him in this Design. Thus the
Company broke up, having first agreed on the Time and Place where they should
meet again, to consider of the best Means to bring the Matter to a speedy and
successful Issue.

Pinto seeing them thus disposed in Favor of his Master, writ privately to him
to come into the Neighborhood of Lisbon, for the encouraging the Conspirators
by his Presence, and taking precise Measures with them for the Execution of
that Design. This crafty Man put in Motion all the Wheels in that Affair,
without appearing to be any farther concerned than a private Person, acted by a
Zeal for the Public Service. He seemed to doubt whether his Master would enter
into it, upon the Account of his Natural Aversion to all Hazardous
Undertakings, which require Application and Attendance. He started some
Difficulties, which served only to remove all Suspicion of any Understanding
between him and his Master; and yet were such as tended rather to excite their
Ardour, than discourage them.

Upon the Advice which Pinto gave, the Duke some Days after left Villa-viciosa,
and came to Almada, a Castle near Lisbon, under Color of Visiting the Forts of
that Kingdom. His Equipage was very Magnificent, and he had a vast Train,
composed of Men of Quality, and Officers of the Army; which more resembl'd a
King taking Possession of his Kingdom, than of a Governor of a Province
visiting the Places under his Care and Inspection. Being near Lisbon, he could
not dispense with paying his Duty to the Vice-Queen. When he entered the Great
Court of the Palace, all the Avenues were filled with an infinite number of
People, who crowded to see him pass along, and most of the Nobility came to his
House to wait on him. It was a general Holy Day throughout the Town, and all
People were overjoyed to see him; there seemed only to want a Herald to
proclaim him King, or Resolution enough in himself to put the Crown on his Head.

But this Prince was too wise, and had too much Experience to trust so
important a Concern to the Sallies of a fickle and inconstant Multitude; He
very well understood the vast difference between those vain Shouts which the
People soon quit, and those steady Motions which are necessary to support an
Enterprise of that nature. Thus after he had taken his Leave of the Vice-Queen,
he retired to Almada, without going to Braganza-House, or passing through the
City, to prevent making the Spaniards uneasy, who were already too much alarmed
at the Transports of the People.

Pinto did not fail to observe to his Friends the Fear and Caution which his
Master used; urging, That they ought to improve the opportunity of his stay at
Almada, to break the Matter to him, and use some sort of Violence to engage him
to accept of the Crown, which was at this time absolutely necessary for the
public Good. The Conspirators approving this Advice, appointed him to obtain
of his Master some favorable Occasion for making this Proposition: He accepted
this Commission without much difficulty, and the Duke of Braganza agreed to an
Interview, on condition that only Three of the Conspirators should meet him,
not judging it proper to explain himself to more.

So Miguel d' Almeida, Antonio d' Almada, and Mendoza, came to him that Night;
and being introduced privately into his Closet, d' Almada, who spoke for the
rest, made a lively Representation of the unhappy State of that Kingdom, where
persons of all Conditions were exposed to the Injustice and Cruelty of the
Castillians; adding, That himself, with all his Greatness, was not secure from
their Attempts: That He was too discerning a person not to observe the Industry
which the prime Minister used to destroy him: That there was no other Refuge to
escape his ill designs, except the Throne: That in order to put him into that,
he had Commission to offer him the Services of a considerable Number of Persons
of Rank, who would sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes with pleasure for his
Interests, and to deliver their Country from its insolent Masters.

In the next place he told him, The Time of Charles the Fifth and Philip the
Second were past, when the Spaniards were the Terror of Europe, and gave Laws
to their Neighbors: That this Monarchy which had formerly conceived such vast
Designs, could now scarce preserve her ancient Territory, was attacked, and
often beat by the French and Hollanders: That Catalonia alone employed her
utmost Strength: That she, was destitute of Troops and Money, and governed by a
weak Prince, who himself was governed by a Minister hateful to the Kingdom. He
wished him to consider the Alliance and Protection which he might expect from
those Princes, in Europe, who were Eternal Enemies to the House of Austria:
That Holland and Catalonia showed what Assistance he might expect from a great
Minister, The Cardinal Richelieu.
whose mighty Genius seemed bent to ruin that House: That the Sea opened a way
for receiving all necessary Supplies. In short; That the Kingdom being empried
of the Castillian Garrisons, which the King had been forced to draw out of
Portugal, to increase his Army in Catalonia, he could never hope for a more
fovourable Juncture to assert his Right, and free his Country from Tyranny and
Slavery.

It may easily be thought this Discourse was very well relished by the Duke of
Braganza; but he with that Coldness, which was natural to him, so ordered the
Expressions of his Reply to the Deputies, that he seemed neither to lessen or
increase their Hopes.

He told them, That he was of their Opinion: That the Spaniards had reduced the
Kingdom to a Deplorable State: That Himself was not exempt from Danger: That he
could never enough commend their Zeal for their Country; And that he was in
particular very much obliged to them for the favorable Regard they had to his
Interest: but after all, he doubted if the Time was yet come, to think of such
violent Remedies as they proposed, which always had very bad consequences, if
the Event did not fall out as was projected.

To this Answer (for a more positive one he would not give) he added so many
Caresses and obliging Thanks to each Man in particular, that they went away
satisfied their Message was well Received; but that they must expect the Prince
would make no more Advances in the Matter, than by giving his Consent when
Things should be in a Condition to put the Success out of doubt.

After the Deputies were gone, he agreed with Pinto what new Measures were best
to be taken, and so went back to Villa-viciosa; and now he began to feel a
Disquiet of Mind, which hindered him from relishing the Pleasures of a private
Life.

As soon as he was returned, he communicated to the Duchess, his Wife, the
Propositions which had been made to him. This Princess was of Spanish
Extraction, and Sister to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, a Grandee of Spain, and
Governor of Andalusia. She had by Nature a strong inclination to whatever was
great and noble, which in time was grown up to a boundless Passion for Glory.
The Old Duke finding mighty things were to be expected from her Wit and
Courage, had taken care to improve the Gifts of Nature by a suitable Education.
He placed about her the fittest Persons to inspire Ambition into her Breast,
which the World regards as something noble, and the chief Virtue of a Prince.
She learnt several Tongues with a great deal of ease, but nothing could come
near that wondrous Sweetness with which she expressed her self in her natural
Language. In the Sound of her Voice, and in every word she spoke, was a secret
Charm, which ravished all who heard her. Her Air was noble, great, and free,
full of a majestic Sweetness, which at the same time inspired Love and Respect
into those who were about her.

She took the Portuguese Air with so much ease, she seemed Born at Lisbon. In
the first place, she was careful to win the Esteem of her Husband, which she
perfectly well did by the Austerity of her Life, by a solid Devotion, and a
perfect Complaisance to his Relish. She waved those Pleasures which are the
ordinary Amusement of Persons of her Quality and Age, and seemed to employ her
leisure Hours in those things which might embellish her Mind, or improve her
Judgment.

The Duke of Braganza was transported with the Happiness of enjoying so
finished a Woman: He had an infinite Esteem for her, and an entire Confidence
in her: He never undertook any thing without consulting with her, and therefore
had a care not to engage in an Affair of this kind without her Advice and
Opinion.

He discovered to her the Plan of the Conspiracy, the Names of the Persons
privy to it, their Zeal and Warmth, and every Particular that had passed at
Lisbon, and the Conference at Almada. He added, That on the News of the
Expedition into Catalonia, he plainly saw the Nobility would revolt, rather
than be compelled to leave their Country: That, it was to be feared, upon his
Refusal, they would look out for another Head: That notwithstanding, he could
not forbear confessing, that the Danger of the Enterprise startled him: That as
often as he had thought of this Design at a distance, the flattering Idea of
Greatness had made an agreeable impression on his Mind; but now he was upon the
point of putting this in execution, and running all the Risks of so hazardous
an Undertaking, he could not look without Dread on the Danger which he and his
whole Family was about to throw himself into. That the fickle Humor of the
Multitude was not much to be relied on, the Edge of whose Courage is taken off
by the least Difficulty, and they easily dispersed by every Blast of Wind. That
it was not sufficient for him to have the Nobility on his side, unless they
were supported by the Great Men of the Kingdom, but very far from hoping they
would come over to his Interest. He could not but foresee they would be the
most cruel of his Enemies; the natural Pride of Mankind never suffering them to
make a Master of one who has once been their Equal.

These Considerations, with several other; as the Power of Spain, the small
Assurance of Foreign Assistance, balanced his Passion for Government. But the
Duchess, who had a greater Firmness of Mind, and a more lively Ambition, closed
wholly with the Conspiracy. The View of so great an Undertaking, served only to
excite her Courage, and rowse up her Ardent Thirst after Greatness: She
represented to her Husband with a great deal of Vehemence, the undoubted Rights
which he had to the Crown: That in the deplorable State to which the
Castillians had reduced Portugal, a Man of his Rank and Quality could not
dispense with remaining any longer indifferent: That his Children and Posterity
would reproach his Memory with a Pusillanimity beneath his Blood, if he should
lose so favorable an Opportunity. After this she exaggerated to that Prince
the sweetness of Reigning in a Country where he could not Obey without Fear;
the Charms of a Crown, and the Facility of seizing it: That in case he should
miss of that Foreign Aid which had been offered to him, he was Potent enough to
expel the Spaniards, especially at this Juncture, when there was a Revolt in
Catalonia. In fine, she so Skilfully showed him the Crown on its most
glittering side, that she determined him. But in this she agreed with him, to
let the Number of the Conspirators increase, before he declared himself more
positively, and not to appear publicly in this Matter till the Moment of its
Execution.

All this while the Court was not without some Disquiet. The extraordinary
Marks of Joy which the People of Lisbon had shown on the Duke of Braganza's
appearing amongst them, had made a great Impression on the Minister. He began
to suspect private Clubs were held in that City; and some Rumors, which
commonly precede great Events, exceedingly increased his uneasiness.

The King held several Councils on this Occasion; in which it was resolved,
That for the effectual defeating the Portuguese Hopes of a Revolt, the Duke of
Braganza, the only Person whom they had occasion to fear, should forthwith be
sent for to Madrid. For this purpose the Conde Duke sent a Courier to him, with
this Message; That the King had a Mind to be informed from himself, and confer
with him concerning the State of the Troops and Garrisons in Portugal: That he
was mightily wished for at Court by his Friends; and that he could not doubt he
should be received in a manner suitable to his Birth and Merit.

No Clap of Thunder could have surpised him more than this News. The
Earnestness and different Pretenses they made use of to draw him out of
Portugal, confirmed his suspicion they had a Design on his Person, and were
resolved to take him off. They had left pretended Employs and false Caresses,
and were now come to positive Orders, which would soon be followed by Force and
Violence in case of Disobedience. This put him into a Panick Fear, imagining he
was betrayed; the usual Fate of those who have great Projects in their Head,
who still believe the World is busy in observing their Steps, and guesses at
the Secret of them. Thus did that diffident Prince perplex himself, thinking he
was now plunged in an Ocean of Trouble.

However, to gain Time, and have leisure to give the Conspirators notice of his
Danger, by the Advice of his Wife, he sent a Gentleman of his House, a Person
of great Address and Fidelity, to Madrid, to assure the Minister he would
suddenly attend the King. To this Man he gave secret Instructions, to invent
from Time to Time different Pretenses to excuse his Delay, hoping to prevent
the Storm by bringing the Conspiracy to ripeness. As soon as this Gentleman was
at Madrid, he assured the King and First Minister, that his Master followed
him. He took a great House, which he furnished very richly, and retained a
great Number of Servants, giving them Liveries by way of Advance, laying out
very considerable Sums of Money every day. In short, he omitted nothing to make
them believe the Prince would come immediately, and appear at Court in all the
Splendour becoming a Person of his Rank.

Some few Days after, he feigned to have received Advice, That he was very ill.
At last, finding this would not hold longer, he presented a Memorial to the
First Minister, praying in the Name of the Duke his Master, the King would
assign his Precedence in the Court.

He thought this would take up some time to adjust, and meet with Opposition
from the Great Men, who would intervene to maintain their Rights: But the
Minister, who began to suspect these Delays, soon removed all Difficulties, and
engaged the King to declare in his Favor, in every point for his Honor; so
desirous he was to draw him out of Portugal, and see him at Madrid.

The Conspirators no sooner understood the Orders which the Duke had received
from the Court, but fearing he should obey them they sent Mendoza to confirm
him and engage him more strictly to their Party. They made choice of this
Gentleman, because being Governor of a Place near Villa-viciosa, the pretense
of going to his Government covered the secret Intention of this Journey from
the Spaniards. He took an opportunity of meeting that Prince a Hunting; They
struck into the Wood, and stopping in a private place, Mendoza laid before him
the Danger which he exposed himself to by going to Court: That he would
absolutely ruin the Hopes of the Nobility and People by putting himself with
too rash a confidence into the Hands of his Enemies: That there were a great
Number of well-qualified Gentlemen who were resolved to sacrifice their Lives
and Fortunes for his Service: That they only expected notice from him when they
should appear: That the Critical minute was now come when he must choose either
to dye or wear a Crown: That it was Hazardous to make any further Delays; and
he must not doubt an Affair of so great Importance, which was entrusted in so
many Hands, must needs at length come to the Knowledge of the Spaniards. The
Duke replied, That he was of his mind, and that he might assure his Friends
that he was resolved to put himself at their Head.

Mendoza returned Post to Lisbon, acquainted his Friends with the Success of
his Voyage; and that the Prince desired Pinto might come to him. Him they sent
away instantly with necessary Instructions to inform the Duke of the Scheme and
Ways by which they intended to put their Project in Execution. When Pinto came,
he acquainted him in what Confusion the Court at Lisbon was; the Vice-Queen
made high Complaints of the Insolence and Pride of Vasconcellos; That she could
not any longer endure that all the Dispatches from Spain should be Addressed to
him, while she being invested with a glittering Title, had no real Authority.
This Complaint was the more to be regarded, because That Princess was a Person
of great Merit, and every way capable of Discharging the Extent of her Trust:
but indeed the Greatness of her Genius, and her other good Qualities, were the
principal Reason why she had so inconsiderable a share in the Government
allowed her.

Pinto observed to his Master how much this misunderstanding favored his
Designs, and that he could not lay hold of a fairer occasion than these
Divisions at Court, which would not give the Spanish Ministers leave to observe
the Steps he should take.

The Duke, who perceived the Strength of his Reasons, found himself likewise
pressed by that Gentleman whom he sent to Madrid. He received Letters from him
every Day, assuring him, That he could not find new Colors for his Absence, or
delude the Minister, who would not any longer hear his Excuses. Thus seeing he
had no Time to lose, he resolved to rise without delay. And now to gain Time
for the disposing his Affairs, he commanded his Agent to represent to the Conde
Duke d'Olivarez, That he should have been at Madrid before that time, if he had
had Money enough to bear the Expenses of his Journey, and enable him to make a
Figure suitable to his Quality and Character; and that as soon as he could
raise the necessary Funds, he would instantly come away for the Court.

When he had sent the Dispatch, he took Pinto with him into the Duchesses
Apartment, to consider of the most proper means to put their Design in
execution. And after some Debate, the Duke resolved on this, That it was
necessary to secure Lisbon, which being the Capital, was the Spring which moved
the whole Kingdom: That on the same Day that City should declare for him, he
would cause himself to be proclaimed King of Portugal in all the Cities of his
Dependence: That those of his Friends, who were Governors of Forts, should do
the same in all Places where they Commanded, and the Conspirators should raise
the People in all the Towns and Villages which belonged to them; that so this
General Insurrection diffusing it self like a Conflagration through every part
of the Kingdom, the Spaniards might not know whither to bend their Arms: That
he would fling his own Regiment into the Town of Elvas, the Governor of which
was at his Devotion: That as for the manner of seizing Lisbon, he could not
prescribe any thing, that Action depending wholly on the Time, and other
Circumstances when they should attempt it: That however he was of the Opinion,
they ought to make their first Attacks on the Palace, and secure the Person of
the Vice-Queen, and the rest of the Spaniards, who might serve as Hostages for
the Surrender of the Citadel, which otherwise might very much incommode the
Town after they were Masters of it.

He gave two Letters of Credence, one to d'Almeida, and the other to Mendoza;
in which he signified to them, That he had entrusted the Bearer with his
Intentions; He only added, That he hoped they would be Faithful to the
Assurances they had given him, and act with Courage and Vigor in the Work they
were about to undertake. After this the Duke sent Pinto to Lisbon, having first
given him the highest Marks of Confidence, he should enjoy the same Place in
his Affection, after a Revolution, that he now had.

As soon as he came to Lisbon, he delivered his Letters to d' Almeida and
Mendoza, who sent immediately to Le Mos and Coree, whom Pinto had formerly
brought over to his Master's Interest. These were two Rich Citizens, who had a
mighty Authority with the People; they had passed through most of the Offices
of the City, and had a great Number of Workmen who depended on them. These Men
had taken a great deal of Pains to foment and cherish in the Minds of the
Townsmen an Aversion to the Spaniards, by Rumors they daily spread of Taxes
intended to be raised the beginning of the next Year. They had discharged
several of their Workmen, especially the most Mutinous, pretending the Badness
of Trade would not suffer them to employ them, they could not keep them any
longer; while their Real Intent was by Necessity and Starving, to prepare them
for an Insurrection. And the better to accomplish their Ends, they supplied
these starving Wretches from Time to Time, keeping them at their Devotion.
Besides this, these Men held a private Correspondence with the principal
Persons in all Parts of the Town; by the help of which, they assured the
Conspirators, That upon notice given the Night before the Execution, they would
engage to raise the People at any Hour they should assign.

Pinto being thus assured of the Inferior People, began to look to the other
Conspirators, whom he urged to be ready upon the first Alarm, desiring they
would secure their Friends under pretense of some private Quarrel, without
making them privy to the design in which they should be employed. In this
Conduct he gave proof of an Extraordinary Prudence, there being abundance of
People who have Courage and Resolution when the Sword is in their hands, who
are not able in cold Blood to bear the weight of so important a Secret.

Thus finding every one firm, undaunted, and impatient to be revenged on the
Spaniards, he conferred with d' Almeida, Mendoza d' Almada, and Mello; who
finding all things in such a condition as they wished, agreed on Saturday 1st.
December. 1640.
the First of December for the Execution. They gave notice to the Duke of
Braganza of this Resolve, that so he might cause himself to be proclaimed King
in the Province of Alenteio, which almost entirely depended on him; and agreed
before the Company broke up, to have another Meeting 25th of November.
to take the last Measures for the Action.

The 25th of November, at night, they met at Braganza House, as they had
agreed. They found they could account on a hundred and fifty Gentlemen, the
most part of which were the Heads of their Families, with all their Domestics,
and about Two hundred Citizens and Tradesmen; and they concluded by the
Interest of these, they should bring the greatest Part of the People over to
them.

The Death of Vasconcellos was resolved on as a Victim due to the Resentment of
the Portuguese, and some proposed to treat the Archbishop of Braga after the
same manner. They represented him as a Man whose great Abilities rendered him
formidable: That it was not to be thought he could stand as an unconcerned
Spectator in this public Confusion: That possibly he might put himself at the
Head of the Spaniards, and their Creatures; and whilst they were busy in making
themselves Masters of the Palace, he might throw himself into the Citadel, or
come to the Assistance of the Vice-Queen, to whom all the World knew he was
devoted: That in an Affair of this Nature it was a great Imprudence to leave
Enemies behind them: That such a Conduct might possibly give them occasion to
repent severely of their ill-timed and mistaken Pity.

These Reasons drew the greatest part of the Company to consent to his Death;
and this Prelate had suffered the same Fate as Vasconcelles, if Dom Miguel d'
Almeida had not taken his part. He remonstrated to the Conspirators, That the
Death of a Man of his Character, and in so high a Dignity, would render them
odious to all the World: That such an Action would draw on the Duke of Braganza
the Hatred of the Clergy and Inquisition, a Race of Men formidable to the
greatest Princes, and add the Reproach of an Excommunicated Person to that of
Rebel and Usurper: That the Prince himself would be deeply affected to see his
Accession to the Throne blemished by so bloody an Action: That Himself would
have an Eye over him, and take effectual care to prevent his undertaking any
thing to the prejudice of the public Interest. In short, he spoke so much in
his Favor, that he obtained the Life of that Prelate, of his Friends, who
could not refuse any thing to a Man of his Worth.

Nothing farther remained to be adjusted, but the Order they should march in,
and the Manner of making the first Attack. At last it was resolved to throw
themselves in four different Parties, into so many several Parts of the Palace,
and make themselves Masters of the several Avenues; to cut off all
Communication, and prevent the Spaniards from bringing any Assistance. That Dom
Miguel d' Almeida should attack the German Guard before the Palace-Gates: That
the Great Master of the Horse, Mello, his Brother, and Dom Estean d' Acugna at
the Head of the Townsmen, should surprise a Spanish Company which kept Guard
every Day before the Fort: That Feillo de Menezes, Emanuel Saa, the Great
Chamberlain, should make themselves Masters of Vasconcello's Apartment, whom
they should forthwith dispatch: That Dom Antonio d' Almada, Mendoza, Dom Carlos
Norogna, and Antonio de Salsania, should secure the Person of the Vice-Queen,
and all the Spaniards in the Palace to serve as Hostages if there should be
occasion: That whilst each one was busy in making themselves Masters of the
Posts, assigned them some few Horse should be detached away, who, with some
principal Citizens should proclaim Dom John Duke of Braganza, King of Portugal:
That when the Multitude was drawn into the Streets, they should throw
themselves where any Opposition should happen to be made. Thus they broke up
with a Resolution to meet on Saturday the First of December, some at Dom Miguel
d' Almeida's, and others at d' Almada's and Mendoza's Houses, where the
Conspirators were to Arm themselves.

While the Friends of the Duke of Braganza were thus busy at Lisbon in
advancing his Affairs, he himself was employed in securing the Provinces; the
First Minister alarmed by these Delays, dispatched away a Courier, with express
Orders for him to come immediately to Court, and to prevent his making any
pretense of Want of Money, he sent with him an Order for Ten Thousand Ducats on
the Royal Treasury.

This was plain and intelligible Language. The Duke could not defer his Journey
without justly rendering himself suspected: He could not with any Color of
Reason dispense with obeying the King's Message; and had Grounds to conclude,
That all farther Delays would soon bring some unwelcome Orders from Madrid,
which would break all his Measures, and ruin his Enterprise. And therefore, to
make an Appearance of complying with the King's pressing Commands, he ordered
the greatest part of his Household to set forward for Madrid.

He gave all necessary Orders during his Absence: He dispatched away a
Gentleman at the same time to the Vice-Queen, to give her notice of his
Departure. He writ to the First Minister to assure him, that he would be at
Court within Eight days at farthest; and to have all things represented to the
best advantage, he bribed the Courier with a Sum, under a pretense of a
Gratuity for his Care and Dispatch in bringing the King's Orders to him. At the
same time he acquainted the Conspirators with these fresh Orders, laying before
them the Necessity of putting their Designs in execution on the Day which was
agreed on, for fear of being prevented by the Spaniards.

But there was an Obstacle which hindered them from attempting any thing so
suddenly. There was a Man of Quality at Lisbon, who showed on all Occasions a
violent Hatred of the Spanish Government. He would ever be Railing against
them, calling them Tyrants and Usurpers, and declaiming against their Injustice
and Oppression; above all, he would ever be venting his Spleen on the
Expedition into Catalonia, and making a Thousand dismal Prognostics on it. D'
Almada having frequently conversed with him, did not believe any Man could more
heartily wish the Prosperity of Portugal, or would be more transported to hear
of any Designs on foot for the effectual Restoring of its Liberty. But, Gods!
how he was astonished, when taking him aside, to acquaint him with this
Conspiracy! He found him as fearful and backward in Action, as he had appeared
daring in Words. He began now to excuse himself from having any share in this
matter, or being concerned in this Plot, pretending there was no good Grounds
to proceed on; and the same Person, who so Bold and Brave when the Thing was
remote, was now become timorous, and scared at the Prospect of the least
Danger; Where, says he to d' Almada, are those Forces which are necessary to
support a Design of this nature? What Army have you to oppose the Spanish
Troops, which will be poured into the Country upon the first Motion of this
kind? What Great Men have you to appear at the Head of you? Or, have they a
Fund sufficient to bear the Expense of a Civil War? I Am afraid, that instead of
Restoring the Liberties of Portugal, your Attempt will only prove destructive
to it, and furnish the Spaniards with a Pretense, which they have long sought
for, to accomplish the Ruin of this Kingdom.

D' Almada, who expected nothing less than Expressions of this kind, enraged to
find he had trusted his Secret in so ill hands, gave no other Answer; but
drawing his Sword, his Eyes sparkling with Rage, replied, False Man! either
thou shall take my Life, together with my Secret, or I will make thee an
Example for having thus surpised my Credulity by thy Lies and Imposture. The
other, who always held it Prudent to avoid the Danger which was nearest, at the
sight of a drawn Sword consented to all that d' Almada had proposed, and
offered to enter into the Conspiracy, finding Reasons to invalidate those he
first gave; he swore with repeated Oaths again to keep the Secret inviolably:
In short, he forgot nothing that might persuade d' Almada, that it was neither
Courage, nor want of Resentment against the Spaniards, which had kept him from
agreeing to the Proposal as soon as he had made it.

However, d'Almada did not dare to rely on his Oaths and Assurances, but was
mightily disturbed at this Accident; And keeping a watchful Eye on this Man, he
gave notice to the Conspirators of this Adventure. The Alarm was soon spread,
and several Reflections were made on the Levity and Inconstancy of this Man; and
they began to fear, That the View of Danger, or the Hopes of a Great
Recompense, should induce him to prove Treacherous in spite of all their Care
for Prevention. On this Consideration they resolved to defer the Execution of
their Plot, and obliged Pinto to write to his Master to forbear till he
received farther News from them. But Pinto, who very well knew of what
Importance it is to defer the Day in Matters of this Nature, writ privately to
that Prince to have no Regard to his Letter, as proceeding only from a Panick
Fear in the Conspirators, which would certainly vanish before the Messenger
could arrive at Villa-viciosa.

And so it happened; for the next Morning finding every one continue unshaken,
they began to be ashamed of taking so hot an Alarm; and he who was the chief
Cause of this Uneasiness being a little better settled (either by a greater
Generosity of Temper, or Apprehension of the bad Consequence of accusing so
many Great Men) they resolved to adhere to the Day first agreed on. But scarce
was this Difficulty over, but another arose, which did not create less Disquiet
amongst them.

Pinto had taken Care to place diverse of the Conspirators about the Palace to
observe all that passed. These, as they appeared to walk idly up and down, the
Night before the Execution, which was to begin with the Death of Vasconcellos,
saw that Minister Embark on the Tago.

None besides the Conspirators could have drawn any Conclusion from this, since
a Thousand several Occasions, in which they had not the least share, might
carry him over the River. But their Jealousy was so great, that an Alarm was
instantly spread amongst them. They immediately concluded this Crafty, Politic
Minister, who had his Spies in every Corner, had discovered something of their
Plot. They made no Doubt his going over the Water was with design to send some
of the Troops which Quartered in the Neighboring Villages, into the Town. The
Images of the most terrible Punishments, and the Horrors of Death presented it
self to their Imaginations; they fancied their Houses surrounded with Officers
of Justice; and some began to think of flying into Africa or England to escape
the Cruelty of the Spaniards. They passed away part of the Night under these
terrible Apprehensions, as it were between Life and Death, when some of the
Conspirators, who kept about the Court, came to inform them, That the Secretary
was returned with Hautboys Sounding before him, he only having been at an
Entertainment on the other side of the Water. This News put an End to all their
anxious Thoughts, and made them all joyful; and so each Man departed, being
well assured there was nothing stirring in the Palace, and that all there slept
in a profound Security, not once dreaming of the next Day's Action.

It was very late when they parted; and from that time, to the Minute of the
Execution, there were but a few Hours of Night, notwithstanding a considerable
Accident happened in that Space; which shows us how full of Uncertainty and
Hazard all Enterprises are, where the Fear of Punishment, or the Hope of
Reward, may tempt Men to be Treacherous and Faithless. George Mello, Brother to
the Master of the Horse, most commonly lodged at the House of one of his
Relations, in one of the Subburbs, at a small Distance from the City. This
Gentleman thought that the Minute of the Plot breaking out being now at hand,
his Relation, who had for a long time been his intimate Friend, might justly
reproach him if he should conceal a matter of that Importance from him, in
which the other was equally concerned with himself for the Common Good of his
Country: That he could easily engage him in the Conspiracy, and bring him with
him to the Rendezvous. Upon this Consideration, as soon as he was returned to
his Lodging, he goes up to his Kinsman's Chamber, and taking him into his
Closet, communicates the Enterprise to him, urging him to join with so many
Worthy Persons, and to behave himself like a Man of Honor, and a true
Portuguese. The Other was surpised with so strange a Piece of News; however he
strove to show a sort of Joy to find his Country was upon the Point of
Recovering its Liberty. He thanked Mello for the Confidence he had honored him
with, and assured him, he should esteem it a Happiness to expose his Life, and
be admitted to have a share of Danger with so many brave Men in so Just and
Glorious a Cause.

After this they parted to take a Repose of some few Hours; Mello was scarcely
in his Chamber before he began to Repent of his Excessive Confidence, and to
blame himself for having put the Fate of so many Worthy Men into the Hands of a
Person he was not entirely assured of. He thought he discovered in his Eyes and
Countenance a secret Uneasiness, and the Marks of Surprise and Apprehension at
the Prospect of so Dangerous an Enterprise. In short, he was afraid the Fear of
Punishment, and the Hopes of a Certain Reward, might prevail with him to make a
Discovery.

Full of these Tormenting Reflections he walked about his Chamber; when hearing
a sort of muttering Noise, and several Persons talking low, he opened his
Window to hear what they said: And by the Help of a Dim-light he discovered his
Kinsman at the Door, ready to mount on Horseback. At this being fired with
Rage, he soon came down; and running with his drawn Sword at him, demanded,
What made him out of Doors at that time of Night? What his Business was, and
whither he was going? The other being exceedingly surpised, endeavored to
give several indifferent Reasons; but Mello threatening to kill him, constrained
him to return again into his Chamber, and took the Keys along with him, and
kept him under his Eye till the Time of Action, and then brought him with him
to meet the other Conspirators.

At length the Day was come when the Event was to determine whether the Duke of
Braganza deserved the Title of King, and Deliverer of his Country, or that of
Rebel and Enemy of the State.

The Conspirators came early to the House of Dom Miguel d' Almeida, and the
other Gentlemen, where they were to Arm themselves. They all appeared there
with so much Resolution and Confidence, they seemed to go to a certain Victory.
It was remarkable, that in so great a Number of Clergymen, Citizens, and
Gentlemen, all acted by different Interests, not one Man out of the whole
Number failed in his Word and Honor: Every one was as impatient for the Moment
of Execution, as if he had been Chief, and Author of the Enterprise, and
expected the Crown for the Recompense of the Dangers which he exposed himself
to. Diverse Ladies coveted a share in this Glorious Exploit; and History has
preserved the Memory of Dona Philippa de Villenas, who Armed both her Sons with
her own Hands; and after she had put on their Cuirasses, Go, my Children, says
she, put an End to Tyranny, and Revenge your selves of your Enemies; and be
assured, that if your Attempt fail of Success, your Mother will not survive one
Moment the Misfortune of so many brave Men.

All being thus Armed, made their way to the Palace, and diverse of them went in
Chairs to conceal their Number and Arms. They divided themselves into four
Bodies, as was agreed, waiting with a great deal of Impatience till the Clock
struck Eight, which was the precise Moment of Execution. Never did Time seem so
long; the fear of having their Number observed, or that the early Hour they
appeared before the Palace, might give the Secretary any Suspicion, made them
very uneasy. At length it struck Eight a Clock, and Pinto having fired a
Pistol, they all took the Signal.

Each Man charged briskly in the Post assigned him, Dom Miguel d' Almeida, with
his Party, fell on the German Guard, who being unprovided, and destitute of
Arms, were soon defeated, and that almost without making any Resistance.

The Master of the Horse, Mello his Brother, and Dom Estevan d' Acugna attacked
the Spanish Company, which lay before that part of the Palace which is called
the Fort. In this he was sustained by those Townsmen who were concerned with
him. These Men, with their Swords in their Hands, forced the Corpse de Guard
where the Spaniards were retrenched. But none made a more considerable Figure
than a Priest of the Town, who marched at the Head of the Conspirators, with a
Crucifix in one Hand, and a Sword in the other, exhorting the People to cut
their Enemies in Pieces, and charging the Spaniards himself with the utmost
Fury. All fled before him; for appearing Armed, with an Object that Religion
teaches us to revere, no Person dared to hurt him. Thus, after a slight
Resistance, the Spanish Officer and his Soldiers were forced to submit, and
save their Lives, by crying as the rest did, God save the Duke of Braganza,
King of Portugal.

Pinto having thus made his way to the Palace, put himself at the Head of those
who attacked the Apartment of Vasconcellos. He marched with so much Assurance
and Resolution, that happening to meet one of his Friends, who asked him,
trembling, where he was going with that number of Armed Men, and what he was
about to do. Nothing, replied he smiling, but to dethrone a Tyrant, and restore
a lawful Prince.

In entering the Secretaries Apartment they met Francisco Soarez d' Albergeria,
the Civil Lieutenant Corrigidor de Civil.
who was just going out of his Lodgings. This Magistrate thinking the Tumult
only proceeded from a quarrel, offered to interpose his Authority, to end the
Fray. But hearing them cry on all sides, God save the Duke of Braganza, he
thought the Honor and Duty of his Place obliged him to cry, God save the King
of Spain and Portugal, which cost him his Life, one of the Conspirators
shooting him instantly dead, proud to have this occasion to punish his
ill-timed Loyalty.

Antonio Correa, first Commissioner of the Secretary, ran out upon the first
Noise. This Man was the common Instrument of his Cruelties; and after the
Example of his Master, treated the Nobility with great Contempt, Dom Antonio de
Menezes, plunged his Dagger in his Breast. This Blow could not make the Wretch
sensible his Power was at an End, but imagining in this Assault they had
mistaken him for another, he turned in a Rage to Menezes, crying, Dogs, How
dare you strike at me: The other without replying, redoubled his Thrusts, and
laid him on the Ground, weltring in his Blood. However, these Wounds did not
prove Mortal, and he escaped at that time, to lose his Life after with more
Ignominy, by the Hands of the common Executioner.

The Conspirators having thus treated the Commissary, who had stopped them for a
small while on the Stairs, forced into the Secretaries Chamber. He had then
with him Diego Garcez Palleia, a Captain of Foot, who seeing such a multitude
of People enter Armed and enraged mistrusted a design on the Life of
Vasconcellos. Though he had no obligation to that Minister, the generosity of his
Temper made him throw himself out of the Door, with his Sword in his Hand, to
dispute the Entry of the Conspirators, and give the Secretary time to make his
Escape, but receiving a Hurt in his Arm, and being disabled from holding his
Sword, and oppressed by the Multitude, he threw himself out of a Window, and had
the good Luck to escape with Life.

Immediately the Conspirators rushed in a Crowd into the Secretaries Lodgings,
they searched for him every where, overturned the Beds, opened the Coffers, and
every one was eager to have the Honor of the first Blow.

However, all this while he was no where to be found, and the Conspirators were
reduced to Despair, and enraged to think he should thus escape their Vengeance,
till an Old Woman Servant being threatened with Death, pointed to a Wall in
which several Arms were hid, and here they found him buried in Papers.

The Consternation he was in at the apprehension of immediate Death, which he
saw before him, would not suffer him to speak the least Word. Dom Rodrigo de
Saa gave him the first shot with a Pistol, after which the rest of the
Conspirators stabbed him, and threw his Body out of the Window, crying, The
Tyrant is dispatched, God preserve our Liberty, and Dom John, King of Portugal.

The Crowd about the Palace, seeing them throw out the Body, received it with
great Shouts and Acclamations. Every one offered some Indignity to the lifeless
Trunk, as if by this means they hoped to revenge the Oppression of their
Country, and give a Blow to Tyranny.

This was the Fate of Michael Vasconcellos, a Portugueze by Birth, but an Enemy
to his Country, and a Spaniard by his Inclination. He had by Nature an
admirable Genius for Business, was a Man of great Ability and Application, of a
mavelous Industry, fruitful in Inventing new Methods of drawing Money from
the People, and, by consequence, void of all Pity, Inflexible and Rigorous,
even to Cruelty: He had no regard to Kindred, Friends, or other Considerations:
No Man had any Ascendant over him, he was insensible to all Pleasures, and
incapable of being touched with any Remorse of Conscience: He had heaped
together immense Wealth, by his Place, part of which was plundered in the Heat
of the Sedition, the People pretending to do themselves Right for the Damages
they sustained during his Ministry.

Pinto, without losing Time, marched to join the other Confederates, who were
ordered to make themselves Masters of the Palace, and seize the Person of the
Vice-Queen: He found this was done already, and that all Parts of their Design
had been crowned with equal Success. In short, those who were appointed to
attack the Apartment of the Princess, presenting themselves before the Gates,
and the furious Multitude threatening to set fire to them, if they did not
forthwith open them, the Vice-Queen, attended with her Maids of Honor, and the
Archbishop of Braga, presented her self at her Chamber Door, flattering her
self that her Presence would appease the Nobility, and oblige the People to
withdraw. Gentlemen, said she, advancing toward the principal of the
Conspirators, the Secretary has justly drawn on himself the Odium of the
People, and your Indignation, by his haughty and insolent Carriage; and now his
Death has delivered you from so hateful a Minister, methinks your Resentment
ought to be satisfied? Consider, Gentlemen, these Disorders may as hitherto be
imputed to your Hatred against the Secretary; but if you persist any longer in
this Tumultuous manner, you will be guilty of Rebellion, and render me unable
to make any Defense for you to the King.

Dom Antonio de Menezes, replied, That it was a Folly to think, that so many
People of Rank had appeared in Arms to take away the Life of a Wretch, who
ought to have lost it by the Hands of the common Hangman; That they were met
together to restore the Duke of Braganza to a Crown, that rightfully belonged
to him, and had been usurped by Strangers, and they would sacrifice their Lives
with Pleasure, to replace him on the Throne. She was about to reply, and
interpose the King's Authority, but d' Almeida fearing that any longer Parley
might abate the Heat of the Conspirators, interrupted her, telling her in
short, Portugal owned no other King than the Duke of Braganza, and the
Conspirators immediately gave a shout, each striving to outvie the other, God
save Don John, King of Portugal.

The Vice-Queen seeing the Torrent had broke all bounds, thought she should
find more Obedience in the City, and that her Presence would have more
Influence on the People and Townsmen, when the Conspirators were not there to
encourage them. But as she offered to go down, Don Carlos Norogna entreated her
to keep in her Chamber, assuring her she should be served with the same
Respect, as if she had still the Command of the Kingdom, telling her, He did
not judge it by any means convenient, to expose the Person of so great a
Princess to the Insults of the Multitude, who were all in Tumult, and full of
Zeal for their Liberty. She soon understood she was his Prisoner, and vexed,
demanded in a disdainful manner, And what can the Mobb do to me? To which
Norogna replied, in a very great Passion, Nothing, Madam, but throw your
Highness out of the Windows.

The Archbishop of Braga was incensed at these words of Norogna, and snatching
a Sword from a Soldier near him, attempted in an outrageous manner to throw
himself through the Conspirators, to kill him, and revenge the Affront done to
the Vice-Queen; but Dom Miguel d' Almeida embracing him, conjured him to
consider the danger to which he exposed himself, and taking him aside by force,
told him, his Life had not cost nothing: That he had had a great deal of
difficulty in obtaining it, from the Conspirators, to whom his Person was
odious enough, that he had no farther need to exasperate them by a Piece of
Bravery so ill-timed, and so little agreeable to a Person of his Character. By
this means he was persuaded to withdraw, and dissemble his Passion, hoping Time
would give him a more favorable occasion of showing his Resentment, and his
Devotion to the Interest of Spain.

The rest of the Conspirators secured the Spaniards, who were in the Palace or
the City: They seized on the Marquess de la Pueiba, Major domo to the
Vice-Queen, and eldest Brother to the Marquess de Leganez, Dom Didaco Cardevas,
-- Major General, Dom Fernant de Castro, Intendant of the Marine; the Marquess
de Bainetto, Gentleman Usher to the Vice-Queen, and several Sea-Officers who
were in the Port. All this was done with as little Disturbance as if they had
been apprehended by Orders from the King of Spain. No Man stirred to assist
them, and themselves were not in a Condition to resist, being for the most part
taken in their Beds.

In the next place, Antonio de Saldania, at the Head of his Friends, with a
vast Crowd following him, went up to the sovereign Chamber of Justice; He made
a short Speech to the Company, displaying the Happiness of Portugal, that now
had regained her Natural Lord: telling them, That Tyranny was now at an End:
That the Laws would be re-established, and Justice have its ancient Course,
under the Government of so Wise and Just a Prince. This Speech was received
with a general Applause, and answered by loud Acclamations; and all Decrees
made in the King of Spain's Name were changed, and styled, By the Authority,
and in the Name of Dom Juan, King of Portugal.

Whilst this Gentleman obliged the Chamber of Justice to own the Duke of
Braganza for their King, Dom Gaston Contingno set free those whom the Severity
of the Spanish Ministers had confined. These poor Men passing in one Moment
from a gloomy Dungeon, and the continual fear of Death, to the delightful view
of the Liberty of their Country, transported with Gratitude, and dreading the
return of their Chains, made up a new Company, who did not show less Ardour to
establish the Throne of the Duke of Braganza, than the Body of the Nobility,
who formed the first Design.

In the midst of this general Gladness, which the Success of the Enterprise
gave the Conspirators, Pinto, and several of the Chief were extremely uneasy.
The Spaniards were still in the Citadel, from whence they could batter the
Town, and soon give them occasion to repent of their hasty Joy: Besides, this
was a Port where the King of Spain could re-enter the City at pleasure;
therefore thinking they had done nothing till they were Masters of the Place,
they went to the Vice-Queen, and demanded an Order from her for the Governor
to put that into their Hands.

She rejected the Proposition with Scorn, reproaching them with their
Rebellion, and asking them disdainfully, if they intended to make her an
Accomplice. D' Almeida, mad at her Refusal, all on Fire, and his Eyes sparkling
with Rage, swore that if she did not sign this Order, without farther delay, he
would instantly stab all the Spaniards they had in Custody. The Princess,
surprised at the Passion of the Man, and fearing so many People of Quality
might lose their Lives, thought the Governor knew his Duty too well to pay
Obedience to an Order which he must needs see was extorted by Force, and upon
this Consideration she Signed it, but this had a very different Effect from
what she imagined. The Spanish Governor, Dom Louis del Campo, a Man of small
Resolution, seeing so many of the Conspirators in Arms, and followed by a vast
Crowd of People, who threatened to tear him and the whole Garrison in pieces, if
he did not instantly Surrender, was glad to come off so cheaply, and have so
good a pretense to cover his Cowardice, surrendered the Citadel, and tamely
delivered it into their Hands. The Conspirators having thus secured all sides,
dispatched away Mendoza and the Master of the Horse to the Duke of Braganza, to
carry him the News, and to assure him from the City, that there was nothing
wanting to complete their Joy, but the Presence of their King.

However, this was not equally desired by all Persons. The Great Men of the
Kingdom could not see his Elevation without a secret Envy, and most of the
Nobility, (who had no share in the Conspiracy) were silent, waiting for the
Issue before they would declare their Sentiments. Nay, some proceeded so far as
to question, whether that Prince would own an Action which would infallibly
have such terrible Consequences. Above all the rest, the Creatures of Spain
were in a strange Consternation, not a Man of them daring to stir, for fear of
irritating the People, furious with their new Liberty, and every one kept
himself close at Home, till Time should show what they had to Fear or Hope from
the Designs of the Duke of Braganza.

But his Friends, who were well informed of his Intentions, pursued their way.
They met at the Palace to give Orders, till their New Master should arrive, and
unanimously declared the Archbishop of Lisbon, President of the Council, and
Lieutenant General for the King. He excused himself at first, representing to
them, that the present State of the Kingdom required a General, rather than a
Man of his Character, in such a Post. But at length pretending to comply with
the Importunity of his Friends, he consented to take upon him the signing the
Orders, provided the Archbishop of Braga were appointed for his Colleague in
the management of Business, and all Dispatches till the King's Arrival.

By this Device, that crafty and politic Prelate hoped, under Color of
sharing an Authority with him, to render the other an Accomplice and Criminal
in the Eyes of the Spaniards, if he accepted the Offer; or in case he refused,
to ruin him with the King, and render him Odious to the People, and all
Portugal, as a declared Enemy of that Kingdom.

The Archbishop of Braga perceived the Snare laid for him, but being wholly
devoted to the Spaniards, and in the Interests of the Vice-Queen, he refused
peremptorily to have any share in the Government. So the Archbishop of Lisbon
had it alone, and Dom Miguel d' Almeida, Pedro Mendoza, and Dom Antonio d'
Almada were appointed as Counselors of State to assist him.

One of the first Cares of this Governor, was to seize the three great Spanish
Galleons in the Port of Lisbon. For this purpose several Barks were fitted out,
into which the Youth of the City threw themselves: They discovered an eager
desire to gain Honor in this Exploit, but little Opposition was made, the
Officers and greatest part of the Soldiers being seized in the City, at the
Time when the Conspiracy broke out.

The same Evening he dispatched Couriers to exhort the People to give Thanks to
God for the Recovery of their Liberty, with Orders to the Magistrates of each
City to proclaim the Duke of Braganza, King of Portugal, and secure all the
Spaniards they could find. In short, he made all Preparations at Lisbon, for
the magnificent reception of their new Master. The Archbishop gave notice to
the Vice-Queen, that it would be convenient she should leave the Palace, and
make room for the King and his Household, and ordered an Apartment to be
prepared for her in the Royal House of Xabregas, at one end of the Town. The
Princess left the Palace as soon as she received this Message, but with a
haughty Air, not speaking one word, and past through the City thither. And now,
far from a Crowd of Courtiers attending her, she had scarce any of her
Domestic Servants with her, only the Archbishop of Braga, steady to her
Interests, gave her public Marks of it on this Occasion, at a time when he
could not do it without an apparent hazard of his Life.

In the mean time the Duke of Braganza endured great Convulsions of Mind,
reflecting on his uncertain Destiny, and at once his Breast was filled with all
the various Images with which Hope can flatter, or Fear torment a doubtful
Mind. The distance of Villa Viciosa, which is thirty Leagues from Lisbon,
prevented his being informed of what passed so soon as he earnestly wished. All
he knew was, that his Life and Fortune lay at Stake, and that Critical Minute
must decide his Fate. He had resolved at first, as was noted above, to raise
all the Cities under his Dependencies, but after he judged it better to expect
News from Lisbon, and act his Part conformably to what should pass there.

There only remained the Kingdom of Algarba, and the City and Citadel of Elvas,
which he could retire to, if Success failed in the Capital City; and if the
Plot should miscarry, he thought he should easily excuse himself from having a
share in it, at a Time when the Spaniards would be glad to have him Innocent.

He had planted several Couriers on the Road to Lisbon; and though he expected
News every Hour, he had past the whole Day, and a great part of the Night in
disturbance, till at length Mendoza and Mello, with extreme diligence, arrived
at Villa Viciosa. They threw themselves instantly at the Prince's Feet, and by
this respectuous Action, and the Joy which shone in their Face, they discovered
to him, sooner than they could by any Expressions, that he was King of Portugal.

They would have given him an exact Account of the Success of their Enterprise;
but the Prince, without giving them Time to enter into the particulars of this
Affair, conducted them, with some Impatience, into the Dutchesses Apartment.
These two Lords complimented her in the same manner as if she had already been
upon the Throne, and assured her of the Hearty Wishes of her Subjects, and as a
Mark they owned her for their Sovereign, they treated her with the Title of Her
Majesty, which was the more agreeable, since the Kings of Portugal, before that
Time, had only taken that of Highness.

It is easy to judge how mighty was the Joy of the Prince and Princess, if we
reflect on the great uneasiness they were freed from, and the high Station they
were raised to. The Castle resounded with Acclamations, and the News spread it
self every where in a Moment. And the same Day he was proclaimed King of
Portugal, in all the Cities of his Dependances. Alphonso de Mello did as much
in the City of Elvas, whole Crowds came in to pay their Duty to their new King;
and probably these first Homages, though paid in a confused and disorderly
manner, did not less please that Prince, than those after on a Public Day of
Ceremony.

The King set forward for Lisbon, with the same Equipage, which seemed designed
for the Court of Spain. He was accompanied by the Marquess de Ferrara, his
Kinsman, the Count de Vimiosa, and a great number of Persons of Quality which
met him there.

He left the Queen, his Wife at Villa Viciosa, to keep the Province firm to his
Obedience. He found the Ways lined on both sides, with an infinite number of
People, which flocked to see him, and had the pleasure to hear the Shouts of
the People, wishing his Prosperity, and loading the Spaniards with all the
Curses they could invent. The whole Body of the Nobility, the Great Officers of
the Crown, and the first Magistrates, went out in several Bodies to receive
him, at a great distance from Lisbon, and he entered the City, amidst the
Acclamations and Applause of the People, followed by a numerous and magnificent
Court, filled with Joy.

At Night were several Fireworks in diverse public Places of the Town. Each
Citizen had one before his Door, and the Windows shone with an infinity of
Candles and Flambeaux, that the whole City seemed one Flame, which made a
Spaniard say, That Prince was very Fortunate, to gain so fair a Kingdom for a
Bonefire.

The Insurrection at Lisbon was instantly followed by the General Revolt of the
whole Kingdom, and the Revolution was so speedy and general, that each City
seemed to have a Plot ripe for Execution, after the Example of their Capital.
Couriers arrived hourly with Advice, that Cities, and entire Provinces had
expelled the Spaniards, and submitted to the King. The Governors of the other
Places had not more Resolution than him of Lisbon, and either for want of
Troops, or other Warlike Provisions, or for want of Courage they went off
shamefully, and for the most part without once Firing. Every one feared the
Fate of Vasconcellos, and nothing appeared so terrible as an enraged Multitude.
In short, they fled like so many Criminals escaped out of Prison, and not one
Spaniard was to be seen in the whole Kingdom, except those who were detained;
and all this in less than a Fortnight's Time.

Dom Fernand de la Cueva, Governor of the Citadel of Sir Juan, at the Mouth of
the Tago, was the only Person who made some resistance, and pretended to keep
the Place for the King his Master. This Garrison, composed only of Spaniards,
and commanded by brave Officers, made a vigorous Opposition, upon the first
Approaches of the Portugueses. To reduce this Place, they thought it necessary
to Besiege it in Form; and for this purpose brought their Canon down from
Lisbon; the Trenches were opened, and they made their Advances as far as the
Counterscarp, notwithstanding the continual Fire, and frequent Sallies of the
Besieged; but a Treaty being the safest and shortest way to gain the Place, the
King (in fine) made the Governor such advantageous Offers, that he had not
Power to stand out any longer. He was dazzled with the great Sums offered, and
having a Commend of the Order of Christ, which the King promised to conferr on
him. In short, the Articles were agreed on, and the Place Surrendered,
notwithstanding the endeavors of the Officers to the contrary, who refused to
Sign the Capitulation: Of this number was Dom Rodrigo de Cha lon, a young
Gentleman of Andalusia, of great Valor, who commanded a Spanish Terce in that
Place, and offered to hold out three Weeks longer, till they should receive Aid
from Spain, which they had Intelligence were put to Sea, under the Command of
the Duke of Maqueda.

The King thought it best not to deferr his Coronation any longer, to confirm
his Authority, and render his Person more August to the People. The Ceremony
was observed on the 15th of December, with all possible Magnificence. The Duke
d'Aveiro, the Marquess d' Villareal, the Duke de Camino his Son, the Count de
Monsano, and the rest of the Great Men of the Kingdom assisted at the
Solemnity. The Archbishop of Lisbon, at the Head of his Clergy, accompanied by
several Bishops, received him at the Gate of the Cathedral, and he was solemnly
acknowledged as King of Portugal by all the States of the Kingdom, who took the
Oath of Fidelity to him.

A few Days after the Queen arrived with a numerous Train. The whole Court went
a great way out of Town to meet her; The Officers who were appointed to compose
her Household were gone before, and the King himself went out of Lisbon to
receive her. This Prince omitted no Magnificence which might become his new
Dignity, or might give the World a Mark, how much he thought she contributed to
place the Crown on his Head. It was remarkable, that in so great a Change she
was not in the least embarass'd, but supported her new Character with so much
Grace and Majesty, that she seemed born in a Throne.

Thus was that great Enterprise happily finished, which may be accounted a
Miracle, considering the vast number, and different Characters of Persons
entrusted with the Secret. No Cement could ever have made so firm an Union, but
that Hatred to the Spanish Government, an Antipathy as ancient as the Monarchy
it self, arising from the perpetual Wars, frequent between Neighboring States,
and after fomented by the Concurrence of both Nations in discovering the
Indies, and their Difference in matters of Trade.

The News of the Revolt was soon brought to the Court of Spain. The Minister
was enraged to find all his Measures broken, and so fair a Kingdom lost beyond
all hopes of retrieving. The King, his Master, had no occasion for new
Business: He found Difficulties enough to defend himself against the united
Arms of France and Holland; but above all, the Revolt in Catalonia was of
dangerous Consequence, and created in his Mind a thousand anxious Cares.

All the Court knew how Things went, and the King was the only Man who remained
ignorant, and no one dared inform him, dreading the Displeasure of the
Minister, who would never have pardoned an Offense of this Nature. At last,
this Affair making too much noise to be concealed any longer, the Conde Duke
fearing some of his Enemies should attempt to relate the Matter to his
Disadvantage, resolved to disclose it to the King. But knowing the Temper of
that Prince, he thought to give this such a Turn, that he should not know the
extent of his Loss; and for this end, coming to him with a seeming Openness and
Assurance. Sir, says he, I bring your Majesty a piece of good News, Your
Majesty is just now become Master of a fair Duchy, and a large Estate. How so?
replied the King, all surprised, I shall explain my self, says the Minister,
the Duke of Braganza has been lately Giddy, and suffered himself to be seduced
by the Populace, and proclaimed King of Portugal. By this Act all his Estate is
Confiscated, and Your Majesty may reunite it to Your Revenue; and by the
Extinction of that Family, enjoy that Kingdom, without fearing any Disturbance
for the future.

Notwithstanding this Prince was a very weak Man, he was not so dazzled with
these magnificent Hopes, but he saw this was no easy matter. But not daring to
see with other Eyes than those of his Minister, he only replied coldly, That he
hoped he would use all Diligence to suppress this Rebellion, which if let alone
might have dangerous Consequences.

The King of Portugal neglected nothing which might establish his new
Greatness. Immediately after his arrival at Lisbon, he named for Governors of
the Frontier Places, Men of the most approved Valor, Fidelity, and Experience;
all which had Orders to depart strait, with all the Soldiers they could get
together; and to use all possible Diligence to put their several Forts in a
Posture of Defense. He delivered out Commissions for raising Men, and
immediately after his Cororonation, called a Convention of the States of the
Kingdom.

In this Assembly, to prevent all Doubts, he caused his Title to be examined,
and, by a solemn Act, was acknowledged to be the True and Rightful King of
Portugal, as descended by the Princess his Mother, from the Infant Edward, Son
to King Emanuel, to the Exclusion of the King of Spain, who was descended from
the same King by a Daughter, who farther was, by the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, disabled, by being married to a Foreign Prince.

He declared to this General Assembly of the States, that he would content
himself with his Patrimonial Estate, for the support of his Household, and would
reserve the Royal Revenue for the Necessities of the Kingdom, and to make the
People relish the sweetness of his Government, he abolished all Imposts, which
the Spaniards had laid on them.

He filled all the most considerable Posts and Employs in the State with those
Conspirators which had shown the greatest Ardour in this Revolution. Pinto had
no share in this Promotion, the Prince not thinking his Authority well enough
settled to place one of his Domestics of a mean Extraction, in any principal
Place. Notwithstanding this, his Power with the King and People was not less;
and without the Title of a Minister, or Secretary of State, he performed the
Office, by the great Confidence the King had in him.

Having thus given all the good Orders imaginable, within the Kingdom, he bent
his Thoughts next to Foreign Princes. He dispatched able Ambassadors to procure
himself to be owned, to make Alliances, and raise new Enemies to the House of
Austria. He made a League Offensive and Defensive with the Hollanders and
Catalonians, and obtained assurance of the Protection of France. The King of
Spain discovered his Weakness, by attempting nothing considerable on the
Frontiers of Portugal all the Campaign, probably because the Revolt in
Catalonia employed all his Strength. All his Attempts were unsuccessful, and
his Troops still came off with disadvantage. Some time after News came that
Goa, and other Places, under the Dominion of the Portuguese in the Indies,
Africa, and Peru, had followed the general Revolution of the Kingdom; every
thing seemed to promise the King of Portugal a Series of Success, and a Kingdom
quiet at Home, and Victorious abroad. But observe the uncertainty of Human
Greatness, how this Prince, in the midst of his Prosperities, and the caresses
of Fortune, was upon the Point of perishing, and losing at once his Life and
Crown by a horrid Conspiracy, silently formed in Lisbon, within the Walls of
his own Court.

The Archbishop of Braga was, as I related before, wholly devoted to the Court
of Spain, and one of their Ministers in Portugal. He plainly saw he could never
hope to be restored till the Spanish Government should be reestablished;
besides, he was afraid the King, who seemed at first to have some respect to
his Character, in forbearing to seize him with the rest of the Spanish
Ministers, might nevertheless do it when his Authority was better settled. But
the most potent Motive that put him upon any considerable Action, was his Zeal
for the Vice-Queen. He could not endure to see that Princess in Prison in a
place where he thought She had a Right to Reign; but above all, he was
exasperated to be refused admittance to her, which was denied him, and diverse
other Persons of Quality, when it was found She only made use of this Liberty
to inspire Rebellion into those who resorted to her. This Proceeding seemed to
him Tyrannical, and an intolerable Hardship; and he could not but represent to
himself, that Princess every Moment demanding her Liberty from him, as a just
Return for those Favors he had received from her. These Reflections kindled a
Rage in the Breast of this Prelate; and made him resolve to employ all means to
express his Gratitude, and Revenge her on her Enemies. And considering it would
be difficult to surprise or corrupt the Guards set over her, he resolved to go
directly to the Spring, and by killing the King, to restore at once, that
Princess her Liberty, and her former Authority.

Having concluded on this Design, he applied himself to find means to put his
Project in execution as soon as possible, fearing he should not long continue
in his Place of President of the Palace, and be obliged to retire to Braga. He
concluded strait, he must take a different Step from that which, the King had
taken. He never hoped to gain the People, by reason of their natural Hatred to
the Spaniards; on the other side, the restoring of the King being the Work of
the Nobility, it was certain they would never engage in a Conspiracy of this
kind, he plainly found he could only apply himself to the Great Men, who were
not concerned in this Revolution, and uneasy at the Duke of Braganza's
Fortunes. And therefore having first secured Protection of the Minister of
Spain, he cast his Eyes on the Marquess of Villareal.

He represented to that Prince, That the New King being of a timorous and
diffident Temper, would lay hold of all Opportunities to ruin, or at least
diminish the Greatness of his Family, to secure the Crown to his own Posterity.
That He, and the Duke d' Aveiro, both of the Blood Royal of Portugal, had no
Employs conferred on them, whilst all Places of Profit and Trust in the
Kingdom, were given as a Recompense to a parcel of Seditious Fellows. That all
Men of Honor were concerned to see him thus contemptuously used. That he must
consume his Life in a mean inactivity, and be buried in the Solitude of his
Country-Seat. That He ought to consider his High Birth and Fortunes rendered him
too Great to be a Subject to so petty a King. That He had lost in the King of
Spain, a Master who had several Kingdoms and Governments in his disposal; and
was able to give him an Employment suitable to the Greatness of his Condition.

Seeing this Discourse made an Impression on the Mind of that Prince: He added,
That he had Order from the Court of Spain to promise him the Vice-Royalty of
Portugal, as the Reward of his Fidelity: However, this was not in any manner
the Intention of that Prelate, who aimed at nothing more than the Liberty and
Restoration of the Duchess of Mantua: But more powerful Motives were necessary
to engage the Marquess de Villareal. The Considerations which the Archbishop
laid before him, prevailed with him to be the Head of the Conspiracy, with the
Duke of Camino his Son.

The Archbishop being well assured of these two Princes, engaged the Grand
Inquisitor, his intimate Friend. This Man was of great Consequence to the
Archbishop's Design, because with him he brought in all the Officers of the
Inquisition, a Race of Men which have ever been more formidable to Honest Men,
than Rascals, and bear a great sway amongst the Portuguese. He labored to
convince him it was his Duty, reminding him of his Oath of Fidelity to the King
of Spain, which he pretended he ought not to break in favor of a Rebel:
Farther he urged, it could not be his Interest to adhere to the New King, since
neither of them could hope long to enjoy their Places, under a Prince who
conferred all Employs on his own Creatures.

He spent some more Months in gaining over more Conspirators: The principal of
which were the Commissary La Crusada, the Count d' Armamar, Nephew to the
Archbishop; the Count de Ballerais, Dom Augustine Emanuel, Antonio Correa, the
same Commissary of Vasconcellos, whom Menezes had given diverse Stabs on the
breaking out of the Plot; Lorenzo Pidez Carrable, Keeper of the Royal Treasury,
all Creatures of the Spaniards, to whom they owed their Places and Fortunes,
which they could not hope to retain long, without the return of the Spanish
Government.

The Jews, who are very numerous at Lisbon, and live there, by making an
outward show of the Christian Religion, had a share in this Conspiracy. The
King had lately refused very considerable Sums, which they had offered him to
put a stop to the Proceedings of the Inquisition, and to obtain a Permission
for the public Profession of their Religion. The Archbishop craftily made use
of their Resentment to engage them in this Enterprise. He had private
Conferences with several of the Chiefs of the Party, who dreaded to think they
had thus unseasonably declared themselves; and by this means exposed themselves
to the Severities of the Inquisition.

This Crafty Prelate improved the Confusion they were in to his Advantage, and
immediately assured them of his Protection with the Grand Inquisitor, whom they
all knew to be at his Devotion. In the next place, he endeavored to raise a
Jealousy, insinuating, That a Prince who affected Bigotry, would certainly
drive them out of Portugal, and promised them Liberty of Conscience, and a
Synagogue in the Kingdom, if they would contribute to the Restoration of the
late Government.

So violent was the Passion of the Archbishop, he did not blush to use the
assistance of the Enemies of JESUS CHRIST, to dethrone his rightful Prince; and
perhaps this was the first time the inquisition ever acted in concert with the
Synagogue.

The Conspirators, after various Projects, at last resolved on this, which was
the sense of the Archbishop, and had been agreed between him and the Prime
Minister of Spain: That in the dead of the Night, of the Fifth of August, the
Jews should set Fire to the four Corners of the Palace; and at the same time to
several Houses in different Parts of the City, to keep the People employed in
quenching those next their own Dwellings. That the Conspirators should throw
themselves into the Palace, under Color of assisting to extinguish the Fire;
and in the midst of that Hurry and Confusion which attends Accidents of this
kind, they should thrust in near the King's Person, and so stab him. That the
Duke of Camino should, in the mean time, secure the Queen, and the young
Princes, just as the Princess of Mantua had before been, as Hostages for the
Surrender of the Citadel. That Preparations should be made to fire those
Vessels which were in Harbor. That the Archbishop, and the Grand Inquisitor,
with all his Officers, should march through the City to appease the People, and
prevent any Commotion by the dread of the Inquisition: And that the Marquess de
Villareal should take upon him the Government, till farther Orders should
arrive from Spain.

But having no Assurance the People would declare for them, they needed Troops
to support this Action. To this end it was agreed to solicit the Conde Duke to
send a considerable Fleet on the Coasts, to be ready to enter the Harbor at
the Moment the Conspiracy should be put in Action. That upon the first notice
of the Success, he should give Orders to all the Troops on the Frontiers to
march directly to Lisbon, to make Head against all Opposition.

But the Conspirators found great difficulty in settling this necessary
Correspondence with the Prime Minister. As Soon as the King was informed the
Vice-Queen had writ to Madrid, he had placed so strict a Guard on the
Frontiers, that no Person could go out of the Kingdom without his express
Leave; and it was not judged safe to corrupt the Guards, for fear they should
prove Treacherous, and deliver the Letters up, or disclose the Practices used
to corrupt them.

At length being pressed with the necessity of acquainting the Spanish Minister
with their Intentions, without which, all the Measures they should take would
be vain; and doubtful what way to effect this, they cast their Eyes on a Rich
Merchant of Lisbon, who was Treasurer of the Douane, who, upon the Account of
his great Dealings in several Parts of Europe, had a Permission to write into
Castile. This Man, named Baeze, made a Public Profession of the Christian
Religion, but was one of those whom the Portuguese call New Christians, who are
suspected to observe in Private the Jewish Rites. They offered him a very great
Sum of Money to engage in this Affair. This joined with the Importunity of the
Jews, who were in the secret of this Conspiracy, determined him, he accepted
their Offers, and undertook to have their Letters delivered to the Conde Duke
d' Olivarez.

He addressed his Packet to the Marquess d' Aiamonte, Governor of the first
Frontier Place in Spain, not doubting they were safe as soon as out of the
Dominion of Portugal.

This Marquess, who had a private Interest in the Affairs of Portugal, being
nearly Allied to the Queen, surprised to find Letters with the great Seal of
the Inquisition affixed to them, and addressed to the First Minister of Spain,
instantly opened them, fearing they might contain some Particulars of his
Private Correspondence with the King and Queen of Portugal, notwithstanding the
late Revolution, but found in them, to his no small Amazement, the Project and
Plan of a Conspiracy, which was ripe for Execution, and aimed to destroy him
and the whole Royal Family.

He sent the Packet back to the King of Portugal. His surprise was unspeakable,
to find, upon opening the Letters, that Princes nearly Allied to him, an
Archbishop, and several of the Chief Men in his Court, who showed the greatest
Joy at his Elevation, should so soon Conspire to deprive him at once of his
Life and Crown.

He summoned a Council privately, and some Days after acted according to the
Resolutions then taken. The Fifth of August was the Day when the Plot was to be
put in execution, about Eleven a Clock at Night, the Particulars of which were
set down in the intercepted Papers. The same Day the King ordered all the
Troops quartered in the Neighboring Villages, to march into Lisbon, under a
Pretense of a General Review in the great Court of the Palace. He gave
privately, with his own Hand, several Billets sealed, to those about him, in
whom he most confided, with strict Orders not to open them till Noon, and then
to execute punctually, the Orders contained in them. In the next place, taking
the Archbishop, and the Marquis de Villareal into his Closet, under pretense of
Communicating some Business to them, he secured them without noise, about Noon,
and a Captain of the Guards seized on the Duke of Camino, in the Great Square.
Those who received the Billets, opening them, found Orders to seize some of the
Conspirators, and commit them to such and such Prisons, and to set a Guard on
them till farther Orders. These Measures were so well taken, and so punctually
executed, that in less than an Hours time, the whole Forty seven were seized,
no one having Notice to make his escape.

The noise of this Plot being spread through the Town, the People flocked to the
Palace in great Crowds, demanding the Traitors to be delivered to them. Though
the King was pleased to see the Affection of his New Subjects; yet this unusual
Concourse made him a little uneasy. He feared these popular Tumults might grow
frequent, which he looked on as no better than Seditious Assemblies. So having
thanked the People for their Concern for his Person, and assured them Justice
should be done, he ordered the Magistrates to disperse them.

However, lest the Heat of the People should abate, who easily pass from the
most violent Fury and Rage, to Sentiments of Pity and Compassion, this Prince
gave out, the Conspirators had a Design to Assassinate him, and the whole Royal
Family, to set the City on Fire, and seize what escaped the Flames as their
Plunder: And to prevent all Conspiracies for the future, and to discharge their
Vengeance, they had resolved to People the Town with a Colony of Spaniards, and
to send the Citizens to the Mines in America, and bury them alive in that
Abyss, which had swallowed a World of People.

In the next place, he appointed Judges out of the Supreme Court of Judicature,
for the Trial of the Conspirators; to these he added, two of the Grandees of
the Kingdom, upon the Account of the Archbishop of Braga, the Marquess of
Villareal, and the Duke of Camino.

The King ordered the Commissioners not to make use of the Letters which he put
into their Hands, if they could Convict the Plotters without them, for fear the
Court of Spain should come to know by what means they came to fall into his
Hands. But there was no need to employ them to discover the Truth. Baeze
contradicted himself in almost all the Questions which were put to him; and
this Wretch, on the first Torture, confessed his Guilt, and disclosed the whole
Plan of the Conspiracy. He owned they had a Design to kill the King; that the
Office of the Inquisition was full of Arms, and they only waited the Conde
Duke's Answer for the Execution of their Designs.

Most part of the other Plotters being put to the Question, their Depositions
were agreeable to those of the Jew. The Archbishop, the Grand Inquisitor, the
Marquis de Villareal, and the Duke of Camino confessed their Guilt, to avoid
the Torture. The Judges condemned the two last to be Beheaded, and the rest to
be Hanged and Quartered, and reserved the Sentence of the Churchmen for the
King.

The King summoned a Council immediately, and told his Ministers, he feared the
Punishment of so many Persons of Rank, though they were Guilty, might have bad
Consequences. That the chief Conspirators being of several of the first Houses
of the Kingdom, their Kindred would be so many secret Enemies of the
Government, and the desire to revenge their Death, would be the unhappy source
of perpetual Plots. That the Death of Count Egmont in Flanders, and of the
Guises in France, had both fatal Consequences; that to Pardon some, and inflict
a less severe Punishment than Death, would win the Hearts of all Persons, and
oblige them, their Relations and Friends, to act by motives of Gratitude. That
however his private Opinion was for Mildness, he had assembled them to have
their sense, and resolved to proceed as they judged best.

The Marquis de Ferrara was for having them Executed without delay. He asserted
with vehemence, that a Prince on these Occasions, ought to hear nothing but
Justice; that Mildness was dangerous, and to pardon Criminals of this kind,
would be thought a Weakness in a Prince, proceeding more from a Fear of their
powerful Friends, than a natural Goodness: That Impunity would bring the
present Government into Contempt, and encourage their Friends to deliver them
out of Prison, and possibly to push Matters further. That an Example of
Severity was necessary upon his Accession to the Crown, to deterr others from
the like Attempt. That this Offense was not only against the King's Person, but
against the State, and a design to subvert the Government. That he ought to
consider more the Justice he owed his People, than his Inclination to Clemency,
at a Time when the Preservation of his Person, and the Public Safety, were
inseparable.

All the Council being of the same Opinion, the King yielded, and the Sentence
was executed the next Day. The Archbishop of Lisbon interceeded for the Life of
one of his Friends, and solicited the Queen, with all the Assurance of a Man,
who thought nothing could be refused to his Services. But the Queen, who
understood very well the necessity of impartial Justice, how much a distinction
of this Nature would exasperate the Friends of the rest, only replied, with a
Tone which showed her inflexible Resolution. My Lord, the greatest Favor I can
grant you, is to forget that you ever spoke to me of this Matter.

The King fearing to draw the Court of Rome on him, and being willing to make
use of the good Graces of the Holy Father, that he might own him as King,
changed the Punishment of the Archbishop of Braga, and the Grand Inquisitor,
into a perpetual Prison. The Archbishop died of Grief, because his design had
miscarried. The Vice-Queen was delivered to the Spaniards; and the first
Minister of Spain seeing clandestine ways unable to destroy the King of
Portugal, was resolved to attack him by open force. But this too was still
unsuccessful. This Prince kept a considerable number of Troops on his Frontier,
commanded by the best Generals, and composed of a great number of Foreign
Officers and Volunteers, whom his Bounty had drawn into his Service. Besides
this, he had the dexterity to make Pensioners in the very Council of Spain, who
served him effectually, and disposed Matters so, that those Generals who were
ordered to attack Portugal, were never in a Condition to attempt any thing
considerable to its prejudice. Thus he reigned seventeen Years, the Delight of
his Subjects, and the Terror of Spain. After his Death, the Queen, a Princess
of Courage and great Skill in the Affairs of Government, gloriously kept the
Crown and Fortune for her Children. She shone with full Splendour on the Throne,
during the whole time of her Regency, and showed all those Qualities in their
brightest Luster, which made her one of the most Illustrious Princesses that
ever reigned. The Conduct and the Art of Government were her chiefest Care, and
her constant Study. She applied her self with great assiduity, to unmask the
several Characters, and guess by the most nice and fine outsides, the most
concealed Intentions; and if at any time she happened to be deceived, she would
trace the several Steps to find the Original Mistake. By her extraordinary
Diligence she had attained to great Skill and Judgment; the Spanish Ad haec
politicas arts, bonos and malos Regiminis dolos, dominationis arcana, humani
latibula ingenii non modo intelligere Mulier, sed and pertractare quoque and
provehere tam Natura quam Disciplina mirifice instructa fuit. Caetan Passar. de
Bello Lusitan.
Historians as well as the Portugueze, do her the Justice to own, she could see
the naked Hearts of her Courtiers, though veiled with the most artful
Dissimulation. In short, where there appeared any thing Great or Glorious to
attempt, she wanted neither Courage to conquer all Difficulties, or Wit to find
means to obtain what she desired; and there was nothing farther to be wished
for in this matchless Woman, except a more true Notion of real Greatness, or
higher Motives than Fame and Glory.

The Court of Spain thinking the Regency the most favorable opportunity to
regain their lost Power in Portugal, bent the force of their Arms on that
Kingdom. The Pensioners of the late King, in the Councils of Madrid, who had
hitherto diverted the Storm, were dead, and the Regent had no way left but to
prepare for War. She obtained of the Princes, her Allies, the best Generals,
and the most experienced Officers. The weight of Affairs did not make any
Impression on her. Her Capacity, Wit, and steady Courage were proof against all
Adventures. Nothing but the Throne she filled could have ever shown the great
Genius of this Princess, wise in her Counsels, impenetrable in her Designs,
rigid and inflexible in maintaining every Point of her just Authority. The
People had a great Affection to her Government. Fear and Respect kept the Great
Men of the Kingdom in a perfect Submission. Never Troops were in better
Condition, or better Disciplined: Her Orders were executed as punctually as if
she had been at the Head of her Army in Person. Every one knew Offenses to the
prejudice of the Queen's Affairs were never pardoned. All Men were diligent in
doing their Duty: She would know every thing, read all Dispatches, and nothing
escaped her Care and Providence.

To conclude, She put every thing in so good Order, in the time of her Regency,
that King Alphonso, her Son, upon his entering into the Government, found the
Kingdom in a Condition to maintain a War against Spain, with Advantage, his
Generals won great Battles, and ever beat their Enemies; so that some time
after the Abdication of that Prince, Spain, wearied with so fruitless and
expensive War, was constrained to desire a Peace of Dom Pedro, his Brother, now
reigning, and own him Rightful King of Portugal, and that Crown, independent.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line pen. dele then. p. 6. for Moguel, r. Miguel. p. 11. after the
Crown, insert, were not Criminal. p. 16. for Ozono. 1. Ozorio.

MEmoirs of the most Material Transactions in England, for the last Hundred
Years, preceding the Revolution in 1688. By James Wellwood, M. D. Physician in
Ordinary to His Majesty, and Fellow of the College of Physicians, London.

Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Queen's-Head against St. Dunstan's-Church in
Fleet Street.


