A VINDICATION Of the Two LETTRES CONCERNING Alterations in the Liturgy; IN
ANSWER TO VOX CLERI.

A VINDICATION Of the Two LETTERS CONCERNING Alterations in the Liturgy; IN
ANSWER TO Vox Cleri.

By a London Presbyter.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey. MDCXC.

A VINDICATION OF THE Two Letters TO THE CONVOCATION
Though the two Letters concerning the Convocation are sufficient to satisfy any
reasonable and unprejudiced Man, that alterations in our Liturgy are not only
Lawful, but [in this juncture] expedient too: Yet a late Pamphlet entitled Vox
Cleri, gives me a just occasion both of confirming what they have said, and
also of exposing this Pamphlets little Pleas and Sophistry, against so Wise and
Charitable an undertaking.

The very Title, viz. Vox Cleri: or, The Sense of the Clegy, speaks the Author
both weak and peevish; and the Quotation of Prove. 24.21. in the Title page --
Fear God, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to Change, is
an argument ex abundanti this way.

For what has this busy Thing to do with the Sense of the Clergy? What
Commission has he to acquaint the World with their Minds? The very thing it
self betrays the Author to a just suspicion, as speaking more of Design than
Truth,

But what Clergy does he mean? It must be either the Convocation, or those in
his Neighborhood, p. 1. if the former, the thing is false; for he declares in
his Protestation, that there is nothing yet proposed to them, therefore they
have not yet Voted in this matter, whence alone we may conclude their Sense; if
the latter, the thing is weak and frivolous, because to these we oppose the Vox
Cleri, or Sense of the Clergy, in the City, as well as else where, who must be
allowed to be more considerable than those in a Country Neighborhood; for (to
mention no more) these are few, and (as we have reason to belie^e) prejudiced
by Le^ters mis^epresenting the whole Affair. Indeed his Reflections, p. 24.
say, they have not seen any Pamphlets, or [Printed] Letters against
Alterations; but this implies, that they have seen Written ones, else what need
of this restriction? In truth this is the (...) the true cause of our present
hea^s and difficulties, which speaks the Sense of some Men to be more a Passion
than a true Judgment.

As to that Scripture, Solomon spoke not in reference to Forms and Ceremonies,
which is our Subject, but of substantial Duties to God and the King; which
affects this Gentleman more than those whom he opposes, in that he makes it his
business, p. 2. etc. to sham and put tricks upon His Majesty's Commission;
therefore his application of it is but an absurd wresting of the Sacred Text.
It is true, it has been sometimes used this way, from the general force and
signification of the Word, which yet speaks more of Fancy than Jugdment, but
ought not by formal Quotation, for this imports the sense the Author uses it
in, to be the sense of the Holy Penman.

According to this the Author must be of no Church in the World; for where is
the HoIy-Kiss and Love Feasts? Where are Deaconesse, Exorcisms, with a
multitude or Ceremonies in Baptism, as thrice Diping, Anointing, etc. Where is
the Water mingled with the Sacramental Wine? Where Kneeling in Prayer all the
Week, in token of the Fall by sin; and Standing on Sundays, as well as all that
space between Easter and Pentecost, signifying the Resurrection? Which things
we frequently meet with, both the Greek and Latin Fathers. Where is the
steddiness of the Greek Church, which has altered her Liturgy so often, that a
Collection of her several Forms are said by the Letter to a Friend, to amount
to Twenty Volums? Where is the unchangeableness of the Latin Church, which has
often altered her public Service, notwithstanding her pretenses to an
Infallibility? Where is the constancy of the Church of England, which has
changed not only under Popery, but under Edw. 6. Q. Eliz. and Car. 2. therefore
this Gentleman with vanity enough advises, not to meddl^ with them that are
given to change; while he professes himself a Member of that Church that has
changed so often already, and allows of farther changes still.

In the Book it self he says, p. 1. that the Clergy in his Neighborhood are
inclinable to part with several Ceremonies, and to submit to many Alterations
for the peace of the Church, and satisfaction of sober Dissenters.

Jane, which he pretends to have received from one of the Convocation; and the
great satisfaction, he says, it gives to the Clergy of those parts, is all but
a mere contrivance, and may justly be suspected to have more of a Trick than of
Truth in it.



They are to consider what is fit to be done, not what a few prejudiced and
designing Men would have them do. But,

viz.

1. That Dissenters apply themselves to the Convocation for Alterations, lest
they should reject the kindness with a Quis requisivit? p. 2. and 2. That they
declare what Alteration will satifie 'em, p. 3.
To the former of these we Answer,





Duty, to grant them something, lest they get what we are unwilling to part
from.



But in truth all this is only a blind excuse for not doing what he has no
mind should be done; for the close of this Paragraph says, it is declared in
the Preface to the Liturgy, as also in the Kings Ecclesiastical Commission,
that Alterations may be made according to the exigency of times and occasions;
yet he opposes another part of the Preface to both, viz. That the Book, that
is, of Common Prayer, as it stood before Established by Law, does not contain
in it any thing contrary to the Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or which a
godly Man may not with a good Conscience use and submit to, or which is not
fairly defensible -- to which he adds, that it has been altered for the better
in some hundreds of places since, suggesting hereby, that it needs no
Alterations now; which gives an undoubted evidence,

1. Of his inconsistency with himself; for he argues against Alterations merely
for want of application from Dissenters, and yet under the same Head changes
his Topic, disputing against such Alterations from the perfection of our
Liturgy; he would have none, because Dissenters ask for none, and then because
there is need of none: Certainly he shifts his Argument, because he suspects
that the first prpposed will not stand the shock, and therefore brings on this
as a reserve to support it.

2. This speaks his Insincerity; for he knows we plead for Alterations from a
prudential necessity arising, not so much from the Book it self, as from the
weakness of some who misunderstand, and the perverseness of others who
industriously abuse it; What need then of justifying the Book in this argument,
unless to amuse the Reader with an heap of pleas to no purpose?

3. This discovers his gross Inadvertency, in that he pleads against
Alterations, from Dissenters not asking for them; and yet in the same Head
declares himself absolutely against all Alterations, whether they ask or not;
in that he uses the Kings Commission, and the Preface to the Common Prayer,
against the design of that Commission, and that very Liberty which the Preface
it self does give us; so fain would he carry on a design which he is ashamed to
own, (i. e.) hinder Alteration, and yet lay the fault at the Dissenters doors.

Whatever is at the bottom; this is generally the humor amongst Men of this
complexion; they wish for Peace, but will part with nothing for it; and the
Gentlemen in this Authors Neighborhood, who speak fair but do nothing, are
like the disobedient Son who said, I go, but went not; for which he had (I Will
warrant you) as good reasons as these before you.

2. He pleads, p. 3. That they ought to declare what Alterations will satisfy,
else they have no reason to make any.

Car. 2. and still do by their frequent complaints, and the reasons they give
of their separation. And the late promise of accommodation must respect the
Alteration of those things (so far as may be) that offend the more reasonable
and judicious amongst 'em. Now after all this, for them to make new proposals,
is not only actum agere, but a putting their Cause back, which is already
known, and has advanced so far as to have gained the promise of a due
consideration. Therefore there is now nothing wanting on our parts in order to
their case and our security, but a performance of that Promise.

p. 2. acknowledges is impossible, therefore his requiring impossible
conditions of peace is no better, than a fallacious denial of that peace it
self.

Hence he urges the extravagancy of some men, that have trampled on
Condescensions made in the Year 1661. and others proposed by the present Bishop
of Worcester, in the Year 1681. which he thinks enough to render the Church
justly sour and peevish forever.

p. 2. that all cannot agree in common Proposals, which utterly destroys his
argument; for as some will not, so the very Differences amongst themselves do
assure us, that others will accept reasonable Condescensions, and the gaining a
part is not only all we expect, but is sufficient to our end too.



But p. 4. drives on the same argument, quoting a Book of Mr. R. B's, which
says, There are Forty sinful particulars in our Communion, besides Thirty
tremendous Principles and Circumstantials, which affright Dissenters from it;
and the healing attempt requires not such abatements, as Authority now designs;
but the admission of their new Model for a Comprehension, which is such as will
make every Parish Church independent; All which things, p. 5. assure us, that
the Convocation neither can nor will alter, and yet if any one remain
unaltered, the Schism will continue. Whence he asks Cui bono? To what end
should any Alterations be made? To which (he thinks) a satisfactory Answer
cannot be given.

But this is an argument of the weakness of his reasoning, not of the strength
of his Cause; for this supposes, that all Dissenters are of the same mind;
which is a poor fallacy called Petitio principii, a taking that for granted,
which he must prove, else his whole cause falls to the ground. To which we
Answer,





This is so obvious, that he immediately starts an Objection, which he sees
will be certainly made against him, viz. that Alterations may please the King,
the Parliament, and a great part of the Dissenting Laity, by which we must
understand all those that are not in Communion with the Church.

In Answer to which, he Complements the King, Lashes the Parliament, and (like
a Lawgiver) proposes other measures toward the Laity; industriously evading
that part of the Objection which he dare not undertake to Answer. But leaving
this a while, we will pursue the present argument.

In this Case we are to consider, not what every Dissenter would have, which is
the way to hinder all Alterations, or to leave our selves nothing; but what
Alterations will take away the greatest occasions of mistake and cavil, as
knowing, that this will reduce some and leave others inexcusable.

This was the method of the Church before; for the Preface to the Common Prayer
says, that though there were proposals made, yet our aim was not to gratify
this or that Party in any their unreasonable demands; but to do that, which to
our best understanding we conceive might most tend to the preservation of
Peace, and Unity in the Church, etc. And certainly the Church may Alter things
now without any fresh Proposals made, much better than she could then without
having any regards to them that were made; because,

1. Those Proposals then made, together with Complaints, Demands, and other
Methods since, do give us a better understanding of Dissenters, than those
Proposals could give then; therefore (without any Proposals now made) we have,
less need of being informed what will satisfy Dissenters, than the Church had
then even after their Proposals were received.

2. Alterations then without regard to their Proposals might exasperate some,
who might think themselves neglected; but Alterations now without fresh
Proposals cannot exasperate any, but may oblige the more, as being evidences of
a free inclination to Peace and Unity. Therefore if those methods gained some,
these are likely to gain more. But

3. Suppose they do not recover one Dissenter, yet (as we said) it is not to be
imagined, but that they will fix many of the unsettled Multitude, who added to
the Church, will leave Dissenters the objects of our Pity, not of our Fear.
This must be granted, and consequently his principal argument against
Alterations, viz. the improbability of gaining Dissenters is utterly overthrown.

But our Author, p. 5, 6. leaves his Usurped Province, for instead of giving
reasons against Alterations designed for winning Dissenters, he is for reducing
them by force; which methods (he says) had left in some great Cities scarce
three or four Persons of any note, that kept off from our Communion, till
Toleration disordered all again.

This very Plea does farther evidence, not only the great presumption of the
Man, who prescribes to all Authority, but of the great necessity of present
Alterations too, because

1. A Toleration had not unsettled so many, had not the strict terms of
Communion made them so uneasy: therefore there seems to be (in our present
circumstances) an absolute necessity of present abatements, that we may reduce
those we have lost, and keep them we yet have.

2. Suppose, that nothing but a Toleration makes Alterations now necessary, yet
if Authority thinks fit to put such a necessity upon us, we ought in prudence
and duty both, to apply our selves to that [perhaps] only expedient, which is
now left us, whereby to preserve our Church and People. If a Toleration made it
lately necessary in the judgment of all our Clergy, to promise Condescensions,
why should not a Toleration now render it full as necessary to make them? The
truth is, this Gentleman is of the same mind with the Book lately quoted, which
is not for parting a Stake, but for having all or none; and were all Churchmen
on one band, and all Dissenters on the other, of the same humor, we should find
the whole Nation as mad as the Psalmists sinners, who when any spoke of Peace,
were making ready for Battle.

He grants, p. 6. that they know not what the Commissioners have done in order
to an Alteration; and yet at the same time pleads, that the Alterations, which
are said to be prepared, will hazard the offending a greater number, than they
are likely to gratify.

viz. That they were Condemned unheard; he censurses the thing, and determins
the consequences, and yet confesses that he knows nothing of the matter, only
as People say, who know as little as himself. This we may presume is the effect
of those Letters, which were sent abroad to prepossess and prejudice the
Country-Clergy.

And indeed it is evil Surmises and wicked Representations of what men know
not, that is the cause of most of our Heats and Mischiefs. I know, that some
hottest opposers of Alterations, have submitted to the particulars prepared
(when laid before 'em) as very reasonable; though they have represented the
whole, (unknown) as Monstrous Innovations. And were they made public, I doubt
not, but they would shame these opprobrious Scandals cast upon the
Commissioners, and themselves. But in the mean time, we must expect a great
deal of candor in this harangue, when the Author is so notoriously guilty
himself, of what he thinks all his Art and Passion, little enough to expose in
others.

In the same Page it is Objected, That Alterations will leave incorrigible
Dissenters the more inexcusable; which he denies, saying, they will still plead
Conscience, and under every Penalty still cry out of Persecution.



In p. 7. He wheedles with Dr. Beveridges Sermon before the Convocation, and by
breaking it into bits and shreds, would make it speak contrary both to the
Letter and design of it. Het here quotes p. 25. that a part should not be
preferred before the whole. Whence he opens against the Schism, and would have
Dissenters by strict discipline, taught the Duty of Self-denial. But what is
this to the Doctors design or our business?

His design there is to show, that there are a weak sort of Dissenters, in
reference to whom the Church ought to make such provision, that she may keep
those members she has, and reduce those she wants; -- that however, nothing
ought to be omitted for the sake of these, that may be profitable to the whole
Church; nor admitted, that may be detrimental to it. Because a part ought not
to be preferred before the whole. Where the Pamphlet, out of either ignorace or
design, takes that absolutely, which is spoke only Secundum quid; quoting the
Doctor against all Alterations, when he first allows some, and then is against
none but such that may be of public mischief.

And what is this to our business, who are not to give Laws and inflict
Penalties on Dissenters, but are only to consider what prudent Alterations may
possibly win them, and give the Church safety, but not danger?

The Sermon, p. 26. says, that Alterations should not be made without a cogent
necessity, and p. 27. utrum autem ecclesia nostra -- but whether our Church be
constrained by such a necessity, is not my part to determine; where the Doctor
is not against Alterations, as the Pamphlet vainly insinuates, but modestly
refuses directly to anticipate the business of a Convocation, which our
Pamphleter has face enough to do. But that he may give us a sufficent proof,
not of his impertinency only, but of his want either of Judgment or Honesty
too, he proceeds with the Doctors Sermon, till he does sufficiently lead the
Reader to the conclusion of such a necessity, which the Pamphlet it self
requires, viz. This only I dare to affirm, that if it be necessary to reduce
wandering Sheep into Christ's Flock; if to take off Scruples from the minds of
weak Brethren; if to allay hatred, appease and (as much as may be) to suppress
all Dissentions concerning Religion -- if these things (says he) seem
necessary to any man; it will also seem necessary to that man to admit such
changes, as he is persuaded will conduce to such ends -- where the Doctor so
fairly leads his Reader to the circumstances of our Church, and the designs of
calling this Synod; that he leaves him necessarily to conclude that necessity,
which himself would not express. This shows both his candor and his Rhetoric;
since in a point so nice and yet so important too; here is a Miosis more
intended, than he thought convenient to speak.

P. 9. Tells us from the Doctor still, that even incommodious Laws, ought not
to be changed without some urgent necessity. We readily grant it; but the only
question between us, viz. whether our Church has at this time such a necessity
or not, is as much undetermined, as if he had never made any of these
Quotations; whence I cannot see what service he has done himself, unless to
show the World, that he is able to Translate a piece of a Latin Sermon.

His next Paragraph tells us of an apt allusion of this Learned Doctors, but I
am sure it is no way apt for his purpose; for the Doctor there shows, That both
the universal and particular Churches, have power by their Synods to make Laws,
as they shall judge expedient for the better Administration of the public
Worship of God -- But wherein this can serve him who is against all
Alterations, I can by no means see. And in truth, were all the parts of his
Pamphlet like this, which troubles the Doctors Sermon, and the World to no
purpose, I must have spoken him a weak Brother, not fit to be received to
doubtful Disputations.

Without peradventure the design of all this pudder is to persuade the World,
that the Doctor is like himself, viz. Learned to no purpose, (i. e.) has
Preached and Printed a Sermon, that is not to the Point; only because it is
more modest than the Pamphlet, which presumes to give peremptory injunctions to
the Convocation it self; against whom we have the judgment as of other learned
and unprejudiced men, so of the Bishops themselves, who judge it so suitable,
that by their Commands we have a Second Impression.

Had he followed our Doctors advice, p. 30. Nulla praejudicata opinio, nulla
praesumpta suspicio, nulla litium cupido, huc afferatur: Let no preposessions,
no presumed suspicions, no desire of contentions approach this Synod; neither
this Pamphlet nor its Author would find any place there.

In p. 10. he starts this Objection, viz. Our Divisions had almost betrayed us
to Popery and Slavery; for prevention of which danger for the future, it is
advisable (as much as may be) to enlarge the terms of our Communion.

An Objection well put, but not so well Answered; for he says, Who betrayed us
to those Divisions? Were they not such as causlesly separated from us, and
joined with the common Enemy, rather than with the Church of England? This we
would prove as otherwise, so from their addresses to the late King; which
promised to stand by him with their lives and fortunes, and to obey him without
reserve.





England, may expose us to those dangers now, as much as it did then; and
therefore there is at this time as well a necessity of performing the Bishops
Promise, as there was then of making it; but we acquiesc'd in that, and
consequently we ought in this.

Our Savior says, That a Kingdom divided cannot stand; yet our Pamphlet would
continue our Division in order [forsooth] to our preservation. And certainly if
ever there was a time that speaks this Truth; if ever a time that requires our
Union in order to a common Preservation; if ever a time that calls for mutual
Condescentions, which is the only way to this Union, it is this. In truth, was
the Author a professed enemy to our Church and Established Religion, I should
believe there is more of judgment and sincerity in his Answer to this
Objection, than I can yet discern in it; for his Argument lies thus: viz.
Dissenters by their Division have already endangered us; Ergo, we should leave
them Dissenters still, that they may endanger us again; as if he wisely
designed to punish their Obstinacy by our own Ruin.

But he proceeds, if some leading Presbyterians are by our Alterations let into
the Church, and be made Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. what security have
we that they will not promote Divisions in the Church? -- This was the reason,
says p. 11. that the Clergy opposed a Bill for Comprehension, contrived by
Bishop Wilkins; and for which, and other Reasons, the House of Commons cast it
out.

viz. That such Comprehensions would have made a Division in the Church;
therefore this being a mere surmise, must not be allowed the repute of an
Argument.



But however, to give strength and color this suspicion, he says, p. 10. That
some Bishops and others, preferred under King Charles the Second, did attempt
this.

To which we Answer;

have, so long as there be moderate and judicious men in it; and had that
Comprehension been established, it would have proved our security at this very
day.



p. 3, 4. he passionately pleads against all Alterations, from the unlikelyhood
of gaining one Dissenter, who are so stubborn and unreasonable in the terms
they propose for an Accommodation; and yet here he is afraid of such a number
coming in, as shall divide and ruin the whole Church; which speaks the Author
to pursue an Hypothesis, but not the Truth; and resolved by all manner of Pleas
agreeing and disagreeing, probable and improbable, true and false, or by any
thing else you can imagine, to confound and obstruct intended Condescensions.



But in the same Page he pleads against Alterations from another Topic, viz,
reasonable Condescentions to one party is likely to encourage unreasonable
Solicitations from another.





Our, frequent changes in some things, may make men question all, and at last
center in the Church of Rome.





Thus you have his Feats; whence in the next Paragraph he Triumphs, reckoning
he has knocked down his Enemies with this Pamphlet, as Sampson did the
Philistines, with the Jaw Bone of an Ass. For thus he proceeds;

And now let the men that are given to change, produce those weighty and
important reasons required, in the Preface to the Common Prayer; or that great
necessity which Dr. Beveridge requires for the Alteration, even of commodious
Laws.

A bold Challenge indeed! however I shall accept it; And will show these
important Reasons and great Necessity of present Alterations from, 1. The
Sacred Scriptures. 2. Our Circumstances. 3. The general Sense of the Nation. 4.
The Duty of doing all we can for the keeping and securing our Flocks. And, 5.
Some things themselves imposed.


1. The Sacred Scriptures do determine this controversy against our Pamphlet;
for St. Paul forbids us to offend a weak Brother, in using our power in things
indifferent. This indeed does not affect us as we are now under the Law, but it
does affect the Church, when the civil Authority calls her to Explain, Alter,
and Omit those things that do offend. But you will say, that the Church has
power in all matters indifferent, whence results the Duty of the Peoples
Submission in all such matters: It is true, but if the People cannot see the
Lawfulness of such Submission, the Church ought not to press them any further,
than a due regard to the Souls of Men will allow, or the general Interest of
Religion, and the common safety of the Church does require, 1 Corinthians. 10.3. We
must not do all things that are Lawful, but what things are expedient and
edifying; upon which Scripture Clem. Alex. Paedag. b. 2. c. 1. has this Note,
(...), Those who will do all that is Lawful, quickly fall into that which is
Unlawful; and I am sure it is no Paradox, that if the Church will do all she
may, she certainly does more than she ought, because her power must be tempered
by a tender and prudential regard to the weakness of all her Members. St. Paul,
2 Cor. 10.8. speaks of a power that God has given for edification, not for
destruction; therefore that Church does abuse her power, which by too strict
terms of Communion does not gather and build up, but scatter the Flock. Indeed
at our last settlement the evils we have suffered, were not sufficiently
foreseen; but since sad experience has given us such terrible admonitions, the
Church seems utterly inexcusable, if she refuse (to the best of her skill and
power) to apply a suitable remedy.

2. That a Kingdom divided cannot stand, is a Truth so certain, and allowed by
all observing Men, that our Savior brought this as a Medium to prove, that a
Division will ruin even Satan himself; and what our Divisions have done this
way by obstructing all public undertakings, and exposing us to hazards both at
home and abroad, I leave the World to judge; nor can we think of any other
expedient to secure us, but Union; nor is there any way to Union, but mutual
condescensions; nor must we expect (as long experience has taught us) that if
we stiffly stand our ground, others will move, unless perhaps to confound and
ruin us; therefore if it be necessary to put life into the affairs of Church
and State; if necessary to secure to our selves Peace and Prospetity, it is
then necessary to make those Condescensions, which seem now the only means to
that end.

3. This is evident from the general sense of all Parties in the Nation, who
look upon Alterations as the only Methods of Union, which may be proved by an
induction of particulars. Those who are for Union and Settlement, are for
Alterations, others are against them. Moderate Presbyterians, and the Unsettled
multitude, expect Alterations, as encouraging motives to the Church: Rigid
Dissenters, who resolve at any rate to maintain their Schism, diligently
endeavor (as we hear from Essex and the West) by all imaginable Methods to
secure their People from a compliance, what Alterations soever the Church may
make; which abundantly satisfies us, that they fear Alterations will endanger
their Parties. Inferior Sects, whose Principles are inconsistent with
Government, are against these things, lest hereby the Church should become
strong enough to quash them at her pleasure. While the Papists abhor these
Methods, as knowing they will obstruct all their designs, and suffer them no
longer to use Protestants as Tools in the ruining one another. Now after all
this, what is the true reason, that this Gentleman, with those in his
Neighborhood, and others under the same prejudices, should oppose these
undertakings? If because they fear that Dissenters will not be gained, or the
Church be ruined by it; we have the Sense of the whole Nation, both Friends and
Enemies against them; but if for other Reasons, let them look to it, who must
severely answer for their obstructing the most probable Methods of Peace and
Unity. Therefore if Peace and Unity, and the common Interest both of Church and
State, be of any necessity and importance with us; then in the judgment of the
Nation, Alterations must be of some necessity and importance too, because they
judge these the most conducive to those ends.

4. We argue from the indispensible Duty of doing all we may to secure our
Flocks in the ways of Truth and Peace, which lies so hard upon us, that their
Blood will be required at the hands of those Shepherds, who suffer them to
perish out of negligence, humor, or any other means whatsoever: And certainly
few can be so much strangers at home, as not to observe, that they daily lose
some and find others unsetling, and perceive those growing encroachments upon
our several changes, which will quickly hasten things to a confusion; and that
especially since the present stiffness against Alteration. And though I do not
Damn those that leave us, yet Schism is very dangerous; and unsetling turns
many to looseness and irreligion, and occasions some to fix in Opinions that are
in themselves Damnable; which ought to be well considered by them who have read
Jer. 23.1. Woe to the Pastors that destroy and scatter the Sheep of my Pasture,
says the Lord. I know that Separation is but an accidental consequence,
proceeding not from the Nature of our Constitution, but from the Weakness and
Prejudices of Men; yet when experience does teach us such an accidental evil,
and the Church is called to provide (so far as may be) a suitable remedy, I
must place those that oppose this design amongst such Shepherds, that destroy
and scatter the Sheep; for by such refusal they make the cause of Separation to
be not only the others weakness, but their own wilfulness too; in that, as the
one will not understand, so the other will not remove (so far as they may) the
occasion of error.

Therefore as Dr. Beveridge says, if it be necessary to reduce wandering Sheep
into Christ's flock; if necessary to take off scruples from the minds of weak
Brethren; -- if necessary to suppress all dissentions concerning Religion -- if
necessary to keep those we have, and to give up our accounts with joy at the
last day; it must be necessary to admit such changes, as are conducive to such
ends.

5. We argue from things imposed. As

1. Apocryphal Lessons, which ought in reason and prudence to be changed for
Canonical Scriptures; because these containing some things unseemly, some
improbable, and others evidently false, do scandalize not only them without the
Church, but many of those who are frequenters of our daily Prayers.

His Answer to a Letter from a Minister in the Country brings several Pleas
from others against Alterations in this particular, p. 25. these are read not
to confirm our Faith, but to reform our manners; this may be better applied to
Ecclesiasticus, and the Book of Wisdom, than to Tobit, Judith, and Bell and the
Dragon, which looking like Legends and Romances, seem very unapt this way. But
however why should not they that offend, and respect Manners only, give place
to those Scriptures that do not offend, and respect both Faith and Manners too,
unless men fear that they should do too much good at once? He pleads the
ancient use of them from Cypr. in Symb. which is it self an Apocryphal Book,
and not so old as the pretended Author by about One hundred and fifty years,
and is ascribed by some to St. Hierom, by others to Ruffinus; but however, we
are to enquire not what is oldest, but what is most edifying; indeed they might
anciently be of good use, but not now, since squeamish and critical times are
so much prejudiced against them; whence according to the Preface to the Common
Prayer, it is but reasonable they should be changed according to the present
exigence.

Omitting other things, 26. pleads for em from the Dissenters, who have
declared, that they are not against Apocryphal Chapters, being read in the
Church, but against their being read as Lessons; but our Liturgy does order
them as Lessons, therefore this Quotation shows, that they require an
Alteration, if not of the Chapters, yet of the manner of reading 'em. Where our
Pamphleter shows himself such a Master of Defense, that instead of hitting of
his Enemy, he either beats the Air, or wounds himself with his own Weapon.

Some Nonconformists give this as a great Reason of their Dissent, that they
cannot be satisfied, but that the Assent and Consent required by the Act of
Uniformity, does reach not only the Use but the Truth of these Books. Many of
our own Church are offended, some persons unsettled, and others fixed in their
Separation by reason of these Lessons. He pleads, p. 27. that some Sermons have
done more mischief than Bell and the Dragon, with Tobit and his Dog; suppose
that, yet why should these do any, unless we think it a sufficient discharge of
our Duties only to do less evil than others? I must think these and all other
Pleas this way, highly unreasonable, unless they can prove, that there is worth
and weight enough in these Books, beyond what there is in Canonical Scripture,
to compensate all these mischiefs, which the Church continually suffers upon
their accounts, as well as otherwise; which (I presume) the Pamphleter himself
will hardly undertake.

2. There are some passages in our Liturgy that may be so Altered, as to take
away many Objections, which weakness has raised and malice improved to a
mighty height; I need not mention them, because the Letter from a Minister in
the Country, has already done it; in Answer to which, our Pamphleter, p. 38.
by certain explications shows, that they are capable of a very fair
construction; but who denies this? The Preface to the Common Prayer does
affirm, and our Conformity does speak it; but the Question is, Whether it is
not expedient so to express them, that Weakness may not stumble nor Malice
cavil at 'em? Our Pamphlet it self (to clear them from objections) does explain
them; a good argument, that they are not (as he pretends, p. 41.) self-evident,
but that they want an explication; that is indeed an Alteration. And if the
Pamphlet may explain them, Why may not the Convocation? Unless our Pamphleter
be so vain as to think his explication must go along with the Liturgy, that
they may see the one who are offended at the other. I must declare it an
extreme dotage upon Forms and modes of Speech, which inclines men to keep in
things with so much difficulty and damage, that may be so easily and
advantagiously parted from.

It is not for me to instance in all things that may be to very good purpose
Altered; this is the business of a Convocation, and is made (in some part) the
Province of the Minister in the Country, who (I doubt not) will support his
Letter against the Attacks of this Pamphlet; yet however I shall add some few
things not yet in Controversy, which seem of moment enough to become the care
of a Convocation; and they are one Rubric, and one of our Creeds.

The Rubric is that after the second Hymn in the Morning-Service, and runs
thus, Then shall be sung or said the Apostles Creed -- excepting only such days
as the Creed of St. Athanasius is appointed. Where I shall prove that it is not
a mere notion, but of a mighty concern to Alter it thus, viz. The Creed
commonly called the Apostles; and so of the other.

As to the former, I grant there was some Creed very early in the Church, as
appears from Iren. l. 1. c. 2. and c. 19. where it is called REGVLA VERITATIS;
and from Tertull. de Virgin. Veland. c. 1. where it is REGVLA FIDEI, which
Novatian. de Trin. explains by Symbolum; and again, de Praescript. Haer. c.
13.14. and from the Constitutions ascribed to Clem. l. 7. c. 42. But I deny
that any of these were that we call the Apostles. Because

1. These Creeds differ one from another, as being not the same, but diverse;
nor do any one of them agree with this, unless in some main Articles of Faith,
as all Confessions must do; which speaks them only to be Creeds, but not the
same. 2. Tertull. ad Prax. c. 2. Speaking of the Mission of the Holy Ghost,
says, Hanc regulam ab initio Evangelii decucurrisse -- which Rule must be
understood either of the Sacred Scriptures, or of some common Creed; if the
Latter, it must be another, not this called the Apostles, because this speaks
of no such Mission at all.
As we cannot yet meet with this Creed, so it is highly unreasonable to
suppose, that the Apostles ever composed any such thing: Because,

1. It is not mentioned in the History of the Acts, which yet gives an account
of a Council Convened, and Canons made about things indifferent; and therefore
certainly would not have omitted a Rule of Faith. Baronius boldly says, It was
made before the Dispersion from Jerusalem; but it is unworthy so great a Man to
fix the circumstance of Time, but not prove the thing it self.

2. Had this always passed for the Apostles, since it does not intimate the
Divinity of the Son, nor of the Holy Ghost, it is not to be supposed, but that
1. Simon M^gus, Cleobius, Menander, Cerinthus, etc, who denied Christ's
Divinity, would have pleaded, that this Doctrine of theirs was no way contrary
to the Apostolical Faith. 2. The Arians. And 3. The Macodonians, who deny the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, would have done the like.


But we find no such Plea from those First Heretics; nor from the Arians,
either before, at the Nicene Council, or in their Synods under Constantius; nor
from the Macedonians, either Separately, or Convened under the same Emperor:
Ergo, we must conclude there was no such thing at all; for cany any in their
Wits imagine, that they who rejected, (...), and (...), because these terms are
not in the Scriptures, would not have rejected them also, because not found in
that Rule of Faith delivered by the Apostles, if any such had been? Can any
imagine, that they would not have endeavored to have kept this as a standing
Rule of Faith, exclusive of any that might destroy those darling notions, which
this leaves undisturbed? Can any think that when the Fathers under Constantius
pleaded, that they could not Alter the Creed of Nice, that the Arians would not
have replied, neither can you add to that of the Apostles?

3. St. Hilary Pict. Episc. lib. de Synod. gives us those Confessions of Faith,
he had then, viz. about the middle of the Fourth Century met with, but never
mentions this.

4. We never meet with it, either Name or Thing, till Ruffinus and St. August.
both within the Fifth Century. Nay

5. Arius himself in Epiphan. Adv. Haer. l. 2. Tom. 2. Haer. 69. Number. 7.
justifies his Doctrine, in that it was not contradictory to that Creed there
laid down, which he had received from his Ancestors, and from Alexander Bishop
of Alexandria; and can we think he would not much rather have pleaded, that his
Doctrine was not contradictory to the Apostolic Creed, had they then known or
believed any such thing? Which things together are to me as cogent as a
demonstration, that the World then knew no Creed under the Apostles Name.

It was indeed after some Ages ascribed to the Apostles, as many things were,
whose Authors and Origin were not known; and likewise because what it does
contain is agreeable to the Apostles Doctrine; so Epiphan. Tom. 2. Ancorat. Number.
120. says of the Nicene Creed, (...). this Faith was delivered us by the holy
Apostles, and was confirmed by above Three hundred and ten Bishops.

Now this Rubric gives a mighty advantage to the Socinians, who plead, that as
our Church ascribes this Creed to the Apostles, so it suits none but the
Unitarian Doctrine, as asserting the Divinity of the Father only; and many of
our own Writers affirm, that it contains all the Credenda necessary to
Salvation, as the Decalogue does the Agenda: Whence it follows, either 1. That
the Doctrine of Christ's Divinity was not known in the Apostles time: Or, 2. That
the Apostles have given us an imperfect Rule of Faith: Or, 3. That the Belief
of this Doctrine is not necessary to Salvation.


Whence we must either deny this Creed to be theirs, and thereby set up our
private light in opposition to the Church, and thence fall under that lash
which we have laid upon Dissenters; or grant, that this Apostolical Rule is
wanting in some things necessary to Salvation; or else yield, that this Doctrine
(if true) is yet of no such moment. All which absurdities will be avoided only
by intituling it the Creed, Commonly called the Apostles.

Moreover, it is the observation of the Learned Bishop of Worcester in his
Iren. that (...) is such a Tradition as came certainly from some Apostle; but
(...) is only some ancient Tradition, that came from some Apostle or Apostolic
Man. And what is true of (...) may be as true of (...), and yet in our Copies
it is (...). So in Dr. Duports Version, and in our Rubric it is the Apostles,
not the Apostolic Creed. Which Observation speaks this Alteration the more
necessary, because hereby we seem to speak it not an ancient Creed collected
out of the Apostles Writings, but a Creed composed by the Apostles themselves.

Therefore if the honor and judgment of our Church, if the checking a growing
Heresy, which has lately gained ground by this very Plea, is worth the care
of a Convocation, then it must be worth their care to make this Alteration,
because this one particular does wound the Church, and advance an Heresy at
once.

2. The Creed of St. Athanasius.
This is indeed amongst his works; but our Dr. Cave, who is so curiously
skilled in these monuments of ancient Learning, speaks it supposititious. Du
Pin says, that some ascribe it to one, some to another, but Tout le monde
convient qu'il n'est point de ce Pere; all Mankind agree, that it is none of
that Fathers. St. Hilary before quoted, who was the great Champion against
Arianism in the Latin Church, as Athanasius was in the Greek, though he gives us
other Creeds touching this Controversy, yet never mentions this, nor do we any
where find it for a long time after Athanasius.

Indeed, Bellar. de Script. Eccles. says, that St. August. Tract. in Psalm.
120. has these words, viz. Filius Dei a Patre solo est, non factus, nec
creatus, sed genitus. Whence he concludes, that St. Augustine must have seen
this Creed; and Labbey is pleased very much to follow him. But these words are
not to be found together in St. Augustine, and those parts he has are no more
than what we find in the genuine works of Athanasius, as in his Epistles ad
Serap. from whence St. Augustine might have what we find in him, as well as out
of this Creed, had it been then in being, Ergo: there is no weight or proof in
what Bellarmine and Labbey say upon this Argument.

Vossius says, It did not appear in the World till about the Year One
thousand, above Three hundred Years after the Death of Athanasius, and yet was
then reckoned the work of an uncertain Author. But Baronius has a trick for
this, endeavoring to persuade that it was a long time lost. But when such
things have happened, we find the names of those Tracts or Fragments of 'em in
ancient Authors, before they were lost; as in Clemens Romans Iren. Epist. etc.
whence the World have known there were such things Wrote, though they, could not
find 'em; but we never meet with the name, or any certain Fragments of this
Creed in that Age or the next to it, in which Athanasius did live; therefore
what Baronius says in this Case is but a groundless presumption, and (like
that of Bellarmine and Labbey but now mentioned) proves nothing, unless that it
is easy to confute a Jesuit.

And certainly by this time it appears highly reasonable to Alter this Rubric,
especially since that before this Creed seems doubtful in this matter; whence
both Rubricks laid together, seems to speak the Church fickle and uncertain in
her judgment, and that even in a Case too clear to admit a Scruple.

3. As to the Damnatory Sentence in this Creed, this Pamphlet will not have it
restrained to the Procession of the holy Ghost, or to any particular Article,
but to respect the whole, and consequently not to affect the Greek Church; this
is a point which I will not grant him, nor at present deny; because if we
suppose what he says, I have yet enough to my purpose, since it is generally
taken otherwise, and many are extremely scandalized at it; therefore it is
necessary for the Church to omit this Creed, or else to Alter or explain this
sentence, that so Some may not be affrighted from us, and others be enabled to
meet together with one mind, as well as in one place.

Since the finishing this Piece, there is published a Book Entitled, Remarks
on Two Letters; the Author has too much Reason to mistake the Case, and had he
as much Sincerity, he would not have Misrepesented it: How far he is guilty
this way, will appear from this Tract, as well as what has been already done
by another hand.

FINIS.

