THE COMPLETE HISTORY OF Independencie.

UPON THE PARLIAMENT Begun 1640.

By CLEM. WALKER, Esquire;

Continued till this present year 1660. which fourth Part was never before
published.

Horat. Spe Metuque procul.

LONDON, Printed for John Wiliams at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

RELATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS, HISTORICAL and POLITIC, upon the PARLIAMENT begun
Anno Dom. 1640.

Divided into II. Books: 1. The Mystery of the two Junto's, Presbyterian and
Independent. 2. The History of Independency, etc.


TOGETHER WITH An APPENDIX, touching the Proceedings of the Independent Faction
in SCOTLAND.

POLIB. Historici est, Ne quid falsi, audeat dicere:
Ne quid very, non audeat.
HORAT. Spe, metuque procul.
Printed in the Year 1648.

To my dread Sovereign.
Royal Sir,
YOU have Drunk deep in the Cup of Affliction, and we have all Pledged you; it
is wholesome, though bitter; but let us pray to God to remove this Cup in time,
for the dregs and lees are poison. You have learned by over-winding the strings
of Authority, how to tune the People of this Monarchy, without breaking their
Patience hereafter. Most Princes desire unlimited power, which is a Sail too
great for any Vessel of Mortality to bear; though it be never so well Ballasted
with Justice, Wisdom, Moderation, and Piety, yet one flarb or other will
endanger the over-setting it. Those Commonwealths are most stable and pleasing
where the State is so mixed that every man (according to his degree and
capacity) has some interest therein to content him. The KING, Sovereign
Command and Power; The Nobility and Gentry, a derivative Authority and
Magistracy; and all enjoy their Laws, Liberties, and Properties. God has
cursed him that removes the Bound-marks of his neighbor: this is a
comprehensive curse, Kings enlarging their Prerogatives beyond their limits,
are not excepted from it. You may be pleased to take heed therefore of two
sorts of men, most likely to mis-lead you in this point, Ambitious Lawyers, who
teach the Law to speak, not what the Legislators meant, but what you shall seem
to desire: To avoid this snare, suffer your Parliament to nominate 3. men for
every Judges place, out of which you may please to choose one, as in pricking
of Sheriffs. For it is the people that are obnoxious to their wickedness, you
are above the reach of their malice. The second sort is Parasitical Divines:
These Ear-wigs are always hovering in Princes Courts, hanging in their ears.
They take upon them to make Princes beholding to their violent wresting of the
Text, to bestow upon them whatever Prerogative the Kings of Juda or Israel used
or usurped; as if the judicials of Moses were appointed by God for all
Commonwealths, all Kings: as a good Bishopric or Living is fit for every
Priest that can catch it. These men having their best hopes of preferment from
Princes, make Divinity to be but Organon Politicum, an instrument of
Government; and harden the hearts of Princes, Pharaoh-like: Kings delight to be
tickled by such venerable, warrantable flattery. Sir, you have more means to
prefer them than other men, therefore they apply themselves more to you than
other men do. Tu facis hunc Dominum, te facit ille Deum. The King makes the
poor Priest a Lord, and rather than he will be behind with the King in
courtesy, he will flatter him above the condition of a Mortal, and make him a
God Royal. Sir, permit me to give you this Antidote against this poison; let an
Act be past, That all such Divines, as either by Preaching, Writing, or
discoursing, shall advance your Prerogative and Power above the known Laws and
Liberties of the Land, forfeit all his Ecclesiastical preferments ipso facto,
and be incapable ever after, and for ever banished your Court. But above all
learn to trust in your Judgment: Plus aliis de te quam tu tibi credere noli:
God has enabled you to remember things past, to observe things present, and by
comparing them together to conjecture things to come; which are the three parts
of Wisdom that will much honor and advantage you. God keep your Majesty; so
prays

Your humble Subject, THEOPH. VERAX.

To his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the ARMY under his Command.
MY Lord and Gentlemen, I have here by way of Preparation laid open to your
view, those Ulcers which you have undertaken to cure, viz. The 2 Factions in
Parliament, Authors of Schisms and Divisions in the two Houses, from whence
they are derived to the whole Kingdom, to the obstructing of justice, and of
the establishment of our Laws, Rights, Liberties and Peace; the enslaving of
the Parliament it self, and the dilapidating of the Public Treasure: whereby
the whole Kingdom may be enfranchised, secured, and united; and the King and
his Posterity settled in His due Rights; which is the sum of all your
undertakings in your many reiterated Papers. I confess a Herculean labor, and
far beyond his clensing of the Augaean Stable; That was performed by an Arm of
flesh, this cannot be effected without an extraordinary calling (for ordinary
calling thereto you have none, and God seldom blesses a man out of his
calling) and though an heroic heat and zeal may go far, yet it will tire many
miles on this side the work, unless it be blown and inspired with divine
breath. And as Alchymists say of the Philosophers Stone, so I of this work
(which is the Philosophers Stone in our English Politics) it cannot be
effected but by a man of wonderful and unspotted Integrity and Innocence; free
from all Fraud, Self-seeking, and Partiality. In order to this great work you
have already begun to sift and winnow the House of commons, by charging 11
Presbyterian Grandees; who if they be proved guilty, must needs have their
counterpanes equally faulty, even to a syllable; in the opposite Junto of
Independents; for when two factions shall conspire to toss and keep up the
golden ball of Government, Profit and Preferment between them, neither can be
innocent; unless therefore you apply your corrosive to one Ulcer as well as the
other, you will never work a complete cure, nor will be free from scandal and
appearance of faction or design (that I may use your own words) to weaken only
one party (under the notion of unjust or oppressive) that you may advance
another more than your own. Representation p. 6. sect. 2.
Besides, it is observed that you speak but coldly to have the public accounts
of the Kingdom Stated; putting it off with a wish only, as if you did secretly
fear, what the Presbyterians openly say, That the Independents are guilty of
more Millions than their party: your own words are, p. 14. sect. 7.
We could wish the Kingdom might both be righted and publicly satisfied in
point of Accounts for the vast sums that have been Leavied; as also for many
other things, etc. But we are loath to press any thing that may lengthen
dispute. Are so many Millions to be cursorily passed over without dispute? were
they not the blood and tears of the exhausted people, and the milk of their
Babes; are they not like Achan's wedge amongst us? would it not much ease the
people of burdens, and go far in the payment of Soldiers and public debts,
to have both the Kings and the Parliaments sponges (of what party and
profession soever) squeezed into the common Treasury whenever the
Commonwealth settles? Review this clause well, and as the Parliament has
altered some Votes for you, so do you alter this clause for the people, who
long not only to see the Kingdom, but also our new-made Gentlemen in statu quo
prius. Gentlemen, you that will give Counsel will take it without offense,
against him that dares lay as good claim to justice and honesty as your selves.

THEODORUS VERAX.

The Mystery of the Two Juntoes, Presbyterian and Independent, with some
Additions.
Prerogative, Corruption and Superstition, (the fruits of a long and lazy
peace) by a long discontinuance of Parliaments; at last by Providence his
Majesty was necessitated to call a Parliament, the only College of Physicians
to purge the much-distempered body of the Commonwealth.

Kings Prerogative and the Peoples Laws and Liberties begat a War. The Divines
on both sides, out of their Pulpits, sounding Alarm thereto; and not only
Sermons, but Declarations of Parliament and National Covenant, holding forth to
the people the defense of Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties inflamed the
people to the rage of battle, as the Elephant is enraged at the sight of Red.
This War occasioned extraordinary Taxes and Leavies of money, such as were
never heard of by our Ancestors, and were Irritamenta malorum, the nurse of our
corruptions.

Grandees.
caused them first to interweave their particular interests and ambitions with
the public, and lastly to prefer them before the public.

leading men or Grandees (for that is now Parliament language) first divided
themselves into two factions or Juntoes, Presbyterians and Independents;
Factions.
seeming to look only upon the Church, but (Religion having the strongest
operation upon the spirit of man) involved the interests of the Commonwealth.

man's judgment to the opinion of another man is but a silly trust and
confidence) studied the upholding of their parties with earnestness, whilst
the Grandees of each party in private close together for their own advancement,
serving one another turn.

Grandees (in all public debates) seem as real in their reciprocal
oppositions, as those silly ones who are in earnest, whereby they cherish the
zeal of their respective parties, keep them still divided ( Divide and impera
is the Devils rule) and so amuse them, and take them off from looking after
other interests, in which, were they conjoined, they might share with the
Grandees themselves: and for the better contentment of such their Confidents,
as looking too intentively after their own gain, the Grandees of each Junto
confer something of advantage upon those that are subservient unto them, as
five pounds a week, or some petty employment.



seemingly divided themselves, Monopolizing profits and preferments.
and having really divided the Houses, and captivated their respective parties
judgment, teaching them by an implicit faith, Jurare in verba Magistri, to pin
their opinions upon their sleeves; they begin to advance their projects of
Monopolizing the Profits, Preferments and Power of the Kingdom in themselves.
To which purpose, though the leaders of each party seem to maintain a hot
opposition, yet when any profit or preferment is to be reached at, it is
observed that a powerful Independent especially moves for a Presbyterian, or a
leading Presbyterian for an Independent; and seldom does one oppose or speak
against another in such cases, unless something of particular spleen or
Competition come between, which causes them to break the common Rule. By this
means the Grandees of each faction seldom miss their mark, since an Independent
moving for a Presbyterian, his reputation carries the business clear with the
Independent party; and the Presbyterians will not oppose a leading man of their
own side. By this artifice the Grandees of each side share the Commonwealth
between them; and are now become proud, domineering Rehoboams, even over the
rest of their fellow Members, contrary to the liberty of Parl. which consists
in an equality) that were formerly fawning ambitious Absoloms.

There has been lately given away to Members openly (besides innumerable and
inestimable private cheats mutually connived at) at least 300000 l. in money,
besides rich Offices, Employments in money Committees, Sequestrations, and
other advantages. And those Members who have so well served themselves, under
color of serving the public, are, for the most part, old Canvasers of
Factions, who have sat idly and safely in the House, watching their
advantages to confound businesses, and shuffle the cards to make their own
game, when others that have ventured their persons abroad, labored in the
public work, like Israelites under these Egyptian taskmasters, and lost
their estates, are left to sterve until they can find relief in that empty bag
called by fools, fides Publica, by wise men, fides Punica, and are now looked
upon in the House superciliously, like unwelcome guests, for it is known how
malignantly, and how juglingly writs for new Elections were granted and
executed, and called younger brothers, and like younger brothers they are used*
their elder brothers having slipped into the World before them, and anticipated
the inheritance; they have broken first into the common field, and shut the
door to prevent after comers even from gleaning after their full harvest, for
the better effecting whereof, they have now morgaged, in effect, all the means
they have to raise money, unto the City, and being themselves fat and full with
the public Treasure, to express rather their scorn than care, they are making
an Ordinance that no more money shall be given to their Members, and yet to
show how careful they are of all such as have cheated the Commonwealth under
them, I will not say for them, they have taken advantage of the Petition of the
Army, wherein they desire Indemnity for all acts done in Relation to the War,
and have passed an Ordinance of Indemnity for all such as have acted by
Authority, and for the service of the Parliament, wherein, under great
penalties, and with an appeal at last from the Judges of the Law to a Committee
of Parliament, such as have gone beyond the Authority given by Parliament, and
sequestered men unjustly, and so withheld their goods under pretense thereof,
and such as have leavied Taxes three or four times over, are quit from private
actions, and the benefit of Law and Justice taken from the oppressed, to secure
Country Committees, Sequestrators and others (not Prerogative but Legislative)
Thieves, contrary to Magna Charta, which says, nulli negabimus, nulli
differemus justitiam, aut rectum; We will deny, nor defer justice and right to
no man. Oh prodigious acts, and of greater Tyranny than any King ever durst
adventure upon. What is become of our National Covenant, and the Parliaments
many Declarations for defense of Laws and Liberty? Or have we fought our
Liberty into slavery? By these devices the honest middle men of the House
(whose Consciences will not let them join in any faction to rend the
Commonwealth in sunder) are out of all possibility of repair, and made
contemptible as well by their own wants, as the pride of the Grandees: and in
the end, their poverty will enforce them to leave the sole possession of the
House to these thriving Junto men, who do beleaguer them therein, making them
(for farther addition to their losses) pay all taxes, from which the thriving
men go free: so that the poorer part of the House pays tribute to the richer.
Nay it is farther whispered, that at last the Junto men will quit the
Parliament Privilege of not being sued, purposely to leave these younger
Brothers to the mercy of their creditors, and disable them to sit in their
House.

Junto men is, their devise of referring all businesses of moment to
Committees. Committees of the Houses.
For the active speaking men by mutual agreement naming one another of every
Committee (or at least their confident Ministers) do thereby fore-stall and
intercept the businesses of the House, and under color of examining and
preparing matters, they report them to the House with what glosses, additions,
detractions, and advantages they please; whereby the House (judging according
to their report) oftentimes mis-judgeth, and if it be a business they are
willing to smother, the Committees have infinite artifical delays to put it
off, and keep it from a hearing, or at least from reporting. By this means the
remaining part of the House are but Ciphers to value, and Suffragans to ratify
what is forejudged by the said Committees. This usurpation of theirs is much
helped by keeping the doors of their Committee-rooms shut, and dispatching all
affairs privately and in the dark; whereas Justice delights in the light, and
ought to be as public as the common air, it being against its nature to be
Chambered up, and kept from the observation of eye, and ear-witnesses.

And by their examining of men against themselves, contrary to Magna Charta,
they much enlarge their power.

Multiplicity of money-Committees, as Goldsmiths-hall, Haberdashers-hall, Money
Committees.
the Committee of the Kings Revenues, Committee of the Army, etc. Where every
man's profit and power is according to his cunning and conscience. Hereby they
draw a general dependency after them, for he that commands the money, commands
the men. These Committee Men are so powerful that they overawe and overpower
their Fellow Members, contrary to the nature of a free-Paliament; wherein the
equality of the Members must maintain the freedom and integrity thereof, and
suppress factions.

Members as (in scorn of the self-denying Ordinances) hold Offices by gift or
connivence of the Parliament, either openly in their own name, Members holding
Offices, etc.
or secretly in the name of some friend. Their offices inabling them to do
courtesies and discourtesies. And although there has been a Committee
appointed to certify all pensions, sequestrations, offices, employments of
advantage and profits conferred by the Parliament upon any their Members, in
which Committee Mr. Sands holds the chair; yet is this merely a formality to
blind the eyes of the World, and fool the expectation of some losing Members,
who were then resolute to know who had already received satisfaction for their
losses, and how far they had outrun their Fellow Members therein. Yet this
Committee is now let fall, no reports demanded of Mr. Sands, and when any is to
be made, they are not unprovided of a means to make it fruitless, by putting
every particular to debate; well knowing, that no man will be willing to argue
against the particular persons and merits of his fellow Members, and thereby
heap envy upon his own head, besides the delay of a particular debate.

Country Committees act contrary to the Laws of the Land; Country Committees.
how they trample Magna Charta under their feet; how boldly and avowedly they
transgress all Orders and Ordinances of Parliament, and break our Solemn League
and Covenant; how they ordinarily turn well-affected men out of their
free-holds and goods, imprison and beat their Persons, without any known
charge, accuser, or witness against them; nay murder them, as in the case of
Doctor Rawleygh killed in prison at Wells by the Committees Marshal; and the
poor men murdered at Bridgwater, whose bloods were shed like the blood of a
dog, and no real prosecution thereof; how frequently they leavy one Tax three
or four times over, and continue their leavies after the Ordinance expi^e; How
cruelly they raise the twentieth and fifth part upon the well-affected,
exercising an illegal, arbitrary, tyrannical power over their fellow Subjects,
far higher than ever Strafford or Canterbury durst advise the King to; how
ignorantly and unjustly they exercise a power to hear and determine, or rather
to determine without hearing, or hear without understa^ding, private
controversies of Meum and Tuum for debts, trespasses, nay Title and possession
of Lands, without either formality or knowledge of the Law, not having wit,
manners, nor breeding enough, as being chosen for the greatest part, out of the
basest of the People, for base ends, to satisfy men with an outside, or
Complement of justice: Insomuch that nothing is now more Common, than an
accusation without an accuser, a sentence without a Judge, and a condemnation
without a hearing. How they exclude all other Magistracy, engrossing to
themselves the power of Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Churchwardens, etc. in an
Arbitrary way; keeping Troops of Horse, upon pay and free quarter for their
guards, like the 30 Tyrants of Athens, and if any man but speak of calling them
to give an account, they presently vote him a Delinquent, and Sequester him. If
any man, I say, be so deaf as not to hear the loud universal out-crying of the
people, so great a stranger in our Israel as not to know these truths, let him
peruse M. Edward Kings discovery of the arbitrary actions of the Committee of
Lincoln, and the heads of Grievances of Glamorganshire, printed 1647. where he
may see these things briefly Epitomized; but to Historize them at large would
require a volume as big as the Book of Martyrs. These Committees are excellent
spunges to suck money from the people, and to serve not only their own, but also
the Covetous, Malicious, Ambitious ends, of those that raked them out of the
dunghill for that employment, and do defend them in their oppressions; who is so
blind as not to see these men have their protectors? the Daemones to whom they
offer up part of their rapins, to whom they sacrifice Occulta spolia, and
plures de pace Triumphos.

If there be any intention to restore our Laws and Liberties, and free us from
Arbitrary Government, it is fit these Committees and all associations be laid
down, having no enemy to associate against, and that the old form of Government
by Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, etc. be re-established, and the Militia in
each County settled as before in Lieutenants, and deputy Lieutenants, or in
Commissioners.

The rather, because the people are now generally of opinion, They may as
easily find Charity in Hell, as Justice in any Committee; and that the King
has taken down one Star Chamber, and the Parliament has set up a hundred.

many several and confused Taxes. Taxes.
Whereas one or two ways orderly used and well husbanded, would have done the
work. 1. Royal Subsidy of 300000 l. 2. Pole money. 3. The free Loans and
Contributions upon the Public Faith amounted to a vast incredible sum in
money, Plate, Horse, Arms, etc. 4. The Irish adventure for sale of Lands the
first and second time. 5. The Weekly meal. 6. The City Loan after the rate of
50 Subsidies. 7. The Assesment for bringing in the Scots. 8. The five and
twentieth part. 9. The Weekly Assesment for my Lord Generals Army. 10. The
Weekly (or Monthly) Assesment for Sir Thomas Fairfax Army. 11. The Weekly
Assesment for the Scotch Army. 12. The Weekly Assesment for the British Army in
Ireland. 13. The Weekly Assesment for my Lo. of Manchesters Army. 14.
Free Quarter (at least) connived at by the State, because the Soldiers having
for a time subsistence that way, are the less craving for their pay; whereby
their Arrears growing stale, will at last either be frustrated by a tedious
Committee of Accounts, or forgotten; in the mean time, the Grand Committee of
Accounts discount it out of the Commanders Arrears, whereby the State saves it.
15. The Kings Revenue. 16. Sequestrations and Plunder by Committees, which if
well answered to the State, would have carried on the work, which thus I
demonstrate; One half of all the goods and Chattels, and (at least) one half of
the Lands, Rents, and Revenues of the Kingdom have been sequestered. And who can
imagine that one half of the profits and Goods of the Land will not maintain any
Forces that can be kept and fed in England, for the defense thereof? 17. Excise
upon all things; this alone if well managed would maintain the War; the
Low Countries make it almost their only support. 18. Fortification-money, etc.
By these several ways and Taxes, about forty Millions in money and money-worth
have been milked from the people; and the Parliament (as the Pope did once) may
call England, Puteum inexhaustum; yet it is almost drawn dry. A vast Treasure,
and so excessive, as nothing but a long peace could import; and nothing but
much fraud and many follies could dissipate, and we ought not to wonder if it
be accounted inter arcana novissimi imperii, to be always making, yet never
finishing an account thereof.

Accounts.
so (for the same reason) they let the money run in so many muddy, obscure
channels, through so many Committees and Officers fingers, both for collecting,
receiving, issuing and paying it forth, that it is impossible to make or
balance any Public account thereof; and at least one half thereof is known to
be devoured by Committees and Officers, and those that for lucre protect them.
By these means, as they make many men partners with them in the public spoils,
so they much strengthen and increase their party, whereby multitudo peccantium
tollit poenam.

If these things were not purposely done, 1. Our Taxes would be fewer in
number, Accounts again.
and more in effect. 2. They would be put to run in one chanel, under the
fingering of fewer Harpies, and perspicuous and true Entries made of all
receipts and disbursments, which would be public to common view and
examination. The Exchequer way of accounts is the exactest, antientest, and
best known way of account of England, and most free from deceit, which is
almost confessed de facto, when, to make the Kings Revenue more obnoxious to
their desires, they took it out of the Exchequer way, (contrary to the
fundamental Laws of the Land; for both the Higher and Lower Exchequer are as
ancient and fundamental as any Court in England) and put it under a Committee,
which as all other Committees do, will render an account of their Stewardship
at the latter day. In the mean time diverse of that Committee buy in old
sleeping Pensions, which they pay themselves from the first of their arrears;
yet other men that have disbursed money out of their purses for the Kings
Service, can receive no pay for any money laid forth before Michaelmas Term,
1643. because (forsooth) then the Committee first took charge of the Revenue.
In the mean time the Kings Tenants and Debtors are deprived of the benefit of
the Laws and Liberties of the subject, which before they enjoyed; all Debts and
Moneys being now raised by the terror of Pursuivants and Messengers, whose
Commissions are only to distrain and levy, etc. whereas formerly the Exchequer
sent out legal Process, and the Tenant or Debtor had liberty to plead to it in
his own defense, if he thought himself wronged; but now New Lords, new Laws;
and to countenance their doings, the Committee have gotten an addition of some
Lords to them. 3. If there were fair play above board, so many members of both
Houses would not be ambitious of the trouble and clamor that attends Task
masters, Publicans, and such sinners as sit at the receipt of Custom, being no
part of the business for which the Writ Summons, or the people choose or trust
them, and whereby they are diverted from the business of the House: but would
leave that employment to other men, who not having the character and privilege
of Parliament upon them, will be less able to protect themselves and their
agents from giving public accounts of their receipts and disbursments, and
from putting affronts and delays upon the Committee of Accounts, (as it is well
known) some of them have done. Lastly, it is scandalous that the same men
should be continued so long in their money-imployments, because Diuturnitas and
solitudo carrumpunt Imperia; and by long continuance and experience they grow
so hardened, so cunning in their way, and so backed with dependencies, that it
is almost impossible to trace them. And although (when we look upon the many
persons employed) we cannot say there is solitudo personarum; yet when we
consider that by a long partnership in their employments they are allied
together in one common interest, they are to be esteemed but as one man, for a
Corporation of men is but many men joined together as one man, and with one
mind pursuing one and the same end or interest.

Committee of Accounts.
and it must needs be suspicious for an Accomptant to choose those persons
before whom he shall account. And we see (after so long a time of their
sitting) no fruit thereof. Whereas the people did hope, that after so much
money spent, and such great debts and arrears left to pay, (whereby they are
threatened with continuance of their Taxes,) that a full and exact general
account of all Receipts and Disbursments would have been published in Print,
for their satisfaction, as is usually done in the Low Countries, and as was
once done by this Parliament, Anno 1641. by a Declaration of the accounts of
the Kingdom.

But it may be the Synod in favor of the Grandees, have voted that place in
Scripture ( Render an account of thy Stewardship) to be but Apocryphal.

Wants of the Parliament and how occasioned.
yet (as Philip of Macedon was said to be Inter quotidianas rapinas semper
inops) they are fallen to such ridiculous want and beggary, that they have lately
pawned almost all the security they have, for 200000 l. to disband the Army,
and enter upon the Irish employment. They have slit Goldsmiths-Hall in sunder,
and given one side thereof to the City, and kept the other half thereof to
themselves, and that already charged with 200000 l. at least. So that if any
sudden occasion happen, they have put their purse into the hands of the
uncircumcised Jews of the City, and cannot raise one penny but by new Taxes
upon the people. It was worth observing to see how officiously some of the old
Stagers took leave of the Public purse, before it came into Hucksters hands.
Alderman Pennington had a debt of 3000 l. he owed to Sir John Pennington
forgiven him, (he never asked forgiveness of his sins more heartily) and 3000
l. more given him out of Goldsmiths Hall in course; the reason of this bounty
was forked or twofold.

1. Because he has got enough before.

2. To comfort his heart, for being left out of the City Militia. But the most
observable thing was, to see this old Parliament like a young Prodigal, take up
money upon difficult terms, and entangle all that they had for a security.

1. They gave way to the City to hedge in an old debt, being a loan of money
after the rate of 50 Subsidyes, and other old debts.

2. Whereas 200000 l. only was the sum to be borrowed, the City enjoined them
to take up 230000 l. whereof the od 30000 l. to be bestowed for relief of
decayed occupiers of the City; so that upon the matter the Parliament pays
30000 l. Broakage.

3. That the City may not trust the greatest unthrifts of Christendom, with
laying out of their own money; they put upon them 2 Treasurers of the City, to
receive and disburse it for the service for which it was borrowed; so you see
they have now neither credit, money, nor a purse to put it in.

modest Members, who have been more forward to help their Country than
themselves, Modest and middle members.
are left in the lurch for their losses, and exposed to the laughter of their
elder brothers, the old Junto men, and factious leaders of the House, all being
now morgaged to the Lombards of the City. The thriving Members hope their
younger brothers will continue as modest, as they have been, and digest all
with patience; but others, and those neither fools nor knaves, hope all the
modest and middle men of the Houses, such as are engaged in no faction, will be
provoked hereby to draw into a third party or Junto, to moderate the excesses
of the other 2. when any thing prejudicial to the Commonwealth is agitated; and
to call the old Junto men, those land Pirates to account, making them cast up
what they have swallowed, and bring it to a common divident, or rather to pay
the Army and Public debts, whereby the people may be eased of their pressures;
nor let them be discouraged with the supposed difficulty hereof, since 20 or 30
men holding together, and observing the cross debates, and different sway of
each party, may easily make themselves moderators of their differences, and
turn the scales for the best advantage of the common, which way they please to
cast in their Votes, since it is very rare to have any question carried by more
than eight or ten voices.

Grandees are reported to have, for their retreat, houses in the Low Countries,
Grandees provision to save themselves.
richly furnished with Sequestered Plate, Linen, and Stuff, and great store of
money in bank for their shelter, against such storms as their Rapine, Tyranny,
and Ignorance may happily raise here amongst us. In those their retirements,
these Authors of our miseries will enjoy their sins, and our spoils in
security, attending an opportunity to purchase their peace at last, and betray
our Safeties and Liberties to the enraged Prince and People. This is called
robbing of the Egyptians; and doubtless these ambitious State-Mountebanks have
brought us into darkness worse than Egyptian. The text says, the Egyptians
rose not from their places in three days; they yet knew where they were, which
is more than we do, every man being out of his place and rank; the Servant in
place of his Master, the Beggar in place of the King, the Fool in place of the
Counselor, the Theif in place of the Judge, the cheater in place of the
Treasurer, the Clown in place of the Gentleman, none but God alone can play
Daedalus part, and give us a Clue to lead us out of this labyrinth, into which
these unpolitick Hocas Pocasses have brought us. These unskilful workmen that
have built up Babel, and pulled down Sion. Others are said to prepare Foreign
Plantations for Retreat; to People which, Chi^dren are ravished from their
parents Arms, and shipped away; an abomination not known in England before, and
therefore no competent Law made against it; no more than in ancient Rome
against Paricides.

several, and what the conjoined interests of these two Junto's or Factions,
Grandees their several interests and designs and strengths.
Presbyterian and Independent are; let us now consider where their several
strength lies. The Indep^ndent groundeth his strength upon the Army, which if
he can keep up, he hopes to give the Law to all; and to produce that great
Chymaera, Liberty of Conscience: not considering that the confusion and
licentiousness of such a liberty will destroy it self, Libertas Liberate
perit. The Presbyterians have three Pillars to support them. 1. The City is
their chief foundation, with which they keep a strict correspondency, and daily
communication of Counsels. Upon this consideration, they have lately put the
Parliament Purse into the Cities Pocket as aforesaid; settled and enlarged the
City Militia. Whereas all the Countries of England (being more obnoxious to
injuries than the City) suffer much for want of settling their Militia; the
Parliament not trusting them with arms, so much as for their own defense: An
evident sign, there is a farther design than disbanding this Army. And because
the City Militia can only keep in awe the adjacent South and East Counties of
the Kingdom; therefore to suppress the remoter parts, and enforce them to
obedience, they keep up some inland Garrisons, and have the Scots and G.
Poyntz supernumerary forces for the North. And in the West (under color for
sending men for Ireland) they keep upon free quarter and pay of the Country,
many supernumerary Regiments and Troops, most Cavaliers, at least five times as
many as they really intend to transport. These are always going, but never
gone, like St. George, always in his saddle, never on his way. Something ever
is and shall be wanting until Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army be disbanded; and then
(it is thought) the disguise will fall off; and these supernumeraries shall
appear a new modelled Army, under Presbyterian Commanders, you may be sure, and
such whose Consciences shall not befool their wits where any matter of gain
appears; if this be not their aim, why did they not disband those lewd
supernumeraries before last Winter, since they might have raised as many men
the spring following for half the charge their very free quarters cost? and
most of these swear they will not go for Ireland, vowing they will cut the
throats of the Roundheads.

The Country is amazed, fearing these Cavaliers are kept on free quarter by a
Cavaleerish party for some Cavaleerish design. Secondly, why did they not
rather divide Sir Thomas Fairfax Army into two parts, one to go for Ireland,
the other to stay in England, being already modelled, excellently disciplined,
and having the visible marks of Gods favor upon their actions? But to take a
few for Ireland, a few for England, and leave a Coar in the middle to be
plucked forth and disbanded, was the way to discontent them, and put them into
mutiny, and thereby necessitate the Parliament to disband them all, and give an
opportunity to them that seek it, to new model another Army out of the
aforesaid Supernumeraries, more pliable to the desires of the Presbyrerian
Junto: add hereunto the causeless exasperating speeches and aspersions cast
upon most of the Army purposely, as moderate men think, to discontent them.
Thirdly, If they have no intent to keep up an Army against the People, why have
they continued the Military charge for another year, and enlarged it from 52000
l. to 60000 l. a month?

Inland Garrisons, Presbyters.
and Supernumerary forces new modelled are like to prove the three-stringed
whip, wherewith the Presbyterian Phaetons will drive the triumphant Chariot if
they prevail; to which may be added the Presbyters themselves, who by overawing
men's Consciences with their Doctrine, will subdue and work men's minds like wax
to receive any impression of bondage that tyranny and oppression can set before
them, as they do in Scotland, the Clergy in all times and places have ever held
with the mighty, as the Jaccal hunts still with the Lion to partake of his
prey; The Clergy have ever had an itch to be meddling with State affairs, which
shows how contemptible an opinion they have of their own Coat, that they can
find no contentment in it; yet they would have the Laity to have a reverend
opinion of it; the Popish Clergy draw all Civil Affairs, public and private,
under their jurisdiction and cognizance, quatenus there is peccatum in all
humane actions; the Presbyterians quatenus there is scandalum in all human
actions, what is the odds? Peccatum is the Mother, Scandalum the Daughter, and
both pretend they do this in ordine ad Deum; but universal experience teaches
us, how miserable that Commonwealth is, where the corruption of a Churchman
proves the generation of a Statesman.

The premises considered, I shall propound these ensuing Quaeries to those that
are of better judgment than my self.

Quaere, Why the title and punishment of Malignants is translated from the
Cavaliers, Quaeres upon the premises.
who fought for regal Tyranny against the Parliament, and laid upon those that
fought against regal Tyranny for the Parliament; is it not because those
Cavaliers that have fought for one Tyranny, will not be scrupulous to fight for
another? and such well-affected as have opposed Tyranny in one kind, will not
admit of it in another? why is it now accounted a note of Malignity and
disaffection to endeavor the putting down of Arbitrary Government, and
re-establishing our Laws, Liberties and Properties, whereto the Parliament by
their many Declarations and their National Covenant are bound? lay this to
heart, and consider whether they have not changed these their first Principles,
and consequently whether they are not desirous to change their old friends who
resolutely adhere to the said Principles.

2. If the King grant the Propositions, or if he deny them, and the
Praedominant Junto (or both Junto's joined together, to drive on one Common
interest?) for it is now thought they are upon an accommodation to keep up that
lower Conjunctim, which they despair to uphold divisim) establish the military
and civil power without him, according to their desires, and in order to their
ayms; Quaere, whether the said leading men settled in their posture, with their
confident guards about them, may not draw after them so many of their party as
upon an implicit faith will follow them, and lick up the crumbs of the public
spoils under their tables, expelling or disabling (as aforesaid) the
disingaged Members, and by this policy make themselves perpetual Dictators,
incorporating and engrossing to themselves both the Consultive, Directive, and
Ministerial power of the Kingdom in all causes Civil and Military, setting up
an Oligarchy or popular Tyranny instead of a Regal, as the thirty Tyrants of
A^hens did. In order whereto, they already declare, 1. That an Ordinance of
Parliament, without the Kings royal assent, is equal to an Act of Parliament.
2. That an Ordinance is a above a Law by virtue of their legislative power:
upon which presuming in their Ordinance of Indemnity, they have granted an
appeal from the Judges of the Law to a Committee of Parliament; see the
Ordinance May 21. 1647. 3. That they are the irrevocable Trustees of the
peoples Lives, Liberties and Properties, without account, with other principles
preparative to Tyranny.

3. Quaere, Why Arbitrary and Barbarous Government by Committees and other
illegal proceedings (which in time of war were used upon real or pretended
necessity, and were then only excusable, because necessitas tollit Legem) are
still continued upon us now in time of peace, no enemies troubling our quiet;
and without any further pretense of necessity, contrary to their National
Covenant, and all their Declarations? is it not to inure the people to
servitude, and exercise their patience?

4. Quaere, Whether the prodigious oppressions of Committees, Sequestrators,
etc. and of Free Quarter, be not purposely countenanced to necessitate the
people to rise in tumults, that thence occasion may be taken to keep Inland
Garrisons and Armies?

5. Quaere, Whether our Laws, Liberties and Properties, are not now as liable
to an invasion from the Legislative power, as formerly from the Prerogative?
considering that those who like ambitious Absalom courted and wooed the people
in the beginning of troubles, now like haughty Rehoboams care not though the
people complain, their little finger is heavier than the loins of the King, the
controversy between the 2 Juntoes being no more, than whose slaves we shall be.

6. Quaere, Whether if the King hereafter tread in the steps of this
Parliament, and their Committees, he will not be a greater tyrant than either
the Turk, Russe, or French, and have as absolute dominion over his Subjects, as
the Devil has over damned Souls in Hell? and how dangerous these presidents may
be to those Laws and Liberties which we have sworn to maintain.

middle and disingaged men in the House, do not speedily unite themselves into
a party or Junto, Middle and modera^e Members again.
as the factious have done, and communicate their counsels, they will be arena
sine calce, loose and dissipated by every breath: and neither serviceable for
themselves nor their Country. Whereas if they unite, twenty or thirty may
become Moderators and Umpeers between both parties, (as has been already
said;) let the moderate men but consider how sad and dishonorable a thing it
is, to see nothing almost of great and public concernment come into the House,
but what has been before hand contrived, debated, and digested in one or both
of the two Junto's at their private meetings, and put into so resolved and
prejudicate a way and method of dispatch, that every man is appointed his part
or Cue beforehand; one man to move it, and set it on foot, another to second
him; one man speak to one part of the Argument, another to another part;
another to keep himself to the last for a reserve, and speak to the question,
which he is provided to qualify with a distinction, or vary it, if he find it
difficult to pass. Thus all public businesses are measured by private
respects; whereby it appears, that as frequent Parl. are good Physic, so
continual Parl. are bad food; and the people may complain, that qui medice
vivit, miser^ vivit. Parliaments are Bona peritura; they cannot keep long
without corruption. Their perpetuity emboldens the Members, by taking from them
all fear of being called to account, especially if they get their Sons into the
Houses as well as themselves (as many have done this Parliament, and more
endeavor to do) whereby they have an estate in their places for two or three
lives. Moreover by long sitting they become so familiar with one another
persons and designs, as to serve one another turns, to join interests, and to
draw into factions, Hodie mihi, cras tibi. If you and your party will help me
to day, I and my friends will help you to morrow.

Miserima Resp. ubi majestas Imperii, and salus populi discordibus
conflictantur studiis. Conclusion with some complaints,
What shall we say? En quo discordia terra -- perduxit miseros?

Shall we complain to God? God has a controversy with us. Of whom shall we
complain? Of our selves? we must first reform our selves: We that take upon us
to reform Church and Commonwealth; Shall we complain of our sins? Ask the
grace of repentance first, and so ask that we may obtain. Shall we complain of
our punishments? Let us first repent, and amend our sins that caused them. Let
us first pluck off the mask of hypocrisy, God will see thorough such a
fantastical garment of Figleaves. Let us no longer make Religion a
stalking-horse; God, who is all Wisdom and all Truth, will not be deceived. If
we talk like Christians, and walk like Turks, Christ will not own us. To fast
for a day, and hang our heads like bulrushes, will not reconcile us. We must
fast from public spoils, rapines, and oppression, and not drink the tears of
the poor and needy. Shall we complain with the Prophets; That our Princes are
become Thieves? that was heretofore our complaint, now we must invert it, and
cry, That our Thieves (mean and base people) are become Princes. We are sick,
very sick, intemperatly sick, and God has given us a Physician in his wrath, a
Leper as white as Snow, fitter to infect, than cure us. What Physic does he
prescribe? Poison. What diet? Stones instead of bread, Scorpions instead of
fishes, hard fare for them that formerly fed so daintily. Before I conclude,
let me give you the pedigree of our Miseries, and of their Remedies. A long
Peace begat Plenty, Plenty begat Pride, and her Sister Riot, Pride begat
Ambition, Ambition begat Faction, Faction begat Civil War: And (if our evils
be not incurable, if we be not fallen in id temporis quo nec vitia nostra, nec
eorum remedia far possumus) our War will beget Poverty, Poverty Humility,
Humility Peace again, S^c rerum revertentibus vicibus annulus vertitur
Politicus. The declining spoak of the wheel will rise again. But we are not yet
sufficiently humbled, we have not repented with Ninivy. We wear Silks and
Velvets, instead of Sach-cloath and Ashes (even the meanest up-start has his
thefts writ upon his back by his Tailor in proud Characters of Gold Lace) we
have not watered our Couch with our Tears, but with an adulterous sweat. Look
to it therefore ye State Incubi, that by an incestuous copulation have begot
Plenty upon War, and filled your houses with the spoil and plunder of your dear
Country; an inundation of blood, and of the tears of the oppressed, will wash
away the foundation of your houses: And peace will be far from you in this
World, but especially that peace which the world cannot give: And because
Salamander-like you delight in the fire of Contention, an unquenchable fire
will be your lot hereafter. And though you escape all accounts here, yet upon
the great day of account when you shall receive your sentence of condemnation,
those your Children for whose preferment you sell your Souls, your God for
gold, shall not show so much thankfulness or pity toward you, as to say, alas
our Father! But your hearts are hardened with Phoraoh, I leave you therefore to
Pharaohs destiny, to be drowned in your own Red sea, as he was in his.

Resolution and scope of the Author.
in discharge of my Conscience, and pursuance of our National Covenant, which
obliges us to defend them against whosoever to our power, neither knowing nor
caring whether in so wicked an age (wherein vice is honored, and virtue
contemned) I may be thought worthy of punishment for being more righteous than
my superiors. I know an honest man is wondered at like a monster, and the
innocence of his life and conversation suspected as a Libel against the State,
yet if I perish I perish; and pereundum in licitis: nor am I less provided of a
safe retreat than our Grandees, my grave is open for me, and one foot in it
already. Contempsit omnes ille qui mortem prius. He that contemns Death, scorns
both Hope and Fear; which are the only affections that make Knaves, Fools and
Cowards of all the World. The world is a goodly Theater, we are the actors, God
is Poet and chief spectator; we must not choose our own parts, that is at Gods
appointment; one man he appoints to play the King, another the Beggar; one a
Comic, another a Tragic part; whatsoever part God has appointed for me in
this remainder of my life, I will have a care to personate it ingenuously and
aptly, not doubting but my Exit shall be accompanied with an applause into my
Tyring-room, my Tomb; nor will I refuse the meanest part that may draw a
plaudit from so excellent a spectator, but will prepare my self for the worst
of evils in this worst of times, and pray to God to Reform our Reformers. Amen.

THE END.
THE HISTORY OF INDEPENDENCY, WITH The Rise, Growth, and Practices of that
powerful and restless FACTION.

D. AMBROSIUS. Nec nobis ignominiosum est pati quod passus est Christus, nec
vobis gloriosum est facere quod fecit Judas.

TACIT. Scelera, sceleribus, tuenda.

VIRGILIUS. -- sua cuique Deus fit dira libido.

1 St. JOHN, c. 2. v. 16. Quicquid est in mundo est concupiscentia oculorum,
concupiscentia carnis, aut superbia vitae.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1648.

Reader,
GEntle or ungentle, I write to all, knowing that all have now got almost an
equal share and interest in this Gallimaufry or Hotchpot which our Grandee
Pseudo-Politicians with their negative and demolishing Councils have made, both
of Church and Commonwealth: and therefore I write in a mixed style, in which (I
dare say) there are some things fit to hold the judgments of the Gravest; some
things fit to catch the fancies of the Lightest; and some things of a middle
nature, applying my self to all capacities, (as far as truth will permit)
because I foresee the Catastrophe of this Tragedy is more likely to be
consummated by multitude of hands, than wisdom of heads. I have been a
curious observer, and diligent inquirer, after, not only the Actions, but the
Counsels of these times; and I here present the result of my endeavors to
thee: In a time of mis-apprehensions it is good to avoid mistakings, and
therefore I advise thee not to apply what I say to the Parliment, or Army in
general, if any phrase that has dropped from my pen in have (for this is a
work of have) seem to look asquint upon them: No, it is the Grandees, the
Junto-men, the Hocas-Pocasses, the state-Mountebanks, with their Zanyes and
Jack-puddings, Committee Men, Sequestrators,, Treasurers, and Agitators under
them, that are here historified: were the Parliament (the major part whereof is
in bondage to the minor part and their Janisaries) and the Army freed from
these usurping and engaged Grandees, who betrayed the Honor and Privileges of
Parliament and the Army to their own lusts, both would stand right, and be
serviceable to the settling of a firm lasting Peace under the King, upon our
first Principles, Religion, Laws, and Liberties, which are now so far laid by,
that whosoever will not join with the Grandees, in subverting them, is termed a
Malignant, as heretofore he that would not adhere to the Parliament in
supporting them was accounted; so that the definition of a Malignant is turned
the wrong side outward. The body of the Parliament and Army (in the midst of
these distempers) is yet healthy, sound, serviceable; my endeavor is therefore
to play the part of a friendly Physician, and preserve the body by purging
peccant humors: Were the Army under commanders and officers of better
Principles, who had not defiled their fingers with public moneys, their
consciences by complying with, and cheating all interests, (King, Parliament,
People, City, and Scots) for their own private ends, I should think that they
carried the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon; but clean contrary to the Image
presented to Nebuchadnezzar in a dream, the head and upper parts of this
aggregate body are part of Clay, part of Iron, the lower parts of better
metal: I cannot reform, I can but admonish; God must be both the Aesculapius
and Prometheus, and amend all, and though we receive never so many denials,
never so many repulses from him, let us take heed how we vote (even in the
private corners of our hearts) no Addresses, no Applications to Him. Let us
take heed of multiplying sins against God, lest he permit our Schismatical
Grandees to multiply Armies and Forces upon us, to war against Heaven as well
as against our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Properties upon earth, and keep
us and our estates under the perpetual bondage of the Sword, which has been
several ways attempted in the Houses these 2 last weeks, both for the raising
and keeping of a new Army of 30000. or 40000. men in the seven Northern
Associate Counties, upon established pay (besides this Army in the South) and
also for the raising of men in each County of England, and all to be engrossed
into the hands of his Excellency, and such Commanders and Officers as he shall
set over them; and this work may chance be carried on by the Grandees of
Derbyhouse and the Army, if not prevented; for the General (notwithstanding
this power was denied him in the House of Commons) has sent warrants into most
Counties to raise Horse and Foot; yea, to that baseness of Slavery has our
General and Army, with their under-Tyrants the Grandees, brought us, that
although themselves did heretofore set the rascality of the Kingdom on work in
great multitudes (especially the Schismatic party) to clamor upon the
Parliament with scandalous Petitions, and make peremptory demands to the
Houses, destructive to the Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Properties of the
Land, and the very foundation of Parliaments; to which they extorted what
answers they pleased; and got a general vote, That it was the undoubted right
of the Subject to Petition, and afterward to acquiesce in the wisdom and
justice of the two Houses: Yet when upon 16 of May 1648. the whole County of
Surry (in effect) came in so civil a posture to deliver a petition to the
house, that they were Armed for the most part but with sticks, in which
Petition there is nothing contained which the Parliament is not bound to make
good by their many Declarations and Remonstrances to the people, or by the
Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, or National Covenant, or by the known Laws of
this Land. Yet were they, 1. Abused by the Soldiers of White Hall as they
passed by, where some of them were pulled in and beaten. 2. When those
Gentlemen of quality that carried the Petition came to Westminster Hall, they
found a Guard of Soldiers at the door, uncivilly opposing their entrance to
make their addresses to the House. 3. When they pressed into the Hall, and got
up to the Commons door, they were there reviled by the Guard. 4. The Multitude
which stood in the new Palace, (because some of them did but whoop as others
did, who were purposely set on work (as is conceived) to mix with them and
disorder them) were suddenly surrounded with a strong party of horse from the
Mews, It is reported by some that Sir H. Mildmay, Col. Purefoy and the Speaker
(doubting the Hou. would give too good an answer to their Petition) sent for
these Horse and Foot.
and some more Companies of Foot from White Hall, who by the appointment of the
Committee of Schismatics at Derby-House were ready prepared for this design,
and catched them (as it were) in a Toil, and with barbarous and schismatical
rage fell upon these naked unarmed Petitioners, slew and wounded many without
distinction, telling them, They were appointed to give an answer to their
Petition, and they should have no other; (as indeed they had not) though the
Lieut. Colonel that did all the mischief, was called into the House of
Commons, and had public thanks given him at the Bar, took many of them
Prisoners, and Plundered their Pockets, Cloaks, Hats, Swords, Horses, and some
of them (even Gentlemen of as good quality as their General) were stripped of
their doublets: those Gentlemen of quality who where in the Lobby before the
Commons door, civily expecting an answer, were abused, and violently driven out
by the Guard, to take their fortune among the Rabble; what Tyrants ever in the
World refused to hear the Petitions and grievances of their people before? The
most Tyranicall government of the world is that of Russia, and Jo. Vasilowich
was the greatest Tyrant of that Nation, yet shall this Tyrant rise up in
judgment at the latter day against these Monsters. Behold what entertainment
your Petitioners shall have hereafter, if public Peace be the end of their
desires: yet many Petitions ready drawn are sent up and down in most Counties
by Committee Men, and Sequestrators, to enforce men to give thanks for the four
votes against the King; and many Petitions from Schismatics, destructive to
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Property, have been obtruded upon the Houses,
and received encouragement and thanks, because they tend to subvert the
fundamental Government of Church and Commonwealth, and cast all into the Chaos
of confusion, whereby the Grandees may have occasion to keep up this Army, and
perpetuate their Tyranny and our burdens. And from these Tumults of their own
raising, the grandees pretend a necessity to keep this Army about this Town, to
watch advantages against it. Cromwell having often said, This Town must be
brought to more absolute obedience, or laid in the dust; in order to which, the
Soldiers are now disarming the Country, and then the City is next, who being
once disarmed, must prostitute their mony-baggs to these fellows, or be
Plundered.

Reader, having spoken my sense to thee, I leave thee to thy own sense;
submitting my self to as much Charity as God has endowed thee withal. God
that made all, preserve and amend all, This shall be the daily prayer of him
that had rather die for his Country, than share with these Godly Thieves, in
eating out the bowels of his Country, and enriching himself with public spoils.

The History of INDEPENDENCY.
YOU have in The mystery of the two Juntoes, The Prea^ble.
Presbyterian and Independent, presented to your view these two Factions, (as
it were in a Cockpit pecking at one another) which rising originally from the
two Houses and Synod, have so much disturbed and dislocated, in every joint,
both Church and Commonwealth. I must now set before you Independency
Triumphant, rousing it self upon its Legs, clapping its wings, and crowing in
the midst of the Pit, with its enemy under its feet, though not yet well
resolved what use it can or may make of its Victory.

But before I go any farther, it is fit I tell you what Independency is.

It is Genus generalissimum of all Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, 1 What
Independency is
and Schisms; a general Name and Title under which they are all united, as
Sampson's Foxes were by the Tails. And though they have several opinions and
fancies (which make their vertiginous heads turn different ways) yet profit
and preferment (being their Tails) their last and ultimate end by which they
are governed (like a Ship by his Rudder) and wherein they mutually correspond;
the rest of their differences being but circumstantial are easily plastered
over with the untempered Mortar of hypocricy by their Rabbis of the Assembly,
and their Grandees of the two Houses and Army, in whom they have an implicit
faith. As Mahomet's Alchoran was the Gallemaufry of Jew and Christian; so are
they a Composition of Jew, Christian, and Turk; Independen^^ is compoun^ed of
Judaism
with the Jew they arrogate to be the peculiar people of God, the Godly, the
Saints, who only have right unto the Creatures, and should possess the good
things of this World, all others being Usurpers; a Tenent so destructive to
humane society and civil Government, that by virtue hereof they may and do by
fraud, or force, Tax, eat up with Free Quarter, cozen and plunder the whole
Kingdom, and count it but robbing the Egyptians: To this purpose they overthrow
all the Judicatures, Laws, and Liberties of the Land, and set up Arbitrary
Committees, Martial-Law, and Weathercock Ordinances in their room, made and
unmade by their own over-powring faction in Parliament at pleasure, with the
help and terror of their Janisaries, attending at their doors.

^ristianism.
With the Christian, some of them (but not all) acknowledge the Scriptures, but
so far only as they will serve their turns, to Pharise themselves, and Publican
all the World besides; men filled with spiritual pride, mere Enthusiastiques,
of a speculative and high flying Religion, too high for Earth, and too low for
Heaven; whereas a true and fruitful Religion (like Jacob's Ladder) Stat pede in
terris, caput inter nubila condit, must have one end upon earth, as well as the
other in Heaven. He that acknowledges the duties of the first table to God,
and neglects the duty of the second table to Man, is an Hypocrite both
against God and Man.

^rcism.
With the Turk they subject all things, even Religion, Laws, and Liberties (so
much cried up by them heretofore) to the power of the Sword, ever since by
undermining practices and lies they have jugled the States Sword into the
Independent Scabbard.

^he Earl of ^^sex and Sir ^ill. Waller ^^dermined (...) let in the
^^dependents.
The Earl of Essex, General of all the Parliaments Forces (a man though popular
and honest, yet stubbornly stout, fitter for Action than Counsel, and apter to
get a victory than improve it) must be laid by, and his Forces reduced. The
like for Sir William Waller and his Forces; that Commanders of Independent
Principles and Interests, with Soldiers suitable to them, might by degrees be
brought into their room to reap the harvest of those crops which they had sown.

This was the groundwork of the Independent design, to monopolize the power of
the Sword into their hands.

This could not be better effected than by dashing the Earl of Essex and Sir
William Waller one against another: for which purpose the hotheaded
Schismatique Sir A. Haslerigge was employed with Sir William Waller and some
others (whose Ashes I will spare) with the E. of Essex to break them one upon
another. This was at last effected by taking advantage of their several
misfortunes: the one at Lislethyell in Cornwall, the other at the Devises in
Wiltshire, where Haslerigge (a man too ignorant to command, and too insolent to
obey) not staying for the foot, who lay round about the Devises in a storming
posture, charged up a steep hill with his Horse only against the Lord Wilmots
Party, one Division so far from another, that the second Division could not
relieve the first, thereby freeing Sir Ralph Hopton from an assured overthrow,
and bestowing an unexpected Victory on the L. Wilmot: he received a wound in
his flight, the smart whereof is still so powerfully imprinted in his memory,
that he abhors fighting ever since; witness his praying and crying out of
Gunshot at the Battle at Cheriton, when he should have fought; and his
complaints openly made in the House of Commons of the Earl of Stanford for
Bastonadoing him. Which rashness of his (if it deserve not a worse name) was
so far from being discountenanced, that he received not long after a gift of
6500 l. from the House, and is lately made Governor of Newcastle, and 3000 l.
given him to repair the works there. I shall not need the Spirit of Prophecy to
foresee, that the tenth part of the said 3000 l. will not be bestowed upon
those Works. Thus was he favored by his party in the House, who were thought
to look upon this action as an acceptable service.

In farther porgresse of this design, Manchester (a Lord, 3 The Earl of
Manchester undermined.
and therefore not to be confided in) was undermined and accused by his Lievt.
General Cromwell of high Crimes, whom he again recriminated with a Charge of as
high a nature; and when all men were high in expectation of the event, it grew
to be a drawn battle between them; whereby, all men concluded them both guilty:
Manchester was discarded.

Out of the ashes of these three arose that Phoenix (forsooth a new moddell'd
Army, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, a Gentleman of an irrational and
brutish valor, fitter to follow another man's counsel than his own, and
obnoxious to Cromwell, and the Independent faction (upon whose bottom he
stands) for his preferment, it being no dishonor to him to become the property
to a powerful Faction.

4 The Victories ^f the new ^odel how ^tchieved.
It pleased God to bestow many Victories upon this Army over the Kings Forces,
then strong in bulk, but weakened by Factions, want of pay, and other
distractions (whereby many of their Commanders not confiding in one another,
began to provide for their future safety and subsistence) but above all, they
had generally lost the peoples affections. To these their Victories, the
constant pay, and supplies, and all other helps and encouragements from a
concurring State, which their working and restless Faction carefully
accommodated them withal, (far beyond what any other Army had formerly) did
much conduce, in so much as they cleared the Field, and took in all the enemies
Garrisons, with so much facility, that to many men they seemed rather
Cauponantes bellum quam belligerantes, to conquer with silver than with steel:
a good Purse is a shrewd weapon.

5 Artifices to make Cromwell and his ^ew Model popular.
Thus this Faction having got a General fit for their turn, and a Lieutenant
General wholly theirs in judgment and interest, were diligent to make him
famous and popular, by casting upon him the honor of other men's achievements
and valor. The News-books taught to speak no language but Cromwell, and his
Party; and were mute in such actions as he and they could claim no share in;
for which purpose the Presses were narrowly watched. When any great exploit was
half achieved, and the difficulties overcome, Cromwell was sent to finish it,
and take the glory to himself, all other men must be eclipsed, that Cromwell
(the Knight of the Sun, and Don Quixot of the Independents) and his Party may
shine the brighter.

6 The new Model new-modelled by degrees to put the Sword into the hands of
Schismatics.
And that Cromwels Army might be suitable to himself, and their Designs carried
on without interruption or observation of such as are not of their Principles,
all the Sectaries of England are invited to be Reserves to this Army; and all
pretenses of scandals and crimes laid hold of at their own Councils of War, to
casheer and disband the Presbyterian party, that Independents might be let into
their rooms, though such as (for the most part) never drew Sword before: so
that this Army (which boasts it self for the Deliverer, nay the Conqueror of
two Kingdoms) is no more the same that fought at Nazeby, than Sir Francis
Drakes Ship that brought him home, can be called the same Ship that carried him
forth about the Earth, having been so often repaired, and therefore suffered so
many substractions and additions, that hardly any of the old vessel remained.
It was therefore nominally and formally, not really and materially the same.

The said mystery of the two Juntoes farther tells you, that the Independent
Junto bottomed all their hopes and interests upon keeping up this Army, whereby
to give the Law to King, Kingdom, Parliament and City, and to establish that
Chimaera called Liberty of Conscience. That this was Cromwels ambition
formerly, the Earl of Manchester's aforesaid Charge against Cromwell (though let
fall without prosecution, lest so great a mystery should be discovered) makes
it probable, and his later practices upon which I now fall makes it infallible.

The Houses long since (for ease of the people) in a full and free Parliament,
ordained the disbanding of this Army: 7. The Army voted to be disbanded through
Cromwels craft.
only 5000. Horse, 1000. Dragoons, and some few Firelocks to be continued in
pay for safety of this Kingdom, and some of them to be sent for Ireland: for
which purpose they borrowed 200000 l. of the City (being the same sum which
disbanded the Scots) and for the rest of their Arrears, they were to have
Debenters and Security without all exceptions; such terms of advantage as no
other disbanded Soldiers have had the like, neither are these like to attain
to again: so that they have brought the Soldiers into a loss, as well as into
a labyrinth; their continuing in arms without, nay, against lawful Authority,
being a manifest act of Treason and Rebellion, and so it is looked upon by the
whole Kingdom; nor can the Parliaments subsequent Ordinances (which all men
know to be extorted by force, as hereafter shall appear) help them.

To the passing of this Ordinance, Cromwels Protestation in the House with his
hand upon his breast, In the presence of Almighty God, before whom he stood,
that he knew the Army would disband and lay down tbeir Arms at their door,
whenever they should command them, conduced much: this was maliciously done
of Cromwell to set the Army at a greater distance with the Presbyterian Party,
and bring them and the Independent party nearer together; he knew the Army
abominated nothing more than Disbanding and returning to their old Trades, and
would hate the Authors thereof.

8. Agitators raised by Cromw.
And at the same time when he made these protests in the House, he had his
Agitators ( Spirits of his and his Son Ireton's conjuring up in the Army, 9.
The beginning of the project to purge the Houses.
though since conjured down by them without requital) to animate them against
the major part of the House (under the notion of Royalists, a Malignant party
and Enemies to the Army) to engage them against Disbanding and going for
Ireland, and to make a Traitorous Comment upon the said Ordinance, 10. The Army
put into mutiny against the Parliament, whereby Cromwell monopolizeth the Army.
to demand an Act of Indemnity, and rely upon the advice of Judge Jenkins for
the validity of it, and to insist upon many other high demands; some private,
as Soldiers; some public, as Statesmen.

Cromwell having thus by mutinying the Army against the Parliament, made them
his own, and monopolized them, (as he did formerly his Brew House at Ely) which
he might easily do, 11. Cromwell's family in the Army.
having beforehand filled most of the chief Officers in the Army with his own
kindred, allies, and friends, (of whose numerous family, 12. Cromwell and Ireton
usurp Offices in the Army.
Lievt. Col. Lilburn gives you a list in one of his Books) he now flies to the
Army, doubting (his practices discoverd) he might be imprisoned: where he and
Ireton assuming Offices to themselves, acted without Commission; having not
only been ousted by the self-denying Ordinance, (if it be of any power against
the godly) but also their several Commissions being then expired; and Sir
Thomas Fairfax having no authority to make General Officers, as appears by his
Commission (if he make any account of it) and therefore Sprig, alias Nathaniel
Fines, in his Legend or Romance of this Army, called Anglia Rediviva, sets down
two Letters sent from Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Speaker William Lenthal, one to
desire Cromwell's continuance in the Army, another of thanks for so long
forbearing him from the House: see Ang. Red. p. 10, 11, 29. which needed not,
had he been an Officer of the Army.

And now both of them barefaced, and openly, join with the Army at Newmarket,
in traiterous Engagements, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Manifesto's; and
Petitions penned by Cromwell himself, were sent to some Counties to be
subscribed, against supposed Obstructors of justice, and Invaders of the
Peoples Liberties in Parliament; and the Army at Newmarket and Triplo-Heath
prompted to cry, justice, justice against them; and high and treasonable
demands, destructive to the fundamental privileges of Parliament were
publicly insisted upon; many of which for quietness sake, and out of
compassion to bleeding Ireland, were granted; yet these restless spirits
(hurried on to further designs) made one impudent demand beget another, and
when by Letters and otherwise they had promised, That if their then present
demands were granted, they would there stop and acquiesce; yet when they seemed
to have done, they had not done, but deluded and evaded all hopes of Peace by
mis-apprehension, and mis-construction of the Parliaments concessions; making
the mis-interpretations of one grant, the generation of another demand, so that
almost ever since the Parliament has nothing else to do but encounter this
Hydra and roll this stone.

Having thus debauched the Army, Securing Oxford, and plundring the King from
Holdenby
he plotted in his own Chamber the securing the Garrison, Magazine, and Train of
Artilery at Oxford, and surprising the Kings person at Holdenby; which by his
Instrument Coronet Joyce, with a commanded party of Horse, he effected; and
when Joyce (giving Cromwell an account of that action) told him, He had now the
King in his power; well (replied Cromwell) I have then the Parliament in my
Pocket. O insolent Slave! O slavish English! thus to suffer your King and
Parliament, together with your Wives and Children, Religion, Laws, Liberties,
and Properties, to be Captivated by so contemptible a Varlet. If our Noble
Ancestors (who vindicated their Liberties, and got Magna Charta by the Sword)
shall look down from Heaven, and see their Posterity so cowardly resign them to
a handful of bloody, cheating Shismaticks, they will not own us, but take us
for Russian Slaves, French Peasants, and cry out, that we are a Bastard brood,
Servi natura, born for bondage; yet afterward (having recourse to his usual
familiarity with Almighty God) Cromwell used his Name to protest his ignorance
and innocence in that business, both to the King and Parliament, adding an
execration upon his Wife and Children to his protestation; yet Joyce is so free
from punishment, that he is since preferred, and his Arrears paid by their
means; and though both Houses required the Army to send his Royal Person to
Richmond, to be there left in the hands of the Parliaments Commissioners,
whereby both Kingdoms might freely make addresses to him, (for they had
formerly excluded and abused the Scots Commissioners, contrary to the law of
Nations, and Votes of both Houses, and yet then granted free access to the most
desperate persons of the Kings Party) yet they could obtain no better answer
from these Rebellious Saints, than That they desired no place might be proposed
for his Majesty's residence nearer London, Manifesto of the Army June 27. 1647
than where they would allow the Quarters of the Army to be. This was according
to their old threats of marching up to London, frequently used when any thing
went contrary to their desires; they knew what dangerous and troublesome guests
we should find them here.

How much is this Army degenerated since Cromwell and his demure white-livered
Son-in-law Ireton poisoned their manners with new principles? Anglia Rediviva
p. 247. tells us, that about Woodstock private overtures were made by some from
Court for receiving his Majesty, who was minded to cast himself upon the Army;
but such was their faithfulness in that point, that conceiving it derogatory to
the honor and power of Parliament, (for his Majesty to wave that highest
Court, and address himself to any others) and therefore inconsistent with their
trust and duty, being servants of the State, they certified the Parliament
thereof, and understanding it to be against their sense also, they absolutely
refused to be tampered with. Oh, how faithful then! how perfidious and
Cromwellized are they now! let their frequent tampering with the King and His
Party, to the amazement of the Kingdom, and the abusing of the King, testify.
Read Putney Projects written by a considerable Officer of the Army, and a
friend to Cromwell, though not to his false practices.

14. Their project to keep the Parliament in Wardship.
Having thus gotten the King (the first and most visible legal authority of
England) into their possession, their next design is to get the Parliament (the
second legal authority of England) into their power.

15. Purging the Houses again.
This could not be effected but by purging the two Houses of Presbyterian
Members (especially the most active, and such as had labored their disbanding)
that an Independent Parliament and Army might govern the Kingdom: In order to
which design they sent to the House of Commons in the name of Sir Thomas
Fairfax and the Army, 16. Accusing the 11. Members.
a general and confused Charge of High Treasons and other mis-demeanours
against eleven Members, for things done (for the most part in the House) and
many of the principal, such as the House had long before examined and acquitted
them of, and such as the whole Kingdom knows Cromwell and Ireton to be
apparently guilty of; as, Trucking with the King, etc.

One chief Article insisted upon in the Charge was, That by their power in the
House, they caused the Ordinance for Disbanding this Army to pass. Here you see
where the shoe wrings them; This Charge was not subscribed by any informer
that engaged to make it good, or else to suffer punishment, and make the House
and the parties accused, reparations: as by the Stat. 25. Ed. 3. c. 4. 27. Ed.
3. c. 18. 38. Ed. 3. c. 9. 17. R. 2. c. 6. 15. H. 6. c. 4. but especially by
31. H. 6. c. 1. concerning Jack Cade (which comes nearest this case) ought to
be; and they professed in the 2. 3. 4. Article of their Charge, That they were
dis-obliged and discouraged from any further engagement in the Parliament
service, or Irelands preservation; And demanded the House should forthwith
suspend the impeached Members from any longer sitting and acting. Whereupon,
the House after full debate in a full and free Parliament, Resolved, June 25.
1647. That by the Laws of the Land no judgment could be given for their
suspention upon that general Charge, before particulars produced, and proofs
made; Yet the Army (which had now learned only to acquiesce in their own
prudence and justice) insolently threatened to march up to Westminster against
the Parliament, 17. Threats to march up to London.
in case the said 11 Members were not suspended; and courted the City of London
to sit Newters, 18. London solicited to fit Newters.
and let them work their will with the Parliament.

The 11. impeached Members therefore modestly withdrew to free the House from
such danger, as they might incur by protecting them, as in Justice and Honor
they were bound to do: After this, the Army sent in their particular Charge;
and libellously published it in print by their own Authority. To which the 11.
Members sent in, and published their Answer. Upon which there has been no
prosecution, because they pretend first to settle the Kingdom, b^t if they stay
till these fellows have either authority, will, or skill to settle the Kingdom,
they shall not need to make ready for their trial till Doomsday; Here you have
a whole Army for Accusers, and the chief Officers of the Army (being Members of
the House) not only accusers, but parties, Witnesses, and Judges, and carrying
the Rules of Court, and Laws by which they judge, in their Scabards. And the
Charge of Impeachment, such (as all men know) mutatis mutandis are more
suitable to Cromwells and Iretons actions, than the accused Parties. If the
proceeding in the Kings name against the 5 Members mentioned in The exact
Collection part. 1. p. 38. were Voted A Traiterous design against King and
Parliament, and the arresting any of them upon the Kings Warrant, an Act of
public enmity against the Common wealth: How much more Treasonable were these
proceedings; and the Armies March toward London to enforce them; and their
arresting Anthony Nichols, having the Speakers Pass, and leave of the House;
Colonel Burch, being upon service of the Parliament going for Ireland; and Sir
Samuel Luke, resting quiet in his own house?

19. The first occasion of quarrel against the City.
Whilst these things were acting, Cromwell finding he could not have his will
upon the Parliament, but that he must make the City of London, (who had denied
the neutrality) his Enemies, cast about how to cheat the Country people of
their affections; (for to have both City and Country his Enemies in the posture
his Army was then in, 20. Courting and cheating the Country and all other
interest to lull them a sleep till the Grandees had wrought their will upon the
City and Houses.
was dangerous) he therefore by many Printed Books and Papers, spread all
England over by his Agitators, and by some Journey-men Priests (whose Pulpits
are the best Juglers boxes to deceive the simple) Absolom-like, wooeth them to
make loud Complaints of the pressures and grievances of the People: to neglect
the King and the Parliament, and make Addresses to the Army as their only
Saviors, the Arbitrators of Peace, Restorers of our Laws, Liberties and
Properties, Setlers of Religion, Preservers of all just interests: pretended to
settle the King in his just Rights and Prerogatives; to uphold the Privileges
of Parliament, 21. Petitions to the Army, and for the Army.
establish Religion, to reform, and bring to account all Committees,
Sequestrators, and all others that had defiled their fingers with public
money or goods; To free the people from that all devouring Excise and other
Taxes; to redress undue elections of Members; To relieve Ireland: Things
impossible to be performed by an Army, and now totally forgotten; so that they
have only accepted of their own private demands as Soldiers; That the
Parliament should own them for their Army; Establish pay for them; put the
whole Militia of this Kingdom, and Ireland both by Sea and Land, into their
Hands, and Vote against all opposite Forces. But they are now become the only
Protectors of all corrupt Committee Men, Sequestrators, Accomptants to the
State, and all other facinorous persons, who comply with them to keep up this
Army, for their own security against public justice.

Having thus courted and cheated all the public and just Interests of the
Kingdom, they deceived the people so far as to make them Issachar-like,
patiently to bear the burden of free quarter, and to make addresses to the Army
for themselves; by Petitions, to which they gave plausible answers, That this,
and this was the sense of the Army: As if the sense of the Army had been the
supreme Law of the Land, and to make addresses to the Parliament for the Army
not to be disbanded, (for which purpose their Agitators carried Petitions ready
penned to be subscribed in most Counties.)

The People being thus lulled asleep, 22. A quarrel against the City invented.
they now cast about how to make benefit of a joint quarrel both against the
Parliament and City, (since they could not separate them) or at least against
the Presbyterian party in both; they had withdrawn their quarters (in a seeming
obedience to Parliaments commands) 30 miles from London (of which they often
brag in their Papers) and presumed the suspension of the 11. Members, had
struck such an awfulness into the Houses, that most of the Presbyterian Members
would either absent themselves, (as too many indeed did) or turn Renegadoes
from their own principles to them: but found themselves notwithstanding
opposed, and their desires retarded (beyond their expectation) by the remainder
of that party. 23. The Army demand the City Militia to be changed into other
hands.
They must therefore find out a quarrel to march against the City, and give the
Houses another Purge, stronger than the former.

The Army being principled, and put into a posture suitable to Cromwels desire,
and the Country charmed into a dull sleep, now was his time to pick a quarrel
with the City, that what he could not obtain by fair means, he might obtain by
foul, to make them desert and divide from the Parliament, and leave it to be
modelled according to the discretion of the Soldiery. He could not think it
agreeable to policy, that the City which had slai^ his Compeer and fellow
Prince Wat Tyler (the Idol of the Commons in Richard the seconds time) and
routed his followers (four times as many in number as this Army) should be
trusted with their own Militia, the City being now greater, more populous and
powerful than in his days. In a full and free Parliament upon mature debate,
both Houses by Ordinance (dated 4 May 1647.) had established the Militia of the
City of London for a year, in the hands of such Citizens, as by their Authority
and approbation were nominated by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council;
and though the Army had recruted it self without Authority, and had got
themselves invested with the whole power of all the Land forces of the Kingdom
in pay of the Parliam. so that there was nothing left that could be formidable
to them but their own crimes; and that it was expected they should go roundly
to work upon those public remedies they had so often held forth to the people
in their popular Printed Papers: See the Letter and Remonstrance from Sir Tho.
Fairfax and the Army, p. 8. 9.
Yet the Army (contrary to what they promised to the City in their Letter 10.
June, and their Declaration or Representation, 14 June, 1647. That they would
not go beyond their desires at that time expressed, and for other particulars
would acquiesce in the Justice and wisdom of the Parliament (behold their
modesty!) by a Letter and Remonstrance from Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army,
with unresisted boldness demanded the Militia of the City of London to be
returned into other hands; without acquainting the City of their Commissioners
(then resident in the Army to keep a good correspondency with them) therewith;
upon which Letter alone, the House of Commons (being very thin, and many
Members driven away by menaces) upon July 22. Voted the repealing the said Vote
of 4 May, and a new Ordinance for reviving the old Militia, presently passed
and transmitted to the Lords the same day about seven of the clock at night,
and there presently passed without debate, though moved by some to be put off
until the City (whose safety and privileges it highly concerned) were heard
what they could say to it.

Observe that neither by the said Paper from the Army; nor by any man in the
two Houses, any thing was objected against any of the new Militia.

And indeed, formerly the Parliament never made choice of, enlarged, or changed
the City Militia, but they were still pleased first to communicate the same to
the Common Council; a Res^ect justly showed to that City which had been such
good friends to them; but of late, since the Parliament have shifted their old
P^inci^les and Interests, they have learned to lay by their old Friends. The
pretense for this hasty passing the Ordinance, was to prevent the Armies so
much theatned march to London, if the Houses refused to pass it; and the Cities
opposition, if not passed before their notice of it. But the real design was to
strike a discontent and jealousy into the City, thereby to force them to some
act of self-defence, which might give a color to the Army to march up against
them, and their friends in the Houses.

The unexpected news of this changing their Militia, 24. The City troubled at
the change of their Militia.
caused the City ( June 24. being Saturday) to meet in Common Council, where,
(for some reasons already expressed) and because the repealing this Ordinance
upon no other grounds than the Armies imperious desires, might justly be
suspected, to shake all other Ordinances, for security of Money, sale of
Bishops Lands, I appeal to Colonel Harvy, whether this did not fright him?
by making them repealable at the Armies pleasure; they resolve to Petition the
House upon Monday morning following, being 26. July, which they did by the
Sheriffs and some Common Council men; But so it happened, that about one thousand
Apprentices wholly unarmed, 25. The City Petition the Houses for their Militia
again.
came down two or three hours after with another Petition, of their own, to the
Houses; Therein complaining, that to Order the Cities Militia was the Cities
Birthright belonging to them by Charters confirmed in Parliament, for defense
whereof they had adventured their lives as far as the Army; And desired the
Militia might be put again into the same hands in which it was put with the
Parliaments and Cities consent by Ordinance, May 4. 26. The tumult of
Apprentices, 26. July.


Upon reading these Petitions, the Lords were pleased to revoke the Ordinance
of July 23. and revive that of May 4. by a new Ordinance of July 26. which they
presently sent down to the Commons for their consents, where some of the
Apprentices (presuming they might have as good an influence upon the House to
obtain their due, as the Army in pay of the Parliament had to obtain more than
their due) in a childish heat were over-clamorous to have the Ordinance passed,
refusing to let some Members pass out of the House, or come forth into the
Lobby when they were to divide upon the question about it, (so ignorant were
they of the customs of the House) which at last passed in the affirmative
about three of the clock afternoon; 27. The Tumult of Apprentices ceased, but
artificially continued by Sectaries.
and then most of the Apprentices departed quietly into the City. After which,
some disorderly person (very few of them Apprentices) were drawn together and
instigated by diverse Sectaries and friends of the Army who mingled with them
(amongst whom one Highland was observed to be all that day very active; who
afterward [26. Sept.] delivered a Petition to the House against those Members
that sat, and was an Informer and Witness examined about the said Tumult)
gathered about the Commons door and grew very outrageous, compelling the
Speaker to return to the Chair after he had adjourned the House; and there kept
the Members in until they had passed a Vote, That the King should come to
London to Treat.

This was cunningly and premeditately contrived, to increase the scandal upon
the City; yet when the Common Council of London heard of this disorder as they
were then sitting; they presently sent down the Sheriffs to their rescue with
such strength as they could get ready (their Militia being then unsettled by the
contradicting Ordinances of the Parliament) who at last pacified the Tumult,
and sent the Speaker safe home; which was as much as they could do in this
interval of their Militia, being the Houses own Act.

28. The Speaker of the Commons complained of a report, that he meant to fly
to the Army; yet run away to the Army:
The Lords adjourned until the next Friday; the Commons but until the next day.
Tuesday morning the Commons sat again quietly, and after some debate adjourned
until Friday next, because the Lords had done so.

The next day being Wednesday, the monthly Fast, the Speaker and Members met in
Westminster Church; where the Speaker complained (in some passion) to Sir Ralph
Ashton and other Members, of a scandalous report raised on him in the City, as
if he intended to desert the House, and fly to the Army, saying, he scorned to
do such a base, unjust, dishonorable act; but would rather die in his House and
Chair: which being spoken in a time and place of so much reverence and
devotion, makes many think his secret retreat to the Army (the very next day)
proceeded not so much from his own judgment, as from some strong threats from
Cromwell and Ireton (who were the chief contrivers of this desperate plot to
divide the City and Houses, and bring up the Army to enthrall them both) That
if he did not comply with their desires, they would cause the Army to impeach
him for cousening the State of many vast sums of money.

And truly I remember I have seen an intercepted Letter, sent about the time of
his flight, from the Army to Will. Lenthal Speaker without any name subscribed
to it, only the two last lines were of John Rushworths hand; earnestly
importuning him to retire to the Army, with his friends.

On Thursday morning early, 29. The City proclaim against Tumults.
the newly renewed Militia of London, made public Proclamation throughout the
City and Suburbs, and set up printed Tickets at Westminster, That if any person
should distrub either of the two Houses or their Members, the Guards should
apprehend them, and if resistance were made, kill them; yet notwithstanding,
the Speaker and his party, (carrying the causes of their fear in their own
consciences) in the evening of that day secretly stole away to Windsor to the
Headquarters.

Upon Friday morning at least 140 of the Members assembled in the House (they
that fled being about 40.) 30. The Houses appear, the Speakers being at the
Army.
whither the Sergeant coming with his Mace, being asked where the Speaker was?
answered, He knew not well; that he had not seen him that morning, and was told
he went a little way out of Town last night; but said, he expected his return
to the House this morning: after that, being more strictly questioned about the
Speaker, he withdrew himself, and would not be found, till the House (after
four hours expectation, and sending some of their Members to the Speakers
house, who brought word from his Servants, that they conceived he was gone to
the Army) had chosen a new Speaker, 31. New Speakers chosen.
Master Henry Pelham, and a new Sergeant, who procured another Mace. The like
(mutatis mutandis) was done by the Lords, to prevent discontinuance and fayler
of the Parliament for want of Speakers to adjourn and so to continue it; 32.
Petition and Engagement of the City.
and take away all scruples.

As for the Petition and Engagement of the City (so much aggravated by the
Independent party) it was directed to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council; from diverse Citizens, Commanders and Soldiers, and was
occasioned by some intelligence they had, that the Army would demand an
alteration of the City Militia, in order to a design they had against the City.
It was only intended to the Common Hall, but never presented, as the Soldiers
Petition was to their General, which being taken notice of by the Parliament as
it was in agitation, was so much resented by the Soldiery, as to put
themselves into the posture they are now in (as Lieut. Col. Lilburn says in one
of his books) to act no longer by their Commission, but by the principles of
Nature and self-defence; nor did the said Engagement contain any thing but
resolutions of self-defence, in relation to the City; so that we cannot see
what the Army had to do to declare their sense upon it in their Letter 23.
July, and so put a prejudice upon it in the Houses. I have insisted the more
particularly upon this Grand Imposture, as being the Anvill upon which they
hammered most of their subsequent designs, violent and illegal accusations.

33. Votes passed after new Speakers chosen.
The new Speakers chosen; the two Houses proceeded to Vote and Act, as a
Parliament.

And first, The House of Commons Voted in the eleven impeached Members: next,
They revive and set up again the Committee of safety by Ordinance of both
Houses, enabling them to join with the Committee of the restored City Militia,
giving power by several Ordinances to them, to List and raise Forces, appoint
Commanders and Officers, issue forth Arms and Ammunition for defense of both
Houses and the City against all that should invade them. Which Votes and
preparations for their self-defence (warranted by the same law of Nature, as
the Armies papers affirm) were not passed, nor put in execution until the Army
(every day recruited contrary to the Houses Orders) were drawing toward
London, and had with much scorn disobeyed the Votes and Letter of both Houses,
prohibiting them to come within thirty miles of London.

34. Members Engagement with the Army.
The Army, to countenance their Rebellion, draw the two Speakers and fugitive
Members to sit in consultation, and pass Votes promiscuously with the Council
of War in the nature of a Parliament, and to sign an Engagement (dat. 4.
August) to live and die with Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army under his command,
affirming therein, that generally throughout, their sense agrees with the
Declaratitn of Sir Tho. Fairfax, and his Council of War, showing the grounds of
their present advance toward the City of London. In which Declaration, the
Council of the Army take upon them to be supreme Judges over the Parliament;
Telling you who of the two Houses they hold for persons in whom the public
trust of the Kingdom remains, and by whose advise they mean to govern
themselves in managing the weighty affairs of the Kingdom. They declare against
the late choice of a new Speaker by some Gentlemen at Westminster; And that as
things now stand, there is no free nor legal Parliament sitting, being through
the violence (26. July) suspended. That the Orders and Votes, etc. passed 29.
July last, and all such as shall pass in this assembly of some few Lords, and
Gentlemen at Westminster, are void and null, and ought not to be submitted unto.

Behold here, not only a power without the Parliament Houses, judging of the
very essence of a Parliament, and the validity of their resolutions, but
usurping to themselves a negative Voice, which they deny to the King; and yet a
Schismatical faction in the 2 Houses complying with them, and betraying and
prostituting the very being, Honor, and all the fundamental rights and
privileges of this and all future Parliaments to an Army of Rebels who refuse
to obey their Masters, and disband.

This Engagement so over-leavened the army, that their brutish General sent
forth Warrants to raise the Trained Bands of some Counties to march with him
against the City and both Houses; although Trained Bands are not under any pay
of the Parliament; and therefore not under command of the General, by any Order
or Ordinance. But what will not a Fool in authority do, when he is possessed by
Knaves? Miserable man! His Foolery has so long waited upon Cromwell's and
Ireton's knavery, 35. The City send Commissioners to the Army, Fowks, Gibs, and
Estweck, by whom they are betrayed.
that it is not safe for him now to see his folly, and throw by his Cap with a
Bell and his Babble.

The Earl of Essex died so opportunely, that many suspected his death was
artificial.

Yet the City were so desirous of Peace, that they sent Commissioners sundry
times to the Army to mediate an Accord; Who could obtain no more equal terms of
Agreement than that They should yield to desert both Houses, and the impeached
Members: Call in their Declaration newly Printed and published: Relinquish the
Militia: Deliver up all their Forts and Line of Communication to the Army;
together with the Tower of London, and all the Magazines and arms therein:
Disband all their Forces: Turn all the Reformadoes out of the Line: Withdraw
all their guards from the Houses: Receive such Guards of Horse and Foot within
the Line, as the Army should appoint to guard the Houses: Demolish their works,
suffer the whole Army to march in triumph through the City as Conquerours of it
and the Parliament, and (as they often give out) of the whole Kingdom: terms
which they might have had from the great Turk, had he sat down before them and
broken ground.

All which was suddenly and dishonourably yielded to, and executed according,
by such an Army as was not able to fight with one half of the City, had they
been united: But they are the Devils seed-men, and have sown the Cockle of
Heresies and Scism, so abundantly in City and Country (especially amongst the
more beggarly sort) that these men joining Principles and interests with the
Army, weaken the hands of all opponents. They often brag that they made a civil
march, free from Plunder: I Answer, they neither durst nor could do otherwise:
their Soldiers being ill armed, and so few, that they were not able to keep
stands in the streets, and keep the Avenues while their Fellows dispersed to
Plunder. Charles 8. with a far greater, and more Victorious Host, durst not
offer violence to the far less^ City of Florence when Signior Capona put an
affront upon him in the Townhouse; Bidding him beat his drums, and he would
ring their Bells.

36. The fugitive Members returned.
Upon the 6. of August, 1647. The General brought the fugitive Speakers and
Members to the Houses with a strong Party, (who might have returned sooner
without a Guard, had not their own crimes and designs hindered them) the two
Palaces filled with armed guards, double Files clean through Westminster hall,
up the stairs to the House of Commons, and so through the Court of Requests to
the Lords House, and down stairs again into the old Palace. The Soldiers
looking scornfully upon many Members that had sat in the absence of the
Speaker, and threatening to cut some of their throats. And all things composed
to so ridiculous a terror, as if they would bespeak (without speaking) the
absence of those Members that sat; placed the Speakers in the Chairs without
Vote, out of which they had been justly Voted for deserting their calling;
where the General was placed in a Chair of State, (enough to make a fool of any
man that was not fit for it) and received special thanks for his service from
both Speakers. And in the second place, a day of thanksgiving was appointed to
God, (I think) for his patience in not striking these Atheistical Saints with
thunder and lightning for making him a stale to their premeditated villainies.

Here Sir Thomas Fairfax, with a breath (and before any man that was not privy
to the design could recover out of his amazement) was made Generalissimo of all
the Forces and Forts of England and Wales; to dispose of them at his pleasure:
Constable of the Tower of London. The common Soldiers Voted one months
gratuity, besides their pay (the Commons being in good case to give gifts
before they pay debts:) left to the discretion of the General to set what
Guards he pleased upon the two Houses. Whereby you may perceive in what unequal
condition those Members that did not run away with the Speaker, do now sit;
after so many reiterated threats of the General against them in his printed
Papers.

After this, the General, Lieutenant General, 37. The Armies march in Triumph
through the City: with other subsequent Acts.
Major General Skippon (heretofore Waggoner to Sir Francis Pere, and one that
has got well by serving the City) and the whole Army, with the Train of
Artillery, marched through London in so great pomp and Triumph, as if they
would have the People understand that the Authority of the Kingdom (in whose
hands soever it remains in these doubtful times) must submit to the power of
the Sword, the hilt and handle whereof they hold. They turn out the Lieutenant
of the Tower without cause shown. The consequences of these two actions were,
that immediately the City decayed in Trade above 200000 l. a week; and no more
bullion came to the Mint.

They displace all our Governors, though placed by Ordinance of Parliament,
and put in men of their own party; for this encroching faction will have all in
their own hands: they alter and divide the Militia of London, setting up
pa^ticular Militia's at Westminster, Southwark, and the Hamblets of the Tower,
that being so divided they may be the weaker: Demolish the Lines of
Communication, that the City and Parliament may lie open to Invasion when they
please, and fright many more Members from the Houses with threats, and fear of
false impeachments.

The 11. impeached Members, having leave by order of the House, and license of
the Speaker, some to go beyond Sea, and Anthony Nichols to go into his own
Country to settle his Affairs; Some of them (as Sir William Waller, and M. Den:
Hollis) were attacht upon the Sea, Nichols arrested upon the way into Cornwall
by the Army, and despightfully used. And when the General was inclined to free
him, Cromwell (whose malice is known to be as unquenchable as his Nose) told him
he was a Traitor to the Army. You see now upon whom they meant to fix the
peoples allegiance, (for where no allegiance is due, there can be no Treason)
and to what purpose they have since by their 4 Votes (first debated between the
Independent Grandees of the Houses and Army) laid aside the King, and (as much
as in them is) taken off our Allegiance from him.

Col. Birch formerly employed for Ireland by the Parliament, was imprisoned,
and his men mutinied against him by the Army, and Sir Sam. Luke resting quietly
in his own house, was there seized upon, and carried Prisoner into the Army.

All these Acts of terror were but so many scarecrowes set up to fright more
Presbyterians from the Houses, and make the Army masters of their Votes.

38. Proceedings of both Houses under the power of the Army.
I must in the next place fall upon the Proceeding in both Houses, acted under
the power and influence of this all-inslaving, all-devouring Army, and their
engaged party; to attain the knowledge whereof, I have used my utmost industry
and interest with many my near friends, and kinsmen sitting within those Walls,
heretofore (when Kings, 39. Ordinance to Null and Void all Acts passed in
absence of the 2 runagado Speakers.
not Brewers and Draymen, were in power) the walls of public Liberty.

The Lords that sat in absence of the two Speakers (all but the Earl of
Pembrook, whose easy disposition made him fit for all companies) found it
their safest course to forbear the House, leaving it to be possessed by those
few Lords that went to, and engaged with the Army: which engaged Lords sent to
the Commons for their concurrence to an Ordinance, To make all Acts, Orders,
and Ordinances, passed from the 26, July, (when the tumult was upon the Houses)
to the 6 of August following (being the day of the fugitive Members return)
Void and Null ab initio. This was five or six several days severally and fully
debated, as often put to the question, and carried in the Negative every time;
Yet the Lords still renewed the same message to them, beating back their Votes
into their throats, and would not acquiesce, but upon every denial put them
again to roll the same stone, contrary to the privileges of the Commons.

The chief Arguments used by the engaged party were all grounded upon the
Common places of fear and necessity: 40. Menaces used by the engaged party in
the House.
Mr. Solicitor threatening if they did not concur, the Lords were resolved to
vindicate the Honor of their House, and sit no more; they must have recourse
to the power of the Sword; The longest Sword take all. That they were all
engaged to live and die with the Army. They should have a sad time of it.
Haslerigge used the like language, farther saying, Some heads must fly off;
and he feared, the Parliament of England would not save the Kingdom of England,
they must look another way for safety. They could not satisfy the Army but by
declaring all void ab initio; and the Lords were so far engaged, that no middle
way would serve. To this was answered, That this was an appeal from the
Parliament to the Army. And when these and many more threats of as high nature
were complained of, as destructive to the liberty and beings of Parliaments,
the Speaker would take no notice of it. Sir Henry Vane junior, Sir John Evelin
junior, Prideaux, Gourdon, Mildmay, Thomas Scot, Cornelius Holland, and many
more, used the like threats.

Upon the last Negative (being the fifth or sixth) the Speaker perceiving
greater enforcements must be used) pulled a Letter out of his pocket, 41. A
threatening Remonstrance from the Army to the House.
From the General and General Council of the Army (for that was now their
style) pretending he then received it; But it was conceived he received it over
night, with directions to conceal it, if the question had passed the
affirmative. It was accompanied with a Remonstrance full of villainous language
and threats against those Members that sat while the two Speakers were with
the Army, calling them pretended Members, charging them (in general) with
Treason, Treachery, and breach of Trust; and protested, if they shall presume
to stir before they have cleared themselves, that they did not give their
assents to such and such Votes, they should sit at their peril, and he would
take them as prisoners of War, and try them at a Council of War.

What King of England ever offered so great a violence to the fundamental
Privileges of Parliament, as to deny them the Liberty of Voting I and No
freely? Certainly the little finger of a Jack Cade, or a Wat Tyler, is far
heavier than the loins of any King.

Many Members were amazed at this Letter, and it was moved, That the Speaker
should command all the Members to meet at the House the next day; and should
declare, That they should be secured from danger: And that it might be ordered,
That no more but the ordinary Guards should attend the house. But these two
motions were violently opposed with vollies of threats, by the aforesaid
Parties and others. And after more than two hours debate, the Speaker refused
to put any question upon them, or any of them; and so adjourned to the next
morning, leaving the Presbyterian Members to meet at their Peril.

The next day being Friday, the 20. August, there was a very thin Assembly in
the House of Commons; the House having with so much violence denied protection
to their Members the day before, made most of the Presbyterian party absent.
Some went over to the Independent party: others sat mute. At last a Committee
was appointed presently to bring in an Ordinance of Accommodation; which was
suddenly done and passed, and is now printed at the latter end of the said
menacing Remonstrance of the Army: a Child fit to wait upon such a Mother.

42. Debate in passing the Ordinance of null and void.
Thus was this Ordinance of null and void gotten (which has been the cause of
so much danger and trouble to multitudes of people) by the Lords reiterated
breaches upon the Privileges of the House of Commons; The engaged parties
threats within doors: The Armies thundering Letters and Remonstrance, Their
Guards upon their doors, and a Regiment or two of Horse in Hide Park, ready to
make impressions upon the House, in case things had not gone to their minds:
diverse of whose Commanders walking in the Hall, enquired often how things
went: protesting, they would pull them forth by the Ears if they did not give
speedy satisfaction.

Thus for the manner of passing that Ordinance.

The matter of Argument used against it was (as far as I can hear) to the
purpose following: It was alleged that the Force upon Monday, 26. July, ended
that day, that the next day being Tuesday, the House met quietly, and
adjourned: that upon Friday following, the Houses sat quietly all day, and
gave their Votes freely, and so forward; the City having sufficiently provided
for their security, that the transient force upon Monday, could have no
influence on the Houses for time to come.

That the Supreme power of no Nation can avoid their own Acts by pretended
force: this would make the Common people, the Jurors, and Judges, to question
all Acts done in Parliament, since one man can, and may judge of force as well
as another: this were to bring the Records of the House into dispute: Magna
Charta was never gotten nor confirmed but by Force: Force was threefold, upon
one, or both Houses; or upon the King, in giving his Royal assent; neither
could plead it: the Parliament is presumed to consist of such men as dare lay
down their lives for their Country.

When the King came with force to demand the 5. Members: When the City came
down crying for justice against the Earl of Stafford: When the Women came down
crying for Peace: When the Reformadoes came down in a much more dangerous
Tumult than this of the unarmed Apprentices; yet the Houses continued sitting
and acting, and none of their Acts were nullified.

That to make their Acts, Orders, and Ordinances void ab initio, would draw
many thousand men, who had acted under them, into danger of their lives and
fortunes, who had no Authority to dispute the validity of our Votes: we must
therefore give them power to dispute our Acts hereafter upon matter of fact;
for to tie men to unlimited and undisputable obedience to our Votes, and yet to
punish them for, obeying whenever we shall please to declare our acts void,
ab initio, is contrary to all reason. If to act upon such Ordinances were
criminal, it was more criminal in those that made them. And who shall be Judges
of those that made them? not the Members that went to the Army; They are
parties pre-ingaged to live and die with the Army; and have approved the Armies
Declaration, calling those that sat, a few Lords and Gentlemen, and no
Parliament: They have joined with a power out of the Houses to give a Law to,
and put an engagement upon both Houses, a president never heard of before, of
most dangerous consequence, it takes away the liberty of giving I and No
freely, being the very life of Parliaments: If all done under an actual force
be void, it it questionable whether all has been done this four or five years
be not void; and whether his Majesty's Royal assent to some good Bills passed
this Parliament, may not be said to have been extorted by force. If the Kings
party prevail, they will declare this Parliament void, upon the ground your
selves have laid. Fabian's History.
1. Hen. 7. that King urged the Parliament to make void ab initio, all Acts
passed Rich. 3. which they refused upon this ground, that then they should make
all that had acted in obedience to them liable to punishment, only they
repealed those Acts.

The debate upon this Ordinance of Null and Void, held from Monday, 9. of Aug.
to the 20. Aug. (when it was passed) but not without some interloaping debates
of something a different nature, yet all looking the same way; occasioned by
Messages from the Lords: 43. The Lords Message to the Commons to approve the
Declaration of the Army:
Namely, once upon a Message from them, The said Declaration from Sir Thomas
Fairfax and his Army, concerning their advance to London was read and debated
in gross, whether the Commons should concur with the Lords in approving it?
But almost all but the engaged party and their pensioners distasted it, it was
laid by without any question put, lest it should prove dangerous to put a
Negative upon their Masters of the Army. Yet many menaces (according to
custom) were used by the engaged party to get it passed: Haslerigge affirming
that those Gentlemen that sat and voted for a Committee of safety, and the
Kings coming to London, 44. The Committee of safety.
did drive on the design of the City Protestation and Engagement. To which was
answered, That the Committee of safety was not then newly erected by those
which sat, but of the old Committee, revived by that Vote, which had been long
since erected in a full and free Parliament, when the Army first mutined, and
threatened to march to London, and for the same ends, defense of Parliament and
City; and for the Kings coming to London, it was Voted only to get him out of
the power of the Army; as formerly in a full and free Parliament he had been
Voted to Richmond for the same reason.

Upon another Message from the Lords, 45. A Committee to Examine the Tumult.
the Commons concurred in an Ordinance to erect a Committee of Examination, to
inquire into, and examine the City Petition, Engagement, and the force upon the
Houses 26. July, and all endeavors to raise any forces, etc. This Committee
consisted of 22. Commons besides Lords, almost all of them Members engaged with
the Army: but because there were some three or four Presbyterians gotten in
amongst them, to shut these Canaanites forth, that the Godly, 46. A
Sub-committee of secrecy selected to examine the Tumult.
the true seed of Israel might shuffle the cards according to their own mind,
the 13. August after (upon another Message from the Lords) there was a
Sub-Committee of Secrecy, named out of this Grand Committee of Examinations, to
examine upon Oath; the persons were, the Earl of Denbigh, and Mulgrave, Lord
Gray of Wark, Lord Howard of Escrig, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Mr. Solicitor,
Gourdon, Miles Corbet, Alderman Penington, Allen, Edwards, Col. Ven, or any
three of them; all persons engaged to live and die with the Army, and now
appointed to make a clandestine scrutiny, and search into the lives and actions
of the Presbyterian Party that sat in Parliament doing their duty, when the
engaged Party fled to the Army, and brought them up in hostile manner against
them.

The unreasonableness of this way of proceeding was much urged, and farther
alleged, 47. Debate upon passing the Committee of Secret examinations
that it was neither consonant to the customs of the House, nor unto common
reason, that a Sub-committee should be chosen out of the Grand Committee of
Examinations, with more power then the Grand Committee it self had, and
excluding the rest of the Committee, under the pretense of Secrecy; Besides,
it was against the privilege of the House of Commons, that the Lords should
nominate the Commons in that Sub-committee as well as their own Members. But
the Independent Grandees would have it pass. Breach of Privilege and all other
considerations are easily swallowed when they are subservient to their present
designs.

48. The manner of prosecution and proceeding upon the Tumult.
The party engaged were resolved to be Examiners, Informers, and Witnesses, as
well as Parties; (so active was their malice) and had so well packed their
Cards, that eight or nine Schismatical Lords engaged likewise with them, and
the Army should be Judges of the Presbyterian Party that sat in absence of the
two Speakers, the better to give the two Houses a through Purge, and make them
of the same complexion with the Army: without which they had no hopes to divide
the power and profit of the Land between themselves by 10000 l. 20000 l. in a
morning shared amongst the Godly; and to make the whole Kingdom to be
Gibeonites, hewers of wood, and drawers of water to the faithful.

49. Miles Corbet makes report of Examinations taken at the Close Committee
First, against the Committee of Safety.
In order to the playing of this game, Miles Corbet (Interpreter to the
State-puppet play behind the curtain, commonly called The Close Committee of
Examinations) upon the 3. September, stood up and began his Report from that
Inquisition, saying, He would begin with the Committee of Safety, wherein many
Members were concerned, and it was necessary to purge the Houses first. But
further said, he would suppress the names of many of his Witnesses, because the
Depositions he should report were but preparatory Examinations, and it would be
for service of the State to conceal their names.

He first produced many Warrants signed at the Committee of Safety by the Earls
of Pembroke, Suffolk, Middlesex, Lincoln, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Maynard,
Mr. Hollis, Sir Phi. Stapleton, Sir Will. Waller, Mr. Long, Mr. Nichols, Sir
William Lewis, Mr. Baynton.

Against Master Baynton.
Next, Corbet reported, he had a Witness who deposed that a Gentleman with a Red
head had signed many Warrants, supposed to be Master Edward Baynton; at length
after much wyer-drawing of the business, one Warrant was shown to Master
Baynton, which he confessed to be his hand. And presently Haslerig moved that
Master Baynton might forthwith Answer; against which was objected, That since
these were but preparatory Examinations, not legal proofs, no man was bound to
Answer them; otherwise a man shall be but to as many several answers as several
new matters of Charge come in against him, and shall day by day be liable to
new vexations, and never know when he has cleared himself. But Corbet (who of
an examiner was now become the Kings Solicitor, or Advocate Criminal) moved to
proceed to Judgment against him: but first to ask him some preparatory
questions. But it was answered, that it was illegal to squeese examinations out
of a man's own mouth; neither was a man bound to answer, where his words may
condemn, but not absolve him: for so much as depends upon the testimony of
Witnesses against this Gentleman, you cannot proceed unless he be by, and have
liberty to put cross questions to the Witnesses. It is alleged, Warrants were
signed, and all done in relation to a new War. It is answered, it was done in
order to Self-defence (allowed by the Laws.) Long before this occasion, when
the Army first mutinied and threatened to march up to London, and use such
extraordinary means against the Parliament and City as God had put into their
hands, you then in a full and free Parliament appointed a Committee of Safety
for your defense, who sat and acted. This Committee was but the same revived,
and upon the like or worse threats and menaces, as by the many printed papers
from the Army will appear; you have no Testimony against this Gentleman by
name, but only a character of his Hair: and for signing the Warrant confessed
by himself he is acquitted by the Proviso of the Ordinance 20 August last,
which excepted only such as acted upon the force; but when the Committee of
Safety was revived, the Parliament was freer from force than it is now. Mr.
Baynton notwithstanding, was adjudged to be suspended the House during pleasure
of the House, which is as much as to say, So long as the Tyranny of this
Domineering Faction lasts.

The 4 of Sept. Corbet reported he had a Witness (but named him not, Against
Mr. Walker.
because they were but preparatory examinations) who deposed, that an elderly
Gentleman, of low stature, in a Gray suit, with a little stick in his hand,
came forth of the House into the Lobby when the tumult was at the Parliament
door, and whispered some of the Apprentices in the ear, and encouraged them,
(supposed to be Mr. Walker.) Mr. Walker denied he spoke then with any man in
the Lobby, or saw any face that he knew there; and so neglected the business as
a thing not considerable. But the next day Corbet moved that Mr. Walker might
be ordered to put on his Gray suit again, and appear before the Close
Committee, and the Witness, who says, he knows him again if he see him. I
hear Mr. Walker desired to know (seeing the Witness had not named him) by what
Authority the examiners should take such a Deposition, and make application
thereof to him; And seeing there were many Gentlemen in the House that day with
whom that Character agreed as well as with himself, why the Reporter did not
move that all to whom that Character was appliable might be put to that test as
well as himself, but single him out for a mark to shoot at; complaining, that
he was not ignorant out of what quiver this Arrow came: he had been threatened
with a revenge by some of that Close Committee, and had other Enemies amongst
them, that could bite without barking. He told them that yesterday Mr. Corbet
reported that the supposed old man whispered, etc. but desired those that were
then in the House to call to mind that the noise was then so great in the
Lobby, that no whisper, nay the loudest words he was able to speak could not be
heard. Then Corbet changed his Tale, saying, the words were, What you do, do
quickly; and were spoken aloud; and said the Character agreed best with Mr.
Walker, for that the Deponent said, the Gentleman was a Lean meager man.

Here Mr. Walker desired the House to take notice, that the Reporter had twice
varied his Report. 1 In the words spoken, from a whisper to loud speaking. 2 In
the Character enlarged with the words lean and meager. Here is haile-shot
provided, if one miss the other must hit; Yet with this addition, there were
diverse in the House with whom the Character agreed as well as with himself. And
by the incivility of his words, it should seem the Witness is a man of no
breeding; wherefore he desired to hear his name, that he might inquire of his
credit and repute. If the Reporter thinks he may be practiced, he does not
think him a man of honesty, and then he had more cause to suspect him. He
farther complained, that to make Hue and Cry after him (as it were upon fresh
suit) upon a Character of his person and clothes five or six weeks after the
supposed fact (he never having absented himself one day from the House)
savoured too much of a party overswayed with malice and revenge.

Your Close Committee of Examination carry on businesses so in the dark (being
parties engaged with the Army, and not sworn to be true in their office) that
no man can see how to defend himself, or how he is dealt with, or when he is
free from trouble and danger. It seems we are here called ex tempore to answer
for our lives, ore tenus; and our Accusation begins with the Examination of
our persons, to make us state a Charge against our selves, to betray our
selves, and cut our own throats with our tongues, contrary to Magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, and all those Laws of God and Man, which in the Kings time
were in use; and no Witnesses are produced, nor so much as named: methinks
therefore we are compelled to play at blind-man bough for our lives, not seeing
who strikes us. You have the most summary way of hanging one another that ever
I saw; it is a kind of Starchamber proceeding in matter of life and death; your
secret Examinations savours so much of the Spanish inquisition, and of the
Council of troubles erected by the Duke d' Alva in the Low Countries (called
Consilium Sanguinis) that they can never agree with the Laws and Nature of our
Nation: if our Kings shall imitate you hereafter, they will be the greatest
Tyrants in the World. Formalities and Privileges of Court, derogating from the
common Rules of Law, and practice of the Land, are but curtains drawn before
oppression and tyranny to dazzle men's eyes. Give me leave to tell you, that I
have served you faithfully from the beginning, and have taken as much pains,
and run as many hazards, as most men in your service, wherein I have lost my
health, and above 7000 l. of my Estate, without one penny compensation, as
other men have had; nor have I laid my hand upon any man's money or goods, or
had any gainful employment from you; I contented my self to serve my Country
gratis, and with some little honor I had gotten thereby, whereof you have now
robbed me, by a roaving Accusation shot at random at me. Had I cheated the
State of 40000 l. or 50000 l. peradventure I might have been thought a Godly,
confiding man, of right principles, and have had 10000 l. given me for my
pains. Sir, You have heard the voice of a Freeman (not of a slave) that dares
keep his first Principles, Religion, Laws, and just liberties, whosoever lays
them aside* and protest against Tyranny and oppression, wheresoever he finds
it, whether in the Government of one or many. You may murder me by the Sword of
Justice, but you cannot hurt me: but deliver me from the evils to come. Nor
shall I be unwilling to suffer a Jail-deliver of my Soul from the prison of my
body when I am called to it.

When Mr. Walker had done his defense, the debate followed much to this
purpose, That to order him to appear in his Gray suit before the Close
Committee and Witness was illegal, and against the Laws and Liberties of the
Subject.

1. It is to help another to accuse himself; which is all one as if he did
accuse himself.

2. To bid a Witness look upon a man (after he is engaged to name some body) is
to prompt him to go no farther than the party showed.

3. A Witness ought not to be twice examined against a man, that is, to draw
him on by degrees to swear home, and to mend in his second Deposition what fell
short in his first.

4. If the Witness depose to the matter, not naming the party, and five or six
weeks after declare the Person without Oath, this is no Deposition, and if the
Oath be renewed, the Witness is twice examined: So the business was laid by,
and Corbet allowed to show Mr. Walker casually as he could meet with him to his
Witness, which was (in a manner) to draw dry-foot after him with his
blond-hound.

I was the more curious in gathering the circumstances of this business out of
the reports of many several men, in regard of the rareness of the case, and the
exquisitness of the malice with which it was prosecuted. And it seemed to me
the more admirable, because I hear generally that Mr. Walker has always been
opposite to all parties and factions, both Presbyterian and Independent, upon
whom he looks as the common disturbers both of Church and Commonwealth, and
enemies of peace. Nor could he ever be persuaded to be at any of their Junto's
or secret meetings; and therefore it is not probable he should suddenly and in
the open view of the House go forth and engage with a company of silly unarmed
Apprentice Boys. But I hear they cannot endure his severity, nor he their
knavery. What will not the malice of a desperate Anabatistical faction attempt?
they have long sported in the blood and treasure of the Land, as the Leviathan
does in the Waters; and do now keep up a numerous Army to carry on those
designs by force, which they can no longer make good by fraud. All England is
become as Munster was, and our Grandees suitable to John of Leyden and
Knipperdoling.

The next report Corbet made concerning Mr. Recorder Glyn. Against Mr. Recorder
Glyn.
The chief things objected were, That he had frequented the Common Council, the
Committees of the Militia, and Safety, more than he was want to do: That he was
silent and made no opposition; and that he gave thanks to the Apprentices when
they delivered their Petition to the City, offering their help for defense
thereof against whomsoever.

The Recorder answered, The Charge was long, and his Memory short: He desired
time to examine his memory, concerning the circumstances of time, place,
persons and other matters; and that he might examine Witnesses for clearing his
innocence. But his prosecutors (hoping to do more good upon him by way of
Surprise, than in a deliberate and legal way of proceeding) put him upon it to
answer ex tempore. He confessed and avoided some things, but denied the most
material. He denied he was more frequent at their meetings than ordinary. For
his silence, he alleged, he was but the Cities servant, and had no voice
amongst them, but when his opinion was demanded: That he gave thanks to the
Apprentices as a servant by command, yet had mixed some admonitions and
reprehensions in his Speech to them.

So the Recorder withdrew. And presently Haslerig (according to his custom)
moved judgment might be given against him. To which was answered, that the
Recorder denied the principal parts of his Charge; and offered proofs by
Witnesses: you must give him that leave, or take all parts of his speech for
granted; as well that makes for him, as against him. Two or three days more
will make this business ripe for judgment: let him have one judgment for all.
If you judge him now to be expelled the House, he is already fore judged, and
that will be a leading case to a farther judgment: for who dares acquit where
you have condemned? A man ought to be but once judged upon one accusation. The
dishonor of expulsion is a punishment exceeding death. If you judge now upon
one part of the Accusation, and hereafter upon another part of the Accusation,
he will be twice condemned upon one Accusation, and shall never know when he
has sati fied the Law, an endless vexation.

Yet Haslerig moved he might receive judgment now, for what was already proved
or confessed, to be expelled the House, (saying, The Lords went on without
obstruction in their businesses, because they had purged their House) and that
he might be farther impeached hereafter upon farther hearing. So he was
adjudged to be discharged the House, committed to the Tower, and farther
impeached hereafter.

Against S John Maynard.
Sir John Maynnrd the same day was called to Answer. He desired a copy of his
Charge, with leave to Answer in writing by advice of Counsel, as the 11.
Members formerly did; to examine Witnesses on his part, and cross examine their
Witnesses. But these requests were denied, and he commanded to Answer ex
tempore. He gave no particular Answer, but denied all in general: as Col. Pride
(whom he cited for his president) had formerly done at their Bar. He was
adjudged to be discharged the House, committed to the Tower, and farther
impeached.

The like for Commissary General Copley, whose case differed little.

Against the 7. Lords.
The 8. of Sept. the Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, Middlesex, the Lords Berkley,
Willioughby, Hunsdon, and Maynard, were impeached of High Treason in the name
of the Commons of England, for leavying War against the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom. The Earl of Pembroke (then sent to Hampton Court with the Propositions
on purpose to avoid the storm) was omitted until Wednesday following, and so
had the favor to be thought not worth remembering.

Sir John Evelin the younger sent up to the Lords with the Impeachment, and a
desire they might be committed. They were committed to the Black Rod; and so
the engaged Lords had their House to themselves according to their desires.

50. Schismatical Petitions.
The 14. Sept. A Petition from diverse Schismatics in Essex came to the Houses,
bearing this Title, To the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, distinct
from the Lords and Commons that sat in absence of the two Speakers.

16. Sept. a Petition from diverse Sectaries of Ox fordshi. Bucks. Berksh. was
delivered to the House against diverse Members sitting in the House, Enemies to
God and Godliness, Enemies to the Kingdom, etc. Usurpers of Parliamentary
authority, who endeavored to bring in the King upon his own Terms. They
desired a free Parliament, and that (according to the desires of the Army)
those that sat when the Parliament was suspended in absence of Tithes, etc. in
it. Such another Petition came but the day before from Southwark.

These Petitions were all penned by the engaged party of the Houses and Army,
The aim of these Petitions.
and sent abroad by Agitators to get subscriptions. The design was to put the
two parties in the House into heights one against another, to make the lesser
party in the House ( viz. the engaged party, but 59.) to expel the greater
party, being about 140. whereby the House might be low and base in the opinion
of the people, and no Parliament, and so leave all to the power of the Sword.
The Army daily recruiting, and thereby giving hopes to all loose people, that
the Army should be their common Receptacle, as the sea is the common Receptacle
of all waters, because those who had no hopes to be Members of Parliament,
might become Members of this Army. Besides their plausible way of prompting the
people to Petition against Tithes, Enclosures, and Copyhold fines uncertain,
was to encourage them to side with the Army against all the Nobility, Gentry,
and Clergy of the Land, (from whom the Army did most fear an opposition) and to
destroy Monarchy it self; since it is impossible for any Prince, to be a King
only of Beggars, Tinkers, and Cobblers.

But these interlopping discourses omitted, Against the Lord Major Aldermen and
Citizens.
let us again return to these prodigious Impeachments. The next in order comes
in the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens, with whom short work was made.
Impeachments were sent to the Lords against them, and they sent to the Tower
upon a bare report of the Inquisitor-general Corbet, and the reading of some
depositions, the Witnesses names for the most part concealed, and none of them
so much as called to the Commons Bar, to see what they could say for
themselves; contrary to Magna Charta, 29. chapter and contrary to 28. Edw. 3.
enacting, That no man shall be put out of his Land, etc. nor taken, nor
Imprisoned, etc. or put to death, etc. without being brought to answer by due
process of Law. That is, according to the Stat. 42. Ed. 3. c. 3. That no man be
brought to answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or
by due process, or writ o^iginal according to the old Law of the Land: not
according to new invented Articles of Impeachment, but according to those Laws
that were well known, and old in Edw. 3. time: See Stat. 37. Ed. 3. 1. Ed. 6.
chapter 12. 6. Ed. 6. c. 11. and the Stat. 25. E. 3. says, No man shall be taken
by Petition or suggestion made to the King or his Counsel, etc. and the House
of Peers is no more but the Kings Counsel, as anon I shall make evident.

51. Arguments against impeachments before the Lords.
It was moved by diverse, that these Gent. might be tried according to Law at the
Kings Bench, by a Jury of twelve men de vicineto, their Peers and Equals to
judge of matter of fact: alleging that the Common Law was the Birthright of all
the free People of England: which was one of the 3. Principles for which the
Parliament so often declared in print that they fought, and for defense whereof
they had entered into a covenant, with their hands lifted up to God: the other
two principles were Religion and L^berties.

1. The Lords were not Peers to the Commoners: At the common Law they shall
have sworn Judges for matter of Law, of whom they may ask questions in
doubtful points, nor can they be Judges in their own cases.

2. They have sworn Jurors of the Neighborhood for matter of fact, whom they
may challenge.

3. The known Laws and Statutes for Rules to judge by, which in case of Treason
in the Stat. 25. Ed. 3. you cannot Vote nor declare a new Treason: And if you
could, to do it Ex post facto, is contraty to all rules of justice: The Apostle
says, sin is a breach of a Commandment (or Law) I had not known sin but by the
Law: the Law therefore must go before the Sin.

4. At the Common Law, They have Witnesses openly and newly examined upon Oath
before the accused's face, who may except against them and cross examine them.

5. Even in Star Chamber and Chancery (where only hearings are upon
Testimonies) the Examiners are sworn Officers.

6. A man has but one Trial and Judgment upon one accusation: so that he knows
when he has satisfied the Law.

In this way of proceeding, all these necessary legalities are laid by; and
these Gentlemen have not so much fair play for their Lives and Estates, as
Naboth had for his Vineyard: he had all the formalities of the Law; yea, he had
Law it self; yet he had not justice, because they were the sons of Belial that
were set before him: what shall we conceive these Witnesses are that do not
appear? nay, whose very names are concealed? yet Naboth was murdered by the
sword of Justice: for the honor of Parliaments give not the people cause to
suspect these Gentlemen shall be so too: non recurrendum ad extraordinaria,
quando fieri potest per ordinaria.

But all this was but to charm a deaf Adder: 52. Arguments proving the Lords to
have no power of Judicature over the Commons.
the nine or ten engaged Lords that then possessed the House, were thought to
be fitter than a Jury of Middlesex to make work for the hangman, and yet they
have no Judicature over the Commons, as appears by the President of Sir Simon
de Berisford, William Talboys, and the City of Cambridge. Note that one
president against the Jurisdiction of a Court is more valued than a hundred for
it: because the Court cannot be supposed ignorant of the Law, and its own
rights; but a particular man or Client may: see Sir John Maynard's Royal
quarrel, and his Laws subversion, Lieutenant Col. Lilburn's Whip for the
present House of Lords, and Judge Jenkins Remonstrance to the Lords and Commons
of the two Houses of Parliament, dated 21 Feb. 1647. As for the cases of
Weston, Gomenes, and Hall, (cited by Mr. Pryn) they were for facts done beyond
Sea, and before the Stat. 1. Hen. 4. chapter 14. whereof the Common Law could then
have no connusance, and therefore an extraordinary way of proceeding before the
Lords was requisite, and by the Kings special authority it was done, without
which (I dare boldly affirm) the Lords have no Judicature at all; which thus I
make appear.

1. The King by delivering the Great Seal to the Lord Keeper, 53. The House of
Peers no Court of Judicature at all properly and per se.
makes him Keeper of his conscience for matter of equity; By His Brevia
patentia to the Judges of the two Benehes and the Exchequer, the King makes
them administrators and interpreters of his Laws: But he never trust any but
himself with the power of pardoning and dispensing with the rigor of the Law in
Criminal cases. And though the Lord Keeper is Speaker of the Lords House of
course, yet he is no Member of the Lords House virtute Officii: the Judges are
not Members, but assistants only: so that no man in the House of Peers, as he
is simply a Peer, is trusted by the King either with dispensation of Law, or
Equity.

2. When a Peer of Parliament, or any man else is tried before the Lords in
Parliament criminally, he cannot be tried by his Peers only, because in acts of
judicature there must be a Judge Superior, who must have his inferiors
ministerial to him: therefore in the trial of the Earl of Strafford (as in all
other trials upon life and death, in the Lords House) the King grants his
Commission to a Lord high Steward to sit as Judge, and the rest of the Lords
are but in the nature of Jurors. So that it is the Kings Commission that
Authoriseth and Distinguishes them.

3. When a Writ of Error issues out of the Chancery to the House of Peers,
they derive their Authority merely from that Writ.

For the three Reasons aforesaid, the House of Peers is no Court of Judicature,
without the Kings special Authority granted to them, either by his Writ, or his
Commission; and the Lords by their four Votes having denied all further address
or application to the King, have cut off from themselves that fountain from
which they derived all their power; and all trials by Commission must be upon
Bills or Acts of Attainder, not by Articles of Impeachment, a way never heard
of before this Parliament, and invented to carry on the designs of a restless
impetuous faction: Had the Faction had but so much wit as to try the Gentlemen
by Commission of Oyer* and Terminer, before Sergeant Wild, he would have
borrowed a point of Law to hang a hundred of them for his own preferment.

Observe, that almost all the cases cited by Mr. Pryn concerning the Peers
trials of Commissioners were Authorized by the King upon the special instance
of the House of Commons; as for the House of Commons, they never pretended to
any power of Judicature, and have not so much Authority as to Administer an
Oath, which every Court of Pye-Poulders has.

54. Blank Impeachments dormant.
But this way of trial before the pre-ingaged Lords, and upon Articles of
Impeachment, (which they keep by them of all sorts and sizes fit for every man,
as in Birchin-lane they have suits ready made to fit every body) was the apter
means to bring men to death, whom they feared living, had not a doubt of the
Scots coming in taught them more moderation than their nature is usually
acquainted with; and to fright away, (at least) put to silence the rest of the
Members with fear of having their names put in blank Impeachments; and that it
might be so apprehended, Miles Corbet moved openly in the House of Commons that
they should proceed with the Impeachments which were ready, nothing wanted but
to fill up the Blanks, they might put in what names they pleased. This
Inquisitor General, this Prologue to the Hangman, that looks more like a
Hangman than the Hangman himself, has since gotten a rich office of Register
of the Chancery, as a reward for his double diligence: Oh Sergeant Wild and Mr.
Steel despair not of a reward.

Friday 27 Sep.t the advice of Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Council of War was
read in the House of Commons, 55. Establishment for the Army.
What standing forces they ought to keep up in England and Wales, and what
Garrisons; also what forces to send for Ireland; namely, for Ireland, 6000
foot, and 2400 horse, out of the supernumerary loose forces, being no part of
the Army; and for England, upon established pay 18000 foot at 8 d. per diem.
7200 horse at 2 s. per diem each Trooper, 1000 Dragoons, and 200 Fire locks,
Train of Artillery, Arms and Ammunition, to be supplied. The foot to be kept in
Garrisons, yet so that 6000 may be readily drawn into the Field*

The Independent party argued, that the Army were unwilling to go for Ireland,
pretending their engagement to the contrary; If you divide or disband any part
of your Army, they will suspect you have taken up your old resolution against
them, to disband the whole Army: it is now no time to discontent them, when the
Kings Answers to your Propositions tend to divide you and your Army, and the
people are generally disaffected to you.

The Presbyterian Party argued, that the engagement of the Army ought to be no
rule to the Counsels of the Parliament; otherwise new engagements every day may
prescribe the Parliament new Rules; we must look two ways. 1 Upon the people
unable to bear the burden. 2. Upon the Army. Let us keep some power in our own
hands, and not descend so far below the dignity of a Parliament, as to put all
into the hands of the General and his Council of War. You have almost given
away all already. The Army advises you to keep up your Garrisons, then upon
mature deliberation this House formerly Voted: you have already made Garrisons
manned with gallant and faithful men, to whom you owe Arrears; to remove them,
and place new Soldiers in their rooms, will neither please them, nor the
places where they are quartered, who being acquainted with their old guests,
will not willingly receive new in their rooms. These men have done you as good
and faithful service as any in the Army; and were ready to obey you and go for
Ireland, had they not been hindered by those, who under pretense of an
engagement to the contrary (which they mutinously entered into) will neither
obey you, nor go for Ireland, nor suffer others to go. Though you discharge
these men without paying their Arrears, (which others of ^ther principles will
not endure) yet give them good words. If you will be served by none, but such
as are of your new principles; yet consider your Army are not all alike
principled. and peradventure the old principles may be as good as the new for
public, though not so fit for private designs and purposes. You have passed an
Ordinance, That none that have born Arms against the Parliament shall be
employed: if you disband all such, your Army will be very thin; many have
entered into pay there in order to do the King service, and bring the Parliament
low. There is no reason you should keep up 1400 horse more than you last voted
to keep up, being but 5800 at which time 60000 l. a Month was thought an
establishment sufficient both for England and Ireland. But now the whole charge
of England and Ireland will amount to 114000 l. a month, which must be raised
upon the people, either directly and o^enly by way of sessement, or indirectly
and closely, partly by sessements, and partly by free quarter and other
devices: nor will the pay of 2 s. per diem to each Trooper, and 8 d. to each
foot Soldier enable them to pay their quarters. If you mean to govern by the
Sword, your Army is too little: if by the Laws and justice of the Land, and
love of the people, your Army is too great: you can never pay them, which will
occasion mutinies in the Army and ruin to the Country. Thus disputed the
Presbyterians, but to no purpose, it was carried against them.

Observe that when the War was at the highest, the monthly tax came but to
54000 l. yet had we then the Earl of Essex's Army, Sir William Waller's, My
Lord of Denbigh's, M. Genesis Poyntz's, M. Genesis Massey's, Maj. Genesis Laughorn's,
Sir William Brereton's, Sir Th. Middleton's Brigades, and other forces in the
field, besides Garrisons.

But now this Army has 60000 l. a month, 56. Monthly taxes.
and 20000 l. a month more pretended for Ireland; which running all through the
fingers of the Committee of the Army,

That Kingdom (which is purposely kept in a starving condition to break the Lo.
Inchequins Army, 57. Ireland why kept in a starving condition.
that Ireland may be a receptacle for the Saints, against England spews them
forth) has nothing but the envy of it, the sole benefit going to this Army.
This 20000 l. a month being a secret unknown to the common Soldiers, the
Grandees of the Army put it in their own purses.

Moreover, this Army has still a kind of free quarter, (under color of
lodging, fire and candle,) for who sees not that these masterless guests upon
that interest continued in our houses, do and will become Masters of all the
rest? and who dares ask money for quarter of them, or accept it when it is
colourably offered, without fear of farther harm? besides, the Army, (whose
requests are now become Commands) demanded that they might have the leavying of
this Tax, and that their accounts might be audited at the Headquarters; and
though the Officers of this Army (to catch the peoples affections) encouraged
them often to Petion the Houses against Free Quarter, pretending they would
forbear it, after an establishment settled upon them; the use their party in the
House made of these Petitions, was to move for an Addition of 20000 l. or 30000
l. a month, and then they should pay their quarters, lodging, fire and candle,
nay stable-room too excepted.

Here it is not amiss to insert a word or two of this villainous oppression,
Free Quarter; 58. Free Quarter.
whereby we are reduced to the condition of conquered Slaves, no man being
Master of his own Family, but living like Bondslaves in their own Houses,
under these Egyptian Taskmasters, who are spies and intelligencers upon our
words and deeds, so that every man's table is become a snare to him. In the
third year of King CHARLES, the Lords and Commons in their Petition of Right
(when not above 2000. or 3000. Soldiers were thinly quartered upon the people
but for a month or two) complained thereof to his Majesty as a great grievance,
contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and humbly prayed as their
right and Liberty, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, that he
would remove them, and that his people might not be so burchened in time to
come, which his Majesty graciously granted. Yet now we are ten thousand times
more oppressed with them, and if these quarterers offer violence or villainous
usage to any man in his house or family, or commit murder or felony, they are
protected against the Laws and Justice of the Land, and Triable only by a
Council of War at the Headquarters, where a man can neither obtain justice,
nor seek it with safety. 59. Martial Law.
So that we live under the burden of a perpetual Army of 30000. or 40000. men,
exempt from all but Martial Law, which frequently oppresses, seldom righteth
any man: witness Oliver Cromwell's taking of Tompson (being no Soldier) from
the House of Commons door with Soldiers, imprisoning and condemning him at a
Council of War, where he sat Judge in his own cause, there being a quarrel
between them; yet it was held Treason in the Earl of Strafford, to condemn the
Lord of Valentia so, being a Member of his Army, because it was in time of
Peace, as this was. Many other examples we have of the like nature, and of this
Army, enough to persuade us, that these vindicative Saints will not govern by
the known Laws of the Land, (for which they have made us spend our money and
blood) but by Martial Law, and Committee Law, grounded upon Arbitrary
Ordinances of Parliament, which themselves in the first part of exact
Collections, p. 727. confess, are not laws without the Royal assent.

This Army has been daily recruited without any Authority, far beyond the said
number or pay established; the supernumeraries living upon free quarter; and
when complaints have been made thereof in the House, the Army being quartered
in several Brigades, supernumeraries have been disbanded in one brigade, and
their Arms taken by their Officers, 60. Cheats put upon the State.
and shortly after they have been listed again in another Brigade, and their
Arms sold again to the State, after a while to new Arm them. And of this sort
were those Arms which being found in a Magazin in Town by some Zealots, and
rumoured to belong to the City for the arming of Reformado's, were upon
examination found to belong to Oliver Cromwell: so the business was buried in
silence; for though the Kings over sights must be tragically published to the
world, yet the heinous crimes of the godly must lie hid under the mask of
Religion.

And though they have usually taken free quarter in one place, 61. Arrears
secured although the State ows them nothing.
and taken Composition money for free quarter in another place, some of them in
two or three places at once 3 s. a day, some of them 5 s. for a Trooper, and 1
s a day, and 1 s. 6 d. for a foot soldier, whereby no arrears are due to them,
but they owe money to the State, yet they have compelled the Houses to settle
upon them for pretended Arrears.

1. The moity of the Excise (that they may have the Soldiers help in leavying
it; although to flatter the peope, the Army had formerly declared against the
Excise.)

2. The moity of Goldsmiths-hall.

3. Remainder of Bishops Lands.

4. The Customs of some Garrisons.

5. Forest Lands.

This Army brags They are the Saviors (nay Conquerours) of the Kingdom. Let
them say when they saved it, whether at the Fight at Nazeby, or taking in of
Oxford, and we will pay them according to the then list. And for all the
recuits taken in since the reducing of Oxford, it is fit they be disbanded
without pay, having been taken in without, nay, against Authority, to drive on
wicked designs, and enthrall King, Parliment, City, and Kingdom.

24. December. 1647. The two Houses by their Commissioners presented to the King
(at Carisbrook-Castle) 4. 62: 4. Dethroning Bills presented to the King at
Carisbrook Castle.
Bills to be passed as Acts of Parliament, and diverse Propositions to be
assented to. They are all printed, so is his Majestis Answers to them,
wherefore I shall need to say the less of them, only a word or two to two of
the Bills.

1. The Act for raising, settling, 63. Acts for the Militia.
and maintaining Forces by Sea and Land, within the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, Wales, etc. (though it seems to be but for 20. years) devests the
King, his Heirs, and Successors, of the power of the Militia for ever, without
hope of recovery but by repealing the said Act, which will never be in his nor
in their power: for,

First, it says, That neither the King, nor His Heirs, or Successors, nor any
other, shall exercise any power over the Militia by land or sea, but such as
shall Act by authority and approbation of the said Lords and Commons: That is,
a Committee of State of twenty or thirty Grandees, to whom the two Houses shall
transfer this trust, being overawed by the Army, (for the groundwork of this
Committee was laid by these words, though the Committee be erected since.)

And Secondly, it prohibiteh the King, His Heirs and Successors, etc. after the
expiration of the said 20. years, to exercise any of the said powers without
the consent of the said Lords and Commons, and in all cases wherein the said
Lords and Commons shall declare the safety of the Kingdom to be concerned after
the said 20. years expired, and shall pass any Bills for raising, Arming, etc.
Forces by Land or Sea, or concerning Leavying of Money, etc. if the Royal
assent to such Bills shall not be given by such a time, etc. then such Bills so
passed by the Lords and Commons shall have the force of Acts of Parliament
without the Royal assent. Lo, here a foundation laid to make an Ordinance of
both Houses equal to an Act of Parliament, and take away the King's Negative
Voice, if this be granted in one case, it will be taken in another, and then
these subverters of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, will turn their
usurpations into a legal Tyranny.

2. It gives an unlimited Power to the two Houses to raise what Forces and what
numbers for Land and Sea, and of what persons (without exceptions) they please,
and to employ them as they shall judge fit.

3. To raise what Money they please for maintaining them, and in what sort they
think fit, out of any man's Estate. This is a Tax far more Arbitrary and
unlimited than Ship Money, and the more terrible because it depends upon the
will and pleasure of a multitude; who to support their own tyranny, and
satisfy their own hunger after other men's goods, may and do create a
necessity, and then make that necessity the law and rule of their actions and
our sufferings: besides, they are but our fellow subjects that usurp this
Dominion over us, which aggravates the indignity. If the 24 Conservators of the
Peace in Hen. 3. time, were thought a burden to the Commons, and called totidem
tyranni; what will our Grandees prove when the Power of the sword is theirs by
Act of Parliament? Besides, if the King give them his Sword, they may take all
the rest of the Propositions demanded without a Treaty.

The Bill for adjournment of both Houses to any other place, etc. 64. Bill for
adjournment of the Parliament as well for Place as time.
will enable the engaged Party of the two Houses and Army to adjourn the two
Houses from time to time, to, or near the Headquarters of the Army; where those
Members that refuse to enter into the same Engagement, shall neither sit with
accommodation nor safety, and so be shaken off at last: this is a new way of
purging the Houses. Besides, the Parliament following the motions of the Army,
the King shall follow the Parliament, whereby the Army having both King and
Parliament present with them, whatsoever attempt shall be made against the
Army, shall be said to be against the safety and Authority of the King and
Parliament, and a legal Treason, triable by Indictment, not a constructive
Treason only triable before the Lords.

Note this Message to the King, plus significat quam loquitur, though it
holds forth but four Demands to open view, yet it includes five; for, if the
King pass these four Bills, as Acts of Parliament, either he must do it by his
Personal Presence in the House of Peers, or by His Commission under the Great
Seal; and so consequently must confirm the Parliaments Great Seal, and all
things done by it, (to the nullifying His own Great Seal at Oxford.) His
personal presence they will not admit; for, though they pretended heretofore
they toook up Arms to bring the King to his Parliament, yet now they continue
in Arms to keep Him from His Parliament, lest the presence of the true Sun
should obscure such Meteors, and Ignes fatni, as they are. Though this may be
Godly and Saint-like dealing, yet it is not plain nor fair dealing, latet
anguis in herba, there is Coloquintida, nay death in the pot. 65. The Kings
answer debated.


Monday 3 Jan. the Kings Answer to the said Bills and Propositions was debated
in the House of Commons. And first, Sir Thomas Wroth (Jack-Pudding to Prideaux
the Postmaster) had his cue to go high, and feel the pulse of the House; who
spoke to this purpose, That Bedlam was appointed for madmen, and Tophet for
Kings: that our Kings of late had carried themselves as if they were fit for no
place but Bedlam: that his humble motion should consist of three parts.

1 To secure the King, and keep him close in some inland Castle with sure
guards.

2 To draw up Articles of Impeachment against him.

3 To lay him by, and settle the Kingdom without him; he cared not what form of
Government they set up, so it were not by Kings and Devils.

Ireton's speech.
Then Commissary Ireton (seeming to speak the sense of the Army, under the
notion of many thousand Godly men who had ventured their lives to subdue their
enemies) said after this manner, The King had denied safety and protection to
his people by denying the four Bills; that subjection to him was but in liers of
his protection to his people; this being denied, they might well d^ny any more
subjection to him, and settle the Kingdom without him: That it was now
expected, after so long patience, they should show their Resolution, and not
desert those valiant men who had engaged for them be and all possibility of
retreat, and would never forsake the Parliament, unless the Parliament forsook
them first.

After some more debate, when the House was ready for the question, Cromwell's
Speech.
Cromwell brought up the rear, and giving an ample Character of the valor, good
affections, and godliness of the Army, argued; That it was now expected the
Parliament should govern and defend the Kingdom by their own power and
resolutions, and not teach the people any longer to expect safety and
government from an obstinate man, whose heart God had hardened: That those men
who had defended the Parliament from so many dangers with the expense of their
Blood, would defend them herein with fidelity and courage against all
opposition. Teach them not by neglecting your own and the Kingdoms safety (in
which their own is involved) to think themselves betrayed, and left hereafter
to the rage and malice of an irreconcilable enemy whom they have subdued for
your sake; and therefore are likely to find His future Government of them
insupportable, and fuller of Revenge than Justice, lest despair teach them to
seek their safety by some other means than adhering to you, who will not stick
to your selves; and how destructive such a resolution in them will be to you
all, I tremble to think, and leave you to judge.

Observe, he laid his hand upon his Sword at the latter end of his speech; that
Sword that which by his side could not keep him from trembling when S. Philip
Stapleton baffled him in the House of Commons.

This concluding Speech having something of menace in it, was thought very
prevalent with the House.

The first of the four questions being put, 66. The 4 Bills for no addresses nor
applications passed.
That the two Houses should make no more Address^s nor Applications to the
King; the House of Commons was divided, 141 yeas, to 91 noes, so it was carried
in the Affirmative.

The other three Votes followed these Vote with facility: See them in print.
Upon the last of these 4 Votes the House was divided, and candles were Voted to
be brought it only to tell the House; yet (contrary to the said Order) when the
candles were in they proceeded farther, as follows:

The Members had been locked into the House of Commons from before nine of the
clock in the morning to seven at night, 67. The Committee of Safety revived.
and then the doors were unlocked, and what Members would, suffered to go
forth, whereby many Presbyterians thinking the House had been upon rising,
departed, when presently (the House being grown thin) the Vote to revive the
Committee of both Kingdoms called the Committee of safety at Darby-house,
passed by Ordinance dated 3 Jan. 1647. in these words; Resolved, etc. That the
powers formerly granted by both Houses to the Committee of both Kingdoms, (viz.
England and Scotland) in relation to the two Kingdoms of England and Ireland,
be now granted and vested in the Members of both Houses only that are of that
Committee, with power to them alone, to put the same in execution. The original
Ordinance that first erected this Committee, and to which this said Ordinance
relates, bears date 7 February 1643. in which the English Committees were
appointed from time to ti^e, to propound to the Scottish Commissioners
whatsoever they should receive in charge from both Houses, and to ^ake report
to both Houses, to direct the managing of the War, and to keep good
correspondency with foreign States, and to receive directions from time to time
from both Houses, and to continue for three months and no longer. But this
Ordinance, 3 January 1647. vests the said power in the Members thereof only,
and alone: words excluding the two Houses; and for a time indefinite. The
Members of this Committee are now, the E. of Northumberland, Robert E. of
Warwick, the E. of Kent, Ed. E. of Manchester, Will. L. Say and Seal. Phil. L.
Wharton, Jo. L. Roberts, Will. Pierrepoint, Sir Hen. Vane sen. Sr. Gilbert G
rrard, Sr. Will Armine, Sr. Ar. Haslerig. Sr. Hen Vane jun. Jo. Crew, Rob.
Wallope, Oliver St. John's, Sol. O. Cromwell, St. Brown, Natha. Fiennes, Sr. Jo.
Evelin. jun.
There were then added to this Committee, Nathaniel Fiennes, in place of Sir
Phil. Stapleton; Sir John Evelin junior, in place of M. Recorder; and the Earl
of Kent, instead of the Earl of Essex. 22 Jan. following, the Lords sent down a
Message for a farther power to this Committee, which was granted in these
words, Power to suppress Tumults and Insurrections in England, etc. and at
Barwick; and for that purpose the Committee to have power to give Orders and
Directions to all the Militia and Forces of the Kingdom. The addition of four
Lords and eight Commoners likewise to this Committee was desired, but denied.

68. Whitehall and the Mews Garrisoned.
Friday 14 January, after a long debate, it was ordered that Sir Lewis Dives,
Sir John Stowel, and David Jenkins, be tried as Traitors at the Kings Bench;
the Grand Jury had found the Bill against Jenkins. Mr. Solicitor, etc.
appointed to manage this business, See Judge Jenkins's Remonstrance to the
Lords and Commons of Parliament, 21. Feb. 1647.
but Jenkins is so great a Lawyer, that the Solicitor durst not venture upon
him, the long sword being more powerful in his mouth than the Law; wherefore
the Solicitor found an Error in the indictment, turned him back again upon the
House to be impeached before the Lords, to whose Jurisdiction he pleaded: so
the Solicitor put the affront from himself upon the Houses. It was now twelve
of the clock, and many of the Independent party began to cry, Rise, rise; The
Presbyterians thinking all had been done, many went to Dinner, yet the
Independents sat still, and finding the House for their turn, moved, That a
Letter might be forthwith sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax, to send a convenient
number of Foot to Garrison White Hall, and a party of Horse to quarter in the
Mews. The Lords concurrence was not desired to this Vote, but the Letters
immediately drawn and sent.

Observe, that before this Vote passed, diverse forces were upon their March
toward the Town, and came to White Hall Saturday following by eight of the
Clock in the morning.

Saturday 15. Jan. The Army sent a Declaration to the House of Commons,
Thanking them for their 4. Votes against the King, 69. The Armies Declaration,
thanking the Commons for their 4. Votes. 70. The Lords pass the 4. Votes.
promising them to live and die with the Commons, in defense of them against
all Opponents.

Many of the Lords had argued very hotly against the said four Votes, insomuch
that it was 10. Lords to 10. but this engagement of the Army, and the
unexpected garrisoning of White Hall, and the Mews, turned the scales; so that
they passed the said 4. Votes, only adding a short preamble (little to the
purpose) holding forth some reasons for passing them, to which the Commons,
when they came down, assented. When presently (about twelve of the clock the
House being thin) Dennis Bond moved, That whosoever should act against those 4.
Votes, or incite other to act against them, should be imprisoned and sequestered.

Three or four days after the Lords had passed the said 4. Votes, 71. The Army
thanks the Lords.
the Army vouchsafed to spit thanks in their mouths, and make much of them.
These 4. Votes were generally sinisterly taken, and filled men's minds with
suspicion, what form of Government the Grandees would set up, now they had laid
by the King; and every man's mind presaged a new War, which they conceived the
Independent Grandees were willing to have, to color their keeping up this
Army, and raising money to maintain them, and every man began to lay the
project of a new war at their door: notwithstanding, (by way of prevention)
they had Impeached diverse Members, and Citizens of London, for endeavoring a
new War, when they did but raise men for their self-defence.

To show the people therefore the reasons of these 4. Votes, 72. The
Declaration against the King.
the Independent Grandees appointed a Committee to search into the Kings
conversation and errors of his Government, and publish them in a Declaration to
the World: wherein they objected many high crimes against Him concerning His
Fathers death, the loss of Rochel, and the Massacre and Rebellion in Ireland:
which upon debate in the House, were very much moderated by the Presbyterians;
of which Declaration I will only say, that they have set forth no new matter
therein, which they have not formerly published in parcels, since which time
they have taken, and caused others to take the National Covenant, whereby they
vow to maintain the Kings Person, Crown and Dignity, in defense of Religion,
Laws, and Liberties: and therefore to reprint only the same things as arguments
to lay by the King, savours more of design, than justice.

I will wade no farther in the censure of the said Declaration, lest I imitate
the Authors of it; and as they by a feeble accusation have done the King much
right, so I by a weak defense should do him much wrong.

73. Tho. Haslerig's Letter concerning the King.
The people were as ill satisfied with this Declaration, as with the 4. Votes;
wherefore (24. Feb.) Mr. Speaker, with much seriousness, presented to the House
a Letter out of Leichestershire from Thomas Haslerig, (brother to Sir Arthur)
which was read, to this purpose, That there was one Mr. Smalling, a
Committee-man of Leichestershire, who had been a Deputy examiner in the
Star Chamber, and affirmed, that above twenty years since there being a suit in
Star Chamber between the Earl of Bristol Complainant, and the Duke of
Buckingham Defendant, concerning Physic presumptuously administered by the said
Duke to King James; the said Smalling took many Depositions therein, and was
farther proceeding in the Examinations, until a Warrant, signed by the King,
was brought him, commanding him to surcease, and to send him the Depositions
already taken; which Smalling did: yet kept notes by him of the Principal
passages, doubting what farther proceedings might be hereafter in a business of
such importance. Sir Henry Mildmay moved that Smalling be sent for, and
examined upon Oath by the Committee that penned the said Declaration; but upon
motion of the Presbyterians, he was Ordered to be examined at the Commons Bar.
Smalling came, produced the Warrant, but no Notes, so this Chimaera vanished.

What the said Committee would have made of this, who knows? God bless us all
from clandestine examinations, especially when they are taken by parties
pre-ingaged.

3. Caroli, This business had been ventilated and examined against the Duke,
and no mention made of poisoning or killing King James; it was then only
called, An Act of high presumption and dangerous consequence in the Duke: nor
was there then the least reflection upon King Charles; yet now because King
Charles dissolved that Parliament, the Independent party were willing to raise
a suspicion against him concerning His Fathers death: whereas the accusation
against the Duke of Buckingham, 3. Caroli, contained 7. or 8. Charges against
him, the least whereof might occasion the dissolving of that Parliament.

These desperate courses (to dishonor the King, 74. Why the independents went
so high against the King: To usurp the regal power into themselves, either in
the Houses purged, or in the Committee of Safety at Derby house.
and make Him incapable of Government, to ruin His Person, Crown and Dignity,
and extirpate Monarchy root and branch) were taken in order to the usurping the
Kingly power into the Grandees of the Parliament and Army, and in case they
could not purge the two Houses, and make them wholly Independent, (which they
now despair of) then into the Hands of the Committee, or Council of State at
Derby-house, and Grandees of the Army. In order to which, they are now
contriving to strengthen the said Committee with more power and more Members;
and to adjourn the Parliament, and sent down the Presbyterian Members into the
Country upon pretense of service, where if any Tumults happen (for which their
extortions will give sufficient provocation) the said dissenting Members shall
bear the blame; and have blank Impeachments given them to purge them out of the
Houses, if not out of the world, or at least be sequestered: for now they have
squeezed what they can out of the Kings party by Sequestrations, the next fuel
to their covetousness is to sequester the Presbyterians; and then to sequester
one another: for they are already divided into Pure Independents and Mixed
Independents, and have feuds amongst themselves, for this faction (insatiate
with money and blood) are all beasts of prey; and when they want prey, will
prey one upon another: nor shall the Houses meet above one month or two in a
year to ratify and approve what Derby-house, and the Junto of the Army shall
dictate to them; and to give an account to the domineering party how eath
Member has carried himself in the Country. Thus instead of one King, 75. Why
the Grandees do still continue to truck with the King, notwithstanding the said
4. Votes.
we shall have twenty or thirty tyrants in chief, and as many subordinate
Tyrants as they please to employ under them, with the Iron yoke of an Army to
hold us in subjection to their Arbitrary Government.

Notwithstanding the aforesaid four Votes and Resolutions, the Cabal of
Grandees still keep Ashburnham and Barkley in the Army, and have sent diverse
Turn-coat-Cavaliers and Emissaries underhand disguised to the King, who
pretending that by Bribes they had bought their admission to Him, after some
insinuations endeavor with false and deceitful news and arguments to shake
His constancy, and persuade him to pass the said 4. dethroning Bills, (for
these Usurpers of Sovereign Authority long to turn their armed and violent
Tyranny into a legal Tyranny) or (at least) to make him declare against the
Scots coming in. In both which cases He will dis-hearten His Friends (who
endeavor to take the golden reigns of Government out of the gripes of these
Phaetons, and restore them again to His hand) unking Himself and His Posterity
for ever, be carried up and down like a stalking Horse to their Designs, and be
Crowned Ludibrio Coronae, with straw or thorns. For who can think that at the
end of twenty years, these Usurpers will lay down what they have so unjustly,
contrary to all Laws, Divine and Humane, and contrary to their own
Declarations, Oaths and Covenants, extorted? And who can, or dare, wrest these
powers out of their hands, being once settled and grown customary in them; the
peoples spirits broken with an habitual servitude; a numerous Army and
Garrisons hovering over them; and all places of Judicature filled with corrupt
Judges, who shall by constrained interpretations of the Law, force bloody
presidents out of them, against whosoever shall dare to be so good a Patriot as
to oppose their Tyranny? They could make Steel sharp enough to cut Captain
Burlies throat for attempting to rescue the King out of the hands of a
Rebellious Army, that neither obeys King nor Parliament, will find gold and
silver enough to corrupt all the Judges: the mean to prefer and make them Wild
and vild enough for their purposes. But it is hoped He has more of a King,
more of man in Him than to leese his Principles, and stumble again at the same
stone, dash again upon the same Rock, whatsoever Sirens sing upon it; knowing
He has a Son at liberty to revenge His wrongs, all the Princes of Christendom
His Allies, whose common cause is controverted in His sufferings; the greatest
men of England and Scotland of His blood, and the People generally (whose
farthest design was, to preserve their Laws and Liberties, and to defend the
Parliament from being conquered by the Sword) looking with an angry aspect upon
these Seducers, who by insensible degrees, and many forgeries have engaged them
further than they intended, not to the Defense of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, but to the setting up of Schism, Committee Law, and Martial Law,
Impeachments before the Lords, and unlimitted slavery.

And I am confident this Faction despair of working upon the King, who like a
Rock is mediis tutissimus undis, whatsoever reports they give out to the
contrary, having from the beginning made lies their refuge, which being wisely
foreseen by the King, He sent a Message to both Houses (by way of prevention)
delivered in the Painted-Chamber by the Lords of Louderdale, one of the Scots
Commissioners, consisting of three heads,

1 That He was taken from Holdenby against his will.

2 That they should mantain the Honor and Privileges of Parliament.

3 That they should believe no Message as coming from him during his Restraint
in the Army, but should only credit what they received from His own mouth.

These Grandees have cheated all the interests of the Kingdom, and have lately
attempted the City again, and had the repulse. But the King is their old
Customer, and has been often cheated by them, and having him in strict
custody, peradventure they may persuade Him it is for His safety to be deceived
once more: wherefore (notwithstanding their many endeavors to root up
Monarchy, dethrone the King, and His Posterity, and usurp his power; in order
to which, they have overwhelmed Him, and all His, with innumerable calamities
and reproaches) yet since the passing of the Declaration against the King,
their desperate condition has enforced them to make new Addresses in private
to Him, notwithstanding their four Votes inflicting the penalitie of Treason
upon the Infringers: But Treason is as natural to Cromwell, as false accusing,
protesting, and lying; he is so superlative a Traitor, that the Laws can lay no
hold on him. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn in a verbal Charge delivered at the
Commons Bar, accused him of many Treasonable Acts, which he avowed to make
good: and in his Book, called, A Plea for a Habeas Corpus: But as if Cromwell
were a Traitor cum privilegio, the House of Commons, (being under their Armed
Guards) dares take no notice of it. But the Roman Tribune said to Scipio
Africanus, in Livy, Qui jus aequum far non potest, in eum vim haud injustam
fore, he that exalts himself above the Law, ought not to be protected by the
Law.

To conclude, Cromwell has lately had private conference at Tarnham with
Hammond.

The Earl of Southampton has been courted to negotiate with the King, and
offered the two Speakers hands for his warrant.

Capt. Titus taken into favor and employed that way.

The Grandees have brought themselves into a mist, and now wander from one
foolish design to another.

The Spaniard is said to forecast in his debates, what will happen forty years
after. But these purblind Politicians do not foresee the event of their Council
forty days, nay hours beforehand; but it is a curse laid upon wicked men, to
grope at noon day.

About 5 or 6 of Jan. 1647. the Scots Commissioners had written certain Letters
to the House of Commons; 76. Debates in the Hou. of Commons upon the Scots
Letters, 1 Concerning the said 4 Votes.
one whereof repeating the four Votes against the King, propounded to know,
whether the Houses by their Votes, That no person whatsoever do presume to make
or receive any Application or address to, or from the King, would debar the
Scots to make or receive any Addresses to, or from Him, and so put an
incapacity upon Him to perform acts of Government toward them. In the debate
the Independents called to mind a more ancient Vote, whereby it was Ordered,
That the Scots might be admitted to the King. Against which was alleged, That
these latter Votes, being made general, without exception, Repealed that former
Vote. At last by an interpretative Vote it was concluded, That notwithstanding
the said four latter Votes, the former Vote, That the Scots Commissioners might
make Addresses to the King, was still in force. Observe that this was done four
or five days after the Scots Commissioners were on their way toward Scotland.

2 Concerning 100000 l. due to the Scots.
The second Letter was concerning 100000 l. due by contract to the Scots from
the Parliament, whereof 50000 l. was payable by assignment to diverse Scots
Gentlemen who had advanced money to hasten the Scots Army to our relief;
whereof 10000 l. was payable to the Earl of Argyle.

Sir Henry Milmay made a long Speech in praise of Argyle; saying, That he and
his party, and the Scottish Clergy, were the only men that upheld the English
interest in Scotland, and were better friends to us than all Scotland besides:
wherefore he moved, that Argyle might be paid his 10000 l. and the rest
continued at interest, at 8 l. per cent. Presently the whole Independent gang,
with much zeal, and little discretion, ran that way, until more moderate men
stopping them in full cry, minded them what dishonor and danger they might
bring their friend into by laying him open to suspicion.

After this it was resolved to send four Commons and 2 Lords into Scotland as
Commissioners, with instructions. 77. Six Commissioners sent into Scotland.
To send all Independents, would not be acceptable; 2. Presbyterian Commoners
therefore were sent, one whereof was sweetened with the gift of 1000 l. and an
Office, before they would trust him: with them were sent Mr. Hearl, and Mr.
Marshal.

Marshal, when he saw Independency prevail, 78. Mr. Marshal.
had secretly turned his coat the wrong side outward, and joined interest with
Mr. Nigh; but before he declared himself, he was to do some service for his new
party: wherefore when the Army looked with a threatening posture upon the
Parliament and City, before they marched through London, (the common Soldiers
being in such discontent for want of pay, that they were ready to mutiny and
disband, and their Officers scarce daring to Govern them) the first fruits of
Marshal's service to his new friends, was, to persuade the City to lend the
Parliament 50000 l. to pacify the Soldiers: assuring them by Letters, that
the Army had nothing but good thoughts toward the City, only the common
Soldiers were troubled for want of pay: After the City had laid down the said
50000 l. his next labor was, to persuade the Citizens to let the Army march
through the City without opposition, for avoiding of bloodshed and firing; and
to let them possess the Tower, and Line of Communication. After these services,
the Grandees of the Parliament and Army, finding him suitable to them, received
him into an avowed favor, and then four Independents and four Presbyterian
Divines (conjoyning their Interests) were sent to season the Army, and new tune
them according to the more modern design: Marshal was one, where, after he had
preached according to the Dictates of the Grandees of the two Houses and Army
for diverse weeks, Marshal was thought fit to attend the Commissioners into
Scotland: He and Master Nigh had been sent to Carisbroke Castle formerly with
those Commissioners that carried the 4 Bills to the King, and had 500 l. a piece
given them for their journey.

Scotland, a longer journey, promised a larger reward; it is good being a
Postilion of the Gospel at such rates.

The Sunday before he went, he preached at Margarets Westminster, and as much
cried up Presbytery and the Covenant there, as he had before slighted them in
the Army. This was a Preparation Sermon, to make him acceptable to Scots, that
he might cajole them the easier. Before he went he sent his Agents from house
to house at Westminster, to beg men's good wills toward his journey. He was
willing upon this pretense to get what he could from St. Margarets Parish,
where he found the people to grow cold in their affections, and contributions
to him. Wherefore having made his bargain before he went, to leave S.
Margarets, and officiate in the Abbey where he is to have 300 l. per annum
certain allowance, he would rob the Egyptians at Saint Margarets for a parting
blow. This Priest married his own Daughter with the Book of Common prayer and a
Ring, and gave for reason, that the Statute establishing that Liturgy was not
yet repealed, and he was loath to have his Daughter whored and turned back upon
him for want of a Legal Marriage: Yet he can declare against all use of it by
others. He has so long cursed Meroz and neutrality, that he has brought Gods
curse upon the Land, and has put Church and Commonwealth into a flame, but
himself and his Brats have warmed their fingers at it: as Moneys are decried or
enhaunsed by the Kings Authority, so is every man's Religion cried up or down by
Marshal's authority and stamp.

76. The Answer ^o the Scots Declaration.
About the 24 of February, the Answer to the Scots Declaration began to be
debated in parts: in which Debate the Covenant was much undervalued, and
called, An Almanac out of Date. Nathaniel Fiennes argued against it, That that
clause in the Covenant, [To Defend the Kings Person, Crown, and Dignity, etc.]
was inconsistent with their four Votes, for making no Addresses to the KING: To
which was answered by some, That then they would relinquish the four Votes and
adhere to the Covenant.

About the beginning of March, was given to Col. Sydenham and Col. Bingham 1000
l. a piece as part of their Arrears; 80. Money shared amongst godly Members.
their Accounts not yet stated. To the Lord of Broghil 2000 l. To Mr. Fenwick
500 l. for losses. To Mr. Millington 2000 l. for losses. To Col. Ven 4000 l.
notwithstanding in was moved he might first account for Contribution money, the
plunder of the Country about Windsor, and the Kings Household Stuff, Hangings,
Linen, and Bedding. Mr. Purie the Petty-bag office, besides 1000 l. formerly
given him. To Purie's Son, the Clerk of the Peaces place, and 100 l. a year:
all Independents.

The 7. of March, an Ordinance passed the Commons to settle 2500 l. a year
land, out of the Marquess of Worcesters estate, 81. Cromwell.
upon Lieut. Genesis Oliver Cromwell. I have heard some Gentlemen, that know the
Manor of Chepstow, and the rest of the Lands settled upon him, affirm, that in
the particulars the said lands are so favorably rated, that they are worth
5000 l. or 6000 l. a year: It is farther said those lands are bravely wooded.
You see though they have not made King CHARLES a glorious King, as they
promised, yet they have settled a Crown Revenue upon Oliver, and have made him
as great and glorious a K. as ever John of Leyden was. Wonder not that they
conspire to keep up this Army, as well to make good these Largesses, as to keep
their guilty heads upon their Shoulders.

Thursday 9. March, 82. A Message from the Lords desiring the Commons
concurrence to the Engagement of the Members with the Army. The Ingagem,
approved by threats.
the Lords sent a Message to the House of Commons, To desire their concurrence
to the Engagement of those Members that fled to the Army, to live and die with
the Army. It was debated all day until 7. of the clotk at night; and at last
the ques ion put. That this House does approve the subscription of the said
Members to the said Engagement. The House divided upon the question, yeas 100.
noes 91.

Observe, 1. that Mr. Solicitor, Haslerig, and many more, when they perceived
difficulty in passing it, began to skirmish with their long Sword again. And
many told them, they must live content without doors (meaning the Army) as well
as within, else all would go naught.

2. 44. Of those Members that engaged with the Army sat in the House, and
Voted in their own case; many of them carrying themselves very high and
insolent in their gestures and expressions.

3. Many Presbyterians left the House because it was late; and some (as it is
thought) not daring to Vote in the Negative.

4. This Engagement about six months ago had been sent to the Commons by the
Lords, once or twice, and was rejected, yet now was obtruded upon them again by
the Lords, who would not acquiesce, contrary to the privileges of the House of
Commons.

5. This approbation thus surreptitiously gotten, is equal to a Pardon sued
forth before Conviction, which in Law amounts to a Confession of the Crime.

83. The temper of the House tried, had the Engagement not been approved, a new
Charge from the Army intended.
6. The Agitators tell you in Derby-house Projects, page 7. That this Engagement
was sent down to the Commons to try the temper of the House, and if the House
had not approved of the Eagagement, the resolution of their secret Counsel was
to fly to their Arms, and make a new Charge against their principal opposers;
for they acknowledge amongst themselves, That they Rule by Power only, and that
the House of Commons is no longer theirs than they overawe them, and that they
fear the Critical day will come which will discover the Parliament to be no
longer theirs than while they have a force upon it.

As men ready to sink embrace every shadow of help, and catch hold of leaves,
twigs, and bulrushes, to support them; so these desperate and purblind
protectors, having engaged themselves in a way of Tyranny, out of which they
can find no issue, lay hold of frivolous inventions to piece up from time to
time their ill-laid designs, like the man in the parable, That patched up his
old Garment with new cloth, which breaking out again, left the rent wider than
it was before.

Their last project was to unite all Interests in the Houses, City, and Army;
84: A project to unite all Interests.
To which purpose Cromwell (the heaviest, basest, and most ridiculous Tyrant
that ever any noble Nation groned under) made a Speech in the House of Commons:
To which was Answered, That the Members were chosen and trusted by the people,
to pursue one common Interest, which was, the common good, the safety and
Liberty of the People, and whosoever had any peculiar Interest eccentrick from
that, was not fit to sit in that assembly, and deserved to be called to a
strict account by those that trusted him.

Observe, See the Argument against all accommodatio^ between the City and
Grandees, etc. and the seasonable caution to the City, printed at the latter
end of this Book.
that the extent of this project was to conjoyn these three Interests from
upholding the greatness of the Grandees, in the Parliament, City, and Army;
for in all three the vulger multitude, and the more modest and honest sort, are
but in the same condition with other men: the Parliament bearing the Authority,
the Army the Sword, and the City the purse.

The first, shall be the Taskmasters, and impose Tribute.

The second, the Sheriffs, or rather free-booters, to leavy it by distress.

And the third, the Brokers, to receive and buy it off.

But it pleased God to bestow so much providence and integrity upon the City,
that when upon Saturday 8. April, 1646. Cromwell and his fellow Grandees offered
this temptation (at a Common Counsel) to them,

The City grew wiser than our first Parents, and rejected the Serpent and his
subtilties, insomuch that Cromwell netled with the affront, called his Solicitor
Glover to account by what Authority he had offered the restitution of the Tower
and Militia, and the enlargement of their accused Aldermen: who answered, he
did it by his Authority, and delivered him a Warrant to that purpose signed by
Sir Thomas Fairfax, Oliver Cromwell, Mr. Solicitor, and young Sir Henry Vane,
which Cromwell had the impudence to put in his pocket.

Cromwell had felt the pulse of the City long before by his Agents Glover and
Watkins, 85. A device to put the Apprentices into a Tumult.
and found them averse from complying with him: wherefore (being a man of an
early, as well as an implacable malice) he (by the advice of the Committee of
Derby-house) cast about with the Schismatical Lord Mayor Warner, (he that
raised the ridiculous Tumult at Christmas about Rosemary and Bays, a man that
had been chosen Mayor by power of Parliament, (out of course) to carry on the
design of the faction) and with the Lieutenant of the Tower, how to put the
City into some distemper, of which they might take advantage. The Citizens were
well acquainted with their juggling tricks, they had no hopes to work upon them:
wherefore they contrived how to put a provocation upon the silly Apprentice
Boys, and put them forth into some rash action, of which they might make use to
carry on their designs against the whole City: wherefore upon Easter Day,
1648. in the evening some few apprentices playing in Finnisbury fields, some
Soldiers were sent to drive them away; which they did, and imprisoned some of
them for not readily obeying: upon Sunday following, 9. April, diverse
Apprentices being at play (according to custom) in Moor-fields, the Mayor sent
Capt. Gale (one of the new Captains of the Hamlets, a Silk-Throster, and a
Tub-preacher, and one that ran away at the fight at Newbury wash, and hid
himself in a Ditch, as my L. Wharton at the Battle of Keynton hid himself in a
Saw-pit) thither to disturb them, with about 50. or 60. of his Trained Band,
and no more; (that he might the better encourage the Boys to resist him) who
surlily asking them What they did there? some of them answered, they did no
harm but only play; and since all Holy days have been Voted down, they had no
other time of Recreation: The Captain insolently commanded them to be gone;
they replied, he had no authority so to do, and continued playing: whereupon
the Captain commanded his Musketeers to shoot amongst them; which they
forbearing, he took a Musket himself, and discharged amongst them, when
presently two or three schismatical Musketeers of his Company following his
example, discharged upon them likewise, and killed (or, as the Schismatics
say, wounded only) one of the Boys: whereat the Boys making a great outcry,
more company gathered to them, and so with stones, brick-bats, and sticks, they
dispersed the Trained Band, and at last got their Colors, and instantly in a
childish jollity marched (un-armed as they were) toward the Mewes, when
presently a party of Horse (ready prepared for this forelaid design) met them,
charged, and with ease routed them; Cromwell himself animating the Troopers to
shoot and spit them, and to spare neither man woman nor child. All Sunday night
the Apprentices kept in a body in the City, locked the City gates, but set no
guards upon them; whereby you may see this business proceeded merely from the
rash and unpremeditated folly of Children, not from the advice of Men:
howsoever the Independent faction in the House of Commons have since aggravated
it: to countenance their future cruelty and rapines upon the City. Monday
morning Sir Tho. Fairfax sent a strong party into the City, who fell upon the
Boyish rabble, routed and killed many, and shot poor Women great with Child,
sitting in their stalls, one whereof the Child lived two hours in her belly
after her brains were shot out: a man likewise not knowing of their coming, as
he was drinking Milk at the corner of a street, was shot (as it were) in sport:
as they rid, they cried, Cuckolds keep your Houses, cutting and wounding all
they met; Cromwell (who followed in the Rear safe enoogh; the Van having cleared
the streets before him) cried out to them to Fire the City. Oh Oliver! what a
barbarous John of Leyden art thou become? Oh London! how wretched a Munster
will thou become? at last they drove those silly unarmed wretches into
Leaden Hall, and took many of them Prisoners, none of the Trained Bands, nor
Citizens, appearing to help those poor Boys, but leaving the Soldiers to get a
bloody and boyish Triumph over them, as they pleased; they are now imprisoned
in Cromwels shambles at White Hall. This is the truth of the business,
notwithstanding, the long-winded lying report made by Alderman Fouks, at the
Commons Bar: a man that has feathered his nest well these miserable times, and
has much public money sticking to his fingers; who, when he gave in his
account before the General Committee of Accounts, refused to give it in upon
Oath, (as other men did) alleging Magna Charta, that no man was bound to accuse
himself. It should seem he had something in his Conscience that would not
endure the test of an Oath: but he is one of the Godly, and therefore the good
things of this world belong unto him.

The House of Commons (upon this occasion) gave 1000 l. to the Soldiers for
their valorous exploit, and Voted 1000 Foot, and 100 Horse to be kept in the
Tower. The Garrisons of Whitehall and the Mewes to be strengthened: 3 Barges
capable of 50 Musketeers apiece to lie at Whitehall for the Soldiers to
convey themselves to any landing place to disperse such watermen as shall
assemble: The City Chains to be taken away from their Posts, and a Commission
of Oyer and Terminer to issue forth to murder more of these Children legally.

The Mayor having kindled this fire in the City, stole out at a window
disguised, and hid his foolish head in the Tower.

The House of Commons (overruled by the Grandees) Voted a day of thanksgiving
for this delivery. So bold are these Saints, as to mock Gods holy name with
impious devotions to color their designs.

86. The Lord Inchiquin.
The Lord Inchiquin, president of Munster and General of the Army there, had a
long time been heaved at by the Indepe^dent faction. The Lord Lisle, (who gaped
after his employment) Sir John Temple, Cromwell, the Lord Broughill, Sir Arthur
and Sir Adam Loftus, and others: who by obstructing all supplies of Money,
Ammunition, Victual, Clothes, labored to mutiny and disband his Army, that
they might send Schismatics of their o^n party to Lord it there, as they do
here, and keep Ireland as a Retreat for the Saints: for the better effecting
whereof they sent over many Emissaries, whom they had commended to him, to be
officers in his Army. When this would not do, they Printed scandalous Articles
against him, and put infinite provocations upon him to incite him to do that
which they falsely accused him to have done already; But the many
gallant-services he preformed since the publishing those Articles gave them the
lie, and confuted all their slanders: at last (under color of sending a supply
of forces to him) they projected to surprise him, and bring him away prisoner;
so that he has suffered all the convulsions that treacherous friends, and
malicious enemies could put upon him. And lately (for the more close conveyance
of the design) the Houses sent three Commissioners toward Ireland, to survey
his Actions; but (as if it were purposely done) when the Commissioners came as
far on their way as Bristol, about a dozen renegado Officers of his Army met
the Commissioners and turned them back again. The said Officers posted up to
the Parliament before the Commissioners, and the 13 April were called in to the
Commons Bar, where they made a relation to the House to this purpose; That the
Lord Inchiquin having made an expedition into the County of Kerry, upon his
return, sent for these Officers into his presence Chamber, and told them, He
intended to declare against the Army and Independent party in England, who kept
the King and Parliament under a force, that he would stand for the Liberty of
the King and Parliament, and a free Conference to settle Peace; and that he
expected all his Officers should join with him in so honorable an undertaking;
but should take an Oath of secrecy, before he discovered himself farther to
them. They Answered, They could make no such Oath before they knew whether they
might with a safe conscience keep it, saying, they would be true to the
Parliament. My Lord Inchiquin replied, So have I, and will be; delude me not
with ambiguous words, do you mean this pretended Parliament? telling them
farther, he had good correspondence with all the Presbyterians in Scotland and
England, as well in the Parliament, as out of it; that he doubted not to go
through with his undertaking; and if the worst happened, to make good conditions
for himself and his party. That he would make peace with my Lord Taff, ( and
that he knew the Independents in England were upon Treaty with Owen Roe Oneal)
who was a man of their humor, and loved to keep all in combustion. They
refused to join, he dismissed them for England. The same day Letters from Capt.
John Growthen (Vice Admiral of the Irish Seas) from a shipboard, were read in
the House, much to the same purpose, though not so large: wherein he said, He
had already blocked up all my Lord Inchiquin's Havens.

Presently Allen the Goldsmith moved, 87. Allen the Goldsmiths moves to put
the House to the touch by some Covenant, Declaration, etc.
That since the Lord Inchiquin had discovered that he had a correspondency with
the Presbyterians in the House, before they dealt with their Enemies without
doors, they should try who were their Enemies within doors, by putting all men
to some Covenant, Engagement, or Protestation, etc. And Lieutenant General
Cromwell said, That being to debate this business to morrow, whosoever with
cross Arguments shall spin out the debate, and so retard our prceedings, (by
my consent) shall be noted with a Black Coal: to which was answered, That this
tended to take away freedom of debate, which was the life of Parliaments, and
of all Councils; and was destructive to the very being of Parliaments.

It is not amiss to insert here by way of digression, what I formerly omitted:
Sir Henry Mildmay long since moved, That 150 rich Guard Coats of the King,
might be sold for 800 l. to find Fire and Candle for the Soldiers in
White Hall. The question put: The Speaker gave judgment, the Yeas had it. Mr.
Edward Stephens declared the No's had it. They were unwilling to divide upon
such a question: but Mr. Stephens persisted; and Robert Reynolds, said aloud,
notice shall be taken of him for putting such a dishonor upon the House. Upon
the Division, the No's carried it by nine voices. Thereupon, complaint was made
against Reynolds for attempting against the liberty of Voting, but no redress.

But to return from my digression: the next day (14 of April) it was moved that
my Lord Inchiquin's Son, a Child of 8 or 9 years old, going to School at
Thistleworth, might be secured in the Tower and kept for a Hostage. To which
was Answered, That no man could take an Hostage without consent: an Hostage
must be given upon the public faith, upon some stipulation, and must be so
received, by mutual agreement; you cannot punish the child for the Fathers
fault; yet he was voted to the Tower, and sent. My Lord Inchinquin's Commission
as President of Munster, and General of the Army, Voted void, and no man to
obey him, himself Voted a Traitor; yet no man examined upon Oath against him,
nor any man sent to take information of the business into Ireland, and his
professed enemy the Lord Lisle, is to go General into Munster in his room; and
the said fugitive Officers all rewarded, as if they had brought acceptable news.

This day Reynolds revived Allens motion for putting the Members to the Test,
by some Covenant, Protestation, or Declaration, subscribed, That this is a free
Parliament, and that they would live and die with this Parliament and Army: To
which was answered,

1. That by Ordinance of both Houses, all men were enjoined to take the
National Covenant. This Covenant is the true Touchstone of the Parliament, and
so agreed upon by the wisdom of both Nations; yet many sit here who refuse to
obey this Ordinance: I know no reason therefore why any man should obey you in
any other Ordinance of this Nature: let us keep the old Covenant before we take
any new.

2. It has been moved in the House, that the Oaths of Justices of the Peace,
and Sheriffs, might be taken away: I hope you will not abolish legal Oaths,
and impose illegal Oaths. This House has not so much Authority, as to
administer an Oath, much more to impose one: you must allow to others that
liberty of Conscience which you demand for your selves.

3. Major Gray told you my Lord Inchiquin said he had correspondency with all
the Presbyterians in the House, who had made their peace with the King. But my
Lord Inchiquin told him farther, the Independents were upon Treaty with Owen
Roe, and Oneal, let them clear themselves of that imputation first before they
give a purgation unto others, otherwise what you do will savor of force.

4. The true Touchstone to try every man's integrity is to examine, who have
enriched themselves by the calamities of the times and your service, and who
are impoverished.

5. This is a new device to purge the House.

The Grandees of the House have cantonized the Kingdom between them, 88. The
Counties compelled to give thanks to the Houses for their Votes against the
King.
every man in his Division protecting the Country Committees, and receiving
tribute from them in recompense of their protection; and Prideaux the Post
master being King of the West Saxons, his Viceroy or Lord Deputy for the
County of Somerset is that running Col. John Pyne, who being often inspired
with Sack, rules the Committee and County by inspirations. Pyne and his Peers
of the Committee, to please his superiors, set on foot a draught of a Petition
to be handed by the Country, Giving thanks to the Parliament for the four Votes
against the King, and promising to live and die with the Parliament and Army,
and desiring the County might be freed from Malignants, Neuters, and Apostates;
which (in their interpretation) signifies Presbyterians and moderate men, who
will not dance about the flame when the Independents make a Bonfire of the
Commonwealth. The Eastern Division of Somersetshire rejected the Petition; in
the Western Division Pyne and his Committee sending abroad his Sequestrators
with the Petition, (threatened to take them for Malignants, and Sequester them
that refused) got many Subscriptions; but the Subscribers since (better
informed of the danger and mischief of those Votes) retracted what they had
done by a counter Petition, wherein they declare, that their Subscription to
the former Petition was contrary to their Judgment and Consciences, and
extorted by the terror of Sequestrators, and threats of being Sequestered. This
affront stung the Committee, and opened the eyes of the Country: As the like
foolish attempt of Sir Henry Mildmay did the eyes of the County of Essex.
Wherefore to find a Plaster for this broken pate, Sergeant Wild (he that hanged
Capt. Burly) coming that Circuit, care was taken to have a select Grand Jury of
Schismatics and Sequestrators blended together, who made a presentment
subscribed by 19. of their hands, which Sergeant Wild preserved in his pocket;
and upon Tuesday 18. April, delivered with as much gravity as a set speech and
a set ruff could furnish him withal in the House of Commons, and was read and
hearkened unto by the thriving Godly, with as much attention, as pricking up of
ears, and turning up of eyes could demonstrate: the Contents of this
presentment were the same with the aforesaid revoked Petition. Great care was
taken to give thanks to the High Sheriff and Grand Jury, who had so freely
delivered the sense of that well-affected County: and as much care taken to
improve this Talent and put it to interest throughout the Kingdom. Colonel
Purefoy is now at this work in Warwickshire. Sir Arthur Haslerig about
Newcastle, others in other places. Pitiful Crutches to support a cripled
reputation, which now halts, and begs for relief worse than their own maimed
Soldiers do, and with as bad success, they have juggled themselves out of
credit, and would fain juggle themselves in again. Behold the wisdom of our
Grandees, wise, religious, new-modelled Politicians, who have brought
themselves and the whole Kingdom into these deplorable, contemptible straits;
take notice of your Representative, you that are represented, call them to a
seasonable account: But whither does my zeal carry me? I shall anon stumble
upon a new fangled Treason to be declared against me, without, nay against Law.

89. Men's tongues tied up by an Ordinance.
Friday 21. April, An Ordinance was presented to the House, entitled, For
suppressing all Tumults and insurrections (the Committee of Safety at Derby
House had before an ample power conferred upon them for that purpose; but
guilty consciences, though they be safe, are never secure; like Cain, they
think that every man will slay them) it was passed after some amendments to
this purpose, That any three Committee Men shall have Power to Imprison and
Sequester all such as shall actually adhere to any that shall raise or
endeavor to raise Tumults and Insurrections; or shall speak or publish any
thing reproachful to the Parliament, or their proceedings. Behold here an
excise (amounting to the Value of all you have) set upon every light word; a
man made an offender for a word, to the utter ruin of him and his posterity,
under color of defending Laws, Liberties, and Properties, you are cheated of
them all, and reduced to mere and absolute slavery and beggary: you are not
Masters of your own carcasses, yet your mouths are but toned up; you must not
be allowed that silly comfort of venting your griefs by way of complaint; what
Tyrant was ever so barbarous, so indiscreet as to do the like? It was moved
that Offenders of this kind might be bound to the good behavior, and the
offenses proved openly at the Assizes or Sessions, before so destructive a
punishment be inflicted. There are three principles in Law, of which the Laws
are very tender, and will not suffer them to be touched but upon great
Offenses, clear proofs, and exact formalities observed, life, liberty, and
estate: by Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and many other Statutes, these
principles are so sacred, that nothing but the Law can meddle with them, Nemo
imprisonetur aut disseisietur nisi per legale judicium parium suorum. You have
made the people shed their money and blood abundantly, pretending defense of
Religion, Laws, and Liberties; let them now at last (being a time of peace)
enjoy what they have so dearly paid for; and delay them not with a pretended
necessity of your own making; you now make all that is, or can be near and deer
to them, liable to the passions of three Committee Men, to judge and execute
according to their discretion, without Law, or so much as a formality thereof:
And yet both Houses of Parliament have often heretofore offered to abolish
those Committees, as men whose wickedness and folly they and the whole Kingdom
were ashamed of. The Grandees of the Parliament and Army, when the Houses are
called, and full, have resolved to draw their forces near about the Town, and
by that terror to try the temper of the Houses; such Members as will not
comply with them, they will with fresh Charges purge out of the House, and
publish base and infamous scandals against them, to which if they submit with
silence, they betray their reputations for ever, and spare the credits of their
juggling enemies. If they make any defense for their honors by way of Apology,
they shall be brought within the compass of this devouring, inslaving
Ordinance, as men that reproach the Parliament, and their Proceedings. Thus the
same whip shall hang over the shoulders of the Presbyterian party, (who will
not agree to King-deposing Anarchy and Shism) as it did formerly over the Kings
party. And the Presbyterians shall be squeesed into the Independents coffers,
as formerly the Kings party were, so long as they had any thing to lose; for
the whole earth is little enough for these Saints, who are never satisfied with
money and blood, although they never look toward Heaven but through the
spectacles of this world. The old elogium and Character of this English Nation
was, that they were Hilaris gens, cui libera men's and libera lingua: But now
(Countrymen) your tongues are in the Stocks, your bodies in every jail, your
souls in the dark, and estates in the mercy of those that have no mercy, and at
the discretions of those that have no discretion: Farewell English liberty.

90. The Kentish Committee-War.
In the Epistle to this book, I have given you an account of the bloody Answer
given to the Surrey Petitioners, May 16. 1648. I must in the next place speak
something of the Kentish Petition, and of the Committee-war they raised to
oppose it; which took his rising and beginning partly from the insolences and
oppressions of their tyrannical Committee Men, (persons for the most part of
weak fortunes, and weaker wits) and partly from the frantic zeal of the Mayor
of Canterbury (who for his Religion, prudence and honesty, may well be younger
brother to Warner Lord Mayor of London) upon Christmas day 1648. sundry people
going to the Church of Canterbury to solemnize that day, were uncivily
interrogated, and roughly handled by the Mayor, as if it were superstition, nay
impiety to serve God on that day; or as if some days were exempted from
serving God, as some days are exempted from worldly labor: This grew to a
Tumult, which the Committee of the County hearing, they presently gathered
forces to make ostentation of their power in suppressing it, but were prevented
by intelligence that all was quiet; but this quietness was rather a truce,
than a lasting peace, a desire of revenge against the Mayor for wounding some
of the People, like fire hid under ashes, broke forth two days after, but was
presently pacified by the discreet endeavors of Sir W. Man, Ald. Sabin, and
Mr. Lovelace a Lawyer. The Committee of that County presently assemble forces,
with which (together with their Chaplains and other instruments of war) they
march to reduce the City, and (though they had news that all was appeased) yet
would they not believe it, but continued their march in triumph; where finding
the Gates open, they took them off and burnt them, threw down part of their
Walls, thereby degrading the City, and turning it into a Village, as a trophy
of their high indignation; committed many to Prison upon light suspicions,
amongst whom, the aforesaid 3 Peacemakers, for being so saucy as to compose the
difference, and thereby deprive their highnesses of a Triumphant Victory. For
these upstart Committees mounted above the sphere of their activity, and having
stolen his Majesty's Sword (His principal mark of Sovereignty wherewith he
protects his people) out of his Scabbard, know not how to use it, but to the
destruction of the people: like ill-natured Children, they have gotten a gay
thing, and must do mischief with it. And for farther magnifying of their power
to the Country, and their diligence to the Parliament, they charged the
prisoners with High Treason, and so forgot them languishing in Gaol, had not
those Gentlemen remembered themselves and clamoured for a Trial; which at last
was granted them by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer to Sergeant Wyld, and
Sergeant Creswell: the Juries were men known to be well-affected to the
Parliament, who found Ignoramus upon the Bill, and (notwithstanding many checks
and taunts from the Committee, and the refusing of the return) adhered, so that
the Court adjourned for some months: Hereupon the Kentish men fearing the
tyrannical disposition of their Committees, consulted with the said Grand Jury
upon the place concerning a Petition to the Parliament for Peace, to end our
distractions; which Petition was subscribed by the Grand Jury, in the name of
the whole County. The Committee jealous that these things would hearten the
People, and loosen the bonds of that slavish fo^r, wherein they had hitherto
held them captive, printed, and caused to be published in all Churches a Paper
prohibiting the same Petition, and branding it with the name of seditious and
tumultuous, saying, they would hang two in every Parish that were promoters of
it, and sequester the rest. And endeavored first to raise forces in the
County; but at last made their complaint to the Army. When the Country saw
their just desires like to be suppressed by Arms, and themselves to be still
Committee-ridden, they resolved upon a place of meeting to promote their
Petition, and to come Armed thither for their own defense only. But the County
Committee plied their business so well with the Committee of Derby House and
the Army, that they first drew a party of Horse into the County, who committed
many murders according to Custom, and then the whole Army which at Blackheath
encamped on the same place where the Petitioners intended to Rendezvous. So the
result of all is but this: The whole County of Kent oppressed by a tyrannous
Committee, and a lingting war, now likely to be renewed, prepare to present a
Petition to the Parliament for Peace, and had appointed a day and place of
meeting, which by reason of the large extent of the County they could not alter
at the pleasure of the Committee: and being terrified by the menaces and
warlike preparations of the said Committee, brought their Arms with them in
order only to self-defence, (allowed by the Laws of God and Man, and by the
doctrine and practice of this Parliament and Army; and peradventure induced
thereto by the sad Massacre of the Surry Petitioners) The Committee to support
their usurped, illegal authority, invite an Army to break in upon them with
fire and sword, and so enforced them upon thoughts and actions of War, never
before thought on: as will appear,

1. Because many of the Petitioners went home the next day after the Rendezvous.

2. The County had provided no General, nor no old Commanders.

3. They never thought of forming an Army until Sir Tho. Fairfax was storming
one of their Towns.

4. The Kentish-men were compelled to take in Sandwich, and the 3 Castles, lest
they should fall upon the backs of them when the Army marched against them; yet
did they hurt no man in person or goods: which argued a peaceable disposition,
aiming only at defense. Thus you see a whole County always well-affected to the
Parliament, complaining of a few Independent sectary Committee Men,
Sequestrators, etc. for infinite oppressions and cheats daily committed: they
being weighed in the scales together, the whole County are thought too light
for want of an unpartial holding the balance even: one prudential
consideration, that they must not discountenance their friends (as they call
the Committee) and something else more substantial, being put upon the
Committees scale, hoyseth the whole County into the air. And when the
Parliaments Army was at Blackheath, the County sending some of their Gentry
with Petitionary Letters to the House of Commons, declaring the peaceablenesse
of their inclinations, their continued obedience to the Houses, and a desire
their grievances against their Committee might be put into a way of examination
and redress, they could obtain no other Answer (the schismatical engaged party
overpowering the House with the near approach of their own Army, for it is no
bodies else) than, that they would send them an answer by their General; which
was as much as if they had said, They would send an answer by the Executioner:
the terror of this answer made the Country desperately engage in an
un-premeditated War, for which they were wholly unprovided, as the irresolute
and distracted managing of it makes manifest. But this advantage was greedily
laid hold of by the Saints, to ravish a victory from the Country, which they
were resolved to use with so much secrecy and solemn cruelty, that the example
thereof should strike an awfulnesse into the hearts of all that should hear of
it, and beget a slavish fear in the whole Kingdom to submit to the laying aside
of the KING, and his Negative Voice, and the establishing of a tyrannical
Oligarchy, in the Grandees of the two Houses and Army: for finding the whole
Kingdom to hate them with a perfect hatred, they have no hope to govern by
Love, but by Fear; which (according to the Turkish rule) is more predominant
and constant passion. And certainly had not Goring's passing over at Greenwich
into Essex compelled Fairfax to follow immediately after with his Army, they
had been used with much extremity: insomuch that Weaver, (a Member, fuller of
zeal than wisdom, though wise enough for his own profit, as most Saints and
knaves are) moved in the House, That all Kent might be sequestered, because they
had rebelled, and all Essex, because they would rebel. And truly this is as
good a way as Cromwell's selling his Welsh Prisoners for 12 d. a head to be
transported into barbarous Plantations, whereby to expel the Canaanites, and
make new plantations in old England for the Godly, the seed of the Faithful:
for this faction (like the Devil) cry, all is mine.

91. Banbury-Castle obtruded upon the State.
27. May A friend of my Lord Says moved in the House of Commons, That
Banbury-Castle might be demolished to prevent any surprise thereof by
Malignants, saying, it had already cost the State 200000 l. to reduce it, and
had undone the Country, which was unable to pay for it: it belonged to a Noble,
Godly person, the L. Say, and it was not fit to demolish it without his consent
and recompense; it was therefore desired the State should bear the charge, his
Lordship being willing to sell it for 2000 l. To which was answered, That other
well-affected Gentlemen had their Houses destroyed for service of the State,
without recompense, not so well provided to bear the loss as my Lord Say; as
Mr. Charles Doyly, two handsome habitable Houses, Mr. Vachell, some Houses in
Reading, and others well deserving of the State, though not of themselves. This
Castle was unhabitable, a rude heap of stones, a public nuisance to the
Country. It cost his Lordship but 500 l. and now to obtrude it upon the State
at 2000 l. price, in so great a scarcity and want of money, the Kingdom graoning
under Taxes, was not reasonable. So Divine providence not saying Amen to it,
this Cheat failed like the untimely birth of a Woman.

92: The Impeached Lords, Members and Aldermen.
About the beginning of June, a debate happened in the House of Commons about the
four imprisoned Aldermen, occasioned by a Petition from the City, and
concerning the impeached Lords and Commons. Mr. Gewen spoke modestly in their
behalf, saying, That what they did was done by virtue of an Ordinance of
Parliament made this very Sessions of Parliament, and without any intent to
raise a new war, but only to defend the City against the menaces of the Army
marching up against them and the Parliament. But Mr. Gourdon (a man hot enough
for his zeal to set a Kingdom on fire) Answered, He thought they intended a new
War, and were encouraged thereto by the Gentleman that spoke last; when he said
to them at their Common Council, Up and be doing: Mr. Walker (perceiving Mr.
Gewen to be causlesly reflected upon) replied, that since this debate upon the
City Petition tended toward a closing up of all differences, it was unfit, men
that spoke their consciences freely and modestly should be upbraided with
Repetitions tending to disunion, and desired men might not be permitted to
vent their malice under color of showing their zeal: when presently. Tho.
Scot, the Brewers Clerk (he that has a Tally of every man's faults but his own
hanging at his Girdle by virtue of his Office, being Deputy-Inquisitor, or
Hangman to Miles Corbet in the clandestine Committee of examinations) replied
upon Mr. Walker, That the Gent. that spoke last was not so well-affected, but
that the close Committee of examinations would find cause to take an order with
him shortly: Mr. Walker offered to answer him, and demanded the Justice of the
House, but could not be heard: those that spoke in behalf of the Aldermen, were
often affronted, and threatened with the displeasure of the Army, which they
alleged, would be apt to fall into distempers if we discharged them.
Notwithstanding these menaces, it was Voted, that the House would not prosecute
their Impeachments against the said four Aldermen, Sir John Maynard, and the
seven Lords; and that they would proceed no faother upon their Order for
impeaching Mr. Hollis, Sir William Waller, etc. Two or three days after, a
motion was set on foot, That the Order whereby the said Members were disabled
from being of the House might be revoked; many zealots argued fiercely, and
threatened against it; amongst many arguments for them, a President was insisted
upon, That Master Henry Martin was by Order disabled from being a Member, yet
was afterward readmitted upon his old Election: and desired these Gentlemen
might find equal justice. The House having freed them a Culpa, could not in
equity but free them a poena, and put them in the remainder of all that
belonged to them. But Sir Peter Wentworth answered, That Mr. Martins case and
theirs differed: Mr. Martin was expelled for words spoken against the King,
such as every man's Conscience told him were true; but because he spoke those
words unseasonably, when the King was in good strength, and the words (whether
true or false) were in strictness of Law, Treason: the House (especially the
lukewa^n men) considering the doubtful events of War, disabled and committed
him, lest the whole House might be drawn in compass of High Treason for
conniving at them: which was a prudential Act contrary to justice, and contrary
to the sense of the Godly and honest party of the House. But afterward (the
King growing weaker, and the Parliament stronger) the House restored Master
Martin, and thought fit to set every man's tongue at liberty to speak truth even
against the King himself; and now every day words of a higher nature are spoken
against him, by the well-affected Godly in the House. After many threats used
by Wentworth, Ven, Harvy, Scot, Gourdon, Weaver, etc. The said disabling Order
was repealed.

93. Members added to the Committee of Safety at Darby house.
About the same time the Lords sent a Message to the Commons, that they had
named six Lords to be added to the Committee of safety, and desired the House
to add twelve Commons to them. (This had five or six times been brought down
from the Lords before, and received so many denials, but the Lords would not
acquiesce) the Message came down about one of the Clock, the House being thin,
many argued against it, saying, that there were seven Lords and fourteen
Commons of that Committee already, enough (if not too many) to dispatch
business with secrecy and expedition; that to add six Lords more to them was
(in effect) to make the whole House of Peers of that Committee; so the whole
House of Peers, and twenty six of the ablest and best spoken Commons being
engaged in that Committee, that Committee would sway the Houses which way they
pleased; draw, by degrees, all power and authority from the Parliament to
themselves; cause the House to adjourn at pleasure, or leave them so
evirtuated, and enervated, that they should no longer keep the dignity nor
Authority of a Parliament; contrary to the trust reposed in them by those that
chose them, and contrary to the tenor of the Writ of Election. It were more for
the service of the Commonwealth to examine what the powers of that Committee
are, and to set a short time to its continuance, and not leave it indefinite as
now it is. After more than an hours debate, the Speaker (instead of putting the
question, whether an addition or no?) called to have the names read, first of
the Lords, who were Voted, one, by one; and then the Commons were named, who
are almost all Independents; Weaver excepted against the naming of Major Genesis
Brown to be of that Committee, for being disaffected to the Army; to which
Major Genesis Brown gave a discreet and honest Answer; in reply to which, Weaver
concluded, That the Parliament in the posture it was in, was not likely to save
the Kingdom, but the Committee of Safety and the Army must save it: whereupon
satisfaction was demanded against Weaver for dishonouring the Parliament, and
alleged that the Honor of the Parliament was more considerable than the Honor
of the Army, and ought to be vindicated before the Honor of the Army,
whatsoever their Agents and Servants in the House (who gained by them) thought
to the contrary, unless they would acknowledge the Parliament to be subordinate
to the Army. It was farther said, that if the Parliament should relinquish the
work of settling Peace, Religion, Laws, and Liberties in the Kingdom to the
Committee of Safety, (as the Gentleman that spoke last seems to intimate, that
in order thereto, the said Committee is enlarged) the Parliament should forsake
their trust, and be no longer a Parliament, and all they had done, and should
do in that way, (even the erecting, empowering, and enlarging of that
Committee) is void in law. Note, that several Orders have been made, appointing
set days to examine the powers of this Committee, and limit a time for its
determination; but always upon the appointed days, either some Letters of news,
or some new invented Plots have been cast like stumbling blocks in the way to
put it off.

The like for settling the general Militia of the Counties; all which are now
left sine die.

Thurday, 15. June, Mr. Solicitor reported to the House, 94. 20. Royalists sent
to the General in lieut of 10. Committee Men in Colchester.
That Sir William Masham and the rest of the Committee, were carried up and
down in the head of Goring's Army, hardly used, and threatened to be in the
front of the battle whem they came to fight: and moved that 20. of the Kings
party should be seized, and sent to the General to be used in the like manner.
But Gourdon moved, That the Lady Capell and her Children, and the Lady Norwich
might be sent to to General with the same directions, saying, their Husbands
would be careful of their safety: and when diverse opposed so barbarous a
motion, and alleged, the Lady Capell was great with child near her time,
Gourdon pressed it the more eagerly, (as if he had taken the General for a
Man-midwife) he was seconded by Ven, Sir Hen. Mildmay, Tho. Scot, Blackstone,
Hill of Haberdashers-hall, Purefoy, Miles Corbet, etc. Note that Rushworth
(Secretary to the General) reported at the Commons Bar, The Committee were well
used and wanted nothing. And though they have had many Fights and Sallies, they
did never put any of the Committee in the Front; so that it should seem this is
only a fabulous pretense to carry 20. of the Kings party in Front before them
to facilitate and secure their Approaches against the Enemies shot, which is
the more credible, because the sense of the House was, not to exchange these
for the Committee. This is to cheat the Enemy of a Town, not to conquer it.
Behold the Saints way of getting Victories, and Cromwell practi^eth the same in
Wales, as I hear.

And that it may farther appear, this Saint-like Army neither Conquers by
Miracle, nor the Sword, but by the battery of Angels, I can assure you, that
lately one of the setting-bitches of these States (as they now call themselves
in their foreign negotiations) the hogen mogens of Derby-house, the Lady Norton
(Wife to bul-headed Sir Grig.) offered a large sum of money to a Gentlewoman to
procure her Husband to yield up a Hold he keeps for the KING, using this
argument to persuade it, That most of the good Towns they seemed to conquer,
were purchased of men that had wit enough to respect themselves, (for you must
know that this virtuous Lady trucks as well for strong Towns and Forts, as for
Plackets and other weaker pieces) but the motion was contemned; And the General
having gotten together the Trained men of Suffolk and Essex to assist him,
puts them in the Forlorn Hope in all his stormings of the Town of
Colchester, and drives them on with his Horse, using them as the Turk uses his
Asapi to dead the first fury and edge of the Enemy, that his Janisaries may at
last come on with the more safety, and carry the business.

95. The National Covenant.
Saturday, 17. June. It was moved that no Commissions might be granted to any
Commanders or Officers, until they had taken the National Covenant: against
which, it was argued, That the Covenant was become the pretense of all
Rebellions and Insurrections; that most of them that had Rebelled in Wales,
Kent, Essex, had taken it; but those that refused it were true friends to the
Parliament, and had done them gallant service. That the Covenant had so many
various interpretations put upon it, that no man knew what to make of it, or
how with a safe Conscience to take it: thus argued the Independent, as if the
Covenant were malum in se. To which was answered, that by this last reason,
they might lay aside the Scriptures, which were frequently and variously
mis-interpreted by Heretics and Shismaticks. If the Covenant in its own nature
were the cause of Insurrections, it was unwisely done of the Parliament to
impose it upon men; and to tie them by Vow to defend it, and one another in
defense of it, with their lives and fortunes, whatsoever number of Armed men
should gather together in defense of the Kings Person, Crown and Dignity, or of
Religion, Laws, Liberties, or of Privileges of Parliament, according to the
said Covenant they have the authority of Parliament, nay of Heaven (where their
Vow is recorded) for what they do, and cannot be said to Rebel, or War against
the Parliament, but against a Faction, who having deserted or never taken the
Covenant, to carry on new designs for their own advantage: do now mis-apply the
title of Malignant and Rebel, to those which fight for the Covenant, because
they will not change their principles with them for Company. And upon this
ground only were the four Aldermen, seven Lords, Sir John Maynard, etc.
impeached and imprisoned only for such actions as the Covenant (which they
took by authority of Parliament) bound them in conscience unto; and for which
they had a special Ordinance of Parliament, made this very Sessions, and not to
raise a new War as was scandalously and violently enforced upon them: Had it
come to a new War, it must have been laid at their doors that subvert the
Principles in the Covenant. Many have taken the Covenant in obedience to you,
and are bound up by it; and now to leave other men at large not to take it, and
accuse them of Treason for endeavoring to keep it, is very unjust. You have
lately promised the Scots, you will adhere to the Covenant: How can they
believe this, unless you enjoin all to take it? And so long as you put all the
Arms, Garrisons, and ships of the Kingdom, and all places of power, profit and
preferment, into the hands of Schismatics and Antimonarchists, whose
principles and actings run counter to the Covenant, and such as talk much of
your service, but have done only their own, in order to which, they refused to
obey you and Disband, ravished the King from you at Holdenby, kept you in
wardship ever-since, and dishonored and brought you low (...) treasonable,
scandalous, threatening Engagements, Declarati^ (...) Remonstrances, and other
Papers? But those that would have had the Covenant current, could not get the
question put.

96. O^burn's information concerning a design to murder the King. See [The
Independents loyalty] a Book so called.
Upon Saturday, 17 June 1648, about one of the clock afternoon (most of the
House being gone to dinner, and very few Presbyterians left) the Speaker of the
House of Commons stood up and told the House, that he had received Letters from
Richard Osburn (he that projected to deliver the King out of the custody of
Colonel Hammond at Carisbrook-Castle) that he conceived the Letters tended only
to the setting of us altogether by the Ears; and propounded, whether they
should be read or no? some were against the reading of them, but the Major part
called to have them read; which was do^e accordingly. The Letter to the said
Speaker had a copy of another Letter enclosed in it, to the Lord Wharton, which
bore date 1 June, 1648. to this purpose, Giving his Lordship to understand,
That upon private conference with Captain ROLF ( a man very intimate with
Colonel Hammond, and high in the esteem of the Army) the said Captain Rolf told
him (the said Osburn) that to his knowledge Hammond had received several
Letters from the Army, advising him to remove the KING out of the way by
Poison, or any other means, for it would much conduce to their affairs. But
(said Rolf) Hammond had a good allowance for keeping the KING, and is therefore
unwilling to lose so beneficial an employment. But (says Rolf) if you will
join with me, we will endeavor to convey away the KING to some secret place,
and we may then do what we will with Him. Osburn offers in his said Letter,
That if he may come and go with safety, he would come and justify the same
upon Oath. He likewise writ to the Speaker of the Lords House about it. Then
was read Osburn's Letter to Mr. Lenthall Speaker, dated 10. June 1648.
containing the same Narration, with an offer to appear, and make it good upon
Oath if he might come and go with safety and freedom. The Clerk had no sooner
done reading this Letter, but with a slight neglect, and the laughter of some
Members, the business was passed over without debate, and Mr. Scawen stood up
to propound a new business from the Army; when presently* Mr. Walker
interrupting Scawen, desired to speak a (...) to the late business; and asked
Mr. Speaker, from whence (...) Letter came, and who brought it? the Speaker
called upon the Sergeant of the Mace, who Answered, The Letter was given him at
the door by a man that he knew not; that he had many Letters and Papers thrust
upon him of which he could give no account, but he would endeavor to find the
Messenger. Then Mr. Walker urged that such an information coming to the House
ought not to be neglected whether true or false, but to be examined and sifted
to the bottom. If the KING should die a natural death, or any mischance befall
him, (the People calling to mind how little care we had taken of his safety)
would never be satisfied with our protestation; and moved, that a Committee
might be named to examine Osburn, Rolf, Hammond, and such others whose names
should occur in the Examination. This was seconded by Sir Simond Dewes, Mr.
Henry Hungerford, Mr. Edward Stevens, and some others, who pressed it farther,
but received a slight Answer. That those that desired to examine the business
knew not where to find Osburn. That Osburn was a Malignant, and had attempted
to set the KING at liberty. To which Mr. Walker replied, That the other day we
had named a Committee to examine the business concerning the Footboy that
struck Sir Henry Mildmay, and yet we neither knew then where to find the
Footboy, or what his name was. If we do but publish that Osburn shall with
freedom and safety come and go, in case he appear to make good his Charge,
either he will appear, or we shall declare him an Impostor, and punish him when
we take him, and clear the reputation of those upon whom this Letter seems to
reflect. Consider how vast a difference there is between beating a Subject, and
Killing a King. And if Osburn (whom I know not) be a Malignant, yet unless you
can prove him a Nullifidian, or a person convict of Perjury, both according to
the Rules of Christian Charity, and in the charitable intendment of our Laws,
his Oath is valid and good. Then Tho. Scot stood up and said, That this
pressing for a Committee to examine this business, was but a device to draw
Colonel Hammond, and Rolf, up to Town to be examined, that the KING might the
easier make an escape. And Sir John Evelin of Wilts, alleged that he conceived
this was an invention of Osburns to bring the King to Town with Honor,
Freedom, and Safety. Then Walker stood up again, but was interrupted by Master
Hill, and not suffered to speak, having already spoken twice. At the end of
almost every motion made for a Committee to examine the business, either Mr.
Scawen, or Major General Skippon stood up and offered to divert the business
by new matter concerning the Army, which usually bears all other businesses
down before it. At last those few that moved for an Examination of this
Information, having spoken as often as the Orders of the House do permit, were
forced to be silent; so the business was buried in silence. I hear that some
of the Lords called upon this business the Monday following, being the 19 of
June, and that the Lord Wharton being asked, why he did not impart Osburn's
said Letters to the House? Answered, That as soon as he opened the said Letter
he received from Osburn, and saw his name at the bottom, he looked upon the
business as not considerable: yet he sent the Letter to Hammond. Upon Tuesday,
20 June, The Lords sent a Message to the Commons; the first paper whereof
concerned Osburns said Letters: they desired that forty days might be assigned
for Osburn to come and go with safety to make good his information. But Sir
William Armine stood up, and desired, That the minutes of two Letters prepared
to be sent into into Holland and Zealand concerning our Revolted ships might be
first dispatched, as being of present use. And when the business was ended,
Mr. Pierpointe propounded another part of the said Message. So Osburn's
Information was left sine die, for that time, but since, the Lords have
quickened it, and 40 days are given to Osburn to come and go with Freedom and
Safety to make good his information; who is come, and avoucheth it; and one
Dowcett, speaks much in affirmation of a design of Rolfes to pistol the King.
Rolf presents himself at the Commons Bar with a Letter from Hammond, which
denies the Design, and pleads Rolfes cause for him. Rolf denied it at the
Commons Bar with a trembling voice, yet afterward hid out of the way; but
being discovered upon search, he was found to have a Byle upon him, that
disabled him from riding, otherwise (it is thought) he would have fled far
enough. I do not hear that Hammond is yet sent for, or questioned. And for
Osburn's endeavor to convey his Majesty from Carisbrook-Castle, it is
alleged, he did it with a charitable intent to preserve his life, and not of
any disaffection to the Parliament, to which he has been affectionately
serviceable. Though many take offense at Master Walker, as if his stirring of
his business were only to cast an aspersion upon the Army: yet (I conceive)
that what he did was commendable, in discharge of the duty he owes to God, his
King, and Country, and of his trust as a Member of the Representative body of
this Kingdom, and in performance of the obligations which the Oath of
Allegiance, the Parliaments Protestation, the National Covenant, and the known
Laws of the Land lay upon him, which duty he was bound to perform, (though with
the extremest hazard of his life and fortunes) and though he may happily hope
better things of this Army, yet since neither the Laws of the Land, nor common
reason warrants him to presume upon his own private hopes and judgment (things
which often deceive the wisest men in matters of far less moment) he could do
no less than free his conscience, by making the whole House Witnesses of the
cleernesse of his actions and intentions. Considering,

1. The many high speeches and threats often used against the King in all
places, none excepted.

2. The dangers the King escaped from this very Army, which drove him from
Hampton Court to the Isle of Weight; and may possibly pursue him thither.

3. The Antimonarchical Principles wherewith many Members of this Army, and
their Chaplians, and many elsewhere are seasoned, who cannot govern this
Kingdom at their pleasure by a military Olygarchy of Grandees of the Committee
of Safety at Derby-house and the Army (and so establish the Kingdom of the
Saints) nor yet bring it to their own level, but by taking off summa papaverum
capita, all that is high and eminent. There is a Crowned Head in their way
which must be removed.

4. The corrupted fantasies of many Antimonarchical Schismatics with
Revelations and Raptures, who serve the Devil for Gods sake; making him the
Author, and the doing of his will the pretense of all their crimes and
villainies.

5. The many desper^te guilty persons that fear peace; and are resolved, now
the Sword is out, to burn the Scabbard. These look upon the King with an evil
eye, as the Center in whom all Interests must unite before we can have Peace.
Despair tempts these men to make one sin a degree, and step to a higher. These
three last fort of men having cast off all fear of God, will as easily contemn
Gods substitute, the King; as he that casts off all reverence to the King will
contemn his substitute, a Constable.

6. The continual endeavors of the Grandees of Derby-house and the Army, to
put all the Arms, Garrisons, Ships, and Strengths of the Kingdom into the
hands of Antimonarchical, Schismatical Independents: in order to which, they
are raising of new Forces, and erecting new Garrisons in most Counties. These
men when they could not get a power from the House of Commons to raise what
Forces they pleased, (for when it was moved, they there ordered, that no more
motions should be made for raising new Forces, but between the hours of ten and
twelve) yet what they could not get by their leave, they now take without their
leave: the General granting Commissions for raising and listing Horse and Foot
in almost all Counties; for example, Sir Hardresse Waller (that one eyed
Polyphemus of Pastebord) lately sent forth Commissions in the County of Devon:
(by virtue (as his Commissions say) of the power granted him from his
Excellency) for raising, listing, and training Horse and Foot, which shall be
no burden to the Country, but be in pay with the rest of the army. In these
Commissions he styles himself (untruly) Commander in chief of all the forces
of the five Western Associat Counties: and gave authority and encouragement to
the well affected (that is, to Independents, Sectaries, Antimonarchists, and
the more desperate, forlorn sort of people) to enter into, and subscribe
Engagements, to live and die with the Army (an imitation of the Members
Engagement) in defense of the Parliament, (that is, of the engaged faction of
Independents, Schismatics, and corrupt persons, whom only the Army looks upon
as the Parliament) witness the Declaration of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his
Council of War, showing the grounds of his advancing up to London. This
usurpation was complained of in the House of Commons, Monday 19. June, and
prohibited then by Order.

7. Peradventure the reason why this Letter was published so unseasonably in a
thin House, in so slight and surreptitious a way (as aforesaid) was, in hope it
would have been passed over in silence (as it had like to have been) and so the
whole House should have been engaged in the crime (if any such thing be
intended) as guilty of connivance and negligence, though not as Actors guilty
of the fact. The main scope of this party has ever been, by Treaties of
Accommodation, uniting all Interests, and other devices, to involve others in
their crimes, to infect others with their diseases; that all standing in need
of one and the same desperate way of cure, may jointly have the same friends
and foes, and the same sins and quarrels to defend.

8. Friday, 16 June 1648. I was told, the Committee of Derby house had lately
received a Letter from Col. Hammond, Governor of Carisbrook Castle, informing
them, That unless they supplied him with Money and Men, he could give no good
account of the King, in case the Revolted ships should attempt his rescue: and
farther, That he had matters of great importance to communicate to them, but
durst not commit them to Paper; but if they would send for him up, or send a
Confident of theirs to him, he would impart them. This may probably be the
business whereof Osburne gives information in his said Letters; and it may be
Mr. Walker had heard of this report in the Hall, as well as my self, and might
have the same conceit of it, that I have; if it be lawful for me to take
measure of another man's judgment by my own.

9. Lastly, who knows whether a powerful desperate party, may have a design to
take away the Kings life, and then declare his two eldest Sons incapable of
Government; supposing they deserted the Kingdom, and invited foreign States to
invade it: and then Crown the Duke of Gloucester, and so (abusing his tender
years) usurp the protection of him, and under color of that authority,
establish (by degrees) their own usurpation, and the peoples slavery; having
subdued their spirits by a long and customary bondage, under them; and having
filled all places of power, profit and preferment in the Kingdom with men of
their own principles and Interests, their own creatures and Confidents? This
Army (last April) in their Council (amongst other things) debated, The Deposing
of the KING, (why not murdering as well, since few Kings are deposed and not
murdered?) Dis-inheriting the PRINCE, and Crowning the DVKE of YORK: which was
then approved of by Cromwell and Ireton. Why may they not now dis-inherit both
the elder Sons, and Crown the Duke of Gloucester as well? See the excellent
Remonstrance of the Colchester Knights and Gentlemen, 1648. which I have
Printed herewith for your satisfaction. That some such design might be to make
away the KING, and dis-inherit the PRINCE, may well be suspected; because the
12. day of July, upon information, That the Prince had sent into England some
Blank Commissions to List men: Weaver (an Implement of the Army, and Son to an
Ale-house-keeper in Wilish.) moved the House of Commons to Vote the Prince a
Traitor, etc. And (I hear) that Mr. Solicitor (contrary to his Oath and duty of
his place) refuses to be of Council against the said Rolf; this Gentleman the
Solicitor has got above 300000 l. by keeping open shop to sell the cruel
mercies of the new Great Seal to the Royalists.

97. Trinity-house Petition for a Personal Treaty.
The 29. June. A Petition was delivered the House of Commons from the Masters of
Trinity-house, Masters and Captains of Ships and Seamen, for a Personal Treaty
with the KING; declaring the great decay of trade, to the undoing of many
thousand families, and that they would not fight against the revolted ships,
their Brethren, who desired but the same things with th^^. Tho. Scot said, That
the Surrey-men first delivered a Petition for a Personal Treaty, which was
seconded by the Kentish-men in Arms, and they by the City of London,: that all
this was a design to ruin the Godly party. That he had read of a Man, who
being asked when he was young, Why he did not marry? Answered, It was too soon:
and being asked the same question when he was old, Answered, it was too late.
So he was of opinion there could be no time seasonable for a personal Treaty,
or a Peace with so perfidious and implacable a Prince; but it would always be
too soon or too late. He that draws his sword upon his King must throw his
Scabbard into the fire. All peace with him will prove the spoil of the Godly.
To which was Answered, That some men got well by fishing in troubled waters;
and accounted peace their spoil, because war was their gain: and they looked
upon a Personal Treaty as a design against them (under the notion of the Godly,
Honest, Confiding party) because a Personal Treaty was the high way to peace.
But the generality of the people (who were despoyled of their Estates by the
War) resolved upon a Personal Treaty, without which there is no hope of Peace:
they would no longer be made fuel to that fire wherein these Salamanders live;
nor any longer feed those Horse-leeches, (the Army, their engaged party and
Servants) with their blood and marrow. It now appears who desire a new War;
namely, those Zealots who supply their indigent fortunes by War. These men fear
peace, doubting they shall be forced to disgorge what they have swallowed in
time of War: Ven, Miles Corbet, Hill the petty Lawyer of Haberdashers hall, the
two Ashes, Col. Harvy, and many other thriving Saints, opposed a Personal
Treaty; so their Petition had no success. I hear that (not many days after)
the Committee of Derby house (to take off this affront) employed Col.
Rainsborough (the quondam Neptune of our Seas) to go up and down and solicit
the Common sort of Mariners to subscribe, and present the House of Commons
with a counter Petition, wherein they offered to live and die with the
Parliament, etc. and that Rainsborough gave 12 d. a piece to as many as
subscribed it. This Petition was delivered.

The 2 of July, 98. The City Petitions for a personal Treaty.
and after that (upon occasion of the City Petition for a Personal Treaty in
London) upon the 5 of July, the House of Commons again took into debate a
Personal Treaty. They spent much time upon the place where?

1. Whether in the Isle of Wight? which the Independents principally affected.

2. Holdenby? which they next inclined unto.

3. Or any his Houses not nearer than 10 miles of London: at his own choice.

4. Or in the City of London?

Which two last places the Presbyterians approved of, but chiefly London: for
London, it was argued, That the Common Council and Officers of the Soldiery
would undertake for His safety against all Tumults. In any other place he would
be within the power of the Army; who might probably take him away again (as
they did at Holdenby) if they liked not the manner and matter of the Treaty.
London was a place of most Honor, Safety, and Freedom; and would best satisfy
the KING, the Scots, the people: In all other places (especially the Isle of
Wight) He would be still a prisoner to the Army; and therefore all he should
agree to, would be void by reason of Dures. Sergeant Wild Answered, That
Custodia did not always in Law signify Imprisonment; Though He was under
restraint of the Army. He was not in Prison; making a wyld kind of (nonsense)
difference between Restraint and Legal Imprisonment, (which all but himself
laughed at.) The King cannot plead Dures, no man can imprison or hurt the King
in his politic capacity as King, though in his natural capacity, as man, he is
as passive as other men. To which was replied, That it had been frequently said
in the House, the King was a prisoner. That there was no difference in Law,
between a restraint and an imprisonment, whether legal, or illegal. A tortious
restraint is called in Law, a false Imprisonment. That former Kings have
avoided their own Acts by pleading Restraint (or Imprisonment) and Constraint,
as R. 2. H. 3. That the King may as well plead Imprisonment, as the Parliament
plead a Force, which they have lately done. That the Kings Restraint in Law is
Arcta custodia, God grant it be salva custodia; we have lately had Information
to the contrary. The distinction between the Kings natural and politic
capacity was Treason in the Spencers, and so declared by 2 Acts of Parliament
in the time of Edw. 2. and Edw. 3. See Calvin's case in my Lord Cook, they are
unseparable by the Law. Tho. Scot argued, That the City was as obnoxious to the
Kings anger as any part of the Kingdom; and if the Treaty should be in London,
who shall secure us that the City will not make their Peace with the enraged
King, by delivering up our Heads to Him for a sacrifice, as the men of Samaria
did the heads of the 70 sons of Ahab? It was farther moved, That if the King
came not to London, but to one of his houses about 10 miles from London, That
He might be desired to give His Royal word to reside there until the
Conclusion of the Treaty. Col. Harvy slighted this motion, vilifying the Kings
Royal word, and saying, There was no trust in Princes; he alleged, the Kings
promises had been frequently broken; as when he protested the safety and
privileges of Parliament should be as precious to Him, as the safety of His
Wife and Children, and within three or four days after came with armed Guards
to force the House, and other instances which have been too often remembered,
and shall be here omitted.

At last they fell upon a report, that the Committee of Lords and Commons had
Voted, They would not insist upon the 3 Votes preparatory to a Treaty, viz.
Presbytery, the Militia, and recalling all Declar. Procla. etc. This was long
argued to and fro. At last it was Voted, That the King be desired to assent to
the said 3 preparatory Propositions, 99: My Lord Says discourse about a
Personal Treaty.
and sign them with his hand, to be passed as acts of Parliament when the King
shall come to Westminster.

My Lord of Warwick had moved in the Lords House about this time for a Personal
Treaty, and was seconded by the Earl of Northumberland; but my Lord Say opposed
it, and prevailed against it: afterward my Lord Say in his way home visited
the Duke of Richmond, and amongst other discourse, told the Duke, He was sorry
to find so great an indisposition to peace, saying, he had moved for a Personal
Treaty, but could not prevail; this was done upon hopes the Duke would have
writ so much to the Queen, or Prince. But the Earl of Holland coming that day
to see the Duke, and the Duke relating to the Earl what the Lord Say had told
him, the Earl of Holland discovered the truth to him, and so spoiled the
design: you see the Devil does not always own the endeavors of his servants.

The said 5 July, the Speaker, as soon as he sat in his Chair, 100. The news
of the D. of Buck. taking Arms.
alarmed the house of Commons with the news of the Duke of Buckingham's, and
the Earl of Holland's drawing into an hostile posture; relating they were 2000.
that they intended to take Lambeth-house, that the Bullets would presently be
about their ears if they did not rise; which put the zealots into such a rout,
that they presently cried, Adjourn, adjourn, until Monday; and had hardly so
much patience as to hear any reasons to the contrary; but this was but a
counterfeit fear: the design hid under it was, to prevent the City from
bringing in that day their Petition for a Personal Treaty, and to leave the
whole power of the House, during the Adjournment, to the Committee of Derby
house, to raise what Horse and Foot they pleased, under color of suppressing
this Insurrection.

For when they found they could not prevail to Adjourn, 101. Skippon authorized
to raise 1000 Horse.
they moved for power to be given to Maj. Genesis Skippon to raise Horse, whether
to possess the Avenues and passages from the City to the Earl of Hollands Army,
or to keep the City under the terror of a Horse Guard, is doubtful.

And the same day Mr. Swynfin reported from the Committee of Safety, That they
offered to the Consideration of that House, 102. A Report from Derby house that
the Members should underwrite for maintaining of Horse.
that it was fit the House should have a Horse Guard, and that every Member
should underwrite how many Horse he will pay for 10 days.

This is refused by some Gentlemen upon these grounds:

1. It bears the aspect of an Imposition or Tax set upon the House by their
Committee.

2. The Members have not suffered alike; and therefore cannot do alike, some
have lost much and got nothing, others have got much and lost nothing: and it
is not equal that Losers should bear equal burdens with Getters, and
contribute out of their Losses to maintain other men's Gains, and preserve them
in their rich Offices, and Bishops Lands purchased for little or nothing.
Gentlemen are made Beggars, and Beggars Gentlemen.

3. It is a dividing motion: tending to lay an imputation of Malignancy and
dis-affection upon those that cannot, as well as those that will not,
subscr^be: and so gives a great advantage to the Gainers over the Losers, which
the Losers have no reason to submit to.

4. A Personal Treaty being now in debate: this motion makes many Members
forbear the House, who cannot grant, and dare not deny: It carries with it
therefore something of design and terror, and so takes away the liberty of
Parliament, which when so weighty a business is handling is ought to be.

If this Horse Guard be raised, how shall we assure our selves they shall be
Disbanded after ten days, being once under Command? It is therefore a subtle,
malicious, tyrannous act, for the Committee of Safety to put so tempting a
motion upon the House, and give men cause to suspect that something of Design
and Danger lies hid under it.

103. The device of a forged letter.
About this time a Letter without any name subscribed, was left at Major General
Brown's house, in his absence: consisting of two parts.

1. A Preamble, of great respect and love born to him by the Epistoler for his
fair carriage to the King, and good affection to peace, and reconcilement with
the King.

2. An Admonition to look to himself, and moderate his Actions, the Army
looking upon him as their only Enemy, and Opponent in the City, lest they
should seize upon him and carry him away, or do him some other mischief. This
is conceived to be an Independent mouse-trap set up to catch a Presbyterian in;
for if the Major General had not discovered the said Letter, and it had been
found about him, or in his House; or if it had been testified that such a
Letter was left at his house and concealed: here had been matter enough for an
Impeachment against him. 104. Correspondency with Card. Mazerini.


The Grandees of Derby house and the Army solicit the detaining of the PRINCE
in France, and the delaying of his journey for England, lest he trouble the yet
unsettled Kingdom of the Saints. To negotiate which, they have an Agent lying
Lieger with Cardinal Mazarini (the great French instrument of State) who is so
well supplied with Money, and so open handed, That it has been heard from
Mazarin's own mouth, That all the money the Queen and Prince has cost the
Crown of France, has come out of the Parliament Purse with a good advantage.
It is likewise said, Mazarini has an Agent here, to drive on the Interests of
France in England.

The Grandees in reference to the pulling down of Monarchy, 105. Doleman's
Antimonarchical Book printed.
and the establishing of their Olygarchy or Tyranny (contrary to their
Remonstrances, Declarations, the National Covenant, and their late Vote, That
they would not alter the ancient form of Government by King, Lords, and
Commons) have caused the Book written by Parsons the Jesuit, 1524 (under the
feigned Name of Doleman) and called [A Conference about the succession of the
Crown] to be published, under the Title of [Several Speeches delivered at a
Conference, concerning the power of Parliaments, to proceed against their Kings
for mis-government.] Parsons had made this Book a Dialogue, these Men have made
it into Speeches. The Arguments and Presidents are merely the same; you see
they can join Interests with France: Doctrine with the Jesuits, to carry on
their design, See the Conclusions, 15, 16, 17.
and reduce us to the condition of French Peasants or Slaves, under the Kingdom
of the Saints. Doleman's Book was condemned by Act of Parliament, 35 Eliz. But
what care the Grandees for Acts of Parliament, having fooled the people into a
belief, That both the Legislative and Judicative power is in the two Houses of
Parliament without the King, and that an over-powering party or Junto in the
two Houses (complying with an Army to keep the rest under force and awe) is the
Parliament. 106. The Legislative, Judicative power, and the Militia, where they
reside. See the Conclusions, 15, 16, 17.


The Parliament consists of 3 Estates.

1. The King, whom the Law calls, Principium, Caput and finis Parliamenti:
and therefore he only can Call, He only can Dissolve a Parliament, and is
himself called and chosen by none, being primus motor, that animates all.

2. The Lords: who have their creation and vocation only from the Kings bounty.

3. The Commons, who have their summons only from the Kings Writ, though their
election from the people; and in that respect only (the people being too
diffused a Body to be Assembled) they have something of Representation in them,
being the Epitome of the People. These 3 Estates concurring, have power to make
news Laws, to change or repeal old Laws, and in some doubtful cases rarely
happening (which the Judges dare not venture upon) they have power to interpret
the Laws. This is a wise and politic constitution, for if any one, or any two
of the said three Estates should make new Laws, Change, Repeal or Interpret old
Laws, arbitrarily and at pleasure, without mutual agreement of all the three
Estates, it were in the power of that one or two to enslave the other Estate or
Estates so omitted. Besides, the Law does not favor the making of new Laws,
nor the changing and repealing of old Laws, being an innovation that stirs too
many humors in a body politic, and indangers its health, and brings contempt
upon the Laws: Leges priusquam latae sunt perpendendae, quando latae, sunt
obediendae, says Arist. Pol. But though all 3 Estates must assent to the
making, altering or repealing a Law, yet any one of the 3 Estates has a
Negative Voice, and may dissent from such making, 2 H. 5. 4. H. 7. c. 18. 12.
H. 7. c. 20. 1 Ja. c. 1. 2 Chapter c. 1.
altering or repealing, to avoid innovation, as abovesaid. How then can the two
Houses of Parliament exercise the Legislative power, and make, change or repeal
any Law by Ordinance, without the King, (the first Estate and head of the
Parliament) and so deprive Him of His Negative Voice, and the people of their
Laws, Liberties, and Estates, contrary to 9 H. 3. Magna Charta, 1 part. Instit.
sect. 234. in fine. 7. H. 7. 14. especially when this very Parliament declares
in the Exact Col. 1 part. p. 727. That the King has a Negative Voice, and that
Bills are not Laws (or Acts of Parliament) without the Kings assent
(consequently nor Ordinances.) And as the two Houses take upon them the
Legislative power without the King, so in the case of the 4 Aldermen and Sir
John Maynard, they usurped a Judicative Power in case of Treason tryable in the
Kings Bench: yet it is most certain, that when the 3 Estates in Parliament have
passed any Act, their power determines as to that Act, and then the Authority
of the Judges begins, which is Judicative: whose Office is (upon cases brought
before them) to determine whether that Act be binding or no; (for Acts of
Parliament against common right, Repugnant, or Impossible, are Void ( Cook 8.
f. 118. Dr. and Student, l. 1. c. 6.) and to expound the meaning, and
signification of the words of such Act. If therefore the 2. Houses usurp the
Legislative and Judicative power, or the Militia, otherwise than has been by
the fundamental constitution of this Monarchy, and the practice of all ages
accustomed, the Grandees of the two Houses and Army seem to lay claim to them
all by the Sword, for in the late Declaration against the Scots Papers, p. 64.
they say, That they engaged in this war upon these principles, viz. To keep the
Legislative power, and the exercise of the Militia, without and against the
Kings consent and p. 63. ibidem, the Members tell us, that in all matters
concerning Church or State, we have no judge upon Earth but themselves. It
follows then, the Grandees do it to subvert the ancient Government, Laws and
Liberties of this Nation; and establish a Military Olygarchy, or the Kingdom of
the Saints over us in themselves. In order to which design they have put all
things out of order, and turned them upside down; nay, they have crucified the
whole Kingdom with Saint Peter's Crucifixion, the head downwards, and the Heels
upwards.

When this King went into Scotland, He compared the Commonwealth to a Watch,
which they had taken in pieces; and advised them to keep every piece and pin
safe, and put all in their right places again; but now all the principal pieces
are either broken, or lost. God grant them to number their hours better
hereafter, and to cloze well with our Master Workman; for though this Kingdom
has always been Ruled by King, Lords, and Commons; yet by the KING,
architectonice; and by the other Two, organice; the King as the Architect, the
Lords and Commons as His Instruments; each in his proper sphere of Activity,
without interfering: and till this again come in use, look for no peace.

The Independent Grandees of the Parliament and Army are much offended with the
City, and their adherents, 107. The Armies Aspect upon the City and personal
Treaty.
in Petitioning for a Personal Treaty with the King, and give out, That when
they have done with Colchester, they will humble the City, and bring it to
better obedience, for which purpose, they have already taken all the
Block-houses, upon the River East of the City, Windsor-Castle West of the City,
and are now fortifying Gyddy-tall near Rumford in Essex South from the City;
the like they intend at Hampton Court; and to build a Fort upon the Isle of
Dogs, to keep under the Seamen: whereby, possessing the principal ways, and
Avenues to the City, they shall neither feed, nor Trade, but at the discretion
of the Army. In the mean time the Cities desires of a Personal Treaty are
delayed and made frustrate by a tedious Conference between a Committee of
Parliament, and a Committee of Common Council. And Counter-Petitions against a
Personal Treaty are sent about by Alderman Gybs, Foukes, Estwicke, Wollaston,
Andrews, Nigh the Independent Priest, and others, (who hold rich Offices by
favor of the Grandees) to be subscribed even by Apprentice Boys; whereby it
appears the Independents have no intent, to make peace with the King, but to
engage in a new War, thereby to contiune their Army, and our Slavery.

The yearly Income they raise upon the people under color of this War,
(besides the Kings Revenue, Sequestrations, and Compositions) amounts to three
Millions sterling per annum, being six times as much as ever the most greedy
and burdensome of our Kings raised: where our Stewards hide these our Talents
(public Debts and Arrears being unpaid) were worth finding out, if any but the
Devil could give an Account thereof. But this is an unsoundable Gulf, here my
plumb-line fails me.

108. Major Genesis Skippon's complaint.
The 10. of July, Major General Skippon complained in the House of Commons of a
printed Paper, called, [A Motive to all loyal Subjects, to endeavor the
preservation of his Majasties Person] wherein (he pretended) he was falsely and
scandalously slandered for speaking some words in the House to divert the
Examination of Mr. Osborn's Charge against Rolf. The House (that is, the
Independents) were as diligent to become his Compurgators, and vindicate his
credit, by passing and Printing 5. Votes for him, as they had formerly been to
ruin the KING'S Honor by passing a Declaration against Him. This fellow
Skippon was heretofore Waggoner in the Low Countries to Sir Francis Vere, after
that came over into England a poor forlorn Commander, and obtained of the King
his Letters of Commendation to keep a kind of Fencing School in the City
Military yard, and teach the Citizens the postures of the Pike and Musket, and
Train them; where he wore the mask of Religion so handsomely, that he soon
insinuated into their favors, and found them very bountiful Patrons to him;
there he got his fat belly, and full purse; from the City he became Major
General to the new-modelled Army: and observing some discontents arising
between the City and Army, and being willing to keep two strings to his bow,
that he might uphold his credit with the City, he voluntarily submitted himself
to some affronts, purposely and politickly put upon him in the Army; and yet
that the Army might understand him to be their creature, he marched with the
Army in their Triumph through the City, still carrying himself as a moderate
reconciling man, and sweetning the insolences of the Army, by making mild and
fair interpretations of their Actions; yet still so much magnified the power of
the Army, as if he would persuade the City they were beholding to the Army, for
making no worse use of their strength against them: Thus (as many other
moderate, prudential men do) he lay a good while undescried in the bosom of
the City, and there as a Spy and Intelligencer kept Centry for the Army,
until such time as the City petitioning the Commons for restoring of their own
Militia to them again, the Council of the Army, (to mock them with an
uneffectuall Militia) by their engaged party in the House, and the Committee of
Derby-house (of which Cabal Skippon is one) caused their confiding man Skippon,
not only to be named of the Committee of the Militia (although no Citizen) but
to be obtruded upon the City as their Major General, Commander in Chief of all
their Forces, without whom nothing is to be acted. This being resented and
opposed, as contrary to the Cities Charter and Liberties, Skippon found he was
discovered, and then (taking advantage of the Earl of Holland's going forth
into Arms) upon a Report from the Committee of Derby-house, the Commons
ordered, that a Party of Horse should be raised and listed under Skippon:
Skippon by virtue of this Order granted Commissions to diverse schismatic
Apprentices to raise men underhand, and authorized the said Commissioned
Apprentices to grant Sub-commmissions again to other Apprentices under them for
the like purpose: This was pretended to prevent Tumults and Insurrections, but
indeed it was to join with the Independent party of the City, and the army,
(when they have done their work at Colchester) in purging the Presbyterians out
of the Common Council and Parliament; in reference whereto, the Army have
resolved not to march Northwards against the Scots, until they have brought
this City to more absolute obedience, or laid it in the dust, according to
Cromwell's advice; as a preparative to which design, the prevailing party in the
House, Yet they knew they came in by Authority of the Parl. of Scotland.
July 15. (hand over head) Voted, All such Scots as are come into England in
hostile manner, without consent of both Houses of Parliament of England,
Enemies to the State; and all such English as do or shall adhere to, aid, or
assist them Traitors: and the next day following, Weaver o^enly in the House
affirmed, that the Scottish design of D. Hamilton, the Colchester design, and
that of the Earl of Holland, were all begun and carried on in the City of
London: to which Ven, the two Ashes, Harvy, Scot, Miles Corbet, Blackstone, Sir
Peter Wentworth, and others gave applause: lo here a foundation laid for a new
Charge against the City, when the Army are at leisure to make use of it. This
Hypocrite Skippon, when he had spoken any thing in the House prejudicial to the
King or City, about a Week after (when the venom he has spet has wrought its
effect, and is past remedy) usually complains in the House, that his words are
carried forth of the House, and maliciously and falsely reported in the City to
his disgrace and danger, and repeating in a more mild and qualified way some
part of what he had formerly said, appealed to the House, Whether that were not
the full truth of his words? When the House, having forgotten his former words,
no man can, and (for fear of the envy and malice of a powerful Faction) no man
will contradict him; this is his way of Apologizing and clearing himself. He
has got above 30000 l. in his purse, besides 1000 l. a year land of
Inheritance given him by the Parliament. He has secured his personal Estate
beyond Sea, and his Wife and Children, and thereby withdrawn all pawns and
pledges of his Fidelity both out of the power of the Parliament and City, and
is here amongst us but in the nature of a soldier of fortune.

Note, that upon the said 15 day of July, when the debate was for Voting the
Scots that were come in, Enemies, etc. the first question was put, 106. D.
Hamiltons Army Voted Enemies.
that all such Scots as are, or shall come into England, in hostile manner,
without consent of both Houses of the Parliament of England, were Enemies, etc.
but upon farther debate, the words (or shall) were left out, upon this
Consideration, that the Earl of Argyle might happily come into England with a
Party, and fall upon Duke Hamilton in the rear to divert him.

July the 20. The Speaker told the Commons, 110. D. Hamilton's Letter and
Decaration brought to the House.
that Major General Lambert had made stay of a Scottish Gentleman, one Mr.
Halybarton who passed through his quarters with Letters from D. Hamilton, to
the two Houses, and the King; that he found about Mr. Haly-barton diverse
private Letters, for the carrying of which, he had public on Authority, and
therefore Lambert made bold to seal those private Letters in a packet by
themselves with his own seal and Mr. Haly-bartons: That Lambert had sent up Mr.
Haly-barton with one Lieut. Col. Osburn, a Godly Scottish Gent. and another
Keeper, in nature of a Prisoner. 111. L. Col. Osburn a fugitive Scot.
This Osburn delivered that private packet to the Speaker; so a Committee was
named to peruse that private packet, and Osburn was called into speak what he
knew; who delivered at the Bar, that the Godly party in Scotland were oppressed
and trodden under foot by Duke Hamilton's party, that their very souls we
afflicted at his proceedings, that the Kirk of Scotland with one mouth
proclaimed in their faces their engagement and proceeding thereupon to be
damnable and destructive: he desired the House not to look upon these
proceedings as the Act of the Nation of Scotland, since there were a great many
Godly men who hoped the Lord would enable them in his good time to march into
England with the Marquess of Argyle and fall into the rear of Duke Hamilton
with a diversion. He reported, the Scots that came in to be but 8000 Horse and
Foot, and Langdale but 2000. Then was read the Letters of D. Hamilton, wherein
He complains no answer had been given to the Parliament of Scotlands just
desires of the 26 April last, that by authority of the Scottish Parliament he
was necessitated to come into England according to the Covenant, and not
without the invitation of diverse well-affected English who had taken the
Covenant. There was a Declaration enclosed in the Letters, which the prevailing
party obstructed the reading of (yet the Lords having printed it, they have
since read it in the House) and presently the question was put, that all such
English as have invited the Scots under D. Hamilton, to come in hostile manner
into England, shall be declared Traitors? and carried in the Affirmative. I
formerly told you, that about 12 July, Weaver moved, that the Prince of Wales
might be Voted a Traitor: what they could not then carry with a fore-wind, they
now brought in again with a side wind; but who doubts but the Prince invited in
the Scots to the relief of his Father and himself oppressed and imprisoned,
contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant, by a Rebellious Army, and a
schismatical party of both Houses engaged with the said Army: And that the
Scots are come in according to the Covenant only?

112. A motion in the House of Commons to Bayl Rolf.
A little before this time Tho. Scot, Sir P. Wentworth, Blackstone, C. Harvy,
Hill the Lawyer, and others pressed the House with much earnestness to Bayl
Rolf, committed Prisoner to the Gatehouse upon the Complaint of Mr. Osburn for
endeavoring to make away the KING: u^ing many words in his commendation for
his godliness and faithfulness, and complaining of his hard usage in Prison
where he lay amongst Rogues. It was opposed by many, because High Treason is
not baylable by the Law, neither is the House of Commons a Court of Judicature;
and therefore can neither Imprison, nor Bail any but their own Members. At
last Mr. Sam. Brown moved, that a Committee might examine the business for
matter of Fact, and report to the House, and then the House (if they saw cause)
might Bail him; and bind over Master Osburn to prosecute him next term in the
King's Bench. This motion took effect, and great care was taken for the present,
that Rolf might have better entertainment in the Gate House according to his
quality; having been not long since a Shoo-maker, one of the Gentle-craft.

113. The Speakers Warrant to search for the Footboy that beat Sir Hen.
Mildmay.
About this time, 2 Files of Musketeers, by warrant from the Speaker of the
House of Commons, came in the dead time of the night to the Houses of Sir Paul
Pynder, and Alderman Langham, pretending to search for the Footboy that beat
Sir H. Mildmay. They forced open the doors of Sir Paul's house, and searched
with great diligence; but could not do the like at Alderman Langham's, who
being guilty of having some Money in his House, durst not adventure to obey the
Warrant and open his doors; nor had he reason to do it, his House (by the Law)
being his Castle of Defense, the privilege thereof not to be violated but in
case of Felony or treason. Compare the diligent prosecutions in the behalf of
Sir Harry Mildmay, with the slack and negligent proceedings in the behalf of
the King, and you will find a new practical Law (contrary to the old known
established Law) that a trespass against a Grandee (though but a Subject) is
more than a treason against a King.

Fears and Iealousies arising from several Informations (as that of Croply and
Hyde, called, 114. Fears and jealousies cause the City to resume the power of
their own Militia.
The Resolutions of the Army) and diverse other Symptoms of danger, but
especially Skippons secret Li^ting of Schismatiques in the City amongst the
Congregations of Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Patience, and others, with power given him to
kill and slay; his listing servants against their Masters, and setting up a
Power against a Power, had provoked that dull beast the City to know their own
strength, to look into their Charter and the Customs of the City, and to
Counter-list in their own defense: for which purpose, they passed an Act of
Common Council, dated 27. July 1648. which was soon complained of in the House
of Commons by Ven, Harvey, Pennington, and other ill Birds of that Corporation,
who usually defile their own nests, after many aggravations; that after they
had fought with the King for the Militia, any power out of the Parliament
should presume to exercise it: a Committee was appointed to Treat with a
Committee of the Common Council, to hear what they could say for themselves,
and by what authority they claimed the use of their own Militia. The Committees
met, and amongst other things the said question was asked, By what authority
they listed men? To which was answered, That they did it by the Law of
Self-defence, warranted by the Law of God, of nature, and of the Land: and by a
farther Authority, to question which, would make lirtle for the advantage of
the Parliament: This mysterious Answer stopped the mouths of the Parliament
Committee. If London should plead their Charter and usages, other places might
do the like; so this business was shut up in silence. Note that many
Sectaries of Westminster, Southwark, and the Hamlets have been invited and
countenanced to petition the House of Commons against uniting their Militia's
with London, upon pretended cavils: As that they desired to have equal number
of Voices in the Militia with London: But since London bears 7. parts of 9.
in the charge, it is an unreasonable demand.

By Orders (as is thought) from Derby-house, 115: The Governor of Dublyn
seizes and sends over Prisoners the Presbyterian Commanders.
Colonel Jones Governor of Dublyn, has seized upon most of the Presbyterian
Commanders thereabouts, and sent them Prisoners to Westchester, as Sir Maurice
Eustace, Sir John Gyford, Col. Willoughby, Colonel Flower, Major Stephens,
Major Capron, etc. to make room for Independent Officers in his Army, that the
Saints only may possess the good things of this world; but chiefly, that his
Army being Commanded by Antimonarchical Schismatics may the better sympathize
and unite with the Antimonarchical Papists in Owen Roe Oneal's Army, against
the Lord Inchiquin, whereof the said Lord has given some hint, as I have
aforesaid. You see the predominant Principle is Antimonarchy, which easily
overswayes Religion on both sides.

116. A Frigot of the Princes taken with many Letters and Commissions.
Sir Milles Levesey having casually taken a little Frigot of the Princes, called
the Chistopher manned with one Captain Green, and 8. men, took diverse
Commissions in her, and a Letter of Mart, granted to the said Captain to make
prize of Rebels and Enemies Goods, and a Paper of Instructions, prohibiting
Green to use any Hostility until the Prince had published his Declaration, and
until it were designed who were His Enemies; other writings were then taken,
which were referred to a Committee of the House of Commons to peruse and
report. Mr. Lechmore reported from the said Committee, That some of those
writings were not fit to be published in the House, (hereby you see that the
House is already divested of that Power and Authority which the People have
Trusted only them with, and all is now usurped by confiding Sectary Committees)
so Mr. Lechmore reported, That there was an Adjudication out of the Princes
Admiralty held in the Isle of Jersey, whereby a ship belonging to one Tucknell
was adjudged against him, upon this ground given in the Adjudication, That
Tucknell had taken that damnable Oath, called [The National Covenant.] I appeal
to any man that does not hastily believe all he hears, whether it be probable
the Prince (in such a conjuncture of time, when the Parliament it self says,
That the Prince invited the Scots to invade England, and had declared for them)
would hazard the losing of the Scots, by inserting such a clause in the
Adjudication? All is not Gold that glisters; these Letters may be St. Martins
ware, counterfeit stuff.

117. A design to seize on diverse Presbyterian Aldermen, Lords and Commons.
About this time (it is reported by some that profess to know it) there was a
design for Skippon's new listed-men to seize upon Alderman Langham, Alderman
Bunce, and some of the Lords and Members of the House of Commons in the night;
whereof notice being given, some of the Members knowing that Treachery (like
the Basilisk) dies if it be first seen, to show that it was discovered, caused
one of their Party in the House, to move, That Skippon might be Ordered not to
seize on, kill or slay any Member of either House.

An order passed the House of Commons for the Earl of Warwick, to fight the
Prince at Sea. It was sent up to the Lords, 118. An Ordinance for the Earl of
Warwick to fight the Prince at Sea.
and passed that House too; whereby it became an Ordinance. Yet some of the
Lords entered a protestation against it, as the Earls of Lincoln, Suffolk, Lord
North.

2. Of August, The Zealots of the House of Commons fell again upon the
business of Rolf, 119. More endeavors of the Independents in favor of Rolf.
at an unseasonable hour of the day, and in a thin House. They ordered a
Conference with the Lords about him, and that the Lords be desired to join with
the Commons in Bayling of him; and yet, for Treason, a man is not Baylable by
Law. I cannot hear that Mr. Osburn's time of staying with Freedom and Safety to
prosecute Rolf is renewed by the Commons, although it be expired; you see the
Iron-bound Saints of the Army are impregnable, even against High Treason; if
this Puny Saint be so inviolable, what hope have Major Huntington, and John
Lilbourn to be heard against Cromwell?

For if the man such freedom have,

What then must he that keeps the Knave?

Yet if Rolf had but bastinadoed Sir Henry Mildmay (and that is no great matter)
peradventure he had been prosecuted in earnest.

Thursday, 3. August, 120. A Letter from the Earl of Warwick for Martial Law at
Sea.
a Letter from the Earl of Warwick was read in the House of Commons,
complaining of the Refractorinesse of the Seamen, and that he could not govern
them without a Commission for Martial Law; which was readily assented to; as
any thing that cries up Arbitrary power, above the known Laws, usually is. But
how this will agree with the discipline of the Sea, and how they will fight
being so yoaked, I know not.

The same day a Letter passed the House of Commons, 121. A Letter from the
Parliament to the Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland.
directed to the Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, setting forth what the
Parliament had done in way of settling peace, reforming the Church and
Universities, and maintaining the Covenant and union between the two Nations,
and complaining of Duke Hamilton's Invading England under the Authority of the
Parliament of Scotland, to the Kirk there. How dangerous this president may
prove to both Kingdoms, to make a few ambitious, paedantical Churchmen supreme
Judges over Parliament and State affairs, in ordine ad Deum: and how apt they
are to lay hold upon such occasions, and kindle their zeal into a consuming
flame, I leave to all wise men to judge.

122. A Declaration and 2. Letters from the Prince, to the City. The Commons
Debate upon them.
Thursday, 3. August. The Sheriffs of London and some of the Common Council
brought to the House the Copies of two Letters they had received from the
PRINCE; one directed to the Common Council, expressing his Highness good
affection to Peace, and to the whole City; and his endeavors to vindicate his
Fathers Liberty and just Prerogative and Rights; to restore to the People their
Laws, Liberties, and Property, to free them from that bondage under which they
were now held like a Conquered Nation, to ease them of Excise and Taxes, to
settle Religion according to his Fathers Agreement made with the Scots, and to
reduce all things into their ancient and proper Chanel. This Letter was
accompanied with his Declaration to the same purpose. The other was to the
Merchant Adventurers, Informing them he had made stay of 3. of their ships, but
without any intent to make prize of them, desiring to borrow 20000 l. of them
to be repayed out of the Customs, and requiring their speedy answer. To which
Col. Harvy (first aggravating many faults in the King's Government, according
to the scandalous Declaration against him) said, The Prince was his Fathers own
Son, as like him as could be. That he had invited the Scots to come in, and
declared for them; and had been formerly in Arms against the Parliament. That
he was but a subject; And moved the House to declare him a Rebel and a
Traitor. Sir Peter Wentworth, Mr. Knightly, and Mr. Blackstone seconded him
with much earnestness; so did Edward Ash, who farther moved, That the Common
Council and Merchants should give no answer to his Letters, saying, there was
no danger the Prince should make prize of their ships, for that he had engaged
to the States of the Low Countries to do no act prejudicial to Trade. At last
the Debate was put off until the next day, being Friday: when the Speaker
putting the House in mind of it again, It was earnestly called upon by the
younger Sir John Evelin (Mr. Solicitors shadow) Scot, Weaver, Holland, Boys,
and almost all the Godly Gang. So the Debate was resumed: and Weaver went very
high to try the temper of the House. But the Debate in Terminis, That the
Prince should be declared a Rebel and a Traitor, was soon laid by (though
violently pressed) chiefly upon these reasons.

1. That they had not the Originals of the Princes Letter and Declaration,
(which the Common Council still kept) but only Copies, not so much as attested
upon Oath by any authentical Clerk; therefore no legal proceedings could be
upon them.

2. To Vote the Prince a Traitor the same day when they sent Messengers to
invite the King his Father to a Treaty of Peace, would argue no peaceable
inclination in them, and would be so understood by the People.

3. They were engaged by the National Covenant to defend the King's Person,
Crown and Dignity; but the Prince, Heir apparent to His Crown, was (next under
God) the chief supporter of his Crown and Dignity, therefore to Vote him a
Traitor was to subvert his Crown and Dignity.

4. By the Stat. 25. Edw. 3. it is High Treason to endeavor the destruction of
the Prince, the Kings eldest Son; but to declare him a Rebel and a Traitor, was
to endeavor to destroy him; and therefore High Treason.

5. The people were already jealous that the KING and His Posterity should be
laid by; and in them the Monarchical Government of this Nation subverted, and a
new form of Government introduced; they had already by the Votes of No
Addresses to the KING, and by their Declaration against Him (wherein they say,
They can no longer confide in Him) laid by the KING, and now to Vote the PRINCE
a Rebel and a Traitor, was to lay by both him, and his Brother the DUKE of
YORK, who adheres to him, which would exceedingly confirm the people in their
fears. But what they could not do expressly, All that adhere to the Prince,
declared Traitors.
they did implicitly, by Voting All that should adhere to, aid, or assist the
PRINCE, Rebels and Traitors: Hereby they put a tie upon the City not to redeem
their Ships, by lending 20000 l. to the Prince; and yet had a Pirat taken them,
it had been lawful to redeem them.

Saturday, 5 August. 123. The National Covenant.
The House of Commons went upon the Commissioners to judge of Scandals; there
was a Clause in the Ordinance, forbidding the Nomination of such as refused the
National Covenant, which was strongly opposed by the Independents, who argued,
That the National Covenant was but a League sworn mutually by the two Nations;
that the Scots by Invading England had first broke it, and thereby set the
English at liberty from it, that the Covenant was not Jure divino, no more than
Presbytery was. To which was Answered, That the large Treaty containing the
League between the two Nations, so did not the Covenant, which was a Vow made
unto God with our hands lifted up to heaven, for the maintenance and
observation of the ends and principles expressed in the Covenant, from which no
power on Earth can absolve. That though the Covenant was not Jure divino, yet
the keeping of it after we have taken it is Jure divino, it being the revealed
will of God, that we should not offer to him the sacrifice of fools; a Covenant
to day, and break it to morrow.

124. A new Militia erected in every County, in the hands of Sectaries.
Mondon, 7 August. A particular Ordinance to put the County of Wilts into a
posture of defense was read, many that were named to be Deputy Lieutenants, or
Commissioners, were mean petty fellows, as one Read a Serving-man, and others,
such as refuse to Act upon the Ordinances for settling Church Government, and
declare that our Ministry is Antichristian, and are new dipped Brethren that
have been rebaptized. These to have power to raise what men, and put arms into
what hands they list; to fine 10 l. and twenty days Imprisonment for every
default, and to levy 400 l. a week upon that poor County over and above the
Taxes to Fairfax's Army, and Ireland and Free Quarter. The general Ordinance to
trust the Counties with their own defense, is obstructed, to give way to these
particular Ordinances, That all the Arms and Garrisons of the Kingdom may be
put into the hands of Antimonarchical Sectaries, and the Militia of Godly
Cutthroats established in every County toward the putting down of Monarchy,
and the erecting of the many-headed Tyranny of the Saints of Derby-house and
the Army. This Ordinance was committed.

125. Letters uncharacterized, a new invented net to catch Presbyterians in.
Tuesday, 8 August. Thomas Scot made report to the House of Commons of the
private Letters brought out of Scotland by Master Haly-barton, (whereof I have
formerly given you notice) this Gentleman being a public Messenger from the
Kingdom of Scotland, (and not from Duke Hamilton or his Army, whom only the
House of Commons have declared Enemies, without the concurrence of the Lords)
has leave given him by the Lords to stay a Month in England; yet the Commons
have since Voted he shall be gone in twenty four hours, or else he shall be
sent home in Custody. These Letters are most of them written in Characters, yet
this wel-gifted Brother Scot, has found out a New Light to Decipher them by;
and can tell by Inspiration, or by Privilege of Parliament, what Cipher or
Character must signify such a Letter of the Alphabet, or such a man's name.
This engine added to the Schismatical High Commission or Committee of
Clandestine Examinations, is better than any spring or trap to catch any active
Presbyterian that lies cross to the design of the Godly.

They may suppose any man's name to lie hid under such or such Characters and
Ciphers, and so accuse him by virtue of this mysterious art, of ayding or
complying with the Scots or the Prince, and pin whatsoever the Faction pleases
to call Treason upon his sleeve; these are the Arts of the Godly to make
Innocence it self seem nocent, and remove out of the way such as hinder the
erecting the Kingdom of the Saints.

These Letters so decyphered, were afterward at a Conference reported to the
Lords.

Wednesday, 9 August. 126. The City Petition answered.
The Answer to the City Petition (the day before delivered to the House of
Commons) was reported to the House. It was an Answer to some of the Prayers of
that Petition only, but gave no Answer to their desires, for the Disbanding of
all Armies to ease the people of their Burdens. The restoring of the peoples
Laws and Liberties. The enjoining all Members to attend the House; nor to the
effectual observation of the self-denying Ordinance: this last is a noli me
tangere; if all Members should be enjoined to be self-denying men, there would
be few Godly men left in the House; How should the Saints possess the good
things of this world? yet (after some debate, and diverse expressions used by
Weaver and Harvy, That it appeared by the Petition that the City would desert
the Parliament) they gave an Answer to their desires concerning the union to be
kept with Scotland, and a Cessation of all acts of Hostility during the Treaty
of Peace; That they had Voted the Army under Duke Hamilton Enemies, and
Declared, They would Act accordingly against them, to which they would adhere.

Master Hugerford argued, 127. The Commons debate to take away the Lords
Negative voice and act without them.
That because the Lords had denied to concur in the said Vote, he conceived the
House could make no such Declaration, nor act therein without them. This put
the Zealous into a flame, that any Member should argue against the Pr^vileges
of their House, so far as to deny them to be Almighty singly, and per se:
Reynolds the Lawyer positively affirming, that the Houses of Commons (being the
Representative of all the People) had power to Act without the Lords for safety
of the people, in case the Lords deserted their trust: you see in this doctrine
(as it has been already, and is likely to be practiced hereafter) a ground
laid to subvert the foundation of all Parliaments for ever, and to bring all
degrees of men to a parity or level. For the Parliament (by all the known Laws
of the Land) consisting of 3. Estates,

1. King, 2. Lords, And 3. Commons.

Two of the Estates ( viz. the Lords and Commons) have already laid by the
King, and His Negative Voice; and now the Commons debate of laying by the
Lords, and their Negative Voice, because (in their judgment) they desert their
Trust. And so the Commons alone shall act as a Parliament without KING or
Lords, until falling into contempt and hatred of the people, (which will soon
happen) the Grandees of Derby-house and the Army shall take advantage to lay
the House of Commons by, and usurp the Kings supreme Governing Power, the
Parliaments Legislative Power, yea and the Judges Judicative Power to
themselves, and establish the many-headed Kingdom, Tyranny, or Oligarchy of the
Saints (so much contended for) in themselves. O populum in servitutem paratum!
as Tyberius said of the Romans. This is the tail of the Viper, here lies his
venom.

128. Dead men Sequestered, and the Sanctuary of the Grave violated.
Saturday, 12 August, A Message was sent to the Commons from the House of Lords
in the behalf of Commissary General Copley, who had bought, and had a grant of
the Wardship of the Heir of Sir William Hansby, for which he paid Fine and
Rent, and was outed of it by a Sequestration laid upon Hansby's Estate after
his death, he having been never questioned for Delinquency during his
lifetime; and this was maliciously done about the time when Master Copley was
Imprisoned by the power of the Independent Faction, (whereof I have already
said something) Master Copley desired the Sequestration might be taken off, and
he permitted to enjoy his Contract made with the Court of Wards; alleging, that
to Sequester or condemn a man after his death, when he could not answer for
himself, was against the Laws of the Land, even in the highest crimes of Felony
and Treason: and produced a President, That the Committee of Lords and Commons
for Sequestrations had taken off a Sequestration from the Lands of Andrew Wall,
for no other reason but because Andrew Wall was Sequestered after his death. The
case was diversely argued; it was alleged, that in cases of the highest Treason
no man was condemned after death, because he was not then in being to answer
for himself, there could be no proceeding in Law against a non ens. In Felony
if a man will stand mute, he forfeits not his lands, because there wants an
Answer, and yet it was his own fault not to answer. The Parliament is bound by
all their Declarations made both to KING and People, and by the National
Covenant which contains all the first and just Principles of the Parliament, to
defend the Laws and Liberties of the Land, and not to subvert them. Take heed
of giving so dangerous a President for Kings to act by hereafter against the
People, and against this Parliament and their friends; since no man yet knows
which way the tide may turn. But the Independent Faction (whose interest it is
to keep themselves rich, and all men else poor) argued the case merely upon
point of profit and convenience, and neglected the right and jus of the
business. They alleged, That men of desperate resolutions would not reward the
loss of their own lives, so as they might preserve their Wives and Children:
That the State (as they pleased to style it) would lose much by such an
example, they could not therefore approve of the lenity of the Lords and
Commons used in Walls case; many had been Sequestered after death, and so
arguing a facto ad jus; alleged, that in case of Monopolies, satisfaction had
been awarded out of dead men's Estates. But they forgot that out of
Sequestrations no satisfaction is given to the parties wronged; the Committees
and Sequestrators imbezelling the profits of them to increase their own gains,
not bestowing them to repair injured men's losses, and so the equity upon which
this President is founded, fails in case of Sequestrations. Thus you see
these greedy Canibal Saints (like the hungry dogs that ate Jesabel) will devour
carrion, or any thing that will make them fat and full: yet they declared, They
were willing this Sequestration should be bestowed upon Master Copley as a
Gratuity, not as a Right for fear of the example. Observe, that if Master
Copley had waived his Title by Composition, and accepted this Wardship as a
Gift, they would presently have published it in their News books, and Gilbert
Mabbot should have proclaimed to all the world, that Presbyterians and
Independents might be thought alike guilty of impoverishing the Kingdom: for
the Faction labors nothing more than to have Companions in their sins and
shames: At last it was passed, That Mr. Copley should have the Wardship
restored to him, but great care taken it should not be drawn into example
hereafter, that a man may not be Sequestered for Delinquency after his death,
Cavete vobis mortui atque sepulti, dead men's graves are not secure from these
Lycanthropi, these Lou-garons.

129. The Messengers to the King, Report their Message in the House of Commons.
Monday, 14. August, Master Bulkeley in the name of himself and his
fellow-Commissioner Sir I. Hippesly (sent to the King to acquaint him with the
Vote of the two Houses, That they desired a Treaty with the King upon the
Propositions of Hampton Court in what place of the Island of Wight He should
think fit, and that the Treaty shall be with Honor, Freedom, and Safety to His
Majesty) Reported to the House of Commons all the circumstances and emergencies
of their employment, (the Kings Letter of Answer being carried to the Lords by
the Earl of Middlesex, and therefore not delivered to the Commons for the
present) which with much candor were related as follows, That the KING bad
them welcome, saying, they came about a welcome business (PEACE) which no man
desired with more earnestness than Himself; and if there did not ensue a
Peace, the fault should not lie at his door; and that He feared no obstructions
from any but those who gained by the War. He farther said, that His Majesty
desired (immediately after the delivery of the Votes) to speak a word with them
in private, which they modestly excused for want of Commission. That about two
days after his Majesty seeing the said Commissioners of the Parliament standing
in the Presence Chamber, first beckoned the Earl of Middlesex to him, and had
some short discourse singly with him, and then with Sir John Hippesly and
Master Bulkeley one after another. These three Gentlemen afterward comparing
their notes, found the Kings discourse to every of them to be all to one
effect, viz. Expressing His desires of a good peace; and importuning them to do
all good Offices conducing thereto. He farther related, that when they took
leave of His Majesty, He delivered His Answer in writng to them unsealed;
telling them, He doubted not their fidelity, though ill use had been made of
His last Answer which he sent open, it having been debated in private, and a
prejudice put upon it, before it was presented to the Houses. This free and
unpartial Report showing how earnest his Majesty is for Peace, did the King so
much Right, that the Antimonarchical Faction looked upon it as done to their
wrong, and Herbert Morley presently spit out his Venom to this purpose, Mr.
Speaker, These Gentlemen have delivered all to you but what they should
deliver, that is, the Kings Answer, which they have suffered first to be
carried to the Lords; they might have delivered you at least a Copy thereof (it
should seem Morley had forgot that the House proceeds not upon Copies) My
motion is, that since these Gentlemen have exceeded their Commission by
conferring privately with the King, the House may do well either to question
them therefore, or give them an Act of Oblivion for their good service: This
was cried upon a long time by the whole kennell of the Faction, and at last put
off till the next day, when the Lords sending down the Kings Letter, the House
should have the whole business before them.

The next day being Tuesday, 15. August, 130. The aforesaid Messengers again.
the Kings aforesaid Letter of Answer with diverse Votes thereupon were sent
down from the Lords to the House of Commons, when presently the Beagles of the
Faction spent their mouths freely against the said Commissioners again for
lending the KING the civility of an ear in private, as abovesaid. After a long
debate, at last this Objection stopped the Mouths of Malice it self, That if
these Gentlemen had reported an averseness in the King to Peace (and aggravated
His Words as other Messengers had formerly done, whereof the King seemed to
complain) it would have proved a welcome discovery, and have been rewarded with
Thanks instead of an Act of Oblivion. So with much ado, Thanks were given to
the said Gentlemen, with approbation of their proceedings.

The same day the Militia of London were called into the House of Commons, 131.
The Militia of London: Concerning private Listing by Skippon; and the Militia
of the City.
where Alderman Gybs in the name of the Common Council and Militia (not by
Petition, but in a set Speech) delivered the fears and jealousies of the City
(even of the gravest, wisest, and best affected) occasioned by Skippon's
underhand Listing of Schismatics, Antimonarchists; his setting up thereby a
power against a power, to the endangering of a civil War within the Bowels of
the City; weakening of the Trained Bands, deboshing Servants from their Masters,
Children from their Parents. That under color of Skippon's private Listings,
other private Listings were carried on by Malignants, the Magistrates of the
City not being able to question either, and distingush one from the other. That
fear was a violent passion, and was now grown so universal, that the Common
Council knew not how to give satisfaction therein, the Citizens usually
clamouring, that if the Houses did not give them leave to look to their safety,
they must have recourse to the Law of Nature, and Act in their Militia without
the Houses in order to Self-defence, allowable by all Laws, and practiced by
this very Parliament against the King, and by Fairfax's Army against this
Parliament.

The Prayers of his Speech were three.

1. That Skippon's Listed men might be under the Militia of the City.

2. That the expired Ordinance for Listing Forces might be revived.

3. That the Militias of Westminster, Southwark, and the Hamlets might be
united with the City as formerly.

To this clause of having recourse to the Law of Nature for Self-defence, great
exceptions were taken in the debate of the House by the two Ashes, Ven, Harvy,
Scot, Weaver, and other of the Godly pack. That the Parliament having fought
with the King for the Militia, and having got it by the Sword, any other
Interest, upon any title whatsoever should dare to lay claim to any part of it.
You see these Lions of the Tribe will allow no Beasts of different kind to
share with them in their prey, although they did sweat and bleed with them in
the hunting and catching it. The Grandees may as well say they have conquered
our Laws and Liberties; for (as I have in my General Conclusion cited) they
say, That they fought with the King for his Negative Voice, and Legislative
Power, and that God has by the Verdict of the Sword given judgment for them;
and yet when the King claimed them by a better and more legal Title than the
Sword, they could object the equity of the Laws against the killing letter of
them, which they say, directs still to the equitable sense of all Laws, as
dispencing with the very letter thereof as being supreme to it when safety and
preservation is concerned, and alleging, That all Authority is seated
fundamentally in the Office, and but ministerially in the persons; and that it
is no resisting of Magistracy to side with the just Principles of Nature. See
the Declaration and Papers of the Army, p. 39. 40. and the Ectact Collect. p.
150. and alibi passim: In conclusion, after a tedious debate, the desires of
the Citizens were referred to a Committee of the House to be wyer-drawn into an
Ordinance, That all Forces raised, and to be raised in the City of London, and
the Liberties thereof, should be subject to the Militia of London (whereof
Skippon is a Member) and under the Command of Major General Skippon. When this
Ordinance will be perfected, what the sense and meaning of this Riddle is, and
what dangers may befall the City if Colchester be taken, or the Scots beaten,
before they have leave to put themselves into a posture of defense, God knows.
It was farther referred to bring in an Ordinance for uniting the aforesaid
Militias. You see how jealous they are of late of the Militia, since the
Grandees entertained new Principles, and new designs. In the Propositions
presented to the King at Newcastle, the Proposition for the Militia has this
proviso, Provided that the City of London shall have and enjoy all their
Rights, Liberties, Franchises and Customs, and Usages in raising and employing
the Forces of that City for the defense thereof, in as full and ample manner to
all intents and purposes, as they have, or might have used or enjoyed the same
at any time before the making of this Act or Proposition: to the end that City
may be fully assured, it is not in the intention of the Parl. to take from them
any Privileges or Immunities in raising and disposing of their Forces, which
they have, or might have used or enjoyed heretofore. This is a clear
confession, that by the ancient Customs and Usages of the City, they have Right
to their own Militia, or else this Proviso were vain; howsoever the learned
Counsel of the City fool them. The like proviso word for word is contained in
the Proposition for the Militia of Hampton Court, saving that the last clause,
That the City may be assured the Parliament has no intention to take from them
any Privileges, etc. is omitted, I think to please the Army and their engaged
party. See the Letters, Papers, Transactions of the English Commissioners in
Scotland with the Scots, etc. p. 58.

Wednesday 16 August. The Kings said Letter was read, 132. The Lords Votes upon
the Kings Letter, debated in the House of Cmmons.
and the Lords Votes thereupon: first, (after some little opposition) the
Commons concurred with the Lords in recalling the 4 Votes for making and
receiving no Addresses to or from the King: thereby, 1. Absolving him from a
kind of Parliamentary Excommunication.

2. Restoring to all Freeborn Subjects the Liberty they are born to, of
presenting their humble desires to his Majesty, and performing the duties of
their Allegiance and Oath.

And 3. Reducing themselves unto that scope, and end, for which only the Writ
summons them as a Parliament, viz. To Treat with the King. The second Vote,
was, To recall the Instructions of Parliament given to Hammond, how to carry
himself in his Charge toward the King, His Servants, and all Resorters to Him,
etc. This was laid by, to be debated in the last place, after all the rest of
the Lords Votes. The third Vote read, was, That such men of all professions as
the King should send for, as of necessary use to Him in the Treaty, may be
admitted to wait on him, and that He might be in the same state of Freedom He
was in when He was last at Hampton Court. This Vote (instead of concurring with
the Lords) was divided. The first part (after many objections to it) was
molded into this following question, and carried in the affirmative, that His
Majesty might send for men of all professions, and he being desired first to
send a List of their Names to the Parl. and nominating no Person excepted out
of Pardon, none that have been in Actual War against the Parliament, nor any
man that is under restraint of the Parliament. The latter part of this Vote,
for enjoying such Freedom as he was in at Hampton Court, was diversely argued
for the Ambiguousnesse of it; the question being, Whether such freedom as the
Parliament allowed him, or such freedom as the Army (for their own ends) gave
him, de facto, were intended? at last the question was agreed to be in
Terminis. The fourth Vote, was, that the Scots should be invited to the treaty:
this likewise was doubtfully argued, 1. Whether they should be invited by the
Parliament? considering they had broken the large treaty, National Covenant,
and Union, by surprising and Garrisoning Barwick and Carlisle, and by entering
England with an Army: This was carried in the Negative. The 2. Debate, was,
Whether it should be left to the King to invite the Scots to send some persons
authorized to treat upon such Propositions as they should make for the Interest
of Scotland only? This likewise was opposed for the reasons aforesaid, and
because the Power and Authority of Scotland was now in the hands of Duke
Hamilton and a few disaffected persons, who were not likely to send any of the
honest Godly party to Treat, whereby the Treaty would be carried on to the
disadvantage and ruin of the Godly and of the Church, our only friends there:
And Mr. Ashurst related, That the major part of the past Parliament of Scotland
over-powred the minor part by an Army, and so got the Engagement and other
Acts, and the Committee of Estates passed, against which the Assembly of the
Kirk (consisting of 400 persons) declared with one Voice. I know not what he
meant, by saying the major part in Scotland over-powred the minor, when I
consider that major pars obtinet rationem totius, the major part is virtually
the Parliament, to which the minor part must submit; although here in England
the lesser part of the Parliament engaging and conspiring with an Army (whom
themselves in a full and free Parliament had formerly declared Enemies to the
State) overpowred the greater part, contrary to reason and practice. This
question seemed to agree with the sense of the Independents reasonably well,
because it leaves it only to the pleasure of the King to Treat dis-junctively
with the Scots upon the sole Interest of Scotland, as men no ways concerned in
the settlement of Peace in England; whereby it is tacitly inferred, that the
Treaties, Covenant, and Union between the two Kingdoms is dissolved, so the
question aforesaid was put with this addition, That if the King shall be
pleased to invite the Scots to send some Persons Authorized, etc. the
Parliament will give them safe conduct. The fifth Vote of the Lords was, That
Newport in the Island of Wight should be the place of Treaty: to which the
Commons concurred. With these debates ended this Week the 19 day of August.

About this time came forth a Book entitled, 133. A pestilent Book, called,
[The necessity of the absolute power of Kings, etc.]
[ The necessity of the absolute power of all Kings; and in particular, of the
King of England] concerning which, I am to admonish the Reader, that it is
conceived to be a Cockatrice hatched by the Antimonarchical Faction, to
envenome the people against the KING and PRINCE.

The next Week begins with Monday 21 August, of whose proceedings I can give
you only an imperfect scambling relation; and so shall surcease all farther
endeavors in this kind, because I have already delivered enough for your
Instruction, if God have not appointed you to be led blindfold into the pit
dug for your destruction; but principally because my good Genius, that
furnished me with Intelligence, has now retired himself from acting without
hope, to praying with faith, for his Country; being tired out with hearing and
seeing so much sin and folly as now raigns at Westminster: and I love not
much to take news upon trust from the vulgar Peripateticks of the Hall. 134.
Mr. Martyns levelling practices and principles.
The chief things of note were, More Complaints of Henry Martyn, who now
declares himself for a Community of Wealth, as well as of Women, and protests
against King, Lords, Gentry, Lawyers, and Clergy, nay, against the Parliament
it self, in whose bosom this Viper has been fostered, and against all
Magistrates; like a second Wat Tyler, all Pen and Inkhorn-men must down. His
Levelling Doctrine is contained in a Pamphlet, called, [Englands Troubler
Troubled] wherein, All Rich men whatsoever are declared Enemies to the Mean men
of England, and (in effect) War denounced against them.

135. Skippon's Listings.
Next, the Ordinance for transferring over to the Militia of London Skippon's
power of listing men in London, was passed in the House of Commons, with this
Coloquintida in it, That Skippon should name and appoint Commanders and
Officers for the Forces listed, to be approved of by the Militia of London.

136. Cromwell's laureat letters 20 Aug. 1648:
A Letter from Oliver Cromwell was read in the House of Commons, relating his
easy victory over Duke Hamilton and Major Genesis Bailey, (which puts me in mind
of Ovid's Victory over Corinna, of whom he says, Victa est, nou aegre,
proditione sua.) and containing an admonition not to hate Gods people, who are
as the apple of his eye, and for whom even Kings shall be reproved: and
exhorting the Speaker (to whom it was written) to fulfill the end of his
Magistracy, that all that will live peaceably and quietly (viz. in Vassalage to
Oliver and his Faction, and neglect Religion, Laws, and Liberties) may have
countenance from him. (God bless all honest men from the light of Oliver's
countenance, lest in an ignis fatuus mislead them from the duties of their
Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, Potestation, and Covenant) and they that are
implacable, may speedily be destroyed out of the Land.

137. Martial Law in London.
To prepare the way to whose destruction, it was Ordered, That an Ordinance be
penned, and brought into the House of Commons, to try all such by Martial Law
in the City of London as shall be found to plot, design, or contrive any thing,
to endanger the Parliament or City. And yet London is no Garrison now as it was
when Tomkims and Challoner were tried; not is there any Enemy considerable in
the Field, whereby the known Laws of the Land may not pass currently through
the Kingdom: but our known Laws are not written in blood; nor are they so
flexible as to make all Traitors, the Faction pleases to call such.

Yet as cruel as these Caco fuegos of the Faction are to some, 138. Rolf's Bayl
again pressed.
they have mercy enough for Rolf, whose Bayl was again exceedingly pressed: and
that his two Prosecutors Osburn and Dowcet should be under restraint in his
stead; whom they have forejudged (out of the King's Letter to the Houses) not
to be able to prove their information, whereas it may be discretion in the King
not to increase his danger by acknowledging it.

Saturday, 26. August. 139. The KINGS Letter to the States of Scotland taken
from Haly-burton.
The King's Letter to the Committee of States in Scotland, etc. in Answer to
their Letter sent to Him by Haly-burton (which Letter was taken from
Haly-burton, although a public Minister of State, and allowed by Parliament
to carry their Letter to the King) was read in the House of Commons.

I hear in general, that it was excellently well penned, and a very just,
honest, and peaceable Letter. Yet it was Voted, neither to be sent to the
Lords, nor to be restored to Haly-burton; but damned to close imprisonment in a
Box, under Seal; lest the people should know how truly zealous his Majesty is
to settle Peace in the Land: a mystery their understandings must not be trusted
withal.

Prolegomena. Promises, Protestations, and Covenants, made by this Parliament
in behalf of the King and People.
AFter a repetition of many good Acts and Concessions obtained by this
Parliament of the King for the ease of the People, Remonstrance 15. December
1642. Exact. Collect. p. 15.
they say farther, that other things of main importance for the good of this
Kingdom are in Proposition, etc. which yet before the end of this Session they
hope may receive some progress and perfection; As the establishing and
ordering the Kings Revenue, etc. The Regulating of Courts of Justice, and the
abridging both the delays and Charges of Law Suits, etc. Preventing the
exportation of Gold and Silver; and the inequality of Exchanges between this
and other Kingdoms; improving the Herring fishing upon our Coasts, etc. which
things in all their Propositions and Addresses to the King have not been once
mentioned, nor any thing else but what makes for the profit, preferment, and
power of a few ambitious Grandees of the Parliament, and Army; in order to
which, they demand the Militia of a standing Army, with an arbitrary power to
raise what Forces by Land and Sea, consisting of what persons, and to raise
what sums of Money out of every man's Estate they please: which power the King
has not to give, neither did He nor His Ancestors ever exercise: the only
Militia they used having been either the Posse Commitatus under the Sheriffs,
which is very legal and ancient, or the Militia of Trained Bands under Lord
Lieutenants, and their Deputy Lieutenants, which is a new invention. Nor did
the policy of our Law ever trust the power of the Sword, and the Purse in one
hand, for fear of enslaving the People.

Ex. Col. p. 19.
They farther declare, That it is far from their purpose or desire to let loose
the Golden reins of Discipline and Government in the Church, to have private
persons or particular Congregations to take up what form of Divine Service they
please, because they hold it requisite that there should be throughout the
whole Realm a Conformity to that Order which the Laws enjoin.

Ex. Col. p. 203.
They farther say there, That the gracious favor His Majesty expressed in the
Bill for continuance of this Parliament, and the advantage and security which
they thereby have from being Dissolved, shall not encourage them to do any
thing, which otherwise had not been fit to have been done.

Ex. Col. p. 281.
They conclude the said Declaration thus, That they doubt not but it shall in
the end appear to all the world, that their endeavors have been most hearty
and sincere, for the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, The Kings
just Prerogatives, The Laws and Liberties of the Land, and the Privileges of
Parliament, in which endeavors (by the Grace of God) they would still persist,
though they should perish in the work.

Ex. Col. p. 376.
In their Declaration, 4. June 1642. The Lords and Commons do declare, That the
Design of their Propositions for Plate and Money is, To maintain the Protestant
Religion, the King's Authority and Person, in his Royal Dignity; The free
Course of Justice, The Laws of the Land, (what then becomes of Martial Law, and
Committee Law?) The Peace of the Kingdom, and Privileges of Parliament.

In their Propositions for bringing in Money and Plate, Ex. Col. p. 340.
10. June 1642. the Lords and Commons declare, That no man's affections shall be
measured according to the proportion of his offer, so that he express his good
will to the Service in any proportion whatsoever, (that is, so that he engage
with them) yet notwithstanding the 29. November. following, Ex. Col. p. 765.
the same Lords and Commons appointed a Committee of 6. persons, who should
have power to Assess all such persons as were of ability, and had not
Contributed, and such as had Contributed, yet not according to their ability,
(which is now looked upon as a Malignancy) to pay such sums of Money, according
to their Estates, as the Assessors, or any of them should think fit, so as the
same exceeded not the 20. part of their Estates. The power is still exercised
by all Country Committees, to a 5. and 20. part, charged upon all men, even
such as have been destroyed and undon, or laid forth themselves beyond their
abilities, for their service to this Parliament.

In the National Covenant taken by this Parliament, and by them imposed upon
the Kingdom to be taken with hands lifted up to the most High God, the Lords
and Commons vow, To maintain the King's Person, Crown and Dignity, in Defense
of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, etc. To suppress all Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, and Schisms; and to defend one another mutually in the same work
with their lives and fortunes; yet is the same Covenant now cast aside, and
called, An Almanac out of date. Many men have been punished for attempting to
keep it. And (I hear) the House of Commons are now upon passing an Ordinance
for Martial Law to be executed in London, upon all such persons, as having
taken the said Covenant, shall attempt or design any thing against the
Parliament or City of London: what is this but to impose a special penalty upon
such as have taken the Covenant, and leave those that have not taken it free?
And who doubts but that the said Council of War shall consist of
Anti-monarchical Schismatics and Anti-covenanters, for the most part, who
shall stretch every word to the utmost extent. And this is now in brewing,
contrary to the Petition of Right, 3. Caroli, and Magna Charta, no considerable
enemy being in the Field, and the Courts of Justice in Westminster hall
sitting: nay, I hear (like Janus Bifrons) this Law (if I do not mis-call it)
looks backwards to Acts past, as well as forward, contrary to the nature of all
Laws, which have an admonishing power to warn men of the evil to come, before
they can have a punishing power for evils passed: Therefore the Apostle says,
Sin is a breach of a Commandment, (or Law) I had not known Sin but by the Law.
The Law therefore must be previous to the Sin. How the said Promises and
Covenant, and many more have been kept, let the world judge.

What the Promises, Undertakings, and Proposals of the Army have been in order
to settling the peace of the people of this Kingdom, and of the King's just
Rights and Prerogatives, and their own Disbanding, are to be found in their
many printed Papers; which I will here omit, because they had no lawful
calling or warrant for such undertakings, and how they have been prosecuted and
perfomed, is obvious to every capacity.

General Conclusion.
Out of these Premises, I shall draw these Conclusions following.
1. The Grandees have subverted the fundamental Government of the Kingdom, and
why?
1. THe engaged Party have laid the Axe to the very root of Monarchy and
Parliaments; they have cast all the Mysteries and secrets of Government, both
by Kings and Parliaments, before the vulgar, (like Pearl before Swine) and have
taught both the Soldiery and People to look so far into them, as to ravel back
all Governments, to the first principles of nature: He that shakes
Fundamentals, means to take down the Fabric. Nor have they been careful to
save the materials for Posterity. What these negative Statists will set up in
the room of these ruined buildings, does not appear, only I will say, They have
made the People thereby so curious and so arrogant, that they will never find
humility enough to submit to a civil rule; their aim therefore from the
beginning was to rule them by the power of the Sword, a military Aristocracy or
Oligarchy, as now they do. Amongst the ancient Romans, Tentare arcana Imperii,
to profane the Mysteries of State, was Treason; because there can be no form
of Government without its proper Mysteries, which are no longer Mysteries than
while they are concealed. Ignorance, and Admiration arising from Ignorance are
the Parents of civil devotion and obedience, though not of Theological.

2. Nor have these Grandees and their party in the Synod, 2. They have
subverted the Church.
dealt more kindly with the Church, than with the Commonwealth; whose reverend
my^teries, their Pulpits and holy Sacraments, and all the functions of the
Ministry are by their connivence profaned by the clouted shoe; the basest and
lowest of the People making themselves Priests, and with a blind distempered
zeal Preaching such Doctrine as their private spirits (spirits of illusion)
dictate to them; But let them know, that their burning zeal without knowledge,
is like Hell fire without light. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper
discontinued* and why?
Yet the greatest wonder of all is, That they suffer the Lords supper (that
Sacrament of Corroboration) to be so much neglected in almost all the Churches
in the Kingdom: Is it because men usually before they receive our Savior (that
blessed guest) sweep the house clean, casting out of their hearts (those living
Temples of the holy Ghost) Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Envy, Hatred,
Malice, and all other unclean Spirits to make fit room to entertain Jesus, that
Prince of Peace, whereby the people having their minds prepared for Peace,
Charity and Reconciliation, may happily spoil the trade of our Grandees, who
can no longer maintain their usurped dominion over them, than they can keep
them dis-united with quarrels and feuds, and uphold those badges of factions,
and terms of distinctions and separations, Cavaliers, Roundheads, Malignants,
Well-affected, Presbyterians, and Independents? or is it because they fear, if
the Church were settled in peace and unity, it would be a mean to unite the
Commonwealth, as a quiet cheerful mind often cures a distempered body? I
will not take upon me to judge another man's Servant; but many suspect this is
done out of design, not out of peevishness.

3. That these Grandees govern by power, not by love, 3. The Grandees rule by
the arbitrary power of the Sword, not by the Laws.
and the Laws of the Land, (which was my last assertion) appears by,

1. The many Garrisons they keep up, and numerous Army they keep in pay to
overpower the whole Kingdom, more than at first the Parliament Voted, all in
the hands of Sectaries.

2. Their compelling the Parliament to put the the whole Militia of England and
Ireland by Land and by Sea, in the power of Sir Thomas Fairfax and their party,
together with all Garrisons.

3. Nor do they think the Laws of the Land extensive enough for their purposes;
therefore they piece them out with Arbitrary Ordinances, impeachments before
the Lords, and Marshall Law, which is now grown to that height, that the
Council of War, General, and Judge advocate of the Army do usually send forth
Injunctions to stay Suits, and release judgments at Law, or else to attend the
Council of War wheresoever they sit, to show cause to the contrary; and when
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn was ordered to be brought to the Kings-Bench-Bar,
upon his habeas Corpus, Easter Term, 1648. Cromwell sent word to the Lieutenant
of the Tower not to bring him; and Cromwell was obeyed, not the Judges. Thus the
Laws of the Land are daily baffled, that men may be accustomed to arbitrary
Government, and those actions which no Law of the Land calls a Crime, may be
interpreted Treason when our Grandees please to have it so.

4. Their allowing money to some Committees to reward Informers, Spies and
Intelligencers, to betray even their nearest friends and relations.

5. Their holding Honest, Generous, and Grave men in suspicion, and making the
Houses of Parliament and Army snares to them, expelling them with false and
extrajudicial Accusations.

6. Their owning dishonest, base-minded men, that have cheated the State, as
instruments fit to be confided in, and associate with them in time of danger.

7. Their impoverishing the people with confused Taxes, decay of Trade, and
obstructing of the Mint, and thereby breaking their spirits.

8. Their changing and dividing the Militia of London purposely to weaken it.

9. Their not restoring to the Counties their Militia, and trusting them to
defend their own houses as formerly.

10. Their nourishing Factions in the Commonwealth, Schisms in the Church.

11. Expelling learned Divines to let in ignorant men. All these are tyrannical
policies grounded upon the old principle, That a Tyrant should deprive his
Subjects of all things that may nourish courage, strength, knowledge, mutual
confidence and charity amongst them; which Maxim the Politicians say contains
the whole Systeme or method of Tyrannical Government.

4. 4. The Independents divide the Taxes, Spoils, and preferments of the land
between them.
As this encroaching Faction have usurped all the Military and Civil power of
both Kingdoms; so they have monopolized all the great Offices, rich
Employments, and Treasure of the Land; they are clearly the predominant party
in all Money Committees; they give daily to one another for pretended Services,
Arrears, and Losses, great sums of money; many of their Largisses I have
already set down. They gave lately to Col. Hammond Governor of the Isle of
Wight, for his Table 20 l. a Week, 1000 l. in money, and 500 l. a year land; to
Major General Skippon 1000 l. per annum land of Inheritance; to Colonel Mitton
5000 l. in money; Prideaux has 100 l. a Week benefit by the Post-Masters
place; his whole Estate (before this Parliament) was hardly worth a 100 l. nor
is he eminent for any thing but impudence and arrogance. Mr. Rowse has Eaton
College, worth 800 l. per annum, and a Lease of that College worth 600 l. per
annum, Sir William Alanson the Hamper-Office, and Crab Castle worth 600 l. per
annum, bravely wooded: Alder. Hoyl of York, the Treasurers Remembrancers
Office: Mr. Sallaway a poor Grocer, the Kings Remembrancers Office; neither of
which, are able to read any one Record in those Offices. Tho. Scot,
Lambeth-house: Sir Will, Brereton, Croyden-house. Col. Harvy, Fulham and
Norwich-houses. Mr. Lisle the Mastership of St. Crosses: Dennis Bonds 3 Sons,
each of them a Place worth 500 l. a year, besides many others. All the
cheating, covetous, ambitious persons of the Land, are united together under
the name and title of The Godly, the Saints, etc. and share the fat of the Land
between them, few of them pay any Taxes, but all the Land pays Tribute to them.

It is thought this Faction, their under-Agents and Factors have cost this
Commonwealth above 20 millions never laid forth in any public service; nay,
the Treasurers and Publicans of this Faction have clipped and washed most of
the Money that comes into their fingers before they pay it forth, knowing that
any money that comes out of their fingers will be accepted: two Goldsmiths are
thought to be dealers this way, yet they lay the blame on the Scottish Army, as
the Cuckoo lays her brood in other Nests.

5. Having thus imped their wings for flight, 5. The Indep^ndents provided of
places of retreat to flee to.
they have provided themselves of places of retreat in case they cannot make
good their standing in England: Ireland is kept unprovided for, that they may
find room in it when necessity drives them thither. If their hopes fail in
Ireland, they have New England, Bermudas, Barbadus, the Caribby Isles, the Isle
of Providence, Eleutheria, Lygonia, and other places to retreat to, and lay up
the spoils of England in: nay they usually send chests and vessels with money,
place and goods beyond Sea, with passes from the two Speakers to let them pass
without searching: the Navy is in their power to accommodate their flight, and
by their instruments called Spirits, they have taken up many Children and sent
them before to be Slaves and drudges to the Godly in their schismatical
Plantations, as the Turk takes up Tribute Children from the Christians to
furnish his nursary of Janisaries; and so they have their Agents that buy up
all the Gold they can get, Cromwell not long since offered 11000 l. in silver
for the 1000 l. in gold; besides he is well furnished with the Kings Jewels
taken in his Cabinet at Nazeby; many of them known Jewels, as the Harry and the
Elizabeth.

6. The vulgar Independents but props and properties to the Grandees.
6. Nor shall the vulgar sort of Independents either in Parliament, Army, or
City, fare better than the rest of the Kingdom. The Grandees both of
Parliament, and Army endeavoring to adjourn the Parliament, and draw all the
power of both Houses into the Committee of Derby-house, consisting but of 30.
or 40. the rest of the Independent Members will find their power dissolved in
the Adjournment, and swallowed up by that Committee, and their services
forgotten; nor shall they have any power in the Militia, which is the only
quarrel between them and the King; the Grandees disdaining to have so many
Partners in that which they have got by their own wits; for know, that the
Grandees have always been winnowing the Parliament. First, they winnowed out
the moderate men, under the notion of the Kings party, then the Presbyterians,
and now they will winnow forth the lighter and more chaffy sort of
Independents, who stand for the Liberty of the People; a thing which Cromwell
now calls, A fancy not to be engaged for; and so they will bring all power
into their own hands. Thus having contracted the Parliament into a Committee of
safety, they will adjourn themselves (though the Parliament cannot) to Oxford
or some other place which they more confide in than London: and this is the
settling the Kingdom without the King, they so much aim at; and which, they had
rather the people should be brought practically and by insensible degrees, than
by Declarations held forth to them beforehand, or by politic Lectures in the
Pulpit. Thus it is decreed, that this Cabal of Godly men at Derby-house shall
with military Aristocracy, or rather Oligarchy, rule this Nation with a rod of
Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel.

Observe, that the Ordinance by which the Committee of Derby-house is revived,
and the addition of Power to it, are purposely penned in such ambiguous terms,
that He that has the Sword in his hands may make what construction of them he
pleases: neither were they clearly penned, Is it in the power of the Houses
(being but the Trustees of the people) to transfer or delegate their trust to a
lesser number of men? a trust not being transferrable by Law, and the people
having chosen a Parliament, not a Committee, to look to their safety and peace.

7. 7. The Army hinder Peace and Settlement.
The Grandees of the Parliament and Army have brought the Kingdom to so
miserable a condition, that they have left no Authority in England able to
settle peace: The KING is a close Prisoner to the Army, therefore all he shall
do will be clearly void in Law, by reason of Dures: The Parliament is in
Wardship to them, who keep armed Guards upon them, Garrisons round about them,
and by illegal Accusations, Blanck Impeachments, threatening Remonstrances, and
Declarations, etc. fright away many Members, and compel the rest to Vote and
un-Vote what they please, whereby all the Parliament does is void and null in
Law ab initio, it being no free Parliament, but a Sub-committee to the Army,
and living as the Egyptians did, under vassalage to their own Mamaluchi, or
Mercenaries: The people thefore must resolve either to have no Army, or no
Peace.

8. They have put out the eyes of the Kingdom, 8. The two Universities
destroyed.
the two Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and have brought the whole Land
to make sport before them; knowing that Learning and Religion, as well as Laws
and Liberties, 9. Many honest men seduced by fair pretenses took part with
them; never intending to leave their first principles, and enslave King, and
Kingdom.
are enemies to their barbarous, irrational, and Russian way of Government.

9. Many honest men took part with this Parliament, seduced by those fair
pretenses of defending Religion, Laws and Liberties which they first held forth
to the People; and being unwilling to have a Parliament conquered by the Sword,
not thinking it possible that a prevailing Faction in Parliament should so far
prevaricate as to conspire to enslave King, Parliament, and Kingdom, to subvert
the Laws Liberties, and fundamental Government of the Land, under which they
and their Posterity were, and were likely to be so happily governed; and betray
Religion unto Heretics and Schismatics, and share the spoils of the
Commonwealth between them, and think of enriching themselves with them in
foreign Lands, yet many at the beginning much disliked, that Religion should be
used an as ingredient to the carrying on of a Civil War, and that Schismatics
should have so great a stroke in managing the business; yet were pacified with
this consideration, that we must refuse no helps in our defense: if a man be
assaulted by Thieves on the highway, he will not refuse to join with
Schismatics or Turks in a common defense; the same authority that then
countenanced those Schismatics (it was hoped) would be able to discountenance
them again when the work was done. But the Grandees of the Houses, (having
other designs) had so often purged the Houses, that they left few honest
moderate men in them to oppose their projects, still bringing in Schismatics,
and men of their own interests, by enforced and undue Elections, into their
rooms, and so by insensible degrees, new modelled the House suitable to their
own corrupt desires, and new modelled the Army accordingly; so that the people
(who had no intention to be interested so far) were step by step so far engaged
before they were aware, that they could not draw their feet back, and do now
find (to their grief) that the Bit is in their mouths, the Saddle fast girt on
their galled backs, and these Rank riders mounted, who will spur them (not only
out of their Estates, Laws, and Liberties, but) into Hell with renewed
Treasons, new Oaths, Covenants and Engagements, if they take not the more heed
and be not the more resolute: they have changed their old honest principles,
and their old friends, who bore the first brunt of the business, and have taken
new principles and friends in their room, suitable to their present desperate
designs, and now (that they have squeezed what they can out of the Kings party)
they think of sequestring their old friends because they adhere to their old
principles.

10. Who are the Kings bitterest enemies.
10. Amongst those that are most bitter against the King, His own Servants
(especially the Judasses of the Committee of the Revenue, that carry His purse,
and have fingered more of His Money and Goods than they can or dare give an
account for) are the greatest Zealots, those that take upon them employments
about His Revenue, and share what allowances to themselves they please for
their pains; those that buy in for trifles old sleeping Pensions, that have not
been paid nor allowed this thirty years, and pay themselves all arrears; those
that Rent parcels of the Kings Revenue, for the eighth or tenth part of the
worth, as Cor. Holland, who renteth for 200 l. per ann. as much of his Estate
as is worth 1600 l. or 1800 l. per annum. Thus you see the Lion (Lord of the
Forest) growing sick and weak, become a prey, and is goared by the Ox, bitten
by the Dog, yea, and kicked by the Ass. Look upon this president you Kings and
Princes, and call to mind examples of old, that of Nebuchadnezzer, and others,
lest by exalting your selves too high, you provoke God to cast you too low.

When the Grandee Independents have a desire to raise new forces, or erect new
Garrisons, or use any extremity against the City, 11. Forged Conspiracies and
false News.
or Royal party, they commonly usher in their design with reporting to the
House the discovery of some new-invented conspiracy, or plot full of danger and
destructinn; such as was that of many thousond consecrated Knives, and then
propound their own forelaid design as a counsellable way to prevent it; and he
that does not hastily believe their Informations, or does argue against the
remedies they propound, (though he show never so great inconveniency in them)
is presently cried out upon as a Malignant, that does not take the danger of
the Parliament to heart, and branded by the black tongues of the Godly; and
when any great business is to be treated of in Parliament, or City, which they
either desire to promote, or to obstruct, they commonly publish counterfeit
News, and Letters of great victories and successes gotten by their Party in
parts so remote that they cannot in a short time be confuted; this serves to
credit and animate their Party to go on boldly with their work, and to
dishearten their Opponents; and though the profit and reputation of a lie is
seldom long-lived, yet if it last some few days, until they have carried on
their present business, they care not: herein they imitate a skillful
Architector, who building an Arch, supports it in the beginning with circular
props, and pieces of Timber, until he has closed it, and enabled it to
support it self, and then throws away the props.

When they have a design to ruin any man, 12. The Art of Slander and Calumny.
before they fall openly upon his person, they secretly undermine his credit
and reputation, that afterward they may oppress him with applause, and they
are so excellently well fitted with Agents and Instruments for this purpose,
that they can prove what they list. The close Committee of Examinations is an
excellent forge for these contrivances; they know where to find the sons of
Belial (now commonly called Knights of the Post) who will trust God with their
souls to advance the good Cause; they have secret Examinations of several
sorts, some preparatory only, amounting but to suspicions and presumptions, to
wound a man's good name, and make him liable to more deadly blows hereafter; and
some consummatory, laying the Axe to the root at the first blow: nor is it a
small Artifice of theirs boldly to accuse other men of those crimes they
themselves are guilty of, as they did the 11. Members of trucking with the
King, being their own fault; by this means it does constare de re presently, it
appears such offenses are committed: and if they can but fix them upon the
persons of other men by bold Accusations, close Examinations, and false
Witnesses, then constat de persona, they have found men to personate them,
deputies to bear the ignominy and punishment of their sins: so some
lascivious persons free themselves, bestowing their diseases upon others.

13. What a Confiding man is.
They account no man a Godly, faithful, confiding man, but he that engages as
far in sin, and makes himself as hopeless of reconciliation, as themselves.
Quis nunc diligitur nisi conscius?

14. The last Retreat and Refuge of the Godly.
Since the revolt of some of their Ships has almost made them hopeless of
transportation to foreign Plantations, the schismatical Grandees have made Col.
Walton (Brother-in-law to Cromwell) Governor of Lyn, Boston, and Crowland, and
of all that level of morasse Ground in the Isles of Ely, Holland, and
Marshland, which they can lay under water at pleasure: it is a plentiful and
strong Fastness, able to feed 40000. men, besides the ordinary Inhabitants;
there are but three passes to enter it, over three Bridges, upon which they
have, or may build Forts, for their defense, and may from thence invade the
adjacent Country at pleasure, being themselves free from incursions; or they
may (if they list) break down the said Bridges. These places (already strong by
nature) they daily fortify by art; for which purpose great sums of money have
been sent to him, and much Arms, Powder, Ammunition, and Ordnance from Windsor
Castle: Here (when all other helps fail) the Godly mean to take Sanctuary; this
shall be their last retreat, from whence they will draw the whole Kingdom to
Parley upon Articles of treaty, and enforce their peace from them at last. These
are the stratagems of the Godly: These are our Saints, no where canonized but
in the Devils Calendar.

As the Church of Rome is never unfurnished with dormant Articles of Faith upon
all emergent occasions; 15. Supposititious Privileges of Parliament: see The
History, sect. 105, 106.
so the Grandees are never unprovided of dormant Privileges of Parliament
(which they call (by a new canting word) lex Parliamenti, in opposition to lex
Terrae) with these they boulster out their designs. These Privileges were much
insisted on in their Impeachments of the Members and Aldermen; and whosoever
pleads against them in his own defense, and flies from those Privileges to the
known Laws for Sanctuary, is cried out upon for overthrowing the Jurisdiction
and Privileges of Parliament, and therefore guilty of Malignancy; thus John
Lylburn suffers: if he does not plead against them, he lays his head on the
block at the mercy of those merciless men. This net caught many a Wood-cock,
until the said Aldermen and Sir John Maynard broke through it, and spoiled the
cock-road.

The Grandees of the Parliament and Army have so totally subverted our
fundamental Government and Laws, 16. The confusion this Monarchy is btought
unto: see The History, sect. 105, and 106.
that they have neither Monarchy nor Commonwealth left; non jam Respublica sed
magnum latrocinium est, we have not so much as a face and shadow of Government
remaining; we have a KING de jure, but so wholly eclipsed and disabled to
perform Acts of Government by his close imprisonment, that (for the present) we
have no King de facto, and every man does what seems good in his own eyes; we
have Magistrates, Judges, and Justices de facto, but not being constituted and
ordained by any lawful Authority, nor under any authentical Great Seal
according to the Laws of the Land, they are not Magistrates and Judges de Jure,
so that if we look upon the King our Supreme Governor, our violent Grandees
have brought an Inter-regnum upon us; If upon our Magistrates, Judges, etc.
they have brought a Justitium (a total eclipse of Justice) upon us: It follows
then, that both the imperative and coercive power of the King and Magistrates,
the legislative power of the Parliament, the judicative power of the Judges and
Justices, are all suspended and in Abeyance: and like a Watch, when the
principal wheels are broken, no part can move to perform its function.
Contzenius the Jesuit in his Pol: says, He that will introduce a new Religion,
or a new form of Government, must utterly abolish the old, and erect his new
Fabric upon the ruins of it. You see they have been apt Scholars in this
doctrine of the Jesuit this 7 years, which they have spent in Demolishing; but
what form of Government our Grandees wi^^ e^e^t upon the ruins they have made,
does not yet appear, nor how all just interests, and men's particular Estates
shall be preserved from being buried under the ruins of this earthquake.

17. The Regal Legislative, and Judicative power usurped.
The King is the only supreme Governor of this Realm of England, to regulate
and protect the people by commanding the Laws to be observed and executed, and
to this end He (and He alone) bears not the Sword in vain; yet the KING by
himself can neither make, repeal, or alter any one Law, without the concurrence
of both Houses of Parliament, the Legislative power residing in all three, and
not in any one, or two of the three Estates, without the third, and therefore
no one or two of them can exclude the other from having a Negative voice in
passing, repealing, or changing of Laws; nor can the King by himself, or
jointly with the Lords and Commons judge what the Law is, this is the office of
the sworn Judges of the two Benches and Exchequer, who are the known
Expositors, and Dispensers of Law and Justice in all causes brought before
them, yea they do declare by what Law the King governs, thereby keeping the
KING from governing arbitrarily and enslaving the People. And these Judges of
the Law have always been authorized by the King; and all legal proceedings have
been in his Name, and by his Authority 1200 years before Magna Charta granted,
or any set form of Parliament established. The Law it self is called, the Kings
Law; the Realm, the Kings Realm. He is the fountain of justice, mercy, honor,
witness all our Statues, Law Books and Histories, and the Oaths of Supremacy,
which every Member takes before he sits in Parliament. Now for any one man, or
any Assembly, Court, or Corporation of men (be it the two Houses of Parliament)
to usurp these three powers, 1. The Governing power, 2. The Legislative power,
3. And the Judicative power, into themselves, is to make themselves the highest
Tyrants, and the people the basest slaves in the world; for to govern supremely
by a Law made, and interpreted by themselves according to their own pleasure,
what can be more boundless and arbitrary? they may put to death whom they
please for what cause they please, and confiscate his estate to their own use;
yet this the two Houses of Parliament, or rather an overpowring party in the
two Houses, seasoned with a Schismatical humor of singularity, have lately
done.

1. For the Governing power. 1. They coin, enhaunce, and abate money. 2. They
make War and peace, and continue an extraordinary Militia of an Army upon us.
3. They declare who are Enemies to the Realm. 4. They maintain foreign
negotiations. 5. They regulate matter of Trade, and exercise other Regalities:
whereas all Jura Regalia belong only to the King as Supreme Governor.

2. For the Legislative power. They exclude the King from his Negative Voice,
and the two Houses obtrude their Ordinances (things so new, that they are not
pleadable in any Court of Justice) as Laws upon the people; laying an excise,
Assessements, and Taxes upon the People: They Vote and declare new-Treasons,
not known by the statute 25 Edw. 3. nor by any other known Law; yea even to
make or receive any address to, or from the King; and they account it a breach
of Privilege, if men do not believe it to be Treason, being once declared. They
out men of their free-holds, and imprison their Persons, contrary to Magna
Charta, by Ordinances of Sequestration, etc.

3. For the Judicative power. They erect infinite many of new Judicatories
under them, as their Committees of complaints, of secret Examinations, of
Indempnities; their Country Committees, where businesses are examined, heard,
and determined without, nay against Magna Charta, and the known Laws: nay even
in capital crimes they wave the Courts of Law, and all Legal proceedings by
Outlawry, Indictment, or Trial by Peers, and Bill of Attainder; (which is the
only way of Trial in Parliament: For the Parliament cannot judicially determine
any thing, but by Act of Parliament) and set up new-invented forms of
proceeding before the Lords (even against free Commoners, although the Lords be
not their Peers) as in the case of the four Aldermen, etc. and the Archbishop
of Canterbury: They defend these doings by a pretended necessity of their own
making: but when the King had neither Army nor Garrison in the Kingdom, and
thereby this necessity was removed, why did they not (to prevent Tumults,
Insurrections, and a new war) content the People, and return all things into
their old Chanel, and restore to the people their Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, being their first principles, for which they engaged them to spend
their blood and treasure, and for defense whereof, they engaged themselves and
us in a Covenant, with Hands lifted up to the High God? Why did they then
provoke the Scots to a new War? but that they might have occasion to keep up
their Army still, and inthrall the Kingdom: look upon their Doctrine, as well
as their aforesaid practices, and you will find that all they do, is but to
carry on a fore-laid design, to lay by the King and enslave the People, under
the new erected Kingdom of the Saints: the Grandees of Derby-house and the
Army. In the Declaration against the Scots Papers, p. 67. They have adjudged
the King unfit to Govern, and p. 70. they say, the power of the Militia was the
principal cause of their War, and quarrel with the King; and in their
Declaration against the King, they say, they cannot confide in Him. It has
been commonly spoken in the House of Commons, that the two Houses, nay, the
House of Commons alone, is the Supreme power of this Nation under God. 16.
Match, 1642. Both Houses Voted it a High Breach of Privilege of Parliament, for
any Person, (not excepting King or Judge) to oppose their Commands, or to deny
that to be Law, which the two Houses declared to be so. In their Declaration
against the Scots Papers, p. 63. The Members say, That in all matters either
concerning Church or State, we have no Judge upon Earth but themselves. Who
will account the Popes plenitude of power monstrous hereafter, that shall
observe this Doctrine and practice of Subjects in Parliaments, claiming and
exercising a Supreme Government, (whereof the Militia is a part) a Legislative
and Judicative power over the Consciences, Lives, Liberties, and estates of
their Fellow Subjects; And all this under color of a necessity, raised by
themselves out of a dispute they set on foot against the King, which they have
affirmatively adjudged and determine for themselves against Him, without
consulting the Laws, Statues, and usages of the Realm; Nay, the very Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, which all with one voice speak against them? Who
would think that a faction in Parliament, or any pest less than an Earthquake
or Deluge should in seven years time reduce so well-formed a Commonwealth into
such a Chaos? Yet even now the People are promised to be governed by the known
Laws, and Judges are appointed to determine suits according to the Laws.
Surely, There never was Tyrant that deprived his Vassals of a known Law amongst
themselves, this were to disable them to acquire wealth, and so lose his own
benefit of Taxes and Confiscations. By the Laws of England, a villain was
protected in his goods against all men, his Lord excepted: The Turkish Vassals
heap up much wealth, and are protected against their fellow slaves, though not
against their Grand Seigneor who may seize their estates, and take their lives
at pleasure: And this is all the protection the people of England have now by
the Laws. We have the benefit of Law one against another, (unless some
Powerful Member interpose) but against the two Houses, or either of them, or
any Grandee, what Law, what Justice can protect our lives, liberties or
estates? and yet we were allowed heretofore to make our defense in Law against
the King. And until the King be again restored to his Right, expect no better
Right to be done you by this heedless headstrong Faction in Parliament.

The sum of all their endeavors is no more but this; 18. The final scope of
the Grandees endeavors.
The Grandees of Derby-house and the Army have already by their Votes of No
Addresses, and their scandalous Declaration, laid by the King, and in Him
Monarchy, (notwithstanding they delay and fool the people with tedious debates
of a Personal Treaty,) And when this innovation is digested by the people,
their next step will be to make use of the Schismatical, Antimonarchical party
in the House of Commons, Army and City, to cast off the House of Peers, as
Prerogative creatures and rags of Royalty: (some Schismatical Plebeian Lords
excepted, who shall recruit the Power they lose in the House of Lords, by being
of the Committee of Derby-house) and when the people are well inured to this
change, and the grievance of it worn out by custom, then to lay by the House of
Commons, and usurp the full Power of the King and Parliament into the Committee
of safety at Derby-house, who by way of preparation, do already style
themselves in all foreign Negotiations, The STATES: Nay they do already act all
matters of moment at home, and assume unto themselves all the properties of a
State, the Parliament being but a Sub-Committee to them, upon whom they put
what Impositions and Injunctions they please; witness the design put upon the
House of Commons for every Member to subscribe what number of Horse he would
maintain for a Guard; I know not whether to the Parliament, or to the Committee
of Derby-house.

This disease being now come to its Crisis, 19. The Prognostic of this Disease.
it is no hard matter to pronosticat, That nature (that is, the King, our
natural liege Lord) must inevitably prevail at last against this
Antimonarchical Faction, for these reasons.

1. The King can never want a Party: the Parliament (or rather Antimonarchical
faction in Parliament) can never manage a party without faction and confusion.

2. The King may hushand his treasure to His best advantage: the faction in
Parliament cannot, but must necessarily be cheated; that they may be followed
and befriended: since only common crimes, and common profit glues and cements
them together; and only such are found to be confiding men to them.

3. The King is now discovered, (to every common capacity) to have all the
known Laws on His side: the Parliament all known Laws against them, and the
people will no longer be governed without Law, by new Arbitrary inventions.

4. The King has recovered all the peoples affections: the Parliament has
lost them; a privation which can never be reduced into habit again.

5. The King is allied both in Consanguinity of Blood, and affinity of Cause
with all the Princes of Christendom: the faction in Parliament are terrae
filii, faterculi Gigantum, Mushromes.

6. The Kings Army will obey Him and His Interest: the Parliaments Army will
command them and their Interests; besides, they are men of different Principles
and Interests, only held together by profit; and when that fails, they fall in
sunder.

Nothing therefore but a free Personal Treaty in London can prevent a Conquest,
whatsoever desperate forlorn people say to the contrary.

The Epilogue.
I Am not Ignorant that there is a natural purging, a natural phlebotomy,
belonging to Politic, as well as to Natural bodies; and that some good humors
are always evacuated with the bad; yet I cannot but deplore what I have
observed, That the honestest and justest men on both sides (such as, if they
have done evil, did it because they thought it good; such as were carried aside
with specious pretenses, and many of them seduced by Pulpit-devils, who
transformed themselves into Angels of light) have always fared worse than other
men, as if this difference between the King and Parliament were but a
syncretismus or illusion against honest men: nay, I do further foresee, that in
the period and closing up of this Tragedy, they will fare worst of all, because
they have not taken a liberty to enrich themselves with public spoils, and
fat themselves by eating out the bowels of their mother, but are grown lean and
poor by their integrity; whereby being disabled to buy friendship in the days
of Trouble, they will be put upon it to pay other men's reckonings. When Verres
was Praetor of Sicily, he had with wonderful corruptions pillaged that
Province; and at the same time the Praetor of Sardinia being sentenced for
depeculating and Robbing that Province, Timarchides, Verres Correspondent at
Rome, writ a very anxious Letter to him, giving him warning of it: But Verres
in a jolly humor answered him, That the Praetor of Sardinia was a fool, and
had extorted no more from the Sardinians than would serve his own turn; but
himself had gathered up such rich booties amongst the Sicilians, that the very
overplus thereof would dazzle the eyes of the Senate, and blind them so, that
they should not see his faults: Such (I foresee) will be the lot of the more
just and modest men, who shall be guilty because they were fools, as the other
sort shall be innocent because they were knaves. Whatsoever befalls (you clear
and innoxious souls) be not ashamed, be not afraid of your integrity: if this
Kingdom be a fit habitation for honest men, God will provide you a habitation
here: if it be not capable of honesty, God will take you away from the evils to
come, and pour out all the Vials of his wrath on this totally and universally
corrupted Nation, this incurable people, Qui nec vitia sua nec eorum remedia
far potest: for my own part, (if I am not such already) I hope God will make
me such a man, Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent; and if
Moses in an heroic zeal, to draw a remission of the peoples sin from God,
desired to be blotted out of his Book, (the Book of Life) and St. Paul to be
Anathema for his Brethren; why should not I (with relation to my self, and
submission to Christ) say, oportet unum mori pro populo, it is fit one man die
for the people, and devote my self to death for my Country, as the family of
the Decii in ancient Rome were wont to do? I have read and admired their
examples, why not imitate them? is it because (as Machiavel says) The
Christian Religion does too much break, enfeeble, and cowardice the spirit of
man, by persecuting and subduing nature, by denying her due Liberty, and tying
her to be more passive than active? At facere and pati fortia Romanum, imo
Christianum est; or is it because in this general deluge of sin and
corruption, a public spirit, and excellency in virtue is accounted a degree
of madness? or is it because of the corrupt judgment of these times, which
makes a man more infamous for his punishment than for his sin? and therefore
Heroic acts are out of fashion: the circumstances and ceremonies of Death are
more taken notice of, than Death it self; these follies weigh not with me.
Sublimis an humi putrescam, parvi refert. The Thief upon the Cross found a
ready way to Heaven, How much more an honest man? Many a man out of Prison
steps into Heaven, no man out of Paradise ever found the way thither: Salebrosa
sit via, modo certa modo expedita; alte succinctus ad iter me accingo.

THe Premises considered, I do here in the name and behalf of all the free
Commons of England declare and protest, that there is no free nor legal
Parliament sitting in England, but that the two Houses sit under a visible,
actual and an horrid force of a mutinous Army, and of a small party of both
Houses conspiring and engaged with the Army, to destroy, expel, and murder
with false Accusations, and Blank and Illegal Impeachments and prosecutions,
the rest of their fellow Members, who sat in Parliament doing their duty, when
the two Speakers with a small company of Members, secretly fled away to the
Army, and sat in Council with them, contriving how to enslave King,
Parliament, City, and Kingdom, and how to raise Taxes at their pleasure, which
they share amongst themselves and their party, under the name and title of the
Godly, the Saints; and afterward they brought the Army up to London against
the Parliament and City in hostile manner, a design far exceeding the Plot of
Jermine, Goring, etc. to bring up the Northern Army to London, to overawe the
Parliament: I do farther protest, that the two Houses have sat under the said
force, ever since the sixth of August 1647. and therefore all they have done,
and all they shall do, in the condition they sit in, is void and null in Law,
ab initio, by their own doctrine and judgment included in their Ordinance of
the 20. of August last, whereby they null and void, ab initio, all Votes,
Orders, etc. passed from the 26. July, 1647. to the 6. August following.

Arguments against all accommodation and Treaties, between the City of LONDON,
and the engaged Grandees of the Parliament and Army.
1 IT will never be safe nor honorable, for so great a City to accommodate and
join interest with a conspiring Party, that by frequent violations of their
faith and duty, have inslaved King, Parliament, City and Kingdom, and broken
the Faith of this Nation, given to the Scots in the large Treaties, and in the
National Covenant.

2. By accommodating with them, you make all their crimes your own; their
subtilty being to involve you to join with them in defense of their crimes.

3. The Scottish quarrel is not against the English Nation, but against the
treacherous and hypocritical Grandees, who by perjuring themselves, and
falsifying their engagements both unto Kingdom and Army, keeping the Soldiers
by false suggestions from disbanding, and totally obstructing Irelands relief;
and also a conspiring party in Parliament, who keep them up to make good the
aforesaid crimes, forcing what Votes they please to pass, by over-awing the
Parliament: Witness Cromwels laying his hand upon his Sword, and forcing the
House to pass those traitorous Votes against the King, contrary to their own
Consciences, Allegiance, Protestations, Vow and Covenant, and to raise Taxes
upon the people, which they share among themselves. This war is not like to be
of any continuance, considering there being in the Army many conscientious men,
who have had such ample experiment of the falsehood of their Grand Officers,
that they are not like to hazard their lives again under the command of such
Grand Impostors as they are, also knowing the General hatred of the Kingdom to
them, under whose insupportable burdens and oppressions it groaneth. Nor have
we any way to break the power of the said Grandees of this Army but by the
Scots, whereby the just rights and Interests of all the three Kingdoms may be
settled, and Ireland relieved; All which the Scots have declared in their former
Papers delivered to both Houses of Parliament.

4. If you accommodate with this faction, you must have the same friends and
foes with them, as well as the same sins and quarrels; and then it will grow to
a National quarrel between England and Scotland, which will be of long
continuance and misery: and the Interest of the King and his Children, and of
all Princes of Christendom concerned in the example, will be carried on in the
Kingdom of Scotland against you, if you join with those beggarly Grandees, who
have enriched themselves, and their fellow-Impostors, by the ruins of the
Kingdom. You will lose your credit and interests with your friends and brethren
of Scotland; the only fear and terror of whose coming into England kept this
Faction (which all men know is never satisfied with money and blood) from
taking many of your innocent heads from off your shoulders, and confiscating
your Estates to pay the arrears of the Army: witness their often speeches to
this purpose in the house of Commons, and their illegal and violent proceedings
against you: you will likewise lose all the people of England.

I have showed you your losses, let me show you your gains by this
accommodation, that by comparing one with the other, you may cast up your
account whether you shall be gainers or losers by it.

1. They offer you the Tower of London, and your Militia to be restored (things
of no great consideration) and your Aldermen and Citizens to be set at liberty:
they do not offer to disband their Army, which makes them Lord it over you, and
overpower both Tower and Militia; and when they have divided you from all your
friends, and destroyed your reputation, and are secure from the Scots, the same
violence which at first took your Tower, your Militia and your most honest
Citizens from you, can deprive you of them all again at pleasure, when you
shall have none to stick by you: your obligation to them shall be of steel,
theirs to you but of straw, he that gives me that he can deprive me of at
pleasure, gives me nothing.

2. Cromwell and his party knew your City to be the entire strength of England.
In Rich. 2. days (when it was not half so great and populous as now) it slew
Wat Tyler and routed his rabble, six times as many in number as the Army. They
therefore fear you, and consequently hate you, and labor nothing more than to
divide and weaken you, which is their proper interest: For which purpose (to
divide the City in it self) they caused the Parliament to change your Militia
into other hands: they cut off Westminster, Southwark, and the Hamlets from
your Militia, to weaken it; they have divided you from the Parliament, they
have endeavored to divide the Country from you, Ut dividendo singula imperent
universis. Wherefore the Army in their Remonstrance 7. December 1647.
Insolently demand Reparations from the City to the Country adjacent, for above
100000 l. loss sustained through the Armies attendance on the Cities defaults;
which was a device only to make the Country quarrel with the City, and to make
the Army Umpiers.

3. Consider you shall join with them that never kept Faith longer than they
may gain by it, whereof you have many examples. Any honest man may be deceived
once, but he is a fool that will be deceived twice by one man.

4. Nay you cannot treat with these men, nor give them a Common Council, or
Hall, without loss and danger: they have always made lies their refuge, and
built their Designs upon the sandy foundations of Rumors and Fables.

Cromwell and Glover already give out, that they and you are as good as agreed,
that you differ only upon a puntilio of honor, which will soon be reconciled:
what is the meaning of this? but that they (having creatures of their own,
Commissioners in Scotland) have advertisement to spread the same reports there,
thereby to take off the edge of your friends affections; to lay an imputation
of inconstancy upon you, and make you inconsiderable in the judgments of your
best friends, and retard all endeavors for your succor. In the mean time,
this party has blocked up all passages to Scotland, that truth can have no
access to you, and you have only such news as Derby-house does please to
impart to you. These men have committed those crimes that cannot be safe
without committing greater: they must on headlong: go not with them for
company; they desire to bestow their plague-sores upon others. Let it not
trouble you, that the Parliament has approved their subscription of the
Engagement, with the Army; it was a Vote extorted in a thin house, many Members
having been driven away by threats of the Army before, and there were many
dissenting Members. A little patience and constancy will settle you in a
lasting peace.

To petition the Houses to repeal their four Votes against the King, is to save
their reputation, that seek to destroy yours.

A seasonable Caution to the City of London.
Gentlemen of the City.
YOur Neighbors of Kent, and other Counties wishing well to them, take it
unkindly, that (notwithstanding all these former admonitions) you should let
down your chains, and give a free march to this bloody, cheating, schismatical
Army at all hours of the night through your City, to cut their throats, and
lend them 6000 l. to enable them to march: when they had no other design, but
in a peaceable way to deliver a Petition to the Houses, demanding nothing but
what the Parliament by their Declarations, Covenant, the Oaths of Supremacy and
allegiance, and the known Laws of the Land ought to grant: Only, being
forewarned by the inhumane assassination of the Surrey Petitioners, they had
some men in Arms, a sufficient distance from the Town, to secure their
Messengers. They have by their Letters to your selves and the Houses manifested
the clearness of their intentions to you all. They are known to be men of
settled habitations and fortunes (for the most part) not vagabonds and Soldiers
of Fortune like the Army. Their commerce with you help you both to trade and
feed: whereas the Armies insolent march in triumph through your City, so far
lessened your reputation ever since, that you constantly lose in your trading
200000 l. a Week, and no Bullion comes into the Mint; whereby multitudes of you
are undone, and yet the Armies Arrears, and all other Taxes are exacted from
you with as much cruelty, as you lost nothing.

Remember that Butchery committed upon the unarmed Apprentices, when Cromwell
cried to the Soldiers to kill man, woman, and child, and fire the City: at
which time his Nose looked as prodigiously upon you as a Comet.

Remember the scorn put upon you by a Grandee when you were enabled to put up
your Chains again; That the House had consented your Posts should have Chains
as well as your Aldermen, and did as well deserve them. And Weaver's word when
your Guards came to attend the House, that 60 of the Army should beat 3000 of
them.

Remember how unwillingly and juglingly they restored unto you the Tower (first
plundered of all its ammunition you formerly had in it) and part only of your
Militia, and that clogged with many restrictions: they that bestow gifts so
grudgingly upon you when they are weak, will deprive you of them again when
they are strong. Adversity makes them your false friends, Prosperity your real
Enemies, Necessity only ties them to you: have a care therefore you do not
relieve their necessities, lest you lose them; like the frozen Snake in the
bosom, when they grow warm they will bite and sting.

You seem to have forgotten the unjust imprisonment of your Aldermen; the
unfaithfulness and inconstancy of their Votes, and Ordinances, even for
security of Money, and Land bought; the several Informations and Testimonies
you had of their good intentions to borrow more of your Money, not by way of
Loan, nor upon the Public Faith, but by way of plunder. Notwithstanding all
these injuries, and many more, (as if God had infatuated you, to destroy you)
you suffer a corrupt Faction within you to List men (to the amazement of your
neighbor Counties) whose principles you first examine; and if they be not
Independents, you trust them not with Arms. I hear of a young man, who being
asked, of what principles he was? he answered, That in these doubtful times he
professed no principles but gain: to whom was replied, then we are of one
principle, for we are resolved to keep what we have got. Behold the Principles
of these men that obstruct our peace! consider that Heaven and Earth have
denounced war against these men, and that God himself has touched the hearts
of all men as one man to rise against them, and demand to have Peace, Religion,
and Justice restored. When the whole Kingdom shall rise in a flame, what will
be your lot, but smoke in your eyes, and at last a consuming fire in your
bowels? when you only shall be left to maintain this domineering Army with your
money, and to recruit them with your blood? many of their Officers say already,
That the Country is exhausted of Money, and you shall be their purse-bearers:
but because you are a cursed Cow, they must keep the Army about you, that the
Soldiers may hold you by the horns whilst their friends milk you.

Consider how absolute a necessity, and how general a resolution there is, that
all things should return to their old channel: If you stop the violence of this
Torrent, it will swell until it overwhelm and drown you. You that are
guiltless, join not with the guilty; you that are guilty sin no more; there
will be mercy for you if you repent, and amend in time. The very multitude of
offenders will help to excuse your offenses; let not despair hu^^ you from one
sin to another until you fall into destruction, as ^ said Judas, whose Despair
(by all Divines) is held to be a greater i^piety than his Treachery; by the
first, he sinned against the Godhead of Christ, by the second against his
Manhood only.

The Remonstrance and Declaration of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and
Freeholders in COLCHESTER.
PEtitions (the birthright of Subjects) are by Law our addresses to our King,
(Gods Vicegerent) by custom our approaches to the Houses of Parliament, (His
Majesty's great Council,) by them we used humbly to present our modest desires,
and were wont to receive answers (as Gideons fleece the dew) without noise, yet
satisfactory; but that was denied our first Petition, and before our second
could be ready, our brethren of Surrey by theirs ecchoed our prayer to both
Houses of Parliament, but received their answer, (as the Jews their Law) in
thunder and lightning, a two-edged sword the tongue, and the report of Muskets
the voice, which spoke nothing but wounds and death.

We therefore thus admonished, resolved thus to present our grievances to the
World, and our Petitions to Heaven, for a blessing upon our intended endeavors.

Our grievances are these:

1. First, the distraction and threatened ruin of our glorious Protestant
Church, the neglect and abuse of Religion, the destruction of our Universities
(the springs of all Learning; Divine and Humane) occasioned by the fierce and
ignorant Separatists, set up and maintained as Rulers both in Church and State,
by the prevalency and violence of a rebellious and destructive Army, under the
command of the L. Fairfax, and countenanced by the seeming Authority of a pact,
unfree, and overawed House of Parliament.

2. Next, that contrary to the Oath and duty of Allegiance (from which no power
can, nor yet has pretended to absolve us) our Sovereign Lord the King is by
the design of the said Army, drawn from His House at Hampton Court to the Isle
of Wight, and there by the power of Col. Hammond and others of the Army
Imprisoned, and detained from His Parliament; by which act the said Hammond,
and all adhering to him, are according to the Votes passed in both Houses, 16.
March, 1641. Enemies to the peace of the Kingdom.

3. A third, is the violent and unchristian separation of the King, His Royal
Consort and Children, at once depriving His Majesty of the two first blessings
bestowed on Man.

4. The forcing the Queen and Prince of Wales, to seek in a foreign Nation, what
in their own they could not enjoy, liberty, safety, and support.

5. The exercise of Martial Law while the Courts of Justice are open, and
sitting at Westminster, the obstructing justice in our Courts of Judicature,
and by the private Committee of Indemnity perverting judgment, and exercising
arbitrary power, which is a subversion of our ancient Laws, and an introducing
of a tyrannical government, as was resolved by both Houses in the Cases of the
E. of Strafford, and Archb. of Canterbury, and writ in their blood.

6. Sixthly, the present mischief and future danger to the whole Kingdom, by
reason that the public affairs of highest concern, are managed and carried on
by a few particular men in a private Committee at Derby-house, wherein
(contrary to the self-denying Ordinance) the prime actors are chief Officers of
the Army, and have by our unhappy differences, possessed themselves of the most
beneficial offices and employments of the Kingdom; and the other Places of
profit and commodity, are by their design conferred on others, Members of the
Army and Houses of Parliament, to purchase their compliance and Votes in all
matters agitated in the Houses of Parliament: by reason whereof all motions for
His Majesty's return to his Parliament (the first step to our desired Peace)
have been either totally rejected, or by them politickly delayed, because Peace
would determine both their power and profit.

7. The Estates of Delinquents, the Lands of Bishops, Deans and Chapters,
(designed by several Ordinances for discharge of public Debts) are by the
Houses and power of the Army shared and divided amongst themselves, while the
public debts be unsatisfied, the common Soldier unpayed, the mained
unrelieved, the Widows and Children of the slain unprovided for, and all left
burdens to the Commonwealth.

8. That the Army consisting of mean, ignorant and illiterate men, (only gilt
with hypocrisy, divine and civil) under pretense of tender Consciences (the
better to induce and tolerate all Heresies) have expelled and suppressed all
learned Orthodox Divines, and Church Government, and crying Liberty, Liberty,
have subjected our Persons and Estates to arbitrary Law and tyranny; and by
Rape embracing the Legislative power, cuckolds the body Politic, giving Laws
to the whole Kingdom, and yet by Petitions and Remonstrances make both Houses
father (as their own) the adulterous issue.

9. That this Army assuming to themselves the modelling and settlement both of
Church and State, at Windsor in April last, in their Council did consult these
3. Questions.

First, Whether shall we join with the Levellers, and new model both Church and
State?

Next, Whether with the moderate Party, Treat, and receive the KING with more
qualified and limited Power?

Thirdly, Whether Depose the KING, Dis-inherit the PRINCE, Crown the DUKE of
YORK, and appoint a Protector?

The first was held to promise most of liberty and profit; but threatened
greatest danger in effecting, and difficulty in continuing.

The second was said to be easiest obtained and continued, because nighest to
the present frame and constitution already settled; but would bring them little
of profit, and less of Sovereignty.

The third (like Benjamin, last in birth, but first in the Parents affections)
was held not difficult to be acted, but to be maintained; for it would require
both the expense of much blood and money, and the Kingdom to re-act York and
Lancaster, under the names of Wales and York.

To this Lieut. Genesis Cromwell answered, It was the better, for that would
necessitate the continuance of our Army, which secures our persons, will
enforce our reasons, make just our demands, and facilitate their grant; For the
blood, that will flow from the cheapveins of Common Soldiers, whereof England
has plenty, and we will not want; For the money, London is our bank, and from
their Purses it shall drain to our Coffers.

Commissary Ireton, L. Genesis Cromwell's Son-in-law, said, The work was half done;
for we have already Voted no Addresses to be made to the King, and Him guilty
of crimes enough to Depose Him, and by Imprisoning His Person, have fitted Him
for a private life, and by it taught the people that He is subject to the
dispose of both Houses of Parliament, whole Ordinances are only powerful by our
Swords, and therefore our Actions shall be legal by their Vote. Further, the
Prince (said he) is linked with his Father in crime, and therefore cannot be
severed in punishment, he has been General in a Western Army, warring (as his
Father) against the Parliament, a crime that as it rendered the Father fit to be
Deposed, so does it the Son unfit to succeed in the Government. And that the
descent of the Crown purge not him, (as it did Hen. 7.) let us in the Fathers
life time Crown the Duke of York, now in our power, whose tender years have
preserved him innocent, and presents him fitter for protection and our design,
and should any blame our severity toward the King and Prince, others will
commend our clemency toward the Duke of York.

Upon the result of this Council, L. Genesis Cromwell in the House of Commons, tells
Mr. Speaker, That it was time to set on foot our great design, and that such as
should not concur in Votes with us, be not continued of us.

The motion being mis-timed, and diverse of his party absent, it was only
wondered at by Master Knightly, and died with the words. The Scene now alters
from Westminster to Carisbrook-Castle, and the King that could not be removed
by Votes, must now by Poison, the Actor Col. Hammond, Major Rolf, etc. all
Members of the Army: yet must we by cursed Excise that insensibly devours the
poor, by insupportable Monthly Taxes that impoverish the rich, contrary to Law
and our Allegiance, contrary to our Protestation and Covenant (enforced upon
us) we must traitorously maintain and pay this Army that traitorously contrive
and endeavor the deposal and murder of our Sovereign Lord the King, the
subversion of our Protestant Church, our Fundamental and known Laws.

We therefore declare to the World, that God blessing us, we will with hazard
of our lives and fortunes, disband and dissipate this Army, the Suppressors of
the pure Protestant Religion, the Imprisoners, and would be the Murderers of
their Sovereign Lord the King, and grand Oppressors of the Commonwealth; then
free from Imprisonment our said Sovereign, and him (God-willing) restore to his
lawful Government, just Rights, and Throne in Parliament; this done, we shall
joyfully and readily, deposite our justly assumed Arms, and on our knees beg
what his Majesty has often most graciously offered, and will undoubtedly
grant, his most Royal and gracious pardon to all his misled Subjects, will
return to their Allegiance, and forward to bring the King back to his own house.

We therefore hereby earnestly desire and request all loyal and well-affected
Subjects as well Members of both Houses of Parliament as others, to be herein
aiding and assisting to us. First, by not recruiting the Forces of the Lord
Fairfax. Next, by withdrawing all aid and assistance from his Army, by
withholding Excise and Monthly Taxes allotted for their pay and support, and
to give us with their prayers such assistance as their Allegiance and
opportunity shall advise; and we trust that the God that judges rightly will
crown our loyal action with happy success, and our success with a glorious
peace, which is heartily prayed for, and shall (God willing) be resolutely
fought for by us, His Majecties loyal and faithful Subjects in Colchester.

A List of the Names of the Members of the House of Commons, Observing which
are Officers of the Army, contrary to the self-denying Ordinance: Together with
such sums of Money, Offices, and Lands, as they have given to themselves for
service done and to be done, against the KING and Kingdom. Corrected and
augmented.
Note, Reader, that such as have this mark [*] coming immediately before their
Names, are Recruiters, illegally elected, by color of the new Seal, the power
of the Army, and voices of the Soldiers, and are unduly returned, and serve
accordingly.

The first Century.
1. WIlliam Lenthall, Speaker of the House of Commons worth 2000 l. per an.
besides rewards for courtesies; (not to say Bribes) Master of the Rolls, worth
3000 l. per an. beside the sale of Offices: Chamberlain of Chester in the Earl
of Darbies place, And until of late Chancellor of the Dutchey of Lancaster,
worth 1230 l. per an. and one of the Commissioners of their great Seal, worth
1500 l. per an. and had 6000 l. given him at one time by the House.

2. Bulstrode Whitlock, Commissioner of the great Seal, worth 1500 l. per an.
and had 2000 l. given him out of Mr George Minn's estate.

3. Edmund Prideaux, formerly a Commissioner for the great Seal, worth 1500 l.
per an. Now by Ordinance practices within the Bar, as one of the Kings Council;
worth 500 l. per an. and is Postmaster for all Inland Letters; worth 100 l.
every Tuesday night beside his supper, and it was thus got: The Lord Stanhop,
the Postmasters and Carriers of England complained in Parliament, against Mr.
Witherings and others, touching the carrying of Letters, whereupon the benefit
of foreign Letters were given to the Earl of Warwick; worth 5000 l. per an. and
the Inland Letters to Mr. Prideaux: good Parliament Justice.

4. Roger Hill, a Barrester of the Temple, in no practice, nor of a
considerable estate, till this Parliament, has now from the House the Bishop
of Winchesters Manor of Taunton Dean, being the best of England; and worth
1200 l. per an. when the estates for lives determine.

5. Humphrey Salway, the Kings Remembrancer in Mr. Fanshaw's place; worth 200
l. per an.

6. Francis Rous, Provost of Eaton, in Dr. Stewards place; worth 600 l. per
annum, and has got a College Lease worth 600 l. per annum.

7. John Lisle, Barrester of the Temple, Master of St. Crosses in Dr. Jews his
place, being a place for a Divine; and worth 800 l. per annum.

8. Oliver St. John, by Ordinance both Attorney and Solicitor to the King,
worth what he please to make it; and has the passing of all Pardons upon
Commissions, worth 40000 l.

9. Sir William Allison, Alderman of York, Clerk of the Hamper, worth 1000 per
an. he has Crabb-Castle; worth 600 l. per an. Sometimes the Bishop of Yorks in
Yorkshire.

10. Thomas Hoile, Alderman of York, Treasurers Remembrancer in the Exchequer,
in Sir Peter Osburn's place, worth 1200 l. per annum.

11. Thomas Pury Senior, first a Weaver in Gloucester, then an ignorant Country
Solicitor, had 3000 l. given him, and Mr. Gerrards place in the Petty-bag,
worth 400 l. per an.

12. Thomas Pury Junior, Son to the Elder, Receiver of the Kings Rents in
Gloucester and Wilts, Clerk of the Peace of Gloucestershire, worth 200 l. per
an. and Captain of Foot and Horse, the first year of this Parliament, servant
to Mr. Towneshead, an Attorney of Staple Inn.

13. William Ellis, Steward of Stepney, worth 200 l. per an. and by him sold to
one of the Temple.

14. Miles Corbet, at the beginning of the Parliament 3000 l. in debt for
himself and his Mother, more than he was worth: now one of the Registers in
Chancery, worth 700 l. per an. besides Chairman for scandalous Ministers,
worth 1000 l. per an. And has money in his purse.

15. John Goodwyne, the other Register in Chancery, worth 700 l. per annum.

16. Sir Thomas Widdrington, a Commissioner of the great Seal, worth 1500 l.
per. an.

17. Edward Bishe, Garter Herald, in Sir Edward Walkers place, worth 600 l.
per an.

18. * Walter Strickland, Agent in Holland for the two Houses of Parliament,
worth to him 5000 l.

19. Nicholas Love, Mr. Speakers Chamber-fellow, one of the six Clerks in
Chancery, in Mr. Penruddocks place; worth 2000 l. per annum.

20. Sir Gilbert Gerrard, much in debt before the Parliament, play master to the
Army, and had 3d. per pound allowed, besides Gratuities, worth 60000 l. and now
Chancellor of the Dutchey, worth 1200. per an.

21. Gilbert Gerrard, his second son, Clerk of the Dutchey, and for whose
benefit the Clerk-ship of the Assize in Norfolk, is granted to Mr. Edward
Garret his Cozen by the procurement of Sir Gilbert, and is worth 500 l. per an.

22. John Seldom, had given him 5000 l. of which he received 2500 l. pound.

23. * John Bond, (Son to Dennis Bond, a Parliament man) made Master of
Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, which Mr. Seldom refused to accept of.

24. Sir Benjamin Rudiard, given him 5000 l. And has he not deserved it?

25. * Lucas Hodges, Customer of Bristol.

26. Sir John Hipsley, has the keeping of three of the Kings Parks,
Mary-bone-Park, that was Mr. Carewes, Hampton-Park, and Bushy-Park, and given
him 2000 l. in Money.

27. Sir Thomas Walsingham, the Honor of Eltham, that was the Earl of Dorsets,
the middle-Park and house, which was Master Whines, and has cut down 4000.
Timber Trees:

28. Benjamine Valentine, given him 5000 l.

29. * Sir Henry Heyman, given him 5000 l.

30. Denzell Hollis, given him 5000 l.

31 * Nath. Bacon, given him 3000 l.

32. * John Steevens, given him out of the Lord Astley's Composition 1000 l.

33. * Henry Smith, made one of the six Clerks; worth 2000 l. per annum.

34. Robert Renolds, had 2000 l. given him; Besides Abingdon-Hall, and the
Lands, worth 400 l. per annum. Has bought a good pennyworth of Bishops Lands,
has 20000 l. beyond Sea, as he made appear upon his Marriage.

35. Sir John Clotworthy, Treasurer for Ireland, and by the Army charged with
defrauding of the State of 40000 l. which may be one reason the King could
never get an Account of the moneys rai^ed for the Irish, though he desired it.

36 ^ohn Ash, given him out of Mr. John Coventry's Composition 4^00 l. out of
Sir Edward Mosely's 1000 l. out of Mr. Edw. Ph^^'s 1200 l. out of Sir John
Powel's estate 8000 l. And (which is w^ ^ll this) is the great Chairman at
Goldsmiths Hall. Is not this better than clothing?

37. * John Lenthall, son to the Speaker, made one of the six Clerks, worth
2000 l. per annum.

38. * Francis Allen, a poor Goldsmith at St. Danstans in Fleetstreet, now made
a Customer for London. In honor of whom clipped moneys are called (Allens.)

39. Giles Green, the Reciver of Yorkshire, being put out of his place, got it
for his Son-in-Law, is Chairman for the Navy, and for Sir Thomas Daws his
estate, and what it was worth to him, Sir Thomas Daws his Creditors will tell
you; for they got nothing.

40. Francis Pierpoint has the Archbishop of York's Lands, lying in
Nottingham-shire.

41. William Pierpoint has 7000 l. given him, and all the Earl of Kingston's
personal Estate, worth 40000 l.

42. * John Palmer, Mr. of All Souls in Oxford, in Doctor Shelden's place, a
Divine.

43. * John Blackeston, a poor shopkeeper in New Castle, was Executor to the
Executor of Sir John Fenner, trusted with 6000 l. for Charitable uses, and was
sued in Chancery to perform the trust; but got himself returned a Burgess for
New Castle by the Scots Garrison there; had 3000 l. given him out of one
Gentleman's Composition, and out of others as much as made it up 12000 l. as was
made appear at a Committee before Mr. Sandis of the Temple Chairman; has also
a Cole-meeter's place worth 200 l. per annum, and the Bishop of Durham's Castle
at Durham, and Lands of great value.

44. Tho. Ceely, long a Prisoner for debt, helped out by the Parliament, and
made Recorder of Bridgewater.

45. * Thomas Moor, an Officer in the Custom-house, and his brother Governor of
Ludlow.

46. * Scawine, given him 2000 l.

47. Isaac Pennington, twice broke; once Lieutenant of the Tower; a year and a
half Lord Mayor of London before his time; had 7000 l. given him, and has
store of Bishops Lands.

48. Samuel Vassel given him 1000 l.

49. Oliver Cromwell Leiut. Genesis has 2500 l. per an. given him out of the
Marquess of Worcesters Estate, for which 4000 l. per an. is set out at the rate
of 2500 l.

50. Sir Will. Brereton, Col. Genesis for the Cheshire Forces, has Cashobery, and
other Lands of the L. Capels worth 2000 l. per an. and the Archbishops house
and Lands at Croiden, where he has turned the Chapel into a Kitchen. A goodly
Reformation, and fits with his stomach as well as his Religion.

51. * Thomas Wait, Colonel, Governor of Burley, where he thrives so well,
as he is now buying 500 l. per an. who before was not able to buy 5 l. a year.

52. Sir Oliver Luke, decayed in his Estate, Colonel of H rse.

53. Sir Samuel Luke his Son, Colonel, and Scout-master for the Counties of
Bedford, etc.

54. * Thomas Gell, Leiut. Col. to Sir John Gell, made Recorder of Derby, in
Mr. Allistrie's place.

55. Valentine Walton, Colonel, and Governor of Lin Regis.

36. * Richard Norton, Colonel, Governor of Southampton.

57. * Edward Harvy, late a poor Silk-man, now Col. and has got the Bishop of
London's House and Manor of Fulham.

58. Edward Rossiter, Colonel, and General of all the Lincolnshire Forces,
and Governor of Belvory Castle.

59. * Sir Michael Livesey, Col. Sequestrator, and Plunder-master General of
Kent.

60. * Henry Ireton (son in Law to Lieutenant General Cromwell) Colonel, and
Commissary General.

61. * Richard Salway, Col. formerly a Grocer's man.

62. * John Birch, formerly a Carrier, now a Colonel.

63. * Thomas Rainsborough, a Skipper of Lin, Col. Governor of Woodstock, and
Vice Admiral of England.

64. * Robert Black, Col. Governor of Taunton.

65. * Francis Russel, Colonel.

66. * Rowland Wilson, Colonel.

67. * Robert Harley, Col. son to Sir Robert Harley.

68. * Richard Brown, Major General, and Governor of Abingdon.

69. * Peter Temple, Captain of a Troop of Horse.

70. * John Ven, Colonel, Governor of Windsor, had 4000 l. given him.

71. * Algernon Sidney, Governor of Dover-Castle.

72. * Richard Ingolsby, Colonel, Governor of Oxford.

73. * John Hutchinson, Colonel, Governor of Nottingham.

74. * Sir John Palgrave, Col. at the siege of Newark.

75. * Edmund Ludlow, Governor of

76. * Cornelius Holland renteth as much of the Kings Grounds for 200 l. per
an. as is worth 1600 l. or 1800 l. per an.

77. * Philip Skippon, Sergeant-Major-General of the Army, Major-Gen. of
London, and Governoor of Bristol, had 1000 l. per an. lands of inheritance
given him.

78. * Charles Fleetwood, Colonel.

79. * Thomas Westrow, Capt. under Sir Michael Livesey, was nothing worth,
until a Captain and a Parliament man; and now has gotten the Bishop of
Worcesters Manor of Hartlerow, which proves he has two good and beneficial
offices.

80. Henry Martyn, Col. of a Regiment of Horse, and a Regiment of Whores.

81. Nathaniel Fiennes, Col. once Governor of Bristol. Thereby hangs a Tail.

82. Anthony Stapley, Col. Governor of Chichester.

83. Alexander Rigby, Col. and Governor of Bolton.

84. Charles Pym, Captain of a Troop of Horse.

85. Sir Arthur Haslerig, Colonel, Governor of New Castle, and has the Bishop
of Durham's house, Park, and Manor of Aukland, and 6500 l. in money given him.

86. William Jepson, Colonel.

87. Sir Thomas Middleton, Major General for Denbigh, and five other Counties.

88. Godfrey Boswell, Colonel.

89. The Lord Gray of Grooby, (son to the E. of Stamford) Col. and has given
to him the Queens Manor house, Park, and Lands at Holdenby, and there is a great
fall of the Woods.

90. Sir Will. Constable, Col. Governor of Gloucester, he sold his lands to Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, for 25000 l. and is restored to it again by Parliament.

91. Sir Will. Purefoy, Col. and Governor of Coventry, fought resolutely
against the Cross in the Market place at Warwick, and against the Ancient
Monuments in the Earls Chapel in St. Mary's Church there; for which he had
1500 l. given him, but when he should have fought with the Enemy, hid himself
in a Barley-field, for which a Water-man at Temple stairs (that had been his
soldier) refused to carry him.

92. Sir Edward Hungerford, Col. famous for plundering Warder Castle, has the
Lands of the Countess Dowager of Rutland, worth 1500 l. per an. and she
allowed but 500 l.

93. Harbert Morley, Col. Plunder-master of Surrey.

94. John Moor, Col. of the Guards, and for some time had the benefit of Passes
out of London.

95. Walter Long, Col. had 5000 l. and the Office of Register for 4. years.

96. Sir Will. Waller, General, and lost two Armies, yet a gainer by the
employment.

97. John Allured, Col.

98. Michael Oldsworth, no Col. but Governor of Pembroke and Mountgomery, and
has a share with his Lord out of Sir Henry Comptons Office, worth 3000 l. per
an. and is Keeper of Windsor Park.

99. Tho. Scot, a Brewers Clerk formerly, has the Bishops house at Lambeth.

100. Master Ashhurst, when he went Commissioner into Scotland, had the Clerk
of the Peaces place for Lancashire, and 1000 l. in money given him.

Besides these Offices, Commands, and Gratuities, every Member of the House of
Commons, being in all 516. are by their own Order allowed 4 l. per Week a man;
which amounts to 110000 l. per annum.

By the Ordinance for sequestring Delinquents (1 April, 1643.) it was declared,
That their Estates should go for maintenance of the Public Affairs, and
several Ordinances designed Bishops Lands for pay of 200000 l. Public debt:
Yet by this, and the following Centuries, thou shall see how both Delinquents
Estates and Bishops Lands are by Members of Parliament shared amongst
themselves, whilst the 200000 l. is unpaid, the public affairs supported by
unsupportable Taxes, and that Dutch Devil Excise, that insensibly devours the
poor, and will impoverish the rich.

These are they that with Hananiah, break the wooden yoke from our necks, (28
Jeremiah) and put on one of Iron; free us from a little Ship Money paid thrice
in an Age, and impose as much at once for a Monthly Tax; quit us of the
Monopolies of Tobacco, and set up Excise on Bread and Beer: The first eases
the wanton rich man, and the latter grindeth the needy and poor. Yet these are
thy Gods O London! these are the Idol Calves the People have set up and do
worship: these be the Molec to whom ye sacrifice Sons and Servants by Troops,
Regiments, and Armies, to maintain their sovereignty, rebellion, and profit.

And that these and other their actions may never be questioned, they His
Majesty's loyal and obedient subjects, will always Imprison their King,
continue their Army, perpetuate their Parliament, and intail their Member-ships
(as the Priesthood on Levi) upon confiding Families, to furnish them with
Votes, as Mr. Gilbert Gerrard and his 2 Sons, Brampton Guidon and his 2 Sons,
Sir Robert Harley and his 2 Sons, 3 Fines, 2 Ashes, 4 Stephens, 4 Pelhams, 4
Herberts, 4 Temples; it were endless to name the Father and the Son, Brother
and Brother that fills the House; they come in couples more than unclean Beasts
to the Ark: 2 Vanes, 2 Puries, 2 Chaloners, 2 Bacons, 2 Pierpoints, 2 Bonds, 2
Onslowes, 2 Lenthals, etc. And that our Ecclesiastics may comply with our
Temporal Governors; the Houses abolish (as superstitious because Legal) the
Convocation of learned Divines, (regularly summoned by the King's Writ, and
duly elected by the Clergy) and the House of Commons nominates an assembly of
gifted Divines (indeed wicked Simons) that slander the Godly Onias, (2. Mac.
4.) to out him of his Priests place; so that at this day there is not one
Assembly-man but is illegally thrust into another Benefice, a Catalogue of
whose names and Preferments expect shortly, and with them a view of the Militia
and Common-Council-men of London, observing what Places, Offices and salaries
they have from the Houses of Parliament, and then thou will know the reasons of
their Votes and Actions in the City.

You see in part what the Grandees have done for themselves. Consider after 8
years sitting what they have done for the people, when amongst all their
Propositions to the King for Peace, hardly any one respects the good of the
People, but their own grandeur and profit. They demand a Militia to keep up
this Army upon us, which is not the Kings to give. No King of England ever
governed by a standing Army. They demand likewise power to raise what Forces
for Land and Sea, consisting of what Persons they please to press; and to
raise what money to maintain them out of all men's Estates, to be laid on at
their discretion, and as partially as they please, so that they may favor one
Faction, and oppress the other at pleasure; for, so much the Act for the
Militia as it is penned imports: and this is more than his Majesty has power
to grant. The late Militia of Trained Bands, and the Posse Comitatus under
Sheriffs (being the only legal Militia of England) will not serve their turns.
It has always been the Policy of England, to trust the Militia and sword in
one hand ( viz. the KINGS) and the Purse that should pay them in another ( viz.
the PARLIAMENTS) whereby one power might bound and limit the other. For to put
the Sword and the Purse into one hand, is to make that hand absolute Master of
our Persons and Estates, and so reduced us to absolute slavery under the
Arbitrary power of one man, without appeal or redress. Awake and look about
you good People.

THE END.
AN APPENDIX TO The History of Independency, BEING A brief description of some
few of ARGYLE'S proceedings, before and since he joined in Confederacy with the
Independent Junto in ENGLAND: With a Parallel betwixt him and Cromwell, AND A
Caveat to all his seduced Adherents.

CICERO. Totius injustitia nulla capitalior est quam eorum, qui cum maxim
fallunt, id tamen agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1648.

AN APPENDIX TO The History of Independency. BEING A brief description of some
few of Argyle's proceedings, before and since he joined in confederacy with the
Independent Junto in ENGLAND: With a Parallel betwixt him and Cromwell; AND A
Caveat to all his seduced Adherents.
THe Covenant being at the first taking, held to be the true Touchstone whereby
the Religious Royal Subjects were discerned from all those who were unwilling
to submit to the yoke of Christ in matters of Religion, or to the just and
lawful Government of our dread Sovereign his Vicegerent; now a subtle
generation of men (or rather Vipers) in both Kingdoms, who did take the
Covenant, and did magnify it so long as it could serve them for a Ladder to
mount to their intended Greatness, being now at the top, have kicked away the
Ladder, and standing (as it were) on the pinnacle, look with disdain on all
their old friends, who out of the integrity of their hearts, did for the good
of Religion, and His Majesty's honor, join in that solemn engagement, it being
far from their thoughts that their modest and humble desires for the
Reformation of some abuses both in Church and State (all which, His Majesty in
the respective Kingdoms did (or was willing to) cure) should have struck so
deep as to endeavor the overthrow of all lawful Governments, Civil and
Ecclesiastical; bringing, instead of a promised Reformation in Religion, a
cursed Toleration of the most damnable Sects, Errors, and Heresies that ever
Hell did send forth; and for the Civil State, instead of a well-setled
Monarchy, a most confused tyrannical Anarchy, quite contrary to the words and
meaning of the Covenant, and the honest intentions of all true-hearted,
Religious and loyal Subjects in the three Kingdoms, who did take that solemn
Covenant with a purpose to keep it, and of very many thousands who did never
take the Covenant, (yet very good Protestants and loyal Subjects) being more
affrighted with the compulsory way of enforcing it on all, than unsatisfied in
the matter, being introduced in a legal way, none of these deserving the name
of Malignants, or to be so cruelly dealt with either for their persons or
Estates, as has been too too common in both Kingdoms; but the Covenant it
self, does best decypher who are Incendiaries, Malignants, and evil
Instruments, viz. those who hinder the reformation of Religion, who divide the
King from His People, or one Kingdom from another, or make any Faction or
Parties amongst the people, contrary to the League and Covenant. Yet by our new
tenets, none must be called Malignants but those that have loyal hearts
toward their Sovereign, though otherwise never so Religious, and all of them
(with Master Martin) would gladly make the Covenant an old Almanac, that they
might be rid of that tie of preserving His Majesty's Person and Authority, in
the preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with their consciences of their
loyalties, and that they have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His
Majesty's just Power and Greatness.

As the History of Independency has discovered the practices of the
Independent Junto, so this Appendix will discover their chief Confederate in
Scotland, namely the Marquess of Argyle; whose dealing with his Kindred,
Friends, and Confederates mentioned in the following discourse, will be a
warning to all religious Protestants, how they trust such an Apostate
Covenanter, whose ambition and avarice has ruined the KING, Church and State,
or three flourishing Kingdoms. Although it may seem a paradox to many, I dare
boldly aver, that Argile and his Faction in Scotland, have been, and are the
chief Malignants, Incendiaries, and evil Instruments, who have been the Ruiners
of these three flourishing Kingdoms, and the Authors of the blood shed in all
of them, as I hope by this following Discourse will be made appear to every
impartial and unprejudicate Reader, who has, or may have the certain knowledge
of every particular when time shall serve. This Argile's Father, after the
Marriage of his English Lady, having turned Roman Catholic, and this his only
Son by his first Lady being carefully educated by the Earl of Morton, by whose
means he obtained the possession of his Fathers whole Estate for a small
Pension, and by His Majesty's special favor (for out-quitting his pretended
Title of Justice General (of the Kingdom of Scotland) did obtain an Heritable
Justiciary of Argile, Lorn, Kintyre, and many of the Western Isles; which power
he did execute with that cruelty, that he disgusted all the Islanders, and
Highlands of Scotland, who were never so tyrannized over by any of their Kings,
till his Fathers death (still fearing his return) he kept himself somewhat
moderate for the engaging for the Covenant, or keeping company sometimes with
those that were against it; but his Father being dead, finding himself idolized
by those who had taken the managing of all affairs into their hands, and that
by his power and policy he could prevail with them in any thing, to indear
himself the more to that party, he did seem exceeding zealous for the Covenant,
and pretending great fears from Ireland, (which the then Lord Deputy Strafford
his Greatness, and known averseness from the Covenant, did make the more
easily to be believed) whereas the true cause of his fears was for the loss of
Kintyre, (whereof he cosened his Brother long before his death) Isla, and
diverse considerable Isles which were and ought to be the possessions of the
Mackdonalds, and his indiscreet provoking of Strafford, who in revenge of him
did use very hardly all the Scots in Ireland who would not renounce the
National Covenant of Scotland: he dis-arming them, did Arm and Train many
Irish, who (after his Head was off) shed so much blood in Ireland, and upon
pretense of diverse of the Mackdonalds (Argile's own Tenants for the time) were
accessory to the Plot, fearing his Judiciary power where he was both Judge and
Party, they were enforced to fly to Ireland till their peace should be made;
to prevent which, he sent their Wives and Children after them, took possession
of all their movables, and placed other Tenants in their Room; but being
grieved that Culkettough and his Sons, who had goodly Possessions, were not
gone with the rest, he caused cite them before the Council, as accessory to an
Invasion to be made by Antrum and some of their friends; which citation (as
legal men and not guilty in the least) they did obey, and after some days stay
in Edinburgh (taking their walk daily before Argile's door) they did humbly
entreat his Secretary to plead for them, that they might have a speedy hearing,
since they were weary of their attendance; which the Secretary acquanting the
Lord Argile, returned them this Answer, That since they had testified their
obedience by their appearance, they might go home and he have themselves
civilly, not meddling with their Rebellious friends, (as he was pleased to term
them) and be ready upon any new citation, they should be excused for that time:
they did humbly thank his Lordship, and his Secretary, for this courtesy, and
did presently depart from Edinburgh toward their home; whereof my Lord (by his
Spies upon them) having notice, did immediately convene the Council, and
whereas in many days before (during their stay in Town) they could not be
heard, that day they were first Called, and upon their not Answering, my Lord
aggravating their Accusation by their departure, occasioned by his own and his
Secretaries contriving, procures a Warrant to make them prisoners till they
should be Tried, and to seize upon their Estates; which out of his zeal to the
Covenant (God knows) he did carefully perform, and made Culkettough and his two
Sons Prisoners before they were half way at home; which Alexander Macdonald
(afterward Sir Alexander Macdonald) being fled to Ireland (having no valuable
possession to look to at home) did associate himself with the Irish in the
beginning of their Rebellion; but so soon as the Scots Army came over, he did
apply himself to them, assuring them that he would do them faithful service
against the Irish Rebels, if they would release his old Father and his two
Brethren, unjustly detained prisoners, or bring them to Legal Trial, whereof
having assurance given him, he brought with him two hundred gallant men of his
friends, and did more execution upon the Irish than half of the Scots Army,
their horse being not able to follow through Bogs, and their Foot not so swift
as the Irish, and did in one morning bring in six or seven thousand Cowes to
the Scots Camp (the like booty they did never take at any one time before or
since) for which good service, the General did of new engage for his Father and
Brethrens releasment; but when the Committee of Estates had consented, Argile
did reverse all, and frustrate the Generals promise: which Alexander Macdonald
perceiving, said no more (but well) I will yet cause my faithful service
procure my Fathers enlargement, and did continue without pay, or hope of pay,
saving a very spare allowance of quarters, until Argile sent over and caused
him to be discharged of all quarters, to the grief of all the Scots Officers,
who did well know what faithful service he had done, and was able to do them: so
that mere necessity did enforce him to make his peace with the Irish, by whose
help he did come over into Scotland, merely to be revenged on Argile, and to
relieve his Father, hoping the Estates of Scotland would not blame him for
suing the performance of what their General had promised unto him, intending no
more til Montrosse out of his desire to be revenged on Argile did enforce
Alexander Macdonald to join his Majesty's Interest, as Montrosse pretended,
with the said Macdonald, hoping he would find (as indeed he did) a great many
discontented persons to join with them, all which, or the most considerable,
were parties and persons wronged, oppressed, and ruined by Argile, as chiefly
(besides the forementioned Islanders and these Highlands that were under his
lash) the Atholl men twice or thrice plundered by him; Montrosse himself
provoked by many wel-known injuries, which no Noble heart could endure, as the
death of Mr. James Stewart who was no Traitor either to King or Country save
only to Argile. The Earl of Airly having his estate plundered, and his House
thrown down in revenge of an ancient quarrel amongst their Predecessors, for
the Earl of Airly having some Lands in the Bray of Angus, out of which Argile's
men did many times drive Herds of Cattle, Sheep, and other Beasts, for which
the Lord Ogilbee could have no remedy, these Thieves being protected by the
Earl of Argile, by advice of his Lawyers he did Charge the Earl of Argile, that
he should find surety not to maintain or protect such Out-lawes; but before he
could obtain the same, he was obliged (according to the custom of Scotland) to
give his Oath, he did fear bodily harm from Argile, which he was unwilling to
do; alleging, it were only a Beastly harm that he did fear, for if he would not
protect those that did steal his poor men's Beasts, he was nothing afraid of his
body. This tart Answer, after an age must (under color of service to the
State) be so revenged.

The Gourdons, diverse of whom he betrayed under trust, and under pretense of
securing his Neces Portions that he was engaged for, possessing himself of
Badinoch and Lochabar, and plundring friends and foes indifferently in his
marches too and fro, and the inexhaustible treasure of the Scots Exchequer must
allow him eleven or twelve thousand pound sterling for every Voyage; whereas
his Breechlesse Soldiery were well content with their Beef and Bannocks, and
such convenient plunder as the Country could afford: these (as I conceive) were
the most considerable Forces Montrosse ever had, unless some that were through
fear, compelled to yield for the time, so that the bloodshed in Scotland by
Montrosse and Macdonald do properly fall upon Argiles score, no other under
Heaven having occasioned both their out-breakings, and all their partakers, who
did see no other way to be revenged on him (that had made himself Master of all
the Estate, having made Argile's quarrel their own) than by heaving at all
under the specious pretext of the Kings interest: which if God in mercy had not
prevented, they had almost effectuate through Argile's misgovernment; wherein
it is to be remarked, that when he was overthrown by Montrosse in Lochaber the
second of February, 1645. many of his friends being killed, and others taken,
he who would not release Culkettough for his Sons good service, nor the
Generals engagement, or the Committee of Estates desire (you must not speak of
Command) for Master James Hamilton, a faithful Minister of the Gospel, who
found more kindness from Culkettough than from this Canibal Covenanter, is now
content to release all to get a poor Company of his Countrymen, leaving the
Godly Minister in cruel bondage, whom Culkettough did release upon his Paroll
and promise to send him a Boy that was forgot behind.

This religious Covenanter, out of his pious care for the education of his
Sister, in the true Religion as he pretended, did by His Majesty's special
favor overthrow the last will and Testament of his Mother-in-law, by getting
himself made Administrator in the room of him who was nominated therein,
whereby he got the Gentlewoman his Sisters whole patrimony into his hands; but
before he could prevail in this, his Majesty did take special care that
sufficient Surety should be given that the Will of the Dead should be truly
performed by payment of their respective portions when they were Married, and
sufficient maintenance until they were Married: the Elder whose Portion was
Five thousand pound sterling, is presently sent for, and one thousand pound or
thereby given to a Gentleman for his second Wife, the rest (there being a
clause, that if any of them should enter into Nunneries, they should only have
300 l. sterling for all) being kept so scarce of their due maintenance (the
Gentleman who was surety, having advanced of his own above 1000 l. whereof he
is not as yet repaid) were seduced to go to Monasteries all save one, who is
now ready to enter through his neglect; so this 12000 l. of his Sisters
Portions (with the ruin of their Souls to boot) is a part of Argile's wel-made
purchase.

The great care taken by the Earl of Morton for Argile's education and
preservation both of his life from the crafty designs of a Stepmother, and
recovery of his almost ruined Estate, was so well requited, that
(notwithstanding he has the Earl of Morton's Daughter in his bed) in open
Parliament he spoke what became him not both of that noble Lords Person and
Estate (only, as he pretended, out of his zeal to the welfare of the Kingdom)
whereas the truth is, it was merely out of his ambition to have that Honorable
place conferred upon himself, which was intended by his Majesty upon that noble
Lord; but finding His Majesty not inclinable that way, the next assault was,
for one of his own name, a man truly wel-deserving (for to say, better
deserving than himself, is no great praise) and if, his two much favoring of
him do not stain his reputation, worthy to be beloved.

Thus having shortly viewed Argile's religious carriage toward his Vassals and
Tenants, Parents, Friends, and Allies, Brother and Sisters, Neighbors and
fellow-Patriots, let us take a short view of his Loyal carriage toward his
Sovereign, and his due observation of the Solemn League and Covenant with his
covenanted Brethren of England, and then let the impartial Reader judge whether
he be not such as is affirmed in the proposition, the greatest incendiary in
the three Kingdoms.

It cannot be denied, but His Majesty (as is mentioned before) did confer many
great and Princely favors upon him at the Earl of Morton's desire when he was
Lord of Lorn, such whereof as required confirmation were approved and ratified
in Parliament, His Majesty being present, anno 1641. with the addition of the
honor and title of Marquess, and a full Pension well paid ever since whoever
want, together with (not only an act of oblivion, but) an approbation of all
his tyrannical proceedings against the Athol men, the Earl of Airely, and
others, though not particularly mentioned, yet as done in obedience of Orders
from the Committee of Estates (obtained by his own procurement) therefore to be
no further questioned.

The first endeavor in requital of these and many other Royal favors was the
entering in conspiracy with certain his Confederates (whom I forbear to name) to
transform the Kingdom of Scotland into a Free State like the Estates of
Holland, and because some truly noble Lords did abhor such a disloyal motion
(after so many Acts of favor, witnessing to all Posterity his Royal bounty
both to Church and State, whereof these chief Conspirators tasted not a little)
he did at that time forbear not so much to prosecute his design, as to conceal
their Counsel from all these that had thoughts of Loyalty, though most
faithful to the true Religion and their Country, according to the Covenant.
The Irish Rebellion breaking out, fearing his own stake if Antrim should grow
strong, he procured one Regiment for himself, another for his Cozen Lawers, a
third with the place of L. General for that most ungrate Gentleman the Earl of
Lothian (who was married to his Niece and one of his Confidents, who was once
heard say, That the 3 Kingdoms would never have peace so long as King CHARLES
his Head was on his shoulders: and yet it is only King CHARLES his favor that
has made him and his Father exceed the estate of Gentlemen) with many other
places to diverse of their friends, intending a full Conquest of Ireland (at
least) to banish Antrim and the Mackdonalds from thence, as he and his
Predecessors had done many of them out of Scotland, taking a gift from the
Parliament of England of some of the Earl of Antrims Lands in Ireland,
especially the Island of Rachera; to the which, one of the forementioned
Regiments was sent, and kept there a long time, so that all the three Kingdoms
must be at the charge to maintain Armies and Garrisons for enlarging the
Dominions of Argile. His next project, having begun his Confederacy in England,
by showing them the ways to get money by Taxes and Excise, 10. and 20. part,
bringing in of Plate, voluntary Contributions, borrowing on the Public Faith,
tyrannizing over the Persons and Estates of all that durst be so bold as speak
against the Illegal Orders, and all this Money in both Kingdoms to be employed
against His Majesty, whom their renewed Covenant did oblige them to defend,
having good opportunity to traffic betwixt under the pretense of
Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland, the rest for the most part either
his Creatures or Confidents; so that he ruled all the Council at home and
abroad, sending Lothian to France to have them brought in a Confederacy,
abusing his Majesty by procuring His Commission for Treating concerning the
keeping and preservation of that ancient League betwixt France and Scotland
(begun in Charles the Great's time, with Achaius King of Scotland) but the
effect of the Treaty was to bring money to Argile, who, at that time when the
Kingdom stood in much need of men, sold five thousand to the French to be under
his Brother, (from whom he had, as formerly the Estate, so now the Title of
Kintyre, and he must be Earl of Irwin, all the Interest he had there being by
his quondam Tutor (now Slave) Barcley, his being sometime Provost thereof) and
the Chancellors Brother Lundie sur France and Irwin had bad penny worths,
although Argile made a good market for the Men, like Money trusted in a Jugle^s
hand, were gone with a puff: thus you see how much both KING and Kingdom were
obliged to him in this particular. But to come to the main point of the
Conspiracy, finding Scotland (although he had all the power of the Persons and
Estates in his hand) not pliable as yet to cast off Monarchy, and embrace
Aristocracy, of whom (as affairs stood) none could be the chief Ruler but
himself, he did employ the Zealots of the Clergy to asperse those who did
oppose him (especially some most faithful and religious Noble men) as if they
were fallen from their first love, turn, enemies to the cause of Christ, had
with Demas embraced this present world, and that Argile was the only man that
stood in the gap; threatening out of their Pulpits all such as would think or
speak evil of him; but when the State-juglers with their Clergy-Impostors,
could neither shake the Loyalty of the one, who were really for the Covenant
and Monarchical Government, nor plaster over the many fraudulent cheats of the
Argathelian party, now become a most odious and heavy burden to the Kingdom,
harased and ruined from the one end to the other by him and his Armies on the
one part, and Montrosse and his Confederates on the other part, ( Argile, of
the two, being the Kingdoms most cruel Enemy) was simulat humiliation, having
the Churchmen still his friends, did reconcile himself to the other noble and
loyal Patriots, by suffering them to take some share of the Government, that
the (by him) dis-joynted State might by them be set in a right frame again,
with a resolution, when all things were right, to usurp his wonted Authority,
and follow his old trade of Dethroning His Majesty, and cantonizing the
Kingdom; but things falling out so, that one day at Nazeby, quelling the KINGS
party in England; and one day at Philipshaugh, almost quieting Scotland;
finding the Presbyterians in England inclinable to peace, and desirous of his
Majesty's re-establishment according to the Covenant, he leaves them, and joins
Counsel with Say, Perpoint, Cromwell, and others of the Independent Junto,
doing them that Master^iece of good service, First, under color of Loyalty and
friendship to prevail with His Majesty to return to the Scots Army then at
Newark, Cromwell contributing a Pass to Hudson and Ashburnham with a slack
Guard, that His Majesty might the more freely escape. Secondly, after many
learned and loyal Speeches for Monarchy, the Kingdom of Scotlands interest in
the person of the KING, and many Vows and Protestations both in private and
public, not to abandon His Majesty without his own consent, contrary to all
which, he and his Party did overthrow the Loyalty of That once famous
Gentleman, Lieuten. General David Leslie (who had deeply sworn, and engaged
himself to His Majesty, to convoy him safely into Scotland, or then to see His
Majesty peaceably settled in his Throne in England) forcing him, and he
persuading and prevailing with the Soldiers to march away, leaving his Majesty
behind little better than (but now an assured) Prisoner, and the whole power of
the Sword in the hands of the Independents and Sectaries, to the ruin and
overthrow of their Presbyterian friends in the City and Parliament, as the
History of Independency does Witness, encouraging the Independent Party (by
their Letters) to proceed in their dethroning Votes, and accusation of his
Majesty, assuring them that no party from Scotland shall be able to hinder them
in their proceedings; but finding the body of the Parliament, and the Kingdom
of Scotland to be sensible of the ruin of Religion and Monarchical Government
if the Sectaries prevail, and their resolution to adhere to their Covenant,
and re-establishing his Majesty, being in fear their party shall not be able
any longer to delude the Kingdom, or hinder the Army designed to come in for
the vindication of the many breaches of the Solemn League and Covenant, and the
several Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms, they have solicited the Armies of
Sectaries to come to their assistance, some of their Ministers professing in
their Letters They have no hope of safety, unless it be by means of this
(rebellious) Army now in England, thereby endeavoring to make Scotland the
seat of War.

And if these troubles in Wales, and cutting Petitions from Essex, Kent, Surry,
and Sussex, had not hindered them, their resolution was to have sent Cromwell
thither, it being debated before he went to Wales, which of the two he should
take in hand; but the constant assurance they had from Argile, and those
accursed Clergymen that were bribed by Stephen Marshal, That there was no fear
of danger from Scotland in have, made them hasten to finish the enslaving of
England and Wales, and then they resolve to conquer Scotland; which they
conceive may be quickly done, having Argile and his Faction so firm to them,
that although he would, neither he nor his Partners dare revolt from them,
having received so much of their money, lest they should reveal more than he
desires should be known; and as the Independents sent their Emissaries through
all Counties and Corporations to get hands to Petitions for thanks to the House
for their dethroning Votes, so Argile and Marshal's Hirelings have been very
active to get hands to Petitions in many Shires, Corporations, and Provincial
Assemblies, for hindering the engagement against the rebellious Army of
Sectaries, and the Independent Junto their Confederates: whereas there is no
intention against the Parliament, or Body of England; but to comply with all
religious honest hearted and loyal Subjects, who desire that His Majesty may be
enlarged and brought to a Personal Treaty, whereby Peace and Truth may be
settled in the three Kingdoms; their chief pretenses being, that Religion is not
secured: the Religion now established in Scotland was by Act of Parliament (His
Majesty present) so well secured as the most religious Churchmen, and most
skillful Lawyers could devise; if you have got New Lights, and desire any other
Religion to be established, vindicate His Majesty's Honor, and put up your
Petitions to Him in an orderly way, and He may possibly vindicate you from the
Yoke of Slavery which some of your tyrannizing Clergy desire to put upon you;
The next is a wonderful increase of your fears by the great Trusts put upon
such persons, of whom you have just cause of jealousy to this Kingdom, and the
Cause of God; though you do not speak plain, your Pamphletters do, and your
Pulpit Incendiaries to some purpose; you mean Duke Hamilton now General of the
Forces, des gned by the Kingdom and Parliament of Scotland for vindicating the
Honor of the Nation, and revenging His Majesty's Captivity upon that
perfidious rebellious Army of Sectaries, and their adherents: what he did
before the subscribing of the Covenant ought not to be objected, (his
moderation even then deserving the honor and love of his Country) and since
his subscribing, malice it self cannot tax him that he has done any thing
contrary to his Covenant or his Country; what Montrosse does asperse him with,
that he hindered his intended invasion of Scotland, and so consequently His
Majesty's Service; none of those who stand for the Covenant who did think
Montrosse an enemy to the Covenant, and to his Country, ought to object this to
my Lord Duke, whose tender care of the safety and welfare of his Country may
evidently appear even in the relation of one of his most deadly enemies; and
whereas his good advice for moderation was misconstrued by Argile and his
prevailing Faction on the one side, as if he had done things contrary to the
Covenant; and by Montrosse and his Confederates at Court on the other side, as
if he had connived or been accessory to those violent courses against his
Majesty, which (God knows) he was not able at that time to hinder; his
intentions being still for Peace, and such a Peace as might consist with the
safety of Religion, and His Majesty's honor; whereof he was very hopeful,
being confident of His Majesty's propensnesse to Peace, and the interest he had
in His Majesty's favor: but the watchful malice of his enemies, and the
enemies of Peace, did cunningly prevent his going about so good a work, making
him Prisoner without His Majesty's knowledge, hindering by all means a meeting
betwixt them, knowing that his Majesty's justice, and the Dukes innocence,
would quickly make their calumnies to vanish: what a sad imprisonment did he
endure, much heightened by the then impossibility of clearing his innocence to
his Sovereign (the loss of whose favor would be more bitter than a thousand
deaths) and his real intentions for the good of his Country, for whose cause he
hazarded and suffered so much misery and imprisonment? Yet this noble Dukes
implacable and malicious enemies do further asperse him as a man of no
Religion, a mere Politician, and one that seeks the ruin of his Sovereign,
by the aspiring to the Crown of Scotland: It would trouble the best
Politicians, and the most Religious upon earth, in these distracting and
distracted times, to distinguish rightly betwixt the duty we owe to Religion,
and the duty we owe to our Prince, supposing them enemies; but the falsity of
this supposition, (which has misled many thousands, and been the ground of all
our miseries) being evident to the Duke, who had the honor to be educated and
intimate with his Majesty from his youth, knowing his Majesty to be a lover and
honourer of the true Protestant Religion, a lover of justice and mercy, and a
practiser of all Christian and moral virtues, and with a most munificent hand a
royal Benefactor to himself and his Family. It may be asked, if it had been
either piety or policy in the Duke to have kicked off so loving and so liberal
a Lord and Master, (although he had not been his Sovereign) or to have engaged
against his Country with any Party that for their own ends more than the good
of their Sovereigns, were disturbers of all moderate Counsels, so long as he
had any hopes of Peace; especially seeing so many sad presidents in both
Kingdoms, where many powerful Subjects, lovers of the true Protestant
Religion, not joining prudence with their loyalty and innocence, have crushed
them under the Load, and nothing eases His Majesty's burden, but rather
increases the same; all their wealth and power being now made instrumental to
enslave both KING and Kingdoms: the Duke's prudence having vindicated him from
the ruin intended against him by his enemies, and reserved him (through Gods
blessing) to vindicate his Loyalty by re-enthroning his Majesty so soon as God
has enabled him with any power to do it. As for his Religion, it is known he
is neither Popishly affected, nor a Sectary; but who has ever been a professor
of the true Protestant Religion, a lover and Patron of all Godly men and honest
Ministers, even in the time of Episcopacy, when few or none but himself durst
appear for them; if his judgment had not been overswayed in some Star Chamber
sentences before he had that wisdom and experience which he now has, and long
before he did take the Covenant; if he had been ambitious of popular applause,
he had been more renowned for his Religion, than for his Princes royal bounty;
but wishing rather to be religious, than seem so, his favors were given in
secret to many godly Ministers, and his Majesty's honor and good chiefly aimed
at in the bestowing of them: and that you may take a short view of his
proceedings, as you have done of Argile's, by comparing them, you will find who
does deserve the Title of the most Religious.

Duke Hamilton suffered his worthy Mother to enjoy, besides her own Jointure,
all his Estate, (whereby, indeed he lost nothing, she improving it much to his
advantage) has helped his Brother to a great estate, with Titles and Places of
Honor and profit, suitable to his birth and worth; his Sisters, and now some
of his Neices matched in the Noblest and best Families of the Kingdom.

1. Whereas Argile did in his Fathers life time bring him to a Pension, outed
his Brother of his Estate, Kintyre, and ruined his Sisters by cheating them of
their portions, and so enforcing them to go to Cloisters.

The Duke had no quarrel with any save Montrosse; the ground you heard, for
crossing his first intention for the Invasion of Scotland, to prevent the
misery and bloodshed that he did foresee was like to follow.

2. Argile, for private quarrels betwixt him and Montrosse, Culkettough, and
the Athol men, the Earl of Airely, and other, has drawn much misery and
bloodshed upon the Kingdom, whom he enforced to espouse his quarrels.

The Duke had no spoils nor gifts given him since ever he signed the Covenant
(save the Title of DVKE) but has been spoiled both himself and friends by
those that followed Montrosse.

3. Argile had enriched his Country with the spoils of the Kingdom, and himself
with the great treasure bestowed on him both by Scotland and England, which is
well secured without the reach of an Impeachment.

The Duke stands firm to his Covenant for the established religion, loyal to
his Prince for Monarchical Government, faithful to his Country against all
foreign Invasion.

4. Argile has contrary to his Covenant, Duty and Allegiance, conspired to
extirpate Monarchical Government, to introduce foreign forces of Sectaries, to
the utter overthrow of the established Religion.

The Duke acts nothing but according to the Laws established, according to the
Covenant, and the duty of every good Subject.

5. Argile has overthrown all Laws, tyrannizing over the Lives, Liberties, and
Estates of the Subjects.

Duke Hamilton has been of that temper to mediate for a wel-grounded Peace,
his Majesty's deliverance, and the Personal Treaty, being the only probable
ways for settling the three Kingdoms, and settling the power where it ought to
be for the Honor and safety both of King and Subjects.

6. Argile opposes all ways of the Peace, and settlement of the three
Kingdoms, His Majesty's deliverance, and being brought to a Personal Treaty,
lest the power should be taken out of his and his Confederates hands whereby
they oppress and ruin both King and Subject.

The Duke has used, and is using all endeavors to Vindicate the oppressed
Subjects in both Kingdoms, never changing Interests, being always faithful to
all those to whom he did profess love and friendship.

7. Lastly, Argile has betrayed his old friends the Presbyterian party in both
Kingdoms, especially the Presbyterians in the Parliament of England and City of
London, not only suffering them to be made a prey to their enemies, but
obstructing their relief.

Let the impartial Reader now judge which of the two is most religious. As this
opposition betwixt Duke Hamilton and Argile makes them both to appear what they
are; so this following Parallel betwixt the Argathelian Faction and the
Independent Junto will serve for an eye salve to cure the eyesight of both
Kingdoms, and let them see clearly how near they are to the brink of an
intolerable and perpetual slavery.

Argile and his Faction styled by the Independents, the Godly party in
Scotland, the rest all Malignants.

1. The Army of Sectaries in England (however formerly Preached and wrote
against) now called by Argile's faction the hope of their safety.

The like in England by the Army of Sectaries and Independent Junto, above
twenty millions shared amongst them, whereof the Kingdom can never get account;
all places of Honor and Trust of England still in the hands of those that are
engaged for, and with the Army of Sectaries.

2. The heavy Taxes imposed and continued upon Scotland by Argile and his
Faction, and all the benefit thereof, and most part of the moneys got from
England, shared amongst them, and no satisfactory account given to the Kingdom
thereof.

Cromwell and the army for the King in their first engagements; but having
inslaved the City, enforced the Parliament to the dethroning Votes, and as not
formerly acquainted therewith, gave thanks for them, and sent their Emissaries
to some seduced Counties and Corporations to do the like.

3. All places of Honor and trust usurped by Argathelians (till of late) and
the Army modelled to maintnin their Interest.

4. Argile formerly (yet but seemingly) for Monarchy, now really against it,
and all that desire to assert it.

Cromwell contributes a Pass to His Guides slacking the guards, as he did the
second time, when he frighted him with a Plot from Hampton Court to the Isle of
Wight, where he remains close Prisoner.

5. That Faction first betrays the King to come to the Scots Army, promising
protection, and then most persidiously delivered Him up to the mercy of His
most cruel Enemies.

The blood shed in England under color of justice in cold blood, calls aloud
for vengeance; and the persidious breaches of the Army of their promises to
King, Parliament and Country, is too too evident.

6. Argile and his Faction have been most cruel to those they call their
Enemies, especially in cold blood; and perfidious to their friends, deserting
and betraying them.

What the insolent Army did, coming with Bays in their hats when they
inslaved the Parliament, and riding in triumph through the City, by whose
bounty they were made and maintained an Army, will to their perpetual infamy be
registered to all posterity.

7. Argile when he had done mischief, must have both thanks and reward; and
like a Conqueror, march through the Kingdom in triumph: a thing never granted
amongst the noble Romans to triumph for a Victory in a Civil War.

The Army, and some others by their instigation, petition that the Kingdom may
be settled without the King, and that Army continued to e^slave the Kingdom,
especially the Presbyterian party, their Army being for Toleration.

8. Argile's Faction petitions, That the Army intended for His Majesty's
enlargement, and the relief of our Presbyterian Brethren shall not come in.

Cromwell was ready to comply, but got some other work for the time; and if God
prevent it not, will now speedily be able to obey Argile's desires; but if that
fail, Argile shall have money, and send David Lesley to levy Forces abroad to
work Argile's ends.

9. Argile and his Faction desires but five thousand Horse to assist them to
subdue Scotland, which must be turned a Province to the Kingdom of the Saints.

Let this serve for a Caveat to the misled and deluded Protestants of the
three Kingdoms not to trust the fair promises or pretenses of these seeming
Saints, who have made the solemn League and Covenant, (intended for
preservation of Religion, His Majesty's Honor, and the just Liberties of the
Subject) to be the ruin of Religion, the dishonor (so far as in them lies)
of His Majesty and the most absolute enslaving of all free Subjects, not to
Kings or Princes, to Great men or Good men, but to the very scum and
offscouring of both Kingdoms; it being no^ small grief to all that truly
feared God, that so many of the reputed honest Presbyterian party should (out
of base fear, or other by-respects) comply so long with these Stare-Juglers,
the Clergy being most active, hastening thereby their own and the Kingdoms
misery; for they may be well assured, if these Saints prevail, they must (as
some of them have done already) turn their Coats once more, and become the
Hirelings, and tongue-tied Tenants at will to their Brethren of the
Independency, or be kicked out of their fat Benefices, and possibly out of the
Kingdom to prevent new Insurrections against them, which they are cunning to
procure, having the power in their hand to repress all that dare appear against
them may be ruined, others by their example terrified, and their Saints may
enjoy the fatness of England; but I would ask these violent Clergymen of the
Presbyterian Party that are unwilling His Majesty should be brought speedily to
a Personal Treaty, what their Assemblies of Divines have been doing? for if
that Confession of Faith set out in England, approved of in Scotland, be
agreeable to the truth of Gods word (as I know nothing to the contrary) why
should the chief Magistrate our dread Sovereign be any longer debard of his
just dues? is He worse than Infidel, that you will assist those that deny His
sacred Majesty that which they allow to Infidel Magistrates? blush for shame,
and repent in time, lest as they change their Votes every day, according as the
tide of their power ebbs and flows; so they may soon force you to repeal that
Article concerning the chief Magistrate, or (like the gloss of Orleans) put an
exposition upon it which destroys the text. God send us peace and truth, and
preserve His sacred Majesty, and his Posterity, and confound the wicked
counsels of all such as are enemies to Peace, Truth, and Monarchy.

-- Si quid novistirectius istis,
Candidus imperti; Si non, his utere mecum.

THE END.
ANARCHIA ANGLICANA OR, THE HISTORY OF Independency.

THE SECOND PART.

BEING A Continuation of Relations and Observations Historical and Politic
upon this present PARLIAMENT, Begun Anno 16. CAROLI PRIMI.

By THEODORUS VERAX.

PSALM. 8.8. Virum sanguinum and dolosum abominabitur Dominus.

Printed in the Year, M.DC.XL, IX.

THE PROTESTATION AND DECLARATION.
THe premises considered, I do hereby in the name and behalf of my self, and
of all the Free People of England, Declare and protest, That the General,
Council of War, and officers of the Army, by their said violent and
treasonable force upon the far major, more honest and moderate part of the
House of Commons (being above 250.) and leaving only 50. or 60. Schismatics of
their own engaged party, sitting and voting under their Command, and almost all
of them such as have and do make a prey of the Commonwealth, to enrich
themselves and their Faction; have broken, discontinued, and waged War against
this Parliament, and have forfeited their Commissions. And the remaining
Faction in the House of Commons, by abetting* aiding and concurring with the
said Council of War, in the said rebellious Force; and by setting up new,
illegal, and arbitrary Courts of Judicature to murder King Charles the First,
our Lawful King, and Governor, (who by his Writ according to the Law) summoned
and authorized this Parliament to meet, sit, Principium, Caput and finis
Parliamenti. Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
and Advise with Him, and was the Fountain Head and Conclusion, or consummatory
End of the Parliament, and Supreme Governor over all Persons, and in all
Causes of this Kingdom) and by Abolishing the House of Peers, and the Kingly
Office, and dis-inheriting the Kings Children, and Usurping to themselves the
Supreme Authority and Legislative Power of this Nation in order to make and
establish themselves a Council of State, Hogen Mogens, or Lords States General,
and translate the said Supreme Power and Authority into the said Council of
State and then Dissolve this Parliament and perpetuate their said Tyranny and
this Army, and Govern Arbitrarily by the power of the Sword; and raise what
illegal Taxes they please, and eat out, consume and destroy whosoever will not
basely submit to their Domination, See 1. part, sect. 105, 106. and the
Conclusions; 15, 16, 17, 18. and return to sect 79, 109 110. Stat. of
Recognition, 1. Iac. Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
have by the aforesaid ways and means totally subverted this Kingdom, and
destroyed the fundamental Laws, Authority and Government thereof, Dissolved and
Abolished this and all future Parliaments, so that there is now no visible,
lawful Authority left in England, but the Authority of King CHARLES the Second,
who is actually KING of all his Dominions presently upon the Decease of the
King his Father, before any Proclamation made, or Coronation solemnized,
notwithstanding that by his unjust Banishment (caus^d by the interposition of
the said traitorous, combined, Antimonarchical Faction) He be eclipsed for the
present, and not suffered to perform any Acts of Government to his three
Kingdoms, and restore peace, plenty, justice, mercy, Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, to them again, which no Hand but his own can bestow; and therefore
in vain do the people long for and expect Figs from thistles, Grapes from
thorns: This Kingdom of the Brambles now set up, being only able to Scratch
and Tear, not to Protect and Govern them. I farther Declare and Protest, That
this combined traitorous Faction, have forced an Interregnum and a Justitium
upon us, an utter suspension of all lawful Government, Magistracy, Laws and
Judicatories: so that we have not de jure, any Laws in force to be executed,
any Magistrates or Judges lawfully constituted to execute them: any Court of
Justice wherein they can be judicially executed; any such Instrument of the Law
as a lawful Great Seal, nor any Authority in England that can lawfully Condemn
and Execute a Thief, Murderer, or other Offender, without being themselves
called Murderers by the Law, all legal proceedings being now coram non Judice;
nor can this remaining Faction in the House of Commons show any one President,
Law, Reason or Authority whatsoever for their aforesaid doing, but only their
own irrational tyrannical Votes, and the Swords of their Army, Wherefore I do
further Declare and Protest before God and the World, That all freeborn
subjects of the Kingdom of England and Ireland, are bound by the Stat. of
Recognition, 1. Jac. and by all our Laws and Statutes, By their Oaths of
Allegiance, Obedience and Supremacy the Protestation and National Covenant, by
very many Declarations, Remonstrances, Petitions, and Votes of this Parliament;
and all Soldiers are engaged also by their own Declarations, Remonstrances,
and Proposals, to defend, assert, and vindicate, with their Lives and Fortunes,
the Person, Authority, and Title of our aforesaid Lawful KING and Suprem
Governor (the undoubtful Heir of all his late Fathers Dominions) CHARLES the
Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
against all opposites and pretended Authorities whatsoever, unless they will
be guilty of the fowlest sins of Treason, Rebellion, Perjury, and
Perfidiousnesse against their God, their King and Country; and of prostituting
the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Land, their Wives, Children and
Estates, to the lusts of an Armed Faction, usurping a far more Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Power over our Consciences, Persons, Liberties and Estates, then
ever was known in England before, or then is now used by the Russe, Turk or
Tartar, or any the most enslaving and lawless Tyrants under Heaven.

An Exhortatory CONCLUSION to the English NATION.
Compare the Date of the K. Commissions with those of the Parliament and their
Declarations on both sides.
TO conclude the series of Affairs and Action on both Parties (especially of
late) rightly compared, it appears by the sequel, That KING CHARLES the
First, from the beginning took up Defensive Arms, to maintain Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and the Ancient fundamental Being of Parliaments, and this Kingdom:
and that there always was, and now especially is, a predominant Faction in
Parliament, (notwithstanding their frequent Declarations, Remonstrances,
Petitions, Protestations, Covenant, and Votes to the contrary) conspiring with
a Party (especially of Commissioned Officers of the Army) without the Houses,
to change the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Church and Commonwealth,
to usurp into a few hands the Supreme Authority, to enslave the People with an
Oligarchical, Military, and Arb trary Government, to raise what illegal Taxes
they please, to establish their Tyranny, and enrich themselves and their Party,
to oppress, consume and devour all Men of a judgment contrary to their
Interest: to Murder them by new declared arbitrary Treasons, contrary to the
Stat. 25. Edw. 3. for ascertaining Treasons: to Disfranchise them of their
birthrights, and make them Adscriptios Glebae, Villains Regardante to their
own Lands, which the Nobility, Gentry, and Yeomanry plough, sow, and reap,
whilst Brewers, Dray-men, and Cobblers eat, drink, and play upon the sweat of
their Labors; and are the Usufructuaries of their Estates. All which they have
lately brought to pass, wherefore let all true Engl shmen (as becomes good
Christians, good Patriots, and gallant Men) claim their Birthrights; and with
one voice cry out,

1. We will not Change our Ancient, settled, and well-approved Laws to which we
are sworn.

2. We will not Change our Ancient and well-tempered Monarchy to wh ch we are
sworn.

3. We will not change our old Religion for New Lights and Inventions.

4. We will not subject our selves to an eighth part of one Estate or House of
Parliament; sitting under a force, and having expelled two hundred and fifty of
their Fellows (more Righteous then themselves) by force, and usurping to
themselves the Supreme Authority.

5. We will not be subjected to a new Supreme Authority usurped by forty
ambitious, covetous Tyrants, arrogating to themselves to be a Council of State,
and designed to supply the room of Parliaments, under what name or title soever
they shall mask themselves.

6. We will not submit our selves to a Military Government, or Council of
Officers.

7. We must and will have A KING, See the Star. of Recognition, 1. Iac. and the
Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy.
and The KING whom the Laws of God and this Land have designed to us, we being
by the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy sworn to bear faith and
true Allegiance to KING CHARLES the First, his lawful Heirs and Successors.

Hic telum infigam, moriarque in vulnere --
Postscript.
REader, at the latter end of my First part of The History of Independency, I
have presented to thy consideration some General Conclusions arising out of the
Premises: the same Conclusions does naturally arise out of the Premises of this
Second Part of the History, and do as aptly serve to illustrate this Second, as
that First part; wherefore to that First Part I send thee for opening thy
understanding.

When our old Laws run again into their Ancient Channel, and the Sword of
Murder is sheathed, and the Sword of Justice drawn, the Author engages to
publish his Name and Apology, and show what he has done and suffered for the
Parliament and Kingdom.

THE END.
TO THE READER.
READER,
having spoken to thee in the First Part, I might have forborne thee in this
Second, did I not fear to seem guilty of the fullennesse and malignity of
these times. The subject matter of my Book is a Combination or Faction of
Pseudo-Polititians, and Pseudo-Theologicians, Heretics, and Schismatics, both
in Divinity and Policy; who, having sacrificed to their Fancies, Lusts,
Ambition, and Avarice, both their God and Religion, their King and Country, our
Laws, Liberties and Properties, all duties Divine and Humane, are grown so far
in love with their prosperous Sins, as to entitle God himself to be Father and
Author of them: from whose written Word and revealed Will held forth to us in
the Scriptures as the only North Pole and Cynosure of our Actions (where they
find no warrant for their doing) they appeal to the secret Will and Providence
of God, to which they most Turkishly and Heathenishly ascribe all their
enormities, only because they succeed: and from that Abyss of Gods Providence,
draw secondary principles of Necessity and Honest Intentions; to build the
Babel of their confused Designs and Actions upon; not considering that wicked
Men perform the secret Will a God to their Damnition; as good Men do the known
Will of their Father to their Salvation; If a Man lie sick to death, and his
Son wish him dead, this is Sin in the Son, although his desire concur with the
Secret Will of God, because the Son ought to desire the preservation of his
Fathers life; whereto the Will of God revealed in his Word obliges. him: and,
vivendum secundum Praecepta, non secundum Decreta Dei; The secret Will and
Providence of God can be no rule and law of our Actions, because we know it
not, nor can search into it without presumption: We must not therefore, altum
sapere, think our selves too wise and well-gifted to tie our selves to the
Scripture of God; and lust after Revelations and Inspirations; expecting God
should rain Bread from Heaven for us, ( Manna, Exodus 16.4.) but be wise unto
Sobriety. But, prosperum scelus, virtus vocatur: Thus casting off the written
Word of God (unless where by an enforced Interpretation they can squeeze
Atheism and Blasphemy out of it (as they do sometimes rack Treason, Murder, and
Nonsense out of our Laws and Parliament-Priviledges) conducible to their ends
they insensibly cast off God himself, and make themselves both the supreme
cause and final end, the Alpha and Omega of all their doings, whilst they use
the hidden and unsearchable Providence of God, but as a Disguise and Vizard to
mask under, like Caelius the Atheist in Martial. Prosperity is become a snare
to them, and a Topic place out of which they draw Arguments to satisfy
themselves there is no God, no Religion, but a prudential one to fool the
people with. Nullos esse Deos, inane Coelum,
Affirmat Caelius, probatque,
Quod se videt, dum negat haec, beatum.


But O wretched unholied men! What are they that thus commit Burglary in the
Sanctum Sanctorum of Gods Providence? That presume not only to pry into, but to
thrust their hands polluted with blood and rapine into Gods mysterious Ark?
Thus much for the subject matter. For the manner of my writing, I confess, as
to the Style, it is not aequabile scribendi Genus, all of one weaving and
contexture: It is a History writ with a Satyrique style and vein: -- Nam quis
iniqui;
Tam patiens orbis, tam ferreus ut teneat se?
It is a virtue to hate and prosecute vice. The Scripture tells us, there is a
perfect hatred, a Holy Anger. And our Chaucer tells us, The werds must be of
kynne unto the deeds: otherwise, how can they be expressive enough? I detest
vitia pulcherrime mangonizata vice trick't up in virtues raiment; and
prostituted under her modest dress to stir up Adulteries. Quicquid agunt
homines nostri est farrago libelli. An huge Gallimaufry, an Oglio of all
villainies I here set before thee: it cannot be all of one dressing and
seasoning, it must be a mixture, a Hogo of all Relishes: like Manna in the
Wilderness, it must be applicable to all palates: wherefore according to the
variety of every present subject matter, vel ridenti rideo, vel flenti fleo, I
become all things to all Men, I assimilate my affections and humors to every
Man's humor as well as to the present Theme; that I may take every Man by the
right hand, and lead him out of this Ur of the Chaldeans, this Land of Egypt,
this House of Bondage in judgment and conscience, though not in person and
estate: which must only be the mighty handiwork of that God who is able to
divide the Red Sea, and give us a safe march through it upon dry Land.

Which that he would vouchsafe to do let us all join our hearty prayers, and
that we may instrumentally serve him in it, let us all join our heads, hearts
and hands together, since God neglects faint-hearted and cowardly prayers: Let
us not lie in the Ditch, and cry, God help us, But let us help God to help us:
and keep cor unum, viam unam, in the doing of it.

The Ordinance passed, 20. Aug. 1647. To null and void all Acts, etc. passed
under the force of the Apprentices. Die Veneris 20. Aug. 1647. An Ordinance for
Declaring all Votes, Orders, and Ordinances passed in one or both Houses, since
the Force on both Houses, July ^6. until the 6. of this present August 1647. to
be null and void.
Whereas there was a visible, horrid, insolent, and actual force upon the
Houses of Parliament, on Monday 26. July last; whereupon the Speakers, and many
Members of both Houses of Parliament, were forced to ab^ent themselves from the
service of the Parliament: and whereas those Members of the House could not
return to sit in safety before Friday, the 6. August. It is therefore Declared
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that the Ordinance of Monday
26. July, for the Repealing and making void of the Ordinance of the 23. of the
said July, for settling of the Militia of the City of London; being gained by
force and violence; and all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, passed in either, or
both Houses of Parliament, since the said Ordinance of the 26. of July, to the
said 6. of August, are null and void, and were so at the making thereof, and
are hereby Declared so to be, the Parliament being under a force, and not free:
Provided always, and be it Ordered, That no Person or Persons shall be
impeached, or punished for his or their Actions, by, or upon, or according to
the aforesaid Votes, Orders, or Ordinances, unless he or they shall be found
guilty of contriving, acting, or abetting the aforesaid visible and actual
force; or being present at, or knowing of the said force, did afterward act
upon the Votes so forced, or were guilty of entering into, or promoting the late
Engagement for bringing the KING to the City, upon the Terms and Conditions
expressed in his Majesty's Letter of the 12. of May last.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

THE SECOND PART OF The History of Independency.
MY first Part of Relations and Observations Historical and Politic upon this
present Parliament, 1 The Proeme.
begun Anno Dom. 1640. Anno Car. primi. 16. is divided into two Parts or Books
[The Mystery of the two Juntoes, Presbyterian and Independent] wherein I show
with what art (to advance their designs) the Grandees divided the Houses into
the said two Factions; which Factions entertaining the Quarrel in earnest,
their respective Grandees were forced to turn their jest into earnest too, for
upholding their Authority, with their several Parties: not unlike Butchers,
who, in a Country Market set their Dogs together by the ears in sport, and at
last own their Dogs quarrel themselves in earnest. The second Book is [The
History of Independency] wherein I show the Rise, Growth, and Fractises of that
Party; which being full of schimatical quicksilver, restless and stirring, and
tenable by no Oaths, Principles, Promises, Declarations, nor by any obligations
or Laws, Divine or Humane, does now enjoy the fruits of their perfidiousness
and treachery, a Conquest gotten over their Adversaries by pretending,
protesting, and false promising, which they attribute to the bounties and
Mercies of God: and from the success of their villainies argue most Turkishly
his blessings over them; and as Jewishly arrogate to themselves to be the
peculiar People and Saints of God, although he uses them but as a Rod in his
hand to scourge the sins of the other Party, and of the whole Kingdom. It is
the usual method of Gods justice not only to punish one sin by another, but
one Sinner by another; nay, a lesser Sinner by a greater, and at last to
receive the humble and corrected Sinner into Abraham's bosom, and cast the
insulting Executioner of his wrath into the fiery furnace of his anger. In my
aforesaid [History of Independency] you have that Faction conquering: In this
Continuation or Supplement of the said History, I represent them to you
triumphing, using and abusing their Victories to the dishonor of God,
destruction of the King, beggering and enslaving of the Kingdom, depriving us
of our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Estates, and consequently, making our
Wives and Children the objects of our fear, despair, and ill boding doubts, not
the objects of any comfort and joy we can take in them, whose miseries we
foresee, but cannot help. When I consider the intricacy of this my undertaking,
how perplexed it is, how entangled with various changings, counterchangings,
revolutions, revoltings, and betrayings of Parties (such are all Civil Wars,
but especially those where the most uncivil and barbarous sort of men, the
dregs and lees of the People swim a top) how full of divisions, and
subdivisions; insomuch that they who are Friends, and hold together in one
Interest or Faction, are Opposites in another. Methinks my labor is as vain as
his that attempted to take the Picture of Proteus; or his, that endeavored to
shape a Garment for the Moon: When God brought a confusion but of Lips and
Tongues upon Babel, what man was able to reduce them into order again? But God
has brought upon us a Confusion, a Babel, not only of Lips and Tongues, but
of Heads, Hearts, Hands, etc. What Historian can find a method in so universal
a Chaos? can draw light out of so palpable a darkness? Besides, I foresee my
reward to be envy, hatred, malice, contempt, slanders, sequestration, beggary,
imprisonment, and at last an Arbitrary death without any legal trial,
proceedings, Jury, Judges, or Court, or any known established Law to judge by,
Obsequium amicos veritas odium parit. I have already followed truth so near at
the heels (although but a private retainer to her) that almost all my teeth are
secretly stricken out* what dare they not now do openly against me? since by
murdering our King, dis-inheriting his Posterity, subverting Monarchical
Government, abolishing the House of Lords, and perverting the House of Commons,
setting up new Representatives, with Supreme and Legislative Power, and new
Courts and Jurisdictions against all Laws, they Proclaim themselves Conquerours
of King, Parliament, and Kingdom, Victors of our Religion, Laws, Liberties,
and Properties, and Triumphers over our Persons, Wives, Children, and Estates?
since they profess their will and power, to be the only Laws and Rules of
their doings, and our sufferings. But when I consider, that as no man's
inncency, so no man's reservedness can protect him; but that some men must dye
(according to Catilines rule) to make up the number, others to multiply
confiscations, others to satisfy private suspicions, malice, and revenge, and
they must dye to cement and foment this new erected Tyranny with their blood, I
thought it as easy and more honorable to dye waking and working for my God,
my King, and Country, than to dye sleeping, and have my throat cut in a
Lethargy. I know these Schismatics thirst as much after blood, as they hunger
after money: and I am sure to be involved in the common and inevitable ruin of
my Country, why should I not rather perish for it now, then with it hereafter?
It is more manly, more noble, more Christian; Dulce and decorum est pro patria
mori, was the saying of an Heathen, why not of a Christian? Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, lie now at stake, why should not I come in for a Gamester? It is a
mixed cause, and he that dies for it is a Martyr. He that fears Death, must be a
slave to those Tyrants that carry the Sword; he that fears Poverty, must be a
Villain to those Judasses that bear the Purse; but he that fears God, will
borrow strength from him to contemn them both: Thus putting my trust in God, I
put Pen to Paper, and put my life into the scales, where God (I know) holds the
balance; he whose providence takes notice of a Sparrow falling from the
housetop, will watch over me, and either protect me against them, or receive
me from them. 2 An Introductory Repetition. See my 1 Part of the History of
Independency, sect. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14.


Cromwell, and Ireton (by advice of their thriving Junto of Independents in the
two Houses) having mutinied the Army against their Masters the Parliament,
found that crime could not be defended but by committing greater; wherefore
they seized the Kings person at Holdenby to gain Authority with the People,
that they might the better subdue the Parliament to their lusts: for the better
expediting whereof, Sect. 18, 119.
they courted the City of London to sit Neuters, and let them work their wills
with the Parliament; which Mine not taking fire, they united the schismatical
party of the City and Country to them, and all such as being guilty of public
cheats and sp^^ls, desired the protection of the Sword to make good their
rapines, and accounted all men else as Enemies; applying themselves to woo and
cajole the People, easily wrought upon as being weary of the War, and of the
mis-government, Factions, confusions and oppressions of their new Masters the
Parliament, which indeed were very great, but aggravated by them and their
Agitators beyond the truth: and the whole weight of them charged upon the more
moderate and innocent party (only because they were their Opposites) whereas
had they set the saddle upon the right horse, as sure as Judas bore the Bag,
the Independents must have rid before the Cloakbag; they being the Publicans
and Sinners that handled most public treasure. The Layers on, Exactors,
Treasurers, etc. of Taxes, the far more numerous and busy party in all
Mony-Committees, and gainful employments, Engrossers of all great Offices, and
the greatest sharers of public money amongst themselves for Compensations for
Losses and Rewards for Services pretended; and consequently, that Faction were
the greatest Dilapidators of the Commonwealth, Oppressors of the People, and
Authors of confusion, though (according to custom) by an impudent fallacy,
called (Translatio criminis) the Independent Faction lay their Bastards at
other men's doors, making a show to redress those faults in other men, which
themselves are chiefly guilty of; wherefore the better to ingratiate themselves
with King and People, they printed and published Engagements, Declarations,
Remonstrances, Manifestoes, Proposals, and Petitions of their own penning, and
sent them by their Agitators and sectary Priests into all Counties for
concurrence and Subscriptions, the better to steal the respects of the People
from the Parliament to themselves, like Absalom, they flattered the People to
make Addresses and Complaints against public Grievances to them only;
Boasting themselves for the sole Arbitrators of Peace, Restorers of Laws,
Liberty, and Property; Setlers of Religion, Maintainers of the Privileges of
Parliament, Reformers and Callers to Account of all Committees, Sequestrators,
Treasurers, etc. Deliverers of the People from that intolerable Excise, and
other Taxes: But above all, Preservers of all just Interests, and Restorers of
the King to his just Rights and Prerogatives with honor, freedom, and safety
to his Person, (originally their own words, Book of Declarations of the Army,
page 112.

Represent. of the Army at S. Albons, June 23. 1647.

B Decl. again, p 64.

Sir Tho. Fairfaxs Letter to the Houses from Reading, July 6. 1647. B. Decl.
again, p. 75.

Proposals of the Army, Aug. 1. 1647. Putney Projects, p. 13, 14, 43. and my
Animadversions upon the Armies Remonstrance, delivered to the Commons, November.
20. 1648.

The second part of Englands New Chains; and the Hunting the Foxes from
New Market and Triplo heath to White Hall by five small Beagles, p. 6, 7.

See my Animadversions upon the Army Remonstrance, Nov. 20. 1648. and Putney
Projects, p. 43. and Major Huntingtons Relation in a Book called, A Plea for
King and Kingdom, in Answer to the Army Remonst. presented November. 20. 1648.
page 14, 15, 16. and Second part of Englands New Chains; and the said Hunting
of the Foxes, etc, And the Reasons inducing Major Robert Huntington to lay down
his Commission.


though since they Quarrel with Parliament and City for using them) and
Reducers of his Queen and Children; without which they openly profess and
declare positively in many printed Papers to the world and the Parliament,
There can be no settled peace nor happiness to this Nation. The truth of this
Assertion was obvious to the meanest Capacities; and will suddenly be proved by
dear and lamentable experience. To all these undertakings they now hunt
directly counter, yet in pursuance of these undertakings the Army (by their own
Authority) made Addresses to his Majesty, and presented to him more tolerable
Proposals than any he could obtain from his Parliament: They treated with him,
yea, they wrought upon him underhand to neglect the Propositions from
Parliament tendered to him at Hampton Court, and to prefer the Proposals of the
Army; and then (presuming they had him fast lymed) they propounded to him anew
(as I have it from good hands) private Proposals from the Interest of the
Independent Grandees and the Army, derogatory to the Kingly Power and Dignity,
to the Laws, Liberties and Properties of the Subject, and destructive to
Religion. To which his Majesty giving an utter denial, they began to entertain
new Designs against the Kings Person, and Kingly Government, which they ushered
in by setting the Schismatical and Levelling Party on work in City and most
Counties, to obtrude upon the Houses clamourous Petitions against further
Treaties, and demanding exemplary Justice against the King: exceedingly
labored by Cromwell himself in Yorkshire both amongst the Gentry and
Soldiers, etc. (amongst these the Petition, D^cemb. 11. 1648. was the most
eminent) these men that insolently petitioned against the fundamental
Government of the Land, and peace by Accommodation, were entertained with
Thanks; Others that petitioned for Peace by Accommodation were entertained with
Frowns, disfranchisings, sequestrations, wounds and death, as the Surrey
Gentlemen! this showed with how little reality the overruling party in the
Houses Treated with the King. 2. part of Englands Chains discovered. 1. ^reaty
in the Isle of Wight.
In order to this Design of laying aside the King, and subverting Monarchy,
They 1. frighted his Majesty into the Isle of Wight. 2. The Parliament (that
is, the predominant Party) pursued him thither with offer of a Treaty upon
Propositions: conditionally (that before he should be admitted to Treat) he
pass 4. Dethroning Bills; of so high a nature, that he had enslaved the People,
subverted Parliaments, and had made himself but the Statue of a King and no
good Christian, had he by his Royal assent passed them into Acts of Parliament;
1. par. Hist. In^. sect. 62, 63, 64.
and the Parliam^nt (or rather the Grandees) after his Royal assent, might have
made themselves Masters of all the other Propositions without his Consent: so
that this Treaty was but a flourish to dazzle the eyes of the world. His Majesty
therefore denied the 4. said Bills, and thereby preserved the legal Interests of
King, Parliament, and People; yet the Faction presently took a pretense and
occasion thereupon to lay aside the King, Ibidem, sect. 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70,
71. 72, 74. 75. And my said Animadvers p. 10. And the 2 part of Englands new Chapter
by passing 4. Votes for no more Addresses to him; and a Declaration against
him: which were not passed without many threats, and more show of force than
stood with the nature of a Free Parliament, the Army lying near the Town to
back their Party: the design having been laid beforehand between Sir Henry Vane
Junior, Sir John Evelyn of Wilts, Nath. Fiennes, Solicitor Saint John's, and a
select Committee of the Army. I told you before, the People had been thoroughly
instructed formerly by the Army and their Agitators, That there could be no
peace nor happiness in England, 2 part of Englands new Chapter discovered, p. 4, 5.
without restoring the King to his just Rights and Prerogatives, etc.
notwithstanding which the people now found their hopes that way deluded by the
Army and their Party; who had cast off the King upon private discontents, the
true grounds whereof did not appear; and had obstructed all way s to Peace and
Accommodation, and made them dangerous and destructive to such as traveled
peaceably in them, witness the sad example of the Surrey-men, Kent, Essex; and
all to perpetuate their great Places of power and profit. The minds of the
people therefore troubled with apprehension that our old Laws and laudable
form of Government should be subverted, and new obtruded by the power of the
Sword, suitable to the power and lust of these ambitious, covetous men; and
finding besides evident symptoms of a new War approaching to consume that
small Remainder, which the last Wars had left, grew so impotient of what they
feared for the future, and felt at present (insupportable Taxes, Free Quarter,
insolency of Soldiers, Martial Law, Arbitrary Government by Committees, and by
Ordinances of Parliament changed and executed at the will and pleasure of ths
Grandees, instead of our settled and well approved Laws) that despair thrust
them headlong into Arms in Wales, Kent, Essex, Pontefract, etc. and at the same
time a cloud arising in Ireland, a storm powered in from Scotland, and the
Prince threatening a tempest from Sea; these concurrences looked so black upon
the Independent Grandees, that they gave way to a second mock-Treaty in the
Isle of Wight; 2. Treaty in the Isle of Wight.
which was the fruit of their cowardice and subtilty; as appears by Sergeant
Nicholas (a Creature of theirs) who (upon Saturday, October. 28. 1648.) moved in
the House, That the Lord Goring might be proceeded against as a new Delinquent
out of mercy, because he had Cudgelled them into a Treaty; though now they
attribute all to the Kings corrupt Party in the two Houses: the Army likewise
kept a mock-Fast or day of Humiliation at Windsor, to acknowledge their sins,
and implore Gods mercy for their former disobedience to the Parliament in not
Disbanding, and their insolent Rebellion in Marching up in a Hostile and
Triumphant posture against the Parliament and City, August 6. 1647. promising
more obedience hereafter, and to acquiesce in the judgment of the Parliament,
and Declared, Decl. Jun. 14. 1647.
That it was proper for them to act in their own sphere as Soldiers, and leave
State affairs to the Parliament: but this was done but to recover the good
opinion of the people and City, and to keep them from stirring, and to stay the
moderate Party of the two Houses from Declaring the Army Enemies, recalling and
Voting their Commissions, and established Pay void, which they might have done
with ruin to the Army and their Party in that Conjuncture of Affairs, and with
safety to themselves, and applause of all honest men of England that had taken
part with the Parliament from the beginning; had not some Grandees of the rigid
Presbyterian party (both within and without the Houses) some cursed thing, some
Achans wedge in their bosoms which suggested, Their sins were greater than
could be forgiven; and therefore they durst not cast down the partition wall
between them and the King (this Army) though it lean so hard upon them, it is
ready to overwhelm them: War is necessary for some men of every Faction, whose
crying sins peace will lay open and naked to the scorn, derision, and
detestation of the world. How well these sanctimonious Sword-players of the
Army have observed the Duties and Undertakings of their said Humiliation, let
the world judge: Have they not returned again with the Dog to the Vomit? have
they not cozened God, and their own Souls? Sure they fasted from sin then,
that they might sin with the more greedy appetite now; and asked God
forgiveness of the old score, that they might sin again upon a new score. Thus
you see the two Treaties in the Isle of Wight were begotten by fear and (that
Idol of the Independents to which they offer up all their knaveries) necessity.
They were Cockatrice Eggs laid by their Grandees when they had been
Crow-trodden by Armies from abroad, and Tumults at home; See my 1. part sect.
65, 66, 105, 106, 107, and the Conclusions there. Sect. 16, 17, 18.
upon which they s^te abrood only to hatch Scandals and new quarrels against
the King, Anarchy and confusion to the State, and Tyranny and oppression of the
People: to set up the Olygarchy of the Saints, or Council of State, the Kingdom
of the Brambles, which since does scratch the wool from off the skin, the skin
from off the flesh, and the flesh from off the bones. I have been compelled to
use some introductory Repetitions in this part of my discourse, that I may give
you the whole mystery of the 2. Treaties with the King in the Isle of Wight,
with the causes efficient, and final of them, under one view; lest some one
link of the Chain escaping your observation, it become a Chain of errors to you.

My first part of the History of Independency ends with that which was but an
unlucky preface to a Treaty with the King; 3. Hamilton overthrown. See my 1.
part. sect. 136.
namely, Cromwell's menacing Letters to the Speaker of the House of Commons,
dated August 20. 1648. Relating his easy purchase of a great Victory over Duke
Hamilton, and Lieut. Genesis Bailey; wherein he relates the number of the Scottish
Forces, far differing from the former Report of Lieut. Col. Osborne a
Scottish Gentleman, made in the House of Commons, July 20. Sect. 110, 111.
(whereof I have spoken in my first part) who (to take away the terror of them)
estimated Hamiltons and Langdales conjoined forces to be but 10000. and it was
then thought a note of disaffection to report them any more; but this Letter
(for the greater glory of his sanctified Army) multiplies them to be 21000. The
manner of the Fight was very strange and Exceedingly to be suspected
(especially by any man who has heard or read of Bayly's former demeanor in
his own Country at Kylsythe and Auforte Kirk) It was little better than a
beating up of Quatters for 20. miles together (for so far the Scots Army lay
scattered in their Quarters, the Horse so far distant from their Foot, they
could bring them no seasonable relief) Sir Marmaduke Langdale with his small
Party drew forth, and made an honorable resistance, had he been timely and
strongly seconded: on the Scottish Party the Fight began at Preston in
Lancashire, where the Duke being worsted, retreated to Wigon, from thence to
Warrington through Lanes and Fastnesses, where Bailey, Lieut. General of the
Scottish Foot, being strongly quartered upon a Bridge and Pass, yielded up 6000.
Foot and Arms without fighting, and so ruined his whole Infantry: from
Warrington the Duke fled with 4000. Horse to Namptwich, from thence to
Vtoxeter, where his manner of yiedling himself to Colonel Wait (a Member of
the House of Commons) take out of Waytes own report in the House, who said,
the Duke yielded simply; and without any Articles of Surrender; that he
voluntarily gave him his Sword, Scarf, Signet of Arms, and his George; that
he hung upon him so that he could not get from him, desiring him to secure him
from the rage of the Soldiers; saying, He had not come into England, but that
he was invited by a greater part of Lords, Commons, Citizens and Covenanters
then called in the last Scottish Army: presently the Bloudhounds of the Faction
in the House sented this, and called upon Wait to know whether he named any?
Wait Answered that Hamilton was ^ s^btil^, politic Lord, and no doubt (for
the saving of his own life) would do that in more convenient time. Hereupon a
Committee (all of Canibal Saints) was presently packed, and ordered to go down
and examine the Duke, but no particulars could they get from him: which was an
honorable silence, and made amends for his former lavish speech. It was happy
the Prince did not trust himself in the Head of this Army. Had Hamilton marched
immediately to Colchester, or but to Pont^fract, (which he might easily have
done, Lambert his only Opposite still retreating before him) the whole Country
had risen with him. But he knew the Presbyterian party had rendered themselves
contemptible, and he as much contemned the Independents, therefore he
foreslowed his march, willing Cromwell and Fairfax should subdue all other
Parties, and that he only might have Arms in his hands to bring in the King
upon his own terms; this over-confidence undid him: He was too much a
Statesman, and too little a Soldier.

4. The insolency of the schismatic Members upon report of the Victory.
This Victory did work like Botled-Ale with Scot, Thomson, Cornelius Holland,
Sir Henry Mildmay, and many others of the light headed Saints, who were so
puffed up with the windiness of it, that they began to swell with disdain and
malice against the Personal Treaty, and to threaten and insult over all that
had either Petitioned for it from abroad, or spoke for it in the House, as the
only means of peace and a settlement.

5. The wiser sort subtly continue a mock-Treaty.
But the wiser sort (more crafty to do mischief) knowing that the people were
weary of Taxes and the Army; and had no hopes of peace but by a Personal
Treaty; and were resolved to purchase peace, although at the price of a new
War, that Colchester, Pontefract, Scarborough, and a Castle or two in Kent
were not yet reduced, the people in Wales, Kent, Essex, the North, not yet
settled in such a calm, but that a new storm might arise: a considerable party
of the Scots yet unbroken in England, and fronting Cromwell and Lambert, under
the Command of Monroe, a daring, knowing, and uncorrupted Commander; Scotland
it self not yet assured to them: and above all, the Prince of Wales with a
strong Fleet at Sea, likely to raise new tempests at Land, had he landed some
men ^n Kent or Essex, to gather up the malcontents there but newly sc^^tered
and broken, and ready to adhere to any Party to defend themselves from the fury
and rapines of their Committee; Warwick but a fresh water Admiral, lying in the
Thames under Protection of the Block-houses, and relying upon Land-souldiers,
to awe the Mariners from mutinying; a cloud arising in Ireland ready to break
into a storm: upon these considerations, the Cabal or close Junto of Grandees
thought fit to dally on the Treaty, the better to keep the Prince quiet, in
expectation thereof, and gain time to work upon his Seamen, (already corrupted
with want of work and pay) and to gull and pacify the rest of the Members and
People, (not patient of a sharper remedy,) until Oliver had quite finished his
Northern work, and marched nearer London, Colchester reduced, and the Princes
Fleet retired to Harbor to avoid Winter, and then to break off the Treaty, and
purge the House of those Members that sought Peace by an accord with the King,
under the notion of the Kings corrupt party; to blind their eyes therefore,
the Speaker Lenthall, (though at this time the Foreman of Olivers shop) when
it was debated in the House, Whether a Treaty should be had with the King in
the Isle of Wight upon the Propositions of Hampton Court? The Question much
opposed, and at last put, the No's and the Yeas were equal, 57. to 57. insomuch
that the Speakers voice was put in to turn the Scales; he gave his voice in the
affirmative, that time following his conscience against his Interest, and my
Lord Say (openly in the House of Lords) said, God forbid that any man should
take advantage of this Victory to break off the Treaty: and the Armies Scout,
from Tuesday November. 14. to November. 21. 1648. propounds three Riddles to the
Reader, 1. Why the Grandees of the Junto that use to rule the Army are the most
active Solicitors for an Agreement of the Parliament with His Majesty when then
the Army are acting to the contrary? 2. Why His Majesty, stumbles only at the
matters wherein the Presbyterian Interest are concerned, when that Faction is
the only visible prop to His Life, Crown, Dignity, and dying Interest? 3. Why
the Soldiers Petitions for Justice upon his Majesty were ill resented, and
they thought worthy to be tried by a Council of War, as Offenders, yet a
Remonstrance was then framing by the Grandee-Officers to the same purpose, and
much more against the present Authority? and in this the General concurres.

6. New Instructions to Hammond in order to the Treaty, sect. 132.
The next thing taken into consideration in relation to the Treaty, was, the
giving new instructions to Hammond the Head-Goaler, how to demean himself in
the Treaty, which had formerly been Voted to be in the Isle of Wight, with
honor, freedom, and safety to his Majesty: The Instructions were, 1. That the
King should enjoy the same liberty during this Treaty that He had at
Hampton Court. 2. That no person excepted out of mercy, none now Imprisoned by
the Parliament, nor none now in actual Arms against the Parliament should be
admitted to come to the King. 3. That no foreign Agent should make any
Address to him without leave of both Houses. Against these Instructions it was
argued, That some of them contradicted the former Votes, That the King should
Treat in Honor and Freedom, and that He should enjoy the same Liberty He had
at Hampton Court, which could not be so long as He was denied to correspond
with other Princes His Allies (with whom He was in league and amity) by their
Ambassadors and Agents, a Royalty inseparable from the Crown, allowed Him at
Hampton Court, and to deny it was implicitly to dethrone Him. To which was
answered, That this was true of a King in actual exercise of his Regal power,
which this King neither is, nor ought to be until He has given satisfaction
to His Parliament: That it was a great condescension in them, and below the
Dignity of a Parliament to recall their Votes of Non-Addresse, and put the
business of the Treaty thus forward; and if He would not accept of a Treaty
upon such conditions as the Parliament thought fit, then things would be but
where they were. The peaceable moderate Party, perceiving what operation the
Scottish Victory had already upon the fancies of those hotheaded Men, knew they
must speak mannerly and modestly for fear of correction, and must take what
they could, since they could not have what they would. 4. That the King should
give His Royal word not to remove out of the Island during the Treaty, nor in
20. days after, without consent of the two Houses: this was to make his
chains a link or two longer, 7. The Earl of Warwicks Letter to Derby-ho.
complaining of his Seamen.
yet the King did give His Royal word accordingly.

Thursday, Aug. 24. a Letter came to the Committee of Safety at Derby-House
from the Earl of Warwick, complaining of the perverseness of his own
Seamen, and that those with the Prince would not yet stoop to the Gods of
Gold, (his own words) That some other way must be thought of besides force, to
undermine the Prince, that since they had subdued their Enemies by Land, it
would be a good preparative to work upon their Enemies by Sea with the same
Engine. You see these Saints having gotten a public Purse into their hands,
are (at the peoples cost and charges) bountiful Corrupters of other men's
faith, having none of their own.

About this time a new kind of pick-lock was invented to open the iron Chests
and Counter-Boards of the City; 8. A Committee to make effectual the Sale of
Bishops Lands; and cajole the City.
and invite them to throw more money after that they had cast away already in
purchase of Bishops Lands; namely, a Committee to consider of a way to secure
unto the Purchasers the Money they had already disbursed upon the said Lands;
and to remove all impediments in the Sale for time to come. To which Col. Harvy
said, That he had experience in the late defection of the City; when the Men
most backwards in the Parliaments service, were such of the Presbyterians as
had no engagement upon Bishops Lands; whereas others of the same Party that have
interest in the same Lands, are as forward as any the best affected. Here you
see what it is that chains the affections of the City to this Parliament, and
what it is that divides them amongst themselves; self-respects makes them run
along blindfold with the Grandees in any design or faction. A good bargain
makes a bad Man; Harvey needs no other president but himself, nor no more
visible monument then his exceeding cheap bargain of Fulham-house and Manor;
which has changed him from a furious Presbyter to a Bedlam Independent.

About this time it was Ordered, 9. A Commission into the North to enquire what
damages they have sustained by the Scottish Invasion.
That Commissions should be issued forth into the Northern Counties, to
enquire what Damages they have any ways sustained by Hamilton's Invasion? This
device was of a twofold use, 1. To cut off the Scots demands for Money due to
them for their last Brotherly assistance, and otherwise. 2. To cajole the poor
Country into a belief they shall have reparations against the Scots, and raise
them into a clamorous complaint against the Scots; and at last a deadly feud
when they shall find their hopes denied by them and disappointed. In the mean
time they are patiently eaten up with Taxes and Free Quarter, and while they
look for what they shall never have, they lose what they have already; This
was the much applauded invention of Master St. J^hns of Lincolns-Inne.

10. Col^hester surrend^ed, with the sequel thereof.
About this time the news of the Surrender of Colchester inflamed the
Antimonarchical faction from a Fever to a frantic Calenture. They yielded to
mercy, and within 4 hours after Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle (for
the better explanation what Independent mercy is) were shot to death; some
attribute it to an old quarrel between him and General Fairfax, others think
it was done to put an affront upon the King and the Treaty: Colonel Far was
likewise condemned by the Council of War at the same time, but is reprieved
as a witness against the Earl of Warwick when time serves, for when Warwick
long since waited at the Commons Door with some Ladies to petition for a
Reprieve for the Earl of Holland, a Soldier of the Guard insolently told him,
He had more need petition for himself.

11. Instructions for the Commissioners to Treat with his Majesty.
Instructions for the Commissioners to Treat with the King were Debated. The
Independents propounded, that those Propositions that were most advantageous to
the Parliament should be first debated, and if the King did not confirm them
all, the Treaty to break off: But it was held unreasonable in any Treaty, that
one Party should bind himself before the conclusion, and leave the other at
large, and himself in the lurch; so it was Ordered, They should be Treated of
in order as they lay, and (according to His Majesty's desire) nothing binding
to either Party until all was agreed of. The next stumbling block cast in the
way was, that seeing 40 days only were allowed for to Treat, that they should
limit how many days (and no more) should be spent in Treating upon every
several proposition: But this was looked upon as a cavil to make void the
Treaty, and so overruled; you see what use these men that gain by War make
of their Victories.

12. A Debate what Gentl. should be allowed to attend his Majesty in the Treaty.
The next thing debated was, the List of such Gentlemen as were named to attend
the King in this Treaty: The moderate Party excepted against Ashburnham (a
great man with Cromwell) and Leg, as being Prisoner to the Parliament: The
Independents excepted Dr. Shelden, Hammond, and Oldsworth, for the same reason;
but the next day the Speaker moved, that Leg and Ashburnham might go to the
King; and to satisfy such as had objected their Imprisonment against them, the
Independents alleged they were unduly imprisoned, and moved, a Committee might
be appointed to examine the cause of their Restraint: but the moderate
alleging the same reason for the said three Doctors, and making the same
motion for them, there was no farther proceedings therein. 13. Master Pryns
speech in the House; proving the Kings con^essions to be a ground for a
setlement.


Thus far I have briefly set down the Preparations toward a Treaty; the
Treaty it self between the King in the Isle of Wight, and the Parliaments
Commissioners; their Reports of the Results to the Houses; and the Houses
Debates and Votes upon them took up almost all the time until the 6. December,
1648. (some few businesses of no great moment intervening) many imperfect and
partial Relations of them have been printed cum Privil gio; but Mr. Will. Pryn
in his excellent Speech made in the House of Commons, 4. December. 1648. and
since printed, has set down all the most material Arguments on both sides,
with great candor and ingenuity, and has confuted the Enemies to Peace and
Accommodation: if strength of Reason can confute those men that follow only
their own Interests of power and profit, whose wills and lusts have always bin
their own Laws, and are now become the only Laws of this Conquered Kingdom:
I love not actum agire, I refer my Reader therefore to his Speech, and will
only trouble him with some Observations upon this Treaty.

I have said something of the Militia, 14. The Militia, and Negative Voice.
sect. 62, 63, 64, 106. and the Conclusions. 15, 16, 17.
and the Kings Negative Voice, in the 1. part of this History, especially in
the Conclusions at the latter end; I will only say that without them the King
cannot be a Governing King, but a bare titular King, a picture, a shadow,
because the protection of the people depends upon the power of the Sword; He
cannot protect them and their Laws with the Scabbard: The Authority of the
Scepter follows the power of the Sword; wherefore to give away one, is to lose
both, nor can the Subjects be any longer his Majesty's Subjects, but Slaves to
their fellow Subjects, when so many petty Kings (not authorized by any Law of
God or Man to protect the People) shall hold the Sword over their Heads, and
distract them with different Opinions, disagree in Commands, according to the
variety of their several lusts, factions, and interests: how can the King
according to his Coronation Oath and duty (to which God has called him)
Govern and protect his People, 1. part sect. 40. 41, 42.
when he has given away his Sword to a factious Parliament where one Party
tyrannizeth over the other, and threatens the other with the longest Sword? how
absurd and impossible it is for the Subject to expect protection from one hand,
and to swear and pay Allegiance to another hand, that has divested it self of
all power to protect them; let our Laws, the practice of all Nations and
times, and the judgment of the learned Politicians tell you, whose Maxim
is, Illa optima est Respublica ubi Princeps quam maximum potest boni, and quam
minimum mali; Primo ne nova Tributo indicere, nova victigalia constituere
possit, inconsulta Republica: Deinde legum condendarum anti quandarumque poenes
Rempublicam, non unum aliquem Magistratum esse debet potestas; nulla enim in re
gravius peccatum admittitur, nusquam graviores turbae minantur quam hisce de
rebus; That is the best form of Government, where the King can do most good,
and least evil: 1. Let Him be disabled to raise new Taxes, and lay on new
Tribute. 2. Let Him not have the sole power to make or repeal Laws, which
ought to belong to the Commonwealth; not any one Magistrate; for no power is
more hurtful to the people, nor stirs more Commotions then these two: such
is the Kingdom of England; the King has neither the power of our Purses, nor
the changing of our Laws in His hands, and if he give away his Sword, he will
be such a King of clouts as can do neither good nor evil, like Rex
Sacrificulis at Rome, ea summa potestas dicitur, qua secundum Leges non est
major neque par; such was the Dictator at Rome, he had no equal there; Papyp:
cursor dictator, adjudged to death his General of the Horse Fabius, for
fighting against his command though prosperously; and rejected all appeal to
the Senate and Tribunes of the People; yiedling at last only to their prayers,
with this saying, Vicit tandem imperii majestas: such is the King of England,
the Commonwealth cannot compel him to grant a Pardon, or dispense justice or
mercy as they please; the Oath of Supremacy calls Him Supreme Governor in all
Causes, over all Persons, so do all our Statutes, to whom in Parliament (which
is his highest sphere of majesty) is the last appeal by Writ of Error, who
is, Principium, caput and finis Parliamenti, the beginning, head and end of the
Parliament: and therefore he only calls the Parliament, to advise with him,
and dissolves it when he is satisfied: He makes War and Peaee, See the 1.
part of this History, Prolegomena, 1.
and is Protector of the Laws, and of all just interests; only the policy of
the Law disables him to make, repeal, or alter Laws, or raise Moneys without
consent of both Houses by Bill passed; (which is but an Embrio until he
quickens it by his Royal Assent) because this way the King may do most hurt,
and wrong to his people, (as I have already said) it being the wisdom of our
Laws to keep the Sword in one hand, and the purse in another.

The 1. 15. The 1. Proposition for j^stifying the Parliaments, and condemning
His own quarrel.
proemial Proposition for justifying the Parliaments Cause and Quarrel, and
condemning his own Cause and Party, was a bitter pill; but an earnest desire
of peace sweetened it, and gilded it over, and invited him to swallow it
without chawing or ruminating upon it: but how devilish, unchristian, and
illegal a use the Faction has made of this extorted confession, let God judge.

Their insisting upon it, that the King should take the Covenant, 16. The
Covenant endeavored to be put upon the King.
was an error in Policy, whereof the rigid Presbyterians are guilty; they
(supposing the King would take it at last) stood upon it, and intended thereby
to join the King to their Interest and Party. The more subtle Independent
knew the King would not, nor could not take it; and therefore complied with the
Presbyterians in obtruding it upon him, to break off the Treaty: many things in
the Covenant were vain in the Person of His Majesty, as, that He should swear
to maintain his own Person, etc. which the Law of nature binds him to without
an Oath, which in this case is idle, and a profaning of Gods name: some things
in the Oath were contradictory to what the Parliaments Propositions desired of
him, as, to maintain His own Authority in defense of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, which was impossible for Him to do unless he kept the Militia in
his own hands, and his Negative Voice also, which that clause in the Bill of
Militia, That all Bills for leavying Forces should have the power of Acts of
Parliament, without the Royal Assent, etc. would have deprived him of, by
making their Ordinances Acts of Parliament in effect, binding to the Persons
and Estates of the People in an Arbitrary way, to their utter enslaving: To
swear to Abolish Bishops, etc. was against his Coronation Oath, To swear to
extirpate Heresies, Schisms, etc, is more then the Independents would permit;
To swear to maintain the Union between the two Nations, which the Parliament
declare already to be broken by the Scots Invasion, is vain: besides, how
unjust a thing was it to impose that Oath upon the King, when most Members of
the Parliament, Army, and others, are left at large not to take it? The
Parliaments Demands, That the King should declare against the Marquess of
Ormonds proceedings to unite all the Interests of Ireland for the service of
his Majesty, was no part of the Propositions upon which the Treaty was begun,
but a subsequent request upon an emergent occasion; and therefore I see no
reason why the King should have given any answer to it, but only have held
himself to the original Propositions, yet he did Answer, That the whole
business of Ireland was included in the Treaty, and therefore a happy
Agreement thereupon would set an end to all differences there, which being
voted unsatisfactory, and moved that a new Declaration might be published
against him; the King was enforced to put a stand to the Marquesses proceedings
by his Letter, to his great prejudice; yet these Declarers against him do now
comply with Owen Roe Oneale, and have entertained O Realy, the Popes
Irish-Vicar-general in England, to negotiate for the Irish massacring Rebels
with the Parliament: These things considered, prove what I find in our late
King Charles the 1. most excellent Book, Chap. 18. That it is a Maxim to those
that are Enemies of peace, to ask something which in Reason and Honor must be
denied, that they might have some color to refuse all the rest that is
granted. More observations upon this unlucky Treaty I will not trouble my
Reader with, these being enough to show the vanity of those Propositions; by
these he may take a scantling of the rest ex pede Herculem. I cannot but blame
the indiscretion, if not the indisposition of those Commissioners who cavilled
away so much time in the Treaty, 17. Jones complains by Letters that Ireland
was like to be lost.
until Cromwell had done his work in the North, and marched up to Town to make
the Treaty ineffectuall.

About the latter end of October. 1648. Col. Jones sent whining Letters from
Dublin, to the Steersmen at Derby-house, complaining that all Ireland was like
to unite and prosecute the Kings Interest, and therefore he cried for help; but
neither the said Committee, in their consultations, nor the Army in execution
of what was resolved, could agree amongst themselves: the Engrossers and
Monopolizers of Oligarchy into a few hands, desiring to make themselves a
Corporation of Tyrants, suspect an opposition from the Levellers; and would
feign turn them out of the Kingdom, into Ireland, to seek their fortunes, and
practice their Levelling principles in a strange Land: The Levellers (more
numerous in the Army, though less numerous in the said Committee) strain
courtesy with their Betters, and would have them go first, thinking the seeds
of liberty and equality will prosper better in the soil and air of England;
While they were disputing, if Marquess Ormond had been acting (as he had been,
had not the King been necessitated to retard him, by his said Letters, sent
from the Isle of Wight during the Treaty,) the King had recovered that Kingdom
entirely to himself, which had bin of great advantage to him.

The 20. November. 1648. Col. Ewers with seven or eight Officers more, presented
at the House of Commons Bar a thing called (by those that use to miscal
things,) An humble Remonstrance of the Army: It is founded upon these five
Anarchical Principles. 1. That themselves and their faction only (whom they
call exclusively, the Well-affected, Godly, Honest Party, the Saints) are the
People of England; all the rest but Philistines, Amorites, or (at the best) but
Gibeonites. 2. That their Interest only is the public Interest of the People.
3. That the People (that is, themselves) are the only competent Judges of the
peoples safety (contrary to the Laws and Practice of all Nations, which bestow
that Prerogative only upon the Supreme Magistrate) but it may be here lies hid
another subsequent principle, That they are the Supreme Magistrates, armed with
Supreme Authority, as well as with their Swords, and hereupon, they as good as
tell the House, That if their supposed dangers be not removed, and those
remedies which they Remonstrate admitted, they shall make such appeal to God,
(that is, their Sword) as formerly they have done. 4. Principle is
consequential to the 3. That they may drive on their design (upon pretense of
necessity, self-preservation, honest intentions, providence, or revelation)
against all Powers, Forms of Government, and Laws whatsoever, under color of
the much abused Maxim, Salus Populi Supremae Lex esto, the safety of the
People is the Supreme Law; which has been the fruitful Mother of many
Rebellions in all Ages, to serve the corrupt ends of ambitious Persons; who
usually fish in troubled waters to attain to those ends which they could never
arrive at in settled Governments. This is a Principle, or new light discovered
by Major Huntington, That it is lawful to pass through any forms of
Government, for accomplishment of their ends, and therefore either to purge the
Houses, and support the remaining Party by power everlastingly, or put a period
to them by force: and themselves employ as much in this Remonstrance, p. 45.
saying, It cannot be safe to accommodate with the King, because if He return,
and this Parliament continue long and unlimited, He will make a Party amongst
them; He has bid fair for it among the Commons already, and the Lords are his
own out of Question; and therefore we dare not trust the King amongst them.
Again they say, That if the King come into the Parliament, He will be looked
upon as the Repairer of breaches, Restorer of trade, peace, plenty, etc. and if
the Army should keep up (as it must) upon Taxes, the Houses and Army will be
looked upon as Oppressors; and the jealousies and discontents of the People be
increased against them, and make them apt to join issue with the Kings
interest, and may yield us up a sacrifice to appease the King and his Party;
out of these words, and their own practice, I concluded for them, ergo, They
may carry on their design upon necessity for self-preservation, against the
Monarchical Government, and Law of the Land, to murder the KING, as they have
since done. Again they say, If the King were returned, each Party would strive
first, and most to comply with Him, ergo, there is a necessity to subvert the
Kingdom and murder the KING. Behold what use these cowardly Saints make of
necessity, and self-preservation. 5. That they may appeal to their Sword
against the Authority of any their Governors, in order to public safety;
which two last conclusions set the door wide open to Faction and Rebellion;
since the People are ever floating and given to change, and every turbulent
ambitious Fellow, is apt to raise them into a storm against their Governors,
for their fabulous assertions wherewith these Saints usually guild over their
foul actions, 1. That the Houses were free when they passed the 4. Votes for
Non-Addresses. 2. That they were not free when they recalled them. 3. That the
People were quiet and contented until the recalling those 4. Votes; and
afterward were unsettled, and presented clamorous Petitions. 4. That the Army
did not apply themselves to the King until he proffered himself to them. 5.
That when they made Addresses to Him, it was but to prevent the Presbyterian
Party. But it appears, their aim (from the beginning) was to suppress the
Presbyterian, and advance their own Party, and lay by the King, and domineer
over Him and the Kingdom; for when Cromwell had brought his Design to
perfection, he said at Kingston, That he was as fit to rule the Kingdom as
Hollis. 6. And then but hypocritically. Sect. 65.66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73,
74, 75, 88, 89, 97, 98.
All these are sufficiently confuted in my said Animadversions, and in the said
Plea, for the King and Kingdom, in Putny Projects, and in my First part of the
History of Independency. After all this tedious stuff aforesaid, they make
Propositions to the Parliament of two sorts, all founded upon the said five
Antimonarchical Principles; The first for satisfying public Justice, (that
is, for the Hangman to teach the Judges who they shall sentence to execution)
1. They demand, the Person of the King may be brought to speedy Justice; this
affront they put upon the Parliament when they were near conclusion of their
Treaty with Him: when He had already granted more to his Subjects than ever any
King condescended to: The Kings Supremacy; and from thence his indemnity
proved.
this is through the sides of the King to give Monarchy, the fundamental
Government, and Laws of this Land, and consequently the Liberty and Property
of the People, their Deaths-wound. By the Law of God, nature, reason, and the
Laws of all Kingdoms impunity is an inseparable prerogative of Kings, as they
are Supreme in their Dominions; See the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy. Stat.
of Recognition. 1 Jac. Cokes. Institut. 5.1. Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, l.
1 chapter 1, 2, Stat. 25. Edw. 3, 42. E. 3. Read Mr. Pryns Memento to the
unparliamentary Iunto, his Speech in the House of Commons, 4. Dec. p. 72, 73,
74, 75, 76, 77. and my 1. part, sect. 106. The Conclusions; sect. 17. and my
Animadversions. p. 18.
the Petition of Right, 3. Caroli, Declares, That they had no power to hurt the
Kings Prerogative, much less (I think) to hurt his Person, the Laws, are the
Kings Laws; Courts the Kings Courts: Judges his Judges; Great Seal, his
Seal; Writs, the Kings Writs; the Justice and Peace of the Land are his,
consequently the Wars his Wars; he is the fountain of all Authority as well
as of all Honor; 1 Pet. ^.13 H^^e the King is called Sup^e^e, not the People;
and though said to be an ordinance of man in some respects, yet St. Paul, R^m.
13. says, He is ordained of God: 2. Governors are distinguished, the King is
supreme, and Governors are sent by him, and his Commission. Besides, it
appears, Genesis 3.16. and 4.7. God gave not to all men that freedom which is
supposed the foundation of supremacy, in the people; He made them not Masters
of their own liberty, for even then he laid the foundations of obedience in
Abel to Cain* Eve to Adam. If a people choose a King, it is the act of every
particular man, of whom the Commonalty consists; and each individual, nor the
whole Commona^ty can give him more power then himself has. But no man has
power over his own life, neither arbitrarily, nor judicially; but on^y over his
liberty, which he may so give away, as to make himself a subject, or a slave,
this makes him so chosen a Ruler, or Protector of them, who have parted with
their liberty, and subjected to him; and then God, (who only has power of life
and death, invests the King with power to be the Minister of God, to exec^te
vengeance, not bearing the Sword in vain, Romans 13. See Dr. Hammonds Letter to
the L. Fairfax, Jan. 5. 1648.
Thou shall not speak ill of the Governor of the People: therefore not accuse
him. The King has no Superior nor equal in England, contrary to that false
distinction of the Observator, that he is, Major singulis, minor universis.
When David would have gone forth to Battle, his Army dissuaded it, using these
reasons, If we flee, they will not care for us, neither if half of us die,
will they care for us; But thou art worth ten thousand of us: Here you see the
King is reckoned, major universis, more than all his Army; and yet that Army
was (at that time) in effect, all the well-affected of the Land; and therefore
(by the Anarchical Principle aforesaid) the only People of the La^d; for
further proof hereof I appeal to all our Laws and Statutes, how will they Try
him? Who shall Judge him? who are his Peers, that he may be Legally Tried like
a Freeborn man (for sure they cannot deny him that right) according to Magna
Charta, per legale judicium parium suorum? It is a grounded Maxim in our
Laws, The King can do no wrong; wherefore then will they Try him, for doing no
wrong? The policy and civility therefore of our Laws, (and of our Parliament
too, in all their Declarations, Remonstrances, so long as they continued (in
any state or degree of innocence) always accused his Evil Counselors and
Ministers, and freed Himself, lest they gave advantages to ambitious men,
Absalom-like, to scandalize and dishonor him, and render him low and vile in
the eyes of the People; to the disturbance of the peace of the King and
Kingdoms, and shaking of the Royal Throne which is always accompanied with an
earthquake of the whole Land. Saint Peter bids us, Submit to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto
Governors, as those that are sent by him. As free, and not using your liberty
for a cloak of malitiousnesse, but Fear God, Honor the King: But these
rebellious Saints abusing Christian liberty for a cloak of malitiousnesse,
will (according to their 4th Antimonarchical Principle) make the giddy,
ignorant, tumultuous, many-headed multitude Judges of their King, and make the
confused Rabble his Superiors, thereby setting up two Superiors one
contradictory to the other, and so turn the Kingly Government into a popular
Military Government, abolish our Laws, and leave all to the power of the Sword
in an Arbitrary way, to carry on their design: to which purpose they have
lately caused their Journey-men, the present House of Commons, to Vote,
(contrary to our known Laws) That the Supreme Authority of this Nation is in
the People of England, and therefore in themselves as their Representative.
This is a 6. Anarchical Principle of the Army and their Party, who wanting
reason to prove it, assert it by the Authority of their Mock-Parliament, and
must now make it good by the Sword to justify their proceedings against the
King and People. These popular principles are mere empty notions, whereby the
Grandees draw the Supreme Authority through the People to themselves, the better
to enslave them; for the liberty of the Commons does not consist in a
licentiousness to interrupt the Government of their Superiors, and change the
Government according to their fancies; but the liberty of the People consists
in the enjoying the fruits of their labors, their goods, possessions, estates,
and their personal liberty, according to the known Laws of the Land. When
Harry Martyn in Barkshire forbade the People to stand bare at the Sessions, and
do homage and fealty to their Lords; he gulled them; and gave them that which
was not their due, to rob them of that which was their due; their Horses,
Goods, Money, plundered from them, for service of the State (forsooth) and beat
them that defended their own; so that while he flattered them to be the
Supreme Authority and Lords Paramount, and the Parliament to be their Servants;
he used them like Slaves conquered by the Parliament. Besides, it is not all
the People, nor the thousandth part of them, but a few covetous, ambitious men,
that desire to bring the King to capital punishment, and subvert our
fundamental Government and Laws, that have usurped the power of the Kingdom
into the hands of their Faction, and now require this to keep themselves from
being called to account. The second Demand tends to disinherit his Posterity,
viz. That the Prince and Duke of York come in by a day appointed, and acquit
themselves of their capital Delinquency, or else to be Declared incapable of
Government, and to die without mercy, if afterward found in the Kingdom; th^s
Summons is but to insinuate their guilt; if they refuse to appear, as reason
tells us they must and will. This is to shut the door after Monarchy, and keep
it out for ever; in farther pursuance, they demand the Revenue of the Crown to
continue still in Hucksters hands to pay public Debts, and repair the Losses
of the People, (that is) themselves. The second sort of Propositions are, for
settling of the Kingdom upon their own Grounds and Interest, That a certain
period be set to this Parliament, by which time the Supreme trust in them may
return unto the People: that is, still to themselves and their Faction, the
new erected Committee of State, the hogen mogens at White Hall. Thus you see
having removed out of the way the King, the first and most visible legal
Authority: they will now put down the Parliament, the second visible Authority
of England, who are now the only Bulwark against the Tyranny of the Sword,
and then (as Major White said at Putney long since) there will be no visible
Authority left in England but the power of the Sword, which will introduce a
new Parliament, or rather fantastical new invented Representative (destructive
to Parliaments) all of their own Creatures: as appears by their next
Proposition, concerning succession of Parliaments. 2. That n^ne shall be
capable of Electing, This is so explained by the Moderate (one of the raling
Penmen of the Faction who has a large share in the 500. or 600. a year
allowed to these Pamphletires, for divulging State-lies and slanders amongst
the People) who from November. 14. to November. 21. 1648.) Number. 19.) defines
the People of England to be only such as have not engaged for the King; and
such as shall sign to the Agreement of the People, which is to be above Law;
and all the rest are to be Disfranchised.
or being Elected, that have engaged against the public Interest, (that is,
the Interest of them and their Party, as appears by their 5. Anarchical
Principles in the beginning of this Paragraph) nor any that oppose this
Agreement: By what Authority (but the arbitrary sway of the Sword) shall
Freemen be Disfranchised, and lose their Birthrights for not changing the
fundamentals of Parliaments, Government, and Law, and yiedling them up to the
lusts of an Army of Rebels, that brag they have Conquered the Kingdom, and
we are their Slaves? 3. That Elections may be so distributed, as to render the
House of Commons a Representative of the whole People, (that is, tagge and
ragge and Canting Beggars, who have nothing to give or lose, as well as
Freeholders) so farewell Writs of Summons, and all orderly, legal forms; if
all men, without any distinction, may Elect, and be Elected, all will fall into
confusion; the Rabble will never agree, all things will tend to Riots and
Tumults; so that the better and soberer fort will, and must forbear, and leave
all in the hands of the Rascallity, and at last no Representative will be
chosen, or such an one as the People will be ashamed to own, and will desert
them, and leave them to be ordered at the pleasure of the Army. 4. Prop. That
our Kings hereafter may be Elective, and disclaim a Negative Voice: how
frequent Civil Wars are in all Elective Kingdoms during the interregnum, or
space between the death of the old, and choice of the new King; how obnoxious
to the Soldiery, let the old Emperors of Rome, those later of Germany, the
Kingdom of Poland, and heretofore Bohemia, and Hungary tell, all Histories are
full of examples; yet if our elective Kings shall have neither the Militia, nor
a Negative Voice in Councels, and the Crown Revenues be otherwise disposed of
(as is inferred) and their Heads exposed to the humors of the People, or their
Representative, the Office will be so unworthy of any wise man, that I do by
these presents freely give my voice to the Lord Fairfax, and so unfit for any
honest Gentleman; that I do hereby give my voice to Cromwell the perfidious
Brewer; catch who catch can, let them agree amongst themselves, I care not
which of the two shall be set up for the new States Scar-Crow. This
Remonstrance was about a Week after seconded with a most insolent threatening
Declaration, composed altogether to terror; it was occasioned as follows.
About the latter end of November, the Parliament was informed the Army was upon
their march to London, whereupon (not without great opposition by the Armies
Party in the House, and with great caution it should be mannerly phrased for
fear of angring his insolency) a Letter was Voted to be sent the General,
forbidding his nearer approach. In contempt whereof the Army immediately printed
the said Declaration, accusing the Parliament of Breach of Trust, Lightness,
Inconstancy, Indiscretion, saying, They would appeal from them to the People
(that is, still themselves; you see they hold one and the same Rod over King
and Parliament) and threatening to advance presently to Westminster, to do what
God should enable them unto: The same night they came to Hyde-Parke-corner, and
kept Guards there: Hereupon it was put to the Question; That the Armies
approach was prejudicial to the freedom of Parliament? but through the
cowardice of some, whose hearts now began to melt, and the impudent restless
bawling of those cheating Saints, that comply with the Army to keep themselves
from giving Accounts, it passed in the Negative.

19. The Kings Concessions debated; and young S. Hen Vanes insolency.
December. 2. The Kings Answer was debated; and as a prologue to it, young Sir
Henry Vane (a Whelpe of the Old Curre) spoke thus, Mr. Speaker, By this Debate
we shall know who are our Friends, and who are our Foes; or to speak more
plainly, We shall discover who are the Kings Party in the House, and who the
Peoples: To which was Answered, That since this Gentlemen were so bold, to
deal thus by way of prevention, in a threatening manner; and had forejudged and
divided the House into two parts: I hope it is as lawful for me (who am no
Grandee, nor no Gainer by our troubles,) to put you in mind of another
Division of the House. Sir, you will find some desirous of peace, and they are
Losers by the War; Others are against peace, and those are Gainers by the
War, My humble motion is, that the Gainers may contribute to the Losers, that
we may all stand upon equal feet for till then, the Balance of the
Commonwealth will never stand right toward a settlement. True jests bite sore.
He and his Sire oppose peace: lest the Kings Revenue being restored, they
should lose a good Trade there: the old Dog is Chairman of that Committee;
the young one is a principal Publican and Treasurer; they get constantly above
6000 l. per annum, between them besides private cheats by paying half Debts,
and taking Acquittances for the whole; and then discounting for the whole;
buying in old sleeping Pensions for trifles, that have not been paid in many
years, and paying themselves all Arreares, Cornelius Holland is Servant to
them both, and has gotten as much wealth as makes him saucy enough to hire
William Lilly, and other Pamphletiers to derive his Pedigree from John Holland
Duke of Exeter, although it be known he was originally a Link-boy, but he is
now one of the New Lights, an illuminated Brother. Master Pryn moved the debate
of the Kings Answer might be laid aside until it was a free Parliament not
environed by the Army: but (said Mr. Rich. Norton) Take heed what you say
against the Army, for they are resolved to have a free Parliament to Debate the
Kings Answer, if we refuse.

This day the General took possession of White Hall for his Quarters, 20. The
General Garri^ons White Hall and the Mewes upon h^s own head.
as if he meant to keep out the King in defiance of the Treaty: he brought to
Town with him four Foot Regiments, and six Regiments of Horse; part whereof
quartered at White Hall, the rest in York House, and other great Houses; the
Horse turned the Reformado Horse Guards that attended the Houses, and lodged in
the Mewes by their order, out of their Quarters, without applying themselves to
the Houses.

Upon Monday, December. 4. 21. The House informed that the King was surprised by
the Army, and ca^^ied Prisoner to Harst Castle.
News came to the House that by several Orders from the General, His Majesty
was seized in His Bedchamber, and hurried away Prisoner to Hurst Castle, a
Blockhouse out of the Isle of Wight, standing about a mile and a half in the
Sea, upon a Beache full of mud, and stinking oaze upon low tides; having no
fresh water within two or three miles of it, bitter cold, and of a foggy and
pestilent air, so noisome that the Guards thereof are not able to endure it
long without shifting their Quarter. This was a torment beyond Pistol and
Poison, many spoke against the insolency of this fact, as being committed
against the life of the King, and against the honor and public faith of the
Parliament; who had Voted, He should Treat in Honor, Freedom and Safety, in
Newport in the Isle of Wight; and had accepted His Royal Word not to withdraw
out of the Island during the Treaty, nor in 20. days after; (which were not
yet expired) and now to have the Houses debates and results fore-stalled, and
the Treaty made frustrate by such an act of violence and prevention committed
upon the Person of the King, was a presumtuous and rebellious act: It was moved
therefore that it might be Declared That his Majesty was removed out of the
Isle of Wight by his Excellencies Warrant, without the consent or privity of
the House: But those Members that Idolize that Bell and the Dragon, the Army,
and are but Priests fatting themselves upon the Sacrifices of that Image;
insisted upon it to have two words amended in the Question, 1. The word
[Declare] would be construed to be a Declaring against the General and Army: 2.
The word [Consent] to be left out, lest it argued a disagreement in opinion and
practice between the Army and the House, as if the Houses dissented from it.
And certainly those Gentlemen that stood upon these niceties, could not say, it
was done with their consent, for it was hatched in the Junto; so it was barely
voted, To be done without privity of the House, nevertheless,

22. The D^bate upon the King^ Answers resumed.
The same day, they resolved to resume their last Saturdaies debate upon the
Kings Answers to the Propositions of both Houses: The first Question debated
was, Whether they were satisfactory or no? The Army Party argued, They were not
satisfactory because the King had not granted all their Propositions in
Terminis: To this was Answered, That these Propositions were not sent to his
Majesty as Bills to be passed in Terminis, without debate: but as Propositions
to be Personally Treated upon, (as the Votes of both Houses, and the
Instructions of their Gommissioners prove) now it is against the nature of all
Treaties Personal, to tie up the Parties of either side so precisely, that
they shall have no liberty to vary in any circumstance or particular; so that
if all be not precisely granted, the Condescentions shall not be satisfactory,
though all just things are yielded to; as appears by all Treaties between
Nation and Nation where their first demands are never fully granted, but
always qualified and limited, if not diminished, the rule being, Iniquum pitas
ut justum feras; so in all Treaties between Enemies, Party and Party, see Mr.
Pryn's said Speech, December. 4. 1648. where to avoid cavils, he waves this
equivocall Question, and propounds the Question anew in these terms, Whether
the Kings final Answers to the Propositions of both Houses in this Treaty,
considered altogether, be not so full and satisfactory in themselves, that this
House may, and ought accept of, and proceed upon them for the speedy setlement
of a safe and wel-grounded Peace both in Church and Commonwealth, rather than
reject them as unsatisfactory, and so hazard the loss of all, and the
perpetuating of our Wars and miseries? This he held in the Affirmative, with so
many strong and solid Reasons, Arguments, and Presidents both out of Divinity,
Law, History, and policy; and with so clear a confutation of the opposite
Arguments, that no man took up the Bucklers against him to refute him: the
Arguments are too many, and too long to be here repeated. Nor do I love to
abridge that which has little or nothing in it superfluous; or to make that
short-lined by epitomizing it (such is the laziness of men to prefer
Epitomies before Large works) which I desire should be long-lined, and pass
through many hands: This Debate lasted until Tuesday morning, 5. December. eight
of the clock (the Independents hopeing to tire out and fright away the moderate
men) and then it was Resolved upon the Question (notwithstanding the terrors
and menaces of the Army) That the Answers of the King to the Proposition of
both Houses, are a ground for the Houses to proceed upon, for the settlement of
the peace of the Kingdom; It was carried affirmatively by 140 Voices, against
104. that this Question should be put, and the Question it self was carried
clearly Affirmative without dividing the House: presently after this House
appointed a Committee of 6. Members to attend the General, to confer with him
and his Officers* and keep a good correspondency between the House and the
Army; who had so much surly pride, and so little manners, as to give them leave
to take a nap of three or four hours long (after their nights watching) before
admittance, and at last dismissed them with this churlish Answer, That the way
to correspond, was to comply with the Armies Remonstrance: The House adjourned
until Wednesday following.

Wednesday, December. 6. 1648. 23. The Armies treasonable violence upon the
House in s curing and secluding their Members.
The Saints militant being enraged that the House had recovered so much courage
and honesty as to Vote according to their Consciences, and neglect their wild
Remonstrance and threatening Declaration, (after some private conference in the
morning between Pride, Hewson and other Officers, and the Speaker in
Westminster Hall with the doors shut (they sent to the House of Commons a
Paper, requiring that the impeached Members and M. G. Brown, (who they belied
to have called in Hamilton) might be secured and brought to justice, and that
the 90. and odd Members who refused to Vote against the late Scottish
Engagement, and all that Voted for recalling the 4. Votes for Non-Addresses,
and Voted for a Treaty, and concurred in Yesterdaies Vote, [That the Kings
concessions were a ground for the H^^se to proceed to a Setlement:] may be
immediately suspend the H^u^e, and that all such faithful Members who are
inn^cent of (...) s would by Protestation acquit themselves from any (...) in
them that they may be distinguished: This is ^o subv^^t the foundation of
Parliaments, and appeal to the judgment of the many-headed multitude without
doors, and put all into Tum^lts. You see what kind of Parliament the Kingdom
has had ever since the Army Rebelled and Refused to Disband: a ^eer
^ree-Schoole, where Crommel is Head-school-master, Ir^^n Us^e^, and (that
cipher) Fairfax a Prepositer; surely these ^en are either the supreme Judges,
or the supreme Rebels and Tyrants of the Kingdom: This Paper was delivered in,
but they scorning to s^ay for an Answer, (by advice of their Independent
Grandees of the Junto) upon Wednesday morning, December. 6. 16^8. Sent two or
three Regiments of Horse and Foot to W^stminster, set strong Guards at the
Houses doors, the Lobby c^aires, and at every door leading toward the House,
admitting none but Parliament men to enter Westminster Hall, where Col. Pride,
Col. H^wson, and Hardres Waller (sometimes a Cavalier, then a violent
Presbyterian, and now a tyrannical ^ndependent) violently seized upon diverse
Knights and Burgesses upon the ^arliament stairs and elsewhere going to the
House, and forcibly carried them away Prisoners to the Queens Court without any
warrant showed, or cause assigned: and there set strict Guards upon them, Mr.
Edward Stephens and Col. Birche being in the House of Commons were called forth
by feigned Messages sent in by some Officers under other Men's Names, and there
violently pulled out of the door, though they called to the Speaker to take
notice of the force. The House sent the Sergeant of the ^ace to command the
Imprisoned Members attendance: but the Guards would not let them come. A second
time the Sergeant was sent with his Mace upon the same Errand, but Col. Pride
in the Lobby would not let him pass: which contempt was entered in the Journall
Book. Hereupon the House concluded not to proceed in business until their
Members were restored; and sent to the General about it: yet afterward when
the Officers had several days secured, secluded, and frighted away more of the
Members: and made the House a Conventicle of their own Complexion, then the
House prevaricated and deserted their Members: About three of the Clock
afternoon Hugh Peter's with a Sword by his side, (but not the Sword of Saint
Peter) came into the Queens Court to take a List of the Prisoners Names by
order from the General (as he said) where being demanded by what Authority
they were imprisoned? he answered, By the power of the Sword: Night being come,
the Imprisoned Members (41. in number) were conveyed away to a
Victualling-House called HELL, and there kept all Night without Beds, or any
fitting Accommodation, when it grew late some of them had offers made them to
go upon their Parolls to their own Lodgings, and to appear the next morning at
White Hall; but this was but a juggling trick to make them acknowledge the Lord
Fairfax Authority, and become voluntary prisoners upon their own engagement^
and was therefore refused. The next morning being Thursday, the Imprisoned
Members had warning given them to meet the General and his Council of War at
White Hall, whither they were guarded in Coaches, tired out with watching and
fasting: But the mechanic Council took so much state upon them, that after six
or seven hours attendance until dark night, and no admittance nor application
to them; they were led away from thence on foot with Guards of Musketeers like
Thieves and Rogues, and through the kennels like Col. Prides Dray-horses, to the
Swan and King's Head, two Innes in the Strand, and there distributed under
several Sentinels: The Soldiers making a stand with them sometimes half an
hour together in the snow and rain, until they had put their Guards into a
ma^ching posture; and reviling them, See the 2. part of Englands Chains
discovered; and the Hunting of the Foxes, etc.
that they were the men that had cousened the State of their money, and kept
back their Pay: Upon which scandalous provocation, some of them Answered; That
it was the Committee of the Army, and their own Officers that had cousened
them: which some of the Foot-souldiers then acknowledged. Besides the 41.
Imprisoned Members, the Officers standing several days with Lists of Names in
their hands at the Parliament-door, have turned back from the House, and denied
entrance unto above 160. other Members, besides 40. or 50. Members, who
voluntarily withdrew to avoid their violence, all whom they know to be Losers
by the War, and therefore desirous of a safe and wel-grounded peace; so that
they have made war against the majority of the House, (that is) against the
whole House, for, major pars obtinet rationem totius, by all our Laws and
Customs, The major part of the House is virtually the whole House; which is
Treason by their own Declarations and Remonstrance far higher than that
whereof they accuse the King; and for which they demand Justice against Him:
and the remaining faction of 40. or 50. engaged Members who now pass
unpresidented Acts of Parliament of the House of Commons (as they call them
(without the Lords, ought not to sit, Act, nor take upon them the style of a
House under so visible, actual, and horrid a force, both by the Laws of the
Land, and their own Ordinance, passed August 20. 1647, To null and void al^
Orders, Votes, and Acts passed under the Tumult of Apprentices, from July 26.
to the 6. August following; and yet the said Tumult ended the said July 26.
when it begun. See the said Ordinance herewith printed. The Army (who now
acknowledge no power but that of the Sword (as Major White long since foretold
at Putney) and whose principle it is, To break the Powers of the Earth to
pieces, as Will. Sedgewicke in his Justice upon the Army-Remonstrance, says:
And who (as Joh. Lilburne in his Plea for Common Right, p. 6. says) have by
these extraordinary proceedings overturned all the visible supreme Authority of
this Nation, now suffer only their own party of 40. or 50. Members to sit, and
do journey-work under them, who are Enemies to peace, and have got well by
fishing in troubled waters, and hope to get better: so that hardly a seventh or
eight part of the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs that ought to have Members
sitting, have any body to represent them, and therefore how they shall be bound
by the Votes and Acts of this fagge end, this Rump of a Parliament with corrupt
Maggots in it, I do not see. Friday, December. 8. a Message from the General was
brought to Sir Robert Harlow that he might go home to his house, giving his
engagement not to oppose the actings and proceedings of this present Parliament
and Army: The like was offered to diverse others: you see hereby what the
offense of these Imprisoned Members is, only a fear that they will defend the
fundamental Government, the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Land, the
Kings Person and Authority, and the being of Parliaments; against the
Tyrannical and Treasonable practices of the Army and their House of Commons.

The small remnant of the House of Commons sent sundry times to the General to
know why be Imprisoned their Members, 24. Reasons, proving that the remaining
faction or Iunto sitting under the force of the Army, were consenting to the
securing and secluding their Members, sect. 134. 135.
and humbly to beseech him to set them at liberty if he had nothing against
them: But all this was but prevarication and false shows: for, 1. Their base
and conditional way of demanding their Liberty [if he had nothing against
them] implies an acknowledgement of the Generals jurisdiction and conusance
over them, and an invitation of him to accuse them. 2. Their sitting and acting
under so brutish a force before their Members righted, or the honor of the
House vindicated, is a deserting and yielding up of their Members and honor.
3. Their Voting an approbation of the matter of the General Officers
scandalous and juggling Answer to their said Demands concerning the secured and
secluded Members (as afterward they did) without hearing what the said Members
could say for themselves, is clearly a fore-judging and b^traying them. 4.
Their late Votes, That no man shall peruse their Journall Book of Orders, etc.
without special leave: is purposely done to bar the said Members who cannot
make any perfect Answer in confutation of the Scandals cast upon them by the
General Councels printed Libel against them, without having recourse to the
said Book, to see what Votes passed for I^eland for the 200000 l. and other
matters. To say nothing how unusefull and unjust it is to keep the Records of
the House from the view and knowledge of any man. and yet to expect their
obedience to them. 5. Their exceeding strict and severe prohibiting the
printing any Books not Licenced, and employing Soldiers to Search all Printing
Houses daily, is done in order to bar the said accused Members from
publishing an Answer in their justification. 6. Their Summoning Mr. Pryn by
order to appear at the Commons Bar, knowing him to be still a Prisoner to the
Army; shows, that the Army and they serve each others turns against them. 7.
And Lastly, the Declaration of the present House of Commons, dated Jan. 15.
1648. is nothing but an echo of the said answer of the General Council,
against the said secured and secluded Members. They that are so wickedly
industrious to destroy these Gentlemen's credits, do this as a preparative to
destroy their Persons, and seize upon their Estates, for the maintenance of a
new War, (which they foresee their violent courses will bring upon them) and
for the farther enriching of themselves, and establishing their Tyranny, which
they miscall, The Liberty of the People. This violent purge wrought so strongly
upon the House, and brought it to that weakness, that ever since it is eleven
or twelve of the clock before they can get forty Members together to make an
House, of which number they sometimes fail: One time the Members would have had
the Speaker go on upon businesses with a less number than forty, but he knowing
all so done to be illegal and void, refused; and yet (to piece up the House)
they permit Mr. Blagrave, Mr Frye, and Humphry Edwards to sit as Members,
notwithstanding their Elections are Voted void by the Committee of Elections;
and one day an Officer of the Army having taken some Members going to the
House, and secured them in the Tobacco Room, under Guard: The Speaker not being
able to muster enough to make a House, was fain to send to the said Officer, to
lend him his said Prisoners to make up a Free Parliament: This disgrace put
upon the Imprisoned Members is purposely intended as an Invitation to all their
Enemies to come in and accuse them; nay, it can be proved that means has been
used to suborn Witnesses against them: besides which, the Faction have made a
strict Inquisition into their lives and conversations, and have hitherto met
with nothing.

25. The day after the House purged, in comes Dr. Cromwell and Henry Martin his
Apothecary.
Thus the House being thoroughly purged, the next day in comes the Dr. O. Cromwell
out of the Country, bringing in under his Protection that sanctified Member
Henry Martin, who had spent much time in plundering the Country, had often
baffled the House, and disobeyed many of their Orders; sufficient to have made
an honest man a Malignant liable to Sequestration: But great is the privilege
of the Saints. It fortuned that day the case of the secured Members was
reported to the House, which Harry interrupting, desired them to take into
consideration the deserts of the Lieutenant General; which with all slavish
diligence was presently done. And the Speaker moved, that to morrow might be a
day of Humiliation to be kept in the House, to humble the Spirits of the Godly,
much overleavened with the Scottish Victory. That you may the better understand
how far they mean to be humbled, Hugh Peter's the Pulpit-Buffon was one of
their Chaplains, who in stead of delivering the Oracles of God, delivered the
Oracles of the Council of War to them, talking obscurely of Accommodation
and Moderation, and advising them to adjourn till Monday or Tuesday (I think)
that the Army might cut out work for these Journey-men of theirs; and might
work their wills upon the City in the mean time, when no House should be
sitting for the Citizens to address their Complaints to; for in the interim
they Garrisoned Black Friars, and S. Paul's, reforming it, from the Church of
God, to a Den of Thieves, Stable of Horses, and Brothell of Whores, and Robbed
diverse Halls in London of vast sums of money by the prerogative royal of the
Saints.

The 11. day of December. 1648. 26 A declaration of the secured and secluded
Members, against the violence of the Army.
the said secured Members published a printed Paper, as follows: A solemn
Protestation of the imprisoned and secluded Members of the Commons House:
Against the horrid force and violence of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, on Wednesday and Thursday last, the 6. and 7. of December. 1648.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament,
(above one hundred in number) forcibly seized upon, violently kept out of the
House by the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under Thomas Lord Fairfax,
coming thither to discharge our duties on Wednesday and Thursday last, being
the 6. and 7. of this instant December; do hereby, in our Names, and in the
Names if the respective Counties, Cities, and Buroughs for which we serve, and
of all the Commons of England, solemnly protest and declare to the whole
Kingdom, That this execrable force and open violence upon our Persons, and the
whole House of Commons, by the Officers and Army under their command, in
marching up against their command, and placing strong armed Guards of Horse and
Foot upon them, without and against their Order, is the highest and most
detestable force and breach of Privilege and Freedom ever offered to any
Parliament of England; and that all Acts, Ordinances, Votes and proceedings of
the said House made since the 6. of December. aforesaid, or hereafter to be made
during our restraint and forcille seclusion from the House, and the continuance
of the Armies force upon it, are no way obligatorie, but void and null to all
intents and purposes: And that all Contrivers of, Actors in, and Assistants to
this unparalled force and treasonable armed violence, are open Enemies to,
and professed Subverters of the Privileges, Rights, and Freedom of Parliament,
and Disturbers of the pace and settlement of the Kingdom; and ought to be
proceeded against as such: and that all Members of Parliament, and Commoners of
England, by their solemn Covenant and duty, under pain of deepest perjurie
and eternal infamy, are obliged unanimouslie to oppose and endeavor to their
utmost power to bring them to exemplarie and condign punishment for this
transcendent offense, tending to the dissolution of the present, and subversion
of all future Parliaments, and of the fundamental Government and Laws of this
Realm.

All which we held it our duties to declare and publish to the world, for fear
our stupid silence should give any tacit consent or approbation to this most
detestable crime, and make us guilty of betraying the Privileges, Freedom,
and Honor of this Parliament, to our perpatuall reproach, and the prejudice of
all succeeding Parliaments.

Dated at Westminster, December. 11. 1648.


27. The tame Lords and insolent Commons pass and print a Declaration against
the said Declaration.
The said solemn Protestation of the secured Members being complained of, was
sufficiently barked at in the House of Commons; and the Lords fell a barking at
it too for company: and at last (that they might confute it with Authority
instead of Reason) both Houses passed this following declaration against it:
The Declaration of the Lords and Commons: Against the first Declaration of the
secured and secluded Members.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their consideration
a printed Paper, entitled [A solemn Protestation of the Imprisoned and
secluded Members, etc.] wherein amongst other things, it is Declared, That all
Acts, Ordinances, Votes, and proceedings of the House of Commons, made since
the 6. of this instant December. or hereafter to be made during their restraint
and forcible seclusion from the House, The present visible Government is the
Power of the Sword in the hands of Rebels. The fundamental Government of this
Kingdom is destroyed by the Faction remaining in the House of Commons, by their
Acts, For abolishing Kingly Government, The House of Peers, their putting down
Trials by Jury of 12. men, and setting up illegal High Courts of Justice, their
usurping the Supreme Authority, their m^k^ng Treason an Arbitrary crime, their
erecting a Council of State, o^, Hogens mogens, forty Tyrants in lieu of one
King, their altering the style of Writs and Legal Proceedings, etc. Sentence
given before any person accused, or heard to speak for himself. Oh the brutish
understanding of men whose sins and fears have intoxicated their wits!
and the continuance of the Armies force upon it, are no way obligatory, but
void and null to all intents and purposes: The said Lords and Commons do
thereupon judge and declare, the said printed Paper to be false, scandalous,
and seditious, and tending to destroy the visible and fundamental Government of
this Kingdom: And do therefore order and ordain the said printed Paper to be
suppressed, and that all persons whatsoever that have had any hand in, or given
consent unto the contriving, framing, printing or publishing thereof, shall be
adjudged, and hereby are adjudged incapable to bear any Office, or have any
place of trust or authority in this Kingdom, or to sit as Members of either
House of Parliament. And do further order and ordain, That every Member of
either House respectively now absent, upon his first coming to sit in that
House whereof he is a Member, for the manifestation of his innocence, shall
disavow and disclaim his having any hand in, or given consent unto the
contriving, framing, printing or publishing of the said paper, or the matter
therein contained.



The 12. and 13. Decem^er, 28. The Conventicle of Commons repeat ex tempore in
a thin House under a force; the Votes deliberately passed in a full and free
House.
the Commons (that they might purge their Journal Books of all State-Heresies,
as well as their House of all State-Hereticks) voted this Index expurgatorius,
which in their own canting language I here present to you.

1. Resolved etc. That the Vote of this House, Jan. 3. 1647. for revoking the
Order, Sept. 9. 1647. for suspending Commissary Lion^l Copley from being a
Member of this House; is of dangerous consequence, and tending to the
destruction of the justice and peace of the Kingdom, and is hereby repealed.
The like for the rest of the Impeached Members, mutatis mutandis.

2. Resolved, etc. That the Vote of the House, June 30. 1648. whereby this
House did concur with the Lords (for opening of a way to the Treaty with His
Majesty for a safe and well-grounded Peace) That the Votes. Jan. 3. 1647.
forbidding all Addresses to be made to, or from the King, be taken off; was
highly dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and apparently
destructive to the good of the kingdom, (sure they meant the kingdom of the
Saints.) They likewise by four several Votes, revived the said 4. Votes, Jan.
3. for no Addresses, in terminis.

3. Resolved, etc. That the Vote, July 28. 1648. That a Treaty be bad in the
Isle of Wight with the King in person by a Committee appointed by both Houses,
upon the Propositions presented to him at Hampton Court; was highly
dishonorable, and apparently destructive to the good of the kingdom. The
House adjourned.
Good Boys, they can say their Lessons well, and apace too, when the Army
whips them on; they will shortly have a jubilee of play-days for their pains,
40 or 50 new Lights snuffed by the Council of War, can better discover what is
dishonorable, and apparently destructive to their own kingdom, then 340. or
244 could do at other times: If you ask what Debates they had? they could have
none, being now freed from the contradiction of sinners: being all Birds of a
feather, taught the same tune by the same Masters, and singing in the same cage.

29. A Protest to be entered against the Votes, That the Kings Grants were a
ground for a settlement; a Touchstone of I. Gourdons. See the Order, Dec. 5.
1648.
Yet the unanimous recalling those Votes was not thought (by those that think
one thing and say another) a sufficient Test all were confidently for them,
that voted with them; wherefore godly John Gourdon (a Fellow that spits venom
as naturally as a Toad) moved, That a Protestation might suddenly be drawn up,
and every Member to set his hand to it, in detestation of those repealed Votes.
A Committee was appointed accordingly. The 14 December. the said newfound
Shiboleth was brought in by Gourdon, which caused diverse that were not yet mad
enough for Bedlam to forbear the House, or rather Conventicle.

December. 14. They repealed the Ordinance lately passed (after mature debate)
for settling the Countie-Militias of the Kingdom, 30. The Militia of the
Counties new settled in Independent hands.
because there were some Presbyterians in it not well-affected to the Army; and
in that new sense, Malignants: And ordered, that a new Ordinance, with a List
of new Names, of Saints Militant (sounding like a Jewish pedigree) be brought
in; for (through the indiscretion of the Presbyterians) the Independents have
had the custody of our Purses a long time, and now must keep our Swords too,
and then, Stand and deliver, will be the only Law of the Land.

About this time Major General Brown, one of the Sheriffs of London, was
fetched out of the City by a Party of Horse, 31. Sheriff Brown carried away out
of the City Prisoner to S. James's.
and carried before the mechanic Council of War at Whitehall, (although a
Member of Parliam^nt, and consequently one of their Masters) where he told
them, He knew they had nothing to charge him withal, but his honest endeavors
to preserve His Majesty, and His Posterity, together with the Parliament, City,
and Kingdom, with the Laws and Government thereof from being rooted up by
them, and that he feared them not. Col. Hewson (the one-eyed Cobbler) was so
saw^y as to tell him, He was too peremptory; at last they committed him
Prisoner to S. James's.

And that he might not want company, 32. Sir Will. Waller, etc. removed to S.
James's.
they sent a Warrant to Capt. Lawrence Marshal General, to remove Sir Will.
Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, Major Genesis Massey, and Commissary General Copley
from the Kings Head to him.

The Marshal showing them the Warrant, 33. They protest against the Generals
Authority.
they protested against the Authority, and offered the Protest to the Marshal
in writing, desiring him to show it to the General; which he refusing to
receive, Sir Will. Waller desired all the company to witness what Protestation
they did make in behalf of themselves, and all the Freeborn people of England,
against the violent and illegal encroachments of the General and Council of
War, against the Laws and Liberties, and read it aloud, as follows: A
Declaration of the taking away of Sir Will. Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, Major
Gen: Massey, and Colonel Copley, Members of the House of Commons, from the
Kings Head in the Strand to S. James's: Together with their Protestation read
at their removal: With a Copy of the L. Generals Order for the same. Tuesday,
December. 12. 1648.
Marshal Laurence came and acquainted Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy,
Maj. Genesis Massey, and M. Lionel Copley, Members of the House of Commons, That
he had Orders from the Lord General and Council of the Army, to remove them
from the other Prisoners to S. James's: They replied to him, That they desired
to see his Orders: The Marshal answered, They were only verbal; but the
Gentlemen insisting to see a Warrant for their remove; the Marshal went to the
General, and from him about six a clock brought an Order; a true Copy of which
follows, Viz.

YOu are upon sight hereof, to remove Sir Will. Waller, Sir John Clotworthy,
Major General Massey, and Colonel Copley, from the Kings Head Inn (where they
are now in Custody) to S. James's: And for so doing, this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my hand, December. 12. 1648. T. Fairfax.

To Marshal General Lawrence.


This Order being showed unto the foresaid Gentlemen, Sir Will. Waller produced
a Paper, desiring that the same might be presented to the General; which
Marshal Lawrence refused to receive: Upon which, the said Sir William Waller,
and the other three Gentlemen, desired the said Marshal and all the Gentlemen
there present, to attend and witness to that Protestation, which they did there
make in behalf of themselves, and all the Commons and Freeborn Subjects of
England, so with a distinct and audible voice read their Protestation, as
follows: WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, being Members of the House
of Commons, and Freemen of England, do hereby declare and protest before God,
Angels, and Men, That the General and Officers of the Army, being raised by
the Authority of Parliament, and for defense and maintenance of the
privileges thereof, have not, or ought to have any power or jurisdiction to
apprehend, secure, detein, imprison, or remove our persons from place to place
by any color or Authority whatsoever; nor yet to question or try us, or any
of us by Martial Law, or otherwise, for any offense or crime whatsoever, which
can or shall be objected against us: And that the present Imprisonment and
removal of our persons is a high violation of the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, and of the Fundamental Laws of the Land, and a higher usurpation
and exercise of an Arbitrary and unlawful power, then has been heretofore
pretended to, or attempted by this or any King or other power whatsoever within
this Realm; notwithstanding which, We and every of us do Declare our
readiness to submit our selves to the Legal trial of a Free Parliament, for
any crime or misdemeanour that can, or shall be objected against us.

At the King's Head in the Strand. In witness whereof, we have hereto
subscribed our Names the 12. of December, 1648. William Waller, Edward Massey,
John Clotworthy, Lionell Copley.




About this time, Mr. Pelham, Mr. Lane, Mr. Vaughan, 34. Four secured Members
discha^ged.
Sir Simon Dewes, (Members secured) were set at liberty without any engagement,
although at first it was demanded they should engage not to attempt any thing
against the present actings of this Parliament and Army; which they refused.

About December. 11. 1648. 35. The Agreement of the People published and Answered.
was delivered into the world a monstrous Beggars Brat, called [The Agreement
of the People.] It is very judiciously Answered by Mr. William Ashurst; all the
Contents thereof is in the Remonstrance of the Army. 20. Nov. 1648. whereof I
have spoken already.

1. It proposes, That the People (that is, some small part of the People, the
Army and their faction) without any color of Law or Right should agree
together to take away finally the present Government by King, Lords, and
Commons, which the Kings Party heretofore charged upon the Parliament as their
Design for which they fought, whereupon, the Parliament to vindicate
themselves, published many Declarations, and passed sundry Votes, That they
would not alter the Government by King, Lords, and Commons; it also takes away
the legal right from Buroughs to choose members of Parliament; this admitted,
they may as well conspire to take away any Law, or any man's Life or Estate, by
which rule we could enjoy nothing but as the will of any number of men that
shall call themselves The People. And upon the same ground that those that
shall subscribe this Agreement may call themselves the People, may those that
shall refuse to subscribe call themselves the People, and upon far better
grounds, as being far the more numerous, and standing for defense of those
ancient Laws, which do constitute the People and Commonwealth of England,
which will breed infinite confusions and divisions: and what those that call
themselves the People now agree to, they may alter upon the next change of
humor or interest.

2. The inconveniences of the present Government have not yet been plainly
discovered, nor no Trial has been made by the present known legal power of
England; whether those inconveniences may not be removed without subverting the
present Government, and introducing so total a change as will be very
dangerous and grievous to all sorts and conditions of men.

3. In the Protestation, May 5. 1641. and the Covenant, September. 27. 1643. we
are bound to defend Parliaments, and to oppose and bring to punishment all such
as shall endeavor the subversion of Parliaments, which this Agreement clearly
does.

4. This Agreement encroacheth desperately upon the liberty of the People of
England, in the Election of this Representative; depriving them that have
constantly adhered to this Parliament as well as the Kings Party (if they cannot
in conscience subscribe it) from Electing, or being Elected; yet they shall
have Laws and Taxes imposed upon them by Subscribers, who are the least, and
the least considerable party of the Kingdom, and upon whom they confer no
trust; which is to disfranchise the Nonsubscribers, and reduce them to the
condition of Conquered Slaves. It is a known Maxim in Law, Quod omnes tangit,
ab omnibus tractaeni debet, what concerns all men must be debated and agreed
to by all men, either personally or representatively.

5. It will raise factions and feuds between the Subscribers and
Non-subscribers of the Parliament party.

6. It takes away Magistracy and Government, not only by placing such a
Supreme power over them as is disputable; nay, apparently illegal: But by
making the heady multitude (the People) supreme Judges over the said
Representative: for although it inflicts the penalty of death upon the
Resisters of their Orders; yet is with this salvo, except such Representative
shall expressly violate this Agreement, which makes every man or number of men
that shall get power into their hands Judges of it; nor is there any other
Judge designed: and (if there were) who shall judge that Judge? and sic in
infinitum, the legal supreme Trust of all public interests being taken away,
our vagabond thoughts wander in a circle, not knowing where to repose our
trust, all Judges, all Councels may err, but the rascal multitude are the very
sink of errors and corruptions. If therefore the Supreme, the Representative
have so unstable an authority, what shall the subordinate Magistrate acting
under them have?

7. It smells so much of the Jesuit, that it tolerateth Popery in private
Houses; contrary to the known Laws of the Land: Popery (like the old Serpent)
if it once get in the head, will soon insinuate the whole body, being so well
backed by Potent Princes and Councels from beyond Sea. And truly I know not
what to say against Popery, where Heresy, Schism, Atheism, and Blasphemy
are openly tolerated, and exempted from the power of the civil Magistrate, as
in this Agreement.

8. It will lose Ireland; the managing of the War there being legally in this
Parliament by Act passed, not in this newfangled Representative.

9. It divides us from Scotland.

10. It destroys the Cause for which the Parliament so often Declared, Voted,
Protested and Covenanted that they fought, viz. Defense of Parliaments,
Religion, Laws and Liberties, and bestows the Cause upon the King, as if He
only (from the beginning) had fought for them: which all men have reason to
believe, when they shall see the Parliament make such ill use of their Victory,
as to root them all up. And this and all other Parliament-Armies were
Commissioned to preserve this Parliament; by this Authority they have their Pay
and Indemnity, without which they are Thieves, Rebels, and Murderers.

11. It demands, that there be no Lawyers nor Laws, but new Rules in English
to be made from time to time by the new Representative, who are to be chosen
and trusted only by a small faction of Subscribers, (as has been said)
according to which justice shall be administered, not by Mayors, Sheriffs,
Justices of the peace, Officers always ready, but by hundred Courts, who are
to supply the room of all the Judges and Lawyers of the Kingdom: and all this
to lie in the breasts of 12. Men in every Hundred (of the Tribe of the Godly be
sure) who peradventure can neither write nor read, nor have responsible Estates
to satisfy wrongs done: these shall do justice by providence and revelation,

12. It destroys all great and public Interests (and therefore cannot
stand) Kings, Lords, Soldiers, Magistrates, Parliaments, Lawyers, Ministers,
who will oppose it, because it confounds and destroys Religion, and depriveth
the Ministry of its lot, Tithes: stopping their mouths with famine, purposely
to cast them off: and generally all men of quality and discretion will
withstand it; because it gives no security for enjoyment of liberty and
property, nor for increase of learning, civility, and piety; who then are left
to own and subscribe it but desperate forlorn Persons, who, because they
cannot bring their actions under the protection of our present Laws and
Government, will bring the Laws and Government to their own corrupt wills and
interests, and therefore will sign this Agreement: no obedience being given to
this Representative, but upon condition (that they kept this Agreement) and
their being no other Judges of their keeping it but the Subscribers; who in the
result of all, has the Law in their own Wills.

36. This Agreement of the People was condemned by the House of Commons. 9.
Nov. 1647.
This Agreement of the People is the same which was subscribed by 9. Regiments
of Horse, and 7. of Foot, and presented with a Petition to the House of
Commons, November. 5. 1647, by the Agitators, Gifforde the Jesuit being then in
the Lobby with them, and very active therein. Upon reading and debate hereof
the House then declared their judgments against it, by passing these Votes:
Die Martis, 9. Nov. 1647.
A Paper directed to the Supreme Authority of the Nation the Commons in
Parliament assembled, The just and earnest Petition of those whose Names are
subscribed, in behalf of themselves and all the Freeborn people of England:
Together with a Paper annexed, entitled, An Agreement of the people for
present and future peace, upon grounds of Common Right, avowed. How these
Papers come now to be owned, those that oppose them violenrly secured by the
Army, by the connivance (at least) of the dregs of the House now sitting, let
the Saints now voting in the House examine their pockets, for (I am confident)
their consciences had no hand in the business.

Resolved, etc. That the matters contained in these Papers, are destructive to
the beings of Parliaments, and to the fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That a Letter should be sent to the General, and those Papers
enclosed; together with the Vote of this House upon them: and that he be
desired to examine the proceedings of this business in the Army, and return
an Account thereof to this House.



The General and Council of War in pursuance of this Vote, 37. The said
Agreement damned by the General and Council of War, and a Soldier shot by
sentence for promoting it.
condemned one of the Agitators who promoted it, and shot him to death at Ware
(you see what it is to do a thing unseasonably, this Design of the Army and
their Party was not yet ripe) wherewith they acquainted the House; yet they
kept in the same fire in the City still, where some of their Confederates, 23.
of the same Novem. sent the same Agreement, etc. enclosed in a Letter, with a
Petition into the House of Commons: whereupon the House (giving thanks to the
General for the execution done at Ware, and desiring him to examine that
business to the bottom) unanimously passed these Votes: Die Martis, 23. Nov.
1647.
A Petition directed to the Supreme Authority of England, 38. The said
Agreement condemned by the House a second time. 23. Nov. 1647.
the Commons in Parliament assembled, and entitled, The humble Petition of
many Freeborn People of England, sent in a Letter directed to Mr. Speaker,
and opened by a Committee thereunto appointed, was read the first and second
time.

Resolved, etc. That this Petition is a seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
People, formerly adjudged by this House to be destructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom, etc.

Resolved, etc. That Tho. Prince, Cheese-monger, and Sam. Chidley, be forthwith
committed Prisoners to the Prison of the Gate House, there to remain Prisoners
during the pleasure of this House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
People, formerly adjudged by this House destructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That Jeremy Ives, Tho. Tailor, and Will. Larner, be forthwith
committed Prisoners to the Prison at Newgate, etc. as last aforesaid, in
Terminis.

Afterward by an Ordinance, December. 17. 1647. for Electing Common-Councel-men,
and other Officers in London, they expressly ordained, That no Person who has
contrived, abetted, persuaded, or entered into that engagement, entitled, [The
Agreement of the People,] declared to be destructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom; be elected, chosen, or
put into the Office of the Lord Major of the City of London, Sheriff,
Alderman, Deputy of a Ward, or Common-Councel-man of the said City, or shall
have any voice in the election of any such Officers, for the space of one whole
year; and be incapable of any of the said Places: yet now these petty Fellows
keep the whole City in awe.



39. Yet this Agreement since inserted into the Remonstrance of the Army, owned
by the General and Council of War; and Nov. 20. 1648. obtruded upon the
House.
These multiplied Votes and Ordinance, laid this Agreement of the People asleep
until the beginning of November, 1648. when (to hinder the peace of this
Kingdom, and relief of Ireland) the Jesuits and Agitators prosecuted it
again in the Army, and inserted it again verbatim in the Remonstrance of the
Army, November. 20. 1648. to break off the Treaty with the King, bring him to
capital punishment, and cast the odium of all upon the Parliament: And the
General and his Council of Officers (though they had formerly shot a Soldier
to death for prosecuting it) unanimously approved it at Saint Albons, November
16. 1648. and obtruded it upon the House the 20. November. and when they found
the House so resolute in the Treaty as to proceed, they first seized the Person
of the King, and carried Him to Hurst-Castle, as aforesaid; and when the House
at last closed up the Treaty with this Vote, That the Kings Answers to the
Propositions of both Houses were a ground for the Houses to proceed upon
toward a settlement: 40. Why they purged the House.
They seized upon 41. Members of Parliament, secured them, and villanously
treated them; secluded above 160. and frighted away at least 40. or 50. more,
leaving only their own Somerset House Junto of 40. or. 50. thriving Members
sitting to unvote in a thin House under a force, what had been voted in a full
and free House; To vote down the Kingly Office and House of Peers, to vote the
Supreme Authority to be in the People, and in the House of Commons as their
Representative, clean contrary to their three last recited Votes. To bring the
King to capital punishment, before a new invented, illegal, mixed Court,
(consisting of engaged persons) erected for that purpose, that has neither
foundation by Prescription nor Law, and to erect a Council or Committee of
States, out of their number (in the nature of Lords, States General, or Hogen
Mogens) with an unknown and therefore unlimited Authority, to continue in being
after the dissolution of this Parllament. So farewell Kings, Lords and Commons,
Religion, Laws and Liberties, and all Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestation and Covenant, made heretofore only to gull the People, and carry
on their design.

About 19. December. 41. Diverse Lords do homage to the General, and wave their
honors.
diverse Lords went to do homage to the General, to express their good
affections to him, and their concurrence with him for the Common good, and
their readiness to wave their privileges and Titles if they shall be found
burdensome to the liberty of the People, and had a gracious nod for their
pains.

About this time the Lords and Commons passed an Ordinance for electing
Common-Councel-men and Officers in London for the year following, to this
effect, 42. An Ordinance to curb the City in electing Officers.
That no Person that has been imprisoned or sequestered (rightfully or
wrongfully) or has assisted the King against the Parliament in the first or
second War, or has been aiding or assisting in bringing in the Scots Army to
invade this Kingdom, or did subscribe or abett the treasonable Engagement,
1647. or that did aid, assist, or abett the late Tumult within the Cities of
London and Westminster, or the Counties of Kent, Essex, Middlesex, or Surrey,
shall be elected, chosen, or put into the Office or Place of Lord Mayor of
London, Alderman, Aldermans Deputy, Common-Councel-man, or into any office or
place of trust within the City, for the year ensuing, or be capable to give
his voice for choosing any Person to any the Offices aforesaid; And that if any
Persons comprehend under the aforesaid exceptions being chosen, shall presume
to sit in the Court of Aldermen, Common Counsel, or execute any of the
aforesaid Offices, he shall forfeit 200. And all such Elections to be null and
void, the Lord Mayor to take order that this Ordinance be read at all
Elections, and punctually observed: and also to afford the liberty of the Pole,
it being required by any of the Electors present. But this Ordinance not giving
full satisfaction to the Zealots, Skippon stood up, Skippon moves for an
Addition to the said Ordinance.
and looking as demurely as if he meant to say Grace, he told the House, That
the late Ordinance was not sufficient to keep Malignants out of Office in
London, for Mr. Speaker (said he) It is not enough to exclude Delinquents, or
the Abettors of the late Insurrections, etc. for there are a more dangerous
sort of men amongst them: They which promoted the Treaty, and endeavored to
have the King brought to London, except these be made incapable of Authority,
it will be a great discouragement to the Godly party of the City. So an
additionall Ordinance to this end was ordered to be brought in; you fee to
endeavor peace and settlement, is accounted by these Saints militant a
sufficient crime to forfeit a man's Birthright.

43. The Members subscribe John Gourdons Protestation, sect. 29.
I formerly told you of John Gourdons motion, That all Members might subscribe a
Protestation against the Votes for a Treaty with the King in the Isle of Wight,
and especially against the Vote, 5. December. 1648. which declares, That His
Majesty's Answers to the Propositions of both Houses were a ground for the two
Houses to procceed to a setlement: and until such dissent or disapprovall to
forbear the House: This was done in obedience to the demands of the Army in
their Remonstrance presented 20. November. 1648. Sect. 23.
And although it be so clearly against the Orders and Privileges of
Parliament, that diverse members formerly (and some this Parliament) have bin
suspended the House, and committed to the Tower for offering it, because it
tends to breed factions and divisions in the House, and Tumults without doors;
yet every request from an Armed man is a Command and must be obeyed.

The List of the Names of these new Protestants follows, and (it is hoped)
they will in time give better Reasons then (the power of the Sword) for it, 20.
December 1648. subscribed, The Lord Lysle, Col. Boswel, Io. Gourdon, Lord Gray,
Peregrine Pelham, Col. Jones, Col. Temple, Col. Ven, Sir Tho. Malevourer, Sir
Thomas Wroth, Sir Jo. Bourcher, Col. Peter Temple, Humphry Edwards, (who
waited on the King to the House when he demanded the 5. Members, and his
Election is adjudged void by a Committee) Mr. Tho. Chaloner, Sir Gregory
Norton, (who gave a man 20 l. to wait on the King in his place as Pensioner
when He demanded the 5. Members) Michael Oldsworth, Augustine Garland, Sir Jo.
Danvers, Mr. Dove, Mr. Henry Smith, Mr. Frye, (whose Election is voted void)
Mr. Searle, Nich. Love, John Lysle, Coll. Rigby, Cornelius Holland, Coll.
Ludlow, Greg. Clement, Coll. Purefoy, Coll. Stapeley, Mr. Dunch, Mr. Cawley,
Coll. Downs, Jo. Carey, Jo. Blackiston, Tho. Scot, December. 22. Coll.
Hutchinson, Sir Hen. Mildnay, Sir James Harrington, December. 25. Col. Edward
Harvey, Alderman Pennington, Alderman Atkins, Dan. Blagrave (voted out of the
House) Coll. Moore, Coll Millington, Mr. Prideaux, Roger Hill the little
Lawyer, Dennis Bond, Coll. Harrington, Master Hodges, Master Valentine.

Sixteen of the imprisoned Members were about this time sent for by the
General; when they came, out came Ireton, 44. Sixteen imprisoned Members
discharged without engagement.
and finding Mr. Pryn amongst them, he chid the Martial for bringing him, and
commanded him to be taken away; but Mr. Pryn refusing to depart, Ireton
commanded him to be thrust out by head and shoulders: whereupon Mr. Pryn openly
protested, That the Army endeavored utterly to subvert the fundamental Laws
of the Land, and Privilege of Parliament. That they had no power over him, nor
any Member of Parliament. That their late force acted upon them, and their
proceedings was illegal, and traitorous, That all men were bound to bring them
to condign punishment as Rebels and Traitors to their God, their King, Country
and Parliament. So Mr. Pryn was removed by the Martial, and Ireton went in once
more to consult the Oracle, and at last came out again to the Gent: telling
them, It was the Generals pleasure they should be all released, attempting
nothing against the actings of this present Parliament and Army, but (said the
insolent fellow) let that be at your peril: so the Gentlemen expressing that
they would give no engagement, were released without any.

The 22. December. both Juntoes of four Lords, 45. A mock-Fast kept by the two
Houses, and Hugh Peter's Comic Sermon.
and twenty Commons, kept a mock-fast at Saint Margarets, Westminster; where
Hugh Peter's the Pulpit-Buffon, acted a Sermon before them; the subject of his
Sermon was, Moses leading the Israelites out of Egypt, which he applied to the
Leaders of this Army, whose design is to lead the people out of Egyptian
bondage: But how must this be done? that is not yet revealed unto me (quoth
Hugh) and then covering his eyes with his hands, and laying down his head on
the cushion, until the People falling into a laughter, awakened him: He
started up, and cried out, Now I have it by Revelation, now I shall tell you;
This Army must root up Monarchy, not only here, but in France and other
Kingdoms round about; this is to bring you out of Egypt: this Army is that
corner stone cut cut of the Mountain, which must dash the powers of the earth
to pieces. But it is objected, The way we walk, in is without president; what
think you of the Virgin Mary? was there ever any president before, that a Woman
should conceive a Child without the company of a Man? this is an Age to make
examples and presidents in. 46. The Council of War vote a Toleration of all
Religions.


December. 25. The Council of War voted a Tolleration of all Religions: you see
they vote like Statesmen, as well as their Parliament.

47. The Common Council petition against Skippons additionall Ordinance in vain
About this time, a Committee of Common-Councel-men came complainning to the
House of Skippons additionall Ordinance, That none should Elect, or be Elected,
or execute the place of Lord Mayor, Alderman, Aldermans Deputy,
Common-Councel-man, etc. that had signed the Petition for a Personal Treaty,
etc. because they found the City generally engaged in the said Petition: so
that they could not find men enough to Elect, or be Elected: Wherefore it was
referred to a Committee to think of a remedy worse than the disease, as it
proved afterward. You see the petitioning for a Personal Treaty was so
universal and public that it could not be carried on by any private design
in Conventicles and corners; as are all the bloody Petitions for justice,
justice against capital Delinquents, and the most High, which being penned and
solicited by the Army, or sectary Committee Men, 48. Somersetshire encouraged
by the House to associate all the well-affected, i. e. all the Anarchists and
Cheaters.
and subscribed and prosecuted by some few beggarly Schismatics without Cloaks
in the Names of whole Counties, (whom they had the impudence to belie) were
entertained in state; and they, and that well-affected County (though they
abhorred the villainy) thanked for their pains.

* 25. December. The House voted a Letter to be sent by way of encouragement to
the County of Somerset; to go on with settling their association with the
well-affected, and forces of the Counties adjacent; this is to associate and
Arm all the Schismatics, Committee Men, guilty and desperate Persons,
Antimonarchists, and Anarchists, against all the peaceable and honest men of
the Kingdom.

26. December. Mr. Pryn sent a Letter to the General, 49. Mr. Pryns Letter to the
General, demanding his liberty.
demanding his liberty; and seconded it with a Declaration, as follows:

Mr. Pryn's Demand of his Liberty to the General, December. 26. 1648. with his
Answer thereto. And his Declaration and Protestation thereupon.
For the Honorable Lord Fairfax, General of the present Army.
THese are to acquaint your Lordship, 50. Mr. Pryns Declaration seconding his
said Letter.
That I being a Member of the Commons House of Parliament, a Freeman of
England, a great Sufferer for, and an Assertor of the Subjects Liberties
against all Regal and Prelatical tyranny, and no way subject to your own, your
Council of Wars, or Officers military power or jurisdiction, going to the
House to discharge my duty on the 6, of this instant December, was on the
stairs next the Commons House door, forcibly kept back, entering the House,
seized on, and carried away thence, (without any pretext of Lawful Authority
thereto assigned) by Colonel Pride, and other Officers and Soldiers of the Army
under your Command. And notwithstanding the Houses demand of my enlargement
both by their Sergeant and otherwise; ever since unjustly detained under your
Marshals custody, and tossed from place to place, contrary to the known
Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and fundamental Laws of
the Land, which you are engaged to maintain against all violation. And
therefore do hereby demand from your Lordship my present enlargement, and just
liberty, with your Answer hereunto.

From the King's Head in the Strand, December. 26. 1648. William Pryn.


This was delivered to the Generals own hands at his House in Queen Street,
about three of the clock, the same day it bears date; by Doctor Bastwijcke:
Who returned this Answer by him, upon the reading thereof:

THat he knew not but Mr. Pryn was already released, and that he would send to
his Officers to know what they had against him.

Who it seems act all things without his privity, and steer all the Armies
present counsels and designs according to their absolute wills.

The Public Declaration and Protestation of William Pryn of Lincolnes Inn,
Esquire; Against his present Restraint, and the present destructive Councels,
and Jesuiticall proceedings of the General, Officers, and Army.
I William Pryn, a Member of the House of Commons, and Freeman of England, who
have formerly suffered 8. years Imprisonment (four of them close, three in
exile) three Pillories, the loss of my Ears, Calling, Estate, for the
vindicating of the Subjects just Rights and Liberties against the arbitrary
tyranny and injustice of King and Prelates, and defense of the Protestant
Religion here established; spent most of my strength and studies in asserting
the Peoples just freedom, and the power and privileges of Parliament, against
all Opposers, and never received one farthing (by way of damages, gift, or
recompense) or the smallest benefit or preferment whatsoever, for all my
sufferings and public services; Do here solemnly declare before the most just
and righteous God of Heaven and Earth (the Searcher of all hearts) the whole
Kingdom, English Nation, and the World, that having according to the best of
my skill and judgment faithfully discharged my trust and duty in the Commons
House, upon real grounds of Religion, Conscience, Justice, Law, prudence and
right reason, for the speedy and effectual setlement of the peace and safety of
our three distracted, bleeding, dying Kingdoms, on Monday, Dec. 4. I was on
Wednesday morning following (the 6 of this instant) going to the House to
discharoe my duty, on the Parliament stairs next the Commons door, forcibly
seized upon by Col. Pride, Sir Hardress Waller, and other Officers of the Army
(who had then beset the House with strong Guards, and whole Reg: of Horse and
Foot) haled violently thence into Queens Court, notwithstanding my
Protestation of breach of privilege, both as a Member and a Freeman, by a
mere usurped tyrannical power, without any lawful Authority, or cause
assigned; and there forceibly detained Prisoner (with other Members there
restrained by them) notwithstanding the Houses double demand of my present
enlargement to attend its service by the Sergeant, and that night (contrary to
faith and promise) carried Prisoner to Hell, and there shut up all night, (with
40. other Members) without any lodging or any other accommodations, contrary to
the known Privileges of Parl. the fundamental Laws of the Realm, and Liberty
of the subject; which both Houses, the 3. Kingdoms, the General with all
Officers and Soldiers of the Army, are by solemn Covenant and duty obliged
inviolably to maintain. Since which I have, without any lawful power or
authority bin removed and kept prisoner in several places, put to great
expenses, debarred the liberty of my person, calling; and denied that hereditary
freedom which belongs to me of right, both as a Freeman, a Member, an eminent
sufferer for the public, and a Christian, by these who have not the least
shadow of authority or justice to restrain me, and never yet objected the least
cause for this my unjust restraint.

I do therefore hereby publicly protest against all these their proceedings, as
the highest usurpation of an arbitrary and tyrannical power, the greatest
breach of faith, trust, Covenant, privileges of Parl. and most dangerous
encroachment on the Subjects liberties and Laws of the Land, ever practiced in
this Kingdom by any King or Tyrant, especially by pretended Saints, who hold
forth nothing but justice, righteousness, liberty of conscience, and public
freedom in all their Remonstrances; whils they are triumphantly trampling them
all under their armed iron feet. And do further herby appeal to, and summon
them, before all the Tribunals and powers in heaven and earth for exemplary
justice against them, who cry out so much for it against others less
tyrannical, oppressive, unjust, and fedifragus to God and men than themselves.
And do moreover remonstrat, that all their present exorbitant actings against
the King Parl. present Government, and their new modled representative, are
nothing else but the designs and projects of Jesuits, Popish Priests and
Recusants; (who bear chief sway in their Councels (to destroy and subvert our
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Government, Magistracy, Ministry, the present and
all future Parl. the King, his Posterity, and our 3. Kingdoms, yea, the
General, Officers, and Army themselves, and that with speedy and inevitable
certaint^; to betray them all to our foreign Popish Enemies; and give a just
occasion to the Prince and Duke, now in the Papists power, to alter their
Religion, and engage them, and all foreign Princes and Estates to exert all
their power to suppress and extirpate the Protestant Religion and Professors
of it through all the world, which these unchristian, scandalous, treacherous,
rebellious, tyrannical, Jesuitical, disloyal, bloody present Councels and
exorbitances of this Army of Saints, so much pretending to piety and justice,
have so deeply wounded, scandalized, and rendered detestable to all pious,
carnal and moral men of all conditions. All which I am, and shall always be
ready to make good before God, Angels, Men, and our whole three Kingdoms in a
free and full Parliament, upon all just occasions? and seal the truth of it
with the last drop of my dearest blood.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my Name: at the Sign of the
King's Head in the Strand, December. 26. 1648. William Pryn.

51. The Council of War forbid all state and ceremony to the King. From Dec.
25. to 1. January, Number. 283.
27. December. The Council of War (who manage the business in relation to the
King, says the Diurnal,) ordered, That all state and ceremony should be
forborne to the King, and his Attendants lessened, to mortify him by degrees,
and work Him to their desires.

When it was first moved in the House of Commons to proceed capitally against
the King; 52. Cromwels Sp. in the Ho. when it was first propounded to try the
King.
Cromwell stood up and told them, That if any man moved this upon d^signe, he
should think him the greatest Traitor in the world; but since providence and
necessity had cast them upon it, he should pray God to bless their Councels,
though he were not provided on the sudden to give them counsel: this blessing
of his proved a curse to the King.

53. The Ordinance for electing Com: Council men confi^med.
28. December. was brought into and read in the House an Ordinance, explaining the
former Ordinance for electing Common-Councel-men, which confirmed the former
Ordinance. It was referred back again to the said Committee to consider of
taking away the illegal (as they please to miscall them) Oaths of Allegiance,
Supremacy, and other Oaths usually administered to Officers, Freemen, etc. of
the City.

The 28. December. Tho. Scot brought in the Ordinance for Trial of the King, it
was read and recommitted three several times, 54. The Ordinance for Trial of
His Majesty passed the Commons.
and the Commissioners Names inserted consisting of diverse Lords, Commons,
Aldermen, Citizens, Country Gentlemen, and Soldiers, (that the more persons of
all sorts might be engaged in so damnable and treasonable a design) and
because this Ordinance, and the proceedings thereupon had no foundation in
Divinity, Law, reason, nor practice: The Commons to give it a foundation and
ground from the authority of their Votes, declared as follows.

Resolved, etc. Diurnall from 1. Ian. to the 8. of Ian. 1648. Numb. 286.
That the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, do declare and adjudge,
That by the fundamental Laws of the Realm, it is Treason in the King of
England for the time to come to levy War against the Parliament, and Kingdom
of England.

So together with this declaratory Vote the said Ordinance was carried up to
the Lords by that Renegado Lord Gray of Grooby, Jan. 2. 1648. 55. And sent up
to the Lords,
The Lords met that day far more than ordinary, 16. in number, and promising
to send an Answer by Messengers of their own.

The first Question started by some Lords (who had rather have had a thinner
House) was, 56. And Debated.
Whether it should be presently debated? which passed Affirmatively. The first
Debate was upon the said Declaratory Vote: The Earl of Manchester told them,
The Parliament of England, by the fundamental Laws of England consisted of
three Estates, 1. King. 2. Lords. 3. Commons. the King is the first and chief
Estate, He calls and dissolves Parliaments, and confirms all their Acts: and
without him there can be no Parliament; therefore it is absurd to say, The King
can be a Traitor against the Parliament. The Earl of Northumberland said, The
greatest part (at least twenty to one) of the people of England were not yet
satisfied, whether the King levied war first against the Houses, or the Houses
against Him? 57. The Zealots of the H. of Com: offended with the Lords for
casting forth the Ordin: for Trial of the King.
And if the King did levy War first against the Houses, we have no Law to
make it Treason in Him, so to do: And for us to declare Treason by an
Ordinance, when the matter of fact is not yet proved, nor any Law extant to
judge it by, is very unreasonable: so the Lords cast off the Debate, and cast
out the Ordinance: and adjourned for seven days.

Jan. 3. The Zealots of the Commons were very angry at the Lords, and threatened
to clap a Pad-lock on the Door of their House: but at last they sent up some of
their Members to examine the Lords Book, and see what they have done, who
brought word back, that their Lordships had passed 2. Votes; 1. That they do
not concur to the said Declaratory Vote. 2. That they had rejected the
Ordinance for Trial of the King.

58. Votes passed by them thereupon.
Hereupon, the Commons resolved to rid their hands of King and Lords together;
and presently they voted, That all Members of the House of Commons, and others
appointed by order of that House, or Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament,
to act in any Ordinance wherein the Lords are joined, shall be empowered and
enjoined to sit, and act, and execute in the said several Committees of
themselves, notwithstanding the House of Peers join not with them therein.
Upon the debate, many hot-brained men insisted upon it, That the Lords who
rejected the Ordinance should be themselves Impeached for favoring the grand
Delinquent of England (you see the King was likely to have much justice, when
his Judges must either condemn Him, or be condemned) others thought it more
prudence to touch their Privileges, and let alone their Persons.

Die Iovis, 4. Jan. 1648. The Commons passed these 3. Votes,

A question in Divinity voted in Parliament never agreed to by Divines. This we
find de fact^, in the subversion of our Religion, Laws, Liberties and
Properties, though not de Jure. You see that since both Houses ravished the
Supremacy from the King, and a petty faction from the Houses; our Laws are
first shrunk into arbitrary Ordinances of both Houses; and now into Orders of a
remaining Faction of one House.
1. That the People (that is, their own faction, according to their said
Principle) are under God the original of all just power.

2. That the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, being chosen by, and
representing the People, have the supreme power of this Nation.

3. That whatsoever is enacted or declared for Law by the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament, has the force of Law: and all the People of this
Nation are concluded thereby, although the consent or concurrence of the King or
House of Peers be not had thereunto. This chain-shot sweeps away King, Lords,
Laws, Liberties, property, and fundamental Government of this Nation at once;
and deposites all that is, or can be near or dear unto us in scrinio pectoris,
in the bosoms and consciences of 50. or 60. factious covetous Saints, the
dregs and lees of the House of Commons, sitting and acting under the power of
an Army: and yet the House of Commons never had any Power of Judicature, nor
can legally administer an Oath; but this in pursuance of their aforesaid
Principle, That they may pass through any form of Government to carry on their
Design: The Diurnall tells you, there was not a Negative Voice: this shows
under what a terror they sit, when in (things so apparently untrue) no man
durst say, No: so the said Declaratory Vote and Ordinance for Trial of His
Majesty (by a Court Martial, if the Diurnall speak true, and yet the King no
Prisoner of War) was passed only in the name and by the Authority of the
Commons: Notwithstanding, the Order of the House, That the Clerk should not
deliver a Copy of the said Ordinance to any man, I here present the Reader with
a Copy thereof.

*An Act of Parliament of the House of Commons for Trial of Charles Stuart King
of England. 59. The Act for Trial of the King.

VVHeras it is notorious that Charles Stuart the now King of England, was not
content with the many encroachments which his Predecessors had made upon the
People in their Rights and Freedom, has had a wicked Design to subvert the
ancient and foundamentall Laws and Liberties of this Nation, and in their place
to introduce an Arbytrary and Tyrannical Government, Quaere, Whether the
Faction do not translate these Crimes from themselves to the King, with many
others.
and that besides all evil ways to bring His Design to pass, He has
prosecuted it with fire and sword, levied and maintained a Civil War in the
Land, against the Parliament and Kingdom; whereby this Country has been
miserably wasted, the public Treasure exhausted, Trade decayed, thousands of
People murdered, and infinite of other mischiefs committed, for all which high
offenses the said Charles Stuart might long since have been brought to exemplary
and condign punishment.

Whereas, also the Parliament well hoping that the restraint and imprisonment
of His Person, after it had pleased God to deliver Him into their hands, would
have quieted the distempers of the Kingdom, did forbear to proceed judicially
against Him, but found by sad experience that such their remissness served
only to encourage Him, and His Accomplices in the continuance of their evil
practices, and raising new Commotions, Rebellions, and Invasions: For
prevention of the like and greater inconveniences, and to the end no chief
Officer or Magistrate may hereafter presume Traitorously and maliciously to
imagine or contrive the enslaving or destroying of the English Nation, and to
expect impunity. Be it enacted and ordained by the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and it is hereby enacted and ordained, that Thomas Ld.
Fairfax, General. Oliver cromwell. Lieu. General. Com. Genesis Ireton. Major.
Genesis Skippon. Sir Hardresse Waller. Col. Valentine Walton Col. Thomas Harrison
Col. Edward Whalley. Col. Thomas Pride. Col. Isaac Ewer. Col. Rich: Ingolsby,
Sir Henry Mildmay. Sir Tho: Honywood. Thomas Lord Gray. Philip Lord Lisle.
Will: Lord Munson. Sir John Danvers. Sir Tho: Maleverer. Sir John Bowcher. Sir
James Harington. Sir William Brereton. Robert Wallop, Esquire Will: Henningham,
Es. Isaas Pennington, Alderman. Thomas Atkins, Ald: Col. Rowland Wilson. Sir
Peter Wentworth. Col. Henry Martyn. Col. William Purefoy. Col. Godfrey
Bosvill. John Trencherd, Esquire. Col. Harbottle Morley Col. John Berkstead. Col.
Mat. Tomblinson. John Blackstone, Esquire. Gilb: Millington, Esquire. Sir Will:
Cunstable. Col Edward Ludlow. Col. John Lambert. Col. Io. Hutchingson. Sir
Arth: Hazlerigge. Sir Michael Livesley. Rich: Saloway, Esquire. Humph: Saloway,
Esquire. Col. Rob: Titchburn. Col. Owen Roe. Col. Rob: Manwaring. Col. Robert
Lilburn. Col. Adrian Scroop. Col. Richard Dean. Col. John Okey. Col. Robert
Overton. Col. John Harrison. Col. John Desborough. Col. William Goffe. Col.
Rob: Dukenfield. Cornelius Holland, Esquire. John Carne, Esquire. Sir Will: Armine.
John Jones, Esquire. Miles Corbet, Esquire. Francis Allen, Esquire. Thomas Lister, Esquire.
Ben: Weston, Esquire. Peregrin Pelham, Esquire. John Gourdon, Esquire. Serj. Francis Thorp.
John Nut, Esquire. Tho: Challoner, Esquire. Col. Algern: Sidney. John Anlaby, Esquire. Col.
John Moore. Richard Darley, Esquire. William Say, Esquire. John Aldred, Esquire. John
Fagge, Esquire. James Nelthrop, Esquire. Sir Will: Roberts. Col. Francis Lassels. Col.
Alex: Rixby. Henry Smith, Esquire, Edmond Wild, Esquire. James Chaloner, Esquire. Josias
Barnes, Esquire. Dennis Bond, Esquire. Humph: Edwards, Esquire. Greg: Clement, Esquire. John
Fray, Esquire. Tho: Wogan, Esquire. Sir Greg: Norton. Serj. John Bradshaw. Col. Edm:
Harvey. John Dove, Esquire. Col. John Venn. John Foulks, Ald. Thomas Scot, Alder.
Tho: Andrews, Ald: William Cawley, Esquire. Abraham Burrell, Esquire. Col* Anthony
Stapley. Roger Gratwicke, Esquire. John Downs, Esquire. Col. Thomas Horton. Col. Tho:
Hammond. Col. George Fenwick. Serj. Robert Nichols. Rohert Reynolds, Esquire. John
Lisl: Esquire. Nicholas Love, Esquire. Vincent Potter. Sir Gilbert Pickering. John
Weaver, Eq. John Lenthall, Esquire. Sir Edward Baynton. John Corbet, Esquire. Thomas
Blunt, Esquire. Thomas Boon, Esquire. Augustine Garland, Esquire. Augustine Skinner, Esquire.
John Dickswell, Esquire. Col. George Fleetwood. Simon Maine, Esquire. Col. James
Temple. Col. Peter Temple. Daniel Blagrave, Esquire. Sir Peter Temple. Col. Thomas
Wait. John Brown, Esquire. John Lowry, Esquire.
Mr. Bradshaw, nominated President.
Counselors assistant to this Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
KING, are, Doctor Dorislau. Master Steel. Master Ask. Master Cook.
Sergeant Dandy, Sergeant at Arms. Mr. Philips, Clerk to the Court. Messengers
and doorkeepers are, Master Walford. Master Radley. Master Pain. Master Powel.
Master Hull. And Mr. King Crier.

shall be, and are hereby appointed Commissioners and Judges for the hearing,
trying, and Judging of the said Charles Stuart; and the said Commissioners, or
any 20 or more of them shall be, and are hereby Authorized and Constituted an
High Court of Justice, to meet at such convenient times and place as by the
said Commissioners or the major part, or 20. or more of them under their hand
and seals shall be appointed and notified by public Proclamation in the great
Hall, or Palace-yard of Westminster, and to adjourn from time to time, and from
place to place, as the said High Court or the major part thereof meeting shall
hold fit, and to take order for the charging of Him the said Charles Stuart
with the Crimes above mentioned, and for the receiving His Personal Answer
thereunto, These wise men of Gotham could not tell wh^ her Witnesses upon o^th
were necessary upon Trials of life and death. But (I confess) that upon the
defensive part, upon Indictments; Witnesses upon oath were not to be heard
against the King, much more Accusers of the King.
and for examination of Witnesses upon oath (if need be) concerning the same;
and thereupon or in default of such Answer to proceed to final Sentence
according to justice and the merit of the Cause, to be executed speedily and
impartially. And the said Court is hereby Authorized and required to choose and
appoint all such Officers, Attendants, and other circumstances as they, or the
major part of them shall in any sort judge necessary or useful for the orderly
and good managing of the premises: and Thomas Lord Fairf^x The General is no
Officer of justice. All well affected Persons tag and rag inv ted to assist in
a Tumultuaty way to destroy the King, if need had been, that is, all
Antimonarchists.
the General, with all Officers of justice, and other well-affected Persons are
hereby authorized and required to be aiding and assisting unto the said
Commissioners in the due execution of the trust hereby committed unto them,
provided that this Ordinance, and the Authority hereby granted do continue for
the space of one Month from the Date of the making hereof, and no longer.

60. A new Great Seal to be made.
But at last they stumbled at a rub not foreseen; they could not use the old
Great Seal against Him, because it was the Kings Great Seal (no more could they
use any of our Laws, Courts, or Judges against Him, because they are all the
Kings) the Sculpture upon it is, Carolus Dei Gratia, neither would the Grace of
God square with their proceedings: they must therefore make a new Great Seal;
but that was long a making, and their fingers were in the fire; they therefore
proceeded without any Commission under Seal, only upon the said Ordinance, and
every Commissioner set his own hand and seal to the public instruments of
their proceedings: what need ceremonies when men are resolved upon the
substance?

61. The Jews petition the Council of War to have the Stat: of their
banishment repealed.
About this time the Hebrew Jews presented a Petition to the uncircumcised Jews
of the Council of War, That the Statute of Banishment against them may be
repealed, and they readmitted to a Synagogue and Trade amongst us; They offer
for their readmission, S. Paul's Church, and the Library at Oxford, 500000 l.
but 700000 l. is demanced: Hugh Peter's and Harry Martin solicit the business.
Upon this occasion was published this Paper ensuing.

* The last damnable Design of Cromwell and Ireton, 62. A Paper published upon
occasion of the Jews Petition.
and their Junto or Cabal; intended to be carried on in their General Council
of the Army, and by their journey-men in the House of Commons, when they have
engaged them deed perately in sin, past all hope of Retreat by murdering the
King.
MAjor White, a Member of the Army, long since at Putney foretold, That shortly
there would be no other power in England, but the power of the Sword; and Will.
Sedgwick in his Book called [Justice upon the Armies Remonstrance] says, The
Principle of this Army is, To break the Powers of the Earth to pieces: and John
Lilburn in his [Plea for Common Right] p. 6. says, The Army by these
extraordinary proceedings, have overturned all the visible Supreme Authority of
this Nation, that is they have, and will, by seizing upon the Members of Parl.
dissolving it, and setting up a new invented Representative, and bringing the
King to capital punishment, and dis-inheriting his Posterity, subvert the
Monarchical Government, and Parliaments of this Kingdom; the Laws and
Liberties of the People, and so by bringing all to Anarchy and confusion, put
the whole Government of the Land under the Arbitrary power of the Sword.

In order to which, they have, and will overturn the Government of the City of
London by a Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and govern it by Commissioners, and a
schismatical Common Council of Anabaptists illegally chosen, and deprive them
of their Charter of Incorporation and Franchises; and this shall be a leading
case to all the Corporations of England.

Their next Design is, to plunder, and disarm the City of London, and all the
Country round about; thereby to disable them to rise when the Army removes,
but not to the use of the Soldiers, (although they greedily expect the first
Week in February the time appointed) from whom they will redeem the plunder at
an easy rate; and so sell it in bulk, to the Jews, whom they have lately
admitted to set up their banks and magazines of Trade amongst us, contrary to
an Act of Parliament for their banishment; and these shall be their Merchants
to buy off for ready money, (to maintain such Wars as their violent
proceedings will inevitably bring upon them) not only all Sequestered and
plundered goods, but also the very bodies of Men, Women, and Children, whole
Families taken Prisoners for sale, of whom these Jewish Merchants shall keep a
constant traffic with the Turks, Moors, and other Mahometans; the Barbadus,
and other English Plantations being already cloyed with Welsh, Scottish,
Colchester, and other Prisoners imposed by way of Sale upon the Adventurers:
and this is the meaning of Hugh Peter's threat to the London Ministers, That if
another War followed, they will spare neither Man, Woman, nor Child: For the
better carrying on of which Design, the said Cabal, or Junto, keep a strict
correspondency with Owen Roe Oneale, the bloody Popish, Antimonarchical Rebel
in Ireland, and the Popes Nuntio there. The Antimonarchical Marquess of Argyle
in Scotland; the Parisian, Norman and Picardie Rebels in France, and the Rebel
King of Portugal. If danger be not held so close to your eyes that you cannot
discern it, look about you English. But this Kingdom is not to be saved by men
that will save themselves; nothing but a private band, and a public spirit can
redeem it

63. Master Pryns second Letter to the General.
The 3. Jan. 1648. Master Pryn sent a Letter to the General, demanding what kind
of Prisoner, and whose he was? as follows.

* To the Honorable, Thomas Lord Fairfax, General of the present Army, these
present.
My Lord,
IT is now a full Months space since I (with other Members of the Commons
House) have been forcibly apprehended and kept Prisoner by some of your
Officers and Marshal, against the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the
Subject, the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and all Rules of justice,
conscience, and right reason; without the least shadow of Authority, or any
cause at all yet made known to me, of which (were there any) neither God nor
man, ever yet made your Lordship or your Officers, Judges. I therefore desire
to know from your Lordship, what kind of Prisoner I am? and whose? If a
Prisoner of peace, neither your Lordship, nor your Officers, are any Justices
of peace, or Civil Magistrates in this place, to restrain me for any civil
crime were I guilty of it; much less without proof or hearing, in case I were
no Member: but being neither guilty nor accused of any such crime, and a Member
too, no Magistrate can, nor ought to imprison me upon any pretext, at least
without the Houses license first obtained, If a Prisoner of War, which I
cannot probably be, being never in Arms, and apprehended near the Commons House
door, going peaceably and unarmed thither to discharge my duty; then you, and
your Officers thereby acknowledge, That you have levied War against the
Parliament, and its Members: and what capital offense this is, and what a
punishment it deserves, I need not inform your Lordship, or your Council, who
have for this very crime, condemned and shot some to death, as Traitors; and
demanded speedy justice and execution for it upon the King himself.

I have but one thing more to trouble your Lordship with, and that is to demand
whose Prisoner I am? having yet seen no Warrant nor Order from your self, or
your Officers, for my restraint, though I have often demanded it of your
Marshall: If your Lordships Prisoner, there appearing yet no legal Authority,
cause, or Warrant, for my restraint; I must then crave so much justice from
your Lordship (being but a Subject, and not yet paramount all Laws) to order
your Attorney to give an Appearance for you in the Kings bench, the first
return of the next Term, to an action of false Imprisonment, for this my
unjust restraint; which I intend (by Gods assistance) effectually to prosecute.
If your Officers Prisoner only, and not yours, which I conceive, who yet abuse
your name and authority herein, though it be a rule in Law and Divinity too,
Qui non prohibet malum quod potest; jubet; yet I shall be so just, as to set
the saddle upon the right horse, and commence my action only against such of
your Officers, who have been most active in my Imprisonment, for damage and
reparations; which if there be any justice remaining under Heaven, I doubt not
but I shall recover in Gods due time, in this public cause, which so highly
concerns the honor, freedom, and Privileges of Parliament, and Subjects
Liberties; for defense and maintenance whereof, as I have hitherto spent my
strength, adventured my life, body, liberty, and estate; so shall I now again
engage them all, and all the friends and interests I have in heaven and earth,
rather then they shall suffer the least diminution, prejudice or eclipse by my
stupid patience under this unjust captivity; though I can as willingly forgive
and put up private injuries, when the public is not concerned as any man. All
which, I thought meet to inform your Lordship of whom I am heartily sorry to
see so much dishonored, abu^ed and misled by rash ill-advised Officers, and
dangerous, destructive (and I dare say, Jesuitical) Councels, to the
Parliaments dissipation, the Kingdoms prejudice, Irelands loss, most good men's,
and Ministers grief, your best Friends astonishment, your Enemies and the
Papists triumph, our Religions scandal, and your own dishonor: which I beseech
you as an Englishman, a Christian, a Professor of piety and Religion, a
Soldier, a General, to lay sadly to your heart, as the earnest request of

From my Prison at the Sign of the Kings Head in the Strand, 3. Jan. 1648. Your
Lordships faithful Friend and Monitor, William Pryn.
* An Additional Postscript.
WE read, Luke 3.14. that when the Soldiers demanded of John Baptist,
saying, and What shall we do? he said unto them, Do violence to no man, (or put
no man in fears) neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your allowance:
not imprison, depose, or murder Kings, pull down Parliaments, imprison,
violently shut out, and drive away Parliament men, and then lay all false
accusations and scandals upon them, to color your violence, subvert Kingdoms,
alter States, break all bonds of Laws, Oaths, Covenants, Obligations,
Engagements to God and Men; usurp all Civil, Military and Ecclesiastical power,
and the Kings Royal Palaces into your own hands, as supreme Lords and Kings;
raise what new forces, and levy what new Taxes you please, take up what
Free-quarters and Houses, seize and plunder what public Treasuries and moneys
you please, without Commission or Authority, obey neither God nor Man, neither
Parliament nor Magistrate, and be content with nothing, but alter, and subvert
all things. These are Saint Peter's new doctrines and Revelations, to our
Officers and Soldiers now, and those Jesuits who lurk amongst them, not John
the Baptist, whose Canonical advice is now rejected as Apocryphal, even among
the Army Saints, who prefer every ignis fatuus, though from Doway or R^me it
self, before this burning, and shining old light, and are guided only by a new
minted law of pretended providence or necessity of their own forging, and not
by the revealed will and law of God, the sacred light whereof their present
works of darkness dare not approach, lest they should be reproved and condemned
by them. But some 43. Actions of false imprisonment by the imprisoned, and 150.
Actions of the Case by the secluded Members, brought against these domineering
lawless Officers and Grandees of the Army, wherein good Damages will be
recovered, and some 12. Indictm: of High Treason against them for laying
violent hands upon the Kings Person, and the Members, and leavying War against
the Parliament, will teach them more obedience, humility, and modesty then
either John Baptist, Saint Paul, Saint Peter, or Saint Peter's, will do; and be
like Gideon thorns and briers of discipline to these men of Succoth, with whom
no fair means will prevail; who might have learned so much law and justice from
a Heathen Soldier and Governor Festus, Acts 25.27. It seems unto me
unreasonable to send (much more to commit) a Prisoner, and not withal to
signify the crimes laid against him; and come short of that ingenuity of the
heathenish chief Captain who seized upon Paul, thereby to appease the Tumult at
Jerusalem, Acts 22.27, 29. who as soon as ever Paul told him, he was a Roman,
and Freeborn; then straight way they departed from him who should have
examined him: and the chief Captain also was afraid, after he knew that he was
a Roman, and because he had bound him. And should not false imprisoning of a
Parliament Man and Freeborn Englishman be as formidable to our chief Captains
(being a Christian, I say, sworn and vowed to defend the Houses Privileges,
and Members Persons) as the Imprisonment of a Roman was to this chief Captain,
and they as ingenious and just as he, who shall rise up in judgment against
them, and condemn them at the last.

I shall close up all with this observation. That as the most glorious Angels
in Heaven, when they fell (through pride and ambition, as most conceive) became
the very foulest Devils in Hell; so the most resplendent seeming hypocritical
Saints when they fall through the like sins, and have power in their hands,
become the most incarnate Devils, and Monsters of treachery and tyranny upon
earth, exceeding Turks and Pagans therein, of which we have now sad experience
in our Army-Saints, who every day aggravate, and yet justify their impieties
and exorbitances* 2 Chronicles. 28.11. Now hear me therefore, and deliver the
Captives again, which ye have taken Captives of your Brethren: for the fierce
wrath of God is upon you.

Will: Pryn.




64. Another forged Letter endeavored to be fastened upon Sheriff Brown.
The Saints having nothing to say against Major Genesis Brown, (unless they should
accuse him for being true to King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom, and to all
the first declared Principles of this Parliament) fell to their old trick to
fasten another counterfeit Letter upon him: wherefore a Man coming to S. James'
(where he was then imprisoned) desired, in the hearing of all present to speak
with him in private: Major Genesis Brown told him, He was not for private
conference, and bade him speak openly; then the Fellow presented a Letter to
him, saying, It was from the Prince: but Major Genesis Brown (remembering the like
trick put upon him before) called for the Guard to apprehend him, when
presently the Messenger threw the Letters into the fire, and the Marshall
catching them out half burnt, affirms, He saw Charles Prince, written upon
them. Sanctified eyes may see through the spectacles of their own fantasy what
they please, to accomplish their Design, and therefore they have a new
principle or light (which as the 7. May, be added to the aforesaid 6.) that
though they have no proofs nor evidence against a man, yet if in their
consciences, they think him guilty, they may condemn him upon the testimony of
their own consciences; this is to condemn by Revelation such whose blood they
desire to suck. This supposed Messenger from the Prince was seized by the
Guard, but no proceedings against him heard of; which argues it was but a snare
set to catch the Major.

About this time (to second this device) a man gallantly clothed and mounted,
comes to the Bear in the Strand, 65. Another more general forgery to endanger
whom the Faction please. It will be proved, that diverse Witnesses have bin
practiced and tampered with against Mr. Brown, and others.
gives the Hostler a Piece, and bids him have a care of his Horse; then goes
into the City, and (the Plot being forelaid) was taken there with Letters
subscribed with the Princes name, to diverse Citizens and Members against whom
they want matter of accusation. I hear no more of this matter yet; this is a
device dorman^, to be awakened hereafter, if any shall oppose the present
actings of the Army, and their Parliament.

Cromwell, Ireton, and Hugh Peter's have several times made it their errand to
go into the City and visit the Ministers, giving them threatening Admonitions,
not to preach any thing against the Actings of the Army and their Parliament:
66. London-Ministers threatened. See the Ministers of Londons Letter to the
General, called, [A serious Representation.] Dated Jan. 18. 1648.
But Hugh acted his part above them all, he took some Musketeers with him to
the house of Mr. Calamy, and knocking at the door, a Maid asked whom he would
speak with? he told her, with her Master? she asked his name? he replied, Mr
Hugh Peter's, the Maid going up the stairs to acquaint her Master, (who was
above-stairs in conference with some Divines) overheard Peter's say to the
Soldiers, The very name of Peter's will fright them all: Peter's being called up
the stairs, told Mr. Calamy, He was commanded by the General to warn him to
come before him: Mr. Calamy (leaving Peter's vapouring and canting Religion and
nonsense to the rest of the Divines) slipped down stairs and went to the
General to know his pleasure, telling him, He had bin summoned before him by
Hugh Peter's: the General said, Peter's was a Knave, and had no such directions
from him.

Since this, 67. The C. of War consider how to shut up the Churches doors.
the Council of War (finding it difficult to stop the Ministers mouths) have
sundry times debated, How to shut up the Churches doors in the City, for
Reformation of the Church, and propagation of the Gospel: they have imprisoned
Mr. Canton (a worthy Minister) for praying for King CHARLES, and threaten to
try him for his life in the Upper Bench (forsooth) which all the Laws call,
the Kings Bench: and upon their new Acts of Parliament, made by a ninth part of
the Members, the small remnant or Junto of the House of Commons;
notwithstanding, by The Directory for public Worship, (established by both
Houses) the Ministers are enjoined to pray for the King. It is said that
Monsieur Paux (one of the Dutch Agents here) has advised Cromwell, to stop the
Ministers mouths by hanging up a dozen of them: and vouches a president for it
in the Low Countries.

68. The Lords sent some Votes to the C^mmons for their concurrence.
Jan. 9. The Lords sat again and passed some Ordinances, which they sent down
to the Commons for their concurrence, to feel their pulse w^ether they would
vouchsafe to take so much notice of them; the Commons laid them aside after
some expres^ions of disdain.

69. Sergeant Dandy proclaims the sitting of the new H: Court of Justice.
This day Sergeant Dandie, Sergeant at Arms to the Comissioners for Trial of
His Majesty, rode into Westminster Hall with the Mace belonging to the House of
Commons upon his shoulder, and some Officers attending him, all bare, and 6.
Trumpeters on horsback before him, Guards of Horse and Foot attending in both
the Palace-yards, the 6. Trumpeters sounded on horseback in the middle of the
Hall, and the Drums beat in the Palace-yards, after which a Proclamation was
read aloud by Mr. King, one of the Messengers of the said High Court of
Justice, to this purpose; To give notice, that the Commissioners were to sit
tomorrow, and that all those that had any thing to say against CHARLES STVART
King of England might be heard. The like was done in Cheapside, and at the Old
Exchange.

70. The Great Seal voted to be broken.
This day the remainder of the House voted their Great Seal to be broken, in
order to the making of a new one, justly putting the same affront upon their
own Seal, which they had formerly put upon the Kings. 71. Mr. Pryns Memento to
the unparliamentary Junto
Upon these occasions Mr. Pryn (it is said) published his Memento to the
unparliamentary Junto, therein telling the House, That being forcibly secluded
from the House by the Officers of the Armies violence, whereby he could not
speak his mind to them freely in, or as the House of Commons, yet he would
write his thoughts to them as private Persons only under a force, consulting
in the House without their fellow Members advice or concurrence, about speedy
Deposing and executing CHARLES their lawful Sovereign, to please the General,
Officers, and Counsel of the Army, (who have usurped to themselves the Supreme
Authority both of King and Parliament) or rather the Jesuits and Popish
Priests among them.

1. By the Common Law the Stat. 25. Edw. 3. Cok. 5. Inst 4. 1. Stamf. Pleas of
the Crown, l. 1. c. 1, 2.
and all other Acts concerning Treason, It is High Treason for any man by overt
act to compass the death of the King, or his eldest Son, though never executed;
and so adjudged by Parliament in the Earl of Arundels Case, 21 Ric. 2. Plac.
Coronae, n. 4, 6, 7.

2. In the Oath of Allegiance (which every man takes before he sits in
Parliament) you acknowledge him to be lawful and rightful King of this Realm;
and that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Sea of Rome,
or by any other means, with any other, has any Power or Authority to depose
the King, etc. Exact Collect. p. 16, 19, 21, 59, 66, 83, 102, 103, 118, 123,
125, 141, 142, 143, 173, 180, 195, 219, 259, 281, 307, 380, 312, 360, 376, 457.
A Collect. etc. p. 13, 18, 41, 43, 44, 49, 51, 61, 64, 96, 181, 182, 340, 341,
424, 425, 499, 599, 623, 696, 806, 807, 879. Appendix p. 15.


3. Your selves amongst other Members, in above one hundred Remonstrances,
Declarations, Petitions, Ordinances, etc. in the name of the Parliament have
professed, You never intended the least hurt, injury, or violence to the Kings
Person, Crown, Dignity, or Posterity; but intended to Him and His Posterity
more Honor, Happiness, Glory, and Greatness than ever any of His predecessors
enjoyed: That you would make good to the uttermost with your Lives and Fortunes
the Faith and Allegiance you have always born to him. That all Contributions,
Loans, should be employed only to maintain the Protestant Religion, the Kings
Authority, Person, Royal Dignity, Laws of the Land, Peace of the Kingdom,
and Privileges of Parliament. That the Forces raised by the Parliament were
for defense of the Kings Person, and of both Houses. That the Parliament will
ever have a care to prevent any danger to his Person. That they are resolved to
expose their lives and fortunes for maintenance of the Kings Person, Honor,
and Estate, and the Power and Privileges of Parliament, when the King taxed
the Houses for insinuating, Exact Collect. p. 298, 695, 696, 657, 658, 991.
That if they should make the highest Presidents of other Parliaments their
pattern, (that is, depose the King) there could be no cause to complain of
them: Both Houses by two Declarations protested against it, saying, That such
thoughts never entered, nor should enter into their loyal hearts. Collect. of
all Orders, p. 8, 13, 41, 43, 44, 49, 51, 61, 64, 96, 99, 623, 696, 879.
Appendix p. 15.


4. By the Protestation, They declare in the presence of God to defend the
Kings Person and Estate, and that their Armies under Essex and Fairfax, were
raised for that purpose inter alia.

5. By the National Covenant, They vowed to defend the Kings Person and
Authority in preservation of true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, and
that they will all the days of their lives continue in this Covenant against
all opposition.

6. You monopolize the Supreme power into your own hands, robbing both King,
Lords, and the rest of your fellow Members thereof, whom you are content should
be violently shut out by your Army, who have leavied War against the Parliament
to dissolve it; till the removal of which force, and restoring your Members
with freedom and safety, Also, 15. E. 3. n. 5. 17 E. 3. n. 2* 6. 18. E. 3 n 1.
2. 5. etc. 1. R. 2. n. 1. 2. R. 2. n. 1. 3. R. 2. n. 1. 4. R. 2. n. 1. 5. R. 2.
Parl. 1. n. 1. Parl. 2. n. 1. 8. H. 4. n. 28.
you ought not to sit or Act in your Armies own doctrine in their Remonstrance,
Aug. 18. and by the Declaration and Ordinances of both Houses, Aug. 20. 1647.
Sec 21. R. 2. c. 12. 1. H. 4. c. 3. 31. H. 6. c. 1. 39. H. 6 c. 1. See the
memorable Record, 6. E. 3. Parl. apud Ebor. n. 1, 2 dorso clauso. 6. E. 3. m.
4. 6. E. apud Westminster. Parl. 2. n. 1. 13. E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 4. and many more
Rolls, where Parliaments, when any considerable number of Members of either
House were absent, refused to sit (though under no force) till the House were
full.

You have neither Law nor president for what you do, Edw. 2. Rich. 2. were
forced by Mortimer and H. 4. to resign their Crowns in a formal way, one to
his Son, the other to his conquering Successor, neither of them to the
Parliament, and at last Deposed by a subsequent Sentence of Parliament, as
unfit to Reign, without any formal Trial.

72. The Armies party in the H: approve the matter of the Co: of Officers
accusatory Ans. against the secured Memb: with out hearing them. See Mr. Io:
Geerees Ans. to that silly Sophister Io: Goodwin, called, Might overcoming
right.
Jan. 11. 1648. The House read the Answer of the General Counsel of the Army,
concerning the secured and secluded Members, and (as I have formerly said,
without hearing what the said Members could say for themselves, approved the
matter of it: whereupon the secured and secluded Members, 20. Jan. 1648. (with
much ado) got printed their Vindication, against the Aspersion cast upon them
in The humble Answer of the General Counsel of the Officers of the Army,
concerning the securing and secluding of the said Members: The sum whereof is
as follows.

73. The sec. and secl. Memb. Defense against the scandalous An: of the C: of W:
By the Preamble of this Answer, and by the Proposals of the 6. December. and the
late Declaration and Remonstrance therein cited, it appears this Design to
break the House by force has been long since plotted and contrived with
action. The General Council of the Army in their said Answer, say, Is a
course in it self irregular and not justifiable, but by honest intentions and
extraordinary necessity: the weakness of which Answer we must examine, but
first must state the case b tween us: They are an Army raised by Ordinance of
Parliament, of 15. Febr. 1644. for defense of King and Parliament, the true
Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and to be from
time to time subject to such Orders and Directions as they shall receive from
both Houses of Parliament: and to this end they stand commissioned by them, and
receive pay from them to this day. And besides this trust thus lying upon them,
they are under the obligation of a solemn Covenant, sworn to God, That they
will in their place and callings, with sincerity, reality, and constancy with
their estates and lives, preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament,
and the Liberties of the Kingdom, and defend the Kings Person and Authority in
defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom; they being under
the said trusts and Oath, march up to Westminster (contrary to order) in a
hostile way, forcibly secured, secluded, and drove away many of the Members:
the Question is, Whether this Action be Justifiable upon pretense of Honest
intentions and Necessity?

Their good intentions cannot be known but by their expressions and actions,
and they refer us to their Proposals, Declarations, and Remonstrances, where
we find their desires are: 1. To take away the Kings life. 2. To take away the
lives of the Prince, and the Duke of York; at least to dis-inherit both them
and all the Kings Children. 3. To put a period to thi^ Parliament. 4. To set up
a new Representative of their own, which takes away all Parliaments. 5. To have
an Elective King, if any.
These are their Honest intentions for public good, which must come in to
justice their waging war against their Masters this Parliament: To name them,
is to confute them, as being apparently against the Laws of God and the Land,
under which they live, and which they are engaged to maintain, we shall produce
no other Witnesses to prove this but themselves. On the 15. of November. 1647.
The agreeement of the People, (which is lower in demands than these which they
call, Honest intentions for public good) was condemned by the Army. The
promoting it in the Army judged mutinous and capital; Col. Rainsborough and
Major Scot complained of in the House for appearing in it, and-the Paper it
self adjudged by the House, destructive to Government, and the being of
Parliaments.

The second pretense or principle is, Extraordinary Necessity for the same end.

To this we say, 1. The Army made the same plea of necessity in their
Remon^^rance, June 23. 1647. upon quite contrary grounds to what they exp ess
now, and both to justify the same viol nt proceedings against the Parliament,
then when the King was seized upon by a party of the Army (without Order from
the House) and the Army advanced against the Parliament. They say in their
Letter to the House. July 8. 1647. There have been several Officers of the Army
upon several occasions sent to his Majesty: The first, to present to Him a
Copy of the Representations; and after that some others, to tender Him a Copy
of the Remonstrance: Upon both which, the Officers sent were appointed to clear
the sense and intentions of any thing in either paper, Turn back to sect. 2.
and see my Animadvers. upon the Army, 20 Nov. 1648. p. 4, 5, 6, 7.
whereupon his Majesty might make any Question. There the Army treated with
the King, yet now they offer violence to the Parliament for treating with the
King. Then in their Remonstrance, 25 June 1647. they say, We clearly* profess,
we do not see how there can be any peace to this Kingdom firm and lasting
without a due consideration of, and provision for the rights, quiet, and
immunities of His Majesty's Royal Family, and his late partakers; now they
judge the majority of the House corrupt for moving one step toward a peace
with the King, The Parliament thought it not reasonable the King should be sole
Judge of public necessity in case of shipmony. Return to sect. 18. where I set
down six of their Principles.
though he has now granted more to them then all the Armies Proposals then
demanded of Him. Thus they make this general plea of Necessity serve to
justify the considerations; which they are put to by making themselves Judges
of those things they have no calling to meddle with; for by what Authority are
they Judges of public Necessity?

2. This principle (Necessity) is destructive to all Government, for as the
General Officer urges necessity for acting against the Commands and Persons of
his Superiors; and arrogates to be Judge of that Necessity, the Inferior may
urge the same Necessity (in his judgment) to act against the Commands of his
General. The Soldiers against their Officers: any other 20000. men in this
Kingdom against this Army, and this Army (as against this Parliament) so
against any other Representative or Government; and so in infinitum.

3. The Commons have their Authority from the Writ of Election, though their
election from the people: See the Writ Cromton's Jurisdict: of Court, Tit:
Parliamen.
The Commons in Parliament are not accountable for the use of their trust to
any but the House, being Trustees of the People, not by Delegation, but by
translation: all the power of the people being transferred to them for
advising, voting, and assenting (according to their judgments, not according
to the judgments of those that sent them) for otherwise the parties electing,
and those elected, differing in judgment, one might protest against what the
other had done, and so make void all Acts of Parliament. But if their Acts were
valid or void at the Electors judgments, yet were the Members only
accountable to them that sent them, not to Strangers, and in no case to the
Army, who are themselves but in subordinate trust to the Parliament for their
defense.

4. This violence upon the Members, is not only contrary to the Armies trust,
but against their Covenant and Protestation: the breach whereof being a morrall
evil cannot be made good by honest intentions and necessity.

The particulars of the said General Officers Answer, upon which this
pretended Necessity is grounded, are six: but we must first take notice what is
said from the end of the 2. page to the end of the 5 before we enter upon them:
the sum is, In all new Elections there were 2. Independents chosen for one of
any other principles, Independents were then Commissioners for the Great Seal,
and delivered Writs to men of their own Party, who had the advantage to keep
them, and choose their own time to deliver them and Soldiers (under color of
keeping the peace) became great Sticklers in Elections.
That by the endeavors of some old Malignant Members, and by practices used in
new Elections there came in a flood of new Burgesses that either are Malignant
or Neuters. To this we say, what is done by the majority, is the Act of the
whole House; and what is done against the majority, is done against the whole
House: nor was the Ordinance for New Elections carried on by old Malignants,
unless the major part of the House were always such, and before the new
Elections. It is not hard to show that many of the Officers of the Army came in
upon the last Elections, and were chosen by those places where they are scarce
known: upon what influence therefore they came in, let the world judge. And now
for the said 6. particulars objected.

The Army betrayed Ireland by their disobedience. They would neither go for
Ireland themselves, nor suffer others to go, 1 part. sect. 16. and 55.57.
1. The betraying of Ireland into the Enemies hands, by recalling the Lord Lysle
from his command there, and putting the best part of the said Kingdom and where
the Parliament had the strongest footing (Munster) into the hands of Inchiquine
a Native Irish; who has since Revolted from the Parliament, has lately united
with the Irish Rebels; and with them and Ormond for the King. To this we ^ay,
the Lord Inchiquine came in and brought Munster to the Parliament, and
preserved their Interest in Ireland, in all the heat of their Wars in
England, when they had little other Interest there, and less means to relieve
them; the Lord Lysle was not recalled from his Command there, This Lo: went
late, carried over 160000 l. for which he has not yet accounted, began a
quarrel with Inchiqueen and put him into discontent, and then returned. See
the Irish Letters and Papers to the the House in print.
but his Commission for Lord Lieutenant expiring, 15. April, 1647. on the 17.
April, he hoysed sail for England: after the Lord Lysles return for England,
the Lord Inchiquine did gallant service against the Rebels, took many strong
Holds from them, and won the Battle of Knockeknowes, one of the greatest that
ever was gotten of the Rebels. The House therefore approved of his behavior
until 3. April, 1648. when (the Army having led the way) the Lord Inchiquine
(taking distaste thereat) by way of imitation, began to enter into Engagements
and Remonstrances against the Parliament, (as it was then constituted) for
which he made the Remonstrances, Engagements, and Declarations of the Army the
Summer before, both the cause and precedent; as by the printed Relation does
appear.

2. Their endeavors to bring in the King upon His own Terms, without
satisfaction and security to the Kingdom, v^z: upon His Message of the 12. of
May, 1647. and to this end to Disband this Army before any peace made or
assured. To this we say, the House of Commons upon the first notice thereof,
voted the said Engagement of the 12. of May Treasonable; and by Ordinance, 17.
December. 1647. put an incapacity upon such Citizens as had any hand in it, which
evidenceth, we were here in a right majority, as in other parts of their Paper
they take the Votes of the House to prove us a corrupt majority: The charge
here lying in general, and not fixed upon any particular. Concerning
Disbanding the Army; we say, the House voted 8. Regiments of Foot, 4. of Horse
and 1. of Dragoones, to be sent out of the Army for Ireland, and resolved to
keep 10000. Foot, and 5400. Horse under Command of the Lord Fairfax for defense
of England. This was, 1. For Relieving Ireland. 2. For easing the heavy
pressures of the poor People in England. And 3. an honorable employment for the
Forces of the Army, to prevent such high distempers as have since ensued. See
my 1. part. sect. 16. 17. 18. and my said Animadversions, page 2. neither were
they legally impeached. See Ardua regni, or twelve arduous doubts written in
defense of the expulsed Memb: and the sa d Members Ans. to the Armies Charge.


3. That they endeavored to protect the 11. impeached Members from justice,
and with them to raise a new War. To this we say, we gave them no other
protection than the Laws allowed them. For the mispending 200000 l. designed
for Ireland; we say, that 80000 l. thereof was paid to Nicholas Loftus, and
others, for service of Ireland, and above 50000 l. to the Treasurers at War
for the Army; which may more reasonably be said to be mis-imployed (because the
Army had an established pay another way) than what the Reformado Officers and
Soldiers (who obeyed the Orders of the House for Disbanding) received, who
nevertheless pressed upon the House the more earnestly for their Arrears, after
the Declarations and Remonstrances published by the Army for paying the Arrears
of all the Soldiers of England.

4. Their countenancing, abetting, There was a close Inquisition of Godly
Cutthroats purposely chosen to examine this Tumult; which proceeded illegally,
and used so much foul play as to accuse men upon characters of their clothes,
and persons; yet malice it self could find nothing. See my 1. part. sect. 45,
46. to sect. 54. Return to sect. 2. and 5.
and partaking with the Tumult of Apprentices, and others against both Houses
of Parliament. To this we say, that we wonder they should urge the force
offered to the House then (which they declared, horrid and treasonable) to
justify the violence acted upon the House by themselves of a much higher
nature. This is a mere fiction of the Pen-mans, which we do every one of us for
our selves respectively deny.

5. The holding correspondency, engaging, and assisting the tumultuous
Petitioners last Spring, the rebellious Insurrections in Kent, the Revolted
Ships, Prince of Wales, with the Scots Army: We do every one of us for our
selves respectively deny these.

6. That when the Army was dispensed and engaged in several parts, etc. and
many faithful Members employed abroad upon public services; and others
through Malignant Tumults about this City, could not with safety attend the
House. Then the corrupt and Apostating Party taking advantage of these
distractions which themselves had caused: First, recalled in those Members,
etc. Then they recalled those Votes for Non-Addresses, and voted a Personal
Treaty. To this we say, that if the proceedings of the Treaty were
surreptitiously gotten in a thin House, why do they then complain in other
parts of their Paper, that the majority of the House is corrupt, Return to
sect. 2. and 5. there see the true grounds of these Tumults. See wh t u^e they
make of provid nce in the 1. part of Englands new Chains.
and formed to serve the Kings corrupt Interest? why did they force from the
House above 200 Members at once; the Counties never expressed so high contempt
of the Parliament, until the like had been first done by the Armies quartering
upon them.

And now let us come to that Vote of the House, 5. Dec. 1648. That the Kings
Answer to the Propositions of both Houses are a ground to proceed upon to a
settlement of Peace: of which they say, That though they advanced hither to
attend providence for opening some way to avoid the present evils designed, and
introduce the desired good into the Kingdom, yet they said nor acted nothing in
relation to the Parliament, nor any Member thereof, until by the Vote passed,
December. 5. they found the corrupt majority so resolvedly bent to complete their
Design in bringing in the King. Do they call their threatening Declaration and
Remonstrance a saying nothing? and their marching up against the House,
contrary to the Order of the House, a doing nothing in relation to the
Parliament? But by these words it appears that this Vote, 5. December. is the
very point of that necessity they now rely upon to justify their force upon
the House: For, before that passed, they say, They acted nothing, etc. we must
now state the difference between the Houses Propositions, See. Mr. Pryn's said
Speech in the House, 2 December. 1648. more at large.
and the Kings Answers, and see whether the King did not grant all those
Propositions in which the main security of the Kingdom rests.

He granted the first Proposition for taking off all Declarations; as was
desired.

And the third Proposition for the Militia, as was desired.

He assented to the Proposition for Ireland; limiting the time of the
Parliaments disposing Officers there to 20* years.

He consented to such Acts for public Debts and Public Uses, as should be
presented within 2. years, and incurred within that time.

He granted the Proposition concerning Peers, as was desired.

He granted the Disposing Offices in England, to the Parliament, for 20. years.

He granted the taking away the Court of Wards, having 100000 l. per ann. in
lieu thereof to be raised as the Parliament should think fit.

He granted to declare against the Marquess of Ormond's power and proceedings
after an Agreement with the Parliament.

The only difference therefore remained upon two Propositions: 1. Delinquents.
2. The Church.


For Delinquents, though He does not grant all, His Majesty consented they
shall submit to moderate Compositions, according to such Proportions as they
and the two Houses shall agree.

2. He disableth them to bear Offices of public Trust, and removes them from
the Kings, Queens, and Princes Court.

3. For such as the Houses propounded to proceed capitally against, He leaves
them to a Legal Trial, and declares, He will not interpose to hinder it: which
satisfies the main complaint of the Parliament which was (in the beginning of
the War, ( That the King protected Delinquents from justice. And all that the
House desired in the Propositions presented to him at Oxford, Febr. 1642. was,
That His Majesty would leave Delinquents to a Legal Trial and judgment of
Parliament. But that his Majesty should join in an Act for taking away the
Lives or Estates of any that have adhered to Him (He truly professes) He
cannot with Justice and Honor agree thereto.

4. Nor do we see how Delinquents (being left to the Law) can escape justice,
the King having granted the 1. proemial Proposition, and (so by a Law)
acknowledged the Parliaments Cause and War to be just.

For the Church, The Houses propound the utter abolishing of Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. The sale of their Lands, that Reformation of Religion be settled
by Act of Parliament as both Houses have, or shall agree. The Kings Answer
takes away Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. by taking away
their Courts and Officers, and so far takes away their power of Ordination that
it can never be revived again but by Act of Parliament, so that Episcopacy is
divested of any actual being by the Law of the Land, and instead thereof the
Presbyterian Government settled for three years by a Law; which is for so long a
time as the Houses formerly in their Ordinances presented to Him at New Castle,
did themselves think fit to settle it: For the Sale of Bishops Lands upon the
public Faith; Every cheating Saint of the Faction must have the Public Faith
exactly kept, though he bought the Lands but at 2 or 3. years just value, and
with such moneys as he had formerly cheated the State of; when other men who
have lost the best part of their Estates by and for the Pa li^ment, for
compensation whereof they have the public Faith engaged by Ordinances, are
consumed by Taxes, and repaied with reproaches only.
we say, That although the Purchasers might well have afforded to have given
the same rates for their Purchases (which they now give) if they might have had
them assured by Act of Parliament for 99 years, and such moderate Rents
reserved as the King intimates in his Answer; yet (in His Answer) he expresses
a farther satisfaction to be given them: upon which we should have insis^ed,
n^^with^ anding the said Vote.

5. December. 1648. We farther allege, That the King having granted the rest of
the Propositions ^^d ^o much in these 2. Delinquents, and the Church; the
Natio^^l Covenant does not oblige us to make War upon this poi^^ nothing can
make Presbytery (nor the Purchasers of Bishops L^^ is more odious, nor endanger
them more, than to make them the sole obstacle of Peace; nor could any thing
more work the King to comply with our desires herein, than for us to draw a
little nearer Him.

The Considerations leading us to pass the said Vote, 5 Dec. 1648. come next to
be considered: 1. The saving of Ireland. 2. The regaining the revolted Navy and
freedom of the Seas. 3. The support of the Ancient Government of the Kingdom.
4. The putting the people into a secure possession of their Laws and Liberties.
5. The avoiding such evil consequences as were apparently to follow a breach
with the King.


As 1. the Deposing the King, if not the depriving Him of life: Return to Sect.
71.
whereupon floods of misery will follow, and scandal to the Protestant
Religion, which we (from our hearts) detest and abhor: See the many
Declarations of Parliament against it.

2. The necessitating of the Prince to cast himself into the Arms of Foreign
Popish Princes, and embrace Popish Alliances for his succor.

3. It may beget a change of Government, and a laying aside of Monarchy here:
and so a Breach with Scotland, and this Kingdom (being the more rich) likely
to be the Seat of the War.

4. The vast Debts of this Kingdom upon the public Faith, will never be paid
in War, but increased and multiplied: multitudes of Sufferers by, and for the
Parliament like to be repayed only with new sufferings, and every years War
destroies more Families, and makes more Malignants through discontenting
pressures: until at last the Soldier seeing no hope of pay, the People no hope
of peace and ease, fall together into a general and desperate tumultuousness;
the power of the Sword apparently threatening a dissolution of Government both
in Church and Commonwealth.

To that scandalous Objection, which says, The corrupt majority will not l^nd
an ear to admit a thought toward the laying down their own power, or rendering
it back to the People from whom they received it. We say, this Objection is
unreasonable from men who endeavor to perpetuate an Army upon the Kingdom;
nor is the continuance of this Parliament singly objected, but that they will
not render it back to the People, Viz. To a new Representative, invented and
made by the Army, that is, We will not render our power into the hands of the
Army.

Another Objection is, That whatsoever the King granted, He might plead Force
to break it, and spoil us by policy. This Objection might have been made
against all our Treaties: If there be any Force, it is from the Army, for
spoiling us by policy. The Kings of this Land could never encroach upon our
good Laws, but by corrupt Judges and Ministers, who though they could not
abrogate the Law, made it speak against it self, and the intended good of the
People, or else by the power of Courtiers, stopping the course of Justice at
the Council Table; and in other Arbitrary Courts: both which are taken away by
the Kings Concessions.

1. That the Nomination of Judges and Officers be in the Parliament.

2. That the King make no new Parliament Lords for the future to Vote there.

For this you must take the faith of the misty brained Penman, who had this (as
well as many other gross Lies) by Revelation. The Army had had the King in h^ir
power, and had the Parliament adjourned, the sole power of the Kingdom had been
left in the Army; which is a thing aimed at by them:
Another Objection is, That they had intelligence, that had they been suffered
to meet all in the House once more, it was designed to have passed some higher
Resolutions, to lay farther foundations of a new quarrel, so as to carry
therein the name and countenance of Parliamentary Authori^y together with the
Kings, upon an acceptable pretense of Peace, to draw men in, and then to have
adjourned the Parliament for a long time, excluding all remedy in this case but
by another War. To this we say, the House immediately upon passing the Vote, 5.
December. sent a Committee to the General to confer with him and his Officers,
and keep a good correspondency with them: To which, the General promised his
readiness, howsoever it was hindered afterward. And then they seized upon one
of the Commissioners appointed to Treat, affronted another, and left no way
free for a Conference, which shows they were resolved to do what they had
designed.

The last Obj. is, That those Members that are yet detained in Custody, are
either such as have been formerly Impeached, and (in part) judged by the House
for Treason, and other Crimes, and never acquitted, and against whom they can,
and very shortly will produce new matter of no less crime; or else such who
have appeared most active and united in Councels with them: against whom also
they are preparing, and shall shortly give matter of particular Impeachment. To
this we say, that when it appears what those crimes are, and what persons are
charged with them, we doubt not but they will sufficiently acquit themselves,
if things may be legally carried in a judicial way by competent Judges not
preingaged. In the mean time we conclude, That Soldiers, whose advantages
arise by War, are not fit to judge of the Peace of the Nation.

74. A Declaration by Mr. Walker, and Mr. Pryn
The 19. Jan. 1648. Mr. Pryn, and Mr. Walker, (two of the secured Members)
published in print their Declaration and Protestation, against the actings and
proceedings of the Army and their Faction now remaining in the House of
Commons; as follows: A Declaration and Protestation of Will: Pryn, and Clem:
Walker, Esquires; Members of the House of Commons: Against the present Actings
and Proceedings of the General, and General Council of the Army, and their
Election now remaining and sitting in the said House.
WHereas long since, for ease of the People, both Houses in a full and free
Parliament Voted the Disbanding of this Army: in opposition to which, some
great Officers of the said Army, (to continue their rich Commands) with some
Members of the House of Commons, (who daily enrich themselves by the troubles
of the times) secretly mutinied the Army against the Parliament. And whereas,
lately the far major part of the House of Commons, pitying the bleeding
condition, and tears of the oppressed People, Voted, and entered into a
Personal Treaty with the King: without which (by the Armies own confession in
their Remonstrance at Saint Albons, p. 64.) there can be no peace; which the
Army interrupted by obtruding upon the Commons a treasonable Remonstrance, 20.
November. 1648. tending to destroy the King, and His Posterity, and wholly to
subvert all Parliaments, Religion, Laws, and Liberties for ever; whereby the
Commons in Parliament found it absolutely necessary to prevent such pernicious
innovations, by concluding a safe peace with His Majesty; whereupon (after
mature debate) the House of Commons the 5. December. 1648. Voted, That the Kings
Answer to the Propositions of both Houses upon the Treaty, were a ground for
the Houses to proceed to the settlement of a safe and well-grounded Peace: Upon
which, the General, and Council of War, Wednesday morning, 6. December,
1648. Seized and Imprisoned 41 of the Members going to the House of Commons to
do their Duty, secluded above 160. other Members, besidss 40. or 50. Members
who voluntarily withdrew themselves to avoid their violence, leaving only
their own engaged party of 40. or 50. Members sitting, who now pass Acts of
Parliament of the House of Commons (as they call them) without the Lords; and
comply with the said Council of War, to carry on the said Remonstrance: To
which purpose this present remnant of the Commons have unvoted in a thin House
under the force of the Army, what was deliberately Voted in a full and free
House; whereas by their own Ordinance passed upon the Tumult of Apprentices,
20. August, 1647. to null, and make void ab initio, all Acts, Orders, Votes,
etc. passed under the said force: This remaining Party ought not to sit, act,
nor take upon them the style of a House, under so visible, actual, and horrid
a Force.

The premises considered, We whose names are hereunto subscribed, Members of
the House of Commons, do declare and protest, That the said General,
Commissioned Officers, and General Council of the Army, by the said act of
violence, upon the major part of the House, which legally and virtually is the
whole House, have waged War, and Rebelled against the Parliament their Masters,
who raised them to defend the Privileges of Parliament, and the Kings Person
and Authority, in defense of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and have thereby
forfeited their Commissions, and have broken and dis-continued this Parliament;
so that, until this force be removed, punished, the Honor of the Parliament
and their wronged Members vindicated, and all the Members resummoned, all the
Votes, Orders, and Actings, passed, and to be passed by this nominall House of
Commons, are, and will be void, ab initio, and all such as do, or shall obey
them, are and will be punishable, both by the Armies own judgment in their
Remonstrance, August 18. and by the Houses Declaration, and the said Ordinance,
20. August, 1647.

We do farther declare and protest against this present House of Commons
illegal Acts, Order, or Ordinance, for erecting a High Court of Justice, and
usurping a power without any Law or president, to Try, Depose, and bring to
capital punishment the King, and to Dis-inherit His Posterity, or any of them,
and against the said General Council of Officers, aiding and abetting them
therein, as highly impious against the Law of God, Nations, and the Protestant
Profession, Traitors against the Stat. of Treason, 25. Edw. 3. and against all
Laws and our Statutes, perjurious and perfidious, against the Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, National Covenant, and Protestation; all the
Parliaments Declarations and Remonstrances held forth to the world; their
Treaties and promises made to the Scots when they delivered the Kings Person
into our hands; against our promises made to the Hollanders, and other Nations,
and against all the Professions, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Proposals
made by this Army; when they made their Addresses to the King at New Market,
Hampton Court, and other places.

William Pryn. Clem: Walker.

January 19. 1648.


75. The Coun: of Officers order 2. Petitions for the Commons House against
Tithes. 2. against the Stat. for Banishing the Jews.
Aout this time the General Council of Officers at White Hall, ordered, That
two Petitions (or mandates rather) should be drawn, and presented to their
House of Commons; One against Payment of Tithes; the other, for Repealing the
Act for Banishment of the Jews: Hear you see they shake hands with the Jews,
and crucify Christ in his Ministers, as well as in his Anointed, the King.

About this time Col: Tichburn, and some schismatic Common-Councell-men, 57.
Col: Tichburns Petition and complaint against the Lord Mayor, and their Orders
thereupon. The like Petitions were invited from most Counties, where a dozen
Schism^ticks and two or three Cloaks represented a whole Country.
presented a Petition to the supreme Authority the Commons in Parliament,
demanding justice against all grand and capital Actors in the late Wars
against the Parliament from the highest to the lowest: the Militia, Navy, and
all Places of power to be in faithful hands, (that is, in their own Faction,
all others being displaced under the general notion of disaffected) to settle
the Votes, (That the supreme Authority is in the Commons in Parliament
assembled.) They complained, That the Lord Mayor, and some Aldermen, denied to
put their Petition to the Question at the Common Council, and departed the
Court, with the Sergeant and Town-Clerke, That the Court afterward passed it
Nemine contradicente. The Commons thanked the Petitioners (for the tender of
their assistance) and Ordered, That the Petition should be entered amongst the
Acts of the Common Council, and owned them for a Common Council
notwithstanding the departure of the Lord Mayor, etc. And about four or five
days after, the Commons Ordered, See a just and solemn Protest: of the free
Cit^zens of London, against the Ordinance, 17. December. 1647. disabling such as
had any hand in the City Engagment to bear Office.
That any six of the Commons Council, (upon eme gent occasions) might send for
the Lord Mayor to call a Common Council themselves, and any forty of them to
have power to Act as a Common Council without the Lord Mayor, any thing in
their Charter to the contrary notwithstanding. Thus you see the Votes of this
supreme thing (the House of Commons) are now become the only Laws and Reason
of all our actions.

77, An Act passed for adjournment of part of Hillary Term, and the Lords
concurrence rejected.
The 16 Jan. 1648. was passed an Act of the Commons for adjournment of Hillary
Term for forty days This was in order to the Kings Trial, but the
Commissioners of the Great Seal, declared, That they could not agree to seal
Writs of Adjournment without the Lords concurrence, (the assent of one Lord
being requisite) their tame Lordships sent down to the Commons to offer their
readiness to join therein. But the Commons having formerly Voted, The Supreme
Power to be in themselves as the Peoples Representative, and that the Commons
in every Committee should be empowered to Act without the Lords. The Question
was put, Whether the House would concur with the Lords therein? which passed
in the Negative: so the Lords were not owned. Afterward they ordered, that the
Commoners (Commissioners for the Great Seal) should issue forth Writs without
the Lords.

78. The Agreement of the People presented to the House of Commons by the
Officers the Army. Diurnall, from Jan. 15. 10. 22. 1648. nu. 286.
20. January, Lieut. General Hammond, with many Officers of the Army, presented
to the Commons from the General and Council of the Army, a thing like a
Petition, with The Agreement of the People, annexed. Mr. Speaker thanking them,
desired them to return the hearty thanks of the House to the General and all
his Army for their gallant services to the Nation; and desired the Petition and
Agreement should be forthwith printed, to show the good affection between the
Parliament and Army. I cannot blame them to brag of this affection, being the
best string to their bow. About this time some wel-meaning man (that durst
think truth in private) published his thoughts under the Title of [Six serious
Quaeries, concerning the Kings Trial, by the High Court of Justice..

79. 6. Queries concerning the Kings Trial by the new High Court of Justice.
1. Whether a King of three distinct Kingdoms can be condemned and executed by
one Kingdom alone, without the concurrent consent, or against the judgment of
the other two?

2. Whether if the King be indicted or arraignd of high Treason, he ought not
to be tried by his Peers? and whether those who are now nominated to try him,
or any others in the Kingd: be his Peers?

3. Whether if the King be triable in any Court, for any Treason against the
Ki^gdom, He ought not to be tried only in full Parliament, in the most solemn
and public manner, before all the Members of both Houses, in as honorable a
way, as Strafford was in the beginning of this Parliament? And whether He ought
not to have liberty and time to make His full defense, and the benefit of his
learned Counsel, in all matters of Law, that may arise in or about his Trial,
or in demurring to the jurisdiction of this illegal new Court, as Strafford and
Canterbury had?

4. Whether one eighth part only of the Members of the Commons House, meeting
in the House, under the Armies force, when all the rest of the Members are
forcibly restrained, secluded, or scared away by the Armies violence, and
representing not above one eighth part of the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of
the Kingdom, without the consent and against the Vote of the majority of the
Members, excluded and chased away, and of the House of Peers, by any pretext of
Authority, Law, or Justice, can erect a New great Court of Justice to try the
King, in whom all the rest of the Members, Peers and Kingdom (being far the
Major part) have a greater interest then they? Whether such an High Court can
be erected without an Act of Parl. or at least an Ordin. of both Houses, and a
Commission under the Great Seal of England? And if not, whether this can be
properly called a Court of Justice? and whether it be superior or inferior to
those who erected it? who either cannot or dare not try and condemn the King in
the Com. House; though they now style it, The Supreme Authority of the Kingdom;
and whether all who shall sit as Judges, or act as Officers in it toward the
Deposing or taking away the Kings life, be not really guilty of High Treason,
and all those who were aiding or assenting to the erection thereof in such an
irregular manner, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm?

5. Whether those who are professed Enemies to the King, and by their
Remonstrances, Speeches, and actions, profess they desire his blood and seek
his life, can either in Law or Conscience be reputed competent Judges to try
him for his life? It being a just exception to any Jury man, who is to try the
basest or poorest Felon, and a legal challenge for which he must be withdrawn;
that he is a professed Enemy and Prosecutor who seeks his life, and therefore
no lawful nor indifferent trier of him for it.

6. Whether the trial and taking away of the Kings life by such an illegal and
arbitrary High Court of Justice, as this, will not prove a most dangerous
inlet, to the absolutest tyranny and bloodiest butchery ever yet heard of, or
practiced in this, or any other Nation? and a ready way to teach us, how to
chop off one another heads, till we are all destroyed? For if they may take
away the Kings head in it without, and against all rules of Law: then by the
same or stronger reason, they may in like manner chop off the heads of any
Nobleman, Peer, Member, Gentleman, or inferior Subject for any imaginary
Treason or offense, and confiscate their Estates, there being no assurance they
will stop at the Kings: The Answer of the General Council of Officers touching
the secluded Members, Jan. 3. 1648.
And if those who are confessed to be the Majority of the Com. House, and
therefore excluded, or the Prince of Wales next Heir to the Crown, or the
Malignant party, or any oher Faction whatsoever which may arise, should at any
time hereafter get the upper hand by the peoples general adhering to them, or
any divisions of the Army, or by any means Gods providence should administer
(who has thousands of ways to pull down the proudest Tyrants, and dissipate
the strongest Armies in a moment, as he did Senacheribs, the Midianites, the
Moabites, and Ammonites, with sundry others recorded in sacred Writ, and
profane Stories, and the Scots Army but few months since) they may by like
authority and president erect the like new Court, to cut off the heads of all
the Members now sitting, and of the present General Council of the Army, and
all the Commissioners acting in this new Court; and so fall a murdering and
butchering one another, till we were all destroyed one by another, and made a
spectacle of most unnatural tyranny, and cruelty to the whole world, Angels,
and Men, and a prey to our common Enemies. Upon which consideration, let every
man now seriously lay his hand upon his own breast, and sadly consider what the
bloody tragical issue of this new Phaleris Bull, may prove to him or his; and
whether every Freeborn Englishman (especially of Noblest birth, and amplest
Estate) be not deeply obliged in point of prudence and conscience to use his
utmost endeavor with hazard of life and estate, to prevent the erection of
such an exorbitant and illegal Authority, in the very rise and foundation, ere
it be over-late; and not patiently suffer a rash inconsiderate number of
Hotspurs (of mean condition and broken desperate fortunes for the most part)
out of private malice, fear, or designs to secure and enrich themselves by the
ruins of others of better fortunes and quality; to set up such a new shambles
to butcher and quarter the King, Nobles, Parliament Men, Gentlemen, and persons
of all conditions, as was never heard of among Pagans or Christians, from the
Creation to this present, and will no way suit with our English soil, already
overmuch watered with English blood; and so deeply engaged against all arbitrary
and tyrannical usurpations and proceedings (especially capital) in any hands
whatsoever, which have cost us so much blood and treasure to oppose and fight
against for seven years last past.

Saturday, Ian. 20. 1648. 80. The first days Trial of his Majesty.
The new thing called The High Court of Justice sat: Bradshaw being President,
who had the Mace and Sword carried before him, and 20 Gentlemen (forsooth) with
Partisans for his Guard, under the command of Colonel Fox the Tinker. An O yes
being made, and silence commanded: the said Act of the Commons for erecting the
said Court was read, and the Court called, there being about 70 of the
Commissioners present. Then the King was brought to the Bar by Col. Hacker with
Halberdiers, the Mace of the Court conducting him to his chair within the Bar
where he sat. And then Pres. Bradshaw said to the King, Charles Stuart King of
England; The Commons of England assembled in Parliament being sensible of the
great calamities brought upon this Nation, Prove this power and trust: The
whole Kingdom (in effect) deny it. So do all our Law Books, and the practice of
all Ages.
and of the innocent blood shed (which are referred to you as the Author of it)
according to that duty which they own to God, the Nation, and themselves, and
according to that power and fundamental trust reposed in them by the People,
have constituted this High Court of Justice, before which you are now brought,
and you are to hear your Charge, upon which the Court will proceed.

Solicitor Cook. My Lord, in behalf of the Commons of England, and of all the
People thereof, I do accuse Charles Stuart here present of High Treason and
misdemeanors, and I do in the name of the Commons of England desire the
Charge may be read unto him.


The King. Hold a little.


President. Sir, the Court commands the Charge to be read; afterward you may
be heard. The Charge was read, as follows: The Charge against King Charles
the First, January 20. 1648.
The Charge read.
THat the said CHARLES STUART, being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited power to govern by, and according to the Laws of the
Land, and not otherwise: And by his Trust, Oath, and Office: being obliged to
use the power committed to him, For the good and benefit of the People, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties; yet nevertheless, out of a
wicked design, to erect and uphold in himself an unlimited and tyrannical
power, to rule according to his Will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties
of the People: Yea, to take away, and make void the foundations thereof, and of
all redress and remedy of mis-government, which by the fundamental
Constitutions of this Kingdom, were reserved on the peoples behalf, in the
right and power of frequent and successive Parliaments, or National meetings in
Council; He, the said Charles Stuart, for accomplishment of such his Designs,
and for the protecting of himself and his Adherents, in his and their wicked
Practices to the same Ends, has traitorously and maliciously levied War
against the present Parliament, and the People therein Represented.

Particularly, upon or about the thirtieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand six hundred forty and two, at Beverley, in the County of
York; and upon, or about the thirtieth day of July, in the year aforesaid, in
the County of the City of York: and upon, or about the twenty fourth day of
August, in the same year, at the County of the Town of Nottingham, (when, and
where he set up his Standard of War, and also on or about the twenty third day
of October in the same year, at Edgehill, and Keinton-field, in the County of
Warwick: and upon or about the thirtieth day of November, in the same year, at
Brainford, in the County of Middlesex: and upon, or about the thirtieth day of
August, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred forty and three, at
Cavesham-bridge, near Reading, in the County of Berks: and upon, or about the
thirtieth day of October, in the year last mentioned, at, or near the City of
Gloucester: And upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the year last
mentioned, at Newbury, in the County of Berks: And upon, or about the one and
thirtieth day of July, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred forty
and four, at Cropredy-bridge, in the County of Oxon: And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of September, in the year last mentioned, at Bodmin, and other
places near adjacent, in the County of Cornwall: And upon, or about the
thirtieth day of November, in the year last mentioned, at Newbury aforesaid:
And upon, or about the eighth day of June, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred forty and five, at the Town of Leicester: And also, upon
the fourteenth day of the same month, in the same year, at Naseby-field, in
the County of Northampton. At which several times and places, or most of them,
and at many other places in this Land, at several other times, within the years
aforementioned: And in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred forty and
six, He, the said Charles Stuart, has caused and procured many thousands of
the free-people of the Nation to be slain; and by Divisions, Parties, and
Insurrections, within this Land, by invasions from foreign parts, endeavored
and procured by Him, and by many other evil ways and means. He the said
Charles Stuart, has not only maintained and carried on the said War, both by
Land and Sea, during the years before mentioned, but also has renewed, or
caused to be renewed, the said War against the Parliament, and good people of
this Nation, in this present year, one thousand six hundred forty and eight,
in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and many other
Counties and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea. And particularly, He
the said Charles Stuart, has for that purpose, given Commissions to his Son,
the Prince, and others, whereby, besides multitudes of other Persons, many
such, as were by the Parliament entrusted and employed, for the safety of the
Nation; being by Him or his Agents, corrupted; to the betraying of their Trust,
and revolting from the Parliament, have had entertainment and commission, for
the continuing and renewing of War, and Hostility, against the said
Parliament and People, as aforesaid. By which cruel and unnatural Wars by
Him, the said Charles Stuart, levied, continued* and renewed, as aforesaid,
much Innocent blood of the Free-people of this Nation has been spilt, many
Families have been undone, the Public Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade
obstructed, and miserably decayed, vast expense and damage to the Nation
incurred, and many parts of the Land spoiled, some of them even to desolation.

And for further prosecution of His said evil Designs, He, the said Charles
Stuart, does still continue his Commissions to the said Prince, and other
Rebels and Revolters, both English and Forraigners; and to the Earl of Ormond,
and to the Irish Rebels and Revolters, associated with him; from whom further
Invasions upon this Land are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the behalf
of the said Charles Stuart.

All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evil practices of Him, the said Charles
Stuart have been, and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
Personal Interest of Will and Power, and pretended prerogative to Himself and
his Family, against the public Interest, Common Right, Liberty, Justice, and
Peace of the people of this Nation, by, and for whom He was entrusted, as
aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that He, the said Charles Stuart has been, and is
the Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said unnatural, cruel, and
bloody Wars, and therein guilty of all the treasons, murders, rapines,
burnings, spoils, desolations, damage and mischief to this Nation, acted or
committed in the said Wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by Protestation (saving on the behalf of the people
of England, the liberty of Exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Charge
against the said Charles Stuart; and also of replying to the Answers which the
said Charles Stuart shall make to the premises, or any of them, or any other
Charge that shall be so exhibited) does for the said treasons and crimes, on
the behalf of the said people of England, Impeach the said Charles Stuart, as a
Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public and implacable Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England: And pray, that the said Charles Stuart, King of
England, may be put to answer all and every the premises, That such
Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence, and Judgment may be thereupon had,
or shall be agreeable to Justice.



The King smiled often during the reading of the Charge, especially at these
words: Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and public Enemy of the Commonwealth.


President. Sir, you have now heard your Charge, you find that in the close of
it, it is prayed to the Court in behalf of the Commons of England, that you
answer to your Charge, which the Court expects.


King. I would know by what power I am called hither? I was not long ago in the
Isle of Wight, how I came there is a longer story, then I think fit at this
time for me to speak: But there I entered into a Treaty with both Houses of
Parliament, with as much faith as is possible to be had of any People in the
World: I Treated there with a number of Honorable Lords and Gentlemen, and
treated honestly and uprightly, I cannot say but that they did very nobly with
Me: We were upon a Conclusion of the Treaty. Now I would know by what lawful
Authority (there are many unlawful Authorities, Thieves and Robbers on the
Highway) I was brought from thence, and carried from place to place? (and I
know not what) and when I know by what lawful Authority, I shall Answer.
Remember I am your King, your lawful King, and what sins you bring upon your
own heads, and the judgment of God upon this Land, think well upon it, think
well upon it, I say, before you go on from one sin to a greater; therefore
let me know by what lawful Authority I am seated here? and I shall not be
unwilling to Answer. In the mean time I shall not betray My Trust: I have a
trust committed to Me by God, by old and lawful descent; I will not betray it
to answer to a new unlawful Authority.


Bradshaw Pres. If you had been pleased to have observed what was hinted to you
by the Court at your first coming hither, you would have known by what
Authority: which Authority requires you in the name of the People of England,
of whom you are Elected KING, to answer them.


King. I deny that.


Bradsh. If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court, they must proceed,


King. I do tell them so, England was never an Elective Kingdom, but an
Hereditary Kingdom, for near these thousand years: Therefore let Me know by
what lawful Authority I am called hither? I do stand more for the Liberty of
My People then any here that come to be My pretended Judges: and therefore let
Me know by what lawful Authority, and I will Answer, otherwise I will not
Answer.


Bradsh. Sir, How really you have managed your Trust is known: your way of
Answer is to interrogate the Court, which beseems not you in this condition you
have been told of it twice or thrice.


King. Here is Lieut. Colonel Cobbet, ask him, if he did not bring Me from
the Isle of Wight by force? I do not come here as submitting to the Court; I
will stand as much for the Privilege of the House of Commons, rightly
understood, as any man here whatsoever; I see no House of Lords here that may
constitute a Parliament, and (the King too) should have been. Is this the
bringing the King to His Parliament? Is this the bringing an end to the Treaty
on the public Faith? Let Me see a Lawful Authority warranted by the Word of
God, the Scriptures, or by the constitutions of the Kingdom. I will not betray
My Trust, nor the Liberties of the People; I am sworn to keep the Peace by
that duty I owe to God, and My Country: and I will do it to the last breath in
My body. As it is a sin to withstand lawful Authority, so it is to submit,
to a Tyrannical, or any otherwise unlawful Authority.


Bradsh. The Court expects your final Answer, and will adjourne till Monday
next: Brutish.
we are satisfied with our Authority that are your Judges, and it is upon Gods
Authority, and the Kingdoms; and that peace you speak of will be kept in doing
Justice, and that is our present work. So the Court adjourned, and the King was
conducted back; Note.
They had so contrived it, that diverse Schismatic Soldiers, and Fellows
were placed round about the Court, to cry Justice, Justice, when the King was
remanded, thinking all the rest of the people would have bleated to the same
tune, but they (almost all) cried God bless Him, and were (some of them) well
cudgelled by the Soldiers for not saying their prayers handsomely after the
mode of the Army; one barbarous Soldier (it is confidently reported) spat in
the Kings Face as he bauled for Justice: Whether this were the first day, or
afterward, I know not.
The King only saying, My Savior suffered more for my sake, wiped it off with
His Handkerchief, yet the Court took no notice of this Affront, so far was
His Majesty already fore-judged and condemned to Sufferings.

Monday, January 22. 81. The second days Trial of his Majesty.
The KING was brought again to His Trial.


Solicitour Cock. May it please your Lordship, I did at the last Court in
behalf of the Commons of England, exhibit, and give in to this Court a charge
of high Treason, and other High crimes against the Prisoner at the Bar: whereof
I do accuse him in the name of the people of England, and the charge was read
unto Him, and his Answer required: My Lord, He was not then pleased to give an
Answer, but instead of answering did dispute the Authority of this High Court;
My humble motion to this High Court in behalf of the Kingdom of England, is,
That the Prisoner may be directed to make a positive Answer, either by way of
confession, or Negation: which, if He shall refuse to do, That the matter of
charge may be taken pro confesso, and the Court may proceed according to
Justice.


Bradsh. Sir, you may remember at the last Court you were told the occasion of
your being brought hither, and you heard a charge read against You, etc. You
hear likewise what was prayed in behalf of the People, That you should give an
Answer to that charge: You were then pleased to make some scruples concerning
the Authority of this Court, and knew not by what Authority You were brought
hither: You did diverse times propound your Questions, and were as often
Answered, That it was by Authority of the Commons of England, Assembled in
Parliament, that did think fit to call You to account for those High and
capital Misdemeanors, wherewith You were then charged. Since that the Court
has taken into consideration what You then said, they are fully satisfied with
their own Authority, and they hold it fit You should stand satisfied therewith
too: And they do require that you do give a positive and particular Answer to
this Charge exhibited against You; they expect you should either confess or
deny. If you do deny, Without any Law, President, rational debate, or
Arguments to prove it: Oh brutish Tyranny.
it is offered in the behalf of the Kingdom to be made good against You, Their
Authority they do avow to the whole world, that the whole Kingdom are to rest
satisfied therein, and You are to rest satisfied in it; and therefore You are to
give a positive Answer.


King, When I was here last, its true, I made that Question; and truly, if it
were only my own particular case, I would have satisfied My self with the
Protestation I made here the last time, against the Legality of this Court, and
that a King cannot be tried by any Superior Jurisdiction upon Earth: but it is
not my case alone, it is the Freedom, and the Liberties of the People of
England, and (do you pretend what you will) I stand more for their Liberties;
for if Power without Law may make Laws, nay, alter the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, I do not know what Subject he is in England that can be sure of
his Life, or any thing that he calls his own. Therefore, when I came hither, I
did expect particular Reasons to know by what Law, what Authority, you proceed
against me here? and therefore I am a little to seek what to say to you in this
Particular, because the Affirmative is to be proved, the Negative (often) is
very hard to do. I shall tell you My Reasons as short as I can. All proceedings
against any man whatsoever --


Bradsh. Sir, I must interrupt You; what You do is not agreeable to the
proceedings of any Court of Justice: False.
You are about to enter into Argument and Dispute concerning the Authority of
this Court, before whom You appear as a Prisoner, and are charged as a High
Delinquent; You may not Dispute the Authority of this Court, nor will any Court
give way unto it, You are to submit to it, etc.


King. Under favor; I do plead for the Liberty of the people of England more
then you do; and therefore, If I should impose a belief upon any man without
Reasons given, it were unreasonable --


Bradsh. Oh Brutish Asinine Kingdom, to be Governed by an up-start Authority.
without use of Reason.
Sir, I must interrupt You: You may not be permitted, You speak of Law and
Reason, and there is both against you. Sir, The Vote of the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament, is the reason of the Kingdom, and they are those that
have given You that Law, according to which you should have Ruled and Reigned;
Sir, It will be taken notice of, that you stand in contempt of the Court, and
Your contempt will be recorded accordingly.


King. I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent, but by all Laws that ever
I heard, all men may put in Demurrers against any proceedings as Illegal: and
I do demand that, if you deny that, you deny Reason.


Bradsh. Overruled a Demurrer without Argument: If a man may not Demurre to the
Jurisdiction of any Court, that Court may enlarge its bounds, and become a
Corporation of Tyrants.
Sir, Neither You, nor any Man are permitted to Dispute that Point, You are
concluded; You may not demurr to the Jurisdiction of the Court, if You do, I
must let you know, that they overrule Your demurrer, they sit here by the
Authority of the Commons of England; and all Your Predecessors and You, are
responsible to them.


King. I deny that, show Me one President.


Bradsh. Sir, You ought not to interrupt while the Court is speaking to you:
this point is not to be debated by you, if you offer it by way of Demurrer, to
the Jurisdiction of the Court, they have considered of their Jurisdiction, they
do affirm their own Jurisdiction.


King. I say Sir, by your favor, That the Commons of England were never a
Court of Judicature: I would know how they came to be so?


Bradsh. Sir, you are not to be permitted to go on in that Speech, and these
discourses.


Then the Clerk of the Court read, as follows:

Charles Stuart, King of England, you have been accused in the behalf of the
people of England, of High Treason, and other high crimes, the Court has
determined that you ought to answer the same.

King. I will Answer the same so soon as I know by what Authority you do this.


Bradsh. If this be all that you will say, then Gentlemen, you that brought the
Prisoner hither, take charge of Him back again.


King. I do require that I may give My Reasons why I did not Answer, and give
Me time for that.


Bradsh. Sir, It Is not for Prisoners to require.


King. Prisoners! Sir, I am not an ordinary Prisoner.


Bradsh. The Court have affirmed their Jurisdiction, if You will not Answer, We
shall give order to Record your default.


King. You never heard my Reasons yet.


Bradsh. Sir, Your Reasons are not to be heard against the highest
Jurisdiction.


King. Show Me that Jurisdiction where Reason is not to be heard? Reasons are
not to be heard against a remaining faction of the Commons of England.



Bradsh. Sir, we show it you here, the Commons of England, and the next time
you are brought, You will know more of the pleasures of Court, and it may be,
their final Determination.


King. Show Me where ever the House of Commons was a Court of Judicature of
that kind.


Bradsh. Sergeant, take away the Prisoner.


King. Well Sir, Remember that the King is not suffered to give in His Reasons,
for the liberty and freedom of all His Subjects.


Bradsh. Sir, You are not to have liberty to use this language, how great a
Friend You have been to the Laws and Liberties of the People, let all England
and the world judge.


King. Sir, under favor, it was the Liberty, Freedom, and Laws of the Subject
that ever I took -- defended My self with Arms, I never took up Arms against
the People, but for the Laws.


Bradsh. The command of the Court must be obeyed, no Answer will be given to
the Charge.


So the King was guarded forth to Sir Robert Cottons, and the Court adjourned
to the Painted-Chamber, Tuesday twelve a Clock.

82. The 3d. days Trial of His Majesty.
Tuesday, January 23. The Court sat again, seventy three Commissioners present.

The King brought into the Court, sits down.

Solicit. Cook. May it please your Lordship my Lord President, This is now the
third time that by the great grace and favor of the Court, the Prisoner has
been brought to the Bar, before any Issue joined in this Case. My Lord, I did
at the first Court exhibit a Charge against Him, containing the highest
Treason that ever was wrought on the Theater of England, That a King of England
trusted to keep the Law, that had taken an Oath so to do, that had Tribute
paid Him for that end, should be guilty of a wicked Design to subvert and
destroy our Laws, and introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government in
defiance of the Parliament and their Authority; set up His Sandard for War,
against his Parliament and People: and I did humbly pray in behalf of the
People of England, That he may speedily be required to make an Answer to the
Charge; but, my Lord, in stead of making any Answer, He did then dispute the
Authority of this High Court; your Lordship was pleased to give Him a further
day to put in His Answer, which day being yesterday: I did humbly move, That He
might be required to give a direct and positive Answer, either by denying, or
confessing of it; But, my Lord, He was then pleased to demur to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, which the Court did then overruled, and command Him
to give a direct and positive Answer: My Lord, besides this great delay of
Justice, I shall now humbly move your Lordship for speedy Judgment against
Him: I might press your Lordship upon the whole, That according to the known
rul^s of the Laws of the Land; that if a Prisoner shall stand contumacious in
contempt, and shall not put in an Issuable Plea, guilty or not guilty of the
charge given against him, whereby he may come to a fair Trial, that by an
implicit confession it may be taken, pro confesso; as it has been done to
those who have deserved more favor, than the Prisoner at the Bar has done.
But besides, my Lord, I shall humbly press your Lordship upon the whole fact,
You see the emnant ^f the House of Comm. had f^rejudged the King before they
^rected this new Court to sentence him; and claim a Jurisdiction, as well as a
S^preme Authority.
That the House of Commons, the Supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of the
Kingdom, they have declared, That it is notorious that the matter of the
charge is true; as it is in truth my Lord, as clear as crystal; and as the
Sun that shines at noonday; which if your Lordship and the Court be not
satisfied in, I have notwithstanding on the Peoples behalf, several Witnesses
to produce; and therefore I do humbly pray, (and yet I do confess, it is not
so much I, as the Innocent blood that has been shed: (the cry whereof is very
great) for Justice and Judgment) and therefore I do humbly pray, that speedy
Judgment be pronounced against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Bradshaw. Sir, You have heard what is moved by the Council on behalf of the
Kingdom against you; you were told over and over again, That it was not for
you, nor any other man to dispute the Jurisdiction of the Supreme and highest
Authority of England, from which there is no appeal, and touching which there
must be no dispute; yet you did persist in such carriage as you have no manner
of obedience, nor did you acknowledge any authority in them; nor the high Court
that constituted this high Court of Justice: Sir, I must let you know from the
Court, that they are very sensible of these delays of Yours, and that they
ought not (being thus Authorized by the Supreme Court of England) be thus
trifled withal, and that they might in Justice, and according to the rules of
Justice, take advantage of these delays, and proceed to pronounce Judgment
against you, yet nevertheless they are pleased to give direction, and on their
behalf, I do require you, That You make a positive Answer unto this charge that
is against you, in plain Terms (for Justice, knows no respect of Persons)
you are to give your positive and final Answer in plain English, whether you
be guilty or not guilty of these Treasons laid to your charge.


King. When I was here Yesterday, I did desire to speak for the Liberties of
the people of England, I was interrupted; I desire to know yet, whether I may
speak freely, or not?


Bradsh. Sir, You have had the resolution of the Court, upon the like question
the last day, and you were told, that having such a charge of so high a nature
against you, Your work was, that you ought to acknowledge the Jurisdiction of
the Court, and to answer to your charge; when you have once Answered, you shall
be heard at large, make the best defense You can: But Sir, I must let you know
from the Court, (as their commands) That You are not to be permitted to Issue
out into any other di^^^^^ses till such time as You have given a positive
answer concerning the matter charged upon you.


King. For the charge I value it not a Rush, it is the Liberty of the people of
England that I stand for; for Me to acknowledge a new Court that I never heard
of before, I that am your KING, that should be an example to all the people of
England, to uphold Justice, to maintain the old Laws, Indeed, I do not know
how to do it: you spoke well the first day that I came here, (on Saturday) of
the Obligations that I had laid upon me by God, to the maintenance of the
Liberties of my people, the same Obligation you spoke of, I do acknowledge to
God, that I owe to him, and to My people, to defend as much as in Me lies, the
ancient Laws of the Kingdom; therefore until that I may know, that this is
not against the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, I can put in no particular
Answer, if you will give Me time I will show you My Reasons, and this -- here
being interrupted, the King said again, Whether these breaches and
interruptions were made by Bradshaw, or whether they are omissions and
expunctions of some material, parts of the King's Speech which this licenced
Pen man durst not let down; I Know not: I hear much of the King's Argument is
omitted, and much depraved, none but Licenced-men being suffered to take Notes.
By your favor, you ought not to interrupt Me, How I came here I know not;
there is no Law for it to make your King your Prisoner; I was in a Treaty upon
the public Faith of the Kingdom, that was the known -- two Houses of
Parliament, that was the Representative of the Kingdom, and when I had almost
made an end of the Treaty, then I was hurried away and brought hither, and
therefore-


Bradsh. Sir, You must know the pleasure of the Court.


King. By your favor Sir --


Bradsh. Nay Sir, by your favor, You may not be permitted to fall into those
Discourses: You appear as a Delinquent, You have not acknowledged the Authority
of the Court, the Court craves it not of You, but once more they command You to
give your positive Answer. Clerk do your Duty.


King. Duty Sir!


The Clerk reads.

Charles Stuart, King of England, You are accused in behalf of the Commons of
England of diverse high Crimes and Treasons; which Charge has been Read unto
You, The Court now requires You to give Your positive and final Answer, by way
of confession or denial of the Charge.

King. Sir, I say again to you, so that I may give satisfaction to the People
of England, of the clearness of My proceedings, not by way of answer, not in
this way, but to satisfy them that I have done nothing against that Trust that
has been committed to Me, I would do it; but to acknowledge a New Court
against their Privileges, to alter the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,
Sir, you must excuse me,


Bradsh. Sir, This is the third time that You have publicly disavowed this
Court and put an affront upon it: how far You have preserved the privileges of
the people, Your actions have spoken, but truly Sir, men's intentions ought to
be known by their actions, You have written Your meaning in bloody Characters
throughout the whole Kingdom, but Sir, you understand the pleasure of the
Court; Clerk Record the default; and Gentlemen, you that took charge of the
Prisoner take Him back again. So the King went forth with His Guards, and the
Court adjourned to the Painted Chamber; the Crier (as at other times) crying,
God bless the Kingdom of England. 83. The fourth and last days Trial of His
Majesty.


Saturday, 27. Jan. 1648. The Court sat again in Westminsterhall, the
President was in his Scarlet Robes, after him 67. Commissioners answered to
their Names; The King came in, in His wonted posture with his Hat on, a Company
of Soldiers and Schismatics placed about the Court to cry for Justice,
Judgment, and Execution, The people not daring to cry God bless Him, for fear
of being again beaten by the Soldiers.


Bradsh. Gentlemen, it is well known to all, or most of you here present, that
the Prison^r at the Bar has been several times convented, and brought before
this Court, to make Answer to a charge of High Treason, and other high crimes
exhibited against Him, in the Name of the people of England; to which charge
being required to Answer, He has been so far from obeying the commands of the
Court, by submitting to their Justice, as He began to take upon Him Reasoning
and Debate unto the Authority of the Court, And to the Highest Court that
appointed them to Try and to Judge Him; but being overruled in that, and
required to make His Answer, He still continued contumacious, and refused to
submit to Answer. Hereupon the Court (that they may not be wanting to
themselves, nor the Trust reposed in them, nor that any man's willfulness
prevent Justice) they have considered of the charge, of the contumacy, and of
that confession which in Law does arise on that contumacy, they have likewise
considered the notiority of the Fact charged upon this Prisoner; and upon the
whole matter, they are resolved, and have agreed upon a Sentence to be
pronounced against this Prisoner, but in respect He does desire to be heard
before the Sentence be Read, and pronounced, the Court has resolved to hear
Him; yet Sir, thus much I must tell you beforehand, (which you have been minded
of at other Courts) that if that which you have to say, be to offer any debate
concerning the Jurisdiction, You are not to be heard in it: You have offered it
formerly, and you have struck at the root, that is, the Power and Supreme
Authority of the Commons of England, which this Court will not admit a Debate
of: and which indeed is an irrational thing in them to do, being a Court that
act upon Authority derived from them. But Sir, if you have any thing to say in
defense of your self concerning the matter charged, the Court has given me in
commands to hear You.


King. Since I see that you will not hear any thing of debate concerning that
which I confess I thought most material, for the peace of the Kingdom, and
for the liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it; but only I must tell you, that
this many a day all things have been taken away from Me, but that, that I call
dearer to Me than My life, which is My Conscience and Mine Honor: and if I had
a respect of my life, more than the peace of the Kingdom, and the liberty of
the Subject, certainly I should have made a particular defense for My life, for
by that at leastwise, I might have delayed an ugly Sentence, which I believe
will pass upon Me, therefore certainly Sir, as a man that has some
understanding, some knowledge of the world (if that my true zeal to my Country
had not overborne the care that I have for My own preservation) I should have
gone another way to work than that I have done: Now Sir, I conceive that a
hasty Sentence once passed may sooner be repented of than recalled; and truly,
the self-same desire that I have for the peace of the Kingdom and the liberty
of the Subject, more than My own particular ends, makes Me n^w at last desire,
that I having something to say that concerns both, I desire, before Sentence be
given, that I may be heard in the Painted-Chamber before the Lords and Commons,
this delay cannot be prejudicial to you, whatsoever I say, if that I say no
reason those that hear Me must be Judges, I cannot be Judge of that that I
have: if it be reason, and really for the welfare of the Kingdom, and the
liberty of the Subject, I am sure its very well worth the hearing, therefore I
do conjure you, as you love that which you pretend (I hope its real) the
Liberty of the Subject, and peace of the Kingdom, that you will grant Me this
hearing before any Sentence passed; but if I cannot get this Liberty, I do
protest that your fair shows of Liberty and Peace are pure shows, and that
you will not hear your King.


The President said, This was a declining the Jurisdiction of the Court, and
delay: Yet the Court withdrew for half an hour, advised upon it, and sat
again.

Bradshaw said to the King, That the Court had considered what He had moved,
and of their own Authority; the return from the Court is this, That they have
been too much delayed by You already, and they are Judges appointed by the
highest Authority, and Judges are no more to delay, than they are to deny
Justice; and notwithstanding what You have offered, they are resolved to
proceed to Sentence, and to Judgment, that is their unanimous resolution.

The King pressed again and again, that He might be heard by the Lords and
Commons in the Painted Chamber, with great earnestness, and was as often
denied by Bradshaw: at last, the King desired that this Motion of His might be
entered.

Bradshaw began in a long Speech to declare the Grounds of the Sentence, much
aggravating the Kings offenses, and misapplying both Law and History to his
present purpose: When Bradshaw had done speaking, the Clerk read the Sentence
drawn up in Parchment to this effect: 84. The Sentence against His Majesty.
THat whereas the Commons of England in Parliament had appointed them an high
Court of Justice for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom He
had been three times convented; and at the first time a charge of High Treason
and other high crimes and misdemeanors was read in behalf of the Kingdom of
England, etc. Here the Clerk read the aforesaid Charge.
Which charge being read unto Him as aforesaid, He the said Charles Stuart was
required to give His Answer; but He repused so to do: and so expressed the
several passages at His Trial in refusing to Answer. For all which Treasons
and crimes this Court does adjudge, That He the said Charles Stuart as a Tyrant,
Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy shall be put to Death, by severing of
His Head from His Body.



After the Sentence read, the President said, This Sentence now read and
published, it is the Act, Sentence, Judgment, and resolution of the whole
Court; Here the whole Court stood up, as assenting to what the President said.

King. Will you hear Me a word Sir?


Bradshaw. Sir, You are not to be heard after the Sentence.


King. No Sir!


Bradshaw, No. Sir, by your favor Sir! Guard, withdraw our Prisoner.


King. I am not suffered to speak; expect what Justice other people will have.


These are the Names of such Persons as did actually sit as Judges upon the
Trial of His Majesty, with the Council and Attendance of the Court.

Oliver Cromwell, L. Genesis Com. Gen: Ireton. Major Genesis Skippon. Sir Hardresse
Waller. Col. Thomas Harrison. Col. Edward Whalley. Col. Thomas Pride. Col.
Isaac Ewer. Col. Rich. Ingelsby. Sir Henry Mildmay. Thomas, Lord Gray. Philip,
Lord Lisle. Will. Lord Munson, Sir John Danvers. Sir Tho. Maleverer. Sir John
Bowcher. Sir James Harrington. Sir William Brereton. Will. Henningham, Esquire.
Isaac Pennington, Ald. Thomas Atkins, Ald. Col. Rowland Wilson. Sir Peter
Weentworth. Col. Henry Martyn. Col. William Purefoy. Col. Godfrey Bosvill. Col.
John Berkstead. Sir Will. Cunstable. Col. Edward Ludlow. Col. Jo. Hutchingson.
Col. Robert Titchburne. Col. Owen Roe. Col. Adriaen Scroop. Col. John Oky. Col.
John Harrison. Col. John Desborough. Cornelius Holland, Esquire. Miles Corbet, Esquire.
Francis Allen, Esquire. Peregrin Pelham, Esquire. John Gourdon, Esquire. Serj. Francis
Thorp. Tho. Challoner, Esquire. Col. John Moore. John Aldred, Esquire. Col. Francis
Lassels. Henry Smith, Esquire. James Chaloner, Esquire. Dennis Bond, Esquire. Humph.
Edwards, Esquire. Gregory Clement, Esquire. John Fray, Esquire. Tho. Wogan, Esquire. Sir Greg.
Norton. Serj. John Bradshaw. Col. Edm. Harvey. John Dove, Esquire. Col. John Venn.
John Foulks, Alder. Thomas Scot. Tho. Andrews, Alder. William Cawley, Esquire. Col.
Anthony Stapley. John Lisle, Esquire. John Corbet, Esquire. Thomas Blunt, Esquire. Thomas
Boon, Esquire. Col. George Fleetwood. Col. James Temple. Sir Peter Temple. Col.
Thomas Wait John Brown, Esquire. William Say, Esquire. Col. Matthew. Thomlinson. John
Blackston. Gilb. Millington. Abraham Barrel. Col. Jo. Downs. Norton. L. Genesis
Tho. Hammond. Nich. Love. Vincent Potter. Augustine Garland. Sir Miles Lyvesey.
Jo. Dixwell. Simon Main. Daniel Blagrave. Col. Robert Lylburne. Col. Rich.
Deane. Col. Huson. L. Col W. Goffe. Master Carewe. Jo. Joanes. Mr. Bradshaw
nominated President. Counselors assistant to this Court, and to draw up the
Charge against the KING, are, Doctor Dorislaus. Master Ask. Master Cook.
Sergeant Dandy, Sergeant at Arms. Mr. Philips Clerk to the Court.
Messengers, and Dorekeepers, are, Master Walfard. Mr. Radley Mr. Pain. Mr.
Powell. Mr. Hull. and M. King Crver.
85. Observations upon the trial of His Majesty.
This is a Relation of his Majesty's Trial by a mixed Court of Justice erected
by 50. or 60. confederate Members of the House of Commons, sitting under the
power of the Army, after all the rest of the Members above 250. had been
violently secured, secluded, and frighted away. And in order to this design
against the King, the House of Peers ^^^d down, and yet the House of Commons
(when entire) ^s (...) Court of Judicature, nor can give an Oath. Had
indifferent (...) been permitted to take Notes, you had had a more perfect
narrative; yet as it is, truth shines forth to the confusion of this bloody,
cheating, Tyrannical faction: could they have wrought the King to have
submitted to the Jurisdiction of this Arbitrary Court, His example should have
been urged as an irrefragable Precedent against the lives and liberties of the
whole Kingdom, and urged to be of as great Authority, as if He had established
that Court by Act of Parliament: So that the King is to be looked on as a civil
Martyr, dying for the Liberty of the people. And although they have failed of
this device, yet they will have some other Arbitrary bloody Inquisition to cut
off the lives (without Law) of such as they desire to remove, without which
this Tyrannous Kingdom of the Saints, or Brambles, cannot subsist; And
therefore on Thursday, 2. February, Cromwell and Ireton, and their canniball
Counsel of Officers projected to get an Act passed by their House of Commons
(where all their requests, are commands) to enable the said Council to hang all
such as they shall adjudge Disturbers of the Army, 2. Part of Englands liberty
in Chains* sub fine And the Hunting of the Foxes, etc.
although no Members of the Army: they must have public Slaughter-houses in
terrorem, as well as private ad poenam, the nature of their cause, and their
natural conditions requiring it. Oliver is a Bird of prey, you may know by his
Bloody Beak; so was his Prodomus that Type and figure of him, John of Leyden;
than whom, this Fellow will shortly prove far more bloody: you see this
schismatic remnant of one House, have the impudence to usurp the Supreme
Authority to themselves: And then to tell you, that the Votes of this petty
conventicle (calling themselves the Commons) are the Law, nay the Reason of the
Land, thereby divesting us of those Laws which shall distinguish us from
Slaves, and denying us the use of our reason, whereby we are differenced from
Beasts, and expecting an implicit faith and blind obedience from us, to all
the Votes of this half-quarter of an House of Commons, so far that they Vote
obedience to the known Laws (in many cases) to be Treason, and what all our
Laws call Treason, they Vote no Treason: nay, should they vote a Turd to be a
Rose, or Oliv^rs Nose a Ruby, they would expect we should swear it, and fight
for it. This legislative Den of Thieves erect new Courts of Justice, neither
founded upon Law nor Prescription, Theaters of illegal tyranny and oppression,
to take away men's lives Arbitrarily, for Actions which no Law makes criminous,
nay, for such acts as the Laws command, where their proceedings are contrary
to Magna Charta, and all our known Laws and usages, not per probos and legales
homines, no Juries, no sworn Judges, authentically chosen, no Witnesses face to
face, no formal Indictment in which a man may find error, and plead to the
jurisdiction of the Court; or where the Court ought to be of Council with the
Prisoner: but the same engaged and vowed Enemies, are both Parties,
Prosecutors, Witnesses, Judges, (or Authorizers and Nominators of the Judges)
Actors of all parts upon that stage of blood.

The King pressed earnestly (especially upon Monday, 22. Jan.) to have his
Reasons against the Jurisdiction of the Court heard, but was as often denied,
He intended then to give them in writing, which was likewise rejected, so they
were sent to the Press. A true Copy whereof follows: His Majesty's Reasons
against the pretended Jurisdiction of the High Court of Justice, which he
intended to deliver in Writing on Monday, Jan. 22. 1648.
Faithfully transcribed out of the Original Copy under the Kings own hand. 86.
His Majesty's Reasons against the Jurisdiction of the high Court of justice;
published after His condemnation.

HAving already made my Protestations not only against the Illegality of this
pretended Court, but also that no earthly power can justly call Me (who am your
King) in question as a Delinquent, I would not any more open My mouth upon this
ocasion, more then to refer my self to what I have spoken, were I alone in this
case concerned. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the true
Liberty of my people, will not suffer Me at this time to be silent: For, how
can any freeborn Subject of England call life or any thing he possesses his
own, if power without right daily make new, and abrogate the old fundamental
Law of the Land. which I now take to be the present case. Wherefore when I came
hither, I expected that you would have endeavored to have satisfied Me
concerning these grounds, which hinder Me to answer to your pretended
Impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to it (though
Negatives are not so naturally proved as Affirmatives) yet I will show you the
Reason why I am confident you cannot judge Me, nor indeed the meanest man in
England; for I will not (like you) without showing a Reason, seek to impose a
belief upon My Subjects.

93. Hereabout I was stopped. and not suffered to speak any more concerning
Reasons.
There is no proceeding just against any man, but what is warranted either by
Gods Laws, or the municipall Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am
most confident, that this days proceeding cannot be warranted by Gods Law, for
on the contrary the authority of obedience unto Kings is clearly warranted and
strictly commanded both in the Old and New Testament; which if denied, I am
ready instantly to prove: and for the question now in hand, there it is said,
That where the word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him,
what do thou? Eccles. 8.4. Then for the Laws of the Land, I am no less
confident, that no learned Lawyer will affirm that an Impeachment can lie
against the KING, they all going in His Name; and one of their Maxims is, That
the King can do no wrong. Besides, the Law upon which you ground your
proceedings, must either be old or new; if old, show it; if new, tell what
authority warranted by the fundamental Laws of the Land has made it, and
when. But how the House of Commons can erect a Court of Judicature, which was
never one it self (as is well known to all Lawyers) I leave to God and the
World to judge; And it were full as strange that they should pretend to make
Laws without King or Lords House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws of
England.

And admitting, but not granting, that the People of Englands Commission could
grant your pretended power, I see nothing you can show for that; for certainly
you never asked the question of the tenth man of the Kingdom, and in this way
you manifestly wrong even the poorest Plough-man, if you demand not his free
consent, nor can you pretend any color for this your pretended Commission
without the consent at least of the major part of every man in England, of
whatsoever quality or condition, which I am sure, you never went about to seek,
so far are you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for My own
right alone, as I am your King, but also for the true Liberty of all My
Subjects, which consists not in sharing the power of Government, but in living
under such Laws, such a Government as may give themselves the best assurance
of their lives and propriety of their goods. Nor in this must or do I forget
the privileges of both Houses of Parliament, which this days proceedings does
not only violate, but likewise occasion the greatest breach of their public
Faith (I believe) ever was heard of, with which I am far from charging the
two Houses: for all the pretended crimes laid against Me, bear date long
before this late Treaty at Newport, in which I having concluded as much as in
Me lay, and hopefully expecting the two Houses agreement thereunto. I was
suddenly surprised, and hurried from thence as a Prisoner, upon which account I
am against my will brought hither, where since I am come, I cannot but to My
power defend the ancient Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, together with My
own just Right, then for any thing I can see the higher House is totally
excluded.

And for the House of Commons, it is too well known that the major part of
them are detained or deterred from sitting, so as if I had no other, this were
sufficient for Me to protest against the lawfullnesse of your pretended Court.

Besides all this, the peace of the Kingdom is not the least in My thoughts,
and what hopes of Settlement is there so long as power reigns without rule of
Law, changing the whole frame of that Government under which this Kingdom has
flourished for many hundred years, (nor will I say what will fall out in case
this lawless unjust proceeding against Me do go on) and believe it the Commons
of England will not thank you for this change, for they will remember how happy
they have been of late years under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the King my
Father, and My self, until the beginning of there unhappy troubles, and will
have cause to doubt that they shall never be so happy under any new. And by
this time it will be too sensibly evident, that the Arms I took up were only
to defend the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have
supposed My power has totally changed the ancient Government.

Thus having showed you briefly the Reasons, why I cannot submit to your
pretended Authority without violating the trust which I have from God, for the
welfare and liberty of My People; I expect from you either clear Reasons to
convince My judgment, showing Me that I am in an error (and then truly I will
readily answer) or that you will withdraw your proceedings.

This I intended to speak in Westminster Hall on Monday, 22. January, but
against reason was hindered to show My Reasons.



87. Alteration of the forms and styles of Writs and Legal proceedings.
The 27. Jan. The Commons read the Act for Altering the forms of Writs, and
other proceedings in Courts of Justice, which (according to all our known Laws,
the custom of all Ages, and the fundamental Government of this Kingdom) ever
ran in the Kings Name. This Act upon the Question was assented to, and no
concurrence of the Lords desired, of this more hereafter.

88. A Proclam. to be brought in, prohibiting the Pr. of Wales, or any of the
Kings Issue to be proclaimed King of England.
The Junto of 50. or 60. Commons appointed a Committee to pen a Proclamation,
That if any man should go about to Proclaim Prince Charles, or any of that line
King of England (after the removal of King Charles the Father out of this
life,) as is usually, and ought to be done by all Mayors, Bailiffs of
Corporations, High-Sheriffs, etc. under high penalties of the Law for their
neglect) or shall proclaim any other without the consent of the present
Parliament: the Commons declare it to be High Treason; and that no man under
pain of Imprisonment or such other (arbitrary) punishment, as shall be thought
fit to be inflicted on them, shall speak or preach any thing contrary to the
present proceedings of the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of
England assembled in Parliament. Your hands and feet, liberties and consciences
were long since tied up, 89. The Bishop of London appointed by the Ho. to
administer spiritual comfort to the cond^mned King; and the Kings usage by the
Army. See Mr. Jo Geree's Book against Goodwin, called, (Might overcoming
right.) And Mr. Pryns Epistle to his Speech, 6. Dec. 1648.
now you are tongue-tied.

Upon motion, the House ordered, That Doctor Juxon Bishop of London, should be
permitted to he private with the King in His Chamber, to preach and Administer
the Sacraments, and other spiritual comforts to Him: But notwithstanding,
their Masters of the Council of War, appointed that weathercock John Goodwin
of Coleman-sireet (the Balaam of the Army that curses and blesses for Hire)
to be Superintendent both over King and Bishop, so that they could hardly speak
a word together without being overheard by the long-schismaticall-eares of
black-mouthed John: Besides, I hear that for some nights a-Guard of Soldiers
was kept within His Chamber, who with talking, clinking of Pots, opening and
shutting of the door, and taking Tobacco there (a thing very offensive to the
Kings nature) should keep Him watching, that so by distempering and amazing
Him, with want of sleep, they might the easier bring Him to their bent.

28. January, being the last Sabbath the King kept in this life, 90. A
Paper-book of Demands tendered to be Subscribed by the King the Sunday before
He died. See sect. 94.
some of the Grandees of the Army and Parliament tendered to the King a
Paper-book, with promise of Life and some shadow of Regality (as I hear) if He
subscribed it: It contained many particulars destructive to the fundamental
Government, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Property of the People: One whereof
was instanced to Me, viz. That the King should (amongst many other demands,)
pass an Act of Parliament for keeping on foot the Militia of this Army, during
the pleasure of the Grandees, who should be trusted with that Militia, and with
power from time to time to recruit and continue them to the number of 40000.
Horse and Foot, under the same General and Officers, with power notwithstanding
in the Council of War to choose new Officers and Generals from time to time,
as occasion shall happen, and they think fit, and to settle a very great Tax
upon the people by a Land-Rate, for an established Pay for the Army; to be
collected and levied by the Army themselves, and a Court Martial of an
exorbitant extent and latitude. His Majesty (as I hear) read some few of the
propositions, and throwing them aside, told them, He would rather become a
Sacrifice for His People, then betray their Laws and Liberties, Lives and
Estates, together with the Church and Commonwealth, and the Honor of his
Crown, to so intolerable a bondage of an Armed faction.

91. The S^ile and Title of Custodes libertatis Angliae, voted to be used in
legal proceedings, in stead of the sty^e of the King. These Goalers of the
Liberties of England are Individuum vagum, not yet named. See a Continuation of
this madness in an Act for better settling proceedings in Courts of Justice,
according to the present Government. Dated 17. Feb. 1648.
Monday 29. Jan. 1648. The Legislative half-quarter of the House of Commons,
voted as follows, (hearken with admiration Gentlemen) be it enacted by this
present Parliament, and by Anthority of the same, that in all Courts of Law,
Justice, and Equity, and in all Writs, Grants, Patents, Commissions,
Indictments, Informations, Suits, Returns of Writs, and in all Fines,
Recoveries, Exemplifications, Recognizances, Process, and Proceedings of Law,
Justice, or Equity within the Kingdoms of England or Ireland, Dominion of
Wales, etc. in stead of the Name, Style, Test, or Title of the KING heretofore
used, that from henceforth the Name, Style, Test or Title Custodes libertatis
Angliae, authoritate Parliamenti, shall be used, and no other: and the Date of
the year of the Lord, and none other, and that all Duties, Profits, Penalties,
Fines, Amerciaments, Issues, and Forfeitures whatsoever, which heretofore were
sued for in the name of the KING, shall from henceforth be sued for in the name
of Custodes libertatis Angliae, authoritate Parliamenti: and where the words
were (Juratores pro Domino Rege) they shall be (Juratores pro Republica) and
where the words are (contra pacem, dignitatem and coronam nostram) the words
from henceforth shall be (contra pacem Publican.) All Judges, Justices,
Ministers and Officers are to take notice thereof, etc. and whatsoever
henceforth shall be done contrary to this Act, shall be, and is hereby declared
to be null and void; the death of the King, or any Law, usage or custom to the
contrary notwithstanding, Another device to mortify the King.
etc.

The King lay in White Hall Saturday (the day of his Sentence) and Sunday night
so near the place appointed for the separation of his Soul and Body, that He
might hear every stroke the Workmen gave upon the Scaffold (where they wrought
all night) this is a new device to mortify him, but it would not do.

Jan. 1648. was the day appointed for the Kings Death; He came on Foot from
Saint James's to White Hall that morning: His Majesty coming upon the Scaffold,
made a Speech to the People; which could only be heard by some few Soldiers
and Schismatics of the Faction who were suffered to possess the Scaffold, and
all parts near it; and from their Pens only we have our Informations.

His Majesty's Speech upon the Scaffold, and his Death, or Apotheosis.
The KING told them,

And a little after He said, I pray God they may take the right way to the
peace of the Kingdom; Soldiers Rebelling against their Master or Sovereign,
though they prevail, cannot claim by Conquest, because their quarrel was
perfidious, base, and sinful from the beginning.
But I must first show you how you are out of the way, and then put you into
the right way: First, you are out of the way, for all the way you ever had yet
(by any thing I could ever find) was the way of Conquest, which is a very ill
way, for Conquest is never just, except there be a good just Cause, either for
matter of wrong, or just Title, and then if you go beyond the first Quarrel
that you have, that makes it unjust in the end, that was just in the Beginning:
But if it be only matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery, as the Pyrate
said to Alexander, and so (I think) the way that you are in has much of that
way; Now (Sirs) to put you in the way, believe it you will never do right, nor
God will never prosper you, until you give him his due, the King (that is, My
Successor) his due, and the People (for whom I am as much as any of you) their
due.

1. You must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church, (according to
his Scripture) which is now out of order, to set you in a way particularly now
I cannot, but only a National Synod freely called, freely debating amongst
themselves, must settle this: when that every opinion is freely and clearly
heard.

2. For the King, the Laws of the Land will freely instruct you, and because
it concerns My self I will only give you a touch of it.

3. For the people (and truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom as much as any
man whatsoever) I must tell you, their Liberty and Freedom consists in having
such a Government, whereby their Lives and Goods may be most their own, it lies
not in having a Share in the Government, that is nothing pertinent to them; a
Subject and a Sovereign are clean different things: and therefore until you
restore the People to such a Liberty, they will never enjoy themselves; Sirs,
it was for this I now come hither, if I would have given way to an Arbitrary
sway, to have all Laws changed according to the power of the Sword, I needed
not to have come here; See Sect. 90.
and therefore I tell you, (and I pray God it be not laid to your charge) that
I am the Martyr of the People, etc.

The House had the Impudence to answer the Dutch Ambassadors, that what they
had done to the King, was according to the Law of the Land. They mean, that
their Lusts are the Laws of the Land: for other Law they can show none.
This was the effect of his Majesty's Speech, who showed much Magnanimity and
Christian patience, during all the time of His Trial and Death, notwithstanding
many barbarous affronts put (by way of tentation) upon Him, He had his Head
severed from his Body at one stroke, the Soldiers and Schismatics giving a
great shout presently.

Thus this noble Prince (a Gentleman sanctified by many afflictions) after He
had escaped Pistol, Poison, and Pestilent air, could not escape the more
venomous tongues of Lawyers and Pettyfoggers, Bra^shaw, Cook, Steel, Ask and
Dorislaus; thus the Shepherd is smitten, and the Sheep scattered.

THe said High Court of Justice, with the downfall of King CHARLES the I.
thereby, and in Him of the Regal Government, Religion, Laws, and Liberties of
this ancient Kingdom is Emblematically presented to the Readers view: See the
Figure, before the Title page.

Presently after this dissolution of the King, 94. Proclamations published
against proclaiming the King.
the Commons sent abroad Proclamations into London, and all England over,
reciting, That whereas several pretenses might be made to this Crown, and
Title to the Kingly Office set on foot, to the apparent hazard of the public
peace. Be it enacted and ordained by this present Parliament, and by the
Authority of the same, that no Person whatsoever do presume to proclaim,
declare, publish, or any ways to promote Charles Stuart (Son of the said
Charles) commonly called Prince of Wales, or any other Person to be King, or
Chief Magistrate of England, or Ireland, or of any Dominions belonging to them;
by color of Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any other claim whatsoever,
without the free consent of the people in Parliament first had and signified by
a particular Act or Ordinance, for that purpose, any Law, Stat: Usage or
custom to the contrary notwithstanding; Who shall judg^ when these Fellows
will be thought free, and when not?
and whosoever shall contrary to this Act, Proclaim, etc. Shall be deemed and
adjudged a Traitor, and suffer accordingly.

95. A Proclamation privately printed and scattered, proclaiming CHARLES the
second.
Notwithstanding which inhibition, the 2. February 1648. was printed and
scattered about London-streets this following Proclamation: * A Proclamation
proclaiming CHARLES Prince of Wales, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
WE the Noblemen, Judges, Knights, Lawyers, Gentlemen, Freeholders,
Merchants, Citizens, Yeomen, Seamen, and other freemen of England, do,
according to our Allegiance and Covenant, by these presents heartily, joyfully
and unanimously acknowledge and proclaim the Illustrious CHARLES Prince of
Wales, next heir of the blood Royal to his Father King CHARLES (whose late
wicked and traiterous murder we do from our souls abominate, and all parties
and consenters thereunto) to be by herditary Birthright, and lawful
succession, rightful and undoubted King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereunto belonging. And that we will faithfully, constantly
and sincerely in our several places and callings defend and maintain his
Royal Person, Crown, and Dignity with our Estates, Lives, and last drop of our
Bloods, against all Opposers thereof; whom we do hereby declare to be Traitors
and Enemies to his Majesty and his Kingdoms. In testimony whereof, we have
caused these to be published and proclaimed throughout all Counties and
Corporations of this Realm, the first day of February, in the first year of His
Majesty's Reign.

God save King CHARLES the Second,


The fag end of the House of Commons, Febr. 1. 1648. 96. A V^te that such
Members a^ had assented to the Vote. 5. Dec shall sit no more: others to enter
their d s^e^^ and disappro all.
passed a thing they call an Act, That such Members as had assented to the
Vote, 5. December. 1648. That the Kings Concessions were a ground for the House
to proceed to a settlement, should not be readmitted to sit as Members; such
as were then in the House and voted in the negative should first enter their
dissent to the said Vote, such as were ab^ent should declare their disapprovall
before they sit. You see the cheating Godly are resolved to keep all to
themselves.

This day their tame Lordships sent a Message to the House of Commons, but they
were too surly to call the Messengers in: 97. The Lords send a Message to the
Commons but the messenger not called in.
the substance of the Message was, That their Lordships had appointed 7. of
their House to join with a proportionable number of Commons, to consider of a
way how to settle this Nation.

Monday, 5. Febr. 1648. 98. The house of Lords voted down.
The Commons debated whether they should continue the House of Lords as a Court
Judicatory, or Consultory only? And the day following they put this Question,
Whether this House shall take the advice of the House of Lords, in the exercise
of the Legislative power of the Kingdom, in pur^uance of the Votes of this
House, 4 Janu: last. This was carried in the Negative by many Voices: in
farther pursuance of which Vote, they farther voted, That the House of Peers in
Parliament is useless and dangerous, and ought to be abolished; and that an Act
be brought in for that purpose, and voted down their Privilege of being exempt
from Arrests; yet they graciously condescended they shall be capable of being
elected knights of Shires, and Burgesses, if any will be so mad as to choose
them: yet my Lord of Pembroke is as much overjoyed with gay Privilege, as if
they had bestowed a new Cap with a Bell and a Babble upon him: who will not now
conclude that the Votes of this Legislative, this supreme piece of the House of
Commons, is the only Law and reason of the Land, which leads all our Laws and
reason captive, and is almighty against all but the Council of the Army.

The 8. Febr. came forth A Declaration and Protestation of the Peers, Lords
and Barons of this Realm, 99. A Protestation of the Peers.
against the late treasonable proceedings and tyrannical usurpations of some
Members of the Commons House, who endeavor to subvert the fundamental Laws,
and Regal Government of this Kingdom, and enslave the People to their
boundless Tyranny in stead of Freedom. The Protestation follows, WE the
Peers, Lords and Barons of this Realm of England, for the present necessary
vindication of the undoubted Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and more
particularly of the House of Peers, the just Prerogatives and Personal safety
of our Kings, the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, the Hereditary
Freedom of all the Freemen of this Nation, and our own affronted and contemned
Honors and Authority, against the many late unparalled dangerous Invasions,
and treasonable Usurpations of a few insolent mis-advised Members of the (late)
House of Commons, whiles the greatest and ablest part of that House were
forcibly detained or deterred from thence, wherewith we find our selves and the
whole Kingdom unsufferably injured, and deeply afflicted. Do, after a long
patient expectation of their own ingenious Retractions of such injustifiable
Exorbitancies, which their own judgments and consciences cannot but condemn,
whereof we now utterly despair; being thereto engaged in point of Honor,
Loyalty, Conscience, Oath, and love to our Native Country, as also by our
Solemn League and Covenant, publicly declare and protest to all the world,
That by the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and usage of Parliament time out
of mind, ever since there were Parliaments in this Island, the principal
Authority and Iudicatory of the Parliaments of England has always constantly
resided, and ought still to continue only in the King and House of Peers,
(wherein He always sits) and not in the Commons House, who never had, claimed,
nor ought to have any right or power to judge any Person or Cause civilly or
criminally (having no authority to examine any Witnesses upon Oath, and being
no Court of Record) but only to accuse and impeach Delinquents in and before
the House of Peers, where they always have used to stand bare-beaded at their
Bar; but never yet to stand covered, much less to sit, vote, or give
Judgment. And that the House of Commons without the concurrent assent of the
House of Peers, and Kings of England, never heretofore challenged nor enjoyed,
nor can of right pretend to any lawful power or Jurisdiction to make or
publish any form or binding Ordinance, Vote, Act, or Acts of Parliament
whatsoever, nor ever once presumed to pass any Act or Acts to erect a new High
Court of Justice, to try, condemn, or execute the meanest Subject, least of all
their own Sovereign Lord and King, or any Peer of the Kingdom (who by the
Common and Statute Laws of this Realm, and Magna Charta, ought to be tried only
by their Peers and not otherwise) or to dis-inherit the right Heir to the
Crown, or to alter the Fundamental Government, Laws, Great Seal, or ancient
forms of process and legal proceedings of this Realm, or to make or declare
High Treason to be no Treason; or any Act to be Treason, which in it self, or
by the Law of the Land is no Treason, or to dispose of any Offices or Places of
Judicature, or impose any Penalties, Oaths, or Taxes on the Subjects of this
Realm. And therefore we do here in the presence of Almighty God, Angels, and
Men, from our hearts disclaim, abhor, and protest against all Acts, Votes,
Orders or Ordinances of the said Members of the Commons House lately made and
published, for setting up any new Court of Justice to try, condemn, or execute
the King, or any Peers or Subject of this Realm: (which for any Person or
Persons to sit in or act as a Judge or Commissioner, to the condemning or
taking away the life of the King, or any Peer or other Subject, We declare to
be High Treason, and wilful Murder, to disinherit the Prince of Wales of the
Crown of England, or against proclaiming him King after his Royal Fathers late
most impious, traitorous and barbarous murder, or to alter the Monarchical
Government, Laws, Great Seal, Judicatories, and ancient forms of Writs, and
legal process and proceedings; or to keep up, or make good any Commissions
Judges, or Officers, made void by the Kings bloody execution; or to continue
any old, or raise any new Forces or Armies; or to impose any new Taxes,
Payments, Oaths or forfeitures on the Subjects, or to take away any of their
Lives, Liberties or Estates against the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, or to
make any new Judges, Justices or Officers; or set aside the House of Peers (far
ancienter than the Commons House) and particularly this insolent and frantic
Vote of theirs, Feb. 6. [That the House of Peers in Parliament is useless and
dangerous, and ought to be abolished, and that an Act be brought in for that
purpose] to be not only void, null, and illegal in themselves by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, but likewise treasonable, detestable, tyrannical and
destructive to the Privileges, Rights and being of Parliaments, the just
Prerogatives and Personal safety of the Kings of England: the Fundamental
Government and Laws of the Realm, the Lives, Liberties, Properties and Estates
of the People, and the most transcendent tyranny and usurpation over the King,
Kingdom, Parliament, Peers, Commons, and Freemen of England ever practiced or
attempted in any Age, tending only to dishonor, enslave and destroy this
ancient flourishing Kingdom, and set up Anarchy and confusion in all places.

All which exorbitant and traiterous Usurpations; We and all freeborn
Englishmen, are by all obligations bound to oppose to the uttermost with our
^^^es and fortunes, lest We should be accessory to our own and our Posterities
slavery and ruin, for preventing whereof We have lately spent so much blood
and treasure against the Mal^gnant Party, whose Treasons and Insolences they
far exceed.



100. The Kingly Office voted down, after almo^t 1000 years, it is now
discovered by these new Lights to be inconvenient to be in one hand, therefore
it must be in the Council of State, forty Tyrants for one King; that is, the
Army, and their Party.
The 7. Febru. the Commons debated about the Kingly Office, and passed this Vote.

Resolved, etc. By the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, that it has
been found by experience, and this House does declare, That the Office of a
King in this Nation, and to have the power thereof in any single Person is
unnecessary, burdensome and dangerous to the liberty, safety, and public
Interest of the People of this Nation, and therefore ought to be abolished, and
that an Act be brought in for that purpose.

101. A Committee to bring in a list of Names for a Council of State.
A Committee was named to bring in a list of Names (not exceeding 40) to be a
Committee of State, by Act of the House of Commons. This is to pull down one
King to whom we owe Allegiance; and set up forty Tyrants, to whom we owe no
Allegiance.

104. New Commissions for the Judges, whereof six hold, and six quit their
places.
Instructions were given by the Commons for drawing new Commissions for the
Judges, according to the new Antimonarchical style and way, the new Great Seal
being now ready, a Committee of the House met the Judges about it; whereof six
agreed to hold (upon a Provision to be made by Act of the House of Commons,
that the Fundamental Laws be not abolished.) This very provision so made by Act
of the Commons (beside all their former Votes against Monarchy, Peerage,
altering the style of Writs, coynage of Money, etc.) is it self an abolition of
the Fundamental Laws: This is but a Fig-leaf to cover their shame. Those that
held were, Of the Kings Bench, Mr. Justice Rolls and Judge Jerman; of the
Common Pleas, Mr Justice S. John, and Judge Pheasant; of the Exchequer, Chief
Baron Wild, and Baron Yates: those which quitted their places and kept their
Consciences, were Justice Bacon, and Justice Brown, Sir Tho. Beddenfield,
Justice Creswel, Baron Treaver, and Baron Atkins. 103. Cyrencester el^ction:
But the Clerk of the Crown cert fied, that between the Commitee of Elections,
and himself, they could not find the Indentures of return: the House therefore
Ordered, That they should sit, and do service; so they are Burgesses not
returned, but ordered to sit.


8. Febr. The Election of the General and Col. Rich at Cyrencester, which never
durst see the light before, after about 3. years lying dormant, and no account
made of it; is on a sudden reported to the House, approved of, and the Clerk of
the Crown (for whom they have not invented a new name yet) ordered to mend the
return of the Writ at the Bar.

104. A Declaration, That they will keep the Fundamental Laws, (lives) why did
they erect the High Court of Justice, and do still continue Martial Law?
(liberties) why do they press Seamen then? (properties) why do they levy
illegal Taxes by Soldiers, and continue illegal Sequestrations.
They likewise passed a Declaration to this purpose, that they are fully
resolved to maintain, and shall and will uphold, preserve and keep the
Fundamental Laws of this Nation; for and concerning the preservation of the
lives, liberties, and properties of the People, with all things incident
thereunto, with the alterations concerning Kings, and House of Lords, already
resolved in this present Parliament.

Monday, February 12. The Commons appointed the Circuits for those Judges that
held, 105. The Judges Circuits appointed, the Benches filled up, and their
Oaths altered.
and passed an Act for completing the Judges of the several Courts, filling up
the rooms of those that held not, with some alterations in their former
Commissions, and a new Oath to be given them, to swear well and truly to serve
the Commonwealth in the Office of a Justice of the Upper Bench (which all our
Laws call the Kings Bench) or Common Pleas, according to the best of their
skill and cunning. 106: A new Oath for the Freemen of London, and other
Co^porations.


The House passed an Act that the Oath underwritten, and no other, be
administered to every Freeman of the City of London at his admission, and of all
other Cities, Buroughs, and Towns Corporate.

YOu shall swear, that you will be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of
England, and in order thereto, you shall be obedient to the just and good
Government of the City of London, etc.

107. An Act to repe^l the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy.
They passed an Act also, to repeal the several Clauses in the Statute, 1.
Eliz. and 3. Jacob. enjoining the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience and Supremacy,
That the said Oaths, and all other Oaths of the like nature shall be, and are
hereby wholly taken away, the said Clauses in the said Acts be made void and
null, and shall not hereafter be administered to any Person, neither shall any
place or office be void hereafter by reason of the not taking of them, or any
of them, any Law, Custom, or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

108. Another Declaration and Protestation of the secured and secluded Members.
In opposition to these tyrannous, destructive, illegal and traiterous
proceedings of 40. or 50. cheating Schismatics, sitting under the force, and
promoting the Interests of will and power, of the rebellious Council of
Officers in the Army, The secured and secluded Members of the House of Commons
Declared as follows, * A public Declaration and Protestation of the secured
and secluded Members of the House of Commons; Against the treasonable and
illegal late Acts and proceedings of some few Confederate Members of that dead
House, since their forcible Exclusion, 13. Febr. 1648.
WE the secured and secluded Members of the late House of Commons, taking into
our sad and serious Considerations the late dangerous, desperate, and
treasonable proceedings of some few Members of that House (not amounting to a
full eighth part of the House, if divided into ten) who confederating with the
Officers and General Council of the Army, have forcibly detained and secluded
us (against the Honor, Freedom, and Privileges of Parliament) from sitting
and voting freely with them, for the better settling of the Kingdoms peace; and
contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, their Protestation, the
Solemn League and Covenant, and sundry Declarations and Remonstrances of both
Houses, to His late Murdered MAJESTY, His Heirs and Successors, the whole
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and to all foreign States and
Nations (since our exclusion and forced absence from their Counsels, by reason
of the Armies force) most presumptuously arrogated and usurped to themselves
the Title of, The Supreme Authority of this Kingdom: and by color and
pretense thereof have wickedly and audaciously presumed, without and against
our privities or consents, and against the unanimous Vote of the House of
Peers, to erect a High Court of Justice (as they term it) though never any
Court themselves, to Arraigne and condemn His Majesty, against the Laws of
God, and the municipall Laws of the Realm: which Court (consisting for the
most part of such partial and engaged Persons, who had formerly vowed His
Majesty's destruction, and sought His blood) most illegally and unjustly
refused to admit of His Majesty's just Reasons and exceptions against their
usurped Jurisdiction; and without any lawful authority or proof against Him,
or Legal Trial, presumed most traitorously and impiously to condemn and
murder Him: and since that, have likewise presumed to Try and Arraigne some
Peers, and others free Subjects of this Realm for their Lives, contrary to
Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, the Laws of the Land, and the liberty of
the Subjects, to the great enslaving and endangering of the lives and liberties
of all free People of England.

And whereas the said confederated Commons have likewise tyrannically and
audaciously presumed contrary to their Oaths and Engagements aforesaid, to
take upon them to make Acts of Parliament (as they term them) without our
privity or assents, or the joint consent of the King and House of Lords,
contrary to the Use and Privileges of Parliament and known Laws of the Land,
and by pretext thereof have traitorously and wickedly endeavored to
Dis-inherit the Illustrious CHARLES Prince of Wales, next Heir to the Crown,
and actual KING of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, immediately after
His said Royal Fathers barbarous Murder, by Right of descent; and proclaimed
it Treason for any Person to Proclaim him KING; (whereas it is high Treason in
them thus to prohibit His proclaiming) and have likewise traitorously and
impudently encroached a tyrannical and lawless power to themselves to Vote
down our ancient Kingly and Monarchical Government, and the House of Peers;
and to make a new Great Seal of England without the Kings Portraicture or
Style, and to alter the ancient Regal and Legal Style of Writs and
proceedings in the Courts of Justice, and to create new Judges and
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and to dispense with their Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and to prescribe new Oaths unto them contrary to Law, (though
they have no Authority by any Law, Statute, or custom to administer or injoyne
an Oath to any man) and thereby have traitorously attempted to alter the
fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and to subvert the freedom,
privileges, and being of Parliaments; for which Treasons, Strafford and
Canterbury (though least criminal) lost their Heads this last Parliament, by
some of their own prosecutions, and the judgment of both Houses.

We in discharge of our respective duties and obligations both to God, the
King, our own Consciences, our bleeding dying Kingdoms, and the several
Counties, Cities and Burrroughs for which we serve, do by this present Writing,
in our own Names, and in the Names of all the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs
which we represented in Parliament, publicly declare and solemnly protest
before the all-seeing God, the whole Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the world, that We do from the bottom of our hearts abominate,
renounce and disclaim all the said pretended Acts, Votes, and proceedings of
the said confederate Members, (acted under the Armies power against our
consents) as treasonable, wicked, illegal, unparliamentary, tyrannical, and
pernicious both to the King, Parliament, Kingdoms, and all the freeborn
People of this Realm; extremely disadvantagious and dishonorable to our
Nation, scandalous to our Religion, and mere forcible Usurpations, and
Nullities void in Law to all intents and purposes; which we, and all the
Freemen of this Kingdom, and all the Kingdoms and Dominions thereto
belonging, are bound openly to disavow, oppugn, and resist as such, with our
purses, arms, lives, to the last drop of our bloods; and to which, neither We,
nor any other can, ought, or dare to submit or assent in the least degree,
without incurring the guilt of High Treason, and the highest perjury, infamy,
and disloyalty. And in case the said confederates shall not speedily retract,
and desist from those their treasonable practices, and tyrannical usurpations;
(which We cordially desire and entreat them by all obligations of love and
respect they have to God, Religion, their King, Country and Posterity timely to
do.) We do hereby denounce and declare them to be Traitors and public Enemies
both to the King and Kingdom, and shall esteem and prosecute them, with all
their wilful Adherents, and voluntary Assistants as such; and endeavor to
bring them to speedy and condign Punishment, according to the Solemn League
and Covenant; wherein, We trust the whole Kingdom, all those for whom We
serve, and the Lord of Hosts himself to whom We have sworn and lifted up our
hands, hearts, and fervent prayers, will be aiding and assisting to us, and all
our Brethren of Scotland and Ireland who are united and conjoined with us in
covenant to our GOD, and Allegiance to our Sovereign King CHARLES the Second,
who (we trust) will make good all His destroyed Fathers concessions which
really concern our peace, or safety, and secure Us against all force and
tyranny of our Fellow Subjects; who now, contrary to their Trusts and former
Engagements, endeavor by the mere power of that Sword, (which was purposely
raised for the protection of our Persons, Government, Religion, Laws,
Liberties, the KING's Royal Person and Posterity, and the Privileges of
Parliament) to Lord it over Us at their pleasure, and enthrall and enslave Us
to their armed violence, and lawless martial wills; which we can no longer
tolerate nor undergo, after so long fruitless and abused patience in hope of
their repentance.



About the same time came out another Paper, entitled: 109. A Paper entitled
[Foure true Positions, etc.]
Four true and considerable Positions for the sitting Members, the new Courts
of Justice, and new Judges, Sheriffs, Officers, Lawyers, Justices, and others,
to ruminate upon.
1. THat the whole House of Commons in no Age had any Power, Right or Lawful
Authority to make any Valid or binding Act or Ordinance of Parliament; or to
impose any Tax, Oath, Forfeiture, or capital punishment upon any Person or
Freemen of this Realm, without the Lords or Kings concurrent assents: much
less then can a small remnant only of the Members of that House do it,
sitting under an armed force (which nulls and vacates all their Votes and
proceedings, as the Ordinance of 20. August, 1647. declares) whilst most of
their Fellow Members are forcibly detained and driven thence, as Mr. St. John
proves in his Speech concerning Ship-mony, p. 33. and in his Argument
concerning the Earl of Strafford's Attainder, p. 70, 71, 76, 77, 78. and Sir
Edw. Coke in his 4. Instit. c. 1.

2. That the few Members now sitting in, and the House of Commons being no
Court of Justice of it self, and having no power to hear and determine any
civil or criminal causes, nor to give an Oath in any case whatsoever, cannot
by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, nor by any pretext of authority
whatsover, erect any new Court of Justice, nor give power or authority to any
new Judges, Justices, or Commissioners to arraigne, try, condemn or execute any
Subject of meanest quality, for any real or pretended crime whatsoever; much
less their own Sovereign Lord the King; or any Peers of this Realm, who ought
to be tried by their Peers, and by the Law of the Land alone, and not
otherwise. And that the condemning and executing the King, or any Peer, or
other Subject by pretext of such an illegal Authority, is no less than High
Treason and wilful Murder, both in the Members, and Commissioners, Judges or
Justices, giving and executing Sentence of Death in any such arbitrary and
lawless void Court, or by virtue of any such void and illegal Commissions.

3. That the House of Commons and Members now sitting, have no power nor
authority to make or alter the Great Seal of England, or grant any Commissions
to any Commissioners, Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, or any other.
That all the Commissions granted by them, under their New, or any other Seal,
are merely void and illegal; and all the new Writs and proceedings in Law or
Equity before any Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, or other Officers made by them,
merely void in Law to all intents, and coram non judice,

4. That the denial of the KING's Title to the Crown, and plotting the means
to deprive Him of it, or to set it upon another Head, is High Treason, within
the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. chapter 2. And that the endeavoring to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realm of England [by King, Lords, and
Commons] and to introduce a tyrannical or arbitrary Government against Law, is
High Treason at the Common Law (especially in Judges and Lawyers) not taken
away by any Statute. Both which Mr. St. John in his Argument at Law, concerning
the Bill of attainder of high Treason of Tho. E. of Stafford, published by
order of the Com. House, An. 1641. p. 8. 14. to 33. and 64. to 78. And in his
Speech as a conference of both Houses of Parl. concerning Ship-mony, An. 1640.
has proved very fully by many reasons and presidents; and Coke in his 7.
Report, f. 10, 11, 12, and 3. Instit. c. 1. That the Commons now sitting, in
making a new Great Seal, without the Kings Image or Style, in granting new
illegal Commissions to Judges, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and other
Officers, in the name of Custodes Angliae in the general, in omitting and
altering the Kings Name, Style and Title in Writs, Process, Indictments, and
proceedings at the Common Law, and thereby endeavoring to Dis-inherit the
Prince, (now lawful King by and since his Fathers bloody murder) and to alter
and subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realm, by such
commissions and proceedings, and by the power of an Army to enforce them; and
the Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, and other Officers who accept of such
Commissions, and all those (especially Lawyers) who voluntarily assist,
consent, and submit to such Commissions and Alterations by such usurped
illegal Authority, and the Commissioners sitting in the new Courts of Justice
are most really guilty of both these high Whereupon six Judges refused to
accept any new Commissions, or to act as Judges.
Treasons (in which there are no Accessories) and less excusable than
Strafford or Canterbury, whom some of these new Judges and sitting Members
impeached and prosecuted to death for those very Treasons themselves now act in
a more apparent and higher degree than they, and (in respect of their oaths,
covenant, callings, and places) are more obliged to maintain the Kings Title,
the Fundamental Laws and Government, the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom
and Parliament then they; and therefore (if they persevere therein) may justly
expect the self-same capital punishments they underwent, if not far worse;
especially since they attempt to reduce the antientest Kingdom of all
Christendom, into the puniest and most contemptible State in all the World; and
thereby to render us the most infamous, perfidious and dishonorable Nation
under Heaven, both to the present and all succeeding Ages: which must needs
make the contrivers and Abetters thereof the most detestable Traitors and
public Enemies to their King and native Country, that ever this Realm
brought forth in any Age. Repent therefore of these your Treasons, and amend
your lives, if you expect the least hope of pardon from God or Man; and expiate
all your former high misdemeanors, by engaging all your power and endeavors
to settle all things in Church and State according to your primitive
engagements; instead of accumulating one sin and Treason to another, which will
prove your certain ruin in conclusion, not your safety.



About the same time, and (it is thought) from the same Author came forth a
Paper bearing the Title of, 110. Six propositions of undoubted verity Another
Paper. Every Act of Parliament relates to the first day of the same Parliam.
but it cannot be, that any Act passed in the Reign of King Charles the second,
should relate to the first day of this Parliament, which happened in the
sixteenth year of Charles the First, ergo this Parliament is determined by the
death of King Charles the first.
Six Propositions of undoubted verity, fit to be considered in our present
exigency by all loyal Subjects and conscientious Christians.
1. THat this Parliament is ipso facto Dissolved by the King's death; He being
the Head, Beginning and End of the Parliament, called only by his Writ, to
confer with Him as His Parliament and Council about urgent affairs, concerning
Him and His Kingdom, and so was it resolved in 1. Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 1. 14
H. 4. Coke 4. Instit. p. 46. and 4. c. 4. f. 44. b.

2. That immediately upon this Parliaments dissolution by the Kings death, all
Commissions granted by the King, or by one or both Houses to the General or
Officers of the Army, the Commissioners of the great Seal of England, Judges
of the Kings Courts, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Excise-men, Customers, and
the like; with all Committees, and ordinances of one or both Houses made this
Parliament, did actually determine, expire, and become merely void in Law to
all intents and purposes, and cannot be continued as good and valid by any
Power whatsoever.

3. That instantly after the Kings decease, the Imperial Crown of this Realm
of England, and of the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights thereunto belonging,
was by inherent Birthright, and Lawful undoubted succession and descent,
actually vested in the most Illustrious Charles, Prince of Wales, being next
lineall Heir of the blood Royal to his Father King CHARLES: and that He is
actual KING thereof, before any ceremony of Coronation, as is resolved in full
Parliament, by the Statute of 1. Jacobi, chapter 1. and by all the Judges of
England since. Coke 7. Report f. 10, 11. in Calvin's case, Whose Royal Person
and Title to the Crown all loyal Subjects are bound by their Oaths of
Supremacy, Allegiance, and Solemn League and Covenant, with their Estates,
Lives, and last drop of their bloods to maintain against all Opposers.

4. That all Peers of the Realm, Mayors, Sheriffs, chief Officers of Cities
and Corporations in this Kingdom, are obliged by their Places and Allegiance,
without any delays or excuses, to declare and proclaim Prince Charles to be
rightful King of England, and of all Kingdoms and Rights thereunto belonging;
notwithstanding any illegal prohibitions or menaces to the contrary by any
usurped Power whatsoever; under pain of being guilty of High Treason, and
forfeiting their City and Corporation Charters, in case of supine neglect or
refusal thereof; through fear, terror, or any sinister respect.

5. That till King Charles be settled in his Throne, or give other Order, the
present Government of the Kingdom is legally vested only in the Lords and
Peers of the Realm, being by Inheritance, custom and Law in such case, the
Kings and Kingdoms great Council, to whose lawful commands all other Subjects
ought to yield ready Obedience.

6. That every professed actual endeavor by force or otherwise to alter the
fundamental Monarchical Government, Laws, and legal Style and proceedings of
this Realm; and to introduce any new Government or Arbitrary proceedings
contrary thereunto, is no less then High Treason, and so declared and resolved
by the last Parliament, in the cases of Strafford and Canterbury, the loss of
whose Heads (yet fresh in memory) should deter all others from pursuing their
pernicious courses, and out-stripping them therein; they being as great,
potent, and as far out of the reach of danger and justice in humane
probability as any of our present Grandees.



111. A New Stamp for Coin.
That no Act of Rebellion and Treason might be unattempted by this Conventicle,
no part of the Regalities of the King, or peoples Liberties unviolated; they
considered of a New Stamp to be given to all Coin (for the future) of this
Nation.

112. Instructions for the Council of State.
13. Febr. They considered of Instructions and Power to be given by way of
Commission to the said Committee, or Council of State. 1. For the Government of
the two Nations of England and Ireland; appointing a Committee to bring in the
Names of these Hogens Mogens; and to perfect their Instructions: for, (1)
Ordering the Militia. (2) Governing the People, (they were wont to be Governed
by known Laws, not by Arbitrary Instructions, and by one King, not by forty
Tyrants, most of them base Mechanics, whose education never taught them to
aspire to more knowledge then the Office of a Constable.) (3) Settling of Trade*
(most of them have driven a rich Trade in the work of Reformation for
themselves.) (4) Execution of Laws, (this was wont to be done by legal sworn
Judges, Juries, and Officers.)

113. Powers given to the Council of State.
14. Eebr. The Committee reported to the House the Names of the Committee of
State, or Lords States General. Also the Power they were to have, viz: 1.
Power to command and settle the Militia of England and Ireland. 2. Power to set
forth Ships, and such a considerable Navy as they should think fit. 3. Power to
appoint Magazines and Stores for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and
dispose of them from time to time for the service of both Nations, as they
shall think fit. 4. Power to fit and execute the several powers given for the
space of one whole year: with many other powers not yet revealed, and daily
increased: besides what improvements of Power they are able to make hereafter,
having the Militia of an Army (that formidable Hob-goblin) at their command.
They have two Seals appointed, a Great Seal, and a Signet Patents for
Sheriffs, and Commissions for Justices, and Oaths for both, were reformed
according to the Godly cut.

When the Committtee of State was nominated in the House, 114. An expurgatory
Oath put upon the Council of State, scrupled by some of the Members, and
moderated by Cromwell ^n opposition of the Level^ers.
diverse Gentlemen of the best quality were named; whom they could not omit,
because they had sat with them, and concurred in all their great debates:
although they had more confidence in those petty Fellows, who had, or would
sell their souls for gain, to make themselves Gentlemen, to debar the said
Gentlemen of quality therefore and make them forbear, they invented an
expurgatory Oath or Shibeleth to be taken by every Member before his
initiation, whereby they should declare, That they approved of what the House
of Commons and their High Court of Justice had done against the KING, and of
their abolishing of Kingly Government, and of the House of Peers, and that the
Legislative and Supreme power was wholly in the House of Commons, 22. Febr.
Cromwell (Chairman of that Committee of State) reported to the Commons, That
according to the Order of that House, 19. of the said Members had subscribed to
that form of the Oath, as it was originally penned: but 22. of them scrupled
it, whereof all the Lords were part, not but that they confessed (except one)
The Commons of England to be the Supreme power of the Nation, or that they
would not live and die with them in what they should do for the future, but
could not confirm what they had done in relation to the King and Lords: so it
was referred to a Committee, to consider of an expedient.

Cromwell (having made use of the Levellers,, 115. Cromwells usurped power.
When the House of Commons opposed Cromwels and Iret^ns designs, they cried up
the Liberty of the People, and decried the Authority of Parliament, until they
had made use of the Levellers to purge the House of Commons and make it
subservient to their ends, and abolish the House of Lords: and then they cried
up the Supreme Au^horitie of their House of Commons, and decried the Liberty of
the people, and the Levellers who upheld it. So Charles the 5. first made use
of the Popes Authority to subdue the Protest^nts of Germany, and then used an
Army of Protestants to subdue and imprison ^he Pope.
(Assertors of public Liberty) to purge the House of Commons, and abolish the
Lords House) does now endeavor to cast down the Levellers once more, finding
himself raised to so great an height, that he cannot endure to think of a
levelling equality; he overswayes the Council of War, over-awes the House of
Commons, and is Chairman and Ringleader of the Council of State: so that he
has engrossed all the power of England into his own hands, and is become the
Triple-King, or Lord Paramount over all the Tyrants of England; in opposition
therefore to the Levelling party, and for the upholding his own more Lordly
Interest, he procured an expedient to Alter and Reform the said Oath, which at
last passed in this form following: February the 22. 1648.
116. The form of the said reformed Oath.
I A. B. being nominated a Member of the Council of State by this present
Parliament, do testify, that I do adhere to this present Parliament, in the
maintenance and defense of the public liberty and freedom of this Nation, as
it is now Declared by this Parliament, (by whose Authority I am constituted a
Member of the said Council) and in the maintenance and defense of their
resolutions concerning the settling of the Government of this Nation for the
future, in way of a Republique without King or House of Peers, and I do promise
in the sight of God, that (through his Grace) I will be faithful in
performance of the trust committed to me as aforesaid, and therein faithfully
pursue the Instructions given to the said Council by this present Parliament;
Mere you see a curtain drawn between the eyes of the people, and the
clandestine machinations and actings of this Council.
and not reveal or disclose any thing in whole or in part, directly, or
indirectly, that shall be debated or resolved upon in the Council, without the
command or direction of the Parliament, or without the order or allowance of
the major part of the Council, or of the major part of them that shall be
present at such Debates or Resolutions: In confirmation of the premises, I have
hereto subscribed my Name.



117. The C. of War debate to massacre the Kings party. See Will. Sedgwicks
[Iustice upon the Armies Remonstrance.]
About this time it was debated at the Council of War to Massacre and put to
the Sword all the KING'S Party, The Question put, was carried in the Negative
but by two Voices. You see what Furies pursue these sinful Wretches, and what
dangerous rocks they dash upon, in order to that base and cowardly principle of
Self-preservation.

The Army has in every County of England packs of schismatical Beagles, 118.
Schismatic Petitions for 2. or 3. principal Gentlemen in each County to be
brought to justice.
whom they hollow on to hunt in full cry (by Petitions to the House) after the
blood of such whom they design for slaughter. Many Petitions have been lately
presented, That two or three principal Gentlemen of the KING'S Party (by name)
in each County, might be sacrificed to Justice, whereby the Land might be freed
from bloud-guiltinesse.

Diverse Merchants have contracted to send forth several Ships for the next
Summers Fleet, at their own charge. 119. Merchants arming Ships for this
Summers Fleet.


The Prodigious High Court of Justice was revived in order to the Trial of the
Earl of Holland, the Earl of Cambridge, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capel,
and Sir John Owens; 120: The High Court of Justice revived.
the Commissioners were changed (that they may engage as many men in arbitrary,
illegal tyranny and bloodshed as they can.)

Hamilton was exceedingly importuned by Cromwell (who took a journey to Windsor
purposely) to name such Members of Parliament and Citizens as had any hand in
calling him in: 121. The History of Hamiltons imprisonment and death. See
digitus Dei upon Duke Hamil^on.
this he either could not, or would not do; he had (in order to his own
ambition) first exasperated the Independent party against the KING, and
afterward sought their ruin by engaging for the KING: and he doubted that to
undertake so odious an office as to play the Devils part, and be an Accuser of
his Brethren, would but set a gloss upon the Independents intended severity
against him. Being brought to St. James's in order to his Trial, Cromwell
(hoping to train him to a confession) caused all his Creatures to carry a
favorable countenance to him. Bradshaw smoothed him up with soft language at
the Bar; the Lord Gray of Grooby, Col. Wait, and Hugh Peter's, gave him hopes
that they would not much obstruct his pretended Plea of Quarter from Lambert
upon Articles, Peter's avouched Quarter so given by Lambert; notwithstanding
Colonel Wait (when he made Report to the House of Commons how he took him)
affirmed, He yielded at discretion, and Lambert was not then near him: after
this Peter's gives Hamilton a Visit, who gives Peter's thanks and money to boot
for his late favor done him in Court; Quaere, What an accusation extorted for
fear of death, and hope of life is worth? Hamilton confessed at his death, he
had been much pressed; yet had named no man. Argyle.
and knowing him to be an Instrument of Cromwells, employed him as his
Solicitor to the Members of the House and Army. Peter's prays for Hamilton
openly as his Lord and Patron, still feeding him with hopes If he would Impeach
their Opposites: yet still he waved this, offering them 100000 l. for his life,
and often inculcating what services he would do them in Scotland; for which
purpose he offered to join Interests with Argyle, and be a Servant to their
Party. Messengers were posted into Scotland to know Argyles pleasure: But he
had been overreached formerly by Hamilton, and he was resolved to admit no
Competitor, which would have eclipsed his greatness, and have made him not the
sole Patron of Scottish Independency: Besides, the Kirk so far hated Hamilton
that they preached off his head in Scotland, before it was cut off in England:
the High Court of Justice lingered long in expectation of an Answer; at last
such a one came as decried all reconciliation with Hamilton, whereupon the
scene was altered presently, Bradshaw handled him roughly at the Bar, Mar. 6.
Those which smiled on him before, frowned now; being asked what he could say?
he pleaded Quarter, and vouched Peter's Testimony: who with a brazen face
renounced his former Testimony, When Hamilton was upon the Scaffold, diverse
Officers of the Army, and Hugh Peter's conversed familiary with him to the last,
and Messengers passed to and fro.
saying, He now remembered no such matter, but that the Army scorned to give
quarter to him, or any of his Nation: whereupon he was condemned to the Block;
which Sentence was executed upon him, March, 9. yet they fed Hamilton with
vain hopes to the last gasp, for fear he should give glory to God, and throw
shame and infamy upon themselves by a Christian confession of his, Argyles, and
their mutual villainies: besides, such a Discovery would have made Argyle less
serviceable to them in Scotland, whose next design is to cajole the Kirk by
seeming an Enemy to the Sectaries of England, and pretending to serve the
Presbyterian Interest. Thus I conclude the Tragedy of Duke Hamilton.

122. The Death of the Lord Capel.
In opposition to whom, I will briefly relate the Tragedy of the noble Lord
Capel, a Gentleman of great courage and integrity. He had made an adventurous
escape out of the Tower, but was re-taken by the treachery of a limping
Water-man, (if I knew his Name I would bestow a blot of Ink upon him.) He
pleaded for himself Articles of Surrender (which were real in him, though not
in Hamilton) that diverse that were in Colchester, and in his condition, had
been admitted to compound; and desired to be referred to Martial Law, which
being denied, He moved, he might not be debarred of Additionall defense; if he
must be judged by the Common Law, then he demanded the full benefit of that
Declaration of the Commons, 19. Feb. 1648. which Enacteth and Declares, That
though King and Lords be laid aside, yet all other the fundamental Laws shall
be in force concerning the lives, liberties, and properties of the Subject: and
recommended to them Magna Charta, The Petition of Right, 3. Caroli. and the Act
made, H. 7. for indemnity of all such as adhered to the present King in
possessione also the exception in the Act of Attainder of Strafford and
Canterbury, which says, Their Cases shall not be used as a precedent against
any man: He desires to see his jury, and that they might see him, and so might
be Tried by his Peers, saying, He did believe no precedent could be given of
any Subject Tried, but by Bill of Attainder in Parliament, or by a Jury. But
all was but to charm a deaf Adder. He was a gallant Gentleman, and they durst
not let him live.

The KING'S Library at St. James's was given (I hear) to that ignorant Stage
player Hugh Peter's. 123. The Kings Library at Saint James's given to Hugh Peter's


26. Febr. John Lylburne delivered to the Commons (by the name of the Supreme
Authority of England) A Petition in the name of many thousand well-affected,
with a Book annexed, entitled Englands new Chains discovered. The most
material points thereof are, 124. L. C. Lylburnes Petition to the House, with
Englands new Chains, annexed. See the Hunting the Foxes, etc. page 8.
that they find fault with The Agreement of the People, presented to the House
by Lieu. Genesis Hammond, from the Officers of the Army: because,

1. They like not there should be any intervals between the end of this
Representative now sitting, and the beginning of the next, whereby during the
said Intervall the Supreme power will be left in the new erected Council of
State, a constitution of a new and unexperienced nature, which may design to
perpetuate their power, and keep off Parliaments and Representatives for ever.

2. They conceive no less danger in that it is provided that Parliaments for
the future, are to continue but 6. months, and the Council of State 18. Months;
in which time having command of all the Forces by Sea and Land, they will have
great opportunities to make themselves absolute and unaccountable.

3. They are not satisfied with that Clause in the said Agreement, That the
Representative shall extend to the erecting and abolishing Courts of Justice;
since the alteration of the usual way of Trialls by 12. sworn men of the
Neighborhood may be included therein, as has lately been done by erecting a
new High Court of Justice criminal under a President and Commissioners, or
Tryers picked and chosen in an unusual way, all liberty of exceptions against
them being overruled.

4. They are not satisfied with that Clause in the Agreement, That the
Representative have the Highest final Judgment; since their Authority is only
to make General Laws, Rules and Directions for Courts, and Persons assigned by
Law to execute them, unto which the Representatives themselves are to be
subject, it being a great partiality and vexation to the People, that the
Lawmakers should be Law-executors.

5. They find fault with the Excise, calling it, The great obstructor of all
Trade, far surmounting Ship Money, and all Patents, Projects, and Monopolies
before this Parliament.

6. The Act for Pressing of Seamen.

7. The General and Officers obstructing the Press.

8. The Chancery and Courts of Justice not regulated.

Hunting the Foxes. p 8. says, it was Iretons invention
9. They complain, That a Council of State is hastily chosen as Guardians of
the Peoples liberties, with a vast and exorbitant power: 1. To command, order,
and dispose of all Forces by Sea and Land, and all Magazines of Store in
England and Ireland. 2. To dispose all public Treasure. 3. To command any
Person whatsoever before them, to give Oath for discovery of Truth. 4. To
Imprison any that shall disobey their Commands, and such as they shall Judge
contumacious: what now is become of Magna Charta, and the Liberties of the
People, That no Man's Person shall be Attached or Imprisoned, or Disseised of
his Freehold or Free-customes but by lawful Judgment of his Equals? This
Council of State has got all power into their hands (a project long labored)
and now their next motion will be (pretending ease to the People) to Dissolve
this Parliament.

10. The Petitioners complain, that in order to settle their Tyranny, the
Council of Officers insisted upon it, That a motion should be made to the House
of Commons, to enable them to put to death by Martial Law all such as they
shall judge by Petitions, or otherwise to disturb the present proceedings,
whether Members of the Army, or not. And when it was urged, That the Civil
Magistrate should do it: it was answered, The saying of Col. Hewson the
one-eyed Cobbler. See Hunting the Foxes. p. 10.
They could hang twenty ere the Magistrate could hang one. The prayer of their
Petition is:

1. That the Self-denying Ordinance be observed.

2. That they would consider how dangerous it is, to continue the Highest
Military Commands so long in the same Persons, especially acting so long
distinct, and of themselves, as those now in being have done, and in such
extraordinary ways, whereunto they have accustomed themselves, which was the
original of most Tyrannies.

3. That they would appoint a Committee of Parliament Men, to hear, and
determine all controversies between Officers and Officers, Officers and
Soldiers: to mitigate the rigor of Martial Law, and to provide it be not
executed upon any, not Members of the Army.

4. That they will open the Presses.

5. That they will dissolve this Council of State, threatening so manifest
Tyranny.

6. That they will severely punish all such as acting upon any Order,
Ordinance, or Act of Parliament, shall exceed the power conferred on them.

After this came forth a second part of Englands new Chains discovered, 125. A
second part of Englands New Chains.
setting forth the hypocrisy and perfidiousnesse of the Council of the Army
and the Grandees, in cheating all Interests, King, Parliament, People,
Soldiers, City, Agitators, Levellers, etc. which tells you, That the Grandees
walk by no principles of Honesty or Conscience, but (as mere Politicians) are
governed altogether by occasion as they see a possibility of making progress to
their Designs, which course of theirs, they ever termed, A waiting upon
Providence, that under color of Religion, they might deceive the more
securely. It tells you, their intent is to Garrison all great Towns, to break
the spirits of the People with oppression and poverty. It farther Declares,
that these Grandees judge themselves loose, when other men are bound; all
Obligations are to them Transitory and Ceremonial; and that every thing is good
and just as it conduces to their Interests. That the Grandees never intended
an Agreement of the People, but only to amuse that party, whilst they hastily
set up a Council of State to establish their Tyranny, that to prepare the way
to this, they broke the House of Commons, took away the House of Lords, removed
the King by an extrajudiciall way of proceedings, and erected such a Court of
Justice as had no place in the English Government. That the remainder of the
House of Commons is become a mere channel through which is conveyed all the
Decrees and Determinations of a private Council of some few Officers. All
these, and the Votes, That the Supreme power is in the people, and the Supreme
Authority in the Commons their Representative, were only in order to their
Interests of will and power. That they place their security in the divisions of
the People. That if the present House of Commons should never so little cross
the ambition of these Grandees, they would show no more modesty to them then
they have done to the excluded Members: See the Hunting of the Foxes, etc. p.
6, 7, 8.
And so it concludes with a Protestation against their breaking the Faith of
the Army with all Parties, their dissolving the Council of Agitators, and
usurping a power of giving forth the sense of the Army against the Parliament
and People, against their shooting to death the Soldier at Ware, Return to
sect 2. and 5.
and their cruelties exercised upon other Persons, to the debasing of their
Spirits, and thereby new-moulding the Army to their Designs: against their
playing fast and loose with the King and His Party till they had brought a new
and dangerous War upon this Nation. They also protest against their
dissembled Repentances, against their late extraordinary proceedings in
Bringing the Army upon the City, (to the ruin of Trade) their breaking the
House of Commons in pieces, without charging the Members particularly, and then
judging and taking away men's lives in an extraordinary way, as done for no
other end but to make way for their own absolute Domination. They also protest
against the Election and establishment of those High Courts of Justice, as
unjust in themselves, and of dangerous precedent in time to come; as likewise
against the Council of State, and putting some of themselves therein, contrary
to their own Agreement. They also protest against all other the like Meetings
of those Officers, that on Thursday, 2. Feb. Voted for so bloody a Law, as to
hang whom they should judge disturbed the Army, as having no power either by
such Councels to give the sense of the Army, or to judge any Person not of the
Army, or to do any thing in reference to the Commonwealth. 126. The Hunting of
the Foxes from Tryplo and New Market by 5. small Beagles, p. 8.


About this time also became public a pretty Book, entitled [ The Hunting of
the Foxes from New Market and Triploe to White Hall by 5. small Beagles,] which
tells you, That the Grandee-Officers of the Army to keep the Soldiers quiet,
did formalize about an Agreement of the People whilst they carried on their
platform of absolute tyranny (long since hatched by Ireton) by erecting a
Council of State: no sooner was this monster born, but it devoured half the
Parliament of England, and now it is adorned it self with Regal magnificence,
and majesty of courtly Attendants, and like the 30 Tyrants of Athens, to head
it self over the People; this is, and yet this is not our new intended King,
there is a King to succeed, this is but his Viceroy. O Cromwell! whither art
thou aspiring? the word is already given out amongst their Of^^cers, That this
Nation must have one prime Magistrate or Ruler over them, and that that the
General has power to make a Law to bind all the Commons of England: This was
most daringly and desperately avowed at White Hall, and to this temper these
Court-Officers are now a moulding: He that runs may read and foresee a new
Regality, thus by their Machivilian pretenses and wicked practices, they are
become Masters and Usurpers of the name of the Army, and of the name of the
Parliament, under which Visors they have levelled and destroyed all the
Authority of this Nation; for, the Parliament indeed and in truth is no
Parliament, but a Representative Glass of the Council of War; and the
Council of War but a Representative of Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison: and
these are the All in All of the Nation, which under the guises and names of
Parliament, Army, General Council, High Court, and Council of State, play
all the strange pranks that are played. And further, p. 13. The conclave of
Officers have sucked in the venom of all former corrupt Courts and Interests,
the High Commission, Star Chamber, the House of Lords, the King and his privy
Council, The House by Votes, 5. Dec. 1648. voted, the King's Concessions a
ground, etc. And the Army secured a d expelled 250. Members for using liberty
to vote according to their consciences, and overruled those few left sitting to
unvote in a thin House, what was voted in full House; this is more then to
usurp a Negative Voice over them: return to sect. 18.23.28.
are all alive in that Court called, The General Council of the Army. 1. The
King stood upon it, That he was accountable to none but God, that He was above
the Parliament and People; and to whom will these men be accountable? to none
on earth: and are they not above the Parliament? they have even a Negative
Voice thereover, formerly the Commons could pass nothing without the House of
Lords, and now they dare pass nothing without the concurrence of the conclave
of Officers: we were formerly ruled by King, Lords, and Commons; now by a
General, Court Martial, and House of Commons: what is the difference? the
Lords were not Members both of the House of Peers, and of the House of Commons,
but the Officers, (our martial Lords) are Members both in the House, or
Council of Officers, and in the House of Commons, we have not the change of a
Kingdom to a Commonwealth; we are only under the old cheat, A transmutation
of Names, but with the addition of new Tyrannies, for casting out one unclean
Spirit, they have broug^^ with them in his stead seven other unclean Spirits
more wicked than the former, and they have entered in and dwell there, and the
last state of this Commonwealth is worse than the first. Lastly, they set down
some illegal proceedings and Examinations before the Council of War,
exceeding the High Commission, and Star Chamber.

127. The Authors censure of the Levellers.
These three Books show the late endeavors of the Agitators, and that party,
which the Grandees politickly mis-call (to cast an odium upon them) Levellers;
they are the truest Assertors of humane Liberty, and the most constant and
faithful to their Principles and party of any in the Army, and though they
have many redundancies and superfluous Opinions fit to be pruned off by
conversing with discreet honest Men, or rather by a discreet and just public
Authority, (which I am confident is feasible, since their principles concenter
in the public, not in their own private Interest and Opinions, and are no
other ways changeable than conduces with the emergent occasions of the
Commonwealth) yet they are but like the water-boughs of a healthy fruit, Tree*
rather troublesome than dangerous, whereas the designs of their Antagonists
(like rocks under water, or poison in well-cooked meat) destroy before they are
discovered.

128. The Authors censure of His Majesty's Posthumus work, I entitled, (The
Pourtraicture of His Sacred Majesty in His S^litudes and Sufferings.)
About this time arose a Phoenix out of His Majesty's Ashes, that most excellent
Issue of His Brayn, entitled, [THE POURTRAICTURE OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY IN HIS
SOLITUDES AND SUFFERINGS.] A Book full fraught with wisdom, Divine and Humane,
showing Him to be more then Conqueror of His Enemies in His rare Christian
patience and charity; the very reading of it aggravateth our loss of so
Gracious and excellent a Prince, that had learned the whole method of humane
perfection in the school of adversity. Herod and his Jews never persecuted
Christ in his swadling-clouts with more industrious malice, then the
Antimonarchicall Independent Faction, this Book in the Presses and shops, that
should bring it forth into the world, knowing that as the remembrance of Heaven
strikes a horror into us of Hell, So the contemplation of his virtues will
teach us to abhor their vices.

March 8. 1648. 129. The form of Writs for Elections changed.
The Commons assented to a new Form of a Writ for election of Knights and
Burgesses for the Parliament.

But three days before it was reported to the House from the Council of
State, what number of Horse and Foot they thought fit to be kept up for the
service of England and Ireland, 130. A new establishment for the Army reported
to the House from our new Masters the Council of State.
and the Monthly charge, which estimated come to 160000 l. per mensem. You see
we are likely to find these our new Lords such gracious Masters to us, that (
as the second part of Englands new Chains says) We shall have Taxes, though we
have neither Trade nor Bread. In the Earl of Essex time (when the War was at
the highest) the Monthly Tax came but to 54000 l. a Month, yet had we then
seven or eight Brigades besides his Army and Garrisons: but that the Faction of
Saints may carry on the work of a through Reformation in our purses, as well as
they have done in the Church and Commonwealth, they first raised the Tax to
60000 l. a Month for England, besides 20000 l. a Month pretended for Ireland
(but I believe little of it slips through their sanctified fingers to go
thither.) And now (to show they can use double dealing against the Ungodly)
they would double the sum from 80000 l. to 160000 l. a Month; this is to break
our hearts with property, and make them take what impressions of slavery they
please to set upon them; this Conventicle of State will engross all the Coin
and Treasure of the Land into their own hands, and then subdue us therewith,
and make us (like slavish Egyptians) sell our selves and our Lands for Bread,
or money to buy Bread, when (that inseparable companion of a long war) Famine
approaches, which their barbarous and illegal Sequestrations (unstocking men's
Farms and laying them wast) will inevitably bring upon us; they have more hope
to subdue and lessen the number of their Opposites by famine and want, then by
the Sword; in order to which, they have destroyed the Trade of the City, and
undone multitudes of Tradesmen, who being disabled to pay their Taxes, the
Army cause all their Arrears to be leavied upon the City by a new Tax upon the
rest of the Inhabitants and the Outlandlords; and when Cromwell was told, this
would undo the City, He answered, It was no matter, the more were undone, the
more would clap Swords to their sides and come into the Army: you see Soldiery
is intended to be the chief Trade.

131. An Act for Abolishing the Kingly Office, etc.
March 17. 1648. The empty House of Commons in farther prosecution of their
said Design, and to please their Masters of the Army, passed, printed, and
published in the form and style of a Statute this Paper following: entitled,
An Act for the Abolishing the Kingly Office in England.
WHereas Charles Stuart late King of England, Ireland, and the Territories and
Dominions thereunto belonging, has by Authority derived from Parliament, Since
by the Law, the Crown cures al defects; how can the King's blood be attainted?
been, and is hereby declared to be justly condemned, adjudged to die and put
to death, for many treasons, murders, and other heinous offenses committed by
him, by which Judgment he stood and is hereby declared to be attainted of High
Treason, whereby his Issue and Posterity, and all others pretending Title under
him, are become incapable of the said Crowns, or of being King or Queen of the
said Kingdom or Dominions, or either or any of them:

Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained, and it is Enacted, We have sworn faith
and Alleg^ance to K. Charles the First, His lawful Heirs and Successors, and
our Vow is recorded in Heaven from which no power on earth can absolve us. See
the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy. The Statute of Recognition,
1. Iac. But the Commons are now Supreme, as in imitation of the Pope to bring
this Claus in practice, Licet de jure non possumus* tamen pro plenitudine
potestatis nostra volumus, etc.
Ordained, and Declared, by this present Parliament, and by Authority thereof,
That all the People of England and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging, of what degree or condition soever, are discharged of all
Fealty, Homage and Allegiance which is or shall be pretended to be due unto any
of the Issue and Posterity of the said late King, or any claiming under him;
and that Charles Stuart eldest Son, and James called Duke of York, second
Son, and all other the Issue and Posterity of him the said late King, and all
and every person and persons pretending Title from, by or under him, are and be
disabled to hold or enjoy the said Crown of England or Ireland, All our Laws
cut off by the non obstante of an eighth part of the House of Commons sitting
under a force. After almost 1000 years experience it is now found to be
dangerous. The English were never one half-quarter so much enslaved since
William the Conqueror subdued them, as they have been since Oliver the Brewer
subjugated them.
and other the Dominions thereunto belonging, or any of them, or to have the
Name, Title, Style, or Dignity of King or Queen of England and Ireland, Prince
of Wales, or any of them; or to have and enjoy the power and Dominion of the
said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of them, or the Honors, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, possessions, and Hereditaments belonging or appertaining to the said
Crown of England and Ireland, and other the Dominions aforesaid, or to any of
them, or to the Principality of Wales, Duchy of Lancaster or Cornwall, or any
or either of them, Any Law, Statute, Ordinance, Usage, or Custom to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding: And whereas it is and has been
found by experience, that the Office of a King in this Nation and Ireland, and
to have the power thereof in any single Person is unnecessary, burdensome and
dangerous to the liberty, safety, and public interest of the people, and that
for the most part, use has been made of the Regal power and prerogative, to
oppress, impoverish, and enslave the Subject; and that usually and naturally
any one person in such power, makes it his interest to incroach upon the just
freedom and liberty of the people, and to promote the setting up of their own
will and power above the Laws, that so they might enslave these Kingdoms to
their own Lust: But in a Council of State of forty Tyrants sitting under the
protection and awe of Oliver.
Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by
Authority of the same, That the Office of a King in this Nation, shall not
henceforth reside in, or be exercised by any one single Person; and that no one
person whatsoever, shall or may have, or hold the Office, Style, Dignity, Power
or Authority of King of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of them, or of
the Prince of Wales, Any Law, Statute, Usage, or Custom to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And it is hereby Enacted, That if any
person or persons shall endeavor to attempt by force of Arms, or otherwise,
or be aiding, assisting, c^mforting, or abetting, unto any person or persons
that shall by any ways or means whatsoever, endeavor or attempt the reviving
or setting up again of any pretended Right of the said Charles, eldest Son to
the said late King, James called Duke of York, or of any other the Issue and
Posterity of the said late King, or of any person or persons claiming under him
or them, to the said Regal Office, Style, Dignity, or Authority, or to be
Prince of Wales; or the promoting of any one person whatsoever, to the Name,
Style, Dignity, Power, Prerogative or Authority of King of England and Ireland,
and Dominions aforesaid, or any of them: That then every such offense shall be
deemed and adjudged High Treason, High Treason is what these Legislative
Thieves list to make it, an Arbitary crime, notwithstanding the Stat. 25 Ed. 3.
for limiting and ascertaining of Treasons, for security of the people. Tiberius
and Nero's days are fallen upon us; Of which Tacitus, Ingens crimen divitiae;
and complementum omnium accusationum laesa majestas.
and the Offenders therein, their Counselors, Procurers, Aiders and Abettors,
being convicted of the said offense, or any of them, shall be deemed and
adjudged Traitors against the Parliament and People of England, and shall
suffer, lose and forfeit, and have such like and the same pains, forfeitures,
judgments and execution, as is used in case of High Treason: And whereas by
the abolition of the Kingly Office provided for in this Act, a most happy way
is made for this Nation (if God see it good) to return to its just and ancient
right of being Governed by its own Representatives or National meetings in
Council When was England governed by their own Representative? or had any other
regliment then Kings? But what the Legislative Conventicle declares, we must
believe, though contrary to our knowledge. They will lead our Faith and Reason
in a string, or have our necks in a halter. A period to this Parliament, and
leave the Supreme power in the Council of State, a design long since attempted.
See First and Second Part of Englands New Chains, and the Hunting of the Foxes.
No obedience is due by Law to them, which takes no notice of this form of
Government.
, from time to time chosen and entrusted for that purpose by the People; It is
therefore Resolved and Declared by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that
they will put a period to the sitting of this present Parliament, and dissolve
the same so soon as may possibly stand with the safety of the people that has
betrusted them, and with what is absolutely necessary for the preserving and
upholding the Government now settled in the way of a Commonwealth, and that
they will carefully provide for the certain choosing, meeting, and sitting of
the next and future Representatives, with such other circumstances of freedom
in choice and equality in distribution of Members to be elected thereunto, as
shall most conduce to the lasting freedom and good of this Commonwealth: And
it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, notwithstanding any thing contained
in this Act, no person or persons of what condition and quality soever, within
the Commonwealth of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Islands of
Guernsey, and Jersey and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall be discharged from
the obedience and subjection which he and they owe to the Government of this
Nation, as it is now Declared, but all and every of them shall in all things
render and perform the same, as of right is due unto the Supreme Authority
hereby declared to reside in this and the successive Representatives of the
People of this Nation, and in them only. 132. An Act for abolishing the House
of Peers. More New lights, new discoveries made by forty or fifty Ignis satui,
gross fiery Meteors remaining in the House of Commons.




About the same time they passed another Act, for Abolishing the House of
Peers, to this purpose.

THe Commons of England assembled in Parliam nt, finding by too long experience
that the House of Lords is useless and dangerous to the People of England to be
continued, have thought fit to Ordain and Enact, and be it Ordained and Enacted
by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That from
henceforth the House of Lords in Parliament shall be, and is hereby wholly
abolished and taken away, and that the Lords shall not from henceforth meet, or
sit in the said House called the Lords House, or i^ any other House or place
whatsoever, as a House of Lords, nor shall sit, vote, advise, adjudge, or
determine of any matter or thing whatsoever, as a House of Lords in Parliament.
Nevertheless it is hereby Declared, That neither such Lords as have demeaned
themselves with honor, courage, Fidelity to the Common wealth, nor their
Posterities who shall so continue, shall be excluded from the public Councels
of the Nation, but shall be admitted thereunto, and have their free Vote in
Parliament if they shall be thereunto elected, as other persons of Interest
elected and qualified thereunto ought to have: And be it further Ordained and
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Peer of this Land not being
elected, qualified, and sitting in Parliament, as aforesaid, shall claim, have,
or make use of any Privilege of Parliament, either in relation to his person,
quality or estate, any Laws, Usage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to lessen the amazement of the People, the same day they passed and
ordered to be printed, 133. A Declaration of the Commons, to show the Reasons
of their said proceedings. The State is Free, but the people Slaves; as a
Galley is free, but the Rowers Slaves; 1 part. 72, 73. See these Books, ( A
full Answer to an Infamous Pamphlet, Entitled, A Declaration of the Commons of
England.) [The Charge against the King discharged.] (The Royal and Royalists
Plea.) (King Charles vindicated, etc.) And his Majesty's last Book, or
Pourtraicture, and His Maj. Gracious Messages for Peace.
a Book called, [A Declaration of the Parliament of England, expressing the
grounds of their late proceedings, and of settling the present Government in the
way of a Free State:] when they formerly passed the 4. Votes for no more
Addresses, to our late King, they seconded it with a Declaration, to show the
Reasons of those Votes, wherein they set forth no new matter but what they had
formerly in parcels objected against Him; and yet they have since that time
made Addresses to ^im, and both taken and caused others to take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Protestation and Covenant to defend his
person and Authority, etc. And in this Declaration there is no new Objection of
moment, but what is contained in the former Declarations against Him, and as I
looked upon the first Declaration as a Prologue, so I look upon this last as
the Epilogue to His Majesty's Tragedy. The whole matter of charge in both of
them has been sufficiently answered in several Books, and either confuted or
justified, to which I refer the Reader, whom I will only trouble with some few
short Observations of my own upon it: ( p. 5.) The Parliament (in imitation of
their Masters, the Council of Officers) pretend a necessity to change the
fundamental Government into a Free State, to prevent Tyranny, Injustice, and
War, etc. (I doubt rather to promote them.) It affirms, ( p. 15, 16.) That
Offices of Inheritance are forfeited by Breach of Trust, (a condition annexed
to every Office) and seems to imply as much of the Kingly Office: but this
Penman had forgot, that by the Law the Crown takes away all defects, and the
King being Supreme Head and Governor over all Persons, and in all Causes, it
were absurd to make Him accountable to any Authority; for in such case that
Authority would be Supreme to Him, and so erect two Supremes one jarring and
interferring with the other, which in Law and Policy is as absurd as to suppose
two Almighties or Infinities in Divinity, which cannot be, for that one
Infinity would terminate another: Impossible esse plura Infinite, See Greg:
Th^losanus. l. pol. 1. Keckerin: Sistema pol. l. 1. Conezenii. l. politic. 1. a
c. 17 ad. c. 25. and many good Authors quoted by him. Moecenalis orationem ad
Augustum, apud Dionem Cassium.
quoniam alterum esset in altero finitum, says Cusanus. (page 16.) The
Declarers play the Orators in behalf of the felicity of Government by
Free-States, rather than by Kings and Princes. This is a spacious field to walk
in, I will only cite some learned Authors living in Republiques of a contrary
opinion, and send my Readers to them for their Arguments. It applauds the
prosperity and good Government of the Switz: which (I think was never
comm^nded before) a gross-witted People, living in a confused way of
Government, where virtue and industry find no reward, the Rich become a daily
prey to the poor, and their popular Tribunes, who uphold their credits by
calumniating the wealthy, and confiscating [or sequestring] their Estates, the
best wealth of this Nation is Pensions from Neighbor Princes, to whom they let
their Blood to Hire, and become Mercenaries many times to the extreme damage
and (if their Country were worth subduing) danger of the State. For Venice, it
is an Aristocracie (if not Oligarchy) of many petty Kings, so burdensome to all
their Subjects upon Terra firma, that they dare not trust them without Citadels
to keep them under; they never confide in any of their number or Natives to be
Commander in Chief of their Land Forces) fearing to be tyrannized over by a
Cromwell, or an Ireton, or by some property subordinate to them in all but
Title. The Morlachy, and many Inhabitants of Dalmatia, and Candia, have lately
preferred the Turkish Government before theirs. As for the Low Countries,
(their nearest example) peruse Bernavelt's Apology, and many good Histories.
For Rome, from their Regifugium, they were never free from Civil Wars,
cecessious Tumults, and changes of Government, first to Patrician Consuls,
Regia potestate; then to promiscuous Consuls ( Plebeyans as well as Patritians)
with popular Tribunes to control them (then to Decemviri legibus Scribendis;
then to Tribuni militares consulari potestate, Dictators upon all special
occasions, sometimes an Aristocracy, sometimes a Democracie, between two
Factions Patritian and Plebeyan. And never could that unhappy Idol of the
multitude [Libertie] find any time of settled rest and Government until their
giddy Republique was overthrown by Julius Caesar, and turned into a Monarchy
by Augustus, which approved Cratippus saying, Vitiosum Reipub: statum exigere
Monarchiam; and then (and not till then) Rome came to his height of Glory, See
some Authorities cited verbatim in the first Page.
and Dominion, and continued so a long time, sometimes empayred by the vices of
some Emperors, and sometimes repaired by the virtues of others: he that reads
Livy and Tully's Orations, with many other Authors, shall find how infinite
corrupt the People were, both in making and executing Laws, in dispensing
Justice both Distributive, and Commutative; what Complaints, that their comitia
were venalia; what Bulwarks they were fain to erect against the ambition and
covetousness of their Great men; Leges Ambitus, leges Repetundarum peculatus;
all to no purpose: the great abuse of Solicitors and Undertakers in every
Trybesto contracte, for suffrages; the Domestic use of their Nomenclators,
their Prehensations, Invitations, Client ships; their kissings and shaking
hands (even from the greatest Personages) prostituted to every Cobbler and
Tinker; their costly public Shows and spectacles to woe the Rabble; he that
reads observingly shall find that ambition and covetousness (nurses of all
corruption) were the best part of the wisdom and industry of that Republique
until it came to be a Monarchy, and shall farther find, that those corrupt
manners and customs which the People (from the highest to the lowest) had
contracted during the several licentious Alterations of their Commonwealth,
from one form of Republique to another: were (like a second nature) not to be
corrected by the better discipline of a Monarchy, and (at last) occasioned the
ruin of that Monarchy, together with the desolation of that Nation, which
shows, that Monarchy (with which their Nation began) was their natural and
genuine Government, when it could not be taken away sine interitu subjecti,
without the ruin of the whole subject matter. ( p. 11.) It is said, It has
been lately computed, that the Court purveyances (notwithstanding many good
Laws to the contrary) cost the Country more in one year, than their Assesments
to the Army; what? above 100000 l. a month, when the charge of the KING'S
Housekeeping came but to 50000 l. a year: (I speak not of Wages and Pensions)
I know not who should make this computation, unless old Sir Hen. Vane, and his
Man Cornelius Holland, (the latter of which was turned out of his Office in the
Green-cloth for abusing this Place) not in whose time of employment (unless
their own) such prodigious abuses should happen. ( p. 19.) It is said, The
Kings Revenue by a medium of 7 years was yearly 700000 l.
The legal and justifiable Revenue of the Crown fell short of 100000 l. per
annum: I perceive this is all the Account the Commonwealth is likely to have
from the Committee of the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenue, nor do I know
what a pruning-hook that phrase (legal Revenue) may prove: But I conceived all
that Q. Elizabeth, the Kings Father and Himself received, had been His Revenue
de jure; I am sure it was de facto, and the Parliament in their Declarations
promised, to settle a better Revenue upon Him than any of His Ancestors
enjoyed: neither did this, nor any former Parliament complain, that His Purse
was grown too full, or His Revenue too fulsome: and if the Commit of the
Revenues had enjoyed no more but their own legal and justifiable Revenue, so
many of the KING'S Servants and Creditors had not starved for want of their
own. ( p. 19.) They very much aggravate Monopolies, Patente, and Projects: I
wonder they suffer so many Men guilty in that kind to sit in their House, old
Sir Henry Vane, Sir Henry Myldmay, Sir John Hypsley, Cornelius Holland,
Laurence Whytakers, etc. (p. 20. 2 Part of Englands New Chains discovered, etc
and the Hunting the Foxes return to s. 127.
) They speak against the Lords Negative Voice, but not a word against the
Council of Wars Negative Voice, who march up in hostile manner against
Parliament and City, and secure, seclude, and drive away 250 Members at one
time, if they vote any thing contrary to their Interest. They speak likewise
against the Lords Judicial power over Commoners, but have forgot what unjust
and illegal use themselves attempted to make of the Lords jurisdiction against
the 11 impeached Members, the 4 Aldermen, and Citizens. ( p. 21. 1 Part. sect.
45. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
) They excuse their receding from their Declaration of April, 1646. (they might
have minded you of a Vote of a later Date, had it made for their turn) for
Governing the Kingdom by King, Lords, and Commons. To this it is said, the King
nor Lords could take no advantage thereof being a contract they never consented
unto, indeed it was never presented to them; but I shall ask whether the people
may not take advantage thereof? for whose satisfaction this was Declared, (a
general grudge being then amongst them) that the Parliament and Army would
subvert the ancient Fundamental Government, (p. 22, 23.) They answer an
Objection, that these great matters ought to be determined in a full House, not
when many Members are excluded by force, and the privileges so highly broker,
and those who are permitted to sit, do act under a force. To this is answered
(how truly let any man that has read our Histories tell) That few Parliaments
have acted but some force or other has been upon them, (I wonder they did not
argue thus for the silly Tumult of Apprentices) for Breach of Privileges of
Parliament. They Answer, It will not be charged upon the remaining party, or to
have been within their power to prevent it, or repair it, (to this I reply,
that it is doubted the remaining party (being the Army party) contrived it in
their Junto at Somerset House: for ( p. 23.) it is acknowledged, they called
and appointed the Army for their Guard, which was not openly done by a full
House: it must be therefore secretly done by a party. See many Reasons for this
conjecture before Sect. 24. Farther they say, That the safety of the Kingdom
ought to be preferred before privilege of Parliament; and that if their House
had declined their duty (viz: by not Acting) they had resigned up all to ruin
and confusion: from whence should this ruin and confusion come, but from their
own Army, which they perpetuate to eat up the Kingdom; and continue their own
power and profit? and I wonder they did not use the same moderation after that
childish Tumult of Apprentices, but Declared all Acts, etc. passed from 26.
July (which day the Tumult began and ended) to the 6. August, null and void.
And endeavored to make the very sitting of the Members and the Citizens
obeying to the said Orders (though no Judges of the force) Treasonable: they
deny they sit now under a force, the Army being their best friends, called by
them for their safety. Indeed it is generally thought the Army and this remnant
of the House of Commons, are as good Friends and Brethren as Simeon and Levi,
Pilate and Herod were; and were called to secure the Members and purge the
House: yet if the remaining party should Vote contrary to the Dictates of the
Council of War, Quaere, 2 Part of Englands New Chains, and the Hunting the
Foxes, etc.
Whether they will not be used as uncivilly as the secured Members? nay worse,
by being called to account, for cousening the State ( p. 24.) They say, There
is a clear consistencie of our Laws with the present Government of a
Republique. I desire to know who by our Law can call or bold a Parliament but
the KING? who is, Principium, Caput, and Finis Parliamenti? who is the fountain
of Justice, Honor, Peace, when we have no King? who is Conservator of the Laws
and Protector of the people? where is the Supreme Authority? to Vote it (in
their own case) to be in a Representative of 50 or 60 Commons, without legal
proofs or precedents is to lead Men's reason captive, as well as their Persons
and Estates, (to impose an implicit faith upon Man, not to use discourse and
reason against their Votes is to take Man out of Man, to deny him his
definition, Animal rationale) to whom does the Subject owe Allegiance? and
where is the Majesty of England when there is no King? for all Treason is,
Crimen laesae majestatis, contra debitam ligeanciam. Therefore where (by the
known Laws) no Allegiance is, there is no Treason. Lastly, if our present Laws
be so consistent with the Republique, I desire to know why they did not Try
the 4 Lords legally at the Common Law by their Peers, and Sir John Owen by a
Jury of 12 Men of the Neighborhood, according to Magna Charta, and other good
Laws? but were feign to put a Legislative Trick upon them, and erect such a
Court for the Trial of them as was never heard of in England before, nor has
no place in our Government. They conclude ( p. 26.) That as they have not
intermedled with the affairs and Government of other States, so (they hope)
none will intermeddle with them: This assertion is as true as the rest, it
being well known, that for about 3. years last passed they have boasted, That
they have many Agents in France, who under color of Merchandise, vent
Antimonarchicall and Anarchicall Tenants, and sow seeds of Popular Liberty
amongst the poor Peasants, and Huguenots of France, which they brag prospered
well there, their very declared principles and doctrine of their Pulpits and
Army are, That they must break the powers of the Earth in pieces. Monarchy must
down all the world over, first in England, then this Army must put over and
manumit the Peasants of France, the Boore of Germany, etc. And diverse of this
party have reported, That they have supplied the Revolters of France with
money; their Licenced News-Books are full of this Doctrine, and of many
Invectives against the Tyranny of the French King.

134. Harry Martin's Judgment of the King and Kingly Government.
Such were their proceedings against the King, or rather against Kingly
Government, which was cut off by the same Axe that murdered the King, and was
(indeed) first in their intention, though last in execution; as appears by
Harry Martin's Speech in the House upon the Debate, Whether a King, or no King?
That if they must have a King, he had rather have had the last than any
Gentleman in England? he found no fault in His person, but in his Office.

135. The Council of Officers endeavor to join Interest with the Papists in
England and Ireland.
The King had offended the Papists in the last Treaty, by granting so much to
the Parliament for their suppression: The Independents perceiving it, and
willing to join with any Interest to make good their design. It was proposed at
the Council of Officers, That the Papists should raise and pay about 10000
Additional Forces for this Army, in recompense whereof, all penal Laws
concerning them should be repealed, all Taxes and Contributions taken off, and
they to have the protection of this Parliament and Army. Under the same notion
they endeavored to join Interests with Owen Roe Oneale, Owen Roe Oneale.
that commanded the bloody party of massacring Irish (with which they had
formerly taxed the King) they supplied him with Ammunition, and admitted O
Realy, The Popes Nuntio.
the Popes Irish Nuntio to a Treaty here in England, Sir John Winter was taken
into imploiment, and the Arrears of his Rents gathered for him by Soldiers, to
the regret of the Country. Sir Kenelme Digbie had a pass to come into England,
and came, as was foretold by a Letter from an Independent Agent for the Army,
from Paris to an Independent Member of the House of Commons, a creature of the
Army, bearing date, 28. Nov. 1648. and printed at the latter end of [The true
and full Relation of the Officers and Armies forcible seizing of diverse eminent
Members, etc. Walter Mountague let forth upon Bail; what becomes of this
Negotiation? and whether those that have played fast and loose with all
Interests in the Kingdom, have not done the like with the Papists? I cannot yet
learn.

This Winter, 136. Scarcity of Coals how occasioned, and why?
Coals (as well as other things) had been at excessive rates in the City,
whereby many poor perished with cold and hunger; what the reason thereof was
(besides unreasonable Taxes, Excise, and Soldiers quartering in and near the
City) was diversely disputed: most men imputed the blame to Sir Arthur
Haslerigge Governor of Newcastle, who (without any public Authority)
presumed to lay on a Tax of 4 s. a Chaldron upon the Coals there; which is
estimated to amount to 50000 l. a year; what use that Money was put to was as
variously whispered: as likewise what design they had in bringing so pinching a
want upon the City? some said, it was to enforce the poorer sort into Tumults,
and then to charge the wealthier sort with the crime, and ensnare them; others
said, it was to cast an odium upon the PRINCE, as if His Ships had kept in the
Colliers.

The 23. March 1648. The Commons ordered, 137. The Lo. Major ordered to
proclaim in person the Act for abolishing the Kingly Office, and punished for
neglect.
That the Lord Major of London in person be required to publish and proclaim in
the City the aforesaid Act for dissolving Kingly Government: and to give an
account thereof to the House. The Major refusing this service, was by the
Commons called to the Bar, fined 2000 l. committed prisoner to the Tower, and
outed of his Majoralty; and Alderman Andrews (a man after their own heart)
chosen by a few Schismatics in his place.

Ordered by the Commons (upon a report from the Council of State) that
Commissioners he appointed to make Sale of the Kings, 138. The Kings, Queens,
and Princes personal Estate ordered to be sold.
Queens, and Princes personal estate, upon Inventorie and Apprisal, for
satisfaction of all just Debts due to well-affected persons (Viz. Men of their
Faction) in this Nation, before the beginning of these Wars: But first 30000 l.
to be taken out of it for the use of this Summers Fleet, and that it be
referred back to the 40 Hogen Mogens, or Council of State to consider what they
think fit to be sold, and what they think fit to keep and reserve for the use
and furniture of them and their Attendants. Observe, that by that time this
gulf is stopped, the whole remainder to be sold for payment of Debts
aforesaid, may be written with a Cipher. 139. Crown Lands shared amongst the
Godly.


I hear the House has given away the Kings House, Parks and Honor of Eltham
to Sergeant Bradshaw, their quondam President. Greenwich to Bulstrode Whitlock.
The Lions Skin is now dividing amongst the party. Thus have they killed and
taken possession: and the Kings Revenue has proved as ominous to Him as
Naboth's Vineyard was to his Master.

140. Another Report for an establishment for the Army. Diu^nal, Mar. 30, 31.
1649.
This day another Report was made to the House from the Committee of the Army of
the particular sums to be Monthly levied in each County, to make up the whole
sum of 90000 l. Monthly for the Armies of England and Ireland, besides 20000 l.
per men's. out of Fee-farm Rents.

28 March 1649. The Commons in pursuit of the advice given them by Monsieur
Paw, 141. An Order that no Preacher meddle with State affairs.
and according to the example cited by him of the Low Countries, Ordered, That
no Minister in his Pulpit, should meddle with any State affairs: had this been
observed from the beginning, these Pulpit-Incendiaries had never kindled a War
between the King and Parliament. 142. The 5. Lights of Walton.


About the beginning of Lent last, Master Faucet Minister of Walton upon the
Thames in Surrey, preached in his Parish Church after dinner, when he came down
out of his Pulpit it was twilight; and into the Church came six Soldiers, one
of them with a Lanthorn in his hand, and a Candle burning in it, in the other
hand they had four Candles not lighted: He with the Lanthorn called to the
Parishioners to stay a little, for he had a Message to them from God, and
offered to go up into the Pulpit, but the Parishioners would not let him; then
he would have delivered his errand in the Church, but there they would not hear
him; so he went forth into the Churchyard, the people following him, where he
related to them, That he had a Vision, and received a command from God to
deliver his will unto them; which he was to deliver, and they to receive upon
pain of damnation. It consisted of 5 Lights:

1. That the Sabbath was abolished as unnecessary, Jewish, and merely
ceremonial: And here (quoth he) I should put out my first Light, but the wind
is so high I cannot light it.

2. Tithes are abolished as Jewish and Ceremonial, a great burden to the Saints
of God, and a discouragement of industry and tillage: And here I should put out
my second Light, etc. as aforesaid, which was the burden of his song.

3. Ministers are abolished as Antichristian, and of no longer use now Christ
himself descends into the hearts of his Saints, and his Spirit enlightneth them
with Revelations, and inspirations: And here I should have put out my third
Light, etc.

4. Magistrates are abolished as useless, now that Christ himself is in purity
of Spirit come amongst us, and has erected the Kingdom of the Saints upon
earth; besides, they are Tyrants and Oppressors of the Liberty of the Saints,
and tie them to Laws and Ordinances, mere humane inventions: And here I should
have put, etc.

5. Then putting his hand into his pocket, and pulling out a little Bible, he
showed it open to the People, saying, Here is a Book you have in great
veneration, consisting of two parts, the Old and New Testament; I must tell
you, it is abolished: It contains beggarly rudiments, milk for Babes; But now
Christ is in Glory amongst us, and imparts a fuller measure of his Spirit to
his Saints then this can afford; and therefore I am commanded to burn it before
your faces: so taking the Candle out of his Lanthorn, he set fire of the
leaves. And then putting out the Candle, cried, And here my fifth Light is
extinguished.

Upon a Report from the Council of State, 143. The Earl of Warwick's
Commission recalled; and 3 Admirals appointed.
the Commons Voted void the Earl of Warwick's Commission for Admiral, and
appointed three Commissioners to have and execute the Admirals Place, with 3 l.
a day a piece; a Commission for Martial Law, and Land Soldiers aboard to keep
under the Seamen, The three Admirals are, Col. Edw: Popham, Col. Rob: Blake,
and Col, Deane.

Sunday after Easter Day, 144. Cromwell turned Preacher.
six Preachers militant at White Hall tried the patience of their Hearers; one
calling up another successively: at last the Spirit of the Lord called up
Oliver Cromwell, who standing a good while with lifted up eyes, as it were in a
trance, and his neck a little inclining to one side, as if he had expected
Mahomet's Dove to descend and murmr in his ear; and sending forth abundantly
the groans of the Spirit, spent an hour in prayer, and an hour and an half in a
Sermon. In his prayer he desired God to take off from him the Government of
this mighty People of England, as being too heavy for his shoulders to bear: An
audatious, ambitious, and hypocritical imitation of Moses. It is now reported
of him, that he pretends to Inspirations; and that when any great or weighty
matter is propounded, he usually retireth for a quarter or half an hour, and
then returns and delivers out the Oracles of the Spirit: surely the Spirit
of John of Leyden will be doubled upon this Man.

145. The last Retreat of the Faction by H. Martins report.
About this time the Palsgrave took his leave of the Parliament being much
courted and complemented by them, and his 8000 l. per annum with all Arrears
confirmed to him: since his departure Harry Martin (in a jolly humor) was
heard to say, If the worst happened, and that they should not he able to stand
their ground in England, yet the Palsgrave would afford them a place of retreat
in the Palatinate; the seeds of these Anarchicall, Anabaptisticall humors
(upon the reducing of Munster) spread themselves in England, and now have a
mind to return into Germany to kindle a fire there.

146: Io. Lilburn's third Book, called, (The Picture of the Council of State.)
About this time John Lilburn, and his Company, set forth a Book, called, [The
Picture of the Council of State, etc.] wherein they set forth the illegal and
violent proceedings of the said Council against them in seizing upon them with
armed Bands of Soldiers, and interrogating them against themselves, etc.
(where they have these words) The Faction of a Traitorous Party of Officers of
the Army has twice rebelled against the Parliament, and broke them in pieces,
and by force of Arms culled out whom they pleased, and imprisoned diverse of
them, and laid nothing to their charge; and have left only in a manner a few
men, (besides 11 of themselves, viz: the General, Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison,
Fleetwood, Rich, Ingolsby Hazelrigge, Constable, Fennick, Walton, and Allen
Treasurer) of their own Faction behind them, that will (like Spaniel dogs)
serve their lusts and wills; yea, some of the chiefest of them, viz: Ireton,
Harrison, etc. yea, Mr. Holland himself styled them, a Mock Parliament, a Mock
power, at Windsor* yea, it is yet their expressions at London: And if this be
true that they are a Mock-power, and a Mock Parliam^nt, then. Quare, Whether in
Law or Justice (especially considering they have fallen from all their many
glorious promises, and have not done any one action that tends to the
universal good of the people) can those Gentlemen sitting at Westminster in
the House (called, the House of Commons) be any other than a factious company
of Men, trayte^ously combined together with Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison, to
subdue the Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of England, (for no one of them
protests against the rest) and to set up an absolute and perfect tyranny of the
Sword, will, and pleasure, and absolutely intend the destroying the Trade of
the Nation, and the absolute impoverishing the people thereof, to sit them to
be their Vassals and Slaves. And again, the three forementioned Men, viz:
Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison, (the General being but their stalking horse,
and a cipher) and their traiterous Faction, having by their wills and Swords
got all the Swords of England under their command, and the disposing of all the
great Places in England by Sea and Land, and also the pretended Law making
power, and the pretended Law executing power, by making among themselves
(contrary to the Laws and Liberties of England) all Judges, Justices of Peace,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Committee Men, etc. to execute their wills and tyranny,
walking by no limits or bounds but their own wills and pleasures, and
traitorously assume unto themselves a power to leavy upon the people what money
they please, and dispose of it as they please, yea, even to buy knives to cut
the peoples throats that pay the money to them, and to give no account for it
till Doomsday in the afteroon; they having already in their wills and power to
dispose of the Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, and the rest of the Childrens
Revenue; Deanes and Chapters Land, Bishops Lands, Sequestered Delinquents Lands,
Sequestered Papists Lands, Compositions of all sorts, amounting to Millions of
money, besides Excise and Customs; yet this is not enough, although (if
rightly husbanded) it would, constantly pay above one hundred thousand men, and
furnish an answerable Navy thereunto: But the people must now after their
Trade^ are lost, and their Estates spent, to procure their Liberties and
Freedoms, be Assessed about 100000 l. a Month, Master Boon a Member of the
House, lately a Tapster, has 6000 l. given him. Sir Arth: Hazelrig 3 great
Manours, Bishops-Aukland, Ev^r-wood, and another Col. B^rkstead (the pitiful
Thimble and Bodkin Goldsmiths) bought as much Bishops Lands as cost 10000 l. at
two or three years purchase, and has already raised his money.
that so they may be able like so many Cheaters and State-thieves, to give six,
eight, ten, twelve, fourteen, sixteen thousand pounds a piece over again to one
another, (as they have done already to diverse of themselves) to buy the
Commonwealths Lands one of another, (contrary to the duty of Trustees, who by
Law nor equity, can neither give nor sell to one another) at two or three years
Purchase, (the true and valuable rate considered) as they have already done,
and to give 4 or 5000 l. per annum, over again to King Cromwell, as they have
done already out of the Earl of Worcesters Estate, etc. besides about 4 or 5 l.
a day he has by his Places of Lieu. General, and Colonel of Horse in the
Army; although he were at the beginning of this Parliament but a poor Man; yea,
little better than a Beggar (to what he is now) as well as others of his
Neighbors.

147. A Petition in behalf of Io: Lylburn and his company.
2. April 1649. A Petition subscribed by diverse Persons in behalf of John
Lilburn and his company, was presented to the Commons, wherein (amongst other
things) are contained these three just demands:

1. That no man be censured, condemned, or molested, but for the breach of some
Law first made and published to the People, whereby is avoided that uncertainty
and howerly hazard that otherwise every man is subject to, both in respect of
his Estate, Liberty, and Life.

2. That every crime have not only its penalty annexed, hut together
therewith the manner and method of proceedings ascertained.

3. That the execution of Laws be referred to ordinary Magistrates and Officers
by Law deputed thereto, and that the Military power be not used, but where the
Civil is so resisted, as that of its own strength it is deficient to enforce
obedience.

148. Itinerant Ministers, an invention to undermine our Orthodox settled
Ministers, and infect the people with Schisms and Anarchicall principles,
suitable to the many-headed tyranny of the Grandees.
April 12. 1649. It was referred to a Committee to consider of a way how to
raise Pensions and Allowances out of Deans and Chapters Lands to maintain
supernumeracy Itinerant Ministers, who should be Authorized to go up and down
compassing the earth, and adulterate other Men's Pulpits and Congregations, and
put affronts and raise factions and scandals upon such orthodox and
conscientious Ministers (in order to their Sequestration) as cannot frame their
Doctrine to the damnable practices and Anarchicall principles of the times.
These wandering Apostles are to preach Antimonarchicall seditious doctrine to
the people, (suitable to that they call the present Government) to raise the
rascal multitude and schismatic rabble against all men of best quality in
the Kingdom, to draw them into Associations and Combinations with one another
in every County, and with the Army against all Lords, Gentry, Ministers,
Lawyers, rich and peaceable men, and all that are Lovers of the old Laws and
Government, for the better rooting of them out, that themselves alone may
inhabit the earth, and establish their new tyranny or Kingdom of the Saints
upon the ruins of our ancient Monarchy. These men (like Balaam) shall bless
and curse for hire, and vent State-news, State-doctrine, and poison the people
with such changeable and various principles as from time to time shall be
dictated to them by those Pseudo-polititians as now sit at the Helm; they shall
cosen the people with pretended Illuminations, Revelations, and Inspirations,
and pour out all the Vials of Gods wrath amongst them.

Cromwell and Ireton and their Faction, 149. A fraudulent Reconciliation and
uniting of Interests attempted with a mock-fast for that purpose.
having formerly deluded all the Interests and Parties of this Kingdom, were
arrived to that height of impudence as to endeavor to cheat them all over
again, they had by murdering the King, abolishing the House of Lords, putting
an execrable force upon the far major part of the House of Commons, making
themselves and their Party a tyrannical Council of State to usurp the Supreme
power and Government, endeavoring a Toleration of all Religions, attempting to
take away Tithes, See a Paper, called, Arguments against all Accommodation
between the City of London, and the engaged Grandees of the Parl. and Army; And
A seasonable Caution to the City of London? printed at the latter end of
Relation and Observations, Hist. and Pol. etc.
mocking and then tyrannizing over that part of the Army they please to miscall
Levellers, distracted and discontented all Parties within the Kingdom, and
stirred up all the Princes of Christendom to defend the common Interest of
Kings, now controverted in England. This cloud threatened to pour down a new War
upon them; to provide a remedy therefore for this sore, Cromwell moved in the
House of Commons, That the Presbyterian Government might be settled, promising
his endeavors thereto; but whether he meant a Classical or Congregational
Presbytery (which differs little or nothing from Independency) he did not
declare^ and here lies the fallacy; he likewise moved, That the secured and
secluded Members might again be invited into the House: they sent their Agents
both Laymen and Ministers (amongst whom Mr. Marshal, Nigh, Carrell, Goodwin,
and Hugh Peter's were chief) to cajole and decoy the Ministers, Citizens, and
the expulsed Members, with discourses and propositions, they told them, The
Presbyterians had differed from the King in point of civil Interest, which was
more irreconcilable than that Interest of Church Government, whatsoever show
was made to the contrary, (They will not endure to hear of the KING'S exemplary
patience and Christian charity to all; nor of His precepts and strict
injunctions to His Son of clemency and abstinency from revenge, contained in
His last Book, [The Pourtraicture of His Majesty.] These things will both
apologize for our young King, and condemn our bloody vindicative Saints.) That
the Presbyterians as well as the Independents made War against the late King,
brought Him low, and prepared Him to receive his late deadly Blow from the
Independents, and therefore the King would look upon both parties as equally
guilty, and was deeply engaged in point of Interest to cut off both Parties:
Endeavoring by these discourses to put the Presbyterians into despair (their
own and Judas's sin) and then to work upon that base and cowardly principle of
self-preservation, and invite them to join with them in point of civil Interest
and common Defense. But their kindness was but like that of a malicious Man,
who having plague-sores upon him, embraces his friend rather to infect then
cherish him: they know that by sitting, voting, acting, and complying with
them, (whose actions the Laws of God and the Land have damned and anathematized
with the highest condemnation) they should contract the guilt of all their
forepassed crimes and treasons; in the mean time the Presbyterians should sit
and act but as a suspected Party, and should be baffled and turned out again
when the danger is past; the Independents keeping in their own hands all the
power, profits and preferments of the Land, and using the Presbyterian party
but as Gibeonites, Hewers of wood, and Drawers of water under them; they
invited them therefore to share with them in their sins, shames, and
punishments, but would keep Achans Wedge and the Babilonish garment (the profit
of their crimes) to themselves: And (as if it were not sufficient to cosen Man
without mocking God) the House of Commons Ordered a strict Fast to be kept upon
Thursday, 19 April 1649. as a day of Humiliation to implore Gods forgiveness
for the ingratitude of the people, who did not sufficiently acknowledge with
thankfulness Gods great mercies upon this Land in freeing them from Monarchy,
and bestowing liberty upon them, by changing Kingly Government into a
Free State or Republique. The Faction knew that to partake with them in these
prayers, was to partake of their sins. God deliver us from those deceitful
lips, whose prayers are snares, whose kisses prove curses, and whose devotion
leads to damnation: Never was Fast enjoined with more severity, nor neglected
with more contempt and horror; men shunning it like the sins of Rebellion and
Witchcraft. Besides, their Consciences told them, that they never suffered the
thousandth part of the oppressions they now groan under.

About this time it was debated to send supplies for Ireland; 150. The juggling
design of sending part of the Army for Ireland.
the predominannt Grandees were desirous to purge the Army (as they had done
the House) and send the Levellers (Assertors of Liberty) thither: the Levellers
were desirous to keep their ground here, and send the more mercenary enslaving
and enslaved part of the Army; the better to color the design, Cromwell
undertook to be Conductor of this expedition, and light them the way into
Ireland with his Illuminated Nose; having taken Order before hand that his
precious self should be recalled time enough to keep up his party in England
from sinking by his longer absence, and the better to accommodate the business,
Lots were several times cast what Regiments should go; but the Lots not falling
out to the minds of the General Council of Officers, they cast Lots again and
again, until fortune agreed with their desires: This being discovered, a
printed Paper was scattered about the streets, 26. April, 1649. as follows:
ALL worthy Officers and Soldiers who are yet mindful that you engaged not as
a mere mercenarie Army, hired to serve the Arbitrarie ends of a Council of
State; but took up Arms in Judgment and Conscience in behalf of your own, and
the peoples just Rights and Liberties, you may see plainly by the proceedings
of Col. Hewson with his Regiment, that the design of your grand Officers is, to
reduce the Army to a mere mercenary and servile temper, that shall obey all
their commands, without so much as asking a question for Conscience sake.
Intending by this blind obedience in you to make you be whatsoever they shall
find requisite to establish their own absolute power over the Commonwealth,
yea, though it be to cut off your best friends, or perpetuate this their own
Parliament and Council of State, things so evidently destructive to your own
and the peoples just Rights and Liberties as nothing can be more.

And for compassing whereof, you know they have long since dissolved the
Agitators, and erected a Council amongst themselves, by which they have molded
the Parliament and a Council of State to their own wills; both which, are to be
as a screen between the People and your Grandees, to make the world believe,
they do nothing but by Order of Parliament, and Council of State, when they
order all things themselves; and indeed are confederated together to defend and
protect each others in their defrauding and enslaving the Commonwealth.

This they have long aimed at, but cannot possibly effect it, until they
reduce the Army to a servile and base temper, which they have been laboring to
bring to pass along time; as by picking quarrels with most Officers and
Soldiers, that have manifested any sense of Common Right, and so vexing them
and wearying them out of Troops and Company. And (you know) they have bin more
than once disbanding twenty of a Troop, upon pretense of easing the public
charge all their mischief being ever done, after either fasting and prayer, or
upon some very specious pretense; but the care and resolution of the honest
Ofificers and Soldiers ever prevented this.

But now the business for Ireland (it seems) must do the deed; that being a
service that must be preferred before the settling of the Liberties and Freedoms
of this Nation; and all that are not for this service must be esteemed no
better than Enemies and Traitors; and therefore an Ahab-like Fast goes before
the Lots are cast: And Col. Hewson falls to work and disbands all those
Soldiers and Officers that refused to engage for the service of Ireland,
before the Liberties of England (which we never trod under foot) be restored to
the people.

The end of this being to be a leading case to all other Regiments both Horse
and Foot; not that they certainly intend for Ireland, but by such man's to be
rid of all such as are apt to desire to be satisfied in their Consciences of
the justice of the Cause before they engage in the killing and slaying of men
any more; or before they see some fruits answerable to the blood that has been
spilt.

And being rid of this kind of Officers and Soldiers, then to fill the
Regiments as this Hewson does, with such ignorant, needy, or servile men, as
these miserable times (through loss of Trade) have begotten.

And this being done, then to make more strict enquiry after this sort of
People in the Army, and all other places, suppress meetings, and if that will
not do, then to disarme all from whom they suspect the least repining or
opposition.

And therefore all those Officers and Soldiers, and all people in all places
are concerned in a very high nature, even as much as the freedom of the Nation
is worth, yea, as they tender the good of their Wives, Children, Families and
Posterity, to venture their lives and all they have to make opposition against
this the greatest mischief that ever was attempted; the greatest Treason that
ever was committed against the liberties of the People: and not to stand any
longer in a mix-maze between hope and fear; for if this design take place,
your great Officers and their Confederates in Parliament and Council of State,
will be as so many Kings, Princes and Lords, and your selves, and all the
people, their Slaves and Vassals.

Therefore keep every man his place and post, and stir not, but immediately
choose you a Council of Agitators once more to judge of these things; without
which we shall never see a new Parliament, or ever be quit of these intolerable
burdens, oppressions, and cruelties, by which the people are like to be
beggered and destroyed.



About this time Master Robert Lockier, 151. M. Lockier condemned by a Council
of War, with his honorable death and burial: and Lilburns Letter to the
General.
and five or six other Troopers of Captain Savages Troop were condemned for a
supposed mutiny; in behalf of whom Lieut. C. John Lilburne writ this Letter
following to the General, dated 27. April, 1649.

May it please your Excellency,
WE have not yet forgot your Solemn Engagement of June 5. 1647. whereby the
Armies Continuance as an Army was in no wise by the will of the State, but by
their own mutual Agreement: And if their standing were removed from one
Foundation to another, (as is undeniable) then with the same they removed from
one Authority to another; and the Ligaments and Bonds of the First were
Dissolved, and gave place to the Second; and under, and from the head of their
first Station, viz: By the Will of the State, the Army derived their Government
by Martial Law; which in Judgment and Reason could be no longer binding then
the Authority (which gave being thereto) was binding to the Army: For the
denial of the Authority, is an Abrogation and Nullment of all Acts, Orders, or
Ordinances by that Authority as to them: And upon this Account, your Excellency
with the Army, long proceeded upon the Constitution of a new Council and
Government, contrary to all Martial Law and Discipline, by whom only the Army
engaged to be Ordered in their prosecution of the Ends; to wit, Their several
Rights, both as Soldiers and Commoners, for which they associated; Declaring,
Agreeing, and Promising each other, not to Disband, Divide, or suffer
themselves to be Disbanded or Divided, without satisfaction and security in
relation to their Grievances and Desires in behalf of themselves and the
Commonwealth, as should be agreed unto by their Council of Agitators: And by
virtue, and under color of this Establishment, all the Extraordinary Actions
by your Excellency, your Officers, and the Army have past: Your refusal to
disband, disputing the Orders of Parliament: Impeachment and Ejection of Eleven
Members; your first and second march up to London; your late violent Exclusion
of the major part of Members out of the House, and their Imprisonment without
cause, etc. which can no way be justified from the guilt of the highest
Treason, but in the accomplishment of a righteous end, viz. The enjoyment of
the benefit of our Laws and Liberties which we hoped long ere this to have
enjoyed from your hands: Yet when we consider and herewith compare many of your
late carriages both toward the Soldiery, and other free people, and
principally your cruel Exercise of Martial Law, even to the Sentence and
Execution of Death upon such of your Soldiers as stand for the Rights of that
Engagement, etc. And not only so, but against others not of the Army; we
cannot but look upon your defection and Apostasy in such dealings, as of most
dangerous Consequence to all the Laws and Freedoms of the People.

And therefore, although there had never been any such solemn Engagement by the
Army, as that of June 5. 1647. which with your Excellency in point of duty
ought not to be of the meanest obligation. We do protest against your Exercise
of Martial Law, against any whomsoever, in times of Peace: where all Courts of
Justice are open, as the greatest encroachment upon our Laws and Liberties
that can be acted against us; and particularly, against the Trial of the
Soldiers of Captain Savages Troop yesterday, by a Court Martial, upon the
Articles of War, and sentencing of two of them to death; and for no other end
(as we understand) but for some dispute about their Pay: And the reason of this
our Protestation, is from the Petition of Right, made in the third year of the
late King, which declares, That no person ought to be judged by Law Martial,
except in times of War; And that all Commissions given to execute Martial Law
in time of Peace, are contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Land. And it
was the Parliaments complaint, That Martial Law was then Commanded to be
executed upon Soldiers for Robbery, Mutiny, or Murder. Which Petition of Right
this present Parliament in their late Declarations of the 9. of February, and
the 17. of March, 1648. commend as the most excellentest Law in England, and
there promise to preserve inviolably, it, and all other the Fundamental Laws
and Liberties, concerning the preservation of the Lives, Properties, and
Liberties of the People, with all things incident thereunto. And the Exercise of
Martial Law in Ireland, in time of Peace, was one of the chiefest Articles for
which the E. of Strafford lost his Head: The same by this present Parl. being
judged High Treason. And the Parliament it self, neither by Act nor Ordinance,
can justly or warrantably destroy the Fundamental Liberties and Principles of
the Common Law of England: It being a Maxim in Law and Reason both, that all
such Acts and Ordinances, are ipso facto, null, and void in Law, and binds not
all, but ought to be resisted and stood against to the death. And if the
Supreme Authority may not presume to do this, much less may You, or Your
Officers presume thereupon; For where Remedy may be had by an ordinary course
in Law, the Party greived shall never have his recourse to extraordinaries.
Whence it is evident, That it is the undoubted Right of every Englishman
(Soldier, or other) that he should be punishable only in the ordinary Courts
of Justice, according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm in the times of
Peace, as now it is; and the extraordinary way by Courts Martial, in no wise to
be used.

Yea, the Parliaments Oracle, Sir Edward Cook, Declares in the third part of
his Institutes, Chap. of Murder, That for a General or other Officers of an
Army, in time of Peace to put any man, although a Soldier, to death, by color
of Martial Law, it is absolute murder in that General, etc. Therefore erecting
of Martial Law now, when all Courts of justice are open, and stopping the free
current of Law, which sufficiently provides for the punishment of Soldiers as
well as others, as appears by 18. H. 6. c. 19. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 2. 4. and 5 P.
and M. c. 3. and 5 El. 5 and 5 Jam. 25. is an absolute destroying of our
Fundamental Liberties, and the razing of the Foundation of the Common Law of
England; the which out of Duty and Conscience to the Rights and Freedoms of
this Nation (which we value above our lives) and to leave You and Your Council
without all excuse, we were moved to represent unto Your Excellency, Earnestly
pressing You, well to consider what You do, before you proceed to the taking
away the lives of those men by Martial Law; least the blood of the Innocent
(and so palpable Subversion of the Laws and Liberties of England) bring the
reward of just vengeance after it upon You, as it did upon the Earl of
Strafford: For Innocent blood God will not pardon; and what the people may do
(in case of such violent Subversion of their Rights) we shall leave to Your
Excellency to judge, and remain

Sir, Your Excellencies humble Servants, JOHN LILBURNE. RICH. OVERTON.

From our Causlesse, and unjust, and Tyrannica^ Captivity, in the Tower of
London, April 17. 1649.

Notwithstanding which Letter, and much other means made, the said Lockier was
Shot to Death in Saint Paul's Churchyard the same day, to strike a terror and
slavish fear into such other Soldiers as shall dare to take notice of their
approaching slavery; but his Christian and gallant deportment at his death,
with the honorable funeral pomp accompanying him to his Grave turned all the
error of his Tragedy into hatred and contempt of the Authors thereof. 152.
Arreares given to Col. A. P^pham, and H. Martin, and temptations put upon
Lilburne and Joyce.


About this time the House of Commons gave to Col. Alexander Popham all his
Arreares, and to Harry Martyn 3000 l. to put him on upon the holy Sisters, and
take him off from the Levellers: And Cromwell is now playing the Devils part,
showing the Kingdoms of the earth, and tempting John Lilburn to fall down and
worship him, to forsake his good principles and engagements, and betray the
liberties of the people, but L. Col. Lilburne is higher seated in the good
opinion of the People than to be suspected of so much baseness, who are
confident he will as constantly resist false promises and vain hopes, as he
has vain threats and terrors of Indictments, and not cast away the hold he
has of immortality, by harkening to such a Syrene whose promises are but baits
with a hook hidden under them; and his preferments but like Mahomets paradise;
he that has cousened all the Interests of the Kingdom will not scruple to
cheat his enemy, a free-spirited plain meaning man. This is to undermine and
blow up his credit with his party, and make him liable to a revenge hereafter:
He that stoops to the lure of a known enemy is guilty of inexcusable folly, and
a Betrayer of himself, especially having had so fair a Copy of Constancy set
him by Coronet Joyce, who has with much faithfulness resisted the like
allurements, and so foul a Copy of Inconstancy by Reynolds.

The Commons have ordered, 153. The design of making Members of Parliament
liable Arrests.
That upon Complaint made to any Judge of the three Benches, the Judges shall
send a Letter of Summons t^^^ ch Member of their House as shall be complained
of, to give an appearance, and submit to legal proceedings, otherwise his
person to be liable to Arrests. But our present Judges are Creatures to the
House of Commons, and know beforehand what Members are Babes of Grace in
favor, and must be privileged; and who are out of favor, and must not be
privileged; they have an Index tells them when to grant, and when to deny,
Sinners must not be partakers of the same Laws with Saints: This is a Whip and
a Bell to drive such dogged Members out of the Hall as will not hunt in pack
with the Grandees in pursuit of their design, and are quicksented enough to
smell out their Knavery, if they come too near their door: It is thought the
tyrannical Hocas Pocasses had an aim hereby to lash Harry Martin off from the
Levellers, and make him come in to them. 154. Women Petition the House for L.
Col. Lilburne and his Company.


About this time some thousands of well-affected Women of London, Westminster,
Southwarke, and the Hamlets, stormed the House of Commons with two Petitions in
behalf of Jo. Lilburne and his Company; They complain of the Council of States
violent and illegal proceedings against them, in seizing them in the night by
Soldiers; of Lockiers being shot to death by Martial Law; of their Arbitrary
Government, Taxes, Excise, Monopolies, etc. That there was a design to fetch
Lilburne and his Fellow Prisoners out of the Tower at midnight to White Hall,
Second part of Englands new Chains discovered.
and there murder them; That the House by Declaring the Abettors of the Book
laid to those Prisoners charge Traitors, have laid a snare for people; when as
hardly any discourse can be touching the affairs of the present times but
falls within the compass of that Book; so that all liberty of discourse is
thereby utterly taken away, then which there can be no greater slavery.

They received not so good Answers to these Petitions as they were wont to
receive, when they had Money, Plate, Rings, Bodkins, and Thymbles to sacrifice
to these Legislative Idols, they were bid, Go home and wash their dishes; to
which some replied, They had neither Dishes nor Meat left.

Note that the Commons have returned answer to some Petitioners, that Lilburne
shall be Legally Tried by Laws preceding the fact, 155. Observations upon the
Commons Answer to those that petitioned for Lilburne, etc.
and yet by their Order, 11. April, 1649, it is Ordered, That the Attorney
General be required to take speedy course for prosecution of Lieu. Col. John
Lilburne, etc. in the Upper Bench this Term, upon the Declaration of this
House touching the Book, entitled (The second part of Englands new Chains
discovered.] if this Order be not a Law and preceding the fact too, then our
suprene Saints have told a Legislative Lie. In the latter end of the said
Answer they are angry the Petitioners should discover so much of their
baseness, That Cromwell and Ireton rides them, and therefore (contrary to all
men's knowledge, and their own Consciences) they term those Intimations,
seditious Suggestions; and Ordered, that Cromwell and Ireton should draw up a
Declaration to prevent the people from being misled by Sowers of sedition;
Humiliter servivunt, aut superbe dominantur.
such are the degenerous Spirits of under-Tyrants, who are Asses to their
Superiors; and Lions to their Inferiors: Cromwell and Ireton, that have
subverted all civil Authority, murdered the KING, possessed themselves of what
they please, and enslaved the Kingdom with a Military tyranny, must draw up a
Declaration according to their fancy, for their own vindication, and the
Commons must Father the Bastard and set the stamp of their Authority and
privilege upon it, least any man should confute it, and beat back the Authors
lies into their throats. But this is no new invention, for formerly when the
Council of Officers set forth their Answer to the House of Commons Demands
concerning their secured Members; Ireton penned this scandalous Answer of the
said Officers.
Cromwell and Ireton caused their Journey-men of that Conventicle to Vote, That
the House did approve the matter of the said Answer; thereby owning all the
gross lies therein contained to deter the imprisoned Members from replying to
it, and so by a tacit confession to acknowledge themselves guilty.

About this time appeared out of the East a New Light in our Horizon, 156. The
Turkish Alchoran taught to speak English.
the Alchoran of Mahomet (Predecessor to Cromwell) and of Sergius (forerunner
of Hugh Peter's) naturalized and turned English. Now the Jews (Professed
Enemies to Christ (which Mahomet is not) are accepted of) it is believed that
their Thalmude and Caball will shortly be made English too, that this Island
may be rendered a complete Pantheon, a Temple and Oracle for all Gods and all
Religions; our lightheaded innovating People being like Reeds as apt to be
shaken by, and bend unto every wind, every breath of pretended Inspiration, as
the ancient Arabians were.

May 1. 1649. The frighted Conventicle of Commons considered of an Act
(forsooth) to fortify themselves and their usurpations with a Scar-crow of
new-declared Treasons, 157. New-declared Treasons to defend tyranny and
usurpation, and ensnare the People.
to the purpose following.

1. If any man shall maliciously (this is a word of qualification, a backdoor
to let out such as they shall think fit) Affirm the present Government to be
tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful, or that the Commons in Parliament, are not
the supreme Authority of the Nation, or endeavor to alter the present
Government.

2. If any affirm the Council of State or Parliament to be Tyrannical or
unlawful, or endeavor to subvert them, or stir up sedition against them.

For Soldiers of the Army to contrive the death of the General, or Lieutenant
General, or endeavor to raise mutinies in the Army, Quere, whether Cromwell
be Lieutenant General, or no?
or to leavy War against the Parliament to join with any to invade England
or Ireland, counterfeit the Great Seal, kill any Member of Parliament, or
Judge, or Minister of Justice in their duty: All these several cases to be
Declared, Treason. You see the terrors of Caine pursue these guilty Cowards.

This Fools Bolt is chiefly aimed at the honest Levellers; this Junto of
Commons have made themselves legal Traitors already, and would now make all
the Kingdom legislative Traitors, but I hope none of those that arrogate the
Reverend Title of Judges of the Law (although against Law) will be so lawless
as to give Sentence of Death upon any such illegal Act of the House of Commons;
nay, this very Act denounces slavery and bondage to the Nation, and therefore
is an Act of the highest tyranny, and a snare.

158. The Levellers Randezvouz in Oxfordshire.
May 6. 1649. The honest Levellers of the Army, (for that is the Nickname
which Cromwell falsely and unchristianly has christened them withal) Enemies to
Arbitrary Government, tyranny and oppression, whether they find it in the
Government of one or many? whether in a Council of Officers, a Council of
State; or a fag end of a House of Commons? whether it veil it self with the
Title of a Supreme Authority, or a Legislative power?) drew together to a
Randezvouz about Banbury in Oxfordshire, to the number of 4000 or 5000. others
resorting to them daily from other parts. This gave an Alarm to our Grandees,
fearing the downfall of their domination. Cromwell (not knowing what Party to
draw out against them, that would be steadfast to him) shunned the danger, and
put his property the General upon it to oppose the Randezvouz, and (looking as
wan as the guilles of a sick Turkey-cock) marched forth himself Westward, to
intercept such as drew to the Randezvouz. In the mean time the said Levellers
printed and published this ensuing Paper, entitled.

Englands Standard advanced: or, A Declaration from Mr. Will. Thompson, and the
oppressed People of this Nation, now under his conduct in Oxfordshire.
Dated at their Randezvouz, May 6. 1649.
WHereas it is notorious to the whole world, that neither the Faith of the
Parliament, nor yet the Faith of the Army formerly made to the people of this
Nation, in behalf of their Common Right, Freedom, and Safety, has bin at all
observed, or made good, but both absolutely declined and broken, and the people
only served with bare words and fair promising Papers, and left utterly
destitute of all help or delivery: And that this has principally been by the
prevalency and treachery of some eminent persons (now domineering over the
people) is most evident. The Solemn Engagement of the Army at New Market, and
Triploe-heaths by them destroyed, the Council of Agitators dissolved, the blood
of War shed in time of Peace, Petitioners for Common Freedom suppressed by
force of Arms, and Petitioners abused and terrified, the lawful Trial by 12.
sworn men of the Neighborhood subverted and denied, bloody and tyrannical
Courts (called an High Court of Justice, and a Council of State) erected, the
power of the Sword advanced and set in the Seat of the Magistrates, the Civil
Laws stopped and subverted, and the Military Introduced, even to the hostile
seizure, imprisonment, trial, sentence, and execution of death, upon diverse of
the Free people of this Nation, leaving no visible Authority, devolving all
into a Factious Juncto and Council of State, usurping and assuming the name,
stamp, and authority of Parliament, to oppress, torment and vex the People,
whereby all the lives, liberties, and estates, are all subdued to the Wills of
those Men, no Law, no Justice, no Right or Freedom, no Case of Grievances, no
removal of unjust barbarous Taxes, no regard to the cries and groans of the
poor to be had, while utter beggary and famine (like a mighty terrent) has
broken in upon us, and already seized upon several parts of the Nation.

Wherefore through an inavoidable necessity, no other means left under Heaven,
we are enforced to betake our selves to the Law of Nature, to defend and
preserve our selves and Native Rights, and therefore are resolved as one Man,
(even to the hazard and expense of our Lives and Fortunes,) to endeavor the
Redemption of the Magistracy of England, from under the force of the Sword, to
vindicate the Petition of Right, to set the unjustly imprisoned free, to
relieve the poor, and settle this Commonwealth, upon the grounds of Common
Right, Freedom, and Safety.

Be it therefore known to all the free people of England, and to the whole
world, that (choosing rather to die for Freedom, then live as Slaves) We are
gathered and associated together upon the bare Account of Englishmen, with our
Swords in our hands to redeem our selves and the Land of our Nativity, from
slavery and oppression, to avenge the blood of War shed in the time of Peace,
to have Justice for the blood of M. Arnold, shot to death at Ware, and for the
blood of M. Robert Lockier, and diverse others who of late by Martial Law were
murdered at London.

And upon this our Engagement in behalf of the Commonwealth, We do solemnly
agree and protest, That we will faithfully (laying all self-respects aside,)
endeavor the actual relief and settlement of this distressed Nation.

And that all the world may know particularly what we intend, and wherein
particularly to center and acquiesce for ever, not to recede or exceed the
least punctilio. We do declare from the integrity of our hearts, that by the
help and might of God we will endeavor the absolute settlement of this
distracted Nation, upon that Form and Method by way of an Agreement of the
people, tendered as a peace offering by Lieuten. Colonel John Lilburne, Mr.
William Walwyn, Mr. Thomas Prince, and Mr. Richard Overton, bearing date May 1.
1649. the which we have annexed to this our Declaration as the Standard of our
Engagement, thereby owning every part and particular of the Premises of the
Agreement, promising and resolving to the utmost hazard of our Lives and
Abilities, to pursue the speedy and full accomplishment thereof, and to our
power, to protect and defend all such as shall Assent or Adhere thereunto: And
particularly, for the Preservation and Deliverance of L. Col. John Lilburn, M.
Will. Walwin, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. Richard Overton, Captain Bray, and Mr.
William Sawyer, from their barbarous and illegal Imprisonments: And we Declare,
That if a hair of their heads perish in the hands of those Tyrants that
restrain them, That if God shall enable us, we will avenge it seventie times
seven fold upon the heads of the Tyrants themselves and their Creatures.

And that till such time as by Gods Assistance we have procured to this Nation
the Declared purpose of this our Engagement, we will not Divide nor Disband,
nor suffer our selves to be Divided or Disbanded, resolving with soberness and
civility to behave our selves to the Country, to wrong nor abuse any man, to
protect all to our power from violence and oppression in all places where we
come; resolving to stop the payment of all Taxes or Sessements whatsoever, as
of Excise, Tithes, and the Tax of Ninety thousand pounds per mensem.

And having once obtained a New Representative, according to the said
Agreement, upon such Terms and Limitations therein expressed: We shall then
freely lay down our Arms, and return to our several Habitations and Callings.

And concerning the equity, necessity, and justice of our undertaking, We
appeal to the judgment of the oppressed, betwixt their Destroyers and Us;
Whether by the Law of God, of Nature, and Nations, it be not equally
justifiable in us to engage for the Safety and Deliverance of this Nation, as
it was with the Netherlanders, and other People for theirs, and upon the same
Principles that the Army engaged at New Market and Triploe-heaths; both
Parliament and Army declaring, That it is no resistance of Magistracy to side
with just Principles, and Law of Nature and Nations: And that the Soldiery may
Lawfully hold the hands of that General, who will turn his Cannon against his
Army, on purpose to destroy them: The Sea men the hands of that Pilot, who
wilfully runs his Ship upon a Rock. And therefore, (the condition of this
Commonwealth considered) we cannot see how it can be otherwise esteemed in us.
And upon that Account we Declare, that we do own, and are resolved to own all
such persons, either of the Army or Countries, that have already, or shall
hereafter, rise up and stand for the Liberties of England, according to the
said Agreement of the people: And in particular, We do own and avow the late
proceedings in Colonel Scroops, Col. Harrisons, and Major General Skippons
Regiments, declared in their Resolutions published in print; As One Man,
Resolving to live and die with them, in their and our just and mutual defense.

And we do implore and invite all such as have any sense of the Bonds and
Miseries upon the people; any Bowels of Compassion in them, any Piety, Justice,
Honor, or Courage in their Breasts, any Affections to the Freedoms of
England, any love to his Neighbor or Native Country, to rise up, and come in
to help a distressed miserable Nation, to break the Bonds of Cruelty, Tyranny,
and Oppression, and set the people Free.

In which Service, Trusting to the undoubted goodness of a just and righteous
Cause, We shall faithfully discharge the utmost of our Endeavors; Not sparing
the venture of all hardships and hazards whatsoever, and leave the Success to
God.

Signed by me WILLIAM THOMPSON,
at our Randezvouz in Oxfordshire near Banbury, in behalf of my Self, and the
Rest Engaged with me, May 6. 1649.
For a New Parliament, By the Agreement of the People.
About this time Doctor Dorislaus a Civil Lawyer, 159. Doct. Dorislaus stabbed
to death in Holland.
sometimes Judge Advocate to the Earl of Essex, and Lord Fairfax, and lately
one of the Council in the High Court of Justice against the KING, and the 4.
Lords, was sent from the Parliament, Agent into Holland, where about 18.
Scots-men, repayring to his lodging, 6. of them went up the stayres to his
Chamber, whilst 12. of them made good the stayre-foot, they stabbed him to
death, and escaped.

About the 14. day of May, 1649. 160. Hasleriggs barbarous motion to murder six
Royalists of the best quality in revenge of Dorislaus.
Report was made from the Council of State to the House of the examination of
3. Servants of Doctor Dorislaus, concerning the Death of their Master; and what
allowances were fit to be given to his Children out of the Kings Revenue,
thereby to lay an aspersion upon the King (as if He having had an influence
upon that Fact, His Estate must make the recompense, notwithstanding
Scotish-men did the deed in revenge of Hamiltons death) Dorislaus had been a
poor Schoolmaster in the Low Countries formerly, from whence he was translated
to read the History-Lecture at Oxford, where he decried Monarchy in his first
Lecture: was complained of, and forgiven by the benignity of the King. Then he
became Judge Advocate in the Kings Army in his expedition against the Scots:
afterward he had the like employment, under the Earl of Essex: and lastly,
under Sir Tho. Fairfax. a great Gainer by his employments, but withal, a great
Antimonarchist, and a Saint in Cromwells Rubric, and therefore had a
magnetique virtue both living and dead to draw money to him in abundance. Upon
occasion of this Debate, Haslerigge moved, That 6. Gentlemen of the best
quality [Royalists] might be put to Death as a revenge for Dorislaus, and to
deter men from the like attempts hereafter. (That you may the better see of
what Spirit Haslerigge is known, That some Northern Counties having petitioned
the Commons for relief against the miserable famine raging there: Haslerigge
opposed their request, saying, The want of food would best defend those
Counties from Scottish Invasions.) What man that had any sense of Christianity,
Courage, Honesty, or Justice, would have been the Author of so barbarous and
unjust a motion, That six Gentlemen no way conscious nor privy to the fact
should be offered up a sacrifice to revenge and malice, nay, to guilty fears
and base cowardic^, to keep off the like attempts from Haslerigge and his
Party. I wish this Gentleman would read the Alcharon (or new Independent Bible
of the new Translation) and from thence gather precepts of more Humanity,
Justice, Honesty and Courage, since he has Read the Old and New Testament of
Moses and Christ to so little purpose. Yet the House, 18. of May, passed a
Declaration, That if more Acts of the like nature happened hereafter, it should
be retaliated upon such Gentlemen of the Kings Party as had not yet Compounded.
But this is but a device to fright them to Compound, unless it be a forerunner
to a Massacre heretofore taken into consideration at a Council of War: See
Sect. 117.

161. An act declaring more new Treasons.
About this time came forth that prodigious Act, declaring four new Treasons
with many complicated Treasons in their bellies, the like never heard of before
in our Law, nor in any Kingdom or Republike of Christendom: Because I have
formerly spoken of it, the Act it self printed, published, and dreadfully
notorious throughout the whole Kingdom; I will refer you to the printed Copy;
only one clause formerly debated was omitted in the Act, viz. That to kill the
General, Lieuten. Genesis any Members of this present Parl. or Counsel of State,
to be declared Treason; this would have discovered their guilty cowardice so
much they were ashamed of it: besides it was thought fit to make the People
take a new Oath of Allegiance to the new State. First, I will only give you
some few Observations thereupon. This Act declares to be Treason unto death and
confiscation of Lands all Deeds, Plots, and Words: (1.) Against this present
fagge end of a Parliament, and against their never before heard-of Supreme
Authority and Government: for, when was this Kingdom ever governed by a
Parliament, or by any power constituted by them? (2.) All endeavors to subvert
the Keepers of the Liberty of England, and Council of State constituted, and
to be from time to time constituted by Authority of Parliament, who are to be
under the said Representatives in Parliament, (if they please, and not
otherwise; for the Sword and the Purse trusted in the power of the Council of
State) yet the Keepers of the Liberties of England and the Council of State of
England to be hereafter constituted by Parliament, are Individua vaga, ayrie
notions not yet named nor known, and when they are known we owe them no
Allegiance, (without which no Treason) by the known Laws of the Land, which is
only due to the King, His lawful Heirs and Successors thereto sworn; nor
any the particular Powers and Authorities, granted to this Parliament by the
said Keepers of the Liberties of England, and Council of State yet any where
authentically published and made known to us by any one avowed Act, (unless we
shall account their Licensed New Books to be such) and therefore they may usurp
what powers they please: So that these men who involved us in a miserable War
against the late Murdered KING, pretending He would enslave us, and they would
set us free; have brought us so far below the condition of the basest Slaves,
that they abuse us like brute Beasts, and having deprived us of our Religion,
Laws and Liberties; and drawn from us our money and blood, they now deny us
the use of reason and common sense, belonging to us as Men, and Govern us by
Arbitrary, irrational Votes, with which they bait Traps to catch us: Woe be to
that people whose Rulers set snares to catch them, and are amari venatores
contra Dominum, Men-hunters against God: nay, to move any Person to stir up the
People against their Authority is hereby declared, Treason: mark the ambiguity
of these words (like the Devils Oracles) which he that has Power and the Sword
in his hands will interpret as he please: If the Keeper of the Liberties of
England, or Council of State shall extend too far, or abuse their Authority
never so much contrary to the Laws of the Land, Reason, Justice or the Laws
of God (as has been lately done in this Case of Lylburne, Walwyn, etc.) no
Lawyer, no Friend shall dare to perform that Christian duty of giving council
or help to the oppressed* here Fathers and Children, Husbands and Wives,
Brothers and all relations must forsake, nay, betray one another, lest these
Tyrants interpret these duties to be, A moving of them to stir up the People
against their Authority. 3. All endeavors to withdraw any Soldier or Officer
from their obedience to their Superior Officer, or from the present Government,
as aforesaid, By which words it is Treason: First, if any man's Child, or
Servant, be enticed into this Army, and the Father or Master endeavor to
withdraw him from so plundering and roguing a kind of life back to his
profession. Secondly, If any Commander or Officer shall command his Soldiers
to violate, wrong, or rob any man for the party so aimed at, or some
wel-meaning Friend to set before the said Soldiers the sin and shame of such
actions, and dissuade them from obeying such unlawful commands. 4. If any man
shall presume to counterfeit their counterfeit Great Seal, It is declared
Treason. I wonder it is not Treason to counterfeit their counterfeit coin!
Behold here new minted Treasons current in no time and place but this afflicted
Age and Nation: Edw. 3. anno 25. regni. chapter 2. passed an excellent Act to
secure the People by reducing Treasons to a certainty, as our New Legislative.
Tyrants labor to ensnare the People by making Treasons uncertain and
arbitrary; Sic volo, sic ju beo, it shall be Treason, be cause they will call
and Vote it so.
what they please to call Treason shall be Treason, though our known Laws
call it otherwise: we have long held our Estates and Liberties, and must now
hold our Lives at the will of those Grand Seigniours, one Vote of 40. or 50.
factious Commons, Servants and Members of the Army vacates all our Laws,
Liberties, Properties, and destroys our Lives. Behold here a short veiw of that
Act which has no Additions by any Act subsequent. See stat. 1. Mariae, c. 10.
Whereas diverse opinions have been before this time, in what cases Treason
shall be said, and in what not, The King at the request of the Lords and
Commons, Declares:

See 1. H. 4. c. 10. 11. H. 7. c. 1.
1. That to compass or imagine the Death of the KING, (how much more to act it)
Queen, or their eldest Son and Heir.

2. To violate the KING'S Companion, eldest Daughter unmarried, or the Wife of
the KING'S eldest Son and Heir.

3. To leavy War against the King, or adhere to his Enemies in his Realm, and
thereof be proveably attained of open deed by people of their condition.

4. To counterfeit the King's Great or Privy Seal:

5. Or his M ney.

6. To slay the King's Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of one Bench or other,
Justices in Air, Justices in Assize, and all other Justices assigned to hear
and determine, being in their Places doing their Offices.

If any other case supposed Treason which is not above specified, So the four
Lords ought to have been Tried, not by a new shambles of Justice.
does happen before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without any going to
Judgment of the Treason, till the Cause be showed and declared before the King
and his Parliament (not before the House of Commons only, or before both Houses
without the King) whether it ought to be adjudged Treason.

You see how few in number these Treasons specified are, and that they must be
attained of open deed by their Peers; our words were free under Monarchy,
though not free under our Free State; so were they under the Romans. Tacitus,
An. 1. sub finem, seaking of Treasons, facia arguebantut, dicta impune erant.
These horrible tyrannies considered (and being destitute of all other less
desperate relief) I do here solemnly declare and protest before that God that
has made me a Man, and not a Beast, a Freeman, and not a Slave, that if any
man whatsoever that takes upon him the reverend name and title of a Judge or
Justice shall give Sentence of Death upon any friend of mine upon this or any
other illegal Act of this piece of a House of Commons, I will, and lawfully may
(the enslaving scar-crow doctrine of all time-serving, State-flattering Priests
and Ministers, notwithstanding) follow the examples of Sampson, Judith, Jael,
and Ehud, and by Poniard, Pistol, Poison, or any other means whatsoever,
secret, or open, prosecute to the Death the said Judge and Justice, and all
their principal Abettors: And I do here invite and exhort all generous
freeborn Englishmen to the like resolutions, and to enter into Leagues
defensive and offensive, and sacramental associations (seven or eight in a
company, or as many as can well confide in one another) to defend and revenge
mutually one another Persons, Lives, Limbs, and Liberties as aforesaid,
against this, and all other illegal and tyrannous Usurpations.

162. A motion to enlarge Sir Will. Waller, etc. And the Generals Answer
intimating the securing of the Members to be done by confederacy with the
Army-party in the House.
About this time, or a little before, the General was moved to enlarge Sir
William Waller, and the other Members illegally kept Prisoners in Windsor: He
answered, They were no longer his, but the Parliaments prisoners: It should
seem the Brute has made a private deed of gift of them to his Journy-men of
the House. The Generals Warrant seized and imprisoned them, and notwithstanding
the Council of Officers declared in Print, that they were preparing a Charge
against them, yet the Knaves lied like Saints; they were then so far from
having matter to accuse them of, that they have ever since, hunted after a
Charge against them, and endeavored to suborn Witnesses; but after 24 weeks
restraint (whereas by the Law no man ought to be committed without an
accusation) they have found nothing against them. This turning over of these
Prisoners to the House of Commons, proves what I formerly asserted in Sect. 24.
That the violence of the Army in securing, and secluding the Members, was by
consent of their Somerset House Junto now sitting in the House of Commons,

163 The General sends forth Warrants to all Justices of the Peace to attach
those Levellers that he had routed.
The honest Levellers (most of them Countrymen) endeavoring to draw to a
Randezvouz, about 600. or 700. of them marched from Banbury to Burford in
Oxfordshire, where lying securely (because they were upon treaty with the
Enemy) their Quarters were beaten up, and about 180. of them taken Prisoners,
which their enemies (according to their usual custom) to gain reputation by
lying, reported to be so many Hundreds. And the General (as if they had been
all routed) sent forth his Warrants to all Justices of the Peace in the
adjacent Counties, requiring them to apprehend and secure all such of them as
shall be found; I desire to know by what Authority the General takes upon him
to command Justices of the Peace who are not under his Power, and what tame
Animals these Justices are that will submit to his commands? and whether he
thinks the Civil Magistrate to be obnoxious to the Power of the Sword, and the
Council of Officers? See the Vote and Act for abolishing the Kingly office. 164.
and his single self the Supreme Magistrate, or Tyrant Paramount,
notwitstanding the Vote of his Journey-men Commons, That no single Man should
be trusted with the Supreme Power.

The Levellers having possessed themselves of Northampton: the General (it is
said) thought fit to take hold of the Horns of the Altar, The General sends to
the City for additional Forces
and wrote to his vassals of the City to send their Trained Bands to his
relief, that he might the better domineer over them; and continue their slavery
hereafter. But if the Citizens have no more wit, I wish their Horns may be as
visible in their foreheads, as the Nose in Olivers face.

To cozen the honest Levellers, 165. The Commons colourably debate to dissolve
this Parl. and settle a succeeding Representative.
the Commons (in order to the ending this present Parliament) are debating how
to pack a succeeding Representative as wicked as themselves, and of the same
leaven; whose Election shall not be free, but bounded with such Orders of
limitation and restriction as shall shut out all men from electing or being
elected, as are not precisely of the same principles and practices, and as deep
engaged in their tyrannical, traiterous, cheating, bloody designs as
themselves, guilty Committee Men, and Accountants to the State shall be the
next Representative; and for the better lengthening of the business (that they
may see what success (in the mean time) the Levellers will have) they wire-draw
it through a Committee, and refer it to be debated by a Committee of the whole
House. And at last (if they must dissolve) having packed themselves into a
Council of State, they will usurp the Supreme Authority there: to prepare the
way to which design, they have passed another Act, May 19. That the People
shall be Governed as a Free State by Representatives, and by such as they shall
constitute; and then consider what kind of Representatives we are like to have.

Great care is taken that the State (or rather our States-mens private pockets)
might not be prejudiced by Judgments, 166. A debate how to defeat Judgments,
Extents, etc. upon Delinquents lands. sect.
Extents, etc. lying upon Delinquents Estates: you see notwithstanding their
Declaratory Vote, That in things concerning the Lives, Liberties, and
Prop^rties of the People, they would maintain the known Laws of the Land; yet
this Vote (as well as all others) has a condition implied, that is do no ways
hinder the Gains of our godly Grandees, otherwise they would not consider how
to defeat Creditors of their legal assurance.

John Lilburne being ordered a close Prisoner in the Tower by the Commons
without Pen, Ink, or Paper, 167. John Lilburne starving imprisonment in the
Tower.
(which was tyranny under King Charles, but not under K. Oliver) a Petition was
presented to the Commons by many well-affected, that John might have the
allowance usually and legally due to Prisoners in the like case for his
support; The allowance is 4 l. a Week as I conceive.
which was rejected, insomuch that John was kept 3 whole days with one half
meals meat: this is to condemn men unheard to be murdered by famine in their
private slaughter-houses, when they cannot, or dare not murder them in their
pretended Courts of Judicature, or public shambles: yet afterward, when the
drawing together of the Levellers, and discontents of Newcastle affrighted the
Commons, they Voted him the short allowance of 20 s. a week. Thus you see
nothing but fears and dangers can kindle the least spark of goodness and
compassion in their woolvish breasts: wherefore Lord (I beseech thee) heap
fears and terrors upon their guilty pates, till with Judas Iscariot they cry
out, We have sinned in that we have betrayed innocent blood.

168. Why Ireton laid down his Commission.
Cromwell being to march against the Levellers, left Ireton behind him (like a
hobby daring of larks) to overawe the Conventicle at Westminster, and see they
chaunt no tune but of their setting, the better to keep himself in a neutral
reconciling posture: Ireton laid down his Commission, (which he can take up
again at pleasure) whereby he puts off all addresses to him from the levelling
party for the present. This poor fellow now keeps his golden Coach which cost
200 l. and 4 gallant Horses. The world is well altered with such petty
Companions; and hereby the Soldiers may see what becomes of their Arrears.
There has been a seeming falling out between Cromwell and Ireton.

169. Hugh Peter's ^isits J. Lil^urne in the Tower, and ^he sum of their
Conse^ence. Witness his ^ampering with Hamil^on, etc.
John Lilburne being a close Prisoner in the Tower (as has been said) Hugh
Peter's (Chaplain in Ordinary to-two great Potentates, Lucifer and Oliver) came
about dinnertime ( May 25. 1649.) to visit him; and though admittance be
denied to other men, yet to him the Gates flew open: as sure as Saint Peter
keeps the keys of Heaven, Hugh Peter's keeps the keys of our Hell and our
Grandees Consciences, and opens and shuts at pleasure: he is Confessor at
Tyburn, and has a great power over damned Spirits, or rather over such
Spirits, as not submitting basely to the tyranny of our State-Mountebanks,
incur their condemnation in this world (by Gods permission) in order to their
salvation in the next world: the tyranny of these Usurpers implying at once,
their cruelties over our bodies, and Gods mercy to our souls. Hugh's first
salute was, That he came merely to give John a visit, without any design (his
guilty conscience prompting him to a voluntary Apology.) John answered, I know
you well enough, you are one of the setting Dogs of the great Men of the Army,
with fair and plausible pretenses to intimate into men, when they have done
them wrong, and to workout their designs when they are in a strait, and cover
over the blots that they have made. Then John complained of the Compare this
Act of the Kings, with the violent act of those Traitors and Tyrants, Fairfax
and his Council of War in imprisoning and secluding above 200. Members at once
without cause shown, and leaving only 40 or 50 of their cheating Faction in the
House to carry on their bloody Anarchical designs; some of which secured
Members with barbarous usage were almost brought to death, and their murder
since attempted by Soldiers.
illegal and violent seizing upon him by Soldiers, and carrying him before
that new erected thing, called [A Council of State] who committed him without
any Accusor, Accusation, Prosecutor, or Witness, or any due process of Law; and
yet when the King impeached the five Members, and preferred a Charge of high
Treason against them; Recorded 1. part Book of Decl. p. 35. and only failed in
a single punctilio of due process of Law, they cried outs, it was an invasion
of the Peoples Liberties; so that four or five Recantations from him (recorded
in their own Declarations) would not serve his turn. Peter's half out of
countenance (if so prostituted a Villain that practices impudence amongst
common Whores, and whose Pulpit is more shameful than another man's Pillory, can
be out of countenance) takes up one of Coke's Institutions, and pofessed
Lilburn was merely gulled in reading or trusting to those Books, for there were
no Laws in England. John answered, he did believe him, for that his great
Masters, Cromwell, Fairfax, etc. had destroyed them all. Nay (quoth Hugh) there
never were any in England; with that John showed him the Petition of Right,
asking him, whether that were Law? which Peter's had the impudence to deny,
asking, what Law was? John replied The Law is now taken away and all things in
confusion by turning our Monarchy (without or consent) into a Free State of
Slaves governed by Tyrants.
out of the Parliaments own Declarations, The Law is that which puts a
difference betwixt good, and evil; just, and unjust: If you take away the Law,
all things will fall into, confusion, every man will become a law unto himself,
which in the depraved condition of humane nature must needs produce great
enormities; Lust will become a law, Envy a law, Covetousness and Ambition will
become laws; and what dictates, what decisions such laws will produce, may
easily be discerned. This (Mr. Peter's) is a Definition of Law by the Parliament
in the days of their primitive purity, before they had corrupted themselves
with the Commonwealths money. And elsewhere the Law is called, The safeguard,
the custody of all private Interests, your honors, lives, liberties, and
estates, are all in the keeping of the Law, without this every man has a like
Right to any thing; It is the best birthright the Subject has: It is a
miserable servitude or bondage where the Law is uncertain, or unknown. To this
the Comic Priest replied, I tell you (for all this) there is no Law in this
Nation but the Sword, and what it gives; neither was there any Law or
Government in the world, This doctrine of Devils, that it is lawful to submit
to any present power that is strongest, is broached in a Pamphlet by old Rowse
the illiterate Jew of Eaton-Colledge. And by John Goodwin the sophistical
Divine; which is fully con^uted in A Religious Demurrer concerning submission
to the present power; an excellent piece.
but what the Sword gave. To this the honest Lieutenant Colonel answered, Mr.
Peter's, You are one of the Guides of the Army, used by the chief Leaders to
trumpet their Principles and Tenants; and if your reasoning be good, then if
six Thieves meet three or four honest men and rob them, that act is righteous,
because they are the stronger Party. And if any power be a just power that is
uppermost, I wonder how the Army and Parliament can acquit themselves of being
Rebels and Traitors before God and man, in resisting and fighting against a
just power in the King, who was a power up and visible, fenced about with
abundance of Laws, so reputed in the common acceptance of Men, by the express
letter of which all th^se that fought against him are (ipso facto) Traitors;
and if it were not for the preservation of our Laws and Liberties, why did the
Parliament fight against Him a present power in being? and if there be no Laws
in England, nor never was, then you and your great M^sters, Cromwell, Fairfax,
and the Parliament, are a pack of bloody Rogues and Villains, to set the People
to murder one another, in fighting for preservation of their Laws (in which
their Liberties were included) which was the principal declared Cause of the
War from the beginning to the end. I thought (quoth the Lieutenant Colonel) I
had been safe when I made the known Laws the rules of my actions, which you
have all sworn and declared to Defend; and make as the standard and touchstone
between you and the People. The Laws are now no protection to us, nor the rule
of our actions, but the arbitrary wills and lusts of the Grandees.
I but (replied Hugh) I will show that your safety lies not therein, their
minds may change, and then where are you? I but (quoth the Lieutenant Colonel)
I cannot take notice of what is in their minds to obey that; but the constant
Declaration of their minds (never contradicted in any of their Declarations)
as, That they will maintain the Petition of Right, and Laws of the Land, etc.
This was the substance of their discourse, saving that John pinched upon his
great Masters large fingring of the Commonwealths money, calling it Theft and
State-Robbery, and saying, That Cromwell and Ireton pissed both in one quill,
though they seem sometime to go one against another; yet it is but that they
may the more easily carry on their main design, To enslave the People.

Reader, I was the more willing to present the sum of this Debate to thee,
that by comparing their doctrine and principles with their daily practices,
thou may perfectly see to what condition of slavery these beggarly upstart
Tyrants and Traitors have reduced us by cheating us into a War against our
lawful Sovereign, under pretense of defending our Laws and Liberties, and the
Privileges of Parliament, which themselves only (with a concurring faction in
the House) have now openly, and in the face of the Sun pulled up by the roots;
and now they stop our mouths, and silence our just complaints with horrid,
Sect. 162.
illegal and bloody Acts, Declaring words and deeds against their usurpations
and tyranny to be High Treason: nothing is now Treason but what the remaining
faction of the House of Commons please to call so. To murder the King, break
the Parliament by hostile force, put down the House of Lords, erect
extrajudicial High Courts of Justice to murder Men without Trial by Peers, or
Jury, or any legal proceeding; to subvert the fundamental Government by
Monarchy, and dispossess the right Heir of the Crown, and to usurp his Supreme
Authority in a factious fagg-end of the House of Commons, to put the Kingly
Government into a packed Junto of forty Tyrants, called, A Council of State; to
exercise Martial Law in times of peace, and upon persons no Members of the
Army; to raise what unnecessary illegal Taxes they please, and share them and
the Crown Lands and Revenues amongst themselves, leaving the Soldiers unpaid
to live upon Free Quarter, whilst they abuse the People with pretended Orders
against Free Quarter; to alter the Styles of Commissions, Patents, Process,
and all Legal proceedings, and intoduce a foreign Jurisdiction; to Counterfeit
the Great Seal and Coin of the Kingdom, and to keep up Armies of Rebels to
make good these and other Tyrannies and Treasons, is High Treason by the known
Laws; but now (by the Votes of the Conventicle of Commons) it is High Treason
to speak against these crimes. Good God! how long will thy patience suffer
these Fools to say in their hearts there is no God? and yet profess thee with
their mouths? to break all Oaths, Covenants, and Protestations made in thy
Name, to cloak and promote their Designs with days of impious fasting and
thanksgiving? how often have thy Thunderbolts rived senseless Trees, and torn
brute Beasts that serve thee according to their Creation? yet thou passest over
these men who contemn thee, contrary to their knowledge and professions:
Scatter the People that delight in War: Turn the Councels of the wise into
folly, let the crafty be taken in their own net; and now at last, let the
Oppressed taste of thy mercies, and the Oppressor, of thy justice; throw thy
rod into the fire, and let it no longer be a bundle bound together in thy right
hand, They appeal to thee as Author of their prosperous sins, become (Lord)
Author of their just punishments; bestow upon them the rewards of Hypocrites,
and teach them to know the difference between the saving strength of
Magistrates, and the destroying violence of Hang-men: But what am I that argue
against thy long-suffering (whereof my self stand in need) and seek to ripen
thy vengeance before thy time? Shall the Pot ask the Potter what he does? I
beheld the prosperity of the wicked, and my feet had slipped: Lord amend all in
thy good time, and teach us heartily to pray, Thy will be done in Earth as it
is in Heaven.

170. The Act for Abolishing Monarchy proclaimed in London.
May 30. 1649. The aforesaid Traiterous Act for abolishing Kingly Government,
and converting England into a Free State, (consisting of forty Tyrants, and
many millions of slaves) was proclaimed in London by the newly intruded illegal
Lord Mayor Andrews, accompanied with 14 Aldermen of the same pack; the People
in great abundance crying out, Away with it, away with it; GOD save King
CHARLES the Second: and bitterly reviling and cursing it and them, until some
Troops of Horse (ready prepared in secret) were sent to disperse, beat, and
wound them: and yet the Trial of the King, and the subverting of our
well-formed Monarchy (under which we lived so happily heretofore) with all
other Acts of the like high nature, was done in the name of the People of
England, although (I dare say) at least five hundred to one (if they were free
from the terror of an Army) would disavow these horrid Acts; so little are the
People pleased with these doings: notwithstanding the new Title the Conventicle
of Commons have gulled them withal, Voting the People of England to be The
Supreme Power, and the Commons representing them in Parliament, the Supreme
Power of the Nation under them: This was purposely so contrived to engage the
whole City, and make them as desperately and impardonably guilty as themselves;
and certainly if this Tumult of the People (amounting to a public disclamour
of the Act) had not happened, the whole City had been guilty by way of
connivance, as well as these Aldermen, and the illegal Common Council, newly
packed by the remaining Faction of Commons, contrary to the Cities Charters, to
carry on these and such like Designs, and entangle the whole City in their
Crimes and Punishments.

* The Names of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London that
personally proclaimed the Act for abolishing Kingly Government.
Alderman Andrews, Lord Mayor. Alderman Pennington, Ald. Wollaston, Ald.
Foulkes, Ald. Kenrick, Ald. Bide, Ald. Edmonds, Ald. Pack, Alderman Bateman,
Ald. Atkins, Ald. Viner, Ald. Avery, Ald. Wilson, Ald. Dethick, Ald. Foot.
The Pharisaical House of Commons voted an Act, June 1. 171. A Thanksgiving
Dinner in the City for the General, etc.
for a day of Thanksgiving to set off K. Olivers Victory over the Levellers
with the more luster, and to sing Hosanna to him for bringing the grand
Delinquent to punishment. The wise Lord Mayor and his Brethren (in imitation)
invited the Parliament, Council of State, the General, and his Officers, to a
Thanksgiving Dinner upon that day. The Commons appointed a Committee (under
pretense of drawing more money from Adventurers for the Relief of Ireland) to
engage the City farther to them; Cromwell had the Chair in that Committee: the
device was, that the Common Council should invite the Parliament, Council of
State, and Officers of the Army to Dinner, and feast them as a Free State, and
then move the Supplies for Ireland. But if the Levellers had prevailed, the
Thanksgiving white-broth and custard had been bestowed upon those
free-spirited Blades, whom Oliver raised into a mutiny with one hand, (and by
advantage of his Spies) cast down with another, for the glory of his own Name,
and that he might have occasion to purge the Army (as he had done the
Parliament) of all freeborn humors.

172. The Council of State sit in pomp at White Hall.
White Hall is now become the Palace of a Hydra of Tyrants instead of one King,
where our Hogens Mogens, or Council of State sit in as much state and
splendor, with their Rooms as richly hanged (I wish they were so too) and
furnished (if you will believe their licenced News-books) as any Lords States
in Europe; yet many of these Mushromes of Maje^ty were but M^chanicks,
Goldsmiths, Brewers, Weavers, Clothiers, Brewers Clerks, etc. whom scornful
Fortune in a spiteful merriment brought upon the Stage, and promoted to act the
parts of Kings (to show that Men are but her Tennis-balls) and when she is
weary with laughing at their disguises, will turn them into the Tyring Room out
of their borrowed cases, and show us that our Lions are but her Asses. The
Kings poor Creditors and Servants may gape long enough (like Camelions) to see
the aforesaid Ordinance executed, for sale of the Kings Goods to pay their
Debts; they (poor Souls) are left to starve while these Saints Triumphant revel
in their Masters Goods and Houses.

173. A general survey to be taken of the whole Kingdom; that every man's
Estate both real and personal may be taxed.
Orders about this time were sent forth into London and the Counties adjacent
for certain Committees to enquire upon Oath and certify the improved value and
revenue of every man's estate real and personal, wherein good progress has been
made already; the like is to go forth throughout the Kingdom. That our forty
mechanic Kings now sitting in White Hall, and the self-created supreme
Authority of the Nation, may take an exact survey (in imitation of William the
Conquerors Book of Survey, called Domes-day, remaining in the Exchequer) of
their new conquered Kingdom, and know what they are like to get by their
villainies; and how to load us with Taxes and Free Quarter, and what the value
of their Estates are when they have completed their Design of Sequestring the
Presbyterians as they have done the Royalists.

The faction in the House are, this beginning of June, 174. An Act enabling
Committees to give Oaths.
1649. sitting abrood upon an Act to enable Committees to give Oaths in some
cases; and yet the House of Commons never had nor pretended to have power to
give Oaths themselves (though every Court of Py-p wders has) because the
House of Commons is no Court of Judicature, but only the Grand Inquest of the
Kingdom, to present to the King the grievance and the necessities of the
People by way of humble Petition; as appears by the Law Books and Statutes: and
therefore the Commons can grant no more than they have themselves. But now the
remaining faction of the House have voted themselves to be the supreme
Authority of the Nation, and have a Sword to maintain it, they and we must be
what they please; yet I must affirm, that to take illegal Oaths is never
justifiable before God nor Man, and no less than damnable. But it may be) that
by accustoming the People to take these new-imposed, illegal Oaths, they hope
to make them the more easily swallow their intended new Oath of Allegiance to
their new State and their own Damnation together hereafter.

All the Scrivenors about the Town are commanded by the Supreme thing to
produce their Shop-books, 175. Scrivenors commanded to show shop-books.
that notice may be taken who are guilty of having money in their purses, that
the fattest and fullest may be culled out, and sequestered for Delinquents, now
that their almighty Saint-ships have occasion to use it for defense of their
Free State, if they would but search one another private pockets they would
find money enough. The like attempt (only) in the Kings time was cried out
upon as a high piece of tyranny, but nothing can be tyranny under a Free State:
The Supreme Authority being so full a Representative-glass of the People, that
it takes our very substance into it self, and leaves us only the shadow,
whilst we wander up and down like our own Ghosts, who having lived under the
Monarchy of Good King CHARLES, are now dead and descended like shades into the
Kingdom of Pluto.

The 7. June, 176. The aforesaid Thanksgiving solemnized.
1649. the Thanksgiving (spoken of Sect. 172.) was solemnized in the City: The
Lord Mayor meeting the Speaker, resigned to him (as formerly was used to the
King) the Sword of State (as had been ordered by the House the day before) and
received it again from him; and then the Mayor conducted them all to
Christ-Church, where the Commons, Council of State, General, and his Officers,
together with the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, etc. mocked God with
their Devotions, where Mr. Tho. Goodwin, and Mr. Owen preached out of the
Politics to them; from thence they were conducted to a great Dinner at
Grocers-hall, and entertained in the quality of a Free State, no man bring
admitted without delivering his Ticket. They were all strongly guarded with
Soldiers, and every Cook had an Oath given to be true to them, which showed
they had more of fear and guilt thah of confidence and innocence within them.
Great Presents of Plate given to his Excellency Fairfax, and to his
Super-excellency Cromw l, and to others, fit to be chronicled in Stow^ and
Hollingsheads Volumes, 177. A necessary advertisement to all honest
Presbyterians See K. Charles the first his book [The Portraicture of his
Majesty in his solitudes and sufferings] Some overhastily expect the King
should satisfy the Presbyterians by his Declaration; but the height of the
Independents malice and their guilty fears are such as may endanger the d awing
on a Massac^e upon them by such a course.
amongst other solemn Fooleries; let it not be omitted that Hugh Peter and many
other Saints were too full of the Creature (anglice) Drunk.

I am to give a necessary advertisement to all men, that though the young King
shows much respect and a desire of reconcilement (according to his dead Fathers
never-dying precepts) to all moderate men and Presbyterians that make Addresses
to Him, yet it is complained of by some (who look not into the undermining
practices of our new Statists) that some few of His Counselors and Followers
are as violent against the more moderate and honest Presbyterians, as against
the Independents who murdered his Father; but these zealous Royalist, are
either some passionate light-brain'd men of little discretion and less power
with him, or else some false-hearted Pen^ioners to our new State, and such as
have underhand an Indemnity for their own Estates in England, who stand like
Scar-crows about His Majesty to fright away such as return to their Loyalty,
and tender their due Allegiance to Him, thereby to weaken the hands of his
Majesty, and cut off the hopes of this Nation from depending upon him, who as
our undoubted Sovereign (both by the Laws of God and the Land) and Gods
Vice-geren^ in His three, Kingdoms, only can and will (if we forsake not him
and our selves) free and protect us from the many-headed, miserable, arbitrary
tyranny we now starve and bleed under; and restore unto us again our Religion,
Laws and Liberties, our Wives, Children, and Estates, Trading, Husbandry, peace
and plen^y now held in more than Egyptian bondage, by our cruel, bloody, and
thievish Taskmasters; See a Book, entituted [His Majesty's gracious Messages
for peace.] Mr. Pryns Speech, 5. Dec. 1648. in the House. And the secured
Members Reply to the Council of War.
Remember his deceased Majesty's gracious Messages frequently sent for peace
and reconcilement; Remember His Concessions to His Parliament upon the last
Treaty; (more than ever any King granted to His People.) Remember His pious
meek and Christian Martyrdom suffered for His People, which bitter Cup had
passed from Him if He would have built up and established this Babel of Tyranny
now insulting over us, and have turned our wel-mixed Monarchy into an
Olygarchical legal Tyranny, by adding His Royal Assent to their wicked Demands
tendered to Him but two days before His Translation from this valley of
tears. Remember His Posthumus Book to His Son, full of Prec^pts, savouring
merely of piety, Christian wisdom, charity, and forgiveness, to His very
Enemies; and then judge whether our late King, or our usurping Kinglings (now
scratching and tearing us, making one War beget another, 1 King. 3.
perpetuating an Army, and domineering over us by the power of the Sword) were
the natural Parent, whose bowels yearned upon this (now) Orphan Child, the
English Nation dying and expiring under this new Corporation of Tyrants, Oath
of Allegiance, and Stat. of Recognition, 1 Jacobi.
(the putative Patent) which overlayed it? He that acknowledged Allegiance to
the Father, cannot deny it to his Son, as having sworn to hear faith and true
Allegiance to the King his Father, and to his lawful Heirs and Successors;
which our usurping Hogens Mogens cannot pretend to be: so that as well for duty
and conscience to God and their own Souls, as for a necessary and just
protection of their lives and estates, all honest and wise men ought to cast
themselves into the Arms of his D^ead Majesty our present KING, as the only
sanctuary of their salvation, and not suffer themselves to be so far misled by
vain reports, as to be more afraid of their cure than of their disease.

Stultorum incurata pudor malas ulcera celat. S^lomon has showed you out of
the Cabinet of Nature the difference between a Natural-mother and a
Stepmother; Dictum de Kennelworth.
and that you may see the difference between a natural King, correcting his own
people with fatherly compassion for examples sake; and a Usurper, wounding,
killing and robbing (those which are none of his own) his fellow servants for
his lust and lucre sake, I will set down a short Abridgement of our own famous
Dictum de Kennelworth, and first the occasion thereof, which was thus:

Simon de Montford, Earl of Leicester, conspiring with many other great men,
rebelled against Henry 3. pretending (after the manner of all Rebels)
Reformation of public Grievances. He overthrew the King in battle, took Him
and his Son Prince Edward Prisoners; the Prince after a while escaped out of
Prison, raised an Army, overthrew and slew in the Battle of Evesham Simon
Montford, subdued the whole Party, rescued and re-inthroned his Father.
Cummissions were sent forth to prevent future troubles, and settle mem minds
grown desperate with fear what horrid punishents so horrible a Rebellion would
bring upon them: The result of all is contained in the said Dictum de
Kennelworth, as I find it in Magna Charta veteri, fol. 60. part. 2. observe the
moderation pf it; No man bled to death for it but in the field; the blood of
war was not shed in time of peace; the King did not slay those whom he had
taken with his Sword and with his Bow, but reasonably fined them, not unto
destruction: though the known Laws called them Traitors, See the late History
of the Marquess of Montross, what gentle use he made of his Victory after he
had subdued the strength of Scotland at Battle of Kylsythe.
and put them into his power for life, lands and goods; they were but once
punished, not always tormented and kept upon the rack, after the late custom of
our Fellow Servants and Subjects; who will never suffer the partition wall
between us to be thrown down, England once more to become one Nation, and one
people; and our broken bones to be again set and knit together.

Dictum de Kennelworth.
None to be Dis-inherited, but only fined: As namely, Those

1. That began and continued in War. 2. That held Northampton against the King.
3. That fought against him at Lewis, Evesham, Chesterfeild. 4. That were taken
at Kenilworth. 5. That sacked Winchester, being yet unpardoned. 6. That
voluntary sent against him, or the Prince. 7. The officers of the Earl of
Leicesters who molested their Neighbors with Rapine, Fire, Murder, or
otherwise, to pay in three years five years value, and half their estates of
Land. If they sell it, such as are by the Kings grant possessed of them to have
them, giving as any other, etc. and so if it be to be Let, those who pay the
whole to have all instantly, and that pay half, to have half: If in three years
the whole be unpaid, the Land to be divided between him that ows it, and him to
whom the King has given it. If any have Woods by sale of which he would pay
his Fine, the money to be paid by two, of which either side to choose one.

2. Knights and Esquires, who during the War have enriched themselves by
Rapine, having no Land, to pay half their goods, and be bound with Sureties to
the peace; if no goods be acquitted by Oath, exceptis bannitis quibus solus,
Rex potest remittere.

3. Lords of Wards to pay for them, and be answered by their Wards when they
come to age; which if they accept not, the Wardship to accrue to such as the
King has given the Ransom to, and they to be so answered.

4. The Kings Wards to remain where they are placed, and be Ransomed as others,
but without destruction.

5. Such as were with the King before the battle of Lewis, and since are
Dis-inherited, His Majesty to declare his pleasure touching them.

6. No man possessed of wood to fell any, but only for repair, till the last day
of payment be passed and not observed.

7. The King and the Popes Legate to send beyond sea for a time such as are
likely to trouble the peace of the Kingdom, which if it hindered the paying of
their Ransom, not for that to be Dis-inherited.

8. Such as were grieved with this Agreement might appeal to the Kings Court
before S. Hilary, and such as were beyond sea to have inducias transmarinas.

9. Because the King was to reward many and some had too much, the King out of
the Fines to provide for them.

10. The Legate, King, and Henry d'Almain to Elect twelve who should eause
these Articles to be executed, and to see performed what they ordain, according
to the estimates already taken, or if not to have new rates taken reasonable
and true.

11. Tenants that were against the King to lose their Leases; but at the
expiration of their time the Land to return to the true owner.

12. Forts built by the assent of the King, but without that of the Person
dis-inherited, after the Fine paid in three years, to pay the costs of building
of it in six years, or receive a reasonable exchange in Land.

13. Such of the Lay as apparently drew any to the part of the Earl of
Leicester to pay two years Revenue.

14. The Buyers of other men's goods wittingly, to restore the value of that
they have bought, and be at the Kings mercy, because that they did was against
justice.

15. Those that at the Earls command entered Northampton, yet fought not, but
entered the Church.

16. Such as held not of the Earl, yet at his command entered to the action with
him to pay half one years Revenue.

17. Such as held of the Earl to be only at the Kings mercy.

18. Impotent persons, and such as did nothing to be restored to their
Possessions, and by justice recover their damages, their Accusers punished by
Law, yet without loss of life or limb.

19. Maliciously accused to have their Estates immediately restored.

20. Women to have their own Lands, and what they had of their first Husbands;
if their late Husbands were against the King to be restored according to Law,
or Fined.

21. None to be fined but such as were against the King.

22. Such as have been pardoned to remain so.

23. Those that are fined to answer no Loss done to any, but all damages to be
remitted on every side; except those that intermedled not, and of the Church,
whose actions are saved.

24. The King by reasonable Exchange to receive the Castles of Erdsley-Bishop,
and Chartley, it seeming dangerous to leave Forts in their hands who have
carried themselves ill toward the King.

25. Those that in the future shall commit any outrages to be punished by Law.

26. An Oath to be taken where it shall be held convenient, not to pursue each
other with revenge; and if any shall attempt the contrary, to be punished
according to Law.

27. The Church to be satisfied by those that injured it.

28. Such of the Dis-inherited as refuse this Composition to have no Title to
their Estates, and to be esteemed public Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

29. Prisoners to be freed by the advice of the King and Legate.

30. No Person to be Dis-inherited by reason of these Troubles by any to whom
he ought to Succeed.

You see what great care was here taken to prevent spoil and waste of Woods,
etc. whereas in this latter Age the first thing taken into consideration, is,
how to raise ready Money by destruction of Woods, Housing, and selling of the
Stock, to lay the Lands waste, and decay Husbandry to the endangering of a
Famine for the present, and the Dis-inheriting our innocent Posterity for the
future; so little care is taken to keep that well which is so ill and illegally
gotten. And how much regard was had to preserve innocent Persons from suffering
wrong in any just claim or Title they could make to any Land possessed by a
guilty Person; whether they claimed by Dower, Jointure, Title or Estate in
Reversion, or Remainder, or otherwise: I wish the like justice were now
observed.

Monday night, 4. June, 178. The loss of Ships at Kingsale suppressed, and
misreported in the House, and why?
1649. that third part of a Lord Admiral, Col. Edw. ^opham came to Westminster,
and presently made his Addresses to the high and mighty Estates in White Hall,
giving them a dismal Relation of his ill success in tampering with the
Governor of Kingsale in Ireland, who (proving honester than the Saints
expected) took a sum of money of him to betray the Town, Forts, and Ships in
the Road: but when Popham came in to the Haven to take possession of his new
purchase, gave him such a Gunpowder welcome, that he lost most of his Men,
landed to take livery and seisin, and diverse Ships; he was commanded to conceal
this ill news, lest it discouraged the City to engage so far with them, as to
entertain them in the condition of a Free State, and surrender the Sword to
them, and so spoil the Design of their Thanksgiving Devotions and Dinner to be
celebrated together, in, and with the City upon Thursday ensuing the 7. of
June; and lest it should dishearten more secluded Members from coming to sit
in the House with them again, knowing, that Tyrants are followed for their
fortunes, not for themselves; wherefore, upon Tuesday following (being the 5.
Jun:) Popham made another kind of Report to the Plebeians of the Commons House
(who must not be trusted with the truth of State-mysteries, but (like
Wood-cocks) must be led in a mist) That he had left Kingsale blocked up with
ten Ships, and the Seas secured in peace and quietness; and the better to adorn
the fable, and suppress the truth from approaching the ears of the people, the
House that day (15. June) passed an Order, That for this remarkable additional
mercy bestowed upon them in the prosperous success given to their Fleet at Sea,
upon Thursday next, 7. June (the day set apart for public Thanksgiving) the
Ministers should praise God. Lord! since there audacious Saints are so thankful
to thee for one beating, bestow many more beatings upon there, for they stand
in need of all thy corrections. The like attempt has been upon Scilly with the
like success, Scout, from June the 8. to 15. 1649. 179. Gifts given amongst the
Faction.
since which time forty sail of Ships are pressed in the Thames to recruit the
shattered Navy, given forth to be a Winter Guard at Midsummer.

John Blackiston is packed away to the other world; and the House upon 6. June,
voted to Wife and Children 3000 l. out of the Earl of Newcastle's, and Lord
Wytherington's Estates, in compensation of the loss of his Pedlery Ware, in his
Shop at Newcastle; he had formerly given to him 14000 l. you see the insatiate
hunger of Gold and Silver survives in the very Ghost of a Saint after he is
dead: 500 l. more was given to John's Brother; an Estate out of the Rectory and
Demesnes of Burford was settled upon the Speaker. 400 l. per ann. Lands are be
settled upon the General out of the Duke of Buckinghams and his Brother the Lord
Francis Villers Estates. 400 l. per ann. out of Claringdon Park upon the Earl
of Pembroke. 1000 l. was bestowed upon an eminent Member of Parliament for his
many good Services. 4868 l. to the Lord Lisle, out of the Monthly Assesment for
Ireland, for his pennyworth of good service done there; you see to what
purpose we pay Taxes. 2000 l. Land per an. and 1000 l. Money given to Bradshaw,
the price of Bood. And 400 l. more given to the Poor of the City (to stop their
mouths from cursing upon the Thanksgiving-day) out of the 2000 l. Fine set upon
the Lord Mayor Reynoldson for not proclaiming the Act for abolishing Kingly
Government; this is (according to the Spanish Proverb) To steal a Sheep, and
give away the Trotters for Gods sake. You see the Saints can find Money to
give Gifts, though not to pay Debts; although the Public Faith lie at pawn for
them. A Committee is appointed to consider how to prefer Mr. Tho. Goodwin and
Mr. Owen to he Heads of Colleges in Oxford as a Reward for asserting the late
proceedings of Parliament upon the aforesaid Thanksgiving-day. It is not fit
such men should serve God for nothing: in the times of S. Peter and S. Paul,
Godliness was great Gain; but in the days of our modern Saints, Gain is great
Godliness.

The thing that miscalls its self a Parliament, 180. The Kxcise enlarged upon
Salt.
has set an Excise of 1 d. the Gallon upon all foreign salt imported; which
is, in effect upon all the salt we use, (our home-made salt being
inconsiderable) you see our Cups, our Spits, our powdring-Tubs, our
washing-bowles, our Kettles, our Hats, Dublets, Breeches, Stockings, Shoes;
nothing we use, eat, drink or wear, is free from being devoured by these
sanctified Locusts of the Free State, who complained of the King for that petty
inconsiderable Tax of Ship-m^ney, which His Majesty spent in maintaining Guards
of Ships upon our Seas, so much to the Honor of our Nation, that the King of
Spain trusted all those vast sums of Bullion he sent to the Low-C^untries, to
be Coined in our Mint, and above a third part yearly to be laid out here in
English Cloth and Commodities, which with the residue of the Spanish Treasure
was afterward wafted over into Flaunders in English Bottomes, for which they
were liberally paid; whereby every man's estate was increased 10 l. in the
hundred, England infinitely abounded with Coin and Plate, as appears by those
many vast sums that have been constantly extorted from the People since the
beginning of these Wars; more, I dare say, than all our Kings since the
Conquest, (excluding William the Conqueror and Henry the Eighth) ever raised
upon the People) and by those many vast sums our seeming Saints have sent into
banks beyond Sea, and buried in their private Coffers.

Reader, let me admonish thee, 181. A Vindication of the Levellers in some
things; and a further design to garble and enslave the Army.
That the Levellers (for so they are mis-called, only for endeavoring to
Level the exorbitant usurpations of the Council of Officers and Council of
State) are much abused by some Books lately printed and published in their
names, much differing from their declared Principles, Tenets, and Practices;
but forged in Cromw^ls and Ir^tons shops to cast an odium upon them. These
State-wolves by such forgeries endeavor to make the Sheep forsake and betray
the Dogs that faithfully guard them; that they may with more security fleece
them, flay them, and eat them hereafter. Ireton, H^slerig, and
Postmaster-Attorney Prideaux, by themselves and their Bloodhounds (Spies and
Intelligencers) have been very diligent to draw dry-foot after Mr. Lilburne,
Walwine, etc. and suborn witnesses against them, but (not having yet quite
extinguished all sparks of truth and honesty, unless it be in their own
breasts) failed of their purposes. Yet they go on to purge the Army (as they
have done the Parliament and Conventicle of State) of all freeborn humors (in
order to their destruction) that the Army may consist of mere mercenary brutish
spirits, such as will so far neglect the duties of men and Christians, as to
execute all their tyrannous, bloody, illegal Commands, with a blind obedience
and implicit faith, without asking a question for Conscience sake, the better
to enslave both the Kingdom and Common Soldiers. In farther prosecution of
this Design, they have projected to levy seven new Regiments, which (by way of
Gullery) they call Presbyterian Regiments, and shall be raised by Presbyterian
Commanders, but those Commanders shall only be employed to countenance the work
for a time, and then for pretended offenses be purged out of the Army, if not
out of this world, by the Council of Officers, and more confiding men put in
their rooms: and then shall these new Officers and Regiments be used as
Catch-poles and Hangmen (contrary to the honor of Soldiers) to persecute and
execute such Members of the Army as retain any sense or memory of their old
Engagements and Principles.

182. The pretended Parliaments Council of State and Officers confederated with
Oneale. See An After-game at Irish, etc. 1649. and the Propositions p^inted at
Cork and reprinted at London. From June 6. 1649. June 8. 1649.
I formerly told you of an underhand combination between the domineering
Independent party here, and Owen Roe Oneale; which is now openly declared and
avowed by their own licenced News-books. Owen Roe and Colonel Monk are joined
(says the M^dest Narrative) our Party have permitted 300. of Oneals own
Regiment to Quarter in our parts amongst the Creats within two miles of
Dundalke, (says the Scout) Owen Roe and Berne are come toward Col. Jones, and
Col. M nks Quarters, he is so fair as to pay Contribution: his Quarters are to
the Scots side of Dublin, to prevent their giving aid to Ormond in his attempt
upon Dublin: Moderate Intelligencer, from June 7. to 14. 1649. number. 221.
who can blame necessity? nor do our Grandees now deny this Confederacy with
the bloody Popish massacring Rebels, although they had the impudence to make
the only supposition thereof one of the principal Charges against the late
King; and to raise a great outcry against the Marquess of Ormond and Lord
Inchiquine for their conjunction with Pr ston: yet they joined but to prevent
the Cromwelists, who offered to associate with him upon conditions much more
prejudicial to the Protestant Religion, and English Interests, than Ormond has
given them. They have offered this Oneale all the Lands in Vlster forfeited by
his Grandfather Tyrone, Shane Oneale, and others attainted, thereby destroying
the British Planters there; and this is the reason they employ so few old Irish
Commanders into those parts, lest the Oneals should doubt they came to recover
their own lands again. But our Atheistical Saints account themselves loose when
other men are bound, nothing but a halter can hold them; all obligations to
men, all duties and vows to God, See the Council of Wars Answer concerning the
secured and secluded Members; from 6. June to 13. number. 3.
they break upon pretended necessity and honest intentions. Their Metropolitan
Nuntio, Judas Haclet, tells you, Their Party will not join with the bloody
Irish, until they are brought to such a pinch, as to say, Flectere sinequeo
superos, Acheronta movebo. If God will not be the Author and Patron of their
Designs, the Devil shall; you see these Independents hang between God and the
Devil, Michael and the Dragon, not resolved which part to take.

Be it known unto all men by these presents, 183. Parker the Observator.
that Harry Parker the Observator is returned from Hamborough, and highly
preferred to be Brewers Clerk, ( alias Secretary) to Cromw^l; to whose Designs
he has prostituted his pen.

There is lately come forth a Book of John Meltons (a Libertine, that thinks
his Wife a Manacle, 184. Meltons Book, the Tenure of Kings and Magistrates, etc.
and his very Garters to be Shackles and Fetters to him: one that (after the
Independent fashion) will be tied to no obligation to God or man) wherein he
undertaketh to prove, That it is lawful for any that have power to call to
account, Depose, and put to Death wicked Kings and Tyrants (after due
c^nviction) if the ordinary Magistrate neglect it. I hope then it is lawful to
put to death wicked Cromwels, Councels of State, corrupt Factions in
Parliament: for I know no prerogative that usurpation can bestow upon them. He
likewise asserteth, That those, who of late, so much blame Deposing, are the
men that did it themselves, (meaning the Presbyterians.) I shall invite some
man of more leisure and abilities than my self, to Answer these two Paradoxes:
But shall first give him these cautions:

1. That for the Polemick part he turn all his Arguments into Syllogismes, and
then he will find them to be all Fallacie^, the froth of wit and fancy, not the
D^ctates of true and solid Reason.

2. That for the Historical or narrative part, he would thoroughly examine them,
and he will find few of them consonant to the plumb-line of truth.

3. That he would consider, that from the beginning of this Parliament there
were three Parties or Factions in it: 1. The Royalists. 2. The Presbyterians.
3. The Independents.


For though they were not then notorious by their name, yet the Persons
confederated were then extant and active; being a complication of all
Antimonarchical, Anarchical heresies and s^hismes, Anabaptists, See the Mystery
of the two Junto's, Presbyterian and Independent.
Brownists, Barrowists, Adamites, Familists, Libertines of all sorts; the true
Heirs and Successors of John of Leyden and Knipperdolling in all their
principles aad practices united under the general Title of Independent: and
these were originally the men that by their close insinuations, solicitations
and actings began, and carried on the War against the KING, with an intent
(from the beginning) to pull down Monarchy, and set up Anarchy, notwithstanding
the many Declarations, Remonstrances, abortive Treaties, Protestations, and
Covenants to the contrary; which were Obligations (from time to time) extorted
from them by the Presbyterians, although not strong enough to hold such subtle
Sampsons, whose strengths to break such Withes lay not in their Bushes of Hair,
but in the Ambushes of their Hearts, wherein there always lay hid some evasion,
equivocation, or mental reservation, which, like a backdoor, gave them leave
to make an escape. In the beginning almost of this Parl. the Independents (that
is, the Schismatics) in the Parliament insisted openly upon it, to have the
Papists in Ireland rooted out, and their Lands sold to Adventurers, and passing
an Act to that purpose, necessitated the Irish Papists to massacre the English
Protestants, which was purposely done by the Independents, that both Papists
and Protestants might destroy one another there, that they might the better
subvert Protestancy in England, which is now in hand. And though it be true
that the first General, the Earl of Essex was a Presbyterian, yet he was acted
by Independents, as the L. Sa^ and others of the like stamp; and had a clause
in his Commission [ to forbear the King's Person] which clause upon the
Independents new Modelling the Army under Fairfax was omitted at their especial
instance.

Monday 18. June, 185. L.C. Lilburns Book [The Legal fundamental Liberties of
the People, etc.]
1649. came forth that most useful Book of John Lilburns, called [ The Legal
fundamental Liberties of the People of England Revived, etc.] wherein he
excellently well sets forth the new usurped tyranny of that Hydra of Nimrods
now subverting our Laws, Liberties, and Property, consuming us with illegal
Taxes, Excise, Free Quarter, Monopolies, and sharing Land, Money, Goods, and
Offices amongst themselves, perpetuating an Army to enslave us, and overthrow
the fundamental Government of this Nation, in order to which they have complied
with, and cheated all Interests, broken all their Obligations to God and Man,
violated all the Laws of this Land, their own Protestations, Covenants, the
Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy (which themselves caused the People to take) and
their own Votes, Declarations, etc. The illegality of their late erected High
Court of Justice, and their unjust proceedings therein, the tyranny and
usurpation of the Council of State and Officers of the Army. And proves that
Col. Prides new purged, new pack^d House, is neither a House of Commons, nor
Parliament; their usurped Supreme Authority to be a mere nullity or fiction,
and especially, That this Parliament is clearly dissolved and ended, which he
proves by the Death of the King, and by many other solid Arguments; and
therefore all their Actings to be void and null, with many other cosiderable
passages, where he ingeniously confesses, that being the Kings Prisoner at
Oxford, with many other of the Parliament Party, the King did strictly observe
the Laws of the Land in His proceedings against them, which this Parliament
does not do in any their most legal proceedings, for all their pretended
Engagements, Declarations, Votes, Protestations and Covenants to maintain and
defend the Laws and Liberties of the People, Ergo, the King really, the Faction
in Parliament, but pretendedly fought for our Laws and Liberties.

186. Tithes to be Sequestered for the State.
The Faction are now contriving to seize all the Tithes of the Kingdom into
their own hands (yet they are the Ministers Freehold) and to make all the
Ministers their stipendiary Lecturers, that they may preach and teach only
such Doctrine to the people as may bring them under a blind and slavish
obedience to our forty Tyrants of the new Council of State, presuming that all
our Ministers carry their Consciences in their purses, because the Independents
do so. Look to your ways Christian Brethren, you are likely hereafter to have
Oracles of State obtruded upon you instead of the Oracles of God. If the
Ministers will not parret forth the new States Doctrine to you, they shall be
starved out of their Pulpits.

187. An Adjournment of this pretended Parliament considered of.
The thing called a Parliament is now likely to have so general a purge as will
leave neither life nor soul, dung, nor guts, in the belly of it. K. Oliver
(unwilling to go for Ireland, and leave them fitting, who may unvote all he
has compelled them to vote) has commanded his Journey-men to think of an
Adjournment for some good time, that they may take the air, and grow wholesome
again; and then (without some dire mischance) they never meet more; but this
Supreme thing has learned to use so much modesty to their Superiors, as to
refer it to the Hogens Mogens, or Council of State, to consider what Votes and
Acts they shall pass beforehand for establishing their Highnesses in their new
Dominion: And when (out of their usurped Supreme Authority) they have conferred
as much upon the Council of State as their ambitions aim at, they (good Boys)
shall have leave to break up School and go into the Country to see their
Friends, and visit their Foes; that is, all such as have full purses to be
squeezed. Thus you see the method of Divine vengeance observes a Degradation;
1. Down went the King, and His Authority lapsed into the two Houses. 2. Down
went the Peers House, and all Authority fell down into the Commons House. 3.
Down goes the House of Commons, and the Supreme Authority translates it self
into a Council of State. And (if my conjecture fail me not) 4. Down will go the
Council of State, and all Authority be grasped into the iron hands of Campson
Gaurus and his Mamaluchy, his Council of War, when they shall think fit to Act
barefaced without using a packt piece of a Parliament or Council of State as a
screen or vizard to cozen and befool the people.

In order to which Government by the Sword, 188. Cromwell voted for Ireland with
full power Civil and Military.
Cromwell is voted to go into Ireland with his own confiding Officers and Army,
with all power Civil and Military for three years; what does this import less
than that he is to be K. of Ireland? there to practice the first rudiments of
Kings-craft, and when he has inured those Semibarbarians to a Military
Government, he shall return with his Janisaries, and subdue the English to the
like obedience: In the mean time his property Fairfax shall be under the
observation of the Council of State here, and be beleagured both in his own
house and Army with Olivers Creatures; and in this dishonorable fickle
condition he shall have the vain honor to keep Olivers Regalia, (the Crown
sitting upon one side like a Fools Cap upon his head) until he return, and
shall then be called to account for all odious and unfortunate accidents that
shall happen (for it is not for the Majesty of Oliver to bear the blame,
although they fall out by Cromwell's own oversights, or Gods anger upon him)
thus Cromwell's shadow being removed, himself may take substantial and actual
possession of the Throne which he already enjoyes in all things but the Title.
And then let all true Saints and Subjects cry out with me, God save K. Oliver
and his brewing Vessels.

The Junto of Titular Supremists at Westminster (especially so many as have not
packt themselves into the Council of State) are very unwilling to quit their
long-held Dominion, 189. 13 Bills enjoined to be passed by the Commons before
Adjournment.
and submit to their own Bastard-brood, The Lords States at White Hall; but
there is no remedy, Oliver is resolved to unyoke his Cattle and turn them to
grass; he knows they may unvote all they have voted at his Command, if (during
his absence in Ireland or Scotland rather) a new emergent power should overawe
them; the present fear being always most terrible to Cowards. But the Council
of State has set them their task, which they must speedily perform before they
Adjourn, consisting of 13 Points:

1. That all Acts concerning the Loans of Moneys, Excise, Sequestrations,
Goldsmiths-hall, Haberdashers-hall, Assesments for England and Ireland be
passed. These reprobate Saints will sooner forget their God, than their Mammon
[money.] You see they mean to perpetuate our burdens, as well as their own
Army; and domineer over us with an arbitrary, military tyranny for ever.

2. That an Act be passed for settling the Militia of the Nation. This amounts
to a new-invented Commission of Array (lawful for usurping Saints, though not
for a lawful King) by virtue of which the scum and dregs of the people (base
enough to associate with the Army) shall be Armed, and all men of quality and
fortunes (unless such as owe their fortunes to their crimes) dis-armed.

3. Against exporting Wool and Fullers Earth. Unless it be for the benefit of
the Saints.

4. To prohibit exportation of Gold and Silver. The Saints have exported all
our Gold already, and most of our Silver; and will never give over the Trade
themselves though they prohibit others. But Gold and Silver are drawn out of
Mines Royal, and belong to the Saints by their Prerogative.

5. An Act to be passed for punishment of Revolted Seamen and Mariners. None
against traitorous, tyrannous, theevish Saints.

6. An Act for relief of well-affected Tenants against Malignant Landlords; who
have compounded for their Estates, rack their Tenants Rents, or turn them out
of doors. This is a device: First, to make work for such Members as not being
of the Council of State, would become as contemptible as they are hateful,
being divested of all power to play the Tyrants after Adjournment. And
secondly, to stir up all the Tenants of England (especially Schismatics) to
combine with them, against their Landlords, and deprive them of the legal use
of their Estates, and the benefit of their Compositions; for, to what purpose
shall Gentlemen compound for their Estates, when they must let and set them at
the discretion of domineering Committees, or Commissioners, conspiring with the
high Shoos, to oppress, make a prey of, enslave and unspirit all the Nobility
and Gentry of England here aimed at under the general Title of Malignants? Oh
perfidious Tyrants! keep your money Gentlemen, or turn it into Iron and
Gunpowder.

7. An Act to suppress Malignant Pamphlets aspersing the present proceedings of
the Parliament, Council of State, and the Army, and prevent Printing as much as
may be. This is to set truth in the pillory, whilst her counterfeit, impudent,
lying and slandering sits in state in Parliament, Council of State, and Council
of Officers, and rides triumphantly Coached into the City to Thansgiving
Devotions and Dinners.

8. That the Pulpits being as scandalous as the Press against their
proceedings, they enjoin that a more strict course be taken to stop the mouths
of the Preachers hereafter. You see how Ahab-like these Subverters of Church
and Commonwealth, 1 King. 18.17.
accuse our Prophets for troubling our Israel (being their own sin) and seek
occasion to bring a spiritual as well as a corporal famine upon the Land,
cutting off the staff of bread as well from our souls as bodies, by stopping
the mouths of Gods Ministers. But I hope they will remember the duty they owe
to the honor of him that sent them upon his Embassage to his people, and
fearing God more than Man, every man cry out to his own soul and conscience
with S. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.16. Vae mihi si non praedicavero, Woe be to me if I do
not Preach.

9. That an Act be passed that that clause of the Stat. 23. Eliz. 25. Eliz. 1
Jac. against Sectaries, should be repealed, that none may be questioned thereby
in the vacancy of Parl. What is this but to pray in aid of Turks, Jews,
Anabaptists of Munster, nay the Devil himself to join with them, as they have
already joined with Owen Roe Oneale, and his bloody massacring Irish Papists
against the Protestant Religion, which was part of the design of the
schismatical Party in Parliament in waging war against the King from the
beginning. See Sect. 184. the Marginal notes there. This impious Liberty of
Conscience to destroy the Protestant Religion, is all the liberty we are like
to enjoy under the Kingdom of these bloody cheating Saints, in all things else
we are mere and absolute slaves.

10. That an Act for a General Pardon be passed to all Persons except such as
are particularly named therein, and declaring no Pardon to any that shall for
the future raise War in this Nation against the present Authority thereof. This
is a project, 1. To pardon themselves and their Party for their transcendent
villainies, and to stop the mouths of the Country from complaining of them
after their Adjournment, and this shall be effectually done. 2. To befool silly
weak-spirited people with general words of a Pardon which shall be made
ineffectual by many exceptions and limitations. 3. This is principally intended
to fright men from attempting any thing against the usurped Supremacy and
Tyranny of the Council of State: and therefore all Pardons to such Attemptors
are beforehand declared against. This with them is (as a sin against the Holy
Ghost) unpardonable; to deny their Supreme, Arbitrary Authority.

11. That the Act for relief of poor Prisoners for Debt may be passed. Though I
can with as much Charity as any Man wish a relief to them; yet I like not that
Charity should be made a cloak to ambitious Knavery; and all the Creditors of
the Kingdom be made liable to the vexation of a covetous Committee, who, under
color of Charity shall raise up all the indebted Men of the Kingdom against
all the monied Men, if they will not sacrifice their purses to the Foh-Gods of
the new State, and be bountiful to the Committee; which is the full scope of
this Proposition.

12. That the Soldiers may be secured their Arreares out of the late Kings
Lands. This is to tie all the Soldiery by the pursestrings (which is Saints
Tenure) to make good that horrid, traiterous Murder.

13. That an Act be passed for Probate of Wills, Granting Administrations, and
investing of Ministers presented. These lunatique Saints should have thought
upon a new way to be set up before they throw down the old one, and not have
left men in an uncertainty how to dispose of their Estates, and a Justitium, a
vacancy of Justice upon the Kingdom: you see what Mountebanks our new
State-Juglers are. The good Boys began to learn these Lessons upon Monday, 25.
June.

190. Things undertaken by the Council of State during the Recess.
The Council of State likewise reported to their said Free School of Commons
several things which they (in order to their future greatness) would put into a
way during the Recess: against the Houses next meeting, when two Sundays come
together.

1. That Commissioners be appointed in every County to make an estimate of all
Tithes, to the end they may be taken away for the future, and some other
provision designed for Ministers. This is a whip and a Bell to lash Ministers
to Preach State-Divinity.

2. That the Council of State consider of settling future Parliaments, and the
constant time of their calling, sitting, and ending, after this Parliament shall
think fit to dissolve themselves. If they are not dissolved already (which is
the constant opinion of many great learned Lawyers well-affected to the Parl.)
they will never be dissolved without the help of a Hangman. But I would gladly
know by what Authority a Pack of forty Knaves calling themselves a Council of
State, and usurping Regal power, shall take upon them to abolish our ancient
form of Parliaments, contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Land, their own
Declarations, Protestations and Covenants, and to pack and shuffle new
Parliaments, to dispose of our Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lives and Estates,
against the consent of the far major part of the people.

3. That they shall consider of an Act for regulating proceedings in Law, and
prevent tediousness of Suits. There are too many Lawyers in the Council of
State to do any thing effectual that way; but it may be they will consider how
to make the Laws of the Land more suitable to an Olygarchical tyranny, and
less agreeing with Monarchy.

4. That they will consider what Laws are fit to be repealed. That is, all
Laws enjoining uniformity in Gods Worship, all Monarchical Laws, and all
Laws allowing more civil Liberty and Privileges to the People, and to several
Degrees of men than squares with the Designs of our new upstart State.

So many men have been cheated with Public Faith, 191. Dean and Chapters
Lands purchased by the Godly.
Irish Adventures, and Bishops Lands, that the Market is spoiled for sale of
Dean and Chapters Lands, wherefore the Saints (being the only monied men left
in the Kingdom) have now agreed to buy them themselves, considering, that
since they hold their Heads and all that they have in Capite of their Lords
Paramount, the Council of Officers, they may as well buy dog-cheap, and hold
Deanes Lands by the same Tenure. For which purpose they have their Broakers
abroad to buy in Soldiers and Officers Debentures for Arrears at 5 s. and 6 s.
in the pound, though they are allowed the whole sum of the Debentures in the
Purchase, which doubling in ready money, they purchase upon such easy
particulars, as brings it down from ten years purchase, to two or three years
purchase. They are not seen in the business themselves, but buy them in other
men's names, and to the secret use of their Wives and Children. The Lord Munson,
Hump^rey Edwards, and Sir Greg. Norton, (who has sold his own Land to purchase
new upon this Title) and many other Saints have lately trod this obscure path.

192. Soldiers insolences remediless.
Great complaints are made by the Country of the Soldiers insolency (amongst
many other things) in putting their Horses into mowing Grass. The General has
ordered the next Officer in chief to cause double damages to be given by the
Soldier; and if the said Officer neglect, he is to answer it at a Council of
War at the Head Quarters. This remedy is worse than the disease, and as mere a
gullery as the Act for taking off Free quarter. The chief Officer will laugh at
the Complainant, the Head Quarters are far off, and the Council of War will
tire him with delays, and expose him to more injuries of the angry Soldiers.
The Officers will not, nor dare not keep a strict discipline.

193. The Earl of Denbigh and Henry Martin referred to Committees.
The Earl of Denbigh referred to the Committee of the Revenue to consider the
Arreares of his Embassy in Italy, and of his 1000. Marks per ann. pension
bestowed upon him by the late King. If his deserts had been better, his Reward
had been worse, and worse paid. Also Henry Martins Losses and Arreares referred
to the consideration of a Committee. If the Committee would know what Harry
has lost, they must examine his Barber-Surgeon. Rowland Wilsons Arrears and
Losses, and the L. Gray's Charges and Arreares to be considered and reported:
you see charity begins at home, and the Members exercise it (for the most part)
in their own House.

194. The Council of State authorized to grant Letters of Marque.
June 25. An Act passed, to enable the Council of State with absolute power to
grant special and particular Letters of Marque or Reprisal in the name of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England by Authority of Parliament: what is this
but to empower the Council of State to make War at Sea with all Princes and
States at their discretion? they have already so far decayed all the Trade of
this Nation, that ere long Traffic will be totally destroyed; whereby our
Seamen with their Ships will be necessitated (for want of employment) to
revolt to the PRINCE: to prevent which inconvenience, they will find work for
them by granting so many particular Letters of Marque to all such as shall but
pretend themselves wronged by Foreign Nations as will amount to a General
practice and profession of Pyracy, and turn England into a second Argires,
whereby all Princes and States will be provoked to make a Pyratical War upon
England, as against a Den of Thieves and Robbers, Common Enemies to Traffic
and humane Society: as the Romans did under the Conduct of Pompey, against the
Cilician, and other Asiatick Pirates.

Captain Young has blown up with Gunpowder a Ship of the Princes, called the
Antilope, 195. Cap. Yongue's blowing up the Antilope in Helversluce; with a
Caution.
lying at Anchor in Helversluce, under the protection of the States of Holland,
whereby the Chamber of Holland, and the honor of their Inland Sea is ravished
from them. By this, and by some former actions of the like insolency (as the
firing upon their Ships, and killing their men for not striking Sail to them)
you may see what good Neighborhood the Dutch are like to have of their younger
brother State, when they are once settled and confirmed in their yet infant
Government: even the very same which the Carthaginians found after the new
erected Commonwealth of Rome grew up to maturity, which proved so dangerous a
Competitor in point of power, profit, and honor, as buried the more ancient
Free State of Carthage in its Ruins. Free-states (especially Aristocracies)
are very quarrelsome with their Neighbors, and never want many of their
Patrician most potent Families ambitious to increase their own power and glory
by Wars: and therefore seek occasions of quarrel with their Neighbors; such
was the whole Family of the Barchines at Carthage; the Scipio's, Fabii,
Camilli, Crassi, Pompeii, Casares, and many more at Rome: Thus was Greece torn
in pieces by its Free-states.

The Commons have bestowed St. Crosses Hospital upon Cook for acting the part
of an Attorney General against the late King. It is fit every Judas should have
his reward; 196. More Gifts to the Godly.
the New Park in Surry bestowed upon the City in reward of their Thanksgiving
Dinner, that the new-packed Court of Aldermen and Common Counsel may not want
Venyson to fill their Wives Bellies, nor they Brow Antlers to hang their Hats
on.

197. Order 9. June 1649. referring all secured and secluded Members to be
examined before a Committee.
The 9. June the Commons (about 46 in number) had passed an Order concerning
their secured, secluded, and absented Members, and referred all such as had not
already entered their dissent to the Vote, 5. December. 1648. to a Committee to
give such satisfaction to them as the House should approve of before the 30. of
June instant, or else the House would take order for New Elections. This was to
bring the said Members (300 in number at least) to the winnowing, that they
might admit such as were for their turn to recruit their thin House, and expel
the rest: few repaired to them, and of those very few were chosen, the Speakers
Son, Sir John Treavor (who has a Monopoly of 1500 l. per annum, out of
Newcastle Coals, for which he was many Months kept out of the House, and at
last admitted (only to comply with the Faction) and his said Monopoly
continued) Sir Henry Haymonde, and two Sons of the Earl of Pembroke, were
received. This was thought very unreasonable that so many Gentlemen either kept
out, or driven away by force should, by a far less number sitting and acting
under the same force, be sent to attend a Committee, to stand with their Hatts
off to Holland, Scott, etc. and be examined and expelled for giving their Votes
(Yea, or No) in the House according to their Consciences. This was to subvert
the Liberty of all Parliaments for the future, and to make this House (which
calls it self a Parliament) a mere packed Junto to carry on forelaid Designs.
Besides, to expect they should approve all that the sitting Party in the House
had done in the absence of these non-sitting Members, who neither heard the
Debate, nor reasons, whereupon they grounded their Votes against the King and
House of Peers, nor for the abolishing Monarchy, and turning it into a
Free State, erecting a Council of State for that purpose, voting the Supreme
Authority to be in themselves, and many other matters of the like high nature,
which have no place in the Laws of England, was such an imposition as neither
agreed with the known Parliament Privileges, Liberty of Conscience, (so loudly
professed by these sanctified Members which sit) nor with humane reason and
sense. And at last to sit under those Armed Guards that put a force upon them
(the 6. December.) before; promised as little of safety, unless they would
renounce their own Consciences and Act the wills of their Janisaries and their
Party; and would render them contemptible to all the world, especially to those
men who put this insolency upon them.

I formerly told you how unwilling the Members were to adjourn and resign their
more than Kingly Power to the Council of State; 168. Articles of Impeachment
against the Speaker.
wherefore Cromwell finding he could not obtain that of them by a Vote,
projected another way to work his Design, not the old way of a violent purge by
securing and secluding the Members with his Myrmidons, that is already
infamous, Note that Oliver, before he left the Town, erected a Committee of
Officers of the Army to prosecute and bring to punishment grand Delinquents.
This is a new kind of Star Chamber o^ military Nobles, held like a Rod over
the Mock-Parliament. Council of State, and the General, in case they shall
oppose Olivers Designs.
and would savor too grossly of the Power of the Sword; and would show Oliver
to be rather a Quack-salving Doctor of Physic than a Doctor of the Civil Law.
He caused the Officers therefore to frame certain Articles of Impeachment
against Mr. Lenthal their Spearker, as follows: 1. FOr releasing out of
Newgate three of the Queens Priests and Jesuits by his Warrant. 2. For
maintaining and protecting several Spies and Agents for the late King within
the Line of Communication during the late War. 3. For conveying diverse
remarkable prisoners of War out of the Line of Communication unto the late
King. 4. For assisting and protecting several Plotters on the behalf of the
late King, to destroy the City of London. 5. For suffering above 30000 l. to be
conveyed to the late King out of the Line of Communication, wittingly and
willingly. 6. For sending Horses of War, with Men and Arms to the late King. 7.
For holding an intercourse of Letters with the late King. 8. For maintaining
and keeping an Agent in the Garrison of Oxford, for expediting the foregoing
Treacheries. 9. For corrupting many Members of the Parliament, some lately
excluded, and some now sitting in the House to conceal and smother the foreging
Treacheries. 10. For endeavoring to take away the Lives of several the
Prosecutors and Witnesses unto the foregoing Treacheries.


You see there is not one word in them of Cousening the Commonwealth (which is
now become the Private wealth of every particular Saint) because this would
have broken universally the whole communion of Saints, and would have set them
all together by the ears, to defend themselves by recriminating one another:
The device was, by taking off the Speaker to Dissolve them, since they cannot
by the Privileges of the House choose themselves a new Speaker without the
consent of a power higher than their own (to wit) the Kings, and though they
will be so much Masters of their own Privileges, as to coin new every day upon
emergent occasions, yet those irregularities are always done under the power
and protection of the Sword, which they could not expect against their own
Vizier Basha Oliver. This trick being smelt out, was so highly resented, that
it perished in the birth; only (I hear) the Speaker bled in private 15000 l.
toward Olivers expedition.

199. 50000 l Ad^nce money ^r Cromwels ^xpedition.
All the sinks of tyranny and oppression about the Town, the Committee of the
Revenue, Goldsmiths hall, Haberdashers hall, the Excise Office, etc. are all
emptied into that Common-Sewer Olivers expedition into Ireland (or rather
Scotland) or engaged as a security to furnish him with 150000. part whereof
only he is accountable for; the residue is left to his discretion and
conscience to buy Towns and Victories with, and to be offered upon an Altar to
be erected Deo ignoto.

At Olivers request, the House admitted Sir Edward Ford to compound upon the
Articles of Oxon, notwithstanding his lapse of time; Forde married Ireton's
Sister, and the Lord Culpepper's Son married Forde's Daughter. Observe how the
General is lessened to advance Cromwell. 1. The Command o^ ^e Irish Forces taken
from him, and Cromwell sent with a Higher power than ever any went with into
that Nation. 2. All Soldiers that will, are enabled to leave their Regiments,
and List under Cromwell: so that the discontented and Levelling Party only are
left under the command of Fairfax.

Col. Martin's Accounts brought into the House, 3. July, 200. More Gifts to the
Godly.
1649. his Arrears came to 25000 l. and 1000 l. per ann. Land ordered to be
settled upon him and his Heirs. The Lord Gray of Grooby's Arrears for the last
Summer only against Duke Hamilton, 1500 l. These things considered, I cannot
wonder at the Petition presented to the General by Captain Jubbs, in the name
of Col. Hus^n's Regiment about July 6. wherein (amongst other things) they
complain, The Moderate, from July 3. to July 10. 1649.
That the House do weekly bestow 1000 l. per an. upon themselves out of the
public Treasury of the Nation, when as the Soldiers wants are great, and all
the people are in great necessity.

As if the dividing of the Army, 201. Endeavors to lessen the General.
and putting the most confiding men under Cromwell, the taking the whole command
of Ireland from the General, and conferring it upon Cromwell, the drawing dry
all Treasuries of Money to furnish Cromwell, and leaving no Money to content the
Generals remaining part of the Army, the turning the odium of seizing and
secluding the Members, and Murdering the KING, upon the General, were not
sufficient diminutions of the General, and augmentations of his Lieutenant
General: The Welsh Counties are set on work to desire Harry Martin for their
Commander in Chief; and the Western Garrisons (the most considerable of
England) are to be taken from the General, and put into the hands of Cromwell
and his Party, for his retreat from Ireland; so that if all this do not enable
him to ruin the General, it will (at least) enable him to divide the Army, and
cantonize the Kingdom, and turn the General into the dangers and troubles of
the starving, forlorn, North Counties bordering upon Scotland. And if Cromwell
find Ireland too hard a bone for him (it is thought) he will endeavor to
surprise the Isle of Man, and from thence infest Scotland and Ireland.

202. An Inquisition for blood, an ingenious piece newly come to light.
About the 18. July, 1649. was presented to the world an ingenious ^ce,
entitled, [An Inquisition for Blood] to the Parliament, instatu quo nunc. And,
to the Army, Regnante: wherein the Author proves, That the KING did not take
the guilt of blood Himself by granting the Preambulatory Proposition in the
late Treaty in the Isle of Wight, in these words, (viz.) That he acknowledged
that the two Houses of Parliament^ were necessitated to undertake a War in
their own just and lawful Defense, etc. And that therefore all Oaths,
Declarations, or other public Instruments against the two Houses of
Parliament, or any for adhering to them, etc. be Declared null, suppressed and
forbidden.





sub stricta novacula, when the Razor was (as it were) at his throat: 1. An
Army of 30000. Horse and Foot effective against Him. 2. When He was endangered
and tired out with a long and close Imprisonment. 3. When many dangerous and
menacing Petitions against His life, had been encouraged and entertained: so
that the King may seem to have been necessitated to yield to this Grant for His
own just and lawful defense.



the Essence of the Treaty. Philosophers and Schoolmen tell us, Proems to
Laws are condemned by many Lawyers and Politicians. Est nihil frigidius Lege
cum Prologe, jubeo lex, non suadet.
No valid proof can be drawn out of Proems and Introductions, but out of the
body of the Text. So in the Laws of England, and in all Accusations and
Charges, Prefaces and Preambles are not pleadable. They are the last in penning
of Laws, least in account, nor never had the force of Laws.

KING: nor those Laws which (e contrario) exempts from punishment all subjects
adhering to the Person of the KING in any Cause or Quarrel.

were necessitated to make a War, etc. This may relate to a necessity a part
post, not a part ante, self-defence is the universal Law of nature, extending
to all Creatures; it is, non scripta sed nata Lex. By raising Tumults, etc.
Therefore when the two Houses (or rather a schismatical Party in them) had
brought upon themselves a necessity of Self-defence, His Majesty was content to
acknowledge that necessity. If one man assault another upon the Highway, and
the Assailed furiously pursue the Assailant, putting him to the defensive part;
the Assailant is now necessitated to fight in his own defense, although he drew
that necessity upon himself, yet is he now excusable a posteriori, not a
priori. And as Civilians say of clandestine Marriges, Quod fieri non debuit,
factum valet; for multa sunt quae non nisi peracta approbantur.

Lewis the 13. of France, had many Civil Wars with his own Subjects, amongst
other Treaties to compose them, upon the Treaty of Lodun he was enforced to
publish an Edict, approving of all that had been done by his Opposites as done
for his service. The like extenuations are not unusual at the close of Civil
Wars; and the only use made of them was never other than to make the adverse
Party more capable of pardon, to secure them against the brunt of the Laws, to
salve their credits, and pave the way for an Act of Oblivion, and restore a
settled peace; Peace and War, like Water and Ice, being apt to beget one
another. But never was use made of such Grants to ruin the King that Granted
them, or his Party.

Thus having confuted that misprision, That the King by Granting that
Introductory Proposition, had taken all the Blood upon His score: my Author
having cleared his way to his farther Inquisition after Blood, proceeds, and
tells you, Blew-Cap was the first that opened the Issue of Blood by entering
England, and showing Subjects the way of representing Petitions to the King
upon their Pikes points: That the Irish took their rise from him. And whereas
occasion was taken to calumniate His Majesty for having a foreknowledge thereof
(amongst many other convincing Arguments to clear him) my Lord Macguire upon
the Ladder, and another upon the Scaffold, did freely and clearly acquit Him.
And (in regard great use was made of the Irish Rebellion to imbitter the People
against the King) the Author winds up the causes thereof upon one bottom.
Telling you

1. They who complied with the Scots in their first and second Insurrection.

2. They who dismissed the Irish Commissioners (sent to present some grievances
to the Parliament) with a short, unpolitick harsh Answer.

3. They who took off Straffords Head (the only Obstructor of that Rebellion)
and afterward retarded the Earl of Leicesters going into Ireland.

4. They who hindered part of the disbanded Army of 8000. Men, raised by the
Earl of Strafford, being Soldiers of Fortune, to go serve the Spaniard, as his
Majesty had promised the two Spanish Ambassadors, the Marquesses of Velada and
Maluezzi: which cashiered discontented men first put fire to the Tumult. They
who did all this, are guilty of the Irish Rebellion, and of the blood of above
100000 Protestants who perished in that War. Add, They who importuned the King
(contrary to His judgment) to make the Irish desperate by passing an Act to
confiscate their estates, and grant them away to such as should advance Moneys
upon Irish Adventures.

Touching the War kindled in England, the Author confesses it was a fatal
thing there should be a withdrawing of the Kings Person from the Parliament.
But averreth it was a barbarous thing that the King with above four parts in
five of the Lords, and two parts in three of the Commons, should be frighted
away by Tumults raised by Ven and Bourges, and a Design to seize the Kings
Person; yet it is fit it should be remembered.

1. What reiterated Messages his Majesty sent, offering to return, if there
might be a course taken to secure his Person, with those Peers and Commons
rioted away.

2. That there was not the least motion toward War, until Hotham shut the
Gates of Hull against the King, attended only with some few of his household
servants; which Act of his was approved of afterward by the House of Commons
Vote, as if he had done it by their warrant.

3. That a while after, there was an Army of 16000. men effective enrolled
about London, to fetch Him to His Parliament, and remove ill Counselors, under
the Earl of Essex, long before the King began to set up His Standard.

4. That the same Army so raised, to bring the King to His Parliament, was
continued two years after to keep Him from His Parliament.

5. Who interdicted Trade first, and brought in Foreign Force to help them?
and whose Commissions of War were near upon two years date before the Kings.

6. That in all His Declarations, He always protested, He waged not War
against the Parliament, but against some Seditious Members, against whom He
could not obtain Common Justice.

7. That upon all good Successes, the King still courted the Parliament and
City to an Accommodation.

8. That upon the Treaty of Vxbridge, The King moved, that (to prepare men's
minds to Peace) there might be freedom of Trade from Town to Town: A
cessation of all Acts of Hostility for the time, that the inflammation being
allayed, the wound might be cured the sooner.

9. That this present Army remember how often in their Proposalls and
Declarations they protested, That their aim was, to restore His Majesty with
Honor, Freedom, and Safety, whereunto they were formerly bound by their
Protestation and Covenant; and that the two Commanders in Chief pawned their
Souls to Him thereupon.

10. That to settle Peace, the King did in effect (by His Concessions) part
with His Sword, Scepter, and Crown, and every thing that was personal to Him.

11. With what admired Temper, Prudence, Constancy, He comported Himself in His
Afflictions; and how many of His engaged Enemies became His Converts thereby,
speaking Panegyricks in His praise.

12. That though there be some precedents in our Histories for Deposing Kings
in point of Competition for the Crown; yet it is unexampled, That a King of
England, of an undoubted Title, should be Summoned, Arraigned, Tried,
Condemned, and Executed at His own Door, by His own Subjects, and by the Name
of their King, to whom they had sworn Allegiance; Contrary to the whole Current
of the Law, which says, The King can do no wrong, The Crown takes away all
defects: Wherefore it was adjudged superfluous to take off Attainders, under
which Hen. 7. and Queen Eliz. lay, because the Crown wiped off all Blots. Rex
non habet Parem in suis Dominiis nec Superiorem, satis habet Rex ad poenam,
quod Deum expectat ultorem. If therefore by the Laws of the Land, all men must
be Tried by their Peers, and the King have no Peer, what power had these Men to
Arraign their King? to be both His engaged Enemies, Accusors, and Judges; and
to Erect an unpresidented Tribunal, without the least Foundation in Law, with
power, and purpose to condemn all that came before it; and that Sentence of
Death should pass without conviction, or Law, against the Head, and Protector
of our Laws, and Fountain of Justice and Mercy.

13. That they who (by their own Confession) represent but the Common People,
should assume power to cut him off, who immediately represented God.

203. Mr. Pryns excellent Book entitled [ A legal Vindication of the Liberties
of England] illegal axes, and pretended Acts of Parliament abridged in part,
but the whole commended to be seriously read by all men.
About the same time Mr. William Pryn Assigned his Reasons, why he could neither
in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence, voluntarily submit to pay the Arbitrary
illegal Tax of 90000 l. a Month, imposed upon the People, by a pretended Act of
the Commons, bearing Date 7. of April 1649. toward the maintenance of Forces
to be continued in England and Ireland.

Because by the Fundamental Laws, and known Statutes of this Land, No Tax, etc.
ought to be Imposed, or Leavied, but by the Will and common Assent of the
Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, Commons, and whole Realm, in a free and full
Parliament. See Magna Charta, 29, 30. Stat. 25 Edw. 1. chap. 5, 6. 34 Edw. 1.
De Tallagio non concedendo, c. 1. 21 Edw. 3. Rot. Parl. nu. 16. 25 Edw. 3. c.
8. 36 Edw. 3 Rot. Parl. nu. 26. 45 Edw. 3. Rot. Parl. nu. 42. 11 Hen. 4. Rot.
Parl. nu. 10. 1 Rich. 3. c. 2. The Petition of Right, and Resolutions of both
Houses against Loans, 3 Car. The Votes and Acts against Ship Money, Knighthood,
Tonnage and Poundage, and the Star Chamber this Parliament, 17, 18. Car. agreed
to by Mr. William Hackwel, in his Argument against Impositions. Judge Hutton
and Crock in their Arguments; Mr. Saint John's in his Argument and Speech
against Ship Money, with others Arguments and Discourses upon that subject. Sir
Ed. Cock in his 2 Instit. page 59. 60 527, 528, 529, 532, 533. But this
Assessement was not so legally imposed, Ergo, I, nor no man else ought to pay
it. 1. This Tax was not imposed by any Parliament; The late Parliament being
actually dissolved above two months before this pretended Act was passed for
imposing it, by the Murder of the King, as is resolved by the Parliament. 1
Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. nu. 1. 4 Hen. 4. and 1 Hen. 5. Rot. Parl. nu. 26. Cooks 4.
Institutes, p 46. 4 Edw. 4. 44. 6. For the King being both the Beginning, End,
and Foundation of Parliaments (according to Modus tenendi Parliamentum, and Sir
Edw. Cook 4. Instit. p. 3.) which are Summoned and Constituted only by his
Writ, the Writ is actually abated by his Death. 1 Edw. 6. c. 7. Cooks 7. Rep.
30, 31. Dyer 165. 4 Ed. 4. 43, 44. 1 Ed. 5. 1 Brook Commission, 19. 21.

It appears by the Writs of Summons to the Lords (Crompt. Jurisdiction of
Courts, fol. 1. Cooks 4. Instit. p. 9. 10.) and of Elections, Quere, How a
Parliament Summoned by the Writ of K. Charles I. and called Parliamentum
Nostrum ad tractandum nobiscum super arduis negotiis regni nostri, can be
continued one and the same Parl. after the Kings death that called it; and the
Monarchy changed into a Commonwealth? formally it cannot be the same, the Head
thereof being gone. The Lords House and Monarchy being abolished, and the State
not the same; materially it cannot be the same, so many of the ancient Members
being thrown out, and new ones unduly elected brought in. But there are some
pragmatical Tailors in the House, who can make a garment fit for all states of
the Moon, and a Parl. fit for all changes of the State.
and leavying their Wages: That the Parliament was only Parliamentum nostrum,
the Parliament of the Kings that is Dead, not of his Heirs and Successors, They
are all Summoned to come to his Parliament to advise with him (nobiscum, not
with his Heirs and Successors) of great and weighty Affairs concerning, Nos and
Regnum nostrum, Him and his Kingdom, 5 Edw. 3. 6. part 2. Dors. Claus. Regist.
fol. 192, 200. So the King being dead, and his Writ and Authority by which they
were Summoned, and the end for which they were Called: Ad Tractandum ibidem
nobiscum, super arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni nostri tangentibus, being
thereby absolutely determined without any hope of revival: The Parliament is
determined thereby, especially as those who have Dis-inherited his Heirs and
Successors, and Voted down Monarchy it self, and the Remnant now sitting are no
longer Members of Parliament, as all Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs,
made only by the Kings Writ or Commission, and not by Patent, Cease and become
void by the Kings death, for this very reason, because they are constituted,
Justitiarios and Vicecomites nostros ad pacem nostram, etc. custodiendum. The
King being dead, his Writs and Commissions expire with Him. 4 Ed. 4. 43. 44.
Brook Office and Officer 25. Commission, 19. 21. Dyer. 195. Cook 7. Rep. 30,
31. 1 Ed. 6. c. 7. Daltons Justice of Peace, chap. 3. page 13. Lambert, page 71.

Car. That this present Parliament shall not be dissolved unless it be by Act
of Parliament for that purpose.

That it is a Maxim in Law, That every Statute ought to be expounded according
to the intent of those that made it, and the mischiefs it intended only to
prevent. 4 Edw. 4. 12. 12 Edw. 4. 18. 1 Hen. 7. 12, 13. Plowdens Comment. fol.
369. Cooks 4. Institutes page 329, 330. Now the intent of the Makers of this
Act, was not to prevent the Parliaments dissolution by the Kings Death (no
ways intimated in any clause thereof, although it be a clear dissolution of it
to all intents, not provided for by this Act) but by any Writ, or Proclamation
of the Kings by his Regal Power, without the consent of both Houses, which I
shall prove by the Arguments following.

1. From the principal occasion of making the said Act. The Commons in their
Remonstrance, 15. December. 1642. complain, That the King had dissolved all
former Parliaments against approbation of both Houses of Parliament; Wherefore
to prevent the Dissolution, Prorogation, or Adjournment of this present Parl.
by the Kings Regal Power, after the Scots Army should be disbanded, and before
the things mentioned in the Preamble could be effected, was the ground and
occasion of this Law: and not any fear of Dissolving the Parliament by the
Kings death, Natural, or Violent, which is confessed by the Commons in the said
Remonstrance, Exact Collect. page 5, 6. 14, 17. compared together, where they
Affirm, The abrupt dissolution of this Parliament is prevented by another Bill,
etc. In the Bill for continuance of this Parliament, there seems to be some
restraint of the Royal power in Dissolving of Parliaments; not to take it out
of the Crown, but to suspend the execution of it for this time, and occasion
only, which was so necessary for the Kings own Security, and the Public
Peace, that without it we could not have undertaken any of those great Charges,
but must have left both Armies to disorder and confusion, etc.

2. The very Title of this Act [an Act to prevent inconveniences which may
happen by the untimely Adjourning, Proroguing, or Dissolution of this present
Parliament] intimates as much, compared with the body of it, which provides as
well against the Adjourning, or Proroguing without an Act, as against a
Dissolution. Now the Parliament cannot be said to be Adjourned, or Prorogued
untimely by the Kings Death (which never Adjourned, or Prorogued any
Parliament) but only by his Proclamation, Writ, or Royal Command to the
Houses, or their Speaker executed during his lifetime, See Parl. Rolls, 6 Edw.
3. 2. Rot. Parl. 3. 6. 5 Ric. 2. n. 64, 65. 11 Ric. 2. nu. 14, 16, 20. 8 Hen.
4. nu. 2, 7. 27 Hen. 6. nu. 12. 28 Hen. 6. nu. 8, 9, 11. 29 Hen. 6. nu. 10, 11.
31 Hen. 6. nu. 22, 30, 49. and Cooks 4. Instit. p. 25. Dyer fol. 203.

3. The Prologue of the Act implies as much, whereas great sums of Money must
of necessity be speedily advanced for relief of His Majesty's Army (not his
Heir or Successor) and for supplying other His Majesty's (not his Heirs, nor
Successors) occasions, which cannot be so timely effected as is requisite,
without credit for raising the said Moneys; which credit cannot be attained
until such Obstacles be first removed, as are occasioned by Fears and
Jealousies; That this Parliament may be Adjourned, Prorogued, or Dissolved,
before Justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents (then in being, as
Strafford, Canterbury, not since made) Public Grievances (then complained of,
as Star Chamber, High Commission, Ship Money, Knighthood-money, Tonnage, and
Poundage, etc.) redressed: Peace concluded between the two Nations, sufficient
provisions made for repayment of the said moneys (not others since) so to be
raised. All which expressions related only to His late Majesty, as to His Acts
of Royal Power, not to His Heirs and Successors, after His Natural (much less)
Violent death, which was not then thought on, but publicly Detested, and
Protested against; no Man being so hardy as to mention it for fear of the Law,
not then subdued by the Sword; And the several Principal Scopes of this Act are
fully satisfied long before the late Kings death.

4. It is clear by the Body of this Act; And be it declared, etc. That this
present Parliament, etc. shall not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of
Parliament to be passed for that purpose; nor shall at any time, or times
during this present Parliament, be Adjourned, or Prorogued, unless it be by Act
of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; and that the House of Peers shall
not at any time, or times, during this present Parliament, be Adjourned, unless
it be by themselves, or by their own Order. And in like manner, That the House
of Commons shall not at any time, or times be Adjourned, etc. as aforesaid.
From whence it is undeniable.

1. That this Act was only to prevent untimely Dissolving, Proroguing, and
Adjourning of that present Parliament then assembled, and no other, by Acts of
Royal Power.

2. That the King was the Principal Estate, and Member, yea, our Sovereign
Lord, the sole Declarer, and Enacter of this Law, by Assent of the Lords and
Commons.

3. That neither this Act, nor any other, for Dissolving, Proroguing, or
Adjourning this Parl. could be made without the Kings Royal Assent, which the
Lords and Commons in their Remonstrance, 26. May, 1642. often acknowledge,
together with His Negative Voice to Bills, exact. Collect. p. 69, 70. 736. 709.
722.

4. That it was not the Kings intent in passing this Act, to shut Himself out
of Parliament, or create Members of Parliament without a King, as He
professes, (...), ^. 5. Nor the Lords and Commons intent to Dis-member Him
from His Parliament, and make themselves a Parliament without Him, as their
said Remonstrance testifies; and the words of the Act import, much less was it
their intent to pack a Parliament of 40 or 50 Commons only, selected by
Colonel Pride, to Vote according to the Dictates of a Council of War, after
they had destroyed the King, and House of Peers: Against which transcendent
usurpation this very Act provides, That the House of Peers shall not be so much
as Adjourned, or Prorogued, but by themselves, or their own Order.

5. Neither did King, Lords, and Commons, in passing this Act intend, That by
Murdering the King, Abolishing the House of Lords, and expelling by power of
the Sword eight parts of ten of the Commons, the remaining Faction should con
titute themselves, their Heirs and Successors, a perpetual Parliament, It is
against the nature, and essence of a Parl. to be Perpetual, and against the
Liberty of the People.
which would Cross, and Repeal the Act for a Triennial Parliament made on the
same day in Law. Brook, Parliament 80. Relation 85. Dyer 85.

6. The last Clause of this Act concludes as much. And that all, and every
thing, or things whatsoever done, or to be done (to wit, by the King, or his
Authority) for the Adjournment, Proroguing, or Dissolving of this Parliament,
contrary to this present Act, shall be utterly void and of none effect. Now
Death of the King, and Dissolution of this Parliament thereby, cannot properly
be styled a thing done, or to be done by the King, if by those words (things
done, or to be done for the dissolving, etc.) they shall say, they related to
the Kings Natural Death: Natural Death is the Act of God, which these Saints
cannot make void, if they related to His violent Death, it could not then be
said a thing done, or to be done for the unlawfulness and injustice of it. This
Act passed long before any War or Bloodshed; The only pretense they have since
found out for the Kings Murder.

2. If this Parliament were not Dissolved by the Kings Death, Yet the House of
Peers (formerly Voted) down by the Commons, gave no consent to the passing
this Act, Entitled, An Act of the House of Commons; who, without the
concurring Assent of the Lords, and the Kings Royal Assent, have no power to
pass any Act, Make, or Declare any Law, or impose any Tax, as appears by the
fore-recited Acts; The Petition of Right, The Act for the Triennial Parliament,
and this very Act against Dissolving, Proroguing, etc. with all our Printed
Statutes, Parliament Rolls, and Law Books. The Commons being so far from
claiming the sole Legislative power heretofore, as that they were not Summoned
to our Ancient Parliaments, (which consisted only of King, Lords, Temporal and
Spiritual) until 47 Hen. 3. nor had they so much as a House of Commons, or
Speaker, until the Reign of Edw. 3. nor never tendered any Acts, or Bills to the
King, but Petitions only of Grievances, until long after Rich. 2. time. See
the Printed Prologues to the Stat. 1, 4, 5, 9, 10, 20, 23, 36, 37. 50 Edw. 3. 1
Ric. 2. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11. 13 H^n. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8. 9 Hen. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4,
6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 28, 29. 39 Hen. 6. 1, 4, 7, 8, 12, 17. 22 Edw. 4. 1
Rich. 3.

3. But suppose the Commons alone had p were to impose Taxes, yet it must be in
a full, and free House: whereas, when this Act for 90000 l. a Month passed,
the House was neither Full, nor Free, The Major part of the House (who by Law
are the House) to wit, 8. parts of 10. at tht least, being Secured, or Secluded
by Col. Pride, and his Soldiers, by Confederacy with those 40 or 50 then
sitting when this Act passed, and passing the Wills of the Council of Officers,
to the subversion of Parliaments, and the great wrong of those Counties and
Buroughs for whom they served.

Members make a House of Commons.

Not to grant Subsidies, nor pass Laws, or matters of greatest moment, Modus
tenendi Parl. Cooks 4. Instit. page 1, 2, 26, 35, 36. Cromptons Juris. of
Courts, fol. 1. 39 Edw. 3. 7. Brook, Parl. 27. 1 Jac. 1.

2. 40 Members make not a House, when the rest are Excluded by force without
doors, and fraud of their Fellow Members within doors, on purpose, that (being
the Major number) they may not over-vote them. The Commons not having power to
expel any of their Members, without consent of King and Lords, in whom only
the Judicial Power resides. Paribus in Pares non est Potestas, Claus. Dors. 7
Rich. 2. M. 27. Seldens Title of Honor, page 737, Baron Camoyes case
discharged by the Kings Writ, and Judgment from serving amongst the Commons,
because a Peer of the Realm: The practice for Members to Expel and Sequester
their Fellow Members, being a late dangerous innovation, to pack a Factious
Conventicle instead of a Parliament.

If the King should send forth no more Writs than would Summon forty or fifty
Commons, it were no House. Added by the Abridger.


So Mr. Pryn concludes, That if he should voluntarily submit to pay this Tax,
by virtue of the said pretended Act of Parliament Dated 7. of April, 1649. made
by those now sitting (some of whose Elections have been Voted void, others of
them Elected by new Illegal Writs, under a new kind of Seal, since the Kings
Beheading; as the Earl of Pembroke, and Lord Edward Howard, incapable of being
Knights or Burgesses by the Common Law, because Peers of the Realm, as was
adjudged in the Lord Cannoyes case, Claus. Dors. 7 Rich. 2. M. 32. and asserted
by Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Part. 2. chap. 5. page 735. Seconded by Cooks
4. Instit. page 1, 4, 5, 46, 47, 49.) As he should admit those to be lawful
Members, so he should assent to ex post facto, some particulars against his
Knowledge, and against the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, Protestation,
Solemn League and Covenant, taken in the presence of God, with a sincere heart,
and real intention to perform the same; and persevere therein all the days of
his life, without suffering himself directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever
Combination, Persuasion or Terror to be withdrawn therefrom. As for example,
he should thereby acknowledge contrary to his knowledge, and the said Oaths
and Covenant.

1. That there may be, and now is, a lawful Parliament of England, actually in
being, and legally continuing after the Kings Death, consisting only of a few
late Members of the Commons House, without either King, Lords, or most of their
fellow Members.

2. That this Parliament sitting under a force, (and so unduly Constituted, and
packed by power of an Army combining with them) has just and lawful Authority.

1. To violate the Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and alter the
Constitution of our Parliaments themselves.

2. To Imprison, Seclude, and Expel most of their fellow Members (the far major
part of the House) for Voting and according to their Consciences (in favor of
Peace, and settlement of the Commonwealth.)

3. To Repeal all Votes, Ordinances, and Acts of Parliament they please.

4. To Erect new Arbitrary Courts of War and Justice.

5. To Arrain, Condemn, and Execute the King himself, with the Peers and
Commons of this Realm, by a new kind of Martial Law, contrary to Magna Charta,
The Petition of Right, 3. Car. and the known Laws of the Land.

6. To Dis-inherit the Kings Posterity of the Crown.

7. To extirpate Monarchy, and the whole House of Peers.

8. To Change and Subvert the Ancient Government, Seals, Laws, Writs, Legal
proceedings, Courts, and Coin of the Kingdom.

9. To Sell and Dispose of all the Lands, Revenues, Jewels, Goods of the Crown,
with the Lands of Deans and Chapters, (for their own advantage, not the easing
of the people from Taxes.)

10. To absolve themselves (by a Papal kind of power) and all the Subjects of
England and Ireland, from all the Oaths and Engagements they have made to the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; yea, from the very Oath of
Allegiance, notwithstanding this express Clause in it (fit to be laid to heart
by all conscientious Christians) I do believe, and in conscience am resolved,
That neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of
this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority
to be lawfully Ministered to me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations
to the contrary.

11. To dispense with our Protestation and Covenant so Zealously enjoined by
both Houses on all sorts of people.

12. To dispose of the Forts, Ships, Forces, Offices, and places of Honor,
Power, Trust, or Profit, to whom they please (to their own party.)

13. To Displace and Remove whom they please from their Offices, Trusts,
Pensions, Callings and Franchises at their pleasures, without any Legal cause,
or Trial.

14. To make what New Acts, Laws, and Reverse what Old ones they think meet, to
ensnare and inthral our Consciences, Estates, Liberties and Lives.

15. To create new monstrous Treasons never heard of before, and to declare
Real Treasons against the King, Kingdom and Parliament to be no Treasons; and
Loyalty, Allegiance, due obedience to our known Laws, and a conscientious
observing our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Covenant, to be no
less than High Treason; for which they may take away our Lives, and confiscate
our Estates to their new Exchequer. Thereby at once repealing Magna Charta, c.
29. 5 Edw. 3. c. 6. 25 Edw. 3. c. 4. 28 Edw. 3. c. 3. 37 Edw. 3. c. 18. 42 Edw.
3. c. 3. 25 Edw. 3 c. 2. 11 Rich. 2. c. 4. 1 Hen. 4. c. 10. 2 Hen. 4. Rot.
Parl. 11. n. 60. 1 Edw. 6. c. 12. 1 M. c. 1. The Petition of Right, 3 Car. So
much commended this Parliament, and laying all our Laws, Liberties, Estates and
Lives waste, after they have drawn so much Blood and Treasure from us, in
defense of them.

16. To raise and keep up what forces by Land and Sea they please, and impose
what Taxes they please, and renew, increase, and perpetuate them to support
their more than Regal or Parliamentary power.

17. To pack and shuffle themselves into a Council of Lords, This 17. is added
by the Abridger.
States General (without any provincial States) forty Hogens Mogens, with
Supreme, Regal, and Arbitrary power, in absence of Parliaments which are
Abolished by these Usurpations as well as Monarchy.

4. The principal ends proposed in the pretended Act for imposing this 90000 l.
a months Tax, oblige all men not to pay it, viz. The keeping up this Army under
the Lord Fairfax.

1. Because this Army, by rebelling against their Masters, the Parliament, and
waging War upon them; and by conspiring with their own party of the sitting
Commons have occasioned all the Mischiefs last mentioned, to the ruin of King,
Parliament, and Kingdom, Religion, Laws, Liberty, and Property; and daily
threaten an utter dissolution, both in their Deeds, and Words. Both Officers
and Soldiers Boasting, That the whole Kingdom, and all we have is theirs by
Conquest; That we are but their conquered Slaves and Vassals, and they Lords of
the Kingdom, That our Lives are at their Mercy and Courtesy; That when they
have gotten all we have from us by Taxes and Free Quarter, they will seize our
Lands, and turn Us, and our Families out of Doors, That there is no Law in
England but the Sword (as Hugh Peter's the Rebels Apostle says) The present
power must be obeyed (says parasitical John Goodwin) that is the power of the
Sword still.

More has been raised by Taxes these last eight years, than in all the Kings
Reigns since the Conquest, and no account given,
2. No Tax ought to be imposed but upon necessity, for good of the people, 25
Edw. 1. chap. 6. Cooks 2. Instit. page 528. But the keeping up this Army is the
Bane of the people.

1. Because they are already exhausted with war, Plunder, Taxes, Free Quarter,
etc.

2. Because the Soldiers have decayed Trade, and brought a Dearth upon the
Land.

3. This Tax of 90000 l. a month destroyed Trade, by Forestalling and
Engrossing most of the Money now left in the Kingdom.

4. There is no Enemy in the Kingdom visible, nor no fear of any, if we will
believe our Grandees.

5. When the King had two Armies in the Field, and many Garrisons, this whole
Army consisted but of 22000. Men, and had an Established pay but of 45000 l. a
month. See Ordinances 15. Feb. 1644. and 6. April 1646. Exact Collect. page
599, 876. But when the Army (by confederacy with their party in the House) took
the boldness to increase their number without Order, 60000 l. a month, was
thought abundantly sufficient to pay the Army, and take off Free Quarter: And
why this Tax should now be raised to 90000 l. a month, when sundry Regiments of
it are Assigned for Ireland, and yet Free Quarter continued, is a mystery of
Iniquity which fills the Saints pockets with Money, and all the World with
Wonder.

6. The Counties Militia (so much contended for with the King) would better
defend the Kingdom from Foreign Invasions than a Mercinary Army. Therefore
there is neither necessity, nor public utility in keeping up this Army, or
raising Taxes to maintain them, or pay their pretended Arrears. The
Free Quarter they have taken in kind, and leavied in money, will treble their
Arrears, and make them much indebted to the Country. Thus far (and much
farther) Master Pryn, whose whole Book at large I commend to all men's serious
perusal.

The Marquess of Ormond's happy atchievments in Ireland beginning to look
formidably, 204. Cromwell sets sail for Ireland.
had cooled the heat of K. Oliver's courage (though not of his Liver) insomuch
that he and his intimate friends began to project how (without loss of
reputation) to take him off from so desperate an Engagement, as (at that time)
that seemed to be: unnecessary delays were used in Shipping his Men. Haslerig
and his Party reported great terrors from Scotland. Oliver and his
Bloodhounds of the Faction made a shift to smell out a silly Plot in
Dorsetshire for surprisal of Weymouth and Portland for the KING: now laughed
at, and exploded by their own News-books. And the tender-conscienced Brethren
were prompted to apprehend their own dangers, and put into a Petitioning
posture, That such a Worthy of Israel, such a chosen Instrument of Gods mercy,
might not in a time of danger leave the Land of his Nativity, the Habitation of
the Saints, to seek foreign adventures in a Heathen Land: Whilst these
preparations were making to withdraw Olivers stake, he appeared not openly in
them, but making more show of the Lions skin than the Foxes, had written to
Col. Jones how heartless his Soldiers were, and that unless Jones did by some
successeful Sally lessen their terror, he should not be able to get them on
Shipboard. This was (like the Monkey) to rake Chessenuts out of the fire with
the Cats foot; to take a presage of his own success at Col. Jones hazard.
Jones makes an attempt with better luck than he expected, though not with half
so good success as was reported. Saturday, 12. August, when the news first
came to Town, (the Lion is not so terrible as he is painted) it is a peculiar
privilege of the Saints to lie (without sin, or at least, without imputation
of sin) for the good Cause, either in Re, or in modo Rei; in the matter, or
manner; in the thing, or the extent thereof: yet this success was enough to
invite Cromwell over to pursue the Victory, and partake of the spoils, if not to
usurp the whole Honor of the Atchievment to himself, by his accustomed special
prerogative. So upon the 16, or 17. of August, K. Nol set sail toward his new
Principality, carrying (contrary to the custom of the Sea) his Lanthorn in his
Proawe, not in his Poop; where we will leave him for the present to his
adventures.

205. The Association between O Neale and C. Monck. See the Paper at large.
I have formerly hinted to you the Agreement made between Colonel Monck in
behalf of the Parliament of England; and Owen Roe O Neale, the massacring Irish
Rebel: I have now occasion to speak more at large of it, and examine the truth
of a Paper, called, [ The true state of the Transactions of Col. George Monck
with Owen Roe Oneale, as it was reported to the Parliament by the Council of
State, etc.] Printed by Edward Husbands, 15. August, 1649. The said agreement
made between the Antimonarchical Independent Party in Ireland, and the
massacring Antimonarchical Popish party under Owen Roe O Neale (being a mere
conspiracy to root out Monarchy and Protestancy: first, in Ireland, and then in
England: and a second crucifying of Christ in his members between two Thieves,
the Schismatic and the Papist) was so generally abhorred by the English
Soldiery, that many there took occasion to forsake the English Parliament; and
many here disbanded rather than they would accompany Cromwell in so wicked an
expedition. Wherefore Cromwell writ Letters to his Creatures of the Council of
State by Monck himself, complaining how much the miscarriage of that Agreement
had retarded his said Voyage; desiring them (for satisfaction of the Soldiery
and People) to Treat with Monck to take the whole business upon himself, and
to clear the Council of State, the Parliament, and Cromwell himself, from having
any hand at all in it, which upon Terms of safety and advantage (he said) he
already found him inclinable to do. The better to carry on the scene, this
Agreement was with much heat of zeal complained of in the Apocryphal House of
Commons by a Brother who had his cue beforehand, and by the Juncto was
referred to the Council of State as was forelaid, where their High and
Mightinesses (after some private conference with Monck to accommodate the
business) voted their dislike of it: Scot having studied the Politiques in a
Brewers Tally, is become a great Statesman in our new Babel. See the said
Paper, The true state, etc.
Bradshaw reprehending Monck in jest therefore. And at last they Ordered, That
the whole business, with Moncks Reasons for his justification, should be
reported by Thomas Scot to the House of Commons; which was accordingly done
Upon Friday, 10. August, Monck was called in to the Bar, where (amongst other
things) the Speaker asked him, What Persons he meant in his Letter to the L.
Lieutenant of Ireland; wherein he says, He made the Agreement with O Neale
with the advice of some others? Monk answered, that he did it upon his own
score, without advice of any other person; only having discourse with Colonel
Jones: Jones told him, if he could keep Owen Roe and Ormond from joining, it
would be a good service. This Answer (such as it is) was taken for satisfactory
in so Comic an Interlude. The next demand was, Whether he had any Advice or
Directions from the Parliament, Council of State, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
or any other Person here to do the same? which he did expressly deny, saying, he
did it upon his own score. Hereupon the House voted as follows:

Resolved, etc. That the House does utterly disapprove of the proceedings of
Col. Monck in the Treaty and Cessation (as they please to call it) made between
him and Owen Roe O Neal, and that this House does detest the thoughts of any
closing with any Party of Popish Rebels there, who have had their hands in
shedding English blood. Nevertheless the House being satisfied that what the
said Col. Monk did therein, was, in his apprehension necessary for the
preservation of the Parliament of Englands Interest: That the House is content
the farther consideration thereof, as to him, be laid aside, and shall not at
any time hereafter be called in question. So exit Monck, and the Play was done:
wherein take notice of these following Observations.

1. The Armies Doctrine, See the Answer of the Council of Officers to the
Parliaments Demand, concerning their secured Members: And their Answer
thereunto.
and use of apprehended necessity and good intentions to justify evil actions;
approved of by this example of the Parliament (as they will be called.

2. This Agreement (though it were at least twelve Weeks ago publicly known in
England, and divulged in their own Licensed News-books) was never scrupled
until now: That 1. the said Agreement was expired. 2. That O Neale was so
beaten by the Lord Inchiquine, that he is (as their own News-books say)
inconsiderable, and must suddenly join with the Marquess of Ormond, or be
destroyed.

3. That these Votes call this Let me not seem overbold in maintaining a
different opinion, since Parliaments are no more infallible than Popes; and all
humane opinions are equal unless Reason make the difference. I hope we have not
lost our Reason with our Laws and Liberties, nor the exercise and use of it.
Agreement but a Treaty and Cessati^n of Arms: which (I affirm) to be a League
Defensive and Offensive against Ormond, Inchiquine, and all that do and shall
uphold Monarchy (if not Protestancy too) for these Reasons: 1. Article second
says, That upon all occasions both Parties be ready with their Forces to
assist one another until a more absolute Agreement be made and condiscended
unto by the Parliament of England. This is beyond a Cessation. 2. Article
third, says, That the Creaghts of Ulster residing within the Quarters of Col.
Monck, shall pay Contribution to General Owen Oneale. This is a Concession of a
great latitude, far beyond the authority of any subordinate Commander or
General, and against the Laws and Liberties of the Land to grant Taxes. It
should seem by this, that Oneale and his Army were become Mercenaries, taken
into pay by Monck. 3. Article fourth, says, That if General Owen Oneale shall
happen to fight against the Forces under the Command of the Marquess of
Ormond, the Lord Inchiquine, or any other Enemies of the Parliament of England,
and thereby sp^nd his Ammunition, if he be near unto my Quarters, and be
distressed for want of Ammunition, I shall then furnish him. This was actually
performed when my Lord Inchequine Besieged Dundalke. I make the same
interpretation of this Article that I have made of the third. 4. The fifth
Article allows to Oneale the use of any Harbors within Col. Moncks liberty;
which likewise is too much fot a bare Cessation or Truce.

4. Who can believe that any subordinate Officer commissionated to prosecute a
War against Owen Roe and the rest in Arms in that Kingdom, should dare to Treat
and conclude an Agreement and conjunction with that very Enemy he had
Commission to fight against without the knowledge and directions (public or
private) of those from or under whom he has his Authority; and should be so
bold when he had done to come over and justify his said doings,
notwithstanding they proved unprosperous? Col. Monck being so much a Soldier
as to know, That (all the world over) to exceed the bounds of his Commission
(much more to act against his Commission, as in this case) is assured death
without mercy, both by the Law Martial (without which Military Discipline will
perish) and by the Laws of hur Land.

See the said Letter, printed at the latter end of a Relation of the securing
and secluding of the Members by the Army.
5. Wherefore was Sir John Winter and Sir Kenelm Digby sent for over (as was
foretold by an intercepted Letter, whereof of I have formerly spoken) and O
Realy the Popes Irish Agent, and another Agent from Owen Roe O Neal privately
entertained in England (as I have formerly hinted) but to drive on Treaties and
Associations of this nature? insomuch that long since it was whispered amongst
Cromwels party in England to uphold their spirits) That upon his showing
himself in Arms in Ireland, Ormonds Catholic Irish party would all forsake him
and go over to O Neal, who maintained the Popes Interest in that Kingdom. Nota.


The aforesaid paper prinred by Authority, and styled The true State of the
Transactions, etc. besides the said Articles of Cessation, sets down other
Articles, called, The Propositions of General Owen O Neale, the Lords, Gentry,
and Commons of the confederate Catholics of VLSTER: To the most High and most
Honorable, The PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
1. INprimis, That such as are already joined, or shall within the space of
three Months join with General Owen O Neale, [Within the space of three Months]
is not in the said Copy printed at Cork.
in the service of the Parliament of England, in this Kingdom, as well Clergy,
as others, may have all Laws and Penalties against their Religion, and its
Professors, taken off by Act of Parliament, and that Act to extend to the said
parties, their Heirs and Successors for ever, while they Loyally serve the
Parliament of England.

2. The said General O Neale desires an Act of Oblivion to be passed, to
extend to all and every of his party, for all things done since the beginning
of the Year, 1641.

3. They desire that General Owen O Neal be provided with a competent Command
in the Army befitting his worth and quality.

4. They desire that they may enjoy all the Lands that were, or ought to be in
their, or their Ancestors possession.

5. That all incapacity, inability, and distrust hitherto by Act of State, or
otherwise, against the said party, be taken off.

6. That on both sides all jealousies, hate, and aversion be laid aside, Unity,
Love, and Amity be renewed and practiced between both parties.

7. That General Owen O Neale may be restored and put in possession of his
Ancestors Estates, or some Estates equivalent to it in the Counties of Tyrone,
Ardmarch, or Londondery, in regard of his merit, and the good service that he
shall perform in the Parliament of Englands Service, in the preservation of
their Interest in this Kingdom.

8. That the Army belonging to General Owen O Neale, and his party be provided
for, in all points as the rest of the Army shall be.

9. That the said party be provided with, and possessed of a convenient
Seaport in the Province of Ulster.

I do upon receiving a confirmation of these Propositions, forthwith undertake
and promise in behalf of my self, and the whole party under my Command,
faithfully and firmly adhere to the State of the Parliament of England in this
Kingdom, and maintain their Interest hereafter, with the hazard of our lives
and fortunes:

In witness whereof, I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal this 8. day of May,
An. Dom. 1649. Signed, Owen O Neale.



Thus far the said paper, styled [The true State, etc.] goes on with the
Relation of the said Treaty and Agreement, but conceals what farther
Transactions passed between Monk and O Neal upon the last recited
Propositions: Wherefore I shall be bold to continue the Story of a paper, The
Story of the father Transactions between O Neale and Monk continued and
enlarged out of the Propositions printed at Cork.
entitled [ The Propositions of Owen Roe O Neal sent to Col. Monk, and a
Cessation for three Months concluded between them. Together with a Letter
thereupon sent by a Gentleman at Dundalk, to his Friend at Cork. Printed at
Cork, 1649.] The last recited Propositions were sent to Monk 25. day of April,
1649. who perused them, and made some considerable Alterations in them, as
appears by Monks Letter of Answer thereupon to Owen O Neale, dated from
Dundalke, 26. April 1649. as I find it in the said paper printed at Cork in
these words: SIR,
I Have received yours of the 25. April, and I have seen your Order given to
Captain Hugh Mac Patricke Mac Mahon to Treat and conclude a peace with me in
the behalf of your self, and the Forces under your Command. I have perused your
Propositions, and conceiving there are some particulars in them which at first
view the Parliament of England may scruple to grant, I have made a small
alteration in some of them, being well assured, by it, you will not receive the
least disadvantage, but it will rather prove a means to beget an increase of
their good opinion toward you and your party; which I believe your reality,
fidelity, and action in their Service will sufficiently merit, and in case you
approve of them, as I have revised and altered them, I desire you to send them
to me Signed and Sealed by you, that I may present them to the Parliament of
England, to obtain their favorable Answer in return of them: And in the mean
time I desire that according to this enclosed paper, three Months Cessation
between us to be condescended unto, and inviolably kept between our Forces
during the same time.

Dundalk, 26. April, 1649. George Monk.




1. Observations upon Monks letter.
1. Col. Monk in his said Letter to O Neale, 26. April, answers him: 1. That
he had perused his Propositions, and conceiving there are some particulars
which at first view the Parliament of England may scruple to grant, etc. A
gentle phrase to nourish hopes in O Neale even of obtaining all his Demands (if
need be) upon debate and deliberation, though not at first view. That he has
made a small alteration in some of them (I confess very small) being well
assured he should not receive the least disadvantage by it, etc. From whom had
Monk this Assurance, unless from those Men by whose Authority and Directions
(private or public) he presumed to Treat with that Enemy he was Commissioned
to fight with, and whose Names he does conceal? That it (yiedling to M^nks
amendments) would rather prove a means to beget an increase of their (the
Parliaments) good opinion of Owen Roe O Neale and his party, etc. It should
seem then the Parliament had entertained a good opinion of O Neale and his
party before hand; for every thing must have a being, before it can have an
increase of being. In case you approve of them (the amended Articles) I desire
you to send them to be signed and sealed by you, that I may present them to the
Parliament of England to obtain their favorable Answer in return of them, etc.
You see all Monk did was in reference to the Parliaments ratification; and
therefore reason tells us the Parliament was originally privy to the Treaty: It
is not likely Monk should Treat upon his own head, and abruptly send the
result of the Treaty to be confirmed by the Parliament without any warning
foregoing to prepare them.

2. Observations upon the Propositions amended. See the said Paper printed at
Cork, especially Monks Letter.
O Neale sent his Letter and Propositions to Monk, Dated 25. April, 1649.
Monk answered his Letter, and corrected O Neales Proposition the day after,
being the 26. April.

And the last mentioned Propositions of Genesis Owen O Neal, the Lords, Gentry,
and Commons of the Confederate Catholics of Vlster, etc. as well as the first
mentioned Articles for three Months Cessation, etc. bear Date 8. May, 1649.
which I conceive to be the Date given them when they were ratified by the
Parliament, or Council of State. See the said Paper [The true state of the
Transactions, etc.] Then follows: A second Copy of Owen Roe Oneales
Propositions as they were corrected by Col. Monck, Paper printed at Cork.
and sont to Oneale to be subseribed: And then sent by Monck to the Parliament
to be granted: as follows verbatim.
1. INprimis. That such as shall join with General O-Neal in the Service of the
Parliament of England in this Kingdom; may have Liberty of Conscience for
themselves and their issue,

2. The said General O Neale desires an Act of Oblivion be passed, to extend
to all and every of his Party for all things done since the beginning of the
Year, 1641.

3. They desire that General O Neale be provided for a competent Command in the
Army befitting his worth, place, and quality.

4. They desire that they may enjoy all those Lands that were in their
possession at the beginning of this War for themselves and Heirs during their
fidelity to the Interest of England.

5. That all incapacity, inhability, and distrust hitherto by Act of State or
otherwise, against the said Party, be taken off.

6. That on both sides all Jealousies, hate and aversion be laid aside; unity,
love, and amity, renewed and practiced between both Parties.

7. That Genesis O Neale may be restored and put in possession of his Ancestors
Estate, or some other Estate equivalent to it, in regard of his merit, and the
good Service that he shall perform in the Parliament of Englands Service in the
preservation of their Interest in this Kingdom.

8. That the Army belonging to the Genesis O Neale and his Party be provided for
in all points as the rest of the Army shall be.

9. That the said Party be provided with, and possessed of a convenient
Seaport in the Province of Ulster.



See the Date in The true state of Transactions, etc. It seems to be 8. May,
1649.
And I do, upon receiving a Confirmation of those Desires, undertake and promise
in the behalf of my self and the whole Party under my Command, faithfully and
firmly to adhere to the Parliament of Englands Service in this Kingdom, and to
maintain their Interest hereafter with the hazard of our Lives and Estates
against all Opposers whatsoever.

Given under my Hand and Seal. In the said Paper, printed at Cork, is also
contained, [ A Letter from a Gentleman in Dundalke, dated May 20. 1649.] which
take kere verbatim; that you may see what opinion Men there (upon the place)
had of that business at Cork in Munster. To my worthy Friend, SIR,
YOu may wonder, my Obligations being so great toward you, that my returns of
acknowledgment should be so seldom as they have been, but you must know there
is no defect in my desires to be at your ears often; it is only the
preservation of my Liberty and Safety in these parts that makes me forbear the
frequencie of such intercourses. I am confident these Letters, this Messenger,
and the enclosed papers which I here send you (containing a true Copy of the
Propositions and Letters of Agreement between Owen Roe O Neale, and Col. George
Monck) will be able to give you some account of the passages in these parts,
and will make you assured that I do not forget the respects I owe unto you.

I must confess to you that (as you ever conceived) I never could imagine that
the Parliament proceedings would have advanced to so high a degree of rage and
wickedness as I see now they are come to, and are resolved to act by: but being
amazed at the KING'S Murder, and seeing the Gangrene does so cruelly spread, I
will impart to you my resolution, That I am resolved to get into your parts
with the first convenience, and adhere to you there, whose actions are more
conducing to the preservation of our Religion, Law, and common Interest, than
any where else that I can find. But that this my so sudden resolution may not
be conceived the fruit of some vain fear, miscarriage in my self, or light
desires to abandon my former principles, I shall give you a right understanding
of all the motions and passages of my soul, since I was acquainted with this
late Treaty between Col. Monck, and Owen Roe O Neal, that thereby you may judge
of the ground of these my Designs and distastes, and my resolutions taken
thereupon.

And before I consider the particulars of the Treaty, the thing it self is so
odious to me, that if they could have made the best bargain to be imagined for
the English Safety, the manner of it would have appeared to me very unsavory.

For although it cannot be denied that almost the whole Irish Party (in regard
of their Confederacies and Combinations) have not been innocent in all
particulars of that vast Ocean of English Blood that has been shed; yet it is
most clear, that the Plotters and Contrivers of this Treason, and the unnatural
and butcherly Executioners thereof are that Party principally which are now
Headed by Owen O Neale; for, although many of the pale, with others of
Conaught, Leinster, and Munster, entertained the Design, when they saw it was
so far spread, and the English so much weakened in their persons and
possessions, yet it cannot be denied but this Kingdom had still many
moderate-minded Men that loathed their Countrymens barbarity, and could never
be drawn to adhere to their Party in their least consent.

Now for the Parliament Agents to gather up these Men (and these only) that
have been drunk with the blood of their Brethren, and to fortify them with
Arms, Councels, and conjunction of Forces, that thereby they may preserve to
themselves the Triumphs of their Cruelty and Treachery, and to lap them up in
their affections with promises of reward, if they will persevere to act with
them the ruin of the KING and Monarchy, the destruction of the remnant of the
English Protestants, and the ancient Irish who have now declared their Loyalty,
and submitted to, and consociated with them, are things that I much loath, and
can no way embrace.

Besides, if you consider the passages of the Treaty, you will easily be drawn
(I suppose) to cast away your former entertained scruples, and not condemn me
for being out of love with mine.

1. For first. The Title to Owen Roes Propos^tions excludes all other of his
Nation but such as will join with him, though they be far more capable of peace
and pardon than himself or his party.

2. He and his party, who in a late paper of theirs styled the Parliament of
England, Monstrosum Parliamentum, (the monstrous Parliament) when (as then) it
had not besmeared it self with Royal, Sacred, and Noble Blood, as since it has
done: yet now where he sees them act like himself, he has taught his tongue to
quaver, and calls them, The most Honorable and Potent Parliament; when all
Honor is persecuted by them, and no power exercised by them but brutish
violence, and extreme tyranny.

3. In the second Proposition: That an Act of Oblivion be passed to extend to
all and every of Owen O Neales party for all things done since the Year, 1641.
You shall find that Monck approves of it totally, without the least reserve of
punishment to any the most bloody plotters and Murderers whatsoever that are
in that Crew, which makes me more in love with my Lord of Ormonds peace than I
was before.

4. It is propounded by Owen Roe, and approved by Monk, That he shall have a
Seaport to himself, to make use of, for the perfecting of his designs, when
(as we hear) the least Traffic will not be allowed to you in Munster.

5. Although Col. Monk do a little pare his Propositions concerning the
Repealing of Statutes against Roman Catholics since Hen. 8. lest he should
offend the people: And though he do not absolutely undertake to grant him his
Ancestors Lands (which when he is once styled O Neale, he will challenge to be
the six escheated Counties) yet by Monks Letter he is assured, that he shall
not receive the least disadvantage thereby. All which directions, councels, and
assurances (I am confident) Col. Monk would not have used toward him, if he
had not had a Parliament foundation to warrant it.

Thus you see these Men who lately were utter Enemies, have confederated
together to ruin Monarchy, and the Protestant Religion, merely to raise
themselves, and support their own Faction. They will not here allow the King to
make use of his own Subjects to revenge His Fathers blood, to Re-inthrone
Himself, to re-establish Religion and the Laws, and the just Liberties, and yet
they allow themselves a latitude of calling in any party, though the most
bloody and inhumane, to assist them, in the carrying on their wicked Designs.

We have seen Col. Jones his Letters, censuring the Lord of Ormond for joining
the Irish to his party (though the best and least culpable of them) and yet the
same Jones (whose head and hand is in this Treaty and Conclusion) thinks it
allowable in himself to close with the worst, and that upon his own terms. And
though Col. Monks hypocrisy (in correcting Owen O Neales 7. Article) will not
allow that unity and amity shall be publicly proclaimed between them; yet he
is willing it shall be practiced, and they shall mutually assist one another
against all Opposers whatsoever, that is, the King, and all in Authority under
Him.

The consideration of these things has left such an impression upon my soul,
that I am resolved to make speed to you, no way desiring to live under their
Commands, whose actions increase in horror, and beget new afflictions to all
honest English hearts. So praying you to forbear further writing to me, because
I mean speedily to see you, I rest,

Dundalk, May, 20. 1649. Your assured Friend and Servant.




Upon which Propositions so corrected by Monk, and the close carriage of this
business, I shall trouble my Reader with these following Observations.

1. Article. You see the Counterfeit, Alchymy Saints, are content to join
covertly with Massacring Irish Parpists, to carry on their Antimonarchical
Designs, and to make a false Religion and corrupt worship of God the wages and
hyre of righteousness.

2. Article. You see those Men that are so bloodily zealous to bring Protestant
Delinquents (nay, the King himself, under the notion of the Grand Delinquent,
the Man of Blood) to punishment, and pretend themselves engaged by Oath so to
do; can dispense with the Massacre of two hundred thousand English Protestants
barbarously and inhumanely slaughtered in Ireland in time of full peace; and
can grant an Act of Oblivion to whole Armies of their Murderers, thereby at
once making their Antimonarchical interest the price for which they sell the
innocent blood of their Brethren, and defrauding the Irish Adventurers of that
Money which the Parliament persuaded them to lay forth to purchase Rebels Lands
in Ireland, for which they have an Act of this Sessions of Parliament.

The like may be said of the 4. and 7. Articles, whereby Rebels attainted and
convict are restored to their confiscated Lands, and the English Protestant
planters that purchased them of the Crown, are expelled out of their
Inheritance; what is this but a design to root out Protestancy, as well as
Monarchy?

5. Article. Takes off all Incapacity, Inability, and distrust from O Neal and
his party at that very time when with much counterfeit zeal they pretend great
severity against the English Papists; I think because they are not so very
Rebels as the Schismatics.

CHARLES the First, (upon light surmises) with complying with the bloody Irish
Papists; and do themselves actually combine with them to root out Monarchy and
Protestancy, giving them a Toleration of their Religion, and the possession of
the English Protestants Etates for their Hyre.

London, the 24. August (notwithstanding the said Votes of the Commons against
all association with the Irish Murderers) That Sir Charles Coote, and O Neale,
are associated; See the Perfect Occurrences, nu. 17. 138. from Aug. 17. to the
24. 1649.
and that the Siege from Londonderry was raised by O Neales help, which plainly
proves, that the Treaty and Conjunction was not only between Monk and O Neale,
but between O Neale and the Parliament, or Council of State; and that the said
Propositions so altered by Monk are confirmed by the Parliament, or Council of
State; 206. Cromwell's Soldiers desert him at Milford-haven, and upon his
complain his House of Commons vote their Debentures void.
and do still serve for a foundation for O Neale to assist the Parliament upon,
who have turned out O Neale at the Fore-door (to gull the People) and taken him
in again at the Backdoor.

Many of K. Olivers Officers and Soldiers, abhorring the said Association with
O Neale, deserted him at Milford-haven (as I have related) and came to London,
whither they were pursued at the heels by a Letter from his Mushrome Majesty,
directed to his Vice-Royes at Westminster, willing his Parliament (that since
(to encourage the Soldiers to undertake the Irish expedition only) their
Accounts had been Audited, and Debentures granted for their Arrears) they
should recall and null their said Debentures: In obedience to which Command, a
thing like an Act of Parliament is drawn up, and order taken that the
Commissioners that attend Cromwell into Ireland should certify the Names of
them all to the Parliament, that they may be punished in purse, for not
prostituting their Consciences, and shedding more innocent blood, with an
implicit faith and blind obedience, to K. Olivers unquestionable commands, in
maintenance of usurpation and lawless tyranny. The rest of the Army may see, by
this precedent, they may as well hope to recover a damned Soul out of Hell, as
their Arrears out of this bottomless Gulf, the New State: (notwithstanding all
their fair promises, Orders, weathercock Acts, and Debentures, which are all
written in waste-paper, and as changeable as Tickets and Securities for the
Public Faith.) It being their constant resolution and best policy to feed them
(from time to time) with vain hopes, and a little spending-mony (for which they
are never the better) now a bit of money, and then a bob of Martial Law; and
always to promise, never to pay their Arrears, thereby to keep them together
from Disbanding, and going to their own homes and callings; whilst the Council
of Officers (who only are accounted the rational part of the Army) receive duly
the hire of unrighteousness, and whatsoever else they can shark from the
private Soldiers (who are looked upon but as the Brutish part of the Army) in
whom it is become a capital Crime to question whether their Superiors deal
justly with them or no? as is proved to Lockyer. The Common Soldiers, as well
as the Common People, paying for the Riot of their Colonels, and superior
Officers (who Lord it in their gilt Coaches, rich Apparel, costly Feastings
(though some of them led Dray-horses, wore Leather-pelts, and were never able
to name their own fathers or mothers) I, and for the Lands they purchase too;
yet the Officers have one device more to keep the Soldiers together, which is,
They make them believe they are so generally hated, they cannot with safety
Disband and go home; whereas it is the Superiors only that are looked upon
with hatred as the Authors of Tyranny and Oppression: The Private Soldier
being esteemed but their Instruments, and such as (in their kind and way) are
sufferers under the hand of oppression as well as other men; many Soldiers
have been purged out of the Army; others have voluntarily quitted the Army and
returned to their callings, without being endangered or injured after their
retirement, which shows this objection is but a Scar-crow.

For the clear manifestation of the Association between O Neale and the
Parliament, 207. A League Defensive and Offensive, concluded between O Neal and
Sir Charles Coote Governor of Connaught for the Parliament: See the last
Section save one.
there are lately come to the Council of State two Letters out of Connaught
from Sir Charles Coote; one Dated the 14. the other the 15. of August, 1649.
informing them with how much zeal to the Parliaments Interest Owen O Neale had
freely raised the Siege of Londonderry. Upon which Letters, and the Votes and
proceedings of Col. Pride's Parliament thereupon, I shall commend to my Readers
observation these following particulars:

1. The 15. August, Letters inform, that O Neale freely offered his assistance
to Coote, professing much affection to the Parliament of England, and an
earnest desire to maintain their Interest, etc. (which is, his own Interest)
you may remember that this bloody Rebel O Neale heretofore (when the Parliament
was not half so corrupt as now) styled it, Monstr^sum Parliamentum, the
Parliament of Monsters: but now that he sees them act his way, and concur with
him to destroy Monarchy and Protestancy, he styles them, The Honorable
Parliament, aids, and affects them.

2. The 14. August, Sir Charles Coote informs, that he has found O Neale and
his Army very punctual and faithful in all their Promises and Engagements, and
he makes no doubt but they will continue so unto the end, etc. The reason is,
becruse they aim all at one end and interest: Subversion of Monarchy and
Protestancy, and go one way to effect it, by a Conjunction of Forces and
Councels.

3. The 16. August, that O Neale in his Express to Coote enclosed some Letters
he had received from Monck; and amongst the rest, a ^opie of a Letter from
Monck in Answer to a Letter of the Lord Inchiquine, charging Monck with joining
with O Neale and his Party; wherein Monck insinuated, as if Oneale's submission
to use the Parliaments Power, were already accepted by them, etc. Monck needed
not insinuate it, but might have spoken it plainly: as he has done to sundry
of his Friends in England, who reprehended him for joining with O Neale, to
whom he Answered, That he had the Authority of his Superiors to warrant his
doings therein: But this was before he went to Milford-haven to Cromwell, who
then taught him the art of Cromwellizing to carry on their design.

Why did they cry out upon King Charles I. upon a surmise that He used the help
of the more innocent Irish Papists, being His own Subjects under His Allegiance
and Protection? but we find the Godly are above all laws.
4. The 15. August, Coote's Letter (to justify his doings) delivers a piece of
Doctrine to the Council of State; the Use whereof they were very perfect in
before, viz. Calling to mind that it is no new thing, for the most wise God,
to make use of wicked Instruments to bring about a good Design, for the
advancement of his glory, etc. This Casuist in Buff had forgotten, That we must
not do evil that good may come thereof; and that both the just and the unjust,
the righteous and the unrighteous man being all of Gods Creation and making, he
has the same prerogative over them all jure creationis, that a Potter has
over his pots, he may use them, and do with them what seems best to his most
holy will: and it is therefore good, holy, just, because he wills it. His
Divine pleasure being the rule and Standard of goodness, holiness, justice.
Mistake me not; I do not mean his bare providence, or permissive will, which
no man can take notice of, and Traitors, Tyrants, Thieves, and Reprobate Saints
execute, and boast of, to their own assured damnation. Therefore Gods employing
wicked Instruments can be no president for our Alchimy Saints to do the like;
unless Cromwels Council of Officers, of State, and Parliament.
three Juntoes and Faction will usurp Gods prerogative, as they have done the
Kings.

5. The 15. August, the Letter says, that Coote called a Council of War, and
resolved, It was better to accept of the assistance of those who proclaimed
themselves Friends to us, and the Interest we fight for, etc. Here you see O
Neales bloody Party and those Parliament Champions united, and friendly
conspiring to uphold one Common Interest, which can be nothing but the downfall
of Monarchy and Protestancy.

6. The 15. August the Letter further says, that we (Coote and his Council of
War) added to the Article this wary Proviso, not to use their assistance longer
than the approbation of the State of England should go along with us therein,
etc. It should seem by this wariness, that for the time they had used their
help (which was ever since the 22. of May last) the approbation of the said
State (as they call it) has gone along therewith. And for the time they mean
to use their assistance hereafter, it is left indefinite; (no longer than the
approbation of the State shall go along with us therein) which may happily be
until Doomsday: notwithstanding the Order, Dated the 24. August, 1649. voting
That their Vote of the 10. August, in the Case of Col. Monck, be communicated
to Sir Chapter Coote, as the Resolution of the House, etc. For, who knows whether
the Copies of that Vote may miscarry, or be stayed by the way either
accidentally or purposely.

7. The 14. August, the Letter says, See Monk's Letter of Answer to O Neale,
Dated 26. April, 1649. from Dundalk, contained in the last foregoing Section
but one: See tie said Paper, entitled, [ The Propositions of Owen Roe O Neale,
sent to Col. Monck, etc. Printed at Cork, 1649.
O Neale was pleased to communicate to him certain Proposals, which (he says)
were long since transmitied into England to the Parliament, by Col. Monck, and
though for his own part and the prime Officers with him, (these are privy to
the secret carriage of the business, and therefore may well be satisfied with
what is done already) they do not doubt but the Proposals are already yielded
to by the State; yet in regard their Army and Party in all other parts of the
Kingdom (these are ignorant of the juggle, and causes thereof) cannot be
satisfied therewith, until the Parliament be pleased to declare themselves more
publicly therein (it should seem they have done it privately already for
satisfaction of O Neale and his said prime Officers) he has therefore desired
me humbly to intraat your Lordships to declare your resolutions therein, with
as much speed as may be. Here you see O Neale and his prime Officers (who know
the juggle) satisfied already with a private confirmation of the Articles. But
to satisfy the rest of his Army and Party (to whom this mystery is not yet
revealed) a public Declaration thereof is desired, that they may unanimously
and cheerfully endeavor the preservation of the Parliaments Interest.

The Articles of Agreement between O Neale and Coote conclude clearly a League
or War Offensive and Defensive against the Enemies of both, or either, until a
more absolute Agreement be made and condescended unto by the Parliament of
England. This more absolute Agreement is now agitation, and private Directions
sent to Coote how to behave himself in the Transaction thereof. See the 1 Vote,
die veneris, 24. Aug. 1649. See the Relation of the Transactions between Sir
Charles Coote and Owen Roe O Neale, printed by Order, 28. Aug. 1649.

The Votes upon these Letters and Articles were two: Upon part, in the first
Vote I have observed something already in the 6. branch of this Section (viz.)
that their Votes of the 10. Aug. in Case of Col. Monck be communicated to
Coote; and a Direction for him how to behave himself in the Transaction between
him and Owen Roe O Neale; this Transaction is called in the Articles (ut supra)
a more absolute Agreement. These Letters, Articles, and Votes being
Apologetically published for satisfaction of the Soldiery and People, it had
been fit to have communicated the said Directions also to the Trustors and
Sovereign Lords the People, that they might have seen fair play above board,
and not to have sent clandestine Directions to Coote (in so suspicious a
business) how to behave himself in the Transaction with O Neal; which implies
the said Transaction shall be continued and may be completed; the rather for
that their second Vote says, The House is well satisfied of the diligence,
faithfulness, and integrity of Sir Charles Coote in preserving the Garris^n of
Londonderry: now it was preserved by his said Conjunction with O Neale, who
raised the Siege.

208. The Levellers vindicated: or, The Case of the twelve Troops, etc.
About this time came forth a Book, called, [ The Levellers vindicated: or, The
Case of the 12. Troops which (by Treachery in a Treaty) were lately surprised
at Burford: Subscribed by Six Officers in the name of many more.] Wherein (p.
2.) they say, That under color of the Armies solemn Engagement at New Market
and Triplo-heath, June 5. 1647. and many other their Declarations, Promises,
and Protestations in pursuance thereof (which Engagement they affirm (against
their Preaching Coronet Den) was never retracted by any General Council of
the Army, nor upon any Petition of the Soldiers, nor their Agitators ever by
them recalled or dismissed) The whole Fabric of this Commonwealth is fallen
into the grossest and vilest Tyranny that ever Englishmen groaned under, all
their Laws, Rights, Lives, Liberties and properties wholly subdued to the
boundless wills of some deceitful Persons, having devolved the whole Magistracy
of England into their Martial Domination, etc.

Page 7. They say, That the Soldiers Paper-Debentures are good for nothing but
to sell to Parliament men for 3 s. or 4 s. in the pound. (which they are forced
to sell them for to keep them from starving, because they will not pay one
penny Arrears to such as they put out of the Army any otherways) that so they
may rob the Soldiers of their Seven years Service, and make themselves and
their Adherents Purchasers of the Kings Lands, for little or nothing: and (for
ought appears) the Money they buy these Debenters with, is the Money the Nation
can have no Account of. That they have dealt as basely with other Soldiers who
never resisted their Commands. 1. They turned them off with only two months
pay. 2. They have taken away three parts of their Arrears for Free Quarter,
without satisfaction to the Country. And at last force them to sell their
Debentures at the aforesaid rates, that those Souldies that are continued in
Arms shall fare no better, when they have served their turns with them.

Page 10. they say, Their Engagement against the King was not out of any
Personal enmity, but simply against his Oppressions and Tyranny on the people;
but the use and advantage on all the success God has been pleased to give us,
is perverted to that end, that by his removal the ruling Swordmen might
intrude into his Throne, set up a Martial Monarchy, more cruel, arbitrary, and
tyrannical, than England ever tasted of, and that under the notion of a
Free State, when as the people had no share at all in the constitution thereof,
but by the treachery and falseness of the Lieutenant General Cromwell, and his
Son in Law Ireton, with their Faction, was enforced and obtruded by mere
Conquest on the people. And a little after, now rather than to be thus
vassalized, thus trampled and tr^d under foot by such as over our backs have
stepped into the Chair of this hateful Kingship over us, in despite of the
consent, choice, and allowance of the Free-people of this Land the true
fountain and original of all just Power (as their Votes against Kingly
Government confess) we will choose subjection to the Prince, choosing rather ten
thousand times to be his Slaves than theirs, etc.

Page 11. They Vote and Declare, The People the Supreme Power, the Original of
all just Authority, pretend the promotion of the Agreement of the People; style
this, The first year of Englands Freedom; entitle the Government, A Free
State; and yet none more bloody, violent and perverse Enemies thereto; for, not
under pains of death and confiscation of Lands and Goods, may any man challenge
or promote those Rights of the Nation, so lately pretended by themselves.
Nothing but their boundless, lawless wills, their naked Swords, Armies, Arms is
now Law in England, etc.

209. Col. Morris Governor of Pontefract for the King, Endicted at the
Assizes at York, condemned and executed.
16. August, 1649. Col. Morris (who kept Pontefract Castle for the King) was
Endicted before Judge Thorpe and Pulleston at York Assizes upon the Stat. 25.
Edw. 3. for leavying War against the late King and Parliament. The Colonel
challenged one Brook (Forerman of the Jury) for being his professed Enemy; but
the Court (knowing Brook to be the principal Verb, the Key of their work)
answered Morris, He spoke too late, Brooks was sworn already. Brook being
asked the Question, whether he were sworn or no: replied, he had not yet
kissed the Book. The Court answered, It was no matter, that was but a Ceremony,
alleging he was recorded Sworn, there was no speaking against a Record; Sure
they made great haste to record him sworn before he could kiss the Book; so
Brook was kept in upon this cavil, by whose obstinacy, Morris was condemned.
I cannot wonder that legal Forms and Ceremonies are laid by (although justice
cannot subsist without those Legalities to ascertain her proceedings, which
otherways would be left at large to the discretion of the Judge) when I see
our known Laws, Magna Charta, the Petition of Right. 3 Carol. and the rest,
with the fundamental Government of this Nation, pulled up by the roots to carry
on their Designs of enslaving the people to their lusts, notwithstanding the
Parliaments Declarations, Remonstrances, Protestations, Covenants, and Oaths to
the contrary; and their late Vote in the Act for Abolishing Kingly Government.
That in all things concerning the Lives, Liberties, Properties and Estates of
the people, they would observe the known Laws of the Land. But to return to our
Relation: Then Morris challenged 16. more of the Jury, where Pulleston was so
pettish, that he bad Morris keep his compass, or else he would give him such a
blow as should strike off his head. Until Morice cited the Stat. 14 Hen. 7.
fol. 19. whereby he might challenge 35. men without showing cause: Here you see
the Judges (which ought to be of Council with the prisoner in matter of Law)
endeavoring to outface, and blind the prisoner with ignorance of the Law,
being a Martial-man. Then he desired a Copy of his Endictment, that he might
know what to answer, saying, he might plead Speeial as well as General, which
the Court denied him. Next because there was point of Law in it, he desired to
have Council, citing the Stat. 1 Hen. 7. fol. 23. which was likewise denied
him; yet (I am deceived, if Rolfe had not Council allowed him, being endicted
at Winchester for an endeavor to murder King CHARLES the First) and had many
other favors denied to Morris. Then Col. Morris for his discharge produced
the PRINCES Commission as Generalissimo to the KING his Father. The Judges
answered, The Prince was but a Subject as Morris was, and if he were present
must be tried as he was, and rejected the Gommission without reading: Morris
told them, the Prince had his Authority from the King, in whose name all Judges
and Officers did then Act. The Court answered, the power was not in the King,
but the Kingdom. Observe, they endicted him for Leavying War against the King
and Parliament. The word [Parliament] was a surplusage; for which no Indictment
could lie: no Allegiance, no Treason; and we owe Allegiance to the King alone;
whosoever Leavieth War in England (in the intendment of the Law) is said to
Leavy War against the King only; although he aim not at his Person, but at
some other Person: And if he that Leavieth War against the King, his Crown, and
Dignity, be a Traitor; how much more must they be Traitors that have actually
murdered the King, and Dis-inherited and proscribed his lawful and undoubted
Heir; and (as much as in them lies) have subverted the Monarchical Government
of the Land, and consequently all Monarchical Laws; whereof the Stat. of
Treasons for Leavying War against the Kings Majesty is one; and therefore
Morris under a Free State ought not to be condemned or tried upon any
Monarchical Law. So Morris was found guilty by a Jury for that purpose. And an
illegal president begun to cut off whom the Faction pleases, under a pretense
and form of Law, without help of a Council of War, or a private
Slaughterhouse, or a Midnight-Coach guarded with Soldiers to Tyborne. These
Usurpers have got the old tyrannical trick, To rule the People by the Laws, but
first to overruled the Laws by their Lawyers; and therefore, Vt rei innocents
pereant, fiunt nocentes judices; that true men may go to the Gallows, Thieves
must sit on the bench; but, silent Leges inter arma; and now, silet Justitia
inter Leges, Three headed consisting of, 1 Council of War. 2 Council of State.
3 Parliament
filet Jus inter Judices: The mungrel, hypocritical, three-headed conquest we
live under has dispoyled Justice of her balance, and left her in a Military
posture, with a Sword to strike, but no scales to weigh withal: Our licenced
News Books (like Ill-Boading-Birds) foretold and fore-judged Morrice's death a
month before: He dyed resolutely. Observe the thing aimed at in this new form
of Endictment of High Treason, for leavying War against the King and
Parliament, is, first that the word [King] may hold in the Endictment, which
otherwise would be found to have error in it; and though the word [for
Leavying War against the Parliament] be a vain surplusage, signifying nothing;
yet at last (by help of their own Judges, and new-made presidents) to leavy War
against the Parliament, shall stand alone, be the only Significator, and take
up the whole room in the Endictment, and thrust the word [King] out of doors;
and then Treason shall be as frequent as Malignancy is now. Morris had moved,
he might be Tried like a Soldier by a Council of War, alleging the
inconvenience of such a president if the Kings Party should retaliate it, which
would not be granted; yet Col. Bethel writ to the General, and his Council of
War, desiring he might be reprieved: but Col. Pride opposed it, urging, That it
would not stand with the justice of the Army (you see now who is the foun- of
Justice) nor the safety of the Commonwealth, to let such Enemies live, the
Parliament having adjudged him worthy of death, (without hearing) and given
instructions to the Judges accordingly. (O serviceable Judges!) so the General
was overborn by this Dray-man. This fellow sits frequently at the Sessions
house in the Old Bailey, where the weight of his Slings turns the scale of
Justice which way he pleases. 210. Cap. Plunkett and the Marquess of Ormonds
brother voted to be Tried.


Col. Pride's Dray-horses, the Commons in Parliament assembled, not yet
satisfied with Blood, because they are out of danger of bleeding themselves,
have voted that Capt. Plunckett and the Marquess of Ormond's Brother (Prisoners
in Ireland) shall be brought to Trial. If the Kings Party (in imitation of
their Cruelty) shall put to death the Prisoners they have taken, the Parliament
will save their Arreares for their own privy purse: These two cases, are
examples of the greatest danger, and the highest contempt of Soldiers that
ever were set on foot in any Age or Nation.

29. August, 1649. came forth a Book, called, 211. An outcry of the young men
and Apprentices of London concurring with those falsely called, Levellers.
[ An outcry of the young Men and Apprentises of London: Or, An Inquisition
after the lost fundamental Laws and Liberties of England.] truly and
Pathetically setting forth the slavery, misery, and danger of the Common
Soldiery and People of this Nation, and the causes thereof: well worth the
reading.

About this time came forth an Act (forsooth) for the speedy raising and
levying money upon the Excise: that is (as the Act tells you) upon all and
every Commodities, Merchandises, 212. Excise.
Manufactures, as well imported or exported as made or growing, and put to sale
or consumed, etc. That is, to lay impositions upon all we eat, drink, wear, or
use, as well in private houses as victualling houses, warehouses, cellars,
shops, etc. as well what the Soldier devours in Free Quarter upon us, as
otherwise, under unheard of penalties, both pecuniary and personal to be paid,
and levied with rigor. And to make every man's house lie open to be searched by
every prowling Rascal as often as he or they please.

The Traitors, Tyrants, and Thieves, 213. Foreign Plantations.
the Commons in Colonel Prides Parliament assembled, are now again frighted
into a consideration of Foreign Plantations: And passing Acts, That they shall
all be subject to the new Babel, or State of England: for which purpose they
are very busy to undermine, divide, and subject the old and first Planters,
that (if need be) these reprobate Saints may come in upon their labors, and
the better to accommodate themselves there. In the Act for the sale of Kings,
Queens, and Princes Personal Estate, they have given leave to their Agents the
Commissioners to transport beyond sea (that is to say, to their own
Plantations) (under pretense of sale) the rarest and choicest of the Kings
Goods; they heap up abundance of wealth by Excise, Taxes, Goldsmiths-hall,
Haberdashers-hall, Sequestrations, cozening the Soldiers, etc. That they may
transport the whole wealth of the Land with them, and leave England naked,
disarmed and oppressed with famine, and disabled to pursue them for revenge, or
recovery of their losses.

214. More gifts to the Faction.
The said Commons are never wearied with exercising their bounty amongst their
own Faction out of the public purse, about 1300 l. to Col. Fielder: to
Scobell their Clerk (heretofore a poor under-Clerk in the Chanery, who writ for
2 d. a sheet) besides an employment he has already in the sale of public
Lands worth 1000 l. a year) a Pension of 500 l. a year; and a Noble Fee for
every Copy of an Order taken forth, toties quoties; although most of their
Orders contain not above three or four lines; an extortion far surmounting the
Star Chamber, or Councel-Table, of which themselves so much complained: the
Diurnal tells you, Numb. 319. from Monday Sept. 3. to Monday, Sept. 10.
an Act was read for satisfying the suff^rings of two Members, who have been in
the late War damnified many thousands: these (I conceive) to be Sir Tho: Jervys
and Mr. Robert Wallope; this satisfaction must be made out of the public
purse, which must be filled by Taxes again out of their private purses who have
lost as well as they without satisfaction, or hopes of satisfaction,
notwithstanding many Votes that all should be satisfied.

215. O Cromwell reduces Iones's own Regiment and other Regiments in Dublin.
Let Sir C. Coote and his Regiment in Londonderry expect the like
O Cromwell has reduced the Officers in Col. Jones his Regiment, and other
Dublin Regiments, notwithstanding their valor and fidelity shown in raising
the Siege of Dublin: you see he will trust none but his own immediate
Creatures: this Faction casts out all other men, as Quicksilver spues out all
other metals (Gold excepted) so that by this, and many other examples, they
may see that all their faithful services and bloodshed are poured into the
bottomless tub of oblivion; as their Arreares are cast into the bottomless
bagg of the Public Faith.

216. A violent irruption of the Parl. Janisaries upon the Protestants at
Church in St. Peter's Paulswharf, Sunday morn, 9. Sept. 1649.
Sunday 9 Sept. 1649. At the Church of Saint Peter's Paulswharfe, Master Williams
reading Morning Service out of the Book of Common Prayer, and having prayed for
the KING, as in that Liturgy (established by Act of Parliament) he is enjoined:
Six Soldiers from St. Paul's Church (where they quarter) came with Swords and
Pistols cocked into the Church, commanding him to come down out of the Pulpit;
which Williams immediately did, and went quietly with them into the Vestry:
when presently a party of Horse from St. Paul's rode into the said Church with
Swords drawn and Pistols spanned, crying out, Knock the Rogues on the Head,
shoot them, kill them; and presently shot at random at the crowd of unarmed
Men, Women, and Children, shot an old Woman into the head, wounded grievously
above forty more, whereof many are likely to die, frighted Women with Child,
and rifled and plundered away their cloaks, hats, and other spoils of the
Egyptians, and carried away the Minister to White Hall Prisoner. You see these
Heretics, Schismatics, and Atheists, that cry so loud upon Liberty of
Conscience for their own Blasphemies, will allow no Liberty of Conscience to
Protestants, notwithstanding their Doctrine and Form of Service is ancient,
allowed, and commanded by known Laws, and approved of by all the Reformed
Churches of Christendom. This strongly argues a Design in the three Kingdoms to
root out Protestancy, as well as Monarchy, carried on by a conjunction of
Councels and Forces between that Triumvirate of Rebels, O Neal, O Cromwell, and
(as many wise men think) Argyle: who would not otherwise keep the Scots from
complying with the KING upon modest and moderate terms, such as shall leave him
in the condition of a Governing King able to protect His People from injuries
at home and abroad, without which he is but -- magni nominis umbra, the shadow
and May Game of a King. Observe, this provocation was put upon the City when an
Artificial Mutiny was raised at Oxford; This Mutiny was not begun by Levellers.
and against the Great Horse-race appointed to be at Brackley, the 11.
September, to draw both City and Country to join with the Mutineers: and then
the Soldiers should have made their peace by themselves, and have left the rest
to the mercy of the State, to raise more money upon them for O Cromwels
expedition in Ireland, who has writ for more Recruits of Men and Money,

Those bloody Saints that accompanied O Cromwell into Ireland (to make that
Kingdom as miserable and slavish as they have made this) do now pour forth
the blood of their own bowels in great abundance: 217. O Cromwell's men sick in
Ireland.
Gods vengeance having visited most of them with the bloody flux; whereof many
die: But this is a secret that must not be known to the Ungodly, and therefore
O Cromwell and his Council of War at Dublin have made an Order, Declaring, That
if any Person residing within the Garrison of Dublin, whether Inhabitants or
Soldiers, shall (upon pretense of writing to their Friends) signify the
Transactions of the Army (between O Neale, and O Cromwell, it may be) or their
Engagements with the Enemy, so as to set forth their Success, or Loss, until
first the General or Council of War have signified (falsified the same to his
Parliament of England, they shall incur the breach of the Article against
Spies, and be accordingly punished with Death, etc. Here you see O Cromwell, in
the first Year; nay in the first Month of his reign, sets up a military
tyranny in Ireland, to which all People, as well not Soldiers as Soldiers,
must submit their lives and fortunes, and the writing of news to their Friends
of England (whereby their Lies and Forgeries may chance to be contradicted)
shall be construed to be a Breach of the Article against Spies: not because
Reason and Truth, or the Customs of War calls it so, but because the Sword puts
this construction upon it. Take notice Ireland that this is the first year of
thy Bondage if they prevail. And take notice England that O Cromwell and his
Council and Party are resolved to Lie without control if they prevail not;
their Letters speak him to be 15000 strong before Tredah, which has Articled
to yield: That the next he will vouchsafe is Dundalke, and that Ormond flies
from the face of this Josua; and Lying Prophets are sent over to gull the
people into a belief. But the truth is, he is not able to draw together above
4000 or 5000 men, unless his Confederate O Neale join with him: And Ormond has
wit enough to know that sickness and famine in that wasted Country, are
sufficient to deal with O Cromwell without his running the hazard of an
engagement with such desperate forlorn wretches.

218. Unreasonable Fees extorted by Birkhead by Dures of Imprisonment; with the
connivance of the Commons.
Col. Bromfield, Hooker, Cox, and Baynes, Citizens, who the last year were
committed upon suspicion of High Treason (to which every offense against this
new Babel-state is now wrested (notwithstanding the Stat. 25 Edw. 3. for
limitation of Treasons) as in an infectious season all diseases turn to the
plague) and were then discharged for want of matter to make good the Charge:
are now again imprisoned (in the first year of Englands Liberty) at the request
of Birkhead (Sergeant at Arms to the Commons) until they pay such unreasonable
Fees as he pleases to exact from them: This had been great Extortion and
Tyranny in the KINGS time, when this Nation enjoyed so much freedom as to call
a Spade a Spade; an Extortioner, an Extortioner; and a Tyrant, a Tyrant. And
reason good; for if such Fees be legally due, Birkhead has Legal means to
recover them; if not Legally due, it is Extortion in him to demand them in so
violent a way; and Tyranny in his Masters the Commons to maintain him in it.

Sir Henry Mildmay lately coming to the Tower, and perceiving the Countess of
Carlisles window had some prospect to Col. Lilborns Grates (out of his
parasitical diligence) told the Lieutenant of the Tower, 219. Sir Har.
Mildmay's Politic Observations, Chaste Conversation, and first initiation at
Court.
That notwithstanding the distance was such as they could not communicate by
speech, yet they might signify their intentions by signs upon their fingers,
to the prejudice of the tender, infant State; and accompanying this admonition
with some grave and politic Nods, hasted away to the Council of State, and
(being both out of breath and sense) unloaded himself of his Observations
there; and was seconded by Tho. Scot (the Demolisher of old Palaces, and
Deflowrer of young Maydenheads, before they are ripe) who much aggravated the
danger, and applauded the Observator. Sure Sir Henry has not yet forgot the
bawdy Language of the hand and fingers; since he first, in Court began, to be
Ambassador of Love, Procuror, Pimp or Pandor to the Duke of Buckingham; and
labored to betray the honor of a fair Lady (his nearest Ally) to his Lust,
had not she been as Virtuous as he is Vicious (if it be possible for any Woman
to be so) and did actually betray others to him. I can tell you that very
lately Sir Harry (pretending himself taken with the Wind-collick) got an
opportunity to insinuate himself into a Citizens house in Cheapside, and
tempted his Wife; but had a shameful repulse: but more of this I will not
speak, lest his Wife beat him, and give an ill example to other Women, to the
prejudice of our other New Statesmen, 220. Felons fetched out of Newgate to
inform against Merchants for not paying Customs
and their New erected Sodomes and Spintries at the Mulbury-garden at St.
Jamses.

Master Gybs (Master of a Ship) having caused three fellows to be committed to
Newgate upon Felony, for Robbing him: These Fellows sent to Col. Harvey, That
if he would procure their Liberty, they would discover to him several Merchants
who had lately stolen Customs: Whereupon, Harvey sends for those Rogues out of
Newgate hears their Accusation, approves it, prosecutes the Merchants upon the
Information of those Villains, discharges them of their Imprisonment by his own
power, and recommends them to Col. Deane to be employed in the Navy. And one
Master Lovel a Silk-man in Saint Lawrence-lane, is committed to the Gate House
Prisoner, because he refuses to swear how many Bayls of Silk he has come
over: If the first year of our Liberty make such presidents, what Monsters will
the Sixth and Seventh year produce? All Princes begin with moderation: The
Elders gave good Council to Rehoboam, Serve the People one day, and they will
serve thee for ever hereafter. Nero had a commendable Quinquennium; But our
Novice Statists are Tyrants ab incunabilis; Oppressors with shells upon their
heads, from the Nest, before they are fledge; what will they be hereafter?

221. Sommer-hill given to Bradshaw. A sop for Cerberus.
Sommerhil, a pleasant Seat, worth 1000 l. a year, belonging to the Earl of
Saint Albans, is given by the Juncto to their Blood-hound Bradshaw, so he has
warned the Countess of Leicester (who formerly had it in possession to raise a
Debt of 3000 l. pretended due to her from the said Earl, which she has
already raised fourfold) to quit the possession against our Lady Day next.

The Protestation and Declaration.
THe Premises considered, I do hereby in the name and behalf of my self, and of
all the Free people of England, Declare and Protest, That the General, Council
of War, and Officers of the Army, by their said violent and treasonable force
upon the far major, more honest and moderate part of the House of Commons
(being above 250.) and leaving only fifty or sixty Schimaticks of their own
engaged Party sitting and voting under their Command, and almost all of them
such as have and do make a prey of the Commonwealth, to enrich themselves and
their Faction, have broken, discontinued and waged War against this Parliament,
and have forfeited their Commissions. And the remaining Faction in the House of
Commons by abetting, ayding, and concurring with the said Council of War, in
the said rebellious Force, and by setting up new, illegal and arbitrary Courts
of Judicature to Murder King CHARLES the First, our lawful King and Governor
(who by his Writ (according to the Law) summoned and authorized this Parliament
to meet, sit, Principium Caput and fini^ Parliamenti. Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy.
and advise with him, and was the Fountain, Head, and conclusion, or su^matory
end of the Parliament, and Supreme Governor over all Persons, and in all
Causes of this Kingdom (and by Abolishing the House of Peers and the Kingly
Office, and Dis-inheriting the Kings Children, and Usurping to themselves the
Supreme Authority and Legislative Power of this Nation, in order to make and
establish themselves a Council of State, Hogen Mogens, or Lords States General,
and translate the said Supreme Power, and Authority into the said Council of
State, and then Dissolve this Parliament, and perpetute their said Tyranny and
this Army, and Govern Arbitrarily by the Power of the Sword; and raise what
illegal Taxes they please, and eat out, consume and destroy whosoever will not
basely submit to their Domination. See 1. part. sect. 105, 106. and the
Conclusions, 15, 16, 17, 18. and return to sect. 79, 109, 110. Stat. of
Recognition, 1 Jac. Oaths of Algiance and Supremacy.
Have by the aforesaid ways and means totally subverted this Commonwealth,
and destroyed the fundamental Laws, Authority and Government thereof, Dissolved
and Abolished this, and all future Parliaments, so that there is now no
visible, lawful Authority left in England, but the Authority of King CHARLES
the Second, who is actually KING of all his Dominions presently upon the
Decease of the King his Father, before any Proclamation made, or Coronation
solemnized, notwithstanding that by his unjust Banishment (caused by the
interposition of the said traiterous, combined, Antimonarchical Faction) He be
eclipsed for the present, and not suffered to perform any Acts of Government to
his three Kingdoms, and restore Peace, Plenty, Justice, Mercy, Religion, Laws,
and Liberties to them again, which no hand but his own can bestow; and
therefore in vain do the people long for, and expect Figgs from Thistles,
Grapes from Thorns: This Kingdom of the Brambles now set up, being only able
to Scrath and Tear, not to Protect and Govern them. I farther Declare and
Protest, That this combined traiterous Faction, have forced an Interregnum and
a Justitium upon us, an utter suspension of all Lawful Government, Magistracy,
Laws and Judicatories; so that we have not de jure, any Laws in force to be
executed, any Magistrates or Judges Lawfully constituted to execute them; any
Court of Justice wherein they can be judicially executed, any such Instrument
of the Law as a lawful Great Seal, nor any Authority in England that can
lawfully Condemn and Execute a Thief, Murderer, or other Offender, without
being themselves called Murderers by the Law, all legal proceedings being now
coram non Judice; nor can this remaining Faction in the House of Commons show
any one President, Law, Reason, or Authority whatsoever for their aforesaid
doings, but only their own tyrannical Votes, and the Swords of their Army:
Wherefore I do further Declare and Protest before God and the World, That all
Freeborn Subjects of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, are bound by the
Stat. of Recognition, 1 Jac. and by all our Laws and Statutes, By their Oaths
of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy, the Protestation and National
Covenant, by very many Declarations, Remonstrances, Petitions, and Votes of
this Parliament, and all Soldiers are engaged also by their own Declarations,
Remonstrances, and Proposals, to defend, assert, and vindicate with their lives
and fortunes, the Person, Authority and Title of our aforesaid lawful KING and
Supreme Governor (the undoubted Heir of all His late Fathers Dominions)
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, etc. against all Opposites and pretended Authorities whatsoever,
unless they will be guilty of the fowlest sins of Treason, Rebellion, Perjury,
and perfidiousness against their God, their King and Country; and of
prostituting the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Land, their Wives,
Children, and Estates to the lusts of an Armed Faction, usurping a far more
Arbitrary and Tyrannical power over our Consciences, Persons, Liberties, and
Estates, than ever was known in England before, or then is now used by the
Russe, Turk, or Tartar, or any the most enslaving and lawless Tyrants under
Heaven. 223. Compare the date of the K. Commissions with those of the
Parliament, and their Declarations on both sides.


An Exhortatory Conclusion to the English Nation.
TO conclude the series of Affairs and Action on both Parties (especially of
late) rightly compared, it appears by the sequel, That King CHARLES the
First, from the beginning took up defensive Arms to maintain Religion, Laws,
Liberties, and the ancient fundamental being of Parliaments and this Kingdom:
and that there always was, and now especially is, a predominant Faction in
Parliament (notwithstanding their frequent Declarations, Remonstrances,
Petitions, Protestations, Covenant, and Votes to the contrary) conspiring with
a Party (especially of Commissioned Officers of the Army) without the Houses to
Change the fundamental Laws and Government of the Church and Commonwealth, to
usurp into a few hands the Supreme Authority, to enslave the People with an
Olygarchical, Military, and Arbitrary Government, to raise what illegal Taxes
they please to establish their tyranny and enrich themselves and their Party,
to oppress, consume, and devour all men of a judgment contrary to their
Interest; to Murder them by new-declared arbitrary Treasons, contrary to the
Stat. 25 Edw. 3. for ascertaining Treasons; to Disfranchise them of their
Birthrights, and make them Adscriptios Glebae, Villains Regardant to their own
Lands, which the Nobility, Gentry, and Yeomanry plough, sow. and reap, whilst
Brewers, Dray-men, and Cobblers eat, drink, and play upon the sweat of their
labors; and are the Usufructuaries of their Estates. All which they have
lately brought to pass; wherefore let all true Englishmen (as becomes good
Christians, good Patriots, and gallant Men) claim their Birthrights, and with
own voice cry out.

1. We will not Change our Ancient, settled and well approved Laws to which we
are Sworn.

2. We will not Change our Ancient and well-tempered Monarchy to which we are
Sworn.

3. We will not Change our old Religion for New Lights and Inventions.

4. We will not subject our selves to an eighth part of one Estate or House of
Parliament, sitting under a force, and having expelled two hundred and fifty of
their Fellows (more Righteous than themselves) by force, and usurping to
themselves the Supreme Authority.

5. We will not be subjected to a new Supreme Authority usurped by forty
ambitious, covetous Tyrants, arrogating to themselves to be a Council of State,
and designed to supply the room of Parliaments, under what name or Title soever
they mask themselves.

6. We will not submit our selves to a Military Government, or Council of
Officers.

7. We must and will have A KING, and The KING whom the Laws of God and this
Land have Designed to us, See the Stat. of Recognition, 1 Jac. and the Oaths of
Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy.
we being by the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy sworn to ^ear
Faith and true Allegiance to King CHARLES the First his lawful Heirs and
Successors.

Hic telum infigam, moriarque in vulnere --
Postscript.
The History of Independency, I have presented to thy consideration, some
General Conclusions arising out of the Premises; the same Conclusions do as
naturally arise out of the Premises of this Second part of the History: and do
as aptly serve to illustrate this Second, as that First part; wherefore to that
First part I send thee for opening thy understanding.



THE END.
THE High Court OF JUSTICE, OR CROMWELS New Slaughterhouse in ENGLAND. With
the Authority that Constituted, and Ordained it.

Arraigned, Convicted, and Condemned, FOR Usurpation, Treason, Tyranny, Theft
and Murder.

Being the Third Part of the History of INDEPENDENCY, Written by the same
Author.

Printed Anno Domini 1660. In the second Year of the States Liberty, and the
Peoples Slavery.

Plin. Paneg. ad Trajanum. Olim criminibus, jam legibus laboratur; and
metuendum est, ne legibus fundata Respublica, sit legibus eversa.

Isaiah 59. verse. 3, 4. Your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers
with iniquity, your lips have spoken lies, your tongues have muttered
perverseness. None calls for Justice, nor any pleads for truth; they trust
in vanity and speak lies, they conceive Mischief, and bring forth Iniquity.

Verse. 7. Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood;
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their
paths. The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their
goings.

Verse. 11. We look for Judgment, but there is none; For Salvation, but it is
far from us.

Verse. 14. Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off;
For truth is fallen in the streets, and Equity cannot enter.

THat every thing is kept and maintained by the same ways and means it was got
and obtained, Vnumquodque conservatur eodem modo quo fit.
is a rule true both in Philosophy and Policy. And therefore Dominion gotten by
fraud and force, must by fraud and force be preserved. Things impiously got,
must be impiously kept. When usurped Tyranny lays its foundation in blood, the
whole Superstruction must be built with Mortar, tempered with blood. One sin
must defend and make good another. And hence arises a Necessity upon Ambitious
men to flank and fortify one Crime with another. But to plead this Necessity,
which they have so wilfully drawn upon themselves, in justification of their
wicked Courses. To expect submission, obedience, and an equal engagement from
men uninterressed therein; and to entitle the Divine Providence and unrevealed
Will of God thereto (in opposition to His Will revealed and declared in the
Scriptures, as is now a days used) is to accuse the Holy Ghost of our Sins,
and an Hypocrisy so impudently sinful and damnable, that I doubt no Age but
this (the Dregs and Lees of time) ever gave an example of the like.

TO illustrate my first Maxim by some foreign Examples (before I lay the
Bastard at our own Doors) Sylla at Rome, by the power of the Sword, proclaimed
(or voted) himself Dictator, to make good which usurpation with a Mask of
Authority, he compelled the Senate, or Parliament) to approve of all his
forepassed Villainies, Murders and illegal Acts, and to confer a power upon
him; To kill whom he pleased and confiscate their Estates; To build and destroy
Cities; Dispose Kingdoms; And exercise an Arbitrary, Supreme Authority, and
then (to establish himself in his self-created power) he posted up at Rome, and
in most Cities of Italy, Bills of Proscription or Outlawry, containing the
names of such persons, as (without any form of Law or Justice) he appointed to
be slain by his Soldiers. These Proscribed men were (for the most part) such
as having some sparks of Roman virtue in them, durst love the ancient
Government, Laws and Liberties of Rome, and were therefore thought fit to be
weeded out, as Malignants against his Innovations and arbitrary courses. Yet
many mean spirited fellows, were proscriscribed and murdered, partly for
confiscation of their Estates, and partly to gratify the malice and hatred of
particular friends who (in that carnage) prayed in aid of Syllas sword to rid
them of their Enemies.

After this Augustus Caesar at Rome, having by terror of Arms made himself
Consul, and finding himself not strong enough singly to subjugate his Country,
he called Antonius and Lepidus to join with him, with whom entering into
confederacy to subvert the fundamental Government, and usurp the Supreme
Authority; they divide that vast Empire between them, and passed a Decree
amongst themselves, that they should be called the Triumvirate for Reforming
and Re-establishing the Commonwealth (well enough before if they had let it
alone) with Supreme Authority to give Estates and Offices to whom they thought
fit, without asking the advice of Senate or people. They appointed what
Consuls, Magistrates and officers they pleased They designed rich donatives,
and 18 of the Chief Cities of Italy to be given to their Soldiers, if, by
their valor they should obtain victory over Brutus and Cassius. They fixed
public lists or Tables of Proscription, naming such persons as they exposed to
slaughter. They proscribed at one time 130 Senators, at another time 150 and
2000 Knights. Whereby the best men for understanding, Conduct, Resolution and
Affection, beeng cut of, the rest (terrified by their example) became but Terra
Maledicta (as Chymicks call it) dull liveless Ashes or clods of Earth, without
power or virtue to quicken them, or make them productive. After some
revolutions, wherein Augustus and Antonius had discarded the dull and stupid
Lepidus, and (at last) Augustus had subdued Antonius: Augustus usurped the
Title of Tribune of the People, whereby his Person became sacred and
inviolable; and (humouring the irrational Animals) took upon him the special
Protection of that Brutish Herd, the Rascal Multitude, the Tribunes of the
people having been originally instituted to Protect the people. His next step
was to make himself Perpetual Dictator, whereby he arrogated to himself a vast
unlimited power above all Laws. The Tribuneship was his Buckler. The
Dictatroship was his Sword. And last of all (for Ornament only) He having
already full power of an absolute Monarch (although he forbore the Title of
(King) because it was hateful to the people, and against the Laws evea since
the Regifugium) he took upon him the Title of Princeps Senatus, or President of
the Senate; to keep a corresponding power over that great Counsel or
Parliament: And finally usurped the Title and Office of Imperator or
Generalissimo of all Forces by Land and Sea, Garrisons, etc.

Philip King of Spain, Lord of the 17. Belgic Provinces, by several Titles,
and under several limitations, Privileges, Exemptions and Fundamental Laws,
according to which he was to govern, and they to obey: In nevum regnum vi
armisque partum redigere, atque aliis Novis legibus domare ac guhernare
Belgium. Meteran. in anno 1567. Roidan in an. 1566. John Fraunces Petit.
Thuanus.
Resolving to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government, and reduce those
17. petty Signiories into one mere absolute Monarchy, sent the Duke D' Alva
thither (a Warrior of a resolute stern nature) Governor, with a powerful
Army; Who taking advantage of some rude Commotions formerly raised by the
Protestants, in throwing down Images, and Sacrilegiously plundering Churches,
erected a New Tribunal Criminal, or (to speak in our modern uncouth Language) A
High Court of Justice, consisting of 12 Commissioners or Judges purposely
chosen, most of them hangers by of the Law, of mean fortunes, practice, birth,
and breeding; Covetous, Ambitious, and slavishly addicted to the Spanish
Faction. To these was given by special Commission full Power and Authority to
enquire into, and judge (or to hear and determine) the forepassed Commotions,
whereupon they styled this Court, Concilium Turbarum, but the multitude called
it Concilium Sanguinis, or the Bloody Conventicle. This Council or Inquisition
did supersede or extinguish the Authority of all other Courts of Judicature,
and make void all Laws, Constitutions, Jurisdictions, and Privileges of the
Nation, as to the aforesaid commotions, and all other causes they pleased to
call High Treason. They had no other bounds nor limits in their proceedings,
than what they prefixed to themselves in certain Articles. Some few whereof I
will here present unto my Reader, because they judged of High Treason by those
Articles, not by the known Laws of the Land (a thing very observable and
applicable to my purpose) so that they were not only Judges, Leges dicere, but
also Lawmakers, Leges dare: as all Judges are who take upon them a liberty to
observe no set forms of proceedings, but at their own pleasure.

1. Article. Petitioning against Innovations in Government, and for the known
Laws made Treason, the like the Parliament practices against such as
petitioned for peace by accommodation. And against our High Court of Justice,
Arbitrary Imprisonments and Taxes.
All Petitions heretofore tendered to the States, or Cities Corporate against
the erecting of new Episcopal Sees: or against the Holy Inquisition: or or
requiring a Moderation of Decrees or Acts of State Parliament, are accounted
mere conspiracies against God and the King.

2. Art. All Nobles, Gentry, Judges, Magistrates, and all others who connived
at Heretical Sermons, plundering of Churches, and delivering such Petitions as
aforesaid, pretending the necessity of the times, and did not resist and oppose
them.

3. Art. Whosoever affirms that all His Majesty's Subjects of Belgia have not
forfeited their ancient Privileges, immunities and laws for Treason: We have
forfeited our laws by conquest, or else our Grandees would not pass the two
Acts for Treason, 14. May, 17. July, 1648. nor erect the High Court of Justice,
and abolish our ancient laws and government. See Pol. 3. Oct. 1650. and the
Case of the Kingdom stated.
and that it is not lawful for the King to use and handle them for the
aforesaid Treasons as he pleases, to prevent the like Treasons for the time to
come, and that the King is not absolved thereby from all Oaths, Promises,
Grants, Contracts and Obligations whatsoever.

Compare this with the two Acts for New Treasons, 14. May, 17. July, 1649. and
the Act 26 March, 1650. and Sir John Gells Case stated.
4. Art. They that affirm this Council or High Court of Justice exercise Tyranny
in their Proceedings, or Judgments; and that they are not Supreme and
competent Judges in all causes Criminal and Civil.

Our High Court of Just. exceeds all this. See Sir John Gells Case stated,
Printed Aug. 1650.
5. Art. Those that in case of Heresy deny, that all manner of Informers and
Witnesses of whatsoever Degree and condition they be, are to be credited: and
that upon the Testimony of any two witnesses, this High Court ought to proceed
to Judgment, Execution, and Confiscation of life and goods, without publishing
the cause or charge, and without any legal form of Trial. All these are guilty
of High Treason against God and the King.

The Rigor, Cruelty, and Injustice of this New erected Counsel of Blood, or
High Court of Justice, enforced the Low Countries to revolt and cast off the
King of Spain.
LEt us now examine whether in some one little Province or Island belonging to
that vast Roman Empire: and in some mean petty fellows (Natives of that
Island) men even at home of obscure Birth, Breeding, and Fortunes; we cannot
find examples of Ambition Usurpation, and Tyranny, as high and transcendent,
as bloody and destructive, as covetous and greedy, as any of the fore-recited
presidents: And (which is worst of all) carried on by those that call
themselves Christians, nay Saints, (which is more than they vouchsafe to Saint
Peter and the rest of the Apostles, though glorified Saints in the Church
Triumphant) and such as in all their bloody, oppressing, cheating Designs
(promoted by Perjury, Treachery, breach of Faith, Oaths, and public
Declarations) pretend to the singular favor, Providence and will of heaven, as
confidently, as if they could show Gods special Commission, to warrant
Usurpation, Treason, Tyranny, and Thievery.

It is not unknown by what Artifices, frauds, falsified promises, Oaths, and
Covenants, a party of Antimonarchists, Schismatics, and Anabaptists lurking in
the Parliament fooled the people to contribute their blood and money toward
the subduing of the King (and in him of themselves) and how by the same ways
and subtilties the said party in the two Houses (now combined openly, under the
General Title of Independents) engaging and conspiring with the Officers of the
Army and Soldiery expelled by armed force seven parts of eight of the House of
Commons, leaving not above 43. or 44. of their own engaged party sitting, men
enriched with public spoils) and voting under the power of the Armies
Commanders, whose commands are now become a law to the said sitting Members, as
their Votes are become Laws to the Kingdom. In Obedience to their said Masters
of the Army, The said remainder of Commons voted down the House of Lords
(though an integral and principal Member of the Parliament of England, far
antienter than the House of Commons, and having a power of Judicature to
administer an Oath (which the House of Commons never had, nor pretended to
have, until this time that they overflow their Bounds, and the whole Kingdoms,
under the protection of their Army) which prerogative of the House of Lords is
clearly demonstrated by the House of Commons standing bare before them at all
conferences, as the Grand Inquest does before the Judges) because they rejected
the Ordinance for Trial of the King. And now these Dregs and Lees of the House
of Commons, take upon them to be a complete Parliament: To enact and repeal
Statutes; To subvert the Fundamental Government, Laws and Liberties of the
Land; To pull up by the Roots without Legal proceedings) every man's private
property and possession, and destroy his life: To burden the people with
unsupportable, unheard of, unparliamentary Taxes, Impositions, Excise,
Freequarter, buying of New Arms after the Country have been disarmed of their
old Arms three times in one year; In their Tax Rolls they usually set in the
Margent to every name private notes of distinction, an M. an N. or P. The
letter M. stands for Malignant; he that is so branded, is highly taxed, and his
complaints for redress slighted. N stands for a Neuter, he is more
indifferently rated, and upon cause shown, may chance to be relieved. The
letter P. signifies a perfect Parliamentarian. He is so favorably taxed, as he
bears an inconsiderable part of the burden, and that they may the better
consume with Taxes and want, all such as do not concur with them in the height
of their villainies. The pretended Parliament, are now debating to raise the
Monthly Tax to 240000 lib. or to deprive every man of the third part of his
Estate; both Real and Personal, for maintenance of their immortal Wars, and
short lived Commonwealth. Besides Excise, Customs, Tonnage and Poundage,
Freequarter, finding Arms and Horses, and the sale of Corporation Lands now in
agitation. Whilst our Grandees enrich all the Banks of Christendom with vast
sums raised by public Theft and Rapines.
Pressings and Leavying of Soldiers, Sequestrations, Plundering of Houses and
Horse, and many other oppressions, more than the Turk, Russe, or Tartar ever
heard of: of all which our Grandees are free, and lay them upon others as
partially as they please, purposely to consume them. To make Religion but a
stalking horse to their Designs, and the Ministers thereof but Hostlers to rub
down, curry, and dress it for their riding; to whom they send Commands, what
they shall, and shall not preach to the people; as if preaching were the
Ordinance of man, not of God. At last by way of preparative to their
machinations, they pass these following Votes.

1. That all Supreme power is in the people.

2. That the Supreme Authority under them, is in the peoples Representatives,
or delegates in Parliament assembled. Meaning themselves (you may be sure) the
Quintessence and Elixar of the House of Commons, extracted by those learned
Chimcks, Doctor Fairfax, Doctor Cromwell, and the rest, graduated at that
degraded University of Oxford. Here note they voted the Supreme power to be in
the people, that they might use those Gulles as Conduit pipes or Trunks to
convey the Supreme Authority into themselves, the better to enslave the people;
And tickle them, whilst they fasten about their necks the Iron yoke of a
Military Oligarchy, wearing the Mask of a perpetual Parliament.

3. That whatsoever the Commons in Parliament shall enact, shall have the power
and force of an Act of Parliament, or Law, without the consent of the House of
Lords, or the Kings Royal Assent; any statute, law custom or usage to the
contrary notwithstanding (they might have said all our statutes, laws,
customs, etc. notwithstanding) This one vote has more of Dissolution and more
of Usurpation and Innovation in it, than any I yet ever read of; This is
universally Arbitrary, and lays the Ax to the root of all our Laws, Liberties,
Lives, and properties at once.

What these men will, they vote:
What they vote is Law.
Therefore what they will is Law.
4. That to wage war, or to bear Arms against the Representative body of the
People, or Parliament is high Treason. By the Law all Treasons are committed
against the King, his Crown and Dignity.

5. That the King has taken up Arms against this Parliament, and is therefore
guilty of all the blood shed this War, and should expiate those crimes with his
blood. If the King were not guilty, these men are; And therefore they passed
this Vote, Se defendendo. Yet observe that herein they became Judges in their
own cause, and forejudged his Majesty before his Trial, if that may be called a
Trial, that was carried on by men, who were both Accusers, Prosecuters, parties
and Judges; and had neither Law, president, formality of proceedings, nor any
other foundation of Justice or Reason to warrant them, nor were delegated by
any lawful Authority?

These Votes thus passed, and by this kind of men, were the foundation upon
which they built their great Engine to destroy the King and Kingly Government
together with the Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lives, and properties of the
people; all condemned in that deadly sentence given against the King) For
having (as aforesaid) created (by their own Votes) themselves as absolute a
power as they pleased and cast the people and all they have into that
bottomless Chaos of their Arbitrary Domination: They erect an Extrajudicial,
unpresidented High Court of Justice to Try (or rather to condemn without Trial)
the King, consisting of 150. Commissioners, Soldiers, Parliament men, Trades
men; the most violent, engaged and factious incendiaries of all the
Antimonarchical faction: Amongst whom were many low conditioned Mechanics, and
Banquerouts, whose Fortunes are since repaired out of the Kings Estate, and
other public Lands, Goods, and Offices, See Stat. Recognition 1 Jac. The Oaths
of Algiance, Obedience and Supremacy, and all our Law Books.
as a reward for that Royal Blood they spilt. The King the Fountain of Law,
Justice, Mercy, Honor, War, and Peace; the Head of the Parliament, and Supreme
Governor over all persons, and in all causes) thus violently removed;
presently (as if the Mounds and banks of the Sea had been overturned) an
impetuous inundation of bloody, thievish Tyranny and Oppression brake in upon
us: So that no man can call his life, liberty, house, lands, goods, or any
other his Rights, or Franchises his own, longer than the gracious aspect of
some of our Grandees shine favorably upon him.

In the next place: contrary to their own Declarations of the 9. Feb. and 17.
March 1648. Wherein they promise that in all things concerning the lives,
liberties, and properties of the people, they will observe the known laws of
the Land, with all things incident thereto) They pass misbegotten Acts of
Parliament, This Stat. 25 Ed. 3. c. 2. S. John's against Strafford, calls the
security of the people. And the Stat. 1 Hen. 4. cap. 10. Ed. 6. cap. 12. 1.
Mariae 1. ratify and highly commend.
one of the 14. of May, another of the 17. of July, 1649. whereby (in
derogation and annihilation of that excellent Stat. 25 Ed. 3. Chap. 2.
Ascertaining Treasons, and reducing them to a small number, and leaving nothing
to the interpretation of the Judges, that the people might not be ensnared)
they exceeding by multiplying Treasons, bringing bare words as well as deeds
within the compass of that offense: and making many duties to which the laws of
God and the land, the Protestation and Covenant, the oaths of allegiance,
obedience, and supremacy oblige us, to be high treason, and these new acts of
treason penned in obscure, ambiguous terms, purposely to leave a latitude of
Interpretation in (their own creatures) the Judges, that the People may be
ensnared.

The King thus taken out of their way. They pass pretended Acts. 1. To
Disinherit his Children. 2. To abolish Kingly Government for ever. 3. To
convert our ancient well-tempered Monarchy into that (which they call a
Commonwealth, They have converted our ancient Monarchy into a Free State; and
tell us they are the State. They tell us they have bestowed Liberty upon the
people: but they and their faction only are the people. All the rest of the
English Nation are annihilated, and reduced to nothing, that these fellows may
become all things: Mere ciphers, serving only to make them of more account.
And this gross fallacy must not be disputed against, lest their New Acts of
Parliament call it Treason.
or Free State; although nothing be therein free but their lusts: nor has it
any form or face of Civil and just Government; wherein a confused Multitude
rule by their own Wills, without Law: and for their own benefit; no
consideration being had of the good and happiness of the people in general. 4.
They Constitute a Senate, or Council of State of 40 men (amongst which some
Tradesmen, Soldiers, illiterate Lawyers, Parliament-Members, men already
engaged over head and ears in sin, therefore to be confided in) to these or
any nine of these they entrust the Administration of this Utopian
Commonwealth, and these they would have us believe (without telling us so) are
the Keepers (or Gaolers) of the Liberties of England.

These things being but Introductions to the Usurpation of these Kinglings: and
having been already showed to the world by many pens. I content my self to give
a cursory view of them, and haste to my intended task, to show that this
Usurped power is kept and administered by as wicked and violent policies, as it
was gotten by.

The first endeavor of all Tyrannical Usurpers is, To lessen the number of
their Enemies; either by flattering and deceiving them: or by violently
extirpating and rooting them out. And such have been the attempts of our new
Cromwellian Statists, ever since (without any calling from God or the people)
they took upon them the Supreme Authority of the Nation; subverted our
well-mixed Monarchy, and created themselves a Free State

1. They endeavored to sweeten and allure to act with them, 1. A Collusive
Accommodation.
as many of the Secured and Secluded Members, Ministers, and other
Presbyterians, as they could, to the end that ex post facto being guilty of
their sins, they might be engaged in one common defense, and go halfs with them
in their ignominy and punishment, though not in their power, profit, and
preferments, in which the Godly will admit no Rivals, but (like their Patron
the Devil) cry all is mine. But this Design failed for the most part.

2. Their second Endeavor was how to diminish the number of their Opposites,
2. An intended Massacre.
Royalists and Presbyterians, by a Massacre, for which purpose many Dark
Lanthorns and Poniards were provided last Winter, 1649. But fame prevented this
plot: which coming to be the common rumor of the Town, put them in mind of the
danger, infamy, and hatred that would overwhelm them. So this was laid aside.

At last they invented two other Engines, no less bloody then, and as effectual
as a Massacre.

3. The Engagement is the first of these two Gins) which all persons are
enjoined to subscribe by their Act 2 Jan. 1649. 3. The Engagement.
To be true to the Commonwealth of England, as it is now established, without
a King, or House of Peers. And this is obtruded under no less penalty, than,
To be totally deprived of all Benefit of Law whatsoever. Now the Laws of the
Land being the only Conservators of our Lives, Liberties and Estates (without
which Laws all men have a like property to all things, and the strongest have
right to all is possessed by the weaker; since the Law only distinguishes Meum
and Tuum) what is this but to expose the Liberties of the Non-Engagers to false
Imprisonments; our Estates to rapine, spoil, and injustice: and our Lives and
Persons to wounds and murders, at the will and pleasure of such as will engage
with our Usurpers: but especially at the pleasure of their own Soldiers: to
whom (I conceive) this Outlawry was intended as an Alarm or Invitation to
plunder and massacre the Non-Engagers, and to pay themselves their Arreares of
which these Parliamennt men have cousened them) out of their Estates, and
though the Soldiers were not so wicked as their Masters, yet we daily see many
good Families in England despoiled of their Estates, for want of protection of
the Laws, brought to miserable beggary, rather than they will wrong their
consciences by subscribing this damnable Engagement contrary to the
Protestation and Covenant imposed by this Parliament, contrary to the known Law
of this Land, which this Parliament has declared to observe and keep in all
things concerning the lives, liberties, and properties of the people, with all
things incident thereto; contrary to this Parliaments reiterated Votes, that
they would not change the Ancient Government, by a King, Lords and Commons. And
contrary to the Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy: whereby (and by
the Stat. of Recognition, 1 Jac.) our Allegiance is tied only to the King, his
Heirs and lawful Suceessors; from which no power on earth can absolve us, and
so much we attest in the Oath of Supremacy. Politicus (Interpreter to our new
State-puppet play) Numb. 19. from Sept. 19. to Sept. 26. out of the dictates of
his Masters tells us, that in Answer to the Kings Act of oblivion granted, the
Parliament intends to pass an Act of General pardon; for which they expect in
future a General obedience and submission to the Government (you see though
they will not be the Kings subjects, they will be his Apes) and in the
beginning of the said Pamphlet, Politicus says, That Protection implies
obedience, otherwise they may be handled as public Enemies and Outlaws, and
ought to be destroyed as Traitors. Here you have the end to which this general
pardon is intended; it is but a shooing-horn to draw on the utmost penalty upon
Non-engagers, appointed by the said pretended Act 2. Jan. 1649. to weed them
out of this good Land, that the Saints only may enjoy the earth and the fullness
thereof; to which purpose all their new coined Acts and Laws are directed. The
Scripture points forth these kind of men, when it says, The Mercies of the
wicked are cruel. The sum of all is, If we will not acknowledge Allegiance to
these Mushromes, we shall be Traitors without Allegiance (a Treason never yet
heard of in any Law) If we will acknowledge Allegiance, we put our selves in a
capacity to be Traitors, when they shall please to make us such. But let them
know, That we are all Englishmen, Freeborn alike, under the protection of an
ancient, legal Monarchy, to which we owe Allegiance; and how we come to forfeit
that legal Protection, our settled Laws and Government; and be subjected to a
New, unknown protection obtruded upon us by a company of upstarts (Mushromes of
Majesty, so mean in birth and breeding (for the most part) that the place of a
Constable equals the highest of their education) imposing what Laws and
conditions upon us they please; I would be glad to hear without being hindered
by Guns, Drums, High Courts of Justice, and other Instruments of Violence and
Murder. But the greatest Mystery in this cheat is, That our Self-created
Supremists, having voted the original power to be in the people, and but a
derivative Authority to be in themselves as the Representative of the people,
should notwithstanding so yoke their Sovereign Lord the people, and make them
pay Allegiance to their own Delegates (the eighth part of a House of Commons)
under the penalty unless they subscribe as the far major part have not) of
out-lawing and depriving all the people of this Land of all benefit of the Laws
they were born to; and consequently of annihilating and making them no longer a
Nation or people. As if they were mere Salvages, newly conquered, collected and
formed into a politic body or Commonwealth, and endowed with Laws newly
invented by the Novice Statists. But the unlawfulness of the said Engagement
with the Injustice of the Self-created power that obtrudeth it has been
handled by many good pens, especially by the Cheshire and Lancashire Ministers
in their plea for Non-subscribers. Therefore I pass on to my principal scope;
The second Engine appointed to root out all such as are of a different party,
the High Court of Justice. A formidable Monster, upon which no pen (that I know
of) has yet adventured.

4. In treating of the High Court of Justice, 4. The High Court of Justice.
I must consider, 1. By what persons and Authority this new erected
unpresidented Court is constituted? 2. Of what persons it is constituted? 3.
The way and manner of their proceedings? What Formalities and Laws they observe
therein? How suitable to the known Laws of the Land, and the Parliaments
Declarations, Protestations and Covenant they are? 4. To what end this Court is
constituted?

1. The Persons constituting this extrajudicial Court are the present pretended
Parliament, consisting of forty or fifty thriving Commons only, who conspired
with Cromwell and the Army to expel seven parts of eighth of their
Fellow Members, without any cause shown, abolished the House of Peers, erected
this High Court of Justice (in nature of a Court Martial) to murder the King,
abolished Kingly Government, turned it into a thing they call a Free State,
disinherited the Royal Family, and now usurp to themselves (without any calling
from God or the People) more than a Regal, Legal or Parliamentary Authority,
wherewith they have subverted the Fundamental Government, Religion, Laws,
Liberties and Property of the Nation, and envassallised and enslaved them to
their Arbitrary Domination; the Authority by which they erect this
extrajudicial Court is, The usurped, Legislative power; by color of which they
passed an Act dated 26. March 1650. establishing the said High Court of
Justice. Yet their own creature Master St. John's, in his Argument against the
E. of Strafford (in a Book called Speeches and Passages of this great and happy
Parliament, printed by William Cook, 1641. page 24.) says, The Parliament is
the Representative of the whole Kingdom, wherein the King as head, The Lords
are the more Noble, and the Commons the other Members, are knit together as one
body politic; The Laws are the Arteries and Ligaments that hold the body
together. (And a little after) Its Treason to embesel a Judicial Record,
Strafford swept them all away. Its Treason to counterfeit a 20 s. piece; here
is a counterfeiting of Law (so in these counterfeit new Acts) we can call
neither the counterfeit nor true one our own. Its treason to counterfeit the
great Seal for an acre of land, no property hereby is left to any land at all
(no more is there by the votes and practice of our new Supremists (thus far Mr.
St. John's.) But that the Parliament does necessarily consist of the King and
the two Houses assembled by his Writ, and can pass no Act without their joint
consent. See the preambles of all our Statutes, all our Parliament Records, all
our Law books, Modus tenendi Parliamentum. Hackwels manner of passing Bills.
Sir Tho. Smith de Repub. Anglorum. Cambdeni Britania. All our Historians,
Politicians, and the uninterrupted practice of all Ages. That it is now, lately
otherwise practiced, is not by any Law of the Land, but by the will of lawless
power and Rebellion, that has cancelled all our Laws, Liberties and
Properties, and subverted our Fundamental Government, and disfranchised and
disinherited the whole Nation. Yet Master St. John's in his said Argument
against Strafford, page 38. was then of opinion, That to subvert the Laws and
Government, and make a Kingdom no Kingdom, was Treason at the Common Law.
This Act 26. Mar. 1650. is a new modelled Commission of Oyer and Terminer; and
all the people of the Land, are by the consequence thereof disfranchised and
proscribed. The illegality and tyranny thereof, they have introduced, who in
this Parliament so zealously complained against the Court of the President and
Counsel of York, or of the North, as an intolerable grievance (notwithstanding
it had been of as long continuance as from 41 H. 8.) as appears by a worthy
Members Speech or Argument against it (in the said Book of Speeches and
Passages p. 409. made by order of the House of Commons in April 1649. I find
not one Exception there made against the Court of York, to which this upstart
High Court is not more liable than it. 1. The Commissioners of this High Court
are not appointed to enquire, per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum,
that is, by Juries; as by Magna Charta, and above 30. Statutes confirming it,
all Commissions ought to run. 2. They are not appointed (nor sworn) to hear and
determine, Secundum Leges Angliae, according to the known Laws (as they ought
to be) but according to certain Articles and powers given in the said Act 26.
March, 1650. 3. The said Act 26 March leaves a dangerous latude to the
interpretation and discretion of the Commissioners (contrary to what is done in
the Act 25 Edw. 3. chap. 2.) namely; It has one Clause enabling them to
inflict upon Offenders such punishment, either by death or otherwise
corporally, as the said Commissioners, or the major part of them present shall
judge to appertain to Justice. This leaves it in the breasts of the
Commissioners (without any Law or rule to walk by) to inflict what torments and
ignominious punishments they please, although not used in our Nation; and
arbitrary corporal pains are proper to slaves, not to subjests. Here (after the
loss of all but their bodies) the people may see their bodies subject to the
lawless wills of our Grandees. And by another clause, this Act impowereth the
Commissioners. To examine witnesses upon oath, or otherwise, if need be. This
word ( or otherwise, etc.) gives them power to examine witnesses without oath
(if they cannot procure witnesses so far the sons of Belial, and cauterised in
conscience as to adventure upon an oath) even in case of life and death, and
mutilation of members; contrary to the current of all our Laws, and practice
of all our Courts of Law, and of all Nations. See Stat. 1 Edw. VI. chap. 12. 5
Edw. VI. chap. 11. Cooks 3. Inst. p..24, 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 17.6. Ex ore duorum vel
trium peribit qui occidetur. Deuteronomy. 17.6. Matthew. 18.16. John 18.23. 2 Cor. 13.1.
Heb. 10.28. This is the most arbitrary and destroying liberty that ever was
given to Judges; And such as none but professed thieves and murderers will
accept or make use of. The Scripture says, An oath is the end of controversy
between man and man. How then can they end and determine a controversy without
oath? But the end of all controversies before this Butcher-row of Judges, is
cutting of throats., and confiscation of estates. And by the same clause of the
said Act (To examine witnesses) they may, and (I hear) do examine witnesses
clandestinely, and proceed upon bare Depositions read in Court, whereas they
ought to produce the witnesses face to face in open Court, See Stat. 5 Ed. 6.
chap. 11. and Cooks 2. Inst. page 26.
and there swear them, that the party accused may interrogate them, and examine
the circumstances, and whether they contradict themselves, or one another, for
clearing the Evidence? And whether they be lawful witnesses or no? Nay (I hear)
they do privately suborn and engage witnesses without oath. And then produce
them to swear what they have formerly related only: and if they scruple at an
oath; punish them for mis-informing the State. 4. That I may make some more use
of the aforesaid Members words, Whether the King, or a prevailing Party
usurping his Kingly power, may canton out a part of his Kingdom (or cull and
mark out for slaughter some principal men, and deny them the benefit of Law, in
order thereto, as these Judges do) to be tried by special Commission, since the
whole Kingdom is under the known laws and Courts established at Westminster? It
should seem by this Parliaments eager complaint against the special Commission
of York, this Parliament has determined this question in the negative already
(whatsoever their present practice to carry on their Design is) See Stat. 17.
Car. 1. against the Star Chamber. To what purpose serve those Statutes of Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right, if men may be fined and imprisoned (nay
murdered) without Law, according to the discretion of Commissioners? This
discretion is the quick-sand that has swallowed our Properties and Liberties
(but is now ready to swallow our carcasses.) Thus far that Gentleman, Whose
words then carried the Parliamentary stamp upon them. Let me add some more
exceptions of my own against this High Court of Injustice. 5 Soldiers of the
Army are appointed by the Act 26 March, to be assistant to the Commissioners,
contrary to the peaceable proceedings of the Law, which never makes use of any
but Civil Magistrates and Officers of the Law. See Stat. 7 Ed. I. 2 Ed. III.
chap. 3. 7. R. 2. chap. 13. 6. And contrary to the old oath which all Judges
ought to take, in these words. You shall swear well and faithfully to serve the
King and people, in the Office of Justice, etc. And that to what estate and
condition they be come before you in the Sessions with force and arms, against
the peace, against the Statute thereof made, to disturb the Execution of the
Common Laws, or to menace the people, that you arrest their bodies, etc. Stat.
18 Ed. 3. in An. Dom. 1344. p. 144. Poultons Book of Stat. at large. But the
oath appointed for these Commissioners to take, is not penned in terms of
indifferency, nor does any ways oblige them to the people, 26. Mar. 1550.
(viz.) You shall swear well and truly according to the best of your skill and
knowledge, to execute the several powers given you by this Act (not well and
lawfully to serve the people.) Besides, they swear to execute the several
powers given ( not to do Justice according to the Laws. Now the Laws are the
only rules of Justice, by which we distinguish crooked from strait, true from
false, right from wrong. This is not the work these Judges are packed for, but
to execute Acts of power and will. But powers are often usurped, tyrannical,
illegal and unjust: So are these. Injuria est quod contra legem fit. 7. How can
the House of Commons (if it were full and free) constitute a new unpresidented
Court of Justice, nominate and ordain Judges, and enable them to administer
Oaths, having never had, nor so much as pretended to have any power to judge,
to nominate Judges, or to administer an Oath; as having never been more than
the Grand Enquest of the Kingdom, humbly to present to His Majesty in a
petitionary way, the grievances of the people? Nemo dat quod non habet. 8.
Suppose the House of Commons had power of Judicature, delegated to them from
the people as their Representative? Delegati non possunt substituere Delegatos,
and Protestatam sibi concreditam, in alios transfer. Delegates cannot make
subdelegates, and transfer their trust to others. See Col. Andrews 3. Answers
given into this High Court, for his defense. Printed at the latter end hereof.

2. My second consideration will be, Of what Persons delegated or Commissioned,
this Court consists? The pretended Act. 26. March 1650. names 25.
Commissioners, all which (for their better credit) it enacteth Esquires,
amongst whom are 4. or 5. that have professed the Law, (as far as wearing a
Lawyers Gown comes to) but were better known by their leisure then by their
Law; until by adhering to our prevailing Schismatics, in subverting our Laws,
they seem to be eminent Lawyers. Of Keeble see the Trial of L. Colonel John
Lilburn, first and second Part. Steel cited expired Statutes at Winchester
against Captain Burley. The rest are (for the most part) poor ignorant Trades
men, some so young they are but lately out of their Apprentiships, others
Broken Tradesmen that have compounded with their Crediturs, some of vild and
base professions; One or two of these Wolvish Saints (I hear) have with some
difficulty escaped the Gallows for Man-slaying: William Wibeard Esquier is a
Rope-seller: this employment may happily help him to the Hangmans Custom.
William Pemoier Esquire was heretofore an Ape-carrier, Cherry-lickom or
Mountredinctido. Cook a Vintner at the Bear at the Bridge-foot, he keeps a
vaulting-School for our sanctified Grandees, and their Ladies of the Game. If
the House of Commons had power to make Judges (which I have disproved) yet, Ex
quovis ligno non fit Mercurius. They must name such Persons as may be competent
Judges. And therefore must not choose. 1. Ignorant men. 2. Nor such as the Law
calls, Viles Personas, men base or contemptible for their Persons or Sordide
callings; Mechanics of the lowest rank. 3. Persons of Scandalous life and
conversations. 4. Not Banquerouts and Indigent Persons. Necessitas cogit ad
turpia. 5. Not partial and preingaged Persons, chosen to suppress another
party. As these Commissioners are engaged to the present power to suppress all
others. 6. Nor such as Schismatically or Heretically affected, are seasoned
with such Doctrines and Principles, as neither agree with the Duties of a good
Christian, a good Commonwealths man, nor a good Judge. Which two last
Objections not only these Commissioners, but the pretended Parliament that
commissioned them are apparently guilty of, as being all of the Independent
Faction conspiring to rob and rout out all other Parties: Royallists,
Presbyterians and Levellers: For which purpose this New Tribunal or
Inquisition is set up. Independency being a mere complication and Syncretismus,
or rather a Sink and Common Sewer of all Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and
Schisms, (though they peevishly differ in some inconsiderable Tenants) yet
having one General End or scope at which they all chiefly aim (viz.) power,
preferment, profit, and the suppression of the Truth and Magistracy, they have
likewise some common principles to soader them together, which they use as a
Means conducing to that General End. Some few whereof I will here set down
for my Readers satisfaction. 1. To tolerate no King nor Magistrate Superior to
themselves, as Being a Tyranny or Bondage over the Christian Liberty of the
Saints and Kingdom of Christ. Because they know no Christian Magistrate can
tolerate them, being (by the Genius of their Sect) enemies to all Civil
Societies, whether Monarchical, Aristocraticall, Democraticall or Mixed; as
the Kingdom of England was before these men destroyed it. Besides their common
Doctrine, That they are appointed to break the powers of the Earth to pieces,
To level the hills and fill up the valleys, That they are called, To bruise the
Nations with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel:
Which they have done in England, and threaten the like in France, Germany, etc.
whereof, their Pulpits and discourses sound. Observe their Practices in the Low
Countries. Where having by their spies and Emissaries, found out some Burgers
of the same humor with themselves; They propagated their Doctrine so far; as
to endeavor to strike the Aristocraticall Members out of that Commonwealth by
abetting some of the States Provincial to lessen (and so to abolish by
degrees) The Lords States General (the Optimates of that State) To ruin the
Prince of Orange, to whose Family they owe their Liberty; To dissolve the
General Union of the said United Provinces, and so take in pieces the whole
Frame of that Republic. To say nothing of their Insolences in fighting and
killing their men, because the Belgike Lion will not strike sail to their
Cross and Harp; and in blowing up the Antelope in Helversluce: Which shows
what good Neighbors Holland, and other Parts, are like to have of the New
State of England and Ireland (when they have made themselves entire by the
purchase of Scotland) that is born (like our English Richard III.) with Teeth
in its head; and snappeth at its Neighbors before it be out of its Swaddling
clouts. This is the cause that Cromwell, before he set sail for Ireland,
caused his Journeymen, the pretended Parliament. To pass an Act for
Tolleration of all Errors, Heresies and Schisms, under the Notion of Liberty
of Conscience, and Ease for Tender Consciences. 2. Their second Principle is,
That the Good things of this World belong only to the Saints (that is;
Themselves) all others being usurpers thereof: and therefore they may rob,
plunder, sequester, extort, cheat and confiscate (by illegal Laws of their own
making, by extrajudicial Courts and partial Judges of their own constituting)
other men's goods and estates, upon as good Title as the Jews spoiled the
Egyptians, or expelled the Canaanites. 3. Their third Principle. That the
Spirit (which sanctifies and illuminates these men) in every particular man
blows when and where it will, sometimes this way, sometimes that way, often
contrary ways: And therefore they can make no profession of any certain Rule
of Doctrine or Discipline, because they know not which way the Spirit will
inspire. For this reason they are still pulling down old and setting up New
Doctrines, as the Nomades do cottages, only constant in unconstancy. They
profess their consciences are the Rule and Symboll both of their Faith and
Doctrine, by this Leaden Lesbian Rule they interpret, and to this they conform
the Scriptures; not their Consciences to the Scriptures; setting the Sun-Dyall
by the clock; not the clock by the Sun-Dyall. That every man must pray
according to the Dictates of his Private Spirit; They reject the Lords Prayer,
for fear of quenching the Spirit. When they break their Faith, Articles,
Promises, Declarations and Covenant; they Allege, the Spirit is the Author
thereof. When Cromwell (contrary to his vows and Protestations made to the
King) kept him close Prisoner in Carisbrook Castle; He affirmed the Spirit
would not let him keep his word. When, contrary to the Public Faith, they
Murdered Him: they pretended: They could not resist the Motions of the Spirit.
Sua cuique Deus fit dira libido. This Hobgoblin serves all turns. 4. Their
fourth Principle is, That they may commit any sin, and retain their Sanctity in
the very Act of sinning: For what is sinful in other men, is not so in the
Saints; who may commit any crime against the Law of God, and yet it cannot be
imputed to them for sin; Because they know in their Consciences what they do.
So tender and delicate are their Consciences, That they are capable of any
Offense against their Neighbor, without breach of Justice or Charity. A
righteous man is a Law to himself. 5. Their fifth Principle is, That 7. make a
Church: although men, women and children, and that this Church is Independent
upon any other. The Anabaptists (though they neither profess to follow Paul
nor Cephas) yet declare themselves to be some of Cromwells Church, some of John
Goodwins, some of Kiffins, some of Patiences, and some of Carters Church. 6.
Their sixth Independent Principle is. That if a man be questioned for any crime,
though his Judges have neither competent witnesses, proofs nor Evidence of his
guiltiness, yet if they think in their Consciences he his guilty; they may
condemn him out of the Testimony of their own Private Consciences. Is it not
fit men so Principled should be Judges and Jury too; and condemn men by
inspiration? So Colonel Andrews and Sir John Gell were condemned; for Bernard
and Pits (witnesses against them) were apparently suborned by Bradshaw and Sir
Henry Mildmay against them, and forsworn in the same cause; and good proof
offered to the Court, that they were both Flagitious men, of scandalous life
and conversation. The letter (supposed to be sent by Andrews to Gell) was
delivered to Bradshaw, whereof Bradshaw sent a Copy only to Gell at 10. of the
clock at night; and had a warrant then ready to arrest Gell, which was done
early next morning before he could conveniently discover it: Yet was Gell
sentenced for Misprision of High Treason. See Sir John Gells case stated
August, 1650. with Colonel Andrews Attestation (in his behalf) under his hand a
little before his death. And though Sir John was Impeached and Mr. Attorney
prosecuted him only for Misprision; yet had he much ado to keep that
bloodthirsty, old cur Keeble from taking a leap at his throat, and giving
Judgment against him for High Treason. So for want of Law Sir John had like to
be hanged by Inspiration and Instinct of the Spirit. He that will see more of
the Independent Tenets, Let him read Cl. Salmasius chapter 10. Defensionis
Regiae, Elenchus Motuum nuperorum in Anglia. And the History of Independency
first and second part. These 6. I have selected, that by comparing their
Doctrine with their daily Practice, the Reader may perceive what pious
Christians, good Patriots, and upright Judges, these engaged, Independent
Commissioners of the High Court of Justice are like to prove. The builders of
this New Commonwealth or Babel, hold forth to the People, Justice and Liberty,
as their Motto: as if those excellent gifts had never received their birth, nor
been so much as shown to the People until they murdered the King, and stepped
into his Throne. But how righteous a Free State or Commonwealth is this like
to be? And how well are the People therein likely to be instructed in the ways
of Righteousness, Justice and Charity, and improved in good life and
conversation, by men so principled as aforesaid, Let the world judge.
Especially when they observe, That our New Statists have enacted in the said
pretended Act. 2. January, 1649. enjoining the Engagement, That whosoever will
promise Truth and fidelity to them by subscribing the Engagement may deal
falsely and fraudulently with all the world besides. And break all Bonds,
Assurances and Contracts made with Non-engagers, concerning their Estates; and
pay their Debts by pleading in Bar of all Actions, That the complaint has not
taken the Engagement: This is to rob the Egyptians of the good things of this
world, This is to break their Faith by the Motions of the Spirit, This is to
cheat and rob their Neighbors without breach of Charity or Justice, and
without imputation of Sin according to their aforesaid Tenets.

3. I am come now to consider in the third place, The way and Manner of their
proceedings; How consonant they are to the usual proceedings of our known
Laws, and Legal Courts of Judicature; (the best Inheritance of all Freemen)
whereof see Colonel Andrews 3. Answers in his Defense given into the said High
Court, herewith printed.

1. The first course they commonly take is; To break open men's Houses, Studies,
Chests, etc. and seize their Papers; and thereby hunt for Matter of Charge
against them: And then to examine them against themselves, upon the said
Papers, contrary to Magna Charta which says, Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum. And
contrary to the Doctrine of Christianity, which forbids a man to destroy his
own life, or be, Felo de se, as many men unwittingly do, who answer to
captious, ensnaring questions. When that tempting question was put to Christ;
Art thou the King of the Jews? He returned no other Answer then Thou say it:
Why ask thou me? Ask them that heard me, That is, Ask witnesses. It was
objected against the Oath ex Officio, That it was High Injustice to examine a
man against himself: Because his Answers may only serve to condemn, but not to
acquit him.

2. They usually break open houses with Soldiers, at all hours of the night,
pulling men out of their beds with great violence and Terror, and so carry
them away, under pretense whereof Robberies and Murders have been committed,
Whereas by the Stat. 1. Ed. VI. chap. 12. and 5. and 6. Ed. VI. chap. 11. A man
ought not to be accused of High Treason but to one of the Kings Counsel; or to
one of the Kings Justices of the Assize; or to one of the Kings Justices of the
Peace being of the Quorum: or to 2. Justices of the Peace where the Offense is
committed. Cooks 3. Instit. chap. High Treason, page 26. 27, 28.

3. They Commit men to Prison without any Accusation or Accusor made known, and
during pleasure: and detain them in Prison many years together without any
Legal proceedings or Charge against them; sharing their Estates, Offices and
Revenues (by Sequestrations and Suspensions of the Profits) amongst themselves;
without any Crime objected: And so leave them to starve, rot and dye in nasty
Gaoles for want of Maintenance, under the cruelty of covetous and merciless
Gaolers, whom they bear out (for money) in all their Extortions. And being thus
imprisoned and wounded with the displeasure of the State, no man dares
adventure, upon any security, to lend him money for fear of incurring the
disfavour of the State, and a Note of Malignancy, Witness about 3000. Scottish
Prisoners of War starved to death at Durham: where they eat one another for
hunger. These were taken at the battle of Dunbar on. 1650. 3. Sept. and many
hundred Prisoners have been murdered in Gaoles, with hunger, cold, nastiness
and contagion, after they have been robbed of their Estates and no Crime laid
to their Charge: this is become a daily practice.
whereby their Prisons are become private Slaughter-houses, as well as their
Courts Public shambles of Injustice. Prisoners in the Tower of London (To
which prison no Goale-delivery belongs) were always wont in the time of (that
supposed Tyrant) King Charles I. and his Predecessors, to have allowance from
the King, according to their several degrees; As 5 l. a week for an Esquire,
etc. although the King deprived them of no part of their Estates until
conviction, and this Maintenance was provided for them by the Lieutenant of the
Tower; and in respect of his care and pains in procuring it he had Fees, and
not otherwise, though now they continue and increase the said Fees; the cause
being taken away the effect cease not. But these men now in power, after they
have Committed men and robbed them of their Estates, without cause shown, are
so far from giving them any allowance to feed them; that they shut them up
close Prisoners in unwholesome Chambers, denying them the Liberty of the Tower,
and the benefit of fresh Air (the Cameleons Diet) for their health, and resort
of friends, for their accommodation. And that they may be sure to deprive them
of all legal means by habeas corpus to recover their liberties; They Commit
men by illegal warrants not expressing any particular Offense or cause for
their Commitment: so that it is impossible for the keeper of the prison to obey
the habeas corpus, which is directed to him in these words: Praecipimus tibi
quod corpus A. B. una cum causa detentionis suae, habeas coram nobis, etc. ad
recipiendum ea quae curia nostra, etc. Whereupon the Jailer or Sheriff is to
bring his Prisoner to the Bar, and tender his mittimus to the Court, showing
the particular cause of his Imprisonment, that the Court may judge whether it
be Legal, or no. Dolosus versatur in Generalibus. In the Acts of the Apostles,
chap. 25. verse. 26, 27. Festus thought it unreasonable to send Paul a prisoner
to Caesar (to whom he had appealed) and not withal to signify the Crimes laid
to his Charge. See Cooks 2. Instit. fol. 591.

4. Their usual Course of practicing and suborning witnesses, tempting them
with hopes and terrifying them with fears, is so notorious; That it is known
the Counsel of State have hundreds of Spies and Intelligencers, Affidavit-men
and Knights of the Post, swarming over all England as Lice and Frogs did in
Egypt: and have both Pensions and set rates for every Pole brought in: So that
now the whole Nation is proscribed, and every man's head set to sale, and made a
staple commodity, (far beyond the definite Proscriptions of Silla and the
Triumvirate aforesaid) These Sons of Belial are sent forth to compass the
earth seeking whom they may devour. These, (with the Liberty of Privileged
Spies) speak bold language to draw other men into danger: and plot
conspiracies, which themselves detect, and are rewarded like Decoy Duckes for
their pains. Of this sort are Bernard and Pits set no work to betray Gell and
Andrews, as aforesaid. For which Bernard had 300 l. and a Troop of horse
conferred upon him. Johnson that falsely accused Sir Robert Sherly, and Colonel
Egerton for their charity in relieving his wants, is another; Varney is a
Fourth. So well are they fitted with these Sons of Belial, that no Naboth can
keep his Vineyard, if a Grandee cast a covetous eye upon it; they can prove
what they list. Nay it is usual for our Grandees to molest one man with
examining him 20. or 30. several times, against one Prisoner, and upon one
point, to distract his memory, and not to let him be quiet until he perceive
he must speak what their questions and discourses lead him to, to redeem
himself from vexation. To say nothing of their Menaces, To torture men if they
will not confess, what they impudently pretend is already discovered by other
means: And their insinuating into the Affections of witnesses, by asking them,
Whether the State does not owe them money? And why they do not use fitting
means and opportunities to recover it? And why they do not make means for
some beneficial employment?

5. In Magna Charta, chap. 29. it is enacted, That no Freeman shall be taken or
imprisoned; or be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties or Free-Customes, or
be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor we will not pass upon
him or condemn him, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the
Land. We will sell to no man, we will not deny or defer to any man, Justice or
Right. See Statute 2. Edward III. chap. 8. 5. Ed. III. chap. 9. 14. Ed. III.
chap. 14. 25. Ed. III. chap. 4. 11. R. II. chap. 10. Pet. of Right. 3. Car. 1.
10. Edward IV. fol. 6. Dier folio 104. Cook lib. 5. folio 6. lib. 10. folio 74.
lib. 11. folio 99. Regist. folio 86. Where note the word (Peers) signifies,
that no man is to be condemned or destroyed, but by the lawful verdict of a
Jury of 12. sworn men of the Neighborhood where the Fact was committed;
because (in probability) Neighbors may have best cognizance of the Fact, and
of the life and conversation of the Party Accused. And these only are Competent
Judges of Matter of Fact; and in many cases of Matter of Law too, if they will
take the knowledge of the Law upon them. Neither can this Petty Jury of 12. men
go upon the Prisoner unless a Bill of Enditement containing the whole Matter
of charge be first found in open Court by a Grande Jury or Enquest of sworn
men; who are to enquire of the Fact upon the Oaths of two lawful witnesses
(at least) to every material Point of the Enditement: and then, when the
Grande Enquest are all agreed, the Foreman endorseth upon the back of the Bill
(Billa vera) and then presents it in open Court, as the Information for the
King of the whole Enqueste: otherwise the Enditement is quasht, and null.
Cooks 3. Instit. chapter High Treason and Petty Treason. And whereas the
Statute says, (but by his Peers. or by the Law of the Land) Lex Terrae,
signifies, The Ancient Customs of the Land; Amongst which Fundamental
Customs; Trialls by Juries hold a principal place. And when the King Charles
I. accused this Parliament, That they disposed of the Subjects Lives and
Fortunes by their votes, contrary to the known Laws of the Land, This
Parliament in their Remonstrance, Sept. 1642. (1. Part of the Book of
Declarations fol. 6 9 3. highly resented it. And Magna Charta being nothing
else but an Affirmation of the Common Law, inserted this Clause (or by the Law
of the Land) as a special caution, not to annihilate or frustrate (no; not so
much as tacitly, or by preterition) any of the said Fundamental Laws or
Customs; nor any other particular lawful Customs, which are not one and the
same in all parts of England: Witness the Custom of Gavelkind in Kent. I have
told you what our known ancient Legal Courts of Justice do. And I must tell you
that Legal forms and set Modes of proceedings are so essential unto Justice,
that without them we can not measure the Rectitude of Obliquity of Justice or
Injustice: where they do not chalk forth the way, both Judges, Lawyers,
Officers and Atturneys will tread what subtle, obscure paths they please,
usurp an Arbitrary power and latitude to prevaricate; and so far corrupt and
work the Law of their sense, that they will rather Leges dare, then Leges
dicere, so that what is Law in one man's case, shall not be so in another man's,
They will so intricate and entangle causes; that every case shall be Casus pro
amico; as Civilians call it; when upon full hearing, The Merits of the cause
appear so equal, and undistinguishable on both parties; that the Judge may
(according to his discretion) look upon the Merits of the Persons only: and
give the cause; Pauperiori, via Charitatis, or digniori, ratione virtutis.
Justice not fixed by Formalities, will become such a vagrant, that no man shall
know where to find her. Let us now see what our new shambles, our upstart High
Court does. Which in this work of Reformation and Destruction, so much abhorres
Superstition and Ceremonies, and sticks so close to a Summary way of
proceeding, that they have not only stripped, but flead her: as their Masters
the Parliament not only fleece but flea the People. In lieu of a Bill of
presentment, by a Grande Enquest, the pretended Parliament or Counsel of
State, send a List of such Persons names, as they have proscribed, And set a
Nigrum Theta upon, (as men dangerous to their designed interest) to the Masters
of their Slaughterhouse, The said High Court, together with such Depositions
as they have taken in corners, against the Prisoners: and this is such a
forejudging of them that the said Court neither will nor dare acquit, whom
their Masters and Pay-Masters have precondemned. Next Articles of Impeachment
in nature of a charge are drawn up against the Prisoner (although such Articles
are nothing in Law, which regards only a Bill of Indictment) Then the Prisoner
(after a close Imprisonment for he knows not what) upon two days warning is
led to the Bar; where the first work is to dazzle his eyes, amaze and distract
his Judgment and Memory with the terror of their Soldiers, the Numerousnesse,
high affronting words and looks of his Judges; having thus mortified the
Prisoner, he is commanded to hear his charge read: and bid plead to it, Guilty,
or not Guilty. If he own their Jurisdiction and plead the said General Plea,
they have him where they would have him: they never ask him; how he will be
tried, Whether by God and his Country? For God has no hand in these
proceedings, nor amongst such Judges: and this rod of Iron is provided to
bruise his Country, as well as himself. Lieutenant Colonel Lilbornes Trial
has taught them That it is an easier Matter for them to pack a Butcher-Rowe of
confiding, partial Judges, then a Jury; who are liable to be challenged, if
suspected of partiality. When Colonel Andrews claimed to be tried legally as
a Freeman by a Jury, and vouched Great Charter, and many other Statutes,
(whereof see his aforesaid 3. Answers) that sneaking Bloud-sucker, illiterate
Keeble answered, Those Statutes were out of date now, (meaning, They were taken
away by conquest.) So that this Shamble Row of Judges, take upon them to be,
both Judges of the Law, (without acknowledging the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, or taking any Oath of Indifferency to the People) Triors of the Fact, or
Jurates of life and death (without being sworn to find according to Evidence)
as well as Parties and Prosecutors. Thieves upon the high way may as justly
arraign a True man before them, because he brought no more Money in his purse,
offered to draw his sword and hid his money about him in contempt of their
Jurisdiction and Authority; and condemn him upon such a Mock Trial and Mummery
or Interlude of Justice, as these Fellows. If they allow him Counsel, his
Counsel must apprehend the minds of his Judges, at his peril; and not be so
faithful and diligent as to help his client in earnest; Lest the Counsel of
State, or some other power (whose will is a Law) interpose, and banish him 20.
miles from London; as they did Master Sprat, Sir John Gells Solicitor, before
Sir John's business was ended; whereby Sir John was left destitute of means to
follow his business, himself being Close Prisoner. If they permit any witness
to speak on the prisoners part, He comes at his peril: Sir John Gells first
witness was so baffled in Court, that the rest stole away and durst not
appear. I have not heard whether they give any Copy of their Aricles of
Impeachment to the Prisoner, (for they cover all their doings with such a
Plaguey Egyptian Darkness, that we cannot see a glimpse of light) or whether
they go a Star Chamber way, and make him Answer Ore tenus, and ex tempore for
his life and Estate. But if they give him any Copy, or any time to answer, it
is not above four or five days or a week, nor do they allow him Counsel or
any other Clearing of the way to his defense, until he have ensnared himself
by owning their Jurisdiction, and pleaded the General Plea, Not Guilty. If he
plead not an Issuable Plea, and yield to their Jurisdiction, quitting all
benefit of the Law and Legal proceedings; the Razor is at his throat, they
thirst after his Blood; and they presently sentence him guilty of contumacy and
take it pro confesso. And if he do submit and plead: His plea will have the
operation but of a Psalm of Mercy, prolonging his life but for a short time, in
the interim Keeble and his Court plays with him as a Cat with a Mouse, and then
devours him. For no man is sent to this Court to be Tried, but to be condemned.
In hac arena dimicatur sine missione. Herein they show themselves much more
Tyrannous and bloody then the Duke D' Alva when he erected his said Counsel of
Troubles, called Concilium Sanguinis, or the Bloody conventicle; as this will
shortly be. For says Strada Declar. 1. lib. 7. Procurator reginus menses 4.
Conficiendae Accusationi accipiens sibi; 5. Concedebat ad Defensionem regis
(Egmontio, Hornano, etc.) The Kings Attorney took 4. Months time to draw up
the charge or accusation, and gave 5. Months time to the Respondents to make
their defense. And had he given less then 5. Months time, To Instruct Counsel,
Pen their Answers, produce and summon witesses, inquire into the lives and
conversation of their Accusors, his feet had been swift to shed blood. Nulla
unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est, But our Inquisitors take whole
years to themselves to hunt for Matter of Accusation, and hire and engage
witnesses against men kept in ignorance and want with close Imprisonment: and
allow not them so many days to make their Defense. All manner of Accusors and
witnesses, though apparently suborned and forsworn in the same cause, and
proofs without exceptions offered to the Court that they are of infamous life
and conversation, are in this Court (the Object of whose desires are Blood and
Confiscations, not Justice) lawful witnesses, such witnesses were the said
Bernard and Pits; Monsters of men. See Sir John Gells case stated: Printed
about August, 1650. To cite any ancient known Laws or Statutes, or any other
then their own new coined Acts, passed by this 8th. Parts of a House of
Commons, (since they became elect Members chosen by Thomas Pride) is to incur
the High Indignation of the Court, expressed abundantly in their words and
looks. But to put them in mind of the Parliaments many Declarations, To
maintain the ancient known Laws, Liberties and Properties of the People, is to
scandal the present Government and incur the Censure of that unknown
Mysterious Crime which knaves call Malignancy. The witnesses and Judges being
thus irrefragable; the first may swear what they will, the second may judge
what they will, since they are left at large and have all things in scrinio
pectoris: and Book Law must give place to Bench Law, The Jurisdiction and
Authority of this New unparalled Court is such a Mystery of iniquity, so
unscrutable and unquestionable, that if a Prisoner scruple (in the least)
either it, or any of the uncouth proceedings of it, it is a Mortal Sin to
him; and he is presently interrupted, See the Trial of King Char. I. in the
History of Independency 2. Part. page 91. etc.
and affronted both with disdainful words and looks, And told, We are
satisfied with our Authority that are your Judges, (So are Thieves upon the
high way satisfied with their Authority that rob and murder us by Gods
Providence and permission.) It is upon Gods Authority and the Kingdoms (yet
what they do is against the will of God revealed in his Scriptures: and against
the known established Laws, Statutes and continual Practice of the Kingdom:)
Which Authority commands you in the name of the People of England to answer
them. (Yet at least) 9. Parts of 10. of the People so much abhor these and
other their Practices, that every man's mouth speaks against them with bitter
curses and reproaches, to restrain which they have minted Acts of New Treasons,
to make men Offenders, nay Traitors, even for bare words; and erected this
bloody, illegal Theater, The High Court (so called, for its High Injustice) as
a Spanish Inquisition over them, and every man's hand would be about their
ears, did they not keep an Army of Janisaries to suppress them.) Their
Authority they do avow to the whole World, that the whole Kingdom are to rest
satisfied therewith. (You see here a Whip and a Bell provided to keep the whole
Kingdom in awe: the declared Supreme power of their Sovereign Lord the People,
must resign their known Laws to their Trustees, their Representatives in
Parliament, and take New Laws from their Arbitrary votes, or woe to be to
their Necks and Shoulders.) I must interrupt you, what you do is not agreeable
to the Proceedings of any Court of Justice. You are about to enter into
Argument and dispute concerning the Authority of this Court: before whom you
appear as a Prisoner; you may not dispute the Authority of this Court: nor will
any Court give way to it, you are to submit to it. (It is not safe to confute a
lie told with Authority. Yet if a man be Endited of Treason or Felony in the
Court of Common Pleas, a man may Demur to and dispute the Jurisdiction of that
Court; because it is not in Criminal Causes, Competens Forum; nor the Judges
Competent Judges: every man, and every cause must be tried Suo Foro, non
Alieno. So if a Peer be arraigned in the Kings Bench. And for this upstart,
unpresidented High Court; it is no Court of Judicature at all; as being erected
without lawful Authority; Consisting of Incompetent Judges: no Records
belonging to it: and tending to disinherit, and disfranchise all the People of
England, and to murder them.) You may not dispute the Jurisdiction of the
Supreme and Highest Authority of England, from which there is no Appeal, The
votes of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament is the Reason of the
Kingdom. (Oh Brutish, irrational Kigdom! Where 40. or 50. Anabaptisticall
Members, the Dregs and lees of the House of Commons, after all the best and
sincerest (7. Parts of 8.) had been racked and purged out at the Bunghole by
Cromwell the Bruer and Pride his Drayman shall be called the Reason and Law of
the Land. This confirms the truth of what King Charles I. Objected to the
Parliament (whereof I have formerly spoken) That they disposed of the Subjects
Lives and Fortunes, by their own Votes, against the known Laws of the Land.
But that there should be no Appeal to their declared Sovereign Lord the People,
from their subordinate Trustees in Parliament is wonderful; Considering that
in all Governments the last Appeal is ever the Highest and most Absolute power.
But it may be they will be the Peoples Trustees in spite of their Teeth, and
by the power of the Sword; and so free themselves from rendering any account of
their Stewardship. You may not demu^re to the Jurisdiction of the Court. If you
do, they let you know, that they overrule your Demurrer, and affirm their own
Jurisdiction. Reason is not to be heard against the Highest Jurisdiction, the
Commons of Engl. make a direct and positive Answer, either by denying or
confessing, and put in immediately an issuable Plea, Guilty, or Not Guilty of
the Charge, or we will record your Default and Contumacy, and by an implicit
confession take you Guilty proconfesso, and immediately give Judgment against
you. This (as I told you before) is it that blanches the Deer into the Toil,
But God deliver us from that Jurisdiction that is too high to hear Reason: and
that overrules Demurrers before they be heard.) I have told you as much of the
proceedings of this Court as the Novelty, Obscurity, Uncertainty and confusion
thereof will give me leave. Let me now (by way of overplus) give you the great
dangers and Slavery that will befall all sorts of People if they tamely and
cowardly suffer themselves to be deprived of their ancient, Legal Trialls by
Enditement and Juries of the Neighborhood: (then which the whole world cannot
boast of a more equal way) and suffer their Lives, Liberties, Estates and
Honors to be subject to an Arbitrary, Extrajudiciall conventicle of Blood,
(Cromwells New Slaughterhouse) which has neither Law, Justice, Conscience,
Reason, Presisident or Authority Divine or Humane, but only the pretended
Parliaments irrational Votes and the Power of the Sword to maintain it, which
will prove a Cittadell over their Liberties, a Snare to their Estates, a
Deadfall to their Lives, and Scandal to their honors and Families, if not
timely opposed.

1. By the Law The Enditement must specify what the Treason is, and against
what Person committed; As, against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignity. But in the said Articles of Impeachment, it is alleged that the
Treason is committed against the present Government; or, against the Keepers of
the Libe^ties of England; but in this dead-water our turning Tide between the
old Regal, and this New, unknown Government; no man knows how to do, look or
speak for fear of contradicting the guilt of an Interpretative Treason, upon
the said two Statutes for New Treasons, and before this boundless, lawless New
Court. And to say that Treason is committed against a Government in abstracto
is Nonsense: it must be said that Treason is committed against the Governors
in Concreto, naming them. For there being, no Treason without Allegiance; And
Allegiance being a personal Obligation, must be due from a certain known
Person, to a certain known Person or Persons. And therefore the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, not being yet made particularly known to us, who they
are, or where to be found, or what their power, Duty or Office is; and being
not tied by any set Oath, to deal well and truly with the People, (as Kings are
by their Coronation Oath; for if the stipulation be not mutual, the People are
Slaves, not Subjects.) Since the Duties of Allegiance and Protection; Obedience
and Command being reciprocal (as they must needs be, the Parliament having
declared the Supreme power to be in the People; they must not govern them Mero
Imperio (by Lawless votes) like Turkish Tartarian and Russian Slaves.) I cannot
owe nor perform Allegiance to those Individua vaga (the Keepers or Gaolers of
our Liberties) nor to an Utopian Commonwealth. And without Allegiance no
Treason: for in all Enditements of High Treason it must be alleged, That the
Accused did (Proditorie) perpetrate such and such Crimes, Contra debitam
Allegantiam suam. And the word (Proditorie) signifies the betraying of a Trust:
According to the Proverb; In Trust, is Treason. Now where there is no
profession of Allegiance, there is no Acceptance of a Trust, no man can trust
me against my will. I was born under a Regal Government, have read the Stat.
Recognition, 1. Jac. Have taken (as well as others) the Legal Oaths of
Allegiance, Obedience and Supremacy to the King his Heirs and Lawful
Successors, imposed upon me by lawful Authority, and from which no power on
Earth can absolve me: and so much I attest in the Oath of Supremacy. And how I
should now come (after the New Moduling of the Parliament and Kingdom by
Soldiers) to owe Allegiance to Cromwell the Bruer, Scot the Bruers Clerk,
Bradshaw the Murderous Petty fogger, Sir Henry Mildmay the Court Pander and
Projector, Holland the Linkeboy, John Trencharde that packed a Committee (in
which he was a Member) and voted to himself 2000 l. Love the super-inducted Six
Clerk, or any other of that Self-created Authority, let them sheath their
swords and tell me.

See the Additionall P^stscript at the Latter end of this Book.
2. An Enditement must certainly allege the Offense committed, in respect of the
Matter, Time, Place, Persons and other Circumstances; But in these Articles of
Impeachment they tie themselves to no such certainties; Whereby the Accused
knows not at what ward to lie, nor how to make his Defense. The Circumstances
of Time, Place and Persons, being the assured Testimony of all Humane Actions.
This Lawless Court leaves him in a vast Sea of Troubles, without Pole Star,
card or compass to steer by: The Arbitrary Opinions of this Court, declared
upon emergent Occasions, being a false-hearted Pilot to him. These Judges not
being of Counsel with the Prisoner, as our Legal Judges are, who swear to do
Justice according to the Law.

3. By the Law, any learned man that is present, may inform the Court, for the
benefit of the Prisoner, of any thing that may make the proceedings erroneous.
Cooks 3. Instit. p. 29. But the whole Proceedings of this Court, their Meeting
and sitting being erroneous, here is no room left for Admonition, To take away
their errors, is to take away Court.

4. Cooks 2. Instit. page 51. expounding the 29. chapter of Magna Charta has
these words. All Commissions ought to be grounded upon the Laws of England (not
upon the votes of the House of Commons) and to contain this Clause in them. To
do what is just according to the Laws and Customs of England, (not to execute
the several powers given them by the Act. 26. March 1650) and a little further
he says, Against this Ancient and Fundamental Law I find an Act of Parliament
made 11. Hen. VII. c. 3. That as well Justices of Assize as Justices of the
Peace, without any finding or presentment by the verdict of 12 men, upon a bare
Information for the King before them made, should have full power and Authority
by their Discretions, to hear and determine all Offenses and Contempts
committed, or done by any Person or Persons, against the Form, Ordinance or
effect of any Statute made and not repealed; saving Treason, Murder or Felony.
By color of which Act shaking this Fundamental Law, it is not credible what
horrible Oppressions and Exactions, to the undoing of infinite number of
People, were Committed by Empson and Dudley Justices of the Peace throughout
England. And upon this unjust and injurious Act, a New Office was erected (as
commonly in like cases it falls out) and they made Masters of the Kings
Forfeitures. (I hear such an other Offfce will be erected, when the Novelty of
this wonderful High Court is lessened, and the yoke thereof thoroughly settled
upon the Peoples Necks) Yet observe the said Act. 11. Hen. VII. c. 3. went not
so high as to Treason, Murder and Felony: But by the Stat. 1. Hen. VIII. chap.
6. the said Act 11. Hen. VII. was repealed, and the reason given, For that by
force of the said Act it was manifestly known; That many sinister and crafty,
forged and feigned Informations had been pursued against many of the Kings
subjects, to their great damage and wrongful vexation. The ill success
hereof (says Cook) and the fearful end of these two Oppressors, (who were
Endited and suffered for High Treason for all the said Act 11. Hen. VII. passed
in a full and Free Parliament. Cooks 3. Instit p. 208.) Should admonish
Parliaments, That instead of this Ordinary and precious Trial by the Law of
the Land, they bring not in Absolute and Partial Trialls by Discretion. And in
his 4. Instit. page 41. Cook says, Let Parliaments leave all Causes to be
measured by the golden and straightened wand of the Law, and not the uncertain
and crooked cord of Discretion: for it is not almost Credible to foresee, when
any Maxim or Fundamental Law of the Land is altered, what dangerous
inconveniences will follow; as appears by this unjust and strange Act 11.
Henry VII. chap. 3.

5. This Parliament always declared they bore Arms against the King, in
Defense of the Laws, Liberties and Properties of the People. This way ran the
whole current of their Declarations. And they always reckoned Magna Charta,
the Petition of Right and Trialls by Juries, the Chief and most Fundamental of
all our Laws. See their 1. Remonstrance: Therefore in their 7. Article against
Strafford. They charged him with High Treason, for giving Judgments against
men's Estates, without Trials by Juries. Much aggravated by Master St. John's in
his aforesaid Argument against Strafford. And for the better preservation of
Legal Trialls by Juries, it is provided in the Bill of Attainder of Strafford,
that the case of the same Earl should not be used as a President in succeeding
times. And in two of this Parliaments late Declarations 9. Febr. and 17. March
1648. The Parliament promises, To preserve and keep the fundamental Laws of
the land, for preservation of the lives, liberties and properties of the
people, with all things incident thereto. Now to erect an arbitrary lawless
high Court, to give judgment against men's lives and estates, and attain their
bloods, without Enditement found by a grand Jury, and a trial by a Jury of
twelve sworn men vicineto, is a far fouler breach of trust in them against
their Sovereign Lords the People, than all they charged the King withal, and a
far higher act of tyranny and injustice than either the late King, or Empson
and Dudley, or Strafford were accused of. But if they alledg, They do not put
down Juries in general, but only in some particular men's cases and upon
necessity. I answer, That we are all born Freemen of England alike, That our
ancient known Laws, Laws Courts and trials by Juries are our inheritance equal
alike to all. And one party or part of the people ought not to be disherited,
disfranchised or forejudged no more than another. No man can be said guilty of
any crime until he be legally convicted and sentenced, the Law must first go
upon him and condemn him, Ubilex non distinguit, non est distinguendum. If we
do not live all under one Law and form of Justice, we are not all of one
Commonwealth. See the aforementioned Gentleman's Argument, against the special
Commission of the Court of York. For Necessity; our present power is under
none, but the fears and terrors of their own guilty consciences. No appearance
nor probability of any enemy by their own confession; nor can they plead in
their excuse, a necessity which they have brought upon themselves. I know some
Kings have, de facto, used the Animadversion of the Sword to cut off such
powerful and dangerous persons as could not safely be called to account by the
Law; so dyed Joab, Adonijah, etc. for which the rule is, Neminem adeo eminere
debere, legibus interrogari nequeat; qui jus aequum far non potest, in eum
vim haud injustam fore. No man ought to advance himself above the powers of the
Law; he that will not submit to equal right, if he be cut off by violence,
suffers no wrong; but this is to be understood of the eminency and greatness of
the person, not of the greatness of the crime, whereof no man is to be
forejudged, because a great crime may prove a great calumny, until a legal
trial have adjudged it. But there is no person in England so eminent for power
or Authority, but that the least of Bradshaws Ban-dogs can drive him to the
Slaughterhouse, and make him offer his throat to Keeble. Therefore
Animadversio Gladii, if at any time lawful, is now unlawful. To make great
examples upon men of little power, is great injustice. But the way of this
Court is not Animodversio per Gladium. It is a Mocking, a Counterfeiting, an
Adulterating and Alchimisting of Justice; it is to falsify her weights and
balance, and steal her sword to commit Murder withal.

See Col. Andrews three Answers.
6. By the known Laws Matter of fact is entrusted to the Jury, matter of Law to
the Judges, to prevent all errors, combinations and partiallities. The Judges
are sworn to do justice according to the Law; the Jury are sworn to find
according to their evidence. But in this high Court the Commissioners or Judges
are all packed, confiding men, chosen by and out of one party, to destroy all
of a different party. They usurp the office of Judges, not being sworn to deal
well and lawfully with the people (as by the said Stat. 18 Ed. 3.) nor to do
justice according to the Law. But only to execute powers given by the said Act,
26. Mar. 1650. And they arrogate (as Jurymen) to be Triers of the Fact,
without being sworn, to find according to evidence. So that they are Judges,
Juries, and parties, (and for ease of their tender consciences (without any
Oath of Indifferency. A most excellent Compendium of Oppression. They may go to
the Devil for injustice, and not be forsworn. Great is the privilege of the
godly.

7. The prisoner may except against his Jurors, either against the Array, if
the Sheriff or Bailey impannelling the Jury, be not wholly disingaged and
indifferent, both to the cause, and to the parties, prosecuting, and
prosecuted; or against the Poll, he may challenge 35 peremptorily, and as many
more as he can render legal cause of challenge for. As for defect of estate, or
other abilities, or for partiality, Disaffection, Engagement, Infamy. But this
Array of Jurymen Judges (a Medley so new we know not how to express it) though
picked and empannelled by an engaged remainder of the Commons, and abnoxious to
all exceptions, must not be challenged, their backs are too much galled to
endure the least touch. Take heed you scandal not the Court (cries Mr.
Attorney) See Col. Andrews three Answers.

8. Many exceptions in a legal Trial, are allowed against Imperfections,
Uncertainties and Illegallities in the Bill of Endictment, for the advantage of
the Prisoner. But no Exceptions are allowed against these illegal Articles of
Impeachment, which are made uncertain, intricate and obscure and ambiguous
purposely to puzle, confound and entangle the Respondent.

9. By the Law a bill of Endictment must have two full and clear lawful
witnesses to every considerable Matter of Fact, both at finding the Bill and at
the Trial. Where there is but one witness, it shall be tried by combat before
the Earl Martial Cook, ibidem
Cooks 3. Instit. page 25, 26. And Probationes debent esse luce clariores.
Proofs must be as clear as the Sun, not grounded upon Inferences, Presumptions,
Probabilities. And the Prisoner must be Provablement Attaint, says the Stat.
25. Ed. 3. chap. 2. Cooks 3. Instit. page 12. The word (attainted) shows he
must be legally proceeded with; not by absolute power as formerly had been used
(and as is now used by this bloody High Court) But before these Slaughter-men
of the High Court, all manner of witnesses, Legal or Illegal, one or two, sworn
or not sworn, or apparently forsworn and suborned, and all proofs clear or not
clear are sufficient. The Prisoner is sent thither foredoomed, and has its
deaths Mark, his fate in his forehead.

10. The said Act 26. March 1650. carries two faces under one hood, and looks
backwards as well as forwards. To facts precedent as well as subsequent the
said Act, contrary to the nature of all Laws, whose office is to prohibit it
before it punish, to warn before it strike. Where St. Paul defines Sin to be
the breach of Commandment, or Law. I had not known Sin but by the Law. The Law
must therefore be precedent to the Offense. But these Acts are not Laws to
admonish, but Lime-twigs and Traps to ensnare and catch men. See Col. Andrews
3. Answers at the latter end of this book.

Fourthly and lastly, I am to consider, To what end and purpose this new
invented High Court is constituted and appointed? Concerning which see a Letter
dated 6. June 1650. Stilo veteri, from the Hague, (supposed to be Walter
Stricklands, the Parliaments Agent there) as I find it in Walter Frosts brief
Relations of some affairs and transactions, etc. from Tuesday June 11. to June
18. 1650. wherein the Epistoler has these words, One piece of the cure (viz.
of the dangers that threaten your new State) must be Phlebotomy, but then you
must begin before Decumbency, and then it will be facile to prevent danger, etc.
they are here most of all afraid of your high Court of Justice, which they
doubt may much discourage their party, they wish you would not renew the power
thereof, but let it expire: then they think that after Michaelmas they may
expect Assistance with you. And indeed that Court is of almost as much use to
you as an Army: and will prevent the rising of as many Enemies, as the other
will destroy, only you must be sure to execute Justice there with all severity.
A few of the first stirrers taken away, by the power thereof, without respect
to cousin or Country, will keep all the rest quiet. But whosoever that Court
condemns, let them be as already dead, etc. But let them be most free in
cutting the vena Coephalica (that is the Presbyterian Party) for the Basilica
(or Royal Party) will be latent. The Median (or Levellers) would be spared as
much as may be, that the body be not too much emaciated. Besides, the blood is
most corrupt in the Coephalicks (or Presbyterians) and is the very causa
continens of your disease. You need not fear to take freely of this vein, etc.
Here you see this State Mountebank gives you the use and application of this
corrasive. (The High Shambles of Justice) so fully that I shall not need to
comment upon it. And in the latter end of a Letter from Cromwell, dated from
Dunbar, 4. Sept. 1650. (as I find it in Politicus) speaking of his new
purchased victory over the Scots, Cromwell says; God puts it more and more into
your hands to improve your power, (viz. your absolute Authority) we pray own
his People more and more, (that is, the Army) they are the Chariots and Horsemen
of Israel (of the Kingdom of the Saints) disown your selves but own your
Authority (which you enjoy under the Protection of the Army, your Lords
Paramount) and improve it; to Curb the Proud and Insolent, etc. (That is, all
men of different opinions and parties from them, that will not engage to be
true and owe Allegiance to the Kingdom of the Saints, and resign their Laws,
Liberties and properties to their lusts and wills.) That I have not
misconstrued the contents of Cromwels mystical letter, will appear by a
Discourse in the same Politicus, Numb. 17. from Thursday Sept. 26. to October. 3.
1650. Where (according to his custom) delivering forth State-Oracles to the
people, He tells them in plain English, That after the Confusions of a Civil
War, there is a necessity of some settlement, and it cannot be imagined (the
Controversy being determined by the Sword) that the Conquerours should submit
to the conquered, though more in number than themselves. Nor are they obliged
to settle the Government again according to the former Laws and Constitutions,
but may erect such a form as they themselves conceive most convenient for their
own preservation. For after a Civil War the written Laws (viz. established Laws
of the Nation) are of no force, but only those which are not written. (And a
little after) the King having by Right of war lost his share and interest in
Authority and power, being conquered, by Right of war the whole must needs
reside in that part of the People which prevailed over him: There being no
middle power to make any claim, and so the whole Right of Kingly Authority in
England being by Military Decision resolved into the prevailing Party, what
Government soever it pleases them to erect, is as valid de Jure, as if it had
the consent of the whole Body of the People. That he should affirm, That after
a Civil War the Established Laws cease, is so gross a piece of ignorance, that
there is hardly any History extant but confutes it: After our Barons war, and
the Civil War between York and Lancaster, Our Established Laws flourished; so
did they after the Norman Conquest. How many Civil Wars in France have left
their Laws untouched? That of the Holy Leage lasted 40 years; Belgia keeps her
Laws maugre her intestine Wars: What is now become of the Parliaments declared
Supreme Power and Sovereign Lord the People, the Original and Fountain of all
just power? are they not all here proclaimed Ear-bored slaves for ever? But I
had thought that an Army of Mercenary Saints raised, paid and commissioned by
the Parliament to defend the Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties of the
people, and the Kings Crown and Dignity, according to the Protestation and
Covenant, and the Parliaments Declarations, would not have made such carnal and
hypocritical use of their Victories gotten by Gods providence and the peoples
money, as to destroy our known Laws, Liberties and Properties, and claim by
Conquest, and impose their own lusts for Laws upon us, thereby rendering
themselves Rebels against their God, their King and Country. Nor was it ever
the State of the Quarrel between the King and Parliament whose slaves the
people should be? Or whether we should have one King, Governing by the known
established Laws? or 40 Tyrants Governing by their own lusts and arbitrary
votes, against our written Laws? Nor can the success make n Conquest just,
unless the cause of the war were originally just, and the prosecution thereof
justly managed. As 1. To vindicate a Just Claim and Title. 2. Ad res
repetendas. To recover Damages wrongfully sustained. 3. To repel an injury done
to your self, or to your Ally in league with you.

The ultimate end of these wicked endeavors is, To establish and cement with
the blood of their adversaries, the Kingdom of the Brambles or Saints, already
founded in blood, by cutting of all such by their said New Acts of Treason and
High Court of Justice, as will not bow their Necks to their Iron yoke. Which
appears more clearly in an Additional Act giving farther power to the said High
Court, (dated 27. Aug. 1650.) To hear and determine all Misprisions or
Concealments of Treasons mentioned or contained in any of the said Articles or
Acts of Parliaments: And to inflict such punishments, and award such execution,
as by the Laws and Statutes have been, or may be inflicted. This Law (if I
miscal it not) considering how they have multiplied Treasons by their said 3
New Statutes, 14. May, 17 July 1649. and 26. March 1650. Whereby bare words
without Act are made High Treason, contrary to those well approved Statutes, 25
Edw. 3. chap. 2. 1 Hen. 4. chap. 10. 1 Edw. 6. chap. 12. 1 Mariae, chap. 1.
Cook 3 Instit. says, That words may make an Heretic not a Traitor, Chap. High
Treason. And the Scripture denounces a woe to him; That makes a man an
Offender for a word, is one of the cruelst, and most generally dangerous and
entrapping that ever was made. For hereby all relations, Husband and Wife,
Parents and Children, Brothers and Sisters, Masters and Servants, are all
enjoined to be informers against, and accusers of one another (which is to take
upon them the Devils office (and be Accusatores Fratrum) for light and vain
words spoken only in passion or ignorantly: or else they fall into the jaws of
this all-devouring Court, from whence, no more then from hell, there is no
redemption) for Misprision of Treason: the Penalty whereof is loss of liberty
and lands for life, and of goods for ever, Who can imagine less hereby, but
that our Statists intend to raise a yearly revenue by this Court, by
Forfeitures and Confiscations: and to erect an Office of Master of the States
Forfeitures: like Empsons and Dudleys in Hen. VII. time aforesaid. And so
continue this Court, 10. December. 1650. A New Act passed, for establish ng an
High Court Justice in N^^folk, Suffolk, Huntington, Camb idge, Lincoln, and the
Isl^ of Ely, etc. And so by degrees this gangrene shall enlarge it self all the
Kingdom over.
to weed out the Ancient Inhabitants Canaanites and Amalekites. The said
Additional Act, 27. Aug. 1650. concludes, That the said High Court shall not
Examine, Try or proceed against any person other then such as shall be first by
name appoin^ed by the Parliament or Council of State. It should seem the
Parliament and Council of State supply the want of a Grand Inquest; and their
Appointment is in stead of a Bill of Enditement found and presented. As
Assuredly as the High Inquisition was erected in Spain by Ferdinando and
Isabella to extirpate the Mohammedan Moors: And the said Council of Blood in the
Low Countries, by the Duke D' Alva to weed out the Lutherans, Calvinists and
Anabaptists. So is this High Court set up in England, to root out the
Royallists, Presbyterians and Levellers; and generally all that will not wholly
concur with our Independents in Practice and Opinions. As will manifestly
appear when their work is done in Scotland, which will soon be effected: the
more zealous Scots being now as ready to sell their Kingdom; as they were
formerly to sell their King.

I. Conclude therefore upon the Reasons aforesaid; That because the
Commissioners or Judges are not sworn to do Justice according to the Laws: and
are parties pre engaged (as well as their Masters, and pay Masters, that named
them) ignorant men, and of vild and base professions, incapable of places of
Judicature, Necessitous Persons, and some of them Scandalous, and the High
Court it self has neither Law, President, nor any just Authority for
constituting thereof or the Judges therein. And all proceedings before them are
directly Contrary to Magna Charta, the Statute 25. Edw. III. chap. 2. The
Petition of Right and all other known and Established Laws, and the continual
Practice of our Nations; and (in many points) contrary to the Law of God and
the Dictates of Right Reason. That these Commissioners are Incompetent Judges;
Their Court an Extrajudicial Conventicle, tending to disinherit, disfranchise
and enslave all the Freemen of the Nation; and all Proceedings before them are
void, and coram non Judice. See Col. Andrews 3. Answers, The said High Court of
Justice to be a mere bloody Theater of Murder and Oppression. It being against
Common Reason, and all Laws divine and humane, That any man should be Judge in
his own Cause. Neminem posse in sua causa Iudicem esse. Is the Rule in Law. But
this Parliament and Council of State know they cannot establish and confirm
their usurped Tyranny, (The Kingdom of the Saints,) eat up the People with
Taxes, and share public Lands, Offices, and Money amongst themselves, enslave
the Nation to their Lawless wills and pleasures, but by cutting off the most
able and active men of all opposite parties by some such expedient as this
Arbitrary Lawless High Court is. The old Legal way by Iuries (being found by
John Lilbourns Trial) to be neither sure enough nor speedy enough to do their
work. A Butcher-Rowe of Judges being easier packed, then a Jury who may be
challenged. So that it fares with the People of England, as with a Traveller
fallen into the hands of Thieves. First, they take away his Purse. And then, to
secure themselves, they take away his life. So they Rob him by Providence,
And then Murder him by Necessity. And (to bring in their third insisting
Principle) they may allege; They did all this upon Honest intentions; to
enrich the Saints, and rob the Egyptians. With these 3. Principles they
Justify all their Villainies. Which is an Invention so merely their own, That
the Devil must acknowledge: They have propagated his Kingdom of Sin and Death
more by their impudent Iustifications, then by their Turbulent Actions.

An Additional Postscript.
SInce the Conclusion of the Premises has happened, the Trial of that worthy
Knight Sir John Stowell, of the County of Sommerset: Who having bin often
before this Court, has so well defended himself, and wiped off all Objections,
and made such good use of the Articles of the Rendition of Excester, that in
the Opinion of all men, and in despite of their ensnaring Acts for New
Treasons, he cannot be adjudged guilty of any Treason, Old or New, which was
the Sum and Complement of the Charge against him. Wherefore the Court put off
his Trial for a longer time, to hunt for New Crimes and Witnesses against him.
At last came into the Court as a witness John Ash, notwithstanding he is a
Party many ways engaged against him. 1. Ash is a Parliament Man; in which
capacity Sir John Stowel bore Arms for the King against him. 2. Ash as a
Parliament Man is one of the constitutors of this murderous Court and the
Judges thereof, and therefore their Creatures (who expect rewards from them)
bear a more awful respect to his testimony, then a witness ought to have from
Judges. 3. It is publicly known that Ash has begged of the House a great
sum of money out of the Composition for, or Confiscation of Sir John's Estate.
And 4ly. It is known to many, That during Sir John's many years Imprisonment
Ash often labored with Sir John to sell unto him for 4000. l. a Parcel of
Land which cost Sir John above 10000 l. promising him to pass his Composition
at an easy rate, to procure his enlargement from Prison, and send him home in
peace and quiet if he granted his desire. But although with all their malicious
diligence, they cannot find him guilty of High Treason, yet their Articles of
Impeachment Charge him in general Terms with Treason, Murder, Felony, and
other High Crimes and Misdemeanors; and amasse together such a Sozites and an
Accumulation of Offenses, as if one fail another shall hit right to make him
punishable in one kind or other: such an hailshot charge cannot wholly miss;
either they will have life, estate, or both; Contrary to the nature of all
Enditements and Criminal Charges whatsoever; which ought to be particular,
clear and certain (Lamb. page 487.) that the accused may know for what Crime he
puts himself upon issue; But this Court (as High as it is) not being
Constituted a Court of Record; the Prisoner, and those that are concerned in
him, can have no Record to resort to either. 1. To demand a Writ of Error, in
Case of Erroneous Judgment. 2. To ground a plea of Auterfois Acquit, in case
of New Question for the same fact. 3ly, Or to demand an enlargement upon
Acquital. Or 4ly, To demand a writ of conspiracy, against such as have combined
to betray the life of an innocent man. Whereby it follows, That this prodigious
Court has power only to Condemn and Execute; not to Acquit and give
Enlargement; Contrary to the Nature of all Courts of Judicature, and of Justice
it self: it is therefore a mere Slaughterhouse to Commit Free State Murders
in, without, nay against Law and Justice: and not a Court of Judicature; to
condemn the Nocent, and absolve the Innocent. And the Judges of this Court
run Parallel with their Father the Devil; who is ever the Minister of Gods
wrath and fury, never of his Mercy.

The humble Answer of Coll. Eusebius Andrews Esquire, to the Proceedings
against him before the Honorable, The high Court of Justice 1650.
THe said Respondent (with favor of this Honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the benefit and liberty of making farther Answer, if it
shall be adjudged necessary, offers to this Honorable Court

That by the Stat. or Charter styled Magna Charta, (which is the Fundamental
Law, and ought to be the Standard of the Laws of England, Confirmed above 30.
times, and yet unrepealed, it is in the 29. Chapter thereof granted and enacted,

1. That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his
Freehold or Liberties, or Free Customs; or be outlawed or exiled, or any other
ways destroyed, Nor we shall not pass upon him but by a lawful Judgment of his
Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

2. We shall sell to no man, nor deferr to any man Justice or Right.

By the Stat. 42. Ed. III chap III. The Great Charter is commanded to be kept
in all points: and it is enacted.

That if any Stat. be made to the contrary, That shall be holden for none.

By the Act 26 March 1650. entitled, An Act for establishing, An High Court of
Justice, Power is given to this Court; To Try, Condemn, and cause execution of
death to be done, upon the Freemen of England, according as the Major number of
any 12. of the Members thereof shall judge to appertain to Justice.

And thereupon the Respondent does humbly infer, and affirm that the Tenor of
the said Act is diametrically opposite to, and inconsistent with the said Great
Charter. And is therefore by the said recited Stat. 42. Ed. III. to be holden
for none.

Secondly, That it can with no more Reason, Equity or Justice, hold the
reputation or value of a Law, (if the said Stat. had not bin) then if (contrary
to the 2d. Clause of the 29. chap of Magna Charta) it had bin also enacted,
That Justice and Right shall be deferred to all Freemen, and sold to all that
will buy it.

By the Petition of Right, 3. Car. upon premising: That contrary to the Great
Charter, Trials and Executions had bin had and done against the Subjects, by
Commissions Martial, etc. it was thereby prayed, and by Commission enacted. That:

1. No Commissions of the like nature might be thenceforth issued, etc.

2. To prevent least any of the Subjects should be put to death, Contrary to
the Laws and Franchises of the Land.

The Respondent hereupon Humbly observes; and affirms: That this Court is
(though under a d^fferent style) in nature, and in the Proceedings thereby
directed, the same with a Commission Martial. The Freemen thereby being to be
tried for life, and adjudged by the Opinion of the Major Number of the
Commissioners sitting, as in Courts of Commissioners Martial was practiced;
and was agreeable to their constitution: And consequently against the Petition
of Right: in which he, and all the Freemen of England (if it be granted there
be any such) has and have Right and Interest, and he humbly claims his right
accordingly.

By the Declarations of this Parliament, Dec. and Jan. 17. 1641. The benefit of
the Laws, and the ordinary course of Justice are the Subjects Birthright.

By the Declaration, 12. July. 6. 1. October. 1642. The Prosecution of the Laws,
and due administration of Justice, are owned to be the justifying cause of the
War, and the end of the Parliaments affairs managed by their Swords and
Counsels, and Gods curse is by them imprecated, in case they should ever
decline those ends.

By the Declaration 17. April 1646. Promise was made not to interrupt the
Course of Justice, in the ordinary Courts.

By the Ordinance or Votes of Non-addresses, Jan. 1648. It is assured, That,
though they lay aside the King; yet they will govern by the Laws, and not
interrupt the course of Justice, in the ordinary Courts thereof. Th y forget
the 2. Declarations 9. Febr. 17. March 1648.


And therefore this Respondent humbly averreth and affirms, That the
constitution of this Court, is a breach of the public Faith of the Parliament
exhibited and pledged in those Declarations and Votes to the Freemen of England.

And upon the whole matter, the Respondent (saving as aforesaid) does affirm
for Law and claims as is Right. That:

1. This Court in defect of the validity of the said Act, by which it is
constituted, has no power to proceed against him, or to press him to a
further Answer.

2. That by virtue of Magna Charta, The Petition of Right, and the before
recited Declarations, he ought not to be proceeded against in this Court, but
by an ordinary Court of Justice, and to be tried by his Peers.

And humbly prays: That this his present Answer and Salvo may be accepted and
registered. Eusebius Andrews.

The Second Answer of Col. Eusebius Andrews Esquire, To the Honorable, The High
Court of Justice. 1650.
THe said Respondent (with the Favor of this Honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the Benefit, and Liberty of making further Answer, if it
shall be Necessary. In all humbleness for the present Answer offers to this
Honorable Court.

That by the Letter and genuine sense of the Act, entitled An Act for
establishing an High Court of Justice. The said Court is not qualified to try a
Freeman of England, (such as the Respondent averreth himself to be) for life in
case of Treason. For that: 1. The said Court is not constituted a Court of
Record; neither has Commission returnable into a Court of Record.

So that: 1. The State cannot upon the Record (and but upon Record cannot at
all) have that account of their Freemen, which Kings were wont to have of their
Subjects, and States exact else where at the hands of their Ministers of
Justice.

2. The Freemen, and those who are or may be concerned in him, can have no
Record to resort to, by which to preserve the Rights due to him and them
respectively. viz.

1. A writ of Error in case of erroneous judgment.

2. A plea of Auterfoies acquit, in case of new question for the same fact.

3. An Enlargement upon Acquitall.

4. A Writ of Conspiracy, not to be brought until Acquital, against those who
have practiced to betray the life of the Respondent.

1. The Writ of Error is due by Presidents. Paschae 39. Ed. III. John of
Gaunts Case Rot. Parliament. 4. Ed. III. Number. 13. Count de Arundells Case. Rot.
Parliament 49. Ed. III. Number. 23. Sr. John of Lees Case

2. Auterfois acquit appears by: Wetherell and Darl^is Case. 4. Rep. 43. EliZ.
Vaux his Case. 4. Rep. 33. Eliz.

3. The Enlargement appears by: Stat. 14. Hen. IV. chap. 1. Diers Reports fol.
121. The year book of E^^. IV. 10. fol. 19.

4. The writ of Conspiracy, by: The Poulters Case. 9, Rep. fol. 55.

This Court is to determine at a day; without account of their proceedings, and
have power to try, judge, and cause Execution: but not to acquit or give
Enlargement. So that the nocent are thereby punishable; the injured and betrayed
not vindicable. Which are defects incompatible with a Court of Justice, and
inconsistent with Justice it self; and the honor of a Christian Nation and
Common wealth.

2. The Members of this Court, are by the said Act directed to be sworn.

1. Not in conspectu populi; For the Freemans satisfaction.

2. Not in words of Indifferency and obliging in equality.

3. But in words of manifest partiality, viz.

You shall swear; That you shall well and truly, according to the best of your
skill and knowledge, execute the several powers given you by this Act.

1. If the Court be Triers and Judges too, it is humbly offered by the
respondent, that it is but reasonable; that they should be sworn as triers; in
the sight of the Freeman who shall be upon his Trial.

2. And, that as Justices of Oyer and Terminer (They being authorized to hear
and determine by the words of the Act. They should take an oath, such as is
usual and equal, set down E. III. Viz. You shall swear, that well and lawful
you shall serve our Lord the King, and his People in the Office of Justice,
etc. And that you deny to no man Common Right.

3. Or that this Court (taking Notice of such high matters as Treason, upon the
guilt whereof the Freemans life depends) should take an Oath (at least) as
equal as a Justice of the Peace. Daltons Just. of Peace, fol. 13. the words
are,

I A. B. do swear that I will do equal Right, etc. according to my best wit,
canning and power, after the Laws and Customs of the Land, and the Statutes
thereof made, etc.

4. If the Court will be Judges and Triers too: (for they have power given them
to conclude the Freemen, by the opinion of the major number of twelve, holding
some resemblance (but with a signal difference) with the verdict of a Jury) it
were but reasonable that they should take an Oath correspondent to that usually
administered to Iury-men. The words are,

You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make between the Keepers
of the Liberties of England, and the Prisoner at the Bar, according to your
evidence. So help you God, etc.

5. When this Court (as it is now constituted) has condemned a Freeman, by
applying their skill and knowledge to the power given them, whether justly or
not: the Oath enjoined them by the Act 26. Marh, 1650. is not broken,
literally; as to be exactable by man, though God will have a better account.

And therefore upon the whole matter premised: The Respondent (saving as
before) averreth for Law and Reason: This Court by the words of the Act
constituting it; is not qualified, (in respect of the objected defects) to
pass upon him for life in case of Treason, And prays this his 2: Answer may
be received, with the Salvo's, and registered,

Eusebius Andrews,

The third Answer of Coll. Eusebius Andrews Esquire, to the Honorable, The High
Court of Justice. 1650.
THe said Respondent (with favor of this Honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the benefit and liberty of making further Answer, if it
shall be necessary, in all humbleness for present Answer offers to this
Honorable Court,

1. That it is his Right (if he admit this Court to be duly and legally
established, and constituted as to their being a Court) to be tried by his
Peers; men of his own condition and Neighborhood.

2. That it is within the power of this Court, by the Letter of the Act, 26.
March 1650. Or (at least) not repugnant to the Act, to try him by such his
Peers, etc.

1. That it is his Right to be tried only so: appears by Magna Charta, chap.
29. 25. Ed. 3. chap. 9. 28. Ed. 3. chap. 4. 42. Ed. 3. chap. 3. 25. Ed. 1.
chap. 1. and 2. 25. Ed. 3. chap. 2. and 4. 37. Ed. 3. chap. 18.


By all which this Right is maintainable; And the Proceedings contrary
thereunto will be held for none, and to be redressed as void and erroneous.

So that if the Laws and Courts were not obstructed in the cases of some sort
of Freemen of England, the whole Proceedings contrary to these Laws without a
Jury of his Peers, were avoidable and reversible by Writ of Error, as appears
by the Presidents vouched in the Respondents second Answer.

3. That it is in the Courts power, To try the Freeman, and consequently the
Respondent, by a Jury of his Equals; The Court is humbly desired to consider
the words of qualification.

1. The Court is Authorized; To hear and determine: and so (if at all
Commissioners) then Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and such Commissioners,
in their natural constitution and practical execution, do proceed against
Freemen according to Law by a Jury of their Peers, and not otherwise.

2. Authorized to proceed to Trial, condemnation and execution: But not
restrained to the manner limitative: As, to Trial by the Opinion of the Court,
as Triers Nor exclusive. As, to Trial per pares. But is left in the Manner, as
in the Judgment it self, To the Opinion of the major part of 12. and if they
shall think fit to try by a Jury, it will be no offense against the Act, there
being no Prohibition to the contrary.

And though this Respondent insisteth upon his said Right, consisting with the
Courts said power, and the more to induce the Court to grant him his said
Right; He humbly represents the wrong done to himself, and in him to the
Freemanzy of England in the following particulars, against their just Rights
depending upon such Trials to be allowed or denied.

1. Challenges to his Triers peremptory, or with cause of Challenge.

2, Seeing, hearing, and counter-questioning the witnesses for clearing of the
Evidence: in matter of Fact and Circumstance.

3. The being convicted or acquitted by a full and fully consented verdict.

To all which benefits as his undoubted Right, and the Right of all the Freemen
of England, the Respondent makes claim by these Reasons, Laws and Presidents
following.

1. The benefit of Challenges by the learning of Stanford in his Pleas of the
Crown, Title challenge fol. 150. To challenge 35. without Reason showed; and
with Reason shown, without Number adjudged 32. Hen. VI. in Poinings case,
abriged by Fitzherb. Tit. Challenge, fol. 26. allowed in Hillary 1. Jac. Sir
Walter Rawleigh and Brooks.

2. To the hearing and questioning the value and weight of the witnesses. The
Laws are plain in Stanfords pleas of the Crown fol. 163, 164. Stat. 1. and 2.
of Phil and Mary, Chap 10 11. 1 Ed. VI. chap. 12. Cooks 3 Instit. page 12.
upon the words in the St. 25. Ed. III. chap 2. (Provablement atteint) Because
the punishment was heavy, the proof must be punctual, and not upon
Presumptions, or Inferences, or Streins of wit, nor upon Arguments simili, or
Minori ad Majus, etc. But upon good and clear proofs, made good also by the St.
1. Ed. c. 6. 19. Ed. c. 1.

3. A verdict by Jury passes from all, or not at all, in this way of
proceeding by the Court immediately: it passes by way of concurrence (or
voting) the great fault found with the Star Chamber; and all Commissionary
Courts, proceeding without presentment or Enditement.

4. A Verdict passes from a Jury before discharged, upon their Affairs of
business, or supplies of Nature; to prevent corruption by money or power. In
this way of Trial a man may be heard to day, and a Sentence given at leisure,
when the power and will of those by whom the Freeman is prosecuted, be first
known. And from such a proceeding this Respondent can hope little equality; he
being (to his knowledge) forejudged already by them.

And therefore (if at all this Honorable Court think fit to proceed to a Trial
of this Respondent) he claims the benefit of Trial per pares: by Evidence viva
voce. And rests on the Opinion of the Court; saving (as formerly) Liberty of
farther Answer, if overruled.

And prays that this his Answer and Salvos may be accepted and registered.
Eusebius Andrews,

WHereas mention has bin made in several printed Books, that John Fowke
Alderman, was one of those persons, that did actually sit as Judges upon the
Trial of his Majesty, with the Council and Attendants of the Court. And was in
the number of the Judges at the Kings sentence of death. These are to give
notice to all men, that the same is most false and scandalous, as will many
ways appear; And in particular, by the Certificate of Henry Scobell Clerk of
the Parliament, in these words following, (ViZ.)

IN a Book Ordered by the Parliament to be kept among the Records of the
Parliament read in the House the 11. of December 1640. and Entitled, A Journal
of the Proceedings of the High Court of Justice, erected by Act of the Commons
of England, Entitled, An Act of the Commons of England in Parliament
Assembled, for Erecting of an High Court of Justice, for the trying and judging
of Charles Stewart, King of England; In which Books are set down the Names of
the Commissioners, appearing each day in Court. Having diligently searched the
same, the name of John Fowke Alderman of London, is not therein mentioned, as
being present with the Commissioners at any meeting upon the said Trial, either
public or private.

March 28. 1660. Henry Scobell Clerk of the Parliament.

THE HISTORY OF Independency.

The Fourth and last Part.

Continued from the Death of his late MAJESTY, King CHARLES the First of happy
Memory, till the deaths of the chief of that Juncto.

By T. M. Esquire, a Lover of his King and Country.

Cicero Epist. Lib. 2. Ep. 3. Civem mehercule non puto esse, qui temporibus his
ridere possit.

Id. Lib. 5. Ep. 12. Habet autem praeteriti doloris secura recordatio
delectationem.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Gun in Ivie-Lane; and H. Marsh at the
Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1660.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF Great BRITAINS MONARCH.

( The Triumphant Son of a most Glorious Father, who was in all things More
than Conqueror.)

The Illustrious offspring of a Royal Train of ANCIENT PRINCES CHARLES The
second of that Name, Entitled PIOUS By the sole Providence of an Almighty
hand, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith.

Restorer of the English Church unto its Pristine State and Glory.

Patron of Law and Liberty, Not to be Seconded by any but himself, Who is the
best of Kings.

And of all Virtue to the World THE GRAND EXEMPLAR.

Most Dread Sovereign.
IT is neither arrogance nor ambition that makes me thus boldly to intrude into
your presence, for I know so great a Sun will quickly dazzle my weak eyes, but
because the former parts were honored with your royal Fathers name, this
therefore hopes to be sheltered under your Princely wing, this but concluding
what they begun, and making you the happy repayrer of those Breaches, which
that powerful and restless faction of Independency made on the Regalia of
England, that posterity may as well see, in this, their felicity, by you, in
the ruin of that faction, as formerly they read their own misery, in the
Treasonable actings thereof, against his late Majesty of ever glorious memory.

I have no more but only to pray, that you may in this World be blessed with
the wisdom, and happiness of Solomon, a peaceable, long and all glorious
Reign: the age of Methuselah, wherein you may enjoy the full contents of a most
happy life, and at last full of honor and days arrive to the perfect fruition
of a more glorious Kingdom, in Gods presence, before whom is fullness of joy,
and at his right hand pleasures for evermore.

29. Oct. 1660. This from his soul is the daily prayer of Your Majesty's most
faithful subject and Servant. T. M.

To the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and Commons of ENGLAND.
IT is I think more out of custom than necessity, that I do at this time
premise any thing, the Subject whereof we treat, having been fatally felt by
most of the Nation in some way or other, yet is it necessary that the history
of such turgencies in the State should be communicated, that posterity may
hereafter see, in their rise and fall, the certain punishment of Treason,
though for a time guarded and upheld by armed violence, and the highest
policies of a subtle malice.

It is said of the Epicureans, that, though they acknowledged no providence,
nor any immortality of the soul, and proposed pleasure as the only end of their
lives, yet they maintained (most of them) that they that were lovers of
pleasure, must of necessity be lovers of Justice, and that without virtue it
was not possible for men to live in true pleasure, So as it was said of the
Stoics (who were for the most part notable hypocrites) that they spoke good
things, and did foul actions, but that the Epicureans spoke and taught things
that seemed foul and shameful, but did that which was fair and honest.

Certainly these two sects of Philosophers might be the very parallel of our
late times, wherein our Stoicall Grandees could speak nothing but holiness,
where the practice of their lives was a continued series of horrid Treasons,
while a little innocent mirth and freeness of speech was the greatest that lay,
or indeed could be cast, upon integrity of their despised Antagonists: so that
we might see Cucullus non fecit Monarchum.

It had been well for England if the sad occasions of writing this history of
the times had never happened: but they have been: And, as our Savior says,
Offenses must come, but woe be to them by whom they come, so then to declare the
actings, and their method and manner, is but so to lay them open, that they may
for the future be the better avoided and prevented.

The knowledge of all persons, the meaning of all matters, Voss. de s^ri Ag^.
and de art. histor.
and the depth of all secrets, is locked up in history according to that of
Vossius, alluding to that of the Roman Poet, Qui quid sit turpe, aut pulchrum,
quid utile, quid non
Before and melius Chrysyppo and Crantore dixit.


And this I dare promise you in the ensuing Manual; without too violent
reflections to widen differences: all the observations arising as naturally
from the relations, as suitable words do fitly supply the ready tongue of a
Learned Orator.

It is the general happiness at this present, that we can, read the downfall
of faction, and rejoice in the glory of restored Majesty with safety and
content; and I pray God, that all the mischiefs of the remaining Achitophel's,
Shimei's and Rabshakeh's, may fall upon their own heads: but peace, happiness
and prosperity, may wait on our Solomon, that he may be blessed, and his
throne be established, before the Lord for ever.

To Conclude; As your Loyalty in the worst, oftentimes has been signal (if in
nothing else yet in sufferings) so despise not to read this tractate, wherein,
I dare presume, you will find something which before you knew not: the work,
'its true is short, but will not, I hope, want substance, inest enim sua gratia
parvis; and to remember these things certainly cannot be irksome -- -- Saepe
recordari medicamine melius omni. to see and escape danger causes, not only
admiration but pleasure: which that you may receive with content by the
perusal hereof is desired.

I shall only add one word in particular, first to the Nobility; You are Right
Honorable Princes in the Congregation of our Israel, Men of renown,
exemplarily both in your names and honors. Be as eminent in service for your
Prince, as obliged to him for favors, that it may be recorded of you as it is
of David's Worthies. These are the mighty men which David had, who strengthened
themselves with him in his Kingdom, according to the word of the Lord.

2. To the Gentry, You are they whom Jethro counseled Moses to provide out of
all the people to assist him, and be mediators between Prince and People;
approve your selves according to that counsel to be able men, such as fear God,
men of truth and hating covetousness, so shall the Lord give a blessing as he
has promised.

3. To the Clergy, God has made you as a Beacon upon an hill, that you might
forewarn Israel of her sins, ye are the salt of the Earth, while you preach to
others be not your selves cast away, but in season and out of season labor,
labor to declare Christ not of contention and strife, but sow the word to
effect that fruit may grow thereby.

And lastly to the Commons, who are tumidum and instabile vulgus: I shall only
wish that they will labor for peace, and, according to their Royal Princes
dictate in his late Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, acquiesce
in his condescentions concerning the differences which have so much disquieted
the Sat: by which endeavor all good Subjects will by Gods blessing enjoy as
great a measure of felicity as this Nation has ever done; which is the earnest
prayer of

No. 2. 1660. Your, etc. T. M.

THE HISTORY OF Independency. The Fourth and Last part.
THE former parts of this Book having traced the prevalent and strong Factions
of Presbyterian and Independent, The Proeme.
through the several devious paths wherein they marched, and with what
devilish cunning they did, each, endeavor to be greatest, by surprising, or
at least undermining the other, until at last they unriveted the very
foundations of Government, by the execrable murder of their undoubtedly lawful
Sovereign, a crime so abhorred, that it is even inexpiable, not to be purged
with sacrifice for ever: I say, these things having received so lively a
delineation in the former parts, shall need no new recitalls. I shall then
begin at the end thereof, which was; when the sacred Relics of betrayed
Majesty, specie justitiae, received a fatal stroke from blood-thirsty hands,
neither able to protect it self, or be a shadow and Asylum for rejected Truth,
and unspotted Loyalty. Thus in an unsettled and confused posture stood poor
England, when the Scepter departed from Israel, and the Royal Lion was not only
robbed of, his prey, but his Life: which Barbarism once committed, what did the
Independent Faction, now grown chief, ever after stick at? Having tasted Royal
Blood, the Blood of Nobles seemed but a small thing: to which end, and to
heighten and perfect their begun villainies, they erect another High Court of
Justice, Lords H. H. C. tried.
for the Trial of James Earl of Cambridge, Henry Earl of Holland, George Lord
Goring, Arthur Lord Capell, and Sir John Owen Knight: whereof that Horsleech of
Hell, John Bradshaw, was also President, who with sixty two more (as honest men
as himself) by a Warrant under the hands of Luke Robinson, Nicholas Love, and
J. Sarland, summoned for that purpose, did accordingly appear upon Monday the
fifth day of February, 1648. for the putting in Execution an Act of Parliament
(as they called it) for the erecting of an High Court of Justice, for the
trying and adjudging the Earls and Lords aforesaid; with whom (according to
their fore-settled resolution) making short work (for they would admit of no
plea) of the five they presently condemned three to lose their heads on a
scaffold in the Pallace-yard at Westminster, Lords condemned.
on Friday the ninth day of March: which day being come, about ten of the clock
that Morning, Lieutenant Colonel Beecher came with his Order to the several
Prisoners at S. James's, requiring them to come away; from whence they were
immediately hurried in Sedans, with a strong guard, to Sir Thomas Cottons house
at Westminster, where they continued about two hours, spending the whole time
in holy devotion and religious exercises. After which the Earl of Cambridge
preparing first for the Scaffold, after mutual embraces, and some short parting
expressions to, and for, his fellow sufferers, he took his leave, and went
along with the Officers, attended on by Dr. Sibbalds, whom he had chosen for
his Comforter in his sad condition. Being arrived at the Scaffold, and seeing
several Regiments both of horse and foot drawn up in the place: after he had
waited a little while with a fruitless hope and expectation of receiving some
comfortable news from the Earl of Denbigh who was his Brother; having sent for
his Servant, who being returned, and having delivered his Message to the Earl
of Cambridge privately, he said, So, It is done now: Hamiltons speech at his
death.
and turning to the front of the Scaffold he spoke to this effect. That he
desired not to speak much, but being by providence brought to that place, he
declared to the Sheriff, that the matter he suffered for, as being a Traitor to
the kingdom of England, he was not guilty of, having done what he did by the
command of the Parliament of his own Country, whom he durst not disobey, they
being satisfied with tbe justness of their procedure, and himself by the
commands by them laid upon him; and acknowledging that he had many ways
deserved a worldly punishment, yet he hoped through Christ to obtain remission
of his sins. That he had from his Infancy professed the same Religion
established by Law in the land. That, whereas he had been aspersed for evil
intents toward the King, all his actions being hypocritically disguised to
advance his own self-interest: hereto he protested his innocence; professing he
had reason to love the King, as he was his King, and had been his Master, with
other words to the same effect. That, as to the matter of invitation into the
kingdom, he referred himself to the Declaration then in Print; and setting
forth how ready and willing he was ever to serve the English, wishing
happiness and peace to them, and praying that his blood might be the last that
should be drawn, heartily forgiving all, saying, I carry no rancour along with
me to the grave. That his Religion was such as he spoke of before, whose Tenets
he needed not to express, as being known to all, and himself not of a rigid
opinion, being not troubled with other men's differing judgments; with which
words, and forgiving all that he might have even the greatest animosity
against, he kneeled down with Dr. Sibbald, and prayed with much earnestness
and devotion: which pious exercise performed, and some short ejaculations
passing between himself and the Doctor, the Earl turning to the Executioner,
said, Shall I put on another cap, and turn up my hair? Which way is it that you
would have me lie, Sir? The Executioner pointing to the front of the Scaffold,
the Earl replied, What, my head this way? Then the Undersheriffs son said, My
Lord, the Order is, that you lay your head toward the High Court of Justice.
Then the Earl, after some private discourse with his servants, kneeled down on
the side of the Scaffold, and prayed a while to himself; afterward with a
smiling and cheerful countenance he embraced the Doctor in his Arms, and then
his servants, saying to them, Ye have been very faithful to me, and the Lord
bless you: then turning to the Executioner, said: I shall say a very short
prayer while I lie down there, and when I stretch out my hand, (my right hand)
then, Sir, do your duty, and I do freely forgive you, and so I do all the
World. So lying down, and having fitted himself, Hamilton executed.
devoutly praying to himself a short space, he stretched out his right hand,
whereupon the Executioner, at one blow, severed his head from his body, which
was received by two of his Servants, then kneeling by him, into a Crimson
Taffeta scarf; and that with the body immediately put into the Coffin brought
thither for that purpose, and so carried to Sr. John Hambletons house at the
Mewes.

This Execution done, the Sheriffs guard went immediately to ^^tch the Earl of
Holland, whom they met in the midway, where the under Sheriffs son having
received him into his charge, conducted him to the Scaffold, Mr. Bolton passing
all the way hand in hand, with him. Being come upon the same, and observing he
could not spoke aloud enough to be heard by the People, by reason of the
numerousness of the Soldiery that encompassed him, he said. Hollands speech on
the Scaffold.
I think it is to no purpose to say any thing; then proceeded. That his
breeding had been in a good family, that had ever been faithful to the true
Protestant Religion, in which he had ever lived, and now resolved by Gods grace
to dye. That he hoped God would forgive him his sins, though he acknowledged
his Justice in bringing him thither for punishment of them in this World. He
observed, that he was looked on as one that had ill designs against the State.
Truly (says he) I look upon it as a judgment, not having offended the
Parliament in any thing, save an extreme vanity in serving them very
extraordinarily. That his affections had been ever known to be faithful, and
without wavering: where the Parliament wrought changes beyond and against
reason and Religion, there He left them. That he ever sought the peace of the
Kingdom, and that made him do what he did. That he knew not how to judge of
(the then) present affairs; but should pray, that the Kingdom might be again
governed by the King, by the Lords, by the Commons: and that the People may
look upon the Posterity of the King with that affection they owe: that they may
be called again without bloodshed, and admitted into that power and glory that
God in their birth intended to them.

That he wishes happiness even to the causers of his death, praying heartily
to God to forgive them. And as Chancellor of Cambridge really praying, that
that University might flourish, and be a continual Nursery both to Learning
and Religion. Then mentioning again his Religion and family, relating something
to his own behavior, and his being a great sinner, yet that he hoped God would
hear his prayers, and give him faith to trust in him, with his prayers for the
People, he ended. Then turning to the side, he prayed for a good space of time:
after which by the instigation of Mr. Bolton, he said. That he was the less
troubled with his violent death, when he remembered how his Savior suffered for
him; and again, when he considered the King his Master not long before passed
the same way; with others at this time with himself, with a serious and pithy
justification of his said Master the late Kings Majesty, a short recapitulation
of his first speech concerning his Actions, Religion, breeding and sufferings.
After all, wholly casting himself, on the merits and mercies of Jesus Christ,
forgiving his Enemies, praying for peace, and that their blood might be the
last, which was shed strangely, the trial being as extraordinary as any thing
in the Kingdom: but he owned it as Gods hand: then having, some divine
conference with Mr. Bolton for near a quarter of an hour, and spoken to a
Soldier that took him prisoner and others, he embraced Lieutenant Colonel
Beecher, and took his leave of him. After which he came to Mr. Bolton, and
having embraced him, and returned him many thanks for his great pains and
affection to his soul, he prepared himself to the block: whereupon turning to
the Executioner, he said; here my friend, let my Clothes and my body alone,
there is ten pounds for thee, that is better than my clothes, His behavior.
I am sure of it. And when you take up my head, do not take off my cap: then
taking his farewell of his Servants, he kneeled down and prayed, for a pretty
space, with much earnestness.

Then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God bless you
all, God give all happiness, to this Kingdom, to this People, to this Nation.
Then laying himself down, he seemed to pray with much affection for a short
space, and then lifting up his head (seeing the Executioner by him) he said,
stay while I give the sign and presently after stretching out his hand, and
saying, now, now; just as the words were coming out of his mouth, the
Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body. E. of H^ll. death.


The Execution of the Earl of Holland being thus performed, the Lord Capell was
brought to the Scaffold as the former: and as he passed along, he put off his
hat to the People on both sides, looking about him with a very stern
countenance; when mounting on the Scaffold having before taken his leave of his
Chaplain, and bidding his Servants that were with him to refrain from weeping,
coming to the front of the Scaffold, Lo. Capell his speech before his death.
he spoke to this purpose.

That he would pray for those that sent him thither, and were the cause of his
violent Death; it being an effect of the Religion he professed, being a
Protestant, with the profession whereof he was very much in love, after the
manner as it was established in England by the 39. Articles. That he abhorred
Papistry, relying only on Christ's merits. That he was condemned to dye contrary
to the Law that governs all the World, that is, by the Law of the Sword, the
Protection whereof he had for his Life: yet among Englishmen, he an Englishman
acknowledged Peer, condemned to dye contrary to all the laws of England. That
he dyed (as to the cause he fought in) for maintaining the fifth Commandment,
enjoined by God himself, the Father of the Country, the King, as well as the
natural Parent being to be obeyed thereby. That he was guilty of Voting against
the Earl of Strafford; but he hoped God had washed off the guilt of his blood
with the more precious blood of his Son. That his late Majesty was the most
virtuous, and sufficient known Prince in the World. God preserve the King that
now is, his Son. God send him more fortunate and longer days. God restore him
to this Kingdom, that that family may reign till thy Kingdom come; that is,
while all Temporal power is consummated. God give much happiness to this your
King; and to you that in it shall be his subjects. That he did again forgive
those that were the causers of his coming thither from his very soul: so
praying again for the King and his restoration, and for the peace of the
Kingdom, he finished his speech.

L. C. his carri^ge.
Then turning about to the Executioner, he pulled off his doublet; when the
Heads-man kneeling down, Lord Capell said, I forgive thee from my soul, and
shall pray for thee; There is five pounds for thee, and if any thing be due for
my clothes, you shall be fully recompensed. And when I ly down, give me a short
time for a prayer: then again blessing the People very earnestly, and desiring
their prayers at the moment of death, he said to the Executioner, you are ready
when I am ready, are you not, then as he stood putting up his hair, with hands
and eyes lift up he said. O God, I do with a perfect and a willing heart submit
to thy will. O God, I do most willingly humble my self, so kneeling down, and
fitting his neck to the block, as he lay with both his hands stretched out, he
said, When I lift up my Right hand, then strike. When after he had said a short
prayer, L. Capell beheaded.
he lifted up his right hand, and the Executioner at one blow severed his head
from his body, which was taken up by his servants and put into a Coffin.

Having thus brought to pass their bloody purpose, shortly after they acquitted
the Lord Goring, and Sir John Owen as to their lives, but seized upon all they
had: according as they did upon most of the Estates of the Nobility and Gentry
throughout England; for such now was their unsatiable malice, that they thought
it not enough to ruin and destroy the heads of Families; but, The
barbarousness of the faction.
with divellish rancor, endeavor to blot out the name and memorial of
Posterity, by such unheard of cruelties, and barbarous actions, as would make a
Savage Scithian or Barbarian blush to think on, so that we may say with Cicero
in the like case; Rem vides, quomodo se habeat: orbem terrarum Imperiis
distributis ardere bello: urbem sine legibus, sine judiciis, sine jure, sine
fide relictam direptioni, and incendiis. Which indeed is the very present case.

Thus did they grow from bad to worse, acting rather like butchers then Men,
each one of them proving to all about him, a devouring wolf, whose insatiate
gorge was never filled with his pray, so that having in effect the mastery of
them (whom they called their Enemies) like true thieves they fall out about
parting the stakes: The Army and Independent close
the Presbyterian faction will brook no superior, the Independent no equal,
upon these terms stands the Kingdom divided, when the later grown now more
powerful by the additon of the Army, whose guilt in the murder of the King
had suggested to them, that the only way to save and raise themselves, was to
confound and reduce all things else to an Anarchy. In pursuance of which
Principle they at last proceed against the very root of Monarchy: and after
many uncouth debates resolved, that the Nation should be settled in the way of a
free State, Free State appointed.
and Kingly government be utterly abolished. Now was the style in all
proceedings at the law altered, the seals changed, and the Kings arms and
statues in all places taken down, that so their seared consciences might not at
the sight thereof be terrified, with the sad remembrance of their committed
crimes. And that no spark or attendant of ancient Majesty might be left
remaining, soon after, they vote the house of Lords to be burdensome and
useless: Lords house voted useless.
and that the People might understand their meaning also, on the 21th. of
February they proclaim at Westminster, and send it to the City the next Day to
the like purpose, but the then Lord Mayor refusing to do it, as being contrary
to his honor, conscience and Oath, rather chose to suffer an unjust
imprisonment, which he did in the Tower: Any honest Man would have thought this
example would have put a stop to the attempt of any villain for the making that
proclamation, but so far were they from being deterred, that they rather grow
more implacable, and having found some hair brained, and half decayed,
Citizens, out of them, one is set up as a mock-Mayor, who being a fellow fit
for their turns, after a short complement or two with the Juncto: The
Proclamation against Kingship.
he enters the Stage and Proclaims, the abolishing of Kingship, and the House
of Lords. Having thus brought their design to some kind of maturity, they find
another invention to be as a Shibboleth, a mark of distinction, between
themselves and other men, The engagement a mark of distinction.
and that was the engagement forsooth, whereby every man should promise to be
true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, without a King or house of
Lords, and he that would not subscribe to this, was forced either to fly, or
which was as bad, to stay at home, and have neither the benefit, nor the
protection, of the law of the land, nor any advantage either of his liberty or
Estate; Now might you have seen Vice regnand, and nothing but Schism and
faction Countenanced, now might you have beheld England, sometime the Glory of
the World, now become its by words, the name of English being among foreign
Nations esteemed as a crime sufficient, so did the Land mourn for oaths that
she was ready to vomit out her inhabitants, while the Juncto still endeavor to
palliate their villainy, and to get allies among neighbor Princes and States,
to many of whom they send Ambassadors (as they styled them) and were again
reciprocally courted and owned, and particularly by the Spanyard and the
French; but the Dutch did seem to be Men of a better mould and temper, The
dutch quarrel.
and therefore having no better ground they quarrel for superiority; denying
to vaill to the English, because they were the younger State, yet still owning
that respect to the Monarchy: hereat the English (though yet but an) Embrio
begin to startle, and weighing the unsetledness of their basis, and that all
they had hitherto done was only dawbed together with untempered mortar, they
resolve to try all ways rather then fall out, St. John's sent to treat, but
returns without doing any thing.
and will seek to gain that by Courtship, which they are unwilling to hazard by
force; as a fit Man for this work they pick out a pure Saint, Mr. Oliver, St.
John's, and dispatch him into Holland with, as large a train, as great State,
and as full instructions as they could possibly afford or invent, whether when
he is come, he makes his address to the Lords States, but with so little
approbation and success, that in a little time he began to grow weary of his
business, especially, when the multitude began to grow clamourous against him,
insomuch that he durst hardly stir abroad, so that being both outworded, and
outwitted, after many debates, brotherly expostulations, Declarations, and
hearty desires to small (or rather indeed to no) purpose, he gravely makes his
Congee, takes his leave and vanishes; The Juncto at his teturn, somewhat
discontented at his fruitless Embassy, yet finding no other remedy, and
willing to make the best of a bad market, prepare for war, (for by this time
the Dutch had begun both to affront them and seize on what they could catch as
lawful prize) which so vexed the English Puny State, that they presently fall
to an open war, the various successes of which, and the losses that accrewed
thereby to each party by means of the same, I shall not make the work of my
pen, having only designed to delineate those black deeds of impiety acted
within the narrow limits of our England, by the horridest crew of bloody
miscreants that were ever spared by Divine vengeance from sudden destruction.

The English affairs and Government being thus wrested into the hands of a few
desperate persons, Ireland looked at.
the next thing aimed at is, the reducing of Ireland: for effecting whereof
they give a Commission to, and raise an Army under the Command of, Cromwell,
Cromwell sent to Ireland and prove Victorious.
which he as suddenly transports thither, Ormond and Inchequeen having at that
time all the Country in obedience to his Majesty, (save only Dublin kept by
Col. Michael Jones, and Londonderry by Sir Charles Coot) when lo, as it were
to welcome Cromwell, Jones, immediately before his arrival, had made way for
him by the overthrow of Ormonds forces about Dublin: And now, as if fortune had
already designed him the laurel, St. Charles Coot, in an other place at
Londonderry, worsteth a Second party, and the Earl of Ormond, and the Lord
Inchequeen, having joined their broken forces into a considerable strength, are
again together overthrown at Connaught.

The concatenation of these successes, together with the cruelty exercised by
Cromwell at the taking of Tredagh by storm, where his rage spared neither age
nor sex, a barbarism scarcely used by the very Turks, cast such a Panick fear
over the whole Nation, that the strong holds fell into his power, like
over-ripe fruit into the prepared hands of its ready gatherer.

So hidden and mystical is the series of Gods providence, that for a time, the
most enormous crimes are counted virtues, and the poor loosing honest soul
constrained to stoop and bow under the heavy yoke of a prevailing tyrant; yea
Majesty it self enforced, (like the clouded Sun) compulsively to hide his
beams, and retire with his light for a while, as though it had been but
borrowed, but as the Sun, so Majesty can never be kept in perpetual darkness:
for by this time the Independent, who had for a space been chief, find a
Competitor of the Leveller, The Leveller begins to ^^r.
who resolves either to share in the whole, and so reduce and keep all in an
equality, whereby himself may be one of the greatest, or else to endeavor to
b^ing back all into its original channel, and to show they meant as they said,
with better hearts then success or strength they rise in three or four places,
for they are as soon quasht as seen, and themselves and their design end both
together: A garment of linen and woollen was forbidden to be worn by the
Leviticall law, and I suppose because the mixture would be improper either for
wearing, or handsomness of sight, in the same manner may I say of the Levelling
faction, that though they in intent were real for restoring the King, yet God
would not suffer it to be brought to pass by such hands, that had been so
deeply dyed before in royal blood. The royal party though under hatches, and
now suffering for their loyalty, having passed and been refined in the fire of
affliction must be the Men, whose unspotted fingers shall not only pull down
the Idolized Babel of the Peoples imagination, but repair the decayed ruins of
our broken Government, and reinstate exiled Majesty upon its throne adorned
with safety, and with beauty both, and guarded with the safest strength of
faithful hearts and hands, better then walls of brass or formed troops of
mercenary Soldiers.

Scots send to the King.
But that time was not yet come, although the Scots sent a peculiar messenger,
the Lord Libberton to the King, desiring him among other things, that he would
please to appoint a place for a Treaty to be between his Majesty and his
Kingdom of Scotland, which offer of theirs, was graciously accepted, and a
Treaty appointed at Breda, on the 15th. of March, whither the Scots
Commissioners came the 16th. and on the 19th. fell to their business, neither
would by any means relinquish their Presbytery though but in part, and as to
the particular person of the King himself, whom they strongly bound up to the
Covenant, Directory and Catechismes, Treaty at Bredah concluded.
whereto his Majesty; after many long and serious debates, having unwillingly
consented. The Scots on their part did promise. 1. That his Majesty should be
admitted to the throne of Scotland. 2. That his Rights then should be by
Parliament, recovered from the hands of Usurpers, and 3. That they would assist
to bring the murderers of his Father of blessed memory, to condign
punishment, and to restore him to his Native Kingdom of England.

A happy, Omen, surely was this promise and undertaking hoped to be, and so
indeed it might have proved, if it had been gained from any but the worst of
Scotch-men, the Presbyterians, for, at the very same time as it were, when they
had concluded the Treaty, and thus highly promised the King as is before
mentioned, I say at the same time, having gotten the famous Marquess of
Montross into their hand, whose only fault was Loyalty to his Prince, having
brought him with as much ignominy as they could devise to Edinburgh, they there
charge him for keeping away the King (observe the King was now upon the point
of coming to them) from his subjects. 2. For the invading that Kingdom. 3. For
all the murders in the war, and for wast upon Argiles Estate, etc.

Mark, here I pray, Montross murdered and the reasons thereof.
Montross must be murdered (the best subject the King had in Scotland) and
just when the King is ready to come thither, (as if it were done in despite to
him) but why? for keeping away the King? No, he had promised to be with them
with all speed, which Montross in prison could not have hindered. Was it for
invasion? alas neither, for he had none but his own Countrymen, and of them but
a very few and they quickly, and easily defeated; what, was it for then, for
muder? alas neither, what then? O! here is the Devil that murdered the famous
Montross, for waste upon Argiles Estate; Argile, I say that underminer of his
Sovereign, who in a short time after, upon his arrival, was by the means and
instigation of him, upon pretense of nonperformance by the King, left
destitute either of friends (whom they banished from his Court, The K. in
Scotland. held to hard meat.
) means, (which they curtailed him of) and strength (allowing him neither a
Soldier nor a garrison, nay not a town where he might with safety repose his
head); things being at this pass, and his Majesty with much ado gotten into
Scotland as aforesaid, which the Juncto at Westminster, having perfect
intelligence of, and weighing with themselves that promise of the Scots, to
bring the murderers of the Kings Father, to condign punishment, they begin to
think it high time, to provide for their own safety, in consulting whereof,
after much time spent, it is resolved the safest, wisest, and to them least
chargeable course to wait, on the Enemy in his own Country, whereby they
carried the war from home, and not to stay for him to bring it to their own
doors.

As a strong motive to this, just at the instant, they discover that many of
the Presbyterians of England; had by their agents agreed with the Scots at
Bredah, to re-establish his Majesty in all his Dominions: Whereupon many
eminent persons are seized on, and among them, Mr. Case, Mr. Jenkins, Mr.
Jackson, Mr. Love, etc. Which Mr. Love together with one Mr. Gibbons suffered
death together on Towerhill, Mr. Love and Gibbons beheaded.
at the earnest suit of Cromwell, protesting he would not march into Scotland,
unless they were cut off: Being moved hereby as well as by their own fear and
guilt, Cromwell invades Scotland.
his Majesty is scarce in Scotland, but Cromwell is at the borders with 16000.
Horse and Foot, on their behalf; to whom Leslly, L. G. of the horse, which were
now raised, after some expostulations by Letters and Declarations, sends word
that he is in arms upon the account of the good old cause, and not upon the
account of the King, Scots divided among themselves.
whom he clearly disowned; Straughan and Ker, not only disown the King, but say
positively they will fight against him, so that now it was not Bellum Regale, a
war to maintain the Kings honor, and the points of the treaty, but bellum
Presbyteriale, a war for the Kirk of Scotland, against the Independent faction
of England (those two great parties being come now to a second contest for
superiority) for Leven commanded the Foot, and Leslly as I said before the
horse, and these two unaminously drew out against Cromwell, and fought him
within six miles of Edinburgh, though to little purpose, for he immediately
after became Master of the field, 1. Fight at Edinburgh.
and took Garririsons, as fast as he came to them, defeating them at
Musselbourgh, and pursuing them to Pentlan-hills, 2. Fight at Musselbourgh.
where the Scots had him in a straight, and might have destroyed him, but the
certainty as they thought of the victory, caused them to delay, by which, and
the fatal necessities of sickness, hunger and cold pressing upon Cromwells
Army, made them choose rather at one fight desperately to hazard all, then
timourously to become the scorn of an insulting foe, which they knew they
should find: following this resolve with diligence, they whisper about the word
to each other, in the midst of a dark and rainy night, they crept up the hill
and fell on the Scots so suddenly and beyond expectation, that they were
disordered by the first attempt, yet by reason of, their multitudes, 3. Dunbar
fight and total defeat.
and a little courage, they held up a while, till surrounded on the back by
Cromwells horse, the Scots horse affrighted, begin to retreat, and soon after
to fly in good earnest, leaving their foot to mercy, who were taken in greater
numbers then the English Army consisted of; the Independent power by this
victory being absolute conquerors, King in the North of Scotl. private.
and the Presbyterian pride laid grovelling in the dust.

During this quarrel between the said two factions, the King (as disowned so)
not interested therein, retires first to St. Johnstons, and after that,
privately into the North of Scotland, where he continued, expecting what God
would do for him; assuring himself that this defeat at Dunbar (as things then
stood) could not be for his prejudice: King sent to and returns.
which indeed, quickly fell out according to his expectation; for the Scots
upon that overthrow were somewhat humbled in Spirit, and now began again to
think of their late abused King, wishing in their hearts he were among them,
(fearing to speak the truth) least he would have joined with Northern and
loyal Highlanders, to prevent which they send M. G. Montgomery with forces to
entreat his Majesty's return, who finds him out, and affectionately delivers
his message: which the King received even with joyful tears, as minding the
justice of God upon those perfidious Scots, whose pride in success carried them
beyond all bounds of allegiance (and like a stubborn child must be soundly
whipped ere they will kneell and the good manners they obtain must be beaten into
them): Yet he accepts of their request, and accordingly goes toward them. Who
but so good a King would have exposed himself to such men's trust, in so
dangerous a time? Innocentia est sibi munimentum, for he resolves to return.
King crowned.
Upon notice hereof and his arrival, the Parliament address themselves to him,
and appoint the time for his Coronation: which was accordingly with much State,
pomp and Ceremony, performed on the first of January following at Schone; the
particulars whereof I shall not enter upon, several relations thereof being
already extant.

His Majesty thus invested in his throne, undauntedly proceeds to secure both
his person and Kingdom: K. raises an army.
to which end he begins to raise and levy an Army, both of horse and foot,
which in short time, by the conflux of loyal hearts from all parts, became even
formidable to its Enemies, especially having their Prince engaged in person,
(whose every hair was valued at ten thousand lives) and an equal sharer with
them in all things. As they did encourage the hearts, and strengthen the hands
of all that were faithful, so they were a torment of Spirit to the insulting
Enemy, who for the present, seeing that force alone would not serve the turn,
politickly resolves, to undermine and weaken them by division among themselves,
knowing that rule to be true, Divide and impera, and indeed so it proved: for
with so much divellish cunning did the English work, Scots divided.
that they procured Straughan with some forces together with Ker to declare
against the King, Lastly with others, stand for Kirk and King. But Brown,
Middleton, etc. with the best and honest part of the Army, vow to sacrifice
their Lives and Estates in defense of the Kings person. In this tottering and
unstable condition stood affairs, when Cromwell always mindful to lay hold on
the first advantage, and being certainly informed of the height and heat of
these divisions, he takes time by the forelock, and striking while the Iron was
hot, he sends to Straughan and wins him over to him, to fight against his
lawful Sovereign, rejoicing to have debauched such a Soldier, whose
infidelity must now make him sure to Cromwell, not daring to rely on the good
of those whom he had so traitorously deceived; the remaining two parties,
continuing yet in their feuds, are at length, to prevent the destruction of
both, The royalists and Kirk reconciled.
by the care of the Parliament then sitting taken into consideration, and
reconciled by the equal distribution of commands, upon the most eminent persons
of both factions; under one only head and General commander, which was the
King himself. By this union being again become considerable, yea and indeed in
a posture of defense, the King deliberately sets forward toward the Enemy, who
hearing of it, with more, both fury and expedition marches to meet him. And
here you might have observed the different means used by two potent armies to
destroy each other, Cromwell would ruin the King by fighting, the King
endeavors to conquer Cromwell by delaying: never were Hanniball and Fabius so
truly patterned as at this time, for the King knowing it to be an invading
Army, took the best means to break it by delays, getting away all provision,
that the Enemy might have no forage, and as occasion served, giving ground,
till some notable advantage might be found, as might give an hopes if not an
assurance of a victory; and according to expectation so had it proved, for
being desirous to fight, and hearing the King intended to pass at a certain
narrow Island, Fight in life.
thither he commands two Regiments against whom Brown did march with five or
six, fell on them, and in probability had destroyed them utterly, had not
relief come with speed, and in the nick of time, whereby after a hot and eager
fight for some hours, both parties retreated with no small loss to either, yet
such was the fortune of that ambitious wretch Cromwell, that notwithstanding
this, and that his Majesty had still a good Army in the field, he overran the
whole Country and conquered with less difficulty than he marched; which his
Majesty perceiving, he resolves on new designs, and accordingly within a short
time, with his choysest friends and the remains of his Army amounting to 16000.
he privately, gives Cromwell the go-by, and marches by Carlisle into England: K
marches into England.
so have I seen a bird decoy the greedy fowler from her loved nest, by a
seeming neglect thereof in the retiring from it.

It was generally believed that the Kings arrival in England would have been a
motive to all that loved him to stir and show themselves in arms for his
defense, but such was their hard fate and sad misery at that time, that they
durst not stir, the yoke lay so heavy, that it was imprisonment if not death,
but to look toward the King, yet maugre all devices against him, he came
through all the North into Warrington in Lancashire, K. wins War^ington bridge.
where at a bridge the passage was disputed with the Enemy, who did endeavor
to break it down, but with such advantage, that the Rebels were forced to fly
and leave the King master of the place, Comes to Worcester.
from whence with his whole Army he marched toward Worcester, where contrary
to the rules, both of reason and war, and contrary to his own mind and
resolution, overswayed by the treacherous Counsel and persuasions of some too
near, and in too great command about him, he stayed. what might be the motives
to delude the King into such a trap the L. G. is better able to give account
off than my pen; but where treason lies in the heart, there must all things of
force be bad, no relations, ties, or duty can hold or convince him who has
sold his conscience. About this time, the whole Kingdom, having taken the
Alarm, run in troops and multitudes, some one way, some another, several of
the Gentry, particularly the Earls of Derby and Cleveland, the Lord Howards
Eldest Son, Colonel Howard, with many others bring what strengths, in such a
confusion of affairs and straight of time, they could gather together, but to
little purpose: for they are as it were besieged within the City of Worcester,
all the Counties of England having powered out their auxiliary forces against
that place, to heighten and increase whose malice Cromwell is sent to head
them. Now might you have seen Herod and Pontius Pilate reconciled, and both
against Christ: Those two restless and adverse factions, the Presbyterian and
Independent faction, could join together, both in their arms, and prayers
against his sacred Majesty, belching forth the scandalous language of their
ulcerous tongues to incense the People, and bring them into frenzy against
those few poor despised loyal ones, and so indeed they did; those very
pretended Ministers not only preaching, but largely contributing to the raising
of more forces from day to day, yea some of them going in person to assasinate
the poor enclosed Royalists, who yet resolved, that though they foresaw their
ruin, as not being able without a miracle to cope with such an innumerable
multitude, they would sell their lives at a dear rate, and make some of the
purchasers at least share in an equal fate with them, and so in truth they
did. For Cromwell now being very near, commands Lambert to take and secure
Hopton bridge, Worcester. fight.
in the defense of which passage Massey showed both much courage and
experience, though forced to retreat thence and leave the same unguarded, being
overpowered with Lamberts multitudes: after which, for a Day or two, there
happened diverse Skirmishes with as various fortune as is usual at such times;
but Cromwell not brooking such delays (as fearing they might prove dangerous,
if any part of his forces should bethink themselves) resolves upon one general
attempt: and to find work for all hands, himself falls on upon one side, and
Fleetwood on the other, so that now there is nothing but rage, slaughter, and
blood, the loyal Highlanders even standing to fight when they had lost their
legs, not at all daunted at the several horrid shapes-Death presented himself
to them in, but covering the ground with their slaughtered bodies, in death
made good that place, which in life they undertook to defend: while the
increasing Enemy by his numbers, rather killing then conquering, their fear and
guilt guiding them to exorbitances, which the other valiant, though dying souls
were not capable of, proving that maxim true, that fear is far more painful
to cowardice, than death to a true courage. But Actum est, their end is
concluded, the decree is gone forth: so after several routs and rallies, a
general defeat succeeds with the death of between 4000. and 5000. and about
7000. or 8000. taken prisoners, the pursuit being both hotly and eagerly
pursued, each villain hoping to enrich himself by seizing on the Royal pray.
But Heaven had sent a Guardian Angel to protect him, that at length he may
once more come and be the restorer, both of our peace, Religion, and Liberty. I
shall not mention the means were used, or the Spirits which God raised up to be
isntrumental, in that miraculous deliverance, let it suffice they have their
honor and reward, and bless we Cod; who has made us worthy to be partakers of
the inestimable good that has accrewed thereby, invoking Heaven to crown his
life with length of days and health, and to settle his throne by a decree as
unalterable as that of the Earth which cannot be moved.

Thus once more we see Rebellion flourish and applauded; for after this, the
seeds of ambition begin to grow higher in Cromwell, it is not enough that his
faction is the strongest, and he the head of it, unless he may as well govern
as command: The military sword will not satisfy him, he must and will also
have the civil; but as he sees it must not be done rashly or suddenly, least
he should miscarry, so knowing that fair and softly goes far, and festinare
lent is the best have, he concludes in his heart either to have all at his own
book, or dye in the attempt; and the better to moddell his design according to
his resolution, he comes to the Juncto, gives them account of all his
transactions, and so insinuates into them that he g^ts his Son Ireton to be
made Deputy of Ireland, Cromwels policy and power.
and intrusts Scotland into the hand of L. G. Moncke, a revolted Cavalier, by
which two persons in a short time he so roughly handled both those said
Nations, that they were reduced to as perfect a slavery as could be imagined.

Upon consideration of these successes on all hands, he begins now more
publicly to unmask himself; As General he places and displaces Officers in the
Army at his pleasure, until he have so fitted them to his own humor, that he
dares begin to take them into his Council, where the first thing resolved is,
still to hold up the mask of religion, there is no bait so catching to the
vulgar: religion therefore must be cried up, methinks I see Cromwell, like
Catiline at Rome, with all his crew of bankrupt and much worn Officers about
him, speaking to them thus. Surely I need not tell you the great things the
Lord has done for us, your selves are witnesses thereunto: I confess, our
actions seem not to agree to our professions, but it is no matter, let People say
what they will, so we be still gainers, let Governments totter and fall, the
whole World be made but one Enthusiasme, or reduced into its primitive Chaos,
rather than we shall now loose or hold, yet still the mask of zeal must be kept
on that we may not appear in our natural colors, villains ab origin; By
these and the like words is that vicious brood soon instigated to act what his
ambition dares command.

Now was he grown so lofty and imperious that he even grows weary of the
Juncto, and especially because they were at the present the main bar that
hindered his greatness: To remove therefore that obstacle, on the twentieth of
April 1653. early in the morning he seazes the keys of the Parliament house,
Long Parliament turned out.
shuts up the doors, and tells the Members that they must come no more there,
having already sat too long, meriting rather punishment than applause, being
no other than an assembly of Whoremasters, Drunkards, Hypocrites, Knaves and
Oppressors; thus was the pretense of the Parliament taken away, and no face of
Government visibly appearing: Never was the faults of Usurpers with more
bitterness laid open than now by him, whom we shall shortly, as transcendently,
to outdo them in all acts of Tyranny and Usurpation, as the brightest beams of
a midday sun excel the glimmering light of a midnight candle. It Is true as
Seneca says, Nulla tam modesta est faelicitas ut malignitatis dentes vitare
possit, Sen. ep. 3.
there ever was and ever will be some murmurers at present Governors, but so
far were either they, or he from being belyed, that unless a Man do speak all
that may be imagined evil, he must needs fall short of their wickedness,

The Government being thus altered, first by laying aside and murdering their
lawful Sovereign, then by sifting and purging the Parliament, till loosing its
original, it either became as nothing, or at the best but a Juncto, and when
it would no longer suit with Cromwells ambitious ends and soaring thoughts by
turning it absolutely out of doors; At last after much pretended seeking of God
by days of humiliation, Cromwell forsooth is counseled to call together an
assembly of men, picked out and called as fit for his design. These he summons
together by a Letter under his hand and seal directed to each single Man;
Barchones Parliament.
who (in their way of canting) admiring at the great goodness of God, that had
put it into the Generals heart to select them to so great a work as the
settlement of the Kingdom, and to show their skill, and as an Essay of their
zeal, they first vote down all Tithes, discourage the Ministry, abuse the
Universities, and endeavor to abolish the law, and consequently to take away
all propriety. By which Acts the Nation beginning to be sensible of the Devil,
where with they were possessed, did frown upon them, which so disanimated our
Fanatic Enthusiasts, ha a he very first blast they left the helm, and like
good boys and well-taught, having drawn up formally an instrument under their
hands and Seals, they repair to Cromwell, and (according as the design was
laid) together with the said instrument deliver and resign the Government to
him and his Council, They resign to Cromwell
who (though at first he seemingly denied) yet immediately after, with much
solemnity he accepts thereof, before the Mayor, some Aldermen, some Judges, and
the Officers of the Army. Having thus far per^ected his devilish design, and
made all his own, by modelling the Army under the command, of his own
Creatures; settling the Government of Ireland, upon his Son Harry, and Scotland
reduced to obey and submit to him: It is now thought fit he should declare
himself, Cromwels first Parliament do nothing.
which to please and gull the people the better, he does by abasing himself,
and calling (as he termed it) a Parliament, to meet on the Third of September
1654. Which it did, but the poor animalls not having well conned their lesson
beforehand, were, suspected dull, and turned a grazing to get more
understanding, the very first instant he might lay hold on to do it; By which
means once more all pretense of Government being utterly abolished, he himself
plays Rex, and by an arbitrary power beyond, without, and against, law, does
what he list, Major Genesis set up.
by Mayor-Generals (a name in England unknown) oppressing the Country, robbing
the Gentry, spoiling all, and murdering many, so that none durst say what do
thou? A question was converted into a plot, and to deny a tax merited
decimation. It was not enough, to have suffered all former rapines,
imprisonment and plunderings, fines and taxes, but at last we must all be
decimated. We were tanquam Oves destined for slaughter, and such was our misery
there was none to redeem: sad testimonies whereof were Gerard, Grove and others
about this time, whose blood only could expiate a crime they never thought or
were guilty off.

In this unlimited posture of arbitrary power did the the Kingdom stand, when
that Arch-Machiavilian Cromwell adding strength to the wings of his ambitious
mind soared an Eagle-height, and made all the circumference of his actions to
center at the royal State, thinking with a grasp of the Scepter to ennoble his
name and family, not minding either the danger of the passage or the
slipperriness of the station, when arrived at the top: And indeed such was his
fortune that he did ascend the throne, in which it was for the future, his
restless endeavor to settle himself and his posterity, and the better to cast
a seeming gloss of legality upon his usurpation, Cromwels second Parliament
confirm him as Protector.
he summons another Parliament, in the Year 1656. hoping thereby to work his
ends unseen, and so he did (as to the vulgar eye) for soon after their meeting
and first trial of their temper, he so moulds them to his own humor by a
recognition, that they are overhastily delivered of a strange abortion, by them
called the petition and advice, etc. in which with much solemnity, though
damnable hypocrisy, they desire him to be King, but in more general terms to
take upon him the government, and be chief Magistate, which he very gravely
considering of diverse days, returns his denial, in part, but withal
insinuates in part, his willingness to be settled Lord Protector, at which news
his faction rejoicing, (with many Eulogies for his humility in refusing the
Kingship) he is by the said Parliament, who adjourned for the same end,
solemnly installed Protector at Westminster by Widdrington, who was the Speaker
to that convention, by Whitlock, Lisle, Warwick, etc. And upon their resisting,
he is petitioned to accept of almost two millions, by the year for his support,
to maintain a crew of idle wenches his daughters, whose pampered lusts were
grown almost insatiable) 2. To erect a new house of Lords of his own Creatures,
who being indebted to him for their raising, durst do no other than by a
slavish submission, perform his tyrannous will, 3. To name his successor, that
so he might entail his yoke of tyrannical Usurpation and slavish oppression on
the Kigdom, and several other things: which with much ado, after many
persuasive entreaties and much unwillingness, God knows) he accepts of.

No sooner is this done, The said Parliament dissolved.
but the fox laughs in his sleeve to see how he has cheated the Parliament. And
therefore to make them know their rider, after a few words of exhortation to
them of the want of them in the Country, and the necessity of their retiring
thither for the peace of the Nation, with a friendly nod he dismisseth them and
sends them home.

Thus with much cunning and dissimulation having attained the perfection of his
desires, Cromwell seeks to strengthen himself.
knowing that such greatness must be upheld with allies, and every noble coat
of arms must have his supporters, he strengthens himself at home, by
intermixing with noble blood marrying own of his Daughters to the Lord
Faulconbridge, and an other to the heir apparent of the Earldom of Warwick, the
later of which though in the prime of his youth, finding the disagreement
between N^ble and Rebel blood, was soon overheated and by the suddenness of
his death left his wife the widow of a loathed bed. In the next place he seeks
friendships and leagues abroad, and intending to close with France, He closes
with France.
he directly quarrels with the Spanyard, and affronts him in several places
near about one time, particularly he sends one part of the Fleet under the
command of Pen to Hispaniola, but with so little disadvantage that he was
enforced to retreat thence, with no small loss, falling soon after on Jamaica
with better success, winning a part thereof, though most inconsiderable, the
whole Island being not worth the tenth part of the blood and treasure it has
cost this Kingdom, being no way at all serviceable, either for the advance or
security of trade in those parts; Mazarine in France, finding the benefit of
these helps, upon the very first motion strikes with him a league offensive and
defensive, Cromwell promising to assist the French with 7000. Men to maintain
the war against the Flanders: which at this time he sent, they proving so
helpful by their valor, that in a short time they gain Mardike, Gravelin, and
Dunkirke, Dunkirke gained.
the last of them according to articles, being delivered up to the English, in
whose hand it yet remains. In the interim while these things were transacting,
Cromwell suspicious of every blast of wind, and fearful of every motion,
contrives in himself to take off two or three of the most eminent of the Kings
party in England to daunt the rest, among whom he separates one layman, Sir
Henry Slingsby, and one Churchman, Dr. Hewit, Dr. Hewits death.
for the slaughter: and conscious to himself that they had done nothing
contrary to the law of the land, he durst not try them by a Jury, but re-erects
his monstrous high Court of Justice; before which being brought, they denied
the authority thereof as unwarrantable, which so wrought upon the patience of
Mr. Lisle their bloodily learned President and the rest of the gange, that they
(according as they were foreinstructed by their Master Devil Oliver) without
any great matter of circumstance condemn them both to be beheaded, which
sentence was accordingly executed, on them the 8th. Day of June at Towerhill,
notwithstanding all the means their friends could use of engagements,
persuasions and money, and the deep, earnest and continued entreaties,
solicitations and supplications of Mrs. Claypoole his best beloved daughter,
Mrs. Clapooles death.
for so inexorable he continued, that like the deaf adder he stopped his ears
to the charmer, charm he never so wisely: at which unheard of cruelty, and for
that Dr. Hewits Lady (as is said) was then with child, Mrs. Claypoole took such
excessive grief, that she suddenly fell sick, the increase of her sickness
making her rave in a most lamentable manner, calling out against her Father for
Hewits blood and the like, the violence of which extravagant passions working
upon the great weakness of her body, carried her into another World, even at
the heighest thereof.

No sooner did Cromwell receive the deplorable news of this sad death of his
Daughter, but himself falls into a desperate melancholy, which never left him
till his Death, which was not long after. Observe.
Give me leave here to relate a passage which I received from a Person of
Quality, Viz. It was believed, and that not without some good cause, that
Cromwell the same morning that he defeated the Kings Army at Worcester Fight,
had conference personally with the Devil, with whom he made a contract, that
to have his will then, and in all things else for seven years after from that
time (being the Third of September 1651.) he should at the expiration of the
said years have him at his command, to do at his pleasure, both with his soul
and body. Now if any one will please to reckon from the third of September,
1651. till the Third of September, Cromwels death.
1558. he shall find it to a Day just seven years and no more, at the end
whereof he dyed but with such extremity of tempestuous weather, that was, by
all men judged to be prodigious, neither indeed was his end more miserable,
(for he dyed mad and despairing) than he has left his name infamous; this was
the end of our English Nero, and thus having laid the best foundations, his
short and troublesome Reign would give leave to have continued his posterity in
the same unlimited Dominion, at his death, (si ulla fides viris, qui castra
sequuntur) declaring his eldest Son Richard his successor in his Usurpation.
Leaving his Son Henry Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and his Daughter Fleetwood,
married to the Commander in chief of the Army under himself, and the only Man
suspected for a Competitour in the Protectorship, for Lambert had been laid
aside long before as a person of too dangerous and aspiring principles to be
trusted.

Richard Cromwell Protector.
Richard Cromwell p esently ascends the Throne, being but a private Gentleman
of Hampshire, invited thereunto and encouraged by Fleetwood, Desborow,
Sydenham, the two Jones, Thurloe, and others, the relations and confidents of
his Father: His first work is to take care for his Fathers Funeral, his corpse
being shortly after interred among the Kings and Queens at Westminster, at a
far 29000 l.
greater charge than had been used upon like occasions in the richest times,
death giving him that honor which he aspired to, but durst not embrace in his
life time, which solemity ^ast, by the contrivance of the new Courtiers,
congratulations are sent (prepared at Whitehall) from most of the Counties,
Cities and chief Towns of England. And from the Armies of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, with engagements to live and dye with him. Addresses from the
Independent Churches, by Mr. Goodwine and Nigh, their Metropolitans, and was
indeed worshipped by many as the rising Sun in our Horizon.

This Introduction being made for transferring the Government of these Nations,
from the Royal family of the Stewarts to that upstart of the Cromwells: it was
thought fit, that a general Convention, Di^ks Parliament now model ed.
after the manner of a Parliament wisely chosen by influences from Whitehall
should be called, to meet the twenty seventh of January, and (upon pretense of
restoring the people to their ancient way of Elections, but real) that the
Court might command the more votes, the Buroughs also had writs sent to them,
and the Elections were all made in the ancient way, only thirty member^ were
called by writs from Scotland, and as many from Ireland, according to the late
combination of the three Nations into one Commonwealth.

This new kind of Parliament being met at the time and place appointed, God who
had so well ordered the Elections, notwithstanding the practices of Men, that
their English Spirit quickly appeared against Impositions, both from Court and
Army, Act of Recognition.
which being discerned by the Protector and his Grandees, a Recognition is sent
to them to be drawn into a bill, the debate whereof taking up a whole
fourtnights time, and they still remaining in a great straight, till, by the
expedient of an honest Gentleman, they were extricated thence by passing these
votes on Monday the 14th. of February, 1658. without any division or negative.

Resolved, that it be part of this Bill to Recognize and declare his Highness
Richard Lord Protector, and chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging,

Resolved, that before this Bill be committed, the House do declare such
additionall clauses to be part of this Bill, as may, bound the power of the
chief Magistrate, and fully secure the Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
and the Liberties and Rights of the People, and that neither this nor any other
previous vote, that is, or shall be, passed in order to this Bill, shall be of
force, or binding to the People, till the whole Bill be passed.

Committee of inspection.
This done, a Committee of Inspections is appointed to take a view of the
accounts and revenue of the Commonwealth, and twelve Members versed in matters
of account, were selected and fully empowered for that work, in order to the
lessening the charge of the Commonwealth.

On Saturday the 19th. of February, they reassumed the debate upon the Act of
Recognition and resolved. That it be part of the bill to declare the Parliament
to consist of two houses: Parl. to consist of two houses.
after which they fell upon the point of bounding the chief Magistrates power
and the bounds and powers of the other house, the Protectors party standing for
the powers, given by the Petition and advice, and the rest of the house
withstood it as of no value being obtained by force, by which force also
thirteen hundred thousand pounds a year was settled for ever upon the single
person: and the ruling members of the other house, being a hotch potch or
medley of Officers of the Army, and Protectorian Courtiers, contrary to the law
of the land, The other house debated.
and to the enslaving of the people. By this means nothing being done herein as
to the powers, the Cromwelians, that they might enforce something, propose the
question of transacting with the persons sitting in the other house as an house
of Parliament, urging both law and necessity for the same, yea threatening force
from the Army upon refusal; notwithstanding all which a whole fornight the
honest party of the House thought of nothing less, asserting the undoubted
Right of the ancient Peers, and denying all the rest, but seeing nothing could
be done till this was over, in a very full house they came at last to this well
qualified resolve.

Resolved.
That this House will transact with the Persons now sitting in the other house,
as an house of Parliament, during this present Parliament. And that it is not
hereby intended to exclude such Peers as have been faithful to the Parliament,
from their privilege of being duly summoned to be Members of that house.

Herein may be seen something of the old English gallantry, for in this vote
those in the other House are not owned as Lords, Not owned as Lords.
(but called the Persons now sitting in the other House as an house of
Parliament) neither would the Commons treat and confer with them in the usual
way, as with the house of Peers, but found ou^ a new word (to transact) and
that neither but upon trial, Viz. during this present Parliament. And the
better and more legally to curb them if they should begin to grow imperious,
they inserted the privilege of the ancient Peers as a good reserve, concluding
also to receive no message from them, but by some of their own number.

The intent of that Parament.
During this time, they had under consideration several good Acts about the
Militia, against Excise, concerning Customs, etc. and questioned diverse
illegal imprisonments, calling some Jaylors to the Bar, and preparing a strict
bill to prevent the unlawful sending Freeborn Englishmen against their wills
to be slaves in foreign Plantations; They also examined several grievances,
by the Farmers of the Excise, Major Generals, and tyrannical, and exorbitant
Courts of Justice. The Committee of Inspections having by this time brought in
their report by which it did appear, that the yearly incomes of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, came to Eighteen hundred sixty eight thousand seven
hundred and seventeen pounds, Committee of inspections report.
and the yearly Issues to, Two Millions, two hundred and one thousand, five
hundred and forty pounds. So that, Three hundred, thirty two thousand eight
hundred twenty three pounds of debt incurred yearly by the ill management of
double the revenew that ever any King of England enjoyed: And to maintain the
unjust conquest of Scotland cost us yearly, One hundred sixty three thousand
six hundred and nineteen pounds more than the revenew of it yields.

At these proceedings the Protector and the Army, who were already jealous of
one another, Divisions between the Protector Praliament and Army.
grew both suspicious of the Parliament, because the people begin to speak as
if they expected great good from the issue of their Counsels, therefore the
Army, (least they should come too late) put in for to get the power into their
hands, and according to the method used by them in like cases, erect a General
Council of Officers who daily meet at Wallinford-house, which the Protector
hearing, endeavors to countermine at Whitehall; but they, better skilled in
their work than he was, conclude a representation, which is with speed both
drawn and presented to him about the seventh of April, a copy whereof the next
day after is sent enclosed by him in a Letter to the Speaker of the House: who
hereupon takes the Alarm, and while the Protector thinks to secure himself by
standing on his guard, they not fearing the menaces of the Soldiers, but
resolving to behave themselv^s like true Englishmen, on Monday the 18th. of
April passed these votes following. Resolved,

Resolved, or Navies of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any the Dominions and
Territories thereto belonging, who shall refuse to subscribe. That he will not
disturb or interrupt the free meeting in Parliament, of any the members of
either house of Parliament, or their freedom in their debates and Counsels.



Now that this bitter pill might be the easier swallowed, knowing, or at least
believing that want of money was the thing that pinched in chief as to the
private Soldier, (without whom the Officer was worthless) they passed a vote
to take into consideration how to satisfy the Arrears of the Army, and provide
present pay for them, and also to prepare an Act of Indemnity for them. But
all this tended nothing to satisfaction, for the Soldier being through Levened
with the wicked designs of their Officers, did nothing but murmur, especially
since the Protector in pursuance of the votes of the house had forbidden the
meetings of the Officers; so that now the animosities grew so high, that guards
were kept night and day by one against the other, in which divided posture the
management of affairs, continued till Friday the 22. of April, on which day
early in the Morning, Fleetwood, Desborough, and the rest of the Mutinous
Officers, with the greatest part of the Army at their beck, Dicks Parliament
dissolved.
the Cromwelian party not daring to stir, got the supereminency, and forced
young Richard to consent to a commissiion and Proclamation ready pre-prepared,
thereby giving power to certain therein named to dissolve the Parliament,
although he had with much serious earnestness protested and promised, rather to
dye than be guilty of so pusillaminous an act, which he was well assured would
work for his confusion. But actum est, for the same day the black rod was sent
twice to the house of Commons to go to the other house, which they refused and
scorned, but understanding there were guards of horse and foot in the Palace
yard, after some ebullient motions, without resolving any question, they
adjourned till Monday morning, the five and twenty of April, and with much
courage and resolution attended the Speaker in order through Westminster Hall
to his Coach, even in the face of the Soldiery.

The Army having thus for the present missed their design, resolve no longer to
dally; whereupon they, lay aside their new Mr. Richard, and all the Officers,
great and small with one consent, take the Government into their own hands,
having shut up the house of Commons door, whither when the Members came on
Monday, entrance was denied them by the Soldiers, who had possessed themselves
of the Court of requests and all avenues in all places, giving no other account
to the Members than this, Viz. They must sit no more. The Army new modelled.


The next meeting of Officers new modelleth themselves, some they casheire as
Whaly, Ingoldsby, Goffe, etc. others they re-admit, as Lambert, Haselrig, Okey,
and others, in which time not knowing how to behave themselves in such a
condition, and weary of the perpetual toil they foresaw, they must still with
ceasing undergo; they mean to cast the burden off from their own shoulders,
and to that purpose they send to some of their old hackney drudges of the long
Parliament, The Rump comes in.
(as they then did call it) at that time about London, whose consciences they
knew would digest any thing, and did not care how, per fas aut nefas, so they
might again be suffered to sit, with several of these, I say, upon the fifth
and sixth days of May they had conference, the last of which was at their
never failing Speakers, the Master of the Rowles house in Chancery Lane, where
both Officers of the Army, and pretended Members, to the number of twenty
solicited William Lenthall Esquire to sit Speaker again, but he objected
diverse scruples in judgment and conscience: (But O how soon had the sweet
ambition of domineering obliterated all such idle fancies?) yet nevertheless
instantly fifteen Articles being agreed upon among themselves, they conclude to
meet in the house on Saturday the 7th. day of May, and the better to compass
their ends by a base and clandestine surprise, they gave out that they would
not sit till Tuesday the tenth of May, yet surreptitiously, as I say, they met
early on Saturday in the painted Chamber at Westminster and wanting of their
number to make up a house, they sent for those two debauched lustful Devils,
the Lord Munson, and Harry Martin out of prison, where they were in Execution
for debt, with Whitelock, and Lisle of the Chancery Court, making in all forty
two, the Chancery Mace also for have being carried before them, William
Lenthall Esquire. their tender conscienc'd Speaker, together with the said Names of
the Rumpers.
L. Munson. Henry Martin. Mr. Whitlock. Mr. Lisle. Mr. Thomas Chaloner. Alderman
Atkins Alderman Penington. Thomas Scot. Cornelius Holland. Sir Henry Jane. Mr.
^rideaux At. Ge Sir James Harrington. L. G. Ludlow. Michael Oldsworth. Sir
Arthur Haselrig. Mr. Jones. Col. Purefoy. Col. White. Harry Nevill. Mr. Say.
Mr. Blagrave. Col. Bennet M. Brewster. Sergeant Wild. John Goodwin. Mr. Nich.
Lechmore. Augustine Skinner. Mr. Downs. Mr. Dove. Mr. John Lenthall. Mr.
Saloway. Mr. John Corbet. Mr. Walton. Gilbert Willington. Mr. Gold. Col.
Sydenham. Col. Bingham. Col. Air. Mr. Smith. Col. Ingoldsby. And Lieutenant
General Fleetwood.
Stole on a sudden into the house, the invitation of the Army for sitting of
the long Parliament being first published in Westminster Hall.

Upon notice of this surprise of the house by so few, there being more than
double the like number of members of the same Parliament there, and about town,
some of them at the same instant in the Hall, they to prevent future mischief,
(whereof this packing of Parliament men was an ill Omen) to the number of
fourteen, went immediately into the Lobby, and the persons that did so were
these, Viz.

Mr. Anslewy. Sr. George Booth. Mr. James Harbet. Mr. Prinne. Mr. George
Montague. Sir John Evelin. Mr. John Harbert. Mr. Gewen. Mr. Evelin. Secluded
members.
Mr. Knightly. Mr. Clive. Mr. Hungerford. Mr. Harbey. Mr. Pecke.
But as soon as they came near the door, they were not suffered by the Officers
of the Army to go into the house, though they disputed their privilege of
sitting, (if the Parliament were not dissolved) but reason not prevailing,
after they had thus fairly made their claim they retired, resolving to acquaint
the Speaker by letter of their usage. And accordingly on Monday the 9th. of May
they went to Westminster, where the guards being not yet come, Mr. Ansley, Mr.
Prinne, and Mr. Hungerford, went freely into the house, receiving the
Declaration of the 7th. of May at the door, But Mr. Ansley walking down into
the Hall, (the house not being ready to sit) at his return was by one Capt.
Lewson of Goffes Regiment and other officers denied entrance, Mr. Prinne
continued within and resolved so to do, Vote against the secluded members.
since he saw there a new force upon the house, whose only staying (so guilty
were the rest of their evil actions) made them loose that morning, and adjourn
without the Speakers taking the chair. And to prevent his or any other honest
man's coming in among them, after that they barred the door by the following
Vote. Ordered. 1648. And have not subscribed the engagement in the R^ll of
engagement of this House, shall not sit in this house till further order of the
Parliament.



Thus (to the grief of all honest and true hearted Christians) the same
pretended Parliament that was sitting in 1653. (till Oliver disseized them)
sitting again in 1659. upon a Declaration of the Army, with the same
resolutions they had before, minding nothing but prefering one another, The
good old cause what.
and their friends into good Offices and commands, and Counselors places, as
appear by their Vote of the 29th. of May, Viz. The Parliament does declare,
that all such as shall be employed in any place of trust or power in the
Commonwealth, be able for the discharge of such trust, and that they be
persons fearing God, and that have given testimony to all the people of God,
and of their faithfulness to this Commonwealth, according to the Declaration
of Parliament of the 7th. of May.

Now who they mean by persons fearing God in their canting language, by their
very next work you shall see, which is the nominating a Council of State,
Council of State nominated.
into whose hands is given the dispose of all places of trust and profit, yea
and the command of the wealth of the Kingdom; those of the house are as follow.

Sir Arthur Haselrig. Sir Henry Vane. Ludlow. Jo. Jones. Sydenham. Scot.
Saloway. Fleetwood. Sir James Harrington. Col. Walton. Nevill. Chaloner.
Downs. Whitlock. Harb. Morley. Sydney. Col. Thomson. Col. Dixwell. Mr.
Reignolds. Oliver St. John's. Mr. Wallop.
Of Persons without the house Ten. Viz.
John. Bradshaw. Col. Lambert. Desborow. Fairfax. Berry. Sir Anthony
Ashley-Cooper. Sir Horatio Townsend. Sir Robert Honywood. Sir Archibald
Johnson. And Josia Berners.
Who under the mask of the good old cause began now to act as high villains as
ever before; having forgotten how justly they formerly had been laid aside, but
they are like the dog that returns to his vomit, and with the sow that is
washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

The good old cause what it is.
And the better to cast a seeming gloss over the foulness of their actions, and
their clandestine intrusion into the Government, they send forth a Declaration
in print, the particulars whereof might very well have been here observable, if
they had not already been so clearly demonstrated, by the laborious pen of
learned Mr. William Prinne, in his book entitled, The Republicans good old
cause stated; having therein so fully detected them, Remainder of Crown lands
to be sold.
that there remains nothing more to be said in the same matter.

And now, as if already they had not wasted enough, by exposing to sale the
Kings, Queens, Princes, Nobles and Gentries, Lands and Goods, being very quick
sighted, and of a long and large memory, whereby they knew all was not sold:
therefore about the beginning of June, to show us further what they meant by
the good old cause, they ordered the bill for public sales to be brought in; A
sweet act, to enrich the saints, as they in their canting language called
themselves; but their necessities (by the long deteining of the public purse
from them) being grown very pressing, and though they thought the money arising
from those sales would be sure, yet for their present urgencies (not being able
to stay till that could be raised) they appointed the same afternoon to
consider of a more speedy way for raising money, for that was all they ever
aimed at, or hoped for, and to this purpose a bill of Assessement is concluded
the most fitting: Qua^enda pecunia primum est.
And because they would leave no stone unturned, from which they might hope
gain, see how ingeniously they can project, making an order to the Committee of
inspection (a precious crew) to take special care that such persons who have
assumed the titles of Honor, Dignities and precedencies heretofore conferred
on them by the late King, since the same were taken away by act of this present
Parliament, do pay the several sums of money by them forfeited, Honors
g^ven by the late King or his Son to be null.
and that the said Committee do also examine whether they have brought in their
Patents, and to report how the said moneys may be employed to the best
advantage of the Commonwealth, and to offer an act to take away all honors
conferred by the late Kings Son. Was there ever such a piece of unseemly
inconsistency, that the Fountain of honor should be debarred of its spring by
a company of peasants, whose Acts were no better than of an assembly of rogues
at beggars bush; but would you know why they were so much troubled; 'twas
precedence that stuck in their stomachs, those noble souls went before them
both in honor and honesty therefore seeing they could not hinder them from
being called Lords by others, yea the generality, they lay it as a crime of
pride upon them, that they did assume such titles, for which imaginary fault
they must pay the sums forfeited for such insolence against their Rumpships.
O this Auri sacra fames, quid non mortalia pectora cogit, what will it not make
them do? They first must pay, then bring in their Patents, otherwise pay again:
thus the Devil rangeth, fiercest, when his time is most short; for so general
was theirs hoped to be, in regard they and their Masters of the Army could not
cotton together, The Army fright the Grandees.
being already alarumed from them by a petition and address, yet they grew a
little more confident upon the news of Harry Cromwells submission, and falling
down to worship the image which they had set up, Moncke also having about the
same time, sent them the resolutions of himself and his Army to adhere to them,
as a testimony whereof he informed them of a design of an Agent from the King
of Scots (as they called him) which his diligence and care in the Highlands had
prevented.

These news so animated our Juncto, that thinking all cocksure, Money matters
only taken notice of.
they fall to their old Trade of raising money. First by assessements, then by
continuing the Excise and Customs until the first of October, and lastly by
ordering the Trustees for sale of Crown Lands, forthwith to proceed to the sale
of all computed within the Act for sale thereof, and that they take care of the
profits arising from the same, for the use of the Commonwealth till sale
thereof be made.

Money being thus taken care for to be raised by all means, suddenly after by a
Vote they revive the Committee for plundered Ministers (or rather for
plundering Ministers) that so they may also provide them of hacknies who shall
infuse into the people strange Enthusiastic ways of Government. Plundered
Ministers and Tithes.
It was not enough with Jeroboam to cause a general rebellion, but with him
also to uphold it, they make of the lowest and basest of the people, Priests of
their high places, for whom the old way of tithes is not thought good enough,
it was consulted how a more equal and comfortable maintenance might be settled
on the ministry for satisfaction of the people, whom thus intending to lull
asleep: they resolve to advance their own safety by colloguing with the land
forces with promises of sudden pay, Seamen to be impressed.
and strengthening the Navy by impressing Seamen, which about this time, in
June they were about, And lest they should be wanting to themselves in any
thing, mercenary drudges of the Juncto begin to take upon them as may appear by
this order.

22. June. 1659
By the Contractors for sale of Crown Lands. Crown lands exposed.

These are to give you notice, that Somerset House with the Appertenances, and
Hampton Court with the parkes, etc. Thereunto belonging, are speedily to be
exposed to sale, and that the Contractors intend to sit on Wednesday next the
29. instant, to take in desires of such as intend the purchase of any part of
Somerset House, and on Wednesday the 6th. of July, the desires of any that
intend the purchase of any part of Hampton Court, the premises are to be sold
for ready money.

Will. Tailor Clark attending the said Contractors.

Indeed the last clause for ready money was very nenessary, as affairs then
stood, for the Grandees at Westminster, having only wasted and imbezelled the
rest by divisions and sharings among themselves and friends, with no advantage
to the public Exchequer, they would now seem to begin to amend, but it is
according to the Proverb like sour ale in Summer, for they intended nothing
less than increasing the public stock, but rather by augmenting and converting
it to their own use, make a hoped provision against an ensuing storm, which
they foresaw would ere long fall upon them without any means of prevention: yet
resolving to share the spoil as long as they could, at Midsummer, they re-made
their everlasting Speaker, Offices bestowed and on whom.
Custos rotulorum, of Oxford and Berkshires. And that worshipful Judas, Sir H.
Mildmay, Custos rotulorum for Essex, with several other the like places to
diverse of their leading members, as the Government of Jersey to Col. Mason,
and several Regiments in Ireland to Col. Cooper, Col. Zankey, Col. Sadler, H.
Cro mwell leaves I eland.
and Col. Laurence.

Having proceeded on thus far succesfully, they now begin to clap their wings
as invincible, Ireland being delivered up wholly and quietly into their power
by that pitiful cowardly Impe H. Cromwell who had already attended their
pleasure at the Commons bar, for which good service they stroaked him on the
head, told him he was a good boy, for which kindness he bussed his hand, made a
leg and Exit.

But leave we him to stupid folly, and let us see what rates Crown land bears,
the Contractors lately were very busy, and behold the product.

June. 29. 1659.
By the Trustees and Contractors appointed by Act of Parliament, for sale of
the Castles, parkes, etc. exempted from sale by a former Act.
These are to give notice, that there are Competitors for the purchase of
Somerset House, Sommerset-house set to sale ctc.
with the Appurtenances in the Strand, Middlesex, which therefore is to be
exposed to sale for ready money, by the box to be opened on Friday, the eight
of July next. The annual value being 233. l. the gross value of materials,
etc. 5545. l. 1. s. 3. d. At which time such as desire to purchase the same may
put in their papers with their name subscribed into the box aforesaid at
VVorsester-House, containing how many years purchase, (not under 13.) they will
give for the annual value, etc. and he that offers most is to have the
purchase.

Will. Tailor Clarke, etc.

At the same time they appointed to sell ten brace of Buckes, or more out of
Hampton Court Parkes, and so from time to time.

Thus did they strive to make havoc of whatever belonged to the King, which
indeed, and no other, was the good (or rather cursed) old cause that these
miscreants so lustily fought for, and so loudly cried up.

And now, lest they should seem ungrateful to Richard Cromwell, who had so
tamely left the chair of State to these Mountebanks to sit in: they vote him an
exemption from all arrests, for any debt whatsoever, for six months, and
appoint a Committee to examine what was due, for mourning for the late Lord
General Cromwell, R. Cromwell protected.
and to consider how it may be paid for, without charge to the Commonwealth.

Kind Gentlemen surely they are, they take all he has from him, and then allow
him a pension; they rob him of a pound and give him a farthing, not a feather
of his own bird, and well so too: for his ambitious stepping into the royal
seat, deserved a greater punishment, which 'twas a wonder how he escaped, since
Usurpation and Tyranny in different hands are generally vehement scourges to
each other, and always torments to themselves; as will appear by the sequel.

For these godly great ones, being now newly warm in their seats, New plots and
jealousies.
begin (as of old) to dream of Jealousies and fears: Plots, Plots, nothing but
Cavaleer plots rings either in their ears or mouths: if two Gentlemen do but
meet accidentally in the Street, and talk together, straight there is a
confederacy, and they must be committed to prison for doing nothing, so that we
might say with that Noble Roman Cicero, Circumspice omnia membra Reipublicae,
quae nobilissima sunt: nullum reperitur profecto quod non fractum,
debilitatumve sit. O rem miseram! dominum far non potuimus, conservis vero
jam servimus. A sad cause of complaint, to live in such a slavery; but our
Taskmasters would fain seem merciful, witness their Act of Indemnity, Act of
indemnity pardons all but Cavaliers.
which came out in print about July, wherein they except none from pardon but
only such whose consciences are not large enough to approve of open Rebellion,
as the last clause of their said mock-Act will show, wherein all are debarred
the benefit of the same, even from sixteen years of age, unless they subscribe
against a single person, Kingship or house of Peers; all sins can be digested
by these fellows, except lawful obedience to magistracy, which they so
abominate that all persons that are tainted therewith must not only depart out
of London, but out of England, in either whereof if they be taken, they shall
be proceeded against as Traitors: and all persons are impouered to take and
apprehend them, for encouragement of which roguery every one that discovers, or
takes such a person was to have ten pounds from the Council of State; Surely
they are in a great fear, else what should they make all this noise, and bustle
so furiously on a sudden, to settle and raise a new militia, but latet anguis
in herba, for now (it being the Dog-dayes) the house grew so hot, that diverse
members withdrew, whereby the rest in regard of their fewness, being become
incapable to act, because not enough to make up a house, according to their own
fantastical model on Friday 22. of July did Resolve. Members to attend.
That the Members of Parliament, who have had Letters to attend the service of
the Parliament, or have actually attended since the 7th. of May, 1659. be
hereby enjoined to give their attendance in Parliament every Morning at eight
of the clock, for fourteen days, and if employed by Parliament, within a
fourtnight.

Alas, poor men, the harvest truly was great, but the laborers few; therefore
it was time to call for more help, for which now they are so put to it, that
they hardly know which way to turn themselves: they complain of designs, and
of buying up of Arms to disturb the peace, which made a great one among them
say, this restless Spirit of the common Enemy should excite the friends of the
Commonwealth to diligence and to study unity, that advantage may not be given
by divisions, but that we may be all of one Spirit to uphold and promote the
common cause that has been contended for. And the better to color their
villainies (according to their usual custom in like cases when they had
mischief to do) they set apart a day of fasting and humiliation; A fasting day
set a part for mischief.
and to show that they were the same men and of the same (if not worse) mind
than formerly for rapine and blood, they proclaim J. Mordant Esquire, with
several others traitors; and order the Lady Howard, Sr. E. Byron, and Mr.
Sumner, to be brought to a speedy trial, for dangerous and traiterous
designs, of bringing this Nation into blood and confusion again: that is for
endeavoring to restore his Sacred Majesty to his lawful birthright and
dominions, for which the whole current of the law is constant encourager,
although these men's effrontery is such, that they dare say any thing by an
infallible Spirit as they imagine, and the World is bound to believe them. But
their vizor being now ready to fall off, Commoti^ns.
and the people not willing to be any longer blinded, begin to move in most
parts of England, which so mads the Phanatick faction, that they seize upon
persons, horses, and arms all about London, increase and double their guards,
stop passengers, even on the Road, the Council of State (so called) sits night
and day without intermission, whereby the City militia and all the forces
throughout England were drawn into a body to prevent the danger. Yea so
general was the fear that they begin to court the people in their canting way.

And because you shall see their desperate fear of, and divellish malice to,
the King and his Friends, take the words of one of themselves as they pass,
Viz. A canting lie.
The Lord stir up the hearts of his people to prayer and sincere humiliation,
and fill them with unanimity and courage in this evil time, and make the
People to see, that whatever fair pretenses may be made use of by the common
Enemy, to get power into their hands, yet should they prevail, no man that has
been of a party against them heretofore, yea no man that has been a mere
Neuter, but must expect that his private Estate, as well as the public
Liberty, shall become a prey to a desperate crew of ravenous and unreasonable
men: for (says he) like an irreverent Villain) let but CHALES STUART get in,
and then to satisfy the rabble of followers, and the payment of forreyners to
enslave you, you shall soon see them entailed upon your selves and your
Posterity, to maintain the pomp and pride of a luxurious Court, and an
absolute Tyranny. Thus far he, which how much truth, yea or but probability
thereof is therein; I dare appeal to the greatest Enthusiast among their whole
gange: for if there were nothing in it else but the railing (besides all the
falsity and Scandal) it were sufficient to convince the Speaker to be a Son of
Beliall, as having so far forgotten grace, and laid a side all honesty, that he
durst rail against the Lords anointed, concerning whom the Scripture forbids
to have an evil thought, but it is the custom of rebels to go on from bad to
worse, and when they have once drawn the sword against their Prince, to throw
away the scabbard, and never entertain a thought of return or repentance, like
the bold Usurper in the Poet.

The more we are opposed the more we will spread,
And make our foes our fuel: To be head
We Will, cut off any member, and condemn
Virtue of folly for a Diadem.
Banish Religion, etc.
The use of the Juncto's fasting.
And such was their practice, though sometimes (especially when encompassed with
dangers) they hang their head like a bull rush, and even but mock God with a
fast, while they only pray to be prosperous in their villainy

About this time, the whole Nation of England began to grow sick of the
abhorred fag end of a Parliament, endeavoring to make head against them in
Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Hartford, Hereford, Gloucester, Bristoll, in Cheshire
especially, where many of the Gentry were actually engaged, correspondence
maintained, England sick of the Rump.
a rendevous appointed, and the ancient City of Ches^er surprised: this indeed
was the most formidable appearance in all England, for the only appeasing
whereof most of the County forces in those parts, and several Regiments of the
Army from London, did speedily march under the command of a hot-spur zealot,
Mr. G. Lambert, whose ambition made old Nol lay him aside as dangerous, and
that dishonorable discarding, created him a desperate Enemy to the Cromwelian
name and family, which made the Juncto think him the fitter man for their
service, A rising in Ch^shire by Sir G. B.
Sir G. B. appeared commander in chief in Cheshire, though many other Noble
Gentlemen, were present, so that this seemed to be the most likely place for
Action. Lambert according to Order being upon his march thither, with three
Regiments of horse, and three Regiments of Foot, and one Regiment of Dragoones,
besides a train of Artillery: and the Juncto for his encouragement shot a paper
gun (by them called a Proclamation) after him against Sir George Booth, Sir
Thomas Middleton, Randolph Egerton, proclaiming them and their adherents to be
Rebels and Traitors, and all else that should any way assist, abet or conceal
the carrying on of their design; backed thus he marches furiously, and in a
fourtnight or three weeks time draws near to Cheshire, in the mean and
during his absence, the congregated Churches of Schismatics and Sectaries in
and about London, raise three Regiments for the security of those parts, in the
intervalls of which time, Sir George Booths Declaration came out in print, the
contents whereof was setting forth how the Westminster Statesmen had violated
all laws of God and Men; that the defense of the laws and lib^rties was the
chief things he and his aimed at, which would never by these self seekers be
settled, and therefore desired a new free Parliament. This, as it carried
nothing in it but what was real true, so it gave very great satisfaction to
all understanding people, though by the Phanatick rout it was descanted upon
otherwise: but Gods time was not yet come, for Lambert no sooner arrived with
his Army near Sir George Booth, and his forces, Sir G. B. ^^u ed.
but he fell on them with valor and violence, which produced a very sharp
engagement, but the Country not being acquainted, nor used to such hot and
furious work quickly yielded ground: Sr. Georges whole body being afterward
drawn forth near Northwich, and possessed of the bridge, they drew up their
foot in the meadows, yet Lamberts Men being commanded to attempt the pass, did
it with such resolution that they soon beat the Enemy from them, and made way
for the whole Army, who having passed the river immediately gave them a total
rout.

The news of this victory so fleshed our bloodhounds, that they began to boast
above measure, vaunting the Lords mercy to them (his own people forsooth) but
Justice to their adversaries in so apparently blasting their Traiterous
undertakings in every corner of the land; like the turks, reckoning the
goodness of their cause by the keenness of their sword, Their maxim to make
good their cause.
and denying that any thing may properly be called Nefas, if it can but win the
Epithete of Prosperum.

The Juncto upon this, set forth a Declaration to invite all the people to
thanksgiving, for this great deliverance to the Parliament, and Commonwealth,
(as they styled themselves): Lamberts policy.
but Lambert intends to make use of his success against the loyal party for
himself, and to that end in a seeming, slighting and neglect of himself, writes
to the Parliament his Soldiers merits, with whom (the sooner to endear them)
he is more than usually familiar: and the Parliament have no sooner voted him
1000 l. to buy him a Jewel, as a mark of their favor, but he presently
distributes it among his Soldiers, endeavoring by that and all other means to
engage them wholly to himself, so as to venture in one bottom with him; he yet
carried himself so, that his ambitious design was not discovered, and that he
might the better conceal: at this time Sir George Booth, Sir G. B. taken.
who had fled from the battle, at Northwich in Cheshire, was taken at
Newport-Pannel in disguise; upon notice whereof, he is committed close prisoner
to the Tower of London. for high Treason, in levying war against the
Parliament, and Commonwealth, and that a Committee be appointed on purpose to
examine him, all which was done accordingly, and Sir Henry Vane, and Sir Arthur
Haselrig, (two Saints of the Devils last edition) went to him to take his
examination.

While things are thus in handling here, Lambert seeks cunningly to get all the
strength of those Counties into his own hands, which the Parliament at his
request grant him, by giving him power to seize all arms for their use (as he
pretended) in the same: of which piece of service they seemed to be very glad
as also of letters that came out of Scotland, assuring General Monks fidelity
to them against the interest of the Stuarts, or any other whatsoever, so that
now they began to descant on the late design, laying all the blame on the
loyal party, A trial of the royal family.
whose game they said it was, though he least appeared in it, taking occasion
also from thence to blast the royal family with hellish scandalls: the safety
of which the divine providence has always had a particular and peculiar care
of, but as it were in despite of Heaven, they are not content with all their
former wickednesses of banishing, exiling, and railing against their lawful
Sovereign, but now they will enforce all to renounce him, which in September
they Resolved in these words. Oath of abjuration.
J. A. B. Do hereby declare, that I renounce the pretended title of CHARLES
STUART, and the whole line of the late King James, and of every other person,
as a single person, pretending to the Government of these Nations, of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging.
And that I will by the grace and assistance of Almighty God be true, faithful,
and constant to this Commonwealth against any King, single person, and house
of Peers, and every of them, and hereunto I subscribe my name.

Thus may every one see, that it was not to amend or reform any errors in the
State, but only their particular malice to the Royal line and covetousness
after their Estate, that made them run into such desperate designs, wherein
having so deeply engaged themselves, that there was no going back, they mean to
make all sure to their interest: and to that end take into debate in the
beginning of September, the matter of the Government, and referred it to a
Committee upon the votes in 1648. The blindness of the Juncto.
To prepare something in order to the settlement of the Government, on or
before the tenth of October.

See here the indiscretion of these men, after a ten years unsettlement and
bringing all into confusion, in all which time they have minded nothing but
their own private wealth, and till this last minute of time have not so much as
thought of resettling; and that they now have, is so weakly, that it tends no
further than to an offer: thus running willingly into one crime, they daily
perpetrate new ones without any sense of evil, or will of amending,
attributing the guilt of their faults to all that endeavor either to reform or
punish them.

The business of Cheshire thus blown over, and the great hopes that were
grounded thereon blasted; the Juncto fall to their old humor of raising money,
no less will serve their turn than 100000. l. a month, besides Excise and
Customs, ^^xes and excise confirmed, new delinquents made and militia arreas
collected.
together with the hoped benefit that would arise from the sequestered Estates
of new Delinquents; and least any thing should escape them, the 16th. of
September they vote. That such persons as have been assessed to find horses and
Arms, by virtue of the Act of Parliament, for settling the Militia, and have
not brought in their horses and Arms, nor paid in lieu thereof the sum of
money, appointed by the said Act. That every such person and persons do under
the penalty in the said Act mentioned pay, after the rate of ten pounds for an
horse and Arms for such number of horses and Arms respectively as they have
been charged to find.

Resolved,



It Is no matter, you see, by this, whether any Horse or Arms be brought in at
all, so that the money be paid, Oh! It Is the money that adds Life and Legs to a
decrepit and dying old cause: The Grandees would never take so much pains,
unless an extraordinary profit also waited thereon; which they resolve to
compass, though with the extremest hazards, whereof there began to be some
kind of an appearance, by the growing of heart-burnings, and multiplying fears
and jealousies between their late great Champion Lambert and themselves, The
Juncto grow suspicious o Lambert
the sparks of which animosities growing into a flame, quickly increased to
that height, that not daring to trust him any longer with the Army, they send a
seeming courteous Letter to invite him home; which he, taking no notice of any
thing further than the pretended outside fair show, acceps of; and on the 20th.
of September returns accordingly to London, but immediately before his
arrival there, the Juncto, He comes to London.
to show the great charity, wherewith they abounded, took into consideration
how to cozen the poor Knights of Windsor, and to ingross into their hands all
Hospitals and their reveneues, by these two following votes. Viz. Tuesday
September 20th. 1659. Resolved, Windsor, The Juncto intend to seize on all
Hospitalls and convert their rents.
to examine what the same at present is, and will be for the future, after
Leases expired, and to see that the charitable uses, to which the said revenue
was granted, be performed, and the residue to be answered, to the use of the
Commonwealth, (by all means pray take a care of that) and to examine the
Leases that have been made, and the fines that have been paid thereupon, and
how disposed, and by what authority; with power to give relief and allowance
to the said poor Knights, and other poor people not exceeding their former
allowance (Oh, take heed of too much charity!) and also to take a Catalogue of
all Hospitalls within this Commonwealth, and the revenewes of them (they are
sure to mind that.) And that the Masters and Governors do return to this
Committee, the constitution of the respective hospitalls, and how the profits
thereof have been, and are disposed of, and by what authority, before the first
of December, 1659. And to report the whole matter to the house.

Ordered,



See here how greedy is the zeal of these devouring Statists, which yet is
clothed in the garb of a seeming Sanctimonious care, but this hypocrisy must
not go long unpunished, neither does it, for now begins to appear the result of
Lamberts designments abroad, in a remonstrative address from the Army: at the
very first news, whereof the Parliament is so startled, that, fearing to be
whipped with their own rod, they ordered, Col. Ashfield, Col. Cobbet, and
Lieutenant Col. Duckenfield, Armies remonstrate the Juncto send for ^ome
Officers.
(three of the chief promoters of it) to bring to them the original paper,
intended to be presented; upon notice of which order given, immediately, a
letter was delivered into the house signed by many persons of the Army,
superscribed to the said three summoned persons, by whose hands they desired
the enclosed paper might be presented to the Lord Fleetwood, and after to the
general Council, which enclosed paper was entitled, to the supreme authority
of these Nations, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, The humble
Petition and proposalls of the Officers under the Command of the Right
Honorable the Lord Lambert in the late Northern expedition, the manner and
method of which paper the Juncto so highly resented (as supposing it to strike
at their very root) that they presentely voted. That this house does declare,
Observe this crack.
that to have any more General Officers in the Army, than are already settled
by Parliament, is needless chargeable and dangerous to the Commonwealth.

Here was the first step to that division, which afterward grew into a flame
but the Army Officers finding their design, was not yet ripe enough, by a
dissembled acquiescency, seemed to lay aside their proposalls, by signifying to
the Parliament, that they would adhere to their authority in opposition to the
common Enemy, and that they would stand by them in the settlement of the
Commonwealth, against all disturbances whatsoever, which lulled the Juncto
into a kind of security, the City also at this time seeming to claw them by an
invitation to a Thanksgiving dinner, whereat the field Officers of the Army
were also to be present; Thanksgiving dinner in the City.
so that now being in a manner rid of their fear, they fall upon sequestring
the Gentry, about Sir George Booths business, settle the Excise, and revive the
Assessements for the Militia, using all their skill and power for amassing
together the wealth of the Nation into their private purses, concluding with
the Epicureans, ede, lude, bibe, post mortem nulla voluptas, so sottishly
stupid were they grown in their high flown ambition.

But now, least they should forget their duty, the Officers of the Army present
a new address requiring answer thereto, Armies new address.
which made them take it into the several pieces wherein it was proposed,
wherein among other things (to show you the harmony that was then between them)
they give to their third proposal this answer. Juncto angry there with.
Viz. The Parliament declares, that every Member of the Army, as free Men of
England, have a right of petitioning the Parliament, but withal thinks fit to
let them know, that the Petitioners ought to be very careful, both in the
manner, and in the matter of what they desire, that the way of promoting and
presenting the same may be peaceable, and the things petitioned for, not
tending, to the disturbance of the Commonwealth, nor to the dishonor of the
Parliament. And that it is the duty of petitioners to submit their desires to
the Parliament, and acquiesce in the judgment thereof.

By this Declaration they intended to curb the Wallingford party, by teaching
them manners, and to know their distance; but they being Men of another spirit,
and knowing they had the power of the sword in their own hands, would not be so
put off: which the Juncto, perceiving, and beginning to grow jealous of their
own safety, and satisfied that the Army could not subsist without money (which
is the Nerve of War) to engage the People to themselves, and to dis-inable the
Officers from raising any money (in case they should (which they now much
doubted) interrupt them in their sitting) they passed an Act against raising of
moneys upon the people, without their consent in Parliament. Part whereof take
as follows. Be it enacted, etc. That all Orders, Act against raising money
without consent of Parliament makes the Soldiery mad.
Ordinances, and Acts, made by any single person and his Council, or both, or
either of them, or otherwise, or by any assembly or convention pretending to
have Authority of Parliament, from and after the 19th. Day of April, 1653. and
before the 7th. of May, 1659. And which have not been, or shall not be enacted,
allowed, or confirmed by this present Parliament be, and are hereby declared,
deemed, taken and adjudged to be of no force and effect from and after the said
seventh day of May 1659.

And be it further enacted, that no person or persons, shall after the eleventh
of October, 1659. Assess, Levy, Collect, gather or receive any Custom, Impost,
Excise, Assessment, contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any sum or sums of money
or other imposition whatsoever upon the people of this Commonwealth, without
their consent in Parliament, or as by law might have been done before the third
of November, 1640. And that every person offending contrary to this Act shall
be, and is hereby adjudged to be guilty of high Treason, and shall forfeit and
suffer as in case of high Treason.



When the Juncto had thrown abroad this killing thunderbolt, to show that they
durst own the power which they yet conceived themselves Masters off, they took
into consideration a Letter, dated October the 5th. and signed by diverse
Officers of the Army, and directed to Col. Okey, and also a printed paper,
called the humble representation and Petition of the Officers of the Army to
the Parliament, etc. Upon the reading of which two papers, the house was so
highly incensed and flew into such a sudden heat of passion, that without any
more ado they resolved.

That the several Commissions of, 9. great Officers displ^ced and voted out of
commission.
Col. John Lambert, Col. John Desborow, Col. James Berry, Col. Thomas Kelsey,
Col. Richard Ashfield, Col. Ralfe Cobbet, Major Richard Creed, Col. William
Packer, and Col. Rob. Barrow, were null and void, and every of them discharged
from military employment. And that the Army should be governed by seven
Commissioners, Commissioners to govern the Army.
Viz. L. G. Charles Fleetwood, L. G. Edm. Ludlow, General George Monck, Sir
Arthur Haslelrig Barronet, Col Valentine Walton, Col. Harb. Morley, and Col.
Robert Overton, or any three or more of them, which said Commissioners, were to
give notice to the said nine Officers of the discharge of their Commissions,
which being accordingly communicated, now might you have seen the smoking
embers of dissembled friendship, break out into an open flame of violent
enmity, this great and so long domineering faction, being divided in it self,
and each side prepairing for its own, The feud betwixt the rump and the
Soldiery breaks out.
both defense, and elevation, for now a Quorum of the Commissioners which were
appointed to govern the army, being gotten together, and sitting all night in
the Speakers chamber, which was within the Parliament house, to issue forth
orders; part of the army with most of the discharged Principal Officers
presently drew down to Westminster in a warlike order, where they possessed
themselves of the great Hall, the Palace yard, and all avenues, and passages
leading thereunto, having before given out, that they found it absolutely
necessary for the good of the Nation, to break up this Parliament, for the
maintaining whereof another part of the army were as active in drawing
together, the same night also marching down to Westminster, and planting
themselves in Kingstreet, and in and about the Abbey Church and Yard: This
unusual assembly at such an unaccustomed hour caused a general terror in the
hearts and minds of the Inhabitants, who dreaded some greater mischief than
they were sensible of, but the night being past, in the morning the Speaker Mr.
W. Lenthall, at his usual time came along Kingstreet, and had passage through
the ranks of Soldiers, till he came to the new Palace gate, The Rump turned
out of doors.
where his Coach was stopped, and himself compelled to return home, as wise as
he went, whereby the house was interrupted from sitting; which was the chief
thing that Lambert aimed at; yet though he had thus wrought his purpose, he
durst not withdraw, but make good his station against the other faction, the
greatest part of the day, each of the Phanatick leaders (for so indeed they
were both) expecting who should give the first blow, of which meekness the then
council of State taking notice, required both to draw off to their quarters,
which motion was willingly accepted on all hands, and so both sides marched
away.

Observe.
Thus have we seen that rump of pretended authority, which in May was, with much
soliciting, many entreaties, and not a few specious pretenses, courted to come
into play, now again in October, with as great scorn and malice laid a side and
trampled on: Nec lex est justior ulla, quam necis artifices art perire sua, It
has been a general Observation, that Treason is always the greatest
punishment to it self, like the Viper, it breeds young with her own
destruction, and as the Poet speaks of envy, sit licet injustus livor, so may
I say of it, though it be unjust to others, yet is it very just, to destroy
them first that would destroy others.

The Council of Officers having thus seized the Government into their hands,
Officers meet.
played with it for certain days, till (with the old Philosopher, in the
question about God) finding, the more they studied, the less they understood,
and that they were led by an Ignis fatuus, which only trained them to the
sight, but would never bring them to the certenty, of a settlement, and
pondering their own many weaknesses, and infirmities, with the exigency of
affairs, they fell into consideration of what was fit to be done: In the debate
whereof, after many frivolous essays, they agreed at length among themselves
to nominate some persons to be a Council of State, which device being
applauded, and a new name devised for them (for they will be called forsooth
the Committee of safety) these following persons were pitched upon, They erect
a Committee of safety, their names and characters.
Viz. Fleetwood, whose folly would have exempted, but they were afraid he
would have cried. Knowing also that the best play ever has a fool in it.

Lambert a seeming Saint, but chief Engenier of the model.

Desborow a drunken Clown, skilled in Harrassing the land steel, once a
sneaking petty fogger, now Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and a Traitor.

Whitlock a lump of ingratitude and deceit.

Sir Henry Vane, chief secretary to the seven deadly sins.

Ludlow, once a Gentleman, but since by himself Levelled into the plebeyan rank.

Sydenham, nothing good in him but his name.

Upstart Saloway Strickland, once a rumper, after a Lord of Nolls edition, then
a convert to the good old cause.

Berry, pedum nequissimus, the wickedst villain among 10000.

Lawrence, once an upstart privy Counceller, now scarce a Gentleman.

Sir James Harrington, Per risum multum possis cognoscere. --

Wareston, a mickle knave geud faw Sir.

Ireton, and Tichborn, two of the City Puckfoists, who lie ledger in the Common
Council, to discover plots for the getting of money.

Henry Brandrith, fit for mischief, else he had not been here.

Thompson, a dull fellow, but a soaking Committeeman.

Hewson, the Commonwealths upright setter.

Sniveling Col. Clarke Factious, Col. Lilburn, preaching, Col. Bennet, and
Cornelius Holland, a most damnable Apostate, both to God and his King.

To these fellows thus fitly accoutred, is the Government committed, Com
safety their power.
and not only so, but they have power to call Delinquents to account, to
oppose, and suppress all insurrections; to treat with foreign States, and
Princes, to raise the militia's in the several. Counties. To dispose of all
places of trust, with many other things: by which may be seen, what an
unlimited arbitrary power they assumed to themselves over the lives and estates
of all Englishmen. And that all England might take notice hereof, they send out
a Declaration in print, Armies declaration.
entitled a Declaration of the General Council of the Officers of the Army,
wherein they say they have lodged the civil and executive part of Government,
in the Committee of safety, whom they have obliged to prepare such a form of
Government, as may best suit with a Free State, without a single person,
Kingship or house of Peers: with many equivocating, though Saint-like,
expressions to the like effect, with which they hoped to delude the World, and
continnue their usurpation, but Sera venit sed certa venit. All their
hypocritical shows cannot cheat God, who raises up the Spirit of one among
themselves to chastise the errors of their pride, and vain glorious attempts:
for no sooner is that Infernal crew of Atheists met in their Committee, but
they are alarumed with a letter from General Monck out of Scotland, wherein he
gives them notice that both himself and some Officers of the Army in Scotland,
Monck dissatisfied with their proceedings.
were much dissatisfied in reference to the transactions of affairs in England,
at the same time receiving intelligence that he had, seized several strong
holds, secured diverse of his dissenting Officers, and possessed himself of
Barwick, Seizes Barwick.
which drove them for a time into a kind of Phanatick stupidity, that they knew
not which way to move in the management of their affairs, but at last willing
to preserve themselves, they order the forces in the North into a posture, and
command Lambert with more Regiments out of the Southerly parts to join with
them, that so they might appear formidable at least at a distance, and put a
stay to the violence which they foresaw was approaching to them; for the
prevention of which storm Col. Cobbet is sent to General Monck with insinuating
relations, Lambert marches against him.
whom the General immediately upon his arrival commits to custody, thereby,
preserving his Army from the dangerous contrivances that Person brought along
with him, and depriving of the intelligence he might have carried to England
back with him: which being done by the power of his Commission (as one of the
seven) he straight new models his Army, according to his own mind, and then
declares his resolution to assert the authority of Parliament, against all
violence whatsoever. Upon news of this, our safe Committeemen, knowing the
pulse of the late Juncto to beat after the mode of a free state, think they
shall merit highly at the hands of the General, if they promote that, though
they disown the Parliament he pretended to declare for, and to that purpose
having nominated several Gallant fellows of their own number, Viz. Fleetwood,
Vane, Ludlow, Saloway, Tichburn, Lambert, Desborow, Hewsen, Holland, and
others, to consider of, and prepare, a form of Government to be settled over the
three Nations, Safe Committee for a free state.
in the way of a Free State and Commonwealth, they send away Whalley, Goffe,
Caryl, and Barker, to show the same to General Monck, and thereupon to mediate
with him for avoiding the effusion of blood: the Officers at London writing
also to his Officers, and expostulating with them, touching the necessity of a
brotherly union, crying out of nothing but Liberty, while the Nation groaned
under their oppression; But Monck revolving with himself, both the greatness,
difficulty, and hazard, of his design, concludes not to be rash in a direct
quarrel, but rather by procrastinations to weaken the force of his enemies
(which he knew could not continue long without money) and so to gain the
victory without striking a blow, therefore to amuse them, and cast the more
seeming gloss upon his action he orders Col. Talbot, Monck desires a treaty.
and Dr. Clargies (who were the first messengers sent to him) to send Fleetwood
word that himself and his Officers had nominated Col. Wilkes L. C. Cloberry,
and Major Knight, to repair speedily to London, and treat with the like number
of Officers there, for a firm unity and peace, and the better to confirm it, he
sends another Letter from himself to the same purpose, with promise that his
forces should advance no further. But the Committee of safety, willing by
strenth to hold what they had got, and not knowing what to think of the
General, issue out many several Commissions to raise forces throughout all
England, to anticipate him, and to settle Militia's to be ready in a moment,
Militia settled.
as it were to resist him: which he hearing, and that Lambert was coming
against him with thirteen thousand men, he according to his before mentioned
Letter, forthwith sends his three appointed messengers for peace, upon whose
arrival at York, in November, and speech with Lambert, he became so far
satisfied of their intentions toward an Accommodation, that thereupon he gave
order his forces should advance no further Northward in their march.

Things being brought now into this posture, The treaty begun.
the Generals three Commissioners arrive at London, November the 12th. where
the Treaty is immediately begun: which lulled the Committee of safety into such
a security, that they begin to think of shareing great Offices and places of
trust and profit among themselves, to this end, appointing Fleetwood, Desborow,
Sydenham, Saloway, Cornelius Holland, Col. Clark, Col. John Blackwell, or any
two of them to be Commissioners for the Treasury, and to manage the affaris of
the public revenue, with power as large as could be desired: (And would it not
be well managed think you in the hands of such bankrupts) but while these men
mind their own wealth only, the Treaty must not be forgotten, which was now in
hand, and on a sudden brought to such an issue, that it startled the City, who
had by Col. Alured, and Colonel Markham received Letters from Scotland of
another purport, for at last the Commissioners on both sides agreed on these
heads ensuing, that is to say.

The articles of the Treaty.
That the pretended Title of CHARLES STUART, or any other claiming from that
family should be utterly renounced. (O horrid Treason, first murder the Father,
and then abjure the Son!)

That the Government of these Nations, shall be by a free State or
Commonwealth, and not by a single person, King, or house of Lords. What must
the new settlement utterly abolish all the old fundamental Laws of England at
one breath? Your Precipitation bodes your ruin.

That a Godly and learned Ministry, shall be maintained and encouraged: It Is
well the Generals Men thought of it, for you may be assured it is against the
principle of Anabaptists, and fifth-Monarchy Men;

That the Universities shall be reformed and countenanced, so, as that they may
become Nurseries of Piety, and Learning. That the Officers and Soldiers, and
other persons on either side be indemnified for what is past, touching their
late difference, and that all unkindness betwixt them be buried in perpetual
Oblivion; pray take care of that: but it may be supposed you shall be the
furthest off when you think your self nearest.

That the Officers which were made prisoners in Scotland, be forthwith set at
liberty; How will the General like that?

That the Armies be presently disposed into quarters, and that there be a
committee of nineteen whereof nine to make the Quorum, who were to meet about
qualifications, for succeeding Parliaments.

This was the effect of part of the agreement, which was sent away with all
speed to General Monck; upon knowledge whereof, and by reason, the conclusions
of the said Treaty were so contrary to the Letters, by them formerly received,
the City was startled, The City startle.
having (as they supposed by order) been encouraged to stand fast in their
liberty for their Laws, Privileges, Properties, and lawful Government.

But the General in a wise foresight, and providentiall care, having cast in
his mind the danger he stood in (for he had a wolf by the ears) though he sent
his Commissioners aforesaid, yet reserved to himself the ratification, so that
nothing should be of force until it were confirmed with his own seal: But now
the articles of the Treaty being come to his hands, he commands the return of
his Commissioners, which they obeying, he presently commits Col. Wilks to
custody for going beyond his Commission) declares the Treaty void, Monck
commits one of his Commissioners.
and marches toward the borders: which the Committee of safety being
advertised off, fall to their old tricks to delude the people, endeavoring to
make them believe it was only a rumor grounded on a fained Letter pretended to
be by him sent to the City, whereas they seemed to be assured that he would
acquiesce in the former agreement, but truth who is filia temporis, the
daughter of time, quickly appeared to undeceive the people; for in this interim
his excellency (having as himself expressed it a call from God and Man, to
march into England, for resetling the Parliament) calls an assembly of the
Nobles and Gentry of Scotland at Edinburgh, He calls an assembly in Scotland.
to whom he proposed these three things.

1. That they would, during his absence, which would not be long, preserve and
secure the peace of that Nation.

2. That they would supply him with some men for his undertaking (which he
engaged upon his honor should be to their satisfaction) and that if any
troubles should arise, they would assist him in the suppressing thereof.

3. That they would advance and raise what money they could before hand.

To these Propositions the Earl of Glencarn, who was chairman of that assembly,
returned these modest answers.

1. That they could not engage to preserve the peace of the Country in his
absence, wanting arms, and so in no condition to do it, but they should with
all faithfullness notwithstanding endeavor it.

2. That they were incapable to answer his desires for the reasons aforesaid,
neither did they think it prudent for them to engage in a war, which if it
should prove unsuccessfull on their part, would be a ruin to them: or if
successful, they did not understand, that it would be advantageous to them in
any measure. But as to the third.

3. That they were content to levy moneys, and advance a years tax aforehand.

General Monck highly satisfied with those civil returns, endeavors to
caresce and indear them by.



Hereupon he resolves now to dally no longer than his supplies of Men and money
come in, in the mean while holding correspondence and intelligence with his
friends all over England, He keeps intelligence.
from whom he a new received advertisement, that if he could yet for a little
time keep fairly at a distance, his work should be done even without any noise
of drum or trumpet except it were in exultation and triumph. This advise caused
him to make some seeming overtures of a second treaty with Lambert, yet all
along insisting upon the readmission of the Parliament, before they began it.

As a balk to which the Committee of safety declared, The Wallingford in
government.
(hoping thereby yet to lead the Nation into further error and mischief) that
they had transmitted a great part of a form of government for these Nations to
a Committee of the Officers of the Army ('it is like to be well done if it must
be hewn out by a dint of the sword) to be considered by them, (a mad crew of
Gotamists) who daily meet, and are gone through a great part of it with much
satisfaction, (to themselves possibly to think how finely they should Lord it,
but to no body else surely) they are very desirous to have such a Government,
as may preserve the Liberties of the Nation (this is the old cheat) and secure
the cause they have contended in (which is flat treason and rebellion) both
against CHARLES STVART, and any other that may disturb the peace: hoping in
time to make it appear, that their Enemies are Liers when they traduce them and
render them a people that seek only themselves. Then they conclude, that they
hope the faith of Gods people will hold out and not make have, and that good
men will help them in their prayers, that God the Lord would bring forth
righteousness and truth, and discover, and bring to naught the secret
contrivances of all his adversaries: And so no doubt, he will to the shame and
ruin of all such dissembling Hypocrites.

About this time being the later end of November, the People beginning to smell
their knavery, drew several Petitions, with an intent to deliver them, but
their crazie stomachs being not able to bear such strong Physic, belched forth
a Proclamation against all such Petitions, Proclaim against su^scriptions.
which they call undue and dangerous papers, and prohibit all persons to
subscribe any such papers, and if offered to suppress them, or cause the person
endeavoring to get subscriptions to be apprehended, upon penalty of being
accounted disturb^rs to, and enemies of, the peace.

But this not working its desired effect, but rather making men the more eager,
so as they began to fear tumultuous proceedings, therefore the Mayor is
commanded and he accordingly sent warrants to all City Officers to charge all
Masters of families to keep in their Sons and Servants: This enraged the youth
of the City to such a height, that the Committee of safety fearing their own
danger to arise from some disturbance there, gave order December the 5th. to
part of the Army, Hewson goes into London.
both horse and foot to march into the City, which they did early in the
morning, where being entered, great multitudes of all sorts of people gathered
together in the Streets, the shops were shut up, and the Soldiers in all
places affronted, which so madded them, that by command of their Col. Hewson,
they fell on the people with some violence, and killed two or three persons,
wherewith the multitude for the present dispersed, but began to bear a grudge,
whose revenge would not be satisfied but with the ruin of their oppressors.
This was the last help they had to rely on that they would rather reduce all to
a Chaos, than quit their hold, snatching at every the least opportunity that
did but flatteringly seem to offer them an advantage: for by this, though
unwillingly, foreseeing their Catastrophe at hand they are driven into more sad
thoughts of their dissolution, by the revolt of Portsmouth, which Haslerig,
Walton, and Morley, with the consent of Col. Whetham, the Governor had gained:
now might any man guess their time to be short by the violent extravagancy of
their actions, for nullum violentum diuturnum; the news of which arriving to
them, they sent some horse and foot either to reduce or block up that garrison
(here we see, now we see that great and divellish faction of Independency
strongly divided) but soft and fair, the game goes quite contrary, as will
appear afterward.

During this dealing at Portsmouth, the Army Officers finding that nothing
would satisfy the People, but either to re-admit the Rump Parliament or have
another, they to give them hopes of a glimmering of content, Ordered.
Parliament proclaimed by Committee of safety.
That a Parliament shall be called and appointed to sit down in or before
February next.

That the Parliament to be called as aforesaid, shall be according to such
qualifications as are or shall be agreed upon, and may best secure the just
rights, liberties, and privileges of the people.



This must be solemnly proclaimed forsooth by their journey men of safety,
together with another edict of the same stamp, commanding all honest and loyal
souls out of the Cities of London, and Westminster, upon pain, of imprisonment,
and to be proceeded against as traitors, and executed: By this means, they
thought to walk in a mist without any supervisors, but alas they were much
mistaken, for though they thus cleared themselves, as they thought, from fear
of the Common Enemy (as they termed all loyalists) yet they could not free
themselves of their new gotten Enemies at Portsmouth, by whose policy they were
outwitted and casheired: yet nevertheless seven principles and unalterable
fundamentalls are agreed on, which were published to this effect, by these high
and mighty John's a Leyden.

1. That no Kingship shall be exercised in these Nations. Wallingford 7.
principles of Rule


2. That they will not have any single person to exercise the office of chief
Magistrate in these Nations.

3. That an Army may be continued and maintained, and be conducted, so as it
may secure the peace of these Nations, and not be disbanded, nor the conduct
thereof altered but by consent of the conservatours appointed.

4. That no imposition may be upon the consciences of them that fear God.

5. That there be no house of Peers.

6. That the Legislative and Executive power be distinct, and not in the same
hands.

7. That the assemblies of the Parliament shall be elected by the people of
this Commonwealth, duly qualified.

Here you see the scope of these Bedlamites, and what a fine hotch potch they
would have made, Lawson declares.
but their sport was quickly spoiled by a Declaration from Vice Admiral Lawson
giving several reasons of a necessity for the long Parliament to sit again,
neither would any thing else satisfy him, though Sir Henry Vane himself with
his Jesuited and poisonous breath sought to infect him.

Now also had Haslerig, Morley, and others so bestirred themselves, and by
their policy wrought upon the Soldiers that were sent by the Wallingfordians
against them that they all came over to them, and relinquished their preten ed
Masters, whose want of money (if nothing else) would have made their cause seem
bad enough, especially since the rogue of all the Kingdom ran directly
encounter to their designs, their being motions almost in every County, some
for the Rump wholly, others for the joining of the secluded members to them, but
most, and they the wisest, moderatest, and not least considerable were for a
full and free Parliament, but Independency being not yet arrived at its full
period, Independencies first declining.
begins first to decline by the General advance, though in part seemingly
upheld by admitting the Rump-Parliament again into their full power, as when
they were interrupted the thirteenth of October before going, who accordingly,
on the four and twentyeth day of December, were owned by all the Soldiery,
both in England and Ireland, as the suprem authority with much solemnity, the
Speaker Lenthall going immediately to take care of the Tower of London, the
Government whereof he committed for the time present to Sir Anthony
Ashly-Cooper, Mr. Weever, and Mr. Berners, and on Monday the 26th. of December,
in the evening by twilight began to sit again, and were as peremptorily
imperious as before, commanding Lambert to London, Lamberts Army vanishes.
whose forces were all, either revolted away to General Monck, or piecemeal
retired into quarters for want of pay, yet notwithstanding all this removal of
force from them, they thought not themselves secure, until he by his authority
came to awe the Soldiery, and people, who were now grown tumultuous, and as
ready to throw them out of the sadle, as they had done the Wallingford faction.

H s excellency therefore, Monck marches to Enggland.
(who could never be persuaded out of Scotland, since he first went thither)
now lays hold on this opportunity, to do his Country service, having
therefore, as is before mentioned, secured Scotland, he likewise deals with Sir
Charles Coot, and others in Ireland, who striking a perfect harmony with him,
did surprise the most eminent Phanaticks in the midst of their designs in
Dublin Castle, and stop Ludlow, who was commander in chief in Ireland, at Sea,
by this means making all Ireland sure for the Parliament [for such yet was the
pretence] as it was in the 12th. of October, 1659. This wrought so effectually,
and even to such an excess of joy in the Parliament, that they not only
approved of all General Monks former actions, but ordered the hearty thanks
of the house to be given to him for his fidelity, and faithful service, and a
letter of thanks to be sent to him, signed by Mr. Speaker, a proper reward
surely, as if one word of their mouths were a sufficient recompense for all
labors, hazards, and travels.

While they are thus minding themselves and boasting of their own strength,
they receive a cooling card from some of the secluded members, who demanded to
be admitted to sit, if that Parliament were not broken, which put our mushromes
Juncto into such a dump, that they were fain to pass this following Resolve.
Tuesday 27. December. 1659.
Note this.
Resolved, January next, this house will take into consideration the case of
all absent Members, and also how to supply the vacant places in order to the
filling up of the house; and that in the mean time it be referred to a
Committee, to consider of all proceedings, and all orders, and cases touching
absent members, and make their report at the same time.



But this did not prove satisfactory, as they expected it should, for the City
begins to grow discontent, preparing themselves for a posture of defense; In
the Country the casheired Officers, and the depressed Nobility and Gentry
bestir themselves, courting his Excellency all along in his march, and ecchoing
in his ears perpetually a free Parliament, to whom he generally gave no other
answers, but that he would use his utmost interest, to persuade them to reason
and Justice, in the mean time wishing them to acquiesce in what they should
order; thus he marches with his whole Army, modelling to his own mind all
Garrisons and forces in his way: This and his number of men that he brought with
him, being far beyond allowance, (for they ordered only three hundred) put our
Rumpers to a stand, and they could not be satisfied until they send the
subtilest couple in the house, Scot and Robinson are sent to Monck.
Scot and Robinson, to sound his intention, under pretense of congratulating
his coming to England, and complementing him, to whom he carried himself with
so much gravity and reservedness, that they could not catch one dropping
syllable that might betray him.

About this time the City by their Sword Bearer, The City Count him.
send to him, to whom he returns, that he is for the Parliament as aforesaid,
yet assures them that, when he came to the City, he would satisfy their
desires and hopes conceived of him, thus owning the authority then in being, he
keeps close to his commission, notwitstanding all the addresses of the
Countries for a free Parliament, promising nothing more but that he would see
all force removed from the Parliament, 2. The House filled, and 3. That there
should be good provision made for future Parliaments. Thus with a slow and
orderly march, attended by the prayers and wishes of the whole Nation, he comes
at length to St. Albans. He comes to St. Albans.


In this interval of time, the Rumpers minding to ingross the whole power, both
Legislative, and Executive into their own hands, and to share all places of
trust and profit among themselves: on the fifth of January pass this following
vote. Resolved, Observe this.
1648 and 1649. do stand duly discharged by judgment of Parliament from sitting
as Members of this Parliament, during this Parliament; and that writs do issue
forth for electing of new Members in their places.



Thus did they intend to have perpetuated themselves for their l^ves, and to
have bequeathed their villainy in succession, to such as were to be new chosen,
having already concluded, Oath of abjurai^on.
that the Oath of renunciation of the title of CHARLES STUART (as these
unmannerly mungrels were pleased to style their Sovereign) and the whole line
of the late King James should be taken by every member that hereafter shall sit
in Parliament, nay so high were they now grown, that they committed diverse for
but Petitioning for a free Parliament.

M. comes to London.
This made his Excellency have up to London, where his Lady and Family were come
before him by Sea; into which City he comes about the beginning of February,
and takes up his lodging at White Hall, as the Parliament had appointed him
(contrary to the thoughts of many) and after two or three days refreshment
(taking no notice of his resentment of the aforesaid insolences) he solemnly
attends the house according to their order, Goes to the house.
and with much modesty gives them an account of his undertakings, refusing the
chair offered him for his ease and honor, but leaning on the back of it, he
delivered himself to this effect.

H^s speech then.
That he deserved not the thanks they gave him, having done no more than his
duty, but wished them rather to praise God for his mercy: then he humbly
desired them to satisfy the expectation of the Nation in the establishment of
their laws, liberties, properties, etc. God having restored them, not so much
that they should seek their own, as the public, good. He desired them in
particular to take away the jealousy, men had of their perpetuity, by
determining their own sessions, and providing for future Parliaments, wishing
them to use the Nobility and Gentry civilly, intimating that it was their
wisdom rather to enlarge, than contract their interest, he told them, that the
fewer qualifications they put upon succeeding Parliaments, the better, and
desired them to be tender in imposing new oaths (for he had heard of the oath
of abrenunciation) alleging there was more reason to repent of those already
taken, than to take new ones, so warning them to take heed of Cavaliers, and
Phanaticks, he concluded, commending Scotland to their care, and assuring them
of Ireland, and hinting at a Free State.

This done, and he retired laden with thanks, How the P. employ him.
he withdrawes to his place in the Council of State, where the first that he
finds under consideration is the reducing of the City, (which to make a short
digression was now grown unruly, being stiffly resolved to own no power, but
that of a full and Free Parliament, whereto they had been encouraged by the
Country in several Declarations, but especially that of Devonshire, which in
regard it gives the sense of all in one, and was that chiefly stuck to by the
City: I shall give it you at large, as Mr. Bamfield, the Recorder of Exon, sent
it to the Speaker, January the 14th.

The Declaration.
We the Gentry of Devon, finding ourselves without a Regular Government, after
your last interruption, designed a public meeting to consult remedies, which
we could not so conveniently effect till this week at our general quarter
Sessions, at Exon; where we found diverse of the Inhabitants groaning under
high oppressions, and a general defect of trade, to the utter ruin of many,
and fear of the like to others, (which is so visible in the whole Country) that
it occasioned such disorders, as were no small trouble and disturbance to us,
which (by Gods blessing upon our endeavors) were soon suppressed without blood:
And though we find, since our last purposes, an alteration in the State of
affairs, by the re-assembling you at the helm of Government, yet we conceive
that we are but in part redrest of our grievances, and that the chief expedient
to amend the whole, will be the recalling all those Members that were secluded
in 1648. And sat before the first force upon the Parliament, and also by
filling up vacant places, and all to be admitted without any Oath and
engagement previous to their entrance, for which things if you please to take a
speedy course, we shall defend you against all opposers, and future
interrupters, with our Lives and fortunes: for the accomplishment whereof we
shall use all lawful means, which we humbly conceive may best conduce to the
peace and safety of this Nation.

This was signed by most of the chief gentry of the Country.

Now the City, owning the purport of this Declation by one of their own, and
refusing to pay taxes, had drawn the Council of State to that violent
ebulliency, of reducing it to a submission, which was, as I said before, the
point, upon which they fell, when first General Monck, came first among them;
for they had rather bring the whole World into a combustion than their usurped
power either to equals or superiors, Mo. goes into the City and demands taxes.
they were so in love with power, that they would not have left pilling, as
long as there had remained any matter either to satisfy their ambition or
covetousness; wherefore they resolve to drive on furiously, and therefore give
order to the General to march into the City, with so many horse and foot, as
should reduce them to an obedience, and compel them to pay the Assessment. His
excellency according to their command, being then their servant, went to the
City, and at Guildhall peremptorily demands, by order from the Parliament and
Council of State, the payment of their taxes: this so sudden demand, coming
from him (from whom they hoped better things) and quite contrary to their
expectation, drove the Citizens to such a nonplus, that for a time they were
as extasied not knowing what to say, but at last, recollecting somewhat of an
English temper, they return this answer. That in Magna Charta confirmed by the
Petition of right, and renewed by the present Parliament, a day before their
forceable dissolution upon the 11 of October, they were to pay no taxes, etc.
but by their consent in Parliament, which now they had not: yet to avoid giving
any offense, they desire time to consider of it, which the General grants, but
in the mean time writes to the house to know their pleasure, to which they
presently answer, that 1. he should imprison Col. Bromfield, Alderman
Bludworth, L. C. Jackson, Major Cox, Col. Vincent, etc. Some of which had
waited upon him from the City but a little before; 2. that he should remove
their chains, dig up their posts, and break their gates.

M. his carriage in that exigent of affairs.
These strange orders being brought to him, did a little startle him, knowing
they were sent as well to try his patience and obedience; as to breed an open
enmity between him and the City, thereby to compel him to serve them
perpetually, by being assured that they were mortal enemies; yet not willing,
since he had gone so far with success, to loose all now by passion, he with
silence obeyes them readily, and thereby clearly finds the temper of the City
to be positively resolute for Liberty and right, so that being sensible they
might be trusted, he hopes shortly to make them an amends, which he had an
occasion offered to do soon than he expected, Is ungenerall'd.
for the Parliament had a double design upon him, first to weaken him in his
interest and credit, by an employment which they knew would so incense the
City, and then while he is acting their unreasonable commands, they are busy
in undermining him in his power; for when he had done their design as they
thought, to the enraging of the Citizens, and breeding in their hearts
revengefull thoughts, He joins with the City.
he returns to White Hall upon Friday the 10th. Day of February, upon which
day his Commission did expire, instead of the renewing whereof, which he might
with much justice have expected, as the reward of his merit, he is made a
Colonel again, and only made equal in command with six men more, as short of
him in desert, as in honesty, wherewith when he had acquainted the Officers of
his Army, who were much unsatisfied with such a reward for their late
abominated employment, agreed unanimously among themselves, that the Parliament
intended to lay them aside, notwithstanding their former faithful service to
them, and to perpetuate the Nations slavery, by their datelesness: and
therefore they resolved to march with their General into the City to join with
them, and declare for a free Parliament: to this purpose a conference is had at
the Three Tons near Guild Hall, where the City and Army strike hands, at
which time his Excellencies Officers remonstrate the resent they had of the
violence they were commanded to offer that famous City, which was of a stamp
unparalleled in the most horrid rage of former ages, whose barbarousness even
spared that, when they harassed the whole Nation beside, then give warning of
several persons, both within and without the City, whose tyrannous minds they
feared, abhorring in an especial manner a late petition delivered in the house
by one Praise-God Barebone, being a treasonous libell, subversive of all order
and Government, dangerous to religion, both in discipline and worship, and
destructive to all Laws, Statutes and Customs, even in fundamentalls, wishing
at last the Parliament to think of determining their Session, and provide for
future Parliaments.

This being, by his Officers I say, presented to his Excellency, and by him in
a letter communicated to the Speaker, he marches into London, and takes
quarters, declaring for a free Parliament; and this blow was it, Free P.
promised
made Independency stagger, for so highly were both City and Country pleased
with this Declaration, that they did hardly know in what manner to express
their joy, ringing their bells, making bonfires, the air resounding nothing but
the name and praises of Monck, and the Streets filled with grateful hearts,
who on bended knees prayed for blessings on the head of the hoped restorer,
both of the Church and Commonwealth, and in this resolution he persisted,
notwithstanding all the flatteries, threatenings and snares of the house, who
now studied nothing more than his ruin, as in him foreseeing their own,
nevertheless he waits for the Parliaments answer to his last letters to them,
but finding they neither minded him nor them, and thought of nothing but
settling their own interest, and continuing themselves in power, he procures a
conference between some sitting members of the house, and some of the
honorable Gentlemen and worthy Patriots that were excluded from it, at which
himself being in person present, and weighing judiciously the reasons and
arguments formed on both sides, which he heard with a deep and reserved
silence, after all were withdrawn, he concluded with himself, upon result from
the whole, that the pretended settlement proposed by the house, was of compass
too narrow, and too weak of foundation to bear up the Nation, and repair its
breaches: Secluded members admitted.
he resolved therefore to withdraw all manner of force from the house, and to
admit men of more sober, moderate, and less biased judgments, whose Spirits
being more apt for public good, would establish the Kingdom, upon terms
comprehensive of every considerable interest therein: hereupon, on the one and
twentyeth day of February, meeting the secluded members at White Hall, and
expressing himself to them in a speech not delivered by himself, but by his
Secretary, wherein he commended to their care,

1. Religion, that great primum mobile and unum necessarium, without which to
live rather befits beasts than men, and this was proposed in the most sober and
moderate way imaginable, yet neither countenancing error nor allowing
libertinisme.

2. He commended to them the State, desiring them to be good Physicians to its
crazed body, by applying suitable Physic, which (he said) he supposed would be
a full and a free Parliament, upon whose resolves, as himself; so he doubted
not but the whole Nation would acquiesce, he told them the house was open for
them to enter, and prayed for their good success.

The secluded members being thus admitted, How they begin and wherein proceed.
fall immediately to work where they were abruptly forced to break of in
December. 1648. Confirming their Vote made then by another now, that the
concessions of the late King were a sufficient ground to proceed on for settling
the peace of the Kingdom, hereby not only vindicating themselves, but as it
were at once disanulling all that had been done as dissonant thereto, during
the whole time of their recess.

This began to infuse a new spirit of life into the Kingdom, in whom at this
springing season of the year, began a new to bud and peep out the bloomes of a
too long frost-nipped loyalty, so that one now might have seen what twenty
years before could never show, countenances, that lately were dejected through
the cruel tyranny of their Aegipitian task masters, now gather cheerful
looks, and like fresh blown roses yield a fragant savor.

The Parliament thus sitting, freely vote his Excellency Lord General of all
the forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland: by virtue of which Commission he
disarmes all the Phanatick party, both in City and Country, the Parliament in
the mean time providing to secure the Nation by two seasonable Acts, the one of
Assessment, and the other of the Militia; the last impowering and arming
Gentlemen, and Men of worth and power, to stand up for their Liberties, and
Privileges, and put the Country into a posture of defense, against all
encroaching pretenders whatsoever; and the former enabling them to raise
moneys (which are the sineues of war) for maintaining of the forces, so raised
to assert their and our rights.

Thus settling the ancient Government of the City, and vacating the Phanatick
power in the Country, they commend the establishment of the Nation to a full
and free Parliament, to be called the 25th. of April, 1660. Issuing out writs
to that purpose in the name of the keepers of the Liberty of England, by
authority of Parliament, and settling a Council of State of most discreet and
moderate men, to whom the affairs of the three Nations, in the intervall, and
until the meeting of the Parliament, on the aforesaid 25th. of April was
committed, who with much discretion managed their power, to the satisfaction of
all sober minded men, and so (saving to the house of Lords their rights,
notwithstanding the Commons were in this Juncture of time, put upon necessity
to act without them) commending the Soldiery once more to his Excellency upon
the sixteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1659. (a day worthy to be
remembered) they dissolved themselves, Lorg P. legally ended.
and so at last put a legal period to that fatal long-Parliament, which could
not be dissolved by any but by it self.

And thus we see Independency laid in the dust, and ready to give up the ghost,
and indeed not long after we shall see fully to expire the Prodromi, of whose
miserable end might be these and the like.

The Council of State in this intervall of power, The intervall.
with very great caution and wariness, manage their affairs, turning neither to
the right hand nor to the left, but keeping a direct course, as knowing in
medio ibunt tutissimi, they set out a Proclamation against all disturbers of
the peace, under what pretense or name soever, sparing none that in a time of
such hopes durst either move a hand or tongue to work a disturbance, taking
care also that the order of the last Parliament touching elections should be
duly and punctually observed, as considering that the peace or ruin of the
Nation would lie in their hands. Elections for a new Parl.


His Excellency the Lord General in this interregnum accepts of several
invitations and treatments in the City by several of the worthy companies, yet
still having an eye to the main, he keeps close to his Officers (who were not
yet fully resolved) and often confers with them in a more familiar manner than
ordinary, whereby he so wrought on them, that at last he brought them to
declare that they would acquiesce in the resolves of the approaching
Parliament; and indeed this was a shrewd forerunner of the fall of
Independency, as I said before, whose only hope was builded on the averseness
of these men to lawful power, which when they saw frustrated they might well
depair; yet endeavor once more to endeavor a confusion, which being observed
by the Council, and that a discontented Spirit possessed some of the old
Officers and Grandees, according to the power given them to that purpose, they
send for all suspected persons, confining them unless they subscribed an
engagement to demean themselves, quietly, and peaceably, under the present
Government, and acquiesce submissively in the determination of the Parliament
next ensuing, which reasonable engagment Lambert and some others refusing, were
carefully confined to several prisons, by which means the peace was wonderfully
preserved: but notwitstanding all this care, such were the restless endeavors
of that divellish faction, that (whether by the neglect or treachery of his
keepers is not yet known) Lambert gets out of prison cuningly, who being a man
of loose principles and desperate fortunes, so encouraged the Phanatick party,
and stirred up their drooping Spirits, that they began to threaten great
matters, and for perfecting their wicked design, begin to gather to an head
near Edg-hill, which they hoped would prove to them an auspicious Omen for the
beginning of a Second war, but Heaven would no longer wink at such intolerable
villainies, for the sins of these Amorites were fully ripe for judgment, so that
they were discovered and quickly nipped in the bud, Lambert and his accomplices
being so eagerly pursued by Col. R. Ingoldsby that they were suddenly forced to
scatter and shift for themselves by flight, Taken and sent to the Tower.
neither was that so swift or secure, but that Lambert was taken prisoner by
the said Col. Ingoldsby, and sent prisoner up to London, at which time passing
by Hide park, on the twenty fourth of Ayril, he saw all the City Regiments both
of horse and foot, Trained Band and Auxiliaries, complered, armed, and trained,
and ready to hazard their Lives and Fortunes against all seditious and factious
Traitors to their King and Country.

The news of this first appearance of armed loyalty being spread abroad into the
Countries, The first loyal muster.
did so animate and encourage the old oppressed, that casting off their fetters
and fears together, they begin to appear in their wonted guise, and because
they were by the Phanaticks traduced as men of blood and full of revenge, not
to be satisfied but with the utter ruin of their adversaries, thereupon to
undeceive the vulgar, who might possibly have been misled by such lies, if not
answered, did from their several and respective Counties, as also in the Cities
of London and Westminster declare, The Gentry declare.
that they were far from any thoughts of revenge, it belonging to God alone
(alluding to that text of Scripture, Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the
Lord) but as for Justice they would acquiesce in the judgment of the
approaching Parliament.

This being done, and the whole Parliament at the appointed time, The
Parliament begins.
beginning first with their duty to God (they follow that golden Pythagorean
rule.) (...)
(...).) --
giving him hearty thanks for that their freedom of meeting, which when they
had cordially done, they fell in order to their Governor --

First, They fear God, then honor the King. As the same Pythagoras goes on; --
(...)
(...)
The very Heathen we see, by the mere light of Nature, could dictate that which
our Grand Enthusiasts of Religion would not for these many years, by the ignis
fatuus of their new lighted notion walk after. But the Parliament were better
principled, for after their devotions regularly paid to God, they in the very
next place own their duty to their Prince, upon the first day of May (a happy
day to be remembered to posterity) voting the Government to be by King, Kingly
government voted.
Lords, and Commons, a constitution so incomparably mixed, that it may rather
be admired then envied: neither were they satisfied to rest there but on the
Eighth day of the same May, caused his Majesty to be proclaimed King of
England, King proclaimed.
Scotland, France, and Ireland, which was performed with so much Solemnity and
Joy, as I presume England, I dare say hardly any Kingdom in the World, ever
saw or were sensible of the like, the shouts and acclamations of the pleased
people rending the very skies as a token of their extraordinary Thankfulness
to Heaven, and at night by the multitude of their bonfires, turning the
Darkness into a kind of lightsome day.

This hapy beginning thus owned by the general consent of all honest men, made
the Parliament resolute to prosecute their begun endeavors; which the more
orderly to do (for order befitteth men best both as Subjects and Christians)
they immediately prepared Commissioners, Commissioners sent to the King
who were persons choice for their integrity and wisdom, (like those heads of
the children of Issachar which were men that had understanding of the times to
know what Israel ought to do) being entrusted to wait on his Majesty, and to
desire him to come to his Parliament and People with all convenient speed.
Before whose arrival his Majesty had withdrawn himself from Bruxels, not upon
any account as was by the ignorant and malicious insinuated, but out of a
design of safe guard to his own sacred Person, as knowing those two principles
of the Romanists, (si violandum est jus, Regni causa violandum est; and nulla
fides servanda est haereticis) might prove dangerous, if not fatal to his
interest as affairs then stood. He well remembered Richard the first his case
surnamed Caeur-du-Lion, and what his detention once cost England, and therefore
had no reason to cast himself into the like hazard. Therefore having discharged
all Accounts whatsosoever at Bruxels, he as (I said) removes his Court to
Breda. As that first, he might hold the more certain and quick intelligence
with his friends in England, where there hardly wanted any thing to complete
his Restoration and the Kingdoms satisfaction, but his Personal presence; so
in the second place he there knew himself safe, being within the jurisdiction
of his beloved sister, the Princess Royal Mary Princess of Orange, King at
Breda.
whose tender love and zeal to him in his affliction deserves to be written in
brass, and graven with the point of a Diamond.

During the time of his residence there to show himself to be a second Solomon,
a Prince of Peace, and not only so, but the most pious and merciful of
Princes, who was wise as a Serpent, yet innocent as a Dove, by the Honorable
the Lord Viscount Mordant and Sir Richard Grenvile (since by his Majesty's
special grace created Earl of Bath) Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber; He
sent a most gracious Declaration, with respective Letters to the Lords, to the
Commons, to the City, and to the Army: Whetein, His Majesty's Declaration lays
Independency dead.
His Majesty first offers a Pardon for all miscarriages and misdemeanors against
his Father, or himself, to all persons (such only excepted as shall be
excepted by the Parliament,) promising likewise security to all, whose guilt
might otherwise endanger them, so as they laid hold on his Majesty's Pardon
within 40. days after the publication thereof.

2. He refers the purchasers of Kings, Queens, and Bishops Lands to Justice, to
the Law, and to the Parliament.

3. He assures the Soldiery of their Arrears for past services, although done
against him, and of encouragement and pay for the future under him.



This Declaration was received with no ordinary joy and solemnity, the
messenger Sr. John Greenvil being rewarded with 500. pounds to buy him a
Jewel, and upon reading thereof and a conference had with the Lords, (who had
now reassumed their Native right by taking their places in the higher House)
they agree unanimously each in their several house; That a Letter be sent in
answer to his Majesty's gracious Letter and Declaration, superscribed To his
most Excellent Majesty; which were since more immediately drawn up and sent by
Commissioners (before prepared as is already mentioned) six from each House,
who were in the name of both Houses,

1. To give his Majesty most humble and hearty thanks for his gracious Letter
and Declaration.

2. To desire his Majesty to return to the exercise of his Regal Office, and
come to his Parliament and people with all speed possible.

And thirdly, to that purpose to desire him to appoint a place for the Navy to
attend him: the Commissioners that went from the house of Peers were these.

The Earl of Oxford, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Middlesex, Lord Brook, Lord
Berckley, Commissioners names that went to the King.
Lord Visc. Hereford.
Of the House of Commons were selected these following,
Lord Charleton, Lord Bruce, Lord Falkland, Lord Mandevile, Lord Herbert, Lord
Fairefax. Sir George Booth, Sir John Holland, Sir Antho. Ashly-Cooper, Sir
Horatio Townsend Sir Henry Cholmly, Mr. Hollis.
The City of London having also received the like Letters and Declarations, the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council appoint a loyal and humble answer to be
returned, wherein they give his Majesty thanks for his tender care, grace and
favor to their ancient and renowned City, which was sent by these worthy
Gentlemen.

For the City of London.
Alderman Adams Recorder VVilde Alderman Robinson Alderman Bateman Theophilus
Biddolph Richard Ford Alderman Vincent Alderman Frederick Alderman VVale John
Lewis Esquire William Bateman Esquire. Alderman Bludworth Major Chamberlin Colonel
Bromfield Sir James Bunce Bar. Alderman Langham Alderman Reinoldson Alderman
Brown Sir Nicholas Crispe Alderman Tompson
All these Letters were sent away, but the first that arrived to his Majesty's
hand was from his Excellency the Lord General Monck, who by the leave of the
House sent the same by his brother in Law, Sir Thomas Clergies, who was (as
being the first) beyond all expression welcome, and after some long but not
tedious conferences Knighted, and at length dismissed with as much kindness as
he was at first received with joy.

Commissioners how received by the King.
After whom arrived shortly all the forenamed Commissioners, together with some
of the Ministry, and were received by his sacred Majesty, his two illustrious
brothers of York and Gloucester, and his sister of Orange, with demonstrations
of affections on both sides such as are not capable of a description by my rude
pen, for they were such as may be imagined only not defined, like the joys of
a condemned soul now at point to die, when suddenly and beyond expectation it is
not only snatched out of the very jaws of death, but mounted aloft into a seat
of Honor, how it is even overpressed with the overflux of such a sudden, yet
joyful change, and stands extasied, not knowing, or at le^st not well
discerning the realities of those violent emotions under the happiness whereof
it at present labors; which surpassing joy grown over, and they dismissed with
abundance of satisfaction, with all speed his Majesty according to the earnest
request of his Parliament prepared for England, his Royal brother, the most
illustrious Duke of York, Lord high Admiral, taking order for the Navy. And in
the way to the Seaside his Majesty was honorably entertained by the States
General at the Hague, of whom having taken his leave, and thanked them for
their Treatment and Presents, he proceeded in his journey.

During this time, the Navy under the conduct of General Mountague, was come to
attend and wait on his Royal pleasure; upon notice of which, attended by the
Princess of Orange and her son, and the Queen of Bohemia, he comes aboard the
Naseby Frigot, The King comes aboard for England, and lands at Dover.
by him then named the Charles, and after a repast there, parting with high
satisfaction, pleasure and content on both sides, with his Royal and Princely
attendants, he lanched forth, and quickly with a prosperous and safe gale of
wind, anuuente Coelo, came within two leagues of Dover, Monck meets him.
(a place formerly not so infamous for receiving the Barons in their rebellious
wars against the King, and harboring Lewis of France, as now it was famous for
its loyalty in the joyful reception of its lawful Sovereign) when he was come
thither, he sends Post for the General (being resolved not to set foot on
English ground till he came thither) who upon the first hearing of that happy
news, presently took Post to meet him, having before taken care for Palaces to
entertain him, and left order for several Regiments of Horse to attend him, for
his Majesty's security; Providing with valor against open enemies, and with
prudence against pretended and basely false friends, which being performed
according to Order, His Excellency waits upon his Majesty at Dover.

He is no sooner come thirher, but upon knowledge thereof, the King Landed, at
whose Honored feet in the most humble posture of a Loyal Subject, on his Knees
Our Great General presents himself, and was received and embraced by his
Majesty in the open arms of an endeared mercy, with so much affection as might
well manifest the great respect the King bore to his high deserts; for to show
that his embrace was signal, and far from a mere complement, he went nearer and
kissed him. No endearment is ever thought too great, where there is grounded
Love, neither rested he there, but like a true friend and lover indeed, takes a
delight in his society; for the more clear demonstration whereof to all the
world, he took him with his two Brothers the Dukes of York and Gloucester into
his Coach with him to Dover aforesaid, KINGS journey to London, and the manner
of it.
where after a dutiful acknowledgment from the Magistrates there, and solemn
though short entertainment he rid to the City of Canterbury (so famed for her
Archbishops Sea) his Majesty being in the middle between his two brothers; and
the Duke of Buckingham and the General riding bare before him.

In this Equipage with the whole Gentry and Nobility of England attending, and
thousands of the meaner rank; he arrived as I said at Canterbury, being met by
the Mag^stracy in their richest habiliments of Honor, and by the Ministry of
the place, who after a grave Speech and hearty Gratulation, presented him with
a rich Bible as He was Defender of the True Faith, and afterward with a Golden
Boul full of Gold, rendering it as a Tribute to him to whom Tribute was due.
From Canterbury, where he rested all Sunday, and gave thanks to God his Father
and mighty Deliverer. On Monday he came to Cobham-Hall in Kent, a House
belonging to the Duke of Richmond, but without any stay there passed on the
same night to Rochester, from whence on Tuesday, May the 29. (the day of the
week which was fatal for the murder of his Royal Father, but happy to himself,
not only for his Birth, but also for giving the first hopes of his long wished
and prayed for return by the Vote of the Parliament on Tuesday the 1. of May,
and his being proclaimed nemine contradicente on Tuesday the 8. of May.) I say
on that day, attended by the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of North-hampton,
the Earl of Cleaveland, the Earl of Norwich, the Earl of Shrewesbury, and
many others with their several respective Troops of the choice Nobles and
Gentry of the Land, and his Excellency with many Regiments of his best Horse,
the Lord Gerard with the choice Lifeguard, and the whole Country flocking in,
and cutting down Palms, and strowing the ways with all sorts of Fragrant
Flowers and decking the Lanes and Passage, with the greatest variety of Country
Pomps, Garlands, beset with Rings, Ribands and the like, the Air ecchoing all
along and redoubling the perpetually iterated Hosanna's; He came to London (The
Metropolis of his Kingdom, whose preparations were no less sumptuous then
joyful,) making a short stay only at Black Heath; (a place many years since,
and more then once noted and remembered for the tumultuous assemblies of several
Rebels, but now much more famous for the united Congregation of the whole
Kingdoms Loyalty) from hence about n on, order was given for a speedy march to
London, in which Major General Broun did lead the Van with a complete Troop of
Gentlemen, all in cloth of Silver Doublets: Alderman Robinson followed him with
an other select company, the several Lords came after with their respective
Troops, then came the Lifeguard: After the Marshals and Heralds, with some
ancient Lords, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Lord General bareheaded; and
then his Majesty rid between his two brothers, the Duke of York on the right
hand, and the Duke of Gloucester on the other; after whom followed his
Excellencies Lifeguard, and then the Regiments of the Army all completely
accoutred with back breast and Pot. In this order they came to Saint Georges
fields, in a part of which toward Newington was a Tent erected, in which the
Lord Mayor, King rides through the City.
and Aldermen in their most solemn Formalities, with their Officers, Servants,
Livery-men, and Lackeyes innumerable waited, to which place when his Majesty
came, the Lord Mayor presented him on his knees with all the Insignia of the
City, viz. Sword, Mace, Charter, etc. Which he immediately returned with
promise of Confirmation, and conferred the Honor of Knighthood on the Lord
Mayor in the place, whereafter a short refreshment, three hundred in Velvet
Coats and Chains representing the several Companies passing on before, the Lord
Mayor bearing the Sword before the King, they proceeded in an excellent order
and equipage into and through the City, which was all hung with Tapistry, and
the Streets lined on the one side with Livery men, on the other side with the
Trained Bands, both taking and giving great satisfaction, until at last even
tired with the tedious pleasure of his Welcome Journey, he came to the Gate of
his Palace of Whitehall, which struck such an impression of grief into his
sacred heart, by the Remembrance of his Fathers horrid Murder there, as had
almost burst forth, if not stopped or recalled by the Joy he received from the
acclamations of the people, and the thought that he was peaceably returned
after so many years unto His own House.

The King being come in, went presently to the Banqueting House, where the
Houses of Parliament attended for him, to whom the two Speakers severally made
an incomparable Speech, wherein, with great eloquence, they set forth the many
years misery under which the Nation labored, then repeated the Kingdoms Joys
at present, for their hoped happiness in the future by his Majesty's
Restoration, and so commended to his Princely care his three Kingdoms and
people, with their Laws and privileges, whereto the King in a Majestic style,
made this short, but full return.

That he was so disordered by his Journey, and the Acclamations of the people
still in his Ears, which yet pleased him as they were demonstrations of
Affection and Loyalty, that he could not express himself so full as he wished,
yet promised them, that looking first to Heaven with a Thank-ful heart for his
Restoration, he would have a careful Eye of especial grace and favor toward
his Three Kingdoms, protesting that he would as well be a Defendor of their
Laws, liberties, and properties, as of their faith.

Having thus received and taken several Congratulations and Entertaiments, and
dismissed his Noble, Honorable, Worshipful, and Reverend Guard of the
Nobility, Gentry, Citizens, and Ministry, he retired to Supper, and afterward
having devoutly offered the Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise to the most high,
for his safe return, he went to his Repose and Bed. The first Beam that darted
from our Royal Sun, infused such a sense of piety into the peoples Affection,
that it even made them break into an Excess of Joy, it was that happy Omen of a
virtuous Government, the admirable Proclamation against debauchednesse,
(wherein such is his Majesty's zeal) he takes no notice of his Enemies, but our
sin which had so long occasioned his exile, not sparing therein those who
pretended to be his friends, yet by their profaneness, disserved him. A happy
Prince and happy people sure! where the Extremity of Justice endeavors to
take nothing from the Subject but a Liberty to offend, which so highly pleased
the people, that their Joys rather increased then diminished according to that
of the Poet. -- Littora cum plausu clamor, superasque Deorum
Implevere Domos, gaudent, generumque salutant
Auxiliumque Domus servatoremque fatentur.
The Shores ring with applause, the Heavens abound
With grateful Clamours which therein resound.
All men salute him, Father, Prince, and King;
That home again their banished peace does bring.


Which is further also expressed by the Poet in these words, -- Largis
satiantur odoribus ignes
Sertaque dependent tectis, and ubique lyraeque
Tibiaque and cantus animi felicia laeti
Argumenta sonant: reseratis aurea valvis
Atria tota patent, pulchroque instructa paratu
-- Proceres ineunt convivia Regis.
The Bonfires light the Sky, Garlands adorn
The Streets and Houses: Nothing is forborne
That might express full joy, while to his Court
The King by Nobles followed does resort,
And in their Feasts Gods wondrous Acts report.


So restless were the Nights of our pious King, that he began to account all
time spent in vain and amiss, wherein he did not do or offer some good to his
Kingdom: to this purpose, on the first of June, (the very next day but one
after his Arrival, accompanied with his two Brothers and Sir Edward Hide, Lord
Chancellor of England, with many other honorable persons, went by water to
the House of Lords, where having seated himself in his Royal seat, the Black
Rod was sent to the Commons to inform them of his being there: They immediately
adjourned, and with their Speaker, waited his Majesty's pleasure, who in a
short speech acquainted them with the Occasion and Cause of his present sending
for them, viz. To pass those Bills which he understood were prepared for him;
the said Bills being therefore read according to ancient form by the Clerk of
the Crown, were passed by his Majesty,

First, The Bill constituting the present Convention to be a Parliament.

Secondly, For authorizing the Act of Parliament for 70000. l. per men's. for 3
months.

Thirdly, For Continuance of Easter Term and all proceedings at Law, which done
the Lord Chancellor Hide in a pithy Speech, told both Houses with how much
readiness his Majesty had passed these Acts and how willing they should at all
times hereafter find him, to pass any other that might tend to the advantage
and benefit of the people, desiring in his Majesty's behalf, the Bill of
Oblivion to be speeded, that the people might see and know his Majesty's
extraordinary gracious care to ease and free them from their doubts and fears,
and that he had not forgotten his gracious Declaration made at Breda, but that
he would in all points make good the same.

Things being brought to that happy issue, the King wholly intends to settle
the Kingdom, and because that in the multitude of Counselors there is both
peace and safety, he nominates and elects to himself a Privy Council, whereof
were, The Duke of York The Duke of Gloucester. The Duke of Somerset. The Duke of
Albemarle. The Marquess of Ormond. The Earl of Manchester. The Earl of Oxford.
The Earl of Northampton. Lord Seymour. Lord Say. Lord Howard. Sir Atho. Ashly
Cooper. Sir William Morris. Mr. Hollis. Mr. Annesley.


On several such men he bestowed great offices, as Marquess of Ormond to be
Lord Steward of His Honorable Household. The Earl of Manchester Lord
Chamberlain. The Duke of Albemarle to be Master of the Horse, and Knight of the
Garter. Sir Will. Morris one of the Secretaries of State: which took up some
time, in which the Parliament according to the Kings desire proceeded in the
Act of Oblivion, which at last, after many tedious and strong debates passed
both Houses, and on the (...) day of (...) in the Twelfth year of his Majesty's
Reign, had his Royal assent and was confirmed, wherein were excepted from
pardon both as to Life and Estate, John Lisle William Say Sir Hardresse
Waller Valentine VVauton Thomas Harrison Edward Whalley John Hewson William
Goffe Cornelius Holland Thomas Chaloner John Carew John Jones Miles Corbet
Henry Smith Gregory Clement Thomas VVogan William Heveningham Isaac Pennington
Henry Martin John Barkstead Gilbert Millington Edmund Ludlow Edmund Harvey
Thomas Scot William Cauley John Downs Nicholas Love Vincent Potter Augustine
Garland John Dixwell George Fleetwood Simon Meyne Sir Michael Livesey Robert
Titchburn Owen Row Robert Lilburn Adrian Scroop John Okey James Temple Peter
Temple Daniel Blagrave Thomas Wait John Cook Andrew Broughton Edward Dendy
William Hewlet Hugh Peter's Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtell.


Who had sat in judgment on, sentenced to death and did sign the instrument
for the horrid murder, and taking away the precious Life of our late Sovereign
Lord King Charles the First, of Glorious memory; several of whom have by diverse
means in sundry places been taken, and others have surrendered themselves
according to a Proclamation of summons set out by the King for that purpose,
the persons that surrendered themselves were these.

Owen Row Augustine Garland Edmund Harvey Henry Smith Henry Marten Simon Meyne
William Heveningham Isaac Pennington Sir Hardress Valler Robert Titchborn
George Fleetwood James Temple Thomas Wait Peter Temple Robert Lilburn Gilbert
Millingon. Vincent Potter, Thomas VVogan, and John Downs,
And therefore though they be all attainted and convicted of High Treason by
the Law of the Land at a fair and legal Trial by a special Commission of Oyer
and Terminer directed to several of the Judges learned in the Law, and to
diverse other worthy and honorable persons, yet they are not to suffer the
pains of death, but their executions are to be suspended until his Majesty by
the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament shall order the
execution by Act of Parliament to be passed to that purpose.

The persons that have been taken were, Thomas Harrison Adrian Scroop John
Carew John Jones Francis Hacker Gregory Clement Thomas Scot John Cook Hugh
Peter's Daniel Axtel, and William Heulet.


Thomas Harrison having received his Trial, and being condemned to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, accordingly on Saturday betwixt nine and ten of the clock
in the morning the thirteenth of October 1660, he was drawn upon a hurdle from
Newgate, to the place that is rayled in by Charing Cross, where a Gibbet was
erected, and he hanged with his face looking toward the Banqueting House at
White Hall (the fatal place pitched upon by those infernal Regicides, for the
solemn murder of our late Sovereign Charles the first, of glorious memory)
when he was half dead, the common Hangman cut him down, cut off his privy
members before his eyes, then burned his bowels, severed his head from his
body, and divided his body into four quarters, which were sent back upon the
same sledge that carried it, to the prison of Newgate, from thence his head was
brought and set on a pole at the South end of Westminster Hall, looking toward
the City of London, but his Quarters are exposed to view, as a public example
upon some of the Gates of the same City.

His pleading at his arraignment were nothing but treasonable and seditious
speeches, rather justifying the crime he had committed, then any whit
relenting; and so he continued a desperate Schismatic to the Church of England
to the last moment of his breath.

2. John Carew was the next that followed, who at the time of his trial,
endeavored only to justify the late Rump and their actings, but that would not
serve his turn, for it was proved that he did consult and meet together with
others how to put the King to death, that he sat at the time of the sentence,
and signed the Warrant for execution, so that the Jury found him guilty of
compassing and imagining the Kings death; for which he was also condemned to be
hanged, drawn, and quartered, etc. which sentence on Monday the fifteenth of
October, in the morning, was put in execution on the body of the said Carew,
his Quarters being likewise carried back on the Hurdle to Newgate; but such was
the goodness of his Majesty, that upon the humble intercession of his friends,
he was graciously pleased to give them his body to be buried, though his
execrable treasons had merited the contrary.

3, 4. The next in order, were Mr. John Coke the Solicitor, and Mr. Hugh Peter's
that Carnal Prophet, and Jesuitical Chaplain to the traiterous High Court; upon
Cooke's Trial it was proved against him, that he examined witnesses against the
King, that he was at the drawing of the Charge, that he exhibited it in the
name of the Commons assembled in Parliament, and the good people of England,
that this Charge was of High Treason, that he complained of delays, prayed
that the Charge might be taken pro Confesso, and at last, that it was not so
much he as innocent blood that demanded Justice, and that notwithstanding all
this, he acknowledged the King to be a gracious and wise King, upon which the
Jury found him guilty.

2. Then Peter's was set to the Bar, against whom was proved, that he did at
five several places consult about the Kings death, at Windsor, at Ware, in
Coleman-street, in the Painted Chamber, and in Bradshaw's house, that he
compared the King to Barrabas, and preached to bind their Kings in chains,
etc. That he had been in New England, that he came thence to destroy the King
and foment war, that he had been in arms, and called the day of his Majesty's
Trial a glorious day, resembling the judging of the world by the Saints that he
prayed for it in the Painted Chamber, preached for it at White Hall, St.
James's Chapel, St. Sepulchers, and other places: upon which proofs the Jury
finding him guilty also, of compassing and imagining the Kings death, the Court
sentenced them, viz. (Cook and Peter's both) to be led back to the place from
whence they came, and from thence to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of
execution, etc. On Tuesday following, being the sixteenth of October, they were
drawn upon two Hurles to the rayled place near Charing Cross, and executed in
the same manner as the former, and their Quarters returned to the place whence
they came: since which, the head of John Cook is set on a Pole on the
Northeast end of Westminster Hall (on the left of Mr. Harrisons) looking
toward London; And the head of Mr. Peter's is placed on London Bridge, their
Quarters also being exposed upon the tops of some of the Gates of the City.

5. The next brought to Trial, were Scot and Clement, Scroope, and Jones;
against Thomas Scot was proved, that he did sit and consult about the Kings
death, that he agreed to the sentence, and signed the Warrant, whereby the King
was murdered, that since he has owned the business of the Kings death, by
glorying in it, defending it, and saying he would have it engraven on his
Tombstone, that all the world might know it, which being high aggravations of
his crime, he was soon found Guilty by the Jury.

6. Then Gregory Clement was set to the Bar, who immediately confessed himself
Guilty, modo and forma, and so without troubling the Jury was set aside till
Judgment.

7. Next was brought Mr. John Jones against whom the proofs were short, that he
did sit upon the King in that monstrous Court, and that he signed the Sentence
and horrid Instrument whereby the King was ordered to be put to death, upon
which the Jury found him guilty.

8. Then Scroop was tried upon the like Indictment for compassing the Kings
death, and against him was proved that he sat in the Court, and did Sentence
the King, and sign the bloody Warrant, and after the coming in of his Majesty
that now is, justified the committing of that detestable murder, for which the
Jury finding him guilty, the Court gave sentence of death against them as the
former to suffer as Traitors, and accordingly on Wednesday the 17. of October,
about 9. of the clock in the morning. Mr. Thomas Scot, and Mr. Gregory Clement
were brought on several hurdles to the Gibbet erected near Charing Cross, and
were there hanged, bowelled and quartered, and about an hour after Mr. Adrian
Scroop, and Mr. John Jones together in one hurdle were carried to the same
place, and suffered the same pains of death, being afterward returned to
Newgate, and thence their quarters placed on several of the City Gates, and
their heads deservedly disposed on the top of London Bridge and other places.

These being thus dispatched, and having received the reward of their Treason,
Mr. Daniel Axtel, and Master Francis Hacker were brought before the Court to be
tried; Against the first of whom, viz. Axtell, was in proof, that is the
imagining and compassing the death of the King, that he bid his Soldiers cry
out Justice, Justice, and Execution, Execution; and beat them till they did it;
That he bid shoot the Lady that spoke and called Cromwell Traitor, saying, not a
quarter of the people of England consented to their wicked Charge; that he said
to Col. Huncks upon his refusal to sign the warrant for executing the King: I
am ashamed of you, the Ship is now coming into Harbor, and will you strike
sail before we come to Anchor; that he laughed at the Transactions, as
applauding them while others sighed; that after the King was murdered, he kept
Guards upon the dead body, and knew who cut off the Kings head, having sent one
Elisha Axtell for the Executioner; upon which proof the Jury found him guilty
of the said Treason whereof he stood indicted.

10. Francis Hacker was arraigned, and by diverse witnesses it was sworn
against him, that he was Commander of the Halbeteers, who kept the King
prisoner, and would not suffer any access to be unto him; that he guarded him
to their mock-Court, and after kept him sure till he was murdered; that he was
one of the persons to whom the Warrant for execution was directed, and that he
signed it, that he brought the King to the fatal block and was upon the
scaffold, being a principal agent about the Kings death; for which horrid
Treason the Jury found him guilty: after which the Court sentenced both him and
Axtell to suffer death as Traitors, according to which judgment they were on
Friday the 19. of October, about 9. of the clock in the morning, drawn upon one
hurdle from Newgate to the common place of execution, generally called Tyburn,
and there were hanged. Mr. Axtel was bowelled and quartered and so returned
back and disposed as the former, but the body of Mr. Hacker, by his Majesty's
great grace and favor, and at the humble suit and intercession of his friends
was given to them entire, and by them afterward buried.

The last of this crew that was for present execution was Will. Hulet, against
whom was proved that he was one of those which came with a Frock on his body,
and a Vizor on his face to perpetrate the horrid murder on the Person of the
King, and that being so disguised upon the Scaffold, he fell down before the
King and asked him forgiveness, being known by his voice; that himself said,
He was the man that beheaded K. Charles, and for that he had one 100 l. and
preferment. That Hewson said of him that he did the Kings business upon the
Scaffold; That he either did cut it off, or took it up and said, Behold the
head of a Traitor. That being questioned about the said words, he said,
whosoever said it matters not; I say now, it was the head of a Traitor, with
many other things to the like purpose; for which most abhorred Treason, the
Jury found him guilty, and he was condemned to be hanged drawn and quartered at
Tyburn.

This was the deserved Catastrophe that was set to these men, who without any
reason, nay contrary to reason, Laws both Divine and Humane, yea, even in
defiance of Heaven, dipped their hands in the sacred blood of their lawful
Sovereign, according to that of the Wiseman, The eye that mocketh his Father,
(Rex Pater Patriae) and despises his Mother, (Ecclesia est Matter) the Ravens
of the Valley shall pick it out; which which we see befallen them, their heads
in several places being become a spectacle both to Angels and Men, and a prey
to the Birds of the Air.

In the last place, it is provided by the said Act of Oblivion, that if
William Lenthal, Will. Burton. Oliver St. John, John Ireton Alderman, Col.
John Disborrow, Col. Will. Sydenham, John Blackwel of Moreclack. Christ. Pack
Alderman, Richard Keeble, Charles Fleetwood, John Pyne, Rich. Dean, Major
Richard Creed, Philip Nigh Clerk, John Goodwin Clerk, Sir Gilbert Pickering,
Col. Thom. Lister, and Col. Raph Cobbet, shall after the 1. of September 1660.
accept or exercise any Office Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, or any other
public employment within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town
of Barwick upon Tweed, that then such person or persons as do so accept or
execute as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes in Law stand, as if he,
or they had been totally excepted by name in the Act. The like penalty is
imposed on all such who did give sentence of Death upon any person or persons
in any of the late illegal or Tyrannical high Courts of Justice, or signed the
Warrant for execution of any person there condemned.

Thus by the blessing of God I have waded through the many intricate Meanders
and Revolutions, until at last I have as it were brought you by the hand to
see that desperate Faction of Indepencency (as one may say,) laid into its
Grave; all the heads thereof being so annihilated by the Justice of the known
Law of the Land, that I hope its memory shall be raked up in such an Eternal
forgetfulness, that posterity seeing no footsteps thereof, shall conceive it
to be a bare name, a mere notion, or aliquid non ens, of which in nature there
can be no subsistence.

An Appendix.
HOw far the Treasons of faction have reached, and how high they durst soar is
to be seen before, I shall only now in short give a hint how highly the Law of
England resents such impious acts: I say then, the wisdom and foresight of the
Laws of this Land in all cases of Treason makes this judgment: that the
Subject that rises or rebelleth in forcible, to overrule the royal will and
power of the King, intends to deprive the King both of Crown and Life, and
this is no mystery or quidity of the Common Law, but an infallible conclusion
drawn out of reason and experience; for the Crown is not a ceremony or Garland,
but as Imperial consists of pre-eminence and power. This made former Traitors
in all their quarrels against their Princes, not to strike downright, because
God unto Lawful Kings did ever impart such beams of his own glory, as Rebels
never durst look straight upon them, but ever turned their pretenses against
some about them; this caused the Judges sometime to deliver their opinions for
matter in Law upon two points.



this is not only the wisdom of the Laws of our own Kingdom, but it is also
the censure of foreign Laws, the conclusion of common reason, (which is the
ground of Law) and the demonstrative assertion of experience, which is the
warranty of all reason.

Crimen Laesae vel dimminutae Majestatis, making every offense which abridgeth
or hurts the power and authority of the Prince, as an insult or invading of
the Crown, and extorting the imperial Scepter.

And for common reason and experience, they cry, it is not possible that a
Subject should once come to that height, as to give law to his Sovereign, but
what with terror of his own guilt, and what with the insolency of the change he
will never permit the King if he can choose to recover his authority, nay or to
live Experience further tells us, and it is confirmed by all stories and
examples; two notable ones we had formerly in our own Chronicles, the first of
Edw. the 2d. who when he kept himself close for danger, was summoned by
proclamation to come and take upon him the Government, but as soon as he
presented himself, was made prisoner, next forced to resign, and shortly after;
was tragically murdered in Berkly-Castle. The other is of K. Rich. the second,
before whom the Duke of Hereford (afterward K. Hen. the 4th) presented himself
with three seemingly humble, but indeed flattering reverences, yet in the end
both deposed him and put him to death: but our own experience outvies all else,
in the Horrid murder of our late dread Sovereign, which is related in the
former parts, the punishment whereof is fully related in this last part, and
therefore I shall no more thereof in this place.

You may have observed that the practice of our Regicides was after they had
ruined the Gentry, to advance their own kindred and allies, though never so
insufficiently unworthy, to the most profitable places of the Common wealth; by
which means all kind of exorbitances were committed without control, the Death
of the King being attended with infinite oppressions, as in such changes is
usual; which made Writers say, that the Death of Caesar was no benefit to the
Romans, but rather brought greater Calamities on them they underwent befere, as
may be found in Aspian. The success was the like when Nero fell, for the next
year that followed after his Death, felt more oppression, and spilt more blood
then was shed in all those nine years wherein he had so tyrannically reigned.
So when the Athenians had expelled one Tyrant, they brought in thirty; and when
the Romans expelled their King, they did not put away the Tyranny but only
change the Tyrants.

But such and so tender is the hand of heaven over us, that he has not only
restored our Kings as at the first, and all our Counselors as at the
beginning; but brought us home our King so accomplished and pious, that we must
needs confess with the Children of Israel, because the Lord has a delight in
us, therefore has he made him King over us.

Oh then let us render without grudging unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, acknowledge him as Gods immediate Vicegerent, not prescribing him in
what manner we will be ruled, nor by what means: But in all things with
obedience and humility to submit to his command, like Julian the Apostata's
Soldiers who would not sacrifice at his words, sed timendo potestatem,
contemnebant potestatem, in fearing the power of God, they regarded not the
power of man; yet when he led them against his enemies, Subditi errant propter
Dominum eternum, etiam Domino Temporali.

I will conclude all with one word of Advice: Since God has so bettered our
condition, that our words are hardly able to express our happiness, to avoid
the danger of a relapse through a too careless security, let circumspection
and moderation take away all bitterness, rather reflecting on the offenses
then the persons of any offenders, so it may be those concerned will not be so
desperate to proceed on further in their wicked courses, but with speed retire,
and make some recompense to in^ured parties, by their future provident
endeavors for the Common good. And for these Loyal hearts who have borne the
brunt of the storm both at home and abroad; since God has rescued them as
brands out of the fire; it is hoped they will be nothing the more secure in
their vigilant care of future occurrences, having always a provident eye for
the timely prevention of such inconveniences, as might steal on them in their
own, or be intended against them from foreign parts. That so the Throne of our
Solomon may continue for ever, and peace be upon our Israel.

(...). Sed and been velle meretur veniam. Cicero.
THE END.
There is now in the Press ready to come forth, that so much desired Book,
entitled, An Exact History of the Life and Actions of Hugh Peter's: As also his
Diary, Sold by H. Brom, and H. Marsh, etc.


