Athenae Oxonienses.

An Exact HISTORY OF ALL THE Writers and Bishops Who have had their EDUCATION
in The most ancient and famous University OF OXFORD, FROM The Fifteenth Year of
King Henry the Seventh, Dom. 1500, to the End of the Year 1690.

REPRESENTING The Birth, Fortune, Preferment, and Death of all those AUTHORS
and PRELATES, the great Accidents of their LIVES, and the Fate and Character of
their WRITINGS.

To which are added, The FASTI or Annals, of the said University, For the same
time.

The First VOLUME, Extending to the 16th. Year of King Charles I. Dom. 1640. --
Antiquam exquirite Matrem.
Virgil.

LONDON: Printed for THO. BENNET at the Half Moon in S. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXCI.

TO THE Most High, Mighty, and Illustrious PRINCE JAMES Duke, Marquess, and
Earl of Ormonde,

Earl of Brecknock and Ossory, etc. Gentleman of the Bedchamber to His Majesty,
Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, and Chancellor of the Famous
University of OXFORD.

TO THE Right Worshipful JONATHAN EDWARDS Doctor of Divinity, and Principal of
Jesus College, his Worthy Vice Chancellor.

AND To the Worshipful The Doctors, the Proctors, and Masters, Members of the
venerable Convocation of the said University.

The Author does humbly dedicate these his ATHENAE and FASTI OXONIENSES.

The PREFACE
IT is well known, that the Author of this Work has through the whole course
of his life, declined the pursuit of any private interest or advantage, and
has only, according to his abilities, endeavored to promote the honor and
glory of that Nation where he had been born; and more especially of that
University wherein he was educated. His early application, or as some call it,
his natural propensity to Histories and Antiquities made him more fit to serve
his Country in that, than in any other St^^y; and that part of Antiquity, which
was most useful in its self, and which yet lay most neglected became the
immediate object of his care, as that which not only deserved, but required and
wanted the greatest industry.

The University of Oxford had now flourished for many Centuries, its Members
had been great and famous; their works wanted neither value nor number, and
therefore nothing seemed more necessary for the increase of its glory, and for
the true knowledge of its strength than a Register of its Heroes and an exact
survey of its powers: It was requisite then, not only that the Writers of this
University, and the Characters of their works should be perpetuated to
posterity, but that a History of all Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops, as
well in this Nation as beyond the Seas; all of them formerly Members of this
University, should at the same time and by the same hand be attempted, and
carried on; and that lastly the account of any remarkable Persons, that would
not fall under those heads, might be reserved to, and digested under the Fasti,
or Annals of the University. So that upon the whole, not only the lives of the
Authors, and the fate of their Writings, but the succession of all eminent Men
in Oxford, the decay and growth, the rise and progress of learning, might at
one view in due order of time distinctly appear. It is a wonder indeed that
among all the members of that Body* who have signalized their learning and
industry in all professions, and almost upon all subjects; the entire glory of
this Work should be left to this Author, and that no part of literature should
be left wholly uncultivated in that famous Society; but the Memoires of the
University it self, and the History of Learning therein. Somewhat indeed in
defense of the antiquity of the place had before, by Mr. Twyne and others been
successfully undertaken and performed; but it was a far more easy and less
useful enquiry to look into the Original of this Society, than to record the
Acts of its Members, to discover the head of this Fountain, than to trace all
its Channels: Since therefore this Work seemed for the most part new, and as
yet untouched, it was once the Authors design to Commence with the time of K.
Alfred, and from thence to have brought down the concurrent History of the
University and Learning together. But afterward when he had considered not
only that the famous Antiquary Jo. Leland, and his followers Bale, Pits, and
Dr. Fran. Godwin, had in a great measure anticipated the former part of his
design, but that the Records and Registers themselves, upon which his Relations
are chiefly founded, were in those times either wholly lost, or at least dark
and imperfect; He thought fit to begin with the 15th Century, and to ascend no
higher than his Records would lead him. However, since a great and noble part
of the History of Learning, would upon so late a date of this Work be wholly
omitted, it was esteemed requisite that a short and full relation of all
Authors and Works, which before that time had been published in this Island
should supply that loss, and render the work it self more perfect and entire.

This Introduction the Reader may expect before the 2d. Vol. At present nothing
more remains for the subject of this Preface, than to give a short account of
the design of this work, of the management and language of it, and to add
somewhat concerning the Author.

As to the design, it must be owned that since an entire Collection of all
passages relating to eminent Authors was intended; some circumstances have a
place here which at first view may seem trivial and immaterial. It ought
therefore to be considered, that those little accidents however mean in
themselves, yet in respect of the Persons and of the works which they attend,
oftentimes become considerable. In a common repert^ry any redundance or
superfluity of matter, however too severely blam^d by nice palats, is such a
fault as is not far removed from an excellence. The work is fitted for all Men
in all faculties, and therefore those of one profession should not be
displeased, if somewhat be inserted, which however useless to them, may be
chosen and admired by others. In all Commentaries and Journals which afford
Materials for History, there ought not only to be somewhat rude and naked,
which may afterward be polished; somewhat rough and plain, that may be
beautified and improved; but somewhat at least little, and seemingly immaterial
than may upon occasion judiciously be chosen, or sometimes perhaps with no less
prudence, rejected. Such general collections are read by most Men with
different designs; and therefore however easy it may be for any Man to
discover an omission; it is very hard for any one Reader to pronounce one
single passage in them wholly superfluous. It Is true indeed, that Men who after
a great search and enquiry into Records, have found but somewhat that might as
well have been spared, naturally choose rather to trespass on the Reader, than
to pass sentence on their own disc^veries; and this, if any blemish, is so
common to this Author with all other famous Antiquaries, from Plutarch, and
Athenaeus down to Seldom, and Dugdale; that his Title to that name might well
be disputed if he should be without it.

2ly. The management of such a Work as this must necessarily depend as upon a
search into ancient Records, so upon a Commerce with those Relations and
Friends of the deceased Authors which had survived them. Those of the Chapter of
Rome, to which this Author applied himself, have been communicative and
industrious in furnishing Materials for this Work; and therefore if any thing
more largely be said of the Members of that Communion than may be thought
necessary, it ought to be imputed to the ready concurrence of that party
toward a Work of this nature, rather than to any propensity of the Author to
that Religion. The Nonconform^sts, who bear some s^are in this Work, have been
as usually, so little Friends to the carrying on of a public design, and to
that free intercourse, which ought to be maintain^d between all learned Men,
that very few, and those unsatisfactory relations could be obtained from them;
and therefore a true, but no very large nor favorable account of their
Writings ought to be expected from him. And lastly, as to those of the Church
of England, they have generally behaved themselves so well, that they have no
need to desire flattery no^ have any reason h^^e to complain of Calumny. It is
to be hoped therefore, since this Author has endeavored to show himself just
and indifferent to Men of all professions; his love of impartiality will not be
mistaken for want of Religion. All good Antiquaries, Men of enlarged Souls, and
of an even temper; however of diverse professions, have always been of the same
Principle: They all equally sacrificed to Truth and Learning; and suffered not
their private Opinions to put a biass on their History. And whoever will
compare the Cento's of Bale, and Pits, with the excellent Works of Leland and
Camden, must necessarily discern, how near an Alliance there is between Zeal
and Ignorance, and between Learning and Moderation.

3. As to the Language, the Reader may expect such Words as are suitable to the
character of the Work, and of the Person. It is impossible to think that men
who always converse with old Authors, should not learn the dialect of their
Acquaintance. An old Word is retained by an Antiquary with as much Religion as
a Relick; and few are by him received as English, but such as have been
naturalized by Speneer. Language is the dress of the Thoughts as well as
Clothes of the Person; and therefore the Expressions of an Antiquary ought to
be priviledg'd, as well as his Garb. Words are neither good nor bad if
abstracted from Things; and therefore they, as all Ornaments, have no beauty in
themselves, but receive it by accidents as gracefully suited, and applied to
the Subject. Originals are best expressed, as found, without Alteration; and it
is not only a misspent, but ridiculous labor, to change the old Expressions of
a Deed; and to put a new Stamp upon a Medal. Thus much has in short been said
of the Book, and somewhat that may prevent Objections may without suspicion of
Vanity be added concerning the Author of it. When this Work some years since
was first undertaken, he not only consulted all the Registers relating to the
University, but all other Writings and Records, MS. and printed, whether in the
Bodleian, Norfolk, or Cottonian Libraries, whether in the Tower, Exchequer,
Paper Office, or elsewhere, that could give him any notice of these Authors, or
let him into the true knowledge of their Lives, Preferments, and Writings. The
Registers of the ancient Churches and Cathedrals were diligently consulted; the
Wills of the deceased persons were at the Prerogative Office examined; the
Windows of Churches, Epitaphs and Inscriptions, have been searched; the
Genealogy of the Authors at the Heralds Office has been nquir'd into; and no
method has been unattempted which could contribute to a true History of these
Writers, or ascertain the least date and circumstance of their Lives. This
extraordinary care and unwearied industry, was undertaken without any other
motive than a love to Truth, and without any other prospect, than the benefit
of Posterity. The Author never enjoyed any Preferment, nor pursued any; he
lived as a Recluse from the World, so independent of it; and therefore it is
not to be wondered if he takes such a liberty of Speech as most other Authors,
out of Prudence, Cunning, or Design, have usually declined. It might be fit
perhaps that some harsh Expressions might be allayed; that a few severe
Reflections might be softened, and that some Passages at last, which seem too
hardly charged on men otherwise creditable, might be wholly omitted: but at the
same time it is not to be denied, That Faults ought no more to be concealed
than Virtues, and that whatever it may be in a Painter, it is no excellence in
an Historian to throw a veil on Deformities.

If lastly, There should be any defect or failure; if Truth, which is often too
strictly pursued, should in one single instance, or some little circumstance,
be mistaken; it is at least, certainly a just Request, that in so great and
tedious a Work, which oftentimes and almost every where deserves praise, any
small Errors may be entitled to Pardon.

A farther discourse of the nature of these Books in general, and of the use of
this in particular, is reserved to the second Volume; in the mean time all
judicious men must be satisfied that the History of Learning, which has
hitherto been so much wanting in England, is now at last so far advanced; and
that the Materials at least of so great and so useful a Work are ready, and
prepared.

In other Countries, particularly in France, Italy, and the Northern Nations,
now above fifty years, the most famous Writers have employed their care in the
account of Authors and Books, and have thought it more necessary to number and
marshal than to increase the Forces of the Commonwealth of Learning.

In England in the mean time an Account of Learning was more defective even
than our Civil History: Our Authors had been as famous as our Heroes; our
Writings were as successful as our Battles; and yet the Annals of both were so
imperfect, that either generally we had no representation of them at all, or
such an one as traduced the Original. As to our Heroes indeed, Tho an universal
History to the discredit of this Nation, be yet to be desired, and in all
probability will be long expected, yet some independent Relations that give
account of one great Action, or perhaps of one particular Reign, may with
honor be remembered; but as to our Author's, after the ancient Discoveries of
Boston and Leland, there has been nothing attempted but some rude and
disproportionable draughts of mean and ignorant Designers. However now at last
it must be owned, That if this Essay may not be just and complete, yet the
first Lineaments are so faithfully and exactly drawn, that the finishing
strokes may without difficulty be added, and perhaps without loss expected; and
that so regular a design is here presented to your view, as may encourage at
least the future industry of the best Artist, if not supersede it.

ERRATA.
By the Absence of the Author from the Press, many Faults have been committed
in the printing this Book; most of which, especially those that are notorious,
follow. Page Line. Error. Correction. 2 7 from the top Puritanorum aliorum
Puritanorum sive aliorum ibid. 9 from top citation relation 3 13 from top The
case of showing case showing 14 36 from bot. ^erdinandus Ferdinandus 16 20 from
top Will. Coley Hen. Coley. 28 24 from bot. Exhileraverit Exhilaraverit 33 18
from top implyments. employments 45 4 from bot. genere generis 46 32 from bot.
quendam quandam 48 23 from top Palsgrauf Palsgrave 52 9 from bot. Solopian
Salopian 64 27 from bot. Horologeorum Horologiorum 66 13 from bot. locupletus
locupletatus 67 18 from bot. collorary corolary 68 16 from bot. Lectore Lectori
ibid. 13 from bot. antiquarum antiquorum 70 20 from bot. plano plane 75 15 from
top Papiculorum Papicolarum 89 in marg. 158 1558 96 in marg. 5121 121 99 28
from top but that of it which was left part but that part of it which was left
106 3 from bot. Bemardine Bernardine 107 21 from bot. Cathral Cathedral 111 19
from bot. Melanctonum Melanctonem 119 4 from bot. transegit transigit 141 in
marg. 183 to be set opposite to Jo. Parkhurst. 142 24 from top Obscurity
obscenity 155 17 from top Exilis Exulis 157 19 from bot. per fide pro fide 158
29 from top caluit calluit 160 4 from top besece beseech 168 in marg. 158 1581
171 29 from bot. Sacrorum Sacrarum ibid 5 from bot. librandus liberandus 174 40
from top Tresmagistus Tresmegistus 179 22 from bot. reipub. repub. 180 5 from
top Bosgrace Bosgrave ibid. 41 from top occidendum Occidendam 181 2 from bot.
ipsius inscriptae ipsius nomine inscriptae. 183 10 from bot. fond, a B fond as
B 188 in marg. 238 to be set opposite to Jo. Field. 192 in marg. Clar. 1580
Claer. 1588 194 24 from top Stoke Tatmach Stoke-Talmach ibid. 33 from bot.
Amoratto Amoretto 219 alias 5 from top Gesnaro Gesnero 201 ibid. 22 from top
Pombrochian Pembrochian Page Line. Error. Correction. 222 21 from top perfectus
professus 231 31 from top Hexamiter Hexameter 234 29 from top republica reipub.
ib. 49 from top Turcorum Turcarum ib. 50 from bot. concensione consentione ib.
23 from bot. Women Woman 235 23 from bot. Rosial Rossall ib. 39 from bot.
Academy Academy 242 30 from top upon whereupon 243 25 from top though through
ib. 30 from bot. prastontiss prastantiss 252 29 from bot. 1272 1572 260 13 from
top Dobon Dobson 269 38 from bot. Elegantio Elegantia 272 12 from top Dormon
Dorman ib. 17 from top Norten Norton 277 8 from top to to 279 29 from bot.
Weevon Weever ib. 23 from bot. Edes Eedes 389 10 from bot. Sentence Sentences
ib. 11 from bot. read Reader ib. 12 from bot. Acts Arts 290 37 from bot. trund
turned 296 13 from top venestum Venustum 304 36 from top sermonum sermonem ib.
27 from bot. Iscamus Iscanus 309 17 from top his the 316 11 from bot. Juridicum
Juridica ib. 9 from bot. defendetur defenditur 335 33 from top it in 336 40
from top Old Philip Philip 345 10 from bot. Relationem Relationum 346 10. 16.
21. 2. 3. 4. 3. 4. 5. fr. the top Bunnry Bunney 355 15 from top 359 4 from top
there thence 361 29 from top discouse discourse 364 31 from top imparted
imparked ib. 35 from bot. a act take away a 370 24 from top. was he he was 374
2 from bot. magna magni 375 4 from top Speech Speeches ib. 6 from top Speeches
Speech 383 33 from top Magd. Coll. Magd. Hall. 390 30 from bot. Nich. Torporley
Nath. Toperley 395 17 from bot. Notes Votes 398 38 from top linea. linia 415 18
from bot. Religularibus Regularibus ib. 17 from bot. obitat obital 416 23 from
bot. credulous incredulous 430 17 from top Monutague Mountague 439 33 from top
both but 441 12 from bot. Harnet Harsnet 445 25 from bot. Assasianate
Assasinate ib. 9 from bot. attainted tainted 449 3 from bot. Ecclesiam
Ecclesiarum 455 17 from top Turnball Turnbull 456 42 from top Balstrode
Balstrode 464 13 from top care ear 470 11 from bot. Vniversam Vniversum 477 39
from top carle curle 480 4 from top of learnedest of the learnedest 518 34 from
top addition addiction 525 32 from bot. Victa Vecta ib. 30 from bot. preficium
perficiam 528 34 from top 1633 1636 ib. 33 from bot. Sunnilbank Sunnibank 531
35 from bot. Reipub. Repub. 536 in marg. 163 -- 4 1639 -- 40 538 31 from bot.
Burlow Barlow 554 20 from top Kicomaing Kilcomaing 566 27 from top Bostou
Boston 591 9 from top Gheest Gheast 614 30 from top Thorp-Thales Thorp-Thules
640 15 from bot. Ma^^ore Marmore 644 39 from bot. Hutcon Hutton 681 32 from top
Prebendary Prebendship. ib. 44 from top Budlyngham Bullyngham 698 22 from top
Roch. Harford Rich. Harford 706 36 from top Turnball Turnbull 764 37 from top
Boughton Mountague 782 22 from top Belcher Belchier 788 22 from top Giles
Thorn Will. Thorn 825 26 from bot. Sea-blood Sea of blood

In page 579. lin. 2. from the bottom, is this gross mistake -- Within the
Parish Church of S. James in Longdon he bequeathed, etc. which is to be read
thus -- Within the Parish Church of S. James in Longdon before mentioned. For
the use of which Chapel and the Parishioners of Longdon he bequeathed, etc.

Also in page 816. is this mistake, June 21. Dan. Price of Ex. Coll. June 21.
Lew. Bailey of Ex. Coll.
Mar. ult. Tob. Venner of S. Alb. Hall, who accumulated the degrees in Physic.

Doct. of Div. June 21. Dan. Price of Ex. Coll. etc. June 21. Lew. Bailey of Ex.
Coll. etc.


ATHENAE OXONIENSES
The History of the Writers of the University of Oxford, from the Year of our
Lord 1500, to the end of 1640.
Vol. I.
UNIVERSITY of OXFORD the most noble Theater and Emporium of all good Sciences,
the very Source and most clear Spring of good Literature and Wisdom; from
whence Religion, Civility, and Learning, have spread most plentifully through
all Parts thereof, and beyond the Seas; has these things following, going
under her name as Author.

Epistolae ad Magnates and alios; in two Volumes in Folio. The first written on
Parchment, begins in 20. Hen. 5. Dom. 1422. and ends in 18. Hen. 7. Dom. 1503,
which is two Years and more beyond the time wherein I begin this work. This
Book endorsed with the Letter F, was chiefly written by the Hand of one John
Farley, the public Scribe or Registrary of the University of Oxon. and is at
this time kept in the School-Tower, among the Books and Records of the said
University. The second Vol. which is written on Paper, begins about the latter
end of the 24. Hen. 7. Dom. 1508, and is continued to 1597, and has added to
it certain Epistles of a later date. This Book endorsed with the Letters F F,
was borrowed from the School-Tower by Dr. Tho. James, the first Keeper of the
Bodleian Library; who afterward putting it into the Archives thereof, did
enter it, as a Manuscript belonging thereunto, into the Bodleian Catalogue of
Books, Printed in 4to. An. 1620. The continuation of the University Epistles
(mostly Penned by the public Orator) are remitted into the Books of Acts of
Convocation that follow F F. To pass by the Sentence or Opinion of the
University of Oxon. concerning the divorce between King Henry 8. and Queen
Catherine, dated 8. Apr. 1530, and their Sentence in order to the expelling or
ejecting the Popes Authority from England dat. 24. July 1534. (both which
contain but little more matter than two Programma's) I shall set down other
things going under her name of a laterdate, as,

An answer to the humble Petition of the Ministers of England, desiring
Reformation of certain Ceremonies and abuses in the Church. Oxon. 1603. and
1604. in four or five Sheets in Quarto.

Decretum ^amnans propositiones Neotericorum, sive Jesuitarum, sive
Puritanorum, aliorum cujuscunque generis Scriptorum -- dat. 6. Jun. 1622. Oxon.
1622. in one Sheet in 4to. see the full Citation of the said Decree and
Propositions in Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 327.

Epistola ad reverendiss. in Christo patrem D. Gul. Archipras. Cantuar. dat.
10. Nov. 1640. It was Printed at the end of the said Archb. Letter, which he
sent with diverse MSS. to the University of Oxon.

Humble Petition to the Parliament in behalf of Episcopacy and Cathedrals. --
dat. 24. Apr. 1641. Oxon. 1641. Printed in one Sheet in 4to. as also on a broad
side of a Sheet. It was answered by a certain Anonymus, but very sillily.

Epistola ad ampliss. and reverendiss. D. Gul. Archipraes. Cant. dat. 6. Jul.
1641. It was Printed at the end of the said Archbishop's Letter, by which he
resigned his Office of Chancellor of the University of Oxon. This Epistle was
published by command of the Chief Members of the said University, upon occasion
of a base Libel and Forgery that was Printed by Anon. under the said title.
Oxon. 1641. in one Sheet and half.

Reasons of their present judgment concerning (1) The Solemn League and
Covenant. (2) The Negative Oath, and (3) The Ordinances concerning Discipline
and Worship, approved by general consent in a full Convocation, on the first of
June 1647. Oxon. 1647. in five Sheets and half in 4to. These Reasons (which
were for the most part drawn up by the Profound and Learned Dr. Rob. Sanderson
of Linc. Coll.) were afterward translated into several Languages and published.

Answer to the Petition, Articles of grievance, and Reasons of the City of
Oxon, presented to the Committee for regulating the University of Oxford, 24.
July 1649. Oxon. 1649. and 1678. 4to. This Answer was drawn up by Dr. Gerard
Langbaine of Queens Coll. but published in the Name of the University of Oxon.
The said Petition of the City of Oxon (the general part of which, were then
Presbyterians, or at least very Factious) was for the diminishing, and taking
away, several of the Liberties and Privileges of the University.

Judgment and Decree past in the Convocation 21. July 1683. against certain
pernicious Books and damnable Doctrins, destructive to the Sacred Persons of
Princes, their State and Government, and of all Humane Society -- Printed at
the Theater in Oxon. in Latin and English in three Sheets in Folio. 1683.

Humble Address and Recognition Presented to His Sacred Majesty James 2. King
of England, etc. according to an Act of Convocation, bearing date 21. Feb. 1684
-- It Is Printed in Latin and English; and was set before the Verses, made by
several Members of the University on the said Kings coming to the Crown of
Great Britain, Fol.

The Case of showing, that the City of Oxford is not concerned to oppose the
Confirmation of their Charters by Parliament; presented to the Honorable House
of Commons, 24 Jan. 1689. Oxon. 1690. in 2 Sheets in Fol. and in two and an
half in 4 to. drawn up by Ja. Harrington M. A. of Christ Church.

Judicium and decretum latum in Convocatione habita Aug. 19. an. 1690. contra
propositiones quasdam impias and haereticas, exscriptas and citatas ex libello
quodam infami haud ita pridem intra dictam Academiam perfide typis mandato, ac
divulgato, eui tit. est, The naked Gospel. Quae praecipua fidei nostrae
mysteria in Ecclesia Catholica, ac speciatim Anglicana, semper retenta and
conservata, impugnant ac labefactant. Oxon. 1690. in two Sheets in Fol. This
Book called The Naked Gospel was written by Arth. Bury D. D. Rector of Exeter
Coll. and by him was first made public in the beginning (in Apr.) of the same
Year: And tho it is said in the Title Page to be Printed at London, yet it was
really Printed at Oxon, by virtue of his Authority, as being then
Pro-Vice-Chancellor. But before Twenty Copies of it had been dispersed, the
Author, by the persuasion of some of his Friends, made certain alterations for
the best, as he thought, in one or more Sheets in the middle of the said Book;
and thereupon several Copies so altered were exposed to sale; yet in the Month
of May following, the remaining Copies of the Impression not altered were
dispersed abroad. The said Book was publicly Burnt in the School-quadrangle,
just after the said Decree had passed: Whereupon about three days after, the
Author of it dispersed in Manuscript, his Apology for writing the said Book
called The Naked Gospel; the beginning of which is this: The design of the Book
and the occasion of it were as follows; when the King had called a
Convocation to reconcile, as it was hoped, to the Church of England the several
Sects, etc. In which Apology, the Author says, that certain Persons to him
unknown, got a Copy of the said Book unaltered, and Printed it at London.

As for the several Books of Verses, which were published on various occasions,
under the Name of the University of Oxon, are not to be remembered here, because
the Names of all, or at least most of, the Persons that had composed Copies of
Verses, have their Names set at the end of them.

Dominicans, commonly called Blackfriars, then noted in England and elsewhere,
for their Religion and Learning; and in the prime of his Years, obtained much
of his Learning in the College or Convent belonging to that Order, in the South
Suburb of Oxon. In his middle Age, he being then accounted by those of his
Society, a Person of great Discretion and Prudence, as well as of Learning; he
was Elected by them their Provincial Minister; that is the chief Governor or
Master of them and their Order in England; which laudable Office he executed
for some Years with great approbation. He has written according to Anton. In
Bibliotheca Ordinis Fratrum Praedicatorum, edit. Parisiis 1585. in octavo, p.
97.
Senensis. Comment. sup. 4. libros sententiarum. Tract. de unitate formarum.
Lecturae Scholasticae, Claruit 1501.
and other things which I have not yet seen. This William Beeth was in great
renown among Learned Men, especially among those of his Order, in the Reign of
K. H. 7. of England, but when he died it appears not.

England, especially in this of Oxon; wherein he obtained a considerable
competency in humane and Divine Learning. At riper Years, he, upon mature
consideration, entered Joh. Baleus in lib. De Scriptorib. maj. Britanniae, cent.
8. number. 51.
into the most Holy Order of the Carthusians; and soon after by a severe and
strict life among them, mostly by fasting and a continual and religious
contemplation; his divine Soul was at length totally refined and fitted for the
Society of the Saints in Heaven. He has transmitted to Posterity,

Compendium divini amoris. Par. 1530. in Oct. This Book was Printed elsewhere
before that time.

Epistolae ad solitarios; besides other things as it is said, but such I have
not yet seen: Theodor. Petreius in his Bibliotheca Edit. Colon. 1609 in octavo,
p. 212.
Cartusiana, Claruit 1502.
tells us, that this John Percevall was Prior of the Carthusians at Paris, in
the Year 1550, but my Author ( Jo. Baleus) before quoted, mentions no such
matter, only that he was a bare Carthusian; and that he was in great esteem
among Men for his Piety and Learning Fifty Years before that time. The Reader
is now to know that contemporary with the former, lived another John Percevall
Doctor of Divinity of Oxon, and by order a Franciscan or Gray Friar; who being
a Person of great note among his Brethren, or among those of his Society, was
elected the Seven and Fortieth Provincial Minister of them; but what relation
there was between this and the former, it appears not. This John Percevall the
Franciscan died at London, and was buried in the Church of the Franciscans, now
commonly called Christ-Church within Newgate; whereupon Hen. Standish D. D.
(whom I shall mention elsewhere) succeeded him in the Provincialship. It is
also farther to be noted, that whereas a Learned Francisc. a Sancta clara in
Supplement. Historiae Provinciae Angliae, edit. Duac. in fol. 1671. p. 7. b.
Author tells us, that this John Percevall succeeded in that honorable Office,
one Will. Goddard a Doctor of Divinity of Oxon, it is a great mistake, for that
Will. Goddard whom he sets down to have been Provincial Minister, was only
Warden or Guardian Ut in quodam Manuscripto continent. Monumenta in Ecclesia
Fratrum minorum ( vel Franciscanorion) Londi^^. MS. in Biblioth. Cottoniana,
sub effigy Vitellii, F. 12.
of the House or College of Franciscans at London beforementioned, (to which he
was a Benefactor) who dying 26. Ibid.
Sept. 1485. was Buried in the Chapel of the Apostles, joining to the Church
of the said House. As for the famous Dr. Will. Goddard, who was the Ibid.
Provincial Minister of the Franciscans, he Ibid.
died 30 October. 1437. and was buried in the said Church, on the right side of
the Tomb of Sir John Hastyngs: So that I believe two, three, or more were
Provincials between this last Dr. Goddards death, and the time when Dr. John
Percevall took the Provincialship upon him.

ROBERT BALE called by some Robert Bale Junior, because there was another of
both his Names, a Lawyer of London, and before him in time, was born in the
County of Norfolk, entered, when Young, among the Carmes or Carmelites, commonly
called White-Friers, in the City of Norwych; spent some time for the sake of
Study, among those of his Order, living in the North Suburb of Oxon, where he
improved himself much in the faculty of Theology; as, I presume, he did partly
at Cambridge among those of his Society there. Afterward he became Prior of
the Carmes at Burnham in his own Country, where he was had in veneration by
them and others for his great love toward Learning and Learned Men. All the
time that he could procure, he greedily spent in his beloved Study of Divinity,
and Histories both Divine and Profane; and having to his great expense obtained
a considerable Library of Books, they, at length, came after his Death to that
of the Carmes at Burnham. He has written,

Annals perbreves Ordinis Carmelitarum. The beginning of which is, Anno Mundi
3042. Helias Thesb. etc.

Historia Heliae Prophetae. The beginning of which is, Ecce ego mitto, etc.

Officium Simonis Angli. The beginning of which is, Simon pater inclytus, etc.
This famous Simon was Simon Stock, the most noted and religious Brother of the
Carmes that ever was; the first of all his Order that took a degree in this
University, as I have told In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 99. a.
you elsewhere; and the same, who many Years after his death was Canonized.
Besides the said Books, he the said Rob. Bale composed Several. Sermons, which
went from hand to hand, as one V^le Baleum in lib. De Scrip. maj. Brit. u^ sup.
Cont. 11. number. 59.
of his Order will farther tell you, who adds, 18th. Year of K. Hen. 7. was
buried in his Monastery of Burnham beforementioned.

Bardney in Lincolnshire; became when Young, a Monk of the Order of St.
Benedict in his own Country, received his Learning in the supreme faculty among
those of his Society in Oxon, and afterward retiring to his Monastery, wrote in
Verse,

Vita Roberti Grostest quondam Episcopi Lincolniensis. It Is as yet in
Manuscript, and was finished by the Author in 1503. he being then Bachelaur of
Divinity, and by him dedicated to Will. Smythe Bishop of Lincoln. The beginning
of this Book is Lincolniensis apex presul sacrate Wilelme, etc. Many fabulous
things are inserted therein, not at all agreeable to so profound and subtle a
Philosopher as Grostest was; who in his Life and Actions did very humbly Tho.
Bradwardin in lib. 3. De libero arbitrio contra Pelapium.
imitate, or at least endeavored so to do, St. Austin Archbishop of
Canterbury. The said Author Bardney tells us, that Grestest was Born at Stow in
Lincolnshire, which no Author besides himself, has in the least mentioned, and
other matters of him which are false, tho some are true, Claruit 1504.
and fit to be mentioned in History. What else our Author Bardney has written,
I know not as yet, nor any thing else of him; only, that he was in good esteem
for some parts of Learning, especially by those of his Society, during the time
that King Henry 7. lived; but when he died it appears not.

Cork in Ireland: whence in his Youthful Years being sent to Oxon, improved
himself much in Academical Learning; but whether he took a Degree, we have no
Register that testifies it. Afterward receeding to his Native Country, he wrote
in his own Language.

The Annals of Ireland -- drawn down with great care and labor to his time,
and by him Dedicated to his Patron, and Favourer of his Muse Florence Mac
Mahoun. This Book, which does as yet, as I conceive, continue in MS, was in the
Custody of one Flor. Mac Carty in 1626, as the Antiquary Jacob. Waraeus in lib.
1. De Scriptorib. Hibern. cap. 11.
of Ireland attesteth; who adds, that this our Author O Fihely did write the
said Annals about the latter end of the last, or in the beginning of this
Century, which we are now upon: So that I presume, that he was living in
Fifteen hundred and five, Claruit 1505.
and that he wrote, as it is probable, other things, but lost. In this Man's time,
I find many noted Persons of Ireland to have studied in this University; who,
as it seems, have either been Writers, Bishops, or Statesmen in that Kingdom;
but most of their Christian Names being deficient, I cannot justly
particularize them, or say that this was afterward a Writer, or that a Bishop,
etc.

Hawys originally descended, as it seems, from the Hawes of Hawes in the Bushes
in the County of Suffolk; was instructed in all such Literature as this
University could at that time afford, but whether he took a Degree, we have no
Register to show it. Afterward in his Travels through England, Scotland, and
France; visiting the receptacles of good Letters, did much advance the
Foundation of Literature that he had laid in this place; so that after his
return, he being esteemed a complete Gentleman, a Master of several Languages,
especially of the French, and above all, for his most excellent vein in Poetry;
he was received into the Court of King Henry 7. who being a great encourager of
Learning, and a judicious understander of Men, was by him made Jo^. Baleus ut
supra, cent. 8. number. 58. where it is said that the King called St. Hawes ab
interiori camera ad secretum cubiculum.
at length one of the Grooms of his Chamber, and highly esteemed by him for his
facetions discourse, and prodigious memory; which last did evidently appear in
this, that he could repeat by heart most of our English Poets; especially Jo.
Lydgate a Monk of Bury, whom he made equal in some respects, with Geff.
Chaucer. He has transmitted to Posterity several Books in English, some of
which are in Verse, and somein Prose, as,

The pastime of pleasure; or, the History of Graund Amor, and la bell Pucell,
containing the knowledge of the seven Sciences, and the course of Man's Life in
this World. Land. 1555. quart. Written in English Verse, and finished by the
Author 21. Henry 7. Dom. 150 5/6. About which time it was first of all, I
suppose, made public. It is adorned with Wooden Cuts to make the Reader
understand the Story the better, and Printed in an old English Character. But
such is the fate of Poetry, that this Book which in the time of Henry 7. and 8.
was taken into the Hands of all ingenious Men, is now thought but Worthy of a
Ballad-mongers Stall. He has also written (1) The Exemplar of Virtue. (2)
Delight of the Soul. (3) Consolation of Lovers. (4) The Chrystalline Temple,
etc. one or more of which were written in Latin. Claruit 1506.
This Author was in great value among ingenious Men, in the latter end of Henry
7. but when he died I know not as yet.

WILLIAM GALEON a Norfolk Man Born, did Austin the Hermit at Lynn Regis in his
own Country; Studied several Years in this University among the Brethren of
that Order in their College there, proceeded Ibid. in Bal. cent. 8. number. 91.
Doctor of Divinity at Oxon, and at length was made Provincial of his Order,
that is the chief Governor of the said Brethren, living in the Province of
England; he being then accounted a most eminent Person for Literature and
Piety, and the prime example among those of his Society for all kind of Virtue
and Learning. He has written and left to Posterity, Lectiones in Theologia.

Course of Sermons for the whole Year, Preached to the People. -- Besides other
things which I have not yet seen. He paid his last debt to Nature at Lynn
beforementioned in Fifteen hundred and seven, Hen 7.) and was buried in the
Church there belonging to the Friars of St. Austin. Joseph. Pamphilus Bishop of
Segni says In Chron. ord. Fratrum eremit. Edit. Romae 1581. in qu. Fol. 92. b.
that he died in 1500, Aged 90 Years, but falsely, for all Authors, except
himself, say otherwise.

JOHN SOUL, a Carme of London, was for Oxon, took one, if not both the
Degrees, in the said Faculty in this University, in the Reign, as I conceive,
of Henry 7. being then a very famous Preacher, and not only followed by the
Secular Priests, but by many of the Religious Orders. He was a great admirer,
and a Preacher up of the Doctrine of S. Paul, and endeavored to his utmost, to
frame his life according to it, and to make others do the like, and therefore
much honored and valued by Dr. John Colet, the learned and religious Dean of S.
Paul's Cathedral. He has Written according to Baleus In cent. 9. Script. maj.
Britan. number. 13.
these things following, Sermones ex D* Paulo. Divisiones Thematum.

A course of Sermons for the year -- Besides other matters relating to
Divinity. Henry 7. and was buried among the Carmes, commonly called the White
Friars in their Convent near Fleetstreet, in the Suburb of London, leaving then
the Character behind him of a most Pious and Religious Father.

EDMUND DUDLEY, Son of John Dudley John Lord Dudley, of Dudley Castle in
Staffordshire, became a Student in this University about 1478. went afterward,
as it seems, to Greys-Inn in Holborn near London, where he in a short time
became so noted a Proficient in the Municipal Law; that King Henry 7. taking
notice of him, did Pol. Virgil. in Lib. 26. Angl. Hist.
for his singular prudence and faithfulness, make choice of him to be one of
his Privy Council in the first year of his Reign, Dom. 1486. Dudley being then
but twenty four years of age. Soon after, he discerning the King to be of a
frugal disposition, did, to gain his favor the more, project the taking
advantage against such as had transgressed the Penal Laws, by exacting from
them the Forfeitures according to those Statutes. In which employment he had
for his assistant one Sir Richard Emson, another Lawyer, Son of a Sieve-maker
of Tocester in Northamptonshire. Both which being constituted by the said King
his Judices fiscales, as one Idem ibid.
is pleased to style them, ( Dudley being then Franc. Bacon Vis^. S. Alban, in
his History of Henry 7. Printed at London in folio 1622. p. 209.
a person that could put hateful business into good language) they became so
extremely hated of all people, that they were forced many times to go guarded
in the Streets. In the 19. of Henry 7. he being Speaker of the House of Commons
in Parliament, should have been made Sergeant at Law on the 13. of November the
same year, but (for what reason it appears not) he did petition that he might
be discharged from assuming that Degree, which was accordingly done to his
desire, and in the 22. of the said Kings Reign, he In the third Tom. of the
Baronage of England, p. 217. b.
obtained the Stewardship of the Rape of Hastings in Sussex. He has written
Baleus ut supra, Cent. 11. nu. 84.
a Book Entit.

Arbor Reipublicae, etc. It is penned in a Juridic Style, and is now, or at
least lately was, reserved, as a choice Monument, in the Cottonian Library.
Whether ever Printed, I cannot tell. At length after King Henry 7. (who
favored his actions because he brought Grist to his Mill) being dead, his
Successor King Henry 8. did, for the Peoples satisfaction, issue out his
special Precept for the Execution of the said Dudley, then a Prisoner in the
Tower of London. Whereupon he had his Head smitten off on Tower Hill, 28. Aug.
2. Henry 8. being the year of our Lord fifteen hundred and ten, John,
afterward Duke of Northumberland, Father to Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick,
and to Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester.

Holtigena, was born in the County of Sussex, and from being Usher of the
School joining to the common gate of S. Mary Magdalen College, and Bachelaur of
Arts, was elected Probationer of the said College in 1490. and within the
compass of an year following was admitted true and perpetual Fellow thereof.
Afterward he took the Degree of Master of Arts, and carried on the profession
of Pedagogy so zealous, that by his admirable way of teaching the Faculty of
Grammar, many from his School were transplanted to several Colleges and Halls
in this University, that were afterward eminent in the Nation. Since which
time, and that of King Henry 7. has been a singular care of Royal Authority,
and of worthy learned men to lay a solid Foundation of all kind of Learning, by
producing a right Grammar-Institution. For tho before the said King's time a
great part of our English men had little leisure, and less care of good Arts,
yet when the Houses of York and Lancaster were united by the Counsel of Dr.
John Moreton, Bishon of Ely, and the times thereupon became more peaceable, our
Author Holte made a Grammar, Entit.

Lac Puerorum, etc. Printed about the year 1497. and Dedicated to the said
Moreton, then Archbishop of Canterbury. Which Grammar (Printed also with the
Works of John Stanbridge) being the first of note, or most fit for use, that
was ever Printed in England, was much used and taken into the hands of all
sorts of Scholars. Afterward the said Stanbridge, and his Scholar Robert
Whittington, with others, did put forth diverse Treaties of Grammar, but more
especially Dr. John Colet, the learned Dean of S. Paul's Cathedral, who
compiled the Eight parts of Speech, and William Lilye, the first Master of S.
Paul's School, an English Syntax: whereunto Cardinal Thomas Wolsey did
afterward prefix an Epistle, and directions for teaching the eight Classes or
Forms in Ipswich School. The learned Erasmus also, entreated See in the Preface
of Tho. Hayne to his Gramm^^ Latinae compendium* Printed 1640. in octavo. From
which Pref. one John Twell^ a Schoolmaster in, or near, Newarke, has
furnished himself with many materials for his Preface to his Grammatica
Reformata, -- Land. 1883^ in octavo, but without any acknowledgment on his part.
by Dr. Colet, to revise Lilyes Syntax, made a new Latin Syntax, in 1513. upon
which Henry Pryme, a Schoolmaster in a certain Monastery, and Leonard Cox of
Carleon in Monmouthshire Commented; the former in 1539. and the other in 1540.
But these things being spoken by the by, I shall only say that our Author Holte
being esteemed the most eminent Grammarian of his time, there is no doubt but
that he did Compose other things belonging to Grammar, which perhaps are now
quite lost, Clar. 1511.
and past recovery, as the time of his death, and place of burial is. One
Holte, who was Master to Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancellor of England, did
publish an Accedence and Grammar about the same time that Lac Puerorum was made
extant. Which Holte is in the Printed at London in 1682 See there among the
English Books in quarto, numb. 310.
Auction Catalogue of Mr. Richard Smith, sometimes Secondary of the Poultry
Compter, written Nich. Holt. Qu. whether not mistaken for John.

NICHOLAS MAGWIRE, was born in Idron Ireland, Educated Jac. Waraeus Eq. Au^. in
Commant. de praesulibus Hiberniae. Dublin 1665. p. 156.
among the Oxonians, and took one or more Degrees. Afterward returning to his
Country, he was made Prebendary of Hillard, in the Diocese of Laighlin, being
then, and after, accounted famous among his Countrymen for his great Learning,
and constant Preaching among them. In 1490. he was, by provision from the Pope,
promoted to the Bishopric of Laighlin, aged about thirty one years. Where
being settled, he began to write several Books, but being untimely snatched
away by death, finished only these following.

Chronicon Hiberniae, ( of which Thaddeus Dowling made use, when he Composed
his Annals Hiberniae) and, Vita Milonis de Rupe Episc. quondan Laighliensis.

This our Author Magwire, Hen. 8.) and was buried, as it seems, in his own
Church of Laighlin. In his Bishopric succeeded one Thomas Halsey Doctor of
both the Laws, whom I shall remember in his proper place, among the Bishops,
that have received their Education in Oxon.

MAURITIUS de PORTU, otherwise called O-Fihely, who, in his time, was, for his
great Learning and Virtue, called and written by many The Flower of the World,
was born Idem Wareus in lib. 1. De Scriptoribus Hibern. cap. 12. and in Com. de
praesulib. Heb. ut sup. p. 250.
in the County of Cork near to a celebrated Port called Baltimore in Ireland,
where the ancient Seat of the O-Fihely's was placed, instructed for some time
in Grammaticals and Trivials in this Universi^^, and not unlikely in other
Learning (after he had taken upon him the Habit of S. Francis) in the Convent
of the Brethren of that Order situated in the South Suburb of Oxon, wherein the
person that he admired beyond all the World ( John Duns Scotus) had spent some
years in Religion and Learning, and in the Library of which place many of his
Books had been Religiously preserved. From Oxon he Traveled into Italy, and
settling in the University of Padoua or Padua, then flourishing in Learning,
made very great proficiency in Philosophy in the Monastery of the Franciscans
called S. Antony, and at riper years applied himself severely to the study of
Metaphysics, School Divinity, and above all to the Doctrine of John Duns, whom
he had in so great veneration, that he was in a manner besotted with his
Subtilities. After he had taken the Degree of Doctor of Divinity (in which
Faculty he for some time Read with great applause among the Brethren) he became
known to, and much respected by, Pope Julius 2. who, for a reward of his
Learning and Virtues, conferred on him the Archbishopric of Tuam in Ireland in
the year 1506. In 1512. he was present at the two first Sessions of the Council
of Lateran, and in the year following, minding to return to his Native Country,
he obtained a Faculty from the Pope, of granting Indulgences to all such that
should retire to Tuam to hear the first Mass that he should Celebrate there:
but at his arrival at Galloway, being overtaken with a deadly Disease, died
before he could Celebrate it. His Works, which have been much admired, and
taken into the Hands of all Catholics, are mostly these.

Expositio ( sive lectura) accuratiss, in questiones dialecticas Divi Johan.
Scoti in Isagogen Porphyrii. Ferrar. 1499. Ven. 1512. etc. fol.

Commentaria Doctoris Subtilis Johan. Scoti in xii. lib. Metaphysicae
Aristotelis Emendata, and Quotationibus, Concordantiis, atque Annotationibus
decorata. Venet. 1507. fol. These Comments were made to the new Translation of,
and the many Additions made to, the said twelve Books, by that most famous
Disciple of Duns Scotus, named Antonius Andreas, a Franciscan of the Province
of Aragon.

Epithomata in insigne formalitatum opus de mente Doctoris Subtilis, etc. Ven.
1514. fol.

Dictionarium Sacrae Scripturae universis conoionatoribus apprime utile and
necessarium. Venet. 1603. fol. This Dictionary reaches but to the latter end of
the Letter E. to the Word Exnitguere.

Enchiridion fidei. Printed in 1509.

Epistolae diversae ad Jo. Camersium, with several other things, besides his
postillizing the whole Doctrine of Duns Scotus, and his subtle Comments on his
Vniversals, as Ant. Possevinus in his Apparatus Sacer, will farther tell you.
He gave way to fate at Galloway, before he could reach to Tuam (as it is
already told you) to the great reluctance of all learned Men, especially those
of his own Country, and of Padoua, on the eighth of the Call. of June, in
Fifteen hundred and thirteen; Franciscans, commonly called the Gray Friars, at
Galloway. In the Sea of Tuam succeeded one Thomas O-Mullaly, commonly called
Laly; which Surname occurring often in our Registers and Records, there is no
doubt but that he had received some knowledge of good Letters among us.

West-Chester, commonly called the City of Chester, and being much addicted to
Religion and Learning, when a Youth, was received among the Benedictine Monks
of S. Werbergs Monastery in the said City. Thence at riper years he was sent to
Gloucester College, in the Suburb of Oxon, where after he had passed his course
in Theology among the Novices of his Order, he returned to his Cell at S.
Werberg, and in his elder years wrote, De antiquitate and magnificentia Urbis
Cestriae.

Chronicon, etc. and translated from Latin into English, a Book which he thus
entitled. The life of the glorious Virgin S. Werberg: Also many Miracles that
God has showed for her. Land. 1521. qu. He died in Fifteen hundred and
thirteen (5. Henry 8) and was buried in his Monastery,

Preaching or Dominican, commonly called Black, Friars, did also pass his
course in the supreme Faculty among those of his Order in the College
pertaining to them, sometimes situated and being in the South Suburb of Oxon;
where making great proficiency in his Profession, was at length honored with
the Degree of Doctor of Divinity, being then accounted one of the prime
Theologists of his Order, not only for Learning, but for conspicuous Virtue,
sanctimony of Life, and acuteness in all Subtilities, and Scholastical
Disputations. He has written according to Anton. In bib. Ord. fratrum
praedicatorum, ut sup. p. 141.
Senensis, a Brother of the said Order. Bina Commentaria super 4. libros
Sententiarum. Tract. de Praedestinatione Dei. Quodlibeta varia. The time when
he left this vain and transitory life my Author Anton. Senen. tells me not,
only that his name sounded high, and was in great renown for his erudition,
Clar. 1515.
and most refined sanctity of life, in Fifteen hundred and fifteen, which was
the seventh year of King Henry 8. of England.

Irish Man born, and a Student for some time in Oxon, as certain imperfect
Notes show, but what Degree he took, I find not. Afterward upon his return
into his Country, being then, if not some years before, a Canon Regular, he
became Subprior of the Cathedral Church of the Holy Trinity in Dublin, and in
his elder years wrote,

De rebus Ecclesiae Cath. SS. Trinit. Dublin, lib. 1. It is in MS. and was
sometimes in the Library of Sir James Ware, who says it was usually called The
White Book, and takes it to be the same See in his first Book De Scriptoribus
Hibern. cap. 12.
with the Obital Book of that Church, for in his time it was written, as by the
Character it appears, being at this day reserved as a great rarity in the
Library of Trinity College near Dublin. This person, Tho. Fich, who is supposed
to have written other things, gave way to fare on the sixteenth of the Call. of
Febr. in Fifteen hundred and seventeen, Henry 8. and was buried in the
aforesaid Cathedral Church.

GEORGE COGLEY another Irish Man, but Oxonians, and after his return to his own
Country, became a Public Notary, and Registrary to the Bishops Court at Mead;
where having opportunity, time, and place to peruse the Registers of that
Church, wrote and commended to Posterity,

Catalogus Episcoporum Midensium, MS. Sometimes in the Library of Sir James
Ware, Knight. This Catalogue commences with Simon Rochfort, (or de Rupe forti)
who was the first of English Men that obtained the Bishopric of Mead, in
1194. or thereabouts, and reaches down to Hugh Ynge, who became Bishop in 1511.
A Copy of this Cataloge, Clar. 1518.
if not the Original, was sometimes in the hands of the famous Dr. Usher,
Bishop of the said place, who communicated it to Sir James Ware, when he was
composing his two Books De Script Hibern.

JOHN COLET, the eldest Son of Sir Henry Colet, London, (by Christiana his
Chaste and faithful Wife) Son of Robert Colet of Wendover in Buckinghamshire,
was born in London, (in the Parish of S. Antholin as it seems) in the year
1466. was Educated in Grammaticals, partly in London or Westminster, and being
fitted for greater Learning, was sent to the Habitation of the Muses, the
University of Oxon, about 1483. (at which time one or more of his Surname were
of S. Mary Magdalen College) where, after he had spent seven years in Logicals
and Philosophicals, was Licensed to proceed in Arts, being about that time so
exquisitely Learned, that all Tullies Works were as familiar to him, as his
Epistles. He was also no stranger to Plato and Plotinus, whom he not only read,
but conferred and paralleled, perusing the one, as a Commentary on the other.
And as for the Mathematics, there was scarce any part thereof, wherein he was
not seen above his years. Having thus obtained a most admirable competency in
Learning at home, he Traveled into Foreign Countries to improve it by seeing
the variety of Learning: As first into France, where at Paris he advanced
himself much in Divinity, and in Italy he prosecuted his Studies therein so
effectually, that there were none of his time went beyond him either in that
Faculty, or for the Reading of the Ancients, particularly Dionysius Areopagita,
Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Austin, etc. But as for Thomas
Aquinas, Jo. Duns Scotus, and other Schoolmen, he seemed not to delight in.
After his return from Italy, he retired again to his Mother the University of
Oxon, where he publicly and freely without stipend or reward, Expounded all S.
Paul's Epistles, about 1497. 98. 99. etc. in which years, Erasmus Rot. studied
(perhaps our Author Colet too) in the College of S. Mary the Virgin, a Nursery
for the Canon Regulars of the Order of S. Austin. Which most learned person did
make this report of Colet, that there was neither Doctor, Abbat, or Master in
the whole University, who frequented not, and (which was more) took Notes of
his Lectures. In 1493. he was, upon the resignation of Christoph. Urswyke,
admitted by proxy (being then absent) Prebendary of Botevant in the Church of
York, in 1502 he became Preb. of Durnesford in the Church of Salisbury, on the
resignation of Rich. Rauson, and about the year 1504. being then Doctor of
Divinity, he was by King Henry 7. made Dean of S. Paul's Cathedral in the place
of Rob. Sherebourne, promoted to the Sea of S. David. After his settlement in
Paul's, he according to the blessed example of S. Paul, became a free and
constant Preacher of the Gospel, by Preaching every Holyday in the Cathedral,
(not customary in those times) besides his Sermons at Court, (which made him be
loved of the King) and in many other Churches in the City. In his own Church he
Expounded the Scriptures, not by retail but wholesale, running over sometimes a
whole Epistle: which, with his Sermons elsewhere, were much frequented by
Courtiers and Citizens, and more especially for this cause, that the strickt
disciplinee of his Life, did regularly corespond with the integrity of his
Doctrine. In 1512. (4. Hen. 8.) he was at the charge of 4500 l. for the
Founding a Free School in the East part of S. Paul's Churchyard for three
hundred fifty and three poor Men's Children, to be taught free in the School,
appointing a Master, Usher, and a Chaplain, with sufficient stipends to endure
for ever, and committed the oversight of it to the Mercers of London, whom he
endowed with an hundred and twenty pounds yearly for the maintenance thereof.
He also at the same time gave Orders for the Scholars, whereby also the
Schoolmasters themselves should be directed. As for the Rents, they being much
increased since, more comes to the Schoolmaster than the whole endowment. The
first Master was William Lilye, the famous Grammarian, who before had privately
taught Grammar elsewhere (2) John Retwise, 1522. (3.) Richard Jones, 1532. (4.)
Thomas Freeman, 1549. (5.) John Cook, 1559. (6.) Will. Malyn, 1573. (7.)
William Harrison, 1581. (8.) Rich. Mulcaster, 1596. (9.) Alexander Gill,
senior, 1608. (10.) Alexander Gill, jun. 1635. (11.) John Largley, 1640. (12.)
Sam. Crumbleholme, of C. C. C. Ox. 1657. (13.) Thomas Gale of Trin. Coll. in
Cambridge. Our Author Colet was accounted one of the lights of Learning of his
time, and therefore entirely beloved of Erasmus, who See in the Epistles of
E^as. Printed 1642. from p. 702. to 712.
wrote his Life (which I have seen, and in some things follow) Thomas Lynacre,
Sir Thomas Mere, Richard Paice his successor in the Deanery of S. Paul's,
William Latymer, William Grocyn and others. As for the things that he wrote,
they are many, which being found in his Study after his death, few understood
them, because written only for his own understanding with intentions, if life
had been spared, that they should have been all fairly transcribed and
published. The most part follow. Orationes duae ad Clerum in Convocatione, An
1511. etc. Land. in oct. One of them was also Printed in three Sheets in quarto
by Rich. Pynson. Comment. in Ecclesiasticam D. Dionysiii Hierarchiam,MS.
Comment. in Proverbia Salomonis. Comment. in Evang. S. Matthei. Comment. in
Epistolas D. Pauli.

The said Com. on the Epistles of S. Paul, are said to be in MS. in the Library
of Bennet Coll. in Cambridge. Com. in Precationem Dominic. Symbolum fidei.

The first of these two last is translated into English.

Breviloquium dictorum Christi.

De Reformidatione Christi.

Conciones Ordinariae. Extraordinariae.

Some of these, I think, are published.

Epistolae ad Erasmum. Some of these, if not all, are published in the Epistles
of Erasmus.

De Moribus componendis.

Grammatices rudimenta. Land. 1539. oct. This, I think, is called Paul's
Accidence, etc.

E^^^olae ad Thom. Taylerum.

Daily Devotions: or, the Christians Morning and Evening Sacrifice, etc.
Printed at London several times in twelves and sixteens. Before one Impression,
if not more, of this Book, is Dr. Colet's Life, t^^ely and imperfectly written
by Thomas Fuller of Waltham in Essex, being mostly the same with that in his
Abel Redivivus.

Monition to a godly life. London 1534. 1563. etc. oct. This without doubt is
the same with A right fruitful admonition concerning the order of a good
Christian. Man's life, etc. London 1577. oct.

Sermon of Conforming and Reforming, made to the Convocation in S. Paul 's
Church, on Romans 12. 2. An. 1511. This was also published at Cambridge, in 1661.
in octavo, by Thomas Smith of Christ's Coll. there, with Notes, of his making,
put to it, and the Particulars of his Life in English, framed from some of the
Epistles of Erasmus.

Responsio ad argumenta Erasmiana de taedio and pavore Christi. This is
mentioned in the thirty first Book of the Epistles of Erasmus, ep. 46. The
Titles of other Books written by Dr. Colet, you may see in John Bale's Book De
Script. Maj. Britan. Cent. 8 nu. 63. At length our learned Author discovering
the sweating Sickness to grow upon him, he retired to his Lodgings that he had
built in the Monastery of the Carthusians at Sheen near to Richmond in Surrey:
where spending the little remainder of his days in Devotion, surrendered up at
length his last breath to him that first gave it, September in Fifteen hundred
and nineteen. Afterward his body was carried to London, and by the care of his
old decrepid Mother, it was buried in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, nigh to
the Image of S. W^gefort. Soon after was a comely Monument set over his Grave,
near to the little one which he had set up in his life time, between the Choire
and the South Isle: which Monument remaining whole and entire till 1666. was
then consumed in the dreadful Conflagration that happened in the City of
London. But before that time it was carefully preserved in Effigy by the
industrious Pen of Mr. (since Sir) William Dugdale in his History of S. Paul's
Cathedral. Printed at London in fol. 1658. In the last In Offic. Praerog.
Cantuar. Secus Ecc D. Pauli, in r^g. Ayloff, qu. 22.
Will and Testament of the said Dr. Colet, dated 22. Aug. and proved the 5. of
October, in 1519. I find this passage -- Item, The New Testament, and other of
my making, written in Parchment, as Comments of Paul's Epistles, and
Abbreviations, with many such other, I Will shall be disposed at the
disposition of my Executors, etc. His body which was closed up in a leaden
Coffin of six feet and two Inches long, and of three feet and two inches broad,
was laid up and enclosed in the Wall, near to the place where his Monument was
afterward put. In 1680. or thereabouts, when the Wall was taken down, the said
Coffin was discovered (for it laid in the said Wall about two feet and an half
above the surface of the floor) whereon was a plate of Lead fastened, with an
Inscription engraven thereon, showing the name of the person thee deposited,
his Fathers name, his Dignity, Obit, benefaction, etc. Some of the Royal
Society, who out of curiosity went to see it, did thrust a probe or little
stick into a chink of the Cossin, which bringing out some moisture with it,
found it of an ironish taste, and fancied that the body felt soft and pappy like
Brawn.

JOHN CONSTABLE, Son of Roger Constable Isabel his Wife, was born in London,
Educated in Grammaticals under William Lilye, in Academicals in an ancient
Hostle sometimes called Byham, afterward corruptly Bohem, Hall, opposite to
Merton Coll. Church, under the tuition, as I conceive, of Mr. John Plaisted the
chief Moderator thereof. About the time that he had taken the Degree of Master
of Arts, which was in 1515. (7. Hen. 8) he left the University, being then
accounted an excellent Poet and Rhetorician, and had some preferment conferred
upon him, but what, I know not. He has written and published.

Querela Veritatis. The beginning of which is Destinavimus tibi hunc nostrum,
etc. Joh. Bradford, the Protestant Martyr, wrote a Book Entit. The complaint of
Verity, etc. Land. 1559. in oct. Whether in imitation of the former, I know not.

Epigrammata. Land. 1520. qu. which Book of Epigrams I have seen in the
Bodleian Library, given thereunto by that curious collector of Books,
Democritus Junior. Other things, as I conceive he has written, but of what
Subject I cannot yet tell; nor can I say any more of John Constable, only this,
that one of both his Names, who was Doctor of Decrees, fourth Son of Sir^ Rob.
Constable of Flamburgh in Yorkshire Knight, and Residentiary of the Church of
Lincoln, became Dean of the said Church, in the Year 1514. who dying 15. Jul.
1528. recommended his Body to be buried in the Cathedral Church of our Lady of
Lincoln, near to the Corpse of George Fitzhugh sometimes Dean thereof, who was
buried in the Body of the said Church: Clar. 1520*
What relation our Author Jo. Constable the Poet (who was in great renown among
learned Men in Fifteen hundred and twenty) had to John Constable the Dean, I
cannot yet find. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, lived one Henry Constable. a
noted English Poet, not unfitly ranked with Sir Edw. Dyer Chancellor of the
most noble Order of the Garter, a poetical Writer, and of good esteem in the
said Queens time, as living in the 39 Year of her Reign. The said Henry
Constable, who had spent some time among the Oxonian Muses, was a great Master
of the English Tongue; and there was no Gentleman of our Nation, had a more
pure, quick, and higher delivery of conceit than he; witness among all others,
that Sonnet of his before the poetical Translation called The Furies, made by
King James the First of England, while he was King of the Scots. He has also
several Sonnets extant, written to Sir Phil. Sidney; some of which are set
before the Apology for Poetry, written by the said Knight.

Lincoln Coll. whence being taken to govern the Free School joining to that of
S. Mary Magd. did exercise such an admirable way of teaching there, that many
were by him fitted for the University. In 1507. he proceeded in Divinity, and
being afterward a commoner for some time of University Coll. became so much
known to, and respected by, Cardinal Wolsey, (who if I mistake not conferred
some dignity on him) that he was represented to the King as one of those most
fit Persons in the University to encounter Mart. Luther* Whereupon in the Year
1521. he being then Reader of the Cardinals Divinity Lecture, which was by him
founded in the University 3 or 4 Years before, he wrote a Learned piece, entit.

Tractatus contra doctrinam Martini Lutheri. Whether Printed I know not;
Claruit 1521.
sure I am, that it is commended for a good Book in one of our public In Reg.
Epistolarum FF. ep. 89. vide etiam in ep. 90.
Registers. What other Books he wrote, I cannot tell, nor when he died, or where
buried.

Bristol in Somersetshire, was educated in Grammaticals in Wykehams School near
Winchester, made true and perpetual fellow of New Coll. after he had served two
Years of probation, in 1467, and in 1479, being then M. of A. he was presented
by the Warden and Society of that House to the Rectory of Newton Longvill in
Bucks. But his Residence being mostly in Oxon. the Society of Magd. Coll. made
choice of him to be their Divinity Reade^, about the beginning of the Reign of
King Rich. 3. which King coming soon after to Oxon, and taking up his lodging
in that College; he was pleased to hear our Author Grocyn, and some others of
that House dispute: And being much delighted with their disputations,
especially with those of Grocyn, which were in Divinity, he did most graciously
Vide Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 233. a.
reward them. But Grocyn leaving his Readers place in Magd. Coll. in the
beginning of the Year 1488, being then accounted excellent in the Latin and
Greek Tongues according to the then knowledge of them, he did, for the farther
accomplishment of himself in those critical studies, take a Journey into Italy;
where by the helps of Demetrius Calchondile and Politian, he obtained his
design. So that returning into his own Country, and at length to Oxon, he
became Rot. Comput. Rectorum Coll. Exon, in thesaur. ibid.
a Sojournor in Exeter Coll. in the Year 1491. or thereabouts, took a Degree in
Divinity at it In reg. antiq. coll. Merton. fol. 49. a.
seems, taught and read the Greek Tongue to the Oxonians after that way, which
had not before, I suppose, been taught in their University, became a familiar
Friend of, or rather Tutor to, Erasmus, and a Person in eminent renown for his
learning -- Recens tunc ex Italia venerat Grocinus (says In lib. cui tit. De
Tribus Thomis, in Tho. More, cap. 1.
Stapleton) qui primus ea aetate Graecas literas in Angliam invexerat,
Oxoniique public professus fuerat, a cujus sodali Thoma Lynacro, (Morus)
Graecas literas Oxonii didicit. In 1504 or thereabouts, he resigned his rectory
of Newton Longvill, being about that time made Master of the College of
Allhallowes at Maidston in Kent, yet continued mostly in Oxon, for several
Years after. He has written, Tract. contra hostiolum Jo. Wyclevi. Epistolae ad
Erasmum and alios. Grammatica. Vulgaria Puerorum.

Epigrammata, with other things which are mentioned by Leland and Bale. While
Dr. Colet was Dean of St. Paul's, our Author Grocyn did read in his open Lecture
in that Cathedral the Book of Dionysius Areopagita, commonly called Hierarchia
Ecclesiastica, (for the reading of the Holy Scripture, in the said Cathedral
was not in use) and in the very first entry of his Preface, cried out with
great vehemence against them whosoever they were, which either denied or stood
in doubt of the Authority of that Book; in the number of whom he noted Laur*
Valla, and diverse other of like judgment. But afterward the said Grocyn, when
he had continued a few Weeks in his reading thereof, and had farther considered
of the matter, he utterly altered and recanted his former sentence; protesting
openly, that the said Book, in his judgment, was never written by that Author,
whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles to be called Dionysius Areopagita. He
the said Grocyn died at Maidstone beforementioned, in the beginning of the Year
Fifteen hundred twenty and two, Allhallows beforementioned. Thomas Lynacre the
Famous Physician was his Executor, to whom he left considerable Legacies; and
William Lilye the Grammarian, who was his God-son, had a little Memorial
bequeathed to him in his last Will which I have In Offic praerog. Cant, in reg.
Ayloff ut supra Qu. 30.
seen. To, and with, this Grocyn, and other eminent Scholars of England, who
were of his time, was well known, and familiar, Andreas Ammonius a Clerk of
Luca in Italy, Son of Elizab. de Harena, or Arena, a grave Matron of that
place; which Andrew, who was an Apostolic Prothonotary, Collector for the Pope
in England, Latin Secretary to King Henry 8. and a Learned Man, did, as I have
just reason to conceive, spend some time in Oxon for the sake of Study, while
Grocyn, or at least Erasmus were conversant there: But being not certain of the
matter, I shall only say, that Ammonius dying in September. 1517. (9. Henry 8.)
being then Prebendary of Fordington and Writhlington in the Church of
Salisbury, (which Dignity was conferred upon him, on the Death of Gendesalvus
Ferdinandus 17 Jul. 1513.) was Buried in the King's Chapel of the Blessed
Virgin Mary and St. Stephen, situate and being within the Palace of
Westminster; leaving then a considerable part of his Wealth, to his Executor
Mr. Peter de Vannes an Italian, his Sisters Son, whom I shall mention elsewhere.

WILLIAM LILYE was born at Odyham in Hampshire, Mary Magd. Coll. in 1486. Aged
18 Years, took, as it seems, one Degree in Arts; and then giving a farewell to
the University, went for Religion sake to Jerusalem; where, after he had paid
his Vows, put in at his return at the Isle of Rhodes, and making some stay
there, he learned the Latin and Greek Tongues exactly: which matter has seemed
strange to some, forasmuch as Rhodes was not Rhodes in that Age, except some
great Critic was casually there. Thence he went to Rome, where he heard Joh.
Sulpitius and Pomponius Sabinus, great Masters of Latin in those days Read and
Teach. After his return he settled in London, and taught Grammar, Poetry, and
Rhetoric with good success. At length Dr. John Colet Dean of St. Paul's
Cathedral, made him the First Master of the School, which he had Founded in the
Yard, belonging to the said Cathedral, in the Year 1512. where teaching about
Ten Years, many issued thence, who were afterward serviceable in the Church
and State. He has written many things in English and Latin, and in Verse and
Prose; among which are these.

An Introduction to the Eight Parts of Speech -- This is generally said to be
written by Lilye; yet some there are, that stick not to tell us, that the said
Introduction was written by Dr. Colet or Dav. Tolley.

The Construction of the Eight Parts of Speech, -- This also goes under the
Name of Lilye.

Monita Paedagogica, seu Carmen de moribus, ad suos discipulos. The beginning
of which is, Qui mihi discipulus, etc.

Brevissima Institutio, seu ratio Grammatices cognoscendae, ad omnium puerorum
utilitatem praescripta, etc. This contains the four Parts of Grammar, viz. (1)
Orthographia. (2) Etymologia, (3) Syntaxis, and fourthly Prosodia. In which
Book or Books (very many times Printed) that part in Verse, called Propria quae
Maribus, etc. and another called, As in praesenti, etc. were afterward
published by John Ritwise (Lilye's Successor in Colet's School) with an
Interpretation of the words in them, about the Year 1530. (22. Hen. 8.)

Omnium nominum in regulis contentorum, tum Heteroclitorum ac Verborum,
interpretatio aliqua.

All these beforementioned were published at London 1513, and afterward in
1520, and had additions and annotations put to them by Ritwise before
mentioned, Tho. Robertson, etc. Tho the rules in them were excellent in that
Age; yet they have been much meliorated, and more compendiously methodized by
very many since, even to these our days.

In aenigmatica Antibossicon Primum, Secundum, Tertium, ad Guliel. Hormannum.
Land. 1521. qu.

The said three Antibossicons are witrily written in an elegant Style, and neat
Verse, not only against the said Horman, but also against Rob. Whittington a
Laureat Grammarian and Rhetorician: The beginning of them is Non Hormanne
latet, etc. In which Antibossicons, the said Whitting^on had, under the feigned
name of Bossus, much provoked Lilye with scoffs and biting Verses.

Poemata varia. Printed with the said Antibossicons. De laudibus Deiparae
Virginis.

Apologia ad John Skeltonum. Rob. Whittington.

Besides these, he has written other things, as Baleus and Pitseus will tell
you, and has made several translations from Greek into Latin, and from Italian
into English. At length this Learned Author being infected with the Plauge,
died of it to the great grief of Learned Men, on the fifth of the Call. 152 2/3.
of Mar. in Fifteen hundred twenty and two, and was buried in the North-yard,
belonging to the Cath. Church of St. Paul; leaving then behind him a Son named
George (begotten on the body of his Wife Agnes) whom I shall hereafter mention,
and Peter a Dignitarie, as it seems, in the Church of Canterbury, Father of
another Peter Lilye D. D. sometimes Fellow of Jesus Coll. in Cambridge,
afterward a Brother of the Hospital, called the Savoy in the Strand near
London, Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral, and of the Church of Sarum,
Archdeacon of Taunton, and a Writer of certain Books, as (1) Conciones duae,
una inscripta Pax Liliana, in Act. 15 39. Altera Columba Ecclesiae, in John 19.
9. 10. -- Land. 1619. qu. published by his Widow Dorothy (2) Two Sermons, 1. A
preparative Lilie to cure Souls, on Mark 16. 6. and the other, How to seek and
find Christ on Luke 24. 5. Both Printed at Land. in 1619. qu. published by his
said Widow Dorothy, whose Daughter Mary has Verses before, in commendation of,
them. This Dr. Peter Lilye gave way to fate in the latter end of 1614 (12. Jac.
1.) and was buried in the Church belonging to the Savoy beforementioned. Will.
Lilye the Grammarian had a Daughter named Dionysia, who was married to his
Usher John Ritwise or Rightwyse, afterward Master of St. Paul's School, on the
Death of his Father-in Law; and a most eminent Grammarian in his Generation.
This Person by the way I must tell you, was born at Sawl in Norfolk, educated
in Eaton School near Windsor, elected into Kings Coll. in Cambridge an. 1507.
made the Tragedy of Dido out of Virgil; and acted the same with the Scholars of
his School before Cardinal Wolsey with great applause. One Rich. Jones
Succeeded him in the Government of St. Paul's School, 1532. (24. Hen. 8.) in
which Year Ritwise perhaps died. Afterward his Widow Dionysia took to her
second Husband James Jacob, who was one of the Masters of the said School, by
whom he had a Son called Polydore Jacob. In the next Centery after the Death of
our Famous Will. Lilye, appeared as a Comet to the Vulgar from Leicestershire,
one of both his Names, a great pretender to Astrology and Physic, and in ^uch
considering his Education, which was without the help of an Academy, he was
eminent. He began to write, much about the time when the grand Rebellion
commenced, wrote in favor of the Long Parliament and their proceedings, and
many notorious matters against the Royal Family; which being highly resented by
the generous Loyalist, he was aimed at upon His Majesty's Restoration in 1660.
to be brought to condign punishment: But upon the Intercession of George
Wharton (to whom Lilye had been civil in the times of Usurpation) and others,
he escaped, and continued in writing his Ephemerides to the time of his Death.
This Person who pretended much to Prophecy (of which he has published several,
Pamphlets, especially in his said Ephemerides) and had exercised the trade of
Conjuration among ignorant People, died at Walton upon Thames in Surrey (where
he had purchased a fair Estate, with the Moneys he had got, by imposing on the
Vulgar with his Juggles) on the 9th day of June, an. 1681. Aged near 80 Years,
and was buried in the middle of the Church there, toward the North Wall. Soon
after, was a black Marble Stone, with an Inscription thereon, laid over his
Grave by his Friend Elias Ashmole Esquire. A little before his Death, he did adopt
for his Son by the Name of Merlin Junior, one Will. Coley a Tailor by Trade,
and a Native of Magd. Parish in the North Suburb of Oxon, and at the same time
gave him the Impression of his Ephemeris, after it had been Printed for 36
Years, which Coley continues to this day. The Writings of this Lilly being too
many to be here inserted, I shall only give you the canting and amusing Titles
of some, as (1) Englands Prophetical Merlin, (2) English Merlin revived, etc.
(3) Storry Messenger; or an interpretation of the strange Apparition of three
Suns, (4) A Collection of Ancient and Modern Prophecies, etc. (5) Astrological
Prediction of the occurrences in England (6) The Worlds Catastrophy (7)
Monarchy and no Monarchy, etc. (8) Annus tenebrosus, or the dark Year, etc. (9)
Christian Astrology, etc.

JOHN STANBRIDGE another noted Grammarian Heyford in Northamptonshire, educated
in Trivials in Whykehams School near Winchester, admitted, after two Years of
probation, true and perpetual Fellow of New College, in the Year 1481, left it
Five Years after, and being naturally delighted in the faculty of Grammar (tho
then Bac. of Arts) he was made first Usher of the Free School joining to Magd.
Coll. (for so he occurs in the Year 1488.) and after the Death of Job.
Anwykyll, chief Master thereof; in which employment, he continued, if I mistake
not, to the time of his Death, and became so happy in the practice of his
profession, that many Persons, who proved afterward eminent, acknowledged to
have received instruction from him. Among such Rob. Whittington was one, by
whose endeavors, as also those of Stanbridge, Will. Horman, and Will. Lilye,
(all Oxford Students) the Latin tongue was much refined and amended. This Jo.
Stanbridge was a right worthy Lover of his faculty, and an indefatigable Man in
teaching and writing, as it may appear by those things that he has published,
very grateful to the Muses and public concerns. The last of which he consulted
more than his own private interest; and when in his old Age, he should have
withdrawn himself from his profession (which is esteemed by the generality a
drudgery) and have lived upon what he had gotten in his younger Years, he
refused it, lived poor and bare to his last, yet with a juvenile and cheerful
Spirit. He has written,

Embryon relimatum, sive Vocabularium Metricum. This I have seen Printed in an
old English Character, about 1522. in qu. In the title of which, is the Authors
Picture (Printed from a Wooden Cut) sitting in a Chair with his Gown on, and a
Hood on his Shoulders, but no Cap on his Head, only a close one, like to a
Curlot. This Book was viewed and corrected in Qu. Elizabeth's time by Thomas
Newton of Cheshire, who has an Vide Illustrium aliquot Anglorum encomia, per
Thom. Newton Land. 1589. p. 128.
Encomium upon it: Afterward enlarged, and made to run in complete Verse, by
that noted Grammarian John Brinsley, sometimes a Schoolmaster and Minister in
Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, an. 1636. I mean the same Brinsley, who married the
Sister of Dr. Jos. Hall Bishop of Norwich, and wrote and published several Books
of Divinity and Grammar besides translations. Stanbridge also wrote, Parvulorum
Institutiones. De ordine constructionum.

Vulgaria. With other things which I have not yet seen. Clar. 1522.
He lived beyond the Year Fifteen hundred twenty and two, but when he died, or
where he was buried, (unless in Magd. Coll. Chap. or Yard belonging thereunto)
I know not. One Thomas Stanbridge, his Kinsman I think, took the Degree of
Master of Arts in this University an. 1518. being then a noted Schoolmaster of
Benbury in Oxfordshire, who dying 1522, left several Books to the Coll. of
which he had been Fellow; which, if I mistake not, was Magd. College.

Will. Vaux of Harwedon in Northamptonshire by Catherine his Wife Inter cod.
MS. in Coll. Armorum Land G. 4. fol. 6.
Daughter of Gregory Penystone of Curtesels in Piemont, a Province of Italy,
was born in that County ( Northamptonshire) and in his juvenile Years, was sent
to Oxon, where by reading Humane and Romantic, rather than Philosophical,
Authors, advanced his Genie very much in Poetry and History. In his riper Years
he followed the Camp, did King Hen. 7. noted service in the Battle of Stoke
(near Newark) in the second Year of his Reign, and thereupon he received the
Honor of Knighthood. In the 17th Year of that Kings Reign, he appeared like a
Star at the Marriage of Prince Arthur, for the Gown of Purple Velvet which he
then wore, was valued at a Thousand pounds, besides a Collar of SS about his
Neck, which weighed Eight hundred pounds in Nobles. In the 1. Hen. 8. he was
made Lieutenant of the Castle of Guisnes in Picardy, and in the 5th of that
Kings Reign, he was at the Seige of Turwyn. In the 10th, he was one of the
Ambassadors then sent into France, for confirming the Articles of Peace,
between King Hen. 8. and the French; and in the 11th, was one of the
Commissioners appointed to make preparation for that famous interview near
Guisnes, between King Hen. 8. and the King of France. After which he grew into
such high esteem at Court, that in the 15. Hen. 8. he was advanced See the
Baronage of England, Tom. 3. p. 304. b.
to the dignity of a Baron of this Realm, by the Name and Title of Nicholas
Lord Vaux of Harwedon. It is reported by a certain The Author of The art of
English Poesy. See in Theatr. poetarum. pr. 1675. p. 230.
Author, that his fancy laid chiefly in the facility of his meeter, and the
aptness of his descriptions, such as he takes upon him to make; namely, in
sundry of his Songs, wherein he shows the counterfeit action very lively and
pleasantly. His Book, or Books of Poetry I have not yet seen, only many of his
Copies of Verses, in a Book Intit. The Paradise of dainty devises, etc. Printed
at Land. 1578. in qu. Among them I find some, which have these Titles set to
them, (1) A Copy made In his extreme sickness, which is the eighth Copy in that
Book (2) His desire to exchange life, numb. 17. (3) Of sufferance comes ease.
numb. 41. (4) No pleasure without some pain. fol. 36. b. (5) A lover disdained
complains, fol. 51. a. (6) Of a contented mind. (7) Try before you trust.
(8) He renounceth all the effects of love. (9) Bethinking himself of his end,
he writes thus, etc. There goes a doleful dutty also under his Name beginning
thus, I loath that I did love, etc. which was thought by some to be made upon
his Death bed. At length after this learned and valiant Lord had enjoyed his
Honor but a very little time; he gave way to fate in May or June, in Fiveteen
hundred twenty and three; Harwedon beforementioned, (where he founded a
Chantry for one Priest to sing Mass for his Soul, in the Parish Church there;)
or else in the Church of the Black Friars at London.

Job. Caius in Hist. Cantab. lib. 2. p. 126.
at Canterbury, but descended from the Lynacre's of Lynacre Hall in the Parish
of Chesterfield in Derbyshire, (which may be the reason why Holinshed, and
others that follow him, say, that he was born in the Town of Derby) was chosen
Fellow of Allsouls Coll. in 1484 where by his close retirement, he improved
himself very much in Literature, and in few Years after, much more by his
Travels into Italy, where taking, I suppose, the Degree of Doctor of Physic,
became intimate with Persons famous for learning there. The chief Cities of his
residence were at Rome and Florence; at the last of which places, being
countenane'd by Laurence Medices Duke thereof, had for his instructors
Demetrius and Politian; and at Rome he became familiar with the learned
Hermolaus Barbarus, who directed him very freely in his Studies. After his
return into his own Country, he was incorporated Doctor of Physic in this
University, read a shagling Lecture in that faculty, became Tutor to Prince
Arthur, and to his Princess Catherine for the Italian Tongue, Physician to King
Hen. 7. (as some say) afterward to King Hen. 8, one of the chief Founders of
the Coll. of Physicians in Knightridersstreet in London, (of which he was the
first President) and at length in Holy Orders, and a Priest. In 1519. Apr. 29.
he was admitted Reg. Vicecanc. Eccles. Eborac. incipiens 1504.
Chauntor of the Church of York, in the place of Joh. Perot, who died in Febr.
going before; but Lynacre resigning that place in Nov. following, was succeeded
therein by Rich. Wyatt. D. D. who was admitted thereunto 13. of the same Month.
At the same time our Author Lynacre had other Dignities in the Church, but at
what place I cannot justly say. He was great with, and highly admired by, Sir
Tho. More, (whom formerly he had taught Greek) Erasmus, Grocyn, Latimer,
Tonstall, and who not. He was one of the first English Men that brought polite
learning into our Nation, and it has been justly questioned by some of the
Goliahs of learning, whether he was a better Latinist or Grecian, or a better
Grammarian or Physician. Sure it is that he being a general Scholar of his
time, and esteemed the Honor of the Nation, was much reverenced by the
Oxonians; especially upon reading his Medicinal Lectures among them gratus, and
generally by all Persons of Honor, and others for his happy practice among
them. He has written,

The Rudiments of Grammar. Land. in aedib. Pynsonianis. Turned into Latin by
George Buchanan a Scot -- Par. 1533. and 50. in oct. Which Book has ever since
been the Cynosura for many of our best Grammarians.

Compendious Regiment, or a Dietarie of health, used at Mountpillour. Land. by
Rob. Wire, in 8vo.

De Emendata Structura Latini sermonis, libri sex. Several times Printed, as at
Paris 1532. 43. 50, etc. Col. Agrip. 1555, etc. all in 8vo. recognized and
amended by Joachim Camerarius -- Lips. 1591. oct. The said 6 Books were
originally made for the use of the Lady Mary the Kings Daughter, the same, I
think, who was afterward Queen, and are much commended by Jo. In Principum ac
illustrium aliquot and eruditorum in Anglia virorum, enomi^s, Trophaeis, etc.
Land. 1589. p. 43.
Leland. He also translated from Greek into Latin several of the works of
Claud. Galen, among which were those De temperamentis and de inaequali
temperie. lib. 3. Venet. 1498. Which Latin Translation, as it is said, speaks
better than the Original. He also translated into the said Language Procli
Diadochi Sphaera. Venet. 1500 fol. Dedicated to Prince Arthur by a large Epist.
or Praef. dat. at Land. 6. call. Sept. with other things, which you may see in
Baleus and Pitseus. This Dr. Lynacre died 20. October. Paul within the City of
London, before the Rood of the North Door, between the long Form and the Wall,
directly against the said Rood. Over his Grave was afterward a comely
Monument, erected at the charge of that eminent Physcian and Antiquary Dr. John
Cay of Cambridge; out of the Epitaph of which I am instructed in these matters
concerning Lynacre, viz. That he was a most skilful Critic in the Greek and
Latin, and an excellent Physician besides, (being Physician to King Hen. 8.)
who in his Generation did many miraculous Cures, and restored several to life
when help was past, and even at the very point of death He translated Galen's
works out of Greek into Latin with singular perspicuity and clearness. He also
compiled a most excellent piece for the rectifying of the frame, and module of
the Latin Tongue. He gave two Lectures to the University of Oxon, and one to
Cambridge. -- He was a perfect hater of all indirect, or fraudulent dealings,
being sincerely faithful to his Friends, and well beloved of all ranks and
degrees of Men, etc. As for the two Physic Lectures, which he gave to the
University of Oxon, I have largely mentioned In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 4^
elsewhere, and upon what account they came to be settled in Merton Coll. and
how the Readers, whether Superior or Inferior, are to read in the common Hall
there to any of the University that will bestow the pains to be Auditors. Those
that have read the Superior Lecture, who are called the Superior Readers, and
have received 12 l. per an. for their pains, have been these, (1) Rob. Barons
or Barnes Fellow of Mert. Coll. and a Learned Physician, who was appointed
(after several others had read it by the nomination of the Feoffees of Tho.
Lynacre) by the Society of Merton Coll. with the consent of Cuhbert Tonstall
the last surviving Feoffee, an. 1558. He the said Dr. Barnes died the 26. Oct.
1604. (2) Tho. Dotchen Med. D. of Magd. Coll. was elected by the Warden and
Society of that of Merton Coll. 4. Nov. 1604. He died 29. Jan. following (3)
Henry Bust M. D. of Magd. Coll. Elected 15. Feb. 1604. (4) Bartholomew Warner
M. D. of St. John's Coll. 12. Apr. 1617. Buried in Magd. Parish Church in the
North Suburb of Oxon. 26. Jan. 1618. by the Body of Anne Dobson his sometimes
Wife. (5) Edw. Lapworth M. D. of Magd. Coll. originally of St. Albans Hall, 9.
Aug. 1619. He died at Bathe about the 23. May 1636. and was buried in the
Church of St. Peter and Paul there, having before resigned this Lecture. (6)
John Bainbridge M. D. 25. May 1635. (7) Edw. Greaves M. D. of Allsouls Coll.
14. Nov. 1643. (8) Dan. Whistler M. D. of Merton Coll. 1. Aug. 1650. (9) Rich.
Lydall M. A. of Mert. Coll. and Student in Phys. 1. Aug. 1653. (10) Edm.
Dickinson Med. D. of Mert. Coll. succeeded Dr. Lydall, and after him has been
two or three, or more.

Philomelus, was born in London, and educated, if I mistake not, under Will.
Lilye, before he taught in Paul's School, by whose endeavors he became excellent
for the Latin Tongue and Poetry. Afterward being sent to this University, he
made proficiency in Logicals, Philosophicals, and the Civil Law. Which last
being the faculty he was noted for, was admitted Bachelaur thereof in January
1515. Hence, he retired to his Native place, where for his wit and innocent
mirth he was held in admiration by his contemporaries, especially for the
things he published, as De obitu Johannis Colet Carmen. In mortem Gulielmi
Lilii Elegiae. Claruit 1524.
With other matters of the like nature, which I have not yet seen. He was in
great esteem among Men, in the sixteenth Year of King Hen. 8. but when he died,
I know not.

de COLORIBUS, by Birth an Outlander, by Profession a Black Friar, was a Reader
of Divinity in this University several Years, in the Reign of K. Hen. 8. and
proceeded in Divinity 1517. Afterward he became a favorite of Cardinal
Wolsey, by whose power he was appointed one of the learned Doctors of the
University to write against Luther, and in 1525. he was by him promoted to be a
Member of his new erected Coll. at Oxon, but in what capacity I know not. He
has written,

Tract. contra doctrinam M. Lutheri, an. 1521; with other things which I have
not yet seen, Claruit 1525.
written when he was in great esteem among the Oxonians in Fifteen hundred
twenty and five, (17. of Hen. 8.) and after.

de MELTON was a Yorkshire Man born, as it seems, had part of his Education
among the Oxonians, and at length being famed for his great knowledge in
Philosophy, Divinity, and for his admirable way of Preaching, became Chancellor
of the Cathedral Church at York, on the resignation of William Langton D. D. in
the Month of January 1495, to which Office the Prebendary of Laghton in the
said Church being annexed, he was admitted thereunto by the Name of Will.
Multon 15. Jul. 1498. This Person whom some call Sixth. Senensis in Bib. Sancta.
col. 1586. lib. 4. p. 243. a. Anton. Senensis in Bib. Ord. praedicatorum. Par.
1585. p. 100.
Gul. Melitona, report withal, that he was Chancellor of Paris, and by Order a
Dominican, but how true it is (seeing that Baleus In cent. 9. number. 12. Scriptum
Maj. Britan.
mentions no such thing) I cannot yet discern. His writings are,

Postilla in XII. Prophetas. MS. in the Library of the Dominicans at Bononia in
Italy.

Comment. in Epist. ad Hebraeos. MS. in the said Library; the beginning of
which is Narrabo nomen tuum, etc. Sermons in Evangelia.

Com. in Pentateuchum, with other things mentioned by Ibid.
Baleus. He concluded his last day in the latter end of the Year Fifteen
hundred twenty and eight, York, or in the Church of Acklam (in which Town he
made his Will 20. Aug. 1528.) whereupon his Chancellorship was bestowed on Hen.
Trafford a Licentiat in Divinity, in Feb. the same Year.

JOHN SKELETON the eminent Poet of his time, was Skeltons of Cumberland; and
having been educated in this University, as Job. Baleus In lib. De Scriptoribus
Anglicis, M S. inter cod. M S S. Seldom, in bib. Bodl. p. 69. b.
attests, who styles him Oxonii Poeta laureatus, became highly renowned among
Men for his Poetry and Philology. Afterward taking holy Orders, he was made
Rector of Dysse in Norfolk, where, and in the Diocese, he was esteemed more fit
for the Stage, than the Pew or Pulpit. The Reader is now to know that one John
Skeleton was made Regist. Hadr. de Castello Episc. B. and Wellen. sub an. 1512.
Vicar of Dultyng in the Diocese of Bath and Wells an. 1512, upon the promotion
of Hugh Ynge to the Sea of Mead in Ireland; where having continued some Years
without a degree, (as some Chancellors, Archdeacons, nay Priors, Abbats, and
Deans, have so done in their respective times and places) did retire to Oxon,
study there with leave from his Diocesan, and in July 1518. (10. Hen. 8.) was
Reg. Congregat. Univ. Oxon. notat. cum litera H. sub an. 1518.
admitted to the extraordinary reading of any Book of the Decretals, that is to
the degree of Bach. of Decrees, which some call the Canon Law. The next Year I
Reg. Tho. Wolsey Episc. Bath and Wells. an. 1519.
find him to be made Rector of Westquamtoked in the said Diocese, by the Name
and Title of John Skeleton Bach. of Decrees, and in 1525. Rector Reg. Joh.
Clerk Ep. Bath and Wells an. 1525.
of Clotwortley there. But this Joh. Skeleton I cannot take to be the same with
him that was the Poet and Rector of Dysse; who having been guilty of certain
crimes, (as most Poets are) at least not agreeable to his coat, fell under the
heavy censure of Rich. Nykke Bishop of Norwich his Diocesan; especially for his
scoffs and ill language against the Monks and Dominicans in his Writings. In
which also, reflecting on the actions of Cardinal Wolsey, he was so closely
pursued by his Officers, that he was forced to take Sanctuary at Westminster,
where he was kindly entertained by John Islipp the Abbat, and continued there
to the time of his Death. Erasmus in an Epistle to King Hen. 8. does style this
Poet Britannicarum Literarum lumen and decus, and of the like opinion were many
of his time; yet the generality said, that his witty discourses were biting,
his laughter opprobrious and scornful, and his jokes commonly sharp and
reflecting. He has written, besides translations, 50 several things upon
various Subjects, as well in Prose as Verse, among which are these. Elynour of
Rummyng) the famous Ale-Wife of England -- This was several times Printed, and
one Impression, which was the last I think, was made at London 1624. in 2
Sheets and an half in 4to. In the Title Page is the Picture of an old
ill-favored Woman, holding in her hand a black Pot of Ale, and underneath her
these Verses are written, When Skeleton wore the Laurel Crown,
My Ale put all the Ale-Wives down.


This Book is the same, I conceive, which some Authors call The tunning of
Elynor Rumpkin. He has also written, being written in Verse and very carping,
was returned in its kind by the Grammarian,

Epitaphs on several Kings, Princes, and Nobles -- Two or more of which you may
see in a Book intit. Reges, Reginae, Nobiles and alii in Eccl. collegiata B.
Petri Westmonast. sepulti, usque ad an. 1600. published by Will. Camden --
Land. 1600. qu. See more in Will. Baldewyn among these Writers under the Year
1564. I have seen another Book of Skeleton bearing this title.

Here after follows a little Book called Colyn-Clout, compiled by Master
Skeleton Poet Laureate -- Printed in an old Engl. Char. at London in 8vo without
date, by Abraham Veale, much about the time, as I conceive, of the Authors
death. The beginning of it is, What can it avayle
To drive forth a snayle
Or to make a Sail, etc.


Poetical Fancies and Satyrs. Land. 1512. oct.

Verses on the creation of Arthur Pr. of Wales -- and other things which are
slightly and unsatisfactorily set down by Baleus and his follower Pitseus. At
length, our Poet dying in his Sanctuary, was buried in the Chancel of the
Church of St. Margaret within the City of Westminster, in Fifteen hundred
twenty and nine. Hen. 8.) Over his Grave was this Inscription soon after put.
Johannes Skeltonus Vates pierius hic situs est. Animam egit (ejicit) XXI Junii
an. Dom. MDXXIX. Near to his Body was afterward buried an old Court-Poet
called Tho. Churchyard, and not in the Church Porch, as certain old Rhimes tell
you, beginning thus.

Come Alecto, and lend me thy torch, To find a Churchyard in a Church Porch.

I find another Joh. Skeleton, who lived in the time of King Hen. 4 but he was a
D. of D. and a Dominican (as I In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Ox. lib. 1. p. 65. a.
b.
have elsewhere told you) and therefore I conceive it the reason why Baleus
styles In cent. 8. number. 66.
this Poet Dr. of Divinity, which no other Author beside himself does. Another
Job. Skeleton I find, who was confirmed Abbat of Whitby in Yorkshire (upon the
Death of Tho. Bolton) by the Archb. of York, 6. Nov. 1413.

Leonard Spenser of the City of Norwich, having from his Youth been much
addicted to learning and piety, especially the last, became afterward a
Carthusian in the Monastery of that Order at Henton in Somersetshire; whence
for a time he receeded to Oxon, (as several of his Order did) to improve
himself, or to pass a course, in Theology. After his return he obtained so much
leisure from his divine exercise, as to Baleus ut sup. cent. 9. number. 6. and
Theod. Petreius in Bib. Cartusiana, edit. col. 1609. p. 294.
write several matters relating to his faculty; among which were, Comment, in
Epist. D. Pauli ad Galatas.

Trialogue between Tho. Bilney, Hugh Latimer, and W. Repps -- Which Book was
written partly to show the great complaints of Bilney and Latimer two
Protestants, had against the said Repps a Roman Catholic, the same Person, I
presume, who became Bishop of Norwich, in 1536. As for our Author Spenser, he
gave up the ghost (after he had spent most of his time in the severities
belonging to his Order) Henton beforementioned, leaving behind him a most rare
example of Piety.

Whittington was born in the City of Lichfield, educated partly in Grammaticals
under John Stanbridge in the School joining to the common gate of Magd. Coll.
and afterward made a considerable progress in Logicals and Philosophicals, but
in what Coll. or Hall, it appears not. However his delight being much in the
teaching of Youth, he became so excellent in that way, that it was thought,
especially by those that favored him, that he surpassed W. Lilye. In the
beginning of the Year 1513. (5. Hen. 8.) he Reg. cong^eg. Univ. Ox. notat. cum
lit G. fol. 173. b.
supplicated the venerable Congregation of Regents, under the name and title of
Rob. Whytingdon a secular Chaplain, and a Scholar of the Art of Rhetoric, that
whereas he had spent 14 Years in the study of the said Art, and 12 Years in the
informing of Boys, it might be sufficient for him that he might be laureated.
This supplicat being granted, he was (after he had composed 100 Verses, which
were stuck up in public places, especially on the door or doors of St. Mary's
Church) very solemnly crowned, or his temples adornd, with a wreath of Laurel,
that is doctorated in the Arts of Grammar and Rhetoric 4 July the same Year.
At the same time also he was admitted to the reading of any of the Logical
Books of Aristotle, that is to the degree of Bach. of Arts, which was then
esteemed equal with the degree of Doctor of Grammar, or Rhetoric. From that
time he always wrote himself in several of his works Protovates Angliae, which
was much stomach'd by Will. Horman and W. Lilye, and scorned by others of his
profession, who knew him to be conceited, and to set an high value upon
himself, more than he should have done. He was then notwithstanding esteemed by
many for his great skill he had in the Greek and Latin tongues, for his lepid
and jocular discourse also, but much blamed by Scholars for the biting and
sharp reflections used in it, and in his Books against several noted Persons of
his Age. His writings were many, of which some were against W. Lilye, Rob.
Aldridge, and Will. Horman, who esteemed him a Man of great vanities, a
Catalogue of some of which follow.

De difficultate justitiae servandae, in reipublicae administratione, MS. in
4to. written in verse to and in praise of, Cardinal Tho. Wolsey. The beginning
of which is, Quae res in terris, etc. Before it is an Epigram, and an Epistle
in Prose, written on, and to, the said Cardinal by our Author Whitynton.

De quatuor virtutibus Cardineis. MS. written to the said Cardinal in prose:
The beginning is, Cum tuas multifarias virtutes, etc. These two bound together,
are in Bodlies Library.

Vulgaria, and de institutione Grammaticulorum opusculum, libello suo de
concinnitate Grammatices accommodatum, and in quatuor parts digestum. Printed
at Land. by Wynand de Word, 1524 in Lat. and Engl. having been printed several
times before. It Is the same, if I mistake not, with his Grammar printed at
Land. 1500. qu.

Secunda pars Grammatices, de syllaba and ejus quantitate. Land. 1516 qu. With
which is bound up this following.

Whittintoni editio cum interpretamento Francisci Nigri Diomedes de accentu in
pedestri oratione potius quam soluta observando. Printed there the same Year.

De nominum appellativorum, Deorum, Dearum, Heroum, Heroinarum, locorumque
synonimis. Land. (1514) qu.

De Epithetis Deorum, Dearum, Heroum, Heroin. clar. virorum, and Animalium.

De variandi formulis tam pedestri, quam soluto sermon.

Experientiae de virtutis immortalitate.

De veterum Romanorum Magistratibus. These four last were printed with his De
nominum appellativorum, etc.

De octo partibus orationis. Land. 1513. 23. etc. qu.

De nominum generibus. Land. 1521. 24 etc. qu.

De preteritis and supinis. Land. 1524. qu.

De nominum declinatione. Land. 1522. qu.

De Heteroclitis. Land. 1524. qu.

Syntaxis. Land. 1524. qu.

Epistola ad Gul. Hormannum. Land. 1521. qu.

Responsiva contra Gul. Hormanni invectivas literas. Land. 1521. qu. in long
and short verses; with other things, which may be seen in Baleus, Clar. 1530.
who tells us, that he was in great renown for his learning in Fifteen hundred
and thirty, (22. Hen. 8.) but when he died, or where he was buried, I cannot
yet find. See more of him in W. Lilye, and Will. Horman.

ROBERT SHIRWODE received his first breath in Coventry, whence being translated
to the University of Oxon, made a considerable progress in Logicals, but more
by far in the Hebrew and Greek Languages. Thence, in his mature Years, he went
to Lovaine in Brabant, where about the Year 1519. he Valor. Andreas in Fastis
Acad. Lovain. Edit. 1650. p. 284.
succeeded Rob. Wakfeld an English Man in the reading the Hebrew Lecture to the
Academians of that place. But he reading there only for a Month, went to other
Universities, and had a Book of his composition published bearing this title.

Liber Hebraeorum Concionatoris, seu Ecclesiasticen, nuper ad veritatem
Hebraicam recognitus, cum nonnullis annotationibus Chaldaicis, and quorundam
Rabbinorum sententiis, textus obscuros aliquos litteraliter explanantibus.
Antw. 1523. qu. Dedicated to one Joh. Webe (whom he calls Monachorum decus)
Prior of the Monastery of the Benedictins at Coventry. In the title of which
Book he is not styled Doctor, and therefore I presume he had that degree
conferred on him after that, time but in what University, I cannot yet tell.
Job. In cent. 11. number. 90.
Baleus and his follower In Aet. 16. nu. 934.
Pitseus do style him Doctor Oxoniensis, but the truth is, in all my
researches, I cannot find that he took that degree there, unless under another
name. He the said Dr. Shirewood has also various Sermons extant, as those
Authors report, Clar. 1530.
who also tell us that he was in high esteem among learned Men in Fifteen
hundred and thirty, but when he died, or where he was buried, I am altogether
as yet ignorant.

Cornish Man born, was conversant for a time among the Oxonian Muses, either in
Exeter Coll. or in Heart Hall, but whether he took a degree, it appears not.
However by the help of an happy Genie, accompanied with industry, prudence, and
dexterity, he obtained a Name among Men, and was held in great esteem by
several of the Nobility for his proficiency in various sorts of Learning. At
length being received into the Family of the great Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, was
by him entrusted with many matters of consequence. All which he performing with
singular fidelity, was made one of his Cabinet Council, and by him promoted to
places of trust. At leisure times he improved his natural Genie by the reading
of Histories, as well Ancient as Modern; which at length being made easy to
him by the help of a good memory composed Ib. in Io. Bal. cent. 9. number. 19.
several little Books, as,

Chronicorum Epitome, in one Book.

De bello Trojano, Clar. 1530.
lib. 1. and, as it is probable, other things in the time of Hen. 8, and before
and after the said Cardinal's fall. The time when he surrendered up his last
breath is yet unknown, as also the place of his Sepul^ure.

Kent, and after he had been instructed in Academical Learning, he retired to
Greys Inn in Holbourn to obtain knowledge in the municipal Law. About which
time one Mr. Roo or Roe, having composed a Play, wherein one part deeply
reflected on Cardinal Wolsey, he undertook, when diverse refused, to act it: For
which being soon after forced to leave the Nation, he found out Will. Tyndale
in Germany, with whom for a time he sorted himself. In 1527, or thereabouts, he
made a little Book entit.

The supplication of Beggars -- The beginning of which is, Most lamentably
complains their woeful misery, etc. It contains a great deal of bitter stuff
against Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Monks, Friars, etc. and indeed against the
generality of the Clergy. In 1528, a Copy of it was sent to the Lady Anne
Bulleyne; which, after perusal, she gave it to the King, who did not dislike
it, and soon after were diverse Copies scattered in London streets, which was
complained of by the Cardinal to the said King. Afterward the Cardinal being
out of favor, the Author Fish was sent for home, and graciously countenanced by
the King for what he had done. About which time he translated from Dutch into
English, The sum of the Scriptures, which was also published and well
approved. At length being overtaken by the Pest, Dunstan (in the West.)
Afterward James Baynham, Son of Sir Alex. Baynham of Glocestershire Knight,
Married his Widow; which James being a zealous Protestant, suffered death soon
after in the Flames, as you may see in the Acts and Mon. of the Church, written
by Jo. Fox.

living, for his great Piety and Learning, did, after he had been instructed in
Sophistry, enter into the most holy Order of the Carthusians, abiding in the
House commonly called the Charter House near to London. In his elder Years he
became the Head or Prior of that House, and about that time, or rather before,
was conversant in the Theological faculty with us, but whether he took a degree
therein, (tho supplicate he did to oppose in Divinity) it appears not. This
Person being intimate with Dr. Edw. Lee, afterward Archbish. of York, did, at
his entreaty, write,

Animadversiones in annotat. Erasmi in Nov. Testam. Which animadversions he
retracted in another piece.

Tract. contra a Doctrinam M. Lutheri. This also he retracted in another Book.

Comment. in Contica Canticorum. Proverbia Salomonis.

Institutions for Novices.

Of the contempt of the World.

De Christo duodeni, a Homily. -- Other things he has written which Jo. Ib.
cent. 9. nu. 14.
Baleus and Theod. In Bib. Cartus. ut sup. p. 157.
Petreius do mention; the last of which says that he died 16. Nov. in Fifteen
hundred thirty and one, Charter House. John Houghton Prior of Beauvale in
Nottinghamshire, sometimes a Carthusian of the said House, was elected Prior in
his place, and about 4 Years after suffered death by hanging for denying the
Kings Supremacy.

RICHARD KEDERMYSTER, a Worcestershire Man Benedictines at Winchcombe in
Glocestershire, and at 19 sent to Gloucester Coll. in the N. W. suburb of Oxon.
to obtain Theological and other Learning, (in which College was an appartment
belonging to the said Monastery, called Winchcombe Lodgings) where spending
three Years and an half, was sent for home, at which time being about 22 Years
of Age; he was by the favor of his Patron and fautor of his Studies John
Twynnyng Lord Abbat, and by the Decree of the Chapter, of the said Monastery of
Winchcombe, made Scholar or Pastor thereof. In the 3. of Hen. 7. Dom. 1487. he
was elected Lord Abbat on the Death of the said Twynnyng, and how he made it
flourish like to a little University, you may see elsewhere In Hist, and Antiq.
Universe. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 248. a.
In the Year 1500, being then D. D. he traveled to Rome, where tarrying more
than a Year, did improve himself much in learning and experience. Afterward he
became a frequent Preacher, and a great Man in the Court of King Hen. 8. In the
seventh Year of that King, Dom. 1515. he Preached a Sermon at Paul's cross,
while the Parliament sat, in maintenance of the exemption of the Clergy from
temporal Judges: At which time were great agitations between the Clergy and
Seculars concerning diverse ecclesiastical liberties: whereupon Rob. Keilwey in
Relationibus quorundam casuum select. etc. fol. 181.
arising a great dispute between those Parties, one Dr. Hen. Standish Guardian
of the Convent of the Franciscans in London, did, in an Assembly of Bishops,
Judges, and others, maintain the contrary. Soon after there was a grand
Committee of Bishops and Judges in the House of the Blackfriars in London
assembled, to discuss that matter; which being ended, Articles were exhibited
against the said Standish for being a promoter of all evils. Many other things
may be said of our Author Kedermyster, as they were noted by himself in his
Life, written in the History or Catalogue of the Abbats of Winchcombe; (which
History I shall anon mention) but that Book being burnt, and when I saw it, I
did not in the least dream that I should write these Athenae Oxonienses, they
are therefore here omitted. The Books that he wrote are these.

Tractatus contra doctrinam M. Lutheri. Finished in the Year 1521. See in Hist.
and Ant. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 247, and lib. 2. p. 35. a. wherein is mention
made of his Book De veniis, which, I presume, is the same with that against
Luther. I have also seen a register sometime belonging to Winchcombe Abbey,
which was totally composed by our Author, an. 1523, containing first,

Historia fundationis Manasterii de Winchcomb, in com. Glouc. The beginning of
the Preface to which is, Quoniam antiqua testimonia de prima nostri
Winchelcombensis caenobii institutione, etc. Which Preface, with part of the
History, you may see in the first Vol. of Monasticon Anglicanum. p. 188. And
secondly,

Catalogus, vel Historia Abbatum Monast. de Winchcomb in com. Glouc. This Cat.
or History commences from one German, who was appointed Abbat of Winchcombe by
S. Oswald Bishop of Worcester, in the 7 Year of K. Edgar, an. Dom. 988. and
reaches down to the Author Rich. Kedermyster. In the said Register also (which
contains these matters) lib. 1. fol. XI. is set down at large the story of the
Life of St. Patrick, and of the antiquity of Glastenbury Abbey, which you may
see in Monast. Anglic. vol. 1. p. 11. Also Renovatio privilegiorum, chartarum,
ac aliorum munimentorum Monasterii de Winchcomb, etc. This Register of
Winchcombe, (in which these things are) containing at least, 5 Books, or Parts,
came after the dissolution of the Abbey there, into obscure hands. At length it
being produced by an ordinary Farmer at an Assize held at Gloucester, for the
proof of some matter then in question, at which Sir Will. Morton Lord of the
site of Winchcombe Abbey was present; he, by some device got it out of the
Farmers hands, as belonging more properly to him, and kept it sometimes in his
House at Kidlingtom in Oxfordshire, and sometimes in his Lodgings at Sergeants
Inn in Fleetstreet London. But so it was, that the said Sir William, (who was
one of the Justices of the Kings Bench) being in his Norfolk Circuit at what
time the dreadful conflagration of London happened (which was Sept. 2. 3. etc.
1666.) the said Book, with other of his goods, and the Inn it self was totally
consumed to ashes. Whether there be any other Copy left, I am not certain: sure
it is, that Dr. Sam. Fell of Chapter Chapter in Oxon. had a Copy of it (written either
in Vellum or Parchment) about 1630, as by some notes taken thence (as then
remaining in his custody) which I have seen, does manifestly appear; but from
whence he had it, or to whom it did afterward return (for I think he borrowed
it) I know not. Sir Will. Moreton also showed to me in his House at Kidlington
several extracts made from that Copy which was sometimes in his hands, written
by one of his Clerks, but, in many material things, false. Which extracts, I
presume, are in the hands of his Son Sir James Moreton. As for our learned and
curious Author Rich. Kedermyster, he gave way to fate, to the great reluctance
of all that knew the virtue and piety of the Man, Winchcombe Abbey: On which
Church, he had before done great cost, and enclosed Joh. Leland in his
Itineraries in com. Gloc. MS. in Archiv. Bib. Bod.
the Abbey it self toward the Town with a main stone Wall, ex quadrato saxo.

Pace or Pacey, so many ways I find him written, was one of the lights of
learning in his time, and therefore commended Vide Epist. Erasmi lib. 11. ep.
3. etc.
by Erasmus, (who among several things that he says of him is, that he was
utriusque literaturae callentissimus) and all other Heroes of learning in that
Age. When he was a Boy he became a manu Minister (as he himself In lib. De
fructu qui ex doctrina percipitur, p. 27.
says) to Tho. Langton Bishop of Winchester, and was trained up at School,
with others, at his charge: Which Bishop also perceiving him to profit in
Music above his Years (for those under his patronage did learn, if capable,
that faculty also) did often express to his Attendants about him, that seeing
he did overcome Music easily, his Genie therefore was born to greater Studies.
In short time after, he sent him to Padoua in Italy (which was then most
flourishing in literature) to obtain, or rather advance himself in, good
letters, and allowed him an yearly Pension to defray his Charges. While he was
conversant with the Muses there, he was much instructed in his Studies by
Cuthb. Tonstall, and Will. Latymer, whom he calls his Praeceptores; and whether
he took a Degree there, I find not. After his return into England, he retired
to Oxon (where, as I conceive, he had studied for some time before he
traveled) and settled for a time, as it is supposed, in Queens Coll. (of which
his Patron T. Langton had been Provost) and soon after was received into the
service of Dr. (afterward Cardinal) Christopher Bambridge, who succeeded his
said Patron in that Provostship, as I have elsewhere In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv.
Oxon. lib. 2. p. 116. a.
told you. From the service of the said Cardinal, he was received into the
Royal Court, where his parts being soon discovered, and his accomplishments
made known to the King, was by him made Secretary of State, and employed in
matters of high concern. In the beginning of 1514, he was admitted Prebendary
of Bugthorpe in the Church of York, in the place of Thom. Wolsey, consecrated
Bishop of Linc. and on the 20. of May the same Year, he was made Archdeacon of
Dorset, upon the resignation of Dr. Rob. Langton sometimes of Queens Coll. in
this University. Afterward he was sent in one or more Embassies by the King,
which he performed with very great honor to himself and the English Nation. In
1519, he became Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral within the City of London, on the
Death of Dr. Joh. Colet, and about that time Dean of Exeter; but whether he was
ever Dean of Salisbury it appears not. It Is true that Edward Lord Herbert of
Cherbury does say in the Life and Reign of King Hen. 8. Printed at Land. 1649.
p. 405.
under the Year 1536. that Pet. Vannes then Archdeacon of Worcester, was not
long before that time made co-adjutor to Rich. Pace Dean of Salisbury, being
then thought commonly distracted and out of his Wits. But how that can be, I
cannot find, for (1) it does evidently appear from the Registers of that
Church, that one Raymund Pade had that Deanery conferred upon him 19. Jan.
1522. (2) That in the said Registers no mention at all is made of R. Pace as
Dean, and thirdly, that Pet. Vannes beforementioned became Dean of the said
Church by virtue of the King's Letters, on 3. Feb. 1539. in the place, as it is
supposed, of the said Pade, at which time R. Pace had been dead 7 Years. In
1521, he being made Prebendary of Comb and Harnham in the said Church of
Sarum, he showed himself Lib. Epist. Univ. Oxon. FF. ep. 85. and in reg.
Congreg. H. fol. 74. b.
serviceable to the University of Oxon; the Members of which, would then have
had him to adorn their Lycaeum with a degree, if certain customs belonging
thereunto did not hinder him. Afterward our Author Paice, who was then
esteemed by all ripe in wit, learning, and eloquence, and very expert in
Foreign Languages, was sent in the Kings Affairs Ambassador to Venice: which
function there he so discharged, that it is hard to say, whether he procured
more commendation or admiration among the Venetians, both for dexterity of his
wit, and especially for the singular promptness in the Italian tongue, wherein
he seemed nothing inferior, neither to Pet. Vannes here in England, the Kings
Secretary for the Italian tongue, nor yet to any other, which were the best for
that tongue in all Venice. For opinion and fame of learning he was so generally
accepted, not only here in England with Lynacre, Grocin, Sir Tho. More and
others, but also known and reported abroad in such manner, that in the great
Volume of Erasmus his Epistles, he wrote almost to none so many, as he wrote to
this our Author Paice. It must be now noted, that while he continued at Venice
he grew much out of favor with Cardinal Wolsey, first for showing his
readiness to assist Charles Duke of Burbon with Money, while the said Cardinal
(who had little or no affection for that Duke) did under hand keep back a vast
sum of Money, which K. Hen. 8. had sent to the said Duke to carry on his War
near Pavia, against Francis 1. K. of France, and secondly for his negligence in
advancing the said Cardinals designs to succeed in the Papacy P. Adrian the 6.
who died 1523. I say for these two reasons especially, he was so much inflamed
against Paice, that he forthwith took such causes, that for the space almost of
two Years, he had neither writing from the King or Council how he should
proceed in his Affairs at Venice, nor any allowance for his diet,
notwithstanding he had sent Letters for the same to England very often. Upon
this, and especially upon some private intimation from his Friends at home, he
took such an inward thought and conceit that his wits began to fail him. It is
See in Jo. Fox this Book of Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. in Hen. 8.
reported that the Venetian Ambassador residing in London repaired to the
Cardinal, and desired to know of him, whether he would command any thing to the
English Ambassador at Venice: Whereupon he made answer Paceus decepit Regem.
Which words coming to Paice's knowledge, so deeply pierced his stomach, that he
in a manner fell quite besides himself. Soon after his frenzy, and the reason
thereof, being made known to the King, he was forthwith sent for home, and by
the Kings command he was so carefully attended by his Physicians, that in short
time he came to his wits again, and began to study the Hebrew Language with
Rob. Wakfeld. About that time the Cardinal being absent, Paice's Friends found
such means, that he was brought to the King then residing at Richmond, where
they had private discourse for two hours or more, not without great rejoicing
to His Majesty, to see him so well amended in his senses. Afterward the
Cardinal hearing what had passed, and suspecting that he had disclosed somewhat
to the King, which he would not have known, as also doubting the King would
take Paice into favor again, began in short time after to quarrel, and to pick
up matters to lay to Paice's charge; whereas he should have rather cleared
himself of those things, which Paice laid unto him before the King, and then to
have proceeded accordingly. But so it was, that when the King had willed the
Cardinal to purge himself of those things, which Paice had rightly charged him
withal, he sitting in judgment with the Duke of Norfolk, and other States of
the Realm, not as a Defendant, but as a Judge in his own cause, did so bear out
himself, and weighed down Paice, that he was forthwith commanded to the Tower
of London as Prisoner; where he continuing for the space of two Years or
thereabouts, was at length by the Kings command discharged. While he was in his
disconsolate condition, he was so deeply sensible of his case, that he was more
distracted in his wits than before, and so continued to his dying day, tho now
and then, which was rarely, he would discourse very rationally. Some time
before his Death, he resigned up his Deaneries, viz. that of St. Paul, and that
of Exeter, in the first of which succeeded, if I am not mistaken, Dr. Rich.
Sampson, who was afterward B. of Lichfield and Coventry, and in the other
Reginald Pole. The Books which this our eminent Author has written and
translated are many, some of which, not all, follow.

De fructu qui ex doctrina percipitur liber. Basil. 1517. qu. dedicated to Dr.
Jo. Colet Dean of Paul's. It was written by the Author at Constance, while he
remained Ambassador in Helvetia. But therein inveighing much (as it is observed
by Baleus and Pitseus, etc.
some) against drunkenness, as a great obstacle to the obtaining of knowledge,
the Drunkards of Constance were so sensible of it, that they made a sharp
answer to his Book, apologizing for themselves, and their customs in drinking.

Oration de pace nuperrime composita and faedore percusso, inter Henricum
Angliae regem, and Francorum reg. Christianiss. in aede Pauli Land. habita.
Land. 1518. qu.

Epistolae ad Edw. Leeum Ep. ad Erasmum Rot. Land. 1520. qu.

These Epistles are in a Book entit. Epistolae aliquot eruditorum virorum, etc.
mentioned in Edw. Lee under the Year 1544.

Praefatio in Ecclesiasticen recognitum ad Hebraicam veritatem, and collatum
cum translatione lxx Interpretum and manifesta explicatione causarum erroris
ubicunque incidit. where printed or when, it is not expressed. In the writing of
this piece, which is printed in quarto, he was assisted by Rob. Wakfeld.

Exemplum literarum ad Regem Hen. 8. an. 1526. See in the said Wakfelds Book
entit. Syntagma de Hebraeorum codicum incorruptione. He also wrote a Book
against the unlawfulness of the Kings Marriage with Catherine, the Wife of his
Brother Prince Arthur, in 1527. in which Book he was also assisted by Wakfeld.
Other things are mentioned by Baleus and Pitseus very tritely, and with little
satisfaction to the Reader, (as they do all or most of the titles of Books
belonging to the Writers, that they set down in their respective works) but
such I have not yet seen. He has also made several translations, among which
is that from English into Latin of the Sermon of John Fisher B. of Rochester,
which he Preached at London, on that day when the Writings of Martin Luther
were publicly burnt, on Joh. 15. 26. -- Printed, at Cambr. in Feb. 1521. qu.
Before which is a large Epistle to the Reader, written by one Nich. Wilson of
the University of Cambridge. He also made a translation from Greek into Latin
of Plutarch's work De commodo ex inimicis capiendo; dedicated to Card.
Bainbridge. At length this most excellent Person, who was admirably well versed
in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, in all kind of polite literature, and in civil
Affairs, retiring to Stepney near London for healths sake, concluded his last
day there, to the great reluctance of all learned Men, encomium In Principum ac
illustrium aliquot and eruditorum in Anglia virorum encomiis. -- Land. 1589. p.
25.
which Jo. Leland his Friend made on his return from Venice. I find one John
Pace, who, from Eaton School, was elected Scholar of Kings Coll. in Cambridge.
1539. or thereabouts, went away Fellow, became Jester to K. Hen. 8. for a time,
and afterward to the Duke of Norfolk, but what relation he had to Rich. Paice
our learned Author, who, if I mistake not, was born at, or near, Winchester, I
know not.

THOMAS LUPSET Son of Will. Lupset Citizen and London, by Alice his Wife, was
born in London, particularly in the Parish of St. Mildrid in Breadstreet,
(where the Father lived when Thomas was born, but lived in his last days, and
died in 1522, in the Parish of St. Vedastus in Cheep) taken into the care and
protection of Dr. Joh. Colet, and educated in Grammar learning under Will.
Lilye; which is the reason why the said Doctor calls him in his last Will, his
Scholar. But whether from W. Lilyes School he went to this University, or to
that of Cambridge, is doubtful. Dr. Jo. Cay the In Hist. Cantab. p. 59.
Antiquary does tell you that he was educated in Pembroke Hall there, (tho Bale
and Pits are silent in it) but what his Authority is for that report, he tells
us not. Howsoever it is, sure I am, and shall be, till I am convinced to the
contrary, that he took the Degree of Bac. of Arts at Paris, and soon after
coming into England, he fixed in the University of Oxon, particularly in Corp.
Chr. Coll. about the Year 1519, and soon after he succeeded Jo. Clement in the
Rhetoric Lecture of Card. Wolsey. To which Cardinal, the University having had
occasion to write, make this mention of our Author Lupset in an In reg. Epist.
Univ. Oxon. FF. Ep. 83.
Epistle dated 7. Id. May, 1521 -- Nam immortalis beneficii loco accepimus,
quod benignissima tua beneficentia in communem rei literariae usum dignata sit
Lupsetum ad nos remittere, quem etsi semper habuimus charissimum, nunc tamen
quia a tua majestate tam amanter commendatum, multo arctius amplectimur. Illud
autem supra quam credi potest nos omnes exhileraverit, quod prudentissima tua
authoritas ex omnium animis abstulerit scrupulos quibus anxie alligabimur
ordinariis lectionibus, quas jam prorsus extraordinarias utinam tua prudentia
vel penitus ab omni ordine abigeret, vel in meliorem redigeret, etc. Sir Tho.
More also in an Epist, to Erasmus, does make Vide Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Ox.
lib. 2. p. 36. a.
honorable mention of him, and his reading in both the Tongues at Oxon. But
Lupset's desire being bent to proceed in Arts, he supplicated Reg. Congreg. H.
fol. 63. b.
the venerable Regents met in Congregation 2. June 1521. that whereas he had
spent four Years in Study at Paris and in Oxon, it might be sufficient for him
that he might be admitted to proceed in the faculty of Arts. Which supplication
of his being granted, he was licensed to proceed on the 19. of the same Month,
and on the 9. July following, he did really stand in the Act then celebrated.
Afterward he became famous in this University, and other places of Literature,
(especially after he had performed the Office of Secretary to Rich. Paice, when
he was Ambassador to the Venetian) and by his conversation with eminent Men,
did make great progress in Sciences: He has written,

A Treatise of charity.

An exhortation to young Men, persuading them to walk honestly.

A Treatise teaching how to dye well -- These three little Books were printed
at London, 1546. and 1560. in 8vo. He has also translated into English, (1)
St. Chrysostomes Sermon (or Homely) teaching that no Man is hurt but by
himself. (2) Sermon of St. Cyprian of the mortality of Man. (3) Picus Earl of
Mirandula his rules of a godly life. (4) The gathered Councils of Isidore.
Which four translations were printed at Land. 1560. in 8vo. He has also
written.

Epistolae variae ad Edw. Leium, Nisenum and Paynellum. Written from C. C. C.
in Oxon, as by their dates it appears. Those to Edw. Lee (Archb. of York) were
written in behalf of Erasmus, (between whom and the said Lee were learned
bickerings) and are printed in a Book entit. Epistolae aliquot eruditorum
virorum, ex quibus perspicuum, quanta sit Edwardi Lei virulentia. Basil. 1520.
qu. Which virulence was against Erasmus.

In Ciceronis philippicas.

Sermones ad Clerum: Preached mostly at Calais. See the titles of other of his
labors in Pitseus. This Tho. Lupset submitted to the stroke of Death 27.
December. in Fifteen hundred thirty and two, Roscombe in the Church of Salisbury,
on the Death of John Fox Archdeacon of Winchester) and was buried in the Church
of St. Alphaghe or Elphaghe within Cripplegate in London. (which Church was
translated afterward, to the Church now called St. Alphaghe by Sion Coll.)
Over his Grave, tho there be no memory of him by Inscription, yet Joh. Leland
celebrates him in his Encomia, Trophaea, etc. Near to his Grave was the body of
Alice Lupset his Widow, buried in 1545.

Berners, Son of Humph. Bourchier, eldest Son of Sir Joh. Bourchier Knight,
Lord Berners of Hertfordshire, the fourth Son of William Earl of Ewe, by Anne
his Wife, Daughter of Tho. de Wodestock Duke of Gloucester, the sixth Son of K.
Edw. 3. was instructed in several sorts of learning in this University in the
latter end of K. Edw. 4; in whose Reign and before, were the Sons of diverse of
the English Nobility, educated in Academical literature in Balliol Coll.
wherein, as it is probable, this our Author was instructed also. After he had
left the University, he traveled into diverse Countries, and returned a Master
of several Languages and a complete Gentleman. But that which made him first
known to the World, was his valor showed in quelling the fury of the Rebels in
Cornwall and Devon, under the conduct of Michael Joseph a Blacksmith, about
1495, whereby he greatly gained the favor of K. Hen. 7. In the 6. Hen. 8. he
was made Baronage of England. Tom. 2. p. 133. a.
Chancellor of the Kings Exchecquer for life, and about that time attended the
Lady Mary, (the Kings Sister) into France, in order to her Marriage with K.
Lewis 12. Afterward being made Lieutenant of Calais, and the Marches
adjoining, in France, spent most of his time there, and wrote,

Of the duties of the Inhabitants of Calais.

Comedy called Ite in vineam meam. Usually acted in the great Church at Calais
after vespers. He also translated into English (1) The life of Sir Arthur an
Armorican Knight (2) The famous exploits of Hugh of Bordeaux. (3) The castle of
Love, a Romance: And besides something of Marc. Aur. Ant. must not be forgotten
that noted translation of his, which he performed at the command of K. Hen. 8.
viz. The Chronicles of France and England, composed originally in the French
Tongue by Sir Joh. Frossard Canon and Treasurer of Chinay, Clerk and Servant to
K. Edw. 3. as also to Queen Philippa. These Chronicles have been more than
once, if I mistake not, printed in English, in an English Letter, in fol. This
worthy Lord Sir Joh. Bourchier died Bal. De Script. maj. Britan. cent. 9. nu. 1.
at Calais beforementioned 16 March in Fifteen hundred thirty and two, 1532/33.
aged 63 or thereabouts. Whereupon his body was buried in the Parish Church of
our Lady there; where was, if not still, a comely Mon. over his Grave.

Rich. Fryth an Inholder of Sevenoake in Kent was born there, (some say See Jo.
Fox in his Append. at the end of the Acts and Mon. of the Chapter
at Westram in the said County) and educated in Kings Coll. in Cambridge till
he was Bachelaur of Arts. Afterward being incited to go to Oxon for
preferment, was for his towardly parts made one of the junior Canons of
Cardinal Wolsey's College, and soon after, viz. in Dec. 1525. he was with other
Cantabrigians incorporated in the same degree of Bachelaur. But before that
time falling into the acquaintance of Will. Tyndale a zealous Lutheran, they
conferred together privately about the abuses in Religion: So that in short
time after he being by him converted to his opinion, Fryth made a public
profession of it. Whereupon being seized and examined by the Commissary of the
University, he was imprisoned within the limits of the said College. At length
being freed thence, in 1528, or thereabouts, he went beyond the Seas, where
improving himself much in his religious opinions, returned into England about
two Years after, leaving his Wife behind. But then again finding few Friends
there that favored his opinions, he wandered to and fro; and in fine, was taken
for a Vagabond at Reading in Berks. set in the Stocks, and endured misery for
want of relief. At that time his condition being made known to Leonard Cox the
Schoolmaster of that Town, who presently understood the merits of the Person by
his discourse, procured his releasment, refreshed his hungry stomach, and gave
him money. Afterward he went to London, where endeavoring to gain Proselytes,
he was by the care of Sir Tho. More Lord Chancellor, seized and sent Prisoner
to the Tower, where he had several disputes with Sir Tho. and others. At length
being examined by the Bishops sitting in St. Paul's Cath. who persuaded him to
recant his opinions but in vain, they condemned him to be burnt. So that being
delivered to the L. Mayor and Sheriffs, was committed to Newgate, where he
remained in the Dungeon till he was conveyed thence to be burnt. His works are,

Treatise of Purgatory.

Answer to Joh. Rastal's Dialogues of Purgatory -- This Jo. Rastal was Son
in-Law to Sir Tho. More.

Answer to Sir Tho. More's Dialogue concerning Heresies.

Answer to Joh. Fisher B. of Rochester.

The Subsidy or Bulwark to his first Book against Jo. Rastal.

His judgment upon Will. Tracy of Todington in Glocestershire his Testament,
an. 1531.

Letter unto the faithful followers of Christ's Gospel -- Written from his
Prison in the Tower, 1532.

A Mirror, or Glass to know thy self -- Written in the Tower, 1532.

Mirror or Looking-glass, wherein you may behold the Sacrament of Baptism --
Written 1533.

An Antithesis between Christ and the Pope.

Of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, in answer to Sir Thom.
More's letter, which he wrote against the first little treatise of Fryth, made
concerning the Sacrament etc. an. 1533. Land. 1548. oct.

Articles, wherefore he dyed -- Written in Newgate Prison 23. June 1533. All
which treatises, were reprinted at London in fol. an. 1573. He also translated
into English Patricks places written by Patr. Hamilton. At length after he had
remained in the said Prison about a Fortnight or more, he was carried thence to
Smithfield on the 4. Jo. Fox his Book of Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc.
under the Year 1533, and in Rob. Persons his animadversions on Fox's words
concerning Fryth in The third part of a treatise entit. Of three conversions of
England. Chapt. 11. p. 45. 46, etc. as also in Joh. Gwynneth among these
Writers under the Year 1557.

JOHN ROPER born in Berks. in the Dioc. of Sarum, Magd. Coll. and afterward
being M. of A. was admitted perpetual Fellow of that House, in 1483. When he
was some Years standing in that degree, he was made Reader of Philosophy, and
when Bach. of Divinity, Reader of the Sentences, or Divinity, in the said
College. In 1502, he was confirmed Margaret Professor by the Found^ess of that
Lecture, was afterward Vicar of St. Mary's Church in Oxon, Principal of
Salesurry, and George Hall in that Parish, Doctor of Divinity, Canon of the
Coll. founded by K. Hen. 8. (now Chapter Ch.) in Oxon, to which he was admitted
1532, and Rector of Witney Church in Oxfordshire. This Person who was esteemed
one of the eminent Theologists of this University, was appointed by the King in
1521. to write,

Tract. contra Doctrinam Mart. Lutheri. Which, whether ever printed, I know
not. He was a zealous Enemy against the Kings divorce from Queen Catherine, in
the Year 1530, but did not dare to write openly, or publish any thing against
it, tho Preach he did. This learned Person died in the Month of May, Magd.
Coll. Chapel.

Cambridge, was there made M. of Arts, as it is said, tho I rather think Bach.
of the Laws. Afterward he was sent to the Pope at Rome, by Dr. Warham Archb.
of Canterbury, about certain matters relating to the Church, where remaining
about 9 Years, was in that time created Doctor of the Laws, either there, or in
an University in Italy. After his return he became Chaplain to Cardinal Wolsey,
who knew him, as I conceive, while he was in Oxon, was Judge of his Court as he
was Legate a latere, (but in that Office he was thought to be a perjured and
wicked Person) and assisted him in visiting first, and afterward in that great
matter of dissolving, 40 little Monasteries at least, for the erection of his
Coll at Oxon, and that at Ipswych. In the latter end of the Year 1525, he was
incorporated LL. Dr. of this University, on the 13. March 1528. he was
consecrated Archb. of Dublin, and about that time was made Chancellor of
Ireland. He has Written,

Epistola de Pallii significatione activa and passiva. Penned by him when he
received the Pall to be Archbishop.

De consuetudinibus ac statutis in tuitoriis causis observandis. Besides other
things concerning the Church. At length being taken in a time of rebellion by
Tho. Fitz-Gerard or Gerald, eldest Son to the Earl of Kildare, was by his
command most cruelly Jac. Waraeus in Comment. de praesulib. Hibern. Edit. 1665.
p. 118, 119.
murdered, by being brained like an Ox, at Tartaine in Ireland, 28. Jul. in
Fifteen hundred thirty and four,

Salisbury, educated in Grammar learning in Wykehams School near Winchester,
made true and perpetual Fellow of New Coll. in 1477. which place he resigning
in 1485, (being then M. of A.) he became Schoolmaster and Fellow of Eaton Coll.
near Windsor, and at length Vice provost of the same College. In which place
spending many Years in pleasant retirement, became one of the most general
Scholars of his time, as may appear by the diffusiveness of his Learning, and
Books written in all faculties. All the Academical Education that he received
was in the University of Oxon, where he also took the Degrees in Divinity: So
that whereas Joh. In cent. 8. Script. Maj. Britan. number. 70.
Baleus and Jo. In Aet. 16. ^c^ipt. Ang l. nu. 590.
Pitseus say that he was of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, is false, being led, I
presume, into that error, from one Godfrey Harman a Cantabrigian; who, from
being a Junior Canon of Cardinal Coll. in Oxon, was made Fellow of Eaton Coll.
beforementioned, where he died and was buried in 1533. As for our Author Will.
Horman he has written many things, of which I can only give you an account of
some, as they follow.

Antibossicon ad Gul. Lilium. Land. 1521. qu.

Apologeticon contra Rob. Whittintoni Protovatis Angliae incivilem indoctanque
criminationem. Land. 1521. qu. part. 2. Before the said Books is printed from a
Wooden Cut the Picture of a Bear baited by six Dogs, and at the end is some of
Whittington's poety taken in pieces by Horman, and by him severely answered.

Vulgaria puerorum, etc. They are elegant sentences written in English and
Latin, and dedicated to Will Atwater Bishop of Lincoln.

Compendium Hist. Gul. Malmsburiensis.

Epitome Historiae Joh. Pici com. Mirandulae.

Elegiae in mort. Gul. Lilii.

Anatomia membrorum hominis. In one Book.

Anatomia corporis humani. In two Books. The titles of the rest you may see in
Jo. In cent. 8. ut sup. number. 70.
Baleus; and therefore, I can say no more of our Author Horman, than this, that
he paid his last debt to nature on the 12. Apr. in Fifteen hundred thirty and
five, and was buried in the Chapel of Eaton Coll. beforementioned. Over his
Grave are certain Verses engraven on a brass plate, the two first of which run
thus.

Hac Hormannus humo requiescit amice viator,

Pene annos numerant lustra vicena suos.

The rest you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 135.

THOMAS MORE one of the greatest prodigies of Joh. More Knight, one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, was born in Milk-street within the City of London,
an. 1480. trained up in Grammar learning in St. Anthonies School there, and
afterward received into the Family of Card. Joh. Moreton Archb. of Canterbury,
merely for the towardliness of his Person, and the great hopes that the
pregnancy of his parts then promised. About the Year 1497. it is said by some
late Authors Tho. More Gr. Grandson to Sir Thomas, in The Life of Sir Tho.
More, printed about the Year 1627. cap. 1. p. 20. and J. H. in The Life (also)
of the said Sir Tho. printed at Land. in 8 vo. an. 1662. p. 4.
that that worthy Cardinal did send him to Canterbury College in Oxon, to
obtain Academical Learning, but upon what grounds they report so, it appears
not. Miles Windsore (whom I shall mention among these Writers under the Year
1624.) who came to the University of Oxon, in the time of Queen Mary, does In
Collectaneis quibusdam ad rem Historic. and Antiq. pertinent. MS. penes me A. W
Vide etiam B. Twynum in Apol. Antiq. Acad. Oxon. lib. 3. Sect. 311.
tell us more than once that he had his Chamber, and studied in the Hall of St.
Mary the Virgin, and constant tradition does say the like, and 'twas never
reported to the contrary, before those two Authors here cited ( Tho. More and
J. H.) published their respective Books. What continuance Sir Tho. made in
Oxon, or whether he took a Degree, it appears not, neither can we find means to
resolve us, because the University Registers of that Age are deficient.
However, this is certain, that at what time our Author studied in this
University, Grocynus read publicly the Greek Tongue there; whom, he constantly
hearing, became a great proficient in that Language, and other sorts of
Learning by the helps of Lynacre his Tutor; then, if I mistake not, Fellow of
Allsouls Coll. From Oxon he removed to an Inn of Chancery at London called New
Inn, where continuing for a time according to the manner and custom of those
that intended to make a proficiency in the municipal Laws, translated himself
to Lincolns Inn, where easily conquering those Studies, was at length called to
the Bar. Afterward growing into great favor with K. Hen. 8. who highly valued
him for his Learning, Wisdom, Experience, and extraordinary gifts of nature
that he was endowed with, conferred these honors and employments successively
upon him, viz. the Mastership of the Request, the intrusting him in several
Embrassies, the honor of Knighthood, the Treasureship of the Exchecquer,
Chancellorship of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Embassage to the Emperor and
French King, and at length upon the removal of Cardinal Wolsey, had the great
Seal delivered to him 25. Oct. 21. Hen. 8. and then also declared High
Chancellor of England; in which last office no Person ever before did carry
himself more uprightly, or with greater liking to the generality of People,
than he. On the 16. May 24. Hen. 8. he delivered up the great Seal to the King
at his Manor House called York-place near Westminster, in the presence of
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, upon the foresight of some evil matters that were like
to come to pass, and on the 20. of the same Month the said Seal was delivered
by the King, in his Manor of Pleasaunce, otherwise called East-Greenwych to
Sir Thomas Audley Knight. After this, Sir Thomas retired to his House The same
House where Sir Joh. Danvers lately lived, where two Pyramids are at the gate.
at Chelsey near London, where continuing for a time in the enjoyment of his
Muse, not without severe devotion, was at length, for not acknowledging the
King's Supermacy over the Church of England, committed Prisoner to the Tower of
London; where remaining several Months very close, to the endangering of his
health, his Daughter Margaret, Wife of William Roper of Tenham and Eltham in
Kent, wrote a Letter to Thomas Cromwell chief Secretary of State, (the contents
of which I have In the Paper Office at Whitehall.
seen) entreating him to be good to her Father in Prison, kept so close that
his health is utterly decayed. Another also I have seen from Dame Alice More
his Wife to the aforesaid Cromwell, beseeching him to be good to her poor old
Husband, whose close keeping, destroys his body. Also the be good to her and
hers, considering their necessity -- For my good Master (says she) as I would
be saved before our Lord, I am driven to that point, that I am fain to make
sale of certain employments and old stuff to find Mr. More, and me, and my poor
household with, etc. with other like matters written by that whining Woman,
which I shall now for brevity omit, and only at present tell the Reader that no
Man was more patient, pious, and severe in the course of his life than he. He
was also very meek, humble, charitable, and a despiser of the things of this
World, and nothing was wanting in him to make a complete Christian. His parts
were great and profound, his skill in Divinity, municipal Laws, the Latin and
Greek Languages, in Poesy, Mathematics and what not, was excellent and
without compare. All which endowments made him not only beloved of Kings and
Nobles, but of the lights of Learning of his time, as Erasmus, Colet, Tonstal
B. of Durham, Fisher B. of Rochester, Grocyn, Lynacre, Liyle, Paice, Elyot,
Lupset, Leland, etc. most of which, especially Foreign Writers, have celebrated
his Memory in their respective Works, and all ingenious Scholars at this time
bear a great respect to his Name and Lucubrations. He has written in English.

A merry jest how a Sergeant would learn to play a Friar. -- Written in Verse.

Verses on a hanging of a painted Cloth in his Fathers House. -- Containing 9
Pagiants, and Verses in each.

Lamentation on the Death of Elizabeth Wife of King Hen. 7. An. 1503.

Verses on the Book of Fortune.

These four beforegoing, being written in his Youth, are not numbered among his
Works.

History of K. Rich. 3. -- This, which was never quite finished, is the same, I
presume, that is entitled The tragical History of K. Rich. 3. printed under
Sir Thom. More's Name at London 1651. in 8vo. His Great Grandson Tho. More in
The Life of Sir Tho. More; at the later end.
says, that he did not only write elegantly the Life of Rich. 3. in English,
(which is abroad in print tho corrupted and vitiated) but in Latin also, not
yet printed.

Memorare novissima.

Dialogue concerning Heresies and matters of Religion.

Supplication of Souls, made against the supplication of Beggars. -- This is
sometimes called The supplication of Purgatory, written against that of
Beggars, made by Sim. Fish of Greys Inn Gent.

The confutation of Tyndale's Answer of Sir Th. More's Dialogues.

The second part of the confutation -- Written 1533.

Answer to Joh. Fryth's Book made against the Blessed Sacrament -- Written the
same Year.

An Apology -- This was written against a Book intit. A Treatise of the
division between the spirituality and temporality. Against which Apology, was
published a Book called Salem and Bizance, written Dialogue-wise. Land. 1533.
oct.

The debellacyon of Salem and Bizance. Land. 1533. oct

Answer to the first part of the poisoned Book, which a nameless Heretic has
named, The Supper of our Lord.

Treatise upon the passion of Christ.

A Godly instruction. Godly meditation. Devout Prayer. Letter to his Lady his
Wife.


Certain Letters written by him, after he had given over the Office of Lord
Chancellor.

Certain Letters written by him while he was Prisoner in the Tower. -- All
which treatises were collected and printed in one Vol. at London, an. 1557.
fol. Among them are,

A godly instruction -- written in Lat.

His Epitaph -- In Lat. See the Copy of it in Joh. Weevers Book entitled,
Ancient funeral Monuments. p. 522, 523, and in the beginning of Maur. Channy or
Chawney his Historia aliquot nostri saeculi martyrum. printed 1550. in qu. He
has also translated into English (1) The life of Joh. Picus Earl of Mirandula.
(2) An exposition of a part. of the possion of Christ.

His Latin Works, besides those two little things beforementioned are these.

De optimo repub. statu, deque nova insula Utopia, libellus aureus, etc. Basil.
1518. there again 1563, both in qu. and at Oxon 1663. in oct. Translated into
English, with notes added to it in the Margin, by Ralph Robinson of C. C. C. --
Land. 1557. oct. Published also at the same place 1639. in oct. by one Bernard
Alsop, who dedicates it to Cressacre More of More-place in Northmimes in
Hertfordshire Esquire. one of the posterity, and next in blood to our Author Sir
Tho. More. The said Utopia also was published in Italian, at Venice 1548.

Epigrammata. Bas. 1518. 1563. oct. Land. 1638, etc.

Progimnasmata. Bas. 1563.

Responsio ad convitia Martint Lutheri. written in the Year 1523. This I take
to be the same with Vindicatio Henrici 8. Regis Angliae and Galliae, a
calumniis Lutheri. Land. 1523. qu. published under the name of Gul. Rosseus.

Quod pro fide mors fugienda non est. Written in the Tower of London, 1534.

Precationes ex Psalmis. Collected there the same Year.

Imploratio divini auxilii contra tentationem, cum insultatione contra Demones,
ex spe and fiducia in Deum. Lugd. 1572. He also translated from Greek into Lat.
Dialogi Luciani, with other matters of that Author -- Bas. 1563. All which
(except Precationes ex psalmis, beforementioned) together with his History of
K. Rich. 3. and his Expositio passionis Domini, were printed at Lovaine, 1566.

Epistolae. Bas. Land. 1642.

Epistola ad Acad. Oxon, an. 1519. Ox. 1633. qu. See in Tho. James under the
Year 1638.

History of the pitiful life, and unfortunate death of Edward 5. and the then
Duke of York his Brother. Land. 1651. oct. This last being in English, and
published the last of all his Works; I do therefore put it here. At length this
our worthy Author being brought to his trial in Westminster Hall, was there for
Treason (for denying the King's Supremacy) condemned to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered. But that Sentence being mitigated by the K. he only lost his Head on
Tower Hill 6. July, in Fifteen hundred thirty and five. Tower called St. Peter
ad Vincula, by the care of his Daughter Margaret, to which place, as it is said,
she afterward removed the Body of John Fisher B. of Rochester, who being
beheaded for the same matter on 22. June going before, was buried in the
Churchyard of Allhallows Barkin. But More's Body continuing not long in that
Chapel, was by the said Margaret removed to Chelsey Church near London, and
there deposited on the South side of the Choire or Chancel. Over it is a large
Epitaph made by himself, after he had given up his Chancellorship, which is
printed in several Books and by several Authors. As for his head, it was set
upon a pole on London Bridge, where abiding about 14 days, was then privily
bought by the said Margaret, and by her for a time carefully preserved in a
leaden Box, but afterward with great devotion, 'twas put into a Vault (the
burying place of the Ropers) under a Chapel joining to St. Dunstans Church in
Canterbury,] where it does yet remain, standing in the said Box on the Coffin
of Margaret his Daughter buried there. Much more, as it is probable, I could say
of his Death and Burial, could I see a Book intit. Expositio fidelis de morte
Thomae Mori. Printed in 8 vo. in the Year 1536. but the Book is very scarce,
and I could never see no more of it than the bare title. One More of
Hertfordshire (descended from him) had one of his Chaps, and was by his among
other rarities carefully preserved till the Rebellion broke out in 1642. Jasper
and Ellis Heywood, Jesuits, Sons of Joh. Heywood the noted Poet in the time of
Hen. 8 had one of the teeth of the said Sir Tho. More, but they being loath to
part with their right to each other, the tooth Ib. in Si^ Tho. Mores life
before mentioned.
fell asunder and divided of it self. The said Sir Thomas had issue by his
first Wife Jane, the Daughter of John Cowlt of Cowlts Hall in Essex three
Daughters, and one Son named John, who being little better than an Idiot, (as
it is said) took to Wife in his Fathers life time Anne, Daughter and sole Heir
of Edward Cressacre of Baronburgh in Yorkshire, by whom he had issue (1)
Thomas, (right Heir of his Father and Grandfather) who had 13 Children, of
which Five were Sons. The four eldest lived in voluntary contempt, and loathed
the World, before the World fawned on them. The first was Thomas, born anew,
and baptized on that day of the Year (6. July) on which Sir Thomas suffered
death. This Thomas having the Estate come to him, married, So he says in the
said life.
and had several Children, but being a most zealous Catholic, and constantly
affected to the French Nation and Crown, did at his own cost and charge, with
unwearied industry, assemble all the English Persons of note that were then in
and about Rome to supplicate his Holiness for a dispatch of a contract between
the K. of England and Henrietta Maria of France an. 1624-25. which being done,
the said Thomas, who was the Mouth or Speaker for the said English Persons,
died XI. April (according to the account followed at Rome) an. 1625. aged 59.
and was buried in the middle almost of the Church of St. Lewis in Rome, leaving
then behind him the life of his Gr. Grandfather Sir Tho. More's, incomparably
well written, published (at London I think) in 4to, about 1627 and dedicated to
Henrietta Maria beforementioned. Over the said Tho. Mores Grave, was soon after
laid a monumental Stone at the charge of the English Clergy at Rome, and an
Epitaph engraven thereon, a Copy of which was sent to me by I know not whom,
(as several things of that nature are, from other places) running thus. D. O.
M. S. Thomae Moro dioc. Ebor. Anglo, magni illius Thomae Mori Angliae
Cancellarii and Martyris pronepoti atque haeredi, viro probitate and pietate
insigni; qui, raro admodum, apud Britannos exemplo, in fratrem natu minorem,
amplum transcripsit patrimonium, and presbyter Romae factus, inde fuisse sedis
Apostolicae in patriam profectus, plusculos annos, strenuam fidei propagandae
navavit operam: postea cleri Anglicani negotia septem annos Romae, and 5 in
Hispania P. P. Paulo 5to, and Gregorio 15 summa cum integritate and industria
suisque sumptibus procuravit. Tandem de subrogando Anglis Episcopo ad Urbanum 8
missus negotio feliciter confecto laborum mercedem recepturus, ex hac vita
migravit, XI. Apr. An. 1625. aet. suae 59. Clerus Anglicanus moestus P. -- The
second Son of the said Joh. More (Son of Sir Thomas) was Augustine, who dyed
unmarried. The third was Thomas the second, or Thomas junior, born at Chelsey
8. Aug. 23. Hen. 8. who, when he came to man's Estate, Tho. More in the life of
Sir Tho. More, p. 361
degenerated from the Catholic Religion, and lived and died a professed
Minister, leaving Issue several Children, of whom the eldest Cressacre More
(who was born at Baronburgh in Yorkshire 3. July 1572.) lived afterward Ib. p.
361.
in no commendable fashion. The fourth was Edward, Ib. p. 360, 361.
born after Sir Thomas his death, and having not his blessing as Thomas (the
first) and Augustine in bad, degenerated from the Catholic Religion. The fifth
was Bartholomew, who died young of the Plague in London. The Pictures of most
of these Mores, mentioned here by me, viz. of Sir Joh. More the Father, and his
Lady, Sir Thomas the Son, and his Lady, John the Grandson, Margaret, Elizabeth,
and Cicely, the Grand Daughters, etc. were most admirably well depicted by the
curious hand of Hans Holbin, well known to, and acquainted with, Sir Thomas
More. Which piece, being an original, remains to this day (1689) in the House
^f the Lenthals at Besills-Lee near to Abendon in Berks. Round which is an
Inscription, showing the names and matches of those that are there depicted,
but now scarce legible. To conclude, if any curious Person is desirous to know
more of this noted Author Sir Tho. More, who has been, and yet is, wonderfully
celebrated throughout the learned World, let him consult (1) His life MS. in
archiv. bib. Bod.
written by Will. Roper beforementioned. (2) Dr. Tho. Stapleton his Book Edit.
Duac. 1588. and Col, Agrip. 1599.
entit. De tribus Thomis, mostly as to this Sir Tho. More, taken from that
written by Roper. (3) His life written by Thom. More beforementioned, much of
which is taken from the former two. (4) His life Printed at Land. 1662. oct.
written by J. H. (Haddesdon I think) collected from Stapleton and More,
especially the last, which was, and is scarce to be had. (5) A Book written by
Maur. Channey or Chawney, sometimes a Carthusian near London, intit. Historia
aliquot nostri saeculi, etc. which Book, and its Author, I shall mention
elsewhere. (6) His life intit. The mirror of virtue in worldly greatness. Paris
1616. in oct. (7) A MS. of his life (whether a Copy of that MS. written by
Roper I know not) in the Library of the Free School at Colchester. The Reader
is now to know that Will. Roper beforementioned who married Margaret More, was
born in Kent, and educated for a time in one of the Universities. Afterward he
succeeded his Father John Roper in the Office of Prothonotary of the Kings
Bench; which, after he had kept and faithfully performed 54 Years, he resigned
it to his Son Thom. Roper. The said William was very bountiful both at home and
abroad, merciful, meek, and a Staff to such that were poor, oppressed, and
imprisoned. At length after he had lived a Widower 33 Years, and 82 in this
vain World, he submitted to fate 4. Januar. 1577. Whereupon his body was buried
next to that of Margaret his Wife, in a Vault under a Chapel joining to the
Chancel belonging to the Church of St. Dunstan in Canterbury. The life of Sir
Tho. More beforementioned, written by this Will. Roper, I have several times
perused, the beginning of which is, Forasmuch as Sir Tho. More Knight, etc.

HENRY STANDISH descended from a right Ancient Lancashire, became, when young,
a Franciscan or Greyfrier, but in what convent, I know not as yet, studied for
some time in the convent of his Order at Oxon, and partly at Cambridge,
proceeded D. of D. of this University, as a certain Register Reg. fratrum
Minorum, Land. MS, in bib. Cotton. sub Effig. Vitellii. F. 12. fol. 68.
belonging to his Order tells us, made Guardian of the Franciscan convent in
London, Provincial of his Order, and in 1519. being nominated Bishop of St.
Asaph, received consecration thereunto in the conventual Church of the
Franciscans at Oxon beforementioned, on the eleventh of July the same Year. In
1526, he, with Sir John Baker were sent Ambassadors to Denmark, and in 1530, he
was one of the Bishops that assisted and directed Qu. Catherine in the suit
concerning her divorce from K. Hen. 8. He was esteemed a learned Man of his
time, and a most zealous favourer and assertor of the Catholic Religion; for
which, had he lived longer, he would have suffered much. He has written,

Several Sermons preached to the People.

Treatise against Erasmus his translation of the New Testament. -- With other
things, as it is probable. He gave up the Ghost at London, in the beginning of
August in Fifteen hundred thirty and five: Franciscans, commonly called
Greyfriers in the said City, now known by the name of Christ-Church. Over his
Grave was soon after a Tomb erected with the 13 l. 6. s. 8 d. which he
bequeathed for that purpose. He gave Reg. Hogen in offic. praerog. Cantuar. Qu.
26.
40 l. to pave the Choir of the Cath of St. Asaph, and for other necessaries;
five marks to the Franciscans of Oxon to be prayed for; ten marks also for the
reparation of their Church, and for the building of an Isle joining to the said
Church forty pounds. For exhibition of Scholars in Oxon forty pounds, besides
legacies to Ralph Standish Lord of Standish in Lancashire his near Kinsman, to
Agnes Worthington his Sister, and Will. Standish his natural Brother. See more
of this H. Standish in Rich. Kedermyster, under the Year 1531.

JOHN KYNTON was by rule or order a Minorite Greyfrier, and being a Man of
parts, and noted for his proficiency in Divinity, the Society of Magd. Coll.
made choice of him to be their Reader of that faculty within their House. Which
Office he performing with great honor for several Years, the Doctors and Bach.
of Div. of the University, elected him Margaret Professor in the place of Joh.
Roper, being then D. of D. and a Person of great note in the University. He
wrote at the command of the King, an. 1521.

Tract. contra doctrinam Mart. Lutheri. Whether this, or any thing else that he
did write, were ever printed, I know not. 1535-36.
He died in Fifteen hundred thirty and five, and was, as I conceive, buried in
the Chapel of Durham, now Trinity, College in Oxon. for on a little
Gravestone there, yet remaining, is written this. Obiit Johannes Kynton Frater
minor, sacrae Theologiae professor, 20. Januar. 1535.

Hitchins, was born on the borders of. Wales, brought up from a Child in
Grammar, Logic, and Philosophy in this University, particularly for the most
part in St. Mary Magdalens Hall; where, having sucked in the Doctrine of
Luther, read it privately to certain Students, and to some of the Junior Fellows
of Magd. Coll. adjoining. Whether he took a Degree, either by the name of
Tyndale or Hitchins, it does not appear in our Registers, and whether he was
one of the Junior Canons of Cardinal Wolseys Coll. as some think, there is no
ground or footstep left to persuade us to it. From Oxon he went to Cambridge,
where being well ripened in Gods word, he was entertained by one Sir Joh. Welsh
a Knight of Glocestershire, and by him made Tutor to his Children. While he
continued there, he showed himself so much a friend to Luther, and foe to the
Pope, before several Abbats, Doctors, and other Men of the Clergy living in the
neighborhood, that he was forced merely for the security of his Person to
leave that place. So that journying to London, he endeavored to get into the
Family of Cuthb. Tonstall Bishop thereof; but being frustrated of his design,
he was desirous for the good of his Country to translate the New Testament into
English, but finding no place to do it in England, he left his native Country
and went into Germany, where setting on the work, he finished it in the Year
1527, which was the first translation of it made into English. Afterward going
on with the Old Test. He finished the five Books of Moses with sundry prologues
before every one of them, besides other treatises written there. Which being
sent into England, did, as esteemed by the then Clergy thereof, prove very
mischievous to the whole Nation: Insomuch, that the King was forced to put out
a Proclamation, prohibiting the buying and reading the said translation or
translations. Afterward the King and Council, finding that he would do much
harm if not removed out of the way, they sent to the Emperors Attorney at
Bruxels to have him seized: Whereupon our Author who was then at Antwerp, being
snap'd by two Catchpoles, appointed by one Hen. Philipps an English Man, sent
thither on purpose to find him out, was, after examination, sent to Prison in
the Castle of Filford 18 Miles distant from Antwerp, where continuing for some
time, did at length suffer death, (notwithstanding great intercessions were
made for him by the English Merchants abiding in that Country) as I shall tell
you anon. He has written,

Protestation touching the Resurrection of the Bodies, and the State of Souls
after this life.

Preface to the five Books of Moses called Genesis -- Written in the Year 1530.
Jan. 17.

Prologue showing the use of the Scripture.

Prologues to the five Books of Moses.

Certain hard words expounded in the first, second, and fourth, Book of Moses.

Prologue upon the Prophet Jonas, the four Evangelists, upon the Epistles of
St. Paul, the Epistles of St. Peter, and the 3 Epistles of St. John.

The Parable of the wicked Mammon -- Published 1527. May 8.

The obedience of a Christian Man, and how Christian Rulers ought to govern --
Published 1528. Oct. 2. and 1561. in oct.

An Exposition on the 5. 6. and 7 Chapters of St. Matthews Gospel.

Answer to Sir Tho. Mores Dialogues. -- An. 1530.

The practice of papistical Prelates. -- An. 1530. It Is about the divorce of K.
H. 8.

A path way into the Holy Scriptures.

Exposition of the first Epistle of St. John -- Published in Sept. 1531. in oct.

Exposition on Mr. Will. Tracies Will. Noremberg. 1546. oct.

Fruitful treatise upon Signs and Sacraments.

Two Letters to Joh. Fryth Prisoner in the Tower.

All which were printed in one Vol. in fol. 1573. He is also supposed to be
Author of,

The Supper of the Lord, after the true meaning of the 6th of John, and the
eleventh of the 1. of Cor. And incidently in the exposition of the Supper is
confuted, the Letter of Sir Tho. More against Jo. Fryth -- Written Apr. 5. an.
1533. This Person Will. Tyndale was first strangled by the hands of the common
Hangman, and then burnt near to Filford Castle beforementioned, in Fifteen
hundred thirty and six. Joh. Fox his Book of Acts and Monuments of the Church,
etc. and in Rob. Persons his answer thereunto in The third part of a Treatise
intit. of three conversions of England, etc. Printed 1604 chap. 14 p. 170. 171.

DESIDERIUS ERASMUS ROTERODAMUS, a Germany, Italy, England, and other Regions
of Europe, was born at Roterdam in Holland 28. of Oct. 1467. This Person tho
educated in all kind of Learning beyond the Seas, yet he must have a place in
these Athenae, because he had studied in this University, particularly in St.
Mary's Coll. a place for Canon Regulars of the Order of St. Austin (whose great
Gate is almost opposite to that of New Inn) in the Years 1497. 98, and part, if
not all of 1499. and as some think in the Year 1518 or 19. when Card. Wolsey
founded his Lectures in this University, at which time Erasmus read Ut in notis
quibusdam Br. Twyni, MS.
certain Lectures in the public refectory of Corp. Chapter Coll. The reason of his
continuance and studying here, I have told In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib.
1. p. 237.
you elsewhere, and therefore all that I shall now say of him is, that his
works are printed in 9 Volumes, in which are his dissertation De taedio and
pavore Christi, and certain Epistles, which he wrote in the said Coll. of St.
Mary, and that dying at Basil in Germany, July in Fifteen hundred thirty and
six, was buried in the Cathedral Church there: Soon after was a conspicuous
Monument, with an Inscription, put over his Grave, the contents of which, I
shall now for brevity sake omit. His life is twice, or more, written in Latin,
tho not so well as it should be, and once or more in English, which is the
reason that I have spoken but briefly of him in this place.

JOHN RASTALL was a Londoner born, and educated Tho. More, whose Sister
Elizabeth he took to Wife, and by daily conference with that most learned
Knight, he improved his knowledge in various sorts of Learning, besides what
knowledge he before had gotten in the Mathematics. He was a zealous Man for
the Catholic cause, and a great hater of the proceedings of King Hen. 8. as to
his divorce, and for his ejecting the Popes power from the Nation. His Writings
are,

Natura naturata. It Is a large and ingenious Comedy containing a description of
three parts of the World, viz. Asia, Africa, and Europe, adorned with Figures
and Cuts.

Canones Astrologici.

Dialogues concerning Purgatory, in 3. Books.

Apology written against Joh. Fryth. -- Which two last, were in vindication of
Joh. Fisher B. of Rochester, and Sir Thom. More.

The rules of a good life.

Anglorum Regum Chronicon. with others; but as for the Book of Law terms, said
by In cent. 8. nu. 74.
Bale to be written by this Author, is false; for they were written by his Son
William, as I shall tell you under the Year 1565. This Joh. Rastall died at
London, Will. Rastall before mentioned, and John Rastall a Justice of Peace,
who had Issue a Daughter named Elizabeth, the Wife of Rob. Lougher L L. D.
Chancellor of the Dioc. of Exeter.

Minorites or Gray friars, and among them in Oxon he did spend some time in
good Letters. At length in his last days, (being then esteemed a placid old
Man) when he saw the Pope and his Religion begin to decline in England, he
became a zealous Protestant, and wrote in the English Tongue,

The image of divine Love.

Against the blasphemies of the Papists. -- And translated into English,
Prognosticon of Otho of Brunfeild, which he dedicated to Thomas Cromwell. Other
things he wrote as my Baleus, in Script. maj. Brit. p. 101. post cent. 12.
Author says, who adds that he died at London in Fifteen hundred thirty and
six, Hen. 8.

Yorkshire Man born, spent some time among the Oxonian Muses, but whether he
took a Degree, it does not appear. Afterward he received the honor of
Knighthood from the King, and wrote,

A Treatise concerning impropriations of Benefices -- The Epistle before which,
dedicated to K. Hen. 8. is printed (or reprinted) at the latter end of Sir Hen.
Spelman's Larger work of Tithes, by the care of Jerem. Stephens, an. 1647. The
said Treatise seems to have been written after the breach which K. Hen. 8. made
with the Pope, his Marriage with Anna Bolein, and the Birth of Q. Elizabeth, as
it is conjectured by circumstances. The Author's purpose was chiefly bent
against the Monasteries, who had unjustly gotten very many Parsonages into
their possession, as it had been complained of long before his time, especially
be Dr. Tho. Vide Hist, and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 220. a. and 242.
Gascoigne a Yorkshire Man born. The said Bygod translated also certain Latin
Books into English, which I have not yet seen. At length being found very
active in the commotions in Yorkshire called The holy pilgrimage, an. 1536, (at
which time he with his party endeavored to surprise Hull) was thereupon
apprehended, imprisoned, and at length executed at Tyburn near to London, with
other Knights and Esquires, in the Month of June in Fifteen hundred thirty and
seven, Hen. 8.

At the end of his p^raph in Ecclesiast.
ex fidelibus natus fidelis, ex Christianis Christianus, and afterward being
fitted for the University, he was sent to Cambridge, where he took one or more
degrees in Arts. But his desire being solely bent to improve his natural Genie
in the Tongues, he went to travel, and in short time attained to a very
considerable knowledge in the Greek, Hebrew, Chaldaic, and Syriac Tongues.
About that time he read and taught the said Tongues at Tubing in Germany, at
Paris, and in 1519, I find In Fastis Lovan. per Val. Andream, Printed 1650. p.
283.
him to be Hebr. Professor at Lovaine in Brabant, in the place of one Matthew
Adrian: But continuing there only 4 Months, he returned into England, where
being made known to the King by his great friend and admirer Rich. Paice Dean
of St. Paul's, he was made one of his Chaplams, took the Degree of Bach. of
Divinity, was beloved of many, and patronized in his studies by Thom. Bulleyn
Earl of Wilts. When the unlawfulness of Matrimony between the King and
Catherine of Spain, Widow of his Brother Prince Arthur was called into
question, he began to defend the Queens cause, and therefore gained the love of
many, b^t being afterward courted by fair promises to change his mind, and the
rather because of his great skill in the Tongues and Divinity, and therefore
able to say more than another Man, he came over to the Kings Party, whereby he
gained the hatred of many. I have seen At the end of his Kotser Codicis.
a Letter written by him to the King, dated from Sion in Middlesex, 1527.
wherein he tells him, that he will defend his cause or question in all the
Universities in Christendom, etc. and afterward tells him, that, if the
People should know that he, who began to defend the Queens cause, not knowing
that she was carnally know of Pr. Arthur his Brother, should now write against
it, surely he should be stoned of them to death, or else have such a slander
and obloquy raised upon him, that he would rather dye a thousand times than
suffer it, etc. Afterward upon the entreaty of the University of Oxon made to
the King, Wakfeld was sent thither about 1530. and at his first coming he made
a public Speech in the Hall of the Coll. of K. Hen. 8. (since called Chapter
Church) before the University, and afterward read publicly the Hebrew Lecture
there, as his Brother Tho. Wakfeld did at Cambridge by the Kings Authority,
beginning to read there in 1540. In 1532, he was made by the King the twelfth
or junior Canon of his College at Oxon, founded on the site of that of the
Cardinal, and in the same Year, he was incorporated B. of Divinity. So that
continuing there some Years after, and-instructing many in the Tongues, I have
therefore put him among the Oxford Writers. In 1536, when he saw the King make
havoc of Religious Houses, he carefully preserved diverse Books of Greek and
Hebrew, especially those in the Library of Ramsey abbey, which were partly
composed by Laur. Holbeach a Monk of that place, in the Reign of Hen. 4. among
which was his Hebrew Dictionary. As for the works of Wakfeld they are mostly
these that follow.

Oration de laudibus and utilitate trium Linguarum, Arabicae, Chaldaicae, and
Hebraicae, atque idiomatibus hebraicis quae in utroque testamento inveniuntur.
Printed by Winand Word in qu.

Paraphrasis in librum Koheleth (quem vulgo Ecclesiasten vocant) succincta,
clara atque fidelis. Printed in a black char. in qu.

Kotser codicis, quo praeter ecclesiae sacrosanctae decretum, probatur
conjugium cum fratria carnaliter cognita, illicitum omnino, inhibitum,
interdictumque esse tum naturae jure, tum jure divino, legeque evangelica atque
consuetudine catholica ecclesiae orthodoxae. Printed at Land. (1528) in qu.
This is the same with his Book entit. by Bale and Pits, De non ducenda Fratria.

Syntagma de hebraeorum codicum incorruptione. Printed in qu. In which Book are
several things against Joh. Fisher B. of Rochester concerning Matrimony, and
the unlawfulness of the Kings Marrying with his Brothers Wife.

Oration Oxonii habita in Coll. Regio. Printed with the former in qu.

De Laudibus Agriculturae.

Epistolae ad D. Th. Bulleyn comitem Wilts. Joh. Fisherum Ep. Roff. Rich.
Paceum, etc. Besides other things mentioned In Bale cent. 9. nu. 73. and in
Pits, aet. 16. nu. 957.
elsewhere, which I have not yet seen. He died at London on the eighth day of
October. Thomas his Brother his Heir, but where he was buried I cannot yet tell.
Jo. Leland in one In 4. tom. collect. p. 328.
of his Books gives him the name of Polypus, noting thereby, he way of
contumely, that he was a crafty man for craftily conveying away the Hebrew
Dictionary beforementioned. Rich. Paice Dean of Paul's, in a Letter At the end
of Wakfeld's Kotfer codicis, etc. See also in Rich. Paice his Pref. in
ecclesiasten recognitum, etc.
to K. H. 8. dat. at Sion 1527. says that Rob. Wakfeld is a Person of
excellent learning as well in Divinity, as in wonderful knowledge of many and
diverse Languages. The University of Oxon in an Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Vniv.
Oxon. lib. 2. p. 38. b.
Epistle to the said King, does also say, that besides his various
accomplishments, he gives place to none for his admirable knowledge in the
Hebrew, Syriac and Arabic Tongues.

JOHN CLAYMOND, who used to write himself Eucharistiae servus, because he
frequently received the blessed Sacrament, and in the latter part of his life
took it every day, was the Son of Joh. Claymond and Alice his Wife, sufficient
Inhabitants of Frampton in Lincolnshire, in which Town this our Author Joh.
Claymond received his first breath. From thence, when he was a Boy, he was sent
to Oxon, where, after he had completed his Grammar learning in the School near
to Magd. Coll. great Gate, (being then within, and not without, the said Gate,)
he was made Demie first, and in 1488, perpetual Fellow of that College. About
that time entering into holy Orders, and becoming famous for his great learning,
piety, and gravity, was constituted President of the said College, about 1504,
took the Degree of Bach. of Divinity three Years after, and within three more
after that time, supplicated the venerable Congregation of Regents, that he
might be licensed to proceed in that faculty, but whether he was admitted it
appears not. About that time several Dignities, and Ecclesiastical Benefices
Vide ibid. lib. 2. p. 214. b.
were bestowed on him, among which were the Rectory of West-mongton in
Somersetshire, (which he obtained by the resignation of the Honorable Rich.
Gray, from Richard the Abbat, and the Convent of Glastenbury in the Month of
July 1506.) the Prebendship of Whitchurch in the Cathedral Church of Wells, (to
which belongs the Church of Beningar in Somersetshire) and the vicaridge of the
Collegiate Church of Norton in the Dioc. of Durham, which he resigned in 1518,
reserving to himself any yearly pension from it of 20 Marks, to be paid by the
Abbat and Convent of Selby (of the Order of St. Bennet) in Yorkshire. At length
upon the desire of Rich. Fox. Bishop of Winchester, he left his Presidentship
of Magd. Coll. and was by him made President of that of C. C. when founded by
him, an. 1516. Which place being of less value than the former, the said Bishop
did in recompense, give him the rich Rectory of Clyve (called by some Bishops
Clyve) in Glocestershire, which he kept to his dying day. He was a Person of
great gravity, of most exact example in his life and conversation, very
charitable and devout, and had nothing wanting in him to complete a Theologist.
And as he was esteemed a learned Divine by some, so a better Philosopher by
others, as it appears by his Book intit.

Notae and observationes in Plinii naturalem historiam. In 4. Volumes in MS. in
C. C. Coll. Library. Of which Book and its Author hear what Mich. Neander In
Succincta explicatione Orbis terrae. Lips. 1597. p. 410.
says -- de quo nobis retulit aliquando Operinus noster, quod in totum Plinii
opus eruditos commentarios scripserit, and ad se excudendos jam pridem miserit,
cur autem non fuerint excusi ab Operino, puto sumptus ad tantum optis
imprimendum defuisse, etc. Dr. Jo. Cay the Antiquary of Cambridge does In lib.
suo, cui tit. est, De libris suis propriis -- Land. 1570. p. 13. a.
speak something to the same purpose, who styles them Scholia eruditiss. viri
Johan. Claymondi in omnes Caii Plinii Naturalis Historiae libros, etc. but adds
that the Scholia on the two first Books were lost after his death. He
(Claymond) also wrote, In MS. and not, as I conceive, printed.
Comment. in Aulii Gellii Noctes Atticas. Com. in Plautum. Epistolae ad Simon.
Grinaeum.


A Treatise of repentance -- This is in MS. written with his own hand, in 4
sheets in fol. which I have in my Library of MSS. The beginning of it is, It is
the property and condition of every wise Man, etc. At length arriving to a good
old Age, paid his last debt to nature, 19. Nov. Venite exultemus. Over his
Grave was soon after a Marble stone laid, with an Inscription thereon, provided
and made by himself, with void spaces left for the day and year when he died,
to be filled up by his Executor, or Overseer of his Will, but were never
performed. The Copy of the Inscription, you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Univ.
Oxon. lib. 2. p. 244. b. his Character and Encomium in Jo. In Encomiis,
Trephaeis, etc. illustr. virorum, etc. Land. 1589. p. 43, etc.
Leland, and his benefactions to Magdalen, Corp. Christi, and Brasenose,
Colleges in the aforesaid Hist. and Antiq.

Hampshire Man born, was admitted Probationer Fellow of Corpus Chapter Coll. 1.
June 1522. and Bach. of Arts in Jul. 1524. But instead of having that degree
completed by Determination in the Lent following in the public Schools, he
had the Degree of M. of A. conferred upon him, being then taken into the
patronage of the magnificent and generous Cardinal Tho. Wolsey, who held him in
high value for his extraordinary sufficiencies in the Lat. Greek and Hebrew
Tongues. In all which, especially in Poetry, and Humanity, he was so well
versed, that he exceeded most, if not all Persons of his time. Whether the said
Cardinal did afterward promote him to a Canonry or Readers place in his new
Coll. at Oxon, I know not. Sure I am that after his fall, our Author
supplicated to be admitted to the reading of the sentences, and about the same
time wrote,

Comment. in Ciceronem pro M. Marcello.

Scholia in Sophoclem.

Com. in Epistolas Ovidii.

Epitaphium D. Erasmi Roterodami. Written in Gr. and Lat. with other things,
besides his translation from Greek into Lat. St. Chrysostom's Tract. De
providentia and fato, etc. This our Author Helyar, Clar. 1537.
who had acquaintance with the said Erasmus, was held in admiration by all the
Vertuosi, in the 29. Hen. 8.

JOHN FOREST or Forest, whose surname had, several Oxon, (but whether of his
Family I cannot yet tell) was from his Childhood educated in Piety and
Learning. Afterward when he attained to the 17th Year of his Age, he took upon
him the habit of St. Francis at Greenwich in Kent as it seems, and at about 26
Years of Age, was instructed in Theological Studies for a time, among the
Brethren of that Order living without Watergate in the South Suburb of Oxon.
What Degrees he took here, it appears not; yet sure I am that in order for the
taking of the Degree of Bach. Div. he supplicated the Ven. Regents that he
might be admitted to oppose in that faculty, but whether he was admitted, it
appears not, and so consequently that he was not Bachelaur, much less Doctor,
as some report, unless in another University beyond the Seas, for at Cambridge
he had not that Degree conferred upon him, if the Tables at the end of
Antiquitates Britannicae are right. Afterward he was taken into the Service of
Queen Catherine the Consort of King Hen. 8. whose love being great toward
virtue and learning, she made him her Confessor. About that time he was
constituted the one and fortieth Provincial Minister of his Order, as an
eminent Franc. a S. Clara in Supplimento Historiae Provinciae Angliae, Edit.
Duac. 1671. p. 8. a.
Brother thereof, does really suppose from certain Writings relating to the
quarrels between the Order and Card. Wolsey. Which Provincialship had before
been enjoyed by Steph. Baron Confessor to K. Hen. 8. and sometimes a frequent
Preacher in the University of Cambridge. Soon after, when that good Queen was
to be divorced from the said King, this our Author Forest showed himself a
zealous Enemy against it, and in few Years after, when the King was intent to
eject the Pope and his power from England, he, out of a passionate zeal which
he had for the Catholic Religion, did in secret confession declare to many of
the King's Subjects, that the King was not Supreme Head of the Church, whereas
before he had been sworn to the said Supremacy. These matters coming to the
knowledge of the King's Council, he was examined by certain Persons appointed by
them, to whom he made answer, that he took the Oath with his outward man, but
his inward man never consented thereunto. Afterward, being further accused of
diverse heretical Opinions, (as they were then called) he submitted himself to
the punishment of the Church: So that his abjuration being sent to him to be
read, he utterly refused it. Whereupon his confinement in the Prison called
Newgate, being made more close, these Verses were wrote on him by a Protestant.
Forest the Friar that obstinate Liar,
That wilfully will be dead,
Incontinently, the Gospel does deny,
The King to be Supreme Head.


About the same time he took a great deal of pains in writing a Book (whether
in English or Latin I know not) entit. by Latin Writers,

De autoritate Ecclesiae and Pontificis Maximi. The beginning of which is this,
Nemo sibi sumat honorem, nisi fuerit vocatus a Deo tanquam Aaron, etc. In which
Book he inveighed See more in a Book intit. Hist. Ecclesiastica de Martyrto Fr.
ord. Minorum, etc. per Tho. Bouchier edit. Ingols. in 120. an. 1583. part. 2.
fol. 26. 27.
much against the pride and impiety of the King, because that without any call
he did not scruple to entitle himself, The Head of the Church of England, and
to take upon him that, which he was not capable of, whereas if he had thought
himself a true Member of the Cath. Church, he should have given God thanks that
he was so, and to have rested therein without endeavoring to tear it to
pieces, etc. The contents of this Book (which was ready for the Press, but
whether ever printed in England I cannot tell) coming to the knowledge of
certain inquisitors, and at length to the Kings ear, he was forthwith condemned
to dye, and having some days allowed him to make his peace with God and all
Men, he wrote,

Several Letters. -- Some of which I have seen printed in Latin, as first, His
Answer to the Letter which Qu. Catherine sent to him. (2) An answer to the
Letter written to him by Elizab. Hammon Maid (of honor) to the said Queen. (3)
Answer to the Letter of Tho. Abell, who was executed two Years after for
denying the King's Supremacy, with several others, which he wrote to comfort the
afflicted Catholics. At length being drawn upon a Sledge from his Prison to
Smithfield, where a pair of Gallows was set up to receive him, he was hanged
thereon by the middle and armpits quick; and under the Gallows a Fire being
made, he was burnt, and utterly consumed to ashes, May in Fifteen hundred
thirty and eight, aged 60, and in the 43 Year of his professed and religious
estate. At the time he was to suffer, and before he went up the Ladder, Hugh
Latymer B. of Worcester did from a Pulpit set up there, near to the Gallows,
Preach a Sermon purposely to move him to repentance, but all availed nothing.
He had then several discourses with that Bishop, which were verbatim taken by
some of the Brethren of his order. In conclusion Latymer asked him what state
he would die in. Whereupon Forest with a loud voice answered Job. Stow in his
Annals of England, under the Year 1538.
if an Angel should come down from heaven to teach him any other Doctrine than
he had received, and believed from his Youth, be would not now believe him; and
that if his body should be cut joint after joint, or member after member,
burnt, hanged, or what pain soever might be done to his body, he would never
turn from his old profession, etc. and added, that seven years past, he
(Latymer) durst not have made such a Sermon for his life. This being said, he
was conducted from the place where he stood, which was erected above the
People, to the Gallows and there suffered.

Ralph Fitzherbert, Esquire.) and descended from, a right Ancient Family living at
Norbury in Derbyshire, laid a Foundation of Learning in this University, on
which he built a firm structure in after times, but in what House here, or in
what Inn of Court afterward, it appears not. Sure it is that having made a
most fruitful progress in his Studies, he was constituted Sergeant at Law 18.
Nov. 2. Hen. 8. Dom. 1510, one of the Kings Sergeants six Years after, (being
about that time made a Knight) and in 1522. one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, and not of the King's Bench, as one W, D^gd. in Chronica Ser. at
the end of Orig. Jurid.
does falsely report. In which place, carrying himself with great prudence,
justice, and knowledge, became at length the Oracle of the Law, and was admired
by all for his profundity in it. His works are,

Grand abridgment of the common Law contained in the Year Books, and other
Books of Law, Readings, and Records. Land. 1516. 1565. fol. afterward in qu.
divided into several parts or vol. From which abridgment and others, Rich
Bellew of Lincolns Inn, did collect cases adjudged in the time of K. Rich. 2.

A Calender or Index. -- See in Will. Rast all.

Magna charta, cum diversis aliis statut is. Land. 1519. in 12.

Office and authority of Justices of Peace. Land. 1547. and 63. qu. enlarged by
Rich. Crompton Esquire: -- Land. 1583. qu. etc.

Office of Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Escheators, Constables, Coroners, etc. --
Printed several times with the former.

Of the diversity of courts. -- Compiled 21. H. 8. So Sir Edw. Coke in his
Reports Vol. 10. in the Proem.

Natura Brevium Novel. Printed at Land. 26. Hen. 8. and afterward several
times in oct. and qu. corrected and revised, with a Table added, by Will.
Rastall. Printed also several times in French in oct. etc. The same is also
translated into English, and has added thereunto the authorities in Law, and
some other Cases and Notes, etc. See more in Will. Rastall, under the Year
1565. This Natura Brevium is esteemed an exact work, excellently well penned,
and has been much admired by the noted Men in the common Law.

Of the surveving of Lands. Land. 1567.

The Book of Husbandry very profitable and necessary for all Persons -- Printed
in the Reign of Queen Mary, and in the beginning of Queen Eliz. This Book I
have seen more than once, under Anth. Fitzherberts name, yet there are not
wanting some who say 'twas penned by his Brother Job. Fitzherbert. This famous
Lawyer Ant. Fitzherbert, who had been an enemy to Card. Wolsey, paid his last
debt to nature in the Summer time (before August) in Fifteen hundred thirty and
eight, Hen. 8.) whereupon his body was buried in the Church of Norbury
beforementioned. Soon after was a blew Marble-stone laid over his Grave, with
an Inscription thereon, which is now remaining. His name and posterity are yet,
as I conceive, living at Norbury, Tissington and Somersal in Derbyshire, and
elsewhere.

JOHN HILSEY or Hildesley (was of the same Family Beneham in Berks. and they
originally of the Hildesleys of Hildesley in the same County) who being much
addicted from his Childhood to Learning and Religion, nothing was wanting in
his sufficient Parents to advance them. Whereupon falling under the tuition of
a Dominican, or Preaching, or Black, Friar, was entered in his manly Years among
the Brethren of that Order at Bristow, and thence for a time was removed to the
House of the Dominicans in the S. Suburb of Oxon, purposely to initiate him in
the supreme faculty, and in some smattering of Philosophical Learning. In the
Month of May 1527, he supplicated to be admitted to the reading of the
sentences, but whether he was admitted it does not appear (through neglect) in
the public Register, and in Nov. 1532. he by the name and title of Pater
Johannes Hylsey de ordine praedicatorum and Bac. SS. Theol. supplicated to
proceed in Divinity: Which being granted, he was admitted, but did not stand in
the Act following to complete that Degree. So that how it comes to pass, that a
certain Franc. Godwin ep. Landav. in Comment. de praesulibus Angl. in Roff.
Author of note should say, that he was Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, I
cannot perceive, seeing that his name does not occur in the Catalogue of the
Doctors of all faculties, who proceeded at Cambridge from 1500 to 1571. Printed
at the end of the first Edition of Antiquitates Britannicae Ecclesiae. This
Doctor Hilsey being elected Bishop of Rochester after the decollation of John
Fisher, had restitution Pat 27. Hen. 8. p. 1.
made to him of the temporalities of that See, 4. Oct. 27. Hen. 8. Dom. 1535,
where being settled he wrote,

A Manual of Prayers ( or Primer) with the Epistles and Gospels. -- Which Book
being dedicated to Thomas Lord Cromwell, was at his command published at Land.
1539. in 8. He also wrote,

De very corporis esu in Sacramento. Ded. also to the said Cromwell. Of which
Book and its Author, see in a piece of Lat. Poetry intit. Diacosio-Martyrion
Printed at Land 1553 fol. 90. b.
, written by Job. White Warden of the College near Winchester, afterward
successively B. of Linc. and Winchester. As for our Author Dr. Hilsey, I know
not yet to the contrary, but that he has written other things, having always
been accounted a Learned Man, but what the titles of them are, I cannot tell;
nor do I know any thing else of him, only that he dying toward the latter end
of the Year Fifteen hundred thirty and eight, was, Rochester. In the said See
succeeded Nicholas Heath, as I shall tell you elsewhere among the Bishops.

JOHN MAJOR was born at Haddington, within the Lothaine in Scotland, and
trained up from his Youth in the Study of good Letters. For some time he heard
Philosophy taught in the Universities of England, and in Cambridge by his own
In Hist. Maj. Britan. lib. 1. cap. 5.
confession he studied for three Months space in Christ's College, but upon
what account he continued there no longer, he tell us not. In a certain note In
Archiv. tur. Schol.
under the handwriting of our Antiquary Brian Twyne, it does appear that he
was conversant among the Oxonian Muses for a time, but in what House; unless in
the Abbey of Osney, whose melodious ring of Bells he does familiarly Ibid. in
Hist. Maj. Brit. lib. 3. cap. 1. campanis caenobii de Osneya nullae in Anglia
meliores putantur.
commend, I cannot tell. After he had satisfied himself with the curiosities of
both the Universities, he retired to that of Paris, settled in the College of
Montacute, passed his course there, became Doctor of the Arts, and of the holy
Writ, a most Scholastical Doctor of the Sorbon, and in Scholastical Divinity,
Philosophy and Sophistry, equal with any of his time. His works are,

Liber fallaciarum, part. 2. Par. 1516. fol. The matter of this Book, which by
certain Authors is called Sophisticalia Parisiensia, and by others his Opera
Logicalia, was read and discussed in public in the Coll. of Montacute
beforementioned.

In quartum sententiarum quaestiones utilissimae, Par. 1516. and 19. fol.
dedicated to Gawin Douglas Bishop of Dunkeld and Rob. Cockbourne B. of Ross.

Comment. in Mathaeum. When printed I know not.

De auctoritate concilii supra Pontificem Maximum. Par. 1518. Excerpted from
his comments on Matthew, and was reprinted in the first part of Job. Gersons
works at Paris 1606. fol.

In primum sententiarum. Par. 1519. fol. Dedicated to George Hepbourne Abbat of
Arbroth, and of the Privy Council to the King of Scots.

Historia Majoris Britanniae, tam Angliae quam Scotiae, lib. 6. Par. 1521. qu.
Written in a Sorbonick and barbarotis style, yet very truly and with great
liberty of spirit, not sparing the Usurpation of Rome, and taxing in diverse
places Dr. Joh. Sporswood in his Hist. of the Church of Scotland, lib. 2. sub.
an. 1539.
the laziness and superfuity of the Clergy.

In quatuor Evangelia expositiones luculentae, and disquisitiones and
disputationes contra a Hereticos plurimae. Par. 1529. fol. He has also written
Placita Theologica, and Sermones per an. which I have not seen, and has
translated Will. Caxton's Chronicle, but whether into the Scotch or English
Language I know not. At length after, or about, the Year 1530. he retired into
his own Country, and professed Theology in the Coll. of S. Salvator at S.
Andrews, whereof he was made Provost, Clar. 1539.
and died there being of good Age, but when, I cannot yet find. George Buchanan
was his Scholar and bestows In Rerum Scoticarum Hist. lib. 7.
on him this Charater, in studio Theologiae, magnum nomen me puero habuit, yet
in his Epigrams Lib. 1.
he speaks slightly of him and his works. Besides this Job. Major I find two of
both his names, one was Author of In Psalmos Davidis Regis and Prophetae,
paraphrasis heroicis versibus expressa. Witeberg. 1574. oct. and another who
was a Licentiat in Grammar of this University, an. 1452, but whether he has
written any thing in his faculty I know not.

HENRY PARKER Son of Sir Will. Parker Knight, Halingbery morley in the Diocese
of London) by Alice his Wife Daugh. of Will. Lovell Esquire by Alienour his Wife
Daugh. and Heir of Rob. Lord Morley, was with several other Nobles of his time,
educated in most kinds of Literature in this University. Afterward retireing
to his Estate in Northamptonshire, became so much in favor with K. Hen. 8.
that he had Baronage of England, Tom. 3. p. 307. a.
summons to Parliament in the 21. Year of that King's Reign, by the title of
Lord Morley, and in the 22. of the said Reign, Dom. 1530. being one of the
Peers at that time sitting in Parliament, subscribed that Declaration then sent
to P. Clement 7. whereby intimation was given to his Holiness, that unless he
would comply with K. Henry, in the cause of his divorce from Qu. Catherine, the
farther acknowledgement of his Supremacy in this Realm would be in danger; and
in the 25. of the said King was judgment given on his behalf for taking place
before the Lord Dcres of Gilsland. His younger Years were adorned with all kind
of superficial Learning, especially with Drammatick Poetry, and his elder with
that which was divine, and therefore worthily characterized Baleus ut supra p.
106. post cent. 12.
to be vir liter is clarus, ac genere nobilitate conspicus. His writings have
been, Several Comedies and Tragedies.

Declaration of the Psalm 94. Deus ultionum Dominus. Land. 1539. oct.

Lives of Sectaries. -- With other things which I have not yet seen. Clar. 1539.
He was living an Ancient Man, and in esteem among the Nobility in the latter
end of Henry 8. The Reader is now to know that there was another Hen. Parker,
who wrote a Book intit. Dives and pauper. A compendious treatise (an exposition)
upon the ten Commandments. Land. 1496. fol. There again in 1538, and 1586. oct.
Which Henry being a Carme of Doncaster in Yorkshire, and D. of D. of Cambridge,
in the time of Ed. 4. must not be taken to be the same with the former.

EDWARD POWELL was born of British blood within Wales, educated in
Grammaticals, Logicals, and Philosophicals in Oxon, and was afterward, if I
mistake not, Fellow of Oriel Coll. for one of both his names occurs Fellow of
that House in 1495. After he had taken the Degrees in Arts, he gave himself
solely up to Divinity and in that faculty he became a noted Disputant. On the
2. of Nov. 1501. he was admitted to the rectory of Bledon in the of Wells on
the death of Mr. Micb. Clyffe, and afterward took the Degrees in Divinity. In
1508. he, by the favor of Edm. Audley B. of Sarum, was collated to the
Prebendship of Bedmyster and Redclyve, having a little before been admitted
Preb. of Lyme and Halstock, in the said Church. This E. Powell was the Person,
who for his great learning and undaunted courage, was entertained as an
Advocate by Qu. Catherine, when K. Hen. 8. sought cause for a divorce from her;
and the same, who before had showed himself very zealous in disputing and
writing against M. Luther, his Disciples, and Doctrine, for which the
University of Oxon did not only congratulate In Fpist. Univ. Oxon FF. Ep. 88.
him for his pains, but also in an Epistle Ibid. ep. 87.
to the said Bishop Audley they thus honorably speak of him -- res ea
Oxoniensium quorundam ingeniis discutienda permittitur, inter quos eximius ille
Edoardus Powell, Theologiae condidatus, tuae Sarisburiensis Ecclesiae (ut
vocant) Canonicus, connumeratus est. Is enim ex quo res primum in Literarium
certamen venit, tam assiduus semper fuit, tantum operae ac diligentiae
impendit, tam denique erudite adversus eas hereses invectus est, ut ex suis
immensis laboribus, vigilantissimisque studiis nostrae Academiae nonnihil
attribui laudis facile auguramur, etc. Farther also when the University wrote to
K. Hen. 8. to certify him of certain Doctors of Divinity of their own Body,
that had lately written each of them a Book against M. Luther, they make this
especial mention Ibid. ep. 89.
of our Author Powell and his Book -- Editionem tamen Doctoris Poveli, tanquam
praecipuam, and lucidam quendam gemmam visum est nobis seligere; is siquidem ut
est vir summa gravitate and eruditione, praeter immensos labores, frequentiaque
ejus itinera, tantam in hac re exhibuit vigilantiam, ut nisi eum eximia
efferemus laud, videamur plane injurii aut potius inbumani. Hanc suam
editionem in duos potissimum digessit libellos, quorum prior de summo extat
pontifice Eucharistiaeque Sacramento. Posterior de reliquis sex Sacramentis.
Hunc tuae celsitudini sic commendamus virum, ut quamvis eum habeas perquam
gratum, habeas (quaesumus) nostra tamen commendatione gratiorem, etc. As for
the title of the said Book it runs thus.

Propugnaculum summi sacerdotii Evangelici ac septenari^ sacramentorum,
adversus Mart. Lutherum fratrem fumosum and Wiclefistum insignem. lib. 3. Land.
1523. qu. Another Book of his making is intit.

Tract. de non dissolvendo Henrici Regis cum Catherina matrimonio. lib. 1. and
other matters, as it is probable, but such I have not yet seen. At length for
his denial of the King's Supremacy over the Church of England (whereby he
despleased him far more, than before he pleased him by writing against Luther)
he was committed to Prison, and having received sentence to dye, was on the 30.
July in Fifteen hundred and forty, hanged, Smithfield near London, with Tho.
Abel whom I am about to name, and Rich. Fetherston, guilty of the same crime.
This Dr. Edw. Powell Reg. Act. cur Canc, Oxon, notat cum lit. ^ invers. p. 18.
bestowed at least 30 l. about the time when he was licensed to proceed, for
the making of a double roof with painting, gilded knots, and lead for the
Congregation house, house, which is now the upper room in St. Mary's
Churchyard, joining on the North side to the Chancel of St. Mari^^ Church 22.
Hen. 7. Dom. 15 6/7.

Able took the Degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed 1516, but what
Degrees in Divinity I cannot find. He was afterward a Servant to Qu. Catherine
the Consort of K. Hen. 8. and is said by a certain T^o, Bouchier in Hist.
Eccies. de Martyrio Frat. Ord. Minorum Divi Francisci -- Ingols. 1583. in 12.
part. 2. fol. 42. b.
Author to be vir long doctissimus, qui Reginae aliquando in Musicorum tacta
and inguis, operam suam navaret. In 1529. and 30, he showed himself a zealous
Advocate against the divorce of the said Queen, and a passionate enemy against
the unlawful doings of the King. At which time he wrote,

Tract. de non dissolvendo Henrici and Catherinae matrimonio. In 1534, he by
the name of Tho. Able Priest, was attainted of Misprision, for taking part
with, and being active in the matter of, Elizabeth Barton the holy Maid of
Kent. Afterward denying the King's Supremacy over the Church, was hanged,
drawn, and quartered in Smithfield, Jul. in Fifteen hundred and and forty,
having before, as it is thought, written other things, but lost. I find another
Tho. Able, who has written against the Gangraena of Tho. Edwards, but he being
a hundred Years later than the former, (for he lived in 1646.) he must not be
taken to be the same Person.

Senyarmayn or Seyngerman, Son of Sir Hen. Seintgerman Knight, by Anne his
Wife, Daughter of Tho. Tindale Esquire was born, as I conceive, in Warwickshire,
particularly at Shilton near to the City of Coventry, in the Chapel or Church
of which place, his Father and Mother In Offic. Praerog cant. in reg. Alinger
Qu. 29.
received Sepulture. In his juvenile Years he was educated in Grammatical and
Philosophical Learning among the Oxonians, from whom, by the advice of his
Parents, he was taken away and sent to the Inner Temple, where, by the benefit
of his Academical Learning, certain instructors in the municipal Laws, and by
his forward Genie, and industry, he became a Barrester and a Counselor of
note, being then esteemed eminent not only in the Common, but also in the
Civil, Law; by which afterward, he obtained immortal fame among the Citizens
of London. Besides this his profound knowledge, he was admirably well read in
Philosophy, and the liberal Sciences, which made his company desired by
Scholars and Clergy. He lived always a single Man, was an adorer of Chastity
and chaste Men, and showed himself generous in his profession to those that
stood in need of it, for very seldom or never did he take a fee. What he got,
and what he could spare out of his paternal estate, he expended in purchasing
Books. So that several Years before he died, his Library exceeded any one or
two, that belonged to a Person or Persons of his profession. Every night after
his business was past, he read a Chapter in the Bible to those that belonged to
him, and the Substance thereof he expounded to them. By the doing of which, and
his interposing himself in matters relating to Religion and the Clergy, some R.
Catholics have thought that he halted in his Opinion, that is, that he was
inclined to the way of Heretics. His Writings are many, partly written in
Latin and partly in English, the titles of some of which are these.

Dialogus de fundamentis Legum Angliae and de conscientia. Land. 1528. 1598.
1604. 1613, etc. oct. This is the Book which is commonly called Doctor and
Student, being a Dialogue between a Doctor of Div. and a Student in the common
Laws of England. With the edition of the said Book 1528. I have seen this Book
following bound with several Copies of it. Principia five maximae Legum
Angliae, a Gallico illo (ut fertur) sermon collecta, and sic in Latinum
translata, non solum generosis studentibus, verum etiam terrarum dominis and
possessoribus sum necessaria. -- Printted by Rich Lant 24. Dec. 38. Hen. 8.
Dom. 1546. in oct. Whether this Book, which is printed in an English Character
as the Dialogue is, was compiled by Seintgerman I know not: certain I am, that
the English Copy of Dialogus, etc. called, Doctor and Student, etc. Printed at
Land. in oct. an. 1604. contains two Books of Dialogues, the first of which
has 32 Chapters (whereas the Latin impression of 1528, and 1604. contains but
24, and the second 55 Chapters. Among other things that the said Seintgerman
has written are,

Of the power of the Clergy according to the Law.

Treatise showing that the Clergy cannot make Laws.

Treatise of the Church and the meaning thereof.

Treatise of the Sacraments thereof.

Apology written to Sir Tho. More.

Dialogue concerning the power which belongs to the Clergy, and the power which
belongs to the People -- With several other things which are In cent. 8. Joh.
Balei De scriptorib. Maj. Britan number. 75.
mentioned in another place. At length this worthy Person dying in Sept. (the
28 day says Baleus Ibidem.
who falsely adds 1539.) in Fifteen hundred and forty, Tho. Lupset, in the
Church of St. Alphage within Cripplegate, in the City of London. Which Church
was afterward translated to that Church now called St. Alphage near Sion
College. In the last will Ibid. in reg. Alinger, ut supra.
and Testament of the said Seintgerman, dated 10. July, 32. Hen. 8. Dom. 1540,
and proved 30. May 1541. it appears that he was not only a Benefactor to the
Church of Shilton beforementioned, but also to that at Laleford (Lawford) in
Warwickshire, and to the Church at Cathorp in Leicestershire, at which Towns,
it is probable, he had Lands and Inheritances.

JOHN PALSGRAVF was born in London, and educated Cambridge till he was Bach. of
Arts. Afterward he went to Paris, where spending several Years also in
Philosophical and other learning, took the Degree of Master of the said
faculty, and became so excellent in the French tongue, that he was thought fit
to be Tutor to the Daughter of K. Hen. 7. called the Lady Mary, when she was
about to be married to Lewis the 12. K. of France. But that King dying soon
after, the said Palsgrave came with her into England, taught the French
Language to diverse of our young Nobility, and became well beneficed In 1531. he
settled in Oxon for a time, and the next Year being incorporated Master of the
faculty of Arts, was in few days after admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, that is to the Degree of Bach. of Divinity, he being then Chaplain
to K. Hen. 8. and esteemed the first Author of our Nation, or of the French
Men, that had reduced the French tongue under certain rules, and the first in
that kind of exercise that did begin to labor, as it plainly appears by his
most laborious piece intit.

Lesclarcissement de la Language Francois. Land. 1530. in three Books in a
thick fol. Before which the Author has a large Introduction in English; after
which follows, (1) A table of Substantives. (2) A table of Adjectives. (3) The
Pronoun. (4) The Numerals, etc. I never yet saw but one Copy of this Book,
which being filled with Marginal Notes (by whom I know not) in a scribbling
hand, was bought by the learned Seldom, and in his Library at Oxon. I perused
it. The said Joh. Palsgrave has also written Several Epistles, and published a
translation of a Book intit. Ecphrastes Anglica in comoediam Acolasti. Or, the
Comedy of Acolastus translated into our English tongue, after such a manner as
Children are taught in the Grammar School; first word by word as the Latin
lies, and afterward according to the sense and meaning of the Latin
sentences, etc. Land. 1540. in qu. The said Comedy was made by one Will.
Fullonius Hagiensis, an. 1529, and was living when it was put into English by
Palsgrave, Clar. 1540.
who was in great renown among Men for his Learning, in Fifteen hundred and
forty, which was the two and thirtieth Year of King Hen. 8.

LEONARD COX, second Son of Laurence Cox (by Elizab. his Wife Daugh. of --
Willey) Son of Job. Cox of Monmouth, was born in Monmouthshire, educated in
Cambridge till he was Bach. of Arts, went to Oxon in 1528. where making some
stay for the sake of study, was incorporated in the same Degree in the Year
following, and intending to make a longer stay, he supplicated for the Degree
of Master of Arts, but whether admitted it appears not. About the same time he
was a Schoolmaster at Reading in Berks. and was there in much esteem when Joh.
Fryth the Martyr was taken for a Vagabond, and set in the Stocks; to whom, for
his learning and nothing else, he showed singular courtesies, as I have already
told you in John Fryth. Afterward he traveled into France, Germany, Poland,
and Hungary, taught there the Tongues, and became more eminent in Foreign
Countries than at home; which Joh. Leland the Antiquarian-Poet seems to
intimate in these Verses In Eucomiis, Tropheis, etc. illustr. and erudit.
virorum in Anglia -- Edit. 1589. p. 50.
written to him. Inclyta Sarmaticae Cracovia gloria gentis,
Virtutes novit, Coxe diserte tuas.
Novit and eloquii Phaenix utriusque Melancthon,
Quam te Phoebus amet, pieriusque chorus.
Parga tuas cecinit, cecinitque Lutetia Lauds,
Urbs ergo doctos officiosa viros.
Talia cum constent, etc.


In the Year 1540. (32. Hen. 8.) I find that he was living at Carleon in his
native Country, where I think he taught School, and the same Year to publish,

Commentaries on Will. Lily's construction of the eight parts of Speech. --
Besides which, he had before in the said Year, translated from Greek into
Latin, Marcus Eremita de Lege and Spiritu, and from Lat. into English, The
paraphrase of St. Paul's Epistle to Titus, written by Erasmus Roterod. with
whom he was well Vide Epist. Erasm. lib. 19. ep. 15.
acquainted. Baleus tells In cent. 9. Script. Maj. Britan. number. 31.
us that the said Cox was from his Youth instructed in all liberal arts, that
he was a Grammarian, Rhetorician, Poet, Divine, and a Preacher of God's word.
Also that he had written against those, who in his time wrote of Justification
by works, and that he was in high esteem among learned Men in Fifteen hundred
and forty. Clar. 1540.
All which works, besides Verses of diverse kinds, and Epistles, were by him
written before the end of that Year; as also Latin Verses occasionally set
before Books that were published, particularly before John Palsgrave's
Lesclarcissement, an. 1530. He was living in the Reign of Ed. 6. but when, or
where, he died, I cannot yet tell. He left behind him a Son named Francis Cox,
who proceeded D. of D. as a Member of New Coll. in the Year 1594, and he a Son
named William, who was a Divine of Chichester in Sussex.

Henr. Wyatt of Allington Castle in Kent Knight and Banneret, by Anne his Wife
Daughter of Joh. Skinner of Surrey, was born of an ancient and gentile Family
in the said County of Kent, sent to Cambridge to be initiated in Academical
Learning, transplanted thence to Oxon purposely to advance himself in
knowledge by the hearing of the Cardinals Lectures, then lately settled there;
but whether he took a Degree with us, or at Cambridge, I find not as yet.
Afterward he being sent to travel, he returned an accomplished Gentleman, and
was esteemed by all those that knew him to be a Person adorned with the
endowments as well of body and mind, as of fortune. By the daily and unwearied
practice of the two former, while he was in his travels, and after his return,
he became not only well skilled in military matters, but also in several Arts
and Tongues: And as esteemed strong and valiant in body, so powerful in mind
and counsel. At length he with Hen. Haward or Howard Earl of Surrey, (who also
had traveled into Italy, and there tasted the sweet and stately measures and
style of the Italian Poesy) being esteemed to be the first refiners of the
English Tongue, Wyatt was introduced into the Court, was beloved of K. Hen. 8.
who honored him with the Degree of Knighthood, and sent him in several
Embassies beyond the Seas, which he very prudently performed with great trust
to the honor of his Master. But that which is here to be in a special manner
marked, was his admirable skill in Poetry, which in his first Years of reason
he expressed in several amorous Songs and Poems: With which, as also his witty
jests, the King himself being in an high manner delighted, they were so much
admired by the Men of that, and the next Age, (tho I persume they are now lost)
that some have not stuck to report, that as Mecaenas, Ovid, Tibullus, etc. have
been among the Latins most famous for Elegy; So Sir Tho. Wyatt the elder,
Henry Haward Earl of Surrey, Sir Franc. Brian of the Privy Chamber to K. Hen.
8. (and a Traveller in 1528) Sir Phil. Sydney, George Gascoigne Esquire etc. have
among the English been most passionate to bemoan the perplexities of Love. For
his translation also of David's Psalms into English meeter, and other of his
Poetry, Leland the Antiquarian -- Poet In Naeniis in mort. Tho. Viati, edit.
Land. 1542. P. 4. Vide etiam in Encomiis suis illustr. virorum, etc. p. 47.
forbears not to compare him to Dant and Petrarch thus.

Bellum suo merrito, etc. translated by another hand as follows. Let Florence
fair her Dantes justly boast,
And royal Rome her Petrarchs numbered feet;
In English Wyatt both of them does coast
In whom all grateful eloquence does meet.


In his younger Years, as I have told youbefore, he composed.

Several Songs and Poems -- Many of which are in the Printed at Land. in oct.
an. 1565 and 1587.
Songs and Sonnets of Hen. Haward Earl of Surrey, Son of that victorious
Prince, the Duke of Norfolk, and Father of that learned Howard (sometimes his
most lively Image) Henry Earl of Northampton. Which incomparable Earl of Surrey
(who entirely loved our Author Sir Tho. Wyatt) has among other things
translated Virgils Aeneids; the first and second Book whereof, he has
admirably rendered almost line for line. Sir Th. Wyatt also in his elder Years
translated into English meeter, (1) The penitential Psalms, in one Book. (2)
The whole Psaltery of David: in praise of which last, is an Encomium in the
Songs Printed at Land. 1587. fol. 16.
and Sonnets of the Earl of Surrey beforementioned. At length our Author Wyatt
being sent by the King toward Falmouth in Cornwall, to conduct Montmorantius
surnamed a Courriers thence to London, (for he came from Spain in an Embassy)
did, by endeavoring and laboring to please the King, rather than to consult
his own health, make more have than good speed: For by too much riding (which
was not necessarily required) in a very hot season, he fell into a violent
Fever. Whereupon putting in at a Mercate Town called Shirebourn in
Dorsetshire, was within few days after cut off from among the living in the 38
Year of his Age to the great reluctance of the King, Kingdom, his Friends, and
all that knew the great worth and virtues of the Person. He was buried in the
great Church there, John Leland, entit. Naenia. Before the first page of which,
is Sir Thomas's face, with a long curled beard (like to a Man of 80 Years of
Age) printed from a wooden cut, engraved from his face, which was painted by a
Dutchman commonly called Hans Holbin. At the same time was an Epitaph made on
him by the In the said Songs and Sonnets fol. 84.
Earl of Surrey, as it seems, another also by Sir Tho. In lib. suo cui tit.
est, De illustrium quorundam encomits, cum Epigram. and Epitaphiis nonnullis.
Land. 1579. qu. p. 358.
Chaloner in long and short Verses, and a third, which was a large one in
Prose, by his entire Friend Sir Joh. Mason (Chancellor of this University
1553.) a Copy of which I have seen, and in some things do follow it in my
aforesaid discourse. This Sir Tho. Wyatt left behind him a Son of both his
names, begotten on the body of his Wife Elizabeth, Daughter of Thom. Brook Lord
Cobham, who being a Commotioner in the Reign of Qu. Mary, lost his Head, and
left issue by Jane his Wife Daughter and Coheir of Will. Hawte of Bourn Knight. a
Son named Geor. Wyatt of Boxley in Kent Esquire restored 13. Elizab. I find another
Tho. Wyatt to have been a Student in Cambridge 1587, in which Year he had a
Copy of Verses put into Acadedemiae Cantabrigiensis Lachrymae, tumulo D.
Philippi Sydneii sacratae. Published by Alex. Nevill.

RICHARD TURPIN was descended from an ancient Family of his name living at
Knaptoft in Leicestershire (extracted from that of the Turpins of Whitchester
in Northumberland) and educated for a time in Grammatical and Academical
Learning in this University. Whence being taken before he was honored with a
Degree, spent afterward his chief time in Military Affairs at Calice in
France, under King Hen. 8. He has written,

A Chronicle -- containing matters only of his time; 154^.
and dying at Calice before mentioned in Fifteen hundred forty and one (33.
Hen. 8.) was buried in the Church of St. Nicholas there, leaving then behind
him the Character of a Worthy Gentleman.

Wretch of Sion was educated for a time among the Oxonians, but whether he took
a Degree, we have no record that shows it. Afterward he was received into the
Family of Rich. Fox Bishop of Winchester, and by him was made his Chaplain
about the latter end of Hen. 7. at which time he became acquainted with Sir
Tho. More, then a Young Man, between whom was great amity. Afterward Whytforde
being minded to leave the World and all hopes of preferment, entered himself a
Monk of the Order of St. Brigit in the Monastry called Sion near to Brentford
in Middlesex. About which time being known to Scholars for his divine learning
(for in Philosophy he was but little versed) and most sincere holiness, he
became acquainted with that great light of learning Erasmus, who sometimes
mentions him in his Epistles, and advises him thus, Cura at valeas teque tua
Philosophia oblectes, etc. But such was his ill fortune, that he lived to see
himself turned out of his Cell, and the Cell it self converted to a profane
use. Whereupon one Will. Mountjoy descended of a noble race, received him into
his Family, and made him his Confessor, which is all that I know of him at
present, only that he wrote and translated these things following.

Work of preparation unto the Communion, and also for Householders to govern
their Families. Land. in oct. When printed I know not; for the Copy that I saw
was imperfect.

A Book called the Pype or Tonne of the life of perfection. A work of the three
Vows of Religion, contrary to the great Heretics the Lutherans. Land. 1532.
qu. The reason of the title is this. The Author compares the life of perfection
to precious Wine kept in a Pype or Tonne, made as it were of three plain
boords, viz. the three Vows of Obedience, wilful poverty and chastity; which
are bound together, as with hoops, by their rules, as of St. Austine, Benedict,
Francis, Basil. Which hoops are knit, as with wykers, with the holy ceremonies
of Religion, contained in the Statutes, Constitutions, Injunctions, and Customs
of every Monastery. This allegory he seems to prosecute throughout the whole
work. His main aim is to commend and defend the religious Orders, and those
three monastic Vows, against the objections of the Lutherans.

Treatise of patience. Also a work of diverse impediments and lets of
perfection. Land. 1541. qu.

The Martiriloge after the use of the Church of Salisbury, and as it is read in
Sion, with additions. Land. in qu.

Solitary Meditations.

Psaltery of Jesus -- Printed several times in Engl. and French. He also
translated from Latin into English. (1) St. Austin's rule. Land. 1525. qu. to
which also he put notes. This was done before by another hand, but being not
well understood by the Nuns of Sion, they desired him to do it better, which he
accordingly did, and dedicated it to them. Clar. 1541.
(2) St. Bonaventure his lessons entitled Alphabetum Religiosorum. Land. 1532.
qu. with other things, as it is probable. The Reader is now to know that there
was another Richard Whytforde, a wealthy Clerk, possessed of Lands in Hope,
Hopedale, and Whytforde in Flintshire; as also of Lands in Farnworth and
Widdous in Lancashire, who in his last days entering himself a Brother into the
Monastery of Sion beforementioned, died and was buried there 3. Hen. 8. Dom.
1511. But this R. Whytforde, who seems to have been born in Flintshire, was no
writer, only Uncle to Rich. Whytforde before mentioned; who upon his Unkles
account, and because of his benefaction to Sion, was entered a Brother there,
being originally, as I suppose, of Whytforde in Flintshire.

Shepery was born in, or near to, the His Surname and Family did live at
Sugworth in the Parish of Rodley in the time of Qa. Elizab. and before.
Parish of Radley, about a mile or two distant from Abendon in Berks; admitted
Probationer-Fellow of Corpus Chapter Coll. in the Year 1528. aged 19 or
thereabouts, took the Degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed 1533,
about which time he was Greek Reader in the said College, and afterward Hebrew
Professor of the University, in the place of Rob. Wakfeld, about 1538. Three
Years after, he did, with leave from the chief Members of the University, begin
to expound in the public Schools the Book of Genesis in the Hebrew Language,
and would have gone forward with the Books that follow, had not death prevented
him. He was one of the skilfullest Linguists (his Age being considered) that
ever was in Oxon before his time, and was thought to surpass Origin in Memory.
So excellent a Poet also he was, that his equal scarce could be found, it
having been an ordinary matter with him to compose 100 very good Verses every
day at vacant hours, some of which are extant. Several Authors have celebrated
his Memory in their respective Books of Poems, particularly John Leland in his
Edit. Land. 1589. p. 81.
Encomia illustrium and eruditorum in Anglia virorum, etc. and in his Edit.
Land. 1546.
Cygnia Cantio; in the last of which he styles him Decus atriusque linguae:
Also Dr. Joh. White in his Ed. ib. 1553. qu. fol. 89.
Diacosio-Martyrion, who entitles him trium Linguarum peritissimus, and others.
Among the Books that he has written, these only I have seen, viz.

Summa and synopsis Novi Testamenti disticis ducentis sexaginta comprehensa.
First of all published by John Parkhurst at Strasburgh about 1556. in oct. with
some of his Serious Epigrams at the end, taken from his Ludicra or Epigram.
Juvenilia, which I shall hereafter mention under him the said Parkhurst.
Afterward the said Summa and synopsis were printed at Land. 1560. and at Oxon.
1586. in oct. which last edition was reviewed and corrected by Dr. Laur.
Humphrey. They are also printed, if I mistake not, in a Book called Gemma
Fabri. Land. 1598. and were by the Author composed to no other end but to
assist the memories of Novices and Candidates in Divinity.

Hyppolitus Ovidianae Phaedrae respondens. Before which, our Author has a
Preface to the Epistle of Hyppolitus to Phaedra, contained in about 350 long
and short Verses, written to one Mr. Guade a pious Priest and Chaplain to K.
Hen. 8. This Preface with the Book it self, all in the like Verse, was
published at Oxon. about 1584. in oct. by George Etheridge a Physician,
sometimes Pupil to the said Joh. Shepery.

Vita and Epicedion Johannis Claymondi Praesidis Coll. Corp. Chr. MS. in C. C.
C. Library: The beginning of which is, Tristia quisquis ades, etc. written in
long and short Verses. He also translated from Greek into Latin several Books,
as Euripides his Hecuba, and Seneca's Hercules furens, something of Basil, etc.
besides compositions in Poetry and Prose, which after the Author's death came
into the hands of George Etheridge beforementioned; who promised in the Year
1584. to make them public, but what hindered him, unless death, I know not. As
for our Author Sheperey he gave way to fate Geo. Edrycus vulgo Etheridge in
Epist ad Lectorem praefix. Hypolit. Ovid. Phaed. resp.
at Agmundesham commonly called Amersham in Bucks. in the Month of July in
fifteen hundred forty and two, Oxon, diverse ingenious and learned Men made
Verses to his memory in Greek and Latin, and caused them to be stuck up on St.
Mary's Church doors, to be read by the Academians as they passed by. Some
Persons, whether for the sake of his memory, or for Poetry I know not, got
copies of them very greedily, and gathered all they could get, to the end that
with the help of Etheridge they might be published. At length being put into
the hands of Herman Evans a Stationer, for that purpose, he kept them till he
could get more to be added to them, but what hindered their birth I know not.

WILLIAM THYNNE, otherwise Botevill, was, as Solopian born, and educated among
the Oxonians for a time. Afterward retiring to the Court, became through
several petite employments, chief Clerk of the Kitchen to K. Hen. 8. and is
styled by Erasmus In Epist. lib. 15. Epist. 14.
Thynnus Aulicus. This Person who was poetically given from his Youth, did make
a search after all the works of Jeffery Chaucer the Prince of our English
Poets, many of which were then in MS. At length having collected all the
ancient Copies of that Author, he took great pains to correct and amend them.
Which being so done, he put notes and explanations on, and printed them
altogether in one Volume in Folio, (not in double columns as they have been
since) and dedicated them to K. Hen. 8. Clar. 1542.
an. 1542, having been partly and imperfectly done several Years before by
Will. Caxton. Afterward Joh. Stow the Chronologer did correct, increase and
publish, them with diverse ample notes collected out of several records and
monuments. All which he delivering to his Friend Tho. Speght a Cantabrigian, he
drew them into good form and method, mixed them with his own, and published
them 1597. See more in Franc. Thynne, under the Year 1611, who was, as it
seems, descended from him. Whether this Will. Thynne, whom I have mentioned
before, be the same with Will. Thynne Esquire one of the Clerks of the Green-Cloth,
and master of the Household of K. Hen. 8. (the same Will. Thynne, I mean, who
died 10. Aug. 1546. and was buried in the Church of Allhallowes Barkin in
London) I am yet to learn. I find another Will. Thynne Esquire Brother to Sir John
Thynne Knight, who after he had traveled through most parts of Europe,
returned an accomplished Gentleman, and in the 1. Edw. 6. Dom. 1547. went into
Scotland under the command of Edward Duke of Somerset, (to which Duke, his
Brother Sir John, was Secretary) where as an Eques catafractus (that is a
Chevalier armed cap a pee) he performed excellent service in the Battle at
Muscelborough against the Scots. This Person I take to be the same, to whom K.
Hen. 8. by his Letters Pat. dat. 8. May 38. of his Reign, Dom. 1546. gave the
office of general Receiver of two Counties in the Marches of Wales, commonly
called The Earl of Marches Lands. At length when the infirmities of Age came
upon him, he gave himself solely up to devotion, and was a daily Auditor of
divine service in the Abbey Church at Westminster. He surrendered up his Soul to
him that gave it, 14. March 1584, and was buried in the said Church opposite to
the door leading into the Cloister. Over his Grave was soon after erected a
Monument of Alabaster, and 100 Years after, was another stately Monument
erected near to it Westward, for one descended from Sir Joh. Thynne
beformention'd, namely for Tho. Thynne of Langleat in Wilts. Esquire sometimes a
Gent. Com. of Chapter Chapter who was barbarously murdered in the Pall Mall by a
German, Sweed, and Pole, on Sunday in the Evening 12. Feb. 1681. For whom was a
large inscription made, to be engraved on the said Monument, but for certain
passages therein, reflecting on Justice and I know not what, was not suffered
to be put thereon.

Mary Magd. College, and in 1535. Master of Arts, being then accounted
excellently well read in Greek and Latin Authors, a good Rhetorician and Poet,
and much commended for his facete fancy. Leland is pleased to mention him in
one of his works, and to style In Cygn. Cautione.
him, not without desert, Nitor artium bonarum. He has written, Piscator, or,
the Fisher caught, a Comedy.

An Introduction to Rhetoric.

Poema de vero crucifixo.

Epigrammata varia. and other things, which I have not yet seen. Clar. 1543.
He was living in Magd. Coll. in Fifteen hundred forty and three, (being then
Bach. of Divinity of three Years standing) as it appears in the Bursars
accounts of that House. I presume he died shortly after, and not in 1541, as
Bale and Pits do tell you.

Rich. Lee of Lee-magna in Kent Esquire Son of Sir Rich. Lee Knight, sometimes
twice Lord Mayor of the City of London, was born in Kent, particularly (as I
suppose) at Lee beforementioned, sent to St. Mary Magd. Coll. about 1499, and
took, as it is said, one Degree in Arts, but whether true, I cannot justly
affirm, because the Register of that time and other writings, are imperfect. In
the Year 1523, one Ed. Lee was admitted Bachelaur of Arts, but him I take to be
too late for this Edw. Lee, whom we are further to mention. Afterward he went
to Cambridge, as one Fr. Godwinus in Comment. de praesulib. Angl. Edit. 1616.
p. 86 in Eborac.
reports, being probably driven hence by Pests that frequently then happened in
Oxon. Yet the Reader is to know, that he is not reckoned among the Archbishops
and Bishops, which have been educated in that University, by Dr. Matthew
Parker, in his Catalogue of them, at the end of his Cat. of Chancellors,
Proctors, etc. thereof, in his Edition of Antiquitates Britannicae, etc.
Printed an. 157 2-3. Howsoever it is, I shall not dispute it, only say, that
afterward he was made Chaplain to K. Hen. 8. and his Almoner, being then a
violent Antagonist of Erasmus, but whether greater in Learning than he, or his
equal, was then doubtful; yet there be not wanting some that say, that tho he
was a learned Man, yet he was not a fit match for that polite Person. Not long
after, the K. employed him in several Embassies, particularly in that to the
Emperor with Sir Franc. Pointz, and in another with the Lord Morley, and Sir
Will. Hussy into Germany to Don Ferdinando Duke of Austria, with the Order of
the Garter, an. 1523, and a third with Stokesley B. of London, and Thom. Earl
of Wilts. to the Pope at Bononie, about the intricate matter of Marriage with
Qu. Catherine, an. 1529. In which Year, in the beginning of Febr. he became
Chancellor of the Church of Salisbury by the resignation of Thom. Winter, and
was succeeded in that dignity by Edw. Farmer, in December. 1531. After his return
from the last Embassy, he was made Archbishop of York an. 1531. was
incorporated D. of D. of this University in the latter end of October (which
Degree he had received in a transmarine University, while he was an Ambassador,
by actual creation) and on the 5. of Dec. following, in the same Year, he had
Rot. Pat. 23. Hen. 8. p. ^.
restitution made to him of the temporalities belonging to that See. He was a
great Divine, and very well seen in all kind of Learning, famous as well for
his Wisdom as virtue, and holiness of life, a continual Preacher of the Gospel,
a Man very liberal to the poor, and exceedingly beloved of all sorts of Men,
who greatly missed and bemoaned the want of him, when dead. He has written,

Comment. in universum in Pentateuchum Mosys. MS. See in Rog. Aschams Epistles,
lib. 2. in an Epist, Cuidam amico Eborac.

Apologia contra quorundam columnias. Lovan. 1520. in quarto.

Index annotationum prioris libri. Printed there the same Year.

Epistola nuncupatoria ad Desid. Erasmum. There the same Year.

Annotationum libri duo, alter in annotationes prioris editionis Novi Testam.
D. Erasmi; alter in annotat. posterior is editionis ejusdem. Pr. there the same
Year.

Epistola Apologetica, qua respondet D. Erasmi Epistolas. There the same Year.
In which Year also (1520.) was published a Book in qu. at Basil entit.
Epistolae aliquot eruditorum virorum, ex quibus perspicuum sit Edwardi Lei
virulentia. They were written to show the great anger and spleen, that the said
Lee bore against Erasmus and some of his Writings, mostly by Sir Tho. More,
Tho. Lupset, Rich. Paice, Ulricus Huttenus Esquire and Jo. Sapidus.

Epistolae Sexcentae.

Epicedia clarorum virorum, besides other things which I have not yet seen.
This Dr. Lee Archb. of York died 13. Sept. Magd. College (over the great Gate
leading into the quadrangle) are these two Verses set up under his Arms
(impaled by those of the Sea of York) by Dr. Laur. Humphrey, an. 1556. Unus
erat Leyus velut inter sydera Phoebus,
Sic vicit socios temporis ipse sui.


In the said Windows, Dr. Humphrey caused to be put up the Arms of all such
Bishops that had been educated in Magd. Coll. even to his time, an. 1566. I
have seen several Letters written by this Dr. Lee to K. H. 8. and in one he
wonders, that the Popes Supremacy should be a cause for Martyrdom, and that
Fisher Bishop of Rochester should dye in defense of it, when in other matters
of faith, and errors against the same, he has dissembled, and has not been
content with such as have written against them for the favor he bare to the
Party, in whose Books they are found, etc.

Valenza in Spain, educated in Grammar learning there, but in Logic at Paris,
at which time all good Arts were banished thence, and the Students totally bent
on Sophistical Cavils. Soon after being taken off from those vain bablings, he
applied himself to the Study of Humanity, and became (his Age considered) noted
for it. Afterward he went to the University of Lovaine, where he seriously
applied himself to Lat. and Gr. learning, and sought out all ways to be
acquainted with polite and learned Men, being then, by that time, so polite
himself, that in detestation of his former errors in following vain sophistry,
he wrote a Book Contra Pseudo-Dialecticos. At riper Years he applied himself to
the study of the Civil Law and of Divinity, and to the searching of the
Writings of all the learned Doctors of the Church by the advice of Des.
Erasmus, who had a particular respect for him for mending and correcting some
of his Writings, and collecting his Adagies. On the 4. July 1517. he was made
(being then at Lovaine) one of the first Fellows of Corp. Chr. Coll. in Oxon.
by the Founder thereof. By which time his fame being spread over England, and
the more for this reason that Catherine of Spain, the first Wife of K. Hen. 8.
had a peculiar respect for him, and cherished his Muse, he was invited into
England by Cardinal Wolsey (as it seems) in the Year 1523, and coming to Oxon
in Aug. or Sept did See Hist. and Antiq. Universe. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 36. a.
read the said Cardinals lecture of Humanity in the Hall of the said College,
and that (as it is said) of the Civil Law before the Members of the University.
Farther also to add grace and honor to him, it pleased K. Hen. 8. Qu.
Catherine, and the prime Persons of their Courts to be (as Brian. (...) in Ap
1. lib. 3.. 210. etc.
some report) his Auditors about the latter end of the aforsaid Year, he having
been solemnly incorporated Doctor of the Civil Law before, as he had stood in
another University. While he remained here he wrote his Books De ratione studii
puerilis, and De consultatione, and became so much admired by the Academians,
for his great learning and eloquence, (and the more for this reason, that their
studies were then wholly bent toward Humanity) that they revived the Degrees
of Grammar, Rhetoric, and Poetry, which had been before much neglected.
Afterward he retired to Bruges in Flanders from whence he came, where, about
that time he took to him a Wife, but the next Year, viz. in March 152 4-5 he
was at Oxon again, as it appears from an Epistle to K. Hen. 8. dated then
thence, at which time, if I mistake not, he continued his Lectures either in
Humanity or the Civil Law, and was constituted Tutor for the Latin tongue to
the Young Lady Mary Dau. of King Hen. 8. His Writings are many, being mostly
printed in two Tomes at Basil 1555, but least I should break the Method that I
have hitherto followed, I shall make a recital of some.

Jesu Christi triumphans. Wrote at Paris in Apr. 1514.

De initiis, sectis, and laudibus philosophiae lib. 1.

De tempore quo natus est Christus.

Virginis Deiparae Oration.

Fabula de homine.

Written and finished at Lovaine. 1518.

Pompeius fugiens.

Liber in Pseudo-Dialectios.

Veritas sucata, seu in triumphum prae lectio.

Written at Lovaine. 1519.

Praelectio in somnium Scipionis apud Ciceronem. Written at Lovaine 1520.

Declamationes septem. Finished at Bruges.

In Suetonium quaedam. Finished at Lovaine.

1521.

De consultatione. Fin. at Oxon. 1523.

De institutione feminae Christianae. lib. 3. Written to Catherine Qu. of
England from Bruges 1523.

De ratione studii puerilis. Dedicated by his Epist. dat. at Oxon. non. Oct.
an. 1523 to Catherine Qu. of England his only Patroness.

Introductio ad sapientiam. Written at Bruges, 1524.

Satellitium animi, vel symbola. Ded. to Princess Mary Dau. of K. Hen. 8. from
Bruges 1524.

Epist. ad Hen. 8. dat. Ox. 12. Mar. 1525.

De concordia and discordia. lib. 4

De subventione pauperum.

Written at Bruges 1526.

De passione Christi meditatio.

De sudore Jesu Christi, sacrum diurnum.

At Bruges 1529.

De corruptis artibus. Tom. 3.

De disputatione. lib. 1.

At Burges 1531.

De ratione dicendi. lib. 3. At Brug. 1532.

De communione rerum ad Germanos inferiores: At Bruges 1535.

Exercitationes animi in Deum. At Antw. Aug. 1535.

Preces and meditationes diurnae. At Bruges 1535.

Exercitatio linguae latinae. Written at Breda 1538.

De anima and vita. lib. 3. At Bruges: 1538. With many other things, which for
brevity sake I shall now omit. He also translated into Latin, Isocrates his
Nicocles, dedicated to Card. Wolsey, by his Epist. dat. at Oxon 15. Dec. 1523.
with other translations which I also shall omit. As to the time of this worthy
Authors death, many Writers differ, and the just day or year is yet uncertain.
Anton. Postevin says he died at Bruges in Flanders 1536. or therebouts, having
left off writing in 1535. Ludovic. Guicciard in his description of Bruges
reports it, an. 1540. Thuanus who says he was a Professor at Lovaine, tells us
that he died there 1541, and Job. White in his Diacosio-Martyrion printed 1553,
would have it at Bruxels 1545. Which last Author being before all the former in
time, and perhaps may know, or remmeber Vives, ought therefore to be believed
before the rest. But these matters notwithstanding being uncertain, I shall
venture to put his death under Fifteen hundred forty and four, Bruges, was
buried in the Church of St. Donantius there. See more of him in a Book intit.
Bibliotheca Hispanica. Printed at Rome in two Tomes in fol. 1672. Tom. 1. p.
552, 553, etc. Both which Tomes were written by Nicholaus Antonius Hispalensis,
J. C. Knight. of the Order of St. James.

ROBERT SHYNGLETON descended from a good Lancashire, was always esteemed an
ingenious Man while he resided in the University, but whether he was honored
with a Degree, it appears not. Afterward being a Priest and a Requent
Preacher, he took occasion to reflect on the times, and certain Persons, in his
Sermons. For which being called to an account and committed, was forced, with
two other Persons, to make his Palinodie before a Convention of certain Bishops
at London, an. 1543. (35. H. 8.) His works are these.

Treatise Of the seven Churches. Of the Holy Ghost.


Comment on, or explanation of, certain Prophecies -- The two first were
formerly, (perhaps still) in the King's Library at Westminster. The last giving
high offense, as containing many treasonable matters, and most severe
reflections, the Author was Jo. Baleus in Script. Maj. Britan. p. 105. inter
cent. 12. and 13.
hanged for it at London in Fifteen hundred forty and four. Anton. Possevinus
styles In Apparat. sac. Tom. 2. in lit. R.
him a Martyr for the Romans Cath. Cause, and John Pitseus omits In lib. De
illustr. Angl. script.
him as being an Heretic, or at least for the honorable mention made of him by
Jo. Bale.

WILLIAM LATYMER became Fellow of Allsouls Italy, and settling at Padoua for a
time, did much advance his learning, especially in the Greek tongue. After his
return, he was incorporated M. of A. as it seems, became most eminent, and was
worthily numbered among the lights of learning in his time by Jo. Leland, as I
have elsewhere Vide Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 263. b. and l. 2.
p. 177. b. Vide etiam in Lelandi Eucomiis, p. 18.
told you. About the beginning of Hen. 8. he was Master or Tutor to Reynold
Pole (afterward Cardinal, and Archb. of Canterbury) by whose endeavors he had
some preferment in the Church conferred upon him. He was learned in all sacred
and profane Letters, and, as Erasmus says, was vere Thologus integritate vitae
conspicuus. It Is said also that he has written several things, but what they
are except,

Epistolae ad Erasmum; I know not. However he with Lynacre and Grocin did
undertake the translation of all Aristotle's works into Latin, but the latter
being taken away by death before they were half finished, Latymer desisted and
would not go any farther, as being perhaps terrified with the immense labor to
be taken therein. He died very aged at his Rectory of Seyntbury near to Camden
in Glocestershire, (which he kept with that of Wotton under Edge, and a
Prebendship in the Church of Salisbury) about the Month of Sept. Nicholas. Over
his Grave was a Marble-stone soon after laid, with a large Inscription on a
brass plate, fastened thereunto, which has been long since taken away and
defaced. I have seen a Copy In Offic. Praerog. Cant. in reg. Pinnyng, Qu. 38.
of his Will, whereby he gave (with certain conditions) all his Greek and Lat.
Books to Allsouls, and Corp. Chr. Coll. in Oxon. yet whether they received them
it appears not. I find one Will. Latymer D. D. to have been Dean of
Peterborough (in the place of Job. Boxhall ejected, an. 1560) and Archdeacon of
Westminster, who dying in the Summer time (after 29. July) 1583, was buried in
the Choire of the Cath. Chapter of Peterborough beneath the Pulpit; but of what kin
he was to the former I know not. He was succeeded in the said Deanery by Rich.
Fletcher D. D. of Bennet Coll. in Cambridge, afterward B. of London.

Sulmo, Sowlman, and Solimont, was born in the Isle of Gernsey, educated for a
time in this University, and was afterward Secretary of the French tongue to
King Hen. 8. This Person who was much conversant in English History, wrote,

The acts and ghests of St. Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.

Select antiquities relating to Britain. -- And dying in fifteen Bal. cent. 9.
nu. 32.
hundred forty and five, Carmes or Carmelites at London, leaving behind him the
Character In Encomiis illustr. virorum, per Jo. Leland. p. 31.
of a learned Man. I find one Tho. Solme to be Author of a Treatise entit. The
Lords Flaile; being an exposition on the commandments. Printed at Basil in oct.
but when, (unless in the time of Qu. Mary) the beginning or end of the Book
shows not. One Tho. Somus a Preacher in the time of Ed. 6. has English Verses
at the end of Will. Turners Book entit. A preservative or Triacle, printed in
oct. an. 1551. Whether these two last be one and the same Person I know not;
nor can I be positive in it, whether Tho. Solme Author of the Lords Flaile, be
the same with Thom. Solme the Historian.

Lanquet, whose place of nativity, or Hall or Coll. wherein he studied, being
yet uncertain, I shall only say that he being a studious Young Man and curious
searcher into ancient History, laid the Foundation of a great work, I mean a
Chronicle consisting of two parts, reaching from the beginning of the World to
the time of our Savior, and was proceeding with a third part, but death
preventing the completing thereof, Thom. Croper of Magd. Coll. finished and
entitled it,

Lanquets Chronicle -- See more in Tho. Cooper under the Year 1594. Lanquet
also wrote,

Treatise of the Conquest of Bulloigne -- When, or where printed I know not,
nor any thing else of the Author, Pits, in Aet. 16. number. 967.
died at London in Fifteen hundred forty and Five; which was the seven and
thirtieth Year of K. H. 8. but in what Church or Yard he was buried, I cannot
tell.

Suffolk, and educated Milo Windsere, in collectaneis suis ad rem Historic.
pertinent. MS. penes me.
in Academical learning in the Hall of St. Mary the Virgin, where he obtained a
considerable proficiency in Logic and Philosophy. The Year when he first began
to salute the Muses, it cannot, through the deficiency of record, be well
known, unless it should be about the Year 1514, for four Years after, an. 1518,
I find In reg. Congregat. H. sub an. 1518.
one Tho. Elyot to be admitted ad lecturam alicujus libri facultatis artium
Logices Aristotelis, which is the admission to the Degree of Bach. of Arts, and
in the time of Lent the same Year, he did complete that Degree by Determination
in School-street. It does also Ibid sub an. 1524.
appear that the said Tho. Elyot was in the beginning of Aug. an. 1524.
admitted ad lecturam alicujus libri Institutionem, that is to the Degree of
Bach. of the Civil Law. Now if we could find, that Sir Tho. Elyot was about 50
Years of Age when he died, then we may certainly conclude that Elyot the Bac.
of Arts and of the Civil Law, might be the same with him, otherwise we cannot
well do it. After he had left the University, he traveled beyond the Seas, and
upon his return was introduced into the Court: Whereupon being made known to
the King, (a lover of Scholars) who found him to be a Person of good parts,
conferred on him the honor of Knighthood, and employed him in certain Embassies
bejond the Seas, particularly to the Emperor Charles the 5th. at what time his
great Friend and Crony Sir Tho. More was beheaded. He was a very good
Grammarian, Gracian, Poet, Philosopher, Physician, and what not to complete a
Gentleman. He was admired by, and beloved of, Scholars, and his memory was
celebrated by them in their respective works, particularly by In Excomiis
erudit. v^^corum, ut supra. p. 83.
Leland his contemporary. The truth is, his Learning in all kind of knowledge,
brought much honor to all the Gentry and Nobility of England. He has
transmitted to posterity,

The Castle of health. Land. 1541. 1572. 80. 95, etc. in oct.

The Governor, in 3 Books. Land. 1544 47. 80. etc. in oct.

Of the Education of Children. Land. in qu.

Banquet of sapience. Land. in oct.

Preservative against the fear of death.

De rebus memorabilibus Angliae. For the completing of which, he had read and
perused many old Monuments of England. See in Rog. Ascham's Treatise of
Archery, in two Books. p. 28.

A Defense, or Apology for good Women.

Bibliotheca Eliotae. Elyots Library, or Dictionary. Land. 1541. etc. fol.
Which work, Thom. Cooper augmented, and enriched with 33000 words and phrases,
besides a fuller account of the true signification of words. Sir Tho. Elyot
also translated from Greek into English, The Image of Governance, compiled of
the Arts and Sciences by Emperor Alexander Severus. Land. 1556, 1594, etc. oct.
and from Lat. into Engl. (1) St. Cypreans Sermon of the mortality of Man. Land.
1534 in oct. (2) The rule of a Christian life, written by Picus Earl of
Mirandula. Printed there the same Year in oct. See more among the translations
of Tho. Lupset. numb. 38. This worthy Knight (who was a servant to the King)
was buried in the Church of Carleton in Cambridgshire (of which County he had
been Sheriff) 25. March in Fifteen hundred forty and six, Cambridgshire, he had
one or more in Hampshire.

JOHN LONGLAND received his first breath in a Henley in Oxfordshire, was first
made a Semicommoner or Demie, and afterward Fellow, of Magdalen College: About
which time being Master of Arts and in Orders, he addicted himself very
severely to study and devotion, and became famous for his exemplary life and
conversation. In 1505, he was made Principal of Magd. Hall, in 1510 (2. Hen.
8.) he was admitted to the reading of the sentences, and in the Year after he
proceeded in Divinity. In December. an. 1514, he succeeded Dr. Will. Atwater in
the Deanery of Salisbury, and in 1519, he was made Canon of Windsore: At which
time he being in great favor with the King for his excellent way of Preaching,
he did not only make him his Confessor, but also, upon the death of Atwater,
Bishop of Lincoln, and about that time Lord Almoner. To the same See therefore
he being consecrated 5. May 1521 had restitution Rot. p^t. 13. H. 8. p. 1.
made to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto 26. June following. In
1528. or thereabouts, he was the first Man of account that mentioned a divorce
to the King, to be between him and his Qu. Catherine; for which afterward,
when it was known, he was much blamed, and the more, because he took all
occasions to forward, and not in the least to contradict, it. In 1532, he was
elected Chancellor of the University of Oxen, which office he keeping to his
dying day, showed himself a special Friend thereunto in maintaining it
privileges, and in exhibiting (as he had done before) to the wants of certain
Scholars, and in solely maintaining others. I have seen diverse Epistles written
to him from the venerable House of Regents and Non-Regents, wherein they, in an
high manner, do proclaim his Religion and Doctrine, and do not stick to compare
In reg. Epist FF. ep. 93. 145. etc.
him to Joseph the Patriarch. His writings are these.

Declamatio ( five concio) coram reverendiss. in Chapter patribus. Domino, D. Thoma
Romans Ecclesiae Presbytero Cardinali, Ebor. Archiep. etc. and laurentio
Cardinali, sedis Apost. de latere quoque Legato, principio visitationis Ordinis
S. Benedicti apud Westmonasterium initae, 10. Jan. 1519. in Genesis 18. Descendam
and videbo, etc.

Concio babita coram eruditiff. Oxoniae Academiae auditorio in jaciendo
collegii Cardinalis fundamento, an. 1525. in Prove. 9. Sapientia aedificavit
sibi domum.

Concio habita coram celeberrimo conventu, tum Archiepiscoporum, cum
Episcoporum, caeteraeque multitudinis in occidentalis caenobii ( Westminster)
Sanctuario, 27 Nov. 1527. in Psalm. 101. Tu exurgens Domine misereberis Sion.

These three Latin Sermons beforementioned, were printed at London in fol. by
Rich. Pynsen the King's Printer, and dedicated by the Author of them to Dr.
Warham Archbishop of Canterbury.

Quinque sermones sextis Quadragesimae feriis, habiti coram R. Hen. 8. an.
1517. Prima in Ezeck. 18. Anima quae peccaverit, ipsa morietur. Reliquae in
Matthew. 21. Regnum Dei dabitur genti facienti fructus ejus. -- Printed by Rich.
Pynson beforementioned, and by their Author dedicated to Rich. Kedermyster
Abbat of Winchcomb. All the said Sermons are on one volume in fol. but not said
when printed.

Expositio concionalis Psalmi sexti: an. 1518.

Expositio conc. 2di. Psalmi paenitentialis, coram Regia Majestate. an. 1519.
This is Psalm. 31.

Conciones expositativae in tertium Psalmum paenitent. coram R. Maj. an. 1520.
This is Psalm 37.

Conciones expos. in 50 Psalm. paenitent. coram Rege; an. 1521, and 1522.

All which Expositions and Sermons, were, except the first, printed at London
in fol. by Rob. Redman 1532. But the Reader is to note, that all the Latin
Sermons and Expositions that I have mentioned under this Author Longland,
having been all or most preached in the English tongue, were translated into
Lat. by Thom. Key of Allsouls Coll. as I shall tell you when I come to him.

Sermon before the King on Good Friday, on Heb. 13. 10. 11. 12. 13. Land. 1538.
qu. A Copy of which, or at least part, you may see in J. Fox's Book of the Acts
and Mon. of the Church, etc. This Dr. Longland departed this mortal life on the
7. of May in Fifteen hundred forty and seven: Wooburne in Bedfordshire, (where
he died) his heart in the Cathedral of Lincoln, under the blessed Sacrament of
the high Altar, and his body in the Chapel of Eaton Coll. near Windsore, of
which probably he had been Fellow. Over his Grave was a Marble-stone soon after
laid, with an Inscription thereon, a Copy of which is printed in Hist. and
Antiq. Univ. Oxon, lib. 2. p. 193. b. 194. a. In the Cath. Church at Lincoln,
near to the South door, (but somewhat Westward) was a fair Tomb of Marble, in
the form of an Altar, built in an arch in the Wall for the said B Longland. On
the Freeze above the same, is this Inscription, Longa terra mensura ejus,
Dominus dedit. On the South side thereof is a beautiful Chapel, wherein has
been a Chantry for the said Bishop, as some think. He gave diverse Books to
Magd. Coll. Library, some to that of Oriel, and others to the Students of
Durham (now Trinity) Coll. in Oxon. He gave also the second Bell at Wooburne of
fine metal silver found, which was always afterward called Bishop Longlands.
Bell. He built an Alms house at the place of his nativity ( Henley) Southward
of the Chancel, but for how many poor People, or with what revenue he endowed
it, (having been originally large) I know not. Sure I am that now seven Persons
live therein, and have weekly but six pence a piece for their allowance, and is
governed by the Corporation there.

ARTHUR KELTON seems to have been born of a Shorpshire, though said to be a
Welsh Man; and, after he had made a considerable progress in Arts, applied his
mind mostly to the reading of the Histories of Britain, wherein he much
excelled in his riper Years. But being withal very poetically given, he must
forsooth write and publish his Lucubrations in verse; whereby for rhyme sake,
many material matters, and the due timing of them, are omitted, and so
consquently rejected by Historians and Antiquaries, as his

Chronicle of the Brutes. Land. 1547 in oct. Printed in an old English
Character. The Preface of which, being also written in Verse, is by the Author
directed to K. Ed. 6. At the end of the said Chronicle is,

A Genealogy of the Brutes -- This is drawn from Ofiris the first King of Egypt
down to K. Ed. 6. of England, and contains but about 32 Generations, which
shows that the Author was ignorant in Genealogies. He has also written another
Book of Poetry in praise of the Welsh Men, dedicated to Sir Will. Herbert, but
this I have not yet seen, Clar. 1548.
nor other (if any) of his things in Prose. He was living at Shrewsbury in the
time of King Ed. 6. and, for ought I know to the contrary died also, and was
buried, there.

ANDREW BOARD, who writes himself Andreas Perforatus, was born, as it seems, at
Pevensey commonly called Pensey in Sussex, and not unlikely educated in
Wykehams School near to Winchester, brought up at Oxford, (as In his
Introduction to knowledge, cap. 35.
he says) but in what house, unless in Heart. Hall I know not. Before he had
taken a Degree, he entered himself a Brother of the Carthusian Order at, or near
to, London; where continuing till he was wearied out with the seventy of that
Order, he left it, and for a time applied his Muse to the Study of Physic in
this University. Soon after, having a rambling head, and an unconstant mind, he
traveled through most parts of Eurepe (thorough and round about Christendom,
and out of Christendom, as he Ibid. cap. 7.
says) and into some parts of Africa. At length upon his return, he settled at
Winchester, where he practiced his faculty, and was much celebrated for his
good success therein. In 1541. and 42, I find him living at Mountpelier in
France, at which time, I persume, he took the Degree of Doctor of Physic, and
soon after being incorporated in the same Degree at Oxon, lived for a time at
Pevensey in Sussex, and afterward at his beloved City of Winchester; where, as
at other places, it was his custom to drink water three days in a week, to wear
constantly a shirt of hair, and every night to hang his shroud and socking or
burial-sheet at his beds feet, according as he had done, as I conceive, while
he was a Carthusian. He always professed Celibacy, and did zealously write
against such Monks, Priests, and Friars, that violated their Vow by Marriage,
as many did when their respective Houses were dissolved by King Hen. 8. But
that matter being irksom to many in those days, was the reason, I think, why a
Calvinstical Joh. Ponet B. of Winchester.
Bishop, (who was then, as it seems, married,) fell foul upon him by reporting
In his Apology fully answering, etc. Tho. Martins Book, etc. Printed 1555. p
32. See more in T^^. Martin.
openly that under color of virginity and strictness of life, he kept three
Whores at once in his Chamber at Winchester, to serve not only himself, but
also to help the Virgin Priests, etc. about 1547. How true this is I cannot
say, (though the matter as the Bishop reports, was examined before several
Justices of Peace) because the Book here quoted, contains a great deal of
passion, and but little better language, than that of Foul-mouthed Bale, not
only against him ( And. Board) but also against Dr. Joh. Story, Dr. Th.
Martin, etc. The first of whom, he says, kept a Wench called Magd. Bowyer
living in Grandpoole in the Suburbs of Oxon, and the other, another called
Alice Lamb, living at the Christopher Inn in the said City. But letting these
matters pass, (notwithstanding I have read elsewhere, that the said three
Whores, as the Bishop calls them, were only Patients, that occasionally
recurred to his house) I cannot otherwise but say, that our Author Board, was
esteemed a noted Poet, a witty and ingenious Person, and an excellent Physician
of his time; and that he is reported by some to have been, not only Physician
to K. Hen. 8. but also a Member of the College of Physicians at London, to whom
he dedicated his Breviarie of Health. He has written,

A Book of the introduction of knowledge, the which does teach a Man to speak
part of all manner of Languages, and to know the usage and fashion of all
manner of Counties, and for to know the most part of all manner of coins of
money. Land. 1542. qu. Dedicated to the Lady Mary Daughter of K. Hen. 8. by an
Epist. dat. at Mountpelyer 3. May 1542. This Book is partly written in Verse,
and partly in Prose, contained in 39 Chapters; every one of which has in its
beginning the Picture of a Man, sometimes two or three, Printed from a wooden
cut. Before the first Chapter, which treats of the natural disposition of an
English man, is the picture of a naked Man with a piece of cloth lying on his
right arm, and a pair of Scissers in his left hand, with a Copy of Verses
Printed under him, the two first of which are these,

I am an English Man, and naked I stand here, Musing in my mind, what raiment I
shall were.

Before the seventh Chapter is the picture of our Author Board standing in a
Pew, with a Canopy over it, having a Gown on, with sleeves a little wider than
an ordinary coat, a Laurel on his Head, and a Book before him on a desk, with
this title of the said Chapter under him. The VII. Chapyter shows how the
auctor of this Book had dwelt in Scotland, and other Islands, and did go through
and round about Christendom and out of Christendom, declaring the properties of
all the Regions, Countries, and Provinces the which he did travel through. He
has also written,

The Breviary of health, wherein are remedies for all manner of sicknesses and
diseases, which may be in Man or Woman, expressing the obscure terms of Greek,
Lat. Barbary and English, concerning Physic and Surgery. Land. 1547. 48.
57. 87, etc. in qu. in four Books.

Dietary of health. Land. 1576. oct. Sec. Edition.

The merry tales of the mad Men of Gotham -- Printed at London in the time of
K. Hen. 8. in whose Reign and after, it was accounted a Book full of wit and
mirth by Scholars; and Gentlemen. Afterward, being often printed, is now sold
only on the stalls of Ballad-singers.

A right pleasant and merry history of the Mylner of Abington, with his Wife
and his fair Daughter, and of two poor Scholars of Cambridge -- Pr. at Land. by
Rich. Jones in qu. Andr. Bords name is not to it, but the Copy of the Book
which I saw, did belong to Th. Newton of Cheshire, whom I shall hereafter
mention, and by him it is written in the title that Dr. Board was the Author. He
has also written a Book of Prognostics, another of Urines, and a third of
Every Region, Country, and Province, which shows the Miles, Leeges, distance
from City to City, and from Town to Town, with the noted things in the said
Cities and Towns. This last, the Author lent to Thom. Cromwell of
Bishops-Waltham near to Winchester, written fairly with his own hand, but he
afterward being taken up with State Affairs, and matters of high concern, lost
the Book to the great grief of the Author, otherwise he would have published
it. At length after many rambles to and fro in this World, he was made In Reg.
Populwell in offic. Praerog. Cant. Qu. 29.
Prisoner in the close wards of the Fleet in London, (the reason why, I cannot
justly say) where dying in the Month of Apr. in Fifteen hundred forty and nine,
Bride, otherwise St. Bridget, for in that Parish is the Prison called the Fleet
situated. In his Will Ibid.
dated the eleventh of Apr. an. 1549. and proved the 25. of the same Month and
in the same Year, he did constitute one Ric. Matthew, (without the addition of
Nephew, Kinsman, or natural Son) his Heir, left him his two tenements in the
Sooke in the Town of Lynne in Norfolk, his tenements with appurtenances which
he had by the death of his Brother, in Pevens^y, and his House and Chattels in
and near Winchester. Joh. Bale in the very ill Language that he gives of Dr.
Board, says In lib. De script. maj. Britan. p. 105. post cent. 12.
that the Brothelhouse which he kept for his Brother-Virgins being discovered,
took physical poison to hasten his death, which was, as he says, (but false)
in 1548. This is the language of one who had been a Bishop in Ireland.

WILLIAM HUGH a Yorkshire Man Ibid. cent. 9. number. 72.
born, was C. Chr. Coll. but whether in the condition of a Chorister, Clerk, or
Chaplain, I know not. In the Year 1543, he took the Degree of M. of Arts, being
about that time compelled to bestow in a manner all his time in teaching Young
Scholars. Afterward he was favored in his studies by the Lady Denny living at
Court, to whom, I suppose, he was Chaplain. He has written,

The troubled Man's Medicine, wherein we may learn patiently to suffer all kind
of adversity. In two parts. Land. 1567. oct. the 2. or 3. edit. He also
translated into English, a Book intit. by him thus. A Book of Bertram the
Priest entreating of the body and blood of Christ, written to Charles the Great
700 Years ago. Land. 1548. oct. This Book was reviewed and corrected by Tho.
Wilcocks a Minister in Land. printed at Land. 1582. oct. published again with
some alterations, refinements, and corrections from the errors of the former
translation, with an addition of Two short discourses against purgatory and
invocation of Saints. By S. D. -- Land. 1686. oct. To which is prefixed the
large Preface of Sir Humph. Lynd. and a dedicatory epistle of S. D. to Sir S.
B. But these translations being esteemed by many not to be well done, Will.
Hopkins Bac. of Div. and Prebendary of Worcester (sometimes of Trin. Coll. in
Oxon) made and published another the same Year. See more in Humph. Lynd under
the Year 1636. Our Author Hugh has written, and translated, as it is said,
other things, but such I have not yet seen, nor know I any thing more of him,
than this, that he died by a rupture of a vein in Corpus Chr. Coll. before Jo.
Bale in lib. MS. De Scriptorib Anglicis, Inter Cod. MS. Seldom. in bib. Bod. p.
201. b.
the Feast of St. Michael in Fifteen hundred forty and nine.

THOMAS STERNHOLD was in all likelihood Vide Balium int. Script. maj. Britan.
cent. 9. nu. 79.
Hampshire, but whether educated in Wykeham's School near Winchester, is as yet
doubtful. Sure it is, that he having spent some time in this University, left
it without the honor of a Degree, and retiring to the Court of K. Hen. 8. was
made Groom of the Robes to him, and when that King died he left him in his
Will 100 Marks. Afterward he continued in that office under K. Ed. 6. at which
time he was in some esteem in the Royal Court for his grave vein in Poetry, and
other trivial Learning. But being a most zealous Reformer; and a very strict
liver, he became so scandalized the amorous and obscene Songs used in the
Court, that he forsooth turned into English meeter 51 of David's Psalms, and
caused musical notes to be set to them, thinking thereby that the Courtiers
would sing them instead of their sonnets, but did not, only some few excepted.
However the Poetry and Music being admirable, and the best that was made and
composed in those times, they were thought fit afterward to be sung in all
Parochial Churches, as they do yet continue. All those Psalms which he put
into rhyme, have the Letters T. S. set before, to distinguish, them from
others. What other Poetry, or what Prose this our Poet Sternhold has composed,
and left behind, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he died in
London or Westminster, In Offic Praerog. Cant. in reg. Populwell. Qu. 37.
Testament dat. 22. Aug. and proved 12. of Sept. an. 1549, wherein he is styled
Groom of the Kings Majesty's Robes, it appears that he died seized of Lands in
Slacksted in Hampshire, of the Farms of Conynger, Willersley, and Holgreaves
in the same County, and of Lands in the Parish of Bodmin and elsewhere in
Cornwall. Contemporary with Sternhold was Joh. Hopkyns, who is styled to be
Baleus in Script. maj. Britan. p. 113. inter cent. 12. and 13.
Britanicarum Poetarum sui temporis non infimus, as indeed by the generality
living in the Reign of Ed. 6. he was so, if not more, esteemed. He turned into
Meeter 58 of David's Psalms, which are to this day sung in Churches; and in all
editions, of the said Psalms, his (which he translated) has set before them
the two Letters J. H. Whether this Poet, who was living in the 3. and 4. of
Phil. and Mary, Dom. 1556, and after, was of this University of Oxon, I dare
not yet affirm. However the Reader is to know that one Joh. Hopkyns was
admitted Bach. of Arts thereof 36. Hen. 8. Dom. 1544. which he completed the
same Year by Determination. I find also one Job. Hopkyns of Waldingfeild in
Suffolk Clerk, who dying in October. 1570, was buried in the Churchyard there,
leaving then behind him a Son to be brought Ib. in Off-Praerog. in reg. Lion,
Qu. 36.
up in learning. Besides these two, I find others to have had hands in making
the said Psalms to run in meeter, as (1) Will. Whittyngham afterward the
unworthy Dean of Durbam, whom I shall hereafter mention; and (2) Tho. Norton of
Sharpenhaule or Sharpenhoe in Bedfordshire a forward and busy Calvinist in the
beginning of Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, who then was accounted eminent for his
Poetry and making of Tragedies, as I shall tell you in Tho. Sakvile under the
Year 1608. This T. Norton, who seems to have been a Barrester, made 27 of the
said Psalms of David to run in rhyme, but whether he was educated in this
University, is to me as yet uncertain. As for other works of his that are
published, which are now in a manner lost, are these (1) An Epistle to the
Queens poor deceived Subjects of the North Country, drawn into Rebellion by the
Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland. Land. 1569. oct. (2) A warning against
the dangerous practices of the Papists, etc. (2) A Bull granted by the Pope to
Dr. Harding, etc. and others, by reconcilement, and assoiling of English
Papists to undermine faith and allegiance to the Queen; with a true declaration
of the intention, etc. (4) A disclosing of the great Ball, and certain calves
that he has gotten, and especially the monster Bull that roared at my Lord
Bishops gate. (5) An addition declaratory to the Bulls, with a searching of the
maze. All which five pieces, were printed at Land. in oct. an. 1569. He also
translated from Lat. into English. (1) Epistle to Edw. Duke of Somerset. Land.
1550. oct. written by Pet. Martyr. (2) Institutions of Christian Religion.
Land. 1587. qu. written by Jo. Calvin. (3) The larger Catechism. Land. 1571.
qu. written by Alex. Nowell, besides other things which I have not yet seen.

Kentish Man born, near of kin to Sir Jo. Heron Knight. Master of the Jewel-house
to K. Hen. 8. and of the same Family with those of Barmyng in Kent, was elected
Fellow of Allsouls Coll. in 1538, took the Degrees in Arts, that of Master
being completed in 1544; at which time he was in great esteem for his singular
skill in the Latin Tongue, for in that Language Baleus tells Int. Script. Maj.
Britan. ut supr. Cent. 9. nu. 59.
us, that he wrote several things, which he had not seen, and had translated
others from the English into the Latin Tongue; one of which was Explicatio
petititoria adversus expilatores plebis; written originally by Rob. Crowley, as
I shall tell you when I come to him. I find one Joh. Heron of Chiselhurst in
Kent to have been tampering much with Necromancy, to the great affrightment of
his Neighbors. Whereupon being complained of to the higher Powers, he was bound
in a Papers of State, at Whiteha^l.
Bond of an 100 Marks an. 1540, not to practice again Necromancy, Astronomy,
Calculations, and other experiments, etc. Whether this Jo. Heron be the same
with the former, I know not. Sure I am that this Heron the Conjuror was not
unknown to Job. Waller and Will. Cobbie two young Fellows of Kings Coll. in
Cambridge, who studied and were conversant in the Black art, in the Reign of
Ed. 6.

Shirrie became a Demie or Semi-commoner of Magd. Coll. about the Year 1522,
took the Degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed 1531. About which
time he was either Usher or Master of the School joining to the said College;
but whether ever Fellow thereof, I find not. He was a Person elegantly learned,
as Int. Script. Maj. Britan. p. 107. int. cent. 12. and 13.
Bale says, and has written,

A Treatise of Schemes and Tropes. Land. 1550. (oct.) gathered out of the best
Grammarians and Orators. He has also translated from Lat. into English. (1) A
declamation showing that Children should from their Infancy be gently brought
up in learning. Land. 1550. (oct.) (2) Homilies on the sixth of St. John. Land.
1550. in oct. Written by John Brentius. Clar. 1550.
(3) The Letter of St. Basil the Great to Gregory Nazianzen, showing that many
hundred years ago, certain godly Men used the life commonly called monastical.
Clar. 1550.
Land. in oct. This our Author Shirrie has written and translated other
things, which made him to be much esteemed by learned Men in the Reign of K.
Ed. 6.

JOHN GRIFFIN or Griffith a Welsh Man born, and Cistercians in the Monastery of
Hales Owen in Worcestershire, was educated among those of his Order in the
College of St. Bernard in the North Suburb of Oxon, but what degree he took I
cannot yet find. Several of both his names, and of his time have taken Degrees
in the Canon Law and Divinity, but which of them is this that I am now upon, I
cannot say. He is reported to have been a pious and learned Man, but being
unacquainted with the dealings of the World had like to have been drawn over to
the Reformed Religion, but was in due time Jo. Pits. in Aet. 16. nu. 983.
fastened in his faith again to the great joy of the Romans Catholics, who held
him to be a most excellent Preacher, whether in the Lat. or English tongue. He
has published,

Conciones aestuales.

Conciones hyemales. Clar. 1550.
With other things which I have not yet seen. As for the time of his death and
place of burial, I cannot yet find, he having been several Years thrust out of
his Monastery at the dissolution of Religious Houses. He was living in the
Reign of K. Ed. 6. and perhaps in that of Qu. Mary.

NICHOLAS KRACH, or Karche, or Chracher, Kratcher, or Kratzer, (so many ways I
find him written) was born at Munchen in Bavaria, and educated in the
Universities of Colen and Wyttenberg till he was Bach. of Arts: Afterward
coming into England; and at length to the knowledge of Fox Bishop of
Winchester, was made by him Fellow of his College called Corpus Christi, and
admitted thereunto on the fourth of July 1517. About that time he reading
Astronomy in the University by the command of K. Hen. 8. was soon after made by
Cardinal Wolsey his Mathematick Reader when he first settled his Lectures
there. In Feb. 1522. he was incorporated Bach. of Arts, as he had stood at
Colen and Wyttenberg, and in the same Month was licensed to proceed in Arts;
which Degree he completed in an Act celebrated 23. March following, being then
esteemed -- ita Vid. praefat. ad Guidon. Bonatum de Astronomia, edit Bas. 1550.
bonus and probus, ut majore quam Mathematicorum fortuna sit dignus, and ita
suae Artis peritus, ut solus isthic artifex habere debeat. He wrote at the
desire of Will. Tyler one of the Grooms of K. Hen. 8. his Belchamber.

Canones Horopti. MS. This Book which is dedicated to K. Hen. 8. in Corp. Chr.
Coll. Library; and no doubt there is, but that other Copies of it are in other
places.

De Compositione Horologeorum. MS. in the said Library. This is generally said
to be his, as the Annotation at the end, may in part prove it. He made the old
Dial, which is at this day in C. C. C. Garden, and that standing on a Pillar in
St. Mary's South Churchyard in the High Streat of the City of Oxon. On which,
soon after, was hung up the Universities condemnation of the Doctrine of Luther.
This famous Mathematician of his time, Clar. 1550.
was living in the Year 1550. (4 Ed. 6.) and after his death, (which I think
soon followed) many of his Books came into the hands of that eminent
Mathematician Dr. John Dee, and some into those of Dr. Rich. Forster a noted
Physician, and Mathematician also. See more of this Nich. Kratzer, in Hist. and
Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 247. b. lib. 2. p. 35. b.

DAVID CLAPHAM the eldest Son and Heir of Job. Claph. and he the fourth Son of
Tho. Claph. of Beamesley in Yorkshire Esquire; was born, as I conceive, in that
County, and after he had spent some time in Trivials, did solely addict his
mind to the study of the Civil Law, but whether he took a Degree in that
faculty in does not appear. Afterward he retired to Doctors Commons, became a
noted Proctor in the Arches, and for his ingenuity and good natural parts was
beloved of Sir Will. Cecill Secretary of State to K. Ed. 6. and other noted Men
of that time -- praeter Legis peritiam, in qua plurimum excellebat (as one Joh.
Bale in cent. 9. nu. 44.
who knew him well tell us) in diversis scientiis eruditus fuit. He has
translated from Latin into English. (1) A Treatise of Nobility. (2) The
excellency of Women^kind. Both Printed at Land. 1542. in oct. and written
originally by Corn. Agrippa. (3) The praise of Matrimony. Land. in oct. written
by the said Agrippa and Erasmus. What other things he has translated, or what
he has written I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that, after by his
endeavors he had obtained a considerable Estate, he concluded his last day in
his House near to Doct. Com. July in Fifteen hundred fifty and one. Whereupon
his body was buried in the then now Church of St. Faith under part of the Cath.
Church of St. Paul within the City of London, leaving behind him several
Children which he had by Joan his Wife; the eldest of which was Thomas, whose
posterity did lately remain at Helpeston in Northamptonshire.

Ut inter Cod. MSS. Radul. Sheldon de Beoly in Coll. Armorum. Land. number. 113.
p. 56.
Son of Will. Cope or Coope of Banbury in Oxfordshire Esquire; sometimes Cofferer
to K. Hen. 7. by Joan his second Wife, Daughter and Heir of John Spencer of
Hodnell (in Warwickshire) was educated in this University, but in what Coll.
unless in Oriel, wherein studied several of his Surname in the time of K. Hen.
8. and K. Ed. 6. I know not. Afterward he went into France, Germany, Italy,
and elsewhere; in which places visiting the Universities, and joining his
company to the most learned Men of them, became an accomplished Gentleman, wrote
several things beyond the Seas, as well as at home, as it appears from certain
Authors, and from an Epigram made in his praise by Joh. Bapt. Mantuan. Among
them is only this Ibid. in Bal. ut sup. cent. 11. number. 93.
known to Authors.

Godly meditations on 20 select Psalms, necessary for them that desire to have
the dark words of the Prophet declared. Also for those that delight in the
contemplation of the spiritual meaning of them. Land. 1547. qu. The twenty
Psalms that the meditations are on, are the 1. 6. 12. 13. 23. 32. 49. 51. 73.
84. 90. 102. 103. 104. 116. 121. 130. 138. 139. 146. Afterward he received the
honor of Knighthood, and dying in Summer time in Fifteen hundred fifty and one,
Hanwell near to Banbury in Oxfordshire, leaving then behind him a Son named
Edward. As for Will. Cope or Coope Cofferer to K. Hen. 7. beforementioned, he
purchased an Estate in, and near to, Banbury, and dying 7. Apr. 1513. was
buried in the Church at Banbury, I find one Michael Cope to have been a zealous
Calvinist at Geneva and other places, a frequent Preacher in the French Tongue
and Author in the French Language of (1) A faithful and familiar exposition on
Ecclesiastes, an. 1557. Which edition being amended and corrected, was
published again at Geneva, 1563. in qu. (2) A godly and learned exposition upon
the Proverbs of Sol^m^n. When this last was first Printed, I know not. Sure
it is, that being translated into English by one Marcelline Outred for the
benefit of his Countrymen, was Printed at London in 1580. in a thick qu.
Whether this Mich. Cope was of the same Family with that of Sir Anthony's
beforementioned, or was educated in Oxon. I cannot yet tell.

Redmayne, descended from those of his name in Yorkshire, was near allied to
Cuthb. Tonstall Bishop of Durham, by whose counsel and advice he became
conversant from his Childhood in the Study of Learning. At the first Foundation
of Corp. Chapter Coll. he was a Student Ut in quibusd. Excerptis sive collect. Tho.
Cati Antiquarii Oxon. MS. quondam in bib. Tho. Allen.
there for some time under the care and government of Mr. J. Claymond the first
President: Thence he went to Paris, where he improved his Studies till he was
21 Years of Age. Afterward returning to his native Country of England, he
settled in St. John's Coll. in Cambridge, where by his and Joh. Cheeks example
of excellency in learning, of godliness in living, of diligence in studying, of
counsel in exhorting by good order in all things, were bred up so many learned
Men in that one Coll. as 'twas thought by Rog. Ascham in his Schoolmaster,
etc. edit. 1589. fol. 19. b.
one, the whole University of Lovaine in many Years was never able to afford.
In 1537, he commenced Doctor of Divinity, and about that time was made Orator
of that University, and afterward the first Master or Head of Trinity Coll.
and a Dignitary in the Church. But that which is most observable, is that when
he came first to that University, being then very well versed in the Greek and
Lat. tongues, and adorned with knowledge by the diligent reading of Cicero, it
so fell out, that Joh. Cheek and Tho. Smyth (being at that time young Men, but
afterward Knights) were stirred up with a kind of emulation of his parts, and
the honor that was daily done unto him. Whereupon being very desirous to follow
that which he had gained, and then did profess and teach; they threw aside
their sordid barbarisms, and applied themselves to the Eloquence of Plato,
Aristotle, and Cicero. The truth is, by Redman's profound knowledge in the
Tongues, Humanity and Divinity, he obtained many admirers, and thereby gained
Proselytes to the great advantage of the refinement of the Gr. and Lat. Tongues
in the University of Cambridge. He has written,

Opus de justificatione. Antw. 1555. qu.

Hymnus in quo peccator justificationem quaerens, rudi imagine describitur.
Printed with the former work.

The complaint of Grace; containing in it much godly learning, and verity of
matter. Land. 1556. in oct. published by Tho. Smith Servant to Qu. Mary. This,
I suppose, is the same Book with that which Bale and Pits entitle De gratia,
lib. 1. translated into English by Joh. Young of Cambridge. This Dr. Redman
also took pains in compiling the first edition of the Liturgy, or
Common Prayer, in the Year 1549. and dying in the College of Westminster (of
which he was Prebendary) was buried in the North Isle of the Abby-Church there
dedicated to St. Peter, about the latter end of Nov. Lelands Page 46.
Encomia, and in the Epistles Lib. 1. ep. 5.
of Roger Ascham his sometimes friend and crony, as also in Joh. Fox his Book
of Acts and Monuments of the Church, etc. where you will find In the Year 1551.
his conference or communication had with Rich. Wilks, 2. Nov. 1551 the Doctor
being then sick at Westminster; and another conference with Mr. Alex. Nowell
then Schoolmaster in Westminster and certain others, with notes of his censure
and judgment touching certain points of Christ's Religion; which was made when
the Doctor laid on his Deathbed. Whether this John Redmayne was Archdeacon of
Taunton, and Preb. of Mylverton in the Church of Wells, in the time of Ed. 6. I
cannot justly say, because he died in 1551, and that those Dignities were not
filled up till May 1554. when then John Fitz-James was collated to them per
mortem Johannis Redmayne See more in the Fasti, an. 1508. 1524. and 1543.

DAVID TOLLEY or Talley called by Leland the Tavelegus, and by himself
Taulaeus, was born at a Mercate Town called Kingsbridge in Devonshire, became a
Student of this University about 1517. (9. H. 8.) took the Degrees of Arts, as
a Member of the Hall of St. Mary the Virgin, that of Master being completed
1527. About that time he applied his Genie to the faculty of Medicine, took the
Degree of Bachelaur, and in 1534. and before, he was dispensed with by the
venerable Regents to proceed in the said faculty; but whether he was admitted
or proceeded, it does not appear. Sure I am, that he was then noted to be very
able for the practice therein in this University, accounted also a good
Latinist and Grecian, and to be a Person Ibid. in Bulco de Script. Maj. Britan.
cent. 9. nu. 52.
praeclari ingenii, atque optimarum artium cognitione locupletus. He has
written,

Progymnasmata Grammaticae Graecae. Written for the use of Prince Ed. and to
him dedicated by the Author, with an Epistle before it beginning thus, Octavus
jam agitur annus, etc.

Grammatica Regia.

Themata Homeri. With other matters pertaining to Grammar. In 1547. or
thereabouts, I find this Dav. Tolley to be made one of the senior Students of
Chapter Chapter by the name of David Towle, (being then 41 Years of Age) after K. Hen.
8. had settled the Cathedral there; at which time and before, Clar. 155^.
he taught Grammar to young Students of this University. When he died I know
not, nor any thing else of him, only that his name occurs among the senior
Students that were Theologists of that house, in the Years 1551. and 52. Joh.
Baleus in his Manuscript Inter cod. MS. Seldom. p. 33. b.
De Scriptoribus Anglicis styles this Dav. Tolley, Angliae Papistarum Malleus,
being probably then ( temp. Ed. 6.) so accounted, but in his Printed Book
published at Basil 1559, he mentions no such matter, which makes me think
that Tolley conformed in the time of Qu. Mary. if he was then living.

Morenus as he writes himself, was a Devonian born, admitted Scholar of Corp.
Chr. Coll. 23. Feb. 1535. and afterward Fellow, and Master of Arts. About
which time entering into holy Orders, he became noted soon after for his
profoundness in Divinity, and his great knowledge in the Greek tongue, being in
the latter end of King Hen. 8. Reader thereof in his College, and a private
instructor of John Jewel, though afterward a hater of his Opinions. In 1551,
he was admitted Bach. of Divin. and about the same time studied Physic, as
having no good wishes for reformation, which tended to the ruin, (as he
thought) of the Church. He is styled by a learned Laur. Humph. in Vita Joh.
Juelli, p. 25.
Author, not of his opinion, to be homo Graece doctus, sed idem Graecorum more
leviculus and bibaculus, etc. Afterward he was patronized in his studies by
Will. Roper Esquire; whose Daughter, by Margaret his Wife, (Daughter of Sir Thomas
More) he instructed in the Latin and Greek tongues. He has written several
things, but whether extant, I know not. Among them are, Epistolae ad D. Will.
Roperum. Epitaphia diversa. Opuscula Graece and Latin. Written with his own
hand, and said ( Rob. Hegge in Cat. Schol. and Soc. Coll. C. C. Ox. MS.
to be (tho I cannot yet in all my searches find them) in the Bodleian Library.
He also translated into English several of the Greek and Latin Orations, made
by the said Daughter of Will. Roper, as by his Epistles in appears. Clar. 1551.
What became of this Joh. Morwen when Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown (if he
lived to that time) I cannot tell, unless he was received into the Family of
the said Roper a great lover of learning, and a reliever and comforter of
distressed Catholics.

Leyland, that singular light and ornament of Great Britain, was born in
London, but in what Parish, or Year, it appears not, howbeit the day of his
Birth, he himself is pleased to tell In Encomiis, trophaeis, etc. edit. 1589.
p. 31.
us. In his younger Years being deprived of his relations, he was taken into
the protection of one Tho. Miles a great favourer of learning, who not only
exhibited to his wants, but also took care to have him instructed in Grammar,
and other juvenile learning, under the famous Will. Lilye. From his School he
was sent to Cambridge, where, as he himself says, he received the first seeds
of Academical Learning in Christ's College, and from thence, as in another
place he tells us, he went to Oxon, but to what College or Hall therein, he
adds not. Howbeit by sure tradition from Thom. Key of Allsouls College to Thom.
Allen of Glocest. Hall, it appears that he spent several Years in study in the
said Coll. of Allsouls, which is also noted by Will. Burton the Antiquary of
Leicestershire in the Collorary of some part of Leland's Life before the first
tome of his Collections. After he had spent some time there, he journied to
Paris, where he profited himself much by the reading and learning of Budaeus,
Faber, Paulus Aemilius, and Ruellus. Returning thence he entered into Holy
Orders, became Chaplain to K. Hen. 8. and Rector of Poppeling (sometimes
written Popering and Pepling) in the Marches of Calais. Afterward he became
Library Keeper to that King, and had a Commission from him under the broad
Seal, an. reg. 25. Dom. 1533. whereby he was empowered to make a search after
England's Antiquities, and peruse the Libraries of all Cathedrals, Abbeys,
Priories, Colleges, etc. as also all places wherein Records, Writings, and
secrets of Antiquity were reposed. Whereupon, in few Years after, obtaining a
special Pat. 28. Hen. 8. part. 1.
dispensation 12. Jul. 28. Hen. 8. to keep a Curate at Poppeling, and make his
residence in England, or elsewhere at his own liberty, he spent more than six
Years in rambling to and fro in this Nation, and in making researches into the
bowels of antiquity, undertaking so immense a task, that the very thoughts of
completing it, did, as it is said, distract him. At the time of the dissolution
of Monasteries, he saw with very great pity what havoc was made of ancient
Monuments of learning, and if no remedy should be taken, they would all perish.
Whereupon, for prevention sake, he wrote a Letter Among the Papers of state.
to Cromwell the prime Secretary, dat. 16. July, wherein he entreats him to
give him aid and assistance in bringing to light many ancient Authors, and in
sending them to the King's Library; who, he knew well, had no little esteem for
them, and adds that -- it would be a great profit to Students, and honor to
this Realm; whereas now the Germans perceiving our deridiousness and
negligence, do senddayly young Scholars hither, that spoileth them, and cutteth
them out of Libraries, returning home and putting them abroad as Monuments of
their own Country, etc. On the 3. of Apr. 33. Hen. 8. Dom. 1542. he was Pat.
33. Hen. 8. p. 6.
presented to the Rectory of Hasely near to, and in the County of, Oxon; and in
the beginning of the said Month 1543, the King Pat. 34. Hen. 8. part. 8.
gave to him by the name of Job. Leland Scholar, and the King's Chaplain a
Canonry or Prebendship of Kings College (now Chapter Ch.) in Oxon; and about that
time the Prebendship of East-Knoll and W. Knoll near to Salisbury in Wiltshire;
but the Canonry of Chapter Chapter he lost in 1545, upon the surrender of that College
to the King, and in lieu thereof had no pension allowed him as other Canons
had, but preferment elsewhere. At length having made a grand collection of
antiquities, he retired to his habitation in the Parish of St. Michael in le
Querne in London, where spending about six Years more in composing such Books
that he had promised to the King, did at length (upon a foresight that he was
not able to perform his promise, or as the Roman Catholics say, that he had
degenerated from the ancient Religion) fall distracted and lost his sense,
being but a little before esteemed a Person of a clear judgment and of great
insight to discern between substantial and superficial learning. This his
distemper being made known to the King and his Council, His Majesty by Letters
Pattent Pat. 5. Ed. 6. part. 6.
dat. 21. March 5. Ed. 6. Dom. 1550. did grant the custody of him by the name
of John Laylond Junior, of St. Michaels Parish in le Querne, London, Clerk, to
his Brother John Laylond senior, and for his maintenance to receive the profits
of Hasely, Popplyng, E. Knoll, and W. Knoll beforementioned. He was esteemed
by the generality of Scholars of his time an excellent Orator and Poet, learned
in the Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, British, Saxon, Welsh, and
Scottish Tongues, a most diligent searcher into antiquity, and a favourer and
lover of all those that bent their minds that way. His enemies, or such that
cared not for him, as Pol. Virgil, Dr. Jo. Cay, etc. did use to say that he was
a vain glorious Person, and that he promised more than ever he was able to
perform, and others, that his Poetical wit made him so conceited, that it was
the chief reason of his frenzy. He has written,

Naenia in mortem Thomae Viati equitis incomparabilis. Land. 1542. It Is a Lat.
Poem in one sheet and an half in qu.

Genethliacom illustriss. Eadverdi principis Cambriae, Ducis Coriniae and
Comitis Palatini, etc. Printed 1543. A Lat. Poem in 4. sheets in qu.

Syllabus and interpretatio antiquarum dictionum, quae passim per libellum (
praedictum) lectore occurrunt. Printed with the former, an. 1543.

Assertio inclytiss. Arturii regis Britanniae. Land. 1544. qu.

Elenchus antiquarum nominum. Printed with the Assertio inc.

Cygnea Cantio. Land. 1545. It Is a Lat. Poem in about 5 sheet in qu. There
again 1658. in oct.

Commentarii in Cyg. cantionem indices Britannicae antiquitatis locupletissimi.
Printed with the two said Editions of Cyg. Cant.

Laudatio pacis. Land. 1546. A Lat Poem in 2 sh. in qu.

A New-years-gift to K. Hen. 8. (37 Year of his Reign) concerning his laborious
journey and search for Englands antiquities. Land. 1549. Oct. Published with
annotations thereon by Joh. Bale, who has added thereunto of his own. A
register of the names of English Writers, whom the second part of his work, De
Scriptorib. Britanniae, shall comprehend.

Principum ac illustrium aliquot and eruditorum in Anglia virorum, Encomia,
Trophaea, Genethliaca, and Epithalamia, etc. Land. 1589. qu. Published by Tho.
Newton of Cheshire.

These are all the Books composed by him, that are published. Those that he
left behind him in MS. are these following.

Collectaneorum volumen primum. Collections from various Authors, viz. from
Chronologies, ancient Charters, Leiger-Books, Histories, Annals, public and
private Writings, etc. -- Written with Lelands own hand (mostly in Latin) in
folio, containing 913 pages, and all collected from MSS. and nothing from
Authors that were then Printed. There are in this Book many needless additions
and illustrations put in by Will. Burton of Lindley, whom I shall anon mention,
who has written some part of the life of Leland before, and has made a useful
index to, it.

Collect. vol. 2. Collections from various Authors in MS. viz. Chronologies,
Annals, etc. in fol. containing 382. pages.

Collect. vol. 3. Containing the Catalogues of MSS. in the Libraries of several
religious Houses, Cathedrals, Colleges, etc. Collections also from Monkish
Authors concerning the foundations, restaurations, etc. of religious places,
and other matters of considerable moment. In p. 117, is part of an Itinerary
through Devonshire, and p. 127, etc. is something of Kent. In p. 149, etc. is
something of Herefordshire, and p. 204, of Lincolnshire. Afterward follow the
meaning and original of words from several old Dictionaries. This vol. contains
in writing under Lelands hand 287 pages in fol. and has at the end his
New-years-gift to K. Hen. 8.

Collect. vol. 4. Containing the lives and characters of most of the eminent
Writers of England; written in Latin with Leland's own hand, an. 1546. and
contains 354 pages in fol. One or more Copies of this Book, are in private
hands.

An Itinerary throughout most parts of England. -- In five volumes in qu. This
Iter was began about 38. H. 8. Dom. 1538, and the volumes were written with his
own hand; but by the negligence of those, who have had the custody of them,
after the Authors death, most of them have taken wet and are not legible. About
the Year 1631. Will. Burton beforementioned caused all the said five volumes
to be transcribed into one folio; which, with the originals, were, by him soon
after, given to the public Library of Oxon.

Collections concerning English Families and their originals, of relations of
matters of antiquity from diverse Persons, of Towns and religious Houses, (which
he accidentally found in record, or by tradition) of Rivers in several
Counties, and also collections from various MSS. etc. -- All which, are
contained in two quartoes under Leland's hand writing, and go under the names
of the sixth and seventh volumes of his Itineraries, and stand and are mixed
with the other five, in the Archives of the public Library.

Collectiones ex antiquissimis authoribus desumptae, quae ad Britanniam
spectant. MS. in Cotton' s Library under Julius C. 6.

Codrus sive liber contra Polydorum Virgilium de erroribus in scriptis suis.
MS. An exemplar of which I have seen.

Naenia in mort. Hen. Duddelegi ( Dudley) Equitis. MS. in qu.

Bononia Gallo-Mastix, in laudem victoris feliciss. Hen. 8. Anglici, Francici,
Scottici, etc. MS. in qu. With other things, which you may see in Balcus and
Pitseus. All which MSS. and collections, with many other matters of moment,
were, after Leland's death, taken (by command from Ed. 6) into the custody of
Sir John Cheek Tutor to the said King; who not long after gave the four tomes
or vol. of his collections beforementioned to Humph. Purefoy Esquire; (afterward
of the Privy Council to Queen Elizabeth in the North parts of England) whose
Son Tho. Purefoy of Barwell in Leicestershire, giving them to Will. Burt^n of
Lyndley in the same County, in the Year 1612, came many Years after by his gift
(when he had made use of them in compiling his Description of Leicestershire)
to the Bodlcian or pub. Library at Oxon, together with the Itinerary in five
(with the other two) quartoes, where they yet (in the Archives of that Library)
remain. As for some other of his Collections, they came after the death of Sir
John Cheek into the hands of Will. Lord Pagit, and Sir Will. Cecyll, but to
whom, from them, I find not. Perhaps among the said Collect. were those that
came afterward into Sir Rob. Cotton's hands, and the Itinerary into those of
Will. Burton beforementioned. Howsoever it is, sure I am, that several eminent
Antiquaries have made use of them, especially Joh. Bale in his second edition
of British Writer, but not in the same words that Leland wrote. For as he
delivered things impartially and in smooth language, so Bale quite contrary,
and full Vide Jo. Pits De illustr. Angl. script. p. 53.
of scurrilities. Camden also, though now and then he does mention his Author
Leland, yet he made See in Ralph Brooks Discovery of errors in Camden's
Britannia.
considerable use of his Collections in the composing of his Britannia. Sir
Will. Dugdale has perused them several times, and made great use of them in
his Antiquities of Warwickshire, and in his volumes called, The Baronage of
England, but withal quotes him honestly for every thing that he has taken from
them. To conclude, this great Antiquary J. Leland dying on the 18 day of April
in Fifteen hundred fifty and two, Michaels in le Querne, in London. Which
Church having been situated near to the old cross in West-cheap, and not far
from the East part of St. Paul's Cathedral, was totally burnt down in the grand
conflagration, an. 1666. So that soon after its Parish being united to another,
the foundation of the said Church was levelled, and pitched with Stones, as the
rest of the street adjoining was; and at the East End where stood the Altar, or
thereabouts, was erected a Conduit of stone to serve the inhabitants of the
neighborhood with water.

JOHN CLERK, who is reported by a learned Rich. Paice in lib. cui^tit est. De
fructu qui ex doctrina percipitur, etc. Bas. 1517. p. 24.
Oxonians for a time, but in what House, I cannot as yet tell. Afterward he
traveled into several Countries, fell into the company and acquaintance of
Rich. Paice, (mentioned under the Year 1532.) studied together in Italy, and
contracted between them such a faithful and constant friendship, that the like
could not be read in any Author. All things were in a manner common between
them, and what was by either read or observed, was forthwith communicated to
each others great advantage. After his return to his native Country, he was
highly esteemed for his accomplishments, especially for his exact knowledge in
the Latin, French, and Italian, Tongues: Whereupon being taken into the service
of Thomas the great and mighty Duke of Norfolk, was by him made his Secretary,
(a place of credit and considerable profit) and introduced into the
acquaintance of most of the Nobility that frequented the Court. He has
transmitted to posterity,

Opusculum plano divinum de mortuorum resurrectione and extremo judicio, in
quatuor linguis succincte conscriptum ( viz. Lat. Angl. Ital. Gall.) -- Land.
1545. and 47. in qu.

Declaration of certain Articles, with a recital of the capital errors against
the same. Land. 1546. in oct.

Meditations on death.

declinatione verborum.
De Italica De Gallica


He has also translated from French into English, A treatise of Nobility, with
other things written and translated, which I have not yet seen. At length being
clapped up Prisoner within the Tower of London (whether for matters of Religion,
or any other thing I know not) did to avoid public shame, (as it is thought)
hang himself in his Chamber with his girdle, on the tenth of May in Fifteen
hundred fifty and two; Joh Fox in his Acts and Mon. of the Church, under the
Year 1558.
Author, that he was an open Enemy to the Gospel and all godly Preachers. The
Reader is to note that several of both his names occur in records, as first
Joh. Clerk a Berkshire Man born, who became Fellow of Magd. Coll. 1482. (2)
Joh. Clerk, of the same Coll. as it seems, who proceeded M. of A. 1516. (3)
Joh. Clerk a Cambridge Man, afterward Bishop of B. and Wells, whom I shall
elsewhere mention. (4) Joh. Clerk, who was originally of Cambridge, afterward
of Cardinal College in Oxon, and incorporated M. of A. 1525, but ejected the
said Coll. soon after for Lutherisme. (5) Joh. Clerk a Benedictine Monk,
incorporated Bach. of Divinity 13. July 1538, as he before had stood at
Cambridge, proceeded in that faculty at Oxon within few days after, and stood
in an Act to complete that Degree 29. of the same Month in the said Year. But
of all the said Joh. Clerks, not one, as I conceive is Joh. Clerk the writer,
except you will say the second.

de BARKLAY, who seems to have been born at, or near, a Town so called in
Somersetshire, was for a time educated in this University; particularly, as it
seems, in Oriel Coll. of which his great Patron and Favourer of his studies,
Tho. Cornish Bishop of Tyne was then Provost. Afterward he traveled beyond the
Seas, and at his return became, by the said Bishops endeavors (to whom he was
Chaplain) one of the Priests of the College of St. Mary at Otery in Devonshire,
founded by Joh. Grandison B. of Exeter. But his Patron dying soon after, he
entered into the Order of St. Benedict or into that of St. Francis (as one, Jo.
Bale ut supra, cent. 9. number. 66.
who gives him an ill report because he lived and died a single Man, tells us)
but at what place I know not. Sure it is that living to see his Monastery
dissolved, he being about that time Doctor of Divinity, became Vicar of Much
Badew in Essex, and in 1546 Vicar of the Church of St. Matthew the Apostle at
Wokey in Somersetshire on the death of Mr. Rich. Eryngton, which I think was
all the preferment that he had to the time of his death. In his younger days he
was esteemed a good Poet and Orator, as several specimens of his composition in
those faculties showed, but when Years came on, he spent his time mostly in
pious matters and in reading the Histories of Saints. His works are,

The figure of our Mother Holy Church, oppressed by the French King -- Printed
at London by Rich. Pynson in qu.

The miseries, or miserable lives of Courtiers -- Besides his answer to Job.
Skeleton the Poet and other things, which I have not yet seen. He translated
from Lat. into English, The lives of St. Margaret, St. Catherine, St.
Etheldreda, St. George, etc. Several things also of Jo. Bapt. Fiera Mantuam,
and other matters as Baleus In cent. 9. number. 66. ut supra.
tells you. But above all must not be forgotten his translation out of Latin,
French, and Dutch into the English Language, a Book intit. The Ship of Fools,
an. 1508. Printed at Land. by Pich. Pynson, 1509. fol. and dedicated by the
translator to the said Tho. Cornish B. of Tyne and suffragan Bishop of Wells.
This translation is adorned with great variety of Pictures printed from wooden
cuts, which could not be but very delightful to the Reader in those days. The
original Author of that Book was one Sebastian Brantius, much famed in his time
for his excellent works. As for his translator Dr. Barklay who also translated
from French into English The Castle of Labor, lived to be an aged Man, and
dying at a Market Town called Croyden in Surrey before the 10. of June (for on
that day his In Offic. praerog. Cant. in reg Powell Qu 17.
will was proved) in Fifteen hundred fifty and two, was buried in the Church
there, good Scholar.

Joh. Seymoure of Wolfhall in Wilts. Knight, was educated in trivials, and
partly in quadrivials for some time in this University, and whether he
afterward studied in Cambridge (of which he was Chancellor in the Reign of
Edw. 6.) I cannot say. If so, it is very strange that one that had conversed
with the Muses of both Universities, should be so unlearned (as one Rob.
Parsons in his Treatise of three conversions, Vol. 1. part. 1. chapter 12.. 31.
who was an enemy to his memory reports) that he could scarce write or read.
Afterward K. Hen. 8. marrying his Sister Jane, he ascended to, and obtained
great, honors and places in the Realm of England, as all Histories will tell
you. While he was Lord Protector, there went under his name,

Epistola Exhortatoria ad pacem, missa ad nobilitatem ac plebem, universumque
populum regni Scotiae. Land. 1548. qu. In which Year also came out his
Expedition into Scotland, written by another hand. After he was committed
Prisoner to the Tower of London for diverse miscarriages in his Government, he
made very great show of sanctity, and seemed not to omit any opportunity,
whereby he might employ his time religiously, as it well appears by a Book that
he then wrote entitled,

A spiritual and most precious Pearl, teaching all Men to love and embrace the
cross as a most sweet and necessary thing, etc. Land, 1550 oct. At that time,
before, and after, he was much courted by John Calvin and Peter Martyr, as
being the chief Person that carried on the reformation. The former wrote to him
the said Protector, An Epistle of godly consolation, 22. Oct. 1549. Writ before
the time and knowledge of his trouble. Which Epistle being delivered to him in
the time of his trouble, was translated by him from French into English. --
Printed at Land. 1550. oct. The other ( P. Martyr) wrote an Epistle to him about
the same time in the Lat. tongue; which being much pleasing to him, was by his
desire translated into English by that noted Zealot Thom. Norton. -- Printed
1550. in oct. From which Epistles it does plainly appear what great respects
they ( Calvin and Martyr) and their Parties had for him, and what solemn wishes
and prayers they continually sent forth for his welfare and blessed proceedings
in the Reformation then in hand. This great Person, who was also Duke of
Somerset, died on Towerhill near London, by the stroke of the ax, 22. January,
in Fifteen hundred fifty and two, 1552-53.
which was the sixth Year of K. Ed. 6. but where he was buried, I cannot yet
tell.

NICHOLAS UDALL whom Leland In Encomiis, trophaeis, etc. ut supra, p. 12. 33.
62.
styles Odovallus, Hampshire, and descended from those of his name, living
sometimes at Wykeham in the said County, was admitted Scholar of Corp. Chapter
Coll. in June 1520. aged 15 or more, Probationer Fellow in Sept. 1524. being
then Bach. of Arts, and two Years after supplicated for the Degree of Master,
but took it not at that time, being, as it is probable, denied, because he was
much addicted to the opinions of Luther. Afterward he obtained the Mastership
of Eaton School near Windsor, and proceeded in Arts 1534, but in 1540-41 had
like to have lost that place as being suspected to be conscious to a robbery
committed by two Scholars of his School, who having stole images, plate, and
other matters belonging to the College of Eaton, were with Udall examined As in
the Papers of state, in the Paper office at Whitehall.
by His Majesty's Council, in the beginning of March that Year. What became of
the matter I know not; sure it is, that our Author Udall was made Canon of
Windsor, in the beginning of Edw. 6. and is styled by a certain Jo. Baleus ut
sup. cent. 9. nu. 45.
Author to be Elegantissimus omnium bonarum literarum magister and earum
felicissimus interpres. He has written,

Flowers for Latin speaking, selected and gathered out of Terence, and the same
translated into English, together with the exposition, etc. newly corrected --
When this was first Printed I cannot tell. That Edit. which I have seen, was
Printed at Land. 1568. in oct. Which Book being esteemed good in its time, and
very useful for young Scholars Joh. In Encom. p. 62.
Leland and Tho. In Encom. illustrium aliquot virorum, edit. 1589. p. 128
Newton wrote Verses in commendation of it, not only set before the Book, but
Printed in their respective Encomia's, etc.

Commentary on the Apothegms of Erasmus.

Epistolae and Carmina ad Gul. Hormannum. Joh. Lelandum.


Comedies, Epistles, and diverse Verses. -- He also translated into English at
the request of Qu. Cather. Parr (1) Paraphrase on the Gospels and the Acts of
the Apostles. Land. 1551. fol. written by Erasmus. (2) Pet. Martyrs Treatise,
wherein he openly in the Univ. of Oxon. declared his whole and determinate
judgment concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Land. in qu. and (3ly.)
The Tragedy of Popery, Clar. 1552.
and other things, as Bale will tell you. When this our Author Udall died, I
know not, nor any thing else of him, only that his Memory is celebrated by
polite Verses, written by Joh. In Encom. ut sup. p. 12. 33. 62.
Leland, Joh. In Epigram. p. 61. etc.
Parkhurst, and Tho. In Encom. ut sup. p. 128.
Newton of Chestire, to which I refer to the Reader. I have seen In Office
Praerog. Cant. in lib. quodam Administrationum ibid. incipient primo. Januar.
1571.
the Copy of a commission granted in the beginning of the Year 1572, to one
Catherine Yerbury, otherwise Udall, Daugh. of Nich. Udall of Fenne in
Somersetshire, giving her power to administer the goods, debts, and chattels,
of him the said Nich. Udall lately deceased: Whether this Nic. Udall be the
same with him that was the Writer, the Reader is to judge.

Cheshire, received part of his Academical Education in this University,
particularly, as I conceive, in Brasenose Coll. about the time of its first
foundation, but whether he took a Degree it appears not. The genie of this
Person being strangely addicted to the instruction of Youth, he obtained part
of the Carme's House at Huchin or Hitchin in Hertfordshire, an. 1538. being
about that time dissolved, wherein he not only opened a School, but framed out
a lower room into a Stage for his Scholars to act Latin and English Comedies,
to the end that they might be emboldened for speaking and pronuntiation. Which
practice being used by them several Years, his School was in great renown, he
grew rich and was had in much veneration in the neighborhood. He had many
Tragedies, Comedies, Epistles, Orations, etc. laying by him in the time of K.
Ed. 6. which, as he would often tell his Friends, he would never publish till
they had remained by him 9 Years: And whether they were ever published, I
cannot yet learn. The titles of some of his labors were these. Dives and
Lazarus, a Comedy. Patient Greseld, Com. Friendship of Titus and Gisippus, Com.
Chaucers Melibie, Com. Job's afflictions, Trag. Delivery of Susanna from the
Elders. The burning of Sodom. Pugna nominis and verbi. De pueroum institutione.
Epistolae ad Tyrones. Epigrammata, etc.
-- With other things which may be seen in In lib de Script. Maj. Brit. cen. 8.
nu 98.
Baleus, Clar. 1553
who further tells us, that he was in great renown at Huchin in Fifteen hundred
fifty and three, He lived several Years after, died and was buried there, but
when, I cannot yet learn. One or more of his descendants, (for he was married
and had issue) were Knights, particularly Sir Edw. Radcliff of Hitchin, living
in the time of K. James 1.

ap Rise, or Prise, or Priseus, so many ways I find him written by Authors, was
born of a gentile and ancient Family in Wales, but in what County, is yet
uncertain, or in what House in Oxon educated, unless in the ancient hostle
called Broadgates (now Pembroke Coll.) wherein several of both his names and
time have studied. Among them was John Prise Bac. of the Civil Law, who in the
Year 1530. supplicated for the Degree of Bac. of Can. Law, and two Years after
John ap Rice a secular Chaplain, was admitted to the same Degree, which
probably may be the same with Joh. Price Bach. of the Civil Law. Farther also I
find, that in 1523. one John Prise of Allsouls Coll. was admitted Bach. of the
Civil Law, and that he died 1554 And in 1534. occurs another Joh. Price (of
Broadgates Hall I think) who was admitted Bach. of the Civil Law without any
title added to it, which perhaps may be the Author, that I am further to
mention; who being encouraged in his studies by William Earl of Pembroke, made
great advances therein, especially as to the Histories and Antiquities of his
own Country. In 1546. March 2. he, with many others, received the honor of
Knighthood from the hands of Edward Lord Protector of England. About which time
our Author observing the great and manifold errors, which were made by Pol.
Virgil in his Historiae Anglicae Libri 27, wherein many things redounded to the
dishonor of the British Nation, he thereupon published, Fides Historiae
Britannicae. Defensio Regis Arthuri. And wrote about the Year 1553. (1. Mar.) a
Book intit. Historiae Britannicae defensio. But the Author dying before he
could have it published, was at length, in the Year 1573. put out in qu. under
the name of Joh. Priseus, by his Son Rich. Prise D. D. He the said Sir John did
also write,

A description of Cambria, now called Wales. -- Augmented and made perfect by
Humph. Lloyd, and set before the History of Cambria: which was translated into
English by the said Lloyd, and augmented, corrected, and published by Dav.
Powell, an. 1584. The said Description of Cambria was Printed again at Oxon.
1663. in two sheets and an half in qu. under the title of A description of
Wales, but it does so much differ in words from the former, that many Readers
are apt to take it for another thing.

Tractatus de Eucharistia. Clar. 1553.
This I have not yet seen, only a bare mention of it by Baleus Ibid. cent. 9.
number. 47.
Nor do I know any thing else of the Author, only that he died in Qu. Mary's
days. But where, or the particular Day, Month, or Year, when, I know not.

WILLIAM THOMAS, a Welsh Man born, or at Welsh extract, was educated in all
kind of learning fit for a Gentleman, but what Degree he took I know not. One
of both his names was admitted Bach. of the Canon Law, in the beginning of Dec.
1529. but whether the same, I dare not yet affirm. In 1544, he was constrained
by some misfortune to abandon the place of his nativity, and in Feb. 1546. when
the news of the death of King Hen. 8. came into Italy, he was at Bologna la
Grassa, where being in the company of several Gentlemen, he entered into
discourse in defense of the said King, whose honor there had been wrongfully
touched. Which discourse he afterward drew up by way of Dialogue, directing it
to Pietro Aretino the well known Thuscan Poet, as famous for his Satirical wit,
as infamous for his life and death. Afterward, if not before, he lived at
Padoua, where he gathered many materials for his Italian Dictionary and
Grammar, and in 1549, I meet with him returned to London, where he wrote his
short, but methodical History of Italy. About that time his name being highly
famed for his travels through France and Italy, his knowledge in several of the
modern tongues, and in other sorts of learning, he was made Clerk of the
Council to K. Ed. 6. but upon his death, falling into the displeasure of Qu.
Mary, and so consequently deprived of his place, and all hopes of other
employment in the Court, he thereupon designed her murder, (one says Ibid. in
Ba^ p. 110. inter cent. 12. and 13.
that the design was against Steph. Gardener Bishop of Winchester) for which he
was sent Prisoner to the Tower of London, on the 20. Feb. 1553. in the company
of Will. Winter, and Sir Nich. Throckmorton committed to that place also. On
the 26. of the same Month, being much conscious to himself that he should
suffer a shameful death, he endeavored to make away with himself, by thrusting
a knife into his body under his paps, but the wound did not prove mortal. On
the 9. of May 1554. he was arraigned and condemned at the Guild hall in Land.
and on the 18. of the same Month, he was drawn from the Tower to Tyburn; where
after he had made a Speech in defense of himself, he told the company that he
died for his Country. He was a Man of a hot fiery spirit, had sucked in
damnable principles, by his frequent conversation with Christoph. Goodman, that
violent enemy to the rule of Women, and one of more misguided zeal, than true
Religion and Wisdom. This Will. Thomas has written,

The History of Italy; a Book exceeding profitable to be read, because it
entreats of the estate of many and diverse Commonwealths, how they have been,
and now be governed, Land. 1561. qu. Dedic. to John Earl of Warwick, by an
Epistle dated 20. Sept. 1549.

Principle rules of the Italian Grammar, with a Dictionary for the better
understanding of Boccace, Petrarcha, and Dante. Land. 1550. 1567. qu.

Le peregrynne -- written at Bologn la Grassa. It Is a MS. in Bod. Lib. qu. D.
23. Th. fol. 71. The beginning of it is, Constrained by misfortune to habandon
the place of my nativity, etc. In the title page are these Verses. He that
dies with honor, lyveth for ever.
And the defamed dead, recovereth never.


This Book called Le perigrynne is about to be translated into Lat. with a
design to be remitted in the third Tome of Fasciculus, collected by Edw. Brown
of Christ's College in Cambridge.

Common place of state -- Written for the use of King Ed. 6. wherein it is
discoursed whether it be expedient to vary with the time; with some others
writings, which I once saw in the Cottonian Library under Vespasians head D. 18
The title of this Book with other matters relating to Will. Thomas, I did
formerly communicate to H. Foulis when he was gathering materials for an
History of the Romish treasons, not dreaming then that I should afterward make
use of them as I have done now. I am verily persuaded, that there are in being
other Books of this W. Thomas, either public, or in MS. in private hands,
which time, may hereafter produce. So that now I shall only say, that he
suffered death at Tybourne beforementioned by hanging, drawing, and
quartering, 18. May in Fifteen hundred fifty and four, Person of good parts.
What became of his quarters I know not.

Staffordshire, but whether born in that County, I cannot tell, and educated
partly in Cambridge, but mostly in Oxon in all good arts, and in the tongues.
Afterward taking holy Orders, he began to see the light of the Gospel, while
Sir Tho. More was Lord Chancellor of England, in whose time many Heretics, as
they were then called, were imprisoned and brought into trouble. Whereupon
being resolved, to gain what Proselytes he could to his Religion, he changed
his name to Joh. Roberts, and under that name, he not only taught God's word in
several places, chiefly at Ipswych in Suffolk, and Sandwych in Kent, but also
published and translated several things, as,

A muster of Schismatic Bishops, otherwise naming themselves Popes. -- Printed
in oct.

The Plots of Papists -- entitled by a certain (...) cent. 11. (...) Britan.
number 99.
Author De Papiculorum susurris. And translated into English The History of the
life of Hildebrand called Gregory the 7. written in Latin by Beno a Cardinal,
and also The life of Hen 4. Emperor of Rome and Almaine. Which Henry was
imprisoned and deposed by the said Pope. Both these translations were Printed
in oct. and much valued in the time when they were made extant. When Qu. Mary
came to the Crown, and Religion thereupon altered, our Author Thom. Swinerton
fled beyond the Seas, but being overtaken with a certain distemper at Emden in
East Frisland in Fifteen hundred fifty and four,

Hooper, noted to posterity for his manful and painful suffering of death for
the Protestant Cause, received his first breath in Somersetshire, and his
Academical Education in Oxon, but in what House there, unless in that of
Merton, I cannot yet tell. He had an Uncle or near Kinsman of both his names,
who was born in the Dioc. of Wells, made Master-Fellow of that House in the
Year 1513, and this Joh. Hoper, whom we are further to mention, being sent to
the University the Year following, might probably be put under his tuition in
the said Coll. or at least in St. Albans Hall, of which he was then
(notwithstanding Fellow of Mert^n Coll.) Principal. But these matters remaining
yet uncertain, I shall proceed to what is extant on record. In the latter end
therefore of 1518. he was admitted Bach. of Arts, which was the highest Degree
he took in this University, and about the same time completed it by
Determination. What became of him afterward I cannot justly say. Howbeit there
is not wanting an Author John (...) Land. (...) p. 5^3.
who reports that he was of the number of Cistercians commonly called White
Monks, and had so continued for some Years. Which report, I presume is true,
because in all my searches, I cannot find him a Curat, Vicar, or Parson. But so
it was that he being weary of that Order, he left it, and repairing to Oxon,
was, as the R. Catholics say, infected with Lutherisme by Books brought from
Germany; and in short time became a thorow-pac'd Protestant, if not worse as
they further add. In the Year 1539 or thereabouts, at which time the Statute of
six articles came forth, he left what he had, and got himself into the service
of Sir John Arundel a very Catholic Knight, (afterward put to death with the
Protector, by the Duke of Northumberland in K. Edwards days) and was his
Chaplain and Steward of his House. But being discovered by him to be a
Protestant, he was forced to leave that harbor, and to go into France: where
staying for some time in dislike of many matters there, he returned into
England, and lived with a Gentleman called Seintlow. But at length his living
with him being known, he was sought after to be apprehended. Whereupon he put
on a Mariners habit, made himself Master of a Boat and went into Ireland, and
from thence took a larger journey into Zuitzerland, where he became acquainted
with Bullinger, Scholar and Successor of Zuinglius's Chair, first at Basil,
and afterward at Zurich, where also Jo. Fox in Act. and Mon. Eccles. sub. an.
1555.
by his Council and Doctrine, be married a Wife, which was a Burgundian, and
applied very studiously the Hebrew tongue. When K. Ed. 6. came to the Crown, he
returned soon after into England, and settling for a time in London, Preached
to the People there very frequently, and sometimes against pluralities. In
1549. he became an accuser of Bishop Bonner, when he was to be deprived of his
Bishopric, which made him fare the worse when Qu. Mary came to the Crown. In
1550. he, by the help of his former Master Sir Joh. Arundel, who could do all
at that time with the Earl of Warwick, (afterward Duke of Northumberland) was
nominated and elected Bishop of Gloucester, but when he should come to be
consecrated or invested by Dr. Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury, and Rydley B. of
London, (who maligned him for his worse than Calvinistical Principles) they
would not do it, except he would conform himself in all points to them, both in
apparel and opinions, but he obstinately refusing a Rochet, was thereupon Brief
discourse of the troubles at Frankford, etc. Printed 1575. p. 42.
confined to custody. At length by the Earl of Warwick's intercession to
Cranmer, and the King's Letters to dispense with those matters and ceremonies
(which J. Fox usually calls trifles and superstitions) he was consecrated
Bishop of the said See, 8. March 1550. At which time (as it is said) Hoper,
after much hanging off, did take Vide. Tert. part. trac^atus de tribus
conversionib. Angl. cap. 6.
the Oath of Supremacy, and afterward when he Preacher at Court, he did once
for formality sake appear in a Shymar, with a white linen rochet under it, but
much ashamed at the strangeness thereof, as Fox says. Being settled in the Sea
of Gloucester, which was looked upon as a poor pittance for so great a Clerk,
who had suffered so much for the Cause, the Earl of Warwick got for him another
Bishopric much better than the former, called Worcester; of which place being
Pat. 6. Ed. 6. p. 1.
declared Bishop, 20. May 6. Ed. 6. Dom. 1552. (the Bishop thereof N. Heath
being then a Prisoner in the Fleet) had liberty then given to him to keep it in
Commendam with Gloucester. While he was Bishop he Preached often, visited his
Diocesses, kept good hospitality for the poorer sort of People, and was beloved
by many. But when Qu. Mary began to Reign, which was in July 1553, he was
pursevanted up to London, in the latter end of August, and on the first of
Sept. following, was committed Prisoner to the Fleet; where remaining some
Months, was at length examined several times, and required to recant his
opinions. But standing constant and resolute to them, was condemned first to be
burnt, in Januar. 1554, and then in Feb following was degraded. The next day he
was conducted toward Gloucester, where being arrived, he suffered death soon
after with great courage. He was a Person of good parts, well versed in the
Greek and Hebrew tongues, a tolerable Philosopher, but a better Theologist, had
not his Principles been too rigid and dissenting from the English Church, as
appointed by King Edw. 6. His Writings are mostly these.

Answer to the Lord Winchester's Book, entit. A detection of the Devils
Sophestry, wherewith he robs the unlearned of the true belief in the
Sacrament of the altar, Zurich 1547. qu.

A declaration of Christ and his office. Zur. 1547. oct. Dedicated to Edw. Duke
of Somerset. 8. Dec. 1547. Afterward corrected by Christoph. Rosdell, and
reprinted in twelves.

Lesson of the Incarnation of Christ. Land. 1549. oct.

Sermons on Jonas. Land. 1550. oct.

A godly confession and protestation of the Christian Faith, wherein is
declared what a Christian Man is bound to believe of God, his King, his
Neighbor, and himself. Land. 1550. oct.

Homely to be read in the time of the pestilence, and a most present remedy
for the same. -- Print. 1553. qu.

Various Letters written in Prison -- See in Joh. Fox's Book of The Acts and
Monuments of the Church under the Year 1555.

Epistola ad Episcopos, Decanos, Archidiaconos, and caet. Cleri ordines in
Synodo Londinensi congregatos, an. 1554. The beginning is Non vos latet, etc.
Printed by Ja. Fox at the end of the Book of Acts and Mon.

Exhortation to patience, sent to his Wife Anne -- See there in Fox under the
Year. (1555.)

Certain sentences written in Prison. Land. 1559. oct.

Speech at his death.

An apology against the untrue and slanderous report made of him, that he
should be a maintainer and encourager of such that cursed the Queens Highness,
that then was, Queen Mary, etc. Land. 1562. oct. To which are added two or
three of his Letters written in Prison.

Comfortable expositions on the 23, 62, 73, and 77 Psalms. Land. 1580. qu.

Annotations on the 13 Chapter to the Romans. Land. 1583.

Twelve Lectures upon the Creed. Land. 1581. oct.

Confession of the Christian Faith, containing 100 Articles, according to the
order of the Creed of the Apostles. Land. 1581. oct. 1584. qu. Annexed to John
Baker's Lectures on the Creed. These 100 Articles were before Printed, viz. an.
1550. in oct.

Declaration of the 10 holy Commandments of Almighty God. Land. 1550. and 88.
oct. With other things which I have not yet seen, the trite or slender titles
of which, you may see in In lib de Script. Maj. Britan. cent. 8. number. 85.
Baleus. He also translated from Lat. into English, Turtullians second Book to
his Wife, concerning the choice of a Husband or Wife. Land. 1550. oct. and
perhaps other things. At length he suffered death in the flames near to the
College of Priests in the City of Gloucester, on Saturday the ninth of Febr. in
Fifteen hundred fifty and four, 1554-55.
(1. and 2. of Philip and Mary) being then near sixty Years of Age, and much
lamented by those that pretended to Reformation.

Rich. Wotton. superior Beadle of Divinity of this University of Oxon, by
Margaret his Wife, was born within the City of Oxon. particularly, as I
conceive, in the Parish of St. Mary the Virgin, wherein his Father lived and
had Houses in Cat-street. After he had been educated in the Grammar School
joining to Magd. Coll. he was first made Semicommoner or Demie of that House,
and after he had taken the Degree of Bach. of Arts (which was 1513.) he was, as
I conceive, made Fellow. At length upon the desire of John Claymond, and Rob.
Morwent, who knew the singular virtues and learning of the Person, he left that
Coll. and by the favor of that most worthy Person Bishop Fox, Founder of that
of Corp. Christi, was made socius compar thereof, with leave to travel into
Italy for three Years, an. 1520. So that after he had read the Greek Lecture
there for some time, he journied into Italy, studied Physic, and took the
Degree of Doctor in that faculty at Padoua. After his return he was settled
Greek Reader of his Coll. was incorporated in the same Degree in the latter end
of 1525, was made Physician to K. Hen. 8. and not only became famous for his
happy practice in that faculty in these parts, and afterward in London (for he
was one of the College of Physicians there) but also for his great knowledge in
Philosophy and things natural. He has transmitted to posterity,

De differentiis Animalium, lib. 10. Par. 1552. fol. By the publishing of which
he obtained a famous name among learned Men, especially with Mich. Neander, who
In Succinct. explicat. orbis terrae, -- Lips. 1597. p. 410.
says that no Author has written of Animals more learned and elegant than
Wottonus. See more in Thom Mouffet under the Year 1590. What other things the
said Wotton has published, I know not, nor anything else of him, or his, only
(1) That he dying 5. October. Albans Church in Woodstreet, in the City of London
(2) That Catherine his Widow dying 4 Dec. 1558. was buried by him, and both had
a stone, with an inscription thereon, laid over their Graves. But that part of
it which remained an 100 Years after, was totally consumed in the grand
conflagration of London, an. 1666. (3) That he is much celebrated by the
Antiquarian Poet John Leland In Encomiis, Trophaeis, etc. edit. Land. 1589. p.
65.
under the name of Eadverdus Ododunus. (4) That among the Children he left
behind him, (for he had a numerous issue) Brian Wotton LL. Bach. and Fellow of
New Coll. was one, who bequeathed his Body to be buried in the yard belonging
to St. Albans Church beforementioned. Another was called Hen. Wotton, first a
Student of Chapter Chapter and afterward Proctor of the University, Greek Reader and
Fellow of Corp. Chr. Coll. who proceeding in the faculty of Physic an. 1567.
became afterward famous for the practice thereof.

NICHOLAS RYDLEY was born of an ancient and Willymondswyke in Northumberland,
educated in Grammatical Learning at Newcastle upon Tyne, in Academical at
Cambridge, till he was Bach. of Arts. Afterward going to Oxon, he was Reg.
actorum Coll. Universe. p. 5.
elected into one of Walt. Skyrlaw's Fellowship of University Coll. 13. Apr.
1521. Which place he keeping but a little while (and therefore the Members of
that House can hardly lay claim to him) he returned to Cambridge, where he
became D. of D. and Master of Pembroke Hall. Afterward he was made Chaplain to
K. Ed. 6. and at length through Rochester (the temporalities of which See were
Pat. 1. Ed. 6. p. 1.
restored to him 27. Sept. 1547.) became Bishop of London 1549. He was a Person
small in stature, but great in learning, and profoundly read in Divinity -- quo
viro (as Tho. Caius in Assert. Antiq. Acad. Oxon. Land. 1574. in qu. p. 27.
one who knew him says) nihil integrius, and omnibus egregiis dotibus ornatius
Anglia nostra multis hisce retro saeculis habuit, etc. Among several things
that he wrote, were these.

Treatise concerning images, not to be set up, nor worshipped, in Churches. --
Written in the time of K. Ed. 6.

Brief declaration of the Lords Supper -- Printed 1555. and 1586. oct. Written
by him while he was a Prisoner in Oxon. It was translated into Lat. by Will.
Whittyngham, bearing this title: Assertio de coena Dominica. Genev. 1556.
Answered by another Book entit. Confutatio Catholica Nich. Rydley de
Eucharistia. Par. 1556. qu. Written by Alban Langdale D. D. of St. John's
College in Cambridge.

Certain godly and comfortable conferences between him and Mr. Hugh Latymer,
during the time of their imprisonment. Land. 1555. 56. and 74 in oct.

A friendly farewell, written during his imprisonment at Oxford, unto all his
true Lovers, a little before his death. Land. 1559. oct.

A piteous lamentation of the miserable state of the Church of England, in the
time of the late revolt from the Gospel. Land. in oct.

A comparison between the comfortable Doctrine of the Gospel and the traditions
of Popish Religion. -- Print. with the former.

An account of a disputation at Oxford, an. 1554 Oxon. 1688. qu. Written in
Latin, and published from the Original MS: by Gilb. Ironside D. D. Warden of
Wadham Col. and then Vicehanc. of the Univ. of Oxon.

Treatise of the blessed Sacrament -- The beginning of which is Many things
confound the real memory, etc. published with the former, by the aforesaid
Person, from an original MS. to which he added, A Letter written by Mr. Jo.
Bradford the Martyr, never before Printed.

Letter of reconciliation written to Bishop Hooper. Land. 1689. qu. published
by Sam. Johnson, Author of the Short account of the life of Julian the
Apostate. Land. 1682. oct. He the said Dr. Rydley had a hand also in the
compiling of the Common Prayer Book, now in use among us, has also
disputations, arguings, communications, and conferences about matters of
Religion, in the Book of Acts and Monuments of the Church, written by John Fox.
In which Book under the Years 1554. and 55. you may see a full account of his
sufferings, and afterward of his burning near to Balliol College in Oxon.
Philip and Qu. Mary.

Pet. Philpot Knight of the Bath, and twice Sheriff of Hampshire, was born at
Compton in that County, educated in Grammaticals in Wykehams School near
Winchester, admitted true and perpetual Fellow of New Coll. in the Year 1534,
had a Civilians place there, and took (as it is said) the Degree of Bach. of the
Laws, but whether in this University, it appears not in the registers thereof.
However, he was then esteemed a good Civilian, and admirably well skilled in
the Greek and Hebrew tongues. In 1541, his Fellowship became void because of
absence, being then (I presume) in his travels in Italy. After his return,
retiring to Winchester, he read Lectures in the Cathedral there on the Epistle
of St. Paul to the Romans: Which, tho they were done gratis, were not
acceptable to the Catholic Clergy or Citizens of that place. In the time of
Edw. 6. he became Archdeacon of Winchester in the place of one Will. Bolen, who
succeeded Rich. Pates upon his resignation an. 1529. In 1553, he let drop
certain passages in a convocation of the Clergy savouring of Heresy, as 'twas
then ( temp. Mariae) accounted. Whereupon being imprisoned, he was after an
Year and a half confinement, examined in points of faith by the Bishop of
London, and his assistants; who finding him obstinate in his opinions, and past
all recantation, was by them condemned to be burned. He has written,

Epistolae Hebraicae. lib. 1.

De proprietate Linguarum. lib. 1.

An apology for spitting upon an Arrian, with an invective against the Arrians,
and an admonition to all that be faithful in Christ to beware of them, and of
other late sprung Heresies. -- Printed at London in 3 Sheets in oct. at the end
of The examinations of John Philpot, etc. which examinations were afterward
remitted by John Fox into the Book of Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. but not
the Apology.

Supplication to K. Philip and Qu. Mary. Letters to the Lady Vane. Letters to
the Christian congregation. Exhortation to his Sister. See the said Book of
John Fox, under the Year 1555.

Oration -- The beginning of which is, It Is a lamentable thing to behold at
this present in England the faithless departing, etc. This is in MS. in Bodly's
Library qu. D. 23. Th. bound with John Bradford's (the Martyr) Treatise of
predestination, with an answer to certain enormities calumniously gathered of
one to slander Gods truth. MS. The said Joh. Philpot has also translated into
English. (1) Calvinus Homelies. (2) Chrysostom against Heresies; with other
things which I have not yet seen. He suffered death in Smithfield by burning,
December. in Fifteen hundred fifty and five. See his story in Joh. Fox before
mentioned, under the Year 1555. and Rob. Parsons his answer to it in The third
part of a treatise intit. of three conversions of England,, etc. Printed 1604.
chap. 16. p. 286. 287, etc. and elsewhere. In the Archdeaconry of Winchester,
succeeded Mr. Philpot one Steph. Cheston LL. Bach. Prebendary of the same
place, who dying 1571. Dr. Joh. Ebden Preb. of the said Church of Winton also
succeeded.

Aldrisius as some call him, was born at Burnham in Bucks. educated in Grammar
learning in Eaton School, elected Scholar of Kings Coll. in Cambridge in the
Year 1507, where he took the Degrees in Arts, and about that time was styled by
Erasmus in a certain Epistle, blandae eloquentiae juvenis. Afterward he became
Proctor of the said University, Schoolmaster of Eaton, Fellow of the College
there, and at length Provost. In 1529, he retired to Oxon, where he was
incorporated Bach. of Div. as he had stood at Cambridge, and soon after
performing his exercise for the Degree of Doctor in that faculty, he was
licensed to proceed in April 1530. Which Degree being completed by standing in
the Act, which was shortly after celebrated, is the reason why I put him in
these Athenae Oxon. About the same time he was made Archdeacon of Colchester,
and in 1534. May 7. he was installed Canon of Windsore, and in the same Year
constituted Registrary of the most noble order of the Garter. In 1537, Jul. 18.
he was Fr. Gedwin in Com. de praesul. Augl. int. ^pisc. Cu^leol.
consecrated Bishop of Carlisle, in the place of Joh. Kyte deceased, from which
time to that of his death, though there were many changes in the Church and
State, yet he ran through all, and so consequently complied with them. His
works are many, but all that I have seen, are only these.

Epistola ad Gul. Hormannum. -- The beginning of which is Suscipies Hormanne
tue, etc. It Is written in Lat. Verse, and is remitted into the Book called
Antibossicon, mentioned in Will, Horman among these Writers, under the Year
1535.

Epigrammata varia, And certain matters against Rob. Whittington. He gave way
to fate at Horncastle in Lincolnshire (where was then an house belonging to the
Bishop of Carlisle) on the fifth day of March, 1555-56.
in Fifteen hundred fifty and five, and was, as I suppose, buried there. John
Leland the Antiquarian Poet was his familiar acquaintance, and therefore having
had experience of his most admirable parts and learning, did, not without just
desert, commend them to posterity in his Encomia (*) Trophaea, etc. illustrium
aliquot and eruditorum in Anglia virorum, etc. to which I refer the Reader.

JOHN PROCTOR, a Somersetshire Man born, was Corpus Christi Coll. in Jan. 1536,
and when Bach. of Arts, Fellow of Allsouls, with Joh. Watson, was was
afterward Bishop of Winchester. This Person who was Master of Arts in 1544, I
take to be the same John Proctor that was soon after School Master of Tunbridge
in Kent, who wrote and published.

The Fall of the late Arrian, Land. 1549. oct.

History of Wyats Rebellion, and Conference with the degenerate and seditious,
for the search and cause of their great disorder. Land. Clar. 1555.
1554. 55. tw. In the beginning of the first Vol. of Rap. Holinsheds Chronicle,
are the names of such Authors from whence he chiefly compiled that Chron. and
among them is William Proctor's Book called the History of Wyat's Rebellion.
Which should have been Joh. Proctor.

JOHN STANDISH was born of, and descended Lancashire, and at about 17 Years of
Age, in 1524, he was by the care of his Uncle Dr. Henry Standish Bishop of St.
Asaph sent to Brasenose College, where making great proficiency in Logic, was
elected Scholar of that of Corp. Chr. in Januar. 1528. partly by the endeavors
made in his behalf of one Mr. Edw. Standish Fellow of Brasenose (who was either
his Brother or Uncle) and partly by the said Doctor. After he was settled in
that Coll. he went through the usual classes of Logic and Philosophy with
unwearied industry, became a most noted Disputant, took the Degrees in Arts,
holy Orders, and drudging much in the faculty of Divinity, proceeded Doctor
therein, an. 1542. at which time he was one of the Fellows of Whyttingdon Coll.
in London; and having a Chamber in Brasenose, took Commons there when he
receeded to the University for conversation sake with Men and Books. In the
time of K. Edw. 6. he seemed to be a zealous Reformer, was then, if not before,
made Rector of Wygan in his own Country, and took to him a Wife, who lived not
long with him, for when Qu. Mary came to the Crown they were separated. In
1550. Aug. 2. he was installed the second Canon of the eighth Canonry of the
Church of Worcester in the place of Rog. Stanford deceased. When Qu. Mary ruled
the Scepter, he wheeled about, and seeing what great mischief was like to
follow upon the translation of the Bible into the English tongue in the time of
K. Ed. 6. and before, bestirred himself so much about it, that he found means
to have the matter proposed in Parliament, in the beginning of Queen Mary, that
all such Bibles that were in the English tongue should be prohibited and
burned. This being very displeasing to many, he was hated of them, and
therefore one J. Baleus in lib De Scriptorib. maj. Britan p. 111. int. cent.
12. and 13.
after his usual manner calls him Morio and Scurra, and another Mich. Wood in
his Epistle to the Reader before Stephen Gardiners Oration De vera obedientia,
Printed at Roan 1553. oct.
as foul'mouth'd as he, Dr. Inkpot and a blenking Coxcomb, who married against
his conscience, (as he says) more fit to make a riding fool, than Chaplain for
a King. -- This being the language of two zealous reformers, incited one Jo.
Pits. De illustr. Angl. script. aet. 16. number. 1001.
of another opinion, who was after them in time, to characterize our Author
Standish to be Vir doctrina, pietate, fide, and divinae gloriae zelo
conspicu^s. His works are,

A little treatise against the protestation of Rob. Barnes at the time of his
death. Land. 1540. oct. Which R. Barnes was burned in Smithfield 3. Jul. 32.
Hen. 8. Dom. 1540. Soon after came out a confutation of the said little
treatise, in oct.

Treatise of the Union of the Church. Land. 1556. Written to Card. Pole.

Treatise against the translation of the Bible in the vulgar Language -- with
other things, as it is probable, which I have not yet seen. He paid his last
debt to nature about the beginning of the Year Fifteen hundred fifty and six,
Worcester or Wygan, I know not. In his Canonry succeeded one Leonard Pollard
Bach. of Div. and Chaplain to Dr. Pates Bishop of Worcester, who having written
Five Sermons, were, after they had been revised by Dr. Bonner B. of Land.
printed there 1556 in qu. This Pollard who was not of the University of Oxon,
that I can find, died about the beginning of March the same Year, (1556) having
enjoyed his Canonry but few Months. Of the same Family of Standish, I find
another very active Person of his time named Rich. Standish LL. D. and Parson
of Standish in Lancashire, (but his education had been in Cambridge,) who dying
at London in his Lodging in, or near to, Paternoster Row, in the Winter time
1552, was, as it is probable, buried in the Church of St. Faith under the
Cathedral of St. Paul.

Coventrie, descended, if I mistake not, from the ancient Family of his name in
Cheshire, educated in Theologicals in the House or Coll. of the Carmes (he
being one of that order) in the University of Oxon. where making considerable
proficiency in his studies, was admitted to oppose in Divinity in the public
School of that faculty, in the beginning of May 1510, and in June following was
admitted to the reading of the Sentences. In 1513, he proceeded in the said
faculty, and three Years after was made Provincial of his Order throughout
England. But he enjoying that office only three Years, was succeeded therein by
one Rob. Lesbury, who keeping it till 1522, Bird came in again and continued
Provincial till the dissolution of Monasteries. When the Pope was like to lose
his Power in England, be became a zealous Preacher for the King's Supremacy;
for which, being rewarded with a Bishopric in Ireland, as Baleus says, (who
calls it Baleus ut sup cent. xi. nu. 41. p. 61.
Episcopatus Penricensis, tho Waraeus remembers no such place) was translated
thence to Bangor an. 1539, The temporalities of which See, he Pat. 31. Hen. 8.
p. 3.
received by the title of the King's Chaplain only, without that of Episc.
Penricensis, on the 9. Sept. the same Year. In 1541, he was translated to
Chester, made the first Bishop thereof, and paid his obedience to the Archb. of
York 13. Apr. 1542, where he continued till the Reign of Qu. Mary. He wrote and
published,

Lectures on St. Paul.

De fide justificante. lib. 1.

Learned homelies -- With an Epicede on one Edmund in Prose. At length when
Queen Mary came to the Crown, he was (notwithstanding he complied with that
time) deprived of his Bishopric for being married, and living at Chester with
his Wife, George Cootes, as I shall tell you when I come to speak of the
Bishops, under the Year 1555.

Morison was born in Oxfordshire as it is See in the Second vol. of Chronicles
published by Rap. Holinshed, p. 1168.
reported; spent several Years in this University in Logicals and
Philosophicals, took a Degree in Arts, afterward traveled, and making great
improvement in the Latin and Greek tongues, became an accomplished Gentleman,
and well known among the great Men of his time. In 1537, Jul. 17. he being
newly returned from Padoua, was made Prebendary of Yatminster secunda in the
Church of Salisbury, on the promotion of Reginald Pole: Which Dignity he
keeping till 1539. Hen. Cole of New Coll. succeeded. At length being commended
for a Person of worth and parts to K. Hen 8. was by him sent Ambassador to the
Emperor Charles the 5. as he was Vid. S^e^^an. in Comment. lib. 24. 25.
afterward by K. Ed. 6. In whose Reign being a Person zealous for reformation,
was by him appointed one of the number of such that were to reform this
University of Oxon, an. 1549. At which time he showed himself a great friend
to, and a Protector of, Pet. Martyr, when he encountered the Trimviri in a
solemn disputation in the Divinity School. Afterward having the honor of
Knighthood conferred upon him, being then esteemed a great learned Man, he went
into Italy, and in his return died in Germany, as I shall anon tell you. His
works are partly these.

Apomaxis calumniarum convitiorumque, quibus Johan. Coclaeus homo Theologus,
exiguus artium professor, etc. Henrici 8. nomen obscurare, rerum gestarum
gloriam faedare, nuper edita, non tam ad regem, quam in regis invidiam,
epistola studuit. Land. 1537. qu. Dedicated to Tho. Cromwell Secretary of State.

An exhortation to stir all English Men to the defense of their Country. Land.
1539. oct.

Invective against the great and detestable vice, treason, etc. Land. 1539. oct.

Comfortable consolation for the birth of Prince Edward, rather than sorrow for
the death of Qu. Jane. -- with other things which Baleus In lib. De Script. ut
snpr. cent. 8 number. 91.
mentions. He also wrote several Verses, which were sent by him to the Oxonians:
Of which, and his published Books, (much esteemed by K. Hen. 8) John Leland
has exercised his Muse in his Encomia. The said Sir Rich. Morysine has also
translated into English. (1) The Epist. of Joh. Sturmius to the Cardinals and
Bishops that were chosen by the Bishop of Rome to search out the abuses of the
Church. Land. 1538. oct. (2) The Symboles of Lud. Vives, much about the same
time; with other matters which I have not yet seen. He gave way to fate at
Strasburgh (being then there in voluntary exile for the Protestant Religion
which he professed) on the 17. March, 155^^.
in Fifteen hundred fifty and six, but whether buried there, I know not. He
left behind him a Son named Charles, begotten on the body of his Wife Dame
Bridget, and a natural Son named Marcellus Morysine, besides two Daughters,
begotten on the body of one, or more Concubines. Joh. Hales a noted Scholar of
that time (to whom he gave his Books) was one of his Executors, as having
always been an entire friend to him. Bernardine Ochine also, with his Wife and
Children, did taste sufficiently of his liberality: The same Bernard, I mean,
who was Author of the Dialogue of the unjust usurped primacy of the Bishop of
Rome, translated from Latin by John Ponet, (afterward B. of Winchester) Land.
1549. qu. The said Sir R. Morysine had a fair Ut in reg. Wrastley in offic.
praer^g. Cant. Qu. 28.
estate, most of which was obtained by his own endeavors, as the Manor of
Whitesbury or Whichbury with all its appurtenances in Wilts. and Hampshire, the
Manor of East-Chinnock in Somersetshire, the Manor of Cashiobury in
Hertfordshire (where he had began to build a stately House,) etc. All which
descended to his Posterity.

JOHN HUNTINGTON was educated for sometime

Epitaphium Ricardi Pacaei. car. 1. The beginning of which is, Noscitur omnis
homo, etc.

Humanae vitae deploratio. car. 1. The beginning is, Nunc ubi magnanimi, etc.

The Genealogy of Heresies.

De lapsu philosophiae, besides several Sermons. In 1553. December. 3. he was
brought before her Majesty's Council, for composing a rhyme against Dr. Stokes
and the Sacrament, but making a recantation, and an humble submission for what
he had done, with a promise to amend, as well in Doctrine, (for he was a godly
Preacher) as in way of living, was suffered to depart. Afterward he left the
Nation, and lived mostly in Germany with Joh. Clar. 1556.
Bale, who calls him his beloved Son in Christ.

Will. Son of Hen. Tracy, was born of, and descended from, an ancient and
gentile Family living at Todyngton in Glocestershire, (the body of which
William was taken out of the grave, and burned in the time of Hen. 8. for a
Will that he made, then savouring of Heresy.) was conversant among the Muses
for a time, took a Degree in Arts, and became noted for his pregnant parts.
Afterward his learning being much improved in his elder years by reading and
experience, he became noted for it, an enemy to the Roman Church, and a zealous
Reformer, as it may partly appear by his Writings, the titles of which follow.

Of the preparation to the cross and to death, and of the comfort under the
cross and death; in two Books. Land. 1540. in oct. Dedic. to Thom. Lord
Cromwell. Which Book, wrapped up in canvase, being found in the belly of a Cod,
when brought from Lin-Regis in Norfolk to Cambridge Market to be sold on
Midsummer Eve 1626, it was reprinted soon after, (as it is said) under the name
of Joh. Frythe.

The proof and declaration of this proposition, Faith only justifyeth -- Not
said when or where Printed. It Is in oct. and ded. to K. Hen. 8.

Treatise of the errors and blindness of the Popish Clergy.

Declaration of the Sacrament. Land. 1548 oct.

Confutation of the articles of Papisme. -- With other things, as it is
probable, which I have not yet seen, only know that some of them were
prohibited to be read by the Proclamation of K. C^ar. 1557.
Hen. 8. The Author was living in an absconded condition in Fifteen hundred
fifty and six, (which was the 3. and 4. of Philip and Marie) and perhaps was in
being several years after.

Welsh Man born, and tho of very poor parentage, yet of most excellent natural
parts, and exceeding apt to embrace any kind of juvenile learning. But so it
was, that he having little or nothing to maintain him in his studies at Oxon,
he was exhibited to by an Ecclesiastical Mecaenas, who well knew that his
abilities were such, that in future time he might be an Ornament to the Cath.
Church by writing against the Heretics, as they were then called. The younger
years of this Gwynneth were adorned with all kind of polite literature, and his
elder, with the reading of the Scriptures, and conversation with Books, written
by, and against the Lutherans and Zwinglians. At length perceiving full well
what ground their Doctrine had gotten, he wrote,

Declaration of the state, wherein Heretics do lead their lives. Land. in qu.

Detection of that part of Fryths Book which he terms His foundation. Land.
1554. oct. Printed also, if I mistake not, before that time.

Against Joh. Fryth, on the Sacrament of the Altar. Land. 1557. qu. Printed
also, I think before that time.

Declaration of the notable victory given of God to Qu. Mary, showed in the
Church of Luton In Bedfordshire.
22. July in the first Year of her Reign. C^ar. 1557.
Land. (1554) oct. with other things, as it is probable, which I have not yet
seen. This Joh. Gwynneth, I take to be the same with Jo. Gwynneth a Secular
Priest, who for his great proficiency, and works performed, in the faculty of
Music, had the Degree of Doctor of the said faculty conferred upon him by the
Members of this University, an. 1531. See more in the Fasti under that Year.

Suffolk Man born, was elected Fellow of Oriel Coll. in 1529, and after he had
continued in the Degree of Master some years, he studied Physic, became thrice
Proctor of the University, and, as it seems, D. of D. On the 7. of Oct. 1545.
he became Archdeacon of Berkshire, upon the resignation of Dr. Jo. Crayford,
and in the Reign of Ed. 6. a pretender to reformation; but when Qu. Mary
succeeded, he changed his mind, was in the beginning of her Reign, not only
made Dean of Chichester, in the place, if I mistake not, of Barthelm. Traheron,
but also Reg. Gilb. Bourne Ep. B. and Well. (quod ^^^pit 20. Ap. 1551) sub an
1554.
Prebendary of Lytton in the Church of Wells, upon the deprivation of Will.
Wrythiosley, and Rector of Chedsey in Somersetshire, on the deprivation also of
Mr. Nich. Mason. All that I have seen of his labors, are only these following.

Oration coram patribus and clero habita, etc. in Oct. 1553. Land. 1553. in tw.

Disputation with Archb. Cranmer and B. Latymer at Oxon -- part of which you
may see in the Book of Acts and Mon. by Joh. Fox, under the Year 1554. When
this learned Person and celebrated Preacher died, unless in Fifteen hundred
fifty and seven, Ut in Offic. Armorum, G. 5. fol. 103.
of his time and acquaintance, which shall serve for his Epitaph. Cum pia vita
siet, pia cum doceasque popellum,
Jure videre mihi nomine, reque pius.


In his Archdeaconry succeeded Tho. White LL. D. of New Coll. 24. Sept. 1557,
but who in his Deanery, I cannot justly tell.

WILLIAM PERYN of the same Family, as I conceive, Brockton in Shropshire, who
Joh. Parkurst in Ludicris sive Epigram -- Land. 1573. p. 93.
are descended from a gentile Family of that name in Derbyshire, did spend some
time, when he was young, among the Brethren of the Order of St. Dominick,
commonly called Black Friars in their Coll. at Oxon, of which Order he was a
most zealous member. Afterward retiring to the House of that Order in London,
lived there, and became a violent Preacher against such that were called
Heretics, especially about the time when K. Hen. 8. renounced the Popes power
in England; for which his zeal, he was forced to leave the Nation for some
Years. In the beginning of 1543, he supplicated to be admitted to the reading
of the Sentences; whose desire being granted, as it seems, he was about that
time admitted Bach. of Divinity. In the Reign of Ed. 6. he either absconded, or
retired beyond the Seas, but when Qu. Mary came to rule the Scepter, he
appeared openly, was then (if not happily before) made Prior of the Black
Friars of Great St. Barthelmew in Smithfield so I find it mentioned, where he
lived in great repute during her Reign. He has written and published,

Three godly and most learned Sermons of the most honorable and blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, Preached in the Hospital of S. Anthony in London, on
Hoc est corpus meum, etc. Land. 1546. 48. oct. dedic. to his special good Lord
and Master Edm. Bonner B. of London.

Spiritual exercises and Goostly meditations, and a near way to come to
perfection and life contemplative, etc. Land. 1557, and at Caen in Normandy
1598. oct. dedicated by the Author to the devout and religious Sisters
Catherine Palmer of the Order of St. Briget in Dermount, and to Dorothy Clement
of the Order of St. Clar. 1557.
Clare in Lovayne. He published also a Book in defense, and for the frequent
celebrating, of the Mass; but that I have not yet seen. At length when Qu.
Elizabeth came to the Crown (at which time he is said to be living) he was put
to more trouble, and not unlikely did retire beyond the Sea again.

ROBERT RECORD received his first breath among Cambrians, but in what County I
cannot in all my searches find, notwithstanding he was descended from a gentile
Family. About 1525, he first saluted the Oxonian Muses, and in 1531, he was
elected Fellow of Allsouls Col. being then Bach. of Arts, but whether he took
the Magisterial Degree in that faculty, the public Registers show not. Sure I
am that making Physic his Profession, he went to Cambridge, where he was
honored with the Degree of Doctor in that faculty, an. 1545. and honored of all
that knew him for his great knowledge in several Arts and Sciences. It Is said
that while he was of Allsouls Coll. and afterward when he retired from Cambr.
to this University, he publicly taught Arithmetic, and the grounds of
Mathematics, with the art of true accompting. All which he rendered so clear
and obvious to capacities, that none ever did the like before him in the memory
of Man. The truth is, he was endowed with rare knowledge in Arithmetical and
Geometrical proportions touching the statute of coynage, and the standard
thereof; and for natural Philosophy, Astrology, Cosmography, etc. and other
polite and unusual learning of that time, most Authors give him great
commendations. He has written,

The grounds of Arts, teaching the perfect work and practice in Arithmetic in
whole numbers and in fractions. -- When this was first published I know not:
Sure it is, that this Book coming into the hands of the famous Mathematician
Dr. John Dee, he did correct and augment it. Afterward it was augmented (1) By
John Mellis a Schoolmaster. -- Land. 1590. oct. (2) By Rob Norton. (3) By Rob.
Hartwell practitioner in Mathematics in London, and (4) by R. C. etc. All
which augmentations or additions were printed together at Land. in a thick oct.
an. 1623. He also published the second part of Arithmetic entitled

The Whetstone of wit, containing the extraction of roots, the cossick
practice, with the rules of equation and works of surde numbers. Land. 1557.
qu. etc.

The path way to knowledge, containing the first Principles of Geometry, as
they may be most aptly applied unto practice, both for the use of instruments
Geometrical, and Astronomical, and also for projection of platts in every kind.
Land. 1551. qu.

The castle of knowledge, containing the explication of the Sphere, both
celestial and material, and diverse other things incident thereunto, etc. Land.
1556. fol. and 1596. qu.

The urinall of physic, of the judicial of Urines -- Repr. at Land. 1582.
etc. oct. Many other things he has written as Baleus and Pitseus will tell
you, as (1) Of the Eucharist. (2) Of auricular confession. (3) The image of a
true Commonwealth. (4) Of Anatomy; with several other, but such I have not
yet seen, and therefore cannot give you the true titles, or time when they (if
ever) were printed. All that I can say of him more, is, that he concluded his
last day in the Prison called the King's Bench (being there I presume, detained
for debt) in the beginning George in Southwark, (wherein, I conceive the said
Prison then was situated) I know not.

Crocus as he writes himself, was a Londoner born, admitted Scholar of Kings
Coll. in Cambridge 4. Apr. 1506. went thence, during the time of his
Scholarship, to Oxon, was a Scholar or Student in the Greek tongue under famous
Will Grocyn, and other Oxford Men; in which Language excelling, he went beyond
the Seas, and became public Reader thereof at Lipsick in Germany, being the
first of all, as it is said, that taught the Greek tongue there. Afterward,
having first spent some time in other places, he was invited home, and by
recommendations made to the King of his great sufficiencies in the Greek and
Latin tongue, and in Oratory, he became great in favor with him and most of
the Nobility that were learned. Afterward upon the entreaties of Jo. Fisher B.
of Rochester he returned to Cambridge, where he was made Orator about 1522, and
Greek Professor next after Erasmus. So that in time, by his diligent teaching
and instructing, the knowledge of the Greek tongue, or the true and genuine
Greek was there, with much ado, planted. In 1524, he commenced D. of D. at
Cambridge, being then, or about that time, Tutor to the Duke of Richmond, and
beneficed, if not dignified in the Church. Afterward, he was employed by the
King to go to several places in Italy, especially to the University of Padoua,
to agitate about the matter of the unlawfulness of the Kings Marriage with his
Brothers Widow. After his return, the University of Oxford (as a certain Tho.
Hatcher in cat. praeposit. soc. and schol. Coll. Regal. Cant. MS. sub an. 15^6.
Writer tells you) by great means and favorable friends and fair promises of
large allowance, invited him thither to be their Reader. The time when he came
to Oxon, was in the beginning of 1532, in which Year K. Hen. 8. by his Charter
dated 18. Jul. did convert Cardinal Wolsey's College into that of King's Coll.
or that founded by King Hen. 8. In which Year he was not only incorporated D.
of D. as he had stood at Cambridge, but was made the third Canon of the twelve
of the said foundation, but whether he was a Reader I cannot in all my searches
find. In the latter end of the same Year the new Dean Dr. Jo. Hygden died, and
thereupon the Canons wrote to Tho. Cromwell Secretary of State, that he would
interceed with the King that Dr. Croke might succeed him, but for what reason
it was, that he was put aside, I cannot justly say. Sure I am, that Dr. Croke
continued Canon of the said College, till it was about to be converted into a
Cathedral, an. 1545, and then having an yearly pension of six and twenty pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence, allowed to him in recompense of his Canonry,
he retired to Exeter Coll. where he lived in the condition of a Sojournour many
years, and was not at all made a Canon of the Cathedral founded by K. H. 8. He
has written,

Oration de Graecarum disciplinarum laudibus. Dedicated to Nicholas Bishop of
Ely by an Epist. before it dated call. Jul. 1519. It Is Printed in qu. but where,
or when, I cannot tell.

Oration qua Cantabrigienses est hortatus, ne Graecarum literarum desertores
essent. Printed with the former oration. Before, and at the end of the said two
Orations, Gilb. Ducher has an Epistle in praise of Croke and his learning.
Introductiones ad linguam Graecam. Elementa Gram. Graecae. De verborum
c^^structione, besides translations made from Greek into Latin from Theod. Gaza
and Elysius Calentinus. As for those things he wrote against Leland while he
continued in Oxon as a certain Author tells us, are no more, as I suppose, than
scoffs in Verse, or repartees made on him for changing his Religion, and
thereupon dyed distracted, whereas Dr. Croke made no change, as it is said, but
dyed in that Faith, which he in the beginning had received, In Offic. praereg.
Cant. in reg. Noodes, Qu 28.
which I have seen, dated 21, Aug. and proved 29. of the same Month, an. 1558.
I find that he was Parson of Long Buckby in Northamptonshire, but cannot find
the Church or Yard wherein he would have his body to be buried, only that he
died in London, leaving behind him a Brother named Rob. Croke of Water-Horton
in Warwickshire.

JOHN ROBYNS a Staffordshire Man born, became a an. 1516, or thereabouts, was
elected Fellow of Allsouls Coll. 1520. and afterward took the Degrees in Arts
and holy Orders. But such was his vigorous genie, that by the force thereof
being conducted to the pleasant studies of Mathematics and Astrology, he made
so great a progress in them, that he became the ablest Person in his time for
those studies, not excepted his friend Record, whose learning was more general.
At length taking the Degree of Bach. of Divinity in 1531, he was the Year
following made by K. Hen. 8. (to whom he was Chaplain) one of the Canons of his
College in Oxon, and in December. 1543 Canon of Windsore, (upon the death of Dr.
Rich. Rawson, who was also Archdeacon of Essex) and in fine Chaplain to Qu.
Mary, who had him in great veneration for his learning. Among several things
that he has written relating to Astrology, I find these following. De
culminatione fixarum stellarum, etc. De ortu and occasu stellarum fixarum, etc.
Annotationes Astrologicae, etc. lib. 3. Annotationes de Edwardo VI. Tractatus
de prognosticatione per Ecclipsin. All which Books, that are in MS. were
sometimes in the choice Library of Mr. Tho. Allen of Gloucester Hall. After his
death, they coming into the hands of Sir Ken. Digby, were by him given to the
Bodleian Library, where they yet remain. It Is said also, that he the said
Robyns has written a Book intit. De portentosis cometis, but such a thing I
have not yet seen, nor do I know any thing else of the Author, only that paying
his last debt to nature 25. Aug. in Fifteen hundred fifty and eight, George at
Windsore. Over his Grave was soon after a Marble-stone laid, with a large
inscription thereon, part of which you may read in Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 178. b.

WILLIAM STAUNFORD Son of Will. Staunford of London Mercer, Int. cod. MS. Rad.
Sheldon de Beoly in com. Wig. Arm. in coll. Armorum Land. number. 133. p. 146.
(by Margaret his Wife, Daugh. and Heir of -- Gedney of London) Son of Rob.
Staunford of Rowley in Staffordshire, was born in the County of Middlesex 22.
Aug. 1509. (1. Hen. 8.) received so much literature among the Oxonians that
enabled him sooner than another Person to conquer the rudiments of the
municipal Law in Greys-Inn near London. In the 36. of Hen. 8. he was elected
Autumn Reader of that House, but did not read because of the pestilence then in
those parts, yet in the Lent following he did perform that office with great
credit and honor. In the 5. Ed. 6. he was Double-Reader of that Inn in the time
of Lent, and the next Year was called by writ to be Sergeant at Law. In 1553,
(1o Mariae) he was made the Queens Sergeant, and the next Year was not only
constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas (some say of the
Common-bench) but also dubbed a Knight, being then in high esteem for his great
abilities in his profession, especially for the Books that he about that time
composed, taken then, especially in after Ages, into the hands of the most
learned in the Law, which have ever since made him famous among them and
others. The titles are,

Pleas of the Crown, divided into several titles and common places. Land. 1557.
qu. etc. In some impressions, they are divided into two Volumes.

Exposition of the King's Prerogative, collected out of the abridgment of Anth.
Fitzherbert, and other old Writers of the Laws of England. Land. 1567. 68. etc.
qu. Besides other Books which have not been yet Printed. This noted Lawyer, who
was a zealous R. Cath. departed this mortal life on the 28. Aug. in Fifteen
hundred fifty and eight. Whereupon his body was buried in the Church of Hadley
in Middlesex. I have seen a Copy of his In (...). p^gerog. Cant. in Reg.
Noodes, part. 2. Qu. 53.
Will, wherein the styles himself one of the Justices of the Common Pleas under
the King and Queen, and desires that his Body may be buried in the Parish
Church of Islyngdon, Hadley or Houndsworth. His posterity remains in
Staffordshire, Warwickshire, and elsewhere, to this day.

England, and for his care in preserving and collecting ancient Books and
Monuments decayed by time. His cronie John Leland is full In (...) and (...)
Angl. -- Land. 1589. p. 75. and alibi.
of his praises; and not a little are Joh. In lib. Descript cent* 9. nu 49.
Baleus, Joh. In lib. 2. Antiq. Cant.
Cajus, Abr. In Synon. G^^gr. in Sessoriac^m.
Ortelius, Camden and others; the last of which styles In Br^an. in l^^nis. See
also in (...) Lambards Perambu^ation of Kent, in (...), and elsewhere.
him Vir antiquitatis been peritus, and in hac Angliae part (meaning in the
Iceni, i. e. Norfolk, Suffolk, etc.) versatissimus. He the said Talbot was born
at Thorpe in Northamptonshire, but whether at Thorpe Mandevil or Thorpe Longa.
I know not, and seems to be of the same Family with the Talbots of Grafton. He
was educated in Grammaticals in Wykeham's School near to Winchester, in
Logicals and Philosophicals in New Coll. of which he became Fellow (after he
had served two Years of probation) an. 1523. and left it 5 Years after, being
then only Bach. of Arts, supplicated for the Degree of Master 1529, but not
admitted, as I can find in the Register of that time. However, that he was
written Master and Doctor afterward, it does manifestly appear in various
writings, so that I presume he took those Degrees elsewhere. On the 23. Jun.
1541 he was admitted to a Prebendship in the Church of Wells, called Wedmer
secunda, and on the 9. Apr. 1. Ed. 6. Dom. 1547. the Dean and Chapter of
Norwych did by their Letters Pat. confer a Prebendship, or office of Treasurer
of their Church on him, void by the death of one Will. Herydans. On the 27.
Aug. 5. and 6. of Phil. and Mary, Dom. 1558. he gave to John Harpesfeild Dean,
and to the said Chapter of the Cath. of Norwych three Acres of Land in
Lakenham, and soon after died, as I shall tell you afterward. But that which
is chiefly to be noted is, that during his abode at Norwych, he wrote a Book
thus intit.

Roberti Talboti Annotationes in eam partem Itinerarii Antonini quae ad
Britanniam pertinent. The beginning of which is, Itinera hic sunt in Britannia
numero xv. etc. It ends at the word Luguvallo, at the end of the fifth
Itinerary, and goes no farther. Which Book the learned Camden in his
Britannia, and Will. Burton in his Commentary on Antoninus his Itinerary, and
others, did much use. It is not Printed, but remains in MS. in obscure places:
And for ought I know there are but three Copies of it in being, viz. one in the
Library of Bennet Coll. in Cambridge, another in that of Sir Joh. Cotton at
Westminster (which, if I mistake not, did sometimes belong to Mr. Tho. Allen of
Glouc. Hall, got out of his hands by Rich. James of C. C. C. for the said
Library) and a third in Bodlyes Vatican. Our Author Talbot has also written a
Book called,

Aurum ex stercore, vel de Aenigmaticis and propheticis. MS collected from old
Books of verses and rimes, that have been long since lost. The beginning of
which is, Certe non est rarum, etc. In this Book are verses called Magistrates,
every one of which was worth an ordinary Groat. Mr. Allen before mentioned, had
a Copy of, valued, it much and would often repeat verses thence at times of
refection, but where that Copy is now, I know not. Sure I am, that one written
in qu. in the archives of C. C. C. bound with the observations from humanity
Authors made by John Twyne, was given thereunto by Brian his Grandson. Our
Author Talbot has also made choice Collections

De Chartis quibusdam Regum Britannorum. MS. in the Library of Bennet Coll. in
Cambridge. What else he has written I know not, nor any thing more of him,
only that he took his last farewell of this World a little after the 27. Aug.
in Fifteen hundred fifty and eight, and was buried in the Cathedral Church
there, as I have been instructed from the researches of Mr. (afterward Dr.)
Hump. Prideaux Prebendary of that Church, made from several Registers and
Charters belonging thereunto. By Rob. Talbot's In Offic. praerog. Cant. in reg.
Lostes Qu. 6.
Will dated 20. Aug. 1558, which is almost three Months before Qu. Mary died,
he left the best and rerest of his MSS. to New Coll. in Oxon. Which MSS. did
then lie at Thorpe and Cranesley; and maintenance also for an Anniversary to be
kept at Thorpe for himself, Father, Mother, his Brother John, and for his Uncle
Sir Rich. Whitryns. Which Anniversary was to be performed for the present by
Sir Christopher his Priest at Thorpe beforementioned. But this last, I
presume, was never performed. The Reader is to know, now I am got into the name
of Talbot, that after Rob. Talbots time lived one Tho. Talbot commonly called
Limping Talbot, from a lameness in one of his legs, Son of John Talbot of
Salebury in Lancashire Esquire; (who died 30. Aug. 1551.) which Thomas heing
promoted to the Clerkship of the Records in the Tower of London, did at length,
by the help of a good memory, become a most excellent Genealogist, and a Man of
singular skill in our antiquities. Camden in his Britannia In fine cap. intit.
Law courts of England.
does acknowledge his help in the succession of the Earls of each County since
the Norman conquest, and Tho. Abingdon the sometimes Antiquary of
Worcestershire, in his MS. History of the Bishops of Worcester says thus of
him, -- But these first (meaning the first Bishops of Worcester) I had out of
the Collections of an excellent Antiquary Mr. Thomas Talbot, who gathered the
same out of a Leiger of the Priory of Worcester, which I think is now perished.
He left choice Collections behind him, some of which coming into the hands of
Sir Rob. Cotton, he put them into his Sub Effig. Vespasia^ D. 21.
Library as choice Monuments, and being bound in one Volume in fol are thus
intit. by a Sir Will. Dugdale,
late hand. Analecta quamplurima diversi generis, viz. ex quibusdam chronicis,
cartis, aliisque autenticis registris. Epitaphia, Gencalogiae and alia ad rem
historicam spectantia, besides several Collections of Antiquities in Yorkshire.
I have seen also in the Sheldonian Col. MS. nu 72 and 222.
Library, now reposed in the Heralds Office, diverse of his Collections, viz.
among them is a thin fol. intit. Escaetorum inquisitiones de tempore Reg. Ed.
4. etc. Now whether this Tho. Talbot, who was living, an. 1580, and for ought
that I know, was living ten Years after, was of kin to Robert beforementioned,
I know not, nor can I safely believe that he is the same Thomas Talbot, who was
admitted Bach. of Arts of Oxon. in July 1533. I find another Tho. Talbot to
have been born in the said County of Lancaster, and entered into the Society of
Jesus an. 1598. aged 26. who, after he had wrote several Books, died in 1652,
but this Person was not, as I can yet learn, originally bred among us.

HENRY Lord STAFFORD the only Son of Edward Bucks. (attained, and executed for
treason in 1521.) was one of the most accomplished Persons of his time, and tho
not the inheritor of his Fathers honors, yet he was a Man of great virtue,
learning, and piety. In his younger years he received his education in both the
Universities, especially in that of Cambridge, to which his Father had been a
benefactor; where by the care of good Tutors he attained to a considerable
knowledge in the Latin tongue; and in that language he wrote several things, as
it is said, as well in verse as prose, but such I have not yet seen. He
translated into English a Book intit. De vera differentia regiae potestatis and
ecclesiasticae, and quae sit ipsa veritas ac virtus utriusque etc. Written by
Edward Fox Bishop of Hereford. This translation was printed in oct. but when,
it appears not in the Book. He also translated Erasmus his Two Epistles,
wherein is declared the brainsick headiness of the Lutherans, etc. Land. 1553.
oct. and other things which I have not yet seen. This noble Lord gave way
Baleus int. Script. May. Britan. page 112. int. cent. 12. and 13.
in Fifteen hundred fifty and eight, but where buried I cannot yet tell, nor in
what County born, unless in Staffordshire, wherein he was possessor of many
Lands.

ROBERT BROKE or Brook Son of Thom. Broke of Claverley in Shropshire, Margaret
his Wife, Daughter of Hugh Grosvenor of Farmot in the said County, was born, as
I conceive, at Claverley, laid a foundation of Literature at Oxon; which was a
great advantage to him when he studied the municipal Laws in the Middle Temple,
where he became the compleatest Lawyer of his time. In 1542, he was elected
Autumn or Summer Reader of that House, and in the latter end of the Year (in
Lent) 1550, he was elected Double-Reader. In 1552, he was by writ called to be
Sergeant at Law, and in 1553, being the first Year of Qu. Mary, he was made
Lord Chief Justice of the Common pleas (and not of the Common-bench as some
say) and about that time received the honor of Knighthood from that Queen: In
whose Reign, and after, he was held in high value for his profound knowledge in
the Law, and for his just and upright dealing in all matters relating to the
profession thereof. He has written,

An abridgment, containing an abstract of the Year -- Books till the time of
Qu. Marie. Land. 1573. fol. 76, 86, etc. qu.

Certain cases adjudged in the time of K. Hen. 8. Ed. 6. and Qu. Marie, from 6.
Hen. 8. to the 4. of Qu. Marie- Land. 1578. 1604. 25. etc. in oct. The original
title of this Book is in French Ascuns novel cases, etc.

Reading on the Statute of limitations 32. H. 8. c. 2. Land. 1647. oct. Printed
I think before that time. This Sir Rob. Broke, who was a zealous Cathol. died,
as it seems, in Aug. or Sept. Ib. in Offic. praerog. ut sup. in reg. Noodes,
part. 2.
proved. 12. Oct. the same Year, he several times remembers the Church and Poor
of Putney near London. I find another of both his names, who is written
Esquire, Sergeant at Law and Recorder of London, under whose name was
published, Reading upon the statute of Magna Charta, chap. 16. Land. 1641. qu.
before which time the Author was dead. Whether the same with Rob. Brook of
Brasenose, who was admitted Master of Arts 1584. I think not. As for Sir Rob.
Broke the Judge, he obtained a fair estate by his endeavors, which he left to
his posterity, remaining at Madeley in Shropshire, and at one or two places in
Suffolk.

Bonhom's, studied among the Friars of the Order of St. Austin (now Wadham
Coll.) in the North suburb of Oxon, and at length became Provincial of his
Order, that is of Bonhoms. This Person being noted in his time for his great
learning in Divinity and Physics, was by K. Hen. 8. made the first Bishop of
Bristow, after he had placed an Episcopal See there, an. 1542, and by the name
and title of Paulus Bush capellan^s Regis and S. Theologiae Bacalaureus had
restitution Pat. 34. Hen. 8. p. 2.
made to him of the Temporalities belonging to that See, 16. June in the same
Year. But he taking to him a Wife (whom one Jo. Pi^sens in lib De (...) Angliae
Scriptorib. aet. 16 number 997.
calls a Concubine) in the days of K. Ed. 6. was deprived of his Bishopric by
Qu. Mary, an. 1553, whereupon he spent the remaining part of his days at
Bristow. He has written several things in Divinity and Medicine, as well in
verse as prose, of which number these are some.

An exhortation to Margaret Burges, Wife to Jo. Burges Clothier of Kingswood in
the County of Wilts. Land. temp. Ed. 6. in oct.

Notes on the Psalm, beginning with Miserere mei Deus, etc.

Treatise in praise of the Cross.

Dialogues between Christ and the Virgin Mary.

Treatise of salves and curing remedies, -- besides Poems of diverse kinds,
which I have not yet seen. At length taking his last farewell of this World on
the eleventh of October. Bristow. Over his grave was soon after erected a low
altar tomb, and on it was fastened his statue in his Episcopal Robes lying on
his back. On the 4 corners of the Tomb, were erected four small Pillars,
bearing a Canopy; about which is this written. Hic jacet D. Paulus Bush primus
hujus Ecclesiae Episcopus, qui obut undec. die October. an. Dom. 1558. aetatisque
suae 68 cujus animae propitietur Christus. About the tomb, beneath the statue,
are certain verses engraven on three sides thereof, (the fourth joining to the
Wall) some of which follow. Agnus qui primam nostrum sua tempora miram
Indueret, jacet hic Bristoliense decus.
A patre Bush dictus, Paulum baptisma vocavit,
Virtus implevit nomen uterque Pari.
Paulus, etc.
Ille animos verbis, impensos pavit egenos, Hinc fructum arbusto portulit ille
suo.
Ut madidos, arbusta tegunt, sic foedere rupto Inter discordes pacificator erat.


This Monument was erected near to the stone, under which his sometimes Wife
called Edyth Ashley was buried, who died 8. Oct. 1553.

ROBERT WARD, a native of the Dioc. of Durham, Merton College in 1536, he
being then Masters standing or more, and three years after proceeded in Arts.
About that time he became a shagling Lecturer in Philosophy before the
University in the public Schools, a profound Disputant in Philosophical
matters, and homo semper nimium Metaphysicus, as one Laur. Humphredus in Vita
Jo. Juelle: edit. 1573. p. 10^.
does deservedly style him. He was the chief man that disputed with Bishop
Rydley in the Divinity School, an. 1554. as I have elsewhere told In Hist. and
Antiq. Vniv. Oxon, lib. 1. p 277.
you. And Joh. Fox who has a full relation In Act and Man. Eccles. sub an. 1554
of the said disputation, says of this our Author thus. Mr. Ward amplified so
largely his words, and so high he climed into the Heavens with Duns his Ladder,
and not with the Scriptures, that it is to be marvelled how he could come down
again without falling, etc. But what Fox has ironically said concerning this
matter, is fully answered by one Rob. Persons in his (...) of ten pu^lick
(...): Printed 1604. cap. 4. p 222. and cap. 5. p 311. 312.
of Wards persuasion. As for the works that this our Author has written, I
never saw any, and therefore cannot give you the titles, only say with our old,
and later, Catalogue or Register of Fellows of Merton Coll. that he wrote,

Dialectica and Philosophica quaedam, etc. -- Joh. For beforementioned has
published,

His disputation with B. Nich. Rydley in the Divinity-School at Oxon. -- Which
you may see in the Book of Acts and Mon. of the Church, under the Year 1554. A
little before Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown, Mr. Ward (who seems to have been
then Bach. of Div.) traveled to Rome, where paying his last debt to nature on
the 14. Oct. in Fifteen hundred fifty and eight, Oxon his exequies were
celebrated Reg. 1. Act. societ. coll. Mert. fol. 32^. a.
by the Society of Merton College 17. November. following, according to our
account. Of the same Family (tho remote) was Will. Ward, alias Walker, alias
Slaughter, Son of Mr. Rob. Ward of the County of Cumberland, who having spent
7 years in studying the Arts in Brasnose Coll. traveled into Spain with one
Mr. Dutton a R. Cath. and there became one of his opinion. Afterward he
returned into England to settle his concerns, went beyond Sea again, and upon a
Commission received, he returned into his own Country a second time to convert
Persons to his profession; but being taken after he had been a Priest 24 years,
was imprisoned in Newgate. Soon after being tried for his life, he was executed
at Tybourne on Monday 26. July 1641.

Lutherans, was born at Codyngton near to Hadenham in Buckinghamshire, educated
in Wykeham's School near Winchester, made perpetual Fellow of New Coll. in
1512, took a Degree in the Canon Law, afterward that of M. of A. left the
Coll. about 1526. being then Bach. of Divinity and beneficed. But being
desirous of the conversation of learned Men and Books, entered Rot. camp.
Rectorum Coll. Exon in scaccar. ibid.
himself in the condition of a Sojournour in Exeter Coll. where he continued
for some time. At length he became a Monk of St. Mary's Abbey at Reading in
Berks, and in 1530 proceeded in Divinity, at which time Hugh Abbat of the said
Monastery, wrote to the University in In lib. Epist. Univ. Oxon. FF. sol. 101.
102.
Epistle, wherein our Author is thus charactarized -- Dominus Holymannus, non
vita minus quam eruditione Theologus insignis, Londini nuper e suggesto Paulino
cencionatus est: tam frequenti hominum conventu, tanta admiratione, tam magna
apud omnes gratia, ut jamdudum nemo, qui christum sincere praedicat, majorem ab
illo populo, vel laudem vel amorem consequutus est, etc. The said Epistle was
written, as I have In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib 1. p. 252 a lib 2. p. 95
b.
elsewhere told you, in the Year 1530. to the end that the University would be
pleased to dispense with him from Preaching at Oxon for the Degree of D. of
Divinity, and that instead thereof he might Preach at London, upon pretense
that the City was much polluted with Luther's Doctrine. In 1535, he was ejected
from his Abbey, because of the dissolution thereof for a profane use, and lived
afterward partly at Hanborough near to Woodstock in Oxfordshire (of which
place he seems to have been Rector) and partly in Exeter Coll. in 1554, he was
promoted to the Sea of Bristow, upon the deprivation of Paul Bush the first
Bishop thereof; the Temporalities of which See being given Pat. 1. and. 2. Ph.
and Mar. p 1.
to him 28. Nov. the same Year, sat there to the time of his death in good
repute. He has written,

Tract. contra doctrinam M. Lutheri.

Defensio matrimonii Reginae Catherinae cum Rege Henrico octavo, lib. 1. with
other things which I have not yet seen. This Person who was a most zealous
Catholic, gave way to fate either in, or near to, Oxon, much about the time,
when his Predicessor P. Bush died, and was according to his will, as I presume,
buried in the Chancel of the Church of Hanborough beforementioned, in Fifteen
hundred fifty and eight. Alexand. Belsire sometimes Fellow of New College,
afterward the first President of that of St. John Bapt. who was his great
Friend and Overseer of his last Will, was buried near to him, in 1567, being,
while living, seldom from him. The said Bishop Holyman in his last In Off^c
prae^og. in reg. We^^s, Qu. 38.
Will and Testament dated 4 June 1558, and proved 16. Feb. following, did give
to the College near to Winchester the works of St. Augustine, St. Jerome, St.
Cyprian, St. Cecill, Tertullian, Ireneus, etc. Which afterward were chained in
the Library there.

Staffordshire Man born, was educated in Magd. College; of which house he
became afterward Fellow, and esteemed in the University, especially by the
reformed party, a right godly and learned Man, and a good Preacher. Afterward
he belonged to the Church at Windsore, where he helped Jo. Merbeck in making
the Concordance of the Bible. But when Qu. Mary came to the Crown he fled
beyond Seas, and settling at Basil in Germany, was a frequent Preacher among the
English exiles, for whose sake he composed,

An Exposition on the Epistle of St. Paul to the Ephesians. Hebrews.


Expos. on the Genesis Epist. of St. James. -- These expositions which were read
at Basil, were fit for the Press in 1558, but whether they were ever afterward
Printed; I know not. In the said Year, Baleus tells Int. Script. Major. Britan.
p. 113.
us, that he was living at Basil, and Joh. Fox does further In his Acts and
Monof the Church, etc. in the story of Joh. Merbeck.
inform us that he died in Exile. So I presume, that he concluded his last day
between the beginning of Fifteen hundred fifty and eight, November. the same
year; in which Month Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown of England, and soon after
the exiles returned to their Country.

REYNOLD POLE whose piety, learning, and integrity Ric. Pole Knight of the
Garter (Cousin german to K. Hen. 7.) by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of George
Duke of Clarence, younger Brother to K. Ed. 4. The birth of this most noble
Person, was, as a learned Will. Camden in Britannia in Staffordsh.
Author reports, at Stoverton Castle in Staffordshire, or as another See in the
third vol. of a Book intit. Florum Historiae sacri collegii S. R. E.
Cardinalium -- Par. 1660. page 225. written by Ludov. Doni D' attichi, etc.
who was a Forreigner tells us, (but false, as I presume) at London in the
Month of March 1500. His education in Grammatical learning was partly in the
Carmes House (commonly called White Friars) in the North suburb of Oxon, and
his Academical in the Coll. of St. Mary Magdalen, where continuing for some
time, he was admitted to the reading of any of the Logical Books of Aristotle,
that is to the Degree of Bach. of Arts, an. 1515. In which year he supplicated
the venerable Congregation of Regents, that he might wear panni pretiosi and
pellurae pretiosae, and be admitted to enter into the Library. How long he
tarried in that Coll. after he had taken his Degree, or whether he took the
Degree of Master of Arts, or a Degree in any other faculty, it appears not in
our Registers. In the Year 1517. March 19. he was made Prebendary of Roscombe
in the Church of Salisbury, in 1519. Apr. 10. Preb. of Yatminster secunda in
the said Church, and on the 14 of Feb. 1523, he was admitted Fellow of Corp.
Chr. College by command from the founder: Which place, I presume, he never
enjoyed, being then absent, if not happily Dean of Winbourne Minster in
Dorsetshire, from whence he was promoted to be Dean of Exeter. Afterward, his
life being chiefly spent in Italy, he became by the favor of the Pope,
Cardinal of St. Nereus and Achilleus, afterward of St. Mary in Cosmedin, and
at length of St. Prisca, was employed also by him in several Embassies to the
French King, and to the Emperor, and lastly after the said Popes death ( Paul
3.) he was in the Conclave of Cardinals chose twice by them to succeed him, an.
1549. But he, upon some account, refusing both the elections, craved license to
depart unto a certain Monastery in the Territory of Verona, there to spend the
remainder of his days. To which place afterward retiring, he exercised himself
for some years, in great devotion and retiredness. At length the news of K.
Edw. death being brought of him, and that Qu. Mary had obtained the Crown, he
procured of P. Julius 3. license to be sent his Legate into England, to
reconcile that Nation to the Romish See, and the rather for this cause, that
being See in the History of the Council of Trent, written by Pietro Soave
Polano, and translated into English by Sir Nath. Brent -- Land. 1620. p. 384.
not in holy orders, (tho a Cardinal) he might be in a capacity (being one of
the three that were named) to marry the Queen. Soon after coming into England
(the Queen being then married) he was elected Chancellor of this University,
and was made Archb. of Canterbury in the place of Cranmer; to which he was
consecrated 22. March 1555. (being about that time Pat. 2. and 3. Phil. and
Mar. p. 1.
invested with the Temporalities of that See) and kept it to his dying day. He
was a Person of great learning, eloquence and judgment, of singular piety,
charity, and exemplary life, as several Writers tell us, who add also, that he
was an excellent Canonist, and well read in the Laws of ecclesiastical polity,
as may partly be seen in the Books written by him, which are these.

Pro unitate ecclesiastica, ad Hen. 8. Romans in fol.

Oration ad Imperatorem, contra Evangelicos, cum Scholiis Athanasii. Print.
1554. in qu.

Oration of Speech in the Parliament House, 27. Nov. 1554. -- The contents of
which you may see in John Fox his Book of Acts and Monuments of the Church,
etc. under that year.

Letter to P. Julius 3. touching the restoring of the Realm of England -- dated
on the last of Nov. 1554. See there again under the same year.

Unitatis Ecclesiasticae defensio, etc. lib. 4. Argent. 1555. fol. Ingolst.
1587. oct.

Oration in materia de pace. Ven. 1558. qu.

Reformatio Angliae ex decretis Reg. poli, an. 1556. Romans 1562. qu. Lov. 1569.
oct.

De concilio, lib. 1. Romans 1562. qu. Lov. 1567. fol. and 69. oct. etc. This is
printed in Canones and Decreta concilii Tridentini, published by Philip Labbe
-- Par. 1667. fol.

De Baptismo Constantini Imperatoris. Printed with the former Book.

De summi pontificis officio and potestate. Lov. 1569. oct.

A Treatise of Justification. Lov. 1569. qu. in two Books. This was found among
the Writings of Card. Pole, remaining in the custody of Mr. Hen. Pyning,
Chamberlain and receiver general to the said Cardinal, then lately deceased at
Lovaine. With it were Printed and bound certain translations touching the said
matter of justification, viz. (1) The sixth Session of the general Council of
Trent, which is of justification, with the Canons of the same Session. (2) A
Treatise of St. Augustine that famous Doctor, by him intit. Of faith and works,
etc. -- Which translations were made by the Cardinal, who sat several times in
the said Council. (3) A Sermon of St. Chrysostom, of praying unto God. (4) A
Sermon. of St. Basil of Fasting. (5) Certain Sermons of St. Leo the great, of the
same argument. (6) A notable Sermon of St. Cyprian of Almesdeeds. He also
(Card. Pole) had been several years gathering and obtaining from diverse learned
Persons, the various readings, emendations, castigations, etc. of Cicero's
works, with intentions to have published a complete Copy of them, but death
seizing on him unexpectedly, that good work was stopped, and what are become of
the papers of corrections, I know not. This great Person who was in an high
manner venerated by all Men (tho extremely hated by K. Hen. 8.) yielded to
nature 18. Nov. early in the morning, (being the very next day that Qu. Mary
died) in Fifteen hundred fifty and eight, aged 58. years: Whereupon his body
being carried to Canterbury in the latter end of December. Thomas the Martyr,
being, as yet (1689.) the last Archb. of that See that has been there buried.
See more of him in his life written in the Italian tongue by Ludov. Bacatellus
sometimes Domestic to this great Cardinal, and afterward advanced to the
Archbishopric of Rhaguse for his rare piety and learning; translated into
Latin by Andr. Duditius S^ordellatus Episc. Tininiensis -- Ven. 1563. qu. Who
afterward left his Religion and became a Protestant and Socinian.

HUGH WESTON was a Leycestershire Man born, entered Balliol Coll. about 1526,
took the Degree of Bach. of Arts 1530, about which time being chose Fellow of
Lincoln Coll. (I mean into one of those Fellowships founded by Edw. Darby) he
proceeded in his Faculty, studied Physic, and was afterward one of the
Proctors of the University. In 1538, he was elected Rector of the said College,
was admitted the year after to the reading of the sentences, and in 1540. he
proceeded in Divinity. About which time he was made Margaret Professor,
Archdeacon of Colchester, and Rector of Cliff in Kent. In the first of Qu. Mary
he had the Deanery of Westminster bestowed on him, in the place of Dr. Ric.
Coxe, was made prolecutor of the convocation of the whole Clergy of the Diocese
of Canterbury; where in speaking and acting he behaved himself with great
commendation. The same year being forced to leave the said Deanery to make room
for Dr. Joh. Fekenham the former Abbat of Westminster and the Monks, had that
of Wind^ore bestowed upon him, an. 1556. But being taken in adultery (as some
say) was deprived of the said Deanery by Card. Pole Archb. of Canterbury, in
1557. Whereupon looking on himself as much abused, did appeal to an higher
Power. So that being about to take a journey to Rome to complain to his
holiness, was seized, and clapped up Prisoner within the Tower of London, where
as I conceive he died. Jo. Leland In Principum ac illustr. aliquot virorum,
etc. Encomiis. p. 86. and in Cygnea Cant. edit. Land, 1658. p. 22.
gives him the character of a noted Preacher and Orator of his time, and seems
to intimate that he had written several Books. Jo. Bale, who speaks well of few
Men, says In his Declaration of Edm. Bonners articles -- Land. 1561. fol. 69.
that he had been sore bytten with a Winchester gose, and was not as yet (1554)
healed thereof: And tells us of his old familiar Mary Huckvale of Oxford and of
his provider Goodwife Person, and Chrystian Thompson the Widow, and I know not
what. Another Mich. Wood a Printer, in his epist. to the Reader before Steph.
Garamers Oration de vera obedientia, p^. at Roan, 1553.
equal with Bale in scurrilities, says that Hugh Weston is a drunken burnt
tail man, a baudy beast, a leacherous locust, a companion with curtezans of
Coleman hedge -- more meet to be coupled with his old play-fellow and
pack-borse Goodwife Hugfaile at Oxon, at the tail of a Cart, than to be
reverenced and reputed a Maiden Priest in good Queen Mary's Court. But to let
pass this brutish language, more fit to be spoken at Billingsgate than by a
Person that made Divinity his delight, I must tell you that there goes under
this Dr. Weston's name,

Oration coram patribus and clero habita 16. Oct. 1553. The beginning of which
is Cum Demosthenes totius Graeciae lumen, etc. Land. 1553. oct.

Disputations with Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer in the Divnity School at Oxon.
an. 1554. -- At which time he was Moderator in the disputations of several
Doctors had with them, as you may see at large in Joh. Fox his Book of Acts and
Monuments of the Church, etc. wherein are also several conferences, and
discourses of the said H. Weston had with other Persons. At length he giving
way to fate within the Tower of London, (as it seems) in the Month of December.
Crucifix, in the middle of the Church belonging to the Hospital of the Savoy,
situated in the Strand near to London. In his will dat. 26. Nov. 1558, made
within the Tower of London, he bestowed most of his wealth on pious and public
uses, took a great deal of care about the ceremoney to be performed at his
burial, and for the praying for his Soul by several Persons in several places,
as moneys for a Dirige and Mass to be performed (1) By the Master and Fellows
of Balliol Coll. (2) By the Rector and Fellows of Lincoln Coll. (3) By the
Chapl. or Priest of the University of Oxon. (4) By the Priest at Islip near
Oxon. of which perhaps he had been Rector (5) By the Priest of Burton Novery in
Leycestershire, at which place (if I mistake not) he had received his first
breath, because his Brethren lived there, etc. with many other things therein,
which not only showed him to be a zealous Catholic, but also a Person of a
public spirit.

WILLIAM FOREST was related to John Forest beforementioned, but where born,
I cannot justly say, Oxonians, and was there a Student, when the question was
discussed among the Doctors and Masters concerning the divorce of King Hen. 8.
from his Royal Consort Qu. Catherine in 1530, as in the life of the said Queen
(which I shall anon mention) appears. He was a Priest, and had preferment in
the Church, was well skilled in Music and Poetry, had a collection of the
choicest compositions in Music that were then in use: Which coming after his
death into the hands of Dr. Heather founder of the Musical Praxis in this
University, he gave them to the public School thereof, where they yet
continue, and are kept only as matters of antiquity. Among them are the
compositions of Joh. Taverner of Boston, sometimes Organist of Cardinal Coll.
in Oxon; of Joh. Merbeck Org. of Windsore, Rob. Fairfax a Doctor of Music of
Cambridge, Dr. Christ. Tie, Joh. Sheppard, John Norman, etc. All the Books that
our Author Forest has composed (which have as yet come to my view) were
written in English Poetry, such as was commonly used in the Reigns of Hen. 8.
and Ed. 6. The titles of which follow.

A true and most notable History of a right noble and famous Lady, produced in
Spain, entitled the second Gresield, practiced not long out of this time, in
much part tragedous, as delectable both to hearers and readers -- This is a MS.
containing the life of Queen Catherine, the first Wife of K. Hen. 8. and is by
the Author dedicated to Qu. Mary, he being then Chaplain to her. It Is a broad
thin Folio, written very fairly on Vellam, and seems to be the very same (it
being now my proper Book) that the Author presented to the said Queen. There be
many things in it, that are very zealously written against the Heretics of
those times, as he calls them, which plainly shows him to be entirely devoted
to the Church of Rome. And tho there be no great streins in it, yet the
historical part of it is good, (if not too much partiality therein) and I have
discovered from the said Book, many things relating to the Affairs of Oxon,
acted during the time of the said divorce, which I could never see elsewhere.
The beginning of the prologue to Qu. Mary is this, As nature has no
inclination, etc. and of the work it self, Writers have many endeavored their
pains, etc. Throughout the whole History, the Author makes use of the name of
Grysild the second for Qu. Catherine, and the name of Walter for K. Hen. 8. At
the end of it (contained in 20 Chapters) is this written, Here endethe the
Historye of Grysilde the second, duly meaning Qu. Catharine, Mother to our
most dread Sovereign Lady Qu. Mary, fynysched the 25. day of June, the Year
of owre Lord. 1558. by the simple and unlearned Sir Wyllyam Forest Preeiste,
propria manus. -- At the end of the said History, is written in verse also,

An Oration consolatory to Queen Mary -- It Is contained in six leaves, and has
this beginning, Among much inward profound perpending, etc. This Book richly
bound in laced Satin, has on every brass boss at each corner, this sentence
embossed in an English Character, Ave Maria, Gratia plena. Our Author Forest
has also written in old English verse,

The tragedious Troubles of the most chaste and innocent Joseph, Son to the holy
Patriarch Jacob -- MS. in two vol. in fol. dedicated to Thom. Haward Duke of
Norfolk, written curiously on Vellam, and sometime in the Library of Joh.
Theyer of Coopershill near to the City of Gloucester, Gent. Which, with the rest
of the MSS belonging to that person, coming by sale into the hands of Rob. Scot
of London, Bookseller, he sold them for the use of the Kings Library at S.
James. Robert Earl of Alesbury had a Copy of the said History of Joseph, but
whether it was the very same that belonged to Mr. Theyer, I cannot justly say.
He had also these following MSS written by the said Will. Forest, viz.

Poems upon several Occasions -- MS. fol.

Certain meditations and Prayers necessary of a Christian -- MS. fol. in prose
and verse.

Treatise of Heretics and their properties. Of faith, works, and justification.

Glass of charity on the seven penitential Psalms.

Consolation against temptation. Of Penance.

Against desperation of the last judgment. A Mirror of Christianity.

That Heretics are not to be disputed withal.

Several Tracts in defense of the Articles of the Church of Rome.

MS. in two vol. in fol.

What other Books he has written, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only
that he was in great esteem among the Romans Clar. 1558.
Catholics in Fifteen hundred fifty and eight, which was part of the last Year
of Queen Mary, and part of the first of Qu. Elizabeth.

Londoner born, was, as it seems, educated in this University, because I find
several of both his names and of his time to have taken one degree or more
therein, and one John Field to have supplicated for a degree in Arts in the
month of July 1519. Afterterwards leaving the University, he went to another,
as it is probable, and at length retiring to his native place wrote and
published,

Ephemeris pro an. 1557. To which is prefixed a Learned Epistle written by Dr.
Jo. Dee.

Fphemerides trium annorum, an. 1558, 59. and 60, etc. ex Erasmi Reinholdi
tabulis accuratissime ad meridianum Civitatis Londinensis, supputatae. Land.
1558. October. 28. in qu.

Canon Ascensionum obliquarum cujusvis stellae non excedentis 8 gradus
Latitudinis confectus. Printed with the Ephemerides.

Tabula stellarum fixarum insigniorum, qua and ortus, occasus, ac utriusque
caete meditationes earum ad ooulum patebant, etc. Printed with the said
Ephemerides also. What else he has published I find not, nor any thing
memorable of him besides, only that he was much in renown for his learning in
the Reign of Q. Mary, and beginning of Queen Elizabeth. I find another John
Field or Feld, Clar. 1558.
who was a Citizen of London, a zealous Protestant and a great enemy to Sir
Thomas More, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and John Rastal; who having
published certain matters, is numbered among the English writers by John Bale,
In lib. De Script. Maj. Brit. p. 104. inter cent. 12. and 13.
who tells us that he died at London, an. 1546. See another John Field under
the year 1587.

JOHN PLOUGH Son of Christopher Plough of the Nottingham, and Nephew to John
Plough Rector of St. Peter's Church in the said Town, was born there, spent
several years in obtaining Academical learning in this University, supplicated
in the latter end of 1543. for the degree of Bach. of the Civil-Law, but
whether he was ever admitted it appears not. At that time, if I mistake not, he
was Rector of the said Church, the advouson of which for one turn, his Uncle
bought for him of Thomas Hobson the Prior, and Convent, of Lenton, before the
year 1538, for in that year the Uncle died. Afterward our Author John Plough
became a zealous Minister of Gods word in the time of King Edward VI. but
flying beyond the Sea in Queen Mary's Reign, wrote one or more of the Books
following at Basil, where he mostly resided.

An Apology for the Protestants -- Written in answer to a Book against the
English Protestants that was penned and published by one Miles Hogeard of London
Hosier, the first Trader of Mechanic that appeared in Print for the Catholic
cause, I mean one that had not received any Monastical or Academical breeding.
Beside our Author Plough, wrote against him one William Keth an Exile at
Frankford in the Reign of Queen Mary, and Robert Crowley. The said Plough also
wrote,

Treatise against the mitred men in the Popish Kingdom.

The sound of the doleful Trumpet -- When or where, either of these three was
printed, I cannot tell, for I have not yet seen them. Clar. 1558.
He was living at Basil in great esteem among the Exiled Protestants in the
latter end of Queen Mary, and whether he lived to return when Queen Elizabeth
succeeded, I cannot yet find.

GEORGE LILYE Son of William Lilye the famous Paul's Cathedral within the City
of London, educated for a time, as it seems, in Magdalen Coll. which house was
seldom or never without a Lilye (understand me not that it bears Three Lilyes
for its Arms) from the first foundation thereof to the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth. After he had left the University without a degree, he traveled to
Rome, where he was received with all humanity into the protection of Cardinal
Pole, and became noted there for his singular parts in various sorts of
Learning. Some time after his return he was made Canon of S. Paul's Cathedral,
and afterward Prebendary of Canterbury; which last dignity, he had, I suppose,
by the gift of the said Cardinal when he was Archbishop of that place. While he
was Canon of S. Paul he set up a Monument to the memory of his learned Father,
in the Inscription of which, this George is styled Canon of that Church. His
writings are,

Anglorum Regum Chronices Epitome. Ven. 1548. Francof. 1565. qu. Bas. 1577. etc.

Lancastrii and Eboracensis de regno contentiones.

Regum Angliae Genealogia.

Both Printed with the former Book.

Elogia Virorum illustrium.

Cat. sive Series Pontificum and Caesarum Romanorum, besides a Table or Mapp of
Britain, with other things which I have not yet seen. At length taking his
last farewell of this world in the beginning of the year, fifteen hundred fifty
and nine, Elizabeth) was buried, as I suppose, near the body of his Father.

Will. Harrison in his Historical Descript. of the Island of Britain, lib. 1.
cap. 24.
by one Tonstall, upon a Daughter of the Comers, as Leland says) of great
learning and judgment, received his first breath at Hatchford in Richmondshire,
in the year 1476. or thereabouts, became a Student in the University of Oxon.
about 1491, particulary, as some Brian. Twyne in Antiq. Acad. Oxon. Apol. lib.
3. sect 242, and Mil. Windsore Alumnus Coll. Ball. in initio Mariae Reginae, in
Collectaneis suis, MS.
will have it, in Balliol College, and whether he took a degree, or degrees, we
have no Register of that time to show it. Afterward, as it is farther added, he
was forced to leave Oxon. because of a Plague that happened in his time, and went
to Cambridge, but making no long stay there, he traveled to the University of
Padoua in Italy, then most flourishing in Literature; where he became noted to
all ingenious men for his forward and pregnant parts. After his return, being
then, as it seems, Doctor of the Laws, but not of Cambridge, he had diverse
dignities and places of trust conferred upon him successively: Among which I
find the Archdeaconry of Chester to be one, a Prebendship in the Church of York
another, the Vicarship General to Dr. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury a third.
Afterward he was Master of the Rolls, keeper of the Privy Seal; was employed
in one or more Embasies, made Dean of Salisbury in the place of Dr. Joh.
Longland, in the Month of June 1521, and at length Bishop of London, to which
See he was consecrated 19. October. 1522. Whereupon his Deanery was bestowed on
one Reymund Pade, in January following. Two years after, he, with Sir Rich.
Wingfield Knight of the Garter and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lanc. were sent
Ambassadors into Spain, and in 1530. he was translated to Durham. From which
See being ejected for his Religion in the time of K. Ed. 6. was restored by
Queen Mary in the beginning of her Reign, but thrust out thence again in 1559.
when Qu. Elizabeth was settled in her Throne. He was a Man passing well seen in
all kind of more polished literature, a Person very rare and admirable, and in
whom, no Man in his time did reprehend any thing, but his Religion, except
foul-mouthed Bale, who calls him In lib. De illust. script. cent. 9. nu. 34.
Melancholicus and Saturninus somniator atque excogitator omnium malorum, and
another Mich. Wood in his Epist. to the Reader before his translation of Steph.
Gardiner's Oration, De vera obedientia, Printed at Roan, 1553. in oct.
as bad as he, who run's upon the same strain -- a still dreaming Saturn -- a
plotter of Mischief, and I know not what. There was scarce any kind of good
literature, in which he was not excellent. He was a very good Grecian and
Ebritian, an eloquent Rhetorician, a skilful Mathematician, a noted Civilian
and Canonist, and a profound Divine. But that which makes for his greatest
commendation, is, that Erasmus was his friend, and he a fast friend to Erasmus,
in an Epistle to whom from Sir Thom. More, I find this character of Tonstall,
that As there was no Man more adorned with knowledge and good literature, no
Man more severe and of greater integrity for his life and manners; so there was
no Man a more sweet and pleasant companion, with whom a Man would rather choose
to converse. He has written and published,

De art supputandi, lib. 4. Land. 1522. qu. dedic. to Sir Tho. More.
Afterward it was printed at several places beyond the Seas. I find honorable
mention of it in the Preface of Sim. Grynaeus to Euclid in Greek, with the
Scholia of Theon on it. Which Book was published by the said Grynaeus and
dedicated to Tonstall.

In laudem matrimonii. Oration habita in sponsalibus Mariae filiae Hen. 8. and
Francisci Francorum Regis primogeniti. Land. 1518. qu.

Sermon on Palm Sunday before K. Hen. 8. on Philippians 2. from ver. 5. to 12.
Land. 1539. and 1633. qu.

De veritate corporis and sanguinis Domini in Eucharistia, lib. 2. Lutet. 1554.
in qu. Concerning the printing, and authenticalness of the said Book, you may
see at large in Dr. George Carleton's Life of Bern. Gilpin, printed at Land.
1628. p. 12. 13. 33.

Compendium in december libros Ethicorum Aristotelis. Par. 1554. oct.

Contra impios Blasphematores dei predestinationis opus. Antw. 1555. qu.

Godly and devout prayers in English and Lat. -- Printed 1558. in oct.

His and the Letter of Joh. Stokesley B. of Land. to Cardinal Reginald Pole.
Land. 1560. and 79. qu. The beginning is, For the good will we have born to
you, etc. It shows the Bishop of Rome to have no special superiority over other
Bishops. He has also made two thousand faults and noted many corruptions in
William Tyndales translation of the New Testament, and has written several
Epistles to Budeus, and a Book against the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, as
Bale says; which, as I conceive, is his Letter to Card. Pole beforementioned.
But that, or his faults on Tyndale, or Epistles, I have not yet seen. At length
being deprived of his Bishopric of Durham (as I have before told you) about
Midsomer, in 1559. was then, as it is said, committed to free custody at Lambeth
with Matthew Archb. of Canterbury, but how that can be, seeing that the said
Matthew was not consecrated Archbishop till 17. Dec. 1559. I cannot yet
perceive. With him also, it is farther said, that he continued four Months, and
that dying on the 18. Nov. in Fifteen hundred fifty and nine (which was a full
month before Dr. Matthew Parker was consecrated) was buried at the charges of
the said Matthew in the Chancel of the Parochial Church of Lambeth in Surrey.
Over his grave was a fair Marble stone soon after laid, with an Epitaph
engraven thereon, made by Dr. Walter Haddon an admirer of his learning and
virtues. Joh. Leland who calls him Dunostallus has bestowed a collation (not
without desert) upon him, as also upon his Friend Budaeus beforementioned,
which you may see in his Encomia, Trophaea, etc. p. 45.

JOHN BEKINSAU, a younger Son of Joh. Bekinsau Hampshire, but a native of
Bekinsau in Lancashire, where his name was ancient and gentile, received his
first breath at Broadchalke in Wilts. and his Grammatical education in
Wykeham's School near Winchester. At which place being made soon ripe for the
University, was sent to New Coll. where after he had served two Years of
probation, was admitted perpetual Fellow, in 1520. In 1526. he completed the
degree of M. of A. being that year about to take a journey beyond the Seas for
the sake of study, as one of the University registers informs me; at which time
he was esteemed in his Coll. a most admirable Grecian. But whether he did then,
or after, perform his journey, it does not farther appear there. Sure I am that
I find it entered upon In Offic. Armorum Londini in Reg. vel lib. C. fol 72. b.
record that John Beconsaw second Son of John Beconsaw of Hartley-Wespell in
Hampshire, (born at Beconsaw in Lancashire) was Reader of the Greek Lecture at
Paris, and afterward came over and died at Sherburne in Hampshire. In 1538.
John Bekinsau left his Fellowship of New Coll. because he had then taken a
Wife, but what preferment or employment he had afterward, I know not. At that
time he was acquainted with, and had in veneration by, the most learned Men of
the Nation, among whom was John Leland the famous Antiquary and Historian, who
in his In Encomiis, Trophaeis, etc. eruditorum in Anglia virorum. p. 91.
Poetry does speak several things to his honor, of his being bred in Oxon, and
of his studying at Paris, with several other things, which show him to have
been a great Scholar. In 1546. when he saw that the Pope's power was quite
exterminated, he wrote a Book entit.

De supremo and absoluto Regis imperio. Land. 1546. oct. Printed also in the
first vol. of Monarchia S. Romani imperii, etc. by Melchior Goldast.
Hamensfeldius -- Franc. 1621. fol. The Author Bekinsau did dedicate it to K.
Hen. 8. with whom, as also with K. Ed. 6. he was in some value; but when Qu.
Mary came to the Crown, and endeavored to alter all what her Father and
Brother had done, as to the reformation of the Church; then did he wheel about,
change his mind, and became a zealous Person for the Church of Rome, and a
hater of Protestants. After Queen Elizabeth was fetled in the Throne, he
retired to an obscure Town called Sherbourne in Hampshire, where giving way to
fate in great discontent, was buried in the Church of that place 20. December. in
Fifteen hundred fifty and nine, aged about 63 years, leaving then behind him
this character among the R. Catholics, that As he was a learned Man, so might
he have been promoted according to his deserts, had his principles been
constant.

Britain born, as Joh. Bale in lib. De script. c^nt. 9. nu 38.
one that knew him tellus, partly educated in this, and partly in another
University, (beyond the Sea, as it seems) where applying his studies to the
faculty of Physic he proceeded Doctor, and became famous for it at London, not
only for the Theoretic but practick part, and much beloved and admired by all
learned Men, especially by Dr. John Cay and Dr. Joh. Friar two eminent
Physicians of Cambridge. One Bassian Lan^^s de Placentia, in (...) corp. (...)
lib. 2. cap. XI.
that lived in his time styles him Medicus nobilissimus atque optimus, and in
omni literarum genere maxim versatus, and tells us, that he wrote several
things on Galen, which are printed, and by others cited. This is all that I
know of this learned Person, only that he died 26 Dec. in Fifteen hundred fifty
and nine, Edw. Wotton in the Church of St. Alban situated in Woodstreet in
London; in which Parish he had lived many years in great respect, and was
esteemed one of the chief Parishioners. Alice his Widow, who died on the last
day of May 1580. was buried by him, and both had a substantial Gravestone,
with an inscription on it, laid over them, but that of it which was left part
in 1666. was utterly consumed in the grand conflagration of London.

Caversham in Oxfordshire, (where his elder Brother Thom. Brigham had lands of
inheritance, and died there 6. Ed. 6. but descended from those of Brigham in
Yorks.) received his Academical education in this University, particularly, as
I conceive, in Heart Hall, wherein I find several of his Surname (without
Christian names before them) to have studied in the time of Hen. 8. but whether
he took a Degree, it does not appear in our registers that are somewhat
imperfect in the latter end of that King's Reign. When he continued in the
University, and afterward in one of the Inns of Court, he exercised his muse
much in Poetry, and took great delight in the works of Jeffry Chaucer: For
whose memory he had so great a respect, that he removed his bones into the
South cross Isle or trancept of St. Peter's Church in Westminster, in the Year
1556. Which being so done, he erected a comely Monument over them, with
Chaucers Effigies, and an Epitaph in Prose and Verse; which to this day remains
against the East Wall of the said Isle. At riper years our Author Brigham
addicted himself much to the study of the municipal Law, became noted for it,
and without doubt had not death snatched him untimely away, he would have
communicated some Specimen of that faculty to the World. His genie also was
much inclined to English History, in which faculty he published a Book, which
some Joh. Bale. and Joh. (...)
entitle,

De venationibus rerum memorabilum. It contains the discovery or finding out of
several memories of eminent Men of, and things done in, England. Which being
perused by John Bale, he has culled out many things thence for his purpose,
and quotes it when he has occasion to mention several eminent Writers. See in
his Book De Scriptorib. Maj. Britan. cent. 10. nu. 72. cent. 11. number. 6. 42.
52. 95. etc. and in cent. 12. nu. 24. 79. 82. 95. etc.

Memoires by way of Dia^e, in 12 Books. -- And wrote also his youth.

Miscellaneous Poems. -- with other things which I have not seen, being, as I
suppose, irrecoverable and quite lost. This ingenious and curious Person, who
was admirably well versed in Histories and Antiquities, yielded up his last
breath to the great regret of all those that knew his worth, within the City of
Westminster in the month of Dec. in Fifteen hundred fifty and nine, Elizabeth)
but where buried, unless near to the bones of Chaucer, I cannot tell.

JOHN WHITE Brother to Sir Joh. White L. Mayor London an. 1563. Son of Rob.
White of Farnham in Surrey, Son of Joh. White of the same place; Son of Thom.
White of Purvyle in Hampshire, was born at Farnham before mentioned, educated
in Grammar learning in Wykeham's School near Winchester, admitted true and
perpetual Fellow of New Coll. in 1527, took the Degrees in Arts, that of Master
being completed in an Act celebrated 23 March 1533-4 left his Fellowship in
1534. being about that time Master of the said School, in the place of Rich.
Tuchiner. Afterward he was made Warden of the College near to Winchester, was
elected Bishop of Lincoln upon the deprivation of Dr. Joh. Tailor; the
Temporalities of which were Pat. 1. R. Mar. p. 1.
restored to him 2. May 1554, he being then Bach. of Divinity. In the beginning
of October. 1555. he was incorporated Doctor of his faculty, and soon after, upon
the death of Dr. St. Gardener he was translated to Winchester, the
Temporalities of which, were also restored Pat. 3. and 4. R. Phil. and Mar. p 6.
to him, 30. May 1557. Of some of which gradual rises Dr. Christoph. Johnson
one of his successors in the Mastership of Winchester School, made this distick.

Me puero custos, Ludi paulo ante Magister Vitus, and hac demum praesul in urbe
fuit.

He was a Man of an austere life, and much more mortified to the World than
Step. Gardener his Predecessor. He was eminent also for piety and learning, was
an eloquent Orator, a solid Divine, a nervous Preacher, and poetica facultate,
ut tempora ferebant, tolerabilis, as Camden Camden in Annal. Elizab. sub an.
1559.
tells us. His fame and actions did well answer his name, and so did all Men
say, how contrary soever to him in Religion, only for one black Sermon that he
made, he gave offense, yet for the color, it may be said he kept decorum,
because it was a funeral Sermon of a great Queen by birth and marriage, I mean
Qu. Mary: The offense taken against him was this. His See in the Brief view of
the state of the Church of England, etc. by Jo. Harrington Knight, Land. 1653.
p. 59. 60.
Text was out of Eccles. 4. 2. Laudavi mortuos magis quam viventes, and
feliciorem utroque judicave qui nec dum damnatus est. And speaking of Qu. Mary
her high parentage, her bountiful disposition, her great gravity, her rare
devotion, (praying so much, as, he affirmed, that her knees were hard with
kneeling) her justice and clemency in restoring noble houses to her own private
loss and hindrance, and lastly her grevious and patient death, he fell into
such an unfeigned weeping, that for a long space he could not speak. Then
recovering himself, he said she had left a Sister to succeed her, a Lady of
great worth also, whom, they were now bound to obey; for says he, melior est
canis vivus leone mortuo, and I hope so shall Reign well and prosperously over
us, but I must say still with my Text Laudavi mortuos magis quam viventes, for
certain it is Maria optimam partem elegit. Afterward Qu Elizabeth taking just
indignation, (...), partly for his Sermon, and partly for that he was a zealous
Man for the R. Catholic cause, and an enemy to the reformers of Religion,
commit him to custody; and for threatening (as it is said) to excommunicate her,
(as Watson Bishop of Lincoln did) was deprived of his Bishopric, for which he
paid yearly 1000 l. to Cardinal Pole to keep up his state and dignity. His
works are,

Diacosio Martyrion, i. e. ducentorum virorum testimonia, de veritate corporis,
and sanguinis Christi in Eucharistia, ante triennium, adversus Petr. Martyrem,
ex professo conscriptum, sed nunc primum in lucem editum. Land. 1553. qu. in
Lat. verse.

Epistola Petro Martyri. This is printed with the former Book, and treats
mostly of Martyrs disputation at Oxon. in K. Edwards days, and is in
vindication of Dr. Rich. Smith, who disputed with, and baffled, him.

Epigrammatum, lib. 1. Carmina in Matrimon. Philippi Regis, cum Maria Regina
Angliae.

Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Qu. Mary 13. Dec. 1558. on Eccles. 4. 2. --
MS. in the Libr. sometimes of Rich. Smith Secondary of the Poultrey-Compter.
You Will find also several of his discourses in the Acts and Mon. of the Church,
etc. published by Joh. Fox, and also his discourse with Bishop Rydley at Oxon
30. Sept. 1555, when he was about to be burnt, exhorting him to return from his
Heresy, as he then termed it. See also in Rob. Persons his animadversions on
that discourse in The third part of a treatise intit. Of three conversions of
England, etc. Printed 1604. Chap. 14. p. 209. At length our Author Jo. White
being deprived of his Bishopric in June 1559. he retired to his Sisters house
at Southwarnborow in Hampshire, where spending the little remainder of his days
in great sanctity and recluseness, 1559-60.
gave way to fate on the eleventh day of January following. Whereupon his body
was soon after carried to Winchester, and buried in the Cathedral there
according to his will, which partly runs thus -- My desire is to be buried in
that my Cathedral of Winchester, ut in novissima die resurgam cum patribus and
filiis quorum fidem teneo, etc. While he was Warden of the Coll. near
Winchester, and dreamed not in the least to be removed thence to a Bishopric,
he provided a Tomb stone for himself to be laid on the ground in the Chapel
belonging to the said Coll. with intentions to be buried under it, by the care
of his Heir and Executor, whenever it should please God to call him out of
this transitory life, and caused to be engraven twenty long and short verses of
his own composition, under his picture, engraven on a brass plate, and fastened
to the said stone. The two first are these.

Hic tegor hic post fata Whitus propono jacere Scriptor Johannis carminis ipse
mei.

But being afterward contrary to all expectation promoted successively to two
Bishoprics by Qu. Mary, his mind was altered, as I have before told you. He
gave to Wykeham's Coll. near Winchester his Miter and Crosier staff, a silver
tankard guilt, a basin and eure of silver, a Turkey-carpet and other choice
goods; and some years before his death he was a Benefactor to New Coll. as you
may see in Hist. and Antiq. Univers. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 131. b.

Hampshire in the Month of May 1512, admitted Scholar of Corp. Chr. Coll. 1528,
and Fellow in Jan. 1531, being then Bach. of Arts. Afterward proceeding in his
faculty, he applied his studies to Divinity, took the degrees in that faculty,
that of Doctor being completed 1546. The next Year he was made Master of
Balliol Coll. and at length by Qu. Mary Bishop of Gloucester; to which See being
elected after the deprivation of Joh. Hoper, had restitution P^t. 1. Reg.
(...), p. 1.
made to him of the Temporalities belonging thereunto, 8. May 1554, and in the
Year following he was delegated by the Pope for the examining and trying of
Cranmer, Rydley and Latimer, when they stood up for, and were ready to dye in
defense of, the Protestant Religion. He was a Person very learned in the time
he lived, an eloquent Preacher, and a zealous maintainer of the R. C. Religion,
as well in his Sermons as Writings: Some of which are published, as,

Sermon at Paul's Cross in the first Year of Qu. Mary, on Matthew. 9. 18. Land.
1553. 54 oct.

Oration in S. Mary's Church in Oxon, 12. March 1555, to Thom. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury -- The beginning is, My Lord, at this present we are
come to you as commissioners, etc.

Oration in closing up the examination of Th. Cranmer Archbishop of Cant. --
The beg. is, Mr. Cranmer (I cannot otherwise, considering your obstinacy) I am
right sorry, etc. These two Orations are printed by John Fox in his Book of
Acts and Monuments of the Church, etc. (wherein you will find some of his
discourses with Rydley) after they had been published by themselves. What else
is extant under his name, I know not, nor anything of him besides, only that he
dying in the beginning of Feb. (about Candlemass) in Fifteen hundred fifty and
nine (which was the second year of Qu. 1559-60.
Elizabeth) was buried in a stone Coffin in his Cathedral Church at Gloucester,
but has no memory over his Grave.

Holt castle within the Marches of Wales, became a student in Oxon about 1503,
took a degree in Arts in 1507, and the Year after was elected Fellow of Or^el
College, to which place he was a benefactor at the time of his death.
Afterward, proceeding in the said faculty, he took holy orders, and became a
noted Preacher in the University and elsewhere. In 1519, he was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences, and afterward became very well dignified, as Canon
of Salisbury, Well and Bristow, (being then D. of D) Residentiary of the
Cathedral of Wells, and Chancellor of the same Church. The last of which
dignities was Reg. Gilb. Bourne Ep. B and Wells, quod incipit 20. Ap^ 1551.
conferred on him 30. Apr. 1554 upon the deprivation of Joh. Tailor alias
Cardmaker. Besides all these he was Vicar also of St. Cuthberts Church in
Wells, to which he was admitted, 3. Oct. 1543, upon the death of Joh. Southwode
LL. D. When King Hen. 8. had extirpated the Popes power, he seemed to be very
moderate, and also in the Reign of K. Ed. 6. but when Qu. Mary succeeded, he
showed himself a most zealous Person for the Roman Catholic Religion, and a
great enemy to Luther and Reformers. His works are,

Sermons fruitful, godly and learned Land. 1557. qu. containing (1) A
declaration of the seven gifts of the holy ghost. (2) A Homely of the articles
of Christian Faith. (3) Homely of Ceremonies and of man's Laws. (4) A perfect
exposition of St. Peter's first Epistle in XX treatises or Sermons. What other
things he has published I cannot yet find, neither should I have known any
thing of the said Fruitful Sermons, had I not accidentally seen them in that
choice collection of Books in Balliol Coll. Library, given thereunto by the no
less curious, than learned Sir Thom. Wendy Knight of the Bath, sometimes
Gentleman-commoner of the said House. This Dr. Edgeworth took his last farewell
of this World in the beginning of the Year Fifteen hundred and sixty, Wells:
Whereupon Dr. Gilbert Bourne Bishop of that place, did present or collate to
the said Chancellourship of the Church of Wells, one Gilbert Bournford
Bachelaur of Divinity, on the second day of April in the same Year.

THOMAS PHAYER was born in Wales, particularly, Pembrokeshire, had his
Academical education among the Oxonians, whom, after some years, he left, and
retired to the Inns of Court, ( Lincolns Inn as I conceive) where at length he
attained to a considerable knowledge in the municipal Laws. Afterward, being a
Person of a mutable mind, he eagerly addicted his Muse to the study of
Medicine, took the Degrees in that faculty in this University, that of Doctor
being completed in an Act celebrated 21. Mar. 1558-9. at which time he was
much famed among the Academians for his sufficiencies in the Art of Poetry,
which afterward were made public. He has committed to posterity these Books
following of his writing and translation.

Of the nature of Writts. -- Whether the same with that written by the great
Lawyer Anth. Fitzherbert, who lived before Phayers time, I know not.

Exemplars of common places for the writing of several sorts of Instruments --
It is the same which we now call A Book of precedents. I have a MS. lying by me
written on parchment in the time of H. 6. or Ed. 4. containing Copies of all
matters to be used by Lawyers, but who the compiler of it was, I cannot tell.
In the beginning of it, is written in a pretty ancient character, George
Hardley.

A goodly brief treatise of the pestylence, with the causes, signs and cures
of the same. Land. 1544. and 46. oct.

Declaration of the veins of man's body, and to what dyseases and infirmities
the opening of every one of them do serve. -- This is printed with the former
Book, an. 1544. etc.

A Book of children -- And this also, which treats of the grief and diseases of
Children.

Remedies, or prescriptions of Physic for the Body -- Published by Hen.
Holland, 1603. whom I shall mention at the end of Hen. Holland, under the Year
1625. He also translated from French into English, The regiment of Life. Land.
1544. and 46. oct. and from Lat. into English, Nine Books of Virgils Aencidos.
The three first of which were by him finished in the Forest of Kilgarran in
Pembrokshire, in the Year 1555. The fourth at the same place, an. 1556. The
fifth in 1557, being ended 3. May, just after the translator had undergone a
great danger at Ca^rmerden. The sixth and seventh were also finished by him in
the same Year and in the same place. The eighth, there also in Kilgarran
forest, an. 1558. The ninth was ended 3. Apr. 1560. The tenth was begun by him
in the said Year, but died, as it seems, before he could go through it.
Afterward a young Physician named Tho. Twyne meeting with the aforesaid
translations in MS. he finished the said tenth Aeneid, 23. May, an. 1573. Which
being done he translated the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Aeneidos, and
published them altogether, an. 1584. as I shall tell you elsewhere. As for Dr.
Phaer he ended his days at Kilgarran beforementioned, after the 12. of Aug.
(on which day his last will In Offic. praereg. Cant. in reg. Lostes. Qu. 23.
and testament was dated) in Fifteen hundred and sixty, George Ferrers of
Lincolns.-Inn, but what the contents of it are, I know not, nor of any other
Epitaph made for him, only In lib. suo cui tu est De illustrium quorundam
encomiis and Epitaphits nonmillis, etc. Land. 1579 qu. p. 356. 357.
that by Sir Thom. Chaloner a most noted Latin Poet of his time, who having
been well acquainted with the Doctor, does in a pathetical manner highly
commend him for his learning and great skill in Physic. He the said Doctor
left behind him a Widow named Anne, and two Daughters, Eleanor the Wife of
Gruffith ap Eynon, and Mary.

Yorkshire Man born, (either at, or near, Wakefeild) was originally, I think,
of Queens, afterward Demie or Semicommoner of Magdalen, College, Master of the
School joining to it in the place of Joh. Stanbridge, Master of Arts 1525, at
which time he was a great Oppugner Reg. Univ. Ox. H. fol. 138. b.
and Vilifier of the Questionists in the University, and at length Fellow of
the said House. In 1539, he being about that time Treasurer of the Church of
Salisbury in the place of Dr. Rich. Sampson, supplicated the venerab. congreg.
of the Regents to be admitted to the reading of the Sentences, being then
esteemed Flos and decus Oxonii, but whether he was admitted it appears not; and
in 1540, he, by the favor of Longland Bishop of Lincoln, was made Archdeacon
of Leycester in the place of Will. More Suffragan Bishop of Colchester
deceased, in which dignity being installed 5. March the same Year, enjoyed it
to 1560. as I shall anon tell you. In 1546. Jun. 3. he was instituted Vicar of
Wakefield beforementioned, on the death of Dr. Tho. Knolles, by the
presentation thereunto of Joh. Chamber M. D. Dean, and the convent, of the
Kings Chapel of the Virgin Mary and St. Stephen within the Palace of
Westminster. Whereupon in the beginning of 1548. he gave up the Treasurership
of Salibury, in which Dignity Thom. Stevens succeeded, 28. May the same Year.
He the said Robertson was an exact Grammarian and Humanitian, and went, as
'twas thought, beyond his two Predecessors in Magd. College School, in the
education of Youth. In 1532, he Printed a Comment on the rules which Will.
Lilye wrote in verse, and added thereunto Quae Genus, and the versifying rules,
dedicating it to Bishop Longland before mentioned, with reference to Henley
School, which, some think, was founded, or at least enlarged, by Longland. From
whose pains (I mean of Robertson) and also the variety of other men's labors in
Grammar, of whom Joh. Stanbridge, Rob. Whittington, Joh. Colet and Lilye were
of the number, sprang a great diversity in the course of teaching; which King
Hen. 8. intending to reform, caused sundry learned Men (of whom Dr. Rich. Cox
Tutor to K. Ed. 6. is supposed to be one) to reduce the former attempts in this
kind into one body of Grammar, which they jointly did in 1545, being that now
in use, and first authorized by K. Hen. 8. Howbeit soon after it was thought
too prolix, for in the Reign of Ed. 6. John Fox of Magd. Coll. did set forth
Tables of Grammar, subscribed in Print by eight Lords of the Privy Council;
which Tables were quickly laid aside, as being far more too short, than K. Hen.
8. his Grammar was too long. Since which time many learned Men in England, and
far more abroad, have spent much profitable study in this Art and the method
thereof, as we well know. In the 3. of Ed. 6. Dom. 1549. he the said Thom.
Robertson was one of the number appointed by the K. and his Council to compile
and frame the Liturgy of the Church, which we now call the Common Prayers, and
in the Year 1557. Jul. 23. he had the Deanery of Durham conferred on him by the
Queen, being then void upon the promotion of Dr. Tho. Watson to the Sea of
Lincoln, (who had been instituted in the said Deanery by Tonstall Bishop of
Durham 18. Nov. 1553. upon the deprivation of Dr. Rob. Horn) at which time
being greatly in respect for his piety and learning, the Queen would have had
him taken a Bishopric, but he modestly refused it. His works are,

Annotationes in librum Guliel, Lilii de Latinorum nominum generibus, de
verborum praeteritis and supinis, etc.

De nominibus heteroclitis opusculum, cum annotationibus.

De verbis defectivis append, interjectis etiam sparsim ubi opus videbatur,
annotatiunculis.

Compendium sive de art versificandi, cum annotationibus additis. All which
Books were printed together at Basil 1532. qu. What other things he has
published I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he was forced first
to leave the Deanery of Durham to make room for Dr. Horn, about the latter end
of 1559, (who being soon after made Bishop of Winchester, Robertson might, if
he would have taken the Oath of Supremacy, have came in again, but he refused
it, whereupon Ralph Skynner of Oxon succeeded) and secondly to resign his
Archdeaconry of Leycester, to prevent ejection: so that the said Dignity lying
void for some time, Rich Barber LL. D. was installed therein 24. Dec. 1560.
What afterward became of Tho. Robertson, Clar. 1560.
or where, or when, he died, let others seek, for I am totally ignorant. John
Parkhurst B. of Norwich, sometimes his Scholar, has an Epigram on him in
praise of his learning, which may serve instead of his Epitaph, if you think
fit.

WILLIAM CHEADSEY, a Somersetshire Man born, Corp. Chr. Coll. 16. March 1528.
aged 18. or thereabouts, Probationer-Fellow 13. Oct. 1531 and two years after
complete Fellow. In 1534, he proceeded in Arts, and in 1542, he was admitted to
the reading of the Sentences, being about that time Chaplain to Dr. Bonner B.
of London; who having a special respect for his learning, and zeal for the R.
Catholic Religion, he made him not only Archdeacon of Middlesex, but
Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral. In 1546 he proceeded in Divinity, having
about that time subscribed to the 34 Articles, and three years after did
learnedly dispute with Pet. Martyr in the Divinity School. From which time (an.
1549) he seemed so moderate in his Religion in the remaining part of the Reign
of K. Ed. 6. that the Protestants took him to be one of their number. In the
beginning of Qu. Mary he was made Canon of Windsore, showed himself a zealous
Man against the Professors of Protestancy, and in 1557, had a Canonry of Chapter
Chapter in Oxon conferred on him after the death of James Curthopp. In 1558, he was
elected President of Corp. Chapter Coll. and on the 15. Sept. in the same Year he
was admitted thereunto, but removed from it the next Year by the Commissioners
sent by Qu. Elizabeth to visit the University. About that time he was appointed
one of the number of the R. Catholic Divines to repair to London, to dispute
with those of the Protestant Party, when the said Queen was setting on foot a
Reformation in the Church of England. He was by the Protestants accounted a
very mutable and unconstant Man in his Religion, but by the Romans Catholics
not, but rather a great stickler for their Religion and the chief prop in his
time in the University for the cause, as it appeared not only in his opposition
of P. Martyr but of the three Bishops that were burnt in Oxon. He was a learned
Man, a deep Divine, an excellent Disputant, and a characterised by John Leland
In. Crg. Cant. edit. Land. 1658. p. 22.
to be resonae Scholae columna. His works are,

Sermon. on Matthew. 22. 15. -- Printed 1545. in oct.

Disputatio de Eucharistiae Sacramento in Univ. Oxon, habita contra D. Pet.
Martyrem, 29. Maii and Jun. 1. an. 1549. Land. 1549. qu. Which disputation has
also been printed once at least among Pet. Martyrs works, but whether true
according to the Authors Copy, I leave it to others to judge. It Is also
translated into English.

Dispution with John Philpot concerning the real presence in the Sacrament, in
October. 1553.

Disp. with Archb. Cranmer at Oxon, an. 1554.

Communication with B. Rydley, an. 1555. -- See more in the Acts and Monuments
of the Church, etc. written by Jo. Fox, wherein you will find several of his
discourses with, and examination of, Protestant Martyrs. At length he was
deprived of most, if not all, of his spiritualities, and committed a Prisoner
to the Fleet in London; where, Clar. 1561.
as it is supposed by some, he died soon after. However in my searches into
obscure In a certain Book of Wills and Testaments, beginning an. 1569. in the
custody of Mr. Ben. Cooper Registrary to the Office belonging to the Bishop and
Archdeac. of Oxon.
Writings, I find that one John Joanes a Priest, living at, or near, Them in
Oxfordshire, did by his last Will dated 27. of Aug. and proved the 16. of Oct.
following, an. 1574, bequeath to Mr. Dr. Chedsey twenty shillings. By which it
appears, that he was then living, but where, I find not, nor when he died.

Trahern, was born in Cornwall, or at least originally descended from an
ancient Family of his name living in that County, educated in Logicals and
Philosophicals for the most part with us, either in Exeter Coll. or Heart hall,
where he attained to some eminence in the Lat. and Greek Tongues. But being
desirous to improve himself in greater matters, and to see the fashions of the
World, he traveled into Germany, and thence into Italy, where he was an
auditor and an admirer of many famous Men: By whose excellent Lectures, and his
indefatigable industry, he became a complete Person and much respected by
Scholars. Afterward he returned into his own Country, entered into holy Orders
and was made Library keeper to K. Ed. 6. who, finding him to be a Person of
Merit, conferred Bal. de Scripe. maj. Britain. cent. 8. nu* 9.
the Deanery of Chichester on him, about 1551. But when Qu. Mary came to the
Crown he left his preferments, and as a voluntary exile went into Germany,
where accompanying other English Exiles, that had fled thence for Religion
sake, continued there till the death of Qu. Mary, and then returning, was
restored to what he had lost, and without doubt was rewarded with more. While
he was beyond the Sea, he exercised himself much in writing matters in verse
and prose, in both which he wrote several things with great happiness,
especially those to his Brother Thomas to embrace the true Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, that is to leave the R. Catholic Church, turn Protestant and come over
to him. Among many things that he wrote, were,

Paraenesis lib. 1. Written to his Brother Thomas.
Carmina in mortem Henrici Dudlaei.
Analysis Scoparum Johannis Cochlei.
Exposition of a part of S. John's Gospel made in sundry Readings in the
English Congregation against the Arrians -- Printed the second time in an.
1558. oct. The Readings were ten, and they were performed in the English
Congregation beyond the Sea.

Exposition on the fourth Chapter of S. John's Revelations, which treats of
the providence of God, made before his Countrymen in Germany -- Printed 1557.
in oct. Land. 1577. and 83. in oct.

Treatise of Repentance -- besides other things, which are mentioned by Jo.
Bate. He also translated into English The Chirurgerie of Joh. de Vigo. Clar.
1561.
Land. 1580. qu. 2 Edit. and the said Vigo's Little Practice. Land. 1562. in
octavo. In which year (which was part of the third and fourth of Qu. Elizabeth)
Barth. Traberon was, if I mistake not, living.

Lancashire, became a Student in Brasnose Coll. about the year 1538, took the
Degrees in Arts, and afterward those in Divinity in the Reign of K. Ed. 6. he
being then beneficed and dignified in the Church. In the Reign of Qu. Marie he
showed himself so grand a Zealot for the Cause then professed in several
Sermons by him preached, that when in one by him delivered at Paul's Cross,
(which was very sharp against the Heretics, as they were then called) a Gun
was discharged at, but missed, him. Under his Name were these things following
printed.

Homilies to be read in the Churches within the dioc. of London. Land. 1554.
55. qu.

Communication between him and Mr. Lour. Sanders.

Disputation between him and Mr. Joh. Bradford.

Protestants. an. 1555.

The Contents or part of which Communic and Disput. you may see in the book of
Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. and also Pendleton's Arguings with Bartlet
Green, and certain Protestant Martyrs. Other things he has written, which I
have not yet seen, and was always accounted a learned Doctor of his time, and
so endeared to the Cath. Religion, that he made a solemn Protestation in Qu.
Mary's Reign, that he would see the nntermost drop of his Grease molten away,
and the last gobbet of his Flesh consumed to Ashes before he would forsake God
and his truth. Clar. 1561.
He lived after Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown, and was imprisoned for a time,
but when, or where he died, I know not.

PETER MARTYR who is to have a place in these Athenae, was born (...)
in the great and rich City of Florence in Italy, in Sept. (on the Nativity of
the Virgin Marie) an. 1500, educated in several sorts of Learning in that City
by the great care of his Father Steph. Vermilius, became a Canon regular of the
Order of S. Austin at 16 years of age in the Coll. at Fiesoli, more than a mile
distant from Florence. After he had spent three years there, he was sent to
Padua to enlarge his Learning, that University then being in a flourishing
Condition, and settling in the Monastery of St. John de Verdera of the same
Order of S. Austin, spent almost 8 years in philosophical Studies, and all
other Arts, especially in the Greek Tongue and Poets; which at length he
conquered. At 26 years of age he began to preach, and the first time he
performed that Office was in the Church of St. Afra in Brescia, and afterward
frequently in the most famous Cities of Italy, However, all the time that he
could obtain from his Function was spent in sacred Learning, Philosophy, and in
obtaining the Hebrew Tongue. At length being cried up for a celebrated Scholar,
he was made Abbat of Spoleto in the Duchy of L'Ombria in Italy, where he
continued three years. Thence he was translated to Naples, and there became
Abbat of the Monastery of his Order called St. Peter ad aram, being of greater
profit and a far more pleasant place than Spoleto. After he had been settled
there for some time, he began to see the verity of the Gospel, especially after
he had read some of the Works of Bucer and Zwinglius. Three years being spent
there also, he fell into a dangerous Sickness, but the strength of Nature
overcoming it, he was advised by his Physicians to take better Air than what
Naples afforded. To that end therefore, that he might with convenience be
absent from his Cure, the Fathers chose him General Visitor of their Order,
that is of the Order of S. Austin, and soon after was elected Prior of S.
Fridian within the City of Luca, which is a place of great dignity, having
Episcopal Jurisdiction in the middle part of the said City. Being settled at
that place, he instituted a most admirable way of Studies for the younger sort
at Luca: but at length his Opinions, as to Heresy (then so called) being
discovered, snares were laid for him, so that being not in a capacity to speak
his mind, he, by the advice of certain Friends, committed the best part of his
Library to the Custody of one of them, gave another part to the Coll. and
forthwith left Luca, and went to Pisa; whence he wrote Letters to Card. Pole
showing the Reasons of his Departure. Afterward he went into Schwitzerlands,
and fixed for some time at Zurich. Thence to Strasburgh, where for about five
years he read and taught sacred Letters; in which time he took to Wife (he
being near 50 years of Age) one Cath. Dampmartin, causing thereupon his Enemies
to say that he left his Order and Monastic Vows purposely for the sake of a
Woman. Which Wife, after she had lived with him about 8 years, died at Oxon, as
I shall anon tell you. In 1547 he was invited into England by Edward Lord
Protector and Dr. Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury, to the end that his Assistance
might be used to carry on a Reformation in the Church. In the Month of Dec. the
same year, he, with Bemnardine Ochine, another Italian, arrived in England, and
retiring to Lambeth were kindly received by Archb. Cranmer, and entertained
there for some time. About the latter end of the same year, in Feb. or
beginning of March, Martyr went to Oxon, was incorporated Doctor of Div. as he
had stood at Padua, and tho addicted more to the Zwinglian than to the Lutheran
Doctrines in point of the Sacrament, was in the beginning of the year following
appointed by the King to read a public Lecture to the Academians in the
Divinity School, and for his reward to have an Annuity of 40 Marks. What
followed, and how he and his Adversaries behaved themselves thereupon, I have
largely told In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 267.
you elsewhere. In the same year (1548) upon the receeding from the University
of Dr. Rich. Smyth the Kings Professor of Divinity, that Lecture, with the
profits belonging thereunto, was conferred by the King on Martyr, and in the
year following, being much troubled with the R. Catholics (as in all the year
before) he disputed publicly with three of the most eminent of them, as I have
also told Ib. p. 268.
you in the same place. In the year 1550 he had a Canonrie of Chapter Chapter bestowed
upon him by the King, on the death of Mr. Will. Haynes, whereupon being
installed 20 January the same year, entered into his Lodgings belonging to him,
then joining on the North side to Chapter Chapter great Gate leading into Fishstreet.
With him also settled his beloved Wife Catherine, as the Wife of Dr. Rich. Cox
did about the same time with him in the Deans Lodgings, being the first Women,
as 'twas observed, that resided in any Coll. or Hall in Oxon. By whose Example,
it was not only permitted that any Canon beside, might marry if he please, but
also a Head of a Coll. or Hall, whereby other Women or idle Huswives were
tolerated (if the said Head allowed it) to serve in them. Which act (beside
their permitting of bawling Children to come among them) was looked upon as
such a damnable matter by the R. Catholics and others too, that they usually
styled them Concubines, and the Lodgings that entertained them and their
Children Stews and Cony-buries. While Martyr continued in the said Lodgings
(whose Windows were next to Fishstreet) he continually, especially in the night
time, received very opprobrious Language from the R. Catholics, as well
Scholars as Laics, and often had his Windows broken. So that his Studies and
Sleep being often disturbed, he changed his Lodgings, which were those
belonging to the Canons of the first Canonry, for those in the Cloister, which
belonged to those of the second, being formerly the very same which belonged to
the Prior of S. Frideswide: in which being settled, he spent the remaining part
of his Abode in Oxon in Peace. However, for the severer enjoyment of his
Thoughts and Studies, he erected a Fabric of Stone in his Garden, situated on
the East side of his Lodgings, wherein he partly composed his Commentary on the
first Ep. to the Corinthians, and certain Epistles to learned men, which were
afterward printed. This Fabric, which contained two Stories, stood till the
latter end of March 1684, at which time they were plucked down by that Canon
that was Owner of the Lodgings to which the Garden and Fabric appertained.
About that time Martyr's Wife dying, she was buried in the Cathral Church, near
to the place where S. Frideswydes Relics had been reposed; but four years
after, or thereabouts, her body was taken up, thrown out of the Church with
scorn, and buried in a Dunghill; but when Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown, the
body was taken up again and reburied, as I have elsewhere In Hist. and Antiq.
Ox. lib. 1. p. 279. b.
at large told you. After the death of K. Edward 6. and Religion altered when
his Sister Mary was settled in the Throne, Pet. Martyr left Oxon, went to London
and so to Lambeth: and obtaining his safe Conduct from the Qu. he left England
and went to Strasburgh from whence he came, where he taught Philosophy and
Divinity for some time. Thence he traveled to Zurich an. 1556. where he met
with Joh. Juell and several exiled Divines of England, and took to his second
Wife one Catherina Merenda. While he continued there, Maximilian Celsus an
exiled Count, and the chief Minister of the Italian Church at Geneva died;
whereupon being invited to take his place upon him, refused it for several
Reasons. When Qu. Mary died, Queen Elizabeth invited him to return into
England, and there to accept of what Preferment he pleased; but he fearing
another mutation, he modestly refused it. To pass by several other matters not
now fit to be related, I shall give you the Titles of some of his Works, as
they follow.

Comment. in Epist S. Paulis ad Romanos. Bas. 1558. fol. translated into Engl.
by H. B. -- Land. 1568 fol.

Com. in priorem ad Corinth, Epistolam. Written at Oxon. and ded. to K. Ed. 6.
Printed several times at Zurich in fol.

Defensio doctrinae veteris and Apostolicae de Sacramento Eucharisticae
adversus Step. Gardineri librum, sub nomine M. Antonii Constantii editum, etc.
Printed in fol. 1502 in four parts.

Tractatio de Sacramento Eucharistiae habita Oxonii, cum jam absolvisset
interpretationem xi Capitis prioris Epistolae ad Corinthios. Printed 1562. fol.
Translated into English and printed at Land. in qu.

Disputatio de Eucharistiae Sacramento habita in Schola Theol. Oxon. Printed
1562, and translated into English.

Com. in Genesin. Tig. 1579. fol.

Com. in lib. Judicum. Tig. 1582. fol. which is the second or third Impression.
Translated into English and printed at Land. in fol. 1564.

Com. in lib. duos posteriores Regum Heid. 1599. fol.

Com. in Samuelis Prophetae libros duos. Tig. 1595. fol.

Loci communes sacrarum literarum. Tig. 1587. fol. Translated into English and
printed at Land. in fol.

De lib. arbitio.

De providentia and praedestinat.

Tig. 1587. fol.

An Deus sit causa and author peccati.

An missa sit sacrificium.

Ib. eod. an. fol.

Theses propofitae ad disputandum public in Schola Argentinensi, an. 1543. Ib.
eod. an. fol.

Ib. eod. an. fol.
Oration de Utilitate and dignitate sacri Ministerii. Oration de Morte Christi.
Oration de Resurrectione Christi.


These three last are also translated into English, and printed at Land. in
fol. 1583.

Sermo in xx cap. Johan. Christus die unto Sabbat. etc. It Is translated into
English, and printed 1583.

Exhortatio ad sacrarum literarum studium. Translated also into English.

Oration quam Tiguri primam habuit, cum in locum D. Conradi Pellicani
successiscet. Translated also into English.

Adhortatio ad coenam Domini Mysticam. Translated also.

Epistolae Theologicae. Some of which were written at Oxon. and also translated
into English and published. Note that P. Martyr's Common places, and all those
things that follow, which I have said were translated, were put into the
English Tongue by Anth. Marten Gentleman, Sewer to her Majesty -- Land. 1583.
fol. One Anth. Marten of London was Father to Sir Hen. Marten, as I shall tell
you among these Writers, ann. 1641. Whether the same with the Translator, I
cannot yet tell.

Praeces ex Psalmis Davidis desumptae. Tig. 1566. 80. Translated into Engl. by
Charles Glemham Gent.

De votis monasticis and coeleb. Socerdotum.

Defensio sui, contra R. Smithaei duos libellos de coelibatu sacerdotum and
vot. monast. Bas. 1559. oct.

Aristotelis Ethicae cum illis in Sacra Scriptura collatae, etc.

Comm. in Lament. Jer. Prophet. Tig. 1629. qu. corrected and published by Joh.
Rodolph. Stuckius of Zurich, sometimes a Sojournour of Exeter Coll. He the said
P. Martyr also wrote an Epist. to Edward L. Protector of England; translated
into Engl. by Tho. Norton. -- Land. 1550. oct. Also of The use and abuse of
Dancing; translated into Engl. by J. R. printed at Land. in oct. and lastly, An
Exposition on the Creed; translated by T. E, printed at Land. in qu. At length
after many Rambles and changes of Places (he having been, as it evidently
appears, a person of an unsettled Brain) resigned up his last breath at Zurich
on the 12th day of Nov. in fifteen hundred sixty and two,

THOMAS GIBSON, a noted Physician of the Age Bate de Script. cent 9. n* 54.
born at Morpeth in Northumberland, and for a year, or years, was, as I
conceive, educated here, because that several of both his Names and Time, were
conversant with the Muses in this University; but whether he took a degree, or
was licensed to practice Physic, it appears not. Afterward he being noted for
his extraordinary success in curing Diseases, was very much resorted to by
great, as well as ordinary, People, especially by those of the reformed Party,
he being one himself, and a great Enemy to the R. Cath. Bishops; in spite and
envy to whom, he wrote,

A History of the Treasons of the Bishops from the Norman Conquest to his time.
-- Whether this was printed, I know not, because had it been so, there is no
doubt but inveterate Prynn would have found it, to gain matter thence, when he
composed his Book of the same Subject. He also wrote,

An Herball.

Treatise against unskilful Alchymists.

Treat of curing common Diseases.

Of the Ceremonies used by Popes. -- besides other things, and had laid the
Foundation of a little Book to show the Various States that Britanie has been
in, which he divided into five Parts; but whether he completed it, is
uncertain. Clar. 1562.
He lived after Qu. Eliz. came to the Crown, being then in his middle Age, but
when he died it appears not. It Is said, that because diverse Persons had meddled
with the applying of dark Prophecies, purposely to advance the Fame and Glory
of Charles then Emperor, so one Tho. Gibson did endeavor to do the like to
promote the Glory of Hen. 8. of England; which Th. Gibson we are to understand
to be the same with Th. Gibson before mentioned.

de SOTHO, or Soto, was born in a certain City in Spain called Cordova,
became, when young, a Dominican in the House or Coll. of that Order dedicated
to St. Stephen, within the famous University of Salamanca, where prosecuting
his natural Genie with unwearied industry in the Faculty of Divinity, became a
Doctor thereof, and a most eminent ornament to his Order. Afterward his fame
being spread in the Royal Court, he became Confessor to the King of Spain, and
at length to Charles the Emperor of the Romans, with whom going into Germany,
he showed himself in many respects very serviceable against such that were
called Heretics there. At length Philip K. of Spain marrying with Mary Qu. of
England, he was one of those noted Divines that came with him, having then
obtained Eminency among the Learned for his Books written against John
Brentius, accounted among the R. Catholics a Person very well versed in
matters of controversy. Afterward he, with Joh. de Villa Garcia, and one or
more, being sent to the University of Oxon by public authority to read,
preach, and teach there, to the end that they might undo and invalidate all
what Pet. Martyr and others had done in the Reign of King Ed. 6. he accordingly
went, preached often, read Lectures on St. Thomas, whose works had been with
scorn cast out from all, or most, Libraries in this University in the time of
Ed. 6. and was ready upon all turns and occasions to instruct and resolve
doubts, nay and for some time did read the public Hebrew Lecture to the
Academians, while Mr. Bruerne the Reg. Professor was absent. In a word there
was nothing wanting on his part, and tho he had no Canonry of Chapter Chapter or
Headship bestowed on him, yet he had a considerable revenue allowed him out of
the Kings Exchecquer. His works are,

Institutiones Christianae. Aug. 1548. Antw. 1557. in 16o divided into 3 Books.

Adversus Job. Brentium. Antw. 1552. in 16o.

Defensio Catholicae confessiouis, and Scholoiorum circa confessionem
illustriss. Ducis Wirtembergensis nomine editam, adversus prolegomena Brentit.
Antw. 1557.

Doctrinae Catholicae compendium, in usum plebis Christianae recte instituend.
Diling. 1560. in tw.

De sacerdotum institutione. libri 3. With other things, as it is probable,
which I have not yet seen. After the death of Qu. Mary, he returned with K.
Philip into Spain, and thence went, according to command, to the great Council
or Synod held in the City of Trent, called commonly among Foreigners Trento,
sometimes a part of Italy, but since of Germany, where by too much agitation
and concernment, he contracted a disease, which brought him to his grave in
that City, in the Month of Apr. in Fifteen hundred sixty and three. About three
days before his death, and did give much matter of discourse. Which coming to
the knowledge of Sotho, he thereupon did dictate and subscribe a Letter to be
sent to the Pope; in which, by way of confession, he declared his opinion
concerning the points controverted in Council, and did particularly exhort his
Holiness to consent, that residence and the institution of Bishops might be
declared to be de jure divino. The Letter was sent to the Pope, and Friar
Ludov. Soto his companion, kept a Copy of it; who thinking to honor the memory
of his Friend, began to Vide Hist. Conc. Trident. Lib. 7. per Pet. Paul. (...).
spread it, which caused offense in some, and curiosity in others, to get a
Copy of it, when called in. I find one Frater Petrus a Soto Major, who wrote a
Book entit. Prima secundae Divi Thomae, quam quarto nonas Junii interpretandum
suscepit, an 1563. The beginning of which is, Quastio prima, quae est de ultimo
fine hujus vitae in communi, etc. But this Peter who was Author of the said
Book (which is in MS. in Bodley's Library) must not be taken to be the same
with the former Peter, whom I have at large mentioned, because, as it is before
told you in the title, the said Peter began to write the said Book on the
fourth of the nones of June 1563, which was some Weeks after the death of Pet.
de Soto.

RICHARD SMYTH the greatest pillar for the Roman Worcestershire, admitted
Probationer-Fellow of Merton Coll. in the beginning of the Year 1527, Master of
Arts 1530, and the Year after was (on the resignation of Rob. Tailor Fellow of
the said Coll) unanimously chosen the public Scribe or Registrary of the
University. Afterward he became Rector of Cuxham in Oxfordshire for a time,
Principal of St. Albans hall, Divinity Reader of Magd. College, the Kings
Professor of Divinity in the said University and Doctor of that faculty. But
being forced to leave his Professorship in the Reign of K. Edw. 6. to make room
for P. Martyr, he went to Lovaine in Brabant, where being received Vale^.
Andreas in Fastis Academicis (...) edit. 1650. p. 85.
with solemnity, became public Professor of Divinity there for a time, and
read openly on the Apocalips of St. John. When Qu. Mary was advanced to the
Crown, he was not only restored to his Professorship in the University of Oxon,
but also was made one of the Chaplains to that Queen, and Canon of Christ
Church. In 1559, Qu. Elizabeth being then in the Throne, he lost those, with
other, preferments, (of which the Rectory or Headship of Whittingdon Coll. in
Land. was one) and was committed to custody with Matthew Archbishop of
Canterbury; by whose persuasions he recanted what he had written in defense of
the celebacy of Priests. See more of this matter in a Book intit. De
antiquitate Britannicae Ecclesiae etc. in Mathaeo. -- Printed about 1572-3.
being the first impression of that Book. Afterward our Author R. Smyth giving
Matthew the slip, he went to Doway in Flanders, and was constituted Dean of S.
Peter's Church at that place by Philip K. of Spain, who erecting an Academy
there about that time, made him the first Kings Professor thereof. He was by
those of his perswation accounted the best Schoolman of his time, a subtle
disputant, and admirably well read in the Fathers and Councils, which did
evidently appear in his disputations in the Divinity School with Pet. Martyr,
whom, as the R. Cath. Writers of his time say Joh. White ep (...) in initio
libri sui cui tit. est Diacosio-Marryier. edit. (...)
he did in a most egregious manner baffle several times. The wholly story of it
you may see elsewhere (...) Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Ox. Lib. 1. p. 267.
and therefore I shall not make a recital of it now, only say that the
Protestant (...) Vica Jo. Juelli, edit. 1573. p. 42. and alii.
Writers report, that he was more a Sophister than Divine, that he was
non-plus'd several times by Martyr, and that he was a goggle-ey'd fellow and
very inconstant in his Opinion. As for his Writings they are these.

Assertion and defense of the Sacrament of the Altar. Land. 1546. oct.

Defense of the sacrifice of the Mass. Land. 1546. oct.

An answer to all Martyn Luthers, and his Scholar's reasons made against the
sacrifice of the Mass, etc. -- Printed with the Defense beforementioned.

Brief treatise setting forth diverse truths necessary both to be believed of
all Christen People and kept also, which (...) are not expressed in the
Scripture, but left to the Church by the Apostles tradition, Land. 1547. oct.

Declaration upon his retractation made at Paul's cross 15. May 1547. Land.
1547. oct. This retraction was for certain articles contained in two Books of
his making, viz. one in Defense of the sacrifice of the Mass, and that called,
as it seems, A brief treatise etc. wherein he endeavored to prove, that
unwritten verities ought to be believed under pain of damnation.

Diatriba de hominis justificatione contra Pet. Martyrem Lovain 1550. oct.

Defensio caelibatus sacerdotum contra P. Mart. Lov. 1550. oct. Printed also as
it seems at Paris the same year.

Confutatio quorundam articularum de votis monasticis Pet. Martyris Itali.
These two last, being printed at Lovaine in one Vol. are very full of faults by
the negligence of the Printer, and absence of the Author, who pretended they
were printed against his Will, and wished afterward that he had never made
them, because he was then persuaded with himself, that the Priests of England
made a vow (a religious vow) when they were made Priests; which he perceived
afterward was not true. This he told Dr. Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury in a
certain See in the Hist. of the reformation of the Church of England, part. 2.
page 208. numb. 54.
letter, when he heard that he the said Cranmer had made a Collection of (or
answer to) the aforesaid Books De caelibatu and votis monasticis.

Disputation with Bish. Rydley in the Div. School at Oxon; his Sermon at his
and Latimers burning, with Speeches, Orations, etc. -- See in Joh. Fox his Book
of the Acts and Mon. of the Church.

A bucklar of Cath. Faith of Christ's Church, containing diverse matters, now of
late called into controversy by the new Gospellers. Land. 1555. in two books
or parts. The things controverted were (1) Whether a man may keep Gods
commandments. (2) Concerning works of superarrogation. (3) Concerning
purgatory. (4) The sign of the cross and crucifex, etc.

Refutatio luculenta crassae and exitiosae haeresis Johannis Calvini and
Christop. Carlili Angli, qua astruunt Christum non discendisse ad inferos
alios, quam ad infernum infimum. Printed 1562. The said tenet that Christ
descended into hell was maintained in a Commencement held at Cambridge, in
1552. by the said Carlisle, and opposed then in disputations by Sir Joh. Cheek:
Whereupon Smyth wrote the Refutation beforementioned. Afterward Christoph.
Carlisle came out with a book entit. Concerning the immediate going to Heaven of
the souls of the faithful Fathers before Christ, and concerning his descent
into hell, etc. Land. 1582. oct. (sec. edit) I find one Christopher Carlisle to
have lived for some time at Barham in Kent, whence removing to the Parish of
St. Botolph near Billingsgate in London, died there in the beginning of the
Year 1596, leaving then behind him a Relict called Marie. Whether this Chr.
Carlisle be the same with the former, I cannot tell. Another also of both his
names lived in his time, whose warlike skill was sufficiently tried in the Low
Countries, France and Ireland, and in America at Carthage and Santo Dominico,
an. 1585: Which worthy Soldier died Camden in Annal. Regin. Elizab. an. 1593.
about the Year 1593. R. Smyth has also written,

De missae sacrificio contra Melanctonum, Calvinum and alios. Lov. 1562. oct.

De Infantium baptismo, contra Calvinum. Printed there the same Year.

Defensio externi and visibilis sacerdotii, and propugnatio altarium, cum
confutatione communionis Calvinianae. Ibid.

Confutatio earum quae Philip. Melancthon objecit contra propitiatorium missae
sacrificium. Ibid.

De libero hominis arbitrio contra Calvinum. Lov. 1563. oct. and other things,
which you may see in Pitseus. This learned Doctor gave way to fate on the
seventh of the ides of July (according to the account followed at Doway) in
Fifteen hundred sixty and three, Peter at Doway beforementioned. Several of
both his names have been Writers, but they being after him in time, I shall
mention them in their respective places.

Paganell, descended from an ancient Family of his name living in Lincolnshire,
was from his youth always exercised in virtue and good letters. While he was in
his juvenile years he was made a Canon Regular of Merton Priory in Surrey, the
Monasticks of which place having had interest in the College of St. Mary the
Virgin situated in the Parish of St. Michael and St. Peter in the Baylie,
(built purposely for the training up of young Can. Reg. in Philosophical, or
Theological learning, or both) he was sent thither, where improving himself
much in Divine learning, returned to his Monastery, and a little before the
dissolution of that and others, became Prior of a certain Monastery of Canon
Regulars near to London as Baleus In lib. de Script. cent. 9. nu. 71.
says, tho the name of the place he tells us not. But being soon after
ejected, when his Monastery was to be employed for a laical use, had a pension
allowed him during his life: Whereupon retiring to London, and sometimes to
Oxon, had the more leisure to write and translate Books; the titles of which
follow.

Pandicts of the Evangelical Law. Land. 1553. oct.

The pithy and most notable sayings of all the Scripture, after the manner of
common places, etc. newly augmented and corrected. Land. 1560. oct.

A Table of many matters contained in the english works of Sir Tho. More. --
This is set before the said works that were published by Will. Rastell, an.
1557.

A fruitful Book of the common places of all St. Paul's Epistles, right
necessary for all sorts of People, etc. Land. 1562. oct.

Preface to the Book of measuring of Land, as well of Woodland as Plowland --
Printed at Land. in the time of Hen. 8. in oct. The Book it self was written by
Sir Rich. de Benese sometimes Canon of Merton Priory, but corrected and made
fit for the press by Paynell. In the Year 1519. one Rich. de Benese a secular
Chaplain supplicated the Ven. congregation for the Degree of Bach. of Arts, but
whether the same with the writer, I cannot justly say, because he is written
secular Chaplain. Neither can I say that Rich. Benese Clerk, Parson of Long
Ditton in Surrey in the time of H. 8. be the same also; who in his last In
Offic. praerog. Cant. in reg. Alen, Qu. 47.
Will and Test. dated 3. Nov. 1546. and proved 20. Oct. 1547. does bequeath his
body to be buried in the yard belonging to the Church there. Our Author Thom.
Paynell did also translate from Lat. into English (1) Of the contempt of the
world. Land. 1533. oct. written by Erasmus. (2) Of the Medicine Guacum and of
the French disease, etc. Land. 1536. and 1539. oct. written by Ulrich Hutten a
Knight of Almaine. It treats of the wood called Guacum which heals the
French Pox, the Gout, Stone, Palsy, etc. (3) Of the comparison of a Virgin and
a Martyr. Land. 1537. oct. written by Erasmus. This translation is dedicated to
John Ramsey Lord Prior of Merton. (4) Sermon on the Lords Prayer. Land. 1539.
oct. written by St. Cyprian, (5) A faithful and true story of the destruction
of Troy. Land. 1553. oct. written by Danus Phrigius. (6) A devout prayer,
expedient for those that prepare themselves to say Mass, etc. Land. 1555. oct.
written by St. Ambrose. (7) Brief Chronycle of all the Earls of Holland. Land.
1557. oct. written by Hadrianus Barlandus. (8.) Salerni sanit, regim. The
Regiment of health, teaching all People how to govern them in health. Land.
1558 oct. (9) Of the examples of virtue and vice. Land. 1561. oct. written by
Nich. Hannape. (10) Fruitful treatise of well living, containing the whole sum
and effect of all virtue. Printed at Land in oct. written by St. Bernard. (11)
The Precepts teaching a Prince or a noble estate his duty. print. in oct.
written originally in Greek by Agapetus. He also translated from French into
English (1) The civility of Chidhood, with the discipline and institution of
Children. Land. 1560. oct (2) The assault of Heaven. Land. in qu. besides other
translations which you may see In Bal. ut sup.
elsewhere. In my searches I once saw a Will Ib. in Off. praerog. in reg.
Stevenson Qu. 7.
without date, made for Thom. Paynell Priest, born at, or near to
Bothby-Paynell in Lincolnshire, afterwards-Parson (as it seems) of Cotyngam
lying between Hull and Beverley in Yorkshire, to which place he was a
Benefactor, and left considerable Legacies to 20 poor Maidens born, and
dwelling, there. He gave to St. John's Coll. in Oxon (wherein, as it seems, he
had studied in his elderly years in the latter end of H. 8. and in the time of
Ed. 6. at which time it was called St. Bernards Coll.) all his Books in his
Chamber at London, and desired that at his Funeral, a Sermon be Preached by a
Catholic Doctor, or a Bach. of Divinity, etc. This will, which seems to have
been made at London, was proved in the Praerogative Court of Conterbury, on the
22 of March (according to the English account) in Fifteen hundred sixty and
three. Thom. Paynell the writer, and conclude thence that he died in the Winter
time 1563. but where buried I cannot tell.

Baldesley-Clenton in Warwickshire, but the name of the particular place where
he was born, or the name of the House in Oxon, wherein educated, I cannot
justly say. Sure it is that he continued there several years, being then in
much esteem for his Poetry, and about the time that he left the Univ. wrote,

Several Tragedies.

Com. or Interludes.

All which being written with much skill, and magnificence in his meeter, gave
the King so much good recreation, (as the Author See more in Theat. Poetarum,
written by Edw. Phillips, Pr. at Land. 1675. p. 211.
of the Art of English Poesy says) as he had thereby many good rewards, and
adds farther, that for such things, as he has seen, of his writing, and of the
writing of Tho. Sackvile, they deserve the price, etc. Our Author Ferrers has
also written these two Poems following, viz.

The fall of Rob. Tresilian Chief Justice of England, -- and,

The unlawful murder of Tho. of Woodstok Duke of Gloucester -- with several
other things which I have not yet seen, and was Author, as one Franc. M^res, in
the second part of Wits Commonwealth.
or more writers say, of a Book intit. A mirroure for Magistrates. Land. 1559,
Published by Will. Baldwin, whom I shall anon mention. In which Mirror are
involved the two Poems beforementioned, and other things of the composition of
the said E. Ferrers, Cler. 1564.
who was in great renown in Fifteen hundred sixty and four, being, if I mistake
not, the same Edw. Ferrers of Baldesley Clinton, who died and was buried there,
in that year, leaving behind him a Son named Henry, whom I shall mention under
the Year 1633.

Will. Baldwyn (as it is probable) who supplicated the venerable congregation of
Regents that he might take a Degree in Arts, in Jan. 1532, but whether it was
granted, or that he took such a Degree it appears not in the Register of that
time. After he had left the University (being then accounted a noted Poet of
that time) he became a Schoolmaster and a Minister, and a Writer of diverse
Books, the titles of which follow.

Of moral Philosophy, or the lives and sayings of Philosophers, Emperors,
Kings, etc. -- Several times printed at London in qu.

Precepts and Counsels of the Philosophers.

Phraiselike declaration in English meeter, on the Canticles or Ballads of
Solomon. Land. 1549. qu.

The use of Adagies.

Similies and Proverbs.

Comedies.

When printed, or where, I cannot find.

A myrroure for Magistrates, wherein may be seen by example of others, with how
grevious plagues, vices are punished, etc. Land. 1559. qu. in an old English
Character. It is a piece of historical poetry relating the Acts of unfortunate
English Men, commencing with the fall of Rob. Tresilian Chief Justice of
England, and ending with George Plantagenet third Son of the Duke of York, and
has added in the end from Jo. Skeleton the Poet, the story in verse of K. Ed.
4. his sudden death in the midst of his prosperity. In the Epistle to the
Reader, subscribed by the Author Baldwyn, he tell us he had a second part to
print, reaching down with his stories of unfortunate Men to Queen Mary's time,
but whether it was printed, I know not, for I have not yet seen it. This Book,
or another bearing the same title, written by John Higens, is commended by
several Authors, Clar. 1564.
particularly by him that wrote Hypercritica Hypercritica: or a rule of judgment
for writing, or reading our histores. etc. Add. 4. MS. penes me. A. W.
for a good piece of poety. As for Baldewyn he lived, as it is said, some years
after Qu. Eliz. came to the Crown, but when he died it appears not.

WILLIAM RASTALL Son of John Rastall of London Elizabeth his Wife, Sister to
Sir Thomas More Knight, sometimes Lord Chancellor of England, was born in the
City of London, and educated in Grammar learning there. In 1525 or thereabouts,
being then in the year of his age 17, he was sent to the Univers. of Oxon,
where laying a considerable foundation in Logic and Philosophy, left it
without a Degree, went to Lincolns Inn, and there by the help of his Academical
education, he made a considerable progress in the municipal Laws of the Nation,
and in 1 Edw. 6. he became Autumn or Summer Reader of that House. But Religion
being then about to be altered, he, with his ingenious and learned Wife
Wenefrid Daughter of Jo. Clement (of whom I shall speak in 1572.) left the
Nation and went to the University of Lovaine in Brabant, where continuing all
the time of that Kings Reign, returned when Qu. Mary came to the Crown, was
made Sergeant at Law in 1554, and a little before the said Queens death, one of
the Justices of the Common Pleas. At length Religion altering again after
Elizab. became Queen of England, he returned to Lovaine before mentioned, where
he continued till the time of his death. He has written,

The Chartuary. Land. 1534.

A Table collected of the years of our Lord God, and of the years of the Kings
of England, from the first of Will. the Conqueror: showing how the years of
our Lord God, and the years of the Kings of England, concur and agree
together; by which table it may quickly be accounted how many years, months,
and days be past since the making of any evidences. Land. 1563. oct. Continued
by another hand and printed there again in oct. 1607. It was also printed there
a third time 1639. in a large oct. corrected and continued by the famous
Almanack-maker John Booker born at Manchester in Lancashire, 23. Mar. 1601. and
bred a Clark under an Alderman of London; who, after he had published several
matters of his Profession (of which The bloody Irish Almanac, was one, printed
at London, 1646. in 11. Sh. in qu.) gave way to fate on the sixth of the ides
of April an. 1667. and received sepulture in the Church of St. James in
Dukeplace, Land. Whereupon a Marble-stone was soon after laid over-his grave at
the charge of his great admirer Elias Ashmole Esquire. The said Table of years, is
now involved and swallowed up in a Book entitled Chronica juridicalia: or, a
general Calender of the Years of our Lord God, and those of several Kings of
England, etc. with a Chronological table of the Lord Chancellours and Lord
Keepers, Justices of the King's Bench, Common pleas, Barons of the Exehecquer,
etc. Land. 1685. oct. By whom this Book was transcribed, I know not yet:
evident it is, that it consists only of Rastalls Tables, and Sir Will.
Dugdale's Chronica series, etc. at the end of his Origines juridiciales, etc.
and published by some downright plagiary purposely to get a little money. Our
Author Rastall has also written and published,

Terms of the English Law: Or les terms de la ley -- several times printed.

A collection in English, of the statutes now in force, continued from the
beginning of Magna Charta, made 9. Hen. 3. to the 4 and 5 of Phil. and Mary.
Land. 1559. 83. fol. Continued by another hand to the 43 of Queen Elizab. Land.
1603. etc. fol.

A collection of entries, of declarations, bars, replications, rejoynders,
issues, verdicts, etc. Land. 1566. 96. etc. fol. He also corrected and
published a Book entit. La Novel natura brevium Monsier Anton. Fitzherbert,
etc. des chooses notabiles contenus en ycel novelment, etc. To which he also
added a table. This Book was printed several times; one of which editions came
out at Land. 1598. oct. He also composed two tables, one of which contains the
principal matters concerning pleas of the Crown, and the other of all the
principal cases contained in a Book called, The book of affizes and pleas of
the Crown, etc. and a Table to Fitzherbert's Grand abridgment of the Law.

Life of Sir Thom. More Knight. -- Whether printed I cannot tell. Sure I am
that Rastall collected all such works of Sir Tho. More that were wrote in
English -- Land. 1557. fol. As for those things written against Jewel, which
go under the name of Rastall, are not to be understood as written by this Will.
Rastall, as a certain Author Joh. Pits. De illustr. Angl. Script. aet. 16. nu.
1014.
would have it, but by John Rastal a Theologist, as I shall tell you under the
Year 1600. This our Author Will. Rastall, who was accounted a most eminent
Lawyer of his time and a grand zealot for the R. Catholic Religion, died at
Lovaine beforementioned 27. Aug. in Fifteen hundred sixty and five: Peter
there, on the right hand of the Altar of the Virgin Mary, near to the body of
Wenefred his Wife, who was buried there in July 1553. He had a Brother named
Joh. Rastall who was a Justice of the Peace, Father to Elizabeth Rastall, the
Wife of Rob. Longher LL. D. as I have elsewhere told you.

Yorkshire Man born, was educated in New Coll. of which he was either Clerk or
Chaplain, or both successively, and in the Year 1547. being then 3 years
standing Master of Arts and thirty years of Age, was admitted one of the Senior
Students, of Chapter Chapter and much in esteem for his Lat. and English Poetry. About
that time he became a frequent Preacher and a zealous Reformer, but when Qu.
Mary came to the Crown, he absconded and preached privately to the brethren in
the Parish of St. Michael on Cornhill in London, where I find him in 1556.
Afterward he was forced beyond the Seas to Geneva, but returned when Qu.
Elizab. was in the regal Throne, and had the Archdeaconry of Colchester
bestowed on him, (lately enjoyed by Dr. Hugh. Weston) besides other
spiritualities. He has written,

Tract against the Arrians. -- And translated into English verse. (1) The
Ecclesiastes of Solomon. (2) Hist. of Susanna. (3) Hist. of Judith. (4) Hist.
of Hester. (5) Testament of the 12. Patriarchs. He went the way of all flesh,
Edwards Reign. The Reader is to understand that there was one John Pollayne an
Oxfordshire Man born, elected and admitted Prob. Fellow of Merton Coll. in
1507. but what he has written I know not, he being altogether different from
the former, notwithstanding Baleus is pleased to tell In lib. De script. cent.
9. nu. 83.
us, that the said former Pullayne the Writer, was of Merton Coll. which is
false.

Reg. Chaloner, (by Margaret his Wife Daughter of Rich. Middleton) Son of Tho.
Chaloner, second Son of Rice Chaloner of Denbigh in Wales, was born in London,
educated in both the Universities, especially in that of Cambridge, where for a
time he devoted himself to the Muses, as he did afterward to Mars. After he
had left the University, he traveled beyond the Seas in the company of Sir
Hen. Knevet Ambassador from K. Hen. 8. to the Emperor Charles 5. Which Emperor,
T. Chaloner did afterward serve in the expedition of Algier, where being
Camden in Annal. R. Elizab. an. 1565.
Shipwrack'd, did, after he had sworn till his strength and his arms failed
him, catch hold of a Cable with his teeth, and so escaped, but not without the
loss of some of them. In the beginning of K. Ed. 6. he received the honor of
Knighthood in the camp besides Rokesborough, immediately after the battle of
Musselborough, (wherein he had showed great valor) from Edward Duke of
Somerset Lord Protector of England, 27. Sept. 1547. and soon after was by him
made one of the Clerks of the Privy Council. In the time of Qu. Mary he mostly
lived in a retired and studious condition, but in the very beginning of Qu.
Elizabeth an. 1558. he went on an honorable Embassy to the Emperor Ferdinand,
such esteem then had the Queen for his port, carriage and admirable parts, and
about an year after was sent ordinary Ambassador to Philip K. of Spain, where
he continued 4 years, in which time, at leisure hours, he wrote his Book of a
Commonwealth (which I shall anon mention) in elegant and learned verse, whilst
(as he says in his Preface to it) be lived in Winter in a stove, and in Summer
in a barn. Soon after his return from Spain he ended his days, as I shall
tell you by and by, having before written several things, as,

A little Dictionary for Children.

De Rep. Anglorum instauranda, lib. 10. Land. 1579. qu. Which Book was by him
began 25. Dec. 1562. and ended 21. Jul. 1564.

De illustrium quorundam encorniis, cum epigram. and epitaphiis nonnullis.
Printed with De Rep. Angl.

Voyage to Algier with the Emperor, an. 1541. -- See in the first vol. of R.
Hakluyts voyages. He also translated from Lat. into English. (1) The office of
Servants. Land. 1543. oct. written by Gilb. Cognatus: which translation is
dedicated to Sir H. Knevet beforementioned. (2) The praise of folly. Land.
1549. qu. written by Erasmus. What other things he has written and translated,
I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he died in his house in St.
John's near London on the nones of October. Paul within the said City of London.
His Son Thomas I shall mention among these Writers under the Year 1615. and his
Grandson Edward under 1625.

JOHN HEYWOOD or Heewood, a most noted Poet London, and notwithstanding he is
said to be Baleus p. 110. inter cent. 12. and 13.
Civis Londinensis, yet he laid a foundation of learning in this University,
particularly, as it seems, in that ancient Hostle called Broadgates in St.
Aldates Parish: But the crabbedness of Logic not suiting with his airie genie,
he retired to his native place, and became noted to all witty Men, especially
to Sir Tho. More, (with whom he was very familiar) wrote several matters of
Poetry, and was the first, as some say, (but I think false) that wrote English
plays, taking opportunity thence to make notable work with the Clergy. He had
admirable skill also in instrumental and vocal Music, but whether he made any
compositions in either, I find not. He was in much esteem with K. H. 8. for the
mirth and quickness of his conceits, and tho he had little learning in him, yet
he was by that King well rewarded. After Qu. Mary came to the Crown, he was
much valued by her, often had the honor to wait on, and exercise his fancy
before, her; which he did, even to the time that she lay langushing on her
deathbed. After her decease he left the Nation for Religion sake, and settled
at Mechlin in Brabant, which is a wonder to some, who will allow no Religion in
Poets, that this Person should above all of his Profession be a voluntary exile
for it. He has written,

The Play called the four PP. being a new and merry interlude of a Palmer,
Pardoner, Poticary and Peddler -- Printed at London in an old Engl. character in
qu. and has in the title page the pictures of three Men (there should be 4) in
old fashioned habits, wrought off from a wooden cut.

Interludes, printed at London.
The Play Of love. The Play Of weather. The Play Between John the Husband and
Tib the Wife.


Interludes, Printed at Land.
Play between the Pardoner and the Friar, the Curat and neighbor Pratt Play of
gentleness and nobility in two parts.


The Pinner of Wakefeld, a Comedy.

Philotas Scotch, a Com. -- I have seen also an interlude of youth; Printed at
Land. in an old English Char. temp. Hen. 8. but whether Jo. Heywood was the
Author of it, I know not. He also wrote,

A Dialogue containing the number in effect of all the proverbs in the English
tongue, compact in a matter concerning two manner of marriages, corrected and
somewhat augmented by the Author. Land. 1547. and 1598. in two parts in qu. All
written in old English verse, and printed in an English Character.

Three hundred Epigrams upon 300 Proverbs. Land. without date, and there again
1598. qu. All in old English character.

The fourth hundred of Epigrams. Land. without date, and there again 1598. qu.

The Fifth Sixth hundred of Epigr. Land. 1598. qu.

The Spider and the Fly. A parable of the Spider and the Fly. Land. 1556. in
a pretty thick qu. and all in old English verse. Before the title, is the
picture of Jo. Heywood from head to foot printed from a wooden Cut, with a
fur-gown on, representing the fashion of that almost belonging to a Master of
Arts, but the bottom of the sleeves reach no lower than his knees. On his head
is a round cap, his chin and lips are close shaved, and has a dagger hanging
at his girdle. After the Preface, which is in verse, follows a table of all the
Chapters in the Book, then follows his picture again, as is before described.
In the beginning of every chapter (in number 77.) is the Authors picture either
standing or sitting before a table, with a Book on it, and the representation
of a window near it, with cobwebs, flies, and spiders in it. It Is one of the
first printed Books in the English tongue that has many Cuts; and no doubt
there is, but that it was in high value in Qu. Mary's Reign, as the Author of
it was, who ending his days at Mechlin, Ellis, and Jaspar, Heywood, the former
Bach. of the Civil Law, the other M. of Arts, of this University, and both
afterward noted Jesuits.

Bysham near to Maydenhead in Berks. Son of Will. Hoby of Leonminster commonly
called Lemster in Herefordishire, was born, as I conceive, in Herefordshire,
and after he had spent some time among the Oxonian Muses, he went beyond the
Seas, lived in France, Italy, and other Countries several years, became a
perfect Master of the Languages there spoken, and at length returned a complete
Gentleman, well fu^n^shed with learning, and for a time settled at Bysham.
Afterward being introduced into the Court, he became so much esteemed by Qu.
Elizabeth, that she not only conferred the honor of Knighthood upon, but sent,
him Embasslador to the French King, an. 1565 or thereabouts; where acting too
zealous for his Mistress, he was cut off in the prime of his years. What he
has written, I know not: Sure I am that he has translated from Italian into
English Il cortagiano, seu de Aulico written by (...) Castiglione, and from
Lat. into English. (1) (...) to the Church of England, for the restitution of
Christian Religion. Land. in oct. without date: written in Lat. by Martin
Bucer. (2) Answer unto the two railing Epistles of Steph. Gardener B. of
Winchester concerning the married state of Priests and Cloysterers. Land. in
oct. without date: written also in Lat. by the said Bucer. They were both
printed in an English character, after the Authors death, (as it seems) which
happing at Paris on Saturday Lib. Certif. in Coll. Armorum, J. 13 fol. 77. ^.
13. July, between five and six in the morning (to the great reluctance of all
good Men, nay, to the Queen her self) in Fifteen hundred sixty and six,
England, and at length to Bysham, where resting till his Widow Elizabeth,
Daughter of Sir Anth. Coke of Geddy-hall in Essex Knight, had built a Chapel
on the South side of the Chancel there, was put into a Vault underneath it.
Which being so done, the said Widow caused the body of his elder Brother Sir
Philip Hoby a zealous Protestant in Qu. Mary's Reign, (who dying issuless 31
May 1558. aged 53. made his Brother Sir Tho. beforementioned his Heir) to be
removed from under the Chancel, and to be laid by it in the said Vault. That
also being done, she at her own charges caused a fair Table Monument
breast-high to be erected over them, with their stat^a's from head to foot
laying thereon, and a large inscription in English prose and verse to be
engraven, which for brevity sake I shall now pass by. This Sir Tho. Hoby left
behind him several Children, of whom the eldest was Edward, as I shall tell you
more hereafter in the latter end of the Year 1616.

Somersetshire Man born, was admitted Scholar of Corp. Chr. Coll. under the
tuition of George Etheridge, on the eleventh of May 1540, Student of the upper
table of Christ Church at its foundation by K. Hen. 8. in the beginning of the
Year 1547. aged 24, and the same Year took the Degree of M. of Arts. In the
beginning of Qu. Elizabeth, he was made one of the Gentlemen of her Chapel,
and Master of the Children there, being then esteemed not only an excellent
Musician, but an exact Poet, as many of his compositions in Music (for he was
not only skilled in the practical but theoretical part) and Poetry do show, for
which he was highly valued by those that knew him, especially his associats in
Lincolns Inn (of which he was a member, and in some respects an Ornament) and
much lamented by them, and all ingenious Men of his time, when he died. He has
written,

Damon and Pythias, a Com. -- Acted at Court and in the University.

Palaemon and Arcyte, a Com. in two parts. -- Acted before Qu. Elizab. in Chapter
Chapter hall 1566. which gave her so much content, that sending for the Author
thereof, she was pleased to give him many thanks, with promise of reward for
his pains: And then making a pause, said to him and her retinue standing about
her, these matters relating to the said Play, which had entertained her with
great delight for two nights in the said hall. By Palaemon -- I warrant he
dellieth not in love, when he was in love indeed. By Arcyte he was a right
martial Knight, having a swa^t countenance and a manly Face. By Trecatio --
Gods pity what a knave it is? By Peritbous his throwing St. Edwards rich cloak
into the funeral fire, which a stander by would have stand by the arm, with an
oath, go fool -- he knows his part I Will warrant you, etc. -- In the said play
was acted a cry of hounds in the quadrant, upon the train of a fox in the
hunting of Theseus: with which, the young Scholars who stood in the remoter
parts of the stage, and in the windows, were so much taken and surpised
(supposing it had been real) that they cried out, there, there, -- he is caught,
he is caught. -- All which the Queen merrily beholding, said, O excellent! those
boys in very troth are ready to leap out of the windows to follow the hounds.
-- This part being repeated before certain Courtiers in the lodgings of Mr.
Rog. Marbeck one of the Canons of Chapter Chapter by the players in their gowns (for
they were all Scholars that acted, among whom were Miles Windsore and Thom.
Twyne of C. C. C.) before the Queen came to Oxon, was by them so well liked,
that they said it far surpassed Dam^n and Pythias, than which, they thought,
nothing could be better. Likewise some said that if the Author did proceed to
make more plays before his death, he would run mad. But this it seems was the
last, for he lived not to finish others that he had laying by him. He also wrote,

Several Poems in Engl. and Latin -- Those that speak English are for the most
part extant in a Book intit. The paradise of dainty devises. Land. 1578. qu.
Which Book being mostly written by him, was published by Hen. D'isle a Printer,
with other Men's Poems mixed among them. Among which, are those of Edward Vere
Earl of Oxford, the best for Comedy in his time, who died an aged Man 24 June
1604. Will. Hunnys (a crony of Tho. Newton the Lat Poet) who has about nine
Copies in the said collection; Jasp. Heywood, Nich. Lord Vaux, Franc.
Kynwelmersh who has about 8 Copies therein, R. Hall, R. Hill, T. Marshall, Tho
Churchyard a Salopian, Lodowyke Lloyd, one Y^oop, and several others. At length
this noted Poet and Comedian, R. Edwards, made his last Exit before he arrived
to his middle age, George Gasc^^gne the Poet, in his Epist. to the young
Gentlemen, set before his works. -- Land. 15^^. qu.
a noted Poem called Edwards Soulknil or the Souls knell, which was commended
for a good piece. One George Turbervile in his Book of Epitaphs, Epigrams,
Songs, Sonnets, etc. (which I shall hereafter mention) printed at Land. the
second time 1570, has an Epitaph on his death, made by Tho. Twyne of C. C.
Coll. and another by himself.

ROBERT POINTZ to whom Alderli^ in Glocestershire Wykehams School near to
Winehester education, was admitted perpetual Fellow of New Coll. in 1554 took
the Degrees in Arts, that of Master being conferred upon him in 1560, but went
away before he completed it by standing in the Comitia. Afterward leaving his
Relations, Country, and all future expectation, for Religion sake, settled at
Lovaine in Brabant, as it seems, became a Student in Divinity, and published,

Testimonies for the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, set forth at large and faithfully translated out of six
ancient Fathers, which lived far within six hundred years. Lov. 1566. oct.

Certain notes declaring the force of those testimonies, and detecting
sometimes the Sacramentaries false dealing -- Printed with the former book.

Miracles performed by the Eucharist -- This last with other things that he
has written, Clar. 1566.
as it is said, I have not yet seen. An 100 years after this R. Pointz. lived
another of both his names, and of the same Family, a writer also, and a Knight
of the Bath, whom I shall remember hereafter.

Weston Brown of Abbesroding and of Langenhoo in Essex Knight, (by Eliz. his
Wife one of the Daughters of Will. Mordant of Turwey in Bedfordsh. Esquire;) Son
Cod. MS. D. Will. Dugdale in Museo Ashmoleano. E. 2. fol. 91. a.
of Rob. Brown, (by Mary his Wife Daughter and Heir of Sir Thomas Charlton)
Son of Rob. Brown of Wakefield in Yorkshire, (by Joane Kirkham his second
Wife) Son of another Rob. Brown of the West Country, was born in Essex, and
being made soon ripe for the University, was sent thereunto; but before he had
taken a Degree he was transplanted to the Middle Temple; of which, after he had
been some years an Inner Barrester, he was elected summer-Reader 1o Mariae, but
did not read till the Lent following. In the 2 Year of the said Queens Reign he
with several others were by writ called to the Degree of Sergeant at Law, and
was the antientest of the call, and soon after was made Sergeant to the King
and Queen. In oct. 1558. (5. and 6. of Ph. and Mar.) he was made Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, but the said Qu. Mary dying soon after, and
Elizabeth succeeding, she removed him thence and placed in his room Sir James
Dyer. Whereupon A. Brown was made for a time (as it seems) a Justice of the
Common Pleas, and soon after one of the Justices of the Common-bench, in which
dignity he dyed; having, but an year before his death, received the honor of
Knighthood from the Queen at the Parliament house. Edom. Plowden the famous
Lawyer does give this In his Commentaries or Reports of diverse cases. Printed
at Land. 1599. ^ol. 356. a.
testimony of him that he was a Judge of a profound genie and great eloquence:
And all eminent Men of that Age did esteem him as able a Person as any that
lived in Qu. Elizabeth's time, and therefore fit to have obliged posterity by
his Pen, had not too much modesty laid in the way. What he did as to that, was
concealed, and partly published under another name, as his Arguments for Marie
Queen of Scots her right of Succession to the Crown of England, which were
published by Joh. Lesley Bishop of Rosse, as I shall tell you in Morgan
Philipps under the Year 1577. Besides which, there is a folio MS. at this day
in a private hand entit.

A discourse upon certain points touching the inheritance of the Crown --
conceived by Sir Anth. Brown Justice. Which Book coming into the hands of Sir
Nich. Bacon L. Keeper of England, was by him answered, and perhaps therein are
contained the Arguments before mentioned. Our Author Sir Anthony wrote a Book
also against Rob. Dudley Earl of Leycester, as one Dr. Matthew Pateuson, in his
Book intit. Jerusalem and Babel, or the image of both Churches* Land. 1653.
second (...) p. 587.
reports, but what the contents of it are, he mentions not. At length having
always lived a R. Catholic, he gave way to fate Lib. Cert^^. in Col^* Arm. ut
sup. J. 5. fol. 150. a.
at his house in the Parish of South-weld in Essex on the 6. of May in Fifteen
hundred sixty and seven; June following. What Epitaph was put over his Grave, I
know not: Sure it is, that these verses were made on him several years after
his death, which may serve for one.

Elizabetha nonum regni dum transegit annum
Gentis and Anglorum regia sceptra tenet,
Antonium rapiunt Maii mala sydera Brownum
Legum qui vivus gloria magna fuit.
On the 9. Nov. in the same Year in which Sir Anthony died, Joan his Widow,
Daughter of Will. Farington of Farington in Lancashire (and formerly the Widow
of Charles Both Esquire;) died, and the 22 of the same Month was buried near to
the grave of her second husband Sir Anthony beforementioned, who was Nephew to
Sir Humph. Brown of the Middle Temple, made Sergeant at Law 23. Hen. 8. one of
the Justices of the King's Bench 34. Hen. 8. and continued in that place till 5
Elizab. at which time he died, being about 33 Years after he was made a
Sergeant.

WILLIAM SALESBURY, a most exact Critic in Denbighshire, spent several year in
Academical learning either in St. Albans, or Broadgates, hall, or both. Thence
he went to an Inn of Chancery in Holbourne near London, called Thavies Inn,
where he studied and made sufficient progress in the common Law; and thence, as
it is probable, to Lincolns Inn. Afterward he applied his muse to the searching
of Histories, especially those belonging to his own Country, wherein he became
so curious and critical that he wrote and published,

A Dictionary in English and Welsh, much necessary to all such Welshmen, as
will speedily learn the English tongue, thought by the Kings Majesty very meet
to be set forth to the use of his gracious Subjects in Wales. Land. 1547. qu.
whereunto is prefixed,

A little treatise of the English pronunciation of the Letters -- From the said
Dictionary, and treatise, Dr. Joh. Davies obtained many materials when he was
making his Dictionarium Britannico-latinum.

A plain and familiar introduction, teaching how to pronounce the Letters in
the Brytish tongue, now commonly called Welsh, whereby an English Man shall not
only with ease read the said tongue rightly, but etc. Land. 1550. qu.
Afterward perused and augmented by the Author, Land. 1567. in 7. sh. in qu.

Battery of the Popes bottereulx, commonly called the High Altar. Land. 1550.
in oct. He also published The Laws of Howell Da, Clar. 1567.
and other things relating to his own Country, which I have not yet seen. He
was living in the house of Humph. Toy a Bookseller in St. Paul's Chapter yard in
London, in Fifteen hundred sixty and seven, (which was part of the ninth and
tenth years of Qu. Elizabeth) being then esteemed a Person to be much meriting
of the Church and British tongue, but when he died, I find not.

ARMIGELL WADE or Waad, a Yorkshire Man born, Mary Magd. Coll. as it seems,
took a Degree in Arts 1531, went afterward to one of the Inns of Court,
traveled into various Countries, and after his return became Clerk of the
counsel to K. Hen. 8. and afterward to K. Ed. 6. He is In his Epitaph, printed
by Joh. Norden in his Historical and Chorographical descript. of Middlesex.
Land. 1593. in qu. p. 22.
charactariz'd thus -- Qui in maximarum artium disciplinis, prudentiaque civili
instructissimus, plurimarum linguarum callentissimus, legationibus
honoratissimis perfunctus, and inter Britunnos Indiarum Americ^rum explorator
primus. He made many observations in his travels, especially in America, (being
the first English Man that discovered it) which are remitted into the Volums of
voyages collected and published by another hand. This Person, who was a Justice
of Peace for the County of Middlesex, died at Belsie or Belsise in the Parish
of Hampsted in the said County, 20. June in Fifteen hundred sixty and eight,
Hampsted. Soon after was a fair Monument of Alabaster erected over his grave by
Sir Will. Waad his eldest Son, Clerk of the Counsel to Qu. Elizabeth.

WILLIAM TURNER, a noted and forward Theologist Morpeth in Northumberland,
educated in Cambridge in Trivials, and afterward for a time in the study of
Medicine. This Person who was very conceited of his own worth, hot headed, a
busy body, and much addicted to the opinions of Luther, would needs in the
height of his study of Physic turn Theologist, but always refused the usual
ceremonies to be observed in order to his being made Priest: And whether he had
orders conferred upon him according to the R. Cath. manner, appears not. Sure it
is that while he was a young Man, he went unsent for, through many parts of the
Nation, and Preached the Word of God, not only in Towns and Villages, but also
in Cities. In his rambles he settled for a time in Oxon, among several of his
Countrymen that he found there, purposely for the conversation of Men and
Books, which is one reason I put him here, the other I shall tell you anon. But
whether he took a Degree in Arts or Medicine I cannot yet find. At the same
time, and after, following his old trade of preaching without a call, he was
imprisoned and kept in close durance for a considerable time. At length being
let loose, and banished, he traveled into Italy, and at Ferrara he was made a
Doctor of Physic, and as much there in esteem for his faculty, as after his
return into England he was among the reformed party. In the latter end of K.
Hen. 8. he lived at Colen and other places in Germany, where he published one
or more Books: and returning to his native Country when K. Ed. 6. reigned, had
not only the Prebendship of Botevant in the Church of York bestowed on him by
the Archb. of that place, but a Canonry of Windsore, and the Deanery of Wells
by the King. About which time, tho the day, or month, or scarce the Year
appears, he was incorporated Doctor of Physic with us, which is another reason
I put him here; for if I could have found the certain time, (which appears not
because the Register of that Kings Reign is imperfect) I would have remitted
him into the Fasti. About that time he procured a license to read and to
preach, as many Laymen did that were Scholars, practiced his faculty among the
Nobility and Gentry, and became Physician to Edward Duke of Somerset, L
Protector of England. After Q. Mary came to the Crown he left the Nation once
more, went into Germany with several English Theologists, thence to Rome and
afterward for a time settled in Basil. But when Qu. Eliz. succeeded, he
returned and was restored to his Deanery, and had other spiritualities, I
presume, conferred upon him, being then a Person had in much esteem for his two
faculties, and for the great benefit he did by them, especially in his
writings, to the Church and commonwealth. The titles of those Books published
under his name are these.

The hunting of the Romish Fox, which more than 7 years has been hid among the
Bishops of England, after that the Kings highness had commanded him ( Turner)
to be driven out of his Realm. Basil. 1543. oct. Published under the name of
Will Wraughton.

Avium praecipuarum, quarum apud Plinium and Aristotelem mentio est, brevis and
succincta historia. Colon. 1544. in tw.

Rescuing of the Romish Fox; otherwise called the Examination of the hunter,
devised by Steph. Gardener Doctor and defender of the Popes Canon Law, and his
ungodly Ceremonies -- Printed 1545. in oct. published also under the name of W.
Wraughton.

The hunting of the Romish Wolf -- Printed beyond the Sea in oct.

Dialogue, wherein is contained the examination of the Mass, and of that kind
of Priesthood, which is ordained to say Mass, and to offer up for the remission
of sin, the body and blood of Christ again. Land. in oct.

New Herball, wherein are contained the names of herbs in Greek, Lat. Engl.
Dutch, French, and in the Apothecaries and Herbaries, with the properties,
degrees, and natural places of the same. Land. 1551. and 68. fol. It must be
now noted, that after this violent and busy Person had got a license to read
and preach, it hapened that in a Lecture of his delivered at Thistleworth near
to London, he did therein inveigh much against the Poison of Pelagius, which
had then infected the People very much in all parts of the Nation. This Lecture
of his being answered in print by one who was his auditor, he staightway come
out with a reply entit.

A Preservative, or Triacle against the poison of Pelagius, lately renewed and
stirred up again, by the furious sect of the Anabaptists. Land. 1551. in tw.
which Book being dedicated to Hugh Latimer was ushered into the world by
several copies of Lat. and Eng. verses set before, and at the end of, it; made
by Nich. Grimoald of Merton Coll Tho. Norton of Sharpenhoe, Randol Hurleston or
Huddleston and Tho. Soame a Preacher. Afterward our Author Turner published,

A new Book of spiritual Physic for diverse diseases of the Nobility and
Gentlemen of England -- Said to be printed at Rome. but false, an. 1555. oct.
by Marcus Antonius Constantius, otherwise called Thraso miles gloriosus. It Is
printed in an English Character, and in the title are 4 Lat. verses directed by
Turner, ad nobilem Britannum.

The hunting of the Fox and the Wolf, because they did make havoc of the
Sheep of Jesus Christ -- printed in oct.

A Book of the natures and properties, as well of the Bathes of England, as of
other Bathes in Germany and Italy. Collen 1562. in a thin fol. and in an Eng.
Char.

Treatise of the Bath at Baeth in England -- Printed with the former Book.

Of the nature of all waters -- Printed with the former also.

The nature of wines, commonly used here in England, with a confutation of them
that hold, that Renish and other small Wines, ought not to be drunken, either
of them that have the stone, the rume, or other diseases. Land. 1568. oct.

Of the nature and virtue of Triacle -- Printed with the next Book going before.

The rare treasure of English Bathes. Land. 1587. qu. -- Several things in this
Book, were published from his former Books of Bathes. He also translated into
English, (1) A comparison between the old learning and the new. Printed in
Southwarke an. 1538. originally written by Urb. Regius. (2) The Palsgraves
catechismi. Land. 1572. oct. What else he has written and translated, you may
see in Joh. Bale, cent. 8. nu. 95. At length after all the rambles and troubles
that our Author Turner had made and did endure, he did quietly lay down his
head, and departed this life 7. July in Fifteen hundred sixty and eight.
Whereupon his body was buried in the Chancel of the Church of St. Olaves in
Hertstreet in London, leaving then behind him several Children, of whom Peter,
a Doctor of Physic was one, Father to Samuel and Peter; as I shall tell you
elsewhere.

WILLIAM BARLOWE was bred a Canon Regular Austin in the Monastery of St. Osith
in Essex, and partly among those of his order in Oxon (where besides a nursery
for, was an Abbey and Priory of, that order) and there obtained a competency in
Theology, of which faculty, as it is said, he was a Doctor. Afterward he was
made Prior of the Canons of his Order living at Bysham near Maydenhead in
Berkshire, and by that name and title he was sent in an Embassy to Scotland,
as I shall tell you elsewhere. About the time of the dissolution of his Priory,
he was elected to the Episcopal See of St. Asaph; the temporalities of which
being Pat. 27. Hen. 8. p. 2.
delivered to him on the second day of Febr. 27. Hen. 8. Dom. 1535. he was
consecrated Fr. Godw. in Com. de praesul. Angl. inter Ep^^c. Asaphenses.
to the said See 22. of the same Month. Thence he was translated to St. David's
in the Month of Apr. 1536. and thence to Bathe and Wells in 1547, being then a
zealous Professor and Preacher of the reformed Religion. In 1553, upon Qu.
Mary's coming to the Crown, he was deprived of his Bishopric for being
married; whereupon retiring with many others into Germany under pretense of
Religion, lived there in a poor and exile condition. At length when Qu. Elizab.
succeeded, he was made Bishop of Chichester, in December. 1559, (where he sat to
the time of his death) and in 1560, he was made the first Canon or Prebendary
of the first stall, in the collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, then
founded by Qu. Elizabeth; which Dignity he held with his Bishopric five years.
His works are these.

A Dialogue describing the original ground of these Lutheran factions and many
of their abuses. Land. 1553. in oct. Printed in an English Char.

Christian Homelies.

Cosmography -- which two last I have not yet seen. He departed this mortal
life in the Month of Aug. in Fifteen hundred sixty and eight, Chichester. After
this William Barlowe had been a Prior and a Bishop, he took to Wife one Agatha
Wellesbourne, by whom he had issue five Daughters that were all married to
Bishops, viz. (1) Anne, who, after she had buried her first Husband named
Austin Bradbridge bridge of Chichester, sometimes Fellow of New College,
married Harbert Westphaling Bishop of Hereford (2) Elizabeth Wife of Will. Day
Dean of Windsore, afterward Bishop of Winchester. (3) Margaret Wife of Will.
Overton B. of Lichf. and Cov. (4) Frances, who after she had buried her first
Husband named Matthew Parker a younger Son of Dr. Matthew Parker Archb. of
Canterbury, was married to Tobie Matthew, who died Archb. of York. (5) Antonia
the Wife of Will. Wykeham Bishop of Winchester. The said Will. Barlowe had also
a Son of both his names, whom I shall mention in his proper place.

Lacocke in Wiltshire, elected from Winchester School, Probationer of New Coll.
in 1529. and was made perpetual Fellow two Years after. In 1537, he proceeded
in Arts, was the Southern Proctor of the University three years after, and in
1547, he was made Principal of Whitehall, since involved into Jesus Coll. After
Qu. Elizabeth was settled in the Throne, he became Chaplain to Dr. Parker
Archb. of Canterbury, who having a respect for, did put, him in Warden of
Merton Coll. 1562. upon a dissent among the Fellows in an Election of one for
that office, as I have told In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Ox. lib. 1. p. 285. a.
you at large elsewhere. In 1565, he was made Dean of Gloucester in the place of
Will. Jennings deceased, (who from being a Monk of that place, was made the
first Dean 1541.) and in 1567. in the Month of Aug. he was sent by the Queen
her Ambassador to the K. of Spain, who the Year before had sent to our Queen
his Ambassador called Goseman or Gooseman de Sylva, Dean (as 'twas said) of
Toledo. Of which Ambassadors Qu. Eliz. used merrily to say, that as her Brother
the K. of Spain had sent to her a Goos-man, so she had sent to him a Man goose.
While he continued at Madrid in Spain in the quality of an Ambassador, he was
accused Camd. in Reg. Elizab. sub an. 1569.
to have spoken somewhat unreverently of the Pope. Whereupon he was excluded
from the Court, and afterward thrust out of Madrid into a Country Village, his
Servants compelled to be present at Mass, and the exercise of his own Religion
forbidden; and this whether in more hatred to the Queen of England, or to
Religion, I cannot say; whereas she in the mean time had showed all kindness to
Goseman the Spanish Ambassador, allowing him his own Religion. This Man-goose,
has (as I have been informed) written and translated several things, but none
have I yet seen, only his translation from Latin into English of Common places
of Christian Religion, gathered by Wolfg. Musculus, etc. Land. 1563. fol. and
1573. in a thick qu. He paid his last debt to nature at London, 18. March in
Fifteen hundred sixty and eight, 156 8/9.
and received sepulture in the Chancel of St. Anns Church near Aldersgate in
the same City, leaving issue by his Wife Frances Dau. of Edm. Herenden of
London Mercer, several Children; some of whose posterity, do now, or at least
did lately, live at Hatfield-Braddock in Essex. In his Deanery of Gloucester
succeeded Dr. Tho. Cooper, afterward B. of Winchester, and in the Wardenship
of Merton Coll. Dr. Tho. Bickley afterward B. of Chichester. Besides this Jo.
Man, I find another of both his names of New Coll. born at Writtle in Essex,
who, being LL. B. was presented by the Warden and Fellows of the said Coll. to
the rectory of Great-Horwood in Bucks. an. 1551, where he died 1565.

George Savage Priest, Parson of Davenham in Cheshire, natural Son of Sir Job.
Savage of Clifton in the said County, Knight of the Garter, and one of the
counsel to K. Hen. 7. Which Geo. Savage Priest had seven natural Children by
three sundry Women, viz. (1) George Savage Chancellor of Chester (2) Joh.
Wymesley Parson of Torperley in Cheshire, who was made Archdeacon of London by
his Brother Ed. Bonner. (3) Randal Savage of Lodge in the said County. (4) Edm.
Bonner (of whom we are to make further mention) begotten on the body of Elizab.
Frodsham, who was the Wife (after Bonner had been begotten) of Edm. Bonner a
Sawyer living with a Gentleman called Armingham of Potters Hanley in
Worcestershire, besides three Daughters named Margaret, Ellen, and Elizabeth.
Our Author, who was called by his supposed Fathers name, Edm. Bonner, was born
either at Elmeley, or at Potters-Hanley in Worcestershire, and in 1512 or
thereabouts, became a Student of Broadgates hall, (now Pembroke Coll.) being
then a noted nursery for Civilians and Canonists. Soon after, having made a
sufficient progress in Philosophy and the Laws, he was on the 12. June admitted
Bach. of the Canon, and on the 13. of July following, an. 1519. Bach. of the
Civil, Law. About that time he entered into Holy Orders, and performed many
matters, relating to his faculty, in the Dioc. of Worcester, by the appointment
of the then Bishop. In 1525, he was licensed to proceed in the Civil Law, and
about that time obtained the rectories of Ripple, Bledon, Dereham, Cheswick,
and Cherriburton (in Yorks.) Afterward he was one of the Kings Chaplains, a
favourer of the Lutherans, of the divorce between the K. and Catherine of
Spain, a favourer of the Kings proceedings in expelling the Popes authority
from the Kingdom of England, and Master of the Faculties under Dr. Cranmer
Archb. of Canterbury. In 1535, he became Archdeacon of Leycester in the place
of Edw. Fox promoted to the Sea of Hereford (which Fox had been installed in
that Archdeaconry, upon the resignation of Steph. Gardener LL. D. 27. Sept.
1531.) and by the endeavors of Thom. Cromwell Secretary of State, he was
employed Ambassador to the Kings of Denmark and France, to the Pope, and to the
Emperor of Germany, and made Bishop of Hereford 1538: the temporalities of
which See were Pat. 30. Hen. 8. p. 2.
restored to him by the K. 4. March the same Year. But before he was
consecrated thereunto, he was elected Bishop of London 1. Oct. 1539, (being
then in an Embassy) had restitution Pat. 31. Hen. 8. p. 3.
made of the Temporalities belonging thereunto 18 Nov. following, and was
consecrated 3. Apr. 1540. After the death of K. Hen. 8. and Religion being
about to be reformed by K. Ed. 6. Bonner seemed at first to be forward for it,
but recanting what he had done, he was enjoined to preach a Sermon at Paul's
cross, (to make farther trial perhaps of his humor) wherein leaving out the
article of the Kings authority, was, upon the complaints of Joh. Hooper and
Will. (some call him Hugh) One Will. Latimer was Dean of Peterborough, an.
1560. whether the same, I know not.
Latymer Bach. of Div. and Parson of St. Laurence Pountney (who prosecuted him
very zealously for it, and his slowness in forwarding reformation in his
Diocese) first committed Prisoner to the Marshalsea 20. Sept. and in the
beginning of Oct. following an. 1549. was deprived of his Bishopric. Soon
after which time, his Mother Elizab. Frodsham died and was buried at Fulham, at
whose Funeral, Bonner, tho a Prisoner, gave to several Persons mourning coats.
In the beginning of Aug. 1553. he was released out of the Marshalsea, and
restored to his Bishopric by Qu. Mary, in whose Reign he showed himself severe
(being put upon it by public authority) against the Protestants, as may be
fully seen in Joh. Fox his Book of the Acts and Mon. of the Church. As for the
writings of the said Bonner, they are many, but all that I have yet seen, are
only these, viz.

Preface to the oration of Stephen Bish. of Winchester concerning true
obedience -- Printed at London. in Lat. 1534. 35, and at Hamburgh 1536. oct.
Translated and imprinted by a most zealous enemy to the Papists called Mich.
Wood, who wrote a bitter and libellous Epistle before, and a conclusion after,
it, to the Reader -- Print. at Roan 1553. oct. I have seen another translation
of it (perhaps by the same hand) without the said lib. Epist. printed in oct.
an. 1536. In the said Pref. written by Bonner are several matters against the
Popes power in England, and in defense of the Kings divorce from Qu. Catherine.

Several Letters to the Lord Tho. Cromwell. an. 1538.

A declaration to the Lord Th. Crom. describing to him the evil behavior of
Steph* Bish. of Winchester, an. 1538 -- These two last are mentioned in the
Acts and Mon. of the Church, under that year.

Responsum and exhortatio. Land. 1553. in oct. Which answer, and exhortation to
the Clergy in praise of Priesthood, beginning Dum tacitus apud me considero,
etc. were uttered by our Author after Joh. Harpesfield had finished his Sermon
to the Clergy in St. Paul's Cath. in Land. 16. Oct. 1553, and the orations ended
of John Wymesley Archdeacon of London beforementioned, and of Hugh Weston Dean
of Westminster. All which were printed and bound together in one volume.

Articles ( in number 37.) to be enquired of in his general visitation
exercised by him in the City and Dioc. of Land. an. 1554 -- These being very
unusual articles, I do therefore here set them down, especially for this
reason, that Jo. Bale has commented on them with a great deal of raillery in a
Book entit. A Declaration of Edmund Bonners articles. Land. 1561. oct.

A profitable and necessary doctrine ( or Catechism) with certain Homelies
adjoined thereunto, for the instruction and information of the People within
the Dioc. of Land. Land. 1554. 55. qu. Or thus. A necessary doctrine containing
an exposition on the Creed, seven Sacraments, ten commandments, the pater
noster, Ave Maria and the seven deadly sins.

Various letters, declarations, arguings, disputes, etc. -- As in the said Book
of Acts and Mon.

After Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown, he was for denying the Oath of Supreamacy
deprived of his Bishopric again, as he himself has set it down in a spare
leaf before Eusebius his Chapter Hist. with Ruffinus his commentary, printed at
Basil, in the Year 1528. Which Book I, some years ago, bought for the sake of
the note, which he had written, running thus. Litera dominicali A. an. dom.
MDLIX die Maii XXX vocatus ad concilium, recusavi praestare juramentum, and
omnino deprivatus. Afterward being committed to his former prison, the
Marshalsea in Southwarke near London, continued there in a cheerful and
contented condition till the time of his death: which therefore made those that
did not care for him, say, that he was like Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse,
who being cruel and peremptory in prosperity, was both patient and pleasant in
adversity. It Is said that Dr. Bonner being sometimes allowed liberty, he would
walk, as his occasions served, in the street, and sometimes wearing his tippet,
one begged it of him (in scoff) to line a coat, no (says he) but thou shall
have a fools head to line thy cap. To another that bid him Good morrow Bishop
quondam, he straight replied Farewell knave semper. Which answers are
Epigrammatiz'd by an admired Sir Joh. Harrington in his Epigrams, lib. 4. Epig.
15.
Muse of our Nation in his time. When another Person showed the said Bonner his
own picture in the Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. commonly called the Book
of Martyrs, on purpose to vex him, he merrily laughed and said a vengeance on
the fool, how could he get my picture drawn so right? And when one asked him,
if he were not ashamed to whip a Man with a beard, he laughed and told him, his
beard was grown since, but (said See the same Author in his Brief view of the
state of the Church of England, etc. Land. 1653. p. 16.
he) if thou had been in his case, thou would have thought it a good
commutation of penance to have thy bumm beaten, to save thy body from burning,
etc. -- He gave way to fate in the aforesaid Prison 5. Sept. Georges Church in
Southwark, in which Parish the Marshalsea is situated. He had caused formerly
two of his Nephews (Sons of one of his Sisters beforementioned) to be educated
in Broadgates hall, one of which was named Will. Darbyshire, who, by his Uncles
favor, became Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral, and dying in Broadgates, was
buried in St. Aldates Church adjoining, 3. July 1552. The other was Tho.
Darbyshire, who proceeded Doctor of Laws, as a Member of Broadgates, in 1555,
under which year you may see more of him in the Fasti.

John Kingsmyll of Sidmanton in Hampshire, was born there, or in that County,
elected Fellow of Allsouls Coll. from that of Corp. Chr. in 1558, studied the
Civil Law, wherein he attained to a considerable knowledge, and was admitted to
the reading of any Book of the Institutions in that faculty, in the beginning
of the Year 1563. About that time also he exercised himself much in the
Scriptures, and having a great memory, could readily rehearse memoriter in the
Greek tongue St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, and St. John's
first Canonical Epistle, besides other Chapters of the Old and New Test. and
several Psalms. He exercised himself also by writing of sundry matters that he
might grow in judgment, readiness, and aptness to teach others, if at any time
he should be called thereunto; whereof a little treatise entit. A view of Man's
estate, etc. yields some proof, which he wrote at about 22 years of Age. He
esteemed not so much the preferment and profit, whereunto many ways he might
easily have attained by the profession of the Law, as the comfortable assurance
(which he usually urged) and blessed hope of life eternal. Wherefore to further
himself therein, he sought not only the exact knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew
tongues, but also for a time to live in some one of the best reformed Churches,
where he might both by the doctrine and discipline of the Gospel, be daily
confirmed in the true worship of God, and well prepared for the Ministry of the
Church. For this end he settled in Geneva, where he remained the space of three
years, being well liked by the learned and godly there. From thence he removed
to Losanne; where being too good for this world, ended this mortal life,
leaving behind him a rare example of godliness among the Calvinistical Brethren
there. He has written.

A view of man's estate, wherein the great mercy of God in man's free
justification is showed. Land. 1574. 1580 etc. oct.

A godly advice touching marriage. Land. 1580. oct.

Excellent and comfortable treatise for all such as are any manner of way
either troubled in mind or afflicted in body. Land. 1578. oct.

Godly and learned exhortation to bear patiently all afflictions for the Gospel
of Jes. Chapter (on Gal. 6. 14.)

Conference between a godly learned Christian and an afflicted conscience
concerning a conflict had with Satan. All which, and I think a Sermon on S.
Joh. 3. 16. printed in oct. were published, after the Authors death, by his
friend and contemporary Franc. Mylls a Kentish Man, M. of A. and Fell. of Alls.
C. As for the Author, he surrendered up his last breath, in the prime of his
years, at Losanne, (and therefore the more lemented by the brethren,) in the
Month of Sept. in Fifteen hundred sixty and nine, Elizabeth, the Univ. of Oxon
was so empty (after the R. Cath. had left it upon the alteration of Religion)
that there was very seldom a Sermon preached in the University Church called
Sr. Mary, and what was done in that kind, was sometimes by Laurence Humphrey
President of Magd. C. and Thom. Sampson Dean of Chapter Chapter But they being often
absent, a young Man of Allsouls Coll. would often step up and Preach to the
admiration of all his auditors. This young Man, whom, as Sir Hen. Savile Warden
of Merton Coll. (who came to the University in 1561.) use to style the young
Bachelaur of Alls. Coll. I take to be Andrew Kingsmyll Bach. of Law, and none
else.

WILLIAM TRESHAM Son of Rich. Tresham by Rose Tho. Billing Esquire; was born of,
and descended from, a knightly Family of his name living at Newton in
Northamptonshire, educated in Grammar and Logic in this University, elected
Probat. Fellow of Merton Coll. in 1515, and at some years standing in the
Degree of Master of Arts, he was unanimously chosen Registrary of this
University, in the latter end of 1523. Afterward he was made one of the Canons
of the first foundation of the Coll at Oxon. founded by K. Hen. 8. an. 1532,
being about that time a Doctor of Div. and in great repute for his learning, as
also much noted for his taking part with K. Hen. 8. in the matter of divorce
from Qu. Catherine: And being also esteemed an active and forward Man, had the
office of Commissary (the same now with that of Vicechancellour) of the
University conferred upon him, which he executed with great commendation for
several years. When K. Hen. 8. founded the Bishopric of Oxon, and settled the
Cathedral on the ruins of Osney Abbey, by his Charter dated the first of Sept.
an. 1542 he made this Dr. Tresham one of the Canons, where continuing till the
Cathedral was translated to his Coll. Called Chapter Church, he was made the first
Canon of the second Prebendship or Canonry there; and afterward had under his
name these things published.

Disputatio de Eucharistiae sacramento in Universitate Oxon. habita contra Pet.
Martyrem, 28. May 1549. Land. 1549. qu. which disputation has been printed
once at least among Pet. Martyrs works, but whether true according to the MS.
copy in Corp. Chapter Coll. Library, I doubt it. It Is also translated into English,
and printed with the disputations of Will. Cheadsey and Morg. Philipps -- Land.
1568 fol. After this disputation was concluded to his great credit, we find him
to have suffered imprisonment several times in the Reign of K. Ed. 6. After Qu.
Mary came to the Crown he had.

A disputation with Archb. Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, and B. Latymer in the Div.
School at Oxon, an. 1554. -- Printed for the most part in Joh. Fox his Book of
the Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. At length after Qu. Eliz. came to the
Crown, he was, for denying the Oath of Supremacy, deprived of his Canonry of
Chapter Chapter in 1560, and committed to custody at Lambeth, with Matthew Archb. of
Canterbury. Afterward being released thence, upon security given that he would
not concern himself in word or action for the future against the Religion then
established, he retired to his rectory of Bugbrook in Northamptonshire,
(conferred upon him by the King 1541.) and remained there for some time; but at
length was deprived of that also, as the records of the Registraries office
belonging to the Church of Peterborough do testify. He paid his last debt to
nature in Fifteen hundred sixty and nine, Bugbrook beforementioned, (says
Leon. Hutten in Cat. Dec. and can. Aed. chapter MS.
one who lived near his time) tho upon search in the register belonging to that
Church, his name (perhaps upon neglect) is not to be seen therein. Of this
zealous Person for the R. Cath. cause, I have several times made mention in
Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 268. a. b. 275. a. and in lib. 2. p.
257. b. 258. a. 422. a. b. etc.

Wycombe (Great Wycombe) in Bucks. was educated in Eaton School near to
Windsore, admitted into Kings Coll. in Cambridge, in the Year 1528, took one
Degree in Arts in that University, retired to Oxon, where he spent some time to
make a farther progress in Academical studies. Afterward he married, was
beneficed, and became a zealous reformer: But when Qu. Mary came to the Crown,
he left his cure, traveled from place to place in the North parts of England
where he was not known, and by his sometimes practicing of Physic and teaching
of youths, he obtained a comfortable subsistence for himself and his Wife. When
Qu. Eliz. succeeded, he read the Divinity Lecture in St. Paul's Cathedral in
London: which being admirably well performed, he was called thence to be Bishop
of Exeter; to which See being consecrated 14. Jul. 1560. had the Temporalities
thereof Pat. 2. Elizab. p. 14.
given to him 26. Aug. following. In Nov. 1561 he supplicated the venerable
congregation of Regents of this University that the Degree of Bach. of Divinity
might be conferred on him: which being granted, he supplicated for that of
Doctor; and that being granted also, he was admitted to them both successively,
without any mention at all of Incorporation. He was a Person Universally
learned, especially in Divinity and in the tongues, Preached almost every
Holy Day, and read a Lecture every day while he lived at Exeter. He has
written,

The poor man's Library, a rapsodie or miscellany, in two tomes. The first
contains seven Lectures upon the first Epistle of St. Peter, read publicly
in St. Paul's Cath. in London, an. 1560. The second contains 5. Lectures upon
the said first Epist. read in the same place. Land. 1571. fol.

Hebrew Grammar -- Whether ever printed, I know not. He took his last farewell
of this world on the 15. day of April in Fifteen hundred and seventy, Woolton
one of his Successors was afterward buried) leaving behind him a Son named
Rog. Alley Archdeacon of Cornwall. Soon after was a Mon. put over his grave,
with an inscription thereon, wherein it is said that he was acerrimus
Evangelicae veritatis propugnator, morum probitate praecelibris, bonarum
disciplinarum mirabili scientia clarus, etc.

Shropshire Man born, made his first entry into the University, an. 1545 or
thereabouts, and after the last foundation of Chapter Chapter had been finished by K.
Hen. 8. he was soon after made a Student thereof, an. 1548. aged 18. where
going through the usual Classes of Logic and Philosophy, proceeded M. of Arts,
and was Junior of the Act celebrated in St. Mary's Church, 18. Jul. 1552. From
the time that he was first made Student of Chapter Chapter he always gave great hopes
that he would prove a considerable Person in his time, being composed from his
youth to gravity, and endowed with an acute genie and a quick vigor of mind. In
1560 he was made the second Canon of the second Prebendship of the said Church,
was admitted to the reading of the Sentences the Year following, and afterward
became Doctor of D. Dean or Rector of Bockyng in Essex, Archdeacon of
Colchester (in the place, as it seems, of Joh. Pullayne deceased) and at length
upon the translation of Dr. Edwyn Sandys from Worcester to London in 1570 he
was nominated by the Queen to succeed him, but before consecration thereunto,
he died. He was in his younger days a noted Poet and Comedian, and in his
elder, an exact Disputant, and had an excellent faculty in speaking and
preaching. He has transmitted to posterity,

Querela Oxoniensis Academiae ad Cant abrigiam. Land. 1552. qu. It Is a Lat.
Poem written on the death of Henry and Charles Brandon Sons of Charles Duke of
Suffolk, who died of the sweating sickness in the Bishop of Lincolns house at
Bugden, 14. July 1551.

Historia de exhumatione Catherinae nuper uxoris Pet. Martyris. Printed 1562.
in oct.

Answer to John Martial's treatise of the cross. Land. 1565. (qu.)

Progne, a Tragedy. -- Written in Lat. but whether ever printed, I know not.

Poemata varia. This ingenious Person died at Bockyng before mentioned, (having
a little before resigned his Canonship of Chapter Ch.) and was buried in the
Chancel of the Church there, Aug. in Fifteen hundred and seventy, says the
register belonging to that Church, which I suspect is false, because there was
a commission In a Book of Administrations in the Will-Office near St. Paul's
Cath. in Land. beginning in Dec. 1559. fol 162 a.
issued out from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury at Land. to Margaret his
Widow dated 21. Aug. 1570. to administer the goods, debts, and chattels of him
the said Dr. Jam Calfhill lately Archd. of Essex (as there he is styled)
deceased. So I presume he died about the beginning of that Month.

JOHN BOXALL was born at Bramshoot in Hampshire, W. of Wykehams School near to
Winchester, admitted perpetual Fellow of New Coll. an. 1542, took the Degrees
in Arts, being then accounted one of the subtilest Disputants in the
University. Afterward he entered into holy orders, but did not preach in the
Reign of K. Ed. 6. When Qu. Mary came to the Crown, he was made Archdeacon of
Ely, (in the place, as I suppose, of Dr. Hen. Cole) her Secretary of State,
Prebendary of Winchester, and Warden of Winchester Coll. 1554, in the place of
Joh. White made B. of Linc. About that time being appointed one of the prime
Preachers of the Nation to hold forth at Paul's Cross to revive the Catholic
Religion, which had been eclipsed in K. Edwards Reign, had, while he was
preaching, (as one Joh. Pit. in Append. Cent. 2. nu. 86.
says) a dagger flung at him, but I presume false, because the generality of
writers say that that act was committed on Gilb. Bourne. In July 1557 he was
made Dean of Peterborough in the place of Jam. Curthopp deceased, and on the
20. Dec. following he was installed Dean of Norwych in the place of Joh.
Christopherson made B. of Chichester, and about the same time Dean of Windsore;
in which place being installed, he was sworn Scribe or Registrary of the most
noble order of the Garter 6. Feb. 1557. and the Year following was actually
created D. of Div. and made Prebendary of York, and Sarum, After Qu. Elizab.
came to the Crown he was deprived of the Deanery of Windsore (that of Norwych
he gave up before Qu. Mary's death) and George Carew succeeding him in 1559, he
was admitted and sworn thereunto, 22 Apr. 1560. About that time he was also
deprived of the Deanery of Peterborough, whereupon the Queen bestowed it on
Will. Latymer D. D. 1560, which, together with the Church it self, he had
likely to have lost upon information given to the Queen that it was ruinous and
no prayers said therein, but upon better information from Latymer, the great
Peer that begged it withdrew, and nothing more was done in the matter. As for
Boxall, he being thus deprived, he was committed to free custody in the Archb.
house at Lambeth, with Thirlby B. of Ely, Tonstall B. of Durham and others; but
soon after being overtaken with a dangerous fever, had liberty to go over the
water to London, and settling in the house of a near relation recovered, and
enjoyed himself in great retiredness for some years after. He is said by a
noted In a Book entit. The execution of Justice in England for maintenance of
^ub. and Christian p^^ce, etc. Printed at Land. the second time in oct. an.
1583. p. 34.
Author to have been a Person of great modesty, learning, and knowledge, and by
another, M. Parker in Antiq. Eccles. Britan. edit. 1^^2. vel 73. in Mathaeo.
greater than he, that there was in him tanquam a natura ingenita modestia
comitasque summa, qua quoscunque notos ad se diligendum astrinxit. One Jo. Pits
ut supra.
of his persuasion, who highly extolleth him for his eloquence and learning,
says that he wrote several things, but they perishing with the Author, never
saw light. The truth is, that in all my searches I could never see any thing
under his name but a Latin Sermon, which he preached, as it seems, in London,
where it was afterward printed in oct. but upon what subject I cannot tell,
nor any thing else of the Author, only that he died in London toward the
latter end of the Year Fifteen hundred and seventy, March 1571. there was a
Commission In a Book of A^^m ^^strations in the Will-Office near to St. Paul's
Cath. beginning in December. 1559. fol. 171. b.
granted from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury to Edmund and Rich. Boxall
natural and legitimate brothers of him the said Joh. Boxall Clerk, lately
deceased in the City of London, to administer his goods, debts, Chattels, etc.

Lhoyd, Son and Heir of Rob. Lhoyd al^as Rossenhall of the ancient Borough of
Denbigh in Denhighshire, by Joan his Wife, Daughter of Lewis Pigott, was born
at Denhigh beforementioned, but in what house of learning in Oxon, he first of
all applied himself to Academical studies, I know not: Sure it is, that after
he had taken the Degree of Bach. of Arts, which was in 1547, I find him by the
name of Humphrey Lhoyd to be a Commoner in Brasnose Coll. and in the Year 1551
to proceed in Arts as a Member of that House; at which time, as it seems, he
studied Physic, being then ripe in years. Afterward retiring to his own
Country, lived mostly within the walls of Denbigh Castle, practiced his
faculty, and sometimes that of Music for diversion sake, being then esteemed a
well bred Gentleman. He was a passing right Antiquary, and a Person of great
skill and knowledge in British affairs. The learned Camden styles In Britan. in
cap. 1. De primis Inco^s, and in cap 4. De (...) Britan.
him a learned Britain, and for knowledge in Antiquities reputed by our
Countrymen, to carry, after a sort, with him, all the credit and honor, etc.
He has written,

An Almanac and Calendar, containing the day, hour, and minute of the change
of the Moon for ever, and the sign that she is in for these three years, with
the natures of the signs and planets, with dyvers other things, as it does
plainly appear in the Preface -- This was the first thing that our Author
published, as it appears in the said Preface, but when, or where, it was
printed, the imperfect copy, (which is in oct.) from whence I had the title,
shows not.

Commentarioli Britannicae descriptionis fragmentum. Col. Agrip. 1572. in tw.
Dedicated to his dear and intimate friend Abr. Ortelius of Antwerp, in the Year
1568. Translated into English by Tho. Twyne, who entitles it The Breviary of
Britain. Land. 1573. oct.

De Mona Druidum insula, antiquitati suae restituta. Written in an Epistle to
the said Ortelius, dated 5. Apr. 1568.

De Armamentario Romano. These two last are printed at the end of Historiae
Britannicae defensio, written by Sir Joh. Prise -- Land. 1573. qu.

Chronicon Walliae, a Rege Cadwalladero, usque ad an. Dom. 1294. MS. in Cottons
Library, under Caligula, A. 6. He also translated from Lat. into English. (1)
The judgment of Urines. Land. 1551. oct. (2) The History of Cambria now called
Wales. Afterward corrected, augmented, finished and continued by David Powell
-- Land. 1584 qu. (3) The treasure of health containing many profitable
Medicines. Land. 1585. oct. written by Pet. Hispanus. To which translation our
Author Lhuyd added the causes and signs of every disease, with the Aphorisms
of Hypocrates. These are all, I think, that he has written and translated, for
among my searches I have seen no more, nor do I know any thing else of the
Author, only that he paid his last debt to nature, Whitchurch near Denbigh
beforementioned. Soon after was a Monument of Alabaster, set up in the wall,
over his grave to his memory: On which was portraied his Effigies in a praying
posture, with a desk, and a book laying thereon, before him, a sword by his
side, but nothing else military in his habit. Under his said Effigies is a
plain free stone in the said wall, whereon are engraven eight barbarous English
verses: The two first of which run thus.

The corpse and earthly shape does rest. Here tomyd in your sight Of Humfrey
Lloid Mr. of Art. A famus worthy Wight.

In the last verse is mention made of an Epitaph annexed, but where that was
written, unless on the stone lying on his grave, (wherein probably the day and
year of his death were set down) I cannot tell. Many years before his death he
took to Wife Barbara Daughter of George Lumley and Sister to John Lord Lumley;
by whom he had issue Splendian and John, who both died without issue, Henry an
inhabitant of Cheame in Surrey, and Jane the Wife of Rob. Coytmore.

LAURENCE VAUS, Vaux or Vaulx, so many ways I Blackrode in Lancashire, received
his Academical education in Oxon, partly, as it seems, in Queens Coll. but
mostly in that of Corp. Chapter were he was either Clerk or Chorister, and much
favored by Jam. Brokes Fellow of that house. How long he continued there, or
whether he took a Degree in Arts it appears not. About the Year 1540 he applied
his studies to the Theological faculty and was made a Priest, being then
esteemed Anon. MS. de quibusd. script. Angl. in man^b. quondam Gul. Crow
Ludimag. Cro^on.
to be Vir eximiae doctrinae pro instruenda in fide catholica juventute.
Afterward he became Chaplain to the said Brokes when he was Bishop of
Gloc^ster, Warden of Manchester Coll. in his own Country on the death of George
Collier (of the Family of the Colliers near to Stone in Staffordshire) in the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary, and in 1556 he was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences in this University. Upon the coming to the Crown of
Qu. Eliz. and the reformation of Religion that followed, he left his preferment
(in which Will. Byrch of the Family of Byrch hall in Lanc. succeeded 2. Eliz.)
and went into Ireland, where he was dispoiled of all he had by thieves, and
narrowly escaped death. Thence he went into the Low Countries, where, at
Lovaine, he was made a Monk, as Joh. Pits. De illustr. Angl. Script. aet. 16.
nu. 1016.
one says, of the order of St. Dionyse, meaning, I suppose, of the Cenobie of
St. Dionyse, because there is no such order; where he wrote,

A Catechism, or a christian doctrine necessary for Children and ignorant
People. Lov. 1567. Antw. 1574. printed again 1583. 1599. etc. all in oct. and
tw.

An instruction of the laudable customs used in the Cath. Church -- This is
some editions is entit. The use and meaning of holy Ceremonies in Gods Church.

Godly contemplations for the unlearned -- These two last are printed with one,
two, or more of the editions of the Catechism.

Certain brief notes of diverse godly matters -- Printed with the Catechism in
1583 -- 99 oct. At length our. Author Vaux making a return into England to
propagate his, and strengthen others in, Religion, was apprehended, and
imprisoned in the Gate House at Westminster, where he In Lanc. visit. in the
Heralds off. C. 37. at the end.
dyed in great necessity, about the Year, as I find Ibid. in P^^s at supra.
it reported, Margarets Church (wherein the Prison called the Gate House
beforementioned is situated) makes no mention of him in that Year, three years
before, or three years after, as I have been informed by the Letters of Dr.
Simon Patrick Prebendary of St. Peter's Church in the said City, and Dean of
Peterborough, afterward Bishop of Chichester.

Schaftnes, was born in Ireland, became Fellow of Balliol Coll. in 1556 being
then Bach. of Arts, a noted disputant and an excellent Philosopher. In 1560 he
took the Degree of Master, and four years after resigniag his Fellowship, he
retired into his native Country, where he gained a good report for his noted
parts in speaking and penning. Rich. Stanyhurst his countryman says In
Discript. Hibern. cap. 7.
that he was afterward Schoolmaster in Ireland and a learned and a virtuous
Man, but tells us not what he has written, and therefore I suppose that what
he did of that nature, Clar. 1570.
was after Stanyhurst had given the said character of him. Contemporary with
this Shaghens, or a little before, were Students in Oxon, these Irish Men
following (1) Patrick Cusack a Gentleman born, who, after he had left Oxon was
a Schoolmaster in Dublin, where his Ibid.
admirable learning gave great light to his Country, but employed his studies
rather in instructing of Scholars than in penning of Books. He wrote in Lat.
Diversa Epigrammata. (2) One Dormer a Civilian, who was born at Rosse, and wrote
Ib.
in Ballad royal The decay of Ross. (3) One Sheine, who wrote Ib.
De republica. See more among the Bishops, under the Year 1582 and in the
Fasti, 1523. (4) Peter Lombard a most learned Man of his time, but did not take
any Degree. See more of him in Pet. White among the writers, under the Year
1590. (5) Elias Sheth, who wrote Diverse Sonnets. (6) One Tailor a Bach. of
Arts, who proceeded in the University and wrote Epigrammata diversa. What his
Christian name was I cannot justly say, because many of his Surname and time
did proceed Masters in this University, as Tho. Tailor in 1539. Will. Tailor
1541. and 1551. and Tho. Tailor of Alls. Coll. 1563. Whether this last be the
same Th. Tailor who was a Lancashire Man born and chosen Fellow thereof 1557.
or another, chosen in 1562, I know not. Many other Irish Men were also
conversant in studies here, even till an University was founded at Dublin,
after which time we had but few.

Henxey hall in St. Aldates Parish in Oxon; where making great proficiency, he
was admitted Bach. of the Civil Law in 1531. In 1535 when K. Hen. 8. first
founded certain Lectures in the University, he appointed Job. Story to read
that of the Civil Law, and in 1537 he became Principal of Broadgates hall,
being also about that time Moderator of one of the Civil Law Schools. In 1538
he proceeded in his faculty, and afterward performing excellent service at the
Siege of Bologne in Picardie, in the administration of the Civil Law under the
Lord Marshall there; the King in consideration thereof, did renew his former
grant of the said Lecture in form of Letters Pat. for the term of life of the
said John, in the Year 1546 or thereabouts, joining with him for his ease, Mr.
Rob. Weston Fellow of Alls. College. When Qu. Marie came to the Crown, she
renewed his patent again, but soon after resigning his professorship, because
he had got greater preferment at London, and the Chancellourship of the Dioc.
of Oxon. if I mistake not, became a zealous Man in the Religion then professed,
and an eager enemy against the poor Protestants, as the Histories of those
times will tell you. I find published under his name these things following.

Oration against Th. Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury, in 1556.

Discourse with Joh. Philpot the Martyr about matters of Religion, and with
others.

Answer to Examinations during his imprisonment in the tower of London, in 1570.

Speech at his execution at Tybourne 1o; June 1571. -- with other things (of
which some relate to his profession) that I have not yet seen. When Qu. Elizab.
came to the Crown, he was imprisoned, but soon after broke out, and going
beyond the Sea, continued an enemy to the Protestants there, became Vide
A^^^al. Camde^, sub an. 1569. and 1571.
a sworn servant to the Duke of Alva at Antwerp, and from him received a
special commission to search the Ships for goods forfeited, and and for English
Books; in which service he did very great harm to the English Protestants. At
length being invited under hand to search the Ship of one Parker an English
Man, went unwarily therein: Whereupon Parker causing the hatches to be shut
when Story was searching under deck, he hoised sail and brought him Prisoner
into England about the beginning of December. 1570. So that being clapped up close
Prisoner within the Tower of London, did undergo there several examinations. At
length being brought to a trial, and steadfastly denying to take the Oath of
Supremacy (as he had done several times before within the Tower) he was drawn
thence on a hurdle to Tybourne, on the first day of June in Fifteen hundred
seventy and one, Joh. Feckenham Prisoner in the said Tower) where, after he had
spoken a large speech, which was unexspected, and therefore not interrupted, he
was for a little time hanged; but before he was half dead, he was cut down, and
when the Executioner cut off his privy members, he rose up with alacrity, and
gave him a blow on the ear. But his bowels being soon after draw'd out of his
belly, and his body quartered, his head was set upon London bridge, and his
quarters were hanged on 4 gates of the City. Several of his treasons and
conspiracies against the English Nation you may see in a pamphlet printed in
oct. an. 1571, bearing this title. A copy of a letter sent by a Gentleman,
student in the laws of the realm, to a friend of his concerning Dr. Story.
And what relates to him as praise worthy, you may see in Concertatio Printed at
Trier in Germ. 1594. qu. fol. 43. 44.
Ecclesiae Catholicae in Anglica, taken from Nichol. Sanders his seventh Book
De visibili Monarchia. His Martyrdom is imprinted, or represented Anthony
Monday in his English Romayne life -- Land. 1590. qu. p. 25.
in the English Coll. at Rome, and he is called with the two Notons, Joh.
Felton and others, Saints. The Franciscans have a great respect for his memory
also, because he had been a lay-brother of that Order, and had done several
signal services for them.

JOHN JEWEL one of the greatest lights that the reformed England has
produced, was born at Buden in the Parish of Berinerber in Devon. 24. May 1522.
His Father was Joh' Jewel, and his Mother of the Family of the Bellamies, who
sparing neither labor or charge for his education, was at length, by the care
of Joh. Bellamie his uncle, educated in Grammar learning first at Branton, then
at Southmoulton, and at length at Barnstaple, in his own Country, under one
Walt. Bowen. In which last School being made ripe for the University, he was
sent to Oxon. in July 1535 and being entered into Merton Coll. under the tuition
of John Parkhurst, (afterward B. of Norwych) was by him made his Portionist,
now called Postmaster, and by his care and severe tuition laid the foundation
for greater learning that followed. In the Year 1539. after he (upon
examination) had showed himself a youth of great hopes, he was admitted Scholar
of C. C. Coll. 19. Aug. and the Year after was made Bach. of Arts. So that
being put into a capacity by that Degree of taking Pupills, many resorted to
him, whom he mostly instructed in private in Protestant principles, and in
public in Humanity, he being about that time Rhetoric reader in his Coll. In
1544 he was licensed to proceed in Arts, which he completed in an Act
celebrated 9. Feb. the same year. When K. Hen. 8. was dead, he showed himself
more openly to be a Protestant; and upon P. Martyr's arrival at Oxon, to be an
admirer and hearer of him, whose Notary he was when he disputed with Tresham,
Cheadsey and Morgan. In 1550 he was admitted to the reading of the Sentences,
and during the Reign of K. Ed. 6. became a zealous promoter of reformation, and
a Preacher and Catechiser at Sunningwel near Abendon in Berks. Soon after Qu.
Mary came to the Crown, he was forced to leave the Nation, and retire first to
Frankfort with Henry the eldest Son of Sir Franc. Knollys, Rob. Horn, and
Edwyn Sandys, and afterward to Strasburgh with Joh. Poynet, Edmund Grindal,
Joh. Cheek, etc. After Qu. Mary's death he returned in 1558, and in the Year
following he was rewarded with the Bishopric of Salisbury for his great
learning and sufferings, being about that time appointed one of the Protestant
Divines to encounter those of the Romish persuasion when Qu. Elizab. was about
to settle a reformation in the Church of England. In 1560 he preached at Paul's
cross on the second Sunday before Easter, on 1. Cor. 11. 23. For I have
received of the Lord, that which also I have delivered unto you, etc. In which
Sermon he showed himself the first, who made a public challenge to all the
Romans Catholics in the world, to produce but one clear and evident testimony
out of any Father, or famous writer, who flourished within 500 years after
Christ, for any one of the many articles which the Romanists at this day
maintain against the Church of England, and upon any good proof of any such one
allegation to yield up the bucklers and reconcile himself to Rome. Now tho
Thom. Hardyng and some others undertook him about the controverted articles,
yet, as those of the reformed party say, they came off so poorly, and Jewel on
the contrary so amazed them with a cloud of witnesses in every point in
question, that no Vide Godwinum De Praesul. Angl. in Sarisb. p. 409.
one thing in that age, gave the papacy so deadly a wound as the said challenge
at Paul's cross, so confidently made and bravely maintained. This say the
Protestant writers; but let us hear what a grand Rob. Persons in A relation of
a trial made before the K. of France, an. 1600. between the Bishop of Eureux
and the Lord Plessis Mornay -- Printed 1604. p. 53. 54. etc.
zealot for the Romish cause says concerning the said matter -- After this Man
( meaning B. Nich. Rydley) stepped to Paul's cross in the beginning of Qu.
Elizabeth's days, about the Year 1559 and 1560 Mr. Joh. Jewel, otherwise called
Bishop of Salisbury, and he proceeded yet farther in this brag and fiction, (
meaning that what the Fathers said, made for the Protestants) for he protested
there, even with feigned tears, that if any one authority, place, sentence or
asseveration of any one Father, Doctor, Council, or authentical History, within
the first 600 years after Christ, could be brought forth by any man living for
any one of those points of Catholic Religion (which he there recited) to be in
controversy, that then plainly and sincerely he would subscribe. Against which
vain and shameless bragg, when Dr. Hardyng and diverse other learned men of our
side, began to write from Lovayne, and to bring forth authorities of all
Fathers, Doctors, Councils and Histories in great abundance, the first effect
of this challenge, that appeared to the world, was a severe proclamation, that
no such book written in English by the Catholic party should be received or
read in England, under great punishments. By which Provision Mr. Jewel
thinking meetly well defenced, he plied the pulpit often, and renewed his
challenges many times, and perceiving notwithstanding that Dr. Hardyngs
confutation was come into England, he answered the same with a long volume of
Rhetorical words, and stuffed the Margent thereof with the show of infinite
Authors, as tho the whole world had been for him, and none for the other side:
And with this he deceived the People then, and does to this day, such I mean
that have not commodity or learning, or other means to examine those places,
and to find out the manifold lies and falsifications therein contained. And
this was the gain by all likelihood that Mr. Jewel pretended to his cause by
that work, knowing full well that this sort of Men is far the greater, which
would be gained and settled in his doctrine before the learneder sort (who are
but few in comparison of the other) could have time, books, and commodity to
discover and refute him, and when they should do it, they should hardly be
believed etc. -- How many learned Men lightly of our Nation have taken upon
them seriously to go over that book of Mr. Jewels, and to examine it by the
Authors themselves with any indifferency of mind, have for the most part been
thereby converted to Catholic Religion, though never so great Protestants
before: Of which sort I have heard relation of many, but of some I can testify
my self, for that I have heard it from their own mouths, who of earnest
Protestants were made most zealous Catholics by that means principally; of
which number I think it not inconvenient to name here some two or three,
omitting others, which for just respects may not be named. The first of them is
Sir Tho. Copley, made Lord afterward in his banishment by the King of France,
who oftentimes has related unto one, with much comfort of his soul, how that
being a zealous Protestant, and very familiar to Robert the late Earl of
Leycester in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth's days, when Mr. Jewels book was
newly come forth, he being also learned himself in the Latin tongue, took pains
to examine certain leaves thereof, and finding many falsehoods therein, which
were inexcusable (as they seemed to him) he conferred the same with the said
Earl, who willed him that the next time Mr. Jewel dined at his table, he
should take occasion after dinner to propose the same, which he did soon after:
And receiving certain trifling answers from Mr. Jewel, he waxed more hot, and
urged the matter more earnestly: which Jewel perceiving, told him in effect
That Papists were Papists, and so they were to be dealt withal; and other
answer he could not get. Which thing made the good Gentleman to make a new
resolution with himself, and to take that happy course which he did to leave
his Country and many great commodities, which he enjoyed therein, to enjoy the
liberty of conscience, and so both lived and died in voluntary banishment, etc.
The second example which I remember of mine own knowledge is Mr. Doctor
Stevens, a learned Man yet alive, who being Secretary or Chaplain to Mr.
Jewel, and a forward Man in the Protestant Religion at that time, espied
certain false allegations in his Masters book, whilst it was under the print in
London, whereof advertising him by Letters, (for that he supposed it might be
by oversight) the other commanded notwithstanding the print to go forward, and
passed it over as it was. Which this Man seeing, that had a conscience, and
sought the truth indeed, resolved to take another way of finding it out: And
having found it in the Cath. Church, where only it was to be found, he resolved
also to follow it, and so he did, and went voluntarily into banishment for the
same, where yet he lives to this day in France, etc. -- As for the third
example, which is Will. Rainolds, I shall remember from my before quoted
Author, when I come to speak of him, and in the mean time proceed to speak of
Jewel. In the beginning therefore of the Year 1565, he, tho absent, was
actually created Doctor of Div. and the year following, when the Queen was
entertained by the Oxonian Muses, he showed himself a profound Theologist in
moderating at Divinity disputations in St. Mary's Church. The learned Camden In
Britan. in Wilts, in Sarisb. ibid.
says that he was a wonderful, great and deep Divine, a most stout and earnest
maintainer of our reformed Religion against the adversaries, by his learned
books. That he was a Man Idom in Annal. R. Elizab. sub an. 1571. ad sin.
of a singular ingenie, of exquisite erudition in Theologicals and of great
piety. As for Jewels writings the titles of them follow.

Exhortatio ad Oxonienses. See in his life written by Laurence Humphrey,
printed in 1573. p. 35.

Exhortatio in Coll. Corp. Chapter sive concio in fundatoris Foxi Commemorationem.
See there again p. 45. 46. etc.

Concio in templo B. Mariae Virg. Oxon, an. 1550 in 1. Pet. 4. 11. preached for
his Degree of Bach. of Div. A Copy of which is printed in his life, written by
L. H. beforementioned, p. 49. Translated into English by R. V. -- Land. 1586.
oct.

Oration in Aula C. C. Chr. spoken to the society, when he was ejected from
among them, in 1554.

Epistola ad Scipionem Patritium Venetum de causis cur Episcopi Angliae ad
concilium Tridentinum non convenirent, an, 1559. This also is printed in an
appendix to the second edit. of the translation of the Hist. of the Council of
Trent, made by Sir Nath. Brent -- Land. 1629. fol.

Letters between him and Dr. Hen. Cole upon occasion of a Sermon that Mr.
Jewel preached before the Queen and her Council. Land. 1560. oct. This
Letter-Combat began 18. March 1559 and continued till 18. May 1560.

Sermon at Paul's cross the second Sunday before Easther an. 1560, on 1. Cor.
11. 23. Land. 1560. oct. In which he gave out a bold challenge against the
Papists, as I have before told you.

Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae. Land. 1562. oct. Which book was so much
esteemed by the Men of Zurich and all Protestants, that it was translated
almost into all tongues, to the end that it might be generally known. The
Council of Trent held at that time, saw, and censured, it, and appointed a
Frenchman and an Italian to answer it, but they hung back, and would, or rather
could, not. It was several times printed in England, and beyond the Seas, and
in Greek at Oxon. 1614. oct. This book was, soon after its first publication,
translated into English by Anon. with this title. An Apology or answer in
defense of the Church of England concerning the state of Religion used in the
same. Land. 1562. qu. But Tho. Hardyng coming out with a confutation of it, our
Author published,

A defense of the Apology of the Church of England, containing an answer to a
certain book lately set forth by Mr. Harding, and entit. A confutation, etc.
in 6 parts Land. 1564. 67. fol. Translated into Lat. by Tho. Braddock Bach. of
Div. and Fellow of Christ's Coll in Cambr. -- printed beyond the Seas 1600 fol.
Soon after the first publication of the said Defense, Hardyng publishing A
detection of certain errors in the said Defense, our Author came out with,

An answer to Mr. Hardings book entit. A Detection of certain errors, etc.
Land. 1565. Lov. 1568. Afterward followed,

A reply to Mr. Hardings answer: By perusing whereof the discreet and diligent
reader may easily see the weak and unstable grounds of the Romans Religion, in
27. Articles. Land. 1566. fol. Therein also is an answer to Mr. Hardyngs
preface to his aforesaid answer. This reply of Jewel, is translated into Lat.
by Will. Whitaker Fellow of Trinity Coll. in Camb. -- Genev. 1585. fol. and
with it is printed his Apology.

A view of a seditious Bull sent into England from Pius 5. Bishop of Rome an.
1569. Delivered in certain Sermons in the Cath. Chapter of Sarum, 1570. Land. 1582.
oct.

A treatise of the Holy Scripture, gathered out of his Sermons preached at
Salisbury 1570. Land. 1582. oct.

Exposition on the two Epistles of the Apostle St. Paul to the Thessalonians.
Land. 1594. oct.

A Treatise of the Sacraments, gathered out of his Sermons. -- Land. 1583. oct.

Certain Sermons preached before the Qu. Majesty at Paul's cross and elsewhere
-- They are in number at least 13, viz. on Josh. 6. 1. 2. 3. -- Haggat; 1. ver.
2. 3. 4. -- Psalm. 69. This on Psalm. 69. ver. 9. was reprinted by it self, an.
1641. in qu. with an answer of the same author to some frivolous objections
against the government of the Church.
9. etc. All which Books, (the five first excepted) Sermons, and Apolgie, are
printed in one Vol. in fol -- Land. 1609. with an abstract of his life set
before them (but full of faults) written by Don. Featly. Besides them he has
left behind him these MSS, which, as I conceive are not yet printed, viz.

A paraphrastical exposition of the Epistles and Gospels throughout the whole
Year.

A continuate exposition of the Creed, Lords prayer, and 10 Commandments.

Commentary upon the Epistle to the Galathians.

Com. on the Epist. of St. Peter. -- At length this worthy prelate paying his
last debt to nature at Monkton-Farley 23. Sept. in Fifteen hundred seventy and
one, was buried almost in the middle of the Choire of his Cathedral at
Salisbury. At which time Giles Laurence Archdeacon of Wilts. preached the
funeral Sermon, and Will. Holcot of Buckland in Berks. (formerly a
Lay-preacher) administered at the funeral. See more of Joh. Jewels works in
Job. Garbrand under the Year 1589.

Tuderley in Hampshire, and, when at ripe years, was educated in all kind of
learning and virtue in this H. Holland in lib. cui tit, est Herologia Anglica,
etc. edit. in fol. 1620. p. 195.
University, but whether in Brasenose or Alls. Coll. as some surmise, I find
not. What Degrees he took it does not appear, or whether he was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences, because in the latter end of Hen. 8. and all the time
of K. Ed. 6. the public registers are very imperfect. In the time of Hen. 8.
he was Chaplain to Anna Bulleyne, by whose means he had some preferment in the
Church; and in the beginning of Qu. Mary, he among several zealous Protestants
went to Frankfort in voluntary exile; where, being in great esteem with the
English congregation wrote,

Lections and Homelies on St. Paul's Epistles -- In A brief discourse of the
Troubles began at Frankfort in Germany, etc. printed 1575. you will find several
of his discourses, and answers to the objections of Dr. Rob. Horn concerning
matters of discipline and worship. See there in p. 128. 129. etc. 146. 147.
etc. After his return into England, he had a hand in the third edition of the
English Liturgy, in 1559, and was chosen one of the Disputants against the R.
Cath Bishops. So that in his discourses showing himself a deep Divine, the Qu.
thereupon had so great an esteem for him, that she offered him the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, but he refused it, as about the same time he did
the Mastership of the Hospital called the Savoy in the Strand near to London,
affirming that he could live plentifully on the preaching of the Gospel without
either. So that whether he had any spiritualities of note conferred on him, is
yet doubtful, he being much delighted in traveling to and fro to preach the
word of God in those places, where he thought it was wanting. His life was
spent in celebacy, as it became a true Theologist, and therefore the better
esteemed by the Queen, who had no great affection for such Priests that were
married. He was conducted by death to the habitation prepared for old age, in
Fifteen hundred seventy and one, Joh. Parkhurst in Epigram. juvenil. Land.
1573. p. 61.
of his acquaintance. Nominis unatui est Album, caput altera pars est.
Quadrant in mores scilicet ista tuos.
Candidius nihil esse potest nam moribus is it is:
Dulce vocant omnes te lepidumque caput.


THOMAS KEY or Cay, whose name, and the same Woodsome or Wodersome and
elsewhere in Yorkshire; yet I cannot say that this our Author was born there,
because the statutes of Allsouls Coll. (of which he was Fellow) oblige the
society to choose their Members from the Province of Canterbury. His Relations
therefore having in his time (and perhaps before) lived in Lincolnshire, I
shall appoint that County for his native place, but the house of Learning in
Oxon. of which he was originally a student, I cannot assign, unless University
Coll. Howsoever it is, sure I am, that he was in 1525 elected Fellow of Alls.
Coll being then about 3 years standing in the University, where running through
the several Classes of Logic and Philosophy, took the Degrees in Arts, and
made so great a proficiency in his studies, that he became an eminent Latinist,
Grecian, Poet and Orator, excellent also for all kind of worth, and at length
antiquitatum nostratium plane helluo, as one Ric-Stanyhurst in praelat ad
Harmon, in Porphir. constitutiones -- Edit. 1570.
is pleased to style him. In the Year 1534 he was unanimously chosen Scribe or
Registrary of the University, being then esteemed most worthy of that place,
because he had a command of his tongue and pen: For in his time, and long
before, it was commonly the Registraries office to speech it before, and write
Epistles (as the Orator does now) to, great personages. But as he was excellent
in those matters, so to the contrary in the performance of his Registraries
place. For whether it was upon a foresight of the utter ruin of the University,
which was intended, as he thought, by the Reformers, (for he lived in the
changeable times of Religion) or his being besotted with a certain crime, which
he could not avoid till old age cured it, he became so careless in committing
the acts of congregation and convocation to writing, that diverse articles being
publicly put up against him by the Masters, he was deprived of that place in
1552, and Will. Standish M. of A. of Magd. Coll. succeeded by virtue of the
Kings Letters, sent to the University in Oct. 1543 for the next reversion of
that office. In 1559 he was made Prebendary of Stratton in the Church of Sarum,
by virtue of the Queens Letters, dated in Dec. the same year, in 1561 he was
elected the Head or Master of Univ. Coll. (to which he was afterward a
considerable benefactor) and upon the death of Pet. Vannes, (whom I shall anon
mention) which happened in the beginning of 1563 he became Rector of the rich
Church of Tredington in the County and Dioc. of Worcester: All which he kept to
his dying day. He has written.

Assertio antiquitatis Oxoniensis Academiae. Finished on the first of Sept.
1566, as a copy thereof under his own hand in my possession, attesteth. Which
book being written within the space of seven days, was by him presented in MS.
to Qu. Elizab. at her being entertained by the University in the said month of
Sept. A copy of which book coming into the hands of Joh. Cay Doctor of Physic
of Cambridge, he wrote an answer to it in a book entit. De antiquitate
Cantabrigiensis Academiae, and were both by him published (contrary to the
knowledge of our Author Cay of Oxon) under the name of Londinensis -- Land.
1568. in oct. and there again under the name of Joh. Cains an. 1574 in qu.
Whereupon our Author being unwilling to sit down, and see himself so unworthily
dealt withal, wrote a reply soon after the first edition of his Assertio was
printed, bearing this title.

Examen judicii Cantabrigiensis cujusdam, qui se Londinensem dicit, nuper de
origin utriusque Academiae Lati. Before which is written an Apology for
himself why he wrote his Assertio, and why the said Reply. But this book being
never printed, there only went about from hand to hand some MS. Copies of it;
one of them Mr. Tho. Allen of Glocester-hall, and another Mr. Miles Windsore of
Corp. Chapter Coll. had in their respective libraries. From one of which Copies, I
remember formerly I took some notes, being then in other hands, but where
either of those Copies are now, in truth I cannot tell. Our Author Th. Key
translated from Lat. into English Erasmus his Paraphrase on St. Mark, being
that part of the New Test. which he was desired to translate by Qu. Catherine
Pare. Also from English into Lat. The Sermons of Dr. Jo. Longland Bishop of
Lincoln; from Greek into Lat. Aristotle's book De mirabilibus mundi, dedicated
to the Archbishop of Canterbury; Euripides his Tragedies, and the third oration
of Isocrates, called Nicocles; with other things which I have not yet seen. At
length arriving to the age of Man, he concluded his last day in his Lodgings in
Univers. Coll. about the middle of the month of May in Fifteen hundred seventy
and two, Peter in the East, near to, and within, the East gate of the City of
Oxon. Over his grave, tho there was never any Epitaph to celebrate his memory,
yet certain noted Joh. Leland in Illustr, and eruditorum in Angl. Virorum
Encomiis, etc. Land. 1589. p. 95. and in Epigram. Job. Parkhursti Land. 1573.
p. 79. and 121.
Poets of his time have done it in their respective works, by Encomia's and
Epigrams, to which I refer the curious reader, as they are cited in the margin.
As for Pet. Vannes, whom I have beforementioned, he was the Son of Steph. de
Vannes of the City of Luca in Italy, was brought into England by Andrew
Ammonius his Mothers brother, and made Secretary of the Latin tongue to K. Hen.
8. who sent him to Rome with Steph. Gardener and others, to solicit the Pope
for a divorce from Qu. Catherine. In the Year 1527. March 5. he was made
Prebendary of South Grantham in the Church of Sarum, upon the resignation of
one Will. Burbanke, and in 1529. Dec. 4. Preb. of Bedwyn in the same Church, on
the resignation of Thom. Winter. In 1534 he was made Archdeacon of Worcester in
the place of Dr. Will. Cleybroke deceased, and the same year Feb. 25. was
admitted Preb. of Bool in the Church of York. In Feb. 1539, he, by virtue of
the Kings Letters, became Dean of Salisbury, but whether in the place of
Reymund Pade who obtained that Deanery in Januar. 1522. I cannot tell, nor do I
know yet to the contrary, but that he was deprived of that Dignity in the
beginning of the Reign of K. Edw. 6. because that one Tho. Cole is said In A
brief discourse of the troubles began at Frankford, etc. printed 1575. qu.
to be Dean of Salisbury in that Kings time. Howsoever it is, sure I am that
Vannes was Dean in the time of Qu. Mary, and beginning of Qu. Elizabeth, and
that several years before, viz. in 1543. March 12. he was made Preb. of Shipton
(Shipton under wood) in the said Chapter of Sarum, on the death of Dr. Joh. London,
that in 1545 he occurs one of the Canons of the Coll. of K. Hen. 8. at Oxon,
and soon after Rector of Tredington in the Dioc. of Worcester. On the sixth day
of May 1563 he resigned his Deanery of Salisbury, and in few days after died
either in London or Westminster, leaving then all his wealth to his heir called
Benedict Hudson alias Vannes. This Peter Vannes being well known to Joh.
Leland, he is therefore by him In Encomiis, etc. ut supra, p. 27.
numbered among the famous Men living in the Reign of K. Hen. 8. He was also
much in favor with Cardinal Wolsey, to whom he wrote diverse letters while he
continued in Rome an. 1528 giving him an account of the affairs of that place,
and how matters went relating to the divorce between K. H. 8. and Qu. Catherine.

JOHN CLEMENT had his original education in Tho. More for the pregnant parts
that were visible in him, was by him appointed to be tutor to his Children, and
afterward to Margaret his Daughter. About the Year 1519 he settled in Corp.
Chapter Coll. being about that time constituted Vide Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon.
lib 2 p. 36 (...).
by Card. Wolsey his Rhetoric reader in the University, and afterward that of
Greek; both which he performed with great applause to the benefit of the
Academians. In the Reign of K. Ed. 6. he being then one of the Coll. of
Physicians at London, he left his native Country for Religion sake, and then,
if I mistake not, he took the Degree of Doctor of Physic beyond the Seas.
Afterward, returning in the time of Qu. Mary, he practiced his faculty with
good success in Essex near London, but when Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown, and
a reformation of Religion followed, he left England once more, and spent the
remainder of his days beyond the Seas. He has written,

Epigrammatum and aliorum carminum, lib. 1. And did translate from Gr. into Lat
(1) The Epistles of Greg. Nazian. (2) The Homelies of Nicephorus Calixtus of
the Greek Saints. (3) The Epistles of Pope Celestin the first, to Cyrill Bishop
of Alexandria, besides other matters which I have not yet seen. He died at
Mechlin in Brahant (the place wherein he had lived several years, and had
practiced his faculty) on the first day of July in Fifteen hundred seventy and
two, (...) De illustr. Angl. Script. at 16 nu. 1018.
buried near to the tabernacle in St. Rumbolds Church there, and close to the
grave of his sometimes beloved Wife Margaret, who died 6. July 1570, I mean
that Margaret, on whose Marriage with Jo. Clement, the Antiquarian (...) Leland
ut sup. in Encom. Troph. Epithalamus. etc. p. 38.
Poet has bestowed a Song.

THOMAS HARDYNG was born at Beconton in Devonsh educated in Wykehams School
near Winchester, became true and perpetual Fellow of New Coll. (after he had
served two years of probation) an. 1536, took the Degrees in Arts, that of
Master being completed in 1542, at which time being esteemed a knowing Person
in the Tongues, he was by the favor of K. Hen. 8. made Hebrew Professor of the
University, and shortly after became Chaplain to Hen. Gray Marquess of
Dorchester, afterward Duke of Suffolk. In the Reign of Ed. 6. he was a
Protestant, and seemed forward See more at large concerning that matter in
Laur. Hum^^^^ book (...) edit. 1573. p. 138. 139.
for a reformation, but after his death and Q^. Mary's settlement in the
throne, he wheeled about, became Prebendary of Winchester, proceeded in
Divinity, and on the 17. Jul. 1555 was made Treasurer of the Church of
Salisbury, in the place of Rich. Arche. After Qu. Elizabeth had for some time
swayed the Scepter, he was deprived of his Treasureship, and Tho. Lancaster
(the same Person, I think, who had been deprived of the Bishopric of Kildare
in the Reign of Queen Mary for being married) was put into it in the beginning
of Jan. 1559. So that our Author Hardyng relinquishing his other
spiritualities, (all matters being then involved in controversies) he upon
pretense of some danger that was likely to ensue, went beyond the Seas to
Brabant, where settling at Lovaine, he became the target of Popery, and a
zealous assertor of his Religion in writing these Books following.

An answer to Mr. Jewels challenge. Lov. 1564. qu. Whereupon Jewel came out
with a Reply.

Rejoinder to Mr. Jewels reply: By perusing whereof the discreet and diligent
reader may easily see the answer to his insolent challenge justified, and his
objections against the Mass, etc. Antwerp. 1566. in a thick qu.

Another rejoinder to Mr. Jewels reply against the sacrifice of the Mass. Lov.
1567. qu.

Confutation of a book called An Apology of the Church of England. Ant. 1563.
65. qu. Which Apology being written by Mr. Jewel, he came out with his
Defense, as I have before told you.

Detection of errors and lies in Mr. Jewels Book called A Defense of the
Apology, etc. Lov. 1564.

Answer touching certain untruths which Mr. Jo. Jewel charged him with, in
his late Sermon at Paul's cross, 8. Jul. 1565. Antw. 26. Jul. 1565 in qu. and
oct. with other things which I have not yet seen. Most of the before mentioned
books, were by his Countryman Will. Rainolds turned into Latin, but money being
wanting, their publication was therefore hindered. This learned Man Dr. Hardyng
died at Lovaine in the sixtieth Year of his Age, or thereabouts, Gertrude
there, on the 16 day of September. the same year. Soon after was a monument with
a large inscription thereon, set over his grave; a Copy of which I have In Jo.
Pits. ut sup. aet. 16. nu. 1019.
seen, as also a great Encomium of him by one Jo. Leland in Encom. ut sup p. ^3
vide etiam in Cyg. Cant. script. per eund. Lelandum.
who well knew him, which, for brevity sake, I shall now omit.

Hayles a younger Son of Tho. Hales of Halesplace in Halden in Kent, was born
in that County, and commonly called Club-foot Hales, because in his younger
days he had got that deformity by a wound from his own dagger at the bottom of
his foot. This Person being very much addicted to Letters from his childhood,
was sent to this University for a time, but to what Coll. unless to that of
Brasnose (wherein several of his Surname and time studied) I know not. Yet so
it was that he having a happy memory, accompanied with incredible industry,
became admirably well skilled in the Lat. Greek, and Hebrew tongues, and at
length in the municipal Laws, and in Antiquities; which made him admired by all
ingenious Men of his time. In the Reign of K. Hen. 8. he was Clerk of the
Hemper for several years, obtained a fair estate in Warwickshire and elsewhere
upon the dissolution of Monasteries and Chantries, founded a Free School at
Coventry, and for the use of the youth to be taught there, did write,

Introductiones ad Grammaticam. -- partly in Engl. and partly in Latin. He wrote
also,

High way to Nobility. Land. in qu. And about that time translated into
English Precepts for the preservation of good health. Land. 1543. oct. written
by Plutarch. When Qu. Mary came to the Crown he fled beyond Sea as a voluntary
Exile, and settling at Frankfort in Germany we find him a zealous Man for the
uniting of the Exiles there in peace. See more in a book entit. A brief
discourse of the troubles at Frankford in Germany. printed 1575. in qu. p. 44.
45. etc. 92. etc. When Qu. Elizabeth succeeded he returned, and the first thing
that made him then to be noted was,

An Oration to Qu. Eliz. at her first entrance to her Reign, an. 1558. -- It
was not spoken, but delivered in writing to her by a certain noble Man. The
beginning of it is, Albeit there be innumerable gifts, etc.

He also wrote a little book in favor of the house of Suffolk, especially of
the Children of Edw. Seymour Earl of Hertford, eldest Son of Edward Duke of
Somerset, who was married to the Lady Cath. Gray, Dau. of Hen. Duke of Suff.
(of near alliance in blood to the Queen) in his house in Chanon row within the
City of Westminster, in Oct. 1560. The effect of which, was to derive the title
of the Crown of England, in case Qu. Eliz. should die without issue, to the
house of Suffolk. This Marriage, notwithstanding the Archb. of Cant. did by his
sentence pronounce unlawful, yet our Author Hales, who was esteemed a Man very
opiniotive, tho otherwise very learned, did maintain in the said book that
their sole consent did legitimate their conjunction. Which pamphlet flying
abroad, came straight way to the Court: Whereupon the Queen and the Nobles
being highly offended, the Author was quickly discovered, and forthwith
imprisoned in the Tower of London. Soon after Sir Nich. Bacon then Lord Keeper
was presumed to have had a finger in it, for which he was like to have lost his
office, if Sir Ant. Brown who had been L. Chapter Justice of the Common Pleas in
Qu. Mary's time, would have accepted of it; which her Majesty offered to him,
and the Earl of Leycester earnestly exhorted him to take it; but he refused it,
for that he was of a different Religion from the State; and so Sir Nic. Bacon
remained in his place, at the great instance of Sir Will. Cecill, (afterward
L. Treasurer) who, tho he was to be privy to the said book, yet was the matter
so wisely laid upon Hales and Bacon, that Sir Will. was kept free, thereby to
have the more authority and grace to procure the others pardon, as he did. Soon
after Jo. Lesley Bishop of Ross, a great creature of Mary Queen of Scots, did
answer that Book, for which he got the good will of many, tho, of others, not.
As for our Author Hales, he gave way to fate on the fifth of the calends of
January in Fifteen hundred seventy and two; Peter's poor in London. He died
without issue, so that his estate which chiefly laid in Warwickshire, of which
his principal house in Coventry, called Hales place, otherwise the White Friars
was part, went to John, Son of his Brother Christopher Hales, (sometimes also
an Exile at Frankfort) whose posterity does remain there to this day.

ELIZE HEYWOOD sometimes written Ellis Heewood, Job. Heywood the famous
Epigrammatist, was born in London, and by the indulgence of his Father was
carefully educated in juvenile learning in that City, and in Academical in
Oxon. In 1547 he was elected Probationer-Fellow of Allsouls Coll. where
spending some time in Logicals and Philosophicals, he applied his genie to the
study of the Laws, in which faculty he took one degree, an. 1552, being the
sixth year of K. Ed. 6. Afterward he traveled into France and Italy,
continued for some time at Florence, being patronized by Card Pole; and became
such an exact Master of the Italian tongue, that he wrote a book in that
Language entitled,

Il Moro, lib. 2. Fiorenz. 1556 in octavo. This book which is dedicated to the
said Cardinal contains a discourse, fancied to be in the house of Sir Tho. More
sometimes L. Chanc. of England, and in consolation with him. Besides this book,
he wrote, as it is said, other things in Italian, or in Lat. or in his mother
tongue, which being printed beyond the Sea, we seldom or never see them in
these parts. About that time our Author receiving instructions concerning
matters of faith from an English Man called Hall, he went into the Low
Countries, and at Antwerp performed the office of Preacher, and Prefectship of
the spirit. Thence he went to Lovaine, where he died in the twelfth year, after
his ingress into the society of Jesus; Jasper, bred also in Oxford, and leaving
the Nation for Religion sake, entered himself into the said Society, as I shall
tell you under the Year 1597. number. 295.

NICHOLAS GRIMALD, or Grimoald received his Huntingdonshire, and his first
Academical education in Christ's Coll. in Cambridge, where taking the Degree of
Bach. of Arts, went to Oxon, and was incorporated there in the said Degree in
Apr. 1542. In the next month he was chosen Probationer Fellow of Merton Coll.
he being then in the 23 year of his age. In 1544 he proceeded in Arts, and 1547
when the Coll. of King Hen. 8. was to be settled and replenished with Students,
he was put in there as a Senior, or Theologist, (accounted then only honorary)
and the rather for this reason, because he about that time, did read a public
Lecture to the Academians in the large refectory of that place. All that I have
yet seen of his writings are these.

Archipropheta, Tragedia, jam recens in lucem edita. Colon. 1548. in oct.

Oration ad Pontifices, Londini in aede Paulina, an. 1553. 17. Id. Apr. in
Synodo publica. Land. 1583. oct.

In P. V. Maronis quatuor libros Georgicorum in oratione soluta paraphrasis
elegantissima, Oxonii in Aede Christi, 2. Ed. 6. confecta. Land. 1591. oct.

Fama, com.

Troilus Chauceri, com. -- with several such like things, which you may see in
In cent. 8. nu. 99.
Baleus, who also tells In lib. suo MS. De Scriptoribus Anglicis, inter cod.
MS. Seldom. in bib. Bed. p. 135. b.
us elsewhere that he wrote in English a Book intit. Vox. populi; or, The
Peoples complaint, etc. which was against Rectors, Vicars, Archdeacons, Deans,
etc. for living remote from their Flocks, and for not performing the duty
belonging to their respective offices. He has also diverse Lat. and English
copies of verses, occasionally printed before, and in commendation of, other
Men's works; and has also translated from Lat. Clar. 1573.
into English, Cicero's three books of duties to Marcus his Son. Land. 1558.
oct. with other things from Greek. He was in great esteem among Men in the
fifteenth year of Qu. Elizabeth.

Monmouthshire Man born, as it seems, and mostly educated in Oxon: Afterward
being a forward and zealous Man for the R. Cath. Religion at London (where he
had got some employment) was brought into trouble by Dr. Grindal Bishop of that
place. So that being forced to fly, he went beyond the Sea, and settled for a
time at Antwerp: where to show his zeal for the cause, he translated a Book
from Lat. into English, entit. Certain tables set forth by Will Bishop of
Rurimund in Gelderland, wherein is detected and made manifest the doting
dangerous doctrine, and heinous heresies of the rash rablement of the
heretics. This book was by Lew. Evans entit.

The betraying of the beastl;iness of the Heretics, etc. Antw. 1565 in tw.
Afterward the said Evans being reconciled to the Chapter of England by some of his
friends; did, to show his zeal for the love he had to it, write and publish a
book as full of ill language against the Roman Catholics, as the other was as
full of good for them, entitled.

The Castle of Christianity, detecting the long erring estate, as well of the
Romans Church, as of the Bishop of Rome. Land. 1568. oct. Which being dedicated
to Queen Elizab. he says in his Epistle to her, that he himself had once drank
of the puddle of ignorance, of the mud of idolatry, of the pond of
superstition, etc. whereupon great distaste being taken by the R. Catholics,
the common report flew abroad by their endeavors, that he was gone over again
to the Church of Rome, in which being settled, he died in great ease and
content. These reports being often told to Evans while he was in Oxon, by the
learnedest there, he soon after published a book entit.

The hateful hypocrisy and rebellion of Romish Prelates. Land. 1570 in tw. to
which he added these two treatises following:

A view of certain rebellions and their ends.

Four paradoxes. First a Bishop and a Minister is all one. (2) A Bishop, etc.
-- Afterward, if I mistake not, our Author Evans was a Schoolmaster, and was
the same Person, I think, that revised and increased with phrases and necessary
additions, Clar. 1573.
A short dictionary for young beginners, compiled at first by John Withals, and
by him published at Land. 1566. in qu. but when the additions of Evans came
out, I find not. Afterward the said Dictionary was augmented with more than
600 rythmical verses (whereof many are proverbial) by Abr. Flemmyng a native of
London, printed at Land. 1594 qu. In my travels and searches I find one Lew.
Evans a Flintshire Man, to be a Student of Chapter Chapter in the time of Ed. 6. and to
have taken the Degrees in Arts, (that of Master being completed 1557) but this
Person, I presume, is not the Author, because the Author does not style himself
in his Books Bach. or Master of Arts. Another Lew. Evans a Brecknockshire Man,
became Fellow of Oriel C. an. 1566, Mast. of Arts 1570 and resigned his
Fellowship 1577. A third, who was a Monmouehshire Man, was matriculated as a
Member of Gloc. hall, 1574, aged 28. And a fourth also I find to be a Minister
of God's word, who in the 31 year of his age, or more, was matric as a member
of the same Hall, and as a Native of Monmouthshire, an. 1581. and in 1585 took
the Degrees. of M. of A. Whether either of these was the Author beforementioned, is
to me as yet doubtful, or whether the same with Lew. Evans, who, by the favor
of Dr. Piers B. of Sarum became Prebend of Warmister, in that Church, an. 1583,
(which he resigned in May 1598) I cannot tell: or whether the same with Lew.
Evans Clerk, Parson of Westmeane in Hampshire, who died there, about the
beginning of 1601, Winchester.

JOHN PARKHURST Son of George Parkhurst, was born at Guildford in Surrey, sent,
when very young, to Oxon, where he was educated in Grammar learning in the
School joining to Magd. Coll. common gate, under the famous Vide in Epigram.
Jo. Parkhurst. p. 28.
Mr. Thom. Robertson, was elected Probationer Fellow of Merton Coll. in 1529,
and three years after proceeding in Arts, entered into holy orders, tho better
then for poetry and oratory, than Divinity. At length he became Rector of the
rich Church of Cleve (called by some Bishops Cleve) in Glocestershire, where he
did a great deal of good by his hospitality and charity. After the death of K.
Ed. 6. he left all for Religion sake, and went into voluntary exile to Zurich,
where remaining till the death of Qu. Mary, not without great dangers and
afflictions, returned when Qu. Eliz. succeeded, and was by her made Bishop of
Norwych: To which See being elected 13. Apr. was consecrated on the first of
Sept. and installed by John Salisbury Dean of that Church, 27 of the same
month, an. 1560, and about six years after was made D. of D. He has written
and published,

Epigrammata in mortem duorum fratrum Suffolciensium, Caroli and Henrici
Brandon. Land. 1552. qu. They were the Sons of Charles Brandon Duke of
Suffolk, and died of the sweating sickness. Some of which Epigrams were
afterward published in his Ludicra, which I am now to mention.

Ludicra sive Epigrammata juvenilia. Land. 1573. qu. Which book tho written in
his younger days, and contains therein more obscurity than the Epigrams of
Martial (as some say, tho I my self cannot perceive it) yet while he was Bishop
he must needs have it printed, alleging that he would not be like Heliodorus
to lose his Bishopric for it. He also viewed, took pains about, and published
John Shepreve his Dislicks on the New Test. and added thereunto of his own,

Epigrammata Seria. Land. 1560. oct. Most of which seem to be taken from his
former book, while it remained in MS. See more in Job. Shepreve, under the Year
1542. At length this Bishop yielded up his last breath in Fifteen hundred
seaventy and four, 157^.
and was buried in the body or middle Isle of the Cath. Chapter at Norwych. Over
his grave was soon after a fair monument of marble raised between two pillars
on the S. side of the said middle Isle: on which Mon. was his proportion
engraven on brass; with a gown and square cap on, holding his hands together in
a praying posture, with this inscription engraven on brass also, but taken away
in the civil war. Johannes Parkhurstus Theologiae professor, Gylfordiae natus,
Oxoniae educatus, temporibus Mariae Reginae pro nitida conscientia Tigurinae
vixit exul voluntarius. Postea praesul factus, sanctissime hanc rexit ecclesiam
16 annis, and mortuus est secundo die Februarii, an. 1574. aetatis suae 63.
Another inscription which is on one of the said pillars runs thus. Viro bono,
docto ac pio Johanni Parkhursto Episcopo vigilantissimo, Georgius Gardener
posuit hoc. Which George The said Dr. Gardener was buried on the S. side of the
South isle of the Cath. Chapter of Norwych; over whose grave was this inscription
put in an arch of the wall. Georgius Gardener Barvici natus, Cantabrig^e (...)
primo minor (...), 2o Praebendarius, 3o Archidiac. (...). and demum 28. Nov.
an. 1573 factus est sacellanus D. Regine and Decanus huj^^ Ecclesiae, in quo
loco per 16 annos arexit. He died in winter time, 1589.
Gardener, who was D. of D. was installed Dean of Norwych 24. Dec. 1573, in the
place of John Salisbury deceased. Ralf Gualter, Father and Son, both of Zurich,
and entirely beloved of this our Author Parkhurst have written Edit, Tiguri
1576. in qu.
Epiceds on his death; which, if they could be procured, (being very scarce)
might satisfy a curious reader concerning some actions of him the said
Parkhurst.

LEONARD DIGGES second Son of James Digges Digges Court in the Parish of Berham
in Kent, by Philippa his second Wife Daughter of John Engham of Chart in the
said County, was born in the Province of Kent, particularly, as it seems, at
Digges Court, educated for a time in this University, (but in what house,
unless in Univ. Coll. I know not) where laying a foundation of greater
learning, departed without a Degree, and afterward became a most excellent
Mathematician, a skilful Architect, and a most expert surveyour of Land. At
length lest it should be thought that he studied only for himself, and not for
the benefit of others, he published a book entit.

Tectonicon: Briefly showing the exact measuring, and speedy reckoning of all
manner of lands, squares, timber, stones, steeples, etc. Land. 1556. qu.
Augmented, and published again by his Son Tho. Digges -- Land. 1592. qu.

Printed there again 1647 qu. Our Author Leon. Digges wrote also,

A Geometrical practical treatise named Pantometria, in 3. books. -- Which
being attempted in his younger years, his said Son Thomas supplied such parts
of it after his death, as were left obscure and imperfect, adjoining thereunto,
A discourse Geometrical of the five regular and Platonical bodies, containing
sundry Theorical and Practical propositions arising by mutual conference of
these solides, Inscription, Circumscription, and Transformation. Land. 1591.
fol.

Prognostication everlasting, of right good effect: or, choice rules to judge
the weather by the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. Land. 1555 -- 56. and 64 qu.
corrected and augmented by his said Son Thomas, with diverse general tables and
many compendious rules -- Land. 1592. qu. what else he wrote, Clar. 1574.
I find not, nor certainly when he died, unless about the Year Fifteen hundred
seventy and four, or whether his death was at Eltham in Kent, or at another
place. There is some memory of him and his Family (in whose veins hereditary
learning does seem to run) on a Monument in Chilham Church in Kent, not to show
that he was buried there, but to show the genealogy of his Family, set up by
his Grandson Dudley Digges (of whom I shall make mention in 1638) which being
too long for this place, I shall pass it by at present for brevity sake.

Willeius, which is the reason why some call him Willey, was a Western Man
born, educated in Grammar learning in Wykehams School near to Winchester, and
in Academical for a time, in his Coll. at Oxon, but before he took a Degree, or
was made Fellow, he left the University, and traveled into France, Germany and
Italy; where spending some years in several Universities, returned an
accomplished Gentleman: And being noted for his admirable dexterity, and
honorable advance in the Latin Empire, as Joh. Brownswerd was at the same
time, wrote and published,

Land. 1573. oct.
Poematum liber ad Gul. Baronem Burghleium. De re poetica disputatio. In suorum
poemat. Librum Scholia.
With other things, as it is probable, but such I have not yet seen. In the Year
1574 Apr. 24. he by the name and title of Rich. Wills Master of Arts of the
University of Mentz in Bavaria, supplicated the ven. congregation of Regents
that he might be incorporated into the same Degree in this University; but the
said Regents suspecting his opinions, did grant his desire conditionally. (1)
That he produce a testimony of his creation under the seal of the University of
Mentz. (2) That he render a testimony of his faith before the Vicechanc. Clar.
1574.
and Proctors, and (3) That he acknowledge the Queen to be his legitimate
Governess, or Monarch of all England, etc. whether he performed these
conditions, or was really incorporated, appears not in any of the registers.

Joh. Taverner of Brisley in Norfolk, was born at Brisley, or else in that
County, in the Year 1505, descended from an ancient Family of his name living
sometimes at North Elmham near to Brisley beforementioned, educated for a time
in Logic in Bennet Coll. in Cambridge, but before he had consummated an year
and an half there, did, with others of that University go to Oxon, for
preferment about the same time that Card. Wolsey did begin his Coll. there. At
length being admitted one of the Junior Canons of that Coll. he took the Degree
of Bach. of Arts in the Year 1529 and about that time obtaining a competent
knowledge in Philosophy, the Greek tongue and Divinity, left Oxon some time
before the said Coll. came into the Kings hands by Wolseys fall, and forthwith
went to an Inn of Chancery near London called Staire Inn, otherwise Strond Inn,
(pulled down when Edw. D. of Somerset built Somerset house in the Strond or
Strand) and thence to the Inner Temple (for before his time and some years,
after, students were not admitted into the Inns of Court, before they had read
the ground of Law in one of the Inns of Chancery) where his humor was to quote
the Law in Greek, when he read any thing thereof. In 1534 he went to the Court,
and was there taken into the attendance of Tho. Cromwell then Principal
Secretary to K. Hen. 8. by whose commendation, he was afterward made by the
said King one of the Clerks of the Signet in ordinary, an. 1537. Which place he
kept till the first of Q. Mary, having been in good repute not only with K.
Hen. 8. but also with K. Edw. 6. and most of all with Edw. Duke of Somerset
Lord Protector. In 1552, he, tho a mere Layman, obtained by the name of Rich.
Taverner Master of Arts (being Master of Arts of both the Universities) a
special license subscribed by K. Ed. 6. to Preach in any place of his
dominions, and the more for this reason because the scarcity and slackness of
Preachers was so great, that some of the Kings Chaplains were appointed to ride
circuit about the Kingdom to preach to the People, especially against Popery. I
have been informed by some notes of him, written by his Franc. Taverner of
Hexton in Hertfordsh. Esquire. in a fol. MS. by him written, an. 1636. entit. The
genealogy of the family of the Taverners of Northelmham in Norfolk,
faithfully collected out of records and private evidence, etc.
Grandson, that he preached before the King at Court, and in some public
places in the Kingdom, wearing a velvet bonnet or round cap, a damask gown, and
a chain of gold about his neck; in which habit he was seen, and heard,
preaching several times in St. Mary's Church in Oxon. in the beginning of Qu.
Eliz. In like manner other Lay-Gentlemen, such that had been educated in the
Universities, did either preach, or else write books concerning controversies
in Religion, or else make translations from Divinity books. Will. Holcot of
Buckland in Berks. Esquire; (whom I have mentioned in Joh. Jewel) sometimes of
Univ. Coll. was often seen in the same habit in Pulpits in London, and in his
own Country, and would often give the printed Catechismes in the book of
Common Prayer to Children as he walked in London streets to learn without book,
and would after call out those children and examine them, and for encouragement
would give, especially to the poorer sort of them, money, silk points,
ribbands, etc. Sir Tho. More also, after he was called to the bar in Lincolns
Inn, did for a considerable time read a public Lecture out of St. Austin De
civitate Dei, in the Church of St. Laurence in the Old Jewrie, to which the
learneder sort in the City of London would resort. Afterward also, when he was
L. Chanc. of England, he wrote treatises against the Lutherans, and when at home
on Sundays he would sit in the choir in a surplice and sing service. But to
return; as for our Author Rich. Taverner, he, for security sake when Qu. Mary
came to the Crown, did receede to his house called Norbiton hall in Surrey,
where he mostly continued all her Reign. But when Qu. Elizab. succeeded, he
presented to her a gratulatory Epistle in Latin; by which being made more known
to her than formerly, she had so great respect for, and confidence in, him,
that she not only offered to him the Degree of Knighthood, but put him into the
commission of peace for the County of Oxon, (wherein he had several manors
that had belonged to religious houses) entrusted him with a considerable share
of the concerns thereof, and in the 12 Year of her Reign, Dom. 1569 made him
High Sherriff of the said County. In which office he appeared in St. Mary's
Pulpit with his sword by his side (as it is said) and a chain of gold hanging
about his neck and preached to the Scholars a Sermon (there being then a great
scarcity of Divines in the University) beginning thus. Arriving at the mount of
St. Mary's, in the stony St. Mary's Pulpit was then of fine carved Ashler
stone, joining to the upper pillar of the South side of the body of the Church:
which Pulpit was taken away when Dr. Joh. Owen was Vicechanc. about 1654, and a
framed pulpit of wood was set on the pedestall that upheld the frame of stone.
stage where I now stand, I have brought you some five biskets, baked in the
oven of charity, carefully conserved for the chickens of the Church, the
sparrows of the spirit, and the sweet swallows of salvation, etc. Which way of
preaching was then mostly in fashion, and commended by the generality of
Scholars. This Rich. Taverner has written and published,

The sum or pith of the 150 Psalms of David, reduced into a form of prayers
and meditations, with other certain godly orisons, etc. Land. 1539. oct.

Recognition or correction of the Bible after the best exemplars. Land. 1539
fol. Allowed to be publicly read in Churches in the English tongue, with an
Epist. dedic. to the King, whose servant Taverner then was. But after the death
of the Lord Cromwell the Kings Secretary, an. 1540, the Bishops caused the
Printers of the Bible in the Engl. tongue to be imprisoned and punished, and
this our Author for his labors was committed Prisoner to the Tower of London;
but he so well acquitted himself, that he was shortly after released, and
restored to his place in Court and in the Kings favor.

The Epistles and Gospels, with a brief postill upon the same, from Advent to
Low Sunday (which is the Winter part) drawn forth by diverse learned Men for the
singular commodity of all good Christian Persons, and namely of Priests and
Curats. Land 1540. qu.

The Epist. and Gosp. with a brief postill upon the same, from after Easther
till Advent (which is the summer part) set. forth, etc. Land. 1540. qu.

Fruit of faith, containing all the prayers of the holy Fathers, Patriarks,
Prophets, Judges, Kings, renowned Men, and Women in the Old and New Test. Land.
1582. in tw. Various Poems in Latin and English.

Hortus sapientiae. lib. 2. Sententiarum flores. In Catonis disticha. lib. 4.
In Mimum publianum. Catechismus fidei. These are mentioned by Jo. Bale In cent.
8. number. 96.
but I have not yet seen any of them, and therefore I cannot tell you whether
they are in Engl. or Lat.

He also translated from Lat. into English (1) Rob. Capito (Grosthead) his
prayers on the Psalms. Land. 1539. oct. (2) Confession of the Germans
exhibited to the Emperor Charles 5. in the Council of Augusta in the Year
1530, to which is added, The Apology of Melancton of the said confession.
Land. 1536 in oct. Translated at the command of the Lord Cromwell Lord Privy
Seal, (3) Common places of Scripture orderly and after a compendious form of
teaching, etc. Land. 1577. oct. Written by Erasmus Sarcerius (4) An
introduction to a Christian concord and unity in matters of Religion.
Translated from Erasm. Roterd. De sarcienda ecclesiae concordia. Which
translation was done by our Author upon K. Hen. the eighth, his coming into the
Parliament house an. 1545, at which time he exhorted the members thereof (of
which number R. Taverner our Author was one) to charity, unity and concord. At
length after he had lived beyond the age of Man, and had been a zealous
promoter of reformation and the Protestant Religion, laid down his head in
peace, and willingly resigned up his last breath at Woodeaton near to, and in
the County of, Oxford, in the mannour-house now standing there, (which he did
build from the ground, about 1544) on the 14 day of July in Fifteen hundred
seventy and five. Whereupon his body being conveyed to the Church there by two
Heralds or Officers of Arms about 5 days after, Margaret. Soon after the said
Officers caused to be hung up, on the North wall of the said Chancell, an
helmet, standard, pennon and other cognisances belonging to Esquires. All which
continued there several years after the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. and then were
pulled down by Mr. Joh. Nourse the Lord of that manor, to make room for a
monument and banners for his Relations. He the said Rich. Taverner had married
two wives; the first was Margaret Dau. of Walt. Lambert Esquire. by whom he had
several Sons, whose male issue is now, as I conceive, worn out, except that of
Peter his second Son of Hexton in Hertfordsh. His second Wife was Mary Daughter
of Sir Joh. Harcourt, of the noble and ancient family of the Harcourts of
Stanton-Harcourt in Oxfordshire, by whom having only one Daughter that
survived, named Penelopie, she was married to my Grandfather (by the Mothers
side) named Robert Le Petite, commonly called Petty of Wifald near to Henlie,
and of Cottesford near Bister, in Oxfordshire Gentleman, a younger Son of Joh.
Petty of Tetsworth and Stocke-Talmache near Them in the said County Esquire. The
next Brother in order to the said Rich. Taverner, was named Roger, born in
Norfolk also, and educated for a time in Cambridge, afterward surveyour
general on this side of the river Trent of the Kings woods to Hen. 8. Ed. 6.
and Qu. Elizabeth, who in the Year 1560 wrote a See in Dr. Tho. James his Rologa
Oxonie-Cantabrig, printed at Land. 1600. p. 94. number. 343, who there entitles
the book De fame; and says it was written by Robert (instead of Roger)
Taverner: Followed by Joh. Pits in append. ad lib. De illustr. Angl.
Scriptorib. p. 903.
book De fame, viz. of the means to prevent famine in this land, dedicated to
Qu. Elizab. who delivering it to Dr. Parker Archb. of Canterbury, he gave it
afterward with many other MSS. to Bennet Coll. Library in Cambridge, where it
now remains, and has had this testimony given of the writer by some of that
house in the beginning of Chapter 1. that tho the Author was no professed Scholar,
yet he was competently learned, well versed in the affairs of the Commonwealth,
and of the Estates of Kingdoms in Foreign parts, and that the book was worthy
of publication. He died at Upminster in Essex (where he had a fair Estate) and
was buried in the Church there, in 1582, leaving behind him a Son named John,
who in 1600 published a little treatise concerning The making of ponds,
breeding and feeding of fish, and planting of fruits, etc. printed several
times. Which John succeeded his Father in the surveyourship beforementioned,
and dying in 1606 was, as I conceive, buried by his Father, leaving then behind
him a Son named Roger, living 1636.

HENRY BULL, a Warwickshire Man born, became Magd. Coll. in 1535 or
thereabouts, perpetual Fellow in 1540. being then Bach of Arts, and afterward
a zealous See Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 271.
Man for reformation in K. Edw. days, an exile in the time of Qu. Marie, and a
double, if not a treble, beneficed Man in the Reign of Qu. Eliz. He has
transmitted to posterity,

Christian prayers and holy meditations, as well for private as public
exercise, gathered out of the most godly learned of our time -- Printed at
Land. several times; one edit. bears date 1584 another 92. a third in 1605. and
all either in oct. or 16o.

Lydlies prayers, with certain godly additions. -- He also translated from
Lat. into English A commentary upon the 15 Psalms called Psalmi Graduum, that
is Psalms of degrees, from Psalm. 120 to Psalm. 133, faithfully copied out of
the Lectures of Dr. Mart. Luther. Land. 1577. qu. etc. Published with an
Epistle before it by Joh. Fox the Martyrologist, at which time the translator
had been dead about two or three years, for if I mistake not, he gave way to
fate about Fifteen hundred seventy and five. London, died there in June (or
thereabouts) in 1577, but of what kin to the former, I know not.

NICHOLAS WHITHALK, a Theologist of Losanne, Merton Coll. for the sake of the
Warden thereof Dr. Bickley, with whom he had contracted an acquaintance while
he was an Exile in the time of Qu. Mary, but whether he took a degree, tho
supplicate he did for one, it appears not. He has written,

Christianae fidei ac verae religionis compendium, in locos communes digestum,
Clar. 1575.
and nunc primum in vulgus emissum. Land. 1575 oct. Dedic. to Sir Will. Cecill
Lord Burleigh. No doubt there is but he has published other things, but such I
have not yet seen.

LAURENCE NOWELL the third Son of John Nowell Great Meerley in Lancashire
(where his ancestors had lived several generations before him) by Dowsabell his
Wife, Daughter of Thomas Hesketh of Rufford in the said County Esquire. was born,
as I conceive, at Great Meerley beforementioned, or at least in the said
County, sent to Brasnose Coll. to obtain Academical learning, about 1536, where
applying his Muse to the study of Logic for a little while, went to Cambridge,
where taking the Degree of Bach. of Arts, returned to Oxon. and was
incorporated in the said Degree in July 1542. In the year following he was
licensed to proceed in Arts, and about that time being in sacred orders became
Master of the Free School at Sutton-Colfield in Warwickshire, where he
continued for some years. In the Reign of Qu. Mary he absconded for a time in
the house of Sir Joh. Perrot called Carew Castle in Pembrokeshire, where,
besides that Knight, he found two of his persuasion, viz. Mr. Perrot (Sir John's
Uncle) who had been reader of the Greek tongue in the Reign of K. Ed. 6. and
another Gent. called Banister: But before that Queen died, he went into
Garmany, where finding out his Brother Alexander Nowell, sorted himself among
the English Exiles there. After Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown he was made
Archdeacon of Derby and Dean of Lichfield, which he kept (with one or more
benefices, besides that Prebendship of Ampleford in the Chapter of York, which he
obtained upon the relignation of Will. Day Bach. of Div. 27. May 1566.) to his
dying day. He was a most diligent searcher into venerable antiquity, a right
learned Clerk also in the Saxon Language, and was one of the first that
recalled the study thereof. When he abode in Lincolns Inn, in the lodgings of
one of his brethren, who was a Counselor of note there, he was a tutor in
those studies to Will. Lambard the Antiquary of Kent, who was esteemed the
second best in them, and made use of his assistance and notes when he compiled
his book De priscis Anglorum legibus. Our famous Antiquary Will. Camden tells
In Britannia in Cornwall.
us that he (Laur. Nowell) was a Man of good note for his singular learning,
and was the first in our age that brought into ure again, and revived the
Language of our Ancestors the Saxons, which through disuse lay forlet and
buried in oblivion. He has written,

Vocabularium Saxonium, or a Saxon English Dictionary. -- Written in 1567. It Is
a MS. in qu. and was sometimes in the hands of the learned Seldom, but now in
Bodlies Library. Franc. Junius who makes honorable mention of the Author, had
a Copy of it, and Will. Somner the Antiquary of Canterbury made use of the
original when he compiled his Saxon Dictionary. He also ( L. Nowell) made
several collections from antique historical MSS. which, as rarities, are kept
to this day in the Cottonian Library. One of them is thus entitled.

Collectanea ex Chronicis Gregorii Caerquent Monachi Coenobii Glocestrensis, ab
an. 681. ad an. 1290. It Is under Vespasians head A. 5. with other collections
out of the Registers of Worcester and Gloucester. This eminent Antiquary died,
as it seems, Oct. the same year) aged 60 or more, but where buried unless in
the Cath. Chapter at Lichfield I cannot tell. He left behind him a Son of both his
names, who was a Commoner of Brasnose Coll. 1590. aged 18, and had, if I
mistake not, for his successor in his Deanery one George The said George
Bulleyn became Rector of Bangor on the translation of Will. Chaderton from the Sea of (...) to Li^^ in June. an 1575.
Bulleyn D. D. who dying in Januar. 1602, was succeeded by Dr. Will. Tooker.
One Hen. Boleyne D. D. was sometimes Chauntor and Residentiary of Lincoln,
Archdeacon of Chichester and Rector of Borneford, who dyed 1491. but what
relation George had to this Henry, I know not.

Hen. Legh or Leigh of London, natural or base Son of Randal Legh, (by his
Concubine one Woodroffs Widow of Derby) second Son of Sir Edm. Legh of Baguly
in Cheshire Knight, (living 39. H. 6.) was born in London, where being trained
up for a time in Grammaticals, was sent to Oxon to complete them, and to obtain
so much of the Logicals that he might the better conquer the rudiments of the
municipal Law; for, if I am not mistaken, he studied for some time in one of
the Inns of Court. But such was the vigor of his natural genius to Heraldry,
Genealogies, and History, that he postpon'd those beneficial studies and
totally gave himself up to those of honor and less benefit. All that he has
published is that fruitful and worthy treatise, entit.

The Accedence of Armorie. Land. 1568. and 1612. in qu. Which being the first
book of that nature that was ever printed in the English tongue, was a pattern
or platform to those that came after, viz. to Will. Wyrley in his True use of
Armory. Printed 1592. qu. to Joh. Boswell when he wrote his Works of Armory in 3
books. Land. 1597. qu. and to others. In the beginning of Apr. 1577. there was
some dispute made among the relations of the said Ger. Legh who should
administer his goods, debts, chattels, etc. So that I presume he died in
Fifteen hundred seventy and six; Elizab.) which is all that I yet know of him,
or his works.

Newbury in Berkshire, educated in Wyk^hams School near to Winchester, elected
Probatione-Fellow of New Coll. in 1563, took one Degree in Arts three years
after, and the same year was removed thence by the Bishop of Winton in his
visitation of that Coll. but for what reason, unless for Popery, I cannot tell.
About the same time he went to London, became Fellow of the Middle Temple, and
afterward translated from Lat. into English The five Books of Hicronimus
Os^rius, containing a discourse of Civil and Christian Nobility. Clar. 1576.
Land. 1576. qu. What other things he has translated, or whether he has
written of any Subject I cannot tell.

ANTHONY RUSSHE, a florid and frequent Preacher Norwych, admitted
Probationer-Fellow of Magd. Coll. in July 1554, did complete the Degree of
Master of Arts 1558, and soon after quitting his Fellowship, became Chaplain to
Qu. Elizabeth, Dean of Chichester (in the place perhaps of Barth. Traheron)
Doctor of Divinity, and in the Year 1567 Canon of Windsore. He has written,

A President for a Prince: wherein is to be seen by the testimony of ancient
writers, the duty of Kings, Princes and Governors. Land. 1566. in qu. and
other things, as I conceive, but such I have not yet seen. He paid his last
debt to nature on the first day of April, George at Windsore. Over his grave is
an Epitaph containing a great Elogie of him, which for brevity sake I shall now
omit, and in the mean time proceed to the next writer in order to be mentioned.

RALPH GUALTER Son of the famous Ralph Gualter Zurich in Helvetia, spent
several years in this University, (mostly in Merton Coll.) took the Degree of
Master of Arts in 1573, and then returning to Zurich became Minister of St.
Peter's Church there, where he was held in great admiration for his quick and
forward parts. He has written,

Elegia de militia Christianorum in his terris adversus satanem, carnem, and
mundum militantium.

Epitaphium in Hen. Bullengeri obitum, written in Greek.

Epicedium in obitum Joh. Parkhursti Episcopi Nordovicensis. Tigur. 1576. qu.

Argos Helvetia. Sive carmen de Tigurinorum navigatione Tiguro Argentoratum
usque uno die confecta.

Carmina in imagines Doctorum nostri seculi virorum.

Varia Epigrammata and Epitaphia. At length having spent his short life in
learning and virtuous industry, surrendered up his pious Soul to him that gave
it, Peter's Church beforementioned; at which time the chief Scholars there did
much bewail his loss by their Poetry. A certain Edward Leigh in his Treatise of
religion and learning, etc. p. 216.
Author tells us that this Ralph Gualter the Son, has written Homilies on the
lesser Prophets, but such I have not yet seen. The Father has, and therefore I
suppose there is a mistake in the matter.

MORGAN PHILIPPS or Philip Morgan a Monmouthshire Landaff, became a student in
the University in 1533 or thereabouts, made so great a progress in Logic and
Philosophy, and became so quick and undermining a Disputant, that when he was
Bach. of Arts, he was commonly called Morgan the Sophister. In the Year 1538 he
was elected Fellow of Oriel Coll. being then an year standing in the Degree of
Bachelaur, and taking that of Master of Arts, he entered into the sacred
function. In 1546 he was made Principal of St. Mary's Hall, and three years
after was one of the Triumviri that undertook a public disputation in the
Divinity School with Pet. Martyr. In 1550 he resigned his Principality, being
then Bach. of Div. and in the beginning of Qu. Mary's Reign he became Chauntor
of St. David's Cathedral. Whereupon, and because of his absence from Oriel Coll.
for more time than was allowed, he was denounced non socitis in 1554. In the
beginning of Qu. Elizabeth he left his preferment, friends, and country for
Religion sake, spent most of his time at Lovaine and Doway, and wrote several
books, as it is said, but I have seen only these following, which go under his
name, viz.

Defense of the honor of Mary Queen of Scotland, with a declaration of her
right, title, and interest to the Crown of England. Leig. 1571. in 2 books in
oct.

A treatise showing that the regiment of Women is conformable to the Law of God
and nature, in one book. Ib. 1571. oct.

These two treatises, containing three books, were published under his name,
but written as a noted Camden in Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub an. 1569. and Gul.
Vdall qui illum lequitur in Hist. Vitae and mortis Mariae Scotorum Regine-
Land. 1636. Angl. oct. p. 145.
Author tells us by Joh. Lesley Bishop of Rosse in Scotland, upon occasion of
sundry Pamphlets that came out against the marriage of Mary Qu. of Scots to be
had with the Duke of Norfolk, and the right by which she claimed to become heir
unto England. Which Bishop, as it is farther added, did afterward ingeniously
acknowledge in his Commentaries, that he had his arguments for her right of
succession secretly from Sir Anth. Brown Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
and from Sergeant Joh. Carryll an excellent common Lawyer of the Inner Temple.
So that if Morg. Philipps was not the Author of the said treatises, I cannot
justly say that he wrote any thing else, only his,

Disputatio de Eucharistiae Sacramento in Univ. Oxon habita contra D. Pet.
Martyrem, 31. Maii, an. 1549. Land. 1549. qu. etc. See more in Pet. Martyr an.
1562. and in Will. Tresham 1569 etc. But let our Author Camden, and his
follower here quoted, say what of Leslie's being the Author of those books, and
other judge of the matter, as he, and they, please; while I tell you that a
writer R. Doleman alias Rob. Persons in his conference about the next
succession to the Crown of England, part. 2. cap. 1.
before Camden in time, and equal with him in learning, as to the studies he
professed, reports, that the said Morgan Philipps a Man of good account for
learning among those that knew him, was thought to have written the said
treatises ( divided into three books) by the advice and assistance of Sir Anth.
Brown: which thing is made the more credible by the many authorities of our
common Law, which there are alleged. The first book does endeavor to clear
Mary Q. of Scots for the murder of the Lord Darley her Husband, which by many
was laid against her. The second does handle her title to the Crown of England,
and the third does answer the book of Joh. Knox the Scot, entit. Against the
monstrous government of Women. But not long after the said book was published,
John Lesley Bishop of Ross in Scotland (who at that time was Ambassador for the
said Qu. of Scots in England) did more largely handle in the second book of a
treatise which he published, her title to the Crown of England, etc. Thus he;
so that according to this Authors opinion here quoted, Lesley had no hand in
the said treatises, but in another different from them, which I think is most
true. At length, after our Author Morg. Philipps had suffered about 17 years
exile, died at Lovaine, Doway in Fifteen hundred seventy and seven; for on the
15. Feb. the same years, was a Commission Reg. of Administrations in the
Will-Office, Land. which begins 1. Jan. 1571. fol. 141. b.
granted from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury to George Farmour of
Estneston in Northamptonshire Esquire. to administer the goods, debts, chattels,
etc. of Morgan Philipps Clerk, sometimes Chauntor of the Cath. Chapter of St.
David, who lately died in parts beyond the Seas.

Berchamstede in Hertfordsh. partly educated in the Free School there under Mr.
Rich. Reve a Protestant, by the care and exhibition of his Uncle Tho. Dorman of
Agmondesham alias Amersham in the Country of Bucks. and partly in Wykehams
School near to Winchester. At length being made full ripe for the University,
he was elected Probationer-Fellow of New Coll. but leaving that house before he
was made complete Fellow, (upon what account I know not) was after Qu. Mary
came to the Crown, elected Fellow of Allsouls Coll. in 1554, where following
his studies with indefatigable industry, was admitted in the University to the
reading of any book of the institutions of the Civil Law, an. 1558. But upon
the alteration of Religion which soon followed in the beginning of Qu. Eliz. he
left all he had in the University, his friends, country and patrimony, and went
to Antwerp, where being encouraged in his studies by Dr. Tho. Hardyng, then an
Exile in those parts, (and therefore zealously took his part against Jewel,)
became Bach. and at length Doctor of Divinity. He has written,

A proof of certain articles in religion denied by Mr. Jewel. Antw. 1564. qu.

A request to Mr. Jewel that he keep his promise made by solemn protestation
in his late Sermon at Paul's cross, 15 June 1567. Land. 1567. oct.

Disproof of Mr. Alex. Nowells reproof. Antw. 1565 qu. Besides other things,
which being printed beyond the Seas, we seldom see them in these parts. As for
the death of this our learned and pious Author, Tournay in the Law Countries
about Fifteen hundred seventy and seven, this note following written in a MS.
remaining in the English Coll. of Seculars at Doway, does intimate thus of it.
Thomas Dormannus vir doctus, qui unum aut alterum librum edidit contra
Haereticos, postea fuit pastor in civitate Tornacensi, and ibidem obiit circa
an. 1577.

GEORGE GASCOIGNE an Esquire and an Essex Cambridge; whence being translated to
Greys Inn to study the municipal Law, made less progress in that profession
than in Logic, which was but little, for having a rambling and unfixed head he
left that place, went to various Cities in Holland, and became a Soldier of
note, which he afterward professed as much, or more, as learning, and
therefore made him to take this motto Tam Marti quam Mercurio. From thence he
went into France to visit the fashions of the royal Court there, where he fell
in love with a Scottish Dame. At length being weary of those vanities, and his
rambles in other Countries, he returned into England, and retiring to Greys Inn
again, was esteemed by all ingenious Men there, to be a Person of breeding,
eloquent, and witty, the most passionate among them to bewail and bemoan by his
dexterous Pen the perplexities of love, and the best of his time for his
activity in advancing the stage part. Afterward receeding to his patrimony at
Walthamstow in the Forest, within the Province of Essex, (at which place if I
mistake not he was born) he published several matters, among which are these
that follow.

Flowers -- Poems so called. The first of which is entit. The anatomy of a
Lover. The second The arraignment of a Lover. The third The passion of a Lover;
and the last is, The Lover encouraged by former examples, determines to make
virtue of necessity. Several of these Poems are contained in those made by him
called The Devises.

The delectable history of sundry adventures passed by Dan Barthelmew of Bathe
-- This is written in verse.

The Reporter, or the Reporters conclusion -- This is also a Poem.

Fruits of War, written upon this Theme, Dulce bellum inexpertis. -- Began to
be written at Delft in Holland.

Herbs -- Poems so called. In which are several translations as I shall tell
you anon, and several copies of verses that are in The Devises.

Weeds -- Poems so called, with several things intermixed in prose.

The Divises -- These are also Poems; among which are various copies of verses
made by our Author on certain Theams given by several Gentlemen, among which
are Francis and Anthony Kynwelmersh, Essexians and noted Poets of their times,
(the former having had several Poems printed in a Book entit. The paradise of
dainty Devises. Land. 1578) Alex. Nevill of Cambridge, Richard Courtop, etc.

The steel Glass. A Satyr. Land. 1576. qu. Before which is the Authors
picture in armor, with a ruff and a large beard. On his right hand hangs a
musket and bandileers, on his left stands books and inkhorn, and under him is
written Tam Marti quam Mercurio. Among several commendatory verses set before
it, Walt. Rawley of the Middle Temple has one.

The complaynt of Phylomene. An Elegy. Land. 1576. qu. This Elegy was begun in
Apr. 1562, continued in Apr. 1575, and finished the 3 day of the same month
1576.

Discourse of the adventures of Mr. F. J. ( Freeman Jones) -- Written mostly in
prose, about 1572.

Glass of government. A tragical comedy so entit. because therein are handled
as well the rewards of virtue, as also the punishment for vice. Land. 1575.
qu. Written partly in rhyme, but mostly in prose.

Princely pleasures at Kenilworth castle -- A mask written in verse and prose.
It Is a relation of the entertainment of Qu. Elizabeth given to her there by
Robert Earl of Leycester, 9. 10. 11. etc. of July 1575.

Certain notes of instruction concerning the making of verse or rhyme in
English -- This is written in prose. He also translated from Italian into
English (1) The suppeses, a Comedy. Originally written by Aristo. This Com. was
set out by Gascoigne, and publicly acted at Greys Inn, in 1566. It Is among his
Poems called Herbs (2) The pleasant fable of Ferdinando Jeronimi and Leonora
de Valesco. Transl. from the riding tales of Bartello. It Is among Gascoignes
Poems called Weeds: And from Greek into English, Jocasta, a Tragedy; written
by Euripides. This also was set out by Gascoigne and publicly acted in Greys
Inn, 1566. In this translation the said Gascoigne had the assistance of Francis
Kynwelmersh before mentioned, who translated about half of it. The Epilogue was
written by an ingenious Gentleman of the said Inn called Christoph. Yelverton,
afterward an eminent Counselor, a Knight and a Judge, who dying at Easton
Maudit in Northamptonshire 1607 left behind him several Sons, of whom Henry was
the eldest, afterward a Knight and a Judge also, as I shall tell you
elsewhere. This Trag is among Gascoignes Poems called Herbs. All which poems
and translations being gathered together, were printed in an English character
in two vol. in qu. One of which was printed at London about 1577, and the other
there (after the Authors death) an. 1587, at which time it was ushered into the
world by various copies of verses written by the Poets of that time. As for the
Author of them, he made his last exit, or yielded to nature, in his middle age,
at his house in Walthamstow beforementioned, in October. or Nov. in Fifteen
hundred seventy and eight, George Gascoigne Esquire. but later in time than the
former, of whom, I know nothing, only but that he was of the Middle Temple, and
that he dyed about 1619.

Mary Magdalen (in Old Fishstreet) within the City of London, educated in
Grammar learning in Wykehams School near to Winchester, admitted perpetual
Fellow of New. Coll. in 1534, took the Degrees in Arts, holy Orders, was made
Chaplain to Bonner Bishop of London, and left his Fellowship about 1551, being
then beneficed in London. About 1554 (he being then D. of D.) he was made by
his Patron Archdeacon of that place, in the room of Joh. Wymesley of less
activity by far than Harpesfeild; and it was then ( temp. Mariae Reg.) observed
that as Dr. Bonner B. of London showed himself the most severe of all Bishops
against Heretics, as they were then called, so our Author Harpesfeild of all
Archdeacons, which was the reason he fared the worse for it upon the change of
Religion. In 1558, some months before Qu. Mary died, he became Dean of Chapter Chapter
in Norwych, upon the resignation of John Boxall, but forced to leave that
dignity in the beginning of 1560 to make room for John Salisbury suffragan
Bishop of Thetford, who had been ejected in the first year of Qu. Mary. I find
published under this Doctor Harpesfeilds name these things following.

Concio ad clerum in Ecclesia S. Pauli, 16. Oct. 1553 in Act. cap. 20. 28.
Land. 1553. oct.

Homelies to be read in Churches within the dioc. of London. Land. 1554-55. At
the end of Bonners Catechism.

Disputations for the degree of Doctor of Divinity, 19. Apr. 1554 -- Printed in
the Acts and Mon. of the Church, by Joh. Fox: In which disputation Archb.
Cranmer bore a part.

Disputes, talkings, arguings, examinations, letters, etc. -- Printed also in
the said book of Acts and Mon. After Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown, he was
committed Prisoner to the Fleet, where continuing for an year or more, was
released upon security given that he should not act, speak, or write against
the doctrine of the Church of England. Whereupon retiring to the house of a
near relation of his, dwelling within the Parish of St. Sepulcher in the Suburb
of London, spent the remainder of his days in great retiredness and devotion.
At length paying his last debt to nature in Fifteen hundred seventy and eight,
Dec. in the same year, one Anne Worsop the nearest of kin to him, had In a book
of Administrations in the Will-office, beginning 1. Jan. 1571,
a Commission granted to her from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury to
administer the goods, debts and chattels of Joh. Harpesfeild D. D. of the
Parish of St. Sepulcher in Land. lately deceased; so that I presume he died
either in Oct. or Nov. going before. He had a brother named Nicholas, whom I
shall remember under the Year 1583.

JOHN FOWLER was born in the City of Bristow, Wykehams School near Winchester,
admitted Fellow of New Coll. after he had served two years of probation, in
1555, resigned it in 1559 and the year after took the Degree of Master of Arts,
but did not complete it by standing in the Comitia. About that time leaving
England, he took upon him the trade of printing, partly at Antwerp and partly
at Lovaine, whereby he did signal service for the R. Catholics in printing
their books for the vindication of their cause against the Protestants in
England. He was well skilled in the Greek and Latin tongues, a tolerable Poet
and Orator, and a Theologist not to be contemned. So learned he was also in
Criticismes, and other polite learning, that he might have passed for another
Robert, or Henry, Stephens, Printers. He did diligently peruse the Theological
sums of St. Thomas of Aquine, and with a most excellent method did reduce them
into a Compendium. To which he gave this title,

Loca communia Theologica, etc. lib. 1. He wrote also,

Additiones in Chronica Genebrandi.

A Psalter for Catholics -- Answered by Tho. Sampson sometimes Dean of Chapter Chapter

Epigrams and other verses -- He also translated from Lat. into English, The
Epistle of Osorius; and The oration of Pet. Frarin of Antwerp against the
unlawful insurrections of the Protestants under pretense to reform Religion.
Antw. 1566. oct. answered by Will. Fulke of Cambridge. At length giving way to
fate at Newmarck called by some Krainburg in Germany, 1578-79
13. Febr. in Fifteen hundred seventy and eight, was buried in the Chapter yard of
St. John the Evangelist there, near to the body of John Harrys, sometimes
Father to Alice his Wife.

GEORGE FERRERS seems to have been born at or Alban in Hertfordshire, was
educated for a time in Oxon. whence going to Lincolns Inn, did, after he was
Barrester, became as eminent for the Law, as before he was for his Poetry,
having been as much celebrated for it by the learned of his time as any. This
Person, tho he has not writ much, as I can yet find, yet he is numbered among
the Joh. Leland in Principum ac illustrium aliquot and eruditorum in Anglia
virorum, Encomiis, Trophaeis, etc. Edit. Land. 1589. p 99.
the illustrious and learned Men of the Age he lived in, by Joh. Leland the
Antiquary. He has written,

Miscellany of Poems. -- And translated from French into Latin The Statutes
called Magna Charta. The beginning of which is Hic habes candide lector, leges,
etc. He ended his days at Flamsted in Hertfordshire, in the beginning of the
Year Fifteen hundred seventy and nine, George Feres Burgess for Plymouth to sit
in a Parliament then held; whether the same I know not.

WILLIAM WHITTYNGHAM Son of Will. Whittyngham Haughton of Haughton Tower) Son.
of Will. Whittyngham of Over, Son of Seth Whittyngham of Swanlow in Cheshire,
was born in the City of Chester, became a Commoner of Brasnose Coll. in the
sixteenth year of his age 1540 or thereabouts, where being put under a careful
Tutor, did make great proficiency in learning. In 1545 he was elected Fellow of
Allsouls College, being then Bach. of Arts, in which faculty proceeding two
years after, was made one of the Senior Students of Chapter Church, at what time it
was founded by K. Hen. 8. and endeavored by him to be replenished with the
choicest Scholars in the University. On the 17. May 1550 he had leave granted
to him to travel for 3 years by the Dean and Canons of the said house;
whereupon he went into France, and remaining in the company of learned Men
there for some time, had intentions to go into Italy, but being prevented by
sickness (which took him at Lions) he spent some time among the Students in
Paris, but chiefly in the University of Orleance. About that time, if I mistake
not, he took to Wife Catherine the Daughter of Lewis Jacqueine, by his Wife,
the heir of Gouteron Lord of Ingrue and Turvyle near to the said City of
Orleance. After he had spent more than an year there, he went to certain
Universities in Germany, and thence to Geneva, where tarrying till toward the
latter end of K. Ed. 6. he returned into England. But that King dying, and
Religion seeming to put on another face, he went with other company into
France, where hearing soon after that certain Protestant Divines of England
were for Religion sake fled to Frankfort, and were about, with license from the
Magistrate, to settle a Church there, did hasten thither and entered himself
into their association: But they dissenting among themselves concerning matters
pertaining to Religion, were forced to disjoyn, and those that did best like of
the forms of government of the Church of England in the days of K. Ed. 6. were
to remain at Frankfort, and those that liked better the order and discipline of
the Church at Geneva, were to go to that place, among whom Whittyngham was one
and the chiefest, as you may farther see in a book entit. A brief discourse of
the troubles begun at Frankford 1554 -- Printed 1575, wherein the opposite and
restless humor of this Person may easily be discerned. Soon after their
settlement at Geneva, John Knox a Scot, Minister of the English congregation
there, was to leave that place and return to his Country; so that Whittyngham
being looked upon as the fittest Person to succeed, was earnestly desired by
Joh. Calvin to take that employment upon him, but he alleging that in his
former travels and observations, with the learning of several languages, he had
fitted himself more for state employment than that, he modestly denied it. At
length Calvin urging him farther, he was thereupon made a Minister according to
the Geneva fashion and then took the employment upon him. Soon after Miles
Coverdale, Christop. Goodman, Anth. Gilby, Tho. Sampson, Will. Cole of C. C.
Coll. and this our Author Whittyngham undertook the translation of the English
Bible, but before the greater part was finished, Qu. Maary died. So that the
Protestant Religion appearing again in England, the exiled Divines left
Frankfort and Geneva and returned into England. Howbeit Whittyngham with one or
two more being resolved to go through with the work, did tarry at Geneva an
year and an half after Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown. At the same time also he
turned into meter those Psalms that we to this day sing in our Churches,
inscribed with W. W. They are in number five, of which the 119 Psalm is one,
as large as 22 other Psalms, as also the ten commandments, and a prayer, at
the end of the book of Psalms. At length Whittyngham returning into England,
he was appointed to go in company with Francis Earl of Bedford to condole the
death of the French King, an 1560, and soon after to go with Ambrose Earl of
Warwick to Newhaven to be preacher there, while the said Earl defended it
against the French. Where, tho he showed himself ready in his function, yet he
spared not to persuade the English from Uniformity, and observance of the rites
and ceremonies of the Church. Notwithstanding this, so great a respect had the
said Earl for him, that upon writing to his Brother Robert Earl of Leycester,
he procured for him from the Queen the Deanery of Durham, in 1563, in the place
of Ralf Skinner. Which Deanery the Queen having partly promised Dr. Tho. Wilson
one of the Secretaries of State, was forced by the over-intreaties of the said
Earl to give it to Whittyngham, who enjoying it about 16 years, was then
succeeded by the said Wilson, who enjoyed it not two years. After Whittyngham
had remained there for some time, Sir Will. Cecill Secretary of State was made
Lord Treasurer, in whose place Whittyngham was among others nominated, and had
he stirred in it and made interest with his friend Robert Earl of Leycester, he
might have obtained it. About the same time the order of the sacerdotal
vestures being generally established for Churchmen, and so pressed that they
that would not use the same, should not be permitted to exercise their
Ministry, he then, and not before, submitted himself thereunto. And being
upbraided therewith for so doing by one that had been with him at Geneva, he
answered that he, and others, knew, and had heard John Calvin say that for
external matters of Order, they might not neglect their Ministry, for so should
they for tithing of Mint, neglect the greater things of the Law. And as
concerning singing in the Church, Whittyngham did so far allow of it, that he
was very careful to provide the best songs and anthems that could be got out of
the Queens Chapel to furnish his choire withal, himself being skilful in
Music. To pass by the good service he did his Country against the Popish
rebels in the North-parts of England in 1569, and his Church of Durham in
repelling the Archbishop of York his visiting it, an. 1578. I shall only take
notice that whereas he is styled by certain Authors Rich. Bancroft in his
Dangerous positions lib. 2. cap. 1. and others.
the false and unworthy Dean of Durham, was because he was only Master of Arts,
the statutes of the Chapter of Durham requiring that the Dean thereof should be
Bach. of Divinity at least, that he was not a Minister according to the form of
the Church of England, but of Geneva, and that he was but a lukewarm
conformist at the best. The public works that he has done as to learning are,
(1) His Translation of the Geneva Bible (2) His turning into Meter several of
the Psalms of David, as I have before told you. (3) His translation into
Latin the Liturgy of the Church of Geneva. (4) Nich. Rydleys Declaration of
the Lords Supper. Genev. 1556. To which Whittyngham put Bal. cent. 8. number. 87.
in append.
a Preface of his own making. (5) N. Rydlies protestation: This I have not yet
seen, and know nothing more of it. (6) His translation from Lat into English of
The Book of prayer, or the English Liturgy: See more in A brief discourse of
the troubles begun at Frankford, 1554, etc. Printed 1575. p. 34. 35. He also
wrote the Preface to Christoph. Goodmans book entit. How superior powers ought
to be obeyed, etc. with several other things, which are not yet, as I conceive,
published. As for the works of impiety that he performed while he sat Dean of
Durham, were very many; among which I shall tell you of these. Most of the
Priors of Durham, having been buried in coffins of stone, and some in marble,
and each coffin covered with a plank of marble, or freestone, which laid level
with the paving of the Church (for anciently Men of note that were laid in such
coffins, were buried no deeper in the ground, than the breadth of a plank, to
be laid over them even with the surface of the pavement) he caused some of them
to be plucked-up, and appointed them to be used as troughs for horses to drink
in, or hogs to feed in. All the marble and free-stones also that covered them,
and other graves, he caused to be taken away and broken, some of which served
to make pavement in his house. He also defaced all such stones as had any
pictures of brass, or other imagery work, or chalice wrought, engraven upon
them; and the residue he took away, and employed them to his own use, and did
make a washing-house of them at the end of the Centory-garth. So that it could
not afterward be descerned that ever any were buried in the said
Centory-garth, it was so plain and straight. The truth is, ^e could not See a
book entit. The ancient rites and monuments of the monastical and Cath. Chapter of
Durham. Land. 1672 in oct. p. 101. Which book was written by Anon (one that had
belonged to the choire of Durham, at the dissolution of Abbeys) and published
by Jo. Davies of (...).
abide any thing that appertained to a goodly religiousness, or Monastical
life. Within the said Abbey-church of Durham were two holy water stones of fine
marble, very artificially made and engraven, and bossed with hollow bosses,
upon the ouer-sides of the stones, very curiously wrought. They were both of
the same work, but one much greater than the other. Both these were taken away
by this unworthy Dean Whittyngham, and carried into his kitchen, and employed
to profane uses by his Servants, steeping their beef and salt fish in them,
having a conveyance in the bottoms of them to let forth the water, as they had
when they were in the Church to let out holy water, etc. He also caused the
image of St. Cuthbert (which before had been removed from its proper place by
Dean Rob. Horn, who also had a hand in such impieties) and also other ancient
monuments to be defaced, and broken all to pieces, to the intent that there
should be no memory of that holy Man, or of any other who had been famous in
the Church and great benefactors thereunto (as the Priors, his Predecessors
were) left whole and undefaced. I say it again that he did this to the end that
no memory or token of that holy Man St. Cuthbert should be left, who was sent,
and brought thither by the power and will of Almighty God, and was thereupon
the occasion of the erection of the monastical Church of Durham, where the
Clergy and Servants have all their Livings and Commodities from that time to
this day. At length after his many rambles in this world, both beyond and
within the Seas, and his too to forward zeal for the promoting his
Calvinistical (if not worse) opinion, whereby much mischief happened to the
Church of England, he did unwillingly (being then full of worldly troubles)
submit himself to the stroke of death, on the tenth day of June in Fifteen
hundred seventy and nine, Durham. Soon after was a tombstone laid over his
grave, with an Epitaph of 12 long and short verses engraven on a brass plate,
fastened thereunto; which, with most if not all of the monuments which were set
up after his time, were miserably defaced by the Scots when they invaded
England in 1640. The first four verses run thus. Quae Whittinghami cernis
monumenta sepulti,
Et vitae and mortis sunt monumenta piae.
Anglia testis erat, testis quoque Gallia vitae
Exilis, haec vidit Praesulis illa decus.


So that as he before had in a woeful manner violated the monuments of his
predecessors and others, so was his by Invaders, and nothing now left to
preserve his memory, or Person to show the place where his carkase was lodged.

Godsbyll in the Isle of Wight in Hampshire, educated in Wykehams School near
Winchester, admitted true and perpetual Fellow of New Coll. in 1523, studied
the Civil Law, traveled some years after into Italy, was at Padouo, where he
advanced his studies, and afterward, notwithstanding all this, he did
acknowledge K. Hen. 8. to be the supreme head of the Church in England. In
1540, he being then returned and settled in London, he took the Degree of
Doctor of the Civil Law, and the same year resigned his Fellowship, being then
an Advocate in the Court of Arches, Prebendary of Salisbury, and about that
time Archdeacon of Ely in the place (as it seems) of Rich. Coxe. In 1542 he was
elected Warden of New Coll. and in 45 he was made Rector of Newton Longvill in
Bucks. Soon after when K. Ed. 6. came to the Crown, he was altogether for
reformation, was an admirer of Pet. Martyr, was a frequenter of Protestant
service and a receiver of the holy communion according to their way, did after
preach up reformation in the Church of St. Martin commonly called Carfax in
Oxon, did approve of the proceedings of King Ed. 6. and other matters as a
learned and puritannical Laur (...) in Vita and Mart Jo. Juelli, printed 1573.
p. 129 13^^. 131.
Author tells you. In 1551. (5. Ed. 6.) he resigned his Wardenship, and the
year after the aforesaid Rectory. In 1554 (2. Mariae) he was made Provost of
Eaton Coll. (in the place of Tho. Smith LL. D. of Cambridge) of which house he
had been Fellow, and the same year had the Degree of Doct. of Div. conferred
upon him. Soon after he was appointed one of the Commissioners to visit the
University of Cambridge, became Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral on the removal of
Feckenham to Westminster an. 1556, Vicar general of the spiritualities under
Card. Pole Archb. of Cant. and in 1558 one of the overseers of the said
Cardinals will. I find extant under Dr. Coals name these things following.

Letters to Joh. Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, upon occasion of a Sermon that the
said Bishop preached before the Queens Majesty and her honorable Counsel, an.
1560. Land. 1560 in a pretty thick oct. It was afterward remitted into Jewels
works. I find also that diverse letters of Dr. Cole were sent to Bishop Jewel
after he had preached at Paul's cross on the second Sunday before Esther in the
year 1560, which are also printed.

Disputation with Archb. Cranmer and Bish. Rydley in the Div. School at Oxon,
an. 1554 -- Printed in the Acts and Mon. of the Church.

Funeral Sermon at the burning of Dr. Tho. Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury. -- He
has also other things extant, which I have not yet seen. After Qu. Elizab.
came to the Crown, he, with Jo. White B. of Winchester, and five more most
zealous Cath. Divines, did dispute with as many Protestant Divines concerning
matters of Religion, when Qu. Elizab. was about to make a reformation in the
Church of England. But that disputation coming to nothing, he was deprived of
his Deanery to make room for Dr. Will May Master of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge,
who dying about the beginning of 1561. Alex. Nowell succeeded him. About that
time Dr. Cole was imprisoned, but where I cannot tell: Sure I am that he died
in or near to the Compter in Woodstreet within the City of London, in the month
of December. Humph. Moseley Secondary of the said Compter, I know not. Joh.
Leland the Antiquary was Dr. Cole's acquaintance, and having had experience of
his learning, has eternized his memory among other learned Men of our Nation
and of his time, in his book of Encomia's In Principum ac illustrium, etc. in
Auglia virorum encomiis, trophaetis, etc. Land. 1, 89. p. 79.
to which the curious reader may recur if he please, wherein he will find a just
character of this our Author Dr. Cole and his learning.

PETER MORWYN or Morwyng, a zealous reformer Lincolnshire, made perpetual
Fellow of Magd. Coll. in 1552, being then Bach of Arts, and in the year after
supplicating some few days before K. Edwards death that he might proceed in
that faculty, did obtain his desire: But that King then dying and Morwyn
foreseeing that Religion would alter, he was not presented to that Degree. Soon
after, he, and others of his society, consulting how to withdraw themselves in
private, obtained leave to be absent for a time, but to what place Morwyn went
beyond the Seas (for he was a voluntary exile in Germany) I find not. Sure it
is that after Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown, he retired to his Coll. and in
1559 was presented to the Degree of Master, and became renowned among the
Academians for his great knowledge in the Lat. and Greek tongues and poetry.
When Dr. Bentham was promoted to the Sea of Lichfield he made him his Chaplain,
and upon the next vacancy, Prebendary and Canon of the said Church, and well
beneficed near to that place. He has translated into English. (1) A
compendious and most mavelous history of the latter times of the Jews commune
weal, beginning where the Bible and Scriptures leave, and continuing to the
utter subversion and last destruction of that Country and People. Land.
1558-61. and 1593, in oct. Written in Hebrew by Joseph Ben. Gorion. (2) The
treasure of Enonimus containing the wonderful hid secrets of nature, touching
the most apt times to prepare and distill Medicines. Land. 1565. qu. besides
other books, which I have not yet seen. Clar. 1579.
He was living at, or near to, Lichfield in the month of May, in Fifteen
hundred seventy and nine, in which year he was appointed one of the
administrators of the goods, chattels, etc. of the said Bish Bentham, but how
long he lived after that year, I cannot tell, nor where his relics were
lodged.

JOHN LISTER was descended from those of his Yorkshire spent some years among
the Oxonians, and wrote,

A rule to bring up children; wherein is declared how the Father opposes the
Son in the Holy Scripture, whereby all Parents may be taught how to bring up
their Children -- Printed Clar. 1579.
at Land. in oct. about 1580. What other things he has written and published I
cannot yet

JOHN ROGERS called by some Joh. Rogers the second, because one of both his
names (of Pembr. Hall in Cambr.) was a writer in the Reign of Ed. 6. and a
Martyr for the Protestant cause in the time of Qu. Mary, was educated for some
years in this University, but whether in Qu. Coll. where one of both his names
was Fellow and proceeded Master of Arts, in 1556, or another Joh. Rogers (of
Mert. Coll. I think) who was admitted Master in 1576, I cannot justly say. Sure
I am that Joh. Rogers of Oxon. wrote and published these treatises following.

The displaying of an horrible sect of gross and wicked heretics, naming
themselves the Family of Love, etc. Land. 1579. oct.

The lives of the Authors of the Family of Love. -- Printed with the former.

Answer to certain Letters maintaining the opinions of those of the Family of
Love -- Printed also with the former, and in the same year. What else this
Author has published I cannot yet find, Clar. 1579.
nor when, or where he died. I find one John Rogers to be a Senior Student of
St. Albans hall 1569, which perhaps may be the same with him of Mert. Coll.
because that when any Postmaster, or Student there, takes the Degree of Bach.
of Arts, they commonly receede to the said Hall, which joins to the Coll. of
Merton.

London gave his first breath, was made perpetual Fellow of Magd. Coll. in
1549, and Master of Arts in 52, being that year Senior of the Act celebrated
18. July. In 1558 he was unanimously chosen Senior Proctor of the University,
and in less than two years after, when he saw that the R. Cath. Religion would
be silenced in England, he obtained leave to absent himself for a time from the
said College. Whereupon waiting for a prosperous gale, shipped himself beyond
the Seas, and at length went to Rome; where, tho he before, had for the space
of 5 years, studied the Civil Law in this University, he was actually created,
(as it is said) Doctor or Bach. of Div. and became one of the Canons of St.
Peter's Church there. Vir fuit eximii ingenii, (as one Anon. MS. quandam in
manibus Gul. Crow. Ludimagistri Cro^^^
says) qui post magnos in Ecclesia dei per side Catholica tuenda susceptos
labores, scripsit opus quoddam insigne intitulat.

Historiae Evangelicae veritas. Seu singularia vitae Domini Jesu Christi, eo
ordine quo gesta fuerunt recensita, and ipsis quatuor Evangelistarum verbis
contexta, etc. Lov. 1572, and at Doway 1603. qu. He also published under his
name,

Sex Dialogi, etc. Antw. 1566. But those Dialogues were written by Nich.
Harpesfeild, as I shall tell you in my discourse of him. As for A. Cope he
surrendered up his last breath at Rome about Fifteen hundred and eighty, English
Hospital or Coll. there, leaving behind him, a most admirable exemplar of
virtue, which many did endeavor to follow, but could not accomplish their
desires.

de la HYDE was admitted Probationer-Fellow of Merton Coll. 1549, proceeded
Master of Arts four years after, being then admired and much adored for his
most excellent faculty in disputing, which he exercised as well in the public
Schools, as at home. Soon after he was licensed by the Society of his Coll. to
study the Civil Law, but took no Degree therein in this University: And being
ejected the Coll. for denying the Queens Supremacy over the Chapter of England in
1560, he went thereupon into Ireland; where, if I mistake not, he was born, and
prosecuting his studies there, as he had done in Oxon. became an exquisite and
profound Clerk, well read in the Greek and Lat. tongues, expert in the
Mathematics, a proper Antiquary, and an exact Divine. His pen was not lazy
(as one Rich. Stan^hurst in Descrip. Hybern. cap. 7.
says) but daily breeding of learned books. He wrote,

Schemata Rhetorica in tabulam contracta. And an oration also entit.

De Ligno and Faeno. Spoken in praise of Mr. Jasper Heywood, who was in the
time of Qu. Mary Rex regni fabarum in Merten College; which was no other than a
Christmas Lord, Clar. 1580.
or a Lord or King of misrule. He has written many other things, which being
done and printed beyond the Seas, we see them but seldom, or never, in these
parts.

Irish Man born, was educated in this University, but what Degrees he took
there, I find not. In the Year 1572 and belike before, he had a Chamber, and
took his commons in Heart hall, being then a Student in Divinity with Mr.
Leonard Fitz-Simons his Countryman. Both whom are entitled Magistri that year
in the Reg. Matric. P. page 745.
Matricula of the University, under Aula cervina. The said Jam. Walsh has
written,

Epigrammata diversa. With other things of the like nature, and translated into
English The Topography of Ireland, written in Lat. by Silv. Giraldus. Which
translation with Scholia's was made also much about the same time by Jo^.
Hooker alias Vowell of the City of Exeter, Clar. 1580.
as you may see elsewhere. In the time of this Jam. Walsh, studied in Heart hall
also, diverse of his Country men of Ireland, some of whom having been afterward
Men of note, or else writers, you shall have their names as they follow. (1)
David Clear, Bach. of Arts 1565. (2) Nich. Clear of the County of Kilkenny,
matriculated 1567. aged 19 (3) David Sutton a Gentleman's Son of Kildare, 1571
aged 16. (4) Pet. Nangle a Gent. Son of Dublin, 1571. aged 15 (5) Rich. Walsh a
Merchants Son of Waterford, aged 15. an. 1572. (6) Rob. Boteler a Merch. Son of
the said City aged 23. an. 1572. (7) George Sherlock the Son of a Merchant also
of the same City, at. 17. an. 1572. (8) Rich. Masterson a Gent. Son of Wexford.
aet. 15. an. 1573. (9) Nich. Gaydon an Esquire. Son of Dublin, aet. 19. an. 1574.
(10) Tho. Finglas a Gent. Son of Finglas near to Dublin, aet. 18. an. 1571.
(11) Will. Nugent a Gent Son of Mead, or of the County of Mead, aet. 21. an.
1571. With several others of a later date, as Alex. Barrington a Gentleman's Son
of Ireland, aet. 18. an. 1583. etc.

LEONARD FITZSIMONS was born in the Diocese Dublin in Ireland, admitted Scholar
of Trinity Coll. (from that of Corp. Chapter of which he was Clerk) 17 June 1558,
aged 17, and the next year was made Fellow, being then Bach. of Arts. In 1563
he proceeded in that faculty, but being a R. Cath. in his heart, and therefore
unwilling to take holy Orders according to the Church of England, left his
Fellowship and retired to Heart hall about 1571. At length going into his own
Country, had some employment conferred upon him, and was in his latter years, as
I conceive, a Romans Priest. He is charactarized by one Ri^. Stany^. ut sup. cap.
7.
who knew him, to be profundus clericus, qui utrasque linguas, Theologiam and
Mathematicam admodum caluit and coluit. And there is no doubt but that he has
written and published several Books, which being printed beyond the Sea, we
seldom see them in these parts. He was famous and noted for his learning in
Ireland in Fifteen hundred and eighty, Clar. 1580.
but when he died, or where his relics were lodged, I cannot tell. One Hen.
Fitzsimons, a famous Jesuit was also educated in Heart hall, as I shall tell you
elsewhere.

JOHN SECURIS, a Wiltshire Man born and a most New Coll. in the time of Ed. 6
(but not in the condition of a Fellow) did retire to Paris for the improvement
of his studies, where applying his muse to the faculties of Physic and
Astronomy, became a diligent hearer of the Lectures of Dr. Jacobus Silvius of
high learning and famous memory, the reader of the Physic lecture in that
University, who usually had a thousand auditors every time he read. After he
had completed his studies there, he returned into England and settled within
the City of Salisbury, where he was much frequented for his great knowledge in
Medicine, and wrote,

Several Prognosticons -- One of which for the Year 1580 I have seen, and to it
is joined

A compendium; or, brief instruction how to keep a moderate diet -- In the
title of the said Prognosticon he writes himself Master of Arts and Physic,
but whether he took those Degrees in Oxon. I cannot tell, because the register
containing the acts of Congregation and Convocation, is almost totally
neglected during the Reign of Ed. 6. In the Preface to the said Compendium, he
tells us that in his time fell near to Salisbury hailstones as big as a child's
fist of 3 or four years old. Our Author Securis has also written,

A detection and querimonie of the daily enormities and abuses committed in
Physic, concerning the three parts thereof, that is of the Physicians part,
the part of Surgeons and the part of Poticaries. Land. 1566. in oct. Dedicated
in a Lat. Epist. to both the Universities, Oxford (of which he says he was an
Alumnus) and Cambridge. Clar. 1580.
After which follows a Preface to the reader in old English verse, and at the
end of the book is a peroration to both the Universities. Contemporary with
this noted Author Securis, was another Astrologer called Evans Lloyd a Welsh
Man, educated in Logicals and Philosophicals in Oriel Coll. but took no Degree
here. Afterward retiring to the great City, wrote several Ephemerides, which
were much valued in their time; one of them written for the Year 1582. I have
seen, supputated especially for the elevation and meridian of London, but may
generally serve for all England. It was printed there the same year, and
approved by Dr. John Dee, with whom, as also with Securis, he had acquaintance.

Waterford in Ireland, took a Degree in Arts 1562 after he had spent at least 4
years in this University in pecking and hewing at Logic and Philosophy: Which
Degree being completed by Determination, he went into his own Country, entered
into the sacred function and had preferment there, but turned out from it
because of his Religion. He wrote in English a pithie and learned treatise, very
exquisitely penned as one Idem ibid.
says, entitled.

Answers to certain questions propounded by the Citizens of Waterford. -- Also

Diverse Sermons. -- Soon after he left his Country for the sake of Religion,
went to the University of Lovaine in Brabant, where he was promoted to the
Degree of Doctor of Divinity 23. June 1576, Clar. 1580.
and afterward, as it is said, wrote and published diverse other things. See more
in Peter White, under the Year 1599. To him I now add his great friend and
countryman Rob. Garvey of the Diocese of Kilkenny, who was elected Fellow of
Oriel Coll. 1563, proceeded Master of Arts three years after, and became noted
for his skill in both the Laws, and for a volubility in the English and latin
tongues, as my Author Id. ib. cap. 7.
an Irish Man tells me, but whether he published any thing I know not, nor any
thing else of him, only that he died in Ireland about 1579.

Chamney, Chancy, or Channy, so many ways I find him written, was from his
juvenile years a Carthustan Monk in the house of that order near London, (now
called by some the Charter House, and by others Suttons Hospital) the Brethren
of which place, as of others in England, did commonly study in an ancient place
of Literature near to London Coll. alias Burnells Inn within this University,
and no doubt there is but that this M. Chawney did receive instruction in
Theological matters therein, or at least in some other house of learning in
Oxon. But so it was, that at the dissolution of religious houses by K. Hen. 8.
he, with his brethren (18 in number) being committed to custody for denying the
Kings Supremacy over the Chapter of England, did at length with much difficulty
escape out of prison, and so consequently death, which all the rest suffered at
several times, before the Year 1539. At length settling himself at Bruges in
Flanders became Prior of some of his English Brethren (of the same order)
there: And from him do our English Carthusians beyond the Sea at Neoport in
Flanders derive their succession in the said house near London, to this day,
having always been by them esteemed a most devout and pious Person. He has
written a book entit.

Historia aliquot nostri saeculi Martyrum cum pia, tum lectu jucunda nunquam
antehaec typis excusa. Printed (at Mentz in Bavaria as it seems) an. 1550 in
qu. and dedicated by Vitus a Dulken Prior of the Carthusians of St. Michael
near to Mentz. and William a Sittatis Procurator of the said house, to Theodore
Loher a Stratis Prior of the Carthusians house of St. Marie the Virgin in Buxia
near to Memmingen in Schawben a Province of Germany. This book contains (1) The
Epitaph of Sir Tho. More, written by himself in Latin, fixed over his grave in
Chelsey Church near to London. (2) The captivity and martyrdom of John Fisher
B. of Rochester. (3) The capt. and mart. of the said Sir Th. More, sometimes L.
Chanc. of England. (4) The martyrdom of Reynold Brigitt a pious Divine, and of
other. (5) The passion of 18 Carthusians of London, beginning with the life and
passion of John Houghton the Prior of them all, contained in 14 Chapters, etc.
This passion and martyrdom of the said Carthusians was by the care of our
Author represented Theod. Petreius in Biblioth. Carthusiana, edit. Col. 1609.
p. 245, 246.
in figures; and being afterward engraven on copper, were printed at Colon.
Ub. about 1608. He also reviewed, corrected, and put some additions to a book
entit. Vita Carthusiana, written by Peter Suitor Prior of the Carthusians at
Paris, an. 1522. Which being so done, he wrote the Epistle dedicatory before it;
all printed together at Lovaine, 1572. in oct. Our Author Chancaeus (as he
writes himself in that book) was then living in his Cell at Bruges
beforementioned, with several English Carthusians under his government. I have
seen a MS. written by our Author Chancaeus, bearing this title,

The divine cloud of unknowing -- The beginning of which is, Goostly friend in
God, I pray the and besece the that thou will have a besy beholding to the
course and manntr of thy calling, etc. It contains 75 Chapters, and with i is
bound his Epistle of private counsel, the beginning of which is, Goostly friend
in God, as touching thy inward occupation, etc. And at the end of the book is
this written. Liber domus Salvatoris beatissimae virginis Mariae juxta London
Ordinis Carthusiani, per M. Chawncy, quem exaravit secundum Willmum Exm^use.
The said Exmeuse or ex Mewe, who had been bred in Christ's Coll. in Cambridge
did enter himself a Carthusian of the said house near London in the 28 year of
his age, being then sufficiently versed in the Gr. and Lat. tongues. Afterward
he was made Vicar, and thence removed to be Procurator thereof: And being one
of the number that denied the Kings Supremacy, suffered death by hanging,
drawing and quartering, 19. June 1535. As for our Author Chancy he submitted to
fate on the 12. July in Fifteen hundred eighty and one, Flanders. Whereupon his
body was buried, as I suppose, in the Chapel belonging to the Carthusians at
Bruges beforementioned He has left behind him a most celebrated name for his
rare piety, which is preserved among those of his profession at Bruges, Neoport
in Flanders, and at other places. Neither is it denied by any knowing and
moderate Protestants but that his name is worthy to be kept in everlasting
remembrance.

RICHARD DAVYES, a Welsh Man born, was educated, New Inn, but what Degrees he
took in Arts, it appears not. In Qu. Mary's Reign he retired beyond the Seas
upon account of Religion, whence returning in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth,
was elected Bishop of St. Asaph on the deprivation of Tho. Goldwell; the
temporalities of which See he receiving Pat. 2. Elizab. p. 14.
29. March. 1560, was the year following translated to the Sea of St. David,
and in 1566 was actually created Doctor of Divinity. He has published several
things, among which are,

Epistle to all the Welsh, especially within his Diocese, wishing a renewing of
the ancient Cath. faith by the light of the Gospel of Christ. -- Printed and
bound with the New Test. in Welsh, an. 1567. It was printed also among other
things, and published by Charles Edwards a Welsh Man. -- Ox. 1671. in oct.

Funeral Sermon preached 26. Nov. 1576. in the Parish Church of Caermerthen at
the burial of Walt. Earl of Essex, on Rev. 14. 13. Land. 1577. qu. Whereunto is
added a genealogical Epitaph with memorials on the said Count, but these were
made by other Men. This Bishop paid his last debt to nature about the month of
October. in Fifteen hundred eighty and one, Abergwilly in Caermerthenshire,
leaving then behind him a Widow called Dorothie, and several Children.

JOHN TWYNE Son of William, Son of John, Son Nicholas, Son of Sir Brian Twyne
of Long Parish in Hampshire Knight, was born at Bolingdon in the same County,
educated, as it seems, in New Inn, where applying his studies to the Civil Law,
was admitted to the reading of any of the Books of Institutions, an. 1524. at
which time the said Inn was replenished, and did excellently flourish with
Civilians. After he had left the University he became supreme Moderator of the
Free School within the cemitery gate at Canterbury, and in 1553 Mayor of that
City. At length growing rich (for his School was very much frequented by the
youth of the neighborhood, many of which went afterward to the Universities)
he purchased Lands at Preston and Hardacre in Kent, which he left to his
posterity. He was a Person well read in Greek and Lat. Authors, in the
histories and antiquities of our Nation, and much valued for his abilities in
other matters by the learned Men of his age, particularly by his acquaintance
In Principum ac illustrium, etc. in Auglia virorum eucomus, trophaeis, etc.
Land. 1589. p. 83.
Joh. Leland, who numbers him among the illustrious worthies of his time. He
has written,

De rebus Albionicis, Britannicis atque Anglicis commentariorum libri duo.
Land. 1590. in oct. written to his Son Thomas; who afterward, with an Epistle,
made it public. Our Author John Twyne has also written and collected diverse
things of antiquities, which are dispersed in several hands, and some of them
descending to his Grandson Brian Twyne, he gave them at his death to the
Library of C. C. Coll. At length our Author arriving to a good old age, November.
in Fifteen hundred eighty and one, and received sepulture in the Chancel of the
Church of St. Paul withing the City of Canterbury. Over his grave is an
inscription, wherein he is styled Armiger, and said to have been Mayor of
Canterbury in the time of Wyatts rebellion, in the beginning of Qu. Mary. This
Epitaph being written in verse, I shall now omit, and commend you to that just
Encomium of him given by Leland before mentioned. By Alice his Wife (who died
20. Oct. 1567. aged 60 and in the 43 year of her Wedlock) Daughter of Will.
Piper of Canterbury he had issue diverse Sons. The first was Laurence Twyne who
was Fellow of Allsouls Coll. and Bach. of the Civil Law, an ingenious Poet of
his time, as several copies of verses, set before books, written in
commendation of their respective Anthors, do sufficiently attest. He was a
married Man, lived at Hardacre in Kent, and left issue behind him at his death
several Children. The second was Tho. Twyne beforementioned, whom I shall
mention under the Year 1613. The third was John Twyne whose ingenuity also is
scattered in several copies of verses before books in the time of Qu.
Elizabeth; and the fourth was Nicholas, of whom I know nothing.

In Cat. praeposit. soc. and schol. coll. Regal. Cant. MS. sub an. 1519.
said, at Whaddon in Bucks. elected from Eaton School, Scholar of Kings Coll.
in Cambridge, in 1519, where taking the Degree of Bach. of Arts, went to Oxon
for preferment, was made one of the junior Canons of the Cardinal Coll. and in
December. 1525, was, with other Cantabrigians incorporated in the same Degree.
About that time he supplicated that he might answer at the Austin Fryery (now
called Disputations in Austins) and answer the Masters in formal disputations,
which was granted conditionally that he also oppose at the said Fryery. This
exercise being by him performed in order to the taking of his Masters Degree,
he was licensed to proceed in Arts, 8. Feb. following, and accordingly did
proceed in an Act celebrated 2. July 1526. Soon after being notoriously known
to be a follower and abettor of the opinions of Luther, he was forced to leave
Oxon, and some years after became Master of Eaton School near to Windsore,
where by his diligent instruction, the boys profited much. About the Year 1537
he proceeded D. of D. at Cambridge, became Archdeacon of Ely, in the room, as
it seems, of Tho. Thirlby promoted to the Sea of Westminster, and afterward
was incorporated at Oxon in the Degree of Doctor. In 1543. Jan. 8. he was made
Dean of the new erected Cathedral of Osney near Oxon, and in 1546 when that See
was translated to Chapter Chapter he was also made Dean there. In 1547 he was chosen
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, being in great favor with the then K.
Ed. 6. By which election it fell out, that as the Oxonians enjoyed one that had
been partly educated in Cambridge, so it was with the Cantabrigians in former
time by their election of John Bromyerd an Oxonian and an eminent writer in the
Reign of Rich. 2. and since by their election of Dr. Thomas Ruthal in the Reign
of Hen. 7. But what mad work this Dr. Coxe did in Oxon while he sat
Chancellor, by being the chief Man that worked a reformation, I have elsewhere
In Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 269. 270. 271. etc.
told you. In 1548. July 16. he was installed Canon of Windsore in the place of
Dr. Thomas Magnus, who resigned that dignity in 1547, and about that time was
made one of the Privy Council, Almoner to the King and Dean of Westminster: But
when Qu. Mary came to the Crown, he, among others, fled to Frankfort in
Germany, where he showed Brief discourse of the troubles begun at Frankford,
1554 -- Printed 1575. p. 38. 39.
himself among the English Exiles a zealous Man for the Common Prayer, as used
in the days of K. Ed. 6. against Joh. Knox a Scot and a violent Calvinist. When
Qu. Elizabeth succeeded in the Empire, he was appointed the chief of the
Protestant Divines to encounter those of the Romans persuasion in a disputation,
when that Queen was about to settle a reformation in the Church of England. But
that disputation coming to nothing, he was made Bishop of Ely, to which See he
was consecrated 21. Dec. 1559; yet, whether it was for his retiredness, or
small hospitality, or the spoil he was said to make of his woods and parks,
feeding his Family with powdered venison, he was but in little favor with the
said Queen. At Cambridge he was esteemed a good Scholar, and a better Poet than
Dr. Wall. Haddon, who called him Master, as having been either his Scholar or
Servant. There goes under this Dr. Coxe's names,

Oration at the beginning of the disputation of Dr. Tresham and others with
Pet. Martyr.

Oration at the conclusion of the disputation -- These two orations, which are
in latin, were printed 1549. in qu. and afterward among Pet. Martyrs works.
Dr. Coxe also had a considerable hand in framing the first Liturgy of the
Church of England, and a hand in the third an. 1559, and also turned into meter
the Lords Prayer, at the end of the Psalms of David, besides other works not
yet remembered by public Authors. He yielded up his last breath (22. Jul. Ely
near to the monument of Bishop Goodrich. I find another Rich. Coxe who was
living (and a writer) in the t^me of the former, but that Rich. Coxe which Joh.
Leland the Antiquary and Poet does so much In Encomiis, trophaeis, etc. ut
supra. p. 89.
celebrate for his faith and integrity in a copy of verses written to Thom.
Legh of Adlington Esquire. must be understood of Bishop Coxe before mentioned.

NICHOLAS SAUNDERS the most noted defender Charlewood in Surrey, educated in
Grammar learning in Wykehams School near Winchester, admitted true and
perpetual Fellow of New Coll. an. 1548, Bach. of the Laws 3 year after and
about 1557, Shagling Lecturer, or as he himself In visib. Monarchia Eccles.
lib. 7. number. 1833.
says tanquam regius professor juris canonici. But Religion putting on another
face in the beginning of Q. Eliz. he left England about 1560, and going to Rome
was made Priest and D. of D. and soon after went with Cardinal Stanislaus
Hosius to the Council of Trent, where he showed himself to be a Man of great
parts by his several disputations and arguings. Which Cardinal having an
especial respect for, made him his individual comparison in his journey into
Poland, Prussia and Lithuania. As for the chief actions of his life that
followed, his Sisters Son John Pitseus, will tell In illusr. Angliae
scriptorib. aet. 16. number. 1025.
you. But that which I must not forget now to let you know, is, that when he
was a Nuntio from P. Gregory 13 into Ireland (where he, with 3 Ships full of
Spaniards landed at Smerwick in Kerrey, about the first of July 1579) to
encourage the Irish there to take up arms and rebel against Qu. Elizabeth, was
(after they, with the said Spaniards had been overcome by the English) forced
to abscond in caves, dens, woods, etc. At length after two years time, being
not able to hold out longer, did miserably perish by hunger and cold, at the
same time as my Author says (but as it seems false) that Gerald Fitzgerald
Earl of Desmond chief captain of the rebels was taken in a poor cottage and
killed. Of which matter hear what the learned Canmden In Annal. Reg. Elizab.
sub an. 1583.
tells us -- The principal of whom ( meaning the priests that persuaded the
said Earlto forfeit his allegiance to his Prince) was Nich. Saunders an English
Man, who, very near at the same instant of time, was miserably famished to
death, when, forsaken of all, and troubled in mind for the bad success of the
rebellion, he wandered up and down among woods, forests and mountains, and found
no comfort or relief. In his pouch were found several speeches, and letters,
made and written to confirm the rebels, stuffed with large promises from the
Bishop of Rome and the Spaniard. Thus the divine justice (if a Man may judge)
stopped that mouth with hunger, which had been always open to encourage
rebellions, and to belch forth malicious lies and slanders. For (to omit other
things) he was the first Man that broached that abominable lie concerning the
birth of Qu. Elizabeth's Mother, which no Man in those days (though the hatred
and the malice of the Papists was then fresh against her, and might remember
it) ever knew, England in full forty years after never heard of, the
computation of time does egregiously convince of falsehood and vanity; and he,
forgetting himself, (which a liar should not do) does himself plainly confute,
etc. The things that he has written are mostly these.

The supper of our Lord set forth according to the truth of the Gospel and
Cath. Faith, with a confutation of such false doctrins, as the Apology of the
Church of England, Mr. Al. Nowells challenge or Mr. Jewels reply have uttered
touching the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament. In seven books. Lovain.
1566 in a thick qu. Answered by Will. Fulke of Cambridge.

A Treatise of the images of Christ, and of his Saints; and that it is unlawful
to break them, and lawful to honor them. With a confutation of such false
doctrine as Mr. Jewel has uttered in his reply concerning that matter. Lov.
1567. oct.

Brief declaration, which is the true Church of Christ -- This is written by
way of preface to the Treatise of the images, etc.

The rock of the Church, wherein the primacy of St. Peter and of his
Successors the Bishops of Rome is proved our of Gods word. Lov. 1567, and St.
Omer 1624. in oct. Answered by the said W. Fulke.

Brief treatise of Usurie, Lov. 1568. oct.

De typica and honoraria imaginum adoratione, lib. 2. Lov. 1569. oct.

Sacrificii missae ac ejus partium explicatio. Lov. 1569. oct.

Tractatus utilis, quod Dominus in sexto capite Johannis de sacramento
Eucharistiae proprie sit locutus. Antw. 1570. in tw.

De visibili Monarchia Ecclesiae, lib. 8. etc. Lov. 1571. 'Antw. 1581. Wiceburg
1592. fol. In which book, written before the Author went into Ireland, he does
avow the Bull of P. Pius 5. against Qu. Elizab. to have been lawful, and
affirms that by virtue thereof, one Dr. Nich. Moreton an old English fugitive
and conspirator was sent from Rome into the north parts of England to stir up
the first rebellion there, whereof Charles Nevile Earl of Westmorland was a
head captain. And thereby it may manifestly appear to all Men how the said Bull
was the ground of the rebellions both in England and Ireland.

De clave David, seu regno Christi lib. 6. contra columnias Acleri pro visibili
Ecclesiae Monarchia. Wiceburg. 1592. fol.

De origin ac progressu schismatis Anglicani, lib. 3. quibus historia
continetur maxima ecclesiastica, annorum 60 lectu dignissima, etc. Col. Agrip.
1585. Romans 1586. Ingolst. 1588. Col. Agrip. 1590. etc. oct. Which book being
left in many places imperfect, was supplied, augmented and corrected by Edw.
Rishton Afterward the book being translated into French, and printed 1673-4,
gave occasion to Gilbert Burnet D. D. to write his two volumes of The History
of the reformation of the Church of England. In the appendix to the first of
which, you may read more of Saunders and his work de Schismate, as also of Edw.
Rishton and his corrections and additions of, and to, that book.

De justificatione contra colloquium Altenburgense lib. 6. in quibus, etc. Aug.
Trev. 1585 in a thick oct. This sometimes goes under the title of De
Lutheranorum dissidiis circa justificationem. Col. Ag. 1594. oct.

De militantis Ecclesiae Romans potestate. Romans 1603. qu.

De martyrio quorundam temp. Hen. 8. and Elizab. printed 1610. oct. with other
things which I have not yet seen, the titles of which you may see in In lib. De
illustr. Augl. script. aet. 16. nu. 1025.
Joh. Pitseus, who tells us that he died in Ireland about 1580. yet Edw.
Rishton who was his contemporary and knew him well, says in the preface to the
first edition of the book De orig. and progressu schism. printed at Col. Agrip.
1585 that he died in Ireland (in the County of Kerrey) in Fifteen hundred
eighty and one. Camden should say In Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub. an. 1583.
that he died in 1583, I cannot justly tell, unless his information was, that
he died at that instant of ^^me (as is before said) when the E. of Desmond was
killed, which was Ibid. and in Hibernia, in com. Kerriae.
1583 as he says. The reader must now know, that whereas Camden (whom I follow
in some things) tells us that our Author N. Saunders was miserably ramish'd to
death, seems to be contrary to what a certain Philip Osullie^an B^arrus
Hibernus, in lib. cui tit. est, Historiae (...) Ibe^^ae com pend^^n.
Ulyssippon, 1621. in oct. Tom. 2. lib 4. cap. 16.
Author of Camdens time reports, but he being one of Saunder's persuasion may
perhaps not be believed by many. He tells us that before the end of the said
war, wherein Desmond was killed, Saunders was overtaken with the flux, (a usual
disease with strangers in Ireland) and tho he was strong, and in the judgment
of all near to him, far from the approach of death, yet in the beginning of the
night he desired Cornelius the Bishop (titular) of Killaloa to give him the
extreme unction, for, says he, this night I shall die, having received a call
from my Creator. Whereupon Cornelius made answer that there was no need of it,
seeing that his body was strong, and no sign of death near it. Notwithstanding
this, his disease pressing forward, he was anointed in the middle of the night,
and about the time of Cock-crowing he surrendered up his Soul to God. In the
night following he was carried to his grave by 4 Irish chevaliers, whereof
Dermitius Osullevan (father to the Author, whom I here quote) was one, and was
buried by certain Priests according to their manner, his body having been
exposed to the sight of certain Persons as well of England as of Ireland, who
for privacy sake, were prohibited their presence at his funeral. Afterward
Cornelius went into Spain and died at Lisbon, an. 1617. Thus in effect the said
Author, who tells us not the name of the place where he died, or was buried,
neither the time when.

EDMOND CAMPIAN another stiff defender of the London on St. Paul's day in Jan.
1540. educated in School-learning among the blew coats in Chapter Chapter Hospital
within the said City, spoke an eloquent oration before Qu. Mary there at her
first coming to the Crown, an. 1553, put in Scholar of St. John's Coll. by the
worthy founder thereof at its first foundation, took the Degree of Master of
Arts in 1564, and was Junior of the Act celebrated on the 19. of Feb. the same
year; at which time speaking one or more most admirable orations, to the envy
of his contemporaries, caused one Tob. Matthew in Coneione Apologet. edit. Oxon.
1638. p. 61.
of them, who was afterward an Archbishop to say, that rather than he would
omit the opportunity to show his parts and dominare in una atque altera
conciuncula, did take the oath against the Popes Supremacy, and against his
conscience. Soon after, if not before, he took holy orders according to the
Church of England from the hands of Rich. Cheyney Bishop of Gloucester, (who had
encouraged him in his studies) and became a florid Preacher. In 1566 when Qu.
Elizab. was entertained by the University of Oxon, he did not only make an
eloquent oration before her at her first entry, but also was Respondent in the
Philosophy Act in St. Mary's Church, performed by him with great applause from
that Queen and the learned auditory. In 1568 he was the junior Proctor of the
University, being the first of his Coll. who did undergo that office, and in
the Year following he took a journey into Ireland, where improving his time
very industriously, did, by the help of his admirable parts, write in short
time a history of that Country; but then he being discovered to have left the
Church of England and to labor for Proselytes, was seized, and detained for a
time; but getting loose from his keepers, did with much ado obtain footing on
the British shore, an. 1571, where making but short stay, took shipping again
and went into the Low Countries, and settling for a time in the English Coll.
at Doway made an open recantation of his heresy, as they there styled it,
studied Divinity and had the Degree of Bach. of that faculty conferred upon
him. Thence he went to Rome, where he was admitted into the Society of Jesus,
in 1573, and being esteemed by the General of that order to be a Person every
way complete, was sent into Germany, where living for some time at Brune and
afterward at Vienna, composed a Tragedy called Nectar and Ambrosia, acted
before the Emperor with great applause. Soon after settling at Pragne in
Bohemia, where had been newly erected a College for Jesuits, taught there, for
about 6 years time, Philosophy and Rhetoric and became amongst them a constant
Preacher in the Latin tongue. At length being called thence to Rome, was, with
Father Persons, sent at the command of P. Gregory 13 into England, in 1580,
where arriving at Dover, on the day next following that of St. John Baptist,
was the day after that received with great joy by the Catholics in London.
Afterward he printed privately and by stealth his neat well penned book called
Rations december, of which many copies were dispersed in St. Mary's Church at an
Act-time, an. 1581. by one who was sometimes a Member of St. John's Coll. (in
the time of Campian) named Will. Hartley a R. Priest, a native of
Nottinghamshire, and a learned Man, who being taken in short time after, was
imprisoned, and in Feb. 1584 being released, was (with other Priests and
Jesuits) put on Shipboard at Tower-wharf, and thence at the Queens charge was
wafted over the Seas to Normandy, where he and his company were left to their
shifts. Afterward it being commonly known that Campian was in England, great
inquisition was made after him. At length at the desire and insinuation of
Walsingham Secretary of State, one George Eliot a Priest-catcher (sometimes a
zealous Catholic) undertook, for a considerable reward, to find him out. But
all his searchings in London availing not, he did at length, upon some
intimation received, go into Berks. where with his attendants, making great
enquiries, did with much ado find him out (disguised like a Royster, as it is
said) in the house of Edw. Yates Esquire. at Lyford, a little before which time
Persons the Jesuit, who had been with, and accompanied, him in his travels to
and fro, had left him, and diverted his course toward Kent. So that being
carried as a Prisoner with triumph through Abendon, Henly, Colebroke, and so
through part of London with a paper fastened to his hat, and a writing thereon
to show to the People that he was Edm. Campian a most pernicious Jesuit, was
chap'd up a close Prisoner within the Tower of London, where he did undergo
many examinations from several People, abuses, wrackings, tortures and I know
not what; but scarcely answered the expectation raised of, when certain Divines
disputed with, him. About which time a little Pamphlet was published in oct.
containing a discourse of his apprehension, which I have not yet seen. All
writers, whether Protestant or Popish, say that he was a Man of most admirable
parts, an elegant Orator, a subtle Philosopher and disputant, and an exact
Preacher whether in English, or Lat. tongue, of a sweet disposition, and a well
polished Man. A certain Tho. Fuller in his Chapter Hist. lib. 4. p. 114.
writer says he was of a sweet nature constantly carrying about him the charms
of a plausible behavior of a fluent tongue and good parts, and another Rich.
Stanyhurst in Descript, Hybern.
who was his most beloved friend, says that he was upright in conscience, deep
in judgment, and ripe in Eloquence. As for the works by him written, and
published under his name, they are these.

Nectar and Ambrosia, Trag. -- Much praised by Greg. Martin.

Rations december oblati certaminis in causa fidei, redditae Academicis Angliae.
Printed first of all privately in the house of one Stonor a Cath. Gent. living
near to Henly in Oxfordshire, an. 1581, afterward, at least five times,
publicly beyond the Seas, (of which once was at Aug. Trev. 1583 in Concertat.
Eccles. Cath.) and at length were translated into English -- Land. 1687. qu.
These reasons were very learnedly answered by Will. Whittaker of Cambridge, and
replied upon by John Durey a Scot; which Durey was answered by Dr. Laur.
Humphrey.

Nine articles directed to the Lords of the Privy Council, an. 1581 -- See more
in Mer. Hanmer, under the Year 1604, and in Rob. Persons, an. 1610.

Various conferences concerning Religion, had with Protestant Divines in the
Tower of London, on the last of Aug. and on the 18, 23, and 27. of September.
1581. Land. 1583. qu. Among those Divines that he disputed with, were Alex.
Nowell Dean of St. Paul's Cath. and Will. Day Dean of Windsore.

The History of Ireland, in two books -- Written 1570. The MS. or original of
which, being in the Cottonian Sub effig. Vitelli^, F. 6.
Library, was afterward published by Sir James Ware of Dublin Knight -- Dubl.
1633. fol.

Chronologia Universalis. Much commended by Greg. Martin beforementioned.

Narratio de divortio Hen. 8. Regis ab uxore Catherina. Printed at the end of
Nic. Harpesfeild's Chapter History, at Doway, by the care of Rich. Gibbon a Jesuit,
who also added thereunto a Lat. translation of John Speeds Catalogue of
religious Houses, Colleges, and Hospitals in England and Wales. Ingolst. 1602.
oct.
Orationes. Epistolae. Tractatus de imitatione Rhetorica.


Among which orations, are those (as I suppose) which he made at the funeral of
Sir Tho. White, and of the Lady Amey Robsert the first Wife of Robert Earl of
Leycester, whose body having been at first buried in Comnore Church near
Abendon, (for there she died, or rather was murdered, in the manor house there
belonging to Anth. Forster Gent. 8. Sept. 1560) was taken up, and reburied in
the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, in Oxon.

Literae ad Rich. Chenaeum Episc. Glocestr. The beginning, of which is, Non me
nunc and alium, etc.

Letters to Everard Mercurian, General of the Society of Jesus, giving an
account of his proceedings in England, an. 1580. -- Printed in Lat. in
Concertatio Eccles. Cath. in Anglia, part 1. p. 3. and elsewhere. Besides all
these, are other things of our Author Compian, which I have not yet seen, that
were collected and published among some of his works by Silvester a Petra
Sancta a Jesuit of Italy, printed at Antw. 1631. in tw. but those things being
scarce and rare to be had, I can make no farther report of them, nor their
Author, only that he, with other Romans Priests, having been found guilty of
treason according to the Act of 25. Ed. 3. and of adhering to the Bishop of
Rome, the Queens Enemy, and of coming into England to disturb the peace and
quiet of the Realm etc. were executed at Tybourne near London on the first of
December. in Fifteen hundred eighty and one, Campians carcass I know not. Paul
Bombin a Jesuit has written his Life and Martyrdom, published at Antw. 1618.
in 12o. and afterward at Mantua an. 1620. in oct. But that Pamphlet, which I
have several years looked after, but in vain, is the Report of the death and
martyrdom of E. Campian, R. Sherwyn and A. Briant, printed in English, in oct.
soon after their death. The two last of which I am now about to mention.

RALPH SHERWYN, where born unless in the Western England I know not, was made
Fellow of Exeter Coll. by Sir Will. Petre a principal benefactor thereunto, in
July 1568, went through with great industry the several classes of Logic and
Philosophy, and in 1574 proceeding in Arts, was made Senior of the Act
celebrated 26 July the same year, being then accounted an acute Philosopher,
and an excellent Grecian and Hebritian. Afterward he, (with Joh. Currey M. of
A. and Fellow of the said Coll.) obtaining leave to travel beyond the Seas in
July 1575, left the University, utterly renounced the Religion, in which he had
been mostly educated, went to Doway, spent some time in the study of Divinity
in the English Coll. there, and was made Priest with Laur. Johnson (who
afterward was hanged by the name of Richardson) 23. March 1576/7. In that
place (and for a time in the English Coll. at Rome) he continued in making
progress in divine studies till about the beginning of 1580, and then instead
of going into England with certain Persons of his society into the Mission, he
went to Rheimes upon public concerns to be had with Thom. Goldwell Bishop of
St. Asaph then there, who being at that time in a sickly condition, and
therefore not able to serve Sherwin and his Brethren as to Episcopal
confirmation and other matters relating to the mission, he waited upon the said
Bishop in the quality of a Chaplain during his sickness. Afterward being well,
and sent for to Rome, Sherwin went into England, and before he was quite
settled in London, he was taken in the house of one Roscarriot or Roscarrock,
committed Prisoner to the Marshalsea, and had fetters fastened to his legs.
While he continued there he had notice once or twice that he should prepare
himself to dispute with certain Protestant Divines; whereupon showing himself
very ready to encounter them, he was translated to the Tower of London, where,
after he had many questions proposed to him concerning Campian, Persons and
other Priests, he showed himself afterward to be a Man of parts, and one that
needed not to be ashamed of his education in Exeter College. At length after he
had continued there more than an year in great misery, was at length tried for
his life, and refusing several times the Oath of Supremacy and going to hear
service in the Protestant Churches, was condemned to die. His writings are,

Discourse in the tower of London with Edm. Campian the Jesuit.

^ account of the disputations in Wisbich Castle between Will. Fulk of
Cambridge and certain R. Priests who were Prisoners there. -- These two are not
printed, but kept in MS. as choice relics among R. Cath. beyond the Sea.
Where, or else in the Tower, Rich. Stanyhurst saw them.

Epistles and Letters to diverse Persons -- Two of which are in a book entit.
Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae. Aug. Trev. 1594. fol. 71. 72. etc. See more
of him in the latter end of Pet. White, under the Year 1590. At length being
found guilty of high treason, was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn 1.
December. in Fifteen hundred eighty and one. At the same time suffered Edm.
Campian beforementioned, who was much pitied by all learned Men, especially
by his contemporaries in Oxon, as Sherwyn was, who had been very often a
companion with Campian in his travels. Alex. Briant also (whom I am now about
to mention) did suffer at the same time, and tho not so much commiserated by
Scholars, yet by many others, because he was, as the character went on both
sides, juvenis pulcherrimus, vultu innocens and prope angelico, etc.
Contemporary with Ralph Sherwyn was one Martin Ayray, who, after he had left
this University, was one of the first that was brought up in the English Coll.
at Rome, and was companion there with the said Sherwyn. Afterward he became a
good workman in England and of great edification for diverse years (as those of
his opinion say) both before he was taken, and afterward in Prison. He was
living in 1602 which was the last year of Qu. Elizab. at which time he was
Provost of the English Church and residence of St. George in St. Lucar of Spain.

Somersetshire, was admitted a Student of Heart hall about Lent-term in 1573-74
aged 17 or more, where being trained up under a tutor sufficiently addicted to
Popery, left the University and went to Rheimes and afterward to Doway: At the
last of which places taking the Priesthood on him, he returned into his own
Country, an. 1579. and settling for a time in Somersetshire, converted the
Father of Rob. Persons the Jusuit, to the R. Cath. Religion. On the 28. Apr.
1581 he was taken in the night time in his Lodging by one Norton, who took away
3 l. in money from him, besides clothes, and conducting him to a Magistrate,
was after examination, committed close Prisoner to the Compter in London, where
enduring great misery till the morrow after the Ascension, was removed to the
Tower of London, and there (as Card. Will. Allen in his Modest defense of Engl.
Cath. that suffer for their faith, etc. written against The execution of
Justice. p. 11.
it is reported) he was tormented with needles thrust under his nails, racked
also otherwise in cruel sort, and specially punished by two whole days and
nights with famine, which they did attribute to obstinacy, but indeed
(sustained in Christ's quarrel) it was most honorable constancy. While he was in
Prison he wrote Concertatio Eccles. Catholicae in Anglia adversus
Calvino-papistas, etc. Aug. Trev. 1583. p. 229. Ibid iterum 1594 fol. 74. 75.
,

Literae ad reverendos patres societatis Jesu in Anglia degentes. The beginning
of which is, Quoties mecum cogito reverendi patres, etc. They were written
purposely that they would be pleased to receive him into the Order of Jesus
before he died, which accordingly they did to his great comfort.

Several Letters to his friends, and afflicted Catholics -- Whether extant I
know not. At length being found guilty of high treason at a Sessions in London,
he was hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn, on the first day of Dec. Heart
hall (after he had continued there for some time) one Rich. Holtbie born at
Fraiton in Yorkshire, educated for a time in Cambridge, and afterward going to
Oxon, settled in the said hall, an. 1574 aged 21. and more; but departing
without any Degree in this University, he went beyond the Seas to Doway, then
to Rheimes and other places, became a noted Jesuit and spun out his time to a
fair age. The reader is now to know, that during the principality of Philip
Rondell of Heart hall, who had weathered out several changes of Religion (tho in
his heart he was a Papist, but durst not show it) many Persons who were
afterward noted in the Romans Church, were educated under him, but they having
not exercised their pens upon any subject that I can yet find, I can claim no
pretense to set them down among such writers that that ancient house of
learning has sent into the learned world.

JAMES DYER second Son of Rich. Dyer of Wymaulton Somersetshire Esquire. by his
Wife the Dau. of one Waiton of the said County, was born, as I conceive, at
Wymaulton, but in what house he was educated in Oxon (for he was a Commoner for
some time there) it appears not, notwithstanding tradition tells us in
Broadgates hall. From thence, without the honor of a Degree, he went to the
Middle Temple, where making great proficiency in the municipal Laws, was, after
he had continued for some time in the Degree of Barrester, elected Autumn, or
Summer, Reader of that house 6. Ed. 6. and about the same time was by writ
called to the Degree of Sergeant at Law. In the Reign of Qu. Marie he was made
a Justice of the Common pleas, (being about that time a Knight and Recorder of
Cambridge) and in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth Lord Chief Justice of that
Court, in the place of Sir Anth, Brown, and not Lord Chapter Justice of the
Kingsbench as one Sir Will. Dugdale in his Chron. series at the end of Orig.
Jurid sub an. 1559.
does falsely report. As for his writings which show him a great and eminent
Sage of the Law, and a Person of great abilities are these.

Reports: or, a collection of Cases, with diverse resolutions and judgments
given upon solemn arguments, etc. and the reasons and causes of the said
resolutions and judgments, in the Reigns of K. Hen. 8. Ed. 6. Phil. and Mary
and Qu. Eliz. Land. 1601. 1621. etc. fol. Abridged by Sir Tho. Ireland of
Greys-Inn, (the same Person who abridged the Eleven Books of Reports of Sir
Edw. Coke) and by another, with a table made to them: printed by Rich. Tothill.

Learned reading upon the useful statute of 32. Hen. 8. chap. 1. of Wills, and
of 34 and 35. Hen. 8. chap. 5. for the explanation of that statute. Land. 1648.
qu. At length this great Lawyer having arrived to a good old age, paid his last
debt to nature at Stowton in Hunting donshire (where he had purchased an
estate) on the 24. March in Fifteen hundred eighty and one, 158.
whereupon his body was buried in the Parish Church of Much Stowton in the said
County, near to that of his Wife, on the 9 day of Apr. 1582. His said Wife was
named Margaret Dau. of Sir Maurice Abarrow of Hampshire Knight, Widow of Sir
Tho. Eliot of Carleton in Cambridgeshire, (by whom she had 3 Sons but all died
without issue) which Margaret Lib. Certis. in Coll. Arm. Land. J. 5. fol. 14.
died 25. Aug. 1569, but having had no Children by Sir James went after his
death to Richard, Son of his Brother Laurence Dyer, whose posterity are at this
time Baronets in Somersetshire.

RICHARD BRISTOW another most zealous Person Worcester, educated in Grammar
learning under one Rog. Golbourne M. A. (the same I think who was a Reader in
St. Bernards Coll. in the Year 1540) saluted the Oxonian Muses in 1555, but
whether he was then entered into Exeter Coll. I know not. One Bristow I find to
be Chaplain of Chapter Chapter in 1549. 50. and 51. but him I cannot take to be the
same with the former, because he of Chapter Chapter seems then to be Master of Arts. As
for our R. Bristow he took the Degree of Bach. of Arts in the beginning of the
Year 1559, that also of Master in 1562, and was Junior of the Act celebrated 13
of July the same Year, at which time he was entered in the Proctors book as a
member of Chapter Chapter About that time, having obtained great credit among the
Academians, for his admirable speeches spoken while Junior of the Act, he
applied himself to the study of Divinity, became noted in the University for
his acute parts, and being recommended therefore to that singular lover of
learning Sir Will. Petre, was by him promoted to one of his Scholarships or
Fellowships in Exeter Coll. in July 1567, where exercising himself much in
Theology, did in a set disputation in the Divinity School put the Kings
Professor ( L. Humphrey) to a nonplus, as those of our Authors persuasion do
report. At length being convinced that he had erred in his opinion, left the
Coll. in 1569, his Religion, and the Kingdom, went to Lovaine and became
acquainted with Dr. William Allen, who made him the first Moderator (or Prefect
of studies) in the English Coll. by him founded at Doway, took upon him the
Priesthood, being the first in that Coll. that did so, and read the public
lecture of Divinity there. In 1573 his said Scholarship or Fellowship of Ex.
Coll. being pronounced void, because he had been absent several years, John
Petre Son of Sir W. Petre beforementioned did put into his room Mr. Oliver
Whiddon Archdeacon of Totness 27. Oct. but resigned it in the latter end of
Nov. following. Afterward upon Dr. Allens instituting another Seminary at
Rheimes, Bristow was sent for, and the care of that place was committed to him
also, in 1579, while another was his substitute at Doway: About which time he
took the Degrees in Divinity, partly at Doway and partly at Lovaine, and became
famous in those parts for his Religion and learning. He has written,

A brief treatise of diverse plain and sure ways to find out the truth in
this doubtful and dangerous time of heresy, containing sundry motives unto the
Cath. Faith; or, considerations to move a Man to believe the Catholics, and
not the Heretics. Antw. 1599. in tw. and before, at another place. Dr. W.
Allens testimony of this treatise is prefixed, dat. 30. Apr. 1574, wherein he
says that the said book contains with great perspicuity, order, and art diverse
most excellent works, whereby to discern in Religion the true judgment of the
Catholic Church from the false vanity of the Heretics, etc. that it is also
in all points Catholic, learned and worthy to be read and printed. These
motives were answered by Dr. Will. Fulke of Cambridge.

Reply to Will. Fulke, in defense of Dr. Allens scrowle of articles, and book
of Purgatory. Lov. 1580. qu. Whereupon Dr. Fulke came out with a rejoinder the
Year following.

Anti-Heretica Motiva, omnibus catholicae doctrinae orthodoxis cultoribus
pernecessaria. Atrebat. 1608. in two tomes in qu. This large book, which
contains most, if not all the former motives, was translated into Lat. by Thom.
Worthington a Secular Priest (afterward a Jesuit) an. 1606. and by him
published at Arras two years after.

Demands (51 in number) to be proposed by Catholics to the Heretics. --
Several times printed in oct. This also was answered in a book entit. To the
seminary Priests late come over, some like Gentlemen, etc. Land. 1592. qu.

A defense of the Bull of P. Pius 5. -- He also collected and for the most part
wrote Annotations on the New Testament, translated into English at Rheimes. And
was also as it seems Author of,

Veritates aureae S. R. ecclesiae autoritatibus vet. patrum, etc. Printed 1616.
qu. for the name of R. Bristous Anglus is set to that Book. At length after our
Author had lived at Rheimes about two years, went privately into England (by
his Physicians advice) for healths sake in 1581, and going to London, was
kindly received by, and entertained in the Family of, one Bellamie, (Rob. or
Jerome Bellamie as it seems) a sincere and constant Lover of R. Catholics and
their Religion. But his distemper being gone too far, dyed the year following,
and was by Bellamie buried pivately, Harrow on the hill in Middlesex, where the
Bellamies had a seat and Lands, I know not. In the Year 1682 I received a note
from one of the English Coll. in Doway, whereby I was instructed that Rich.
Bristow was made D. of D. at Doway, from whence he was sent into England, where
he died not far from London 18. Oct. 1581. But this note I reject, because that
what I have said already of his death, I had from the writings of one that knew
him, viz. Tho. Worthington, who published his Motives.

Macksfield near to Winchelsey in Sussex, was put in one of the original
Scholars of S. John's Coll. by the Founder thereof Sir Tho. White, in 1557,
where going through the usual forms of Logic aad Philosophy with incredible
industry, took the degree of Master of Arts, 1564. Afterward he was taken into
the Family of Thomas the great and mighty Duke of Norfolk to be Tutor to his
Son the Lord Philip (afterward Earl of Surrey) and his Brethren; where
continuing for some years, it happened in that time that the said Duke came to
Oxon, and giving a visit to S. John's Coll. had an eloquent Speech delivered
before him by one of that Society, wherein, of Gr. Martin, he said thus --
Habes illustrissime Dux, Hebraeum nostrum, Graecum nostrum, Poetam nostrum,
decus and gloriam nostram. After he had done with his service in the said Dukes
Family, and received sufficient rewards for his pains, he went beyond the Seas,
and renouncing his Religion openly, (for before he was but a Catholic in
private) he retired to Doway, where applying his mind to the studies of
Divinity, was made a Licentiat in that Faculty, in 1575. Afterward going into
Italy, he went to Rome to do his Devotions to the places and Temples of the
Apostles, but making no long stay there, he went to Rheimes in France, where
fixing his station in the English Coll. became public Professor, and one of
the Divinity-Readers there. He was a most excellent Linguist, exactly read and
versed in the Sacred Scriptures, and went beyond all of his time in humane
literature, whether in Poetry or Prose. As for those things he has written,
they have been, and are, taken into the hands of Men of his profession, but all
that I have seen of them, are only these.

A treatise of Schism, showing that all Catholics ought in any wise to
abstain altogether from heretical Conventicles, viz. their Prayers, Sermons,
etc. Doway 1578. oct.

A discovery of the manifold corruptions of the Holy Scripture by the Heretics
of our days, especially the English Sectaries, and of their foul dealing herein
by partial and false translations, etc. Rhemes, 1582. oct. Answered in a book
entitled, A defense of the sincere and true translations of the Holy
Scriptures into the English tongue, etc. Land. 1583. oct. Written by Will.
Fulke D. D. Master of Pembroke hall in Cambridge.

Treatise of Christian Peregrination and relics -- Printed 1583. oct.

Epistles to certain of his friends -- The last of which (which is the largest)
dat. 15. Oct. 1575. was written to Dr. Tho. White then lately Warden of New
Coll. touching his following the world, and dissembling in Religion against his
conscience and knowledge.

Of the love of the soul, with questions to the Protestants -- Printed at Roan
in Normandy. He has also written other books which remain in MS. in several
Libraries beyond the Sea, as I conceive, treating of Divinity, In the Year 1584
was set forth a certain book which one Gul. Camden in Annal. sub. an. 1584.
calls a horrid piece of Popish malice against Queen Elizab. wherein her
Gentlewomen were exhorted to act the like against the Queen, as Judith had done
with applause and commendations against Holofernes. The Author was never
discovered, but the suspicion lighted upon Gregory Martin, (one very learned in
the Greek and Lat. tongues) as my Author before quoted says, but how he could
be Author, having been dead two years before that time, I cannot say. He also
was the chief Man that translated the New Testament; printed at Rhemes 1582,
for which work his name remains precious to this day among those of his party.
He also made other translations, which are preserved in MS. in certain
Libraries, among which is the Tragedy of Cyrus King of Persia, which is, as
some say, in the Library of St. John's Coll. in Oxon. See the titles of other
books, which are remembered by one ^o. Priseus in lib. De illustr. Angl. script.
aet. 16. nu. 1031.
that knew him, while I in the mean time tell you, that our Author dying 28.
October. in Fifteen hundred eighty and two, was buried in the Parish Church of
St. Stephen at Rheimes There is an Epitaph over his grave comprehended in 16
verses, the two first of which are these.

Quem tulit umbrosis tenerum Southsaxia sylvis, Gallica qua spectat regna
Britannus ager.

The rest I shall now omit for brevity sake and proceed to the next in order,
who was a Romanist also.

WILLIAM HEART, a most zealous young Man for Somersetshire, entered in his
puerile years into Lincoln Coll. an. 1572, where after he had been instructed
in Grammar and Logic, left it without a Degree, his relations and Country, and
going beyond the Seas to Doway, completed his studies in Philosophy.
Afterward he traveled to Rome, studied Divinity and was there made a Priest.
At length being sent into the mission of England before he was 24 years of age,
settled in Yorkshire, where he administered comfort to the afflicted Catholics
for a considerable time, with little or no interruption. At length being taken
and imprisoned at York, he wrote,

Letters to certain Catholics.

Letters to his spiritual Sons.

Letters to the afflicted Cath. and to those that suffer in Prison.

Letters to a noble Matron -- All which, at least 10 in number, were as I
presume written by him in the English tongue. The Latin copies, with many
things of their Author, you may see in a book entit. Concertatio Ecclesiae
Catholicae in Anglia, p. 104. mentioned in Joh. Bridgwater among the writers
following, under the Year 1594. This Will. Heart was hanged, drawn, and
quartered, for being a R. Priest, 1582-83.
at York, on the 15 of March in Fifteen hundred eighty and two, and his
quarters afterward hanged up in public places. In his time were several young
Scholars of Lincoln Coll. educated, and afterward professed themselves openly
to be R. Catholics, having received instructions from some of the Fellows that
were inclined that way, but chiefly from the Rector thereof Job. Bridgwater
beforementioned, who always at last his Rectory to prevent expulsion. Some of
them I shall mention, as they lay in my way.

Marie Magd. (in Old Fishstreet) within the City of London, and his
Grammaticals in Wykehams School near to Winchester. In 1536 he was admitted
true and perpetual Fellow of New Coll. (after he had served 2 years of
probation there) about which time having with great industry gone through all
the parts of Philosophy, he applied himself to the study of the Civil and Canon
Law, wherein he became very eminent. In 1544, he being then Bach. of the Civ.
Law of about an year standing, was admitted Principal of an ancient hostle
(mostly for Civilians) called White hall (on the Site of which, Jesus Coll. was
afterward partly built) and in 1546 he was appointed by K. Hen. 8. to be the
Kings Professor of the Greek tongue in the University. In 1553 he left his
Fellowship, took the Degree of Doctor of his faculty, and had then considerable
practice in the Court of Arches. In 1554 he was made Archdeacon of Canterbury
in the place of Edm. Crammer, (Brother to the Archb.) deprived for being
married, and in the beginning of Qu. Elizab. he was one of the 7 R. Cath.
Divines who were to dispute with those of the Protestant party concerning
matters of Religion, when Qu. Eliz. was setting on foot a reformation in the
Church of England. But that matter coming to nothing, he was soon after
imprisoned for denying the Queens Supremacy over the Church, and thereupon had
opportunity given to write several books, some of which follow.

Dialogi sex, contra summi pontificatus, monasticae vitae, sanctorum, sacrorum
imaginum, oppugnatores and pseudo-Martyres. Antw. 1566. qu. Which book being
put into the hands of his friend Alan Cope, he put it out under his name, lest
danger should befall the Author in Prison. See before in Alan Cope, an. 1580.
Our Author Harpesfeild wrote also,

Historia Anglicana Ecclesiastica, a primis gentis susceptae fi dei
incunabilis, ad nostra fere tempora deducta. Duac. 1622. fol. published by
Rich. Gibbon a Jesuit. It Is a book no less learnedly, than painfully performed,
and abating his partiality to his own interest, he well deserves of all
posterity. The original of this Ecclesiastical history, written with the
Authors own hand, is in the Cottonian Library, under Vitellius. C. 9. number. 12.
and a copy of it in two volumes is in the Archbishops Library at Lambeth, L. 3.
and 4. But in that copy in the Cottonian, are several things expunged by the
Licenser, and not at all remitted into the printed copy. Among which are these
to be in p. 422. cap. 2. lin. 4. and to come in between the words inter
exitialem, and Qui omnis, etc. -- Non ignoro magna Innocentium Romanum
pontificem invidia propter Johannem (meaning K. John of Engl.) apud quosdam
laborare (qua de re non est hic disceptandi locus, neque ego quidem idoneus
arbiter, neque volo eam mihi quam non habeo, jurisdictionem prorogare) qui ut
non forsan omni culpa immodicaque cupiditate librandus sit, it a certe
Johannes, qui, etc. Also in the same page and chapter, in the last line from
the bottom, saving one, are these words omitted between Innocentio suggerente
and Stephanum Langtonum -- aut ut quidam tradunt pontificiarum dirarum
terroribus exprimente -- There are many other things of the like nature omitted
in the printed copy, which the MS. in Cottons Libr. had in it before they were
expunged, especially matters that laid open the discords, broiles, and
ambitious poverty of the begging Friars.

Historia haeresis Wicliffianae. Published by the said Gibbon with the former
book; a MS. copy of which is also in Lambeth Library, l. 5.

Chronicon a diluvio Noae ad an. 1559. Written in lat. verse, and is at this
time in the Cottonian Library, under Vitellius C. 9. nu. 11.

Impugnatio contra Bullam Honorii papae primi ad Cantabrigiam. MS.

A treatise concerning marriage, ocasion'd by the pretended divorce between K.
Hen. 8. and Qu. Catherine. In 3 books -- MS. in New Coll. Library. The
beginning of the Epistle to the Reader is, It is an old saying, etc. and of the
work it self; Forasmuch as this matter is incident to the life and doings of
Sir Tho. More, etc. At the end of the said book is this note. This copy was
taken from the original, which was found by Mr. Topcliff in the house of
William, sometimes servant to the said Dr. Harpesfield, who confessed that two
lines of the said original, were of his said Masters own hand writing. What
other things, he has written, whether published, or in MS. I know not, nor any
thing else of him, only that after he had been a Prisoner in London, more than
20 years, Encomium given to him by the Antiquarian-Poet In Cygn, Cant.
Joh. Leland -- Atticae Linguae interpres facilis, disertus, aptus. I find Reg.
act. O King ep. B. and Well.
another Nich. Harpesfeild who was bred in Oxon. and being 24 years of age 1496
became about that time Minister of Uphill in Somersetshire by the presentation
of Joan the relict of Edward Viscount L'isle, and Rector of Ashrengney alias
Ryngesash in the Dioc. of Exeter; but what relation the former I had to this,
know not.

JOHN NICOLLS, a busy and forward Welsh Man, Dunraven, or, as the R. Cath.
writers say, at Cowbridge, in Glamorganshire, did first of all apply his muse
to Academical learning in White hall where Jesus Coll. now stands, in the Year
of his age 16. where spending one year, he translated himself to Brasnose Coll.
and continued there till he was Bachelaurs standing. Afterward leaving the
University without a Degree, he went into his own Country, where at first he
taught a Gentleman's Children, and then became Curat of Withicombe under one Mr.
Jones Vicar of Taunte^ in Somersetshire. From thence he removed to
Whitestanton, where he exercised his function till 1577, at which time being
possessed with certain motives, left the Church of England, went to London and
shipped himself for Antwerp, where tarrying for some time, he went to Rheimes
and at length to Rome. So that as soon as he was settled, and had gained an
opportunity, he offered himself to the inquisition, made a recantation of his
heresy, as it is there called, and forthwith was not only received into the
bosom of the holy Cath. Church, but also as a member into the English Coll. at
that place; where, after he had continued about two years, did, under pretense
of going to Rheimes, return into England, was seized on at Islyngton by London,
sent Prisoner to the Tower, and there recanted his R. Cath. opinions before Sir
Owen Hopton Lieutenant thereof, several courtiers, and others. After which he
published these books.

His pilgrimage, wherein is displayed the lives of the proud Popes, ambitious
Cardinals, lecherous Bishops, fat bellied Monks, and hypocritical Jesuits.
Land. 1581. oct.

Declaration of his recantation, wherein he desires to be reconciled, and
received as a member into the true Church of Christ in England. Land. 1581.
oct. Soon after came out A confutation of Job. Nicolls his recantation, etc.
written by Anonymus, but answered by an old puritan called Dudley Fenner, Land.
1583. qu. Which Fenner a noted dissenter from the Church of England died at
Middleborough in Zeland, in the winter time, an. 1589.

Oration and Sermon pronounced before the Cardinals, an. 1578. -- or as another
title says. An oration and sermon made at Rome by commandment of the four
Cardinals and the Dominican inquisitor, etc. Land. 1581. oct. After which the
R. Catholics taking these things as unworthily and falsely done, one of them
named Rob. Persons a Jesuit published a book against him entit. A discovery of
Jo. Nicolls Minister, misreported a Jesuit. Printed 1581. in oct. After which,
Nicolls to vindicate himself, published,

An answer to an infamous libell maliciously written and cast abroad against
him. Land. 1581. oct. Notwithstanding which, and the endeavors of D. Fenner
and other Puritans, who labored to strengthen him in his Faith, yet he went
beyond the Sea again, but upon what account I know not, tho I am apt not to
think, upon any design of turning Mahumetan, as N. Saunders or rather his
continuator Rishton is pleased to tell In lib. 3. de schism. Angl.
us. However it is, sure I am, that being got as far as Roan in Normandy, he
was there seized on, clapped up in Prison, an. 1582 and like to pay for his old
tales against the Romanists. Soon after came out a Pamphlet entit. A report of
the apprehension and imprisonment of Jo. Nicolls Minister, at Roan, and his
confession, etc. Printed 1583 in oct. In this perplexity and restraint, the
said Rishton tells us how Nicolls recanted all that he had formerly divulged,
was either through vain glory, envy, fear, or hopes of reward. About that time
he also wrote,

Literae ad D. Gul. Alanum. Printed at the end of Saunders his third book De
schism, Anglican. Col. Agr. 1590 and

Literae aliae ad eundem Alanum, 19. Feb. 1583. Printed there also in the same
edition. After which follows,

Confessio publica Job. Nicolai; qua fatetur se multa mendacia contra summum
Pontificem, Cardinales, and Catholicos Anglos protulisse to tempore, quo in
Anglia^ versabatur, etc. What became of him afterward I cannot find, Clar.
1583.
nor do I know any more of him only this, that it does appear from his writings
that he was an inconstant Man in his Religion, timorous, vainglorious, and a
mere braggadocio. I find another Job. Nicolls, who was born in Norwych,
educated in Cambridge, and from the Popish Religion wherein he was trained up,
became a zealous Protestant, but he lived and died before the time of the
former Jo. Nicolls. See more in Jo. Bale, cent. 9. nu. 26.

Heath well known to, and respected by, Dr. Job. Dee and Mr. Tho. Allen, was
born in the City of London, admitted Probationer-Fellow of Allsouls Coll. in
1567, proceeded in Arts 1579, being then in great repute for his admirable
skill in Astronomical and Physical affairs. The products of which are,

A manifest and apparent confutation of an Astrological discourse lately
published to the discomfort (without cause) of the weak and simple sort.

Brief Prognostication, or Astronomical prediction of the conjunction of the
two superior Planets, Saturn and Jupiter, which shall be in 1583. Apr. 29.
etc. -- Printed with the former book. Both these were written 25 March the same
year, to Sir George Carey Knight, Knight-Marshal of her Majesty's most
honorable household, who was a cherisher of the muse of our Author, and printed
at Land. 1583. oct. The said Astrological discourse, which our Author answered,
was written in the beginning of January, an. 1582. upon the great and notable
conjunction of the two superior Planets, Saturn and Jupiter, which was to
happen 28 Apr. (Heth says 29.) 1583, by Rich. Harvey a native of
Saffron-Walden in Essex, Brother to Dr. Gabr Harvey, and a Student in
Cambridge, particularly, as I conceive, in Trinity hall, afterward a professed
Divine, and a Man of note. Upon the coming out of the said Astrological
discourse, the common sort of People were driven out of their wits, and knew
not what to do. But when nothing happened, which was therein predicted, they fell
to their former security, and condemned the discoverer of extreme madness and
folly. Whereupon Tom Nash did register In his Apology of Pierce Penniless, or
strange news, etc. Printed 1593. in qu.
down the infinite scorn that the whole realm entertained it with, the adages
also that ran upon it, with Tarltons and Eldertons nigrum theta set to it. What
became of our Author Tho. Heath I know not, nor of another Tho. Heath Bach. of
Arts of Magd. hall, an. 1570, whom my friend takes to be the Astronomer, and
not him of Alls. Coll. but mistaken, as I conceive, for certain reasons, not
necessary to be now set down. Heath the Astronomer was in great renown among
those of his profession in Fifteen hundred eighty and three, Clar. 1583.
but when he died, or where he was buried, I cannot justly say. As for Rich.
Harvey beforementioned, it was the very self-same Person who read the
Philosophy Lecture at Cambridge, and the same whom the whole University histat,
if you will believe that noted Buffoon Ibid.
Tho. Nash his contemporary there; who farther adds, that Tarlton at the
theater made jests of him, and W. Elderton consumed his ale-cramn'd-nose to
nothing, in bear-baiting him with whole bundels of ballads. 'Twas the same Ric.
Harvey also that set Aristotle with his heels upward on the School-gates at
Cambridge, and asses ears on his head, a thing that the said Tom did in
perpetuam rei memoriam See Th. Nashes book intit. Have with you to
Saffron-Walden, etc.
record: And the same Person who coming to take one Smiths (a young Bachelaur
of Trinity Coll.) questions, cried out, when he durst not venture on them,
Aquila non capit muscas; and so gave them to him again. Whereunto, the other
(being a lustly big-bon'd fellow, and a Goliath or Behemoth in comparison of
him) strait retorted, nec eliphas mures, and thereupon parted. The same Dick
Harvey also, of whom Christoph. Marlo was wont to say that he was an ass and
good for nothing but to preach of the iron age. But to let pass other matters
which these vain Men report of Rich. Harvey, it is fit that the reader should
know some of the other works that he has done, which show him quite another
Person that what they make him to be, as (1) A discourse of the eclipse of the
Sun which happened in 1582, as also A compendious table of phlebotomie. Both
printed at the end of the Astrological discourse. Land. 1583. oct. (2)
Ephemeron, sive Paean, in gratiam propurgatae, reformataeque Dialecticae. Land.
1582. oct. (3) Theological discourse of the Lamb of God, and his enemies.
Containing a brief commentary of Christian faith; together with a detection of
old and new barbarism. Land. 1590. qu. and fourthly was, as I conceive, the
Author of another book entit. Philadelphus; or, a defense of Brutes and the
Brutans history. Land. 1593. qu. This Rich. Harvey had a Brother named John
Harvey a Cambridge Man also, who wrote An addition to the late discourse upon
the great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter. Land. 1583. oct. which discourse,
as I have told you before, was written by his Brother Richard, and thereunto
was adjoined by John his translation of Hermes Tresmagistus his
Jatromathematica, and was afterward Author of A discoursive problem concerning
prophecies, how far they are to be credited, according to the surest rules of
Div. Phil. Astrol. and other learning, etc. Land. 1588. qu.

THOMAS MARTYN, a younger Son of Tho. Martyn Cerneley commonly called Cearne in
Dorsetshire, educated in Wykebams School near to Winchester, admitted true and
perpetual Fellow of New Coll. after he had served two years of probation, an.
1539, where applying his genius to the faculty of the Civ. Law, made great
proficiency therein. At length obtaining leave to travel, went as a Tutor to
certain young Gentlemen into France, where making his chief residence in the
University of Bourges, took the Degree of Doctor in the same faculty there. Of
whose behavior and manner of life, while he continued there, is a testimony In
Jo. Bales Declaration of Edm. Bonners articles, concerning the Clergy of London
Diocese, etc. Land. 1561. in oct. fol. 42. 43. etc. 46. 47. etc.
extant, written by Francis B^ldwin of Arras, Doctor of the Civ. Law and
public Reader at Bourges. But forasmuch as the said Baldwin was an ill
natured, turbulent and quarrelfom Man, as I understand from other places, and
Jo. Bale the publisher of the said testimony (full of ill language) as bad
almost as he, and one that speaks well of no R. Catholic, not so much as of
Sir Tho. More, Cuthb. Tonstal Cardinal Job. Fisher, etc. especially of those
that wrote against Priests marriages, as our Author Thom Martyn did, they
therefore, I presume, are not to be believed, tho there is no doubt but that
Martyn had his faults as well as they. Besides what is in that testimony, Bale
calls him Ibid. fol. 76. b.
a known pedant or paederastes, the subtle Ib. fol. 39. a.
summener of Berkshire and the clark protector of the Popes Sodomites under
Winchester a polytick Ib.
Gentleman that runs with all winds -- the great Ib. fol. 15. a.
Hercules and mighty defender of stinking buggeries, etc. besides other ill
language In lib. De script. May. Brit. cent. 9. nu. 98.
elsewhere. But if you will consult Pitseus you will find him quite another Man, as
others also of his persuasion make him, which I shall now omit. In 1553 he
resigned his Fellowship, being then in good practice in the Court of Arches and
an officer in the Archdeacons Court of Berks. In the Year 1555 he was
incorporated Doctor of the Civil Law in this University, about which time being
in favor with Dr. Bonner Bishop of London and with Gardener B. of Winton,
became Chancellor to the last, and of noted repute during the Reign of Qu.
Mary, who had so great a respect for him and his abilities, that she
commissionated him with Dr. Story to go to Oxon to try and examine Archb.
Cranmer. He published,

In lib. De script. Maj. Brit. cent. 9. nu. 98.
A treatise proving that the marriage of Priests and professed Persons, is no
marriage, but altogether unlawful. Land. 1554. qu. Whereupon Joh. Ponet or
Poynet Bishop of Winton, came out with an answer thus entit. An apology fully
answering by Scriptures and ancient Doctors a blasphemous book gathered by Dr.
Steph. Gardener, Dr. Rich. Smyth, Albertus Pighius and other Papists, as by
their books appears, and of late set forth under the name of Tho. Martyn Doct.
of the Civ. Law, etc. Printed beyond the Sea, an. 1555-56. in oct. In which
book, fol. 9. Ponet says thus -- Thy book has betrayed thee Martyn, for thy
fondness was not known before it came abroad, but as soon as that showed it self
in Men's hands, they might easily perceive that in playing the Christmas Lords
minion in New Coll. in Oxon in thy fools coat, thou did learn thy boldness,
and began to put off all shame, and to put on all impudence. -- By the
aforesaid title we are given to understand, as if B. Gardener, Dr. Smyth, etc.
were Authors of, or at least had considerable hands in, it; with whom agrees
Baleus In his Declaration of Bonners articles, as before, fol. 15. a. 57. b.
71. b. 76. b.
beforementioned, who styles Martyn, Winchesters voice, but whether true I
cannot say it. The book has been commended by many learned Persons, and no
doubt but he had helps in it, but whether by any of the former, is doubtful.
About the same time came out another answer entit. A defense of Priests
marriages, establyshed by the imperial laws of the Realm of England, etc.
printed in qu. To which tho no name is set to it, yet it is See Dr. Jo. Cosin's
book intit. Apology for sundry proceedings by jurisdiction Ecclesiastical,
etc. Printed 1593. in qu part 2. chap. 12. p. 109.
said to be written by Dr. Matthew Parker, who was afterward Archb. of
Canterbury. The same year Tho. Martyn put out,

A confutation of Dr. Joh. Poyners book entit. A defense for the marriage of
Priests, etc. Land. 1555 (qu) He has also extant,

Oration to Dr. Cranmer Archbishop, 12 March 1555. -- The beginning of which
is, Albeit there are two governments etc.

Discourse between him and Archbishop Cranmer concerning conscience and matters
of Religion -- The beginning is Mr. Cranmer you have told here a long glorious
tale, etc. Which oration and discourse you may see in the Acts and Mon. of the
Chapter by Jo. Fox, under the Year 1555, besides Examinations and Conferences,
under the Year 1556.

Vita Gul. Wicami Wintoniensis Episc. Land. 1597, Ox, 1690 in a large qu.
Printed after the death of the Author, who took much of his matter from the
life of the said Bishop written by Tho. Chaundler Vide Hist. and Antiq. Vniv.
Oxon, lib. 2. p. 134. a.
sometimes Warden of New Coll. There is a copy of this book in the Library of
the said Coll. and in a leaf before the title, are curiously delineated with a
Pen the effigies of the said W. Wykeham setting in a chair. On the right hand
is Chichley founder of Alls. and on the left, Waynfleet of Magdalen, College;
both holding the pictures of their respective Colleges in their hands, and
presenting them, as 'twere, to the founder of New Coll. they having had their
education therein. As for our Author Th. Martyn, he concluded his last day in
Fifteen hundred eighty and four, New Coll. Library, to be there reposed for the
use of the Fellows thereof. In my former searches among records I In a book of
Administrations in the Will-Office near Paul's Cath. in London, beginning in
Januar. 1580. fol. 108. b.
found one Joan the relict of Tho. Martin lately of Isfield in Sussex, to have
received a commission from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, dated 26. June
1584 to administer the goods, debts, chattels, etc. of the said Th. Martin
lately deceased, but without the addition of Doctor of Civil Law, or of that of
Gent. or Esquire. However he may be the same with the Doctor, because, as I have
observed, many whose names have been odious among some, or have retired in
private because of their Religion, their names in wills or administration are
barely written without addition of a title, or town sometimes, only in general
of the County.

EDMUND PLOWDEN Son of Humph. Plowden by Elizab. his Wife, Daughter of Joh.
Sturey of Rosshall in Shropshire, was born of an ancient and gentile Family at
Plowden in the said County, spent 3 years in the study of Arts, Philosophy and
Medicine at Cambridge, and afterward, as I conceive, was entered into the Inns
of Court. Soon after coming to Oxon, he spent 4 years more in the same studies
there, and in Nov. an. 1552 he was admitted to practice Surgery and Physic
by the Ven. Convoc. of the said University. But as about that time Dr. Tho.
Phaer did change his studies from common Law to Physic, so did our Author
Plowden from Physic to the common Law, being then about 35 years of age. In
1557 he became Autumn or Summer reader of the Middle Temple, and three years
after Lent reader, being then a Sergeant at, and accounted the Oracle of the,
Law. He has written in old French,

The Commentaries or Reports of diverse cases, being matters in Law, and of
arguments thereupon; in the times of the Reigns of K. Ed. 6. Qu. Mary and Qu.
Elizabeth: In two parts. Land. 1571. 78. 99. etc. fol. To which was a table
made by Will. Fleetwood Recorder of Land. They are esteemed exquisite and
elaborate commentaries and are of high account with all professors of the Law.
Afterward they were abridged in the French tongue -- Land. 1659. oct. (and
several times before) translated by Fabian Hicks Esquire. and printed also in oct.
There goes also under our Author Plowdens name,

Plowdens Queries, or a moot-book of choice cases useful for the young Students
of the common Law -- This was several times printed, and afterward translated
from French into English, methodised and enlarged by H. B. of Lincolns Inn Esquire.
-- Land. 1662. oct. At length, as this famous Lawyer Plowden mostly lived a R.
Cath. in his heart, so he dyed in that faith, on the sixth day of Feb. in
Fifteen hundred eighty and four, 158^.
and was buried in the Church belonging to the Temples between the body of
Catherine his Wife (Dau. of Will. Sheldon of Beoly in Worcestershire Esque) and
the North wall, near the East end of the choire; leaving then this character In
Annal. Reg. Elizab. pro Gul. Camd. an. 1584.
behind him, (which shall serve instead of his Epitaph, notwithstanding there
is one already over his grave) that ut in juris Anglicani scientia, de qua
scriptis been meruit, facile princeps; ita vitae integritate inter homines suae
professionis nulli secundus. He left behind him a fair estate in lands lying at
Plowden beforementioned, at Shiplake in Oxfordshire, and at Burfield in Berks,
as also a Son of both his names to enjoy it, who dying in less than two years
after his Father, did bequeath In reg. Rutland in offic. praerog. Cant. Qu. 1.
his body to be buried in the Chapel of the Bow built and erected by his
ancestors (wherein some of them were buried) joining to the Church of North
Lydbury (near to which place is the Village called Plowden situated) in
Shropshire. The name and posterity of this Edm. Plowden do now remain at
Shiplake in Oxfordshire.

PATRICK PLUNKET Baron of Dunsanie in Ireland, Rob. Plunket Baron of the same
place (who died 1. Elizab.) was educated in Grammar learning at Ratough Ric.
Stanyhurst in Descript. Hibern. cap. 7.
under one Staghens, and from thence was sent to Oxon to obtain Logicals and
Philosophicals, but to what house there, unless to Gloucester hall, (where many
of his Countrymen, and some of his Surname studied in the time of Qu. Elizab.
as I shall anon inform you) I cannot justly tell, or whether to Univ. Coll.
when Richard Stanyhurst (who calls him his Brother) studied there, I am as yet
ignorant. Howsoever it was, sure I am, that by the care of his Father-in-law
Sir Christoph. Barnwell Knight. he was maintained according to his condition for
some years in this University, where profiting much in several sorts of
learning, tho honored not, or was honored with, any Degree, did afterward
compose several things fit for the press, which Ibidem.
by reason of his bashful modesty, or modest bashfulness were wrongfully
imprisoned, and in a manner stifled in shadowed couches -- I doubt not, (as my
Author Ibid.
adds) but what by his fame and renown in Learning, he shall be answerable to
his desert and value in writing, etc. This worthy Baron who was of ancient
extract in Ireland, and of the R. Cath. Religion, was a Person noted in his
Country for his great possessions there, for his good natural parts, Clar. 1584.
and renowned therefore among the learned in Fifteen hundred eighty and four:
In which year, and after, he had books dedicated to him, as being not only a
learned Person himself, but also a Patron of learning and learned Men. While he
studied in this University, were eight of his Countrymen of Glouc. hall
matriculated in 1574, having been Students there some years before, as Walter,
Henry, and Joh. Talbot of gentile extraction, the first of which was then 21
years of age, and the other two 20. Edw. Plunket a Gentleman's Son, of 20 years
of age; Christoph. Galway and John Martill, Sons of Plebeians, the former 19,
the other 20, years of age; and one Pendergast and Whitty the Sons of Gent. the
former 22, the other 21, years of age. Besides these were several other Irish
Men matriculated as members of that Hall during the Reign of Qu. Elizab. as (1)
Rich. White a Gentleman's Son, aged 21. an. 1578. (2) Giles Hovenden of Leis in
Kings County, the Son of a Gent. an. 1582. aged 26. (3) Gerard Salwey of (
Dromore) an Esquire; Son, the same year, aged 14. with others, to the beginning of
K. James his Reign, which for brevity sake I now omit. Of the said Baron
Plunkets Family was descended that most ven. and religious Dr. Oliver Plunket
titular Primate of Ireland, who being found by some Persons to have been deeply
engaged in the Popish Plot in Ireland, an. 1678. 79, was brought over into
England, where receiving sentence to die in Westminster hall, was accordingly
hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn on the first day of July 1681; whereupon
his quarters only (not his head) were buried in the yard of St. Giles Church in
the Fields near to London, by the bodies of the five Jesuits, that were a
little before executed, and buried under the North wall of the said Yard. In
the said place Plunkets quarters continuing till the fanatical plot broke out
in 1683, they were taken up and conveyed beyond the Sea to the Monastery of the
Benedictines (of which order he was a Brother) at Lambspring in Germany, where
they were with great ceremony and devotion re-buried. Before I speak of the
next writer, the reader may be pleased to know farther of this Plunket, that
when the Lady D. D. had borrowed 200 Crowns of an Irish Priest at Bologna; she,
rather than repay that sum procured the Archbishopric of Armagh (to which the
Primacy of Ireland is annexed) for the said Plunket by the means of Cardinal
Rospigloisi; who, tho he would not be at the congregation that day, wherein
that matter was to be done, yet he made Card. Chigi do it; and when Card.
Barbarini opposed the nomination, Chigi told the said Cardinal that it must be
so: This was about 1669.

de FECKENHAM was so called because he was born of poor Parents living in a
cottage, or poor house, joining to the Forest of Feckenham in Worcestershire,
tho his right name was Howman. While he was a Child, he was very apt to learn,
having a natural genie to good letters, and to any thing that seemed good;
which being perceived by the Priest of his Parish, he was by the endeavors and
persuasions of one or more considerable Persons taken into Evesham Monastry in
the said County, the Abbat and Monks of which, were of the Order of St.
Benedict. When he arrived to the age of about 18 he was sent by his Abbat to
Gloucester Coll. in this University, where there was a particular apartment for
the young Monks of that Abbey to lodge in, and to continue there for certain
years, purposely to obtain Academical, or at least Theological, learning.
Afterward, he being called home by his Abbat to make room for other Monks to
succeed in the said apartment, his Abbey was soon after dissolved, viz. 17 Nov.
1535 at which time he had an allowance Clem. Reyner De Antiq. Ord. Bened. in
Angl. etc. Tract. 1 Sect. 3. p. 233, 234.
made to him from the Exchecquer of an annual pension of 100 florens during his
natural life. Whereupon retiring to the said Coll. of Gloc. again, I find In
reg. Act. cur. Canc. Ox. notat. in dors. cum lit. B invers fol. 194. b.
him there in 1537, in which year he subscribed by the name of John Feckenham
to a certain composition then made between Rob. Joseph Prior of the said Coll.
and 29 Students thereof on the one part (of which number Feckenham was one of
the Seniors) and threeof the Senior Bedells of the University on the other; and
in the Year 1539 he was admitted to the reading of the Sentences, being about
that time Chaplain to Dr. John Bell Bishop of Worcester. But that Bishop giving
up his place in few years after, our Author Feckenham was entertained by Dr.
Bonner B. of London, with whom continuing till 1549 (at which time he was
deprived of his Bishopric and put into the Marshalsea) he was committed
Prisoner to the Tower of London, occasioned, as it is said, by Mr. Rob. Horn,
afterward B. of Winchester. Soon after he was released, or rather borrowed
thence for a time by Sir Philip Hobie, for no other reason but to dispute about
matters of Religion to satisfy Protestants, who then thought that their
Religion could not be denied. The first disputation that he had with the chief
of that party was at the Savoy in the house of the E. of Bedford. The second in
the house of Sir Will. Cecill in Canon rue, and the third in that of Sir John
Cheek at the Carmes (or White friars) lately dissolved. These three
disputations which were well carried on with great vigor and dexterity,
especially by Feckenham, were prorogued to other places, as first to Pershore
in Worcestershire, in which town was then lately a famous Monastery of the
Benedictines standing, and in the said County was Feckenham then beneficed. At
which place, I say, Hooper Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester did dispute with
him, he being then in visiting his Diocese, and received satisfaction from what
he then said. The next was in the Cath. Chapter of Worcester, where Jo. Jewel did,
as it is reported, (but I think false) oppose him. When these things were done
he was remanded to his Prison in the Tower, where continuing till the first
year of Q. Mary, was then released, and not only made Dean of St. Paul's
Cathedral, but soon after (in Nov. 1556) Abbat of Westminster and Chaplain to
that Queen. In 1554 he was in Oxon and openly disputed with Cranmer, Ridley,
and Latymer about matters of Religion before they were to sacrifice their lives
in the fire, and in the beginning of 1556 he was actually created Doctor of
Divinity, being then in wonderful esteem for his learning, piety, charity,
humility and other virtues. All the time of Qu. Mary's Reign he employed
himself in doing good offices for the afflicted Protestants from the highest to
the lowest, and did interceed with the Queen for the Lady Elizabeth, for which
he gained her displeasure for a time. After the said Lady Elizab. came to the
Crown, and Religion about to be altered, he denied the Queens Supremacy over
the Church of England, in 1559. About that time he planted the elmes, which do
yet, or did lately, grow in the garden belonging to the Coll. of Westminster.
But the Queen having a very great respect for his learning and virtuous life,
as also for his former tenderness of her, sent for, and had private discourse
with, him; but what it was, none yet do positively know, tho there be not
wanting some that say, that she offered to him the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, if he would take the oath and conform to the Church of England,
which he refused. The year after, he was committed Prisoner again to the Tower,
and about that time did undergo several disputes with Protestant Divines about
Religion, but was not suffered to be one of those that were publicly to
dispute with the said Divines when the Queen was setting on foot a reformation
in the Church of England. In the winter time 1563 he was committed to free
custody with Dr. Horn B. of Winchester, who, as the R. Catholics say, did
deal uncivilly and falsely with him: But tarrying with that Bishop only one
Winter, he was sent to the Tower again, thence after some time to the
Marshalsea, then to a private house in Holbourn, and in 1580 to Wisbich castle
in Cambridgshire, where he remained to the time of his death in great devotion
and sanctity of life. Under his name, do go these things following.

A conference dialoguewise held between the Lady Jane Dudley and Mr. Jo.
Feckenham four days before her death, touching her faith and belief of the
Sacrament and her Religion. Land. 1554. oct. There again 1625. qu. Jo. Fox
entitles this little book A communication between Mr. Feckenham and the Lady
Jane Gray, before she was to be beheaded, 12. Feb. 1553.

Speech in the House of Lords, an 1553.

Two Homelies on the first, second, and third article of the Creed. Land. in qu.

Oration funebris in exequiis Ducissae Parmae, Caroli quinti filiae and Belgii
Gubernatricis.

Sermon at the Exequy of Joan Queen of Spain, etc. on Deuteronomy. 32. 28. 29. Land.
1555. oct.

The declaration of such scruples and stays of conscience touching the Oath of
Supremacy, delivered by writing to Dr. Horn of Winchester. Land. in qu.
Answered by the said Horn, an. 1566. qu. refuted by Tho. Stapleton the year
after.

Objections or Assertions made against Mr. Joh. Goughe's Sermon preached in the
Tower of London, 15. Jan. 1570. -- Soon after was published by the said Gough,
An answer to certain assertions of Mr. Fecknam, which of late be made against a
godly Sermon etc. Land. 1570. oct.

Caveat Emptor -- This I have not yet seen.

Commentarii in psalmos Davidis. This was seen in MS. in the hands of the
Author (while he was a Prisoner at London) by Rich. Stanyhurst, but lost with
other things, (as it is conceived) among which was his Treatise of the
Eucharist, written against Joh. Hooper. At length after our Author had seen
many changes in Religion and had continued steadfast in that, wherein he was
educated, surrendered up his pious Soul to him that gave it, within the
precincts of Wisbich castle beforementioned, he was a Person full of offices
of piety and humility, and was always ready, tho of a contrary opinion, to do
good to the Protestant party, especially in the Reign of Q. Mary when they
suffered. Our celebrated Antiquary W. Camden tells In Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub
an. 1559.
us that he was a learned and good Man, lived a long while, did a great deal of
good to the poor, and always solicited the minds of his adversaries to good
will.

Chaldwell, a Staffordsh. Man born, was educated in Brasenose College, of which
he was afterward Fellow, took the Degree of M. of Arts, entered upon the
Physic line, and in the 32 year of his age became one of the Senior Students
of Chapter Chapter a little after its last foundation by K. Hen. 8. an. 1547.
Afterward he took the Degrees in the said faculty and became so highly valued
for his learning, and happy practice therein, that he was examined, approved
and admitted into the Physicians Coll. at London and made censor of it in one
and the same day. Six weeks after he was chosen one of the Elects of the said
Coll. and in 1570 President thereof. He has written several matters relating
to his profession, but whether extant I cannot tell. All that I have seen of
his labors is his translation into English of The tables of surgery, briefly
comprehending the whole art and practice thereof, etc. Land. 1585. fol. Written
originally by Horatio More, a Florentine Physician. As for his death, which
happened in Fifteen hundred eighty and five, Camden tell Ibid. sub an. 1585.
you in these words -- Nee inter hos, licet minoris notae, silendus hoc etiam
anno fato fanctus Richardis Chaldwellus e Coll. Aenei Nasi Oxoniae Med. Doctor,
qui ut de reipub. been mereretur (adscito in partem honoris Barone Lumleio)
lectionem Chriurgicam honesto salario in Medicorum collegio Londini a Thoma
Linacro fundato instituit. Juxtaque ad Sancti Benedicti inhumatur, monumento
laqueis, plintheis, and carchesiis, scamno Hypocratis, glossocomtis and aliis
chirurgicis ex Bribasio and Galeno machinamentis exornato. The Coll. of
Physicians was then in Knight-riders-street in London, not far from the Church
of St. Benedict near Paul's Wharf.

Lancashire, became a Student in the University about 1568 particularly, as it
seems, in Brasenose College, where after he had spent some years in Philosophy
and Mathematics, supplicated the Ven. congr. of Regents in Apr. 1572 for the
Degree of Bach. of Arts, having performed all exercise requisite thereunto,
but whether he was admitted it appears not in the University registers.
Afterward he left his native Country and Friends, and went to Doway, where
studying for some time in the English Coll. was made M. of A. Thence he went to
Rome in 1577 and after he had consummated certain studies in Divinity, was made
Jo. Pits. De illustr. Aug. script. Aet. 16. number. 1035.
a Priest in 1580 or thereabouts. Soon after he was sent into the Mission of
England, but before he was quite settled, he was taken and kept close Prisoner
in the Tower of London and elsewhere 3 or 4 years. At length being released,
his life spared, and he condemned to banishment with Jam. Bosgrace a Jesuit,
John Heart and others, he went into France, and settled for a time in the
University of Pont-a-musson in Loraine to the end that he might proceed in the
study of Divinity and take a Degree or Degrees therein; but the plague being
then there and he careless to avoid it in time, was infected therewith and soon
after died. This is that Edw. Rishton, qui impie ingratus (as one Camden ut
sup. sub an 1584.
says) in Principem cui vitam debuit, publicatis scriptis malitiae virus
illico evomuit. The titles of the said writings are these.

Synopsis rerum ecclesiastiearum, ad an. chr. 1577. Whether in Engl. or Lat. I
know not, for I have not yet seen it.

Profession of his faith made manifest, and confirmed by 24 reasons ( or
motives) -- It must be now known that Nich. Saunders left behind him at his
death two imperfect books De schismate Anglicano; with the beginning of the
third, commencing with the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, which coming into the hands
of our Author Rishton after he had suffered imprisonment for some time in
England, he supplied what was defective in them, corrected and caused them to
be published at Colen. 1585. to which he added of his own composition, besides
the third book, which was in a manner all his,

Rerum pro religione catholica ac inturri Londinensi gestarum ab an. 1580. ad
an. usque 1585 indiculus seu diarium, with a preface to it.

Religiosorum and sacerdotum nomina, qui pro defensione primatus Romans Ecclesiae
per Martyrium consummati sunt, sub Henrico 8. Angliae rege, etc. Mostly taken
out of Saunders his book De visibili Monarchia Ecclesiae, etc. These additions,
with the book De Schismate, having undergone several impressions, as I have
told you elsewhere, have been since added to them (1) An appendix, which makes
a fourth book, exerpted from certain of the works of Peter Ribadeneira a Jesuit
(2) Summarium rationum, quibus Cancellarius Angliae and Prolocutor Puckeringius
Elizabethae Angliae Reginae persuaserunt occidendum esse Mariam Stuartum
Scotiae Reginam, etc. Which being published in English were translated into
Latin, and had added thereunto, Supplicium and mors Reginae Scotiae, etc. by
the labor of Romoald Scot (3) Epistola Doctoris Johannis Pistorii Nidani ad D.
Jacobum Grynaeum Ministri verbi Ecclesiae Basiliensis. (4) Mariae Stuartae Reg.
Scotiae innocens a cade Darlean^, etc. written by Obertus Barnestapolius. Which
four things being added to Rishtons additions to Saunders book De Schismate,
were all printed together at Colen 1628 in a thick oct. What other things our
Author Rishton has extant, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he
dying near to St. Manhou after, Pont-a-mosson to avoid the pest) was buried
there by the care Jo. Pits. ut sup.
of Joh. Barnes an English exile, the same, I suppose, with John Barnes the
Benedictine Monk, whom I shall mention elsewhere. I find one Edw. Risden a
Secular Priest of the English Coll. at Doway in this Man's time, who was
afterward of the Order of Carthusians, but he being descended from the Risdens
or Risdons of Devonshire, must not be taken to be the same (as some are apt to
do) with Edw. Rishton beforementioned. I find also one Edw. Risden or Risdon a
Devonian to have been Fellow of Exeter Coll. and Master of Arts 1566, which
probably may be the same with the Carthusians; sed Qu.

HENRY SIDNEY who was learned in many languages, Cranleigh in Surrey, became a
Student in New Coll. (as it seems) in 1543 or thereabouts, but making no long
stay there, he went to the Court, where he became a companion to Prince Edward
(afterward King Ed. 6.) and by him much esteemed. In the third year of that
Kings Reign he received the honor of Knighthood, and was forthwith, being then
about 22 years of age, sent Ambassador into France, where he behaved himself
far beyond his years. In the 2 and 3 of Phil. and Mary he was made general
Governor of all the Kings and Queens revenues, within the Realm of Ireland,
and about two years after Lord Justice thereof. In the 2 of Qu. Elizab. he was
Raphael Holinshed in his Descript and Chron. of England p. 1550. etc. See in
the third tome of The Baronage of England p. 411. a.
appointed Lord President of the Marches of Wales, and 4 years after was made
Knight of the honorable order of the Garter, having before been employed in one
or more Embassies. In 1568, in the month of Apr. he was constituted Deputy of
Ireland, and in Aug. the same year, being then at Oxon. he was actually created
Master of Arts. Afterward he was Lord Justice again and twice Deputy of the
said Kingdom, etc. This Person has written many things, which chiefly continue
at this time in MS. All that I have seen are,

A godly letter to his Son Philip. Land. 1592. oct. Since which time have been
other letters of his to the said Person made extant; two of which I have See in
the Collection of Letters at the end of Archb. Vshers life, printed in fol. at
Land. 1636. number. 15. 16.
seen without date, as that which begins thus, Son Philip I have received two
letters from you. And the other My Son, the virtuous inclination of thy
matchless mother, etc. He has also written,

Miscellanies of Irish affairs -- MS. and caused also the Statutes of Ireland
to be first published in print. He paid his last debt to nature in the Bishops
Palace at Worcester in his return from Ludlow, on So in an old book of Funeral
certificates, communicated to me by Sir Hen. St. George Knight. Clar. K. of Arms,
fol 63. a.
the fourth day of May in Fifteen hundred eighty and six, June following in the
Church at Penshurst in Kent, he having some years before obtained the manor
thereof to him and his posterity for ever. The character given of him by one
Edm. Campian in his Hist. of Ireland, lib. 2. at the end. p. 138.
the knew him in Ireland, I shall here insert for a conclusion of those things
I have said of him, which is this. He was stately without disdain, familiar
without contempt, very continent and chaste of body, no more than enough
liberal, learned, and a great lover of learning, perfect in blazoning of Arms,
skilful of Antiquities, of wit fresh and lively, in consultations very
temperate, in utterance happy, which his experience and wisdom has made
artificial, a preferrer of many, a Father to his Servants, and both in war and
peace of commendable courage.

Glastenbury in Somersetshire, educated in Grammar learning there, admitted
Scholar of C. C. Coll. 26. Feb. 1545, afterward Fellow, Master of Arts 1552,
and about that time Humanity reader in the said College. After Queen Mary came
to the Crown, being then a most zealous R. Catholic, he was promoted to an
Ecclesiastical Benefice in his own Country called Middle Chinnoke, and to a
little Prebendship in the Church of Wells called Comba octava, in Nov. 1556,
besides the rectory of a School in the said City. All which he keeping till Qu.
Elizabeth came to the Crown and for some time after, he voluntarily left them,
and his native Country for Religion sake, and retiring to Tourney in Flanders,
entered himself there into the Society of Jesus, in 1562 aged 35. After he had
served his probationship, he went into Ireland with Father David the titular
Archbishop of Armagh, who left no stone unremoved there for the settling of
that Kingdom in the Catholic faith and obedience. Four years being spent in
that Country, not without some danger, he went to Lovaine, where he met with
Rob. Persons about to enter into the said Society, whom he strengthened with
many arguments in order thereunto. In 1577 he was called to Rome to take upon
him the profession of the four vows; which being done, he went into Sweeden and
Poland in the company of Anth. Possevin to settle certain affairs relating to
the society. Two years after he returned to Rome, and became Confessor to the
English Coll. there, newly converted from an Hospital dedicated to the Holy
Trinity, to a Seminary for the educating the youth of England that profess the
R. Cath. Religion. Vir fuit probatae virtutis and doctrinae, (as one Pet.
Ribadeneira in Bib. scriptorum ^oc. Jesu in Lit. G.
of his society says) atque imprimis in historiis Sanctorum Angliae optime
versatus, quorum res gestas in templo collegii Anglicani curavit coloribus
exprimi, quae subinde in aes incisae prodierunt tacito ipsius inscriptae,

Ecclesiae Anglicanae Trophaea. Robnae 1584. fol. In the Library also of the
English Coll. at Rome there is extant a Manuscript digested according to the
years of Christ and Kings of Britain containing the Acts of the Saints of
Britain. Which book is said there among those of England to have been composed
and written by our Author Good, who dying at Naples 5. July (according to the
account there followed) in Fifteen hundred eighty and six,

PHILIP SIDNEY, the short-lived Ornament of his Marcellus of the English
Nation, has deserved, and without dispute or envy enjoyed, the most exalted
praises of his own and of succeeding Ages. The Poets of his time, especially
Spencer, reveren'd him not only as a Patron, but a Master; and he was almost
the only Person in any age (I will not except Mecaenas) that could teach the
best rules of Poetry, and most freely reward the performances of Poets. He was
a Man of a sweet nature, of excellent behavior, of much, and withal of well
digested, learning; so that rarely wit, courage, breeding, and other additional
accomplishments of conversation have met in so high a degree in any single
Person. It is to be wished that his life might be written by some judicious
hand, and that the imperfect essay of Sir Fulk Grevill L Brook might be
supplied; In the mean time I am forced to consider him only as an Author, and
to give him these short notes of his life and education. He was Son of Sir Hen.
Sidney beforementioned by the Lady Mary his Wife, eldest Daughter of Joh.
Dudley Duke of Northumberland, was born, as it is supposed, at Penshurst in
Kent, 29. Nov. 1554, and had his Christian name given to him by his Father,
from K Philip, then lately married to Qu. Mary. While he was very young, he was
sent to Christ Chapter to be improved in all sorts of learning; and was
contemporary there with Rich. Carew Author of The Survey of Cornwall, where
continuing till he was about 17 years of age, under the tuition of Dr. Tho.
Thornton Canon of that house, he was in June 1572 sent to travel, for on the 24
Aug. following, when the Massacre fell out at Paris, he was then there, and at
that time, (as I conceive) he, with other English Men, did fly to the house of
Francis Walsingham Ambassador there from the Queen of England. Thence he went
through Loraine, and by Strasburgh and Heydelburg to Frankfort in Sept. or Oct.
following, as his said Printed at Land. 1652 in oct. c p 1. p. 8 9.
life written by Sir Fulk Grevill his companion and friend attesteth. But what
is added there, that Hubert Languet accompanied him in the whole course of his
3 years travels, is a great mistake, as will appear by Languets Epistles to our
Author Philip Sidney, printed more than once. For so it was, that in the next
spring in May 1573, Larguet removed to Vienna, where our Author met him again,
and stayed with him till September, when he went into Hungary and those parts.
Thence he journied into Italy, where he continued all the Winter following, and
most of the Summer, an. 1574, and then he returned into Germany with Languet,
and next spring he returned, by Frankfort, Heydelberg, and Antwerp home into
England, about May 1575. The like mistakes are in the said life Page 11. etc.
concerning Languets coming into England in Februar. 1578, at which time, it is
said, he was about 66 years of age, whereas he was but 61; that also he and
Sidney parted at Sea, which could not be, for Duke John Ca^^mire, with whom he
came, went away so suddenly, that Languet could not take leave of him. In the
Year 1576 he was sent Camden in Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub an. 1576.
by the Queen to Rodolph the Emperor to condole the death of Maximilian, and
also to other Princes of Germany, at which time he caused this inscription to
be written under his Arms, which he then hung up in all places where he lodged.
Illustriss. and generosiss. virs Philippi Sidneii Angli, Proregis Hiberniae
filii, Comitum Warwici and Leycestriae nepotis, sereniss. Reginae Angliae ad
Caesarem Legati. The next year, in his return, he saw that gallant Prince, Don
John de Austria Vice Roy in the L^wcountries for the K. of Spain, and William
Prince of Aurange or Orange; by the former of which, tho at first he was
lightly esteemed, upon the account of his youth, yet after some discourse he
found himself so stricken with him, that the beholders wondered to see what
tribute that brave and high minded Prince paid to his worth, giving more honor
and respect to him, in his private capacity, than to the Ambassadors of mighty
Princes. In the Year 1579, he, tho neither Magistrate or Counselor, did show
himself, for several weighty reasons, opposite to the Queens matching with the
Duke of Anjou, which he very pithily expressed by a due address of his humble
reasons to her, as may be fully seen in a book called Part. 3. p. 201.
Cabola. The said address was written at the desire of some great personage,
his Uncle Robert (I suppose) Earl of Leycester; upon which a great quarrel
happened between him and Edw. Vere Earl of Oxford. This, as I conceive, might
occasion his retirement from Court next Summer, an. 1580, wherein perhaps he
wrote that pleasant Romance called Arcadia. In 1581 the treatise of marriage was
renewed, and our Author Sidney with Fulk Grevill Vid. Annal. Camdeni. sub an.
1581.
were two of the tilters at the entertainment of the French Ambassador; and at
the departure of the Duke of Anjou from England in Febr. the same year, he
attended him to Ibid. an. 1582.
Antwerp. On the 8. Janu. 1582 he with Peregrine Bertie received the honor of
Knighthood from the Queen, and in the beginning of 1585 he designed an
expedition with Sir Francis Drake into America, but being hindered by the Queen
(in whose opinion he was so highly prized that she thought the Court deficient
without him) he was in October. following made Governor of Flushing, about that
time delivered to the Queen for one of the cautionary towns, and General of the
Horse. In both which places of great trust, his carriage testified to the world
wisdom and valor, with addition of honor to his country by them; and
especially the more, when in July 1586 he surprised Axil, and preserved the
lives and honor of the English Army at the enterprise of Gravelin. So that
whereas (through the fame of his high deserts) he was then, or rather before,
in election for the Crown of Poland, the Queen of England refused to further
his advancement, not out of emulation, but out of fear to lose the jewel of her
times. What can be said more? He was a Statesman, Soldier, and Scholar, a
complete Master of matter and language, as his immortal Pen shows. His Pen and
his Sword have rendered him famous enough. He died by the one, and by the other
he will ever live, as having been hitherto highly extolled for it by the Pens of
Princes. This is the happiness of art, that although the sword does archieve
the honor, yet the arts do record it, and no Pen has made it better known
than his own, in that book called Arcadia. Certain it is, he was a noble and
matchless Gentleman; and it may be justly said without hyperboles of fiction,
as it was of Cato Uticensis that he seemed to be born to that only which be
went about. His written works are these.

The Countess of Pembrokes Arcadia -- Several times printed at London in quarto
and fol. Which being the most celebrated Romance that was ever written, was
consecrated to his noble, virtuous and learned Sister Mary, the Wife of Henry
Earl of Pembroke, who having lived to a very fair age, dyed in her house in
Aldersgate Street in London 25. Sept. 1621. whereupon her body was buried in
the Cathedral Church of Salisbury among the graves of the Pembrochian Family.
This Arcadia, tho then, and since, it was, and is, taken into the hands of all
ingenious Men, and said by one living at, or near, the time when first
published, to be a book most famous for rich conceit and splendour of courtly
expressions, yet the Author was not so fond, a B. Heliodorus was of his amorous
work, for he desired See Edw. Le^gh's Treatise of religion and tearning. --
Land. 1656. fol. lib. 5. p. 324.
when he died (having first consulted with a Minister about it) to have had it
suppressed. One who writes himself G. M. Perhaps Gervase Markham, qu.
wrote the second and last part of the first book of the said Arcadia, making
thereby a complete end of the first History -- Land. 1613. qu. And in the
eighth edit. printed at Land. 1633. Sir W. A. Knight made a supplement of a
defect in the third part of the History, and R. B. of Linc. Inn Esquire; added then
a sixth book thereunto. In 1662 came out the said Arcadia again, in 6 books;
with several of his other works added to them. In 1624 it was printed in
French, in 3. vol. or parts in oct. and has, as I have been informed,
undergone several impressions in France. It has been also printed once or more
in the Dutch language and in others. Sir Philip also wrote,

A dissuasive Letter to Queen Elizab. her marriage with Monsier of France, etc.
-- It Is in a book called Scrinia Ceciliana Land. 1663. qu.

Astrophel and Stella; wherein the excellency of sweet poesy is concluded.
Land. 1591. qu. Said to be written for the sake of one whom he entirely loved,
viz. the Lady Rich, by whom was understood Philoclea in the Arcadia.

An Apology for poetry. Land. 1595. qu. in prose. There is a book in being
called The Art of English Poesy, not written by Sidney, as some have thought,
but rather by one Puttenham sometimes a Gentleman Pensioner to Qu. Elizab.

Sonnetts.

Remedy for love.

At the end of the 11th. edit of Arcadia, Land. 1662. fol.

Ourania, a Poem. Land. 1606. published by N. B.

An Essay upon valor -- so I find it mentioned in Cottoni posthuma, yet others
say it was written by Sir Thom. Overbury Quaere.

Almonzor and Almanzaida, a Novel. Land. 1678. oct. This book coming out so
late, it is to be enquired, whether Sir Philip Sidneys name is not set to it
for sale-sake, being a usual thing in these days to set a great name to a book,
and to enhance the price of it by the esteem of the supposed Author.

Englands Helicon; or, a collection of Songs -- Sir Philip Sidneys name is also
put to it, as being the Author of most of the said Songs. 'Twas printed at
Land. in qu.

Instructions describing what special observations are to be taken by
Travelers in all nations, states, and countries -- This book which is printed
in 12o, has the names of Robert Earl of Essex and Sir Philip Sidney put to it,
but may be questioned whether either had a hand in it. He also translated from
French into English, A work containing the trueness of Christian Religion
against Atheists etc. written originally by Philip Morney. But the said
translation being left imperfect by Sidney, Arthur Golding finished it. --
Land. 1587. qu. He also ( Sidney) turned the Psalms of David into English
verse, which are in MS. in the Library of the Earl of Pembroke at Wilton,
curiously bound in a crimson velvet cover, left thereunto by his Sister Mary
Countess of Pembroke. At length Sir Philip being wounded in the battle at
Zutphen, while he was getting up the third horse (having had two slain under
him before) on the 22 September. Arnheim, where languishing under his wound 25
days or thereabouts, he died on the sixteenth of October following. This was
that Sidney, whom, as Gods will was, he should be therefore born into the
world, even Camdeni Britan. in Kent.
to show unto our age a sample of ancient virtues: so his good pleasure was,
before any looked for it, to call for him again, and take him out of the world
as being more worthy of Heaven than Earth. Soon after his death, his body was
brought to Flushing, and being embarked with great solemnity on the first of
November, landed at Tower Wharf on the sixth day of the said month. Thence
'twas conveyed to the Minories without Aldgate, where it lay in state for some
time till his magnificent funeral in St. Paul's Cathedral 16. of Feb. following;
which, as many Princes have not exceeded in the solemnity, so few have equalled
in the sorrow for his loss. He was buried near to that place which his
Father-in-law Sir Francis Walsingham had designed (as I have heard) to be
entombed in, without any monument or inscription save only a copy of English
verses written on a wooden table, that were diverse years after his death put
over his grave. When his said Father-in-law was buried in that place
afterward, there was a fair tomb designed for them both, and epitaphs composed
by Dr. Jo. Rainolds, a copy of which for Sidney you may see In Hist. and Antiq
Vniv Ox. lib. 2. p. 265. b.
elsewhere. James King of Scots, afterward of England honored him with an
Epitaph of his composition. The muses of Oxon also lamenting much for his loss,
composed verses to his memory; (printed at Ox. 1587. qu.) among which I find
Cardinal Wolsey's Daughter lamenting the loss of her Alumnus. Those of New
Coll. in their Peplus Edit. Ox. 1587. qu.
Sidnaei, dedicated to Henry Earl of Pembroke (who married Sir Philips Sister)
as having been formerly of that house, did bewail his death. The most ingenious
of Cambridge University did also exercise their fancies; made public by Alex.
Nevill a member thereof -- Land. 1587. qu. besides several private Persons,
among which, was L. B. who wrote a pastoral Elegy and Eglogue on his death,
entit. Astrophel, printed at the end of Edm. Spencers Poetry called Colin
clouts, etc. Land. 1595. qu. The said Sir Philip left behind him a Daughter
named Elizabeth, who being born in 1585, Scipio Gentilis an eminent Civilian
wrote a Lat. Poem on her nativity entit. Nereus, sive de natali Elizabethae,
illustriss. Philippi Sydnaei filiae Land. 1586. in one sh. in qu. She was
afterward married to Rog. Mannours Earl of Rutland, but died without issue by
him.

Bathe, but in what County born, I cannot yet tell, received some parts of
literature in this University, particularly, as I conceive, in Magd. Coll. yet
took no Degree there, unless in the Reign of Edw. 6. when the common register
of the University was in a manner totally neglected. Afterward upon pretense
of being weary of the heresy, as he called it, that in his time was practiced
in England, he went beyond the Seas, settled in Paris, took upon him then, if
not before, the habit of St. Francis, and lived as a Brother in the house of
that order there, where also others of his Country lived, and at length became
Doctor of Divinity of the Sorbon, at which time he was held in great esteem for
his Religion and learning. Afterward going to Rome he lived among those of his
order in the Monastery called by Latin Authors Ara coeli, and at length became
Penitentiary to the Church of St. John Lateran there. He has written.

Historia Ecclesiastica de Martyrio fratrum ordinis Minorum Divi Francisci de
observantia, qui partim in Anglia sub Henrico 8, Rege, partim in Belgio sub
Principe Auriaco, partim and in Hybernia tempore Elizabethae regnantis Reginae,
passi sunt ab an. 1536. ad an. 1582. Par. 1582. and 1586. in oct. Ingolst.
1583. in tw. The names of those English Men that suffered Martyrdom in
England, were Father Anton. Brorbe, or, as some call him, Brockby, Tho. Cortt,
Thom. Belchiam and Father John Forest. All which were executed in 1537. and 38.
What other things our Author Bourchier has written, I cannot tell, nor any
thing else of him, only, Jo. Pitseus in lib. De illustr. Angl. script. aet. 16.
number. 1036.
about Fifteen hundred eighty and fix, and was buried either in the Church of
St. John Lateran, or in that belonging to the Monastery called Ara coeli
beforementioned.

Northamptonshire Man born, was elected Demie of Magd. Coll. by the endeavors
of Peter Morwyng, an. 1553, aged 16, where after he had continued a sedulous
Student for some years, was elected Probationer-Fellow of Allsouls College in
1558. Thence also he returned to Magd. Coll. of which he became Fellow in 1562,
and soon after proceeding in Arts, applied his mind partly to Divinity and
partly to Physic. In 1574 he supplicated to be admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, but whether he was really admitted it appears not. The next year he
resigned his Fellowship, having a spiritual cure, or School, or both, conferred
on him at, or near to, Banbury in Oxfordshire, where, as it seems, he practiced
Physic. His works are,

The poor Man's Jewel, viz. a Treatise of the pestilence. To which is annexed a
Declaration of the virtues of the herbs Carduus benedictus and Angelica, etc.
-- Land. 1578. and 91. in oct.

Questiones in Officia M. T. Ciceronis, etc. Clar. 1586.
etc. Oxon. 1615. oct Dedicated to Dr. Laur. Hamphrey President of Magd. Coll.
an. 1586. What other things he published, I cannot yet tell, nor any thing of
his latter end.

St. Botolphs town commonly called Boston in Lincolnshire, an. 1517, became a
Student of Brasenose Coll. at about 16 years of age under the inspection and
patronage of Mr. Joh. Hawarden Fellow thereof. Afterward he was elected Fellow
of Magd. Coll. and proceeded Master of Arts in 1543, which was the highest
Degree he attained to in this University, being then esteemed eminent for his
learning and knowledge in the three tongues. About that time King Hen. 8.
setting up a mongrel Religion in the Land, which our Author did not like by
showing his opinion in several respects, especially by absenting himself from
the Chapel, did, with others of the same mind, resign his Fellowship about St.
Mary Magd. day in 1545, merely as 'twas thought to prevent expulsion.
Afterward he was entertained for a time in the house of Sir Thom. Lucy in
Warwickshire, where, as it is said, he took to him a Wife, and then went to
Riegate in Surrey to be tutor and teacher to the children of the Duke of
Norfolk; where remaining for some time, was the first Man (as it is said) that
ever preached the Gospel in that place, even when the Roman Catholic Religion
was in great strength. But Gardener Bishop of Winchester having notice of,
caused search to be made after, him. Whereupon the said Duke being careful of,
sent, him safely into Germany; where, in the City of Basil he became a most
painful labourer at his Pen in the house of Operinus a learned Printer. Being
then about 30 years of age, he had read over all that either the Greek, or
Latin Fathers had left in their writings, the Schoolmen in their disputations,
the Councils in their Acts or the Consistory in their Decrees, and acquired no
mean skill in the Hebrew tongue. After King Hen. 8. had been dead some time, he
returned to Magd. Coll. whence, after a little stay, he went again to his
charge at Riegate, and there remaining till after Queen Mary came to the Crown,
left England once more, and retired to his old Landlord at Basil, where
continuing a severe drudge at his book till Queen Elizabeth was settled in the
Throne, he returned to his Country and was received by the said Duke, then
living at his manor place called Christ Church in London, who very
bountifully entertained him. From that house he traveled weekly every Monday
to the house of John Day the Printer to consummate his Acts and Monuments of
the Church, and other works in English and Latin. But as for the preferments he
then enjoyed, (for he was offered to accept in a manner what he pleased) were
only the Prebendship of Shipton in the Church of Salisbury (which he obtained
on the death of Peter Vannes, in the month of May 1563) and as some say, the
Vicaridge of St. Giles near Cripplegate in London, but this last, I suppose, he
kept (if he had it at all) but a little while in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, being always averse to subscribe to the Canons, (tho tendered to him
by Parker Archbishop of Canterbury) and to the ceremonies, in some part, of the
Church. He was a Person of good natural endowments, a sagacious searcher into
historical antiquity, incomparably charitable, of exemplary life and
conversation, but a severe Calvinist and a very bitter enemy in his writings
(exceeding the rules of charity, as it is conceived by some) against the Romans
Catholic party. He has written,

De Christo triumphante, Comaedia. Land. 1551. Bas. 1556. oct. etc. Written at
Basil in the house of Operinus beforementioned, translated into English by
Rich. Day or D'aiia, Son of John Day the noted Printer in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, with this title, Christ Jesus triumphant, wherein is described the
glorious triumph and conquest of Christ, over sin, death and the Law, etc.
Land. 1579 and 1607 oct. Which Ric. Day, by the way it must be noted, was bred
a Scholar in Kings Coll. in Cambridge, and afterwads exercised the place of
Minister at Riegate in Surrey, in the room of our Author Fox, but soon after
leaving that profession, followed the trade of Printing, and lived several
years near to Aldersgate in London where his Father had lived before. In 1672
it was published again at Land. in oct. and dedicated to all Schoolmasters, to
the end that it might be admitted into their respective Schools for the eminent
elegance of its style, by T. C. Mast. of Arts of Sydney Coll. in Cambridge.

De censura seu excommunicatione ecclesiastica, interpellatio ad Archiep.
Cantuar. Land. 1551. oct.

Tables of Grammar. Land. 1552.

Commentarii rerum in Ecclesia gestarum, maximarumque per totam Europam,
persecutionum a Wiclevi temproibus, ad hanc usque aetatem descript. Argent.
1554. oct. in one book. To which the Author added 5 more books; all printed
together at Basil 1559. fol.

Articuli, seu Aphorismi aliquot Job. Wiclevi sparsim ex variis illius
opusculis excerpti per adversarios Papicolas, ac concilio Constantiensi
exhibiti.

Collectanea quaedom ex Reginaldi Pecoki Episc. Cicestrensis opusculis exustis
conservata, and ex antiquo psegmate transcripta.

Opistographia ad Oxonienses. These three last are printed with his Commentarii.

Locorum communium Legicalium tituli and ordinationes 150, ad seriem
praedicamentorum december descripti, etc. Bas. 1557. qu.

Probationes and resolutiones de re and materia sacramenti Eucharistici. Land.
1563. or thereabouts.

Acts and Monuments of matters most special and memorable, happening in the
Church, with an universal history of the same. Wherein is set forth at large
the whole race and course from the primitive age to these later times of ours,
etc. -- Land. 1583. in two vol. in fol. the 4th edition. There again 1596, etc.
Printed also in 3. Volumes 1632, etc. In the Year 1684 the said book came out
again in 3 volumes with copper cuts, the former editions having only wooden.
The undertakers of which impression had in a manner obtained a promise from
King Charles 2. to revive the order in Queen Elizabeth's time of placing the
said book of Acts and Monuments in the common Halls of Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, Heads of Colleges, etc. according to the Canons of Dr.
Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, an. 1571, to the end that they might
not be losers by the said impression, etc. As our Author Fox has taken a great
deal of pains in the said volumes and showed sometimes much judgment in his
labors, so has he committed many errors therein, by trusting to the
relations of poor simple People, and in making such Martyrs that were living
after the first edition of his book came forth, tho afterward by him excused
and omitted. Nay Father Parsons, if he may be believed, tells us of his wilful
corruptions and falsifications of Authors, particularly Ven. Bid, of his
tergiversation, impertinent and ignorant arguments, contempt of antiquity, his
rejection of our ancient Historiographers and I know not what. But these
matters being beyond my Province to mention, I shall only refer the reader to
the two parts of conversions in the first volume of those three called, A
treatise of three conversions of England, etc. where he may not only find much
discourse concerning the said book, or volumes of Acts and Mon. but also of the
Author of them, as the index at the latter end will direct him. See also the
said Parsons his Relation of a trial held in France about religion -- Printed
1604. p. 59. 60.

De Christo crucifixo: Concio in die Paracev. in 2. Cor. cap 5. ver. 20. 21.
Land. 1571. qu. Printed also in English -- Land. 1609. oct.

De Oliva Evangelica: Concio in baptismo Judaei habita Londini 1. Apr. cum
narratione capitis XI. D. Pauli ad Romanos. Land. 1578. Translated into English
by Jam. Bell. To which Latin Sermon is an appendix De Christo triumphante,
which is the same I have mentioned before.

Concerning man's election to salvation. Land. 1581. oct.

Certain notes of election, added to Beza his treatise of predestination. Land.
1581. oct.

De Christo gratis justificante, contra Jesuitus Land. 1583. oct.

Disputatio contra Jesuitas and eorum argumenta, quibus inhaeren^^n justitiam
ex Aristotile confirmant. Rupell. 1585. oct

Eicasmi, seu meditation^s in Apocal. S. Johannis Apostoli and Evangelistae.
Land. 1587. fol. Genev. 1596. oct.

Papa consutatus: vel sacra and Apostolica Ecclesia papam confutans. Translated
into English by James Bell a great admirer of Joh. Fox -- pr. at Land. in qu.

Brief exhortation, fruitful and meet to be read in the time of Gods
visitation, where Ministers do lack, or otherwise cannot be present to comfort
them. Land. in oct. He translated also from English into Latin. Concio funebris
in obitum Augustae memoriae Ferdinandi Caesaris recens defuncti, in Eccles.
Cath. S. Pauli habitae 3. Oct. 1564. Also from Latin into English. (1) A Sermon
of Joh. Oecolampadius to young Men and Maidens. Land. in tw. (2) An instruction
of Christian Faith, how to lay hold upon the promise of God and not to doubt of
our salvation. Or otherwise thus. Necessary instructions of faith and hope for
Christians to hold fast, and not to doubt, etc. Land. 1579. sec. edit. in oct.
Written by Urbanus Regius. He finished also and completed An answer
Apologetical to Hierome Osorius his slanderous invective. Land. 1577, and 1581.
qu. (began in Latin by Walt. Haddon LL D.) and published, The four Evangelists
in the old Saxon tongue, with the English thereunto adjoined. Land. 1571. qu.
What else he wrote and translated you may see in In lib. De script. Maj. Britan.
cent. 9. number. 92.
Baleus; but the reader is to understand that several of those books that he
mentions, were never printed. At length after our Author had spent 70 years or
more in this vain and transitory world, he yielded to nature on the 18. Apr. in
Fifteen hundred eighty and seven, and was buried in the Chancel of the Church
of St. Giles without Cripplegate beforementioned. Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
lib. 2 p. 195. but not one word of him (which is a wonder to me) is mentioned
in the Annalls of Q. Elizab. written by Will. Camden, or by any Epigrammatist
of his time, only Joh. Parkhurst, who was his acquaintance in this University.
He left behind him a Son named Samuel, born in the City of Norwych, made Demie
of Magd. Coll. 1576. aged 15, afterward Fellow of that House and Master of
Arts, who about 1610 wrote The life of his Father Joh. Fox, which is set in
Latin and English before the second Volume of Acts and Monuments, printed at
Land. 1641. I find one Joh. Fox to be Author of Time and the end of time, in 2
discourses, printed at Land. in 12o, but that Joh. Fox was later in time than
the former. While Joh. Fox the Martyriologist was Prebendary of Sarum, he
settled the Corpse belonging thereunto (which is the impropriation of Shipton
Underwood near Burford in Oxfordshire) on his Son: whose Granddaughter named
Anne, Heir to her Father Tho. Fox, was married to Sir Ric. Willis of Ditton in
Essex Knight and Baronet, sometimes Colonel-general of the Counties of Linc.
Not. and Rutland, and Governor of the Town and Castle of Newark, who, or at
least his Son Tho. Fox Willis, enjoys it to this day. an. 1690.

JOHN FIELD was a noted Scholar of his time in this University, but in what
house he studied, I cannot yet tell. One of both his names was admitted Fellow
of Lincoln Jo. Field took the Degree of Bach. of Arts only, in 1570. Which of
these three was afterward John Field the famous Preacher and Minister of St.
Giles Cripplegate in London (who says in one of his books, which I shall anon
mention, that he was educated in Oxon) I cannot justly say, unless it be he
that was Mast. of Arts. The works of that Joh. Field, who says that he was of
the Univ. of Oxon, are these,

Prayers and meditations for the use of private families, and sundry other
Persons according to their diverse states and occasions. Land. 1581. 85. 1601.
etc. in tw.

Caveat for Persons, Howlet and the rest of the dark brood. Land. 1581. oct.

Exposition of the Symbol of the Apostles. Land. 1581. oct.

Godly Exhortation by occasion of a late judgment of God showed at Paris
garden, 13. Januar. 1583. upon diverse Persons, whereof some were killed, and
many hurt at a Beare-baiting, etc. Land. 1583. oct. Printed there again 1588
with this title. A declaration of the Judgment of God showed at Paris garden,
etc. The said Jo. Field also has translated into English. (1) A treatise of
Christian righteousness. Land. 1577. oct. Written in French by Mr. J. de
L'espine. (2) Notable treatise of the Church, in which are handled all the
principal questions that have been moved in our time concerning that matter.
Land. 1579. oct. Written in French by Phil. de Mornay. (3) Sermons on Jacob and
Esau, on Genesis 25. ver. 12. to the 38. verse of 27. of Genesis Land. 1579. qu.
Written by Joh. Calvin. (4) Four Sermons entreating of matters very profitable
for our time, (the first of which is on Psalm. 16. 3.) With a brief exposition
of the 87 Psalm. Land. 1579. qu. Written in French by John Calvin. (5) Second
part of questions which is concerning the Sacraments. Land. 1580. Written by
Theod. Beza. (6) Com. on the Creed. Land. 1582. oct. Written by Gasp. Olevian.
(7) Prayers used at the end of the readings upon the Prophet Hosea. Land, 1583.
in 16. Which prayers were made and written by J. Calvin. (8) Christian
Meditations, on the 6. 25 and 32 Psalms. Land. in 16o. written by P. Pilesson,
etc. besides other things which I have not yet seen. At length our Author Field
dying about his middle age, in the latter end of the year (after the 16. Febr.)
Fifteen hundred eighty and seven, was buried in the Church of St. Giles before
mentioned, leaving behind him several Children, of which the eldest was named
Theophilus Field, educated in Cambridge, afterward Chaplain to King James the
first, Bishop of Landaff and at length of Hereford, as I shall more at large
tell you elsewhere.

Londoner born, educated in Grammar learning at Westminster under Mr. Alex.
Nowell in the latter end of King Hen. 8. or beginning of King Edw. 6. sent to
Oxon to obtain Academical learning, but to what house therein, unless Chapter Chapter I
cannot justly tell. From Oxon he went to Cambridge, and making some stay there,
became at length domestic Chaplain to Sir Will. Brook Knight, Lord Warden of
the Cinque ports and Baron of Cobham in Kent; who, if I mistake not, preferred
him to a benefice. He has written,

Historical description of the Island of Britain: with a brief rehearsal of the
nature and qualities of the People of England, and such commodities as are to
be found in the same. In 3. books -- They were first published in the first and
second volume of Chronicles that go under the name of Raphael Holinshed,
printed at Land. 1577. in fol. and there again in 1587 with augmentations by
Jo. Hooker alias Vowell. The collection is made from diverse choice Authors,
many of which were then in MS.

A Chronology. -- Gathered and compiled with most exquisite diligence, after
the example of Gerardus Mercator, and other late Chronoligers: So says Raph.
Holinshed in his Preface to the third volume of Chronicles. What he has
written besides, Clar. 1587.
I know not, nor any thing else, but that he was living in Fifteen hundred
eighty and seven. I find one Will. Harrison born in the Dioc. of London,
elected Bachelaur-Fellow of Merton Coll. 1557, admitted M. of Arts in 1560,
being then beneficed near to Northampton, but he dying 1564 cannot be
understood to be the same with the writer. Another Will. Harrison I find to be
installed Canon of Windsore, 1586. being about that time Rector of Radwynter,
(in Essex) who dying 1593 was buried at Windsore, leaving behind him several
Children which he had by his Wife Marian Daughter of Will. Isebrand of Anderne
near to Guisnes in Picardie. Whether this Will. Harrison be the same with the
writer, I cannot tell.

Chapter Chapter became Prebendary of Milverton in the Church of Wells after he had
taken the Degree of Bach. of Arts, afterward he was one of the Proctors, and
Bach. of Divinity of this University. He has translated into English. (1) Of
the happiness of this our age, and the ingratitude of Men to God for his
benefits. Land. 1578. qu. Written by Joh. Rivius. (2) Meditations on the 32.
Psalm. Land. 1579. Clar. 1587.
oct. and other things, which I have not yet seen. How long he lived beyond
Fifteen hundred eighty and seven (29. Elizab.) in which year he took the Degree
of Bach. of Div. I know not.

Somersethire Man born, and a Gentleman's Son, became a Commoner of St. Mary's
Hall, in the Year 1578 aged 32 but whether he took any Degree among us, it
appears not. While he continued in the said House, where he was esteemed a
Person of ingenuity by his contemporaries, he partly wrote,

The eighth liberal science, called Ars adulandi, or, the Art of flattery --
Printed 1579. qu. Afterward having learned the art of Poetry among the
Academians, he wrote and published,

A pleasant interlude, intit. Like will to like, quoth the Devil to the
Collier. Wherein is declared what punishment follows those that will rather
live licentiously, that esteem and follow good counsel. Land. 1587. qu. Clar.
1587.
Written in time, and printed in an English Character. The name of Ulp. Fulwell
stands quoted by Jo. Speed in his life of K. Ed. 6. in his Chronicle, and
therefore I suppose he has other things printed, for I cannot conceive that
Joh. Speed should quote him for any thing out of the two former books.

ROBERT CROWLEY, or Croleus as he writes himself, Ed. 6. and Qu. Elizab. was
Reg. 3. electionum soc. C. Magd. an. 1542.
born in Glocestershire, became a Student in the University about 1534, and was
soon after made Demie of Magd. Coll. ^^ 1542, he being then Bach. of Arts, was
made Probationer-fellow of the said House by the name of Rob. Crule, but
whether he took the Degree of Master of Arts it appears not; for likely it is,
that he left the University when K. Hen. 8. began to settle a mongrel Religion
in the Nation. When K. Ed. 6. began to Reign, he exercised the profession of
Printing in Ely rents in Holbourn near to London, sold books, and at leisure
times exercised the gift of Preaching in the great City and elsewhere: But upon
the succession of Queen Mary, he, among several English Protestants, lest the
Kingdom, went to Frankfort in Germany and settled there purposely to enjoy the
Religion which had been practiced in England in the days of K. Ed. 6. After her
decease he returned, and had several benefices bestowed on him, among which was
the Vicaridge of St. Giles by Criplegate in London, (of which Church he wrote
himself Vicar 1566.) where continuing his pretended gifts in preaching, was
followed and respected by the neighborhood of those parts, and by others for
his skill in rimes and poetry. He has written,

The Supper of the Lord after the true meaning of the sixth of John, and the XI
of the 1 Epist to the Corinthians, etc. And incidently in the exposition of the
Supper, is confuted the Letter of Mr. Tho. More against Joh. Frith -- Printed
5. Apr. 1533 in a small oct.

Confutation of Nich. Shaxton Bishop of Sarum, his recantation of 13 Articles,
at the burning of Mistress Anne Askew. Land. 1546. (oct.)

Explicatio petitoria (ad Parliamentum) adversus expilatores plebis. -- Printed
in the Engl. tongue 1548 in oct. Translated into Lat. by John Heron.

Confutation of Miles Hoggard's wicked ballad made in defense of
transubstantation of the Sacrament. Land. 1548. oct.

The voice of the last Trumpet blown by the seventh Angel, etc, containing 12
several lessons. Land. 1549. oct. Written in meter.

Pleasure and pain, heaven and hell. Remember these four and all shall be well.
Land. 1550 51. in oct. Written in meter.

Way to wealth, wherein is plainly taught a most present remedy for sedition.
Land. 1550. oct.

One and thirty Epigrams, wherein are briefly touched so many abuses, that may,
and ought to, be put away. Land. 1550. in tw. This was printed by the Author (
Crowley) in his house in Ely rents beforementioned.

An apology of those English Preachers and Writers, which Cerberus the
three-headed dog of hell, charge with false doctrine under the name of
Predestination. Land. 1566. qu. Of which book you may see more in Canterburies
doom, written by Will. Prynne, p. 169.

Of the signs and tokens of the latter day. Land. 1567. oct.

A setting open of the subtle sophistry of Tho. Watson D. D. which he used in
his two Sermons preached before Qu. May in Lent 1553 concerning the real
presence in the Sacrament. Land. 1569. qu.

Sermon in the Chapel at Gilde hall in London 29. Sept. 1574. before the Lord
Mayor and the whole state of the City, on Psalm 139. ver. 21. 22. 23. 24.
etc. Land. 1575. oct.

Answer to Tho. Pound his six reasons, wherein he shows that the Scriptures
must be judged by the Church. Land. 1581. qu.

Brief discourse concerning those four usual notes whereby Christ's Catholic
Church is known, etc. Land. 1581. qu.

Replication to that lewd answer which Friar Joh. Francis (of the Minimies
order in Nigeon near Paris) has made to a letter that his Mother caused to be
sent to him out of England. Land. 1586. qu.

Deliberate aunsweare to a Papist, proving that Papists are Antichristian
Schismatics, and that religious Protestants are indeed right Catholics. Land.
1587. qu.

The School of virtue and book of good nurture, teaching Children and Youths
their duties. Land. 1588. oct. etc. This book is composed in Engl. meter, has
at the end of it certain prayers and graces, and is at this day commonly sold
at the stalls of Ballad singers.

Dialogue between Lent and Liberty, wherein is declared that Lent is a mere
invention of Man. Land. in oct. He also translated into English the Psalter of
David; The Letany with Hymns, and turned into meter David's Psalms. All
printed in the time of Ed. 6. in qu. an. 1549. etc. He also first of all
published The Visions of Pierce Plowman. Land. 1550. qu. Which has since, been
once or twice made extant with corrections. At length this most zealous Person
having lived to a fair age, mostly spent in continual action for the settlement
and propagation of the Protestant Religion, submitted to the stroke of death in
Fifteen hundred eighty and eight, Giles, situated and being near to Cripplegate
in Land. Over his grave was soon after a monumental stone laid, with this
inscription engraven on a brass plate fastened thereunto. Here lies the body of
Robert Crowley Clerk, late Vicar of this Parish, who departed this life the 18
day of June, an. dom. 1588.

Etheridge, or, as he writes himself in Latin, Edrycus, was born in a mercate
town in Oxfordshire called Them, admitted Scholar of C. C. Coll. in Nov. 1534,
being then put under the tuition of John Shepreve, and in Feb. 1539 was made
Probationer-Fellow. In 1543 he was licensed to proceed in Arts, and two years
after was admitted to the reading of any of the Books of Aphorisms of
Hypocrates. At length being esteemed by all to be a most excellent Grecian, he
was made the Kings Professor of that language in the University about 1553, and
kept that lecture till some time after Qu. Elizab. came to the Crown; and then,
because he had been a forward Person against the Protestants in Qu. Mary's
Reign, was forced to leave it. So that following the practice of his faculty of
Medicine with good success in, and near, Oxon, especially among those of his
opinion, gained a considerable stock of wealth. He mostly lived, and kept a
Family in an ancient decayed place of literature called George hall opposite
almost to the South end of Catstreet in St. Mary's Parish in Oxon, in which he
took to him (in the condition of Sojournours) the Sons of diverse Catholic
Gentlement to be instructed in several arts and sciences; among whom was Will.
Gifford afterward Archbishop of Rheimes, who received from him rudiments in
Grammar, Music, and partly in Logic. He constantly adhered to the R.
Catholic Religion, wherein he had been zealously educated, for which he
suffered at the reformation by losing his lecture (perhaps his Fellowship too)
and by continual imprisonments to be great impoverishment of his health and
estate. In a word, he was esteemed by most Persons, especially by those of his
opinion, a noted Mathematician, well skilled in vocal and instrumental Music,
an eminent Hebrician, Grecian, and Poet, and above all an excellent Physician,
as it appears in certain books of his composition, the titles of which follow.

Musical compositions.

Diversa Carmina.

MS.

Acta Henrici octavi, carmine Graec. Presented in MS. Vide. Hist. and Antiq.
Univ. Ox. lib. 1. p. 289. a.
to Qu. Elizabeth when she was in Oxon. 1566.

Hypomnemata quaedam in aliquot libros Pauli Aeginetae, seu observationes
medicamentorum quae hac aetate in usu sunt. Land. 1588 oct. He also turned the
Psalms of David into a short form of Hebrew verse, and translated most, if not
all, of the works of Justin Martyr from Greek into Latin, with other things,
which I have not yet seen. He was living an ancient Man in fifteen hundred
eighty and eight, Clar. 1588.
but when, or where he died, I know not, nor where buried unless in the ayard
of St. Mary's Church in Oxon, in which his Father and Mother were before
buried. John Leland who was his familiar friend did celebrate his memory In
Princ. and illustr. aliquot and erudit. in Angl. virorum encomii, etc. Land.
1589. p. 111.
by verse while he lived, and told him thus. Scripsisti juvenis multa cum laud
libellos,
Qui Regi eximie perplacuere meo.


PETER LEVENS or Levins was born at, or near, Eske in Yorkshire, became a
Student in the University, an. 1552, was elected probationer-Fellow of Madg.
Coll. into a Yorkshire place 18. Jan. 1557. being then Bach. of Arts, and on
the 19. Jan. 1559, was admitted true and perpetual Fellow. In 1560. he left his
fellowship, and one Thomas Dunne M. A: succeeded him, but whether our Author
Levens proceeded in Arts, or took a degree in Physic, or was licensed to
practice that Faculty, it appears not in our Registers. Afterward he taught a
Grammar School, and practiced Physic, which is all I know of him, only that he
wrote and published these things following.

A Dictionary of English and Latin words, etc. the English going before the
Latin; necessary for Scholars that want variety of words, and for such as use
to write in English meter. Land. 1570. in 18. sh. in qu.

A right profitable book for all diseases called the Pathway to health; wherein
are most excellent and approved medicines of great virtue, as also notable
potions and drinks, and for the Distilling of diverse waters, and making of
Oils and other comfortable receipts, Land. 1587. qu. The Author is styled in
the title page Master of Arts of Oxon. and student in Physic and Chirurgerie.
Clar. 1580.
This Book was afterward several times printed with corrections; and one
Edition came out at Land. 1664. what else Peter Levens has written I cannot
yet tell.

THOMAS SAMPSON was born about the year 1517 Oxonian Muses, afterward studied
the municipal Laws in one of the Temples, where being converted to the
Protestant Religion, did shortly after, as it is said, convert John Bradford the
Martyr. Whereupon they both taking Orders from Nich. Ridley Bishop of London,
became noted Preachers in the Reign of Ed. 6, and about that time Sampson, as
it is said, was made Dean of Chichester. In the beginning of Qu. Mary he
absconded, at which time being well acquainted with one Rich. Chambers a
zealous Protestant, they collected moneys in the City of London from the well
affected there, to be distributed among such poor Scholars of each University,
that were haters of the Roman Catholic Religion. Which matter being at length
discovered, he, with his wife the Neice of Hugh Latimer were forced with
Chambers to go beyond the Seas to Strasburge, where wholly applying himself to
the study of Divinity, as much advanced in the knowledge thereof by his often
associating himself with learned Tremelius. After Queen Elizabeth came to the
Crown he returned to his native country, and became a frequent Preacher in
London and much followed by the reformed party there, and afterward in the
north parts of England. In 1560. the Queen designed him to be Bishop of
Norwich, but he altogether refused it, for no other reason, as 'twas supposed,
but that he was much disaffected to the Hierarchy and Ceremonies of the Church
of England. In the latter end of the said year (in the beginning of March) he
supplicated the venerable congregation of Regents of this University, that
whereas he had for the space of 16 years studied Divinity he might be admitted
to the reading of Epistles of S. Paul, that is to the degree of Bach. of
Divinity which was before the time of Reformation, to the reading of the Book
of Sentences. This supplicat was granted by, notwithstanding he had taken no
Degree before among, them, as it appears from the public Registers. In the
same congregation he supplicated also that after he was admitted Bach. of
Divinity he might have liberty to proceed in the same Faculty; but to that no
answer was given. Afterward he supplicated that he might not only use the
habit of Master of Arts in the time of his admission to the Degree of Bach. of
Divinity, but afterward also while he continued in that state. Which request,
though granted simpliciter, yet it does not appear that he was admitted to that
Degree. In Michaelmas term, 1561. he was installed Dean of Christ Church in
Oxon, in the place of Dr. George Carew, and soon after in the month of November
he supplicated the congregation of Regents, that it might be lawful for him to
Preach within the limits of the University in a doctoral habit. Which desire,
being, as they thought, unreasonable, yet because he was a Dean they granted it
only to continue till the Act following. At that time there being a great
scarcity of Divines in the University, and but very few Masters, he the said
Sampson and Laur. Humphrey of Magd. Coll. another severe Calvinist, preached by
turns every Lords day either at St. Mary's or elsewhere to the Academians, and
soon after got another brother of Allsouls Coll. (as it is said) to join with
them, but who that was, unless Andrew Kingsmyll LL. B. who afterward out of
pure sanctity went to Geneva, I know not. But Sampson being too severe a
Calvinist, if not worse, to govern such a noted Coll. as Chapter Chapter (for he was an
enemy to Organs, ornaments of the Church, clerical vestments, the square cap,
(he always in imitation of Humphrey wearing the round cap) and rather a
perswader from, than encourager, to use them) he was at length, after a great
many of admonitions from authority to conform, and entreaties from certain
Bishops so to do, removed from his Deanery by the sentence of Matthew
Archbishop of Canterbury, an. 1564. Afterward he obtained the Mastership of
the Hospital of Will. de Wygston at Leycester, (besides the Penitentiaryship,
or the Prebend of St. Pancras in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul) where
continuing for some time in teaching, he was by the leave and favor of the
Queen permitted to be a Theological Lecturer in Whittingdon Coll. in London:
but before he had enjoyed that place 6 years, he was taken with the palsy.
Whereupon retiring to his hospital spent the remaining part of his days in
preaching and writing. Those works that go under his name are these.

Letter to the professors of Christ's Gospel, in the Parish of Allhallows in
Bredstreet, Land. Strasburg 1554 oct.

A warning to take heed of Fowlers Psalter. Land. 1578. oct. See in John Fowler
under the Year 1578.

Brief collection of the Church and Ceremonies thereof. Land. 1581. oct.

Prayers and meditations Apostolic: gathered and framed out of the Epistles of
the Apostles, etc. Land. 1592. in 16o. He also corrected, and caused to be
published Two Sermons, the first of repentance, the other of the Lords Supper.
Land. 1581. oct. written by his friend Joh. Bradford, with other things of that
Author. At length Tho. Sampson having lived beyond the age of Man in a
perpetual motion (as 'twere) for the carrying on of the holy cause, laid down
his head, and gave up the ghost on the 9. Apr. in Fifteen hundred eighty and
nine, Will. de Wygston beforementioned. Over his grave was a monument soon
after fastened to the South wall thereof, with an inscription on it, erected by
his Sons John and Nathaniel Sampson. A copy of which, with other matters of the
said Author, which I have not here mentioned, you may see in Hist. and Antiq.
Univ. Ox. lib. 2. p. 254. From this Tho. Sampson, is, if I mistake not,
descended Tho. Sampson a pretender to Poetry, Author of Fortunes fashion
portrayed in the troubles of Lady Elizab. Gray, Wife of Edw. 4. Land. 1613. qu.
a Poem. dedicated to Henr. Pilkington of Gadsby in Leicestershire.

Brunswerdus as he writes himself, a most noted Master of the Latin Tongue, was
born, as I conceive, in Cheshire, and had a considerable part of his education
in this University, but mostly, as it is thought, in Cambridge, where, I
presume, he took one, or more Degrees. After his retreat thence, he settled at
Macclesfield in Cheshire, where he taught the Free School with very good
success, and having obtained a good report, and honorable advancement in the
Latin Empire, was deservedly numbered amongst the best Latin Poets that lived in
the Reign of Qu. Elizab. His works are,

Progymnasmata aliquot poemata. Land. 1590. qu. with other things which I have
not yet seen. He took his last farewell of this world on the 15. Apr.
Macclesfield beforementioned. In which year Tho. Newton his sometimes Scholar
did publish a book of Encomia's of certain illustrious Men of England, in which
he has this Distick of Brownswerd. Rhetora, Grammaticum, Polyhistora teque
poetam
Quis negat: is lippus, luscus, obesus, iners.


And soon after, the said Newton, whose respect to his memory was great, set up
a Monument on the South wall of the said Chancel, with an inscription thereon,
stiling Brownswerd, Vir pius and doctus, and concluding with these two verses.
Alpha poetarum, Coryphaeus Grammaticorum,
Flos Paedagogor^a hac sepelitur humo.


GEORGE PETTY, a younger Son of John le Petite Petty of Tetsworth and
Stoke-Tatmach in Oxfordshire Esquire; was born in that County, and at about 16
years of age, an. 1564 was a Scholar or Student of Chapter Chapter under Mr. Tho.
Barnard Canon thereof, and took one Degree in Arts as a member of that house in
the latter end of the Year 1568. Soon after he left the University, traveled
beyond the Seas, and at length became excellent for his passionate penning of
amorous stories, equal for poetical invention with his dear Friend Will. Gager,
and as much commended for his neat style as any of his time. He has written a
book intit.

A Petite palace of Petty his pleasure, containing many pretty stories in
comely colors and most delightful discourses -- Printed at Land. twice at
least in an English character, one of which editions bears date, 1608. in qu.
written in imitation of a book intit. The palace of pleasure beautified,
adorned and well furnished with pleasant histories and excellent Novells, etc.
Land. 1569. qu. written by Will. Painter Clerk of the ordinance and armory
within the Tower of London. The aforesaid Petite palace, etc. I have in my
study, and for the respect I bear to the name of the Author (he having been
uncle to my Mother Maria la Petite) I will keep it, but it is so far now from
being excellent or fine, that it is more fit to be read by a Schoolboy, or
rustical amoratto, than by a Gent. of mode or language. The said George Petty
translated from French into English, (with a preface of his own put to it,) The
civil conversation of M. Stephen Guazzo, in 4. books. -- Land. 1586. qu.
written originally in the Italian tongue, which I have also. Three of the said
books were translated by the said Petty, the fourth was begun by him, but
finished by Barthelm. Young of the Middle Temple Gentleman, being the same
Barthelmew, as I think, who lived afterward at Ashurst in Kent, and died
therein 1621. What other matters G. Petty has written, or translated, I
cannot tell, nor do I know any thing material of him besides, only that he died
in the prime of his years at Plymouth in Devonshire (being then a Captain and a
Man of note) about the latter end of July in Fifteen hundred eighty and nine,
Aston-Rowant, in Kingston in the Parish thereof, and at Tetsworth in
Oxfordshire, he gave to his Brother Christopher Petty.

JOHN GARBRAND alias Herks Son of Garbrand Herks a Dutch Man and Bookseller
living sometimes in St. Mary's Parish in Oxon, was born within the City of
Oxon, educated in Grammar learning in Wykehams School near Winchester, admitted
perpetual Fellow of New Coll. an. 1562, being esteemed then a good Poet.
Afterward, he, by the favor of Bishop Jewel (who had been well acquainted
with his Father while he lived in the University) became Prebendary of
Yatesbury in the Church of Salisbury, on the resignation of Tho. White LL. D.
in Nov. 1565, being then only Bach. of Arts, and Prebendary of Minor pars
Altaris in the said Church. In 1567 he left his Coll. and on the 18. of March
1568 he was made Preb. of Chute and Cheesenbury in the said Church of Sarum, on
the deprivation of Joh. Fuller, Garbrand being then Rector of North-Crowley in
Bucks. In 1582 he took the Degrees in Divinity, was then accounted an eminent
Theologist and a noted Preacher, but withal a severe Puritan. He has gathered
together, corrected and completed several things of the said B. Jewel, whom
he in a mavelous manner had admired, as (i) A view of a seditious bull sent
into England from Pius 5. Pope of Rome, an. 1569. (2) A short treatise of the
Holy Scriptures. Land 1582. oct. Both which Jewel delivered in diverse Sermons
in the Cathedral Church of Salisbury, an. 1570. (3) An exposition on the two
Epistles to the Thessalonians. Land. in oct. (4) Certain Sermons preached at
Paul's Cross. Land. 1583. oct. They are in number six. (5) Treatise of the
Sacraments, gathered out of certain Sermons preached at Salisbury. Land. 1583.
oct. This Dr. Garbrand died in the Winter time (about Christmas) in Fifteen
hundred eighty and nine, North-Crowley beforementioned. He gave by his will
several books to New Coll. Library: And all such books and papers that were
given to him by B. Jewel, as also all such loose sheets which he the said
Garbrand had drawn for common places, gathered out of that Bishops books, he
gave to Rob. Chaloner and John Rainolds Doctors of Divinity.

Humfredus as he sometimes writes himself, was born at a mercate Town called
Newport Paynell in Bucks. educated in Latin and Greek learning at Cambridge,
made Demie of Magd. Coll. in Oxon, 1547, perpetual Fellow two years after,
(being then Bach. of Arts) and Master of the said faculty in 1552. About that
time he was made Greek reader of his Coll. took holy orders and became a
zealous and forward student in the Theological faculty. In June 1555 (2. and 3.
of Phil. and Mary) the President, Vicepresident, Deans, etc. of that Coll. gave
leave Reg. act. Coll. Magd. fol. 11. a.
to the said Humphrey, who in the opinion of all was much commended for his
life and conversation, as also for the excellency of his learning and wit, that
he might freely for the cause of study travel into trasmarine parts for one
year, conditionally that he contain himself from those places that are
suspected to be heretical or favorers of heresy, and that also he refrain
from the company, who are, or were authors of heresy or heretical opinions,
etc. Which leave being procured, he went forthwith to Zurich and associated
himself with the English exiles there, that had fled from the Nation for
Religion sake. After the death of Qu. Mary he returned to his Coll. and was
restored to his Fellowship, having been expelled thence because he did not
return thereunto, after his time of leave was expired. In the Year 1560 he was
constituted the Queens Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxon, being
then about 34 years of age, at which time was a very great scarcity of
Theologists throughout the body of Students, and in the year following he was
elected President of his Coll. In 1562 he took the Degrees in Divinity, and in
1570 he was made Dean of Gloucester upon the promotion of Dr. Tho. Cooper to the Sea of Lincoln. In 1580 he was constituted Dean of Winchester, in the place of
Dr. Joh. Watson promoted to the Sea of Winchester, which was the highest
preferment he had among the Clergy; and the reason for it (as 'twas guested)
was, because that in matter of ceremony or indifferency, he altogether
consented not to the Church of England. For the truth is, that from the City of
Zurich (remarkable for the Preachings and death of Zwinglius) and the
correspondence that he had at Geneva, he brought back with him at his return
into England so much of the Calvinian both in doctrine and discipline, that the
best that could be said of him was, that he was a moderate and conscientious
Nonconformist. Whence 'twas that by his being many years President of Magd.
College, public Professor of Div. in the University and several times
Vice Chancellor, he did not only, upon advantage issuing from those place,
stock his Coll. with a generation of Nonconformists, which could not be rooted
out in many years after his decease, but sowed also in the Divinity School such
seeds of Calvinisme, and labored to create in the younger sort such a strong
hatred against the Papists, as if nothing but divine truths were to be found in
the one, and nothing but abominations were to be seen in the other. This was
the opinion of several eminent Divines of the Church of England, yet one Gabr.
Harvey LL. D. Oxon. in his Pierce's superarrogation, etc. Land. 1573. qu. p. 92.
that lived in his time and knew him, says that he and Dr. Will. Fulke of
Cambridge, whom he styles standard bearers for a long time of the
Nonconformists, did grow conformable in the end, as they grew riper in
experience and sager in judgment: Howsoever it was, sure it is, that Humphrey
was a great and general Scholar, an able linguist, a deep Divine, and for his
excellency of style, exactness of method and substance of matters in his
writings, he went beyond most of our Theologists. An eminent Tob. Matthew in
Conc. Apologetica, edit. Oxon. 1628. p. 75.
Archbishop who knew him well says that be (Dr. Humphrey) had read more
Fathers, than Campian the Jesuit ever saw, devoured more than he ever tasted,
and that he had taught more in this University than he either had learned or
heard. Dr. Humphrey has written,

Epistola de Graecis literis, and Homeri lectione and imitatione, ad Praesidem
and Socios Coll. B. Mar. Magd. Oxon. Set before a book intit. Cornu copiae,
etc. written by Hadrian Junius -- Bas. 1558. The beginning of the said Epistle
is Patriae communis nostrae, etc.

De religionis conservatione and reformatione deque primatu Regum. Bas. 1559.
oct.

De ratione interpretandi authors. Bas. 1559. oct. At the end of which is the
Prophecy of Obadiah in Hebr. and Lat. and Philo de judice in Greek and Latin;
done by our Author Humphrey.

Optimates sive de nobilitate, ejusque antiqua origin, natura, officiis,
disciplina, etc. lib. 3. Bas. 1560. oct. At the end of which is Humphries
translation from Greek into Lat. of Philo Judaeus his book De nobilitate.
Optimates was afterward translated into English by Anon. and printed at Land.
1563. oct.

Oration Woodstochiae habita ad illustriss. R. Elizab. 31. Aug. 1572. Land.
1572. in 3 sh. or more in qu.

Johannis Juelli Angli, Episc. Sarisburiensis vita and mors, ejusque verae
doctrinae defensio, etc. Land. 1573. qu. From which is taken an abstract of the
said Bishops life, published in oct. in the English tongue, by one who writes
himself a Person of quality, an 1685, put at the end of a translation into
English of Jewels Apology and his Epistle to Scipio.

Orat. in Aula Woodstoc. hab. ad illustr. R. Elizab. an. 1575. Land. 1575. qu.
The beginning is Eloquar an sileam, etc.

De fermento vitando: concio in Math. 16. Marc. 8. Luc. 12. Jesus dixit illis,
videte and cavete a fermento Pharisaeorum. Land. 1582. Rupel. 1585. oct.

Jesuitismi pars prima: sive de praxi Romans curiae contra respubl. and
principes, etc. Land. 1582. in a large oct.

Jesuitismi pars secunda: Puritano-papismi, seu doctrinae Jesuiticae aliquot
rationibus ab Edm. Campiano comprehensae, and a Joh. Duraeo defensae,
confutatio, etc. Land. 1584 in a large oct.

Apologetica Epistola ad Academiae Oxoniensis Cancellarium. Rupel. 1585. oct.

Seven Sermons against treason 1 Samuel cap. 26. 8. 9 10. 11, etc. Land. 1588.
oct.

Concio in die Cinerum. Pr. in oct. He also (with Rob. Crowley) has written a
book against that of Miles Hoggeard, published in Qu. Mary's Reign against the
Protestants, and other things which I have not yet seen: And reviewed,
corrected and published Joh. Shepreves book intit. Summa and Synopsis N.
Testamenti, etc. At length after Dr. Humphrey had spent most part of his time
in a studious and retired condition, tho with little comfort of his Wife and
male Children, he departed this mortal life on the kalends of Febr. 1589-90.
in Fifteen hundred eighty and nine, aged 63, and was buried at the upper end
of the inner Chapel of Magd. Coll. Soon after was a comely mon, set over his
grave, in the South wall; which, when the said Chap. was adorned, and paved
with Marble, was removed, and set up on the S. wall of the outer Chapel: The
inscription of which, you may read in Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p.
208. b. and some things said of him in lib. 1. p. 287. a. 288. a. b. 292. a.
304. a. 310. a etc. He took to Wife in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth one Joan
the Daughter of Andr. Inkfordby of Ipswych in Suffolk by whom he had 7 Sons
and 5 Daughters, She dyed 27. Aug. 1611. aged 74 and was buried in the Chancel
of Steple Barton Church in Oxfordshire; over whose grave her eldest Dau. called
Justina the Wife of Caspar Dormer of the said place Esque erected a fair
Monument, as she had before done over that of her Father in Magd. Coll. Chapel.

Nottingham lived there many years in great esteem, and was wonderfully
followed by all sorts of People for his happy practice in that and surgery.
His works are,

A needful, new, and necessary treatise of surgery, briefly comprehending
the general and particular curation of ulcers. Land. 1575. oct.

Certain experiments of his own invention, etc.

History of Man, sucked from the sap of the most approved Anatomists, etc. in 9
books -- Land. 1578. in a thin fol.

Compendious chirurgerie, gathered and translated especially out of Wecker,
etc. Land. 1585. in tw.

Antidotary chirurgical, containing variety of all sorts of Medicines, Clar.
1589.
etc. Land. 1589. oct. What other books he has published I know not, nor any
thing else of him, only that he was in great renown in the middle of the Reign
of Qu. Elizabeth. several years after his death came out his works in six
books, as 1 Of Tumors in general and particular 2 Of Wounds in general and
particular 3 Of Ulcers in general and particular 4 Of Fractures and Luxations,
(5) Of the curation of Ulcers, and (6) Antidotarie, beforementioned. All which
six books were printed at Land. 1633. qu.


Averey Randolphe of Badlesmere in Kent, was born in that County, made Student
of Chapter Chapter when K. Hen. 8. turned it into a Cathedral, admitted Bach. of the
Civil Law 1547 and about that time was made a public notary. In 1549. Nov. 20.
he succeeded Rob. Weston in the principality of Broadgates hall, which he kept
till 1553, and then Tho. Stempe LL. D. was admitted into his place. In the
Reign of Qu. Elizab. he being then Doctor of his faculty, he was Camd. in (...)
Elizab. an. 1590.
employed in several Embassies, as thrice to the Peers in Scotland, thrice to
Q. Mary of Scotland, after her return from France; seven times to K. James the
6. of Scotland, thrice to John Basilides Emperor of Russia, once to Charles the
9. of France and again to Hen. 3. The Queen of England, who knighted him,
rewarded these his services with the Chamberlaines office in the Exchecquer,
heretofore a place of great honor and worth, the Mastership or office of
Comptroller general of the Post horses, and with some small Land. He has
written,

An account of his Embassage to the Emperor of Russia, an. 1568. -- Remitted
into the first vol. of Rich. Hakeluyts voyages. Land. 1598. He then (in 1568)
procured privileges from the Emperor of Russia for the English Merchants
trafficking there.

Instructions given to, and notes to be observed by, James Bassendine, Jam.
Woodcock and Rich. Brown for the searching of the Sea, and border of the
coast, from the river Pechora, to the Eastwards, an. 1588. -- There was then a
commission granted to Sir Thom. Randolphe for the searching of those parts, but
he entrusted the matter with the 3 Persons beforementioned. See more in the
said vol. of voyages by R. Hakeluyt. At length after Sir Thomas had painfully
spent his time in sundry and frequent Embassies, and in continual services of
his Prince and Country, at home and abroad, he quietly surrendered up his last
breath in his house at St. Peter's hill near to Paul's Wharf in London, June in
Fifteen hundred and ninety, aged 67, (leaving then behind him several Children
that he had by two Wives) whereupon his body, accompanied by one or two Heralds
of arms, was buried 6. July following in the Church of St. Peter near to the
said Wharf. Besides this Tho. Randolphe a Statesman, has been another of both
his names of a later date, and a most celebrated Poet of his time; of whom, by
the way, I desire the reader to know these matters following, viz. that he was
born at Newnham near to Daintry in Northamptonshire, 15 June 1605, Son of Will.
Rondolphe of Hams near to Lewis in Sussex (Steward to Edw. Lord Zouch) by
Elizabeth his Wife, Dau. of Tho. Smith of Newnham before mentioned, educated in
Westminster School, and went thence (being one of the Kings Scholars) to
Trinity Coll. in Cambridge 1623. of which he became Fellow. Afterward he
commenced Master of Arts, in which Degree he was incorporated at Oxon, became
famous for his ingenuity, an adopted Son of Benj. Johnson, and accounted one of
the most pregnant wits of his age; the quickness of which was first discovered
when he was about 9 or 10 years old, when then he wrote the History of the
incarnation of our Savior, in verse, which is at this day preserved in MS.
under his own hand writing. When he arrived to Man's Estate, and perhaps before,
he wrote (1) Poems. (2) The Muses Looking-glass, a Comedy. (3) Amyntas or the
impossible dowry, a Pastoral. (4) Aristippus, or the jovial Philosopher, etc.
Trag. presented in a private show. (5) The conceited Peddler; presented in a
strange show. -- Land. 1630. qu. (6) Jealous Lovers, Tr. Com. (7) Hey for
honesty, down with knavery. Com. Translated out of Aristophanes his Plutus:
Augmented and published by F. J. Land. 1651. qu. All which, except the last,
were gathered together, and printed in one vol. by the care of his Brother Rob.
Randolphe Student of Chapter Chapter in Oxon. being then commended to the world by
diverse Poets of the said University. Several other things of the like nature,
were expected from the said young Poet Th. Randolphe, but by indulging himself
too much with the liberal conversation of his admirers (a thing incident to
Poets) brought him untimely to his end, in the House of Will. Stafford of
Blatherwyke in Northamptonshire Esquire; (having spent some time in that of his
Father at Little Houghton in the said County in his delightful studies)
Whereupon his body being buried in an Isle, joining to the Church at that place
(among those of the Staffords) on the 17 day of March, an. 1634, had soon after
a Monument of white Marble, wreathed about with laurel, erected over his grave,
at the charge of Sir Christopher (afterward Lord) Hatton of Kirby. The
inscription on which, in Lat. and Engl. ver. was made by the Poets Friend Pet.
Hausted of Cambridge.

DAVID POWELL, a learned searcher into the bowels Denbighshire, entered a Member
of this University in 1566 or thereabouts, but in what Coll. or Hall resident,
I know not. Sure it is that as soon as Jesus Coll. was founded (1571) he
translated himself thereunto, took the Degrees in Arts as a Member thereof,
holy Orders, and at length was made Vicar of Ruabon in his own Country. About
that time he had conferred on him a Dignity in one of the Cathed. in Wales (St.
Asaph I think) grew famous for his learning, and soon after took the Degrees in
Divinity. His works are,

Annotationes in itinerarium Cambriae, scriptum per Silv. Giraldum Cambrensem.
Land. 1585. oct. Franc. 1603.

Annot. in Cambr. descriptionem, script. per Silv. Giraldum.

De Britannica historia recte intelligenda, Epistola ad Gul, Fleetwoodum civit.
Land. Recordatorem. Which two last books are printed with his Annotationes in
Itin. Cambr. He also took a great deal of pains in making a Welsh Dictionary,
but died before he could perfect it; corrected also and published Historia
Britannica, written by Ponticus Virunnius, in 6 books, -- Land. 1585. oct. And
amended and augmented The History of Combria now called Wales; which was
translated into English by Humph. Lhoyd Gent. -- Land. 1584. qu. This History
of Cambria was originally written in Latin by Caradoc a Monk of Lancarvan, and
by him continued till the Year 1156. Afterward being yearly augmented by
several hands, was, as I have told you, translated into English by H. Lhoyd as
you may see under the Year 1570, but he dying before he could come near to the
end of it, 'twas finished by our Author D. Powell, and by him published. What
else he has transmitted to posterity, I find not, nor any thing more of him,
only that he was buried in his Church of Ruabon (as the Ancients there say, tho
the register not, because it is imperfect) about Fifteen hundred and ninety,
Sam. Powell succeeded him in the Vicaridge of that Village. They add also that
he had left behind him several things sit to be printed, but what became of
them after his death they could not tell. The next that (...) is one, who was
accounted an eminent Scholar of his time, as by the generality of writers is
confessed.

Albimontanus to his name, was the Son of John Rogers (by his Wife Adriana
Pratt alias de Weyden) Son of Joh. Rogers of Derytend in the Parish of Aston in
Warwickshire, was by his Fathers care strictly educated in juvenile learning,
but at the coming to the Crown of Q. Mary, being then about 13 years of age, he
went with his Father, as it seems, beyond the Seas for Religion sake; where
settling at Francfort, obtained great knowledge in humane learning, especially
in the Greek tongue. After his return in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth, he was
sent to Oxon, but to what particular Hall or Coll. therein, I know not. In July
1561 he was admitted Bach. of Arts, and in the beginning of Aug. following was
licensed to proceed in the same faculty; the first of which Degrees he
completed not by Determination, nor the other by standing in the Comitia.
Afterward taking to Wife Susan Dau. of Nicasius Yetswiert secretary of the
French tongue to Q. Eliz. and one of the Clerks of the signet, was introduced
into the Court, where his most admirable parts being quickly discerned, he
became one of the Clerks of the Council to that Queen, and often employed by
her in Ibid. in Annalib. Camdeni, an. 1575. 77. and 88. vide Jac. Aug. Thuan.
in Historiarum suit temp. lib. 89. p. 264.
Embassies, as into the Netherlands an. 1575, to Don Joh. of Austria 1577, and
to the K. of Denmark in 1588. He was a very good Man, excellently well learned,
a good Lat. Poet, and one that was especially beloved by the famous Antiquary
and Historian W. Camden, for whose sake he had laid the foundation of,

A discouse concerning the Acts of the Britains, the form of their
Commonwealth, and the order and laws by which they lived -- Which discourse he
intended to communicate to the said Camden, to have it inserted in his
Britannia, but he died Idem Camden in Britannia in cap. de morib. and
consuetudinibus Britannorum.
before 'twas finished. He wrote also,

Odae, Epigrammata, Epitaphia, etc. in laudem and mortem Johannis Juelli Episc.
Sarisbur. See at the end of the said Jewels life written by L. Humphrey. He
has also published certain Latin Poems, which are quoted by the said Camden in
his discourse lb. in Belgi^.
of the City of Salisbury, and Poems in English mentioned by other Persons with
great commendation, but these I have not yet seen. He has also Lat. verses
occasionally printed in other Authors, as before Ortelius his Theatrum orbis
terrarum, and an Epigram to the University of Oxon, in Ralph Agas his Accurate
description (or Type) of the said University, an. 1578. He yielded up his last
breath to him that gave it, on the 11th of Febr. 1590-91.
in Fifteen hundred and ninety; whereupon his body accompanied by an Herald or
two, was buried on Shrovetuesday the 16 of the same month near to that of
Nicas. Yetswiert beforementioned in the Church of Sunbury near to
Hampton Court in Middlesex. I find another Dan. Rogers later in time than the
former, who among several things that he has published are, (1) David's cost,
wherein every one who is desirous to serve God aright, may see what it must
cost him. Land. 1619. oct. being the effect of certain Sermons. (2) A practical
Catechism. Land. 1633. (3) Lectures upon the History of Naaman the Syrian, his
disease and cure. Land. 1642 -- 50. fol. (4) Matrimonial honor, or the crown
and comfort of marriage, etc. Land 1642. qu. with other things which I have not
yet seen. But this D. Rogers who was a Man of most rare parts, was educated in
Christ's Coll. in Cambridge, afterward a Minister and Bach. of Div. and I think
the same, who was Parson of Haversham in Bucks. qu.

Will. Faunt of Foston in Leicestershire Esquire. was born of an ancient and
gentile Family living at that place, an. 1554, and being very studious and
delighted in Letters while he was a Child, became fit for Academical studies at
14 years of age. Whereupon being sent to Merton Coll. in 1568 he was committed
to the tuition of the most noted Philosopher of that house named Joh. Potts;
who, tho he had been before ejected by Mr. Jo. Man the Warden, yet was he
permitted to attend his Pupil, whom he before had instructed in Grammar in the
Country. But the said Potts being a R. Cath. or else an hearty well-wisher to
the Popish Religion, he took away his Pupil from the said Coll. with the advice
of his relations (who were Catholics also) and in the beginning of 1570
conducted him to Lovaine in Brabant, where entering him into the Coll. of the
Jesuits the same year, left him and went into Ireland. In the said Coll. he
continued till he was Bach. of Arts; at which time, having a desire to travel,
he went to Paris, where he remained for a time. Thence he went to Mynchen or
Munchen a City and University in Bavaria, where William Duke of that Province,
did, for the towardliness that he saw in him, choose him for his Scholar, and
maintained him in the said University. While he continued there, he took the
Degree of Master of Arts, and then having an ardent desire to study Divinity,
he departed thence in the Year 1575, went to the English Coll. of Jesuits at
Rome, made a very forward progress in that faculty, and changed his name to
Laurence Arthur Faunt. Not long after, he was constituted Divinity reader in
the said Coll. and was in very great favor with P. Greg. 13. who, had he lived
a little longer, would, as 'twas then supposed, have honored our profound
Author Faunt with a Cardinals cap. However in token of his love, he gave him,
on his humble desire, license to make a seal, that by virtue of it, which
should be set to a writing to be drawn up by him, any of his Countrymen (whose
welfare he ever tendered) might with safety pass through any Country, without
peril of the Spanish inquisition, or any danger else whatsoever. In the mean
time the K. of Poland having settled a Coll. for Jesuits at Posna, a City in his
Dominions, our Author was sent by the said Pope to be Governor thereof. So
that leaving Rome in order for that employment 10. June 1581, he was not long
after received there with ceremony. Where, for his great learning, gravity,
wisdom, and his religious life and conversation, he was held in great esteem by
the spiritual and temporal estates of that Nation. While he remained there, he
wrote several books, among which these following are some.

Doctrina Catholica de Sanctorum invocatione, and veneratione, etc. Posnan.
1584. oct.

Coenae Lutheranorum and Calvinianorum oppugnatio. part. 2. Posnan. 15986. qu.

Catholicae Eucharistiae defensio. Printed with Caena, etc.

Apologia Libri sui de invoc. and venerat. Sanctorum contra falsas Danielis
Tossani criminationes, etc. Col. Agrip. 1589. in oct. He also wrote without his
name set to it,

Tractatus de controversiis in ordinem ecclesiasticum and secularem in Polonia.
Print. an. 1592. in qu. With other things which the Bib. script. of his society
will tell you. This worthy Person, who was much celebrated in his time, gave
way to fate at Vilna the chief City of the Province of Lithuania in Poland, on
the 28. Febr. according to the account there followed, 1592/9^.
in Fifteen hundred ninety and one, (which is ninety with us) after he had
religiously served in the society of Jesus about 25 years, to their great
renown and honor. The next Person in order to be mentioned is one, as famous
in his way, as the former, but of the reformed Religion.

THOMAS MOUFET or Muffet was born in London, Leonards Shoreditch, as I
conceive, because his name and relations lived in that Parish, and one John
Muffet died there in 1596. After he had been educated in Grammar learning in
that City, he spent some time in this University, afterward traveled into
diverse Countries in Europe, where he became known to the most eminent Men,
especially Physicians and Chemists of that time, and was doctorated in Physic
in some noted University in his travels. After his return, he fell into very
great practice within the City of his nativity, became much honored and
beloved by Peregrine Bertie Lord Willoughby of Eresbie, and esteemed the famous
ornament of the body of Physicians, and the true pattern of all polite and
solid Literature. He has written,

De jure and praestantia Chemicorum Medicamentorum dialogus Apologeticus.
Francof 1584. Ursell. 1602. oct. and in the first volume of Theatrum Chemicum,
Argent. 1623. oct. page 70.

Epistolae quinque Medicinales. Most of which were written to one whom the
Author calls Philalethes a German Chemist. They were printed with the former
book in that impression of 1602, and I think elsewhere.

Nosomantica Hippocratea; sive Hippocratis prognostica cuncta, ex omnibus
ipsius scriptis methodice digesta, etc. Franc. 1588. oct. in 9 books. He also,
by his great labor and charge, did enlarge, and finish, Insectorum sive
minimorum Animalum Theatrum; olim ab Edw. Wottono, Conrado Gesnaro, Thomaque
Pennio inchoatum. Which Book the Author leaving behind him in MS. at his Death,
it came some years after into the hands of Sir Theod. de Mayern, Knight, who
published it in Fol. at Land, 1634. with an Epistle Dedicatory before, and
Preface to, it: But before that time some imperfect Copies of it were published
by Laur Scholzius, an. 1598, etc. This Book was published in the English Tongue
at Land. 1658. Fol. by J. R. M. D. Dr. Moufet has written also,

Healths improvement; or, Rules comprising and discovering the nature, method,
and manner of preparing all sorts of Food used in this Nation. -- This was
corrected and enlarged by Christoph. Bennet -- Land. 1655. 4to. Whatelse our
Author Moufet has written, I know not, nor any thing more of him, only that in
his latter days he lived much at Bulbridge, near Wilton in Wilts. as a retainer
to the Pombrochian Family; from which he had an yearly Pension allowed to him
to his last day, mostly by the favor of that incomparable Lady, Mary Countess
of Pembroke. He concluded his last day toward the latter end of Q. Elizabeth,
Clar. 1590.
and was, as I have been credibly informed by one or more ancient Men that
belonged to the said Family, buried at Wilton. Contemporary with him was Joh.
Securis an eminent Physician of Sarum, whom I have mentioned before.

Waterford in Ireland, elected Fellow of Oriel Col. An. 1551. and in the year
1555. was admitted Master of Arts. About the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign he returned to his Native Country, and became the Happy Schoolmaster of
M^ster, and Dean of Waterford for a time. From which last place being ejected
for his Religion, about 1565. he continued notwithstanding in his beloved
Faculty of Pedagogy, which was then accounted a most excellent Employment in
Ireland by the Catholics; especially for this Reason, that the Sons of
Noblemen and Gentlemen might be trained up in their Religion, and so
consequently keep out Protestancy. His School was, during his time, in a
flourishing condition, and by his care and industry many learned Persons issued
thence. Among such (not that I shall mention Rich. Stanyhurst. of whom I shall
speak hereafter) was one Peter Lombard born in Waterford, who afterward
studied at Lovaine in Brabant; where, after he had spent two years and an half
in Philosophy, he was chosen Ric. Stanyhurst in Descript. Hibern. cap. 7.
when he proceeded Master of Arts, Primus Vniversitatis, by the uniform consent
of the Four Principals; which preferment did not happen in such sort for many
years before. About that time the said Lombard wrote Carmen heroicum in
Doctoratum Nicholai Quemerfordi, with other things afterward, which were much
valued at Lovaine; but such I have not yet seen. See another Pet. Lombard in my
discourse of Will. Camden. As for P. White, he has written, Epitome copiae
Erasmi. lib. 1.
Epit. figurarum Rhetoricarum. lib. 1.
Annotationes in Orat. pro Archia poeta.
Annot. in Orat. pro T. A. Milone.


Epigrammata diversa. lib. 1. He lived, as I guess, to the latter end of Q.
Elizabeth; Clas. 1590.
but the particular time when he died, I find not. Equal in time with the said
Pet. White, was another of both his Names, an Englishman born, and a severe
Calvinist; who, among several things that he has written, published a Book,
entitled. An Answer to certain crabbed Questions, pretending a Real Presence in
the Sacrament, together with a discovery of the Jesuitical Opinion of
Justification, guilfully uttered by Sherwin at the time of his Execution. Land.
1582. oct. Also A Sermon against Idolatry, on Apoc. 1. 12, 13. Land. 1581. oct.
etc. Whether he was an Oxford Man, I cannot yet find.

Yeate in Glocestershire, sped a Child into the College near Winchester, by the
endeavors of his Mother's Brother Alex. Belsire Fellow of New College, where
profiting exceedingly in Grammar Learning in the School there, was chosen
Probationer of New College in 1538. and two years after was admitted true and
perpetual Fellow of the said House. Afterward prosecuting his Studies with
great industry, took the degree of Master of Arts, in 1546, Holy Orders, and
soon after became an able Theologist, and admirably well skilled in the Greek
and Hebrew Languages; the last of which he read to several young Scholars in
the University, particularly to Bern. Gilpin of Queen's College. About that
time Sir Tho. White (who was afterward Founder of S. John's College) having
had notice of his pregnant Parts and Virtues, did for an encouragement allow
unto him an yearly Pension of 10. l. In the beginning of Q. Mary he became
Chaplain to Dr. Bonner Bishop of London, and in 1556. being newly returned from
Paris, and other places in France, he was admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, being then Rector of Thenforth in Northamptonshire. But when Q.
Elizabeth came to the Crown, and he thereupon bereft of his Lord and Patron
Bonner, he betook himself to Oxon; and in 1559. he was made the Queen's
Professor of the Hebrew Lecture, entered himself a Commoner of Heart Hall, and
built little Lodgings opposite thereunto, joining to the West end of New Col.
Cloister, wherein he lived several years; but his Religion being more Catholic
than Protestant, he left Oxon, as he had done his Lecture before; and being of
a timorous Nature, and always dreading of being called into Question for his
seldom frequenting the Church, and receiving the Sacrament, he retired to an
obscure Village, called Cassington, distant from Oxon, North-West, about 4
miles, where purchasing an House, at the end thereof next to Einsham, spent the
remainder of his Days in Study and Devotion. As he was accounted by many an
eminent Theologist and Linguist, so by some a tolerable Philosopher, Poet, and
Geographer. He has written,

Dialogus in adventum sereniss. Reginae Elizabethae gratulatorius, inter eandem
Reginam and D. Rob. Dudleium comitem Leicestriae, and Acad. Oxon. Cancellarium.
It Is a 4to. MS. In Archivis bib. Bod.
written in 1566. in long and short Verses, and has this beginning, Siccine
chara tuis, etc. In this Book are contained, besides the said Dialogues, the
Pictures, or Effigies of all the Colleges and Schools then in being, with long
and short Verses under them, showing by whom they were founded, and when.

A Table, or Map, describing the Colleges and Halls in Oxon, with Verses
underneath each. -- This Map was hung up for two or three days on St. Mary's
Church door, when Q. Elizabeth was entertained at Oxon, in Sept. 1566. which
she several times viewed. I take it to be the same, containing the pictures of
the Colleges and Halls, which one Mr. Will Nutburne, sometimes Commoner of St.
John's Col. gave thereunto, and the same which usually hung in the President's
Lodgings; but by a decree Reg. Secund. col. S. Jo^. p. 60^
made by that Society, 28 Aug. 1616. it was given to Sir Tho. Lake Secretary to
his Majesty King James I. and one of the Privy Council; whereupon Sir Thomas
gave to that College 20 l. toward the reparation of their Buildings, situated
between their Common Hall, and their Public Gate. Our Author Th. Neale made a
translation also of all the Prophets out of the Hebrew, which he presented to Q.
Elizabeth, when she was entertained at Oxon, in 1566, and translated from that
Tongue several of the Rabbis into Latin, which he dedicated to the great
Cardinal Pole: What else he has performed, either in writing or translating, I
cannot tell, neither any thing material of him besides; only, (1) That he is
noted by some Writers, to be the Original Reporter of the Consecration of
Matthew Parker to the Sea of Canterbury, at the Nags-Head-Tavern in Cheapside,
which since is manifestly made a mere Forgery, Clar. 1590.
and (2) That in the year fifteen hundred and ninety, he being then seventy one
years of age, and did put up a Monument for himself, with an inscription on a
Brass plate fastened thereunto, at the upper end of the Body of Cassington
Church, over the Seat which belonged to the House where he lived, (for he
sometimes went to Church,) with intentions to be buried under the said Seat;
but when he died, or was buried, the Register of that place, which is very
imperfect, tells us not. The Copy of the inscription is printed in Hist. and
Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 139. a. One Tho. Neale of Yeate in Glocestershire
(where our Author was born) dying in 1590. his Window named Christiana had a
Commission granted Book of Administrations in the Will-Office before quoted,
beginning in Jan. 1586.
to her to administer the Goods, Debts, and Chattels of him the said Thomas
lately deceased, dated 23 Sept. the same year. Whether it be meant of our
Author, I cannot justly say, because I could never learn that he was ever
married.

Antonius Corranus, or Corrano, Son of Ant. Corranus Doctor of the Laws, was
born at Sevil in Spain, educated there from his Childhood in the R. Catholic
Religion, and was at length an Ascetic, but whether a Monk or Friar, I know
not. Afterward he left his Order and Religion, and being desirous to embrace
the Reformed Doctrine, fled from his Country, went into England, in 1570. or
thereabouts, and at length to London, where he became a frequent Preacher. In
1571. he was made Reader of Divinity in the Temple, by the favor of Dr. Edwin
Sandys Bishop of London; in which Office he continued about three years. In the
beginning of March, 1575. he was Reg. Univ. Oxon. KK. fol. 207.
recommended to the University of Oxon, by Rob. E. of Leicester Chanc. thereof,
to the end that he might proceed Doctor of Divinity at the next Act, have the
charges of his Degrees remitted, and that he be dispensed with for taking the
Degree in order. In the beginning of April following a Convocation was
solemnized, wherein the Chancelor's Letters being read concerning the said
matter, a Dispensation was proposed, that he, the said Corranus, might proceed;
but the House demurring upon it, was at length granted with this condition,
that he purge himself of Heretical Opinions before the next Act. This they did
for this cause, that the Chancellor had designed him to read Divinity in the
University, and to allot him a Catechist Lecture, upon some consultation (as
was pretended) for the utter extirpation of the R. Catholic Religion from the
University. This being the seeming design, as it was afterward the real
intention of the Queen's Council, and High Commissioners, to plant him among
the Accademians; you cannot imagine what Fears and Jealousies were raised in
the Heads of the old Puritanical Doctors and others, who were fully bent to
root out the dregs of Popery in the University, lest that which they labored
in, should be frustrated by a Stranger. I have seen a Copy of a Letter written
by Jo. Rainolds of Corpus Christi College, to Dr. Laur. Humphrey then
Vice-chancelour, dated June 7. wherein several things being said of Corrano and
his Doctrine, you shall have the Contents only. (1) That if Corano be settled
in the University, it is to be feared that it will raise such Flames therein,
that they will not easily be quenched. (2) It Is requisite that it be really
known, whether he be able to show that he be lawfully called to the Ministry of
the Gospel, and charge of teaching publicly, either by the order of any
Christian Church beyond the Sea, or by the Authority of the Church of England,
or whether Ordained by a Bishop; of which matters there be some that doubt. And
if he be not, how can he read? And if he be, it would be well if it be known.
(3) That he is evilly thought of for Heresy of the French Church and others:
And Beza does publicly Bezae Epist. 58. 59.
charge him of it in an Epistle of his that is extant. (4) That he is supposed
to be tainted with Pelagianism, which partly appears from certain Tables which
he brought with him, and afterward scattered abroad. On which, a certain
Person of sound judgment made such Notes, that from thence one may evidently
perceive, that Corrano's obscure speeches in the said Tables, do give just
suspicion of very great Heresies, about Predestination and Justification by
Faith, two the chief Points of Christian Religion, etc. And therefore it is
hoped, that as you were a means to remove Franc. Puccius, so you will endeavor
to stop Corrano from coming among us, who is thought to be a Master of Puccius,
etc. Thus in brief from Job. Rainolds. But notwithstanding all the endeavors
to keep him out, he was at length admitted, after he had fleed himself from
Heresy, and became Reader of Divinity to the Students in Gloucester, St.
Mary's, and Heart, Hall, lived as a Student in Chapter Chapter in 1579. if not before,
of which House he occurs Censor Theologicus, in 1581, 82, 83, 84, and 85. being
then also Prebendary of the Prebend of Harlesten, belonging to the Cathedral of
St. Paul. In 1579. he stirred again for the Degree of Doctor of Divinity; but I
cannot yet find that he was admitted, (notwithstanding he styles himself Doctor
of that Faculty, in his Dialogus Theologicus, an. 1574.) and in the year 1582.
in April he laid under the censure of Heresy again, upon which arose some
trouble, but soon after quieted, and he restored to the good Opinion of the
generality of Scholars and others. His Works are these:

An Epistle, or godly Admonition, sent to the Pastors of the Flemish Church in
Antwerp, exhorting them to concord with other Ministers. -- This was originally
written in Latin; but the Copy of it have not yet seen. Translated into English
by Geofry Fenton -- Land. 1570. oct.

Tabulae divinorum operum, de humani generis creatione. -- Printed 1574. etc.
oct. Translated also into English, under the Title of Tables of God's Works,
etc.

Dialogus Theologicus, quo Epistola D. Pauli Apost. ad Romanos explanatur:
Collect. ex praelectionibus Corran. Land. 1574. oct. printed in English there,
1579. oct.

Articuli fidei orthodoxae, quam ille perfectus est. Printed with Dial. Theol.

Supplication to the King of Spain; wherein is showed the Sum of Religion, for
the Profession whereof the Protestants do suffer Persecution in the Low
Countries. Land, 1577. oct. 'Twas written in Latin and French; but who put it
into English, I know not, unless the Author.

Notae in concionem Solomonis de summo hominis bono, quam Hebraei cohelet,
Graeci and Latini Ecclesiastem vocant. -- Land. 1579. and 81. in oct. The
version of which into Latin was done by Corranus also. The said Notes were
adorned with a learned Analasis by Abrah. Scultet. Printed at Francf. 1618. oct.

Sermons on Ecclesiastes. -- Abridged by Thomas Pit -- Oxon. 1585. oct. which
is called by some Pitt's Paraphrase on Ecclesiastes.

A Spanish Grammar, with certain rules, for teaching both the Spanish and
French Tongues. -- Put into English by Joh. Thorius, as I shall tell you when I
come to him. Printed at Land. 1590. qu. What other things Corrano has written,
I find not, nor any thing else of him; only that he dying at London, March 30.
or thereabouts, in one thousand five hundred ninety and one, Andrew; but
whether in that in Holbourn, or in that by the Wardrobe, I know not, (perhaps
in the last) leaving then behind him a Wife of no good repute, and a Daughter
named Susan; which, if the same that was at Woman's Estate in Oxon, a little
before her Father's Death, was (if any credit might be given to a Libel of that
time, made by an Oxf. Scholar) of a light reputation.

JOHN MOLYNS, Molens or Mullins, so many Sommersetshire, elected Probat. Fellow
of Magd. College in 1541. and afterward being Bach. of Divinity, became a
zealous Man for Reformation. In the Reign of Q. Mary he left the Nation for
Religion sake, and settled at Zurick, where he was esteemed Preface to the Brief
Discourse of the troubles began at Francsort, An. 1554. Printed in 4to. An.
1575.
a learned Man of credit and Authority, being there, as it is said, Greek
Reader among the Natives of England: But when Q. Elizabeth came to the Crwon,
he returned, was made Archdeacon of London, in the place of Jo. Harpesfield
deprived, and Canon of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, where he was much
reverenced for his great Learning and frequent Preaching. One Laeur. Hunmfredus
in Vita and Mort. Jo. Juclli. Edit. 1573. p. 73.
that knew him well gave this Character of him. Johannes Molinsaeus
Archidiaeconus Ecclesiae Paulinae, qui nulli injuriam fecerat, qui prodesse
omnibus studuerat, qui Philosophiae, Theologiae, Linguarum studio sc totum
tradiderat, qui nihil commeritus est nisi quod, ut Aristides, justus, ut olim
Christiani veteres, and nunc (meaning in the beginning of Q. Mary's Reign)
missae interesse recusaret, eandem and ancipitem fortunam subire compulsus est;
meaning also that he was forced to leave his Fellowship of Magd. College, and
seek his Fortune elsewhere, with Arth. Saul, Pet. Morwin, and other learned and
pious Fellows of that House, who soon after went as voluntary Exiles into
Germany. He has written and published several Books; yet in all my searches I
can only find extant,

Carmina Lat. and Graec. in mortem duorum fratrum Suffolciensium Henrici and
Caroli Brandon, etc. Printed 1552. in two sheets, in qu.

Sermons, etc. He concluded his last day on the eleventh of the Call. of June,
in one thousand five hundred ninety and one, Paul, within the City of London,
leaving then behind him a Daughter named Mary, Wife of Walt, Chetwind of
Ingestry in Staffordshire. Over his Grave was soon after a flat stone laid,
with his Image thereon, engraven on a Brass plate, and an Epitaph under it, the
beginning of which runs thus, Clarus Johannes vitae moderamine Mullins,
Doctrinae insignis plenusque senilibus annis.
Qui. etc.


He gave by Will 200 l. to purchase Lands worth 12 l. per An. for an exhibition
to be given to two Scholars of Magd. College in Oxon, each to have 6 l. which,
if I mistake not, continues to this day. In his Archdeaconry of London
succeeded Theophilus Aylmer, Son of Dr. Jo. Aylmer Bishop of London.

Will. Hatton of Holdenby in Northamptonshire, Son of John, Son of Hen Hatton,
by Eliz. his Wife, Sister and Heir of Will. Holdenby of Holdenby
beforementioned, was born at Holdenby, became a Gentleman-Commoner of S.
Mary's Hall, in the Reign of Q. Mary, at which time Will. Alan (afterward a
Cardinal) presided it. Thence, without a Degree, he went to the Inner Temple;
afterward became successively one of the Queen's Gentlemen Pensioners,
Gentleman of the Privy Chamber, Captain of the Band of Pensioners, a Knight,
Vice-chamberlain of the Queen's Household, one of the Privy Council, Lord
Chancellor of England, Knight of the Garter, and Chancellor of this University.
He was a Man Camden in Britan. in com. Northampt.
to say nothing of him, but that which in truth is due, for Religion and
Godliness right devout, of approved faithfulness to the State, of incorrupt,
Equity, for Alms deeds of all others most bountiful, and one (which is not the
least part of his praise) that was most willing and ready to support and
maintain Learning, etc. He was also somewhat Idem in Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub
An. 1591.
inclined to the Popish Party, by reason his Natural Clemency could not be
drawn into a Persuasion, that in case of Religion, Men should be burnt, hanged,
or quartered. And therefore it was that one Pet. Ribadeneira in Append. ad N.
Sanderum de Schism. Anglic.
reports that he always was in animo Catholicus; and another See in
Leycester's Commonwealth, printed 1641. p. 149.
that he was of such credit and favor in Rome, as if he was the greatest
Papist in England. He wrote, as it is said, several things pertaining to the
Law, but none of them are extant; only this, if I may say it is his, and not
his Name set to it for sale sake.

A Treatise concerning Statutes, or Acts of Parliament, and the Exposition
thereof. Land. 1677. oct. Whether ever before printed, I know not.

Speeches spoken during the time of his Chancelorship -- MS. This great and
worthy Person dyed on the 20th. of November in one thousand five hundred ninety
and one, Paul's Cathedral in London, on the 16th. of December following. Soon
after came out a little Book of Verses made on his Death, by several Hands,
intit. Musarum plangores. Christopher Lord Hatton, Son of John Hatton, the
nearest Knsman of the Male Line to the aforesaid Sir Christopher, was not of
St. Mary's Hall, but of Jesus College in Cambridge, and afterward a Doctor of
the Civil Law of Oxon, as I shall elsewhere tell you. He published the Psalms
of David, with Titles and Collects, according to the matter of each Psalm.
Printed at Oxon, 1644. in oct. and afterward enlarged and published several
times. These Collects or Prayers at the end of every Psalm, were compiled by
Dr. Jeremiah Tailor, and so were the Devotions for the help and assistance of
all Christian People, which are at the end of every impression of the aforesaid
Book; yet notwithstanding they go all under the Name of the aforesaid Christop.
L. Hatton, (having his Arms in the Title of them,) who dying 4 July 1670. being
then, or lately, a Member of the Privy Council to his Majesty, was buried in a
private Chapel of the Collegiate Church at Westminster (dedicated to St.
Peter) opposite to the Capella Regum, on the North side. See more in Jer.
Tailor, under the year 1667.

BARTHELMEW CHAMBERLAIN Oxfordshire, admitted Scholar of Trinity Col. 7. June
1563. aged 17 years, Probationer in 67, and Fellow the year after. About that
time entering into Holy Orders, he became a noted Preacher in these parts, took
both the Degrees in Divinity, that of Doctor being completed 579. before which
time he was beneficed and dignified in the Church, but where, I cannot justly
say. He has written and published.

Several Sermons, as, (1) The Passion of Christ, and benefits thereby, on Heb.
9. 28. Land. 1581. and 1613. oct. (2) Concio ad Academicos Oxomienses in
Comitiis, An. 1576. Land. 1584. qu. (3) Sermon at Paul's, on Amos 3. 6. Land.
1589. oct. (4) Sermon at Farington in Berks, Clar. 1591.
on -- Land. 1571. oct. with others, which I have not yet seen. Between the
time of the first coming of the said Barth. Chamberlain to Trinity College, to
the year 1578. I find seven of his Surname to be Students in the said College,
and some after; but cannot in all my searches find out George Chamberlain, who
was afterward Bishop of Ypre, and whether he ever abode in this University in
the condition of a Student, I cannot justly say it. The said George
Chamberlain was the eldest Son of George Chamberlain Esque (by his Wife, the
Daughter of Moses Pring of Gaunt in Flanders) and he the second Son of Sir
Leonard Chamberlain of Oxfordshire Knight, Governor of the Isle of Guernsey,
who dyed there 2. Eliz. From which Sir Leonard are the Chamberlains of Sherburn
in the said County desended; the Heiress general of which Family, named
Elizabeth, was married to John Nevile, Baron of Abergavenny. The said George
Chamberlatine who was Bishop of Ypre, was born at Gaunt beforementioned, An.
1576. and being bred up to Learning and Religion, became successively Canon,
Archdeacon, and Dean of St. Bavon in Gaunt, and at length, in 1626. was made
Bishop of Ypre within the Province of Machlin in Brabant, on the Death of
Antonius de Hennin; where being settled he became much admired (as he was
partly before) for his great Piety, for his voluble Preaching in five Languages
at least, and beloved of Kings and Princes, etc. Had I time, and room allowed,
I would give you a Copy of an Epitaph made on, by one that knew and much
admired, him; wherein, no doubt, but that high character of his Piety,
Learning, and Worth, is justly said; but I must hasten, and tell you that he
dying, to the reluctance of all that knew him, on the 19. Dec. according to the
account followed at Ypre, in 1634. aged 58 years, one month, and 19 days, was
buried in his own Cathedral. Some years before his Death he came into England,
purposely to resign up his Heirship of his Estate at Sherburn beforementioned,
and elsewhere, which belonged to the noble Family of the Chamberlains,
sometimes Barons of Tanquervil in Normandy, he being the first and true Heir:
And this he did for Religion sake, and purposely to avoid the encumbrances of
earthly things. See more of him in Athenae Belgicae, etc. written by Franc.
Sweertius, printed at Antwerp, 1628. where you will find several things that he
had written and published.

ROBERT GWINN, a Welsh Man born, took Thom. Crowther another Batchelaur, to
Doway, where being admitted into the English College, made very great progress
in Divinity. Afterward Gwinn returning into England, and settling in Wales in
the condition of a Secular Priest, did write several Pious Works in the Welsh
Tongue, as Anton. Possivinus tells In Apparat. Sac. de Scriptorth (...) Edit.
Col. Agrip. 1608. Tom. 2. p. 342.
us, but the Titles of them he omits; and also translated from the English into
the Welsh Language, A Christian Directory or Exercise guiding Men to Eternal
Salvation, commonly called the Resolution: Clar* 1591.
Written by Rob. Persons the Jesuit. which Translation was much used and
valued, and so consequently did a great deal of good among the Welsh People.
See more in Jo. Davies under the year 1634.

WALTER BALEY or Bailey, Son of Henry Baley of Warnwell in Dorsetshire, was
born at Portsham in that County, educated in Wykchams School (...) Win chester,
admitted perpetual fellow of New College after he had served two years of
probation, an. 1550, tok the degrees in Arts, entered upon the Physic line, was
admitied to practice that faculty while he was Proctor of the University, in
the year 1558, and about that time was made Prebendary of Dultingcote alias
Dulcot, etc. in the Church of Wells, which he resigned in 1579. In 1561 he was
made the Queens Professor of Physic in this University, proceeded in that
faculty two years after, and at length became Physician to Qu. Elizabeth, and
much resorted to for his practice. He has written,

A discourse of three kinds of Pepper in common use -- Printed 1588, in oct.
dedicated to Sir Jo. Horsey, Knight.

Brief Treatise of the preservation of the Eyesight -- Printed in the Reign of
Qu. Eliz. in tw. and at Oxon 1616, and 1654 in oct. etc. In that Edition of
1616 was printed another or second Treatise of the Eyesight, collected from
Fernclius and Riolanus, but by whom, I know not. They both now go under the
name of Bailey, who has also written,

Directions for health, natural and artificial; with Medicines for all diseases
of the Eyes -- Printed 1626, in qu.

Explicatio Galeni de potu convaelescentium and senum, and praecipue de nosti
ae Alae and Biriae paratione, etc. MS. in qu. sometimes in the Library of
Robert Earl of Aylesbury. He the said Dr. Bailey surrendered up his last breath,
March 3. in fifteen hundred ninty and two, aged 63, and was buried in the inner
Chapel of New Coll. 159 2^3.
whose Epitaph you may read in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 152. b.
His posterity do live at this day at Ducklington near to Witney in Oxfordshire,
some of whom have been Justices of the Peace for the said County.

Filidinus was born of the noble and renowned family of the Puccii at Florence,
from which had sprung before his time three Cardinals; educated from his
Childhood in good Letters and in the R. Cath. Religion, exercised the trade of
Merchandise at Lions, where many differences and disputes arising concerning
Religion, which were not then quite sopited, our Author Puccius, who was only a
Spectator, laid aside his trade, and totally applied himself to the study of
Sacred Letters, to the end that he might perfectly understand the grounds of
his belief, and what was professed by the Protestants. At length being
satisfied in Conscience that those of the To. Church were in an error, he left
France and Italy, retired into England, and being seemingly a Protestant, he
went to the University of Oxon, got himself, through commendations of his
sincerity, to be entered into a Coll. or Hall, wherein he studied Philosophy and
Divinity very severely, and took the degree of Master of Arts, an. 1574. About
which time, maintaining certain opinions contrary to those of the Grandees of
the said University, (which were Calvinistical) especially de fide in dcum,
quae and qualis sit, had many private disputes with Theologists there, and at
length public. Which disputes being altogether displeasing to them, who
esteemed them ridiculous, and the author no better than an arrogant and an
opinionative person, they found means to remove him from the University, much
about the same time that he was endeavoring to be a Theol. or Catechistical
Lecturer, lest his Doctrine should take root among the juniors. For at that
time they being very zealous for a through Reformation, were jealous of all
strangers that came among them, and particularly of him, whom they well knew to
have been a zealous Papist, and then no well-grounded Protestant. From Oxford
he went to London, had several disputes there also, and became acquainted with
Ant. Corrano, who living about that time in Oxon also, his person could never
be well relisht among them. Afterward Puccius went Vide in Epistalis Faeust.
Socini ad amico -- Racov. 1618. in oct. Ep. 3. ad Math Radecium. p. 102, etc.
to Basil in Germany, upon the invitation of Francisc. Bettus a Roman, then
living there; where meeting also with Faustus Socirus, they had many discourses
concerning the adventures of (...) England, and at length had several disputes
These disputes are remitted into the Biblietheca Fratrum P^l^norum, with this
title, De statu frimi hominis (...) disputatio, quam Faust. S^^inus per scripia
habuit. (...) per blore^^. an. 1578.
(...) himself; with which, he seeming (...) Puccius wrote ten arguments de
(...) primi hominis ante peccatum. All which being answered by Socinus, were by
him, with several disputations that had passed between them, made public.
Afterward Puccius was forced to leave Basil. because he had printed certain
Theses to be disputed on, in which he asserted universum humanum genus in ipso
matris utero efficaciter particeps esse beneficiis Christi and vitae immortalis
and beatae, etc. Whereupon he went into England, and so to London, where he
began to publish his paradoxical opinions, and that with such confidence, as
if, Orpheus* like, he meant to charm all to follow him; but his waters being
narrowly watched, he was seized on, imprisoned, and suffered several
calamities, otherwise Oxford would have once more tasted of his Doctrine.
Afterward, being let loose, he went into Flanders and Holland, where he
corresponded by Letters with Socinus. From Holland he went to Antwerp, where he
did the like, and had several cavilling disputes not only with such that he
esteemed heterodox, but with those of his own opinion. Thence he removed to
Cracaw in Poland, where he had frequent disputes with the Jesuits, and others,
nay and with some of his own persuasion, ( Socinus being there also) and wrote
several matters in the Italian Tongue against the Church of Rome, in 1585.
While he continued in the said City of Cracaw, it happened that he became
acquainted with two persons that had come to that place with Albertus Alaskie,
Prince (or Vaywood) of Sirad, when he left England. Their names were John Dee
and Edward Kelley, Magicians; who having partly known Puccius in England, did
entertain See the Relation of what (...) and some Spirits. etc. Land. 1659.
(...) p. 400. 410. 413, 419, (...) etc.
and admit him into their secrets, with great hope of some good to be done by
his fellowship; and in August the same year, he was actually with them at
Prague in Bohemia (to which place they conveyed him) while certain Spirits
appeared to them, Kelley being then Seer, and Dee an observer or writer down of
what was said by the Spirits, and Kelley's seeing and interpreting. At length
Puccius did not deal truly and sincerely with them, which much troubled Dee;
and thereupon he desired to be rid of him. Puccius therefore perceiving it,
wrote a large and submissive Letter to the said Dee and Kelly; and among other
things, gave him a very punctual account of what had passed between Philip
Bishop of Placentia (who was sent by the Pope, as his Nuncio, to have the said
Magicians banished, or else sent to Rome) and himself, concerning their cause,
apparitions, high attempts, etc. But so it was, that whither by the persuasions
of the said Nuncio, or some things uttered by the Spirits, that all the World
should at length come to the Church of Rome, he forthwith recanted before
certain Romans Priests, and became a zealous Papist, and at length a Priest. All
that I have seen of his works, besides what are already mentioned, are,

De Christi Salvatoris efficacitate in omnibus and singulis hominibus, quatenus
homines sunt, assertio Catholica, etc. Goudae 1592. oct. Ded. to P. Clem. 8.

Epistola ad Jo. Dee and Edw. Kelly. Dat. at Prag. 15. Call. oct. 1585. It Is a
large Epistle in Latin, and is the same with the submissive Letter before
mentioned. After the year fifteen hundred and ninty two, Clar. 1592.
he went to Rome, and became Secretary to Cardinal Pompeius Arragon, from whom
he expected great matters, but death snatching him untimely away, in the midst
of his aspiring thoughts, about the year 1600, was buried in the Church of St.
Onuphrius in Rome. I have more than twice sent to that place for the day and
year of his death, with a copy of his Epitaph, but as yet I have received no
answer. Therefore take this Epit^^ made for him, which I have met (...) (...)
in Select. (...) detum, Col. Agup. 1626. p. 106. (...) Nath. (...) in (...) in
Europt (...) deli^iis, Edit. (...)
with elsewhere. Inveni portum, spes and fortuna valete,
Nil mihi vobiscum, ludite nunc alios.


HENRY SALESBURY, born of, and descended Denbigbshire, became a commoner of S.
Albans hall in 1581, aged 20 years, took one degree in Arts, and no more, in
this University, entered on the Physic line, practiced afterward in his own
country, and was esteemed by the learned not only an eminent Physician, but a
curious Critic, especially as to matters relating to the Antiquities and
Language of his country. He l^th written,

Dictionarium Britannicum. Which being left (...) in MS, came into the hands of
Job. Davies, who made great use of it when he was (...) his Dictionary in
British and Lat. and in Lat. and British. What our author Salesbury has
written besides, Clar. 1592.
or when he died, I find not, nor any thing else of him, only that he was of
the same family with, and very nearly related to, Will. Salesbury, whom I have
mentioned under the year 1567, from whose endeavors this H. Salesbury found
diverse materials when he was composing his Dictionary beforementioned, and
perhaps had received instruction from his own Person, in matters relating to
British affairs.

Amandus Colfe alias Coult of Callis in France, and of the City of Canterbury
in England, was born in Kent, particulary, as I suppose, in the said City,
become a Commoner of Broadgates Hall in the beginning of the year 1576. took
the Degrees in Arts, Holy Orders, and was afterward beneficed, if not
dignified, in his own Country. His Works are,

Sermon 17. Nov. 1587. on Psalm. 118. 22. to the end of 26. Land. in oct.

A Comfortable Treatise of the Temptation of Christ. Land. 1592. Clar. 1592.
in oct. with other things, as it is probable, which I have not yet seen. His
eldest Brother Rich. Colfe was born at Callis. educated in Chapter Chapter in this
University, and was afterward Doctor of Divinity, as I shall elsewhere tell
you. He left behind him several Sons, among whom were Isaac of Chapter Chapter and
Jacob of All Souls Col.

ap Henry, that is the Son of Henry, better known by the Name of Martin
Marprelate, or Marpriest, as having been a Plague to the Bishops and Ministers
of his time than by his own; was born and bred, as he used to say, in the
Mountains of Wales; particularly, as others say, in the County of Brecknock,
became a Subsizer of Peter House in Cambridge, about 1578. At which time as one
Cu^bb. Curry-Knave in his Al^^ for a paras printed at Land. in Qu. fol. 14.
a says) he was as arrant a Papist as ever came out of Wales, and that he
would have run a false Gallop over his Beads with any Man in England, and help
the Priest, for a shift, to say Mass at midnight, etc. In 1583. or thereabouts,
he took a Degree in Arts in that University, and afterward did perform some,
or most, of the Exercise requisite for Master; but leaving the said University
abruptly, (for what cause I know not) he retired to Oxon; and getting himself
to be entered a Commoner of St. Alban's Hall, (notwithstanding the vigor of
Puritanism did then Reign among the Heads of the University, which makes me to
think that Penry was not then inclined to Popery) he continued there for some
time, finished the remaining part of his Exercise, and in the beginning of July
1586. he was licensed to proceed in Arts, as a Member of the said Hall, and on
the eleventh of the said Month completed that Degree in an Act celebrated in
the Church of St. Mary. About that time he took Holy Orders, did Preach in
Oxon, and afterward in Cambridge, and was esteemed by many a tolerable
Scholar, an edifying Preacher, and a good Man; but being a Person full of Welsh
Blood, of a hot and restless Head, did, upon some discontent, change the course
of his Life, and became a most notorious Anabaptist, (of which Party he was in
his time the Cor^p^^^us) and in some sort a Brownist, and the most bitter Enemy
to the Church of England, as any that appeared in the long Reign of Q.
Elizabeth. He has written.

A view of some part of such Public Wants and Disorders as are in the Service
of God, within her Majesty's Country of Wales; with an Humble Petition to the
High Court of Parliament for their speedy redress -- Printed 1588. in oct.
Therein is showed not only the necessity of Reforming the State of Religion
among that People; but also the only way, in regard of substance, to bring that
Reformation to pass.

A defense of that which has been written in the questions of the ignorant
Ministry, and the communicating with them. -- Printed 1588. in oct. written
against Rob. Some, D. D. of Cambridge, who published the same year, A Treatise
deciding several questions concerning the Ministry, Sacrament, and Church.
Land. in qu. As also A confutation of some of Mr. Penry's Errors. About that
time J. G. of Oxon published a Book entit. Mr. Some laid open in his Colors;
wherein the indifferent Reader may easily see, how wretchedly and loosly he
has handled the Cause against Mr. Penry. -- Printed in oct. Penry has also
written,

Exhortation unto the Governors and People of her Majesty's Country of Wales,
to labor earnestly to have the Preaching of the Gospel planted among them. --
Printed (1588.) in oct.

Theses Martinianae, i. e. certain demonstrative conclusions set down and
collected by Martin Marprelate the Great, serving as a manifest and sufficient
confutation of all that ever the College of Catercaps, with their whole Band of
Clergy-Priests, have, or can bring for the defense of their ambitious and
Antichristian relacy. -- Published by Martin Junior, 1589. in oct. and
dedicated to John Kankerbury; that is, John Archbishop of Canterbury. At the
end of which Book Martin Junior has an Epilogue.

The just censure and reproof of Mart. Marprelate to Martin Junior. -- Printed
with the former.

Protestation of Mart Marprelate: Wherein, notwithstanding the surprising of
the Printer, he makes it known unto the World, that he fears neither proud
Priest, Antichristian Pope, Tyrannous Prelate, nor godless Catercap, etc. --
Printed (1589.) in 120. by stealth, and very full of faults.

Dialogue, wherein is plainly laid open the tyrannical dealings of the Lords
Bishops against God's Children. -- Printed (1589.) in qu. Therein are several
reflecting stories on Dr. Martin Culpeper Warden of New College, and on Dr.
Nich. Bond of Magd. College, and on his excellent dancing. This scandalous
Dialogue, (which was reprinted when the Long-Parliament began, An. 1640.
purposely to spite Archbishop Laud and the Bishops) was, with other like stuff
of the said Mart. Marprelate, answered by T. C. that is, Thom. Cooper, in his
Admonition to the People of England, etc. See more in Tho. Cooper under the
year 1594.

Treatise wherein is manifestly proved, that Reformation, and those that
sincerely favor the same, are unjustly charged to be Enemies unto her Majesty
and the State. -- Printed 1590. in qu. This was answered in a Book, intit.
Pasquils Apology, the first part, wherein he renders a reason of his long
silence, and gallops the Field with the Treatise of Reformation. Printed where
I was, and where I shall be ready by the help of God and my Muse, to send you a
may game of Martinism, An. 1590. qu.

Hay' any work for a Cooper, etc. -- This was written against Dr. Tho. Coper
beforementioned, and said to be printed in Europe, not far from some of the
bouncing Priests, An. 1590. qu.

Epitomy of the first Book of Dr. John Bridges, against the Puritans. --
Printed in qu.

Oh! read over Dr. Joh. Bridges, for it is a worthy Work. -- This was written
against Dr. Bridges, Bishop of Oxon, and said to be printed over Sea in Europe,
within two furlongs of a bouncing Priest, at the cost and charges of Mart.
Marprelate, Gent. in qu.

Epistles to the terrible Priests in the Convocation House. -- in qu.

The State of the Church of England. -- in oct.

Petition for Peace. -- in oct.

His Apology. -- This I have not yet seen.

Of Prelatick Ministry. -- Printed 1609. in qu.

History of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16. Chapter Applied to the Prelacy
Ministry, and Church Assemblies of England. -- Printed 16. 9. qu. This Book
being left imperfect by the Author when he was seized and imprisoned, was
published by one of his (...) who says in the Title that it was written by
Joh. (...), a (...) of Jesus Christ; and in the Epistle to the Reader, (...)
was a godly Man, learned zealous, and of a (...) carriage and courage. -- That
with all (...) he endeavored to have the Gospel preached (...) among his poor
Country Men, whose Case he (...) passion of, in that they wanted the (...) of
(...) After all this, God using him as a (...) more clear manifestation of
(...) imprisioned, condemned, and excuted, and so (...) dom for the Name of
Christ etc. These (...) Titles I have here set down, are all (...) knowledge,
if not too many (...) Author of which did in most of them (...) of England, and
its Members, that (...) Sir Edwin (...) p. 10^.
Roman (...) of them in their Books, and Marprelate for a grave Author and
Witness, etc. But this the Reader is to understand, that the learned and sober
Men did answer most, or all of the said Books, (which were printed by stealth,
partly in that nest of rigid Puritans and Schismatics at Fawsly in
Northamptonshire, and partly at Coventry, and elsewhere,) because they knew
Penry to have more than ordinary Learning in him; yet they did not so much work
on the Author and his Disciples, make them ridiculous, and put him and them to
silence, more than those Answers which were written in a buffooning style; as
(1) that written by Tom Nash, intit. Pappe with an hatchet: alias, A Fig for my
God-Son: Or, Crack me this Nut: Or, A Country Cuff; that is, A sound Box of the
Ear for the Idiot Martin to hold his Peace: Written by one that dares call a
Dog, a Dog. -- Imprinted by John Ancke, etc. And are to be sold at the Sign of
the Crabtree Cudgel in Thwack-coat-Lane. (2) That entit. Martin's months mind,
etc. pr. 1589. in qu. (3) That called, The return of the renowned Cavaliero
Pasquill of England, from the other side of the Seas; and his meeting with
Marforius at London upon the Royal Exchange, etc. Land. 1589. qu. against
Martin and Martinism. (4) Another entit. A countercuff given to Martin Junior,
etc. by the Pasquill of Engl. Cavaliero, etc. Land. 1589. qu. (5) That entit.
The first part of Pasquill's Apology, which I have before mentioned. (6) A
certain Oxford Scholar, under the Name of Cuthbert Curry-Knave; who in his Book
called, An Almond for a Parrot, or an Alms for Mart. Marprelate, etc. Printed
in qu. does most egregiously run Martin down. I say, that these Buffoonries and
Pasquils did more nonplus Penry and his Disciples, and so consequently made
their Doctrine more ridiculous among the common sort, than any grave or learned
Answer could do; as in some part did A. L. who entitles himself Anti-Martinus,
in his Monitio ad adolescentes utriusque Academia. Land. 1589. qu. At length
our Author Penry being apprehended at Stepney, near to London, (after his
return from beyond the Sea,) for his writing and publishing infamous Books and
Libels, and the Religion then established, was (after condemnation rto die for
the same) hanged at St. Thomas a Waterings, on the 29. May, in fifteen hundred
ninety and three. He was adjudged at the King's Bench, by Sir Jo. Popham,
Knight, L. Chapter Justice of that Court, and the rest of the Judges there
assembled, on the 25. of the said Month of May, but was not executed on the
next day after judgment, as it was expected, nor the second, nor the third day
after; But when Men looked least for the same (as one Author of the Preface to
(...) Dathan, and Abiram, etc.
says) then was he brought forth, being at dinner, (as I have heard,) by a
Warrant under the Hands of John Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir John Puckering
Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Sir John Popham aforesaid; and the
matter being carried after a close manner, he was suddenly conveyed to the
place of Execution, where he was as hastily bereaved of his Life, and not
suffered (though he desired it) to make declaration of his Faith toward God,
or of his Allegiance to her Majesty, etc. Thus by the Death of this forward and
zealous Person, with the condemnation of John Vdal, and Henry Barrow before
that time, the neck of the Plots of the fiery Non-conformists were broken, and
their brags turned into Preaching of Preces and Lachrymae, as the only means
for Christian Subjects.

Fleet woods of Penwortham, and they from those of Heskyn, in Lancashire;
educated for a time in this University, (either in Brasnose. Coll. or
Broadgates Hall) left it without a degree, and retired to the Middle Temple,
where by continual industry, advanced by good natural parts, he attained to the
name of an eminent Lawyer. In 5 of Eliz. he was elected Autumn or Summer-Reader
of that house, and in the year following Autumn-Reader again; but he omitting
one of those times to read, he was in the 11th year of the said Queen, elected
Double Reader thereof in Lent. About that time being made Recorder of London,
he was afterward by Writ, called to the degree of Sergeant at Law, An. 1580.
and in 1592. he was made the Queen's Sergeant. He was a learned Man and a good
Antiquary; but a marvelous, merry, and pleasant conceit: And as touching his
Learning, Justice, and Elocution, I cannot better describe them, than a Poet
Tho. Newton in Illustrum aliquot Anglorum Encomiis. Land. 1589. p. 121.
of those days has done in certain Verses, beginning thus, Ipse forem brevibus
gyaris and carrere dignus,
Culleolo insutus, si te mea musa sileret, etc.


As for his Writings they were many, but none of them (only one) were published
till after his Death, some of which are these.

Elenchus Annalium Regum Edwardi 5. Rich. 3. Hen. 7. and 8. Land. 1579. and
1597. in tw. Dedicated to Sir Tho. Bronley Lord Chancellor of England. This is
called among the Lawyers, Table to the Annals, (or Year-Book) of Edw. 5. Rich.
3. etc.

The office of a Justice of Peace: Together with instructions how, and in what
manner, Statutes shall be expounded Land. 1658. Oct.

Observations upon the Eyte of Pickering, Lambert's Areheion, etc. MS. Fol.
sometimes in the Library of Rich. Smith Secondary of the Poultrey-Compter, with
other things which I have not yet seen. This eminent Lawyer did mostly dwell in
London, in a street called Noble-street, within Aldersgate-ward, in an house
which himself newly built, wherein he dyed, but was buried, as I suppose, in
the Church at Great Missenden in Buckinghamshire, (where he had purchased an
estate) in the latter end of fifteen hundred nienty and three, 159 3^4
for on the 7th of March that year, was a commission In a Book of
Administrations in the Will-Office, near Paul's in Land. beginning in Jan.
1591. fol. 90.
granted from the Prorogative Court of Canterbury, to Mariana his Widow
(daughter of Joh. Barley of Kingsey in the said county) to administer the
goods, debts, and chattels of her Husband Will. Fleetwood, lately deceased. He
left behind him two Sons, whereof Sir Will. Fleetwood, Knight, was one, who
succeeded him in the Estate at Missenden, and the other was Sir Thomas of the
Middle Temple, afterward Attorney to Prince Henry. He had also diverse
Daughters, one whereof was married to Sir David Foulis Knight and Baronet, and
another to Sir Tho. Chaloner* Tutor to the said Prince, Son of the learned Sir
Tho. Chaloner Knight.

JOHN WOOLTON was born at a Market Lancashire, called Wigan or Wiggen, entered
Reg. antiq. coll. Aenean. fol. 90. b.
a Student in Brasnose Col. 26. Oct. 1553. aged 18, or thereabouts, having
perhaps wore a Gown in the University before that time, supplicated for the
Degree of Bach of Arts, in the beginning of 1555. but it does not appear that
he was admitted. Afterward, as it is said, he went to, or with, his Uncle
Alex. Nowel into Germany; to which place several Protestants of England had
receeded as voluntary Exiles. In the beginning of Q. Eliz. he returned, and in
1563. being about that time Canon Residentiary of Exeter, he was admitted by
the Name of John Wolton, Bach. of Arts to the Church of Spaxton in the Diocese
of Wells. In April 1574. he supplicated the venerable congregation of Regents,
that he might be admitted to the reading of the Sentences; but whether his
desire was granted, or he admitted, it appears not. In May 1575. being then
Warden of Manchester College in his own Country, he supplicated under the Name
of John Wolton a Minister of Gods Word, and sometimes a Student of this
University, that he might be licensed to proceed in Divinity; but whether that
also was granted, it does not appear. Sure it is, that he being then the
designed Bishop of Exeter, was consecrated thereunto in the beginning of August
following. He was a Person of great Piety and Reason, and an earnest assertor
of conformity against the Opposers thereof, for which he was blamed by many,
but commended by more, after his Death. He has written,

The armor of proof; showing the firm sortress of defense and haven of rest,
in these troublesome times, Land. 1576. oct.

Of the immortality of the Sou; wherein is declared the Origin, Nature, and
Power of the same, etc.

Christian Manual: Or, the Life and Manners of true Christians; wherein is
declared how needful it is for the Children of God, to manifest their Faith by
their Works.

Castle for Christians, and Fortress for the Faithful, besieged and defended
now almost 6000 years.

New Anatomy of the whole Man, as well of his Body, as of his Soul; declaring
the condition and constitution of the same, in his first creation, corruption,
regeneration, and glorifiration.

Discourse of the conscience; wherein is declared the unspeakable joys and
comfort of a good conscience, and the grief of an evil conscience. -- All which
six Treatises were printed at London, in oct. An. 1576. At length he having
sat Bishop about 14 years with great commendations, dyed on the 13th. of
March, in fifteen hundred. ninety and three, 159 3^4.
and was buried in his Cathedral Church at Exeter, on the South side of the
Presbytery or Choire, leaving then a Son behind him named John, Fellow of
Allsouls college, Master of Arts, and a Graduat in Physic. Over his Grave was
a Monument soon after erected, with an inscription thereon, containing six
Verses, two of which run thus: Ingenium, genium, mores, pietatis honor,
Eloquiumque pium busta perusta tegent.


THOMAS WATSON a Londoner born, did spend some time in this University, not in
Logic and Philosophy, as he ought to have done; but in the smooth and pleasant
studies of Poetry and Romance, whereby he obtained an honorable Name among the
Students in those Faculties. Afterward retiring to the Metropolis, studied the
Common Law at riper years, and for a diversion wrote,

Ecloga in obitum D. Francisci Walsingham Eq. aur. Land. 1590. in two sheets in
qu.

Amintae Gaudia. Land. 1592. qu. Written in Lat. Hexamiter, and dedicated to
the incomparable Mary Countess of Pembroke, who was a Patroness of his Studies.
He has written other things of that Nature or Strain, and something pertaining
to Pastoral, which I have not yet seen, Clar. 1593
and was highly valued among ingenious Men, in the latter end of Q. Elizabeth.
I shall make mention of another Tho. Watson (who in his younger years was a
Poet also) in the Fasti following, among the Incorporations of the year 1554.

Erasmus Smith of Bosworth, Son of Joh. Smith, alias Harrys of Withcock, in
Leicestershire, was matriculated Lib. Matric. P. p. 389.
as a Member of Lincoln Col. in 1575. thus, Henricus Smithe Leicestrensis
generosus, Aetat. 15. What stay he made in the same House; or whether he was
the same He^ Smyth, who received Reg. antiq. coll. Ae^. fol. 38.
the Benefaction of Jo. Claymond, in Bras. Col. An. 1574. or took the Degree of
Batchelaur of Arts, it appears not. Sure it is, that having some Ecclesiastical
employment conferred upon him, was absent from the University for some time;
and at length, in 1583. did take the Degree of Master of Arts, as a Member of
Heart Hall, being then esteemed the Miracle and Wonder of his Age, for his
prodigious Memory, and for his fluent, eloquent, and practical way of Preaching
Afterward he became Lecturer of St. Clements Danes without Temple Bar, near
London, where being much frequented by the Puritanical Party, was by them
esteemed (as he was by the generality) the prime Preacher of the Nation, which
his Sermons, taken into the Hands of all People, did show. Some of them were
printed in 1591, 92, and 93, while he lived; but after his Death, 40 or more
were collected into one Volume, and printed at London in 1594. in qu. Among
them are (1) A preparative to Marriage. (2) Treatise on the Lord's Supper. (3)
Examination of Usury. (4) Benefit of Contentation. (5) Affiuity of the
Faithful. (6) Christians Sacrifice. (7) Trial of Spirits (8) Wedding Garment.
(9) Way to walk in. (10) Pride of Nebuchadu^zzar, etc. There has been also
printed, of late times, a Quarto Volume, containing 53 Sermons, besides
Discourses, Prayers, Letters, etc. Among which is God's Arrows against
Atheists, etc. which has been translated and printed in Lat. at Openkeim,
beyond Sea, An. 1614. oct. All written by the said Henry Smith; among which are
those numbered, that were printed 1594. This Person was in very great renown
among Men in fifteen hundred ninety and three; Clar. 1593.
in which year, if I mistake not, he died, aged 34. but where he was buried,
the Register of St. Clements beforementioned, tells us not; for his Brother,
who lived to about the time of the Restoration of King Charles 2. did assure
my Friend, that he retired for Health's sake out of the said Parish, and dyed
in another more remote.

THOMAS COUPER, or Cooper, was born Oxon, educated in Grammar Learning in the
School joining to St. Mary Magd. Col. being then a Choirister of that House;
where with very great industry, making proficiency beyond his years, was
elected Probationer in 1539. and in the year following perpetual Fellow of the
said House. Afterward proceeding in the Faculty of Arts, he was made Master of
the School wherein he had been educated; left his Fellowship about 1546. and
gave himself solely up to the studies of Humanity and Medicine. In the Reign of
Q. Mary, he being then inclined to the Protestant Religion, he took, as it
seems, a Degree in Physic, and practiced that Faculty in Oxon; but when she
was dead, he reassumed his former Faculty of Divinity, became a frequent
Preacher, took the Degrees in that Faculty in the latter end of 1566. being
about that time made Dean of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, and was several years after
Vice-chancelour of the University. In 1569. he was made Dean of Gloucester, in
the place of John Man deceased, and in 1570. Feb. 24. he was consecrated Bishop
of Lincoln. In 1584. he was translated to Winchester; where, as in most parts
of the Nation, he became much noted for his Learning and sanctity of Life. I
have heard some reverend and ancient Divines of this University say, (as they
had heard it from others who knew the Man,) that at what time Dr. Cooper was to
leave Oxon, to go to the Sea of dincoln, he did humbly confess, in his farewell
Sermon to the University, That he was born of very mean Parents in Cat-street,
His Father was a poor Tailor, living in (...) mostly situated in St. Mary's
Parish.
that he had undergone several mean and servile Offices in Magdalen College,
till by the favor of Friends he was advanced to be Fellow and Schoolmaster,
etc. And so going forward with a recital of the chief parts of his Life, did,
in conclusion, humbly acknowledge God's great providence toward him, praying
withal That he would be pleased to prosper him in that great Employment, which
was put upon him, etc. Of this Person much may be said, and perhaps some wrong
might redound to his memory, if I should say little; for he was indeed a
reverend man, very well learned, and exceeding industrious, as it appears by
that great Dictionary, which yet bears his Name, and was the cause of his
preferment; the foundation of which was taken from Sir Tho. Eliot's Dictionary,
and the materials, for the most part, from Rob. Stephens's Thesaurus, and Joh.
Frisius's Lat. and Germ. Dictionary. The course of his Life in Oxon, was very
commendable, and, in some sort, Saint-like, if it be Saint-like to live
unreproveable, to bear a cross patiently, and to forgive great Injuries freely,
this Man's example was without pattern. The Truth is, he being little
acquainted with the World of Men, he did unhappily marry an Oxford Woman, who
proved too light for his gravity, and in the end became so notorious for her
ill living, that the Libels that then came forth, did sound out her infamy;
especially that made by Th Bulkley of Alis. col. which tells us, That a certain
Person. Tho. (...) Can. of (...) some times Fellow of Alls. Col.
did so much frequent her Company, that at length he was bound in a bond of
100. l. not to come near her. Nay, another Sir (...) in his brief view of the
State of the Church of England, and^. Lo^d. (...) o^t. p 64.
tells us, That the whole University in reverence of the Man, and indignity of
the matter, offered him to separate his Wife from him by public An^^ority and
to set him free, being the innocent P^rts. But he would by no means agree
thereto, alleging, he knew his own infirmity, that be could not live
unmarried, and to divorce, and marry again, he would not charge his conscience
with so great a scandal. He has written*

The Epitome of Chronicles, from the 17th. year after Christ, to 1540. and
thence afterward to the year 156^. Land. 1560. qu. The Reader is to note that
one The Lanquet, a young Man of 24 years of Age, had composed a Chron.
consisting of two parts, reaching from the beginning of the World to the time
of our Savior; and was proceeding on a third part; but death cutting him off
in his eager pursuit of the work, in 1545. our Author Cooper undertook to
finish it; and his part, which is the third, contains almost thrice as much as
the two parts of (...) All which being finished, a third Person, contrary to
the Mind of Cooper, published all the parts, under the Title of Lanquet's
Chronicle, an. 1559. which being very full of faults, our Author made a view
and correction of, and published them in the year following, under the general
Title of Coper's Chronicle, etc. with a running Title of Lanquet's Chronicle at
the top of every leaf of the first and second part, and The Epitome of
Chronicles at the top of every leaf of the third part, which, as I have told
you, was composed by Cooper; who has further written,

Thesaurus linguae Romanae and Britannicae, etc. Land. 1565. in a large fol.
This is commonly called Cooper's Dictionary, which was so much esteemed by Q.
Elizabeth, that ever after she endeavored to promote the Author as high in the
Church as she could. Of this Dictionary see more in Tho. Eliot, under the year
1546.

Dictionarium Historicum and Poeticum. Printed with the former Book.

A brief exposition of such Chapters of the Old Testament, as usually are read
in the Church at Common Prayer, on the Sundays throughout the year. Land. 1573.
qu.

Sermon at Lincoln 1575. on Matthew. 16. 26, 27. Land. in oct.

Twelve Sermons on Romans 1. 16. Matthew. 7. 15, 16. on 1 Cor. 10. 1. 3. 5. Matthew.
13. 3. 5. and Joh. 8. 46. Land. 1580. qu.

An admonition to the People of England; wherein are answered, not only the
slanderous untruths, reproachfully uttered by Martin the Libeller, but also
many other crimes by some of his Brood, objected generally against all Bishops,
etc. Land. 1589. qu. This Book was written after Mart. Marprelate had writ his
Libel, which some (playing with Martin at his won weapon) answered pleasantly
both in Rhyme and Prose. But this our Author, the Bishop, with Authority and
Gravity confuted him soundly in this Book; whereupon Martin replied in a Book
enit. Ha'y any Work for a Cooper, etc. At length this reverend and holy Bishop
paying his last Debt to Nature at Winchester, Apr. in fifteen hundred ninety
and four, was buried on the South side of the Choire, a little above the
Bishop's Seat, belonging to the Cathedral there. Over his Grave was soon after
laid a flat Marble, with an inscription thereon in Prose and Verse, a Copy of
which you may read in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 197. a. He left
behind him a Widow named Amey, and two Daughters, one of which, named
Elizabeth, was the Wife of D^^ Joh. Belly, sometimes Provost of Oriel Col.
afterward, Chanclour of the Dicocess of Lincoln, the other was Mary the Wife of
John Gouldwell Gent.

Rich. R^^^^ids, a sufficient Farmer, third Son of Rich. Rainolds, was born at
Pynhoc alias Pynhawes (the Seat of his Ancestors) near to the City of Exeter in
Devonshire, educated in School learning in Wykeham's Coll. near Winchester,
elected Probationer of New Coll. in 1560. and two years after was admitted
perpetual Fellow. In that House, where then was a severe Discipline kept up, he
became a most noted Philosopher, a quick Disputant, and one much noted for his
sincere love to the Protestant Cause. In 1566. he proceeded Master of Arts, and
about that time he took Holy Orders In 1572. he left his Fellowship, and
retiring to Heart Hall, lived there in the quality of a C^^moner: All which time
he was earnest for Reformation, while John his Brother of C. C. Coll. stood
affected to the Roman Catholic Religion, as it is said, This difference in
judgment proved a firebal of C^ntention between, and engaged, them in a strong
Duel, and set Disputes; whereupon both being strengthened by each (...)
Arguments, our Author Willaim turned a zealous Catholic, and John a strong
Puritan. Whereupon Dr. Will. Alabaster a learned Divine, and an excellent Poet,
made an Epigram on them, a copy of which you may see In ^ist. and Antiq liniv.
Oxon. lib. 2. p. 139. a.
elsewhere. This is the reason commonly received among Protestants, for each
others conversion, but false* for the dispute was, if you will believe one that
then lived, between John, and Edmund, Rainolds of C. C. C^ll. as I have told
Ibid. (...) p. 300. b.
you elsewhere. So that now there being no pretense left for William's
conversion by disputing with his Brother John, you may take this reason
following, different from the other, if your charity will permit you to believe
a R. Catholic Rob. Persons in A relation of a trial made before the K. of
France, between the Bishops of Eureux and the Lord Plessis Mornay. Printed
1604. p. 57. 58.
Author, as he had received it from the mouth or Pen of Will. Rainolds, which
is this -- Mr. William Rainolds being first an earnest Professor and Preacher
of the Protestant Religion in England, and much engaged among the Puritans in
Northamptonshire, ( as he was wont to tell,) he fell in the end to read over
Mr. Jewel' s Book, and did translate some part thereof into Latin; but before
he had passed half over, he found such stuff, as made him greatly mistake of
the whole Religion, and so he, leaving his hopes and commodities in England,
went over the Sea, and the last year of Jubilee, to wit, 1575. he came to Rome,
and brought that Book with him, and presented both himself and it to the
Tribunal of the Inquitsition, of his own free motion and accord, where I guess
the Book remains still, if it be not burned; and himself after absolution
received for his former Errors (which he with great humility and zeal required,
and my self also at that time spoke with him in that place) he returned into
France and Flanders, and there lived many years, with singular edification for
his rare Virtue and Learning, etc. Thus a zealous Romanist, whom I have here
quoted in the Margin. Afterward our Author Will. Rainolds went to Rheimes in
France, where being kindly received by Dr. Will. Allen President of the English
College there, was shortly after made Professor or Reader of Divinity, and of
the Hebrew Tongue. Afterward he went to Antwerp, where he wrote, mostly under
the Name of Will. Rosseus, these things following:

Resutation of Mr. W. Whittaker's Civils against the Annotations of the New
Testament. Par. 1583. oct.

De justa republicae Christian in reges impios and haereticos Authoritate.
Antw. 1592. oct. etc.

Catholic Faith concerning Christ's last Supper, against Berengarius and
Bruce. Antw. 1593. oct. This Bruce was the same, as it seems, with Rob. Bruce a
Scotch Minister.

Paraphrase on the New Testament -- MS. in the English coll. of Benedictines at
Deiulward in Loraine.

Calvino-Turcismus, i. e. Calvinisticae perfidiae cum Mahumetana collatio, and
dilucida utriusque sectae confutatio. Antw. 1597. Col. Agr. 1603. oct in four
Books. Which Books being left imperfect, were corrected, finished, and
published, out of his Notes, by his dear Friend Will. Gifford Dean of St.
Peter's Church at L'isle. This Book endeavors to prove that Calvin's Religion
is worse in condition, and less probable in reason, than that of the Turks, and
has less ground and substance therein, than the other, The copies of which,
stealing over the Sea into England, were answered by one who writes himself T.
M. S. in a Book bearing this Title, De Turco-Papismo. Hoc est de Turcorum and
Papistarum adversus Christi Ecclesiam and fidem conjuratione, eorumque in
Religione and moribus concensione and similitudine. Land. 1598, 99. qu. ibid.
1604 in oct. To which Book are added 4 more against the said Calvino-Turcismus.
In the Preface to the first that came forth, the Author says, that Will.
Rainolds his going over to the Church of Rome, was because he was not compos
mentis, as being somewhat distracted for the love of the Wife of one M. a
famous Women of Oxon, etc. The said Rainolds also translated from English into
Latin all the Works of Tho. Harding, with a large Preface to them, as I have
elsewhere told you; but for want of Money they could not be Printed: Also Dr.
Will. Allen's Book entit. A true, sincere and modest defense of English
Catholics, etc. which Book W. Rainolds did also much increase. And what else
he has written, Pitscus will In lib. Dr. illustr. Angl. Script. Aet. 16. nu.
1040.
tell you, who adds that he deceasing at Antwerp in Flanders, Bigwins there, on
the South side of the Altar. Soon after was a stone laid over his Grave, with
this inscription thereon. Honorabili Domino D. Gulielmo Reginaldo, alias
Ressaeo pio exuli Auglo, viro doctissimo, and hujus Ecclesiae Ministro. Obiit
24. Aug. 1594, etc. T^^w. Rainolds had five Brothers, the eldest of which was
named Hierom Fellow of C. C. College, and Master of Arts in 1557. who
continuing in the Roman Catholic Religion, practiced Physic in the beginning
of Q. Elizabeth's Reign; but soon after left the University, and whether he
went beyond the Seas, and was Doctorated there, I cannot tell. Under this
Hierom Rainolds, our Author William, who was the next Brother, did receive most
of his tuition, while he was a Junior in Oxon. The third Brother was Edm.
Rainolds beforementioned, Fellow of C. C. College also, who leaving that House
because he was in animo Catholicus, retired to Gloucester Hall, where living
many years in the condition of a Tutor, dyed a wealthy Man. The fourth Brother
was James Rainolds, Master of Arts, and Fellow of Exeter Coll. The fifth and
youngest was Nicholas, who lived at Pynhaws on the Lands of his Ancestors,
Father to Will. Rainolds of Cassington near to Woodstock in Oxfordshire
Gentleman, sometimes a Member of Gloucester Hall, (under his Uncle Edmund,) from
whom I formerly received a writing under his hand, concerning his Ancestors and
Relations for three Generations above him, part of which is here mentioned.

Allen or Alan, so many ways I find him written, was the second Son of John
Allen, (by Joanet or Jennet Lyster his Wife, Sister of Tho. Lyster of Westby in
Yorkshire,) the Son of George Allen of Staffordshire, who having an Uncle, or
near Kinsman, called Allen Abbat of Delawise, settled at Rossal in Lancashire,
by the endeavors of the said Abbat, who demised to him diverse Lands there,
which belonged to his Monastery. At that place ( Rosial) was Will. Allyn or
Alan, whom we are farther to mention, born; and being arrived to about the
fifteenth year of his age, was sent to Oxford in 1547. entered into Oriel Coll.
and committed to the tuition of Morgan Philips, the chiefest Tutor then in that
House; under whom having profited to a miracle in Logic and Philosophy, was
unanimously elected Fellow of that Coll. in 1550. (4. Ed. 6.) Four years after
he proceeded in Arts, and stood in that Act, wherein proceeded Tho. Hardyng and
Nich. Harpesfield, two noted Writers, the former being then a Proceeder in
Divinity, and the other in the Civil Law. In 1556. or thereabouts, he became
Principal of St. Mary's Hall, and in that and the year following, one of the
Proctors of the University. In 1558. or thereabouts, he was made Canon of York;
but soon after upon the coming to the Crown by Q. Elizabeth, and the alteration
of Religion that followed, he left his Country and Preferment about 1560. and
going beyond the Seas, he retired to Lovaine, then an eminent Acamedy,
especially for the study of Divinity, to which place did several eminent
Theologists repair for a time, (as Saunders, Harding, Dorman, Rastal, etc.)
purposely to avoid the places infected with Heresy, as they called it. While
he continued at Lovaine, he wrote Nic. Fitzberber. in E^^. Vit. Carl. A^ani, p.
39.
a Book in the English Tongue against Mr. Jewel, treating of Purgatory, which
afterward was Printed. About that time falling into a grievous disease, by too
careful attending a Pupil of his of gentile extraction in England, had advice
given him by his Physicians to retire to his Native Country for Health's sake.
Whereupon returning into England, he kept himself unknown till he had recovered
his former strength; and then endeavoring to reconcile People to the Church of
Rome, and to terrify them from going to the Meetings of Heretics, as he
styled them, was forced by the Magistrates to leave that harbor, Lancashire.
So that going to a certain place near Oxon, he practiced the like, and wrote
two Books in English, one Of the Authority of the Priesthood, and the other Of
Indulgences. From thence he removed his Quarters to the County of Norfolk, and
lived sometimes in the House of the Duke of that Name, and sometimes near it,
where he wrote Certain brief Reasons concerning Catholic Faith; whereby the
vanity of Heresy, and excellency of Catholic Faith (as therein it is said)
were evidently set down, purposely to settle such who were wavering in other
Opinion. Afterward, tho advantage was given to him to return to Lovaine, by
the opportunity of a Ship then going from England; yet he neglected it, and
went near to Oxon again, went to the University, and meeting with one of his
Contemporaries, did work so much upon him by his discourse, that he promised
him to abstain for the future from Protestant Company, and their Meetings.
Which act of his, being made known to the Parents of the said Contemporary,
they prosecuted Allyn so close that he was forced to leave England, after he
had continued there about three years. So that retiring to a certain Monastery
at M^chlin in Brabant, became a Divinity Reader there; which Office he
performed with great commendations for some time. Afterward being desirous to
go to Rome, in the company of Dr. Jo. Vendivile, the King's Professor at Doway
(afterward Bishop of Tournay) did make some advance that way; but for certain
Reasons that then passed between them, Allyn turned his Face and went to Doway,
(at which place in Academy was settled about 1562.) where he studied Divinity,
became Doctor of that Faculty, and so much esteemed for his rare and active
Parts, that he was made Canon of the Church of Cambray. Afterward by his
endeavors he began a Seminary at Doway, about 1568. to receive all such
learned English Catholics that had fled their Country for Religion sake, where
soon after they framed for themselves a common Discipline, after the manner of
a College, and got the Pope to assign them an yearly Pension. Soon after our
author Allyn being made Canon of Rheimes, he procured another Seminary to be
erected there by the Guises, Kinsmen to Mary Q. of Scots: For the Netherlands,
wherein Doway is situated, being run into confusion, the English Fugitives or
Scholars were banished thence, by the command of Don Lewis de Requesens; so
that thence going to Rheimes they settled there for a time. Afterward our
active Author began another Seminary at Rome, and two in Spain, to the end that
English Youths might be trained up, purposely to keep up the Roman Catholic
Religion in England. At length for these his great and indefatigable labors,
he was created a Priest Cardinal of St. Martin in montibus, by Pope Sixtus 5.
on the 28. July, according to our account, An. 1587. and two years after was
made Archbishop of Mechlin, or Machlin, the Metropolis of Brabant. The
character given of this Man, by several of our English Authors of the reformed
Party, is, That he, with R. Persons the Jesuit, and others, did Vide C^m^.
Annal. A. Elizab. sub An. 1589.
lay in continual wait for the destruction of Prince and People of England, and
who by exciting both Foreigners abroad, and natural Subjects at home, plotted
the reducement of the R. Religion to its ancient vigor, etc. Farther Ibid. sao
An. 1594.
also, That after he had put off both his love to his Country, and his
obedience to his Prince, he incensed the Spaniard and the Pope of Rome to
assault England: And to that purpose adjoined himself to all pernicious
consultations about that matter, after that Pope Sixtus 5. had bestowed on him
the title of Cardinal, and the Spaniard had gave him an Abbacy in the Kingdom
of Naples, and nominated him Archbishop of Machlin. When the Bull of
Excommunication against Q. Elizabeth, at that time that the great Navy was
provided for England, came forth, he brought it into the Low Countries, and
caused it to be printed in English. Withal he wrote an Admonition to the
Englishmen, that they should stick to the Pope and Spaniard; but being deceived
of all his hopes, he returned again back to Rome, where, being wearied with the
discords, hatreds, and dissentions of the English Run-aways, both Scholars and
Nobles, at last he dyed in the 63 year of his Age, etc. Another Fr. Godwinus in
com. de^ra^^l. Angl. ad finem. intes Cardinales.
says, That he was so ill deserving to be accounted English, as that like
another Herostratus, he endeavored to raise a combustion in the Church and
State, etc. But let Writers say what they please; certain it is, that he was an
active Man, and of great parts, and high prudence: that he was Religious and
Zealous in his Profession, restless till he had performed what he had
undertaken, that he was very affable, gentile, and winning, and that his
personage was handsome and proper, which with an innate gravity, commanded
respect from those that came near, or had to do with, him. His Works as to
learning, are these,

A defense of the Doctrine of Catholics concerning Purgatory, and Prayers for
the Dead. Antw. 1565. in oct. Brief Reasons concerning Cath. Faith.

Treatise made in defense of the lawful Power and Authority of Priesthood to
remit Sins. Lov. 1567. oct.

The People's duty for confession of their Sins to God's Ministers. -- Printed
with the Treatise made, etc.

The Churches meaning concerning Indulgences, commonly called Pope's Pardons.
-- Printed also with the Treatise made, etc. Which three last were answered by
Dr. Will. Fulke of Cambridge.

De Antw. 1576. qu,
Sacramentis in genere. Sacramento Eucharistiae. Sacrificio Euch.


Apology and true declaration of the institution and endeavors of the two
English Colleges, the one in Rome, the other now resident in Rhemes; against
certain finiste. informations given up against the same. -- Printed at Mounts
in He^^cault, 1581. in a large oct. This Books is said by Anon. in lib. cui
tit, Hypercritica, or a rule of Judgment, etc. MS. address 4. Sect. 2.
one to be a princely, grave, and flourishing piece of natural and exquisite
English.

Apologia pro sacerdotibus Societatis Jesu, and Seminariorum alumnis contra
Edicta Regia. Printed in a Book entit. Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae, etc.
Aug. Trev. 1583. in oct. and 1594. in qu. part. 3.

Piissima admonitio and consolatio vere Christiana ad afflictos Catholicos
Angliae. Printed also in the said Book.

A true, sincere, and modest defense of the English Catholics that suffer for
their Faith both at home and abroad, against a slanderous Libel entit. The
Execution of Justice in England. -- Not expressed where, or when, Printed; but
by the character and some passages therein, is showed that it was Printed
beyond the Seas, about 1583. in oct. Printed also in Latin, at Ingolst. 1584.
in oct. and in a Book entit. Concertat. Eccles. Cath. in Anglia, etc. 1594.
This defense was answered by Dr. Tho. Bilson, in the third part of his Book of
the Supremacy, or in that Book called, The true difference between Christian
Subjection, and Unchristian Rebellion. As for The Execution of Justice, which
the defense answers, was written, as it was then, and since, reported, by Sir
Will. Cecil Lord Burleigh. The second impression of which, made at Land. 1583.
in five sheets in oct. I have, and bears this Title, The execution of Justice
in England for maintenance of Public and Christian Peace, against certain
stirs of sedition, and adherents to the Traitors and Enemies of the Realm,
without any persecution of them for questions of Religion, as is falsely
reported, etc.

Epistola de Daventriae ditione. Cracov. 1588. in oct. Printed also about that
time in English. It must be noted that in 1587. Will. Stanley, and Roll. York,
Englishmen, did traitorously deliver up a Fort near Zutphen, and the strong
Garrison of Daventry to the Spaniard; whereupon our Author Dr. Allyn, did
(being provoked by the Bull of Pius 5. against Q. Elizabeth) not only commend
the Treason, but excited others, in the said Epistle to the like exploit or
perfidiousness, as if they were neither bound to serve nor obey an
excommunicated Queen. At which time the said Allyn dispatched away diverse
Priests to Roll. York, whose Regiment of 13 hundred consisted all of English
and Irish, to be Chaplains and Confessors to them. In the year 1588. our author
Allyn compiled a Book to be published when the Spaniard should arrive into
England, to stir up all the English Papists to take up Arms against the Queen.
The first part of the said Book was intit.

A declaration of the Sentence of Sixtus 5. -- Grounded on the said Pope's
Crusaido, whereby he gave plenary Indulgence and Pardon of all Sins to all that
gave their helping hand to deprive Q. Elizabeth of her Kingdom. The second part
was entit.

An admonition to the Nobility and People of England. -- Which Book, or Books,
coming straightway to the knowledge of the Queen, she dispatched away Camd. ut
sup. in Annal. sub. An. 1588.
D. Val. Dale to the Prince of Parma, Viceroy of the Low Countries for the
King of Spain; who being introduced into his presence, he did mildly
expostulate with him about the said Book or Books, written by Allyn, wherein,
as Dale said, he exhorted the Nobility and People of England and Ireland to
join with the Spanish Forces under him, the said Prince, to invade England,
etc. but he pretended he knew nothing of such a Book, and so sent him away
unsatisfied. However so it was, that presently upon the overthrow of the great
invincible Armado, under their heroical Adlantado, certain Roman Catholics
procured the whole impression to be burned, saving some few that had been sent
abroad beforehand to Friends, and such as had otherwise been conveyed away by
the Printer, and others in secret wise. What else our Author Allyn has
written, Joh. Pitseus, who In lib. De illustr. Angl. Script. Aet. 16. Nu. 1041.
speaks very honorably of him, will tell you; who adds that he gave up the
ghost on the 6 of O^^ob. according to our account, in fifteen hundred ninety
and four, and was buried in the Church or Chapel of the English College at
Rome, where there is an Epitaph for him, which being printed by two several
Authors at least, I shall now pass it by. The Jesuits triumphed openly (as one
Tho. Bell in his Anatomy of Popish Tyran^t, lib. 2. cap. 2. parag. 1.
says) at his Death, and among other of the calumniations against him, they
said, That God had taken him away in a good time; for if he had lived longer he
would have disgraced himself, and lost the credit which he had got. In one or
more Books containing the lives, or at least characters, with the Arms, of the
Popes and Cardinals of Rome, it appears that the Arms of Cardinal Allyn, are
Argent 3 Connies or Rabbets passant Sable; yet the ancient Arms belonging to
the Allens or Allyns of Staffordshire (from whom he is descended) are Parted
per Chevron Gules and Ermine two Lions heads erased, in the upper part, or. The
next Card. that the English Nation has been honored with, is Philip Howard,
third Son of Henry Earl of Arundel, and younger Brother to Henry Earl of
Norwich and Duke of Norfolk; who at this day is living at Rome. He was born in
Arundel House, in the Parish of St. Clement Danes without Temple Bar near
London, an. 1629. and there educated under several Tutors, till he was 14 years
of age. At length, upon the eruption of the Civil War, he left the Nation, and
traveled with his Grandfather Thomas Earl of Arundel into Italy, and at 15
years of age became a Dominician, or Black-Frier, at Cremona. After several
years spent there, he returned into England, and upon the Marriage of King
Charles 2. with Katherine the Infanta of Portugal, he became Lord Almoner to
her, and continued in her service several years. Afterward, upon the People's
being exasperated against Popery, he quitted that Noble Office, and went to
Bornheim in Flanders, where having a Convent of English Friars of his Order,
had not continued there long, but at the desire of his sometimes Tutor, then
Confessor to Pope Clement 10. had a Cardinals Cap sent to him by the said Pope
in the month of May, 1675. by his Messenger Seignior Con, at which time Father
Howard was at Antwerp with the Bishop of that place. By virtue of which, and
the instrument with it, he was made Cardinal Priest, Sub tt. Ecclesiae S.
Mariae supra Minervam: which Church was in most ancient time built upon the
ruins of the Temple of Minerva at Rome, where the said Card. is now generally
styled The Cardinal of Norfolk, and by some The Cardinal of England. Afterward
taking his journey toward Rome, he was attended by his Uncle William Viscount
Stafford (beheaded in 1680. upon account of being engaged in the Popish Plot)
Mr. John Howard Son of the said William, Lord Thomas Howard Nephew to the said
Cardinal, and younger Brother to the present Duke of Norfolk, Seignior Con
beforementioned, Dr. Joh. Laybourne President of the English or Clergy College
at Doway, then Secretary or Auditor to the Cardinal, and others. He took his
journey through Flanders to Doway, where he was with great solemnity received
and lodged in the said Coll. The next day he designing to visit the College of
English Benedictines at that place, he was received by the whole Convent in
their Church, in a solemn procession with Copes, a Te Deum, and other
Ceremonies, as appointed in the Ritual, for such receptions. From the Church he
was conducted into the Cloister, and entertained with a banquet, and a
Panigyrick spoken to him, by a Student of that college. All which was so well
performed, that Vis^ Sta^^ord was pleased to say, that it was the only fit
reception his Eminence had met with in all his journey. Afterward his Eminence
went to Paris, where he continued for some time incognito. At length, with
other Nobility and Persons of Quality added to the former company, he journeyed
to Rome, and made his entry for the defraying of which and his journey, he had
the assistance of the Pope, and not of King Charles 2. and Queen Catherine, as
the common report then went.

ADAM HILL, a most noted and eloquent Preacher Baliol Coll. in 1568. being that
Bachelaur of Arts, stood in the Act to complete the degree of Master of that
Faculty in 1572. and on the 12. of Jan. following, he resigned his Fellowship.
About that time, he being noted for his practical way of Preaching, he became
Vicar of Westbury in Wilts, (in which County he was, as it is probable, born)
Parson of Goosage in Dorsetshire, and at length Prebendary of Gillyngham Minor
in, and Succentor of, the Cath. Church of Salisbury. In 1591. he took the
degrees in Divinity, and had he not been untimely snatched away by Death, he
would have been advanced to an high degree in the Church. He has written and
published.

Several Sermons: Among which are, (1) Godly Sermon showing the Fruits of Peace
and War, on 2 Cor. 20. 1 Land. 1588. oct. (2) Sermon. On Genesis 18. 21, 22. --
Land. 1593. oct. (3) Sermon. concerning Christ's descent into Hell, Preached 28.
Feb. 1589. but on what Subject I cannot tell, for I have not yet seen it. It
was answered by Alex. Humo a Scot; whereupon our Author Hill came out with a
Book intit.

A defense of the Article, Christ descended into Hell, with an Answer to the
arguments objected against the truth of the said Doctrine, by one Alexand.
Hume, etc. -- Land. 1592. (qu). Afterward Hume came out with A Rejoinder,
wherein the answer to Dr. Hylls Sermon is justly defended. Printed 1593. qu.
But before our author Hill could come out with another answer, he gave way to
fate; which happening at Salisbury about the 16. of Febr. in fifteen hundred
ninety and four, was buried in the Cath. Church there, 1594-5
on the nineteenth day of the same Month. Soon after his dignity or dignities
in the said Church were bestowed on one Tho. Crump. As for the said Alex. Hume
he was Master of Arts of the University of St. Andrew in Scotland, was
incorporated here, as I shall tell you in the Fasti; and wrote, besides what is
before mentioned, Reg. antiq. coll. Aenean. fol. 88. b.
A Treatise of Conscience, etc. (2) Treatise of the Felicity of the World to
come, etc. (3) Four discourses of praises unto God, etc. All which were printed
at London in 1594. in oct.

Thorius, Son of John Thorius Doctor of Physic, who intitles himself,
Balliolanus Flandrus, was born in London, matriculated in this University, as a
Member of Chapter Chapter 1 Oct. 1586. aged 18. but whether he took a degree, it
appears not, though in one of his Books he writes himself a Graduat of
Oxenford. He was a Person well skilled in certain Tongues, and a noted Poet of
his time, as several pieces of his, then published, show. All the things that I
have seen of his writing or translating are these.

A Spanish Dictionary. Land. 1590. qu. Added to his translation into English of
a Spanish Grammar, written by Auth. de Corro; which Dictionary contains the
explication of all the Spanish Words cited in the said Grammar, and is as a Key
to open every thing therein.

Letters and Sonnets to Gabr. Harvey, An. 1593. -- See at the end of a book,
entit. Pierces Superarogation; written by the said Harvey: And at the end of
another called* Have with you to Saffron Walden, etc. written by Tho. Nash
anoted Poet of his time, and a Dramatick Writer, as his published Comedies
show. Our author Thorius also translated from Spanish into English, a book
entit. The Counselor: A Treatise of Councils and Councillors of Princes.
Land. 1589. qu. written by Barth. Philip. L. L. D. and another entit. The
Sergeant Major; or, a Dialogue of the Office of a Sergeant Major. Land. 1590.
qu. Written in Spanish by Francisco Valdes Master of the Camp. (...) 1^^4.
I shall make mention of another Joh. Thorius in the Fasti, 1627. and of the
Name of Thoris in other years there, and elsewhere; but whether the Thoryes of
Boston and Ingoldmells in Lincoluishire, who lived there in the time of Queen
Elizabeth and King James. I. and after, were of Kin to the aforesaid Joh.
Thorie, I know not. Besides all these, I find one Raphaei Thorius. commonly
called Thoris, a Frenchman, whom I shall set down among he Writers under the
year 1625.

Aquepontanus as he writes himself, was born Reg. antiq. coll. Aenean. fol. 88.
b.
in Yorkshire, as the Reg. here quoted says, but descended from those of his
name in Somersetshire, applied his Muse to Accademical Studies, at his first
coming to Oxon, in Heart Hall; whence translating himself to Brasenose soon
after, took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed in 1556. and
about that time entered into Holy Orders. In 1562. May 1. he was admitted Reg.
Gilb. Berkley ep. B. and Wells, An. 1562. etc.
to the Rectory of Wotto^-Courtney in the Diocese of Wells; and on the 14. Apr.
1563. he was elected Rector of Lincoln College, on the resignation of Dr.
Francis Babington. On the 23. of May following he was Ibid.
admitted Rector of Luccomb, in the said Diocese of Wells, being then also
Archdeacon of Rochester, and soon after being made Canon Residentiary of Wells,
was admitted Rector Ibid.
of Porlock in the Diocese thereof, 16. Apr. 1565. In 1570. Nov. 28. he was
Ibid.
admitted Master of the Hospital of St. Catherine neay to Be^mystre, and in
1572. March 29. to the Ib. sub an. 1572.
Prebendship of Bishops Compton in the Church of Wells. In 1574. he resigned
his Rectory of Lincoln College, to prevent, as I presume, expulsion, because he
was actually, or very near it, a Roman Catholic, and had given great
encouragement, during his Government, to the Students under him, to embrace
Religion. The same year he left Oxon, carried away with him several Goods
belonging to the said College, and taking with him certain young Scholars, left
all his preferments, acquaintance, and relations, and went beyond the Sea to
Rheimes: Where continuing for a time, did at length (as it is said) enter
himself into the Society of Jesus. He was esteemed by those of his Profession
a good Scholar, and well read in various Authors, as many of his Writings show;
all which being published beyond the Sea, I have only seen these following:

Confutatio virulentae disputationis Theologica, in qua Georgius Sohn professor
Academiae Heidelbergensis conatus est docere Pontificem Romanum esse
Antichristum a Prophetis and Apostolis praedictum. Aut. Trev. 1589. qu. It must
be now known that one Joh. Gibbon a Jesuit, and John Fenne, having taken a
great deal of pains in writing the lives and sufferings of several Popish
Martyrs, with other matters relating to the Roman Catholic cause; their
labors were published under this Title, Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae in
Anglia adversus Calvino-Papistas, and Puritanos, etc. Aug. Trev. 1583. in a
prerty thick oct. But many things therein being wanting, or defective, our
author Bridgwater took more pains in enlarging, and adding to it other matters,
with an account of 100 or more Popish Martyrs, which were partly written by the
said Gibbon and Fenne; which being so done, it was printed with this Title,
like almost to the former, viz.

Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae in Anglia adversus Calvino-Papistas and
Puritanos sub Elizabetha Regina, quorundam hominum doctrina and sanctitate
illustrium renovata and recognita, etc. Aug. Trev. 1594. in a thick qu. and
divided in 3 parts. The Preface to it, dedicated to John Archbishop of Trier;
was writ by our author, who subscribes himself at the end, by the Name of Joh.
Aquepontanus, who has also written,

Apologia Martyrum, qua ipsorum innocentia variis rationibus demonstratur, etc.
Printed in the third part of the said Concertatio Ecc. Cath.

De persecutione Anglicana. -- So Pet. Ribadeneira; In Cat. (...) Scriptorum
soc. (...) -- Lugd. 1609. (...)
but his continuatour Phil. Alegamb does In l^^b. Scri^t. (...) Jesu in he R.
in (...).
attribute that work to Rob. Persins, Entitling it De presecutione Anglicana
Epistola, etc. It is printed in the first part of Concertatio Ecclesiae
Catholicae.

A Treatise or Discourse against the six articles, which are wont to be
proposed to Martyrs. -- This I have not yet seen; nor do I know any thing more
of the author, only that he was living in great esteem at Trier in Germany, in
fifteen hundred ninety and four. From the said Concertatio Eccles. Cath. Clar.
1594.
did Thom. Worthington take most of his materials when he composed his
Catalogus Martyrum pro religione in Angliae accisorum, etc. Which, though but a
six penny book when it first came forth, yet eleven shillings and more was
given for it in a certain Auction, An. 1682. as I shall tell you when I come to
speak of the said Worthington.

GEORGE TURBERVILE ( de turbida villa) Nich. Turbervile of Whitchurch in
Dorsetshire, Son of Hen. Turb. of the said place, and he the fifth Son of Joh.
Turbervile of Bear Regis (a right ancient and gentile Family) in Dorsetshire,
was born at Whit^^urch beforementioned, educated in W^keham's School near to
Winchester, became perpet^^ Fellow of New Coll. 1561. left it before he was
graduated the year following, and went to one of the Inns of Court, where he
was much admired for his excellencies in the art of Poetry. Afterward being
esteemed a Person fit for business, as having a good and ready command of his
Pen, he was entertained by Tho. Randolph Esquire; to be his Secretary, when he
received commission from Queen Elizabeth to go Ambassador to the Emperor of
Russia. After our author's arrival at that place, he did at spare hours
exercise his muse, and wrote, Poems describing the places and manners of the
country and people of Russia, an. 1568. -- Written to Edw. Dancie, Edm.
Spencer, etc. at London. See in the Voyages of R. Hakeluyt, printed 1598. vol.
1. p. 384, 385, etc. After his return he was esteemed a most accomplished
Gentleman, and his company was much sought after and desired by all ingenious
men; especially upon his publication of his Labors, entit.

Epitaphs, Epigrams, Songs, and Sonnets. Land. 1570. oct. Some, if not most, of
which were published a little before that time. This Book was the same, as I
conceive, which was printed with additions, under his name, in oct. An. 1587.
with this Title, Tragical Tales, Epitaphs, and Sonnets, etc. He also translated
in English, The Eglogues of John Bapt. Fiera Mantuan. Land. 1594. Which
Eglogues Turbervile turned in English Verse, and added an argument to every
Eglogue: Also about the same time, he translated into English Verse, and set
out, The Heroical Epistles of the learned Poet, Pub. Ovid. Naso: with Aul.
Sabinus Answers to certain of the same. Printed in oct. twice as it seems, one
edition whereof came out at Land. 1600. The said Eglogues were afterward
translated by another hand; but not without the help of that translation of
Turbervile, though not acknowledged. The person that performed it was Tho.
Harvey, who writes himself Gent. But whether the same Tho. Harvey who was
Master of Arts, the first Master of Kington School in Herefordshire, (founded
1620.) and the author of The Synagogue, in imitation of divine Herbert, I know
not. As for George Turbervile he lived and was in great esteem among ingenious
men, Clar. 1594.
in fifteen hundred ninety and four, (36. Reg. Elizab.) but when he dyed I
cannot yet learn. I find one George Turbervile to be author of (1) Essays
politic and moral. Printed 1608. in oct. (2) The noble art of Venery, or
hunting and hawking. Printed with figures in 1611. in qu. etc. Whether George
Turbervile beforementioned was the author of the said two books, or another of
both his names, who was a Dorsetshire man born, and a Commoner of Glouc. Hall,
An. 1581. aged 18. or a third G. Turbervile who was born in the said County,
and became a Student in Magd. Hall 1595. aged 17. I cannot justly tell you,
unless I could see and peruse the said two books, of which I am as yet totally
ignorant.

Mich. and Rich. Walpoole Jesuits, was born in the County of Norfolk, educated
in both the Universities, but in what College or Hall in Oxon, it does not
appear, because not matriculated; so that his stay here being, I persume, but
short, nothing occurs memorable of him, only that he was inclined to
Puritanism. which made Pasquil in his Apology The first part of Pa^quill^
Apology, written against Jo. Penry's Trevise of (...). -- Printed at Land. in
qu. An 1590. (...) 5.
to challenge Oxford men to enquire and tell him, whether the said Walpoole was
not a Puritan when he forsook them. Soon after his retirement from the
University, he became so zealous a Roman Catholic, that endeavoring to
persuade others to his Opinion, he was forced to leave his station: whereupon
going to Rome, he was entered into the Society of Jesus, in 1584. aged 25 years;
where continuing for some time, he went afterward into Spain, and when he had
spent certain years there, he journeyed into Holland, where he suffered much
upon account of Religion. In 1593. he was sent into England, was seized on at
his first entry therein, and carried to York, where he was imprisoned for
denying the Queen's Supremacy over the Church of England. The next year he was
sent to London, and committed Prisoner to the Tower, where he suffered much
misery. After an years durance there, (in which time several Ministers were
with, to persuade, him to recant, but in vain,) he was sent back to York. where
he suffered death, as I shall tell you anon. He has written in English Verse,

The Martyrdom of Edm. Campian the Jesuit. -- and other things that are not
printed, having been secured, by certain Protestants, when the author was
imprisoned at York; at which place, he was hanged, drawn, and quartered for
Treason, on the 17. Apr. in fifteen hundred ninety and five. Bibl. Script. Soc.
Jesu, written originally by Pet. Ribadeneira. -- Lugd. 1609. in oct. continued
by Philip Alcgambc. -- Antw. 1643. fol. and at length by Nath. Sotvellus,
commonly called Southwell, of the Family of the Southwells in Norfolk. -- Romans
1676. fol. See also in Historia Provinciae Anglicanae Soc. Jesu. lib. 5. nu.
33, 34. written by Henry More an Englishman, a descendant from Sir Tho. More,
sometimes L. Chanc. of England. Which Hen. tells us, that the said Hen.
Walpoole was educated in Cambridge, without any notice taken of Oxon. The
learned Camden in his Annals of Queen Elizabeth, does make mention of one of
the Walpooles, an 1598. but which, I cannot yet tell.

JOHN HEART was educated in most kinds of Oxon; but in what College or Hall I
cannot find. One Mr. Heart was a Sojournour of Exeter College, An. 1551. (5.
Ed. 6.) but him I take to be too soon for our author, who was but a young Man
when he encountered Dr. Jo. Rainolds in a disputation. What degrees he took
here, it appears not, though those of his Profession (the Jesuits) tell Vide
Hen. Morum in Hist. Provinc. Angl. Soc. Jesu. lib. 4. number. 13.
us, that he was Bachelaur of Divinity of Oxon; yet upon the strict perusal of
our Registers, I cannot find the least authority for it. After he had left this
University, being then, and before, very unsettled and wavering in mind, he
went beyond the Seas, changed his Religion, took priestly Orders, and was sent
into the Mission of England; but soon after taken and committed to Prison, to a
filthy dungeon, as a noted Card. Will. Alan in his Answer to the Libel, entit.
The Execution of Justice, p. 14, etc.
author tells us; who adds that after he (whom he calls the happy young
Confessor) had been often by Famine tormented, was unexpectedly brought out to
encounter Joh. Rainolds beforementioned, An. 1583. or thereabouts. Which
disputation being smartly held on both sides, those of Harte's Persuasion say
that Rainolds was foiled; though, the opposite, not; upon some years after was
published,

The sum of a conference between Joh. Rainolds and Jo. Heart, touching the
Head, and the Faith of the Church, etc. Land. 1588. qu. See more in Jo.
Rainolds, under the year 1607. Afterward our Author Heart, who is styled by a
learned Gul. Camdenus in Annal. R. Eliz. part 3. sub an. 1584.
Author, Vir praecaeteris doctissimus, being banished with diverse other R.
Priests, in 1584. he went to Verdune, where he entered into the Society of
Jesus. Thence he was called to Rome, where making some stay till authority
commanded him thence, he went into Poland, and settled for a time at Jareslaw.
At length giving way to Fate on the 14. of the Call. of Aug. in fifteen hundred
ninety and five, Jareslaw, or Joreslaw. Seven years after his Body was taken
up, and translated to another place belonging to the Jesuits, who had an high
esteem for his Person while living, sanctity of Life and Learning, and when
dead for his memory. I find another John Heart, who was Chester Herald, and
wrote and published, An Orthography, containing the due Order and Reason how to
write or paint the Image of Man's Voice, most like to the Life or Nature. Land.
1569. And another Jo. Heart of later time, who, among other Books, did publish,
The burning Bush not consumed, wherein one may judge whether he be the Child of
God or not. Land. 1641. 2. fourth edit. But whether this last, who was a
zealous Puritan, (if not worse,) or the former, who was an Herald, were of this
University, I know not as yet.

THOMAS DIGGES, Son of Leonard Digges, Sarah his Wife, Sister to Jam. and Tho.
Wilford, two most valiant Knights of Hartridge in the Parish of Crainbrook in
Kent, was born in that County, and for a time educated among the Oxonian Muses,
but in what House I cannot yet tell, neither whether he be the same Mr. Digges
which the famous Lampoon or Libel, made by Th. Bulkley, in the time of Q.
Elizabeth, (on several Scholars and others of Oxon,) points at. However, of
this I am sure, he the said Tho. Digges did spend his younger years, even from
his Cradle, in the Liberal Sciences; especially in searching the most difficult
and curious demonstrations Mathematical, by the assistance of the practices,
observations, monuments, and conferences of his Father. He was a Person of
great Piety, well skilled in matters relating to Soldiers, and War, (having
been Muster-master General of all Q. Elizabeth's Forces in the Low Countries,)
and learned to a miracle in Mathematical Sciences, which made him much esteemed
by Joh. Dee, Tho. Allen and others. He has transmitted to Posterity,

Alae sive scalae Mathamaticae. Land. 1573. qu. Of which Work Tycho Brahe In
lib. suo De nova Stella, lib. 1. cap. 9.
gives a favorable and ingenious censure.

An Arithmetical Military Treatise, containing so much of Arithmetic, as is
necessary toward Military Discipline. Land. 1579. qu.

Geometrical Treatise named Stratiaticos, requisite for the perfection of
Soldiers. Land. 1579. qu. This was first of all attempted by his Father, but
finished by this our author Thomas his Son; afterward corrected and amended,
and sundry additions put to it. -- Land. 1590. qu.

Perfect description of Celestial Orbs, according to the most ancient Doctrine
of the Pythagoreans, etc. Land. 1592. qu. set at the end of his Fathers
Prognostication.

Humble motives for association to maintain Religion established. -- Printed
1601. in oct. To which is added his Letter to the same purpose to the
Archbishops and Bishops of England.

England's Defense: a Treatise concerning Invasion: or, a brief discourse of
what orders were best for the repulsing of Foreign Enemies, if any time they
should invade us by Sea in Kent, or elsewhere. -- Written 1599. but not printed
till 1686. which was at Land. in 5 sheets in fol. Besides these and his Nova
corpora, etc. he had several Mathematical Treatises lying by him, which were
fit for the Press, and by him intended for public view; but being diverted by
Law-sutes, his intentions were not only stopped, but the happy Society of the
Mathematical Muses were discontinued. He concluded his last day on the 24. Aug.
in fifteen hundred ninety and five, and was buried in the Chancel of the Church
of S. Mary the Virgin in Aldermanbury in the City of London. On the North wall
of the said Chancel was soon after set up a fair monument to his memory; which
continuing till 1666. was in the beginning of Sept. in that year, consumed with
the Church it self in the dismal conflagration that then happened in London. You
may see more of this Tho. Digges in my discourse of his Father Len. Digges
under the year 1574.

Talbot was born in the City of Worcester, at about 4 of the clock in the
afternoon, on the first day of Aug. in 1555. (3 of Q Mary) whose Nativity being
afterward calculated, it did appear that he was born to be a man of clear
understanding, quick apprehension, of an excellent wit, and of great propensity
to Philosophical studies and the mysteries of Nature. This Person, being about
17 years of age, at which time he had attained to a competency of Grammar
Learning at Worcester and elsewhere, he was sent to Oxon, but to what House I
cannot tell. However I have been informed by an ancient Bach. of Divinity, who
in his younger years had been an ^manuensis to Mr. Tho. Allen of Gloucester
Hall, that he ( Kelley) had spent some time in that House: Whereupon I
recurring to the Matricula, could not find the name of Kelley, only Talbot of
Ireland, three of which Name were Students there in 1573, -- 74, etc. about
which time Mr. (afterward Sir) John Davies was instructed in the Mathematics
by the said Allen. But this relation having been somewhat dubiously delivered
to me, I must tell you, that Kelley having an unsettled mind, left Oxon
abruptly, without being entered into the Matricula, and in his rambles in
Lancashire, committing certain soul matters, lost both his Ears at Lancaster,
and about that time caused, by his incantations, a poor Man that had been
buried in the yard belonging to Law-church, near to Walton in the dale, to be
taken out of his grave, and to answer to such questions that he then proposed
to him. The story of which, being to me incredible, I shall refer you to the
Writer Jo. Weever in his Discourse of ancient Funeral Monuments. Land. 1631.
fol. p. 45, 46.
of it, who is too credulous in many matters. About that time our author Kelley
became intimate with Dr. John Dee the famous Mathematician, with whom
continuing several years in Philosophical Studies, and Chemical Experiments,
they both became very famous among Scholars, and therefore noted by Persons of
high and noble extraction, one for the Mathematics, and the other for
Chemistry; for though Dee was the most eminent man in his time for the first,
yet Kelly went far beyond him in the latter, as by the sequel it will appear.
It Is reported by a certain Elias Ashmole in his Theatrum Chemicum Britannicuam.
Land. 1652. qu. p. 481.
Rosacrucian that they were so strangely fortunate, as to find a very large
quantity of the Elixir in some part of the ruins of Glastenbury Abbey, which
was so incredibly rich in virtue, that they lost much in making projection, by
way of trial, before they found out the height of that medicine. In the
beginning of 1583. Dr. J. Dee having contracted with certain Spirits to act and
converse with them, he appointed his Friend Kelley to be his Seer or Skryer, or
Speculator, that is to take notice what the Spirits said, and to tell it to
Dee, while he wrote down in a Book what was dictated to him. Soon after Dee and
Kelley being made known to, and acquainted with, the learned and most noble
Polonian, named Albert Alaskie Prince of Sirad, who was come into England. to
see the fashions of the Court, and to admire the Wisdom of the Queen, he
thereupon had so great respect for them, (himself being a Mathematician,) that
in Sept. following when he left England he took them and their Wives with him
in the same Ship, and traveling with him afterward by Land, he saw them
safely conveyed to Cracaw in Poland. Where continuing for some time, they
removed to Prague; and at length, in Sept. 1586. to Trebona in Bohemia: at all
which places tho Kelley was several times troublesome, inconstant, and false to
Dee, yet he mostly performed the office of Skryer. And further, that
notwithstanding Dee took the said Spirits to be Angelical, yet Kelley not, but
rather mere delusions of the Devil, which has been since confirmed by Dr.
Meric Casaubon, who published the Relation of Dr. Dee's conversing with
Spirits. At Trebona Kelley Ibid.
made projection 9. Dec. 1586. with one small grain of the Elixir (in
proportion no bigger than the least grain of sand) upon one ounce and a quarter
of common Mercury, and it produced almost an ounce of most pure Gold. At
another time he made projection upon a piece of metal cut out of a
Warming-pan, and without his touching or handling it, or melting the metal,
(only warming it in the fire,) the Elixir being put thereon, it was transmuted
into pure Silver. The said Warming-pan and piece were sent to Q. Elizabeth by
her Ambassador then residing at Prague, that by fitting the piece, with the
place whence it was cut out, it might exactly appear to be a part of the said
Warming-pan. At another time Kelley, who was openly profuse beyond the modest
limits of a sober Philosopher, did give away in Gold-wyer-rings (or rings
twisted with three Gold-wyers) at the Marriage of one of his Maid Servants, to
the value of 4000 l. but this I think was acted after Dee had left him at
Trebona, (which was in May 1589.) otherwise it had not been done, and so
consequently Rodolph 2. Emperor of Germany (who had a great respect for him and
Dee) would not for his Prodigality, or open management of the secret, or
rather, as some say, for a chemical cheat put upon him, have committed him to
close custody. The Writings of Kelley that are made public are these,

Poem of Chemistry. -- Pr. in Theat. Chemic. Britannicum. an. 1652.

Poem of the Philosophers-Stone. -- Written to his Friend G. S. Gent. Printed
there also.

De lapide Philosophorum, Hamb. 1676. in oct. Qu. Whether this be not falsely
fathered on him. He has also several Lat. and Engl. discourses in a Book
intit. A true and faithful relation of what passed, for many years, between Dr.
Joh. Dee and some Spirits, etc. Land. 1659. fol. Published by Dr. Meric
Casaubon beforementioned. At length our author Kelley (who had been Knighted
by the Emperor, as it seems) being imprisoned the second time (at Prague) by
the aforesaid Emperor, after he had been at Liberty for some Months, and in a
manner had crept into his favor, attempted an escape out of an high Window by
tying his sheets together, after he had divided each into two parts at least;
but he being too weighty for them, he fell to the ground before he was half way
down; so that bruising his Body and breaking his Legs, he Ibid.
dyed soon after in October. as it seem, in fifteen hundred ninety and five; Nov.
following the news of his death came to Dr. Dee then in England, which he
inserted in his Diary thus, Nov. 25. an. 1595. news that Sir F. K. was slain.
Jo. Weever before quoted tells In his Discourse beforementioned.
us otherwise. viz. That Q. Elizabeth sent very secretly Capt. Peter Gwinne
with some others, to persuade Kelly to return back to his Native Country; which
he was willing to do; and thinking to escape away in the night, by stealth, as
he was clambering over a wall in his own House in Prague, (which bears his name
to this day, and which sometimes was an old Sanctuary,) he fell down from the
battlements, broke his Legs, and bruised his Body, of which hurts within a
while after he dyed, etc. Thus Weever beforementioned, a Lancashire man born,
educated in Queens coll. in Cambrige, under the tuition of Dr. Rob. Pearson
Archdeacon of Suffolk, afterward a great traveller beyond the Seas, and
collector of several Epitaphs of Englishmen that he met with in his rambles.
Soon after his return, he traveled though most parts of England, for the
obtaining of English Antiquities, and through some of Scotland, being
encouraged thereunto by those excellent Antiquaries Sir Rob. Cotton and Joh.
Seldom. At length after he had arrived to the 56 years of his age, his little
body being then in a manner worn out with continual motion, he yielded to
nature in his house in Clerkenwelclose near to London, an. 1632. Whereupon his
body was buried toward the west end of the Church of St. James in Clerkenwel.
As for Edw. Kelley beforementioned you may see more of him before, in Franc.
Puccius, and afterward (under the year 1651.) in Arth. Dee.

Tho. Williams of Penrose in Monmouthshire, by Elianour his Wife, daughter of
Sir Will. Vaughan Knight, was born in that County, of a Family rather ancient
than wealthy, and being from his childhood more given to Military, than
Scholastical, matters; yet for form sake he was sent to the University; but to
what house therein, unless to Brasenose, whereof one of both his Names, and a
Welsh-man, was a Student in 1554. (2. of Q. Mary) I know not. Soon after he
left Oxon, became a Soldier of Fortune under the Duke of Alva, ran through all
the degrees of Military Offices, was a Colonel in the French and Belgic Wars,
and might have been sided with the best of those times, if his discretion could
have but well tempered his hot furious valor, which was the reason that Q.
Elizabeth would not commit any place, or Employment, of great trust to his
care. In 1586. he had the Honor of Knighthood conferred upon him, was then
beloved of all Soldiers, and so much noted for his martial prowess, that he
went beyond the commendation of Panegyric, which was specified in the said
year, when at midnight he assaulted the Camp of the Prince of Parma near
Venlow, slew some of the Enemies, and pierced the Tent of the General, as a
noted Camden in Annal. Reg. Eliz. sub an. 1586. vide etiam sub an. 1581.
author tells us. He has written,

The Actions of the Low Countries. -- Printed at Land. in time of Q. Eliz. as
it seems, and 1618. qu. The author being unlearned, and only tutored by
experience, has penned the said History with very exquisite judgment, he being
an actor in the said Actions or Wars.

A brief discourse of War, with his opinion concerning some part of martial
discipline. Land. 1590. qu. In this excellent book the author defends the
military art of his, against that of former, days; but to the great envy then,
and discontent of some old-beaten Soldiers, and the Lovers of Archery. He paid
his last debt to Nature in his House in the Parish of St. Benedict, near to
Paul's Wharf in London, in the month of December. in fifteen hundred ninety and
five, Tho. Powell of Vsk in Monmouthshire, and Gellie Merick of the Parish of
St. Clements without Temple Bar, Gent. (his Kinsmen) within the Cath. Chapter of
St. Paul; at whose Funeral Rob. Earl of Essex, and all the warlike men of the
City of London mourned. Whether any Epitaph was ever set over his grave, I know
not: Sure it is that one ^o. Stradlingus in lib. 1. Epigram. p. 31.
who knew him, has commended to Posterity a learned Epigram on him, the
beginning of which is,

Quid tumulum lachrymis violas, and murmr vexas

Fortissimi manes Ducis? etc.

You may be pleased to satisfy your self concerning this valiant Colonel, in a
Book intit. A true discourse historical of the succeeding Governors of the
Netherlands, and the Civil Ware there began in the year 1565. etc. Translated
and collected by Tho. Churchyard Esquire; and Rich. To. out of the reverend E. M.
of Antwerp his 15 books of his Historia Belgica, etc. Land. 1602. I find
another Rog. Williams later in time than the former, an inhabitant of
Providence in New England, and author of (1) A Key to the Language of New
England. Land. 1643. oct. (2) The hireling Ministry none of Christ: or, a
discourse of the propagation of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Land. 1652. qu.
etc. But of what University the said Williams was, if of any, I know not; or
whether a real Phanatick or Jesuit.

HENRY UNTON was born of an ancient and Wadley near Faringdon in Berkshire,
educated in Oriel coll. under Mr. Rich. Pygot one of that Society, left it
without a degree and traveled. After his return, being esteemed a Person well
qualified, had some Employment under Sir Christopher Hatton L. Chancelour, who
quickly finding him to be a man of business and experience, commended him to
the Queen, who in 1586. not only conferred on him the Honor of Knighthood, but
sent him afterward twice in the quality of an Ambassador to the King of
France, where he behaved himself right stoutly in behalf of his Mistress,
particularly for some injury done to her by the Duke of Guise, an. 1592. This
person, who was actually created M. of A. of this University, before he went
into France, has written,

An account of his Embassy: or, a Diary containing his Commission,
Instructions, Expenses, and Transactions; as also Letters from, or to, him,
from July 13. an 1591. to June 12. an. 1592. -- MS. in bib. Bod. He also made a
Diary for his last Embassy, which continued to the time of his Death, but that
I have not yet seen. He gave way to Fate in the King of France's Camp, lying
before Lafere, on the 23. March in fifteen hundred ninety and five; 1595-6.
whereupon his Body being conveyed into England, was buried on the 8. July
following, in a Chapel joining to the North side of the Church of Faringdon
beforementioned. Soon after was a noble Monument set over his grave, with this
inscription, containing certain matters relating to him, which I have not yet
mentioned. Virtuti and honori Sacrum. Henrico Vntono Eq. Aurate, Edovardi
Vntoni, Eq. Aur. filio, ex Anna Comitissa Warwici, filia Edovardi de Sancto
Mauro Ducis Sommersetti and Angliae Protectoris, qui optimarum artium studiis a
prima aetate in Academia Oxon institutus, magnam orbis Christiani partem
perlustravit, ob virtutem bellicam in Zutphaniae obsidione, dignitate equestri
donatus, propter singularem prudentiam, spectatum sidem, and multiplicem rerum
usum iterum Legatus a Sereniss. Angliae Regina ad Christianiss. Regem missus in
Galliam, e qua ad celestem patriam migravit 23. Mart. an. 1596. etc. The Muses
of Oxon had so great a respect for the memory of this most worthy Person, that
a book of Verses on his death, came out soon after under their name, intit.
Funebria nobiliss. ac praestomtiss. Eq. D. Henrici Vntoni ad Gallos bis legati
regii, etc. a Musis Oxon apparata.

WILLIAM MIDDLETON, the third Son of Rich. Middleton of Denbigh, (by Jane his
Wife, Daughter of Hugh Dryhurst of the same place,) fourth Son of Foulk
Middleton of Denbigh beforementioned, the third Son of Dav. Middleton of
Gwenock, Recordator of North Wales, was born in Denbighshire, and educated for
a time among the Oxonians, but whether in Jesus coll. at its first foundation,
as probably it might be so, or whether he took more than one degree, I know
not. Afterward he traveled into various parts of the World, exercised himself
in fears of Arms, became the most noted Bard of his Country; and tho a Soldier
and a Captain by profession, (having had the command of a Ship for several
years,) yet all the time he got, was bestowed in exercising his Poetical fancy.
The Works of him that I have seen are these.

Bardoniaeth: or, the Art of Welsh poetry. Land. 1593. qu. in 3 sh. and half.
This book which is written in Welsh, he styles the first book, or part, as if
there was a second to be published. He also translated into the Welsh tongue
the Psalms of David, running in excellent Meter. Which noble work he performed
apud se^tum insulam occidentalium Indorum, and finished it there 24. Jan. in
fifteen hundred ninety and five. Clar. 1595.
This translation coming into the hands of his Countryman Tho. Salisbury, was,
with the help of his Friend Tho. Middleton Citizen of London, and kinsman to
the author, published at Land. 1603. qu. Before which time the author, as it
seems, was dead. In my searches I find another Will. Middleton Bach. of
Divinity and Minister of Hardwick in Cambridgshire, author of Papisto mastix:
or, the Protestants Religion defended, etc. Land. 1606. qu. and of other
things, but what relation there was between the former and this (who seems to
have been educated in Cambridge) I know not.

Smith, Son of Sir Clem. Smythe of Little Badew in Essex, by Dorothy his Wife,
Sister to Edw. Seymour Duke of Somerset, (whose Sister Jane Seymour was the
third Wife of K. Hen. 8.) was born as it seems, in Essex, and laid the
foundation of Literature in Oxon, but in what house, it is difficult to find,
because both his Names are very common. Afterward being martially inclined, he
traveled into various countries, exercised himself in feats of arms, and
became as well a complete Soldier, as Gentleman. At length he was made a
Knight by Qu. Elizabeth, and by her sent Ambassador into Spain, in 1576, as
being a person of a Spanish port and demeanor, and well known to the Spaniard,
who held him, as their King did, in high value, and especially for this reason,
that he was first cousin to K. Ed. 6. His works are,

Discourse concerning the forms and effect of diverse Weapons, and other very
important Matters Military; greatly mistaken by diverse of our men of War in
their days, and chiefly of the Musket, Calyver and Longbow, etc. Land. 1589.
and 1590. qu.

Certain Instructions, Observations, and Orders Military, requisite for all
Chieftains, Captains, higher and lower Officers. Composed 1591. Land. 1594. 95.
qu.

Instructions for Enrolling and Mustering -- Printed with Certain Instructions,
etc. What other books of his are published, I cannot yet find, nor exactly when
he died, only that he was living and in great esteem among Soldiers and
learned men in fifteen hundred ninety and five. Clar. 1595.
Besides this, was another Sir Joh. Smyth equal in time with him, eldest Son of
Tho. Smyth of Ostinhanger in Kent Esquire. and brother to Sir Thomas of Bidborough
in the same County, whom I shall mention elsewhere. Which Sir John dying in the
beginning of 1609. was buried in Ashford Church in the said County, leaving
Issue, as it seems, Tho. Smyth of Ostenhanger, afterward Knight of the Bath
and Viscount Stranford in Ireland; who dying 30. June 1635. was buried in his
Chapel joining to the said Church of Ashford. But this Sir John was no writer,
nor of the same Family, because he was descended from the Smyths of Corshan in
Wiltshire; whereas Sir John who was the Writer and Soldier, was Grandson to
Tho. Smyth of Ravinhall in Essex, and he a Discendant from John Carrington, who
fled for a time from England, and changed his Name to Smyth, for adhering to
the deposed King Rich. 2. Further also I find another John Smyth commonly
called Captain Smyth, who wrote (1.) A Map of Virginia, with a Description of
the Country, the Commodities, People, Government, and Religion. Oxon. 1612. qu.
(2.) New Englands Trials, etc. Land. 1620. qu. (3.) General History of
Virginia, etc. Land. 1624. qu. (4.) Travels in Europe, etc. Land. 1630. with
other things, but this Captain Smyth was a Cheshire man, and whether he had
received any Education in this University of Oxon, I cannot say to the contrary.

Rob. Prime, a Fletcher, was born in the Parish of Halywell in the North Suburb
of Oxford, received his Grammatical Literature in Wykehams School near to
Winchester, admitted perpetual Fellow of New Col. in 1570. took the degrees in
Arts, holy Orders and became a noted puritanical Preacher in the City of his
Nativity, and much favored by Dr. Cooper Bishop of Winchester. In 1589. he
proceeded in Divinity, being at that time Vicar of Adderbury alias Eabburbury
in Oxfordshire, where he became much followed for his edifying way of
preaching. He has written,

A short treatise of Sacraments generally, and in special of Baptism, and of
the Supper. Land. 1582. oct.

Treatise of nature and grace. Land. 1583, oct.

Sermon briefly comparing the State of King Solomon and his Subjects together
with the condition of Queen Elizabeth and her People, preached at S. Mary's in
Oxon. 17. Nov. 1585. on 1 Kings 10. 9. Oxon. 1585. oct.

Exposition on the Galathians. Ox. 1587. oct.

The consolations of David applied to Queen Elizabeth, in a Sermon at S. Mary's
in Oxon. 17. Nov. 1588. on Psalm. 23. 4. Oxon. 1588. oct. These, as I think,
were all the books and Sermons that he has published, tho he intended more had
he not been cut off in his middle Age. At length after he had been Vicar of
Adderbury about 7 years, he concluded his last day there about the 12 of April
in fifteen hundred ninety and six,

FRANCIS KNOLLIS, Son of Robert Knollis of Rotherfield-Gray, commonly called
Grays, near to Henley in Oxfordshire, did receive for a time his Grammatical
and Dialectical Education in this University, particularly, as it seems, in
Magd. coll. Afterward he retired to his patrimony, and at length to the court,
and became one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to K. Hen. 8. in the latter end of
his reign. When a reformation was set on foot by King Ed. 6. he was so zealous
for the religion then professed, as that, when Qu. Mary began to reign and grow
severe toward the Reformed party, he Camden in Annal. Reg. Eliz. sub an. 15.
6. vide etiam in Baro^^g. Angl. To. 3. p. 412.
fled into Germany, where he sorted himself for a time among several of the
English Divines that went away about the same time for conscience sake. After
the death of that Queen, he returned, and became so much in esteem by Q.
Elizabeth (who stood totally affected to the reformation) as that in the first
year of her reign, he was made choice of, for one of her privy Council, and
shortly after that, she made him Vice-chamberlain of her household, and employed
him in matters of concern beyond the Seas. In 1566. he was actually created
Master of Arts, being then chief Steward of the City of Oxon, Captain of the
Halbertiers, and about that time Ib. in Ca^d. an. 1566.
Treasurer of the Queens Chamber in the place of Sir John Mason deceased.
Afterward he was trusted with the custody of Mary Qu. of Scots, while she was
a prisoner in Bolton-castle in Yorkshire, and in the 29. Elizab. being then a
Knight, he was one of those, who by commission sat in judgment upon the said
Queen at Foderingey. At length he was made Treasurer of her Majesty's Household,
and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, being always by many
accounted a faithful subject, an honest and learned man, and a person of great
prudence and wisdom; and by others so a great a friend to Calvin in his heart
(whose principles he embraced while he lived at Geneva) that he was never a
cordial friend to Episcopacy, but rather a patron of the Non-conformists, which
appeared by several of his actions while he was a privy Counselor. His
writings are these.

Treatise against the usurpation of Papal Bishops -- Printed 1608. in oct. some
attribute it to Jo. Rainolds the famous Divine.

A General Survey of the Isle of Wight, with all the Castles and Fortresses
near adjoining -- This is a MS. in fol. and was sometimes in the Lib. of Arthur
E. of Anglesey: From whence we may suppose that the author had some office in,
or relating to, the said Isle, but what, in truth I cannot tell. I have seen
also several of his speeches spoken in Parliaments, letters of state, and
letters written by him to the said Jo. Rainolds, between whom there was great
amity and intercourse, but few or none, of those letters or speeches, I think,
are printed. At length paying his last debt to nature in the Summer time
(before September.) Grays before mentioned. By his Wife Catherine daughter of
Will. Carry Esque by Mary his Wife, daughter of Thom. Bolein Earl of Wiltshire,
as also Sister to the Lady Anne Bolein second Wife to K. Hen. 8. he had issue
Henry his Eldest Son, bred in the Free School joining to Maga. College under
the care, as it Vide Pi^s. De illustr. Angl. Script. aet. 16. nu. 9^6. p. ^32
seems, of Tho. Robertson. Afterward he went with his Father and others into
Germany, and at his return, if not happily before, became a Commoner of the
said College, where he obtained so much literature as afterward to gain the
character by a learned (...) in Vita and morte Jo. Juelli, edit. (...) p. 87,
88.
Author of homo virtute and animi dotibus non infimus, and of homo religionis
studiosissimus and liberalissima literatura egregic ditatus, etc. But he dying
without issue, the estate went to the next Son called William, afterward Earl
of Ba^bury, He had another Son named Francis, 2 Knight, whom I shall mention
elsewhere, as also a fourth, who was a member of the said College; and all four
admired by some, and envied by others, for their great virtue and towardliness.

Berkshire man born as it seems, became Fellow of St. John's coll. in the
Founders time, Master of Arts in in 1560. and afterward Schoolmaster at, and
Vicar of the Church of St. Laurence in, Reading in the aforesaid County. He
has written,

The Doctrine of Prayer in general for all men, that is universally for all
Mankind, etc. Land. 1595. qu. What else he has published I know not, being a
difficult matter to distinguish his Works from others of both his names and
time: And whether he was author of The use of the Gospel, printed 1580. in qu.
which is said to be written by Jo. Smith, I cannot tell. The said Joh. Smith of
Reading, did give way to Fate there, and was buried in his Church of St.
Laurence; Clar. 1596.
but when, it appears not; leaving then behind him a Son of both his Names,
Scholar of St. John's coll. an. 1600. which he left after he was M. of A. to
prevent expulsion. I find another John Smith, who has published, (1) The
bright Morning Star; or, the resolution and exposition of the 22 Psalm. Cambr.
1603. in tw. (2) A pattern of true Prayer, being an exposition or commentary on
the Lords Prayer, etc. Land. 1605. and 1624. oct. besides other things. But in
his Epistle Dedicatory, before the said Exposition, it appears that he was then
(1605, and before) a Lecture in the City of Lincoln, and that he had received
part of his education in Cambridge. I shall make mention of another Joh. Smith
of St. John's coll. under the year 1616.

Balesius) a most dextrous Person in his profession, to the great wonder of
Scholars and others, spent several years in Sciences among the Oxonians,
particularly, as it seems, in Gloucester hall. But that study which he used for
a diversion only, proved at length an employment of ptofit. His Works are these.

The art of Brachygraphy, that is to write as fast as a man speaks treatably.
Land. 1597. in tw. 2 edit.

The order of Orthography.

The Key of Calygraphy; that is of fair Writing.

Printed with the former.

Before these Treatises are 18 copies of Verses made in praise of them; four
whereof, or more, were made by the Students of Glouc. hall, (among whom Edw.
Mychilbourne a most noted Poet of his time has two) and three, or more, by the
Students of St. John's Col. who are proprietaries of that hall. What afterward
became of the said Balesius, Clar. 1596.
(who was engaged in the Earl of Essex his treasons, An. 1600.) I cannot tell,
nor whether he published any other matters. I find one of both his Names, a
Divine, who published (1.) The Lords prayer pleading for better entertainment.
Land. 1643. qu. It Is a Sermon as it seems, on Luke 11. 2. (2.) Infirmities
inducing to Conformity, on Jam. 3. 2. Printed 1650. qu. and other things.
Whether this Peter Bales was Son or kinsman to the former, I cannot tell.

Clarke, was originally of Oxon, but making little stay there, he retired to
Doctors Commons in London, and for about 40 years practiced the Civil Law in
the most famous Courts in England, as in the Court of Arches, Admiralty,
Audience, Prerogative, and Consistoral of the Bishop of London, besides his
employment diverse times in the Ecclesiastical Causes of the delegated Power of
the King, and chief Commissioners. In 1594. he having then practiced his
Faculty 35 years at (...), had the degree of Bach. of Civil Law conferred upon
him, by the venerable Convocation of Doctors and Masters, not by way of
creation, but, as the Register says, by admission to the reading of the
imperial institutions, tho no exercise he did for it in this University. The
reason for this their Civility, was, that he had performed the part of chief
Proctor for the said University, by virtue of Letters and their common Seal, in
all their concerns in the aforesaid Courts. He has written,

Praxis tam jus dicentibus, quam aliis omnibus, qui in foro Ecclesiastico
versantur, apprime utilis. This book was finished by the Author, and made ready
for the press, in April 1596. Clar. 1596.
but what diverted him from the publication thereof (unless death) I know not.
Afterward several imperfect Copies of it flying abroad, one, supposed to be
true, came into the hands of Tho. Bladen, D. D. Dean of Ardfort in Ireland and
Chaplain to the Duke of Ormond, who caused it to be printed at Dublin in 1666.
qu.

Praxis curiae Admiralitatis Angliae. Dubl. 1666. qu. published by the said
Doctor. But the Copy from whence that Edition was published, being, as 'twas
pretended, false in many matters, a better Copy was published at London, 1667.
in 8vo. by E. S. One Sir Franc. Clerk of Bedfordshire Knight, was a benifactor
to Sydney Col. in Cambridge, tho not educated there, whom I take to be the same
with Sir Francis Clerk of Merton Priory or Abbey in Surrey (Son of Barthol.
Clerk mentioned in the Fasti under the year 1574.) quite different from the
Writer.

JOHN MARTIAL, a zealous man for the R. Dalysford in Worcestershire, near
Chippingnorton in the County of Oxon; educated in Grammatical learning in
Wykeham's School near Winchester, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. after
he had served two years of probation, an. 1551. took the degree of Bach. of the
Civil Law five years after, about which time he was made Usher, or second
Master, of the aforesaid School under Tho. Hide, whom I shall anon mention. In
the beginning of Q. Eliz. he left his Employment, Fellowship, and at length the
Kingdom, and going beyond the Seas to Lovaine, he made proficiency there in the
studies of Divinity, and at length by the procurement of Lewis Owen Archdeacon
of Cambray, (afterward Bishop of Cassano) he was made Canon of St. Peter's
Church at L'isle in Flanders. Which place he keeping eight years, resigned it,
(being then D. of D.) to the end that he might give himself solely upto his
devotions, and prepare himself for another World. He has written,

A Treatise of the Cross, gathered out of the Scriptures, Councils, and ancient
Fathers of the primitive Church. Antw. 1564. in oct. Whereupon Jam. Calfhill of
Chapter Chapter making an answer to it, our Author came out with a reply intit.

A reply to Mr. Calfhills blasphemous answer against the Treatise of the Cross.
Lov. 1566. qu. Afterward he wrote,

Treatise of the tonsure of the Clerks. -- Left imperfect and therefore never
printed. He departed this mortal Life at L'isle beforementioned, (to the great
grief of the R. Catholics,) in the Arms or Embraces of Will, Gifford Dean of
that Church, Apr. Jo. Pits in lib. De illustr. Angl. Scriptorih. Aet. 16. nu.
1045.
in fifteen hundred ninety and seven, and was buried in the Collegiate Church
of St. Peter beforementioned. At his death he bequeathed a rich ring, with a
stone in it, to adorn a piece of our Savior's Cross, in the Cathedral there.
Whose Will being performed by the said Gifford, that bequest was esteemed as a
Trophy of Victory over Calfhill, and is at this day, as I have been informed,
preserved as a choice relick there.

THOMAS HIDE, a noted Romans Priest of his Newbury in Berks. Descended from the
ancient and gentile Family of his Name in that County, educated in Wykehams
School, admitted perpetual fellow of New Col. 1543, took the degrees in Arts,
that of master being completed 1549. In the year after he le^t his Fellowship,
was made Prebendary of Winchester, and in 1552. succeeded Will. Everard in the
chief mastership of the said School, where continuing till Qu. Elizab. came to
the Crown, he left all he had, and all he pretended to, for Conscience sake,
and going beyond the Seas, spent the remainder of his time partly at Doway and
partly at Lovaine. He was a Person of a strict life and conversation, as those
of his Ibid.
Persuasion say, of great gravity of severity, and a lover of virtue and
virtuous men. He has written,

A consolatory Epistle to the afflicted Catholics. Lov. in oct. and other
things as I have been told, but such I have not yet seen: which if printed, few
or no copies come into England. He dyed at Doway in Flanders in the house of
Alice Fowler, the Widow of John Fowler an Englishman, on the 9. May in fifteen
hundred ninety and seven, and was buried in the Chapel of the Virgin Mary
within the Church of St. James there, near to the horn of the Gospel; leaving
then behind him this character, that he was a most fierce hater of Vice and a
capital Enemy to Sects and Heresies.

Kiddesley in Derbyshire, education in Wykeham's School beforementioned, made
perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1555. (2. and 3. of Ph. and Mar.) left it
after he was M. of Arts, and in 1560. became chief Master of the said School,
in the place of Tho. Hyde; where, by his industry and admirable way of
teaching, were many good Scholars sent to the Universities. All the time that
he could get at vacant hours, he spent upon his beloved study of Physic, which
he practiced in the City of Winchester, but not to the neglect of his School.
At length taking the degree of Doctor of that Faculty, did shortly after resign
his School, and repairing to London practiced with good success in the Parish
of St. Dunstans in the West, where being accounted eminent, was admitted, as it
seems, a Member of the Coll. of Physicians. He has written and published,

Ortus atque vita Gul. Wykehami Winton Episcopi. Written in 140 long and short
Verses, 14. Dec. 1564. -- Printed (1) on the broadside of a sheet of Paper,
with Wykehams Arms encompassed with the Garter before them. (2) At the end of
the Latin Poems of Rich. Willeius, Land. 1573. And (3) in a Book intit. A brief
view of the State of the Church of England, as it stood in Queen Elizabeth's
and King James's Reign, etc. Land. 1653. oct. p. 37, 38. Written by Sir Jo.
Harrington Knight, an. 1608. and made public by Joh. Chetwind his Daughter's
Son, then no Friend to the Church of England.

Custodum sive Praefidum Coll. Winton. Series. Written in Verse also, and put
at the end of the said Lat. Poems.

Didasculorum Coll. Wint. omnium Elenchus. In Verse also, at the end of the
said Poems.

Counsel against the Plague, or any other infectious Disease. Land. 1577. oct.

Question, Whether a man for preservation may be purged in Dog Days or no? --
Printed with the Counsel, etc.

Ranarum and murium pugna, Latino versu donata ex Homero. Land. 1580. in about
3 sh. in qu. with other things as it is probable, but such I have not yet seen.
See more of him in Rich. White, under the year 1612. This Dr. Johnson died in
the beginning of July. Dunstan beforementioned; whereupon his Body was buried
in the Church there, (as it seems,) situated and being in Fleetstreet. He dyed
wealthy, left several Sons and Daughters behind him, and Mr. Joh. Heath his Son
in Law, a Student in Physic, his Executor; who had all his Physical and
Philosophical Books, and succeeded him in his Practice.

Joh. Heywood the Famous Epigramatist of his time, was born in London, sent to
the University at about 12 years of age, an. 1547. educated in Grammar, as well
as in Logic, there, took a degree in Arts in 1553. and forthwith was elected
Probationer-Fellow of Merton coll. where remaining about 5 years, (in all which
time he bare away the Bell in disputations at home and in the public Schools,)
did, upon a third admonition from the Warden and Society of that house for
several misdemeanors, (for he and his Brother Ellis Heywood were for a time
very wild, to the great grief of their Father,) resign his Fellowship, to
prevent expulsion, on the 4. Apr. 1558. In June following he took the degree of
Master, and in Nov. ensuing, he was elected Fellow of Alls. coll. where abiding
for a little while, left the University, and soon after England, and entered
himself into the Society of Jesus. But before he left us he wrote and
translated these things following.

Various Poems and Devises. -- Some of which are Printed in a Book intit. The
Paradise of dainty Devises. Collected and Printed by Hen. D'isle of London
Printer, an. 1573. in qu. He also translated into English Verse (1) Thiestes,
the second Tragedy of Seneca. Land. 1560. oct. Published again with other
Tragedies of that author, by Thom. Newton. -- Land. 1581. qu. as I shall tell
you when I come to him, in an. 1607. (2) Hercules furens, another Trag. of
Seneca: And (3) Troas a third, published also by the said Newton, 1581. qu. In
1561. our Poet left England, and was made a Priest after the R. Cath. fashion,
and in 1562. being then at Rome, he was entered into the Society of Jesus 21.
May, in the then professed house of the Jesuits there. After he had spent two
years in the study of Divinity among them, he was sent to Diling in
Switzerland, where he continued about 17 years in explaining and discussing
controverted questions among those he called Heretics, in which time he was
promoted to the degree of D. of Divinity, and of the four Vows. At length P.
Gregory 13. calling him away in 1581. he sent him, with others the same year,
into the mission of England, and the rather, because the Brethren there told
his Holiness, That the Harvest was great, and the Laborers few. Being settled
then in the Metropolis of his own Country, and esteemed the Chief or Provincial
of the Jesuits in England, it was noted See in Tho. Bell's Anatomy of Pepish
Tyranny. Land. 1603. lib. 1. p. 9. and in lib. 2. p. 25.
by all that knew him, That he kept many Men, Horses, and Coaches, that also
his port and carriage was more Baron-like than Priest-like, etc. At length
going into France about public matters relating to the Order, was, when ready
to land in Normandy, drove back by a contrary wind on the English shore; where
being taken and examined, was, with 19 more R. Priests put into a Ship, and set
on shore in France, in Feb. 1584. Upon his being taken and committed to Prison,
and the Earl of Warwick's offer thereupon to relieve his necessity, he made a
copy of verses, mentioned by a noted Sir Jo. Harr^ngton in his Epigrams, lib.
3. Epig. 1.
Poet of his time, concluding with these two:

-- Thanks to that Lord that will me good; For I want all things saving Hay and
Wood. Afterward he went to the City of Dole, where he was troubled much with
Witches, thence to Rome, and at length fixed in the City of Naples, where, as
at Rome he became familiarly known to that zealous R. Catholic Joh. Pitseus,
who speaks by the by very honorably of him. What he wrote or published after
he became a Jesuit, I know not. Sure it is, if one Hen. Morus in Hist. ^rovinc.
Argl. Soc. Jesu. lib. 4. nu. 11. sub an. 158^.
says true, that this our author was most critical in the Hebrew Language, and
that he did make and digest an easy and short method (reduced into Tables) for
Novices to learn that Language; which I suppose was a Compendium of a Hebrew
Grammar. He paid his last debt to Nature at Naples on the 9. of Jan. according
to the account there followed, in fifteen hundred ninety and eight, 1597-98.
which is 97 with us, and was buried, as I have been informed, in the college
of the Jesuits there. He left behind him several of his Labors in writing,
some of which are preserved as rarities; but whether any of them have been
since printed, I cannot justly tell. His elder Brother Ellis Heywood, I have
mentioned before, under the year 1272. number. 180.

HENRY PERRY a Welsh-man born, was educated Gloucester hall, took the degrees
in Arts, was beneficed in his own Country, and as a Member of Jesus coll. took
the degree of Bach. of Div. 1597. He has written,

A British Dictionary. Clar. 1597.
MS. -- Involved in Dictionarium Britannico-Latinum, published by Dr. Joh.
Davies, who says in the Preface to that Book, that this our author Perry was
Vir Languarum cognitione insignis, which is all I know of him.

CHARLES PINNER an eminent Preacher in Elizabeth, received his first breath in
the ancient Borough of Southampton in Hampshire, educated in Wykeham's School,
made perpetual Fellow of New coll. 1575. took one degree in the Civil Law, and
soon after became Minister of Wooten-Basset in Wiltshire, where being much
resorted to for his edifying way of Preaching, (especially by the Puritan,)
did, for the satisfaction of the neighborhood and others, publish.

Several Sermons, as (1) Sermon upon the Words of St. Paul the Apost. unto Tim.
Ep. 1. 4. 8. Oxon 1597. oct. (2) Honor all Men, love brotherly Fellowship, on
1 Pet. 2. 17. Oxon 1597. in oct. (3) Sermon. at Marlborough in Wilts, on 1 Timothy
Clar. 1597.
4. 16. -- Printed in oct. about the same time. Besides these, it is said he
has published more, but such I have not yet seen, nor do I know any thing else
of the author, only that he was much, in esteem in the latter end of Q.
Elizabeth.

Polonian born, originally (as it seems) a Jew, afterward a R. Catholic, and
at length a Protestant, entered into this University in a poor and obscure
condition, initiated in Academical learning by the exhibition of certain
Doctors, of whom Dr. Ayray and Dr. Rainolds were of the number, who perceiving
that his excellency lay in the Hebrew Language, put upon him the Office of
teaching it privately in several colleges and halls. At length being registered
among Lib. Matric. P. page 707.
the Students of the University, after he had taken the Oath of Supremacy, and
the usual Oath to the University, did translate into Latin, Haec sunt verba
dei, etc. praecepta in Monte Sinai data Judaeis sunt 613, quorum 365 negativa,
and 248 affirmativa; collecta per Pharisaeum Magistrum Abrahamum filium
Kattani, and impressa in bibliis Bombergiensibus, anno a Mundo creato 5288.
Venetiis, ab authore Vox Dei appellata. Clar. 1597.
Afterward Ferdinandus went to Cambridge, where the said translation was
printed in qu. 1597. he being then about 42 years of age, and an instructor, as
I suppose, of the Hebrew Language, which is all that I know of him and his
Works.

Shepery, (who writes himself in Latin Scepraeus,) Nephew to John Shepreve,
mentioned under the year 1542. number. 68. was born near Abendon in Berkshire,
admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. in Feb. 1554. aged 14. or thereabouts,
Probationer in Nov. 1558. and Bach. of Arts the year following, which was the
highest degree he took in this University: For being a zealous Catholic he
left it before he was Master, went beyond the Seas, and at length, settling in
Rome, was exhibited to by Cardinal Gabr. Palaeot Archb. of Bononia, in whose
Family he lived several years. He had the degree of D. of Div. conferred upon
him at Rome, as it seems, where he was accounted the most skilful person in
diverse Tongues of his time, and the worthy ornament of the English Exiles. He
has written,

Miscellanea celebrium sententiarum Sacrae Scripturae. vol. 1. MS.

Commentarii in Epist. D. Pauli ad Romans ex Latino, Graeco, Syriaco, Aethiopico.
vol. 1. MS.

Notae in omnes Epistolas D. Pauli and canonicas, de differentiis textus Latini
a Graeco and Syriaco. vol. 1. MS.

Expositio locorum difficilium in officio B. Mariae. vol. 1. MS.

Connexio literalis Psalmorum in officio B. Mar. Virg. and eorum corroboratio
ex variis linguis Graec. Hebr. Syriac. Chald. Arab. Aethiop. etc. Romans 1596.
qu. What else this curious, most critical and learned person has written I
know not, nor any thing more of him, only that dyed at Rome, in aedibus S.
Severiani, to the very great reluctance of those that knew him, English coll.
there. The Reader is now to know that one Will. Shepreve, or Shepery, who was
elected Probationer of Exeter coll. 17. October. 1559. was admitted perpetual
Fellow thereof 16. Nov. the next year: And being admitted Bach. of Arts in the
beginning of Dec. 1561. took no higher degree, but left his Fellowship in 1568.
This William Shepreve I take to be quite different from the former, and tho of
kin to him, and a, good Scholar, yet I know nothing that he has published.

Will. Stapleton, was born of a gentile Family at Henfield in Sussex, obtained
the first rudiments of Grammar at Canterbury, under John Twyne a noted Master
there, completed them at Wyk^ham's School near Winchester, admitted perpetual
Fellow of New coll. in 1554. made Prebendary or Canon of Chichester a little
before Q. Mary dyed, being then but Bach. of Arts. But when Q. Elizabeth came
to the Crown, and Religion thereupon began to put on another Face, our author
not only, but his Father and Family, left the Nation, and went to Lovain; where
being settled, our author (the Son) applied himself with great zeal to the
study of Theology, and in short time making great proficiency therein, he went
to Paris to complete his knowledge in the sacred Tongues. Afterward for
devotion sake he journeyed to Rome, and in short time after returning to Lovain
he settled himself there for a time, to answer Bishop Jewel, and to translate
Bede's Chapter History into English, to the end that Q. Elizabeth (to whom he
dedicated it) might see and understand the ancient Faith and Religion of our
Ancestors, with other things. A little before that time an University being
erected at Doway, he hastened thither at the desire of Dr. Will. Allen; and for
a time performed the Office of Catechist Reader at Anchine near to that place.
Afterward taking the degrees in Divinity, as Bachelaur, Licentiat, and Doctor,
under Matthew Gallen Provost of the Church of St. Amoure, and Chancellor of the
University at Doway, had a Canonry bestowed on him in the said Church by
Gallen, and was made the King's Professor of Divinity of the said University.
Afterward being minded to put himself into a Religious Order, he renounced his
Canonry and Professorship, and entered into the Society of Jesus at Doway. But
after a long and diligent probation, finding that Order not to agree with his
genie and course of Life, he left it and returned to his former way of
teaching, to the great joy of many, and became a Canon once more of the said
Church of St. Amoure. At length being called to Lovain, he was made the King's
Professor of Divinity, and wrote there several matters against Dr. W. Whittaker
of Cambridge: so that his Fame in short time being over all those parts, and he
in great esteem with the King of Spain, had the Deanery of the Church of
Hilverbeck in Kampenland in Brabant bestowed on him, little enough, God wot,
for such a rare and most learned Clerk as he was. In all kind of literature he
obtained such perfection that he was numbered among the most learned men of that
age. And it was generally thought that he deserved a Cardinals cap before
Allen; but so it was that his ability being ecclipsed by the activity of the
other, he did not rise higher than a Dean. Pope Clement 8. was so much
delighted with his learned Works, that he commanded them to be read daily at
times of his refection, and invited him to Rome with a design to conser on him
the place of Apostolical Protonotary, and, as some say, to make him a Cardinal.
Cardinal Perron also, who was very knowing in the controversies of his time,
was wont to postpone all Writers of controversies in comparison of those of
Stapleton, which he took to be the best of his time, and before. To pass by all
commendations given of him by men of his persuasion, I shall conclude with
those of his Antagonist Whittaker, who In cont. 1. q. 3. cap. 3.
says, Stapletonus hanc cansum (de traditionibus) omnium acutissime ac
accuratissime tractavit, etc. And elsewhere In epist. ded. lib. De Scriptura.
speaking of the opinion as well of Papists as Protestants in diverse matters,
says modestly that he ( Whittaker) differed as much from Stapleton in many
things as to knowledge, as Troilus from Achilles. He has written and
translated many things, most of which were printed in four large volumes in
fol. at Paris 1620. The Titles of them are these.

De principiis fidei doctrinalibus, lib. 12. Par. 1579. and 82. etc.

Defensio successionis Ecclesiasticae. lib. 1.

Relectio principiorum fidei doctrinalium. Antw. 1592.

Defensio anthoritatis Ecclesiasticae contra Gul. Whittakerum Anglo-Calvinistam.

Triplicatio pro Ecclesiae authotitate adversus eundem Whittakerum.

These five Treatises beforementioned are printed in the first vol. of his
Works.

De universae justificationis doctrina hodie controvers. lib. 12.

Speculum pravitatis haeriticae per orationes quasi ad oculus demonstratae.
Duac. 1580.

Orationes funebres. Antw. 1577.

Orationes Academicae Miscellaneae. Some of which were published 1602.

Orationes Catecheticae sive manuale peccatorum de septem peccatis capitalibus.
Antw. 1598.

De magnitudine Romanae Ecclesiae, lib. 2. Antw. 1599. qu.

Fortress of Faith first planted amongst us Englishmen, etc. Antw. 1565. qu.
Which learned Treatise the author wrote upon occasion of his translating of
Bede's Chapter History into English, wherein he endeavors to show that the same
Faith was professed in the primitive times as in his. When the learned Usher of
Ireland was Bach. of Arts, he read over this book several times, and
mistrusting the quotations of ancient authors therein, did put Nic. Benard in
his Life and Death of Dr. Jam. Usher, printed 1656. p. 28.
him upon reading the Fathers.

The horn-blast: or, a reply to the answer of Rob. Horn the false B. of
Winchester: In 4 Books. Lov. 1567.

Discourse of Protestancy, and the first authors of it.

These 9 Treatises immediately going before, are in the second vol. of his
Works.

Antw. 1595.
Antidota Evangelica in Mathaeum. In Marcum. In Lucam. In Johan.


Antidota Apostolica in Act. Apost. Tom. 1. Antw. 1595.

In Epist. Pauli ad Romanos. Tom. 2. Ibid. 1595.

In duas Epistolas ad Corinthios. Tom. 3. Ib. 1598. and 1600.

These before-going are in the third vol. of his Works.

Antw. 1521. Venet. 1594.
Promptuarium in Evangelia Dominicalia. pars Hymalis. Promptuarium in Evangelia
Dominicalia. pars Aestualis. Prompt. Catholicum in Evangelia Dominicalia totius
anni. Col. 1592. etc. 1602. pars Hymalis. Prompt. Catholicum in Evangelia
Dominicalia totius anni. Col. 1592. etc. 1602. pars Aestualis.


Prompt. Cath. super Evang. ferialia totius Quadrages.

Prompt. Cath. sup. Evang in festis SS. totius anni.

Tres Thomae, seu res gestae S. Thomae Apost. S. Tho. Archiep. Cant. and Tho.
Mori Angliae Cancellarii. Duac. 1588. etc.

These five last are in the fourth vol. of his Works.

De justificatione. Par. 1582.

Return of untruths against Mr. Jewel. (Antw. 1566.) He also translated from
Lat. into English, The History of the Church of England. Antw. 1565. qu.
written by Ven. Bid. Which translation (with some notes added in the margin by
Stapleton) is See in Seldens Pref. to the December Scriptores, printed at Land.
1652. p. 9, 10.
censured by the learned Seldom as not altogether true. He translated also
Fred. Staphyles large vol. De desidiis Haereticorum. Antw. 1565. but this I
have not yet seen. At length after our author Stapleton had arrived to the
sixty third year of his age, did end his days at Lovain, to the great grief of
all learned Catholics, on the 12. Oct. (according to the account there
followed) in fifteen hundred ninety and eight, Peter there. Soon after was put
over his grave a monument, with a large inscription thereon, containing in
brief the succession of his Employments in the Universities and Church, here
and beyond the Seas; a copy of which you may see In Jo. Pits. De illustr. Angl.
Script. Aet. 16. nu. 1046.
elsewhere. The next, according to time, that is to crave a place among these
Writers, was a learned Sage of the Law.

Rich. Owen Gent. by Mary his Wife, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Tho.
Oteley of Shropshire Esquire; was born at, or near to, Condover in that county, and
for some time was conversant among the Muses either in Broadgates hall, or in
Chapter Church. From thence (having first taken a degree in Arts as it seems) he
retired to Lincoln's Inn, where by his unwearied industry, advanced by a good
natural genie and judgment, he became a noted Counselor, and much resorted to
for his advice. In 25. Elizab. dom. 1583. he was elected Lent-Reader of that
house, in 1590. he was by Writ called to the degree of Sergeant at Law, and
about that time made the Queen's Sergeant, and at length one of the Justices of
the Common Pleas, and not of the King's Bench as one Will. Dugdale in chronica
serie, at the end of Orig. Jurid.
falsely tells us; which last place he executed for 5 years with great
integrity, equity, and prudence. He was a learned man, and a great lover of
learning and those that professed it; but all the Writings which I have seen of
his that are extant, are only

Reports in the Common Pleas, wherein are many choice Cases, most of them
thoroughly argued by the learned Sergeants, and after argued and resolved by the
grave Judges of those times, with many Cases, wherein the differences in the
Year-books are reconciled and explained. Land. 1656. fol. What else is
published under his Name I know not, nor any more of him, only that he dying
21. December. in fifteen hundred ninety and eight, Peter's Church in Westminster.
Over his grave was soon after erected a noble monument of Alabaster, Marble,
and diverse colored stones, adorned with Arms, and gilt with Gold, with his
Image in scarlet robes lying thereon, which remains to this day. He left behind
him a Son named named Roger, who was a Knight, and Camden, in Britan. in Salop.
for his manifold learning, a right Worthy Son of so Good a Father. This Sir
Roger, who had been a Gent. Com. of Chapter Church, and a great Friend to the
Clergy, by vindicating them when aspersed in open Parliament, 11 Jac. 1. dyed
in a distracted condition, to their great reluctance, 29. May, being Holy
Thursday, in 1617.

MICHAEL MASCHIART, a most excellent Thomas within the City of Salisbury,
educated in Wykeham's School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. 1562.
became Vicar of Writtle in Essex in 1572. being then Bach. of the Civil Law,
and two years after proceeded Doctor of that Faculty, at which time he was not
only esteemed an able Civilian, but also excellent in all kind of Humane
learning. He has written,

Poemata varia. This book I have not yet seen, and therefore know not whether
that be the true title. Nor indeed should I have known that he had written any
thing, had not the learned Camden told me so in his Britannia, wherein are by
him inserted several Verses taken from Maschiart to adorn his discourse of
Clarindon Park in Wiltshire. This learned Doctor dyed at Writtle
beforementioned, in the latter end of the year (about Christmas) of fifteen
hundred ninety and eight, John Lloyd, whom, and his Works, I shall mention
among these Writers under the year 1603.

STEPHEN GOSSON, a Kentish man born, C. Chapter coll. 4. Apr. 1572. aged 16. or
thereabouts, took one degree in Arts four years after, left the University
without completing that degree by Determination, and went to the great City,
where he was noted for his admirable penning of Pastorals, being so excellent
therein, that he was ranked with Sir Ph. Sidney, Tho. Chaloner, Edm. Spencer,
Abrah. France, and Rich. Bernfield, noted Poets of their time. Thence, as he
says, he went to a worshipful Gentleman in the Country to teach his Sons,
where he continued till he showed his great dislike of Plays, having his mind
then quite alienated from them. So that the Gentleman being weary of his
company, Gosson left him, took Orders, and at length became Parson of Great
Wigborow in Essex. He has written and published,

The School of abuse, containing a pleasant invective against Poets, Pipers,
Players, Jesters, and such like Caterpillars of the Commonwealth, etc. Land.
1579. and 1585. in oct. dedicated to Sir Ph. Sidney.

Plays confuted in five actions; proving that they are not to be suffered in a
Christian Commonwealth: By the way, both the cavils of Tho. Lodge, and the
Play of Plays, written in their defense, and other objections of Players
Friends, are truly set down, and directly answered. -- Dedicated to Sir Franc.
Walsingham, but when printed it appears not.

The Trumpet of War, Clar. 1598.
Sermon. at Paul's Cross 7. May 1598. on 2 Chronicles. chapter 20. ver. 20. Land. 1598.
oct. As for the Pastorals, Comedies, Tragedies, or Poetry, (some of which he
has written,) I have not yet seen, either printed, or In Manuscript.

JOHN LYLIE, or Lylly, a Kentish man born, became Magd. coll. in the beginning
of 1569. aged 16. or thereabouts, and was afterward, as I conceive, either one
of the Demies or Clerks of that house; but always averse to the crabbed studies
of Logic and Philosophy. For so it was that his genie being naturally bent to
the pleasant paths of Poetry, (as if Apollo had given to him a wreath of his
own Bays, without snatching or struggling,) did in a manner neglect Accademical
studies, yet not so much but that he took the degrees in Arts, that of Master
being completed 1575. At which time, as he was esteemed in the University a
noted Wit, so afterward was he in the Court of Q. Elizabeth, where he was also
reputed a rare Poet, witty, comical, and facetious. His Works are these.

Gallathea.

Love's Metamorphosis.

Midas.

Endimion, or the man in the Moon.

Mother Bomby.

Maids Metamorphosis,

Sapho and Phao.

Woman in the Moon.

Warning for fair Women.

Alexander and Campaspe.

All which are Comedies, and most of them having been published in the Reign of
Q. Elizabeth, six were reprinted at London in oct. an. 1632. by the care of
Hen. Blount Esquire; afterward a Knight, under the title of Court Comedies, which
before had crowned the author with applause, and the Auditors of them with
pleasure.

Euphues and his England; containing his voyage and adventures, mixed with
sundry pretty discourses of honest love, the description of the Country, the
Court, and the manner of that Isle, etc. Land. 1580. and 82. in two parts, in a
large oct. The first part is dedicated to Edw. Vere E. of Oxon, a noted Poet,
and encourager of learning in his time, and the last to the University of Oxon.
These two parts were published again with corrections and amendments at Land.
1606. and 1636. qu.

Euphues: The Anatomy of Wit, or the delights of Wit in Youth, etc. Land. 1581.
qu. corrected and amended Land. 1606. 1623. and 30. qu. To these books of
Euphues, it is said, that our Nation is indebted for a new English in them,
which the Flower of the Youth thereof learned. All the Ladies then were
Scholars to them and their author, and that Beauty in Court which could not
parley Euphuism, was as little regarded, as those now there that cannot speak
French. Clar. 1598.
What other Books, Comedies, or Trag. our author has written, I cannot find,
nor when he dyed, or where buried, only that he lived till toward the latter
end of Q. Elizabeth, if not beyond, for he was in being in 1597. when the Woman
in the Moon was published. It is said also that he wrote something against
Mart. Marprelate, in defense of Dr. Cooper Bishop of Winton, but what, I cannot
tell, unless it be any of those answers, which I have mentioned in John Penry,
alias M. Marprelate, under the year 1593. Quere.

Grewel in Hampshire, educated in Grammar learning in Wykeham's School near to
Winchester, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1590. took the degrees in
Arts, and traveled for some time beyond the Seas. At his return he studied
Physic, took one degree in that Faculty, and in 1605. left the college, and
settling in the City of Salisbury practiced Physic there many years. He has
translated from Italian into English, Clar. 1598.
A Tract containing the Arts of curious Painting, Graving, and Building. Oxon.
1598. fol. Written originally by Joh. Paul Lomatius. This translation, which
has in the title page the picture of Ric. Haydock, is by him dedicated to Tho.
Bodley Esquire; a favourer of his Muse, as Dr. Joh. Case, and other chief men of
the University then in being were; not only for his learning, but for his great
curiosity in painting and engraving, for which among many he was esteemed
eminent. This is that Rich. Haydock, whom a certain Arthur Wilson in his
History of Great Britain, or of the Reign of K. Jam. I. Land. 1653. p 111.
author reports, that he would practice Physic in the daytime, and Preach in
his sleep in the night, about the beginning of the Reign of K. James 1. The
whole story of which, being too large for this place, I shall refer the Reader
to him, who errs in several particulars of it, especially in that, that when
Haydock had ingeniously confessed the cheat to the King, (who made a discovery
of it,) his Majesty thereupon gave him preferment in the Church. He was not in
Orders, but lived always a Physician of good repute at Salisbury, and retiring
for a time to London, dyed and was buried there, a little before the Grand
Rebellion broke out, as I have been informed by those that knew the Man. The
Reader is now to note that one Ric. Haydock translated from Italian into
English, An ample declaration of the Christian Doctrine. Doway 1604. intw.
written by Card. Rob. Bellarmine. But this person, who was a Doctor of
Divinity, a Romans Catholic, and had spent most of his time beyond the Seas in
the English Seminaries, must not be taken to be the same with the former, who
was a Physician, as some have done.

John Scot of Scots-hall, near to Smeeth in Kent, by his Wife, Daughter of
Reynolde Pimp of Pimps-court Knight, was born in that County, and at about 17
years of age was sent to Oxon, particularly, as it seems, to Heart hall, where
several of his Countrymen and name studied in the latter end of K. Hen. 8. and
in the Reign of Ed. 6. etc. Afterward he retired to his native Country without
the honor of a degree, and settled at Smeeth, where he found great
encouragement in his studies from his kinsman Sir Tho. Scot. About which time
taking to him a Wife, he gave himself up solely to solid reading, to the
perusing of obscure authors that had by the generality of Scholars been
neglected, and at times of leisure to husbandry and gardening, as it may partly
appear from these books following,

A perfect platform of a Hop-garden, and necessary instructions for the making
and maintenance thereof, with notes and rules for reformation of all abuses,
etc. Land. 1576. qu. the 2. edit. as it seems.

The discovery of Witchcraft; wherein the lewd dealing of Witches, and
Witchmongers is notably detected, the knavery of Conjurers, the impiety of
Inchantors, the folly of Southsayers, etc. With many other things are opened,
which have long been hidden, howbeit very necessary to be known. Land. 1584.
qu. in 16 books.

Discourse upon Devils and Spirits -- In this, and the former, both printed
together, it plainly appears that the author was very well versed in many
choice books, and that his search into them was so profound, that nothing
slipped his Pen that might make for his purpose. Further also in the said
Discovery and Discourse, though he holds that Witches are not such that were in
his time, and before, commonly executed for Witches; or that Witches were, or
are not; yet they, which were written for the instruction of all Judges and
Justices of that age, (being the first of that nature that were published in
the Mother tongue,) did for a time make great impressions in the Magistracy and
Clergy, tho afterward condemned by James King of Scots (the same who succeeded
Qu. Elizabeth in the Monarchy of England) in his Preface to Damonology, printed
under his Name at Edinburgh in 1597. qu. and by several others since, among
whom was Rich. Bernard of Batcomb, in his Epist. Ded. before his Guide to Grand
Jurymen, etc. Land. 1627. in oct. What else our author Scot has written, I
cannot yet tell, nor any thing else of him, only but that he dyed in Sept. Oct.
in fifteen hundred ninety and nine, and was buried among his Ancestors in the
Church at Smeeth beforementioned. In the time of the said Reynold Scot and
before, have been conversant among the Muses in Heart hall, the Sackviles of
Sussex, the Colepepers of Kent and Sussex, the Sedlies of Kent, and the Scots
beforementioned, with others of inferior note of the said Counties.

ROBERT TURNER was born at Barnstaple in Devonshire, (to which place, if I
mistake not, his Father came from St. Andrews in Scotland,) and educated for a
time in Exeter coll. But leaving the University without a degree, (wherein he
In Epist. suis, nu. 78. p. 480.
says he spent his time in trifles and toys,) and afterward his Country and
Parents for Religion sake, went first into France, afterward into Italy, and
at length to Rome, where he spent some time in the Liberal Arts in the German
coll. there. Afterward being made Priest he applied himself more severely to
the study of Divinity, and in fine was made Doctor of that Faculty. This person
has several times confessed that he had been Scholar to Edm. Campian the
Jesuit, but whether in St. John's coll. or in that of the English at Rome, is
yet uncertain. Sure it is, that for the great respect he had to his memory, he
published not only several of his Works after his death, but also his Life. At
length, after many travels, and services done for the Cause, he was made
Professor of Eloquence and Ethics in, and afterward Rector of, the University
of Ingolstade in Bavaria, and in short time after one of the Privy Council to
William Duke of that place, but falling into his displeasure, he left him, and
retired for a time to Paris. About an year or two after, he returned into that
Country again, was made Canon of Breslaw in Silesia, and afterward Secretary
for the Latin Tongue to Ferdinando of Gratz, who had an especial esteem for
him, as all others of his persuasion had. His Works are these.

Ingoldstad. 1602. etc. oct.
Commentarii in quaedam S. Scripturae loca. Vita Edm. Campiani. This I have not
yet seen. Vit. and Martyrium Mariae Reg. Scotiae. Orationes Septendecem.
Tractatus Septem. Epistolarum centuriae duae.


Oration and Epistola de vitae and morte D. Martini a Schamberg Episcopi Eustad.
Ingol. 1590.

Funebris oration in Principem Estensem. Antw. 1598. with other things, as one
Job. Pits. in lib. De illustr. Angliae Script. Aet. 16. nu. 1404.
who knew him well tells you, who adds, that he dyed at Gratz. in Istria 28.
Nov. in fifteen hundred ninety and nine, Rob. Turner who (among several things)
wrote A description of the little World, or Body, of Man; which being printed
in oct. an. 1654. must not be taken as written by the former Robert, because
there is 54 years distance between them.

Oxfordshire called Woodstock, educated there in the English, but in the Latin
Tongue partly in New college School, and partly in that at Chapter Church, of both
which places he was successively a Choirister. In 1564. he was elected Scholar
of St. John's coll. and was afterward Fellow, Master of Arts, and the most
noted Disputant and Philosopher that ever before set foot in that college. But
so it was, that being Popishly affected, he left his Fellowship and married,
and with leave from the Chancellor and Scholars of the University, he read
Logic and Philosophy to young men (mostly of the R. C. Religion) in a private
house in St. Mary Magd. Parish, particularly in his latter days in that large
tenement situated on the North side of the Inn called the George; wherein,
having had disputations, declamations, and other exercises, as in colleges and
halls, many eminent men issued thence. He wrote several Treatises for their
use, which afterward he published, as commentaries on Aristotle's Organon,
Ethics, Politics, Economicks, and Physics, which were taken into the hands
also of most of the Juniors of the University, tho since slighted and looked
upon as empty things. As for his knowledge in the Faculty of Medicine, (of
which he became Doctor, 1589. he being made that year Prebendary of
North-Aulton in the Chapter of Sarum) he was much respected, and by his practice
therein and reading to Scholars obtaining a fair Estate, he bestowed much of it
on pious uses, as I have elsewhere told In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1.
p. 309. a. and in lib. 2. p. 303. b. 311. a.
you. He was a man of an innocent, meek, religious, and a studious Life, of a
facete and affable conversation, a lover of Scholars, beloved by them again,
and had in high veneration. His Works are,

Summa veterum interpretum in Vniversam Dialecticam Aristotelis. Land. 1584.
Ox. 1592. and 98. qu.

Speculum moralium quaestionum in Universe. Ethicam Aristot. Ox. 1585. qu.

Sphaera^civitatis sive de politia. Ox. 1588. etc. qu. in eight books. It was
then printed by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University of Oxford; but the said
book undergoing several impressions afterward beyond the Seas, Barnes put up
Reg. Univ. Oxon. L. fol. 246. a.
a Petition to the University in 1590. desiring that every Bachelaur of Arts
that should hereafter determine, should take off one copy of the said book from
his hands, which was granted.

Apoligia Musices tum vocalis quam instrumentalis and mixtae. Ox. 1588. oct. I
have a book in my Library, entitled, The praise of Music; wherein, besides the
Antiquity and Dignity, etc. is declared the sober aend lawful use of the same
in the Congregation and Church of God. Ox. 1586. oct. It was written by an
Oxford Scholar then lately deceased, but what was his Name, I cannot in all my
searches find. 'Twas printed and published by the said Joseph Barnes, who
putting a Dedic. Epist. before it to Sir Walt. Raleigh, with his name
subscribed, he is therefore in several Auction Catalogues said to be the author
of it.

Thesaurus Oeconomiae, seu commentarius in Oeconomica Arist. etc. Ox. 1597. qu.
in two books.

Appendix These. Oeconom. Printed with the former book.

Reflexus speculi moralis, seu comm. in magna moralia Arist. Ox. 1596. oct.

Lapis Philosophicus, seu comm. in octo libros Physicorum Arist. Ox. 1599. qu.

Ancilla Philosophiae, seu Epitome in 8. lib. Arist. Ox. 1599. qu.

MS.
Apologia Academiarum. Rebellionis vindiciae.


What other things he has written or published, it does not yet appear to me,
tho there is no doubt but something in MS. has escaped my sight. At length our
author, after he had attained to about the sixtieth year of his age, surrendered
up his last breathings in his house in Magd. Parish beforementioned, 1599-1600.
23. January in fifteen hundred ninety and nine; whereupon his Body was
solemnly interred in the Chapel of St. John's coll. beforementioned, and had
soon after a comely Monument set over his Grave the inscription on which, you
may read in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 312. b. The said Dr. Case
(whose picture did hang many years after in that house, where he dyed) married
Elizabeth, the Widow of one Dobon the Keeper of Bocardo Prison, 30. Dec. 1574.
whose Daughter Ann Dobson (for Dr. Case had no Children by her) was married to
Barthelm. Warner Doctor of Physic of St. John's coll. 30. Sept. 1583. who
having none but Daughters by her that survived, one was married to Tho. Clayton
Dr. of Physic, and Master of Pemb. coll. another to John Speed, Dr. of the
said Faculty, of St. John's coll. (Son of Joh. Speed the Chronologer,) a third
to Will. Tailor Dr. of Physic of the said coll. and a fourth to Anthony
Clopton D. D. of C. C. coll. and Rector of Childrey in Berks.

GEORGE PEELE was, if I mistake not, a Devonian Broadgates hall, was after some
time, made Student of Chapter Chapter 1573. or thereabouts, where going through the
several forms of Logic and Philosophy, took the degrees in Arts, that of Master
being completed 1579. At which time, as he was esteemed a most noted Poet in
the University, so afterward in the Metropolis, where he knew also what
belonged to the Stage part as well as any there. His Comedies and Tragedies
were often acted with great applause, and did endure reading, with due
commendation, many years after their author's death. Those that I have seen are
only these following.

Land. 1593. qu.
The famous Chronicle of K. Ed. 1. Surnamed Edw. Longshank. Life of Llewellin
Rebel in Wales.


The sinking of Q. Elinor at Charing Cross, and of her rising again at
Potters-Hith, now named Queen-Hith. Land. 1593. qu. This, and a Ballad of the
same subject, are now usually sold by Ballad-singers or Ballad-mongers.

The love of K. David and fair Bethsheba, with the Tragedy of Absalon, etc.
Land. 1599. qu.

Alphonsus Emperor of Germany, Trag. -- Besides these Plays, he has several
Poems extant, as that entit.

A farewell to Sir Joh. Norrys and Sir Fr. Drake. Land. in qu. and some remnants
of Pastoral Poetry extant in a collection intit. Englands Helicon, but such I
have not yet seen, nor his book of Jests or Clinches, which at length was sold
on the stalls of Ballad-mongers. This person was living, Clar. 1599.
in his middle age, in the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, but when, or where he
dyed I cannot tell; for so it is, and always has been, that most Poets dye
poor, and consequently obscurely, and a hard matter it is to trace them to
their Graves.

FABIAN a NIPHO, Son of James a Nipho, was Italy, left his Country for Religion
sake, went to London, where obtaining Letters of recommendation Reg. congr. and
Convoc. Oxon. KK. fol. 24^. a*
from Robert Earl of Leicester, Chanc. of this Univ. dat. 19. Oct. 1581. he
retired to Oxon for relief. So that by virtue of those Letters, wherein the
Members thereof found, that he was a person recommended to them for his great
skill in Physic and Philosophy, they were pleased to confer on him the degree
of Bachelaur of Physic in January following, and permitted him to read a
Shagling Lecture in that Faculty, to gain contributions from the Students
thereof. How long he continued with us, I know not, nor how long he read that
Lecture. Sure it is (if you will believe him) That he having suffered oppression
by the wickedness of certain People in England, (upon what account he tells us
not, unless we suppose that they suspected him to be a Papist, and so dealt
with him accordingly,) he retired to Leyden in Holland; where, (as it farther
appears) after he had made himself to be believed, that he was an honest man,
the States encouraged his Studies, and forthwith he wrote a book, which he
dedicated to them, bearing this title: Ophinus, Clar. 1599.
seu de caelesti animarum progeny divinatio. Lugd. Bat. 1599. qu. There is no
doubt but that he has published other things, but such I have not yet seen;
neither do I yet know to the contrary, but that he made a return again to this
University.

Wilcox, a grave and reverend Divine in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, was
originally of St. Johas coll. but whether ever Fellow thereof, their Register
shows not. His Name stands in the Reg. P. page 235.
Matricula of the University, sub tit. coll. S. Jo. Bapt. in the year 1564. but
I cannot find him Graduated in the public Register, of that time, belonging to
the University. One Tho. Wilcocks a Kentish man, was, as a Member of St. Albans
hall, admitted Master of Arts in Febr. 1589. But this I cannot affirm to be the
same with the former, unless we suppose him to be about 40 years of age when he
took that degree, as many did in those times at that age, after they had been
Parsons or Dignitaries many years. As for Tho. Wilcocks, whom we are farther to
mention, he retired to London, after he had left the University, where he
became a very painful Minister of God's Word, a frequent Writer and Translator,
and was much resorted to, by wavering and dubious Persons, for relief and
settlement of their Consciences. His Writings are,

Exposition on the book of Canticles, or Solomon's Song. Land. 1585. qu.

Exposition on certain Verses of the 8. Chap. of the Romans namely upon Verse. 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Land. 1587. oct.

Short and sound Commentary on the Prove. of Solomon. Land. 1589. qu.

Expos. on the whole book of Psalms, wherein is contained the division and
sense of every Psalm, etc. Land. 1591. qu. All these were reprinted in one fol.
at Land. 1624. by the care of Dr. Jo. Burges, who married the author's
Daughter, and had this general Title put to them, The Works of the Reverend
Divine Mr. Tho. Wilcocks.

Summary and short meditations touching certain points of Christian Religion.
Land. 1579. oct.

Concordance, or Table, containing the principal words, and matters, which are
comprehended in the New Testament. Land. 1579. oct.

Answer to Banister the Libertine. Land. 1581. oct.

Glafs for Gamesters, and namely for such as delight in Cards and Dice, wherein
they may see not only the vanity, but also the vileness of those Plays, plainly
discovered and overthrown by the Word of God. Land. 1581. oct.

Form of preparation to the Lord's Supper. Land. in oct.

On the substance of the Lord's Supper, shortly and soundly set forth, together
with, etc. Land. 1581. oct.

Comfortable Letter for afflicted Consciences, written to a godly man greatly
touched that way. Land. 1584. in tw.

Three large Letters for instruction and comfort of such as are distressed in
Conscience, etc. Land. 1589. oct.

Narration of a fearful Fire at Wooburn in Bedfordsh. Land. 1595. oct.

He also translated into English, (1) A Catechism. Land. 1578. oct. originally
written by Joh. Fountein. (2) Three propositions, the first on the 1. Chap. of
St. Joh. ver. 1. to 5. etc. Land. 1580. written by Jo. Calvin. (3) Treatise of
the Church, wherein the godly may discern the true Church from the Romish, etc.
Land. 1582. oct. written by Bertrand de Loques. (4) Discourse of the true
visible marks of the Cath. Church. Land. in oct. written by Theod. Beza. (5)
Two Sermons on the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Land. 1588. oct. written by
the said Beza; whereunto is added, The substance of the Lord's Supper,
mentioned before. (6) Bertram the Priest concerning the Body and Blood of
Christ, etc. Land. 1582. oct. See more in Will. Hugh under the year 1549. (7)
Meditations on Psalm. 101. Land. 1599. oct. written in French by Phil. Mornay
Lord of Plessis. What else our author has written and translated I know not,
nor any thing of him beside; Clar. 1599.
only that he was living and much in esteem in fifteen hundred ninety and nine.
Two or more of his Surname Reg. Univ. GG. p. 76.
studied in Broadgates hall in the time of K. Ed. 6. whose Christian Names
being not in a possibility to be discovered, I cannot judge farther of them.

RICHARD HOOKER, that rare and admirable Exeter, about the time of Easter, an.
1554. (of which City some of his Name and Family have been Mayors,) was
exhibited to while a Schoolboy by John Jewel. B. of Sarum, became one of the
Clerks of C. C. coll. in 1567. Scholar 24. Dec. in 73. Fellow and Master of
Arts in 77. DeputyProfessor of the Hebrew Language in the University 14. July
1579. entered into Orders, and became a frequent Preacher, married a clownish
silly Woman and withal a mere Xantippe, became Rector of Drayton-Beauchamp in
Bucks. an. 1584. Master of the Temple in the year following, in the place of
Rich. Alvey Bach. of Div. deceased, (who was the first Canon of the fifth stall
in the collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster,) Rector of Boscomb in
Wiltshire, Sub-dean of the Church of Salisbury, and prebendary of Netherhaven
in the same Church, (both which he obtained by the resignation of Dr. Nich.
Balgay, in July 1591.) and at length Rector of Bishops-Bourne near Canterbury,
by the presentation thereunto of the Queen, in 1595. There has been no learned
college in the World, that has yet yielded at one time almost, and from one
County three such Divines as Jewel, Hooker, and Rainolds, of the second of
which hear I pray what the learned In Annal. Reg. Elizabeth sub an. 1599.
Camden says. In this year (meaning 1599. which is false,) dyed too many in
that one Rich. Hooker, born in Devonshire, and bred in C. C. coll. in Oxford, a
Divine very moderate, temperate, and meek, and virtuous even to the best
imitation; and besides very famous for his learned works, as his Books of
Ecclesiastical Policy, set forth in the English, but worthy to speak Latin, do
testify of him, etc. At Boscomb he continued till he had finished four of his
eight proposed books of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Policy, which were entered
into the Register in Stationers hall, 9. March 1592. and afterward came out
with this Title.

The Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity, in four books. Land. 1594. fol. To which he
added a fifth book, (which is larger than the first four,) printed by its self
at Land. 1597. fol. Part of the first four being read by Dr. Tho. Stapleton, in
Latin, to P. Clement 8. who before had heard much in their commendation, he the
said Pope in conclusion said thus, There is no learning that this Man has not
searched into, nothing too hard (...) his Understanding: This man indeed
deserves the Name of an Author. -- His books will get reverence by age, for
there are in them such seeds of Eternity, that if the rest b^ like this, they
shall last till the last Fire shall consume all learning, etc. At the same time
K. James of Scotland (afterward of England) did put an high esteem upon the
said books, and usually said, They were the pictures of a Divine Soul in every
page of Truth and Reason. King Chapter 1. had read them over several times, was
well versed in, and commended, them to be read by the Prince, (afterward K.
Chapter 2.) and his other Children, next to the Bible. The learned Usher Primate of
Ireland, Morton B. of Durham, Hales of Eaton, etc. had the same high opinion of
the author and his Works, and Gauden Bishop of Worcester said, he had been
highly esteemed of all prudent, peaceable, and impartial Readers. But before
the fifth book had been extant two years, was published a Pamphlet intit. A
Christian Letter of certain English Protestants, unfeigned Lovers of the
present state of Religion, authorized and professed in England, unto that
reverend and learned man Mr. Hooker, requiring resolution in certain matters of
Doctrine expressly contained in his five books of Ecclesiastical Polity. --
Printed 1599. in qu. which matters of Doctrine, as they say, seem to overthrow
the foundation of Christian Religion, and of the Church among us. But therein
it does appear, that their ignorant malice has done him great honor; who in
an argument so distasted by them, and coming with a proud confidence to
reprehend, have only carped sillily at some things, neither of moment or
importance, whereof humility and charity would have craved no answer. But these
being willing and desirous to find something to oppose, have only discovered Mr
Hookers great, mature, and grave judgment, and their own small, undigested and
shallow learning. Soon after came out an answer to the said letter, entit. A
just and temperate defense of the 5 books of Ecclesiastical polity, etc.
against an uncharitable letter of certain English protestants, etc. Land. 1603.
qu. written and published by Will. Covel D. D. born in Lancashi^e near the
place where Dr. Chaderton B. of Lincoln received his first breath, bred in
Christ's and Queens coll. in Cambridge, and a writer of other books that came
out soon after. As for the other three books of Ecclesiastical Policy, which
our author Hooker completed before his death, they with the consent of his
unlucky Widow, were seized on in his study soon after his decease, by Will.
Charke a noted Puritan, and another Minister that lived near to Canterbury; who
making the silly Woman believe that they were writings not fit to be seen, did
either burn them in the place, or convey them away secretly: So that the foul
copy being only remaining, with many interlinings, Dr. Joh. Spenser of C. C.
coll. in Oxon. his ancient and entire Friend, got it into his hands, who using
the assistance of Hen. Jackson of the said coll. as an Aman^ensis, and
otherwise, did complete it as much as could be, and kept it by him till his
latter end, with an intent that it should be published, but upon what account
he was hindered I cannot tell. Sure it is, that when he lay on his deathbed, he
bequeathed the said copy, (containing the three last books) fairly transcribed
by the hand of the said H. Jackson, to Dr. Jo. King B. of London. After his
death the copy rested in the hands of his Son Henry (who became B. of
Chichester 1641.) till Dr. Abbot Archb. of Canterbury commanded them out of his
custody, authorizing Dr. Joh. Barcham to require and bring them to him to
Lambeth, which accordingly was done. The said Archbishop esteeming them as
rarities, did put them into the Library there, where remaining till the
decollation of Archb. Laud, were then by the Brethren of the Predominant
Faction, given, Dr. Hen. King in his Letter to Is. Walton, 13. Nov. 1664. set
before Mr. Hookers Life published in 1665. by the said Walton.
with the Library, to that most notorious Villain Hugh Peter's, as a reward for
his remarkable service in those sad times of the Churches confusion. And though
they could hardly fall into a fouler hand, yet there wanted not other
endeavors to corrupt and make them speak that Language for which the Faction
then fought, which was to subject the Sovereign Power to the People. From the
said copy several transcripts were taken, not only, I presume, while it
remained in the said Library, but while it continued in the hands of Peter's,
differing much in words. There was a copy of the sixth and eighth books
published at London in 1648. in qu. and said by the Editor of them to be
collected and compared with five copies, viz. with that in Bodley's Library,
that at Lambeth, that in Bish. Andrew's, that in Archb. Usher's Library, and in
that of the Lord Edw. Conway at Ragley; but whether the publisher may be
believed I know not. Sure I am that the said three last books, which are said
to be true and genuine, (but from whence obtained I cannot tell,) were
published by Dr. Joh. Gauden under this title.

The Works of Mr. Rich. Hooker (that learned, godly, judicious, and eloquent
Divine) vindicating the Church of England as truly Christian and duly reformed,
in eight books of Ecclesiastical Polity, now completed, as with the sixth and
eighth, so with the seventh, etc. out of his own MSS. never before published,
with an account of his holy Life and happy Death. Land. 1662. fol. But whether
the said MSS. were of his own handwriting, we have good reason to question, as
also the greater part of his Life, which he the said Gauden has falsely
written; who with great confidence has used diverse arguments to satisfy the
World, that the beforementioned three books were penned by Mr. Hooker,
notwithstanding those poisonous assertions against the Regal Power, which are
to be found in them. Now although this is generally confessed, that the said three
books are not genuine, yet some Nonconformists, and among these chiefly Mr.
Rich. Baxter, do Fascicul. Literarum, etc. by Jo. Hinkley. Land. 1680. in oct.
p. 107.
urge seemingly probable reasons to induce a belief that these posthumous
books, as published by Dr. Gauden, are to be accounted the true and authentic
Writings of Mr. Hooker; yet this must be known, that the reason why the said
Mr. Baxter contends so eagerly for their genuineness, is because the said three
books, but more especially the eighth, do contain certain popular and false
Principles, concerning the true Nature of the Legislative Power, the Original
of Government, and the Office of Kings it self, as derived from the People. And
on this account it is, that he seems to take a more than ordinary delight in so
often telling the World, that the Abettors of these seditious positions have so
great a Chruch-man, Ib. in Fasc. p. 102, 103, 104, 105, 106. and in the Second
part of the Nonconformists plea for peace, etc. Land. 1680. in qu. p. 54. 64.
and elsewhere in the said Book.
as our author was justly esteemed, on their side. It was these and such like
Prelatist's principles as he Ib. p. 100.
says (meaning, I guess, Bish. Jewel, but chiefly Bish. Bilson in his book of
Christian Subjection, etc. which he frequently cites as defending the
resistance of Superiors in some cases, and such like pernicious tenets, and
whom he usually joins with Mr. Hooker in quotations of Nonconsormists plea for
peace. Land. 1679. in oct. in the 4. page of the Pref. and in 124 of the book.
See Fascit. Liter. ut sup. p. 100, 101, 102. and in the Apol. for
Nonconformists Ministry, etc. Land. 1681. qu. p. 146.
this kind) that led him to what he did, and wrote in the book of Holy
Commonwealth, which he has retracted. And that he may charge these destructive
Assertions home on our author, he In his Pref. to the 4. part of his book
called Christian Directory, or a sum of practical Theology. Which 4. part is
by him intit. Christian Politics. Land. 1673. fol.
says, if any do causlesly question whether the eighth imperfect book be in
those dangerous passages abovementioned his own, let them remember that the
sum of them is in his first book, which is old, and highly honored by the
Prelatists: And after all this, to show himself an Enemy to the abovenamed
Principles, he examines and confutes In the fourth part of Christian Directory,
chap. 3.
the first and eighth books so far, as they make for popularity, (with some
strictures intermixed on Bishop Bilson's false Notes of subjection,) whereby he
makes but a scanty satisfaction for the malignant influence those many
traitorous opinions, with which his Political Aphorisms are fraught, have had
on the minds of many giddy People, toward the withdrawing them from yielding
cheerful obedience to their lawful Superiors; and this, notwithstanding he
has sometime since, called this piece in. The eighth book is commonly supposed
to have been first published, together with the sixth and seventh, by Bish.
Gauden, yet Mr. Baxter In Nonconformists plea for peace, p. 124.
affirms that the said eighth book was in print long before that time; which is
true, for the sixth and eighth were printed at Land. 1648. in qu. nay all the
eight books, with certain Tractates and Sermons, together with the author's
Life, were published in two vol. in fol. 1617. As for the other Books and
Sermons, that our author Hooker has written, are these following.

Answer to a supplication preferred by Mr. Walt. Travers to the H. H. Lords of
the Privy Council. Oxon. 1612. qu.

Causes of contention concerning Church Government. Oxon. 1641. qu.

As for his Sermons they are these, (1) Discourse of Justification, Works, and
how the foundation of Faith is overthrown, on Abak. 1. 4. Oxon. 1612. qu. (2)
Of the Nature of Pride, on Abak. 2. 4. Oxon. 1612. qu. (3) Remedy against
Sorrow and Fear: Fun. Sermon on Joh. 14. 27. Ox. 1612. qu. (4) Of the certainty
and perpetuity of Faith in the Elect, on Abak. 1. 4. (5) Two Sermons upon part
of St. Jude's Epistle, viz. ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Oxon. 1614. qu. All which
Sermons (with Wickliffs Wicket) were published by Henry Jackson Fellow of C. C.
coll. reprinted at London (the Wicket excepted) an. 1622. fol. at the end of
the five books of Ecclesiastical Policy, etc. and again at the end of the eight
books, Land. 1682. fol. (6) Sermon. on Matthew. 7. 7. Found in the study of Dr.
Andrews Bishop of Winchester, and published by Isaac Walton, at the end of Dr.
Saunderson's Life. Land. 1678. oct. What other things our most renowned author
Hooker has extant, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that paying his
last debt to Nature on the second of Nov. Schismaticorum Malleus,) was buried
in the Chancel of the Church of Bishops-Bourne in Kent beforementioned. Over
his Grave was, 35 years after, a Monument erected by Will. Cowper Esquire; with the
Statua of Bust of the Defunct to the middle part of his Body^ From which Statua
was taken the picture of him, set before his Life, written by the said Isaac
Walton, of whom by the way I desire the Reader to know, that he was born in the
ancient Borough of Stafford, in Aug. 1593. that he was by Trade a Sempster in
Chancery Lane in London, where continuing till about 1643. (at which time he
found it dangerous for honest men to be there,) he left that City, and lived
sometimes at Stafford, and elsewhere, but mostly in the Families of the eminent
Clergymen of England, of whom he was much beloved. He has written the lives
of Dr. Joh. Done, Sir Hen. Wotton, Mr. Rich. Hooker, Mr. George Herbert, and
of Dr. Rob. Sanderson sometimes B. of Lincoln: All which are well done,
considering the education of the author; as also The complete Angler, or the
contemplative Man's recreation, etc. He ended his days (in the great Frost) at
Winchester, in the house of Dr. Will. Hawkins, Pre^endary of the Church there,
(who had married his Daughter,) on the 15. Dec. 1683. and was buried in the
Cath. Chapter at that place.

Tho. Cranmer, Son of Edm. Cranmer Archdeacon of Canterbury, (who died in the
beginning of 1571.) Brother to Tho. Archb. of that place, was born in Kent,
admitted Scholar of C. Chapter Coll. 10. Jan. 1577. aged 13. or thereabouts, and
was then, or soon after, put under the tuition of the famous Mr. Rich. Hooker,
who found him afterward very useful to him when he was compiling the books of
Ecclesiastical Policy. In 1583. he was admitted Probationer-Fellow of that
house, and six years after was licensed to proceed in Arts. About which time he
betook himself to the service of Will. Davison Esquire; one of the Secretaries of
State: After whose removal he went in place of Secretary with Sir Hen.
Killegrew in his Embassage into France, and after his death he accompanied that
worthy and learned Gent. Sir Edwyn Sandys in his travels into France, Germany,
Italy, and other parts, for the space of three years. After his return he was
sought out by the most Noble Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy, with whom he went
into Ireland in the quality of Secretary, where he remained until his
unfortunate Death. He has written,

Letter to Mr. Richard Hooker concerning the new Church discipline, Feb. 1598.
Land. 1641. 42. qu. Remitted into the Life of R. Hooker, written by Is. Walton.
-- Land. 1670. p. 123. Our author Cranmer has written other things, as I have
heard Mr. Walton say, but are kept private to the great prejudice of the
public. He was slain in a Battle near Carlingford in Ireland, between the
English and the Rebels there, on the 13. of Nov. in sixteen hundred, In A^^al.
Reg. Elizab. sub an. 1600.
Camden, speaking of the said Battle, thus -- Cecidit tamen ex Anglis, praeter
alios, Cranmerus Prorege ab Epistolis, vir eruditissimus, and ipsi eo nomine
long charissimus. I find another George Cranmer, who was born at Wingham in
Kent, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1559. and died in 1563. but he
has written nothing.

John Jewel, was born within the City of Gloucester, trained up in Wykeham's
School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1549. took the degrees in
Arts, that of Master being completed in 1555. and about that time Sacred
Orders. In 1560. he left his coll. (wherein he had always been accounted an
excellent Disputant,) his Friends, and native Country, and went to Lovaine,
where, and at Antwerp, he published certain books against B. Jewel, being then
a candidate of the Fac. of Theology. Afterward he went to Rome, and in 1568.
he was, with his Brother, or near Kinsman, admitted into the Society of Jesus.
Whereupon, because a way had not then been opened for the Jesuits into England,
he went into Germany to perform offices pertaining to his Order. But being
initiated in the Priesthood before his ingress into the Society, and having
performed the office of Confessor in the place of one Hall, was sent to
Auspurge, and at length became Rector of the coll. of Jesuits at Ingolstadt. He
has written,

Confutation of a Sermon pronounced by Mr. Jewel at Paul's Cross. Antw. 1564.

Copy of a challenge taken out of the confutation of Mr. Jewels Sermon. Antw.
1565. oct.

Reply against an answer (falsely intit.) A defense of the Truth. Antw. 1565.
oct.

Brief view of the false wares packed up in the nameless Apolo^y of the Church
of England. Lov. 1567. oct.

Treatise entit. Beware of Mr. Jewel. Antw. 1566. oct. This Jo. Rastell, who
parhaps has written other things; died in a good old age at Ingolstadt about
the year sixteen hundred, Jo. Pits. in lib. De ^llustr Ang^. Script. A^t. 16.
nu. 101^.
author to Will. Rastell a Judge, but false. See more under the year 1565.
where you will justly find what belongs to him.

HENRY PRICE was born in London, became John's coll. in 1584. aged 18.
afterward Fellow, M. of A. and Chaplain to Sir Hen. Lea of Oxfordshire. At
length taking the degree of Bac. of Div. became Rector of Fleetmarston in
Bucks, a noted Preacher, and an elegant Lat. Poet. His Works are,

Epicedium in obitum Henrici Comitis Derbeiensis. Oxon. 1593. qu.

The Eagles flight; Sermon. at Paul's Cross, on Luke 17. 37. Land. 1599. oct. He
died at Woodstock in Oxfordshire, 2. Feb. 1600-1.
in sixteen hundred, aged 34. or thereabouts, and was buried in St. John's
coll. Chapel. Over his Grave was a Mon. soon after erected, at the charge of
the President and Society, who were his Heirs; a copy of the inscription on
which you may read in Hist. and Antiq. Universe. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 312. He left
behind him several Sermons, which were esteemed by some, worthy of the Press,
one of which I have In bib. D. Tho. Barlow, MS.
seen, written on Romans 7. 24. Preached an. 1594.

THOMAS WILLIAMS, a Welsh-man born, Oxonians, but whether in Brasenose coll.
where one of both his Names took the degree of Master of Arts in 1573. I cannot
tell. Afterward he entered on the Physic line, but took no degree in that
Faculty, retired into his Country and practiced there. This person who was also
a curious Critic in his mother tongue, wrote,

Dictionarium Latino-Britannicum. A work of many years labor; which being left
imperfect in some places, was reviewed and corrected by Dr. Jo. Davies, and by
him published in 1632. who tells us that he said Williams was much encouraged
in his studies by the Father of Sir RichWynne Knight and Baronet, to whom he
did intend to dedicate, had he lived to have finished, it. He tells us also
that the said Th. Williams was living and in great renown in his own Country in
sixteen hundred, Clar. 1600.
but when he died he adds not. I find another Tho. Williams who was elected
Probat. Fellow of Merton coll. in 1562. studied Physic several years, took the
degree of Bach. of that Faculty in 1575. and died in his coll. 1579. being then
accounted a learned Physician. But this person was no author, and whether a
Welsh-man, I cannot yet find. A third Tho. Williams was of Broadgates hall, and
as the eldest Son of an Esquire; took the degree of Bach. of Arts, in the beginning
of July in 1592. besides several others of a later date, and another before,
who wrote Rules of the Italian Grammar. Land. 1567. etc.

HENRY CUFF a most excellent Grecian, is said by Will. Sanderson in The lives
of Mary Q. of Scots and K. Jam. Printed 1656. p. 238.
of no great note, to be base by Birth; meaning, I presume, that his birth was
mean. If so, then let it be known from the In the Visitation Book of
Sommersetshire, made 1573.
Records in the Coll. of Arms, that his birth was gentile in Sommersetshire,
that his Predecessors for 4 Generations before him lived at Creech near to
Taunton in the said County in good esteem, and that his Ancestor Joh. Cuff, who
lived sometimes at Ilchester, and sometimes at Creech, where he had good
inheritances, had a Coat of Arms granted to him and his posterity by Christop.
Barker Garter King of Arms, 36. Hen. 8. and so consequently was made a
Gentleman. At 26 years of age, in 1586. he the said Hen. Cuff was chosen Prob.
Fellow of Merton coll. (having a little before been forced to resign his
Fellowship of Trin. coll. for speaking certain matters (tho true) that
redounded to the great discredit of the Founder Sir Tho. Pope,) and two years
after, was not only made Master-Fellow, but also M. of A. In which time he
occasionally showed himself a rare Grecian, Philosopher, and Disputant.
Afterward he was Greek Professor, and Proctor of the University, and at length
Secretary to that unfortunate Count Robert Earl of Essex. As he was a person of
good parts, so was he ambitious withal, and pretended to be well seen in the
rules of Policy, believed by many that he was so, (because smothered under the
habit of a Scholar,) especially by his great Patron, which brought him the
sooner to the block. He wrote in the year 1600,

The differences of the ages of man's life. Land. 1607. and 1633. in oct.

The original, causes, progress, and end of Man's life. -- Printed with the
former book, and other things which he left fit for the Press, but never
published. Afterward he being found guilty of Treason for conspiring with the
said Rob. E. of Essex, to seize on the Queen and change the Government, he was
hanged at Tyburn near London, 30. March in sixteen hundred and one: Jo. Owen.
in lib. 1. Epigr. ad Hen. Principem Cambr. nu. 107.
one that knew him well. Doctus eras Graece, felixque tibi fuit Alpha?
At fuit infelix Omega, Cuffe, tuum.


The execution of which person, and his unhappy end, is brought in by a certain
author Fr. Osborn in his first part of Advice to a Son. chap. 4.
as a very proper and suitable instance to verify the great reasonableness of
one of his advices to his Son, thus, -- Mingle not your interest with a great
Man's, made desperate by debt, or Court-injuries, whose breaking out prove
fatal to their wisest followers and friends: averred in the last Earl of Essex
but one, where Gelly Merick, Son of Dr. Roll. Merick sometimes Bish. of Bangor,
which Gelly was Knighted by the said E. of Essex at the sacking of Cadiz, an.
1596.
Merick his Steward, and Cuff his Secretary, tho of excellent parts, were both
hanged. For such unconcocted Rebellions turn seldom to the hurt of any, but the
parties that promote them; being commonly guided by the directions of their
Enemies, as this was by Sir Rob. Cecil, afterward Earl of Salisbury.
Cecil, whose creatures persuaded Essex to this inconsiderate attempt, etc.
that is, to seize the Queen and change the Government. Thus far Francis Osborn
here quoted, of whom and his Works the Reader may please by the way (if not too
tedious) to know these things, That he was younger Brother to Sir. Pet. Osborn,
and both the Sons of Sir John Osborn of Chicksand near Shefford in
Bedfordshire; which Sir John and his Father did both enjoy a quiet, happy, and
plentiful Fortune under Q. Elizabeth: That he was bred mostly at home, not so
much as in a Free School or University, being altogether void of such kind of
Faculties that Universities afford. At ripe years he frequented the Court,
became a Servant in the Pembrochian Family, and at length Master of the Horse
to that most Noble Count William Earl of Pembroke. In 1641. he ran with the
times, having been Puritannically educated, had public employments then, and
under Oliver, conferred upon him; and in his last days lived in Oxon purposely
to Print certain books of his compostion that then laid by him, and to have an
eye on his Son John, whom he got by the favor of the Parliamentarian Visitors,
to be Fellow of Allsouls coll. 1648. Those things of his, which I have seen
extant, are these, (1) A seasonable expostulation with the Netherlands,
declaring their ingratitude to, and the necessity with their agreement with,
the Commonwealth of England. Ox. 1652. qu. in two sh. and half. (2) Persuasive
to mutual compliance under the present Government. Ox. 1652. qu. in two sh. (3)
Plea for a Free State compared with Monarchy. -- Printed with the former, in 4
sh. qu. (4) The private Christians non ultra; or, a plea for the Lay-man's
interpreting the Scriptures. Ox. 1656. in 3 sh. and half, in qu. There is no
name to it, only strongly reported to be Fr. Osborn's. (5) Advice to a Son, in
two parts. The first was printed at Ox. in oct. an. 1656. and within 2 years
after were five more impressions of it. The second part was printed at Ox.
1658. oct. but being not so well liked as the first, I cannot justly say
whether it had a second impression. Both, especially the first, being greedily
bought up, and admired in Oxon, especially by young Scholars, it was then noted
among the Godly Ministers, that they did instill principles of Atheism into
them. Whereupon a public complaint being put up against the said books to the
then Vicechanc. Dr. Jo. Conant, there was a proposal made to have them
publicly burnt. But it taking no effect, it was ordered 27. July 1658. that no
booksellers, or any other persons should sell the books; which afterward made
them sell the better. (6) Political reflections upon the Government of the
Turks; to which are added in the same book or vol. A discourse upon Nich.
Machiavell. -- Observations upon the K. of Sweden's descent into Germany. --
Discourse upon Piso and Vindex, who both conspired the death of Nero. -- The
greatness and corruption of the Court of Rome. -- Discourse upon the election
of P. Leo XI. -- Political occasions of the defection from the Church of Rome.
-- Discourse in vindication of Mart. Luther. All these were printed at Ox. in
oct. at least 3 times. (7) Traditional Memoires on the Reign of Q. Eliz. Land.
1658. oct. (8) Trad. Mem. on the Reign of K. James. Land. 1658. oct. (9)
Miscellany of sundry Essays, Paradoxes, and Problematical Discourses, Letters,
and Characters. Land. 1659. oct. (10) Deductions from the History of the Earl
of Essex, who was executed for Treason under the Reign of Q. Eliz. Land. 1659.
oct. These are all that I have seen, and whether he has any others published,
I cannot say. After his death appeared in public a book intit. A modest plea
for an equal Commonwealth against Monarchy, etc. with other things added to it,
as, An Apology for younger Brothers, and A lift at Tithes. All printed twice in
1659. in qu. and oct. These three Treatises, tho they were published by another
person as his, yet some Scholars, more envious than prudent, did not stick to
say, that the publisher found them among the papers of Fr. Osborn (with whom he
had intimate acquaintance) after his death, and disguising the Language, or
making some alterations in, published, them as his own. However all that knew
him well and were intimate with him, (as the writer of these matters was,) knew
him able to write such a book as that was. As for Fr. Osborn he died at
Nether-worton near to Dedington in Oxfordshire, in the house of Will. Draper
Esquire (an Oliverian Colonel) whose Sister he had married, on the eleventh of Feb.
1658-9. aged 70. or thereabouts, and was buried in the Church there. Over his
Grave is a Monument, with an inscription, but the contents I know not yet.

RICHARD LATEWAR, a Londoner born, Merchant-Taylors School, became Scholar of
St. John's coll. 1580. and eight years after M. of Arts, and a noted Preacher.
In 1593. he was elected one of the Proctors of the University, being about that
time Rector of Hopton in Suffolk. Afterward he became Rector of Finchley in
Middlesex, D. of D. and at length Chaplain to the illustrious Hero, Charles
Lord Mountjoy, Lieutenant of Ireland. He was a most ingenious Latin Poet, as
his Epigrams, and copies of Verses, occasionally printed in books published in
his lifetime, do show. He composed,

Carmen (...) Coll. S. John Bapt. Which was restored and augmented by Rich.
Andrews, M. D. and Fellow of the said coll.

Conc. Lat. ad Academicos Oxon. 1594. It was Preached when he was admitted Bac.
of Div. but upon what subject, or when printed, I know not, for I have not yet
seen it. What other things of his are published I cannot find; neither is there
any need to be said more of him, than what the learned In Annal. Reg. Elizab.
sub an. 1600.
Camden has delivered of the overthrow of the Rebels in Ireland, near to
Carlingford, given by the L. Mountjoy beforementioned, thus, On the English
side (says he) there were slain Latewar D. of Div. and Chaplain to the Deputy,
and Cranmer his Secretary, both most learned men, and for that much beloved of
him, besides some others also, etc. But the time that he appoints for his death
is false, for whereas he says it was in 1600. it was not till the year
following, being then buried in the Church at Armagh. John's coll. Chapel, with
a handsome inscription thereon; (a copy of which you may see In Hist. and Anti^
Univers. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 313. a.
elsewhere.) But whereas it is said, that he died on the 27. July 1601. aged
41. is false, as it seems; for Fines Morison in his book, intit. The Rebellion
of Hugh Earl of Tyrone in Ireland. Land. 1617. lib. ^ cap. 1. an. 1601.
one that was upon the place when he received his deaths wound, tells us, that
he was shot at Benburb, July 16. and died the day following, an. 1601. See more
in the Affaniae of a celebrated Lat. Car. Fitz-geofridus ex aul. Lat. Port.
Poet of his time, named Fitz-Geffry, wherein, among the Cenotaphs, at the end,
you will find one upon this Latewar, which without flattery, was justly written.

HUGH LLOYD, a most admired Grammarian Llynn in Caernarvonshire, educated in
Wykeham's School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1564. promoted to
the Chancellourship of Rochester in 1578. being then Bach. of the Civil Law.
Afterward he was made chief Master of Wykeham's School near Winchester
beforementioned, was admitted Doctor of his Faculty in 1588. being then noted
to be not only eminent in Divinity and the Civil Law, but also for his
admirable sufficiencies in the Greek and Lat. tongues. He has written several
books, but all that I have seen are only these following, viz.

Phrases Elegantiores ex Caesaris Commentariis, Cicerone aliisque, in usum
Scholae Winton. Oxon. 1654. in a large oct.

Dictata. Printed with the former. Both which were published by John Lamphire
M. of A. sometimes Fellow of New coll. afterward Dr. of Physic, History
Professor and Principal of Heart hall. The said Dr. Lloyd departed this mortal
life, October. in sixteen hundred and one, and was buried in New coll. outer
Chapel. See his Epitaph in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 153. He had
a Brother named Joh. Lloyd who was Fellow of Alls. coll. Doctor of the Civil
Law, and Judge of the Admiralty; but whether he was of any kin to Hugh Lloyd D.
D. of Barton-Segrave in Northamptonshire, who succeeded Dr. Will. Swaddon in
the Archdeaconry of Worcester, 18. Aug. 1623. and died in July 1629. I know not.

Grant the most noted Latinist and Grecian of his time, was educated in
Grammar learning in the coll. School at Westminster, spent several years in the
study of Logic and Philosophy, either in Chapter Chapter or Broadgates hall, took the
degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed in 1572. and about that time
became the learned Master of the said School; whence, by his sedulous
endeavors, many persons went away well grounded in learning, who were
afterward eminent in Church and State. In 1577. he was made Canon or
Prebendary of the twelfth and last Stall in the collegiate Chapter at Westminster,
in the place of Tho. Wats D. D. (who had succeeded in that Stall Gabr. Goodman
1561. in which year the said Goodman was made Dean,) and about that time being
admitted Bach. of Div. of Cambridge, was incorporated in that degree with us,
in the year 1579. He was afterward Doctor of that Faculty, but not of this
University, was esteemed a most noted Latin Poet, as several of his copies of
verses, printed in various books, show, and was well skilled in all kind of
humane literature. He has written,

Grecae linguae specilegium, etc. Land. 1575. qu. Contracted by his learned
Usher Will. Camden. He also collected, viewed, and received and corrected all
Rog. Aschams Epistles and Poetry, and at the end added of his ( Graunts)
composition,

Oration de vita and obitu Rogeri Aschami, ac dictionis Elegantio, cum
adhortatione ad Adolescentulos. Land. 1577. oct. What else he has published I
know not, nor any thing material of him besides, only (1) That he resigning his
Mastership of Westminster. School about the Month of Feb. 1592. was succeeded therein
by Will. Camden. (2) That dying in Sept. October. in sixteen hundred and one, was
buried in St. Peter's Church at Westminster; whereupon his Canonry was bestowed
on Will. Barlow D. D. Now I am got into the Name of Grant, I cannot without
the guilt of concealment, but to let you know some things of the most ingenious
person (considering his education and employment) that his time has produced.
His name is Joh. Grant, born at the sign of the Seven Stars in Birchin-lane,
within the Parish of St. Michael-Cornhil in London, between 7 and 8 of the
clock in the morn. of the 24. of Apr. 1620. (Son of Hen. Grant a Hampshire
man,) educated while a boy in English learning, bound an Apprentice to a
Haberdasher of small wares, which Trade he mostly followed, tho free of the
Drapers company. Afterward he went through all the Offices of the City, as far
as a Common-Council-man, bearing that Office two years. He was also Captain of
the Trained-band several years, and Major of it two or three, and then laid
down his Trade, and all public Employments upon account of Religion. For tho
he was Puritannically bred, and had several years taken Sermon notes, by his
most dextrous and incomparable faculty in short-writing, and afterward did
profess himself for some time a Socinian, yet in his latter days he turned Romans
Catholic; in which Persuasion he zealously lived, for some time, and died. He
has written, (1) Natural and Political Observations, made upon the Bills of
Mortality, etc. Land. 1661. and 62. in qu. afterward in oct. with several
additions; done upon certain hints and advice of Sir Will. Petty. (2)
Observations on the advance of Excise. And (3) something about Religion, but
these two are not yet printed. He died on the 18. of April (being Easter-Even)
1674. and was buried four days after in St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, in
the body thereof, under the Pews, toward the Gallery on the North side,
London. At which time his body was attended with a great number of ingenious
persons; and among others (with tears) was that great Vertuoso Sir Will. Petty
beforementioned. The said Joh. Grant was an ingenious and studious Person,
generally beloved, was a faithful Friend, a great Peacemaker, and one that had
often been chosen for his prudence and justness an Arbitrator: But above all
his excellent working head was much commended, and the rather for this reason,
that it was for the public good of learning, which is very rare in a Trader or
Mechanic.

JOHN HOOKER alias Vowell, sometimes written Vowell alias Hooker, was born
within the City of Exeter, educated in Grammar and Logic for a time in this
University, either in Exeter, or C. C. coll. but whether he took a degree, our
Registers, which are in the time of K. Ed. 6. very imperfect, show not.
Afterward retiring to his Native place, he became the first Chamberlain
thereof, an. 1554. about which time applying himself to the study of Astronomy,
and English History, became noted in his time for them, especially after he had
published his labors for the benefit of Posterity in these books following.

Order and usage of keeping the Parliaments in England. Land. 1572. qu.

The Events of Comets, or blazing Stars, made upon the sight of the Comet
Pagonia, which appeared in the month of Nov. and Dec. 1577. Land. in oct.

An addition to the Chronicles of Ireland from 1546. where they ended, to the
year 1568. Land. 1587. fol. This addition is in the second vol. of the
Chronicles, first collected and published by Raphael Holinshed, Will. Harrison
and others. The said Chronicles of Ireland did begin, an. 1186. about which
time Giraldus Cambrensis concluded his Irish History, and were continued by
several hands to the said year 1546.

A Catalogue or History of the Bishops of Exeter, from Werestan ( as he calls
him) to John Woolton, an. 1579. -- Remitted into the third vol. of Ra.
Holinshed's Chronicles, Land. 1587. fol. page 1300. He also translated into
English the Irish History of Giraldus beforementioned, and put Scholias to the
same; which being by him dedicated to Sir Walt. Raleigh with a large Epistle,
were remitted into the second vol. of the Chronicles of Ra. Holinshed, Will.
Harrison and others. Land. 1587. fol. He also took great pains in augmenting
and continuing to the year 1586. the said first and second vol. of Chronicles,
which were also printed at London 1587. fol. The first impression of the said
Chronicles were made at Land. 1577. in fol. by the said R. Holinshed, descended
from those of his name that lived at Boseley in Cheshire, educated in one of
the Universities, was a Minister of God's Word, as I have heard, and died at
Bramcote in Warwickshire, toward the latter end of 1580. Whereupon all or most
of his notes, collections, books, and MSS. came into the hands of Thom. Burdet
Esquire; an inhabitant, if not Lord, of the said Town of Bramcote. As for our
author John Hooker, he lived to a fair age, and dying in Nov. Exeter. He gave
up his Chamberlains place about a quarter of a year before he died, and was
succeeded therein by Will. Tickell. There has been two of the Hookers that
have been Mayors of Exeter, viz. Joh. Hooker in 1490. and Rob. Hooker in 1529.
from one, or both, of which, I presume, our author Joh. Hooker was descended,
as also Rich. Hooker the eminent author of Eccles. Policy.

CROMWELL LEA a younger Son of Sir Anth. Lea or Lee of Burston in Bucks.
Knight, (by his Wife the Daughter of Sir Thomas Wyat Knight,) descended from
the Lees of Quarendon in the said County, was educated in all inferior Arts in
this University, and afterward traveling and spending several years in Italy,
he attained to so great knowledge in the common Language of that Country, that
at his return he wrote,

A Dictionary in Italian and English. -- Which tho it reaches but to the Word
Tralingnato, and so consequently wants the following Letters to the end of
the Alphabet, yet it is as big as a Church-Bible. This book the author giving
in MS. to the Library of St. John's coll. in this University, (of which coll. he
had been sometimes a Commoner, about its first foundation,) the Society did so
highly value it, that one of them named Tho. Poticarie, M. of A. and Bach. of
the Civil Law, did transcribe it in a very fair character. Which being so done,
it was reposed in their Library as a choice thing, and is at this day among the
printed books, B. 31. This Crom. Lea, who had married Mary, the Relict of Rich.
Taverner, mentioned under the year 1575. died at his house in Halywell, in the
North Suburb of Oxon, about the beginning of Winter in sixteen hundred and one,
Oxford Scholar, Here lies old Cromwell,
Who, living, loved the Bum well.
When he died he gave nothing to the poor,
But half to his Bastards, and half to his Whore.


Charldon a Devonian born, became a Sojourner of Exeter coll. in 1562. or
thereabouts, made Probationer thereof, 3. March 1564. perpetual Fellow in
October. two years after, entered into Holy Orders in Aug. 1567. being then Bach.
of Arts, and resigned his Fellowship on the 6. Apr. in the year after. About
that time being beneficed in his own Country, particularly within the City of
Exeter, he proceeded soon after in Arts, became a noted Preacher, and
wonderfully followed for his edifying Sermons. In 1581. he was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences, (or the Epistles of St. Paul, as it was then among
the Puritans styled,) proceeded in Divinity five years after, and in 1596. in
May, he was consecrated Bishop of Down and Connor, in the Church of St. Patrick
at Dublin in Ireland. All that are extant of his writing, are only,

Several Sermons, Preached in the Churches of St. Peter in Exeter, St. Mary's
in Oxon, and at S. Pauls-Cross in the City of Land. viz. (1) Sermon of the
World, on Luke 21. 25. Land. 1580. oct. (2) Sermon. at S. Mar. in Ox. on Joh. 9.
1, 2, 3. Ox. 1586. oct. (3) Sermon. at S. Mar. Ox. 11. Dec. 1586. on Joh. 9. 4,
5, 6, 7. Land. 1587. oct. (4) Sermon. at Paulscross 29. May 1586. on Matthew. 6.
19, 20, 21. Land. 1586. oct. (5) Fun. Sermon. on 1 These. 4. from 13. to 18.
verse. Ox. 1586. oct. He has another Sermon extant on Isay 1. ver. 1, 2. Land.
1595. but this, and others, which he has printed, as I conceive, I have not
yet seen nor do I know any thing of him besides, save only that he died in
Ireland, in sixteen hundred and one; Elizabeth.

John Nowell of Great Meerley in Lancashire, was born in that County in 1511.
and at 13 years of age became a Commoner of Brasmose college, where profiting
much in Grammar, Logic, and Philosophy, took the degree of Bach. of Arts in
1536. He was afterward Fellow of that house, Master of Arts, and grew very
famous for Religion and Learning. In the Reign of Ed. 6. and perhaps before, he
taught School at Westminster, where he very zealously trained the Youth up in
Protestant principles; but when Q. Mary began to Reign, he, among other
Divines, much averse to the R. Cath. Religion, did leave the Kingdom. for
Conscience sake, and lived, as opportunity served, in Germany. Upon the coming
of Q. Elizabeth to the Crown, he returned, and was made the first Canon of the
seventh Stall in the collegiate Church of St. Peter in Westminster, an. 1560.
and soon after about the beginning of the year 1561. he was made Dean of St.
Paul's Cathedral in the place of Will. May, L. L. D. Master of Trin. coll. in
Cambr. (the same, who in 1549. had a hand in compiling the first Edition of the
Common Prayer, and in correcting the the third Edit. in 1559.) So that Nowell,
being settled in the Deanery of Paul's, resigned Westminster, and afterward
became a frequent and painful Preacher, and a zealous writer against certain
English Catholics that had fled their Country upon account of Religion. For 30
years together he Preached the first and last Sermons in the time of Lent
before the Queen, wherein he dealt plainly and faithfully with her, without
dislike. In 1594. Apr. 28. he was installed Canon of Windsor, in the place of
Rich. Reve Bach. of Div. deceased, in the year after, Sept. 6. he was elected
Principal of Brasnose coll. and in oct. following he was actually created D. of
Divinity, with allowance of Seniority over all the Doctors then in the
University, not only in regard had to his age, but Dignity in the Church. He
was, in the time he lived, a learned Man, charitable to the poor, especially if
they had any thing of a Scholar in them, and a great comforter of afflicted
Consciences. His Works are,

A reproof of a book intit. A proof of certain Articles in Religion, denied by
Master Jewel, set forth by Tho. Dorman Bach. of Div. Land. 1565. qu.

Reproof of Mr. Dormans proof continued, with a defense of the chief authority
of Princes, as well in causes Ecclesiastical, as Civil, within their Dominions,
by Mr. Dorman maliciously impugned. Land. 1566. qu.

Confutation as well of Mr. Dormons last book intit. A defense, etc. as also of
Dr. Saunder's Causes of Transubstantiation. Land. 1567. qu.

Catechismus, sive prima institutio disciplinaque pietatis Chistianae, Latin
explicata. Land. 1570, 71, 74, 76. qu. There again 1590. 1603. etc. oct.
Translated into English by Tho. Norten, Land. 1571. and into Greek by Will.
Whittaker, an. 1575. etc.

Catechismus parvus pueris primum, qui ediscatur, proponendus in Scholis. Land.
1574. 78. oct. etc. Written in Lat. and Greek. Translated also into English by
another person. -- Land. 1587. oct. etc. and into Hebrew by Anon; but this last
I have not yet seen.

Conference had with Edm. Campian Jesuit, in the Tower of London, ult. Aug.
1581. Land. 1583. qu. See more in Joh. Redman under the year 1551. This
reverend Dr. Nowell died in a good old age, on the 13. Feb. in sixteen hundred
and one, 1601-02.
and was buried in the Chapel of the Virgin Mary within the Cathedral of St.
Paul. Soon after was a comely Monument set over his Grave, with an inscription
thereon in Prose and Verse, a copy of which you may see in Jo. Stow's Survey of
London, and elsewhere: And of his benefaction to Brasnose coll. and other
matters you may read in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Ox. lib. 2. p. 214. b. 225. b.
In his Deanty of St. Paul succeeded Joh. Overhall, the King's Professor of Div.
in Cambridge, a general learned Scholar, preferred to it by the commendations
(to the Queen) of Sir Fulk Grevill his Patron.

HARBERT WESTPHALING, Son of Harbert Westphaling, Son of Harbert a Native of
Westphalia in Germany, from whom, by a popular Error, the Son who lived mostly
in London, and this his Grandson, were called Westphaling. At 15 years of age,
in 1547. which was the year after K. Hen. 8. had put his last hand to the
foundation of Chapter Church, he was made one of the Students thereof, took the
degrees in Arts, (that of Master being completed in 1555.) applied his studies
to the Supreme Faculty, was admitted to the reading of the Sentences in Dec.
1561. and in the beginning of March following he was installed Canon of the
said Church, being about that time Rector of Brightwell near Watlington in the
County of Oxon. In 1565. he was licensed to proceed in his Faculty, in the year
following he learnedly See Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 305. b.
disputed before Q. Elizabeth in S. Mary's Church, and in the beginning of
1577. he was installed Canon of Windsor, in the place of Dr. Ant. Rush
deceased. In 1585. Dec. 12. he was consecrated Bishop of Hereford, (in which
County he had several Lands and Inheritances,) where, as throughout the Nation,
he was esteemed a person of great gravity, integrity, and most worthy of his
Function. He has written,

Treatise of Reformation in Religion, divided in seven Sermons, Preached in
Oxford, on Matthew. 21. 12, 13. Land. 1582. qu.

Two Sermons touching the Supper of, the Lord, on 1 Cor. 11. 28, 29. and on
Matthew. 26. v. 26, 27, 28. Land. 1582. qu. and perhaps other things, but such I
have not yet seen. He paid his last debt to Nature on the first day of March in
sixteen hundred and one, and was buried in the North transcept of the Cath.
1601-02.
at Hereford. In his Will he bequeathed the Manor of Batche in Herefordshire
to Jesus coll. for the maintenance of two Fellows and two Scholars,
conditionally that his kindred be preferred to the said places before all
others. His picture is painted on the Wall in the School-Gallery at Oxon. next
to that of Dr. E^des, as having in his time been a famous Theologist.

CHRISTOPHER GOODMAN was Cheshire, particularly, as I conceive, within the City
of Chester, became a Student in Brasnose coll. 1536. aged seventeen or
thereabouts, took one degree in Arts, but was never, as I can yet find, Fellow
of that House. In 1544. he proceeded in that faculty, and three years after was
constituted one of the Senior Students of Chapter Church, being then newly founded
by K. Hen. 8. In the year 1551. or thereabouts, he was admitted to the reading
of the Sentences, at which time he was (as it is said) Reader of the Divinity
Lesson in the University, but whether of that founded by the Lady Margaret, or
by K. H. 8. seems as yet doubtful. In the beginning of Q. Mary he left the
University, and went with several Academians beyond the Sea for Religion sake,
but dissenting from the chief body of them assembled at Frankfort, he did with
Whittyngham, Knox, Gilby, etc. retire to Geneva, as may be farther seen in a
book intit. A brief discourse of the troubles began at Frankfort, etc. printed
1575. qu. wherein, as in other places, the turbulent spirit of this person may
be discerned. A noted Rob. Persons in his second Vol. of Three conversions of
England, etc. printed 1604. p. 220.
author tells us that he was a most pernicious fellow, for that he not only
practiced against the life of Q. Mary, but wrote also that most seditious known
Libel against the regiment of Women, etc. This Goodman ( I say) being a furious
hot spirit, and guilty in conscience of wicked attempts (but especially as was
thought, of the conspiracy with Will. Thomas, that would have killed Q. Mary)
ran out of England to Geneva, in the beginning of Q. Mary's reign, and there
joined with Joh. Knox ( as quiet a spirit as himself) that was the firebrand of
his country of Scotland, etc. The truth is, Goodman was a most violent
Nonconformist, and for rigidness in opinion, he went beyond his friend Calvin,
who remembers, Lib. Epist. Jo. Calv. number. 306.
and mentions, him in his Epistles, 1561. There was no man more ready than he,
(as Knox was for Scotland) to oppose in the beginning of Q. Eliz. the
settlement of the Chapter of England according to the way used in the time of K.
Ed. 6. What his preferments were, when the said Queen came to the crown, and
where (if any) they were, unless at Chester, or in the county, I know not. Sure
I am that when Sir Hen. Sydney was Deputy of Ireland, and had much to do with
the popish rebels there, Goodman showed his faithful diligence in that service.
His works are these:

How superior powers ought to be obeyed of their subjects, and wherein they
may be lawfully by Gods word, be disobeyed and resisted. Genev. 1558. in tw.
etc. W. Whittyngham has a preface to it.

The first blast of the trumpet against the monstrous regiment of Women --
Printed beyond Sea 1558. oct. wherein Qu. Mary is called a wicked woman,
traitress, bastard, Proserpine, etc. But most of his doctrines in the said two
books, being destructive to the sacred persons of princes, and their state and
government, were not only See Dangerous positions, etc. Land. 1591. lib. 2.
cap. 1.
condemned by the Episcopal Clergy of England in the time of Q. Elizab. and
after, but also by the judgment and decree of the University of Oxon, past in
their convocation held 21. Jul. 1683. Nay, The first blast of the trumpet, etc.
was esteemed by all, especially the R. Catholics, a wicked, seditious and base
book, and not fit to be taken into the hands of a Christian, and the rather for
this reason, because as a See at the end of Pet. Frarins Oration against the
unlawful insurrections of the Protestants, etc. Antw. 1566.
Poet of that time says, No Queen in her Kingdom, can or ought to sit fast, If
Knocks or Goodmans books blow any true blast. He has also written,

A commentary on Amos -- This I have not yet seen: Nor can I say any thing else
of him, only that when he laid on his Deathbed at Chester, Jam. Usher
(afterward Archb. of Armagh) at what time he came from Ireland into England to
buy books for Dublin Library; several of whose stories he heard with great
delight, which he would afterward, when an ancient man, repeat to his friends.
He the said Goodman died that year, and was, as I have been informed by some of
his relations, buried in the Church of St. Werberg in Chester. His sometimes
friend and crony Job. Parkhurst has an In Epigram. Juvenil. Land. 1573. p. 57.
Epigram upon him, which you may take instead of an Epitaph.

Nemo bonus, Servator ait, sed solus Olympum Qui regit, is bonus est: Gudmane,
nemo bonus.

Yet an English Presbyterian Edw. Leigh in his Treatise of religion and
learning. lib. 4. cap. 2.
who says that Goodman was a learned Scotch Divine; was according to his name
good and holy.

WILLIAM HARRYS became Fellow of Lincoln English College then newly erected at
Doway, where spending diverse years in the study of Theology, was at length made
a Priest. Afterward returning to his native country to serve the afflicted
Catholics and gain Proselytes, lived there several years, and composed a large
volume intit.

The Theater or Mirror of the most true and ancient Church of Great Britain,
founded by Apostolical men, and propagated from generation to generation, even
to our time, by most holy Doctors and Catholics, in 10 books -- What else he
wrote I find not, not any thing material of him besides, England in sixteen
hundred and two. Contemporary with him was Thomas Marshall, Bach. of Arts 1562.
and about that time Fellow of the said college; but soon after leaving his
Fellowship, he went to Lovaine, where he entered into the Society of Jesus.
Afterward he went to Doway, where he spent 9 years in reading and explaining
Philosophy, and at length became Confessor to the English coll. at Rome, where
he died in 1589. leaving behind him the character of a learned person.

HAYWORD TOWNSHEND eldest Son Hen. Townshend Knight, Justice of Chester, by
Susan his first Wife, daughter of Sir Rowland Hayward of London Knight, was a
Shropshire man born, became a Gentleman Commoner of St. Mary's Hall, about the
beginning of the year 1590. took one degree in Arts, being about that time a
Student in the Municipal Law in Lincoln's Inn, and was afterward a Barrester.
In 1601. he was elected a Burgess for Bishops Castle in his own country, to
serve in that Parliament which began at Westminster 27. Oct. the same year,
where showing himself an observing man, made an Historical collection of the
proceedings therein, to which adding other collections for three Parliaments
preceding, viz. (1.) For that which began 4. Feb. 1588. (2.) For that which
began 19. Feb. 1592. and thirdly, for that which commenced 9. Feb. 1597. he
made a complete collection in folio. At length when the press; was open, and
the author had been dead many years, his labors were published under this
title:

Historical collections: or, an exact account of the proceedings of the four
last Parliaments of Q. Elizabeth, wherein is contained the complete Journals
both of Lords and Commons, taken from the original records of their Houses. As
also the more particular behaviors of the worthy Members, during all the last
notable sessions, etc. Land. Clar. 1602.
1680. fol. In the title of which book the publisher has set down Heywood,
instead of Hayward, Townshend: whose time of death tho unknown to me, yet sure
I am that he died without Issue, some years before 1623. See more in Will.
Monson under the year 1606. In 1681. was published in octavo a book intit. The
connection, being choice collections of some remarkable passages in K. James his
reign, etc. which may supply the vacancy between Townshend and Rushworths
collections; but who the author of it was I cannot tell. It Is a trite thing.

WILLIAM FULBECK a younger Son, if I Thom. Fulbeck who died in his Mayoralty of
the City of Lincoln 1566. was born in that City, particularly, as it seems, in
the parish of St. Benedict, wherein his Father lived and died, became a
commoner of St. Albans Hall in 1577. aged 17. admitted Scholar of C. C. coll.
23. January 1579. took the degree of Bach. of Arts two years after, and then
translated himself to Gloucester Hall: Where continuing a severe Student till he
had taken the degree of M. of Arts, and had completed it by standing in the
Act 1584. he went to Greys-Inn in Holbourn near to London, where he addressed
himself to the study of the Municipal Laws; and, as it is said, had the degree
of Doctor of the Civil Law conferred on him elsewhere, but at what place, or by
whom, I cannot yet find. He has written,

Christian Ethics: or, Moral Philosophy, containing the difference or
opposition of virtue and voluptuousness. Land. 1587. oct.

An historical collection of the continued Factions, Tumults and Massacres of
the Romans and Italians, during the space of 120 years, before the peaceable
Empire of Augustus Caesar, etc. Land. 1600. oct. and 1601. in qu.

A parallel or conference of the Civil Law, the Canon Law, and the Common Law
of this Realm; wherein the agreement and disagreement of these three Laws, and
the causes and reasons of the said agreement are opened and discussed in sundry
Dialogues. Land. 1602. qu. in 2 parts. But this book lying dead on the
Booksellers hands, he put a new Title to the first part, as if the whole had
been reprinted at London 1618. but to the second not, leaving the old Title
bearing date 1602.

The Pandects of the Laws of Nations; or, the discourses of the Matters in Law,
wherein the Nations of the World do agree. Land. 1602. qu. What else he has
written I know not, Clar. 1602.
nor when, or where, he died. One Henry Fulbeck, related to the said William,
has published, A direction or preparation to the study of the Civil Law;
wherein is showed what things ought to be observed, and what ought to be
eschewed and avoided. Printed at Land. in oct. much about the time that the
former was.

Hugh Erdeswicke Esquire was born at Sandon in Staffordshire, studied in the
condition of a Gent. Com. in Brasnose coll. Reg. 1. coll. Aenean. fol. 91. a.
in 1553, and 54. (1. and 2. of Q. Mary,) where he laid the foundation of some
learning that advanced him to greater in future times. Afterward he retired to
his Patrimony at Sandon, where applying his Muse to that kind of learning which
his genie led him to, became at length a Gentleman well accomplished with many
virtuous qualities. He was very well versed in Histories, but more in
Antiquities, especially in those of his own County; and therefore styled by the
learned Camden, In Britannia, in com. Staff.
A very great Lover and diligent Searcher of venerable Antiquity, adding, that
in this regard he is no less worthy of remembrance, than for that he is
directly in the Male-line descended from Sir Hugh Vernon, Baron of Shipbrook,
the name being changed, by the use of that age, according to sundry
habitations, first into Holgrave, and afterward into Erdeswicke. At length for
the tender respect he had to his Native Country, and desiring much the honor
of it, wrote,

A short view of Staffordshire, containing the Antiquities of the same County.
-- MS. The beginning of which is, Sir, having disposed with my self to take a
farther view of the Shires of Staffordshire and Chester, etc. It was began
about the year 1593. and continued by him to his death, from ancient Evidences
and Records, with brevity, clearness, and truth. The original of this, or at
least a copy, is in the hands of Walt. Chetwind of Ingestre in Staffordshire
Esquire who is, and has been several years, in the collecting of the Antiquities
of that County.

Collections of Genealogies, Monuments, Arms, etc. -- MSS. Some of which are in
the hands of the said W. Chetwind, and elsewhere and have been used by diverse
Antiquaries. It is said also that 'our author Erdeswicke wrote a book intit.
The true use of Armory, published under the name of Will. Wyrley, an. 1592. (as
I shall more at large tell you hereafter,) but let that report remain with its
author, while I tell you that Erdeswicke submitted to the stroke of death on
the eleventh of Apr. Sandon beforementioned. Which Church was, a little
before, new glazed and repaired by him. See more of him in William Wyrley among
these Writers, under the year 1617.

Oxfordshire, was born in that County, elected Probationer-Fellow of Magd,
coll. an. 1563. and after he had taken the Magisterial degree, entered on the
Physic line, traveled and became Doctor of his Faculty in the University of
Basil. Afterward settling in London, he became one of the College of
Physicians, and much frequented for his successful Practice in his Faculty. He
had a chief hand in a book intit.

Bibliotheca Hispanica; containing a Grammar with a Dictionary in Spanish,
English, and Latin. Land. 1591. qu. in two parts. This book was published by
one Rich. Percyvall Gent. who had another hand in it, yet with the advice and
conference of Dr. D'oylie, who dying in the beginning of the year sixteen
hundred and three, Little S. Barthelmew in London, leaving then behind him a
Son named Francis, born 8. Feb. 1597. and a daughter married to Hugh Cressy a
Counselor, Father to Hugh Cressy a Benedictine Monk.

WILLIAM GILBERT, Son of Hierom Gilbert Colchester in Essex, was born there,
and educated in both the Universities, but whether in Oxon first or in
Cambridge, I cannot justly tell. Afterward he traveled beyond the Seas,
where, I presume, he had the degree of Doctor of Physic conferred upon him,
and at his return being famed for his learning, depth in Philosophy, and
admirable skill in Chemistry, became one of the Coll. of Physicians in Land.
and Physician in Ord. to Q. Elizabeth, who had so high a value for him, that
she allowed him an annual Pension to encourage his studies. He has written,

De magnete magneticisque corporibus and de magno magnete tellure; Physiologia
nova. Land. 1600. fol. To which book the author added an Appendix of 6 or 8
sheets, but whether printed I cannot tell.

De mundo nostro sublunari, Philosophia nova. Amstel. 1651. qu. Published from
a MS. in the Library of the Famous Sir Will. Boswell Knight. He also was the
first that invented the making, description, and use of the two most ingenious
and necessary instruments for Seamen, to find out thereby the Latitude of any
place upon the help of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. Which invention was published
by one Tho. Blondeville, -- Land. 1602. qu. This Dr. Gilbert gave way to fate
in the Summer time in sixteen hundred and three, Holy Trinity in Colchester, in
which Parish he was born, and accounted the chief person thereof. By his last
Will and Test. he gave all his books in his Library, his Globes, Instruments,
and Cabinet of Minerals to the Coll. of Physicians; which part of his Will was
exactly performed by his Brethren, viz. William (so he is written in his Will)
a Proctor in the Arches, Hierom, Ambrose, and George, who participated of his
Estate. The picture of this famous Doctor, drawn to the life, is hanging in the
School-Gallery at Oxon, which shows him to have been of statute tall, and of a
cheerful complexion.

JOHN LLOYD, or Lhuyd, nearly related to Humph. Lhuyd, mentioned under the year
1570. was born in the ancient Borough of Denbigh in Denbighshire in Wales,
educated in Wykehams School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1579.
took the degrees in Arts, was Junior of the Act in 1585. and soon after became
in eminent Preacher. In 1595. he proceeded in Divinity, became Vicar of Writtle
in Essex, on the death of Dr. Maschiart, 1598. and was in high esteem there, in
the Neighborhood, and the University, for his rare Learning and excellent way
of Preaching. He has published,

Interpretatio Latina, cum Scholiis in Flav. Josaphum de Macabaeis, seu de
rationis imperio, etc. Oxon. 1590. oct. Done by the help of an excellent
Exemplar, more corrected and complete than ever before. He also was the first
that published Barlaamus de Papae Principatu, Grace and Latin. Oxon 1592. What
other things he has written and published, I now not, not any thing else
material of him, only this, that he paid his last debt to Nature at Writtle
beforementioned, in sixteen hundred and three, Matthew Davies Doct. of Div. by
the gift of the Warden, and the Society of New college, of which he was Fellow,
and continued there to the time of his death, an. 1624. Soon after succeeded
Dr. Joh. South the King's Professor of the Greek Tongue in this University.

EDWARD PHILIPS was entered a Student Broadgates hall (now Pembro^e coll.) in
1574. took the degrees in Arts, and became a Preacher at St. Saviors in
Southwark near to London, where he was by those of his large Auditory (mostly
zealous Puritans) esteemed A person zealous of the truth of God, powerful in
his calling, faithful in his message, powerful in his Speech, careful of his
flock, peaceable and blameless in his life, and comfortable and constant in his
death. While he lived, it does not appear that he published anything, but after
his death a certain Gentleman of Greys-Inn named Hen. Yelverton (afterward a
Judge) Son of Judge Christopher Yelverton, published,

Two and thirty godly and learned Sermons. Land. 1605. qu. The first of which
is on Matthew. 1. ver. 1. (2.) On Matthew. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, etc. All which
Sermons were taken from the authors mouth by the pen of the said Yelverton.
This Edw. Philips who was a zealous Calvinist (as Yelverton then was, and both
bitter enemies to popery) died, Phillps his death, that were of his speaking or
writing, I cannot tell.

Will. Ely sometimes president of S. John's coll. was born in Herefordshire, and
from being a Student in Brasnose, was chose Scholar of S. John's coll. before
mentioned, in 1566. But before he took a degree, or (as I think) was made
Fellow, he left that place, and giving a farewell to his friends, country, and
religion, he crossed the Seas, settled at Doway, studied the Civil Law and
became Licentiat therein. Afterward he went to Rome, with his great friend Dr.
Will. Allen, where being made Doctor of his faculty, he returned into France,
and settling at Rheimes, was wholly taken up for a time in the correcting and
printing the said Allens books. At length upon the breaking out of the civil
dissentions in that country, he was called into Loraine in 1588. About which
time he was made the public and the Dukes professor of the Civil Law in the
University of Pont a Mousson, where he continued till the day of his death. He
was by those of his religion esteemed a wise and learned Priest, of sincere
honesty, void of dissimulation, full of zeal to the truth, and equity, etc. But
that which is mostly to be noted of him, is that upon a controversy that Jo.
Pits. De illustr. Angl. Script. Aet. 17. nu. 1053.
arose among the English popish Clergy concerning the receiving of an
Archpriest into England, and the power that was to be allotted to him, he
wrote, with a long preface to it,

Certain brief notes upon a brief apology set out under the name of the
priests, united to the Archpriest. Paris about 1602 -- 3. in tw. and oct. which
book (written against Fa. Persons) I once saw among many other rarities of the
like nature in Balliol coll. Library, given thereunto by that curious collector
of choice books Sir Tho. Wendy of Haselingfield in Cambridgeshire, Knight of
the Bath, sometimes Gentleman commoner of the said House. Our author Ely has
written other books, as it is said, but such I have not yet seen, nor can I say
any more of him at this time, 1603-4.
only that he dying at Pont a Mousson on the Ides of of March in sixteen
hundred and three, was buried there in the church of the Nuns called Clarissae,
that is of the order of S. Clare. Over his grave was soon after a monument put,
with a large inscription thereon, which for brevity sake I shall now omit.

Welsh-man became a Batler or Commoner of New Inn in the beginning of 1589.
took one degree in Arts, which being completed by Determination, he translated
himself to Jesus coll. and as a member and fellow of that house took the degree
of Master, and afterward wrote,

The picture of a perfect Commonwealth, describing as well the offices of
Princes and inferior Magistrates over their Subjects, as also the duties of
Subjects toward their Governors, etc. Land. 1600. in tw. He has written, as
it is probable, other things, but what, I cannot tell, only certain Latin Poety
scattered in several books, C^a* 1603.
particularly in that intit. Academia Oxoniensis pietas erga Jacobum Regem an.
1603. I find three or more of both his names, his contemporaries, and Welsh-men
also of Jesus, college, but whether either of them has any thing extant I
cannot tell.

Yorkshire, and in the year 1569. was, tho Merton coll. had then no Lands in
that county, chosen purely for his merits, by the consent of all the Society,
Probationer-Fellow of the said house. In which place, as also in that of Bach.
fellow, he went beyond all of the same election for subtle disputations, and
knowledge in the Greek tongue. After he had taken the degree of Master, in
1573. he applied his Muse to the study of Medicine and Astronomy; about which
time he read publicly on the Almagest of Ptolomy. In the year 1582. he became
fellow of Eaton coll. near to Windsore, being then in holy orders, and two
years after supplicated the congregation of Ven. Regents, that he might be
admitted to the reading of any of the books of Hypocrates: But whether he was
admitted, it appears not in any of the registers of that time. In 1601. he
being then famed for his learning, he was made canon of Windsore in the place
of Rog. Brown B. D. (sometimes of Kings coll. in Cambridge) deceased; which,
with Eaton, he held to his dying day. He has written,

Scholia ad Barlaami Monachi Logisticam Astronomiam. Par. 1600. qu. Which book
he also translated from Greek into Latin,

Treatise against Judicial Astrology. Land. 1601. qu. In which book having done
no less than a christian learned man ought to have done, he had reason to look
for another reward of his labors than he found. For instead of thanks and
commendation for his labors so well placed, he was roughly entertained by Sir
Christop. Heyden Knight (sometimes of Cambridge University, afterward
High-Steward of the Cath. Chapter of Norwych) in his Defense of judicial Astrology.
Cambr. 1603. qu. a work full of no common reading, and carried on with no mean
arguments. But our author not living to see his reply published, he was some
years after defended by his friend George Carleton, as I shall tell you under
the year 1628. As for Sir Cristop. Heyden, who was a man of parts, and had been
Knighted at the sacking of Cadiz by Rob. Earl of Essex in 1596. was of
Baconsthorp in Norfolk, and died (in the winter time as it seems) in 1623. The
reply which our author wrote, but could not live to put it in the press, has
this title:

A confutation of Astrological Daemonology, or the Devils School, in defense of
a treatise intit. Against judiciary Astrology; and oppugned in the name of Sir
Chapter Heyden Knight. -- This is a MS. very fairly written in fol. richly bound
and gilt, dedicated by the author to K. James, with an Epistle dated from
Windsor Chapel 2. Feb. 1603. The beginning of which is, In the midst of all my
pains and labors (most puissant and renowned Prince) etc. and the beginning of
the work it self is, In the setting down and delivery of Arts, Galen, in his
book intit. Ars Medicinalis, etc. 'Twas the very same book, as it seems, that
was given to the King, which coming into the hands of Sir Hen. Savile, he gave
it to his Mathematical Library in Oxon.

Astronomiae encomium, ante annos 27. peroratum, quo tempore Prolomei
Almagestum, in Vniversitate Oxon enarravit. Land. 1601. in Lat. and Engl. These
I think are all the things that our author Jo. Chamber has either written or
published; and therefore I have nothing more to say, only that he yielding up
his last breath at Windsore on the first of August, in sixteen hundred and
four, Georges Chapel there. Over his grave was soon after a plain marble laid,
whereon is insculp'd the figure of a man in a mantle, bearing an Escutcheon of
S. Georges arms, with this inscription under him. Johanni Chamber, Socio primum
collegii Mertonensis, an. 1569. dein Etonensis, an. 1582. postremum canonico
hujus Ecclesia, an. 1601. Theologo, Medico, Mathematico insigni. Henricus
Nevill and Henricus Savile Milites posuere. Natus apud Swillington in Com.
Ebor. an. 1546. Mense Maio, obiit Etonae an. 1604. ineunte Augusto; corpus hoc
marmore humatum jacit. Praeter alia Legavit moriens collegio Mertonensi Mill
Libras. The said thousand pounds were by him given to Merton coll. to purchase
Lands in Yorkshire, on this condition, that two Scholarships of the said
college should be supplied out of Eaton School by the nomination and election
of the provost of Kings coll. in Cambridge, and the provost of Eaton. This gift
was soon after settled, and the two Scholars were successively added to the
number of the 12 Postmasters of the said house of Merton.

MEREDITH HANMER Son of Tho. Hanmer, Ginta Hanmer, of Porkington in Shropshire,
was born in that county, but descended from the Hanmers of Hanmer in
Flintshire, became chaplain of C. C. coll. in Apr. 1567. took the degrees in
Arts, and after some yeas spent in that house, was made Vicar of S. Leonards
Shoreditch in London: Among the inhabitants of which place he left an ill name,
for that he converted the brass of several ancient monuments there, into coin
for his own use, as an observing Joh. Weever in his Ancient funeral M^^uments,
etc. printed 1631. p. 427.
author tells us. In 1581. and 82. he took the degrees of Divinity; about which
time he went into Ireland, and at length became Treasurer of the Church of the
Holy Trinity (now called Chapter Church) in Dublin, which he kept to his dying day.
He was esteemed an exact Disputant, a good Preacher, Grecian, and excellent for
Ecclesiastical and Civil Histories. He has written,

Confutation and answer of the great braggs and challenge of Mr. Campion the
Jesuit, containing 9 articles, by him directed to the Lords of the Privy
Council. Land. 1581. oct.

The Jesuits banner, displaying their original and success, their vow, and
other their hypocrisy and superstition, their doctrine and positions. Land.
1581. qu.

A confutation of a brief censure upon two books, written in answer to Mr.
Campions offer of disputation-Printed with The Jesuits banner, etc. soon after
came out A defense of the Censure, etc. See more in Rob. Persons under the year
1610.

The Chronicle of Ireland, in two parts -- The second of which was printed at
Dublin in 1633. fol.

Sermon at the baptizing of a Turk, on Math. 5. 15. Land. 1586. oct.

An Ephemeris of the Saints of Ireland.

A Chronography, with a supputation of the years from the beginning of the
World unto the birth of Christ, and continued from the birth of Christ (where
Eusebius chiefly, Socrates, Evagrius and Dorotheus, after him do write) unto
the twelfth year of the reign of Mauritius the Emperor, being the full time of
600 years, wanting five, after Christ. All chiefly collected out of Eusebius,
Socrates and Evangrius, Land. 1585. etc. fol. Besides these, he has translated
from Greek into English (1) The ancient Ecclesiastical histories of the first
six hundred years after Christ, originally written by Eusebius, Socrates and
Evagrius. Land. 1577. 85. etc. fol. (2) The lives, ends and Martyrdoms of the
Prophets, Apostles, and 70 disciples of Christ, originally written by Dorotheus
Bishop of Tyrus -- Printed with the former translation. This Dr. Hanmer, as it
appears, had translated all the Church Historians except Eusebius his four
books concerning the life of Emperor Constantine, and the two orations
subjoined thereunto, which were afterward done by Wye Saltonstal, and printed
in a fifth edition of Hanmers translation -- London 1650. fol. At length Dr.
Hanmer being suddenly berest of his life by the plague raging in Dublin, before
he attained to the sixtieth year of his age, Holy Trinity there. Joh. Weevon,
whom I have here quoted, tells us Ibid. ut Sup.
that he ended his days in Ireland ignominiously, but what his meaning is to
say so, I cannot tell, unless the plague came upon him as a judgment for the
sacrilege he committed while he was Vicar of S. Leonards Church before
mentioned. Qu.

Sewell in Bedfordshire, was born perhaps in that county, and being made full
ripe for the University in Westminster School, was elected Student of Chapter
Church in 1571. where going through the usual Classes of Logic and Philosophy,
proceeded in Arts in 1578. being then Junior in comitiis, or, of the Act that
year. About the same time taking the sacred function on him, he became a most
noted and celebrated preacher, was admitted to the reading of the sentences in
1584. (being that year installed Preb. of Yatminster prima in the Church of
Sarum) made chaplain to Q. Elizabeth, Canon of Chapter Chapter in the l^tter end of
1586. and in 89. Doct. of Divinity. In the latter end of 1596. he was made Dean
of Worcester in the place of Dr. Franc. Willys deceased, being then and ever
after, to his death (for he ^as also chapl. to K. James. 1.) held in great
admiration at Court, not only for his preaching, but most excellent and polite
discourse. His younger years he spent in poetical fancies and composing of
plays, (mostly Tragedies) but at riper, he became a pious and grave Divine, an
ornament to his profession, and a grace to the pulpit. No two men were ever
more intimate than he and Tob. Mathews Dean of Chapter Chapter for they entirely loved
each other for virtue and ingenuity sake: and when Mathews was to remove to the
Deanery of Durham in 1584. our author Eedes intended to have him on his way
thither for ones days journey; but so betrayed were they by the sweetness of
each others company, and their own friendship, that he not only brought him to
Durham, but for a pleasant pennace See A brief view of the State of the Church
of England. etc. by Sir Joh. Harrington -- Land. 1653. oct. p. 147.
wrote their whole journey in latin verse, intit. Iter boreale, several copies
of which did afterward fly abroad. Then also, and before in their youthful
acquaintance, passed so many pretty apothegms between, that if a collection had
been made of, them, they would have filled a manual. His works are,

Iter boreale. MS. The beginning of which is Quid mihi cum Musis? quid cum
borealibus oris? A copy of this written by an unknown hand, I have in my little
Library.

Various Poems -- MS. in Lat. and Engl.

Six learned and godly Sermons, preached some of them before K. James, and some
before Q. Elizabeth. Land. 1604. oct. The two first are called, The duty of a
King, on Micah. 6. 8. (3) A fruitful Meditation upon the sickness, on Micah. 6.
13. (4) The principal care of Princes to be nurses of the Church, on Isay 49.
23. (5) Of the difference of good and evil, on Isay 5. 20. (6) Of heavenly
conversations, on Phil. 3. 20, 21.

Three Sermons. Land. 1627. qu. One of which is on Ephesians. 2. ver. 19. to 33.
Another on Ephesians. 5. 15, etc. This learned Doctor dyed at Worcester, on the
nineteenth of Nov. Margaret, daughter of Dr. Harb. Westphaling Bishop of
Hereford; who soon after was at the charge of putting a monument over his
Grave, with an inscription thereon, containing a dialogue in verse between the
Passenger and the Monument; a copy of which, you may see in Hist. and Antiq.
Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 266. b. In this Deanery of Worcester succeeded James
Mountague D. D. of Cambridge, who being made Bishop of B. and Wells, was
succeeded in the said Deanery by Arth. Lake D. D. 23. Apr. 1608. who succeeded
him also in B. and W. as I shall tell you elsewhere.

THOMAS STORER Son of John Storer a Londoner, was elected Student of Chapter Chapter
1587. or thereabouts, took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed
1594. at which time he was had in great renown for his most excellent vein in
poesy, not only expressed in verses printed in several books, made
occasionally by the members of the University, but for that writ in English
verse intit.

The life and death of Tho. Wolsey Cardinal. Divided into 3 parts; his
aspiring, triumph and death. Land. 1599. in ten sheets in qu. Which book being
perused by the learned Dr. Alberic. Gentilis, he does occasionally make In lib.
cu^ tit. est. Lauds Academiae per^finae and Ox^niensis -- H^nnon. 1625. p. 41.
this mention of Wolsey and our author -- Atque o utinem etc. quod Wolsaeo,
aedificatori magnificentissimi collegii Christi, praestitum ab ingenioso poeta
est, etc. The truth is Storer obtained from the then Academians great credit
for that work, (particularly from his friend Chapter Fitzgeoffry In Affanis, etc.
Oxon. 1601. lib. 2.
the poet of Broadgates hall) but more among others for his

Pastoral Aires and Madrigalls -- which were afterward remitted into a book
called Englands Hol^con. What other things this ingenious person has extant, I
know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he died in the parish of St.
Michael Basinghaugh within the City of London, in November,

RICHARD TURNBULL was born in Lincolnshire, admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 9.
Nov. 1566. aged 16. or thereabouts, and was afterward made Fellow. M. of Arts
and a Priest. At length being beneficed in London, where he was much followed
for his edifying way of preaching, wrote and published,

An exposition on the canonical Epistle of St. James. Land. 1591. oct. in 28
Sermons* Exposition on the Canon. Epist. of St. Jude. -- In 10 Sermons. Printed
there the same year in oct.

Four Sermons on Psalm. 15. -- Which Sermons, with the former Expositions, were
printed in quarto at Land. 1606. Clar. 1604.
the author being then dead. I find that one Will. Turnfull L. L. Bac. was
installed Preb. of Worcester 1557. which he resigned in 1558. being then Parson
of Fladbury in Worcestershire, and that he died in Jul. or Aug. 1573. Whether
this William was a writer, or had any relation to Richard beforementioned, it
does not yet appear to me.

Durham, elected from Magd. hall to be Scholar of Corp. Chapter coll. in the Month
of October. 1581. aged 21 years, took the degrees in Arts, and was afterward
beneficed, and in great repute for his learning. He has written and published,

An Oration gratulatory to K. James 12. of Febr. when his Majesty entered the
Tower of London in order to his Coronation, etc. Oxon. 1604. qu. The Title is
in English, but the Oration is in good Latin.

Several Sermons. -- One of which is on 1 Pet. Clar. 1604.
3. 21, 22. What other things he has published, I know not, nor the time, or
place, when, and where, he died.

Broughton in Lincolnshire, as being a younger Son of Thomas Anderson
(descended from the Addersons of Scotland,) who lived first in Northumberland,
and afterward at Broughton beforementioned, did spend some time in Oxon, (in
Linc. coll. as it seems,) from whence being sent to the Inner Temple, did, by
his indefatigable study, obtain great knowledge in the Municipal Laws. In the
9. of Q Eliz. he was either Lent, or Summer, Reader of that House, in the 16.
Double Reader, and in the 19. of the said Queen's Reign Sergeant at Law. In
1582. he was made L. Chapter Justice of the Common Pleas, in the place of Sir Jam.
Dyer deceased; and in the year following he was made a Knight, being then
esteemed a zealous promoter of the established discipline of the Church of
England, as afterward a severe prosecuter, in his Circuits, of the Brownists.
In 1586. he sat in judgment on Mary Q. of Scots, at which time he was Chief
Justicer of the Bench, as a certain Camden in Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub an. 1586.
Vide in Chronserie per Gul. Dugdale sub an. 1582.
author styles him, being then a learned Man of the Law. He wrote much, but
nothing is printed under his name, only,

Reports of many principle Cases argued and adjudged in the time of Q.
Elizabeth in the Common Bench. Land. 1664. fol.

Resolutions and judgments on the cases and matters agitated in all the Courts
at Westminster in the latter end of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth. -- Collected by
Joh. Goldesburg Esque and by him published at Land. in qu. This Sir Edm.
Anderson died at London on the first of August in sixteen hundred and five,
Sept. following, his Funerals were solemnized Lib. Certif. in Offic. Armorum,
l. 16. p. 212.
at Eyworth or Eworth in Bedfordshire, (where he had an Estate,) leaving issue
several Sons, whose Posterity remains there, and elsewhere, to this day. In
the place of Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas Camlen in Annal. Reg. Jac.
1. MS. sub an. 1605.
suceeded Sir Francis Gaudy of the Inner Temple.

Cuthb. Warcupp of English in Oxfordshire Esquire; descended from those of Warcupp
in Yorkshire, became a Student of Chapter Chapter in 1561. or thereabouts, took one
degree in Arts, went to travel, and became in time the most accomplished
Gentleman of the age he lived in, and Master of several Languages. Afterward
settling in his Native Country, he became Justice of Peace, and Parliamentarian
Knight for Oxfordshire, in that Convention met at Westminster 43. Eliz. In the
beginning of K. James's Reign, he was by him designed Ambassador either to
France or Spain, and had gone, but was prevented by death. He has written and
translated several things, as it is said, but I have only seen his translation
of Prayers on the Psalms. Land. 1571. in sixteens, written originally by
August. Marlorat. He died much lamented in the sixtieth year of his age, on the
Ides of Aug. in sixteen hundred and five, and was buried in the Chancel of
Nuffield near to English beforementioned. Soon after came out a little Printed
at Oxon. 1605.
book of verses on his death, made by sixteen of the Members of New coll. (of
which Will. Kingsmill his Kinsman was one, and the chief,) from whence may be
collected that the said R. Warcupp was the most complete Esquire of his time.

FRANCIS TRESHAM Esquire Son of Sir Tho. Tresham Knight, (who died 11. Sept. 1605.)
and he the Son of Sir John Tresham of Rushton in Northamptonshire, was born in
that County, where his Family was ancient, gentile, and knightly, educated
either in St. John's coll. or Gloc. hall, or both; in which he laid the
foundation of some learning, that he afterward improved by experience. He has
written, as it is supposed,

A Treatise against Lying and fraudulent Equivocation. -- MS. among those given
by Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury to Bodlies Library. See more in George
Blackwell under the year 1612. After the Gunpowder Treason was discovered, the
said book was found by Sir Edw. Coke in a Chamber in the Inner Temple where Sir
John Tresham used to lie, 5. Dec. 1605. The said Fr. Tresham wrote.

De Officio Principis Christiani. In which he maintains the lawfulness of
deposing Kings, an obstinate Heretic having no right to Dominion. At length
this person, who was a strict R. Catholic, being deeply engaged in the
Gunpowder-Treason, (as he had before been in that of Robert Earl of Essex, in
1600.) was taken and committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, where he died
of the Stranguary say some, others, that he murdered himself; yet a venerable
Godf. Goodman Bish of of Gloc in his Review of the Court of K. James by Sir A.
W. -- MS. in bib. Bo^. 75, 76.
author tells us, that he being sick in the Tower, and Dr. Will. Butler the
great Physician of Cambridge coming to visit him, as his fashion was, gave him
a piece of very pure Gold to put in his mouth; and upon taking out of that
Gold, Butler said he was poisoned. He died on the 20. of Nov. London Bridge;
his body, I suppose, was buried within the Precincts of the Chapel of St.
Peter ad vincula within the Tower of London. Quere. This Francis Tresham was
the person who Ibid. p. 73.
wrote the Letter to the Lord Mount-Eagle, who lived then at Bednall green near
Algate, who communicating it to the Secretary of State, and he to the King, the
Plot for blowing up the Parliament House was thereupon discovered. See in Tho.
Habington under the year 1647.

CHARLES TURNHULL, a Lincolnshire man C. C. coll. 24. Dec. 1573. took the
degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed 1581. about which time he was
made Fellow of the said coll. and became Famous for his admirable knowledge in
the Mathematick Science. He has written,

A perfect and easy Treatise of the use of the Celestial Globe, written as
well for an introduction to the unskilful in Astronomy, as for the use of such
as be exercised in the art of Navigation. Land. 1597. oct. Which I think was
the second Edition. Clar. 1605.
He also built and made those several sorts of Dialls that stand upon a Pillar
in the middle of C. C. coll. Quadrangle, an. 1605. What other things he wrote,
or when he died, I cannot yet find. See more in Rob. Hegge, an. 1629.

AEGEON ASKEW, a person as well read in the Lancashire, became a Student in the
University in 1593. aged 17. or thereabouts, Chaplain of Queens coll. in 98.
being then Bach. of Arts. Afterward proceeding in that Faculty he became a
noted Preacher, and a great admirer of Dr. Jo. Raynolds, and Ric. Crakenthorpe.
In the beginning of the Reign of K. James he lest the college, and retiring to
Greenwich in Kent, became Minister, I think, of that place. His works are,

Of brotherly reconcilement, in several Sermons Preached in Oxon. Land. 1605.
qu. The author then lived at Greenwich.

An Apology, of the use of the Fathers and secular learning, in Sermons. -- In
which two books is showed much reading in ancient authors of the Church, Clar.
1605.
and indeed beyond his age. What became of him, when he left Greenwich, I know
not, for he died not there, as I have been informed by an ingenious person Joh.
Evelin of Says Court Esquire
who lives in those parts.

Sidmanton in Hampshire, became a Student in this University in 1555. or
thereabouts, and Fellow of Magd. coll. in 1560. being then Bachelaur of Arts.
In 1565. he was elected Public Orator, and in 69. he was made Hebrew Professor
of the University. In 1572. he was a candidate for the degree of Bachelaur of
Div. but whether he was really admitted, I find not. Soon after being
distempered in brain by too much lucubration, the famous Mr. Rich. Hooker of C.
C. coll. supplied his place of Professor in 1579. and for some years following.
What became of him afterward, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that
he recovering his Senses, wrote and published,

A complaint against Security. Land. 1602. oct.

Classicum Paenitentiale. Ox. 1605. qu.

Tractatus de Scandalo. Printed with the Classicum. There was another Tho.
Kingsmill who was M. Clar. 1605.
of A. Preacher of God's Word at Hyth, one of the Cinque Ports in Kent, an
1631. and the publisher of a Sermon called The Drunkard's Cup, on Prove. 23. 21.
Land. 1631. oct. but whether he has published any thing else, or was of this
University, I cannot justly say it.

Devonshire and Cornwall was educated for a time, either in Broadgates hall, or
Exeter coll. but took no degree here: Afterward taking upon him the Sacred
Function, became a Minister of God's Word, a frequent Preacher, and a publisher
of,

Several Sermons, as (1) Sermon. on Psalm. 90. 12. (2) Sermon. on S. Jo. 3. 3.
called Necessity of Man's renovation. (3) Sermon. on 1 Timothy 3. 16. (4) On 1 Pet.
3. 3. 4 (5) On Jam. 5. from ver. 1. to 5. Which five Sermons were published in
oct. an. 1603.

Four godly Sermons, viz. (1) Against Popery, or false Religion, on Matthew. 16.
18. 19. (2) Against Atheism, the Enemy to Religion, on Psalm. 53. 1. (3) Against
Hypocrisy, the counterfeit of Religion, Clar. 1605.
on Matthew. 7. 5. (4) Against Apostasy, the falling from Religion, on Matthew.
12. 31. 32. Which four Sermons were published at Land. in oct. an. 1605. and
dedicated by the author to Sir George Carew Baron of Clopton, Lord President of
Mounster, Vice-Chamberlain and Receiver-general to the Queen's Majesty, and
Lieutenant of the Ordinance.

Oxonian Muses in University coll* an. 1564. aged 17. or thereabouts, took the
degrees in Arts, entered into the Sacred Function, and at length became Rector
of Wellbourne near to Beckyngham in Lincolnshire; in which County, if I mistake
not, he was born. His Works are,

An Apology showing that the days wherein we live are more good and blessed,
than those of our Forefathers. Land. 1589. qu.

Analysis capitis 24 Evangelii secundum Matthaeum, etc. Oxon. 1591.

Comment. in cap. 12. ad Romans Ox. 1590.

Comemnt. in Rev. S. Joh. Printed 1590.

Sermon. Preached at Grantham, an. 1592. on Isay 24. 1. 2. 3. Ox. 1594. oct.

Touchstone of Cath. Faith. -- Printed 1599. qu.

The true Catholic formed, according to the truth of the Scriptures. Land.
1602. qu. At length paying his last debt to Nature at Welbourne
beforementioned, was buried in the Chancel of the Church there, on the 12. of
May, in sixteen hundred and six. Grantham in Lincolnshire, on the wall of which
are these Verses written, which you shall have instead of his Epitaph. Optima
Franciscus donavit Biblia Triggus,
Welbourniae quondam concionator amans.
Plurima permultis largitus munera Sanctis,
The saurum nobis condidit usque Sacrum.
Sic pie talis opus voluit, sic pignus amoris,
Sic Christum coluit, sic docet esse pium.


Beside the said Benefaction, he, and his Wive's Mother named Elizab. Hussy of
Hunnington, gave to the poor of Grantham, 3. lib. 6 sol. 8. den. per an. and
for so doing they are entered among the Benefactors. There goes about those
parts a memorable story, concerning the prediction of the death of this our
author, (a very strict Puritan in his time;) but whether any credence may be
given to it, forasmuch as it is propagated by dissenting Brethren, I doubt it,
and therefore I shall now pass it by.

JOHN ARGALL, third Son of Thom. Argall by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of John
Talkarne of the County of Cornwall, was born in London, entered a Student in Chapter
Chapter in the latter end of Q. Mary, took the degrees in Arts, that of Master
being completed in 1565. and was Senior of the Act, celebrated the 18. of Feb.
the same year. Afterward he studied the Supreme Faculty, was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences, and at length became Parson of a Market Town in
Suffolk called Halesworth. He was always esteemed a noted Disputant during his
stay in the University, was a great Actor in Plays at Chapter Chapter (particularly
when the Queen was entertained there 1566.) and when at ripe years a tolerable
Theologist and Preacher. But so much was he devoted to his studies, that being
withal unmindful of the things of his World, he lived and died like a
Philosopher. He has written and published,

De vera paenitentia. Land. 1604 oct.

Introductio ad artem Dialecticam. Land. 1605. oct. In which book (ver facete
and pleasant) the author says of himself in the Postpredicaments Vide Hist.
and Antiq. Univ. Ox. lib. 2. p. 266. b.
under Simul tempore, that whereas the great God had raised many of his Cronies
and Contemporaries to high dignities in the Church, as Dr. Tho. Bilson to the Sea of Winton, Mart. Heton to Ely, Hen. Robinson to Carlisle, Tob. Mathews to
Durham, etc. yet he an unworthy and poor old Man, was still detained in the
chains of poverty for his great and innumerable sins, that he might repent with
the Prodigal Son, and at length by God's favor obtain Salvation. What other
things he has written, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he was
reputed, by the neighboring Ministers of Halesworth, a great Scholar, and that
being at a Feast at Cheston (a mile distant from that Town) he died suddenly at
the Table. Afterward his body being carried to Halesworth, it was buried in
the Church there 8. October. in sixteen hundred and six. Now I am got into the
name of Argall, I must let the Reader know, that in my searches I find one
Rich. Argall to be noted in the Reign of K. Jam. 1. for an excellent divine
Poet, having been much encouraged in his studies by Dr. Jo. King Bishop of
London, but in what house educated in Oxon, where he spent some time in study,
I cannot now tell you. He wrote and published, (1) The Song of Songs, which was
Solomon's, metaphrased in English heroicks, by way af dialogue. Land. 1621. qu.
dedic. to Hen. King, Archd. of Colchester, Son to the Bishop of Land. (2) The
Brides ornament; Poetical Essays upon a Divine Subject. In two books, Land.
1621. qu. The first dedic. to Jo. Argall Esquire the other to Philip, Brother to
Henry, King. (3) Funeral Elegy consecrated to the memory of his ever honored
Lord John King late B. of London, etc. 1621. He also wrote a Book of
Meditations of Knowledge, Zeal, Temperance, Bounty, and Joy And another
containing Meditations of Prudence, Obedience, Meekness, God's Word, and
Prayer. Which two books of Meditations were intended by the author for the
Press, at the same time with the former Poetry: But the ever lamented loss of
his most honored Lord (which did change all his Joys into Sorrows, and Songs
to Lamentation) did defert their publication, and whether they were afterward
published, I know not.

HENRY BILLINGSLEY, Son of See in Stew's Survey of London, in the chap. or part
of temporal Government.
Roger Billingsley of the City of Canterbury, did spend some time among the
Muses in this University, as others did who were afterward Traders in London,
particularly See Hist. and Antiq. univ. Ox. lib. 2. p. 343. b.
Benedict Burnham of St. Albans hall, afterward a rich Citizen, Sheriff, and
Alderman of London. But before our author Billingsley had continued there three
years, (in which time, as it is probable, he became known to an eminent
Mathematician called Whytehead, then, or lately, a Friar of the Order of St.
Augustine in Oxon,) he was taken thence and bound an Apprentice to an
Haberdasher, as it seems, in London. Afterward setting up for himself, he
became so rich, that he was made successively Sheriff, Alderman, one of the
Queen's Customers in the Port of London, and at length 1596. Lord Mayor
thereof, and a Knight. But the chief matter which I am to let the Reader know
concerning him, is, that when the said Whytehead was put to his shifts, after
the demolition of his house in the latter end of Hen. 8. he was received by
Billingsley into his Family, and by him maintained in his old age in his house
in London. In which time he learned Mathematics of him, and became so
excellent in them, that he went beyond many of his time, whether Laymen, or
professed Scholars. When Whytchead died he gave his Scholar all his
Mathematical observations that he had made and collected, together with his
notes on Euclids Elements, which he had with great pains drawn up and digested.
Afterward our author Billingstey translated the said Elements into English,
and added thereunto plain Declarations and Examples, manifold additions,
Scholias, annotations, and inventions from the best Mathematicians, both in
time past, and in the age he lived in. Which being done, he published them
under this title.

The Elements of Geometry of the mos ancient Philosopher Euclide of Megara,
faithfully translated into the English tongue: Whereunto are added certain
Scholias, annotations, etc. Land. 1570. fol. To which book Dr. Joh. Dce did put
a large Mathematical Preface, containing a great deal of Learning pertaining to
that Science. As for Billingsley he departed this mortal life in a good old
age, 22. Nov. in sixteen hundred and six, and some weeks after his body was
buried in a little Vault under his Pew in the Church of S. Catherine Colman in
London. What, or where, was the end of Whytehead, I cannot tell, yet thus much
I know, that what I have said relating to him and Billingsley concerning
Mathematics, I had from the Mathematical observations Ms. in Archiv. coll. c.
c.
of our Antiquary Brian Twyne, and he from the information of that noted
Mathematician Mr. Th. Allen of Glouc. hall, and he from an eminent Physician
called Reb. Barnes M. D. who was elected Fellow of Merton coll. 29. Hen. 8.
dom. 1537. and remembered, and had some acquaintance with, Whytehead and
Billingsley. I find also one Rob. Billingsley, who was not long since a teacher
of Arithmetic and Mathematics, and author of a little book of Arith. and
Algebra, called An Idea of Arithmetic, etc. Whether he was descended from, or
related to, Sir Henry, I know not.

Henry) Son of Henry Savile of Over-Bradley in Staneland near to Eland (not far
from Halifax) in Yorkshire, Esquire; was born in that County, particularly, as it
seems, at Over-Bradley, became a Commoner of Brasnose coll. in 1561. or
thereabouts; where laying a considerable foundation of Acad. learning, was
taken thence before he could attain to a degree in the University, and sent to
the Middle Temple, where making great proficiencie in the Municipal Laws, was
called to the Bar, fell into considerable Practice, became Autumn-reader of
that house, 28 Elizab. dom. 1586. Steward of the Seigniory or Lordship of
Wakefield in his own Country, called to the degree and honor of the Coif in
1594 made one of the Barons of the Exchequer, 98. and about that time one of
the Justices of Assize. When K. James came to the Crown, he not only continued
him in his Barons place 4. Apr. but also conferred on him, just before his
Coronation, the honor of Knighthood, 23. July following, an. 1603. being then
one of the Judges that was to attend that Solemnity. He left behind him, at his
death, certain things fit for the Press, of which only this following is as yet
made public.

Reports of diverse special Cases, as well in the Court of Common P^eas, as of
the Exchequer, in the time of Q. Elizabeth. Land. 1675. in a thin fol. Printed
in old French in a black character, and published by John Richardson of the
Inner Temple. Sir Jo. Savile paid his last debt to nature at London on the 2.
1606-7.
of Feb. in sixteen hundred and six, aged 61. whereupon his body was buried in
the Church of St. Dunstans in the West in Fleetstreet, London, and his heart
carried to Medley in Yorkshire, where it was buried in an Isle joining on the
South side of the Church belonging to that place. Soon after was a very fair
Monument erected over it, with the Effigics thereon of the Defunct in his
Judges Robes, (cut out from stone,) laying thereon. The Reader is to know, that
there was one John Savile a great pretender to Poetry, in the beginning of the
Reign of K. James 1. patronized in his studies by his kinsman, (a young Spark,)
called George Savile, Son of Sir George Savile Knight: which John wrote among
several things, K. James his entertainment at Theobalds, with his welcome to
London, and a salutory Poem. Land. 1603. qu. This I thought fit to let the
Reader know, lest Posterity may take him to be the same with Sir Jo. Savile
beforementioned. The Name and Family of the Saviles are numerous in Yorkshire,
and pretend to be descended from the Savelli in Italy, a Family accounted by
some to be the ancientest in the World; having been in Italy about 3000 years;
some of which have been Consuls before, and after, the time of our Savior. But
how any of our Saviles in England can make it out, that they are descended from
the said Family of the Savelli, I cannot in the least conjecture, (being the
name of a Town,) nor can I believe it, no more, than that the Corbets of
Shropsphire are descended from the Corvini, another ancient Family in Italy.

GEORGE CORYAT received his first being Thomas within the City Salisbury,
educated in Grammaticals in Wykehams School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New
coll. in 1562. took the degrees in Arts, and in June 1570. became Rector of
Odcombe in Sommersetshire on the death of Tho. Read, and at length Bach. of
Divinity. In 1594, he was made Prebendary of Warthill in the Church of York,
and had some other Dignity, but what I cannot tell. He was a person much
commended in his time for his fine fancy in Latin Poetry, and for certain
matters which he had written, quoted by John In Speculo Moralium, lib. 4. cap.
2.
Case the Philosopher, Jam. In octavo libro De celeberrimis Academ. Col. Agrip.
1602. p. 450, 451.
Middendorp, Joh. In lib. 1. de Antiq. Acad. Cant. p. 45. and alibi.
Cay and others. All that I have seen of his composition, are only these things
following.

Poemata varia Latina, Land. 1611. qu. Published by his Son Thomas after his
death, and by him intit. Posthuma fragmenta Poematum.

Descriptio Angliae, Scotiae, and Hiberniae. Written in Lat. verse as it seems,
and dedicated to Q. Elizabeth. He died in the Parsonage house at Odcombe, on
the fourth of March in sixteen hundred and six: 1606-7
whereupon his Son Tom, upon some design, preserving his body from stench above
ground, till the 14 of Apr. following, was then buried in the Chancel of the
Church at Odcombe; at which time one Gibbs Gollop M. A. who was admitted to
that Rectory, 23. Mar. 1606 did officiate. Gertrude Widow of the said G.
Coryate lived many years after at Odcombe, and near to it, where dying, was
buried near to the Relics of her Husband, on the 3. Apr. 1645. (21. Car. 1.)
as I have been informed by the searches, by Mr. Humph. Hody M. A. of Wadham
coll. a Native of Odcombe. At the same time that George Coryat was elected
Prob. Fellow of New coll. was elected also one John Mundyn, born at Maperton in
Dorsetshire, who being a Civilian, and not conforming himself to the Protestant
Religion, was ejected thence by the B. of Winchester in his Visitation of that
coll. 1566. Afterward he went beyond the Seas, was made a Seminary Priest, and
sent into the Mission of England: But being taken on Hounslow-heath, in his
journey from Winchester to London, was by Sir Fr. Walsingham Secretary of State
committed to Prison. Afterward being convicted according to the Law against
Seminaries, was (with 4 other Priests) executed at Tybourne 12 Feb. 1583. See
more in a book intit. Concertatio Eccles. Catholicae in Anglia. Printed at
Trier 1594. fol. 140, 141.

WILLIAM BURTON, a Native of the City Winchester, was educated in Wykchams
School there, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. 1563. and left that house
after he had taken one degree in Arts. This person I take to be the same Will.
Burton who was a Minister in Bristow, and afterward at Reading in Berks. And
author of these things following.

Several Sermons, as (1) Sermon Preached at Norwith 21. of Dec. 1589. on Jer.
3. 14. Land. in oct. (2) David's Evidence; or, the assurance of Gods love, in 7
Sermons on Psalm. 41. 11, 12, 13. Land. 1592. oct. 1602. qu. (3) A Caveat for
Sureties, two Sermon. at Bristow on Prove. 6. from 1. to the 5. verse. Land. 1593.
oct. 1602. qu. (4) The rousing of the Sluggard, in 7 Sermons, on Prove. 6. from
6. to the 11. verse. Land. 1595. oct. (5) Sermons on the Churches Love to
Christ her Husband, on Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Land. 1595. oct. and 1602. qu.
These Sermons are intit. Gods Wooing his Church. (6) David's Thanksgiving for
the arraignment of the Man of Earth, two Sermons on Psalm. 10. 17, 18. Land.
1598. oct. dedicated to Sir Will. Periam Knight, Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, a favourer of the authors Muse, (7) Ten Sermons, on Matthew 5. 3, 4.
Land. 1602. qu. (8) The Anatomy of Beliel, in 10 Sermons on Prove. 6. 12, 13,
14, 15. Land. 1602. qu. dedic. to Ralph Warcupp of English in Oxfordshire Esque
a great favourer of the author.

Catechism containing certain Questions and Answers concerning the knowledge of
God, and the right use of the Law. Land. 1591. oct.

Conclusions of Peace between God and Man, containing comfortable meditations
for the Children of God, on Prove. 7. 1, 2. Land. 1595. oct. and 1602. qu.

Exposition of the Lords Prayer, drawn into Questions and Answers. Land. 1594.
oct. 1602. qu.

Certain Questions and Answers concerning the attributes of God. Land. 1602.
qu. second edit.

Questions and Answers concerning the right use of the Law of God. Land. 1602.
qu.

An Abstract of the Doctrine of the Sabbath, briefly, yet fully and plainly,
Clar. 1606.
set forth. Land. 1606. oct. These are all, and enough, which I have seen
published by Will. Burton a Minister in Bristow, and afterward in Reading.
Whether he be the same Will. Burton of the Parish of St. Sepulcher without
Newgate in Land. Clerk, who Book of Administrat. in the Will-Office near S.
Paul's Cath. beginning in Jan. 1614.
died in that Parish in Oct. or Nov. in 1612. (16. Jac. 1.) and left behind a
Widow called Dorothy, I know not.

Lincolnshire Man born, a Knight's Son, and of the same Family with those of
South Carleton in that County, was a Gent. Com. or at least a Commoner of
Balliol coll. where he continued for at least two years. But his mind being
more Martial than Mercurial, he applied himself to Sea-service, wherein he
attained to great perfection, was a Captain Camd. in Annal. Reg. Eliz. an.
1597. 1602. etc.
in several Expeditions against the Spaniard, Vice Admiral and Admiral. In
1594. he was actually created Master of Arts, and in 1596. he received the
Honor of Knighthood from Robert Earl of Essex at the Sacking of Cadiz. In
1602. when Ireland was cleared of the Spanish Forces, he was appointed
Vice Admiral under Sir Rich. Levison Admiral to carry on the War by Sea against
the Spaniard, lest they should invade England, wherein he performed most
admirable Service, especially in the taking of a great Carack of 1600 Tun from
them at Cezimbria against Barbarum, the Promontory of Portugal. This heroical
person left behind him at his death, written with his own hand,

A true and exact account of the Wars with Spain, in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth,
being the particulars of what happened between the English and Spanish Fleets,
from the year 1585. to 1602. showing the expeditions, attempts, etc. Land.
1682. fol. dedicated to his Son John Monson. In some copies of this book the
Title runs thus, A particular and exact account of the last xvii. years of Qu.
Elizabeth's Reign, both Military and Civil. Land. 1682. fol. The first written
by Sir Will. Monson, the other by Heywood Townshend. This worthy Knight was in
great renown in the beginning of the Reign of K. Clar. 1606.
James 1. and the last time I find him mentioned in his Sea-service, is in
1605. in which year he conveyed over Sea Edward the old Earl of Hertford, when
he was sent Ambassador to the Archduke for the confirming of a Peace: In which
Voyage, it is observed by a certain Sir Ant. Welden in The court and character
of K. James. Land. 1650. oct. p. 48, 49.
person that the Royal Ships of England did then (being the first time as he
says) suffer an indignity and affront from a Dutch Man of War, as he passed by
them without vailing. Of the same Family was Will. Monson a Knight or Esquire;
(Father to Will. Monson Visc. Castlemaine) who died in the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields near London, in January, or thereabouts, 1642.

EDWARD FORSET, a Gentleman's Son of Lincolnshire, and of the same Family with
the Forsets of Billesby in that County, became a Commoner of Linc. coll. in
1590. or thereabouts, aged 18. but leaving that house without the honor of a
degree, retired at length to his Patrimony, and wrote,

A comparative discourse of the bodies natural and politic. Wherein, out of
the principles of nature, is set forth the true form of a Commonweal, with the
duty of the Subjects, and the right of the Sovereign, etc. Land. 1606. qu.
Clar. 1606.
and other things as it is probable, but such I have not yet seen. The next
person that must begin the year of 1607. was in his time esteemed a most
excellent Latinist and Poet, as was by all acknowledged.

THOMAS NEWTON, the eldest Son of Edw. Netwon of Butley in the Parish of
Presbury in Cheshire (descended originally from the Newtons of Newtons) by
Alice his Wife, was born in that County, educated in Grammaticals under John
Brownswerd, (whom I have mentioned under the year 1589.) sent while very young
to Oxon, but making little stay there, he went to Cambridge, where he settled in
Queens coll. and became so much renowned for his Latin Poetry, that he was
numbered by Scholars of his time among the most noted Poets in that Language.
Afterward taking Oxon in his way, (where he continued for some time,) he
retired to his own Country, taught School at Macclesfield, or near it, with
good success, practiced Physic, and was encouraged in his undertakings by
Robert Earl of Essex. At length being benificed at Ilford in Essex, taught
School there also, as it seems, and continued at that place to the time of his
death. This person has written several things, and translated more, the titles
of which, such that have come to my hands, you shall have, though he is rather to
be numbered among the writers of Cambridge than of Oxon.

A notable History of the Saracens, etc. drawn out of August. Curio, in 3
books. Land. 1575. qu.

A summary or brief Chronicle of the Saracens and Turks, continued from the
birth of Mahomet, to an. 1575. -- Printed with the former book.

Approved Medicines and cordial Precepts, with the Nature and Symptoms, etc.
Land. 1580. oct.

Illustrium aliquot Anglorum Encomia. Land. 1589. qu. At the end of Jo. Letands
Encomia, Trophaea, etc.

Atropoion Delion: Or, the death of Delia, with the tears of her Funeral. A
poetical excusive discourse of our late Elizabeth. Land. 1603. qu.

A pleasant new History: Or, a fragrant Posie made of three flowers, Rosa,
Rosalynd, and Rosemary. Land. 1604. He also viewed and corrected Embryon
relimatum, written by Joh. Stanbridge, and was author, as a certain Edw.
Phillips in his Theatrum Poetanum, or collect. of Poets, etc. Land. 1675. oct.
p. 182. among the modern Poets.
writer says, of two Tragedies, viz. of the first and second parts of
Tamerline the great Scythian Emperor, but false. For in Tho. Newtons time the
said two parts were performed by Christop. Marlo, sometimes a Student in
Cambridge; afterward, first an actor on the stage, then, (as Shakespeare,
whose contemporary he was,) a maker of Plays, though inferior both in fancy and
merit. This Marlo, by the way it must be known, was author (besides the said
two Tragedies) of (1) The rich Jew of Malta. Trag. published at Land. by Tho.
Heywood. (2) The tragical History of the life and death of Dr. Jo. Faustus,
several times printed. (3) Lusts dominion, etc. Trag. Land. 1661. oct. then
published by Franc. Kirkman, Junior, a Bookseller, and a great Trader in Plays.
From which Tragedy was another stolen, or at least the better part, intit.
Abdelazer, or the Mores revenge. Land. 1677. published under the name of
Mistress Aphora Behn. (4) Trag. of K. Ed. 2. (5) Trag. of Dido Qu. of Carthage.
In the composure of which Tom Nash joined with him. But in the end, so it was,
that this Marlo giving too large a swing to his own wit, and suffering his lust
to have the full reins, fell to that outrage and extremity, as Jodelle a French
tragical Poet did, (being an Epicure and an Atheist,) that he denied God and
his Son Christ, and not only in word blasphemed the Trinity, but also (as 'twas
credibly See in Tho. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments, lib. 1. chap. 23.
reported) wrote diverse discourses against it, affirming Our Savior to be a
deceiver, and Moses to be conjurer: The holy Bible also to contain only vain
and idle stories, and all religion but a device of policy. But see the end of
this person, which was noted by all, especially the Precisian. For so it fell
out, that he being deeply in love with a certain Woman, had for his Rival a
bawdy serving man, one rather fit to be a Pimp, than an ingenious Amoretto as
Marlo conceived himself to be. Whereupon Marlo taking it to be an high affront,
rushed in upon, to stab, him, with his dagger: But the serving man being very
quick, so avoided the stroke, that with all catching hold of Marlo's wrist, he
stabbed his own dagger into his own head, in such sort, that notwithstanding all
the means of surgery that could be wrought, he shortly after died of his wound,
before the year 1593. Some time before his death he had began and made a
considerable progess in the Poem called Hero and Leander, which was afterward
finished by George Chapman, who fell short (as it is said) of the spirit and
invention of Marlo in the performance thereof. It was printed at Land. 1606. in
qu. and whether before that time, I know not. But all this I speak by the by.
Our author Tho. Newton, whom and his works I am further to mention, has also
translated from Latin into English. (1) A direction for the health of
magistrates and students, namely, such as be in the consistent age, or near
thereunto. Land. 1574. in tw. written by Gul. Gratarolus. (2) Commentary or
exposition upon the two Epistles general of S. Peter and that of S. Jude;
gathered out of the lectures and preachings of Dr. Martin Luther by Anonymus.
Land. 1581. qu. (3) Touchstone of Complexions, containing most easy rules, and
ready tokens, whereby every man may know as well the exact state, habit,
disposition and constitution of his body outwardly, as also the inclinations,
etc. of the mind inwardly. Land. 1581. oct. written by Levinus Lemnius. (4)
Third Tragedy of L. Ann. Seneca, ent it. Thebais. Land. 1581. qu. in old verse,
and printed in an English character. Note that the fourth, seventh, eight The
eighth Trag. called Agamemnon was first of all published by the said (...) at
Land. 1566. (...) tw.
and tenth Tragedys, of the said author, were in the like manner translated by
John Studley of Trin. coll. in Cambridge, a noted Poet in Qu. Elizabeth's time.
The fifth called Oedipus was translated by Alex. Nevill of Cambridge, the same
person I mean, who was author of Kettus, sive de furoribus Norfolciensium, etc.
lib. 1. an. 1582. The 9th Trag. was translated by Tho. Nuce, contemporary with
Studley and Nevill, and three more by Jasp. Heywood, as I have told you
elsewhere. (5) Of christian friendship, etc. with an invective against
Dice-play and other profane games. Land. 1586. oct. written by Lamb. Danaeus.
(6) Trial and examination of a man's own self, etc. Land. 1587. tw. by Andr.
Hiperius. (7) Herbal of the Bible, containing a plain and familiar exposition
of such similitudes, parables, etc. that are borrowed and taken from Herbs,
Plants, etc. Land. 1587. oct. by Levinus Lemnius. These are all the
translations, as I conceive, that Tho. Newton has made. At length having otten
a considerable estate by his endeavors, concluded his last day at Little
Ilford in Essex in the month of May in sixteen hundred and seven, and was
buried in the Church belonging to that Village, Abell, and a Legacy to the
parishioners of the said place to buy ornaments for their Church.

Reginaldus, the fifth Son of Rich. Rainolds, and he (who was younger Brother
to Thom. Rainolds D. D. and Warden of Merton coll.) the third Son of another
Richard, was born at Pinhoe, alias Pinhawes near to the City of Excester in
Devonshire, became a Student in Merton coll. 1562. aged 13. or thereabouts,
admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 29. Apr. 63. Prob. Fellow 11. Oct. 66. and six
years after proceeded in Acts, being then Senior of the Act, and about that
time Greek reader in his college. In 1579. he was admitted to the reading of
the sentence, and six years after proceeded in Divinity, being then in great
esteem for his profound learning. In 1598. he was made Dean of Lincola in the
place of one Ralph Griffyn; about which time he lodged and studied in Queens
coll. But being unwilling to part with an Academical Life, he changed that
Deanery in the year following, with Will. Cole for the Presidentship of C. C.
coll. where being settled he had more leisure to follow his studies and have the
communication of learned men, than at Lincoln. So temperate then were his
affections, notwithstanding of very severe conversation, that he made choice
rather to be Head of that House, than to be made a Bishop, which Queen
Elizabeth offered to him. He was a person of prodigious reading Dan. Featly in
Funebri orat. D. Rainoldi.
and doctrine, and the very treasury of erudition: and what Tully spoke of
Pompey's noble exploits in War, that they could not be matched by the valiant
acts of all the Roman Commanders in one year, nor in all years, by the prowess
of one Commander; so it might be truly said of Jewel, Hooker and this our
author Rainolds that they could not be paralleled by the Students of all
countries, brought up in one college, nor the Students in all Colleges, born in
one County. The two former mainly opposed the enemies of the doctrine, the
third, of the discipline, of the Church of England with like happy success, and
they were all three in several kinds very eminent if not equal. As Jewel's same
grew from the Rhetoric Lecture, which he read with singular applause, and
Hooker's from the Logic, so Rainolds from the Greek, in C. C. coll. The Author
that he read was Aristotle, whose three incomparable books of Rhetoric he
illustrated with so excellent a Commentary so richly fraught with all polite
literature, that as well in the Commentary, as in the Text, a man may find a
golden river of things and words, which the Prince of Orators tells us of. As
for his memory also, it is most certain See in Dr. Georg^ Hakewill's Apol. of
the power and prove. of God in the govern^m. of the world, printed 1635. p. 154.
that he excelled to the astonishment of all that were inwardly acquainted with
him, not only for S. Augustins Works, but all classick Authors. So that in this
respect, it may be truly said of him, which has been applied to some others,
that he was a living Library and a third University. I have heard it very
credibly reported, that upon occasion of some Writings which passed to and fro,
between him and Dr. Gentilis then Professor of the civil Law, in the University
of Oxon, that he publikly avowed that he thought Dr. Rainolds had read and did
remember more of the civil and canon Law, than himself, though they were his
profession: Dr. Hall also Bishop of Norwich reports In his First Decad. ep. 7.
that he alone was a well furnished Library, full of all faculties, of all
studies, of all learning; -- the memory and reading of that man were near to a
Miracle, etc. The truth is he was most prodigiously seen in all kind of
Learning, and had turned over all Writers Profane, Ecclesiastical, and Divine,
all the Councels, Fathers and Histories of the Church. He was also most
excellent in all Tongues, of a sharp and nimble wit, of mature judgment,
indefatigable industry, exceeding therein Origin surnamed Adamantius, and so
well seen in all Arts and Sciences, as if he had spent his whole time in each
of them. The learned Cracanthorp tell In Delens Eccles. An^s. etc. cap. 69.
us also, that for virtue, probity, integrity, and which is above all, piety
and sanctiy of life, he was so eminent and conspicuous, that as Nazianzen
speaks of Athanasius, it might be said of him, to name Rainolds is to commend
virtue it self. In a word, nothing can be spoken against him, only that he with
Tho. Spark were the pillars of Puritanisme, and grand favorers of
Nonconformity, as the general part of writers say, yet Se The friendly debate
betw. a Conformist and Non-(...)mist, part 2. Land. 1669. 5th edit. p. 201.
one of late date reports that Rainolds professed h^mself a Conformist, and
died so. His works are,

Sermon of the destruction of the Idumaeans, on Obad ver. 5, 6. Land. 1584. oct.

Sex Theses de S. Scriptura and Ecclesia. Rupellae 1586. Land. 1602. oct.
printed in English at London 1598. qu. with a defense of such things as Tho.
Stapleton and Greg. Mar^^ have carped at therein.

Sermon preached to the public assembly of Scholars in the University of Oxon.
ult. Aug. 1586. upon occasion of their meeting to give thanks for the late
detection and apprehension of Traitors, who wickedly conspired against the
Queens Majesty, etc. on Psalm. 18. 48, 49, 50, 51. Oxon 1586. oct.

Orationes duae in coll. Corp. Chapter Ox. 1587. oct.

Sum of a conference between Joh. Rainolds and Joh. Heart, touching the Head
and the Faith of the Church, etc. Land. 1588. 98. and 1609. qu. approved (as
it is said) by Joh. Heart to be a true conference, and translated into Latin by
Hen. Parry of C. C. C.

De Romanae, Ecclesiae idolatria, in cultu Sanctorum, Reliquiarum, Imaginum,
etc. lib. 2. Oxon. 1596. qu.

The overthrow of Stage Plays, by way of controversy betwixt Dr. Gager and Dr.
Rainolds, wherein all the reasons that can be made for them, are notably
refuted, etc. -- Finished 1593. and said to be printed at Middelberg in 1599.
qu. Printed also at Ox. 1629. qu. whereunto are added certain latin Letters
between him and Dr. Alb. Gentilis, concerning the same matter. See more in
Will. Gager, under the year 1610.

Apologia Thesium de Sacra Scriptura and Ecclesia. Land. 1602. oct.

Epistle to Tho. Pie -- at the end of Rob. Burhills book intit. In
controversiam etc. in sex commentationes. Oxon. 1606. qu. written upon Pyes
submitting his lat. Epistle against Dr. Howson's Thesis, to his censure and
approbation. It contains also several emendations and corrections of Pyes
Epistle, before it went to the Press. See more in Tho. Pie, under the year 1609.

Defense of the judgment of the reformed Churches, that a man may lawfully, not
only put away his wife for her adultery, but also marry another: wherein Rob.
Bellarmine the Jesuits latin treatise, and an English pamphlet of a nameless
author, maintaining the contrary, are confuted -- printed 1609. qu.

Consura librorum Apocryphorum veteris Testamenti, adversus Pontificios,
imprimis Robertum Bellarmin, etc. Oppenhiem 1611. Tom. 2. Which book was
consulted by Matthew Poole when he composed his third volume of Sinopsis, who
says that the said Censura, etc. was written multijuga and stupenda
eruditione, etc. which is very true, for the author was seven years in writing
and composing it.

The prophecy of Obadiah, opened and applied in sundry learned and gracious
Sermons, preached at Allhallows and S. Mary's in Oxon. Oxon. 1613. qu.
Published by Will. Hind of Queens coll.

Letter to his friend containing his advice for the study of Divinity, dat. 4.
Jul. 1577. Land. 1613. in tw. in one sheet.

Orationes duodecem in C. C. C. Oxon. 1614. and 28. in oct. Among which are the
two before mentioned, printed. The rest were corrected and published by Hen.
Jackson Bach. of Divinity. The first of those which Jackson published, which is
the third of the said twelve, and has this beginning Si quis adsit in hoc
conventu, etc. was translated into English by Joh. Leycester of Cheshire, for
the use all such that affect the studies of Logic and Philosophy -- Land.
1638. in tw.

Epistolae ad Guliel. Rainoldum fratrmm suum, Guliel. Whitakerum, and Elizab.
Reginam. Printed with Orationes duodecem.

The discovery of the man of sin, a Sermon on 2 These. 2. 3. Ox. 1614. qu.
published by Will. Hind before mentioned.

Letter to Sir Franc. Knollys concerning some passages in Dr. Rich. Bancrofts
Sermon. at Pauls-cross, 9. Feb. 1588. Land. 1641. qu.

The original of Bishops and Metrapolitans briefly laid down. Ox. 1641. qu.
It Is but a little thing, and included in Archb. Vshers discourse of that
matter. Other titles have it thus. Dr. Rainolds his jugment touching the
original of Episcopacy, more largly confirmed out of antiquity by James Usher
Archbish. of Armagh.

Judgment concerning Episcopacy, whether it be Gods ordinance. In a Letter to
Sir Franc. Knollys Knight. 19. Sept. 1598. Land. 1641. qu. which Sir Franc. was Son
of Sir Fr. Knoll^s Knight.

Prophecy of Haggai interpreted, and applied in 15. Sermons. Land. 1649. qu.
Published by Edw. Leigh Esquire, who had the Copy from Nath. Hind a Minister
of Staffordshire, Son of Will. Hind before mentioned, who had viewed and
perfected it. What else is printed under Rainolds name, unless a Treatise
against the Racovian Catechism (as some say, which I doubt) I know not. Among
the MSS. which he left behind him, I find these.

Commentarii in tres lib. Aristot. de Rhetorica.

Answer to Nich. Saunders his books De Schismate Anglicano, in defense of our
reformation, etc.

Defense of our English Liturgy against Rob. Brown his Schismatical book. --
This Brown, who was a Knights Son of Rutlandshire, and educated in Cambridge,
and afterward Father of the Sect called Brownists, did use to say that the
true Protestants had no Church in England, yet afterward he found the way into
their Church and became Pastor of a place in Northamptonshire called Aychurch:
Bonum nomen, bonum omen, and quantum mutatus ab illo. And then he used to say
that there was no Church in England (...) his, and that was A Church. He died
in Prison in (...) (after he had been in very many before) about the year of
his age 80. and the year of our Lord 1630. or, as some say, 34.

Treatise of the beginning and progress of Popish errors, and that for the
first 300. years after Christ, Bishops ruled their own Dioceses, without
subjection to the Pope.

Collectaye^ quaedam, potissime Theologica. MS. in the Libr. of Dr. Tho. Barlow.

Collectanea continent. diversa Rhetorica and Theologica. MS. in oct. in the
same Library: Where also I have seen some of his Orations and Declamations,
which have not been yet printed. He also translated into Latin Plutarchs two
books, viz. (1) De utilitate ex hostibus capienda. (2) De morbis animi and
corporis. This last was also translated by the beforementioned. Hen. Jackson,
some time after Rainolds's death, but differs much, by the comparing, which I
have made, between them. Our author Rainolds also translated into Latin Maximus
Tyrius his Three Disputations: Which Translations, with his Epistles to his
Brother William, Will. Whittaker and Q. Elizabeth, are printed at the end of
his Orationes duodecem. -- Oxon. 1628. oct. The translation of Plutarchs two
books, were also printed at Ox. 1614. in oct. At length after he had lived many
years a severe Student, and a mortified devout person, he surrendered up his
last breath to him that first gave it, (...) Thursday next after the Ascension,
being then the 21. of May, 16^^
in the year sixteen hundred and seven. On the Monday following his corpse was
carried to S. Mary's Church, where a Funeral Sermon was Preached by Dr. Hen.
Ayray the Vicechancellour. Which being ended, the corpse was removed into the
Chancel of the said Church, where Isaac Wake the Orator of the University made
an elegant Oration in praise of the Defunct. Which being ended also, it was
carried to C. C. coll. where (the Chapel being not spacious enough) an Oration
was excellently well delivered from a Pew, covered with mourning, in the middle
of the Quadrangle, by Dan. Featley Fellow of that house, containing a brief
History of the life and death of our most admired author. He was buried in the
inner Chapel of the said coll. under the North wall, and had a Monument, with
his bust, fastened to the said Wall, by Dr. Joh. Spenser his Successor in the
Presidenship of the said coll. with an inscription thereon in golden letters; a
copy of which you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 244. b.

THOMAS COGAN, a Somersetshire Man born, 36^
of the same Family with those of Chard, was elected Fellow of Oriel coll.
1563. being then Bach. of Arts. Afterward proceeding in that Faculty, he
entered on the Physic line, and took a degree in that Faculty 1574. The year
after he resigned his Fellowship, being about that time chief Master of the
School at Manchester in Lancashire, where also he practiced his Faculty with
good success. He has written,

The Haven of Health, made for the comfort of Students, and consequently for
all those that have a care of their health, etc. Land. 1586. qu. there again
1605. and 1612. qu.

A preservative from the pestilence, with a short censure of the late Sickness
at Oxford. -- Printed with the former. The said Sickness happened in. 1575.

Epistolarum familiarium Cicero^is Epitome, secund^m tria genera libro secundo
Epist. 3. proposita. Cantab. 1602. oct.

Epistolae item aliae familiares Cicero^is (...) genera, demonstrativum,
deliberativum, and (...) redact^^.

Orationes aliquot faciliores Cicero^is, in (...) tria genera Rhetoribus
usitata, depositae. What other things he wrote, I know not, nor any thing else
of him, only that he deceased at Manchester, 16^^
in sixteen hundred and seven, and was buried in the Church there 10. June.
leaving behind him the character of an able Physician and Latinist, a good
Neighbor, and an honest Man.

JOHN POPHAM, (...)
second Son of Edw. Popham Esque of the ancient and gentile Family of his Name
living at Huntw^rthy in Somersetshire, spent some time in ^ludy among the
Oxonians, particularly, as it seems, in (...) coll. being then observed to be
given at leisure hours to manly Sports and Encounters. Afterward he retired to
the Middle Temple, lived a loose life for a time, but taking up soon after, his
juvenile humor was reduced to gravity. So that making great proficiency in his
studies, became a Barrester, Summer or Autumn-reader of the said Inn, an. 1568.
Sergeant at Law soon after, Solicitor General in 1579. Attorney General two
years after, and Treasurer of the Middle Temple. In 1592. he was made L. Chapter
Justice of the Kings Bench, as In Annal. Reg. Elizab. an. 1592. vide etiam in
Britannia in com. Some.
Camden tells us, (though others Dugdale in chron. sei^ ad finem Orig. jurid. an.
1592. and alii.
say of the Common Pleas) in the place of Sir Christop. Wray deceased, and the
same year hereceived the honor of Knighthood from her Majesty. While he held
that honorable office of L. Chapter Justice, he administered it toward Malefacters
with such wholesome and available severity, that England was beholding unto him
a long time for a part of her private Peace and home Security. For the truth
is, the Land in his days did swarm with Thieves and Robbers, (whose ways and
courses he well understood when he was a young Man,) some of whom being
condemned by him to die, did gain their Pardons, not from Qu. Elizabeth, but
from K. James; which being soon discovered to be prejudicial to Justice, and
the Ministers thereof, this our worthy Judge complained to the King of it:
Whereupon granting of Pardons were not so often afterward issued out. His
works that are extant are these.

Reports and Cases adjudged in the time of Q. Elizabeth. Land. 1656. fol. To
which are added Remarkable Cases and Reports of other learned Pens since his
death. These Reports were afterward printed again.

Resolutions and Judgments upon Cases and Matters agitated in all Courts at
Westminster in the latter end of Qu. Elizabeth. Land. in qu. collected by Joh.
Goldeshurg Esque one of the Protonotaries of the Common Pleas. At length our
author Popham dying on the 10. of June in sixteen hundred and seven, Wellington
in Somersetshire: Which Town, he had, for several years before, graced by his
habitation. By his last Will and Test. dated 21. Sept. 1604. and proved 17.
June 1608. (wherein he styles himself Chief Justice of the Pleas,) he makes
provision for an Hospital to be at Wellington for 6 Men, and 6 Women, and for
other works of Charity. Afterward was a noble Monument erected over his grave;
with a short inscription thereon, wherein he is said to have been Privy
Councellor to Queen Elizabeth and King James.

John, Son of Tho. Lyte, was born of, and descended from, an ancient Family of
his name living at Lytes-Carey in Somersetshire, became a Student of this
University in the latter end of Hen. 8. about the year 1546. but in what coll.
or hall, I know not as yet, or whether he took a degree, the Registers of that
time, and in Ed. 6. being very imperfect. After he had spent some years in
Logic and Philosophy, and in other good learning, he traveled into Foreign
Countries, and at length retired to his Patrimony, where, by the advantage of a
good foundation of literature made in the University and abroad, he became a
most excellent Scholar in several sorts of learning, as by these books
following it appears, most of which I have seen and perused.

Records of the true original of the noble Britains that sprang of the remains
of the Trojans, taken out of Oblivions treasure -- MS. The beginning of which
is Isis the principal river of Britain, etc. The copy of this that I saw, was
written with the authors own hand very neatly, an. 1592, the character small,
lines close, some words in red Ink, and others only scored with it.

The mystical Oxon. of Oxonford, alias a true and most ancient record of the
original of Oxford and all Britain. Or rather thus. Certain brief conjectural
notes touching the original of the University of Oxon, and also of all Britain
called Albania and Calydonia Sylva. -- MS. The beginning of which is, The
ancient City and famous University of Oxford in Britayne, etc. The copy also of
this that I saw was written with the authors own hand in 1592. like the former.
The said two books being written in a small character and very close, are
contained but in a little quantity of Paper. In the last of which, are many
pretty fancies which may be of some use as occasion shall serve, by way of
reply for Oxon, against the far fetched antiquities of Cambridge. They were
both sometimes in the library of Miles Windsore formerly fellow of C. C. coll.
after whose death they came into the hands of Br. Twyne, and after his, to the
University of Oxon.

The light of Britain, being a short sum of the old English History --
Dedicated to Qu. Elizabeth. He also translated from French into English, The
History of Plants, wherein is contained the whole discourse and perfect
description of all sorts of Herbs and Plants, etc. Land. 1578. fol. written by
Rembert Dodonaeus. It was then printed with Sculptures from wooden cuts; and
without Sculptures by Ninion Newton -- Land. 1589. qu. printed the third time
in fol. at Land. 1619. This book which has been taken into the hands of
curious Physicians, had an Epigram In illustrum aliquot Anglorum encomiis, p.
134
made on its first edition by that noted Poet Tho. Newton, friend to the
Translator. What else our author Hen. Lyte has written and translated I know
not, nor any thing of him besides, only that paying his last debt to nature in
sixteen hundred and seven, 16^7.
aged 78. was buried in the north Isle of the Church of Charlton-Makerel in
Somersetshire; which Isle belongs to the Lytes of Lytes Carey. He left behind
him two Sons, (or more) one was named Thomas, of whom I shall speak elsewhere,
and the other Henry Lyte Gent. a teacher sometimes of Arithmetic in London,
who published a book entit. The art of Tens and Decimal Arithmetic. Land.
1619. oct.

GABRIEL POWELL, Son of Dev. Powell mentioned Ruabon in Denbighshire (of which
place his Father was Vicar) and baptized there 13. Jan. 1575. educated in
Grammar learning in those parts, entered into Jesus coll. in Lent term 1592.
took the degree of Bach. of Arts, and then departed for a time. It must now be
known that Gabr. Goodman Dean of Westminster having founded a Free School at
Ruthyn in Denbighshire, in 1595. he appointed one Rob. Griffith to be the first
Master thereof. To him succeeded Rich. Parry, afterward Dean of Bangor and B.
of St. Asaph, and to him, as it is said, Gabr. Powell our author, but in what
year, I find not. Sure it is, that while he remained in the Country, he did
exercise himself much in the reading of the Fathers, and in the studies of
Philosophy, and laid a foundation for several books that he intended afterward
to publish. But being not in a possibility of completing his endeavors where
he remained, he therefore retired to Oxon, became a Commoner of St. Mary's
hall, published certain books while he was there, and supplicated to be Bach.
of Divinity, but whether really admitted, it appears not. So that his name
being famous for those things he had published, especially among the Puritans,
Dr. Rich. Vaughan B. of London called him thence, and made him his domestic
Chaplain, gave him a Dignity, and would have done much for him had he lived,
but he dying in 1607. our author lived not long after. He was esteemed a
Prodigy of Learning in his time, being but a little above 30 years of age when
he died; and it is thought, had he lived to the age of man, he would have gone
beyond Jo. Rainolds or any of the learned Heroes of that age. His works are
these.

The resolved Christian, exhorting to resolution, etc. Land. 1602. oct. third
edit. There again 1616. etc.

Prodromus. A Logical resolution of the first Chapter of the Epist. of St. Paul
to the Romans Land. 1600. Ox. 1602. oct. Printed there again in Lat. 1615. oct.

Theological and Scholastical Positions concerning Usury. -- Pr. with Prodromus.

The Catholics supplication to the King for toleration of Catholic Religion,
with Notes and Observations in the Margin. Land. 1603. qu.

A Supplicatory parallel-wise, or Counterpoise of the Protesatants to the said
King. -- Printed with the Cath. supplic.

Reasons on both sides for, and against, toleration of diverse religions -- pr.
with the Cath. suppl.

A consideration of Papists reasons of state and religion, for a toleration of
Popery in England, intimated in their supplication to the Kings Maj. and the
state of the present Parliament. Oxon 1604. qu.

The unlawfulness and danger of toleration of diverse religions, and connivance
to contrary worship in one monarchy or kingdom. printed 1605. qu.

Refutation of an Epistle Apologetical, written by a Puritan-Papist to persuade
the permission of the promiscuous use and profession of all sorts of Heresies,
etc. Land. 1605. qu.

Consideration of the deprived and silenced Ministers arguments for their
restitution to the use and liberty of their Ministry, exhibited in their late
supplication to this present Parliament. Land. 1606. qu.

Disputationes Theologicae de Antichristo and ejus Ecclesiae, lib. 2. Land.
1605. 06. oct. In the Preface to this book, dedicated to the University of
Oxford, the author does enumerate all those of the said University that have
wrote or acted against the Pope and Court of Rome. But therein having fixed
most of them on certain colleges and halls, as if they had studied and been
educated in them, has committed many errors. Among them are, (1) That Gualo
Britannus studied in the Kings hall in Oxon, before 1170. (2) That John
Baconthorpe was of Oriel college, which cannot be, because he was a Carme, and
was in great renown before that coll. was founded. (3) That Cardinal Philip
Repingdon was of Merton coll. whereas it appears from Record that he was of
Broadgates hall, now Pemb. coll. (4) That Pet. Pain and Hen. Parker were of
Alls. coll. whereas they were in great renown, and far in years before that
coll. was erected, etc.

De Adiaph ^is these Theologicae and Scholasticae, etc. Land 1606. Translated
into English by T. J. of Oxon. -- Land. 1607. qu.

Rejoinder unto the mild defense, justifying the consideration of the silenced
Ministers supplication to the Parliament.

Comment on the Decalogue -- Printed in oct. This I have not yet seen, and
other things, which probably he has written. He departed this mortal life at
London, in sixteen hundred and seven, Vaughan Bishop of London died in the
beginning of that year, and Gabr. Powell died very shortly after, as I have
been informed by one or more ancient Divines that remembered him.

Somersetshire Man born, was elected Demi of Magd. coll. in 1570. aged 18. made
Fellow when Bach. of Arts, in 74. and proceeding in that degree three years
after, became a noted Preacher here and at London, Subdean and Canon
Residentiary of Wells, where he was much followed for his fluent and eloquent
way of Preaching, and well beneficed in that Diocese. This person who proceeded
D. of D. in 1596. has published several Sermons, and perhaps other things, but
all that I have hitherto seen are only,

Two Sermons: One at Paul's Cross, on John 6. 27. The other at Chapter Chapter in London
on the same subject. Land. 1585. oct. He died about the beginning of Dec. in
sixteen hundred and seven, Wells. He had a Son, or near Kinsman, of both his
names, who became Rector of Croscombe in the said Dioc. 1623. on the death of
Will. Rogers.

Lancashire Man born, was chosen Scholar (Kings Scholar) of Brasnose coll.
1574. aged 16. entered into Holy Orders when Bach. of Arts, and proceeding in
that degree 1585. became a godly Divine, a noted Preacher, and admirably well
read in Theological and Polemical authors. His works are,

An Apology of three Testimonies of Holy Scripture, concerning the Article of
our Creed, [ He descended into Hell] first impugned by certain objections sent
in writing by a Minister unto a Gent. in the Country, and lately seconded by a
printed Pamphlet, under the name of Limbomastix. Land. 1607. qu. Answered by
Andr. Willet of Cambridge in his Loidromastix.

A second book containing a Rejoinder to a reply made against the former book,
lately published in a printed Pamphlet intit. Clar. 1607.
Limbo-Mastix. Land. 1607. qu. The same year was published at Cambr. in qu. A
Scourge for a Railer, written by the said Willet, against our author Parks.
What else he has written, it appears not, nor any thing besides.

Neath in Glamo^^^shire, was educated in Grammaticals in the famous School of
Will. of W^behm, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. 1569. took the degrees
in Arts, entered on the Physic line, and in 1583. was Proctor of the
University, in which year he showed himself an exact Disputant before Alb.
Alaskie Prince of Sirad, when he was entertained by the Oxonian Muses. About
that time taking one degree in Physic, he settled within the City of Bath,
where he became as much noted for his happy success in the practice of Physic,
as before he was for his Lat. Poetry in the University. He wrote in Lat.

Poem describing the site and beauty of St. Donats Castle in Glamorganshire.
-- Which Poem coming to the sight of Dr. John David Rhese his worthy
acquaintance, who styles it Venestum Poema, he turned it into Welsh, and gave
the author of it this character, Vir cum rci medicae, tum Poetices
merilissimus. I have seen much of his Poetry scattered in several books; which,
if gathered together, might make a pretty Manual. Sir John Harrington the
famous Epigrammatist, had an especial respect for his learning, and so had Sir
Edw. Stradling of St. Donats Castle, who never failed in all his lifetime to
encourage learning and ingenuity. Joh. Stradling also, whom I shall anon
mention, has several Epigrams written unto him, one In lib. 1. Epigram.
especially, upon the sending to him a Poem of a Crott, which was paraphrased
by Charles Thynne. This Mr. Leyson died at Bath, Clar. 160^.
and was buried in St. James's Church there, near to the body of his Wife; but
the year when, I cannot tell. I have been credibly informed by several Scholars
of Wales, that he has written diverse other things, but what, they could not
justly tell me.

New coll. in 1577. was incorporated Bach. of Arts the same year, as he had
stood elsewhere, but in what Univ. or Academy, it appears not. Afterward he
proceeded in Arts as a Member of the said coll. left the University soon after,
and became a Preacher at Warington in Lancashire. Thence he removed to Bansted
in Surrey about the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, and thence, having a rambling
head, to Tanridge in the same County, where I find him in 1604. to be a
Schoolmaster, and, as it seems, a practitioner in Physic. His works are these.

Two godly Sermons Preached at Manchester in Lanc. The first contains a
reproof of the subtle practices of dissembling Neuters, and politic
Worldlings, on Romans 10. 19. The other, a charge and instruction to all
unlearned, negligent, and dissolute Ministers, on Luke 20. 2. Land. 1582. oct.

Exhortation to the common People to seek their amendment by Prayer with God --
Printed with the two Sermons beforementioned. He purposed then also to write
the second part of the aforesaid Text on Romans 10. 19. but because he had
occasion to entreat more at large of that article of Justification in another
work, which he did determine to publish, he then thought good to omit it for
that time.

Sermons, viz. one Preached at Crowhurst, on Psalm 1. ver. 1. -- Land. 1592.
oct. and another on 1 Samuel 12. 19. -- Printed 1590. in octavo. etc.

Solace for a Soldier and Sailor, containing an Apology out of the Word of God,
how we are to esteem of the valiant attempts of Noblemen and Gent. of England,
which incurr so many dangers on the Seas to abridge the proud Power of Spain.
Land. 1592. qu.

Phlebotomy: or, a Treatise of letting Blood. Land. 1601. Oct.

Discourse concerning the Soul and Spirit of Man, wherein is described the
Essence and Dignity thereof, etc. Land. 1614 oct.

Discourse of the several kinds and causes of Lightning. Written by occasion of
a fearful Lightning, 17. Nov. 1606. Which in short time burnt the Spire-steeple
of Blechingley in Surrey, and in the same, welt into infinite fragments a
goodly ring of Bells. Land. 1607. in three sh in qu.

A most profitable new Treatise from approved experience of the art of
propagating Plants. Land. 1623. qu This was published after the authors death
(as it seems) by one Will. Clar. 1607.
Lawson, at the end of his New Orchard and Garden, etc. What other things our
author S. (...) has written, I cannot yet find; nor do I know how to trace him
to his grave, because he died not at Tanridge, as a worthy Knight of that Town
(Sir W. Hayward) has informed me, but removed thence to another place, which I
think was Blechingley beforementioned.

Withyam in the County of Sussex, educated in this University in the time of Q.
Mary, (in Heart hall, as it seems,) where he became an excellent Poet.
Afterward he retired for a time to Cambridge, where he had the degree of M. of
A. conferred upon him. About the same time, being a Student in the Inner Temple,
he became a Barrister, traveled into Foreign parts, and was detained Tho.
Mills in his Cat. of Honor, p. 412.
for a time a Prisoner in Rome; whence, his liberty was procured for his return
into England, to possess the vast inheritance left to him by his Father, an.
1566. The next year he was advanced to the degree and title of the Lord
Buckhurst; and after he had been employed in several Embassies, (particularly
into France 1571.) he was incorporated M. of A. of this University in Jan.
1591. having a little before been chosen Chancellor thereof. In the 41. of Q.
Elizabeth he was constituted Lord Treasurer of England, and in the beginning of
K. James was created Earl of Dorset. From his puerile years to his last, he was
a continual favourer and furtherer of learning: And having been in his younger
days poetically inclined, did write, while he continued in Oxon, several Latin
and English Poems, which tho published, either by themselves, or mixed among
other Men's Poems, yet I presume they are lost or forgotten, as having either no
name to them, or that the copies are worn out. He had also an excellent faculty
in composing Tragedies, and was esteemed the best of his time for that part of
the Stage. But what remains of his labors in that way, that are extant, I
could never see but this following.

The Tragedy of Ferrex and Porrex Sons to Gorboduc King of Britain. -- Acted
before the Queen by the Gentlemen of the Inner Temple, at White Hall, 18. Jan.
1561. It was printed at Land. without the consent of the authors, and so
consequently very imperfectly, an. 1565. Afterward being made perfect, it was
printed there again in 1570. or thereabouts, and after in qu. In the composure
of this Tragedy (written in old English rhyme) our outhor Sackvile had the
assistance of Tho. Norton, who made the three first Acts, I mean the same
Norton who made some of the Psalms of David to run in rhyme, as I have told you
before. However Sackvile being afterward a noted Man in the Eye of Q.
Elizabeth, (to whom he was an Allie,) and in the State, the composition of the
whole was attributed to him, and the ingenious men of that age did esteem the
said Tragedy to be the best of its time, even in Sir Philip Sidney's judgment,
who tells In his Apology for Poetry. Land. 1595. qu.
us, that it is full of stately Speeches, and well sounding Phrases, climyng to
the height of Seneca's style, and as full of notable morality, which it does
most delightfully teach, and so obtain the very and of Po^sie; yet in truth it
is very desectious in the circumstances, etc. Our author Sackvile also wrote,

Induction to the Mirror of Magistrates. -- Not to that Mirror published by
Will. Baldwyn, but to that, I suppose, which was published by Joh. Higens an
eminent Poet of his time, whom I shall farther mention in Rich. Nicolls, an.
1615. Which Induction, with the Mirror it self, were highly valued by Scholars
in the time of Q. Elizabeth. What else this Noble Person has made public, I
know not, nor any thing besides material of him, only that dying suddenly at
the Council board (being one of the Privy Council to K. James) on the 19. Apr.
in sixteen hundred and eight, was buried in the Church of Withyam
beforementioned. From him is lineally descended Charles Sackvile, now Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex, a person that has been highly esteemed for his admirable
vein in Poetry, and other polite learning, as several things of his
composition, while Lord Buckhurst, show,

Northamptonshire, elected Demi of Magd. coll. 1556. aged 17. and soon after
being a great proficient in Logic and Philosopy was admitted Probationer, 11.
Sept. 1559. and the year after perpetual fellow of the said coll. In 1564. he
proceeded in Arts, was with Sir Tho. Hoby in his Embassy to France; and in
1568. he resigned his fellowship. What became of him afterward, let his Epitaph
following speak, while I tell you that he translated from Lat. into English (1)
Sermons on the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. Land. 1579. qu. written by John
Calvin. (2) Version and annotations on the New Test. Land. 1589. in oct. Which
version and annot. were made in lat. by Theod. Beza. He also translated from
French into English (1) A Treatise of the excellency of a Christian man. Land.
1576. and 85. in oct. written by Monsieur Peter de la Place one of the Kings
Council, and chief President of the Court of Aides in Paris. (2) The life and
death of Pet. de la Place, etc. Land. 1576. and 85. in oct. What other things
he has translated, or what he has written, I cannot tell. Chertsey in Surrey.
Over his grave was this Epitaph soon after fastened on the east wall of the said
chancel. Laurentio Tomsono honesta Tomsoniorum familia in agro Northamptoniensi
oriundo, in collegio Magdal. Oxon. educato, perigrinatione Sueviae, Russiae,
Daeniae, Germaniae, Italiae, Galliae nobilitato: duodecem linguarum cognitione
instructo; Theologiae, Juris civilis and municipalis nostri, totiusque
literaturae politioris scientiae claro: ingenii acumine, disputandi
subtilitate, cloquenai suavitate and lepore, virtute omni pietateque insigni:
linguae Hebraicae publica Genevae professione celebri: accurata Novi Testamenti
translatione notabili: In politicis apud Walsinghamam Elizabethae Reginae
Scribam pracipuum diu multumque exercitato: post cujus mortem vitae privatae
umbratilisque jucunditate annos XX. Sir Fr. Walsingham died 1590. and therefore
he lived not there 20. years.
continuos Lalamiae Middlisexiae persuncto, and septuagenario placidissime
religiosissmoque desuncto quarto calendas Aprilis an. 1608. Vxor Jana, and Jana
filia ex quinque una superstes filiabus amoris ergo posuerunt and pietatis. The
report at Chersey is, that he built the House which now stands on the top of S.
Anns-hill in Chertsey parish, out of the ruins of S. Anns-chappel, and on the
very place where that chapel stood; having a prospect into several Counties:
In which House, the Inhabitants of the neighborhood will tell you that this
learned author died.

WILLIAM WARFORD received his first Bristow which is in Sommersetshire, was
admitted a Scholar of Trinity coll. 13. June 1576. probationer two years after,
being then Bach. of Arts, Fellow 1579. and Master of Arts in 82. But having
more a mind to the To. Cath. religion, in which he was partly educated, than to
Protestancy, he left the college, his friends and the nation, went to Rome, and
obtaining entrance into the English coll. there, profited very much in
Divinity. At length being ordained Priest, he was sent into the mission of
England, where making but little stay, he returned to Rome, and in the year
1594. he was entered into the society of Jesus. Afterward being sent by his
Superiors into Spain, he spent the remainder of his time in the English
Seminaries there. He has written,

A short institution containing the chief mysteries of Christian religion,
collected from the holy Scriptures and Fathers. Sevil 1600. and at S. Omers in
1616. Translated into Latin by Tho. More a Jesuit, descended from the famous
Sir Tho. More, sometimes L. Chancellor of England; -- Printed at S. Omers in
1617. The said Warford also translated into English several of the Histories of
Saints, written by Pet. Ribadeneira, but died, before he could finish them, at
Valladolid in Spain on the 3. Nov. (according the account there followed) in
sixteen hundred and eight, and was buried in the college of the Jesuits there,
a godly and learned man.

WILLIAM WILKES, a most excellent preacher James 1. was born within the diocese
of Lichfeild and Coventry, elected Probationer-fellow of Merton coll. in 1572.
entered into the sacred function when Master of Arts, and in 1580. became Vicar
of the Church of S. Peter in the East, within the City of Oxon, by the
presentation thereunto of the Warden and Society of the said coll. where for
his excellent Sermons he was much frequented by Scholars and Citizens.
Afterward taking the degrees in Divinity he resigned the said Church, being
well beneficed in Wiltshire, and dignified. After K. James came to the English
Crown, he was made one of his Chaplains in ordinary, preached often before him
to his great content, and wrote

Of obedience or Ecclesiastical union* Land. 1605. oct.

A second memento for Magistrates, directing how to reduce all offenders; and
being reduced, how to preserve them in the Unity and Love both in Church and
Commonwealth. Land. 1608. (oct.) As for the first memento I have not yet seen,
unless it be meant of the book Of Obedience, etc. Clar. 1608.
He died at Barford S. Martins in Wiltshire, of which he was Rector, leaving
behind him one only daughter named Mary, who was married to John Marston of the
City of Coventry, Gentleman. Which John dying 25 June 1634. was buried in the
Church belonging to the Temples in London, near to the body of John Marston his
Father, sometimes a Counselor of the Middle Temple.

Wiltshire, of the same family with those of Chute in that County, became a
Commoner of S. Albans-hall, in 1577. or thereabouts, took the degrees in Arts,
studied Divinity many years, and being a frequent preacher in Oxon, was made
one of the Chaplains of Merton coll. in 1590, at which time, and during his
stay in Oxon, (which was at least 13 years after) his life and conversation was
without exception. He has written,

A short dialogue, wherein is proved, that no man can be saved without good
works, Oxon. 1604. in tw. sec. edit. The dialogue is between a Gallant and a
Scholar. He wrote another book also, intit.

A warning for worldlings, or a comfort to the godly and a terror to the
wicked, in a dialogue between a Scholar and Traveller. Clar. 1608.
Land. 1608. in tw. At which time tho the author was a deserving person, yet he
was not preferred to a living, and whether he was afterward, (he being
scrupulous of taking one) I know not, nor of any other books that he has
published.

Rich. Barnes Bishop of Durham, was a Yorkshire-man born, and at about 17.
years of age 1586. became a student in Brasn. coll. but left the University
without a degree, and what became of him afterward I know not. His works are
these.

A divine Century of spiritual Sonnets. Land. 1595. dedicated to Tob. Matthews
B. of Durham.

Four books of Offices; enabling private persons for the special service of all
good Princes and policies. Land. 1606. Fol.

The Devils charter: a Trag. containing the life and death of P. Alex. 6. Clar.
1608.
Land. 1607. oct. One Barnabe Barnes of the City of Coventry died in the time
of the civil War (about 1644.) leaving behind him a widow named Margery, but
what relation there was between this and the former Barnabe, or whether the
same, I cannot tell.

Elizabeth, was born in London, became Demi or Semicommoner of Magd. coll. 25.
Jul. 1539. aged 15, Perpetual-fellow in 1551. being then Bach. of Arts.
Afterward proceeding in that faculty, he took holy orders, left the coll. and
absented himself during the reign of Qu. Mary. In 1565 he took the degrees in
Divinity, being then well beneficed and dignified, and in 1579. was made Bishop
of Lichfield and Coventry, where he was much commended for his hospitality to
the poor, and the good reparation he kept of his house, which a married Bishop,
as he was, seldom did, or does. He has published,

Sermon against discord, on Romans 16. verse. 17. Land. in oct.

Oration doctiss. and graviss. habita in domo capitulari Lichfield ad
Praebendarios and reliquum clerum in visitatione Ecclesiae suae cathedralis
congregatum, an. 1600. Land. 1600. He died in a good old age in the beginning
of April, in sixteen hundred and nine, Eccleshall in Staffordshire, near to the
bodies of his two Wives. In the Sea of Lichfield succeeded Dr. Rob. Abbot, as I
shall tell you elsewhere.

Tho. Stradling Knight by Cath. his Wife, Daughter of Sir Tho Gamage of Coyty
Knight, was born of, and lineally descended from, an ancient and Knightly
family of his name living at S. Donates castle in Glamorganshire, educated in
several sorts of learning in this University, but before he took a degree, he
left it, traveled into various Countries, spent some time at Rome, returned an
accomplished Gentleman, and retiring to his Patrimony, which was large, did
build a firm structure upon that foundation of literature that he had laid here
and elsewhere. In 1575. or the year after, he received the Honor of
Knighthood, was made a Justice of Peace, became a very useful Man in his
Country, and was at the charge of such Herculean See in Jo. Stradings Epigrams,
lib. 4. p. 151. 161. etc.
works for the public good, that no Man in his time went beyond him. But above
all he is to be remembered for his singular knowledge in the British Language
and Antiquities, for his eminent encouragement of learning and learned Men, and
for his great expense and indefatigable industry in collecting together several
Monuments and ancient Manuscripts of Learning and Antiquity. All which with
other books were reduced into a well ordered Library at St. Donates, to the
great credit and renown of that place and his Family. He has written,

A Welsh Grammar. -- When or where printed I know not. Of which book, written
mostly in Latin, one of his Humph. Prichard in his Pref. to Dr. Jo. D^^ Rhese
his book, intit. Cambrobritanicae Cymeraecave linguae institutione, etc. Land.
1592.
Countrymen gives this character. Hae institutiones Grammaticae adeo concinne
sunt compositae, and omnibus suis numeris absolutae, ut nec eis addi quicquam,
nec ab eis demi (meo judicio) quicquam poterit; nisi secundam hujus operis
author in posterume editionem maturet. He has also written,

The winning of the Lordship of Glamorgan or Morgannwe out of the Welsh-mens
hands, etc. -- Of which book you may see more in The History of Cambria, now
called Wales, etc. Printed 1584. p. 122. and 141. This learned and worthy
person has written other things, but such I have not yet seen, nor can I say
more him, only that he paid his last debt to nature in the Summer time, in
sixteen hundred and nine, Virgin Mary,) joining to the Parish Church of St.
Donate, between the bodies of his Great-Grandfather and Grandmother on the
North side, and the body of his Father on the South side. He died without Male
Issue, whereupon the Estate went to his next Kinsman Sir John Stradling Knight,
who was soon after made a Baronet: From whom was descended Sir Edw. Stradling
Baronet, (a Colonel in the Army of K. Chapter 1.) buried in Jesus coll. Chapel,
21. June 1644.

MICHAEL RENNIGER, commonly called Rhanger, received his first being in this
World in Hampshire, became perpetual Fellow of Magd. coll. in 1547. afterward
Master of Arts, and a Preacher in the Reign of K. Ed. 6. being then esteemed by
those that knew him a person truly pious, and of singular erudition. But when
Q. Mary came to the Crown, he, with others of the said coll. voluntarily left
the Land for Religion sake, and lived mostly at Strasburg in Germany. After her
death he returned, was made one of the Chaplains to Q. Elizabeth, became a
zealous assertor of the Protestant Religion, but refusing considerable
preferments that were then offered to him, he accepted only of a Prebendship in
the Church of Winchester for the present, as also the Rectory of Crawley near
to the said City. In the year 1573. he took the degrees in Divinity, and in 75.
was upon the resignation of Dr. Joh. Ebden made Archdeacon of Winchester. His
Works are,

Carmina in mortem duorum fratrum Suffolciensium Henrici and Caroli Brandon,
etc. Land. 1552. qu.

De Pii V. and Gregorii XIII. furoribus contra Elizabetham Reginam Angliae.
Land. 1582. oct.

An Exhortation to true Love, Loyalty, and Fidelity to her Majesty. Land. 1587.
oct.

Treatise against Treasons, Rebellions, and such Disloyalties. -- Printed with
the Exhortation to, etc.

Syntagma hortationum ad Jacobum Regem Angliae. Land. 1604. oct. and translated
from English into Latin, An apology or defense of Priests Marriages, written by
Joh. Poynet or Ponet B. of Winchester. The other Works, done by him, may be
seen in a certain Joh. Baleus, in cent. Script. Maj. Brit. 9. nu. 73.
author who knew Rhenniger well, which made him therefore say of him, -- In
omni bonarum literarum ac linguarum genere it a se exercuit, ut famam non
vulgarem inde meruit. He died on the 26. of Aug. Crawley beforementioned,
under the Communion Table. Over his Grave was soon after a Marble Stone laid,
with an inscription thereon in prose and verse; a copy of which you may see in
Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 197. b. This Dr. Rhenniger died rich,
left a fair Estate, (some of which laid in Lincolnshire,) and a Son named
Samuel to enjoy it. In his Archdeaconry of Winchester succeeded Dr. Ranulph
Barlow of Cambridge.

Abendon in B^rkshire, educated in Grammar learning there, (in the Free School
founded by Joh. Royse, Citizen and Mercer of London, an. 1563.) became a
Student of Chapter Chapter in 1570. took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being
completed in 78. and six years after was elected one of the Proctors of the
University. About that time, he being esteemed a religious and a discreet
Gentleman, was made Secretary to that popular Count Robert Earl of Essex, who
had an especial respect for him. So that being thereupon introduced into the
Court, raised himself merely by his own merits to considerable eminency, as
first to be Clerk to the High Court of Parliament, afterward to be one of the
Clerks of the Council, a Knight in 1603. Secretary of the Latin Tongue, and one
of the Masters of the Requests. It Is supposed by some, and confidently reported
by others that are learned, that tho he lived not to publish any thing, yet
several matters he left behind him fit for the Press, but of what Subject or
Faculty they treat, I could never learn. He deceased in the prime of his years
(whereby a stop was given to his father promotion) at his house called Parsons
Green near to London, 28. Nov. in sixteen hundred and nine; Fulham in Middlesex
on the 7. of Dec. following. Over his grave was soon after erected a comely
monument by his disconsolate Widow Frances the Daughter of William Lord
Chandois, (afterward the Wife of Thom. Earl of Exeter,) by whom he had a Son
named Robert, who was entered a Gent. Com. of Chapter Chapter in Mich. Term, an. 1620.
aged 15. and became an Inheritor for a time several Lands which his Father left
to him, particularly the Manor of Barwick upon Tease in Yorks. The said Sir
Thomas Reg. Dorse^ in Oss. c. prorog. Cant. (...). 113.
bequeathed a considerable sum of Money to this University to buy books for the
new or East part of the Public Library, as also a Mathematical instrument
gilt, besides 100 l. to the poor of Abenaon for their relief. All which was
accordingly done and settled by his younger Brother Rich. Smith, sometimes a
Member of Chapter Chapter also, who had been prime Mourner at his Brothers Funeral.

I find another Sir Tho. Smyth to have been of Bidborough in Kent, second Son
of Tho. Smith of Ostenhanger in the same County Esquire (who dying Lib. Certif. in
Offic. Arm. (...). 10. fol. 33.
7. June 1591. was buried in the Church of Ashsord adjoining) Son of John Smith
of Corsham in Wilts, Gent. Which Sir Thomas (who had Vid. Camd. in Annal. Reg.
Elizab. an. 1590.
sarmed the Customs in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, and therefore by some called
Customer Smith) was so much in favor with K. James that he sent him Ambassador
Idem Camd. in Annal. Reg. Jac. 1. MS. sub an. 1604.
to the Emperor of Russia 19. Mar. 1604. From whence returning he was made
Governor of the Society of Merchants trading to the East Indies, Mus^^ie, the
French and Summer Islands, and Treasurer for the Colonies and Companies of
Virginia. There goes under this Man's name a book intit. Sir Thomas Smith's
voyage and entertainment in Russia, with the tragical ends of two Emperors,
and one Empress, within one Month, during his being there, etc. Land. 1605. qu.
But him I take not to be the author, because it was published unknown to him,
and without his consent. What else I find of him is, that his fair and
magnificent house at Deptford near to London was burnt lb. sub. an. 1619.
on 30. Jan. 1618. and that upon several complaints against him for certain
frauds used by him, in withdrawing sums of Money in his Rectorship, and place
of Treasurer, before mentioned, he was Ib. eod. an.
removed from those employments, in Apr. 1619. His eldest Son, Sir Joh. Smith,
married Isabel Daughter of Rob. Earl of Warwick, and another the Natural
Daughter of Charles Blount Lord Mountjoy, without the consent of his Father, in
Nov. 1618. but in the middle of July following, he, upon some discontent, left
Ibid.
England without taking leave of his Father or Wife.

Besides these two, I find another famous Sir Tho. Smith, who went before them,
not only in time, but eminence. His native place was Saffron-Walden in Essex,
his Parents John Smith of the same place, and Agnes the Daughter and Heir of
one Charnock Gent. and the place of Academical education, Queens coll. in
Cambridge, where at riper years he was made choice of (such was his proficiency
in learning) to be sent into Italy at the King's charges, and there to be
educated in certain kinds of learning, which our Universities at home could not
then yield, or rather for the complete polishing of his parts and studies.
After his return he became so eminent for his acquired learning, that he was
not only made the public Orator of Cambridge, but also the King's Professor of
the Greek Tongue, and at length the King's Professor of the Civil Law, in which
Faculty he was incorporated Doctor at Cambridge, in 1542. and afterward at
Oxon, but the particular time when, it appears not, through the imperfectness
of the Registers of that time. In the Reign of Ed. 6. he found so much favor
with the Duke of Somerset, that he was made one of the Secretaries (Sir Will.
Cecill being the other) to that King, a Knight, Steward of the Stanneries, and
Dean of Carlisle in the place of one Lancelot Salkeld then ejected. About the
same time also he Camd. in Annal. Reg. Eliz. sub an. 1577,
became Provost of Eaton coll. whereof he had very well merited, but when Q.
Mary came to the Crown she deprived him of those dignities, assigning him an
100 l. per an. Pension for his Life, howbeit on condition that he should not
depart the Realm. In the beginning of Q. Elizabeth, he was called again to the
service of the Commonwealth, was restored to his Deanery, was present with the
Divines at the correcting of the English Liturgy, and afterward with great
commendations performed several Embassies. At length being one of the
Secretaries of State again, and Chancellor of the Order of the Garter, and
several times a Parliament Man, became very beneficial to the Commonwealth of
learning, by procuring the Laws concerning Corn for the colleges of Students in
both the Universities. This person who was a noted Orator, Grecian, and
Civilian, and worthy to be remembered for other learning, has written, (1) The
Commonwealth of England, and the manner and government thereof, in 3 books.
Printed in an old Engl. character at Land. 1583. 94. in qu. and several times
in oct. notwithstanding it was left unfinished by the author. Translated into
Lat. by Dr. Jo. Budden, who caused it to be printed at Land. in oct. 'Twas also
published in Lat. by Joh. Laet of Antwerp, at Leyden 1630. in tw. (2) De recta
and emendata linguae Graecae pronuntiatione, ad Gardinerum Ep. Winton,
Epistola. Lutet. 1568. qu. (3) De recta and emendata linguae Anglicae
scriptione. Printed dialogue ways with the former book. (4) De re nummaria. (5)
The Authority, form and manner of holding Parliaments. This book being lately
(1685.) published, may be doubted whether Sir Tho. Smith was the author of it.
He has also extant Many Letters in the Complete Ambassador, etc. collected by
Sir Dudley Digges. He departed this mortal life in the climecterical year of
his age, in the month of July 1577. and was buried in the Church of
Theydon-Mount, or Theydon at Mount in Essex. All his Latin and Greek books he
gave to Queens coll. in Cambridge, as also a great Globe of his own making,
besides maintenance for two Scholars to come from Saffron-Walden to that house.
There was a very fair monument ordered to be put over the bodies of him and his
Wife, and no doubt there is but that it was done accordingly, yet what the
Inscription on it is, I cannot yet learn, not any thing else of him, only that
Jo. L^^and does highly extol him, in his In Princicum ac illustrium aliquct and
eruditorum Anglia vir orum encomiis, etc. Land. 1589. qu. p. 87.
Encomiae of illustrious and learned men of England.

JOHN SANSBURY, or Sandsbury, an eminent London, educated in Merchant-Taylors
School, became Scholar of S. John's coll. in Midsomer Term, an. 1593. aged 17.
took the degrees in Arts, became Vicar of the Church of S. Giles in the North
Suburb of Oxon, 1607. and the year after was admitted Bach. of Divinity. He
has written,

Ilium in Italiam. Oxonia ad protectionem regis sui omnium optimi filia, pedi
sequa. Oxon. 1608. oct. In the said book are the Arms of each coll. and verses
under them.

Tragediae diversae. MS. Acted several times by the Scholars of the aforesaid
coll. in their common refectory in the time of Christmas. He was buried in the
Church of S. Giles beforementioned, in the month of Jan. in sixteen hundred
and nine. 1609-10.
The next writer, according to time, that is to be mentioned is one, that had
learning enough to be a Dean or Bishop, yet could never rise higher than a
Vicar and Pedagogue. His name is,

Darlaston-near Wednesbury in Staffordshire, educated for the most part in
Logicals and Philosophicals in Merton coll. of which he became one of the
Chaplains in 1581. being then esteemed among the learned to be one of them.
Afterward taking the degrees in Divinity as a Member of that house, he became
Vicar and Schoolmaster of Bexhill near Hastings in Sussex about 1590. being
then, and before, accounted an eminent Linguist, excellent in Sacred
Chronology, in Ecclesiastical Histories and Polemical Divinity. His works are,

A computation from the beginning of time to Christ, by ten Articles. Land.
1597. qu.

A confirmation of the same for the times controverted before Christ: As also
that there wants a year after Christ in the usual computation. -- Printed
with the former book, and both under the general title of An Hourglass.

Epistola ad ornatiss. virum D. `Johan. Howsonum S. T. D. Acad. Oxon
Procancellarium, qua dogma ejus novum and admirabile de Juderum divortiis
refutatur and suus SS. Scripturae nativus sensus ab ejus glossematis
vindicatur. Land. 1603. qu.

Epistola responsoria ad clariss. virum D. Alb. Gentilem, MS. It Is on the same
subject with the former, and are both answered by Rob. Burhill.

Scholastical determination of Usury. Land. 1604. qu.

Answer to a Treatise written in defense of Usury. -- Printed there the same
year. He gave way to fate at Bexhill, 1609-10.
in the latter end of sixteen hundred and nine, at which time, he by his Will
(dated 20. Dec. and proved 20. March, an. 1609.) desired that his body might be
buried in the School house at Bexhill beforementioned, lately repaired and new
paved by him. In his said Will he leaves certain Moneys to the poor of
Brightling near Battle in Sussex, at which place, as it is probable, he had a
Cure. About two years before his death he bestowed much money in building the
Campanile or Tower at Darleston beforementioned, which before was built of
timber.

Cumberland, became a Student in Queens coll. in 1583. where, after he had gone
through the servile duties several years, was made Fellow; whereupon entering
into Holy Orders became a most polite and learned Preacher. Afterward
traveling, he was introduced into the acquaintance of Cardinal Bellarmine, who
showing to him the picture of the profound William Whittaker of Cambrige, which
hung up in his Library, told him, pointing to the picture, that he was the most
learned Heretic that ever he read, or to that effect. After his return he was
made Chaplain in Ordinary to Q. Elizabeth, took the degree of D. of D. in 1600.
was made Principal of S. Edmunds hall the year after, being about that time
Rector of Islip near to, and in the County of, Oxon, and soon after Chaplain in
Ord. to K. James 1. He was a person well accomplished with all kind of
learning, profoundly read in the Fathers, and in School Divinity, an exact
Linguist, and of an aquiline acumen, as one Is. Wake in lib. cui tit. Rex
Platonicus, in act. Secundae diei.
who is profuse in his praise tells you. What he has published I find not;
however the reason why I set him down here, is, that he had a most considerable
hand in the translation of the New Testament, appointed by K. James, in 1604.
which is all that I know material of him, saving only that he dying at Islip,
to the very great reluctance of all learned and good men, on the 6. Febr.
1609-10.
in sixteen hundred and nine, aged 43. was buried in the Chancel of the Church
there. Soon after was set up an Inscription, to his memory, on the East wall of
the said Chancel, (by his Widow I think,) wherein being nothing of him, but
what I have mentioned already, I shall pass it by for brevity sake.

JOHN DAVID RHESE, or Jo. David or Davis, was born at Lanvaethley in the Isle
of Anglesey, elected Student of Chapter Chapter after he had been conversant among the
Oxonians for 3 or more years, in the month of Dec. 1555. aged 21. traveled
beyond the Seas before he took a degree in this University, became Doctor of
Physic of Senes or Sienna in Tuscany, and public Moderator of the School at
Pistoia in that Country, whose Language there, which is Italian, he understood
as well as any native. Afterward he returned to his Country, where he
practiced his Faculty with admirable success, and was held in high esteem by
learned men, for his exquisite knowledge in all kind of literature, especially
for Physic, Poetry, the Grammatical part of the Welsh Tongue, and curiosity in
various Criticisms; yet by the generality, he being not understood, his rare
parts and curious learning was in a manner buried where he lived. He has
written in the Florentine Language,

Rules for the obtaining of the Latin Tongue. -- Printed at Venice: And in
Latin these two books following.

De Italicae linguae pronuntiatione. Printed at Padua. Both which were, in
their time, held in great repute by the Italians, and the last by Strangers
that occasionally traveled into Italy.

Cambro-Britannicae Cymraecaeve linguae institutiones and rudimenta, etc, ad
intelligend. Biblia sacra nuper in Cambro-Brittannicum sermonum eleganter
versa. Land. 1592. fol. Written to Sir Edw. Stradling of S. Donats Castle in
Glamorganshire, a great favourer and furtherer of learning, as I have elsewhere
told you. Before which book is a large Preface, written by Humph. Prichard of
Bangor in North Wales, sometimes an Oxford Scholar. Our author Rhese has also
written in the British Language.

Compendium of Aristotle's Metaphysics. -- MS. formerly in Jesus coll. Library.
In which book the author says that the British Language is as copious in
expressing congruous terms, as the Greek, or any Language whatsoever. He has
written other excellent things, but are lost, as I have been assured by Olor
Iscamus, and therefore I cannot say any thing else of him, only that he died a
Romans Cath. (as he had lived) at, or near, Brecknock, (where he mostly dwelt and
practiced Physic) in the Reign of K. James 1. Scil. about sixteen hundred and
nine, Clar. 1609.
and that he is much celebrated by In lib. 1. Epigram.
Stradling the Epigiammatist for his learning, while he lived, who styles In
lib. 1. De via and more contemnend.
him Novum antiquae linguae lumen, and by Camden who calls him, See in the
Additional collection of Letters, at the end of Dr. Jam. ushers life, printed
in fol. 1686. let. 2. p. 2.
Clariss. and eruditissimus linguae vir D. Johannes David. See more of him in
Tho. Leyson under the year 1607.

ROBERT PERSONS, or Parsons, a most noted Tho. In the Anatomy of Popish
Tyrannv. Land. 1603. lib. 2. chap. 5. sect. 1.
Bell and Tho. In the Life of Father Parsons, at the end of The Jesuits
downfall. Ox. 1612. p. 52.
James from them has done the like,) that he was basely born of mean parentage
at Stokersey in Sommersetshire, that his supposed Father was a Blacksmith, his
right, the Parish Priest of Stokersey; by means whereof he was binominous,
sometimes called Rob. Parsons, sometimes Rob. Cowbuck, etc. that he was See
Camdens Annals of Q. Eliz. under the year 1602. and in Watsons Quodlibets of
State.
one of the dregs of the Commonalty, a Fellow of a most seditious disposition,
a Sycophant, an Equivocator, and one that would set Kingdoms to sale, etc. But
these things, with many other, not now to be named, having been written out of
malice against him, I shall by no means follow, or embrace them for truths, but
receed to that collection of his life, which I have made partly from his own
writings, partly from record, and partly from impartial Writers. Born therefore
he was Rob. Persons in his Manifestation of Folly. Printed 1602. fol. 89. b.
cap. 7.
at Stowey commonly called Nether-Stowey near to Bridgewater in Somersetshire,
an. 1546. His Father was a Plebeian of honest repute, and an enemy to the
Church of Rome, but by Alex. Bryant reconciled thereunto. His mother was a
known grave Matron living diverse years in flight and banishment for Religion,
dyed therein at London, very aged, about 1599. The Son Robert being a child of
very great towardliness and exceeding apt to learn, was by his Fathers
edeavours trained up in the English tongue, and having a good memory, could
repeat what he had read once or twice, very readily. About that time it happened
that one John Hayward a virtuous good Priest, who before had been a Canon
Regular in Devonshire, became Vicar of Nether-Stowey, who perceiving that
Robert had pregnant parts, did teach him the Latin tongue, and after had a
special affection for him; for he living to the beginning of the year 1575.
endeavored to get him into Balliol coll. did exhibit unto him, as it is said,
and was not against the resignation which he made of his fellowship. In the
latter end of 1563. our author R. Parsons being fitted for Academical learning
was sent to the said coll. but whether he was at his first coming a Servitour,
or Scholar, I know not. Sure it is, that by the help of good natural parts,
accompanied with unwearied industry, he became in short time a smart Disputant,
not only in the coll. but public Schools, as occasion served. In the latter
end of May 1568. he was admitted Bach. of Arts, and the same year
Probationer-Fellow of the said college; which being terminated, he was made
Chaplain-Fellow, and so consequently (I presume) went into Orders, being then a
noted Tutor in the coll. In Michaelmas-Term 1572. he was admitted Master of
Arts, stood in the Act celebrated 12. Oct. 1573. and on the 13. of Feb.
following he resigned his Fellowship of his own accord (as the Register of Bal.
coll. Reg. Actor coll. Ball. p. 125. See the whole story of his expulsion,
which was no other than an resignation in Fa. Persons Brief Apology, fol. 192,
193, 194. etc.
says, tho certain authors tell us, that he resigned to prevent Expulsion)
being then, if not before, about to change his Religion. In June 1574. he left
England, went to Calis and thence to Antwerp; at which place after he had
continued for some weeks, he diverted himself for a time with a journey to
Lovaine, where, being no sooner arrived, but he fell into the company of Father
Will. Good his Country man, by whom he was kindly received, and with him spent
some days in spiritual exercise. So that whereas then, and before, he had
addicted his mind to the study of Physic, and did intend to prosecute it at
Padua, (to which place he had then intentions to go) he, by Goods advice, made
some doubt of that matter. At length he went there, and was for some time not
only conversant in that faculty, but also in the Civil Law. Upon second
thoughts he relinquished those studies, went to the English coll. at Rome, was
there admitted into the Society of Jesus 4. July 1575. went through the several
Classes of Dinivity, and in 1580. journied into England with Edm. Campian and
others to advance the Romish affairs, with power then given by P. Greg. 13. for
moderating the severe Bull of P. Pius 5. While he continued there, which was in
the quality of a Superior, he traveled up and down in the Country to
Gentlemen's houses, disguised in the habit sometimes of a Soldier, sometimes
like a Gentleman, and at other times like a Minister and an Apparator. And
being a person of a seditious and turbulent spirit and armed with a confident
boldness, tampered Camden in Annal. Reg. Eliz. Sub an. 1580.
so far with the R. Catholics about deposing Qu. Elizabeth that some of them
(as they afterward confessed) thought to have delivered him up into the
Magistrates hands. About which time Campian being seized and committed, he made
haste out of England for fear of being snap'd also, and forthwith went to Rome,
where making profession of the four vows, he was constituted Rector of the
English coll. there, an. 1587. Afterward he went into Spain, where by his
great learning expressed in disputing, writing, and promoting the Cause, he
became known to, and respected by, the King of that place. About 1597. he
returned to Rome, in hopes of a Cardinals Cap, but missing it, died, as it is
said, with grief. He was a restless active man, and tho of a violent fierce
nature and rough behavior, yet he was more zealous for the promoting of the
Jesuits interest than any of, and perhaps before, his time; witness his
unwearied endeavors of instituting Novices of the Society at Sevill,
Valladolid, Cadiz, Lisbon, Doway, S. Omers, and at Rome. Also his continual
publishing of books, as well in the Latin, as in the English, tongue, which did
no great good to the Church of England, and the noted professors thereof. And
lastly his endeavors of keeping Spain and England in difference, and of his
inciting the Spaniard to invade England or Ireland again, of breaking the
lawful Succession of the Crown, by confirming the right of it to a Daughter of
Spain, and what not to promote the interest of that Country and his Society. As
for those books which he has written (published either without a name, or else
in the names of other persons,) I shall here give you the titles of as many
that have come to my hands, and they are these.

A brief discourse containing the reasons, why Catholics refuse to go to
Church -- Said to be Printed at Doway, but really at Land. 1580. in oct.
Published under the name of Jo. Howlet, and dedicated to Q. Eliz. with a large
Epist. subscribed by the said J. Howlet. See more in the Fasti, 1569. I have
seen a book in Bodlies Lib. (being one of the Copies which was seized before
the title page was printed) entitled in the first page of the book it self,
thus, Reasons that Catholics ought in any wise to abstain from heretical
conventicles. The running title at the top of every leaf of the book is A
Treatise of Schism. Printed at London by Will. Carter, (executed for Treason
in the year 1584.) who confessed, when that book came to be seized on in his
house on Tower Hill near London, that there had been printed 1250. Copies of
the said book. At that time the Searchers found the original, sent from
Rheimes, and allowed under Dr. Will. Allens own hand to be truly Catholic and
fit to be published. This book without doubt is the same which a certain Ant.
Possivin in Apparat. Sac. Tom. 2. in Rob. Persons.
author styles Nine reasons why Catholics should abstain from heretical
Conventicles, said by him to be written by Rob. Parsons. The same year that the
Brief discourse containing, etc. was published, came out an answer to it intit.
A check to Mr. Howlets Shreechings to her Majesty, etc. but whether any reply
followed I know not. The next books that F. Parsons wrote were,

Reasons for his coming into the mission of England, with a proffer or
challenge to dispute with the Protestants. -- This book or Treatise, tho
afterward put under the name of Rob. Persons in the Bib. Soc. Jesu, yet in the
answer to it made by Mer. Hanmer and Will. Charke, it is by them said to be
written by E. Campian.

Brief Censure given upon the two books of W. Charke and M. Hanmer, written
against the Reasons and Proffer. Land. 1581. (oct.) To which W. Chark made a
reply, Printed in oct.

A discovery of Joh. Nichols Minister, misreported a Jesuit -- Printed 1581. in
octav. Answered by Tho. Lupton in a book intit. Answer against a Jesuits book,
entit. A discovery, etc. Land. 1582. qu. See more in Joh. Nicholls an. 1583.

A defense of the Censure, given upon two books of Will. Charke and Meredith
Hanmer Ministers, which they wrote against Mr. Edmund Campian Priest, of the
Society of Jesus and against his offer of disputation -- Printed 1582. oct.
Taken in hand since the death of Campian. Against this book came out another
intit. A treatise against the defense of the censure, etc. Cambr. 1586. oct.

De persecutione Anglicana Epistola. Qua explicantur afflictiones, aerumnae and
calamitates gravissimae, etc. Romans and Ingolst. 1582. Printed also in a book
intit. Concertatio Ecclesiae Catholicae in Anglia, etc. Aug. Trev. 1583. in
oct. p. 79. Both which editions, the former I am sure, were published under the
name of the English coll. at Rome. See more in Joh. Bridgewater, an. 1594.

A Christian directory or exercise guiding men to eternal Salvation, commonly
called The Resolution -- First published in 1583. in oct. From which edition
and book, were framed two more, published An. 1584. One of which was done by a
catholic Gent. living at Roan in Normandy, full of errors, but in sense the
same. Another by Edm. Bunny of Merton coll. in Oxon, but all altered to the
Protestant use, as may be seen in the Preface to Rob. Persons's edition of the
same book in the year 1585.

The second part of a Christian directory or exercise, etc. Land. 1594, 92. in
tw. Printed also in 1650. in a large oct. But these two parts, as it seems,
being falsely printed at London, the author came out again with them, bearing
this title.

A Christian directory, guiding men to their Salvation; divided into three
books. The first thereof pertaining to Resolution, is only contained in this
volume, and divided into two parts, and set forth now again with many
corrections and additions by the author himself, with reproof of the falsified
edition lately published by Mr. Edm. Bunny. Lovaine 1598. in a thick oct. etc.
These books of Resolution, won our author ( Persons) a great deal of praise,
not only in the judgment of R. Catholics, but of very learned Protestants. Yet
not to heap more praises upon him than he justly deserves, his Enemies, and
those of the Protestant party, say, that he was but a Collector or Translator
at most, and that the book was not of his own absolute invention, but taken out
of other authors. They say farther also, that his praise was for well
translating, close, couching, and packing it up together in a very smooth
style, and singular good method; and add, that the platform of the said
Resolution was laid to his hand, by L. de Granada, who gave him the principal
grounds and matter thereof, and the penning by one Brinkley, etc.

Responsio ad Elizabethae Reginae edictum contra Catholicos. Romans 1593. in oct.
etc. Published under the name of Andr. Philopater.

A conference about the next succession of the Crown of England, in two parts.
-- Printed 1593, 94. in oct. under the name of N. Doleman, and is known by the
name of The book of titles. The first part is for chastising of Kings, and
proceeding against them, etc. and was reprinted before the time that K. Chapter 1.
was beheaded, by Rob. Ibbotson living in Smithfield, under this title, Several
Speeches made at a conference; or Several Speeches delivered at a conference
concerning the power of Parliament to proceed against their King, for
mis-government. The second part was to prove that the Infanta of Spain was the
legal Heir to the Crown of England; the penning whereof did much endear him to
the K. of Spain. But so soon as this book peeped forth, which was accounted a
most heinous and scandalous thing, the Parliament enacted 35. Elizab. that
whosoever should be found to have it in his house should be guilty of High
Treason. And whether the Printer of it was hanged, drawn, and quartered (as
some say he was) I cannot affirm it. K. Charles 1. in his Printed by R.
Royston, p. 125.
Messages for Peace, does mention and insist upon that book called Several
Speeches, etc. and Mr. W. Prynne in his Speech to the Committee 4. Dec. 1648.
affirmed p. 108. 109.
that he himself and others did complain of it, but nothing was done to
vindicate the houses from that gross imputation, etc. The said Conference about
the next Succession, etc. put out under the name of Doleman, was answered by
Sir Joh. Hayward Knight, LL. D. an. 1603. under this title, The right of
Succession asserted, etc. Which answer was reprinted for the satisfaction of
the zealous promoters of the Bill of Exclusion. -- Land. 1683. oct. The
Conference it self also was reprinted at Land. 1683. oct. purposely to lay open
the author's pernicious Doctrines in that juncture of time when the Parliament
was zealously bent to exclude James D. of York from the Imperial Crown of
England. And how much some of the then Fanatical applauded pieces in Politics
have traded with, and been beholding to, that Conference, written by Doleman
alias Persons, (notwithstanding their pretendedly great hatred of, and seeming
enmity to, Popery,) by asserting many of the self same most damnable and
destructive Principles, laid down therein, is at large, by a just and faithful
comparing of them together, made apparent in a piece intit. The Apostate
Protestant, in a Letter to a Friend occasioned by the late reprinting of
Doleman. Land. 1682. in 8 sh. in qu. Said to have been wrote by Edw. Pelling
Rector of S. Martins Church near Ludgate in London, Chaplain to the Duke of
Somerset, and a Wiltshire man born. Among the said Fanatical applauded pieces
in Politics beforementioned, must be reckoned a Pamplet intit. A brief
History of Succession, collected out of the Records, and the most authentic
Historians. Written for the satisfaction of George Earl of Hallifax, in 5 sh.
in fol. To which, tho no place or time was set, to show when or where 'twas
printed, yet, as I then observed, 'twas published in 1680. It was answered by
Rob. Brady Doctor of Physic, Master of Gonvil and Caius coll. and the Kings
Professor of Physic in the University of Cambridge, and Burgess for that
University to sit in the Parliament that began at Oxon. 21. March. 1680. in a
book intit: The great point of Succession discussed, etc. Land. 1681. in a thin
fol. and by another excellent tract written by Anon, called Religion and
Loyalty supporting each other. Another Pamphlet also, which was mostly borrowed
from Doleman alias Persons was that intit. The great and weighty considerations
relating to the Duke of York, or Successor of the Crown, etc. considered. Land.
1680. in 9 sh. in fol. which is quoted also in the Brief History of Succession,
beforementioned. Which Great and weighty considerations, etc. consisidered,
were reprinted at Land. 1682. in oct. and annexed to the second edition of the
Postscript, written by Thom. Hunt of Grays Inn Esquire who, therein, tho he makes
use of Doleman'S Principles, yet in a new Epistle before the said second
edition of the Considerations, he owns them to be his. This person ( Tho. Hunt)
who had an ingenious Pen, and was commonly called Postscript Hunt, was forced
to leave England in the Fanatical Plot, which broke out 12. June 1683.
Afterward settling at Vtrecht in Holland, we heard no more of him till Sept.
1688. and then an express coming to my hands, dated 13. of that month, I was
thereby instructed that he then died lately at Vtrecht beforementioned, being
big with expectation of returning shortly after to his native Country, under
the conduct of the Prince of Orange, then about to make his expedition into
England. But to return, I find other noted Pamphlets, which were about that
time published by some ill designed Scriblers, who are shown to have taken many
of their dangerous tenets thence, I mean from Doleman alias Persons, which is a
well furnished common-place-book for such turbulent authors to enlarge on, as
their respective projects and interests should suggest. Also that John
Bradshaws long Speech spoken at the condemnation of K. Chapter 1. and also the
Treatise concerning the broken Succession of the Crown of England Printed at
Land. 1655. qu.
etc. to make way for Oliver the Usurper, were mostly taken out of Doleman
alias Persons, may be seen in Dr. George Hicks's Sermon Printed at Land. 1682.
first edit. p. 28.
on the 30. Jan. 1681. before the L. Mayor of London. The truth of this, as to
the last, a note placed at the end of the said Treatise, has put beyond all
doubt. At length several positions in the said Conference written by Persons,
being looked upon as dangerous and destructive to the Sacred Persons of
Princes, their State and Government, by the University of Oxford, particularly
that which says, Birthright and Proximity of Blood do give no title to Rule or
Government, etc. the Members thereof condemned them, and that in particular, by
their judgment and decree passed in Convocation 21. July 1683. Which being so
done, they caused the book it self to be publicly burnt in their
School-quadrangle. As for the other books that our author Rob. Persons has
written, are these following.

A temperate Wardword to the turbulent and seditious Watchword of Sir Franc.
Hastings Knight, etc. -- Printed 1599. qu. under the name of N. Dolman, that is
Vir dolorum, in respect of the grief and sorrow that Fa. Persons bore in his
heart for the affliction and calamity of his Country, as a certain author tells
me, tho Vide Comdonum in (...) Reg. El^zab. sub an. 1594.
others say that the reason why he put the name of Doleman to some of his
books, was because he bore great malice to, and hated him, Card. Allen, and Sir
Fr. Inglefield as bitter Enemies. Of this Nic. Dolman, who was a grave Priest,
and of a mild disposition, you may read in a book intit. A relation of a
Faction began at Wisbich, 1595, etc. p. 12, 13, 14, etc. 32. 47, etc.

A copy of a Letter written by a Master of Arts of Cambridge, to his Friend in
London, concerning some talk passed of late between two worshipful and grave
men, about the present state, and some proceedings of the Earl of Leicester and
his Friends in England, etc. -- Written in 1584. but the certain year when
prin^ed, unless in 1600. I cannot tell. It was also printed in oct. (as the
other was) in 1631. and has this running title on the top of every leaf of the
book, A Letter of State of a Scholar of Cambridge. The first edit and perhaps
the second, was printed beyond the Seas, and most of the copies being sent into
England bound, with the outside of the leaves colored with green, the book was
commonly called Father Persons Green-coat. It Is the same book with that intit.
Leicesters Commonwealth, being a dialogue between a Scholar, a Gent. and a
Lawyer. Land. 1641. qu. This book, though commonly reported to be Persons, (and
that he had most of his materials for the composition thereof from Sir Will.
Cecill Lord Burleigh,) which, I presume, did arise from Dr. Tho. James his
affirmation In the life of Fa. Persons, printed at the end of The Jesuits
Downfall, ah. 1612. p. 55, 56, etc.
that he was the author of it, yet Persons himself says in his Preface to the
Warnword to Sir Franc. Hastings Wastword, that he did not write Leicesters
Commonwealth, And certainly if he had been the author it, Pitseus, and
Ribadeneira with his Continuators, would have mentioned it in their respective
Catalogues of our author's works, whereas they are altogether silent in that
matter.

Liecesters Commonwealth. Land. 1641. oct. written in verse. This is a small
thing, and contains not the same sense with the former.

Leicesters Ghost. -- in verse also. To both which, tho the name of Rob.
Persons Jesuit, is set in the title, yet I cannot any where find that he was
the author.

Apologetical Epistle to the Lords of her Maj. Council, in defense of his
Resolution in Religion. -- Printed 1601. oct.

Brief apology or defense of the Catholic Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and
Subordination in England, erected these later years by P. Clem. 8. and impugned
by certain Libels printed and published of late, etc. S. Omer 1601. in oct.
Soon after were certain notes wrote on this by Humph. Ely.

Manifestation of the folly and bad spirit of certain in England, calling them
Secular Priests -- Printed 1602. qu. This is called a Libel in a Reply made to
it by W. C. printed 1603. qu. And it was animadverted upon by A. C. in his
Second Letter to his dis-jesuited Kinsman, concerning the appeal, state,
Jesuits, etc. Printed 1602. qu.

A Decachordon of 10 Quodlibetical Questions, about the contentions between the
Seminary Priests and the Jesuits. -- Printed 1602. qu.

De perigrinatione lib. 1. Printed in tw. This I have not yet seen, and
therefore know not whether it be in Lat. or Engl.

The Warnword to Sir Franc. Hastings Wastword. -- Pr. 1602. in oct.

Answer to O. E. whether Papists 'or Protestants be true Catholics. -- Pr.
(1603.) in ect.

Treatise of the three conversions from Paganism to Christian Religion --
Published under the name of N. D. that is Nic. Doleman, in three Volumes in
oct. The first Vol. which contains two parts of the said treatise, was
printed at S. Omers an. 1603. The second Vol. which contains the third part
of the treatise, and an Examen of the Calendar or Catalogue of Protestant
Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors, devised by Joh. Fox, etc. for the first six
months, was printed at the said place in 1604. And the third Vol. which
contains also the third part of the treatise, and an Examen of the said
Calendar of John Fox for the last six months, was printed at the same place in
the same year, under the initial Letters of N. D. When the said three Volumes
were first published, they were sold in Oxon for 20 shillings, but some years
after the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. I bought them for 3 sh. The same year
(1604) came out Around answer to Parsons, alias Doleman the Noddy, in qu. but
whither to any of the former treatises, I know not.

A relation of a trial made before the K. of France, upon the year 1600.
between the Bishop of Eureux and the Lord Pleffis Mornay; about certain points
of corrupting and falsifying authors, whereof the said Plessis was openly
convicted. S. Omers 1604 in oct. Published under the initial Letters of N. D.

A defense of the precedent relation of a conference about Religion -- Printed
with the Relation of a Trial, etc.

Review of ten public disputations or conferences, held within the compass of
four years, under K. Ed. and Q. Mary, concerning some principal points in
Religion, especially of the Sacrament and Sacrifice of the Altar. S. Omer 1604.
in oct. under the name of N. D.

Forerunner of Bells downfall; or an answer to Tho. Bells downfall of Popery --
Pr. 1605. in oct.

An answer to the fifth part of Reports lately set forth by Sir Edw. Coke
Knight, the Kings Attorney Genesis etc. S. Omer 1606. in qu. Published under the
name of a Cath. Divine.

De Sacris alienis non adeundis, quaestiones duae: Ad usum praximque Angliae
breviter explicatae. Audomar 1607. in oct.

Treatise tending to mitigation toward Cath. Subjects in England, against Tho.
Morton -- Pr. 1607. qu. The said Morton was afterward Bishop of Durham.

The judgment of a Catholic Gent. concerning K. James his Apology for the oath
of Allegiance. S. Omer 1608. in qu. Answered by Will. Barlow Bishop of Lincoln.

Sober reckoning with Mr. Tho. Morton -- Pr. 1609. qu.

Discussion of Mr. Barlowes answer to The judgment of a Catholic Englishman
concerning the Oath of Allegiance. S. Omer 1612. This book being almost
finished before Persons's death, was afterward completed and published by
Tho. Fitzherbert. See more in Tho. Fitzherbert under the year 1640.

The Liturgy of the Mass, of the Sacrament of the Mass -- Pr. 1620. in qu.

A memorial for reformation: or, a remembrance for them that shall live when
Catholic Religion shall be restored in England, in 3 parts. -- It Is the same,
I suppose, that is called The high Court or Council of Reformation for England.
The author of it, tho twenty years (as it is said) in compiling it, (all which
time and after, it was secretly kept) yet it was never printed in his time.
'Twas finished by him 1596. and, as I have been informed, 'twas published some
years after his death. At length a copy of it coming into his hands of Edw. Gee
Rector of S. Benedict, near Paul's Wharf in Land. and Chaplain in Ord. to K.
Will. and Qu. Mary, he published it under this title: A Memorial of the
Reformation of England; containing certain notes and advertisements, which seem
might be proposed in the first Parliament, and National Council of our Country,
after God of his mercy, shall restore it to the Catholic Faith, for the better
establishment and preservation of the said Religion. Land. 1690. oct. To which
the said Edw. Gee has put before it an Introduction, and added some
Animadversions.

Controversiae nostri temporis in Epitomen redactae. MS. in Baliol coll.
Library, written with the authors own hand. In the front of which is this
written: Compilator hujusce Epitomes est Robertus Personius, ut patet ex
Johanne Rainold^ in censura librorum Apochryphorum, praelectione secunda, page
22. ex editione Hieronimi Galleri in nobili Openhemio. He also translated from
English into the Spanish tongue, A relation of certain Martyrs in England.
Madrid 1590. oct. At length after he had spent his life in continual agitation
for the cause, gave up the ghost at Rome 15 Ap. according to the account there
followed, which is the fifth day of the same month with us, in sixteen hundred
and ten, and was buried in the Church or Chapel belonging to the English coll.
English coll. succeeded Tho. Owen a Welsh-man.

RICHARD KNOLLES of the same family Cold-Ashby in Northamptonshire, made his
first entry into this University, in 1560. or thereabouts, took one degree in
Arts four years after, and then was elected Fellow of Lincoln college, where,
after he had proceeded in that faculty, did purpose to perform (if God granted
him life) something that might be profitable to the Christian Commonwealth, as
in time God should give him means and occasions. In the mean while Sir Peter
Manwood of S. Stephens near to Canterbury, Knight of the Bath, minding to be a
favourer of his studies, called him from the University, and was by (...)
preferred to be Master of the Free School at Sandwich in Kent, where being
settled, he did much good in his Profession, and sent many Young men to the
Universities. And tho he was there in a world of troubles and cares, and in a
place that afforded no means of comfort to proceed in great works, yet he
performed much for the benefit of History at his vacant hours, upon the desire
of the said Sir Peter, as it does appear by these his works following.

The history of the Turks, Land. 1610. etc. fol. which book he composed in
about 12 years time. And tho it all goes under his name, yet some there be that
think he was not the sole author of it, because therein are found diverse
translations of Arabic Histories, in which Language he was not at all seen, as
some that knew him have averred. In other editions of this book, for there have
been at least five, it bears this title, The general History of the Turks,
from the first beginning of that Nation, to the rising of the Ottoma^ Family,
etc. It has been continued from Knolles's death by several hands; and one
continuation was made from the year 1628. to the end of the year 1637.
collected out of the dispatches of Sir Pet. Wyche Knight. Embass. at
^onstantinople, and others, by Tho. Nabbes a writer (for the most part comical)
to the English Stage in the Reign of K. Chapter 1. A continuation of the Turkish
Hist. from 1623. to 1677. was made by Paul Rycaut Esquire late Consul at Smyrna --
Land. 1679.

The Lives and Conquests of the Ottoman Kings and Emperors, to the year 1610.
Land. 1621. Continued from that time (1610.) to 1621. by another hand.

A brief discourse of the greatness of the Turkish Empire, and where the
greatest strength thereof consists, etc.

Grammat. Latin, Graecae and Hebr. compendium, cum radicibus. Land. in oct. He
also translated from the French and Lat. copies into English, The six books of
a Commonwealth. Land. 1606. fol. written by Joh. Bodin a famous Lawyer. At
length this our author Knolles dying at Sandwich, before he had quite attained
to the age of Man, in sixteen hundred and ten, Mary's Church there, on the
second of July the same year, leaving behind him the character of an
industrious, learned, and religious person.

Francis Earl of Huntingdon, was born, as it seems, in Leicestershire, where
his Father mostly lived, educated in Madg. coll. under the tuition of Dr. Laur.
Humphrey, in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, from whom sucking in many
Calvinistical Opinions, proved, when he was ripe in years, a severe Puritan and
Predestinatian, (as his elder Brother George was, who was trained up at Geneva
under Theod. Beza,) and a most zealous Man for the reformed Religion. Two other
Brothers also were as zealous for the Church of Rome, yet all for a time lived
friendly together. Afterward our author Francis was Knighted by Q. Elizabeth,
and being several times chosen a Parliament Man in her Reign, became a frequent
Speaker in them, and at first a violent Man against the Papists, tho afterward
a favourer, especially at that time when he and Sir Rich. Knightly of
Northamptonshire presented a Petition to the Parliament for favor, or a
toleration to be given to them. Whereby it appeared then to the observer, that
the Putitan could join with the Papist against the Church of England. He was a
learned Gentleman, well read in authors, especially in those relating to the
controversies between the Protestants and Papists, as it appears by his works,
the titles of which follow.

The Watchword to all true-hearted Englishmen. Land. 1598. oct. Which title
did imitate that belonging to a book printed at Land. in qu. an. 1584. running
thus, A Watchword to England to beware of Traitors, and treacherous practices,
etc. But the Watchword of Sir F. Hastings being answered by Nic. Doleman alias
Rob. Persons in his Temperate Wardword, our author came out with.

An a^^logy or defense of the Watchword, against the virulent and seditious
Wardword, published by an English Spaniard under the title of N. D. Land. 1600
qu. In which year came out also another book in defense of Hastings, intit. A
brief reply to a certain odious and scandalous Libel, lately published by a
seditious Jesuit calling himself, N. D. etc. entit. A temperate Wardword. --
Printed at Land. in qu. but who the author of it was, I know not. Another also
who writes himself O. E. published a second reply the same year against the
said Temperate Wardword. Against which, or another book relating to the said
controversy, came out, A confutation of a vaunting challenge made by O. E.
unto N. D. Pr. 1603. in oct. written by W. R. a Romans Catholic. Our author Sir
Francis also wrote,

The Wastword, etc. -- Pr. at Land. 1601. oct. Answered by Persons's book
called The Warnword, an. 1602.

Meditations. -- Printed several times in 16o.

Several Speeches in Parliament. -- Some of which are printed in H. Townshends
Collections.

Remonstrance to his Majesty and Privy Council on the behalf of persecuted
Protestants, setting forth his Maj. interest, laying safely in protecting them,
and encouraging the preaching of the Gospel, and in being more watchful against
the Papists. -- MS. in qu.

Discourse of Predestination. -- MS. in the hands of the present Earl of
Huntingdon, with other things. All or most of which books were written at
North-Cadbury in Somersetshire, where he mostly lived after he was married,
being also a Justice of Peace for that County. He died in the month of Sept. in
sixteen hundred and ten, N. Cadbury Church, near to the body of his Lady, who
died 14. June 1596. To the memory of whom, Sir Francis put up a Monument in the
wall over her grave, with an inscription thereon, engraven on a Brass plate,
leaving then a blank for his own Name to be put after his death, but was never
performed.

NATHANIEL POWNOLL, a Kentish Man Canterbury,) was entered a Batler of
Broadgates hall in Michaelmas-Term, an. 1599. aged 15. and two years after was
made a Student of Chapter Chapter where being an indefatigable plodder at his book, and
running through with wonderful diligence all the forms of Philosophy, took the
degree of M. of Arts, an. 1607. His life, as it deserved well of all, so it was
covetous of no Man's commendation, himself being as far from pride, as his
desert was near it. He lived constantly in the University 10 years, in which
time he learned eight Languages, watched often, daily exercised, always
studied, insomuch that he made an end of himself in an over fervent desire to
benefit others. And tho he had, out of himself, sweat all his Oil for his Lamp,
and had laid the Sun a-bed by his labors, yet he never durst adventure to do
that, after all these studies done and ended, which our young Novices, doing
nothing, count nothing to do; but still thought himself as unfit, as he knew
all men were unworthy, of so high an Honor, as to be the Angels of God. And
since in him so great examples of piety, knowledge, industry, and unaffected
modesty have been long since fallen asleep, there is no other way left but to
commend the titles of his Monuments to posterity, which are these.

The young Divines Apology for his continuance in the University.

Meditations on the Sacred Calling of the Ministry.

Comment or Meditation on the first seven Penitential Psalms of David.

His daily Sacrifice. -- All which were printed at Cambridge, an. 1612. and the
two first at Oxon. 1658. oct. He died in the prime of his years, to the great
grief of those who well knew his piety and admirable parts, about the year
sixteen hundred and ten, Chapter Chapter I know not. One Nathaniel Pownoll of the City
of Bristow Gent. Registrarie of the Diocese of Bristow died 28. March 1611. and
was buried in the Chancel of Little S. Austins Church there, but of what kin he
was to the former, I know not.

NICHOLAS HILL, a native of the City of London, was educated in Grammaticals in
Merchant-Taylors School, in Academicals in St. John's coll. of which he became
Scholar in 1587. and in that of his age 17. In 1592. he took a degree in Arts,
being then Fellow of that house, left it before he proceeded in that Faculty,
and applying himself to the study of the Lullian doctrine, became most eminent
in it. About that time he was a great favorite of Edward the poetical (...) of
Oxford, spent some time with him, while (...) co^^umed his Estate beyond the
Sea and at home. After that count's death, or rather before, he was taken into
the re^^^ue of that most noble and generous person Henry (...) of
Northumberland, with whom he conti^ued for some time in great esteem. At length
being suspected to comply with certain Traitors against K. James fled beyond
the Seas and there died. He has written a book intit.

Philosophia Epicurca, Democritana, T(...)a simpliciter, non e(...)a Par. 1601.
(...) Dedicated to his little Son Laurence Hill. (...) edit. and perhaps with
others, is printed, (...) prae(...)io cui (...) hands of his Widow, various
matters under his own handwriting, but nothing that I can learn, fit for the
Press. Among them are imperfect papers concerning the Eternity, infinity, etc.
of the World, and others of the Essence of God, etc. Some of which coming into
the hands of William Backhouse of Swallowfield in Berks. Esquire from the Widow of
the said Nich. Hill, living behind Bow Church in London, about 1636. various
copies were taken of them, and Edm. Earl of Mulgrave about that time having a
copy, another was taken thence by one Dr. Joh. Everard, part of which I have
seen under another hand. This is all, of truth, that I know of Nich. Hill, only
that his name is mentioned by In his Epigrams numb. 134.
Ben. Johnson thus. -- Those Atomi ridiculous,
Whereof old Democrite, and Hill Nicholis,
One said, the other swore, the World consists.


There are several traditions going from Man to Man concerning this Nich. Hill,
one of which is this, that while he was Secretary to the Earl of Oxford
beforementioned, he, among other accounts, brought in this to him, Item for
making a man. 10l. -- 0 -- 0. Which, he being required to explain by the Count,
he said he had merely out of charity given that sum to a poor man, who had
several times told him, that ten pounds would make him a man. Another is this,
which I had from Dr. Joseph Maynard, sometimes Rector of Exeter coll. (younger
Brother to Sir Joh. Maynard Sergeant at Law,) who had it from Mr. Rob. Hues
author of the book De Globis, (an intimate acquaintance of Hill,) while he
continued in Oxon in his last days, that is to say, That he was one of those
learned men who lived with the Earl of Northumberland, that he fell into a
Conspiracy with one Basset, who pretended some right to the Crown. Upon which
he was forced to fly into Holland, where he settled at Roterdam, with his Son
Laurence, and practiced Physic. At length his said Son dying there of the
Plague, did so much afflict him, that he went into an Apothecaries shop,
swallowed poison, and died in the place, etc. which by several is supposed to
be about sixteen hundred and ten. Hill was a person of good parts, but
humorous, that he had a peculiar and affected way, different from others, in
his writings, that he entertained fantastical notions in Philosophy, and that
as he had lived most of his time in the Romish Persuasion, so he died, but
cannot be convinced that he should die the death of a Fool or a Madman.

Student of Chapter Church from Westminster School in 1574. took the degrees in
Arts, and afterward entering on the Law line, took the degrees in that Faculty
also, in 1589. About which time, being famed for his excellencies therein,
became Chancellor of the Diocese of Ely, and much respected by the Bishop
thereof Dr. Martin Heton. He was an excellent Poet, (especially in the Lat.
tongue, as several copies of verses, printed occasionally in various books,
show,) and reputed the best Comedian of his time, whether it was Edward Earl of
Oxford, Will. Rowley the once ornament for wit and ingenuity of Pembroke hall
in Cambridge, Rich. Edwards, Joh. Lylie, Tho. Lodge, Geor. Gascoigne, Will.
Shakspeare, Tho. Nash, or Joh. Heywood. He was also a man of great gifts, a
good Scholar, and an honest person, and (as it should seem by Dr. Joh.
Rainolds's several answers and replies to what this Doctor has written,) has
said more for the defense of Plays than can be well said again by any Man that
should succeed or come after him. The cause for the defense of Plays was very
wittily and Scholarlike maintained between the said two Doctors for some time,
but upon the rejoinder of Rainolds, Gager did let go his hold, and in a
Christian modesty and humility yielded to the truth, and quite altered his
judgment. He has written several Plays, among which are,

Ulysses redux.

Rivales. Both which were several times acted in the large Refectory, of Chapter
Chapter but whether ever printed, I cannot yet tell. The last was acted before
Albert Alaskie Prince of Sirad, a most learned Polonian, in June 1583. in which
year he purposely came into England, to do his devotions to, and admire the
wisdom of, Queen Elizabeth. After he had beheld and heard the Play with great
delight in the said Refectory, he gave many thanks in his own person to the
author.

Meleager, Trag. Written also in Latin, as the two former were, and acted
publicly in Chapter Chapter hall, an. 1581. or thereabouts, before the Earl of
Pembroke, Rob. Earl of Leicester Chanc. of the Univ. of Ox. Sir Ph. Sidney, and
many other considerable persons. This Tragedy giving great delight, was shortly
after acted there again, and at length in 1592. 'twas printed at Oxon in oct.
to the great content of Scholars. A copy of the said Tragedy, with two letters,
being sent by the author to Dr. Jo. Rainolds, (in which letters, as I conceive,
were many things said in defense of Theater sights, Stage Plays, etc.) the said
Doctor drew up an answer, dated at Queens coll. 10. Jul. 1592. Whereupon our
author Gager making a reply, with a desire to Rainolds to forbear any farther
writing against him, yet Rainolds came out with a rejoinder in July 1593. As
for Gagers letters and reply, I think they were not printed, for among my
searches, I could never see a copy of them. The answer of Rainolds with his
rejoinder, I am sure were printed under the title of, The overthrow of
Stage Plays, etc. This is all that I know of our author Gager, only that he was
living in, Clar. 1610.
or near to, the City of Ely, in sixteen hundred and ten, and that he wrote the
Latin Epistle before the book of verses made by the University of Oxon. intit.
Exequiae D. Philippi Sidnaei. Oxon. 1587. qu. In which book also he has copies
of verses on the death of that famous Knight; who, while he was in being, had a
very great respect for the learning and virtues of Gager; of whom you may see
more in Joh. Rainolds, under the year 1607. and in Will. Heal, who next
follows. In 1615. was published a book at London in qu. intit. A refutation of
the Apology for Actors, but by whom written I know not, for only the two
letters J. G. are set to it.

WILLIAM HEAL, a zealous maintainer of Devonian born, being originally
descended from an ancient and gentile Family of his name, living at South-Heale
in the same County, became a Sojourner of Exeter coll. in 1599. aged 18. took
the degrees in Arts, and became Chaplain-Fellow of that house, wherein he wrote
and compiled,

An apology for Woman: Or, an opposition to Mr. Doctor G. ( Gager) his
assertion, Clar. 1610.
who held in the Act at Oxon. an. 1608. That it was lawful for Husbands to beat
their Wives. Oxon. 1609. qu. What preferment he afterward had in the Church,
or whether he wrote any thing else, I find not. He was always esteemed an
ingenious Man, but weak, as being too much devoted to the fem. Sex.

ALBERICUS GENTILIS, the most noted Scipio Gentilis, and both the Sons of
Matthew Gentilis Doctor of Physic, by Lucretia his Wife, was born at La
Chastell St. Genes in a Province of Italy called La Marca d' Ancona, educated
mostly in the University of Perugia, where being made Doctor of the Civil Law,
in 1572. aged 21. soon after left his Country for Religion sake, with his
Father and younger Brother Scipio beforementioned. The Father and Scipio
settled in Germany, but Albericus going into England found relief from several
persons in London, and, by recommendations, obtained the patronage of Robert
Dudley Earl of Leicester, Chancellor of the University of Oxon. But our
learned author being desirous to lead an Academical life, he procured the
Chancellours letters for that purpose, dated 24. Nov. 1580. wherein it appears,
that he left his Country for Religion sake, and that his desire was to bestow
some time in reading and other exercises of his profession in the University,
etc. Soon after the date of the said letters, he journeyed to Oxon, and by the
favor of Dr. Dan. Done Principal of New Inn, and his successor Mr. Price, he
had a convenient Chamber allowed to him in the said Inn, and not only Moneys
given toward his maintenance by several Societies, but soon after 6 l. -- 13
s. -- 4 d. per an. from the common Chest of the University. In the latter end
of 1580, he was incorporated Doctor of the Civil Law of this University, as he
had stood before in that of Perugia; and after he had continued some years in
the said Inn, where he wrote certain books, and laid the foundation of others
(of which the Students thereof have gloried in my hearing) he receeded either
to C. C. coll. or to Chapter Chapter and became the flower of the University for his
profession. In 1587. the Queen gave Vide Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 2.
p. 40.
him the Lecture of the Civil Law for his farther encouragement, which he
executed for about 24 years with great applause. As for the books by him
published, which speak him most learned beyond the Seas, were all written in
the University of Oxon; the titles of which are these.

De juris interpretibus, dialogi sex. Land. 1582. qu. Dedicated to Rob. E. of
Leicester, being the authors first fruits of his lucubrations.

Lectionum and Epistolarum quae ad jus civil pertinent lib. 1. Land. 1583. oct.

De legationibus lib. 3. Land. 1585. qu. Hannov. 1607. oct.

Legalium comitiorum Oxoniensium actio. Land. 1585. oct.

De nascendi tempore disputatio. Witeberg. 1586. oct.

De diversis temporum appellationibus liber. Witeberg. 1586. oct.

Condicionum lib. unus. Land. 1587. oct.

De jure belli cemmentatio prima. Lugd. Bat. 1588. qu. etc.

De jure belli com. sec. Land. 1588. qu. etc.

De jure belli com. ter. Land. 1589. qu. etc.

De injustitia bellica Romanorum actio. Ox. 1590. qu. Before which is an
Epistle dedic. to Rob. Earl of Essex, wherein the author says, that he had
then lying by him fit for the Press, Defensio Romanorum, and disputatio de
ipsorum justitia bellica. But whether afterward printed I cannot tell.

De Armis Romany, libri duo. Hannov. 1599. oct. etc.

Disputationes duae. 1. De Actoribus and Spectatoribus fabularum non notandis.
2. De abusu mendacii. Hannov. 1599. oct. etc.

Duae literae ad Joh. Rainoldum de Ludis Scenicis. Middleb. 1599. Ox. 1629. qu.
They are at the end of a book called, The overthrow of Stage Plays. See more in
Jo. Rainolds and Will. Gager.

Ad primum Macbaeorum disputatio. Franc. 1600. qu. It follows the notes of Joh.
Drusius made on the said book.

De linguarum mixtura, disputatio parergica. This disputation, with the other
immediately going before, are remitted into the fifth vol. of Critics, p.
8073, 8093.

Disputationum de nuptiis libri vii. Hannov. 1601. oct. etc.

Lectionis Virgilianae variae liber. Hannov. 1603. Written to Rob. Gentilis his
Son.

Ad tit. cod. de Maleficis and Math. de caeteris similibus commentarius.
Hannov. 1604.

Item Argumenti ejusd. commentatio ad lib. 3. cod. de professoribus and
medicis. Han. 1604.

Lauds Academiae Perusianae and Oxoniensis. Hanov. 1605. oct. Dedicated to Dr.
Ralph Hutchinson President of S. John's coll. by Rob. Gentilis his Son, then a
Student in that house.

Disputationes tres. 1. De libris juris Canonici. 2. De libris juris Civilis.
3. De latinitate veteris Bibliorum versionis male accusata. Hannov. 1605. oct.

Disp. 3. 1. De ^^testate Regis absoluta. 2. De unione Regnorum Britanniae. 3.
De vi Civium in Regem semper injusta. Land. 1605. qu.

In Titulos codicis, si quis Imperatori maledixerit, ad legem juliam
majestatis, disputationes december. Hannov. 1607.

Epistola ad Joh. Howsonum S. T. P. In which Epistle our author does learnedly
interpose his judgment concerning Dr. Pyes book of divorce. Printed at the end
of Dr. Burhills book intit. In controversiarum, etc. an. 1606. qu. See more in
Tho. Pie, an. 1609. and in Rob. Burhill, an. 1641. The Reader is to note, that
besides the answers of Pie and Gentilis, one Joh. Dove did prepare a third
answer, but whether it was ever printed, I cannot tell.

Hispanicae advocationis libri 2. Hannov. 1613. qu.

Comm. in tit. Digestorum and verborum significatione. Hannov. 1614. qu.

Discourse of Marriages by proxy -- Written to Egerton L. Chancellor of
England. These are all, and enough too, that I have seen written by this
eminent Doctor Gentilis, and whether any title is omitted, I cannot justly say
it. He concluded his last day in the beginning of the year (either in the
latter end of March, or beginning of Apr.) in sixteen hundred and eleven, Chapter
Chapter in Oxon, is yet uncertain. I have seen a copy of his In Offic. prerog. in
Reg. Cope, part. 2. qu. 12.
Will, written in Italian, dat. 14. June 1608. wherein he desires his body to
be buried in the place, and in such manner, as his Fathers was, as deep and as
near to him as may be, etc. Where his Father Matthew. Gentilis died, or was
buried, it does not yet appear to me. Sure it is, if the information of Sir
Giles Sweit, LL. D. who well remembered Alb. Gentilis, be right, it is evident,
that he the said Alb. Gentilis died in Oxon. He left behind him a Widow named
Hester, who afterward lived at Rickmansworth in Hertfordshire, where she died
in 1648. ( ult. Car. 1.) and two Sons Robert and Matthew, the first of which,
being afterward a translatot of books, I shall elsewhere remember.

RICHARD MULCASTER, Son of Will. of Carlisle in Cumberland Esquire was born in that
City, or at least in the County, educated in Grammaticals in Eaton School near
Windsore, elected Scholar of Kings coll. in Cambridge, in 1548. took one degree
in Arts there, retired afterward to Oxon, where he was elected Student of Chapter
Chapter an. 1555. and the next year being incorporated Bach. of Arts here, was
licensed to proceed in that Faculty in Dec. 1556. Which degree being completed
by his standing in the Act celebrated 5. Jul. in the year following* he became
eminent among the Oxonians for his rare and profound skill in the Greek tongue.
Afterward spending more than 4 years in Oxon, in a continual drudgery at his
book, made so great proficiency in several sorts of learning, which was
exceedingly advanced by his excellencies in Grammar, Poetry, and Philology,
that he was unanimously chosen Master of the School erected in London 1561. in
the Parish of St. Lawrence Pountney by the worshipful Company of the
Merchant-Taylors of that City. In which place exercising his gifts in a most
admirable way of instruction, till 1586. (28. Elizah.) in all which time it
happily prospered under his vigilance, St. John's coll. in Oxon was supplied
with such hopeful plants, that it soon after flourished, and became a fruitful
Nursery. In 1596. he succeeded one Joh. Harrison in the chief Mastership of St.
Paul's School in London, (being then Prebendary of Yatesbury in the Church of
Sarum,) and soon after (if not happily before) had the rich Parsonage of
Stanford-Rivers in Essex bestowed on him by Q. Elizabeth, which he kept to his
dying day. He has written,

Positions, wherein those primitive circumstances be examined, which are
necessary for the training up of Children, either for skill in their book, or
health in their body. Land. 1581. 87. qu.

The first part of the Elementary, which entreats chiefly of the true writing
of the English tongue. Land. 1582. qu. Whether there was a second part
published I know not, for I have not yet seen such a thing.

Catechismus Paulinus, in usum Scholae Paulinae conscriptus. Land. 1599. 1601.
etc. oct. Written in long and short verse. He died at Stanford-Rivers
beforementioned, 15. Apr. in sixteen hundred and eleven, Paul's School 3 years
before,) and was buried 26. of the same month in the Chancel of the Church
there, under a stone, which he two years before had laid for his Wife
Katherine, on which he caused to be engraven, that she was Wife to Richard
Mulcaster, by ancient parentage and lineal descent an Esquire born, who by the
most famous Q. Elizabeth's prerogativegift was made Parson of this Church, etc.

JAMES COOK, who writes himself Cocus, received Chale in the Isle of Wight, his
Grammatical education in Wykehams School, his Academical in New coll. of which
he became perpetual Fellow in 1592. being then accounted a good Latin Poet, as
several of his copies, which afterward were printed, testify. In 1608. he
proceeded in the Civil Law, being about that time Rector of Houghton in
Hampshire, and in good esteem for his profession and excellencies in the Greek
tongue. His works are,

Juridicum trium questionum ad majestatem pertinentium determinatio, in quarum
prima and ultima processus judicialis contra H. Garnetum institutus ex jure
civili and canonico defendetur, etc. Oxon. 1608. qu. Dedicated to Bilson Bishop
of Winchester, to whom he was then Chaplain.

Poematavaria. Houghton, I know not. One James Co^k of Warwick Surgeon, and
a pretender to Physic, has published certain matters relating to Physic and
Surgery, in the Reign of Oliver and after; and therefore not to be taken for
the same with the Civilian.

John Blagrave of Bulmarsh Court, near to Sonnyng in Berkshire, by Ann his Wife
Daughter of Sir Auth. Hungerford of Downe-Ampney in Gloucestershire Knight, was
born in Berks. educated in School-learning at Reading, in Philosophical among
the Oxonians, particularly, as it seems, in St. John's coll. about the time of
its first Foundation. But leaving Oxon without the honor of a degree, retired
to his Patrimony which was at Southcote Lodge in the Parish of S. Mary at
Reading, and prosecuted with great Zeal his Mathematical Genie to so
considerable an height, that he was esteemed the flower of Mathematicians of
his age. He has written and published these books following.

A mathematical Jewel, showing the making and most excellent use of an
Instrument so called: the use of which Jewel, is so abundant, that it leads
the direct pathway through the whole art of Astronomy, Cosmography, Geography,
etc. Land. 1585. fol.

Of the making and use of the Familier Staff so called, as well for that it may
be made usually and familiarly to walk with, as for that it performs the
Geometrical mensurations of all altitudes, etc. Land. 1590. qu.

Astrolabium Vranicum generale. A necessary and pleasant Solace and Recreation
for Navigators in their long journeying, containing the use of an Instrument or
general Astrolabe, etc. compiled 1596. -- Printed in qu.

The Art of Dyalling in two parts. The first showing plainly, etc. Land. 1609.
qu. with other things as it is probable which I have not yet seen. This worthy
Mathematician, who had a most generous love for his kindred, gave way to fate
in sixteen hundred and eleven, Laurence within the ancient Borough of Reading.
Soon after was a fair Monument erected in the Wall (with his Bust to the
middle) over against the Desk there, where his Mother was before buried. Part
of the Epitaph which is engraven under his said Bust or proportion, runs thus.
Johannes Blagravius totus Matthematicus, cum matre Sepultus: Obiit 9. Aug.
1611. Here lies his Corpse, which living had a Spirit,
Wherein much worthy knowledge did inherit.
By which, with zeal, one God he did adore,
Left for Maidservants, and to feed the Poor, etc.


From one of the brethren of this Mathematician, was descended Daniel Blagrave
a Counselor at Law, who running with the rout in the beginning of the
Rebellion, was chosen a Burgess for Reading, to serve as a Recruiter in the
Parliament, began at Westminster 3. Nov. 1640. About the same time he was made
Steward of Reading and Treasurer of Berks, and had given to him the Exegenters
Office of the Common Pleas, then esteemed 500 l. per an. Afterward he was one
of the Judges of K. Chapter 1. bought the Kings Fee-Farm of the great Manor of
Sonnyng beforementioned, and other Estates at very easy rates, was Master
extraordinary in Chancery, a constant Rumper, and a great persecutor of the
ministers in and near, Reading, especially when an Act of Parliament issued out
for the ejection of such, whom they then (1654.) called Scandalous, ignorant
and insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters. At length upon the approach of
his Majesty's Restoration, in 1659-60 he fled from the justice, retired to
Acon in Germany, where living some years under a disguised name, died in an
obscure condition, an. 1668. and was buried in a certain piece of ground,
somewhat distant from that City, appointed to receive the bodies of such whom
they there call Heretics.

West-Harptre) in Somersetshire, became a Commoner of Mag. coll. in Mich. term,
1579. aged 15 or thereabouts, but before he took a degree, he went to London
and studied the municipal Laws for some time. At length being inflamed with a
love to the Romans Cath. Religion, he left his Parents, Country, and the prospect
of a fair Inheritance, (for he was the first Heir to his Father) and went
forthwith (by the instigation without doubt of some Priest) to the English
coll. at Rheimes; in which place, and at Rome he spent about 7 years in the
eager obtaining of knowledge in Philosophy and Divinity. Afterward being made
Priest and sent into the mission of England, lived chiefly, I presume, in his
own Country, and spent above 20. years in doing offices belonging to his
profession. The things that he has written and published are these.

Seven sparks of the enkindled Soul.

Four lamentations, which composed in the hard times of Qu. Elizabeth, may be
used at all times, when the Church happens to be extremely pesecuted.

^Drawn out of the holy Scriptures after the form of Psalms. -- Printed in
twelves.

In the Title, or end, of these two little things (with which was printed A
Jesus Psalter, but by whom written, or published it appears not) there is no
place or time mentioned, where, or when, they were printed, neither is the
Epistle dedicatory to his Mother B. B. dated: However that they were printed
after K. James 1. came to the Crown of England, appears in the first Psalm p.
12. thus By the hand of thy great Servant James, Shake off our Yoke: that we
may find him an honorable Comforter, -- Beautify him with a name, more
precious than his Crown: by the true name of a good King, etc. A Copy of the
said two little things, which contain Ejaculations very full of most servent
devotion for the reconcilement of England and Scotland to the Romans Church,
coming afterward into the hands of the most learned Dr. Usher Primate of
Ireland, he took occasion in a MS. in bib. Tho. Marshall nuper Rect. coll. Linc.
Sermon preached in S. Mary's Church in Oxon, 5. Nov. 1640. to tell the learned
Auditory then present, that the said two books having been printed at Rome in
1603. or thereabouts, the Gunpowder-Treason which was discovered two years
after in England, was then there known, and Prayers sent up to God Almighty for
a prosperous success thereof, from certain passages therein ( drawn, as it is
said in the title, out of the holy Scripture) which he then publicly read
before them, some, in not all, of which are these. -- Psalm. 2. p. 25 confirm
their hearts in hope: for the redemption is not far off. The year of visitation
draws to an end: and jubulation is at hand. -- Psalm. 2. p. 32. But the memory
of novelties shall perish with a crack: as a ruinous house falling to the
ground. -- Ibid. p. 33. He will come as a flame that burns out beyond the
Furnace, etc. His fury shall fly forth as Thunder. -- Psalm. 4. p. 54. The crack
was heard into all Lands; and made Nations quake for fear. -- Ibid. p. 66. In a
moment can thou crush her bones, etc. All which passages, delivered from the
Pulpit, by that learned and godly Archbishop, being then generally believed, I
must make bold to tell the Reader, being an eager pursuer of Truth, that by the
several Copies of the said Books which I have seen, it does not appear at all,
that they were printed at Rome, or elsewhere: and if it may really be guessed
by the make or mould of the Letter, wherewith they were printed, I should
rather take them (as one or more Doctors of this University do the like) to
have been printed, either at Rheimes or Doway, or not unlikely at Antwerp; for
at Rome there were seldom before that time, then, or since, such sine or clear
letters used, as, by multitudes of Books, which I have seen, that were printed
at that place, appears, nor indeed ever were, or are, any English Books printed
there. Our author Buckland has also written,

An Embassage from Heaven, wherein our Lord Christ gives to understand his
indignation against all such, as being catholickly minded, dare yield their
presence to the rites and public prayers of the Malignant Church -- Printed in
octavo, but where, or when, it appears not, either in the beginning, or end, of
the said Book. He also translated from Lat. into English a Book entit. De
persecutione Vandelica. lib. 3. Written by Victor Bishop of Biserte or Benserte
in Africa. Which Bishop was in great renown according to Bellarmine In lib. cui
tit. est. De Scriptoribus Ecclesiast -- Col. Agrip. 1631. p. 156.
an. Chapter 490. Also the six Tomes of Laur. Surius entit. De vitis Sanctorum.
Which translation I have seen often quoted, under the name of Robert (instead
of Ralph) Buckland. What else our zealous Author has written and translated, I
find not as yet, nor any thing else of him, only that he dying in sixteen
hundred and eleven, a most pious and seraphical person, a person who went
beyond all of his time for fervent devotion.

Thom. at the Inn, otherwise Thynne, of Stretton in Shropshire, Son of Ralph
Botevill of the same place, descended from an ancient and gentile Family of his
name living elsewhere, was educated in Grammaticals in Tunbridge School in
Kent, (in which County, as it seems, he was born,) where being fitted for
higher learning by Jo. Proctor Master thereof, (whom I have mentioned
elsewhere,) was thence sent to this University, at which time several of his
Surname of Wilts, studied there, and one of both his names, and a Knight's Son
of the same County, was a Commoner of Magd. coll. in 1577. Whether our author
Franc. Thynne went afterward to Cambridge, or was originally a Student there
before he came to Oxon, I cannot justly say it. Sure it is, that his Genie
tempting him to leave the crabbedness of Logic and Philosophy, and to embrace
those delightful studies of Histories and Genealogies, he became at length one
of the Officers of Arms, by the title of Blanch-Lyon, and afterward Herald by
that of Lancaster, which he kept to his dying day. His works are,

The Annals of Scotland in some part, continued from the time in which Ra.
Holinshed left, being an. 1571. unto the year 1586. Land. 1586. fol. There are
also the catalogues of the Protectors, Governors or Regents of Scotland during
the King's Minority, or the Minority of several Kings, or their insufficiency
of Government. There are also the catalogues of all Dukes of Scotland by
creation or descent, of the Chancellours of Scotland, Archbishops of St.
Andrews, and diverse writers of Scotland.

Catalogue of English Cardinals. -- Set down in R. Holinsheds Chron. at the end
of Q. Mary: Used and followed in many things by Francis Bishop of Landaff, in
his Cat. or Hist. of them, at the end of his book De Praesubibus Angliae Com.

Cat. of the Lord Chancellours of England. -- MS. From which, as also from the
endeavors made that way by Rob. Glover sometimes Somerset Herald, and of Tho.
Talbot formerly Clerk of the Records in the Tower of London, John Philpot, Some.
Herald, did frame his Cat. of the Chanc. of England, etc. Land. 1636. qu.

The perfect Ambassador, treating of the antiquity, privileges and behavior of
men belonging to that function, etc. -- This was published in 12o. in the times
of the late Usurpation, and therefore is supposed to be very imperfect.

A discourse of Arms, wherein is showed the blazon, and cause of diverse
English, Foreign, and devised Coats, together with certain Ensigns, Banners,
Devises, and Supporters, of the Kings of England. -- MS. sometimes in the
Library of Ralph Sheldon of Beoly Esquire now (by his gift 1684.) among the books
of the College of Arms near St. Paul's Cath. in London. The beginning of this
MS. written to Sir Will. Cecyll Lord Burghley, is this, I present unto your
rare judgment (right honorable and my singular good Lord) no vulgar conceit of
Armory, etc. The discourse is dated from Clarkenwell-Green, 5. Jan. 1593.

Several collections of Antiquities, notes concerning Arms, monumental
Inscriptions, etc. -- MS. in Cottons Lib. under Cleopatra. C. 3. p. 62.

Miscellanies of the Treasury. -- MS. written to Tho. Lord Buckhurst, an. 1599.

Epitaphia, sive monumenta Sepulchrorum Anglice and Latin, quam Gallice. --
MS. in a thin fol. in the hands of Sir Henry St. George Clarenceaux K. of Arms.
The said Inscriptions, with Arms and Epitaphs, were collected in his travels
through several parts of England, and through some of France, and have been
ever acceptable to such curious men, and Antiquaries, that have had the
happiness to see them. Several of his collections were transferred to obscure
hands, which without doubt would be useful if they might be perused; but it is
feared by some, that they are turned to waste paper. I have seen diverse
collections of Monuments, made by him from Peterborough Cath. in 1592. several
of which Mon. were lost and defaced before Sir Will. Dugdale, or Sim. Gunton
made their respective surveys of that ancient Edifice, an. 1640. 41. What other
things our author Thynne has written I know not, nor any thing else of him,
Notes on, and corrections of, Chaucer's Works lying by him; with the helps of
which, he did intend to put out that author, with a comment in our English
tongue, as the Italians have Peteark and others in their language. But he
having been taken off from that good work, he did assist Tho. Speght of
Cambridge with his notes and directions, as also with considerable materials
for the writing Chaucer's life. Whereupon the said Speght published that author
again in 1602. (having in the former edition 1597. had the notes and
corrections of Joh. Stow the Chronologer for his assistance,) whereby most of
Chaucer's old Words were restored, and Proverbs and Sentences marked. See more
in Will. Thynne, under the year 1542. from whom, if I mistake not, this Francis
was descended.

THOMAS HOLLAND was born at Ludlow in Shropshire, elected Socius Sacerdotalis,
commonly called Balliol coll. 13. Jan. 1573. being then Bach. of Arts, and a
most noted disputant in that house, and in 1575. proceeding in that Faculty, he
became a solid Preacher. Afterward he took the degrees in Divinity, left his
Fellowship in 1583. succeeded Dr. Humphrey in the Divinity-chair 1589. and
Glasier in the Rectory of Exeter coll. an. 1592. In which house continuing
almost 20 years, appeared in sight under him at one time these noted Scholars,
Edw. Chetwind, Dan. and Samp. Price, Rich. Carpenter, Tho. Winniff, Joh.
Flemmyng, Joh. Standard, Joh. Whetcombe, Joh. Prideaux, etc. all Doctors of
Divinity. Sim. Baskervill, Rob. Vilvaine, etc. eminent Physicians, with others,
to the great credit of our common Mother. This learned Dr. Holland did not, as
some, only sip of learning, or at the best drink thereof, but was mersus in
Libris; so that the Scholar in him, drowned almost all other relations. He was
esteemed by the precise men of his time, and after, another Apollos, mighty in
Scriptures, and so familiar with the Fathers, as if he himself was a Father,
and in the Schoolmen, as if he had been a Seraphical Doctor. He has published,

Oration cum Henricus Episc. Sarisburiensis gradum Doctoris susceperet habita.
Oxon. 1599. qu.

Sermon. on Matthew. 12. 42. Oxon. 1601. qu. He had also a considerable hand in the
translation of the Bible, appointed by K. Jam. 1. an. 1604. and left behind him
at his death, several things fit for the Press. He departed this mortal life on
the 17. of March in sixteen hundred and eleven, 1611-12.
and was on the 26. of the said month ( an. 1612.) buried in the Chancel of St.
Mary's Church in Oxon; where being then present all the degrees of the
University, Dr. Kilbie Rector of Linc. coll. laid open to them, in a Sermon,
the great learning and virtues of him the said Dr. Holland.

JOHN FENNE, a noted translator from Lat. Mountacute near Wells in
Somersetshire, educated in the rudiments of Grammar and Music, in the
condition of a Choirister within the Precincts of the Cathedral there.
Afterward at riper years he was sent by his Relations to Wykehams School near
Winchester, to the end that he might be fitted for the University. Where, in a
short time making great proficiency, he was elected Probationer of New coll. in
1550. (4. Ed. 6.) and two years after being made perpetual Fellow, was then
appointed one of those that were to study the Civil Law, which the statute of
that house styles Civilistae, but whether he took a degree in that Faculty, it
does not appear in the University Registers. In the Reign of Q. Mary he became
Schoolmaster of St. Edmundsbury in Suffolk; where, by his excellent faculty in
teaching, the boys were advanced very much in Grammatical learning. But upon
the alteration of Religion in the beginning of Q. Elizab. he was forced thence
by the giddy zeal of two Scots, that were then settled in those parts. At length
he gave a farewell to England, went into the Low Countries, and afterward into
Italy, where spending 4 years in study, returned to the Low Countries again,
where, partly at Lovaine (at which place he was at length made Confessor to the
English Nuns) and partly in the Cities adjacent, he spent about 50 years, as an
exiled person, doing extraordinary benefit in the way he professed. He has
written,

Vitae quorundam Martyrum Angliae. -- Which, with other matters by him written,
may be seen a book intit. Concertatio Eccles. Catholicae in Anglia, etc. See
more in Joh. Bridgewater, an. 1594. He also translated from English into Latin
several of the Books of Cardinal Joh. Fisher, as, (1) Commentary on the Seven
Penitential Psalms. Which book Fisher wrote at the desire of Margaret Countess
of Richmind. -- Pr. 1509. in qu. (2) Sermon of the Passion of our Savior. (3)
Sermon. concerning the justice of the Pharisees and Christians, etc. Also from
Lat. into Engl. (1) The Catechism of the Council of Trent. (2) A learned and
very eloquent treatise, written by Hieron. Osorius, Bishop of Sylva in
Portugal, wherein he confuteth a certain answer, made by Mr. Walt. Haddon,
against the Epistle of the said Bishop unto the Queens Maj. Lov. 1568. oct. in
3 books. And lastly from Italian into English, (1) The life of the Blessed
Virgin S. Catherine of Sienna. -- Print. 1609. oct. originally written by Dr.
Caterinus Senensis. (2) Treatise of tribulation. Written by Caccia Guerra. (3)
The 15 Mysteries of the Rosarie. Written by Gasp. Loart. And, lastly, collected
from diverse ancient English books, Spiritual Treatises, for the use of the Nuns
of the Order of St. Bridgit, and other things which I have not yet seen. Clar.
1 611.
He ended his days at Lovaine, after the year sixteen hundred and eleven, and
was, as I presume, buried within the precincts of the Monastery belonging to
the English Nuns there. He had a younger Brother named Rob. Fenne, who was
admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1555. but removed thence, by the
Queen's Commissioners, for being a R. Catholic an. 1562. having a little
before been honored with the degree of Bach. of the Civil Law. Another Brother
also he had, called James Fenne, who was first a Choirister of New coll. and
afterward Scholar of that of C. C. an. 1554. but put aside from the degree of
B. of Arts, and from his place in the said coll. for refusing to take the Oath
of Supremacy. Afterward he settled in Gloucester hall, where he had several
Pupils committed to his charge, and was had in great respect by the Seniors of
that house. Thence, being forced, he retired to his native Country, (
Somersetshire) where he taught a private School, and soon after married. But
his Wife dying, he went beyond the Seas, settled at Rheimes for a time, and was
made a Priest. Afterward returning into England, he settled in his native
Country, but being soon after apprehended, was conveyed to London, and there
kept in prison several weeks. At length being condemned to die, according to
the Statute against Seminaries, was executed at Tybourne with George Haddock,
Tho. Emerferd, and Joh. Nutter, 12. Febr. 1582/3. All which are enrolled among
the R. C. Martyrs, that suffered during the Reign of Q. Elizabeth.

Cartwrights of Washbourne in Glocestershire, received his Academical education
in Magd. coll. but whether he took a degree in this University, it appears not.
Afterward he traveled, was, as it seems, in holy Orders, and after his return
published these books following.

The Preachers travels: Wherein is set down a true Journal to the confines of
the E. Indies through the great Countries of Syria, Mesopotamia, Armenia,
Media, Hircania, and Parthia, etc.

A relation of Sir Anth. Sherley's entertainment in the Court of the K. of
Persia.

Description of the Port in the Persian Gulf commodious for the East India
Merchants of England.

Rehearsal of some gross absurdities in the Turkish Alcoran. -- Which four
Treatises were printed in one vol. at London, Cla^. 1611.
1611. in qu. At which time the author of them was living in Southwark near
London. Afterward the said treatises being contracted, were remitted into Sam.
Purcha^s second part of Pilgrims, lib. 9. p. 1422. -- Land. 1625. fol.

Bondius) a most noted critic in Greek and Latin learning of his time, was
born in Somersetshire, educated in Grammaticals in Wykehams School near Winton,
became a Student in this University about the nineteenth year of his age, an.
1569. took a degree in Arts 4 years after, being either one of the Clerks or
Chaplains of New coll. and much noted for his proficiency in Academical
learning. In 1579. he proceeded in Arts, and had soon after the Mastership of
the Free School of Taunton St. Mary^ Madg. in his own, Country conferred on him
by the Warden and Society of New coll. At which place continuing many years, he
did exercise such an admirable way of teaching, that many departed thence so
excellently well grounded in humane learning, that they proved afterward
eminent either in Church or State. At length being in a manner worn out with
the drudgery of a School, he did for diversion, I cannot say profit, practice
Physic, tho he had taken no degree in that Faculty in this University, and
became at length Chief Secretary to the Lord Chancellor of England ( Egerton)
if one Tho. Coryat in his Letters from the Court of the Great Mogul, etc. Land.
1616. p. 45.
of his admirers may be credited. As for his writings, which are used by the
Juniors of our Universities, and in many Free-Schools, and more admired and
printed beyond the Seas, than in England, they are these.

Commentarii in Poemata Q. Horatii Flacci. Printed 1606. oct. and several times
after beyond the Sea, and at London.

Comment. in sex Satyras A. Persii. Land. 1614. oct. published after the
author's death by Rog. Prows, who married his Daughter Elizabeth. He has at
least written, if not published, other things, but such I have not yet seen. He
yielded up his last breath on the third of Aug. in sixteen hundred and twelve,
Taunton, Wilton near Taunton, and in Newenton,) and was buried in the Chancel
of the Church at Taunton beforementioned. Over his grave was this Epitaph soon
after put. Qui Medicus doctus prudentis nomine clarus,
Eloquii splendour, Pieridumque decus.
Virtutis cultor, pietatis vixit amicus,
Hoc jacet in tumulo spiritus alta tenet.


The Reader is now to know that there was another John Bond, but after the time
of the former, Son of Dennis Bond of Dorchester in Dorsetshire, who having been
educated in his youthful years under John White, commonly called The Patriarch
of Dorchester, and from him sucked in most dangerous principles, was sent to
Cambridge, and placed, I think, in S. John's coll. where he took the degree of
Bach. of Civ. Law. Afterward he was made a Lecturer in the City of Exeter, and
carried himself conformable for a season. But when the times turned, in 1641.
and he saw that the Puritan began to be uppermost, then did he Preach very
seditiously, and published what he had said under this title, A door of Hope:
Also holy and loyal activity. Two Treatises delivered in several Sermons in
Exeter. The first on Psalm. 126. 1, 2. and the other on Exodus 17. 11. -- Land.
1641. qu. Both which do contain most scandalous and rebellious stuff, besides
what he preached in a Sermon. in the said City before the Deputy-Lievtenants. --
Land. 1643. qu. So that having thus began his pranks, and showed himself a
zealous Brother for the Cause, and a rank Covenanteer, he was made Preacher or
Minister of the Savoy in the Strand near London, (in the place of Joh. White
beforementioned, when he passed over the water to Lambeth, to take possession
of the Rectory there, belonging to Dr. Dan. Featly,) one of the Assembly of
Divines, and about that time Doctor of the Laws. This J. Bond, by the way you
must know, being scarce warm in the Pulpit, but he began to threaten Heaven
with some of his Divinity, by telling the auditory with great zeal, that they
ought to contribute, and pray, and do all they were able to bring in their
Brethren of Scotland, for the settling of Gods Cause; I say this is Gods Cause,
and if ever God had any Cause, this is it; and if this be not Gods Cause, then
God is no God for me, but the Devil is got up into Heaven, etc. About the same
time he became a frequent Preacher before the Long-Parliament, and has 3 or
more Sermons preached before the Members thereof published, as, (1) Salvation
in a mystery, etc. on Jer. 45. 25. Land. 1644. qu. It was a Fast Sermon. pr.
before the H. of Commons, 27. Mar. 1644. (2) Ortus occidentalis, or a dawning
in the West, etc. on Isa. 25. 9. Land. 1645. qu. 'Twas a Thanksgiving Sermon. for
the Parliament Forces their gaining of Bathe, Bridgwater, Sherbourne Castle,
etc. preached before the H. of Commons 22. Aug. 1645. and on the eleventh of
Dec. following the said Jo. Bond was made Master of the Hospital called the
Savoy under the great Seal. (3) A Thanksgiving Sermon. before the H. of Com. on
Psalm. 50. 23. Land. 1648. qu. preached on the 19. Jul. 1648. In which year he
had a Sermon. published, intit. Grapes among Thorns, preached before the H. of
Commons. In all which Sermons, as in others, which he delivered in London and
Westminster, are contained many strange positions, rebellious doctrines,
religious cantings, and I know not what. About that time he was made One Joh.
Bond Doct. of the Law, was a Recruiter in the Long-Parliament for Melcombe
Regis in Dorsetshire, and so he continued till 1653.
Master of Trinity hall in Cambridge, which Mr. Jo. Seldom refused, and in
1654. he was made an assistant to the Commissioners of Middlesex and
Westminster, for the ejection of such, whom they then called scandalous and
ignorant Ministers and Schoolmasters. These things I thought fit to let the
Reader know, that posterity may distinguish between the said two Bonds, the
first a polite and rare critic, whose labors have advanced the Commonwealth
of learning very much; and the other an impudent, canting, and blasphemous
person; who by his doctrine did lead People to Rebellion, advance the cause of
Satan much, and in fine, by his, and the endeavors of his Brethren, brought
all things to ruin, merely to advance their unsatiable and ambitious desires.
He lived, as I conceive, to the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. an. 1660. being then
about 49 years of age; but when, or where he died, I cannot yet learn. His
Father Dennis Bond beforementioned, who was Son of Joh. Bond of Lutton in
Dorsetshire, and he the Son of Dennis of the same place, was bred up to the
Trade of a Woollendraper in Dorchester; being then a constant hearer and
admirer of Jo. White aforesaid, was elected Burgess (with Denzil Hollis) for
the Borough of Dorchester (of which he was then Alderman) to serve in that
unhappy Parliament which began at Westminster 3. Nov. 1640. In which, showing
himself an active person, first under the opinion of a Presbyterian, and
afterward of an Independent, was designed and pricked down for one of the
Judges of K. Chapter 1. an. 1648. but whether he sat, when Sentence was passed
upon him, I cannot justly say it, notwithstanding one or more authors say, that
he did then sit, and was numbered among the Judges. On the 14. Feb. next
following the decollation of that King, he was appointed one of the 30 persons
for the Council of State, and ever after showed himself a Devoto to Oliver's
interest. On the 30. of Aug. 1658. being then Monday, and the windiest day that
had before happened for 20 years, he paid his last debt to nature, being then
tormented with the Strangury and much anxiety of Spirit. At which time, as the
then vulgar talk was, the Devil came to take away Oliv. Cromwell, who then lay
on his deathbed, but being not prepared for him, he gave Bond for his future
appearance, and accordingly on Friday following being the 3. of Sept. he made
good his promise. The carcass of Dennis Bond was buried in the Abbey Church of
St. Peter at Westminster, where continuing about three years, was (with the
bodies of other Cromwellians) taken up in the month of Sept. 1661. and buried
in St. Margarets Churchyard adjoining, before the backdoor of the lodgings
belonging to one of the Canons of Westminster. I find one John Bond to be
author of a Pamphlet intit. A whip for the Judges, Bishops, and Papists, etc.
Land. 1641. Of another also called, The downfall of the old Common-Counsel-Men.
-- Pr. there the same year, and of a third intit. The Poets recantation. Land.
1642. qu. but I take this John Bond to be different from the other Joh. who was
a Presbyterian, and afterward an Independent. I find another John Bond later
than all the former, who is now, or at least was lately, a Barrester of
Gray's Inn, who wrote and published, A complete Guide for Justices of the Peace,
etc. in two parts. Land. 1685. in oct.

Vitus as he writes himself, the Son of Henry The said Hon. White died in the
Siege of Bulloigne, an. 1544.
White of Basingstoke in Hampshire, (by Agnes his Wife, Daughter of Rich.
Capelin of Hampshire,) the Son of Tho. White, the Son of Jenkin (sometimes
called John) White, (who had almost half the Town of Basingstoke in his own
possession,) the Son of Tho. White of Purvyle in Hampshire, (which Thomas was
Gr. Grandfather to John White sometime Bishop of Winton.) was born in the Town
of Basingstoke beforementioned, trained up in Grammar learning in Wykehams
School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1557. took one degree in
Arts, but before he had that of Master conferred on him, he absented himself
from his college, and the time limited for his absence being spent, his place
was pronounced void in 1564. A little before that time he went to Lovaine, and
afterward to Padua in Italy, where applying his Muse to the study of the Civil
and Canon Law, became Doctor of them. At length going to Doway he was
constituted the King's Professor of those Laws, (in which place he continued
above 20 years,) married two rich Wives, (of which one was an Inheretrix) grew
wealthy, was made by order of the Pope Magnificus Rector, tho out of his
ordinary turn, and about the same time was created Comes Palatinus. Which title
is commonly conferred by the Imperials on their Professors. At length having
buried two Wives, he was by the dispensation of P. Clem. 8. made a Priest, and
about the same time had a Canonry in St. Peter's Church in Doway bestowed on
him. The first thing that made him known to curious Scholars, was his
exposition of an ancient enigmatical Epitaph, which was in his time remaining
near to Bononia, the title of which is,

Aelia Laelia Crispis. -- Epitaphium antiquum in agro Bononiensi adhuc videtur;
a diversis hactenus interpretatum vary: novissime autem a Ric. Vito
Basingstochio, amicorum precibus explicatum. Patav. 1568. in 6 sh. and a half
in qu. dedicated to Christop. Johnson chief Master of Winchester School.
Afterward he wrote and published,

Orationes quinque, de circulo artium and Philosophia -- De eloquentia and
Cicerone. -- Pro divitiis Regum, -- Pro doctoratu, -- De studiorum sinibus, cum
notis. Attrebat. 1596. oct. The two first, which were spoken at Lovaine, were
published by Christoph. Johnson beforementioned, about 1564. and commanded by
him to be read publicly in the said School near Winton. by the Scholars.

Notae ad leges Decem-virorum in xii. tabulis. Attrebat. 1597. oct.

Historiarum Brittanniae libri, 1. Ab origin ad Brutum. 2. Ab illo ad
Malmutium. 3. Ab hoc ad Heliam. 4. Ab isto ad Lucium. 5. Ab eo ad Constantium,
cum notis antiquitatum Britannicarum. Attreb. 1597. oct.

Historiarum Britanniae liber sextus. Quo vis armorum in campis, and authoritas
literarum in Scholis, atque religio Christiana in orb terrarum publicata,
demonstratur: cum notis. Duac. 1598. oct.

Histor. Britan. lib. 7. Quo versus ad eam insulam Saxenicam ingressus, and
permansio declaratio; cum notis. Duac. 1600. oct.

Hist. Brit. lib. 8. Quo vera causa excidii, regni Britonum in insula
demonstratur; cum notis. Duac. 1600. oct.

Hist. Brit. lib. nonus. Quo fundamenta regni and Ecclesiae Anglorum in insula
Brit. exponuntur, cum notis. Duac. 1602. oct. After this last was published,
all the nine books were bound together, and had this general title put to them.
Historiarum Britannicae Insulae ab origin mundi ad annum Domine
octingentesimum, libri novem priores. Duac. 1602. in a thick oct. Before the
Preface to the Reader is the author's picture, and before the beginning of the
work it self, are his arms, viz. Parted per chevron embatled arg. and gul,
three rases, leaved vert, counter-changed of the field, on a chief of the
second, a Lion passant, or; all within a bordure Ermine. The creast is, A Stork
or Crane standing, resting its right foot on the top of an hourglass. With
this Motto under all^, Plus vigila. Allowed to our author Count Rich. White,
with two Dragons for the Supporters, by Sir Will. Dethick, Garter, principal
King of Arms, in allusion to the Arms of his Kinsman, Dr. John White sometimes
Bishop of Winton, whose Arms are quite different from those of his Brother, Sir
Joh. White Lord Mayor of London, an 1563.

Explicatio brevis privilegiorum juris and consuetudinis circa ven. sacramentum
Eucharistiae. Duac. 1609. oct.

De reliquiis and veneratione sanctorum. Duac. 1609. and other things as you
may elsewhere In Jo. Pits. De illustr. Angl. Script. aet. 17. nu. 1057.
see. At length this learned person dying at Doway, 16^2.
in sixteen hundred and twelve or thereabouts, was buried in the Parish Church
of S. James there. Contemporary with him in New coll. was one Will. Pomerell
Chaplain of that house, who taking the degree of Bach. of Arts in 1557. went
afterward to his native Country of Ireland and became benefited in Drogheda.
From thence he went to Lovaine, where by continual hearing of Lectures and
Disputations, more than by private study he obtained great knowledge in
Divinity, gaining thereby (as 'twas usually said of him) all his learning b^
hearsay. He died at Lovaine in 1573. being then Bach. of Div.

John Fitzherbert, second Son of Sir Anth. Fitzherbert, Knight, (the great
Lawyer,) Son of Ralph Fitzherbert of Norbury in Derbyshire Esquire was a Student in
Exeter coll. and exhibited to by Sir Will. Petre, about 1568. but what
continuance he made there, I know not. Sure it is, that his bare name stands in
the Register called Matricula, under the title of Coll. Exon, in 1571. and 72.
he being then the Senior Under-graduat of that College. About that time he left
his native Country, Parents and Patrimony for Religion sake, and went beyond
the Seas as a voluntary Exile. At first he settled at Bononia in Italy,
purposely to obtain the knowledge of the Civil Law, and was living there in
1580. Not long after he went to Rome, took up his station there, and in the
year 1587. began to live in the Court of Will. Alan the Cardinal of England,
(whose person and virtues he much adored,) and continued with him till the time
of his death, being then accounted eminent for his knowledge in both the Laws,
and for humane literature. His works are,

Oxoniensis in Anglia Academiae descriptio. Romans 1602. in 3 sh. and a half, in
oct.

De antiquitate and continuatione Catholicae Religionis in Anglia. Romans 1608.
in oct.

Vita Cardinalis Alani Epitome. He also translated from the Italian, into the
Latin tongue, Joh. Casa Galateus de moribus. Romans 1595. He was drowned in a
journey taken from Rome in sixteen hundred and twelve, English coll. at Rome
for resolution, but have received no answer.

Middlesex Man born, was admitted Scholar of Trinity coll. at 17 years of age,
27. May 1562. Probationer in 65. being then Bach. of Arts, perpetual Fellow the
year following, and Master of his Faculty in 67. But his mind being more
addicted to the Catholic, than Reformed, Religion, he left his Fellowship, and
retired to Gloucester hall for a time, where he was held in good repute by Edm.
Rainolds and Th. Allen, the two learned Seniors. Afterward going beyond the
Seas, where he spent some time in one of the English Seminaries, newly erected
to receive exiled Catholics of the English Nation, was at length in the year
1598. constituted by Henry Cardinal Cajetane Protector of the English Nation at
Rome, (with leave first obtained from P. Clem. 8.) the Superior of the of the
English Clergy, with the Power and Name of Archpriest of England, and by the
said Pope made Notary of the Apostolic Seat. This matter being taken very ill
by the Ecclesiastical Papists of our Nation, and the rather for this reason,
that Blackwell was altogether at the beck of Henr. Garnet Provincial of the
Jesuits of England, they fell Vide C^md. Annai. Reg. Eliz. sub an 1602. See
also A relation of a Faction began at Wisbich, an 1595. etc. Printed 1601. p.
57.
together by the Ears in their own Country in a most grievous manner. For the
Jesuits against the Secular Priests fought continually with sharp pens,
poisoned tongues, and contumelious books, insomuch that they detracted in an
high degree from Blackwells authority. Hereupon he degraded them of their
Faculties, so that afterward they appealing to the Pope of Rome, he caused
them in a book to be declared Schismatics and Heretics. This aspersion they
soon wiped off, having the censure of the University of Paris approving the
same, which was answered by Blackwell, as I shall tell you anon. The office of
Archpriest he kept till 1607. at which time George Birket a learned Priest
succeeded. And the reason of the change was, because our author having been
taken near Clerkenwell by London 24. June the same year, was committed first to
the Gatehouse in Westminster, and afterward to the Clink in Southwork, and
consequently deprived of liberty required to act in his Office. Soon after,
upon his taking the oath of Allegiance, he was freed from the Clink, and set at
liberty. Concerning which matter there was a book published intit. The
examination of George Blackwell, upon occasion of his answering a Letter sent
by Cardinal Bellarmine, who blamed him for taking the oath of Allegiance. Land.
1607. qu. As for those things which were written by our author Blackwell, who
was by those of his persuasion, and others too, accounted a learned and pious
Man, and a good Preacher, the titles of them follow.

Letter to Card. Cajetane in commendation of the English Jesuits. -- Written
1596.

Answers upon sundry Examinations, while he was a Prisoner. Land. 1607. qu.

Approbation of the Oath of Allegiance.) Printed with the Answers upon, etc.

Letters to the Romish Priests touching the lawfulness of taking the Oath of
Allegiance.

Another to the same purpose.

Epistolae ad Anglos Pontificios. Land. 1609. qu.

Epistolae ad Rob. Card. Bellarminum See more in the third tome of the works
Francof. 1613: in fol.
of Melch. Goldasti Haiminsfeldii. from page 565. to 605.

Answer to the Censure of Paris in suspending the Secular Priests obedience to
his authority. -- dat. 29. May 1600. Replied upon by Joh. Dorel or Darrel Dean
of Again, the same year. See more in a book intit. Relation of a Faction begun
at Wisbich, in 1595. etc. Printed 1601. in qu. p. 81. Afterward was a book
printed intit. In Geor. Blackvellum quaestio bipartita, written by Joh. Milson.
-- Land. 1609. but whether it relates to the said controversy, I cannot tell,
for I have not yet seen it.

A Treatise against Lying, and fraudulent Dissimulation. -- MS. among those
given to Bodies Lib. by Archb. Laud, 40. E. 45. At the end of which is the
approbation of the book written by the hand of Blackwell, and subscribed by him
as fit for the Press. So that no other name being put to it, has caused our
Librarians to insert him in the Catalogue of MSS. as the author of it; whereas
he was not, but rather Franc. Tresham, as I have told you elsewhere. He, the
said Blackwell died suddenly (having been much troubled with swooning fits) on
the 12. of Januar. in sixteen hundred and twelve, 1612-33.
and was buried, as I conceive, in some Church in London. This next person
according to time and order that must crave place, is one, who, tho no writer
worth the remembrance, yet has he been the greatest promoter of learning that
has yet appeared in our Nation.

THOMAS BODLEY, another Ptolomey, eldest John Bodley of the City of Exeter (by
Joan his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Rob. Hone of Otterie S. Mary in Devon, Esquire)
Son of Joh. Bodley of Tiverton, second Son of John Bodley of Dunscumbe near
Crediton in Devon. Gent. was born in the said City of Exeter, 2 Mar. 1544.
partly educated in Grammar learning in the said City, but mostly in Geneva,
while his Father lived there as a voluntary Exile in the time of Q. Mary;
where, tho he was then very young, yet he was an auditor of Chevalerius in
Hebrew, of Berealdus in Greek, of Calvin and Beza in Divinity, and of some
other professors in the University there, (then newly erected,) besides his
domestical teachers in the house of Philebertus Saracenus, a famous Physician
in that City, (with whom he was boarded,) where Rob. Constantinus, that made
the Greek Lexicon, read Homer to him. After the death of Q. Mary he returned
into England with his Father, and was sent to Magd. coll. in 1559. where making
great proficiency in Logic and Philosophy under Mr. Laur. Humphrey, was
admitted Bach. of Arts in Jul. 1563. and soon after being elected Probationer
of Merton coll. determined in the Lent following. In 1565. he, by the
persuasion of some of the Fellows of that house, and for his private exercise,
did read publicly for some years a Greek Lecture in the hall of that coll.
without expectation of any reward or stipend for his labor. Nevertheless it
pleased the Society to allow him soon after, of their own accord, four Marks by
the year. In 1566. he was admitted Master of Arts; which degree being
completed, he read Not. Philosophy for an year in the Pub. Schools then
situated on the East side of Schoolstreet. In 1569. he was elected Junior
Proctor of the University; which office he performing with great commendations,
bestowed some time in the study of sundry Faculties, without any inclination to
profess any one above the rest. At length being desirous to travel beyond the
Seas, for the obtaining of knowledge of some special modern tongues, and for
the increase of his experience in the managing of affairs, (to no other end but
to employ himself, and all his cares, in the public Service of the State,) did
with leave from the Warden and Society of his coll. depart England, with the
allowance belonging to a traveller, an. 1576. and continued near 4 years in
Italy, France, and Germany. Afterward returning to his coll. he remained there
for some time in studying politics and historical affairs, and in 1583. he was
made Esquire of the Body to Q. Elizabeth. At length in 1585. having about that
time married Anne the Daughter of.... Carew of the City of Bristow, (the rich
Widow, as I have heard, of one Ball) was employed by the Queen to Frederick K.
of Denmark, Julius Duke of Brunswyke, William Lantgrave of Hesse, and other
German Princes. Which imploymnet being faithfully performed, he was sent to K.
Hen. 3. of France, at what time he was forced by the Duke of Guise to leave
Paris. In 1588. he was sent to the Hague for the better conduct of the Queen's
affairs in the United Provinces; where making his residence for some years, was
admitted one of their Council of State, took place in their Assemblies next to
Count Maurice, and gave a suffrage in all that was proposed. In 1593. he
returned into England for a time, to look after his private Estate, but was
soon after remanded to the Hague again by the Q. where continuing near one
year, returned again to deliver some secret overtures to her, and to perform
thereupon an extraordinary service. Soon after, the applauding the fruit of his
discoveries, he was presently commanded to return to the States, with charge to
pursue those affairs to performance, which he had secretly proposed. At length,
all things being concluded, and brought to the desired issue, he procured his
last revocation, in 1597. At his return, as before in his absence, Burleigh the
Lord Treasurer, did several times tell the Queen, that there was not any Man in
England so meet as Bodley to undergo the office of Secretary, by reason of his
well-tryed Wisdom in the Low Country affairs intending that he should be
Colleague with his Son Rob. Cecill. But the Earl of Essex commending him also
to the Queen in a higher manner, not without biting calumniations of Cecill,
Burleigh found means to divert the Queens mind from him, supposing that Essex
endeavored to gain him to his party against Burleigh and Cecill. So that Mr.
Bodley being eased of ever expecting that troublesome office, he retired from
the Court, and wholly commended himself to the care and provision for learning,
worthy indeed the care of the greatest King. For about that time setting up his
staff at the Library door in Oxford, did restore, or rather new found it; the
particulars of which I have In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 308.
lib. 2. p. 50. 51.
elsewhere told you. After K. Jam. came to the Crown, he received the Honor of
Knight. from him, and a few years before his death, wrote,

His Life, -- an. 1609. Which being kept as a choice rarity in the archives of
his Library was published at Oxon. 1647. qu. But this little thing, is not the
reason that I put him among the Oxford Writers, but because by his noble and
generous endeavors, he has been the occasion of making hundreds of public
Writers, and of advancing in an high degree the Commonwealth of learning; in
which respect he should have craved the first place, but I have put him here,
according to the time of his death, which is the method I observe.

Letters of State. -- Some of which I have seen published, not in one vol. but
scatteredly.

Letters relating to Books and Learning. Written to Mr. Tho. James -- MS. in
his Lib. He paid his last debt to nature 28. Jan. in sixteen hundred and
twelve, 1612-13
and was buried with very great solemnity at the upper end of Merton coll.
Choire. The manner of which you may see at large in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv.
Oxon. lib. 1. p. 320. The Reader may be pleased now to understand that Dr. Joh.
Morris Canon of Chapter Chapter did bequeath to the University of Oxon. a Rentcharge
of 5 l. per an. to be given to a Master of Arts that should make and speak a
Speech in praise of Sir Tho. Bodley, every year on the 8. of Nov. (on which day
the Visitation of his Library is commonly made,) to be nominated by the Dean of
Chapter Chapter and confirmed by the Vicechancellour for the time being. But the said
gift was not to take place till the death of his Widow. At length upon her
decease, which was at Great Wolford in Warwickshire, 11. Nov. 1681. (she being
then the Wife of Tho. Keyt of that place Gent.) the said annuity fell to the
University. Whereupon the year following, Dr. Fell Dean of Chapter Chapter nominating
one of his own house, ( Tho. Spark M. A.) there was a solemn Speech made by
him in the Schola Linguarum, on the 8. Nov. 1682. Which Speech is yet continued
by Chapter Chapter Viz. Zacheus Isham, an. 1683. Char. Hickman, 1684. Tho. Newey, 1685.
Tho. Burton. 1686. Will. Bedford, 1687. Rich. Blak^way, 1688. Rog. Altham, Jun.
1689. Edw. Wake, 1690.
men, without any regard had to those of Allsouls coll. wherein Dr. Morris had
much of his education, and had been Chaplain thereof, or to any Master of
another coll. or hall. The said Sir Thom. Bodley had a younger Brother named
Josias Bodley, who having received part of his education in Merton coll. became
afterward a Soldier of note in Ireland, a Knight, and Overseer of the Trenches
when the English laid Siege to Kingsale, Baltamore, Berehaven, and Castlehaven
in Ireland, holden against them by the Irish, assisted by the Spaniard, an.
1601. at which time Bodley behaved himself bravely both in their Works and
Battle. He left behind him to posterity, (1) Observations concerning the
Fortresses of Ireland, and the British Colonies of Vlster. MS. fol. sometimes
in the Library of Sir Jam* Ware, now perhaps in that of Henry E. of Clarendon.
(2) A jocular description of a journey by him taken to Lecale in Vlster. an.
1602. MS. Sometimes in the same Library.

WILLIAM WARMINGTON a Dorsetshire Man Heart hall, (then presided by one, who was
always in animo Catholicus,) matriculated, 20. Dec. 1577. aged 21. or more,
having been there a Student for some time before. Shortly after he left the
Nation, and his Religion, and spending some ye^s in a Seminary, in
Philosophical and Theological studies, was made a Priest, and sent into the
Mission of England; but being soon after taken, he was with others conveyed on
Shipboard in the Month of Feb. 1584. and sent beyond the Seas with great
menaces of utter ruin, if they return again. Afterward being noted in Foreign
Countries by those of his own Nation for his learning and piety, he was made
Chaplain to Cardinal W. Alan, with whom continuing till about the time of his
death, did return again into England, being then, as he styles himself, An
Oblate of the holy Congregation of S. Ambrose, and did execute his Function
very zealously among the Brethren. At length being apprehended by two
Pursevants 24. Mar. 1607. and committed Prisoner to the Clinke in Southwark,
the next day, according to the English account, by the Bishop of Londons order,
he entered somewhat more deeply into consideration of the controversy about the
Oath of Allegiance, than he had done before, while at liberty. So that in the
end making sufficient proof of his Loyalty toward his Majesty, by accepting of
the Oath, when it was required of him, he did thereupon premeditate and provide
reasons for so doing; and at length reducing into method, for the help of his
memory, certain notes in scattered papers that he had collected concerning that
matter, did frame thence a complete discourse. At length, after it had laid by
him for some time, did publish it under this title, tho he knew 'twould
displease his Holiness, who in his breves had either admonished or prohibited
all Romans Catholics to take the Oath of Allegiance, or to teach the lawfulness
of it.

A moderate defense of the Oath of Allegiance: Wherein the author proves the
said Oath to be most lawful, notwithstanding the Pope's Breves, etc. -- Printed
by permission of the Superiors, in 1612. qu. Whereunto is added, The Oration
of P. Sixtus 5. in the Consistory of Rome, upon the Murder of K. Hen. 3. the
French King, by a Friar.

Strange Reports, or News from Rome. -- Printed with the former book. Clar.
1612.
Upon the publishing, of these things, the Friends of the author Warmington,
and his kindred of the Romans Persuasion, became his Enemies, and withdrew from
him all the benevolence they used to allow him. Warmington therefore being put
to his shifts for maintenance, for this his Loyalty and Obediencce, petitioned
Rog. Widdrington in his Disputatio Theologica de jur. fidel. cap. to Sect. 4.
p. 397.
the King for some allowance. His petition thereupon was received, and he
commended by his Majesty to Dr. Bilson Bishop of Winchester, with order to take
him to himself to his own house, there to provide for him. The Bishop obeyed,
Warmington lived with him, wanted nothing, had his liberty as he pleased, and
freedom of his Religion.

Wollocombe born of, and descended from, the ancient and gentile family of the
Wollocombes of Wollocombe in Devonshire, was educated for a time in Exeter
coll. left the University without a degree, and became beneficed in his own
Country, where he was much resorted to, especially by the precise Party, for
his frequent and edifying way of Preaching. His works are,

Sinners Salve, which applied and practiced, as well of impenitent, may be
moved to conversion, as the penitent armed against disputation. Land. 1595. in
tw.

Armor for the Soul against the assaults of Death. Printed with Sinners Salve,
etc.

A glass for the Godly; containing many comfortable Treatises to persuade man
from the love of this World, to the love of the world to come, etc. Land. 1612.
oct. in two Parts. The first dedicated to Sir Edw. Seymour of Bury-pomery in
Devon. contains 7 Treatises, which are no other than the effect of Sermons.
The first is entit. The seeking of Heaven, on Mat. 6. 33. The second part
dedicated to Sir Edw. Giles Knight. contains likewise 7 Treatises, the first of
which is entit. Spiritual balm for the afflicted, on Joh. 16. 20.

A Letter to a pensive friend -- Printed and bound with the former parts. He
also translated from Lat. into English The restitution of a Sinner, entit. The
restoring again of him that was fallen. Land. 1581. oct. Written by St. John
Chrysostom. Clar. 1612.
What other things he has written and translated, I cannot tell, nor when he
died. I find one of both his names, a Ministers Son of Devonshire, to have been
matriculated as a member of Exeter coll. an. 1584. aged 16. which I take to be
Son to the Writer.

Joh. Twyne mentioned under the year 1581. was born in the City of Canterbury,
admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 6. Jul. 1560. and Probationer 9. Nov. 1564.
being then Bac. of Arts. Afterward proceeding in his Faculty, he applied his
Muse to the study of Medicine, retired to Cambridge, where he continued for a
time, and then settling at Jews in Sussex where his Patron Tho. Lord Buckhurst
lived, practiced his faculty and became successful therein. In 1593. he was
admitted Bach. of Physic of this University, and afterward being doctorated
at Cambridge; was famed not only for Medicine, but Astrology, and much
respected by Dee and Allen. He has written,

Almanacks and Prognostications for diverse years -- Printed in the time of Qu.
Elizabeth, and then much valued, as Dee's were.

The garland of godly flowers, carefully collected out of the Garden of the
holy Scripture, etc. Land. 1589. in tw. And did also translate from Lat. into
English (1) The breviary of Britayne, etc. containing a learned discourse of
the variable estate and alteration thereof. etc. Land. 1573. oct. written by
Hump. Lhuyd. This translation being esteemed very good of its time, was ushered
into the world by the copies of Verses of Thom. Brown Prebendary, and Edw.
Grant Schoolmaster, of Westminster, Lodowick Lhuyd, Laurence and Joh. Twyne
brethren to the Translator. (2) The dialogue of witches, in fort-time called
Lot-tellers, now commonly called Sorcerers. Land. 1575. oct. written by Lamb.
Danaeus. (3) Christian natural Philosophy concerning the form, knowledge, and
use of all things created, etc. Land. 1578. qu. written by the said Danaeus.
(4) New counsel against the Plague. Land* in oct. written by Pet. Droet. (5)
The Tragedies of Tyrants, exercised upon the Church of God, from the birth of
Christ, to 1572. Land. 1575. oct. written by Hen. Bullenger. (6) Physic
against fortune, as well prosperous as adverse. Lib. 2. Land. 1579. qu. written
by Franc. Petrark. (6) The eleventh, 12. and 13. books of Virgils Aeneids.
Land. 1584. and 1620. qu. Which translation shows him ( Tho. Twyne) to be a
tolerable English Poet. The nine first Books of the said author were translated
by Thom. Phaeer, as I have before told you, under the year 1560. the tenth also
was began by him, but he dying before he had done half of it, was taken in hand
by our author Twyne, and by him finished 23. May 1573. At length after he had
obtained a considerable Estate by his practice at Jews in Sussex before
mentioned, died there on the first of Aug. in sixteen hundred and thirteen,
Anne, but more properly S. Peter and S. Mary Westout in Jews. Over his Grave
was soon after a brass fixed to the East wall of the said Chancel, having
engraven thereon 14 verses; a copy of which, you may read in Hist. and Antiq.
Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 238. a.

JOHN WILLIAMS, A Caermarthenshire man Allsouls coll. in 1579. being then
Master of Arts. Afterward he was made Parson of Llanderico, Margaret
Professor, Dean of Bangor (in the place of Rich. Parry promoted to the Sea of
S. Asaph) Doctor of Div. and at length Principal of Jesus coll. He has written,

De Christi justitia and in regno spirituali Ecclesiae pastorum officio, concio
ad clerum Oxon. in cap. 10. Rev. verse. 1. Oxon. 1597. qu. He also published
Rog. Bacon's book De retardandis senectutis accidentibus, and sensibus
confirmandis. Oxon. 1590. in oct. He died on the fourth of Sept. in sixteen
hundred and thirteen, Michael in Oxon. In his Margaret Professorship succeeded
Dr. Seb. Benefield, in his Deanery Edm. Griffith, and in his Principality
Griffith Powell, of all whom, mention shall be made in their respective places.

THOMAS OVERBURY, Son of Nich. Overbury Boorton on the hill near to Morton in
Marsh in Gloucestershire Esquire, by Mary his Wife Daughter of Giles Palmer of
Compton-Scorfen in the Parish of Ilmington in Warwickshire, was born at
Compton-Scorfen in the house of his Mothers Father, and educated partly in
Grammar learning in those parts. In Michaelmas Term an. 1595. he became a Gent.
Commoner of Queens coll. in the year of his age 14. where by the benefit of a
good Tutor and severe discipline, he made great proficiency in Logic and
Philosophy. In 1598. he, as a Squires Son, took the degree of Bach. of Arts,
which being completed by Determination in the Lent following, he left the
University, and settled for a time in one of the Temples, where he had before
been entered in order to study the municipal Laws. Afterward he traveled for a
time, and returned a most accomplished person, which the happiness of his Pen
both in Poetry and Prose does declare. About the time of the Coronation of King
Jam. 1. he became familar with Sir Rob. Carre Knight. of the Bathe, who perceiving
him to be a person of good parts and abilities, and withal sober and studious,
did take him nearer to, and made, him his bosom friend. Soon after Carre being
in great favor with the King, he not only procured Overbury to be Knighted at
Greenwich 19. June 1608. but his Father to be made one of the Judges in Wales
about that time. But so it was that a familiarity bing made between Carre then
Viscount Rochester, and the Lady Frances Daughter of Thomas Earl of Suffolk and
Wife of Robert E. of Essex, it did so much distaste Overbury, who knew her to
be a Woman of no good reputation, that he endeavored out of pure affection and
friendship to diswade Carre from her company, fearing withal (upon very good
grounds then on foot) that he might in the end marry her, and so consequently
ruin his honor and himself, adding, that if he went on in that business, he
would do well to loo^ to his standing. Which advice Carre taking impatiently,
because thereby he had touched the Lady in her honor, discovered all to her,
Whereupon she thinking that he might prove a great obstacle to their enjoyment
of each other, and to the marriage then designed, she never ceased, till she
had procured his overthrow. It happening therefore about that time, that Overbury
being designed to be sent Ambassador into Russia by the King, which was
proposed to him by the Lord Chancellor, and the Earl of Pembroke; Carre,
(whose counsel he asked) advised him to refuse the service, by making some fair
excuse. Which advice he followed, supposing that it did proceed out of
kindness; but for his refusal he was committed to the Tower 21. Apr. 1613. Soon
after he being closely confined, she by her instruments endeavored to work his
ruin by Poison, (the particulars of which are now too many to enumerate) but
Nature being very strong in Overbury, it was repelled by breaking out in
botches and blaynes on his Body. At length by a poisoned Clister given to him
under pretense of curing him, he was dispatched in Sept. following. But before
two Months were past, all being discovered, his death was closely examined, and
several persons being found guilty of, and consenting to, it, were afterward
executed, viz. Sir Jervice Elwaies Lieutenant of the Tower consenting, Rich.
Weston and James Franklin, who attended Overbury in his Chamber, and gave him
the Meats and Broaths wherein the poison was mingled, and Anne Turner Widow,
the preparer of them, actually concerned in the matter. Some time after, Carre,
then Earl of Sommerset, and his Lady Frances beforementioned, were brought to
their trials for contriving his death, and hiting others to make him away; who
being both found guilty, had the sentence of death passed on them, but through
the clemency of the King being spared, they were only banished the Court. As
for our author Overbury, who in learning and judgment excelled any of his
years, (which, as 'twas generally thought, made him while living in the Court
to be proud, to overvalue himself, undervalue others, and affected, as 'twere,
with a kind of insolence,) has written,

A Wife. Being a most exquisite and singular Poem of the choice of a Wife, etc.
-- Printed several times at Land. while the author lived. In 1614 it was
printed there again in qu. being the fourth or fifth impression, bearing this
title, A Wife, now the Widow of Sir Tho. Overbury, being, etc.

Characters: Or, witty descriptions of the properties of sundry persons. --
Which Characters, as it is observed, were the first that were written and
published in England. To them are added, (1) Certain Edicts from a Parliament
in Eutopia; written by the Lady Southwell. (2) News from any whence; or old
truth under a supposal of novelty, occasioned by diverse Essays and private
passages of Wit, between sundry Gentlemen upon that subject. (3) Paradoxes, as
they were spoken in a Mask before his Majesty at Whitehall. (4) The Mountebanks
Receipts. (5) Songs.

Of the remedy of Love: In two parts. A Poem. Land. 1620. in about 2 sh. in oct.

Observations in his travells upon the state of the 17. Provinces, as they
stood, an. 1609. -- Printed 1627. qu. This goes under his name, but doubted by
some, whether he wrote it.

Observations upon the Provinces united. And on the state of France. Land.
1651. oct. with his picture before it, an. aetat. 32. This also is doubted,
whether ever he wrote it.

The arraignment and conviction of Sir Walt. Ralegh at the King's Bench Bar at
Winchester, 17. Nov. 1603. etc. Land. 1648. in 5 sh. in qu. Said to be copied
by Sir Tho. Overbury, but doubtful. He yielded up his last breath, occasioned
by poison, as I have before told you, on the 15. Sept. in sixteen hundred and
thirteen, presently and very unreverently in a pit dug in an obscure and
mean place. But the Register of the Tower.-Chapel, dedicated to S. Peter ad
vincula, says he was buried in the said Chapel 15. Sept. (being the day of
his death) an. 1613. as I have been informed by the Letters of that learned
Gent. Sir Edw. Sherburne Knight, late Clerk of his Maj. Ordinance and Armories
within the Kingdom of England. Over his Grave tho no memory by writing was ever
put, yet Ben. Johnson's Epigram In the first vol. of his works, Epigr. 113.
written to him will eternize it, and other verses by the Wits of his time, set
before his Poem called A Wife, and in particular that Epigram written by Owen
In Epigram. ad Hen. Princ. Wall. etc. nu. 48. See also in Char. Fitz-Geoffry's
Affania. etc. lib. 1.
the Welsh Bard, running thus. Vxorem angelico describis carmine talem,
Qualem oratorem Tullius, ore potens.
Qualem describis, quamvis tibi nuberet Vxor,
Aequalis tale non foret illa viro.


Our author Sir Tho. Overbury had a Nephew of both his names, a Knight, and
Justice of the Peace for the County of Gloucester, who lived, and enjoyed the
inheritance of the Overburies at Boorton on the hill beforementioned. He
wrote, (1) A true and perfect account of the examination, trial, condemnation,
and execution of Joan Perry and her two Sons John and Rich. Perry, for the
supposed Murder of Will. Harrison Gent, etc. Land. 1676. in 4 sh. and half in
qu. Written by way of Letter to Thom. Shirley Doctor of Physic in London. (2)
Queries proposed to the serious consideration of those who impose upon others
in things of divine and supernatural revelation, and prosecute any upon the
aecount of Religion; with a desire of their candid and christian resolution
thereof. Printed 1677. Answered by George Vernon Rect. of Boorton on the water,
the same year, in his Ataxiae obstaculum. Whereupon Sir Tho. came out with a
reply intit. Ratiocinium vernaculum: or a Reply to Ataxiae obstaculum. Being a
pretended answer to certain Queries dispersed in some parts in Gloucestershire.
Land. 1678. oct. This Sir Tho. Overbury was not educated in any University,
only was a great Traveller in parts beyond the Seas, and afterward a favourer
of Protestant Dissenters; which is all I know of him, only-that he sold his
Inheritance at Boorton on the hill to Alex. Popham Esquire about 1680. and
afterward retiring to an Estate that he had at Adminton in Queinton Parish in
Gloucestershire, died there 28. Feb. 1680. and was buried in Queinton Church.

JOHN HARMAR, a most noted Latinist, Grecian, Newbury in Berks, educated in
Grammaticals in Wykehams School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. 1574.
took the degrees in Arts, was made the Kings Professor of the Greek Tongue in
this University, 1585. (being then in holy Orders,) one of the Proctors thereof
two years after, chief Master of Winchester School for nine years, Warden of
the coll. there 17 years, and at length Doctor of Divinity, being always
accounted a most solid Theologist, admirably well read in the Fathers and
Schoolmen, and in his younger years a subtle Aristotelian. The chief actions
of his Life, an account of his travels, of his disputing at Paris with the
great Doctors of the Romans Party, and also of the things that he had written and
published, his Nephew John Harmar (whom I shall mention under the year 1670.)
promised to give unto me a full narration in writing; but sickness, and death
soon after, following, prevented him. He has published, (1) Chrysostomi
Archiep. Constant, Homeliae sex, ex MSS. cod. in bib. coll. Novi. Oxon. 1586.
(2) Chrysostomi Homeliae ad populum Antiochenum, omnes, excepta prima, cum
Latina versione Homeliae decimae nonae, quae in latinis etiam exemplaribus
hactenus desiderata est. Land. 1590. He also translated from French into
English, Sermons on the three first Chapters of the Canticles. Ox. 1587, qu.
Written by Theod. Beza: And from Lat. into English, Sermons on the 10.
Commandments. Lord. 1581. qu. written by Joh. Calvin; and had a prime hand in
the translation of the New Testament into English, at the command of K. Jam. 1.
an. 1604. At length paying his last debt to nature on the eleventh of Oct. in
sixteen hundred and thirteen, New coll. Choire. His Epitaph you may read in a
book intit. Historia and Antiquit. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 152. a. He was a
considerable Benefactor to the Libraries of both Wykehams colleges.

EDWARD BREREWOOD, Son of Rob. Wet-Glover, thrice Mayor of the City of Chester,
was born, and educated in Grammar learning, there; applied his Muse to
Academical studies in Brasenose coll. in the latter end of 1581. aged 16. or
thereabouts, where continuing an indefatigable Student several years, took the
degrees in Arts, and then, as it is said, translated himself to St. Mary's hall.
In 1596. he became the first Astronomy Professor in Gresham coll. in London;
wherein, as in Oxon, he always led a retired and private course of Life,
delighting with profound speculations, and the diligent searching out of hidden
verities. It was also observed, that tho he never published any thing, while he
enjoyed this earthly Tabernacle, yet to avoid the fruitless curiosity of that
which some take upon them, to know only that they may know, he was ever most
ready in private, either by conference or writing to instruct others, repairing
unto them, if they were desirous of his resolution in any doubtful points of
learning, within the ample circuit of his deep apprehension. The things that he
wrote were many, the first of which that was published, was, as I conceive,
this.

De ponderibus, and pretiis veterum nummorum, eorumque cum recentioribus
collatione, lib. 1. Land. 1614. qu. Published by his Nephew Rob. Brerewood of
Chester, who was Commoner of Bras. coll 1605. aged 17. Remitted into the eighth
vol. of the Critics, and in the Apparatus before the first vol. of the
Polyglot Bible. He also wrote,

Enquiries touching the diversity of Languages, and Religion, through the chief
parts of the World. Land. 1614. 23. 35. etc. qu. and in 1647. etc. in oct.
published by the said Rob. Brerewood, who, if I mistake not, has written a
large and learned Preface to it.

Elementa Legicae in gratiam studiosae juventutis in Acad. Oxon. Land. 1614.
and 15. etc. in oct.

Tractatus quidem Logici de Praedicabilibus and Praedicamentis. Oxon. 1628. 37.
etc. oct.

Treatise of the Sabbath. Oxon. 1630. qu. Which coming in MS. into the hands of
Nich. Byfield a Minister in Chester, and by him answered, was replied upon by
our author in,

A second Treatise of the Sabbath, Ox. 1632. qu. The Puritans, it seems, then
(before our authors death 1613.) did verily think there was a Plot against the
power of godliness, but could never be pulled down, whilst the Sabbath stood
upright, and therefore the Patrons of impiety (as they said) did rightly
project to take that out of the way, which stood so much in theirs. Rich.
Byfield did vindicate his Brother against Brerewood, and Joh. Ley wrote partly
against him in his Sunday a Sabbath. An old and zealous Puritan named
Theophilus Brabourne, an obscure Schoolmaster, or, as some say, a Minister of
Suffolk, was very stiff for a Sabbath in his books published 1628. and 31. and
endeavored to take off all objections that might be said against one; yet by
maintaining the indispensable morality of the fourth Commandment, and
consequently the necessary observation of the Jewish Sabbath, did incline
several of his Readers to Judaism. Tho. Broad, who was esteemed an
Anti-Sabbatarian, did write almost to the same effect that Brerewood did, tho
Brerewood's first book did dissent from his opinions in those points, opposed
by George Abbot in his Vindiciae Sabbathi, wherein are also surveyed all the
rest that then had lately written on that subject concerning the Sabbath, viz.
Francis White B. of Ely, Pet. Heylyn D. D. and Christop. Dowe, whose several
treatises on the said subject, he calls Anti-Sabbatarian.

Tractatus duo, quorum primus est de meteoris, secundus de oculo. Oxon. 1631.
Published by Tho. Sixesmith M. A. and Fellow of Bras. coll.

Commentarii in Ethica Aristotelis. Ox. 1640. qu. Published by the said
Sixesmith, and it is called by some Brerewood de moribus. The original MS. of
which, written with his own hand, in the smallest and neatest character, that
mine eyes ever yet beheld, was by him finished 27. Oct. 1586.

The Patriarchal Government of the ancient Church, declared by way of answer
unto four questions, etc. Ox. 1641. qu. He ended his days in Gresham coll. of a
Fever, to the great reluctance of all good men, that knew the learning and the
excellencies of the person, Nov. in sixteen hundred and thirteen, and was
buried the eighth day of the same month, near to the Readers Pew, in the
Chancel of the Church of Great S. Helen, within the City of London. In his
Lectureship of Astronomy in the said coll. succeeded Edm. Gunter, as I shall
tell you elsewhere.

Gloucester hall, in the latter end of 1583. took one degree in Arts,
translated himself to Oriel coll. proceeded in that Faculty, and by continual
study and unwearied industry, he became a proficient in Divinity, and Minister
of Sanbridge in Hertfordshire. Afterward his merits introducing him to the
knowledge of Dr. Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, was by him made his Chaplain,
so that taking the degree of Doctor of Div. was also by him preferred to a
Dignity. He has published.

Several Sermons, as, (1) A prohibition of revenge, on Rev. 12. 19. Land. 1600.
oct. (2) Sword of maintenance, on Amos 5. 15. Land. 1600. oct. (3) Faithful
Subject, or Mephibosheth, on 2 Samuel 19. 29, 30. Land. 1608. oct. (4) Salomons
Porch, or a Caveat, etc. on Eccles. 4. 17. Land. 1608. oct. (5) Jacobs Well,
Clar. 1613.
on Joh. 4. 6. Land. 1613. oct. etc. What other things he has published, I
know not, nor any thing else of the author.

JOHN DUNSTER, born of a Family of his Doneat near to Ilminster in
Somersetshire, was made Demi of Magd. coll. in 1598. aged 16. perpetual Fellow
1602. afterward Master of Arts, Proctor of the University 1611. and at length
Chaplain to Archb. Abbot, who bestowed on him a Benefice or Dignity about 1613.
in which year Dunster resigned his Fellowship. He has published,

Caesar's Penny, Sermon. on 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Oxon. 1610. oct.

Prodromus. Or a literal exposition of the 79 Psalm, concerning the destruction
of Jerusalem. Clar. 1613.
Land. 1613. oct. In his younger days, being esteemed a noted Poet by his
Contemporaries, had several copies of verses printed in various books,
especially in that made by the Society of Magd. coll. on the death of a noble
young Man of that house named Will. Gray, Son of Arth. Gray Baron of Wilton,
who died 18. Feb. 1605.

WILLIAM SYMONDS, an Oxfordshire Man Magd. coll. in 1573. and perpetual Fellow
six years after, but whether he was M. of A. it appears not. About the time
that he was made Fellow, he entered into holy Orders, and had a Spiritual Cure
bestowed on him at Halton Holgate in Lincolnshire, by Sir Rob. Bertie Lord
Willoughby; where continuing several years, was called thence and became at
length Preacher at S. Saviors Church in Southwarke, and D. and D. 1613. He was
a person of an holy life, grave and moderate in his carriage, painful in the
Ministry, well learned and of rare understanding in Prophetical Scriptures. He
has written,

Pisgah Evangelica, according to the method of the Revelation, presenting the
History of the Church, and those Canaanites over whom she shall triumph. Land.
1605. qu.

Virginia. Sermon. at White-chappel in the presence of many honorable and
worshipful, Clar. 1613.
the Adventurers and Planters for Virginia, 25. Apr. 1609. on Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3.
Land. 1609. qu. What other things he published, I cannot yet find, nor to what
year he lived.

WILLIAM CHEEK, who writes and entitles Austro-Britannus, became a Student in
Magd. coll. in the beginning of the year 1592. took one degree in Arts, as a
Member of Madg. hall, in Lent Term 1595. which being completed by
Determination, he left the University, and afterward wrote and published
certain matters, of which, one is intit.

Anagrammata and Chronogrammat a Regia. Clar. 1613.
Land. 1613. oct. In which book are several copies of Latin and Greek verses,
which show the author to have been a good Poet in the time he lived.

ROBERT HOVEDEN, a Kentish Man born, Allsouls coll. in 1565. took the degrees
in Arts, that of Master being completed in 1570. and in the year following,
being then 27 years of age, he was elected and confirmed Warden of the said
coll. About the same time entering into holy Orders, he was made Domestic
Chaplain to Matthew Archb. of Canterbury, afterward Prebendary of the Cath.
there, Prebendary of Henstridge in the Church of Wells, Prebendary of Clifton
in the Church of Lincoln, and at length Doctor of Div. He has written,

Henrici Chichleii Cantuar. Archiepiscopi, collegiique Omnium Animarum apud
Oxonienses fundatoris vita. Written in Dec. 1574. and has this beginning,
Henricus Chichleius in pago prope Northamptoniam, etc. It is a short thing, and
is kept in MS. under the authors hand in Alls. coll. and served as an Apparatus
of a larger life, written by Dr. Arth. Duck.

Catalogus Custodum and Sociorum coll. Om. Animarum. -- MS. It commences at the
foundation of the college, and reaches down to Hoveden's days, and by others
continued to these times. This Catalogue, tho it is trite and slender, and now
and then faulty, yet it has instructed me in many things, when I was in
composing this and a preceedent work. It is commonly in the custody of the
Warden, and has in the beginning of it the life of the Founder
beforementioned. This worthy Doctor died on the 25. of March in sixteen
hundred and fourteen, and was buried toward the upper end of Alls. coll.
chapel. copy of his Epitaph you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Universe. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 185. a.

Suffolk man born, was originally one of the Clerks of C. C. coll. and being
Bach. of Arts in 1577. was elected Greek Reader of the same, 9. June in the
year following, not without great opposition of Mr. Joh. Rainolds whose
resignation it was. On the 7. May 1579. he was admitted Fellow, and the year
after took the degree of Master of Arts. So that entering into Orders he became
a noted Preacher, Chaplain to K. Jam. 1. and a great admirer of Rich. Hooker
and Rainolds before mentioned. On the death of the last he was elected
President of the said coll. and reverenced by all good men for his knowledge,
learning and piety. At the time of his death he left several things fit for the
Press, among which was a Sermon published by Hamlet Marshall his Curate,
bearing this title.

A learned and godly Sermon at Paul's Cross on Esaias 5. 2. 3. Land. 1615. qu. But
this is not all that he is to be remembered for, for, for several years before
his death, he took extraordinary pains, together with a most judicious and
complete Divine named R. Hooker before mentioned, about the compiling of a
learned and profitable work, which he published, (I mean some of the books of
Ecclesiastical Policy) yet would not he be moved to put his name to tho he had
a special hand in, it, and therefore it fell out that tulit alter honores. Our
Author Spenser also, did about four years after Hooker's death publish the five
Books of Eccles. Policy together in one Volume, with an Epistle before them,
subscribed by J. S. and reprinted at London with some of his smaller works
(which had been before published) by Hen. Jackson, an. 1622. fol. He the said
Dr. Spenser gave way to fate 3. Apr. it sixteen hundred and fourteen, Corp. Chapter
coll. Chapel. Over his Grave is a fair Monument, with his bust, and an
inscription; a copy of which you may read in Histor. and Antiq. Universe. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 244. b. His Picture is painted on the Wall of the School gallery in
Oxon, among our eniment English Divines.

Dublin in Ireland, Studied several years in this University with indefatigable
industry, but whether in any of the three houses wherein Irish men of his time
studied, viz. in Vniv. coll. Heart, or Glocester-hall, or whether he took a
degree, I find not. Afterward, under pretense of being weary with the Heresy
professed in England (as he usually called it) left the Nation, the Religion
that he was brought up to, and entered himself into the Society of Jesus, in
1596. being then between 30. and 40. years of age. After he had spent some time
in that order, he was sent from Flanders to Padua to increase his studies:
which being completed, he went into Spain, where at Salamanca he presided the
Seminary of that Nation ad formationem spiritus. He was endowed with a most
ardent zeal for the obtaining of Souls, and was beloved of, and respected by,
not only those of his own Order, but of other Orders for his singular virtues
and excellencies of good conditions. He has written

Introduction to the Art of Music, wherein are set down exact and easy rules,
with arguments and their solutions, for such as seek to know the reason of the
truth: which rules, he means, whereby any by his own industry, may shortly,
easily, and regularly, attain to all such things, as to this Art do belong.
Land. 1584. qu. This book he wrote while he was a young Student in Oxford,
being then much delighted in the faculty of Music.

Janua linguarum: seu modus maxim accomodatus, quo patefit aditus ad omnes
linguas intelligendas. Salam. 1611. Published by the care of the Irish Fathers
of the Jesuits Order living at Salamanca, and is used at this time there for
the instruction of Youth. He also wrote in the Spanish Tongue.

Preparation for the administering of the Sacrament, with greater facility and
fruit of repentance, than has been already done. Millan. 1604. Published by
Joseph Creswell under the name of Pet. Manrique. He also ( W. Bathe) wrote in
English, but his name not put to it,

A methodical institution concerning the chief mystesteries of Christian
Religion.

Method for the performing of general Confession. -- At length our author
taking a journey to Madrid in Spain about several concerns of the Order, died
there 17 June in sixteen hundred and fourteen (according to the account there
followed) and was buried,

JOHN REINOLDS, the most noted Epigrammatist Joh. Owen and Sir Jo. Harrington
of his time, received his first being in this world at Tuddington in
Bedfordshire, was elected Probationer of New coll. from Wykeham's School near
to Winchester, in 1600. and two years after was admitted Perpetual fellow,
being then noted for a good Grecian, Orator, and Poet. Afterward he took the
degree of Bach. of the Civil Law, and wrote and published,

Disticha classis Epigrammatum, sive carminum inscriptorum. Centuriae duae. The
first part was printed at Oxon 1611. in oct. and contains an 110. Epigrams
concerning the British and English Kings, each Epigarm consisting but of two
Verses. The other part was printed at the same place in 1612. in oct. Besides
which Epigrams, he has much of his Poetry printed in diverse books,
particularly in that made by certain fellows of New coll. on the death of Ralph
Warcup, Esquire an. 1605, wherein he flourishes in his Greek Poetry. He ended his
days in the prime of his years in sixteen hundred and fourteen, and was buried,
New coll Cloister. I find another of both his names and equal almost in time
with him, who was born within the City of Excester, and by the books that he
published, had gained a famous name among the vulgar Scholars, Gentlemen, and
Women of love and mode. The titles of them are (1) The triumphs of Gods
revenge, against the crying and execrable sin of Murder, etc. Land. 1621. qu.
the first book. Five more came out afterward at several times, mostly taken
from French printed copies, which he had gathered in his Travels into France.
All the six books, were printed at London in one fol. 1635. and several times
after. At length the sixth edition being adorned with Cuts, was published at
Land. 1679. fol. by Sam. Pordage of Lincolns Inn, Son of Joh. Pordage Rector of
Bradfield in Berks. and formerly Head Steward of the lands to old Philip Earl
of Pembroke. (2) Gods revenge against the abominable sin of Adultery,
containing ten several Histories. Land. 1679. fol. This being never printed
before, was illustrated with Cuts, and published by the said Sam. Pordage with
the former book. (3) The flower of fidelity: Displaying in a continuate
history, the various adventures of three foraigne Princes. Land. 1650. oct.
Dedicated to his Father-in-law Rich. Waltham Esquire Justice of Peace of Devon. and
other things which I have not yet seen. Among the translations that he has
made from French into English is A Treatise of the Court, written by Monsieur
de Refuges, and by the Translator dedicated to Prince Charles, afterward K.
Chapter 1. Whether the said John Reynolds was ever a Student in Oxon, I cannot in
my searches yet find. However some of the Ancients of Exeter coll. who knew the
man, have averred it several times, that he had received some Accademical
education, but before he could take a degree, was called away to travel into
France. He was living in the times of Usurpation, but whether in those of the
restoration of K. Chapter 2. I cannot tell.

ARTHUR HOPTON, fifth Son of Sir Arth. Knight of the Bathe, (by Rachell his
Wife, daughter of Edm. Hall of Gretford in Lincolnshire) Son of Sir Owen
Hopton, sometimes Leivtenant of the Tower near London, was born in
Somersetshire, (at Wytham as it seems) became a Gent. Commoner of Lincoln coll
in Michaelmas Term, an. 1604. aged 15. or more; where falling under the tuition
of a noted and careful Tutor, became the miracle of his age for learning. In
1607. he was admitted Bach. of Arts, and then left the University to the great
sorrow of those who knew the wonderful pregnancy of his parts. Afterward he
settled in London, in one of the Temples as I conceive, where he was much
admired and beloved by Seldom and all the noted men of that time, who held him
in great value not only for his ancient and gentile Extraction, but for the
mavelous forwardness of his Mathematical genie, which led him to perform
those matters at one or two and twenty years of age, which others of forty or
fifty could not do, as in these Books following of his composition may appear.

Baculum Geodaticum sive Viaticum. Or, the Geodetical Staff containing eight
books. Land. 1610. in a pretty thick qu.

Speculum Topographicum. Or, the Topographical Glass; containing the use of the
Topographical Glass, Theodelitus, plain Table and Circumferentor, etc. Land.
1611. qu.

A Concordancy of years; containing a new, easy, and a most exact computation
of time, according to the English account. Land. 1616. oct. To which were
additions made by Joh. Penkethman. Land. 1635. in qu. in one sh. and half. He
has also diverse copies of verses scattered in books, which show that he was a
tolerable Poet of his time. He ended his days in the prime of his years, within
the Parish of St. Clements Danes, without Temple Bar near to London, in the
month of Nov. in sixteen hundred and fourteen, Ralph Hopton, Son of his Brother
Robert, was a Gent. Com. also of Linc. coll. and after the Rebellion brake out
in 1642. he was a General of an Army under K. Chapter 1. and by him made a Baron.

Cocus, was born at, or near to, Beeston in Yorkshire, was entered a Student in
Brasenose coll. in 1567. aged 17. or thereabouts, where, with unwearied
diligence, traveling through the various Classes of Logic and Philosophy, he
became the most noted Disputant of his time. On the 2. Dec. 1573. he was
unanimously elected Probationer-Fellow of that coll. and three years after took
the degree of M. of A. About which time entering into Holy Orders, and being
noted for his admirable learning, was therefore elected one of the Proctors of
the University: In which office he behaved himself so admirably well, that his
house gained credit by it. In 1584. he was admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, and in the beginning of June 1590. resigning his Fellowship, retired
to his new obtained Vicaridge of Leedes in Yorkshire; where making the best
advantage of his time, became a Man learned in the Church, singularly well
studied in the disquisition of antiquity, especially for the discerning of the
proper works of the Fathers from the forged and counterfeit, as it may appear
in a book which he wrote, intit.

Censura quorundam Scriptorum quae sub nominibus Sanctorum, and veterum
auctorum, a Pontificiis passim in eorum Scriptis, sed potissimum in
quaestionibus hodie controversis citari solent. Land. 1614. and 23. qu. Which
is all I think he has published. He gave way to fate at Leedes
beforementioned, on the first of Jan. in sixteen hundred and fourteen, 1614-15.
and was buried the day following in the Church there. Alex. Cook his Brother,
whom I shall mention under the year 1632. succeeded him in the Vicaridge of
Leedes, and there died.

So I find it in the Pedigree of the Slades (of 17. or more generations.) sent
to me from Amsterdam by some of the Slades living there, in Ap. 1690.
Son of Joh. Slade of the West Country, Son of Joh. Slade of Roughley in
Staffordshire, the second Son of Joh. Slade of the ancient and gentile Family
of the Slades of Norton-Slade in Lancashire, was born in Devonshire, became a
Batler of St. Albans hall in 1584. and in that of his age 17. took a degree in
Arts four years after, and about that time was a candidate for a Fellowship of
Morton coll. but what put him by, unless the want of Friends, for Philosophy he
had sufficient, I know not. Afterward he retired to his native Country, taught
School for a time, and Married, as I shall anon tell you. At length upon an
invitation, he went to Amsterdam in Holland, where by the High and Mighty
States he became Rector of the learned Academy or Gymnasium, situated and being
in the old part of that famous City; where he was esteemed, by all that knew
him, an excellent L^tinist, a good Grecian, one well read in profound authors,
a stiff Enemy to the Socinians, and a walking Library. His works are these:

Cum Conrado Vorstio S. T. D. de blasphemiis, haeresibus, and atheismis a
Jacobo Rege Angliae 1. in ejusd. Vorstii de dei tractatu, etc. Scholasticae
disputationis pars prima. In qua fides Orthodoxa de vera immensitate and
infinitate triunius dei opponitur, etc. Amstel. 1612. qu.

Appendix prioris disceptationis. Amstel. 1614. qu. Which is set before this
book following.

Disceptationis cum Conrado Vorstio S. T. D. pars altera, de immutabilitate and
simplicitate dei: Qua docetur R. Jac. 1. just and merito notasse blasphemum
Vorsti dogma. Deum esse mutabilem and accedentibus subjectum adserentis.
Amstel. 1614. qu.

C. Vorstii and F. Socini concentus, sive Bicinii exemplum: cum rerum, verborum
atque testium Syllabo. Printed with the former, viz. Disceptationis altera
pars. Clar. 1614.
These things were replied upon by Vorstius, in 1615. but whether our author
Slade put out a rejoinder, I know not as yet, or any thing else that he has
published. He took to Wife Alethea Daughter of Rich. Kirford of, or near to,
Honiton in Devon. on the 20. of Sept. 1593. by whom he had Issue Cornelius
Slade born in Amsterdam 14. of Oct. 1599. and made Rector of the Gymnasium
there, (perhaps on the death of his Father) on the 9. of May 1628. who taking
to Wife Gertrude the Daughter of Luke Ambrose a Preacher of Amsterdam, begot on
her, among other Children, Matthew Slade born 9. of June 1628. and being
strictly educated in learning, became a Doctor of Physic and a learned Man,
and thereupon often mentioned with honor by Swammerdam, as also by Scrader,
who dedicates a book to him. This Matthew Slade did publish, under the borrowed
name of Theodorus Aldes (Slade) Anglus, a book intit. Dissertatio Epistolica de
Generatione Animalium contra Harveium. Amstel. 1666. in tw. Reprinted with
other Anatomical Works at Francfort, twice in the year 1668. in qu. and is
extant in the Bibliotheca Anatomica. The Collectors of which have unveiled him,
and put him down under his true name Mattheus Sladus Amstelodamensis M. D. He
has also written Observationes in Ovem. Amstel. 1673. in tw. which is also in
the said Bibliotheque, and Sciagraphia nutritionis Foetus in utero; and de ejus
urina. Ibid. At length coming into England in Sept. or Oct. 1689. retired to
Oxon in Dec. following to see it, the Colleges, Libraries, and learned Men
there: And after he had tarried at that place about a fortnight, went in the
Stage-coach toward London, but being taken suddenly with an Apoplectical fit
on Shotover hill, two miles distant from Oxon, died thereof before he came to
Wheatley, on Friday the twentieth day of the same month, being the Eve of St.
Thomas the Apostle. Whereupon his body being lodged in a common Inn there, was,
by the care of James Tyrrell Esquire and Dr. Edw. Bernard one of the Savilian
Professors, conveyed thence the next day to the Angel Inn in Oxon, where lying
till the day following, was buried in the yard (near to, and behind the West
door leading therein,) belonging to the Church of St. Peter in the East; at
which time were present certain Doctors of, and Graduats in, Physic, and
Masters of Arts.

THOMAS FREEMAN, a Gloucestershire Man Batsford and Todenham near to Morton in
Marsh, became a Student in Magd. coll. an. 1607. aged 16 years, or thereabouts,
and Bach. of Arts four years after. At length retiring to the great City, and
setting up for a Poet, was shortly after held in esteem by Sam. Daniel, Owen
the Epigrammatist, Dr. Joh. Donn, Shakspeare, George Chapman, Tho. Heywood the
Playmaker and others. To some of whole judgments he submitted these his two
books of Epigrams following.

Rub, and a great Cast. In 100 Epigrames. Land. 1614. qu.

Run, and a great Cast. The second bowl, in an 100 Epigrams. Clar. 1614.
-- Printed with the former Epigrams, and both dedicated to Thomas Lord
Windsore, who seemed to patronize his studies. The reason for Rub and Run,
he gives in these four verses. Sphaera mihi; calamus, mundi sunt crimina, nodi,
Ipse sed est mundus, Sphaeromachia mihi.
Sive manner Jubes, Lector, seu currere spaeram
Lusori pariter, curre mane que placent.


THOMAS CHALONER, Son of Sir Thom. Knight, by Ethelreda his Wife, Daughter of
Edward Frodsham of Elton in Cheshire, was educated in Magd. coll. where he was
held in esteem for his Poetry; but taking no degree, traveled beyond the Seas,
and at his return became a complete Gentleman. In 1591. he received the honor
of Knighthood, and being esteemed a learned, prudent, and sober person, when K.
James the first came to the English Crown, he therefore by him was appointed
Tator (and afterward Chamberlain) to his Son Prince Henry the lively joy and
delight of Britain, and about that time was actually created Master of Arts, as
in the Fasti, under the year 1605. I shall tell you. This person, who was a
learned searcher into Natures Works, did first discover an Allum-mine near to
Gisburgh in Yorkshire, (being possessed of Land there,) about the latter end of
Q. Elizabeth; but being adjudged to be a Mine-Royal, was rented by several, and
little benefit came to Sir Thomas. At length the Long Parliament which began in
1640. voted it a Monopoly, and restored the benefit thereof to the former
Proprietaries. He has written several things, but all that I have seen is only,

The Virtue of Nitre, wherein is declared the sundry cures by the same
effected. Land. 1584. qu. and other matters pertaining to Virtuosity, and
something, as it seems, to Pastoral, but whether extant, I cannot tell. He died
about the 17. Nov. in sixteen hundred and fifteen, Cheswich in Middlesex, near
to the body of Elizabeth his first Wife, Daughter of Will. Fleetwood, sometimes
Recorder of London, by whom he had Issue Will. Chaloner of Gisburgh in
Yorkshire, soon after his Fathers death made a Baronet, Thomas, James, etc.
which two last were of the number of Judges that sat in Judgment on King
Charles 1. of Blessed Memory, as I shall tell you at large. He had also several
Children by his second Wife Judith, Daughter of Will. Blount of London, some of
whose Posterity (as I think) lives at, or near, Steeple-Claydon in Bucks,
where Sir Thomas had a fair Estate.

Driesschus, commonly called Vander Driesche the most noted Critic, Linguist,
and Theologist of his time, was born at Oudenard a City of Flanders, situated
between Gaunt and Tourney, 28. June 1550. educated in Grammar learning in
Gaunt, in Academical in the University of Lovaine, where he took the degree of
B^ch. of Arts. About which time his Father Clement Driesche, being proscribed
for Religion, and deprived of his Estate, fled into England, and took this his
Son with him. When he came to London he met with Anth. Cevallerius a Professor
at Caen in Normandy, exceeding skilful in the Hebrew Tongue, who reading there
to several Scholars and Laics, our author attended him, went also with him to
Cambridge, where he read the said Language, and afterward for a time into
France, and by his diligence became an exact proficient in the Hebrew, as well
as in the Greek, Language. Soon after he returned to London, and when he
purposed to go back into France he heard of the Massacre at Paris, which made
him alter his mind. So that turning his course to Oxon, in the beginning of the
year 1572. he was entertained by the Society of Morton coll. admitted to the
degree of Bach. of Arts, as a Member of that house, in July the same year, and
in the beginning of Aug. following had a Chamber set apart Reg. 2. Act. coll.
M^rton, p. 27. 35. 47. 53, etc.
for him by the Society; who then also decreed that he should have forty
shillings yearly allowed to him, so long as he read a Hebrew Lecture in their
common Refectory. For 4 years, at least, he lived in the said house, and
constantly read (as he did sometimes to the Scholars of Magd. coll. upon the
desire of Dr. Laur. Humphrey President thereof) either Hebrew, Chalde, or
Syriack Lectures. In 1573. he was, as a Member of the said house of Merton,
licensed to proceed in Arts, and in the year following was Reg. Univ. Oxon. KK.
fol. 177. b.
recommended by the Chancellor of the University to the Members of
Convocation, that he might publicly read the Syriack Language in one of the
public Schools, and that for his pains he receive a competent stipend. Soon
after, upon consideration of the matter, they allowed him twenty marks to be
equally gathered from among them, and ordered that the same respect be given to
him, as to any of the Lecturers. In 1576. he left Oxon, and in the year
following the States of Holland chose him to be the Professor in Hebrew,
Chalde, and Syriack in the University of Leydon. Soon after, being Married, the
States of Frisland, who had erected an University at Franeker, invited him
thither to be a Professor; where continuing many years, was held in high esteem
of all Scholars and Foreigners, that repaired thither. He was an excellent
Hebrician, and well versed in the Rabbines, and has given great light to a
large part of the Scriptures, as these books following shows most of which are
remitted into the several Tomes of the Critics.

Comm. ad Voces Hebraicas Novi Testum. viz. pars prior.

Com. ad Voc. Hebr. N. Test. viz. pars posterior. Antw. 1582. qu. Both printed
together at Franek. 1616. fol.

Quaestionum Hebraicarum libri 3. In quibus varia S. Scripturae explicantur.
Lugd. 1583. oct.

Animadversionum lib. 2. Lugd. 1585. oct.

Com. in librum Esther. Lugd. Bat. 1586. oct. Additiones Apocryphae latin
versae, cum Scholiis.

Miscellanea locutionum Sacrarum. Franek. 1586. oct.

Versio and Com. in lib. Ruth, ejusque translatio Graeca cum notis ad candem.
Franek. 1586. oct. etc.

Alphabetum Hebraicum vetus, and veterum Gnomae Heb. Lat. Franek. 1587.

Parallela, seu locorum vet. Testamenti quae Novo citantur, conjuncta
commemoratio. Franek. 1588. qu.

Proverbiorum sacrorum classes 2. seu explicatio Proverb. Salomonis. Franek.
1590. qu.

Lectiones in Amos, Nahum, Habuc, Sophoniam, Joel, Jonam, and Abdiam. Lugd.
Bat. 1591. oct. etc.

Liber Tobias Graece, cum castigationibus. Franek. 1591. qu.

Lectiones in Jonam. Lugd. Bat. 1591. oct.

Observationum Sacrarum lib. 16. Franek. 1594. oct.

Carmina Hebraica in obitum Jos. Scaligeri. Franek. 1591. qu.

De quaesitis per Epistolam. Printed 1595. oct.

Ecclesiastices Graece, cum versione and notis. Franek. 1596. qu.

Versio and Scholia ad Proverbia Ben-Syrae. Franek. 1597. qu.

Adagiorum Hebraicorum Decuriae aliquot, cum Scholiis.

Quaest. Hebr. lib. 3. Franek. 1599. oct.

Lectiones in Hoseam. Lugd. Bat. 1599. oct.

Versio and notae ad librum Hasmonaeorum seu priorem Machabaeorum. Franek.
1600. qu.

Grammatica Chaldaica ex tabb. Merceri descripta. Franek. 1602. oct.

De Hasidaeis. Franek. 1603. oct.

De nomine Elohim. Franek. 1604. oct.

De nomine Tetragrammato, cum Scholiis in Pauli Burgensis 12. questiones de
eodem subjecto. Franek. 1604. oct. Amst. 1634. qu.

Comm. de 3 sectis Judaeorum, contra Serarium. Franek. 1605.

Comm. de sectis Judaicis, viz. de Hasidaeis, and de 3. sectis Judaeorum, and
spicilegium Tribaeresii Nic. Serarii. Franek. 1603. and 1605. oct. Arnh. 1619.
qu.

Respons. ad Nic. Seraerii Minerval. Franek. 1606. oct.

Notae ad Sulpitii severi historiam sacram. Franek. 1607. oct.

Opuscula Grammaticalia. Franek. 1609. qu.

Annot. in Nov. Test. sive praeteritorum libri 10. Franek. 1612. qu. etc.

Annot. pars altera. Franek. 1616. qu.

Apothegmata Hebraeorum ac Arabum, ex variis authoribus collecta, Lat. Franek.
1612. qu. etc.

De Patriarcha Henoch and ejus libro: ubi etiam de libris in S. Scriptura
memoratis qui nunc interciderunt. Franek. 1615. qu.

Comm. in difficiliora loca Pentateuchi. Franek. 1617. qu.

Comm. in difficiliora loca Josuae, Judicum, and Samuchs. Franek. 1618.

Vet. Gr. Interp. fragm. in vetus Test. cum notis. Arnh. 1622. qu.

Com. seu Lectiones in 12 Prophetas Minores. Amstel. 1627. Published with
additions and amended by Sixth. Amama.

Annot. in librum Koheleth seu Ecclesiasten. Amstel. 1635.

Versio and Scholia in lib. Job. Amstel. 1636.

Veterum Interpretum Graecorum fragmenta in Pentateuchum, cum notis.

Conjectanea in Graecam editionem (...) lxx.

Tetragrammaticon: sive de nomine dei proprio, etc. Amstel. 1634. qu.

Historia Ruth Graece ad exemplar Complutense cum Latina versione ex Ebraeo,
and cum comment. Amstel. 1632. qu.

Animadversionum libri duo pro emendatione (...) Ebr. and veterum Interpr. in
plurimis locis S. Scripturae. Amstel. 1634. qu.

Grammatica linguae s^^ctae. Franek. 1612. qu. Catechesis religionis
christianae Heb. Gr. and Lat. pr. 1591. oct. Other things, as it is probable, he
has published, but such I have not yet seen. He surrendered up his pious soul
to God: 1615-16.
on this 12. of Feb. in sixteen hundred and fifteen, and was buried, as I
suppose, at Franeker, after he had lived there a most severe student, and in
continual labor for the good and benefit of Literature about 31. years. He
left behind him a Son of both his names, bred partly in this University, but
not to be numbered among most learned men, especially such as was his Father, as
also a Daughter named Agnes, the wife of Abel Curiander author of the Latin
life of his Father-in-Law Joh. Drusius, printed at Franaker 1616. qu. In which
the Reader may see more of his life and works, than are here set down by me.

Cheshire, and came full ripe to the University before 1568. About which time
being made one the Students of Chapter Chapter took holy Orders very early, and
afterward the degree of Master of Arts, Scil. an. 1576. before which time, he
was a sedulous and constant Preacher of Gods word. What his preferments were
successively afterward, I know not, only that he was Chaplain to Doctor
Bancroft Bishop of London, and at length Rector of Horninger near to S. Edmonds
Bury in Suffolk, where and in the neighborhood, he was always held in great
esteem for his learning and holiness of life and conversation. His works are
these.

A Philosophical discourse, entit. The Anatomy of the mind. Land. 1576. oct.
Before which is a copy of Verses in praise of it, written by his Contemporary
Will. Camden of Chapter Chapter

Of the end of the world, and second coming of Christ, etc. Land. 1577. qu.

The English Creed; wherein is contained in tables an exposition on the
articles which every man is to subscribe unto. Where the articles are expounded
by Scripture, and the confessions of all the reformed Churches and Heresies are
displayed. Land. 1579. and 85. fol.

General Session, containing an apology of the comfortable doctrine concerning
the end of the world and seccond coming of Christ. Land. 1581. qu.

The English Creed; consisting with the true ancient Catholic and Apostolic
Church in all the points and articles of Religion, which every christian is to
know, and believe, that would be saved, etc. -- In two parts. The first printed
at London in 1585. the second there 1587. and both in fol.

An Exposition on the 39 Articles of the Church of England. Land. 1586. etc.
qu. Which book, at the first appearance, met not with that welcome
entertainment, which seemed due to the authors endeavors. For besides the two
extremes, Papists and Schismatics, who were highly enraged, many Protestants
of a middle temper were much offended thereat. Some conceived it presumption
for a private Minister to make himself the mouth of the Church, to render her
sense in matters of so high-concernment. Others were See Tho. ^ullers Chapter Hist.
lib. 9. an. 1584.
offended, that his interpretation confined the charitable latitude, formerly
allowed in those Articles. Howsoever it was, sure it is, the work in some
years, wrought it self in good esteem, as dedicated to, and countenanced by,
Dr. Bancroft beforementioned.

A golden Chain taken out of the rich treasure house of the Psalms of David.
Land. 1587. in tw.

The Peerles of K. Soleman, gathered into common places -- Taken from the
Proverbs of the said King, printed with the former book.

Historical dialogue touching Antichrist and Popery; drawn and published for
the comfort of our Church, etc. Land. 1589. oct.

Sermon. on 12. Romans ver. 6. 7. 8. Land. 1590. qu.

Miles Christianus, Or, a defense of all necessary writings and writers,
written against an Epistle prefixed to a Catechism made by Miles Moses. Land.
1590. qu. This Miles Moses was Bach. of Div. and published besides the former
things, The arraignment of Usury in six Sermons. Land. 1595. qu.

Table of the lawful use of an oath, and the cursed state of vain Swearers.
Land.

Two dealogues. Land. 1608. He also translated into English. (1) A discourse of
the end of the world and second coming of Christ. Land. 1577. 78. oct. written
by Schelto a Geveren of Emden in Friesland. (2) General discourse of the
damnable sect of Usurers, etc. Land. 1578. qu. written by Philip Caesar. To
which is added, A treatise of the lawful use of riches: written by Nich.
Heming. (3) The profession of the true Church, and Popery compared. Land. 1578.
oct. (4) Exposition on the 84. Psalm. Land. 1581. oct. written by Nic. Heming
for the instruction of the ignorant in the grounds of Religion; and confutation
of the Jews, Turks, etc. (5) S. Augustins heavenly meditations, called, A
private talk with God. Land. 1581. in tw. Purified by our Translator T.
Rogers, and adorned with annotations of Scripture. (6) Of the foolishness of
men and women in putting off the amendment of their lives from day to day.
Land. 1583. and 86. oct. written Joh. Rivius. (7) Of the imitation of Christ,
Land. 1584. 89. in tw. written in three books by Tho. de Kempis; and for the
worthiness thereof often since translated into sundry Languages. Now newly
translated by Tho. Rogers, corrected, and with most ample Texts and Sentences
of holy Scripture illustrated. (8) A method to Mortification, called heretofore
The contempt of the World, etc. Land. 1586. in tw. written by Didac. Stella.
(9) S. Augustins Prayers. Land. 1591. in tw. etc. Purged by our Translator (T.
Rogers) from diverse superstitious points, and adorned with manifold places of
Scripture. (10) A manual containing special and picked meditations and godly
prayers. Land. 1591. in tw. with corrections by the Translator. (11) Enemy of
security; or, a daily exercise of godly meditations. Land. 1580. and 91. in tw.
written by Joh. Avenar public Professor of the Hebrew tongue in the University
of Witeberge. (12) Enemy to Atheism: or, christian godly prayers for all
degrees. Land. 1591. in tw. written in the German Language by Jo. Avenar,
translated out of Lat. by our author T. Rogers. (13) Soliloquium animae: The
fourth book of the imitation of Christ. Land. 1592. in tw. written by Th. de
Kempis before mentioned. What other thing our author has written and
translated, I know not; Nor any thing else of him, only that he was a zealous
opposer of the doctrine of the Sabbath, and the first that publicly stood up
against Dr. Nich. Bownds opinion of it in his Preface to the Exposition on the
39. Articles, etc. which made the other party, (the Puritan) angry, and so far
to be enraged, as maliciously to asperse and blemish him. Whereupon he wrote a
vindication of himself in MS. now in the hands of a near relation of his. At
length after a great deal of pains taken for the benefit of the Church, he gave
up the Ghost at Horninger before mentioned, otherwise called Horningshearth:
whereupon his body was buried in the Chancel of the Church there, under a
rough, unpolished and broken Gravestone, without name or Epitaph, 22. Febr. in
sixteen hundred and fifteen, as the Register of that Church tells us; 1616-16.
which, I presume, follows the English account, and not the common, as many
country Registers do. I find one Tho. Rogers a Cheshire man born, to have been
admitted Student of Chapter Chapter 1547. aged 24. or more, being then Bac. of Arts,
and soon after made Master. What relation he had to the former Th. Rogers I
know not. Another Tho. Rogers I find, who was born in Glocestershire, in, or
near to, Tewksbury, lived mostly in his latter days, in the Parish of S. Giles
in the fields near London, and published a Poem entitled The tears or
lamentations of a sorrowful Soul. Land. 1612. qu. written by Sir Will. Leighton
Knight, one of his Majesty's band of Pensioners. To which, the said Tho. Rogers
added of his own composition, a Poem called Glocesters mite. But this Tho.
Rogers is quite different from the Divine before mentioned.

RICHARD NICCOLLS, esteemed eminent London and at 18 years of age, an 1602. was
entered a Student in Mag. coll. in Michaelmas-Term, but making little stay there
he retired to Mag hall and took the degree of Bach. of Arts in 1606. being then
numbered among the ingenious persons of the University. After he had remained
there for some time, he retired to the great City, obtained an employment
suitable to his faculty, and at length honored the Devoto's to Poetry, with
these things following.

The Cuckoo, a Poem. Land. 1607. in qu. Dedicated to Mr. (after Sir) Thom.
Wroth a favourer of his Muse.

The fall of Princes. Land. 1610. qu.

A winter nights Vision. Land. 1610. qu. being an addition of such Princes,
especially famous, who were exempted in the former History, meaning in the
History called The mirror of Magistrates, written in Verse by John Higens of
Winceham, an. 1586. qu. This mirror, which was esteemed the best piece of
Poetry of those times, (if Albions England, which was by some preferred, did
not stand in its way) contained the lives of some of our Kings and Queens, and
was exceedingly admired by ingenious Scholars and others.

Momodia, Or Walthams complaint upon the death of the most virtuous and noble
Lady, Clar. 1615.
late deceased, the Lady Honor Hay. Land. 1615. oct. I find another Rich.
Niccolls who is styled the Elder, and of the Inner Temple Gent. who wrote (1) A
Treatise setting forth the mystery of our Salvation. (2) A day Star for dark
wandering souls: showing the light by a christian controversy. Both which were
published after the authors death, at Land. 1613. in oct. But whether this R.
Niccolls the Elder, was ever of this University, I find not as yet.

Denbighshire, applied his eager mind to Academical studies in Chapter Chapter an.
1598. aged 16. took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed 1607.
and afterward published,

Verba dierum: Or the days report of Gods glory, in four Sermons or Lectures
upon one text in the University of Oxon. Clar. 1615.
on Psalm. 19. 2. Oxon. 1615. qu. Another of both his names I find to have been
born at Westmeane in Hampshire, admitted fellow of New coll. 1595. and that he
took the degree of M. of A. 1602. But this person leaving his fellowship in
1604. and so consequently the University, he is not to be taken for the same,
who published the four Sermons before mentioned.

Stalls* (whether a hamlet or House I know not) in Somersetshire, educated in
Wykehams School, admitted Perpetual fellow of New coll. 1607. aged 22. took the
degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed in 1613. and three years after
left his Fellowship. But before that time, when he was Bach. of Arts, he wrote
and published,

Two centuries of Epigrams. Land. 1610. in tw. and had verses printed in
several books that occasionly were published, particularly in that on the death
of Sir Th. Bodley Knight. He has also made a translation from Spanish, Clar. 1615.
into English, which I have not yet seen, and wrote other matters fit for the
Press, but whether ever printed I cannot tell.

Harman Bilson, (the same, I suppose, who was fellow of Merton coll. an 1536)
Son of Arnold Bilson, son and heir of Arnold Bilson a Native of High Germany,
by his Wife, the Daughter (natural or legitimate, I know not) of the Duke of
Bavaria, was born in the City of Winchester, fitted for the University in
Wykeham's School there, admitted Perpetual fellow of New coll. after he had
served two years of Probation, an. 1565. took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders
and became a most solid and constant preacher in these parts and elsewhere.
Afterward he was Schoolmaster, (say some) then Prebendary of Winchester,
Warden of the coll. there, Doctor of Divinity, and at length Bishop of
Worcester; to which See being consecrated 13. June 1596. was translated thence
to Winchester in the year following, and made one of his Majesty's Privy
Councillors. He was as reverend and learned a Prelate as England ever
afforded, a deep and profound Scholar, exactly read in Ecclesiastical authors,
and with Dr. Rich. Field of Oxon. (as Whittaker and Fulke of Cambridge) a
principal maintainer of the Chapter of England, while Jo. Rainolds and Tho. Spark
were upholders of Puritanism and Nonconformity. In his younger years he was
infinitely studious and industrious in Poetry, Philosophy and Physics, and in
his elder in Divinity. To which last his genie chiefly inviting him, he became
so complete in it, so well skilled in Languages, so read in the Fathers and
Schoolmen, so judicious in making use of his readings, that at length he was
found to be no longer a Soldier, but a Commander in chief in the spiritual
warfare, especially when he became a Bishop, and carried prelature in his very
aspect. His works are,

Of the true difference between Christian subjection and unchristian rebellion,
wherein the Princes lawful power to command and bear the Sword, are defended,
against the Popes Censure, and Jesuits Sophismes in their Apology and defense
of English Catholics. Also a demonstration that the things reformed in the
Church of England by the Laws of this realm, are truly Catholic, against the
late Rhemish Testament. Oxon. 1585. Land. 1586. in 4. parts, in a thick oct. In
the third part of which, is answered Dr. Will. Allens Defense of Engl. Cath.
before mentioned. It must be now noted that whereas in England the interest of
the State had a great influence upon the doctrine of Obedience, Qu. Elizabeth
therefore conceiving it convenient for her worldly designs to take on her the
protection of the Low Countries against the King of Spain, did employ our
author Bilson to write the said book of Christian subjection, etc. In which, to
justify the revolt of Holland, he gave strange liberty in many cases,
especially concerning religion, for Subjects to cast off their obedience. But
this book which served her designs for the present, did contribute much to the
ruin of her Successor K. Chapter 1. (which one Hug. Paul. de Cressey in his
Exomologesis, etc. cap. 11.
calls a just judgment of God) For there is not any book that the Presbyterians
have made more dangerous use of against their Prince ( Chapter 1.) than that which
his predecessor commanded to be written to justify her against the King of
Spain. However our authors (Bilson) Successor in Winchester, I mean Dr. Morley
In his Vindication of himself against diverse scandalous reflections made upon
him by Mr. Rich. Baxter, cap. 3. Sect. 6.
says that tho Bishop Bilson was in an error, yet he was not so much for the
resisting of Kings, as Mr. Rich. Baxter is.

Of the perpetual government of Christ his Church, wherein are handled, the
fatherly superiority which God first established in the Patriarks, and after
continued in the tribe of Levi, etc. Also the points in question at this day
touching the Jewish Synedrion, etc. Land. 1593. qu. etc. Printed in Lat. at
Land. 1610.

The effect of certain Sermons touching the full redempton of mankind by the
death and blood of Chapter Jesus; wherein besides the merit of Christ's sufferings,
the manner of his offering, the power of his death, the comfort of his Cross,
the glory of his Resurrection are handled, etc. Land. 1599. qu. The clearing of
certain objections made against the aforesaid doctrine. -- The said Sermons
being preached at Paul's Cross, made great alarums among the puritanical
brethren. Whereupon they mustering their forces and comparing their notes, sent
them to Hen. Jacob an old Dessenter, to have them published, with his
collections, under his own name. But the matter of the controversy coming to
the Queens knowledge, (she being at Farnham castle belonging to the B. of
Winchester) she signified her pleasure to Bilson that he should neither desert
the doctrine, nor suffer the Function, which he had exercised in the Church of
England, to be trodden and trampled under foot by unquiet men, who both
abhorred the truth and despised authority. Upon which command, the Bishop did
set himself upon the writing of that learned Treatise (chiefly also delivered
by him in Sermons) entitled,

A survey of Christ's sufferings and descent into Hell. Land. 1604. fol. See
more in Hen. Jacob. He also published,

Sermon at Westminster. before K. and Qu. at their Coronation S. James day, 28. Jul.
1603. on Romans 13. 1. Land. 1603: oct. and wrote, MS. in my Libr.
Orationes. Carmina varia. Vulgaria, etc.


He also, with Dr. Miles Smith, added the last hand in the translation of the
Bible, commanded by K. James 1. At length after he had gone through many
employments, and had lived in continual drudgery, as 'twere, for the public
good, surrendered up his pious soul to God on the 18. June in sixteen hundred
and sixteen, and was buried says Fr. Gedwin in Append. ad. Com de. praesul.
Angliae.
one, on the south side of Westminster Abbey Church near to the Monument of K.
Rich. 2. or as the Register has it, near to the entrance into S. Edmunds
Chapel. One John Dunbar a Scot, who writes himself Megalo-Britannus, has a
learned Epigram In lib. Epigr. Land. 1616. in oct. cent. 2. Epig. 40.
on him, which may serve for his Epitaph.

Pitsous as he writes himself, a grand zealot for the To. Cath. cause, Son of
Hen. Pits by Elizabeth his Wife, sister to Dr. Nich. Saunders, was bron at a
market Town called Aulton in Hampshire, educated in juvenile learning in
Wykeham's School near to Winton, admitted Probationer-fellow of New coll. in
1578. being then about 18. years of age, but leaving that house before he was
admitted perpetual Fellow, which was to be in 1580. he went beyond the Seas as
a voluntary Exile, and going to Doway was kindly received there by the learned
Tho. Stapleton, who then gave him advice what course to take relating to his
studies. Thence he went to Rheimes, and after one year spent in the English
college he was sent to Rome and continued in the English coll. there also in
the zealous prosecution of the studies of Philosopy and Divinity for seven
years, and was made a Priest. Thence he returned to Rheimes where he taught
Rhetoric and Greek for two years. But troubles arising in France, he withdrew
himself into Loraine, and took the degree of Master of Arts (which before he
had neglected) at Pont-a-musson, and was soon after made Bach. of Divinity.
Thence taking a journey into High Germany, he continued at Trier an year and an
half, where after he had performed certain exercise, he was made a Licentiat of
Divinity. Thence, after he had seen several of the best Cities in Germany, he
removed to Ingolstadt in Bavaria; where remaining 3 years, did in that time,
after he had performed solemn disputations, take the degree of Doctor of his
faculty. So that by that time having viewed several parts of Italy and Germany
and had learned their Languages, he returned to Loraine; where, by Charles
Cardinal of Loraine he was made Canon of Verdun. After two years spent there,
he was called thence by the illustrious Princess Antonia, Daughter to the Duke
of Loraine and Wife to the D. of Cleve, and was by her made her Confessor. And
that he might be the better serviceable to her, he learned the French Tongue
most accurately; so that it was usual with him afterward to preach in that
Language. In her service continuing about 12 years, he had leisure to turn over
the Histories of England, whether Ecclesiastic or Republic. Whence making
several collections and observations, he wrote and digested four great Volumes.
One was of the Kings, another of the Bishops, a third of Apostolical, and a
fourth of illustrious and learned, men of this Nation. At 12 years end the said
Duchess dying, he went a third time into Loraine, where by the favor of John
Bishop of Toul sometimes his Scholar, he was promoted to the Deanery of
Liverdune of considerable value; which, with a Canonry, and an Officialship of
the said Church, he kept to his dying day. He has written,

De legibus, Tract. Th^ologicus. Trev. 1592.

De beatitudine; Tr. Th. Ingols. 1595.

De Peregrinatiene, lib. 7. Dusseld. 1604. in tw. dedicated to Antonia Duchess
of Cleve.

Relationem Historicarum de Rebus Anglicis, tom. 1. quatuor parts complectens,
etc. Par. 1619. in a thick qu. published by Dr. Will. Bishop, of whom I shall
speak elsewhere. This book is the same with that De illustribus Angliae
Scriptoribus, commonly called Pitseus de Scriptoribus. And has in the
beginning of it certain prolegomina, containing (1) De laudibus Historiae. (2)
De antiquitate Ecclesiae Britanniae. (3) De Academiis, tam antiquis Britonam,
quam recentioribus Anglorum. This is the first part. The second part contains
the lives and characters of English Writers. The third contains an Appendix,
of which I shall speak more anon; and the fourth, fifteen indices, which are,
as 'twere, the Epitomy of memorable things of the said first tome. Concerning
which, I shall make these observations following. (1) That according to the
time wherein 'twas written, things are expressed in eloquent Latin. (2) That
the most part thereof, especially concerning the Writers is taken from Joh.
Bale's book De Scriptoribus majoris Britanniae, notwithstanding he declares In
prima part Relat. Historic. p. 53: 54. etc.
an abhorrence of him and his book. (2) That therein he omitts Wycleve and all
the Wyclevists, Irish, and Scotch Writers, which Bale for the most part
commemorates; and in their room he gives us an account of R. Cath. Writers,
such for the most part, that had left their Country upon the reformation of
religion made by Q. Elizabeth, and after, which is the best and most desired
part of his book. (3) That several Writers in the Appendix, are taken from a
book entit. Ecclogua Oxonio -- Cantabrigensis, written by Tho. James of New
coll. Of which book also he makes use, when he tells you in what Libraries the
MSS. of certain authors, which he mentions, are preserved. (4) That tho he
pretends to give you an account only of R. Cath. Writers, especially about the
time that reformations were made, or endeavored to be made, yet he sets down
(for want of full information I presume) some that were sincere Protestants, or
at least more Protestants than Papists, as Sir Anth. Cope who died 1551. Joh.
Redman who died the same year. Tho. Key or Cay Master of Vniv. coll. who died
1572. Joh. Leland the Antiquary, Rob. Record Mathematician, Dr. Alb. Hill an
intimate acquaintance with Jo. Bradford the Martyr, Joh. Cay the Antiquary of
Cambridge, Pet. Morwyn or Morwyng of Magd. coll. etc. and in the Appendix
George Coriat, rather a Puritan, than a true Son of the Church of England,
Robert (for Roger) Taverner, whom I have mentioned in Rich. Taverner, an. 1575.
Timothy Bright of Cambridge Doct. of Physic, and Rector of Methley in
Yorkshire, by the death of Otho Hunt, in July 1591. Tho. Mouffet. a Doctor of
Physic contemporary with the former, Joh. Huntington a zealous reformer and
the beloved Son in Christ of Joh. Bale. See among the Writers under the year
1556. etc. (5) That whereas he pretends to follow Jo. Leland his Collectanea de
Scriptoribus Angliae, (for very many times he familiarly mentions and quotes
them,) it is only that he may avoid the naming of Bale, for whom all R.
Catholics, nay zealous Protestants have little or no kindness at all, because
his book is stuffed with revilings and such Language that befits rather a
Huckster at Billingsgate, than the meanest or worst of Scholars. The truth is
our author Pits never saw the said Collectanea, he being but 20 years of age,
or little more, when he left the Nation, neither was it in his power
afterward, if he had been in England, because they were kept in such private
hands, that few Protestant Antiquaries, and none of those of the Church of
Rome, could see or peruse them. (6) That in the said tome are very many errors,
misnomers, etc. and so consequently in Bale, whom he follows, too many now to
reckon; and how he and Bale are most egregiously deceived in what they mention
of Amphibalus Vide Pits nu. 56. nu. 59.
Junior, and of Gildas Badonicus you may at large see in the learned Usserius,
in his book De primordiis Ecclesiarum, etc. printed in qu. an. 1639. p. 539.
533, 477. 539, 557. and 1144. (7) That whereas Pits pretends to set down in the
said book or tome, only English Writers, he has mixed among them some that are
out landish; among which are these. Herbertus Losinga, number. 182. born, as he
says, in Suffolk, but false, for the MS. which I follow in my marginal notes
and additions of, and to, the Bishops of Norwich, mentioned by Franc. Bishop of
Landaff in his book De Praesulibus Angliae Commentarius, says that he was born
in Pago Oxinnensi, or Oximensi in Normannia. -- Jo. Erigena, nu. 133. said by
him, and many others to be born in the City of S. David in Wales, but the
generality say in Ireland. etc. At the end of the book of illustrious Writers,
our author Pits has,

Appendix illustrium scriptorum trecentorum octoginta circiter, ordine
alphabetico per centurias continens. Made up mostly from Bale, and partly from
Dr. Tho. James his Ecloga beforementioned. But therein are many authors put,
which are before in the work it self, De script. illust. Angliae, as (1)
Godfridus Historicus, cent. 2. number. 94. p. 844. is the same with Godfridus
Arturius, or de Monmouth, in the body of the work, nu. 212. (2) Gualt. Cepton,
cent. 2. nu. 4. p. 846. the same with Walter Catton in the body, nu. 550. (3)
Guliel. Califord, cent. 2. nu. 18. p. 851. is the same with Gul. Cockisford,
nu. 653. (4) Guliel. de Dunclmo cent. 2. nu. 27. is the same with Gul. Shirwood
in the body of the work, nu. 348. (5) Gul. Worcestrius, c. 2. nu. 53. the same
with Gul. Buttonerus in the work it self, nu. 848. p. 648. (6) Joh. Anglicus,
cent. 2. nu. 78. seems to be the same with Joh. Hoveden, nu. 396. P. 356. (7)
Joh. de Alton, cent. 2. nu. 94. seems to be the same with Joh. Acton, nu. 416.
p. 372. (8) Joh. Yorcus, cent. 3. nu. 10. is the same with Joh. Eboracensis in
the same Appendix, p. 874. nu. 1. (9) Joh. Vton, cent. 3. nu. 35. is the same
with Joh. Stone in the body of the work, nu. 862. p. 657. (10) Rich. de
Montibus, cent. 3. nu. 80. seems to be the same with Will. de Montibus, nu.
302. p. 285. (11) Rich. Ruys, c. 3. nu. 92. the same with Rich. Rufus, nu. 380.
p. 348. (12) Rob. Bridlington, c. 3. nu. 100. the same with Rob. Scriba, nu.
244. P. 242. (13) Rob. Cestrensis c. 4. nu. 2. the same with Rog. Cestrensis,
nu. 514. p. 438. (14) Miserorum Simplissimus, c. 3. nu. 52. seems to be the
same with Joh. Wethamstede, nu. 818. P. 630. (15) Rob. Dominicanus, c. 4. nu.
8. the same with Rob. Holcot, nu. 333. p. 463. (16) Rob. Herefordiensis, c. 4.
nu. 11. the same with Rob. Foliot B. of Hereford. nu. 236. p. 236. (17)
Robertus Prior, c. 4. nu. 13. is the same with Rob. Canutus, nu. 234. p. 234.
Which R. Canutus also is supposed to be the same with Rich. Greekladensis, p.
397. nu. 448. and that Rich. to be the same with Rob. Greekladensis, mentioned
by Leland in vol. 3. collect. p. 36. where it is said that the said Rob. wrote
40 Homilies, and a Tract De connubio Jacob, which makes me think that the said
Robert Prior, may be the same with the said Rob. Greeklade, and the same R.
Greeklade to be the same with Rob. Canutus. (18) Rog. Junius, c. 4. nu. 23.
seems to be the same with Rog. Herefordiensis, nu. 238. p. 237. See more fully
in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 53. (19) Roger Varro, c. 4. nu. 27.
seems to be the same with Gul. de Waria, nu. 384. p. 349. (20) Simon
Dominicanus, c. 4. nu. 35. is the same with Sim. Henton, nu. 591. p. 486. (21)
Steph. Anglicus, cent. 4. nu. 38. seems to be the same with Steph. Langton, nu.
326. p. 302. (22) Tho. Wicket, c. 4. nu. 68. the same with Tho. Wiccius, nu.
425. p. 379, (23) Anonymus alter, c. 1. nu. 20. the same with Rich. Canonicus,
nu. 283. p. 267. etc. And as our author Pits has repeated many writers in the
said Appendix, which were before in the work it self, so has he mixed a great
many outlandish writers among them, supposing them to be English, among whom
are, (1) Alacenus, cent. 1. nu. 8. who was an Arabian, as from his works may be
gathered. (2) Anonymus Sacerdos, c. 1. nu. 26. who has written, In Apocalypsim
S. Johannis. lib. 8. Which book diverse writers do attribute to Peter Scaliger
Bishop of Verona. (3) Joh. de Muriis, c. 2. nu. 97. Who was a French man of
Paris. (4) Joh. Major, c. 3. nu. 15. he was a Scot born. (5) Joh. Mearus, c. 3.
nu. 18. whom I take to be Joh. de Meara an Irish man. (6) Guido Folla Episc.
Eliensis, c. 2. nu. 13. He is the same with Guido Elnensis in Majorica, who
sometimes writes himself Guido Perpinian Elnensis. No Guido Folla was ever
Bish. of Ely. (7) Gilla Lincolniensis, c. 2. nu. 93. He was an Irish Man, was
Bishop of Limerick, and died about 1139. (8) Anton. Pacinus, c. 1. nu. 28. he
was an Italian. etc. At length after our author Jo. Pits had spent most of his
time in rambling, and but little at Liverdune, he gave way to fate there, on
the 17. October. according to the account there followed, in sixteen hundred and
sixteen, Hic jacet D. Pittz, quondam Decanus, Officialis, and Canonicus hujus
Ecclesiae, Doctor SS. Theologiae, qui decessit ex hac vita 17. Oct. an. 1616.
As for the other volumes, which our author says he has written, viz. a vol.
of the Kings, another of the Bishops, and a third of Apostolical men, of
England; they were not buried with him, as he desired, in case he should not
live to finish them, but were saved, and are to this day preserved as rarities
in the Archives of the Coll. or Church at Liverdune. One of the said volumes,
if not more, were used and quoted by Edward Maihew a Benedictine Monk,
sometimes Scholar to our author Pitscus, in a book which he published at
Rheimes, an. 1619. intit. Congregationis Anglicanae Ordinis S. Benedicti
Trophaea. Which Maihew was a Salisbury Man born, and a professed Monk of the
Congregation at Cassino, called by the French Mount-Cassin, about 48 miles
distant from Naples. The other book of Bishops, which our author wrote, and
often refers to, in his book De scriptoribus, is chiefly a collection taken
from the Catalogue of the Bishops of England, published by Francis Godwin
Sub-Dean of Exeter, an. 1601. as I have been informed by one that has seen and
perused the book.

HENRY AIRAY was born in Westmorland, educated Bernard Gilpin the northern
Apostle, and by him sent to S. Edmunds hall, an. 1579. aged 19. or thereabouts,
of whose benefaction he did not only then participate, but also of his Legacies
in his last Will, dated 27. Oct. 1582. Soon after our author Airay was
translated to Queens coll. where he became Pauper Puer Serviens, that is, a
poor serving Child that waits on the Fellows in the Common hall, at Meals, and
in their Chambers, and do other servile work about the College. After he was
Bachelaurs standing, in 1583. he was made Pauper Puer, or Tabardus or
Tabardarius; that is, a Tabarder or Tabitter, (so called because anciently they
wore Coats, or upper Gowns, much according to the fashion of those belonging to
Heralds,) and in the year 1586, Master of Arts and Fellow. Which servile work
belonging to Pauper Puer Serviens, when Under-graduats, all are to undergo
before they can be Fellows. About the time he was Master, he entered into Holy
Orders, and became a frequent and zealous Preacher in the University,
particularly in the Church of S. Peter in the East, joining to Qu. coll. and
taking the degree of B. of Div. in 1594. was four years after chose Provost of
his College. In 1600. he proceeded in Divinity, and six years after did undergo
the office of Vicechancellour, wherein, as always before, he showed himself a
zealous Calvinist, See Hist. and Antiq. Univers. Oxon. lib. 1. (...)
and a great maintainer of such that were of his mind, which then went beyond
the number of those that were true English Chapter men. He is reported by those of
his party, especially such that had an admiration for him, that he condemned
himself to obscurity, and affected a retired and a private life, but being
generally noted and esteemed for his holiness, integrity, learning, gravity,
and indefatigable pains in the discharge of his Ministerial Function, etc. he
could not hide himself from the eyes of the World. Also that by his singular
wisdom and dexterity in the Government of his College, many learned Ministers
were sent thence into the Church, and many worthy Gentlemen into the
Commonwealth, etc. To pass by other commendations, which are needless now to
repeat, I shall only tell you of his writings, which were published after his
death, viz.

Lectures upon the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Philippians. Land. 1618.
qu. Which Lectures having been Preached in the Church of St. Peter in the East
in Oxon, were published after his death by Christop. Potter Fellow of Queens
coll. with an Epistle before them of his composition.

The just and necessary Apology touching his suit in Law for the Rectory of
Charlton on Otmore on Oxfordshire. Land. 1621. oct. Published also by the said
Potter, a great admirer of this author and his doctrine.

Treatise against bowing at the Name of Jesus -- When printed I know not, for I
have not yet seen it. Tho. Beacon, an old Calvinist, had long before written on
that subject, and about Airay's time Dr. W. Whittaker, and Andr. Wille^, did
the like. As for our author he died in Queens coll. on the sixth of the Ides of
October. Hist. and Antiq. Universe. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 124. b.

FRANCIS TATE, Son of Barthelm. Tate of Delapre in Northamptonshire Esquire was
born there, or at least in that County, became a Commoner of Magd. coll. in
1577. aged 17. where laying a foundation of le^rning, for a greater structure
to be erected thereon, departed without a degree to the Middle Temple (...)
became a noted Counselor, a person of great (...) in the Law, and eminent for
his knowledge in (...), and in the Saxon Language. In the latter and of Q*
Elizabeth he was a Parliament Man, and in the 5. Jac. 1. he was Lent-Reader of
the Middle Temple, and about that time one of the Justices Itinerant for S.
Wales. He has written several matters relating to Antiquity, which being crept
into private hands, the public is thereby robbed of the benefit of them.
However some of them I have seen, which bear these titles.

Nomina Hydarum in com. Northampton. -- MS. much used by Augustine Vincent Son
of Will. Vincent of Wellingborough and Thingdon in Northamptonshire, in his
intended Survey or Antiquities of Northamptonshire. I have a copy of this lying
by me.

Explanation of the abbreviated words in Domsday book. -- Used also the by said
Vincent, who after he had been Rouge Croix and Windsore Herald, as also had
published, A discovery of Errors in two Editions of the Catalogue of Nobility,
written by Raphe Brook, did yield to nature on the 11. Jan. in 1625. and was
buried in the Church of St. Bennet near to Paul's Wharf in London. The said two
MSS. of Franc. Tate were reserved as rarities in the Library of Christop. Lord
Hatton of Kirkly in Northamptonshire, but where they are now, I know not.

His opinion touching the antiquity, power, order, state, manner, persons, and
proceedings of the High Court of Parliament in England. -- See more in Joh.
Doderidge, under the year 1628.

Learned Speeches in Parliaments, held in the latter end of Q. Elizab. and in
the Reign of K. Jam. 1. -- with other things which I have not yet seen. He
lived a single Man, and dying so on the Camden in Annal. Reg. Jac. 1. MS. sub.
an. 1616.
16. Nov. in sixteen hundred and sixteen, Temples. He had a Nephew, Son of his
elder Brother Sir William Tate of Delapre, called Zouch Tate, who became a
Gentleman Com. of Trinity coll. in 1621. aged 15. but took no degree. In 1640.
he was chosen a Burgess for Northampton to serve in that unhappy Parliament,
which began at Westminster 3. Nov. the same year, where siding with the
Factious Crew, took the Covenant, and became a zealous Enemy to the King and
his Cause. Two or more Speeches of his are printed, one of which was spoken in
a Common Hall at London 3. Jul. 1645. containing Observations on the King and
Queens Cabinet of Letters. -- Land. 1645. qu. Which Speech, with that of John
L'isle and Rich. Brown, were animadverted upon by Tho. Brown of Chapter Chapter as
hereafter it shall be told you. There were also Annotations printed at the end
of the said Cabinet of Letters taken at Naseby Battle, where the King was
worsted. -- Printed at Land. 1645. qu. but who the author of them was I cannot
tell.

Hertford, was entered a Student in Magd. coll. in 1577. where continuing in
drudging at his book, till he was about Bachelaurs standing, retired to Magd.
hall, took the degrees in Arts, and afterward for about 7 years was not only a
daily Reader of Logic and Philosophy, but also a Moderator, and every Sunday a
discusser of controversies against Bellarmine, and other Pontificians, before
his Fellow-Aularians and many others. Afterward being Bach. of Divinity, he
became first a Reader thereof in the Cath. Church of Winchester, and afterward
in Lincolns Inn; and when Doctor, Chaplain in Ordinary to Queen Elizab. and
after her death to K. James; the last of whom not only gave him a Prebendship
of Windsore, on the death of Jo. Chamber, an. 1604. but also the Deanery of
Gloucester, in 1609. in the place of Dr. Tho. Morton promoted to the Deanery of
Winchester. Both which he kept, with the Rectory of Burcleere or Burrowcleere
in Hampshire, and all little enough for the encouragement of so right learned a
Man as this our author Dr. Field was, who in his time was esteemed a principal
mountainer of Protestancy, a powerful Preacher, a profound Schoolman, exact
Disputant, and so admirable well knowing in the Controversies between the
Protestants and the Papists, that few or none went beyond him in his time, as
it does plainly appear in these his labors.

Of the Church, four books. Land. 1606. fol. To which he added a fifth book. --
Land. 1610. fol. with an Appendix containing, A defense of such passages of the
former books that have been excepted against, or wrested, to the maintenance of
the Romish Errors. All which were reprinted at Oxon, 1628. fol. He also
published,

A Sermon Preached before the King at Whitehall, on Jude ver. 3. Land. 1604.
qu. He surrendered up his pious Soul to the great God that first gave it, on the
21. Nov. in sixteen hundred and sixteen, George at Windsore, a little below the
Choire. Over his grave was soon after laid a plank of black Marble, and thereon
this inscription engraven on a Copper plate fastened thereunto. Richardus Field
hujus olim coll. canonicus, and Ecclesiae Glocestrensis Decanus, vere Doctor
Theologiae, and author librorum quinque de Ecclesia. Vna cum Elizabetha
Harrisia Sanctissima and Charissima conjuge, ex qua sex reliquit filios, filiam
unicam. Hic sub communi marmore expectant Christi reditum, qui faelicitatem,
quam ingressi sunt, adventu suo perficeat, ac consummet. Obierunt in Domino,
ille an sal. 1616. aetatis suae 55. Haec an. sal. 1614. aetatis suae 41. In Dr.
Field's Deanery of Gloucester succeeded Dr. William Land, and in his Canonry of
Windsore, Edm. Wilson Doctor of Physic and Fellow of Kings coll. in Cambridge.

RICHARD HAKLUYT was born of, and Yetton in Herefordshire, elected Student of
Chapter Chapter from Westminster School, in 1570. took the degrees in Arts, lived for
some time in the Middle Temple, where, I presume, he studied the Municipal Law.
Afterward he entered into holy Orders, and at length became Prebendary of the
fourth stall in the Church of Westminster, in the place of one Dr. Rich.
Webster, an. 1605. and Rector of Wetheringset in Suffolk. But that which is
chiefly to be noted of him is this, that his Genie urging him to the study of
History, especially to the Marine part thereof, (which was encouraged and
furthered by Sir Francis Walsingham,) made him keep constant intelligence with
the most noted Seamen at Wapping near London. From whom, and many small
Pamphlets and Letters, that were published and went from hand to hand in his
time, concerning the Voyages and Travels of several persons, he compiled a book
intit*

English Voyages, Navigations, Trafficks, and Discoveries. Land. 1598. 99. and
1600. in three vol. in fol. Which work being by him performed with great care
and industry, cannot but be an honor to the Realm of England, because possibly
many Ports and Islands in America, that are base and barren, and only bear a
name for the present, may prove rich places in future time.

Notes of certain Commodities in good request in the East Indies, the Molucoes,
and China. -- MS. among those given by Seldens Executors to the Pub. Lib. at
Oxon. He also illustrated by diligent observation of time, and with most useful
notes, Peter Mart. Anglericus his eight Decades De novo orb. Par. 1587. oct.
and corrected and much amended, and translated into English, The discoveries of
the World from the first original, unto the year of our Lord 1555. Land. 1601.
qu. briefly written in the Portugal tongue, by Anth. Galvano, Governor of
Ternate, the chief Island of the Molucoes: As also from the said Language into
our English tongue, Virginia richly valued, by the description of the main Land
of Florida, her next Neighbor. Land. 1609. qu. He paid his last debt to
nature, 23. Nov. in sixteen hundred and sixteen, Westminster, dedicated to S.
Peter, on the 26. of the same month, leaving behind him a Son named Edmund,
begotten on the body of Frances his Wife, to whom he left his Manor of
Bridgplace; and several tenements in Tuttlestreet within the City of
Westminster. Oliver Hackluyt, Brother to the said Richard, was a Student of Chapter
Chapter also, and being graduated in Physic had an happy hand in the practice of
it. In R. Hakluyts Prebendship of Westminster succeeded Joh. Holt of Cor. Chapter
coll. as I shall tell you elsewhere.

JOHN SMITH was born in Warwickshire, elected John's coll. into a Coventry
place, an. 1577. aged 14. and at length was made Fellow, and highly valued in
the University for piety and parts, especially by those that excelled in both.
Soon after he grew to that note, that he was chosen (being then Bach. of Div.)
to be Lecturer in S. Paul's Cathedral in London, in the place of that great Man
Dr. Lauc. Andrews, which he discharged not only to the satisfaction, but
applause of most judicious and learned hearers, witnessed by their frequency
and attention. Not long after he was removed to a Pastoral Charge at Clavering
in Essex, where being fixed, he shined as a Star in its proper sphere, and was
much reverenced for his Religion, learning, humility, and holiness of Life. He
was skilful in the original Languages, an excellent Text-man, well read in
writers that were of note in several ages of the Church, which may partly
appear from these things following, that he wrote, viz.

The Substance and Pith of Prayer: or, a brief, holy, and heavenly Exposition
on the Lord's Prayer, being the Sum and Marrow of diverse Sermons, etc. on
Matthew. 6. 9. Land. 1629. qu.

The Essex Dove presenting the World with a few of her Olive branches, etc.
delivered in three several Treatises, viz. 1. The Grounds of Religion. 2. An
Expoon the Lord's Prayer. 3. A Treatise of Repentance. Land. 1629. qu.

The poor Penitent: or, the Doctrine of Repentance, Preached in diverse Sermons,
etc. Land. 1629. qu. in 14 Lectures, published by John Heart.

Exposition on the Creed. Land. 1632. fol.

Explanation of the Articles of our Christian Faith. -- Which two last books
were delivered in 73 Sermons. He concluded his last day in the month of Nov. in
sixteen hundred and sixteen, Clavering beforementioned, leaving then, by his
Will, several books to St. John's coll. Library. I have mentioned several John
Smiths in this work, that were Divines. See under the year 1596. and elsewhere.

Lincolnshire, (at South-Somercote, as it seems,) became perpetual Fellow of
Magd. coll. in 1570. in which year he was admitted Bach. of Arts. Soon after,
by the favor of Arthur Lord Gray, he was preferred to the Parsonage of
Bletchley in Bucks, where he was held in great esteem for his piety. In the
year 1575. he was admitted to the reading of the Sentences, without ruling in
Arts, and about that time was Chaplain to Dr. Cooper Bish. of Linc. who, that
year, bestowed the Archdeaconry of Stow on him, in the place of Rog. Kelke
Bach. of Div. who had succeeded Joh. Harrison in that Dignity, 1563. In 1581.
he proceeded in Divinity, being then in great renown for his learning. But his
Dignity being remote from his Cure, and therefore could not well attend it, he
gave it up out of Conscience sake, in 1582. and contented himself only ^ith
Bletchley; whereupon Joh. Farmery, B. D. succeeded him therein. This Dr. Spark
was the person, who, being noted for a great Nonconformist, and a Pillar of
Puritanism, was, by Letters from the King's Council, called to the Conference
at Hampton Court, an. 1603. where appearing in the behalf of the Millinaries,
(as it is said,) or rather, with Jo. Rainolds, as a Proctor for the precise
Party, not in a Priests Gown, or Canonical Coat, but such that Turkey Merchants
wear, received then so great satisfaction from his Majesty's most ready and apt
Answers to the Doubts and Objections there and then proposed, that he (tho he
spoke not one word) did not only, for the time following, yield himself in his
practice to Universal Conformity, but privately by word and writing, and
publicly by his brotherly persuasion. He was a learned Man, a solid Divine,
well read in the Fathers, and so much esteemed for his profoundness, gravity,
and exemplary life and conversation, that the Sages of the University thought
it fit, after his death, to have his picture painted on the wall in the
School-gallery among the English Divines of note there, viz. between that of
Dr. Joh. Spenser of C. C. coll. whom I have mentioned under the year 1614. and
that of Dr. Rich. Eedes of Chapter Chapter He has written,

A comfortable Treatise for a troubled Conscience. Land. 1580. oct.

Brief Catechism with a form of Prayer for Householders. -- Taken, as it seems,
from the Catechism of Vrsinus.

Sermon Preached at Cheyneys in Bucks, at the burial of the E. of Bedford, 14.
Sept. 1585. on Apoc. 14. 13. Land. 1585. oct. etc.

Treatise to prove that Ministers publicly, and Householders privately, are
bound to Catechize their Parishioners and Families, etc. Oxon. 1588. oct.

Answer to Mr. Joh. de Albines notable discourse against Heresies. Oxon. 1591.
qu.

Sermon. at the Funeral of the Lord Gray, on Esaias 57. 1, 2. Ox. 1593. oct.

The Highway to Heaven by the clear Light of the Gospel, etc. against
Bellarmine, and others, in a Treatise made upon 37, 38, and 39 verses of the 7.
of John, etc. Land. 1597. oct.

A brotherly persuasion to Unity and Uniformity in Judgment and Practice,
touching the received and present Ecclesiastical Government, and the authorized
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England. Land. 1607. qu. Answered by
Anon. in a book entitled, The second part of the defense of the Ministers
Reasons for refusal of Subscription and Conformity to the Book of Common
Prayer, etc. Printed 1608. qu. And by another Anon. in a book intit. A dispute
upon the question of kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacramental Bread and
Wine, etc. Pr. 1608. qu. Our author also (I mean Spark) had in Q. Elizabeth's
time wrote a book of Succession. For which being brought into trouble, King
James, who before had received intimation of the matter, sent for him the next
day after the Conference at Hampton Court, and talking with him about it, the
King at length was so well satisfied with what he had done, that he then gave
him his most gracious countenance. He died at Bletchley beforementioned, viz.
Thomas Fellow of New coll. in Oxon, Andrew of Peter house in Cambridge, and
Will. Spark of Magd. coll. whom I shall mention hereafter.

ROBERT TINLEY, a Kentish Man born, became Magd. hall in the latter end of
1578. aged 17. or thereabouts, was translated soon after to Magd. coll. of
which he became Demi, and at length Fellow. In 1595. he was elected one of the
Proctors of the University, being then esteemed a Man of parts, and an eloquent
Preacher. Afterward being made Vicar of Wytham or Wictham in Essex, as also,
if I mistake not, Minister of Glemsford in Suffolk, and at length Archdeacon of
Ely, took the degrees in Divinity, and had then the general character of a
person well read in the Fathers, but withal, a most bitter Enemy to Papists. He
has written and published,

Of the mischievious subtility and barbarous cruelty of the Romish Synagogue,
on Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Land. 1609. qu.

Of the false Doctrines and refined Heresies of the Romans Synagogue, on Matthew.
7. 15, 16. -- Printed there the same year. In the first are examined diverse
passages of that English Libel, written by a certain Fugitive against the
Apology of the Oath of Allegiance. In the other are answered many of the
arguments published by Rob. Chambers, Priest, concerning Popish Miracles. He
has written other things, as it is said, but such I have not yet seen, nor do I
know any thing else of him, only that he concluding his last day in sixteen
hundred and sixteen, 1616:
was buried, as I presume, at Wytham beforementioned, leaving then behind him
a Son named Martin Tinley, afterward a Member of Chapter Chapter in this University.

HENRY PARRY, Son of Hen. Parry, Son of Will. Parry of Wormebridge in
Herefordshire Gent. was born Wilts, 20. Dec. or thereabouts, an. 1561. admitted
Scholar of C. C. coll. 13. Nov. 1576. and Probationer 23. Apr. 86. being then
Master of Arts. Afterward he was Greek Reader in that coll. Chaplain to Q.
Elizabeth, Doctor of Divinity 95. Dean of Chester in 1605. in the place of Dr.
Will. Barlow promoted to the Sea of Rochester, and at length through
Gloucester, was made Bishop of Worcester, an. 1610. He was reputed by all of
his time an able Divine, well read in the Fathers, a thro-pac'd Disputant, and
so eloquent a Preacher, that K. James 1. always professed he seldom heard a
better. The King of Denmark also, who was sometimes present at our Kings Court,
gave him a very rich ring for a Sermon that he Preached before him and K. James
at Rochester, an. 1606. He has published,

Concio de regno dei, in Matthew. 6. 33. Land. 1606. qu.

Concio de victoria Christiana, in Apoc. 3. 21. Oxon. 1593. 94. Land. 1606. He
also translated from Eng^ish into Latin, The sum of a Conference between Joh.
Rainolds and Joh. Heart, touching the Head and the Faith of the Church. Oxon.
1619. fol. Also from Lat. into English, A Catechism, wherein are de^ated and
resolved the questions of whatsoever moment, which have been, or are,
controverted in Divinity. Oxon. 1591. oct. Which Catechism was originally
written by Zach. Vrsinus. This worthy Bishop died of a Palsy at Worcester,
Dec. in sixteen hundred and sixteen, and was buried in a little Chapel joining
to the north side of the Door of the Cathedral Church at Worcester. In his
Epitaph over his Grave (a copy of which you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniver.
Oxon. lib. 2. p. 238.) he is characterized to be trium linguarum cognitione,
assidua verbi divini praedicatione, provida Ecclesiae gubernatione, mentis
pietate, morumque integritate spectatissimus, etc.

Tho. Hoby Knight (mentioned under the year 1566.) by Elizab. his Wife,
Daughter of Sir A. Coke Knight. was born in Berks particularly, us I conceive, at
Bysham near to Maydenhead, became a Gentleman-Commoner of Trinity coll. in the
beginning of 1574. aged 14. years, where, after he had spent 8 Terms in the
study of Logic under a noted tutor, he became so great a proficient, that he
was admitted in the latter end of the year 1575. Bach. of Arts of the
University. The next year he proceeded in that faculty and was the Senior
Master in the Comitia (whom we usually call The Senior of the Act) celebrated
the same year. Afterward spending some time in France, and in other Countries,
as I suppose, was, some time after his return, honored with the degree of
Knighthood, an. 1582. made Constable of the Castle at Queenburg in the Isle of
Shepy, was an Officer at the taking of Cadiz, a Parliament man several times in
the latter end of Qu. Elizabeth, and upon K. James his coming to the Crown (if
not happily before) was made one of the Gent. of the Privy-Chamber. He was a
person of great reading and judgment, especially in the controversies between
Protestants and Papists, a singular lover of Arts, substantial Learning,
Antiquities, and the Professors thereof, particularly the Learned Camden, who
had sufficiently received of his bounty, as he himself In his Britannia, in
Berks.
acknowledges, having dedicated his Hibernia Edit. Land. 1587. oct.
to him, and publicly told In Britan, in Kent. in Queenborough.
the world that he had polished his excellent wit with learned Studies. He has
written,

A letter to Mr. Theoph. Hyggons late Minister, now a Fugitive, in answer to
his First motive, Land. 1609. qu.

A counter-snarl for Ishmael Rabshacheh a Cecropedian Lycaonite, being an
answer to a R. Catholic, who writes himself J. R. Land. 1613. qu. In which
book, or in another, which I have not seen, our author treating of Purgatory,
was answered by Joh. Floyd commonly called Father Fludd a Jesuit, in a book
which he published under the name of Daniel a Jesu, printed at S. Omer in 1613.
quarto.

Curry-comb for a Coxcombe: Or Purgatories Knell. In answer to a Libel by Jebal
Rachel against Sir Edw. Hobies Counter-snarle, entitled Purgatories Triumph
over hell. Land. 1615. qu.

Several motions, speeches and arguments in the four last Parliaments in Queen
Elizabeth -- Published in the Historical collections of Hayw. Townsend Esquire He
translated from French into English, Politic discourses upon truth and lying:
An instruction to Princes to keep their faith and promises. Land. 1586. qu.
Composed by Sir Mart. Cognet Knight, one of the Privy-Councel to the most
Christian King, master of the Requests to his Household, and lately Ambassador
to the Cantons of Zwitzers and Grisons. And also from Spanish into English, The
Origin and practice of War. Land. 1597. oct. Written by Don Bernard de
Mendoza. At length he giving way to fate in Queenburgh Castle on the first day
of March (St. David's day) in sixteen hundred and sixteen, his body was
conveyed to Bysham before mentioned, 1616-7.
and buried there in a Chapel called Hoby's Chapel on the south side of the
Chancel of the Church there, near to the body of his Father Sir Thomas, The
said Sir Edward left behind him a natural Son named Peregrin Hoby, born of the
body of one Katherin Pinkney, an. 1602. From which Peregrin are the Hobyes now
of Bysham descended.

THOMAS EGERTON, the natural Son of Sir Rich. Egerton of Ridley in Cheshire,
was born in that County, applied his Muse to learning in this University, about
1556. particularly, as it is said, in Brasnose coll. of which he was a Commoner,
in the year of his age 17 or thereabouts; where continuing about 3 years, laid
a foundation whereon to build profounder learning. Afterward going to
Lincoln's Inn he made a most happy progress in the municipal laws, and at length
was a Counselor of note. In 1581. June 28. he was constituted Baronag. Tom.
3. p: 414. b.
by the Queen her Solicitor General, and soon after he became Lent-reader of
the said Inn. In 1592. June 2. the said Queen made him her Attorney General, in
1594. (he being then a Knight) he was made Master of the Rolls, and two years
after Lord Keeper of the Great Seal. In which emiment office he continued
during the whole remainder of Qu. Elizabeth's happy Reign. On 21. of Jul. 1603.
he was raised to the degree of a Baron of this Realm, by the title of L.
Ellesmere, and upon the 24. of the said Month, he was made Lord Chancellor of
England. In the beginning of Nov. 1610. he was unanimously elected Chanc. of
the University of Oxon. and in 14. Jac. 1. dom. 1616. he was advanced to the
dignity of Vicount Brackley. He was a most grave and prudent man, a good
Lawyer, just and honest, of so quick an apprehension also, and profound
judgment, that none of the Bench in his time went beyond him. He has written,

Speech in the Exchequer Chamber, touching the Postnati. Land. 1609. in qu. in
16. sheets.

Certain observations concerning the office of Lord Chancellor. Land. 1651.
oct. and left behind him at his death four MSS. of choice collections, fit to
be Printed, concerning (1) The prerogative Royal. (2) Privileges of
Parliament. (3) Proceedings in Chancery. (4) The power of the Starr-chamber. He
resigned up his last breath, in York-house in the Strand near London 15. 1616-7.
March in sixteen hundred and sixteen, and was buried in the Church of
Dodleston in Cheshire. His memory was much Vide in Epigram. Jo. Sradling, lib.
3. p: 99. lib. 4. 141. and in Epigram. Johannis Bunbari Megalo Briranni, Cent.
2. Epigram: 52.
celebrated by Epigrams while he was living, and after his death all of the
long Robe lamented his loss. We have his Picture drawn to the life in the habit
of Lord Chancellor, setting in a Chair, hanging in the Gallery belonging to
the Bodleian Library, called the School-gallery.

WILLIAM MARTYN, Son of Nich. Martyn Exeter, (by his first Wife Mary Daughter
of Leonard Yeo of Hatherley in Devon) Son of Rich. Martyn of the said City, and
he the second Son of William Martyn of Athelhampton in Dorsetshire Knight, was
born, and educated in Grammar learning, within the said City of Exeter: where
making early advances toward Academical learning, was sent to Broadgates hall
(now Pomb. coll.) an. 1579. aged 17. In which place falling under the tuition
of a noted Master, laid an excellent foundation in Logic and Philosophy.
Afterward going to the Inns of Court, he became a Barester, and in 1605. was
elected Recorder of Exeter in the place of John Hele Sergeant at Law. But his
delight being much conversant in the reading of English Histories, he composed
a book of the Kings of England, as I shall tell you anon. Upon the publication
of which K. James (as it is said) taking some exceptions at a passage therein,
either to the derogation of his family, or of the Realm of Scotland, he was
thereupon brought into some trouble, which shortened his days. He has written,

Youths instruction. Land. 1612. qu. dedicated to his Son Nich. Martyn then a
Student in Oxon. In the said book is showed a great deal of reading, and
consequently that the author was no loser of his time.

The History and Lives of the Kings of England, from William the Conqueror to
K. Hen. 8. Land. 1616. and 28. fol. ushered into the world with the copies of
Verses of Nicholas, William and Edw. Martyn the Sons of the author, and by Pet.
Bevis his Son-in-Law. To this History was afterward added the History of K.
Edw. 6. Qu. Mary and Qu. Elizabeth, by B. R. Master of Arts -- Land. 1638. fol.
At the end of all the impressions was Printed,

The succession of the Dukes and Earls of this Kingdom of England, from the
Conqueror, to the 12. of James 1. with the then Viscounts, Barons, Baronets,
etc. -- which was drawn up by the author, and continued after his death by R.
B. beforementioned. What other books the said Will. Martyn has either written
or published I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he was buried in
the Church of S. Petrock in the City of Exeter 12. Apr. in sixteen hundred and
seventeen. The inscription which was on the Stone, supposed to be laid for him,
is worn out, and a new inscription cut thereon for one of the same family
buried there. The next who must follow according to time was a severe Puritan,
as Martyn was.

Edmund, whom I shall anon mention, was born in an ancient House called the
Vache in the Parish of Chalfont S. Giles in Bucks, on the 8. of May 1543.
became a Student in the University in the latter end of the Reign of Q. Mary,
an. 1558. and perpetual Fellow of Madg. coll. in 1562. being then Bach. of
Arts. Afterward proceeding in that faculty he took holy Orders, and began to
preach Gods word on the first of Nov. 1567. Whose Sermons being noted among
many, he became soon after Chaplain to the Earl of Bedford, but continuing with
him not long, he left his Fellowship in 1571. and retiring into the north parts
of England, where he preached the word of God very constant, as his brother
Edmund did, was inducted into a Prebendship of Durham 9. May 1572. made
Archdeacon of Northumberland, on the resignation of Ralph Lever, 20. Oct. 1573.
and on the eleventh of Sept. 1578. he was made Rector of Ryton within the
Bishopric of Durham. This person was very zealous in the way he professed, was
a great admirer of Jo. Calvin, a constant preacher, charitable, and a stiff
enemy to Popery. He has written and published,

Survey and trial of the Popes Supremacy. Land. 1590. qu. Written against Card.
Bellarmine.

Comparison between the ancient faith of the Romans and the new Romish
Religion. Land. 1595. qu. This is commonly called Truth and Falsehood.

Answer to a popish Libel, called A petition to the Bishops, preachers, and
Gospellers. Oxon. 1607. oct.

Exposition on the 28. verse of the third Chapt. of the Epistle to the Romans,
wherein is manifestly proved the doctrine of justification by faith, etc. Land.
1616. qu.

Plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments, by questions and
answers. Land. 1617. oct.

In Joelis prophetiam enarratio. Written by the author an. 1595. and by his
Epistle dedicated it to Tobie Bishop of Durham, in which he says he has
preached Sermons at Berwick about 20. years before that time, upon Joel, of
which this book is the sum: And if printed, (for it is in MS.) would contain
about 3 quire of Paper. He departed this mortal life, at Ryton before
mentioned, 16. Apr. in sixteen hundred and seventeen, and was buried in the
Chancel of the Church there, Jane his Wife, Daughter of Henr. Priestly. Over
his Grave was soon after, set up in the Wall adjoining, a table or plate of
Brass, whereon are engraven certain trite Verses. The first Stanza runs thus.
My bark now having won the haven
I fear no stormy Seas,
God is my hope, my home is heaven,
My life is happy ease, etc.


By his will, he bequeathed to the University of Oxon. 100 l. toward their
building of the New Schools, and 33 l. to Madg. college.

Shawhill in Yorkshire, commonly called Long Harry Savile, was born of an
ancient family of his name, living at Bank near Halyfax in that County, entered
a Student in Merton coll. (of which his kinsman Mr. Hen. Savile was Warden) in
1587. and was soon after made one of the Portionists, commonly called
Postmasters. After he had taken the degree of Bach. of Arts, he left it, and
retired to S. Albans hall, and as a member thereof, he took the degree of M. of
Arts, in 1595. All which time being under the inspection of his kinsman, he
became an eminent Scholar, especially in the Mathematics, Physic, (in which
faculty he was admitted to practice by the University) Chemistry, Painting,
Heraldry and Antiquities. Afterward, for the completing and advance of his
knowledge, he traveled into Italy, France, and Germany, where spending his
time very profitable, returned the most accomplished person of his time, and
therefore his company was desired, and sought after by all learned and virtuous
Men. He had written several things fit for the Press, but whether ever
published, I find not as yet. It must be now known that this Henr. Savile being
an intimate friend with the learned Camden, he Vide Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Ox.
lib. 1. p. 9. 10.
communicated to him the ancient exemplar of Asser Menevensis, which contains
the story of the discord between the new Scholars that Grimbald brought with
him to Oxon, at the restoration of the University by K. Alfred, with the old
Clerks that the said Grimbald found when he came to that place. Which exemplar
being discovered to be genuine, by the said Camden (who afterward In
Britannia, in Dobunts.
styled it Optimum exemplar Asserii) he did therefore make it public, an.
1602. But so it was, that as soon as it peeped forth, certain envious
Cantabrigians did not stick to report that the said story concerning the
dissension between the old, and new Scholars, was foisted into Asser by the
said Long Harry Savile, and which is more, that passage also, was put by him
into the printed History of Ingulphus, which makes much for the Antiquity of
the University of Oxon. Ego Ingulphus, etc. pro literis addiscendis in
teneriore aetate constitutus, primum Westmonasterio, postremo Oxoniensi studio
traditus sum, etc. But for the clearing of the said vain reports, much has
been In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. ut supr.
said already: and therefore I shall trouble the reader no more, but only tell
him, that after the said Long Harry had lived for some years after his return
from foreign Countries, within the Parish of S. Martin in the Fields near
London, died there, to be the great reluctance of all learned men, on 29. Apr.
in sixteen hundred and seventeen, Hen. Savile Esquire who was employed as a Captain
in one of her Majesty's Ships, called the Adventure, under the conduct of Sir
Franc. Drake and Sir John Hawkyns against the Spaniard in the West Indies.
Which Henry wrote a book intit. A Libel of Spanish lies found at the Sack of
Cales, discoursing the fight in the West Indies between the English and the
Spaniard, and of the death of Sir Franc. Drake, with an answer confuting the
said Spanish lies, etc. Land. 1596. qu. But this Capt. Henry Savile must not be
understood to be the same with Long Harry, or with Sir Hen. Savile Warden of
Merton college, but another of the same House, as I conceive, for three Hen.
Saviles of Yorkshire, were atriculated as members of that coll. in the time of
Qu. Elizabeath, viz. one, who is written the Son of a Plebeian, 1588. a second,
the Son of an Esquire in 1593. and a third an Esquire Son also, in 1595. The said Capt.
Savile, or else Long Harry, was engaged in the Earl of Essex his treasons; for
which, he was forced to abscond and withdrew for a time.

WILLIAM JAMES, Son of Joh. James of Little On in Staffordshire, by Ellen his
Wife, Daughter of Will. of Sanabach in Cheshire, was born at Sandbach, admitted
Student of Chapter Chapter in 1559. or thereabouts, and took the degrees in Arts.
Afterward entering into holy Orders, he was admitted to the reading of the
Sentences 1571 being then Divinity Reader of Magd. coll. The next year he was
elected Master of Vniv. coll. and in 1577. Aug. 27. he became Archdeacon of
Coventry, on the death of Thom. Jews. In 1584. he was made Dean of Chapter Chapter in
Oxon, and in 96. June 5. he was installed Dean of Durham, after that place had
laid void for some time, upon the promotion of Tob. Matthew to the Sea of
Durham. In 1606. he succeeded the said T. Matthew in the Bishopric of Durham, to
which See he was consecrated 7. Sept. the same year. Whereupon Sir Adam Newton,
afterward a Baronet, was installed Dean of Durham 27. of the same month. Which
Deanery he keeping till 1620. did for a certain sum of money Camden in Annal
Jac. 1. MS. sub an. 1620.
resign it, and thereupon Dr. Rich. Hunt Prebendary of Canterbury was installed
in his room 29. May the same year. Dr. W. James has published,

Several Sermons, as, (1) Sermon before the Q. Maj. at Hampton Court, 19. Feb.
1578. on Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3. Land. 1578. oct. (2) Sermon at Paul's Cross, 9. Nov.
1589. on 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26, 27. Land. 1590. qu. and others, as it is said, which
I have not yet seen. He died on the 12. of May in sixteen hundred and
seventeen, Durham. He had a younger Brother named Francis James Fellow of Alls.
coll. whom I shall mention in the Fasti 1587. and a Son of both his names by
his first Wife, (named Katherine an Abendon Woman,) who was Student of Chapter Chapter
and Orator of the University, an. 1601. Another Son also he had, named Francis
James, begotten on the body of his third Wife, named Isabel; which Francis was
Student of Chapter Chapter also, afterward a Minister and well beneficed. He published
A Proclamation to the King, in a Sermon Preached 15. June 1647. before his Maj.
on Jonah 3. 7, 8. Land. 1647. qu. About which time loosing all his
Spiritualities, lived poor and bare, till the Kings return, 1660. There was
another Fr. James, whom I shall mention in the Fasti 1612.

Cranford in Northamptonshire, sent to Oxon at 12 years of age in the Reign of
Q Mary, was made Choirister, and afterward, as it seems, Student of Chapter Chapter
where making a considerable progress in Logic and Philosophy, departed without
a degree, (tho a noted Sophister,) and at length became Rector of the Parish
Church of St. Anne and St. Agnes within Aldersgate, in London, where he
continued many years a constant and faithful Preacher of Gods word. He has
written and published,

The History of the Bible, briefly collected by way of Question and Answer. --
When first printed I know not. Sure it is, that one edition of it came out at
London 1627. oct. In the title of which, it is said, that it was corrected by
the author. Another edition came out in 1657. in tw. and one or more afterward.

Sermon. of Tithes, on Genesis 14. 20, 21. Land. 1583. oct.

Sermon. of Election, on Genesis 25. 23. Land. in oct.

Catechism. Land. 1591. oct. He also translated from Lat. into English, Harmony
on Matthew: Mark, and Luke, written by Joh. Calvin. Other things, as it is said,
he has either written or translated, but such I have not yet seen. He died in
a good old age, either in the latter end of May, or beginning of June, in
sixteen hundred and seventeen, and was buried in his Church of SS. Ann and
Agnes beforementioned, leaving then behind him a Son named Ephraim Paget,
(whom I shall hereafter mention,) a godly and learned Minister, and one that
suffered by the Presbyterians, in the beginning of the Grand Rebellion raised
by them.

Warwickshire, and his juvenile education there, at the cost and charges of
Rob. Oluey of Tachbrook in that County. Thence he was sent to Gloucester hall,
where he spent near four years in Logic and Philosophy. Afterward he went to
Emanuel coll. in Cambridge, where taking the degrees in Arts, he taught a
School in Kent. About that time taking holy Orders, ( an. 1596.) he became
Curate of Southfleet there, where he was much followed for his familiar way of
Preaching. At length he removed, and was first made Minister of S. Alkmonds,
then of Allhallows, in the ancient Borough of Derby. He has written,

The burden of a laden Conscience, or the Misery of Sin. Land. 1608. Camb.
1614. etc. in all, at least six editions, in oct.

The unburthening of a laden Conscience. -- Printed with the former book. With
other things which I have not yet seen. He died 21. Oct. in sixteen hundred and
seventeen, Allhallows in Derby beforementioned. Over his grave is a brass
plate fastened to the midst of the North wall of the said Chancel, with eight
homespun verses engraven thereon, the four first of which, run thus: Lo
Richard Kilby lies here,
Which lately was our Minister.
To the Poor he ever was a Friend,
And gave them all he had at's end, etc.


ROBERT TIGHE was born at Deeping in Lincolnshire, Magd. coll. whence going to
Cambridge, he took the degrees in Arts there, and then returning to the said
coll. again, was not only incorporated in that degree, but admitted to the
reading of the Sentences, in 1596. Afterward he went to Cambridge again, took
the degree of D. of D. being about that time Vicar of Allhallows Barkin near to
the Tower of London, and going to Oxon again, was incorporated there, an. 1610.
at which time, he was Archdeacon of Middlesex. He was an excellent Textuary,
and a profound Linguist, which was the reason (as it is said) why he was
employed by King James 1. in the translation of the Bible, in 1604. What else
he translated, or wrote. I know not, nor any thing besides, only that he died
about the beginning of Nov. in sixteen hundred and seventeen, Mary. In his
Archdeaconry succeeded Dr. Will. Goodwin Dean of Chapter Chapter Oxon.

JOHN FLAVELL, a native of Bishops-Liddiard Somersetshire, was entered a Student
in Trinity coll. in 1610. aged 14. and soon after became the forwardest Youth
in that house, for his quick and smart disputations in Logic and Philosophy.
At length the Foundress of Wadham coll. having been often told of the pregnancy
of his parts, she made him one of her first Scholars thereof, in 1613. In the
year following, he took the degree of Bach. of Arts, and became very useful
among the Juniors by his frequent reading of Logic Lectures, and presiding in
Philosophical disputations in the public Refectory. In 1617. he proceeded in
Arts, being then esteemed a good Greek and Lat. Poet, was Senior of the Act
that year, and chose public Professor of Grammar in the University, in which
Faculty he was excellent and took great delight. He has written,

Tractatus de Demonstratione methodicus and polemicus. Oxon. 1619. etc. oct. in
4 books, not intended for the Press, only for the use and profit of private
auditors. But so it was, that after his death, his notes coming into the hands
of Alex. Huish of the same coll. he put them into order, disgested, and sent
them to the Press, which since has been taken into the hands of all Juniors,
and have undergone several impressions.

Grammat. Graec. Enchyridion. in oct. This goes under the name of Joh. Flavell,
but whether written by the former, I know not, for I have not yet seen it. He
died in the flower of his youth on the 10. Nov. in sixteen hundred and
seventeen, and was buried in Wadham coll. Chapel. I find another Joh. Flavell,
after the former in time, author of a little thing intit. A Prayer or Treatise
of God's mighty power and protection of his Church and People, etc. Land. 1642.
and another (if not the same) author of Husbandry spiritualized, etc. Land.
1669. qu. of A Saint indeed, etc. Land. 1670. oct. and of several other things,
but whether he was ever of this University, I know not. He occurrs Minister of
Dartmouth in Devon. 1672. and several years after.

THOMAS CORYATE, Son of George Coryate, Odcombe in Somersetshire, became a
Commoner of Gloucester hall in the beginning of the year 1596. aged 19. where
continuing about three years, he attained, by the help of a great memory, to
some competency in Logic, but more by far in the Greek tongue, and in humane
learning. Afterward he was taken home for a time, then went to London, and was
received into the Family of Henry Prince of Wales. At which time falling into
the company of the Wits, who found him little better than a Fool in many
respects, made him their Whetstone, and so became notus nimis omnibus. In the
beginning of the year 1608. he took a Voyage into France, Italy, Germany, etc.
and at his return published his travels under this title.

Crudities hastily gobled up in five Months travels in France, Savoy, Italy,
Rhetia, Helvetia, some parts of High Germany and the Netherlands. Land. 1611.
qu. Which book was then ushered into the world by an Odcombian banquet,
consisting of near 60 copies of excellent verses made by the Poets of that
time: (which did very much advantage the Sale of the book) Among them were Ben.
Johnson, Sir Jo. Harrington of Kelston near Bathe, Dudl. Digges afterward
Master of the Rolls, Rich. Martin Recorder of London, Laur. Whittaker, Hugh
Holland the traveller, Jo. Hoskyns Sen. Inigo Jones, the surveyour, Christop.
Brook, Rich. Corbet of Chapter Chapter Joh. Chapman, Thom. Campian Dr. of Phys. Jo.
Owen the Epigrammatist, Sam. Page of C. C. C. Tho. Bastard of New coll. Tho.
Farnaby sometimes of Mert. coll. Jo. Done, Mich. Drayton, Joh. Davys of
Hereford, Hen. Peacham, etc. In the year following (1612) after he had taken
leave of his Countrymen by an oration spoken at the Cross in Odcombe, he took a
long and large journey, with intentions not to return to his native Country,
till he had spent 10 years in traveling to and fro. The first place he went to
See in Edward Terry's Voyage into East India, printed at Land. 1655. in oct. p.
60. etc.
was Constantinople, where he took special notice of all things there
observable. In which place he found very great respect and encouragement from
Sir Paul Pindar then and there Ambassador. Being there for some time he took
his opportunities to view diverse parts in Greece; and in the Helespont he took
special notice of those two Castles directly opposed each to other, called
Sestos and Abydot, which stand on the several banks that bound that very narrow
Sea. Which places Mus^^u makes famous in his very ancient Poem of Hero and
Leander. He saw Smyrna famous at that time for trade, but not religion, and
what then remained of the ruins of sometimes great Troy, but the very ruins of
that place were almost all gone to ruin. From Smyrna he found a passage to
Alexandria in Egypt, and there, near Grand Catro (anciently called Memphis) he
observed what remained of the once famous Pyramids. Returning thence back to
Alexandria he found a passage by Sea to Joppa, and traveling thence 20 English
miles, he arrived at Jerusalem, but found it a very solitary, rocky and
uncomfortable way, full of danger, by reason of the wild Arabs, who keep about
those passages, to make poor travelers their prey and spoil. In Jerusalem he
saw Mount Calvery (where our Savior suffered) then enclosed within the Walls,
Bethlem where he was born, about 5 English miles from Jerusalem; and Mount
Olivet, whence he ascended. From Jerusalem he took his way to make a view of
the Dead Sea, the place where Sodom and Gomorrah, and Admah and Zeboim once
stood. Thence he went to have a sight of the River Jordan, which discharges it
self into that most uncomfortable Lake, and from thence he journied north-east
through the Ten Tribes, till he came to Mount Libanus. Thence back to Sidon,
where he got a passage by Sea unto Alexandretta, now called Scanderoon, which
is one of the most unwholesome places in the world. Thence he took his way to
Aleppo in Syria, about 70. miles distant from Scanderoon, where he was kindly
received by the English Consul, and tarried with him till he could get the
benefit of a Caravan, which consists of a great multitude of people from diverse
parts, which get and keep together traveling in those parts, for fear of the
incursions and violences by Thieves and Murderers, which they would undoubtedly
meet withal, if they traveled single, or but few together. With these, he
after set forward toward, and to that City anciently called Nineveh in
Assyria, which we find in the Prophecy of Jonah was sometimes a great and
excellent City of three days journey, but then so exceedingly lessened and
lodged in obscurity, that passengers could not say this was Nineveh. From
thence he journied to Babylon in Chaldea, situated upon the River Euphrates,
once likewise so great, that Aristotle called it a Country, not a City, but now
very much contracted. From this place he proceeded through both the Armenia^s,
and either did, or else he was made to, believe, that he saw the very mountain
Ararat, whereon the ark of Noah tested after the flood. From thence he went
forward toward the Kingdom of Persia, and there to Vspahan the usual place of
residence for the great King. Thence to Seras, anciently called Shushan, where
the great King. Ahasuerus kept his Royal and most Magnificent Court. Afterward
to Candahor, the first Province north-east, under the subjection of the Great
Mogul, and so to Lahore the chiefest City but one, belonging to that great
Empire, of very great trade, wealth, and delight. From Lahore he went to Agra,
which is 400 English miles, planted with great Trees on both sides, which are
all the year clothed with leaves, exceeding beneficial unto travelers for the
shade they afford them in those hot climes. At Agra he made an halt, being
there lovingly received in the English Factory, where he staid till he had
gotten to the Turkish, and Morisco or Arabian Languages, some good knowledge in
the Persian and Indostan Tongues, in which study he was always very apt, and in
little time showed much proficiency. The first of those two, the Persian, is
the more quaint; the other, the Indostan, is the vulgar Language spoken in East
India. In both these he suddenly got such a knowledge and mastery, that it did
exceedingly afterward advantage him in his travels up and down the Moguls
Territories, he wearing always the habit of that Nation, and speaking their
Language. In the first of these, the Persian Tongue, he made afterward an
Oration to the Great Mogul, as I shall tell you anon, and in the Indostan he
had so great a command, that he undertook a Landry-woman (belonging to the
English Ambassador in that Country) who had such a liberty and freedom of
speech that she would sometimes scould, braul and rail from Sunrising to
Sunset: I say that Tom Coryate undertaking her in her own Language he did so
silence her by eight of the clock in the morning, that she had not one word
more to speak, to the great wonder and mirth of those present. After he had
visited several places in that Country and had been courteously received by Sir
Tho. Roe Ambassador there for the K. of England, he went at length to Surat,
lying on the banks of Swally Road, which is in E. India under the Empire of the
Gr. Mogul, where he ended his days as I shall tell you anon. He was a man of a
very coveting Eye that could never be satisfied with seeing, tho he had seen
very much, and yet he took as much content in seeing, as many others in the
enjoying of great and rare things. He had got (besides the Latin and Greek)
the mastery of many hard Languages, in which, if he had obtained wisdom to
husband and manage them, as he had skill to speak them, he had deserved more
same in his generation. But his knowledge and high seize in several
Languages made him not a little ignorant of himself, he being so covetous and
ambitious of praise, that he would hear and endure more of it than he could in
any measure deserve; being like a Ship that has too much sail, and too little
ballast. However had he not fallen into the smart hands of the Wits of those
times, wherein he lived, he might have passed better. That itch of fame which
engaged this man to the undertaking of those very hard, long, and dangerous
travels, has put thousands more (and therefore he was not alone in this) into
strange attempts, only to be talked of. 'Twas fame, without doubt, that stirred
up this man unto these voluntary, but hard undertakings, and the hope of that
glory which he should reap after he had finished his long travels, made him not
at all to take notice of the hardship he found in them. That hope of name and
repute for the time to come did even feed and feast him for the time present.
And therefore any thing, that did in any measure ecclips him in those high
conceivings of his own worth, did too too much trouble him; which you may
collect from these following instances. Upon a time Ibid. p. 73.
one Mr. Rich. Steel a Merchant, and servant to the East India company, came to
Sir Tho. Roe the Ambassador at Mandoa, the place then of the Moguls residence,
at which time our author Tho. Coryate was there. This Merchant had not long
before traveled over land from E. India, through Persia, and so for
Constantinople, and so for England, who in his travels homeward had met with T.
Coryate as he was journying toward E. India. Mr. Steel then told him, that
when he was in England, K. James (then living) enquired after him, and when he
had certified the King of his meeting him on the way, the K. replied is that
fool living? which when our Pilgrim Coryate heard, it seemed to trouble him
very much, because the K. spoke no more nor no better of him; saying that Kings
would speak of poor men what they pleased* At another time when he was ready to
depart from Mandoa, Sir Th. Roe the Ambassador gave him a Letter, and in that a
Bill to receive ten pounds at Aleppo when he should return thither. The Letter
was directed to Mr. Libbeus Chapman there Consul at that time, in which, that
which concerned our traveller was thus. Mr. Chapman when you shall hand these
Letters, I desire you to receive the bearer of them Mr. Tho. Co^yate, with
courtesy, for you shall find him a very honest poor wretch; and further I must
entreat you to furnish him with ten pounds, which shall be repayed, etc. Our
Pilgrim liked the gift well, but the language by which he should have received
it, did not at all content him, telling his Chamber-fellow Mr. Terry, that my
Lord Ambassador had even spoiled his courtesy in the carriage thereof; so that
if he had been a very fool indeed, he could have said very little less of him
than he did, honest poor wretch! and to say no more of him, was to say as much
as nothing. Furthermore also he told him that when he was formerly undertaking
his journey to Venice, a person of honor, wrote thus in his behalf to Sir Hen.
Wotton then and there Ambassador, My Lord, good wine needs no Bush, neither a
worthy man's Letter commendatory, because whethersoever he comes, he is his own
Epistle, etc. This did so much please the Pilgrim, that there (said he) was
some language in my behalf, but now for my Lord to write nothing of me by way
of commendation, but honest poor wretch, is rather to trouble me, than to
please me with his favor. And therefore afterward his letter was phras'd up
to his mind, but he never lived to receive the money. By which his old
acquaintance might see how tender the poor man was to be touched in any thing
that might in the least measure disparage him. O what pains he took to make
himself a subject for present and after discouse! being troubled at nothing for
the present, unless with the fear of not living to reap that fruit, he was so
ambitious of in all his undertakings. And certainly he was surprised with some
such thoughts and fears (as he afterward told the company) when upon a time he
being at Mandoa with the English, and there standing in a room against a
stone-pillar, where the Ambassador was, upon a sudden he fell into such a
swoon, that they had very much ado to recover him out of it, but at last he
came to himself, and told them, that some sad thoughts had immediately before
presented themselves to his fancy, which, as he conceived, put him into that
distemper; like Fannius -- Ne moriere mori. For he told them that there was
great expectation in England of the large accounts he should give of his
travels after his return home, and that he was now shortly to leave them, and
he being at present not very well, if he should dye in his way toward Surat,
whether he was then intending to go (which place he had not yet seen) he might
be buried in obscurity, and none of his friends ever know what became of him,
traveling then, as usually he did, alone. Upon which the Ambassador willed him
to stay longer with him, but he then thankfully refused that offer, and turned
his face presently after toward Surat, which was 300. miles distant from the
place where the Ambassador was, and he lived to come safely thither. But there
being over-kindly used by some of the English, who gave him Sack, which they
had brought from England, he calling for, as soon as he first heard of, it, and
crying Sack, Sack, is there such a thing as Sack? I pray give me some Sack, and
drinking of it moderately (for he was very temperate) it increased his flux
which he had then upon him: and this caused him within few days after his very
tedious and troublesome travels, for he went most on foot) at that place to
come to his journeys end, as I shall anon tell you. What became of his notes
and observations, which he had made in his long journeys, I know not, only
these following which he sent to his friends in England, who printed them in
his absence.

Letters from Asmere, the Court of the Great Mogul, to several persons of
quality in England, concerning the Emperor and his Country of E. India. Land.
1616. qu. In the title of which is our authors Picture, riding on an Elephant.
The first letter is written to Sir Edw. Philips of Montag^e in Somersetshire
Knight. Master of the Rolls.

A Letter to his Mother Gertrude, dated from Agra in E. India, ult. oct. 1616.
containing a speech that he spoke to the Gr. Mogul in the Persian Language --
See in the Pilgrimages of Sam. Purchase, part 1. book 4. chap. 17. and also at
the end of his Letters from Asmere before mentioned. It Is reported (...)
that in an Oration which our author Coryate did speak to the said Mogul he
brought in that story of the Queen of Sheba, 1 Kings 10. (in which parts of
that sacred History the Ma^umetans have some knowledge) and told him that as
the Queen of Sheba having heard of the fame of K. Solomon, came from far to
visit him; which when she had done, she confessed that tho she had heard very
much of him, and many things beyond her belief, yet now seeing what she did,
acknowledged that she had not heard half of that which she now saw concerning
the wisdom, and greatness, and revenue, and riches of Solomon: So our Orator
Coryate told the Mogul, that he had heard very much of him before he had the
honor to see him (when he was very far off in his own Country) but now what he
beheld did exceedingly surmount all these former reports of him, which came to
his Ears at such a distance from him. Then larding his short speech with some
other piece of Flattery, which the Mogul liked well, concluded. Afterward the
Mogul gave him one hundred Roopus, which amounts to value of 12l. 10s. of our
English money, looking upon him as a Derveese, or Votary, or Pilgrim, (for so
he called him) and such that bear that name in that Country seem not much to
care for money, and that was the reason (I conceive) that he gave him not a
more plentiful reward.

Certain observations from the Moguls Court and E. India. -- See in Purchase
beforementioned.

Travels to, and observations in, Constantinople and other places in the way
thither, and in his journey thence to Aleppo, Damasco and Jerusalem. Ibid.
part, 2. lib. 10. cap. 12.

His Oration, purus putus Coriatus; quintessence of Coryate -- Spoken extempore
when Mr. Rob. Rugg dubbed him a Knight on the ruins of Troy, by the name of
Thomas Croyate the first English Knight of Troy. Ib. cap. 12.

Observations of Constantinople abridged. Ib. cap. 12.

Diverse Lat. and Greek Epistles to learned men beyond the Seas. -- Some of
which are in his Crudities, as those to Gasp. Waserus, Radolp. Hospinian, Hen.
Bullinger, descended from the famous Henry Bullinger, Marc. Buellerus, etc. At
length our author Coryate giving way to fate, occasioned by a Flux, at Surat in
E. India beforementioned, in the month of December in sixteen hundred and
seventeen, Sic exit Coryatus: (Hence he went off the Stage, and so must all
after him, how long soever their parts seem to be. For if one should go to the
extremest part of the world East, another West, another North, and another
South, they must all meet at last together in the field of Bones, wherein our
traveller has now taken up his lodging, and where) I leave him, to make way
for the next, as eminent almost for the Law, as he for his Travels.

FERDINANDO PULTON alias P^ulton. Giles Pulton Esquire who died 1560.) was born at
Deusborough in Northamptonshire, became Reg. 1. coll. Aenean. fol. 92. ^
commoner of Brasnose coll. in the beginning of Q. Marys Reign, laid there a
foundation of Academical literature, which he found useful to him afterward
when he grew eminent in the common Law. But leaving that house before he took a
degree, he went to Lincolns Inn, studied the said Law, took the usual degrees,
and became eminent for the knowledge in, and practice of, it, not only in
London, but the usual place of his residence in the country, viz. at Borton in
the Parish and County of Buckingham* He has written and published,

An abstract of all the Penal Statutes which be general, Land. 1600. qu.
Digested alphabetically according to the several subjects they concern.

Abridgment of the Statutes of England, that have been made and printed from
Magna charta to the end of the Session of Parliament, 4. Jac. 1. Land. 1606.
and 12. etc. fol.

Collection of Statutes repealed and not repealed. Land. 1608. fol.

De pace regis and regni, declaring which be the general offenses and
impediments of Peace. Land. 1610. and 15* fol.

Collection of sundery Statutes frequent in use: with notes in the Margent, and
reference to the book, Cases and books of Entry and Registers, where they be
treated of. Land. 1618. in two vol. in fol. the^e again 1632. fol. etc. which
collection rea^hes from 9. (...)* 3. to 7. ^^c. 1.

The Statutes at large, concerning all such Acts which at any time heretofore
have (...) extant in (...) Char^a, to the 16. of Ja^. 1. etc. divided (...)
with marginal Notes, etc. Land. 1618. etc. fol. He departed this Life, 1617-18.
on the 20. January in sixteen hundred and seventeen, aged 82. and was buried
in the Chancel of the Church of Deusborough, beforementioned. Over his grave
was a large plain Stone soon after laid, with an Epitaph engraven thereon,
wherein it is said that he was Vir omni virtutis and doctrinarum genere, (and)
quondam illustrissimus necnon sedulus scriptor and propagator legum hujus
regni. But if you are minded to read his English Epitaph, see in Sir Joh.
Beaumont's Taste of the variety of Poems, at the end of his Bosworth-field.
Land. 1629. oct. The said Ferdinando Pulton left behind him several Sons,
whereof two were R. Cath. Priests.

Augustine Wyrly of Netherseile in Leicestershire (by Mary his Wife, Daughter of
Walt. Charnells) Son of Will. Wyrley of Handsworth in Staffordshire, descended
from an ancient family of his name, sometimes living at Rowley in the said
County, was born Reg. Matric. Univ. Oxon. P. page 447.
in Staffordshire; and in those parts educated in Grammar learning. This
person, whom we are farther to mention, having from his childhood had an
excellent Genie for Arms and Armory was entertained in the family of Sampson
Erdswyke of Sandon Esquire (mentioned under the year 1603.) called then by some the
Antiquary of Staffordshire, where making a considerable progress in Heraldical
and Antiquarian studies under his inspection, published a book under his own
name entitled,

The true use of Armory, showed by History and plainly proved by example, etc.
Land. 1592. qu. Reported by some to be originally written by the said
Erdeswyke, but he being then an ancient man, thought it fitter to have it
published under Wyrley's name than his. However the reader is not to think so,
but rather to suspend his thoughts (being only a bare report that came See Sir
Will. Dugdales book en^it. The anti^nt usage and bearing of suc^ Ensigns of
honor, as are called Arms, etc. Oxo^. 1681 and 82. in oct. p. 4.
originally from Erdeswykes mouth; and to know this, that Wyrley was an
ingenious man, and fit to compose such a book, and that Erdeswyke being often
times crazed especially in his last days, and fit then for no kind of serious
business, would say any thing which came into his mind, as it is very well known
at this day among the chief of the college of Arms. Soon after the publication
of that book, Wyrley left him, and retired to Balliol coll. purposely to obtain
Academical learning, where being put under the tuition of a good tutor, and in
great hope to obtain the grounds of the said learning, was matriculated in the
University Ib. in reg. matric. ut sup.
as a member of that house in Act term, an. 1595. he being then about 29. years
of age. How long he continued there, or whether he took a degree, it appears
not. However for diversion sake, he employed his time so admirably well during
his abode in that house that he made several In manibus D. H^n. St. George
Clare^t. Arg. Arm.
collections of Arms from Monuments and Windows in Churches and elsewhere in
and near Oxon, which have given me much light in my searches after things of
that nature, in order to the finishing the great work that I have been many
years drudging in. He also made diverse remarks and collections from various
Leiger books, sometimes belonging to Monasteries in these parts, and elsewhere.
The Original of which, written with his own hand, I have in my little Library,
which tho partly perished by wet and moisture, yet I shall always keep them as
monuments of his industry. On the 15. May, 2. Jac. 1. dom. 1604. he was Pat. 2
Jac. 1. p. 1.
constituted Ronge-Cr^ix, Officer or Pursivant of Arms. Which place he holding
several years, was always reputed among those of the coll. of Arms, a knowing
and useful person in his profession; and might, had a longer life been spared,
have published several matters relating thereunto, but being untimely cut off
in the midst of his endeavors, about the beginning of Feb. 1617-18.
in sixteen hundred and seventeen, we have enjoyed only (besides the printed
book and collections already mentioned) various collections of Arms and
Inscriptions made in, and from (which several Churches and Gentlemen's
habitations in his own County, Leicestershire have assisted Burton the
Antiquary thereof) and in other Counties, and from Churches in, and near to,
London* Some of which I have seen and perused in the Sheldonian Library, I mean
in that Library which belonged sometimes to that most worthy and generous
person, (my friendly acquaintance never to be forgotten) Raphe Sheldon of Boely
Esquire, the same Raphe (for there are several of his family of both his names)
who died on Midsomerday, an. 1684. aged 61. or thereabouts. Which Library, the
MSS. only, to the number of about 300. besides very many Parchment rolls and
Pedegrees, he bequeathed to the Coll. of Arms situated on Bennet-hill near to
St. Paul's Cathedral in London, where they yet remain. As for the body of
Wyrley, 'twas buried, as I have been informed, in the Church of S. Bennet near
to Paul's Wharff.

EDMUND BUNNEY, elder brother to Francis before mentioned, was the Son of Rich,
Bunney of Newton, otherwise called Bunney-hall in the Parish of Wakefield, and
of Newland in the Parish of Normanton, in Yorkshire Esquire by Bridget his Wife,
Daughter and coheir of Edw. Restwold of the Vache near to Chalfont St. Giles in
Bucks. (who died 1547.) descended from Richard and Philipp de la Vache, Knights
of the illustrious Order of the Garter in the time of K. Rich. 2. These Bunneys
(by the way it must be known) pretend that their Ancestors, descended from the
Bunneys of Bunney, a Town so called, near to the ripe of the River L^ir by
Orleans in France, came with William the Conqueror into England, and settled
themselves at a place in Nottinghamshire called from them Bunney rise; but how
they can make that out, seeing their name is not in the original and genuine
Copy of Battle-Abbey roll, I cannot yet understand. This our author Edm.
Bunney, whom I am farther to mention, was born at a house called the Vache
before mentioned, (being then imparted) an. 1540. sent to this University at 16
years, of age in the fourth year of Q. Mary, and about the time he took the
degree of Bach. of Arts, he was elected Probationer Fellow of Madg. coll. being
then noted to be very forward in Logic and Philosophy. Soon after he went to
Staple Inn, and thence to Greys Inn, in either of which he spent about two
years, for his Father, intended him for the Common Law, being his eldest Son,
but he resolving for Divinity, was cast off by his Father, (tho a good man, as
he the Son In these Defense of his labor in the work of the Ministry MS.
faith, and one that fled for his Religion in Qu. Marys days) so that returning
to Oxon, he took the degree of Master in the latter end of 1564. and in the
year following was elected fellow of Merton coll. at which time Hen. Savile was
elected Probationer. For which a act, tho the Society had no preceedent, yet
there was a necessity for it, because there was not one then in that Society,
that could, or would, preach any public Sermon in the college turn, such was
the scarcity of Theologists, not only in that House, but generally throughout
the University. In the year 1570. he was admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, and about that time became Chaplain to Dr. Grindall Archb^ of York,
who gave him a Prebendship of that Church and the Rectory of Bolton Percy,
about six Miles distant thence. Which Rectory after he had enjoyed 25. years,
he resigned, and maintaining himself with the profits of his Prebendship,
(being also Subdean of York) and other Dignities, mentioned in his Epitaph
following, he preached and catechized where there was most need. I have heard
Dr. Barten Holyday say, that when he was a Junior in the University, this our
author Bunney (who had a bulkey body and a broad face) did several times come
to Oxon, accompanied with two men in black Liveries with horses, and did preach
or catechize in some Churches there, and near to it, where was none to do that
office, particularly in Allsaints Church, to whom many resorted and took Notes.
Also that whatsoever he had given to him by way of gratuity, he would bestow on
his men; and farther added that by his seeing holiness of life and soundness of
doctrine, many Scholars (particularly himself) were induced afterward to take
holy Orders. He would travel over most parts of England like a new Apostle, and
would endeavor to act as the Apostles did. So that being blamed for it by
many, as if there were none to be found to do that office but he, and looked
upon by others as a forward, busy and conceited man, he therefore wrote his
Defense of his labor in the work of the Ministry, and dispersed several copies
of it abroad among his friends and acquaintance. The truth is he was the most
fluid Preacher in the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth, for he seldom or never studied
for what he was to deliver, but would preach and pray extempere, as our beloved
Saints did in the time of the rebellion under K. Chapter 1. and after; insomuch
that many were pleased to say he was troubled with the Divinity squirt. I have
heard some of our Ancients, who remember him, report, that he was a severe
Calvinist, and that by the liberty he took, did a great deal of harm by his
Preaching in Corporation-Towns, as many then did* and some Gentlemen also, with
Licenses obtained from the Queen under pretense of a scarcity of Divines. He
has written,

The sum of Christian Religion, in two parts. The first entreats of the
Trinity, and the second of the Commandments. Land. 1576. oct.

Abridgment of Jo. Calvin's Institutions, Land. 1580. oct. Translated into
Engl. by Edw. May.

Scepter of Judah, or what manner of Government it was, that unto the
Commonwealth, or Church of Israel, was by the Law of God appointed. Land. 1584.
oct.

Of the Coronation of K. David, wherein out of that part of the History of
David, that shows how he came to the Kingdom, we have set out what is like to
be the end of these troubles that daily arise for the Gospels sake. Land. 1588.
qu.

Necessary admonition out of the Prophet Joel, concerning that hand of God that
of late was upon us, and is not clean taken off as yet, etc. Land. 1588. oct.
The Reader is to understand that Rob. Persons a Jesuit did put out a book
intit. Christian Exercise appertaining to Resolution, etc. in two parts. The
first of which coming forth before the other, our author Bunney did correct,
alter, and made it fit for the use of Protestants, adding thereunto of his own
composition,

A Treatise of Purification* Land. 1584. or thereabouts, in oct. But the Jesuit
in the next edit. of the said Resolution, did much complain of our author for
assuming to himself the labors of another person, and of spoiling his work and
the impression thereof. Whereupon our author put out another book intit.

A brief answer unto those idle and frivolous quarrels of R. P. against the
late edition of the Resolution. Land. 1589. oct. He has also written,

Of Divorce for Adultery, and Marrying again, that there is no sufficient
Warrant so to do. Oxon. 1610. qu. At the end of which is a note to show that
Rob. Persons was many years since answered.

The corner Stone: Or, a form of teaching Jesus Christ out of the Scriptures.
Land. 1611. fol.

A defense of his labor in the work of the Ministry. -- MS. written 20. Jan.
1602. He also translated, as some say, into the English tongue, or as others,
perverted it, that excellent book of Joh. Gerson, or rather of Tho. de Kempis,
intit. Of the imitation of Christ; but whether true I know not, for I have not
yet seen such a thing. He ended his days at Cawood in Yorkshire 26. Febr. in
sixteen hundred and seventeen, 1617-18.
and was buried in the south Isle joining to the choire of York Cathedral. Over
his grave is a fair Monument in the wall, with his Effigies carved from stone,
and this inscription by it. Edmundus Bunnaeus ex nobili Bunnaeorum familia
oriundus, S. Th. Bac. coll. Mertonensis in Ox^n. olim Socius, Parochiae de
Bolton-Percy Pastor, Ecclesiarum Preb. of Oxgate in the Church of St. Paul.
B. Pauli London, B. Petri Eborum, and B. Mariae Carleol. Praebendarius
dignissimus; concionator frequentiss, vicatim and oppidatim praedicando multos
annos* consum si^, cum ob amorem christi haereditatem paternam fratri Ri^^^^
^^uniori relinquisset. Obiit die mensis Febr. 26. an. 1617. Haec senis Edmundi
Bunney est quem cernis imago,
A quo Bunnaei villula nomen habet.
Clarus ^rat tanti, tumuit neque sanguinis aestu,
Haeres patris crat profuit esse nihil.
Denotat aetatem gravitas, resolutio mentem,
Zelum Scripta, aciem Pulpita, facta fidem.
Vasa sacro librosque dedit post funera templo,
Et bona pauperibus, caetera seque deo.


Maurice Abbot Sherman, (who died 25. Sept. 1606.) by Alice March his Wife, was
born at Guildford in Surry, in an house now an Alehouse, bearing the sign of
the Three Mariners, by the Rivers side near to the Bridge, on the North side
of the Street, in St. Nicholas Parish; educated in the Free School there,
(founded by K. Ed. 6. 1551.) under Mr. Franc. Tailor Schoolmaster thereof,
became a Student in Balliol coll. 1575. aged 15 years, elected Socius
Sacerdotalis of that house 16. Jan. 1581. took the degree of M. A. in the year
following, became a noted Preacher in the University, and a constant Lecturer
at St. Martins Church in the Quadrivium, and sometimes at Abendon in Berks.
Afterward being made Lecturer in the City of Worcester and Rector of Allsaints
Church there, he resigned his Fellowship 8. March 1588. and not long after
became Rector of Bingham in Northamptonshire by the favor of Joh. Stanhope
Esquire, and afterward took the degrees in Divinity, that of Doctor being
completed in 1597. In the beginning of the Reign of K. James 1. he was made
Chaplain in Ordinary to him, in the year 1609. he was unanimously elected
Master of Balliol coll. and in the beginning of Nov. 1610. he was made
Prebendary of Normanton in the Church of Southwell. In 1612. he was appointed
Doctor of the Theological Chair, usually called the Kings Professor of
Divinity, by his Majesty; and in 1615. he was nominated by him to be Bishop of
Salisbury, merely, as it is said, for his incomparable Lectures read in the
Divinity School concerning the Kings Supreme Power, against Bellarmino and
Suarez, and for his Antilogia which he a little before had published. So that
being consecrated thereunto on the third of Dec. the same year, sat there till
the time of his death, which was soon after. He was a person of unblameable
life and conversation, a profound Divine, most admirably well read in the
Fathers, Councils and Schoolmen, and a more moderate Calvinian than either of
his two Predecessors ( Holland and Humphrey) in the Divinity-chair were; which
he expressed by countenancing the Sublapsarian way of Predestination. His works
are,

The Mirror of Popish Subtilties; discovering certain wretched and miserable
evasions and shifts, which a secret cavilling Papist in the behalf of one Paul
Spence Priest, yet living, and lately Prisoner in the Castle of Worcester, has
gathered out of Saunders and Bellarmine, etc. concerning the Sacraments, etc.
Land. 1594. qu.

The Exaltation of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ. Sermons on 110 Psalm,
from the 1. to the 7. ver. Land. 1601. qu.

Antichristi demonstratio, contra fabulas Pontificias, and ineptum Rob.
Bellarmini de Antichristo disputationem. Land. 1603. qu. 1608. oct.

Defense of the Reformed Catholic of Mr. Will. Perkins lately deceased,
against the Bastard Counter-Catholick of Dr. Bishop Seminary Priest. The first
part. Land. 1606. qu. The second part was printed at the same place, 1607. qu.
and the third part, 1609. qu.

The old way: Sermon. at S. Mary's Oxon, on Act-Sunday 8. July 1610. on Jerem. 6.
16. Land. 1610. qu.

The true ancient Romans Catholic, being an Apology against Dr. Bishops Reproof
of the defense of the Reformed Catholic. Land. 1611. qu. See more in Will.
Bishop, an. 1624.

Antilogia adversus apologiam Andreae Endaemon-Johannis Jesuitae pro Henrico
Garnetto Jesuita proditore; qua mendacissime, etc. Land. 1613. qu.

Exercitationes de gratia and perseverantia Sanctorum, etc. Land. 1618. qu.

In Richardi Thomsoni Angli Belgici deatribam, de amissione and intercessione
justificationis and gratiae, animadversio brevis. The former of which two, viz.
Exerc. de gratia, etc. was printed at Francfort 1619. under this title,
Exercitationes Academicae de gratia and perseverantia Sanctorum, it^mque de
intercessione justificationis. in oct. As for Rich. Thomson you may see more of
him in the Fasti, an 1596.

De suprema potestate regia, exercitationes habitae in Acad. Oxon, contra Rob.
Bellarminum and Franc. Suarez. Land. 1619. qu. He also wrote a most accurate
Commentary (in Latin) upon the Epistle to the Romans, with large Sermons upon
every verse, in which he handled, as his Text gave him occasion, all the
controverted points of Religion at this day. This Commentary, which is in 4
volumes in MS. was given to Bodlies Library by Dr. Edw. Corbet Rector of
Has^ley in Oxfordshire, who married Margaret, the Daughter of Sir Nath, Brent
Knight by his Wife Martha the only Daughter and Heir of the said Dr. Rob.
Abbot. Other matters also he left behind him fit for the Press, but whether
they were all printed I know not. At length through a too sedentary life, which
brought him to the terrible disease of the Stone in the Kidneys, he gave way to
fate on the second of March in sixteen hundred and seventeen, 1617-18.
and was buried in the Cath. Church of Salisbury, over against the Bishops
seat, having in less than two years before, married a second Wife, for which he
gained the great displeasure of his Brother Dr. Geo. Abbot Archb. of
Canterbury. I find another Rob. Abbot, who was a frequent writer, but after the
former in time. He was originally of Cambridge, and afterward a Minister of
God's Word, first in Kent, then in Hampshire, and at length in London, as I
shall more at large tell you in the Fasti, 1607.

Cornish man born, educated in Exeter coll. took the degrees in Arts, stood as
a Member of Broadgates hall in an Act celebrated 1594. to complete it, being
about that time Minister of Dartmouth in Devonshire, and much resorted to for
his frequent and practical way of Preaching. He has written and published,

The sincere Preacher: Clar. 1619.
Proving that in whom is adulation, avarice, and ambition, he cannot be
sincere: Delivered in three Sermons in Dartmouth, upon 1 These. 2. 5, 6. Land.
1616. oct.

Dorsetshire called Blandford, educated in Wykehams School, admitted perpetual
Fellow of New coll. in 1588. and two years after Bach. of Arts. But this person
being much guilty of the vices belonging to Poets, and given to libelling, he
was in a manner forced to leave his Fellowship, in 1591. So that for the
present being put to his shifts, he was not long after made Chaplain to Thomas
Earl of Suffolk, Lord Treasurer of England, by whose favor and endeavors he
became Vicar of Beer-Regis, and Rector of Amor or Hamer in his native Country,
being then M. of A. He was a person endowed with many rare gifts, was an
excellent Grecian, Latinist, and Poet, and in his elder years a quaint
Preacher. His discourses were always pleasant and facete, which made his
company desired by all ingenious men. He was a most excellent Epigrammatist,
and being always ready to versifie upon any subject, did let nothing material
escape his fancy, as his compositions running through several hands in MS.
show. One of which made upon his three Wives runs thus. Terna mihi variis ducta
est aetatibus uxor,
Haec juveni, illa viro, tertia n^pta seni.
Prima est propter opus teneris mihi juncta sub annis,
Altera propter opes, tertia propter opem.


The things that he has written and published are many, but all that I have
seen are only these.

Epigrams. -- Which being very pleasant to the Reader, that noted Poet Sir Joh.
Harrington of Kelston made one In his Witty Epigrams, in 4 books. Land. 1618.
lib. 2. Epig. 64. See also Epig 84 in lib. 2.
or more Epigrams, dedicated to the author of them.

Pocma, intit. Magna Britannia. lib. 3. Land. 1605. qu. Dedicated to K. Jam. 1.

Five Sermons. Land. 1615. qu. The three first on Luke 1. 76. are called, The
Marigold and the Sun. The two last on Luke 7. 37, 38. are intit. The Sinners
Looking-glass.

Twelve Sermons. Land. 1615. qu. The first on Ephesians. 4. 26. is intit. A
Christian exhortation to innocent anger. The second on Exodus 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
is, The calling of Moses, etc. This Poet and Preacher being toward his latter
end crazed, and thereupon brought into debt, was at length committed to the
Prison in Allhallows Parish in Dorchester, where dying very obscurely, and in a
mean condition, was buried in the Churchyard belonging to that Parish, on 19.
Apr. in sixteen hundred and eighteen, Oxford Students in the Reign of Q.
Elizabeth, I meet with two made by his author. One of which is intit. An
admonition to the City of Oxford: or his Libel intit. Marprelates Basterdine.
Wherein he reflects upon all persons of note in Oxon that were guilty of
amorous exploits, or that mixed themselves with other Men's Wives, or with
wanton Huswives in Oxon. Another also, was made after his expulsion, wherein he
disclaimeth the aforesaid Libel, beginning thus: Jenkin why Man? Why Jenkin?
fie for shame, etc. But the Reader must know that none of these were printed.

JOHN DOVE, a Surrey Man born of Plebeian Westminster School a Student of Chapter
Chapter an. 1580. aged 18. and after he had taken the degrees in Arts became a
Preacher of note in the University. In 1596. he proceeded in Divinity, being at
that time well beneficed, if not dignified, but where I cannot yet tell. His
works are,

A persuasion to the English Recusants to reconcile themselves to the Church of
Rome. Land. 1603. (qu.)

Confutation of Atheism. Land. 1605. and 1640. oct.

Defense of Church Government, wherein the Church Government in England is
directly consonant to the Word of God, etc. Land. 1607. qu.

Defense of the Cross in Baptism, as it is used in the Church of England. --
Printed with the Defense.

Advertisement to the English Seminaries and Jesuits, showing their loose kind
of writings, and negligent handling the cause of Religion, etc. Land. 1610. qu.

The conversion of Solomon. A direction to holiness of life, handled by way of
Commentary upon the whole book of Canticles, etc. Land. 1613. qu.

Sermons, on Ezekiel. 33. 11. and S. Matthew. 19. 9. Land. 1597. 1601. oct. etc. See
more in Alb. Gentilis, an. 1611. where you will find him author of another
book, but whether printed I know not. He concluded his last day in Apr. (about
the 19. day) in sixteen hundred and eighteen, John Dove to be author of
Polydorian, or a miscellany of Moral, Philosophical and Theological Sentences.
Printed 1631. oct. But whether he was the same with the Doctor, or another, I
cannot tell, unless I see the book it self, which I have not yet done.

RICHARD MOKET, was born in Dorsetshire, in Salisbury, elected from Brasnose,
to be Fellow of Allsouls, coll. in 1599. being then near four years standing in
the degree of Bach of Arts. Afterward he proceeding in that Faculty, took on
him the Sacred Function, became Domestic Chaplain to George Archb. of
Canterbury, Warden of Allsouls, Rector of Monks-Risborow in Bucks, and of
Newington near Dorchester in Oxfordshire, D. of D. and one of the Kings
Commissioners concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs. He published in the Latin
tongue, Land. 1616. fol.
The Liturgy of the Church of England. Greater and Lesser Catechisms. Thirty
nine Articles. Book of ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Doctrinal
points extracted out of the Book of Homilies.


To which he added his own book, written in Latin, entitled,

De politia Ecclesiae Anglicanae. Reprinted at Land. 1683. oct. Which
collection he published in a pious zeal for gaining honor to the Church of
England amongst Foreign Nations. But this his zeal was so little accompanied in
the Constitutions of the said Church, or so much biased toward those of
Calvin's Platform, that it was thought fit not only to call it in, but to
expiate the errors of it in a public flame. And the true cause which was
conceived why the book was burned, was, that in publishing the twentieth
Article concerning the authority of the Church, he totally left out the first
clause of it, viz. Habet Ecclesia ritus and caeremonias statuendi jus, and in
controversiis fidei authoritatem. By means whereof the Article was apparently
falsified, the Churches authority disowned, and consequently a wide gap See in
Arcb. Lauds Life, by (...) lib. 1. an. 1617.
opened to dispute her power in all her Canons and Determinations of what sort
soever. He yielded up his last breath, (with grief, as it is thought, for what
had been done to his book) on the day before the nones of July, Allsouls coll.
chapel, just below the steps leading to the high Altar. In his Wardenship
succeeded Richard Astley D. of D. who dying in Febr. 1635. was succeeded by
Gilb. Sheldon, who was afterward Bishop of London, and at length Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Goldesburg in Yorkshire, was born 18. oct. 1568. spent some time among the
Oxonians for form-sake about 1584. went thence to the Middle Temple, were after
he had continued in the degree of Barrester, and for some years been resorted
to in matters relating to his profession, was made one of the Prothonotaries of
the Common Pleas. He wrote and left behind him fit for the Press,

Reports, or, collection of cases and matters agitated in all the Courts in
Westminster, in the latter years of the reign of Qu. Elizabeth, with learned
arguments at the Bar, and on the bench. Land. 1635. etc. qu. Published by
Will. Shepphard Esquire Upon which cases and matters Sir Edm. Anderson and Sir Jo.
Popham, Judges, wrote Resolutions and Judgments. Goldesburg concluded his last
day on the 9. oct. in sixteen hundred and eighteen. Whereupon his body was
buried near to the high Altar of the Church belonging to the Temples. He left
behind him other things, as it is said, fit for the Press, but in whose hands
they are, I could never learn.

Walt. Raleigh Esquire by Catherine his Wife Daughter of Sir Philip Champernoon Knight.
was born at a place called Hayes in Parish of East-Budeleigh in Devonshire, an.
1552. Which Hayes is a farm, and his Father having had a remnant of a Lease of
80 years in it, came after the expiration thereof to one Duke: unto whom
afterward, our author W. Raleigh having a desire to purchase it, wrote a
Letter dated from the Court 26. July 1584. wherein he says that for the natural
disposition he has to that place, being born in that house, he had rather seat
himself there, than any where else, etc. His Father was the first of his name
that lived there, but his ancestors had possessed Furdell in the same County
for several Generations before, where they lived in See in J^. H^oker's Epistle
dedicated to Sir Walt. Raleigh, set before his translation of Garald C^mbrersis
his Irish History. Printed in the 2. vol. of R^^h Holi^sheds Chror -- Lord.
1587. ^ol.
gentile estate, and were esteemed ancient Gentlemen. In 1568, or thereabouts
he became a Commoner of Oriel coll. at what time C. Champernoon his kinsman
studied there, where his natural parts being strangely advanced by Academical
learning under the care of an excellent Tutor, became the ornament of the
Juniours, and was worthily esteemed a proficient in Oratory and Philosophy.
After he had spent about 3. years in that house, where he had laid a good
ground and sure foundation to build thereon, he left the University without a
degree, and went to the Middle Temple to improve himself in the intricate
knowledge of the municipal Laws. How long he tarried there, it is uncertain, yet
sure I am, from a Epistle, or copy of Verses of his composition, which I have
seen, that he was abiding in the said Temple, in Apr. 1576. at which time his
vein for ditty and amorous Ode, was esteemed most lofty, insolent and
passionate. As for the remaining part of his life, it was sometimes low, and
sometimes in a middle condition, and often tossed by fortune to and fro, and
seldom at rest. He was one that fortune had picked up out of purpose, of whom
to make an example, or to use as her Tennis-Ball, thereby to show what she
could do; for she tossed him up of nothing, and to and fro to greatness, and from
thence down to little more than to that wherein she found him, (a bare
Gentleman) not that he was less, for he was well descended and of good
alliance, but poor in his beginnings, and for the jest Fragm. Regalia, etc by
Sir K. No^m^n, printed at Land. in (...) 1650. p. 57.
of Edw. Earl. of Oxon. (the Jack, and an upstart Knight.) all then knew it
savoured more of emulation, and his humor, than of truth. France was the first
School, wherein he learned the rudiments of War, and the Low Countries and
Ireland (the military Academies of those times) made him Master of that
discipline: for in both places he exposed himself afterward to Land-service,
but that in Ireland was a Militia, which then did not yield him food and
raiment, nor had he patience to stay there, tho shortly after (in 1580.) he
went thither again, and was a Captain there under Arthur Lord Gray who succeeded
Sir Will. Pelham in the Deputy-ship of that Kingdom. Afterward gaining great
credit, he was received into the Court, became a person in favor, and had
several boons bestowed on him afterward, particularly the Castle of Shireborne
in Dorsetshire, taken from the Sea of Salisbury* In the latter end of 1584. he
discovered a new Country, which he, in honor of the Queen, called Virginia,
received the honor of Knighthood from her, and was afterward made Captain of
her Majesty's Guards, Senceschal of the Duchies of Cornwall, and Exeter, Lord
Warden of the Stanneries of Devon. and Cornwall, Lord Leivtenant of Cornwall
and Governor of Jersey. In 1588. he showed himself active against the
invincible Armada of the Spaniards, and in 1592. being about that time a
Parliament man, wherein, as in other Parliaments in the latter end of Q. Eliz.
was he a frequent Speaker, he went to America with 15. men of War to possess
himself of Panama, where the Spaniards Ship their riches, or to intercept them
in their passage homewards, but returned successless, and was out of favor for
a time, not only for that but for divirginating a maid of Honor ( Elizabeth
Daughter of Sir Nich. Trockmorton) whom he afterward married, and for some few
months being kept under custody, was at length set free, but banished the
Court. Afterward to follow the directions of of his own Genie, that was always
inclined to search out hidden regions, and the secrets of nature, he undertook
a navigation to Guiana that bears Gold, in 1595. purposely for the improvement
and honor of his Country, both by getting store of wealth, and by molesting
the Spaniard, within the inward coasts of America, which he thought would be
more profitable than on the Sea coasts, where there are never any Towns laden
with any riches, but when they are conveyed thither to be carried over into
Spain. He set out from Plymouth Camden in Annal R. Elizab. an. 1595.
on the 6. of Febr. and arrived at the Island Trinidada 22. March. There he
easily took a little City called S. Joseph, and the Governor thereof Don
Antonio de Bereo, but sound not so much as a piece of Silver there. Having
enquired many things of this Antonio about the mines of Gold in Guiana, he left
his Ship in Trinidada and entered the vast River Orenoque, with little Barks,
and some hundred Soldiers. He searched up and down Guiana for the space of 4
Miles among the crooked and short turnings of the water several ways: where,
being parched with the reflecting beams of the Sun, just over his head, and too
much wet sometimes with Showers, and having long wrestled with such like
difficulties, he yet continued so long, till that it growing wintry cold in
Apr. the waters all overspread the earth; insomuch that now he could pass away
in no less danger of the waters, than he came thither in danger of his enemies.
After his return he was constituted one of the Vide ibid. an 1596.
chief persons in the expedition to Cadiz, where he performed notable service,
and obtained to himself at home a great name. In 1603, he presented to K. James
at his entrance to the Crown of England a Manuscript of his own writing,
containing valid arguments against a peace to be made with Spain, which was
then the common discourse. But the King being altogether for peace, 'twas
rejected, and the same year, just after he had been deprived of the Captainship
of the Guard, (which K. James bestowed on Sir Tho. Erskin Viscount Fenton in
Scotland) we find him in a plot against the King, generally called Sir Walter
Raleighs Treason, for which being brought to his Trial (with others) at
Winchester in 1603. was at length found guilty and condemned to die. But being
repreived, he was committed Prisoner to the Tower of London for life, where he
improved his confinement to the greatest advantage of learning and inquisitive
men. In Apr. 1614* he W. Camden in Annal. Jac. 1. M.S.(...).
published the History of the World, a book, which for the exactness of its
Chronology, curiosity of its contexture and learning of all sorts, seems to be
the work of an Age. In 1617. power was granted to him to set forth Ships and
men for the undertaking an enterpize of a golden Mine in Guiana, in the
southern parts of America, and on the 28. March in the year following he left
London in order for that Voyage, notwithstanding Didacus Sarmiento de Acunna
Earl or Count of Gundamore the Spanish Ambassador to the K. of England,
endeavored to hinder him with many arguments proposed to his Majesty. But at
length Sir Walter going beyond his Commission in taking and sacking the Town of
St. Thome, belonging to the Spaniard, which was much aggravated by Gundamore,
the K. on the 9. June 1618, published his Royal Proclamation for the discovery
of the truth of Raleigh's proceedings and for the advancement of justice.
Whereupon, when Raleigh arrived at Plymouth, Sir Lewis Steukeley Vice Admiral
of the County of Devon. seized him, and brought him up to London 9. Aug.
following. But Raleigh finding the Court wholly guided by Gundamore, as it is
said, (notwithstanding I find elsewhere Ibid (...)
that he left England 16 July going before) he could hope for little mercy.
Whereupon wisely contriving the design of an escape, was betrayed by Steukley,
taken on the Thames and committed to a close Prison. Afterward being often
examined by the Lord Chancellor and Privy-Councel, was at length on the 24
Oct. warned by them (as they had been commanded by the King) to prepare for
death. The particulars of which proceedings, as also of his Voyage to Guiana,
you may see at large in a book intit. A Declaration of the demeanor and
carrige of Sir W. Raleigh Knight, as well in his Voyage, as in, and sithence
his return; and of the true motives and inducements which occasioned his
Majesty to proceed in doing justice upon him. Land. 1618. in 8 sh. in qu. On
the 28. of the month of Oct. he was conveyed to the Court called the
King's Bench in Westminster, where it being proposed to him what he had to say
for himself, why the sentence of death, pronounced against him in 1603. should
not be put in execution, he fell into a long discourse, and vindicated himself
so much, that most wise men thought then (and all Historians since) that his
life could not be taken away upon that account. Afterward being conveyed to
the Gatehouse, suffered death the next day, notwithstanding David Noion Lord of
Chesne acted much to save him. Authors are perplexed (as some are pleased to
say) under what topic to place him, whether of Statesman, Seaman, Soldier,
Chemist, or Chronologer; for in all these he did excel. And it still remains a
dispute, whether the age he lived in was more obliged to his Pen or his Sword,
the one being busy in conquering the new, the other in so bravely describing
the old, World. He had in the outward men, (as an observing (...) p. 59.
writer says) a good presence, in a handsome and well compacted person, a
strong natural wit, and a better judgment, with a bold and plausible tongue,
whereby he could set out his parts to best advantage; and to these he had the
adjuncts of some general learning, which by diligence he enforced to great
augmentation and perfection; for he was an indefatigable reader, whether by Sea
or L^nd, and none of the least observers both of men and of the times: And I am
confident that among the second causes of his growth, that variance between him
and the Lord Gray, in his descent into Ireland, was a principal, for it drew
them both over to the Council Table, there to plead their cause, where he had
much the better in telling of his tale; and so much that the Qu. and the Lords
took no slight mark of the man and his parts: for from thence he became to be
known, and to have recess to the Qu. and the Lords; and then we are not to
doubt how such a man would comply and learn the way of progression, etc. He had
given the Queens ear at a trice, and she began to be taken with his e^cution,
and loved to hear his reasons to her demands: And the truth is, she took him
for a kind of an Oracle, which netle^ them all; yea, those that he relied on
began to take his sudden favor for an allarum, and to be sensible of their own
supplantation and to project his. -- So that finding his favor declining, and
falling into recess, he undertook a new peregrination to leave that Terra
infirma of the Court, for that of the Wars, and by declining himself, and by
absence, to expect his, and the passion of his Enemies, which in Court was a
strange device of recovery, etc. The truth is he was unfortunate in nothing
else but the greatness of his wit and advancement: his eminent worth was such,
both in domestic Policy, foreign expeditions, and discoveries, Arts and
literature, both practive and contemplative, that they seemed at once to
conquer both example and imitation. Those that knew him well esteemed him to be
a person born to that only which he went about, so dextrous was he in all, or
most of, his undertakings, in Court, in Camp, by Sea, by Land, with Sword, with
Pen: witness in the last, these things following, tho some of them, as it is
credibly believed, were written by others, with his name set to them for sale
sake.

Discovery of the large, rich and beautiful Empire of Guiana, with a relation
of the great and golden City of Manoa, and of the Provinces of Emeria,
Arromaia, Amapaia, etc. performed in the year 1595. Land. 1596. qu. Printed at
Francof. and Norib. in Latin 1599. qu. This book of Guiana, with the authors
Presatorie Epist. to the Hist. of the World, are (as it is said) full of proper,
clear, and Courtly graces of speech.

History of the world in 5 books. Land. 1614. etc. fol. Abbreviated and
animadverted upon by Alex. Ross a Scotchman, in a book entit. The marrow of
History. Land. 1662. oct. 2d. edit. But of Raleigh and his History hear what an
ingenious Degrees. Wheare, in lib. suo De ratione and (...) hi^tori^s. Sect. 6.
writer says -- Hes autem sequi possunt nonnulli ex recentioribus: quos inter,
principem locum obtinere meretur Gualterus Raulaeus nostras, eques auratus, vir
clari nominis, and ob singularem fortitudinem ac prudentiam meliori fato
dignus. Is universalem historiam ab initio mundi usque Macedonici imperii, sive
tertiae monarchiae occasum, ex probatissimis auctoribus coagmentavit, nostrae
quidem gentis idiomate vernaculo, sed accurato admodum judicio, methodo,
perspicua, stylo eleganti ac virili, etc. He was delivered of that Exquisite
Minerva during his tedious imprisonment in the Tower of London; for being clapped
up there for Treason during his Life, as I have before told you, did improve
his confinement, far better than his enlargment. He had composed a second part,
which reached down to the time he lived, but he burnt it a little before his
death. Afterward Alex. Ross before mentioned continued it in a book intit. The
History of the World, the second part in 6. books, being a continuation, etc.
beginning where he left, viz. at the end of the Macedonian Kingdom, and deduced
to these later times, that is from the year of the World 3806. or 160. years
before Christ, till the end of the year 1640. after Christ, etc. together with
a Chronology of those times, etc. Land. 1652. fol. Here having made twice
mention of Alexand. Ross, I desire the reader to observe by the way these
things of him: that he was D. D. and a native and minister of Aberdene in
Scotland, which Country he leaving, (upon what account I know not) came into
England, succeeded Tho. Parker (Son of Robert) author of the book De
traductione peccatoris in the Mastership of the free School at Southampton, and
was Chaplain in ordinary to K. Chapter 1. a little before the civil war began. He
has written many books in Latin and English, and in Prose and Verse, the
titles of which are now too numerous to insert. He died in the Park-house at
Bramsell in Hampshire, belonging to one Henley one of the Prothonotaries, in
the beginning of the year 1654. aged 64. or thereabouts; at which time he
bequeathed many rich legacies by his In the Will-office near to S. Paul's
Cati^^n (...) part 2. Qu. 93.
Will, (dat. 21. Feb. 1653. and proved 19. Apr. 1654.) among which were 200
livers to the Senate of Aberdene to remain for ever toward the maintenance of
two Scholars, that shall be born in the town of Aberdene, and educated in
Grammar there, 50 l. to the town of Southampton, for the better maintenance of
the Schoolmaster, 50 l. to the poor household keepers of Allsaints parish there,
50 l. to the public library at Cambridge, 5 l. to that of Oxon, etc. Andrew
Henley son of the aforesaid Henley was his Executor, who had his library
remaining at ^ramsell, wherein, mostly in the books, he found, as I have been
credibly informed, about a thousand pound in gold. I shall now proceed to give
you a farther account of Sir W. Raleigh's works.

The Prerogative of Parliaments in England, proved in a dialogue between a
Counselor of State and a Justice of Peace. Middleburg (some copies have it
Hamburge) 1621. Land. 1640. qu.

Instructions to his son and posterity. Land. 1632. 36. 1651. oct. 56. in tw.

The life and death of Mahomet, the conquest of Spain, together with the
rising and ruin of the Sarazen Empire. Land. 1637. in tw. In another title
printed the year following it is called The History of Mahomet.

The Prince, or Maxims of State. Land. 1642. in 7 sh. in qu. there again in 51.
and 56. in tw. It Is the same with his Aphorisms of State. Land. 1661. oct.
published by John Milton. Land. 1651. and 56 in tw.
The Sceptick or Speculations. Observations of the magnificency and opulency of
Cities. State of Government. Letters to the King, and others of quality.
Demeanor before his Execution. His Pilgrimage, in verse. Certain verses.


Observations on the first invention of shipping, or invasive War, the
Navy-Royal, and Sea-service. Land. 1650. 1667. oct.

Apology for his Voyage to Guiana. -- Printed with the Observations, etc. 'Twas
by him penned (at Salisbury) in July 1617. I have a copy of it in MS. bound
with his Confession, which is in MS. also, and begins thus, I thank God of his
infinite Goodness that he has sent me to die in the light, and not in the
darkness, etc.

Observations touching Trade and Commerce with the Hollanders and other
Nations, as it was presented to King James. Land. 1653. 56 in tw.

The Cabinet-Council, containing the chief Arts of Empire and Mysteries of
State. Land. 1658. oct. This book was published by John Milton
beforementioned; of whom you may see more in the Fasti, an. 1635.

Historical and Geographical description of the great Country and River of the
Amazons in America, etc. Land. 1661. published by W. H.

Wars with Foreign Princes dangerous to our Commonwealth. Or Reasons for
Foreign Wars answered. -- When printed I know not.

Various Letters. -- See in the Cabala, or Screnia Sacra. Land. 1663. fol.

Diverse Speeches and Arguments in several Parliaments toward the latter end of
Q. Elizab. -- See in H. Townsend's Historical Collections. Land. 1680. fol.

The Sons advice to his Father.

The great Cordial. -- Upon which N. le Febure has written an English
discourse. Land. 1664. oct. I have seen a book in MS. containing Sir Walt.
Raleigh's Speech at the time of his death; and His Ghost, or a conference
between Sur Gundamoure his Maj. Ambassador of Spain, the Friar Confessor, and
Father Baldwyn the Jesuit, at Ely House in Holbourne, in 1622. but whether ever
printed I know not. However the Reader is to understand that Sir Walter's Ghost
beforementioned is not the same with his Ghost or Apparition to his intimate
Friend, willing him to translate into English the learned book of Leonard
Lessius, intit. De providentia numinis and animi immortalitate. Land. 1651. in
tw. translated in compliance with Sir Walter's late request, because he had
been often soully aspersed for an Atheist. There is also a MS. going about from
hand to hand, said to have been written by our author Sir Walter, which is
concerning,

The present state of Spain, with a most accurate account of his Cath.
Majesty's power and riches, etc. -- Whether this, or his

Discourse touching a consultation about Peace with Spain. -- MS. (sometimes in
the Libr. of Arthur Earl of Anglesey,) were ever printed, I know not. He has
also written,

The life and death of Will. the Conqueror. -- MS. sometimes in the Library of
Sir Ken. Digby, afterward in that of George Earl of Bristow.

Of Mines and trials of Minerals. -- MS. etc. with other things which I have
not yet seen. But I say it again, that I verily think that several of those
things beforementioned, which go under his name, were never written by him. At
length he was beheaded in the old Pallaceyard in Westminster, (...) in sixteen
hundred and eighteen, aged 66. Whereupon his body, (which he sometimes designed
to be buried in the Cath. Church at Exeter,) was conveyed to St. Margarets
Church in the said City of Westminster, and buried in the Chancel there, at the
upper end almost, near to the Altar. Over whose grave, tho there was never any
Epitaph put, yet this following, among others, was made for him: Here lies
hidden in this pit,
The wonder of the World for wit.
It to small purpose did him serve,
His wit could not his life preserve.
He living, was beloved of none,
Yet at his death all did him moan.
Heaven has his Soul, the World his fame,
The Grave his Corpse, Steukley his shame.


Some writers in the long Rebellion under K. Chapter 1. especially such who were
not well-wishers to Monarchy, have reported that his death was no less than a
downright Murder, having had his blood spilt upon a Scaffold merely to satisfy
some unworthy ends, and the revenge of the Spaniard. Nay, and farther, they
have not stuck to say that the Conspiracy of Gowry, seemed rather a Conspiracy
of the K. of Scots against Gowry, as many of that Nation have declared. The
said Sir Walt, Raleigh left behind him a Son named Carew Raleigh, born in
Middlesex, (in the Tower of London, as it seems, while his Father was Prisoner
there,) became a Gent. Com. of Wadham coll. in 1620. aged 16. but proved quite
different in Spirit from his Father. Afterward he was Gent. of the Privy
Chamber to K. Chapter 1. who honored him with a kind token at his leaving Hampton
Court, when he was jugled into the Isle of Wight, cringed afterward to the Men
in Power, was made Governor of Jersey, by the favor of General George Monk,
in the latter end of January 1659. and wrote a book (as 'twas generally
reported) intit. Observations upon some particular persons and passages in a
book lately made public, intit. A complete History of the Lives and Reigns of
Mary Q. of Scotland, and of James K. of England, written by Will. Sanderson Esquire
Land. 1656. in 3 sh. in qu. I have seen also some Sonnets of his composition,
and certain ingenious discourses, but whether ever printed I know not. I have
seen also a Poem of his, which had a Musical composition of two parts set to
it, by the incomparable Hen. Laws Servant to K. Chapter 1. in his public and
private Music. Sir Hen. Wotton gives In his Letters printed 1672. p. 481.
him the Character of a Gentleman of dextrous abilities, as it appeared in the
management of a public concern in Sir Henry's time; and so by others he is
with honor mentioned; but far, god wot, was he from his Fathers parts, either
as to the Sword or Pen. He was buried in his Fathers grave in the month of
December. (or thereabouts,) an. 1666. leaving Issue behind him a Daughter.

RICHARD MARTIN, (...)
Son of Will. Martin, (by Anne his Wife, Daughter of Rich. Parker of Sussex,)
fourth Son of Rich. Martin of the City of Exeter, second Son of Will. Martin of
Athelhampton in the Parish of Puddletowne in Dorsetshire, Knight, was born at
Ottert^n in Devonshire, became a Commoner of Broadgates hall (now Pembroke
coll.) in Michaelmas Term 1585. aged 15. and not in Trinity coll. as I have
formerly by a mistake told In Hist. (...) Univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 296. a.
you,) where by natural parts, and some industry, he proved in short time a
noted disputant. But he leaving the said honse before he was honored with a
degree, went to the Middle Temple, where, after he had continued in the state
of Inner Barrester for some years, was elected a Burgess to serve in Parliament
1601. was constituted Lent-Reader of the said Temple, 13. Jac. 1. and upon the
death of Sir Anth. Benn was made Recorder of the City of London, in Sept. 1618.
Which place he enjoying but little more than a month, was succeeded therein by
Sir Rob. Heath. There was no person in his time more celebrated for ingenuity
than R. Martin, none more admired by Seldom, Sergeant Hoskins, Ben. Johnson,
etc. than he; the last of which dedicated his Comedy to him called The
Poetaster. K. James was much delighted with his facetiousness, and had so great
respect for him, that he commended him to the Citizens of London to be their
Recorder. He was worthily characterized; by the virtuous and learned Men of his
time, to be, Princeps By which he is to be understood, that he had been Prince
D'amour of the Middl^ ^emple in the time of Christmas.
amorum, Principum amor, legum lingua, lexque dicendi, Anglorum alumnus, Praeco
Virginiae ac Parens, etc. Magnae orbis os, orbis minoris corculum, Bono suorum
natus, extinctus suo, etc. He was a plausible Linguist, and eminent for several
Speeches spoken in Parliaments, for his Poems also and witty discourses. All
that I have seen of his are,

Speech and Discourses in one or more Parliaments in the latter end of Q.
Elizab.

Speeches delivered to the King, in the name of the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex. Land. 1603. 1643. qu.

Various Poems. -- He died to the great grief of all learned and good men, on
the last day of October. in sixteen hundred and eighteen, Temples. Over his
grave, was soon after a neat Alabaster Monument erected, with the Effigies of
the Defunct kneeling in his Gown, with 4 verses engraven thereon, under him,
made by his dear Friend Sergeant Hoskins beforementioned; a copy of which you
may see See Orig. Jurid. by Sir W. Dugdale, in his discourse of the Temples.
elsewhere. This Monument was repaired in 1683. when the Choire and Isles
adjoining, belonging to the Temple Church, were new-wainscoted and furnished
with seats. He gave by Will to the Church of Otterton, where he received his
first breath, 5 l. and to the Church of Culliton-Raleigh in Devon, where his
House and Seat was 5 l.

ROBERT MANDEVILL, 460.
a Cumberland Man born, was entered either a Batler or Servitour of Queens coll.
in the beginning of the year 1595. aged 17. where remaining a severe Student
till he was Bach. of Arts, he retired to St. Edmunds hall, and as a Member of
it, proceeded in that Faculty. In July 1607. he was elected Vicar of
Abby-Holme, commonly called Holm-Cultram in his own County, by the Chancellor
and Scholars of this University. Where being settled, he exercised with great
zeal his parts in propagating the Gospel against its Oppugners, not only by
Communication and Preaching, but by his exemplary course of Life, and great
Piety. He showed himself also a zealous Enemy against Popery, and the breaking
of the Lords day by profaning it with merchandising and sports, and
endeavored as much as in him lay, (for he was a zealous Puritan,) to persuade
his Parishioners and Neighbors to do those things on Saturday, which they used
to do on the Lords day. The truth is, he was, in the opinion of those of his
Persuasion, a great Man in his profession, for he solely bent himself to his
studies, and discourses for the promotion of Religion and the word of God. He
has written,

Timothy's Task; two Sermons Preached in two Synodal Assemblies at Carlisle, on
1 Timothy 4. 16. and on Acts 20. 28. Oxon. 1619. qu. published by Tho. Vicars
Fellow of Qu. coll.

Theological Discourses. -- He died in sixteen hundred and eighteen,
Holm-Cultram beforementioned. Here you see I have given you a character of a
zealous and religious Puritan. The next in order who is to follow, is one who
was a most zealous R. Catholic, but far more learned than the former, and not
to be named or compared with him.

RICHARD STANYHURST, 461.
Son of James Stanyhurst Esquire was born within the City of Dublin in Ireland, (of
which City his Father was then Recorder,) educated in Grammar learning under
Peter White, mentioned under the year 1590. became a Commoner of University
coll. in 1563. where improving those rare natural parts that he was endowed
with, wrote Comment arises on Porphyry at two years standing, being then 18
years of age, to the great admiration of learned men and others. After he had
taken one degree in Arts, he left the College, retired to London, became first
a Student in Furnivals Inn, and afterward in that of Lincoln, where spending
some time in the study of the Common Law, he afterward went into the Country
of his Nativity for a time. But his mind there changing, as to his Religion, he
went beyond the Seas, (being then a Married Man,) and in the Low Countries,
France, and other Nations, he became famous for his learning, noted to Princes,
and more especially to the Archduke of Austria, who made him his Chaplain, (his
Wife being then dead,) and allowed him a plentiful Salary. He was accounted by
many (especially by those of his Persuasion) an excellent Theologist, Grecian,
Philosopher, Historian, and Orator. Camden styles In Hibernia, in corn.
West-Meath.
him, Eruditissimus ille Nobilis Rich. Stanihurstus; and others of his time
say, that he was so rare a Poet, that he, and Gabr. Harvey, were the best for
Iambicks in their age. He has written and transmitted to Posterity,

Harmonia, sive catena Dialectica in Porphyrianas constitutiones. Land. 1570.
fol. Which book being communicated to Eam. Campian of St. John's coll. before it
went to the Press, he gave this character In Epist. sais, edit. Ingoldst. 1602.
p. 50.
of the author, Mirifice laetatus sum, esse adolescentem in Acad. nostra, tali
familia, eruditione, probitate; cujus extrema pueritia cum multis laudabili
maturitate viris certare possit.

De rebus in Hibernia gestis. lib. 4. Antw. 1584. qu. Dedicated to his Brother
P. Plunket Baron of Dunsany.

Rerum Hibernicarum appendix, ex Silvestro Giraldo Cambrensi collecta, cum
annotationibus adjectis. -- Printed with De rebus in Hib. etc.

Descriptio Hiberniae. Translated into English, and put into the first vol. of
Raphael Holinsheds books of Chronicles. Land. 1586. fol.

De vita S. Patricii Hyberniae Apostoli. lib. 2. Antw. 1587.

Hebdomada Mariana, ex Orthodoxis Catholicae Rom Ecclesiae Patribus collecta;
in memoriam 7. festorum Beatiss. Virginis Mariae, etc. Antw. 1609. oct. In the
front of which book our author writes himself, Serenissimorum Principum
Sacellanus, meaning Duke Albert and Isabell his Princess.

Hebdomada Eucharistica. Duac. 1614. oct.

Brevis praemunitio pro futura concertatione cum Jacobo Vsserio Hiberno
Dubliensi. Duac. 1615. in about 3 sheets in oct. You must note that Dr. James
Usher's Mother, Margaret Stanyhurst, was Sister to our author Ric. Stanyhurst;
who being a zealous Romanist, and Usher (afterward Primate of Ireland) a
zealous Protestant, passed several learned Letters between them concerning
Religion, Stanyhurst endeavoring to his utmost to gain him to his Opinion; but
it is thought, and verily believed by some that Usher was too hard for his Uncle
in controversial points relating to Divinity.

The Principles of Cath. Religion. -- This I have not yet seen and therefore I
cannot tell you when, or where, it was printed. He also translated into English
heroical verse, The first four books of Virgils Aeneis. Land. 1583. oct.
Dedicated to Plunket beforementioned, the learned Baron of Dunsany, at which
time the translator was then living at Leyden in Holland. This translation
being accounted well performed for that age, yet because the verses do not
rhyme, does cause a noted Tho. Na^^e in The Arclogy of Pierce Penniless. Or
strange News, etc. Land. 1593. qu. not paged.
writer, and a professed Buffoon of his time, to say, that Mr. Stanyhurst (tho
otherwise learned) trod a foul lumbring boistercus wallowing measures in his
translation of Virgil. -- He had never been praised by Gabriel Harvey for his
labor, if therein he had not been so famously absurd. Our author Stanyhurst
also translated into English, Certain Psalms of David (the four first)
according to the observation of the Latin verses; that is without rhyme;
printed at the end of the translation of Virgils Aeneis beforementioned. And
at the end of the aforesaid Psalms are of his composition.

Poetical Conceits. Land. 1583. in Latin and English, as also

Certain Epitaphs, framed as well in Lat. as English. -- The first of which (in
Latin) is on James Earl of Ormond and Ossory, who did at Ely house in Holbourn
18. Oct. about 1546. and was buried in the Church of St. Thomas Acres. Another
on the authors Father James Stanyhurst Esquire who died at Dublin 27. Dec. 1573.
aged 51. etc. But as for the Epitaph of our author (which he should have made
while living) none does appear there, neither at Bruxells, (as I can yet
learn,) Will. Stanyhurst, who was born in the said City of Bruxells, an. 1601.
and entered into the Society of Jesus, in 1617. whom I suppose to be Son to our
author R. Stanyhurst. He was a comely person, endowed with rare parts, and a
writer and publisher of several things, as Not. Southwell tells you in his
Edit. Romans 1675. fol.
supplement to Bib. Soc. Jesu, who adds that the said Stanyhurst died in
January 1665.

EDWARD GEE, 462.
was a Lancashire man born, entered a Servitor of Metron coll. in Lent-Term
1582. aged 17, elected fellow of Brasnose coll. when he was about two years
standing in the degree of Bach of Arts, and after some standing in that of
Master, was unanimously elected Proctor of the University 1598. Two years after
he was admitted Bach. of Divinity, and in 1603. he resigned his fellowship,
being about that time Rector of Tedbourne S. Mariae in Devonshire. In 1616. he
proceeded in Divinity, having been before that time made one of the Society of
Chelsey coll. founded by Dr. Matthew. Sutcliffe, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his
Majesty. He was a person well known for his sincerity in conversation,
generality of learning, gravity of judgment and soundness of doctrine. He has
written,

Steps of ascension to God: Or a ladder to heaven, containing prayers and
meditations for every day in the week, and for all other times and occasions --
Printed at least 27 times, mostly in a manual, or in a vol. called Twenty
fours: The 27th edit. came out in 1677.

The curse and crime of Meroz, Sermon. at an Assise holden in Exeter. on Judge. 5.
23. Land. 1620. qu.

Sermon of patience; preached at S. Mary's in Oxon. on James 5. 7. Land. 1620.
qu. Both which Sermons were published by his brethren John and George Gee
Ministers, who had his notes after his death; which happening in winter time,
Tedbourne before mentioned. He left behind him a widow named Marie, and a son,
I think, of both his names. See more in Joh. Gee under the year 1625.

JOHN DAVIES, 463.
who writes himself of Hereford because he was born in that City, was, from the
Grammar School there, sent to this University, but to what house of learning
therein, I know not. After he had remained with us for some years, without the
taking of a degree, he retired for a time to his native Country, having then,
among Scholars, the character of a good Poet, as by those P^ems, which he then
made, and were shortly after published, was manifested. Sir Joh. Davies, whom I
shall mention under the year 1626. was more a Scholar, than a Lawyer; but this
Joh. Davies was more a Poet than a Scholar, and somewhat inclined toward the
Law; which has made some unwary readers take the writings of one for the
other. But our author, finding not a subsistence by Poetry, he set up for a
writing-master, first in his own Country, and afterward in London, where at
length he was esteemed the greatest Master of his Pen that England in his age
T^^. Fuller in his Worthies, in He^^^
beheld, first for fast-writing, (2) fair writing, which looked as if it had
been printed, (3) close writing, (4) various writing, as Secretary, Roman,
Court and Text hand. In all which he was exceeded after his death, by one
Gething his Countryman and Scholar. Sometimes he made pretty excursions into
Poety and could flourish matter with his fancy, as well as letters with his
pen, the titles of which do follow.

Mirum in modum. A glimpse of God's glory and the Souls shape. Lo^i. 16^2. and
1616. oct. a Poem.

Microcosmus. The discovery of the little world, with the government thereof.
Oxon 1603. qu. a Poem. Ushered into the world by the verses of Jo. Sanford of
Madg. coll. (...) Fitz-G^ffry of Broadgates and Rob. Burhill of C. C. c^ll.
Which last wonders why Davies our author, who was la^e^y (as he says) Oxoniae
vates, should write himself of Hereford, as if Oxon was a disgrace to him.

The holy roode of Christ's Cross, containing Christ crucified, described in
speaking picture. Land. 1609. qu.

Sonnets -- printed with the former Poem, and both contained in 10 sheets.

S. Peter's complaint, newly augmented with other Poems. Land. in qu. But when
printed it appears not. With this is commonly bound up S. Mary Madg. Blush, and
therefore I sup^ose 'twas written by the same hand.

Humors heaven on earth, with the civil Wars of death and fortune, etc. London
1609. A Poem in (oct.)

The triumph of death, or the picture of the plague according to the life, as
it was in an. 1603. -- Printed with Humors heaven and earth, etc.

Wits pilgrimage (by poetical essays) through a world of amorous Sonnets,
soul-passions and other passages, divine, philosophical, and poetical. Land. in
a pretty thick qu. but not expressed when printed. It Is dedicated to Philp Earl
of Mountgomery.

Muses sacrifice, or divine meditations. Land. 1612. in tw.

The muses tears for the loss of their hope; heroic and never too much praised
Henry Prince of Wales. Land. 1613. qu.

Times sobs for his ( Pr. Hen.) untimely loss, with Epitaphs -- Printed with
The Muses tears.

Consolatory strains to wrest nature from her vent in immoderate weeping --
Printed with that also.

Ecclogues. Land. 1614. oct. They are at the end of The Sheapards Pipe, written
by Will. Brown of the Inner Temple.

A select second husband for Sir Tho. Overburies wise, now a matchless widow.
Land. 1616. oct. Dedic. to Will. E. of Pembroke.

Elegies on the death of Sir Tho. Overbury.

Speculum Proditori.

Printed with the former book 1616. oct.

Several copies of verses of his, are also published in other books, as a large
copy before Ph. Hollands translation of Camdens Britannia, another in the
Odcombian banquet, etc. He dyed about the year sixteen hundred and eighteen and
was buried, Ibid. in Th. Fuller.
tells us, within the precincts of S. Giles chapter in the Feilds, near Land. I
find one Joh. Davies Gent. to have lived in the parish of S. Martin in the
Feilds, who dying in the beginning of July (or thereabouts) in 1618. was buried
near to the body of Mary, his sometimes wife, in the church of St. Dunstan in
the West. Whether the same with the Poet I cannot justly tell, because may
author here quoted ( Tho. Fuller) says, but upon what authority I know not,
that he was buried at S. Giles in the Feilds. One John Dunbar a Latin Poet of
Scotland, has an In Epigrammat ib. edit. Land. 1616. in oct. cent. 3. nu. 20.
Epigram on J. Davies the Poet, which may serve for an Epitaph, wherein he
tells us that he was another Martial, and that he out-stript in Poetry Sam.
Daniel, Josh. Silvester the Merchant adventurer etc.

THOMAS THOMPSON, 464.
a very noted preacher in the time he lived, was born in the County of
Cumberland, wedded to the Muses in Queens coll. in Mich. Term 1589. aged 15,
made a poor serving child of that house in the year following, afterward
Tabarder, and in 99. Fellow, being then Master of Arts. About that time
addicting his mind severely to the studies of the superior faculty, became a
noted Disputant, Schoolman and very familiar with the Fathers. At length
leaving the coll. about the time he was adwitted Bach. of Div. (which was
1609.) he became one of the public preachers in the City of Bristow, and
Minister of S. Thomas Church there, where he was much followed and admired for
his edifying and orthodox doctrine. Afterward leaving that City, in 1612.
(upon what account I know not) he became Minister in the town and liberties of
Montgomery in Wales; where, if I mistake not, he continued till the time of his
death. He has written and published,

Concio ad clerum de clavibus regni coelorum, habita pro forma Oxon. intemplo
B. Mariae 16. Feb. an. 1609. in Matthew. 16. ver. 19. Land. 1612. oct.

De votis monasticis. Theses disputatae sub pr^sidio Tho. Holland Reg. prof.
Printed with the former (...) Sermon.

Besides these two things, he has.

Several Sermons in English, as (1) A diet for a Drunkard, in two Sermons in
the Church of S. Nich. in Bristow, on Ester 1. 8. Land. 1612. qu. (2) Friendly
farewell to a faithful ^lock taken in a Sermon preached in S. Thomas Church in
Bristow, on Easter Tuseday, 6. Apr. 1612. on 2 Cor. 13. ver. 14. Land. 1616.
Clar. 1618.
qu. (3) Antichrist arraigned, Sermon at Paul's Cross, on 1 John 2. 18, 19, 20.
Land. 1618. qu. (4) The trial of Guides by the touchstone of Teachers, etc.
Sermon. on Luke 6. 39, 40. Land. 1618. qu. dedicated to Richard Bishop of St.
Asaph, his Patron. These are all that I have seen going under his name, and all
that I yet know of the author.

SAMUEL DANIEL, 465.
the most noted Poet and Historian of his time, was born of a wealthy Family in
Somersetshire, and at 17 years of age, in 1579. became a Commoner of Magd.
hall, where he continued about three years, and improved himself much in
Academical learning by the benefit of an excellent Tutor. But his Genie being
more prone to easier and smoother studies, than in pecking and hewing at
Logic, he left the University without the honor of a degree, and exercised it
much in English History and Poetry, of which he then gave several ingenious
Specimens. After his departure, I find nothing memorable of him for several
years, only that at about 23 years of age he translated into English the worthy
tract of Paulus Jovius, containing a Discourse of rare inventions both military
and amorous called Imprese. Land. 1585. oct. To which he has put an ingenious
Preface of his own writing. He was afterward, for his merits, made Gentleman
Extraordinary, and afterward one of the Grooms, of the Privy Chamber to Anne
the Queen Consort of King James 1. who being for the most part a favourer and
encourager of his Muse, (as she was of Jo. Florio, who married Sam. Daniel's
Sister,) and many times delighted with his conversation, not only in private,
but in public, was, partly for those reasons, held in esteem, by the men of
that age, for his excellencies in Poetry and History, and partly in this
respect, that in Fuller in his Worthies in Somersetsh.
writing the History of English affairs, whether in Prose or Poetry, he had the
happiness to reconcile brevity with clearness, qualities of great distance in
other authors. This is the opinion of a late author; but one The nameless
author of Hypereritica: or a rule of judgment for writing or reading our
Histories, MS. in my Library. Address. 4. Sect. 3.
who lived in Samuel Daniel's time tells us, that his works contain somewhat a
flat, but yet withal a very pure and copious English, and words as warrantable
as any man's, and fitter perhaps for Prose than Measure. Our author Daniel had
also a good faculty in setting out a Mask or a Play, and was wanting in nothing
that might render him acceptable to the great and ingenious men of his time, as
to Sir Joh. Harrington the Poet, Camden the learned, Sir Rob. Cotton, Sir H.
Spelman, Edm. Spencer, Ben. Johnson, John Stradling, little Owen the
Epigrammatist, etc. He has written,

The complaint of Rosamond. Land. 1594. 98. 1611. and 23. qu.

Various Sonnets to Delia. -- Wherein, as Parthenius Nicaeus did excellently
sing the praises of Arete, so our author in this piece, has divinely sonneted
the matchless beauty of his Delia.

Tragedy of Cleopatra. Land. 1594. 98. qu.

Of the Civil Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York. Land. 1604. 09.
oct. and 1623. qu. Written in eight books in verse, with his picture before
them.

The Vision of the twelve Goddesses, presented in a Mask, etc. Land. 1604. oct.
and 1623. qu. Some copies have it, The wisdom of the 12 Goddesses in a Mask at
Hampton Court 8. Jan.

Panegyric congratulatory delivered to K. James at Burleigh-Harrington in
Rutlandshire. Land. 1604. and 23. qu.

Epistles to various great Personages in verse. Land. 1601. and 23. qu.

Musophilus, containing a general defense of learning. -- Printed with the
former.

Tragedy of Philotas. Land. 1611. etc. oct.

Hymen's Triumph. A pastoral Trag. Com. presented at the Queens Court in the
Strand, at her Maj. magnificent entertainment of the Kings Maj. being at the
Nuptials of the Lord Roxborough. Land. 1623. qu. second edit.

Muso, or a defense of Ryme. Land. 1611. oct.

The Epistle of Octavia to M. Antonius. Land. 1611. oct.

The first part of the History of England, in 3 books. Land. 1613. qu. reaching
to the end of King Stephen, in Prose. To which afterward he added a second
part, reaching to the end of K. Ed. 3. -- Land. 1618. 21. 23. and 1634. fol.
continued to the end of K. Rich. 3. by Joh. Trussel, sometimes a Winchester
Scholar, afterward a Trader and Alderman of that City. -- Land. 1638. fol.
etc. Which Trussel did continue in writing a certain old MS. belonging to the
Bishops of Winton, containing, as it were, an History of the Bishops and
Bishopric, which continuation was made by him to Bishop Curles time. He also
wrote, A description of the City of Winchester, with an historical relation of
diverse memorable occurrences touching the same. fol. Also a Preamble to the
same Of the Origin of Cities in general. MS. Sam. Daniel also wrote,

The Queens Arcadia. A pastoral Trag-Com. presented to her Majesty and her
Ladies, by the University of Oxon, in Christ Church, in Aug. an. 1605. Land.
1623. qu.

Funeral Poem on the death of the Earl of Devon. Land. 1623. qu. Toward the
end of our authors life, he retired to a Country-Farm which he had at
Beckington near to Philips-Norton in Sommersetshire, (at, or near to, which
place he was born,) where, after he had enjoyed the Muses and religious
Contemplation for some time with very great delight, Beckington
beforementioned. On the wall over his grave was this inscription afterward
put. Here lies expecting the second coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, the dead body of Samuel Daniel Esquire that excellent Poet and Historian,
who was Tutor to the Lady Anne Clifford in her youth, she that was Daughter and
Heir to George Clifford Earl of Cumberland, who in gratitude to him, erected
this monument in his memory, a long time after, when she was Countess Dowager
of Pembroke, Dorset, and Montgomery. He died in October. an. 1619. By the way it
must be noted that this Anne Countess of Pembroke was the same person who lived
like a Princess, for many years after, in Westmorland, was a great lover and
encourager of learning and learned men, hospitable, charitable to the poor, and
of a most generous and public temper. She died 22. Mar. 1675. aged 86. or
thereabouts, and was buried under a splendid monument, which she in her
lifetime had erected, in the Church of Appleby in Westmorland. It must be also
farther noted that there was one Sam. Daniel Master of Arts, who published a
book intit. Archiepiscopal Priority instituted by Christ. Printed an. 1642. and
another, if I am not mistaken, called, The Birth, Life, and Death of the Jewish
Unction. But whether he was of the University of Oxon, I cannot yet find.

JOHN PANKE was a very frequent and noted Preacher of his time, 466.
and well read in Theological authors, but withal a very zealous Enemy in his
Writings and Preachments against the Papists, but in what College or Hall
educated, I cannot as yet find. After he had left the University he became
Minister of Broadhinton, afterward of Tidworth, in Wilts, and at length, had
some Cure in the Church of Salisbury. His works are,

Short Admonition, by way of Dialogue, to all those, who hitherto, upon
pretense of their unworthiness, have dangerously, in respect of their
Salvation, withdrawn themselves from coming to the Lords Table, etc. Oxon.
1604. oct.

The fall of Babell, by the confusion of tongues, directly proving against the
Papists of this, and former ages, that a view of their writings and books being
taken, it cannot be discerned by any Man living, what they would say, or how be
understood, in the question of the Sacrifice of the M^ss, the Real Pressence,
or Tr^^substantiation, etc. Oxon. 16^8. qu. Dedicated to the Heads of Colleges
and Scholars of the University of Oxou.

Collectancae, out of S. Gregory the Great, (...)
and S. Bernard the Devout, against the Papists, (...) the Doctrine of the
present (...) most fundamental points between them and us. Oxon. 1618. oct.
With other things, as it is probable, but such I have not yet seen, not do I
know any thing else of the author.

de Meara, who was born at Ormond in Ireland, whence being sent to this
University, continued there in Philosophical studies several years, but whether
in Vniv. coll. Glouc. or Heart. hall, (^eceptacles for Irish-men in his time,) I
know not. For tho he writes himself in the first of his books which I shall
anon mention, lately a Student in the University of Oxon. yet in all my
searches I cannot find him matriculated, or that he took a degree. Some years
after his retirement to his native Country, he wrote in Latin verse, having
been esteemed a good Poet during his conversation among the Oxonians, these
things following,

Ormonius sive illustriss. herois ac domini, D. Thomae Butler Ormoniae and
Osoriae Comitis, Vicecom. de Thurles, Baronis de Arcklo, etc. Prosapia
laborumque praecipuorum ab eodem pro Patria and Principe susceptorum
commemoratio heroico carmine conscripta. Land. 1615. oct.

Epicedion in obitum Tho. Butler Ormoniae and Osoriae Comitis, etc.

Anagramaticon, Acrosticon and Chronologica in eundem Tho. Butler. These two
last were printed with Ormonius, and are dedicated to Walt. Butler Earl of
Ormond and Oss^^y. Much about the time when these Poetical things were printed,
the author practiced Physic in his own Country, and gained great repute for
his happy success therein. In that faculty he wrote several books, but all that
I have seen is only this.

De morbis haereditariis tractatus Spagyrico-dogmaticus. Dubl. 1619. Clar. 1619.
oct. He was Father to Edm. de Meara an Ormonian born, sometimes a Practitioner
in Physic in the City of Bristow, being the same person who answered Dr. Tho.
Willis's book, intit. Diatribae duae Medico-Philosophicae, etc.

Leicestershire Man born, took the degrees in Arts, as a Member of Broadgates
hall, that of Master being completed 1583. at which time he had the vogue of a
good disputant. But soon after being dissatisfied in many points relating to
the Protestant Religion, he entered into the Society of Jesus at Paris; an.
1588. aged about 30. Afterward he taught Divinity in the University of Doll in
Burgundy, and at length was sent into the Mission of England, to labor in the
Harvest there. He has written,

The Garden of the Virgin Mary. St. Om. 1619. oct. Which contains certain
Prayers and Meditations. Clar. 1619.
Other matters, as it is said, he has written, but being printed beyond Sea, we
have few copies of them come into these parts.

Brasnose coll. in 1582. or thereabouts, took one degree in Arts holy Orders
soon after, and at length was beneficed in his native County of Glamorgan, and
elsewhere. His works are,

Certain Lectures upon sundry portions of Scripture, etc. Land. 1600. oct.
Dedic. to Sir Tho. Egerton, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, who was one of his
first promoters in the Church.

Seven Sermons, or the exercises of Seven Sabbaths. The first intit. The
Prophet David's Arithmetic, is on Psalm. 90. 12. The second called Peter's
Repentance, is on Matthew. 26. 75. etc. Which Seven Sermons were printed at
London several times in the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, once in the Reign of K.
James (1619.) and once in the Reign of K. Chapter 1. (1630.)

A short treatise upon the Commandments, on Rev. 22. 14. Land. 1600. etc. oct.
This is sometimes called A Comment on the Decalogue. I find another Lewis
Thomas of Jesus college, who took the degree of Bach. of Arts, Clar. 1619.
as a Member of that house 1597. and that of Master, as a Member of St. Edm.
hall, 1601. But what relation he had to the former, or whether he has
published any thing, I know not.

JOHN NORDEN, was born of a gentile Family, Wilts, I cannot tell, became a
Commoner of Heart hall in 1564. and took the degrees in Arts, that of Master
being completed 1573. This person I take to be the same John Norden who was
author of these books following, some of which I have perused, but therein I
cannot find that he entitles himself a Minister of Gods word, or Master of Arts.

Sinful Man's Solace, most sweet and comfortable for the sick and sorrowful
Soul, etc. Land. 1585. in oct.

Mirror for the Multitude, or a Glass, wherein may be seen the violence, the
error, the weakness, and rash consent of the multitude, etc. Land. 1586. in
oct.

Antithesis, or contrariety between the Wicked and Godly, set forth in form of
a pair of Gloves, fit for every man to wear, etc. Land. 1587.

Pensive Man's Practice, wherein are contained very devout and necessary Prayers
for sundry godly purposes, etc. Land. 1591. in tw. -- Printed there again 1629.
in tw. which was the fortieth impression.

Poor Man's rest; founded upon motives, meditations, and prayers, etc. Printed
several times in oct. and tw. The eighth edit. was printed at Land. 1620. in tw.

Progress of Piety, whose Jesses lead into the Harborough of heavenly
Harts-ease, to recreate the afflicted Souls of all such as, etc. Land. in tw.

Christian comfort and encouragement unto all English Subjects, not to dismay
at the Spanish threats. Land. 1596.

Mirror of Honor, wherein every Professor of Arms, from the General, to the
inferior Soldier, may see the necessity of the fear and service of God. Land.
1597. qu.

Interchangeable variety of things. Land. 1600. qu.

The Surveyors Dialogue, very profitable for all men to peruse, but especially
for Gentlemen, Farmers, and Husbandmen, etc. in 6 books. Land. 1607. 10. and
18. in qu.

Labyrinth of Man's life: Or Virtues delight, and Envies happiness. Land. 1614.
qu. It Is a Poem dedic. to Rob. Carr Earl of Somerset.

Loadstone to a Spiritual life. Land. 1614. in sixth.

Pensive Souls delight: Or, a devout Man's help, consisting of motives,
meditations, and prayers, etc. Land. 1615. in tw.

An Eye to Heaven in Earth. A necessary Watch for the time of death, consisting
in meditations and prayers fit for that purpose. With the Husband's Christian
Counsel to his Wife and Children left poor after his death. Land. 1619. in tw.
etc.

Help to true blessedness.

Pathway to patience in all manner of afflictions, etc. Land. Clar: 1619.
1626. oct. This John Norden lived at Hendon near to Acton in Middlesex in most
of the Reign of King James 1. being patronized in his studies by, or as some
say was Servant to, Will, Cecil Lord Burliegh, and Rob. Earl of Salisbury his
Son. I take him to be the same John Norden Gent. who has written Speculum
Britanniae, or, an Historical and Chorographical description of Middlesex.
Land. 1593. in about 7 sh. in qu. And of A Chorographical description of
Hertfordshire. Printed much about the same time in 4 sh. in qu.

JOHN BUDDEN, Son of Joh. Budden of Canford Dorsetshire, was born in that
County, entered into Merton coll. in Mich. Term. 1582. aged 16. admitted Scholar
of Trinity coll. 30. of May following, took the degree of Bach. of Arts, and
soon after was translated to Glouc. hall, for the sake, and at the request, of
Mr. Tho. Allen, where being mostly taken up with the study of the Civil Law,
yet he took the degree of M. of Arts, as a Member thereof. At length he was
made Philosophy Reader of Magd. coll. proceeded in the Civil Law 1602. made
Principal of New Inn 1609. the Kings Professor of the Civil Law soon after, and
Principal of Broadgates hall. He was a person of great Eloquence, an excellent
Rhetorician, Philosopher, and a most noted Civilian. He has written and
published,

Gulielmi Patteni cui Waynfleti agnomen fuit, Wintoniensis Ecclesiae Praesulis,
and coll. B. Mariae Magd. apud Oxon fundatoris, vita obitusque. Oxon. 1602. qu.
Reprinted in a Book intit. Vitae selectorum aliquot virorum, etc. Land. 1681.
in a large qu. Published by Dr. Will, Bates a Cambridge Man, a learned and
moderate Nonconformist, living then at Hackney near London, an eminent writer,
and worthy of much praise.

Reverendiss. Patris ac Domini Johannis Mortoni Cantuariensis olim Archiep.
Magni Angliae Cancellarii, trium Regum Consiliarii, vita obitusque. Land. 1607.
in 3 sh. in oct. He also translated from English into Latin, (1) Sir Tho.
Bodley's Statutes of the Public Library, which is remitted into the body of
the Statutes of the University. (2) Sir Tho. Smith's book intit. The
Commonwealth of England, and the manner and Government thereof, in 3 books.
Printed at Land. in oct. and beyond Sea in tw. Also from French into English, A
discourse for Parents Honor and Authority over their Children. Land. 1614.
oct. written by Pet. Frodiu^ a renowned French Civilian. Budden died in
Broadgates hall, on the eleventh of June in sixteen hundred and twenty. From
which place his body being carried to the Divinity School, Rich. Gardener of
Chapter Chapter the Deputy-Orator delivered an eloquent Speech in praise of him, before
the Doctors, Masters and Scholars of the University. Which being done, the body
was conveyed thence to St. Aldates Church near to the hall of Broadgates, and
there in the Chancel was interred on the 14. of the same month. In the
Professorship of the Civil Law succeeded Dr. Rich. Zouch, and in the
Principality of Broadgates Dr. Tho. Clayton.

Lincolnshire, entered a Commoner in Magd. coll. in Michaelmas Term 1604, aged
17. became Fellow of Magd. coll. 1609. Proctor of the University in 1620. being
then Bach. of Physic, and accounted the most accurate Disputant, and profound
Philosopher in the University. He wrote diverse things pertaining to Logic and
Philosophy, but none of them were printed only,

Aditus ad Logicam, in usum eorum qui primo Academiam salutant. Oxon. 1613. 21.
27. 33. 39. etc. oct. He died much lamented 17. June (according as he himself
had foretold it some weeks before he died) Magd. coll. Chapel. I find another
Sam. Smith equal in time with the former, a frequent Preacher and Writer, who
living many years after, is not to have a place among these writers, till the
year 1663.

Tho. Powell of Lansawell in Caermarthenshire Esquire was born there, entered a
Commoner of Jesus coll. 1581. aged 20. became the first Fellow of the said
coll. by election, took the degrees in Arts, and one in the Civil Law, and at
length (after some controversies had passed) was settled Principal of his
College in 1613. being then accounted by all a most noted Philosopher, or
subtle Disputant, and one that acted and drudged much as a Tutor, Moderator,
and Adviser in studies among the Juniors. He has transmitted to Posterity,

Analysis Analyticorum posteriorum seu librorum Aristotelis de Demonstratione,
cum Scholiis. Oxon. 1594. oct.

Analysis libri Aristot. de Sophisticis Elenchis. Ox. 1594. and 1664. oct.
Concerning which two books these verses were made, Griffith Powell, for the
Honor of her Nation,
Wrote a Book of Demonstration,
And having little else to do,
He wrote a Book of Elenchs too.


He also wrote several other matters of Philosophy, which would have been very
useful for Novices, but the author being taken up too much with his charge, he
could not spare time to put them in order for the Press, much less to publish
them. He paid his last debt to nature, 28. June in sixteen hundred and twenty,
Michael (in Jesus coll. Isle I think) near to the North Gate of the City of
Oxon. By his nuncupatory Will he left all his Estate to that Coll. amounting to
648 l. -- 17 s. -- 2 d. with which, and certain Moneys, were Lands purchased
for the maintenance of one Fellow of the said Coll.

RICHARD CAREW, the Son of Tho. Carew Elizab. Edgcombe his Wife, was born of an
ancient and gentile Family at East Anthony in the East parts of Cornwall, an.
1555. became a Gent. Com. of Chapter Chapter very young, but had his Chamber in
Broadgates hall, much about the time that his Kinsman George Carew (afterward
E. of Totness) and Will, Camden studied there. At 14 years of age he disputed
ex tempore with the matchless Philip Sidney, (while he was a young Man, I
suppose,) in the presence of the Earls of Leicester, Warwick, and other
Nobility, at what time they were lodged in Chapter Chapter to receive entertainment
from the Muses. After he had spent 3 years in Oxon, he retired to the Middle
Temple, where he spent 3 years more, and then was sent with his Uncle in his
Embassage unto the King of Poland; whom, when he came to Danizig, he found that
he had been newly gone from thence into Sweden, whither also he went after him.
After his return, and a short stay made in England, he was sent by his Father
into France with Sir Hen. Nevill, who was then Ambassador Leiger unto K. Hen.
4. that he might learn the French tongue, which by reading and talking he
overcame in three quarters of an year. Some time after his return he married
Juliana Arundell of Trerice, an. 1577. was made Justice of the Peace 1581.
High Sheriff of Cornwall 1586. and about that time was the Kings Deputy for the
Militia. In 1598. he was elected a Member of the Coll. of Antiquaries, and
about that time he made an historical survey of his native County, which was
afterward printed, he being then accounted a religious and ingenious Man,
learned, eloquent, liberal, stout, honest, and well skilled in several
Languages, as also among his Neighbors the greatest Husband, and most
excellent manager of Bees in Cornwall. He was intimate with the most noted
Scholars of his time, particularly with Sir Hen, Spelman, who, in an Epistle In
his Apol. of the Treatise De non temerandis Ecclesiis, etc. Land. 1646. qu.
to him concerning tithes, does not a little extol him for his ingenuity,
virtue, and learning. Palmam igitur cedo (says he) and quod Graeci olim in
Caria sua gente, admirati sunt, nos in Caria nostra gente agnoscimus, ingenium
splendidum, bellarumque intentionum faecundissimum, etc. Further also for the
book he wrote and published, intit.

The Survey of Cornwall, etc. Land. 1602. qu. the learned Camden is pleased to
honor In Britannia, in the latter end of his discourse of Cornwall.
him with this character, -- Sed haec, etc. But more plainly and fully,
instructed are we in these points, by Rich. Carew of Anthony, a Gentleman
innobled no less in regard of his parentage and descent, than for his virtue
and learning; who has published and perfected the description of this County
(Cornwall) more at large, and not in a slight and mean manner, whom I must
needs acknowledge to have given me much light herein. Our author Carew has
also written,

The true and ready way to learn the Lat. tongue; in answer to a Quere, whether
the ordinary way by teaching Latin by the rules of Grammar, be the best way for
youths to learn it? -- This is involved in a book published by a Dutchman
called Sam. Hartlib. Esquire intit. The true and ready way to learn the Lat.
tongue, etc. Land. 1654. qu. Our author Carew translated also from Italian into
the English tongue, The examination of Men's Wits. In which, by discovering the
variety of Natures, is showed for what profession each one is apt, and how far
he shall profit therein. Land. 1594. and 1604. qu. written by Joh. Huarte. But
this translation, as I have been informed by some persons, was mostly, if not
all, performed by Tho. Carew his Father; yet Richard's name is set to it. He
died on the sixth day of Nov. in sixteen hundred and twenty, East-Anthony among
his Ancestors. Shortly after he had a splendid Monument set over his grave,
with an inscription thereon, written in the Latin tongue; which being too large
for this place, I shall now omit, as also the Epigram made on him by his Carol.
Fitzgeffry Cornub. in Affaniis, lib. 3.
Countryman, and another by a Joh. Dunbar Megolo-Britannus in Epigrammatib.
suis, edit. in oct. apud L^nd. 1616. cent. 6. number. 51.
Scot. Which last styles our author Carew another Livie, another Maro, another
Papinian, and highly extolls him for his great skill in History, and knowledge
in the Laws. Besides the Rich, Carew, was another, but later in time, author of
Excellent helps by a warming-stone. Printed 1652. qu.

Radcliff on the River Wreake in Leicestershire, elected Fellow of Lincoln
coll. 18. Jan. 1577. being then about three years standing in the University.
Afterward he took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and became a noted
Preacher in the University. In 1590. he was elected Rector of his College, took
the degrees in Divinity, was made Prebendary of the Cath. Chapter at Lincoln, and
at length Hebrew Professor of this University. He has written,

Commentarii in Librum Exodi. Part. 2. MS. in the hands sometimes of Will.
Gilbert Fellow of Linc. coll. The chief part of which is excerpted from the
Monuments of the Rabbis and Hebrew Interpreters. He also continued Jo. Mercers
notes on Genesis, and would have printed them, but was denied; had a hand also
in the translation of the Bible, appointed by K. Jam. 1. an. 1604. and did
other very laudable matters relating to learning.

Sermon. in S. Mary's Church Oxon, 26. Mar. 1612. at the Funeral of Tho. Holland
the King's Professor of Divinity in this Univ. on 1 Cor. 5. 55, 56, 57. --
Oxon. 1613. qu. He, the said Dr. Kilbye, was buried in that Chancel in
Allsaints Church in Oxon. which is commonly called The College Chancel,
(because it belongs to Linc. coll.) on the 17. Nov. in sixteen hundred and
twenty, aged 60. or thereabouts. Whereupon Paul Hood Bac. (afterward D.) of
Divinity succeeded him in his Rectorship, and Edward a Meetkerk Bach. of Div.
of Chapter Chapter in his Professorship. Besides this Rich. Kilbye was another of both
his names, and a writer too, as I have, under the year 1617. told you.

Cornwall, was entered a Batler in Exeter coll. about 1570. where going through the
courses of Logic and Philosophy for the space of four years or more, with
unwearied industry, left the University without a degree, and at length became
Rector of an obscure Town called Northleigh near to Culleton in Devon. He has
written and published,

A sorrowful Song for sinful Souls, composed upon the strange and wonderful
shaking of the Earth, 6. Apr. 1586. Land. in oct.

Remember Lots Wise, two Sermons on Luke 17. 32. Land. 1588. oct.

Preparative for Contentation. Land. 1597. qu.

Song of the Beloved concerning his Vineyard; or, two Sermons on Isay 5. 1.
Land. 1599. oct.

Christian Contemplations, or a Catechism. Land. 1601. oct.

K. Soloman's Solace. Land. 1606. qu.

Plain Man's Spiritual Plough. Land. 1607. qu. He gave up the ghost at
Northleigh beforementioned in the latter end of the year, viz. in March, in
sixteen hundred and twenty, 1620-21.
and was buried in the Chancel of the Church there, before the 25. of the said
month, as it does partly, appear in the Register of that place; leaving then
behind him a Son named Nathaniel, whom I shall mention under the year 1628. I
find another Joh. Carpenter who wrote a book of Keeping Merchants Accounts, by
way of Debtor and Creditor. Printed 1632. fol. but him I take not to be an
Academian.

Will. Tooker, (by Honora Eresey of Cornwall his Wife,) Son and Heir of Rob.
Tooker, was born in the City of Exeter, educated in Wykehams School near to
Winchester, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1577. took the degrees in
Arts, that of Master being completed in 1583. in which year he showed himself a
ready Disputant before Albertus Alaskie Prince of Sirad, at his being
entertained by the Oxonian Muses in S. Mary's Church. In 1585. he left his
Fellowship, being about that time promoted to the Archdeanconry of Barnstaple
in his own Country. Afterward he was made Chaplain to Q. Elizabeth and
Prebendary of Salisbury, took the degrees in Divinity 1595. became Canon of
Exeter, and at length Dean of Lichfield, on the death (as it seems) of Dr.
George Boleyne, in the latter end of 1602. He was an excellent Grecian and
Latinist, an able Divine, a person of great gravity and piety, and well read in
curious and critical authors, as may partly appear by these books following,
which he wrote and published.

Charisma, sive donum Sanati^nis, seu explicatio totius quaestionis de
mirabilium Sanitatum gratia, etc. Land. 1597. qu. In this book he does
attribute to the Kings and Queens of England a power derived into them, by
Lawful Succession, of healing, etc. Which book is reflected upon by Mart.
Anton. Delrius the Jesuit, who thinks it not true that Kings can cure the Evil.
With him agrees most Fanatics.

Of the Fabric of the Church and Church men's livings Land. 1604. oct.

Singular certamen cum Martino Becano Jesuita, futiliter refutante apologiam
and monitoriam praefationem ad Imperatorem, Reges, and Principes, and quaedam
Orthodoxa dogmata Jacobi Regis Magnae Britaniae. Land. 1611. oct. This learned
author, Dr. Tooker, died at Salisbury on the 19. of March, or thereabouts, and
was buried in the Cath. Chapter there 21. of the said month, 1620-21.
in sixteen hundred and twenty, leaving behind him a Son named Robert Tooker of
East-Grinsteade in Surrey. In June following Dr. Walt. Curle of Cambridge
succeeded him in the Deanery of Lichfield, and him Dr. Augustine Lindsell another
Cantabrigian, an. 1630.

HENRY SWINBURNE, Son of Thomas of the City of York, was born there, spent some
years in the quality of a Commoner in Heart hall, whence translating himself to
that of Broadgates, took the degree of Bach. of the Civil Law, married Helena
Daughter of Barthelm, Lant of Oxon, and at length retiring to his native place,
became a Proctor in the Archbishops Court there, Commissary of the Exchecquer,
and Judge of the Prerogative Court at York. He has written,

Brief Treatise of Testaments and last Wills. In 7 parts. Land. 1590. 1611, 35.
40. 77. etc. qu.

Treatise of Spousals, or Matrimonial Contracts, etc. Land. 1686. qu. In which
two books the author sh^ws himself an able Civilian, and excellently well read
in authors of his Faculty. Clar. 1620.
He paid his last debt to ^^^ure at York, and was buried in the North Isle of
the Cathedral there. Soon after was a comely Monument fastened to the wall near
to this grave, with his Effigies in a Civilians Gown kneeling before a deske,
with a book thereon, and these verses under. Non Viduae caruere viris, non
Patre Pupillus,
Dum stetit hic Patriae virque paterque suae.
Ast quod Swinburnus viduarum scripsit in usum,
Longius aeterno marmore vivet opus.
Scribere supremas hinc discat quisque tabellas,
Et cupiat qui sic vixit, ut ille mori.


There is no day or year on the Monument to show when this H. Swinburne died,
neither any Register belonging to the Cathedral, and therefore I have put him
under the year 1620. wherein he was in great esteem for his learning.

MICHAEL WIGMORE was born Reg M^tric. ^. page 592.
of a Somersetshire, entered a Commoner in Magd. hall 1602. aged 14. elected
when Bach. of Arts (as a native of the Dioc. of Gloucester) Fellow of Oriel
coll. an. 1608. After he had proceeded in his Faculty, he took upon him the
Sacred Function, and became a painful and zealous Preacher, and a publisher of,

Several Sermons, as, (1) The holy City discovered, besieged, and delivered, on
Eccles. 9. 14, 15. Land. 1619. qu. (2) The way of all flesh, on Prove. 4. 1.
Land. 1619. qu. (3) The good adventure, Clar. 1620.
on Rev. 4. 2. 3. Land. 1620. qu. etc. one Mich. Wigmore was author of a Sermon.
intit. The diss^^tion of the brain, on Isa. 9. 15. Printed 1641. which person I
take to be the same with the former. When our author Mich. Wigmore of Oriel
died, or where he was beneficed, I cannot yet tell. Quaere.

ROBERT STAFFORD, a Knight's Son, was Dublin in Ireland, entered a Sojournour in
Exeter coll. under the tuition of Mr. Joh. Prideaux, an. 1604. aged 16. but
took no degree as I can yet find. He published,

A Geographical and Anthological description of all the Empires and Kingdoms,
both of Continent and Islands in this Terrestial Globe, Clar. 1620:
etc. Land. 1618. and 34. qu. Ushered into the World by the commendatory verses
of Tho. Rogers, Caspar Thomannus of Zuriche (sometimes an Oxf. Student) Joh.
Glanvill and Joh. Prideaux. Which last was supposed to have had a chief hand in
the campiling the said book, as the tradition goes in Exeter coll. The said
Rob. Stafford lived afterward in Devon, (at Dowlton, I think) and had a Son of
the same coll.

Gifford was a Student in Heart hall several years before 1568, (10. Elizab.) at
which time did also study there others of his Surname and allies, as Humphrey,
Walter, and Rob. Gifford, but whether our author George was originally of this
University, or that he took a degree in Arts, Law, Physic, or Divinity
therein, it does not at all (perhaps by the imperfectness of the registers)
appear. Several persons in his time and before, did, tho they were beneficed,
retire to this University purposely to improve themselves in learning and by
conversation, and it is supposed that this Gifford did the like. Afterward he
became Minister of Maldon in Essex, a very noted preacher, and one most
admirably well versed in several sorts of learning, which were rare and much in
esteem in his time, but withal a great Enemy to Popery. His works are,

Country divinity, containing a discourse of certain points of Religion, which
are among the common sort of Christians, with a plain confutation thereof.
Land. 1581. 1. oct.

Dialogue between a Papist and a Protestant, applied to the capacity of the
unlearned. Land. 1583. oct.

Against the Priesthood and Sacrifice of the Church of Rome, wherein you may
perceive their impiety, in usurping that office and action, which ever
appertains to Christ only. Land. 1584. oct.

Catechism, giving a most excellent light to those that seek to enter the
pathway to salvation. Land. 1586. oct.

Discourse of the subtle practices of Devils by Witches and Sorceres, etc.
Land. 1587. qu.

Short treatise against the Donatists of England, whom we call Brownists;
wherein by answer unto their writings, their heresies are noted. Land. 1590. qu.

Plain declaration that our Brownists be full Donatists, by comparing them
together from point to point out of the writing of Augustine. Land. 1591. qu.
Reply to Mr. Joh. Greenwood and Hen. Barrow touching read Prayer, wherein their
gross ignorance is detected -- These two last are dedicated to Sir Will. Cecill
Lord Burleigh Chanc. of Cambridge.

Dialogue concerning Witches and Witchcrafts. In which is laid open how
craftily the Devil deceives, not only the Witches, but many other, etc. Land.
1593. and 1603. qu.

Treatise of true fortitude. Ibid. 94. oct.

Comment. or Sermons on the whole book of the Revelations Ibid. 96. qu.

Exposition on the Canticles. Land. 1612. oct. Besides all these books he has,

Several Sermons extant, as (1) Sermon on the parable of the Sower on Math. 13.
ver. 1. to 9. Land. 1581. oct. (2) Sermon on 2 Pet. ver. 1. to 11. Land. 1584.
oct. (3) Sermon. on Jam. 2. ver. 14. to 26. Ibid. 86. oct. (4) Sermon on the
first four chapt. and part of the 5. of Ecclesiastes, etc. Pr. at the same
place 1589. oct. (5) Sermon. at Paul's cross, on Psalm. 133. Land. 1591. oct. (6)
Two Sermons on 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. wherein is showed that the Devil is to be
resisted only by a steadfast faith, etc. Land. 1598. oct. (7) Four Sermons upon
several parts of Scripture. Land. 1598. oct. The first Sermon is on 1 Timothy 6,
17, 18, 19. etc. (8) Fiveteen Sermons on the Song of Solomon. Clar. 1620.
Land. 1620. oct. He also translated into English Prelections upon the sacred
and holy Revolations. Land. 1573. qu. Written in latin by Dr. Will. Fulke of
Cambridge. This George Gifford has written, and translated other things, which
I have not yet seen, and lived to a good old age, but when he died it appears
not.

a Petruccioli, or, as he writes himself, Ludovicus Petruccius infelix Eques,
Son of Ariodant or Aridante ^etrucci, was born at Sienna a Petigliano in
Tuscany, educated partly in juvenile learning in his own country, but before he
had made proficiency in Academicals, he became a Soldier of fortune, first in
Creet for the Venetians where he was Sarjeant-major, in 1602. secondly in the
Hungarian wars, where he was Captain of a Foot-company in the regiment first of
Count Salma and afterward in that of Colonel Ferdinand de Colonitsch, serving
for the Emperor, and at length in the services of the Prince of Brandiburg and
Nuburgh. But being unfortunate in all his undertakings, he left the trade of
war, and retiring into England, took a journey to Ox^^. in 1610. and was entered
into the public Library in the beginning of the year following. About that
time he was a Commoner of S. Edmunds hall, as he was afterward of Ball. coll.
wore a gown, spent four years or more in Academical learning, and frequented
the Prayers and Sacraments according to the Church of England. But being
notwithstanding suspected for a Papist, or at least popishly affected, and to
keep intelligence with that party, were several objections made against him for
the inconveniency and evil consequence that might happen for his long
continuance in the University. Whereupon he was forced, or at least desired, to
depart, such were the jealousies of the puritanical party in the University. He
has written,

Farrago Poematum, diversis locis and temporibus conscriptorum, etc. Oxon.
1613. in Ital. and Lat. in qu.

Oration ad D. Joh. Bapt. Bernardum Praetorem Patavinum and universam curiam, in
Vigiliis Paschatis. Printed with the former book.

Apologia contra calumniatores suos. Land. 1619. qu.

Emblemata varia, dedicata Regibus, Principibus and Magnatibus.

Epistola ad D. Georg. Abbot Archiep. Cantuar. Domino Franc. Bacon supremo
Angl. Canc. and Gulielmo comiti Pembrochiae.

Poemata varia.

Oration composita quando statuit relinquere Academiam Oxon. 18. Aug. 1614.
Clar. 1620.
Which four last things were printed with his Apologia, etc. 1619. what other
books he has published, I cannot justly tell. However, from those before
mentioned, it appears that the author was a fantastical and unsettled man, and
delighted, as it seems, in rambling.

CHRISTOPHER NEWSTEAD, third son Tho. Newstead of Somercotes in Lincolnshire,
was born in that County, became a Commoner of S. Albans hall in 1615. aged 18
years or thereabouts, continued there till after he was Bachelaurs standing and
wrote,

An Apology for women: or the woman's defense. Land. 1620. oct. Dedicated to the
Countess of Bucks. Clar. 1620:
Afterward he retired into the Country, studied Divinity, had a benefice
conferred upon, and tho he never took any degree in Arts in this University,
yet he took that of Bach. of Div. 1631, which is all I know of him.

JOHN KING, Son of Philip King of Wormenhale, Wornal, near to Brill in Bucks.
(by Elizazabeth his wife, Daughter of Edm. Conquest of Hougton Conquest in
Bedfordshire) Son of Thom. King, brother to Rob. King the first Bishop of Oxon,
was born at Wornal before mentioned, educated in Grammar learning partly in
Westminster School, became Student of Chapter Church in 1576. took the degree in
Arts, made Chaplain to Q. Eliz. as he was afterward to K. James, installed
Archdeacon of Nottingham 12. Aug. 1590. upon the death of Joh. Lowth,
(successor to Will. Day 1565.) at which time he was a Preacher in the City of
York. Afterward he was made Chaplain to Egerton Lord Keeper, proceeded D. of
D. 1602. had the Deanary of Chapter Chapter in Oxon conferred upon him in 1605. and was
afterward several years together Vicechanc. of this University. In 1611. he
had the Bishopric of London bestowed on him by K. James 1. who commonly called
him the King of preachers, to which being consecrated 8. Sept. the same year,
had Pat. 9. Jac. 1. p. 3.
restitution of the temporalities belonging to that See, made to him 18 of the
same month, at which time he was had in great reverence by all people. He was a
solid and profound Divine, of great gravity and piety, and had so excellent a
volubility of speech, that Sir Edw. Coke the famous Lawyer would often (...) of
him that he was the best speaker in the Star Chamber in his time. When he was
advanced to the Sea of London, he endeavored to let the world Chapter Hist. by
(...) lib. ^^. an. 1621.
know that that place did not cause him to forget his Office in the Pulpit,
showing by his example that a Bishop might govern and preach too. In which
office he was so frequent, that unless hindered by want of health, he omitted no
Sunday, whereon he did not visit some Pulpit in or near London -- Deus bone,
quam canora Vox, (says Will. Hull D. D. in his Epist. dedi^. to (...) London
before his book, entit. (...)
one) vultus compositus, verba selecta, grandes sententiae? Allicimur omnes
lepore verborum, suspendimur gravitate sententiarum, orationis impetu and
viribus fl^ctimur, etc. He has written.

Lectures upon Jon^s, delivered at York. Land. 1594. Ox. 99. etc. qu.

Several Sermons, viz. (1) Sermon at Hampton Court, on Cantic. 8. 11. Ox. 1606.
qu. (2) At Ox. 5. Nov. 1607. on Psalm. 46. from ver. 7. to 11. Ox. 1607. qu. (3)
At Whitehall 5. Nov. 1608. on Psalm. 11. 2, 3, 4. Ox. 1608. qu. (4) At S. Mary's
in Ox. 24. Mar. being the day of his Maj inauguration, on 1 Chronicles. ult. 26. 27,
28. Ox. 1608. qu. (5) Vitis palatina, Sermon. appointed to be preached at
White Hall upon the Tuesday after the marriage of the Lady Elizab. on Psalm. 28.
3. 3. Land. 1614. qu. (6) Sermon. at Paul's cross for the recovery of K. James
from his late sickness, preached 11. of Apr. 1619. on on Esaias 28. 17. Land.
1619. qu. (7) At Paul's cross 26. Mar. 1620. on Psalm. 102. 13, 14. Land. 1620.
qu. Besides these he published others, as one on 2 Kings 23. 25. printed 1611.
Another on Psalm. 123. 3. and a third on Psalm. 146. 3. 4. etc. printed all in
qu. but these three I have not yet seen. He paid his last debt to nature 30.
March Camden in his Annals of K. Jam. 1. MS. says he died on the 29. March.
in sixteen hundred twenty and one, Paul in London. A copy of his Epitaph you
may see in the History of that Cathedral written by Sir Will. Dugdale Knight.
Soon after Bishop Kings death, the Romans Catholics endeavored to make the
world believe that said Bishop died a member of their Church; and to that end
one of them named Gregory Fisher alis Musket did write and publish a book
intit. The Bishop of London his Legacy. Or, certain motives of Dr. King, late
B. of London, for his change of religion, and dying in the Cath. and Romans
Church, with a conclusion to his brethren the Bishops of England. Printed by
permission of the superiors, 1621. But concerning the falsity of that matter,
his son Hen. King, not only satsified the world in a Sermon by him preached at
Paul's cross soon after, but also Dr. Godwin Bishop of Hereford in his Appendix
to his Commentarius de Praesulibus Angliae, printed 1622. and Joh. Gee in his
book called The foot out of the Snare, cap. 12. The reader is to know that
there was one Joh. King contemporary with the former, who published a Sermon
entit. Abels offering, etc. on Genesis 4. ver. 4. printed at Flushing 1621. qu.
and other things. But this Joh. King was Pastor of the English Church at
Hamburgh, and whether he was of this Univ. of Oxon. I cannot yet tell.

Agilliams son of John Williams of Westbury in Glocestershire, received some
Academical education in Oxon. but in what house I am uncertain. I find one of
both his names, who was a student in Brasnose coll. in the year 1581. aged 16,
and another of Glouc. hall 1598. aged 25. Both which were, according to the
Matricula, born in Herefordshire, in which County the author of The worthies of
England, places Jo. Guillim the Herald, (of whom we now speak) who afterward
retired to Minsterworth in Glocestershire, was soon after called thence, and
made one of the Society of the coll. of Arms. commonly called the Heralds
Office in London by the name of Portsmouth, and on Pat. 15. Jac. 1. p. 10.
the 26 Feb. 1617. Rouge Croix Pursevant of Arms in Ordinary. He published,

The display of Heraldry. Land. 1610. etc. fol. Written mostly (especially the
scholastical part) by John Barcham of C. C. coll. in Oxon. In 1660. came out
two editions of it in fol. with many insignificant, superfluous, and needless
additions to it, purposely to gain money from those, whose coats of Arms the
publishers added, without any consideration had to the spoiling of the method
of the book. One of the said editions was put out by Alexander Nowers a
Herald-painter, burned in his bed (to which he went drunk) in his house about
Lothbury, behind the Exchange, within the City of London, by a fire that
occasionally happened in those parts 25. July 1670. The other edition was put
out by Rich. Bloome, then a kind of an Arms Painter (but originally a ruler of
books and paper) who has since practiced for diverse years progging tricks in
employing necessitous persons to write in several arts and to get contributions
of Noble men to promote the work. What he has done as to the Arms, Crests, and
supporters of the Nobility is most egregiously erroneous, and false also in the
quarterings. In 1679. he set forth the said book again, (which is the 5
edition) with the pictures at large, of several of the Nobility, whereby the
book is so much disguised, that I verily believe if the author, or authors of
it, were living they could scarce know it. To the said edition is added
Analogia honorum: or, a treatise of honor and nobility, etc. in two parts.
Said by Bloome to have been written by Capt. John Logan of Idbury in
Oxfordshire, but Qu. This person Bloome, is esteemed by the chiefest Heralds a
most impudent person, and the late industrious Garter (Sir W. D.) has told me
that he gets a livelihood by bold practices, and that he is the pretended
author of a book called Britannia, Or, a Geographical description of the
Kingdom of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. Land. 1673. fol. Scribled and
transcribed from Camdens Britannia and Speeds Mapps, as also the publisher of
Cosmography and Geography, in two parts, etc. As for Jo. Guillim the Herald, he
died on the 7. of May sixteen hundred twenty one, but where buried unless at
Minsterworth, 1621:
I know not, for the register belonging to the Church of S. Bennet near to
Paul's Wharff (in which parish the Heralds Office is situated) does not mention
any thing of his burial there.

THOMAS HARIOT, or Harriot tumbled out of Oxonian Muses, an. 1560. but in what
parish I cannot yet tell. All the registers that begin before that time (namely
that of S. S. Ebb, S. Aldate, S. Thomas which begins that year, S. Michael,
All Saints and S. Peter in the East) I have searched but cannot find his name.
That of S. Mary's parish, wherein I suppose this our author was born, has been
lost several years, and there is no register remaining, that goes above the
year 1599. After he had been instructed in Grammar learning within this City of
his birth, became either a Batler or Commoner of S. Mary's hall, wherein
undergoing the severe discipline then, and there, kept up by Rich. Pygot and
Thom. Philipson the Principals thereof, he took the degree of Bac. of Arts in
1579. and in the latter end of that year did complete it by determination in
School-street. Soon after coming to the knowledge of that heroic Knight Sir W.
Raleigh, for his admirable skill in the Mathematics, he entertained him in his
family, allowed Pref. R. Hakluyt ad Orbem novum, scriptum per Mart. Angler Par.
1587.
him an yearly pension, and was instructed by him at leisure-hours in that art.
In 1584. he went with the said Knight, and first Colony, into Virginia, where
being settled, he was employed in the discovery and surveying thereof, and to
make what knowledge he could of the commodities it yielded, and concerning the
inhabitants and their manners and customs. After his return into England Sir
Walter got him into the acquaintance of that noble and generous Count Henry
Earl of Northumberland, who finding him to be a gentleman of an affable and
peaceable nature, and well read in the obscure parts of learning, he did allow
him an yearly pension of 120 l. About the same time Rob. Hues and Walter Warner
two other Mathematicians, who were known also to the said Count, did receive
from him yearly pensions also, but of less value, as did afterward Nich.
Torperley, whom I shall mention elsewhere. So that when the said Earl was
committed prisoner to the Tower of London in 1606. to remain there during life,
our author, Hues, and Warner were his constant companions, and were usually
called the Earl of Northumberlands three Magi. They had a table at the Earls
charge, and the Earl himself did constantly converse with them, either singly
or altogether, as Sir Walter then in the Tower, did. Our author Hariot was a
great acquaintance with Sir Tho. Aylisbury Knight. a singular lover of learning and
of the Mathematick arts. To whom Dr. Rich. Corbet sending In his Poems, printed
at Land. 1672. p. 5^.
a Poem when the blazing Star appeared, dated 9. Dec. 1618, does by the way
mention our author thus. Now for the peace of God and Men advise,
(Thou that have wherewithal to make us wise)
Thine own rich studies and deep Harriots Mine,
In which there is no dross, but all refine.


But notwithstanding his great skill in Mathematics, he had strange thoughts
of the Scripture, and always undervalued the old story of the creation of the
world, and could never believe that trite position Ex nihilo nihil fit. He made
a Philosophical Theology, wherein he cast off the Old Testament, so that
consequently the New would have no foundation. He was a Deist, and his doctrine
he did impart to the said Count, and to Sir Walt. Raleigh when he was in
compiling the History of the World, and would controvert the matter with
eminent Divines of those times; who therefore having no good opinion of him,
did look on the manner of his death (which I shall anon mention) as a judgment
upon him for those matters, and for nullifying the Scripture. When he was a
young man he was styled by an Hackluytus ut sup. in Praef.
author of note, juvenis in illis disciplinis (meaning in the Mathematics)
excellens. When in his middle age, by Nath. Torperler in Praefat. ad Declides
coelometricas, etc. an. 1602.
another homo natus ad arts illustrandas, etc. and when dead by a Camden in
Annal. Jac. 1. MS. sub. an. 1621.
third of greater note, Mathematicus insignis. His Epitaph which was made, or
caused to be made, by his Executors, or those to whom he left his goods, books,
and writings, viz. Sir T. Aylesbury before mentioned and Rob. Sidney Viscount
L'isle, says that Omnes scientias calluit, and in omnibus excelluit;
Mathematicis, Philosophicis, Theologicis veritatis indagator studiosissimus,
Dei Triniunius cultor piissimus, etc. As for his Writings they are these.

A brief and true report of the Newfound Land of Virginia; of the commodities
there found to be raised, etc. Land. 1588. qu. Put into Latin by C. C. A. and
published and adorned with many admirable Cutts, by Theodore de Bry of Liege --
Francof. ad Moenum 1590. fol. The English copy is mostly, if not all, involved
in the third Vol. of R. Hakluyts voyages, p. 266. etc.

Ephemiris Chyrometrica. MS. in the Library at Sion coll. Land.

Artis Analyticae praxis ad aequationes Algebraicas nova expedita and generali
methodo, resolvandas, tractatus posthumus, etc. Land. 1631. in a thin fol. and
dedic. to Henry E. of Northumberland. The sum of this book coming into the
hands of Aylesbury beforementioned, Walt. Warner did undertake to perfect and
publish it, conditionally that Algernon eldest Son of the said Henry E. of
Northumb. would, after his Fathers death, continue his pension to him during
his natural life. Which being granted at the earnest desires and entreaties of
Aylesbury made to that Lord, Warner took a great deal of pains in it, and at
length published it in that sort as we see it now extant. By the way it must be
known that this Walt. Warner was a Leicestershire man born, but whether
educated in this University, I cannot as yet find, that he was esteemed as good
a Philosopher as Mathematician, that he made and invented a Logarithmical
table, i. e. whereas Brigg's table fills his Margin with numbers increasing by
unites, and over against them sets their Logarithms, which, because of
incommensurability, must needs either be abundant or deficient, Mr. Warner
(like a Dictionary of the Latin before the English) filled the Margin with
Logarithms increasing by Unites, and did set to every one of them so many
continual mean proportionals between one and 10. and they for the same reason
must also have the last figure incomplete. These after the death of Warner came
through the hands of one Tovey sometimes Fellow of Christ's coll. in Cambridge,
(afterward beneficed in Leicestershire and took to Wife the the Niece of
Warner) into those of Herbert Thorndyke Prebend of Westminster, sometimes
Fellow of Trin. coll. in Cambridge, and from him after his death (which
happened in July 1672.) into those of Dr. Rich. Busby Prebend of the said
Church. They were in number ten thousand, but when John Pell D. D. sometimes a
member of Trin. coll. in Cambridge became acquainted with Warner, they were by
him, or his direction, made an hundred thousand, as the difference of hands
will show in the MS. if Dr. Busby will communicate it. He also (I mean Warner)
wrote a Treatise of Coins and Coynage, in relation to Mint-affairs; a copy of
which John Collins Accomptant to the Royal Fishery Company had in his
possession, but what became of it after his death, I know not. The sixth book
of Optiques in Marsennus is generally said to be his, and the seventh is
Hobbes's of Malmsbury. He also did make it appear So used to say Dr. G. Morley
sometimes B. of Winton, and Dr. Joh. Pell.
in a MS. of his composition, that the blood in a body did circulate, which he
communicating to the immortal Harvy, he took his first hint thence concerning
that matter, which he afterward published as the first inventor. I have been
informed by those that knew Warner well, that he had but one hand, and was born
so, that as he received a pension from the Earl of Northumberland, so did he,
tho smaller, from Sir Tho. Aylesbury, and lastly that he died at the Wolstable
near the waters-side, not far from Northumberland house, (which is near Charing
Cross) where he commonly wintered (but kept his summer with Sir Thomas in
Winsore-Park) much about the time when the Long Parliament began, in Nov. 1640.
or rather in the latter end of that year, leaving behind him a brother, who was
High-Sherriff of Leicestershire, or at least pricked for that office, in the
beginning of the rebellion that happened under K. Chapter 1. As for our author
Hariot, who for some time lived in Sion coll. near to London, July in sixteen
hundred twenty and one; whereupon his body was conveyed to S. Christophers
Church in London, by the brethren of the Mathematical faculty, and by them
committed to the earth with solemnity. Over his grave was soon after erected a
comely Monument, with a large Inscription thereon, but destroyed with the
Church it self, by the dreadful fire that happened in that City, in the beginning
of Sept. in 1666. This person tho he was but little more than 60 years of age,
when he died, yet had not an unusual and rare disease seized upon him, he might
have attained, as it is thought, to the age of 80. The disease was an ulcer in
the Lipp, and Dr. Alex. Rhead was his Physician, who, tho he had cured many of
worser, and more malignant, diseases; yet he could not save him. In the
treatise of ulcers, in the said Rheads Printed at Land. 1650. Treat. 2. Lect.
26.
works, is this mention of him. Cancerous Ulcers also seize on this part (the
Lipp) etc. This grief hastened the end of that famous Mathematician Mr. Harriot,
with whom I was acquainted but short time before his death. Whom at one time,
together with Mr. Hues, who wrote of Globes, Mr. Warner and Mr. Torpley, the
Noble Earl of Northumberland the favourer of all good learning, and Mecaenas of
learned men, maintained whilst he was in the Tower for their worth and various
literature.

RICHARD TILLESLEY, Son of Tho. Tillesley Eccleshall in Staffordshire by
Catherine his Wife Daughter of Rich. Barker of Shropshire, was born in the City
of Coventry, entered a Commoner in Ball. coll. in Lent-Term 1597. aged 15,
elected Scholar of S. John's coll. two years after, took the degrees in Arts,
holy Orders and became Chaplain to Dr. Buckridge Bishop of Rochester, whose
Niece he marrying (viz. Elizabeth Daughter of George Buckridge) was thereby a
way made for his preferment. In 1613. he was admitted Bach. of Divinity; about
which time being Rector of Kuckstone and Stone in Kent, he resigned his
Fellowship. Soon after he proceeded in his faculty, and was by the favor of
the said Dr. Buckridge made Archdeacon and Prebend (some say Dean but false) of
Rochester in the place of Dr. Tho. Sanderson; and higher would he have been
promoted had he not unexpectedly been cut off by death. He was a person of
great reading and learning, as his writings show. He was also very devout in
the strict observance of all the Church ceremonies, the reasonableness of
which, he convinced many that retired to him for satisfaction. He was one of
three that undertook to answer Seldens Hist. of Tithes, he and Montague the
Law-part and St. Nettles the Rabinical or Judaical. As for that which our
author published, it bears this title.

Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, and his review thereof. Land.
1619. and 21. qu. What else he has written and published, it appears not, nor
any thing besides, only that he dying, to the great reluctance of all learned
men, in the month of Nov. in sixteen hundred twenty and one, was buried in the
Choire of the Cath. Church of Rochester, John, who was an Infant in 1619. One
Eliseus Burgess whom I shall mention elsewhere, was installed Archdeacon of
Rochester in his room, on the 24. of the said month of Nov. in 1621. who
continued in that Dignity till the grand rebellion broke out, and after.

FRANCIS MORE, Son of Edw. More Gent. by Elizab. his Wife, Daughter and Heir of
one Hall of Tileherst in Berks, received his first breath at East Hildesley or
Ildesley near to Wantage in the said County, where his name yet continues,
educated in Grammar learning at Reading, entered a Commoner in S. John's coll.
1574. or thereabouts, continued there till near Bachelaurs standing, and then
he retired to the Middle Temple; where, after severe encounters had with the
crabbed parts of the municipal Laws, he became a Barrester and noted for his
great proficiency in his profession and integrity in his dealings. In the
latter end of Qu. Elizab. and beginning of K. James he was several times
elected a Burgess in set in Parliaments, in which he was a frequent Speaker.
Afterward he was Counselor and under-steward for several years to this
University, the members of which conferred upon him the degree of Master of Arts
in 1612. Two years after he was made Sergeant at Law, and in 1616. March 17.
received the honor of Knighthood at Theobalds from his Majesty K. James 1.
After his death some of his works were published, which bear these titles.

Cases collected and reported. Land. 1663. fol. printed from the original in
French, that then remained in the hands of Sir Jeff. Palmer Attorney General to
K. Chapter 2. which is the same, as I take it, written fairly with the authors own
hand in fol. that was lately in the Library of Arth. E. of Anglecy. These cases
were abridged by Will. Hughes Esquire -- Land. 1665. oct.

His learned reading 4. Jac. 1. in Middle Temple hall concerning charitable
uses, abridged by himself. Land. 1676. fol. published by George Duke of the
Inner Temple Esquire. Our author F. More was a member of that Parliament, as it
seems, wherein the Statute concerning charitable uses was made, and was, as
it is farther added, the Penner thereof. At length paying his last debt to
nature on the 20. Nov. in sixteen hundred twenty and one, aged 63. was buried
in a Vault under the Church of Great Fawley near to Wantage beforementioned,
Hen. More Bt. I find another Franc. More to have published certain matters,
among which is The sinners guide, or the regiment of a Christian life. Printed
1614. qu. and certain Sermons, but whether this person who was a Divine, was of
Oxford University I know not as yet.

Vindex Ecclesiae Anglicanae, was born in the County Palatine of Durham and
there educated in Gram. learning, began to be conversant with the Oxonians in
the beginning of the year 1583. aged 17, and making a hard shift to rub out
till he was Bach. of Arts, being the Son of a poor Plebeian, was elected
probationer-Fellow of Merton coll. in the latter end of 1586. After he had
proceeded in his faculty, he entered into the sacred function, and when full
standing, he was admitted to the reading of the Sentences in 1597. About which
time he was made Rector of Orford a Market Town near to the Seaside in
Suffolk, Chaplain to K. James 1. (who usually styled him a wise builder in Gods
house) and at length upon the death of Rich. Stokes LL. Bach. was installed
Archdeacon of Norfolk 18. December. 1619. which Dignity the said Stokes had held
from the month of Apr. 1587. Our author Mason has written,

The authority of the Church in making Canons and constitutions concerning
things indifferent, etc. Sermon on 1 Cor. 14. 40. Land. 1607. Ox. 1634. qu.
From which, as also from the Epist. dedic. before it, made to his patron Rich.
Archb. of Cant. it appears that the author was a zealous conformist to the Chapter
of Engl. This Sermon. was answered by Anon. in a book entit. The second part of
the defense of the Ministers reasons for refusal, etc. See in Tho. Hutton, an.
1639.

Vindication of the Church of England concerning the consecration and
ordination of the Bishops, etc. as also of the ordination of Priests and
Deacons, in five books. Land. 1613. fol. Framed in form of a conference between
Philodox a Seminary Priest and Orthodox a Minister of the Church of England.
From which book it appears that the author was a general-read-Scholar,
thorough-pac'd in the councils, and all sorts of Histories, whether divine,
civil, or profane. The next year, he, as a greatful Son, sent a copy of it to
be reposed in the Library of his tender Parent Mert. coll. with this note at
the end of it written with his own hand, -- Whereas Mr. Tho. Fitzherbert.
Fitzherbert has lately sent a book from Rome against the most rev. Bishop Dr.
Lanc. Andrews.
of Ely, to which he has annexed an appendix concerning the records and
registers by me produced, desiring that some of their discreet Catholics might
view and consider whether they be true, or counterfeit: Know therefore that
upon the 12. of this present May an. 1614. his Grace of Canterbury sent for Mr.
Job. Colleton.
Colleton the Archpriest, Leake Tho. Leake.
a secular Priest, as also one Jesuit called Tho. Lathwait.
Lathwait, etc. and showed unto them the register and other records of his
predecessor Matthew. Parker, which they perused over and over, and found that the
said Parker was See more of this matter in Godwin D: praesuti^. Angliae. Land.
1616. lat. p. 219.
consecrated in Lambeth Chapel ( and not at the Nags head in Cheapside) by
certain Bishops that had been ejected in Qu. Mary's reign, etc. This book of
the Vindication of the Church of England, coming at length into the hands of
Anthony Champney an English man born, a Romans Cath. Priest and a Doctor of the
Sorbon, was by him answered in English and dedicated to George Archb. of
Canterbury not without some reproaches and scoffs given to him in the Epistle.
But afterward Champney recollecting himself, thought that he had not
sufficiently consulted his own reputation by publishing his answer in English.
Wherefore he translated it into Latin, (intit. Tractatus de vocatione
Ministrorum. Par. 1618. in oct.) that his pretended victory over Mason, might
by this means be spread over all Europe. Soon after our author, to be even with
him, translated his own book also, and entitled it Vindiciae Eccles.
Anglicanae, etc. and therein interweaves answers to Thom. Fitzherbert Priest,
Hen. Fitzsimons Jesuit, Dr. Matthew. Kellison, A. Champney, etc. and withal
dedicated it to Hen. de Gondy Bishop of Paris, without any aspersions at all
thrown upon him. All this he did in the year 1619. or 20. at farthest, but
before he could conveniently put it in the Press, he died. Whereupon at the
desire of the Archbishop of Cant. Dr. Nath. Brent Warde^ of Mert. coll. did
review it, examine the quotations, compare them with the originals, and at
length printed the copy as he had found it under the authors hand, an. 1625.
^ol. printed again at Land. 1646. fol. The said author also wrote,

Two Sermons preached at Court concerning David adultery and his public
practices, on 2 Samuel (...) 13. Land. 1621. oct.

The vadility of the ordination of the ministers of the reformed Churches
beyond the Seas, maintained against the Donatists. Oxon. 1641. qu. Taken, I
presume, by the publisher from our authors book intit. A vindication, etc. At
length our author Mason surrendering up his pious soul to him that first gave
it, (not without the great grief of those who well knew his learning and piety)
in the month of Dec. in sixteen hundred twenty and one, was buried in the
Chancel of the Church of Orford beforementioned. Norf. was installed Tho.
Muriel M. A. 30. Dec. 1621. After him was installed Writhington White 19 Oct.
1629. and after him Rob. White Bach. of Div. 23. Sept. 1631. who dying in the
times of usurpation, Philip Tenison was installed in his place 24. Aug. 1660.
who dying, Edw. Reynolds M. A. and Son to Dr. E. Reynolds B. of Norwich was
installed therein 15. Apr. 1661.

HENRY JACOB, was a Kentish man born, entered Mary's hall 1579. aged 16, took
the degrees in Arts, holy Orders and became beneficed in his own Country,
particularly, as I have been informed, at Cheriton, but upon search into that
Parish register, wherein are the names of all the Rectors of that Church set
down since 1591. H. Jacob. occurs not, as having been perhaps Rector before
that time. He was a person most excellently well read in Theological authors,
but withal was a most zealous Puritan, or as his Son Henry used to say the
first Independent in England. His writings against Francis Johnson a Brownist
(exile for Jesus Chapter as he styles himself) and Tho. Bilson Bishop of Winton.
speak him learned. With the former he controverted concerning the Churches and
Ministers of England, and with the other concerning Christ's suffering and
descention into Hell. Which controversy, though eagerly bandied to and fro
between them, yet it was afterward plied more hotly in both the Unisities, in
1604. and after; where Bilsons doctrine was maintained and held up, yet
publicly opposed by many of our Zealots, both at home and abroad. At home by
Gabr. Powell a stiff Puritan (mentioned under the year 1607.) and abroad by
Hugh Broughton and Rob. Parker, I mean that Robert a Divine, sometimes of
Wilton in Wilts, who leaving the Nation for conscience sake, died at Deusbourgh
in Gelderland, in Autumn time or after, an, 1630. leaving behind him a Widow
named Dorothie, and a Son named Thomas, author of De traductione peccatoris.
There were two more brethren at least of the separation, who opposed Bilson's
doctrine, but their names I cannot now justly tell you. The works of our author
Hen. Jacob are these.

Treatise of the sufferings and victory of Christ in the work of our
redemption. etc. written against certain errors in these points publicly
preached in Land. 1597. Land. 1598. oct. The points we^e (1) That Christ
suffered for us the wrath of God, which we may well term the pains of Hell, or
hellish sorrows. (2) That Christ after his death on the Cross, went not into
Hell in his Soul.

Defense of the Church and ministry of England, against Francis Johnson
Brownist. Middleburg 1599. qu. They had several disputes in Amsterdam about the
Church of England being a true Church.

Defense of a treatise touching the sufferings and victory of Christ in the
work of our redemption -- Printed 1600. qu.

Reasons taken out of Gods word and the best humane testimonies, proving a
necessity of reforming our Churches of England, etc. -- Printed 1604. qu.

A position against vain glorious, and that which is falsely called, learned,
preaching -- Printed 1604. oct.

The divine beginning and institution of Christ's true visible and material
Church. Leyden 1610. oct.

Plain and clear exposition of the second commandment. -- Printed 1610. oct.

Declaration and opening of certain points, with a sound confirmation of some
others, in a treatise entit. The divine beginning, etc. (as before) --
Middleburg 1611. He has written and published other things, as the Counter
poison, etc. which being printed by stealth, or beyond the Seas, London, where
he began to gather a congregation in the year 1616. I cannot tell. He left
behind him a Son of both his names, who was afterward Fellow of Mert. coll.
and a prodigy for curious and critical learning, as I shall tell you at large
when I come to him.

Hen. Savile (by Elizab. his Wife Daughter of Rob. Ramsden Gent.) second Son of
Joh. Savile of New hall in Yorksh. Esquire was born at Bradley alias Over-Bradley
near to Halifax in the same County, on the last day of Nov. an. 1549. (3. Ed.
6.) made his first entry into this University in the beginning of the year
1561. and then, according to the fashion, had a Tutor to teach him Grammar, and
another Dialect, or else one and the same person did both. In the beginning of
Lent 1565. he was admitted Bach. of Arts, and forthwith determined to the
admiration of his Auditors, who ever after esteemed him a good Philosopher.
About that time an election of Bach. Fellows of Merton coll. (then in a very
poor condition for good Scholars, as most places in the University were,) being
made, he was chosen one of the number, as was Edm. Bunney, afterward a learned
Theologist. In 1570. our author Savile proceeded in his faculty, and read his
Ordinaries on the Almagest of Ptolomy: Whereby growing famous for his learning,
especially for the Gr. tongue and Mathematics, (in which last he voluntarily
read a Lecture for some time to the Academians,) he was elected Proctor of the
University for two years together, with Joh. Underhill of New college,
afterward Rector of that of Lincoln, and Bishop of Oxon. For then, and after,
those that executed the Procuratorial office, were elected by the Doctors and
Masters of the University for learning, worth, experience, and magnanimous
Spirits; but when the Caroline Cicle was made, in 1629. they were elected in
their respective Coll. by a few notes. In 1578. he traveled into France and
other Countries; and thereupon improving himself in learning, languages, and
the knowledge of the World and Men, became a most accomplished person at his
return. About that time he was instituted Tutor to Q. Elizab. for the Gr.
tongue, who taking a liking to his parts and personage, was not only the sooner
made Warden of Merton coll. tho a noted person ( Bunney beforementioned) was
elected with him and presented to the Archb. of Cant. for confirmation; but
also, by her favor, was made Provost of Eaton coll. in the year 1596. upon the
promotion of Dr. Will. Day to the Sea of Winton. While he governed the former,
which was 36 years, Summa cura (as it is Reg. 2. Act. Societ. coll. Merton. p.
1^1.
said) and diligentia fere plusquam humana perdius and pernox, he made it his
chief endeavors, (tho troubled with the cumbrances of Marriage) to improve it
with riches and literature. For the effecting of the last, he always made
choice of the best Scholars at the usual elections of Bach. Fellows. In the
first that he made after he was Warden, which consisted but of four persons,
were Hen. Cuffe and Franc. Mason elected, both noted for their learning, tho
the first was unfortunate. In the last, about three years before his death,
which consisted of six, four of them (whereof two were afterward Bishops) were
esteemed eminent, namely Dr. Reynolds of Norwych, Dr. Earl of Salisbury, John
Doughty and Alex. Fisher: the last of which, tho he has published nothing, yet
in some respects he was as able as any of the rest so to do, had not a weak and
timorous Spirit stood in his way. Our author Savile also took as much care as
he could to place noted men in Eaton college; among whom were Tho. Allen, Joh.
Hales, Tho. Savile, and Jonas Mountague, all of Mert. coll. the last of which
(whom he made Usher of the School there) helped him, as Allen and Hales did, in
the edition of St. Chrysostom, as I shall tell you elsewhere. When K. Jam. 1.
came to the Crown he had a great respect for Mr. Savile and his learning, and
as I have heard our Ancients say, he would have advanced him to a higher place,
either in Church or State, but he refused it, and only accepted of the Honor
of Knighthood from him at Windsore, 21. Sept. 1604. Much about which time Henry
his only Son and Heir dying, and no hopes left of propagating his Name, and of
settling a Family, he bestowed much of his wealth in publishing books, and in
founding two Lectures in this University, which will make his memory honorable
not only among the learned, but the righteous for ever, even till the general
conflagration shall consume all books and learning. Many are the Encomiums
given of him by diverse authors, which, if I should enumerate, may make a
Manual. In one Ibid.
place he is styled, Musarum Patronus, Mecoenas literarum, fortunarumque
Mertonensium vere Pater, etc. In another Jo. (...) in lib. De illustr. Argl.
(...) 14. nu. 563. p. 471.
he is characterized by a zealous Romans Cath. who seldom or never speaks well of
a Protestant, (or at least by Dr. W. Bishop the publisher of his book,) to be
Vir Graece and Latin perinde doctus, venerandae Antiquitatis (ut videtur) tam
exquisitus indagator tam ingenuus and liberalis editor. To pass by the noble
and generous characters given of him by Isaac In Append. ad Epist. Vide etiam
(...) ipsas Epistolas, Ep 100. Script. ad Hen. Savile.
Casaubon, Joh. In (...) Homel. in Genesis int. opera S. (...)
Boysius, Josias In Not. ad Cor^. Y^.
Mercerus, Marc. In Pref. ad Gaudentii introduct. (...).
Meibomius, Jos. In 3. (...) 232. Script. ad Ric. (...)
Scaliger and others, (among whom must not be forgotten the learned Rich.
Mountague, who styles In his (...) upon the first part of the (...)
him, The Magazine of all Learning,) I shall proceed to make mention of those
things that he has published and written, which are these following.

Learned notes on, and a translation into English of, Corn. Tacitus his (1) End
of Nero and beginning of Galba. (2) Four books of Histories. (3) Life of
Agricola. Land. 1581. 98. etc. fol. A rare translation it is, and the work
(...) Rule of judgment for writing (...). MS. Addres. 4. Sect. 2.
of a very great Master indeed, both in our tongue, and that story. For if we
consider the difficulty of the original, and the age wherein the Translator
lived, is both for the exactness of the version, and the chastity of the
language, one of the most accurate and perfect translations, that ever were
made into English. The said notes were put into Latin by Is. Gruter, and
printed at Amsterdam, 1649. in tw.

A view of certain Military Matters, or Commentaries concerning Roman Warfare.
Land. 1598. etc. fol. Put into Lat. by Marq. Fraherus, printed at Heidleburg
1601. in oct. and at Amsterd. by Is. Gruter 1649. in tw.

Fasti Regum and Episcoporum Angliae usque ad Willielmum Seniorem. These Fasti
are at the end of the writers which Sir Hen. Savile published, intit. Rerum
Anglicarum Scriptores post Bedam praecipui, etc. viz. Gul. Malmsburiensis, Hen.
Huntingdon, Rog. Hoveden, etc. Land. 1596. fol. The best copies of which
authors he collected, viewed, reviewed and corrected. In his Epist. dedic.
before which, (made to Q. Elizab.) speaking of the History of England,
delivers these matters, after he had condemned Pol. Virgil -- Neostri ex face
plobis Historici, etc. Our Historians being of the dr^gs of the common People,
while they have endeavored to adorn the Majesty of so great a work, have
stained and defiled it with most fusty fooleries. Whereby, tho I wot not, by
what hard fortune of this Island, it is came to pass, that your Ancesters (most
gracious Queen) most puissant Princes, who embracing a great part of this our
World within their Empire, did easily overgo all the Kings of their time in the
Glory of great achievements, now destitute of (as it were) the light of brave
Wits, do lie unknown and unregarded, etc. These words being uttered by a Gent.
excellently learned, to a Sovereign Queen excellently understanding, and in
print, were then understood, and wished for, by Historians and curious Men, to
have this meaning, That the Majesty of handling our History might once equal
the Majesty of the argument. This was their opinion, and the publisher ( Great
Savile) gave hopes to them that he should be the Man that would do it. All the
learned of England were erected, and full of expectation, but at length were
grieved to find it vain. Somewhat notwithstanding he is said to have attempted
in that argument, by making searches in the Tower of London for furniture out
of the Records; but, if he did any such thing, whether impatient of the harsh
and dusty rudeness of the subject, or despairing that he could deal so truly as
the honor and splendor of his name, and as the nature of the work, required;
he desisted, converting all his cares to the edition of St. Chrysostom in
Greek. Thus was he carried away by speculation of things Divine, as it were in
a Chariot of fire, from this other immortal office to his native Country. He
also carefully collected the best copies of books, written by St. Chrysostom,
from various parts of the World, and employed learned men to transcribe, and
make annotations on, them. Which being done, he printed them at his own charge
in a most beautiful edition, bearing this title, S. Johannis Chrysostomi opera
Grace, octo voluminibus. Printed in Eaton coll. 1613. fol. On several parts of
which he put learned notes, besides what the profound Joh. Boyse, Andr. Downs,
Tho. Allen, etc. had done. The whole charge of which edition, and for the
payment of certain Scholars employed beyond the Seas for the obtaining of the
best Exemplars of that author, cost him more than 8000 l. But the copy as soon
as 'twas finished, coming into the hands of a learned French Jesuit, named
Fronto Ducaeus of Bordeaux, he mostly translated it into Latin. Which being so
done, he printed it in Gr. and Lat. at Paris in 5 volumes, at the charges of
the Bishops and Clergy of France, an. 1621. The sixth vol. was put out by him
in 1624. and the other volumes (four in number) came out before at different
times at Heidleburg, by other hands, at it seems. Sir Hen. Savile also procured
six Manuscript copies of Bradwardins book, De causa Dei, to be compared and
corrected to his great charge: and afterward published a true copy thereof
under this title, Thomae Bradwardini Archiep. olim Cantuariensis, De causa Dei,
contra Pelagium, and de virtute causarum, ad suos Mertonenses. lib. 3. Land.
1618. fol. Before which Sir Henry put of his own writing,

Vita Thomae Bradwardini Archiep. olim Cantuariensis. He also wrote and was
author of,

Praelectiones tresdecem in principium elementorum Euclidis Oxoniae habitae,
an. 1620. Oxon. 1621. qu. Some of which Lectures he read when he was a Junior
Master, as I have before mentioned.

Oration coram Reg. Elizab. Oxoniae habita, an. 1592. Oxon. 1658. qu. Published
by Mr. (afterward Dr.) Tho. Barlow of Queens coll. from the original in the
Bodleian Library, and also by Dr. Joh. Lamphire in the second edit. of
Monarchia Britannica. Oxon. 1681. oct.

Tract of the original of Monasteries.

Orations.

Tract concerning the Union of England and Scotland, at the command of K. James
1.

MSS. in the Bodleian Lib.

Concerning the last of these, John Thornborough B. of Bristow did write a book
about the same time. Our author Savile also did publish Nazianzen's
Steliteuticks, Zenophon's Institution of Cyrus, etc. and had many choice
Exempl^rs in his Library, which were by others published as from Bibliotheca
Saviliana. He also translated into elegant Lat. K. James the first his Apology
for the Oath of Allegiance: Which fl^ing in that dress as far as Rome, was by
the Pope and the Conclave sent to Francis Suarez at Salamanca, with a command
to answer it. When he had perfected the work, which he calls Defensio fidei
Catholicae, etc. cum responsione ad Apologiam pro juramento fidelitatis, etc.
it was transmitted to Rome for a view of the Inquisitors, who blotted out what
they pleased, and added whatsoever might advance the Pope's power. Which matter
Joh. Salkeld, his his Assistant when he wrote at Salamanca, did often profess
when he came over to the Church of England, and lived for some time in the
House of Dr. King Bishop of London, that the good old Man Suarez (whose piety
and charity he magnifyed much) did not only disavow, but detest it. However
printed it was, (at Colen, I think, an. 1614.) but so soon as any of the copies
came into England, one was burnt in detestation of the fact, by public
command. Sir Hen. Savile also made several notes with his Pen in many of his
books in his choice Library, particularly on Eusebius his Ecclesiastical
History, made use of by Hen. Valesius in his edition of that History, an. 1659.
as he will tell you more at large, if you will consult the Preface to that
elaborate work. He also made several notes on those books which he gave to the
Mathematical Library in the School-Tower, and on others which I have seen.
Diverse of his Tracts of various subjects in MS. were greedily procured after
his death (sometimes also while he lived) by industrious and ingenious
Scholars, which do now, or at least did lately, go from hand to hand. At
length, after he had lived beyond the age of Man, and had done many noble and
generous works for the benefit of learning, he departed this mortal life in
Eaton coll. near to Windsore, on the nineteenth day of Febr. in sixteen hundred
twenty and one, 1621-22.
and was buried in the Chapel there, near to the body of Henry his Son, (who
died 1604 aged 8 years,) leaving behind him one only daughter named Elizabeth,
(begotten on the body of his Wife Margaret, Daughter of George Dacres of
Cheshunt in Hertfordshire,) who was married to Sir Jo. Sedley of Kent Baronet.
Soon after, the News of his death being sent to Oxon, the Vicechancellour and
Doctors ordered a Speech to be publicly spoken to the Academians in memory of
so worthy a Benefactor and Scholar as Sir Henry was. Which being accordingly
done by Tho. Goffe of Chapter Chapter the Speech was shortly after made public, with
many copies of verses made by the best Poets of the University, added to it,
with this title, Vltima Linia Savilii. Oxon. 1622. qu. These things being done,
was a black Marble stone laid over his grave on the south side of the Communion
Table in the said Chapel of Eaton coll. and a most sumptuous honorary monument
to his memory, on the south wall, at the upper end of the Choire of Merton
coll. the inscription on which you may see In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon, lib.
2. p. 89. b.
elsewhere. In the Provostship of Eaton coll. succeeded Tho. Murrey a Scot,
Tutor and Secretary to Prince Charles, (afterward K. Chapter 1.) who died, as one
Camden in Annal. Reg. Jac. 1. MS. sub an. 1623.
observed, on the first day of Apr. 1623. being then newly cut for the Stone,
and was buried in the Chap. of that Coll. whose Epitaph there says that he
died on the ninth day of the same month, aged 59 years. Afterward the King
designed Ibid.
Sir Will. Beecher to succeed, but by Friends, and many entreaties, Sir Hen.
Wotton had that place conser'd on him. In the Wardenship of Mert. coll.
succeeded Nath. Brent LL. D. afterward a Knight, who minding wealth and the
settling a Family more than generous actions, that College did nothing near so
well flourish as under the Government of Sir Henry.

ROGER HACKET, an eminent Theologist in James within the City of London,
educated in Wykehams School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1577.
took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and soon after was cried up for an
eminent Preacher. In 1591. or thereabouts, he was made Rector of North-Crowley
in Bucks And four years after proceeded in Divinity. All that I have yet seen
of his writing or publication, are only

Several Sermons, viz. (1) Sermon. at Paul's Cross, on 1 Samuel 11. 5, 6, 7. Oxon.
1591. oct. dedic. to the Lord Norrys. (2) Sermon. on 2 Cor. 5. 20, 21. Land.
1593. oct. (3) A Marriage present, on Genesis 2. 22. Land. 1607. qu. (4) Sick man's
glass, on Isaiah 30. 1, 2, 3. Land. 1607. qu. (5) Sermon. on Psalm. 122. 6. etc.
He concluded his last day in sixteen hundred twenty and one, or thereabouts,
1621-22.
(for in 1622. were several books conveyed into the public Library at Oxon, by
his bequest,) and was buried, as it seems, in his Church of North-Crowley
beforementioned.

Edw. Croft Esquire descended from an ancient and gentile family of his name living
at Croft Castle in Herefordshire, was educated in Academicals in Chapter Chapter as his
Son Col. Sir Will. Croft use to say, tho his name occurrs not in the Matricula,
which makes me think that his stay was short there. Afterward he married, was
a Parliament man in the latter end of Qu. Eliz. and in 1603. received the
honor of Knighthood from K. Jam. 1. at Theobalds, being then a person of
repute in his own country. At length being full weary of the vanities and
fooleries of this world, did retire to Doway in Flanders, and there was by
letters of confraternity, dated in the beginning of Feb. (1617) received among
the Brethren in the coll. of English Benedictines: who appointing him a little
cell within the ambits of their house, spent the remainder of his days therein
in strict devotion and religious exercise. After his settlement there he wrote,

Letters persuasive to his wife and children in England, to take upon them the
catholic religion.

Arguments to show that the Romans Church is a true Church -- written against Dr.
R. Field his Four books of the Church.

Reply to the answer The said Answer, as Sir Herb. Croft says, was penned for
her by a Protestant Minister.
of his Daughter M. C. ( Mary Croft) which she made to a Paper of his sent to
her, concerning the Romans Church. At the end of it is a little thing entit. The
four ministers of Charinton gagged by four propositions made to the Lord Baron
of Espicelliere of the religion prtended: And presented on S. Martins day to du
Moulin in his house, and since to Durand and Mestrezat. All these were
published by Sir Herb. Croft at Doway, about 1619. in tw. containing 255.
pages. There were but eight copies printed, viz. one for himself, now in the
libr. of the English Benedictines at that place, formerly sent to me by a Edw.
Sheldon second Son of Will. Sheldon of Boely Esquire;
Brother of that order, purposely to be perused for a time, and then to be
returned: who for religion sake, and in contempt of the world has denied the
inheritance of an Estate of at least three thousand pounds per. an. Another
copy was printed for Sir Herberts wife and the rest for his children, but all
without a title, only dedicated to his wife and children, with a short Epistle
before them beginning thus. I would have you know that although this ensuing
discourse comes to you in print, etc. The beginning of the book it self is
this, When it had pleased almighty God, in his great mercy, even after above
53. years of my misspent life, etc. At length after he had macerated his body
with fasting, hardship, and devotion, surrendered up his pious Soul to the
Almighty, 1622*
on the 10 Apr. (according to the account there followed) in sixteen hundred
twenty and two, and was buried in the Chapel or Church belonging to the said
English Benedictines at Doway. Soon after was a monument put over his grave,
with an inscription thereon, (a copy of it you may In Hist. and Antiq. Univ.
Ox. lib. 2. p. 269. b.
elsewhere see) in which he is styled vir prudens, fortis, nobilis, and patriae
libertatis amantissimus, etc. He left behind him a Son of both his names,
sometimes a R. Catholic, but afterward a zealous Protestant and a Bishop, of
whom I shall hereafter make mention in his due place.

London, was born at Missenden in Bucks sent by his relations to S. Mary's
hall, in 1581. being then very young, where spending some time in Trivial
learning, was afterward translated to Trinity coll. and, as a member thereof,
took the degree of Bach. of Arts, which he completed by determination. In
1587. July 6. he was elected Fellow of Lincoln coll. and two years after
proceeded in his faculty. About that time entering into the sacred function, he
became one of the most noted preachers in the University. In 1598, he was
admitted Bach. of Divinity, and the year after resigning his fellowship, was
made about that time Rector of the Church of S. Andrews Hubart in Little
Eastcheap in London; where, after some time, he became so great a labourer in
Gods vineyard by his frequent and constant work in the ministry, as well in
resolving of doubts and cases of conscience as in preaching and lecturing, that
he went beyond his brethren in that City to the wonder of all. But greater was
the wonder, especially to those of his parish and neighborhood, that this poor
man, who was for the most part strangely afflicted with sickness, should
undergo his duty so strictly, and preach so many Sermons as he did for comfort
and support in troubles. This indeed did sound highly to his merit, and plainly
showed that his great learning and parts could not be subdued with the pitiful
afflictions here below. He was accounted a judicious, orthodox, and holy man,
and by some a zealous and innocent puritan, of a harmless life and
conversation, and one that was solely framed to do good acts. His works are
these.

Several Sermons as (1) The necessity of righteousness, on Mat. 5. 20. Land.
1622. and 1640. qu. (2) Description of fleshly lusts, on 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.
Land. 1622. and 40. qu. (3) S. Paul's triumph, etc. eleven Sermons on Romans 8.
38. 39. Land. 1633. etc. qu. published by Will. Holbrook preacher.

The great mystery of godliness: or, a treatise opening unto us what God is and
Christ is. Land. 1624. qu. there again 1640. third edit.

Treatise concerning the Sacraments. Land. 1630. qu. etc.

Catechistical Lectures ( in number 23.) upon the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. Land. 1630. qu. etc.

Nine and twenty lectures of the Church, for support of the same in these
times, etc. Ibid. 1631. etc. qu. besides other things fit for the press, as
one, showing what a true visible Church is, and another what Predestination is.
He concluded his last day in the beginning of June in sixteen hundred twenty
and two, being then about 54. years of age, Andrew before mentioned. By his
last will and testament, he bequeathed a tenement to Linc. coll. called Ship
hall, situated on the west side of that Street, anciently called
Schediardstreet, now commonly called S. Mary hall lane, in Oxon. The picture of
this Mr. Randall drawn to the life when he was fellow of Linc. coll. is, or at
least was lately, hanging in the Common room of that house.

JOHN OWEN, or Audoenus as some call him, the Armon in Caernarvonshire,
educated in Wykehams School, admitted perpetual Fellow of New coll. after he
had served two years of Probation there, in 1584. took the degree of Bach. of
Civil Law in 1590. and leaving his fellowship the year after, taught School (as
some of his ancient country men that remember him, have told me) at Trylegh
near to Monmouth, and at Warwick (as the tradition goes there among the
Schoolmasters) in the School founded by K. Hen. 8. in the place of one Tho.
Hall, about the year 1594. He was a person endowed with several gifts,
especially with with the faculty of Poetry, which has made him famous for
those books of Epigrams, that he has published, wherein an ingenious liberty
of joking being by him used, was, and is now with some, especially foreigners,
not a little pleasing and delightful. But that which I must farther note of him
is, that being always troubled with the disease that attends Poets (indigence)
he was received into the patronage of his countryman and Kinsman Dr. Jo.
Williams B. of Lincoln and L. Keeper of the great Seal, who for several years
exhibited to his wants. He has written,

Epigrammatum lib. 3. ad Mariam Nevill comitis Dorcestriae filiam dicati. Land.
1606. oct. printed twice that year.

Epigrammatum lib. singularis; ad doctiss. Heroinam D. Arbellam Stewart.

Epigram. lib. 3. ad Hen. Principem Cambriae duae; ad Carolum Ebor. unus.

Epigram. ad tres Maecenates libri tres. Ad Car. Noel Eq. and Baronettum, unus.
Ad Gul. Sedley Eq. and Bar. alter. Ad Rog Owen Eq. aur. tertius.

Monostica quaedam Ethica and Politica veterum sapientum.

All which coming out as successive additions to the several editions of the
three first books of Epigrams, were at length published all in one vol. in oct.
and twelves, not only in England but beyond the Seas. In the year 1619. Joh.
Vicars Usher of Chapter Church hospital in London and a puritanical Poet having
selected many of them from several of the books that were then extant, did
tanslate them into Engl. verse and were that year printed at London in oct.
Thomas Pecke also of the Inner Temple Gent. did translate 600. of the said
Epigrams in Eng. verse, which were printed with Martial de spectaculis, or of
the rarities to be seen in Rome, and with the most select Epigr. of Sir To.
More: To which is annexed a Century of Heroic Epigrams, etc. All published
under the general title of Parnassi puerperium, at Land 1659. in oct. And
lastly Tho. Harvey has Englished most, or all of them; but these I have not
yet seen. The first Latin impressions of the author Owen, being greedily
bought, and taken into the hands of all ingenious Scholars, and forthwith
conveyed beyond the Seas, they came at length into the hands of the Romish
Inquisitors after Heretical matters in printed books, who finding dangerous
things in them, especially these two verses following, the book was put, into
the the Index expurgatorius. An (...) Romae, sub judice lis est.
(...) Romae, nemo suisse negat.


For which verses, and others of the like nature, Owen's Uncle, who was a
Papist, or at least Popishly affected, (from whom he expected Legacies,) dashed
his name out from his last Will and Testament; which was the chief reason, that
he ever after lived in a poor condition. He died in sixteen hundred twenty and
two, Paul's Cathedra within the City of London, at the charge of the
beforementioned Dr. Williams; who also, soon after, caused a monument to be
erected to his memory on a pip^^^ next to the Consistory stairs, with his
Effigies (a shoulder-piece in brass) crowned with Laurel, and six verses to be
engraven under it. The two first of which runs thus: Parva tibi status ^st,
quiae parva statura, supellex
Parva, volat (...) magna per ora liber.


The rest you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 144. a where
the Reader is to note that by the error of the Printer, it is said that Joh.
Owen died 1623. and not in 1622. as before it is told you. As for the generosity
of Dr. Williams done to the memory of this little Poet, Richard ^rach has an
Epigram in his Epigrammatum H^catontades du^. Land. 1627. oct. number. 3. But that
which I must note of him farther is, that whereas he had made many Epigrams on
several People, so but few were made on, or written to, him. Among which few,
one was written by Joh. In (...) a Etigr. p. 1^9.
Stradling, and another by Joh. Dunbar In c^ent. 4. Epigram. Land. 1616. (...)
a Scot.

Tho. Edmonds Comptroller of the Kings household, was born in Shropshire, (at
Shrawardine, as it is said,) became either Clerk or Chorister of Allsouls coll.
in 1585. aged 19. took one degree in Arts, and then was chosen Fellow of that
house 1590. Four years after he proceeded in that Faculty, and then leaving the
coll. was mostly, by his Fathers endeavors, made successively Secretary, as
it is said, for the French tongue to Q. Elizab. about 1601. Remembrancer of the
City of London, Master of the Requests, Muster-Master at Brill in Zeland, one
of the Clerks of the Council, and in 1617. a Knight. He was a learned person,
was generally skilled in all Arts and Sciences, and famous as well for
military, as for politic affairs, and therefore esteemed by all an ornament to
his degree and profession. He has written and published,

Observations upon the five first books of Caesar's commentaries, etc. Land.
1600. fol.

Observat. on the sixth and seventh book of Caesar's com. Land. 1600. fol.

Observat. on Caesar's com. of the Civil Wars, in 3 books Land. 1609. fol. On
which, or the former observat. Ben. Johnson In (...) first vol. of his works,
in his Etigr. p. 34. (...)
has two Epigrams. All, or most of, these observations, are reprinted with an
addition of an eighth commentary on the Wars of Gallia, written by A. Hir^^us
Pa^sa, beginning where Caesar left, and deducing the History to the time of the
Civil Wars; with our authors short the observ^^ (...) upon them. -- Printed at
the (...) in the Strand, (...) London, 1677. fol. Before which edition is the
life of (...) (with an account of his Medals) (...) conected, and enlarged. In
1565. Arthur Golding of (...) published (...) English translation of Caesar's
commentaries, but whether he made any observations or notes on them, (...) Our
learned author Sir Clem. (...) died within the Perish of Sr. Martin in the
Fields near to London, on the twelfth Lib. certif. in (...) Armorum, l. 22.
fol. 62. b.
day of Odo^ in sixteen hundred twenty and two, and was buried in the little
Chapel belong^^^ to his M^nnour of Preston near to the ancient B^rough of
(...). (...)
Over his grave is a comely mon. erected, having an English and a Lat. epitaph
inscribed thereon. The last of which being already In Hist. (...) l. niv. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 181. b.
printed, you shall therefore have the other, as most proper for this place.
Here lies Sir Clement Edmonds Knight, one of the Clarks of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council. His dextrous Pen made him worthily esteemed excellent
in his own vocation; and in the art Military, ly Caesar's confession, an
understanding Soldier. He lived faithfully, industrious in his place, and died
religiously constant in the belief of the resurrection, etc. One Sir Tho.
Edmonds Knight (a Member of the Privy Council) died in Nov. 1639. and left
behind him a Daughter named Muriel, the Wife of Rob. Mildmay Esquire Which Sir
Thomas, I take to be the same with Tho. Edmonds, (Brother to Sir Clem.) who
being made Treasurer of the Kings household 19. of Jan. 1617. was about that
time sent by his Majesty Ambassador to Bruxells, and elsewhere.

NICHOLAS BYFIELD, Son of Rich. Byfield, Stratford upon Av^n, in Jan. 1596.)
was born Reg. Ma^tic. Univers Ox^n. P. page (...)
in Warwickshire, became a Batler (...) a Servitour of Exeter coll. in
Lent-Term, an. 1596. aged 17. at least, continued under a severe discipline
more than 4 years, but never took a degree. Afterward entering into the Sacred
Function, he left the University, and had intentions to go into Ireland to
obtain preferment in the Church, but at Chester, in his way thither, he was,
upon the delivery of a noted Sermon at that place, invited to be Pastor of St.
Peter's Church there: Which invitation being esteemed by him as a great
providence, he willingly accepted. So that continuing there several years a
constant Preacher, was much followed and admired by the precise party, who
esteemed his preaching profitable, and his life pious. He was a strict observer
of the Lords day at that place, and preached and wrote for the sincere
observance of it, which caused some Pens to be active against him, particularly
that of Edw. Breerwood, who being a native of that City, was sometimes his
auditor. At length being called thence, he had the Benefice of Istleworth in
Middlesex conferred on him, where he remained to his dying day. He was a person,
in the opinion of the Zealots, of profound judgment, strong memory, sharp wit,
quick invention, and of unwcaried industry. Also that in his Ministry he was
powerful, and that unto all turns and upon all occasions, not only at Chester,
but at Istleworth, where his preaching and expounding were very frequent, etc.
The books that he has written are these.

An Essay concerning the assurance of God's love and of man's Salvation. Land.
1614. oct.

Exposition on the Epist. to the Colossians, etc. Land. 1615. and 28. etc. in
fol. It Is the substance of near 7 years week days Sermons at Chester.

Directions for the private reading of the Scriptures, etc. Land. 1618. etc.
oct.

Treatise showing how a godly Christian may support his heart with comfort
against all the distresses, which by reason of any affliction or temptation can
befall him in this life. Land. in oct. This was published afterward again, in
the Marrow of the Oracles of God.

Beginning of the Doctrine of Christ, or a Catalogue of Sins. Land. 1619. 20.
in tw. Sometimes bound in two vol.

The Marrow of the Oracles of God. Land. 1620. etc. and 1660. in tw. Which
edit. of 1660. contains these six treatises following, viz. (1) (...)
principles or the pattern of (...) words, etc. Printed the first time at Land.
1618. oct. (2) The spiritual touch stone: or, the signs of a godly man, etc.
Land. 1620. and 3^. in tw. (3) The (...) of a wicked man. Land. 1620. in tw.
(4) The promises: or, a treatise showing how a godly Christian may support his
(...) with comfort, etc. See before. (5) The (...) holy life toward God, m^n,
and our selves. Land. 1619. 20. in tw. (6) The cure of the fear of death, etc.
Land. 1618. oct.

Commentary o^ Sermons on the 2 chap. of the 1 Epist. of S. Peter. Land. 1623.
qu.

The principal grounds of Christian Religion, -- Several times printed.

Sermons on the first ten verses of the third chap. of the 1 Epist. of S.
Peter. Land. 1626. qu. Which Sermons with the Commentary (...) Sermons
beforementioned, came out afterward with additions, (...) A commentary upon
the three first chapters of the (...) etc. in fol. In 1637. (if not before)
came out a Com. upon the whole first Epistle, in fol. under the name of Nic.
Byfield.

Answer to Mr. Breerwoods treatise of the Sabbath. Oxon. 1630. 31. Written by
him while he was at Chester.

Exposition on the Apostles Creed. Land. 1626. qu.

Light of Faith and way of Holiness. Land. 1630. oct.

Signs of Gods love to us. Ibid. 1631. oct.

The practice of Christianity: or, an Epitome of Mr. Rich. Rogers's seven
treatises. -- The said Treatises were published by Mr. Rogers 1610. and were
epitomized by this Nicholas, (as it seems,) and not by Richard, Byfield, as
some think.

Several Sermons. As (1) On Psalm. 72. 18, 19. (2) On Joh. 5. 28, 29. etc. It Is
commonly reported that this person died at Istleworth beforementioned, in
sixteen hundred twenty at two: (...)
Which, if true, his writings and works show him (being not then above 44 years
of age) to have been a person of great parts, industry and readiness. He left
behind him a Son named Adoniram Byfield, a most ^ealous and forward Brother for
the Cause, of whom I shall make mention in R. Byfield in the 2 vol. of this
work.

Rob. Full. a Frenchman born, (or at least a borderer on France, and by
profession a Carver of wood or stone,) by Catherine his Wife, descended from
the ancient and worshipful house of the Cressets of Shropshire, was born in the
ancient Borough of Southampton, educated in Lat. and Gr. in the Free School
there, first under John Hurloke, then under Dr. Hadrian Saravia. At length
being made ripe for the University, he was taken from School into the Family of
Dr. Rob. Horn B. of Winchester, where spending some time in study, was by him
made his Secretary, and after his death was continued in that office under Dr.
Joh. Watson his Successor, at the request of Dr. W. Barlow Brother-in-Law to
Horn. But Watson dying also after he had sat three years, our author Fuller,
as being weary of civil affairs, retired to his home with a resolution to
follow those studies which his Genie did then very much direct him to. But
before he was settled, he was invited to instruct in juvenile learning Henry,
William, and Oliver, Wallop, the Sons of a Knight of Hampshire. With the two
former he afterward went as a Tutor to this University, and in the beginning
of Mich. Term, 1584. they were all matriculated as Members of St. Jo^ns coll.
our author Fuller being then 27 years of age. But his Pupils remaining there
but a little while, William (...) to his home, and our author with Hen. Wallop
translated themselves to Heart hall; where, without any neglect of his precious
time, he improved his studies to a miracle* took both the degrees in Arts, and
then retired to his own Country. At length taking the Sacred Function upon him,
he became Rector of a small Village called Allington alias Allington near to
Amesbury in Wilts. but so small was his Benhce, that it could not maintain an
ingenion person in common necessaries. Here he was as a Candle put under a
Bush^l, so private was his place and employment, yet so dear were his studies
to him, that by passing through all difficulties, he attained to so great a
proficiency in the Tongues, and was so happy in pitching upon useful
difficulties, tending to the understanding of the Scripture, that he surpassed
all Critics of his time. Afterward he was made Prebendary of Vlfcomb in the
Church of Salisbury, and Rector of Bishops-Waltham in (...) Which last he
obtained, as it is said, by the (...) of Dr. (...) B. of Winton. This most
renowned (...) has written these things following.

(...) lib. (...) Heidelb. 1612. oct. To which he added a fourth book,
published with the former three at Oxon. 1616. and at Land. 1617. qu. But these
(...) coming soon after into the hands of Joh. Drusius an old (...) (whom I
have before mentioned,) he gr^w angry and jealous, as one Tho. Fulier in his
Worthy.
tells us, (...) he should be out-shined in his own sphere. Whereupon he spared
not to cast some drops of ink upon him for being his Plagiary, and taking his
best notes from him without any acknowledgment. But our author knowing himself
guiltless, as having never seen Drusius his works, added a fifth and sixth book
to the former, intit.

Miscellanea Sacra, cum Apologia contra V. Cl. Johan. Drusium. Lugd. Bat. 1622.
qu. and at Argent. 1650. etc. All which Miscellanies are remitted into the
ninth vol. of the Critics, and scattered and dispersed throughout the whole
work of M. Poole's Synopsis. He has also written,

Exposition of Rabbi Mordochie Nathans Hebr. roots, with notes upon it. -- MS.
in the Archieves of Bodies Library. Which book does show his excellent skill in
the Hebrew, and in other Philological learning.

Lexicon. -- MS. Which, had he lived, he would, with his Exposition, have
published. At length breathing out his divine Soul at Allington
beforementioned, about the tenth day of Febr. in sixteen hundred twenty and
two, 1622-3.
was buried in the middle of the Chancel of the Church there, on the 13. of the
same month, and thereupon his Prebendship of Sarum was conferred on one Tho.
Clerk, 28. Apr. 1623. Besides this Nich. Fuller, was another of both his names
and time, Son of Nich. Fuller of the City of London Merchant, younger Son of
Thom. Fuller of Neats hall in the Isle of Shepy; which Nich. having received
education in one of the Universities, (in Cambridge as it seems, where he was a
Benefactor to Eman. coll.) went afterward to Grays Inn, of which he was at
length a Counselor of note, and a Bencher. But being always looked upon as a
noted Puritan, and Champion of the Nonconformists, pleaded in behalf of his two
Clients Tho. Lad and Rich. Maunsell, (who had been imprisoned by the High
Commission,) and endeavored to prove that the Ecclesiastical Commissioners had
no power by virtue of their Commission to imprison, to put to the Oath ex
officio, or to fine any of his Majesty's Subjects. Whereupon a legal advantage
being given to Archb. Bancroft, Fuller was imprisoned by him, and continued in
custody several years. He has written, An argument in the case of Tho. Lad and
Rich. Maunsel his Clients, proving that Ecclesiastical Commissioners have not
power by virtue of their Commission to imprison, to put to the Oath ex officio,
or to fine any of his Majesty's Subjects. Land. 1607. and 1641. qu. He died in
durance on the 23. of Feb. 1619. aged 76 years, and was buried toward the east
end of the south Isle joining to the Church of Thatcham in Berks, (in which
Parish his Seat called Chamber-house is situated.) leaving then behind him two
Sons, Nicholas and Daniel, besides Daughters. Nicholas, who had been a Student
in Queens coll. in this Univ. of Oxon, was a Knight while his Father lived, but
dying 30. of July 1621. was buried near to the grave of his said Father.

JOHN COMBACH ( Combadius) was born in Wetteraw a part of Germany, educated in
the Academy of Marpurg within the dominion of the Lantgrave of Hesse, retired
to Oxon to complete that learning which he had begun in his own Country, about
1608, and the next year I find him a ^^journour of Exeter college, where he was
then noted to be a very good Philosophical Disputant, and a great admirer of
Holland and Prideaux, especially the l^st. After he had laid the foundation of
one or more books there, he retired to (...) of which, being M. of A. he became
Ordinary Professor of Philosophy thereof, and much famed for the books that he
published in that Faculty. Among which are some of these following.

Antidotum oppositum M. Joh. H^sselbeinio, in quo epriscae Philosophiae and
Sch^asticorum d^tri^^, 1 F^rr^rum divisio cruitur. 2. Propri^rum communicatio
destruitur, etc. Marpurg. Cattorum 1608. oct.

Antidoti lib. 2. circa (...) partium integrantium. Marp. Cat. 1608. oct.

Metaphysicorum lib. singu^^^. Marp. C^t. 1613. 20. oct. etc. Dedicated, by the
fast Epistle before it, to the Vichancellour, Heads of Colleges and Halls in
Oxon, and the rest of (...) the^e. The 2 Epist. is written to his (...) Rector.
of Exeter coll.

Liber de homine (...)

^

Physicorum libri iv. juxta (...) Marp. 1620. oct.

Actus solennis promotionis xiii. (...) bitae in Acad. Marpurge^s^ etc. (...)
things, as it is probable, he has (...)

have not yet seen. While he studied in Exeter college (where he contracted
friendship with Will. Helm the Subrector, a man of rare piety, and with G.
Hakewell R. Vilvaine and others) studied also one of his Countrymen, a quick
Disputant, who writes himself Henr. Petreus, afterward a learned man, Doctor
of Philosophy and Physic and Dean of the faculty of Philosophy at Marpurg for
a time, about 1613.

Kent, (at Egerton as I have been informed) sent to Magd. coll. in the
beginning of the year 1610. aged 18 where continuing a severe student (under
the tuition of R. Capell) till after he had completed the degree of Bach. by
determination, which was in Lent 1613. he retired to Magd. hall adjoining,
became a noted reader and a tutor there, took the degree of M. of A. entered
into sacred Orders, made Div. reader of that house, became a famous preacher, a
well studied Artist, a skilful Linguist, a good Orator, an expert Mathematician
and an ornament to the Society among whom he lived. All which accomplishments
were knit together in a body of about 32 years of age, which had it lived to
the age of man, might have proved a prodigy of learning. Adrian Heereboord
sometimes professor of Philosophy in the University of Leyden, is very profuse
in his commendations of this our author and his works; and good reason he has
for so doing, for in his book entit Printed at Amsterdam 1665. in qu.
Maletemata Philosophica (wherein he takes upon him to confute the commonly
entertained and old Aristotelian opinion asserting the substantiality of the
vegetative and sensitive Souls to be different and distinct from that of
matter) he has taken a great quantity from them, especially in his four
disputations De formis, which are mostly composed from our athour Pemble's book
De formarum origin. The works of the said W. Pemble are these.

Vindiciae gratiae: A plea for grace, more especially the grace of faith. Ox.
1629. qu. (sec. edit.)

Vindiciae fidei: A treatise of justification by faith. Ox. 1625. qu. published
by Joh. Geree sometimes M. A. of Madg. hall. Our authors mind did run so much
upon this subject, that he said, when he was upon his death bed, that he would
dye in it, viz. in his persuasion of justification by righteousness of Christ.

Treatise of the providence of God.

The book of Ecclesiastes briefly explained. -- Printed 1628. qu.

The period of the Persian Monarchy, wherein sundry places of Ezra, Nehemiah
and Daniel are cleared. Land. 1631. qu.

Exposition on the first nine chapters of Zachary. Land. 1629. qu.

Five godly and profitable Sermons. Land. 1628. 29. qu.

Fruitful Sermons upon the 1 Cor. 15. 18, 19. Land. 1629. qu.

Introduction to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Land. 1628. 29. Land. 1639. oct.

De formarum origin. Ibid. 1629. in tw. dedic. to Dr. Accepted Frewen. Printed
also at Camb. in tw.

De sensibus internis. Land. 1629. Ox. 1647. in tw.

Enchiridion oratorium. Ox. 1633. qu. etc.

A sum of moral Philosophy. Oxon. 1630. qu. All which books or Treatises
(those only that were written in English) were remitted into one volume, and
printed several times. The third impression was at Land. 1635. and the fourth
impression at Ox. 1659. both in fol.

Introduction to Geography. Ox. 1685. qu. At length our author (a zealous
Calvinist) retiring to the house of the beforementioned Rich. Capell minister
of Eastington alias Easton near to the City of Gloucester to make some
continuance there for the sake of study and health, died of a burning Fever in
sixteen hundred twenty and three, and was buried in the yard under the great
Yew-Tree, Eastington Church. Over his Grave was a stone soon after laid, with
these words engraved thereon. Here lies the body of William Pemble master of
Arts and preacher, who died 14 Apr. an. 1623.

Joh. Sprint, descended from those of his name living in the City of Bristow,
was born, as I conceive, there, or in Glocestershire near to it, elected
Student of Chapter Chapter in 1592. took the degrees in Arts, and some time after
became Vicar of Thornbury in the said county. Thence he removed to London, was
cried up by the Citizens for a godly and frequent preacher and by them much
followed, but was cut off in the prime of his years when great matters were
expected from him. He was a grave and pious Divine, yet for the most part
disaffected to the ceremonies of the Church of England while he continued at
Thornbury. At length upon the gentle persuasions of Mr. Sam. Burton Archdeacon
of Glouc. he did not only conform, but was a great instrument in persuading
others to do the like by a book that he wrote and published called Cassander
Anglicus, which I shall anon mention. His works are these.

Propositions tending to prove the necessary use of the Christian Sabbath, or
Lords day, etc. Land. 1607. qu. and in 1635. in tw. or oct.

The practice of that sacred day, framed after the rules of Gods word --
printed with the former.

The sum of Christian religion by way of question and answer. Land. 1613. oct.

Cassander Anglicus: showing the necessity of conforming to the prescribed
ceremonies of our Church, in case of deprivation. Land. 1618. qu. dedic. to
Sam. Burton Archd. of Glouc. Whereupon came out a brief and plain answer to the
first reason of it, which was replied upon by Sprint, but I have not yet seen
it.

The Christians sword and buckler; or, a letter sent to a man seven years
greviously afflicted in conscience and fearfully troubled in mind, etc. Land.
1638. oct. These are all the pieces I think that he has written, which are
published, and therefore I shall only let the reader know that he was buried
within the precincts of the Church of S. Anne situated in the place called the
Blackfriers, in London (of which he seems to have been Minister or Lecturer) on
the seventh of May in sixteen hundred twenty and three. Hist. and Antiq. Univ.
Oxon. lib. 1. p. 309. b. His Father Dr. Sprint, who was Dean of Bristow and a
frequent preacher (but a Calvinist) I shall mention more at large in the Fasti,
under the year 1574. not as a Writer but as a D. of D. and rich Dignitary.

PHILIP CLUVER, ( Cluverius) the Son of a Dantzick the chief town of the
province of Prussia in Poland, but descended from an ancient and gentile family
of his name living in the Duchy of Bremen in Lower Saxony, instructed in his
puerile years at home, in his youthful in the royal Court of Poland, where he
learned among the Courtiers the exact speaking of the Polish tongue and their
manners. Thence his Father sent him into Germany, where he received a command
from him to apply his mind solely to the study of the Civil Law. Whereupon he
journeyed to Leyden in Holland and did endeavor to follow it; but his Genie
being naturally inclined to Geography, he followed for altogether that study,
especially upon the persuasions of Joseph Scaliger, who had perused his Table
of Italy, which he had composed while he was a youth in Poland. Thence, partly
to see the world, but more for the conversation of Just. Lipsius, he took a
journey into Brabant, but missing him, was dispoiled by thieves, who left him
in a manner naked. Thence he returned to Leyden, and afterward went into
Bohemia and Hungary, where coming to the knowledge of one Popel a Baron who
had been closely confined by the Emperor for some misdemeanors, did translate
his Apology (written in his own defense) into the Latin tongue. Which coming
to the ear of the Emperor, Cluver was thereupon imprisoned. Afterward, being
set at liberty, he traveled into Scotland, England, France, Germany and Italy.
In England his chief place of residence was in this University, particularly in
Exter coll. of which he became a sojournour for the sake of Holland and
Prideaux in 1609. age 29, where being settled he wrote his book De tribus Rheni
alveis, as I shall tell you anon. In Italy he became acquainted with some of
the Cardinals, who held him in great esteem for his curious and exact knowledge
in Geography, the Greek and Latin tongues, and for his mavelous knowledge in
the Dutch, German, French, Italian, Bohemian, Hungarian, Polonian and British
Language. Afterward he returned to Oxon again, being then highly valued by Mr.
Prideaux for one or more of his things then published; and had offers of
promotion tendered unto him. But Leyden being the place of his delight, he
retired thither, and tho he could get no place of benefit there, yet the
curators of that University gave him an yearly stipend for the encouragement of
his studies, as being a person repleated with all humane literature, ancient
Histories, and Geography. He is styled by a certain Joh. Mich. Dilber in
Disputat. Acad.
author vir stupendae lectionis and curae, and by Ger. Jo. Vossius De Hist.
Graecis
another princeps aetatis nostrae Geographus, and Idem in Hist. Pelag.
magnum Germaniae ornamentum. His works are,

De tribus Rheni alveis and ostiis; item de quinque populis quondam accolis,
etc. Lugd. Bat. 1611. qu. This book was written in Oxon, with the helps of the
public Library, in the register of which place, as also in one of the public
registers of this University, the author is written Philippus Cluverius
Generosus Borussus.

Germaniae antiquae libri 3. Lugd. Bat. 1616. fol.

Vindelicia and Noricum. Printed there also the same year, with the next book
going before.

Sicilia antiqua, cum minoribus insulis ei adjacentibus lib. 2. Lugd. Bat.
1619. fol. Printed with the former.
Sardinia antiqua. Corsica antiqua.


Italia antiqua, etc. Lugd. Bat. 1624. Printed in two Tomes in fol. (with his
picture before the first) containing four books.

Introductionis in Universam Geographiam, tam veterem quam novam, libri sex.
Lugd. Bat 1624. qu. etc.

Disquisitio de Francis and Francia. Printed in Andr. du Chesne his Historiae
Francorum scriptores coetanei. Lut. Par. 1636. p. 175. Our author Cluverius
died Joh. Meursus in Athen. (...) Lugd. Bat. 1625. lib. 2. p. 291. vide etia^
Dan. Hensium in Orat. su^ in obit. Ph. Cluverii. Lugd. Bat. 1624.
of a Consumption, about the month of June, at Leyden in sixteen hundred twenty
and three, John Sigismund Cluver, who was matriculated as a member of Exeter
coll. in 1633. aged 18. a Londoner born, and as Son of Philip Cluverius a
Priest. The same year he was admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. in this
University, in a Surrey place, and afterward became a learned man, but is not
to be understood to be the same with Joh. Cluver author of Historiarum totius
mundi Epitome, etc. Lugd. Bat. 1631. qu. for he was born in the province of
Stormaren in Denmark, was D. D. of the Academy of Sor a in the Island of
See-landt in the said Kingdom and afterward superintendent of South Dithmarsh.

Oxfordshire, being of the same family with those of his surname, who lived at
Burford, was entered a Student of this University about 1566. and took the
degree of Master of Arts as a member of Glouc. hall. Afterward retiring to his
Estate at Shipton under wood, near to Burford, lived as a Gentleman there many
years, and employed his time (being a zealous and harmless Puritan) in virtuous
industry and piety. He has written several books, as I have been informed by
persons of his neighborhood, but I have not seen any, only

An abridgment of the holy history of the old Testament, from Adam to the
incarnation of Christ. Land. 1594. July or Aug. in sixteen hundred twenty and
three, and was buried, as I conceive, at Shipton beforementioned, where'in the
Chapter yard at the East end of the Chancel were some of his Surname buried before
his time. I find one Sim. Wisdom to have been Alderman of Burford
beforementioned, and to have given constitutions and orders for the government
of a Free School in the said Town, 13 Elizab. Whereupon he was then, as he is
now, reputed the Founder of the said School. He died at Burford in 1587.
leaving behind him a brother named Tho. Wisdom, a nephew named Ralph, and a
grandson called Simon, Son of his Son, called Will. Wisdom. Which Simon, if he
be not the same with the writer, may be the same with another Simon of S.
Albans hall in the latter end of Qu. Elizab.

Bampton or Banton in Westmoreland, made a poor serving child of Queens coll.
in 1602. aged 17, afterward Tabarder, and when M. of A. perpetual Fellow, an.
1611. About that time being in holy orders, he was made Lecturer of S. Helens
Church in Abendon in Berks, and minister of Culham near to that Town. At both
which places he was much followed, and beloved of all for his smooth and
edifying way of preaching, and for his exemplary life and conversation. After
he had taken one degree in Divinity (for he was Doctor of that fac.) he was
made Lecturer of S. Mary-Overhee in Southwark, where also he was much followed
and admired. At length being desirous to finish a work of charity which he had
began, took a journey into his own Country, in 1623. and there at his native
place put his last hand to the finishing of a Free School, which he before had
began, as his Son Tho. Sutton sometimes of C. C. coll. Oxon. has told me, but
in his return from Newcastle to London by Sea, was unfortunately drowned, as I
shall tell you anon. He was a person esteemed by all that knew him to have been
furnished with many rich endowments, and as a true servant of God, to have
employed his talent faithfully and fruitfully. His works are only,

Sermons and Lectures, as (1) Englands summons, Sermon at Paul's Cross, on Hosea
4. 1, 2, 3. Land. 1613. oct. (2) Engl. second summons, preached at the same
place on Rev. 3. 15, 16. Land. 1615. oct. These two were reprinted in one vol.
at Land. 1616. in oct. (3) The good fight of faith; Sermon. before the Artillery
company, on 2 Timothy 6. 12. Ibid. 1626. qu. published by Francis Little Student
of Chapter Chapter whose Sister, the Daughter of Francis Little of Abendon Brewer and
Inholder, Dr. Tho. Sutton our author had taken to Wife while he was Lecturer
there. (4) Jethroes counsel to Moses: or, a direction for Magistrates, Sermon. at
S. Saviors in Southwark 5. Mar. 1621. before the honorable Judges, on Exodus
18. 21. Land. 1631. qu. Printed by a certain Bookseller, who, as it is said,
took it in shorthand from Dr. Suttons mouth.

Lectures upon the eleventh chapt. to the Romans. Land. 1632. qu. Published by
Joh. Downham Bac. of Div. (brother to Dr. George Downham B. of Londonderry in
Ireland) who married the widow of the author Sutton, and promised in his
Epistle to the Reader, set before them, that if the said Lectures took with the
men of the world, to put forth Lectures on the 12. chapt. to the Romans, and on
a great part of the 119. Psalm, which Dr. Sutton had left behind him in MS. He
died in the Ocean, (as I have already told you) before he had attained to high
noon of perfection, on S. Barthelmews day (24. Aug.) in sixteen hundred twenty
and three; Sutton, was (as is supposed) one, and forthwith buried in the yard
belonging to the Church of Aldborough a Seaport Town in Suffolk. As soon as
the news of this great loss came to London one Rob. Drurie who was first a R.
Catholic, afterward a Protestant and at length a Jesuit, did much See in a
book intit. Poetici Cona^^^ written (...) p. 11. 12.
rejoice at it, as a great judgment befallen on Dr. Sutton for his forward zeal
in preaching against the Papists; but the 26. of October. following he the said
Drurie was suddenly slain by the fall of the floor at an assembly of R.
Catholics in the place called the Blackfriers in London.

WILLIAM CAMDEN, surnamed the learned, Sampson Camd. a Native of the City of
Lichfield, Citizen and one of the Society of Painter-stayners of London, by his
Wife, descended See in Camd. Britannia in Cumberland in his discourse of
Wirkington.
from the ancient family of the Curwens of Wirkington in Cumberland; was born
in the Old Baily, situated partly in the Parish of S. Sepulcher and partly in
S. Martin near Ludgate in the said City, on the second day of May, 5. Edw. 6.
Dom. 1551. When this most eminent person (of whom I shall be more particular
than of another author) was a child, he received the first knowledge of letters
in Chapter Church hospital in London, then newly founded for Blew-coated children,
where being fitted for Grammar learning, he was sent to the Free School,
founded by Dr. Colet near to S. Paul's Cathedral. About which time (1563.) he
being infected with the Plague, was sent to Islington, where he remained for
some time to the great loss of his learning. In 1566. (8. Elizab.) he was sent
to Oxford, and being placed in Madg. coll. in the condition of a Chorister or
Servitour, did perfect himself in Grammar learning in the Free School
adjoining, then lately presided by D. Tho. C^^per, afterward Bishop of Linc.
But missing, as it is said a Demies place of that coll. tho of great desert, and
partly grounded in Logic, he was transplanted to an ancient hostle called
Broadgates, now Pembr. coll. where he continued two years and an half under the
tuition of a great encourager of learning, called Dr. Tho. Thornton canon of
Chapter Chapter who finding our author to be a young man of great virtue, and in him
tokens of future worth, he took him to Chapter Chapter and gave him entertainment in
his Lodgings so long as he continued in the University. About that time he
being a candidate for a Fellowship in Alls. coll. lost it for desending the
religion then established, as Dr. (afterward Sir) Dan. Donn at that time
Fellow, did several times testify, and would often relate how our said author
Camden was opposed by the Popish party of that house. In the month of June
1570. he supplicated Regist. Univ. Oxon. KK. sol. 95. b.
the ven. Congregation of Regents, that whereas he had spent four years in the
study of Logic, he might he admitted Bach. of Arts, but what answer was made
thereunto, or whether he was then admitted, it appears not. In 1571. he
relinquished his conversation with the Muses, to the great reluctance of those
who were well acquainted with the pregnancy of his parts, and whether he was
afterward favored in his Scholastical endeavors by Dr. Gabr. Goodman Dean of
Westminster, whom he acknowledges In his Britannia. in (...) in his dis^ of
(...)
to have been Patron of his studies, I cannot positively affirm. In 1573. he
returned to Oxon for a time, and supplicated again in the beginning of March
for the said degree; which though, as it seems, granted, and so, I presume,
took it, yet he did not complete it by Determination in Schoolstreet. In 1575.
he was made second Master of Westminster School, upon the recommendations of
Godfrey, Nephew to Gabriel, Goodman beforementioned, (which Godfrey put him
upon the study of Antiquities, and bought, and (...) Gods. Goodman. Bish. of
(...) of K. James, by Sir (...)
gave him books) and in 1581. he contracted an entire friendship with Barnab.
(...) the learned Chief Justice of France, called by some (...). While he
continued in teaching at Westminster. God so blessed his labors that Dr. King Bishop
of London, Noyle Archb. of York, Parry Bishop of St. Asaph, etc. (to say
nothing of persons employed in those times in eminent place abroad, and many of
special note at home of all degrees,) did acknowledge themselves to have been
his Scholars. Besides also, as a testimony of his sincere love to the Church of
England, (which some in his time did doubt,) he brought there to Church diverse
Gentlemen of Indeed, as the Walshes, Nugents, O-Rayley, She Is, the eldest Son
of the Archb. of Casshills, Pet. Lombard a Merchant's Son of Waterford, a Youth
of admirable docility, (the same who was afterward titular Archb. of Armagh,
Pri^ate of Ireland, domestic Prelate and Assistant of his Holiness the Pope,
and author of a book intit. De regno Hiberniae, Sanctorum Insula commentarius.
Lov. 1632. qu.) and others bred P^pishly, and so affected. In 1582. he took a
journey through Suffolk into Yorkshire, and returned through Lancashire in the
month of April, in order to the completing of his Britannia, which he says he
published in the same year, having with great industry, at spare hours, and on
festival days, composed it. In 1588. Jun. 3. he, by the name and tit. of Will.
Camden Bach. of Arts of Chapter Chapter supplicated the ven. Convocation, that whereas
he had spent 16 years, from the time he had taken the degree of Bachelaur, in
the study of Philosophy and other liberal A^^, he might be dispensed with for
the reading of three solemn Lectures, and so be admitted to proceed in that
(...) Which supplication was granted conditionally, that he stand in the Act
following, but whether he was admitted, or stood, it does not appear in the
Registers. In the same month and year he took a journey ( Oxford being in his
way) to Ilfarcomb in Devonshire, in order to obtain more knowledge in the
Antiquities of that Country, and elsewhere, for the next edition of his (...),
and on the 6 Feb. following, he was made Preb. (...) in the Chapter of Salisb. in
the place of one J. Hotman; which Prebendship he kept to the time of his death,
and (...) succeeded him. The said journey, and (...) that he took for that
purpose, the charges of them (...) defrayed by the aforesaid Dr. Gab. Goodman.
In (...) he journeyed into Wales in the company of Franc. (...) of Chapter Chapter
afterward author of the Commentary (...) Bishops, and in 1592. Oct. 26. he was
taken with a Qa^rtan Ague* which made him often purge Blood. In March 1592-3.
he was made chief Master of Westminster School, in the place of Dr. Ed. Grant,
and in 1594. in the month of June, he was freed from his Ague. In 1596. he
traveled to Salisbury and Wells, for the obtaining of more knowledge in
Antiquities, and returned through Oxon, where he visited most, if not all, of
the Churches and Chapels, for the copying out of the several Monuments and
Arms in them, which were reduced by him into a book written with his own hand,
by me seen and perused. In 97. he fell into a most dangerous sickness;
whereupon being taken into the house of one Cuthbert Line, he was cured by the
care of that persons Wife, and in that year he published his Greek Grammar. On
the 22. of Oct. the same year he was, for fashion sake, (after he had refused a
Mastership of the Requests, which was offered to him,) created Herald of Arms,
called Richmond, because no person can be King before he is Herald, and the
next day he was created Clarenceaux King of Arms, in the place of Rich. Lee Esquire
who died on the 23. of Sept. before-going. This was done by the singular favor
of Q. Elizabeth, at the incessant supplication of his Patron Sir Foulk Grevill,
afterward Lord Brook; both of them having an especial respect for him, and his
great learning, in English and other Antiquities. In 1600. he took a journey in
Summer time to Carlisle in the company of the eminent Antiquary Rob. Cotton Esquire
(afterward a Baronet,) for the viewing of some Northern Antiquities to be put
into another edit. of his Britannia, and returned not till Dec. following. In
1603. (1 Jac. 1.) when the Plague raged in London, he retired to the house of
his Friend Rob. Cotton beforementioned, at Connigton in Huntingdonshire, where
he remained till the Nativity of our Savior. In 1606. he sent his first
Letters to Jac. Aug. Thuanus the most noted Historiographer of France, from
which time to the death of Thuanus, which was in Apr. 1617. there was a
constant commerce of Letters between them. Our author Camden styles him In (...)
Galliae Lumen and Historicorum nostri saeculi princeps, to whom he had
communicated many material matters concerning English affairs, which were
afterward remitted into the several books of Histories published by him the
said Thuanus. In 1607. Sept. 7. he fell from his Horse, and dangerously hurt
his Leg: So that being perfectly lame, he kept up till the 4. of July
following; at which time he went to order, set forth, and attend the funeral of
Sir Joh. Fortescue Knight. In 1618. he began to put in order and digest his
Annals of Q. Elizabeth, and in 1609. being taken with a grievous disease, on
his birthday, he voided blood twice. At which time one being sick of the
Plague in the house next to that where he then was, he was conveyed to that of
Dr. Will. Heather in Westminster, and was cured of his disease by Dr. Joh.
Gifford sometimes Fellow of New coll. in Oxon. Whereupon betaking himself to
Chiselhurst in Kent, in the month of August, he remained there till the 28. of
Oct. following. In the beginning of the year 1613. at which time he attended
the Funeral of Sir Tho. Bodley at Oxon. he had the degree of Master of Arts
offered to him, but refused, as it seems, to take it, it being then too late to
gain any benefit or honor thereby, and soon after was made the first
Historiographer of Chelsey coll. by the Founder thereof. In 1619. Jul. 1. his
name being then spread over the learned World, six Noblemen of Germany gave him
a visit at his house in Westminster, in whose Albums, (after they had
complemented him for his high worth,) he, at their desire, wrote his name and a
Latin sentence, as a testimony of respect to them, which they took for a very
great honor; and on the 18. of Febr. following he coughed up blood so much,
that he was left in a manner dead and deprived of all sense. At that time Dr.
Gifford beforementioned taking from him ^ ounces of blood, cured him. In 1621.
May 5. he, by his Deed then bearing date, founded the History Lecture of this
University: Which Deed being published in a Convocation of Regents and
Non-Regents on the 17. of May 1622. he was in the year following declared a
public Benefactor of this University of Oxon. In 1622. June 7. he fell again
into a most dangerous sickness, and on the 16. of Aug. following while he ^^te
musing in his Chair, the office of his hands and feet suddenly failed him:
Whereupon falling on the ground, ro^^ again much distempered, and was never
afterward well ti^l death conveyed him to the habitation prepared for old age.
He was a very good natured man, was very mild and charitable, and nothing was
wanting in him for the completing a good Christian. He was an exact Critic
and Philologist, an excellent Grecian, Latinist, and Historian, and above all a
profound Antiquary, as his elaborate works testify. All which accomplishments
being compacted in a little body, made him not only admired at home by the
chiefest of the Nobility, and the most learned of the Nation, but also beyond
the Seas, particularly by Ortelius, Lipsius, Dousae, Scaliger, T^uanus,
Grutcrus, Piereskius, Is. Casau^on, Jo. Is. Pontanus, Fra. Swertius, N.
Chytreus, etc. The Epistles of all whom, and of diverse others of lesser note, I
have seen in the Cottonian Library, and collect thence that he was one of the
greatest Scholars of his time (as to the learning he professed) in Christendon.
At home, I am sure he was esteemed the Pausanius of the British Isles, and
therefore his same will be permanent so long as this Kingdom is known by the
name of Britannia. His works are these.

Britannia; sive reg^orum Angliae, Scotiae, Hiberniae, and insularum
adjacentium descriptio. Land. 1582. 85. 87. in oct. Land. 1590. 94. and 1600.
in qu. Land. 1607. in fol. Printed with Maps of every County. Epitomized by
R^gn^rus Vitellius Zirizaeus. Amstel. 1639. in twelv. The folio edit. of 1607.
was translated into English by Philemon Holland of Coventry. -- Land. 1610.
fol. revised and amended. -- Land. 1637. fol. In both which editions are
several of Holland's additions scattered in many places. This Britannia being
much admired in France, was also translated into the Language of that Country,
and printed with Maps in fol. After the first quarto edition came out, one
Ralph Brook, or Brookmonth, Herald of Arms, by the title of York, made answer
to it in a book intit. A discovery of certain errors published in print in the
much commended Britannia. Printed 1594. in qu. In which book the said
Brookmonth endeavors to make the World believe that Camden composed his
Britannia mostly from the Collectanca of Joh. Leland without any
acknowledgment, and at the end of the said Discovery adds a little thing
written by Leland, called, A New-years-gift given of him to K. Hen. 8. etc.
Whereupon came out soon after, against that busy and envious person, (for so
he was by his society accounted,) a Vindication or Reply, written by Camden in
Latin, containing about 30 pages in quarto, but not said when or where printed.
You may sometimes find it bound with the Discovery beforementioned, and at
other times with the Britannia printed in qu. for by it self I have not yet
seen it. A certain credulous (...)
Historian is pleased to set down in his Church History a copy of verses, like
a two-edged Sword that cuts on both sides, reflecting on Camden for Plagiarism
from the said Collectanea. But under favor I think they are unworthily spoken,
and unworthily set down. Why is Camden, I pray, blameworthy for making use of
Leland's Collections? Was it because one was originally of Cambridge, and the
other an Oxford Man? Verily, I think, if the truth could be known, that was the
chief reason of the Historians carping. But let those of his opinion, if any
there be, know, that Camden sought not to suppress those collections, as Pol.
Virgil did certain authors. The other works of Camden are these following.

Instituti^ Gracae Grammatices compendiaria, in usum Regiae Scholae
Westmonasteriersis. Land. 1597 etc. oct.

Reges, Reginae, Nobiles, and alii in Ecclesia collegiata B. Petri
Westmonasterii sepulti, usqu^ ad an. 1600. Land. 1600. and 1606. in about 10
sheets in qu. Involved in a book intit. Monumenta Westmon, ^r, an historical
account of the original, increase, and present State of S. Peter's, or the Abbey
Chapter of Westminster, etc. Land. 1682. in oct. Published by Hen. Keep of the
Inner Temple Gent. sometimes a Gent. Com. of New Inn in Oxon.

Remains concerning Britain: their Languages, Names, Surnames, Allusions, etc.
Land. 1604. 14. etc. qu. Published at first under the two letters of M. N.
which are the two last letters of the authors name. To this book were several
additions made by Jo. Philipot, Herald of Arms, under the title of Somerset. --
Land. 1637. etc. qu. afterward in oct with Camden's picture before all the
editions.

Rerum (...) regnante Eli(...), in 4 parts. The first half, (with an Apparatus
before it,) reaching from the beginning of the Reign of Q. Elizab. to the end
of the year 1588. was printed at Land. in fol. 1615. having had several things
therein before that time expunged, especially such that related to the story of
Mary Q. of Scots. The other half reaching from the beginning of 1589. to the
death of Q. Elizab. and an Appendix, were printed at the same place in fol.
1627. Both printed in two tomes at Leyden in oct. and in a thick oct. at
Amsterdam, 1639. and all translated into English by B. N. Gent. and several
times printed in fol. The last half was translated into English by Thom. Brown
of Chapter Chapter (afterward Canon of Windsore,) and by him intit. Tomus alter and
idem: or, The History, etc. Land. 1629. in qu.

His opinion concerning the High Court of Parliament. Land. 1658. oct. Printed
with the opinions on the same subject of Joh. Doderidge. Arth. Agard, and
Franc. Tate. I have seen also a discourse of his concerning the High
Stewardship of England, but it is not, as I conceive, printed.

Epistolae variae ad viros doctos. Written mostly in Latin.

Annals Regis Jacobi. These reach from the death of Q. Elizab. 24. of March
1602-03. to the 18. of Aug. 1623. and no farther, because the author being then
very ill in body (remaining in that condition till his death) he could not well
continue them any farther: So that there wants memories more than for a year,
to the end of the Reign of K. Jam. 1. These Annals are written with the authors
own hand in fol. being only a Skeleton of a History, or bare touches to put the
author in mind of greater matters, that he had in his head, had he lived to
have digested them, in a full History, as that of Q. Elizabeth. The original
came, after his death, into the hands of Mr. Joh. Hacket, afterward D. D. and
at length Bishop of Lichfield; who, as I have been diverse times informed, did
privately convey it out of the Library of the author, Hacket being then a
Master of Arts of some years standing. This original being communicated by the
said Dr. Hacket, while he was living at Lichfield, to Mr. (afterward Sir)
Will. Dugdale, then Norroy King of Arms, he, contrary to the Doctors knowledge,
took a copy of it, which I have seen and perused at Sir Williams house called
Blithe hall in Warwickshire, but therein I found many mistakes, as it afterward
more evidently appeared to me when that Transcript was put into the Ashmolean
Musaeum. Another copy I have seen in the hands of Sir Hen. St. George,
Clarenceaux King of Arms, which having been transcribed by one that understood
not Latin, are innumerable faults therein, and therefore not at all to be
relied upon. After Dr. Hacket's death the original was put into the Library of
Trin. coll. in Cambridge, where it now remains. Our author Camden did also put
into Latin, Actio in Henricum Garnet Societatis Jesu in Anglia Superiorem, etc.
adjectum est supplicium de Hen. Garnet Londini sumptum, etc. Land. 1607. qu.
And also viewed, corrected, and published certain old writers, to whom he gave
this title, Anglica, Normanica, Hibernica, and Cambrica, per varios authors,
etc. Francof. 1603. 04. fol. The first of which writers is Asser Menevensis his
book, De vita and rebus gestis Regis Aelfredi. At length our author Camden
paying his last debt to nature, in his house at Chiseihurst in Kent, on Sunday
the ninth of Nov. (about 4 or 5 of the clock in the morn.) in sixteen hundred
twenty and three, Westminster, to the house there, where he used to dwell;
where laying in State for some time, 'twas on the 19. day of the same month
carried to St. Peter's, commonly called the Abby-Church within that City,
accompanied by several of the Heralds in their formalities, many of the
Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and others. All which being placed, Dr. Christop.
Sutton, a Prebendary of that Church, stepped up into the Pulpit, and made a true,
grave, and modest commemoration of his life: Adding, that as he was not
sactious in Religion, so neither was he wavering or inconstant, of which he
gave good testimonies at his end, prosessing in the Exordium of his last Will,
that he died, as had lived, in the Faith, Communion, and Fellowship of the
Church of England. Sermon being ended, the body was carried into the S. Cross
Isle, where it was buried in the west side or part of it. As soon as the news
of his death was certified to the Sages or Governors of the University, they,
in gratitude of so worthy a Benefactor as he had been, caused his memory to be
celebrated in an Oration, publicly delivered by the mouth of (...) M. of A.
and Student of Chapter Chapter who was then the Deputy O^^tor. To which Speech many of
the Academians adding verses on the Benefactors death, they were, with the
Speech, printed under the title of Camdeni Insignia. Oxon. 1624. qu. After
these things were done, was a Monument erected on the west Wall of the said S.
cross isle with the bust of the Defunct resting his hand on a book with
Britannia insculp'd on the Leaves thereof. This Monument, which was composed of
black and white Marble was somewhat defaced in 1646. when the Hearse and
Eff^gies of Robert Earl of Essex the Parliamentarian General were cut in pieces
and defaced. The Inscription however being left entire, I caused it to be
printed lib. 2. p. 270 b.
elsewhere. In the last Will and Testam. of this great Scholar, which I have
more than once perused, I find besides his public benefactions, his Legacies
of 16 l. 10 l. and 5 l. to all his learned acquaintance then in being, as to
Ja. Gruter Library Keeper to the Prince Pal. Elector of Heidelberg 5 l. To Mr.
Tho. Allen of Gloc. hall in Oxon. 16 l. To Jo. (...) of the Inner Temple 5 l.
etc. besides a piece of plate to Sir (...) Grevill Lord Brook Chancellor of
the Exchequer, who preferred him gratis to his Office, and another of 16 l.
price to the Company of Painter-Stainers of London, and this to be engraven
thereon, Gul. Camden Clarenceaux filius Sampsonis Camden pictoris Lo^^incosi^.

Joh. White was born in the City of Bristow (in Temple Parish) but descended
from the Whites of Bedfordshire, entered a Student in Madg. hall in the year
1566. or thereabouts, took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and became a noted
and frequent preacher of Gods word. Afterward retiring to London he was made
Minister of St. Gregory's Church near to St. Paul's Cathedral, and at length
Rector of St. Dunstans in (...) where he was held in great esteem for his golly
and practical way of preaching. In 1584. he was licensed to proceed in
Divinity, and in Nov. in the year following he had a Canonry in the Cath. Chapter
of S. Paul, and a Prebendship there called Wenlocks barn conferred upon him by
John Bishop of London, upon the not. death of Reb. Towers Bac. of Div. In Apr.
1592. he was made Treasurer of Salisbury in the place of Dr. Joh. Sprint
deceased, in 91. Canon of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, and in 93. of S. Georges Church at
Windsore. All that he has published are only,

Sermons, as (1) Two Sermon. at S. Paul's in the time of the Plague: the first on
Zeph. 3. 1, 2, 3. the other on Jer. 23. 5, 6. Land. 1577. oct. (2) Fun. Sermon.
on Sir Hen, Sidney, on 1 John* 3. 2, 3. Land. 1586. oct. (3) Sermon. at Paul's
Cross, on the Queens day, 1589. on Luke 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Lo^a. 1589. oct.
and others which I have not yet seen. This worthy Doctor who was esteemed by
all that knew him an honest and generous minded man and a great encourager of
learning, gave up the Ghost on St. David's day (1 Mar.) in sixteen hundred
twenty and three, 1623-24.
and in few days after was solemnly interred in the Chancel of his Church of S*
Dunstan in the West, before mentioned. Soon after, his death being certified to
the Heads of the University, they in honor to his memory caused an Oration to
be publicly delivered by the mouth of Will. Price the first reader of the
Moral Philos. Lecture, lately founded by the said Dr. White. To which speech,
certain Academians adding verses on the benefactors death, were with the speech
printed under the title of Schola moralis (...) Oxon. (...). Oxon. 1624. in 2.
th* in qu. In 1613. he sounded an Alms house in Temple parish within the City
of Brislow, endowing it with 92 l. per a^. in 1621. he founded a moral
philosophy lecture in the University of Oxon, and the same year he settled an
exhibition for five Students in Magd. hall. See (...) in Hist. and (...). Vniv.
Oxon. lib. 2. p. 43. and 370. a. and b. As for his (...) to Sion coll. in
London and to other places, (expending most if not all his estate, which he got
from the Church, on public uses) let others tell you, while I proceed to the
next writer, to be mentioned according to time.

JOHN ^AVOUR* born in the Borough of South(...) in (...) was educated for a
time in Grammatical learning there: Afterward being completed for the
University in (...) School, he was elected Probationer of (...) coll. in 1576.
and two years after was made comp^^t fellow. In (...) he proceeded Doctor of
the civil (...), and in the year following, he became Vicar of Halifax in
Yorks. in the place of Dr. Henry Ledsham sometimes Fellow of Mert. college
resigning. At which place he being settled, he preached every Lords day,
lectur'd every day in the week, exercised justice in the Commonwealth, (being
Justice of Peace as Vicar of that place) practiced for Gods sake and merely out
of Charity, Physic and Surgery on those that were not able to entertain a
professed Doctor or Practitioner. On the 23. March 1616. he was collated to the
Prebendship of Driffeild in, and to the Chauntorship of, the Chapter of York, on
the death of Dr. Joh. Broke or Brook deceased, and in the beginning of March
1618. was made Warden of the Hospital of St. Mary Madg. near Ripon in
Yorkshire, on the death of Ralph To^stall. He was esteemed a person of great
piety and charity, and one well read in substantial and profound authors, as it
appears by those books he has written, especially in that published, entit.

Antiquity triumphing over novelty, etc. or Antiquity a certain note of the
Christian Cath. Church, Land. 1619. qu. He concluded his last day in this world
on the tenth of March in sixteen hundred twenty and three, and was buried in
his Church of Halyfax; 1623-24.
a copy of whose Epitaph you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p.
144. a. In his Vicaridge succeeded Rob. Cl^y D. D. of M^rt. coll. and him Hugh
Ramsden B. of D. another (...) in 1628. and in his Chantourship of York
succeeded H^n. Hook D. D. as I shall tell you elsewhere.

JOHN SHAW, 508.
a Westmoreland man born, became a Student in Qu. coll. about the beginning of
1579. ^^ed 19. took one degree in Arts, left the coll. and at length became
Vicar of Oling or W^^ing in S^rrey, where he was had in esteem by many for his
preaching, and by some for his Poetry. His works are these.

The blessedness of Mary mother of Jesus, Sermon. on Luke 1. ver. 28. and 45.
Land. 1618. oct.

The comfort of a Christian, by assurance of Gods love to him written in verse.

The complaints of a Sinner: The comfort of our Savior -- in verse also. These
two last are printed with the former Sermon.

Bibliorum Summula, seu argumenta singulerum capitum Scripturae Canonicae,
utrinsque Testamenti, alphab^tice distichis comprehensa Land. 1621. and 23.
etc. in oct. Dedicated to Poynings More, Son of Sir Rob. More a servant to K.
James, Son of Sir George More Son of Sir. W. More Knight. These are all the things
that I have seen written by this John Shaw, who was living at Ok^ng before
mentioned in sixteen hundred twenty and three, Clar. 1623.
before which time he had a Son named Tobias who was Bach. of Arts of Magd.
coll. As for other Sermons and books, which go under his name of Joh. Shaw, I
shall mention hereafter in their proper place, as having been written by others
of both those names.

SIMON WASTELL, a (...) and man born Wastellhead, in the (...) County, was
entered a Student also in Queens coll. in 1580. or thereabouts, took one degree
in Arts five years (...) at which time being accounted a great proficient in
classical learning and Poetry, was made Master of the Free School at
Northampton, whence, by his sedulous endeavors, many were sent to the
Universities. He has written,

The true Christians daily delight; being a sum of every Chapter of the Old and
New Testament set down alphabetically in English verse, that the Scriptures we
read may more happily be remembered, etc. Land. 1623. in tw. Published
afterward with amendments and some additions with this title. (...): or, the
Bibles ^pitome, etc. Land. 1629. etc. in tw. This person who was well known to
John S^^w, was living in Northampton in sixteen hundred twenty and three. Clar.
1623*
(21. J. c. 1.) In his time was one Samuel Wastell a Master of Arts of New Inn,
1628. but him I find not to be a writer or publisher of books.

WILLIAM BISHOP, Son of John (...), who Brayles in Warwickshire, sent to this
University in the 17 year of his age, in 157^. or thereabouts, particularly, as
I conceive, to Gloucester hall, at which time it was presided by one who was a
R. Catholic, or at least suficie^tly addicted to the R. persuasion, and that
therein, did then, and especially after, study (...) or else in (...) who was
in anino Catholicus. After he had continued in Oxon. about 3 or 4 years, he
left it, his paternal estate which was considerable, and all his friends and
his native Country which was more. So that settling himself in the English coll.
at Rheimes, he applied himself partly to the study of Divinity. Soon after he
was sent to Rome, where making a fruitful progress in Philosophy and Divinity,
he was made Priest and sent into England to convert Souls; but being taken in
the haven was kept prisoner several years as Jo. Pits in lib. (...). Angl.
Script. (...) 17. p. 810.
one of his persuasion reports. Afterward being set at liberty ( an. 1584.) he
went to Paris, where he was honorably received, and worthily numbered among the
Sorbon Doctors. At length he took another journey into England and labored 9
years in the R. C. harvest. Upon the expiration of which, he was sent for to
Rome about certain matters depending between the Jesuits and Secular Priests;
(of which business a certain Tho. Bell. in The (...) lib. 4. cap. 2. 3, 5.. 2.
author has a large story) all which being determined, he returned the third
time into England, and after 8 years laboring therein to advance his religion,
was taken and committed prisoner to the Gate House in Westminster, where he was
remaining in 1612. Afterward being released and sent back beyond the Seas
again, lived at Paris in the Arras or Atrebatian coll. newly rebuilt for
Benedictin Monks, by Philip Caverell, Head or Prefect of the Monastery of S.
Vedastus at Arras. About the year 1622. our author being made Bishop of
Chalcedon by the Pope, he was sent into England to execute the office of a
Bishop among the Catholics; and was by them received with great honor and
respect. He has written,

Reformation of a Catholic deformed by Will Perkins -- Print. 1604. in qu.
Part 1.

The second part of the reform. of the Cath. etc. Printed 1607. qu.

An answer to Mr. Perkins's advertisement -- Pr. with the former.

A reproof of Dr. Rob. Abbots Defense of the Cath. deformed by W. Perkins --
Pr. 1608. in 2. parts in qu.

Disproof of Dr. R. Abbots counter-proof against Dr. Bishops reproof of the
defense of Mr. Perkins reform. Cath. Par. 1614. in oct. part 1.

Defense of the Kings honor, and of his title to the Kingdom of England. -- He
also published and added several things (besides a Preface) to Joh. Pits his
book De illustribus Angliae Scriptoribus, and was one of the principal authors
of the Libels written against the Archpriestship in England, mentioned in
George Blackwell, an. 1612. I find a book written by the Bp. of Chalcedon,
entit. A treatise of the best kind of Confessors, pr. in oct. but whether
written by this Bishop, or Dr. Ric. Smith, who was his Successor in that
titular See, I know not. At length after this learned person, (who was in his
latter time of the order of S. Benedict) had lived 71. years, he paid his last
debt to nature near to London, on the thirteenth day of April in sixteen
hundred twenty and four, Pancras Church near to the said City, I know not. One
Dr. Jo* (...) Senior.
that remembers the man, has told my friend that he died at Bishops Court in
London, but where that place is, unless in the Parish of S. Sepulcher, I am yet
to seek. A Latin Manuscript containing the obits and characters of many
eminent Benedictines since the reformation, has this character of Dr. Will.
Bishop, that he was carceribus, exilio, and Apostolicis sudoribus inclitus, qui
a Sancta sede in patriam ad solamen Catholicorum missus, clericis,
Religularibus, ac ipsis laicis ob innatum unionis ac pacis affectum juxta
charus extitit, etc. This obitat book which I have in my little Library, was
written by a Benedictin Monk of Doway named Tho. White alias Woodhop, who
having spent several years in the Sheldonian family at Beoly in Worcestershire,
(in which County he was born) retired at length in the time of the civil War to
Doway, was chosen Prior of the coll. of English Benedictines, and died there of
the Pla^ue in 1654. From the said book, (wherein it is said that Dr. Bishop died
near to London) was another composed in English with additions, and therein is
this said of that Doctor -- he was sent into England by the holy See for the
comfort of Catholics, where he so modestly behaved himself, that he was by
all, both Clergy and Seculars, dearly beloved and honored: And after
imprisonments and all sorts of afflictions, patiently endured for the true
religion, died in peace near London, etc. This English obital, was penned by
another Benedictine named Tho. Vincent alias Vincent Sadler author of The
Childs Catechism, etc. pr. at Paris alias London 1678. in oct. who died, as I
remember, much about the time that K. Jam. 2. came to the crown. He was nephew
or near of kin to Fath. Vincent Sadler of the same order, who died at Land. 11.
June. 1621. after he had been Superintendent of the Province of Canterbury for
some years.

MILES WINDSORE, Son of Thomas, Son of Andrew Lord Windsore, was born in
Hampshire, (at Stanwell I think) elected from Balliol coll. Scholar of that of
Corp. Chapter in Jan. 1556. aged 15 or thereabouts, made Probationer-Fellow 16 Feb.
1560, took the degrees in Arts, left the coll. soon after because popishly
affected, and spent the remaining part of his time within the City of Oxon. in
a most retired condition. He was a tolerable Latin Poet, but a better Orator,
as was sufficiently witnessed by his speech, intended to have been spoken in C.
C. C. when Qu. Elizab. was entertained by the Oxonian Muses, 1566. and more
especially by that which he most admirably well delivered before her at the
Lord Windsores house at Bradenham a little after she left Oxon. Which giving
the Queen great content, she, in an high manner did commend it before Dedicus
Gosemannus de Sylva the Spanish Ambassador then present, and looking wistly on
Windsore (who then had a beard according to the fashion) said to Goseman, is
not this a pretty young man? At riper years he applied himself to the study of
Histories and Antiquities, and had a hand, as 'twas frequently reported, in the
Apologia of B. Tuyne who In (...)
styles our author Windsore, Antiquae Historiae artifex peritus, etc. But
before that Apologia was extant he wrote,

Academiarum quae aliquando fuere, and hodie sunt in Europ^ catalogus. Land.
1590. qu. contracted by the author, and printed on one large sheet of Paper, to
be put into a frame. At the end of the said book he published,

Chronographia, sive origo collegiorum, Oxoniensis Academiae. This last was
mostly written by Tho. Neal of New coll. in Lat. verse, and to it is added a
description of the Divinity and public Schools, and an Epitome of the Halls.
Our author Windsore had intentions to write a book of the Antiquity of the
Univ. of Oxon. and in order thereunto had made many collections, but Twyne with
his forward and natural genie undertaking that work, Windsore forbore to
proceed, and imparted to him his collections. At length after he had lived to a
fair age, he surrendered up his last breath in his lodgings near S. Michaels
Church in Oxon. 1624*
in sixteen hundred twenty and four, and was buried in the outer Chapel of C.
C. coll. under the north wall behind the Vicepresidents seat. At that time he
left many, if not all, his collections of Antiquities (containing many dotages
and fooleries) to Twyne before mentioned, Legacies to the prisoners in the
prison called Bocardo, to the parishioners of S. Michaels Parish and to the
Chest in the Tower of C. C. coll. After Twynes death some of the said
collections were put into the Libr. of the said coll. and others were scattered
about when the great fire happened in Oxon. soon after Twynes death. One vol. of
which came at length into my hands, wherein I find many vain and credulous
matters, (not at all to be relied upon) committed to writing

MILES SMITH, a Fletchers Son, received his first Hereford, became a Student
first in C. C. coll. about 1568. whence translating himself soon after to
Brasnose, took the degrees in Arts as a member of that house; wherein by the
benefit of a severe discipline that was in his time exercised, and by his
indefatigable industry, he proved at length an incomparable Theologist. About
that time he was made one of the Chaplains or Petty-Canons of Chapter Chapter and took
the degree of Bach. of Div. as a member of that Royal foundation. Afterward he
became Canon Residentiary of the Cathedral Chapter of Hereford, Doctor of Divinity
and in 1612. Bishop of Gloucester; to which See (which was given him for his
great pains in translating the Bible) he received consecration 20. Sept. the
same year. From his youth he constantly ^^plyed himself to the reading of
ancient Classical authors of the best note, in their own Languages; wherewith,
as also with Neotericks he was plentifully stored, and lusted after no worldly
thing so much as books; of which tho he had great store, yet there were none
scarce to be found in his Library, especially of the Ancients, that he had not
read over, as has been observed by those, who have perused them since his
death. He ran through the Greek and Latin Fathers, and judiciously noted them in
the margin as he went. The Rabbis also, as many as he had with their Glosses
and Commentaries, he read and used in their own idiom of speech. And so
conversant he was, and expert in the Chaldaick, Syriack, and Arabic, that he
made them as familiar to him, almost, as his own native tongue. Hebrew also he
had at his fingers ends, and with all stories of all times: And for his rich
and accomplished furniture in that study, he had this Elogy given him by a
learned Bishop of this Kingdom, that he was a very walking Library. For this
his exactness of those Languages, he was thought worthy by K. Jam. 1. to be
called to that great work of the last translation of our English Bible, wherein
he was esteemed the chief, and a workman that needed not be ashamed. He began
with the first and was the last Man in the translation of the work; for after
the task of translation was finished by the whole number set apart, and
designed to that business, being some few above 40. it was raised by a dozen
selected from them, and at length referred to the final examination on Bilson
Bishop of Winton, and this our author, who, with the rest of the twelve, are
styled in the History of the Synod of Dort, vere eximii and ab initio in toto
hoc opere versatissimi, as having happily concluded that worthy labor. All
being ended, this excellent person Dr. Smith was commanded to write a Preface,
which being by him done, 'twas made public, and is the same that is now extant
in our Church Bible, the original whereof is, if I am not mistaken, in the
Oxonian Vatican. He has written, besides what is beforementioned,

Sermons. Land. 1632. fol. They are 15 in number, and were transcribed out of
his original MSS, the first of which is on Jer. 9. 23. 24. He departed this
mortal life in the beginning of Nov. Gloucester, leaving behind him two Sons
which he had by his first Wife, ( Mary Hawkins of Cardiff,) named Gervase of
the Midale Temple Gent. and Miles Smith, and this character by the zealous men
of the Chapter of England, that tho he was a great Scholar, yet he was a severe
Calvinist, and hated the proceedings of Dr. Laud, especially after he was made
Dean of Gloucester. Over his grave was afterward a white stone laid, without
any inscription thereon, only his Arms impaled by those of the Sea of Glouc.

Strickland in Westmorland, became a Student in Queens coll. in 1583. aged 16.
and soon after a poor serving Child, then a Tabarder, and at length in 1598.
Fellow of the said coll. About which time, being a noted Preacher, and a
profound Disputant in Divinity, (of which Faculty he was a Bachelaur,) was
admired by all great men, and had in veneration, especially by the Puritanical
Party, he being himself a Zealot among them, as having, with others of the same
coll. entertained many of the principles of Dr. Joh. Rainolds while he lived
there. After K. Jam. 1. came to the Crown, he went in the quality of a Chaplain
to the Lord Evers, who in 1603. or thereabouts, was sent Ambassador
extraordinary to the Emperor of Germany. By which opportunity he, as Tho.
Morton his Brother Chaplain in that Voyage, (afterward B. of Durham) did
advantage themselves exceedingly by conversing with learned men of other
Persuasions, and by visiting several Universities and Libraries there. After
his return he became Chaplain to Dr. Ravis B. of London, Chaplain in Ordinary
to his Majesty, and by the favor of Sir John Levesen, (who had sometimes three
Sons of Qu. coll.) Rector of Blacknotley near to Brayntrey in Essex, which was
the best preferment, I think, he had. He was a person esteemed by most men to
have been replenished with all kind of virtue and learning, to have been
profound in Philosophical and Theological learning, a great Canonist, and so
familiar and exact in the Fathers, Councels, and Schoolmen, that none in his
time scarce went beyond him. Also that none have written with greater
diligence, (I cannot say with a meekermind because some have reported that he
was as foul-m^^ched against the Papists, particularly M. Ant. de (...) was
afterward against them and the Prelatists,) or with better truth or faith,
than he, as by those things of his extant do appear, the titles of which are
these.

Sermons. As (1) Sermon. of Sanctification, preached on Act Sunday 12. Jul. 1607.
on 1 These. 5. 23. Land. 1608. qu. (2) Inaugurat. Sermon. of K. Jam. at Paul's
Cross 24. Mar. 1608. on 2 Chronicles. 9. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Ibid. 1609. qu. (3) Sermon. of
Predestination, on 2 Pet. 1. 10. Land. 1620. 23. qu.

Justinian the Emperor defended, against Card. Baronius. Land. 1616. in 7 sh.
in qu.

Introductio in Metaphysicam lib. 4. Oxon. 1619. in a little oct.

Defense of Constantine, with a treatise of the Popes Temporal Monarchy. Land.
1621. qu.

Logicae libriquinque de praedicalibus, praedicamentis, etc. Land. 1622. etc.
Ox. 1677. in a large qu.

Appendix de Sillogismo Sophistico.

Tractatus de providentia Dei. Cantab. 1622. etc. qu.

Defensio Eccl. Anglicanae contra M. Anton. de Dominis Archiep. Spalatensis
injurias. Land. 1625. qu. Published by Dr. Joh. Barcham. Which book was held to
be the most exactest piece for controversy since the time of the Reformation.

Virgilius dormitans. Or, a treatise of the first General Council held at
Constantinople, an. 553. under Justinian the Emperor, in the time of Pope
Vigilius, Land. 1631. fol.

Popish falsifications. Or, an answer to a treatise of a Popish Recusant,
intit. The first part of Protestants proofs for Catholics Religion and
Recusancy; taken only from the writings of such Protestant Doctors and Divines
of England, as have been published in the Reign of K. James, an. 1607. -- MS.
This book I saw at Oxon in the hands of Mr. Edw. Benlowes the Poet, who in his
younger days was a Papist, or at least very Popishly affected, and in his elder
years a bitter Enemy to that Party. Whether the said book was ever printed I
cannot tell.

Animadversions on Cardinal Baronius his Annals. -- MS. Either lost or
embezil'd after the authors death.

MSS. The copies of which were formerly, if not still, in the Tabarders Library
in Qu. coll.
De caelo. Physica. In Aristotelis Organon.
I have seen also several of his Epistles, written to Dr. Hen. Airay Provost of
Qu. coll. stitched up with Dr. Joh. Rainolds his Declamations, and other things
among the MSS. in the Library of Dr. Thom. Barlow, afterward B. of Lincoln.
What else he has written I find not, nor any thing more of him, only that he
dying at Blacknotly beforementioned, (for want of a Bishopric, as K. Jam. 1.
used to say,) was buried in the Chancel of the Church there, 25. Nov. in
sixteen hundred twenty and four: At which time Dr. Joh. Barchem, Dean of
Rockyng in Essex, did Preach his Funeral Sermon before several Gentlemen and
Ministers of the neighborhood, showing to them, in the conclusion, the great
piety and learning of him, who then lay as a spectacle of mortality before
them. Had that Sermon been printed, I might have thence said more of this
worthy author, but it being quite lost, I presume, after that Doctors death, we
must be content with those things that are already said of him.

PETER BOWNE, or Boun^^u, as he is sometimes Bedfordshire man born, admitted
Scholar of C. C. coll. in Apr. 1590. aged 15. of which he was afterward
Fellow, and M. of Arts. This person having a great Genie to the Faculty of
Medicine, entered on the Physic line, practiced in these parts, and at length
became Dr. of his Faculty. Afterward he wrote,

Pseudo-Medicorum Anatomia. Clar: 1624.
Land. 1624. qu. At which time he practiced Physic in the great City, and was
much in esteem for it in the latter end of King Jam. 1. and beginning of King
Chapter 1. What other things he has published, I know not, nor any thing of his
last days.

GEORGE MORE, Son of Sir Will. More, beloved Elizabeth for his many services
done in the Commonwealth, was extracted from the Mores of Devonshire, but
whether born there, or in Surrey, in truth I cannot tell. After he had spent
some time in Oxon, particularly, as it seems, in Exeter coll. he went to the
Inns of Court, but took no degree there or here. In 1597. he had the honor of
Knighthood con^er^ed upon him, being about that time a frequent Speak^^ in
several Parliaments, and much in esteem for his excellent parts. In 1604. he
being about that time Treasurer to Henry Prince of Wales, did by the name of
Sir George More of Surrey give several MSS. to the Public Library at Oxon, and
40 l. to buy printed books, and in the year following he was actually created
Master of Arts. In 1610, he became Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and about 1615. Lieutenant of the Tower, in the place of Sir Jervase
Elwaies, imprisoned for the consenting to the poisoning of Sir Thom. Overbnry.
He has written,

A demonstration of God in his Works, against all such that deny either in word
or in life, that there is a God. Land. 1598. 1624. qu.

Parliamentary Speeches, -- and other things which I have not yet seen. He was
living at Losely, or Lothesley, near Guildsord in Surrey, Clar. 1624.
where he had a fair Estate descended to him from his Father, in sixteen
hundred twenty and four, and after, and there died and was buried. He had a Son
named Rob. More, who was a Knight, and a Daughter, who was married to the
famous Dr. Joh. Done, afterward Dean of Paul's. I have made mention of another
George More in the Fasti, an. 1573.

Tho. Br. of Tavystock in Devonsh. Gent. was born there, spent some time among
the Muses in Exeter coll. after K. Jam. 1. came to the Crown; whence retiring
to the Inner Temple, without any degree conferred upon him, became famed there
for his Poetry, especially after he had published,

Britannia's Pastorals. -- Esteemed then, by judicious persons, to be written
in a sublime strain, and for subject amorous and very pleasing. The first part
of it was printed at Land. 1613. fol. and then ushered into the World with
several copies of verses made by his learned acquaintance, as by Joh. Seldom,
Mich. Drayton, Christoph. Brook, etc. The second part, or book, was printed at
Land. 1616. fol. and then commended to the World by various copies made by John
Glanvill, (whom I shall mention elsewhere, for his sufficiencies in the Common
Law,) Joh. Davies of Hereford, George Wither of Linc. Inn, Ben. Johnson, Thom.
Wenman of the Inner Temple, etc. which last I take to be the same, that had
been Fellow of Ball. coll. and Public Orator of this University. These two
books, or parts, in fol. were also printed in two vol. in oct. (1625.) which I
have not yet seen. Our author Brown has also written a Poem intit.

The Shepard's Pipe; in 7 Eglogues. Land. 1614. oct. The fourth Eglogue is
dedicated to Mr. Tho. Manwood, (who died about that time,) Son of Sir Pet.
Manwood, and the fifth to his ingenious Friend Mr. Christop. Brook, mentioned
elsewhere in this work.

Elegy on the never enough bewailed, etc. Prince Henry. Land. 1613. qu. and
other Poems, as it is probable, but such I have not yet seen. However the Reader
is to know, that as he had honored his Country with his elegant and sweet
Pastorals, so was he expected, and also entreated a little farther, to grace
it, by drawing out the line of his Poetic Ancestors, beginning in Josephus
Iscanius, and ending in himself; but whether ever published, having been all or
mostly written, Clar. 1624.
as 'twas said, I know not. In the beginning of the year 1624. he retired to
Exeter coll. again, being then about 34 years of age, and was Tutor or Gov. to
Rob. D^rmer of that house, the same who was afterward Earl of Caernarvon, and
killed in Newbury fight, 20. Sept. 1643. In the same year he was actually
created Master of Arts, as I shall tell you elsewhere in the Fasti, and after
he had left the Coll. with his Pupil, he became a retainer to the Pembrochian
Family, was beloved by that generous Count, William E. of Pembroke, and got
wealth and purchased an estate, which is all I know of him hitherto, only that
as he had a little body, so a great mind. In my searches I find that one Will.
Brown of Otterie S. Mary in Devon, died in the Winter time 1645. whether the
same with the Poet, I am hitherto ignorant. After the time of the said Poet,
appeared another person of both his names, author of two Common Law Books,
written in English, intit. Formulae been placitandi, and of Modus intraadi
placita generalia, and of other things pertaining to that Faculty.

an excellent Mathematician, as the learned Camden Cam^. in A^^al. R. Elizab.
sub an. 1601.
styles him, was the Son of John Davies of London, in which City he was born,
at about six of the clock in the evening of the eighth of Feb. in 1559-60. and
educated in Gramaticals there. In 1574. he made his first entry into this
University, and settling in Gloucester hall under the tuition of one that was
much inclined to the Romans Persuasion, made great proficiency in his studies;
and Mr. Tho. Allen of that house finding that his Genie was much addicted to
the Mathematics, instructed him therein, and gave him all the encouragement
imaginable to proceed in that noble Science. In 1581. he proceeded M. of A. as
a Member of Glouc. hall, continued there for some time after, and then retiring
to the great City was instructed in Astrological matters by one Dr. Sim.
Forman, a very able Astrologer and Physician, as it appears by the MS. books In
bib. Eliae Ashmole Arm.
he left behind him when he died, tho a certain Sir Ant. W^ldan in The Court
and Character of K. James. Land. 1650. in oct. p. 110.
author tells us he was a very silly fellow. In Feb. 1587. he was first of all
introduced into the Royal Court, where he was made known to, and received with
great courtsie by, that popular Count, Robert Earl of Essex. In 1589. he
traveled into France, and made a voyage into Portugal, whereby he advanced his
knowledge, as to men, and the Languages of those Countries very much. In 1596.
after he had been married 3 years, he went under the conduct of the said Count
toward Spain, where doing most admirable service at the taking and sacking of
Cadiz, he received So it is written on his mon^ment in the Chancel of Pangbourne
Church in Berks.
the honor of Knighthood and of Baneret. In 1597. he traveled to the Islands
of Terceres, where he performed that employment he went about, to the great
honor of himself, and in 1598. Jan. 31. he was made Surveyor of the Ordnance
by the endeavors of his singular good Lord, the E. of Essex, under whom, in
the year following, he went as a prime Officer into Ireland, where his service
was much remarkable against the Rebels. In 1600. he was deeply engaged in that
Earls Teasons, for which he was taken and committed to custody, on the 8. Feb.
the same year. About the eleventh of the same month, the Archbishop of
Canterbury issued out a Direction for the Ministers and Preachers in his
Province, to the end that they give the People a right understanding what the
Earl of Essex intended by his treasonable conspiracy; in which Direction I find
these matters of Sir Joh. Davies. viz. that he was brought up in Oxford, and
was by profession a seller of figures, and on whom that hateful Earl, hoth to
God and man, did repose great affiance, insomuch that he made him chief Officer
about the Ordnance in the Tower, and thought him one of the faithfull'st
Servants he had to make his Keeper, etc. This Davies was one, that favored
nothing less than the Gospel; for being in hold, the chiefest motion that he
made to the Gentleman that had the custody of him for that time, was, that if
it were possible, he might have a Priest to confess him, etc. In March
following he was tried among other Conspirators for his life, and being in a
manner convicted by his own Conscience and confession, held his peace; and then
being taunted by the way that he was a Papist, he denied not, but that in Oxon
he was instructed in the Romish Religion by his Tutor, and confirmed in the
same by Sir Christop. Blount one of the Conspirators, while he was in the Irish
Wars, At which words, when he perceived Blount was moved, he straight appeased
him, affirming that he was confirmed in that Religion, not by Blounts
persuasion, but by the example of his Christian and Religious life. Afterward
being condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, he requested, that although he
was no Nobleman, yet he might suffer as they did, that is, by beheading; if
not, not to be quartered in pieces, but to be buried Christianly. After
sentence, he was remanded to his prison, but by the intercession of Friends,
the Queen signed his Pardon, 5. Feb. 1601. which was allowed by the Judges in
Westminster hall, on the 12. of the same month. So that being free, he
purchased an Estate in the Parish of Pangborne in Berks, where he spent the
remainder of his days in a retired and studious condition. This person, who is
styled in literis Mathematicis apprime eruditus, has written many things of
Mathematics and Astrology, but has nothing, as I can yet find, that is
extant. There went from hand to hand a volume of Letters which were written by
this Sir Joh. Davies, Dr. Joh. Dee, and Dr. Mat. Gwinne, concerning Chimical
and Magical secrets; which, as some say, (tho I cannot yet be satisfied in it)
was given by Dr. T. B. to Cosmo Prince of Tuscany when he was received and
entertained by the Univ. of Oxon 1669. But let this report remain with the
author, while I tell you that this Sir John Davies giving way to fate in his
House called Berecourt, in the parish of Pangbourne in Berks, 14. May in
sixteen hundred twenty and five, Pangbourne. Over his Grave was a very sair
Mon. erected, whereon his Statue in Armor lies between the Statues of his two
Wives. He left behind him a Son of both his Names, who was a Gent. Com. of
Glouc. hall, 1626. and afterward a Knight, but neither he, nor his Father, was
author of the History of the Caribby Islands printed 1666. fol. but another
Joh. Davies.

Will. Barlowe, sometimes B. of Chichester (mentioned among these writers under
the year 1568) was born, as it seems, in Pembrok^shire, while his Father was
Bishop of S. David, became a Com. of Ball. coll. about 1560, and four years
after, took a degree in Arts: which being completed by Determination, he left
the University before he proceeded in that faculty, and afterward traveling,
became very well skilled in the Art of Navigation. About the year 1573. he
entered into the Sacred Function, was afterward Prebendary of Winchester,
Rector of Easton near to that City, Chaplain to Prince Henry, and at length
Archdeacon of Salisbury: To which last he was collated, on the death of Dr.
Ralph Pickover, on the 12. of March 1614. This was the person who had knowledge
in the Magnet 20 years before Dr. Will. Gilbert published his book of that
subject, and therefore by those that knew him, he was accounted superior, or
at least equal to that Doctor for an industrious and happy searcher and finder
out of many rare and magnetical secrets. He was the first that made the
inclinatory instrument transparent, and to be used pendant, with a glass on
both sides, and a ring on the top, whereas Dr. Gilberts has but of one side,
and to be set on a foot. And moreover, he hanged him in a Compass-box, where
with two ounces weight it was made fit for use at Sea. Secondly, he was the
first that found out and showed the difference between Iron and Steel, and
their tempers for Magnetical uses, which has given life and quickening,
universally to all Magnetical Instruments whatsoever. Thirdly, he was the first
that showed the right way of touching Magnetical Needles. Fourthly, he was the
first that found out and showed the piecing and cementing of Loadstones. And
lastly, the first that showed the reasons why a Loadstone being double capped,
must take up so great weight. The books which he has published for use are
these.

The Navigators supply: containing many things of principal importance
belonging to Navigation, with the description and use of diverse instruments
framed chiefly for that purpose, etc. Land. 1597. qu. Dedic. to Rob. Earl of
Essex.

Magnetical advertisements: or diverse pertinent observations and approved
experiments concerning the nature and properties of the Loadstone, etc. Land.
1616. qu. Ded. to Sir Dudley Digges Knight, because of his rare learning,
joined with piety, and accompanied with a pleasing carriage toward every man;
which were the chief reasons that caused all good men to love him. Upon the
publication of this book, a certain Cantabrigian named Mark Ridley, Doctor of
Physic and Philosophy, sometimes Physician to the English Merchants trading in
Russia, afterward chief Physician to the Emperor of that Country (as he
entitles himself) and at length one of the eight Principals or Elects of the
coll. of Physicians at London, made Animadversions upon it; whereupon our
author came out in vindication of himself with this book.

A brief discovery of the idle animadversions of Mark Ridley Doct. in Physic,
upon a treatise entit. Magnetical Advertisements -- Land. 1618. qu. What other
things he has written I know not as yet, nor any thing else of the said books,
only that seven years before the Magnetical Advertisementt were published, he
sent a copy of them in MS. to the learned Sir Tho. Chaloner, which he mislaying
or embesling, he sent him, upon his desire, another copy, and that being
imparted to others, the author afterward, before its publication, met with
many portraitures of his Magnetical implements, and diverse of his propositions
published in print in another man's name, and yet some of them not rightly
understood by the party usurping them. He concluded his last day in sixteen
hundred twenty and five, Easton before mentioned. To his Archdeaconry of
Salisbury was collated Tho. Marler on the 27. of June the same year, but who to
his Prebendship of Winchester, I know not as yet. Soon after was an Epitaph put
over Mr. Barlows Grave running thus. Depositum Gulielmi Barlowe Archideaconi
Sarisburiensis, Prebendarii Ecclesiae Cath. Winton, and Rectoris Ecclesiae de
Easton; qui cum sedulam per annos 52. aedificationi corporis christi navasset
Operam, ad meliorem Vitam migravit Maii 25. An. Dom. 1625.

EDWARD CHALONER, second Son of Sir Tho. Chaloner of Steeple Claydon in Bucks
Knight (whom I have before mentioned) was born in the County of Middlesex,
particularly, as it seems, at Cheswick, where his Father and Mother lived, and
both were buried; applied his muse to Academical studies in the condition of a
Commoner in the coll. of S. Mary Madg. 1604. aged 14. took the degrees in Arts,
that of Master being completed 1610. and the next year was chosen Fellow of
Allsouls coll. Afterward entering into the sacred function, he became Chaplain
in Ordinary to K. James, Doctor of Div. Principal of St. Albans hall, and
Chapl. in Ord. to K. Chapter 1. He was reputed, considering his age, a very learned
man, able for the Pulpit, and well read in polemical Divinity, as some of his
lucubrations show. There was nothing of his composition so mean, which the
greatest person did not value: and those Sermons of his making, which were
published after his death, were looked upon as several choice pieces, or at
least such, as would prove serviceable to the Church and Commonwealth. His
works are.

Six Sermons, as (1) Babel, or the confusion of Languages on Genesis 11. 7. (2)
Naioth, or the University Charter, on Am. 4. 14. (3) Ephesus Common Pleas. (4)
Judah's prerogative. (5) The Gentiles creed. (6) Paul's peregrination, or the
travelers guide, etc. Land. 1623. oct.

Vnde Zizania? The orig. and progress of Heresy, Sermon. before K. Jam. at
Theobalds, on Mat. 13. 27. Land. 1624. qu. ^b. 1638. in tw.

Credo Ecclesiam S. Catholicam. I believe the holy Cath. Church, the authority,
universality and visibility of the Chapter handled and discussed. Land. 1625.
quarto, and 38. in tw.

Six Sermons, as (1) The Cre^ians conviction and reformaon, on Tit. 1. 13. (2)
The ministers charge and mission, on Mat. 20. 6. (3) Gods bounty and Gentiles
ingratitude. (4) Afflictions the Christians portion. (5) Duty and affinity of
the faithful. (6) No peace with Rome, etc. Oxon. 1629. qu.

Status quaestionum inter nos and pontificios -- MS. in qu. containing 92.
pages in Lat. in the Libr. of Dr. Tho. Barlow. At length, after he had lived
34. years, he was, to the great grief of many, untimely snacth'd away by the
Plague that was then in Oxon. 25. July in sixteen hundred twenty and five,
Mary's Church within this University, leaving then behind him a disconsolate
Widow named Elizabeth, Daughter of Dr. R^b. Hoveden sometimes Warden of Alls.
coll. besides children. Over his grave was soon after an altar-monument
erected, with an Epitaph engraven thereon; a copy of which you may see in Hist.
and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 181. b.

RAPHAEL THORIUS, commonly called Thoris, a French man born, was in his younger
days conversant among the Oxonians in the condition of a Sojourner, and made a
considerable progress in the faculty of medicine, but took no degree therein,
only numbered among those of the Physic line. Afterward he settled in London,
practiced that faculty with good success and was in his time accounted R. A. E.
in lib. suo cui tit. est Lessus in funere Raph. Thorii, etc. Land. 1625. qu.
Corypheus Medici gregis; and as a Physician famous, so no vulgar Poet. The
works that he has written are many, but none were published till after his
death; the titles of some of which follow.

Hymnus Tabaci, sive de Pacto libri duo. Which books being procured from the
author in Feb. 1624. by Ludov. aKinschot, were by him published at Land.
(1627.) oct. This elegant Lat. Poem was translated into English verse by Pet.
Hansted M. A. of Cambridge, afterward D. D. -- Land. 1651. oct.

Cheimonopegnia. A winter song in Lat. verse -- published also by the said
Kinschot, (1627.) oct. and translated into English, by P. Hausted before
mentioned.

Epistolae duae de Isaaci Casauboni morbi mortisque caussa* written in 1614.
Put at the end of Isaac Casaubons epistles, published by Joh. Freder Gronovius,
1638. qu. In the first of Car. 1. when the plague raged in London, he acted
more for the public (by exposing his person too much) than his most dear
concern. Wherefore being deeply infected with that disease, died of it in his
house in the parish of S. Bennet Finck, in Jul. or Aug. in sixteen hundred
twenty and five, John, whom I shall elsewhere mention, and a most dear friend
who lamented his death in a Lat. Poem (not to be contemned) entit. Lessus in
funere Raphaelis Thorii Medici and Poetae praestantissimi, etc. In which, if it
can be seen, (which I think not, for I never saw but one) you may read many
things justly said of him.

the Resolute, as he used to write himself, was born in London, in the latter
end of the reign of K. H. 8, a little before which time, his Father (descended
from the Florii of Sienna in Tuscany) and Mother, who were Waldenses, had fled
from the Valtoline into England for religion sake. But when K. Ed. 6. died and
the protestant religion silenced, by the succession of Qu. Mary, they left
England, and went to another Country, where Jo. Florio received his puerile
literature. After Protestancy was restored by Q. Elizab. they returned and
Florio for a time lived in this University. At length Rich. Barnes Bishop of
Durham sending his Son Emanuel to Magd. coll. to obtain Acad. literature in the
quality of a Commoner, about 1576. Florio was appointed to attend him as a
Tutor in the Italian and French tongues. At which time wearing a Gown, he was
matriculated as a member of that house in 1581. aged about 36 years, and as a
teacher and instructor of certain Scholars in the University. After K. James
came to the Crown he was appointed Tutor to Pr. Henry for those languages, and
at length made one of the Privy Chamber, and Clerk of the closet, to Qu. Anne,
to whom he was a Tutor also. He was a very useful man in his profession,
zealous in the religion he professed, and much devoted to the English nation.
His works are,

His first fruits, which yield familiar speech, merry proverbs witty sentences
and golden saying* Land. 1578. qu. 91. oct.

Perfect introduction to the Italian and English tongues. -- Printed with the
former, and both dedicated to Rob. Earl of Leicester.

His second fruits to be gathered of twelve Trees, of diverse but delightsome
tastes to the tongues of Italian* and English men. Land. 1591. oct.

Garden of recreation, yielding six thousand Italian Proverbs -- Printed with
the former.

Dictionary Ital. and English. Land. 1597. 98. fol. Which Dictionary was by him
afterward augmented, and to the honor of Queen Anne did entitle it, Queen
Anna's new world of words. Land. 1611. fol. which for the variety of words, was
far more copious than any extant in the world at that time. But this
notwithstanding being also defective, our author did, out of other Dictionarys
and Italian authors, which came accidentally into his hands, collect out of
them an addition of many thousand words and phrases relating to Arts, Sciences,
and Exercises, intending, if he had lived, to come out with a third edition.
After his death, his additions being transmitted to Gio Torriano an Italian and
professor of the Italian tongue in London, were by him diligently perused, and
in very many places supplied out of the generally approved Dictionaries of the
Academici della crusca, and several others that were set forth since Florio's
death. The said Torriano also did much correct the English interpretations, and
where there was cause, he reduced them to their genuine sense, as they are now
used in these modern times. Which additions and corrections were printed at
Land. 1659. fol. Florio also translated from French into English, The Essays
of Michael Lord of Montaigne. Land. 1603. 13. 32. fol. and others things, as
it is said, but such I have not yet seen. At length retiring to Fulham in
Middlesex to avoid the plague raging in London, was there overtaken by it in
his old age, of which he died in Aug. or Sept. in sixteen hundred twenty and
five and received, either in the Chapter or yard there. I have several times sent
for his Epitaph, but receiving none, you may take this for one, -- Virtute sua
contentus, nobilis art,
Italus Ore, Anglus pectore, uterque opere.
Floret adhuc, and adhuc florebit; floriat ultra
Florius, hac specie floridus, optat amans.


THOMAS LODGE, was descended from those Lincolnshire, but whether born there, I
cannot tell, made his first entry into this University about 1573. and was
afterward Servitour or Scholar under the learned and virtuous Mr. Edward Hobye
of Trinity coll. where making early advances, his ingenuity began at first to
be observed by several of his compositions in Poetry. After he had taken one
degree in Arts, and had spent some time in exercising his fancy among the Poets
in the great City, he was esteemed, (not Jos Hall of Emanuel coll. in Cambridge
excepted) the best for Satyr among English men. At length his mind growing more
serious, he studied Physic, for the improvement of which he traveled beyond
the Seas, took the degree of Dr. of that faculty at Avenion, returned and was
incorporated in the University in the latter end of Qu. Elizabeth. Afterward
settling in London he practiced it, became much frequented for his success in
it, especially by the R. Catholics (of which number he was by many suspected
to be one) and was as much cried up to his last for Physic, as he was in his
younger days for his poetical fancy. He has written,

Alarm against Usurers, containing tried experiences, against worldly abuses.
Land. 1584. qu.

History of Forbonius and Prisaeria, with truths complaint over England --
Printed with the Alarm.

Euphues Golden Legacy found after his death in his cell at Silexedra,
bequeathed to Philautus Sons, nursed up with their Father in England. Land.
1590. etc. qu.

The wounds of a civil War, lively set forth in the true Tragedies of Marius
and Scilla. Land. 1594. qu.

A fig for Momus -- Pr. in qu.

Looking-glass for London: An historical Comedy. Land. 1598. qu. In the
composure of which he had the assistance of Robert Green M. A. of Cambridge.

Liberality and prodigality, Comedy. Lady Alimony, Com. Luminalia, a Mask.
Laws of nature, Com.

Assisted also in these by the said Rob. Green, who is accounted the half
author of them.

Treatise of the Plague, containing the nature, signs and accidents of the
same, etc. Land. 1603. qu.

Countess of Lincol. Nusery. Oxon. 1622. in 2. or 3. sh. in qu.

Treatise in defense of Plays. -- This I have not yet seen, nor his Pastoral
Songs and Madrigals, besides several other things which are as it were lost to
the generality of Scholars. He also translated into English (1) Josephus his
History or Antiquities of the Jews. Land. 1602. 09. 20. etc. sol. (2) The works
both moral and natural of Luc. An. Seneca. Land. 1614. 20. fol. etc. This
eminent Doctor who practiced his faculty in Warwick Lane in the beginning of K.
Jam. 1. and afterward on Lambert-hill, removed thence a little before his last
end into the parish of S. Mary Magd. in Old Fishstreet, London, where he made
his last exit (of the Plague I think) in September, in sixteen hundred twenty
five, Joan, but where buried, unless in the Church or yard there, I know not.
His memory is celebrated by several Poets, whose Encomiums of him being
frequent, I shall for brevity sake pass them now by, and proceed to the next
who had a name among those of his persuasion for an eminent. Theologist.

HENRY HOLLAND, was born at Daventry Dantry in Northamptonshire, educated in
Grammar learning in Eaton School near to Win^sore, elected Scholar of S. John's
coll. in 1565. took one degree in Arts, left that house soon after, his
Friends, Country and Religion, and went to D^way in Flanders, where making a
considerable progress in the Theological faculty, was made Priest and Bach. of
Div. Afterward he went to Rheims, and in the English coll. there was a most
noted preacher for several years, and at length gave his assisting hand to the
Translation of the Rheimish Testament. Soon after he was sent into the English
Harvest, to gain souls to his religion, but finding that employment dangerous,
he retired to Doway again, where being made (...) Divinity, read and
interpreted divine Letters f^r many years in the Monastery of Anchine near to
that place. His works are,

De venerabili Sacramento.

De Sacrificio Missae. Duac. 1609.

Carmina diversa, with other things printed beyond the Seas, which seldom, or
never, come into these parts. He gave way to fate in a good old age, within the
said Monastery of Anchine, Sept. in sixteen hundred twenty and five, and was
buried in the Cloister there. Over his grave is an Epitaph beginning thus.
Dantria me genuit, me clara Vigornia fovit,
Aetona me docuit, post doeet Oxonium.


The rest you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 307. b. In
this Hen. Holland's time were one, two, or more writers of both his names, as
(1) Hen. Hol. who wrote A treatise against Witchcraft, etc. Camb. 1590. qu. and
the same, as it seems, who published Spiritual preservations against the
Pestilence; and added thereunto, An admonition concerning the use of Physic.
Both printed 1603. qu. (2) H. Hol. who published the Hist. of Adam, or the
fourfold state of Man, etc. Pr. 1606. qu. and Christian Exercise of Fasting,
private and public, etc. Pr. 1596. qu. Whether this H. Holland be the same
with the first, (who was of Cambridge, as it seems,) I cannot tell, unless I
see their respective books; neither can I say to the contrary but that he may
be the same H. Holland, who published the Posthuma of his Brother Abrah.
Holland sometimes of Trin. coll. in Cambridge. -- Land. 1626. Which Abraham
(who was author also of a Poem, called, Naumachia; or Hollands Sea Fight. Land.
1622. qu.) died on the 18. of Febr. 1625. (3) Hen. Holland, Son of Philemon
Holland a Physician and Schoolmaster of the City of Coventry, who was born
there, traveled with John Lord Harington into the Palatinate, in 1613. and
collected and wrote, Monumenta Sepulchralia Ecclesiae S. Pauli Land. Printed in
qu. Also Herologia Anglica, sive effigies, vitae and elogia clarorum and
doctorum aliquot Anglorum, ab an. 1500. ad 1620. Land. 1620. in two tomes. fol.
and did engrave and pub. a book, intit. A book of Kings, being a true and
lively Effigies of all our English Kings from the Conquest till this present,
etc. 1618. But this Hen. Holland was not educated either in Oxon or Cambridge,
having been a Member of the Society of the Stationers in London. See in the
Fasti, among the incorporations, an. 1572.

Thom. Finch of East well in Kent, was born in that County, and for a time
educated in this University, particularly, as I conceive, in Oriel coll.
wherein several of his surname and Family studied in the time of Q. Elizabeth.
From Oxon he was translated to Greys Inn, wherein making great proficiency in
the Municipal Laws, became a Counselor of note, Autumn or Summer-Reader of
that house, 2. Jac. 1. Sergeant at Law 1614. and one of the Kings Sergeants,
and a Knight, two years after, being then in great esteem for his knowledge in
his profession. He has written,

Nomotexnia; cestascavoir, un description del common Leys d' Angleterre
solonique les rules del Art, etc. Land. 1613. fol. in 4 books. Done into
English by the same author, under this title, Of Law; or a discourse thereof,
in 4 books. Land. 1627. 36. 61. etc. oct. From the said book is mostly
extracted another, intit. A summary of the Common Law of England. Land. 1654.
oct. done by another hand. Our author Finch also wrote,

Of the calling of the Jews. -- By which book it appears, that the studies of
the author, were not altogether confined to the Common Law. But his judgment
therein, as to the subject matter, dissenting from the opinions of ingenious
persons, yet they cannot otherwise but allow him to have learnedly maintained
an Error. He departed this life on the eleventh day of October. in sixteen
hundred twenty and five, Martins Church near Canterbury, leaving then behind
him a Son, begotten on the body of his Wife Vrsula, Daughter and Heir of Will.
Thwayts, called John Finch, born the 17. Sept. 1584. educated in the Common Law
in Greys Inn, afterward a Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lord
Finch of Fordwyche, forced out of England by the severity of the Members of the
Long Parliament, an. 1640. had leave afterward to return, and lived privately
at the Mote near Canterbury, and dying the 20. Nov. an. 1660. was buried in the
Church of S. Martin beforementioned. This John Lord Finch (who had a younger
Brother called Henry) seems to have had some considerable knowledge in
Mathematics and Astronomy, as it appears by a Manuale Mathematicum, curiously
written on Velom with his own hand, preserved to this day as a rarity in
Dugdale's Press, among the MSS in the Ashmolean Musaeum.

RICHARD FOWNS, a Ministers Son, and a Worcestershire man born, was elected
Student of Chapter Chapter 1577. aged 17. took the degrees in Arts, became Chaplain to
Prince Henry, Bach. and D* of D. 1605. and about that time Rector of Stoke upon
Severn, commonly called Severnstoke, in his own Country. He has written,

Trisagion, or the three Offices of Christ. Land. 1619. qu. He was buried in
the Church of Severnstoke, 25. Nov. in sixteen hundred twenty and five, Rich.
Fowns, preached on 2 Thessalonians. 2. 34. was published in 1660. but whether preached
by our author, or another of both his names, I cannot tell, because I have not
yet seen it.

CHRISTOPHER BAGSHAW was originally descended from the Bagshaws, living at
Ridge or Abney Derbyshire, but the name of the place wherein he received his
first breath, I cannot yet find. In 1572, he was by the endeavors of Rob.
Persons (afterward a Jesuit) elected Probationer-Fellow of Balliol coll. being
then a Bach. of Arts, and a celebrated Logician and Philosopher. Soon after
proceeding in his Faculty, he was much noted for his zeal to Protestancy, yet
proved troublesome in his public disputes, and in his behavior toward
Persons. About the year 1579. he was Principal, or at least Deputy, for a time,
of Gloucester hall; where also being disliked, he left that place soon after,
and his Fellowship in 1582. which was pronounced void the year following. About
that time he went beyond the Seas, changed his Religion, and being made a
Priest in France, and getting helps and directions from Fa. Persons, he
journied to Rome, where for some time he lived in the English college. But
being troublesome there also, and raising great garboyles among the Scholars of
that place, Cardinal Boncompagno, Protector of the English Nation, expelled him
thence, as one Rob. Persons in his Manifestation of the folly, etc. fol. 56. b.
that had no good will for him says: Yet our author in his own vindication
tells Answer to certain points of a Libel, p. 31. etc.
us, that he had a Benedicessit, and departed very orderly. Afterward he
returned to Paris, where, as it is said, he was made Doctor of Div. and one of
the Sorbon, at which time, and after, the Jesuits used to style him, Doctor
Erraticus, and Doctor per Saltum. Afterward he was sent into England to gain
Souls to his Religion, but taken and committed Prisoner to Wisbich Castle in
Cambridgshire, where I find him in 1593. among many other Priests and Gentlemen
of the Romans Cath. Religion, that had some years before been secured in that
place. It Is said In the Relation of the Faction began at Wisbich, 1595. etc.
Printed 1601. qu. p. 18.
while he continued there, that he carried away the glory and fame of all that
was heretofore laudably done in that Castle, before Fa. Edmonds alias Weston a
Jesuit began to show his tricks, and then that Party, and those Lay-persons
that favored them, would condemn Bagshaw as Ibid. p. 38.
a man of no worth, unruly, disordered, and a disobedient person, not to be
favored or respected by any, etc. Afterward being freed from that prison, he
went beyond Sea again, where he ended his days. He has written,

An answer to certain points of a Libel, called, An Apology of the
Subordination in England. Par. 1603. oct. He had a considerable hand also in
writing a book, intit.

Declaratio motuum ac turbationum inter Jesuitas and Sacerdotes Seminariorum in
Anglia. Rothomag. 1601. in qu. Set out under the name of one Joh. Mush a
Yorkshire man born, and a learned Priest, who engaged himself much in composing
the differences that happened among the Priests and Jesuits in Wisbich Castle.
Dr. Bagshaw had also a hand in,

A true relation of the Faction began at Wisbich by Father Edmunds alias Weston
a Jesuit, 1595, and continued since by Father Walley alias Garnet, the
Provincial of the Jesuits in England, and by Fa. Persons in Rome. -- Printed
1601. qu. This Dr. Bagshaw died and was buried at Paris after the year sixteen
hundred twenty and five, clar. 1^25.
as I have been informed by Franc. a Sancta Clara, who remembered and knew the
Doctor well, but had forgotten the exact time of his death.

Devon, but whether of John or George Gee, whom I have before mentioned in Edw.
Gee, under the year 1618. I cannot justly say, was entered into Brasnose coll.
in 1613. aged 16. where making no long stay, he entered himself a Batler among
his Countrymen of Exeter college, and having holy Orders conferred on him, after
he had taken one degree in Arts, became beneficed at Newton near to Winwick in
Lancashire, of which last place Mr. Josias Horn being then Parson, Gee had
oftentimes several conferences with him concerning matters of Religion; but
they savouring much of a mind inclining to Popery, Mr. Horn and the
neighboring Ministers concluded among themselves, that he had changed his
Religion before he had left that place. Thence taking his rambles, he retired
to London, and became acquainted with the noted persons of the R. Cath.
Persuasion that then lived there. But at length being moved to leave them, and
his opinions newly embraced, by the urgent letters of his Father, and by the
valid reasons concerning the vanity (as he termed it) of that Religion by Dr.
Abbot Archb. of Canterbury, (who sent for him upon notice received that he had
been at the doleful Even-song in the Blackfriars in London, 26. Oct. 1623.)
became a bitter Enemy to the Romanists, and studied to do them what mischief he
could by these books following.

The Foot out of the Snare: with a detection of sundry late practices and
impostures of the Priests and Jesuits in England, etc. Land. 1624. qu.

A gentle excuse to Mr. Greg. Musket for stiling him Jesuit. -- These two,
which go, and are joined together, were printed four times in the said year
1624. because all the copies, or most of them, were bought up by R. Catholics
before they were dispersed, for fear their lodgings, and so consequently
themselves, should be found out and discovered, by the catalogues of all such
Priests, Jesuits, Popish Physicians, Chyrurgions, etc. with the names of the
streets, lanes, etc. in London, where they mostly lived, which were printed at
the end of the Gentle Excuse beforementioned. Our author Gee has also written
and published,

Hold fast: Sermon at Paul's Cross on Rev. 3. 11. Land. 1624. qu.

New shreds of the old Snare; containing the apparitions of two Female Ghosts,
the copies of diverse letters, etc. especially Indulgences purchased at Rome,
etc. Land. 1624. q^. For the publishing of which books, and for his mutability
of mind, he was very much blamed by both parties, especially by those of the
Romans persuasion, as I have been several times informed by a grave Bach. of Div.
Mr. Rich. Washbourne Chanter of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, who had been his contemporary
in Exeter coll. Which person having known Gee well, and what he was, as to his
life and conversation, blamed the writer of this book much, for honoring the
memory of such a sorry fellow as he was, in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. He was
afterward beneficed at Tenterden in Kent, Clar 1625.
where he died and was buried, but when, I cannot yet tell, leaving then behind
him a young Brother named Orlando Gee, afterward a Knight. One Joh. Gee was
Minister of Dunsford in Devon, who died about the beginning of 1631. leaving a
Relict behind him called Sarah. Which Joh. Gee was perhaps Father to the
aforesaid Joh. Gee the writer. Qu.

Rich. Rowland, a great reviver of our English antiquities, and a most
admirable Critic in the Saxon and Gothic languages, ought with all due
ceremony to crave a place among these writers, not only because he is little
remembered among authors, but also for that he had received part of his
education among the Oxonians. His Grandfather who was called Theodore Rowland
Verstegan, was born See Rich. Verstegans epist, to the renowned English Nation,
set before his book, intit. A restitution of decayed intelligence, etc.
in the Duchy of Gelderlandt, and there descended of an ancient and worshipful
Family. From which Duchy, when it had been much ruined, wasted, and depopulated
by the intestine Wars there raised, and continued by Charles Duke thereof, and
Philip the Archduke, and Charles the fifth his Son, he the said Verstegan being
then a young man, and deprived of his Friends in the said Wars, came into
England about the latter end of Hen. 7. and there married, and soon after died,
leaving behind him a Son but nine months old, which gave cause of making his
fortune meaner, than else it might have been. Afterward when the said Son grew
up to be about 16 years of age, he was bound an Apprentice to a Cooper: Nor is
this any discredit, Wolfgangus Musculus his Father being of that Trade. This
Cooper was Father to our author Rich. Verstegan, born in the Parish of St.
Catherine, (near to the Tower of London,) where his Parent mostly lived, and
gained so comfortable a subsistence by his Trade, that he made shift to give
his Son ingenious and Grammatical education, which being improved by Academical
in his University, where he was mostly known by the name of Rowland, became
esteemed for some parts of learning that were not then among the Academians
regarded. Afterward to avoid Oaths, he left the University without a degree,
and being by that time a zealous R. Catholic, he left England, went into the
Spanish Netherlands, and settled at Antwerp, where he composed,

Theatrum crudelitatum Hereticorum nostri temporis. Antw. 1592. qu. in 12 sh.
Whether ever printed before, as some say it was, I cannot tell. This book is
full of Cuts, representing the hanging, quartering, and beheading, or
butchering of Popish Martyrs, engraven from the delineations made with the Pen
of Verstegan, who was observed, while in England, to be much delighted in
drawing and painting. The verses under, to explain the meaning of, them, were
made by one Joh. Bochius born at Bruxills, and then (1592.) Register, if I
mistake not, at Antwerp. Afterward, the Rebellious League beginning, he
conveyed himself and books to Paris, where the English Ambassador complained
Gul. Barclay in lib. suo cui tit. est De regno and regali potestate adversus
Buchananum, Brutum, Bo^rchierum and reliquos Monarchomacos, etc. Par. 1600.
lib. 6. cap. 7. p. 438, 439. See in Hen. Foulis his Hist. of Romish Treasons
and Usurpations, lib. 7. cap.. 2.
of him to K. Hen. 3. and desired that he being born a Subject to the Q. of
England, and then a Fugitive, and one that had abused her by his representation
of Cruelties, he might be delivered into his hands, to be sent to England,
there to receive reward. And the Ambassador had reason for his request, if that
be true which is reported, Ib. in Gul. Barclay ut sup.
that K. Hen. 3. was so much possessed with those cruel pictures, and did put so
much credit in them, that he accused Q. Elizabeth of great cruelty, calling her
wicked and cruel woman. Yet at the Ambassadors desire Verstegan was imprisoned;
at which Jean Bouchier that active firebrand of the League is not a little See
in a book intit. De justa Henrici 3 abdicatione* etc. Lugd. 1591. oct. lib. 2.
cap. 16. p. 123.
troubled, and lays it as an heretical fault on K. Hen. 3. At length
Verstegan is released, quits France and returns to Antwerp, where, as it is
said, he reprinted his book, exercised the Trade of Printing, and by his rising
up only (as one The author of a Pamphlet against the Jesuits, intit. Another
l^tter of Mr. A. C. to his dis^esuited kinsman concerning (...) appeal, (...)
and^* Printed 1602. qu. p. ^^.
tell us) by Brocage and Spierie for the Hispanish'd Jesuits, lived then and
there (1602.) as if he were an Hidalgo, as who may not be a Gentleman, who
lives so far from home, where he is not known, etc. At that time, and before,
the Jesuits and Secular Priests falling out in England, each party defended it
self by the Pen. In this quarrel Verstegan concerns himself, joining with the
Jesuits, and writing in their behalf, though not one of their number, but
rather a Secular, showing himself as zealous a railer as the best of them: And
indeed never was there quarrel composed, of so many hard words, either side
considered, yet whether Verstegan has published any of his railings, or
whether they are done in other books, I cannot tell, for I have seen nothing of
that nature. Sure I am that about the death of Q. Elizabeth he employed his
studies on a more noble subject, which being finished, he published it under
this title.

A restitution of decayed intelligence in antiquities concerning the most noble
and renowned English Nation. Antw. 1605. qu. Before which, Rich. White of
Basingstoke, and Rich. Stanyhurst (whom I have elsewhere mentioned) have
commendatory verses. In this book are several cuts engraven from the
representations drawn with great curiosity by him, which has advantaged the
sale of it much: And I am verily persuaded had the said book been published two
years before, I mean before the first edition of Camdens Remains, which first
saw light in 1604. it would have been more cried up, and consequently would
have sold more. But however, so it is, that the book has been so much valued
by learned and curious men in times following, that a second impression of it
was made at Land. 1653. in large oct. and another in 1674. oct. He has also
written.

The sundry successive regal governments of the Realm of England, Antw. 1620.
printed in one long sheet, wherein are the pictures of a Britain, Roman, Saxon,
Dane and Norman, wrought off from a Copper plate: And was the same person,
without doubt, with him, who writes himself R. V. author of Odes in imitation
of the seven penitential Psalms, with sundery other Poems and Ditties bending
to devotion and piety. Printed beyond the Sea in 1601. with the Jesuits mark in
the title; for, as I have been informed, Verstegan had some skill in Poetry as
well as in Painting. In the said Poems he touches on many matters of
antiquity, and ancient Saints of England. The same R. V. also has translated
into English A dialogue of dying well. Antw. 1603. oct. written in Ital. by Don
Peeter of Luca a Can. regular and D. of D. and by the translator dedicated to
the Lady Joan Berkley Abbess of the English Nuns of S. Benedict. in Bruxells.
The said Verstegan has written and translated other things, but few of them
coming into England, we seldom or never see them. He was living in good
condition among the English at Antwerp who had fled for the sake of Religion,
under the notion of a Spanish stipendary (having several years before been
married to so thir^ty and prudent a woman, that she kept up his credit) Clar.
1625.
in the latter end of K. James, and beginning of K. Chapter 1. as one or more
Letters written by him to the great Antiquary Sir Rob. Cotton (which I have
seen in his Library) show. And thus much of Rich. Verstegan alias Rowland, of
whom Will. Watson Priest will give In his Quodlibets, p. 257.
you a sharp character, and another, stuff The author of a pamphlet against the
Jesuits, called Another Letter, etc. as before, p. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
enough (beyond the rules of charity) to run down a Dog.

Franc. Stradling by Elizabeth his Wife, was born near to Bristow in
Somersetshire, but descended from an ancient and Knightly family of his name,
living at S. Donats in Glamorganshire, was educated in puerile learning under a
learned and pious man named Edw. Green Prebendary of the Cath. Chapter at Bristow,
became a Commoner of Brasnose coll. in 1579. aged 16. years or thereabouts, and
in 1583. he took a degree in arts as a member of Magd. hall, being then
accounted a miracle for his forwardness in learning and pregnancy of parts.
Soon after his great worth being discovered in the Metropolis, while he
continued in one of the Inns of Court (but especially after he had returned
from his travels beyond the Seas) was courted and admired by the Learned
Camden, Sir Joh. Harrington the Poet, Tho. Leyson mentioned before, under the
year 1607. and above all, by that most noted Critic and Physician Dr. Jo. Dav.
Rhese. He has written and published,

De vita and morte contemnenda, lib. 3. Francof. 1597. in oct. written to his
Uncle Sir Edw. Stradling of S. Donats, whom I have mentioned under the year
1609.

Epigrammatum libri quatuor. Land. 1607. in oct. Two years after he became heir
to his Uncle before mentioned, settled at S. Donats Castle, and was made a
Baronet in 1611. at which time he was esteemed a wise and most learned
Gentleman. Afterward being involved in secular affairs and the services of his
Country, was taken off from writing till the latter end of the reign of K. Jam.
1. at which time he published a book intit.

Beati pacifici. Printed 1623. but whether in prose or verse I cannot tell, for
I have not yet seen it. Afterward he published,

Divine Poems in seven several Classes, Clar. 1625.
written to K. Chapter 1. Land. 1625. qu. At the end of which is an Epitaph made by
him on K. Jam. 1. I have sent several times, to several persons in Wales, to
have some account of this person, his last end, and his Epitaph, but no returns
are yet made.

ARTHUR LAKE, brother to Sir Tho. Lake Knight Jam. 1. Son of Almeric Lake or du
Lake of the ancient borough of Southampton, was born in S. Michaels parish, and
educated for a time in the Free School, there. Afterward being transplanted to
Wykehams School to per^ect his Grammar learning, was thence elected probationer
Fellow of New coll. and after two years of Probation he was made perpetual
Fellow thereof, an. 1589. Five years after that, he proceeded in Arts, entered
into the sacred function, was made Fellow of Wykehams coll. near to Winton,
about 1600. and three years after Master of the hospital of S. Cross in the
place of Dr. Rob. Bennet promoted to the Sea of Hereford. In 1605. he took the
degrees in Divinity, and the same year he was installed Archdeacon of Surrey.
Afterward he was made Dean of Worcester in Apr. 1608. in the room of Dr. Jam.
Monutague promoted to the Sea of Bath and Wells, and at length Bishop of those
Cities; to which he was consecrated at Lambeth 8. Dec. 1616. In all these
places of honor and employment, he carried himself the same in mind and
person, showing by his constancy, that his virtues were virtues indeed* in all
kind of which, whether natural, moral, Theological, personal, or pastoral, he
was eminent, and indeed one of the examples of his time. He always lived a
single man, exemplary in his life and conversation, and very hospitable. He was
also well read in the Fathers and Schoolmen, and had such a command of the
Scripture (which made him one of the best preachers) that few went beyond him
in his time. The things that he has written, were not by him published, but by
his Friends, after his death; the titles of which follow.

Exposition of the first Psalm.

Exposition of the 51. Psalm.

Nine Sermons on Matthew. 22. verse 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40.

Ten Sermon. on Exodus 19.

Five Sermon. at S. Mary's in Oxon. on Luke 3. ver. 7, 8, 9.

Eight Sermon. on Isa. 9.

Six Sermon. on Haggai 2.

Sundry Sermons de tempore preached at Court.

Meditations -- All which being collected into a large volume, were printed
under this general title. Sermons with religious and divine meditations. Land.
1629. fol.

Ten Sermons upon several occasions preached at S. Paul's Cross and elsewhere.*
Land. 1641. qu. The first is on Psalm. 160. 29, 30. the second on Jude 5. etc.
He dyed in sixteen hundred twenty and six, 1626:
and was buried in an Isle on the north side of the Choire of Wells Cathedral.
Over his grave was soon after laid a plain stone, neither marble nor free, with
this engraven on a brass plate fastened thereunto. Here lies Author Lake Doctor
in Divinity late Bishop of Bathe and Wells, who died on the fourth day of May,
an. 1626. His brother Sir Thomas before mentioned, who was of Channous near
Edgworth in Middlesex, died at Chanous 17. Sept. 1630. and was buried on the
19. of the same month.

JOHN DAVIES, the third person of both his Chisgrove in the parish of Tysbury
in Wiltshire, being the Son of wealthy Tanner of that place, became a Commoner
of Queens coll. about the beginning of Mich. Term in the fifteenth year of his
age, an. 1585. wherein, having laid a considerable foundation of Academical
literature, partly by his own natural parts (which were excellent) and partly
by the help of a good Tutor, he was removed (having taken a degree in Arts, as
it seems) to the Middle Temple, wherein applying himself to the study of the
Common Law, tho he had no great genie to it, was in fine made a Barrester. But
so it was that he being a high spirited young man, did, upon some little
provocation or punctilio, bastinado Rich. Martin (afterward Recorder of
London) in the common Hall of the Middle Temple, while he was at Dinner. For
which act being forthwith expelled, he retired for a time in private, lived in
Oxon in the condition of a Sojourner, and followed his studies, tho he wore a
cloak. However among his serious thoughts, making reflections upon his own
condition, which sometimes was an affliction to him, he composed that excellent
Philosophical and Divine Poem called Nosce teipsum. Afterward by the favor of
Thomas Lord Ellesmore Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, he was again
restored to his Chamber, was afterward a Concellour, and a Burgess for that
Parliament which was held at Westminster in 1601. Upon the death of Q.
Elizabeth, he, with the Lord Hunsdon, went into Scotland to congratulate K.
James as her Lawful Successor; and being introduced into his presence, the King
enquired the names of those Gentlemen who were in the company of the said Lord,
and naming Joh. Davies among, who stood behind, them, the King straightway
asked, whether he was Nosce Teipsum? and being answered that he was the same,
he graciously embraced him, and thenceforth had so great favor for, that soon
after he made, him his Attorney General in Ireland. While he held that place,
he was made Sergeant at Law, (having never been Reader,) an. 1606. the Poesy
of whose Rings that were then given, being Lex publica lux est. Notwithstanding
the said degree, he returned into Ireland by his Majesty's leave and
dispensation, kept his office of Attorney, and received the honor of
Knighthood from his Majesty at Whitehall, 11. Feb. 1607. Afterward he came
into England for altogether, was made one of his Maj. Sergeants at Law here, in
1612. and sundry times appointed one of the Justices of the Assize in diverse
Circuits. At length being constituted Lord Chapter Justice of the Kings Bench, had
his robes made in order to be settled in that high office, as his Daughter Lucy
Countess of Huntingd^n.
has several times reported, but died suddenly before the ceremony of
settlement or installation could be performed. He was held in great esteem by
the noted Scholars of his time, among whom were Will. Camden, Sir Jo.
Harrington the Poet, Ben. Johnson, Jo. Seldom, Facete Hoskyns, R. Corbet of Chapter
Chapter and others, who esteemed him to be a person of a bold Spirit, of a sharp
and ready wit, and completely learned, but in truth more a Scholar than a
Lawyer. His works are,

Nosce Teipsum. This Oracle expounded in two Elegies, 1. Of Humane Nature. 2.
Of the Soul of Man. Land. 1599. qu. dedicated to Q. Elizabeth. There again
1622. in oct.

Hymus of Astrea, in Acrostick verse. -- Printed with the former.

Orchestra. Or a Poem expressing the antiquity and excellency of dancing, in a
dialogue between Penelope and one of her Woers, containing 131 Stanzaes,
unfinished. -- This being also printed with Nosce Teipsum, they were all three,
especially the first, much extolled by Scholars of all sorts. Among them I find
one, who has dealt poetically with him by an ingenious copy of verses, which
begins thus, Si tua legisset, redivivus, etc. If Plato lived and saw these
Heaven bred lines,
Where thou the Essence of the Soul confines,


Or merry Martial, etc. -- Sir Jo. Harrington also beforementioned would not
let his memory escape his Pen without an In his second book of Epigrams, numb.
67.
Epigram, especially for his Orchestra, besides other Poets of those times,
which for brevity-sake I shall now pass by.

Discover of the true causes why Ireland was never entirely subdued, nor
brought under obedience of the Crown of England, until the beginning of his
Maj. happy Reign. Land. 1612. qu. Dedic. to the King with this Latin verse
only. Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos.

Declaration of our Sovereign Lord the King, etc. concerning the title of his
Maj. Son Charles, the Prince, and Duke of Cornwall, etc. Land. 1614. in 14 sh.
in fol. Printed in columns, one in French and the other in English.

Le primer Reports des cases and matters on ley resolves, etc. adjudges in les
Courts del Roy en Ireland. Dubl. 1615. Land. 1628. fol. In the sec* edit. was
added a Table, which was not in the former. From this book it was, that Sir
Joh. Pettus Knight, did chiefly select matter for another, intit. Englands
independency upon the Papal Power, historically and judiciously stated by Sir
Jo, Davies Attorn. Genesis in Ireland, and by Sir Edw. Coke L. Chapter Just. of
England in two reports, selected from their great volumes, with a Pref. written
by Sir Joh. Pettus. Land. 1674. qu.

Perfect abridgment of the eleven books of Reports of Sir Edw. Coke. Land.
1651. in tw. written in French by Sir Joh. Davies, translated into English by
another hand.

Jus imponendi vectigalia. Or, the learning touching Customs, Tonnage,
Poundage, and Impositions on Merchandises, etc. asserted, etc. Land. 1656. 59.
etc. oct. I find one Sir J. D. Knight, to have published, Reasons Academy. Or,
a new post with Sovereign Salve to cure the worlds madness; expressing himself
in several essays and witty discourses. Land. 1620. oct. Written in prose, and
at the end of it is Reasons moan, written in verse in eleven Stanzaes. Whether
the said Sir J. D. be the same with Sir Joh. Davies, I cannot justly tell.
Besides the beforementioned things (as also Epigrams, as it is said) which were
published by, and under the name of, Sir Joh. Davies, are several MSS. of his
writing and composing, which go from hand to hand, as, (1) Metaphrase of
several of K. David's Psalms. (2) A large Epistle to Rob. E. of Salisbury of the
state of the Counties of Monaghan, Fennanagh, and Down, and of Justices of the
Peace, and other Officers of Ireland, written 1607. (3) Speech when he was
Speaker of the H. of Commons in Ireland, before Arthur L. Chichester, Visc.
Belfast, L. Lieutenant of Ireland, 21. May 1613. These two last, were in the
Library of Sir Jam. Ware of Ireland, and are now, if I mistake not, in that of
the Earl of Clarendon. (4) An argument upon the question of impositions,
digested and divided in sundry chapters. This was in the Library once of Rich.
Smith, Secondary of the Poultry-Compter, and with it was bound up an Answer
thereunto. -- Fol. But the question is, whether this argument be not part of,
or involved in, Sir John's Jus imponendi vectigalia beforementioned. At length
he died suddenly in his house in the Strand near to London, in the 57 year of
his age, for being well at night, when he went to rest, he was on Thursday
morning, December, in sixteen hundred twenty and six, found dead in his bed, by
an Apoplexy, as 'twas said. It was then commonly rumored that his Prophetical
Lady had foretold his death in some manner, on the Sunday going before. For
while she sat at Dinner by him, she suddenly burst out with tears: Whereupon
he asking her what the matter was, she answered, Husband these are your Funeral
tears; to which he made reply, Pray therefore spare your tears now, and I will
be content that you shall laugh when I am dead. Her name was Elianor Touchet,
youngest Daughter to George Lord Audley Earl of Castlehaven, and what she
usually predicted, she folded up for the most part in dark expressions,
received from a voice, which she frequently heard, as she used to tell her
Daughter Lucy, and she others. By this Elianor, Sir Joh. Davies had Issue a
Son, who was a natural Idiot, and dying young, the Father made an Epitaph of 4
verses on him, beginning, Hic in visceribus terrae, etc. So that the said Lucy
being sole Heiress to her Father, Ferdinando Lord Hastings (afterward Earl of
Huntingdon) became a Suitor to her for Marriage; whereupon the Father made this
Epigram. Lucida vis oculos teneri perstrinxit amantis
Nec tamen erravit, nam via dulcis erat.


After the body of Sir John had laid in state for some time, it was conveyed to
the Church of St. Martin in the Fields near to Whitehall, where it was solemnly
interred in the South Isle. Soon after was a monument fastened to the Pillar near
his grave, with a large inscription on it, part of which runs thus, Vir ingenio
compto, rara facundia, oratione cum soluta tum numeris astricta, faelicissimus;
juridicam severitatem morum elegantia, and amaeniore eruditione mitigavit:
Patronus fidus, judex incorruptus, ingenuae pietatis amore, and anxiae
superstitionis contemptu, juxta insignis, etc. Obiit 8. Id. Dec. 1626. His
Widow afterward lived mostly at Parton in Hertfordshire, had her Strange and
wonderful Prophesies. -- Printed in qu. an. 1649. and dying in St. Brides
Parish in London, 5. Jul. 1652. was buried near to the relics of her Husband,
and soon after had a large Epitaph of commendations put over her grave. You may
see more of her and her Prophecies in the History of the life and death of Dr.
Will. Laud Archb. of Cant. Part. 2. lib. 4. an. 1634. See also in the Diary, or
Breviat of the life of the said Archb. -- Printed 1644. p. 18. One Joh. Davies,
a Bencher of the Inner Temple, was buried against the Communion Table, in the
Temple Church, 20. Aug. 1631. What relation he had to the former, or whether he
collected or published Reports, I know not.

EDMUND GUNTER, was a Hertfordshire man Reg. Matri^. Univ. Oxon. P. page 31*
born, but descended originally from those of his name living at Gunterstown in
Brecknockshire, elected from Westminster School a Student of Chapter Church 1599.
aged 18. where going through with great industry the several Classes of Logic
and Philosophy, took the degrees in Arts. Afterward he entered into the
Theological Faculty, became a Minister of Gods word, and in 1615. he was
admitted to the reading of the Sentences. But his excellencies being above all,
in the Mathematick Arts, he was made Astronomy Professor of Gresham coll.
(before he was Bach. of Div.) in the place of Edw. Breerewood deceased. Where
being settled he acted much for the public by his profession, as well by
writing as teaching. His works are,

Of the Sector, Cross Staff and other Instruments. Land. 1624. 36. qu.

Canon Triangulorum, five tabulae sinuum artificialium ad radium 10000,0000.
and ad scrupula prima quadrantis. Land. 1620. oct. This being Englished, was
with the former book, published by Sam. Foster Astronomy Professor of Gresham
coll. (sometimes a Member of that of Emanuel in Cambr.) with a tract of his
own, called, The use of the Quadrant. Land. 1624. 53. qu. The fifth edition of
these works of Gunter was diligently corrected, and had diverse necessary things
and matters (pertinent thereunto) added, throughout the whole work not before
printed, by Will. Leybourne sometimes a Printer, and afterward an eminent
Mathematician. -- Land. 1673. qu. What these additions are, the said Leybourne
acquaints us in his Epistle before the said works: Wherein he takes notice of
some Plagiaries, who had then lately thrown into the World several tractates
extracted (or rather transcribed) from Mr. Gunter, without the least mention of
their true author. Some questions in Navigation are added to these works, by
Hen. Bond teacher of the Mathematics at Ratcliff near London, and to that was
then (1673.) added, The description and use of another Sector and Quadrant;
both of them invented by Sam. Foster beforementioned. What other things our
author Gunter has written, I know not, unless one, two, or more parts of
Dialling, which I have not yet seen. He concluded his last day in Gresham coll.
December in the same year, in the Parish of St. Peter le Poor within the City
of London. See more of him in Edm. Wingate, whom I shall hereafter mention
under the year 1656.

Rich. Worthington by Dorothy his Wife, Dau. of Tho. Charnock of Charnock in
Lanc. was born at Blainscough near to Wygan in that County, and being fitted
for the Univ. in those parts, he was sent to Ox. about 1566. but to what house
of learning, unless to Brasnose coll. I cannot tell. After he had been drudging
in the studies of Logic and Philosophy for about 4 years, he took a degree in
Arts, which being completed by Determination, he left the University, his
Country, and Friends, and crossed the Seas to Doway, where he was received with
great humanity into the English college, in Feb. 1572-73. Soon after he took
upon him the Priesthood, and in 1577. he was promoted to the degree of Bach. of
Divinity, and the year after being translated to the English college at
Rheimes, was thence sent into England to gain Proselites, but being taken at
Islington near to London, in the house of my Progenitor Rich. a Wood his Friend
and Countryman, an. 1584. was committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, where
remaining some months, was at length released, set on Shipboard with Dr. Jasp.
Heywood, Edw. Rishton, Joh. Colleton, and others, and wa^ted over the Seas to
the coast of Normandy, where they were left to shift for themselves. In 1587.
he being about to return into England, he was sent by Cardinal Alan to Sir
will. Stanley a Colonel, to whose Regiment in the Low Countries he was by him
made Chaplain. In 1588. he was promoted to the degree of D. of D. in the
University of Trier in Germany, and in 89. he was sent for to Doway by the
Jesuits (whom he was always afraid to offend) to assist Dr. Rich. Barret
President of the English college, in the Government of that place. In 91. he
was sent to Bruxells, and remitted to the Camp, to exercise the office of
Chaplain again; where, with other Exiles, they acted See Camdens Annals of Q.
Eliz. under the year 1594.
many things which tended much to the destruction of the Q. of England, and not
long after returned to Doway again, and by the command of Cardinal Cajetan,
Protector of the English Nation, he was made President of the English coll.
there, ann. 1599. At length being grown old and unfit to govern, returned into
England, lived sometimes in London and sometimes in Staffordshire. But that
which is to be farther noted of him is, that having for the most part of his
life lived in the habit of a Secular Priest, did about six months before his
death take upon him the order and habit belonging to the Society of Jesus. His
works are,

Annotations on the Old Testament. Duac. 1609. in two Tomes in qu.

Catalogus Martyrum pro Religione Catholica in Anglia ^^^isorum ab an. 1570. ad
an. 1612. Printed 1612. and 14. in oct. Before which book is,

Narratio de origin Seminariorum, and de Missione Sacerdo^um in Anglia. This
Catalogue and Narration, taken mostly from a collection, intit. Concertatio
Eccl. Catholicae in Anglia, etc. could not be sold more than for six pence when
it was published, (for it contains but 4 sheets in oct.) yet in 1682. when the
choice Library of Mr. Rich. Smith (mentioned before in Sir Joh. Davies) was
sold by way of Auction, Dr. Tho. Marshall Dean of Gloucester, and Rector of
Linc. coll. gave eleven shillings and six pence, being then great bidding for,
before he could get, it.

The Anchor of Christian Doctrine, wherein the most principal points of
Christian Religion, are proved by the only written word of God, etc. Doway
1622. in two thick quarto's, containing four parts, viz. the first vol. one,
the other three. These two quarto's were, as one (...) the end of his (...)
says, printed at London, and sold by the author in his lodgings in
Turnbull-street for 14 shillings, which might have been afforded for five.

The Mysteries of the Rosary. -- This I have not yet seen. He also corrected
and translated the Doway Bibles, and translated into Lat. and published,
Anti-Haeretica motiva, etc. written by Rich. Bristow. -- Attrebat. 1608. in two
Tomes in qu. before which he has put a lame account of the author. This person
Tho. Worthington who was esteemed very learned among those of his persuasion,
and had hazarded his life, and done great service for the Cause, did quietly
lay down his head, and submit himself to the stroke of death in the house of
one Bidulph, Esquire of Bidulph, commonly called Biddles in Staffordshire (near to
Congleton in Cheshire,) Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire.

ALEXANDER SPICER, a Minister's Son, Somersetshire man born, became a Batler of
Exeter coll. in 1590. aged about 15. took one degree in Arts, was made Fellow
of that house and proceeded in his Faculty. At length entering into the Sacred
Function, was a Preacher for some years in these parts: Afterward upon an
invitation, he went into Ireland, where by the savor of Sir Arthur Chichester
Baron of Belfast, and L. Dep. of that Country, he became well beneficed and
dignified, and in great estimation for his learning. He has published,

David's Petition, on Psalm. 19. 13. Land. 1616. oct.

The Pope at Babylon. Sermon. on the 5. of Nov. at Colerain in the North of
Ireland, on Dan. 3. 6. Land. 1617.

Elegies on the death of Arthur Lord Chichester, etc. -- Printed 1625. which
Lord dying much about the time that K. Jam. 1. of England died, was buried at
(...) in Ireland, to the great grief of his Country, because it was in such a
time that it most required his assistance* courage, and wisdom, which are often
at odds, and seldom meet, yet in him shook hands as friends, and challenged an
equal share in his perfections. Clar 1626.
Other things were written and published by the said A. Spicer, as some of the
(...) of his coll. have informed me, but such I have not yet s^en, nor do I
know any thing besides of the (...) he left behind him the (...) lid Divine.

WILLIAM PELHAM, the eldest Son of Sir Will. Pelham of Brocklesby in
Lincolnshire, Master of the Ordnance, by Elianor his Wife, Daughter of (...) of
(...), was born in London, (near, or (...)) became Fellow-Commoner of New coll,
in the beginning of 1582. aged 14. continued a sedulous Student there, for at
least two years, in a Chamber within one of the turrets of the College wall
that encompasses the Garden. Afterward he traveled and improved his learning
in the Universities of Strasburg, Heidelburg, Wittenburg, and Lipswick in
Germany, as also in Paris and Geneva, and returning to his native Country,
settled again for a time in this University, till Mars distracted him from the
studies of Minerva, as he himself used to say. But when that Planet was set, he
retired to a Country lise at Brocklesby, where after he had received satiety of
all worldly blessings, did, in his old age, incline his heart to more
supernatural contemplations. Which being by him committed to writing, for the
benefit of his Children, (of which he had plenty,) were published under this
title,

Meditations upon the Gospel of S. John. Land. 1625. in tw. and other things,
as his Son Dr. Herbert Pelham, sometimes Fellow of Magd. coll. has told me,
but whether printed I know not. Clar. 1626.
This Sir Will. Pelham, who was Knighted by K. Jam. 1. at Newmarket, 20. Nov.
1616. lived after the publication of that book, two, three, or more years, but
when he died I cannot yet find. Among the Sons that he left behind him was Hen.
Pelham one, sometimes a Student in this University, afterward in one of the
Inns of Court, and a Barrester. At length being chosen a Burgess for Grantham
in Lincolnshire to serve in that unhappy Parliament which began at Westminster
3. Nov. 1640. sided with the Presbyterians, and was by that party elected
Speaker of the House of Commons, when the Independent-party fled with Will.
Lenthal their Speaker to the Head Quarter of the Army, then at Windsore, 30.
Jul. 1647. In which office he continued but till the 6. of Aug. following, at
what time the General of the Army ( Fairfax) restored Lenthall to his Chair,
but suffered Pelham to keep his Recordership of Lincoln City, which he had
conferred upon him by the Presbyterians upon the ejection of Sir Charles Dalison.

LongSutto^ in Hampshire, was elected Probationer Fellow* of New college from
Winchester School, in 1574. and two years after he was made complete Fellow. In
1582. he proceeded in Arts, and about 8 years after had the Parsonage of
Stockton (in Wilts) conferred upon him, where he always expressed himself a
zealous Enemy against the R. Catholics not only in his Lectures and Sermons,
but also in his writings; the titles of which follow.

Theological Logic: Or, the trial of truth containing a discovery of the
chiefest points of the doctrine of the great Antichrist, and his Adherents the
false Teachers of the times. Oxon. 1600. qu. In 1602. was published the second
part of Theol. Logic, and in 1625. the third part, both in qu. and the last
dedicated to the B. of Bath and Wells.

Reasonableness of wise and holy truth, and the absurdity of foolish and wicked
error, Sermon. on Joh. 17. ver. 17. Oxon. 1617. qu.

Defense of Protestancy, Clar. 1626.
proving that the Protestants Religion has the promise of Salvation, etc.
Land. 1635. second edition. Before which time the author was dead.

Anth. Hungerford of Dewne-Ampu^y in Gloucestershire, by Bridget his Wife,
Daughter of one Shelley a Judge, was educated in this University (with other R.
Catholics,) but for a short time, for his Father being much troubled with the
incumbrance^ of his Estate, and therefore could not well look after the Son,
the Mother, who was a zealous Papist, caused him to be trained up in her
Religion from his Childhood. So that carrying his opinion on till 1584. about
which time he had left Oxon, being then 20 years of age, staggered somewhat in
his opinion upon the reading of Capians book called December rations, wherein he
found some undecent passages, but confirmed in his mind soon after by Mr. Tho.
Neale of Cassington near Woodstock in Oxfordshire, and at length totally settled
by one Twiford a Priest or Jesuit, who was brought to him by George Etheridge a
Physician of Oxon. In this settled course he held on till the beginning of the
year 1588. at which time it pleased God (as he said) to make a hand that had
given the wound, the means to make good the cure, when it aimed at a further
mischief, being occasioned mostly from certain words unwarily dropped from one
Hopton a Priest, and his acquaintance, concerning an invasion then about to be
made, for the relief chiefly of Romans Catholics, who laid under the heavy hand
(as they said) of Q. Elizabeth. In 1594. one of both his names was actually
created Master of Arts, and it is supposed that he was the person, because he
had formerly spent some time in this University. In 1607. he received the
honor of Knighthood, and about that time, (being then of Blackbourton near
Witney in Oxfordshire,) wrote,

The advice of a Son professing the Religion established in the present Church
of England to his dear Mother a Romans Catholic. Oxon. 1639. qu. Which book
lying by him till his death, and several years after in his Cabinet, his Son
Sir Edw. Hungerford carried it at length (upon a sight, as he thought, of the
increase of Popery in England) to one of the Chaplains of Dr. Laud Archb. of
Canterbury to have it licensed, an. 1635. but he refusing so to do, because
there See in (...) etc.
were several offensive passages in it against the Papists, he therefore got it
to be printed at Oxon, and added to it another thing of his Fathers writing,
intit.

The memorial of a Father to his dear Children, containing an acknowledgment of
God's great mercy, in bringing him to the profession of the true Religion, at
this present established in the Church of England. -- Finished and completed
for the Press at Blackbourton, in Apr. 1627. This person who has written other
matters of the like nature, but not printed, gave way to fate about the latter
end of June in sixteen hundred twenty and seven, Blackbourton. He left behind
him Issue, by his Wife Lucy, Daughter of Sir Walt. Hungerford of Farley Castle
in Somersetshire, Sir Edward Hungerford, who had Issue another Edward, made
Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of K. Chapter 2. who most unworthily
squandered away the Estate of his Ancestors.

JOHN DAY, Son of a famous Printer of both his Elizabeth, was born near, or
over, Aldersgate in London, entered a Commoner of S. Albans hall in 1582. aged
16. elected Fellow of Oriel coll. in 1588. being then Bach. of Arts, proceeded
in that Faculty, entered into holy Orders, and became the most frequent and
noted Preacher in the University. In the beginning of the Reign of K. Jam. 1.
he, with leave from his Society, traveled for 3 years beyond the Seas, whereby
he improved himself much in learning and experience, and, as I was about to
say, in Calvinism. After his return he was made Vicar of S. Mary's Church in
Oxon, in Jan. 1608. where, by his constant and painful Preaching, he obtained
great love and respect not only from those of the University but City. But
missing the Provostship of his Coll. upon the resignation of Mr. Will. Lewis,
in 1621. he left his Fellowship and Vicarage in the year following, and by the
favor of Sir Will. S^ame Knight became Minister of one of the Thirlows ( Great
Thirlow I think) in Suffolk; where he continued to his dying day, not without
some discontent for the loss of the said Provostship. He was a person of great
reading, and was admirably well versed in the Fathers, Schoolmen, and Councels.
He was also a plain Man, a primitive Christian, and wholly composed, as 'twere,
to do good in his Function. His works are these.

Several Sermons, as, (1) David's desire to go to Church, in two Sermons on
Psalm. 27. 4. Ox. 1612. oct. and 1615. qu. (2) Day's Festivals; or, twelve of
his Sermons. Ox. 1615. qu. The first of which is of our Saviors Nativity, on
Esa. 9. 6. To these twelve Sermons, are added,

Several fragments concerning both the Sacraments in general, and the Sacrament
of the Supper in particular. -- He has also written,

Day's Dial, or his twelve hours, that is twelve Lectures by way of Catechism,
as they were delivered in Oriel coll. Chapel, an 1612. and 13. Oxon. 1614. qu.

Conciones ad Cierum, viz. (1) In 2. Reg. 6. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Oxon. 1612. and
1615. qu. (2) I^ Joh. 9. 4. Oxon. 1612. qu.

Commentaries on the first eight Psalms of David. Ox. 1620. twenty and seven,
and was buried in his Church of Thirlow before mentioned. I find another John
Day, who was a flourishing Poet and Comedian of his time, author of (1) The
Isle of Gulls, Comedy. Land. 1606. qu. (2.) Lawtricks; or, who would have
thought it, Com. Land. 1608. qu. (3.) Blind Beggar of Rednal-Green, with the
merry humor of Tom Strowd the Norfolk Yeoman. Com. Land. 1639. qu. (4.) Humor
out of breath. Com. (5). The Parliament of Bees, with their proper characters.
Or, a Bee-hive furnished with 12. hony-Combes, etc. It Is a Poem, and was
reprinted in 1641. qu. He was also one of three ( Will. Rowley and George
Wilkins being the other two) who wrote The Travels of the three English
Brothers Sir Thom. Sir Auth. and Mr. Robert, Shirley. Land. 1607. qu. It Is a
Com. or Trag. Com. containing an Epitome of the vol. of their Travels in a
compendious Abstract. But the said Joh. Day the Comedian, I take to be the same
person, who was sometimes a Member of Caeius coll. in Cambridge, which is all I
yet know of him. I find a third John Day author of A case of Conscience
resolved concerning Ministers meddling with State matters. Printed 1649. qu. And
of the same more satisfactorily resolved. Pr. 1650. qu. But whether he was ever
an Academian I cannot tell, tho one of both his names was matriculated as
member of Chapter Chapter 1631.

Oxfordshire, of the family of the Wentworths living in Northamptonshire,
entered a Commoner or Gent. Com. of University coll. in 1584. aged about 17.
translated thence after 3 years standing to Lincolns Inn, where drudging at the
Common Law was made a Barrester. In the month of Sept. 1607. he was elected by
the Citizens of Oxon. their Recorder, upon the death of the former, and in
1611. he became Lent-Reader of the said Inn, being then a person of a
considerable note among those of his profession. In several Parliaments during
the reign of K. James and in the beginning of Chapter 1. he was constantly elected
a Burgess to serve in them by the Citizens of Oxon. In one or more of which,
showing himself a troublesome and factious person, was more than once
imprisoned. While he was Recorder of the said City, he behaved himself so
turbulent, that at length he being notoriously known to be Reg. Congr. and
Convoc. Un. Oxon. K. fol. 70. a and 72. b.
a most malicious and implacable fomenter and author of diverse troubles between
the University and City, he was by the prime Magistrate of the said University,
with the consent of the Convocation, discommoned, 1611. At the same time also,
it was decreed that he should be Ibid. fol. 70. b.
registered to all Posterity por intensissimo and inimicissimo viro Vniversitati
Oxon. After he continued discommoned for two whole years or more, he was upon
his earnest desire restored to his former estate. But being of a restless
spirit, he returned to his former trade: Whereupon his friends persuading him
to leave Oxon for a time, to prevent his utter ruin, he retired to a Market
Town called Henly in Oxfordshire, and soon after, viz. 20. Jac. 1. Mr. Joh.
Whistler was appointed by the Citizens to be his Deputy in the Recordship. This
Mr. Tho. Wentworth has written,

The office and duty of Executors; or, a treatise of Wills and Executors
directed to Testators, in the choice of their Executors, and contrivance of
their Wills, with directions for Executors, in the execution of their office,
etc. Land. 1612. oct. etc. Afterward was added to it an Appendix, wherein are
the nature of Testaments, Executors, Legataries general, and diverse other
material things relating to the same, by T. M. Esquire; what other books he has
written I know not, any thing else of him, only that he ended his days, in or
near Lincolns Inn, as it seems, in the Month of Sept. Thomas, and others, and a
Nephew then called Sir Peter Wentworth. In his Recordership was elected Mr.
John Whistler his Deputy before mentioned, on Monday before the feast of S.
Matthew the Apostle, 3. Car. 1.

Edw. Gwinne an inhabitant of London, but originally of Wales, by Elizabeth
Thayer his Wife, was elected Scholar of S. John's coll. (of which he was
afterward perpetual Fellow) an. 1574. took the degrees in Arts, entered on the
Physic line, and practiced that faculty for some time in these parts. At
length being designed for an employment of considerable trust, he was actually
created Doctor thereof, and soon after went in the quality of a Physician to
the honorable Sir Hen. Vnton Knight. Leaguer Ambassador to the K. of France from
Qu. Elizabeth. After his return he was designed Physician to the Tower of
London, was elected Medicine Professor of Gresham coll. and made one of the
college of Physicians. In his younger years he was much admired for his great
skill and dexterity in Poetry, in Philosophical disputes, humane and profane
learning, but above all for the modern Languages, which he obtained in his
Travels into various Countries; and in his elder years for his happy success in
the practice of Physic, which made him highly valued in the great City, but
more by far among the nobility in the Royal Court. He has written,

Epicedium in obitum illustriss. Herois Henrici Comitis Derbiensis, etc. Oxon.
1593. qu.

Nero, Tragaedia. Land. 1603. commended by Just. Lipsius in one of his books.

Orationes duae habitae in Aedibus Gresham in Laudem Dei Civ. etc. Land. 1605.
qu.

Vertumnus, sive Annus recurrens Oxonii, an. 1605. etc. Land. 1607. qu. It Is a
Latin Comedy, and was acted by the Society of S. John's with great applause
before K James, Prince Henry, and their Courts, 29. Aug. 1605. See more in Rex
platonicus, at the end of the Acts of the third day.

Aurum non aurum; sive Adversaria in assertorem chymiae, sed verae medicinae
desertorem Franc. Anthonium. Land. 1611. qu. This Francis Anthony, who was a
great Paracelsian, and Son of a Goldsmith of London, belonging to the
Jewel-house of Qu. Elizabeth; was born in that City 16. Ap. 1550. but whether
he received any Academical education in this University, it does not yet appear
to me. This person who wrote himself Doctor of Physic, pretended to be the
first discoverer, and to make known to the world a medicine called Aurum
Potabile, etc. which being animadverted upon by our author Dr. Gwinne, and
esteemed by most Physicians but a vain thing, Dr. Anthony wrote and published An
Apology and defense of his medicine called Aurum Potabile. Land. 1616. qu.
Whereupon another Doctor of Physic named Joh. Cotta a Cambridge man, came out
with The Ant -- Apology, showing the Counterfeitness of Dr. Antony's Aurum
Potabile -- Which book tho fit for the Press in 1616. yet it was not printed
till 1623. and then being published at Oxon. in qu. was by the author (tho of
another University) dedicated to the Doctors of Physic resident in Oxon. This
Dr. Anthony died in S. Barthelmews Close (where he had lived many years) on 26.
May 1623. and was buried in the Isle joining to the north side of the Chancel
of St. Barthelmew the Great in London; leaving then behind him two Sons by
Elizabeth his second Wise, viz. John Anthony M. D. who succeeded his Father in
his practice in London, and Charles a Physician of Bedford, living there 1634.
and after. I find another Francis Antony to have been a writer of the same time
with our author Dr. Anthony, but he was by birth a Portugues, and by profession
a Jesuit, and therefore the books of his composition must not be attributed to
the other. Our author Dr. Gwinne has also written a book of Travels, various
Letters concerning Chemical and Magical secrets, and also diverse copies of
Verses in English, Italian and French occasionally set by way of commendation
before the books, published by his friends and acquaintance, but none of these
have I yet seen, only some of the said verses. He deceased in the month of
October. or in the beginning of Nov. in sixteen hundred twenty and seven, in his
house situate and being in S. Mary Magdalens parish in Old Fishstreet within
the City of London, and was, as I suppose, buried in the Church there. He had a
Son named John Gwinne, and lest behind him a Widow called Susanna, who had a
Commission from the Prerogative Court, dated 12. Nov. 1627. to administer the
goods, debts, chattels, etc. of her Husband Dr. Gwinne, then lately deceased.

RICHARD CARPENTER, a Cornubian Exeter coll. in the beginning of of 1592. and
four years after Fellow, being then B. of Arts. Afterward proceeding in that
faculty, he solely dedicated his studies to Theology, by the advice and
directions of Holland the Rector of his college, and proved in few years after
learned and profound in that faculty, and an excellent preacher. In 1611. he
was admitted to the reading of the Sentences, and about that time was made
Rector of Sherwill, and of Loxhore adjoining, near to Barnestaple in
Devonshire; both which he kept without any other preferment, (except the
Benefice of Ham, near unto Sherwill, which he enjoyed for some years) to the
time of his death. Afterward he proceeded in Divinity and became much esteemed
for his learning Vide in lib. 2. and 3. Affaniarum Caroli Fitzgeofridi, edit.
1601: octa^.
by Scholars, and by others, for those things that he published, which are.

Various Sermons, as (1) The Souls Sentinel, etc. at the funeral solemnities of
Sir Arthur Acland Knight. 9. Jan. 1611. on Job. 14. verse 14. Land. 1612. oct. (2.)
A Pastoral charge, faithfully given and discharged at the Triennial visitation
of William B. of Exon. at Barnstaple, 7. Sept. 1616. on Acts. 20. 28. Land.
1616. oct. (3) Christ's Larambell of love resounded, etc. on Joh. 15. 12. Land.
1616. oct. (4.) The conscionable christian. etc. Three Assize Sermons at
Taunton and Chard in Somersetshire, 1620. on Acts 24. 16. Land. 1623. qu. Which
three Sermons are mostly concerning the keeping of a good conscience. He paid
his last debt to nature on the 18. December. in sixteen hundred twenty and seven
aged 52. and was buried in the Chancel of the Church of Loxhore before
mentioned. Over his grave is a large Epitaph in Prose and Verse, some of which
runs thus. Richardus Carpenter S. Theol. D. ab eruditione multiplici
venerandus, pietate vitae, integritate, morumque comitate valde clarus. Hujus
and Ecclesiae Sherwillensis pastor fidus, etc. The reader is now to know that
there was another Rich. Carpenter a Divine, both after the former in time, and
much inferior as to learning. He was educated in the School at Eaton coll. near
Windsore and thence was elected Scholar of Kings coll. in Cambridge 1622. where
continuing about two or three years, left it, his friends, and Country, went
beyond the Seas and studied in Flanders, Artois, France, Spain, Italy, and at
length received holy Orders at Rome from the hands of the Popes substitute.
Soon after he was sent into England to gain Proselites, being then, as I have
been told, a Benedictine Monk. In which employment continuing an year and
upward, returned to the Protestant Religion, and had by the Archbishop of
Canterburies endeavors the Vicaridge of an obscure and small Village called
Poling by the Sea side near Arundel Castle in Sussex bestowed on him. But
before he was warm in that Seat, he received many abuses and affronts from
certain Romans Priests, and Laymen of their profession living in those parts,
particularly by Franc. a S. Clara, who being sometimes in the neighborhood by
the name of Hunt, would be very free with and expose, him, to scorn before his
parishioners. In the year 1642. and that of his age 33. or rather more, he
published a treatise intit. Experience, History and Divinity, in five books.
Printed at Land. in a thick oct. and by the said author dedicated to the
Parliament then sitting: In which Treatise p. 32. 37. etc. are many things
spoken of himself. This book came out again, or rather had a new title to it of
The Downfall of Antichrist, etc. an. 1648. What preferment he had afterward I
cannot tell, yet sure I am, that in the time of the Civil War he left the
Nation and retired to Paris, where he became a railer against the Protestants.
Afterward he returned to his old trade of Independancy in England, and about
that time published The perfect Law of God, being a Sermon and no Sermon,
preached and yet not preached. Printed 1652. in oct. He lived then, and after,
at Aylesbury in Bucks, where he had kindred living, and would preach there very
fantastically to the great mirth of some of his Auditors. After his Maj.
Restoration, he published a Comedy intit. The Pragmatical Jesuit, with his
picture before it, represented in very gentile Lay-habit, whereas his picture
before his Experience, History and Divinity, represents him to be a formal
Clergy man, with a mortified countenance. He was living at Aylesbury before
mentioned in 1670. But before his death (which was elsewhere) he was (as some
of his acquaintance has told me) returned to Popery and caused his pretended
Wife, to be of his persuasion, in which Faith he died. Those that knew him,
have often told me that he was an impudent fantastical man, that changed his
mind with his clothes, and that for his juggles and tricks in matters of
Religion, he was esteemed a Theological Mountebank. I find one or more of both
his names, that have been writers, which I shall now pass by, and one Rich.
Carpenter who had a public dispute with one Gibs concerning Infant Baptism, in
the times of Usurpation; which probably may be the same with him before
mentioned.

ADAM REUTER, who intitles himself in some Cotbusius L. Silesius, did, for his
improvement in all kind of Literature, retire to the University of Oxon in the
beginning of 1608. being then a Licentiat in both the Laws, wherein continuing
many years in the condition of a Commoner (for he wore a Gown) and was entered
into the Matricula, as a member, if I mistake not, of Exeter coll. was first
exhibited to by the Warden and Fellows of New coll. and afterward by the
Vicechancellour and Heads of colleges and halls. He was very well read in
substantial authors, and had a quick command of his Latin Pen, but then withal
he was a severe Calvinist, which was not, in his time, displeasing to many of
the Sages and Heads of the University. His works are.

Questiones juris controversi 12. Ex L. ut vim. 3. just. and jure. Oxon. 1609.
qu.

Oration quam, papam esse bestiam, quae non est, and tamen est, apud Johan.
Apoc. 17. ver. 18. etc. Land. 1610. qu. Which Oration was by the author spoken
in public before the members of the University.

Libertatis Anglicae defensio, seu demonstratio: Regnum Angliae non esse feudum
pontificis: In Acad. Oxon. public opposita Martino Becano Societatis Jesu
Theologo. London 1613. quarto.

Eadgarus in Jacobo redivivus; seu pietatis Anglicanae defensio, etc. contra
Ross-Weydum. Land. 1614. qu.

Tractatus de concilio, Theophilo Suffolciae comiti dedicat. Oxon. Clar. 1627.
1626. qu. Besides other things which I have not yet seen, whether he
afterward receeded to his own Country or died in England, I know not.

MATTHIAS PASOR, Son of George Pasor a learned Herborn, was partly educated
there and partly at Heidelburg, of which last, he at length became Professor of
the Mathematics. Afterward retiring to Oxon, he was incorporated Master of
Arts, as he had stood at Heidelburg before mentioned, read an Arabic Lecture
twice in a Week in Term-time in the Divinity School, for some years; for which
he had a Pension collected from his Auditors, and was held in great esteem by
them and others for his admirable knowledge in that and other Tongues and
Learning. He has published,

Oration pro linguae Arabicae professione, public ad Academicos habita in
Schola Theologica Vniversitatis Oxon, 25. Oct. 1626. Oxon. 1627. qu.

Marsilius Patavinus. Clar. 1627.
Which, with other things, by him written and published, I have not yet seen:
Nor indeed do I know any thing more of him or his end.

NATHANIEL CARPENTER, Son of Joh. Carp. mentioned under the year 1620. was born
at Northleigh near to Culleton in Devonshere 7. Feb. 1588. elected Probationer
Fellow of Exeter coll. from S. Edmonds hall, 1607. at which time Michael Jermyn
of the said coll, standing against him for that place, had equal Votes with
him. So that the matter being referred to the Vicehancellour, he adjudged the
right of the said Fellowship for Carpenter, and the next year Jermyn was sped
into C. C. coll. of whom I shall speak hereafter under the year 1659. As for
Carpenter he afterward took the degrees in Arts and by a virtuous emulation
and industry he became a noted Philosopher, Poet, Mathematician and Geographer.
About the time that he proceeded in Arts, he entered into the sacred function,
took the degree of Bach. of Divinity in few years after, and tho a zealous
Calvinist, yet he was by the generallity of Scholars cried up for a very famous
Preacher. At length being introduced into the acquaintance of the learned and
religious Dr. Usher Primate of Ireland, at what time he was in Oxon and
incorporated D. of D. in July 1626. that incomparable person took him then into
his service, conveyed him into Ireland, made him one of his Chaplains,
Schoolmaster of the Kings Wards in Dublin, in the same year, and soon after, as
it is said, Dean of a certain Church there, but Quaere. He has written,

Philosophia libera, triplici Exercitationum decade proposita, etc. Francof.
1621. Land. 1622. Ox. 1636. and 75. oct.

Geography delineated forth in two books; containing the Sphaerical and Topical
parts thereof. Ox. 1625. and 35. qu.

Achitophel: or, the picture of a wicked Politician, in 3 parts. Dubl. 1627.
oct. Ox. 1628. qu. These three parts are the effect of three Sermons preached
before the Univ. of Oxon, on 2 Samuel 17. 23. and were very much applauded by all
the Scholars that heard them, and therefore were by them most eagerly desired
to be printed. Soon after they were published with license, and had in them (as
a busy Will. Prynne in his Canterburies Deom, printed 1646. p. 166.
body says) diverse passages against Arminianism, averring it to be planted
among us by Jesuitical Politicians to undermine our Religion by degrees, and
covertly to introduce Popery it self. But so soon as it peeped abroad, it was
forthwith called in, and all the passages against Arminianism were expunged by
Bishops Lauds Agents. Which done, it was reprinted at London 1629. in qu. to
the great injury both of the truth and author. In 1633. it was printed there
again, and at Ox. 1640. in tw.

Chorazin and Bethsaida's woe and warning piece, on Matthew. 11. 21. Oxon. 1640.
in tw.

Treatise of Optics. -- MS. The original whereof was lost at Sea; yet some
copies of it are saved, but imperfect. He died at Dublin in Ireland, about the
beginning of the year sixteen hundred twenty and eight, he had formerly so much
courted the Maid instead of the Mistress, meaning that he had spent his chief
time in Philosophy and Mathematics, and had neglected Divinity.

Guy, second Son of Thomas Carleton of Carleton hall in Cumberland, was born
Camden in Britan, in Northumb.
at Norham in Northumberland, at what time his Father was Keeper of the Castle
there, educated in Grammar learning by the care of the Northern Apostle, called
Bern. Gilpin, who also, (when he was fitted for the University,) sent him to S.
Edm. hall in the beginning of the year 1576. being then 17 years of age, and
exhibited to his studies, and took care that nothing should be wanting to
advance his pregnant parts. In the latter end of 1579. he took a degree in
Arts, and forthwith completed it by Determination, his disputes being then
noted to exceed any of his Fellows that did their exercise in the same Lent. In
1580. he was elected Probationer-Fellow of Merton coll. wherein he spent almost
5 years before he proceeded in his Faculty. While he remained in that Coll. he
was esteemed a good Orator and Poet, but as years come on, a better disputant
in Divinity, than he had before been in Philosophy. He was also well versed in
the Fathers and Schoolmen, and wanted nothing that might make him a complete
Theologist. -- I have loved him (says a learned Iden ibid.
author) in regard of his singular knowledge in Divinity, which he professes,
and in other more delightful literature, and an loved again by him. What were
his preferments successively after he had left that Coll. I cannot tell,
because the Register of Acts of that house is altogether silent as to them.
Sure I am that after he had continued many years there. and had taken the
degrees in Divinity, he was promoted to the Sea of Landaff, upon the
translation of Dr. Godwin to Hereford, in the year 1618. and the same year was
one of the learned English Divines that were by his Majesty's command sent to
the Synod of Dort, where he behaved himself so admirable well, to the credit of
our Nation, (as some Chapter Historians will tell you,) that after his return, he
was, upon the translation of Dr. Harnet to Norwich, elected to the Sea of
Chichester, confirmed by his Maj. 20. Sept. 1619. He was a person of a solid
judgment and of various reading, a bitter Enemy to the Papists, and a severe
Calvinist, which may farther appear in some of these books following, of his
composition.

Heroici Characteres, ad illustriss. equitem Henricum Nevillum. Oxon. 1603. qu.
Several of his Latin verses are in the University book of verses made on the
death of Sir Phil. Sydney, in Bodleiomnema, and in other books.

Tithes examined, and proved to be due to the Clergy by a divine right. Land.
1606. 1611. qu.

Jurisdiction Regal, Episcopal, Papal: Wherein is declared how the Pope has
intruded upon the jurisdiction of Temporal Princes, and of the Church, etc.
Land. 1610. qu.

Consensus Eccles. Catholicae contra Tridentinos de scripturis, Ecclesia, fide
and gratia, etc. Land. 1613. oct. Dedicated to the Mertonians.

A thankful remembrance of Gods mercy, in an historical collection of the great
and merciful deliverances of the Church and State of England, from the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth. Land. 1624. qu. The fourth edit. came out in 1630.
qu. adorned with cuts.

Short directions to know the true Church. Land. 1615. etc. in tw. Dedicated to
Prince Charles as the former book was.

Oration made at the Hague before the Prince of Orange, and the Assembly of the
High and Mighty Lords, the States General. Land. 1619. in one sh. and an half
in qu.

The madness of Astrologers: or, an examination of Sir Christop. Heydons book,
intit. A defense of judiciary Astrology. Land. 1624. qu. Which being written
twenty years before that time, was then published by Tho. Vicars Bach. of Div.
who had married the authors Daughter. It was reprinted at Land. in 1651.

Examination of those things, wherein the author of the late Appeal, holds
the doctrine of the Pelagians and Arminians, to be the doctrines of the Church
of England. Land. 1626. and 36. in qu. Besides this answer or examination, made
to the Appeal of Rich. Mountague, (who succeeded Carleton in the Sea of
Chichester,) came out six more, viz. one by Dr. Matthew Sutcliff Dean of
Exeter, a second by Dr. Dan. Featly, a third by Franc. Rouse sometimes of
Broadgates hall in Oxon, a fourth by Anth. Wotton of Cambridge, a fifth by Joh.
Yeates Bach. of Div. sometimes of Eman. coll. in Cambridge, afterward Minister
of S. Andrews in Norwich, and the sixth by Hen. Burton of Friday-street in
London.

A joint attestation avowing that the discipline of th Church of England was
not impeached by the Synod of Dort. Land. 1626. qu.

Vita Bernardi Gilpini, vere sanctiss. famaque apud Anglos aquilonares
celeberrimi. Land. 1628. qu. Published in Engl. at Land. 1636. oct. and also in
Lat. in Dr. Will. Bates his collection of lives. Land. 1681. in a large qu.

Testimony concerning the Presbyterian discipline in the Low Countries, and
Episcopal government in England. -- Printed several times in qu. and oct. The
edit. in qu. at Land. 1642. is but one sheet.

Latin Letter to the learned Camden, containing some notes and observations on
his Britannia. -- MS. among those given by Seldens Executors to the Publ. Libr.
at Oxon. The beginning of which Letter is Dum nuper ( Mi Camdene) Brittaniam
tuam, etc.

Several Sermons, viz. one that is joined to the English life of Bern. Gilpin:
Another on Luke 2. from ver. 41. to 50. in tw. A third on Rev. 20. 3. 4. in
oct. etc. He had also a hand in the Dutch Annotations, and in the New
Translation of the Bible, which were ordered by the Synod of Dort to be
undertaken, yet were not completed and published till 1637. At length having
lived to a good old age, he concluded his last day in the month of May in
sixteen hundred twenty and eight, and was buried in the Choire, 1628,
near to the Altar, of his Cath. Church at Chichester, on the 27. of the same
month. By his first Wife named Anne, Daughter of Sir Hen. Killegrew Knight, and
Widow of Sir Hen. Nevill of Billingbere in Berks, he had Issue a Son named
Henry Carleton, living sometimes in the Parish of Fur^e in Sussex, elected
Burgess for Arundel, to serve in that Parliament which began at Westminster. 13. Apr.
1640. and from the unhappy Parliament which began on the 3. Nov. following, he
received a Commission from the Members thereof to be a Captain, in which office
and command he showed himself an Enemy to the Bishops.

JOHN DODERIDGE, or Doddridg, was born at Barnstaple in Devonshire, became a
Sojournour of Exeter coll. in 1572. took one degree in Arts about 4 years
after, and completed it by Determination. About that time being entered into
the Middle Temple, he made great proficiency in the Common Law, became a noted
Counselor, and in 45. Eliz. Lent Reader of that Inn. In 1603. Jan. 20. he was
made Sergeant at Law, being about that time Prince Henry's Sergeant, but in the
year following he was discharged of his Serjeantship, and became Solliciter
Genesis to King James 1. In 1607. Jun. 25. he was constituted one of the Kings
Sergeants, and on the 5. July following he received the honor of Knighthood
from his Maj. at Whitehal. In 1612. Nov. 25. he was appointed one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, (afterward of the Kings Bench,) and in Feb.
1613. he was actually created Master of Arts in Sergeants Inn by the Vicechanc.
both the Proctors, and five other Academians. Which degree was conferred upon
him in gratitude for his great service he had then lately done for the
University, in several Law suits depending between the said University and City
of Oxon. While he continued in Exeter coll. he was a severe Student, and by the
help of a good Tutor he became a noted Disputant. So that by the foundation of
learning which he had laid in that coll. forwarded by good natural parts and
continual industry, he became not only eminent in his own profession, but in
the Arts, Divinity, and Civil Law, insomuch that it was difficult with some to
judge, in which of all those Faculties he excelled. But being mostly taken up
with the Common Law, he could not be at leisure to honor the World with his
great knowledge, only with these things following.

The Lawyers light; or due direction for the study of the Law, etc. Land. 1629.
qu.

A complete Parson: or a description of Advowsons and Church Livings, etc.
Land. 1630. qu. Delivered in several readings in an Inn of Chancery called New
Inn in Land. 1602. and 1603.

History of the ancient and modern Estate of the Principality of Wales, Duchy
of Cornwall, and Earldom of Chester, etc. Land. 1630. qu.

The English Lawyer: Being a treatise describing a method for the managing of
the Laws of this Land, and expressing the best qualities requisite in the
Student, Practicer, Judges, etc. Land. 1631. qu.

Opinion touching the antiquity, power, order, state, manner, persons, and
proceedings of the High Court of Parliament in England. Land. 1658. oct.
Published by John Doddridge. Esquire; a Counselor of the Middle Temple, and
Recorder of Barnstaple; descended from, or at least near of kin to, our author
Sir Joh. Doderidge. With the aforesaid Opinion, are published also the opinions
of Arth. Agard, Joseph Holland, Francis Tate, and Will. Camden, all eminent
Antiquaries and Historians; the two last of which I have before mentioned, and
the two first I shall speak of anon.

Treatise of particular Estates. Land. 1677. in twelv. printed at the end of
the fourth edition of Will. Noy's book, called, Grounds and Maxims of the Laws
of this Nation.

A true presentation of fore-past Parliaments to the view of the present times
and posterity. -- This I saw in MS. in a thin fol. in the Library of Dr. Tho.
Barlow now B. of Lincoln, but whether it was ever printed I know not. Our
author Doderidge also did peruse and enlarge a book intit. The Magazine of
Honor; or a treatise of the several degrees of the Nobility of this Kingdom,
with their rights and privileges: Also of Knights, Esquires, etc. Land. 1642.
oct. The MS. of which I saw also in the said Library, fairly transcribed and
dedicated by T. S. of Wycombe to John Lord Lovelace, an. 1637. This book which
is the collection of Will, Bird, I take to be the same, which was afterward
published with a title something different from the former, under our author
Doderidge's name, running thus.

The Law of Nobility and Peerage; wherein the antiquities, titles, degrees, and
distinctions, concerning the Peers and Nobility of this Nation, are excellently
set forth, with the Knights, Esquires, Gent. etc. Land. 1657. 58. oct. What
else he has written, (besides certain Speeches which are extant in books put
out by others,) I know not; and therefore I shall only say of him, that he
surrendered up his last breath at Forsters near to Egham in Surrey 13. Sept. in
sixteen hundred twenty and eight, and that his body was carried to the City of
Exeter, Oct. following; where at this time is visible a very fair monument over
his grave, and that of his Wise. Now as for Arthur Agard, whom I have before
mentioned, I desire the Reader to know of him these things, that he was the Son
of Clem. Agard of Foston in Derbyshire, by his Wife Elianor Daughter of Tho.
Middlemore of Edgbaston in Warwickshire, that he was bred up to the Law, got to
be a Clerk in the Exchequer, and at length to be Deputy-chamberlian thereof;
which office he held 45 years, while these persons following were successively
Chamberlains, (a place formerly of great honor and worth,) viz. Sir Nich.
Throckmorton, Sir Tho. Randolphe Postmaster, Sir Tho. West after Lord La War,
Mr. George Young a Scot, Sir Will, Killigrew Knight, Sir Walt. Cope Knight, and
in his last days, in 1615. to Sir Joh. Poyntz Knight. While he held that place,
he learned and received all his knowledge and learning in Antiquities from his
faithful and dear friend Sir Rob. Cotton, a singular lover of, and admirably
well read in, English Antiquities; to whom when Agard died, he gave all his
Leiger books and MSS. (at least 20 in number) to be reposed as choice things in
his Library; among which was Agard's book of his own writing, intit. Tractatus
de usu and verbis obscurioribus libri de Domesday, which was afterward put
under the Effigies of Vitellius, nu. 9. The learned Camden styles him In Annal.
Reg. Jac. 1. MS. sub an. 161^.
Antiquarius insignis, as having been well acquainted with him, and his
prodigious works collected with his own hand out of his Maj. Records in the
Abbey of Westminster, (where the Exchequer-Office was,) and elsewhere. He died
22. Aug. 1615. and was buried in the Cloister of St. Peter's Church in
Westminster, near to the Chapter House door, where he had set up a monument in
his lifetime for himself and his Wife. At the time of his death, his will and
desire was, that eleven Manuscripts of his writing and collection should (for a
small reward given to his Executor) be reposed in the Exchequer, because they
were necessary both for the Kings service, and readiness for the subject. Also
a book of his collection in the Treasury, wherein is first contained what
records are in the Kings Maj. four Treasuries, and how the same are placed, and
especially how to be preserved: And after, is contained A collection of all
leagues and treaties of Peace, entercourses and marriages with Foreign Nations.
Which book was three years labor, and was (I think still) very carefully
preserved for the Kings service. The writer and collector thereof took order
that it should be preserved in his Maj. Court of Receipt, under the charge and
custody of the Officers there, and to be delivered to them by Inventory,
because it is very necessary for the Kings use, good of the Subject, and
readiness and light to the Officers. As for the other person Joseph Holland,
whose Opinion concerning the antiquity, power, etc. of Parliament,
beforementioned, which was also published, I can say only this of him, that he
was a Devonian born, an excellent Herald, Genealogist, and Antiquary, as
several things of his writing, now in being in the Coll. of Arms, commonly
called the Heralds Office, show: Among which is a very long roll of Parchment,
containing the Arms of the Nobility and Gentry of Devon before, and to his
time, made in 1585. There also goes from hand to hand a folio MS. of his
collection, not only containing the Arms of the Nobility and Gentry of
Devonshire, but also of Somersetshire and Cornwall.

FULKE GREVIL, descended from an ancient and Milcot in Warwickshire, was born
in that County, an. 1554, being the same year wherein Sir Philip Sidney
received his first breath, did spend some time in the condition of a Gent.
Commoner in this University, either before he went to Trin. coll. in Cambridge,
or at his return thence, but in what house, unless in Chapter Chapter or Broadgates, I
cannot well tell, nor does it matter much, seeing that he was more properly a
Cambridge man (to which University he was a Benefactor) than an Oxonian. After
he had left the University he traveled, and at his return, being well
accomplished, was introduced into the Court by his Uncle Rob. Grevil a Servant
to Q. Elizabeth, where he was esteemed a most ingenious person, and had in
favor by all such that were lovers of Arts and Sciences. At length obtaining
an honorable Office under the Queen, he became one of her favorites, which he
held for no short term, but had the longest lease of any, and the smoothest
time without rub. In the beginning of 1588. he, among other persons of honor
and quality, was actually created Master of Arts, which, I think, was the
highest degree that was conferred upon him in this University. In 1603. he was
made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of K. Jam. 1. and soon after obtained
the grant of the ruinous Castle of W^rwick* In the 12. year of the said Kings
reign, he being constituted under Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequer,
he was made choice of for one of Kings Privy Council. And meriting much for his
faithful services in those employments, was, by Letters Patents, bearing date
9. Jan. 18. Jac. 1. advanced Baronage of England, To^. 2. p. 442. b.
to the dignity of a Baron of this Realm, by the title of Lord Brook of
Beauchamps court. In Sept. 1621. he was made one of the Gentlemen of the Kings
Bedchamber; whereupon Camd. in Annal. (...). MS. an. 16^^
giving up his Chancellourship of the Exchequer, Rich. Weston (afterward Earl
of Portland) succeeded him. He was always esteemed a brave Gentleman and
honorably descended, as being sprung from the family of Willoughby Lord Brook,
was favored by Qu. Elizabeth, and such that knew he had interest in the Muses.
His life was always single, and tho he lived and died a constant Courtier of
the Ladies, yet he prosecuted his studies in History and Poetry: In which,
consider him as a Gentleman of noble birth and great Estate, he was most
excellent in his time, as these things following show, composed in his youth,
and familiar exercise with Sir Ph. Sidney.

Poems.
A Treatise of humane learning. Inquisition upon fame and honor. Treatise of
Wars.
Tragedy of Alaham. Trag. of Mustapha. Caelica, containing 109 Sonnets. Letter
to an honorable Lady.
Letter of Travels -- Written to his Cousin GrevilVerney residing in France,
etc. Some of the said things having been singly published, were all remitted
into a little thin Folio, printed at Land. 1633. and had this general title put
to them, Certain learned and elegant works of the Right Honorable Fulke Lord
Brook, etc.

The first five years of King James, or the condition of the State of England,
and the relation it had to other Provinces. Land. 1643. qu.

The life of the renowned Sir Philip Sidney, with the true interest of England,
as it then stood in relation to all foreign Princes, etc. Land. 1652. oct.
Published by P. B.

Short account of the Maxims and Policies used by Qu. Elizab. in her
Government. -- Printed with the former book.

Remains, containing Poems of Monarchy and Religion. Land. 1670. oct. never
before printed; with other things, (among which is his Trag. of Marc. Tull.
Cicero) which I have not yet seen. At length our author, (who was Counselor
of State to Chapter 1.) neglecting to reward one Haywood, who had spent the
greatest and chiefest part of his time in his personal service, for which he
expostulated the matter with his Master, but was sharply rebuked for it; the
said Haywood thereupon gave him a mortal stab on his Back (they two being then
only together) in his Bedchamber in Brook house in Holbourne near London, of
which wound he died 30. Sept. in sixteen hundred twenty and eight, aged 74.
Oct. following he the said Lord Brook was buried in a Vault, situate on the
north side of the collegiat Church at Warwick, which formerly had been a
chapter house belonging thereunto: wherein he had, in his life time, erected a
fair Tomb, with this Epitaph thereon. Fulke Grevil Servant to Queen Elizabeth,
Counselor to King James, and friend to Sir Philip Sidney.

In his honor and dignity, succeeded his kinsman Robert Grevil, being then
(1628.) one and twenty years of age, educated in Academical learning, not in
this, but in the other University of Cambridge, (as I have been informed) where
being well tutored, became learned, considering his quality. But being
afterward unhappily attainted with fanatic and antimonarchical principles, by
the influence of one of his near relations and some Schismatical preachers,
(tho in his own nature a very civil and well humored person) was, without much
difficulty, drawn in by those fiery spirits of the Long Parliament, which began
1640. By whom being backed on, he became an active man in the House against the
Prerogative, Bishops* and the established discipline of the Church, insomuch
that no less than the abolishing of all decent order in the service of God
would satisfy him. So that the members of the said Parliament looking upon him
as a faithful person for the cause, that they then drove on, appointed him a
Commander in their Army, as I shall anon tell you. As for the things which he
wrote and published are, (1) The nature of truth, etc. Land. 1643. oct.
Animadverted upon by John Wallis a Minister in London, (afterward Geom.
Professor of Oxon) Printed at Land. 1643. (2) A discourse opening the nature of
Episcopacy, which is exercised in England. Land. 1641. 42. qu. Assisted therein
by some puritanical Minister, and printed when the Press was open to receive
all books against the Prerogative and Bishops. (3) Two speeches spoken in the
Guild Hall in London, concerning his Majesty's resusal of a Treaty of peace.
Land. 1642. qu. (4) Answer to the speech of Philip Earl of Pembroke, concerning
accommodation. Which answer was spoken in the House of Lords 19 Dec. 1642. Pr.
in one sh. in qu. by order of the House. (5) Speech at the election of his
Captains and Commanders at Warwick Castle. Land. 1643. qu. In the beginning of
the Civil War, an. 1642. he became Commander in chief of those Forces, which
were sent to assault the Church-Close at Lichfield, then defended by a small
Garrison, placed there by his Majesty out of a pious intent for the
preservation of the stately Cathedral, which the Lord Brook intended presently
to destroy, when taken by his Forces. But so it fell out, that he having
planted his great Guns against the South-east- gate of the Close, he was, tho
harnessed with plate-armour cap-a-pe, shot from the Church in the Eye by one
Diot a Clergy-mans Son (who could neither hear or speak) as he stood in a door,
(whether he came to see the occasion of a sudden shout made by the Soldiers) of
which he instantly died. This memorable accident happened on the second day of
March, an. 1642. which is the festival of that sometimes famous Bishop, S. Cedd
or Chad, to whose memory Offa King of the Mercians did erect the said
Cathedral, and devoutly dedicate it. Archbishop Laud being then a prisoner in
the Tower of London, did make this memoire of it in his Diary, under the year
1642. Thursday March. 2. S. Ceddes day, the Lord Brook shot in the left Eye,
and killed in the place at Lichfield, going to give onset upon the Close of the
Church, he ever having been fierce against Bishops and Cathedrals. His bever up
and armed to the knee, so that a Musket at that distance, could have done him
but little harm. Thus was his Eye put out, who about two years since said, he
hoped to live to see at S. Paul's not one stone left upon another, etc. This
Lord Brook who did often bragg that he should live to see the millinary fools
paradise begin in his life time, did give occasion, by words that he uttered,
to certain observing persons to think, that his death was near, viz. that at
his going out of Coventry, when he went toward Lichfield, he give order to his
Chaplain, that he should preach upon this Text, If I perish, I perish, being
the words of Ester in a different, but a far better, cause, Est. 4. 16. Also
that in a prayer of above an hour long, which he conceived before his setting
on the Close, he was heard to wish that if the cause he was in were not right
and just, he might be presently cut off, using the like expressions to his
Soldiers also.

JOHN BEAUMONT, Son of Francis Beaumont Common Pleas in the reign of Qu.
Elizabeth, was born of, and descended from, an ancient and noble family of his
name living at Gracedie^ in Leicestershire, became a Gent. Com. (with his
Brethren Henry and Francis) in Broadgates hall in the beginning of Lent-term,
an. 1596. aged 14. Whence, after he had spent about three years, he retired to
one of the Inus of Court, and afterward to his native Country, where taking to
Wife one of the family of Fortescue, was at length (in 1626.) made a Baronet.
The former part of his life he successfully employed in Poetry, and the latter
he as happily bestowed on more serious and beneficial Studies: And had not
death untimely cut him off in his middle age, he might have proved a Patriot,
being accounted at the time of his death a person of great knowledge, gravity,
and worth. He has written,

Bosworth Field: A Poem. Land. 1629. oct.

A taste of the variety of other Poems -- Printed with* the former Poem. He
has also made translations into English from Horace, Virgil, Lucan, Persius,
Aus^nius, Claudian, etc. All which were collected together, after the authors
death by his Son, Sir Joh. Beaumont, Bt. and were printed with the former Poems
in 1629. being then usherd into the world by the commendation-Poems of Tho.
Nevill, Tho. Hawkyns, Benj. Johnson, Mich. Drayton, Philip King, Son of the B.
of London, etc. This Sir John Beaumont the Poet departed this mortal life in
the Winter time, Gracedieu, leaving behind him a Son named John
beforementioned, who died without issue, another called Francis, afterward a
Jesuit, and a third named Thomas, who succeeded his brother in his estate and
honor. As for Francis Beaumont, who with his elder brother Sir John, came to
Broadgates hall in 1596. as I have before told you, he must not be understood
to be the same with Francis Beaumont the eminent Poet and Comedian, for tho he
was of the same family, and most of his name studied in Oxon, yet he was
educated in Cambridge, and after he had made himself famous over all England,
for the 50. Comedies and Tragedies, which he with Joh. Fletcher Gent. had
composed, made his last exit in the beginning of March, and was buried on the
ninth of the same month in 1615, at the entrance of St. Benedicts Chapel
within the Abbey Church of St. Peter, within the City of Westminster. As for
John Fletcher, Son of Rich, Fletcher B. of London, he was also a Cambridge man,
and dying of the Plague, was buried in the Church (or yard) of S. Mary Overey
in Southwark, 29 Aug. 1625. aged 49. Sir Aston Cockaine Baronet has in his
Choice Poems of several sorts, etc. Pr. 1658. in oct. an Epitaph on Mr. John
Fletcher and Mr. Philip Massinger, who, as he says, lie buried both in one
grave, in St. Mary Overies Church in Southwark, yet the register of that Church
says that Massinger was buried in one of the four yards belonging to that
Church, as I shall tell you when I come to him, under the year 1639. Later in
time than Sir Jo. Beaumont, has appeared another of both his names, who has
written and published Observations upon the Apology of Dr. Hen. More. Cambr.
1685. qu. And is at present the Kings prof. of Div. there.

Balliol coll. at the beginning of the year 1590. and when M. of A. entered into
orders, preached frequently in these parts, was made Chaplain of K. James 1.
chief moderator of the Free School in Reading in Berks, and at length Vicar of
St. Mary's Church there: In which last he was succeeded by Tho. Bunbury of
Ball. coll. but thrust out thence by the Presbyterians in the beginning of the
civil Wars. Denison was a learned man, well read in Theological authors, and
wrote and published these things following.

Several Sermons as (1) The Christian Petitioner, preached on Act Sunday 7 Jul.
1611. on Nehem. 13. 22. Land. 1611. qu. (2) The sin against the Holy Ghost, at
Paul's Cross, on Heb. 10. 26, 27. Ib. 1611. qu. (3) Christians care for the
Souls safety, on Mark 8. 36. Land. 1621. oct. (4) Heavenly Banquet: or, the
doctrine of the Lords Supper, set forth in seven Sermons, on 1 Cor. 11. from
verse 23. to 29. Land. 1619. oct. (5) Blessedness of Peacemakers, two Sermons
on Matthew. 5. 9. Land. 1620. oct. (6) The Sinners acquittance, before the K. at
Greenwich on Isa. 53. 4. Land. 1624. oct. (7) Check to curiosity, and The
safest service, two Sermon. at Whitehall, on Joh. 21. ver. 22. Land. 1624. oct.
(8) Heavens joy for a sinners repentance, on Luke 15. 7. Ibid. 1623. oct. etc.

A threesold resolution concerning earths vanity, hells horror and heavens
felicity. Land. 1616. oct. 4th edit.

Justification of the gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper. Land. 1619 oct.

On the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper. Land. 1621. qu.

De confessionis auricularis vanitate adversus Card. Bellarmini Sophismata. Ox.
1621. qu.

De sigilli confessionis impietate, contra Scholasticorum and Neotericorum
quorundam dogmata disputatio. -- Printed with the former. He dyed in the latter
end of January, and was buried on the first of Feb. in the Church of St. Mary
at Reading before mentiond, 1628-9.
in sixteen hundred twenty and eight. He had a Brother, or near Kinsman called
Stephen Denison, D. D. and many years Minister of St. Catherine Kree Church in
London, who hat published several things of Divinity, as the Bodleian or Oxford
Catalogue will tell you. He dyed in that parish, (in 1649. as I think) but was
not of the University of Oxon.

PETER ALLIBOND, an ingenious man in the Wardenton near to Banbury in
Oxfordshire, where his name and family had for some generations lived, became a
Student of Magd. hall in the beginning of 1578. aged 18. years, or thereabouts,
took the degrees in Arts, traveled for some time beyond the Seas, and at his
return became Rector of Cheyneys in Bucks. Where continuing many years, did
much improve the ignorant with his found doctrine. What he has written I know
not, nor translations which he has made, only these two from French into
English, viz. (1) Comfort for an afflicted conscience, wherein is contained
both consolation and instruction for the sick, etc. Land. 1591. oct. written by
John de L'espine. (2) Confutation of the popish transubstantiation, together
with a narration how that the Mass was at sundry times patched and pieced by
sundry Popes, etc. Land. 1592. oct. And a translation from Lat. into English
entit. The golden chain of Salvation. Land. 1604. qu. written by Harman
Renecher. This Pet. Allibond died on the sixth day of March, 1628-9.
in sixteen hundred twenty and eight, and was buried in the Chancel of the
Church of Cheyneys before mentioned; leaving then behind him three Sons, one of
which was called John a witty man of Magd. coll. whom I shall mention
elsewhere; another named Peter of Linc. coll. Proctor of this University in
1640. and a third Job, who changing his Religion, to which he had been
carefully brought up, for that of Rome, (which was the reason, I presume, why
his name was omitted in his Fathers Will) did at length get a place in the Post
Office, which kept him and his in a comfortable condition. This Job was Father
of Rich. Allibond, a Barrester of Grays Inn, who being also a Roman Catholic,
was not only Knighted by K. James 2. but also made one of the Justices of the
King's Bench, to which Office he was sworn by the name of Rich. Allebone, 28.
Apr: 1687. He dyed at his house near to the back part of Grays Inn, 22. of Aug.
1688. aged 47 years of thereabouts, and was buried on the fourth of Sept.
following at Dagenham in Essex near to the grave of his Mother.

JAMES LEY, a younger Son of Henry Ley of Teffont-Evias in Wilts. Son of Henry
Ley of Ley, in the parish of Bere-Ferres in Devonsh. Esquire; was born at
Teffonts-Evias, became a Commoner of Brasenose coll. in the beginning of 1569.
aged 17. or thereabouts, took one degree in Arts, and on the first of May 1577.
he was admitted a Student of Lincolns Inn, where making great proficiency in
the Municipal Law, which was much advanced by his Academical learning, he
became a Counselor of great repute, was called to the Bench. 22. Eliz. and in
the 44. of that Qu. was Lent reader of that Inn. After which, his profound
learning and other great abilities deservedly raised him to sundry degrees of
honor and eminent employment: For in the 1. of Jac. 1. he was called to the
state and degree of Sergeant at Law, and in the year following he was
constituted Chief Justice of the King's Bench in Ireland, in which place he
continued till Mich. term 6. Jac. 1. and then, being a Knight, he was made
Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries in England. Shortly after he
obtained a Privy Seal from the Kings Maj. dat. 15. May 7. Jac. 1. to take place
in the said Court of the Kings Attorney General, which till then was never
used, but since has constantly been observed. By virtue of that Seal, and by
appointment of Rob. Earl of Salisbury, then Master of the said Court, he took
the place the same day of Sir Hen. Hobart Knight, then Attorney General to his
Majesty. During his continuance in that place he was made a Baronet, and in the
18. Jac. he was removed from that Court, having been Attorney 12 years, and
upwards, and was made Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in England. In 22.
Jac. he was made Lord High Treasurer of Engl. and a Counselor of State, and
on the last day of the same month, he was advanced to the dignity Baronage of
England, Tom. 3. p. 451. b.
of a Baron, by the title of Lord Ley of Ley before mentioned. In the 1. of
Car. 1. he was created Earl of Marlborough in wilts, and in the fourth of that
King, he resigned his place of Treasurer, and was made Lord President of the
Council. He was a person of great gravity, ability and integrity, and of the
same mind in all conditions. He has written,

Treatise concerning Wards and Liveries, Land. 1642. oct. composed by the
author, while he was Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries.

Reports of diverse resolutions in Law, arising upon cases in the Court of
Wards, and other Courts at Westminster, in the Reigns of King James and King
Charles. Land. 1659. fol. He also collected, with intentions to publish, some
of the historical writers of Ireland: for which end he caused to be transcribed
and made fit for the Press, the Annals of John Clynne a Fri^r Minor of
Kilkenny, (who lived in the time of K. Ed. 3.) the Annals of the Priory of St.
John the Evangelist of Kilkenny, and the Annals of Multifernan, Resse and
Clonmell, etc. But his weighty occasions did afterward divert his purpose.
After his death the copies came into the hands of Henry Earl of Bathe, who also
did intend to make them public, but what diverted him, I cannot tell. Our
author, Sir Jam. Ley E. of Marlborough, ended his days in his lodgings in
Lincolns Inn on the 14. of March in sixteen hundred twenty and eight, 1628-9.
and was buried in an Isle joining to the Church of Westbury in Wilts. in which
Parish he had purchased an Estate. Over his grave was soon after a stately
monument erected by Hen. Ley his Son, who succeeded him in his honor, begotten
on the body of his Father's first Wife, named Mary, Daughter of John Petty of
Stoke-Talmach and Tetsworth in Com. Oxon: Esquire;.

Vicarsus and de Vicariis, was born within the City of Carlisle in Cumberland,
made his first entry into Queens coll. in the beginning of 1607. aged 16.
where, after he had been a poor serving Child, Tabarder, and Chaplain, he was
elected Fellow 1616. being then M. of A. Six years after he was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences; about which time he being esteemed an able
Theologist, Preacher, and well qualified with other learning, was taken into
the Family of Dr. Carleton B. of Chichester, and by him preferred (after he had
married his Daughter Anne) to the Vicarage of Cockfield near Horsham in Sussex,
and, as it seems, to a Dignity in the Church of Chichester. His works are,

Manuductio ad artem Rhetoricam, ante paucos annos i^ privatum quorundum
Scholarium usum concinnata, etc. Land. 1621. oct. there again 1628. in tw.
being the third edit. This book is the effect of certain Lectures in Queens
coll. public Refectory, when he bore the office of Rhetoric Reader.

Brief direction how to examine our selves before we go to the Lord's Table,
how to behave our selves there, and how to try our selves afterward. Land.
1622. or thereabouts, in oct.

Confutatio cujusd. libelli de amplitudine regni caelestis sub ementito C.
Secundi Curionis nomine in lucem emissi. Ox. 1627. qu. He has also translated
from Lat. into English, A Manuduction to Theology. Clar. 1628.
Land. 1622. or thereabouts, and 26. in oct. written by Barthelm. Keckerman.
Before which translation is a copy of verses made by Mich. Drayton the Poet, an
attestation by Ad. Airay B. D. and a dedication to A^^e the Wife of Dr.
Carleton B. of Chichester. One Tho. Vicary published The Surgeons directory, in
1651. oct. who was, as I suppose, a Surgeon by profession, and therefore not
to be taken to be the same with Tho. Vicars before mentioned.

Westsricsin in Holland, educated for a time in the University in Franaker,
where obtaining considerable knowledge in Oriental tongues, took a journey into
England, and about 1613. settled in Oxford, taught the Hebrew tongue, and for
the sake of Dr. Prideaux Rector of Exeter coll. whose person and doctrine he
much admired, became a Sojournour of that house, and a zealous Student in the
Sacred Faculty. After he had continued there some years, he retired ((...) a
degree conser'd on him,) to his native Country, where at Franaker he was made
Hebrew Profess (...) length D. of D. and held much in esteem for his great
learning. He has written,

(...) quinque librorum Mosis, etc. Franak. 1620. qu.

Supplex (...) ad Synodos, Episcopos and Super-intendentes (...).

(...) Franak. 1625. oct.

Coron, ad Gram. Martino-Buxto^sianum. Ibid.

Anti-Barbarus Biblicus in 3. libros distributus, etc. Amstel. 1628. oct. To
which was added a fourth book. -- Franak. 1656. qu.

De Decimis. In the first Tome of the Critics, p. 1326.

Responsio ad censuras D. Marini Marsenni Theologi Paris. Franak. 1628. oct.
See in the first Tome of the Critics, p. lx.

De nomine Tetragrammato dissertatio, cum responsione ad argumenta cl. viri D.
Nich. Fulleri Angli, quibus pro vulgatae lectionis Jehovah certitudine
disputavit. Fran. 1628. oct.

He has also written the Preface before Joh. Drusius his Commentary on the
more difficult places of the Pentateuch, an. 1617. which is remitted into the
first Tome of the Critics, p. 50. and corrected and published with some
additions his Commentary on the 12 Minor Prophets, and his Com. de Sectis
Judaicis. He has also written and published certain Dissertations and Orations
in Latin, but these I have not yet seen. He was living and in great renown at
Franaker in sixteen hundred twenty and eight, Clar: 1628.
having then, as always before, a natural Genie to enlighten the Text of
Scripture, and to find the notion of the Sacred Language. When he died, and
what other books he has written, I cannot yet tell.

WILLIAM VAUGHAN, Son of Walt. Vaughan Goldon Grove in Caermerthenshire Esquire;
and younger Brother to Sir John Vaughan the first Earl of Carbury, was born at
the Golden Grove, became a Commoner of Jesus coll. in Mich. Term, an. 1591.
aged 14. took the degrees in Arts, and entered on the Law line, but before he
took a degree in that Faculty, he went to travel, and performing some exercise
in order thereunto at Vienna, did proceed Doctor there, and at his return was
incorporated at Oxon in the same Faculty, an. 1605. In which, tho indifferently
learned, yet he went beyond most men of his time for Latin especially, and
English, Poetry. Afterward spending much time in rambling to and fro, did take
a long journey for the honor and benefit of his Nation, and became the chief
undertaker for the Plantation in Cambriol, the southermost part in
New Foundland, now called by by some Britaniola, where with pen, purse, and
person did prove the worthiness of that enterprise. He has written,

(...) Pium, continens canticum canticorum Solomonis, and Psalmos aliquot
selectiores, una cum quibusdam aliis poematis e Sacrae Scripturae fontibus
petitis. Land. 1597. oct.

Elegia gratulatoria in honorem illustriss. Herois Caroli Howard Comitis
Nottingham. 23. Oct. 1597. meretiss. creati. Printed with the former.

Varia Poemata de Sphaerarum ordine, etc. Land. 1589. oct.

Poemata continent, Encom. Roberti Comitis Fssex. Land. 1598. oct.

The Golden Grove moralized, in 3 books. A work very neeessary for all such, as
would know how to govern themselves, their houses, or their country. Land.
1600. and 1608. oct. This book which is written in prose, was commended to the
World by some Poets, or at least pretenders to Poety, then (1600.) living in
the University, as Dr. Joh. Williams Marg. Professor, Will. Osbourne one of the
Proctors, Hen. Price Bac. of Div. of S. John's coll. Griffin Powel of Jesus,
Joh. Budden LL. D. Nich. Langford and Tho. Came Masters of Arts, Gabr. Powel B.
A. Sam. Powel, Tho. Storer, and Jo Rawlinson Masters of Arts, Charles
Fitzjeffry of Broadgates, Tho. Michelbourne, etc.

Cambrensium Carolcia. Quibus nupiae regales celebrantur, memoria regis
pacifici renovatur, and praecepta necessaria ad rempub. nestram faeliciter
administrandum intexuntur: reportata a Colchide Cambriola ex australissima
Novae Terrae plaga. Land. 1625. oct. It Is a Latin Poem, and dedicated by our
author Vaughan under the name of Orp^eus Junior to King Charles 1.

The Golden Fleece, divided into three parts; under which are discovered the
errors of Religion, the vices and decays of the Kingdom, etc. Land. 1626. qu.
in prose. Transported from Cambrioll Colchos out of the southermost part of the
Island commonly called New Foundland by Orphcus jun. alias Will. Vaughan.
There is no doubt but this our ingenious author has other things extant, but
such, tho with great scrutiny, I cannot yet discover: nor can I find any thing
else relating to the author only that he was living at C^^^^iol
beforementioned in sixteen hundred twenty and eight. Clar. 1628.
I find one will Vaughan a Physician, who among several things that he has
published is a book intit. Directions for health, natural and artificial,
derived from the best Physicians, as well modern as ancient, etc. Printed
several times, as in 1617. oct. Land. 1626. qu. the sixth edit. and there again
1633. etc. Another book also he wrote called The Newlanders cure, with rules
against the Scurvey, Coughs, etc. Printed 1630. oct. etc. Whether this
Physician was originally of Oxon. I cannot tell, notwithstanding we have had
several of both his names and time matriculated as Members of Ball. coll.
Jesus, etc. There is also another Will. Vaughan a Physician, who published
Disputatio medica de febre continuata. Printed 1671. qu.

George Carew sometimes Dean of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, was born in Devon, but
originally descended from the Carews of Carew Castle in Pembrokshire, became a
Gent. Commoner of Broadgates hall in 1572. aged 15. About which time two of his
Surname studied in University coll. which has given occasion, many years
after, to some of the Fellows of that house, particularly to Dr. Joh. Brown,
to take In his Additional notes to a Cat. of Scholrs of Univ. coll. in the
(...) of Q. Eliz. Which Cat. consists much of Sirnames only.
one of them to be this George Carew whom we are farther to mention. Howsoever
it is, or whether he studied in both houses successively, I shall not now
dispute it: Sure I am that he was of Broadgates, and that being more delighted
in Martial Affairs than in the solitary delights of a study, he left the
University without a degree, went into Ireland, and there had a command given
him against that noted Rebel the Earl of Desmond. Afterward his merits being
made known to Q. Eliz. she thereupon made him one of her Council, and Master of
the Ordnance, there: In which last employment he behaved himself with great
renown in various expeditions, as some years after he did in the Voyage to
Cadiz in Spain. In 1589. he was actually created M. of A. with other persons of
quality, he being then a Knight. At length when all Ireland was in a manner
invaded with a domestic Rebellion, and a Spanish Army, he was made President
of Munster for 3 years; where joining his Forces with those of the Earl of
Thomond, he took diverse Castles and strong Holds in those parts, and brought
the titular Earl of Desmond (one of the most active Rebels there) to his trial.
After K. James came to the Crown he was called home, and in the first year of
his Reign he was constituted Governor of the Isle of Guernsey and Castle
Cornet. In the third year of that Kings Reign he was Ba(...) of Engl. Tom. 3.
p. 423.
advanced to the degree and dignity of a Baron, by the title of the Lord Carew
of Clopton, having before married Joyce the Daughter and Coheir of Will.
Clepton of Clopton near Stratford upon Avon in Warwicksh. Esque. Afterward he
was made Vicechamberlain and Treasurer to Q. Anne, Master of the Ordnance
throughout England, and of the Privy Council to the King. At length when
Charles came to the Crown, he was made by him, in the first year of his Reign,
Earl of Totness in Devonshire, as being then a faithful Subject, a valiant and
prudent Commander, an honest Counselor, a gentile Scholar, a lover of
Antiquities, and a great Patron of learning. He wrote a book intit.

Pacata Hibernia. Or, the History of the late Wars in Ireland. Land. 1633. fol.
with his picture before, and these verses under, it. Talis crat vultu, sed
lingua, mente manuque
Qualis crat, qui vult dicere, scripta legate.
Consulat aut famam, qui lingua, mente manuve
Vincere hunc, fama judice, rarus erat.


Of which History containing three years transactions in Munster, the said
Earls actions ( G. Carew) are not the least part. It was, while he lived,
reserved first for his own private satisfaction; secondly preserved for the
furtherance of a general history of the Kingdom of Ireland, when some
industrious writer should undertake a complete description of those Affairs:
And lastly out of his own retired modesty, it was by him held back from the
stage of publication, lest himself, being a principal Actor in many of the
particulars, might be perhaps thought to give vent and utterance to his private
merit and services, however justly memorable. After his death it came into the
hands of his faithful and trusty Servant, (or rather his natural Son) called
Tho. Stafford, by whom, it being first offered to the view and censure of
diverse learned and judicious persons, was at length published. This is that
Thom, Stafford who was Master of many choice Originals of Charters of English
Nobility, written in the time of Hen. 2. mostly containing conveyances and
gifts of Lands to Religious Houses; which I presume he had by the gift of his
aforesaid Master the Earl of Totness: But when Stafford died, they came into
the hands of Sir Simonds D'ewes Bt. Besides Pacata Hibernia, our author Carew
has in four large volumes collected several Chronologies, Charters, Letters,
Muniments and other materials, belonging to Ireland. Which as choice rarities,
are at this day reserved in the Bodleian Library. He also made several
collections, notes, and extracts for the writing of the History of the Reign of
K. Hen. 5. which were Hypercritica, or a rule of judgment for writing, or
reading our histories. MS. Address. 3. Sect. 3.
remitted into the History of Great Britain, etc. published by Joh. Speed. In
which History were also remitted most, if not all, of the Lord Viscount S.
Albans Hist. of Hen. 7. the notes and collections of Sir Rob. Cotton concerning
the Reign of K. Hen. 8. notes and collections of Sir Hen. Spelman for another
King, the life of K. John by Dr. Jo. Barcham, and the notes of Edm. Bolton
concerning K. Hen. 2. As for Speeds part in the said History of Gr. Britain, it
is such for style and industry, that for one who (as Martial speaks) had
neither a Graecum (...), nor an Ave Latinum, is perhaps without many Fellows in
Europe. So much also have I understood of him by sure information, that he had
no meaning in that labor to prevent great practick learnedness, but to furnish
it for the common service of Englands Glory. As for our author Carew Earl of
Totness, he ended his days in the Savoy situated in the Strand near London,
Mar. in sixteen hundred twenty and nine, aged 73. and 10 months. Whereupon his
body was conveyed to Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire, and was interred at
the upper end of an Isle joining on the North side to the body of the Church
there. Over his grave was soon after a stately monument erected, with a large
inscription thereon, which for brevity sake I now pass by; and desire the
Reader to observe that there was one Tho. Carve who writes himself of Mobernan
in the County of Tipperary in Ireland, a Priest and Apostolic Notary, who in
the year of his age 70. Dom. 1660. wrote a book intit. Lyra sive
Anacephalaeosis Hibernica in qua de exordio, sive origin, nomine, moribus
ritibusque gentis Hibernicae succincte tractatur. Sulsbaci 1666. 2d. edit. qu.
But this Tho. Carve, who lived at Vienna in Germany in the Court of the
reverend Curats and Levites belonging to the Cath. Church of St. Stephen there,
to the year 1664. and after, is not to be understood (as some have done) to be
the same with Tho. Carue, or any thing of kin to Geor. Carew before mentioned,
or that he was beholding to Pacata Hibernia, when he composed his book, or to
his MS. collections, as I can yet perceive. Besides the aforesaid George Carew
was another of both his names, a native of Cornwall, who having benefited
himself much in this University, and afterward in the Inns of Court and in
traveling beyond the Seas, was at his return called to the Bar. Soon after he
supplied the place of Secretary to Christop. Lord Hatton L. Chanc. of England,
and after his decease performed the like Office to his two Successors, by
special recommendation from her Majesty, who also gave him a Prothonotaryship
in the Chancery, and in 1597. being then a Knight and one of the Masters of the
Chancery, was by the said Queen Camden in Annal. Reg. Eliz. an. 1597.
sent into Prussia to inform the K. and State of Poland, and the prutenic
Cities, those things which she answered to Dzialine the last Ambassador in
England, etc. In which County and in other Nothern parts, he underwent, through
unexpected accidents, extraordinary perils, but being freed from them by Gods
great Providence, he performed his duty in acceptable manner. In January 1605.
he was sent Idem in Annal. Reg. Jac. 1. MS. an. 1606.
ordinary Ambassador into France, where he behaved himself to the credit of the
English Nation, and after his return the Commonwealth used his service, in the
places of trust which he then enjoyed. Whether he was the same Sir George
Carew, who was created Master of Arts, with other persons of quality, at
Cambridge 30. Aug. 1571. I know not Qu.

EDWARD HUTCHINS, a Den^ig^^hire man into the Sacred Function, was in short
time after numbered among the eniment Preachers of the University. His works are,

Sermons, as (1) Sermon. against Recusants, on Cantic. 2. 15. Oxon. 1586. oct.
(2) Sermon. concerning the true comfort of Gods Church truly Militant, etc. on
the Song of Solomon, chapter 4. V. 7. Oxon. 1589. oct. etc. with which last is
printed

An Apology for the Church truly Militant. -- He has also published,

Jaw Bone against the spiritual Philistine. -- Printed 1601. in tw. and other
things which I have not seen. He afterward (being married) became Prebendary
of Chute and Cheesenbury in the Church of Salisbury, and beneficed near to that
City. Joh. Thorpe.

John Gifford Esque by Elizab. his Wife, Daughter of Sir Geo. Throcmorton of
Coughton in Warwickshire Knight, was born in Hampshire in 1554. being the
second year of Qu. Mary, and in 1569. was by his Mother, then the Wife of one
Will. Hodgckin, sent to Linc. coll. at which time it was governed by John
Bridgwater, who in his heart was a R. Catholic, and had under his government
many of that profession. After he had continued in the University, mostly in
the said coll. and partly in the house of Geo. Etheridge a Physician, for the
space of four years, exercising himself in Grammar, Music, Logic, and
Philosophy, he was sent with his Tutor to Lovaine, where soon after he took the
degree of M. of A. Afterward spending four years in Theological studies, under
Father Bellarmine, he took the degree of Bach, in that faculty. But leaving the
said University, because of the Civil Wars in that Country, he retired to
Paris, where continuing for some time in the study of Theology among the
Sorbonists, he was by Dr. Will. Alan sent for to Rheimes, where continuing in
the Eng. coll. (governed by the said Alan) for some time, was by him sent to
the Eng. coll. at Rome, where consummating his divine studies, was recalled by
the said Alan and made public Professor of Theology at Rheimes. About which
time being created Doctor of that faculty, with great solemnity in the
University of Pont-a Mousson in Loraine, (in Nov. 1584.) managed with great
credit his public Professorship for about eleven years. But Civil Wars
breaking out in France, he journyed to Rome and became Chaplain to Card. Alan,
(as he was afterward for a time to Card. Charles Borromeus at Millane) at
whose request to P. Clem. 8. he was made Dean of the Church of S. Peter at
Ressell commonly called L'isle in Flanders; which preferment he keeping for ten
years was at length forced See in the Running Register by Lew. Owen, Printed
2626. p. 91.
to leave it by the violence of the Jesuits, because he took part with the
Benedictine Monks when they prevailed so far with the Abbot of Arra^, a good
man, to build a Cloister for them at Doway, which was much opposed by the said
Jesuits. Afterward Dr. Gifford returned to Rheimes again, and was made Rector
of the Academy there, which he governed with great praise and honor. At length
being above 50. years of age, he gave a farewell to the World, and its
vanities, entered himself into the Order of St. Benedict in June 1608. and
became professed on the 14. Dec. in the year following, in the coll. of the
English Benedictines at Diculward in Loraine. Whereupon according to the manner
he changed his name to Pits De illstr. Argl. Script. Aet. 17. nu. 1061.
Gabriel de S. Maria, which he kept to his dying day, became famous for his
admirable Sermons preached there, in Flanders, Poiteu, at Rheimes, and in
Britain, to which place, as it is In Gall^a Christiana, Tom. 1. p. 548.
said, he was sent a Delegate by P. Clem. 8. to K. Jam. 1. concerning matters
of Religion. Afterward being noted for his great piety and learning, he was
made Prior of the Benedictines at S. Maloes in France, and President of the
Congregation of that Order. At length his great worth suffering him not to live
in a Cell, he was by Ludovic. de Loraine commonly called Cardinal Guise,
(Archbishop of Rheimes) made his Suffragan in that See, under the title of
Episcopus Ar^^id ^liae, (in Greece) Which place he enjoying till that Cardinals
death, the Duke of Guise thereupon (because his second Son was but a Child, and
therefore not capable of the Archbishopric of Rheimes, fearing lest any other
N^bleman in France should beg it for any of their Sons) did presently, before
the death of his Brother the Cardinal was known, go to the French K. and begged
the same for Dr. Gifford, and procured the Pope to confirm the Kings grant.
Whereupon Gifford receiving Consecration in 1622. enjoyed it about 7 years; not
without paying a considerable yearly pension from it (as 'twas thought) to the
then Duke of Guise. By virtue of the said Archbishopric, he became a Duke and
the first Peer of France: And having a great yearly value coming in, became
hospitable, liberal to all English Exiles and Travelers, and a Founder of two
Houses in France, for the reception of the English Monks of the Order of S.
Benedict, namely one at Paris, and another at S. Maloe. He has written and
published,

Orationum lib. 1. Spoken mostly at the inauguration of Albert and Isabell, in
their inauguration at L'isle: Also before Card. Burbon, Vandome, Guise, etc. at
Rheimes, and the Duke of Guise, d'Aumale and others -- Printed at Doway.

Sermones Adventuales. He also took a great deal of pains in perfecting and
finishing a book intit. Calvino-Turcismus, etc. written by Will. Rainolds, and
printed at Antwerp, 1597. Answered by one who writes himself T. M. S. in a book
intit. De Turco-papismo, etc. Land. 1598. 99. qu. In the Preface to which he
falls foul on our author Gifford, whom he styles Scriptor mendicissimus, and,
ut omnibus constat, iracundus -- Ex Anglis ad Hispanos transfuga, hostium
mancipium, hostis patriae, turpissimum popularium suorum propudium -- comptus
and calmistratus, and apud mulieres Belgicas gratiosus, etc. He also wrote a
book at the instance of the D. of Guise, which I have not yet seen, and
translated from French in Engl. The Inventory of errors, contradictions and
false citations of Philip Morney Lord of Plessis: written by Fronto Ducens a
Jesuit. Besides which he has written and translated other matters, but they
having been printed beyond the Seas, we seldom or never see them here, and so
consequently I cannot give you a Cat. of them in this place. This great Archb.
and Duke Dr. Gifford gave way to fate on the eleventh of April, in sixteen
hundred twenty and nine, France, and was buried with great solemnity in the
Church of the Blessed Virgin at Rheimes, behind the great Altar, near to the
grave of Lewis Card. Guise. In his Archbishopric succeeded Hen. de Loraine Son
of Charles Duke of Guise, born at Paris 4. Apr. 1614. so that he was but 15
years of age when he was made Archbishop, which was per accessum; but being not
consecrated, he renounced it in 1641. about which time he succeeded his Father
in the Dukedom of Guise, and took to him a Wise.

CHRISTOPHER SUTTON, a Hampshire Heart hall in 1582. aged 17. translated soon
after to Linc. coll. and as a Memb. thereof took the degrees in Arts.
Afterward entering into Orders, he became successively Vicar of Roneham in
Essex, Parson of Caston in his own Country, Parson of Woodrising in Norfolk,
Parson of Murley-Bromley in Essex, and at length of Cranworth in Norfolk. Which
two last he kept to his dying day, with his Prebendship of Westminster that had
been bestowed on him by K. Jam. 1. for his excellent and florid preaching. His
works are,

Disce vivere. Learn to live. Land. 1608. in tw. and several times after.

Disce Mori, Learn to die. Land. 1609. in tw. and several times after. In both
which is showed in what manner every well disposed Christian may learn first,
how to live the life of the righteous, and how to die the death of the
righteous.

Godly meditations upon the most holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, etc. Land.
1622. etc. in tw. the thirteenth edition of which came out in 1677.

Append. touching the controversy about the holy Eucharist -- Printed with the
Godly meditation^, etc.

Godly meditations concerning the divine presence. -- Printed also with the
former Meditat. He ^eparted this mortal life in May or June, in sixteen hundred
twenty and nine, Peter at Westminster, before the Vestry door, where the
choir-men keep their Supplices, to whom he gave five pounds. In his Prebendship
(given to him much about the time of the death of Dr. Joh. Young B. of
Rochester, who kept that Prebendship in Commendam with his See) succeeded
Lambert Osbaldeston M. A. as I shall else where tell you.

ROBERT HEGGE, a prodigy of his time for forward and good natural parts, was
born within the City of Durham, an. 1599. admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 7.
Nov. 1614. Prob. Fellow thereof 27. Dec. 1624. being then M. of A. and
accounted, considering his age, the best in the University for the Mathematical
faculty, History, and Antiquities, (and therefore much beloved by Tho. Allen of
Gloucester hall) as afterward he was for his excellent knowledge in the Sacred
Scripture, as may be seen in certain books he wrote, the titles of which follow.

Teatise of Dials and dialling. MS. in C. C. coll. Library. In which book is
the picture of the Dial in the said college Garden, made by Nich. Kratzer (whom
I have mentioned under the year 1550.) with a short discourse upon it. In like
manner there is the picture of that fair Cylinder standing on a Pedestal in the
middle of the said coll. quadrangle, made by Charles Turnball, 1605. with a
short discourse on it, which he intitles Horologium Sciotericum in gratiam
speciosissimi Horoscopii in area quadrata. C. C. C. etc.

The Legend of S. Cuthbert with the antiquities of the Church of Durham --
written 1626. and left in MS. behind him at his death, so exactly and neatly
written, that many have taken it to be printed. Afterward a Copy of it, under
the authors hand, coming into the possession of Thomas Lord Fairfax, was by him
reposed as a precious Monument in his Library of MSS. At length one who writes
himself R. B. Esquire;. (sometimes of the retinue of the said Lord, as I have been
informed) published it at Land. 1663. in oct. in a very bad letter and worse
Paper, not without some derogation to the memory of the author by concealing
his name, and putting the two first letters of his own, with the writing a
Prologue, to it. The truest Copy under the authors hand is now in the
possession of Dr. Edw. Pocock Can. of Chapter Chapter and the Kings Hebr. Professor of
this University, having an Epistle to the Reader before it under the authors
own hand, dated 1. Jul. 1626. which the printed has not. Betwixt this MS. and
the printed Copy I find much difference; there being in the latter many
omissions, some additions, besides literal mistakes, (especially in names of
men and places) and several passages transposed.

In aliquot Sacrae paginae loca lectiones. Land. 1647. in 4. sh. or more, in
qu. published by John Hall of Greys Inn, (whom I shall anon mention) who in his
Preface to the said Lections tells us, that if they took, and were approved by
Scholars, he had more laying by him to publish; but whether he did so, or not,
I cannot tell. Our author Hegge also left behind him 4. or 5. Sermons fit for
the Press, learned suppositions in C. C. C. Chapel, verses, Cat. of Schol. and
Fell. of C. C. coll. etc. All which, or at least some of them, are at this day
in the Libr. of the said college. He died suddenly of an apoplexy, to the great
reluctance of those who were acquainted with his admirable parts, June in
sixteen hundred twenty and nine, (having scarce attained to the thirtieth year
of his age) and was buried in the Chapel of the said coll. As for John Hall
before mentioned, who had a great respect for his memory and his works, and was
well acquainted with, if not allied to, his relations, was born also in the
said City of Durham of gentile Parents, in Aug. 1627. and being fitted for the
University was hindered from going to it by the eruption of the Civil War.
Whereupon giving himself solely up to studies at home, especially in the
Library at Durham, improved himself to a miracle. After Oxon was reduced by the
Parliament forces in the year 1646. at which time the Wars were ceased, he was
sent to S. John's coll. in Cambridge, where he had not been there many months,
e're came forth the first issue of his prodigious wit, entit. Horae vacivae, or
Essays, with some occasional considerations. Land. 1646. oct. with his Picture
before them, aged 19. The sudden breaking forth of which, amazed not only the
University, as I am instructed by one John Davies in his Pres. or Prol. before
Joh. Halls translation of H^^r^cles upon the golden verses of Phyth^goras, etc.
of his Fellow Collegiats, but the more serious part of men in the three
Nations, where they were spread. The same year, about New Years time, came out
his Poems. Land. 1646. and with them The second book of divine Poems. Pr. in
oct. Both which books were much admired. After he had continued more than an
year at Cambridge, in the condition of a Commoner and Gent. Com. he was
translated to Greys Inn, where he added to the Structure of a most admirable
Romance, intit. Lucenia, which he had began in Cambridge, but by the lending it
forth to a friend, it was smothered. In 1648. his mind being sufficiently known
to incline toward a Commonwealth, he sided with the Independent and wrote A
Satyr against Presbytery, and in 1649. he published An humble motion to the
Parliament of England concerning the advancement of Learning, and Reformation
of the Universities. Printed at Land. in 6. sh. in qu. In which taking occasion
to court the then Rulers, got him a present sum of Money, and a Pension of 100.
l. per an. from the Council. About the same time he wrote Four Paradoxes, to
which he added two more in 1653. Published at Land. 1653. in tw. under the name
of Joh. de la Salle, by Joh. Davies of Kidwelly: And in 1650. being commanded
by the Council of State into Scotland to attend Oliver Cromwell, to make such
observations on affairs there, as might conduce to the settling of the interests
of the Commonwealth, he wrote a book intit. The grounds and reasons of
Monarchy, with an Appendix of An Epitomy of the Scottish affairs: Both printed
at Edinburgh in qu. and afterward at London. About that time he was called to
the Bar, and sometimes pleaded, and in 1651. he published A Gag to Loves
Advocates, etc. wherein he justified the Parliaments proceedings in the
execution of Christop. Love a forward and busy Presbyterian. What other things
he either wrote or published, are briefly these. (1) A Preface before, with
remarks upon a book intit. A true relation of the unjust, cruel, and barbarous
proceedings against the English at Amboyna in the E. Indies, by the
Netherlandish Government and Council there. Which book, tho it had been
published in the latter end of the Reign of K. Jam. 1. and the third time at
Land. 1632. in qu. Joh. Hall thought it necessary to revive it at that time
(1651.) because of the then differences between the Dutch and the English. This
book he dedicated to the General O. Cromwell, and was much bought up. Whereupon
the Dutch Ambassador residing then in Westminster, made a complaint of that
book and demanded punishment on the reviver of it, but the Parliament thinking
it a seasonable service done to the public, took no notice of it. (2) He
rendered into English from the Original The height of Eloquence, written by
Dionis. Longinus. Land. 1652. oct. Dedicated to Balstrade Whitlock one of the
Commissioners of the Great Seal. (3) He wrote A Letter from a Gent. in the
Country concerning, etc. an. 1653. (just after the Long Parliament was
dissolved) tending to settle the humors of the people in that great emergency.
(4) Answer to the grand politic Informer. Printed 1653. fol. which Politic
Informer being a virulent Pamphlet written upon the Assembly of Barbone's
Parliament, and therefore censured and suppressed, it was thought expedient
that Hall should answer it, and he was well rewarded for it from the Exchequer.
He put out Lusus Serius, in 1654. written in Lat. by Mich. Majerus: Half of
which almost was done in one afternoon, over a glass of Wine in a Tavern. (6)
He made a translation of Hicrocles upon the golden verses of Pythagoras,
teaching a virtuous and worthy life. Published after his death, by his friend
John Davies of Kidwelly -- Land. 1657. oct. with other things, as Poems,
Translations, Treatises, which were never published. At length being overtaken
with a disease, which he could not thoroughly shake off, he left London in Jul.
1655. and retiring to Durham, died there on the first of Aug. 1656. having not
fully arrived to the 29th. year of his age, and was buried there, near to the
grave of his Father, who died about an year before, just after his Sons arrival
there. To conclude; had not his debauches and intemperance diverted him from
the more serious studies, he had make an extraordinary person; for no man had
ever done so great things at his age: So was the opinion of the great
Philosopher of Malmsbury. Besides this John Hall of Durham, were others of both
his names and writers, as Joh. Hall of Richmond author Of Government and
Obedience, in four books. Land. 1654. fol. and of other things, and another
John Hall author of The true Cavalier examined by his principles, and found not
guilty, either of Schism or Sedition. Land. 1656. besides other matters. A
third also, who was Bach. of Div. now, or lately, living, was author of Jacobs
Ladder: or, the (...) souls ascension to heaven in Prayers. etc.

WILLIAM HIND was born at (...) in Westmorland, beloved by the famous Jo.
Rainolds a Commoner of the said Coll. during his time. Whose doctrine making
impressions on the Juniors there, our author Hind became an admirer of him. At
length being full ripe for a removal, he left the Society about 1603. being
then much in esteem among them for his excellent Theological Disputations and
Preachments, and became Minister of Gods word at Bunbury in Cheshire, where he
was much noted among the puritanical party for his piety, and so much followed
by them for his frequent preaching, that he was esteemed the Ringleader of the
Nonconformists in that County, during the time that Dr. Tho. Morton sat Bishop
of Chester, with whom our author had several See in The life of Dr. Tho. Morton
Bish. of Durham, p. 132. etc. written by Joh. Barwick, D. D. Land. 16^0. qu.
contests about Conformity. He has written,

The office and use of the Moral Law of God in the days of the Gospel
justified, and explained at large by Scriptures, Fathers, and other Orthodox
Divines, etc. Land. 1623. qu.

Path to Piety; a Catechism.

A faithful remonstrance: or, the holy life and happy death of John Bruen of
Bruen-Stapleford in the County of Chester Esquire; exhibiting variety of many
memorable and exemplary passages of his life, and at his death, etc. Land.
1641. oct. Published by Sam. Hind a Minister, Son of William the author. The
said John Bruen who was a noted Calvinist, and Brother to that mirror of Piety
Mrs. Cath. Brettergh, was a Com. or Gent. Com. of S. Albans hall an. 1577. aged
18. where he was much noted for an early Zealot. Our author Will. Hind did
also revise, correct, and publish, The discovery of the Man of Sin, etc. Oxon.
1614. qu. written by Jo. Rainolds beforementioned, and An exposition on the
last Chapter of the Proverbs. Land. 1614. qu. penned by Rob. Cleaver the
Decalogist, then lately dead. At length after our author had undergone several
troubles concerning matters of indifferency, he surrendered up his last breath
in his study at Bunbury, in the month of June in sixteen hundred twenty and
nine, Thomas Hind D. of D. sometimes Fellow of Brasnose college, afterward
Chaplain to James Duke of Ormond, and Dean of Limerick in Ireland, who died in
his house at Limerick in Nov. 1689.

Lechius as he is sometimes written, was born at Allerton commonly called
Ollerton in Shropshire, was entered a Student in Brasnose coll. before the month
of Nov. in 1590. for in that year, and of his age 19. he was as a Member of
that house matriculated. But before he took the degree of Bach. of Arts he went
to Cambridge, where taking the degree of Master, he returned to Oxon in 1602.
and in June the same year, he was incorporated in that degree. About that time
he was made Vicar of St. Alkmonds Church in Shrewsbury, where making a short
stay, he returned to Oxon, and became one of the Chaplains or Petty-Canons of
Chapter Chapter Of whose Preaching and what followed, you may see in Hist. and Antiq.
Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. sub. an. 1608. In which year being suspended of his
Chaplainship for Preaching publicly some Popish Tenets, (for so they were
accounted by the puritanical Doctors of the University in those days,) he left
the Church of England, and went to Arras in Artois, where he wrote these things
following.

The triumph of Truth. Or a declaration of the doctrine concerning Evangelical
counsayles, in two parts. Doway 1609. oct.

Sermon in defense of Evangelical counsayles, and the Fathers, on Apoc. 20. 12.
-- Printed with the former book.

Twelve motives which persuaded him to embrace the Catholic Religion.

An honorable Grand Jury of 24 Fathers, testifying the distinction betwixt
legal precepts, and evangelical counsayles, by their uniform Verdict. -- Which
book, with the Motives, were printed with The triumph of Truth.

Humble considerations presented to King James concerning his premonitory
Epistle sent to all Christian Princes. S. Om^r 1609. Afterward our author
going to Rome, was admitted into the Society of Jesus, an. 1618. before or
after which time, he lived in the English coll. of Jesuits at Liege, and was
most commonly the Porter there. At length being sent into the English Mission,
settled in a R. Cath. house in Cheshire, near the River Mersie, owned by one
Massy, where he departed this life in July (about the 18. day) in sixteen
hundred twenty and nine, Will. Lacey of Oxon, one of his Society, whom I shall
remember when I come to the year 1673. as having been originally of this
University.

THOMAS GOFFE, or Gorgh, a Ministers Son, Essex, was elected, from Westminster
School, a Student of Chapter Chapter in 1609. aged 18. where applying his Muse to
polite studies became an excellent Poet and Orator. Afterward he proceeded in
Arts, entered into the Sacred Function, and shortly after became a quaint
Preacher, and a person of excellent language and expression. In 1623. he was
admitted to the reading of the Sentences, and about that time had the Parsonage
of East-Clandon in Surrey conferred upon him; where taking to Wife a mere
Zantippe, the Widow of his Predecessor, notwithstanding he had always before
prosessed himself an Enemy to the Female Sex, and esteemed by many another
Joseph Swetnam, he was so much overtop'd by her and her children which she had
by her former Husband, that his life being much shortened thereby, died at
length in a manner heart-broken. But before his Marriage he composed most of
these things following, some of which were printed after his death.

Oration funebris habita in Ecclesia Cath. Christi Ox. in obitum Gul. Goodwin
istius Eccles. Decani S. T. Doctoris. Ox. 1620. in one sh. and an half in qu.

Oration funebris habita in Schola Theol. Oxon. in obitum D. Hen. Savilii. Oxon.
1622. qu.

Deliverance from the grave, Sermon at St. Mary's Spittle in Land. 28. Mar.
1627. on Ezekiel. 37. 13. Land. 1627. qu.

The raging Turk; or Bajazet the Second. Trag. Land. 1631. qu.

Courageous Turk; or Amurath the First. Trag. Ibid. 1632. qu.

Tragedy of Orestes. Land. 1633. qu. These three Tragedies were reprinted at
Land. 1656. in oct. by the care of Rich. Meighen the authors friend.

Selimus Emperor of the Turks, Trag. Land. 1638. qu.

Careless Shepardess, Trag. Com. Land. 1656. qu. It was printed before, but
lying dead, had a new title bearing date the same year, put to it,

The Bastard, Trag. Land. 1652. qu. Some say it was not written by Goff, but by
Cosmo Manuche, and therefore perhaps 'twas only a translation. Qu. He the said
Th. Goffe made his last Exit at E. Clandon beforementioned; and was buried 27.
July in sixteen hundred twenty and nine, in the middle of the Chancel of the
Church there; leaving then behind him other things fit for the Press, as I have
been informed by one that was acquainted with the author, but what became of
them he could not tell.

THOMAS JAMES, or Jamesuis as he writes himself, Wight, (at Newport as it
seems,) educated in Grammaticals in Wykchams School, and in Academicals in New
coll. of which he became perpetual Fellow in 1593. where drudging day and night
in several sorts of learning, he proceeded in Arts in 1599. About that time he
being taken into the favor of Mr. (afterward Sir) Tho. Bodley for his
excellent worth in the knowledge of books, as well printed, as written, and of
the ordering of them, he was by him designed the first keeper of the Public
Library at Oxon, then in founding; which office being confirmed to him by the
University in 1602. he did much good therein and laid a most admirable
foundation for his Successors to build upon. In 1614. he took the degrees in
Divinity, and having about that time the Subdeanery of Wells conferred upon him
freely without seeking by the Bishop of that place, and the Parsonage of
Mongcham in Kent with other Spiritualities by the Archb. of Canterbury without
asking, he resigned his place of Keeper of the Public Library, (being about
that time also a Justice of Peace,) and betook himself more severe to his
studies. He was very well read in the Fathers and Schoolmen, and so much versed
in several Faculties, that he was esteemed by some a living Library. He was
also indefatigable in reading old MSS. and subtle in finding out the forgeries
in them. He and Allen of Glouc. hall were esteemed as most knowing in the
ancient Statutes and Customs of this University, and therefore their helps in
the several attempts made of framing an entire and complete body of them, were
often desired. He was a Member of the Convocation held with the Parliament at
Oxon, 1. Car. 1. wherein he made a motion that some persons might be
commissioned to peruse the Manuscript Fathers in all public and private
English Libraries, that thereby the forgeries of Foreign Popish editions might
be detected, but what the event of it was I know not. His designs were always
for the public benefit of learning, and English Church; which being well known
to his learned friend Will. Camden, he therefore says In Britan. edit. 1607.
in com. Monmouth.
thus of him, He is a learned man, and a true lover of books, wholly dedicated
to learning, who is now laboriously searching the Libraries of England, and
purposes that for the public good, which will be to the great benefit of
Students. Our author Dr. James says also of himself thus, in 1624. that See in
the Collection of Letters, at the end of Archb. Ushers Life, Land. 1686. fol.
nu. 66. p. 307. and in p. 320.
if Cambridge will set up and set forward the like (that is to collate and
examine ancient MSS. as he has done and will do) I dare undertake more good to
be done for the profit of learning and true Religion, than by building ten
Colleges. I have of late given my self to the reading only of MSS. and in them
I find so many and so pregnant testimonies, either fully for our Religion, or
against the Papists, that it is to be wondered at, that the Religion of Papists,
then and now, do not agree, etc. He also farther tells us, that not only the
Rabbis, but the Thalmud in six volumes at Rome has felt the smart of the
popish indices: would God we were but half as diligent to restore, as they
abolish and put out the truth. I have restored 300 citations and rescued them
from corruption in thirty quier of paper, with sundry other projects of mine,
which if they miscarry not for want of maintenance, it would deserve a Princes
purse. If I was in Germany, the States would defray all my charges: cannot our
estates supply what is wanting? If every Churchman, that has an 100. l. per
an. and upward, will lay down but a shilling for every hundred toward these
public works, I will undertake the reprinting of the Fathers, and setting
forth five or six volumes of Orthodox writers, comparing of books printed with
printed, or written; collating of popish translations in Greek, and generally
whosoever shall concern books, or the purity of them, I will take upon me to be
Magister S. Palatii in England, if I should be lawfully thereunto required,
etc. As for his works that are printed, they are these.

Ecloga Oxonio-Cantabrigiensis, lib. 2. Land. 1600. qu. This Ecloga does
contain a Catalogue of all the MSS in each college Library in the University of
Oxon, but not of those in the public, and in each college Library in
Cambridge, and in that of the public there. In the making of which Catalogue
he had liberty given to him by each coll. in Oxon. to peruse their MSS. and
from that Society which he perceived was careless of them, he borrowed and took
away what he pleased, and put them forthwith into the Public Library. Several
such MSS were taken from Ball. coll. and some from Merton, and do yet bear in
their respective fronts the names of the donours of them to those Houses. This
Ecloga is very useful for curious Scholars, and is much commended by Joseph
Scaliger in an Epistle to Rich. Thompson as I have told In Hist. and Antiq.
Univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 145. a.
you elsewhere.

Cyprianus redivivus, hoc est elenchus eorum quae in opusculo Cypriani de
unitate ecclesiae sunt vel addita, vel detracta, vel lapsu Typographi, vel alio
quovis modo supposita, etc. Printed with the Ecloga.

Spicilegium D. Augustini, hoc est, libri de fide ad Pet. Diaconum, cum
antiquiss, duob. MSS. and postremis ac ultimis editionibus excusis, tam
Basiliensi quam Parisiensi diligens collatio, ac castigatio, etc. Pr. with the
Ecloga.

Bellum paepale, seu concordia discors Sixti v. and Clementis viii circa
Hieronymianum editionem. Land. 1600. qu. there again 1678. oct.

Catalogus Librorum in Bib. Bodleiana. Oxon. 1605. in a large oct. or rather a
small qu. printed again with many additions in a thick qu. 1620. To which was
added an Appendix 1635. -- 6. In this Catalogue is remitted the Cat. of all
such MSS. that were then in the Bod. Library.

Concordantiae Sanctorum patrum, i. e. vera and pia libri Canticorum per Patres
universos tam Graecos quam Latinos expositio, etc. Oxon. 1607. qu.

Apology for Joh. Wicliff, showing his conformity with the now Church of
England, etc. Oxon. 1608. qu. Written in answer to the slanderous objections
urged against by Father Parsons, the Apologist, and others.

Life of Joh. Wicliff -- Printed with the Apology.

Treatise of the corruption of the Scripture, Counsels, and Fathers, by the
Church of Rome -- Land. 1611. qu. lb. 1688. oct.

Sufficient answer unto Jam. Gretser and Ant. Possevine Jesuits, and the
unknown author of the grounds of the Old Religion and the New. -- Printed with
the Treatise of the Corruption, etc.

The Jesuits Downfall, threatened against them by the Secular Priests for their
wicked Lives, accursed Manners, heretical doctrine, and more than Machiavillian
Policy. Oxon. 1612. qu.

Life of Father Parsons, an English Jesuit -- Printed at the end of the former
book.

Index generalis sanctorum patrum, ad fingulos versus cap. 5. secundum
Mathaeum, etc. Land. 1624. oct.

Notae ad Georgium Wicelium de methodo concordiae Ecclesiasticae, cum Catologo
authorum qui scripserunt contra squalores Ecclesiae Romanae. Land. 1625. oct.

Vindiciae Gregorianae, etc. Genev. 1625. qu.

Manuduction or Introduction unto Divinity: containing a confutation of
Papists, by Papists, throughout the important articles of our Religion, etc.
Oxon. 1625. qu.

His humble and earnest request to the Church of England for, and in the behalf
of, books touching Religion -- Pr. in one sh. in oct. 1625.

Explanation, or enlarging of the ten articles in his supplication lately
exhibited to the Clergy of England, for the restoring to integrity authors
corrupted by Papists. Ox. 1625. qu.

Specimen corruptelarum Pontificiarum in Cypriano, Ambrosio, Gregorio, M. and
authore operis imperfecti, and in jure canonico. Land. 1626. qu.

Index Librorum prohibitorum a Pontificiis. Oxon. 1627. oct.

Admonitio ad Theologos Protestants de libris Pontificiorum caute legendis. MS.

Enchiridion Theologicum. MS.

Liber de suspicionibus and conjecturis. MS. These 3. MSS. I saw formerly in
Lambeth Library, under D. 1. 2, 3. but whether printed I know not: perhaps the
Enchiridion is. He also translated from French into English The moral
Philosophy of the Stoics. Land. 1598. oct. And published Two short Treatises
against the orders of the begging Friars, written by Joh. Wicliffe: Also, as
it is said, a book intit. Fiscus. Papalis. Sive Catalogus indulgentiarum and
reliquiarum septem principalium Ecclesiarum urbis Romae, ex vet. MS.
discriptus. Land. 1617. qu. The Latin out of the MS. is set down in one Colum,
and the English in another by the publisher. This, I say, is reported to have
been published by our author James, tho others tell us that it was done by
Will. Crashaw of Cambridge. Howsoever it is, sure we are, that it has supplied
with matter a certain scribler named Henry Care in his Weekly packet of advice
from Rome, when he was deeply engaged by the Fanatical party, after the popish
Plot broke out in 1678. to write against the Church of England, and the members
thereof, then by him, and his party, supposed to be deeply enclining toward
Popery, etc. I say by that Hen. Care whose breeding was in the nature of a
petty Fogger, a little despicable wretch, and one that was afterward much
reflected upon in the Observators published by Rog. L'estrange: which Care,
after all his scribbles against the Papists, and the men of the Church of
England, was, after K. James 2. came to the Crown, drawn over so far by the R.
Cath. party, for bread and money-sake and nothing else, to write on their
behalf and to vindicate their proceedings, against the men of the Church of
England, in his Mercuries, which weekly came out, intit. Public occurrences,
truly stated. The first of which came out 21. Feb. 1687. and were by him
continued to the time of his death, which happening 8. Aug. 1688. aged 42. was
buried in the yard belonging to to the Blackfriers Church in London, with this
inscription nailed to his Coffin. Here lies the ingenious Mr. Henry Care, who
died, etc. This person I can compare to none more than to Marchemont Nedham,
whose parts tho he wanted, yet they were Weather-Cocks both alike, as I shall
tell you more at large when I shall come to that person, which will be in the
2d. Vol. As for our learned and industrious author Dr. James, he paid his last
debt to nature in his house in Halywell in the north Suburb of Oxon, in the
month of Aug. New college Chapel, leaving behind him this character, that he
was the most industrious and indefatigable writer against the Papists, that had
been educated in Oxon, since the Reformation of Religion. Which character being
made manifest by his writings, it would have been esteemed as generous an act
for the Society of that House, to have honored his relics with a Mon. and
Epitaph, as they did those of Tho. Lydiat the Mathematitian. I shall make
mention of another Thomas James in my discourse of Hen. Gellibrand, under the
year 1637.

Tho. Wakeman of Fliford-Flavel in Worcestershire, Minister of Gods word, was
born in that County, became a student of Ball. col. in the beginning of 1590,
aged 14. made Chaplain-Fellow thereof, 17. Jul. 1596. being then Bach. of Arts.
About that time entering into Orders, was a frequent preacher for some years in
these parts. At length being made Rector of Beer-Ferres, and afterward of
Charlton, in Devon. took the degrees in Divinity. He has published,

Several Sermons, as (1) The Christian practice, at S. Mary's in Oxon. on Act.
Sunday 8. Jul. 1604. on Acts 2. 46. Land. 1605. in oct. (2) Solomon's
exaltation, before the King, on 2 Cor. 2. 8. Ox. 1605. oct. (3) The Judges
charge, on 2 Cor. 19. 6. -- printed 1610. oct. (4) Jonahs Sermon and Ninevehs
repentance, at Paul's Cross, on Jonah 3. ver. 4. 5. Ox. 1606. oct. (5) The true
Professor opposed against the formal Hypocrites of these times, on Luke 10. 28.
Land. 1620. oct. and others which I have not seen, among which is a Sermon. on
Eccles. 11. 1. -- printed 1607. he gave up the ghost in September. Beer-Ferres,
on the nineteenth day of the same month, leaving then behind him several
Children, who were all in the beginning of the civil war (as the Tradition goes
there) persuaded from their Religion to that of Rome, by one Capt. Rich. Note
that one Capt. Rhead a Scot. and a Secular Jesuit perverted a minister of the
Church of England, and his family, and married his Daughter. -- So in The plot
discovered by Andr. ab Habernfield and Sir Will. Boswell to Archb. Land. about
the beginning of the Civ. War.
Read (as 'twas supposed) who quartered in the house where they lived, and
married one of the Doctors Daughters. Afterward they retired into
Worcestershire, where they, or at least their issue, now live.

Rich, Sanford of Chard in Somersetshire Gent. (descended from those of his
name in Devon) was born in Somersetshire, entered a Commoner of Ball. college,
about the time of the Act in 1581. where continuing till he was Bach. of Arts,
was then made one of the Chaplains of Magd. coll. At length having contracted a
friendship with John Digby Commoner of that House, did travel with him into
France, Spain and Italy, whereby he did much advantage himself in the modern
languages. Afterward he went in the quality of a Chaplain to the said Digby,
then known by the name of Sir John Digby, at which time he as sent into Spain
to treat of a marriage between the Infanta, Sister of the King of that Realm,
and Prince Charles of England. After his return Dr. Abbot Archb. of Cant. made
him his domestic Chaplain, and at length Prebendary of Canterbury, and Rector
of Ivychurch in Kent. He was a person of great learning and experience, and a
Solid Divine, well skilled in several languages, and a tolerable Lat. Poet. His
works are,

Gods arrow of Pestilence, sermon. on Psalm. 38. 2. Oxon. 1604. oct.

Le Guichet Francois. Janicula scu introductio ad linguam Gallicam. Ox. 1604.
qu.

A brief extract of the former Lat. Grammar done into English, for the easier
instruction of the Learner. Oxon. 1605. qu.

Grammar, or introduction to the Ital. tongue. Oxon. 1605. qu.

An entrance to the Spanish tongue -- Land. 1611. and 1633. qu. and other
things, as it is probable, with I have not yet seen. September. in sixteen hundred
twenty and nine, aged 60. and more, and was buried in the middle almost of the
north Isle, joining to the nave er body of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury.
Over his Grave was soon after laid a white freestone, with an inscription
engraven thereon; a copy of which you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon,
lib. 2. p. 199. b. wherein is mentioned his great charity to Widows, Orphans
and the Poor.

EDWIN SANDYS, Second Son of Edwin sometimes York, was born in Worcestershire,
particularly, as I suppose, within the City of Worcester, when his father was
Bishop of that Diocese, before his translation to York, admitted Scholar of C.
C. coll. in Sept. 1577. and in the year of his age 16 or thereabouts, being
then Pupil to the famous Mr. Rich. Hooker, who made use of his, and the
judgment of George Cranmer when he compiled his books of Ecclesiastical Policy.
In 1579. Jan. 23. he was admitted Probationer-Fellow of that House, being then
Bach. of Arts, and on the 17. March 1581. he was collated to the Prebendship of
Wetwang in the Church of York. Afterward proceeding in his faculty, he left
his Fellowship, traveled into several Countries, and at his return grew famous
for his learning, prudence, and virtue. In the month of May 1602. he resigned
his Prebendship, on the 11. of May 1603. he had the honor of Knighthood
conferred upon him by K. Jam. 1. and was afterward by him employed in several
affairs of great trust and moment. He was very dexterous in any great
employment, kept as constant time in all Parliaments, as he that held the Chair
did, and was esteemed an excellent Patriot in all transactions, faithful to his
Country, without any falseness to his Prince. But this I must say, that being
found factious, and too daring in the Parliament held 1621. he was with Seldom
Camden in Annal. (...) Jacobi 1. MS. sub. an. 1621.
committed to custody to the Sheriff of London, 16. June in that year, and not
delivered thence till the 18. July following. Which matter being ill resented
by the House of Commons, they on the eighth of Nov. following did dispute the
matter tumultuously, taking it for a great breach of their Privileges, that any
one of them should be imprisoned. At length Secretary G. Calvert, protesting
before them, that neither he or Seldom were imprisoned for any Parliamentary
matter, a stop was thereupon put to the dispute. What I find farther of Sir
Edwin, is that he was Treasurer to the undertakers for the Western Plantations,
which he effectually advanced, that he was a person of great judgment and of a
commanding Pen, a solid Statesman, and as my author says ingenio and gravitate
morum insignis. Farther also, that he was as famous for those matters he
published, as his Brother George was for his Travels and Poems. This worthy
Knight Sir Edwin has written,

Europae Speculum. Or, a view or survey of the state of Religion, in the
Western part of the World. Wherein the Roman Religion, and the pregnant
policies of the Church of Rome to support the same, are notably displayed, etc.
-- Written by the author at Paris, and by him finished 9. Apr. 1599. A copy of
which coming into the hands of an unknown person in England, an impression of
it full of errors stole into the world without the authors name or consent,
an. 1605. besides another the same year, or soon after. Notwithstanding which,
the book was esteemed so much by Scholars, and thereupon cried up at home for a
brave piece of ingenuity, that it was forthwith translated into French; and
printed, I think, at Paris. But as soon as 'twas finished, the printer to his
great sorrow received information that it would be called in and suppressed (as
it was shortly after) whereupon he dispersed most of the copies into remote
parts, before he did disperse any at home, and so was a gainer by his
Politics. At length after the author had taken great care that the English
impressions should be called in, and the Printers punished, he caused a true
copy thereof to be printed, a little before his death, anno 1629. From which
were printed the impressions of 1632. and 37. at London in quarto, and another
there in 1673. in oct. One copy under the authors hand, (as it is said) I have
seen in Bodlics Library, and another in that of Dr. Barlow; which, I suppose,
were dispersed to vindicate the author from spurious printed copies that flew
abroad. I find one Sir Edwin Sandys, who paraphrastically turned in English
verse Sacred Hymns consisting of 50 select Psalms of David, etc. set to be
sung in 5 parts by Rob. Tailor: Printed at Land. 1615. in qu. Whether this
version was performed by Sir Edwin Sandys beforementioned, or by another of
both his names of Latimers in Bucks, I know not. Our Sir Edwin Sandys, author
of Europae Speculum, died about the beginning of October. l. to the Univ. of Oxon
for the endowment of a Metaphysick Lecture) and was buried in the Chapter of
Nortbourn in Kent, where he had a Seat and a fair Estate joining to it. Over
his grave is a handsome monument erected, but, as I have been informed, there
is no inscription upon it. He left behind him at the time of his death at least
5 Sons, namely, Henry, Edwin, Richard, Robert, and Thomas. Who all (one
excepted) proved zealous Parliamenteers in the beginning of the Rebellion,
1642. The outrages of the Second, then called Colonel Edwin Sandys, which he
made against the Church, and the vengeance that followed him for so doing, the
common (...)
prints that in those times f^ew abroad do sufficiently testify. He published
(or rather one for him) a Pamphlet intit. Col. Sandy's travailes (...) Kent,
which gives an account of the Sacrileges and outtages he had committed for the
sake of the Blessed Parliament then sitting; and another called, His
Declaration in v^n^icati^n of himself from those calumnious aspersions cast
upon him by Lucius L. Fal^land, and Secretary Nicholas, 11. Oct. 1642. printed
at Land. 17. of the same month: Which was followed with another Pamphlet intit.
A vindication of C^l. Sandys's Honor and Loyalty, from a Declaration pretended
to be set forth by him at Worcester, 11. Oct. 1642. But whether the said
Colonel was educated in Oxon, it is not worth the enquiry, nor any thing else of
him. And therefore I shall only let the Reader know, that he died of his wounds
which he had received in the Parliaments Cause near to Worcrster, from the
hands of a Frenchman called Arnold de L'isle a Captain of a Troop of Horse in
Sir Joh. Byron's Regiment, (for which service he was soon after Knighted.)
whereupon his body was buried in the Cath. Chapter at Worcester, in the month of
Oct. 1642. I find one Edwyn Sandys, an Essex man born, and a Knights Son, to be
entered a Gent. Com. of C. C. coll. in 1608. aged 17. But this person must not
be taken to be the same with the Colonel, who was then but one or two years of
age.

Hampshire man born, was entered a Commoner in Magd. hall in Mich. Term 1615.
took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and soon after became Philosophy Reader
of Magd. coll. Which office he performing with great commendation, was elected
Fellow of that house in 1628. being then accounted by some a serious person in
his studies, devout, and strict in his conversation, and therefore a Puritan by
others. He had in him a singular dexterity in the Arts, a depth of judgment,
acuteness of wit, and great skill in the Hebrew, Greek, and Arabic languages,
which made him (...) reverenced by, the Academians. He wrote.

The trial of a Christian's sincere love to Christ, in four Sermons ca 1 Cor.
16. 22. on Ephesians. 6. ver. ult. etc. Oxon. 1630. etc. in tw. He died much
lamented in sixteen hundred twenty and nine, aged 30. Magd. coll. leaving then
be^^^^ him other things fit to be printed, as I have been informed by those
that were well acquainted with the man.

Christop. (...) of Eston-Man^uit in Northamptonshire, one of the Justices of
the Kings-(...), and a descendant from an ancient and gentile Family of his
name living sometimes at (...) in Norfolk, was born on S. Peter's day in 1566.
educated for a time (...) the Oxonians, and afterward among the Students
(...)-Inn near London; where, after some time of continuance in the degree of
Inner Barr^ster, he was elected Lent-Reader in 1606. being then accounted a
religi^us Gentleman, and a person well read in the Municipal (...). In 1613. he
was made Solicitor (...) the endeavors of Carr Earl of (...) March 1616. he
was constituted Attorney (...) that time committed Prisoner to the Tower for
denying to appear and plead publicly against his Patron Carr, in the matter of
Sir Thomas Overbury's death. In 1621. May 5. he was Camden in Annal. (...)
discharged of his office of Attorney, fined, and committed Prisoner to the
Tower again, upon a late sentence in the Star Chamber, for passing some clauses
in the City-Charter of London, when he was Attorney Genesis not agreeable to his
Majesty's Warrant. These things being mostly done by the power and aggravation
of the D. of Bucks, who hated him because he had been a friend to Somerset,
Yelverton continued where he was without any hopes of release or future
advance. At length upon some things uttered in Buckingham's care when he came
incognito to speak with, and examine, him concerning certain matters in the
Tower, he was afterward released, taken into favor, and in 1625. was made one
of the Justices of the King's Bench, and afterward of the Common Pleas, (which
last he enjoyed to the time of his death,) and had not the Duke been untimely
cut off, he would in all probability been made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.
Under his name goes,

Several Speeches spoken in Parliament. -- One of which was in answer to
matters charged against him by the Commons before the H. of Lords, in 1621.
Soon after the Lords declared that for sundry things uttered in the said Speech
which touched the Kings honor, he should be (...)
fined to the K. ten thousand marks, be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure,
and make a submission to his Majesty: And for the scandal committed in some
words against Buckingham, he should pay him five thousand marks, and make his
submission to him. Several years after his death, was published under his name
this book following.

Reports of diverse special cases in the Court of Kings Bench, as well in the
latter part of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, as in the first ten years of K.
James. Land. 1661. and 74. fol. It was printed by the original in French,
written with the authors own hand, remaining with Sir Tho. Twisden Knight, one
of the Justices of the King's Bench, and published by Sir Will. Wild Knight and
Baronet, then (1661.) Sergeant at Law, the Kings Sergeant and Recorder of the
City of London, and since one of the Justices of the King's Bench. He died near
Westminster 23. Nov. or thereabouts, 1679.

Rights of the People of England concerning impositions. Land. 1679. oct. He
also gathered and published 32 Sermons of Edw. Philips a zealous and
Puritannical Preacher, as I have told you under the year 1603. and other
things, as it is probable, of the like nature, but such I have not yet seen. He
gave way to fate in sixteen hundred twenty and nine, February,) and was buried,
I suppose, where his chief Seat was, viz. at Eston-Manduit or Maudet in
Northamptonshire, leaving then behind him a Son named Robert; and a Brother
called Sir Christopher, who was about that time one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas. From this Sir Hen. Yolverton was descended Charles Yelverton who
was called up to the House of Lords by the name of Charles Lord Gray of Ruthen,
as being the Son and Heir of Sir Hen. Yelverton Baronet, by Susan his Wife,
Daughter and sole Heir of Charles Lord Gray of Ruthen.

JOHN ELYOTT, or Elliot, ^ Cornish man born, Exeter Coll. in Mich. Term, an.
1607. aged 15 years, left the University without a degree, after he had
continued there about 3 years, went to one of the Inns of Court, as it seems,
and was made a Barrester. In 1618. May 10. he received the honor of Knighthood
from his Maj* at Whitehall, and ever after to the time of his death, was either
elected a Knight of his County, or a Burgess for some Borough therein, to serve
in all Parliaments. But so it was, that he showing himself in them an active
man for the public, a generous assertor (as he pretended) of the ancient
liberty of the Subject, and an enemy to the encroachments made by rising
Favorites, was several times committed to custody. He has going under his
name.

Several Speeches spoken in Parliament, as, (1) Speech against George Duke of
(...) and (...) grievances. (2) Sp. by way of Epilogue concerning the Duke of
Bucks impeachment. These two were spoken in 1626. and soon after he, with Sir
Dud. Digges, who spoke the Prologue to the said impeachment, were committed
both prisoners to the Tower, but soon after were released: whereupon Elyott
spoke. (3) A Sp. to clear himself as to the particulars charged against him. In
the same year he was imprisoned in the Gatehouse at Westminster. for refusing to part
with money on the Loan, and thereupon in a Petition to the King he set forth
the illegality of the said Loan, or of any Tax without a Parliament. Which way
he took, when his Council would not assist him otherwise; alleging farther
that his conscience could not submit to it, and prayed for his liberty, but
could not obtain it. (4) Speech upon the Kings giving notice to both Houses,
that he did intend shortly to end the Session of Parliament. an. 1628. (5) Sp.
against the D. of Bucks, interrupted in it by the Speaker. (6) Sp. concerning
Religion, an. 1628. This was printed in 1641. in one sh. in qu. (7) Sp. against
particular persons, spoken in 1628. and therefore a little before the
dissolution of the Parl. he, with other Members were committed to the Tower.
All which Speeches, with Certain Debates of the said Sir Joh. Elyott you may
see in the first vol. of Historical Collections, made by John Rushworth. What
more to be added, is that about the same time (1628.) was an information
exhibited against Sir John in the Court of the Kings Bench, for a sower of
discord, for his murmurings, seditions, etc. against the King, Nobles,
Prelates, etc. in Parliament, which were pleaded against by several persons on
his behalf; and that many years after his death, Car. 1. Dom. 1627. for
opposing the illegalities of that time. The said Votes passed in 1646. and no
doubt there is, but all, or at least some, of the money was paid.

John Drusius, who dedicates to him his Opuscula Gramaticalia) received his
first breath at Semeley in Wilts, his Grammatical education in Wykchams School,
and his Academical in New coll. of which he became perpetual Fellow in 1587.
being then esteemed to be well grounded in humane learning. In 1593. he
proceeded in Arts, and five years after was constituted Hebrew Professor of the
University. Afterward being promoted to the Deanary of Chichester (in the
room, as it seems, of Dr. Martin Colepeper deceased) he proceeded in Divinity;
at which time he was reputed eminent, not only for his incomparable skill in
the Oriental Sacred Tongues by men Joh. Drusius in Epist. ad Gram. Gra^. --
Ab^l Curiard. in vita and (...) Joh. (...) and ahi ultra mare -- (...) Arglus
in Epist. ad Joh. Howson De (...) -- Car. (...) in 3. lib. Epigram. etc.
unmatchable in them (worthily famoused on this side, and beyond the Sea) but
also for other learning. His writings are,

Tullius sive Rhetor, in tria stromata divisus. Oxon. 1592. octavo.

A kenning Glass for a Christian King, Sermon. on Joh. 1^. latter part of the 15.
verse. Land. 1623. oct. and other things, as it is said, but such I have not yet
seen. He died 13. Feb. in sixteen hundred twenty and nine, 1629-30.
and was buried two days after in the Cath. Chapter at Chichester. In his Deanery of
Chichester, succeeded Dr. Francis Dee of Cambridge, about that time Chancellor
of the Chat Sarum, and afterward Bishop of Peterborough.

Merionithshire, became either a Servitor or a Student of Chapter Chapter in Summer
time, an. 1590. aged 18. but left the University without a degree, having some
petty employment bestowed on him about that time. Afterward he traveled in
the latter end of Q. Elizab. and beginning of K. James into several countries
of Europe: and in Spain making a longer continuance than elsewhere, he entered
himself, if I mistake not, into the Society of Jesus at Valladolid, where he
continued a curious observer among them for some time. At length being fully
satisfied of their intregues, which tended, as he said, to worldly policy,
rather than true religion, he left, and became a bitter enemy against, them, as
well in his discourses, as writings, as it may appear in these things following.

The running Register: recording a true relation of the State of the English
Colleges, Seminaries and Cloisters in all foreign parts, together with a brief
discourse of the lives, practices, etc. of Engl. Monks, Friars, Jesuits, etc.
Land. 1626. qu.

The unmasking of all Popish Monks, Friars and Jesuits. Or, a treatise of their
genealogy, beginnings, proceedings and present state, etc. Land. 1628. qu.

Speculum Jesuiticum. Or, the Jesuits looking Glass: wherein they may behold
Ignatius (their Patron) his progress, their own pilgrimage, his life, their
beginning, etc. Land. 1629. qu.

A true Catalogue of all their Colleges, professed houses, houses of
Approbation, Seminaries and houses of residence in all parts of the World. And
lastly a true number of the Fellows of their Society, taken out of their own
books and catalogues printed with the Speculum Jesuiticum, and both at the end
of Europae Speculum, 1629. written by Sir Ed. Sandys before mentioned. This
Lew. Owen who had a rambling head, was living in sixteen hundred twenty and
nine, Clar. 1629.
but what became of him afterward, I cannot find. Besides this Lew. Owen was
another of both his names, born in Anglesie, first a Student in S. Edm. Hall
1578. afterward of Heart hall, and a Benefactor to Jesus coll.

WILLIAM HERBERT, Son and Heir of Hen. Pembroke was born at Wilton in Wilts, 8.
Apr. 1580. became a Nobleman of New coll. in Lent-term 1592. aged 13. continued
there about two years, succeeded his Father in his honors 1601. made Knight of
the Garter 1. Jac. 1. and Governor of Portsmouth six years after. In 1626. he
was unanimously elected Chancellor of this University, being a great Patron of
learning, and about that time was made Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household.
He was not only a great favourer of learned and ingenious men, but was himself
learned, and endowed to admiration with a poetical genie, as by those amorous
and not inelegant Aires and Poems of his composition does evidently appear;
some of which had musical Notes set to them, by Hen. Laws and Nich. Laneare.
All that he has extant, were published with this title.

Poems written by William Earl of Pembroke, etc. many of which are answered by
way of repartee, by Sir Benj. Rudyard, with other Poems written by them
occasionally and apart. Land. 1660. oct. He died suddenly in his house called
Baynards Castle in London, on the tenth of Apr. in sixteen hundred and thirty,
Tho. Allen of Glouc. hall) whereupon his body was buried in the Cath. Chapter at
Salisbury near to that of his Father. See more of him in the Fasti, among the
Creations, an. 1605. He had a younger brother named Philip, who was also a
Nobleman of New coll. at the same time with his brother, was afterward created
Earl of Montgomery, and upon the death of his brother William, succeeded in the
title of Pembroke. But this Philip was quite different in temper from his
brother, for he was esteemed by all that knew, or had to do with, him, a very
choleric man, a frequent Sweater, and so illiterate, that if the report be
true, he could scarce write his name. He also turned Rebel when the Civil Wars
began in 1642. was one of the Council of State by Olivers appointment after K.
Chapter 1. was beheaded, and a most passionate enemy to learning, which notoriously
appeared when he deeply engaged himself in the undoing of this University (of
which he was Chancellor) in 1648. I have seen several rambling and confused
Speeches that he, with great confidence, uttered in Parliament and Committees,
which were afterward printed under his name; and others, very witty and
Satirical, that were fathered upon him. The Reader is to know that besides the
former Will. Herbert, has been others of both his names that have been
writers, as one, who was a Knight, in the time of Qu. Elizab. an. 1586. and
another of Pointington in 1646. who dedicates his book called Herberts belief,
etc. to his Son Benjamin, and one William Har^ert who published The Prophecy of
Cadwallader, etc.

Bedfordshire man born, was admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 10 June 1587. aged
13 or thereabouts, took one degree in Arts, but whether he was Fellow of that
house, or Master of that faculty, it appears not. In his Juvenile years, he was
accounted one of the chiefest among our English Poets to bewail and bemoan the
perplexities of Love in his Poetical and Romantic writings; but when he became
Elder, he applied his Muse to the study of the sacred writ, in which faculty he
was admitted Bachelor in 1603. being then, or about that time, Vicar of
Deptford alias West Greenwich in Kent, and in 1611, he proceeded in his
faculty, being then much in esteem by the Clergy of the neighborhood, where he
lived, and reverenced by the Laity for his orthodox principles and continual
and unwearied labors in his function. His works are these.

God be thanked; Sermon. of Thanksgiving for the happy success of the English
Fleets, set forth by the company of Adventurers to the E. Indies, on Psalm. 126.
2. Land. 1616. qu.

Divine Sea service; containing sundry and useful forms of Prayer and
Thanksgiving for the help of such as travel by Sea, fitted to their several
necessities -- Printed with the former, 1616. qu.

Other Sermons, as (1) Allegiance to the Clergy, on Romans 13. 2. Land. 1616. qu.
(2) The Supper of the Lord, on Prove. 9. 5. Land. 1616. qu. Preached at
Hampton Court. (3) Cape of good hope, or Zebuluns blessing, five Sermons for
the use of the Merchant and Mariner, on Deuteronomy. 33. 18, 19. on Psalm. 95. 5. etc.
Land. 1616. qu. etc. (4) Remedy of Drought, two Sermon. on 1 Kings, 8. 35. and
Psalm. 68. 7. Land. 1616. qu.

A Manual of private devotions -- Published by Nath. Snape of Greys Inn Esquire.

Godly and learned Exposition, together with apt and profitable notes on the
Lords Prayer. Land. 1631. qu. Publ. by the said Snape.

The broken heart: Or David's penance fully expressed in holy meditations on 51
Psalm. Land. 1637. 39. and 1646. qu. He ended his days at Deptford before
mentioned, and was buried in the Church there, on the eighth day of August,
Page published a book intit. Jus fratrum, or the Law of Brethren. Printed in
oct. 1658. but whether it was written by Dr. Samuel, or Dr. William Page, or by
another, I cannot know, unless I could see the book.

Prestbury in Glocestershire, admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 30. Aug. 1586.
aged 17. or thereabouts, and Probationer 16. Apr. 1590. Afterward taking the
degree of M. of A. he entered into sacred Orders, and became a frequent Preacher
in these parts. In 1599. he was constituted Rhetoric Reader in his coll. and
the year after was admitted to the reading of the sentences. In 1608. he
proceeded in Divinity, and five years after was elected Margaret professor of
the University. Which office he executing with commendation for about 14 years,
resigned it, and receeded to the Rectory of Meysey-Hampton near to Fairford in
Glocestershire, which he had long before obtained by his predecessors guilt of
Simony, where he spent the remaining part of his days (about 4 years) in great
retiredness and devotion. He was a person for piety, strictness of life, and
sincere conversation incomparable. He was also so noted an Humanitian,
Disputant, and Theologist, and so well read in the Fathers and Schoolmen, that
he had scarce his equal in the University. Some have blasted him (I know not
upon what account) for a Schismatic, yet Dr. Ravis sometimes B. of London, and
of honorable memory, approved him to be free from Schism, and much abounding
in Science. The truth is he was a Sedentary man, and of great industry, and so
consequently (as it is observed by some) morose, and of no good nature. Also,
that he was accounted no mean Lover of the opinions of John Calvin, especially
as to the points of predestination, which is the cause why one (...) Triumph of
Truth, etc. part. 2. cap. 3. p. 62.
calls him a downright and doctrinal Calvinist. His works are these.

Doctrinae Christianae Sex capita, totidem praelectionibus in Schola Theol.
Oxon pro forma habitis, discussa and disceptata. Oxon. 1610. qu.

Appendix ad caput secundum de conciliis evangelicis, etc. adversus Humphredum
Leech. Pr. with the former book.

Eight Sermons publicly preached in the University of Oxford, the second at S.
Peter's in the East, the rest at S. Mary's Church. Began 1595. Dec. 14. Oxon.
1614. qu.

The sin against the Holy Ghost discovered; and other Christian Doctrines
delivered; in 12 Sermons upon part of the 10 Chapt. of the Epist. to the
Hebrews. Oxon. 1615. qu.

Commentary or Exposition upon the first chapter of Amos, delivered in 21
Sermons in the Par. Church of Meysey-Hampton in the Dioc. of Gloc. Oxon. 1613.
qu. Translated into Lat. by Hen. Jackson of C. C. coll. -- Openheim. 1615. oct.

Other Sermons, as (1.) The Christian Liberty, etc. on 1 Cor. 9. 19. Ox. 1613.
oct. Printed with the Commentary in English beforementioned. It was preached at
Wotton Vnderedge before the Clergy at an Episcopal Visitation. (2) Sermon. at S.
Mary's in Oxon, 24 Mar. 1610. being K. James his Inauguration day, on Psalm. 21.
6. Ox. 1611. qu. (3) The Haven of the afflicted, in the Cath. Chapter of Gloc. 10.
Aug. 1613. on Amos 3. 6. Land. 1620. qu.

Commentary or Exposition upon the 2 chap. of Amos, delivered in 21 Sermons in
the par. chapter of Meysey-Hampton, etc. Land. 1620. qu.

Praelectiones de perseverentia Sanctorum. Francof. 1618. oct.

Com. or Exposition on the third chap. of Amos. etc. Printed 1629. qu. He has
also a Latin Sermon extant, on Rev. 5. 10.* Printed in 1616. qu. which I have
not yet seen. He took his last farewell of this World, in the Parsonage house at
Meysey-Hampton before mentioned, about 24. Aug. in sixteen hundred and thirty,
Hen. Jackson Bach. of Div. of C. C. coll. before mentioned, who being a writer
also, must crave a place in the next volume.

SAMPSON PRICE, Son of Thom. Price, sometimes Chads Church in Shrewsbury, was
born there, became a Batler of Exeter coll. in 1601. aged 16 or thereabouts,
took the degrees in Arts, as a Member of Heart hall, entered into the sacred
function, as a Member of that coll. became a smart Preacher in the University
and near it, especially against the Papists, made one of the Lecturers of S.
Martins church in Oxon, afterward of S. Olaves in London, and took the degrees
in Divinity, that of Doctor being completed in 1617: About which time he was
Chaplain in Ord. to K. Jam. 1. (as he was afterward to K. Chapter 1.) and a most
ready and frequent Preacher in the Court. At length he was made Vicar of Christ
Church in London, where being much resorted to and admired, was usually styled
The Mawle of Heretics, meaning Papists, he being a most bitter Enemy (as his
brother Daniel was) in his preachings, discourses, and writings against them.
So that, as it is presumed, that party having a hatred toward them, the English
Recollect Friars at Doway, did often Lewis Owen in his Running register, pr.
1626. p. 99.
brag that this our author, and his brother Daniel, should one day either carry
faggots upon their shoulders, or be burned in Smithfield, or else recant, and
be glad to have the office to sweep their The said Friars always took Chapter
Church to be theirs by succession, because that House did belong to their
Predicessors the Franciscan Friars, commonly called the Gray Friars, before the
dissolution of Religious Houses in England.
Church (wherein they had preached false doctrine) for an everlasting penance,
and their Wives to carry out the dust and filth, etc. He has published,

Several Sermons, as (1) Londons warning by Loadicea's Lukewarmness, on Rev. 3.
15, 16. Land. 1613. qu. (2) A heavenly proclamation to fly Remish Babylon, on
Rev. 18. 4. Oxon. 1614. qu. (3) Ephesus warning before her woe, on Rev. 2. 5.
Land. 1616. qu. (4) Clearing of the Saints sight, on Rev. 7. 17. Land. 1617.
qu. (5) Beauty of Holiness, on Joh. 10. 22, 23. Land. 1618. qa. Preached in the
Chap. at the Free School in Shrewsbury, 10. Sept. 1617. at what time the said
Chapel was consecrated by the B. of Cov. and Lichfield. (6) The Twinns of
birth and death, preached at the Funeral of Sir Will. Bird 5 Sept. 1624. on
Eccles. 3. 2. Land. 1624 -- 5. qu. (7) Londons remembrancer for the staying of
the plague, on Psalm. 42. 4. Land. 1626. qu. These seven Sermons are all that I
have yet seen of his composition, and therefore I can saynomore of him, but
that he was buried under the Communion Table in the Chancel of Chapter Church
beforementioned in sixteen hundred and thirty, Edw. Finch of Cambridge,
Brother to Sir Joh. Finch, afterward Lord Finch of Fordwich. The said Dr.
Samp. Price had an elder Brother called Dr. Daniel Price, whom I shall mention
under the year 1631.

Hyckes, Son of Rich. Hicks an Arras-Weaver of Barcheston, commonly called
Barston in Warwickshire, was born within the large Parish of Tredington in
Worcestershire, particularly, as I conceive, in a Muket Town called Shipson,
matriculated as a Worcestershire man, and a Member of S. Mary's hall, in the
beginning of 1579. aged 13. and four years after took the degree of Bach. of
Arts, as a Member of that house, having had his Tutor, and his Chamber, as it
seems, in Oriel college. But before he had completed that degree by
Determination, he left the University, and was diverted by a Country
retirement. Where tho, as a plain man, he sye at his time in Husbandry, yet he
never left the true taste and relish that distinguishes men of his education,
but rather made continual improvement of that nutriment which he had received
in his younger days from the breasts of his honored Mother the Univ. of Oxon.
His study, or rather recreation, was chiefly in the Greek tongue; and of his
knowledge therein he has left unto the World sufficient Testimonies, as his
translation from Greek into Latin of (1) Certain select dialogues of Lucian,
together with his true history. Oxon. 1634. qu. Published by his Son Thom.
Hicks M. A. and Chaplain of Chapter Chapter (2) The history of the Wars of Peloponesus,
in 8 books, written by Thuciaides the Athenian. MS. in Chapter Chapter Library in Oxon.
Q. 4. Arts sol. (3) The history of Herodian, beginning from the Reign of
Emperor Marcus. MS. in the Archives of the said Libr. in qu. Given thereunto,
with the former MS. by Tho. Hicks beforementioned. Our Translat^r Franc. Hicks
having spent most of his time at Barston beforementioned, and at Shipson
adjoining, died in a Kinsmans house at Sutton in Gloucestershire, near to
Brayles in Warwickshire, on the 9. day of Jan. in sixteen hundred and thirty,
16^0-31.
and was buried in the Chancel of the Church there. As for Thom. Hicks whom I
have touched upon before, he was an ingenious man, has done something about
Lucan, and therefore shall be remembered elsewhere.

Briggius) one of the most admired Mathematicians of his time, was born in an
obscure Hamlet called Warley Weed in the large Parish of Halifax in Yorkshire;
whose Genie being naturally inclined to the Mathematics, was sent from the
Grammar School in the Vicinity of Warley, to the University of Cambridge, where
in short time he became Fellow of S. John's coll. After he had taken the degree
of M. of A. he was preser'd to be the first Geometry-Reader in Gresham coll. at
London, an. 1596. where continuing about 23 years in reading to, and improving
his auditors, Sir Hen. Savile desired him to accept of his Lecture of Geometry,
chiefly because it was not only better as to revenues, but more honoura^^^.
W^ereupon going to Oxon, 1619. and settling in (...) coll. in the condition of a
Fellow-Commoner, was soon after incorporated M. of A. and kept the Lecture to
the tim^ of his death. It must be now known, that (...) Scotch man (perhaps the
same mentioned in the (...) under the year 1605. among the ^^corporation)
coming out of Denmark into his own (...) called upon (...) Neper Baron of
Marcheston near (...) and told him among other discourses of a new (...) in
Denmark (by Longomontanus as it is said) to save the t^^ious multiplication and
division in Astronomical calculations. Neper being solicitous to know farther
of him concerning this matter, he could give no other account of it, than that
it was by proportionable numbers. Which hint Neper taking, he desired him at
his return to call upon him again. Craig, after some weeks had passed, did so,
and Neper then showed him a rude draug^^ of that h^ called, Canon mirabilis
Logarithmo^am. Which draught, (...) me alterations, he printing in 1614. it
came forthwith into the hands of our author Briggs, and into those of Will,
Oughtred, from whom the relation of this matter (...). Both which consulting
about the perfecting of it, the former took See more of this matter in the (...)
a journey into Scotland to confer with Neper about it. At length having
received some satisfaction from him, he perused the matter, and in few years
after put forth two books of Logarithms, after a more commodious method. The
first is entitled.

Arithmetica Logarithmetica. The other,

Trigonometria Britannica. The former of which shows the construction of
Logarithmetical Tables, the latter the conjunction of the Tables of Sines,
Tangents, and Secants, and the doctrine of Triangles, to the great advantage of
Astronomy and Astronomical operations. These two parts were published with this
title, Arithmetica Logarithmetica, sive Logarithmorum chiliades triginta, pro
numeris naturali serie crescentibus ab unitate ad 20,000. and a 90. 000. ad
100,000. etc. Land. 1624. fol. Besides these he has written,

Treatise concerning the North-west passage to the South Sea through the
continent of Virginia, etc. Land. 1622. and,

Commentaries on the Geometry of Pet. Ramus. MS. Which after Briggs's death
came into the hands of Mr. Joh. Greaves of Merton coll. Successor to Dr.
Bainbridge in the Astronomy Lecture, and from him to his Brother Thomas, and
from Tho. to Mr. Theod. Haak a Member of the Royal Society. At length after our
author Briggs had spent most of his time for the benefit and advancement of
Geometry, he paid his last debt to nature in his lodgings in Merton coll. 26.
Jan. in sixteen hundred and thirty, 16^0-31.
aged 70. or more, and was three days after buried at the upper end of the
Choire of the Church belonging to the said Coll. under the honorary monument of
Sir Hen. Savile: At which time the Heads of several Colleges and Halls being
present, a learned Sermon and an eloquent Oration were delivered; the former by
Mr. Will. Sellar, the other by Mr. Hugh Cross^, Fellows of that College. In
both which were many things said to the honor of the Defunct. Over his grave
was soon after a plain stone laid, neither Marble, nor Free, with only his bare
name engraven thereon; and therefore instead of an Epitaph you may take this
character of him, as it stands in the public Register of that Coll. -- Vir
doctrina clarus, stupor Mathematicorum, moribus ac vita integerrimus, etc.

JOHN ANDREWS, a Somersetshire man born, Trin. coll. 1601. aged 18. took one
degree in Arts, left the University, became a painful Preacher of Gods word,
and a publisher of these books following.

The converted Man's new birth, describing the direct way to go to Heaven, etc.
Land. 1628. oct. second edit.

Celestial Looking-glass to behold the beauty of Heaven, and the perfect way to
it. Land. 1621. in tw. There again 1638.

Andrews resolution to return unto God by repentance, etc. Land. 1621. in tw.
There again 1630.

A Caveat from God, Clar. 1630.
on S. Joh. 5. 14. Land. 1627. with other things which I have not yet seen.
When he died, or where he was buried, I know not.

WILLIAM SPARK, Son of Tho. Spark, whom Bletchley in Buc^s, became a Commoner
of Magd. hall in Lent-Term 1602-3. aged 16. Demie of Magd. coll. 5. June 1606.
and soon after Fellow thereof. Afterward, being M. of A. he was made Chaplain
to the Duke of Bucks, Rector of Bletchley after his Father's decease, Divinity
Reader of Magd. coll. and in 1629. Bach. of Div. He has written,

Vis naturs, and ^irtus vitae explicata, ad univ^^sam doctrine ordinem
constituendum. Land. 1612. oct.

The mystery of Godliness: A general discourse of the reason that is in
Christian Religion, etc. Oxon. 1628. qu. These are all that I have seen that go
under the name, and therefore I can say no more of him, Clar. 1630:
only that he was living at Bletchley in sixteen hundred and thirty. I find one
of both his names of Magd. coll. who was admitted Bac. of Physic. 3. Dec.
1645. by virtue of the Letters of the Chanc. of the Univ. which say, that (...)
deserved well for having (...) very (...) against Enemies, and contributed much
of his skill to his, and our Loyal Friends, etc. This Will. Spark, who became a
Student in Magd. coll. an. 1639. was Son to the former.

Tho. Sherley of Wistneston, commonly called Wiston in Sussex, Knight, by Anne
his Wife, Daughter of Sir Tho. Kempe Knight, was born there, matriculated as a
Member of Heart hall in the beginning of the year 1579. aged 14. admitted Bac.
of Arts in the latter end of 1581. and about the beginning of Nov. following,
he was elected Probat. Fellow of Allsouls coll. being of kin to the Founder
thereof by his Mother's side. But before he proceeded in Arts, he left the
University, and retired to one of the Inns of Court, or went to travel beyond
the Seas, or both successively. Soon after he became known to that popular
Count Robert Earl of Essex, whose heroic spirit and virtues he so much
admired, that he resolved for the future, that he should be a pattern to him in
all the civil actions of his life. The first adventure that he made was his
voyage into America, particularly to S. Jago, Dominica, Margarita, etc. an.
1596. From which voyage (wherein great valor was shown against the Portuguese)
he returned the year following. Afterward, having received the honor of
Knighthood from the said Earl of Essex in Ireland, (if I mistake not,) he went
beyond the Seas again, made long voyages, and was employed as Ambassador
several times by Foreign Princes. In which voyages his Exploits were so great,
that the K. of Spain taking an affection to, allowed, him an yearly pension,
made him Admiral of the Levant Seas, and next in place to the Viceroy of
Naples. So that his greatness making our King jealous of, he sent for, him to
return; but he refused to come, and therefore was numbered among the English
Fugitives. About that time he was known by the title of Earl of the Sacred
Empire, as having been created so, I suppose, by the Emperor of Germany, and
had from his Catholic Majesty a Pension of 200 Ducats yearly. Ever after, so
long as he lived, he showed himself so zealous a Servant to that King, that he
became a great plotter and projector in matters of state, and undertook by
Sea-stratagems, if you will believe an author Jam. Wadsworth in his English
Spanish Vilgrim, chap. 7.
of no great credit, to invade and ruin his native Country; the whole story
and passages of which, would make a just volume. He has written,

Voyage to America, -- See R. Hakeluyts third and last vol. of Voyages, Printed
at Land. 1600. p. 598, 599, etc.

Account of M. Hamets rising in the Kingdom of Morocco, Fez, etc. Land. 1609.
qu.

History of his travailes into Persia. Land. 1613. qu. Which voyage was began
24. May 1599. and is epitomized in the second vol. or part of Sam. Purchase his
Pilgrims, printed 1625. fol. in the ninth book.

Voyage over the Caspian Sea, and thorough Russia. -- Published by W. Parry,
an. 1601. involved in the Pilgrims of Purchase beforementioned.

History of his Embassages. -- See Purchase vol. 2. book 6. 9. and in Rich.
Hakluyt beforementioned. What other matters he wrote, or caused to be
published of his composition, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that
he was living in the Court of Spain in sixteen hundred and thirty, Clar. 1630.
and that he had taken to Wife, long before, Francis the Sister of Rob. Vernon
of Hodnet Knight. He had an elder Brother named Thomas Sherley, who was entered
into Heart hall at the same time with his Brother, an. 1579. aged 15. where
continuing about two years or more, was called home, married, and in 1589.
Knighted. But this person being ashamed to see the trophies and achievements
of his two younger Brothers, Anthony beforementioned and Robert a great Hero,
worn like flowers in the breasts and bosoms of Foreign Princes, whilst he
himself withered upon the stalk he grew on, left his aged Father, and, as it is
In England's Worthies, in Sussex.
said, a fair inheritance in Sussex, and forthwith undertook several voyages
into Foreign parts, to the great honor of his Nation, but small enrichment of
himself. A narration of which voyages he printed, or caused to be printed, but
such I have not yet seen. As for the youngest Brother Rob. Sherley
beforementioned, whether he was of Heart hall I know not, for his name occurs
not in the Matricula, only that of John Sherley a Sussex man, and the Son of a
Gent. matriculated as a Member of that hall in 1582. aged 14. The said Robert
(whom also I find to occur by the title of Knight) was a great man of his time,
and so highly valued by the Emperor of Persia, that he not only sent him
Ambassador to Sigismond the 3. King of Poland, as also to K. Jam. 1. of
England, an. 1612. (for he arrived Camden in Annal. Jac. 1. sub an. 1612. MS.
at London 26. June that year,) but was pleased to give him his Neice in
Marriage, and to confer upon him honor and riches. As to the general
performances of the aforesaid 3 Brothers, I know the affidavit of a Poet
carries but a small credit in the Court of History, and the Comedy made of
them, intit. The travailes of three English Brothers, Sir Thomas, Sir Anthony,
and Rob. Sherley, printed at Land. 1607. in qu. is but a friendly foe to their
memory, as suspected more accommodated to please the present spectators, than
inform posterity. The beforementioned Sir Thomas, the elder Brother and
Traveller, had a Son named Thomas, who was a Knight also, and suffered much in
the time of the Rebellion for adhering to the Cause of K. Chapter 1. of ever
Blessed Memory. And that Sir Thomas the Sufferer had to his eldest Son another
Thomas, commonly called Dr. Tho. Sherley, born in the Parish of S. Margaret
within the City of Westminster, and baptized there 15. Oct. 1638. lived, when a
boy, with his Father in Magd. coll. during the time that Oxon was a Garrison
for the King, and was bred up in Grammar learning in the Free School joining to
the said College. Afterward he went into France, studied Physic, and was
graduated in that Faculty there. After his return he became noted for his
practice therein, and at length was made Physician in Ordinary to his Maj. K.
Chapter 2. and I think Doctor of his Faculty. He has published, A Philosophical
Essay, declaring the probable causes whence stones are produced in the greater
World: From which, occasion is taken to search into the original of all bodies;
being a prodromus to a medicinal truth concerning the causes and cure of the
stone in the Kidneys and Bladder of Man. Land. 1672. oct. An account of which
book you may see in the Philosophical transactions, number. 81. p. 1030. He also
translated from Lat. into English, (1) Cochlearia Curiosa: or, the Curiosities
of Scurvy Grass. Land. 1676. oct. written by Dr. Andr. Molimbrochius of
Leipsig. An account of which book you may also see in the said Phil. Transact.
nu. 125. p. 621. (2) Medicinal Councels, or Advices. written originally in
French by Theod. Tarquet de Mayer^e, put into Latin by Theoph. Bonettus M. D.
-- Land. 1676. and translated from French into Engl. A treatise of the Gout.
Land. 1676. written by the said Tarquet de Mayerne. He the said Dr. Tho.
Sherley died of grief 5. Aug. 1678. and was buried in the S. W. Vault under
part of St. Brides Church near to Fleet street in London. His grief arose upon
a just suspicion that he should be totally defeated of an Estate in Sussex,
worth about 3000 l. per an. descended to him from his Great-Grandfather Sir
Tho. Sherley, mostly detained from him by Sir Joh. Pagge Baronet. Concerning
which matter, the two Houses of Parliament were engaged in a quarrel a little
before Dr. Sherley's death.

SAMUEL AUSTIN, Son of Tho. Austin of Lystwithiel Cornwall, was born there,
became a Batler of Exeter coll. in 1623. aged 17. took the degrees in Arts,
that of Master being completed in 1630. About which time being numbered among
the Levites, was beneficed in his own Country. He has written,

Austin's Urania: Or, the heavenly Muse, in a Poem full of meditations for the
comfort of all Souls at all times. Land. 1629. Clar. 1620.
oct. dedicated to Joh. Prideaux D. D. a favourer of the studies of the author,
then Bach. of Arts. What other things he has written or published, (besides
various copies of verses printed in Lat. and English in other books,) I know
not, nor any thing else of him, only that he had a Son of both his names, (a
conceited Coxcomb,) who endeavored to Patrizare, but through his exceeding
vanity and folly he was made use of, as another Tho. Coryate, by certain Poe^s
of Oxon in their respective copies of verses set before his Naps on Parnassus,
etc. printed 1658. as I shall tell you in my other volume of writers.

JOHN BAILEY, Son of Dr. Lew. Bailey Bish. of Bangor, was born in Herefordshire,
became a Sojournour of Exeter coll. in 1611. aged 16 years, or thereabouts,
made Fellow the year following, and by the help of a good Tutor (Dr. Prideaux)
did advance himself much in Academical learning. After he had completed the
degree of M. of Arts, he took holy orders from his Father, by whose procurement
he had one or more Benefices conferred upon him. At length being made one of his
Maj. Chaplains, and Guardian of Christ's-Hospital in Ruthym, took the degrees
in Divinity and published,

Several Sermons, Clar. 1630.
as, (1) The Angel-Guardian, on Psalm. 34. 7. Land. 1630. qu. (2) The light
enlightening, on Joh. 1. 9. -- Printed at Land. the same year. I have been
informed he had published other things, but such I have not yet seen.

Barnesius, as he writes himself, was descended from those of his name in
Lancashire, but whether born in that County, I know not, was educated for a
time in this University, but being always in animo Catholicus, he left it and
his Country, and going into Spain, was instructed in Philosophy and Divinity by
the famous Doctor J. Alph. Curiel, who was wont to call Barnes by the name of
John Huss, because of a spirit of contradiction which was always observed in
him. After he had finished his course of studies, he took upon him the habit of
S. Benedict, with a resolution then to live and dye in it; and about that time,
was sent into the Mission of England to strengthen the Brethren, but being
taken and imprisoned was sent into Normandy with certain Priests and Jesuits.
Soon after he was by his Superior sent into Lorain, where he taught Divinity in
the English Monastery of Benedictines called Dieuward or Dieuleward, and was
there by the fraternity, and others too, esteemed profound in that great
faculty, tho he cared not to make show of it, much less to have any thing of
his composition published. After he had left Dieuleward he became a Professor
either of Div. or Philosophy in Marchein college in Doway, where also he gained
to himself the name of an eminent Divine and Philosopher: Thence he crossed the
Seas, and settled for a time in England, where he fell out with his Superiors
for refusing to submit to the Union of the Spanish and Italian Monks into one
Congregation. While he continued there he wrote,

Dissertatio contra Aequivocationes. Par. 1625. oct. etc. dedicated to P. Urban
8. at which time the author was the prime person of the English Mission for
assisting the Spanish Congregation. In 1627. I find him in Oxon again in the
condition of a Gentleman and a Sojournor, to the end that he might obtain
materials from the Bodleian Library toward the composition of a work by him
then in hand, and about that time published a book against the Apostolatus
Benedictinorum in Anglia, published by Clem. Reyner D. D. and Secretary to the
Congregation of the Benedictines, an. 1626. fol. Which being esteemed a piece
savouring of too much impudence, and contradiction, if not Heresy, it was
prohibited the reading by the Brethren, and thrown aside among unlicensed and
heretical books, and soon after had a reply published against it, which in some
copies of the Apostolatus is put at the end, without a name to it, or any
naming of Barnes. It must be now known that this learned person, being a very
moderate man in his opinion, and deeply sensible by his great reading and
observation of several corruptions of the Romish Church and doctrine, which
partly were expressed in his discourse, but mostly in a book which he wrote,
called,

Catholico-Romanus Pacificus. became for that, (tho not printed) and his answer
to Apostol. so much hated by those of his Order, that endeavors were made to
seize upon, and make, him an example. Whereupon Barnes perceiving a storm
approaching, he fled to Paris, and was there protected by the English
Ambassador. But so it was, that by the endeavors of Clem. Reyner
beforementioned, and his interest made with Albert of Austria, he was I^aac
Basire D. D. in his Ancient liberty of the Britannick Church, etc. Posit. 4. p.
40.
carried out from the midst of that City by force, was divested of his habit,
and like a four-footed Ibid.
Brute was in a barbarous manner tied to a Horse, and violently hurried away
into Flanders. Where continuing for some time, was thence soon after carried to
Rome, where by command of the Pope, he was, as a contriver of new doctrine,
thrust into the dungeon of the Inquisition. Soon after being distracted in
mind, as a certain Jesuit Theop. Ranaudus in Theologia antiqua de very Martyris
ad^quate suniti notione. Lugd. 1656. p. 7.
says, was removed to a place for the reception of Madmen behind the Church
of S. Paul the less, there to continue till he came to his senses. Afterward
several copies in MS. of Cath. Romans Pacificus, flying abroad, a true copy of it
was made up by comparing it with others, and printed at the Theater in Oxon,
an. 1680. oct. Several years before that, some of the sections therein were
made use of by another Is Baf^^e in Diatrib. (...) antiquae Eccles. (...)
liberate, etc. Brugis 1676.
person, as that (1) Of Councils, Popes, Schism. (2) Of the privileges of the
Isle of Great Britain. (3) Of the Pope's Supremacy, and the Supreme Power of
Kings, both in Temporals, as also in Spirituals, etc. Our author Barnesius has
written also a Tract of the Supremacy of Councils, which I have not yet seen,
and other things; and also has translated from the Spanish, into the Latin,
tongue, Pugna Spiritualis, etc. written by Joh. Castiniza a Benedictine Monk.
It was also afterward translated into the same tongue by Jodochus Lorichius D.
D. of Friburg. -- Duac. 1625. in sixth. By those of the reformed party he, the
said Barnes, (who was living in sixteen hundred and thirty,) Clar. 1630.
is styled, the good Irenaeus, a learned, peaceable and moderate man, but by
the R. Catholics, especially by those of his Order, a person of a turbulent
and contradictory Spirit, occasioned by too much confidence and presumption of
his own parts and wit, which was greater than his humility, and so consequently
did expose him to great danger, (as they say,) of Apostasy, and disobedience to
his Superiors, as also unworthy gratitude toward some who had deserved better
returns from him. The time of his death, or place of burial, I cannot yet
obtain, nor any thing else of him, only this, that certain fierce People at
Rome, being not contented with his death, have endeavored to extinguish his
fame, boldly publishing that he died distracted.

JOHN DONE, a person sometimes noted for London, became a Commoner of Heart
hall, with his younger Brother Henry, in the beginning of Michaelmas-Term, an.
1584. being then but eleven years of age; where continuing about three years
(in which time Sir Hen. Wotton had a Chamber there) he went to Cambridge, and
spending three more there, he was transplanted to Lincolns Inn to obtain
knowledge in the Municipal Laws, where he had for his Chamber fellow, for some
time, Mr. Christop. Brook an eminent Poet of his time. After he had continued
there two years in exercising his poetical fancy, he began to survey the Body
of Divinity, wherein he made very good notes and observations. Afterward he
traveled beyond the Seas, advanced himself much in the knowledge of countries,
men, manners, and languages, and was at his return made by Egerton L. Chanc. of
England his chief Secretary, and soon after was admitted M. of A. of this
University, as I shall tell you elsewhere. But continuing not long in that
beneficial employment, he did, upon the solicitations of some of his Friends,
(especially upon the motion of K. James 1.) enter into the Sacred Function, and
not long after was made one of the Kings Chaplains, Doctor of Div. of
Cambridge, and at length in 1621. Dean of the Cath. Chapter of S. Paul in London,
upon the promotion of Dr. Val. Carey to the Sea of Exeter. He was a person of
great wit, virtue, and abilities, learned in several Faculties, and religious
and exemplary in his life and conversation. In all which, being eminent, he was
therefore celebrated, and his memory had in great veneration by the Wits and
Virtuosi of his time, among whom were Ben. Johnson, Sir Lucius Carry afterward
L. Faulkland, Sydney Godolphin, Jasp. Main, Edward Hyde afterward L.
Chancellor, En^ymion Porter, Arthur Wilson, etc. As for those things by him
written (few of which were published in his time) are these.

Pseudo-Martyr; a treatise showing from certain propositions and gradations
that those that are of the Romans Religion in England may, and ought to, take the
Oath of Allegiance. Land. 1610. qu. See more in Tho. Fitzherbert under the year
1640.

Devotions upon emergent occasions, and several steps in his sickness. Land.
1624. in tw. second edit.

An anatomy of the World. Wherein, by occasion of the untimely death of Mrs.
Elizab. Drury, the frailty and decay of this whole World is represented. Land.
1625. oct. a Poem in two anniversaries. The second anniversary is intit. The
progress of the Soul, etc. which is a Poem also.

Juvenilia, or certain Paradoxes and Problems. Land. 1633. and 1652. in qu.

Divine Poems, with Epistles to Sir H. Goodeere. Land. 1633. qu.

Poems, Songs, Sonnets, Satyrs, Letters, Funeral Elegies, etc. Land. 1633. qu.
35. oct. In which are involved Divine Poems and Epistles before mentioned; and
at the end are Elegies on the authors death.

Six Sermons. Land. 1634. qu.

Fasciculus Poematum and Epigrammatum Miscellaneorum. Translated into English
by Jasp. Main. D. D. with this title, A sheaf of miscellany Epigrams. Land.
1632. oct.

Ignatius his Conclave, or his inthronization in a late election in hell, etc.
Land. 1635. in tw. there again in 1653. An edition of this came forth in 1626.
in oct. intit. Ignatius his Conclave, viz. of establishing a Church in the Moon.

Apology for the Jesuits. -- Pr. with the former.

Eighty Sermons. Land. 1640. fol. Among which are involved the six Sermons
beforementioned. These eighty Sermons are called, The first vol. of Dr. Donns
Sermons.

Declaration of that Paradox or Thesis that self homicide is not so naturally a
Sin, that it may not be otherwise. Land. 1644. 48. etc. qu: The original under
the authors own hand I have seen in Bodley's Library, dedicated to Edward L.
Herbert of Cherbury.

Essays in Divinity, etc. Land. 1651. oct. Published by his Son John, who tells
us that they were written before his Father had entered into holy Orders.

Prayers. -- Pr. with the former.

Paradoxes, Problems, Essays, and Characters. Land. 1652. oct. In which book
are involved several, or most of the Paradoxes, Problems, etc. beforementioned.

Various Sermons. Land. 1649. fol. vol. 2.

Six and twenty Sermons never before published. Land 1660. 61. fol. This is
called the Third vol. of Dr. Donns Sermons.

Letters to several persons of honor. Land. 1651. qu. Some of which, I think,
were before printed. He had also lying by him at his death many Sermon notes,
and other papers, containing an extract of near fifteen hundred authors: All
which, as his last Legacy, he left to Dr. Hen. King, (afterward B. of
Chichester) but what became of them after that Bishops death in 1669. I know
not. He also translated from Greek into English The ancient history of the
Septuagint. Land. 1633. in tw. written originally by Aristeus. Which
translation was revised and very much corrected by another hand. -- Land. 1685.
oct. He paid his last debt to nature on the last day of March, Paul, near to
the Monument of Dr. Jo. Colet. Both whose Epitaphs, with the Pictures of their
respective Monuments, you may see in the History of that Cathedral, written by
Sir Will. Dugdale, lately Garter K. of Arms. Our Author Dr. Jo. Done left
behind him a Son of both his Names, but of none of his virtues, manners, or
generous qualities, and therefore by many his memory is condemned to utter
Oblivion, while that of his Father flourishes in the History of his life,
written by Isaac Walton; the first edition of which (printed 1653.) coming into
the hands of the best critic of the last age, I mean Jo. Hales of Eaton, he
affirmed to his friends, that he had not seen a life written with more
advantage to the Subject, or more reputation to the writer, than it.

London, educated in Grammaticals in Merchant-Taylors School, elected Scholar
of S. John's coll. 1591. aged 15. and was afterward Fellow, M. of A. and so
great a frequenter of the Pulpits in Oxon, that his name being cried up for an
excellent Theologist, became successively Rector of Taplow in Bucks, Vicar of
Asheldam in Essex, Prebendary of Sarum, D. of D. Principal of S. Edmunds hall,
Chaplain to Tho. Egerton Baron of Ellesmere L. Chanc. of England, and in
Ordinary to K. Jam. 1. Rector of Celsy in Sussex, and of Whitchurch in
Shropshire. In all which places he was much followed for his frequent and
edifying preaching, great charity and public Spirit. He has published,

Diverse Sermons, as, (1) The four Summons of the Shulamite, preached at Paul's
Cross, on Cantic. 6. 12. Oxon. 1606. in oct. (2) Fishermen Fishers of Men, on
Matthew. 4. 19. Land. 1609. qu. (3) The Romish Judas, preached on the 5. Nov.
1610. on Luke 22. 48. Land. 1611. qu. (4) Mercy to a Beast, on Prove. 12. 10.
Oxon. 1602. qu. (5) Unmasking of the Hypocrite, preached at S. Mary's in Ox. on
Luke 22. 48. Land. 1616. qu. (6) Vivat Rex. Let the King live, or God save the
King. on 1 Samuel 10. 24. Ox. 1619. qu. (7) The Dove-like Soul, on Psalm. 55. 6.
Oxon. 1625. qu. (8) Lex Talionis, on Judge. 1. 7. Ox. 1625. qu. (9) Surprising
of Heaven, on Mat. 11. 12. lb. 1625. qu. (10) The Bridegroom and Bride, on
Cant. 4. 8. lb. 1622. etc. qu. Which four last Sermons, viz. the 7, 8, 9, and
10. were all published together under the title of Qua^riga Salutis, or Four
Quadragesimal Sermons, etc. These are all the Sermons of his publication that I
have yet seen, and whether he be author of an Explication of the Creed, Ten
Commandments, and Lords Prayer, which is published under the name of Rawlinson,
in oct. I know not. He departed this mortal life in the beginning of the year
sixteen hundred thirty and one, Whitchurch in Shropshire beforementioned,
where his name continues precious to this day among the inhabitants of that
place, and in the neighborhood, In his Prebendship of Salisbury, (called
Netherbury in Ecclesia) succeeded Thom. Fuller, 18. Jun. 1631. the same who was
afterward the author of diverse historical books; and him Tho. Henchman, 17.
Aug. 1661.

JOHN BUCKRIDGE, Son of Will. Buckridge In Thesaur. coll. S. Joh. Bapt. in
(...) Presidents and ^^^ligrees of the (...)
by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Tho. Keblewhyte of Baselden, Son of John
Keblewhyte, (Uncle to Sir Tho. White the Founder of S. John's college,) and he
the Son of Henry (some say John) Keblewhyte of Fawley, was born, as I conceive,
at Draycot near to Marlborough in Wiltshire, educated in Merchant-Taylors
School, became Scholar of the said coll. in 1578. soon after Fellow, and,
through the degrees in Arts, Doctor of Divinity in the latter end of 1596.
about which time he was Chaplain to Dr. Whitgift Archb. of Canterbury. After he
had left the University I find him to have been first of all Rector of
North-Fambridge in Essex, afterward Chaplain to Robert E. of Essex, Rector of
North Kilworth in Leicestershire, Vicar of S. Giles Church without Cripplegate,
London, Archdeacon of Northampton, Canon of Windsore and Hereford, Chaplain to
K. James, and at length President of S. John's college, 1605. At which time his
eminent abilities in the Pulpit had brought him into great credit with K.
James, insomuch that he was chosen to be one of the four (Dr. Andrews B. of
Chichester, Dr. Barlow B. of Rochester, and Dr. Jo. King then Dean of Chapter Chapter
in Oxon, were the other three) who were appointed to Preach before his Maj. at
Hampton Court in the month of Sept. 1606. for the reduction of the two Melvins,
and other Presbyterian Scots to a right understanding of the Church of England.
In the performance of which service, he took for his Text these words of the
Apostle, Let every Soul, etc. Romans 13. 1. In canvassing whereof, he fell upon
the point of the Kings Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical; which he handled (as
the most rev. Arch. Spotswood, who was present at the Sermon has informed
(...) Scotland, book 7. under the year 1606. See (...) Archb. Land, printed
1671. part. 1. p. 44.
us of him,) both soundly and learnedly, to the satisfaction of all the
hearers: only it grieved the Scotch Ministers to hear the Pope and Presbytery
so often equalled in their opposition to Sovereign Princes, etc. As for the
Presidentship of S. John's coll. our author Buckridge keeping but a little more
than five years, became B. of Rochester, to which he was consecrated 9. June
1611. Afterward by the endeavors of his sometimes Pupil Dr. Laud B. of Bathe
and Wells, he was nominated B. of Ely, upon the death of Dr. Nich. Felton, (who
died 1626.) the Temporalities of which See were restored (...)
to him, 18. Jul. 1628. A person he was of great gravity and learning, and one
that knew as well as any other person of his time how to employ the two-edged
Sword of the holy Scripture, of which he made good proof in the times
succeeding, brandishing it on the one side against the Papists, and on the
other against the Puritans and Non-conformists. In reference to the first, it is
said of him in general, by a certain Dr. Fr. Godwin in Comment. de Praesulib.
Angliae in Episc. Roff.
author that he endeavored most industriously both by preaching and writing to
defend and propagate the true Religion here by Law established, which appears
plainly by his learned laborious piece entitled,

De potestate Papae in rebus temporalibus sive in regibus deponendis usurpata;
adversus Robertum Cardinalem Bellarminum. Lib. 2. In quibus respondetur
authoribus, Scripturis, rationibus, exemplis contra Gul. Barclaium allatis.
Land. 1614. in a larg. qu. In which book he has so shaken the Papal Monarchy,
and its superiority over Kings and Princes, that none of the learned men of
that party, did ever undertake a reply unto it -- Johannem itaque Roffensem
habemus (says my before mentioned Dr. Franc Godwin, etc.
author) quem Johanni Roffensi opponamus, Fishero Buckridgium, cujus argumentis
(siquid) ego video) ne a mill quidem Fisheris unquam respondebitur. With like
success, but less pains unto himself, he managed the controversy concerning
kneeling at the Lords Supper, against those of the Puritan Party; the piety and
antiquity of which religious posture in that holy action, he asserted with such
holy reasons, and such clear authorities in

A Sermon preached at Whitehall 22. Mar. 1617. touching prostration and
kneeling in the Worship of God, on Psalm. 95. 6. Land. 1618. qu. and in,

A discourse concerning kneeling at the Communion -- (printed with the Sermon)
that he came off without the least opposition of that party also. Besides which
he has published,

Sermon. preached at Hampton Court 23. Sept. 1606. on Romans 13. 5. London 1616.
qu. Another on Heb. 4. 7. printed 1618. qu. A third which is a Funeral Sermon. on
Heb. 13. 6. was printed 1626. qu. and a fourth, on the same chap. verse. 16. was
published at the end of B. Andrew's Sermons in fol. Land. 1661. The day and
place when and where this most worthy and learned Bishop died I know not, only
that he was buried in the parish Church of Bromley in Kent (the manner of which
belongs to the Sea of Rochester) on the last day of May in sixteen hundred
thirty and one. Rochester succeeded Dr. Walt. Carle, whom I shall mention
elsewhere, and in Ely Dr. Francis White the Kings Almoner.

Mounton in the parish of Lanwarne in Herefordshire, educated in Grammar
learning in Wykehams School near Winchester, admitted Perpetual Fellow of New
coll. in 1601. took the degrees in the Civil Law, that of Doctor being
completed 1613. in which year he left the coll. being about that time Chaplain
to Dr. Rob. Bennet, B. of Hereford (as he was afterward to K. James)
Prebendary of Hereford, and Parson of Ledbury in his native Country. He was an
able Civilian, but better Theologist, and much followed for his frequent and
edifying way of Preaching. He has published,

Eight Sermons preached at S. Mary's in Oxon. Paul's Cross and elsewhere. Land.
1615. qu. The first is on Luke 12. 41. The second on Isa. 28. 1. The 3. and
4th. on Matthew. 11. 19. etc. He has also extant a Sermon upon the parable of
the King that takes an account of his Servants, on Matthew. 18. 23. Land. 1609.
oct.

A short Catechism upon the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments, and the
Creed, very profitable for Children and others. Land. 1678. -- 9. oct.
published by Charles Townsend M. of A. He ended and finished his course at
Ledbury before mentioned, 8. August, in sixteen hundred thirty and one,

Sub Pedibus Doctor jacet hic in Legibus Hoskyns, Esse pios docuit, quodque
docebat erat.

The rest you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 145. 6.

Sampson Price before mentioned, was born in the ancient Borough of Shrewsbury,
and there educated in Grammar learning. In 1594. and in the sixteenth year of
his age, he became a Commoner of S. Mary's hall in Midsomer Term, but before he
took a degree in Arts, he was transplanted to Exeter coll. where by the benefit
of a diligent Tutour, he became in short time a smart disputant. After he had
taken the degree of M. of A. he had holy Orders conferred upon him, and was a
frequent and remarkable preacher, especially against the Papists. About that
time he was constituted one of Prince Henry's Chaplains in Ordinary: whereupon
taking the degrees in Divinity he was made Chaplain to K. Jam. 1. (as
afterward to (K. Chapter 1.) Dean and Canon residentiary of Hereford, Rector of
Worthyn near Cause Castle in Shropshire, and of Lanteglos in Cornwall, Justice
of the Peace also for the Counties of Shrewsbury, Hereford, Montgomery and
Cornwall. He has written and published,

The defense of truth against a book called The triumph of truth, sent over
from Arras, 1609. by Humph. Leech. Oxon. 1610. qu. He has also published at
least,

Fifteen Sermons. Among which are these. (1) Praelium and praemium. The
Christians war and reward, on Rev. 2. 26. Oxon. 1608. qu. (2) Recusants
Conversation, on Esaias 2. 3. Ibid. 1608. qu. (3) The Merchant, on Matthew. 13. 45.
46. Land. 1608. qu. (4) Spiritual Odours to the Memory of Pr. Henry, in four of
the last Sermons preached in S. James after his Highness death, the last being
the Sermon before the body, the day before the burial. The first is intit.
Meditations of Consolation on our Lamentations, on Psalm. 90. 15. The second
which has the same title is on 2 Samuel 12. 23. The third which is intit. Sorrow
for the sins of the times, preached on the third Sunday after the Prince's
death, is on Ezech. 9. 4. And the fourth which is called Tears shed over Abner,
is on 2 Samuel 3. 31. All which four Sermons were printed at Oxon. 1613. qu. (5)
Lamentation for the death of the illustrious Pr. Henry and the dissolution of
his religious family. Two Sermons on Matthew. 26. 31. Land. 1613. qu. (6) Mary's
memorial, on Matthew. 26. 13. Land. 1617. qu. (7) Hearty Prayer in the needful
time of trouble, on Psalm. 118. 25. Land. 1625. qu. These eleven, are all that I
have seen of fifteen, Sermons or thereabouts that he has published. He yielded
up his last breath at Worthyn or Worthing before mentioned on the 23. 1631*
Sept. in sixteen hundred thirty and one, and was buried in the Chancel of the
Church there. Over his Grave was a brass Plate soon after fixed to the Wall,
and thereon engraven a Latin and English Epitaph, made by a fantastical
Pedagogue. The Latin is in four verses, containing a Chronogram of the Doctors
death: the English his Dignities and Employments, which I have before
mentioned. But that which I am to let the Reader now know, is an odd story that
hangs at the tail, reported In a Funeral discourse touching the late different
deaths of two eminent Protestant Divines, at the end of the book entit.
Puritanism the Mother, sin the Daughter, etc. written by B. C. Catholic
Priest, printed beyond the Seas, 1633. oct.
by a R. Catholic Priest, but whether true or no, the Reader is to judge as he
please. -- Dr. Price (says he) by the worth of his parts and learning, was
honored by being particularly known, and respected by his Majesty, and then
afterward was made Dean of Hereford, a place of great estimation -- All his
life time he enjoying his health, showed Ib. p. 117.
himself much averse to the Catholics, and troubled diverse of them. -- In his
lest sickness he desired of his Doctor of Physic, that he would sen^ to him a
Romish Priest: whereupon he was accordingly brought. -- The Doctor told the
said Priest that he was then in judgment a Catholic, and did intend to dye a
member of that Religion. -- Whereupon he took the Sacrament, and so was
incorporated into the mystical of Christ's Cath. Church, and with a constant
resolution died a member of the holy Church, etc. Dr. Hen. Butts,
Vicechancellour of Cambridge hanged Ib. p. 139. 140.
himself in his garters in his own Chamber on Easter day, 1632. being that day
to preach to the University. But Dr. Price like a worthy and Christian
confessor of the true Catholic and Roman Religion, by means of a natural
death, we hope now enjoyes the felicity of the Saints -- Dr. Butts maintaining
( as is reported) the heretical doctrine of Predestination, in the end died a
Reprobate, and by the help of a rope, wherewith he hanged himself, does remain
in insufferable torments with the Devils, etc.

RICHARD PILKINGTON, was descended Rivington in Lancashire, but where born
(unless in the County Pal. of Durham) I cannot justly say. At about 17 years of
age he was sent to Cambridge, where continuing till after he was M. of A.
retired to Oxon, and settling in Queens coll. was incorporated in the same
degree, an. 1599. At that time being esteemed eminent in the faculty of
Theology, he was admitted in the year following to the reading of the
sentences, and 7 years after was licensed to proceed in the same faculty. In
1625. he was made Archdeacon of Leicester, in the place of Robert Johnson
deceased, being at that time the rich Rector of Hambleton in Bucks, which were
all the preferments, I think, that he enjoyed. His works are,

Parallela: Or, the grounds of the new Romans Catholic, and of the ancient
Christian Religion, out of the holy Scriptures, composed together; in answer to
a late popish Pamphlet intit. A Manual of Controversies, etc. by A. C. S. Land.
1618. qu. What else he has written I find not, nor any thing material of him
besides, only that he departed this life about the middle of Sept. Hambleton,
at which time was the most dreadfullest storm of Wind, thunder, and lightning,
as ever was known in those parts. It occasioned so great a darkness, that the
neighbors were forced to convey the Corpse to the Grave by lights at four of
the Clock in the afternoon. I have been also informed by the Rector of that
Church Dr. Fr. G. that the storm was so violent that it moved and broke some of
the stones that were to cover the Grave, and that it forced the Shovel out of
the Clerks hand, shattered it, and made an impression on the Chancel Wall, as
he had received the story from Dr. Pilkingtons servant, who then lived in the
Parsonage House. This last tho very improbable, yet certain it is that that
most unusual storm did occasion certain odd reports concerning the said Doctor,
to be made by the R. Catholics, to whom in general he had been a bitter enemy
in his preaching and writing.

Blackbourne in Lancashire, on Whitsunday 1572. educated in Grammar learning
under one Mr. Yate in the Free School, founded at that place, in the 9. year of
Q. Elizabeth: where in short time by the benefit of excellent parts, strong
memory, labor, and attention, he became the best Scholar in that school. At
about 18. years of age, he being full ripe for the University, he was sent to
Lincoln coll. about 1590. where being put under the tuition of Mr. Joh. Randal
a person then of consisiderable note in the University, he profited in Logic
and Philosophy, to the admiration of all, merely occasioned by that groundwork
of learning, that he had got at School. It was then observed that tho he was
well skilled in the Greek tongue, yet that he might obtain an exactness in it,
he did with intolerable pains write out with his own hand either all Homer or
Hesiod, in a fair Greek character. He wrote that language better than English
or Latin, and was so excellent a Disputant in it, that he did with as much
facility course (or oppose his Antagonist) in the public Schools, as in
Latin. Nay he wrote and spoke it stilo imperatorio, as Lipsius calls it, and
'twas so familiar to him, that he could not avoid it. From the said college he
removed to Brasenose purposely to get a Fellowship, because the Society thereof
consists mostly of Lancashire and Cheshire men. In the beginning of December
1596. he, as a member of that coll. took the degree of Bach. of Arts; but
having few friends, he stayed long without a Fellowship, yet because he should
not be disincouraged (for he was poor and had little to maintain him) Dr. Rich.
Brett a very good Greecian of Linc. coll. did contribute toward his relief. At
length with much ado he became Fellow in 1602. and in the same year proceeded
Master of Arts. So that growing famous, he was successively chosen reader of
the Lectures of Logic, and of Moral and Natural Philosophy in that house. In
1605. when K. James came to Oxon. the Vicechancellour appointed him to read in
Natural Philosophy in the public Schools, and to be one of the Disputants
before him. Afterward ^he grew well studied in the Metaphysics, Mathematics,
and in all School Divinity, especially in Thomas Aquinas; some of whose works
he had read over once or twice. About that time he retired to his own Country,
where he had like to have been carried over to the Church of Rome by one
Anderton his country man and school-fellow, but their meeting together to
confer about the matter being disappointed by Anderton it took no effect. This
Anderton (by the way let it be known) was, after he had left Blackbourne
School, sent to Christ's coll. in Cambridge, where for his eloquence he was
called golden mouthed Anderton: But his mind hanging after the R. Cath.
religion, he left that coll. and his Country, and shipping himself beyond the
Seas entered into R. Cath. Orders, and became one of learnedest among the
Papists. Whether this person be the same with Laurence Anderton a Lancashire
man born, and a Jesuit, who published books in 1632. and 34. I know not as yet.
As for Bolton he returned soon after to Brasnose, where falling into the
acquaintance of Mr. Tho. Peacock a learned and godly man of that house, he was
by him settled a most sober and religious person, having been before a swearer,
a Sabbath-breaker and a boon companion. In the 35 year of his age he entered
into Orders, and two years after, which was in 1609. or thereabouts, he had the
Parsonage of Broughton in Northamptonshire conferred on him by Mr. (after Sir)
Augustine Nicolls Sergeant at Law. The same year, in Dec. he was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences, and then leaving the coll. for altogether in the
latter end of 1610. the University thereby lost a singular ornament. He was a
painful and a constant preacher, a person of great zeal toward God in his
profession, charitable and bountiful, but above all a reliever of afflicted
consciences, which he acquired by that manifold experience he had in himself
and others; and grew so famous for it, that he was sought to far and near, and
diverse from beyond the Seas desired his resolution in several cases of
conscience. He has transmitted to posterity,

A discourse about the state of true happiness, delivered in certain Sermons in
Oxon, and at Paul's Cross, on Psalm. 1. ver. 1. 2. Land. 1611. etc. qu. Which,
for the godliness of the matter, and eloquence of the style therein contained,
was universally bought up, and the sixth edition of it was printed in 1631.

Instructions for the right comforting afflicted consciences. Land. 1631. qu.

Helps to humiliation. Oxon. 1631. in tw.

Sermons, as (1) Directions for walking with God, on Genesis 6. 8. 9. Land. 1625.
qu. (2) Sermon. at Lent, Assize at Northampton, on 1 Cor. 1. 26. Land. 1633. qu.
Published by his great admirer Edward Bagshaw senior. (3) Sermon. on Prove. 29. 2.
London 1635. quarto. (4) Cordial for Christians in the time of affiction, on
Micah 7. ver. 8. 9. Land. 1640. qu. etc.

Of the four last things, death, judgment, hell and heaven. Land. 1633. etc.
qu. Published by the said E. Bagshaw.

Funeral notes on his Patron Sir Aug. Nicolls Knight. Judge of the Com. Plea. Land.
1633. qu. Publ. by the said Bagshaw.

Carnal Professor: of woeful slavery of man guided by the flesh. Land. 1634. tw.

The Saints sure and perpetual guide: or, a treatise concerning the word, on
Psalm. 119. 105. Land. 1634 qu.

The Saints self enriching examination: or, a treatise concerning the Sacrament
of the Lords Sup. etc. 1 Cor. 11. 28. -- printed with the former book, viz. The
Saints sure, etc.

The Saints Soul-exalting humiliation, or Soul-fatting fasting, etc. on 2 Cor.
20. 3. -- printed also with the former book.

Devout Prayers upon solemn occasions. Land. 1638. in tw. Publ. by Bagshaw
before mentioned.

A short and private discourse between him and M. S. concerning usury. Land.
1637. qu. publ. also by the said Bagshaw. This is animadverted upon in a book
intit. Usury stated, etc. by T. P.

The last visitation, conflicts and death of Mr. Tho. Peacock Bach. of Div. and
Fellow of Brasnose coll. Land. 1661. Published also by the said Bagshaw. This
our religious and learned author Mr. Bolton died at Broughton in
Northamptonshire before mentioned, Dec. in sixteen hundred thirty and one, and
was buried two days after in the Chancel of the Church there: At which time
Nich. Estwick Bach. of Div. sometimes Fellow of Christ's coll. in Cambr. and at
that time Minist. of Warkton in the said county of Northampton did preach his
funeral Printed at Land. 1635. 39. qu.
Sermon, wherein he spoke many things to the honor of the Defunct. About two
years after Edw. Bagshaw before mentioned published his life (with some of his
works) to which I refer the reader for more satisfaction of him. He the said
Mr. Bolton left behind him a Son named Samuel, born at Broughton, educated in
Linc. coll. and afterward became an eminent preacher in London and much
followed by the precise party. After the restoration of K. Chapter 2. he was made
Prebendary of Westminster. and actually created D. of D. of this Univer. which is all
that I know of him, only that he dying on the eleventh of Feb. 1668. was buried
in the Abbey Church of St. Peter at Westminster, on the south side of the
Choire, near to the stairs leading up to the Pulpit. The Reader is now to
observe, that whereas many things were published under the name of Sam. Bolton,
he is to understand them not to have been written by this Samuel, but by
another Sam. Bolton educated in Cambridge, Master of Christ's coll. there, one
of the Assembly of Divines, 1643. Preacher to the Congregation of S. Saviors
in Southwark, in the time of the Rebellion and interval, who dying the 15.
October. 1654. aged 48 years, was buried in the Church of St. Martin within
Ludgate in London, much lamented by the Brethren of the Presbyterian persuasion.

JOHN HOWSON received his first breath in the Parish of S. Bride in London, 591^
educated in Grammaticals in S. Paul's School, became Student of Chapter Chapter in
1577. took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and some time after was made one
of the Vicars of Bampton in Oxfordshire. On the 15. May 1601. (43. Eliz.) he
was installed Canon of Chapter Chapter and in Dec. following he took the degrees in
Divinity. In the next year (1602.) he had the office of Vicechanc. of the
University conferred upon him; in which being settled, fell out a controversy
between him and certain Divines thereof called Puritans or Calvinists, who for
their number were not few. For so it was, that he, a zealous man for the Church
of England, as it was established in the time of K. Ed. 6. having heard and
beheld with patience for several years the grand enormities, committed in
Preaching by many, if not the generallity, of the Divines in the University,
was resolved, when in authority, to reform them. But his time being short, only
for an year, and his Successor not of the same mind, little or nothing could be
done. However John Sprint of his own house he called into question for uttering
certain points of doctrine against the ceremonies and discipline then
established according to Law, (which was an usual thing for many puritanical
and discontented Divines in the Univ. to bark at,) and after him Rob. Troutbeck
of Qu. college, nay the most Calvinistical Provost thereof Hen. Airay, who did
not only maintain in their Preachings what Sprint had said and done, but also
spoke many things to the disgrace of the Vicechancellour: Among which was, that
he had to no other end and purpose got the degrees of Bach. and Doct. of
Divinity, without exercise done for them, only but that he might sooner obtain
the Vicechancellourship, and consequently show his authority in unjust
proceedings, etc. From that time there were continual broils during his
government; which being too many now to enumerate, and partly mentioned In
Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Ox. lib. 1. p. 30^. b.
elsewhere, I shall forbear to treat any farther of them. Afterward our author
Howson was made Rector of Brightwell near to Watlington in Oxfordshire, Fellow
of Chelsey coll. and at length Bishop of Oxon. To which See being elected 12.
Sept. 1618. was consecrated at Lambeth with Searchfield B. of Bristow, and
Bridgman of Chester on the 9. of May following. In 1628. Sept. 18. he was
translated to the Sea of Durham, (in the place of Dr. G. Mountaigne translated
to York,) where he remained to his dying day, having always before been
accounted a grave and learned man, and a true Son of the Church of England. His
works are,

Several Sermons, as, (1) Sermons Preached at S. Paul's Cross 4. Dec. 1597, on
Matthew. 21. 12, 13. wherein is discoursed, that all buying and selling spiritual
promotion is unlawful. Land. 1597. qu. (2) Second Sermon. Pr. at S. Paul's Cross
21. May 1598. on Matthew. 21. 12, 13. concluding the former Sermon. Land. 1598.
qu. (3) Sermon at S. Mary's in Oxon 17. Nov. 1602. in defense of the
Festivities of the Church, and namely that of her Maj. Coronation, on Psalm.
118. 24. Oxon. 1603. second edit. qu.

Vxore dimissa propter fornicationem, aliam non licet superinducere. Thesis
tertia proposita and disputata in Vesperiis Oxon. Oxon. 1602. oct. and 1606.
qu. The defense of which Thesis, see in Rob. Burhill, under the year 1641.

Certain Sermons made in Oxon, an. 1616, wherein is proved that S. Peter had no
Monarchical Power over the rest of the Apostles, against Bellarmine, Saunders,
Stapleton, and the rest of that company. Land. 1622. qu. They are four in
number, and all on Luke 12. 41, 42. etc. commanded to be published by K. James,
to clear the aspersion laid upon him of favoring Popery; which having not been
yet replied upon by any of the Romans Cath. party, have rendered their author
famous to posterity. He yielded up his last breath on the sixth day of Febr. in
sixteen hundred thirty and one, 1631/2.
aged 75. or thereabouts, and was buried in the Cath. Church of S. Paul within
the City of London, leaving then behind him the character of a very learned
man, and one plentifully endowed with all those virtues, which were most proper
for a Bishop. The Reader is to know that there was one John Howesoun who wrote,
A short exposition of the 20. and 21. verses of the third chapter of the first
Epistle of St. John containing a profitable discourse of Conscience. Edinb.
1600. oct. but him I take to be a Scot, and to have no relation to Joh. Howson
beforementioned.

DUDLEY CARLETON, Son of Anth. Carleton Baldwin Brightwell near Watlington in
Oxfordshire Esquire was born there, 10. March 1573. became a Student of Chapter Chapter
under the tuition of Mr. (afterward Dr.) John King an. 1591. or thereabouts,
took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed 1600. being then
returned from his travels. Afterward he went in the quality of a Secretary to
Sir Ralph Winwood into the Low Countries, where being very active when K. James
resigned the Cautionary Towns to the States, added thereby experience to his
learning. In 1610. June 25. he received the honor of Knighthood from K. James
at Windsore, who sent him Lib. certific. in Offic. Armorum, J. 8. fol. 32. b.
Ambassador Ordinary to the States of Venice, where he remained five years, and
from thence Extraordinary to Emanuel Duke of Savoy, where he continued half an
year; and after Ord. Ambassador to the States of the United Provinces, where he
was resident 10 years. Toward the latter end of K. James he was made
Vicechamberlain of the household, which office he holding in the Reign of K. Chapter
1. his commission was renewed by that King for the latter part of that 10
years. Afterward, that time being terminated, he was sent Ambassador
Extraordinary at two several times to the most Christian K. Lewis the 13. and
likewise Ambassador Extraordinary to the aforesaid States of the United
Provinces. In the 2. of K. Chapter 1. he was made Baron of Imbercourt in Surrey,
and the next year being accompanied by Sir Will. Segar Knight, then Garter K.
of Arms, went into Holland and there presented the Garter to Henry Pr. of
Aurange, or Orange, with the Ensigns of that most noble Order thereunto
appertaining. In the 4. Car. 1. he was created Viscount Dorchester in
Oxfordshire, and upon the 18. Dec. the same year, he was constituted one of his
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, in which office he continued to the
time of his death. He was a person that understood several Languages well, as
also the Laws, conditions, and manners of most States in Europe. He was an
exact Statesman, understood the intregues of State well, yet just in his
dealings, and beloved by most men, who much missed him after his death. He has
written,

Balance, pour peser en toute equite and droicture la Harangue faite n'agurees
en L'assemblee des illustres and puissans Seignoures Messeigneurs les Estats
generaux des Provinces unies du pais bas, etc. Printed 1618. qu.

Harangue faite au counseile de Messrs. les Estats generaux des Provinces
Vnies, touchant le discord and les troubles del Eglise and la police, causes
par la doctrine d'Arminius, 6. Oct. 1617. still. nov. Printed with the former.
Besides these Speeches he has extant Various Letters in the Cabala, or Scrinia
sacra. Land. 1663. fol. Various Letter's to George Duke of Bucks, in Cabala, or
Mysteries of State. Land. 1654. qu. and lastly, Several French and Latin
Letters to the learned Ger. Jo. Vossius, printed in Ger. Jo. Vossii and
Clarorum Virorum ad eum epistolae. Land. 1690. fol. published by Paulus
Colomesius. Besides these, he has also Several Speeches in Parliament, an.
1626. etc. One or more of which you may see in the first vol. of Joh.
Rushworths Collections, p. 358.

Memoires for dispatches of political affairs relating to Holland and England,
and 1618. with several propositions made to the states. MS.

Particular observations of the military affairs in the Palatinate and the Low
Countries, an. 1621. and 1622. MS.

Letters relating to State affairs written to the King and Viscount Rochester,
from Venice, an. 1613: MS. He paid his last debt to nature in his house
situated within the City of Westminster on the 15 day of Febr. between 10. and
11. 1631-2.
of the clock at night in sixteen hundred thirty and one, and was buried in the
Chapel of S. Paul on the north side of the Abbey Church, dedicated to S. Peter
within the said City. Over his grave was soon after erected against the east
Wall, a well composed plain Monument of black and white Marble, with a half
canopy supported by dorick Pillars, with the image of a man in his robes of
estate, and Viscounts Coronet, leaning on a Pedestall, all formed of the like
black and white marble. He left behind him a Nephew of both his names, who was
admitted Scholar of Kings coll. in Cambridge, 1614. and had the degree of
Master of Arts of that University conferred upon him during his absence in the
Low Countries, being then Secretary to his Uncle, while he was Ambassador
there. In 1629. March 1. he received the honor of Knighthood from his Majesty
at New Market, and in 1637. he was made one of the Clerks of the Council.

Bloys in France, educated mostly in the University of Saumour, retired to Oxon
to improve his studies by the hearing and doctrine of Dr. John Prideaux, an.
1623. was incorporated master of Arts in October. the same year, as he had stood
at Saumour, being about that time entered a Sojournour of Exeter coll. (of which
house Prideaux was then Rector) and numbered among the Academians. Soon after he
was admitted to the reading of the Sentences, as a member of the said college,
being at that time reputed Vide in Charisteriis Degrees. Wheari, Edit. Ox. 1628. p.
119.
to be a person of great erudition, singular piety, and of a most polite
ingenie. After he had tarried there for some few years, he returned to the
place of his nativity, where he became a zealous Minister of, and preacher to,
the Protestant Church. Before he came to Oxon, he published,

Theses Theologicae de satisfactione dei and domini nostri Jes. Chapter etc. Lugd.
Bat. 1622. qu. Highly commended by And. Rivet, and by him annexed to his own
disputations. After he had left Oxon. he published several Sermons in the
French tongue, as. (1) L'Art de bien mourir, on Luke 2. 25. etc. Rochel 1625.
oct. (2) La mere Ecclesiastique, on Gal. 4. 19. (3) De la priere pou les Rois
and Magistrates, on 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. (4) Le Trisagion, on Esaias 6. 1, 2, 3. (5) De
la chente des Auges, etc. on the 6. ver. of S. Jude. (6) Two Sermons at Bloys,
on Rev. 2. 12. (7) Sermon. of the call, confirmation and authority of the
Ministers of the Gospel, on Joh. 20. ver. 21. 22. (8) Panegyrique de la paix,
on Psalm. 122. All which were printed at Rochel 1625. in oct. (9) Practique de
repentance, twenty Sermons on Psalm. 51. Clar. 1631.
Bloys 1631. oct. Besides several others which I have not yet seen. This Nich.
Vignier, who was Minister of the Protestant Church at Bloys before mentioned,
was Son of Nich. Vignier of Bar on the river Seen, a learned Frenchman,
Physician and Historiographer to the K. of France, while our Qu. Elizab.
reigned and after; several of whose works are in our public Library at Oxon.
Among which are. (1) Theater de l' Antichrist, etc. printed 1610. fol. (2)
Dissertatio de Venetorum excommunicatione contra Caes. Baronium. Franc. ad. m.
1607. qu. Which two books are said by a certain Edw. Leigh in his Treatise of
religion and learning, etc. Land. 1656. fol. lib. 6. cap. 5.
author, but false, to have been written by N. Vignier the Son.

Leonard Calvert by Alice his Wife, Daug. of John Crossland of Crossland, was
born at Kypling in the Chappelrie of Bolton in Yorks. (at which place he
bestowed much money in building in the latter end of the Reign of K. Jam. 1.)
became a Commoner of Trinity coll. in Lent Term 1593, and in the year of his
age 15. took one degree in Arts, and then leaving the college, traveled beyond
the Seas for a time. At his return he was made Secretary to Sir Rob. Cecill,
while he was one of the prime Secretaries of State, being then esteemed a
forward and knowing person in matters relating to the State. All which time,
and after, for several years, when Sir Robert was advanced to higher offices he
retained him, and made use of his prudence and faithfulness in many weighty
matters. In 1605. he was actually created Master of Arts when K. Jam. 1. was
entertained by the University. Afterward by the endeavors of the said Sir
Robert Cecill, he was made one of the Clerks of the Council, and in 1617. Sept.
29. he, with Cl. Edmonds sometimes of Alls. coll. Albert Morton (whom I shall
anon mention) both Clerks of the Council also, received the honor of
Knighthood from his Majesty at Hampton Court. On the 15. February 1618. he was
made Gul. Camden. in Annal. Reg. Ja^. 1. MS. sub. an. 1619.
Secretary of State to his Majesty; who, as before he had used his help in many
matters of moment, so he did oftener afterward to his great benefit and
advantage. At the same time also his Majesty judged it very convenient that he
should assist and help Sir Robert Nauton the other Secretary, who had not then
that faculty of managing and expediting matters of State as Calvert had. On the
2 May 1620. the King gave Ibid sub. an. 1620.
him an yearly pension of a thousand pounds to be received from the Customs,
and on the 16 Feb. 1624. (he being then a Parliamentary Burgess for this
University) was by the name of Sir George Calvert of Danbywiske in Yorkshire
Knight, etc. created Baron of Baltimore in the County of Longford in Ireland,
being then a Roman Catholic, or at least very much addicted to their Religion.
As for his adventures into America, where he was absolute Lord and Proprietary
of Avalon in the New-foundland, and of his first venturing and taking
possession of a Peninsula lying in the parts of America, between the Ocean on
the East, and the Bay of Chesopeake on the West, and divided from the other
part thereof by a right line drawn from the Promontory or Cape of Land called
Watkyns point (situate in the aforesaid Bay, near to the River Wighco) on the
West, unto the main Ocean; afterward called and named by him Maryland, let
the Histories, and relations of Travelers tell you, while I acquaint you of
his works, which are,

Carmen funebre in D. Hen. Vntonum, ad Gallos bis Legatum, ibique nuper fato
functum* Printed 1596. qu.

Parliamentary Speeches.

Various Letters of State.

The answer of Tom Tell-Troth. The practice of Princes and the Lamentation of
the Kirk. Land. 1642. qu. He has also written something concerning Maryland,
but whether printed I cannot tell. He ended his days on the 15. Ap. in sixteen
hundred thirty and two, Dunstan in the West in Fleetstreet, near London. As for
Albert Morton before mentioned, who was Nephew to Sir Henry Wotton, was elected
Scholar of Kings coll. 1602. went with his Uncle in the quality of Secretary
when he went on his Embassy to the States of Venice. Afterward he was thrice
Agent in Savoy, Secretary to the Lady Elizabeth in Heidleburg, and there
employed as Agent Martii 10. an. 1620. Albertus Morton rediit e Germania, and
Rex. ( Jac. 1.) eo die non admisit. It^ Camdenus in Annal. R. Jac. 1. MS.
for the King with the Princes of the Union. Afterward he became one the
Clerks of the Council and a Knight as I have before told you, and at length one
of the Secretaries of State. He ended his days in the Parish of S. Margaret
within the City of Westminster in the winter time (in Nov. as it seems) an.
1625. having a little before been elected a Burgess to serve in Parliament for
the Univ. of Cambridge. He then left behind him a Widow named Elizabeth, by
whom he had, if I mistake not, a Son of both his names, who was elected Scholar
of Kings coll. in the said University 1638. but left that house soon after, and
became a Leiuetenant Colonel in the Wars in Ireland.

NATHANIEL TORPORLEY, a Shropshire Chapter Church, an. 1579. aged 16. about which
time he became one of the Students of that house. Afterward he took the degree
of Bach. of Arts, which being completed by Determination, he left the
University, and whether he then traveled beyond the Sea I cannot tell. For
that he was in France for two or more years, and was Amanuensis to the
celebrated Mathematician Fran. Vieta of Fontenay in the Province of Poictau is
notoriously known, but the time when, whether before, or after, he was M. of A.
we cannot tell. Sure it is that his Genie being mostly inclined to the
Mathematics and Astronomy, (in which faculties he had obtained in his absence,
a sufficicient knowledge) he returned to the University, and entering himself
into Brasnose coll: did as a member thereof, take the degree of Master of Arts,
an. 1591, being then eight years standing in that of Bachelaur. Afterward he
retired to the great City, and became so famous for his singular knowledge,
that being made known to the great Earl of Northumberland, named Henry Piercy,
the generous favourer of all good learning, was received into his Patronage,
and had a pension paid yearly unto him, for several years from his Purse. About
the same time he was made Rector of Salwarp in his native Country, in the place
of Tho. Forest deceased, 1608. where residing sometimes, but mostly in Sion
coll. in London, (of which he was a Student and a most eminent member)
continued in the last, till the time of his death. He has transmitted to
posterity.

Diclides Caelometricae; seu Valvae Astronomicae universales omnia artis totius
munera Psephophoretica in sat modicis finibus duarum tabularum methodo nova,
generali and facilima continentes. Lib. 2. Land. 1602. qu.

Tabula praemiss^is ad declinationes and caeli mediationes. Printed with the
former book, in five parts.

Directionis accuratae consummata doctrina, Astrologis hac tenus plurimum
desiderata. Written by way of Preface to the two former books. He has also
printed something against Fr. Vieta, under the name of Poulterey, which is
Torpurley's name transposed, but that book I have not yet seen; and has also
written, MSS. in Bib. coll. Sion.
Congestor: Opus Mathematicum. Imperfect. Pholosophia. Atomorum atopia
demonstrata. Imperfect. Corrector Analyticus artis posthumae. Imperfect.


He took his last farewell of this world in Sion coll. before mentioned, and was
buried in the Church of St. Alphage near to that college, on the seventeenth
day of Apr. in sixteen hundred thirty and two. In the Will-office near S. Paul's
Cath. Chapter in reg. Swan, part 1. Qu. 65.
Will, which he spoke on the 14. day of the same month, he gave to the use of
those that study in the Library of the said coll. all his mathematical books
and others, all his Astronomical instruments, notes, mapps and his brass clock.
Among the said books, were some few MSS. of which one contained Certain
definitions of the Planisphere, made by Walter Warner a most noted
Mathematician of his time.

Caermerthen in Wales, but in what house educated, unless in Exeter coll. or
what degrees he took in Arts, I find not, only that as a member of the said
coll. he was admitted to the reading of sentences, an. 1611. being about that
time Minister of Evesham, in Worcestershire, Chaplain to Prince Henry, and
Minister of St. Matthews Church in Friday-street, in London, and that he
proceeded in Divinity two years after. Much about the same time, he being famed
for his eminence in preaching, was made one of the Chaplains to King James 1.
who nominating him Bishop of Bangor in the place of Dr. H. Rowlands, was
consecrated thereunto at Lambeth, with Dr. Lake to the Sea of B. and Wells, on
the 8. of Dec. an. 1616. On the 15. July 1621. I find this In. Annal. Reg. Jac.
1. ^t supr^, sub. an. 1621.
passage of him. Episcopus Bangoriensis examinatur, and in Le Fleet datur, sed
paulo post liberatur. What his crime was, my author tells me not, nor do I lift
further to inquire, unless it concerned the Princes match with the Infarta of
Spain. He has published.

The practice of Piety; directing a Christian how to walk that he may please
God. -- Printed about 40 times in oct. and tw. the eleventh edition of which
was printed at Land. 1619. It was also printed once or more in the Welsh
tongue; and once or more in the French, an. 1633. etc. And in France having
been much cried up, did therefore cause John Despagne a French writer, and a
Preacher in Somerset House Chapel, an. 1656. to make some complaint of, not
for any ill thing in, it, because the generality of the Plebeians do look upon
the authority of it, equal with that of the Scripture. It is said by an author,
Lu^ov. Molinaeus in lib. suo cui tit. est, Patronus bonae fidei, etc. edit. in
oct. an. 1672. in cap. continent. Specimen contra Durellum, p. 48.
who takes all advantages to speak against the Bishops, and Church of England,
that this book called, The practice of Piety, was written by a Puritan
Minister, and that a Bishop not altogether of a Chaste life, did, after the
Authors death bargain with his Widow for the Copy, which he received, but
never paid her the money. Afterward he interlopating it in some places, did
publish it as his own, etc. But let this report, which has been common with
some, as also that, which says it was written by one Price Archdeacon of
Bangor, remain with their authors, while I tell you that Dr. Bailey dying in the
beginning of the year sixteen hundred thirty and two, was buried in his Church
of Bangor. Nicholas, John, Theodore and Thomas. John was Fellow of Exeter coll.
and a publisher of certain Sermons, as I have already told you. Thomas Bailey
the youngest Son, was not educated in this University, but in Cambridge, and
after he had taken the degrees in Arts, he was presented by his Majesty to the
Sub-deanry of Wells, in the latter end of May 1638. upon the promotion of Dr.
Will. Roberts to the Sea of Bangor. In 1644. he, among other Loyal Ministers,
retired to Oxon, and in the month of Aug. was incorporated Master of Arts, and
afterward had the degree of D. of D. conferred upon him. In 1646. I find him
with the Marquess of Worcester in Ragland Castle, which, as a
Commission-Officer, he helped to defend against the Parliamentarians. But that
Castle being surrendered on the 19. Aug. the same year, upon good Articles,
mostly of Bayly's framing, he traveled afterward into France and other
Countries, where spending that considerable stock of money which he had gotten
from the said Marquess, he returned into England, and published a book intit.
Certamen religiosum: or a conference between K. Chapter 1. and Henry late Marquess
of Worcester concerning Religion, in Ragland Castle, an. 1646. Land. 1649. oct.
but blamed by the true Sons of the Church of England for so doing, because the
Romish cause is there set out in great pomp, he being then warping toward, if
not altogether drawn over to, the Church of Rome, and it was looked upon by
some as nothing else but his Prologue in order to the declaring himself a
Papist, and thereupon the said conference was suspected by the Orthodox party
to have nothing therein of the style of K. Chapter 1. and that the Marquess had not
those abilities in him to maintain a discourse of religious matters with the
said King. There was An answer with considerations on Dr. Bayly's parenthetical
interlocution, printed at Land. 1651. in tw. made unto it, by Ham. L'estrange,
and also answered upon account as being fictitious by Christop. Cartwright of
York. About the same time an Advertisement was put cut against it, as a
counterfeit thing, by Dr. Pet. Heylyn, in his Epistle to the Reader before his
collection of his Majesty's works (wherein the said conference is put) intit.
Bibliotheca Regia, etc. but omitted in other impressions of it, as also in the
works of the said King printed in folio. The same year (1649.) Dr. Bailey
published, The Royal Charter granted unto Kings by God himself, etc. To which
he added, A treatise wherein is proved that Episcopacy is jure divino. Both
which were afterward reprinted at Land. 1656. and 1680. oct. But in them the
Doctor does in many particulars egregiously See the Errors in a book called
Legenda lignea, etc. printed at London 1653. in oct. chap. 37. p. 165. 166.
err, and as an unskilful builder, diruit aedificat, for what he rears with one
hand, he pulls down with the other: And amongst many stories of his travels,
having freely railed at all the Commonwealths in Europe, does at last fall
desperately on the new erection of that in Eng. Which angry and unpleasing
history provoked strict examination; whereupon the author being found out, he
was committed prisoner to Newgate, where being kindly and easily used he penned
a book intit. Herba parietis: Or, the wall Flower, as it grows out of the
Stone-Chamber belonging to the metrapolitan Prison, etc. being a History which
is partly true, partly Romantic, morally divine. Whereby a marriage between
reality and fancy is solemnized by Divinity. Land. 1650. in a thin fol. In the
Epistle before which he falls foul on P. Heylyn, whom he calls a fellow without
a name, etc. for his advertisement before mentioned, which charged him with six
matters; the first for wronging the late K. ( Chapter 1.) very much, and another
that he composed the said Conference himself, etc. Bailey also tells us there of
his great sufferings in the late Civil War, that he had not only lost 1000 l.
per an. for his Majesty's sake, but also blood and liberty, that he was a Peers
Son and his Mother a Knights Daughter, etc. As soon as this book was published,
he made an escape out of Prison, went into Holland, and having rambled abroad,
much more in his mind, than he had in his body, he at last declared himself a
Romans Catholic, and became a grand zealot in that interest, wherein (if he met
with any occasion) he would break forth into rage and fury against the
Protestant Religion, which he before had preached and professed. Thence he went
into Flanders, and settling for a time at Doway, he published this book. The end
to Controversy between the Romans Catholic, and Protestant, Religions,
justified by all the several manner of ways, whereby all kind of Controversies
of what nature soever, are usually, or can possibly be, determined, etc.
printed at Doway 1654. in qu. and dedicated to Walt. Montague Abbot of Nanteul,
afterward L. Abbot of Pantoise. There also goes under his name. The life and
death of that renowned John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, etc. Land. 1655. oct.
but he was not the author of it. The true and genuine writer thereof was one
Rich. Hall, D. D. sometimes of Christ's coll. in Cambridge (the same, of which
B. Fisher was a member) afterward Canon, and Official of the Cathedral Church
at St. Omer, who leaving it behind him in MS. at his death, an. 1604. 'twas as
a choice rarity reposed in the Library of the English Benedictines at Dieuward
in Lorain. Afterward several Copies of it going abroad, one came into the
hands of a person who called himself West. From him it came into the possession
of Franc. a Sancta Clara, an 1623. and from his (as he himself has told me
diverse times) to Sir Wingfield Bodenham, who keeping it in his hands several
years, with an intention to print it in the name of the true author, did impart
it for a time to Dr. Tho. Bailey. So that forthwith he taking a Copy of it, and
making some alterations therein, he sold the said Copy to a Bookseller for a
small sum of money, who caused it to be printed at London, under the name of
Tho. Bailey D. D. I have seen a MS. containing the said Bishops Life, beginning
thus, Est in Eboracensi comitatu, octogesimo a Londino lapide ad aquilonem
Beverleiae oppidum, etc. But who the author was, I cannot tell: 'Twas written
before Halls time, and it is not unlikely, but that he had seen it. There also
goes under Tho. Baylys name The golden Apothegmes of King Chapter 1. and Henry
Marquess of Worcester, etc. Land. 1660. in one sh. in qu. All which were taken
from a book intit. Witty Apothegmes delivered at several times and upon several
occasions by K. James, K. Chapter 1. and the Marq. of Worcester, etc. Land. 1658.
oct. published by Anonymus. After Dr. Bailey had left Flanders, he went into
Italy, where, as several Romans Catholics have told me, he was received into the
service of Cardinal Ottobon, and that he died in his family, while the said
Cardinal was Embass. or Nuntio at Ferrara from the Pope, and also that Prince
Cajetan had a care of his Son (whom he took with him) after his death. But an
English Traveller has told me otherwise, viz. that he was no other than a
common Soldier, that he lived poor at Bononia, and saw his Grave there. Another
also named Dr. Rich. Trevor Fellow of Morton coll. (younger brother to Sir John
Trevor sometimes Secretary of State) who was in Italy in 1659. has several
times told me that he the said Dr. Bailey died obscurely in an Hospital, and
that he saw the place where he was buried.

Shrewsbury, became a Servitour or Clerk of Aills. coll. in 1594. aged 19. took
the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and afterward was made preacher at S. Mary's
in the said Town of Shrewsbury, where he was much resorted to by precise people
for his edifying and frequent preaching. He has published,

The sum of Christian Religion by way of Catechism. Land. 1630. and 37. oct.

Certain Prayers -- And left behind him at the time of his death, Several
Sermons to be made public, but whether they were printed I cannot tell. One of
both his names, was summer Reader of Lincolns Inn 18 Car. 1. afterward
Sergeant at Law, one of the Justices of the Common Bench, and one of the
Commissioners of the Great Seal, in the time of Usurpation, but what he has
extant, I cannot tell. He died in the beginning of the year 1668. being then a
Knight, and a possessor of Lands at Arlesbury in Bedfordshire.

THEODORE GOULSON, Son of Will. Goulson Wymoundham in Leicestershire, received
his first breath in the County of Northampton, became Probationer Fellow of
Merton coll. in 1596. applied his Muse to the study of medicine, after he had
been adorned with the Majesterial degree; in the practice of which, having been
initiated in these parts, lived afterward at Wymoundham; where, as in the
neighborhood, he became famous in, and much frequented for, his faculty. At
length taking the degrees of Physic in this University, an. 1610. was made a
Candidate of the Coll. of Physicians at London, and the year after Fellow
thereof, and afterward Censor, being at that time in great esteem for his
practice in the metropolitan City. He was an excellent Latinist, and a noted
Grecian, but better for Theology, as it was observed by those that knew him. He
has published,

Versio Latina, and Paraphrasis in Aristotelis Rhetoricam. Land. 1619. 1623.
etc. qu.

Versio, variae Lectiones, and annotationes criticae in opuscula varia Galeni.
Land. 1640. qu. published by his singular good friend Tho. Gataker Bac. of Div.
of Cambridge, and Rector of Redrith in Surrey, who died 27. July 1654 and was
buried in the Church at Redrith, after he had governed it 40. years. As for our
author Goulson he ended his days in his house within the parish of S. Martin by
Ludgate within the City of London, May, in sixteen hundred thirty and two:
whereupon his body was buried with solemnity in the Church belonging to that
parish. By his will, which I have seen and perused, he bequethed 200 l. to
purchase a rentcharge for the maintenance of an Anatomy Lecture in the coll.
of Physicians at London, as also several books to Merton coll. Library, besides
other donations, which were mostly, if not all, performed by his virtuous and
religious Widow Ellen Goulson; of whom by the way I must let the reader know,
that she being possessed of the impropriate Parsonage of Bardwell in Suffolk,
did procure from the King leave to annex the same to the Vicaridge, and to make
it presentative: which being so done, she gave them both thus annexed (for she
had the donation of the Vicaridge before that time) freely to S. John coll. in
Oxon.

LEONARD HUTTEN, was elected from Westminster School, a Student of Chapter Church,
in 1574. wherein, with unwearied industry, going through the several Classes of
Logic and Philosophy, became M. of A. and a frequent preacher. In 1599. he was
installed Canon of the said Church, being then Bach. of Divinity and Vicar of
Flower in Northamptonshire, and in the year after he proceeded in that faculty.
His younger years were beautified with all kind of polite learning, his middle,
with ingenuity and judgment, and his reverend years with great wisdom in
government, having been often Subdean of his house. He was also an excellent
Grecian, well read in the Fathers and Schoolmen, which was sufficiently
approved by the consent of the University, and not meanly versed in the
histories of our own Nation. He has written,

An answer to a Treatise concerning the Cross in Baptism. Oxon. 1605. qu. Which
book was held in reverent respect by the best Bishops of the Church, as having
the Fathers agreeing to Scripture truly urged, and understandingly interpreted
therein. See in Jam. Calfhill and John Martial. I have been informed by one
Dr. (...) Canon of Chapter Church, aged 7^. an. 1670.
who knew this Dr. Hutten well, that he was author of a Trag.-Com. called
Bellum Grammaticale, but how that can be, I cannot discern, for tho it was
written by an Oxford man, if not two, yet one edition of it came out in 1574.
in oct. which was the year, when Dr. Hutten first saluted the Oxonian Muses, as
I have before told you. He had also an hand in the translation of the Bible,
appointed by King James, an. 1604. and left in MS. behind him,

Discourse of the antiquity of the University of Oxford, by way of letter to a
friend. -- The copies of this Discourse, which I have seen, were written in qu.
in about 8 sheets, and had this beginning, Sir, your two questions, the one
concerning the antiquity of Oxford, etc. I have seen 4 copies of it, but could
get little or nothing from them for my purpose, when I was writing the Hist.
and Antiq. of the Vniv. of Oxon. A MS. book of the like subject, I once saw in
the hands of John Houghton Bac. of Div. sometimes Senior Fellow of Brasnose
coll. divided into three books, the beginning of which runs thus, All truth is
of it self as glorious, etc. but who the author of it was, I could never learn.
It Is a trite thing, and mostly taken from Apologia Antiq. Acad. Oxon. written
by Br. Twyne, as that of Hutten was. He has also written,

Historia fundationum Ecclesiae Christi Oxon. una cum Episcoporum, Decanorum
and Canonicorum ejusd. Catalogo. It Is a MS. and has this beginning,
Monasterium sive Prioratus S. Frideswydae virginis fundata est ab eadem
Frideswyda filia Didaci alias Didani, etc. A copy of this in qu. I once saw in
the hands of Dr. Joh. Fell Dean of Chapter Chapter but many faults have been committed
therein by an illiterate Scribe. At length Dr. Hutten having lived to the age
of 75. died on the 17. May in sixteen hundred thirty and two, and was buried in
the Divinity-Chappel (the north Isle remotest from the Choire) belonging to the
Cathedral of Chapter Chapter beforementioned. A copy of his Epitaph you may see in
Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 288. b. By his Wife Anne Hamden he had
a Daughter named Alice, who was married to Dr. Rich. Corbet, afterward
successively B. of Oxon and Norwich.

Husius as he writes himself, was born As the said Dr. Gardener has informed
me*
at Little Hereford commonly called Harford near to Leonminsher in
Herefordshire; who, tho well grounded in Grammar learning and of good parts,
and therefore of desert, yet at his first coming to the University he was only
a poor Scholar or Servitour of Brasnose, and among the pauperes Scholares is he
numbered in the public Matricula under Coll. Aenean, about 1571. In that house
he continued for some time a very sober and serious Student, and was
countenanced by one or more of the Seniors thereof, but being sensible of the
loss of time which he sustained there by constant attendance, he translated
himself to S. Mary's hall, and took the degree of Bac. of Arts at about 7 years
standing, being then noted for a good Grecian. Which degree he completing by
Determination, he afterward traveled, and in fine became well skilled in
Geography and Mathematics. The last of which being the faculty he excelled in,
made him respected by that generous Count Henry Earl of Northumberland, who
allowed him an yearly Pension for the encouragement of his studies, but whether
he was ever Mathematick Professor of Gresham coll. as a certain learned See in
the Append. to the Sphere of Manilius, etc. by Edw. Sherburne Esquire p. 86.
Gent. reports, I cannot tell. He has written,

De Globis celest. and terrest. Tract. 2. Several times printed in Lat. and
Engl. in oct. The first edition of this book had this title, Tractatus de
Globis and eorum usu; accommodatus iis qui Londini editi sunt; an. 1593.
sumptibus Gulielmi Sandersoni Civ. Land. Land. 1593. oct. It was afterward
illustrated with figures and annotations by Joh. Isaac Pontanus Professor of
Philosophy at Harderwicke in Gelderlandt. -- Amstel. 1617. 1624. etc. Oxon.
1663. in oct. and twelv.

Breviarium totius Orbis. Printed several times at Land. in Lat. and Engl. in
oct. and tw. This Mr. Hues died in the Stone-house (then belonging to Joh.
Smith M. of A. Son of Tho. Smith Cook of Chapter Ch.) opposite almost to the Inn
called the Blew-Boar in S. Aldates Parish in Oxon, on the 24. May, in sixteen
hundred thirty and two, aged 79 years, and was buried near to the grave of Dr.
Hutten, within the limits of the Cathedral of Chapter Chapter beforementioned. His
Epitaph is printed in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 288. b. wherein
you will find other matters relating to him, which I have not here set down. I
find one Rob. Hughes who was an English Merchant in the Kingdom of India and
City of Agemer, author of a Dictionary containing the English and Persian
Languages; an. 1616. MS. sometimes in the Lord Hattons Library, now in that of
Bodley, but what relation there was between this and the former, I know not, I
think none, because their names differ. The Reader may be pleased now to take
notice that the said R. Hues the Mathematician, having spent one year or two in
the condition of a Tutor to Algernon Son of Hen. Earl of Northumberland, in Chapter
Chapter he was therefore thrust among the writers of that house, against the
consent of the author, into Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. by the publisher
thereof, who endeavored to disturb the course of that History, to satisfy his
partial ends. He also thrust in of his own accord among the Bishops of the said
House Joh. Piers Archb. of York, and Miles Smith B. of Glouc. The former, who
had been Dean for a time, had most of his education in Magd. coll. and the
other who had been Petty-Canon, was chiefly educated in that of Brasnose.

ALEXANDER COOK received his first breath Yorkshire, (at, or near to, Beeston
by Leeds,) and educated in Grammar learning in those parts. In Michaelmas-Term,
an. 1581. he was admitted a Member of Brasnose coll. being then 17 years of
age, and after he had taken one degree in Arts, he was chosen into a
Percy-Fellowship of University coll. in 1587. In the year following he took the
degree of M. of A. and about that time holy Orders: So that applying himself
solely to the study of the sacred writ, became a frequent and noted Preacher in
these parts, took the degree of Bach. of that Faculty in 1597. and had some
little Cure bestowed upon him. At length upon the decease of his Brother
Robert, (whom I have mentioned under the year 1614.) he became Vicar of Lee^s
in his own Country. He was a person most admirably well read in the
controversies between the Protestants and the Papists, versed in the Fathers
and Schoolmen, a great Calvinist, yet witty and ingenious, and a Satirical
Enemy in his writings against the Romanists, as it evidently appears in these
books following, which have been much taken into the hands of ingenious men.

Pope Joan. A dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, manifestly proving
that a Woman called Joan was Pope of Rome, etc. against Rob. Bellarmine, Caes,
Baronius, Flor. Raemundus, etc. impudently denying the same. Land. 1610. qu.
Which book being in great request among Protestants beyond Sea, was translated
into French by J. de la Montagne. Printed at Sedan 1633. in oct.

The abatement of Popish Brags, pretending Scripture to be theirs. Land. 1625.
qu.

The Weathercock of Rome's Religion, with her several changes: or, the World
turned topsie turvie by Papists. Land. 1625. qu.

More work for a Mass-Priest. Land. 1621. qu.

Yet more work for a Mass-Priest. Land. 1622. qu.

Work, more work, and yet a little more work for a Mass-Priest. Land. 1628.
etc. qu. It Is the same with the two former immediately going before, only some
alterations in, and several additions put to, it, especially in that edition
which came out in 1630. What other things he published I know not, nor anything
else of him, only that he was buried in Leeds Church near to the Body of his
Brother Rob. Cook, 23. June in sixteen hundred thirty and two, A good and
learned man, a man abounding in charity, and exemplary in his life and
conversation, yet hated by the R. Catholics who lived near Leeds and in
Yorkshire, and indeed by all elsewhere who had read his works.

JAMES WHITLOCK, was born in London 28. Nov. 1570. descended from those of his
name living near to Olyngham in Berkshire, educated in Merchant Tailors School,
elected Scholar of S. John's coll. in 1588. took one degree in the Civil Law,
settled in the Middle Temple, became summer Reader of that House, 17 Jac. 1. a
Knight, chief Justice of Chester and at length one of the Justices of the
Common Picas, as in his Epitaph it is said, tho in his his last Will, of the
Kings Bench. He had the Latin tongue so perfect, that sitting Judge of Assize
at Oxon, when some Foreigners (persons of quality) purposely came into the
Court to see the manner of proceedings in matters of Justice, he briefly
repeated the heads of his charge to the Grand Jury in good and elegant Latin,
and thereby informed the Strangers and Scholars there present, of the ability
of the Judges, and the course of proceeding in matter of Law and Justice. He
understood the Greek very well and the Hebrew, was versed in the Jewish
Histories, and excellently knowing in the Histories of his own Country, and in
the Pedigrees of most persons of honor and quality in England, and much
conversant also in the study of Antiquity and Heraldry. He was not by any
exceeded in the knowledge of his own profession of the Common Law of England,
wherein, his knowledge of the Civil Law was a help to him, as his learned
arguments both at the Bar and Bench have confirmed it for a truth. His works
are these.

Reading in the Middle Temple hall. -- In which was so much solid Law and
excellent learning expressed, that copies were desired, and taken of it, but
whether printed I cannot tell.

Several Speeches in Parliament. -- One of which is extant in a book intit. The
Sovereign's Prerogative and the Subjects Privileges discussed, etc. in the 3.
and 4. of K. Chapter 1. Land. 1657. fol.

Of the antiquity, use, and ceremony of lawful Combats in England. -- MS. The
beginning of which is, Combats are distinguished to be lawful and unlawful,
etc. This MS. which I saw and perused in the choice Library of MSS. of Ralph
Sheldon of Beoly Esquire had the name of James Whitlock set and subscribed to it,
and so consequently I took him to be the author; who dying on the 22. of June
in sixteen hundred thirty and two, 1632*
the King did lose as good a Subject, his Country as good a Patriot, the People
as just a Judge, as ever lived, etc. as his Son Bulstrode Whitlock tells In his
Memorials of Engl. affairs, under the year 1632. p. 17.
us, His body was afterward buried at Falley or Fawley not far from Great
Wycomb in Bucks; over which, his Son beforementioned, not only erected a
stately monument, but also a Chapel, which serves for a burial place for those
descended from him.

Arthur Wake Rector of Billyng in Northamptonshire, Master of the Hospital of
St. John in Northampton, and Canon of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, third Son of John Wake
Esquire of the ancient and honorable Family of his name living at Saucy Forest,
was born in the said County of Northampton, (at Billyng as it seems,) became a
Member of this University in the beginning of the year 1593. aged 18. or
thereabouts, elected Probationer-Fellow of Merton coll. 1598. Orator of the
University 1604. being then Regent ad placitum, publicly known to the K. and
Court at Oxon in the year following, by his Orations of a Ciceronian style
delivered before them when entertained there, traveled into France and Italy,
1609. and after his return was entertained in the quality of a Secretary to Sir
Dudley Carleton one of the Secretaries of State, and from his, was advanced to
the King's, service, by being employed Ambassador to Venice, Savoy, and
elsewhere. The time when he went to Savoy was in the Camden in Annal. Reg. Jac.
1. MS. sub. an. 1* 19.
middle of Apr. 1619. being in few days before made a Knight, whose Escocheon
then, or soon after, which was hung up in all public places where he came, had
this inscription written under it. Sir Isaac Wake Knight Ambassador
Extraordinary in Savoy and Piemont, Ordinary for Italy, Helvetia, and Rhetia,
select for France. In 1623. he was elected Burgess by the Members of this
University to serve in that Parliament which began the 19. Feb. the same year,
in which he was much admired for his excellent elocution. I have been informed
by some of the Ancients of Merton coll. that this our author Wake had his Pen
more at command in the Latin, English, and French tongue, than any of his time
in the University. Also that his speaking was Majestic, that he was better for
Orations than disputing, and that he employed his time more in reading
political and civil matters, than Philosophy or the great Faculties. Further
also that he was a gentile man in behavior, well spoken, and therefore put
upon Speeches at all Receptions and Funerals. There is no doubt but that he was
a man of exquisite learning, strong parts of nature, and of a most refined wit.
He has written,

Rex Platonicus; sive de potentiss. Principis Jacobi Regis ad Academ. Oxon.
adventu, an. 1605. Oxon. 1607. qu. afterward printed in oct.

Oration funebris habita in templo B. Mariae Oxon, quum maesti Oxinienses, piis
manibus Johannis Rainoldi parentarent. Oxon. 1608. in tw. etc. Translated into
English by Thom. Fuller in his Abel redivivus. -- Land. 1651. qu.

Oration funebris habita in Schola Theologica in obitum Clariss. Equitis Tho.
Bodley. Oxon. 1613. qu. Wake's name is not set to it, only said in the title to
be made by the public Orator of the University, which office Wake then
enjoyed. It Is reprinted in a book published by Will. Bates D. D. a
Nonconformist-Minister, intit. Vitae selectiorum aliquot virorum, qui doctrina,
dignitate aut pietate inclaruere. Land. 1681. in a large qu.

Discourse of the 13 Cantons of the Helvetical League. Land. 1655. oct.

Discourse of the state of Italy as it stood about the year 1625. -- Printed
with the former discourse.

Discourse upon the proceedings of the Kings of Sweden. -- Printed also with
the former. These three last discourses were printed at Land. in oct. with this
title put before them, A threefold help to political observations. I find
another book going under his name that bears this title,

Disquisitions upon the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ. -- When printed I
know not, for I have not yet seen it. And another called,

A relation of what happened in the Dutchies of Mantoua and Montferrat from the
beginning of the year 1628. unto the end of the year 1629. -- MS. among those
given by the learned Selden's Executors to the public Libr. at Oxon. The
beginning of it is, In the year of our Lord 1627. was closed with the death of
Vincenzo Gonzaga, etc. He has also Several Letters of State in the book
called, Cabala, or Mysteries of State, etc. Land. 1654. qu. and Several Letters
in that intit. Cabala, or Scrinia Sacra. Land. 1663. fol. He took his last
farewell of this World at Paris, during his being there in the service of his
Majesty: Whereupon his body being embalmed, was brought over into England, and
interred on the south side of the Chancel belonging to the Chapel in Dover
Castle, in the month of July in sixteen hundred thirty and two. 1632*
At which time Mr. John Reading Minister of S. Mary's Church in Dover preached
his Funeral Sermon, wherein he took occasion to speak very honorably of the
person that laid dead before him, whom he knew and well remembered in the
University of Oxon.

THOMAS ALLEN, or Alleyn, the Father of all Vttoxeter in Staffordshire on the
day of S. Thomas the Apostle, in 1542. being a Descendant, through six
Generations, from Henry Allen, or Alan, Lord of the Manor of Buckenhall in the
said County, was admitted Scholar of Trinity coll. 4. June 1561. Fellow in 65.
and two years after, Master of Arts. But being much inclined to live a retired
life, and averse from taking holy Orders, he left the Coll. and his Fellowship,
about 1570. and receeded to Gloucester hall, where he lived a close Student
many years, and at length became an eminent Antiquary, Philosopher, and
Mathematician, and not only the Prince or Coryphaeus, (as one Gul* Bur^onus in
Orat (...) Tho: Alleni. Land. 1632. qu. p. 6.
says,) but the very Soul and Sun of all the Mathematicians of his time. Being
thus accomplished with various sorts of learning, he was several times invited
to the families of Princes and Nobles, not only of this Nation, but of others:
And when Albertus L'askie Count or Prince of Sirade in Poland was in England,
he did court him to go with him into his own Country, 1583. and to live there
as he pleased, and accept of such Honors and Dignities which he could get for
him; but he being delighted with retiredness and an Academical life, did evade
his civility, and thereby, as a true Philosopher, contemned riches and
greatness. He was also often courted to live in the family of that most noble
and generous Count Henry Earl of Northumberland, a great Patron of
Mathematicians: Whereupon spending some time with him, he was infinitely
beloved and admired not only by that Count, but by such Artists who then lived
with, or often retired to him, as Tho. Harriot, John Dee, Walt. Warner, Nath.
Torporley, etc. the Atlantes of the Mathematick World. Robert Earl of
Leicester, Chancellor of this University, and the grand favorite in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, did also before that time entertain him, and would have
conferred upon him a Bishopric; but for the sweetness of a retired life, he
denied that also. The truth is, that Earl did highly value him, and no person
was more familiar with him than Mr. Allen, and Dee beforementioned. Whence
'twas that the author of the book, called, Leicester's Commonwealth, reports,
that they (whom he styles Atheists) used the art of figuring and con^uring for
procuring the said Earls unlawful designs, and that also by their Black Art,
they endeavored a match between Q. Elizabeth and him. How true these things
are, let others, who know the author of that book that reports them, judge.
Certain it is, that Allen was so great with that Count, that few matters of
State passed, but he had knowledge of them, and nothing of moment was done in
the University, but Allen gave him it in writing. He was also very great and
highly respected by other famous men of his time of this Kingdom, as with
Bodley, Savi^e, Camden, Cotton, Spelman, Seldom, etc. the last of whom In Notis
suis ad Eadmerum, edit. 1623. p. 200.
says, that Allen was omni eruditionis genere summoque judicio ornatissimus,
celeberrimae Academiae Oxon. decus insignissimum: And In Britannia, in cap. De
Saxonibus.
Camden, that he was Plurimis and optimis artibus ornatiss. His sufficiencies
in the Mathematick Science being generally noted, he was thereupon accounted
another Rog. Bacon, which was the reason why he became terrible to the Vulgar,
especially those of Oxon, who took him to be a perfect Conjurer. He was a great
collector of scattered MSS. of whatsoever Faculty, especially those of History,
Antiquity, Astronomy, Mathematics, Philosophy, etc. sparing neither cost or
labor to procure them: Some of which I have seen quoted in the works of
learned authors, as being in Bibliotheca Alleniana. By his help, advice, and
communication, several of the University became eminent in Mathematics and
Antiquities; of which number were Harriot, Twyne, Hegge, the two Jeames,
Burton, Digby, etc. whom for their labors communicated to posterity, I have
partly before touched, and shall hereafter mention, in their respective places.
As for Allen's collections, observations, and notes of Astronomy, Mathematics,
and N. Philosophy, they are got into obscure hands, and it is thought that
Digby, whose name is famous among many, has made use of those of Philosophy.
All that I have seen written by Allen, are these following.

Claudii Ptolomei Pelusiensis, de Astrorum judiciis, aut ut vulgo vocant,
quadripartitae constructionis; lib. secundus. cum expositione Thomae Alleyn
Angli-Oxoniensis. The first chapter of which begins thus, Hactenus quidem pre
ecurrimus ea quorum cognitione, etc.

Cl. Ptolomei de Astror. judiciis, lib. 3. cum expositione Tho. Alleyn, etc.
These two MSS. coming into the hands of William Lilly the sometimes famous
Figure-flinger, were by him bestowed on Elias Ashmole Esquire in 1652. One of the
said copies was transcribed from the original, which Sir Tho. Aylesbury had of
the gift of Mr. Allen, the other copy John Huniades the great Chemist had in
his possession, who gave it, as it seems, to Lilly. He, the said Allen, put
notes also on many of his books, and some were by him put on Joh. Bales book De
Scriptoribus Maj. Britanniae, which are entered by another hand in the margin of
the said author, that is in the public Library at Oxon. At length, he having
lived to a great age, surrendered up his last breath in Gloucester hall, Sept.
in sixteen hundred thirty and two, and the next day an eloquent oration being
delivered by Mr. Will. Burton of that house in the public Refectory there, in
praise of the Defunct, before the Vicechancellour, Heads of Colleges and Halls,
and many of the University then present, the body was accompanied by them to
the chapel of Trinity coll. where, after another Speech was spoken by Mr.
George Bathurst, the body was solemnly interred. Soon after, the chief part of
his Library of incomparable MSS. coming into the hands of Sir Kenelm Digby, as
the owner before had appointed, they were the next year given by him to the
Bodleian or public Library, where they yet remain. Some of them had before,
and about the time of Allen's death, been got from him by Rich. James of C. C.
coll. for the Cottonian Library, and others came into the hands of Sir Tho.
Aylesbury Master of the Requests, but where those are now, in truth I cannot
tell. Some years since I made a search in the said chapel of Trin. coll. for
an Epitaph on Mr. Allens grave, but not so much as a letter appearing, you
shall have part of his character instead of it, which I found written in a
certain MS. in the Library of the said college, running thus, Vir fuit
elegantium literarum studiosissimus, Academicae disciplinae tenacissimus, apud
Exteros and Academicos semper in magno pretio, eorumque qui in Ecclesia
Anglicana atque in Vniversitate Oxoniensi pro meritis suis ad Dignitates aut
Praefecturas subinde provecti fuerunt. Fuit sagacissimus observator,
familiariss. conviva, etc. His picture painted to the life, he gave to the
President of Trinity coll. and his Successors, to be there remaining in the
Dining Room of the said President for ever: Another copy he gave to the
Cottonian Library, and a third to his old Friend Dr. Tho. Clayton Master of
Pembroke college, whose Son Sir Thomas has it at this day. I shall make
mention of another Tho: Allen under the year 1636.

ROBERT HAYMAN, a Devonian born, was entered Exeter coll. while he was very
young, an. 1590, where being noted for his ingenuity and pregnant parts, became
valued by several persons who were afterward eminent; among whom were Will.
Noy, Arth. Duck his kinsman, Will. and George Hakewill, Tho. Winniff, Rob.
Vilvaine, Sim. Baskervile, etc. all of that House, Will. Vaughan of Jesus coll.
Charles Fitzgeffry of Broadgates, etc. Afterward he retired to Lincolns Inn
without the honor of a degree, studied for a time the municipal Law, but his
Genie being well known to be poetical, fell into acquaintance with, and
received encouragement to proceed in his studies from, Mich. Drayton, Ben.
Johnson, John Owen the Epigrammatist, George Wither the puritanical Satyrist,
John Vicars of Chapter Chapter Hospital, etc. and at length writing several specimens
of his wit, which I think are quite lost, had, tho fantastical, the general
vogue of a poet. After he had left Linc. Inn and had arrived toward the
fortieth year of his age he was made Governor of the plantation of
Harbor-Grace in Bristol-hope in Britaniola, anciently called New found-land,
where, after some time of residence, he did, at spare hours, write and
translate, these matters following.

Quodlibets, lately come over from New Britaniola, anciently called
New Foundland.

Epigrams, and other small parcels, both moral and divine. -- These two,
divided into four books, were printed at London 1628. in qu. the author of them
being then there. He also translated from Lat. into English verse, Several
sententious epigrams and witty sayings out of sundry authors both ancient and
modern, ( especially many of the epigrams of Joh. Owen.) Land. 1628. qu. As
also from French into English, The two railing Epistles of the witty Doctor
Francis Rablais. On the 17. of Nov. in 1628. he being then bound to Guiane in
America to settle a Plantation there, made his Will, a copy of which I have In
the Will-Office near to S. Paul's Cath. in reg. Russel, part. 1.
seen, wherein he desires to be buried where he dies. January in sixteen
hundred thirty and two, issued out a Commission from the Prerog. Court of
Canterbury to a certain person, who had moneys owing to him by Hayman, to
administer the goods, debts, chattels, etc. of him the said Rob. Hayman, lately
deceased. So that I suppose he died beyond the Seas that year, aged 49. or
thereabouts.

WILLIAM SUTTON, a Citizens Son, was London, sent by his Relations from
Merchant-Taylors School to Chapter Chapter in 1578. aged 15. or thereabouts, took the
degrees in Arts, entered into the Sacred Function, and in the year 1592. was
admitted to the reading of the Sentences; about which time he was Parson of
Blandford St. Mary in Dorsetshire, and Vicar of Sturminster-Marshal in the same
County. He was a very learned man, an excellent Orator, Latinist, Grecian, and
Preacher. He had a well furnished Library, wrote much, but ordered his Son to
print nothing after his death. All that was made public in his lifetime, was
only this.

The falsehood of the chief grounds of the Romish Religion, descried and
convinced in a brief answer to certain motives sent by a Priest to a Gentleman
to induce him to turn Papist. -- Which book stealing into the Press, and coming
out full of faults, his Son Will. Sutton Bach. of Div. of Chapter Chapter corrected and
reprinted it after his Fathers death Land. 1635. in oct. or tw. He finished his
course about the latter end of October. in sixteen hundred thirty and two, 1632*
and was buried in the Church of Blandford St. Mary beforementioned. I have
been informed that other things of our author Will. Sutton were published after
his death, but such I have not yet seen.

Carrington in Cheshire, applied his Genie to Academical studies in Jesus coll.
an. 1576. took the degrees in Arts, as a Member thereof, and after he had
remained some years in the University in the instruction of Youths in Grammar,
became Minister of S. Mary Magd. at Bermondsey near to London, afterward
Rector of the rich Church of Winwick in Lancashire, Archdeacon of Mead in
Ireland, Dean of St. Patricks Church near to Dublin, and at length Bishop of
Killaloe, an. 1612. where he was much respected and reverenced for his Religion
and learning. While he remained in Oxon he composed,

A Dictionary English and Latin; and Lat. and Engl. Oxon. 1589. in a large
thick qu. It was the first Dictionary that had the English before the Latin,
(epitomizing the learned and choicest Dictionaries that were then extant,)
and was beheld as the best that was then in use. But that part of it which had
the Latin before the English, was swallowed up by the greater attempts of
Franc. Holyoake, who says that he designed and contrived it so, before the
Vocabularies or Dictionaries of Becman, Funger, and Martin came out;
notwithstanding it appears that he was beholding to them, and made use of their
materials in his Dictionary that he published, an. 1606. Besides the said
Dictionary our author Rider has also written,

A Letter concerning the news out of Ireland, and of the Spaniards landing, and
present state there. Land. 1601. qu. And having had controversies with one Hen.
Fitz-Simons a learned Jesuit of Ireland, published a book entitled,

Claim of Antiquity in behalf of the Protestant Religion. -- When this was
printed I know not. The confutation of it, I am sure, with a reply to Rider's
Rescript or Postscript, written by the said Fitz-Simons, were printed at Roan
in Normandy, an. 1608. qu. as I shall tell you under the year 1643. He also (
Rider) published other matters; which having been printed in Ireland, and
therefore few or none of them come into these parts, I cannot give you the
titles of them. He departed this mortal life on the twelfth day of November.
Killaloe, in the Cathedral Church there dedicated to the memory of S. Flannan,
leaving behind him the character of a learned and religious Prelate.

High-Halden in Kent, and educated for a time, as it seems, among several of
his Countrymen in Heart hall, where some of his Surname did about that time
study, but whether he took a degree here, it appears not. Afterward, designing
Physic his profession, he traveled beyond the Seas, spent some time at Padua,
where he took the degree of Doctor of that Faculty, and upon his return
practiced in London, and became one of the Coll. of Physicians there.
Afterward he settled in the City of Bathe, where practicing with good success,
had the applause of the learned, respect from the rich, prayers from the poor,
and the love of all. He has written,

A brief discourse of a disease called the suffocation of the mother, etc.
Land. 1603. qu.

Discourse of natural Bathes and mineral Waters. -- Twice printed: Which being
revised and corrected by Thomas Guidott Bach. of Phys. of Wadh. coll. and a
Practicioner in the City of Bathe, he published it a third time at Land. 1669.
in oct. To which he added an Appendix containing, A treatise concerning the
Bathe, wherein the antiquity both of the Bathes and the City is discoursed,
etc. -- Dr. Jorden died about the seventh day of January in sixteen hundred
thirty and two, 1632-3.
aged 63. and was buried in the south Isle joining to the great Church within
the City of Bathe, dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul. He had a natural
inclination to Mineral See in A discourse of Bathe, and the hot waters there,
etc. Land. 1676. p. 166. written by Tho. Guidott.
works, and was at great charges about the ordering of Alum, which succeeding
not according to expectation, he was thereby much prejudiced in his Estate, as
it appears in the 7. chap. of Not. Bathes and Mineral Waters, wherein it is said
that Alum was the greatest Debtor he had, and he the greatest Benefactor to
it, as he could make it appear, when he thought fit to publish the artifice
thereof.

JOHN BARLOW, a Cheshire man born, became Heart hall in the year 1600. aged 19.
or more, took one degree in Arts 8 years after, being then in Orders and a
Curate. Afterward, upon an invitation, he was made Minister of Plymouth in
Devonshire; where continuing to the great liking of the inhabitants, yet
notwithstanding he left them, and went to Halifax in Yorkshire, where, as it
seems, he was a Curate or Lecturer. He has published,

Various Sermons, as (1) The Christian's last day, is the best day, on 1 These.
4. 18. Land. 1618. qu. (2) Hieron's last farewell; preached at Modbury in
Devonsh. at the Funeral of Sam. Hieron, on 2 Timothy 4. 7. Land. 1618. qu. (3) The
good Man's refuge in affliction, on Psalm. 40. 18. Land. 1618. qu. (4) The true
guide to glory; preached at Plymton-Mary in Devonsh. at the Funeral of the Lady
Strode of Newingham, Widow of Sir Will. Strode, on Psalm. 73. 24. Land. 1619.
qu. (5) The good Man's privilege, on Romans 8. 28. Land. 1618. qu. (6) Joy of the
upright Man, on Psalm. 97. 11. lb. 1619. qu.

An Exposition on the second Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy, the first chapter,
Clar. 1632*
etc. Land. 1625. qu. To which was the Exposition of the second, and of other
parts of Scripture, added. -- Land. 1632. fol. Among several Records in the
Prerogative-office, I once saw the last Will In Reg. Evelyn Qu. 54.
and Test. of one John Barlow Clerk, of Chiddingfield in Surrey, which was
proved 26. May 1641. the Testator having some weeks before been dead, but
whether this John Barlow be the same with the former Joh. Barlow, who was the
writer, I cannot justly say, nor whether he be the same with Joh. Barlow M. of
Arts, who in Sept. 1620. became Prebendary of Wivelscomb in the Church of
Wells, on the resignation of Will. Barlow. The said Joh. Barlow of
Chiddingfield does mention his Brethren, Edward, Raphe, Laurence, William and
Rob. Barlow.

FRANCIS GODWIN, a passing great lover of Thom. Godwin D. D. sometimes Bishop
of B. and Wells, was born at Hannington in Northamptonshire, 4. of Q.
Elizabeth, elected Student of Chapter Chapter in 1578. took the degrees in Arts, holy
Orders, and became Rector of Samford-Orcais in Somersetshire, Prebendary of S.
Decuman in the Church of Wells, Residentiary there, and Vicar of Weston in
Zoyland in the same County; which last he resigning, became Vicar of Bishops
Lidiard in 1595. being then Sub-dean of Exeter, and about that time Doctor of
Divinity. In the year 1601. he was nominated to the Sea of Landaff by Q.
Elizabeth, to which being consecrated 22. Nov. the same year, sat there about
16 years, being a Bishopric rather proportionated to his modesty than merits,
because much impaired by one of his Predecessors named Anth. Kitchen alias
Dunstan, whom I shall elsewhere mention; and therefore had liberty allowed to
him to keep one of his Dignities in Commendam with it, and to take upon him the
Rectory of Kingston-Scymour in the Dioc. of Wells. Afterward for the respect
that K. James had for him and his learning, he gave him the Bishopric of
Hereford, to which he was translated the tenth, and confirmed the 28. of Nov.
an. 1617. and kept it to his dying day. He was a good Man, a grave Divine,
skilful Mathematician, excellent Philosopher, pure Latinist, and incomparable
Historian, being no less critical in Histories than the learned Seldom. A
person also he was so celebrated by many in his time, whether at home or beyond
the Seas, that his memory cannot otherwise but be precious in succeeding ages,
for his indefatigable pains and travel in collecting the succession of all the
Bishops of England and Wales, since the first planting of the Gospel among the
Christians, nor pretermitting such of the British Church, or any that have been
remembered by the care and diligence of preceding writers, or had been kept in
memory in any old monument or record. But as he has in those his infinite
labors endeavored, out of a Puritanical peak, to bring a scandal on the
ancient Cath. Bishops, and to advance the credit of those that were married
since the Reformation (he being one of that number) for the credit of the
Protest. cause; so comes one afterward, by name W. Prynne, the most inveterate
Enemy to the Bishops that ever appeared in our Horizon, who thence (from his
labors) takes all In his Antipathy of the English (...) etc. Land. 1641. qu.
advantages, whether truth or not truth, to raise arguments against, or bring a
scandal upon, the prelatical function. Take heed therefore of being partial,
lest others light Candles from your Torch, and thereby in the end, you lend a
helping hand for the cutting your own Throat. But to return: to give therefore
our author Godwin a farther character (as I have received it from his Char
C^dwin M. A. and Minister of Monmouth.
Son) he was esteemed a good preacher, and a strict liver, but so much employed
in his studies and matters of Religion, that he was as 'twere a stranger to the
world and the things thereof. His works are these.

Concio Lat. in Luc. 5. 3. Printed 1601. qu.

A Catalogue of the Bishops of England, since the first planting of Christian
Religion in this Island, together with a brief History of their Lives and
memorable actions, so near as can be gathered out of antiquity. Land. 1601. qu.
in an English character. For the writing of which, Q. Elizabeth immediately
preferred him to the Bishopric of Landaff. But this book being imperfect, for
therein are omitted the Bishops of Bangor, S. Asaph, etc. the Author came out
with another Edition, with many additions, an. 1615. qu. and thereunto joined,

A Discourse concerning the first conversion of this Island of Britain unto
the Christian Religion -- which is set before it, and

Discourse concerning such Englishmen, as have either been, or in our histories
reputed, Cardinals of the Church of Rome. -- which is put at the end of it. But
this Edition of 1615. with the said two additional discourses, being very full
of faults, and not to be endured by any ordinary Reader, he put them forthwith
into Latin, entitling them De Praesulibus Angliae commentarius, etc. Land.
1616. qu. The Reader is now to understand, that after the first Edition of the
said Catalogue of Bishops came out, in 1601. Sir John Harrington of Kelston
near the City of Bathe, Son of John Harrington of the said place Esquire, (who
dying near to the Bishops Palace of, and in, London, 1. Jul. 1582. was buried
in the Church of S. Gregory near to Paul's Cathedral) and he the Son of Alex.
Harrington, descended from a younger brother of the Harringtons of Brierley in
Yorkshire, I say that the said Sir John Harrington sometimes an Eaton Scholar,
and afterward M. of Arts of Camb. being minded to obtain the favor of Prince
Henry, wrote a discourse for his private use intit. A brief view of the state
of the Church of England, as it stood in Qu. Elizabeth's and King James's reign,
to the year 1608. etc. This book is no more than a character and History of the
Bishops of those times, and was written to the said Prince Henry, as an
additional supply to the before mentioned Catalogue of Bishops of Dr. Fr.
Godwin, upon occasion of that Proverb.

Henry the eighth pulled down Monks and their Cells.

Henry the ninth shall pull down Bishops and their Bells.

In the said book the author Harrington does, by imitating his Godmother Qu.
Elizabeth, show himself a great enemy to married Bishops, especially to such
that had been married twice, and many things therein are said of them, that
were by no means fit to be published, being, as I have told you before, written
only for private use. But so it was, that the book coming into the hands of one
John Chetwind, (Grandson by a Daughter to the author,) a person deeply
principled in presbyterian tenants, did, when the Press was open, print it at
London 1653. in oct. And no sooner it was published, and came into the hands of
many, but 'twas exceedingly clamoured at by the Loyal and orthodox Clergy,
condemning him much that published it. The truth is, that tho it did not give
offense so much as Sir Anthony Weldons book intit. The Court and character of
K. James, which was published three years before, yet it was exceedingly
pleasing to the Presbyterians and other Diffenters. And there is no doubt, but
that if it had come into the hands of Prynne before mentioned, he would have
raked out many things thence, and aggravated them to the highest, to furnish
his Common Place book, when he was about to publish The Antipathy of the
English Lordly Prelacy, etc. Our author Godwin wrote also,

Appendix adcommentarium de Praesulibus Angliae. Land. 1621. 22. in two sh. in
qu.

R^rum Anglicaerum Henrico VIII. Edwardo VI. and Maria regnantibus Annals.
Land. 1616. 28. 30. in qu. and fol. Translated into English by his Son Morgan
Godwin Bac. of Arts of Chapter Chapter afterward Bach. of the Civil Law of Pembr.
coll. Master of the Free School at Newland in Glocestershire, Canon of Hereford
and Doctor of his Faculty. Which English translation has been several times
printed.

The man in the Moon: or, a discourse of a Voyage thither. Land. 1638. and 57.
oct. written while he was a Student of Chapter Chapter under the seigned name of
Domingo Gozales, and published, some years after the authors death, by E. M.
(of Chapter Ch.) This book, (which has before the title of it the picture of a man
taken up from the top of a Mountain, by an Engine drawn up to the Moon by
certain flying Birds) was censured to be as vain as the opinion of Copernicus,
or the strange discourses of the Antipodes when first heard of. Yet since by a
more inquisitive search in unravelling those intricacies, men of solid
judgments have since found out a way to pick up that which may add a very
considerable knowledge and advantage to posterity. Among which Dr. Wilkins,
sometimes Bishop of Chester, composed by hints thence given, (as it is thought)
a learned piece called, A discovery of a new World in the Moon.

Nuncius inanimatus. Utopiae 1629. Land. 1657. oct. Translated into English, by
Anon. who intitles it The mysterious Messenger, unlocking the secrets of men's
hearts. Printed with The man in the Moon. Land. 1657. oct. in two sheets only.
At length after our authors many labors, wherein he aimed mostly at the
public, he was taken with a long lingering disease, which bringing him to his
desired haven, Apr. as it seems) sixteen hundred thirty and three, was buried
in the Chancel of his Church of Whitborne, (which, with the manor thereof,
belongs to the Bishops of Hereford) situate and being about 14. miles distant
from the said City. To the said See, after his death, was elected Dr. William
Juxon, but before he was consecrated, he was translated to London, as I shall
tell you elsewhere. That which I have forgot to let the Reader know, is, that
whereas there goes under the name of the Bishop of Landaff, A treatise on the
blessed Sacrament, printed in oct. and one or more Sermons on the sixth Psalm,
they are not be attributed to Dr. Godwin, but to his predecessor, as I suppose
in Landaff, called Gerv. Babington: Sed de hoc quaere.

HUGH HOLLAND, Son of Rob. Holland (by Pain of Denbigh) Son of Lewys Holland,
Son of Llewellin, Son of Griffith Holland of Vaerdre, by Gwervilla his Wife,
Daughter of Howell ap Madock, ap Jem, ap Einion, was born at Denbigh, bred in
Westminster School, while Camden taught there, elected into Trinity coll. in
Cambridge, an. 1589. of which he was afterward Fellow. Thence he went to
travel into Italy, and was at Rome, where his over free discourse betrayed his
prudence. Thence he went to Jerusalem to do his devotions to the holy
Sepulcher, and in his return touched at Constantinople, where he received a
reprimand from the English Ambassador, for the former freedom of his tongue. At
his return into England, he retired to Oxon, spent some years there as a
Sojournour for the sake of the public Library, and, as I have been informed,
had his Lodging in Ball. coll. which is partly the reason why I insert him
here. He is observed by a Cambridge Tho. Fuller, in his Worthies of England, in
Wales p. 16.
man to have been no bad English, but an excellent Latin, Poet, and by some
thought worthy to be mentioned by Spencer, Sidney and others, the chiefest of
our English Poets. His works are these.

MSS.
Verses in description of the chief Cities of Europe Chronicle of Qu. Elizab.
reign. Life of Will. Camden Clarenceaux K. of Arms.


A Cypress Garland for the sacred forehead of the late Sovereign K. James.
Land. 1625. a Poem; and other things which I have not yet seen; but he was not
the author of the Appendix to the Commentary of Engl. Bishops, as one I^on in
London. p. 207. in Marg.
or more think. He died within the City of Westminster, (having always been in
animo Catholicus) in sixteen hundred thirty and three; 1633:
whereupon his body was buried in the Abbey Church of S. Peter, there, near to
the door entering into the Monuments, or the door, through which people enter to
see the Monuments, on the three and twentieth day of July in the same year. I
have seen a copy of his Epitaph made by himself, wherein he is styled miserimus
peccator, musarum and amicitiarum cultor sanctissimus, etc. and another made by
a second person, which for brevity sake I now pass by. In my searches I find
one Hugh Holland to have been admitted Bac. of Arts with Tho. Worthington
(afterward a Jesuit) in Mich. Term, an. 1570. and another Hugh Holland an
Esquires Son of Denbighshire to be matriculated as a member of Ball. coll. an.
1582. aged 24. with others of that Surname of the same house, but whether any
of them were authors, I cannot yet tell, or whether the last was the same with
the Poet. Qu.

Rob. Abbot, whom I have mentioned under the year 1617. was born in the same
Town and house where Robert was, bred also in the same School, under Mr. Franc.
Tailor, entered a student in Ball. coll. 1578. aged 16. or thereabouts, elected
Probationer-Fellow thereof, 29. Nov. 1583. being then Bach. of Arts; and
afterward proceeding in that faculty, he entered into holy Orders, and became a
celebrated preacher in the University. In 1597. he was licensed to proceed in
Divinity, and in the same year being elected Master of University coll. gave up
all right that he had to his Fellowship. In the latter end of 1599. he was made
Dean of Winchester in the place of Dr. Martin Heton promoted to the Sea of Ely:
Which Dignity he keeping till 1609. succeeded then Dr. Thom. Morton Dean of
Gloucester. On the third of Dec. 1609. he was consecrated Bishop of Lichfield
and Coventry, and had restitution Pat. 7. Jac: 1. p. 4.
of the Temporalities belonging thereunto, made to him on the 29. of the same
month. In Febr. following he was translated to London, and being elected soon
after to the Sea of Canterbury, had the Kings Pat. 9. Jac. 1. p. 29.
consent to it, 29. March 1610. On the 9. of Apr. 1611. he was Camden in Annal.
R. Jac. 1. MS. sub. an. 1611.
translated to the said See of Canterbury, and on the 4. of May following had
restitution Ib. in pat. 9. Ja. 1. p. 43.
made to him of the Temporalities belonging thereunto. On the 23. of June
ensuing, he was Ib. in Camd. in Annal Reg. Jac. 1: sub eod. an.
sworn a member of his Majesty's Privy Council, and accordingly took his place.
So that he having never been Rector or Vicar of a parish, and so consequently
was in a manner ignorant of the trouble that attended the ministers of Gods
word, was the cause (as some think) why he was harsh to them, and why he showed
more respect to a Cloak, than a Cassock. He was a person pious and grave, and
exemplary in his life and conversation. He was also a learned man, and had his
erudition all of the old stamp. He was stiffly Hist. of the reign of K. Chapter 1.
by Ham. L'estrange -- Land. 1656. p. 13^:
principled in the doctrine of S. Augustine, which they who understand it not,
call Calvinism, and therefore disrelish'd by them who incline to the Massilian
and Arminian Tenets. Those that well remember him have said, that tho he was a
plausible preacher, yet his brother Robert was a greater Scholar, and tho an
able Statesman, yet Robert was a deeper Divine. The things that he has written
are these, which show him to be a man of parts, learning, vigilance, and
unwearied study, tho overwhelmed with business.

Questiones sex, totidem praelectionibus in Schola Theologica Oxomiae, pro
forma habitis, discussae and disceptatae, an. 1597; in quibus, e sacra
scriptura and Patribus, quid statuendum sit, definitur. Oxon 1598. qu. Francof.
1616. qu. which last edition was published by Abrah. Scultetus.

Exposition on the Prophet Jonah, contained in certain Sermons preached in S.
Mary's Chapter in Oxon. Land. 1600. and 1613.

The reasons which Dr. Hill has brought for the upholding of Papistry,
unmasked, and showed to be very weak, etc. Oxon. 1604. qu. Which book was in
answer to one intit. A quartron of reasons of Cath. Religion, with as many
brief answers of refusal. Antw. 1600. qu. written by Tho. Hill. D. D. then
living at Phalempyne beyond the Sea, who a little before had left the Church of
England to embrace the Doctrine of that of Rome. He was also answered by Franc.
Dillingham Bac. of Div. of Cambridge, in a book intit. A quartron of reasons
composed by Dr. Hill unquartered, and proved a quartron of follies. Cambridge
1603. qu.

Preface to the examination of George Sprot. London 1608. qu.

Sermon at Westminster 26 May, 1608. at the funeral solemnities of Thomas Earl
of Dorset Lord High Treasurer of England, on Isaiah 40. 6. London 1608. qu.

Brief description of the whole world. Land. 1617. qu: the 9th edition. Other
editions in oct. followed, and the book is commonly called Abbots Geography.

Treatise of perpetual visibility, and succession of the true Church in all
ages. Land. 1624. qu. His name is not set to this book, only his Arms empaled
by those belonging to the Sea of Canterbury are put before it; and it is
generally reputed to be his and none but his.

History of the Massacre in the Valtoline. -- At the end of the third vol. of
Joh. Fox hs book of Acts and Mon. of the Church. Land. 1631. 41. etc.

His Judgment of bowing at the name of Jesus. Ham. 1632. oct.

Several Speeches and Discourses in Parliament and elsewhere. -- At length he
being found guilty of casual homicide (the particulars of which are mentioned
by Historians) he retired for a time to Guildford in Surrey, the place of his
nativity, where he had erected an Hospital for men and women. Afterward
removing to Croyden, he gave way to fate, in his Palace there, on the fourth
day of August, our Lady, within Trinity Church in Guildford. Over his grave was
soon after built a sumptuous Altar, or Table-monument, with his proportion in
his Pontificalia lying thereon, supported by six pillars of the Dorick order,
of black Marble standing on six pedestals of piled books, with a large
inscription thereon, beginning thus. Sacrum memoriae honoratiss.
Archipraesulis, etc. At the east end of the said Mon. is another large
inscript. which begins also thus. Aeternae memoriae Sacrum. Magni hic (Hospes)
Hospitis monumenta vides, etc. Besides this Dr. George Abbot Archbishop of
Canterbury, I find another of both his names to have been a writer also, but
later in time; and author of The whole book of Job Paraphrased, etc. London
1640. qu. Dedicated to his Father-in Law, Will. Purefey Esque as also of
Vindiciae Sabbathi, etc. -- Land. 1641. qu. as I shall tell you farther in Tho.
Broad, under the year 1635. And of Brief notes upon the whole book of Psalms,
etc. Land. in qu. besides other things. But whether this George Abbot was ever
of Oxford, I cannot as yet tell. A third George Abbot I find to have been
elected Probationer Fellow of Merton coll. 1622. and admitted Bach. of the
Civil Law in 1630. but he has written nothing, and nothing else do I know of
him only that he was Son of Sir Maurice Abbot sometimes Lord Mayor of London,
brother to Dr. Geo. Abbot Archb. of Canterbury.

HENRY CARRY, Son of Sir Edw. Carry of Aldenham Berchamsted in Hertfordshire
Knight, Master of the Jewel house to Q. Elizabeth and K. James, by Katherine
his Wife, Daughter of Sir Hen. Knevet Knight, was born in that County, and at
about 16 years of age was sent to obtain Academical learning in this
University, particularly, as it seems, to Exeter coll. where by the help of a
good Tutor, and extraordinary parts, be became a most accomplished Gentleman.
'Ts said In the Worthies of England by Tho. Euller.
that during his stay in the University of Oxford, his Chamber was the
rendezvous of all the eminent Wits, Divines, Philosophers, Lawyers, Historians,
and Politicians of that time, but how true it is, seeing Henry was then a young
man and not graduated, I cannot in the least perceive. Had those things been
spoken of Lucius Carry his Son, who retired several times to, and took commons
in, Exeter coll. while his Brother Lorenzo studied therein 1628. and after, I
should have rather believed it. But let the matter rest as it is: Sure I am,
that after Hen. Carry had left the University where he had obtained a celebrated
name, he was introduced into the Royal Court, was made Knight of the Bath at
the creation of Charles Prince of Wales, Comptroller of his Majesty's Household,
one of his Privy Council, Lord Deputy of Ireland, an. 1622. and about the same
time Viscount Falkland in Scotland, being then in much esteem by that King for
his great abilities and experience in state affairs. He wrote several things,
but not printed, and is supposed to be author of,

The History of the most unfortunate Prince K. Edw. 2. with choice political
observations on him and his unhappy favorites, Gaveston and Spencer:
containing several passages of those times not found in other Historians. Land.
1680. oct. Which book being found among the Papers of the said Henry Visc.
Falkland, was published therefore as his, when the Press was open for all such
books that could make any thing against the then Government, with a Preface to
the Reader patched up from very inconsiderable authors, by Sir Ja. H. as is
supposed. The Reader is to know that in 1628. was published at Land. in oct. an
historical Poem intit. The deplorable life and death of Edward the Second K. of
England, together with the downfall, etc. written by one Rich. Hubert: which
Poem being printed without the knowledge of the author, and so consequently
full of faults and not according to his mind, a true copy was printed at Land.
in the year following in oct. bearing this title, The History of Edw. 2.
surnamed Carnarvon one of our English Kings: together with the fatal downfall of
his two unfortunate Favorites, Gaveston and Spencer. Published by the authors
own copy, with the Addition of some other observations both of use and
ornament, written by his elder Brother Sir Franc. Hubert (or Hobert) Knight. As
for Henry Lord Falkland he gave way to fate, occasioned by the breaking of his
Leg on a stand in Theobald's Park, in Sept. or October. in sixteen hundred thirty
and three, Lucius Carry begotten on the body of his Wife Elizabeth, sole
Daughter and Heir of Sir Laurence Tanfield L. Chief Baron of the Exchequer, by
whom he had the Manor of Great Tew, the Priory, with the Rectory and Demesnes,
of Burford, in Oxfordshire, and other Lands. Whether this Lucius was born at
Burford, (as some think he was,) the public Register of that place, which
commences about the beginning of the Reign of K. Jam. 1. takes no notice of it:
However that he was mostly nursed there by a wet and dry Nurse, the Ancients of
that Town, who remember their names, have some years since informed me. So that
the place of his Nativity being yet doubtful to me, I must tell you that when
his Father became Lord Deputy of Ireland, he carried his Son Lucius then a wild
Youth with him into that Country, where he caused him to be educated in
Academical learning in Trinity coll. near to Dublin, and afterward sent him to
travel under the tutelage and protection of a discreet person, who making a
very great reformation in him, as to life, manners, and learning, Lucius had
ever after a great respect and veneration for him. Upon his return he retired
several times to Oxon to enlarge that learning, which he had acquired, as I
shall anon tell you. His first years of reason were spent in Poetry and polite
learning, into the first of which he made diverse plausible sallies, which
caused him therefore to be admired by the Poets of those times, particularly,
first by Ben. Johnson, who has an Epigram on him in his Underwood, in the
second vol. of his works. 2. By Edm. Waller of Beconsfield, who highly See in
his Poems written on several occasions. Land. 1668. p. 31.
extols his worth and admirable parts; and, 3. By Sir John Suckling, who
afterward brought him into his Poem, called, In Fragmenta aurea, or Poems.
Land. 1648. oct. p. 10.
The Session of Poets, thus, He was of late so gone with Divinity,
That he had almost forgot his Poetry,
Though to say the truth (and Apollo did know it)
He might have been both his Priest and his Poet.


Much about the time of his Fathers death, he became one of the Gent. of his
Majesty's Privy Chamber, had frequent retirements to Great Tew, and sometimes
to Oxon (as he had done very frequently before his Marriage) for the company
of, and conversation with, learned and witty men. Among whom were Will.
Chillingworth of Trinity coll. John Earl and Hugh Cressy of Merton coll.
George Aglionby of Chapter Chapter Charles Gataker of Pembroke coll. (Son of Thom.
Gataker of Redriff or Ridrith near to London,) who, I think, was afterward his
Chaplain, Thom. Triplet a very witty man of Chapter Chapter and others. He had also
intimate acquaintance with George Sandys the Poet, who usually lived at
Caswell, near to Witney, in the house of Sir Franc. W^nman, who married his
Sister; whose company was usually frequented, when Lucius retired to his house
at Burford. In 1639. he was put in Commission for his Majesty in the expedition
against the Scots, and upon his safe return thence, Abr. Cowley the Prince of
Poets, and a great admirer of him, has an excellent See more in his works,
printed at Land. 1678. fol. page 4.
copy of verses, wherein are several things honorably mentioned of him and his
learning. In the beginning of the year 1640. he was chosen a Member of the
House of Commons, for Newport in the Isle of Wight, to serve in that Parliament
that began at Westminster on the 13. of Apr. the same year, and again for the
same place for that Parliament that began there also 3. Nov. following: In
which last he showed himself a great reformer of diverse abuses, and a stickler
for the Commons against the Kings Prerogative, and Bishops. But being taken off
from those proceedings by being made one of the Secretaries of State, he ever
after adhered to his Majesty, was with him at York in 1642. and had a hand in
most of those Declarations published by his Majesty's special command in all
places in England, to show the reason of his intentions and proceedings.
Afterward he was a constant follower of his Majesty, was with him at Edghill
fight, and afterward at Oxon, where he discharged his office with a great deal
of prudence. While he lived, and especially after his death, he was esteemed by
many a Socinian, (having been, as it is said, strengthened in that opinion by
Chillingworth,) and I know not what; but one Hugh or Scren. Cressy in his
Epist. Apologetical, printed 1674..^.
that knew him very well, does (tho a zealous Papist) clear him from being
guilty of any such matter, and tells us withal, that he was the greatest
ornament to our Nation that the last age produced. Another Tho. Triplet in his
Epist. dedic. before the L. Falkland's book of Infallibility, printed 1651.
also, who had been intimate with him, says, that he was the envy of this age,
and will be the wonder of the next, that he honored and served his Creator in
the days of his youth, -- that he was not a Candidate of Atheism, etc. The
truth is, all that knew the said Lucius L. Falkland, were fully possessed with
opinions to the contrary, and have usually said, that he was a sincere
Christian, that he always led a virtuous life, and despised all worldly things
in comparison of necessary divine truth, that he was a lover of veracity and
sincerity, and what not, for the accomplishment of a religious man. As for his
parts, which speak him better than any Elogy, they were incomparable, and
needed no supplies of industry. His answers were quick and sudden, and tho he
had a great deal of true worth treasured up in him, yet he had much of modesty
withal. So that all these things put together, (to which more might be added,)
his memory ought to be precious, especially with such, who have any esteem for
virtue, heroical fidelity to their Prince, or to incomparable learning. Among
several things of his that are printed, are, (1) A speech in Parliament
concerning Uniformity. (2) Sp. concerning ill Counselors; both spoken in
1640. (3) Sp. about Ship Money 5. Dec. 1640. (4) Sp. concerning John Lord
Finch, lately L. Keeper, and the Judges. (5) Sp. to the Lords of the upper
House, after the reading of the Articles against John L. Finch 14. Jan. 1640.
(6) Sp. concerning Episcopacy 9. Feb. 1640, the beginning of which is Mr.
Speaker, he is a great stranger in Israel, etc. Which Sp. is said In the Life
of Archb. Laud. and also in his Observations on the Hist. of K. Chapter 1. written
by Ham. L'estrange, printed 1658. p. 122.
by Dr. P. Heylyn to be a bitter Speech against the Bishops, upon which account
it is much used and See Hen. Hickmans Justification of the Fathers and
Schoolmen, etc. Ox. 1659. sec. edit. p. 40. 41.
quoted by the Presbyterians. I have seen another Speech also intit. A draught
of a Speech concerning Episcopacy, found among the L. Falklands papers since
his death, written with his own hand. Oxon. 1644. in 1 sh. in qu. The beginning
of which is Mr. Speaker, whosoever desires this total change, etc. Also another
thing of his intit. A discourse concerning Episcopacy. Land. 1660. qu.
Published then I presume by one who was not a Friend to Bishops, being the
same, I think, that was by Dr. Heylyn taken to be a bitter Speech against them.
He has also written, A dscourse of the infallibility of the Church of Rome,
several times printed in qu. Whereupon an answer to it being made, the Lord
came out with a reply. All published together by Tho. Triplet sometimes Student
of Chapter Chapter afterward D. of D. and Prebendary of Westminster, printed at London
1651. qu. with a dedicatory epistle before them. See more in Dr. Hen. Hammond
under the year 1660. But before Triplets edition, another was put out by Anon.
to which J. P. put a Preface to it, which is omitted in that of Triplet. See
more in Hugh Cressy, under the year 1674. By this Discourse of infallibility it
is apparent that the L. Falkland had framed a judgment touching the R. Cath.
Church out of certain Cath. writers, who represented it too disadvantagiously,
and not with such qualifications as the Chapter her self has done. He also wrote,
An answer to a letter of Mr. Walt. Mountague, who justifies his change of
Religion, an. 1635. printed at the end of his Discourse of Infalibility, an.
1651. and A Letter to Mr. Fr. M. an. 1636. printed at the end of Five captious
questions, propounded by a Factor for the Papacy. Land. 1673. qu. As also a
Comedy called The marriage night. Land. 1664. qu. At length this learned author
being with his Majesty King Chapter 1. at Newbury in Berks. when he was about to
fight the Rebels, he called for a clean shirt in the morning before the
encounter began; and being asked the reason for it, he answered that if he was
slain in the Battle they should not find his body in foul linen. Whereupon his
friends endeavoring to dissuade him from going into the fight, as having no
call to it, or that he was a military Officer, he said he was weary of the
times and foresaw much misery to his own Country, and did believe he should be
out of it before night. Into the Battle therefore he did go, notwithstanding
all persuasions to the contrary, and was there slain, 20 Sept. 1643. much
lamented as a great Parliamentarian Bulstrode Whitlock in his Memorials of
English effairs, printed, 1682. p. 70. a.
says) of all that knew him, being a Gentleman of great parts, ingenuity and
honor, courteous and just to all, and a passionate promoter of all endeavors
of Peace betwixt the King and Parliament. Whether the Church of England lost a
friend by his death, some have doubted: Sure it is, learning it self had a
loss, and one of the greatest (as many Clergymen have said) that ever happened in
that or in the age before. His body was conveyed to Oxon, and afterward to
Great Tow before mentioned, where it was buried in the Church without being
carried into his house there. Over his grave, tho there be not yet any memory
extant, yet Sir Franc. Wortley of Wortley in Yorkshire Knight and Baronet, an
admirer of his virtues and learning, who styles him Musarum militumque patronus
has bestowed an Epitaph and an Elegy on him, in his book intit. Characters and
Elegies, printed 1646. in qu. His person was little and of no great strength,
his hair blackish and somewhat flaggy, and his eye black and quick. He left
behind him a most disconsolate Widow named Letice, the Daughter of Sir Rich.
Morison of Tooley-Park in Leicestershire Knight, the most devout, pious and
virtuous woman of the time she lived in, who dying about the 35. year of her
age, was buried by her husband. in Feb. 1646. Soon after was composed a book by
one John Duncon a sequestered Divine intit. The returns of spiritual comfort and
grief in a devout soul. Represented (by intercourse of Letters) to the right
honorable the Lady Letice Vi-countess Falkland, in her life time: And
exemplified in the holy life and death of the said honorable Lady, etc. Land.
1648. etc. oct. To the said book, if it may be had, I refer the Reader, wherein
he may soon perceive the unspeakable piety of the woman, and the great command
of her Pen. By her husband Lucius L. Falkland, she had several children, of
which the eldest named Lucius became a Nobleman of Chapter Chapter in the latter end of
the year (in Lent time) 1646. being then a young man of great hopes, but died
soon after, at Paris as I have heard. The next was Henry, not educated in
Academical learning, but so exceeding wild and extravagant, that he sold his
Fathers incomparable Library for a Horse and a Mare, as I have been informed by
Sir J. H. who married his Widow. Afterward he took up, and proved a man of
parts, (which might have been much advantaged if he had submitted himself to
education) was elected one of the Knights for Oxfordshire, to serve in that
Parliament (called Richards Parliament) that began at Westminster 27 Jan. 1658.
Burgess for the City of Oxon, for that called the Healing Parliament, which
began 25 Apr. 1660. and a Knight again for the said County to serve in the
Parliament that began in May in the year following; and at length by his
Majesty's favor, he was made about that time Lord Leiutenant of Oxfordshire.
He died 2 Apr. 1663. aged 29. or thereabouts, and was buried by the graves of
his Father and Mother, leaving then behind him issue (by Rachel his Wife Dau.
of Sir Anth. Hungerford of Blackbourton in Oxfordshire Knight.) a Son named
Anthony, now L. Falkland, Treasurer, Paymaster to the Navy during the reign of
K. Jam. 2. a person of great parts and worth.

Edw. Ferrers of Baldesley-Clynton in Warwickshire Esquire; was born in that
County, became a Student in this University (in Heart hall as it seems) in the
beginning of the reign of Qu. Elizabeth, but whether he took a degree it does
not appear. Afterward he retired to his Patrimony, which was considerable, and
prosecuting his natural Genie to the study of Heraldry, Genealogies, and
Antiquities, became highly valued for his eminent knowledge in them; whereby he
did not only give a fair luster to his ancient and noble family, (whereof he
was no small ornament) but also to the County of his nativity. He was well
known to, and respected by the Learned Camden, who, in his Discourse of the
antiquity of the City of Coventry in Warwickshire does make this honorable
mention of him. -- Thus much of Coventry: yet have you not all this of me, but
(willingly to acknowledge by whom I have profited) of Henry Ferrers of
Baldesley, a man both for parentage, and for knowledge of antiquity very
commendable, and my special friend: who, both in this place, and also
elsewhere, has at all times courteously showed me the right way when I was out,
and from his Candle, as it were has lightened mine. What this Mr. Ferrers has
published, I know not, sure I am that he made several volums of choice
collections (one of which in fol. containing Pedegrees, I have seen in the
Sheldonian Library, now in that of the college of Arms) from which, but chiefly
from those of Sir Sim. Archer of Vmberslade in the parish of Tamworth in
Warwickshire, a person naturally qualified with a great affection to
Antiquities, Will. Dugdale Gent. (afterward a Knight) laid a large foundation
of that elaborate work (which is his Masterpiece) intit. The Antiquities of
Warwickshire illustrated, etc. Land. 1656. fol. After Sir Will. Dugdales death
several of Mr. Ferrers collections that had come into his hands were reposited
in the Ashmolean Musaeum: see the book marked with Z. He had also in his
younger days a good faculty in Poetry, some of which I have seen scattered in
diverse books printed in the reign of Qu. Elizabeth. At length dying on the
tenth day of Oct. in sixteen hundred thirty and three, W. Dugd. in his Antiq.
Warwickshire, p. ^10
buried in the middle of the Chancel belonging to the Church of
Baldesley-Clynton before mentioned, leaving behind him the character of a well
bred Gent, a good neighbor and an honest man.

WILLIAM FOSTER, a Londoner born, became John's coll. in Mich. Term 1609. aged
18. afterward M. of A. Chaplain to Rob. L. Dormer E. of Carnarvan, and Parson
of a little Town called Hedgley near to Beconsfield in Bucks. He has published,

Sermon on Romans 6. 12. -- printed 1629. qu.

Hoplocrisma-Spongus: Or a Sponge to wipe away the weapon salve. Wherein is
proved that the cure taken up among us, by applying the Salve to the weapon, is
magical and unlawful. Land. 1631. qu. In the composure of which book he had
some light from Johannes Roberti a Jesuit, and D. of D. who, because some
Protestants practice this and characterical cures (which notwithstanding are
more frequent among Roman Catholics) he therefore calls them MagiCalvinists,
Characterists, etc. He makes that generally in them all, doctrinal, which is
but in some few personally practiced. But our author Foster, Clar. 1633.
tho he has written rationally, and in his book has showed great reading, yet
he has been answered, not without some scorn, by Rob. Fludd Doctor of Physic,
as I shall tell you elsewhere. This Will. Foster lived some years after the
publication of his Sponge, but when he died, or what other things he has
extant, I cannot yet tell.

EDWARD WESTON, Son of Will. Weston Linc. coll. (afterward one of the Society
of Lincolns Inn) by his Wife, Daughter of John Story LL. D. (of whom I have
made mention under the year 1571.) was born in London and at about 12 or 13
years of age, an. 1578. was sent to the said coll. of Lincoln, where he had a
Tutor that taught him Grammar and Logic for a time. Afterward being taken
thence by his Parents, he was put under the tuition of Dr. Joh. Case, who, with
license from the University, read to Scholars Logic and Philosophy in his
house in S. Mar. Magdalens parish. Under him he profited in several sorts of
learning to a miracle, became a good Disputant, and very well read in
Philosocal authors. But his Parents, who were R. Catholics, taking him away
from his conversation with the Muses, after he had spent at least 5 years in
Oxon. without the taking any degrees, was sent into France, where for a short
time he settled in the English coll. at Rheimes. Thence he went to the English
coll. at Rome, where, partly in Philosophy, and partly in Divinity, he spent
six years; and at length took the degree of Doctor of Div. in the University of
Monreale in Italy. Soon after, he returned to Rhemes, where remaining for some
time, eh went to Doway, and in the English coll. there taught and professed
Divinity for about 10. years. Afterward he went into England to preach the
word of God, to administer to the distressed Catholics, and to gain Souls to
his Religion, where he was living in 1611. But his same for the exquisite
writings that he published gaining him a great name, was called thence and made
Canon of the collegiat Church of S. Mary at Bruges in Flanders, which he kept
till the time of his death. He has written,

Justificationes de triplici hominis officio, ex notione ipsius naturali,
morali, ac Theologica, in 3. libris. Antw. 1602. qu. In the Preface to which,
the author having uttered several matters against the learned Dr. Joh.
Rainolds, which were by the Protestants taken for great reproaches, were
animadverted upon by Wake In Orat. sunchri Joh. Rainoldi, edit. 1608.
the Orator of Oxon in these words -- Eat autem Westonus, etc. Let yet Weston
that lewd and shameless Rabshake, belch out what reproaches he pleases against
him, ( Rainolds) and charge him not only with stupid dullness, but also that he
counterfeited sickness, and pretended only to a disease, to preserve his
credit, etc. Notwithstanding which, this Weston himself (so like his Dr. Hugh
Weston sometimes Rector of Linc. coll. who was his great Uncle, See more of him
under the year 1558. p. 93.
Uncle in his ill conditions and ignominious flight) when he challenged all the
Heads of the University and branded them for inpure, only for that some of them
had entered into the state of Matrimony, could not find any one act out of Dr.
Joh. Raynolds in all his life to blemish him withal, etc.

Juris pontificii sanctuarium. printed 1613. in oct. This I have not yet seen.

The trial of christian truth by the rules of virtues, namely these principal,
Faith, Hope, Charity and Religion, etc. Doway 1614. qu. This is the first part,
which treats only of Faith. The rest I have not yet seen.

Theatrum vitae civilis ac sacrae: five de moribus reipub. christianae
commentaria in quinque libros distributa. Brugis Flandr. 1626. fol.

Jesu Christi D. nostri coruscationes, simulque ^orum vi. dictorum, factorumque
quarundam personarum, eodem Christo praesente, in Evangelica historia
recensitorum enarrationes, etc. Antw. 1631. fol. What other things he has
published I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he was living in
sixteen hundred thirty and three, Clar: 1633:
as I have been informed by Franc. a S. Clara, who told me also that he died
and was buried at Bruges in Flanders. Besides this Edw. Weston, I find one
Will. Weston born at Maidstone in Kent, who was contemporary with Edm. Campian
the Jesuit in the University of Oxon. which place he leaving, he went beyond
the Seas, entered Hen. Morus in Hist. provinc. Angl^ Soc. Jesu, lib. 4: nu. 15.
into the Society of Jesus 1571. aged 25. and after Jasp. Heywoods departure
out of England, he was sent thither by Father Parsons from Paris to be his
substitute in the place of Provincial, and how he behaved himself in that
Office, let another Tho. Bell in his Anatomy of Popish Tyranny, lib. 2. cap. 2.
tell you. In 1587. he was taken, and imprisoned in Wisbich Castle, with
others, where I find In the Relation of the faction began at Wisbich, etc.
printed 1601. qu.
him to be the prime promoter and carrier on of the faction between the
Seculars and Jesuits: see more in Christop. Bagshaw under the year 1625. This
Will. Weston is much noted in English Story by the name of Father Edmonds alias
Weston, especially upon the publication of a book written by Sam. Harsnet
afterward Archb. of York, intit. A declaration of egregious popish impostures,
to withdraw the hearts of her Majesty's Subjects from their allegiance, etc.
under the pretense of casting out devils, practiced by Edmonds alias Weston a
Jesuit, etc. Land. 1603. qu. He died 9 Apr. 1615. leaving then behind him a
precious name among the Brethren of his Order. This person tho evilly treated
and disgracefully mentioned by the Secular Priests and certain Protestant
writers, yet Father Parsons in his Brief Apology Printed at S. Om^r, 1601. in
oct. fol. 63. b. 64. etc.
or defense of the Catholic Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, etc. speaks very
honorably of him as to his piety and mortified way of living.

WILLIAM NOY, Son of Will. Noy of S. Burian in Cornwall Gent. by Philippa his
Wife, was born there, became a sojournour of Exeter coll. in 1593. aged 16.
where continuing a severe Student about 3 years, left the University without a
degree, went to Linc. Inn, studied the Common Law, and by his unwearied
industry and moyling day and night he became eminent in his profession. In the
latter end of the reign of K. Jam. 1. he was chose a Burgess for Helston in his
own Country to sit in that Parliament that began at Westminster 30. Jan. 1620.
and for that which began there 19. Feb. 1623. In both which he showed himself a
professed enemy to the Kings prerogative. In 1625. he was elected a Burgess for
S. Ives to sit in that Parliament, which began at Westminster 6. Feb. wherein,
as in another following, showing himself an enemy as before, he was at length
diverted from his proceedings by being made Attorney General, an. 1631. He was
as famous a Lawyer as ever this Kingdom bred, as a certain author Sir Ant.
Weldon in his book intit. The Court of K. Charles continued unto the beginning
of these unhappy times, etc. Printed at the end of The Court and Character of
K. James. Land. 1651. sec. edit. p. 194. 195.
informs us, who adds that formerly he was a great Patriot, and the only
searcher of Presidents for the Parliaments: By which he grew so cunning, as he
understood all the shifts which former kings had used to get moneys with. This
man the K. sent for, told him, he would make him his Attorney. Noy, like a true
cynick as he was, did, for that time go away, not returning to the King so much
as the civility of thanks, nor indeed, was it worth his thanks, I am sure he
was not worthy of ours. For, after the Court solicitings had bewitched him, to
become the Kings, he grew the most hateful man that ever lived, etc. he having
been as great a deluge to this Realm, as the flood was to the whole world: For
he swept away all our privileges, and in truth has been the cause of all
these miseries this Kingdom has since been ingulphed; whether you consider our
Religion (he being a great Papist, if not an Atheist, and the protecter of all
Papists, and the raiser of them up unto that boldness they were now grown unto)
or if you consider our Estates and Liberties, which were impoverished and
enthralled by multitudes of Papists and illegal ways, which this Monster was
the sole author of, etc. He was a man passing Ham. L'estrange in his Hist. of
the reign of K. Chapter 1. under the year 1634.
humorous, of cynical rusticity, a most indesatigable plodder, and searcher of
ancient Records, whereby he became an eminent instrument of good and ill to the
Kings Prerogative. His apprehension (as it is said) was quick and clear, his
judgment methodical and solid, his memory strong, his curiosity deep and
searching, his temper patient and cautious, all tempered with an honest
bluntishness, far from Court insinuation. He left behind him several things fit
for the Press, and under his name were these books afterward published.

A Treatise of the principal grounds and maxims of the Laws of England, Land.
1641. qu. Afterward printed in oct. and tw.

Perfect conveyancer: or several select and choice Precedents. Land. 1655. qu.
2d edit. collected partly by Will. Noy, and partly by Sir Rob. Hendon Knight,
sometimes one of the Barons of the Exchequer, Rob. Mason sometimes Recorder of
London, and Henry Fleetweod, formerly Reader of Greys Inn.

Reports and cases in the time of Qu. Elizabeth, K. James and King Charles 1.
containing the most excellent exceptions for all manner of Declarations,
Pleadings, and Demurs, exactly examined and laid down. London 1656. fol.

The complete Lawyer: or a Treatise concerning Tenures and Estates in Lands of
inheritance for life and other hereditaments, and chattels real and personal,
etc. Land. 1661. and 74. in oct. with his picture before it.

Arguments of Law and Speeches -- He also left behind him several choice
collections that he had made from the Records in the Tower of London, reduced
into two large paper books of his own handwriting. One contained collections
concerning the Kings maintaining his Naval power according to the practice of
his Ancestors; and the other about the privileges and jurisdiction of
ecclesiastical Courts. Dr. Tho. James of Oxon. when he compiled his Mannduction
or Introduction unto Divinity, printed 1625. he afterward acknowledged himself
See in the Table of MSS. by Dr. James, quoted at the dne of the said Manuduction
beholding to the Extracts out of the Tower, fairly and largly transcribed (as
he says) by the said Mr. Noy a great Antiquary of Law. Which extracts, I
presume, are the same with those before mentioned. At length his body being
much out of Order by continual toyling and drudging, he retired to
Tunbridge-wells to gain health in the month of July, but the waters effecting
nothing; he died there, on Saturday the 9. of Aug. following, in sixteen
hundred thirty and four, New Brentford in Middlesex, was privately buried on
the Monday following under the communion table of the Chancel of the Church
there. Over his grave was a stone soon after laid, with a brass plate fastened
thereunto, and an inscription thereon, but soon after defaced. The next day
after his departure, the news of it came to Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury then
at Croydon, who thereupon made In the Breviat of his life, p. 19.
this observation of him in his Diary. I have lost a dear friend of him, and
the Church the greatest she had of his condition since she needed any such. His
body being opened after his decease, his heart was found shrivel'd like a
leather penny Purse, nor were his Lungs right, which caused several conjectures
by the Puritans. But that which was most observable after his death, was his
Will, In the Will-Office near to S. Paul's Cath. in reg. Seager, Qu. 84.
dated 3 June 1634. at which all the world wondered, because the maker thereof
was accounted a great Clerk in the Law; for therein, after he had bequeathed to
his Son Hamphrey an hundred marks per an. to be paid out of his tenements in
the hundred of Pydar in Cornwall, he concludes, and reliqua omnia, etc. and the
rest of all my Lands, Goods, etc. I leave to my Son Edward Noy, whom I make my
Executor, to be consumed and scattered about, nec de so mellus speravi, etc.
But Edward lived not long to enjoy the estate, for within two years after, he
was slain in a Duel in France, by one Captain Byron, who escaped scot-free and
had his pardon, as Will. Prynn an inveterate enemy to Will. Noy his Father See
at the end, in an append. to a book intit. A Divine Tragedy lately octed, or a
collection of sundry memorable examples, etc. Printed beyond Sea, an* 1636. qu.
reports. As his Majesty was somewhat troubled at his loss, and the Clergy
more, so the generality of the Commons rejoiced. The Vintners drank carouses,
in hopes to dress meat again and fell Tobaco, Beer, etc. which by a fullen
capricio, Noy restrained them from. The Players also for whom he had done no
kindness, did, the next Term after his decease, make him the subject of a merry
Comedy, styled A projector lately dead, etc. He had his humors as well as
other men, but certainly he was a solid rational man, and tho no great Orator,
yet he was a profound Lawyer, and none more better versed in Records than he.
In his place of Attorney General succeeded Sir Joh. Banks, and the next year
Sir Rob. Heath being removed from the Chapter Justiceship of the Kings Bench for
bribery, Sir John Finch came into play, whereupon these verses were made. Noyes
Flood is gone
The Banks appear,
Heath is shorn down
And Finch sings there.


Hyckes, Son of Francis Hicks, mentioned under the year 1630, was born at
Shipson in the parish of Tredington in Worcestershire, became a Student in
Balliol coll. in Mich-Term, an. 1616. aged 17. or thereabouts, took the degrees
in Arts, and at length by the favor of Doctor Duppa Dean of Christ's Church
became one of the Chaplains or Petticanons of that House, about 1628. He has
written,

The life of Lucian, gathered out of his own writings Oxon. 1634. qu. Which
life is set before his Fathers translation of certain dialogues of that author.

Notes and illustrations upon each dialogue, and book of Lucian, etc. --
Besides his great skill in the Greek rongue, he was esteemed among the
Academians a good Poet, and an excellent Limner: And without doubt had not
death cut him off in the prime of his years on the sixteenth day of December,
in sixteen hundred thirty and four, 1634:
he might have benefited the Commonwealth of learning with other matters. He
died in Christ Church and was buried in the Cathedral there; which is all I yet
know of him, only that Dr. J. F. the publisher of Hist. and Antiq. Oxon.
committed a grand mistake of him in that book lib. 2. p. 283. b. Another of
both his names was author of A dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker, etc.
To which a continuation was added by the same author, in 1673. in oct.

ARTHUR PITS, or Pitsius as he writes himself, Arthur Pits Bach. of Law,
sometimes Fellow of Alls. coll. afterward Registrary of the Diocese and
Achdeaconry of Oxford, and Impropriator of Eifley near to, and in the County of
Oxon. was born at Eifley, educated for a time either in Alls. or Brasnose coll.
or in both successively, having been a Chorister of the first as it it seems,
but before he took a degree he left the University, Country, and Relations,
went to Doway, spent some time in the English coll. there, returned into his
Country, was taken and imprisoned: but at length being released and shipped with
other Priests and Jesuits at Tower-Wharf, at the Queens charge in Febr. 1584.
was set on shore in Normandy. Whereupon retiring to Doway passed a course in
Divinity, became Doctor of that faculty, and at length was made Chancellor to
the Cardinal of Loraine, being then a person much in esteem for his great
knowledge in the supreme faculty. He has written,

In quatuor Jesu Christi Evangelia and Acta Apostolorum commentarius. Duac.
1636. in a thick quarto. Which being all that he has written, as I suppose,
was published after his death by the English Benedictines at Doway, as one of
them has told me. At length Doctor Pits coming into England for health sake,
left his preferment beyond the Seas, and settled in the house of a R. Catholic,
named Stoner of Blounts Court near to Henley in Oxfordshire, a younger family
of those of Stomer near to Watlington: Rotherfield Pipard, commonly called
Pepper near to Henley before mentioned, as I have been informed by an ancient
Catholic Gentlewoman, who was born within a mile of, and well acquainted with,
him: yet in the register of that Church his own name appears not. His Father
Art. Pits died at Eifley in 1579. and was buried on the north side of the
Chancel there, leaving a fair estate behind him to be enjoyed by four Sons then
living, viz. Robert, Thomas, Arthur and Philip.

ROBERT JOHNSON, a Londoner born, became Magd. coll. an. 1595. and in the year
after Demi, aged 18. took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed
in 1601. Afterward he entered into the sacred function, became one of his
Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, and Bach. of Divinity; which is all I know of
him, only that he published,

The way to glory, or the preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary means of our
Salvation, Sermon in St. Paul's Cathedral 10. December. 1620. on 2 These. 2. 14.
London 1621. qu.

A confutation of our Adversaries opinion of the Popes defining and expounding,
Scriptures, Ex Cathedra is to be believed as undoubted truth. -- Printed with
the former book.

Various Sermons, as (1) The necessity of faith, before the Prince at S. James,
Clar. 1634.
on Heb. 11, 6. Land. 1624. qu. (2) Sermon. on Psalm. 119. 33. -- Pr. in qu. (3)
Sermon. on 1 Cor. 9. 14. London 1633. and a fourth, if I mistake not, intit.
David's Teacher, on Psalm. 19. 30 -- Printed 1609. Besides this Robert Johnson,
has been several of both his names that have been writers, as (1) Robert
Johnson Gent. author of Essaies. Land. 1607. (oct.) (dedicated to Will. Earl of
Pembroke) whom I cannot say to be the same with Rob. Johnson of Qu. coll. born
in the County of Durham, and Bach. of Arts 1599. (2) Rob. Johnson of York one
of the Assembly of Divines, an. 1643. author of several Sermons preached before
the members of the Long Parliament, as one intit. Lux and Lex, or the light of
the Law of Jacobs house, Fast Sermon. before the H. of Com. 31. Mar. on Isay 2.
6. Land. 1647. qu. Another preached before the Lords 24. Jun. 1646. being a
Fast Sermon, but I have not yet seen it. (3) Rob. Johnson LL. Bac. who, with
Hen. Jolliffe sometimes Dean of Bristow, wrote against Bishop Joh. Hooper, a I
shall tell you in the Fasti, an. 1551. (4) Rob. Johnson an eminent Musician
living in the reign of Chapter 1. who with Tho. Ford were accounted famous and
excellent in their faculties, as matters of their composition, which are
extant, show. (5) Robert Johnson author of Relations of the most famous
Kingdoms and Commonwealths through the world, Land. 1616. qu. which is all I
know of him as yet. See another Rob. Johnson who was a benefactor to learning,
in the Fasti, an. 1564.

Denbighshire man born, bred up at the feet of Will. Morgan, (afterward B. of
S. Asaph) became a Student in Jesus coll. in 1589, took one degree in Arts four
years after, left the University without completing it by Determination,
studied Divinity in the Country, and in the year 1608. was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences as a member of Linc. coll. having been fourteen years
a Minister of Gods Word, and dispensed with for not ruling in Arts. But before
that time he was Rector of Malloyd, or Maynlloyd in Merionithshire, (which
occasioned, as I presume, Sir Leolyne Jenkyns to tell me that he was that
Countryman born) and afterward a Canon of S. Asaph by the gift of Doctor Parry
B. thereof, (to whom he was Chaplain) and a Dignitary, if I mistake not, in
some other Church. In 1616. he proceeded in his faculty, as a member of the
said coll. of Lincoln, being then esteemed by the Academians well versed in the
History and Antiquities of his own Nation, and in the Greek and Hebrew
Languages, a most exact Critic, an indefatigable searcher into ancient
Scripts, and well acquainted with curious and rare authors. His works are,

Ant quae linguae Britannicae nunc communiter dictae Cambro-Britannicae, a suis
Cymraecae vel Cambricae, ab aliis Wallicae rudimenta, etc. Land. 1621. oct.

Dictionarium Britannico-Latinum. Land. 1632. fol. With this, is printed,

Dictionarium Latino-Britannicum. Which was in a manner finished by Tho.
Williams a Physician, before the year 1600. Afterward completed and published
by Dr. Davies. I have been informed that in the Library of MSS. sometimes
belonging to Rob. Vaughan of Hengwrt in Merionithshire, is a Welsh Dictionary
that contains about two thousand words more than in the former.

Land. 1632. printed at the end of the Dict. before mentioned.
Adagia Britannica. Authorum Britannicorum nomina and quando floruerunt.


Adagiorum Britannicorum Specimen -- MS. in bib. Bod. He also assisted Will.
Morgan B. of Landaff and afterward of S. Asaph, and Rich. Parry who succeeded
him in the Sea of S. Asaph, in translating the Bible into Welsh, I mean in that
corrected edition, that came out temp. Jac. Clar. 1634.
1. (1620.) and also translated into the same language (which he had studied at
vacant hours for thirty years) the book of Resolution, written by Rob. Persons
a Jesuit. On the first of Feb. 1626. was one Joh. Davies a Doctors Son admitted
Bac. of Arts, as a member of Glouc. hall, which I take to be Son of Doctor John
Davies before mentioned, at which time Sir John Davies the Mathematician had a
Son of both his names, who was Gent. Com. of that house.

London, applied his muse to Academical Literature in Chapter Chapter 1614. aged 14 of
which house he was afterward made a Student, and at about seven years standing
taking the degree of M. of A. he entered into holy Orders, and became a very
florid preacher in the University. In 1628. he was admitted to the reading of
the Sentences, at which time he was esteemed excellent for Dramatick Poesy,
especially upon his publishing of,

The Tragedy of Ludov. Sforsa Duke of Millan. Land. 1628. oct. Dedic. to Mr.
Fr. Hyde of Chapter Chapter Proctor of the University. He wrote also

The Levites revenge, containing Poetical meditations on the 19. and 20.
Chapters of Judges. Land. 1628. oct. Dedic. to Mr. Barten Holyday, Archd. of
Oxford.

Sermons on 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. London 1634. Dedicated to Sir John
Strangwayes of Melbury in Dorsetshire, who seemed to be a favourer of the
authors studies.

Poems -- Land. Clar. 1634.
1638. oct. They were before published, and had then (1638.) a new title put to
them. One Rob. Gomersall, who seems to be a Devonian born, died 1646. leaving
then by his Will In the Will-Office, near to S. Paul's Cath. Chapter in Reg. Essex
part 3. Qu. 143.
1000 l. to his Son Robert, which Son perhaps may be the writer before
mentioned.

THOMAS INGMETHORP, a Worcestershire Brasnose coll. in the latter end of May
1581. aged 19. went away without any Degree conferred upon him, and was
afterward made Rector of Great Stainton, or Stainton in that Street in the
Bishopric of Durham, being then accounted eminent for the Hebrew tongue, and
for his admirable methods in Pedagogy; which employment he practiced not only
before he came to Stainton, but also afterward in his private house there
among 12 or 14. boys, till almost to the time of his death. He has published,

Several Sermons, as (1) Sermon. on 1 John chap. 2. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. Oxon. 1598.
oct. (2) Sermon upon the words of Saint Paul, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, Romans 13. 1. wherein the Popes Sovereignty over Princes is
briefly, but sufficiently refuted, etc. London 1619. quarto; and others which I
have not yet seen.

A short Catechism for young children to learn, by Law authorized, etc. Land.
1633. oct.

Catechism in English and Hebrew -- printed in octavo. Clar. 1634.
This I have not seen, nor any thing else, besides what is before set down. He
died and was buried at Stainton before mentioned, but when, I know not.

MILES SANDYS, a Knights Son, was born in Worcestershire, became a Gent. Com.
of Ha^t hall in the beginning of the year 1615. aged 15, but put under the
tuition of Dr. Rich. Astley, Fellow (afterward Warden) of Allsouls college, by
whose endeavors this our author became afterward a complete Gentleman. He
departed without a degree, tho much deserving of one, and afterward had the
degree of Knighthood conferred upon him by his Majesty some years after. He has
written,

Prudence, the first of the four Cardinal virtues. Land. 1634. in tw. Clar.
1634:
It Is the first part of a small work written by him, chiefly concerning the
Four Cardinal virtues, especially Prudence; wherein is much reading showed.
What other parts followed I know not, nor any thing else of the author. One Sir
Miles Sandys of Wilberton in Cambridgeshire Knight and Baronet, third Son of
Edwyn Archbishop of York, died in the latter end of 1644, leaving then behind
him a Son called Sir Miles Sandys Knight and Baronet: Whether this last be the
same with the writer before mentioned I know not.

LEONARD DIGGES, Son of Tho. Digges mentioned Anne his Wife, Daughter of Sir
Warham St. Leodgar Knight, was born in London, became a Commoner of Vniv. coll.
in the beginning of the year 1603. aged 15. took the degree of Bac. of Arts,
retired to the great City for the present, afterward traveled into several
Countries, and became an accomplished person. Some years after his return he
retired to his coll. again, and upon his supplication made to the venerable
Convocation, he was, in consideration that he had spent Reg. Convoc. N. fol.
234. ^.
many years in good letters in transmarine Universities, actually created M. of
A. in 1626. He was esteemed by those that knew him in Vniv. coll. a great
Master of the English language, a perfect understander of the French and
Spanish, a good Poet and no mean Orator. He has translated out of Spanish into
English a Romance called Gerardo the unfortunate Spaniard, in two parts. Land.
1622. qu. written by Don Goncalo de Cespedes: And from Lat. into English verse,
The rape of Proserpine, in 3 books. Land. 1617. and 28. qu. written by
Claudian; besides other things which I have not yet seen. He died on the 7.
Apr. in sixteen hundred thirty and five, and was buried in that little old
Chapel of Vniv. coll. (sometimes standing about the middle of the present
Quadrangle) which was pulled down in 1668. Several verses of his composition I
have seen printed in the beginning of various authors, particularly those
before Shakespeares works, which show him to have been an eminent Poet of his
time.

Brodaeus as he writes himself, Son of Will. Broad of Rendcombe in
Gloucestershire Clerk, made his first entry into S. Mary's hall in Mich. Term
1594. aged 17. and soon after translating himself to that of S. Alban, took the
degrees in Arts as a Member thereof. In 1611. in which year his Father died, he
became Rector of Rendcomb, the place of his nativity, where, as before in Oxon,
he was held in great esteem for his learning and Religion. He has written,

Touchstone for a Christian, wherein is showed how a man may know whether he
be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, etc. Land. 1613. etc. in tw.

The Christians Warfare, etc. Sermon. on Jam. 4. 7. Land. 1613. in tw.

Three questions answered. The first question, What should our meaning be, when
after the reading of the fourth Commandment, we pray, Lord incline our hearts
to keep this Law. The second question, How the fourth Commandment, being
delivered in such form of words, bind us to sanctify any day, but only the
seventh, etc. And the third question, How shall it appear to be the Law of
Nature to sanctify one day every week. Oxon. 1621. qu.

Tractatus de Sabbato, in quo doctrina Ecclesiae primitivae declaratur ac
defenditur. Printed 1627. qu.

Two Treatises: one concerning the Sabbath or Seventh day. The other concerning
the Lords day, or first of the week. -- These two that were written in English
and not printed, came in MS. into the hands of one George Abbot, not he that
was Archbishop of Canterbury, but another, who making an answer to them,
published it under the title of Vindiciae Sabbathi, or an answer to two
treatises of Mr. Broad, etc. Land. 1641. qu. He the said Tho. Broad departed
this mortal life about the middle, or latter end of June, Samuel, in the
Chancel of the Church at Rendcombe beforementioned, leaving then behind him
four Sons (besides Daughters) which he had by Margaret his Wife, viz. William,
Thomas, Sam. and John. Thomas succeeded him (if I mistake not) in the Rectory
of Rendcombe, and afterward became Rector of Risington Magna in
Glucestershire, where he died in the beginning of 1679.

Ewel in Surrey, Son See in the latter end in his Poems.
of Vincent A Gardener at Twick^am in Mid. as it is reported.
Corbet; farther known
By Poynters name, than by his own.


And after he had spent some years in Westminster School, was sent to
Broadgates hall in Lent-Term 1^97-98. aged 15. and in the year after was made
Student of Chapter Chapter In 1605. he proceeded M. of A. being then esteemed one of
the most celebrated Wits in the University, as his Poems, Jests, Romantic
fancies and exploits, which he made and performed extempore, showed. Afterward
entering into holy Orders, he became a most quaint Preacher and therefore much
followed by ingenious men. At length being made one of the Chaplains to his
Maj. K. Jam. 1. (who highly valued him for his fine fancy and preaching) he was
by his favor promoted to the Deanery of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, an. 1620. being then
D. of D. Senior Student of that house, Vicar of Cassington near to Woodstock in
Oxfordshire, and Prebendary of Beminster Secunda in the Church of Sarum. At
length upon the translation of Dr. Howson to the Sea of Durham; he, by virtue
of the Kings Letters, was elected Bishop of Oxon, 30. July 1629. and afterward
consecrated at Lambeth 19. October. and installed in his Chair 3. Nov. following.
Upon the translation of Dr. White to Ely, he was elected Bishop of Norwich 7.
Apr. 1632. and had restitution of the Temporalities belonging thereunto, made
Pat. ^. Car. 1. p. 12.
to him on the 12. of May the same year. His writings that are published are
only,

Poetica Stromata: or, a collection of sundry pieces of Poetry: Land. 1647. 48.
etc. oct. made in his younger years, and never intended to be published by
their author. He was buried at the upper end of the Choire belonging to the
Cath. Norwich, in sixteen hundred thirty and five, and soon after, was a large
Free stone of a sandy color, laid over his body, with this engraven on a brass
plate fastened thereunto. Richardus Corbet Theologiae Doctor, Ecclesiae
Cathedralis Christi Oxoniensis primum Alumnus, inde Decanus, exinde Episcopus,
illinc hu^ translatus, and hinc in Coelum, Julii 28. an* 1635. On the said
stone are the ancient Arms of the Corbets of Shropshire, viz. Or, a Raven
passant sab. This person was hospitably disposed and ever ready to express
himself generous toward public designs. Upon the repair of S. Paul's
Cathedral, an. 1634. he used his utmost endeavor both by his excellent speech
and exemplary gifts to advance that pious work, not only contributing largely
himself; but also giving moneys to some Ministers, that had not to give, to
encourage others to contribute, that might better give.

JOHN COLLETON, or Collington, Son of Edmund of Milverton in Somersetshire
Gent. was born there, and at 17 years of age, an. 1565. was sent to the
University of Oxon, particularly, as it is thought, to Lincoln coll. but leaving
the place without a degree, and his Country, he crossed the Seas and went to
Doway, where applying himself to the study of Divinity in the English coll. was
made a Priest, and returned into England with Father Campian, an. 1580. But
being taken and sent Prisoner to the Tower of London, was afterward, upon his
trial for conspiring the death of the Queen at Rome or Rheimes, set at liberty,
and charged to depart the Land within few days after. In obedience therefore to
that command, he, with others of his profession, went (or rather were sent)
accordingly, in 1584. but tarrying there not long, returned, and spent many
years in administering to the Brethren, and gaining Proselytes. In which time,
as Father Persons reports, he was a principal author of the Libels against the
Archpriestship: See more in Christop. Bagshaw, under the year 1625. In the
Reign of K. Jam. 1. he was made Archdeacon of London, (only titular) Vicar
General of the East parts of England, and at length Dean of Chalcedon, but when
age grew upon him, Greg. Fisher alias Musket, Archdeacon of Surrey and
Middlesex, was added as a Coadjutor in the Office of Vicar General, 10. Feb.
1626. to assist in the East parts of England, namely in Essex, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridgshire, Isle of Ely, Bedfordshire, Bucks, Middlesex, and
Hertford. He has written and published,

A just defense of the slandred Priests, wherein are contained reasons against
their receiving Mr. George Blackwel to be their Superior, etc. -- Printed 1602.
qu. concerning which book and Father Persons his character therein, you may see
in The Anatomy of Popish Tyranny, etc. written by Tho. Bell, lib. 4. cap. 5.
sect. 4.

Supplication to the King of Great Britain for a toleration of the Cath.
Religion.

Epistle to P. Paul 5. -- with other things which I have not yet seen. He ended
his days in the house of a Romans Catholic at Eltham in Kent, on the fourteenth
of the Calends of November. John Bapt. Over his grave was soon after a monumental
stone laid, with an inscription round the verge, a copy of which was sent to me
by his Sisters Son, named Joh. Kynn O. S. B. living at Beoly in Worcestershire.
Much about the time that this Joh. Colleton studied according to report in
Linc. college, one Joh. Filby an Oxfordshire man born, studied there also, who
leaving that coll. before he was Bac. of Arts, went to Rheimes, where he
studied Divinity in the English coll. and was made a Priest. Afterward being
sent into the Mission of England, he was taken, imprisoned, and at length being
condemned to die, was executed at Tyburn 30. May 1582.

ALEXANDER GILL, born in Lincolnshire on Feb. 1564. was admitted Scholar of
Corp. Chapter coll. in Sept. 1583. took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being
completed in 1590. left the coll. and became an instructor of Youth, but
where, unless in the City of Norwich, (where he lived 1597. and then wrote his
treatise of the Trinity,) I know not. Sure I am, that in 1608. he became the
chief Master of S. Paul's School within the City of London, in the place of
Rich. Mulcaster, was esteemed by most persons to be a learned man, a noted
Latinist, Critic, and Divine, and also to have such an excellent way of
training up youth, that none in his time went beyond him. Whence 'twas that
many noted persons in Church and State, did esteem it the greatest of their
happiness, that they had been educated under him His works are,

Treatise concerning the Trinity in unity of the Deity. Land. 1601. oct.
written to Tho. Manering an Anabaptist, who denied that Jesus is very God of
very God.

Logonomia Anglica. Qua gentis sermo facilius addiscitur. Land. 1621. qu.

Sacred Philosophy of holy Scripture. Or a Commentary on the Creed. Land. 1635.
fol. At the end of which is printed also his Treatise of the Trinity before
mentioned. He died in his house in St. Paul's Chapter Yard, on the 17. November. in
sixteen hundred thirty and five, and was buried on the twentieth day of the
same month in Mercers Chapel in London, in a vault near to the Monument of Mr.
Brown and Mr. Fishbourne. He left behind him a Son of both his names, whom I
shall hereafter mention.

Richard Deane Bishop of Ossory, and both the Sons of Gilb. Deane of
Saltonstall in Yorkshire, was born there, or in that County, entered a Student
in Merton coll. in Lent-Term 1591. aged 19. took one degree in Arts, and then
retired to St. Albans hall, where prosecuting his Genie which he had to the
faculty of Physic, took both the degrees therein, as a member of the said
hall, and about that time retired to the City of York, and practiced there,
till about the beginning of the Civil Wars. He has written,

Spadacrene Anglica: or, the English Spaw Fountain, being a brief Treatise of
the acid or tart Fountain in the Forest of Knaresborough in Yorkshire. Land.
1626. in oct.

A relation of other medicinal waters in the said Forest -- Printed with the
former book.

Admiranda chymica in oct. tractatulis, Clar. 1635.
cum figuris. Franc. 1630. 35. qu. Sam. Norton is esteemed half author of this
book. This eminent Physician died before the Civil War brake forth, but the
particular time, I know not.

Arminians, was born in London, but descended from those of his name, if I
mistake not, in Dorsetshere, educated in Westminster School, elected Student of
Chapter Church in 1596. aged 17. and four years after took a degree in Arts. About
that time he was called away to be heir to a fair estate, and being looked upon
as a knowing person, was made a Justice of the Peace, a Knight by the favor of
K. Jam. 1. 29. Oct. 1613. and was elected several times a Burgess to serve in
Parliaments. He was a person of great knowledge and integrity, and a severe
enemy to the Pontificians as well in his common discourse, as in his writings,
which are,

Ancient characters of the visible Church. London 1625.

Via tuta. The safe way to the true, ancient, and Catholic faith now professed
in the Church of England. Land. 1628. oct. Answered by Rob. Jenison alias
Frevil a Jesuit in a book intit. A pair of Spectacles for Sir Humph. Lynd, etc.
Roan 1631. in oct. Which Jenison was born in the County Pal. of Durham and died
in England 10. oct. 1656.

Via devia. The by-way leading the weak in dangerous paths of popish error.
Land. 1630. oct.

A case for a pair of Spectacles, etc. -- Refused to be Licensed by Bishop
Lauds Chaplain, upon no other pretense (as one Will. Prynne in Canterburies
Do^me, printed 164^. p. 185:
says) but that Sir Humphrey was a Layman; but in verity, because he (the
Chaplain) was unwilling to have him vindicate himself and the truth against a
railing Jesuit, etc. However this book was afterward published by Dr. Dan.
Featly, with a Supplement thereunto added by the Dr. in defense of Sir Humphrey
-- Land. 1638. qu. Sir Humphrey also has written an Account of Bertram the
Priest, with observations concerning the censures upon his Tract De Corpore and
Sanguine Christi, set by way of preface to it; -- Land. 1623. oct. and by him
dedicated to Sir Walt. Pie Knight, the Kings Majesty's Attorney of the Court of
Wards and Liveries. Which account, with observations, as also the dedic.
Epistle of Sir Humphrey, (all set before the translation of that book) were
published again by Matthew Brian. LL. D. sometimes a Student in Magd. hall,
Oxon. -- Land. 1686, oct. before which is set the picture of Charles the Great
King of France and Emperor of Rome. See more in Will. Hugh, under the year
1549. Farther also, our Author Sir Humphrey, who was esteemed a deserving
defender of the Cause of Religion, and to whom in other respects the Church and
common cause did owe much, did, in the year 1623, upon the motion of certain
eminent Divines, (of whom Dr. Featly was one) undertake the charge of printing
the particular passages of many late writers, castrated by the Romish knife.
The collections were See in the Collection of Letters, at the end of Archb.
Ushers Life, printed at Land. in fol. 1686.
made by Dr. Tho. James and were then (in 1623,) sent to Dr. Featly and others
to prepare them for the Press. They began with. Pol. Virgil, Stella, Mariana,
Ferus, etc. Sir Hump. Lynd died on the eighth day of June in sixteen hundred
thirty and six, Cobham in Surrey (and not in Kent) on the fourteenth day of the
same month; at which time Dr. D. Featly before mentioned preached the funeral
Sermon, showing then to the Auditory the great virtues, piety, and learning
that were once in the person that lay dead before them. He left behind him
three Sons, Robert Alex. and Humphrey, besides six Daughters.

THOMAS ALLEN, an exact proficient in the Kings School at Worcester to this
University in Mich. Term, 1589. aged 16, where making great advances in
Philosophy, was elected Probationer-Fellow of Merton coll. in 1593, and by the
severe discipline then used, he became a most noted Disputant. After he had
completed his Regency, he entered into the sacred function, but instead of
frequent preaching, he exercised himself much in crabbed and critical learning.
Whereupon being well esteemed by his Governor Sir Hen. Savile, he procured for
him a Fellowship of Eaton coll. where he found him very serviceable for his
designs. He has written,

Observationes in libellum Chrysostomi in Esaiam. Printed in Sir H. Saviles
edition of S. Chrysostom, in the eighth vol. p. 139, etc. He also was one that
helped the said Knight in making and framing his Annotations on Chrysostomes
Homelies, on Matthew and the other Evangelists, as he does acknowledge in his
Preface to the said Annotations, wherein he styles this our author, Vir
doctissimus, Graecarum literarum non minus quam Theologiae peritissimus, etc.
He surrendered up his soul to him that gave it, Eaton coll. Chapel near to
Windsore. Over his grave is a flat stone remaining, having this inscription
carved on a brass plate fixed thereunto. Thomas Allenus Wigorniensis, vir
pietate insignis, Theologus praestantissimus, multarum optimarum linguarum,
variaeque eruditionis callentissimus, in collegium hoc (in quo diu socius
vixit) in collegia insuper alia, locaque in quibus aliquam vitae suam partem
posuit pie munificus, hic jacet. Obiit die decimo Mensis Octobris, an. 1636. He
gave books to Mert. coll. library, and some to that of Brasenose; in which last
he had been a Student before he was elected into Merton. Another of both his
names, but later in time, was sometimes Pastor of a Church in Norwich, and
author of The Glory of Christ, set forth in several Sermons from John 3. 34,
35, 36. etc. published after the authors death in 1683. oct.

JOHN JONES, the ornament of the English Benedictines London, but descended
from a family of his name living at Llan-Vrinach in Brecknockshire, elected
Scholar of S. John's coll. from Merchant Tailors School in 1591, aged 16, and
soon after became Chamberfellow there, with Will, Land, who was afterward
Archb. of Canterbury. This person being entered and settled in a Jurists place,
he applied himself to the study of the Civil Law, and made a considerable
progress therein; but his mind being much inclined to the Romans Religion, he
left the coll. (tho then Fellow and Bach. of Laws standing) his friends,
relations, and Country, went into Spain, and being made a Monk of the Order of
S. Benedict at Compostella, changed his name to Leander de Sancto Martino, and
at length became D. of D. Thence he went to Doway, where he executed the office
of public professor of his faculty, and of the Hebrew tongue, in the coll. or
cenobie of S. Vedastus for several years. He was Prior of the Benedictine coll.
of S. Gregory there, and the designed Abbat of Cismar in Germany, Vicar General
also to the English Benedictines of the Spanish congregation, living out of
Spain, twice President, or chief Superior of the Benedictines in England, and
titular Prior of the Catholic Chapter of Canterbury. He was a person of
extraordinary eloquence, generally knowing in all arts and sciences, beloved of
all that knew him and his worth, and hated by none but by the Puritans and
Jesuits. Toward his latter end he was invited into England by Doctor Laud
Archb. of Canterbury, to consult with him about certain important points of
Controversy in Religion, as those of our authors profession say, but W. Prynne
who was always an inveterate enemy to Laud, tells In Canterburies Doom, before
mentioned page 448. See also p. 412. 559.
us, that he sent for him into England, to reconcile us to Rome, or to make a
reconciliation between the Church of Rome and England. But how true those
matters were, let such that have read that Archbishops trial judge, while I
tell you that our author has written,

Sacra ars memoriae ad Scripturas divinas in promptu habendas, memoriterque
ediscendas, accommodata. Duac. 1623. oct. At the end of which is this book
following.

Conciliatio Locorum communium totius Scripturae. Besides the said two, he has
other, things which I have not yet seen. He also set forth the Bible with
glosses in six large volumes, the works also (as it is said) of Ludov. Blosius
and had a hand in that elaborate work intit. Apostolatus Benedictinorum in
Anglia, etc. published by Clem. Reyner 1626. But a greater hand, I have heard
had Aug. Baker, of whom more hereafter. As for our author Leander, he paid his
last debt to nature on the seventeenth day of December. in sixteen hundred thirty
and six, Somerset House in the Strand near to London. He had been Ordinary of
the Dames or Nunns of our Lady of Comfort, of Cambray, of the Order of S.
Benedict, and spiritual father to them for many years:

Worcestershire man born, as it seems, was elected a Student of Chapter Chapter about
1606, took one degree in Arts and became a preacher. In 1620. he was admitted
to the reading of the Sentences, about which time he was Rector of Letley in
Hampshire. He has published,

Several Sermons, as (1) Sermon. at Chapter Chapter on Romans 13. 1. Land. 1622. qu. (2) Of
Oaths, their Object, form and bond, etc. in three Sermons in Oxon. on Joshua
9. 19. Land. 1627. qu. and others, which I have not yet seen. He concluded his
last day in winter time, before the month of Febr. in sixteen hundred thirty
and six, Letley beforementioned, leaving behind him the character of a good
and edifying preacher, a charitable man, and a loving neighbor.

John Perrot sometimes L. Deputy of the Kingdom of Ireland, was born in
Pembrokshire, became a Gent. Com. of Jesus coll. in 1586, aged 15, left it
without a degree, retired to the Inns of Court for a time, and afterward
traveling, returned an accomplished Gentleman, lived on his estate at
Haroldston in Pembrokshire, was dubbed a Knight, and elected a Burgess for
several Parliaments in the reign of King James 1. in which showing himself a
frequent and bold, if not a passionate speaker, especially in that dissolved 6.
January 19. Jac. 1. Dom. 1621. and therefore numbered among the ill tempered
spirits therein (as the King usually called them) he was not imprisoned in
London or Southwark as some of them were, but was sent with Sir Dudley Digges
and others into Ireland for their punishment, joined in commission with certain
persons under the Great Seal of England for the inquiry after certain matters
concerning his Majesty's service, as well in the government Ecclesiastical and
Civil, as in point of revenue and otherwise, within that Kingdom. He has
written,

The first part of the consideration of humane conditions, wherein is contained
the moral consideration of a man's self: as what, who, and what manner of man he
is. Oxon. 1600. qu. Dedic. to Tho. Lord Buckhurst Chancellor of the Univer. of
Oxon, Whether any other parts followed, I know not.

Meditations and Prayers on the Lords Prayer and Ten Commandments. -- Printed
1630. in tw. besides other things which I have not yet seen. He ended his days
at Haroldston before mentioned on the fourth day of Feb. in sixteen hundred
thirty and six, 1636-37.
and was buried in the parish Church of S. Mary in the Town and County of
Haverford-west, to which place Haroldstone adjoyns. This Sir James Perrot
intermarried with Mary Daughter of Rob. Ashfield of the parish of Chesham in
Bucks Esquire but died without issue by her.

CHARLES FITZ-GEFFRY, or Fitz-Geoffry Alex. Fitz-Geoffry) was born of a gentile
family in the County of Cornwall, became a Commoner of Broadgates hall in 1592.
aged 17, took the degrees in Arts, entered into the Theological function, and at
length became Rector of S. Dominick in his own Country, where he was esteemed a
grave and learned Divine, as before he was, while resident in the University,
an excellent Latin Poet. His works are,

The life and death of Sir Francis Drake. -- Which being written in lofty
verse, when he was Bachelaur of Arts, he was by those of his time called The
high towering Falcon.

Affaniae sive Epigrammata lib. 3.

Cenotaphia lib. 1.

Oxon. 1601. in oct.

Diverse Sermons, as (1) Deaths Sermon unto the living; delivered at the
funerals of Philippa late Wife of Sir Anth. Rous of Halton in Cornwall, on
Eccles. 7. 2. Land. 1620. qu. dedicated to Jo. Pym Esquire (2) Elisha his
lamentation, etc. Sermon at the funeral of Sir Ant. Rous late of Halton in
Cornwall Knight, on 2 Kings 2. 12. Land. 1622. qu. (3) The curse of
Corn-horders; with a blessing of seasonable selling, in three Sermons, on Prove.
11. 26. Land. 1631. qu. (4) The blessed birth day celebrated in some religious
meditations on the Angels anthem, Luke 2. 14. Oxon. 1634. and 36. qu. second
edition. To which are added Holy Transportations in contemplating some of the
most observable adjuncts about our Saviors nativity. (5) Compassion toward
captives, chiefly toward our brethren and countrymen, who are in miserable
bondage in Barbary: urged and published in three Sermons, on Heb. 13. 3. at
Plymouth in October. 1636. Oxon. 1637. oct. He has also made A collection of
choice Flowers and Descriptions, as well out of his, as the works of several
others, the most renowned Poets of our Nation: collected about the beginning of
the reign of K. James 1. but this, tho I have been many years in seeking after,
yet, I cannot get a sight of, it. He died in the Parsonage house at S. Dominick
before mentioned, and was buried under the common table in the Chancel of the
Church at that place, on the 22 Febr. in sixteen hundred thirty and six.
1656-57.
In which Church, tho there be no memory by writing remaining of him, yet
others have celebrated it in their respective works. Rob. Chamberlain his
sometimes acquaintance has bestowed an Epitaph upon him in his Printed at
Land. 1638. in tw.
Epigrams and Epitaphs, printed with his Nocturnal Lucubrations. John Dunbar
also a Scot, who was known to, has an Epigram In cent. 2* Epigram. n^. 16.
on, him, his worth and learning. And among others also must not be forgotten
his familiar friend Robert Hayman, who in his Quodlibets and Epigrams does
style In lib* (...) Epigram p 28. etc.
him learned and witty, and a most excellent Poet, but whereas he styles him
Bach. of Div. I cannot find it so mentioned in the public registers, and
therefore, I presume, if he was so, that degree was conferred upon him elsewhere.

THOMAS RISDON, a painful and industrious Winscot in Devonshire, received his
Academical education either in Exeter coll. or Broadgates hall about the latter
end of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, but leaving the University without a degree
he retired to his Patrimony, where prosecuting his natural Genie to the study
of History and Antiquities, especially in those of his own Country, did at
length with great labor and travel draw up,

A Survey, or a chronographical description of Devonshire -- It Is not yet
printed, only contained in a folio Manuscript in more than two quire of paper.
I have been informed that several copies of it are dispersed among the Gentry
of that County, and also that one Westcote a Gent. thereof, many years since
deceased, has written another survey, or at least had a hand in that composed
by Tho. Risdon, Clar. 1636.
who died in sixteen hundred thirty and six, or in the year after. Besides this
Tho. Risdon, I find another of both his names, who was double Reader of the
Inner Temple, 20. Elizab. and had long after his death published by a certain
person, His reading on the Statute of 8. Hen. 6. cap. 9. of forcible entry.
Land. 1648. qu. With which were then published a certain Reading of Sir Jam.
Dyer, as I have told you under the year 1581. and the Reading upon the Stat. of
27. Hen. 8. cap. 10. concerning Jointures, by Sir Joh. Brograve of Greys Inn,
sometimes his Majestys Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster.

Rutlandshire man born, was sent from the Free School at Vppingham, or Okeham,
in that County (both founded by Rob. Johnson Archd. of Leic.) to Wadham coll.
in 1616. aged 16. whence, after he had taken a degree, he was translated to
that of Jesus, and then had the Magisterial degree conferred upon him.
Afterward I find him Chaplain to Sir Lew. Watson of Northamptonshire Knight
and Baronet, Parson of Saltry Allsaints alias Moygne in Huntingdonshire, and
author of,

Several Sermons, as, (1) Comfort to the afflicted, preached at Paul's Cross, on
Job 19. 21. Land. 1626. qu. (2) Nicodemus for Christ, or the religious Moot of
an honest Lawyer, etc. an Assize Sermon. on John 7. 51. Land. 1630. qu. (3) The
Pedigree of Peace, etc. an Assize Sermon. on Levit. 24. 11. Land. 1630. qu. (4)
The Widows petition, etc. an Assize Sermon. Clar. 1636.
at Northampton, on Luke 18. 3. Oxon. 1635. qu. Another of his Sermons was also
printed in 1634. but that I have not yet seen, nor do I know any thing material
of him besides.

Rob. Brett of Whitstanton in Somersetshire, was born of gentile Parents at
London, as the Public Matricula Reg. Matric. P. p. 555.
of the University says, entered a Commoner of Heart hall in Lent-Term, an.
1582. took one degree in Arts, and then was elected Fellow of Lincoln coll.
where, by the benefit of a good Tutor, and by unwearied industry, he became
eminent in the tongues, divinity and other learning. In 1595. or thereabouts,
he was, made Rector of Quainton near to Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire, was
admitted Bac. of Div. in 1597, appointed one of the Translators of the Bible
into English by King Jam. 1. in 1604, proceeded in Divinity the year after, and
at length was made one of the first Fellows of Chelsey college, founded by Dr.
Math. Sutliff, about 1616. He was a person famous in his time for learning as
well as piety, skilled and versed to a criticism in the Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
Chaldaick, Arabic, and Aethiopick tongues. He was a most vigilant Pastor, a
diligent Preacher of Gods word, a liberal Benefactor to the poor, a faithful
Friend, and a good Neighbor. What his writings are I know not, his
translations I am sure from Greek into Latin are these. (1) Vitae Sanctorum
Evangelist. Johannis and Lucae a Symeone Metaphraste concinnatae. Oxon. 1597.
oct. (2) Agatharchidis and Memnonis Historicorum quae supersunt omnia. Oxon.
1597. oct. He also published, Iconum Sacrarum decas, in qua e subjectis Typis
compluscula sanae doctrinae capita eruuntur. Oxon. 1603. qu. He yielded to
nature on the 15. Apr. in sixteen hundred thirty and seven, aged 70. and was
buried in the Chancel of his Church at Quainton beforementioned. Over his
grave was soon after a fair monument set up in the wall by his Widow, with the
Effigies of the Doctor, his said Widow, and four Children, all kneeling, with
a Lat. and English epitaph underneath. The Latin epitaph is too large to obtain
a place here, and the English (contained in four verses) being trite and bald,
I shall now pass by. This learned Doctor left behind him four Daughters,
begotten on the body of his Wife Alice, Daughter of Rich. Brown sometimes Mayor
of the City of Oxon, viz. (1) Elizab. who was married to Will. Spark Rector of
Bletchley, whom I have remembered among these writers, under the year 1630. (2)
Anne the Wife of Hump. Chambers another Divine. (3) Margaret the Wife of Dr.
Calibute Downing: which two last, ( Chambers and Downing) shall be remembered in
their respective places as writers, and the fourth named Mary, to Tho. Goodwin
of Epwell in Oxfordsh.

BENJAMIN JOHNSON, a Poet as soon as he Camden, Seldom, Hoskins, Martin, etc.
made his first entry on the stage of this vain World within the City of
Westminster, (being the Son of a grave Minister,) educated in the College
School there, while Camden was Master, which was the reason why Ben did
afterward In his Epigrams, nu. 14.
acknowledge, that all that he had in Arts and all that he knew he owned to
him. Thence his silly Mother, who had married to her second Husband a
Bricklayer, took him home, and made him, as it is said, work at her Husbands
trade. At length being pitied by some generous Gentlemen, Camden got him a
better employment, which was to attend or accompany a Son of Sir Walt. Raliegh
in his adventures, whereby gaining experience, made his company acceptable
among many. After their return they parted, I think not in cold blood, and
thereupon Ben went to Cambridge, and was, as it is said, statutably elected into
St. John's coll. but what continuance he made there, I find not. Sure it is, that
his Genie being mostly Poetical, he did afterward receed to a Nursery or
obscure Playhouse called The Green Curtain, about Shoreditch or Clerkenwell,
but his first action and writing there, were both ill. At length improving his
fancy much by keeping Scholastical company, he betook himself again to write
plays, which he did so admirably well, that he was esteemed paramount in the
dramatick part of Poetry, and to teach the stage an exact conformity to the
Laws of Comedians. Whereupon Sir Jo. Suckling bringing In his Fragmenta aurea,
or Poems. Land. 1648. p. 7.
him into the Session of Poets, Ben broke silence, spoke to the Poets, and Bid
them remember how he had purged the Stage
Of Errors that had lasted many an age.


His own proper industry and addition to books, especially to ancient Poets and
Classical authors, made him a person of curious learning and judgment, and of
singular excellence in the art of Poetry. Which, with his accurate judgment and
performance, known only to those few, who are truly able to judge of his works,
have gained from the most eminent Scholars of his time (particularly from the
learned Seldom) an increasing admiration. Dr. Rich. Corbet of Chapter Chapter and other
Poets of this University, did in reverence to his parts, invite him to Oxon,
where continuing for some time in Chapter Chapter in writing and composing Plays, he
was, as a Member thereof, actually created M. of A. in 1619. and therefore upon
that account I put him among the Oxford writers, for at Cambridge his stay was
but short, and whether he took a degree in that University, I cannot yet learn
of any. His works are these.

Every Man in his humor, a Comedy. -- Acted 1598.

Every Man out of his humor, Com. -- Act. 1599.

Cynthia's Revels, Com. -- Act. 1600.

Poetaster, or his arraignment, Com. -- 1601.

Sejanus his Fall, a Tragedy -- Act. 1602.

Volpone, or the Fox, Com. -- 1609.

Alchemist, Com. -- 1610.

Cataline his Conspiracy, Trag. -- 1611.

Epigrams -- in number 134.

Epigrams called the Forest -- in number 15.

Part of the Kings entertainment in passing to his Coronation -- in prose and
verse.

A panegyre on the happy entrance of K. James to his first high Session of
Parliament, 19. March 1603. -- A Poem.

A particular entertainment of the Queen and Prince at Apethorp, at the house
of the Lord Spencer, 25. June 1603. -- A Poem.

Private entertainment of the K. and Q. on May day in the morn. at Sir Will.
Cornwallis his house at Highgate 1604 -- In verse and prose.

Entertainment of the two Kings of Great Britain and Denmark at Theobalds 24.
Jul. 1606. -- In Lat. and Engl. verse.

Entertainment of K. James and Q. Anne at Theobalds, when the house was
delivered up with the possession, to the Queen by the Earl of Salisbury, 22.
May 1607. -- Written in verse.

Twelve Masks at Court.

Barthelmew-Fair, Com. -- Acted 1614.

Devil is an Ass, Com. -- 1616.

Staple of News, Com. -- 1625.

Magnetic Lady, or humors reconciled, Com.

Tale of a Tub, Com.

Sad Shepherd, or a tale of Robin Hood, Trag.

Masks.

Underwoods. -- Consisting of diverse Poems, entertainments, and of some Odes of
Horace translated.

Mortimer his fall, Trag. -- imperfect.

Horace his Art of Poetry made English. -- This last was afterward printed by
it self. Land. 1640. oct. and with it, (1) Execration against Vulcan. (2)
Masque of the Gypsies. (3) Epigrams to several noble personages -- about 23. in
number. All composed by B. Johnson.

English Grammar for the benefit of all strangers.

Discoveries made upon men and matter.

All which are contained in two vol. in fol. printed 1616. and 1640.

Tragedy of Thierry K. of France, and his Brother Theodored.

The New-Inn, or the light heart, Com. Land. 1631. octav.

His Motives. -- Printed 1622. oct. He also had a hand in a Com. called, The
Widow. Land. 1652. qu. Jo. Fletcher and Th. Middleton were his Assistants.
Also in Eastward hoe, Com. assisted by Geo. Chapman, etc. and did with Dr.
Hacket (afterward B. of Lichfield) translate into Latin the Lord Bacons Essays
or Counsels Civil and Moral. At length B. Johnson after he had arrived to the
sixty third year of his age, marched off from the stage of this vain World on
the 16. August in sixteen hundred thirty and seven, and was buried three days
after in S. Peter's Church within the City of Westminster, commonly called the
Abbey Church, not among the Poets, but at the west end near to the belfry,
under the Escoheon of Rob. de Ros, or Roos, with this engraven on a common
pavement stone laying over his grave, at eighteen pence charge, given by Jack
Young of Great Milton in Oxfordshire, (afterward a Knight by the favor of K.
Chapter 2.) O rare Ben, Johnson. There was a considerable sum of money gathered
from among the Wits and Vertuosi of his time for the erection of a monument and
a Statua for him, but before they could be done, the Rebellion broke forth and
hindered the design; whereupon the money was refunded. I have been informed by a
worthy Prelate Dr. G. M. B. of Wint.
several years since deceased, that this Poet Ben had a pension of an 100. l.
per an. from the King, a pension also from the City of London, and the like
from several of the Nobility, and from some of the Gentry, particularly from
Sutton, Founder of the Hospital that now bears his name, which were commonly
well paid either out of pure love to him, or out of fear of his railing in
verse or prose, or both. When he was in his last sickness, the said Prelate,
who was then M. of A. did, among other of his acquaintance, often visit him,
and as often heard him repent of his profaning the Scripture in his Plays, and
that with horror, etc. Many years after his death did appear to the World
another Poet of both his names, who writes himself in his Poems, published
1672. Ben. Johnson Junior, but what relation there was between him and the
former I know not.

de Fluctibus, second, afterward eldest, Son of Sir Tho. Fludd Knight,
sometimes Treasurer of War to Q. Elizabeth in France and the Low Countries,
Grandson of Dav. Fludd of Shropshire, was born at Milgate in the Parish of
Bearsted in Kent, became Convictor of S. John's coll. in 1591. aged 17. took the
degrees in Arts, studied Physic, traveled into France, Spain, Italy and
Germany for almost six years. In most of which Countries he became acquainted
with several of the Nobility of them, some of whom he taught, and for their use
made the first ruder draughts of several of his pieces now extant. After his
return, he, as a Member of Chapter Chapter proceeded in the Faculty of Physic, an.
1605. About which time he practiced in London, and became Fellow of the Coll.
of Physicians there. He was esteemed by many Scholars a most noted Philosopher,
an eminent Physician and one strangely profound in obscure matters. He was a
zealous Brother of the Order of Rosa-Crucians, and did so much dote upon the
wonders of Chemistry, that he would refer all Mysteries and Miracles, even of
Religion, unto it, and to that end fetch the pedigree of it from God himself in
his holy word. Nay he did so much profane and abuse the word by his ridiculous
and senseless appllcations and interpretations, in which none has exceeded
more (even to the height of blasphemy) than he, that the learned Gassendus
could not otherwise but chastise him for it, as others since have done. His
books which are mostly in Latin are many and mystical: and as he wrote by
clouding his high matter with dark language, which is accounted by some no
better than canting, or the phrase of a Mountebank; so he spoke to his
Patients, amusing them with I know not what, till by his elevated expressions
he operated into them a faith-natural, which consequently contributed to the
well working of Physic. They are looked upon as slight things among the
English, notwithstanding by some valued, particularly by Seldom, who had the
author of them in high esteem. The Foreigners prize and behold them as
rarities, not that they are more judicious than the English, but more
inquisitive in such difficulties, which has been the reason why some of them
have been printed more than once, the titles of which, and the rest, are as
follow.

Apologia compendiaria, fraternitatem de Rosa cruce suspicionis and infamiae,
maculis aspersam, abluens and abstergens. Leydae 1616. oct.

Tractatus Theologo-Philosophicus de vita, morte, and resurrectione, lib. 3.
Openheim. 1617. qu. Dedic. to the Brethren of the Rosie-Cross, and published
under the name of Rudolfi Otreb, that is anagrammatically Roberti Flud.

Vtriusque cosmi majoris scil. and minoris Metaphysica, Physica, and Technica
historia. in duos tomos secundum cosmi differentiam divisa. Tomus primus de
macrocosmi historia in duos tractatus divisus, prior tract. impr. Openh. 1617.
fol.

Tractatus secundus de naturae simia, seu Technica macrocosmi historia in
parts xi. divisa. Openheim. 1618. fol. and Francof. 1624. fol.

Tomus sec. de supernaturali, naturali, praeternaturali and contr anaturali
microcosmi historia, in tract. tres distributa. -- Openheim. 1619. fol. This is
the first sect. of the first treatise.

Tomi sec. tractatus primi sect. secunda, de Technica microcosmi historia in
portiones 7. divisa. Printed with the very next book going before.

Tomi secundi tract. secundus, de praeternaturali utriusque mundi historia; in
sect. tres divisa. Francof. 1621. fol. This is but the first section of the
three there mentioned: And the whole third treatise of this second tome is
wanting, which perhaps never came out.

Veritatis proscenium, in quo Aulaeum erroris tragium dimovetur, Siparium
ignorantiae scenicum complicatur, ipsaque veritas a suo ministro in publicum
producitur; seu demonstratio quedam Analytica, in qua cuilibet comparationis
particulae, in appendice quadam, a Johanne Keplero, nuper in fine harmoniae
suae mundanae edita, factae inter harmoniam suam mundanum and illam Roberti
Fludd, ipsissimis veritatis argumentis respondetur. Francof. 1621. fol.

Johan, Kepleri Mathematice, pro suo opere harmonices mundi apologia: adversus
demonstrationtem analyticum Cl. V. D. Roberti de Fluctibus Medici Oxoniensis.
In qua ille se dicit respondere ad appendicem dicti operis. Francof. 1622. fol.

Monochordum mundi Symphoniacum, seu replicatio etc. viri clariss. and in
Mathesi peritiss. Joh. Kepleri, adversus demonstrationem suam analyticam
nuperrime editam; in qua Robertus validioribus Johannis objectionibus,
harmoniae suae legi repuguantibus, comiter respondere aggreditur. Francof.
1622. fol.

Anatomiae amphitheatrum Effigy triplici, more and condition varia,
designatum. Francof. 1623. fol.

Philosophia sacra and vere Christiana, seu meteorologia cosmica. Francof.
1626. fol. with the authors picture before it.

Sophiae cum Moria certamen, in quo, lapis Lydius a falso structore, Frat.
Marino Marsenno, monacho, reprobatus, celeberrima voluminis sui Babylonici (in
Genesin) figmenta accurat^ examinat. Franc. 1629. fol.

Summum bonorum quod est verum Magiae Cabalae Alchymiae Fratrum Roseaecruicis
Verorum verae subjectum.




In dictarum scientiarum laudem, in insignis calumniatoris Fr. Mar. Marsenni
dedecus publicatum, per Joachim. Frizium. Anno 1629. fol. -- Although this piece
goes under another name, yet not only Gassendas gives In Opusc. Philosoph. p.
214. being the second of the Preface to his Examen Philosophia Rob. Fluddi
Medici etc.
many reasons to show it to be of our authors composition ( Fludd) but also
Franc. Lanovius shows Judicium (...) Rob. Fluddo, in the 268. page of the said
Opuscula. which Judicium is placed at the close of Gassindu' s answer to R.
Fludd.
others to the same purpose, and Marsennus himself, against whom it is
directed, was of the like opinion. Gassendus, upon Marsennus his desiring him
to give his judgment of Fludd's two books wrote against him, drew up an answer
divided into three parts, (contained in the Opuscula Philosophica above named.)
The first of which sifts the principles of the whole System of his whimsical
Philosophy, as they lie scattered throughout his works. The second is against
Sophiae cum moria certamen, and the third answers this Summum bonum as his. Our
author indeed sullied these two treatises by mixing a great deal of ill
language in them, but Gassendus complains In Opusculis, ut supra, p. 215.
that Marsennus himself had given him a too broad example in this kind, for
some of those epithites which he thought fit to bestow on him, are no better
than Caco-magus, Heretico-magus, faetidae and horridae magiae Doctor and
Propagator. And among other exasperating expressions he threatened him with
noless than damnation it self, which would in a short time seize him.

Medicina Catholica, seu Mysterium artis medicandi sacrarium; in tomos divisum
duos. In quibus Metaphysica and Physica tam sanitatis tuendae, quam morborum
propulsandorum ratio pertractatur. Francof. 1629. fol. Tract. 1.

Integrum morborum mysterium: sive Medicinae Catholicae tomi primi tractatus
secundus, in sectiones distributus duas. Francof. 1631. fol. with his picture
before, and verses under, it.

(...) Medicorum (...): In quo, quasi speculo politissimo morbi presents more
demonstrativo clarissime indicantur, and futuri ratione prognostica aperte
cernuntur, atque prospiciuntur. Sive tomi primi, tractatus secundi, sect.
secunda, de morborum signis. Francof. 1631. fol. The whole second tome
mentioned above in the title to Medicina Catholica, is here wanting, if it was
ever published.

Pulsus, seu nova and arcana pulsuum historia, e sacro font radicaliter
extracta, necnon Medicorum Ethnicorum dictis and authoritate comprobata. Hoc
est, portionis tertiae pars tertia de pulsuum scientia. Printed with the
Catholicon Medicorum, etc. beforementioned.

Philosophia Moysaica. In qua sapientia and scientia Creatoris and Creaturarum
sacra vereque christiana (utpote cujus basis sive fundamentum est unicus ille
lapis angularis Jesus Christus) ad amussim and enucleate explicatur. Goudae
1638. fol. Printed in English at Land. 1659. fol.

Responsum ad Hoplocrisma-spongum Mri-Fosteri Presbyteri, ab ipso, ad unguenti
Armarii validit atem delendam ordinatum. Hoc est, spongiae M. Fosteri
Presbyteri expressio and elisio, etc. Goud. 1638. fol. This book was printed at
London in qu. in 1631. with this title, The squeezing of Parson Foster's
sponge, ordained by him for the wiping away of the Weapen-salve. See more in
Will. Foster, an. 1633. Our author R. Fludd departed this mortal life in his
house situate and being in the Parish of S. Katherine in Colman-street within
the City of London, on the eighth day of Sept. in sixteen hundred thirty and
seven; Bearsted beforementioned, was buried in the Chancel of the Church
there, under a stone which he before had laid for himself. On which, or else on
a monument, which he designed by his last Will to be made after the fashion of
that of William Camden in the Abbey Church of S. Peter at Westminster, and to be
set in the wall near to his grave, was an Epitaph put; a copy of which being
printed elsewhere In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p. (...) a.
, shall now for brevity sake be omitted.

HENRY GELLIBRAND, (...)
received his first breath in the Parish of S. Botolph near to Aldersgate in
London, 17. Nov. 1597. became a Commoner of Trin. coll. in 1615. took one
degree in Arts about four years after, being then esteemed to have no great
matter in him. At length upon the hearing of one of Sir Hen. Savile's
Mathematick Lectures by accident, or rather to save the sconce of a Groat, if
he had been absent, he was so extremely taken with it, that he immediately fell
to the study of that noble Science, and conquered it before the time he
proceeded in Arts. Soon after, his name being up for his wonderful
sufficiencies in Geometry and Astronomy, he was elected Astronomy-Professor of
Gresham coll. in the place of Gunter deceased; where, tho he wrote and
published many useful things, yet he suffered Conventicles (being himself a
Puritan) to be kept in his lodgings. His works are,

Trigonometria Britannica. Goudae 1633. fol.

Appendix concerning longitude. Land. 1633. qu. Which is at the end of Capt.
Tho. James his Strange and dangerous Voyage in his intended discovery of his
northern-east passage into the South Sea.

A discourse Mathematical of the variation of the Magnetical Needle: Together
with its admirable diminution lately discovered. Land. 1635. qu.

The institution Trigonometrical, explaining the doctrine of dimension, of
plain and spherical Triangles, etc, in oct.

Epitome of Navigation, etc. Land. 1674. etc. oct.

Several necessary Tables pertaining to Navigation.

A triangular Canon Logorithmical; or a table of artificial Sines and Tangents,
etc.

Two Chiliads; or the Logorithms of absolute numbers, from an unite to 2000.

Append* containing the use of the Forestaff, Quadrant, and Nocturnal in
Navigation. -- These last 4 Treatises are printed with the Epitome of
Navigation.

Treatise of building of Ships. -- MS. Which, after its authors death, came
into the hands of Edward Lord Conway.

Almanac for the year 1631. -- This was published under the name of his
Servant Will. Beale: But the author thrusting into it the Martyrs mentioned by
John Fox, and omitting diverse Saints, allowed by the Church of England, as the
Epiphany, Annunciation of our Lady, etc. he and his man were called into
question for it in the High Commission Court, and brought into trouble: The
particulars of which you may see in a book intit. Canterbury's (...) at Land.
1645. p. 184.
Doom. But the author of that book ( Will. Prynne) endeavoring all the ways
imaginable to bring envy on Dr. Laud then B. of London, who did discountenance
that Almanac very much, the Reader therefore is not to believe every matter,
which that implacable person does there set down. Our author Gellibrand also
wrote a Preface to, and published Sciographia, or the Art of Shadows, etc.
Land. 1635. in a large thick oct. written by John Wells of Hampshire Esquire a Romans
Catholic. He also intended other matters, but was untimely snatched away to
the great loss of the Mathematical Faculty, 1637 ^8.
in the month of Febr. in sixteen hundred thirty and seven. His body was buried
in the Church of S. Peter in Broad-street within the City of London; at which
time Dr. Hannibal Potter his sometimes Tutor in Trinity college, preached his
Funeral Sermon, showing therein to the auditory the piety and worth that was
sometimes in the body that lay dead before them. His memory is preserved in the
said coll. by a Dial set up by him when he was there a Student, on the east
side of that Quadrangle, which is now called the Old Quadrangle.

HENRY RAMSDEN, a Yorkshire man born, Magd. hall, in 1610. took the degrees in
Arts, was elected Fellow of Linc. coll. in 1621. and five years after leaving
that place, wherein he had advanced himself much in the Theological Faculty, he
became a Preacher in London, was much resorted to for his edifying and
puritanical Sermons, and at length upon the death of Mr. Hugh Ramsden his
Brother, he was made Vicar of Halifax in his own Country. After his death were
published under his name,

Several Sermons, as, (1) The gate to happiness, on Romans 6. 8. (2) The wounded
Savior, on Esaias 53. 5. (3) Epicures caution, on Luke 21. 34. (4) Generation of
Seckers, on Col. 3. 1. which four Sermons are intit. A Gleaning of God's
Harvest. Land. 1639. qu. Published by Joh Goodwin with his Epist. before them.
He ended his days on the seventh of the Call. of March in sixteen hundred thirty
and seven, 1637 ^8.
and was buried in the Chancel of the Church at Halifax. Over his grave is an
inscription to his memory, which being large, I shall for brevity sake pass by.
In his Vicarage of Halifax succeeded Rich. Marsh D. D. afterward Archdeacon
and Dean of York.

JOHN HOSKYNS Senior, elder Brother to Joh. whom I have mentioned under the
year 1631. both the Sons of Joh. Hoskyns, by Margery his Wife, Daughter of Tho.
Jones of Lanwarne) was born at Mownton in the Parish of Lanwarne in
Herefordshire, formerly belonging to the Priory of Lantony near Gloucester, to
the Prior of which place, his Ancestor bore the office of Pocillator. While
this Jo. Hoskyns was a Child, and intended by his Father for a Trade, he was
very importunate with him to make him a Scholar, wherefore at 10 years of age
he began his A, B, C, and in an years time he was got into his Greek Grammar,
for he was one of a prodigious memory, and of wonderful strength of body. After
he had spent one year at Westminster School, he was sped a Child in Wykehams
coll. near Winchester, where making very great proficiency in the School there,
he was elected Prob. Fellow of New coll. an. 1584. and two years after was
admitted Verus Socius. In Feb. 1591. he had the degree of M. of A. conferred
upon him, and being Terrae filius in the Act following, he was so bitterly
satirical, that he was not only denied the completion of that degree by being
admitted ad regendum, but was expelled the University. Afterward being put to
his shifts, he went into Somersetshire, where he taught a School for about an
year or more at Ilchester, and compiled a Greek Lexicon as far as the Letter M.
About that time having married a rich Fortune in those parts, named Benedicta,
the Widow of one Bourne, but Daughter of Rob. Moyle of Buckwell in Kent, he
entered himself a Student in the Middle Temple, where, after he had spent some
years, and performed certain exercise, he was called to the Bar. In 1614. he
sat as a Burgess in Parliament then in being, wherein, in speaking his mind,
he made a desperate allusion to the Scicilian Vesper, for which being committed
Prisoner to the Tower of London 7. June, was examined whether he well
understood the consequence of that Vesper to which he alluded. Whereupon making
answer that he had a hint thereof, and afterward a general information, from
Dr. Lionel Sharp of Cambridge, that Doctor therefore, with Sir Charles
Cornwallis, (Son of Sir Tho. Cornwallis of Brom in Suffolk,) were imprisoned
Camden in Annal. R. Jac. 1. sub an* 1614. MS.
in the Tower, on the 13. of the same month. At the same time that our author
Hoskyns was committed to custody, were others also imprisoned with him for
behaving themselves turbulent in the H. of Commons, as Walt. Chute a Kentish
man who had lately been put out of his place of Carver to the King, one
Wentworth (Tho. Wentworth mentioned under the year 1627.) esteemed See in Sir
Hen. Wottons Letters in Reliq. Wottonianae, printed 1672. p. 432. etc.
by some then living, a silly and simple creature, and a third named
Christopher Nevil, second Son to the Lord Abergavenny, who was newly come from
School and made the House sport with his boyish speeches, wherein were these
words reiterated O tempora! O mores! After our author Hoskyns had continued a
Prisoner for a full year, he, with Sharp and Cornwallis were Ib. in Annal.
Camd. sub. an. 1615.
released, and ever after were held in great value by the Commons. In the 17.
of Jac. 1. he was elected Lent-Reader of the Middle Temple, and in the 21. of
the said King, made a Sergeant at Law, and soon after a Judge or Justice
itinerant for Wales, and one of the Council of the Marches thereof. He was the
most ingenious and admired Poet of his time, and therefore much courted by the
ingenious men then living. There were few, or none, that published books of
Poetry, but did celebrate his memory in them, especially his contemporary in
New coll. named Joh. Owen the Epigrammatist, and fewer but did lay them at his
feet for approbation before they went to the Press. 'Twas he that polished Ben.
Johnson the Poet and made him speak clean, whereupon he ever after called our
author Father Hoskyns, and 'twas he that viewed and reviewed the History of the
World, written by Sir W. Raleigh, before it went to the Press; with which
person he had several years before (especially during their time of
imprisonment in the Tower) been intimate. He was also much respected and
beloved by Camden, Seldom, Sam. Daniel, Dr. Joh. Done Dean of Paul's, Rich.
Martin Recorder of London, Sir H. Wotton, and Sir Benj. Rudyerd: with the last
of whom it was once his fortune, upon a quarrel that fell out, to fight a duel,
and to hurt him in the knee, but were afterward soon reconciled. He was a
person always pleasant and facete in company, which made him much desired by
ingenious men. He was an excellent Master of the Latin and Greek tongue, well
read in Divinity, but in the Common Law, which was his profession, not so well.
He has written.

Lexicon Graecum. MS. imperfect.

Epigrams in Engl. and Lat. -- Some of which are printed in several books, and
among them I suppose are his verses on a F -- t let in the Parliament house,
which are printed in some of the books of Drollery. He had a book of Poems
neatly written, bigger than those of Dr. Done, which were lent by his Son
Benedict to a certain person in 1653. but could never retrieve it.

Epitaphs in Lat. and English.

The Art of Memory. -- He was so excellent in it, whether artificial or
natural, that no man ever went beyond him in his time. When he was a Schoolboy
at Winchester, and had an exercise of verses to make, he neglected, through
idleness, the making of them. So that fearing a whipping, he read the exercise
of one of his School-fellows over his shoulder, just as he had finished it.
Whereupon the Master entering, and the exercise called upon him first, he drew
up to, and told, him he had lost it, yet nevertheless he would repeat it
without book if that would serve his turn; so that the Master being contented,
he repeated 16 or 20 verses that he had before read of the other boys making,
and so was excused. At length the other boy being called, and he showing the
verses that Hoskyns had repeated, he was esteemed the thief that had stole them
away from Hoskyns, and thereupon was sorely whipped for so doing.

Method of the Law reduced under the heads of Rights, Wrongs, Remedies. All
which books, with others of various subjects, are in MS. and for the most part
kept in the hands of his Grandson Sir Joh. Hoskyns Knight and Baronet. He
departed this life in his house at Morehampton in Herefordshire, 27. Aug. in
sixteen hundred thirty and eight, Dowr Abbey in the said County. Over his grave
was erected soon after an Altar-monument with 24 verses engraven thereon, made
by Thomas Bonham of Essex Esquire The four first run thus. Hoc tegitur tumulo totus
quem non tegit orbis,
Hoskinus humani prodigium ingenii.
Vsque adeo excoluit duo pugnacissima rerum
Et qua non subeant nomina pectus idem.
Pieridumque legumque potens, etc.


RICHARD JAMES, was born at Newport in the Wight, admitted Scholar of C. C.
coll. from that of Exeter, 23. Sept. 1608. aged 16. or thereabouts, and on the
30. of Sept. 1615. Probationer-Fellow. About that time, he being involved in
the studies of Theology, he entered into Orders, preached often and at length
was Bac. of that Faculty. This person, tho humorous, was of a far better
judgment than his Uncle Thom. James mentioned under the year 1629. and had he
lived to his age, would have surpassed him in published books. He was a great
traveller also, was in Rushia in 1619. and esteemed to be a person well versed
in most parts of learning. He was noted by all those that knew him to be a very
good Greecian, Poet, an excellent Critic, Antiquary, Divine, and admirably
well skilled in the Saxon and Gothic languages. But as for his Preaching, it
was not, except by the graver sort, approved by any in the University. For of
three Sermons delivered to the Academians, one of which, concerning the
Observation of Lent, was without a Text according to the most ancient manner;
another against the Text, and a third beside it, showing himself thereby a
humorous person. The famous Seldom was much beholding to him for the drudgery
he did for him, when he composed his Marmora Arundeliana, acknowledging him in
his Preface to that book, to be Vir multijugae studiique indefatigabilis. Sir
Rob. Cotton also his great Patron, and his Son Sir Thomas, could not but
acknowledge his like drudgery in the ordering, disposing, and settling their
incomparable Library; with the first of whom (no great friend to the
Prerogative) being intimate and familiar, was confined to close keeping by the
Lords, when Sir Robert was imprisoned for certain matters uttered in
Parliament, an. 1629. Nothing was wanting to our author, and his studies, but a
Sinecure or a Prebendship; either of which, if conferred upon him, Hercules his
labors would have seemed a trifle. His works are these.

Several Lat. Sermons, as, (1) Anti-Possevinus, sive concio habita ad clerum
(...) Acad. Oxon, an. 1625. in 2 Timothy 4. 13. Oxon. 1625. qu. (2) Conc. habita
ad clerum Oxon, de Ecclesia, in Matthew. 16. 18. Oxon. 1633. qu. etc.

Several Engl. Sermons, as, (1) Sermon. concerning the Eucharist, delivered on
Easter day in Oxon. on Matthew. 26. ver. 26, 27, 28. Land. 1629. qu. (2) History
of Preaching, or concerning the Apostles preaching and ours, on 1 Cor. 9. 16.
Land. 1630. qu. (3) Sermon. concerning the observation of Lentfast. Land. 1630.
qu. To which, tho there be no Text, yet it is grounded on Luke 4. 2. (4) Sermon,
concerning the times of receiving the Sacrament, and of mutual forgiveness,
delivered in C. C. C. at the election of a President, on 1 Cor. 11: 25. Land.
1632. ^qu. (5) Apologetical Essay for the righteousness of miserable unhappy
People, preached at S. Mary's in Oxon, on Psalm. 37. 25. Land. 1632. qu.

Poemata quaedam in mort. clariss. viri Roberti Cottoni and Thomae Alleni.
Oxon. 1633. qu. With which Poems he published Sir Thom. More's Epistle, written
from Abendon in Berks, an. 1519. to the Univ. of Oxon, for the embracing of the
Greek tongue, which had been for many years neglected among the Members
thereof. He also translated into English, Octavius. Ox. 1636. in tw. written by
Minutius Felix. All the aforementioned works (except the translation) bound in
one vol. the author gave to Bodlies Library, with a copy of verses of his
composition written in a spare leaf before the first of them, beginning thus,
Dear God by whom in dark Womb's shade
I am to fear and wonder made, etc.


The said copy of verses was made by him when he was confined to close custody
by the Lords. He died of a Quartan Fever in the house of Sir Tho. Cotton Bt.
near to Westminster hall, by too much studying, (as 'twas supposed,) and
wracking his body with hardship, in the beginning of December. Margarets Church
within the said City. He left behind him several MSS. of his own composition,
and others collected by him from various authors, to the number of 45. or
thereabouts, all written with his own hand, which coming after his death into
the hands of his entire Friend and Colleague Mr. Tho. Greaves, came after his
death to the Bodleian Library, where they now are. The MSS. of his composition
are these. (1) Decanonizatio Thomae Cantuariensis and suorum. fol. This book,
containing 760. pages, has this beginning, Viam regiam mihi patefacit ad
decanonizationem ficti and fucati Martyris, etc. and the beginning of the
Epist. to the Reader is this, Amice lector rogatus sum saepius, etc. (2)
Comment. in Evangelia S. Johannis. in two parts in qu. The beginning is,
Postmodo ad* textum sacrae historiae deveniam, ubi prius, etc. Both parts
contain about 12 sheets. (3) Notae in aliquot loca Bibliae, in 3 sh. in qu. The
beginning is Videte sub ficu Paraphrastes sub umbrosa ficu, etc. (4)
Antiquitates Insulae Victae, in 17 pages in qu. The beginning is Angli Saxones
Marciarum, etc. and of the Epistle to the Reader, Vtrum moriar priusque hoc
opus perficium deus novit, etc. It Is only a specimen or a foundation for a
greater work to build on. (5) Epistolae ad amicos suos doctos. The beginning of
the first Ep. which was written to Dr. Seb. Benefeild of C. C. coll. is this,
Sancte Deus, etc. It Is a thick quarto, and contains Epistles mostly written
to C. C. coll. men, Epitaphs and some English copies of verses. (6) Epigrams in
Lat. and Engl. with other Poems. (7) Reasons concerning the attempts on the
lives of great personages, etc. These reasons, which are six or more, have this
beginning, Sir, if you please to learn my mind concerning the attempts on the
lives of great personages, etc. written in 2 sh. in fol. (8) Two Sermons. The
first on James 5. 14. the other on John 12. 32. Both written in fol. papers.
(9) Iter Lancastrense. This Itinerary, which was written in English verse 1636.
has this beginning, High Holt of Wood, and it is contained in two sheets and an
half. (10) Glossarium Saxonicum-Anglicum. It Is a long pocketbook. (11) Glos.
Sax. Angl. another part, in oct. (12) A Rushian Dictionary, with the English to
it. (13) Observations made in his travels through some parts of Wales,
Scotland, on Shetland, Greenland, etc. In 4 sheets in qu. (14) Observations
made on the Country, with the manners and customs, of Rushia, or Rusland, an.
1619. in oct. 'Twas intended to be transcribed, and to have other matters added
to it, but what hindered the design I cannot tell. Besides these 14 books I have
another of Epigrams written mostly in Latin, and partly in Greek, in oct.
dedicated to his Tutor Dr. Sebast. Benefeild. As for his collections, which are
in four and twenty quartoes, and in about 7 thin folio's (all under his own
hand) are contained in them for the most part notes from ancient MSS.
(sometimes from printed authors) relating to Hist. and Antiq. and any thing
that could be found against S. Thomas of Canterbury, the greatness and
corruption of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Monks, Friars, and the
Clergy before the time of Reformation. And when he thought that the matter it
self from the authors, whence he made his collections, was not enough
sufficient to make them bad, his notes in the margin pointing to those matters,
would do it to the purpose, arguing thereby an inveterate hatred he had to the
said persons, as indeed he had, being a severe Calvinist, if not worse.

JOHN KING, second Son of Dr. Joh. King B. of London, whom I have mentioned
under the year 1621. was a Yorkshire man born, and at 14 years of age became a
Student of Chapter Chapter under the tuition of a good Tutor, an. 1608. Afterward he
proceeded M. of A. was public Orator of the University, Prebendary of the said
Church of Christ, in 1624. and the next year D. of D. and Canon of Windsore,
and about that time Prebendary of S. Paul's Cath. and Rector of Remenham in
Berks. He has published,

Oration panegerica de auspicato Caroli Principis in regnum Hispanicum adventu.
Land. 1623. qu.

Gratulatio pro Carolo reduce Oxoniensium nomine recitata. Ox. 1623. in one sh.
in qu.

Cenotaphium Jacobi, sive laudatio funebris piae and faelici memoriae Jacobi
Magnae Britamniae Regis, etc. Oxon. 1625. qu.

David's Strait: The afternoons Sermon on Act Sunday, on 2 Samuel 24. 14. Oxon
1625. qu. His elder Brother Hen. King preached the mornings Sermon called
David's Enlargement, as I shall tell you when I come to him. The very same title
of David's strait, was put to a Sermon on the same subject by one Sam. Buggs
Bac. of Div. sometimes Fellow of Sydney coll. in Cambridge, afterward a
Minister in Coventry: Which Sermon was preached at Paul's Cross 8. July 1621.
Dr. King surrendered up his last breath on the second day of January in sixteen
hundred thirty and eight, 1638 ^9.
aged 43. and was buried near to the monument of Rob. King the first Bishop of
Oxon, in the Isle joining on the fouth side of the Choire belonging to the
Cathedral of Chapter Chapter You may be pleased to read his Epitaph in Hist. and Antiq.
Universe. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 290. b.

CHRISTOPH. ANGELUS, was born in Pelepomesus Greece, thrust out of his Country
for Religion sake by the Turks, after they had inflicted on him many torments;
came toward England for relief, and arriving at Yarmouth was exhibited to by
the B. of Norwich, and some of the Clergy there. Afterward by the said Bishops
recommendation, he went to Cambridge, where he found relief, and studied in
Trin. coll. for near 3 years. About Whitsontide in 1610. he journied to Oxon,
was exhibited to there also, studied in Balliol college, did very good service
among the young Scholars in the University that were raw in the Gr. tongue, and
continued among them till the time of his death. He has transmitted to
posterity,

Of the many stripes and torments inflicted on him by the Turks for the Faith
which he had in Jesus Christ. Oxon. 1617. in Greek and English.

Enchiridion de institutis Graecorum. Cambr. 1619. qu. in Greek and Latin. The
Greek copy of which, coming into the hands of George Fhelavius a Minister of
Dantzig, was by him rendered into Latin, and learnedly noted. -- Francos. 1655.
oct. The Latin copy of the said Fhelavius is thus intit. Status and ritus
Ecclesiae Graecae.

An Encomion of the famous Kingdom of Gr. Britian, and the two flourishing
Sister. Universities Cambridge and Oxford. Cambr. 1619. qu.

De Apostasia Ecclesiae and de homine peccati, Scil. Antichristo, etc. Land.
1624. Gr. and Lat. qu. and other things, as it is probable, which I have not yet
seen. He ended his days on the first of February in sixteen hundred thirty and
eight, 1638 ^9.
and was buried the next day within the Precincts of St. Ebbes Church in
Oxford, (I think in the Church it self,) leaving behind him the Character of a
pure Greccian and an honest and homless man.

Leonard Digges mentioned under the year 1635. was born in Kent, particularly,
if I mistake not, in the parish of Berham, wherein Digges Court is situated;
was entered a Gentleman Commoner of University coll. in 1598. aged 15, where
making great improvement in Academical learning under the tuition of the Master
thereof, Dr. George Abbot, (afterward Archb. of Canterbury) took the degree of
Bach. of Arts; which being completed by Determination, he went to the Inns of
Court, and afterward to travel, and about that time received the honor of
Knighthood. As for the rest of his actions for some years after, I cannot
justly relate. However the chief story of his life, which was honorable and
good, may be the rule of ours. His understanding few could equal, his virtues,
fewer would. He was a pious man, a careful Father, a loving husband, a fatherly
brother, a courteous neighbor, a merciful landlord, a liberal master, a noble
friend. After much experience gained by travel, and an exact survey of the Laws
and people of foreign Kingdoms, he did enable himself thereby for the service
of his Country, but observing too many to justle for place, and cross the
public interest, (if not joined with their public gain) hindering the motion
of the great body of the Commonwealth, desisted, and was satisfied with the
conscience of merit, knowing good men only can deserve honors, tho the worse
might attain them. His noble soul could not stoop to ambition, or be beholding
to that (tho the most generous) vice, for an occasion to exercise his virtues.
So that out of such apprehensions, his moderate desires confined his thoughts
to the innocence of a retired life. But the most knowing of Princes K. James 1.
who ever made choice of the most able ministers, judging none more equal to
employments, than those that would not unworthily court them, sent him
Ambassador to the Emperor of Russia, and in the year 1620. (whether before,
or after his Embssie, I know not) he with Sir Maurice Abbot were Camden ut
super in Annal; Reg. Jac. 1. MS. sub. an. 1620.
sent into Holland in the month of Nov. to obtain the intercepted Goods of some
English men, taken in their coming back from East India. After his return from
the said employments, and some years conscionably spent in the service of the
State, being unbiassed by popular applause, or Courthopes, he was made Master
of the Rolls in the place of Sir Julius Caesar, who dying 12 Apr. Sir Dudley
was sworn to that office on the 20. of the said month, an. 1636. This did crown
his former actions, and tho it would not increase his integrity, yet it made
him more perspicuous, and whom his acquaintance before, now the Kingdom,
honored. If the example of his justice had powerful influence on all
magistrates, the people who are governed, would be happy on earth, and the
Rulers in heaven with him, who counted it an unworthy thing to be tempted to
vice, by the reward of virtue. The things that he wrote and collected were many,
but whether he left them perfect at his death, I know not. Those books that go
under his name, are these following, all, except the first, published after his
death.

A defense of trade: in a letter to Sir Tho. Smith Knight, Governor of the
East India Company. London 1615. qu.

Discourse concerning the rights and privileges of the Subject, in a
conference desired by the Lords, and had by a Committee of both houses, 3 Apr.
1628. Land. 1642. qu.

The complete Ambassador; or, two treatises of the intended marriage of Q.
Elizabeth, comprised in Letters of negotiation, etc. Land. 1655. fol. Which
book, tho it had nothing forged or suppositious therein, yet it was never
intended for the Press by the collector thereof.

Several speeches and discourses in Parliament. -- See in Jo. Rushworths
Collections, part 1. where you will find much of him, and his imprisonment, in
the year 1626. His death, which the wisest men did reckon among the public
calamities of those times, happened on the 18. March, in sixteen hundred thirty
and eight. 1638 ^9.
Soon after his body (which had for some days laid in State) was remitted to
the peaceful shades below, in Chilham Church in Kent, in which Town he enjoyed
fair inheritances by his marriage with Mary the youngest Daughter and Coheire
of Sir Tho. Kemp Knight. There is a fair Monument over his Grave, the
inscription of which, is partly remitted into the foregoing discourse, and
therefore not necessary of repeating it here, neither of a large inscription in
Latin, containing his genealogy from K. Hen. the third, to his time, which he,
some years before his death, set up in the said Church.

JOHN LEYCESTER, was born in Cheshire Brasenose coll. 1618. aged 20, took one
degree in Arts, and afterward followed the employment of teaching a School,
which, I think, he exercised to his dying day. He has written,

Enchiridion, seu fasciculus Adagiorum selectissimorum. Or, a manual of the
choicest Adagies, etc. Land. 1623. oct. in Lat. and Engl. besides other things
which I have not seen. He also translated from Lat. into Engl. An excellent
oration of Dr. Joh. Rainolds, Clar. 1638.
etc. Land. 1638. oct. very useful for all such as affect the studies of Logic
and Philosophy, and admire profane learning. See more in John Rainolds under
the year 1607.

JASPER FISHER, a Gentleman's Son, was born Bedfordshire, entered a Com. of S. M.
Magd. hall. in Mich. Term 1607, took the degrees in Arts, became afterward
Divinity or Philosophy reader of Magd. coll. Rector of Wilden in his own
Country, about 1631, and at length D. of D. He has written and published.

Fuimus Troes Aeneid. 2. The true Trojanes, being a story of the Britains
valor at the Romans first invasion. Land. 1633. qu. Before which time, it had
been once, or more, publicly represented by the Gentlemen-Students of Magd.
coll. in Oxon.

Several Sermons, as (1) Sermon. on Malac. 2. 7. Printed 1636. in oct. etc. Clar.
1638.
This person who was always esteemed an ingenious man while he lived in Magd.
coll. as those that knew him, have diverse times informed me, lived several
years after this, (1633.) but when he died, or what other things he has
published, I cannot learn.

JAMES ROWLANDSON, a Westmorland man Queens coll. in the beginning of the year
1596, aged 19. years, afterward a poor serving child, then a Tarbarder, and in
1605. Master of Arts and Fellow. In 1614. he was admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, being then noted to be a subtle Disputant and an edifying preacher.
About which time being made Chaplain to Dr. Bilson Bishop of Winchester, he
became Rector of East-Tysted in Hampshire, Master of the Hospital of S. Mary
Magd. near Winchester, Chaplain to K. Chapter 1. and in the year 1636. Doctor of
Divinity. In 1638. he was made Canon of Windsore, in the place of Dr. Charles
Sunninbank deceased, and would have risen higher in the Church, had he not been
soon after cut off by death. He has published,

Several Sermons, as (1) Gods blessing in blasting, and his mercy in mildew,
two Sermons suitable to these times of dearth, on Haggai 2. 17. Land. 1623. qu.
(2) Sermon at Bishop Andrews his Consecration of Jesus Chapel near to
Southampton. Printed 1627. in qu. This I have not yet seen, nor-others which
he, as I conceive, has published. He paid his last debt to nature on the ninth
of May, 163^.
in sixteen hundred thirty nine, and was buried in the Chapel of S. George at
Windsore. In his Canonry John Hales of Eaton, the Walking Library, succeeded.
But soon after ejected by the restless Presbyterians, without any regard had to
his great Piety and learning.

WILLIAM WHATELY, Son of Tho. Whately Joyce his Wife, was born at a market Town
called Banbury in Oxfordshire, in the month of May 1583, baptized there 26. of
the said month, instructed in Gramm^r in those parts, sent to Christ's coll. in
Cambridge at 14. years of age, where continuing under the tuition of Mr. Tho.
Potman, till he was Bach. of Arts, an. 1601, was taken home for a time by his
Father. But his pregnant parts being soon after discovered by understanding men
who frequented Banbury, the Father was resolved to make him a Minister,
wherefore sending him to S. Edmunds hall in Oxon, in the year following, was
incorporated Bach. of Arts, and with the foundation of Logic, Philosophy, and
Oratory that he had brought with him from Cambridge, he became a noted
Disputant, and a ready Orator. In the year 1604. he took the degree of Master
of Arts, as a Member of the said hall, being then esteemed a good Philosopher
and a tolerable Mathematician, and soon after entering into holy, Orders, he
became Lecturer of Banbury; which place he keeping 4 years, he was made Vicar
thereof. He was an excellent Preacher, a person of good parts, well versed in
the original Text both Hebrew and Greek; but being a Calvinist and much
frequented by precise and busy People there, and in the Neighborhood, for his
too frequent Preaching, laid such a foundation of Faction in that place, that
it will never be easily removed. His works are these.

Diverse Sermons, as, (1) The new birth: or, a treatise of regeneration,
delivered in several Sermons, Land. 1618. qu. etc. (2) The Bride-bush, or
Wedding Sermon, on Ephesians. 5. 23. Land. 1617. 19. qu. In which Sermon were noted
by curious readers, two propositions, as, First, That committing the Sin of
Adultery, by either of the married persons, does dissolve, annihilate, and
untye the bond and knot of marriage. Secondly, That the malicious and wilful
desertion of either of the married persons does in like manner dissolve, etc.
These, I say, being noted and complained of to the Archb. he was coven'd before
the High Commission to make satisfaction for what he had said and written. But
he ingeniously confessing that he could not make any satisfactory answer, he
recanted the 4. May 1621. and was forthwith dismissed. (3) Sin no more, on Joh.
5. 14. Land. 1628. qu. (4) The Oil of Gladness, in several Sermons. Land. 1637.
oct. (5) Poor Man's advocate, in certain Sermons. Land. 1637. oct. (6)
Redemption of time, on Ephesians. 5. 16. Land. 1606. oct. (7) Caveat for the
Covetuos, on Luke 12. 15. Land. 1609. oct. (8) Samuel's Funeral, Sermon. at the
Fun. of Sir Anth. Cope Knight. and Bt. Land. 1618. 19. qu. Besides other Sermons
printed in 1614. 16. 19. 1623. 24. 28. 1630. etc.

A pithy, short, and methodical way of opening of the Ten Commandments, Land.
1622. oct.

Treatise of the cumbers and troubles of Marriage. Land. 1624. qu.

Prototypes, or Examples out of the book of Genesis, applied to our information
and reformation. Land. 1640. fol. Published by the authors great admirers
Edward Liegh Esquire and Hen. Scudder Minister of Colingbourne Ducis in Wiltshire.
Before which book is his character, written by the said Scudder a Presbyterian.
This Will. Whately surrendered up his pious Soul to God on the tenth day of May
in sixteen hundred thirty and nine, Banbury. Over his grave is a large raised
monument of stone, and thereon a Lat. and Engl. Epitaph in verse, a Lat. and
Engl. Anagram, and a double Chronogram. All which shall be now for brevity sake
omitted, except part of the Engl. Epitaph, running thus, Whatsoe'ere thou wilt
say who passest by,
Why? here is enshrined Celestial dust,
His bones, whose name and fame cannot dye
These Stones as Feoffees weep in trust.
It Is William Wheatly that here lies,
Who swam to's Tomb in's Peoples eyes,
Death was his Crown, etc.


Jo. Chetwynd Esabque; was born of an ancient and gentile Family living at
Ingestrie near to, and in the County of, Stafford, about the year 1577.
admitted Sojournour of Exeter coll. in 1592. took the degrees in Arts, holy
Orders, and became a frequent Preacher in, and near to, Oxon. In 1606. he was
elected by the Mayor and Corporation of Abendon in Berks their Lecturer, being
then Bac. of Divinity, and in the year following upon the desire of the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of Bristow, he was sent by Dr. Hen.
Airay Vicechancellour of the University, and Dr. Jo. Rainolds of C. C. C. to
that City; where being kindly received, he was established their Public
Lecturer on the 2. June the same year, to preach one Sermon every Sunday in the
afternoon in any Church of that City that the Mayor for the time being should
appoint, and one Sermon every Holyday, as he should think fit. In 1613. he was
sworn Chaplain to Q. Anne, in 1616. he was admitted D. of D. and in the year
after, upon the death of Dr. Sim. Robson, he was promoted by K. James 1. to the
Deanery of Bristow, to that Cities great satisfaction, being elected thereunto
16. June the same year. So that whereas he was a little before presented to the
rich Rectory of Sutton-Colfield in Warwickshire, (twice the value of his
Deanery,) he thereupon gave it up, purposely because he would live among, and so
consequently please, the inhabitants of Bristow. In that Rectory succeeded an
eminent Scholar named Joh. Burgess M. of A. and Doct. of Physic, whose memory
is fresh in those parts among the Godly. What other preserments Chetwynd had
besides the Vicaridge of Banwell in Somersetsh, and the Vicaridge of Barcley in
Glouc. (on the houses belonging to which Vicardiges he bestowed above 300 l.) I
know not. He has published,

Concio ad clerum pro gradu habita Oxoniae, 19. Dec. 1607. in Act. 20. 24.
Oxom. 1608. in oct.

Several English Sermons, as (1) The straight and narrow way to life, in
certain Sermons on Luke 13. 23. 24. Land. 1612. oct. (2) Vow of tears for the
loss of Prince Henry. Sermon. at Bristow on Sam. 5. 15, 16. Land. 1613. oct. (3)
Sermon. on Psalm. 51. 10. Land. 1610. besides others, as it is probable, which I
have not yet seen. He departed this life on the 13. 1639:
May in sixteen hundred thirty and nine, and was buried in the Choire of the
Cath. Chapter of Bristow, near the Communion Table, and the grave of Helena his
sometimes Wife, Daughter of Sir Joh. Harrington the eminent Poet of Kelston in
Somersetsh. Knight; which Helena died in Childbed 9. Nov. 1628. aged 39. The Reader
may be pleased now to take notice that this Dr. Edward Chetwynd, with John Dr.
Joh. Whetcombe Maidennutensium Pastor. He died suddenly in the house of Angel
Gray Esabque; of Kingston near Dorchester in Dorsetshire, before the year 1648.
aged 60.
Whetcombe, Joh. Standard, etc. Divines and Doctors of Divinity; Sir Sim.
Baskervile Knight, and Rob. Vilvaine Doctors of Physic, were the learned
persons of Exeter college, which Dr. Joh. Prideaux in an Epistle before a
Sermon preached at the consecration of the Chapel in that Coll. an. 1624. did
enumerate, as being then living, and ornaments of the said house. See more in
Thom. Holland under the year 1611.

WILLIAM LEIG, a Lancashire man born, was Brasnose coll. an. 1571. and in 73.
he was elected Fellow thereof. Afterward he took the degrees in Arts, entered
into the Sacred Function, and became a painful Preacher in the University and
parts adjacent. In 1586. or thereabouts, he being promoted to the Rectory of
Standish in his own Country, took the degree of Bac. of Div. and on the 24. of
Nov. 1587. he resigned his Fellowship, settled at Standish for altogether, was
made Justice of the Peace there, and held in great esteem for his learning and
godliness. He has published,

Several Sermons, as, (1) Fun. Sermon. Job. 14. 14. printed 1602. in oct. (2) The
first step toward Heaven; or Anna the Prophetess her holy haunt to the Temple
of God, preached in Standish Church, on Luke 2. 36, 37, 38, 39. Land. 1609.
oct. (3) Q. Elizabeth paralleled in her princely virtue, with David, Joshua,
and Hezekiah, in three Sermons; the first on Psalm. 123. 1, 2, 3, 4. The second
on Joshua 10. 12. And the third on 2 Kings 18. 5, 6. Land. 1612. oct. (4) The
damp of death, beaten back with the glorious light and life of Jesus Christ,
preached at Lancaster Assize, on Coloss. 3. 3, 4. Land. 1613. oct. (5) The
Soul's solace against Sorrow, Fun. Sermon. preached in Childwal Church in
Lancashire at the burial of Mrs. Katharine Brettergh, 3. June 1601. on Isay 57.
1. Land. 1617. oct. (6) Sermon. on Acts 2. 19, 20, 21. -- Printed 1613. oct. (7)
Sermon. on Heb. 9. 27, 28. -- Printed in qu. with others which I have not yet
seen. He gave way to fate in a good old age in sixteen hundred thirty and nine,
Standish 28. Nov. Over his grave is a brass plate fastened to the wall at the
east end of the said Chancel, whereon is this engraven. Conditum est hic corpus
Gulielmi Leigh S. T. bac. verae religionis professoris sinceri, haeresium
propulsatoris acerrimi, concionatoris suavissimi, hujus Ecclesiae quinquaginta
tres annos pastoris vigilantiss. cujus nonnulla extant, pluraque desiderantur
opera, evocati ex hac vita 26. Nov. an. dom. 1639. aetatis suae octogessimo
nono.

HENRY WOTTON, a person singularly accomplished, Tho. Wotton Esquire by his second
Wife Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Will. Finch of the Mote in St. Martins Parish
in the County of Kent, but the Widow of one Morton of the same County Esquire was
born at Bocton hall in Kent 30. March 1568. educated in Grammar learning in
Wykehams School near to Winchester, and thence in the beginning of 1584, he was
transplanted to New coll. where living in the condition of a Gent. Com. had his
Chamber in Heart hall adjoining, and to his Chamber-Fellow there Rich. Baker his
Countryman, afterward a Knight and a noted writer. But continuing there not
long, he went to Queens coll. where, by the benefit of a good Tutor and severe
discipline there practiced, he became well versed in Logic and Philosophy; and
for a diversion now and then, he wrote a Tragedy for the private use of that
house called Tancredo. On the 8. June 1588. he, as a Member of Qu. coll. did
supplicate the venerable Congregation of Regents that he might be admitted to
the reading of any of the books of the Logic of Aristotle, that is to be
admitted to the degree of Bach. of Arts: which desire of his was granted
conditionally that he should determine in the Lent following; but whether he
was admitted, or did determine, or took any other degree, it does not appear in
any of the University Registers, which I have exactly searched, and the more
for this reason, because the Isaac Walton.
author of his life says, that at 19 years of age he proceeded Master of Arts,
and at that time did read three Lat. Lectures De Ocello; which being learned,
caused a friendship between him and Alberic, Gentilis, who thereupon ever after
called him Henrice mi Ocelle. The said author also says, that the University
Treasury was robbed by Townsmen and poor Scholars, of which such light was given
by a Letter written to Hen. Wotton from his Father in Kent, occasioned by a
dream relating to that matter, that the Felons were thereupon discovered and
apprehended, etc. But upon my search into the University Registers, Records,
Accounts, etc. from 1584. to 1589. in which time our author Wotton was resident
in Oxon, I find no such robbery committed. To pass by other mistakes in the
said life, especially as to time, which are not proper to set down in this
place, I shall go forward. After our author had left Oxon, he betook himself to
travel into France, Germany, and Italy; and having spent about 9 years in those
places, he returned into England, and became Secretary to Robert Earl of Essex,
with whom continuing till toward his fall, he left England once more, and
retiring to Florence, became so noted to the Great Duke of Tuscany, that he was
by him privately dispatched away with letters to James 6. K. of Scots, under
the name of Octavio Baldi to advise him of a design to take away his life.
Which message being welcome to that K. he was by him (when made K. of England)
honored with the degree of Knighthood, sent thrice Ambassador to the Reipub.
of Venice, once to the States of the United Provinces, twice to Charles Emanuel
Duke of Savoy, once to the united Princes of Upper Germany in the Convention at
Heylbrune, also to the Archduke Leopald, to the Duke of Wittenbergh, to the
Imperial Cities of Strasburgh and Vlme, as also to the Emperor Ferdinando the
second. On the 15. July 1619. he returned from his Embassy at Venice with a
vain Camd. in Annal. Jac. 1. MS. sub. an. 1619.
hope of obtaining the office of Secretary of State, but missing his design, I
cannot yet tell to the contrary but that he was sent to Venice again. Sure
it is, that about 1623. he had the Provostship of Eaton coll. conferred upon him,
which he kept to his dying day, being all the reward he had for the great
services he had done the Crown of England. He has written these things
following.

Epistola de Casparo Scioppio. Amberg. 1613. oct. This Scioppius was a man of a
restless spirit, and a malicous pen; who, in books against K. Jam. 1. took
occasion from a sentence written by Sir Hen. Wotton in a Germans Album (viz.
Legatus est vir bonus, peregre missus ad mentiendum Reipublicae causa) to twit
him in the teeth what principles in Religion were professed by him and his
Ambassador Wotton, then at Venice, where the said sentence was also written in
several glass windows.

Epist. ad Marc. Velserum Duumvir. Augustae Vindelicae, an. 1612.

The elements of Architecture. Land. 1624. qu. in two parts. Reprinted in
Reliquiae Wottonianae, an. 1651. 54. and 1672. etc. oct. Translated into Latin
and printed with the Great Vitruvius, and a great Elogy concerning Wotton put
before it. -- Amstel. 1649. fol.

Plausus and vota ad Regem e Scotia reducem. Land. 1633. in a large qu. or
rather in a little fol. Reprinted by Dr. Joh. Lamphire in a book intit. by him
Monarchia Britannica. Oxon. 1681. oct. It Is in English also in Reliquiae Wotton.

Parallel between Rob. late Earl of Essex and George late Duke of Bucks. Land.
1641. in four sh. in qu.

Short view of the life and death of George Duke of Bucks. Land. 1642. in four
sheets and an half in qu.

Difference and disparity between the estates and conditions of George Duke of
Bucks and Robert Earl of Essex.

Characters of, and Observations on, some Kings of England.

The election of the new Duke of Venice after the death of Giovanno Bembo.

Philosophical survey of education, or moral Architecture.

Aphorisms of education.

The great action between Pompey and Caesar, extracted out of the Romans and
Greek writers.

Meditations on 22 Chap. of Genesis Christmas day.

Letters to, and characters of, certain personages.

Various Poems. -- All, or most of which books or treatises are reprinted in a
book intit. Reliquiae Wottonian^ beforementioned. -- Land. 1651. 54. 1672. and
1685. in oct. published by Is. Walton at the end of Sir H. Wottons life.

Letters to the Lord Zouch. -- Printed at the latter end of Reliq. Wottom. in
the edition of 1685.

The state of Christendom: or, a more exact and curious discovery of many
secret passages and hidden mysteries of the times. Land. 1657. fol.

Letters to Sir Edm. Bacon. Land. 1661. oct. He has also several Letters
extant to George Duke of Bucks, in a book called Cabala, Mysteries of State.
Land. 1654. qu. and others in Cabala, or Scrinia Sacra. Land. 1663. fol.

Journal of his Embassies to Venice.-MS. fairly written in the Library of Edw.
Lord Conway.

Three propositions to the Count d'Angosciola in matter of duel, comprehending
(as it seems) the latitude of that subject. -- MS. sometimes in the Library of
my most worthy Friend Ralph Sheldon Esquire now among the books in the Coll. of
Arms. The first proposition is, Quale sia stato, etc. The said Count was a
Gentleman of Parma, from whence he was banished, and afterward lived in the
Court of Savoy, where he was esteemed a very punctual Duelist, and there
managed many differences between Gentlemen. Other MSS. also of his composition
do go from hand to hand, which I have not yet seen. At length after Sir H.
Wotton had spent 72 years in this vain and transitory World, did conclude his
last day in Eaton coll. near to Windsore, in the month of December. in sixteen
hundred thirty and nine, Hic jacet hujus sententiae primus author Disputandi
pruritus, Ecclesiarum scabies. Nomen alias quaere. In his Provostship of Eaton
coll. succeeded Rich. Steuart Doctor of the Civil Laws, and Clark of the Closet
to King Chapter 1. of whom I shall make farther mention under the year 1651.

THOMAS HUTTON, a Londoner born, was elected John's coll. from Merchant-Taylors
School in 1584. aged 19. of which coll. he was afterward made Fellow. In 1591.
he proceeded in Arts, and about that time entering into the Sacred Function, he
became a frequent Preacher, Bac. of Divinity, afterward Rector of North-Lewe
in Devonshire, Vicar of S. Kewe in Cornwall and Prebendary of Exeter. His works
are,

An answer to several reasons for refusal to subscribe to the book of
Common Prayer, etc. Oxon. 1605. qu. Answered by Anonymus in a book intit. The
removal of certain imputations laid upon the Ministers of Devon and Cornwall, by
one Mr. T. H. etc. -- Printed 1606. qu. He also published,

The second and last part of the answer to the reasons for refusal of
subscription to the book of Common Prayer under the hands of certain Ministers
of Dev. and Cornw. etc. Land. 1606. qu.

An appendix, or compendious brief of all other exceptions taken by others,
against the book of Communion, Homilies, and Ordination, etc. -- Published with
the sec. and last part beforementioned.

Answer to both at several times, returned them in public conference, and in
diverse Sermons in the Cathedral of Exeter. -- Printed also with the said sec.
and last part. After the publication of which, came out The second part of the
defense of the Ministers reasons for refusal of subscription and conformity to
the book of Common Prayer against the several answers of Tho. Hutton Bac. of
Div. in his two books against the Ministers of Dev. and Cornw. etc. printed
1608. qu. Whether written by the before mentioned Anon. I cannot tell. Another
answer also was published against it by a nameless author, intit. A dispute
upon the question of kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacramental Bread and
Wine -- Printed 1608. qu. This also answered the book of Will. Covel D. D.
which he wrote against Mr. Jo. Burges, called An Apology to the B. of Linc.
etc. Tho. Spark's book intit. Brotherly persuasion to Unity, etc. and Fr.
Mason's Authority of the Church in making Canons, etc. At length our author
Hutton having lived to the age of 74. years died in his Vicaridge house at St.
Kewe in Cornwall before mentioned, in the month of December. (about Christmas day)
in sixteen hundred thirty and nine, Vir optima fide and moribus, 40 annos
Ecclesiastes, nulli opere evangelico secundus, ecclesiae and musaei captivus,
sacris lectione ^precibus assiduus, Septuagenarius illaeso visu, memoria a
cumina: literarum sanctae Graec. Lat. Gall. Ital. callentissimus. Ad facetias
Rhetoricen and poeticen praesenti impetu Theologus omni literatura instructiss.
apparatissus, Demum Praedicator nunquam satis praedicandus. This Epitaph being
set up several years after Mr. Tho. Hutton died, the time of his death was by
the Executor forgotten, for instead of the time of his burial, which was
according to the Register of St. Kewe, on the 27. Dec. 1639. he caused in his
Epitaph to be put, that he died 20. of Dec. 1640.

Gentleman studious of all good knowledge, as the learned Camden his
acquaintance In Britannia in Com. (...)
tells us, was the Son of Hen. Lyte mentioned under the year 1607. by his
second Wife Fraunces Daughter of John Tiptoft of London, and after he had been
partly educated in Grammar learning in his native Country of Sommersetshire,
did spend several years in Academicals in this University: But his Genie being
mostly inclined to Genealogies and Histories, he left it without a degree, and
retiring to his Patrimony and ancient Seat called Lytes-cary in the said
County, did draw up, with very great curiosity, the Genealogy of James 1. from
Bru^^ written by him on Vellam with his own hand fairer than any print, it was
also illuminated with admirable flourishes and painting, and had the pictures
of the Kings and Queens mentioned therein, most neatly performed by the hands
of an exact Limner. This Genealogy the author did dedicate to his Majesty, who,
after a long and serious perusal of it, gave the said author his picture in
Gold, set with diamonds, with gracious thanks. Charles Prince of Wales
(afterward K. Chapter 1.) was so exceedingly taken with it, that he gave the
author his picture in Gold also. Camden before mentioned had the perusal of it,
and underneath wrote with his own hand about 6 verses in commendation of it and
the author. About which time it being hanged up in public in one of the rooms
at Whitehall, became by the carelessness of pages and idle people a little
soiled: wherefore upon the authors desire made to his Majesty, it was engraven
on copper and printed, with this title,

The most royally ennobled Genealogy of the high and mighty Prince, and
renowned Monarch, James, by the Grace of God K. of Great Britain, etc.
extracted from Brute the most noble Founder of the Britains, as also from the
first original of the Scots, from them ascending to the Imperial Romans, the
warlike Picts, the Saxons, Danes, and conquering Normans: with his lineal
descent from Charlemaine, and other the modern Kings of France, their several
regiments, titles, honors, matches, sirnames, and descents, when they began
their Reign, how long each Prince ruled and governed, the Estate Royal, the
manner of their death and place of burial. Whereunto is added their Regal
Ensigns, Arms, achievements of Honor, Emblems and memorable Epitaphs, etc.
reduced into a Genealogical Table, etc. -- Printed at Land. in forma patenti.
-- This Mr. Tho. Lyte died in sixteen hundred thirty and nine, and was buried
in, or near to, the grave of his Father, in the north Isle of the Church of
Charlton-Makerel in Somersetshire (which Isle belongs to the Lytes of
Lytescary) leaving then behind him other matters fit to be printed, and the
character of an ingenious and learned Gentleman.

THOMAS COVENTRIE, Son of Tho. Coventrie, Ball. coll. was born at, or near to,
Crome D'abitot in Worcestershire, became a Gent. Commoner of the said coll. in
Michaelm.-Term, an. 1592. aged 14, whence, after he had continued under a
strict Discipline for about 3 years, he went to the Inner Temple, and pursuing
his fathers steps in the laudable studies of the Municipal Laws, was made
choice of for the Autumn Reader of that House, 14. Jac. 1. Dom. 1616. and on
the 17. Nov. the same year was Idem Camden in Annal. Jac. 1. MS. Sub. an. 1616.
elected Recorder of London. In 1617, about the 17. of March, he was made Ibid.
an. 1617.
the Kings Solicitor General, upon the promotion of Hen. Yelverton to be
Attorney General, and afterward Knighted and made Attorney Genesis On the 30. of
Oct. 1. Car. 1. he was advanced to that eminent Office of Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England, though of no transcendent parts or same, as the Puritans
said, and upon the 10. Apr. 4. Car. 1. was Baronage of Engl. Vol. 2. Tom. 3. p.
460.
dignified with the degree of a Baron of England by the title of Lord Coventry
of Ailesborough in his native Country. He has extant,

Several speeches, as (1) Speech at the opening of the Parliament, 6. Feb.
1625. (2) Sp. in Parl. 29. Feb. 1626. chiefly concerning the Duke of Bucks. (3)
Sp. at the open^ng of the Parl. 17. Mar. 1627. (4) Sp. to both Houses of Parl.
28. Apr. 1628. (5) Sp. at a Conference, 26. May 1628. (6) Sp. in Parl. 2. June
1628. (7) Sp. at the delivery of a Message from the K. to the H. of C. 6. Jun.
1628. (8) Reply to Sir ^Jo. Finch Speaker. (9) Second Reply, etc. (10) Answer
to the Petition against Recusants, etc. Besides these Speeches and several
discourses, goes under his name,

Perfect and exact directions to all those, that desire to know the true and
just fees of all the Offices belonging to the Court of Common Pleas, Chancery,
etc. Land. in oct. He ended his days in Durham House in the Strand near London,
(in a seasonable time, said the Puritan and discontented Party) on the 14. Jan.
1639-40.
in sixteen hundred thirty and nine, and was buried in the Church of Crome
D'abitot beforementioned, on the first of March following, after he had enjoyed
the Dignity of Lord Keeper about 15 years, if it be not more proper to say,
that Dignity had enjoyed him so long. His front and presence did bespeak a
venerable regard, not inferior to any of his Antecessors. His train and suit of
followers were disposed agreeably to shun both envy and contempt; not like that
of Bacon Visc. S. Albans, or of Williams B. of Lincoln, whom he succeeded,
ambitious and vain; his port was state, theirs ostentation, etc. See more of
his character in The Reign of K. Chapter 1. under the year 1639. written by Ham.
L'Estrange, Land. 1656. fol. which being just, I wonder he did not animadvert
upon a certain Entit. The Court of K. Charles continued unto the beginning of
these unhappy times, etc. Land. 1651. oct. p. 206.
Libel, which tells us, that had the Lord Coventries actions been scanned by a
Parliament, he had been found as foul a man as ever lived.

ROBERT BURTON, known otherwise to Democritus Junior, younger Brother to Will.
Burton, whom I shall mention under the year 1645, was born of an ancient and
gentile family at Lindley in Leicestershire, 8. Feb. 1576, and therefore in the
titles of several of his choice books which he gave to the public Library, he
added to his Surname Lindliacus Leycestrensis. He was educated in Grammar
learning in the Free School of Sutton-Colfield in Warwickshire, whence he was
sent to Brasnose coll. in the long vacation, an. 1593. where he made a
considerable progress in Logic and Philosophy in the condition of a Commoner.
In 1599. he was elected Student of Chapter Chapter and for form sake, tho he wanted not
a Tutor, he was put under the tuition of Dr. John Bancroft, afterward Bishop
of Oxon. In 1614. he was admitted to the reading of the Sentences, and on the
29. Nov. 1616. he had the Vicaridge of St. Thomas Parish in the West Suburb of
Oxon conferred on him by the Dean and Canons of Chapter Church, (to the parishioners
whereof, he always gave the Sacrament in Wafers) which, with the Rectory of
Segrave in Leycestershire, given to him some years after by George Lord
Berkley, he kept with much ado to his dying day. He was an exact Mathematician,
a curious calculator of Nativities, a general read Scholar, a thro-pac'd
Philologist, and one that understood the surveying of Lands well. As he was by
many accounted a severe student, a devourer of authors, a melancholy and
humerous person; so by others, who knew him well, a person of great honesty,
plain dealing and charity. I have heard some of the Ancients of Chapter Chapter often
say that his company was very merry, facete and juvenile, and no man in his
time did surpass him for his ready and dextrous interlarding his common
discourses among them with verses from the Poets or sentences from classical
authors. Which being then all the fashion in the University, made his company
more acceptable. He has written,

The Anatomy of Melancholy -- First printed in qu. and afterward several times
in sol. an. 1624. 1632, 38, and 1652. etc. to the great profit of the
Bookseller, who got an estate by it. It Is a book so full of variety of reading,
that Gentlemen who have lost their time and put to a push for invention, may
furnish themselves with matter for common or scholastical discourse and
writing. Several authors have unmercifully stolen matter from the said book
without any acknowledgment, particularly one Will. Greenwood, in his book
intit. A description of the passion of Love, etc. Land. 1657. oct. Who, as
others of the like humor do, sometimes take his quotations without the least
mention of Democritus Junior. He the said R. Burton paid his last debt to
nature, in his Chamber in Chapter Chapter at, or very near that time, which he had some
years before foretold from the calculation of his own nativity* which being
exact, several of the Students did not forbear to whisper among themselves,
that rather than there should be a mistake in the calculation, he sent up his
soul to heaven through a slip about his neck. His body was afterward with due
solemnity buried near that of Dr. Rob. Weston, in the north isle which joins
next to the choire of the Cath. of Chapter Church, 1639-40.
on the 27. of January in sixteen hundred thirty and nine. Over his grave was
soon after erected a comely Monument on the upper pillar of the said isle, with
his bust painted to the life: On the right hand of which, is the calculation of
his nativity, and under the bust this inscription made by himself; all put up
by the care of William Burton his brother. Paucis notus, paucioribus ignotus,
hic jacet Democritus junior, cui vitam dedit, and mortem melancholia. Obiit
viii. Id. Jan. A. C. M. DCXXXIX. He left behind him a very choice library of
books, many of which he bequeathed to that of Bodley, and a hundred pounds to
buy five pounds yearly for the supplying of Chapter Chapter Library with books.

Holyard in Hampshire, educated in Wykehams School, admitted perpetual Fellow
of New coll. 1589, took the degrees in Arts, and at length, was numbered among
the best of Preachers in that house. In 1597 he left the coll. being then
beneficed at Westmean in his own Country, was afterward made Prebendary of
Winchester, and in the year 1614. took the degrees in Divinity. His younger
years were adorned with variety of learning, and his elder with solid and
substantial Divinity: which last made him as much respected in his native
country toward his latter end, as he was before in the University for this
book following, of his writing and publication when he was a young man.

Diarium Historico-poeticum. In quo praeter constellationum utriusque
Hemisphaerii, and Zodaici, ortus and occasus, numerum Stellarum, causarumque ad
Poesin Spectantium, varietatem, declaratur cujusque mensis dies fere singuli,
Regum, Imperatorum, Principum, Pontificum, virorumque doctorum, natalibus,
nuptiis, inaugurationibus, morte denique aut ralia quacunque insigniores,
celebriores, sic ut nihil, etc. Lib. 12. Oxon. 1595. qu. What other things he
has published I know not as yet, nor any thing else of him, only that he died
on the 20. of Febr. in sixteen hundred thirty and nine, (having had, for some
years before, 1639-40.
diverse contests with Neile his Diocesan for his introducing certain ceremonies
into the Cath. at Winchester) and was buried in the Chancel of the Church at
Westmean before mentioned. Over his grave was soon after a Monument put, with
six verses thereon: the two first of which run thus. Ortus stirpe bona, titulo
Doctoris adauctus
Oxonii, conjux bis, deciesque pater.


PHILIPP MASSINGER, Son of Phil. Massinger Pembrochian family, made his first
entry on the stage of this vain world, within the City of Salisbury, was entered
a Commoner in St. Albans hall, in the seventeenth year of his age 1601. where,
tho encouraged in his studies by the Earl of Pembroke, yet, he applied his mind
more to Poetry and Romances for about four years or more, than to Logic and
Philosophy, which he ought to have done, and for that end was patronized.
Afterward leaving the University without the honor of a degree, he retired to
the great City to improve his fancy and studies by conversation. At length
being sufficiently famed for several specimens of wit, wrote diverse Comedies
and Tragedies for the English Stage, (besides other things) much applauded and
cried up in their time, when acted and published. Their names are these.

The Duke of Millaine; a Tragedy. Land. 1623. qu.

Powerful Favorite: or the life of Sejanus, a Hist. -- Printed 1628. qu.

Roman Actor, Tr. Land. 1629. qu.

Renegado Picture Tr. co. Land. 1630. qu.

Virgin Martyr, Tr. Land. 1631. 1661. qu. In this Trag. he was assisted by Tho.
Dekker a high flier of wit, even against Ben Johnson himself in his Com. called
The untrussing of The humerous Poet.

Emperor of the East. Maid of Honor. Tr. co. Land. 1632. qu.

Fatal Dowry, Tr. Land. 1632. qu. assisted therein by Nathan Field.

New way to pay old debts, Co. Land. 1633. qu.

Great Duke of Florence. A comical Hist. London 1636. qu.

The Bondman: An ancient story. Land. 1638. qu.

Tr. Land. 1639. qu.
Unnatural Brother Unnatural Combat.
Land. 1655. oct. with the authors picture before them.
Bashful Lover, Tr. Co. The Guardian, Co. Hist. Very Woman; or, the Prince* of
Tarent. Tr. Co.



City Madam, Com. Land. 1659. qu. published by one, who calls himself Andr.
Penniewicke. He was also one of the three ( Thom. Middleton and Will. Rowley
being the other two) who had a hand in The old Law, Com. Land. 1656. qu. and
was sole author, if a cat. of Plays at the end of The old Law, may be believed,
of Virtuous Octavia, Trag. and of Rom Alley, Com. As to this last, there is
without doubt a mistake, for all readers of Plays cannot but know that Ram
Alley, or merry Tricks, was penned by the Lord Barry an Irish man, and that it
was acted by the Children of the Kings revels, before 1611. As for our author
Ph. Massenger, he made his last exit very suddenly, in his house on the
Bank-side in Southwerk, near to then Playhouse, for he went to bed well and was
dead before morning. Whereupon his body, being accompanied by Comedians, was
buried about the middle of that Chapter yard belonging to S. Saviors Church there,
commonly called the Bull-head Church yard, that is, in that, which joins to the
Bull-head Tavern (for there are in all four yards belonging to that Church) on
the 18. day of March in sixteen hundred thirty and nine. 1639-40.
Sir Aston Cockaine Baronet in his Choice Poems of several sorts, etc. Land.
1658. oct. has in page 186. an Epitaph on Mr. Joh. Fletcher and Mr. Philip
Massinger, who, as he says, lie buried both in one grave in St. Mary Overies
Church (alias S. Saviors) in Southwerk. See more in Sir John Beaumont under
the year 1628. where you will find more of those two persons. One Walt. Messenger
or Massenger was a student in S. Alb. hall in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, whom I take to be either Father or Uncle to Philip the Poet.

JOHN VICCARS, was originally of the University Cambridge, where taking one
degree in Arts, retired to Oxon, settled in Lincoln coll. in the condition of a
Commoner, an. 1624, and the next year proceeded in Arts as a member of that
house. Afterward he traveled beyond the Seas, visited diverse Academies and
Recesses of learning, and gained from them and their respective Libraries great
experience and knowledge. He has written, Decapla in psalmos. Sive
commentarius ex december Linguis, antiquis paetribus, Clar. 1639.
Rab. Historicis and Poetis, etc. Land. 1639. fol. which book does plainly
demonstrate, that he was a most admirable Linguist, and the best for the
Oriental tongues in his time. I shall make large mention of John Vicars the
Poet among the writers under the year 1652.

Jo. Sp. the Chronologer, was born in London, elected Scholar of S. John's
coll. from Merchant Tailors School in 1612. aged 17. Afterward he was made
Fellow thereof, M. of A. Bach. and Doctor of Physic of this Univ. In which
last faculty he became eminent (especially for the practick part) among the
Academians; and had, if death had not snatched him too soon away, published
several matter of it. He has written,

(...) utriusque sexus (...) -- MS. written in Latin, dedicated to Dr. Laud
Archb. of Cantab. and reserved in S. John's coll. Library as a rarity. The said
MS. points at, and has relation to, the two Skeletons (one of a man, another
of a woman) standing at the north end of the Mathematick Library of the said
college; which Skeletons were made, and given to the said Library, by our
author Dr. Speed, who has also written,

Stonehenge, a pastoral -- Acted before Dr. Rich. Baylie the President, and
Fellows, of the said coll. in their common refectory, at what time the said
Doctor was returned from Salisbury, after he had been installed Dean thereof,
an. 1635. The said Pastoral is not printed, but goes about in MS. from hand to
hand. Dr. Speed who was, by all persons that knew him, accounted an ingenious
man, May, in sixteen hundred and forty, and was buried in the Chapel of S.
John's coll. leaving then behind him a Son named Samuel, who was aftera Student
of Chapter Chapter and M. of A. (installed Canon of the said Church on the death of Dr.
Seb. Smith, on the sixth day of May 1674.) and another named John, afterward
Fellow of St. John's coll. and Doctor of Physic, living now at Southampton.

Will. Fitzherbert (by Isabell his Wife, Daughter and one of the heirs of
Humph. Swinnerton of Swinnerton in Staffordshire) fourth Son of Sir Anth.
Fitzherbert Knight (the famous Lawyer) Son of Ralph Fitzherbert of Norbury in
Derbyshire, was born in the said County of Stafford, an. 1552. in which County
being initiated in Grammar learning, was sent either to Exeter, or Lincoln
coll. in 1568: But having been mostly before trained up in the Cath. Religion,
the college seemed uneasy to him, for tho he would now and then hear a Sermon,
which he was permitted to do by an old Roman Priest that then lived abscondedly
in Oxon, (for to him he often retired to receive instructions as to matters of
Religion) yet he would seldom or never go to prayers, for which he was often
admonished by the Sub-Rector of his house. At length he seeming to be wearied
with the heresy (as he styled it) of those times, he receeded without a degree
to his Patrimony, where also refusing to go to his parish Church, was
imprisoned about 1572. But being soon after set at liberty, he became more
zealous in his Religion, defended it against the Protestant Ministers, and not
only confirmed and strengthened many wavering Catholics therein, but wrote also
several valid reasons for the not going of Catholics to Protestant Churches;
for which being like to suffer, he withdrew and lived abscondedly. In 1580.
when Campian and Persons the Jesuits came into the mission of England, he
retired to London, found them out, showed himself exceeding civil, and
exhibited to them liberally. Whereupon bringing himself into a promunire, and
foreseeing great danger to come on him and all Catholics, he went as a
voluntary exile into France, an. 1582. where he continued a zealous solicitor
in the cause of Mary Queen of Scots with the K. of France and Duke of Guise for
her relief, tho in vain. After her decollation, and all hopes of the Catholics
frustrated for the present, he left that Country, and the rather because that
he, about that time, had buried his Wife, and forthwith went into Spain. For
some years there he became a zealous agitator in the Royal Court for the relief
of Catholics and their Religion in England, but his actions and the labors of
many more of that nature being frustrated by the Spaniards repulse in 1588. he,
under pretense of being weary with the troubles and toils of this life,
receeded to Millaine with the Duke of Feria. Whence, after some continuance
there, he went to Rome, where he was initiated in sacred Orders, took a lodging
near to the English college, and observed all hours and times of Religion, as
they in the college did, by the sound of their bell, and there composed certain
books, of which that against Machiavel was one. A certain author of little or
no note named James Wadsworth, tells In his English Spanish Pilgrim, chap. 7.
p. 65.
us that the said Tho. Fitzherbert had been before a Pensioner, and Spy to the
King of Spain in France, and his service being past, and his pension failing
him, out of pure necessity, he, and his man, were constrained to turn Jesuits,
or else starve. And he being a worthy Scholar and a great Politician, was very
welcome to that Order. But let this report remain with the author, who is
uncharacterized by a Protestant Will. Sanderson in the Reign and death of K.
James. Land. 1655. under the year 1620. p. 491.
writer to be a Renegado proselyte-Turncote, of any Religion, and every trade,
now living 1655. a common hackney to the basest Catch-pole Bailiffs, etc. while
I proceed. In 1613-4 he took upon him the habit of the Society of Jesus, on the
feast of the Purification, initiated therein on the vigil of the Annuntiation
following, and on the next day he sung his first Mass. Afterward he presided
the mission at Bruxells for two years, and at length, much against his will, he
was made Rector of the English coll. or seminary at Rome, which he governed
with great praise about 22. years. He was a person of excellent parts, had a
great command of his tongue and pen, was a noted Politician, a singular lover
of his Country men, especially those who were Catholics, and of so graceful
behavior and generous spirit, that great endeavors were used to have him
created a Cardinal some years after Allens death, and it might have been easily
effected, had he not stood in his own way. He has written,

A defense of the Catholic cause, containing a Treatise in confutation of
sundry untruths and slanders published by the Heretics, etc. S. Omers 1602.

Apology or defense of his innocence in a fained conspiracy against her
Majesty's person, for the which one Edw. Squire was wrongfully condemned and
executed, in Nov. 1598. -- Printed with the Defense before mentioned. This is
the book which the learned Camden tells In Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub an. 1^98.
us was written by Walpole a Jesuit, or one under his name.

Treatise concerning policy and religion. Doway 1606. qu. Wherein are confuted
several principles of Machiavel. The second part of the said Treatise, was
printed also at Doway 1610. and both together in 1615. qu. A third part was
printed at Land. 1652. qu. being then cried up for a good book, as the other
parts had been.

An sit utilitas in scelere, vel de infelicitate Principis Machiavellani. Rome
1610. oct.

Suppliment to the discussion of Mr. Dr. Burlows answer to the judgment of a
Cath. Engl. Man, etc. interrupted by the death of the author F. Rob. Persons
Jesuit. S. Omer 1613. qu. published under the two letters of F. T.

Censure of Dr. Joh. Donnes book intit. Pseudo-Martyr.

Additions to the Suppliment. -- These two last are printed at the end of the
Suppliment to the discussion, etc. against Dr. Will. Barlow B. of Line.
beforementioned.

Confutation of certain absurdities in Lancelot Andrews's answer to Bellarm. --
Printed 1603. qu. and published under the two letters of F. T. instead of T. F.
This was written in vindication of Card. Bellarmine's Apology for his answer
made to K. James's book De jure fidel. Whereupon came out a book intit.
Epphata, to F. T. or a defense of the Bishop of Ely (Lanc. Andrews) concerning
his answer to Card. Bellarmine's Apology, against the calumnies of a scandalous
Pamphlet. Cambr. 1617. qu. written by Sam. Collins D. D. a Buckinghamsh, man
born, Provost of Kings coll. in Cambridge, elected the Kings Prof. of Div. of
that University, 22. Oct. 1617. afterward made Prebendary of Ely, and Parson
of Somersham. Who, in succeeding times, proving a high Royallist, was removed
from his Provostship by order of Parliament 1645. Afterward he lived retiredly
in Cambridge, till the time of his death 1651. leaving then behind him the
character of a Great Scholar. Our author Fitzherbert afterward wrote and
published,

Of the Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance, against the Theological disputations of
Rog. Widdrington. S. Omer. 1614. qu.

The Obmutesce of F. T. to the Epphata of Dr. Collins, etc. -- Printed 1621.
oct. with other things which I have not yet seen. He surrendered up his Soul to
that God that inspired it, on the 17. of Aug. according to the account followed
at Rome, English college at Rome. He had a Son named Edward, living, I suppose,
at the time of his death, to whom he dedicated the first part of the Treatise
concerning Policy and Religion, an. 1606. which Edward was a most zealous man
for the Romans Catholic Religion, and whether he was a Priest or a Gentleman, I
know not.

Witton on the River Weer in the Bishopric of Durham on the day of S. Thomas
the Apostle, an. 1579. became a Student in Queens coll. under the tuition of
Crakanthorpe, in Midsomer Term 1595. was admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 24. of
March 1596. and Prob. Fellow 10. May 1606. being then M. of A. and had laid the
grounds carefully in Arithmetic, Grammar, Philology, Geometry, Rhetoric,
Logic, Philosophy, Oriental Languages, Histories, etc. with an insight in
Heraldry and Hieroglyphics. All which he made use of to serve either as
rubbish under the foundation, or as Drudges and Day laborers to Theology. In
1622. he proceeded D. D. and two years after left his coll. for a Benefice in
his own Country, which the President and Society thereof had then lately
conferred on him. But he keeping the said living not long, was made Vicar of S.
Nicholas Church in Newcastle upon Tine, where he was much followed and admired
for his excellent way of Preaching, which was then Puritanical. At length being
elected President of C. C. coll. partly with the helps of Neile Bishop of
Durham, (who before had taken him off from his precise way, and made him his
Chaplain,) but more by the endeavors of Dr. Laud, and also made Chaplain in
Ordinary to his Majesty, he left the said Vicaridge, and was made Prebendary of
Winchester, Vicar of Witney in Oxfordshire, and Dean of Peterborough in the
place of Dr. Joh. Towers promoted to the Episcopal See thereof, by the favor
of the said Laud, an. 1638. He was a person furnished with all learned
languages, Arts and Sciences, especially in Metaphysics, which he looked upon
as a necessary handmaid to Divinity. He was also profoundly read in the
Fathers, and was of a wonderful and deep judgment, as it appears by his works
that are much admired by all persons. None wrote more highly concerning the
attributes of God, and more vigorous in some of his works, against the Church
of Rome, than he. -- I speak it in the presence of God, (says Barnab. Oley, in
the life of George Herbert, Land. 1652. and in 1675. It Is not pag'd.
one) I have not read so hearty, vigorous a Champion against Rome, ( amongst
our writers of his rank) so convincing and demonstrative, as Dr. Jackson is. I
bless God for the confirmation which he has given me in the Christian Religion
against the A. theist, Jew, and Socinian; and in the Protestant against Rome,
etc. In a word he was a man of a blameless life, studious, humble, courteous
and very charitable, devout toward God and exemplary in private and public,
beloved of Laud Archb. of Cant. and blamed by none in any respect, but by the
restless Presbyterians; the chief of whom, Will. Prynne, who busily concerned
himself in all affairs, does give him this In his Anti-Arminianism; or the
Church of Englands old Antithesis, etc. printed 1630. p. 270.
character in the name of the Brethren. -- Dr. Jackson of Oxon is a Man of
great abilities, and of a plausible, affable, courteous deportment, till of
late he has been transported beyond himself, with Metaphysical contemplations
to his own infamy and his renowned Mothers shame, I mean the University of
Oxon, who grieves for his defection; from whose duggs he never sucked his
poisonous doctrines. -- Also that he is (as in another See Canterb. Doom, p.
532.
place he tells us) of civil conversation and learning, which made his errors
and preferments more dangerous and pernicious, and that it was his Arminian
errors, not his learning or honesty, that were the ground of his advancement
to his Dignity, etc. He tells us also in another In Append. to
Anti-Arminianism, etc.
place, that he was convented in the last Parliament, yea openly accused in the
last Convocation for his heretical Arminian books, which have been censured by
Mr. Hen. Burton in his Seven Viols, and particularly answered by acute and
learned Dr. Twisse, etc. The Parliament that Pryune means, was that which sat
in 1628. wherein he had like to have been sore shent for certain Tenets, I
cannot say, so far driven by him, as by some men since, and now, they have, and
are, with great applause. His works are these.

The eternal truth of Scriptures, and Christian belief, thereon wholly
depending, manifested by its own light. Land. 1613. qu. This is the first book
of his Comments on the Creed.

How far the ministry of men is necessary for planting true Christian Faith,
and retaining the unity of it planted. Land. 1614. qu. This is the second book
of his Com. on the Creed.

Blasphemous positions of Jesuits and other later Romanists, concerning the
authority of the Church. Land. 1614. qu. This is the third book of his Com. on
the Creed.

Justifying Faith: Or, the Faith by which the Just do live. A treatise
containing a description of the nature, properties, and conditions of Christian
Faith. Land. 1615. and 1631. qu. This is the fourth book of his Com. on the
Creed.

A discovery of misperswasions, breeding presumption, and hypocrisy, and means
how Faith may be planted in unbelievers. -- Printed with the former book called
Justifying Faith, etc.

Treatise containing the original of unbelief, misbelief, or misperswasions
concerning the verity, unity, and attributes of the Deity, etc. Land. 1625. qu.
This is the fifth book of his Com. on the Creed.

Treatise of the divine Essence and Attributes. Land. 1628: qu. the first part.
The second part was also printed there in 1629. qu. Which two parts make the
sixth book of his Comments on the Creed. The first part was dedicated to Will.
Earl of Pembroke, with a plausible Epistle, wherein, as one (...)
says, The author professes himself an Arminian, and Patron of their Tenets.
And from chap. 8. to the 20. he professedly maintains a mutability in Gods
eternal Decrees of Election and Reprobation, depending upon the actions and
wills of Men, Universal Grace and Redemption; with other Arminian errors. This
book, though publicly complained of, was never called in by the Bishop, (
Laud) but the second part thereof was printed with License, an. 1629. and the
author of it advanced to the Presidentship of C. C. coll. in Oxon, by this
Bishop, yea by him designed to be Doctor of the Chair (though he missed that
preferment) to poison the University of Oxford with his Arminian druggs.

The knowledge of Jesus Christ. Or the seventh book of the Commentary of the
Apostles Creed. -- A larger title of this runs thus, Christ exercising his
everlasting Priesthood, etc. Or, a Treatise of the knowledge of Christ which
consists in the true estimate or experimental valuation of his death,
resurrection, and exercise of his everlasting sacerdotal Function, etc. Land.
1624. qu.

Humiliation of the Son of God, by his becoming the Son of Man, etc. Land.
1626. and 36. qu. This is the eighth book of his Com. on the Creed.

Treatise of the consecration of the Son of God to the everlasting Priesthood,
etc. Land. 1628. and 33. Oxon. 1638. qu. This is the ninth book of Com. on the
Creed.

The second part of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, etc. Land. 1654. fol. The
tenth book of Com. on the Creed.

Dominus veniet. Of Christ's Session at the right hand of God, and Exaltation
thereby, etc. Land. 1657. fol. The eleventh book of Com. on the Creed. Which,
with the tenth and a Preface concerning them and their author, were published
by his great admirer Barnabas Oley M. A. of Cambridge, who had before published
the second edit. of the three first book. -- Land. 1653. fol. with a large
Preface likewise of his composition, but the life which followed was written by
Edm. Vaughan, as I shall anon tell you. This Barnabas Oley was installed
Prebendary of Worcester 4. of September. 1660. and was afterward Bach. of
Divinity, and Archdeacon of Ely. He died 20. Febr. 1685. whereupon Joh. Hough
B. D. of Magd. coll. in Oxon, succeeded him in his Prebendship and Will.
Saywell D. D. Master of Jesus coll. in Cambridge, in his Archdeaconry.

Several Sermons, as, (1) Five Sermons befitting these present tones. Two of
which are on 2 Cor. 6. 39, 40. and the other three on Jerem. 26. 19. Oxon.
1637. qu. (2) Treatise concerning the signs of the times, or Gods forewarning;
being the sum of some few Sermons on Luke 13. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Oxon. 1637. qu.
(3) Sermon. or Posthill preached on the second Sunday in Advent 1630. on Luke 21.
25. -- Printed with the aforesaid Treatise concerning the signs, etc. (4)
Nazareth and Bethlem; or, Isreal's portion in the Son of Jesse, etc. two Sermons
on Jerem. 31. 21, 22. (5) Mankinds comfort from the weaker Sex. on Gal. 4. 5,
6. (6) Two Sermons, one on Matthew. 2. ver. 1, 2. and the other on the 17. and
18. verses of the same chapter. (7) Christ's answer unto John's question: Or, an
introduction to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him Crucisied; in certain
Sermons at Newcastle upon Tine, etc.

Treatise of the Holy Cath: Faith, and Church, in 3 books. Land. 1627. qu. This
is the twelfth book of his Com. on the Creed.

Treatise of Christian obedience.

Treatise of the primeval estate of man; of the manner how Sin formed entrance
into, and is propagated in the World, etc. Land. 1654. fol.

Discourse of the limitation of the two propositions in the thirteenth verse of
the eighth chapter to the Romans.

Vindication, or a serious answer to Mr. Hen. Buttons exceptions taken against
a passage in his Treatise of his Divine essence and attributes.

Paragraph on the eleven first chapters of Exodus, with useful annotations,
observations, and parallels.

Salvation only from Gods grace, or an Exposition of Romans 9. 16.

Gods just hardening of Pharaoh, when he had filled up the measure of his
iniquity: Or, an Exposition on Romans 9. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Treatise concerning the Acts and Exercises of the Son of God's everlasting
Priesthood. -- Which six last Treatises, or books, were printed with the
Treatise of the primeval estate of Man, etc. 1654. fol.

Three errors disparaging Christ's Priesthood. (1) The novation denying the
reception of some sort of Sinners. (2) etc.

Twenty Sermons, or thereabouts.

Most of which Books, Sermons, and Treatises, having been published at several
times, were collected together, (with others added to them,) and printed at
Land. 1672. 73. in three volumes in fol. with the authors life prefixed, (as it
was before the three first books of Comments on the Creed. Land. 1653. fol.)
written by Edm. Vaughan, sometimes Fellow of C. C. coll. whom I shall mention
elsewhere. Our author Dr. Jackson also wrote,

An historical narration. -- This I have not yet seen, nor do I know farther of
its title. It was licensed by Dr. Edw. Martin Domestic Chaplain to Bishop
Laud, without his privity, for which he turned him out of his service (as he
(...) p. 508.
himself says) and the book called in and suppressed. But Prynne an implacable
enemy to that Bishop says, Ibid. p. 510.
that the said Historical narration, which was the vilest imposture that ever
was thrust upon our Church, was licensed by the said Martin with Lauds privity,
and that the calling of it in, was the act of Archb. Abbot upon Prynns
complaint and the public scandal it gave, much against Lauds will, who ever
since connived at the sale of them. At length after our author Dr. Th. Jackson
had spent 60 years or more, in this life, mostly in studies and devotion,
surrendered up his devout Soul to him that gave it on the 21. of Sept. in
sixteen hundred and forty, Corp. Chapter coll. but has no memory at all over his
grave. In his Presidentship of the said coll. succeeded Dr. Rob. Neulin, D. D.
and in his Deanery of Peterborough succeeded Dr. John Cousin born in the City of
Norwich and educated in Cajes coll. who was first Prebendary of Darham, then
Archdeacon of the East Riding of Yor^^. next Rector of the Church of Branspath
in the Bishopric of Durham, afterward Master of St. Peter's coll. commonly
called Peter-house, in Cambridge, and Vicechancellour of that University, then
Dean of Peterborough as is before mentioned, Chaplain in Ord. to K. Chapter 1. and
2. and lastly, after the sequestration and plunder of all he had, and 17 years
exile for his Loyalty, was consecrated Bishop of Darham 2. (...) 1660. He died
in his lodging in the street called the Palmal in the Suburbs of Westminster
(after he had bestowed much wealth on pious and public uses) on the fifteenth
day of Januar. 1671. aged 77. whereupon his body was conveyed with great
solemnity to Bishops Aukland in his Diocese, and there buried on the 29. of
Apr. 1672. The Reader is now to know that there was another Tho. Jackson who
was a writer also, born in Lancashire, educated, as it seems, in Cambridge,
afterward Minister of Wye in Kent, and at length Prebendary of Canterbury and
D. of Div. This person who mostly seemed to be a true Son of the Church of
England, a hater of Papists, Arminians and Sectaries, published, (1) Seven
Sermons, on the 23. Psalm. of David. Land. 1603. oct. (2) The Converts
happiness, Sermon on Rev. 3. 20. Land. 1609. qu. (3) The raging tempest
stilled. The history of Christ's passage with his Disciples over the Sea of
Galilee, etc. Land. 1623. qu. (4) Help to the best bargain, etc. Sermon. in the
Cath. of Canterb. 26. Oct. 1623. Land. 1624. in oct. and other things which I
have not yet seen. He was living in September. 1644. being then the Senior
Prebendary of Christ-Church in Canterbury, and died shortly after, having
before cast a stone against Archbishop Laud when he was to be tried for his
life.

JOHN BALL, Son of Will. Ball and Agnes Mabet Cassington alias Chersington near
to Woodstock in Oxfordshire, in the beginning of October. 1585. and baptized the
14. of the same month, educated in Grammar learning in a private School taught
by the Vicar of Yarnton, a mile distant from Cassington, admitted a Student of
Brasnose coll. in 1602, where continuing under a severe discipline and Tutor
about five years, in the condition, as it seems, of a Servitour, removed to S.
Mary's hall, and as a Member thereof took the degree of Bac. of Arts in 1608.
Soon after he was invited into Cheshire to teach the Children of the Lady
Cholmondeley, where continuing for some time, fell into the acquaintance of
several severe Puritans, who working on his affections, they brought him over
to them. About that time, having gained a sum of money, he went to London with
some of them, and made shift to be ordained a Minister there, without
subscription, by an Irish Bishop. Soon after he removed into Staffordshire, and
became Curate of Whitmore, a Chapel of ^ase to Stoke, where he lived (and
died) a Nonconformist in a poor house, a poor habit, with poor maintenance of
about 20 l. per an. and in an obscure Village, teaching School also all the
week for a farther supply, deserving as high esteem and honor (as a noted
Presbyterian Rich. Baxter in his book intit. An ansavour^ volume of Mr. Joh.
Crandons anatomized. Land. 1654. sec^. 1 p. 6.
observes) as the best Bishop in England, yet looking after no ^igher things,
but living comfortably and prosperously with these, etc. The Brethren report
him to have been a excellent Schoolmaster and Schoolman, (qualities seldom
meeting in the same person) a painful Preacher and a profitable Writer: And tho
somewhat disaffected to Ceremonies and Church discipline, yet he confuted such
as conceived the corruption therein, ground enough for a Separation. He has
written,

A short treatise containing all the principal grounds of Christian Religion,
etc. -- Fourteen times printed before the year 1632. and translated into the
Turkish Language by Will. Seaman an English Traveller.

Treatise of Faith; in two parts. The first showing the nature, the second the
life of Faith, etc. Land. 1631. qu. 1637. qu. the third edition. It has a
Preface to it in commendation of the work, written by Rich. Sibbes.

Friendly trial of the grounds tending to Separation, in a plain and modest
dispute touching the unlawfulness of stinted Liturgy and set form of Common
Prayer, Communion in mixed Assemblies and the primitive subject and first
receptacle of the power of the Keys, etc. Cambr. 1640. qu. The rude and
imperfect draught of this book was first made for satisfaction of Mr. Rich.
Knightley, which, by importunity of Ministers and others, was afterward
enlarged into this treatise. The answer returned to the first conceptions
thereof, is briefly examined in some marginal notes annexed, p. 13. 15. 24. 33.

An answer to two Treatises of Mr. Joh. Can, the Leader of the English
Brownists in Amsterdam. The former is called A necessity of separation from the
Church of England, proved by the Nonconformists principles. And the other, A
stay against straying: Wherein in opposition to Mr. John Robinson, he
undertakes to prove the unlawfulness of hearing the Ministers of the Church of
England. Land. 1642. qu. Published by Simeon Ash. The Epistle to the Reader is
subscribed by Tho. Langley, Will. Rathband, Simeon Ash, Franc. Woodcock, and
Geo. Croft, Presbyterians. After our author Ball had finished this last book,
he undertook a large treatise of the Church, wherein he intended to discover
the nature of Schism, and to deal in the main controversies touching the
essence and Government of the Visible Church, of which also 50 sheets of paper
he left finished. Notwithstanding all this, yet by what our author has written
in his answer to Jo. Can, and in his Friendly trial, etc. some dividing Spirits
of his own party censured him, as in some degree declining from his former
professed inconformity, in deserting the Nonconformists cause and grounds, being
too much inclined (especially in the last of these two) to favor the times in
Ceremonies and the Service Book. Yet if you will give credit to what these men
deliver, they will tell you that he lived and died a strict forbearer, and
constant opposer of all those pretended corruptions, which the Nonconformists
had commonly in their public writings disallowed in the Church of England. So
that they of his own persuasion would willingly have it believed, that although he
was in these his pieces against aggravating and multiplying conceived
corruptions, and that these were not of so great weight, as to enforce the
unlawfulness of our set forms, or warrant a separation from our Churches, and
public worship in regard thereof, yet he acknowledged some things blameworthy
in the English Liturgy, which he designed to have evidenced (as these men tell
us) in some public treatise, had he lived but a little longer. For all this he
died abundantly satisfied in the justness of that cause, which he so well
defended against separation.

Trial of the new Church Way in New England and Old, etc. Land. 1644. qu.

Treatise of the Covenant of Grace. Land. 1645. etc. qu. Published by his great
admirer Simeon Ash.

Of the power of godliness, both doctrinally and practically handled, etc. --
To which are annexed several Treatises, as, (1) Of the affections. (2) Of the
spiritual combat^. (3) Of the government of the tongue. (4) Of prayer, with an
exposition on the Lords Prayer, etc. Land. 1657. fol. Published by the
aforesaid Simeon Ash, sometimes of the University of Cambridge, Chaplain to the
Lord Brook, afterward to the Earl of Manchester an. 1644. Minister of St.
Michael Bashishaw, and at length of St. Austins, in London; who dying 20. of
Aug. 1662. being a little before the fatal day of St. Barthelmew, was buried
23. of the same month in the Church of St. Austin beforementioned.

Treatise of divine meditation. Land. 1660. in twelv. published also by the
said Ash. These, I think, are all that have been written by our author Ball,
who dying 20. of October. in sixteen hundred and forty, Whitmore aforesaid,
leaving then behind the character of a learned and pious man, and of one, who,
by his daily labors, had done eminent service to the private and public.

Will. Jones Esquire; was born at Castellmarch in Carnarvonshire, the ancient Seat
of his Family, educated in the Free School at Beaumaris in Anglesey, whence, at
14 years of age, he was transplanted to S. Edmunds hall, an. 1570. and
continued there 5 years. But taking no degree, he went to Lincolns Inn and was
there admitted a Student, yet before he resided in that Society he spent two
years in Furnivals Inn, according to the course of those times. After he had
been a Counselor of repute for some years, he became Lent-Reader of the said
Inn 13. Jac. 1. Sergeant at Law the year following, and a Knight, in order to
the chief Justiceship in Ireland, in which place he continued three years, and
then left it upon his own request. In 19. Jac. 1. he was made one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, in the room of Sir Augustine Nicolls, and in the
22 year he was removed to the King's Bench. He has written and collected,

Reports of diverse special cases, as well in the Court of Kings Bench, as of
the Common Pleas in England, as well in the latter time of the Reign of K.
James, as in the years of K. Chapter 1. etc. Land. 1675. fol. They contain the
cases of greatest remark which happened either in the Common Pleas or Kings
Bench, during the time our author was Judge in the said Courts, which was from
the 18. Jac. 1. to 16. Car. 1. In the said book also is reported three Iters,
together with the great case in Parliament between the Earl of Oxford, and the
Lord Willoughby of Eresby. This book also coming into the hands, after the
authors death, of Sir Jo. Glynn Sergeant at Law, he made very good notes on it,
as it appears in the original copy, sometimes in the hands of Dorothy
Faulconberg and Lucy Jones Daughters and Executors of Sir Will. Jones.

Several Speeches in Parliament. -- He concluded his last day in his house in
Holbourne near London on the ninth of December. in sixteen hundred and forty,
Lincoln's Inn, on the fourteenth day of the same month. Over whose grave, tho no
writing or Epitaph appears, yet his eminence in the knowledge of the Municipal
Laws, will make his name live to posterity, more especially in these parts,
where he had, his education, and when Justice, did constantly keep Oxford
circuit.

WILLIAM CHIBALD, or Chiball, a Surrey Magd. coll. 1589. aged 14. but whether
in the condition of a Servitour or Clerk, I know not. Afterward he took the
degrees in Arts, entered into the Sacred Function, became a Preacher in London,
and at length Rector of St. Nicholas cold Abbey in Old Fishstreet there, where
continuing many years was much frequented and admired for his edifying way of
Preaching. He has written and published,

A cordial of comfort to preserve the Heart from fainting with grief or fear,
for our friends, or own visitation, by the Plague. Land. 1625. oct.

An humble thanksgiving to Almighty God for his staying of the Plague in the
City of London and Suburbs thereof. -- Printed with the former.

Sum of all (namely) Gods Service, and Man's Salvation, and Man's duty to God
concerning both, by way of dialogue. Land. 1630. oct.

Several Sermons, as, (1) The trial of Faith by the touchstone of the Gospel,
on 2 Cor. 13. 5. Land. 1622. oct. with others which I have not yet seen.

Apology for the trial of Faith. Land. in oct. when printed I know not, for I
have not yet seen it. He deceased in Febr. (about the 25. day) in sixteen
hundred and forty, 1640-1.
and was buried in his Church of St. Nicholas beforementioned, leaving then
behind him a Son named James, who became a Student in Magd. coll. 1623.
afterward a Minister in London, and, if I mistake not, a sufferer there for
the Royal Cause, when the Grand Rebellion broke out in 1642. by the sedulous
industry of such who were then called Presbyterians.

MARTIN WESTCOMBE, sometimes a Monk Toulouse in France, and Bac. of Arts there,
left the Romans Cath. Church and returned to his native Country of England. At
length being reconciled to the Reformed Church there, was sent to Exeter coll.
among his Countrymen of Devonshire, was incorporated Bach. of Arts in January
1637. and, by the favor of the Chancellor of the University, proceeded in
Arts the next year, as a Member of the said college. He has written.

Fabulae pontificiae Evangelicae veritatis radiis dissipatae. Clar. 1640.
Ox. 1639. oct. Soon after, the author of it went beyond the Seas, returned to
his former Religion (as some of the Ancients of Ex. coll. have told me) and
wrote certain matters there, in vindication of himself, but what, they could
not tell me.

ROBERT CHAMBERLAIN, Son of Rich. of Standish in Larcash. Gent was born there,
or at least in that County, and from being Clerk to Pet. Ball Esquire; Solicitor
General to the Queen, had his Poetical Genie so far encouraged by that generous
person, that he sent him to Exeter coll. to complete it with Academical
learning, in the beginning of the year 1637. aged 30 years. What stay he made
there, or whether he was honored with a degree, it appears not. Sure it is,
that he having about that time composed several poetical, and other, things,
had them viewed by the ingenious men of that house, and published under these
titles.

Nocturnal Lucubrations; or meditations divine and moral. Land. 1638. in tw. To
which are added,

Epigrams and Epitaphs. -- The former he dedicated to his honored Master Peter
Ball beforementioned, and the other to Will. Ball his Son and Heir. He has
also written,

The swaggering Damsel, a Comedy. Land. 1640. qu.

Sicelides, Clar. 1640.
a Pastoral. -- When printed, I cannot tell, for I do not remember I ever saw
it. In 1631. was published in qu. a book intit. Sicelides, a piscatory, several
times acted in Kings coll. in Cambr. and therefore, I presume, 'twas made by
one of that house. This Rob. Chamberlain lived many years after, but when he
died, I cannot justly tell. One Rob. Chamberlain proceeded Master of Arts, as
a Member of Pemb. coll. but he being the Son of Dr. Pet. Chamberlain a
Physician, must not be taken (as some of this University have done) to be the
same with the Poet beforementioned. Will. Chamberlain of Shaftsbury in
Dorsetshire has written Love's Victory, Trag. Com. Land. 1658. qu. and
Pharonida, an heroic Poem. Land. 1659. oct. but whether he was ever an Oxford
Student, I am hitherto ignorant.

ATHENAE OXONIENSES.
The History of the Archbishops and Bishops of the University of Oxford, from
the year of our Lord 1500. to the end of the year 1640.
^THOMAS JANE or Janne was born in a Market Town in Dorsetsh. called Middleton,
educated in Grammar learning in Wykehams School near Winchester, became Fellow
of New coll. after he had served two years of Probation, in 1456, was
afterward Doctor of Decrees, and Commissary (the same now with
Vicechancellour) of the University an. 1468. About that time he was made Canon
of S. Paul's Cathedral within the City of London, Archdeacon of Essex, Canon of
Windsore 1497, Dean of the Kings Chapel, and at length upon the refusal of
Christoph, Vrswyke Dean of Windsore, he became Bishop of Norwich in the room of
James Goldwell deceased: The temporalities of which See (after his election
thereunto) were Pat. 14. Hen. 7. p. 2. Memb: 4.
restored to him 21. Jul. 14. Hen. 7. dom. 1499. where sitting little more than
an year, he concluded his last day in the month of Aug. or thereabouts, in the
year fiveteen hundred. 1^00.
By his Will In Cur. vel offic. Praerog. Cant. in reg. Moon. Qu. 10.
dated 20. Jul. the same year, he bequeathed his body to be buried in his own
Cathedral Church, if it should happen that he dye in Norwich, or within 16
miles of that place. He had before his death been a benefactor to New coll. as
I have told you In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Ox. lib. 2. p. 130. b.
elsewhere, and as it should seem, to the building of S. Mary's Church in this
Univ. of Oxon, if his answer was equivalent to an Epistle In lib. Epist. Univ.
Oxon. notat. in dors. cum lit. ^. MS.
written in its name, to desire his benefaction thereunto.

In the time of this worthy Bishop Tho. Jane, or rather before, studied in this
University Tho. Scot alias Rotheram, Son of Sir Tho. Rotheram Knight, by Alice
his Wife; but going soon after to Cambridge, we can hardly lay claim to him. In
an old book of Epistles, written by the University of Ox. to great personages,
is an Epistle Ibid. Ep: 254:
written to the Bishop of Lincoln, and he that then sat there, must according
to time be the said Rotheram. In which Epistle are certain circumstances that
show that he had sometimes studied in the said University, and besides the
members thereof did seldom ^or never write Epistles to any, except such who had
originally been Students among them. He died Archb. of York, in 1500, and was
succeeded in that See by Tho. Savage. See in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib.
1. p. 243. a. b.

In the Visitation book of the County of Surry, made by the Deput^es of
Clarenceaux King of Arms, an. 1623. in the coll. or Office of Arms.
of Rich. Moreton of S. Andrews Milbourn in Dorsetshire, Son of Will. Moreton
of the said place, and he the second Son of Charles Moreton (the first being
Rob. Moreton of Moreton in Nottinghamsh. from whence sprang the Moretons of
Bautrey in Yorkshire) was born says In Birtan. in com. Dorset.
Camden at St. Andr. Milb. before mentioned, others, particularly one Jo.
Budden in Vita obituque Job. Moreton^ Archiep. Cant. -- Land. 1607. p. 5.
of Camdens contemporaries, at a little Market Town called Bear in the said
County of Dorset, which seems to be most true by those things that I shall anon
mention from his last Will and Testament. When he was a boy he was educated
among the Religious in Cerne Abbey, and at ripe years was sent to Balliol coll.
where making great progress in Academical learning, he took the degrees in the
Laws, without any regard had to those in Arts. In 1446. he being then in his
Regency, he became one of the Commissaries of the University, about which time
one Will. Moreton of the same coll. was the northern Proctor, but whether
related to him, I cannot tell. Afterward Jo. Moreton was Principal or
moderator of the Civil Law School, situated in the Great Jewry in Oxon, and
about 1453. became Principal of Peckwaters Inn: at which time he being also an
Advocate in the Court of Arches, his parts and great learning were so
remarkable, that Tho. Bouchier Archb. of Canterbury taking cognizance of him,
sought means to prefer him. In 1458. Nov. 8. he became Prebendary of Fordinton
and Writhlington in the Church of Salisbury, void by the death of one Will.
Walesby, being also about that time Rector of S. Dunstans Church ( in the West)
in the Suburbs of London. Afterward having other spiritualities conferred upon
him* he was for his great wisdom and prudence made Master of the Rolls an.
1473, and in the year following Archdeacon of Winchester: which Dignity was
then void by the death of one Vinc. Clement sometimes a Doctor of Oxon: In Feb.
1475, he being then Preb. of Dynre in the Church of Wells (which he resigned in
that month, and was succeeded therein by Mr. Will. Dudley) he was collated to
the Prebendship of S. Ducuman in the said Church on the death of one Joh. Pope:
which Dignity he keeping till Jan. 1478. he then gave it up and Tho. Langton
Doctor of Decrees succeeded him, as I shall anon tell you. In 1476. Nov. 6. he
was made Archdeacon of Berkshire upon the resignation of John Russell Doctor of
the Canon Law, (not of Div. as one Fr. Godwin Ep. Lan^^v. in Com de Praesul.
Angl. edit. 1616. p. 359.
says) who was afterward Bishop of Lincoln. In 1478. Aug. 9. he was elected
Bishop of Ely, on the death of Will. Gray, and about that time was made Privy
Counselor to the King. In 1484. (2. Rich. 3.) he was committed prisoner to
the Tower of London, for some jealousies that that King had of him, as being
totally inclined to the Lancastrian family; and it is probable that there he
would have continued during all that Kings reign, but the reverence of the man,
or undeservedness of his wrongs, moved so the affection of the members of this
University, that they directed to the King (who professed much seeming love to
the University, as it is elsewhere In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon, lib. 1. p.
233.
told you) a petitionary In lib. Episto^arum Univ. Oxon. ^. fol. 14^. b.
Epistle in Latin, no less eloquent and pithy, than circumspect and wary,
wherein they much pleaded for his liberty. Whereupon the K. being well pleased
with it, was content to release him from the Tower, and commit him to the
custody of Henry Duke of Buckingham, to his Castle at Brecknock in Wales.
Thence, after he had spent some time, he found liberty to steal to the Isle of
Ely, and for a round sum of money found a safe passage into France, purposely
to join with the Earl of Richmond to pluck down the said Rich. 3. Soon after
the said Earl obtaining the Crown by the name of Hen. 7. called unto his Privy
Council the said Moreton Bishop of Ely, with Rich. Fox, (about that time B. of
Exeter) both vigilant men and discreet, and such as kept watch with the King
almost upon all men else. They were both versed in his affairs before he came
to the Crown, and were partakers of his adverse fortune, and therefore the King
was resolved to promote them in the Church as high as he could. In the
beginning of the year 1486. Archbishop Bouchier before mentioned died;
whereupon the K. making means that the Monks of Canterbury should elect Dr.
Moreton for his Successor, the Pope did forthwith confirm it. So that being
translated to the said See, he had restitution Pat. 2. Hen. 7. p. 1 m. 10:
made to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto, on the sixth of December.
the same year. In 1487. he was made Lord Chancellor of England, in which high
office he acted very beneficial for the King, and in 1493. he was declared a
Cardinal by Pope Alexand. 6. under the title of S. Anastasius. The year after
he was elected Chanc. of the Univ. of Oxon, and became a considerable
benefactor thereunto, particularly to the reparation of Canon Law School in S.
Edwards parish, to the finishing of the re-edification of S. Mary's Church, and
of the edification of the Divinity School. In all which places were his Arms
set up in colors, in the Windows, or else engraven in Stone. But such is the
vicissitude of time, that nothing of Arms, or any thing like them, does at this
time remain. Those that belonged to him were Quarterly gules and ermine, a
Goats head erased in the first and fourth quarter argent: given, or else taken,
in allusion to the Arms of the Corporation of Shomakers, of which Corporation
the Father of this Archb. was, as it is said, a member. They were curiously
engraven on Stone, at the bottom of the Stone-pulpit in St. Mary's Church; as
also the rebus of his name, an M. upon a Tun. Which Pulpit was pulled down when
the inside of that Church was altered, while Dr. Ralph Bathurst was
Vicechancellor an. 1676. They were also engraven on the Respondents Pew or Seat
of Stone in the Divinity School, which also were taken away when the inside of
that School was altered an. 1669. to what it now is. But tho these monuments
are decayed, yet the memory of the person is fresh among some men, who have
said that he was a wife and eloquent man, but in his nature harsh and haughty,
that he was much accepted by the King, but envied by the Nobility, and hated by
the people. He won the Kings mind with secrecy and diligence, chiefly because
he was his old servant in his less fortunes, and for that also he was in his
affections not without an inveterate malice against the House of York, under
which he had been in trouble. Whatsoever else was in the man, he deserves a
most happy memory, in that he was the principal means of joining the two Roses.
At length dying of great years, (about 90.) but of strong health and powers,
about the latter end of September. in fiveteen hundred, Canterbury before the
image of the Virgin Mary, commonly called Our Lady of Vndercroft. Over his
Stone-coffin or Sepulcher, which was but just deposited in the ground, was a
marble-stone laid even with the surface of the pavement: which stone being
afterward cracked and broken, several parts of his body wrapped up in diverse
Cear-cloathes were taken away by certain rude and barbarous people. At length
the head being only in a manner remaining in the said Stone-coffin, 'twas begged
out of a pious mind (purposely to save it) of Dr. Sheldon Archb. of Canterbury,
in 1670. by that truly noble and generous Rophe Shedon of Beoley in
Worcestershire Esquire, who esteeming it as a choice relic, provided a leaden
box to preserve it with its Cear-cloathes about it, and with great devotion
kept it to his dying day, an. 1684. Afterward that choice relic, with very
many rarities which he in his life time had gathered together, came by virtue
of his last Will into the hands of his Uncles Daughter, named Frances Sheldon,
sometimes one of the maids of honor to Catherine the Royal Consort of King
Charles 2. The said Cardinal Moreton did by his last In Offic. Praerog. Cant.
in reg. Moon Qu. 10.
Will and Testament leave maintenance for a Priest to celebrate Mass for 20.
years space in the Church of Bear in Dorsetshire, for the Soul of him the said
Archbishop, and for the Souls of his relations and parents buried there. He
also left maintenance during that time for 20 poor Scholars in Oxon, and ten in
Cambridge. I find one John Moreton to be made Prebend of Whitchurch in the
Church of Wells, on the resignation of Robert Stillington (afterward B. of
Bath and Wells) in July 1447. and Minister of Axbridge and Charlton Mesgrose in
the Dioc. of B. and Wells; but this John Moreton, who died about the month of
Dec. 1463. is, in the registers belonging to the Bish. of B. and Wells, written
Sacrae Theologiae Professor. I find also another Joh. Moreton who translated
into English Speculum Vitae Christi, written by S. Bonaventure. Which John was
living in 1438, in which year, he, with his Wife Juliana, were admitted among
the Suffrages and Prayers of the Dominicans or Black Friars at York.

THOMAS LANGTON, was born in a Market Appleby in Westmorland, where being
educated in Religion and Grammar learning among the Carmes, or White Friars,
was at ripe years sent to Oxon, particularly, as it seems, to Queens coll. but
a pest breaking out in the University soon after, he went to Cambridge and
became a member of Clare hall, (one Fr. Godwin in Com. de Presul. Angl. ut
supra, p 295.
says of Pembroke hall) took the degrees in the Canon Law (in which afterward
he was incorporated at Oxon) and had considerable Dignities in the Church
bestowed him, among which was the Prebendship of S. Ducaman in the Church of
Wells, an. 1478. In 1483, he being about that time Provost of Qu. coll. in
Oxon, and Master of S. Julians Hospital in Southampton, was consecrated Bishop
of S. David's; whence being translated to the Sea of Salisbury, on the death of
Leonel Woodvill, had restitution made pat. 1. Rich. 3. p. 3.
to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto, 4. May, 1 Rich. 3. dom. 1484.
In a certain writing in Queens coll. treasury dat. 19. Aug. 4. Hen. 7. dom.
1489. he occurs by the titles of Doctor of the Laws, Bishop of Salisbury, and
Provost of Qu. coll. Whence we may conclude that he kept the said Provostship
in Commendam with Salisbury, as probably he had done with S. David's. In 1493.
he was translated to the Sea of Winchester, and had restitution made pat. 8.
Hen. 7. p. 2. m. 2.
to him of the temporalities thereof 27. June the same year. Where being
settled, he put in practice his good deeds, which he had done at Sarum, viz. by
showing himself a Mecaenas of learning, for which, I find, he had so great
respect, that he took Rich. Pace in lib. suo, cui tit. est De fructu qui ex
doctrina percipitur. Bas. 1517. p. 27, 28.
care to have youths trained up at his own charge in Grammar and Music, (the
last of which he was infinitely delighted in) in a School which he set apart
within the precincts of his house. It was usual with him, and he took a great
pleasure in it, to make his scholars or exhibitioners repeat at night before
him such dictates that they in the day time had learned from their Master: and
such that could give a laudable account, he either encouraged with good words,
or small rewards, saying to those about him, that the way to increase virtue
was to praise it, etc. In his episcopal office he behaved himself so well, that
he was in great authority with three Kings, especially for his learning,
religion, and experience in civil affairs; annd had not death snatched him
untimely away, would have succeeded Moreton in the Sea of Canterbury. He died
in the beginning of the year fifteen hundred and one, 156^.
and was buried in the Cath. Chapter at Winchester, near to the tomb and shrine of
S. Swithune. By his last will In reg. Moon ut ^upra. qu. 10.
and test. which I have seen, he gave to the priests of Clare hall in
Cambridge, considerable sums of money, and forty pounds to the chest of that
house. To every fellow of Qu. coll. in Oxon six shillings and eight pence, and
forty marks to the elemosinary chest thereof, besides a suit of vestments for a
Priest, Deacon, and Subdeacon, and four copes. He gave maintenance also to a
Chaplain that should celebrate service for him, his Parents, and all faithful
deceased, for the space of an hundred years in the Church of Applebie
beforementioned: Which Chaplain was to receive for his labor eight marks
yearly. To the Friars (the Carmes) in Applebie 20 marks to pray for him,
besides several sums to the Friars of Oxon and Cambridge, and to Rowland Machel
and Elizabeth his wife (sister to the said Bishop) he gave several lands in
Westmorland, besides 200 marks. He built also the little room, (which is now a
large Bay-window to the Provosts dining room in Qu. coll.) with curious
vaulting under it. Which vault is now no other than a portico to the coll.
chapel. Over the said Bay-window is carved in stone a musical note called a
Long on a Tun, which is the rebus for his firname: and out of the Bung-hole of
the Tun springs a Vine tree, which, without doubt was put for Vinton or
Vinchestre, he being then Bishop of that place. He left behind him a Nephew
named Rob. Langton, born also in Applebie, and educated in Queens coll. of
which he was LL. D. He died at London, in the month of June 1524. and was
buried before the image of S. Michael in the body of the Church belonging to
the Charter House (now Suttons hospital) near London. By his last Will In
Offic: Praerog. Cant. in reg. Bodfeld Qu. 21.
and Test. he bequeathed to Qu. coll. before mentioned, two hundred pounds to
purchase Lands, and make a School-house in Appleby: and what his benefaction
was besides, as also of that of Bishop Langton, you may see in Hist. and Antiq.
Vniv. Oxon. Lib. 2. p. 123. 124, 125.

Joy partly educated here, but more in the Univ. of Paris, was by provision
from the Pope made Archbishop of Tuam in Ireland, 16. Call. of June 1485, where
sitting about 16 years, 1501:
gave way at length to fate Jac. Waraeus in Comment de Praesulibus Hiberniae,
Edit. Dubl. 1665. p. 250.
28. Dec. in fifteen hundred and one, and was, as I suppose, buried in his
Cathedral Church. In his Archbishopric succeeded Philip Pinson a Minerite, as
I shall anon tell you.

Episcopus Oleven: (being Suffragan to the Bishop of Worcester, as it seems)
was a Dominican or Black Friar in Warwick, (to whose fraternity there, he gave
6l. at the time of his death) and educated among the Black Friars in Oxon, to
whom also he gave 6l. to pray for him. He yielded up his last breath in Sept.
in fifteen hundred and two, In Offic. ut supra in reg. Blamyr. Qu. 16.
Will which I have seen, buried in the choire of the Church belonging to the
Black Friars in the City of Worcester on the south side of the Tomb of John
Lichfield, and opposite to that of Rich. Wolsey, who, as he says in the said
Will, was nuper Conoren: and Duneren: Episcopus.

New coll. yet whether he was perpetual Fellow thereof, the registers of that
house tells us not. After he had left the University, he was made Prior of
Lanthony near to Gloucester (in the neighborhood of which place, I presume, he
was born) and on the 13 of Sept. or 20. Nov. 11. Hen. 7. he was by Letters Pat.
11. Hen. 7. p. 1. in dors.
Pat. constituted Chancellor of Ireland, to execute that office by himself or
a Deputy. On the first of Janu. following he was constituted Ibid p. 1.
Deputy and Justice of the said Realm, where being settled, he performed good
service against that grand impostor Perkin Warbeck, and being elected Bishop of
Bangor, after the death of Richard lately Bishop of that place, had restitution
Pat. 12. Hen. 7. p. 1. m. 5.
of the temporalities belonging thereunto made by the King 6. October. 12. Hen.
7. Dom. 1496. In 1500. he was translated to Salisbury on the death of John
Blyth lately Bishop thereof, (Son of Will. Blyth of Norton in Yorkshire, Son of
another William of Leedes in the said County) and had restitution Pat. 15. H.
7. p. 1. m. 27.
of the temporalities thereof made to him (as the manner is) on the 12. March
the same year: About which time he was made Chanc. of the Order of the Garter.
In 1501. he was elected Archb. of Canterbury upon the death of Cardinal
Moreton: whereupon being translated thither, had Pat. 16. H. 7. p. 1. m. 1.
restitution made of his temporalities, on the second of Aug. the same year.
About that time the members of the University of Oxon received an Epistle Reg.
Epist. Univ. Oxon. FF. Ep. 518.
of favor from him; wherein, among other things, he styles the said University
his benignissima matter. He died at Lambeth on the 15. of Febr. says a certain
Franc. Godwin Ep. Land^v. in Com. de Praesul. Angl. in Cant.
author, tho a register Reg. Antiq. coll. Merton fol. 138. ^.
of that time tells us, 1502-3.
'twas on the 16. of that month, in fifteen hundred and two: Whereupon his body
was carried to Canterbury, and buried in the middle of the Martyrdom, within
the precincts of the Cathedral there, leaving then behind him the character of
a person altogether fit for those places that he successively enjoyed.

Limerick in Ireland, studied several years among his Country men the Civil and
Canon Law, of which facul^ies he became at length Bachelaur. Afterward
retiring to his native Country, became, through several preferments, Archb. of
Cashills, 1503:
an. 1483, where sitting about 20. years died 5. Sept. in fifteen hundred and
three. Of the great injuries done to him by Gerald Fits Gerald Earl of Kildare,
L. Deputy of Ireland (of which Creagh complained to K. Hen. 7. by the advice of
Sir Jam. de Ormond Knight) the Histories Vide Jac. (...) ^ in com. de (...)
1665. p* 171.
of that Country will tell you.

PHILIP PINSON, an English man, studied Gray Friars for a time, in their house
in Oxon. of which order he was a learned brother, but whether he took the
Degree of D. D. in this University, we have no register that shows it.
Afterward he became Suffragan Bishop to Hadrian de Castello Bishop of Hereford
and afterward of B. and Wells; by whose endeavors, but chiefly of those of K.
Hen. 7. he was advanced at Rome to the Archbishopric of Tuam in Ireland on the
2. of December. in fifteen hundred and three, Ibid. p. 25^.
of the Plague. Afterward that See laid void two years, and then 'twas
conferred on Maurice O Fihely, whom I have before, among the writers, mentioned.

JOHN ARUNDELL, Son of Rainford, or Rainford Arundell Knight, (by Jane his
Wife, Sister and heir of Joh. Coleshull) third Son of Sir John Arundell of
Talvern in Cornwall, (who died 13. Hen. 6.) was born in that County, received
his Academical education in Exeter college, became Canon of Windsore in 1479.
and about that time Rector of Sutton Courtney near Abendon in Berkshire. In
1489. he was made Prebendary of Bolun in the Cath. Church of York, on the death
of Dr. Tho. Chaundler, and in the same year in Nov. he was made Preb. of
Beamister secunda in the Cath. Church of Sarum, upon the promotion of Rich.
Hill to the Sea of London, being then also dignified in the Cath. Chapter at
Exeter. On the 6. of Nov. 1496. he was consecrated Bishop of Lichf. and
Coventry, and on the 28. of the same month had the temporalities of that See
restored Pat. 11. Hen. ^. p. 1. m. (...)
to him. The author In Hist. (...)
of the Comment, of the English Bishops, tells that he was translated from that
See to Exeter, 1501, tho elsewhere (...)
I find that the translation was made on the last day, saving one, of June,
1502. and that the temporalities thereof were not given Pat. (...) Hen. 7* p.
1. (...) 36.
to him till 26. Sept. 19. Hen. 7. Dom. 1503. He surrendered up his last breath
in the house belonging to the Bishops of Exeter within the parish of St.
Clements Danes without Temple Bar, London, 15. March in fifteen hundred and
three; and was buried on the sourth side of the high altar, in the Church of
St. Clement before mentioned. This Joh. Arundell did, upon the desire of the
chief members of this University, promise to them 20l. toward the finishing of
S. Mary's Church, but he dying before 'twas given, they recovered Reg. Epist
(...)
that sum of his Executors. I find another John Arundell of Exeter coll. who
was one of the Proctors of the University 1426. afterward Doctor of Physic,
Physician to K. Hen. 6. and Dean of the Cath. Chapter at Exeter. I take him to be
the same John Arundell M. D. who was collated to the Archdeacon^y of Richmond
in the latter end of October. 1457. in the place of Laur. Both promoted to the Sea of Durham, and had for his successor in that Dignity John Both, collated
to it in May 1459, and afterward became Bishop of Exeter.

JOHN MORGAN, alias Young a We^^ man, and Oxon. was installed Dean ^^^sore in
the place of Will. Benley an. 1484. (2. (...).) and being elected Bish. of S.
David's on the death of (...) (sometimes B. thereof, an Oxford Scholar, and a
^enefactor to the (...)
building of S. Mary's Church) had restitution Pat. (...)
made to him of temporalitie belonging to that See, 23. Nov. 12. Hen. 7. D^m.
1496. He gave way to fate in the latter end of Apr. or beginning of May, in
fifteen hundred and four: whereupon his body was buried between the pillars on
the sourth side of the body of the Cath. Church of S. David. By his Will, which
I have (...)
seen, dated 25. Apr. 15^4. and proved the 15. of May following, it appears
that his desire was to have a Chapel made over his grave, in the best manner
that might be, according to the disposition of his Executors, but whether ever
performed, I know not.

Denbighshire man born, as it seems, was consecrated Bishop of Bangor, in the
year of our Lord 1500, Aug. in fifteen hundred and four, was, as I suppose,
buried in his own Church. This Tho. Pygot, I take to be the same who
supplicated Reg. Act. congreg. Univ. Oxan. Aa. fol: 116: a.
the venerable congregation of Regents of this University, in order to to the
taking of the degree of Bachelaur of the Civil Law, an. 1458. One of both his
names was confirmed Abbat of the Monastery of the Virgin Mary at York, on the
death of Thom. Stayngreve, 24. May 1398. and died in 1405. but what relation
the former had to this I cannot tell.

In fine eiusd. libri vel reg. Epistolam F.
seems) of the Law, Commissary of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, and
afterward Master of the Rolls in the room of Dr. Will. Warham 1502, and one of
the Kings Council, was, upon the translation of the said Dr. Warham to
Canterbury, elected to the Sea of London: which being consented to by the King,
the temporalities thereof were Pat. 2. Hen. 7. p. 1, m. 26.
restored to him 13. Nov. 20. Hen. 7. Dom. 1504. He died in Oct. or Nov. in
fifteen hundred and five, 1505:
and was buried in his own Church of S. Paul. He had studied the Laws in Oxon.
and had presided the Chair, but in what hall or School it does not appear. In
his Bishopric succeeded Richard Fitz James, as I shall hereafter tell you.

Siveyer, was born at Shinkley in the County Pal. of Durham, educated in this
University, but whether in Merton coll. I am as yet uncertain. However as to
that, which the F. Godwin, int. Episcop. Dunelm. p. 136.
author of the Commentary of the English Bishops says, that he was Warden of
Merton coll. and Provost of that of Eaton near Windsore, is false, for 'twas
not William, but Henry Sever, who lived before this man's time, that enjoyed
those places. After Will. Sever had left Oxon, wherein, I presume, he had
studied either in Glouc. or Durham, college (nurseries for those of the Order
of St. Benedict, he himself being a Benedictine) he retired to his Monastery of
S. Mary at York, succeeded Thom. Both in the Abbatship of that place, and in
1495. being elected B. of Carlisle on the death of Rich. Bell (who had been
formerly Prior of Durham) had the temporalities thereof delivered Pat. 11. Hen.
7. m. 4. p. 14.
to him, on the eleventh of December. the same year, and liberty then given to
him to keep his Abbatship in Commendam. In 1502. he being elected to the Sea of
Durham, had the temporalities thereof surrendered Pat. 18. Hen. 7. p. 1. m. 6.
into his hands by the King, on the 15. of October. the same year: where setting
but three years, paid his last debt to nature in fifteen hundred and five,
1505:
and was buried in the Cath. Church there. In his Abbatship succeeded Rob.
Wanhop in Dec. 1502. ( Sever being then Bish. of Durham,) and in his Chair at
Durham, Christop. Bainbridge, whom I shall hereafter mention. The book Hist.
Eccles. Dunelm. and successio Episcoporum ejusd. Eccl. MS. int. cod. Land. in
bib. Bod. 4. L* 5^.
or Hist. of the Chapter of Durham calls this Bish. Will. Sinews or Senwse, and
Leland In tom. 1. collect. p. 472.
Senose; which book tells us that he was translated from Carlisle to Durham, by
virtue of a Bull sent from the Pope, and so by the Breve of K. Hen. 7. dat. 15.
Oct. in the 18. year of his reign, he was consecrated Bishop of Durham 1502.
and stood three years, etc. so that according to time this Sinews must be the
same with Sever.

English man, became Archdeacon of the Isle of Man after he had left the
University, and and at length by provision from the Pope became Bishop of
Killala in Ireland 1498. which office he keeping till fifteen hundred and five,
then resigned Waraus ut supra, p. 291.
it. Clar. 1505.
I take this Thomas Clerk to be the same with Thomas, written and styled
Thomas Aladensis Episcopus that is Tho. Bish. of Killala, who by that name and
title was admitted Reg. (...) de Castello Ep. B. and W^llen^.
Rector of Chedsey in Somersetshire on the death of Mr. Joh. Fynne, 12. Janu.
1505. and dying in the year 1508. Rob. Fisher was admitted to the said rectory
on the 18. Dec. the same year.

JOHN PAIN, a Dominican or Black Friar, spent Dominicans in the south suburb
of Oxon. Afterward retiring to Ireland, was, through several preferments, made
Bishop of Mead by the Popes provision, and installed in the Choire there on
the feast of St. Dominick ( Aug. 4.) in 1483. In the year 1493. he was made
Master of the Rolls in Ireland, being then much celebrated for his great
charity and hospitality, and dying on the sixth day of March in fifteen hundred
and six, Hen. 7.) was buried in the Monastery of his Order at Dublin, or
rather, as the Jac. War. (...) p. 38*
Historian of Ireland tells us, in the Church of S. Patrick there, where his
monument, near the west door of that Church, was remaining in his time, with an
inscription thereon.

MATTHEW MACRAIH, an Irish Man, and Clonfort in his own Country, in 1482. and
dying in fifteen hundred and seven, Ibid. p. 2^6*
at Kicomaing, leaving behind him the character of a person celebrated for the
many virtues of his mind.

THOMAS O-CONGALAU, another Irish man Ibid. p. 88*
succeeded in the Sea of Ardagh one Will. O-Ferall, person of great prudence,
and liberality toward the poor.

WALTER BLAKE, was born in the County Galloway in Ireland, and for some time
educated in this University: Afterward he retired to his native Country,
became Canon of Enagdune alias Enaghcoin, and at length by the favor of P.
Innocent 8. Bishop of Ib. p. 99.
Clocmacnois, or Clonmacnois, in the beginning of 1487. where sitting about 21
years, submitted to fate in the month of May in fifteen hundred and eight.
Thomas succeeded him in that See, but his surname is yet unknown.

EDMUND COMERFORD, was also educated Kilkenny, was consecrated there Bishop of
Fernes in 1505. In which See sitting but four years, died in fifteen hundred
Ibid. (...)
and nine, Nicholas Common.

THOMAS VIVIAN, a Cornish man born, or at Cornwall and Devon, was from his
youth bred a Black Cannon, or Cannon Regular, and among those in Oxon, did he
spend some time. Afterward retiring into his own Country, he became Prior of
the Black Cannons at Bodmin in Cornwall, and at length Suffragan Bishop to the
Bishop of Exeter, under the title of Episc. Majorensis or Megarensis, that is,
as I suppose, Megara. Joh. Leland In. (...)
tells us, that the Priory at Bodmin stood at the east south-east part of the
Parish Chapter yard there. There lay buried before the high Altar in an high Tomb
of very darkish gray marble one Thom. Clar. 1510.
Vivian Prior of Bodmin, and Suffragan Magarensis Episcopatus. He died not long
since, etc. One Tho. Vivian of Exeter coll. proceeded Master of A. in an Act
celebrated 10: March 7. Hen. 8. Dom. 1515. and was afterward Rector of the
said coll. for a time, but him I take not to be the same with the Bishop; yet
Quaere.

CHRISIOPHER FISHER, an Oxford man Elphine in Ireland, and Prebendary of
Hustwayt in the Church of York; which Dignity he obtained after he was made
Bishop. 151^*
In fifteen hundred and eleven, or thereabouts, he departed this mortal life,
and that year one Thom. Wa^lashe succeeded him in the said Prebendship, but who
in the Sea of Elphine, except one John, who became Prebendary of Amplesord in
the Chapter of York 3. Nov. 1530. and died on the Feast of the Assump. of the B.
Virgin, 1536. (being then Prior of Welbeck in Nottinghamshire,) I know not.

Irish man, was promoted to the Sea of Laighlin in Ireland, in 1490. and died
in fifteen hundred and twelve,

ap OWEN, a Welsh man, sometimes a Student in the Civ. and Can. Law in Oxon,
afterward Abbat of Stratmarkell and of Conway in his own Country, was
consecrated Bishop Fr. Godwyn in Com. de prasul. Angl. edit. 1616. p. 662.
of S. Asaph in the year 1503. and dying on the 11. or 12. of Febr. in fifteen
hundred and twelve, Asaph, near the high Altar on the south side. There is a
monument of a Bishop near to the Throne in the said Chancel, which, as the
tradition goes there, was put for the said Dav. ap Owen.

de PORTU, or O-Fihely an Irish man, became by provision from P. Jul. 2.
Archbishop of Tuam in his own Country, June 1506. and died in fifteen hundred
and thirteen. See more of him among the writers under that year.

Somersetshire man born as it seems, was educated in Oriel coll. of which he
was afterward Fellow; and being Master of Arts, was made Vicar of Banwell in
the Diocese of Wells. In Aug. 1483. he became Master of St. John's house or
hospital in the City of Wells, and soon after Chanter and Residentiary in the
Cath. Chapter there. In 1491-2. he was made Suffragan Bishop to Rich. Fox B. of
Bath and Wells, under the title of Episcopus Tynensis, by which, I suppose, is
meant Tyne, the last Island belonging to the Republic of Venice in the
Archipelago. In 1493. he, by the name of Tho. Cornish Bishop of Tyne, was made
Provost of Oriel coll. and in 1497. Jul. 29. he was collated to the Vicaridge
of S. Cuthberts Chapter in Wells. In Oct. 1505. he became Vicar of Chew in
Somersetshire, (on the death of Rob. Wydow,) in which County he had other
Churches successively conferred upon him to keep up the state of a Bishop; and
in 1507. resigning his Provostship of Oriel coll. retired to Wells, being then
also Suffragan to Hugh Oldham Bishop of Exeter; July, in fifteen hundred and
thirteen, was buried in the Cath. Chapter of Wells, in the north Isle, near to the
door that leads up to the Chapter House. Over his grave was a fair monument
erected, which continues to this day, with so much of the inscription thereon
left, that shows the day and year of his death. One Thom. Woulf or Wulff
titular Bishop of Lacedemon had a Commission granted to him 30. Sept. 1513. to
be Suffragan Bishop in the place of the said Cornish, but whether he was ever
of Oxon, I have not yet seen any record to prove it.

Rob. Smyth, was born at Farnworth in the Parish of Prescote in Lancashire,
educated partly in Grammar learning in his own Country, partly in Academical in
this University, either in Oriel, or Lincoln, college, or successively in both.
In the former I have reason to suppose so, because several of his name and
kindred were members thereof soon after, if not in his own time; and in the
other, because in the Bursars accounts In thesaur. vel turri coll. Linc.
thereof, I find one Mr. Will. Smyth to have been a Commoner of that house,
before, and in the year 1478. being the same without all doubt with this person
of whom we now speak. Howsoever it is, (tho I am not ignorant that he was a
benefactor to both the said colleges, especially the last, and that in an In
lib. vel reg. epistol. Univ. Oxon. F* fol. 182. epist. 495. vide etiam epist.
484.
Epistle to him concerning his election to the Chancellourship of the Univ. of
Oxon, the Members thereof do say that he was sometimes Alumnus Academiae Oxon,)
sure I am that he, as others, being fearful of diverse pests happening in Oxon in
their time, did receed to Cambridge, where this Will. Smyth became Fellow, and
afterward Master, of Pembroke hall. About that time he was made Archdeacon of
Surrey, D. D. of Cambridge, (in which degree he was incorporated at Oxon,) and
afterward Clerk of the Hamper, if I mistake not, (for we have an Ib. in F. ^p.
36^.
Epistle written to one Mr. Will. Smyth Cler. Hamperii for the expedition of
the consummation of the privileges of the University) and at length being
elected Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, had restitution Pat. 8. Hen. 7. p. 1.
m. 6.
made of the temporalities of that See 29. Jan. 8. H. 7. dom. 1492. After he
had sat there about three years, he was elected Bishop of Lincoln; so that
having restitution Pat. 11: Hen. 7. p. 2. m. 16.
made of the temporalities thereof on the 6. Feb. 1495. sat there till the
time of his death, became a great man in the Kings favor, Counselor to
Prince Arthur, President of Wales, (being the first of all that bore that
office,) Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and the prime founder of
Brasnose coll. there. He gave way to fate on the second day of January in
fifteen hundred and thirteen, Will. Alnwyke sometimes B. of Linc. toward the
west end of the Cath. Church at Lincoln. Over his grave was a very large marble
Tombstone soon after laid even with the pavement, having thereon engraven, on
a large brass plate, the portraicture of a Bishop mitred and vested for the
Altar, with a Crosier in his left hand; and on the verge of the said stone was
this inscription engraven on several narrow plates of brass. Sub marmore isto
tenet hic tumulus ossa venerabilis in Christo Patris ac Domini, Domini
Willielmi Smyth, quondam Conventriensis and Lychfeldensis, ac deinde
Lincolniensis Presulis; qui obiit secundo die mensis Januarii, anno Domini
Millesimo quingentesimo tertio decimo: cujus anime propitietur deus, qui pius
and misericors and in die tribulationis misericors peccata remittit.
Ecclesiastiio.

At the foot of the portraicture are these verses following, engraven on a
brass plate, fastened to the said stone. Cestrensis Presul, post Lyncolniensis,
Amator
Cleri nam multos cis mare transque aluit.
Quique utriusque fuit Prefectus Principis aule,
Fundavitque duas perpetuando Scholas.
Aulaque sumptu hujus renovatus est Enea Criste
Hic situs est, anime part benign sue.


You may see more of this worthy Bishop in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2.
p. 104. b. 161. b. 212. 415. b. He the said Dr. Smyth gave three hundred pounds
to John the Prior, and Convent of Laund in Leycestershire to have the Parsonage
and Parish Church of Roysthorne in Cheshire bought and appropriated to their
house: Which accordingly being done, the said Prior and Convent, did, in
consideration thereof, give and confirm under their Common Seal to the Mayor
and Citizens of Chester an annuity of ten pounds to be paid from the Monastery
of S. Werburgh within the said City, to the end that they pay that annuity to a
Master or Bachelaur of Arts, or at least to a Master of Grammar, that should
teach Grammar freely at Farnworth in Lancashire. This was done 22. Hen. 7. and
soon after was a School settled there. He also gave many ornaments, and other
stuff to Brasnose coll. to be used in their Chapel and elsewhere.

CHRISIOPHER BAINBRIDGE, Bambridg, Baynbrigg, was born at Hilton near Appleby
in Westmoreland, educated in Queens coll. of which he became Provost before the
year 1495. (being about that time LL. D.) and afterward a liberal benefactor
thereunto. In Feb. 1485. he being then Prebendary of South-Grantham in the
Cath. Church of Salisbury, (which he resigned) became Prebendary of Chardstock
in the said Church, and in Apr. 1486. was made Preb. of Horton in that Church
on the resignation of R. Morton. In 1503. Sept. 28. he was admitted Preb. of
Strenshall in the Cath. Chapter of York, then void by the consecration of Jeffr.
Blyth to the Sea of Lich. and Coventry, and on the 21. Dec. following he was
installed Dean of the said Church of York, in the place of the said Jeffr.
Blyth, who had been installed in that Dignity (in the place of Dr. Will.
Sheffield deceased,) 24. Mar. 1496. In 1505. he was not only made Dean of
Windsore but Master of the Rolls, and one of the Kings Councillors, in which
year he resigned his Rectory of the Chapter of Aller in the Dioc. of B. and Wells.
In 1507. he being elected Bishop of Durham, had restitution Pat ^3. Hen. 7. p.
2. m. 24.
made to him of the temporalities of that See 17. Nov. the same year; and in
the next, being elected Archbishop of York on the death of Thom. Savage, had
the temporalities also of that See restored Pat. 24. Hen. 7. p. 3. m. 11*
to him 12. Dec. 24. Hen. 7. In March 1511. he was made Cardinal of S. Praxedis
for the service he did in persuading K. Hen. 8. to take part with the Pope in
the Wars between him and Lewis 12. King of France, and in 1514. being then in
Rome, was poisoned by one Rinaldo de Modena an Italian Priest, (who was his
Steward,) upon malice and displeasure conceived, for a blow his Master gave
him, as the said Rinaldo, when he was executed for it, confessed at his death.
He ended his days on the 14. July in fifteen hundred and fourteen, and was, as
certain authors say, buried in the English hospital (now called the English
college) in Rome. Wolseys life (In cap. 4.
says, that the said Cardinal Bainbridge died at Rohan in France, being then,
and there the Kings Ambassador. Onuph. Panvinius, and Joh. Baleus with his
authors, tells us that Christopher Vrswyke, who was Predecessor to the said
Cardinal Bainbridge in the Deanery of Windsore, was made Cardinal of S.
Praxedis, but false, for it must be understood of Bainbridge. As for Christoph.
Vrswyke, he had been Recorder of London in part of the Reign of Edw. 4. in the
time of Ric. 3. and in part of Hen. 7. To which last King being Chaplain, and
afterward Almoner, was by him employed in several Embassies, especially to
Charles 8. K. of France, choosing him then the rather for that employment,
because he was a Churchman, as best sorting with an Embassy of pacification,
as that, and others were, to the said King. In 1488. May 22. he being then LL.
D. he was confirmed Dean of York by his Proctor, in the place of Rob. Both,
who died 25. Jan. going before. Which dignity Vrswyke resigning, was succeeded
therein by Will. Sheffield LL. D. in the month of June 1494. In 1490. he was
made Canon of Windsore, and about that time Archdeacon of Wilts, (in the place,
if I mistake not, of one Hugh The said Hugh Pavy was afterward Bish. of S.
David's.
Pavy, who had succeeded in that dignity Pet. Courtney upon his promotion to
the Sea of Exeter, in the beginning of Febr. 1478.) and in 1493. Mar. 21. was
not only only made Preb. of Botevaunt in the Church of York on the resignation
of Edward Cheyney, but also Archdeacon of Richmond on the promotion of John
Blyth to the Sea of Sarum. In 1495. Nov. 20. he was installed Dean of Windsore
in the place of Dr. Jo. Morgan made Bishop of St. David's, and about the same
time became Registrary of the most Noble Order of the Garter. Afterward he was
offered the Bishopric of Norwich, upon the death of James Goldwel, but refused
it, and in the beginning of Febr. an. 1504. became Archdeacon of Oxford, on the
promotion of Dr. Rich* Mayhew to the Sea of Hereford. At length after he (in
the chief part of his lifetime) had refused great honors, and so consequently
riches, he retired to Hackney near London, where, in a contented condition, he
spent several years in a religious and close retirement even to his death,
which happening in a good old age on the 24. October. in 1521. was buried on the
north side of the Chancel of the Chapter there; where was lately, if not still, a
monument of white freestone remaining over his grave.

Thomas Earl of Derby, was born in Lancashire, and educated in this University,
but in what house, I cannot yet tell. On the 3. March 1491. he became Preb. of
Yatminster prima in the Cath. Church of Sarum, and in the year following Preb.
of Beminster prima in the said Church. In 1500. Dec. 3. he became Archdeacon of
Richmond on the resignation of Christop. Vrswyke, and in 1505. in Sept. Chantor
of the Cath. Chapter of Sarum, being then Warden of the coll. at Manchester in his
own Country. On the 18. June 1506. he, by the name of Jacobus Stanley nuper
hujus Vniversitatis Scholasticus, (did Reg. Univ. Oxon. ^. contin. Acta
Congreg. fol. ^9. b.
supplicate the venerable congregation of Regents, that he might be licensed to
proceed in the Civil Law, which was granted with some conditions; and being
soon after elected Bishop of Ely, after the death of Rich, Reaman, the
temporalities thereof were Fat. 22. Hen. 7. p. 3. ^. ^3.
restored to him 5. Nov. following. On the 29. Jan. 1507. the said Regents,
with the Non-Regents, did grant Ib. in cod. ^eg. (...) 51.
that he the said James Stanly Bishop of Ely might be created Doctor of decrees
by a cap put on his head by Will. Archb. of Canterbury and Richard B. of
London. Which grant being accordingly performed with solemnity, a Letter of
thanks was sent to the University for the honor they had done unto him. He
left behind him at his death a natural Son called John de Yarford a Knight;
whom probably he had begotten on a Concubine, which (as Dr. Fr. Godwin tells In
Comment. de praesul. Angl. edit. 1616. p. 331.
us) he kept at Somersham in his Diocese. In his last In Offic. Praerog. Cant.
in reg. Holder. Qu. 7.
Will and Test. dated 210. March 1514. and proved 23. May 1515. I find that it
was his desire to be buried in a new Chapel to be made within the precincts of
the Cath. Chapter of Ely, or else in his new Chapel then in building at
Manchester. His will farther was, That the Chapel to be made for him to be
buried and rest his bones in, should be made at the east end of the Cathedral
Church of Ely, for which be would that 100 marks be bestowed on a Tomb for him
to be erected therein. Also that another Chapel be built at Manchester, on the
north side of the Church, between St. James Chapel and the east end of the
Church, wherein he would have a Tomb made for him. On which Chapel and Tomb he
would have an hundred pounds bestowed for the building of them, etc. -- In this
last Chapel dedicated to S. Joh. Bapt. which joins on the north side of the
collegiate Church at Manchester (wherein I presume he was buried, because there
is neither Tomb or inscription for him at Ely) I find this inscription
following. Of your charytye pray for the Soul of James Stanley sometimes
Bishop of Elye and Wardeyn of Manchester, 1514-15.
who decessed this transytory Wourld the xxii. of March in the year of owre
Lord God mdxv. upon whose Soul and all Christen Sowles Jesu have mercy, etc.
Vive deo gratus, toto mundo tumulatus.
Crimine mundatus, semper transire paratus.
Filii hominum, etc.


In a catalogue, or rather history of the Wardens of Manchester coll. which I
have In (...) C. 37.
seen, I find these matters of James Stanley, -- At Manchester he built a most
sumptuous Chapel on the north side of the Church, being 28 yards long and 9
yards broad, and a square Chapel on the north side of that again he built. He
built the south side of the wood-work in the Quire, the seats for the Warden,
Fellows, and Churchmen, being thirty seats on both sides, and Mr. Rich.
Bexwick that builded Jesus Chapel, builded the other side. -- He lies buried
on the north side of this Chapel, in a fair Tomb, with his picture in brass,
in his pontificial robes, and the Arms of Derbie and his Bishopric impaled,
etc. In the Sea of Ely succeed James Stanly one Nicholas West Doctor of both
the Laws of Cambridge, who had restitution Pat. 7. Hen. 8. p. 2.
made of the temporalities of that See 6. Sept. 7. Hen. 8. dom. 1515. He was
born at Putney in Surrey, educated in Grammar learning in Eaton School near
Windsore, chose Scholar of Kings coll. in 1477. Where Tho. Hatcher in his cat.
of Provests. Fellows and S^hol. of Kings coll. in Cambr. MS. ^ub an. 1477.
proving a factious and turbulent person set the whole College together by the
Ears about the Proctorship of the University. And when he could not obtain his
desires, he set fire on the Provosts lodgings, stole away silver spoons, and
ran away from the College. But within short space after, he became a new Man,
repaired to the University, and with general approbation for his excellent
learning he was made Doctor But in the Kings writing for the the restitution of
his temporalities, he is styled Doctor of both the laws.
of Divinity. He was well experienced in the Civil and Canon Laws, and had such
an art and faculty in opening dark places and sentences of the Scripture that
none of his time could exceed him, etc. In 1510. he became Dean of Windsore, in
the place of Dr. Thom. Hobbes Warden of Alls. coll. deceased, and Registrary of
the most Noble Order of the Garter. Afterward King Hen. 8. sent him often
Ambassador to Foreign Princes, and Q. Katherine chose him and Bishop Fisher her
Advocates in the cause of divorce from K. Hen. 8. for which he incurred that
Kings displeasure. He paid his last debt to nature on the sixth day of Apr.
1533. Whereupon his body was buried in the Cath. Chapter of Elye, in the middle of
a Chapel by him a little before erected on the south side of the same Church.
Soon after was a large marble laid over his grave, with this inscription
thereon. Of your charytye pray for the Soul of Nicholas West sometimes Bishop
of this See, and for all Christian Sowles. For the which prayer, he has
granted to every person so doying fortye days of pardon for every time that
they shall so pray, etc. In the said See of Elye succeeded Thom. Goodrick D. of
Div. Son of Edward Goodrick of Kirbye in Lincolnshire, Son of John Goodricke of
Bullingbrook in the said County, which Thomas was educated in Kings college in
the University of Cambridge.

Thornton, was Doctor of Div. and several times Commissary or Vicechancellour
of this University, while Dr. warham Archb. of Canterbury was Chancellor, viz.
between the years 1506, Clar. 1514.
and 1514. in which time he is often styled Episcopus Syrynensis and Syrymensis
(perhaps the same with Sirmium in Hungary) as being a Suffragan to the same
Archbishop, which is all I know of him.

Mac-CARMACAN, sometimes written among our imperfect Records Carmgan Hibernicus
spent some time among his Countrymen in this University, but whether he took a
degree, we have no Register to show it. Afterward retiring to his Country he
became Dean of Raphoe, and at length Bishop of that place in 1484. He died Jac.
War. in lib. De Praesul. Hibern. p. 77.
in the habit of a Gr^y-Frier on the seventh of the Ides of May in fifteen
hundred and fifteen, Franciscans, commonly called the Grey-Friers, at Dunagall.
Whereupon one Cornelius O-Cahan succeeded him in his Bishopric.

Mayo, received his first breath in Berkshire, in a Market Town, if I mistake
not, called Hungerford, was educated in Grammar learning in Wykehams School
near to Winchester, admitted true and perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1459.
and on the 28. March 1467. took holy Orders from the hands of George Archb. of
York. Soon after he was elected one of the Proctors of this University, and in
1480. was made President of Magd. coll. by the Founder thereof W. Waynfleet,
and about that time D. of Div. In the beginning of May 1501* he was made
Archdeacon of the East Riding of Yorkshire in the place of Joh. Hole Bach. of
Decrees, deceased, (who on the first of May 1497. was, from being Archdeacon of
Clievland admitted to that Dignity on the resignation of Cornbull) and being
installed Archdeacon of Oxon, on the 10. of the same month and in the same
year, was sent into Spain to conduct the Infanta Katherine to England to be
wedded to Prince Arthur. In 1503. he was elected Chancellor of this
University, and in the year after, he being one of the Kings Council, his
Almoner, and elected to the Sea of Hereford, had restitution Pat. 20. Hen. ^.
p. 1. m. 26.
made to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto, on the first of Nov.
1504. He paid his last debt to nature on the 18. of Apr. in fifteen hundred and
sixteen, Ethelbert. By his In reg. Holder, Qu. 18. in Offic. praerog. (...).
Will he gave to 50 Priests studying in the University of Oxon, six shillings
and eight pence a-peice to pray for him, as also several books to New coll.
Library. One Rich. Mayow Doctor of Decrees of this University, and Canon resid.
of the Cath. Chapter of Exeter, died in the year 1500. whose Executor then was
Thom, Harrys Archdeacon of Cornwall, but what relation there was between this
Rich. Mayow (who was a West^rn man) and the Bishop beforementioned, I know
not. In the said See of Hereford succeeded Charels Both LL. D. of Cambridge;
who, after election, received Pat. 8. Hen. 8. p. ^.
the temporalities thereof 9. Feb. 1516. By his last Will and Ib. in reg.
Holder. Qu. 25.
Testam. proved 8. May 1535. he desired to be buried in the Cath. Chapter of
Hereford juxta hostium ex part boreali Ecclesiae, ubi construxi (as he says)
sepulchrum meum. After him succeeded in the said See Edw. Fox another
Cantabrigian, who had the temporalities thereof restored Pat. (...) Hen. 8. p.
1.
to him 4. Oct. 1535. This person who was an eminent Scholar of his time, was
born at Duresley in Gloucestershire, educated in Eaton School near Windsore,
admitted Scholar of Kings coll. in Cambridge, 27. March 1512. became Provost of
it 27. December. 1528. and afterward the Kings Almoner, one of his Privy
Council, and a great promoter of the Kings divorce from Q. Katharine,
particularly in the University of Cambridge, where he, and Dr. Steph. Gardener
procured, with much difficulty and earnest engaging of themselves, the
testimony of the Members of the said University for the Kings divorce
beforementioned, an. 1530. In Sept. 1531. he was installed Archdeacon of
Leycester upon the resignation of Dr. Steph. Gardener, and in Nov. 1533. he was
made Archdeacon of Dorset on the death of Will. Bennet. About which time, or
rather before, he had been Ambassador diverse times into France and Germany, and
afterward was secretly a favourer of the reformed religion, insomuch that
Martin Bucer dedicated his Cemmentary on the Evangelists to him. He, the said
Fox, wrote a book, De vera differentia regiae potestatis and Ecclesiasticae,
and quae sit ipsa veritas, ac virtus utriusque. Land. 1534-38. for which and
other learned labors, as his Annotations on Mantuan, he is celebrated, and
numbered among the learned men, by In Principum ac illustrium aliquot eruditorum
in Anglis virorum encomii^, etc. Land. 1589. qu. p. 63.
Joh. Leland. There is also extant a short oration of his in the story of the
Lord Thomas Cromwell, which you may see in the Acts and Mon, of of the Church,
and other matters elsewhere. By his last In Offic^ (...) ut sup. in reg.
Dingley, Qu. 25.
Will and Test. made the 8. May 1538. and proved 20. March following, it
appears that he bequeathed his body to be buried in the Church of S. Mary Hault
in London, now called S. Mary Mounthaw, (de monte alto) the Patronage of which
belongs to the Bishop of Hereford. After him succeeded John Sk^ppe D. D.
sometimes of Gonvill coll. in Cambridge, who, after his election to the Sea of
Hereford, had the Kings Pat. 31. Hen. 8. p. 3.
consent to it, 7. Nov. 1539. He died in his house at Mount-hault in London in
the latter end of the year (after or on the 18. March) 1551. Whereupon his body
was buried near to that of his Predecessor Edward Fox beforementioned.

JOHN HATTON, a Yorkshire man born, as it Oxonians for a time educated, became
well beneficed in that County, and at length Suffiragan Bishop to the
Archbishop of York under the title of Nigrepont; which is, as I suppose, near
to the Archipelago. In the year 1503. he was made Prebendary of Gevendale in
the Church of York, and in the year following Preb. of Vlleskelf in the same
Church. But the said promotions being not sufficient to keep up the Port of a
Bishop, he was made Archdeacon of Nottingham in the place of Tho. Crosley
deceased, in the beginning of Sept. 1506. He departed this mortal life on the
25. Apr. in fifteen hundred and sixteen, and was buried in the north Isle
joining to the Choire of the Cathedral Church at York. In his Archdeaconry
succeeded William Fell D. D. and in his Prebendary of Vlleskelf Brian Hygden
LL. D.

MILES SALLEY, or Sawley, a Benedictine Monk Abendon Abbey, Almoner Joh. Leland
in tom. 1. collect. p. 4^3.
thereof, and in 1498. Abbat of the Monastery of Einsham near to, and in the
County of, Oxford, was promoted to the rich Bishopric of Landaff in Nov. 1504.
and in the year following did Reg. Univ. Oxon. (...) fol. 237.
bestow considerable exhibitions on certain poor Scholars of Oxford, in which
University, (in Gloucester coll. I think) he had received his Academical
education. He departed his mortal life in the month of September. in fifteen
hundred and sixteen, Einsham Abbey) whereupon his heart and bowels were buried
before the Image of S. Theodorick at the high Altar in the Church of Mathern in
Monmouthshire, (at which place the B. of Landaff has a Palace) and his body
carried to Bristow, where it was with great solemnity buried on the north side
of our Ladies Chapel before the Image of S. Andrew, situate and being within
the college of Gaunts, (which Leland in his Itinerary styles the Gauntes alias
the Bonhomes,) founded originally by Hen. de Gaunt a Priest. After him
succeeded in the Sea of Landaff George Athequa a Black-Frier of Spain, who by
the name of Georgius de Aitien, had the Pat 9. Hen. 8. p. 1.
temporalities thereof given to him 23. Apr. 9. Hen. 8. dom. 1517. and after
him followed a Cambridge Doctor named Rob. Halgate or Holgate of Helmesworth in
Yorkshire, Master of the Order of Sempryngham, and Prior of Watton, who, after
election to that See, had Pat. 28. Hen. 8. p. ^
the Kings consent 29. March 28. Hen. 8. The next was Anthony Dunstan, whom I
shall hereafter mention.

JAMES Mac-MAHON, who studied for some time Ireland, became through certain petite
preferments Bishop of Derry 1507. and died a little before the nativity of our
Savior in fifteen hundred and seventeen. (...) Hib. p. 71.
Priorship of S. Pet. and S. Paul of Knock in the Province of Louth in
Commendam with his Bishopric.

Oxon wherein educated, became Bishop of Waterford and Lismore in Ireland about
1486. and soon after took care that all Ibid. p. 199.
the ancient charters of Lismore should be transcribed into a Register or
Leiger-book; which book remaining with his successors till 1617. was by
accident then burnt. He gave way to fate in fiveteen hundred and seventeen, In
(...)
it appears that one John, Bishop of Waterford, was Rector of Bawdrob or
Baudripp, in the Diocese of Bath and Wells, in January 1482. (22. Ed. 4.) whom
I take to be predecessor to Thom. Pursell, tho not mentioned by the Author of
the Com. of the Irish Bishops.

Courcyes of the Province of Mounster in Ireland, and when young became a
Brother of the Franciscan Order, in his own Country. Afterward going into
England, studied the Theological faculty (of which he was in few years after
Doctor) among those of his Order in Oxon. At length being made Bishop of
Clogher in his own Country, in 1484. was translated thence to Ross, on the
sixth of the Call. of October. 1494. He gave way to fate in a good old age, in the
Monastery of his Order at Temolage, in the County of Cork, on the 14. of March,
in fiveteen hundred and eighteen, (...)
Author to be much valued for his Fidelity by K. Hen. 7. and that he was the
first of the English Nation that obtained the Episcopal See of Clogher.

Oxon, became Prior of the Manastery of Drax in Yorkshire, on the death of one
Thomas Hancocke an. 1507. and about the year 1515. was made Suffragan Bishop to
the Archb. of York, under the title of Nigrepont. In 1518. he built the Choire
belonging to the Church of Bingley in Yorkshire, Clar. 1518.
in which Town, as it is probable, he was born, but when he died, it appears
not. One Rich. Wilson an English man, became, by provision from the Pope,
Bishop of Mead in Ireland, 1523. and sat there about six years: whether the
same with the former I cannot tell.

Owldham, descended from those of his name living at Oldham in Lancashire, was,
as it seems, born at Manchester in that County, and being partly fitted for
Academical learning, was sent to Oxon, where continuing for a while, went to
Cambridge, took a degree there, and in Sept. 1495. was made Preb. of South
Aulton in the Church of Sarum, on the death of John Coryndon, he the said
Oldham being about that time Chaplain to Margaret Countess of Richmond, and
Canon of the Cath. Chapter at Lincoln. In 1499. he, by the name of Hugh Oldham L.
L. Bac. was admitted Preb. of South Cave in the chapter of York, in the place of
Dr. Will. Worsley deceased, and on the 12. of Jan. the same year, he was
installed in his proper person in that dignity. In 1504. he being by the
endeavors of the said Countess elected Bishop of Exeter, by the name of Mr.
Hugh Oldham, without the addition of Doctor or Bach. was (...)
restored to the temporalities of that See, 6 Jan. 1504. He sat there several
years, not without some disturbance from the Abbot of Tavistock, occasioned by
a contention between them about the liberties of the Church of Exeter; and
dying on the 25. of June, Peter at Exeter, in a Chapel of his own erection,
hallowed in honor of our Lord God S. Savior, joining to the South side of the
Church, a little above the high Altar. In which Chapel he appointed some of
the Vicars Choral of Exeter to say Mass daily for his Soal. He was a benefactor
to the said Vicars, by giving them the Lands which belonged to the Brethren of
the Holy Trinity at Totness in Devonshire (whose Cell there had been founded by
one De la Bont, Lord of Little Totness, but (...)
suppressed by the said Oldham) to the end that they might be reduced together
every day at one Table to take Commons. He was also an especial Benefactor to
C. C. coll. in Oxon, as you may elsewhere (...)
see: and at Manchester in Lancashire (where his Obit was solemnised several
years after his death in the collegiat Church) he built an house to be employed
for a School, joining to the coll. there on the West part. Of this School he
appointed a Master and an Usher, who were to teach Children Grammar after the
use, manner, and form, of the School at Banbury in Oxfordshire, where Tho.
Stanbridge taught the Grammar composed by John Stanbridge. He appointed the
President of C. C. coll. in Oxon, for the time being to elect a Schoolmaster
and an Usher, the former to have 10l. and the other 5 l. per an. The Master was
to teach freely without reward or taking of Cock-pennies, Victor-pennies,
Potation-pennies, etc. Whether this School did go to ruin in the time of K.
Ed. 6. or was like to be dissolved I know not. Sure I am that Hugh Bexwyck
clerk, and Joan Bexwyck widow settled the said School 10 Elizab.

THOMAS HALSAY, or Halsey, an English man, English Nation in the Church of S.
Peter in Rome, and the Popes Prothonotarie of Ireland. At length by the
endeavors of Christop. Bainbridge Archb. of York and Cardinal, he was by the
provision of P. Jul. 2. made Bishop (...)
of Laighlin in Ireland, about the year 1513, but never lived, as it seems, to
visit his See or abide there. In 1515 and 16. he was present at the council of
Lateran, while in the mean time his Vicar general ( Charles Cavenagh) managed
his diocese. After his return into England in order to go into Ireland,
Westminster about fifteen hundred and nineteen; whereupon his body was buried
in the Church belonging to the Savoy hospital in the Strand. Near his
tombstone on the left side was Gawin Douglas Bishop of Dunkeld in Scotland
buried (...)
an. 1522. having been suddenly deprived of his life by the Pest. In the same
year (1519) died also Joh. Imurily Bishop of Ross in Ireland, sometimes a
Cistercian monk of Maur in the county of Cork, but whether he was ever of Oxon.
I cannot tell. Sure I am, that several of the surname of Immerley studied there
in the time or age wherein Jo. Imurily lived.

JOHN PENNY whose native place is as yet to (...)
in Lincoln coll. but whether in the condition of a Fellow, I cannot tell.
Afterward he being Doctor of the Laws, and noted for an eminent Canonist, was
made Bishop of Bangor in 1504, (having before been Abbat of Leycester as John
L^land (...)
says) where sitting till 1508. was by the Popes Bull dated at Rome 10. call.
Oct. in the same year translated to Carlisle, and on the 23 of January following
paid his obedience to the Archb. of York. Carlisle I know. His predecessor in
that See was Dr. Rog. Laybourne of Cambridge, who by his (...)
will dated 17. Jul. 1507. desired to be buried in the parish church of S.
James near to Charing Cross by London, but whether he died in that, or in the
year following, I cannot tell because there was no probat made of his Will.
Walter Redman D. D. and Master of the coll. at Greystock in Cumberland was one
of his Executors.

WILLIAM ATWATER, a Somersetshire man Magd. coll. where, while he continued in
the state of Bachelaur, he was esteemed a good Disputant in Philosophy, as
afterward, when Master, in Divinity. In 1489. Dec. 19. he was collated to the
Church of Hawbridge in the Dioc. of Wells, and in 1492. (in Feb. as it seems,)
he proceeded D. of D. In 1497. and several years after, he did undergo the
office of Commissary of the University, being then Rector of Pedylhynton in the
Di^c. of Sarum and Vicar of Comnore near Abendon in Berks, and in Jul. 1498. he
was made Rector of Dychcat commonly called Dichet in Somersetshire, by the
death of John Gunthorp. Which Rectory he holding till Oct. 1513. was in the
next month succeeded therein by Andr. Ammonius an Italian, then Preb. of
Compton-Dunden in the Church of Wells. In 1499. the said Doctor Atwater became
Canon of Windsore, and about the same time Fellow of Eaton coll. and Registrary
of the most Noble Order of the Garter. In 1502. I find him to be Dean of the
Kings Chapel, and on the 5. of July 1506. I find him installed Chanc. of the
Church of Lincoln. Which dignity he holding six years Nich. Bradbridge was
installed therein 16. Nov. 1512. In the beginning of Sept. 1509. he was made
Dean of Salisbury upon the promotion of Thom. Ruthall or Rowthall to the Sea of
Durham; in which year Thom. Writhiously Garter K. of Arms granted to him, the
said Atwater, a Coat of Arms, by the name of Will. Atwater Professor of
Divinity, of Davington in Somersetshire, and Dean of the Kings Chapel, etc. by
which, it may appear that he was originally of Davington, if such a Town or
Village or Hamlet be in that County. On the ^. June 1514. he was installed by
proxy Archdeacon of Huntingdon in the place of Joh. Constable Doctor of
Decrees, and being made Bishop the same year, Rich. Rawlyns D. D. was installed
in that Dignity on the 18. of November. He was a person much esteemed and valued
by Cardinal Wolsey, who finding him a man of parts did use his advice and
council in all or most of his public concerns. At length by his endeavors he
was made his Successor in the Episcopal See of Lincoln, to which being
consecrated on the Fr. Godwin in Com. de prasul. Angl. p. 360.
twelfth day of Nov. 1514. fate there to the time of his death, Lincoln, at the
foot of the Tomb of Bishop Alnwyke, and had soon after a large tombstone laid
over his grave, with the portraiture of a Bishop engraven on a large brass
plate fastened thereunto, with this inscription following engraven also on
plates of brass. Hic requiescit reverendus in Christo Pater Willielmus Atwater
sacre Theology professor, and regum Henrici septimi and octavi sacelle prius
Decanus, mox eorundem a consiliis, postea hujus percelebris Ecclesie Episcopus.
Presedit annos sex, menses tres. Obiit anno etatis sue octogesimo primo,
consecrationis septimo, a Christo nato millesimo quingentessimo vicessimo, die
mensis Februarii quarto.

Rich. Rokeby Treasurer of Ireland, was born in Yorkshire, educated partly in
an ancient hostle for the reception of Canonists in S. Aldates Parish, he
himself being afterward Doctor of the Can. Law, and about the same time Rector
of Sandall near Doncaster, and Vicar of Halyfax, in his own Country. In 1507.
he was by the favor of P. Jul. 2. made Bishop of Mead in Ireland, and the
same year one of the Kings Privy Council there. In the latter end of 1511. he
was translated by the authority of the same Pope to the Archiepiscopal See of
Dublin, and in 1515. was made Chancellor of Ireland by K. Hen. 8. in which
great office, as it is supposed, he continued to the time of his death. He
yielded to the stroke of death 29. Nov. in fifteen hundred twenty and one, Jac
Waraeus ut sup. p. 11^.
author says, in the Church of S. Patrick near Dublin. In his Will In reg Tho.
W'olsey Arch^ep. Ebor. fol. 155.
dated 22. Nov. and proved 4. February, an. 1521. wherein he styles himself
Archb. of Dublin and perpetual Vicar of Halifax, I find these things following,
-- Item, I will that after my death my body be embowelled and my bowels and
heart to be buried in the Church of Halifax within the Quire, and my body to be
buried in the new Chapel at Sandall, and thereon a Tomb of stone to be made,
and about the same to be written, Ego Willielmus Dublin Archiepiscopus, quondam
Rector istius Ecclsie, credo quod redemptor meus vivit -- qui obiit -- cujus
anime proptietur deus amen. Item, I will that a Chapel be made in all
convenient haste at Halifax on the south side of the Church, after the
direction of mine Executors and Church-Masters, and there a Tomb to be made
with my Image, and thereupon written, Hic jacet-Willlelmi Rokeby nuper Dublin
Archiepiscopi and Vicarii perpetui ^stius Ecclesie, qui credo, etc. Item, where
I did obtain a Pardon for the Parish of Halifax, and the Parishings thereunto
adjoining, pro lacticiniis in quadragessima edendis, I will that mine Executors
at their discretion obtain sub plumbo the said license to be renewed, and the
profit thereof to be employed for a Priest to sing at Halifax in my said new
Chapel as long as may be, by the advice and discretion of my Executors and the
Churchwardens. Item, I will that a Doctor of Div. have 10 l. to be occupied in
Preaching, etc. Thus far part of his Will-; according to the tenor of which
his heart was buried in the Chancel of the Chapter at Halifax, and thereon was laid
a stone, with the figure only of an heart engraven thereon. On the north side
of the said Church was also founded a Chapel, wherein was a monument built for
him, with an inscription put thereon. Which being since partly defaced, you
shall have that part which lately remained thereon. Orate pro anima Willielmi
Rokeby jur. Can. profess. ac etiam Episcopi Medensis, and denide Archiepisc,
Dublin, capelle fundatoris istius. Qui obiit... Novembris an. Dom. mcccccxxi.
What was performed at Sandall for the accomplishment of the other part of his
Will, I know not. One Will. Rokeby LL. Bac. who was well beneficed in
Yorkshire, succeeded Joh. Dakyn LL. D. in the Archdeaconry of the East Riding
of the said County, in Dec. 1558. who dying in 1568. Martin Parkinson B. D. had
that Dignity conferred upon him in Dec. the same year, but before he had kept it
an year, he gave way to fate: Whereupon the said Dignity was conferred on John
Mey D. D. who was settled therein in the beginning of Aug. 1569. and soon after
became Bishop of Carlisle. I find also one John Rokeby LL. D. to be Chanter,
Canon resid* and Preb. of Duffeild, of, and in the Church of York, who died in
the latter end of 1574. Which John with William beforementioned were of the
same Family with Will. Archb. of Dublin.

RICHARD FITZ-JAMES, son of John Fitzjames Alice his Wife daugh, of Joh.
Newbourgh) son of James Fitz-james by Eleanor his Wife daugh. and heir of Sim.
Draycot, was born in Somersetshire, became a Student in the University of Oxon
about 1459. elected probatoner-Fellow of Merton coll. in 1465. took holy orders
when he was Master, and in 1473 was elected one of the Proctors of the
University. In the beginning of March 1474 he became Preb. of Taunton in the
church of Wells upon the resignation of John Wansford, and afterward being
constituted chaplain to K. Edw. 4. he proceeded in Divinity. On the 12 of March
1482 he was elected Warden of Merton coll. upon the resignation of John Gygur,
being then and after esteemed a frequent Preacher. Which place he keeping about
25 years, he showed himself most worthy of it by his admirable way of
government which he exercised, by his continual benefaction thereunto, and by
his endeavors, when in power, to promote his Fellows. In March 1484-85. he was
made Vicar of Mynhead, and about that time Rector of Aller, in Somersetshire;
in which last he was succeeded by Mr. Christopher Baynbrigg in the latter end
of May 1497. On the 2. of June 1495. he was admitted Almoner to K. Hen. 7. and
on the 2. of January 1496. being then elected by the Monks of Rochester to be
Bishop of that See, was consecrated thereunto at Lambeth 21. May following by
Cardinal Moreton Archb. of Canterbury, and his Assistants Land^ff and Bangor.
In January 1503. he was translated to the Sea of Chichester in the place of Dr.
Edw. Story a Cantabrigian, (who dying in the latter end of the year 1502. was
buried on the north side of the high Altar in the Cath. Chapter at Chichester,
under a fair Tomb which he a little before had built for himself,) and on the
14. March. 1505. he was nominated by the King to succeed Dr. Barons in the Sea
of London. On the 1. Aug. 1506. the temporalities of that See were (...)
restored to him: So that soon after being settled there, he resigned his
Wardenship of Merton coll. which he had kept in Commendam with Rochester and
Chichester, and all that time had administered the Government thereof with great
commendation. But this the Reader is to note, that tho he was a Bishop several
years while Warden, yet did he, according to statute and custom, submit himself
yearly in the month of January to the scrutiny of the Fellows of the said coll*
in the Chapel of S. Cross of Halywell near to Oxon, de mora and muribus
Custodis. Which statute continuing in use till the time of Hen. 8. was then
disused by Dr. Joh. Chamber Warden thereof, under pretense of absence in
serving his Majesty as Physician. He the said Dr. (...) bestowed much money in
adorning the Cathedral of S. Paul, as he had done before the collegiate Parish
Church belonging to Merton coll. in which house he built (I cannot say all at
his own charge) the hall, with a fair dining room over it; and a lodging room,
with a large vault under it, both joining on the west side to the said hall and
dining room, for the use of him while Warden, and his Successor in that office
for ever. Which hall, dining room, and lodging Chamber were made as additions
to the old lodgings belonging to the Wardens of the said college, and were
built on the south side of those lodgings which were erected by Hen. Sever
sometimes Warden. He the said Dr. Fitz-James also bestowed much money in the
building and finishing of S. Mary's Church in Oxon. In memory of which
benefaction were his Arms, quartering those of Draycot, engraven on stone over
the north door leading from the Schoolstreet to the lower end (on the north
side) of the body of that church. His Arms also with those of Card. Joh.
Moreton Archb. of Cant. and Edm. Audley Bish. of Sarum were at the bottom of
the Stone-pulpit in the said Chapter of S. Mary, most curiously engraven, and also
on the roof of the old Library, (afterward a Congregation-house) on the north
side of S. Mary's Chancel. To the reparation of which Church, as also to the
building of the Pulpit, which consisted all of Ashler-stone, there is no doubt
but that he was a benefactor. He also, with his brother Sir Joh. Fitz-James L.
Chapter Justice of England, were the chief Founders of the School-house in Brewton
in Somersetshire, near which Town (at Redlinch, as it is said) they were both
born. Will. Gilbert Abbat of Brewton was a benefactor to it, and so was John
Edmonds D. D. Abbat of Glastenbury. At length, after good deeds had trod upon
his heels even to Heaven gates, he gave way to fate in a good old age in the
beginding of fifteen hundred twenty and two: Paul, under the Altar of S. Paul,
near to the foundation or foot of the Campanile, under a marble Tomb prepared
and erected by him in his life time. Afterward was a little Chapel erected
over the said Tomb, wherein, I presume, were Masses said for his Soul. But when
the said Campanile was consumed with fire 1561. the Chapel then was consumed
also.

Rowthall, was born in a Market Town in Gloucestershire called Cirencester, in
the Church of which place I saw some years since a monument for one John
Avenying and his Wife: Which John dying 1401. might probably be (according to
time) Grandfather to..... Avenyng, (whom some call Avelyng) Mother to Tho.
Ruthall beforementioned. He was educated for some years in this University, as
it evidently appears in one Reg. vel lib. Epistol. Univ. Oxon. FF. Epist. 22.
55. 109. etc. Vide Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 422. a.
or more of our Registers, but in what coll. or hall I know not. Thence, as
it is said, he went to Cambridge for a time, but when, it does not appear. Sure
it is that one Rothall took the degree of D. of D. in this University, and in
the year 1500. was In the Cat. of Chanc. Proct. and of Proceeders at Cambridge,
at the end of Matthew. Parkers Aniq. Britan. Ecclesiae -- Printed in fol. 1572.
or 73.
incorporated at Cambridge, with Dr. Rich. Mayhew President of Magd. coll. In
1503. he was elected Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, (being then
Archdeacon of Gloucester,) and in the beginning of Sept. 1505. he was made Dean
of Salisbury, in the place, as it seems, of one Edw. Cheyney, who occurs Dean
of that Church in Aug. 1499. About that time, he being esteemed a person of
great virtue and prudence, he was made Secretary to K. Hen. 7. who a little
before his death nominated him to the Sea of Durham upon the translation of
Bainbridge to York. Soon after K. Hen. 8. succeeding in the Throne, he made him
his Secretary for a time, and one of his Privy Council. And being then elected
to the said See of Durham, the temporalities thereof were Pat. ^1. Hen. 8. p.
2. m. ^6.
restored to him, 3. July 1. Hen. 8. dom. 1509. Afterward he was made Pat. 8.
Hen. 8: page 1:
L. Privy Seal, was esteemed a famous Clerk, and admirably well read in both
the Laws, being, as it is said, Doctor or Professor of them. Toward his latter
end he founded a Free School at the place of his nativity, and gave an house
and seven pounds per an. for the maintenance of a Master: Which School having
for the most part flourished in good sort, has educated many that have been
eminent in Church and State. He paid his last debt to nature at Durham place
near London, on Wednesday the fourth of Feb. 1522-23.
in fifteen hundred twenty and two, and was buried in the Chapel of S. John
Baptist joining to the Abbey-Church of S. Peter in Westminster; at which time
Dr. Roll. Phillips Vicar of Croydon a great Divine and a renowned Clerk
preached an excellent Sermon. Some years after was a fair raised Tomb built
over his grave with his Statua thereon mitred and vested, and a small
inscription on it, but false as to the year of his death.

MAURICE FITZGERALD, called by some Mauritius Johannis, was of ancient extract
in Ireland, and for a time educated in Oxon under the name of Fitz-Gerard, but
whether he took a degree we have no Register of that time that shows it.
Afterward by provision from P. Julius 2. he was made Archb. of Cashills in
Ireland, and died, Jac. War. ut supra, p. 1^1.
reported, in fifteen hundred twenty and three. It Is said that certain
statutes, made in a Synod by him held at Limerick 1511. were inserted in the
Register of Thom. Pursell B. of Lismore and Waterford; which with the Reg. it
self were afterward consumed in the flames, as I have before told you.

JOHN TYNMOUTH, sometimes a Grey-Frier Lynne in Norfolk, was edacuted in
Theological learning among those of his Fraternity at Cambridge, and afterward
among those at Oxon, and at length made a Suffragan Bishop under the tit. of
the Bish. of Argos, then in partibus infidelium. Bostou in Lincolnshire, (of
which place he was Vicar) right against the midst of the high Altar, to the end
that his loving Parishioners, when they should happen to see his Grave and
Tomb, might be sooner moved to pray for his Soul. He gave at the time of his
death to the houses of Gray Friars at Lynne, Cambridge, and Oxon, 5 l. a piece.

EDMUND AUDLEY Son of Jam. Tuchet or Touchet Lord Audley by Alianore his wife,
was educated in Academical learning in Lincoln coll. as it seems, to which
afterward he was an especial benefactor, took the Reg. congreg. Aa. fol. 125.
a.
degree of Bach. of Arts in 1463, but whether that of Master, it does not
appear in the reg. of that time, which is imperfect. In Janu. 1471 he became
Preb. of Farendon in the Church of Lincoln, upon the resignation of one Rob.
Skyllington, (or rather Stillington) and in the month of Oct. 1475 Preb. of
Codeworth in the Church of Wells, on the death of Mr. Will, Fulford. On the 25.
Dec. the same year, he, under the title of M. A. became Archdeacon of the
East Riding of Yorkshire on the death of Joh. Walker LL. B. and had other
preferments in other Churches conferred upon him. At length being promoted to
the Sea of Rochester, his Archdeaconry was bestowed on a certain noble man
named Edw. Pole, installed therein 15. Oct. 1480. who being made Archdeacon of
Richmond, (upon the consecration of John Shirwood B. of Durham) was installed
therein 6. Jan. 1484. So that thereupon resigning his Archdeaconry of the
East-riaing of Yorksh. Will. Poteman (sometimes Warden of Alls. coll. as I
guess) was installed on the 16. of the same month in the same year, who dying
25. March 1493. Hen. Cornbull succeeded him. Afterward Edm. Audley was
translated to the Sea of Hereford upon the death of Thom. Myllyng, (sometimes a
Student among the Benedictines of Gloucester coll. in the Suburbs of Oxon,) the
temporalities of which were Pat. 8 Hen. 7. p. 2. m. 2.
given to him 26. Dec. 1492. and from thence to Salisbury, the temporalities of
which See also were put Pat. 17. Hen. 7. p. 1. (...) 1^*
into his hands on the 2. of April 1502. and about that time was made
Chancellor of the most Noble Order of of the Garter. In 1518. he Vide Hest.
and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p 161. b
gave 400 l. to Linc. coll. to purchase lands for the use thereof, and about
that time bestowed upon the said house the Patronage of a Chauntry which he had
lately founded in a Chapel built by him in the north part of the Choire of the
Cath. Chapter at Salisbury. He also was a Benefactor to the reparation of the
Congregation-house (sometimes a Library) on the north side of S. Mary's Chancel
in Oxford, to the erection of that curious piece of workmanship, the stone
Pulpit, in the said Chapter finished 1508. (at the bottom of which were his Arms, a
Fret impaled by the Sea of Sarum) and gave 200 marks for the supply of
Chichleys chest (belonging to the University) which had before been robbed of
its treasure. But whether he built the choire or chancel of S. Mary's church,
or gave the old Organs (as a certain Fr. Godwin in Com de praesul. Angl. edit.
1616. p. 407.
author is pleased to tell us) I find it no where to appear. At length
departing this mortal life, in a good old age, at Ramsbury in Wilts, Aug. in
fiveteen hundred twenty and four, was buried in the chapel beforementioned,
built by him in honor of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, within the cath.
chapter of Sarum: to the reparation of which cathedral he bequeathed threescore
pounds. After his death Laur. Campegius Cardinal of S. Anastasius was made
Bishop of Salisbury, but whither he, (being almost continually absent) or any
of his Successors till the time of Dr. Seth Ward, an. 1671. were ever
chancellours of the order of the Garter, in does not appear.

Terence and Terlach O-brien, was descended from an ancient and noble family of
his name in Ireland, and after he had spent some time in good letters here in
Oxon, became Bishop of Killaloe in the said Country, and a person of great name
there for his liberality and hospitality, yet addicted to warfare more than
became his coat. He paid his last debt to nature Jac. War. ut sup. p. 231.
in fiveteen hundred twenty and five. Several years before his time was another
of both his names Bishop of that place, and another after him; whereupon, by
writers, this Bishop was commonly written and called Terence O-Brien the second.

Newton-Longvill in Bucks, was educated in Wykehams School near Winchester,
became perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1482. and left it in 1502. being then,
or about that time, Doct. of Div. and Rector of S. Martins Church in Oxon.
Afterward he became well known to Cardinal Tho. Wolsey, by whose endeavors
he was made Dean of Chichester, Bishop titular of Callipolis or Galipoli, a
City in Thrace, about 1517. Judge, as it is said, of the Prerogative of
Canterbury, and Warden of New coll. in 1521. He died 28. March, in fifteen
hundred twenty and six, and was buried, as I suppose, in the Chapel of the
said College, under a Marble-stone that he had lain there some time before his
death, with an inscription thereon, and a blank for the time of his death to be
filled up by his Executor, or Overseer of his last Will and Testament, but was
never performed. The reader is to know that there was another John Young, who,
from being Prebendary of Apesthorpe in the cath. chapter of York, was admitted Dean
of that Church by the name and title of Jo. Young LL. D. on the 17. of May
1514. being at that time Master of the Rolls. But he dying 25. Apr. 1516. and
buried in the chapel of the Rolls in chancery-lave near London, must not be
taken to be the same with the former. Besides the said two, I find others of
both their Names, as (1) John Young a Monk of Ramsey, who being well skilled in
the Hebrew tongue, saved many books of that Language that were in the Library
of that Monastery when 'twas dissolved, in 1535. or thereabouts. (2) Joh. Young
(Giovanus) a native of Yorkshire, educated in Trin. coll. in Cambridge,
afterward Master of Pemb. hall and Vice Chancellor of that University, of whom
and his writings Baleus In. cent. 8. number. 99.
and Pitseus In Aet. 16. number. 1020.
will inform you. (3) Jo. Young one of the Bonhoms or Good men, of the
Monastery of Ashrugg in Bucks. Who being turned out thence at the dissolution
by K. Hen. 8. entered himself a Sojourner in Exeter coll. about 1539. He was of
kin to Jo. Young B. of Galipoli, but what name or eminence there was in him, I
find not. (4) Jo. Young born at Newton Longvill before mentioned, Fellow of New
coll. 1512. Rector of his native place in 1525. and died therein 1545. which
Jo. was nearly related to the Bishop.

Buckinghamshire man born as it seems, or at least descended from those of his
name, living at, or near the Wycombs, was educated in all kind of Learning in
this University, and by the title of Master of Arts thereof and the Kings
chaplain, did supplicate the Ven. congregation of Regents in 1512. that he
might be admitted to the reading of the Sentences, but whether he was really
admitted, it appears not. Afterward he traveled, was admitted Doct. of Div.
in an University beyond the Seas, and at his return retired to the University
in the beginning of the year 1526. where by the name of Will. How Episcopus
Aurensis, supplicated the said congregation that whereas he had been created
Doct. of Divinity beyond the Seas, and had been a student in this University
many years, he might be incorporated in the same faculty; which being granted
simpliciter, he was forthwith incorporated. This Bishopric in the same I
presume, with Auriensis or Orensis, commonly called Orense, under the
Archbishopric of Compostella in Spain; to which courtry, as it is probable,
this W. How was sent about business by Catherine of Spain Queen of England,
Clar. 1526.
the Royal consort to K. Hen. 8. I find one Will. How M. of A. presented by the
King to the Church of Shipton-Mallet in Somersetshire, on the death of Mr.
Reynold West, in the beginning of Aug. 1516. and about that time became Rector
of Alre (or Aller) in the same county; but this Will. How dying in 1521. or 22.
must not be understood to be the same with the former. To this last, was Joh.
How prior of Plympton in Devonshire related, who living to see his Monastery
dissolved, went afterward to Oxon, and settled in Exeter coll. in January
1545. in the condition of a Sojourner.

WILLIAM GILBERT a Canon Regular and Brewton or Bruton in Somersetshire (in
which county he was born) became Doct. of Div. of this University in 1506. and
in the year after was made Vicar of Mynhead in his own country, on the death of
Tho. Beaumont sometimes Fellow of Merton coll. Afterward, being esteemed a man
of note, reverence and great Religion, he was made Suffragan Bishop to Hadrian
de Castello Bishop of Bathe and Wells, under the title of Episc. Majorensis,
which is, Qu. whether Megara, in which City Euclid was born:
in partibus Infidelium, and by that title he was admitted Vicar of
Southpertherton in the Dioc. of Wells 16. Dec. 1525. by the presentation
thereunto of Jo. Heart Abbot of Athelney, as also to other benefices, and one
or more dignities to keep up his port. Afterward, or about that time, he went
to Rome, Clari 1527:
and there procured Joh: Leland in 2 vol. Itin. fol. 45.
of the Pope that the Priory of Brewton might be changed into an Abbey. After
his return, he was always called Abbat Gilbert, and with its name, did so
change the buildings of his Abbey, that it was but little better than
re-edified by him. Whether he was the last Abbat I know not.

RICHARD FOX, the worthy Founder of Corp. coll. in this University, of whom
having made mention at large elsewhere, In Hist. Antiq. (...) Oxon. Lib. 2. p.
227. 228* etc.
I shall only say that he was born at Ropesley near to Grantham in
Lincolnshire, educated in Grammar learning at Boston in the said county, in
Academical for a time in Magd. coll. in Oxon, whence being transplanted to
Cambridge, became at length Master of Pembroke hall there, Prebendary of
Bishopston in the Church of Sarum, and in Feb. 1485. Preb. of South Grantham in
the same Church, upon the resignation of Dr. Christop. Bainbridge. This person
having been a constant Adherent to Henry Earl of Richmond, against King Rich.
3. was by him, when made King of England by the name of Hen. 7, made in the
beginning of his reign one of his Privy Council, (he being then LL. D.) and
nominated to be Bishop of Exeter in Feb. 1486. On the 24 of the same month, he
had the custody of the Privy Seal conferred on him, and being elected to the
said See, the K. restored Pat. (...)
to him the Temporalities belonging thereunto, 2. Apr. 1487. On the 5. Jul.
following, he had by the Kings Ibid.
command twenty Shillings per diem allowed to him, to commence from the 24.
Feb. beforementioned; which was allowed to him, as I suppose, as Keeper of the
said Seal: And being elected afterward to the Sea of B. and Wells, had
restitution of its temporalities made Pat. (...)
to him by the King 4. May, 1492. In 1494. he was translated to Durham, and
afterward was elected Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, and being
settled at Durham, he forthwith, out of a great vast Hall in the Castle there,
did take as much away as made a fair Buttery and a Pantry, even to the Pulpits
or Galleries on each side of the Hall, wherein the Trumpeters or Wind-musick
used to stand to play while the meat was ushered in: And on the Wall, which
parted the said buttery from the Hall, was a great Pelican set up, to show
that it was done by him, because he gave the Pelican to his Arms. When Dr.
Richard Neile became B. of Durham, he took away part of the said hall at the
other end, to enlarge the great Parlour, and yet the hall continued fair and
large still. At length upon the death of Dr. Tho. Langton, he was elected B. of
Winchester; the temporalities of which being restored Pat. 16. Hen. 7. p. 2. m
13
to him by the King 17. October. 1500. was soon after installed with great
solemnity. After he was settled there, he performed many acts of piety and
charity, among which was the foundation and establishment of C. C. coll.
beforementioned, and dying in fifteen hundred twenty and eight, Winchester,
on the South side of the high Altar. After him followed in that See Card. Tho.
Wolsey, of whom I shall make mention anon.

Ynge, was born at Shipton-Mallet in Somersetshire, educated in VVykehams
School, made perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1484. took the degrees in Arts,
and left the coll. in 1496. Afterward he traveled beyond the Seas, where he
was made Doct. of Divinity, was successively made Preb. of East Harptrey in,
and Succentor of, the Church of Wells, Guardian of VVapulham in the Dioc. of
Lincoln, Preb. of Auste in the Church of VVestbury in the Dioc. of Worcester,
(to which the Vicaridge of VVellow in the Dioc. of B. and Wells was annexed by
the Pope) Vicar of Oldeston in the Dioc. of Lincoln, of Dultying in
Somersetshire by the presentation of Richard the Abbat, and Conv. of
Glastenbury, on the death of Mr. Will. Speckington, and of Weston alias
Sowey, by the presentation of the said Ab. and Conv. on the death of Mr. Rob.
Stafford. In the beginning of Apr. 1511. he was incorporated D. of D. in this
University, and in the latter end of that year was made Bishop of Mead in
Ireland. Thence he was translated to the Archiepiscopal See of Dublin in the
place of Dr. Will. Rokeby, an. 1521. and about that time was made Chancellor
of Ireland, where he was accounted a person of great probity and justice. He
gave way to fate at Dublin 3 Aug. in fifteen hundred twenty and eight: Patrick
there. In the said See of Dublin, succeeded Dr. John Allen, whom I shall
mention in his proper place.

Beel or Beyll, was bred a Canon regular of the Order of S. Austen, and
educated in Acad. learning among those of his Order, studying in S. Mary's
coll. in Oxon, of which he became Prior about 1508. Afterward taking the
degrees in divinity, he became Lord Prior of S. Mary Spytell without
Bishopsgate in London, and at length Suffragan Bishop to Rich. Fitz-James B. of
London, under the title of Episcop. Lydensis, which is under the Patriarch of
Jerusalem. In that titular See succeeded one Joh. Holt, Clar. 1529.
but whether educated in this University I cannot tell. He lived mostly in the
Town of Bury S. Edmund in Suffolk, where dying about the 12. of Aug. 1540. was
buried in the Church of our blessed Lady S. Mary there, in our Ladies Isle near
to the head of John Holt Gent.

Thom. Cavendish his Gentleman Usher, we are informed therein that he was born
at Ipswych in Suffolk, but not that he was a Butchers Son, as others have
publicly reported, as well in the Cardinals life time, as since: the first of
which was he, who wrote a Libel in English Verse against him, a little before
his fall, called A dialogue between two Priests servants named Watkin and
Jeffry, published in octavo (perhaps written also) by a canting and severe
Lutheran, who writes himself N. O. But so it was, that he the said T. Wolsey
being very apt to learn when he was a Child, his Parents and other good Friends
made shift to maintain him in Oxon, particularly in Magd. coll. where making a
most wonderful progress in Logic and Philosophy, be became Bach. of Arts at
15. years of age an. 1485. Soon after he was elected fellow, and when he had
taken the degree of M. of A. was made Master of the Grammar School joining to
the said College. In the 14. Hen. 7. Dom. 1498. he was Bursar of that House, in
which year the stately Tower was finished. In the beginning of Oct. 1500. he
became Rector of Lymyngton in Somersetshire (on the death of Joh. Board) by the
presentation thereunto of Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset: which Rectory he
conferred upon him for the great care he had of his Sons under his Tuition, in
the Grammar School beforementioned. But that great man dying in Sept. 1501.
and his hopes of being introduced into the court, frustrated, he struck into
acquaintance with one Sir Joh. Naphant Treasurer of Calais, a Gent. of the said
county, who forthwith made him his chaplain: And finding him to be a man of
parts, committed his employment to him, he himself being grown old, and
consequently unfit for business. At length he being mindful of his chaplains
good service, he never left him until he had found means to make him the Kings
chaplain. Which matter being according to his mind effected, he became known to
one of the Kings grave Counselors and Favorites named Rich. Fox Bishop of
Winchester, who finding Wolsey to be not only an active, but a witty man, did
with one Sir Tho. Lovel another grave Counselor, commend him to the service of
the King; who also upon discourse with him, finding him to be a man of
Eloquence, and to understand State affairs, sent him in the quality of an
Ambassador to Maximilian the Emperor, then abiding in Flanders not far from
Calais. Which Embassage he performed with so great dexterity and quickness,
that the K. taking especial notice of it, did soon after confer upon him the
Deanery of Lincoln, void by the death of Jeffrey Simeon sometimes Fellow of New
college, Proctor of this University of Oxon, and Dean of the chapel Royal to
K. Hen. 7. (which Jeffrey died 20. Aug. 1508.) Of which Church, I say, being
made Dean 2. Feb. 1508. was installed by proxy 25. March 1509. and in person
21. of Aug. 1511. After the death of K. Hen. 7. he quickly got into the favor
so much of his successor Hen. 8. that he was by him Pat. 2. Hen. 8. p. 1.
presented to the Rectory of Turrington in the dioc. of Exeter 28. Nov. 1510.
(being then Bach. of Div.) and on the 17. Feb. following, was made Canon of the
collegiate church of Windsor, and about that time Registrary. of the most
noble Order of the Garter. In 1512. Jan. 31. he, by the name of the Kings
Almoner, was made Prebendary of Bagthorp in the church of York by the favor of
Cardinal Bainbridge Archb. thereof, (in the place of James Harryngton Dean of
that church, who died in Dec. 1512.) and on the 21. Febr. following, he was
admitted Dean in the said Harryngtons place, who had been installed in that
dignity in the room of the said Bainbridge 31. Januar. 1507. In 1513. he being
then with the King at the taking of Tournay in France, his Majesty not only
gave him the revenues of the Bishopric of that City, but also made him actual
Bishop thereof, as some are pleased to say. In 1514. March 26. he was
consecrated B. of Linc. in the place of Will. Smyth deceased, and in Nov. the
same year, he was made Archb. of York. In 1515. Sept. 7. he was created
cardinal of S. Cecilia, and in the year following Dec. 7. he was constituted L.
Chanc. of England, and about the same time Legate a latere for the Kingdom of
England. In 1518. Aug. 28. he had the temporalities of the Sea of Bathe and
Wells conferred Pat. 10. Hen. 8. p. 2. m. 25.
upon him, with liberty of holding the same See (being perpetual Commendatarie
thereof) with the Abbatship of S. Albans and other Ecclesiastical Livings in
commendum with York. About the same time he laid in by his Factors at Rome for
the Papacy, especially upon the death of Leo 10. and Adrian 6. but the reasons
why he was not elected, were (1) That he would never to go to Rome in Person.
(2) That he was nimis potens. (3) That he was not old enough, as by the Letters
of Dr. Tho. Hannyball and Jo. Clerk the Kings Orators, and the Card. Agents at
Rome, appears. In 1523. he had the Bishopric of Durham given to him, and
thereupon resigned B. and Wells, and soon after began the Foundations of his
two most noble and splendid colleges at Oxon and Ipswych, as I have largely
elsewhere In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Ox. lib. 2. p. 35. etc. 246, 247. etc.
told you. In 1529. he had the Sea of Winchester conferred upon him whereupon
renouncing Durham, the profits and revenues of the said See were given to the
Lady Anna Boleyne, for the space of one year. But before he was quite warm in
Winchester, he fell into the Kings displeasure, and thereupon being soon after
commanded to live in his dioc. of York, about the beginning of 1530. retired to
the Archbishops Palace at Cawood, where spending the Summer following in great
Hospitality, was about the latter end of October. ensuing, arrested for High
Treason. Whereupon being to be conveyed to London to answer for it, he died at
Leycester in the way thither, Nov. following, and was buried in S. Mary's
Chapel within the precincts of the Abbey-church there. Of all the Clergymen
of his time, and before, and after him, Wolsey was indisputably the greatest.
He managed a most inflexible King with so great dexterity, that of one who
always threw his Riders, none held the reins, either so long, or so
succesfully. He had a vast mind, and a great sense of regulation, and glory,
(which by some is construed Pride.) He lived always with great splendor; and
yet left the most lasting and most noble monuments of his bounty. No Prelate
indeed, especially in this Nation, had ever so many and large, but withal none
ever employed them more generously; so that his vast revenues were hardly
proportionable to his great and extraordinary designs. His parts were
prodigious, and it must be owned, that he wanted not a sense of his own
sufficiency; and therefore his demeanor and management of himself was such, as
was more fitted with the greatness of his mind, and his fortune, than to the
meanness of his birth. Many Historians of that time, whether out of envy of his
order, or contempt of his birth, or hatred of his Religion, have not been very
favorable to his fame; and the traditionary reporters since, who have
pretended to an exact account of his actions, have, upon too slight enquiries,
and with too great confidence, transcribed the former narratives. So that we
yet want an exact and faithful History of the greatest, most noble, and most
disinteress'd Clergyman of that age. His public employments gave him little
leisure for the publication of any works of learning; and, if any were
published, they are dead with him, excep perhaps those which I have seen, which
are the Epistle and directions for teaching the eight Classes in Ipswich
School, set before the Grammar, of W. Lilye, and printed in 1528. Jac. War. in
Com. de Praesulib. Hibern. p. 128.


Mead in Ireland, studied here in Oxon several years, but whether he took a
degree it appears not. At length retiring to his own Country, became through
several preferments Bishop of Kildare, where sitting about eight years, Pat. 9.
Hen. 7. p. 1.
to fate in fifteen hundred thirty and one. In the said See succeeded one
Walter Wellesley, as I shall anon tell you.

Rob. Warham, was born of a gentile Family at Okely in Hampshire, educated in
Grammaticals in Wykehams School, admitted true and perpetual Fellow of New
coll. in 1475. took the degrees in the Laws, left the coll. 1488. and about
that time became an Advocate in the Court of Arches, and soon after Principal
or chief Moderator of Civil Law School, then situated in S. Edwards Parish in
Oxon. On the 2. Nov. 1493. he was collated to the Chantorship of Wells upon the
death of Tho. Overey, (sometimes Fellow of Alls. coll.) and on the 13. of Feb.
following, he was constituted Master of the Rolls. Afterward being elected to
the Sea of London, he had the Great Seal of England delivered unto him on the
11. of Aug. 1502: So that in few days after being consecrated Bishop of that
See, had restitution Pat. 18. Hen. 7. p. 1. m. 14.
made to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto, on the first of October.
following. In the beginning of January in the same year he was constituted L.
Chanc. of England, and in Nov. (as one Fr. Godwin in Com. de praesul. Angl.
int. Episc. Cantuar.
says) in 1504. he was translated to the Sea of Canterbury; whose
inthronization there, appointed to be on the 9. March following, was performed
then with great and wonderful solemnity and magnificence, as it may be partly
elsewhere Vide Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Ox. lib. 1. p. 239. a.
seen. In 1506. May 28. he was unanimously elected Chancellor of the
University of Oxon, being then, and ever after, an especial friend to it, and
its members, as may be discerned in several Epistles Ib. lib. 2. p. 416. b.
that passed between them. In some the said members style him Sanctissimus in
Christo Paeter, and in others, they proclaim in an high manner his prudence,
profound understanding, etc. All which, I presume, was done because he had been
a benefactor to the finishing of S. Mary's Church and the Divinity School. It
must be now known that there was a young Knight called William Warham, Godson
and Nephew to the Archbishop, (as being Son to his Brother Hugh Warham,) that
waited upon him in his chamber: With him the Archb. being always ready to
discourse, did more than once seriously tell him, that if ever after his death
any should succeed him in the Sea of Canterbury called Thomas, he should in no
wise serve him, or seek his favor and acquaintance, for there shall (said he)
one of that name shortly enjoy this See, that shall as much by his vicious
living and wicked heresies dishonor, wast, and destroy the same, and the whole
Church of England, as ever the blessed Bishop and Martyr St. Thomas did before
benefit, bless, adorn and honor the same, etc. This is reported by Nich.
Harpessfield In his Treatise of Marriage, MS lib. 2.
from the mouth of the said Sir Will. Warham, being prophetically spoken by the
said Archb. concerning the Thomas that succeeded him, meaning Thom. Cranmer.
After Dr. Warham had sat in Canterbury in great prosperity about 28 years, he
concluded this life at S. Stephens near to the said City, on the 22. of Aug.
between the hours of 3 and 4 in the morning, Thomas of Canterbury, and had
there a reasonable fair Tomb erected over his body, but defaced in the
beginning of the grand Rebellion began and carried on by the Presbyterians.
Erasmus of Rotterdam having been a great acquaintance of the said Archbishop,
had the honor to have his picture sent to him by the owner: Which being with
great devotion received, Erasmus sent him his, and between them passed several
Epistles. In one of which, or else in another place, Erasmus (who had the
Parsonage of Aldington in Kent bestowed on him) so commends him for humanity,
learning, integrity, and piety, that in the conclusion he says, nullan
absoluti Praesulis dotem in eo desideres. The said Archb. left all his
Theological books to Alls. coll. Library, his Civil and Can. Law books, with
the prick-song books belonging to his Chapel, to New coll. and his Ledgers,
Grayles, and Antiphonals to Wykehams coll. near to Winchester. See more of him
in a book intit. De antiquitate Britannicae Ecclesiae, etc. Land. 1572-3. p.
348. 349. etc.

THOMAS SKEVYNGTON, was descended Leicestershire, but whether born in that
County I cannot justly tell; became, when young, professed in the Monastery of
Cistercians at Merevale or Myrdvale in Warwickshire, instructed in Theological
and other learning in S. Bernards coll. originally built for Cistercians in the
north Suburb of Oxon, (being now S. John's coll.) to which place he bequeathed
on his deathbed twenty pounds toward its reparation. Afterward he was made
Abbat of Waverley, a house of the said Order in Surrey, and on the 17. of June
1509. was consecrated Godwinus ut supr. int. Episc. Bangor.
Bishop of Bangor. Where, after he had sat several years much commended for
the austere course of his life and great charity, he submitted to the stroke of
death in the month of June or thereabouts, in fifteen hundred thirty and there.
Bangor before the picture of S. Daniel, (whereon a stone was soon after laid
with an inscription thereon showing that it was the heart of Thomas late Bishop
of Bangor) and his body in the Choire of Monastery of Beaulieu under a Tomb
which he had erected nigh unto the place where the Gospel used to be read. In
the Sea of Bangor succeeded John Salcot alias Capon Doct. of divinity of
Cambridge, translated thence to Salisbury in 1529; where dying in the summer
time (in August as it seems) an. 1557. was buried in the Cath. Church there,
under a Tomb which he in his lifetime had provided and erected on the south
side of the Choire.

JOHN ALLEN, Doctor of the Laws of this Dublin in the place of Dr. Hugh Inge
deceased, in the year of our Lord 1528. and died on the 25. of July, says Edm.
Camp^an in his Hist. of Ireland. printed. 1633. p. 120.
one, and another (...) Hib. p. 119.
the 28. writers, as a judgment on him, for his unworthy and base dealing in
the dissolution of Daventry Priory in Northamptonshire, being one of those many
which were dissolved for the erection of the Cardinals coll. in Oxon. On the
25. of July early in the morning Tho. Fitzgerald eldest Son of the Earl of
Kildare caused him the said rev. Prelate to be brought before him at Tartaine,
being then feeble by a late sickness; who kneeling at his feet in his shirt and
mantle, bequeathing his Soul to God, and his body to the Traitors mercy, the
wretched young man, Tho. Fitzgerald beforementioned, commanded him there to
be brained like an Ox. The place where this fact was done, was afterward
hedged in, overgrown, and unfrequented, in detestation of the fact. The people
have observed that all the accessaries thereof, being after pardoned for
Rebellion, ended their lives miserably.

Gray Friar of the Order of S. Francis, was consecrated Bishop of S. Asaph in
July 1519. You may see more of him among the writers under the year fifteen
hundred thirty and five, William Barlow in the latter end of the year 1535. who
a little before (in the same year) was sent into Scotland with one Holcroft
about points of Religion against the Pope, at which time he the said Barlow was
styled Prior of Bisham. He was also sent soon after with William Lord Howard
into the same Country, at which time he went by the title of the Bishop of St.
Asaph. Their business then was about the interview with the Scotch King,
induced thereunto by his Council, especially those of the Clergy. See G.
Buchanan in Rerum Scotic. hist.

Merton coll. in the year 1480. and afterward proceeding in Arts, he entered
into the sacred Function. On the 19. Feb. 1491. he was admitted to the reading
of the Sentences, left the coll. soon after, being then beneficed, and in 1495.
proceeded in Divinity. In 1504. Oct. 1. he was admitted Subdean of York on the
death of Edw. Cressacre, (in which Dignity he was succeeded by Dr. James
Harryngton in Jul. 1507.) and in 1505. he became Archdeacon of Huntingdon in
the place of Rob. Sherebourne promoted to the Sea of S. David. In 1506. he was
made Canon of Windsore, and in the middle of June 1507. he was admitted
Archdeacon of Clievland on the death of Joh. Raynolds LL. B. who died on the
vigil of the Nativity going before. In Dec. 1508. he was admitted Warden of
Mert. coll. being then also Canon of S. Paul's Cathedral, and in great repute
for his learning. In 1512. he went with the King into France, and was present
at the Siege of Turwin and Tournay, and in 1514. he was made Almoner to the
said King in the place of Tho. Wolsey, and Archd. of Huntingdon. In 1521. he
was deprived Reg. ptim. Act. coll. Mert. fol. 253. etc.
of his Wardenship of Mert. coll. by the Archb. of Canterbury for many unworthy
misdemeaners, the particulars of which are too large to be here set down; and
soon after, because he should not be a looser, had the Bishopric of S. David
conferred upon him, about the beginning of the year 1523. To which See being
consecrated on the 26. Apr. the same Godwin ut supr. int. ep. Men^^.
year, sat there to the time of his death, which happened about the beginning of
fifteen hundred thirty and six. Edw. Vaughan of the University of Cambridge,
who dying in Nov. or Dec. in 1522. was buried in the Chapel of the holy
Trinity within the Cath. Chapter of S. David. Which Chapel he, a little before his
death, had built at his own charge.

Nix, a Somersetshire man born, as it seems, but in what house in Oxon (where
he had spent some years in study) he was educated, it appears not. In the
beginning of the year 1473. he, by the name of Rich. Nikke Clerk, was collated
to the Church of Ashbury in the Dioc. of Sarum, and in Sept. 1489. he, by the
title of Doctor of the Laws became Rector of Chedsey in Somesetshire, being
then Preb. of Yotton in the Church of Wells. In 1492. he was constituted Vicar
General to Rich. Fox Bishop of B. and Wells, and in Jul. 1494. he was made
Archdeacon of Wells, with the Prebend, of Huish annexed, on the resignation of
Will. Nikke LL. D. In 1496. he was made Canon of Winasore, and about the same
time Registrary of the most Noble Order of the Garter. Afterward he had one or
more benefices conferred on him in the Diocese of Wells and in that of Durham,
(besides the Archdeaconry of Exeter,) and at length on the death of Dr. Tho.
Jane being elected to the Episcopal See of Norwich, had restitution made Pat.
16. Hen. 7. p.1 m.1
to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto by the name of Rich. Nikke
Clerk, Dean of the Kings Chapel, on the 24. of Apr. 1501. where sitting about
35 years, died blind in fifteen hundred thirty and six. Norwych, next to those
two pillars, between which Miles Spencer Dr. of Law and Chanc. of Norwych was
buried. Over the said Nikkes grave was a low Tomb erected, whereon were the
Arms of the Sea of Norwych impaling a Chevron between 3 Leopards heads, being
the same that are on the roof of the north cross Isle. Which roof is supposed
to have been either repaired or built by him, as also part of, if not all, the
said Isle. In the Sea of Norwych succeeded one Will. Rugg alias Repps a Doctor
of Div. of Cambridge, and Abbat of the Monastery of S. Benedict in Hulmo, (Son
of Will. Rugg of North-Repps in Nofolk,) who resigning the said Bishopric in
January 1549. died 21. of Sept. 1550. and was buried in the middle of the
Choire of the Cath. Chapter at Norwych. As for Will. Nikke beforementioned, he
was, as I conceive, brother to the Bishop, aed being Preb. of Ilton in the
Church of Wells, became Archd. of Wells on the resignation of Tho. Bridlington
in the month of Apr. 1473.

ROBERT SHEREBOURNE, a Hampshire man Wykehams School near to Winchester, became
true and perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1474. afterward M. of A. and in
Orders, Canon of Lincoln, Preb. of Whitechurch and Beneger in the Church of
Wells, (which he resigned in October. 1493.) Archdeacon of Taunton, with the
Preb. of Milverton annexed, upon the resignation of Will. Worsley LL. D. in the
month of Dec. 1496. Archdeacon of Huntingdon about the same time, and in 1499.
Dean of S. Paul's Cathedral within the City of London, on the decease of the
said W. Worslley, who had held with it other dignities, among which was the
Archdeaconry of Nottingham, in which he was succeeded by Thom. Crosley in Aug.
1499. In 1505. he the said Rob. Sherebourne being elected Bishop of S. David's
under the title of Consiliarius regius, had restitution of the temporalities of
that See made Pat. 20. Hen. 7. p. 2. m. 22.
to him on the 12. of Apr. the same year; done in requiral of the many services
and embassies which he had performed for his Master K. Hen. 7. In 1508. he was
translated to the Sea of Chichester, and had the temporalities belonging
thereunto delivered Pat. 24. Hen. 7. p. 2. m. 17.
to him on the 13. Dec. that year. He was a person much given to hospitality,
was very charitable to the poor, munificent to the coll. that had given him
Acad. education, as may In Hist. and Antiq. univ. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 130. b. 131.
a.
elsewhere be seen, and bestowed much money in beautifying and adorning his
Cath. Chapter at Chichester. At length after he had resigned his Bishopric, he
gave way to fate Godw. in Corn. de praesul. Angl. int. ep. Cicester.
on the 21. Aug. in fifteen hundred thirty and six, aged 86 years, or
thereabouts, and was buried in the said Cath. Chapter in a poor remembrance In ult.
test. in reg. Hogen Qu. 41. in Offic. praerog. Cant.
that he had made there on the south side of the same Church. A certain note
which Sir Will. Dugdale Garter K. of Arms, collected by himself, and afterward
communicated to me, informs, that the said R. Sherebourne founded a Free School
in the time of Hen. 8. at Rowlston in Staffordshire, at which place he was born
of mean parentage. But this note, which he could not then tell whence he had, I
reject, because the register of New coll. tells us that he was born in
Hampshire, where is a Town called Sherbourne, in which he, or at least his
Father or Grandfather, was, as it is probable, born. After he had resigned his
Bishopric Mr. Rich. Sampson Dean of the Kings Chapel, being elected
thereunto, had the temporalities thereof given Pat. 28. Hen. 8. p. ^.
to him 4. July 28. Hen. 8. Dom. 1536.

London, and for a time educated in this University, but in what house, or what
degrees he took, it appears not. Afterward he had several dignities conferred
upon him, was made Subdean Jo. Leland in tom. 1. collect. p. 472:
of the King's Chapel, and by K. Hen. 7. was sent Ambassador into Spain. In
the latter end of 1513. he was made Archb. of Armagh, by provision from P. Leo
10. the temporalities of which were given Jac. War. in Corn. de praesul. Hib.
p. 24.
to him on the 20. May in the year following. But he resigning the said
Archbishopric on the third of Aug. 1521. (being newly made Bishop of Carlisle
in England on the death of Joh. Penny) was made Archbishop of Thebes in Greece.
All these things were done by the endeavors made to the Pope by Card. Wolsey,
whose creature Kyte was: And because the Bulls of translation, and of Carlisle,
with the retention of his other benefices should be expedited and done to the
desire of Wolsey and Kyte, the fees came to 1790. ducats; but whether all was
paid, I think not, because it partly appears by the letters of Joh. Clerk the
Kings Orator at Rome, (afterward B. of B. of Wells,) that for the sake of the
said Card. 275 ducats were released to Kyte, tho the World was then very hard
at Rome. He the said Kyte took his last farewell of this World (after he had
bestowed much money on Rose-castle the Seat of the Bishop of Carlisle) on the
nineteenth Godwin at sup. int. Ep. carleol.
day of June in fifteen hundred thirty and seven, Stepney near London. Over his
grave is a marble-stone yet remaining, with an English Epitaph thereon,
contained in barbarous verses, showing that he was a person of great
hospitality. The five first run See in Joh. Weever in his Ancient fun.
^onuments, etc. Printed 1631. p. 539. 540.
thus. Under this ston closyde and marmorate
Lies John Kitte Londoner natyff,
Encreasyng in virtues rose to high estate
In the fourth Edwards chapel by his young lyffe
Since which the sevinth Henryes servyce primatyff.
Proceeding still, etc.


How it came to pass, that he was buried at Stepney, I cannot tell. Sure I am
that by his In Offic. Prarog. Cant. in reg. Dingley Qu. 6.
Will and Test. made the 18. June 29. Hen. 8: dom. 1537. and proved 21. of the
same month (wherein he writes himself John Kyte Archb. of Thebes and
Commendatory perpetual of Carlisle,) he bequeaths his body to be buried by the
body of his Father in St. Margarets Church in Westminster.

Dominican or Black Friar, was consecrated Bishop of Rochester in 1535. and
died in sixteen hundred thirty and eight. Rochester, succeeded Nich, Heath,
whom I shall mention at large in his proper place.

Mary Magd. coll. of which he was Fellow, and much noted for his excellent
faculty in disputing, whether in Philosophy or Divinity. In 1502. he being then
M. of A. of some years standing, was admitted Principal of S. Mary Magd. hall,
and in the year following was elected the northern Procter of the University,
because he had been born in the north parts of England. Afterward he became
Vicar of Willoughby in Warwickshire for a time, and Rector of Slimbridge in
Gloucestershire, (both by the gift of the said college,) Prebendary of the
Kings Chapel dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary and S. Stephen, within the
Palace of Westminster, Archdeacon of Dorset in the place of Rich. Paice, Doct.
of Divinity, and Chaplain to Rich. Fox B. of Winchester, who gave him, as I
think, the Archdeaconry of Surrey. At length upon the translation of Tonstall
to Durham, he was made Bishop of London in 1530. In which See being installed,
19. Jul. in the same year, (and about that time made the Kings Almoner,) fate
there to the time of his death, which happening on the eighth of Sept. George
within the Precinct of S. Paul's Cathedral. Soon after was a memorial put over
his grave running thus, Hujus in obscuri tumuli, etc. Which in English is this,
as P. F. tells me. Th'obscure recesses of this key-cold Tomb,
Do Stokeslies ashes, and remains inhume.
Whose general name, good life, dexterity
Of Pen, Tongue, Brain, were known both far and nigh.
Who studied still to serve* God and the King,
And benefit the public in each thing.
What good he did in Foreign parts retrieve,
He brought it home, like honey to his hive.
He knew the intreagues of Italy and Spain,
And of the Grecian Wyles did make much gain.
To many Kingdoms of the World being known,
And honored more, returning to his own.
Who on our Blessed Ladies day being born,
Did on the self same day to dust return.


In 1529. he was sent to the Emperiour and Pope, and to several Universities,
concerning the marriage of King Hen. 8. with his brother's Wife, etc. and was
with Tho. Cranmer at the citation of Katherine the Q. Dowager to appear at
Dunstable, six miles distant from Ampthill, when she was divorced, and the
marriage declared to be void and of no effect. He also burnt W. Tyndales
translation of the Bible, was a disputer with Joh. Lambert alias Nicholls, and
boasted, as R. Holinshed tells us, that he had burned fifty Heretics, meaning
Protestants, and as Dr. Humphrey In Vita and morte Jo. Juelli. p. 268.
says, that he had sacrificed to the god of hell above three hundred.

WALTER WELLESLEY, commonly called Wesley, was bred up a Canon Regular of the
Order of S. Austin, and among them in Oxon was he educated for a time.
Afterward he became Prior of those Canons of his Order living at Conal in the
County of Kildare in Ireland, and Master of the Rolls in that Kingdom. At
length upon the desire of K. Hen. 8. made to P. Clem. 7. he became Bishop of
Kildare in 1531. 1539:
and dying in fifteen Jac. War. ut sup. p. 128.
hundred thirty and nine, was buried in the said Monastery of Conal, the
Priorship of which he kept in Commendam with his Bishopric.

WILLIAM MORE, had part of his education Oxonians, but more in another
University, was afterward Vicar of Walden in Essex, and Suffragan Bishop of
Colchester. In 1537. he was made Prebendary of Gevendale in the Church of York,
but resigned it the year after, and on 14. Sept. 1539. he was installed
Archdeacon of Leycester in the room of Edm. Bonner promoted to the Sea of
Hereford. He died in the Summertime in fifteen hundred and forty, March
following by Tho. Robertson. One Will. More was Lord Prior of Worcester, which
honorable place he resigned in 1535. but was not the same with him who was
Bishop.

THOMAS SPARK, a Benedictine Monk of Durham, spent some time in study in
Durham coll. in this University, took the degree of Bac. of Div. in 1528. being
about that time Prior of a certain Cell. In 1536. he was nominated and made
Suffragan to the Bishop of Durham under the title of the Suffragan Seat of
Barwick, Clar. 1540.
which is the utmost Town in England toward Scotland. See more of him in the
Fasti, an. 1528.

THOMAS CHARD, or Cherd, a Devonian born Benedictine Monk, and among those was
he educated for a time in Oxon, but what degrees he took, it appears not.
Afterward retiring into his own Country, he was made Suffragan to Oldham
Bishop of Exeter, under the title of Bishop of Salubric, and by that title do I
find him collated to the Vicaridge of Wellyngton in Somersetshire on the
resignation of Rich. Gilbert Doct. of Decrees, in the month of June 1512. Three
years after, or thereabouts, he had the Priorship of Mountacute (of the
Benedictine alias Cluniack Order in the said County) conferred upon him, on the
death, as it seems, of Joh. Water, and in Aug. 1521. he was admitted to the
Church of Tyntenhull in the Dioc. of Wells, all little enough god-wot to
support his honorable dignity. Clar. 1541.
By his last In reg. Pynning in Offic. Prarog. Cant. Qu. 1^.
Will and Test. made 1. Oct. 1541. and proved 4. Nov. 1544. he became a
benefactor to the Church of S. Mary Otery in Devon, to the Churches of S. Mary
Magd. in Taunton, at Wellyngton, Holberton, etc. in Somersetshire. See another
Thom. Chard in the Fasti, under the year 1507.

Mary Magd. coll. was installed Arch. of York on the eleventh of Dec. 1531.
York succeeded a very worldly person named Rob. Halgate or Holgate D. D.
ejected thence when Q. Mary came to the Crown for being, as it is said, a
married man. By his last Will Reg. Kitchen, ibid. Qu. 25.
and Test. dated 27. Apr. 1555. and proved 4. Dec. 1556. he bequeathed his body
to be buried in that Parish wherein he should happen to die, but what Parish
that is, I cannot yet tell.

Glocestershire man born as it seems, but whether he was of any Order appears
not, was made Bishop of Crysopolitan and Suffragan to the Bishop of Worcester
in the time of K. Hen. 8. but the particular year I cannot yet find. He gave
way to fate in the Dioc. Gloucester in fifteen hundred forty and six or
thereabouts, leaving then behind him a brother named John Whitmaye Vicar of
Minsterworth in Gloucestershire.

Magdalen college, afterward Principal of the hall joining thereunto, was
consecrated Bishop of Lincoln in May 1521. and died in May in fifteen hundred
forty and seven; Linc. succeeded one Dr. Hen. Holbech alias Rands, written
sometimes Hen. Randes of Holbech in Lancolnshire, educated in Cambridge, made
the last Lord Prior of Worcester on the resignation of Will. More, an. 1535.
consecrated Suffragan Bishop of Bristow (for Latymer B. of Worcester) 24. March
1537. constituted the first Dean of Worcester 33. Hen. 8. Dom. 1541. translated
from Bristow to Rochester in June 1544. and thence to Lincoln beforementioned
in 1547. He concluded his last day after the 2. Aug. in 1551. and was buried,
as I suppose, in his own Church at Linc. leaving then behind him a Son named
Thomas.

Londoner born, educated in Wykehams School near Winchester, became perpetual
Fellow of New coll. after he had served two years of Probation, in 1493. but
leaving that place two years after, he went to the Royal Court, where his parts
and industry being soon known, was made Secretary to King Hen. 7. and 8. The
last of which sending him on an Embassy to Maximilian the Emperor, found so
much favor from him, that besides the great gifts received from his Treasury,
he had by Letters Pat. dated 14. Jul. 1514. a Coat of Arms granted to him as a
farther token of reward for his many services done for the English King in
exposing his life to danger, wearing it out in continual labors for him, and
ready for the future to do the like, if occasion should require, etc. The Arms
granted to him by the name and title of Will. Knight Prothonatary of the
Apostolical Seat and Ambassador from K. Hen. 8. to Maximilian the Emp. are
these. Parted per fess or and gules, an Eagle with two heads displayed sable,
having on its breast a demi-rose and a demi-sun conjoined into one,
counterchanged of the Field. Which Arms are at this day remaining in one of the
south windows of the common Refectory of New coll. In the beginning of the year
1523. he became Archdeacon of Huntingdon on the resignation of Rich Rawlins
promoted to the Sea of S. David, and in the beginning of Dec. 1529. he being
then, or about that time, Prebendary of the fifth Prebendship of the Kings
Chapel of S. Stephen within the Palace of Westminster, (and newly returned
from Rome,) was made Archdeacon of Richmond on the resignation of Tho. Winter.
In 1531. he was incorporated Doctor of the Laws, as he had stood in an
University beyond the Seas, and was afterward made Archdeacon of Chester. In
1541. May 29. he was consecrated Fr. Godw. in Com. de Praesul. Angl. int. Ep.
B. and Well. p. 442.
Bishop of Bathe and Wells, and had restitution of the temporalities of that
See made Pat. 33. Hen. 8. p. 1.
to him the day following. Sept. in fifteen hundred forty and seven, and was
buried in the nave of the Cath. Chapter at Wells. By his last Will In Osfic.
praerog. Cant. in reg. Moryson, Qu. 11.
and Test. dated 12. Aug. and proved on the eleventh of November, an. 1547. he
bequeathed an hundred pounds for the conveying his body from London to Wells,
for the interring it in the Cath. Chapter there, and for a Tomb to be laid, or set
over it. To New coll. he gave 40. l. and to Wykehams coll. near Winchester 20
l. The next person, immediately going before, who was B. of B. and Wells, was
one Joh. Clerk of the Univ. of Cambridge, Chapl. to Card. Wolsey, Doctor of the
Laws of Bononia, afterward Master of the Rolls; and Dean of Windsore; who,
after he had undergone several Messages and Embassies for, and from, Card.
Wolsey and the King, was at length sent Ambassador to the Duke of Cleve to give
a reason why K. Hen. 8. did divorce from him his Sister Anne. Which being done
he fell extremely sick at Dunkirk in Flanders in his return thence, in the
month of Sept. 1540. occasioned, as some say, by poison given to him. Whereupon
making his last In Offic^ praerog. Cant. in reg. Alenger, Qu. 20.
Will at that place, on the 23. of the same month, and in the same year,
(within few days after which he died,) he bequeathed his body to be buried in
the principal or chief Church of the Town of Calais, and withal that there be a
stone laid over his grave with this inscription to be put thereon. Hic jacet
Johannes Episcopus Bathonienfis and Wellens, Anglus, qui cum obiisset plures
insignes legationes, tandem obiit diem suum in legatione Clevensi, anno done.
Millesimo quingentesimo quadragesimo. Which Will was proved 17. January the
same year. So that how it comes to pass that there should be almost the same
inscription on a gravestone sometimes in S. Botolphs Church near Algate,
London, wherein most authors Job. Stow in his Survey of Land. Printed 1633. p.
119. b. Joh. Weever in his Ancient Funeral Monuments, etc. p. 426. etc.
hitherto have reported that he was buried, I know not. In the Pallace-Treasury
at Westminster, I have seen a bundle of books, written, as is supposed, by Dr.
Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury, and this Dr. Clerk B. of Bathe and Wells. Which
books contain a defense of the Kings title of Supreme Head, and of the divorce
from his first Wife Queen Katherine, and several matters against Cardinal Pole.
He the said Clerk is numbered by Leland In Principum ac illustrium aliquot and
crud. in Angl. virorum encomiis, etc. Printed 1589. p. 41.
among the learned and famous men of his time, having written and published
several things; among which is his Oration pro Henr. 8. Angliae Reg. and Defens.
apud Leonem x. in Exhibitione operis regii. It Is against Luther, but where, or
when, printed, it appears not, only that it was published in qu. I have seen
many of his letters which he wrote, while he continued in Rome 1524. etc. to
Card. Wolsey, giving him an account of the affairs of that place, he being then
one of that Cardinals Agents to obtain the Papacy for him.

WILLIAM MIAGH, or Meagh. -- Upon the Walt. Wellesley beforementioned, one
Donald O-Beachan a Minorite was by the Popes provision declared Bishop of
Kildare, in July 1540. but within few days after he died. In Nov. following one
Thaddeus Reynold LL. D. was elected upon the like provision, but the election
being rejected by the King, Will. Miagh beforementioned, an Irishman born, as
I conceive, who had spent some time among the Civilians in Oxon, was Ja^ W^r.
ut sup. in Com. de praesul. Hibern. p. 128.
promoted to the said See of Kildare, and afterward became one of the Privy
Council to K. H. 8. in Ireland. He yielded up his last breath on the 15. 1548:
December. in fifteen hundred forty and eight, and was succeeded, after the Sea
had laid void one year and seven months, by Thomas Lancaster, who about that
time obtained liberty of keeping the Deanery of Kilkenny in Commendam with it.

ROBERT WAKEMAN, a Worcestershire man Benedictine Monk, was educated for a time
among those of his Order in Gloucester coll. and afterward became the last
Abbat of Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire, and the Kings Chaplain. In the year
1541. Sept. 20. (he being then, as it is In lib. H. 5. in coll. Arm. f^l. 17.
said, Bach. of Div.) was consecrated the first Bishop of Gloucester, where
sitting about 8 years, gave way to fate about the beginning of December. in
fifteen hundred forty and nine. 1549:
In his lifetime he erected a Tomb for the place of his burial in the Abbey
Church of Tewkesbury, in the north side of a little chapel there, but buried
at Worthington says a certain Godwin ut supra int. Episc. Gloc.
author, meaning as I suppose, Wormington in Glocestershire; yet I am more apt
to believe at Forthampton in the said county, where he had a house and private
chapel there. Qu.

Fitzgerald an Irish man-born, or at least of Irish extract, was bred a Canon
regular of the order of S. Austin, and among those of his order in Oxon, (where
they had three Monasteries) was for a time educated in Theological learning.
Afterward returning into Ireland, became Prior of Inistiock in the county of
Kilkenny, and in 1527. was consectated Bishop of Ossory, with liberty then
given to him to keep his Priorship in commendam. Before his consecration he
built a new Campanile in his Monastery, as also a cloister adjoining, and after
his consecration, he repaired the house at Kilkenny belonging to his See, and
was a benefactor to his Church. He died in a good old age, in fifteen hundred
and fifty, Jac. Waraeus in Com. de praesul. Hib. p. 148.
others say in fifty one, and was buried in the Monastery of Inistiock
beforementioned, among his predecessors.

Irish man born, natural Son of Peter Earl of Ormond, was bred a Canon regular
of the Order of S. Austin, and for some time studied, as is supposed, among
those of his Order in Oxon, but what degree he took in divinity in this
University, it does not appear. Afterward he became Prior of the Canon
regulars of S. Edmund of Athassell in the county of Tipperary, and at length
Archbishop of Cashills; to which See being consecrated in 1527. became one of
the privy council to K. Hen. 8. in the Kingdom of Ireland, and had then liberty
allowed him to keep his Priorship in Commendum. He died on the 5. of March, in
fifteen hundred and fifty, 1550-1.
and was buried in his Cath. Church at Cashills near the Archbishops Throne.
See more of him in Sir Jam. Wares book entit. Comment. de Praesulibus
Hiberniae, p. 172. In the said See succeeded one Rowland Baron alias
Fitzgerald, descended from the ancient Family of his name living in Ireland.

Hull under the Archbishop of York, was made Prebendary of Langtoft and VVistow
in the Church of York, 1541. and in 1549. January 31. was installed Archdeacon
of Nottingham, on the death of Cuthbert Marshall D. D. who had succeeded Will.
Fell D. D. in that dignity, in Jan. 1527. Clar. 1552.
He either died in the beginning of Q. Mary's reign (1553.) or was deprived,
because then, or soon after, I find one Rob. Pursglove to occur by the title of
Bishop of Hull, as I shall at large tell you under the year 1579.

Stonywell was born in the Parish of Longdon in Staffordshire, within which
Parish is a small Hamlet called Stonywell, from a Well wherein is at the bottom
a large stone, which seems to be no more than a little Rock, whence springs the
water that supplies that Well. This person being much addicted to learning and
religion when a Youth, was taken into a certain Monastery (that at Pershore in
Worcestershire, as it seems) and was bred a Benedictine Monk. Thence he was
sent to Gloucester College in Oxon, where the Monks of Pershore had an apartment
for their Novices to be trained up in Academical learning: of which College he
was, when in his elder years, Prior for a time, and was then noted among those
of his profession for his learning and strict course of life. Afterward being
Doctor of divinity, he became Lord Abbat of the said Monastery of Pershore, and
at length a Bishop (suffragan only as it seems) under the title of Episcopus
Poletensis. He paid his last debt to nature, after he had arrived to a great
age, in the beginning of fifteen hundred fifty and three, In Offic. Praerog.
Cant. in reg. Tash. Qu. 15.
Will in a new chapel built by him within the Parish Church of S. James in
Longdon, he bequeathed all his books, his two Chalices, his Crewetts, holy
water stock, Vestmens, Albes, Altar-clothes, with other things belonging to his
private chapel in Longdon.

JOHN HOPER or Hooper sometimes either of Merton Albans hall, or of both
successively, was consecrated Bishop of Gloucester in the latter end of the year
1550. and about two years after had the Bishopric of Worcester given to him to
keep in Commendam with the former. He yielded up his last breath in the flames,
in the latter end of fifteen hundred fifty and four; Gloucester succeeded him
James Brokes, and in Worcester Rich. Pate. Of the former you may read more
among the writers under the year 1559. and of the other among the Bishops
following, an. 1560.

GEORGE BROWN an Austin Friar of the London, was educated in Academicals among
those of his order in Oxon. Afterward growing eminent among them, was made
Provincial of the said order in England, and about the same time supplicated
the Regents of this University that he might be admitted to the reading of the
sentences, in 1523; but whether he was really admitted, it appears not.
Afterward taking the degree of Doctor of divinity, in an University beyond the
Seas, as it seems, was incorporated in the same degree at Oxon 1534. and soon
after at Cambridge. On the 19. of March 1535. he was consecrated in England
Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, and in 1551. he obtained leave from K. Ed. 6.
that he and his successors for ever in that See may be Primates of all Ireland,
but recalled Jac. Wac. ut supra. p. 120:
soon after by Queen Mary, Clar. 1554.
who in 1554. caused him to be deprived of his Archbishopric for being
married. What became of him afterward I know not, nor when he died.

EDWARD STAPLE received his first breathings Lincolnshire, studied Logic and
Philosophy for a time in this University, and went afterward to Cambridge,
where he took the degree of Master of Arts. Thence returning to Oxon was
incorporated in that degree, and in the latter end of 1525. supplicated the
venerable congregation of Regents that he might be admitted to the reading of
the sentences, being then one of the canons of Card. Wolseys college; but
whether he was really admitted, it dot not appear. In 1530. he, by provision
from P. Clem. 7. became Ibid. p. 38.
Bishop of Mead in Ireland, being at that time Warden or Master of S.
Bartholomews Hospital in London; which, for some time he kept in commendam with
his Bishopric. At length Qu. Mary coming to the Crown, Clar. 1554.
he was deprived of the said Bishopric, (for being married as I suppose) in
the year 1554. and soon after died. In the said See succeeded one Will. Walsh
D. D. of whom I shall speak more under the year 1576.

ROBERT FERRAR was born within the Vicaridge Halyfax in Yorkshire (within four
miles of which place he gave Lands to his near relations) and when a young man
was made a Canon regular of the order of S. Austin, but in what Priory or Abbey
I know not. Sure I am, that he having partly received his Academical education
in Cambridge, did, when he had entered into the same order, retire to a nursery
for the Canons thereof in Oxon, named S. Mary's college, situated in the Parish
of S. Michael and S. Peter in the Bailey, where I find him in 1526. in which
year Tho. Garret Curate of Honey lane in London, and a forward and busy
Lutheran did supply him with prohibited books, or books which were written
against the R. Cath. Chapter and the members thereof, he being then esteemed one of
that party that then opposed the established Church and Doctrine. In 1533. he,
as a member of the said coll. of S. Mary, was admitted to the reading of the
sentences, having a little before opposed in divinity, and about that time
became chaplain to Dr. Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury, by whose example (as one
Rob. Persons in The third part of a treatise entit. Of the three conversions of
Eng. vol. 2. cap. 6. p. 336.
says) he learned to get himself a woman also under the name of a wife, and by
his endeavors had some preserment in the Church. In 1547. he being then in
great favor with Edward Duke of Somerset, he was by him See in Jo. (...) his
Acts and M^n. of the Church, under the year (...).
appointed Bishop of S. David's upon the removal of W. Barlow to the Sea of B.
and Wells, and accordingly was consecrated thereunto the same year. But upon
the fall of the said Duke in 1549. who was an upholder of him and his unworthy
doings, were 56. Articles drawn up against him by some of his neighbors, viz.
Hugh Rawlins Clerk, and one Tho. Lee, accusing him as an abuser of his
authority, a maintainer of superstition, to be covetous, wilfully negligent,
foolish, etc. All which he being not able to answer, was committed to safe
custody in London, during the remaining part of the reign of K. Ed. 6. After
Qu. Mary came to the Crown, it being fully understood that he was a Lutheran
Heretic, as the men of those times styled him, he was called before the Bishop
of Winchester, and other commissioners for Ecclesiastical affairs; and after he
had been diverse times examined by them, he was condemned for certain
propositions which he maintained, viz. (1) That any Priest or Religious man,
after his vow, may lawfully marry. (2) That in the blessed Sacrament there
remains the substance of bread and wine, together with the body and blood of
Christ. (3) That it is no sacrifice propitiatory. (4) That only faith
justifyeth, etc. Afterward he was silenced and degraded, sent into Wales, and
being committed to the secular power, was burned on the S. side of the
Market-cross in the Town of Caermerthen, 30. March, in fifteen hundred fifty
and five. Acts and Monuments of the Church, etc. under the year 1555. where
you will find his answer, (tho insufficient) to the said 56 articles, his
articles also against a furnished information exhibited by Thomas Lee to the K.
and Privy Council, with many of his Letters written during his imprisonment.
From all which, and the story of him in the said Acts and Monuments, a man may
easily perceive (as the Romans Catholics say) that the having a Woman to his
Wife, was the chief motive that drew him to those opinions which he held.

Voysey and Veysey, because he was educated in his infancy (as it is said) by
one of that name, Son of Will. Harman by Joan his Wife, daughter of Henr.
Squyre of Handsworth in Staffordshire, was born at Sutton-Colfield in
Warwickshire, became a student in this University in 1482. Probationer-fellow
of Madg. coll. 28. July 86. and the year following true and perpetual Fellow,
by the name of Joh. Harman only. In few years after he proceeded Doctor of the
civil Law, and became Vicar of S. Michaels Church in Coventry, being then noted
more for his faculty than divinity. In the beginning of June 1505. he was made
Prebendary of North-Aulton in the Church of Salisbury, by the ceasing of one
James Straytbarret, and was admitted thereunto by the name of Joh. Veyse; which
Preb. he afterward resigning, was succeeded by Dr. John Longland of Magd.
coll. in the beginning of December. 1514. But Longland being promoted in few days
after to the Deanery of Sarum, Joh. Veyse was admitted to it again in the same
month, and kept it till after he was Bishop. This person being esteemed well
qualified, and of great abilities, was employed on sundry Embassies, was made
Tutor to the Lady Mary then the Kings only daughter, and President of Wales. In
1515. he was made Dean of Windsore, being about that time Registrary of the
most noble order of the Garter, Archdeacon of Chester, and Dean of the Kings
domestic chapel; and soon after became Dean of the Free chapel of S. Peter
and S. Paul at Wolverhampton in Staffordshire. In 1519. he was elected Bishop
of Exeter, being then Dean of the Church there, had the temporalities of the
said See Pat. 11. Hen. 8. p. 1.
restored to him 4 Nov. and was consecrated thereunto on the 6. Dec. the same
year. Of all the Bishops in England he was accounted the best Courtier, having
been well bred from his youth; and although he had a good report for his learning,
yet he was better esteemed by some for his Court-like behavior, which in the
end turned not so much to his credit, as to the utter ruin and spoil of his
Church. For of 22 Manors and Lordships, which his predecessors had left unto
him of a goodly yearly revenue, he left Job. Vowell alias Hooker in his Cat. of
the Bishops of Exeter, printed in the life of Qu. Eliz. in R. Holinsheds Chron.
See also in Fr. Godwin in Com. de praesul. Angl. int. Episc. Exon.
but seven or eight, and them also leased out. And where he found fourteen
houses well furnished, he left only one house bare and without furniture, and
yet charged with sundry fees and annuities. By which means the said Bishopric
of Exeter, which was accounted one of the best, is now become in temporal Lands
one of the meanest. Now if any person is desirous to understand what became of
all the money which he got by the alienation of the said Manors and Lordships,
let him know that it was most expended (fearing perhaps that the said Lands
might be taken away in the mutable times he lived in) on his native place of
Sutton-Colfield, by making it a corporation, and procuring a Market there,
building most of the Town, and endeavoring to set up the making there of
Kersies, as in Devon. and Cornwall; which in the end, as it is said, proved to
little purpose. Also by building and endowing a Freeschool there, building two
bridges of stone, erecting a Mannour-house called More-place near to Sutton
beforementioned, besides other housing near it, Parks, Ponds, and I know not
what, as you may see In the Antiquities of Warwickshire, by Will. Dugdale, p.
667, 668.
elsewhere. In the reign of K. Ed. 6. when religion was altered, he the said
Dr. Harman resigned his Bishopric, and on the 14. of Aug. 5. Ed. 6. Dom. 1551.
Miles Coverdale D. of D. of Cambridge, was Pat. 5. Ed. 56. p. 1.
Propter ejus singularem sacrarum literarum doctrinam, moresque probatissimos,
made Bishop in his place. In 1553. when Qu. Mary came to the Crown, Dr.
Coverdale was put out, and the said Harman who was forced, as it is Pat. 1. Mar.
p. 2.
said, to give up his Bishopric pro corporis metu, on the 14. of Aug. 5. Ed.
6. was restored Ibid.
thereunto 28. Sept. in the year beforementioned. So that living there for a
time till he saw the R. Cath. Religion settled, retired to his native place
again, where dying full of years (aged at least an hundred) in the summer time
in fifteen hundred fifty and five, was buried on the north side of the chancel
belonging to the Church at Sutton-Colfield beforementioned, where is at this
day a fair Monument remaining over his Grave, with his statua from head to foot
cut out from stone adorned with the Pontificalia belonging to a Bishop.

NICHOLAS RYDLEY sometimes fellow University coll. was consecrated Bishop of
Rochester 5. Sept. 1547. translated to London on the deprivation of Bonner, in
1549. and died in the flames at Oxon in fifteen hundred fifty and five; under
which year you may see more among the writers.

GEORGE COOTES, Cotes or Cotys, so many John, but false) was elected
Probationer Fellow of Balliol coll. in 1522. being then Bach. of Arts.
Afterward he was made Fellow of Magd. coll. but when, it appears not, because
the register of that time belonging to the said house, noted with the letter B.
has been time out of mind lost. In 1526. he proceeded in Arts, was afterward
one of the Proctors of the University, Doctor of Divinity, and in 1539. was
elected Master of Balliol coll. In the beginning of 1554. being then elected to
the Episcopal See of Chester, (of which Church he had been several years
Prebendary) by the name of Mr. George Cotes S. Th. Prof. had restitution made
Pat. 1. Mar. p. 1.
to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto by Qu. Mary on the 18. of Apr.
in the same year, he keeping then with that See the moity of the Church of
Cotgrave. He gave way to fate about the beginning of Dec. (as it seems) in
fifteen hundred fifty and five: Thomas Milner was instituted in the said moity
on the 18. of Dec. the same year, and Cuthb. Scot. D. of D. of Cambridge was
much about that time nominated to succeed him in the Sea of Chester: the
temporalities of which, were Pat. 3. and 4. Phil and Mar. p. 1.
given to him 25. of Sept. 1556.

ARTHUR BOKELY or Bulkley, was descended Anglesie, but in what coll. or hall he
was educated, unless in New Inn, I cannot justly tell. About the time that he
took the degree in the Canon Law he was beneficed and dignified in Wales, where
he was held in esteem for a good Canonist. At length being promoted to the Sea
of Bangor, and consecrated thereunto, had the temporalities of that See given
Pat. 33. Hen. 8. p. 3.
to him on the eleventh of Febr. 1541. After his death, which happened in
fifteen hundred fifty and five, Will. Glynn of Qu. coll. in Cambridge, an
excellent Scholar, and a very good disputant of his time; who dying about the
latter end of May 1558. was buried in the Choire of the Cath. Chapter at Bangor,
under that very place where the Sepulcher on Goodfriday and in Easter time use
to stand. Not long after his death Qu. Mary nominated to succeed in that See
one Maurice Clennock a Welsh man, Bach. of Law of this University, Preb. of
York, and an Officer in the Prerogative Court under Card. Pole Archb. of
Canterbury, but the said Queen dying before he was consecrated thereunto, he
(with Goldwell Bish. of S. Asaph) fled beyond the Seas, and going to Rome,
Clennock some years after became the first Rector of the English Hospital
there, after it was converted into a college for English students, where he was
mostly called by the name of Dr. Maurice, and much noted by the said students
for his great partiality used toward his own Countrymen of Wales, which
always caused during his time, a great faction between the Welsh and English
students abiding in that college.

Carlisle in 1537. and died in the latter end of the year fifteen hundred fifty
and five, 1555-6.
under which year you may see more among the writers. In the Sea of Carlisle
succeeded Dr. Owen Ogelthorpe, of whom I shall make large mention among these
Bishops under the year 1560.

Herefordshire, or at least extracted from those of his name there, admitted
Fellow of Magd. coll. about 1537. being then Bachelaur of Arts and Master of
the Freeschool joining to that college. Afterward proceeding in that faculty,
he took holy orders, became Preacher to the Earl of Warwick, and Tutor to his
children, a zealous Preacher in Oxon against the R. Catholics upon the coming
to the crown of K. Ed. 6. (as I have elsewhere told In Hist. and Antiq. Univ.
Oxen. lib. 1. p. 265. b.
you) and at length chaplain to that Prince, who, for the zeal Harley had in
Preaching up the reformed religion, gave him a Prebendship in the Church of
Worcester, on the decease of Humph. Webley Bach. of Div. an. 1551. Where being
settled, he had the rectory of Vpton upon Severne, and the Vicaridge of
Kederminster in Worcestersh. bestowed on him, he being then Bach. of Div.
Afterward the Sea of Hereford being void by the death of Joh. Skipp, he was
elected Bishop of that place: So that being consecrated thereunto on the 26.
May 1553. was within few months after deprived of it by Qu. Mary for his wilful
avoiding the hearing of Mass and for being married. Joh. Leland the famous
Antiquary, who knew the said Harley well, does in an high manner In Encomi^s,
Trophaeis, etc. eruditorum in Anglia virorum, etc. p. 107.
praise him for his great virtue, and learning, especially in the classical
Authors and Poets, for his fine vein in Poetry, etc. but what he has
published, that author tells us not, nor Baleus, or his follower Pitseus.
Afterward Harley absconding for a time, did at length go from place to place
in an obscure condition, to consolate the poor remnant of Protestants, Clar.
1555.
and confirm them in their belief, but died soon after in his wandering to and
fro in England. In the Sea of Hereford succeeded one Rob. Perfey, sometimes
called Warbington and VVarton, formerly Abbat of the exempt Monastery of S.
Savior of Bermondsey, educated in the University of Cambridge, (of which he
was Bach. of Divinity) who dying in the time of winter 1557. was buried in his
own Church at Hereford. Afterward Tho. Raynolds D. D. Dean of Exeter and
Warden of Mert. coll. was designed to succeed him by Qu. Mary, but she dying
before he was consecrated, he was laid aside: whereupon Joh. Scory a Norfolcian
born, Doct. of Div. and Chaplain to the Queen, succeeded in 1559, having been a
sufferer upon account of religion during Qu. Mary's reign, in which time he
wrote An Epistle unto all the faithful that be in prison in England, or in any
other trouble for the defense of Gods word, etc. printed at Waterford in
Ireland 1555. oct. Wherein he does, by the example of diverse holy Martyrs,
comfort, encourage and strengthen them, particularly to suffer for Christ's sake
persecution. In the same year also he published his translation of S.
Augustin's two books, the one of Predestination of Saints, the other of
Perseverance unto the end, with the determination of two general Councils
concerning that matter. -- Printed in oct. And in the year following, he
published his translation of S. Ciprian's Sermon of Mortality, or the willing
for saking of this life; Also his Exhortation to Martyrdom, and his Exhortation
to keep and endure the faith of Christ, etc. Printed in oct. This Joh. Scory
dyed in his house or palace at VVhitbourne in the country of Hereford 26. June
1585. and was, as I suppose, buried there. He left behind him a Son named
Silvanus Scory, a very handsome and witty man, and of the best education both at
home and beyond the Seas, that that age could afford. His Father loved him so
dearly, that he fleeced the Church of Hereford to leave him an estate, but
Silvanus allowing himself the liberty of enjoying all the pleasures of this
world, reduced it to nothing, so that his Son Edm. lived by hanging on
Gentlemen, and by his shifts. Silvanus was also esteemed a learned man, and
upon that account did Ben. Johnson dedicate to him a piece of his Poetry, but
whether he published any thing, I cannot yet tell, nor any thing else of him,
only that he giving way to fate in the Parish of S. Peter near Paul's Wharff in
London, in Sept. or Oct. 1617. was buried in the chancel of S. Leonards Church
by Shore-a^tch, near to the grave of his Mother Elizabeth, who dyed 8. March
1592.

JOHN BELL a Worcestershire man born as it Balliol coll. to which he was partly
in his life time, but more at his death, a special benefactor. Afterward he
became Chancellor of the diocese of Worcester, in the place of Dr. Thom^
Hanybal, an. 1518. and about that time Archdeacon of Gloucester, and Warden of
the collegiate Church of Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire. At length his
abilities being made known to K. Hen. 8. he was by him employed beyond the Seas
concerning state affairs, was made Doctor of the Laws there, one of the Kings
Counselors at his return, a chief agitator for the King in defense of his
divorce from his first Wife Qu. Catherine, especially in the University of
Oxon, by endeavoring to gain the opinion of the members thereof concerning
that matter, (as I have told In Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 255. a.
you elsewhere) and in 1531. was incorporated Doctor of his faculty, as he had
stood beyond the Seas. In 1539. he was elected Bishop of Worcester, the
temporalities of which being restored Pat. 31. Hen. 8. p. 3. In Off^^ praerog.
Cant. in reg. Kitchen, Qu. 18.
to him on the fourth of Aug. the same year, he was soon after consecrated. In
1543. he abdicated or rather resigned his See, but for what cause is yet
uncertain: Whereupon retiring to Clerkenwell near London, lived there for some
years, August, in fifteen hundred fifty and six, was buried on the north side
of the Chancel belonging to the Church of Islyngton near London, By his last
will ( k) and test. dated 10. of Aug. 1556. he bequeathed very liberally to the
poor people of Stratford upon Avon beforementioned, to the poor of Bromesgrave
in Worcestershire, Tadcaster, Wymbersley, etc. at which places it is probable he
had been beneficed. He also gave 100 marks to certain poor Scholars of Oxon and
Cambridge, in which last University he seems to have received a part of his
education. One Joh. Bell D. D. was Dean of Ely, and dying 31. of October. 1591.
was buried in the Cath. Chapter there, but what relation there was between him and
the Bishop, I cannot tell.

HENRY MAN was bred a Carthusian Monk, Carthusians at Shene in Surrey became
Prior: which Monastery he with his brethren surrendering into the Kings hands,
at the dissolution of Religious houses, had a Pension allowed to him for some
years. In 1539. he took the degrees in Divinity in this University of Oxon, and
in the latter end of Hen. 8. was made the second Dean of Chester in the place
of one Tho. Clerk, and about that time (tho the year when, appear not) was
promoted to the Episcopal See of the Isle of Man. He departed this mortal life
at London on the 19. of Oct. in fifteen hundred fifty and six, Andrew
Undershaft within that City. In his Deanery succeeded Will. Clyve or Clyffe
LL. D. (who had been Chantor and afterward Treasurer of the Cath. Chapter at York)
but the year when, I cannot justly say (or whether the said Dr. Man kept the
said Deanery in commendam with his Bishopric) and in the Sea of Man succeeded
Thom. Stanley, as I shall hereafter tell you.

Bangor in 1539. and translated thence to Chester in 1541. but deprived of that
See by Qu. Mary for being married, in the year 1553. He paid his last debt to
nature in fifteen hundred fifty and six; George Cootes, of whom I have made
mention before, but died about an year before Bird.

Benedictine Monk was partly educated in Oxon, but more in Cambridge, in which
University he was, as it seems, admitted to the reading of the sentences. In
1528. he was made Abbat of Peterborough, (in which Town he was born) upon the
decease of one Rob. Kirton, and living to see his Monastery dissolved, was by
the favor of K. Hen. 8. nominated the first Bishop of that place, when the
said King by his charter dated 4. Sept. 1541 erected an Episcopal See there. On
the said day the temporalities of it were Pat. 33. Hen. 8. p. 3.
delivered to him, and on the 23. of Oct. following was consecrated thereunto;
which is all I know of him, only that he was a worldly man, and that dying in
the winter time, before the month of December. in fifteen hundred fifty and six,
Peterborough. The reader is now to know that Dr. Fr. Godwin does in his
Commentary Edit. Land. 1616. p. 594. int. Episc. Petroburg.
of English Bishops, tells us that the said Joh. Chambers was Doctor of
Physic, bred up in Merton college, and afterward Dean of S. Stephens cell. in
Westminster, but very much mistaken, for that John Chambers Bach. of Div. and
Bishop died in 1556. as it is before told you, and the other who was Dr. of
Physic and Dean, died 1549. Pray be pleased to see more in the Fasti, under
the year 1531. among the incorporations.

the ancient Kings of Devonshire, as the posterity of his brother Thomas say,
but where he was born, unless in Oxfordshire, I cannot justly tell. While he
was young, being much addicted to religion and learning, was made a Cistercian
Monk, and among those of that order did he for some years live in Rewley Abbey
in the West suburb of Oxon, and partly, as I conceive, for the sake of learning
among the Bernardins in their coll. in the North suburb of the said City. In
1506. he, as a Cistercian Monk, was admitted to the reading of the sentences,
and in 1510. 13. and 15. he supplicated to be licensed to proceed in Divinity
by the title of a Monk of the order of S. Benedict; in the last of which years
he occurs Abbat of Bruerne near to Burford in Oxfordshire, anciently founded
for Monks of Cisteaux, which is a branch of the Benedictine order, as the
Bernardins are. In 1518. he proceeded in Divinity in an Act celebrated on the
last of Febr. and afterward was made Abbat of Them in Oxfordshire, the Monks
of which were also Cistercians. About the time that the Abbey of Osney near
Oxon was to be dissolved, he was made Abbat commendatary thereof, being then a
Suffragan, or titular Bishop under the title of Roven (Rovenesis) in the
province of Athens, by which name or title I find him to occur in 1539. In
1542. when Oxford was made an Episcopal See by K. Hen. 8. and the Abbey of
Osney appointed to be the place of habitation of the Dean and Canons of the
Cathedral to be there, he the said Rob. King was made and constituted the
first Bishop in the beginning of Sept. the same year, at which time Gloucester
coll. was appointed his Palace or place of residence, the Abbats lodgings at
Osney for the Dean, and the other lodgings in that Abbey for the Canons, and
Officers belonging to the Cathedral. In 1546. when the said Cath. Chapter at Osney
was translated to Cardinal coll. alias Kings coll. or the coll. of K. Hen. 8.
in Oxon, which was formerly the Priory of S. Frideswyde, but then called
Christ-church, he the said King notwithstanding continued in his office of
Bishop, and his chair was thence translated also, but not his Palace. Yet when
K. Ed. 6. came soon after to the Crown, and made a recital of his fathers
erection of the aforesaid Episcopal See, he left out Gloc. coll. with
intentions that it should remain with the Crown for another use in future time.
So that what house or lodgings the said Bishop King had for his use during the
remaining part of his life, in truth I cannot tell. All that I know more of him
is, that he being an aged man in Qu. Mary's reign, (being then by Joh. Fox
called In the Acts and Mon. of the Church, sub. an. 1558.
the Bishop of Them) he did not care to have any thing to do with such that
were then called Her^icks, and therefore he is commended by Posterity for his
mildness: Also that he paying his last debt to nature on the fourth day of
December. in fifteen hundred fifty and seven, was buried on the North side of the
East end of the Choire of Chapter Church. Duppa being then Dean of Chapter Church) it
was taken away by Henry and John King Canons of the said Church, Sons of Dr.
Joh. King sometimes Bishop of London, great Nephew to Dr. Rob. King
beforementioned, and by them it was placed under the lower South Window of the
Isle joining on the South side of the said Choire. In which Window they caused
to be painted soon after the Picture of the said Rob. King in his Episcopal
Robes, with his Miter on his head, and Crosier in his hand, and the ruins of
Osney Abbey behind him, as also the Arms which the said Hen, and John then
pretended to. The said window was pulled down when the Presbyterians and
Independents governed, an. 1651. by one of the Family of the Kings then living,
who preserving it safe till the Restoration, an. 1660. was soon after set up
again, where it yet continues. A certain author named Will. Harrison tells In
his Description of England, printed in the first vol. of Rap. Helinshed
Chronicle. lib. 2. cap. 2.
us, that in the time of Q. Mary (who died 1558.) one Goldwell was Bishop of
Oxford, who was a Jesuit dwelling in Rome, and more conversant (as the constant
fame went) in the Black Art, than skilful in the Scriptures, and yet he was of
great countenance among the Roman Monarchs. It is said also, that observing the
Canons of his Order; he regarded not the temporality of that See. But it seems
since that, he wist well enough what became of those commodities, for by one
mean or another he found the sweetness of 354. l. -- 16s. -- 06d. yearly
growing to him, etc. Thus the said author Harrison: By which Goldwell, he
means, I suppose, Thou. Goldwell Bishop of S. Asaph, as if he had been
translated thence to Oxon on the death of Rob. King beforementioned, for what
Goldwell it should be else, unless another Thomas, whom I shall mention in the
Fasti, I know not, forasmuch as the generality of authors say, that the said
Tho. Goldwell left the Bishopric of S. Asaph when Q. Elizabeth came to the
Crown, and that thereupon he went to Rome, where he lived in great repute for
many years. See more among these Bishops under the year 1580.

RICHARD THORNDEN, sometimes written Thornton, a Monk of the Order of S.
Benedict of Chapter Church in Canterbury, received his Academical education in
Canterbury coll. in this University, of which he became Warden or Guardian
about 1528. Afterward he proceeded in divinity, run with the unsatiable humor
of K. Hen. 8. and in the Reign of K. Edw. 6. was a great Gospeller and seemed
to all to be an hearty Protestant. But when Q. Mary came to the Crown, he
wheeled about, was made Suffragan Bishop of Dover under Card. Pole Archb. of
Canterbury for the County of Kent, where he showed himself an eager disputant
against the poor Protestants, as you may see by his arguings and reasonings
with several of them about matters of religion in the book of Acts and Mon. of
the Church, Under the years 1552. and 56. See also under the year 1558.
written by John Fox, who adds of him farther, that for his persecuting of Gods
Saints he was suddenly taken with a Palsy on a Sunday at Bourn (Bishops Bourn)
in Kent, having the day before returned from the Chapter house at Canterbury.
Whereupon being conducted to his bed he died soon after, viz. in fifteen
hundred fifty and seven. Dover, appointed by Card. Pole, who showing himself
also vexatious to the Protestants, broke his neck suddenly, as the said author
reports. In the year 1569. one Rich. Rogers bach. (afterward Doctor) of
Divinity was consecrated Suffragan Bishop of Dover, by Matthew Archb. of
Canterbury, and in 1584. he became Dean of Canterb. upon the promotion of Dr.
Th. Godwin to the Sea of B. and Wells. He was Father to Franc. Rogers D. D. and
Justice of the Peace in Kent, who dying 23. of Jul. 1638. was buried in the
Church of S. Margaret in the City of Canterbury. After Bishop Rogers decease
succeeded in the Deanery of Canterbury one Tho. Nevill D. D. who dying in the
beginning of the year 1615. was buried within that Chapel joining to the body
of the Cathedral Chapter at Canterbury, which was before repaired by him, and
wherein he had erected a monument for himself, and his brother Alexander Nevill
some years before that deceased.

Taunton under the Bishop of B. and Wells, from the year 1539. to 1557. in
which last year he was admitted Prebendary of Whitlakynton in the Church of
Wells, but whether he took a degree in this University, Clar. 1557.
tho study he did for a time, it appears not. In his time lived in the diocese
of Exeter one William, who writes himself Episcopus Hipponensis, having been
Suffragan to the Bishop of Exeter, which is all I know of him, only that he
died in 1559.

Will. Peto, was born of, and descended from, the ancient Family of the Peto's
living at Chesterton in Warwickshire, educated for a time, for the sake of
learning, among the Gray Friars of Oxon, (of which Order he was a zealous
brother,) but whether he took a degree among us, it does not appear, unless he
did it under another name, as some have done. Afterward he became Chaplain, if
I mistake not, to Q. Katherine, in whose defense he showed himself a stout
Champion when K. Hen. 8. was about to divorce her, as also against the Kings
marriage with Anna Bulleyne. In 1557. Jun. 13. he was made (tho known to be
unfit) a Cardinal by P. Paul 3. and at the same time Legate a Latere in England,
and soon after Bishop of Salisbury on the death of Dr. Joh. Salcot alias Capon,
on purpose to thwart Cardinal Pole, whom that Pope took to be his Enemy, or
rather out of stomach to work that Cardinals displeasure, whom he before had
recalled to Rome, to be accused and charged as suspected corrupt in Religion.
But Q. Mary, albeit she was most affectionately devoted to the Chapter of Rome,
interposed, or rather opposed her self so, that Peto was forbidden Camden in
Britan. in com. Warwic.
to enter into England, and the power Legantine left entire and whole to her
Cousin Pole. Whereupon Peto continued in France, where he died in Apr. Historia
minor provinciae Angliae Fratrum minorum, in the first tome of the Scholastical
and Historical works of Franc. a Sancta Clara, sect. 25. p. 53.

Bristow in 1542, was deprived of it for being married, in the beginning of the
Reign of Q Mary, and died in October.

New college was made Bishop of Bristow in the place of Bush beforementioned,
an. 1554. and died in fifteen hundred fifty and eight; under which year you may
see more of him among the writers. In the Sea of Bristow succeeded Rich.
Cheyney, which he held in Commendam with Gloucester, as I shall tell you anon
in Jam. Brokes, under the year 1559.

Mary Magd. coll. afterward a Cardinal, and elected twice to the Papacy, was
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury in the latter end of 1555. Archiepiscopal
See Matthew Parker, who was born in the City of Norwych 6. of Aug. 1504. Son of
Will. Parker, who died 16. of Jan. 1516. by Alice Monings his Wife, who died
20. of Sept. 1553. Which Will. Parker, who was an honest poor Man (as a
Schismatical The publisher of The life of the 70. Archb. of Canterb. Printed in
( Holland) 1574. in oct. p. 28. in marg.
writer tells you) and a scowrer or calender of worsteds in Norwych, was the
Son of John Parker, and he the Son and Heir of Nich. Parker a Notary Public of
the dioc. of Norwych, principal Registrary belonging to the Archb. of
Canterbury, and keeper of the Registers belonging to the Court thereof. As for
Matthew Parker, after he had been trained up in Grammar learning at home, he
was sent to the University of Cambridge at about 17 years of age; and being
placed in Corp. Chapter coll. became soon after one of the Bible-Clerks in the said
house. Afterward he took the degrees in Arts, was made Fellow thereof, took
holy Orders, and became a noted Preacher, not only in the University, but also
in other public places in the Kingdom. Whereupon his fame being spread abroad,
he was sent for to the Court, and made chaplain to Q. Anne about 1534. by whose
favor and endeavors he was soon after made Dean of Stoke near to Clare in
Suffolk, and some time after Prebendary of Ely. In 1538. he was made Doct. of
div. about which time by letters of commendation from the King, (to whom he was
chaplain,) he was elected Master of C. C. coll. beforementioned, now known by
the name of Bennet college; the Fellows of which, soon after, presented him to
the Rectory of Landbeach near to Cambridge. In 1545. he was Vicechanc. of the
said Univ. and in 1549. he took to Wife Margaret the daughter of Rob. Harleston
of Norfolk, (born 23. Jun. 1519.) by whom he had Issue, (1) Joh. Parker, born
5. May 1548. who married Joan daughter of Dr. Rich. Coxe B. of Ely. (2) Matthew
who died young; and thirdly, another Matthew, who married Frances dau. of W.
Barlow Bishop of B. and Wells, and afterward of Chichester, but this Matthew
dying 28. Jan. 1574. she was afterward married to Dr. Tob. Matthews Dean of
Durham, the same who was afterward Archb. of York. In 1548. the said Dr. M.
Parker was again elected Vicechanc. of Cambridge, and in 1552. he was made by
K. Edw. 6. (to whom he was chaplain) Dean of Lincoln in the place of Dr. Joh.
Tailor promoted to the Sea of Lincoln. But soon after, when Q. Mary came to the
Crown, losing all his spiritualities, because he was married, he retired in
private, and spent all her Reign within the house of one of his Friends. His
headship of C. C. coll. was thereupon bestowed on Dr. Laur. Mapted, and his
Deanery on Dr. Franc. Mallet, an. 1554. he being then Canon of Windsore,
Confessor to Q. Mary, and Master of Michael-house in Cambridge, of which
University he had before been at least twice Vicechancellour. This Mallet, by
the way it must be known, was the same person who translated into English,
Erasmus's Paraphrase on John, who dying in the latter end of December. 1570. had
for his Successor in that Deanery Dr. Joh. Whitgift, afterward Archb. of
Canterbury. When Q. Elizab. came to the Crown Dr. Parker, tho a married man
(for his Wife died not till 17. of August 1570.) was nominated to the Sea of
Canterbury, after several persons had refused it; whereupon being consecrated
thereunto in the Archb. chapel at Lambeth 17. of Dec. 1559. (after a Sermon,
invocation of the Holy Ghost, and celebration of the Eucharist had been
performed) by the laying on of the hands of three Bishops, viz. Will. Barlow B.
of B. and Wells, Joh. Scorey of Chichester, and Miles Coverdale of Exeter,
(assisted also by Joh. Hodgeskyn Suffragan Bishop of Bedford,) sat there with
great honor to the time of his death. He was a religious and a learned man,
and of modest manners and behavior. He was well read in English history, and a
diligent and curious collector of ancient Mss. that had been scattered at the
dissolution of Monasteries, which he gave to the coll. wherein he had been
educated. He is also reported to have been a person of great charity, a noted
benefactor to the public, and an eminent ornament to the places which gave him
birth and education. The chief book which he wrote and published (assisted
therein, as it is said, by his servant or chaplain Joh. Jostine) was that intit.
De antiquitate Britannicae Ecclesiae, and privilegiis Ecclesiae Cantuariensis,
cum Archiepiscopis ejusdem 70. Land. 1572-3. fol. Most of the copies of this
impression that were commonly fold, conclude with the life of Reynold Pole
Archb. of Canterbury, who died 1558. The other copies which remained, and were
to be bestowed on public Libraries, or else to be given to special Friends,
had in the year 1574, added to them, (1) The life of the author Matthew Parker,
containing 29 pages. (2) A catalogue of such books which he gave to the common
Library at Cambridge, containing 4 pages. (3) A cat of Chancellours,
Vicechancellours, Proctors of, and Doctors of all Faculties that took their
degrees in, Cambridge, from the year 1500. to 1571. containing 6 pages. Before
which catalogue are the Arms of every college and hall there, with the area or
platform of the common Schools, the Arms and Seal of the University, and Seal
of the Chancellor thereof. (4) A cat. from 1500 to 1571. of all the Bishops
that have been educated in Cambridge; among which have been diverse that have
been bred in Oxon, who have only taken one degree, and perhaps that neither,
there. (5) The titles of such Charters that have been granted to that
University by diverse Kings and Queens, from Hen. 3. to the 13. or 14. of Q.
Elizab. (6) An account of the particulars that are successively delivered to
the Magistrates and Servants of the said University, when they enter into their
respective places. (7) The foundation of each coll. and hall in Cambridge, with
the building of the public Schools, and an enumeration of the old hostles. All
which contained under this seventh head, were involved in the first book of the
History of the University of Cambridge, written by Dr. Jo. Cay, printed at
Land. 1574. in qu. As for the life of the said Matthew Parker, mentioned under
the first head, it was, as soon as it peeped into the World, translated into
English, under this title, The life of the 70tie. Archbishop of Canterbury,
presently sitting, Englished, etc. This number of seventy is so complete a
number, as it is great pity there should be one more, etc. Printed (in
Holland) in a Dutch character 1574. in oct. It was translated by a thro-paced
Separatist, with very vile notes added in the margin, endeavoring thereby to
bring an odium on the Archbishop, and make him ridiculous for erecting his
monument while he lived. At length paying his last debt to nature on the 17. of
May 1575. was buried in the chapel where he was consecrated; situate and being
within his Palace at Lambeth in Surrey. It must be now known that in the times
of usurpation, when the Bishops were put down and their lands sold, the said
Palace was inhabited by several Lay-persons, of whom Tho. Scot one of the
Regicides, and one Hardyng were two. Which last having the chapel allotted to
him, as part of his share, he divided it into two rooms, making the upper part
toward the east a dining room, on the bottom of which he laid joysts and on
them a floor of boards. At length, he hearing that the corpse of Archb. Parker
had been there interred, he took up the floor, and pavement under it; and
having so done, dug up the corpse, which was put into cerecloth of many doubles
in a coffin of lead. The coffin he sold to a Plummer, and after he had caused
the cerecloth to be cut open to the flesh, (which he found fresh, as if newly
dead,) he conveyed the corpse into an out-house where he kept Poultrey, and
there privately tumbled it into an hole. About the time of the restoration of
K. Chapter 2. that base fellow the Brute that removed it, was forced to discover
where he had laid it; whereupon it was brought into the chapel, and buried
just above the Litany-desk, near the steps ascending to the Altar.

Yorkshire, particularly, as I conceive, at Myrfield, where his Grandfather and
Father were buried, became when a young man a Black Friar of the Order of St.
Dominick, had his Academical education among those of his Order in Oxon, but
what degrees he took there, it scarcely appears, only, that in his travels to
Rome taking the degree of Doct. of div. at Ronmia, he was incorporated here
after his return in 1529. and soon after was made Prior of the Convent
belonging to the Black Friars in Oxon. In 1532. he was licensed to proceed in
divinity, (so says the same Register which told us that he was incorporated
Doctor in that faculty,) and in the Act celebrated the 8. of July the same
year, he did complete that degree by standing therein. Afterward, he was
chaplain to the Lady Mary, who, when Queen of England, nominating him by the
name of her chaplain to the Sea of Norwyck, upon the translation of Dr.
Thirlby, one of her Counselors, to Ely, he was thereupon elected, and having
the temporalities of that See Pat. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. p. 1.
restored to him 4. of Oct. 1554 safe there till the time of his death, which
happening about the latter end of fifteen hundred fifty and eight, In
Offic-praerog. Cant. in reg. Chayney. Qu. 62.
dated 24 of Aug. 1558. and proved 2. of Dec. 1559. he gave part of his study
of books to the Black Friars of Norwych, if they should be restored to their
Convent again, and another part to Norwyeh Church for a Library there. He also
gave 5 l. to buy ornaments for the Church of Myrfield beforementioned, several
things also to the Church of Leedes in Yorkshire, and a Legacy to Christop.
Hopton of that place Esque without naming him his Kinsman. I find one John
Hopton to be made Prior of Bridlyngton in Yorkshire, an. 1510. upon the death
of one John Ynglish, but what relation there was between him and the Bishop I
know not. This Prior died in 1521. and was succeeded by one Will. Brounflete.
About the 22. of June 1559. the Dean and Chapter of Norwych elected Dr. Rich.
Cox to succeed Dr. Hopton in the Chair there, as it appears in a certain Reg.
MS. p. 250.
Reg. or Ledger book of that Church, but the Queens mind being altered she
nominated him soon after Bishop of Ely.

CUTHBERT TONStALL, sometimes of Ball. coll. afterward of Cambridge, was
consecrated Bishop of London 19. of October. 1522. translated to Durham 25. of
Mar. 1530. Nov. in fifteen hundred fifty and nine, leaving then behind him the
character of a person of great reputation, and of very quiet behavior. See
more of him among the writers under that year. In the Sea of Durham succeeded
James Pilhyngton Bach. of div. born of a Knightly family at Rivyngton in the
Parish of Bolton in Lancashire, Son of Rich. Pilkyngton of Rivyngton Esquire was
educated in S. John's coll. in Cambridge, where he made proficiency in all kind
of learning, was much addicted to reformation, and therefore in the Reign of Q.
Mary, became an Exile in Foreign parts; but upon his return thence, being
elected to the Sea of Durham, was consecrated thereunto 2. of March 1560, and
thirteen days after had the temporalities thereof delivered Pat. 3. Elizab. p.
7.
to him. In the eighth year of Eliz. (he being then D. of D.) he erected a Free
School at Rivyngton, sub nomine and auspiciis R. Elizabethae, and endowed it
with lands and tenements to the yearly value of seven and twenty pounds,
fourteen shillings and ten pence. This worthy Bishop who was esteemed a learned
man and a profound Theologist of his time, has written, (1) An exposition on
Nehemiah. (2) Expos. on Aggeus and Abdias. Land. 1562. oct. (3) Of the causes
of the burning of Paul's Church, against a libel cast in the streets at
Westchester, an. 1561. Land. 1563. oct. etc. At length submitting to sat at
Bishops Aukland 23. January 1575. aged 55 years, was buried there for a time;
afterward taken up and re-buried in the Choire of the Cath. Church at Durham
on the 24. of May following, leaving then several Children behind him, begotten
on the body of his Wife Alice, of the Knightly family of the Kingsmylls in
Hampshire. Soon after was a tomb erected over his grave, whereon was insculp'd
a Mon^die made by Dr. Laur. Humphrey, beginning thus, Hic jacet Antistes
cradeli morte peremptus, and an Epicede by Joh. Fox the Martyriologist,
beginning Tantum te nostrae possint celebrare camenae; besides a large epitaph
in prose. Most, or all of which, has many years since, as I have been
informed, been defaced and obliterated. In the Sea of Durham succeeded Rich.
Barnes of Oxon, as I shall tell you hereafter.

MAURICE GRIFFYTH, or Griffyn a Welsh Dominican or Black Friar by Order, had
his Academical education for a time among those of his profession in their
house in the S. Suburb of Oxon, was admitted to the reading of the Sentences in
July 1532. by the name of Maurice Gryffyth, being, if I mistake not, the same
Maur. Gryxffyth who was admitted Bach. of Can. Law in February following.
Afterward he was Archdeacon of Rochester in the pl^ce of one Nich. Metcalf who
occurs Archdeacon of that place in 1536. and afterward being elected to the Sea of Rochester, upon the translation of Joh. Scory to Chichester, (which John
had been promoted to Rochester Pat. ^. Ed 6. p. 1.
propter singularem sacrarum literarum doctrinam,) was consecrated thereunto on
the first Fr. Godwin in Com. de praesul. Angl. int. Ep. Roff.
of Apr. and had restitution Pat. 1. Mar. p. 1.
made to him of the temporalities belonging thereunto on the 18. of the same
month, in the 1. and 2. of Phil. and Mary, dom. 1554. He ended his days either
in Nov. or Dec. in fifteen hundred fifty and nine, Magnus the Martyr near to
London Bridge. In the said See of Rochester succeeded one Edm. Guest or Gheest,
Bach. of div. Archdeacon of Canterbury, and sometimes Fellow of Kings coll. in
Cambridge, who being consecrated thereunto 21. Januar. 1559. received Pat. 2.
Eliz. p. 14.
the temporalities thereof 3. May following, and about that time was made
Almoner to the Queen. After his translation to Salisbury, followed Edm. Freke
Dean of Salisbury, of whom you may read more in the Fasti, under the year 1570.
And after him Dr. Joh. Piers of Oxon, as I shall tell you among these Bishops
under the year 1594. Upon his translation also to Salisbury succeeded in the
said See of Rochester Dr. Joh. Young born in Cheapside in London, educated in
Pembr. hall in Cambridge, of which he was Fellow, and afterward Master,
Minister of St. Giles Cripplegate, London, twice Vicech. of Cambridge,
Prebendary of Westminster, in the place of Dr. E. Freke promoted to the Sea of
Rochester, and 1572. which he kept in Commendam with his Bishopric till about
the time of his death. He died at Bromley in Kent 10. Apr. 1605. aged 71 years,
and was buried in the Church there on the 14. of May following. Soon after a
comely monument was put over his grave, with an inscription thereon: Wherein
it is said, that he was non minus varia doctrina, and prudentia, quam vitae
sanctimonia clarus, etc. He has extant An exposition (which some call a
Sermon) on Psalm. 131. Land. 1685. oct.

Welsh man born, became a Student in this University about the year 1515. took
the degrees in the Civ. and Can. Law, that of Doctor being completed in an Act
celebrated 17. Jul. 1525. and soon after he became Principal of an ancient
Hostle for Civilians (wherein probably he had been educated) called S. Edwards
hall, near to the Canon Law Schools, situated sometimes in the Parish of S.
Edward, and near to the Church thereof. Afterward he being esteemed a most
admirable Civilian and Canonist, he was for several years the constant
Moderator of all those that performed exercise for their degrees in the Civil
Law, in the School or Schools pertaining to that Faculty, situated also in the
same Parish. Which Schools, Hall, and Church, have been time out of mind gone to
ruin, and the ruins themselves ruined. In 1553. (^^. Mariae) he was elected
Bish. of S. David, upon the deprivation of Rob. Ferrar, which was as it seems
in Nov. the same year; and being consecrated thereunto, had the temporalities
thereof restored to him Pat. 1. Mar. p. 1.
on the 23. of Apr. 1554. In that See he sat till after Q. Elizabeth came to
the Crown, and then being deprived about Midsomer, an. 1559. Elizab.) retired
among his Friends and died a devoted Son to the Church of Rome on the 23. of
December. following. Of whose death hear I pray what Joh. Fox In his book of Acts
and Mon. of the church, under the year 1558.
says in this manner. -- Morgan Bishop of S. David's who sat upon the
condemnation of the blessed Martyr Bish. Ferrar, and unjustly usurped his room,
was not long after stricken by Gods hand, after such a strange sort that his
meat would not go down, but rise and pyck up again, sometimes at his mouth,
sometimes blown out of his nose, most horribly to behold, and so he continued
till his death. Thus Fox, followed by Tho. Beard in his Theater In lib. 1. cap.
13.
of Gods judgments. But where, or when his death happened, they tell us not, nor
any author hitherto, only when, which B. Godwin mentions. Now therefore be
pleased to know that the said Bishop Morgan retiring after his deprivation to,
and near, Oxon, where he had several relations and acquaintance living,
particularly the Owens of Godstow in the Parish of Wolvercote, near to the said
City, did spend the little remainder of his life in great devotion at Godstow,
but that he died in the condition which Fox mentions, there is no tradition
among the inhabitants of Wolvercote. True it is, that I have heard some
discourse many years ago from some of the Ancients of that place, that a
certain Bishop did live for some time, and exercised his charity and religious
counsel, among them, and there died, but I could never learn any thing of them
of the manner of his death, which being miserable, as Jo. Fox says, methinks
that they should have a tradition of it, as well as of the man himself, but I
say there is now none, nor was there any 30 years ago among the most aged
persons then living at that place, and therefore whether there be any thing of
truth in it may be justly doubted, and especially for this reason, that in the
very same chapter and leaf containing the severe punishment upon Persecutors of
Gods people, he has committed a most egregious falsity, in reporting that one
Grimwood of Higham in Suffolk died in a miserable manner for swearing and
bearing false witness against one Joh. Cooper a Carpenter of Watsam in the same
County, for which he lost his life. The miserable death of the said Grimwood
was as J. Fox says, thus, that when he was in his labor staking up a goffe of
Corn, having his health and fearing no peril, suddenly his bowels fell out of
his body and immediately most miserably he died. Now so it sell out, that in
the reign of Q. Elizabeth one Prit became Parson of the Parish where the said
Grimwood dwelt, and Preaching against perjury, being not acquainted with his
Parishioners, cited the said story of Fox, and it happening that Grimwood being
then alive, and in the said Church, he brought an action upon the case against
the Parson, but Judge Anderson, who sat at the Assizes in the County of
Suffolk, did adjudge it not maintainable, because it was not spoken
maliciously. Pray see in the Abridgment of many cases and resolutions, of the
Common Law, written by Judge Henry Rolls, p. 87. sect. 5. tit. Action sur case.
But to return; as for our Bishop Hen. Morgan, who died in Godstow house, then
owned by Rich. Owen, did by his last In Offic. Praerog. Cant. (...)
Will and Testam dated in December. 1559. and proved 24. of January following,
bequeath his body to be buried in the Church of Olvercot or Wolvercot, to which
he gave six shillings and eight pence: Also to two Masters of Arts of Oxon to
pray for his Friends Souls, (of which Edw. Pennant Parson of Stanlake near Oxon
was one,) four pounds yearly during the term of five years; to Mary Owen his
Chymere of Scarlet, to Morgan Philips of Oriel coll. several Legacies, besides
the bestowing of his books, etc. By which Will it appears that he did not die
in a mean condition, that he was not senseless, affrighted, or any way
perturbed.

JOHN WHITE, sometimes Fellow of New coll. Lincoln in the beginning of 1554.
translated thence to Wynchester in 1557. and died in January in fifteen hundred
fifty and nine; Winchester succeeded Dr. Rob. Horn of Cambridge, reported by a
certain Math. Parker at the end of Antiq. Eccre^. B^tan. published 15^2-^. in
the life of Ma. Parker, p. 9.
author to be a man of a great mind and profound ingenie, and no less sagacious
in detecting the crafts of his adversaries, than prudent in preventing and
avoiding them. He was also a frequent Preacher, and an excellent Disputant, and
wrote in the mother tongue, an answer to Joh. F^kenhams scruples concerning the
Oath of Supremacy, as I have told you among the writers under the year 1585. He
gave way to fate in 1579. leaving this character behind him, given by one Anon.
in the Ancient (...) and monuments of the Monast. and Cath. Chapter of Durha^.
Land. 1672. in oct. p. 122.
belonging to the Church of Durham, who (speaking of his demolishing several
ancient monuments of that Church, while Dean thereof) tells us, that he could
never abide any ancient monuments, acts, or deeds, that gave any light of, or
to godly religion.

JAMES BROKES, sometimes Fellow of Corp. coll. was consecrated Bishop of
Gloucester about the beginning of the year 1554. and died about the beginning
of Febr. 1559-60.
in fifteen hundred fifty and nine; under which year you may see more of him
among the writers. In the said See of Gloc. succeeded Rich. Chey^^^ Bach. of
Div. of Pembr. hall in Cambridge, who being elected thereunto, had restitution
made Pat. 4. Elizab. p. 10.
to him of the temporalities belonging to it, on the 15. of Apr. 1562. and had
at the same time liberty allowed to him to keep Bristow in Commendam. In the
reign of K. Ed. 6. he was Archdeacon of Hereford, and dignified elsewhere. In
Q. Mary's time he was deprived of his spiritualities for being more addicted to
the opinions of Luther than he ought. In the beginning of the reign of Q.
Elizab. an. 1560. he was made by her the first Canon of the fourth Stall or
Prebendship in the collegiate Church of S. Peter within the City of
Westminster: Which dignity he keeping till 1562. was then succeeded by one
Rich. Morley. After he had sat Bish. of Glouc. three years, he was
incorporated D. of D. of this University, as he had stood in Cambridge. One of
his Successors in the Sea of Glouc. named Godf. Goodman does wonder In his
Review of the Court of K. James, written by Sir A. W. -- MS. p. 89.
why his Master Will. Camden should say that the said Rich. Cheyney was Luthero
addictissimus, whereas it was certain that he was a Papist, and bred up his
servants Papists, as he had been informed by one of them, with whom he had
spoken. He tells us also that it does appear upon record in the Arches, that he
was suspended for Popery, and died so suspended, and never would make any
recantation. He was buried in his Cath. Chapter of Gloucester, but whether ever any
monument was put over his grave, I know not.

Owen Ogelthorp of Newton-Kime in Yorkshire, Son of John Ogelthorp of Ogelthorp
in the said County, was born at Newton-Kyme beforementioned near to Tadcaster,
admitted Fellow of Magd. coll. about 1526. and in 29. he proceeded in Arts,
being about that time in holy Orders. In 1533. he was Proctor of the
University, and on the 21. of Feb. 35. he was elected President of his coll.
having a few days before taken the degrees in Divinity. About that time he was
constituted one of the Canons of the coll. at Oxon founded by K. Hen. 8. on
that of Cardinal Wolsey; in the year 1540 he was made Canon of Windsore in the
place of Will. Tate LL. D. deceased, and in 1544. he was presented to the
Church of S. Olave in Southwark. In 1551. he did undergo with great honor the
Vicechancellourship of this University, and in 1553. Oct. 31. he being then
Rector of Newyngton and Haseley in the Dioc. of Oxon, was elected again
President of the said coll. (having resigned that place about an year before to
make room for Dr. Walt. Haddon) and in the same year he was made Dean of
Windsore. In 1554 he Pat. 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. p. 14.
was constituted Registrary of the most Noble Order of the Garter, to execute
it by himself, or a sufficient deputy, with the fee of 50 l. per an. allowed
him for it. Which office he kept, while he was Bishop of Carlisle, during the
time that Dr. Hugh Weston his Successor was Dean of Windsore. About the month
of Apr. 1556. he was consecrated Bishop of Carlisle, and in the latter end of
1558. when Heath Archb. of York, and all the rest of the Bishops refused to
Crown Q. Elizabeth, (the Sea of Canterb. being then void,) he, with much ado,
was obtained to set the Crown on her head. For which fact, when he saw the
issue of that matter, and both himself and all the rast of his Sacred Order
deprived, and the Churches holy Laws and Faith, against the conditions of her
consecration and acceptance into that Royal Room, violated; he sore repented
him all the days of his life, which were for that special cause, both short and
wearisome afterward unto him. Thus Dr. Will. Allen in his Answer Printed
beyond the Yeas about 1583. in oct p. 51. 52
to the Libel, intit. The execution of justice in England. The said Dr.
Ogelthorp was deprived of his Bishopric about Midsomer in the year 1559. and
about the beginning of the next year died suddenly of an Apoplexy; Tadcaster
beforementioned a Free School and Hospital dedicated to our Savior Jesus
Christ, called, The School and Hospital of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ of
Tadcaster. The School is endowed with 40 l. per an. and the Hospital with
revenues for 12 poor People, each to have one shilling every week. In the
beginning of Chapter 1. there were but six in pay; how many now I know not. The
said Bishop built a fair house in Headley upon Bramham in Yorkshire, where
there is a memory by verses and his Arms, over the door, I think, yet
remaining. After his deprivation and death, Bernard Gilpin the northern Apostle
was designed to succeed him in Carlil^, but vhe refusing, tho much pressed to
it, the Bishopric was conferred on one Joh. Best a learned and pious man.

Oxfordshire man born, was admitted Scholar of C. C. coll. 1. June 1522. and
the year following Bach. of Arts. Which degree being completed by
Determination, he went to Paris, where he was made Master of Arts, and at his
return Archdeacon of Winchester, on the resignation of Joh. Fox, in 1526. In
1528 he resigned that dignity, being that year made Archd. of Lincoln upon the
death of Will. Smyth Doctor of decrees. By which title, as also that of Bach.
of Arts of this University and Master of Paris, he supplicated on the 17. Jan.
1530. that he might not be bound to be present at Exequies in S. Mary's Church;
which shows that he was not then incorporated. Afterward he was employed in
several Embassies, and in 1534. I find him resident in the Emperors Court, and
there again in 1540. in which year wss a passport made for him by Secretary
Cromwell to Calais, in order to reside with the Emperor, as Ambassador for the
K. of England. In which passport he is styled, Dr. Rich. Pates Archdeacon of
Lincoln. In 1542. he was attained of High Treason; whereupon his Archdeaconry
was bestowed on George Heneage, and his Prebendship of East-Harptre in the
Church of Wells on Joh. Heryng LL. D. In the year 1554. he being preferred by
Q. Mary to the Episcopal See of Worcester, had restitution Pat. 1. and 2: Ph.
and Mar. p. 1.
made to him (by the name of Rich. Pate only) of the temporalities belonging
thereunto, 5. March the same year, at which time Hooper his Predecessor had
been dead about 3 weeks. After Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown, he was not
imprisoned in the Tower of London as Jo. Fox In his book of Acts and mon. of
the c^. an. 1559.
says, but being deprived, he went beyond the Seas, sat in the Council of
Trent, (uninvited as one Laur. Humfredus in Vitae and mort. Jc. Juelli. edit.
1573. p. 179.
says,) as he had done before, Clar^ 1562.
and whether he died there, or at Rome, I cannot tell. He was a learned man, of
a peaceable disposition, zealous in the Faith he professed, yet always against
inflicting corporal punishments on such that were opposite in Religion to him.
In the said See of Worcester succeeded Edwin Sandys Son of Will. Sandys of
Furnes in Lancashire, Justice of the Peace, and the Kings Receiver of that
County, by Margaret his Wife, Daughter of Joh. Dixon of London. To which See
being elected upon Pates his deprivation by the name and title of Edwin Sands
Capellanus regius and SS. Thol. Professor, had restitution made to him Pat. 2.
Elizab. p. 14.
of the temporalities belonging to it 23. March 2. Elizab. dom. 1559.

JAMES TURBERVYLE, a younger Son of Joh. Turbervyle, son and heir of Richard,
second son of William, first son of Sir Robert Turbervyle of Bear and Anderston
in Dorsetshire Knight, (who died 6. Aug. 1424.) by Margaret his Wife, of the
Family of the Carews, Barons, was born at Bear beforementioned, which is now a
little Market Town in the said County, educated in Wykchams School near
Winchester, admitted true and perpetual Fellow of New coll. in 1514. took the
degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed in an Act celebrated in July
1520. and on the 8. of March following was elected the public Scribe or
Registrary of the University, on the resignation of Tho. Fykes M. A. and Fellow
of the said coll. In 1529. he left his Fellowship, which he kept with his
Scribes place, being then promoted to an Ecclesiastical Benefice, as he was
soon after to a Dignity; and taking the degree of Doct. of Div. in another
University, was incorporated here in 1532. In 1555. he being then Preb. of
Winchester, and elected to the Episcopal See of Exeter on the death of Joh.
Harman, was consecrated thereunto in St. Paul's Cath. Chapter in London (with Will.
Glynn to Bangor) on the eighth day of Sept. the same year, and on the 21. of
the said month had the temporalities of the said See delivered Pat. 2. and 3.
Pb. and Mar. p. 1.
to him, and there sat with due commendations for about four years. In 1559.
(2. Elib.) he was deprived of his Bishopric for denying the Queens Supremacy
over the Church, Clar. 1562.
and afterward lived a private life says Joh. Vowell alias Hooker in his Cat.
of the Bishops of Exeter, in the 3 vol. of Holinsheds chron. p. 1309. b.
one, and another The author of The execution of justice in England, etc.
printed 1583. in oct.
that he lived at his own liberty to the end of his life, adding that he was an
honest Gentleman, but a simple Bishop, and a third Fr. Godwin in C^m. de
Praesul. Angl. edit. 1616 p. 476.
that he lived a private life many years and died in great liberty. But at
length a fourth person, who comes lagg, as having lately appeared in print, I
mean Richard Izack then Chamberlain of Exeter tells us in his Antiquities
Printed at Land. 1677. in oct. in the Cat. of the Bishops of Exeter, in the
beginning of the book number. 34.
of the City of Exeter (full of mistakes) that he died on the first of Nov.
1559. and in another Ibid. p. 127.
place in the said book, that after his deprivation he lived a private life.

Benedictine Monk of Westminster, received his Academical education in
Gloucester coll. in the N. W. Suburb of Oxon, in an apartment therein built for
such young Monks of Westminster that were designed for the University. In 1525.
he was admitted to the reading of the sentences, having a little before opposed
in divinity in the School of that faculty, and in the year following he occurs
by the name and tit. of Anth. Dunstan Prior of the Students of Gloc. coll.
beforementioned. In 1538. he proceeded in divinity, being then Abbat of the
Benedictine Monks of Einsham near to, and in the County of, Oxon, and in 1545.
he by the name and title of Anthony Kechyn the Kings Chaplain and Bishop elect
of Landaff, received Pat. 37. Hen. 8. p. 5.
the temporalities belonging thereunto, on the 8. of May the same year, being
then about 68 years of age. He is much blamed by one of his Fr. Godwin ut sup.
p. 641.
successors in the Sea of Landaff for impoverishing his Bishopric, accounted
by some to have been before his time one of the best in England, and since to
be the worst. He gave way to fate 31. Oct. in fifteen hundred sixty and three,
Matherne (where the Bishop of Landaff has a Palace) in Monmouthshire, after he
had gone through several changes of times, and had taken the Oath of Q.
Elizabeth's Supremacy over the Church of England, which no Popish Bishop in the
beginning of her reign did besides this man.

Anglesey, mostly educated in Academical learning in S. Edwards hall, a noted
place for Civilians, sometimes situated near S. Edwards Church, became
Principal, while he was Bachelaur of the Civil Law, of New Inn, afterward
Doctor of his faculty, Chancellor of the Church of S. David, Canon
residentiary thereof in the time of K. Ed. 6. being then one of the persons
that drew up Articles against Rob. Ferrar Bishop of that place, and at length
Bishop of Bangor: to which See being elected, and consecrated an. 1559. aged 54
years, received Pat. 2. Elizab. p. 14.
the temporalities belonging thereunto 21. of March the same year. He died in
the beginning of the year fifteen hundred sixty and six, Bangor, under that
place, where the Table stood in the time of Communion. Over his grave was an
inscription afterward put, the contents of which, I know not as yet. He left
behind him a Son named Gelly Merick of Hascard in Pembrokshire, afterward a
Knight and a great Favorite of that most popular and generous Count Robert
Earl of Essex; in whose treasons having been deeply engaged, suffered death at
Tybourne in the beginning of the year 1601. In the Sea of Bangor succeeded Dr.
Merick, one Nich. Robinson a Welsh man and D. D. of Cambridge, who after he had
suffered calamities for the Protestant cause in the reign of Q. Mary, became,
after her death, domestic Chaplain to Matthew Archb. of Canterbury, and
dignified -- Vir fuit prudens (as it is In fine lib. De entiq. Eccles. Britan.
-- Edit. 1572. 2. in Matheo, page 14.
said of him) and illis humanioribus literis atque Theologia non minus
excultus, quam latina patriaque lingua facundus, etc. He died in the summer
time, an. 1584. leaving then behind him a Widow named Jane Robinson alias
Brereton, and several Sons. After him followed Dr. Hugh Bellot of Cambridge,
who was consecrated Bishop of Bangor 25. Jan. 1584.

John Young of Pembrokshire by Elianor his Wife, was born in that County, became
a Student in the Univ. of Oxon (in Broadgates hall as it seems) about the year
1528. where applying his muse to the study of the Civil Law, took a degree in
that faculty nine years after, being then in sacred Orders. In 1542. he was
made principal of the said hall, and soonafter Chantor and Canon of S. David's;
where, being much scandalized at the unworthy actions of Rob. Ferrar Bishop of
that place, did, with others, draw up articles against him; which being proved
before the Kings Commissioners, the said Bishop was imprisoned in the time of
K. Ed. 6. In the reign of Q. Mary, Th. Young fled from the nation for religion
sake, and remained in Germany in an obscure condition during her time. But when
Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown, and H. Morgan another accuser of Rob. Ferrar,
had been deprived of his Bishopric of S. David's, the said Young was designed to
succeed him. Whereupon being consecrated Godwin. ut supr. int. Episc. Meneo. p.
616.
thereunto 21. January 1559. aged 52 years, or thereabouts, the temporalities
of the said See were delivered Pat. 2. Elizab. p. 14.
to him on the 23. of March following. Where sitting till Feb. 1560. was then
translated to York, and about the same time was made President of the Queens
Council in the north parts of England. In Feb. 1564. he was actually created
Doctor of the Civil Law, and dying on the 26. June, in fifteen hundred sixty
and eight, York. Over his grave was soon after laid a marble stone, with this
Epitaph on it. Thomas Yongus nuper Eboracensis Archiepiscopus, Civilis juris
Doctor peritissimus, quem propter gravitatem, summum ingenium, eximiam
prudentiam, excellentemque rerum politicarum scientiam, illustrissima Regina
septentionalibus hujus regni partibus Praesidem constituit, quo magistratu
quinque annos perfunctus est. Sedit Archiepiscopus annos septem, and sex
menses. Obiit Vicessimo sexto die mensis Junii, an. 1568. He had taken to Wife
in his elderly years one Jane daughter of Thom. Kynaston of Estwick in
Shropshire, by whom he had issue George Young, afterward a Knight, living in
York 1612. for whose sake, the father, being covetous of wealth, pulled down a
goodly hall belonging to him as Archbishop, for the greediness of the lead (as
it is said) that covered it. Concerning which matter there is a large story
extant, related by an Sir Jo. Harrington in his Brief view of the state of the
Chapter of Engl. etc. p. 171.
author who was no friend to married Bishops.

DAVID POLE or Poole of noble race, as it Allsouls coll. in 1520. took the
degrees of Civ. and Can. Law, that of Doctor being completed in 1527. at which
time being Archdeacon of Salop, he was much in esteem for his great
sufficiencies in those Laws. Afterward he was made Dean of the Arches,
Archdeacon of Derby, and Chancellor of the diocese of Lichf. and Coventry. At
length, upon the death of Joh. Chambers, being nominated to the Sea of
Peterborough, was consecrated thereunto Ibid. in Godwin, inc. ep. Peterb. p.
594.
on the 15. Aug. 1557. and on the 28. of January following had the
temporalities thereof delivered Pat. 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. p. 1:
to him. In 1559. about the time of Midsummer, he was deprived of his
Bishopric, for denying the Queens supremacy, being then esteemed a grave
person and a very quiet subject. Whereupon being committed to custody for a
time, was soon after set at liberty, and Principis beneficio (as one Lanc.
Andrews in Tortura Torti, etc. p. 146.
tells us) in agro suo matura aetate decessit. He gave way to fate in the
latter end of May, or beginning of June, Paul's Cathedral in London, or where
buried I cannot tell. All his books of Law and Divinity, which were then at
London and Peterborough, he gave to the Library of Allsoules coll. In the said
See of Peterborough succeeded Edm. Scambler Bach. (afterward Doct.) of div. a
native of Gressingham in Lancashire, and Chaplain to Matthew Archb. of
Canterbury, to which being consecrated 16. Jan. 1560. held in commendam with it
the Prebendship of Wistow in the Church of York, and the first Canonry in the
sixth stall in the Church of Westminster for the space of two, or more, years.
He was a learned man, a zealous enemy against the Papists, yet an impairer of
the honor, privileges, Sim. Gunton in his History of the Church of
Peterborough, printed at Land. in fol. 1686. p. 73.
and revenues of the Bishopric of Peterborough. After his translation to
Norwych succeeded in Peterborough Dr. Rich. Howland Master of S. John's coll. in
Cambridge, who dying in 1600. was succeeded in the said See by Tho. Dove D. D.
and Dean of Norwych, sometimes of Pembroke hall in Cambridge, and one of the
first Scholars of Jesus coll. in Oxon, to which See Q. Elizab. (to whom he was
Chapl. in Ordinary) preferred him for his excellency in Preaching, and reverend
aspect and deportment. He dyed 30. Aug. 1630. aged 75 years, and was buried in
the north Isle of the Cath. Chapter of Peterborough: over whose grave was a comely
monument erected, with a large inscription thereon, but levelled with the ground
by the Rebels, in 1643. He left behind him a son named Thomas, who occurs
Archdeacon of Northampton 1618. having succeeded in that dignity, if I mistake
not, Dr. Joh. Buckridge. In the Sea of Peterborough succeeded Dr. Aug. Lindsell
Rector of Houghton in the Spring in the County Pal. of Durham, who, after he
was elected to it, had restitution Pat. 8. Car. 1. p. 13.
made of the temporalities belonging thereunto on the 20. of Feb. 1632. But
being translated thence to Hereford (in Dec.) 1633. succeeded Franc. Dee D. D.
who being elected to the said See of Peterborough, had the temporalities
thereof Pat. 10. Car. 1. p. 10.
given to him 7. June 1634. See more of him in the Fasti under the year 1603.

Canon Regular, was first made Bishop of S. Asaph, afterward of B. and Wells;
and at length of Chichester. He died in fifteen hundred sixty and eight,
Chichester succeeded Rich. Curteis or Coortesse a Lincolnshire man born, and
Doctor of Divinity, (sometimes Fellow of S. John's coll. in, and Proctor of the
University of, Cambridge, and afterward Chaplain to Matthew Archb. of
Canterbury) who was consecrated at Canterbury gratis, or without reward or
fees, on the feast of the holy Trinity, an. 1570. he being then 48 years of
age. The said Dr. Coortesse has written, (1) An exposition of certain words of
S. Paul to the Romans intit. by an old writer Hugo, A treatise of the work of
three days. Land. 1577. oct. (2) Two Sermons, one at Paul's Cross, and another
at Westminster, an 1576. the first on Apocal. 12. the first nine verses, and
the other on Acts 20. 28, 29, 30, 31. Both printed at Land. 1584. oct. (3)
Sermon. at Greenwich 1573. on Ecclesiastices 12. the first seven verses, Land.
1586. oct. (4) Sermon. at Richmond 1575. on Judges 1. the first 13 verses. Land.
in oct. and other things, as'tis probable. Quaere. In the Sea of Chichester
succeeded him Tho. Bickley, whom I shall mention at large among these Bishops
under the year 1596.

Coren, was descended from an ancient Family of his name in Westmorland, but
whether born in that County I cannot tell, became a Student in this University
in one of the Inns or Hostles frequented by Civilians and Canonists, or in
Brasnose coll. (or both successively,) about 1521. took one degree in Arts,
holy Orders, and some years after was made one of the Chaplains to K. Hen. 8.
In 1532. he proceeded in the Civil Law, and about that time was a great
promoter of the Kings marriage with Anna Bulleyn. In 1533. when Friar Peto
(afterward a Cardinal) had inveighed much against it in his Sermon, or
Sermons, before the King at Greenwich, Dr. Curwyn the next Sunday following
happened to Preach there, at which time he spoke as much for the marriage, as
Peto had against it, uttering there several things against it, and wondered why
a subject should behave himself so audacious as he did before the Kings face,
etc. After this he was preferred to the Deanery of Hereford, where he continued
all K. Edwards time. At length when Q. Mary succeeded (to whom he was Chaplain)
she nominated him Archbishop of Dublin: Whereupon being consecrated thereunto
in S. Paul's Cathedral at London 8. Sept. 1555. he was in few days after
designed Jac. Waraeus in Com. de praesul. Hibern. edu. 1665. p. 120.
by the said Queen (then at Greenwich) Chancellor of the Kingdom of Ireland.
In 1567. he supplicated Q. Elizabeth to have the Bishopric of Oxford conferred
upon him, being desirous to spend the remainder of his days in peace. So that
soon after being elected thereunto by the Dean and Chapter of Chapter Chapter in Oxon,
the Queen Pat. 9. Elizab. p. 2.
consented to the election on the eighth of October. and gave Pat. 10. Elizab. p.
10.
him the temporalities belonging to that See 3. of December. following, the same
year. About that time he settled at Swinbroke near to Burford in Oxfordshire,
(having then no House or Palace belonging to his See,) where dying in the
latter end of October, was buried in the Parish Church of that place on the
first of Nov. Rich. Coren a Lancashire man born, who was admitted Scholar of
Corp. Chapter coll. in 1519. and afterward taking the degrees in Arts and one in
divinity, was made Canon of the first foundation of the college of K. Hen. 8.
at Oxon, and when Doctor of his Faculty, Archdeacon of the diocese of Oxon,
1534. and about that time Canon of the Kings Chapel of S. Stephen within the
Palace of Westminster. This I thought fit to let the Reader know, that each
person might have his right, that is, that the Archdeaconry of Oxon, might be
entitled on Dr. Rich. Coren, and not on Dr. Hugh, which most authors that
occasionally mention him, do tell you.

EDMUND BONNER, sometimes a Student in Broadgates hall, became Bishop of
Hereford toward the latter end of the year 1538. but before he was consecrated
thereunto, he was translated to London: To which See he was consecrated in the
beginning of Apr. 1540. Hereford succeeded him Jo. Skypp, and in London Nich.
Ridley in the reign of Ed. 6. at which time Bonner was deprived, and Edm.
Grindall in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth, when the said Bonner was deprived a
second time.

GILBERT BOURN, son of Philip Bourn of Worcester. cestershire, became a Student in
this University, in 1524* Fellow of Allsouls coll. in 1531. and in the year
after he proceeded in Arts, being then esteemed a good Orator and disputant. In
the 33. Hen. 8. Dom. 1541. he was made one of the first Prebendaries of
Worcester, after the said King had converted the Prior and Monks of that place
into a Dean and Prebendaries; and two years after was admitted to the reading
of the Sentences, that is to the degree of Bach. of div. which was the highest
degree (as it appears in the register of that time) that he took in this
University. About that time he became Chaplain to Bishop Bonner, and a Preacher
against the Heretics of the times, In 1549. he closed so much with the
reformation then on foot, that he became Archdeacon of Bedford on the death of
Dr. Joh. Chamber, being also then, or about that time, Archdeacon of Essex and
Middlesex and Canon of S. Paul's Cath. Chapter but whether he kept the said
dignities altogether, I cannot tell. In the beginning of Q. Mary, he turned
about, and became so zealous for the Romans Catholic cause, that preaching at
Paul's cross in the behalf of the said Bonner then present, against his late
unjust sufferings, and against the unhappy times of King Edw. 6. as he called
them, had a dagger thrown at him by one of the auditors: Whereupon Bourn
withdrawing himself to prevent farther danger, the work was carried on by
another, and search being made after the Assissinate, certain persons were
imprisoned for it. In the year 1554. Sir Joh. Bourn of Batenhall in
Worcestershire, Uncle to the said Gilb. Bourne, being then Principal Secretary
of State to Q. Mary, the said Gilb. was elected to the Sea of Bathe and Wells,
upon the free resignation, as it is In p. 1. Mar. p: 1.
said, of D. Will. Barlow: Whereupon he had the temporalities thereof given to
him 20. of April the same year, at which time Barlow fled into Germany upon
account of Religion. Soon after Gilb. Bourn was made President of Wales, and
was in great favor during the reign of Q. Mary, but when Q. Elizab. succeeded,
he was deprived of his bishopric for denying her Supremacy, notwithstanding he
had done many good offices for his Cath. Church, and had been a benefactor
thereunto. Afterward, he being committed to free custody with the Dean of
Exeter, he gave himself up wholly to reading and devotion. At length dying at
Silverton in Devenshire, 10. Sept. Ibid. in Godwin ut supr. int. ep. B. and.
Wells. p. 4.
in fifteen hundred sixty and nine, 156^.
was buried in the Parish Church there, on the south side of the Altar,
bequeathing then what he had, to his brother Rich. Bourn of Wyvelscomb in
Somersetsh. Father of Gilb. Bourn of the City of Wells. In the Sea of Wells did
not succeed Will. Barlow, who returned from his exile in the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth, as 'twas expected, but Gilb. Berkley D. of div. a Lincolnshire man
born, and a descendant from the Noble Family of the Berkleys.

WILLIAM ALLEY, sometimes a Student in Exeter in July 1560. where sitting about
10 years, died in the beginning of fifteen hundred and seventy. Will.
Bradbridge, as I shall hereafter tell you.

Yorkshire man born, was originally of this University, and afterward was
dignified in the Church of Wells and elsewhere, but leaving all in the
beginning of Q. Mary for Religion sake, lived obscurely, and as occasion
served. At length after Q. Elizab. came to the Crown, he being then Bach. of
Divinity, was consecrated Bishop of Carlisle (in the place of Owen Ogelthorp
deprived) on the second of March, in fifteen hundred and sixty, aged 48 years:
the temporalities whereof were given Pat. 3. Elizab. p. 9.
to him by the Queen on the 18. of Apr. following, and in 1566. he was actually
created Doct. of divinity. May Fr. Godwin ut sup. inter Episc. Carleol. p. 153.
in fifteen hundred and seventy, and was buried in the Cath. Chapter of Carlisle. In
1533. one Joh. Best was admitted to inform in Grammar, as I shall further tell
you in the Fasti under that year, and in 1558. one Joh. Best was elected into a
Founders fellowship of University coll. from that of Lincoln. What relation
this last had to the Bishop I know not, nor do I know yet to the contrary, but
that Jo. Best the Grammarian, was afterward the same who was Bishop.

Stanleys Earls of Derby, and after he had spent some time in this, and another
University beyond the Seas, returned to his native country of Lancashire,
became Rector of Winwick and Wygan therein, as also of Badsworth in the diocese
of York, and dignified in the Church. At length upon the vacancy of the Sea of
the Isle of Man, he was made Bishop thereof, but when, I cannot justly say,
because he seems to have been Bishop in the beginning of K. Ed. 6. and was
really Bishop of that place after the death of Dr. Man, whom I have before
mentioned, under the year 1556. This Thom. Stanley paid his last debt to nature
in the latter end of fifteen hundred and seventy, 157^.
having had the character, when young, of a tolerable Poet of his time, and was
succeeded in the Sea of Man by one John Salisbury, whom I shall mention anon.

Merton coll. afterward Scholar and Fellow of that of Corp. Christi, was
nominated Bishop of Salisbury by Q. Elizabeth. To which See being elected by
the Dean and Chapter of that place, she gave her consent Pat. 2. Elizab. p. 11.
to it 27 Dec. 1559. He departed this mortal life in fifteen hundred seventy
and one, Salisbury succeeded Edm Gheast Son of Thom. Gheast of the family of
the Gheasts of Rough heath in Worcestershire; which Edmund was born, as a
certain Thom. Hatcher in his MS. Catalogue of the Provosts, Fell. and Schol. of
Kings coll. in Cambridge, under the year 1536.
writer says, at Afferton in Yorkshire; and dying 28. of Feb. in 1576. was
buried in the Cath. Chapter of Salisbury.

Denbighshire, but the Town or County which gave him his first breath I cannot
yet learn. This person after he had studied some years in this University, but
more in another, entered into the Sacred Function, and being beneficed and
dignified in the Church, was made Suffragan Bishop of Th^tford in Norfolk, but
the year when I cannot tell, and in 1540. Dean of Norwych in the place of Will.
Castleton, who, having been the last Prior of the Black Moaks there, was made
the first Dean of the Cath. Chapter in 1539. But Salisbury being outed of his
Deanery, for what cause I know not, in the first year of Q. Mary, Dr. John
Christopherson was installed in that dignity 18. of Apr. 1554. and soon after
became Bishop of Chichester. On the 4. of Dec. following the said Salisbury was
installed Chancellor of the Church of Lincoln, in the place of Joh. Pope who
had then lately obtained the Archdeaconry of Bedford. In 1560. he was restored
to his Deanery upon the deprivation of Dr. Joh. Harpesfield, and in the
beginning of the year 1571. being made Bishop of the Isle of Man, was confirmed
in that See on the seventh of Apr. the same year; at which time he had liberty
given him to keep the Deanery of Norwych in Commendam with it. He concluded his
last day about the latter end of September. in fifteen hundred seventy and three,
and was, Norwych. In the said Deanery succeeded George Gardener D. D. installed
therein 24. of Dec. 1573. and in the Sea of Man one Joh. Merick, as I suppose,
of whom I shall make farther mention under the year 1599.

HUGH JONES a Welsh man born, but in what New Inn, I know not, was admitted
Bach. of the Civil law by the name of Hugo Jonys Capellanus, in 1541.
Afterward he was beneficed and dignified in his own Country, and in the Reign
of Q. Mary, an 1556. became Vicar of Banwell in the dioc. of Wells. In the year
1566. he was consecrated at Lambeth to the much impoverished See of Landaff;,
and on the sixth day of May the same year, the temporalities of that See were
restored Pat. 8. Eliz. p* 9*
to him. He was buried in the Church of Mathern in Monmouthshire 15. of Nov. in
fifteen Anne Jones alias Henson and several daughters. In Landaff succeeded
William Blethin another Welsh man, of whom I shall make large mention hereafter.

JOHN PARKHURST, sometimes Fellow of Merton college, became Bishop of Norwych
in 1560. and died toward the latter end of fifteen hundred seventy and four;
Edm. Freke, elected by the Dean and Chapter of Norwych 13. of Jul. 1575. who
being translated to Worcester, Edm. Scambler D. D. and B. of Peterborough was
elected thereunto 15. of Dec. 1584. and was translated in the latter end of
that month. He died 7. May 1594. aged 85 years, and was buried on the 3. of
June following in the Cath. Chapter of Norwych, between the two Pillars, next above
the Tomb of Bishop Parkhurst. Soon after was a monument of a yard and an half
high, with his Effigies in Alabaster laying thereon, erected over his grave,
and all enclosed with an high iron grate. In the time of that Rebellion, which
was began by the Presbyterians, the grate was taken away, the Effigies or
Statua broken and the monument of freestone, on which it laid, was pulled down
as far as the brick-work; which being unsightly, was afterward taken away and
the space between the pillars left void, as it now remains. There was an
inscription, and four verses on it, the first of which did run thus,

Vivo tibi, moriorque tibi, tibi Christ resurgam.

After his death, Will. Redman Archdeacon of Canterb. and Rector of
Bishops-Bourn in Kent, (Son of Joh. Redman of Shelford in Cambridgshire,) was
promoted to the said See, whereupon being elected thereunto, 17. Dec. was
consecrated 12. of Jan. and installed 24. Feb. 1594. He gave way to fate 25.
Sept. 1602. and was buried in the Cath. Chapter of Norwych, leaving behind him a
Relict named Isabell, and several sons and daughters, as also moneys for a
public work to be done in Trin. coll. in Cambridge, of which he was sometimes
Fellow. To carry on the succession a little farther tho out of my road, I
desire the Reader to know that after Redmans death succeeded Dr. Joh. Jegon in
the said See of Norwych, born at Coggeshall in Essex 10. Dec. 1550. (being Son
of Rob. Jegon, by Joan his Wife, daughter of one.... White of the same County,)
educated in Grammar learning there and elsewhere, became, after some years
spent in Logic and Philosophy in Cambridge, Fellow of S. John's coll. in that
University, afterward Master of C. C. commonly called Bennet coll. (which
office he held 12 years) four times Vicechancellour of that University,
installed Dean of Norwych (in the place of Dr. Tho. Dove made Bishop of
Peterborough) 22. June 1601. and at length being elected Bishop of Norwych 18.
Jan. was consecrated thereunto, (with Dr. Rob. Bennet to Hereford) on the 20.
Feb. 1602. In the year 1617. March 13. he died, and was soon after buried in
the Church at Aylesham in Norfolk, and in 1619. his Widow named Lilia was
married to Sir Charles Cornwallis. After him succeeded in Norwych Joh Overhall
Bishop of Lichf. and Coventry, who being elected by the Dean and Chapter 21.
May 1618. was confirmed 30. Sept. following. He died 12. May 1619. and was
buried in the Cath. Chapter of Norwych. About the time of the restoration of K.
Chapter 2. Dr. Cofin Bishop of Durham, did, in honor to his memory, as having been
one of the profoundest School divines of our Nation, erect a monument on the
next pillar to his grave. After him followed Dr. Sam. Harsnet, educated also in
Cambridge, who was translated thereunto from Chichester 28. Aug. 1619. and him
Dr. Franc. White B. of Carlisle and the Kings Almoner, who being elected by the
D. and Chapt. of Norwych (upon the translation of Harsnet to York, after D. G.
Mountaigns death) on the 22. Januar* 1628. was soon after translated thereunto.
To him succeeded Dr. Rich. Corbet, whom I have among the Writers mentioned.

Worcester, elected Fellow of Allsouls coll. in 1536. took one degree in the
Laws, and some years after, viz. in 1549. (3. Edw. 6.) Sept. 2. was installed
Archdeacon of Lincoln on the death of George Heneage, being about that time
Vicar General to the Bishop of that place. After Q. Mary came to the Crown, he
absconded, and studied the Theological faculty, wherein he obtained a
considerable knowledge, but when Q. Elizab. succeeded, he was made Doctor of
his Faculty at Cambridge, was a Judge of Ecclesiastical matters in the Archb.
Court of Canterbury, and at length was promoted to the Episcopal See of
Lincoln. To which being elected after the deprivation of Dr. Tho. Watson, was
consecrated thereunto 21. of Jan. 1559. and on the 18. of Apr. following the
temporalities thereof were Pat. 2. Elizab. p. 11.
restored to him. In 1566. he was incorporated Doctor, as he had stood at
Cambridge, and in Jan. 1570. he was translated to Worcester on the death of
Jam. Calfhill, (who was nominated by the Queen to succeed Edwin Sandys in the
said See, but died before consecration,) where he continued much beloved to the
time of his death. He departed this mortal life on the 18. of Apr. Worcester.
Over his grave was fastened a white marble table to the wall, with these rude
and barbarous verses engraven thereon. Nicolaus Episcopus Wigorn.
Here born, here Bishop, buried here,
A Bullyngham by name and stock,
A Man twice married in Gods fear,
Chief Pastor late of Lyncolne flock.
Whom Oxford trained up in youth,
Whom Cambridge Doctor did create,
A painful Preacher of the truth,
Who changed this life for happy fate.
18. Apr. 1576.


Waterford in Ireland, bred a Cistercian Monk, and for some time lived among
those of that Order in Oxon, purposely for the improving himself in the supreme
Faculty, of which he was afterward Doctor, but whether of this University it
appears not. In Nov. 1554. he succeeded Jac. Waraeus in Com. de praeful. Hibem.
p. 38.
Edw. Staple in the Episcopal See of Mead in Ireland; whence being ejected in
the beginning of the Reign of Q. Elizab. for denying her Supremacy, was cast
into prison for a time. Afterward getting loose, he went into Spain, settled
at Complutum, spent most of his time in Religion, 157677.
and dying on the day before the nones of January in fifteen hundred seventy
and six, was buried in the Church there belonging to the Cistercians. In Mead
succeeded one Hugh Brady, to which being consecrated in 1563. sat there 20
years.

Norfolk, was elected Probationer of Magdalen coll. in July 1543. and in the
year following he was made true and perpetual Fellow of the said house, being
then Master of Arts. Afterward he became chaplain to the Lady Elizabeth, who,
when Queen, did not only make him the first Canon of the tenth stall in the
collegiate Chapter of S. Peter in the City of Westminster, an. 1560. but in the
year after Bishop of Chester; to which See being consecrated Fr. Godwin ut sup.
Int. ep. Cestr:
on the 4. of May 1561. had the temporalities thereof given to him Pat. 3.
Eliz. p. 9.
on the 9. of the same month. In 1566. he was actually created Doct. of div.
and dying in Nov. in fifteen hundred seventy and seven, was buried in the Cath.
Chapter at Chester, 157^*
leaving then behind him two Sons, viz. George Downham afterward Bishop of
Londonderry in Ireland, and John Downham Bach. of div. both learned and
painful writers. In the Sea of Chester succeeded Will. Chaderton D. D. Master
of Queens coll. in Cambridge, sometimes Margaret, afterward the Kings,
Professor of div. in that University, and Prebendary or Canon of the fourth
stall in the collegiate Church of S. Peter in the City of Westminster. This
learned Doctor was born at Nuthurst Reg. Dodsworth in collect. suis MS. in bib.
Bod.
near Manchester in Lancashire, being the Son of Edm. Chaderton (by Margery his
Wife, dauof one Cliffe of Cheshire) and he the Son of Jeffr. Chaderton, both of
Nuthurst. He died Bishop of Lincoln, leaving behind him one only daughter named
Joane, begotten on the body of his Wife, named Katharine, dau. of Joh. Revell
of London.

PATRICK WALSH, was born, as it seems, in or Waterford in Ireland, and after he
had been partly educated in Grammaticals in that country, was sent to Oxon, but
to what coll. or hall therein, unless to that of Brasnose, I know not. In the
latter end of the year 1534. he proceeded Master of Arts; and about that time
applying his mind to the Theological faculty, supplicated at length the
venerable Congregation of Regents that he might be admitted to the reading of
the Sentences, in 1545. but whether he was admitted, it appears not in the
public Register, which was much neglected by the then Scribe. About that time
he was Dean of Waterford, and in so great repute for his learning and religion,
that he was made Bishop of that place and of Lismore: To which being
consecrated in August 1551. had liberty then allowed him to keep his Deanery in
Commendam for a time. He paid his last debt to nature Jac. War. ut supr. p. 199.
in fifteen hundred seventy and eight, and was, Waterford. He had a Son named
Nich. Walsh who was then Bishop of Ossory, and about that time had a hand in
translating the New Testament into the Irish tongue. This Nich. Walsh seems to
have been educated in the University of Cambridge.

WILLIAM BRADBRIDGE, or Brodebridge, Londoner born, but descended from those of
his name in Somersetshire, was admitted Fellow of Magdalen coll. in 1529. and
afterward proceeding in Arts, was at length admitted to the reading of the
Sentences, an. 1539. being then arrived to some eminence in the Theological
Faculty. About the middle of March, 1 and 2 of Phil. and Mary, dom. 1554. he
was made Prebendary of Lime and Halstock in the Church of Sali^bury, vacant by
the death of one Rob. Bone, and in the beginning of Q. Elizab. showing himself
conformable to the discipline then established, was made Dean of the said
Church in June 1563. void by the death of Pet. Vannes an Italian. In 1565. he
supplicated the ven. Congreg. of Regents that he might be admitted Doctor of
divinity, but whether he was really so, or diplomated, it appears not in the
pubick Register, and on the 18. of March 1570. he was consecrated at Lambeth
Bishop of Exeter; which See he laudably governed for about 8 years. He ended
his days suddenly at Newton-Ferrers in Devonshire, on the 27. June, says Fr.
Godwin ut sup. int. ep. Exon.
one, and another Joh. Vowell alias Hooker in his Cat. or Hist. of the Bishops
of Exeter.
the 29. July, in fifteen hundred seventy and eight, 15^8.
and was buried on the north side of the Choire of the Cath. Chapter of Exeter. To
him succeeded in the said See Joh. Woolton, whom I have mentioned among the
writers under the year 1593. and him Gervase Babington D. D. (descended from
the ancient Family of the Babingtons in Nottinghamsh.) who, while he was
Chaplain to the Earl of Pembroke, assisted his Noble Countess Mary Sidney in
her translation of the Psalms: For it was more than a Woman's skill to express
the sense so right, as she has done in her verse, and more than the English or
Latin translation could give her.

Shirebourne (a Market Town I think) in Yorkshire, admitted perpetual Fellow of
Magd. coll. 16. Nov. 1546. proceeded in Arts the year after, and about that
time did solely addict his mind to the study of Theology, and to the learning
of the Hebrew tongue, in which last he was most excellent, as in those of Greek
and Latin, which he had obtained before he was M. of A. After Q. Mary came to
the Crown, he was turned out of his Fellowship (for his forward and malepert
Vide Laur. Humfredum in Vita and morte Jo. Juelli, edit. 1573. p. 72, 73. and
in Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Ox. lib. 1. p. 275. b.
zeal against the Cath. Religion in the time of Edw. 6.) by the Visitors
appointed by her to regulate the University. Whereupon retiring first to
Zurich, and afterward to Basil in Germany, became Preacher to the English
Exiles there, and expounded to them the entire book of the Acts of the
Apostles. Afterward being recalled by some of the Brethren, was made
Superintendent of them at London, and continued among them in a timorous
condition for some time. At length when Q. Elizab. succeeded, he was nominated
Bishop of Lichf. and Coventry upon the deprivation of Dr. Ralph Bayne: To which
See being elected, had the temporalities thereof restored to Pat. 2. Elizab. p.
11.
him 20 Feb. 1559. being then about 46 years of age. On the 24. of March
following, he was consecrated, and about six years following he was actually
created Doct. of divinity, being then in great repute for his learning. He died
on the 21. of Feb. 157879.
in fifteen hundred seventy and eight, leaving then behind him a Widow named
Matilda. He was succeeded in Lichf. and Cov. by Dr. Will. Overton, of whom I
have made mention among the writers under the year 1609.

Heth, a most wise and learned man, of great policy, and of as great integrity,
was descended from the Heaths of Aspley in the Parish of Tamworth in
Warwickshire, but whether born there, (where his brother had certain lands) I
cannot tell, was educated for a time in C. C. coll. in this University, but
before he took a degree there, he was transplanted first to Christ's coll. and
afterward to Clare hall in Cambridge, where proceeding in Arts, took holy
Orders, was afterward Archdeacon of Stafford, and in 1535. did commence D. of
divinity. In 1539. Apr. 4. he was consecrated B. of Rochester, being then chief
Almoner to the King, and on the 14. of the same month, the temporalities of
that See were Pat. 31. Hen. 8. p. 7.
delivered to him. On the 22. of December. 1543. he was elected B. of Worcester
upon the resignation of Dr. Bell, and in Feb. following, being translated
thereunto, the temporalities also of that See were restored Pat. 35. Hen. 8. p.
4.
to him on the 22. March following: where continuing till the beginning of K.
Ed. 6. was soon after committed Prisoner to the Fleet, as being no Friend to
that King, or reformation. Afterward Q. Mary coming to the Crown, he was
restored to his Bishopric, which Jo. Hooper had for some time occupied, and
became so great in the favor of that Queen, that he was not only made by her
President of Wales, but also Archbishop of York; to which See being elected, P.
Paul the fourth by his Bull dated xi. Call. Jul. 1555. did confirm it.
Afterward being translated, the temporalities of that See were given Pat. 2.
and 3. Ph. and Mar. p. 1*
to him 8. Jan. following, and on the 22. of that month was enthronized or
installed in the person of Robert Bishop of Hull, Heath being then Lord
Chancellor of England. While he sat Archbishop, Q. Mary gave to him
Suffolk-house against S. George's Church in Southwark to be a habitation for
him and his Successors for ever in that See, when their occasins called them to
London; done in recompense for York-house near Westminster, which her Father
had taken from Card. Wolsey. But the said house being remote from the Court,
Archb. Heath sold it to a Merchant, and bought Norwich-house or Suffolk-place
near to Charing Cross for him and his Successors for ever. When Q. Elizabeth
came to the Crown, which was in Nov. 1558. (Cardinal Pole Archb. of Canterbury
and Primate of all England being then dead,) he the said Heath not only refused
(tho it appertained to his office) to anoint and Crown Q. Elizab. as all the
Bishops besides did, except one, but also about the beginning of the year
following refused to take the Oath of her Supremacy over the Church. Whereupon
being deprived of his Archbishopric about Midsomer in the same year, as also
of his Chancellourship, was for a time committed to custody, (Jo. Fox says In
the Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. under the year 1558*
to the Tower, where he died,) but being a person of great moderation, quiet
behavior, and modest disposition, was soon after set at liberty. So that
retiring to his estate at Chobham in Surrey which he before had purchased,
spent the remaining part of his days there in great security, retiredness, good
studies, and devotion, being then in such great grace with Q. Elizabeth that
she several times visited him with mavelous kindness. At length arriving to a
fair age, died in the beginning of fifteen hundred seventy and May that year
one Tho. Heath, next Kinsman to the said Archbishop, had a Commission then
granted Ut in lib. MS. Administrationum in Offic. Praerog. Cant. incipiente 1.
Jan. 1571. fol. 168. a.
to him from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury to administer the goods,
debts, chattels, etc. of him the said Nich. Heath S. T. P. sometimes Archb. of
York, lately deceased. He was buried in the middle of the Chanc. belonging to
the Chapter of Chobham beforementioned, and over his grave was soon-after a plain
marble stone laid, with an inscription thereon; which stone was since broken
and made shorter, and the inscription, engraven on a brass plate, taken away.
His brother Will. Heath, as he is at Chobham so called, was also buried in the
said Chancel, some years, as it seems, before the Archbishop, where there was
lately, if not still, some memory of him on a gravestone: But who are now the
possessors of the Archb. lands there, which he left to his relations, I cannot
tell. The picture drawn to the life of the said Archbishop, I have many times
seen, which shows him to have been proper in person, black hair'd, pale-faced,
thin and macerated, somewhat like the picture of Fisher B. of Rochester, but
his nose not so long. I say, this picture I have often beheld, among many other
choice pictures, hanging in the large Gallery belonging to Weston-house near to
Long-Compton in Warwickshire, now in the possession of my worthy acquaintance
Raphe Sheldon. Esquire; whose Ancestor of both his names of Beoly in
Worcestershire, (who died 21. Dec. 1546.) married Philippa daughter and coheir
of Baldwin Heath, (by his Wife Agnes the eldest daughter and coheir of Joh.
Grove of Ford-hall in Wotton in Warwickshire,) Son of Thomas Heath of Aspley in
the Parish of Tamworth beforementioned; which Thomas is supposed by those of
the Sheldonian Family, (who quarter with their Arms those of Grove and Heath,)
to be Great Grandfather to the Archbishop. This has been several times told me
by my never to be forgotten friend and generous acquaintance, Raphe Sheldon of
Beoly and Weston Esquire; (who deceased 1684.) a person always very curious and
industrious in Genealogies.

ROBERT PURSGLOVE, received his first Derbyshire called Tideswall, bred in
puerile learning for some time there, afterward in Grammar learning in S.
Paul's School in London by the care and charge of his Uncle Will. Bradshaw;
where continuing three years was afterward placed in the Abery called S. Mary
Overhee in Southwark. In which place being fitted for the University, he was
sent to Corp. Chapter coll. in Oxford, and maintained there by his said Uncle for
the space of fourteen years, but whether he took a degree in all that time, it
does not appear in our Registers, neither indeed of hundreds more, that have
studied 7 or more years in Oxon, and therefore for that reason, and because we
have no matriculation books above the time of Q. Elizab. the memory of many
eminent Men in Church and State is lost. After he had left the University,
being then esteemed an eminent Clerk, he was received into the Monastery of
Gisbourne alias Gisburgh in Yorkshire, where taking upon him the habit of a
Canon Regular, was at length elected Prior of that house. Afterward upon a
willing surrender of the said Monastery into the Kings hands, he had a
considerable pension allowed to him, was made Provost of Rotheram coll. in
Yorkshire, and on the death of Rob. Sylvester about the beginning of Q. Mary's
Reign, was made Archdeacon of Nottingham, and Suffragan B. of Hull under the
Archb. of York, and, had other dignities and spiritualities conferred on him.
After Q. Elizabeth had been settled in the Throne for some time, the Oath of
Supremacy was offered to him, but he denying to take it, was deprived of his
Archdeaconry and other spiritualities. Whereupon the said Archdeaconry being
given to Will. Day M. A. he was installed therein 24. Apr. 1560. as about the
same time he was in the Prebendship of Ampleford in the Church of York, on the
deprivation of Dr. Alb. Langdale of Cambridge. Pursglove being thus deprived,
he retired to the place of his nativity, and with the wealth that he had heaped
from the Church, founded a Grammar School there, and an Hospital for 12 poor
and impotent people; as also a Grammar School at Gisbourne beforementioned,
the donation or patronage of which he gave to the Archbishop of York and his
Successors for ever, an. 1575. This Clerk of great renown, as he is to this day
styled by the Men of Tideswall, May in fifteen hundred seventy and nine, and
was buried in the Church at Tideswall. Over his grave was a large monument
erected, with twenty rude and barbarous verses in English engraven thereon;
which being too many to set down in this place, I shall for brevity sake pass
them by.

Goldwell in Kent, but whether born in that County, I cannot tell. About the
year 1520. he became a Student in this University, particularly, as it seems,
in Allsouls college, where one, or more, of his name and kindred had studied
before his time. In 1531. he proceeded in Arts, and two years after was
admitted to the reading of the Sentences, being then known to be more eminent
in Astronomy and Mathematics, than in Divinity. What were his preferments and
employments 20 years after, I know not. Sure I am, that he being a most zealous
person for the R. Catholic Religion, he was by Q. Mary promoted to the
Bishopric of S. Asaph; to which See being elected, he had restitution made
Pat. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. p. 1.
of the temporalities belonging thereunto 22. January 1555. Soon after he
procured the Pope to renew the indulgences granted to such that went in
Pilgrimage to S. Winefrids well, commonly called Halywell in Flintshire. The
original of which place, with an account of many miracles performed there, is
largely set down by Robert a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict, afterward Prior
of the Congregation of Cluniaks at Shrewsbury, in a book entitled, Vita
mirabilis. S. Winefridae Virginis, Martyris and Abbatissae, lib. 2. written by
him about the year 1140. (5. Reg. Steph.) and dedicated to Guarinus Prior of
Worcester, the author being then Prior of Shrewsbury beforementioned. So that
how it comes to pass that Silv: Giraldus who lived afterward in K. John's time,
did not make any mention of the said Well in his Itinerarium Cambriae, which
Camden does take In Britannia, in Ordovic^ ^ulgo Flintshire.
notice of, I know not. After Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown Bishop Goldwell
conveyed himself away beyond the Seas, was present at the Council of Trent
under P. Pius 4. an. 1562. and afterward going to Rome lived very
pontificially among the Theatines, was appointed by the Pope to baptize Jews
there, and to confer orders on all such English men that fled their Country for
Religion's sake, which he did there and in several places elsewhere in other
Countries to the time of his death. He was esteemed among them a most useful
person, was had in great veneration for his learning, having, as I have been
informed, wrote one, or more books, Ciar.
and was living at Rheymes in fifteen hundred and eighty, Rome died there soon
after, and was either buried among the Theatines, or else in the chapel
belonging to the English college there. See more of him in Rob. King among
these Bishops under the year 1557. as also in a book intit. Concertatio
Ecclesiae Catholicae in Anglia, etc. among the matters relating to the
martyrdom of Ralph Sherwin. Joh. Fox in his book of Acts and Monuments, etc.
does tell us of one Thom. Goldwell a Priest, living at Brussells, mentioned in
a letter written to Bishop Rich. Thornden, in June 1554. but whether he be the
same with Tho. Goldwell beforementioned, I cannot tell.

New Inn. was consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph in the place of Goldwell
beforementioned, 21. Jan. 1559. aged 50 years, was translated thence to S.
David's, in which See he was confirmed 21. May 1561. and died in fifteen hundred
eighty and one; Asaph succeeded Thomas Davyes a Doctor of divinity of
Cambridge; who, being rich, left much money for pious uses, and settled a
Scholarship in Queens coll. in the said University. He gave way to fate about
the Feast of S. Michael 1573. and was buried either in the Church at
Abergwilly, or in the Church of Llanpedery Kenuen. In the Sea of St. David's
succeeded the said Rich. Davyes Dr. Marmaduke Middleton, as I shall tell you
under the year 1592.

RICHARD COXE, sometimes of Kings coll. in Cambridge, afterward Canon of Card.
Wolseys coll. in Oxon, was consecrated Bishop of Ely 1559. and died in fifteen
hundred eighty and one; under which year you Martin Heton of Oxon, whom I shall
mention among these Bishops under the year 1609.

MATTHEW SHEYNE, an Irish man born, laid Oxon, which afterward he well
improved. At length returning to his Country, was, through several preferments
made Bishop of Cork and Cloyne; to which being Jac. Waraeus in Com. de praesul.
Hib^rn. p. 213:
consecrated in 1572. sat thereto the time of his death; which happened
according to some, on the thirteenth day of June in fifteen hundred eighty M.
Sheyne or John Sheyne was the author of the book De reipublica, I cannot yet
tell. See in Rich. Shagens among the writers, under the year 1570. and in the
Fasti 1523.

JOHN WATSON, was born at a Market Town Worcestershire called Evesham, admitted
Fellow of Allsouls coll. in 1540. took the degree of Master of Arts two years
after, and about that time applied his mind to the study of Medicine; in which
afterward he had considerable practice. At length, about the time that Q.
Elizabeth came to the Crown, if not happily before, he entered into holy Orders,
was made Prebendary of Winchester, Archdeacon of Surrey, and Chancellor of S.
Paul's. In the 15. year of Q. Elizab. Dom. 1572. he was made Dean of Winchester
in the place of Dr. Franc. Newton deceased, and in 1575. he was admitted to the
degree of Doctor of Physic. About which time, he being in great favor at
Court, he was made Bishop of Winchester, tho somewhat against his will, in the
year 1580. to which being consecrated on the 18. of Sept. in the same year,
sat there to the time of his death. He died on the 23. of January in fifteen
hundred eighty and three, aged 63 years, and on the 17. of Feb. his Funeral was
solemnized in the Cath. Chapter of Winchester; 158384.
at which time his corpse was buried in the body thereof. By his last In Offic.
praerog. Cant. in reg. Wa^son Qu. 1.
Will and Test. dat. 23. Oct. 25. Eliz. and proved 22. Jul. 1584. he gave 40 l.
to Alls. college, 20 l. to the University of Oxon, 100 marks to certain poor
Scholars studying there, to five poor Students of Oxon studying there also 4 l.
a-piece for five years after his decease, and to the poor of Evesham
beforementioned he was a liberal benefactor, for whose sake also he gave a
stock of 40 l. to set them on work.

THOMAS CHESTER, a Londoner born, was Hen. 8. but in what house I cannot yet
find, took one degree in Arts, and was afterward beneficed and dignified. In
1580. he was made Bishop of Elphine in Ireland, where sitting about 4 years,
gave way to fate Jac. War. ut supr. p. 260.
at Killiathan in that County in the month of June in fifteen hundred eighty
John Linch, whom I shall mention at large among these Bishops under the year
1611.

RICHARD BARNES, Son of Joh. Barnes, Fridesmonda his Wife, daughter of Ralph
Gifford of Cleydon in Buckinghamshire, was born at Bold near to Waryngton in
Lancashire, admitted Fellow of Brasnose coll. by the authority of the Kings
Council, 6. Edw. 6. Dom. 1552. where making a quick progress in Logic and
Philosophy, took the degree of Master of Arts 1557. About that time he took
holy Orders, and was made Minister of Staingrave in Yorkshire. In 1561, Jul.
12. he was admitted Chancellor of the Cath. Chapter of York in the place of Jeffry
Downs D. of D. (who had succeeded in that dignity one Dr. Hen. Trafford, in
Aug. 1537.) and about the same time was made Canon residentiary and Preb. of
Laughton in the said Church, as also a public Reader of divinity therein.
About 1567. he was consecrated Suffragan Bishop of Nottyngham, in the Church of
S. Peter at York, and in 1570. June 25. being elected to the Sea of Carlisle, in
the place of Jo. Best deceased, was confirmed therein on the 7. Aug. following.
In 1557. Apr. 5. he was elected to the Sea of Durham, was confirmed the 9. of
May following, and was ever after a favourer of Puritanism. In Feb. 1579. he
was actually created Doctor of divinity at Oxon, having taken the degree of
Bachelaur in that Faculty at Cambridge, Durham. Over his grave was a monument
soon after put, with this inscription thereon. Reverendo in Christo Patri ac
Domino, Dom. Richardo Barnes Dunelmensis Episcopo, Praesuli pio, docto,
liberali, and munifico; P. S. precariss. P. P. P. P. Obiit xxiv. Aug. an. dom.
1587. aetatis suae 55. Astra tenent animam, corpus hoc marmore clausum,
Fama polos penetrant, nomen nati atque nepotes
Conservant vivis semper post funera virtus.


Welsh man born, was educated in New Inn or Broadgates hall, or in both, where
applying his studies to the Civil Law, took one degree in that Faculty, in
1562. and afterward became Archdeacon of Brecknock and Prebendary of
Osbaldswyke in the Church of York. In 1575. Apr. 17. he was Fr. Godwin in Com.
de praesul, Anglia, int. ep. Landav. p. 641.
consecrated Bishop of Landaff, October. in fifteen hundred and ninety, was
buried in the Chancel of the Chapter at Matherne in Monmouthshire (where the B. of
Landaff has a Seat) near to the body of Hugh Jones his Predecessor. At which
time he left behind him three Sons, William, Timothy, and Philemon.

Berkshire Idem int. ep. B. and Well. p. 444.
called Okingham, and bred in Grammar learning in the School there, where being
fitted for a gown, was sent to the University of Oxon, about the year 1538. was
elected Probationer of Magd. coll. in 1544. and the year after true and
perpetual Fellow; being then Bach. of Arts. In 1547. he proceeded in that
Faculty, and two years after, did, upon pretense of being disturbed by certain
Papists in that house, (he himself being heretically inclined as they said,)
leave his Fellowship, and accepted from the said college the Rectory of their
School at Brackley in Northamptonshire. Afterward he took to him a Wife, and
what time he had to spare he bestowed on the study of Theology. But so it was,
that when Queen Mary came to the Crown he was silenced, and in a manner put to
his shifts; whereupon applying his study to Physic to maintain him and his, he
was admitted to the reading of any the books of Hypocrates, or of the Aphorisms
of Hypocrates, that is to the degree of Bachelaur of Physic, an. 1555. When
Queen Elizabeth succeeded, and Religion thereupon was altered, he took holy
Orders from Dr. Bullyngham B. of Lincoln, who made him his Chaplain, and being
a chief instrument of his Preaching several times before the Queen, she
approved of him and his person so well, that she thereupon made him Dean of Chapter
Chapter in Oxon, in June 1565. So that taking the degrees in divinity the same
year, and being esteemed much by all for his learning and piety, he was made
Dean of Canterbury in the place of Dr. Nich. Wotton deceased, an. 1566. In
1584. he was nominated Bishop of Bathe and Wells, after that See had laid void
three years; whereupon being consecrated thereunto Reg. Godwin ep. B. and Wells
an. 1584.
on the 17. of Sept. (his Son Fr. Godwin says the 13.) the same year, sat
there to the time of his death without any removal. He came to the place as
well qualified (as one Sir. Jo. Harrington in his Brief view of the State of
the Church of England, etc. Land. 1653. p. 111. alias 113.
says) for a Bishop as might be, unreprovable without Simony, given to good
hospitality, quiet, kind, affable, a Widdower, and in the Queens good opinion.
If he had held on as clear as he had entered, he would have been extolled by
all: But see his misfortune that first lost him in the Queens favor, and after
forced him to another mischief. For so it was that he being aged, diseased and
lame of the Gout, he married (as some thought for opinion of wealth) a Widow
of London, which was his second Wife at least. A chief favorite of that time
(Sir Walt. Raliegh) had labored to get the Manor of Banwell from his
Bishopric, and disdaining the repulse, did upon hearing of this intempestive
marriage, take advantage thereof, and caused it to be told to the Queen,
(knowing how much she disliked such matches,) and instantly persued the Bishop
with letters and mandats for the Manor of Banwell for an 100 years. The good
Bishop not expecting such a sudden tempest, was greatly perplexed, yet a while
he held out, and endured many sharp messages from the Queen, of which Sir Joh.
Harrington of Kelston near to Bathe carried one, being delivered to him by
Robert Earl of Leycester, who seemed to favor the Bishop, and mislike Sir
Walter for molesting him; but they were soon agreed like Pilate and Herod to
condemn Christ. Never was harmless man so traduced to his Sovereign, that he
had married a Girl of 20 years old, with a great portion, that he had conveyed
half the Bishopric to her, that (because he had the Gout) he could not stand
to his marriage, with such, and the like, scoffs to make him ridiculous to the
vulgar and odious to the Queen. The Earl of Bedford happening to be present when
these tales were told, and knowing the Londoners Widow, the Bishop had
married, said merrily to the Queen after this manner, Madam, I know not how
much the Widow is above 20. but I know a Son of hers is but a little under
forty, etc. The conclusion of the premises was this, that to pacify his
persecutors, and to save Banwell he was fain to part with Wyvelscomb, commonly
called Wilscomb, for 99 years, and so purchased his peace. To conclude, his
reading had been much, his judgment and doctrine sound, his government mild and
not violent, his mind charitable, and therefore not to be doubted, but when he
lost this life, he won Heaven. In his last days, being taken with an quartan
Ague, he did, by advice of his Physicians, remove to the place of his Nativity,
Okingham beforementioned, with hopes of recovery, but nothing availing, he
gave way to fate 19. of November. in fifteen hundred and ninety, aged 73 years.
Franc. Godwin then Subdean of Exeter. In the Sea of Bathe and Wells succeeded
John Still D. D. Master of Trin. coll. in Cambridge, (Son of William Still of
Grantham in Lincolnshire,) who had been installed Canon of the seventh stall in
the Church of Westminster, in the place of Thom. Aldridge deprived for
Nonconformity, an. 1573. and Archdeacon of Sudbury 28. of March 1576. He died
26. of Feb. 1607. and was buried in the Cath. Chapter of Wells, leaving then behind
him several Children which he had by his two Wives, especially the first.

MARMADUKE MIDDLETON, Son of Tho. Middleton of Cardiganshire, (descended from
the Middletons of Middleton in Westmorland,) by Lucia his Wife, daughter of
Rob. Nevill, had part of his education here, but took not, as I can yet find, a
degree. Afterward he went into Ireland, where he became Rector of Killare in
the diocese of Mead, and on the death of Patr. Walsh, Jac. War. ut. sup. p.
199.
B. of Waterford and Lisemore, in 1579. In 1581. he was translated to S.
David's, and about two years after he was actually created Doct. of div. of this
University. He was afterward not only deprived of his Bishopric. but Pet.
Heylyn in Exam. historic. edit. Land. 1659. p. 221.
degraded from all holy Orders for many notable misdemeanors: And the sentence
for it was accordingly executed by, and before, the High Commissioners at
Lambeth house, not only by reading of it in Scriptis, but by a formal degrading
him of his Episcopal robes and Priestly vestments. He departed this mortal life
on the 30. of Nov. in fifteen hundred ninety and two, leaving then a Son behind
him Richard who was Archdeacon of Cardigan. In the Sea of S. David's succeeded
Anthony Rudd D. of div. of Cambridge, and a Yorkshire man born, whom I shall
mention in the Fasti under the year 1577.

Tho. Godwin; but before I enter upon him, I must let the reader know that
after the death of Dr. Hugh Curwyn Bishop of Oxon, that See continued void
about 21. years. At the term of which, a great person (Sir Fr. Walsingham) out
of pure devotion to the leases, that would yield good fines, recommended the
said Underhill to it, persuading him to take it, as in a way to a better, but,
as it should seem, it was out of his way very much, for e're the first fruits
were paid, he Brief view, etc. beforementioned, p. 149.
died in much discontent and poverty. Yet his preferrer to seem to do some
favor to the University, for recompense of the spoil done to the Bishopric of
Oxon, erected a new lecture at his own charge, which Dr. Rainolds of C. C.
coll. did for some time read, as I have Vide Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon, lib.
1. p. 301. b. 302. a.
told you elsewhere. This John Underhill was born in an ancient tenement or
receptacle for guests called the Cross Inn in St. Martins Parish, within the
City of Oxon, where his name lived two or three generations, if not more, and
continued there till the daughter and heir of Underhill was married to one
Breys or Brice. After he had been trained up in Grammar learning in Winchester
school, he was sent to New coll. of which he became true and perpetual fellow
in 1563. After he had taken the degree of M. of Arts, it happened that Doctor
Horn Bishop of Winchester visited the said coll. but Underhill making
opposition by questioning the Bishops right for what he did, or should do, as
to visitation, he was removed from his fellowship in 1576. Whereupon making his
complaint to Robert Earl of Leycester chancellor of the University of Oxon, he
hearkened to, and encouraging him to go to law with the Bishop for what he had
done, the Bishop forthwith let the cause fall to the ground, knowing very well
that he should be a loser by carrying on the cause, if that great Count should
stand by Underhill. In 1577. he was elected Rector of Lincoln coll. and
proceeded in Divinity in 1581. About which time he was made Chaplain to the
Queen, one of the Vicars of Bampton, and Rector of Witney, in Oxfordshire. In
1589. he was nominated Bishop of Oxon upon Walsinghams motion, as I have before
told you; whereupon being elected by the Dean and Chapter of Chapter C. on the 8.
day of December. was consecrated thereunto about the latter end of the same month
in the said year. He paid his last debt to nature at London on the 12. of May,
in fifteen hundred ninety and two, and soon after his body being conveyed to
Oxon, Vir clarus eloquio, and acutus ingenio. From the time of his death to the
consecration of Dr. Jo. Bridges his successor, an. 1603. the patrimony of the
Bishopric of Oxon, was much dilapidated, and made a prey (for the most part)
to Robert Earl of Essex, to whom it proved as miserably fatal, as the gold of
Toulouse did of old to the soldiers of Caepio. The said Joh. Bridges had been
sometimes fellow of Pembr. hall in Cambridge, was D. of D. and made Dean of
Salisbury in the beginning of Januar. 1577. upon the promotion of Dr. Joh.
Piers to the Episcopal See there. He was a learned man in the time he lived,
and wrote several books, as the Bodleian or Oxford catalogue will tell you. See
more of him in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 291. b.

Brasnose coll. was consecrated Bishop of Exeter in Aug. 1574. died in the
latter end of fifteen hundred ninety and three, Hic jacet, haud jacet hic
tumulo quem credis inesse,
Terra nequit tantum contumulare virum.


See more of him among the writers, under the year 1593.

Mary Magdalens coll. was made Bishop of Lincoln in 1570. translated thence to
Winchester, in 1584. and died in the beginning of the year fifteen hundred
ninety and four, Winchester succeeded Will. Wickham. Son of John Wickham of
Enfield in Middlesex, Son of Tho. Wickham of Swaclive in Oxfordshire by Joyce
Sandbury his Wife: which Will. Wickham was born at Enfield beforementioned,
educated in Eaton school near Windsore, became a member of the foundation of
Kings coll. in Cambridge, an. 1556. fellow of Eaton college, Prebendary of the
fourth stall in the collegiat chapter of S. Peter in Westminster, in the place of
Rich. Morley, an. 1570. Canon of Windsore 1571. Dean of Lincoln 1577. and
afterward Bishop thereof, preached at the burial of Mary Q. of Scots at
Peterborough, 1. Aug. 1587. translated from Lincoln to Winchester about the
latter end of March 1595. and died in Winchester house in S. Mary Overhees
parish in Southwark on the 12. of June following. You may see his epitaph in
Jo. Stow's Survey of London, printed 1633. p. 452. and more of him in
Antimartinus, sive monitio cujusdam Londinensis, etc. Printed 1589. p. 52.

JOHN ELMER or Aylmer was born of, and descended Norfolk, spent some time in
this University while young, but more in Cambridge, where, if I mistake not, he
took the degrees in Arts. Afterward he became chaplain to Henry Gray Duke of
Suffolk and Tutor to his daughter the Lady Jane Gray, while she lived at
Bradgate in Leycestershire, who taught her so See in the book entit. The School
master, or plain and pleasant way of teaching children, etc. written by Rog.
Ascham -- Land. 1589. qu. p. 11.
gently, so pleasantly, and with such fair allurements to learning, that she
thought all the time nothing, whilst she was with him. And when she was called
from him, she would fall a weeping, because that whatsoever she did else, but
learning, was to her full of grief, trouble, fear, and altogether misliking to
her. And thus her book was so much her pleasure, and brought daily to her more
pleasure and more, that in respect of it, or other pleasures, were in truth but
trifles and troubles to her. In 1553. he, by the name of Joh. Aylmer, was made
Archdeacon of Stow in the place of Christop. Massingberd, who died 8. March in
that year; and soon after we find him one of the Protestant Disputants in the
Convocation house at S. Paul's, when certain Theologists of each party met to
solve such scruples and doubts, as any of them might pretend to have. He spoke
but little on the first day, but the next day he read certain authorities out
of a note-book, which he had gathered against the real presence. Afterward
showing himself nonconformable, he was deprived of his Archdeaconry; whereupon
Joh. Harryson being put into his place, an. 1554. he the said Elmer went as a
voluntary Exile into Germany, where he was miraculously preserved from several
dangers. After Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown, he was appointed one of the
Protestant Disputers against the seven R. Cath. Bishops concerning matters of
religion, when that Q. was about to make a reformation, and in 1562. he by the
name of Joh. Aylmer M. of A. was made Archdeacon of Lincoln in the place of one
Tho. Marshall, who had succeeded Nich. Bullyngham in 1554. In the year 1573. he
retired to this University again, and there as a member of it, took the degrees
in divinity, that of Doctor being completed in an Act celebrated on the 12. of
October. the same year. On the 24. of March 1576. he was Fr. Godwin ut sup. int.
Episc. London, p: 252.
consecrated Bishop of London, being then accounted a learned and an honest
man, and about 1588. he was made the Queens Almoner, at which time he was a
great enemy to the Puritanical party, then numerous in the nation. He died at
Fulham in Middlesex on the third of June in fifteen hundred ninety and four,
and was buried in S. Paul's Cathedral before the chapel of S. George. By his
last Will In Offic. Praerog. Cant. in reg. Dixy part 2. Qu. 81.
and Test. which I have seen, he desires to be buried in the Cath. Chapter of S.
Paul on the north side, in some convenient place within the wall, with a Tomb
of his Picture after the manner of Dean Collet; which, as he says, is on the
south side of the Choire. He then left behind him several Sons, the second of
which named Theophilus, succeeded Jo. Molyns in the Archdeaconry of London
1591. being about that time well beneficed in Hertfordshire, and esteemed a
learned and reverend divine. His father also, the Bishop, was well learned in
the Languages, was a ready Disputant and a deep Divine, and wrote, as it is
said, a book called Tbom. Fuller in his Church History, etc. lib. 9. sect. 10.
The Harborough of Princes, which I have not yet seen, and therefore cannot
tell you where, or in what Vol. 'twas printed. He was a man but of mean
stature, yet in his youth very valiant, which he forgot not in his age. When he
first became a Preacher, he followed the popular phrase, and fashion of the
younger Divines of those times, which was to inveigh against the superfluities
of the Church men, and thereupon he is Brief view, etc. as before, p. 17, 18.
remembered to have used these words in a Sermon before a great auditory. --
Wherefore away with your thousands you Bishops, and come down to your hundreds,
etc. But this was but a heat of his spirit, of which, not long after, by
reading and conference, he was thoroughly cured; insomuch as being asked by one
of his own rank, after he was Bishop of London, what he meant, to preach of the
brainsick fashion, he answered with the words of S. Paul, Cum essem parvulus,
loquebar ut parvulus, sapiebam ut parvulus. But certain it is, no Bishop was
more persecuted and taunted by the Puritans of all sorts, than he was by
libels, by scoffs, by open railing and privy backbiting. He used for recreation
to bowl in a Garden, and Martin Marprelate thence took this taunting scoff,
that the Bishop would cry Rub, rub, rub, to his bowl, and when 'twas gone too
far, say, the Devil go with it, and then quoth he the Bishop would follow. Thus
he was rubbed, as he rubbed others, till they were all galled sometimes, and the
B. was so weary of the place, that he would gladly have removed to Ely, and
made great suit, and was put in some hope, for it. He was diligent in Preaching
at his cure where he was first beneficed, and when his auditory grew dull and
unattentive, he would with some pretty and unexpected conceit, move them to
attention. Among the rest was this: He read a long text in Hebrew, whereupon
all seemed to listen what would come after such strange words, as if they had
taken it for some conjuration: then he showed their folly, that when he spoke
English, whereby they might be instructed and edified, they neglected and
hearkened not to it; and now to read Hebrew, which they understood no word of,
they seemed careful and attentive. When there was talk of dangers, rumors of
wars and invasions, then he was commonly chosen to Preach in the Court, and he
would do it in so cheerful a fashion, as not only showed he had courage, but
would put courage into others. Here is much talk says he of Malum ab aquilone,
and our Cole-prophets have prophesied that in exaltatione lunae leo jungetur
leaenae, and the Astronomer tells us of a watery Trigon. But as long as Virgo is
in that ascendent with us, we need not fear of any thing: Deus nobiscum, quis
contra nos: and for this the Queen would much commend him, yet she would not
remove him. In the Sea of London succeeded Dr. Rich. Fletcher sometimes of C.
C. coll. in Cambridge, and him Rich. Bancroft an. 1597. who being removed to
Canterbury 10. December. 1604. Rich. Vaughan Bish. of Chester, was translated
Camden in Annal ^. Jac. 1. MS. sub. an. 1604.
to London 24. of the same month.

South Henxsey near to Abendon in Berks, and within a short mile of Oxon, was
educated in Grammar learning in the free school joining to Magd. college, in
Academicals in the said coll. of which he was admitted perpetual fellow 25.
July 1546. being then Bach. of Arts. Soon after, upon an invitation, he was
elected into the number of the senior Students of Chapter Church: which place he
being unwilling to take, had liberty granted to him, that if he did dislike it
at the years end, he might leave it. Whereupon being weary of it at the term of
that year, he was elected Probationer of Magd. coll. beforementioned 26. Jul.
1548. and the next year proceeded in Arts. About that time he entered into holy
orders, and being soon after made divinity reader of that house, obtained also
the rectory of Quainton in Bucks: both which places he kept together for some
time. But so it was, that he being a man of good parts, and accounted by his
contemporaries an excellent disputant, yet by keeping rustical company at
Quainton, or at some small cure that he had near to his native place, before he
had obtained Quainton, (where 'twas usual with him to sit tippling in a blind
Alehouse with some of his neighbors) was in great hazard to have lost all
those excellent gifts that came after to be so well esteemed and rewarded in
him. In 1558. he was admitted to the reading of the sentences, being about that
time Prebendary of Chester: of which Church being soon after made Dean in the
place of Rog. Walker M. A. he proceeded in divinity. In the beginning of 1570.
he was elected Master of Balliol coll. but before he was settled therein, he was
made Dean of Chapter C. in Oxon. So that resigning his Mastership in May 1571. was
on the 15. of March following made Dean of Salisbury upon the resignation of
Dr. Edm. Freke made Bishop of Rochester. Which Deanery he kept with that of Chapter
Chapter till he was consecrated Bishop of Rochester, 15. Apr. 1576. About which
time being made the Queens Almoner, she gave him leave notwithstanding to keep
a commendatary title to Salisbury till 1577. and then in the beginning of that
year, she made him Bishop of that place, on the death of Dr. Edm. Gheast who
died in Feb. 1576. In the said See he sat several years with great honor and
repute, and was beloved of all. At length, upon the death of Dr. Edwin Sandys,
being made Archb. of York. was translated to that place on the 19. of Feb. in
1588. He died at Bishops-Thorp in Yorkshire 28. Sept. in fifteen hundred ninety
and four, aged 71. a great and modest Theologist; whereupon his body was buried
in the third Chapel at the east end of the Cath. Chapter of York. Over his grave
was soon after erected a fair monument on the east Wall; the inscription on
which, wherein his character See more of him in Illustrium aliquot Anglorum
Encomia. Written by Tho. Newton, p. 115.
is contained at large, you may see in Historia and Antiquitates Vniv. Oxon,
lib. 2. p. 225. a. and b. He left his estate to Joh. Piers Registrary to the
Archb. of York, (Son of Thomas Piers of S. Henxsey beforementioned, the Archb.
brother) who married Elizabeth daughter of Rich. Bennet, and Sister of Sir John
Bennet Knight. Judge of the Prerogative Court of Cant.

WILLIAM ALLYN Allen or Alan, sometimes Oriel coll. was created Cardinal under
the title of S. Martin in Montibus, an. 1587. and in 1589. he was made
Archbishop of Mechlin the Metropolis of Brabant. He paid his last debt to
nature in fifteen hundred ninety Mechlin succeeded Levinus Torrentius a native
of Gaunt, and Bishop of Antwerp, founder of the coll. of Jesuits at Lovaine,
who dying 6. of the Call. of May 1595. aged 70. and more, was buried in his
Cath. Church.

JEWS OWEN or Owen Jews, by both which Maltrayth in Bodean in the Isle of
Anglesie, was educated in Grammar learning in Wykehams School near Winchester,
made perpetual and true fellow of New coll. in 1533. took the degree of Bach.
of the civil law in Feb. 1558. and made a farther progress in that faculty,
with intentions to proceed therein. But his opinion as to religion not
suffering him so to do, left the University about 1561. (tho his fellowship was
not pronounced void till 1563.) and went to Doway, where he was for his great
merits made the Regius Professor of his faculty. At length being nominated
Bishop of Cassano in the Kingdom of Naples by Philip 2. King of Spain, and
elected by P. Sixtus 5. (whose Referendary he was of each signature) was
consecrated thereunto at Rome on the third of Febr. 1588. according to the
account there followed. In which See sitting about seven years, died full of
commendations and praise on the fourteenth of October. according to the same
account, English Students at Rome, dedicated to S. Thomas Archb. of Canterbury.
Soon after was a marble stone laid over his grave, with this inscription
thereon, which gives a farther account of the man. D. O. M. Audoeno Ludovico
Cambro-Britanno, I. V. D. at Professori Oxonii in Anglia, ac Regio Duaci in
Flandria, Archidiacono Hannoviae, and Canonico in Metropolitana Cameracensi,
atque Officiali Generali, Vtriusque signaturae Referendario, Caroli Cardinalis
Borromaei Archiepiscopi Mediolanensis Vicario generali, Gregorii xiii. et Sexto
v. in congregatione de consultationibus Episcoporum and Regularium a secretis,
Episcopo Cassanensi, Gregorii xiv. ad Helvetios Nuncio, Clementis viii.
Apostolicae visitationis in alma urbe adjutori, Anglos in Italia, Gallia and
Belgio omni open semper juvit, at ejus imprimis opera hujus collegii ac
Duacensis and Rhemensis fundamenta jecit. Vixit annos lxi. menses ix. dies
xiix. Exul a patria xxxvi. Obiit xiv. October. mdxciv. Ludovicus de Torres
Archiepiscopus Montis Regalis Amico posuit. The said Dr. Lew. Owen had a Nephew
called Hugh Griffyth who was Provost of Cambray.

Kilkenny in Ireland, took one or more degrees in the Reign of K. Edw. 6. he
being then a Student in Oxon, but by the negligence of the Scribe his name is
omitted in the public Register of that time. Afterward he retired to his
Country, became Archdeacon of Mead, and in 1565. Dean of the Church of the
Holy Trinity, commonly called Christ-Church in Dublin. Afterward being made a
Member of the Queens Privy Council there, was Jac. Waraeus in Com. de praesul.
Hibern. edit. 1665. p. 252.
promoted to the Bishopric of Kilmore in Ap. 1585. with liberty then allowed
him to keep his Deanery in Commendam. In 1589. he was made Archbishop of Armagh
in the place of Dr. Joh. Long deceased: Whereupon being translated thereunto on
the tenth of May the same year, had liberty given him to keep his Deanery then
also. He departed this mortal life on the second day March in fifteen hundred
ninety and four, 1594-95.
and was buried in the Church of the Holy Trinity beforementioned, leaving
then behind him a little thing of his writing intit. The Conversion of Philip
Corwine a Franciscan Friar, to the reformation of the Protestant Religion, an
1589. -- Published in 1681. when the Phanatical party were big with hopes of
satisfying their insatiable ends, under pretense of aggravating and carrying on
the pretended horridness of the Popish Plot. He was succeeded in Kilmore by one
Rob. Draper Rector of Trimm in Ireland, and in the Sea of Armagh by Henry
Usher, whom I shall mention at large under the year 1613.

Lawly alias Mullaly received his first being in this World in the County of
Galloway in Ireland, was educated in New Inn, took the degree of Bach. of
decrees as a Member of that house, in 1555. (1. and 2. of Ph. and Mary,) and
returning soon after into his own Country, was made Dean of Tuam, and at length
consecrated Ib^d. p. ^52.
Archbishop of that place, in Apr. 1573. He ended his days in fifteen hundred
ninety and five, Tuam. In the Sea of Tuam succeeded one Nehemias Donellan an
Irish man, educated in the University of Cambridge, as my author here quoted
says. Yet the Reader must know, that one or more, of his Surname, and time,
studied in Oxon, but his or their Christian names being not registered, I cannot
say that either of them was Nehemias.

Stow in Bucks. educated in Grammaticals in the Free School joining to Magd.
coll. while he continued in the quality of a Chorister of that house:
Afterward upon examination of his proficiency, he was elected one of the
Demies or Semi-Commoners, and in July 1540. was admitted Probationer, and on
the 26. of the said month, in the year following, was made perpetual Fellow of
the said house. In the beginning of K. Edw. 6. he became the Kings Chaplain or
Preacher at Windsore, to which he was elected according to custom by the
Members of the University of Oxon, and about that time showing himself a very
forward Vide Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon. lib. 1. p. (...)
person for reformation, and therefore looked upon as an impudent and
pragmatical Man by the R. Cath. party, nay and by some also of his own, he was
forced to leave the coll. in the beginning of Q. Mary's reign, being then Bach.
of divinity. Whereupon going into France, he spent most of his time at Paris
and Orleance during her reign, where he improved himself much in learning, and
in the language of that Country. After Q. Elizab. came to the Crown, he
returned and became Chaplain to Dr. Parker Archb. of Canterbury, Archdeacon of
Stafford and Residentiary of the Church of Lichfield; which dignities were
given to him by Dr. Bentham Bishop of that place, sometimes his Friend and
Contemporary in Magd. coll. In the beginning of the year 1569. he was one of
the three persons that was elected Warden of Merton coll. by the Fellows
thereof; whereupon the Archb. beforementioned conser'd that place on him, and
in the next year he proceeded Doct. of div. as a Member of the said house. In
1585. he had the Bishopric of Chichester conferred upon him on the death of
Rich. Coortess; to which See being consecrated 30. of January, was installed or
enthronized the 3. March the same year, where he sat to the time of his death
much beloved of all in his diocese. He gave up the ghost on the 30. of Apr. in
fifteen hundred ninety and six, and was buried 26. May following, Soon after
was a monument set over his grave, with his figure kneeling thereon, (which
shows him to have been a comely and handsome Man.) with this inscription
engraven near it. Thomas Bickley sacrae Theologiae Doctor, Magdalenensis
Collegii Oxon. Alumnus, Archidiaconus Stafford: Collegii de Merton Custos, and
hujus Ecclesiae Episcopus, quam annos december, and tres menses, sobrietate and
sinceritate, summa justitia and prudentia singulari and pie and religiose
administravit. Obiit pridie calendas Maii Aldingborniae, anno salutis nostrae
Millesimo quingentesimo nonagesimo sexto, and aetatis suae septuagesimo octavo,
etc. I find* by his last Will and Test. that he gave to Magd. coll. his good
nurse, forty pounds to be bestowed on the Grammar School joining to the said
college, for the seeling and paving it. To Merton coll. also he gave an hundred
pounds to buy land, that the revenue thereof be bestowed in exhibition on one
of the Fellows thereof that professes divinity, to preach one public Sermon,
etc. This exhibition was afterward ordered to be given to that Fellow that
should Preach a Sermon to the University on May Day in the Chapel or Church
belonging to Merton coll. which yet continues. In the Sea of Chichester
succeeded Anth. Watson D. D. of Cambridge, Son of Edward Watson of Thorp-Thales
in the County Pal. of Durham, and he the Son of Will. Watson of the same place.
Which Anthony was first Chancellor of the Chapter of Wells, in the place of Dr.
Rog. Good; afterward Dean of Bristow on the death of Joh. Sprint in 1590. and
in 1596. being consecrated Bishop of Chichester beforementioned, was succeeded
in his Chancellourship by one Joh. Rogers, (to whom succeeded also Will. Barker
D. D. 1602.) and in his Deanery by Simon Robson, not in 1596. but in 98. which
shows that Watson kept the said Deanery for some time in Commendam with
Chichester. This Dr. Watson, who spent his life in celebacy, as his Predecessor
Bickley did, gave way to fate at his house in Cheame or Cheyham in Surrey,
being then Almoner to K. Jam. 1. whereupon his body was buried in the Church
there, on the third day of Oct. 1605. By his last Will In Offic. Praerog. cant.
in reg. Hayes, Qu. 62.
and Testam. he gave an hundred pounds to Christ's coll. in Cambridge, where he
had been educated before he became Fellow of Bennet college, and diverse other
Legacies for pious uses.

RICHARD MEREDYTH, a Welsh man born. John's coll. it appears not. In 1575. he
proceeded M. of Arts as a Member of Jesus coll. which was the highest degree he
took in this University. Afterward being Chaplain to Sir Joh. Perot L.
Lieutenant of Ireland, he was by him made Dean of S. Patricks Church near
Dublin, and at length B. of Leighlin: To which See being consecrated in the
month of Apr. 1589. sat there till the time of his death; which happening Jac.
Waraeus (...)
on the third of August in fifteen hundred ninety and seven, was Patricks
Church beforementioned. In the said See of Leighlin succeeded one Rob. Grave
Dean of Cork, but whether he was ever a Student in Oxford, I cannot yet tell.

JOHN BULLYNGHAM, received his first Gloucester, was elected Probationer of
Magd. coll. in July 1550. being then Bach. of Arts, and intimate with Julius
Palmer the Protestant Martyr, (whose story he has written in a large letter
dated from Bridgnorth about 1562. for the satisfaction of Jo. Fox when he was
in writing his English book of Acts and Monuments) etc. but before he took the
degree of Master, he left the University, (Q. Mary being then in the Throne,)
and retired, as it seems, beyond the Seas, where continuing mostly all her
reign, returned when Q. Elizabeth succeeded, became well beneficed, and in
1567. was made Archdeacon of Huntingdon, but in whose room, unless in that of
Anth. Draycot, I know not. In 1568. he completed the degree of D. of div. in
an Act celebrated on the twelfth of July, and two years after was made
Prebendary of Worcester in the place of Libbeus Byard deceased. In 1581. Sept.
3. he was consecrated Fr. Godwin ut sup. int. ep. Glouc. p. 591.
Bishop of Gloucester; about which time he had the Sea of Bristow given to him
in Commendam, but that being taken away from him in 1589. the rectory of
Kilmington alias Culmington in the dioc. of Wells was conferred on him, in Jul.
1596. He paid his last debt to nature about the 20. of May in fifteen hundred
ninety and eight, Gloucester. Whereupon his rectory was bestowed on Rich.
Potter, father of Franc. Potter, author of the Interpretation of the number of
666, etc. as I shall tell you when I come to him in the next volume of this
work, and his Bishopric on Godfrey Goldsborough Doct. of div. of Cambridge.

Anglesie, educated in Wykehams School near Winchester, made perpetual fellow
of New coll. in 1557. took the degrees in Arts, became one of the Proctors of
the University in 1565. Vicar of Hornchurch in Essex, in 1570. and three years
after Bishop of the Isle of Man on the death of John Salisbury. He yielded up
his last breath in Yorkshire (as it seems) in Sept. or Oct. George Lloyd of
Cambridge, (Son of Meredyth Lloyd, Son of Joh. Lloyd of Caernarvanshire) who
was translated thence to Chester in 1604. This Joh. Merick left behind him a
brother named Will. Merick, LL. D. and another called Maurice Merick, then M.
of Arts, and certain letters concerning Ecclesiastical, and other, affairs,
which I have seen in the Cottonian Library, under the picture of Julius, F. 10.

Hugh ap Kendrick of Caernarvanshire by Gwenllian his wife, daughter of John
Vychan ap John, ap Gruff, ap Owen Pygott, was born in the said County, and for
a while educated in this University. Afterward retiring to Christ's coll. in
Cambridge, he took there the degrees in Arts and holy orders; and being soon
after made chaplain to Thom. Haward or Howard Duke of Norfolk, attended him to
Oxon in the beginning of the year 1568. where, on the same day that the said
Duke was created Master of Arts, this his chaplain was incorporated Bach. of
div. as he had stood in Cambridge. The year after, the said Duke writing
letters to Dr. Laur. Humphrey in his behalf, he was, by the said Humphreys
endeavors made to the Vicechancellour and Convocation, permitted to proceed in
his faculty. Whereupon being licensed the same year, stood in an Act celebrated
10. Jul. 1570. to complete that degree. In 1573. he was promoted to the
Episcopal See of S. Asaph, to which being consecrated in Lambeth chapel on the
thirteenth Ibid. in Godwin, int. Ep. Asaph, p. 664.
of Sept. the same year, sat there to the time of his death without any
removal. He concluded his last day in October. in sixteen hundred, Asaph; leaving
then behind him a Son named William, and a daughter named Anne (the then Wife
of Tho. Mostyn Gent.) begotten on the body of his Wife Lucia daughter of Rob.
Knowesley of Denbighshire. By his last Will In Offic. Praerog. Cant. int. reg.
Wallop, part 2. Q. 69.
and Test. dated 16. Oct. 1597. and proved 9. Nov. 1600. he left lands and
revenues for the founding a free school in the Cath. Chapter of S. Asaph. He the
said Dr. Hughes was succeeded in St. Asaph by Dr. Will. Morgan author of the
first translation of all the Bible (since printing was used) into the ancient
and unmixed language of the Britains. The translation he dedicated, with a
latin epistle prefixed, to Q. Eliz. and was printed in 1588. For which work he
was rewarded with the Bishopric of Landaff first, and afterward with that of
S. Asaph.

Charldon sometimes fellow of Exeter coll. was consecrated B. of Down and
Connor in Ireland, Down and Connor succeeded one Rob. Humpston Master of Arts,
but whether of this University I cannot tell.

Student of Chapter Chapter was consecrated B. of Hereford, in 1585. 1601-02.
and departed this mortal life in the latter end of sixteen hundred and one;
under which year you may see more of him among the writers. In the said See
succeeded Dr. Rob. Bennet sometimes of Trin. coll. in Cambridge, Son of Leonard
Bennet of Baldock in Hertfordshire, who was consecrated thereunto 20. Feb.
1602-03. By his last Ibid. in reg. Weldon, qu. 122.
Will dated 3. Mar. 14. Jac. 1. he bequeathed his body to be buried in the
Cath. Chapter of Hereford, and moneys for the erection of a Tomb of white
Alabaster, with the picture of a man lying in a white Sheet upon an Altar of
other stone, to be compassed about with strong Iron bars, after the example of
other Tombs in the Church. Which monument was to be erected (as he says) in
the Church of the Quire, behind the seat of his Wife, and to be of the value of
an hundred Marks, with this inscription thereon -- Robertus Bennet S. Theol.
Professor fidelis christi Minister, qui obiit... die..... an. 16.... He also
gave 20 l. to the library of Trin. coll. in Cambridge, and 20 l. toward the
building of the New Schools in Oxon. See more of him in the Fasti following,
under the year 1572.

STEPHEN KEROVAN was born at Galloway Ireland, studied several years in this
University, but whether he took a degree I know not. Afterward advancing his
studies in the University of Paris, returned to his native Country, and became
Archdeacon of Enaghdune in the county of Galloway, and at length Bishop (by Q.
Eliz. command) of Kilmacogh, in 1573. Where sitting some years, was translated
thence to Clonfert 1582. and after a successful enjoyment of that See for about
20 years, gave way to fate about sixteen Jac. War. ut sup. p. 26^.
hundred and two. Rowland Linch Archd. of Clonfert, whose Surname occurring
often in our writings, I have just reason to suppose that he had received some
Academical education among us.

DANIEL NEYLAN or Neyland an Irish man Iniscarty in the diocese of Killaloe,
and much in esteem in those parts for his piety and learning. At length
obtaining the Bishopric of Kildare, was consecrated thereunto by Ibid. p. 130.
Adam Archb. of Dublin (and his assistants) in the month of Nov. 1583. where
sitting more than 19. years, yielded to nature at Disert 18. May in sixteen
hundred and three. William Pilsworth of Magdalen coll. of whom I shall make
large mention among these Bishops under the year 1635.

EUGENIUS O-CONNER commonly called Conner another Irish man and contemporary
with Neylan, became, after he had left Oxon, Dean of Achonry in his own
Country, and at length by the favor of Q. Eliz. was promoted to the Episcopal
See of Killala, in 1591. where after he had sat about 16. years. surrendered up
his last breath to him that first gave it, Miler Magragh Archb. of Cashills,
did keep the Sea of Killala in Ibid. p. 2721.
Commendam with his Archbishopric.

WILLIAM OVERTON sometimes fellow Magdalen coll. was consecrated B. of
Lichfield and Coventry in the beginning of the year 1579. (where he showed
himself sufficiently severe to suppress such, whom he suspected of
Nonconformity) and died in sixteen hundred and nine, under which year you may
see more of him George Abbot, of whom I have spoken at large among the said
writers.

MARTIN HETON Son of George Heton Esquire Joane his Wife, daughter of Sir Martin
Bows Knight, was born in London, but descended from an ancient family of his
name living in Lancashire. His father was master of the Inn or House belonging
to the English Merchants at Antwerp; and being a person of great Hospitality,
caused his house there to be free and open for such that fled from England for
religion sake in the time of Q. Mary. At his return into England, he became
Chamberlain of London, sent this his Son to Westminster school, where profiting
exceedingly in good letters, was thence sent to Oxon, and in 1571. was, with
Rich. Eedes, made Student of Chapter Chapter where in short time he became a most acute
disputant. In 1578. he proceeded in Arts, and in 1582. he was made one of the
Canons of his house. In 1588. he was nominated and installed Vicechancellour of
the University of Oxon, and in the latter end of 1589. he succeeded Dr. Laur.
Humphrie in the Deanery of Winchester, being then but 36. years of age. At
length after the Sea of Ely had laid void 20. years, and a large portion of it
taken thence by the Queen, as it was generally spoken, he was in a sort
compelled to take it. Whereupon being consecrated at Lambeth, on the third Fr.
Godwin in Com. de praesul. Angl. int. episc. Elien.
of Feb. 1599. sat there ten years, and as Cambridge men (who had no great
affection for him, because not bred among them) report, did impoverish See the
Brief view of the state of the Chapter of Engl. etc. (quoted before, in Tho.
Godwin) p. 80.
the said See by sealing many good deeds of it, and till they were cancelled,
it would never be so good as it should be. He was a noted Preacher while he
continued in the University, and a subtle Disputant in Theology, in his elder,
as he was in his younger, years in Philosophy: And while B. he was esteemed
inferior to few of his rank for learning and other good parts belonging to a
Prelate. He took his last farewell of this world on the 14. of July in sixteen
hundred and nine, Ely. Soon after was a fair and large monument built over his
grave, joining to the south wall of the said Presbytery, with his Sta^^a
thereon lying on the back, with the hands erected in a praying posture. On the
said monument was engraven an inscription in prose, to show his descent,
preferments, and time of his death; also a copy of long and short verses, in
number 12. composed by Dr. Will. Gager his Chancellor, and another of 14.
composed by his Nephew George Heton Bach. of div. of Cambridge. All which being
too long and large to be here inserted, I shall therefore for brevity sake pass
them by.

Maulaon alias Meandon in Surrey, his juvenile education in the quality of a
Kings Scholar in the college school at Westminster, and his Academical
education in Chapter Chapter of which he was made a Student in 1575. After he had taken
the degrees in Arts he entered into holy orders, and preached in and near Oxon
for some time with great liking. In 1589. he was admitted to the reading of the
sentences, in 1592. he was made Canon of the seventh stall in the Chapter of Westminster.
in the room of Dr. Joh. Still, promoted to the Sea of B. and Wells, an. 1592.
and in 1594. he was made Dean of his house. In the year following he took the
degree of Doct. of div. and after he had completed it by standing in the Act,
took the office of Vicechancellour on him for two years together. In 1604. he
was for his eminent learning, gravity, and approved prudence, preferred by K.
Jam. 1. to the Sea of Gloucester, and on the 19. of March the same year was Ib.
in Fr. Godwin int. ep. Gloc.
consecrated thereunto. The diocese of which place being then pretty well
stocked with such people that could scant brook the name of a Bishop, yet, by
his Episcopal way of living among them, he obtained their love, and were
content to give him a good report. In 1607. June 2. he was Camden in Annal. R.
Jac. 1. sub. an. 1607.
translated to London, where sitting but for a short time, paid his last debt
to nature (to the great reluctance of all good men, especially such who knew
the piety of the Bishop, and how he had for many years with much vigilance
served his Church, King, and Country) on the fourteenth day of December. in
sixteen hundred and nine. Paul's Cath. Chapter and soon after had put over it a
monument, with an inscription thereon; a copy of which being already printed at
least In Jo. Stow's Survey of London, printed 1633. and in W. Dugdales History
of S. Paul's Cath. Chapter
twice, I shall now omit it, and pass to the next. In his Prebendship of
Westminster succeeded Hugh Goodman M. A. and Student of Chapter Chapter installed
therein 10. May 1607. in his Deanery Dr. Joh. King, and in his Bishopric Dr.
Geo. Abbot.

James Linch was born at Galloway in Ireland, and educated in New Inn, as it
seems, with Will. Laly his Countryman, (afterward Archb. of Tuam) took the
degree of Bach. of Decrees in Apr. 1555. and soon after going into his own
Country, had several beneces bestowed on him. At length by the favor of Q.
Eliz. he was promoted to the Bishopric of Elphine an. 1584; which place he
keeping about 27. years, resigned Jac. Waraeus in Com. de praesul. Hib^rn.
edit: 1665. p. 260.
it 19. Aug. 1611. and dying soon after, Clar. 1611.
was buried in the Chapter of S. Nicholas in Galloway. In the said See succeeded
one Edw. King a Huntingdonshire man born, Doct. of div. of the University of
Dublin, who was consecrated thereunto in Dec. 1611. See another Joh. Linch in
the Fasti, 1618. among the Incorporations.

GILES TOMSON a Londoner born, was entered University coll. in 1571. took the
degrees in Arts, and in 1580. was elected fellow of Allsouls coll. In 1586. he
was one of the Proctors of the University, and about that time Divinity reader
of Magd. coll. When he was a Junior, he gave Bries view of the state of the
Church of England, etc. p. 152.
a great hope and good presage of his future excellency, having a rare gift ex
tempore in all his School Exercises, and such a happy wit to make use of all
occurrences to his purpose, as if he had not taken the occasions, as they fell
out by accident, but rather bespoken such pretty accidents to fall out to give
him the occasions. Afterward he was chaplain to the Qu. Residentiary of
Hereford, Rector of Pembridge in Herefordshire, was installed Dean of Windsore,
2. March 1602. being then Doct. of div. Scribe or Registrary of the most noble
Order of the Garter, and a most eminent Preacher. At length being nominated and
elected B. of Gloucester, had restitution of the temporalities belonging to it,
made to him Pat. 9. Jac. 1. p. 21.
on 27. June 1611. and was in the next month consecrated thereunto, with
liberty then allowed to him to keep his Deanery in Commendam for one year and
no longer. He departed this mortal life, to the great grief of all that knew
the piety and learning of the man (after he had taken a great deal of pains, at
the command of K. Jam. 1. in translating the four Gospels, Acts of the Apostles
and Apocalypse) on the 14. June in sixteen hundred and twelve. Brays chapel on
the south side of that of S. George at Windsore, and had soon after a monument
put over him, with his Bust to the middle, and this inscription under it.
Individua Trinitati per omnia saecula, sit gloria per quam sui, sum, ero. Hic
situs est Aegidius Tomson hujus Capcllae quondam Decanus, cujus men's sincera,
lingua docta, manus munda fuit. Londini natus, educatus Oxoniae in collegio
Omnium Animarum. Bonorum, Indigentium, Eruditorum amantissimus semper vixit,
cujus corpus quamvis mortalitas terrae subjecit, illius tamen animam pietas
caelis inseruit. Hunc virum moribus gravem, prudentia insignem, pietate summum,
haec Regia Capella per annos december Decanum habuit. Inde a serenissimo Rege
Jacobo in Episcopatum Glouc. Commendatum, mors intempestiva (anno decurso)
praesulem rapuit. Obiit 14. Junii An. Dom. 1612. aetat. 59.

RICHARD DEANE Son of Gilb. Deane of Saltonstall Yorkshire (by Elizabeth his
Wife daughter of Edm. Jennings of Syelsden in Craven) was born at Saltonstall,
and after he had been educated in Grammaticals in his own Country, became a
Student in Merton coll. 1587. aged 17. years: where continuing about 5. years,
in the quality, as it seems, of a Portionist, retired to S. Albans hall, and,
as a member of that house, took the degree of Bach. of Arts, in October. 1592.
and that of Master three years after; which was the highest degree he took in
this University. Afterward he taught school at Caermerthen in Wales, (as a
note that came thence, which I have seen, reports, tho I hardly believe it) was
made Dean of Kilkenny in Ireland, and at length Bishop of Ossory there, about
the latter end of the year 1609. He yielded up his last breath on the 20. of
Feb. in Ibid. in War. p. 140
sixteen hundred and twelve, and was buried near to the Bishops chair in the
Church at Kilkenny. Ossory succeeded Jonas Wheeler another Oxford Student, whom
I shall at large mention among these Bishops, under the year 1640.

HENRY USHER a Dublin man born, was educated Cambridge till he was Bach of
Arts, and some time after. In the beginning of the year 1572. he went to Oxon,
settled in University coll. was incorporated in the same degree in the beginning
of July the same year, and in few days after was licensed to proceed in Arts.
Which degree being completed by standing in the Act, he made some continuance
here, studied the Theological faculty, and laid a sure foundation therein by
the helps of diverse noted men, then in the University; among whom Dr. Humphrey
and Dr. Holland were two. Afterward he retired to his native Country, became
Archdeacon of Dublin, and at length Archb. of Armagh, and so consequently
Primate of all Ireland. To which See being consecrated in Aug. 1595. sat there
till the time of his death in great honor and repute, among all Protestants in
that country. He died at Termon-Fechan on the Ibid. p. 28.
second day of April in sixteen hundred and thirteen, Peter's Church at
Drogheda, commonly called Tredagh. In the Sea of Armagh succeeded Dr.
Christopher Hampton, and him Dr. James Usher nephew to Henry before mentioned,
whom I shall mention in the Fasti under the year 1626.

Ric. Cotton Knight. one of the Privy Council to K. Ed. 6. was born in Hampshire,
educated in the Free school at Guildford, became a commoner of Magd. coll. in
1566. or thereabouts, took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being completed
in 1571, holy Orders, and about that time a Wife; by whom afterward he had Sir
Joh. Harrington in his Brief view of the state of the Chapter of England, p. 96.
nineteen children. In 1586. he being then Prebendary of Winchester and well
beneficed, supplicated to be admitted to the reading of the sentences, but
whether he was really admitted, it appears not. On the 12. of Nov. 1598. he was
Godwin, int. ep. Salisb.
consecrated B. of Salisbury, and in the year following was actually created
Doct. of div. by certain Doctors deputed for that purpose, who went to him,
then (I think) at Salisbury. He was Godson to Q. Eliz. while she was Lady Eliz.
who, as it is By Sir Jo. Harr. ut sup. p. 93. alias 95.
reported, usually said that she had blessed many of her Godsons, but now this
Godson should bless her. He gave way to fate on the seventh day of May in
sixteen hundred and fifteen, Salisbury, near to the body of his sometimes Wife.
In the said See succeeded Dr. Rob. Abbot, whom I have mentioned before among
the writers, under the year 1617.

New coll. was consecrated B. of Worcester in 1596. translated thence to
Winchester in the year following, 1^16.
and concluded his last day in sixteen hundred and sixteen; under which year
you may see more of him among the writers. In Worcester succeeded Gervase
Babington of Cambridge, of whom I have made mention in Will. Bradbridge among
these Bishops, an. 1578. and in Winchester succeeded Dr. James Mountague sixth
Son of Sir Edw. Mountague of Boughton in Northamptonshire Knight. who was
translated thereunto from Bathe and Wells, 4. October. 1616. This worthy person
died on the twentieth So it is on his monument in the Chapter of S. Pet. and S.
Paul at Bath^.
day of July 1618. aged 50. and was buried 20. Aug. following, on the north
side of the body of the Church dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul within the
City of Bathe. Over his grave was soon after a high Altar-monument erected
between two Pillars of the said Church, with the proportion of the defunct
painted to the life lying thereon, by his brethren Sir Edw. Mountague of
Boughton, Sir Hen. Mountague Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Sir Charles
Mountague his Executor, and Sir Sidney Mountague Master of the Requests, Kts.
All which were lineally descended from the Earls of Salisbury. The said Dr.
Jam. Mountague was educated in the University of Cambridge, was Master of
Sydney coll. and there noted for his piety, virtue, and learning. Afterward he
was made Dean of the Royal Chapel, then B. of Rathe, afterward of Winchester,
(as it is before told you) and for his faithfulness, dexterity and prudence, in
weighty affairs the King chose him to be one of his Privy Council. By his last
Will and Testament, he made choice of the said ancient Church for the place of
his Sepulture: which, among many other monuments of piety, he repaired to his
great charge. When K. James came first to the Crown he was made Dean of his
Chapel, as before it is told you; which place he held not only when he was B.
of Bathe and Wells, but of Winchester also: And being a great stickler in the
quarrels at Cambridge, and a great Master in the Art of insinuation, had
cunningly (as one Pet. Heylin in his Observations on the History of the reign
of K. Charles, published by Ham. L'Estrange-printed 1656. oct. p. 77.
observes) fashioned K. James unto certain Calvinian opinions; to which the
Kings education in the Kirk of Scotland had before inclined him. So that it was
no very hard matter for him (having an Archb. also of his own persuasion) to
make use of the Kings authority for recommending the nine Articles to the
Church of Ireland, which he found would not be admitted in the Church of
England.

HENRY ROWLANDS was born in the Parish Mellteyrn in LLyn in Caernarvanshire,
educated in the School at Penllech, was admitted a Student in the University
about 1569. took the degrees in Arts as a member of New coll. that of Master
being completed in 1577. and soon after became Rector of La^^ton near Bister
alias Burchester in Oxfordshire. In 1598. Nov. 12. he was consecrated Ib. in
Godwin int. ep. Bang.
B. of Bangor, being then Bach. of div. and in 1605. he was actually created
Doct. of that faculty. He bestowed on his Cath. Chapter four bells, instead of
those that were fold away by Arthur Bulkley his predecessor, and in 1609. he
Vide Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon, lib. 2. p. 316. b.
gave lands to Jesus coll. for the maintenance of two scholars or fellows
there. At length after he had bestowed much money on pious uses, had spent all
his time in celebacy, and had governed his church and diocese with great
commendations, Camden in Annal. R. Jac. 1. MS. sub an. 1616.
June, in sixteen hundred and sixteen, and was buried in the Choire of the
Cath. Chapter at Bangor, among the sepulchers of the Bishops. By his last Will In
Offic. (...). cant. in reg. Cope part 2 Q* 19.
and Test, he bequeathed moneys for the erection of a School at Mellteyrn, or
Bottunog, where he was born and christened. In the Sea of Bangor succeeded Jews
Bailey, whom I have mentioned at large among the writers, under the year 1632.

HENRY ROBINSON was born within the Carlisle in Cumberland, became a poor
serving child of Queens coll. about the year 1568. afterward Tabarder, and at
length Fellow, being then esteemed an excellent Disputant and Preacher. In
1581. he was unanimously elected Provost of his college: which office he
enjoying about 18. years, restored it in that time, and made it flourish, after
it had continued many years but in a mean condition, occasioned by the
negligence of former Governors. In 1590. he proceeded in div. and in 98. being
nominated and elected to the Sea of Carlisle, was consecrated thereunto by John
B. of Land. Joh. B. of Roch. and Anthony B. of Chich. on the 23. of July in the
same year. He was a person of great gravity and temperance, and very mild in
his speech, yet, as one Author of the (...) etc. before mentioned, p. 208.
observes, not of so strong a constitution of body as his countenance did
promise. He paid his last debt to nature on the 13. of the Call. of July in
sixteen hundred Carlisle. Soon after was a brassplate set up on the wall over
his grave, by the care and charge of Bernard Robinson his brother and heir,
with an inscription and verses thereon, running almost word for word, or at
least in sense, with that inscription on a brass plate also, fastened to the
south wall near to the Altar in Qu. coll. chapel in Oxon, a copy of which you
may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon, lib. 2. p. 124. a. b. In which book p.
116. b. you may also see something of his benefaction to the said coll. In the Sea of Carlisle succeeded one Dr. Rob. Snoden or Snowden of Cambridge,
(Prebendary of Southwell) third Son of Ralph Snoden of Mansfeild Woodhouse in
Nottinghamshire; the temporalities of which See were given to Pat. 1^. Jac. ^.
p. 30.
him 20. Dec. 1616. He died at London while the Parliament was sitting in the
latter end of May 1621. leaving behind him a Son named Rutland Snoden of
Horncastle in Lincolnshire, (who was afterward a Justice of the Peace)
begotten on the body of his Wife Abigal, daugh. of Rob. Orme of Elston in
Nottinghamshire. After him followed in the said See of Carlisle Ric. Milbourne
B. of S. David, descended from those of his name in Pembrokeshire, but born in
London, (his mother being occasionally there at the delivery of him,) educated
in Grammar learning in Wykehams school near Winchester, and from thence was
sent to Qu. coll. in Camb. where he continued several years. Afterward he
became Minister of Sevenoke in Kent, Chapl. to P. Hen. Chantor of S. David's
cath. chapter and Dean of Rochester, as I shall elsewhere tell you. At length he
being made B. of S. David, was, after he had sat there about 6. years,
translated to Carlisle, where he continued till 1624. In which year dying, he
left moneys, as it is said, for the endowing of a School, and moneys for the
building of an Hospital. He has a Sermon. in print concerning the imposition of
hands, preached, while he was Minister of Sevenoke, at the Archb. Metropolical
Visitation, 7. Sept. 1607. on 1 Timothy 5. 22. printed in oct. To him succeeded in
the said See of Carlisle Rich. Senhouse Dean of Gloucester, who was first
admitted a Student in Trin. coll. in Camb. and afterward was removed to that
of S. John's, of which he was made Fellow, and continuing there many years, took
the degree of D. of div. as a Member thereof, about 1622. He was first
chaplain, as it is said, in the Earl of Bedfords family, afterward chaplain to
Pr. Charles, and at length to K. Jam. 1. who advanced him to a Deanery and
afterward to the said See of Carlisle, for his transcendent parts and admirable
gifts in Preaching. He has extant Four Sermons preached at Court, and left
behind him at his death Lectures on the first and second Psalms; which are not,
as I conceive, made yet public.

ap Harry, sometimes Fellow of Corp. Chapter coll. was consecrated B. of Gloucester
12. Jul. 1607. translated thence to Worcester in the latter end of Sept. 1610.
the temporalities of which See were Pat. 8. Jac. 1. p. 52.
restored to him 23. Oct. the same year. He yielded to nature in sixteen
hundred and sixteen; Gloucester by Dr. Giles Tomson, and in Worcester by Dr.
Joh. Thornborough. Of the first I have made mention already among the Bishops,
and of the other I shall speak in the second volume of this work, under the
year 1641.

Student of Chapter Chapter became Bishop of Durham in 1606. and died in sixteen
hundred and seventeen; Rich. Neile Bishop of Lincoln was translated to Durham,
and thence to Winchester, as I shall elsewhere tell you.

Cheshire man born, was partly educated in this University, but whether in
Oriel or S. John's coll. where several of his surname and time have studied, I
cannot tell. Afterward he went into Ireland, became Vicar of Naas and Chaplain
to Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton L. Lieutenant of that Country, who promoting him
to the Episcopal See of Ross, was consecrated thereunto Jac. War. ut sup. p.
224.
in the year 1582. and the year following was constituted commendatory of Cork
and Cloyne by the favor of Qu. Eliz. He bestowed a thousand pound in building
the Bishops house at Cork, and other moneys in repairing the Bishops house at
Ross, which three years after was burnt by the Rebel O-Donow. This W. Lion died
in a good old age on the 4. Oct. Cork, leaving then behind him a Son of both
his names, who in the 17 year of his age, 1610. became a Com. or else Gent.
Com. of S. John's coll. in this Univ. In the said Sees of Ross, Cork, and
Cloyne, succeeded Dr. Joh. Boil, whom I shall anon mention.

Balliol college, was consecrated B. of Salisbury on the third of December. 1615.
to the great joy of all Scholars, especially such who knew the learning and
piety of the man. He concluded his last day in the latter end of sixteen
hundred and seventeen; 1617-18.
under which year you may see more of him among the writers. In the said See of
Salisbury succeeded Dr. Martin Fotherby Son of Maurice Fotherby, of the ancient
and gentile Family of his name living at Grimsby in Lincolnshire; which Martin
having been bred Fellow of Trin. coll. in Cambridge, was, after he had been
Prebendary of Canterbury 22 years, consecrated at Lambeth on the 18. Apr. 1618.
He surrendered up his last breath on the eleventh day of March, an. 1619. and
was buried in Allsaints Church in Lombardstreet within the City of London. Soon
after was a very fair monument erected over his grave, with a large inscription
thereon, but destroyed by the great Fire that happened in London in the beginning
of Sept. 1666. He has extant at least 4 Sermons; besides his Atheomastix,
which being put into the press before his death, was not published till 1622.
fol. After him succeeded in the said See Dr. Robert Tounson, or Tonson, Dean of
Westminster, sometimes Fellow of Queens coll. in Cambridge, who was consecrated
thereunto on the 9. July 1620. See more in the Fasti, among the incorporations
under the year 1599.

Kentish man born, and brother to Rich. Boil the first Earl of Cork in
Ireland, received some education with us, but whether D. of div. of this Univ.
as one Idem Jac. War. p. 213. 224.
reports, it appears not in the public Registers. He was consecrated B. of
Cork beforementioned in 1618. at which time liberty was allowed him to keep
the Sea of Ross in Commendam. He died in sixteen hundred and twenty, Youghall,
of which place his brother beforementioned was Baron. In the said See of Cork
and Ross succeeded Rich. Boil Dean of Waterford, and Archd. of Limerick,
brother to Michael Boil B. of Waterford and Lismore, which Richard kept the Sea also of Cloyne in Commendam with the two former.

JOHN KING, sometimes a Student of Chapter Chapter afterward London in 1611. and died
in sixteen hundred twenty and 1621*
one; under which year you may see more of him among the writers. To him
succeeded Dr. George Mountaigne Bishop Almoner, sometimes Dean of Westminster,
who was translated from Loncoln to London 20. July 1621.

ROWLAND SEARCHFIELD, a Londoner Merchant-Taylors School, admitted Scholar of
S. John's coll. in 1582. aged 17 years, or thereabouts: Afterward he was made
Fellow of that house, Proctor of the University, Doct. of div. and successively
Vicar of Emley in Northamptonshire, Rector of Bowthorp in Gloucestershire,
Vicar of Cherlbury in, and Justice of the Peace of, Oxfordshire. He was
consecrated B. of Bristow 9. May 1619. upon the translation of Dr. Nich. Felton
to Ely: which was made 14. March 1618. The said Dr. Searchfield died on the
eleventh of Oct. in sixteen hundred Bristow, leaving then one Son or more
behind him, begotten on the body of his Wife, Mrs. Anne Huchenson of Rewley
near Oxon. Over his grave was a stone soon after laid, with an epitaph thereon,
but removed thence by Dr. Rich. Thompson Dean of that Church when he raised the
Communion Table. In the said See of Bristow succeeded Dr. Rob. Wright, tho one
Kevercher (as he is called) tug'd hard for it.

RICHARD PARRY, Son and Heir of Joh. Parry, Ruthyn in Denbighshire, educated in
Westminster School under Camden for some time, elected Student of Chapter Chapter in
1579. aged 19 years, took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and became
Schoolmaster, as it is said, of Ruthyn beforementioned. In 1598. he proceeded
D. of div. and whether he was before that time Dean of Bangor, I cannot tell.
Sure it is, that that dignity was enjoyed by one Rowland Thomas, who died in
1588. Afterward when K. Jam. 1. who had an especial respect for his learning,
came to the English Crown, he soon after promoted him to the Sea of S. Asaph.
To which being consecrated Fr. Godw. ut sup. int. ep. S. Asaph*
on the 30. Dec. 1604. he received Pat. 2. Jac. 1. p. 31.
the temporalities belonging thereunto on the 5. of Jan. following. He ended
his days at Diesert commonly called Dyssart in Flintshire on the 26. of Sept.
in sixteen hundred twenty and three, Asoph. The year before he died he left a
pension of 6 l. per an. to Jesus coll. for the maintenance of a poor Scholar
born in the Town of Ruthyn, or in the diocese of S. Asaph, to be paid by his
Son Richard and his Heirs for ever. See more in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 317. a. He assisted Dr. Will. Morgan B. of Landaff in the
translating the Bible into Welsh, and after his death had a Lat. Sermon ad
clerum, on Rev. 3. ver. 4. printed under his name, 1628. in oct.

WILLIAM BISHOP, sometimes a Member of Gloucester hall, as it seems, became
Bishop of Chalcedon (titular only) about 1622. and died in the beginning of the
year sixteen hundred twenty and four; Richard Smith another Oxford man by
education, but the year when I cannot tell. Of this Rich. Smith I shall make
large mention elsewhere

MILES SMITH. sometimes a Member of Bras^^se coll. afterward Petty-Canon of
Chapter Chapter was consecrated Gloucester in 1612. and died in sixteen hundred twenty
and four; under which year you may see more of him Gloucester succeeded Godfrey
Goodman, born at Ruthyn in Denbighshire in the first Gregorian year, an. Dom.
1582.-1583. (...). 28-Mar. 10. between the hours of one and two in the morning,
being the Son of Godfr. Goodman Gent. (Nephew to Dr. Gabr. Goodman) by Jane
Cruxton his Wife, made Chorister, and after Scholar, of Westminster under
Camden, an. 1592. Scholar of Trin. coll. in Cambridge in 1600. Parson of
Stapleford-Abbats in Essex, 1607. Canon of Windsore, 1617. installed Dean of
Rochester in the place of Dr. Rob. Scot deceased, 6. Jan. 1620. and at length
was made B. of Glout. in 1625. with leave to hold his Canonry of Windsore, and
the Rectory of West-Ildesley in Berks, in Commendam: About which time
maintaining several heterodox opinions in his Sermons at Court, he was checked
for so doing in 1626. In 1640. he dissented from the Canons, for which, after
three admonitions pronounced by Archb. Laud in little more than half an hour,
to subscribe, he was to his great honor (as 'twas esteemed by some.)
imprisoned, and thereupon accounted a Papist. In certain writings which
sometimes belonged to Archbishop Laud I find these matters relating to Goodman.
-- The Synod was dissolved 29. May 1640. wherein were 17 Canons subscribed by
the Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and Doctors, to the number of 100. or 120. --
The last business insisted on was of the deprivation of Dr. Goodman Bishop of
Gloucester for refusing to subscribe to the said Canons, which had been done by
all the Bishops except him of Gloc. and all the lower house of Convocation. --
With much persuasions he was drawn to subscribe, notwithstanding after his
subscribing, for his obstinate refusal at first, and the scandal of it, he was
by both houses with a general consent suspended ab officio and beneficio, till
he had given the King and Church satisfaction. The Archbishop, upon his refusal
to subscribe, told him, that he must be either a Papist, or Socinian, or
Puritan; which he utterly denied, and said it was a matter of another nature,
etc. Afterward the Archbishop made an exhortation to the Clergy, wherein he
exhorted them to carry themselves well both in life and doctrine: And professed
that all his sufferings were for supporting them; and this he spoke with a
great deal of passion. He protested before God that the King was far from
Popery, that there was no man in England more ready to be a Martyr for Religion
than his Majesty. Bishop Goodman who was first committed to a Pursevant, and
afterward to the Gate House, wrote a letter to Archb. Laud and told him he
dissented from the Canons, and entered an Act in the 19. Session to that
purpose, etc. In 1643. he the said Goodman was plundered, spoiled, robbed, and
utterly undone. His losses were so extraordinary and excessive great, that he
was ashamed to confess them, lest they might seem incredible, and lest others
might condemn him of folly and improvidence. About that time he lived obscurely
in S. Margarets Parish within the City of Westminster in the house of one Mrs.
Sibilla Eglionby, making frequent use of the Cottonian Library, and the company
of certain R. Priests; whose persuasion he having taken up for several years
before, died at length in their belief (Fr. a S. Clara his old acquaintance
being then with him) on the nineteenth day of Jan. 1655. whereupon his body was
buried near to the Font in S. Margarets Church; leaving then behind him, the
character of a harmless man, that he was hurtful to none but himself, that he
was pitiful to the poor, and hospitable to his neighbors. In his last In
Offic. praerog. Came. in reg. Berkley part. 2. Qu. 65.
Will and Testament dated 17. Jan. and proved 16. Feb. 1655. I find these
matters. -- I do profess that as I have lived, so I die most constant in all
the Articles of our Christian Faith, and in all the doctrine of Gods holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church, whereof I do acknowledge the Church of Rome to
be the Mother Church. And I do verily believe that no other Church has any
salvation in it, but only so far as it concurs with the Faith of the Church of
Rome. -- My body to be buried in S. Marg. Chapter in Westminster near to the Font,
in the meanest manner according to the deserts of my Sins, -- Item, I give 20
s. for the painting, or otherwise, of the said Font. -- It. I give my tenement
in Yale, and the two tenements in Caernarvanshire, Cordmaur, and Tudne to the
Town of Ruthyn in Denbighshire where I was born, etc. The rent of the tenement
in Yale he bequeathed to several uses, and among the rest was 20 l. to be given
to some Gentleman who should desire to travel, and that he, together with good
security, should undertake within the compass of two years to live two months
in Germany, two months in Italy, two months in France, and two months in Spain,
and that his own kindred be chosen before others for that purpose, etc. The
books that he designed for Chelsey college, he gave to Trin. coll. in
Cambridge; but with this condition, that if Chelsey coll. be ever restored, the
books should be restored thereunto. He gave 16 l. to outed and sequestered
Ministers of the Loyal Party, and a 100 l. to poor distressed Churchmen (Romans
Catholics) according to the discretion of his Executors Gabriel Goodman and
Mrs. Sib. Eglionby. He desired also that his collection of notes be perused by
some Scholar, and if any thing should be found worthy of printing, that they be
published, etc. It must be now known that in hate and detestation of
Socinianism, he did, in his younger years, examine all the mysteries in
Religion, and all the miracles in Scripture, how far they agreed with natural
reason, and wherein they transcended, and thereupon did publish a book intit.
The fall of man, or the corruption of nature, proved by natural reason. Land.
1616. and 1624. qu. And then he undertook to proceed in the rest of the
Mysteries. Together with these he drew up an History from the beginning of the
World to his time, and so he ended with the Church of England, as se^led by
Laws, little regarding the opinion of particular men, but Statutes, Acts of
State, Proclamations, Injunctions, etc. In which work he was much beholding to
Sir Tho. Cottons Library. But these with the rest of his goods were lost, and
whether they were ever recovered before his death, I know not. He has also
written, Arguments or animadversions and digressions on a book intit. An
apology, or declaration of the power and providence of God in the government of
the World, etc. written by Dr. George Hakewill. Which arguments and digressions
are with Hakewills answer involved in the sixth book of the said Apology,
printed at Oxon, the third time, 1635. fol. See more in G. Hakewill among the
writers, an. 1649. Bishop Goodman also wrote, The Court of K. James by Sir A.
W. reviewed. It Is a MS. in a thin fol. in Bodl. Library, and has this
beginning, I cannot say that I was an eye and ear-witness, but truly I have
been an observer of the times, and what I shall relate of my own knowledge, God
knows is most true. My conjecturals I conceive, etc. The conclusion which is
imperfect is this -- Yet notwithstanding I have given him (Sir A. W.) the name
of a Knight, because he has pleased so to style himself, and that I might not
offend him. This manuscript book was made in answer to a published book intit.
The court and character of King James. Land. 1650. oct. written and taken by
Sir A. W. Which book being accounted a most notorious Libel, especially by the
Loyalists and Court-party, was also answered in print by Anonymus, intit.
Anlicus Coquinariae: or a vindication in answer to a Pamphlet entitled, The
Court and Character of K. James, etc. Land. 1650. The author of the said Court
and Character was one Sir Anth. Weldon of Kent, whose Parent took rise from
Queen Elizabeth's Kitchen, and left it a legacy for preferment of his Issue. Sir
Anthony went the same way, and by grace of the Court got up to the Greencloth;
in which place attending K. James into Scotland he practiced there to libel
that Nation. Which, at his return home, was found wrapped up in a Record of that
Board; and by the hand being known to be his, he was deservedly removed from
his place, as unworthy to eat his bread, whose birthright he had so vilely
defamed. Yet by favor of the King. with a piece of money in his purse, and a
pension to boot, to preserve him loyal during his life, tho as a bad creditor,
he took See the Preface to Aulieus Coquinariae.
this course to repay him to the purpose. In his lifetime he discovered part
of this piece to his Fellow-courtier, who earnestly dissuaded him not to
publish so defective and false a scandal; which, as it seems, in Conscience he
so declined. I have also been credibly informed that Sir A. Weldon did at the
beginning of the Long Parliament communicate the MS. of it to the Lady Elizab.
Sedley, (Mother to Sir Will. and Sir Charles,) accounted a very sober and
prudent Woman; who, after perusal, did lay the vileness of it so much to Sir
Anthony's door, that he was resolved never to make it public: Which perhaps is
the reason why a certain author Will. Sanderson in his Proem to the Reign and
death of K. James. 1. printed 1655. fol.
should say, that with some regret of what he had maliciously written, did
intend it for the fire and died repentant; tho since stolen to the Press out of
a Ladies closet: And if this be true, our exceptions may willingly fall upon
the practice of the publisher of the said libel, who by his additions may abuse
us with a false story, which he discovers to the Reader in five remarkable So
in the said Pre^ to Aul. Coq.
passages, and therefore in some manner gives us occasion to spare our censure
on Sir Anthony, who was dead some time before the said libel was published. The
second edition of it printed at Land. in oct. an. 1651. is dedicated to the
said noble Lady Elizab. Sedley, and has added to it, (1) The Court of K.
Charles continued, unto the beginning of these unhappy times, etc. (2)
Observations (instead of a character) upon this King, from his Childhood. (3)
Certain Observations before Q. Elizabeth's death. But these are not animadverted
upon by Aulicus Coq. or B. Goodman, because they came out after they had
written their respective answers. The said Bishop Goodman has also written The
two mysteries of Christian, religion, the ineffable Trinity and wonderful
incarnation explicated, etc. Land 1653. qu. Dedicated by one Epist. to Oliver
Cromwell L. General, and by another to the Master, Fellows, Scholars and
Students of Trin, coll. in Cambridge. Also An Account of his sufferings; which
is only a little pamphlet, printed 1650.

Middlesex in the diocese of London, admitted Scholar of Trinity coll. in 1583.
aged 17 years; fellow five years after, and when Master of Arts he went into
Ireland; where by the favor of the Lord Lieutenant he was consecrated Bishop
of Limerick in Apr. 1604. In the year 1606. he, by a dispensation kept the Sea
of Kilfenore with it, to the year 1617. at which time he voluntarily resigned
it. He bestowed much money in repairing the Church of Limerick, and in the
adorning it with Organs and several Ornaments, as also in repairing the house
belonging to his See, besides other moneys for pious use. 1625-6.
He died (...) p. 189.
on the 22. of March in sixteen hundred twenty and five, and was buried in the
Cath. Chapter of Limerick, where was a monument soon after erected to his memory.
In the said See succeeded Francis Gough commonly called Goffe, whom I shall
anon at large mention.

New coll. was consecrated B. of Bathe and Wells, in the month of Dec. 1616.
and concluded his last day in sixteen hundred twenty and six; Will Laud, of
whom I shall make mention at large among the writers in the second volume of
this work.

John Matthew, a native of Roos in Herefordshire, by his Wife Elianor Croston of
Ludlow, was born in the city of Bristow, in that part of it which is in
Somersetshire, educated in Grammar learning in the City of Wells, became a
Student in this University in the beginning of the year 1559. aged 13. years,
but in what house, unless in Vniv. coll. (the ancient members of which have
claimed him as theirs) I know not. Sure it is, that being a Student of Chapter Chapter
soon after his first coming, he did, as a member of that house, take the degree
of Bach. of Arts in 1563. and three years after, that of master, and holy
orders; at which time he was much respected for his great learning, eloquence,
sweet conversation, friendly disposition, and for the sharpness of his wit. In
1569. he was unanimously elected the public Orator of the University, which
office he executed with great applause, and with no little honor to the
University. In 1570. he was made Canon of Chapter Chapter and on the 28. Nov. the same
year, he was admitted Archdeacon of Bathe. In 1572. May 15. he became
Prebendary of Teynton Regis with Yalmeton in the Church of Salisbury, and in
July the same year, he was elected President of S. John's coll. At which time
being much famed for his admirable way of Preaching, he was made one of the
Queens chaplains in Ordinary, and soon after proceeding in Divinity, was made
Dean of Chapter Chapter 1576. So that then his name sounding high among scholars, he
deservedly obtained the name of Theologus praestantissimus, for so he is styled
by the learned Camden, who adds In Britannia in (...).
that in him doctrina cum pietate, and ars cum natura certant. Eam. Campian*
the Jesuit in his book of Ten Reasons, (which the R. Catholics count an
Epitomy of all their doctrine) laboring to prove that the Fathers were all
Papists, and to give the uttermost he could to his assertion says that Thoby
Matthew confessed to him so much -- (...) says he, etc. We did once in a familiar
sort sound Th. Mathews opinion, he that now domineers in your Pulpits, whom for
his good learning and seeds o^ virtue, we esteemed, etc. Which character coming
from a Jesuits pen, makes it the truer because he was in some manner his
Adversary. In 1579. he did undergo the office of Vicechancellour of this
University* and in 1583. he was not only made Chantor of the Church of (...) on
the resignation of George Carew, in the month of June, but also Dean of Durham,
void by the decease of Dr. (...). In which dignity being installed 31. Aug. he
g^ve up his Chantorship in Febr. following, wherein he was succeeded by Dr.
Will. Zouch, and in the beginning of the year following his Deanery of Chapter Chapter
In 1595. he was to the great joy of many, especially those of the Clergy, made
Bishop of Durham, upon the translation of Dr. Math. Hutton to York; (which was
made 24. of March 1594.) to which See being consecrated soon after, sat there
till August an. 1606. and then being translated on the 18. of the said month,
and installed on the 11. of Sept. following in the person of his Proctor, sat
there in great honor and repute till the time of his death. He gave way to
sat in a good old age, on the 29. of March in sixteen hundred twenty and
eight, York. Soon after was a noble monument of black and white marble set up
under the great east window of that chapel, with his Effigies in his
Archiepiscopal robes, and an inscription thereon: A copy of which containing
his just character, you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon, lib. 2. p. 255.
b. 256. a. He has extant a latin Sermon. intit. Concio Apologetica contra Edm.
Campianum, in Deuteronomy 32. 7. Oxon. 1638. oct. As also a letter to K. Jam, 1. which
is printed in the Cabala. I have been informed that he had several things lying
by him worthy of the Press, but what became of them after his death, I know
not, nor any thing to the contrary but that they came into the hands of his Son
Sir Tobie. In the said See of York succeeded Dr. George Mountaigne of Queens
coll. in Cambridge, sometimes a Lecturer in Gresham coll. afterward Master of
the Savoy, Dean of Westminster in the place of Dr. Neile promoted to the Sea of
Lichf. and Cov. (in which dignity he was installed in Dec. 1610.) Bishop of
Lincoln, (to which he was consecrated 14. Dec. 1617.) and then of London,
being translated to that place 20. July 1621. In the latter end of 1627. he was
translated to Durham; whence, after he had sat three months, he was translated
to York, in the place of Matthew; (as I have before told you) to which See being
elected 16. June, was inthronized therein 24. Oct. 1628. But he expiring soon
after in the year of his age 59. six months, and two days, was buried in the
chancel belonging to the Church of Cawood in Yorksh. (in which parish he was
born) and had soon after a comely monument set up to his memory, at the charge
of Isaac his brother (Curator of his last Will and Test.) in the north wall of
the said chancel, containing his bust in his lawn sleeves, with a large
inscription under it: All which, especially the verses, were made by Hugh
Holland the Poet. After him succeeded in the said See Dr. Sam. Harsnet Bishop
of Norwych, sometimes Master of Pembr. hall in Cambridge, who being elected
thereunto on the 26. of November. 1628, was inthronized 23. April following. He
died on the 12. of March 1630. (being then Privy Counselor to his Majesty) at
Moreton in Marsh in Glocestershire, in his return from Bathe to his Manor of
Southwell in Nottinghamshire. Whereupon his body was carried to Chigwell in
Essex, and was buried in the Chancel of the Parish Church there. Over his Grave
was soon after a Monument of black Marble set up, with the Effegies of the
Defunct engraven on a brass plate fastened thereunto. Among the several books
that this Doctor Harsnet has published are (1) A discovery of the fraudulent
practices of John Darrel Minister; written in answer to a book intit. A true
narration of the strange and grevious vexation by the devil of Seven persons in
Lancashire and Will Summers of Nottingham: printed 1600. qu. Whereupon Darrell
came out with a reply intit. A detection of that sinful, shameful, lying, and
ridicul^us discourse, intit. A discovery etc. printed 1600. qu. (2) A
Declaration of egregi^us P^pish impostures, to withdraw the hearts of her
Majesty's Subjects from their allegiance, etc. practiced by Edmunds alias
West^n a Jesuit* etc* Land. 1603 qu. besides one, or more Sermons, and four or
more MSS. fit for the Press, of which one is, De Necessitate Baptismi, etc.
This Learned and Judicious Prelate, was born, as it is said, in the Parish of
St. (...) in the ancient borough of (...) in Essex, educated in Pemb. hall,
where he was first Schol^r and afterward Fellow. When he was some years (...)
Master, he was chosen Proctor; which (...) he went through with great credit to
himself. Afterward he become Vicar of Chigwell in Essex, Archdeacon of (...),
Chaplain to Archb. Bancroft, Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral. Master of Pemb.
hall in, and twice Vicechancellour of the University of Cambridge* From whence
he had an easy Progress to the sea of Chichester, and afterward to (...)
After his death (...) being elected to the Sea of (...) 28. Feb. 1631. was
translated thereunto, and on the 16* o^ Feb. 1632. was (...) in the person of
Dr. Phineas Hodson Chanc. of the Church of York.

Merton coll. was consecrated Bishop of Landaff on the 12. July, an. 1618.
translated thence to Chichester in Sept. 1619. May in sixteen hundred twenty
and eight, under which year you may see more of him among the writers. In the Sea of Chichester succeeded Dr. Rich. Mountague, who, after election and
confirmation thereunto, was consecrated in the Archbishops chapel at Croyden
in Surrey 24. Aug. 1628. This learned person who was Son of Laurence Mountague
Minister of Dorney in Bucks. And he the Son of Rob. Mountague of Boudney in the
Parish of Burnham in the said County, was born at Dorney, educated in Grammar
learning in Eaton School, elected a Member of Kings coll. in Cambridge 1594.
took the degrees in Arts, became Parson of Wotton-Courtney in Somersetshire,
Prebendary of Wells, Rector of Stanford-Rivers in Essex, Chaplain to K. Jam. 1.
Archdeacon and Dean of Hereford; which last dignity he changed with Ol. Lloyd
LL. D. for a Prebendship of Windsore, in 1617. and being about that time made
Fellow of Eaton coll. which he kept with Windsore by a dispensation, did
learnedly read for 8 years together the Theological Lecture in the chapel at
Windsore. Afterward he was made Rector of Petworth in Sussex, bestowed much
money in the repairing of the Parsonage house there, as he did afterward on
the Bishops house at Aldingbourne. At length his Majesty being minded to
translate him to Norwych was elected thereunto by the Dean and Chapter 4. of
May 1638. where sitting to the time of his death (which happened in Apr. 1641.
leaving then behind him a Son named Richard) was buried in the Choire of the
Cath. Chapter belonging to that place, where, to this day, is this only written on
his grave, Depositum Montacutii Episcopi. He came to Norwych with the evil
effects of a quartan Ague, which he had had about an year before, and which
accompanied him to his grave, yet he studied and wrote very much, had an
excellent Library of books, and heaps of papers fairly written with his own
hand concerning the Ecclesiastical History: He was a person exceedingly well
versed in all the learning of Greeks and Romans, and as well studied in the
Fathers, Councils, and all other ancient monuments of the Christian World, as
any Man besides in the whole Nation. K. Jam. 1. knew the Man well, and was
exceedingly pleased with his performance against the History of Tithes, wherein
he had beaten the (then thought) matchless Seldom at his own weapon, and showed
himself the greatest Philosopher of the two. Upon which ground his Majesty
looked upon him as the fittest person, and therefore commanded him to view and
purge the Church History, which was then taken and judged by many to be
corrupted and depraved with various figments by certain writers of the R. Cath.
p^rty, especially by Baronius; which he accordingly did with great industry and
admirable judgment. What other things he wrote you may mostly see in the
Bodleian or Oxford catolague: And what he suffered for his New Gag for the old
Gospel, or his Answer to the late Gagger of Protestants, occasioned by the
Puritan, and also for his Apello Caesarem, you may see at large in Dr. Heylyns
History of the life and death of Will. Laud Archb. of Canterbury, under the
years 1624. 25. etc. He also set forth Nazianzen's invective orations against
Julian, in Greek, and was employed by Sir Hen. Savile (who countenanced him
much) in correcting most part of Chrysostom in Greek before it went to the
Press.

Lincoln coll. but took no degree in this University. Afterward retiring
beyond the Seas, he became through various preferments Archbishop of Rheimes, in
1622. He paid his list debt to nature in sixteen hundred twenty and nine, Henry
de Loraine Son of Charles Duke of Guise, as I have before told you.

Shropshire man born, but descended from those of his name living at Hanmer in
Flintshire, was admitted Fellow of Allsouls coll. from that of Oriel, in 1596.
aged 20. and when five years standing Mast. of Arts, was unanimously elected
one of the Proctors of the University, in 1605. Afterward he became Rector of
Bingham in Nottinghamshire, (in which Church he was succeeded by Dr. Math. Wren
in May 1624.) and Prebendary of Worcester in the place of Dr. Joh. Langworth
sometimes of New coll. about the latter end of 1614. and shortly after was
licensed to proceed in Divinity, he being then Chapl. in Ord. to K. Jam. 1. At
length upon the death of Dr. Rich. Parry he being nominated Bishop of St.
Asaph, was elected thereunto about the 20. of January in 1623. consecrated 15.
of Feb. following, and on the 23. of the said month had the temporalities of
that See given Pat. 21. Jac. 1. p. 28.
to him, with liberty then allowed to keep his Prebendship in Commendam with
it. He died at Pentrerpant or Pentrepant near to Oswestrey in Shropshire, 23.
July in sixteen hundred twenty and nine, Sillatin or Selattyn: To the poor of
which place, as also of Oswestrey and S. Asaph, he gave to each five pounds. In
his Prebendship succeeded Giles Thornborough M. of A. (afterward D. D.) Nephew
to Dr. John Thorborough B. of Worcester, who kept it to the time of his death
1663, and in the Sea of S. Asaph succeeded Joh Owen D. D. of Cambridge and
Archdeacon of S. Asaph, who was consecrated thereunto 20. of Sept. 1629. He
died at Perthkinsey 15. Oct. 1651. and was buried on the 21. of the said month
in the Cath. Church of S. Asaph under the Bishops Throne. This Dr. Owen who was
the Ministers Son of Burton-Latimers in Northamptonshire, and born (...) of
England in Northamp^^^shirc.
there, as also bred Fellow in Jesus coll. in Cambridge, has written Herod and
Pilate reconciled: Or, the concord of Papists, Anabaptists, and Sectaries,
against Scripture, Fathers, Councils, and other Orthodox Writers, for the
coercion, deposition, and killing of Kings. -- Published 1663. and by the
author dedicated to the Loyal Subjects of Great Britain. What other things he
has written and published, I cannot tell, nor any thing else of him, only that
he was a great Loyalist, a true Son of the Church of England, and had been much
respected by Laud Arch. of Canterbury, who obtained for him from his most
gracious King the said Bishopric of S. Asaph; which lying void after his death
till the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. Dr. George Griffith was consecrated
thereunto.

JOHN BUCKRIDGE, sometimes Fellow, afterward John's college, became B. of
Rochester in 1611. and from thence was translated to Ely in 1627. He was
conducted to the habitation prepared for old age in sixteen hundred thirty and
one; Rochester succeeded Dr. Walt Curle, and in Ely Dr. Francis White, both
Cambridge men by education.

JOHN HOWSON, sometimes Student and Canon Chapter Chapter was consecrated B. of Oxford
in the month of May 1618. was translated thence to Durham in 1628. and departed
this moral life toward the latter end of sixteen hundred thirty and one;
Durham succeeded Dr. Thom. Morton B. of Lichfield and Coventry; the
temporalities of which, he Pat. 8. ^ar. 1. p. 14
received from the King 12. Jul. 1632. and dying in the house of Sir. Hen.
Yelverton of Easton-Manduit in Northamptonshire, on the morrow after S.
Matthews day, in 1659. aged 95 years, was succeeded in the year following by
Dr. Joh. (...) of Cambridge.

JEWS BAILEY, sometimes a Member of Exeter Ba^ger in 1616. and departed this
mortal life in the beginning of the year sixteen hundred thirty and two; 163^.
under which year you may see more of him among the writers. In the said See of
(...) succeeded a Native of Segroet near Denbigh a certain learned Doctor of
div. named David D^lben of S. John^ coll. in Cambridge, a younger Son of Robert
(...) D^lben of (...) beforementioned in Denbighshire: who dying in
Bangor-house situated in Shoe-lane near S. Andrews Church in (...) in the
Suburb of London, on the 27. of Nov. 1633. was buried in the Church at (...),
which he kept in Commendam with his Bishopric. He was succeeded in the Sea of
Bangor by Edm. Griffith. of whom I shall speak by and by.

JOHN RIDER, sometimes a Student in Jesus coll. Ireland on the 12. of Jan.
1612. and concluded his last in a good old age, in sixteen hundred thirty and
two; 163^.
(...) which year you may see more of him among the writers. In the said
Bishopric succeeded one Jews Jones a Welshman, sometimes a Student in this
University, whom I shall mention at large among the Bishops in the second vol.
of this work.

Student of Christ Church, was consecrated Bishop of Landaff in 1601, thence
translated to Hereford in 1617, and died in the beginning of the year sixteen
hundred thirty and three; Goodman of Gloucester had endeavored to obtain) was
elected Dr. Will. Juxon of Oxon, but before he was consecrated, he was
translated to London; whereupon Dr. Augustine Lindsell Bishop of Peterborough
was translated thereunto in (Dec.) 1633. After him followed Matthew Wren D. of
D. of Cambridge; the temporalities of which See (Hereford) were given Pat. 10.
Car. 1. p. 39.
to him 24 March. 10. Car. 1. Dom. 1634-35. But he being soon after translated
to Norwych, Theophilus Field of Pembroke hall in Cambridge (born in the parish
of S. Giles Cripplegate Land.) succeeded: The temporalities also of which were
restored Pat. 11. Car. 1. p. 14.
to him, 23. Janu. 1635. This Dr. Field dying soon after, George Cook sometimes
of Pembroke hall in Cambridge, brother to Sir Joh. Cook Secretary of State
succeeded, and had the temporalities thereof given Pat. 11. ^ar. 1. p. 17.
to him 7. July 1636. He was the Son of Rich. Cook of Trusley in Derbyshire by
Mary his wife, daughter and heir of Tho. Sacheverell of Kirby in
Nottinghamshire, and he the Son of Will. Cook of the same place, by his wife
the daughter of Ralph Fitzherbert of Tyssyngton in the said county of Derby.
Which George Cook dying in 1646. (22. Car. 1.) the sea of Hereford laid void
till the restoration of K. Chapter 2 and then 'twas supplied by Dr. Nich. Monk of
Oxon, of whom I shall make large mention in his proper place.

Balliol college, afterward Chaplain to Thomas Lord Buckhurst, and then to the
Earl of Dunbar, with whom he was solemnly sent into Scotland, for an effecting
of an Union in the Hierarchy, was consecrated Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry
3 Dec. 1609, translated to London about the latter end of January following,
and in 1610 he was translated to Canterbury, on the death of Dr. Richard
Bancroft. He departed this mortal life in sixteen hundred thirty and three;
Canterbury succeeded Dr. William Laud, as I shall tell you at large when I come
to the next Vol. of this work.

Welsh-man born, as it seems, and having received his Academical education in
Oxon, became afterward Parson of Thorp Basset, and Slingesby in Yorkshire;
which last he obtained in the latter end of March 1591. About that time he
being Chaplain to Henry Earl of Derby, became Archdeacon of Clievland (on the
resignation of Rich. Bird, Bach. of div.) in Apr. 1601, also Archdeacon of the
Isle of Man, and at length, (about 1614.) Bishop of that place, but in whose
room I cannot tell, for between the translation thence of Dr. George Lloyd to
Chester 1604. some person, yet unknown to me, did succeed. In the Rectory of
Slingesby succeeded Sam. Philipps M. A. in Jan. 1618. and in Clievland Henry
Thurcross M. A. an. 1619. as I shall tell you in the Fasti, an. 1610. So that I
presume those two places were kept in Commendam with the Bishopric, by the
said John Philipps, whom I take to be the same with Joh. Philipps who took the
degree of M. of Arts as a Member of S. Mary's hall, in the month of May 1584.
Which degree he completed as a Member of Broadgates, in an Act celebrated 10.
of July the same year. The said Joh. Philipps Bishop of Man translated the
Bible into the Manks language, that is, the language commonly spoken in the
Isle of Man, assisted in the said work by Sir Hugh Cannal Minister of Kirk St.
Michael in the said Isle. He concluded his last day about the year sixteen
hundred thirty and three, Man by William Forster a Divine of some note in his
time, but whether he was ever of Brasnose coll. as some think he was, (wherein
several of his surname and time have studied,) I cannot tell. One Will. Forster
a Warwickshire man born, was entered a Student in S. John's coll. 1601. and
another of that house was a writer, as I have before told you among the writers
under the year 1633. One Joh. Philipps wrote A summon to repentence. Land.
1584. oct. but he is not to be taken to be the same with the former, and
another Joh. Philipps wrote The way to Heaven, on Acts 2. 47. -- Printed in qu.
1625. Which book* I having not yet seen, I cannot say to the contrary but that
it may be published by Joh. Philipps the Bishop. Qu.

FRANCIS GOUGH, commonly called Goffe, the Hugh Gough Rector of Allcannyngs in
Wilts, by Jane his Wife, Daughter of one Clifford of Clifford-hall in Devonsh.
was born in Wiltshire, entered a Batler in S. Edmunds hall in the latter end of
1611. aged 17 years, and afterward was made one of the Clerks of New college;
where continuing some years, returned to the said hall, and as a Member thereof
took the degree of M. of Arts, in 1618. Soon after, he having a just
opportunity of going into Ireland, became first Chancellor, then Bishop, of
Limerick; to which See being consecrated Jac. War. ut supra. p. 189.
at Cashills 17. Sept. 1626. sat there till the time of his death: which
happening on the 29. of August in sixteen hundred thirty and four, was buried in
the Cath. Chapter of Limerick, leaving then Hugh, who was Chanter of Limerick and
Justice of Peace. In the Sea of Limerick succeeded George Web, whom I shall
mention in the next volume, under the year 1641.

WILLIAM PILSWORTH was born in Fleetstreet London, elected and admitted Demie
of Magd. coll. 29. Sept. 1578. aged 18 years on the day of the Nativity of our
Savior following, took one degree in Arts as a member of Magd. hall in Dec.
1581, left the University without any other degree, went into Ireland, became
Prebendary of Monabannoc, and at length Bishop of Kildare: To which see being
consecrated Ibid. p. 130.
at Balsoon in the county of Mead, 11. Sept. 1604, sat there without any
removal to the time of his death; which happening at Naas on the 9. of May in
sixteen hundred thirty and five, Dunfert in the country of Kildare. In the said
See succeeded Robert Usher D. D. Son of Hen. Usher sometimes Archbishop of
Armagh; who lived upon it till the Rebellion broke out in Ireland; an. 1641,
and then retired into England for protection.

RICHARD CORBET sometimes Student, afterward Christ Church, was consecrated
Bishop of Oxford in 1629. (tho in some respects unworthy of such an office) and
translated thence to Norwych in the beginning of 1632. He died in the latter
end of July in sixteen Peter's Cheap in London named Dr. Math. Wren B. of
Hereford was translated to Norwych; the temporalities of which See were Pat.
11. Car. 1. p. 25.
restored to him 24. of Nov. 1635. being elected thereunto on the tenth day of
the same month. Afterward upon the death of Dr. Franc. White Bishop-Almoner,
he was translated to Ely; the temporalities of which were restored to him Pat.
14. Car. 1. p. 35.
on the 5. of May 1638. where he sat to the time of his death. He (by the way
I must tell you) was the Son of Franc. Wren Citizen of London, (a branch of the
Wrens of Binchester in the Bishopric of Durham,) and being an eminent Scholar
in his youth, became first a Student in Pembroke hall in Cambridge, then Greek
Scholar and Fellow of that house, and soon after Chaplain to Lancelot Andrews
Bishop of Winchester. Afterward he was made Master of Peter house,
Vicechancellour of the said University, Chaplain to K. Charles 1. when he was
Prince, (whom he attended after he had taken his journey to Spain) as also when
he was King, Prebendary of Winchester, Dean of Windsor, (in which honorable
Dignity he was installed 24. Jul. 1628.) sworn Registrary of the most noble
Order of the Garter, 23. of Sept. following, and in 1633 became Clerk of the
Closet, in the place of Dr. Will. Juxon. In 1634 he became Prebend of Westminster. in
the room of Dr. John Wilson, and near upon that time Bishop of Hereford. But
continuing there not long, he was translated to Norwych, as I have before told
you: And being made Dean of the Chapel Royal, upon Juxons advance to the
Treasurers staff, an. 1636, he was translated to Ely in the beginning of 1638,
as it is already said. In all which offices his deportment was with such
gravity, exemplary piety, and Government with no less prudence, that upon the
beginning of the unparalled rebellion raised by the Presbyterians, commonly
then called Puritans, who had an implacable hatred for him, for his pride,
insolence, and high hand used toward them, as they frequently reported, he was
by them miserably persecuted, and grievously oppressed by plunder of his goods,
seizure of his estate, and by a strait and tedious imprisonment in the Tower of
London, which he endured with great patience and magnanimity near 18 years.
After his Majesty's return he was set at liberty, was restored to his
Bishopric of Ely, and notwithstanding his former losses, performed several
acts of Piety. Among which, was his building a new Chapel in Pembroke hall
before mentioned; which being beautified with splendid and decorous Furniture,
and amply endowed with an annual revenue, was, upon the Feast of S. Matthew,
(21. Sept.) in 1665. solemnly consecrated and dedicated by himself in person,
and by his Episcopal authority, to the honor of Almighty God. A noble and
lasting Monument of the rare piety and munificence of that great and wise
Prelate, and in every point accorded to his character; which was then so well
known, that the sole nomination of the Founder was a sufficient account of the
elegance and magnificence of the foundation. Before evening service, the
exterior or outer Chapel, and the Cloister leading to it, (a new Fabric of
Sir Robert Hitchams foundation) were by his Lordship also consecrated, for
places of Sepulture to the use of the Society, together with a cell or vault at
the east end of the chapel under the Altar, for a dormitory for his Lordship.
He paid his last debt to nature in Ely House in Holbourn near London, on
Wednesday 24 of Apr. 1667. aged 81 years and upwards. Whereupon his body being
embalmed, was conveyed to Cambridge, and deposited with great solemnity in a
stone coffin in the vault beforementioned. This worthy and learned Bishop has
written (1) Increpatio Bar. Jesu: sive Polemicae adsertiones locorum aliquot S.
Scripturae ab imposturis perversionum in catechesi Racoviana. Land. 1660. qu.
remitted into the ninth vol. of the Critics. (2) The abandoning of the Scotch
covenant. Land. 1661. qu. (3) Epistolae variae ad viros doctiss. Among whom are
to be numbered Ger. Jo. Vossius: As also two or more Sermons; one of which is on
Prove. 24. 21. printed 1627. and another on Psalm. 44. 18. printed in 1662. both
in qu. etc. He left behind him several Sons, who will be mentioned elsewhere.

Londoner born, Son if I mistake not, of Michael Boil of S. Mar. Magd. Parish
in Milkstreet (who died in the latter end of 1596.) and nearly related to the
Boyles of Kentish Town in Middlesex; was educated in Merchant Tailors School,
became Scholar of S. John's coll. in 1593. aged 18. years, took the degrees in
Arts, holy orders and was made Vicar of Finden in Northamptonshire, In 1611. he
proceeded in Divinity, and three years after resigning his Vicaridge, he went
into Ireland, was made Dean of Lismore, and at length in the latter end of the
year 1619. was consecrated Bishop of Waterford and Lismore, being then esteemed
a person of good learning and prudence. He yielded up his last breath at
Waterford Ib. in Jac. War. ut supra, p. 20^.
on the 27. Dec. in sixteen hundred thirty and five, Trinity there, leaving
then behind him a brother named Richard Boil Archb. of Tuam, whom I shall
mention in the Fasti, among the incorporations, an. 1601. There was another
Michael Boil, who was Archb. of Dublin 1663. but he was Nephew to the former
Michael, by being Son to Richard before mentioned.

Caernarvanshire man born, was admitted in the quality of an Exhibitioner Reg.
antiq. coll. Aenean fol. 95. a.
into Brasnose college on the 8. Apr. 1587. having before, as I conceive, been
a Student of that of Jesus, took the degrees in Arts, that of Master being
completed in 1592. About which time being in full Orders, had some employment
agreeable to his profession in these parts. In 1599. he was admitted to the
reading of the Sentences, and afterward being made Dean of Bangor in the place
of Dr. Joh. Williams deceased, in Sept. or Oct. 1613. was at length made Bishop
of that place, on the death of Dr. Dav. Dolben, an. 1633. To which See being
consecrated, the temporalities thereof were restored to him Pat. 9. Car. 1. p.
1^.
on the 26. of Febr. the same year. He died in sixteen hundred thirty and
seven, Bangor. In the said See succeeded Dr. Will. Roberts Subdean of Wells and
Archdeacon of Anglesie, sometimes Fellow of Queens coll. in Cambridge, and
Proctor of that University, who having the said Bishopric bestowed on him the
endeavors of Dr. Laud Archb. of Cant. for discovering Church goods to the
value of 1000 l. had the temporalities thereof given Pa^ 1^. Car. 1. p. 15.
to him 24. Sept. 13. Car. 1. Dom. 1637. with liberty then allowed to him, to
keep his Archdeaconty in Commendam. In the time of Rebellion he suffered much,
and about 1649. he was sequestered of all, or most, of his Estate, whether
spiritual or temporal. In the great year of the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. he
was restored to all he had lost, and dying in 1665. one Dr...... Price was
elected Bishop, but he dying before consecration in the same year, Robert
Morgan Dr. or Bach. of div. Rector of Llanddyfnan in Anglesie and Archdeacon of
Merioneth being elected into his place, was consecrated at Lambeth on the first
day of July 1666. He died in Sept. 1673. leaving behind him a Relict called
Anne.

JONAS WHEELER, Dean of the Church of the Holy Trinity, commonly called Christ
Church in Dublin, and Chaplain to K. James 1. was consecrated Bishop of Ossory
in S. Patricks Church near Dublin on the eighth day of May 1613. and died in
the ninety seventh year of his age at Dunmore, on the 19. of April in sixteen
hundred and forty: Kilkenny. He was born in Oxfordshire, as it is Iac. War. ut.
up. in (...) pa^^ul. (...)
said, particularly, as I suppose, within the City of Oxon, was educated in
this University, but in what house, unless in that of Brasnose, where one or
more of his name and kindred studied about his time, I know not, nor what
degrees he took, because many have studied, in the said University, five,
seven, ten years, or more, and yet never took any degree.

JOHN ATHERTON, Son of John Atherton, who Bawdripp in Somersetshire in 1584.
was born in that County, (at Bawdripp as it seems,) and at 16 years of age
1614. became either a Batler or Commoner of Gloucester hall, where continuing
till after he had taken one degree in Arts, was transplanted to Lincoln
college, took the degree of Master as a Member of it, holy Orders, and soon
after was made Rector of Huish Combflower in his own Country. At length being
made known to Thomas Earl of Strafford L. Lieutenant of Ireland, for his great
sufficiencies in the Canon Law, and Ecclesiastical affairs, was by him made
Prebendary of Chapter Chapter in Dublin, and afterward Bishop of Waterford and Lismore
in the year 1636. (he being then Doctor of divinity,) in which office he
behaved himself for some time with great prudence, tho forward enough, if not
too much, against the R. Catholics in that Country. At length being charged
with a crime, not now to be named, was seized on and imprisoned: And being
found guilty of it, was first degraded, and afterward suffered death by
hanging at Dublin, (being the first of his Function that suffered that kind of
death, as he said it openly to the People at the Gallows,) on the fifth day of
December. in sixteen hundred and forty. John's Church in Dublin. Nich. Bernard D.
D. sometimes Chaplain to the learned and religious Dr. Usher Archb of Armagh
has written and published a book of his penitent death, with a Sermon at his
burial, to which (being very worthy of perusal) I refer the Reader for his
farther satisfaction. In Waterford and Lismore succeeded Dr. Archibald Adair a
Seer, and him Dr. George Baker, who died in Octeb. or thereabouts, an. 1668.

JOHN BANCROFT, Son of Christ (...) Andrey Andrews his Wife) eldest Son of
(...) of Farnworth in Lancashire, by Mary his Wife, daughter of John Curwyn,
brother to Hugh Curcoyn, sometimes Bishop of Oxford, was born in little Village
called Astell or E^well, lying between (...) and (...) was admitted a Student
of (...) more, took the degrees in Arts, holy Orders, and became a Preacher for
some years in (...) being newly admitted to proceed in Divinity, was by the
endeavors of his Uncle Dr. Rich. Bancroft Archb. of Cant. (a younger Son of
John Bancroft beforementioned.) elected Master of University college, where he
continued above 20 years: In which time, he was at great pains and expense to
recover and settle the ancient Lands belonging to that foundation. In 1632. he
was, upon the translation of Dr. Corbet to Norwych, nominated Bishop of Oxford;
whereupon being elected by the Dean and Chapter in April the same year, had the
temporalities of that See given Pat. 8. Car. 1. p. 13.
to him on the 6. of June following, being about that time consecrated. In
1640. when the Long Parliament began, and proceeded with great vigor against
the Bishops, he was possessed so much with fear (having always been an Enemy to
the Puritan) that without little or no sickness, he surrendered up his last
breath in his lodging at Westminster. Afterward his body was carried to
Cudesden in the diocese of Oxon, and was buried near to, and under the, south
wall of the Chancel of the Church there, on the twelfth day of Febr. in sixteen
hundred and forty, 1640-1.
leaving then behind him the character See in Canterburies Doom, printed in
fol. 1646. p. 353.
among the Puritans or Presbyterians then dominant of a corrupt unpreaching
Popish Prelate. The Reader is now to know that before this Man's time, the
Bishops of Oxford had no house left belonging to their Episcopal See, either in
City or Country, but dwelt at their Parsonage-houses which they held in
Commendam, tho Dr. Jo. Bridges, who had no Commendam in his diocese, lived for
the most part in hired houses in the City. For, as I have before told you in
Dr. Rob. King, tho at the foundation of the Bishopric of Oxford in the Abbey
of Osney, the King appointed Gloucester coll. for the Bishops Palace, yet when
that foundation was inspected into by K. Edw. 6. and a recital thereupon made
of the foundation thereof done by his Father, that place was left out of the
Charter, as being designed then for another use. So that from that time till
this Man (Dr. Bancroft) came to be Bishop, there being no settled House or
Palace for him or his Successors, he did resolve by the persuasions of Dr.
Laud Archb. of Cant. to build one. Wherefore in the first place the impropriate
Parsonage of Cudesden beforementioned, five miles distant from Oxon, which
belonged to the Bishop in right of his See, he let the lease thereof run out
without any more renewing, that in the end it might be made an improvement to
the slender Bishopric. The Vicaridge also of his own donation falling void in
the mean time, he procured himself to be legally instituted and inducted
thereunto. All which being done, he, through the power and favor of Dr. Laud
beforementioned, obtained an annexation of it to the Sea Episcopal, (the
design of bringing in the impropriation going forward still) and soon after
began, with the help of a great deal of timber from the Forest of Shotover,
given to him by his Majesty, to build a fair Palace; which, with a Chapel in
it, being completely finished, an. 1635. was, then out of curiosity visited by
the said Dr. Laud; which he remits into his diary thus. Sept. 2. an. 1635. I
was in attendance with the King at Woodstock, and went thence to Cudsden, to
see the house which Dr. Jo. Bancroft then Lord Bishop of Oxford had there built
to be a house for the Bishops of that See for ever; he having built that house
at my persuasion. But this house or Palace (which cost three thousand and five
hundrend pounds) proved almost as short lived as the Founder, being burned down
by Col. Will. Leg during the short time that he was Governor of the Garrison
of Oxford, in the latter end of 1644. for fear it might be made a Garrison by
the Parliament Forces, tho with as much reason and more piety (as one Dr. P.
Heylin in his History of the life and death of Dr. Will. Laud, lib. 3. part. 1.
observes) he might have garrisoned it for the King, and preserved the house.
Being thus ruined, it laid so till Dr. Joh. Fell became Bishop of Oxon, and
then with moneys out of his own purse, and the help of timber, which one of his
Predecessors named Dr. Will. Paul had laid in in his lifetime for that
purpose, did rebuild it upon the old foundation, with a Chapel in it, as
before. The outside of which being finished in 1679. the inside followed soon
after.

METROPHANES CRITOPYLUS, a Greecian England to be instructed in the doctrine
and discipline of the Church, and in order thereunto to learn the Latin and the
English tongues. To these ends he addressed himself to Dr. Abbot Archb. of
Canterbury, who sent him forthwith to Baliol college, where he had for his
interpreter the noted Grecian Mr. Edw. Sylvester, and continued there till the
time of his departure from England, which was about 1622. at which time he was
Chancellor to the Patriarch of Constantinople. After his return to his own
Country, he became Patriarch of Alexandria in the place of Cyrill Lucaris
translated to Constantinople, and wrote, as some See more in Ballio-Fergus
written by Hen. Savage, printed at Oxon. 1668. p. 119.
suppose, The Confession of Faith, which went under the name of Cyrill
Patriarch of Constantinople, published in the Greek tongue 1629. Which
Confession was, with a censure upon it, printed at Rome 1632. the title of
which, rendered into English is this, The condemnation of the confession of the
Calvinists, as it was set forth in the name of Cyrill Patriarch of
Constantinople. With this condemnation and confession is printed an answer to
the Anathematisms of Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria, Predecessor to Critopylus;
wherein the said Anathematisms are acknowledged to be genuine, tho they decry
the said Confession as spurious. This Critopylus was in great renown in his own
Country in sixteen hundred and forty, Clar. 1640.
but when he died I cannot yet find.

FASTI OXONIENSES.
THESE Oxonian Fasti, or Academical Annals, contain in exact Order, Method, and
Time, from the Year of our Lord 1500, to the end of 1640. 1. A Catalogue of the
Chancellours, Commissaries o^ Vicechancellours, and Proctors of the Univ. of
Oxon 2. The Names and Characters of eminent Grammarians, Rhetoricians, and
Musicians, who have been admitted to One, or two, Academical Degree, or
Degrees, with the Titles of such Books, (if any) that they have written. The
Names of
3. Writers, Archbishops, and Bishops, Who have been admitted to 1, 2, or more
Degr. 4. Dignitaries in the Church, as Deans, Archdeacons, Chancellours of
Churches and Dioceses Chauntors, etc. as also of Heads of Colleges and Halls,
Who have been admitted to 1, 2, or more Degr. 5. Abbats, Priors, Gardians, etc
Who have been admitted to 1, 2, or more Degr. 6. Monks and Friars supposed to
be eminent for Place, Learning, or published Writings, etc. Who have been
admitted to 1, 2, or more Degr. 7. Martyrs, either for the Romans Catholic, or
Protestant, Cause. Who have been admitted to 1, 2, or more Degr. 8. Many
learned Men. who have not been Writers, and Men of Note in the way they
professed, with their Characters. Who have been admitted to 1, 2, or more Degr.
9. Writers and Translators of inconsiderable Account, such I mean that have
published but one Sermon, or a little Pamphlet, or have Translated but one or
two Books, with the Titles of such Sermons and Books or Pamphlets that they
have written or translated. Who have been admitted to 1, 2, or more Degr. 10.
All Doctors of what Faculty soever, whether Writers or not Writers. Bishops
then, or afterward, or (...) Bishops, eminent or not eminent, etc. with the
Day and Year when they were admitted, or licensed to proceed in their
respective Faculties. 11. Those that have been incorporated, or embodied, or
taken into the bosom of the said University, as such who have been of any Note
in the Univ. of Cambridge, or of any Univ. in the learned World with their
Characters, and Titles of Books (...) they have written and published. The
Incorporations also of Princes. Dakes, Marques^es. Earls etc. Archbishops
Bishops. Abba^s, Priors, etc. Deans, Archdeacons, etc. with their Characters
etc. 12. Those that have been actually created, or inve^ted with Degrees, or
have had Degrees conferred upon then, without any, or but little* Scholastical
Exercise, performed for them. I mean the Names of such only, who have been
Princes, Dukes, Marque^ses, etc. Archbishops, Bishops, Temporal Lords,
Baronets, Knights, eminent Common Lawyers, etc. The Names also of certain
Writers who have been created, and of such who have been supposed to have had
something of Eminence in them, or have (...) in Church or State, with their
Char. etc. 13. (...) Scholars and Writers, with their Characters, and sometimes
an Account of their Works, who have (...) in Oxon, purposely to advance
themselves in Learning or for the sake of Libraries.



An. Dom. 1500.
An. 15-16 Hen 7.
The Chancellor of the University this year, was Dr. John Moreton. Archb. of
Canterbury, and Cardinal of S. Anastasius: But he dying in the Month of Sept.
Dr Will. Atwater became C^ncellarius (...), and in his Absence W. Herward, D.
D. and others. At length in the beginning of Nov. following, the Members of the
University elected for their Chancellor Dr. Will. Smith Bishop of (...) Which
honorable Office, he, upon notice by Letters, accepting, the said Members
delegated Mr. John Reed Chaplain to the Prince (afterward Warden of Wykeham's
Coll. near Winchester) and Mr. John Dunham B^ch of Div. to give him his Oath;
which being taken he was admitted to his Office.

The (...) or Vicechancellour of the University was this year Mr Will. (...).
D. D (...) S. Mary Magd^^^^ Coll.

Proctors
(...) (...)
The Senior Proctor, who was Fellow of Line. Coll. was afterward Archdeacon of
Stow, in the place, as I conceive, of Hugh Hanworth, who dying the 7th of March
1518, was buried in the Cath. Church of Lincoln. He the said Darby also was
Canon resident. of Line. and Prebendary of Ketton in the said Church; and dying
in 1542, was buried in Chanter Isle joining to the Cath. Chapter of Line before
mentioned. See more of him and his Benefaction to Learning in Hist. and Antiq.
Vniv. Oxom. lib. 2. p. 161.

Masters of Art,
Or such who were licensed to proceed in Arts, or admitted among the number of
Masters of the Faculty of Arts, in order to their proceeding, or being
completed in that Degree in the Act or Comitia following.

Will Gray, or Gray. -- The same, as I have just reason to conceive, who was
some years after this time Archdeacon of Berkshire in the place of Christop.
Twinkley; as also Prebendary of Horton in the Church of Sarton. He died in the
Year 1521, at which time he bequeathed twenty Marks to the University Chest,
four Marks for the Reparation of S. Mary's Church, and four Pounds to buy a new
pair of Organs to be played upon in the said Church. For which, and other his
good Deeds, was yearly a Dirige and Mass said for the health of his Soul. In
his Archdeaconry succeeded Rob. Audley, nearly related to Edm. Audley B. of
Sarum, 14 Feb. 1521.

Opponents in Divinity,
Or such who opposed in Divinity disputations, in the School belonging to that
Faculty, in order to their Admission to the Degree of Bach. of Divinity.

Tho. Brown -- He was about this time Prior of the Cell at Dunster in
Somersetshire. The said Cell or Priory was for Benedictines or Black Monks. and
stood, as Jo. Leland tells (...).
us. in the roots of the North-west side of the Castle at Durster, and was a
Cell to the Priory at Bathe.

Bachelaurs of Divinity,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of the Master of the Sentences, or to
the Sentences of Pet. Lombard.

John Storke or Sterke, Prior of the House or Coll. of the Friars of the Order
of S. Austin the Hermit. -- This Coll. was situated in the North Suburb of
Oxon. On the site of which place, Wadham Coll. was afterward built.

John Hakebourne. Prior of the Coll. of S. Mary the Virgin (a Nursery for (...)
Regulars of the Order of S. Austin) within the University of Oxon -- The great
Gate of this Coll. which is now standing: is almost opposite to that of New
Inn, in a Lane commonly called New Inn Lane. This John H^kebo^n, I take to be
the same with him who is sometimes written John Haukebourn, who was after this
time Doctor of Divinity. and Lord Abbat of the Monastery of our Lady at
Cirencester, (a place for Black Canons) in Glocesters^re.

John Holwel of Exeter Coll. -- In the year 1505 he occurs Principal of Black
Hall near to that of Heart, about which time he was Canon of the Cath. Chapter at
Exeter.

Doctors of the Civil Law,
Or such who were (...) to proceed in the Civil Law, or admitted Doctors of the
Civil Law, in order to proceed, or to be completed Doctors in the Act
following.

Henry Wilcocks, now, or about this time. Principal or chief Moderator of the
Civil Law School in the Parish of S. Edward, being Deputy for Dr. Will. Warham
Master of the Rolls, and afterward Archb of Canterbury. -- This Civil Law
School and the Church of S Edward (both which joined together) have been time
out of mind demolished. They stood in, or near that Lane, which we now call
Blew-^oar Lane* near to the Back-gate of the (...) Inn. This Dr. Wilcocks was
Archdeacon of (...) (in which Dignity he was succeeded by Ric. Mawdly or
Mawdion, D. D) and Vicar genesis to Dr. Smith Bishop of Lincoln.

Doctors of the Canon Law,
Or such who were licensed to proceed in the Decrees or Canon Law, etc.

Roger Sandyford or Sandford, Principal of Broadgates Hall in the Parish of All
Saints -- Upon the Resignation of Philip Agard, an Inceptor in the sacred
Canons or Decrees the said Rog. Sandford succeeded in the Principality of that
Hall in 1498. which Hall did once stand where now is a Yard containing diverse
Tenements belonging to Magd College; the Gate leading to which is almost
opposite to the sometimes Inn called the Sw^n, in that part of the High Street
between the Churches of All (...) and S. Mary.

Will. Horsley Principal of P^ckwaters Inn. -- This Inn is involved in that
Quadrangle belonging to Ch* Chapter now called Peckwater.

This year was a Supplicate made in the venerable Congregation of Regents for
one Tho. Dalby to be admitted to a Degree in Decrees; but whether he was
admitted I cannot yet tell. -- This Tho. Dalby whom I find afterward written
Doctor of Decrees, was installed Archdeacon of Richmond in Oct. 1506, upon the
Promotion of James Stanley to the Sea of Ely, was made about that time
Prebendary of the Prebend of Stillington, and Canon residentiary, in the Church
of York, afterward the thirty seventh Provost of the Church of S. John at
Beverley, Treasurer of the Palace of Tho. Savage sometimes Archb. of York,
Chaplain and Counselor to King Hen. 7. and Dean of the Chapel to the Duke of
Richmond and Somerset. This Dr. Dalby died 26 Jan. 1525, and was buried in the
North Isle joining to the Choire of the Cath. Church of York. I find another
Tho. Dalby who was Archdeacon of Richmond, and Residentiary in the Church of
York, but he dying in 1400, must not be supposed to be the same with the former.

Doctors of Divinity,
Or such who were licensed to proceed in Divinity, or admitted Doctors or
Professors of Divinity, or of the Holy Writ, in order to their proceeding, or
being completed in that Degree in the Act following.

William Vavasor Guardian or Warden of the House or Coll. of the Franciscans or
Gray Friars in the South Suburb of Oxon. -- This Coll. was situated without
Little Southgate, commonly called Watergate, where now a Brewer and a Tanner,
besides other People, live; and the Gardens and Grove belonging thereunto,
situated on the West side of the said Coll. are now called by the Name of
Paradise Garden. This College was one of the famousest Places for learned
Friars in the Christian World, and therein did Roger Bacon, the Miracle of his
Age for Learning, live and die in the Habit of a Franciscan. Another Miracle
also did live and study there about Roger's death, named John Do^^s, highly
famed at this day beyond the Seas, for those Books which he has written, yet
so little valued now among many English Men, that the Philosopher (...) Hobbes
of Malmsbury in his Hist. of (...) of England, printed 1680. pg. 54.
of Malmsbury does not stick to say, that any ingenious Reader, not knowing
what was the design (meaning the Pope's design to carry on his Authority) would
judge him to have been the most egregious Blockhead in the World, so obscure
and senseless are his Writings.

Hugh Sa^ders alias Shackspear of Merton Coll. -- He was afterward Principal
of S. Albans Hall, and is styled in one of our public Registers In reg.
Epistol. Univ. Oxon. ^ Ep^^t. ^.
Vir literis and virtute percelebis.

John Stanywell Prior of the Benedictine Monks of Gloucester Coll. now Gloc.
Hall. -- He was the same Person with John Stonywell who was soon after Lord
Abbat of Pershore (a Monastery for Benedictines) in Worcestershire, and a
Bishop by the Title of Episc. Po^etensis, as I have among the Bishops told you.

Joh. Avery of Lincoln Coll. -- He was afterward several times Commissary of
the University.

John Percivall the seven and fortieth Minister or Provincial of the Minorites,
Franciscans or Gray Friars, in England, did proceed about this Year in
Divinity. See among the Writers under the year 1502.

Joh. Kynton a Minorite or Franciscan, did also proceed this year, but when
admitted, I find not.

An. Dom. 1501
An. 16/17 Hen. 7
Chancellor, Dr. Will. Smyth Bishop of Lincoln, afterward the worthy Founder
of Brasnose Coll.

Commissaries
Will. Atwater beforementioned. Tho. B^^ke D. D. Rector of Linc. Coll. Hugh
Saunders D. D. beforementioned
Proctors
John Game of Allsoules Coll. elected for the Southern Proctor Will. Dale,
elected for the Northern Proctor.
Bachelaurs of the Civil Law,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any of the Books of Institutions.

Thomas Howell Archdeacon of Cardigan, etc.

Mast. of Arts*
Or such who were licensed to proceed in Arts, etc.

William Hew, -- He was afterward Bishop of O^^se in Spain.

John Longland of S. Mar. Magd. Coll. -- He became Bishop of Linc. in 1521.

Tho. Randolph of New Coll. did proceed about this year. -- He was afterward
Canon and Prebendary of the Cath. Church at Lincoln.

Bach. of Divinity,
Tho. Brynknell of Linc. Coll. -- See more among the Writers under the year
1521.

Clement Lychfeld a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict in the Monastery of
E^^sham in Worcestershire -- He was afterward Abbat of that Place, and
continuing there till toward the dissoultion of Religious Houses, with a
resolution not to surrender his House for a profane use, was at length by the
tricks of Tho. ^romwel Secretary of State to K. Hen 8. persuaded to resign his
pastoral Staff to one Philip Hawford alias Ballard, a young Monk of Evesham:
which being done accordingly, (not altogether to the content of Lychfeld) was a
Surrender of that Monastery soon after made into the hands of the said King.
For which Service Ballard had not only a considerable Pension allowed, but also
the Deanery of Worcester given to him, an. 1553, (^ Mar.) upon the deprivation
of one John Barlow, M. A. who had been installed Dean in June 1544, in the
place of Hen. Holbeach alias Rands the first Dean, afterward Bishop of
Lincoln. As for Lychfeld, who was a most pious and zealous man in the way he
professed, he expended much Money in building the Abbey of Evesham and other
places belonging to it, as also in building and adorning the Choir. He made
(...)
also a right sumptuous and high square Tower of Stone in the Cemitery of
Evesham. This Tower had a great Bell in it, and a goodly Clock, and was as a
Gatehouse to one piece of the Abbey. This Abbat builded at his M^^or at
Vss^nham about a mile above Evesham. This good man died at, or near, Evesham,
and was buried in a Chapel (which he before had built) joining to the
Abbey-Church there, 9 October. 1540. In memory of whom, was, in his life time, an
Inscription set up in a Window of the said Church, running thus, Orate pro
anima Domini Clementis Lychfeld Sacerdotis, cujus tempore turris Eveshamiae
^dficata est

John Colet M. A. was about this time admitted to the reading of the Sentences.

Henry Rytoner Abbat of Rewley (a Monastery for Cistercians in the West Suburb
of Oxon.) was admitted about this time.

Doctors of the Civ. Law,
Robert Langton of Queens Coll. -- In the Month of Sept. 1485 he was made
Prebendary of Fordington and Writblington in the Church of Salisbury, and about
that time Preb. of Chy^^inster and Bear in the same Church. In 1486, Jun. 25.
he became Archdeacon of Dorset, void by the Death of Will. Ascough, and in 1509
Apr. 24. he was installed Treasurer of the Church of York, in the place of one
Martin Collyns deceased, who had before been Chauntor of the said Church. --
See more of him (Rob. Langton) among the Bishops in Tho. Langton an. 150.

Rob. Honywode of Allsoules Coll did proceed also this or the year before. --
In 1506 he became Canon of Windsore, and about that time Archdeacon of Taunton.
He died 22 Jan. 1522, and was buried in the Chapel of S. George at Windsore.

Doctors of Div.
Thom. Swawell a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict, and Warden or Guardian of
Durham Coll. in Oxon.

Sim. Green alias Fotherbie of Linc. Coll. -- He was afterward several times
Commissary of the University, and for his Merits made Chauntor and Residentiary
of the Cath. Chapter at Lincoln. and also Predendary of Bykkylleswade or
Biggleswade in the said Church. He gave way to Fate 27 March 1536, and was
buried in the Isle called Chauntor Isle within the Precincts of the Cathedral
of Linc.

Frater or Brother Thom. Latymer a Dominican or Black Friar.

This year Thom. Beaumont of Merton Coll. of about 15 years standing in the
Degree of Master of Arts, did supplicate to be licensed to proceed in Divinity,
but whether he was licensed or admitted I cannot yet find. Before this time he
was Archdeacon of Bathe, and in great repute there for his Learning; which
Dignity he surrendering up, one John Pikman LL. Bac. was collated thereunto (per
dimissionem Tho. Beaumont) 12 Jul. 1499. The very next day Beaumont was
collated to the Provostship of Wells, with the Prebendary called Comb de
twelf, on the Death of Mr. Thom. Barrow, (who had been also Archdeacon of
Colchester) and in 1502 he became Archdeacon of Wells, and well beneficed in
the Diocese belonging thereunto. In October. or thereabouts, in the year 1507, he
died; whereupon Cardinal Hadrian de Cast^llo Bishop of B. and Wells, did bestow
the said Dignity of Archdeacon on his Kinsman Polydore Virgil alias Casteller,
with the Prebendary of Brent in the Church of Wells annexed, on the sixth of
Febr. the same year. At which time Polydore being in great favor with R. Fox
B. of Winchester, had, as I conceive, some Dignity or Benefice in the Church
conferred on him by that worthy Person. In the Reign of Ed. 6. he being then
well stricken in years, he procured an Order or License from the King to depart
from England to go to his native Country; in which Order Pa^. 4. Ed. 6 part 5.
dated 2 June 4 Ed. 6. Dom. 1550. I find these matters -- Whereas our trusty
and welbeloved Pollidoru^ Virgilius has made humble sure unto us, that he,
being born in the Parts of Italy, and, having served our Grandfather K H^n. 7.
and our Father K. H^n. 8. and Us, by the space of forty years and above, in
writing, and putting forth in Print diverse notable Works and Stories, may be
licensed to depart out of this our Realm, and visit and see, now in his old
Age, his said native Country, and there to make his abode, during his pleasure,
and also quietly etc. to enjoy all the Profits of the Archdeaconry of Wells, in
the Cathedral Church of Wells, and the Phebend of Nonyngton in the Cathedral
Chapter of Hereford, which the said Po^lidorus now enjoys, etc. By virtue of the
said Order he departed: but before he went he Sold the perpetuity of the House
of Wells which belonged to the Archdeacon of Wells; and dying at Vrbin in
Italy, the place of his Nativity, was (...)
there buried in 1555. There was some Memory of him remaining diverse years
after his Death in the Choire at Wells; and Jo. Leland takes (...)
notice of his Arms in the Arras Clothes (as he calls them) hanging over the
Stalls in the Choire at Wells, about which was this Verse,

Sum Laurus virtutis honos pergrata triumphis.

And about another in the same Arras Hangings, this,

Haec Polydori sunt numera Virgilii.

In the beginning of Oct. 1510, he was naturalized, or made a (...)
Native of England, by the Name of Polydorus Virgilius alias dictus Polydorus
Castellensis Clericus, having lived several years before in England.

An. Dom. 1502.
An. 17/18 Hen. 7.
Chanc. the same, viz. Mr. Will. Smyth B. of Lincoln; but he resigning about
the beginning of Aug. Dr. Rich. Fitzjanes Warden of Merton Coll. and Bishop of
Rochester, being at this time resident in the University, became (...)
Cancellarius nat^^, and in his absence Mr. John Kynton and Mr. John Thornden
or Tho^^^. At length, after a great deal of disturbance in the University
concerning the Election of a Chancellor, Mr. Rich. Mayhew, President of Magd.
Coll. and the Kings Almoner, was elected Chancellor about the latter end of
Nov. following.

Commiss.
Will. Atwater again. Tho. Bank again. Hugh Saunders again.
This last, as it is said, was Commissary only for that time when Dr. Fitzjames
was Canc. not.

Proct.
Hugh Hawarden of Brasnose Coll. John Matson or Mackson of Mert. Coll.
The Senior was the Northern, the other the Southern, Proctor.

Bach. of Music,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any of the Musical Books of
Boethius.

Henry Parker of S. Mary Magdalens Hall. -- He was eminent in these times for
his Compositions in Vocal and Instrumental Music, some of which, if I do not
forget my self, I have seen in the Musical Bibliotheca reposed in the School of
that Faculty.

Mast. of Arts.
About nineteen Masters proceeded this year, of which three or four were of
Alls. Coll. four of Merton, and one or more of Magd. Coll. among whom Laur.
Stubbes was one, afterward President thereof. What were the Promotions or
Dignities of any besides him, I cannot yet tell.

Opponents in Divinity,
Thomas Wallashe now, or soon after, Prior of the Monastery of the Virgin Mary
at Bradenstoke of the Order of S. Augustine, in the Dioc. of Salisbury. -- About
the year 1511 he was admitted Prebendary of Hustwayt in the Church of York in
the place of Christop. Fisher Bishop of Elphine (in Ireland) deceased. Whether
the said Th. Wallash was afterward admitted to the reading of the Sentences,
which usually follows Opposition in Divinity, I cannot yet find.

Bach. of Div.
John Maynard a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict. -- He was afterward Prior of
the Novices of the said Order living in Gloucester Coll. in this University, in
the place of Dr. Stanywell beforementioned, and was succeeded in the said
Priorship by one John Wynyscom^e or Wynchombe a learned Monk of the said Order,
who occurs Prior in the year 1512.

Doctors of Physic,
Or such who were licensed to proceed in the Faculty of Medcine or Physic.

John Gam or Game of Allsoules Coll. sometimes one of the Proctors of the
University. -- He was now Principal of Biham, commonly called Beam, Hall in
the Parish of S. John Bapt. Which Principality he resigned this year to make
room for Hugh Pole of the same Coll.

Doct. of Div.
John Thornden or Thornton, did proceed in Divinity about this Year. -- He was
afterward several times Commissary of the University, and a Bishop, as I have
before told you.

This year one John Newland, a Black or Regular Canon of the Order of S.
Augustine, supplicated for a Degree in Divinity; but whether granted, which is
very imperfect (or not at all) tells us not. This is the same John Newland who
was born at Newland in the Forest of Deane in Glocestershire, and was commonly
called and written John Naileheart alias Newland. He was the last Abbat saving
one of the Monastery of S. Austin at Bristol; in which Monastery, as also in
the Church belonging thereto, he expended much Money in building and adorning.
He was called the Good Abbat, being a Person solely given up to Religion and
Almsdeeds; and after he had ruled 33 years or thereabouts, he gave way to Fate
in a good old Age, and was buried on the south side of the Choire of the Church
of S. Austin, now the Cath. Church at Bristol. Over his Grave is his Statua in
Pontificalia, graven or carved out from Stone, laying on the Back, with a
Crosier in his Hand, and a Mi^re on his Head. His Arms do now, or did lately,
continue in the Church and other Buildings of that Monastery, which are a Man's
heart pierced through from top to botto^^ with three nails, which is as 'twere a
Rebus for Naileheart.

An. Dom. 1503.
An. 18/19 Hen. 7.
Chanc. Rich. Mayhew D. D. Archdeacon of Oxford, etc. at length Bish. of
Hereford.

Commiss.
John Thornden or Thornton D. D. John Kynton D. D. a Minorite. Sim. Green
alias Fotherbie D. D. of Linc Coll.
Proct.
John Stokesley of Magd. Coll. Rich. Dudley of Oriel Coll.
The Senior who was the Northern Proctor, was afterward Bish. of London; and
the Junior, who was the Southern Proctor, was afterward Chancellor of the
Church of Salisbury. He was Master of Arts of this University; but whether he
took any Degree in Divinity therein, I find not. See more in 1508.

Bachelaurs of Arts,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any Book of the Faculty of Arts of
the Logic of Aristotle.

Edward Lee of S. Mar. Magd. Coll. seems to have been admitted Bach. of Arts
this year, among twenty or thereabouts that were admitted within the compass of
the same year. -- We have no Register that shows it, only certain imperfect and
broken Scripts containing sums of money received for the taking of Degrees,
which I have seen, but I think are now perished.

Bach. of Physic,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any Book of the Aphorisms of
Hypocrates.

Rich. Barthlet Master of Arts and Fellow of Allsoules Coll. -- See more among
the Doctors of Physic under the year 1508.

Doct. of Div.
Will. Salyng (or Selling) Lord Prior of Martyn, or Merton, in Surrey.

Rob. Tehy or They of Magd. Coll.

Rich. Sydenore of the same Coll. about this time Archdeacon of Totness. -- In
1518 he was made Canon of Windsor, and in 1524 constituted Scribe or Registrary
of the most noble Order of the Garter. He died 1534, and was, I presume, buried
in the Chap. of S. George at Windsor. In his Canonry and Registrary's place
succeeded Rob. Aldridge, who was afterward Bish. of Carlisle, and in his
Archdeaconry of Totness succeeded, as it seems, George Carew.

This year was a Supplication made in the ven. Congregation of Regents for one
Rich. Bear a Benedictin Monk, to be graduated in Divinity; but whether in the
Degree of Bach. or Doct. it appears not; or whether he was admitted to either.
'Twas the same Rich. Bear who was installed Abbat of Glastenbury on the Death
of John Selwood the former Abbat, 20 January 1493, (after the Election of
another Person named Tho. Wasyn a Monk of the same Order, had been cassated, by
Rich. Fox Bish. of B. and Wells, on the 12. of Nov. going before.) This Rich.
Bear, who was well known to, and reverenced (...)
by, Erasmus, died 20. Jan. 1524, whereupon Rich. Whyting was elected Abbat in
his place on the third of March following, there being then in the Monastery of
Glastenbury 47 Monks. If you are pleased to know more of this Bear, you may
read what Leland says (...)
of him, and his Benefaction to the said Abbey, thus. -- Rich. Bear Abbat,
built the new Lodgings by the great Chamber called the Kings Lodgings in the
Gallery. -- He builded also new Lodgings for Secular Priests and Clerks of our
Ladies Chapel. He also arched on both sides the East part of the Church. He
built Edgar's Chapel at the East end of the Church. Abbat Whyting performed
part of it. -- Abbat Bear made the Vault on the Steple in trancepto. -- He also
made a rich Altar of Silver and guilt, and set it before the high Altar. And
coming from his Embassadry out of Italy, made a Chapel of our Lady of Loretto,
joining to the North side of the Body of the Church. -- He made the Chapel in
the South end Navis Ecclesiae Glaston, whereby he is buried sub plano mannore
in the South Isle of the Body of the Church. -- He made an Almshouse in the
North part of the Abbey, with a Chapel, for seven or ten poor Women. He also
made the Manor place at Sharpham in the Park, two miles by West from Glaston.
It was before a poor Lodge, etc.

An. Dom. 1504.
An. 19/20 Hen. 7.
Chanc. Dr. Rich. Mayhew, by whose Persuasion K. Hen. 7 gave 10l. yearly
Revenue to the Univ. of Oxon* conditionally, that the Members thereof celebrate
a solemn Ma^s for him yearly in S. Mary's Church.

Commiss.
Sim. Green again. John Kynton again. Rob. Tehy or They D. D. of Magd. Coll.
Proct.
Laur. Stubbes of Magd. Coll. Bor.elected 17. Apr. John Beverston of Mert.
Coll. Principal of S. John Bapt. Hall. Austr. elected 17. Apr.
Mast. of Arts.
Edward Finch. -- Of what Coll. or Hall he was a Member, I cannot yet find:
sure I am that on the 23 Sept. 1517, he became Predendary of Fordington and
Writhlington in the Church of Salisbury, on the death of Andrew Ammonius an
Italian, (whom I have mentioned among the Writers in Will. Grocyn, an. 1522.)
that also he was made Archdeacon of Wiltshire on the death of Christoph.
Vrshwyke, 12 May, 1522; and Preb. of Chermister and Bear in the said Church of
Sarum, on the death of Rob. Langton sometimes of Queens Coll in this
University, 30. June 1524.

Philip Dense Fellow of Mert. Coll. -- He has this Character added to his Name
in the Album of that Society, Medicus and Astronomus cum primis doctus. In the
Act wherein these two proceeded, were about 14 Masters, but whether any of them
were afterward Bishops, Writers, or Dignitaries, I cannot yet find. The said
Philip Dense, who was a learned man as certain Writings which he left behind
him showed, died of a pestilent Disease 4 Sept. 1507, and was buried in the
choire belonging to the Church of the said Coll.

Doct. of Div.
John Colet the most learned and religious Dean of S. Paul's Cathedral in
London. -- I have largely mentioned him before.

John Adams of Merton Coll. -- He was afterward a Dignitary in the Church.

This year was a Supplicat made in the ven. Congregation of Regents in behalf
of Father William Byrd a Benedictine Monk, to be admitted Bach. of Div. or
licensed to proceed in that Faculty; but whether either was granted, I cannot
tell. I take this Father to be the same William Byrd who was elected Prior of
the Monastery of Benedictines at Bathe in Aug. 1499, after the death of John
Cantlo^ the preceding Prior. For what Benedictine of both those Names it
should be, but he, I cannot tell. It is reported by one (...)
who pretended to know him well, that this Will. Byrd was given much to
Chemistry and chemical Operations, that he found out the Stone, or discovered
the Elixir, and at the Suppression of Abbeys he hid it in a Wall, And ten days
after he went to fetch it out,
And there he found the stople of a Clout.


This put the Father into so great an Agony, that he became almost frantic, as
the same Author tells us; who adds, that he ever after wandered about, had no
settled place, that he became blind, had a Boy to lead him about, lost his
Ecclesiastical Preferments, and died poor; with other the like fabulous Tales,
which are commented upon forsooth by a certain Rosacrucian, as if they were as
true as Gospel. I find this Person Will. Byrd to have expended much money in
finishing his Church at Bathe, which is now the great Church there, dedicated
to S* Peter and S. Paul, but before he could finish it, he gave way to Fate;
which happening on the 22. of May 1525. John Holway of the same Order was elected
Prior on the first of July the same year, and was Prior thereof at the
dissolution or suppression of Abbeys, and not W. Byrd as several (...)
Authors report. Toward the upper end of the Choir of the said Church
dedicated to S. Peter and Paul, was, by the Appointment of this Person,
erected, between two of the South Pillars, a neat tabernacular Edifice, which,
I presume, he intended to be the Seat of the Prior at Divine Service. His Arms
on the Roof of it are curiously carved out in Stone, which are a Chevron
between three Spread Eagles, on a chief a Rose between two L^zenges; and on the
outside of the said Seat is a Memorial of his name, viz. a W and a Bird carved
in Stone: in which Seat, or else near to it, he was, as I conceive, buried. As
for John Cantlow beforementioned, who was his Predecessor, and graduated in
this University, he built in a certain Village near Bathe, called Holloway, in
the Parish of Widcomb, a pretty little Chapel dedicated to S Mary Magd. as
also, as it is said there, the little Hospital adjoining for Lunaticks.

An. Dom. 1505.
An. 20/21 Hen. 7.
Chanc. Dr. Mayhew again.

Commiss.
Sim. Green again. Jo. Roper, D. D. who proceeded in Div. this year. John
Adams, D. D. of Mert. Coll.
Proct.
Will. Patenson or Batenson of Queens Coll. Bor. John Goolde of Magd. Coll.
Aust.
The Junior was afterward Principal of B^ham Hall in the Parish of S. John
Bapt.

Bach. of Music.
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any of the Musical Books of
Boethius.

June vlt. Dominus John Goodman, now noted for his Compo^^^^s in that Faculty,
which are, I presume, somewhere still in being.

Bach. of Arts,
Of above 27 who were admitted this year, none of any note do yet appear, or
are worthy to be remembered, only

Matthew Smyth of Oriel Coll. who was afterward the first Principal of Brasnose
Coll. and a Benefactor to Learning; and another named

John Cottisford of Linc. Coll. afterward Rector of that House, and a
Dignitary. Both whom were admitted the last of June.

Bach. of the Civil Law,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any book of the Institutions.

About 10 were admit^ed this year, among whom Dionis Calakan (an Irish Man) was
one, June ult. Twenty or more also supplicated for the said Degree, who were
not admitted this year; among whom Tho. Bennet was one, but whether the same
Tho. Bennet who became Chauntor of the Cath. Church of Salisbury in Jan. 1541,
I dare not affirm it.

Bach. of the Canon Law,
Or such who were admitted to the reading extraordinary of any Book of the
Decretals or Volumes.

About 17 were admitted this year, of whom Rich. Wykeham and John Colchester,
Benedictine Monks, were of the number, ult. June, and Nelanus Neal a Carme or
White Friar another. Twelve also at least supplicated for the same Degree, but
were not admitted, among whom Thom. Cbeltenham a Benedictine was one. Mar. 16.

Mast. of Arts,
Jan. 25. Thom. Southern. -- He was afterward Proct. of the University,
Treasurer of the Cath. Church at Exeter, and Fellow of Eaton Coll. near to
Windsor. He died in 1557. Besides him were about 20 more admitted Masters of
Arts, but none of any note, that I can yet find, among them.

Bach. of Physic,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any Book of the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates.

John Parkhouse of Exeter Coll. -- He was afterward Principal of Heart Hall,
and taking holy Orders, became Canon of Exeter Cath. and a Dignitary elsewhere,
which is all I yet know of him.

Bach. of Div.
June 20. William Godmersham a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict. -- He was
about this time either a Prior or an Abbot.

Jan. 18. The venerable Father Thom. Charde a Monk of the Cistercian Order, and
Abbat of the Monastery of Foord in Devonshire, was then admitted. -- See more
under the year 1507.

Doct. of the Civil Law,
None were admitted this year, only several supplicated in order to be
admitted, among whom were John Wardroper Bach. of both the Laws, Feb. 6.

Doct. of Div.
Apr......John Rooper or Roper of Magd. College, who, after he had proceeded
became Commissary this year.

Jan..... Rog. Vanghan or Vachan, a Black Friar or Dominican, Prior of the
Coll. of Black Friars in the South Suburb of Oxon.

Feb. 3. John Aslaby was then admitted; which Degree he completed in an Act
celebrated on the 15. of the same Month, at which time ten Masters of Arts
proceeded.

Incorporations,
Or such who have taken a Degree in another University, and have been embodied
or taken into the bosom of this of Oxon, and have enjoyed the same Liberties
and Privileges, as if they had taken their Degree here.

Jul. 2. Walt. Peers Doct. of the Civ. Law of Bononia in Italy (where he was
held in great Admiration for that Faculty) was then solemnly incorporated into
the same Degree in the House of Congregation.

Jan. 24. Rich. Kirkby Mast. of Arts of this Univ. and Bach. of Divin. of the
Univ. of Paris, was incorporated Bach. of Div. of this University. -- Which
being done, he supplicated the same day to be admitted or licensed to proceed
in Divinity; but whether granted it appears not.

.... James Denton Doctor of the Laws, sometimes Fellow of Kings Coll. in
Cambridge* did this year supplicate to be incorporated; but whether he was
really so, it appears not. He was Chancellor to the Lady Mary Queen Dowager of
France, who was afterward married to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and so I
presume he took that Degree beyond the Seas. About this time, he being one of
the King's Counselors, and much in savor, was made Prebendary of York,
Lincoln. Salisbury, and in 1510, Canon of Windsor. In 1521, or thereabouts, he
succeeded Dr. Ralph Collingwood in the Deanery of Lichfie^d, having been
installed Prebendary of that Church by his Proctor Dr. Rich. Salter of Oxon. an
1509, and in 1523 he became Archdeacon of Clievland in the Church of York upon
the promotion of Dr. Richard Rawlyns of Mert. Coll. to the Sea of S. David.
This Dr. Denton was also Lord President of Wales, and dying at Ludlow in
Shropshire in 1532, was there buried. In his Deanery of Lichfield succeeded Dr.
Rich. Sampson, who holding it till 1536, at which time he was promoted to the Sea of Chichester, Rich. Williams Chaplain to, and beloved of, K. Hen. 8.
succeeded. In his Archdeaconry of Clievland succeeded Tho. Bedell, as I shall
tell you under the year 1508, and in his Canonry of Windsore Dr. Rich. Wolman,
whom I shall mention elsewhere. This Dr. Denton built the large Back-stairs at
Windsore, was an especial Benefactor to the Church there by founding
Maintenance for the Singing-men and Choiristers; and did, with Dr. John Clerk
Dean of Windsore, receive Tho. Hatcher of Kings Coll. in his Catalogue of
Provosts, Fellows, and Scholars of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, MS^ under the ^ear
(...).
by Indenture from the Lord Hastyngs; the Sheets (as a Relic) wherein K. Hen.
6. Founder of Kings College in Cambridge, lay, when he was murdered in the
Tower.

An. Dom. 1506.
An. 21/22 Hen. 7.
Chanc. Dr. William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, elected 28 May, upon the
resignation then made of Dr. Mayhew Bish. of Hereford.

Commiss. John Thornden or Thornton. Will. Fauntleroy of New Coll. who was
admitted D. of D. this year.

Proct. Edw. Colyar of Universe. Coll. Bor. elected 24 Apr. Rich. Stokes of
Magd. Coll. Austr. elected 28 of the same Month.

Bach. of Music.
None do occur in our Registers that were admitted, only Richard Ede, a Canon
Regular, and a Scholar in Music, did supplicate the ven. Congregation to be
admitted Bachelaur of that Faculty Feb. 10. but whether he was now, or after,
really admitted, it appears not.

Bach. of Arts.
Dec. 17. Leonard Huchenson of Balliol, afterward Master of University Coll.

Feb. 8. Rob. Morwent of Magdalen, afterward President of Corp. Christi, Coll.

Beside these two (who were great Promoters and Encouragers of Learning) were
32 more admitted Bach. of Arts this year.

Bach. of the Civ. Law,
Or such who were admitted to the reading of any Book of the Institutions, as I
have before told ye.

Jan. 28. John Incent or Innocent of Allsoules Coll. -- Two days before he was
admitted Bach. of the Canon Law, as I shall anon tell you.

Besides him were admitted this year six more, and eight at least that
supplicated for the said Degree, who were not this year admitted; among whom
Joh. Prynne was one, Nov 24. This J. Prynne I take to be the same who was Prior
of the Monastery at Timbridge in Kent, an. 1518.

Bach. of the Can. Law,
Or such who were admitted to the extraordinary reading (or reading
extraordinary) of any Book of the Decretals or Volumes, as I have before told
you.

Mar. 29. John Ashdowne a Monk of the Cluniac Order, and Prior of the Monastery
of Jews in Sussex. -- He had before spent seven years in studying the Canon
Law in Cambridge.

Jan. 26. Joh. Incent or Innocent before mentioned, who had formerly spent one
year in the study of the Canon Law at Cambridge, was then admitted Bach. of the
Canon Law. -- He was afterward Doctor of his Faculty, as I shall tell you
hereafter, and the worthy Dean of S Paul's Cath. Church in London. Besides these
two, were eleven more admitted this year, and about fifteen that supplicated
for the said Degree, of whom Thom. Egyston a Benedictine was one. The rest were
mostly secular Chaplains, among whom Rich. Hyll^ or Hylley was of the number;
but whether the same with one of both his names who succeeded in the
Treasurership of the Church of Salisbury one Henry Sutton sometimes Fellow of
Merton College, in the Month of Aug. 1505, I know not. The said Rich. Hylley
who was Treasurer, dying in Sept. or thereabouts, in 1533, Nicholas Shaxton D.
D. succeeded him in that Dignity in the beginning of Oct. the same year, and
him (who was afterward Bishop of Salisbury) Rich. Sampson LL. D. as I shall
tell you under the year 1521.

Masters of Arts.
Of 23 Masters of Arts who were admitted, and stood in three several Acts
solemnized in S. Mary's Church this year, (whereof one was 3 July, another 26
Jan. and the third on the 8 Feb.) I cannot yet find any one of them that
arrived to any Eminence, only John Hewys of Merton Coll. who was Chaplain to
Qu. Catherine, and a rich Dignitary in the Church.

Opponents in Divinity,
Or such who opposed in Divinity disputations, in the School belonging to that
Faculty, in order to their admission to the degree of Bach. of Div.

May 13. Frater Dedicus Fernandus, a Dominican, or Black, or Preaching Friar.

June 28. Frat. Petrus Lusitanus, a Minorite, or Franciscan, or Gray Friar.
Neither of these two (who were learned men) appear in the public Register to be
afterward admitted Bach. of Divinity. Besides them were six more admitted to
oppose, who were all religious, or of religious Orders, and eight that
supplicated to oppose; all, except one, of religious Orders also, among whom
Nich. Pepyr, a Canon Regular, was one. Of him by the way, I must let the Reader
know, that he was elected Prior of the House of Can. Regulars at Taunton in
Somersetshire (on the Resignation of John Prows) 23 Feb. 1513, and dying there
26 Sept. 1523, one Will. York of the same Order was admitted Prior in his
place. In the year 1519, when the said York was admitted Bach. of Div. this
Pepyr did then supplicate for that Degree.

Bach. of Div.
Dec. 14. Thom. Goldwell of Canterbury Coll. (who on the 19. of Oct. going
before was admitted to oppose in Divinity) was then admitted Bach. of Divinity.
-- He was a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict, and in the year 1517 was chose
the last Prior of the Church at Canterbury. I have mentioned another Thom.
Goldwell among the Bishops under the year 1580.

Feb. ult. Rob. King, a Monk of the Cistercian Order in the Abbey of Rewley in
the West Suburb of Oxon. -- He was afterward the first Bishop of Oxford. See
more among the D. of D. 1518.

Mar. -- Richard Ferys a Carme. -- See among the D. of D. 1513.

Besides these three, were seven more admitted of whom John Comb a Cistercian
was one.

Doctors of the Civil Law.
June 28. Brian Hygden LL. Ba^^ of Broadgates Hall, now Pembroke Coll. was then
admitted Doctor. -- On the 26 May 1515, he was admitted Archdeacon of York, or
of the West Riding in Yorkshire, on the Resignation of John Carver LL. D. On
the 20. of June 1516, he was admitted Prehendary of Vlleskelf in the Church of
York^ and on the 27 of the same Month Dean thereof, in the place of John Young
LL. D. Master of the Ro^ls, deceased* He paid his last debt to Nature 5 June
1539, (having before been a Benefactor to Learning, as I have elsewhere In
Hist. and (...).
told you) and was buried in the Cath. Chapter of York. In his Deanery succeeded
Rich. Layton or Leighton LL. D. on the 26 of July the same year, who on the 31
of June going before, was admitted to the said Prebendship of Vlleskelf,
purposely to capacitate him for the Deanery. This Dr. Layton was Chaplain and
Counselor to K. Hen. 8. and did act much to please the unlimited desire of
that King. In Oct. 1541, he, under pretense of his Majesty's Pleasure,
converted the Silver Capsula gilt (in which were then the bones of the head of
S. William Archbishop of York reposed) with the Jewels and Ornaments of it, to
the public use and benefit of the Church of York. In 1544. Dec. 24. Nich.
Wotton LL. D was installed by proxy Dean of York in Dr. Layton's place, and in
Wotton's Dr. Matthew Hutcon, 8 Apr. 1567.

Feb. 29. Rob. Froost was then admitted Dr. of the Civil Law, but never stood
in the Act to complete that degree.

This year March 29. John Ashdowne mentioned before, did supplicate just after
he had been admitted Bac. of the Canon Law, to be licensed to proceed in that
Faculty, but was not granted. Robert Coke also LL. B. and Principal of Henxsey
Hall in S. Aldates Parish, did supplicate to be licensed to proceed in the
Civil Law, but was then denied.

Doct. of Div.
May 12. John Heskins a Preaching or Black Friar.

June 26. Edward Powell (of Oriel Coll.) styled in his Admission perdoctus vir.

Oct. 24. Rob. Holyngbourne a Benedictine Monk and Warden or Guardian of
Canterbury Coll. (now part of Chapter Ch.) in Oxon.

Dec. 13. Will. Gylbert a Canon regular, and Prior of the Monastery at Brewton
in Somersetshire.

Dec. 13. Tho. Mychell of Exeter Coll. Canon of the Cath. Chapter of Exeter and of
Wells.

Will. Fauntleroy of New Coll. was admitted the same day. -- His Sister
Elizabeth was Abbess of Amesbury.

Jan. 22. John Smyth a Minorite or Franciscan.

These also supplicated this year for the said degree; viz. (1.) Will. Gydyng
M. of A. and Bac. of Div. (2.) Sim. Pykeryng a Carme. (3.) John Wetwang B. D. a
Cistercian, etc.

Incorporations.
June 28. Will. Smyth Commissary to the Bishop of Lincoln, and Doctor of
Decrees in another University, was then incorporated. -- He was Nephew, or near
of kin, to Dr. Will. Smyth Bishop of Lincoln, was Archdeacon of Lincoln, and
dying in 1528, was succeeded in that Dignity by Rich. Pate M A. of Oxon, as I
have told you elsewhere among the Bishops.

An. Dom. 1507.
An. 22/23 Hen. 7.
Chanc. Dr. Will. Warham before mentioned.

Commiss. Will. Fauntleroy again. John Thornden again. John Avery, D. D. of
Linc. Coll. John Kynton again.

Proct. John Lane of New Coll. (as it seems) Austr. Will. Thomson of Vniv.
Coll. Bor. Apr. 15.


But the junior Proctor dying in the Long Vacation, Mr. Hugh Pole or Pool of
Alls. Coll. (about this time Principal of Biham Hall) supplied his place as
senior Regent in the University till the fourth day of Nov. following, and then
Mr. Thom. Bentley of New Coll. being elected Proctor, served out the remaining
part of the year.

Bach. of Arts.
June 19. John Bliss. -- He has this Character added to his Name in the Cat.
of Fellows of Mert. Coll. he being of that Society, Medicus and Astronomus quam
doctus.

Feb. 27. Rog Egworth or Edgworth of Oriel Coll. whom I have mentioned among
the Writers, under the year 1560.

Besides these two were at least 55 Bachelaurs admitted this year, and 23 that
supplicated for that degree, that were not this year admitted.

Bach. of Law.
Four in the Civil, and eight in the Canon, Law were admitted. Nine in the
Civil, and five in the Canon, Law supplicated for that degree. One was admitted
Bach. of both the Laws, and one to the Volumes.

One Hen. Rawlyns occurs Bach. of the Civil Law this year, but his Admission is
omitted; and therefore all that I can say of him is, that he became Archdeacon
of Salisbury 10 Apr. 1524, upon the death of James Bromwich, who had that
dignity conferred upon him 2 March 1523, after the decease of George Sydenham.
This H. Rawlyns who was Prebendary of Faringdon, and had been thrice Preb. of
Comb and Harnham, in the said Church, within the space of four years, was made
at the same time (10 Apr. 1524.) Preb. of Husborne and Burbach in the said
Church of Sarum. He was also dignified in the Church of Wells.

Mast. of Arts.
Oct. 13. Hugh Aston, Ashtyn or Ashton, so many ways I find him written. -- He
became Archdeacon of York, that is, of the Westriding of Yorkshire, upon the
resignation of Brian Hygden, in Sept. 1516, and dying in December. 1522, was
succeeded in that dignity by Tho. Winter in the year following, as I shall tell
you under the year 1525. I have made mention of one Hugh Aston a Musician, in
Will. Forest among the Writers, under the year 1558.

Mar. 8. Thom. Makerel of Vniv. Coll. -- One Dr. Makerel Prior of Berlings in
Lincolnshire headed the Commons of that County under the Name of Capt. Cobbler
when they rose against the King in 1536, upon the beginning of the desolution
of Religious Houses, or, as some say, because they would not pay a certain Tax.
Whether this Tho. Makerel be the same I cannot tell, till I know the Christian
Name of the Doctor. John Stow says that Dr. Makerel, an Abbat and a Suffragan
Bishop, was drawn and hanged at Tybourne about 29 March 1537, for denying the
Kings Supremacy; which I suppose is the same with him who was Prior of
Berlings, and the same perhaps who was incorporated Doctor of Cambridge 1516.

Besides these two, were eleven more that were admitted, and four that
supplicated, that were not admitted, this year.

Opponents in Div.
May 10. Peter de Campo, a Portuguese.

Dec. 10. Walt. Goodfield a Minorite. -- See under the year 1510.

Feb. 4. Edm. Vessy or Veysey a Benedictine. -- Besides seven that supplicated,
who were all, except one, Benedictine^ and Black Friars.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 22. John Claymond the most deserving President of Magd. Coll. styled in
his Admission Vir discretus, gravis, and multa doctrina percelebris.

Feb. 6. Gerardus Smyth a Minorite. -- and others of no great account, besides
five at least that supplicated for that degree.

Doct. of the Civ. Law.
Apr.... John Cockys or Cocks of Alls. Coll. -- This year I find him Principal
of George Hall in S. Mary's Parish, and in 1509 Warden or Rector of the Church
of Elmely in Kent, upon the resignation of Will. Broke Doct. of Decrees.
Afterward he was Principal of Henxsey Hall in S. Aldates Parish, (a place for
Civilians) Principal or chief Moderator or Professor of the Civil Law School in
the Parish of St. Edward, and Dean of the Arches. He died in Febr. 1545.

William Parker and Thom. Maket Bachelaurs of the Civ. Law supplicated to be
licensed to proceed in that Faculty, but were not admitted.

Thom. Myllyng Bach. of the Canon Law, supplic. also to be Dr. of that Fac. but
not admitted.

Doct. of Div.
Oct.... Thom. Charde Abbat of Foord in Devon. -- On the second of the same
Month he did really proceed, being then styled (as it is entered in the public
Register of this time) Vir magna doctrina and virtute clarus. He was born at
Aulescombe in the said County, and educated in S. Bernard's Coll. (now S. John
Baptist) to which place being afterward a Benefactor, his Memory was there
preserved, as a token of it, in several of the glass Windows of that House,
particularly in a middle Chamber Window on the South side of the Tower over the
common Gate of that Coll. where was (if not still) his Name contracted in
golden Letters (as the fashion was lately on Coaches) in an Escocheon Sable,
and has behind it, paleways, an Abbats Crosier. He founded, as it is said, an
Hospital at Honyton in his own Country, and repaired, built, and adorned much
of his Monastery, which, I think, he lived to see dissolved.

Mar.... Thom. Brynknell of Linc. Coll. -- He stood in the Act on the 13. of
the same Month, at which time the Professor of Div. or Commissary, did highly
commend him for his Learning.

Those that supplicated this year to be Doctors of Div. were (1.) Humph.
Wystow, sometimes of Alls. Coll. whom I shall mention under the year 1509. (2.)
John Maynard a Benedictine; see in an. 1502. (3.) Clem. Lychfeld another
Benedictine, mentioned under the same year. (4.) Tho. Anyden or Anyday B. of
Div. and a Minorite. (5.) Rob. Burton a Minorite also, and Prior or Guardian of
the College of Minorites or Franciscans, commonly called Gray Friars, in the
South Suburb of Oxon, who had studied Divinity in this, and the University of
Cambridge, 20 years.

Incorporations.
May 4. James Mallet, Master of Arts of Cambridge. -- This Person was
afterward Canon of Windsore, D. of D. and Master of the Hospital of S. Giles
in Great Wycomb in Bucks. But in his latter days, uttering certain Words which
were accounted High Treason, was executed in 1543. The Treason was this; When
the News of the great Commotions made by the Commons in several parts of the
Nation, upon, or after, the dissolution of Religious Houses, he openly said,
Then has the King brought his Hogs to a fair Market.

Rob. Fisher a Doctor beyond the Sea, did supplicate to be incorporated May 10,
but he is not registered as admitted. He afterward was beneficed in
Somersetshire.

Thom. Scarysbrigg of Mert. Coll. Doct. of Div. beyond the Seas also, did in
like manner supplicate 20 Jan. but I cannot find him actually incorporated.

Creations,
Or such that have degrees conferred upon them without performing any exercise
for the same, and sometimes (especially if Noblemen) without paying of Fees.

Jan. 29. It was then granted to James Stanley Bishop of Ely, that he might be
created Doctor of Decrees by a Cap put on his head, by William Archbishop of
Canterbury and Richard Bishop of London; which accordingly was by them
performed with solemnity, at, or near to, London.

It was also granted on the same day to Mr. John Read Master of Arts, Bach. of
Div. and Warden of Wykeham's Coll. near Winchester, that he might be created D.
of D. by a Cap put on his head by Dr. Fauntleroy the Commissary, the Proctors,
and two Masters. Whether performed, I cannot justly say, because in the year
1511 he supplicated for the degree of D. of D. He had been Tutor to Prince
Arthur, was then Canon of Chichester, afterward Warden of New Coll. in Oxon.
and Master of the Hospital of S. Mary Magd. near Winchester.

An. Dom. 1508
An. 23/24 Hen. 7.
Chancellor, the same.

Commiss. Will. Fauntleroy again. John Thornden again.


Proct. Rob. Carter of Magd. Coll. Austr. elected 10 May. Roll. Messynger
Principal of Little Vniv. Hall in School street. Bor. elected the 11. May.


Of which Proctors having spoken largely elsewhere, I shall only now say, that
they were afterward Servants to, and in favor with, Cardinal Wolsey; the
senior of them being Steward of his Household, and the junior Controller of his
Buildings in Oxon.

Grammarians,
Or such who were admitted to inform and teach in the Faculty of Grammar.

March 17. William Beaumond styled in our Registers Disertus vir, and vir
doctus. -- After he had been admitted by the Commissary to instruct Youths in
Grammar, he delivered into his hands a Fer^la and Rod, as badges of his Office,
to be used by his Authority. For at this time, and beyond all memory, no person
in this Xingdom could teach Grammar publicly, until he had first been
graduated in, or authorized by, either of the Universities.

Bach. of Music.
Feb. 12. John Mason. -- He was now much in esteem for his Profession.

This year Dec. 12. John Scherman a secular Chaplain and a Student in Music,
supplicated the ven. Congregation that he might be admitted Bach. of that
Faculty. Whether he was admitted it appears not.

In (...) and Antiq Vniv. Oxon. lib...page 417 (...).
Bach. of Arts.
Oct. 23. John Redman or Redmayne. -- One of both his Names was Archdeacon of
Taunton, and Prebendary of Milverton in the Church of Wells; in which Dignities
he was succeeded by John Fitzjames 1554, as I shall tell you in 1524. See in
the year 1543.

Jan. 18. Marmaduke Bona alias Lindsey. -- I shall mention him elsewhere.

Jan. 29. John Moreman of Exeter Coll. -- He was afterward Dean of the Cath.
Chapter at Exeter.

Besides these, were about 32 more admitted, and about 27 who supplicated for
the said degree, but were not admitted this year.

Bach. of the Civ. Law.
Nov. 5. Thom. Bedell of New Coll. -- In June 1533 he became Archdeacon of
Clievland in the place of Dr. James Denton; which Dignity he resigning in Aug.
following, Will. Clyffe LL. D. succeeded. About which time Bedell became
Archdeacon of Cornwall, and soon after was appointed one of the Commissioners
(Rich. Layton LL. D. and Tho. Barthlet public Notary being two other) to visit
Religious Houses in order to their dissolution.

Besides Th. Bedell were thirteen admitted, and eight that supplicated, that
were not admitted this year.

Fifteen also were admitted Bac. of Can. Law, and eleven supplicated that were
not admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
About fifteen were admitted, and about ten supplicated to be admitted, but
were not. Among all which, I cannot yet find any one that was afterward a
Bishop, a Writer, Dignitary, or Man of note.

Bach. of Div.
July -- Thomas Beel a Canon Regular of the Order of S. Austin, and Prior of
the Students of that Order living in S. Mary's Coll. -- See more among the D.
of D. an. 1514.

Oct. 17. Fr. John Howden a Dominican.

Jan. 16. James Dickson, M. A.

Feb. 1. Fr. Rob. Osbourne a Carme.

Which two last are several times mentioned in the public Register to be Clari
and perdocti viri.

Besides these were about thirteen that supplicated for the said degree, but
not admitted this year; among whom was Will. Gyllingham of the Order of S.
Benedict, who succeeded Rob. Holyngbourne in the Guardianship or Wardenship of
Canterbury Coll. in Oxon. about this year.

Doct. of Law.
Not one, either in the Canon or Civ. Law, was licensed to proceed this year.

In the Canon Law were three that supplicated to be Doctors, viz. David Talley
Abbat of Tally in the dio^ of S. David, Will. Wollur, and John Lacy, all
Bachelaurs of that Faculty. In the Civil Law was only one, whom I shall mention
the next year.

Doct. of Physic.
Nov. 3. Rich. Barthlet mentioned under the year 1503, supplicated that he
might be licensed to proceed in Physic; but whether he was admitted, or did
really proceed, or stood in the Act, it does not, by the neglect of the
Registrary, appear in the Register of this, or of any year following -- He was
about this time admitted by the Name of Dr. Rich. Barlot into the Coll. of
Physicians in London, and some years after was made President thereof. He died
about the latter end of the year 1556, being then possessed of Lands in
Cudesdon and Denton in Oxfordshire, and was buried in the Church of Great S.
Bartholomew in London. In the Annals of the Coll. of Physicians
beforementioned, is this Character left of him, by the famous Dr. Jo. Cay of
Cambridge, -- This good and venerable old man (very famous for his Learning,
great Knowledge and Experience in Physic) died in the 87 year of his Age; at
whose Funeral the President and College attended, it being the first time that
the Statute Book of the College, adoned with Silver, was carried before the
President. -- He the said Dr. Bartlet did bequeath to Allsoules College (his
tender Parent) his Basin and Ewre of Silver, and to his Brother Edm. Bartlet
and his Children of Castle Moreton in Worcestershire several considerable
Legacies.

Doct. of Div.
Not one was admitted or licensed to proceed, or stood in the public Comitia,
which we usually call the Act.

Four I find who supplicated for the said degree, viz. (1.) Fath. Walt.
Goodfield a Minorite, who proceeded in 1510. (2.) Rich. Dudly of Oriel Coll.
lately Proctor of the University. (3.) John Mylford a Benedictine and Bac. of
Div. (4.) Nicholas Bradbridge M. A. and Fell of Mert. Coll. Which last was
afterward D. of D. and Chancellor of the Cath. Church of Lincoln. He died 14
March 1532, and was buried in the said Cath. Chapter See among the Incorporations
in 1526.

Incorporations
Nov. 5. John Smyth, D. of D. of Cambridge.

Dec. 12. John Wilcocks D. of D. in Vniversitate Tantaronensis, as the Register
says. Qu. in what Country that University is.

An. Dom. 1509.
An. 1. Hen. 8.
Chancellor, the same.

Commiss. Will. Fauntleroy D. D.' to whom were sometimes Deputies Dr. Tho.
Mychell, and Dr. Jo. Kynton.

Proct. Tho Erytage of Oriel Rich. Ducke of Exet. Coll.


Both which Proctors were according to a former Statute (lately much neglected)
elected on one and the same day, being the first of Easter-Term.

Bach. of Music.
May...John Wendon, a Scholar of Music; whose Gra^e was granted to be admitted
Bachelaur, conditionally that he compose a Mass to be sung in the Act following.

Jul. 2. John Clawsey was then admitted Bach. of Mus.

Both these were eminent in their Professions.

Bach. of Arts.
About 15 were admitted, of whom Rich. Consent or Consenett a Can. sec. was
one, and James Fitzjames of Mer^. Coll. another; and 7 supplicated, who were
not admitted this year.

Bach. of the Civ. Law.
May...Lancelot Collyns or Colynson. -- He was Nephew to Christopher Bambridge
Archbishop of York, by whose favor he became Treasurer of that Church in the
beginning of May 1514, upon the Resignation of Robert Langton LL. D. mentioned
under the year 1501. After Colynsons death, Will. Clyff, LL. D. of Cambridge,
was installed Treasurer of the said Church 13 Apr. 1539; the same Will. Clyff,
I mean, who became Chauntor of that Church on the resignation of Will. Holgyll
(then or lately Master of the Savoy Hospital near London) in the beginning of
Nov. 1534. As for the Treasurership, Clyff by this Letters resigned it into the
hands of K. Edw. 6. which being confirmed under the common Seal of the Dean and
Chapter of York, he was afterward made the third Dean of Chester in the place
of Hen. Man Bishop of the Isle of Man. This Will. Clyff died at London about
the 7th of December. in 1558. and was succeeded in his Deanery by Roger Walker M.
of A.

June 2. Giles Hakeluyt of Alls. Coll. -- One the 5 of Sept. 1514, he became
Sub-dean of the Church of Salisbury on the Resignation of John Robinson.

Nine more were admitted Bach. of the Civil Law, and seven supplicated, who
were not admitted this year.

Bach. of the Can. Law.
June 11. Oliver Poole or Pole of Nevylls Inn, (involved in the limits of C. C.
C.) afterward Principal of Greek Hall near to the Chapter yard of S. Frideswyde,
and in that Parish; was then admitted Bach. of the Can. Law. -- He is styled in
the public Register of this time Vir doctus and praeclarus, which is all I know
of him, only that he was of noble Race.

June...Will. Page a Canon Regular and Prior of Ivy Church in the County of
Wilts. -- One Richard Page who was an Oxford May by Education, but not
graduated as I can yet find, occurs Prior of Idrose or Ederos in the same
County, an. 1526.

Besides these two were but two more admitted, and 13 that supplicated, who
were not this year admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Thirteen were admitted, and five supplicated who were not admitted this year;
but none of them were afterward Writers or Bishop, and whether Dignitaries, I
know not.

Opponents in Div.
Seven were admitted to oppose, who were afterward admitted Bach. of Div. and
eight supplicated, some of which were afterward Bach. of Div. also.

Bach. of Div.
May 10. The reverend Father Edmund Forest a Canon regular, and Prior of the
Monastery of Langthony (near Gloucester.)

Jun.... William Arden a Dominican. -- See more among the Incorporations, an.
1520.

Jun. 21. Robert Cleyton of Linc. Coll. Principal of Staple Hall in
Schoolstreet, styled in the public Reg. Vir d^lus

Jul. 5. Henry Broke a Benedictin -- One Thomas Br^ks who had been of this
University, (of Gloucester College I think) did supplicate for, or at least
took, a degree in this University, but 'twas before the time that these Fasti
begin. In 1504* ^^n. 21. he was confirmed Abbat of M^chelney of the Benedictin
Order, in Somersetshire, after the death of one William Wyke: and (...) in 1522
John Shirbourne was confirmed Abbat in his place, on the 6 of Nov. in the same
year.

Jul. 6. Father A^th. Etton or E^ton, a Do^^ or (...), who had studied two
years in the University of (...), three in Lovaine, and five in Oxon.

Besides these, others were admitted, and several supplicated.

Doct. of Law.
Not one admitted or licensed, either in the Canon or Civil Law, and but one
supplicated for the degree of Doct. of Civ. Law, who was admitted the next year.

Doct. of Div.
June 19. Humphrey Wystow of Alls. Coll -- He had before this time been
Principal of S. Edm. Hall, and was now beneficed at Tamworth in Staffordshire;
where dying in Oct. 1514, was buried in the Chancel of the Church there,
dedicated to S. Edys, or Edyth.

March 19. Thomas Drax Rector of Linc. Coll.

There were three also supplicated for the said degree; viz. (1.) John Baker
Bac. of Div. who became Rector of Lymyngton in Somersetshire, upon the
Resignation of Thomas Wolsey (afterward a Cardinal) in the beginning of Jul.
1509. (2.) Hugh Bolles B. D. a Benedictin, (3.) Pet. de Campo a Portugnese and
Minorite, mentioned under the year 1507.

An. Dom. 1510.
An. 2 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury.

Commiss. William Fauntleroy John Thornden Thomas Mychel D. D. oftentimes
styled Vicechanc. D. D.


Proct. John Burgeis of Magd. Coll. Bor. John Hewys of Mert. Coll. Austr. April
10.


Bach. of Music.
Jan...John Gilbert. -- His Order and Place are not set down.

Grammarians.
Feb. 3. John Toker or Tooker Bach. of Arts, was then admitted to inform and
instruct in Grammar.

Bach. of Arts.
Feb. 28. William York a Canon Regular. -- See more among the Bach. of Div.
1519.

Besides him were about 40 admitted, and about 30 who supplicated for that
degree, but were not admitted this year.

Bach. of the Civ. Law.
Nineteen were admitted, among whom Anthony Maycok was one, and several others
who were afterward Dignitaries in the Church; and nine that supplicated who
were not adm. this year.

Bach. of the Can. Law.
Feb. 3. Will. Fleshmonger of New Coll. -- He was afterward Dean of
Chichester, as I shall tell ye elsewhere.

Thomas Leson was admitted the same day. -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1512.

Will. Taylour a Canon regular of the Premonstratensian Order, was also
admitted the same day (Feb. 3.)

Besides which three, were about 33 admitted, and more than twenty that
supplicated, who were not admitted this year. Among these last, I find one
Rich. Wraxhall a Benedictine, who on the 7 Jan. 1516 was confirmed Abbat of
Athelney in Somersetshire, in the place of John Wellington some time before
deceased: which Wellington had been confirmed Abbat 27 July 1503, in the place
of one John George, who had been elected Prior 29 Oct. 1485, on the death of
Robert Hill, who died on the tenth day of the same month. These things I note,
because all the said Abbats had received Academical Education in this
University.

Mast. of Arts.
Eleven were admitted this year, among whom John Cottisford, afterward Rector
of Linc. Coll. and Canon of the Coll. of K. H. 8. was one; and fifteen that
supplicated, among whom was Jeffrie Wren, afterward Canon of Windsore.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 12. Fr. Joh. Byrd a Carme. -- On the 2. May going before he was adm. to
oppose in his faculty; and many years after this, he became the first Bishop of
Chester.

Jun....Tho. Wolsey M. A. of Magd. Coll. -- He was now Dean of Lincoln, and
afterward a Cardinal, and Archbishop of York.

Dec.... John Longland of Magd. Coll. now a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict,
as the public register of this time says. -- See more in the year following.

Thirteen supplicated for the said Degree, but not, as I conceive, admitted
this year, among whom Rich. Gray a Canon regular was one, (written in the
public register Reg. Act. Cong^^g G. fol. 110. a. b.
Canonicus regularis and Gardianus S. Augustini) and John Essex a Benedictine
was another, of whom I shall make mention in 1515.

Doct. of the Civ. Law.
May 14. Edw. Culpeper of Al^s. Coll.

June... Joh. Kydwelly of the same Coll. sometimes Principal of S. Edwards hall.

June... Pet. Porkyn of New Inn, one of the Advocates in the Court of Arches
and Rector of St. Leonards Church on New-fishstreet-hi^ in London. -- He died
1. May 1520, and was buried in the Church there.

For the said Degree supplicated (1) Edm. Horde B. of the Civ. Law of Alls.
Coll. sometimes Principal of Greek hall, afterward Princ. of Burnells Inn
alias London Coll. (2) John Noble Bach. of the said faculty, Princ. of
Broadgates hall and Official to the Archdeacon of Berks. He died 2. June 1522
and was buried in Doclingtons Isle (now the Chapel wherein the Society of
Pembroke Coll. celebrate divine service) joining on the South side of St.
Aldates Church. Under the upper South window of which, is a raised Monument of
alabaster, with the proportion of this John Noble from head to foot carved from
alabaster, with the habit of a Bach. of Civ. Law, and his Crown tonsur'd.

Doct. of the Can. Law.
May 14. Thom. Orton or Horton now or lately Principal of White hall and Pyrie
hall in St. Michaels Parish near to the North gate of Oxford.

Jan.... Edw. Hygons lately Princ. of Burnells Inn alias London Coll. in St.
Aldates Parish.

There also supplicated for the said Degree (1) Thom. Thomlyn a Canon regular
and Bach. of the Can. Law. (2) Will. Balborow Bach. of both the Laws, lately
Princ. of St. Mildrids hall in St. Mildrids Parish, and now Princ. of New Inn.

Doct. of Physic.
James Radbourne Bach. of Physic did supplicate on the 29. June to be licensed
to proceed in that faculty. but whether he was admitted, it appears not, nor
that he stood in the Comitia.

Doct. of Div.
May 12. Frater John Howden a Dominican, Prior of the Coll. of Blackfriars or
Dominicans in the South Suburb of Oxon.

Fr. Walt. Goodfield a Minorite or Franciscan, now or lately Prior or Guardian
of the Coll. of Franciscans in the South Suburb of Oxon. was adm. the same day.

Besides these two that were licensed to proceed, were eight Bach. of Div. who
supplicated to be admitted Doctors of the same faculty, viz. (1) John
Waldgrave. (2) Will. Godmersham a Benedict. Monk. (3) John Claymond President
of Magd* Coll. (4) Richard Beverley a Dominican and Bach. of Div. of Cambridge.
(5) Rob. King a Benedictine, who afterward proceeded in 1518. (6) Jam. Foston
a Cistercian Monk. (7) Will. Helmysley of the same Order. (8) Tho. Castle a
Benedictine.

Incorporations.
Oct. 11. Will. Gantlin Doct. of Physic of the Univ. of Mountpelier.

Nov. 20. Tho. Wells or Wellys M. A. of this Univ. and sometimes Fellow of New
College, afterward D. of D. beyond the Sea, was then, or the day after,
incorporated D. of D. being then Domestic Chaplain to Dr. Warham Archb. of
Canterbury and a Dignitary.

Nov. 29. John Sixtinus LL. D. of the Univ. of Senes in Tuscany* was then
incorporated, having been more than an year in this University. He was
afterward dignified in the Church of England, and was reckoned one of the
Foreigners, who were excused from paying a subsidy to the King an. 1513. Petr.
Carmelian, Polyd. Virgil, Erasm. Roterodamus, Andr. Ammonius, etc. who were
beneficed and dignified in the Church, were excused also.

Jan.... Rich. Talot or Tollet Bach. of the Civil Law of this Univ. and Doct.
of the same fac. at Cambridge.

Feb. 3. Brian. Roos Doctor of Decrees of the Univ. of Valence. -- He died 1529
and was buried in the Church of Chelray in...

One Will. Petoe M. A. of Cambridge was also incorp. on the 14. June. -- One
Peter, (whom some call William) Petoe was a Cardinal. See among the Bishops,
under the year 1558.

An. Dom. 1511.
An. 3. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Will. Fauntleroy again. Tho. Drax D. D. of Lync. Coll. John Roper
Princ. of George hall. John Cockys LL. D. Edm. Wylsford D. D. Provost of Ori^l
Coll.

Proct. Will. Brook of Oriel Coll. Austr. elected on the last day of Apr. Tho.
Southern, Bor. elected 2. May.

Grammarians.
Dec. 11. Maurice Byrchensaw a Scholar of the fac. of Rhetoric, was then
admitted to inform in Grammar. -- He taught in the School joining to Magd.
Coll. great gate, and was afterward Bach. of the Civil Law.

Mar. 18. Edw. Watson a Scholar of the fac. of Gram. -- This Person had
afterward his grace granted to him for the Degree of Bac^. of Grammar,
conditionally that he compose an hundred verses in praise of the University,
and also make a Comedy within one year after he had taken that Degree: but
whether he was admitted, or did take it, it appears not.

Bachel. of Grammar.
Apr. 8. John Burgeys a secular Chaplain was admitted to the reading of any
book of the fac. of Grammar.

Bach. of Rhetoric.
Jun. 3. John Bulman a Scholar of the Art of Rhetoric, was admitted to the
reading of any book of the said faculty, viz. the first book of Tullies Offices
and the first book of his Epistles.

Bach. of Arts.
Nov. 10. John Constable a famous Latin Poet of his time.

Feb. 3. John Dovell -- In one of his supplicates for that Degree he is written
Will. Devell: yet I cannot take him to be the same with Will. Dovell a
Bernardine or white Monk, who studied sometimes in St. Bernards Coll. and who
succeeded one Rich. Paynter of that Order in the Abbatship of Clyve in
Somersetshire.

Besides these two were 38. or more admitted Bach. of Arts, and 8. at least
that supplicated, who were not adm. this year.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jul.... George Gray Son of the Marquess of Dorset.

Feb. 9. Thom. Colfox of Alls. Coll. -- In the Catalogue of Fellows of that
House he is styled Decanus Salopiae.

Besides these were adm. 4 more, and 9 there were that supplicated for that
Degree, who were not adm. this year.

I find also 5. who were adm. Bach. of the Can. Law, and six who supplicated;
most of whom were secular Chaplains.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 5. James Fitzjames of St. Albans hall, lately of Mert. Coll. -- See more
in the year 1516.

June 21. John Quarre of Merton Coll. -- He is the same John Quarre, as I
suppose, who occurs Archdeacon of Landaff. 1541.

Feb. 6. Rog. Edgworth of Oriel Coll.

Feb. 12. John Blyss mentioned under the year 1507.

Besides these were about 33 admitted, and eleven, or thereabouts, that
supplicated, that were not adm. this year.

Opponents in Div.
May 31. John Bosforus a Cistercian Monk of St. Bernards Coll. in the North
suburb of Oxon, and Abbat of Tiltey in Essex. -- About the same time he
supplicated for the Degree of Bach. of Div. which, I presume was granted, tho
not set down in the register. He is sometimes written Joh. Brown alias Brom.

Nov. 19. Frat. Rob. Low or Law a Carme -- Whether he was adm. Bach. of Div.
according to the custom of those that oppose in that fac. it does not appear in
the public register. See more of him among the Doct. of Div. in 1520.

Besides these, were eleven more that opposed; most of whom were afterward
adm. Bac. of Div.

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 1. William Malverne alias Parker a Benedictine Monk -- On the 4. of May
1514 he was elected Abbat of St. Peter's Church in Gloucester on the death of one
John Newton D. D. and continued Abbat till the dissolution of his Church. See
more among the Doctors of Div. 1515.

Dec. 12. Joh. de Coloribus a Dominican.

Mar. 14. Hugh Whitehead of Durham (now Trinity) Coll. -- See among the Doctors
of Div. under the year 1513.

Mar. 22. Fr. Rich. Mallet a Friar of the Order of St. Austin the Hermit, who
had studied 12. years here and at Cambridge.

.... Rob. Schouldham a Benedictine Monk. -- He was now, or soon after an Abbat.
See in the year 1515.

Six more were admitted. and 7 supplicated that were not adm. this year, of
whom Rog. Necham a Benedictine was one.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Not one admitted, only John Jane LL. Bac. of New Coll. supplicated for the
said Degree, March 25.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Not one admitted, only Thom. Byrd supplicated for that Degree. Whether he be
the same Tho. Byrd who, from being a Canon of the Order of St. Austin in the
Priory of Taunton, was elected Prior of Barlich (of the same Order) in
Somersetsh. 3. Sept. 1492 upon the deprivation of Rob. Wind, I know not. He
resigned his Priorship on the first of December. 1524, and the very next day one
John Norman was elected into that place.

Doct. of Div.
Dec. 15. John Longland of Magd. Coll. -- Afterward Bishop of Lincoln.

Those that supplicated for the Degree of D. of D. this year, were (1) Laur,
Stubbes, afterward President of Magd. Coll. (2) Tho. Castle a Benedictine
Monk, and Warden or Guardian of Durham Coll. in Oxon. I find one Tho. Castle a
Doctor of Oxon to have succeeded in the Priorship of Durham John Aukland D. D.
an. 1494, but what relation there was between them, unless this last was Uncle
to the former, I know not. See more in the year 1513. (3) Will. Porter Bach. of
Div. Warden of New Coll. and Chaunter of Hereford. (4) John Esterfeild, etc.

Incorporations.
Apr. 3. Hugh Inge or Yuge sometimes of New Coll. Master of Arts of this Univ.
and D. of D. beyond the Seas, was incorp. D. of D. -- He was afterward Archb.
of Dublin.

Rob. Spence LL. D. beyond the Seas, was incorporated the same day.

May... Rich. Smyth M. A. of this Univ. and Doctor of the Civ. Law beyond the
Seas.

June 26. Rob. Fairfax Doctor of Music of Cambridge. -- This Person did
afterward live in Hertfordshire, and was buried in the Church at St. Albans,
near, or under, the seat, where the Mayor of that place usually sits. I have
seen some of his Musical compositions of three, or more parts, which show the
Author to be eminent in his faculty in the time he lived. Among the said
compositions, which were written in a large book, were mixed with them the
compositions of William Newarke, Richard Davyes, Edmund Turges, Sir Thomas
Phelippis, William Cornish jun. and of one Sheryngham, Hampshire, Brown, etc.
All which lived in, or near, the time of the said Dr. Fairfax, who was of the
same family with those of Yorkshire.

Jan. 24. John Hampton Abbat of the Monastery of St. Austin at Canterbury, D.
of D. beyond the Seas.

An. Dom. 1512.
An. 4. Hen. 8.
Chancellor the same.

Commiss. Edmund Wylsford William Fauntlery John Kynton D. D.


Proctors Thomas Pulton of New Coll. Austr. elected 21. Richard Symons of Mert.
Coll. Bor. elected 23. Apr.


Rhetoricians.
Or such who were admitted to inform and instruct in the art of Rhetoric.

Jan. ult. Richard Smyth a secular Chaplain, who in the art of Rhetoric had
spent 16 years, of which 10 were spent in the informing and instructing youths
in Grammar.

Bach. of Music.
Apr.... John Dygon a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict was then admitted.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. ult. Malachias Arthur -- Afterward a learned Physician. See in the year
1515.

Jan. ult. William Bennet -- One of both his names became Archdeacon of Dorset
upon the consecration of John Stokesley Bishop of London, 20. of Dec. 1530, and
afterward was the Kings Orator at Rome. Whether the same with the former I
cannot tell. See among the Bach. of the Civil Law, an. 1527.

About 51. Bachelors of Arts were admitted this year, and 15 at least that
supplicated for that Degree.

Bach. of Civil Law.
Jul.... Hugh ap Rice -- He was afterward Founder of Jesus Coll.

Jul.... John London of New Coll. -- See in the year 1518. Besides these two
were but five more admitted, and two supplicated.

This year 7 were admitted in the Canon Law, and two only, or thereabouts,
supplicated.

Mast. of Arts.
Twenty or more were admitted, of whom John Moreman of Exeter College was one,
and 5 only supplicated.

Bach. of Div.
Nov. 4. William Wall a Canon regular, and Prior of the Monastery at Kenilworth
in Warwickshire. -- See another William Wall in 1518. among the D. of D.

Feb. 4. Fr. Nich. Peter, or Peter Nicholas a Carme or White Friar, Prior of
the College of Carmes in the North suburb of Oxon.

Besides these two, were six more admitted, and about eleven that supplicated,
that were not, as I can yet find, admitted this year. Among those that
supplicated, were first William How M. A. and the Kings Chaplain. See among the
Doctors of Divinity 1526. (2) John Lleson Abbat of the Monastery of St. Mary of
Neath, of the Cistercian order in Glamorganshire, now studying in St. Bernards
Coll. In a certain writing dated some years after the dissolution of religious
houses, I find mention of one Thomas Leyson late Abbat of Neath, which I
presume is the same and his Christian name mistaken. See in the year 1510. (3)
Thomas Knolles M. A. and Subdean of York: whom I shall mention elsewhere.

Doct. of Civil Law.
Not one admitted, only four supplicated viz. (1) Richard Benger LL. Bach. (2)
Maurice Glynn Bach. of the Civil Law, who was afterward Doct. of that fac. and
died in July 1525. (3) John Incent or Innocent of Alls. Coll. (4) Thomas
Myllyng LL. Bach. and Chaplain to Dr. Warham Archb. of Canterbury. He was
afterward a Benefactor to New Coll. as I have In Hist* and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 131.
elsewhere told you.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 2. Hugh Myllyng of Exeter Coll.

Dec. 6. Thomas Coke.

Four also supplicated this year, who were all afterward admitted Doctors of
Div. except Thomas Hamden a Minorite or Gray Friar.

Incorporations.
May 3. John Stokys or Stokes D. of D. of Cambr. and Provincial of the Friars
of the Order of St. Austin the Hermit.

May... Simon Pickeryng a Carme Bach. of Div. of this Univ. and D. of D. of
Cambr. was incorp. D. D.

Dec.... William Spark M. A. of Cambridge.

Jan. 28. William Heryson M. A. of the Univ. of Paris.

Jan.... William Bark M. and an Archdeacon.

Jan. 29. Edward Burrell M. A. of Paris. Besides several Bach. of Arts of
Cambridge.

An. Dom. 1513.
An. 5. Hen. 8.
Chancellor the same.

Commiss. William Fauntleroy John Kynton John Thornden D. D.


Proctors Thomas Mede of Ex. c. Austr. Thomas Hobson of Vniv. c. Bor.

Bach. of Music.
Oct... Christopher Wodde did supplicate for that Degree, but whether he was
admitted it appears not.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 4. Robert Whityndon or Whittington was then admitted Bach. of A. and in
the same Congregation Doctor of Grammar and Rhet.

Thomas Abell was admitted the same day. -- See among the Writers under the
year 1540.

Oct. 29. John Rogers Quaere.

Feb. 9. Edward Wotton of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward an eminent Physician.

Besides these were about 57 admitted, and about 24 that supplicated for that
Degree, that were not this year admitted.

Doct. of Grammar and Rhetoric.
July 4. Robert Whityndon the most famous Grammarian of his time, had his head
crowned, or his temples adorned with Laurel, -- At which time, and the time
also when that Degree was completed, it was allowed to him by the venerable
Regents that he might wear a hood lined with silk, but not to be used for the
future by any body else. See more among the Writers under the year 1529.

Bach. of Law.
Nineteen were admitted in the Canon and about 18 in the Civil Law. Eight also
supplicated for the Degree of Bach. of Canon, and about 12 for the Degree of
Bach. of Civil Law.

Master of Arts.
About 20 were admitted this year, and about eleven that supplicated for the
same Degree, among whom was John Ramsey a Canon regular, Nov. 18. -- He was
afterward Prior of St. Mary's Coll. in Oxon. the great of which, is almost
opposite to the common gate of New Inn. This College was a nursery to train up
young Canon regulars in Academical learning.

Bach. of Physic.
Apr... Peter Coloniensis Bach. of Arts of the University of Colen and a
Student in Physic, was then admitted. -- The same year he supplicated to be
Doctor of that faculty under the name of Petrus Coloniensis de Nonovigio and
Novonigio. Others supplicated for the said Degree of Bach. and one to practice
Physic.

Bach. of Div.
June 16. Edward Bockyng a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict and now Warden or
Guardian of Canterbury College in Oxon. -- He was afterward much concerned in
promoting the matter of Elizabeth Barton the holy maid of Kent as the
Chronicles will tell you at large. See more in 1518.

June 20. Edward Hynmersh of the same Order. -- He was afterward Warden or
Guardian of Durham College in Oxon.

Besides these were 7 more admitted, who had all before opposed in Divinity,
and eight that supplicated (all of religious Orders) who were not admitted this
year.

Doct. of Civil Law.
Not one admitted this year, only five supplicated; among whom was John Incent
or Innocent of Alls. College who supplicated in July and November, yet not set
down as admitted. In a certain writing dated this year, he is written thus.
John Incent LL. Bac. Episcopi Winton commissarius, and ejusdem consistorii
Episcopalis Praesidens. He became Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral in 1537 in the
place of Richard Sampson promoted to the Sea of Lichfield; and about the same
time was made Master of the Hospital of St. Cross near Winchester. He founded a
Free School at Berchamsted (the place of his nativity) in Hertfordshire for 120
Scholars to be taught therein, allowing to the Master, Ushers, and School it
self, a very ample salary, 33. Hen. 8. The visitor of which is the Warden of
Alls. College; and several of its Masters have been of that society. In the old
hall belonging to Doctors Commons near St. Paul's Cathedral, were in one of the
Windows his Arms, viz. Argent, on a bend gules a fair and innocent Virgin stark
naked, with her hair loose about her shoulders, or; her right hand is extended
above her head, holding a Chaplet of roses therein, and her other hand covers
her privities.

The other four who supplicated were (1) Matthew Knightley, (2) Richard Brown,
(3) William Marbull, (4) Peter Ligham; all Bachelors of the Civil Law.

Doct. of Can. Law.
May 25. Edmund Horde (sometimes by a mistake written Forde) of Allsouls
College. -- This Person whom I have mentioned among the Civilians in 1510, was
about this time a noted Advocate in the Court of Arches, and Procurator of the
Charter house near London.

William Fleshmonger of New Coll. -- He was afterward Dean of Chichester in
the place of John Young Bishop of Callipolis (who died 1526) and a Benefactor
to New College. See Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 131. a.

There also supplicated for this Degree (1) Ailnoth Arscot sometimes Principal
of Perkwaters Inn, now involved within the limits of Christ Church (2) Michael
Wogan or Ogan. Both which were Bachelors of the Canon Law.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. ult. William Goderyche.

May 4. Fr. Henry Osbourne a Dominican.

13. The ven. Father Hugh Whitehead a Benedictine Monk -- In 1512 he succeeded
Thomas Castle in the Wardenship or Gardianship of Durham College in Oxon, and
in 1524. he succeeded another Thomas Castle in the Priorship of the Church of
Durham. See more in the year 1511 among the Doctor of Div. This Hugh Whitehead
living to see his Priory dissolved, he was soon after made the first Dean of
Durham by the foundation Charter of King Hen. 8. dat. 12. May, an. reg. 33.
Dom. 1541. In which Dignity he was succeeded by Robert Horn of Cambridge, by
the donation of King Ed. 6. dat. 20. Nov. an. reg. 5. Dom. 1551. The said
Whitehead dying at London was buried in the Church of the holy Trinity called
the Minories, but when I cannot yet tell.

May 15. Kobert Hill of Merton Coll.

June 27. Fr. Thomas Anyday Robert Saunderson Gilbert Saunders John Smythe John
Brown Minorites or Grey-fryers.


Nov. 19.

Nov. 25. Richard Ferys the Provincial of the Carmes or White friars -- He was
now, or lately, Prior of the Coll. of Carmes in the North suburb of Oxon.

January 22. John Baker.

23. Edm. Forest Prior of Langthony. -- See among the Bach. of Divinity 1509.

25. Laurence Stubbes of Magdalen Coll. -- Afterward President of that house
in the room of Dr. John Hygden.

29. John Hygden of Magdalen Coll. -- In 1516 he became President of that
College, in 1524 Dec. 2. he was admitted Prebendary of Wighton in the Church of
York, and the year following Dean of Cardinal College in Oxon. In 1529 he was
made Prebendary of Wetwang in the said Church of York, and in 1532 Dean of the
Coll. in Oxon. founded by King Henry 8. on the site of that of Cardinal; in
which year dying, he was succeeded by Dr. John Oliver in the said Deanery.

Feb... John Bird a Carme -- In the year 1516 he succeeded the aforesaid
Richard Ferys in the Provincialship of the Carmes, and was at length Bishop of
Chester, as I have told you in 1510.

Four also supplicated this year to be admitted Doctors of Div. of whom Robert
Cheltenham a Benedictine was one, and Simon Mollonde Bach. of Div. of Mert.
College another, but were not admitted. The other two were afterward admitted
as I shall tell you when I come to them.

Incorporations.
Jul... John Wythers of Magd. Coll. M. of A. and sometimes Proctor of the
University, afterward made Doctor of the Canon Law by the Popes Bull, was then
incorp. Dr. of the Canon Law.

Oct... Thomas Hanyball or Hannyball Doctor of the Civil Law of Cambridge -- In
the year 1504 May 14. he was installed Prebendary of Gevendall in the Church of
York upon the resignation of John Hatton Bishop of Nigrepont, and in the year
1514 he became Chancellor of the Diocels of Worcester, in the place of one
Rob. Hallesworth Doctor of Decrees, who succeeded Tho. Alcock LL. D. in that
office 1508, and Alcock, Tho. Wodyngton Dr. of Dec. 1503. In 1522. (14 Hen. 8.)
I find the said Tho. Hanyball to be living in Rome in the quality of the King
of Englands Orator, and in that of Agent or Factor for Cardinal Wolsey: to the
last of which he ever and anon gave an account by Letters of the Affairs of
Rome. In one dated 13 Dec. 1522, he told the Cardinal, that his Holiness has
sent for Erasmus Rot. under a fair color by his brief; and if he come not, I
think (says he) the Pope will not be content, etc. In 1524 the said Dr.
Hanyball was made Master of the Rolls in the place of Dr. John Clerk; which
honorable Office he keeping till 1528, was succeeded therein by Dr. John
Tailor, of whom I shall speak at large in 1522.

Nov.... Robert Byse or Bysse Dr. of the Civil Law in the Court of Rome. -- In
the year following (1514) he occurs by the Name of Rob. Besse LL. D. Principal
of Henxsey Hall, and in 1524 he became Vicar General to the Bishop of B. and
Wells by the death of Roger Church Dec. Doctor and Canon of Wells, as also a
great Pluralist in the Dioc. of Wells and elsewhere. He died in the month of
Dec. or thereabouts, 1546.

Nov. 18. William Latymer Bach. of Art of this University, and Mast. of Arts
beyond the Seas, was then incorporated M. of A. -- Perhaps this William Latymer
may be the same whom I have mentioned among the Writers under the year 1545;
where you 'll find another Will. Latymer who was Dean of Peterborough.

This year also supplicated to be concorporated (1) John Buke D. D. beyond the
Seas, (2) John Dolman Dr. of Civ. Law of Cambridge, (3) Charles Lucy Bach. of
Phys. of Cambridge; but whether any of them were accordingly incorporated, I
cannot yet find. I think Dolman was, because his Supp. was granted simpliciter.

There was also a Supplication made that Richard Master M. A. and Proctor of
the University of Cambridge, might be incorporated; but whether granted, I know
not. I take this Rich. Master to be the same with him who was a Native of
Maidstone in Kent, and Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, where he was
esteemed an excellent Philosopher, and the same who was afterward Bac. of Div.
and Parson of Adlington in Kent, and much concerned in the matter of Eliz.
Barton the holy Maid of Kent.

An. Dom. 1514.
An. 6 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same viz. Dr. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury.

Commiss. John Thornden or Thornton, written this year in the public Reg.
Episcopus Syrymensis. Lawrence Stubbes D. D. of Magd. Coll. Edward Wylsford D.
D. Hugh Whytehead D. D. etc.

Proct. Leon. Huchenson of Ball. Coll. Bor. Tho. Ware of Oriel Coll. Aur. Apr.
27.


The senior was afterward Master of Universe. Coll. and the other Provost of
Oriel.

Grammarians.
Jul. 3. Tho. Thompson a secular Chaplain. October. 12. Thom. Bond. adm. to
inform.

One John Ball, a Scholar of Grammar, who had spent twelve years in Logic and
Grammar, supplicated that he might be admitted to inform, etc. Granted
conditionally that he compose an hundred Versus in praise of the University
against the Act following, and that in the time of the Act he fasten them on S.
Mary's Chapter door; besides other Exercise then imposed on him.

Also one Thomas Hatton a Scholar of Gram. supplicated to inform, etc. whether
granted, I know not.

Bach. of Arts.
Jan. 16. William Tresham of Merton Coll.

Besides him were 20 more admitted at least, and about thirty supplicated that
were not admitted this year, among whom was Reginald Pole of Magd. Coll. who
was admitted in the year following.

Bach. of Canon Law.
Jul.... John Holyman of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Bristol.

Besides him, were 30 at least who were admitted, and eight at least who
supplicated, among whom were (1) Dermitius de Meara an Irish man, who had
studied the Canon Law in this University, in Paris, and in Cambridge 16 years.
(2) Dermit. Rian another Irish man, who had studied the said Law in the said
Universities 12 years.

Both these Irish men were afterward well dignified in their own Country.

Mast. of Arts.
About 24 were admitted, and about 12 that supplicated, who were not admitted,
this year; yet not one was either a Bishop or a Writer, as I can yet find.

Bach. of Div.
Dec. 10. Fr. John de Castro Banoniensi.

Jan. 20. Fr. John Harvey a Minorite. -- He was now Prior or Guardian of the
Coll. of Minorites or Franciscans in the S. Suburb of Oxon. In which Office he
succeeded Dr. Goodfield.

Besides these two, were six more admitted that had before opposed in Divinity;
and twelve who supplicated, among whom were (1) Thomas Rowland, sometimes
written and called Rowland Penticost, a Monk of the Order of S. Benedict, and
now, or soon after, Lord Abbat of Abendon in Berks. (2) Thomas Wells or Wellys,
a Monk of the same Order, and afterward, if I mistake not, Prior pro tempore
of Gloc. College near Oxon. See another Thomas Wells among the Incorporations
an. 1510.

Doct. of Law.
Not one admitted in the Canon or Civil Law, and but one, named Giles Hackluyt
LL. B. who supplicated to be D. of Can. Law; and but one, named Thomas Colfox,
who supplicated to be D. of Civ. Law.

Doct. of Phys.
Not one admitted; only Hen. Marsh Bac. of Arts and Phys. supplicated for that
degree May 18.

Doct. of Div.
June... Thomas Ryngstede Monk of S. Edmunds Bury, now a Student in Gloucester
Coll. -- Two of both his Names have been eminent Authors: one was a Dominican,
living in the Reign of K. Edw. 4. the other LL. D. and in great esteem during
the Reign of K. Hen. 6. In my searches also I find one Richard Ringsted a
Benedictin, who was Prior of the Novices living in Gloc. College in this
University 30 Hen. 6. Dom. 1452, and Author of Commentaria super 29 Capitula
parabolorum Salomonis, MS. in Bodl. libr. int. lib. med. 121. The beginning is,
In absconditis parabolorum conversabitur, etc. These Commentaries are no more
than ordinary Lectures which he read in the Schools at Oxon.

Oct. 16. Robert Cleyton of Lincoln Coll.

Mar. 20. Thomas Beel a Canon regular of the Order of S. Austin. -- See more of
him among the Bishops under the year 1528.

Besides these, were three that supplicated that were not admitted this year,
of whom Rob. Schowldham before mentioned was one, and Roll. Philipps M. A. an
eminent Preacher of his time, afterward Warden of Mert. College, another,

An. Dom. 1515.
An. 7 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Edmund Wylsford D. of D. and others.

Proct. John Cottysford of Lincoln William Fossey of Allsoules Coll.


Both which were elected together on the first day of Easter Term.

Grammarians.
Edward Pole and Henry Harchar Secular Chaplains, did supplicate to inform; but
whether they were admitted, it appears not.

Bach. of Arts.
June 27. Reginald Pole of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward a Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Canterbury.

October. 10. Rich. Tracy. -- See among the Writers under the year 1557.

Jan. 14. John Holway. -- One of both his Names became Prior of Bathe an. 1525.
as I have told you under the year 1503. Qu..... 9. James Blythe etc.

Besides these were about 56 admitted, and about 25 who supplicated, that were
not admitted this year.

On the 18. of December died Will. Gilberd Bach. of Arts of Magd. Coll. who, in
his Epitaph in the Chapel of the said Coll. is styled Archidiaconus Salopiae;
but the day and year when he was admitted Bach. of Arts, appears not in the
public Registers. In a certain Writing In the (...) Office near S. Paul's Cath.
Chapter in Land. in Re^. H^^der, Qu. 18. in the Will of Rich Bishop of Hereford.
dated 24 March 1515, (which is a quarter of an year after W. Gilberd died) I
find one Mr. Henry Marten to occur Archdeacon of Salop, together with Mr.
William Web Archdeacon of Hereford and William Porter Chaunter thereof; so
that I suppose that the said Marton succeeded in that Dignity William Gilberd.

Doct. of Music.
Robert Perrot Bach. of Music, and about this time Organist of Magd. College,
supplicated that he might be licensed to proceed in the said Faculty. -- His
request was granted conditionally that he compose a Mass and one Song, before
he really proceed. or stand in the Comitia; but whether he was admitted or
licensed to proceed, it does not appear in the Register. This Robert Perrot,
who was the second Son of George Perrot of Haroldston near Haverford West in
Pembrokeshire (of an ancient and knightly Family living there) was an eminent
Musician of his time, and did compose several Church Services and other
Matters, which have been since antiquated. He was a Benefactor to the said
College, as his Widow, and his eldest Son Simon afterward were, and is
Ancestor to the Perrots of North-Ley in Oxfordshire, I mean to that Family of
the Perrots, (for there are two that live there) who are called Gentlemen
Perrots. He gave way to Fare 20 April 1550, and was buried in the North Isle or
Alley joining to the Church of S. Peter in the East in Oxon.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 2. Maurice Byrchensaw the eminent Grammarian. -- He was afterward
Prebendary of Wells.

Jan. 28. Thomas Nightinghall. -- Vir lepidus and poeta, as Baleus says. See
among the Writers under the year 1524.

Besides these two, five were admitted; and about 16 that supplicated, who were
not this year admitted.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Thirteen were admitted, and eleven there were that supplicated, who were not
admitted this year. Many of which were without doubt afterward Dignitaries in
the Church.

Mast. of Arts.
June...John Constable of Byham Hall in the Parish of S. John Bapt. -- See
among the Writers, an. 1520.

March 5. John Clark of Magd. Coll. Quaere.

Besides these two, were about 25 admitted; and eleven or more that
supplicated, who were not admitted this year.

Bach. of Div.
April 29. Thomas Knolles of Magd. Coll. -- In the year 1507 he became Subdean
of York upon the promotion of Dr. James Harrington to the Deanery of that
Church, and resigning in 1529, (being then Prebendary of Aplethorpe in the said
Church) Will. Clifton LL. D. succeeded. See more among the D. of D. an. 1518.

May 9. John Essex a Benedictin. -- He was afterward Lord Abbat of S. Austins
at Canterbury.

Nine besides were admitted, (among whom was Roger Stanford a Benedictin Monk
of Worcester, afterward one of the first Prebendaries there) and about
eighteen that supplicated.

Doct. of Law.
Not one admitted either in the Canon or Civil Law, and but three that
supplicated, viz. William Barow, John Blount and William Middleton.

Doct. of Physic,
Not one admitted only Malachias Arthur sometimes a Graduat of Oxon. and
afterward Doctor of Physic of Bononia, supplicated to be admitted to practice
in the said Faculty, Oct. 23. which was accordingly granted.

Doct. of Div.
June 10. Nich. Miles or Mylys of Queens Coll. -- He was a Benefactor to
Learning. See in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. page 115. b.

Dec. 13. Fr. Will. Wetherall Prior of the College of the Friars of the Order
of S. Austin the Hermit in Oxon. In the year 1531 I find that he was Provincial
of the Austin Friars of England; and whether he was the last that bore that
Office, I know not. He is sometimes written, but falsely, Wodiall. -- See among
the Incorporations this year.

Jan.... Edmund Smythesby a Canon regular of the Order of S. Austin. -- In
another place in the Register, he is said among the Bach. of Div. to be a Friar
of the Order of S. Austin.

Besides these who were admitted Doctors of Divinity, supplicated for the said
dagree about 20; among whom were (1) Will. Malvern Lord Abbat of S. Peter's in
Gloucester, as the public Register styles him, whom I take to be the same that
Jo. Leland In the Transcript of his Itineraries in bib. Bod. fol. 172. 2.
calls Malvern alias Parker late Abbat of Gloucester, who made a Chapel joining
to the Church of Gloucester to be buried in. (2) Rob. Showldham or Shulde^m
mentioned under the year 1511. He was a Benedictin or Black Monk and now, or
soon after, Lord Abbat of S. Savior or S. Mary Overie in Southwark. Also Tho.
Marshall a Benedictin, Will. Hoddeson a Dominican, John a Pantry Bac. Div. and
Provost of Queens Coll. John Holder and John Hoper Masters of Arts of Mert.
Coll. Tho. Barton and Tho. Sellyng Bachelaurs of Div. and Benedictines etc. did
supplicate.

Incorporations.
Apr.... Tho. Martyr M. A. and Proctor of the University of Cambridge.

Oct. 26. Fr. Will. Wetheral Bach. of Div. of Cambridge. -- He soon after was
admitted Doctor of that Faculty in this University* as it is before told you.

Mar..... Will. Clerk M. A. of Cambridge, etc.

An. Dom. 1516.
An. 8 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. William Warham Archbishop of Cant.

Commiss. Laurence Stubbes D. D. and others.

Proct. Richard Walker of Merton Coll. Edmund Gray of New Coll. April 2.


Bach. of Music.
Not one appears admitted by the negligence of the Scribe. On the 13 of Apr.
Hen. Peter or Petre a secular Chaplain who had spent 30 years in Practical and
Theoretical Music, supplicated for the degree of Bach. of Music; which being
granted, he was without doubt admitted. One John Draper also a Student in the
said Faculty, supplicated also, which was granted with one or more conditions.

Bach. of Arts.
June 17. James Timbervyle of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Exeter.

December 16. Thomas Wylson. -- See in 1546 and 53.

Besides these were about 38 admitted, and about 21 that supplicated, who were
not admitted this year.

Bach. of Law.
Six in the Canon, and nine in the Civil Law, were admitted.

Thirteen in the Canon Law supplicated, (who were mostly secular Chaplains)
among whom was Richard Newman a Canon regular of the Order of Premonstratenses
as the public Regist. says, and about twelve in the Civil.

Mast. of Arts.
June 27. Thomas Abell or Able. -- See among the Writers an. 1540.

-- John Clerk of Magd. Coll.

Besides these were about 34 admitted, and about 9 that supplicated, who were
not admitted this year.

Bach. of Div.
May 5. James Fitzjames of S. Albans Hall. -- This person who was Son of John
Fitzjames Knight. Lord Chief Justice of England, was now Chancellor of the Church
of Wells, and had several Benefices in that Diocese, whereof the Rectorship of
the Collegiate Church of North-Cadbury was one. In 1534 he was made Prebendary
of Warmystre in the Church of Wells, and in the same year, by the death of
Thomas Lovell Decr. Dr. he was made Subdean of Wells, and Vicar General to the
Bishop thereof. He had other Preferments in the Cath. Church of S. Paul in
London, given to him by his Uncle Dr. Richard Fitzjames Bishop thereof, was
soon after a Doct. of Div. (but whether of this University it appears not) and
died in the beginning of the year 1541.

Besides him were about four admitted, and about fifteen that supplicated who
were not admitted; among whom William York a Canon, and Bac. of Arts, was one.

Doct. of Can. Law.
June 21. William Burghyll a secular Chaplain. John Morris or Morres. Peter
Lygham or Lyngham.

February 7. William Clyfton. -- In 1522 he became Succentor of the Church of
York, on the death of William Cook; and in May 1529 he was made Subdean of the
said Church on the Resignation of Dr. Thomas Knolles. In the former Dignity he
was succeeded by Robert Nooke 1529, in which year Clyfton resigned, and in the
other by Rob. Babthorp D. D. in September 1548, in which year Clifton died.
Bapthorp dying in 1570, Edmund Buney succeeded him, whom I have elsewhere
mentioned.

Doct. of Div.
Not one admitted, only three or more supplicated, viz. William Wall and
William Germyn, Minorites, and Richard Doke, all Bach. of Divinity, whom I
shall anon mention.

An. Dom. 1517.
An. 9 Hen. 8.
Chancellor the same.

Commiss. Mr. Rich. Doke or Duck of Exeter College, now Chaplain to Cardinal
Wolsey.

Proct. Thomas Irish of Exon Thomas Musgrave of Mert. Coll.


Bach. of Arts.
Thomas Garret was this year admitted, but the Month or Day when, appears not,
because the Register is imperfect; however in the year following he occurs by
the Title of Bach. of Arts. -- He was afterward Curate of Honey-lane in
London; and being much addicted to the Opinions of Martin Luther, went to Oxon
in 1526, and dispersed diverse prohibited Books among his Acquaintance and
Contemporaries, as Anth. Delaber of S. Albans Hall, afterward a Civilian of
Gloc. College, Nich. Vdall and John Diot both of C C C. John Clerk, Hen.
Summer, Will. Betts, John Taverner a Musician, of Card. Coll. etc. All which
being Lutherans, or Heretics as they were then called, suffered much. At
length Thomas Garret, after several Flights from place to place, Sculkings and
Imprisonments, was burnt in Smithfield near London, with Dr. Robert Barnes and
William Hierome, an. 1541, as John Fox, in his Book of Acts and Monuments of
the Church, will at large tell you.

Between the ending of one Register and the beginning of another, are the Acts
of the Congregation of this year wanting, many of which were torn out from the
former.

Mast. of Arts.
Their Admissions being all wanting in the public Register, I therefore
recurred to my MS. Book of Inceptions, and there found that 30 Masters stood in
the public Act or Comitia, but none can I yet find, who were afterward
Bishops, Writers, or Men of note.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
... Will. Pigman was then admitted Doctor of the Civil and Canon Law.

Who were Candidates for either, the Register which is imperfect this year, as
I have before told you, shows not.

Doct. of Div.
Apr.... Richard Doke or Duck of Exeter Coll. -- He was about this time Canon
of Exeter Cathedral, and afterward became Archdeacon of Wilts, and of
Salisbury, in which last Dignity I find him to occurr 1536. After he was
admitted Doctor, he was made Commissary of the University, as I have before
told you.

May... Frat. John de Coloribus a Dominican. -- See among the Writers under the
year 1525.

Feb.... Ralph Barnack of New Coll.

A Supplication was this year made for one Will. Woddysbury a Monk of the Order
of S. Benedict, but whether for the degree of Bach. or Doct. of Divinity, it
appears not, because the Register of this year, as I have told you, is
imperfect. He was elected Lord Prior of Worcester in 1515, in the place of
Thom. de Mildenham deceased; and dying in 1518, he was succeeded by one William
More, who resigning upon a foresight of Ruin, Hen. Holbeach alias Randes, was
elected Prior 13 March 1535, and afterward became the first Dean of Worcester.

An. Dom. 1518.
An. 10 Hen. 8.
Chancellor, the same.

Commiss. Rich. Duck D. of D. before mentioned.

Proct. John Stevyns of Oriel Roger Dyngley of Allsoules Coll.


Bach. of Arts.
Jul.... Paul Bush. -- He was afterward the first B. of Bristol. Thomas Elyot
of S. Mary's Hall. Thomas Runcorne. -- See among the M. of A. 1521. John Shene.
-- See among the M. of A. 1523.

Jan.... John Hoper or Hooper. -- He was afterward Bishop of Gloucester and
Worcester.

Arthur Cole of Magd. Coll. etc.

Besides these were about 44 admitted, and many that supplicated the ven.
Congregation for Admission.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Jul.... John Gryffyth or Gruffyth. -- He was afterward Treasurer of Landaff,
Dean of S. Asaph, and a Dignitary in the Church of Salisbury. He concluded his
last day in 1559.

John Stanley was admitted in the same month. -- About which time studied in
this University Thomas Stanley, who was afterward Bishop of the Isle of Man.

Besides these, were about six admitted, and six or more that supplicated.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Jul.... Frat. John Gregory a Brother of the Holy Trinity for, or of, the
Redemption of Captives. -- He was afterward the last Minister or Perfect of
the House or College of the Brethren of the Holy Trinity, situated without the
East Gate of the City of Oxford, on the South side.

Jul.... John Skeleton -- See among the Writers, under the year 1529. Thomas
Parker -- See in these Fasti, 1525.

Feb. ult. Fath. John Burton Prior of S. Frideswydes Monastery (now Christ
Church) in Oxon.

Richard Gwent of Alls. Coll. was admitted the same day -- He was afterward
Archdeacon of London, and Dean of the Arches. See in the year 1524.

Besides these, were about 16 admitted, and 6 or thereabout that supplicated.

Mast. of Art.
Jul.... John Holyman of New Coll. -- In the year 1514 he took the degree of
Bach. of the Can. Law, and was long after this time made Bishop of Bristol.

Tho. Stanbridge (of Magd. College) an eminent Grammarian. -- He was Brother,
or nearly related, to John Stanbridge the most noted Grammarian of his time,
was Master of a School at Banbury, much frequented for his sake, and died in
1522.

Besides these two were about 30 more admitted, and some few that supplicated,
and about 40 that stood in two Acts celebrated this year.

Bach. of Div.
Not one admitted, and but about ten supplicated for that degree, among whom
were (1) Richard Yaxley a Benedictin Monk, (2) Edward More of New Coll. who was
admitted the eighth Warden of Wykeham's Coll. near Winchester 29 Oct. 1526, and
dying 1541, was buried in the Choir of the Chapel there. (3) Arnold Guy alias
Buckfast a Cistercian Monk of S. Bernards Coll. in Oxon. He was afterward
Provisor or Prefect of that Coll. and an Abbat (perhaps of Buckfast in
Devonshire) as may seem by his Arms, or Rebus of his Name, now or lately in one
of the middle Chamber Windows of S. Bernards, now called S. John Bapt. Coll.
wherein is a Crosier thrust through a Bucks face palewaies. One William Arnold was
the last Abbat of Merevale in Warwickshire, of the Cistercian Order; but what
Relation he had to Arnold Guy, I cannot tell.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Feb.... John London of New Coll. -- He was about this time Canon of York and
Lincoln, afterward Warden of New Coll. Canon of Windsore, Prebendary of
Shipton in the Church of Salisbury, Dean of the Cath. Church of Osney near
Oxon, and of the collegiat Chapel of Walingford in Berks. He died in the Fleet
Prison at London (having been committed to that place for Perjury) an. 1543,
and was succeeded in his Canonry of Windsore by Fr. Mallet D. D. and the Kings
Chaplain, afterward Confessor to Qu. Mary and Dean of Lincoln. Of this Dr.
London you may read much in the Book of Acts and Monuments of the Church, etc.
penned by John Fox, who loads his Memory with a great deal of ill Language.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Febr.... Richard Banger or Benger of New Coll. who had been a Candidate for
that degree in 1512, was then admitted -- He was afterward Commissary of the
University.

Three there were this year that supplicated to be Doctors of the Can. Law,
viz. (1) Robert Bysse Doct. of the Civ. Law, mentioned among the
Incorporations, an. 1513. (2) Will. Cleyton Bach. of the Canon, and (3)
Lendricus Predi Bach. of the Civil, Law.

Doct. of Phys.
June... Edward Fynch. Thomas Bentley of New Coll.

I have made mention of Edward Fynch, different I suppose from this Physician,
among the Masters of Arts, an. 1504.

Doct. of Div.
Tho. Knolles of Magd. Coll. a secular Priest. -- See more among the Bach. of
Div. 1515. He was born at Westgaite in Yorkshire, was a learned man, and much
followed for his Preaching at Wakefield in Yorkshire, of which place he was
Vicar. He gave way to Fate in April 1546, and was buried near to the Graves of
his Father and Mother in the South Alley joining to Allhallows Church in
Wakefield.

Will. Patenson a secular Priest.

Edward Bocking a Benedictin of Canterbury Coll. -- I have made mention of him
already among the Bach. of Div. in 1513.

Fath. Will. Germyn Will. Wall Minorites.


Fath. John Narbury Ralph Wedell Austin Friars.


The last of which became Prior of the Coll. of Austin Friars in Oxon in the
place of Fa. Will. Wetherall.

Jan.... Fath. Rob. King a Cistercian Monk, and Abbat of Bruerne in
Oxfordshire. -- He was afterward Abbat of Them in the same County, the last
Abbat of Osney near to, and the first Bishop of, Oxford.

Jan.... Fath. John Anyngton Roger Neckham Benedictines.


The last of which was a Monk of Worcester, and one of the first Prebendaries
thereof. He died 1557.

Jan.... Edw. Feyld.

Incorporations.
Feb.... Francisc. Valentinus a secular Chaplain and Bach. of Arts of the
University of Lisbon, was then incorporated B. of A.

An. Dom. 1519.
An. 11 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Ralph Barnack D. D. of New Coll. Richard Duck again.

Proct. Thomas Flower of Linc. Coll. Bor. Thomas Alyn of Brasn. Coll. Austr.
May 7.


Grammarians.
Jul. 7. Will. Richards.

Jan. 26. Hen. Sheldon a secular Chaplain.

Both whom were admitted to inform. -- There also supplicated Rich. Williams,
Rob. Broke, Humph. Penkeythman a secular Chap. and Rob. Colleys a secular
Priest; but whether they were admitted this year, it appears not.

Bach. of Mus.
Not one appears admitted, only Tho. Pen a Canon regular, and Tho. Janys or
Janes supplicated, which is all I know of them.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 8. John Fylde or Field -- I take him to be the Astronomer mentioned among
the Writers under the year 1558.

Besides him were about 46 admitted, and about 24 that supplicated, among whom
were Rich. Benese a sec. Chapl. mentioned in Tho. Paynell among the Writers,
under the year 1563, and John Clement one of Card. Wolsey's Lecturers.

Bach. of the Laws.
June 12. Edmund Bonner of Broadgate Hall, was then admitted Bach. of Canon,
and the day following Bach. of the Civil Law. -- He was afterward, through diverse
Preferments, Bishop of London.

Besides him were but two admitted in the Canon, and eight in the Civil, Law. I
find also about four to have supplicated for the former, and but two for the
latter.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 26. Richard Rydge. -- One of both his Names occurs Abbat of Notley near
Long Crendon in Bucks. 26 Hen. 8. Dom. 1534, being, as I conceive, the last
Abbat of that place for Black Canons.

This year about 24 were admitted, and about 9 that supplicated that were not
admitted this year.

Bach. of Div.
June 28. Rob. Morwent lately of Magd. Coll. Now Vicepresident of Corp. Christ.
Coll. -- He was a great Patron of Learning, and was styled in a Sermon preached
before the University, Pater patriae literatae Oxoniensis. He was known to, and
well beloved of, Rich. Fox Bishop of Winten, who constituted him, for his
Fidelity and Prudence, perpetual Vicepresident of his Coll. Homo non tam ipse
doctrinae laudibus abundans (as one Laur. Humfred in (...) and morte Jo^.
(...). p. (...).
says) quam doctorum fautor and Moecenas. See more in Hist and Antiq. Vniv.
Oxon. l. 2. p. 232.

Jul. 2. William York a Canon regular. -- On the 19 of November. 1523, he was
admitted Prior of the House of Can. regulars at Taunton in Somersetshire, in
the place of Nich. Peper deceased, by the power of Card. Wolsey, to whom the
Patron of that place had granted him leave to nominate a Prior for one turn.

Oct. 13. Roger Edgworth of Oriel Coll.

Besides these three, were six more admitted, and about ten that supplicated
for the said Degree, among whom were John Warboys or Gardeboys a Monk of the
Order of S. Benedict, and Lord Abbat of Ramsey in Huntingdonshire; and Nich.
Pepyr or Peper, whom I have mentioned in 1506 and here among these Bachelaurs
of Divinity.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Not one admitted, only Tho. Lloyd LL. B. and Tho. Wise Bach. of the Civil Law
supplicated, whom I cannot, in any of the years after, find admitted.

Doct. of Div.
Not one admitted or licensed to proceed, only six supplicated for that degree,
viz. (1) Richard Evesham a Benedictin Monk. (2) William Wall a Canon regular
and Prior of Kenelworth. (3) John Goodridge, (4) Matthew Smyth Principal of
Brasnose College. (5) Robert Law or Low a Carme. (6) Gilb. Rose an Austin
Friar. All which were Bachelaurs of Divinity.

Incorporations,
May... Bernard Traves Bach. of the Civil Law of the University of Colen.

This year was a Supplicat made that William Butts Doct. of Physic of
Cambridge, might be incorporated; but whether he was so, or not, I cannot find.
He was afterward Physician to King Hen. 8. and one of the College of
Physicians at London, in whose Records he is highly characterized for his
eminent Learning and Knowledge, his singular Judgment and great Experience.
This Person who was Knighted by the said King by the name of William Butts of
Norfolk, died 17 November. 1545, and was buried in the Church of Fulham near to
London. He is much extolled for his Learning by diverse Authors who lived in his
time; and Bishop John Parkhurst has several Epigrams on him.

An. Dom. 1520.
An. 12 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Will. Broke or Brook Doct. of Decrees, and Warden of Allsoules
College. Rich. Benger Doct. of Decrees of New Coll. and ordinary Reader of the
Decretals.

Proct. John Booth of Brasnese Coll. Bor. George Croftys of Oriel Coll. Aust.
Apr....


Grammarians.
Jul. 15. Rog. Bostock Mar. 18. Dav. Owen Gilb. Beaumont Secular Chaplains.


Whether they were very eminent in their Profession, I know not.

Bach. of Arts.
Nov. 9. John Warner of Allsoules Coll. -- See in 1535.

Jan. 21. Walt. Buckler. -- See in 1534.

Jan. ult. John Robyns of Allsoules Coll. -- Afterward an eminent Astronomer.

Mar. 18. Tho. Robertson of Magd. Coll. the Grammarian.

This year 55 or more Bach. of Arts were admitted, and about 22 supplicated,
who were not admitted.

In the latter end of March in the beginning of this year, is mention made in
the public Register of Thomas Lupset Bach. of Arts, and Cardinal Wolsey's
Rhetoric Lecturer. See more in the next year.

Bach. of Law.
Nine were admitted in the Canon Law, of whom John Southwode was one
(afterward Fellow of Wykeham's College near Winchester, and Canon residentiary
of Wells) and as many in the Civil Law.

Mast. of Arts.
June 26. James Turbervyle of New Coll.

Jul. 3. John Heart or Heart -- If the addition of Benedictin Monk had been set
to his Name, I should have taken him to be the same John Heart who succeeded
Richard Wraxhall in the Abbatship of Athelney in Somersetshire, about 1524. But
I take the said John Heart who was Mast. of Arts, to be the same with him who
became perpetual Fellow of New Coll. an. 1513, and was afterward an eminent
Schoolmaster.

Jul. 11. Will. Tresham of Merton Coll.

March 15. John Rogers. Quaere.

Bach. of Div.
Six admitted, of whom Richard Gloucester and John Newbolt, Benedictines, were
two; and about 23 supplicated who were not admitted this year; among whom were
John Perrot a Minorite, Thomas Hill B. of A. and a Bonhome, etc.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 6. John Leffe of New Coll. -- He was afterward Warden of the College at
Maidstone in Kent, Vicar General, and Keeper of the Spirituality to Dr. Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Master of the Hospital of S. Cross near to
Winchester. He died 19 Aug. 1557, aged 66, and was buried in the Chapel
belonging to Wykeham's Coll. near to the said City, of which Coll. he was
Fellow.

For the said Degree supplicated Edward Orange LL. B. and for the Degree of D.
of Canon Law supplicated two, who were afterward admitted.

Doct. of Div.
Jan... Leonard Huchenson Master of Universe. Coll.

Jan. ult. Robert Law or Low a Carme, now Prior of the College of Carmes in the
North Suburb of Oxon. -- In 1505 he was made Provincial of the Carmes in the
place of John Vynde or Wind; which honorable Office he keeping about 17 years,
was succeeded in it by Rich. Ferys.

Feb. 11. Thomas Mole or Molle a Carme.

25. Thomas Francis a Minorite or Franciscan.

There also supplicated for the said Degree John Burgeis Bach. of Divinity of
Magdalen College, who was elected President of that House upon Dr. Laurence
Stubbes his resignation an. 1527, and by the name of President he does occur in
a Deed or Writing dated 10 Jul. the same year, but soon after being removed,
Dr. Richard Knolles was elected. Others there were that supplicated, who were
afterward admitted, except one Mabot Bac. of Div.

Incorporations.
May... Father Robert Miles a Dominican, Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge.

Oct.... Fernandus or Ferdinandus de Victoria Doctor of Physic (beyond the
Seas) now Physician to King Hen. 8. and the Queen Consort. He, Dr. Thomas
Lynacre, and Dr. John Chamber, were the first Founders of the College of
Physicians at London.

Oct.... William Arden a Dominican or Black Friar, Prior elect of the College
or Convent of the Black Friars in the South Suburb of Oxon, and D. of D. in the
Court of Rome.

Feb.... Thomas Wellys or Wells Master of Arts of this University and Doctor of
Divinity elsewhere. -- Whether he be the same with Thomas Wellys mentioned in
the Incorporations under the year 1510, I know not.

This year, the month I cannot tell, I find that there was a kind of a
Supplicate made for one Magnus a Doctor beyond the Sea, to be incorporated
here, but in what Faculty, I cannot yet discover. This Person was the same with
Thomas Magnus who was a Foundling at Newark upon Trent in Nottinghamshire, and
had the Surname Camden in his Remains, printed 163^. p. 14^. among the Sirnames.
of Among us given to him, as being maintained among certain People there; or,
as some say, by certain Yorkshire Clothiers, who occasionally traveled that
way early in the Morning and first found him. At length being brought up in
Literature in one of the Universities in England, became so much noted to King
Henry 8. that he was by him not only promoted to several Dignities, but sent
Ambassador into various Countries; whereupon he was, by the generality of
People, called Dr. Magnus, and by some Magnus Doctor. Among several Embassies
that he was employed in, was that into Scotland an. 1524, where he was employed
as the Kings Agent to procure his business, and to incline the young Kings eat
toward him, as also to give intelligence, etc. Among the Dignities he enjoyed
were (1) The Archdeaconry of the East Riding of Yorkshire, to which he was
collated in June, 1504 upon the promotion of Dr. Richard Mayhew to the Sea of
Hereford. (2) The Sacristship of the Chapel of our Lady and the holy Angels at
York, to which he was collated in Dec. the same year. (3) A Canonry in the
Church of Windsore, an. 1520, which he resigning in the latter end of 1547 was
succeeded by Dr. Richard Cox. (4) The Mastership of the hospital of St. Leonard
at York, etc. And among the benefices he had, was the rectory of Bedall in
Yorkshire one. Toward his latter end he founded a Free School in the place of
his nativity, which he well endowed; and paying his last debt to nature at
Sesay or Sessay in Yorkshire 27. Aug. or thereabouts, in 1550, was buried in
the Church there. Whereupon John Dakyn LL. D. was installed in his Archdeaconry
of the East Riding, 13. April 1551. I have seen a copy of his last Will and
Test. dated 8. March 1549. and proved 30. Apr. 1551, wherein he desires that if
he dye at his house at Sybthorp, or nigh those parts, to be buried in the
Trinity Isle of the Church of Newark upon Trent, before the midst of the altar
there, for there he was baptized, etc. He makes mention therein of his singular
good Lord and Master Savage sometimes Archbishop of York and his singular good
Lord the Earl of Wilts. and Lord Treasurer of England.

An. Dom. 1521.
An. 13. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury.

Commiss. Richard Benger D. of Dec.

Proct. Henry Tyndall of Merton College Bor. John Wild Austr. April 17.


Grammar.
May 12. John Kendall 13. Richard Guissoll Jul. 8. Henry Gold. Sec. Chaplain.

One George Marshall did also supplicate, but was not admitted. Qu.

Bach. Music.
Feb... John Sylvester did supplicate, and was, as it seems admitted in that
month, being at the same time accounted very eminent in his profession.

Bach. of Arts.
About 60 were admitted, and about 29. supplicated who were not admitted this
year.

Jul. 8. John Mason, about this time Probationer-Fellow of Allsouls Coll. was
then admitted. -- He was born at a mercate town called Abendon in Berks, the
son of a Cowherd, by his Wife, the Sister of a Monk at that place. Which last
Person finding him very apt to learn, he caused him to be trained up in
Grammaticals and Academicals in this University, where he obtained for him a
Fellowship in the said Coll. of Alls. Soon after, his pregnant and acute parts
being taken notice of by great Persons, he was upon the motion of Sir Thomas
More, sent by the King to the University of Paris to be accomplished with other
parts of learning. After his return thence, he became a favorite to K. Hen. 8.
who employed him in several Embassies and made him one of his Privy Council.
After that Kings death he was made a Privy-counsellour to K. Ed. 6. and tho he
was a Knight, and a perfect Layman, yet he enjoyed several Church Dignities,
or as one (...). an. 1566.
says, he was a great intruder into Ecclesiastical Livings. Among which the
Deanery of Winchester Cathedral was one, installed therein, in the place of
William Kingesmyll the last Prior of St. Swithins Monastery there, and the
first Dean of the said Cathedral, in the third of Ed. 6. Dom. 1549. In 1552 he
succeeded Dr. Richard Coxe in the Chancellourship of this University: which
honorable office he keeping till 1556, did then resign it purposely to make
room for Cardinal Pole then designing to visit, and to do great matters for,
it. He was also a Privy Counselor to Queen Mary, and much respected by her,
but did not hold any Ecclesiastical Dignity in her Reign, as I can yet learn.
For giving up the Deanery of Winchester in the first year of her Reign, Dom.
1553. Edmund Steward LL. D. of Cambridge, was then installed, and kept it till
1559. After her death, he became a Privy Counselor to Queen Elizabeth, and in
1559 was elected Chanc. of this University again, being then Treasurer of the
Queens Chamber, and Master of the Hospital in Abendon, (the erection of which
he had before procured, as also the Incorporation of that Town) but whether a
possessor of any Dignity in the Church in her Reign, I find not. He paid his
last debt to nature 20. Apr. 1566, and was buried in the North Chancel, or the
North Isle joining to the Chancel of the Cathedral Chapter of St. Paul in London;
whereupon Sir Franc. Knollis Knight succeeded him in the Treasurership of the
Qu. Chamber. Soon after was a large Epitaph set over his grave; which, tho
since consumed, yet his memory lives among the learned Men in the Encomia Edit.
London, 1589. p. 5^.
illustrium virorum, penned by John Leland.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Mar. 3. William Roberts -- he was afterward Archdeacon of Merionithshire and
Principal of New Inn. In a certain Register he is styled In reg. (...)
Archd. of Monmouth, 1528.

Four admitted in the Can. and about 9 in the Civ. Law.

Three supplicated in the former and as many in the latter.

Mast. of Arts.
June 19. Thomas Lupset who had studied four years at Paris and Oxon, was then
admitted M. of A.

Jul. 5. Thomas Runcorne -- He was afterward made Provost of the Collegiat
Church of St. Elizabeth (Daughter of the King of Hungary) founded in the time
of Ed. 1. in the meadow of St. Stephen, situate before, and opposite to, the
gates of Wolvesey Castle near to Winchester. This Thomas Runcorne surrended the
said Coll. into the hands of K. Hen. 8. and thereupon he was made one of the
first Prebendaries of the Cath. Church of Winchester. Afterward the King
granted the said Coll. and its site to Thomas Lord Writh^ousley, who sold it to
the Warden and Fellows of Wykeham's Coll. near to Winchester for 360 l.
provided that they either make the Church there a Grammar School for 70 Persons
to be taught therein, or to pull it down to the ground before Penticost an.
1547. Which last they did sooner than the first, because it should not be
prejudicial to their School. This Thomas Runcorne was a learned Man, and among
the learned Men of his time is he remembered by Leland in his Encomia
beforementioned, p. 67.

Bach. of Div.
Dec. 7. Father Richard Stopys or Stopes Abbat of Meaux or Melsa in Yorkshire
of the Cistercian Order, now studying in St. Bernards College.

Fa. William Thryske Abbat of Fountains in the Dioc. of York, was admitted the
same day.

Fa. William Hestyngton Abbat of Roche in Yorkshire of the Cluniac or
Cistercian Order was admitted the same day, being then of St. Bernards Coll.

Feb. 6. John..... Prior of the Order of the Dominicans -- See in an. 1532.

Besides these were 8 at least admitted, and 12 at least that supplicated; all
whom, except two, were of religious Orders.

Several also were admitted to oppose in Divinity, that were not admitted Bach.
of that faculty; among whom were Father Rich. Wyche of Whalley a Cistercian
Monk now studying in St. Bernards College.

Doct. of Law.
Not one admitted either in the Can. or Civ. Law, and only Will. Lytherlond.
Bach. of the Can. Law supplicated to be admitted Doctor of that faculty, and
John Noble before mentioned, supplicated to be admitted Dr. of the Civ. Law.

Doct. of Physic.
Jul. 3. Thomas Moscroff or Musgrave of Mert. Coll. -- In 1522 he was Card.
Wolseys Physic reader in, and in 1523 he was Commissary of, the University,
being then a Student in Divinity; and on the eleventh of March the same year he
did supplicate the ven. Congregation of Regents, that it might be dispensed
with him from circuiting and certain exercises preceding, if so be it should
happen that he should be admitted to the reading of the Sentences. The reason
for this was because he was Commissary, and that it did not become a Doctor to
circuit for an inferior Degree. This supplication was granted conditionally
that he Preach a Sermon in the Church of St. Peter in the East. Afterward, his
exercise being all performed, as twice answering in the Schools and 4 times
Preaching in St. Mary's Chapter (all done in the space of one year) he was admitted
to the reading of the Sentences, that is to the Degree of Bach. of Divinity by
Dr. John Young Bishop of Callipolis and Warden of New Coll. in the presence of
8 Doctors of Divinity. In 1527 he would have proceeded in that faculty, but was
prevented by death.

Doct. of Div.
June 3. Fr. David Williams a Minority, or Franciscan, or Gray friar.

Three also supplicated for the said Degree, viz. Richard Stubbes, William
White, and William Curters a Minorite, all Bachelauis of Divinity.

Incorporations.
May... Patrick Gower M. of A. of Paris and Cambridge.

Nov.... John Rain LL. D. of Cambridge.

Nov. 25. George Thyle B. A. of Colen.

Mar. 3. Henry Marshe Dr. of Phys. by authority of the Popes Bull, was then
Incorporated. -- In the year 1514 Mar. 26. he was admitted to practice Physic
by the ven. Congreg. of Regents of this University.

16. John Crayford M. A. of Cambridge -- He had been lately of Qu. Coll. in
that University, from whence being ejected he went to Oxon. and was made Fellow
of Vniv. College. See in 1546. among the Incorporations.

In January one Edward Pennant Bach. of Can. Law of Cambridge supplicated to be
incorporated, but whether granted I find not. See more in Hen. Morgan among the
Bishops. -- One John Pennant Doct. of Dec. and Chancellor to the Bishop of
Bathe and Wells was constituted by him the said Bishop his Vicar General in the
beginning of June 1526, and dyed in Apr. or May 1529.

This year, but the day or month I know not, was a supplicate made in the
behalf of Richard Sampson sometimes of Trin. hall in Cambridge, to be
incorporated LL. D. but whether he was so, it appears not, and therefore I
shall only say these matters of him, that he had that Degree conferred upon him
beyond the Seas, was incorporated at Cambridge the last year, was installed
Dean of Windsore by proxy 14. Nov. 1523, being then in remote parts about the
Kings affairs; made Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral about 1530, Dean of Lichfield
in 1532, Treasurer of the Church of Sarum, 16. Mar. 1534, Bishop of Chichester
in 1536, translated thence to Lichfield in 1543, and published several books,
which show him to have been a learned Man, the titles of which you may see in
the Oxford Catalogue. He did at Eccleshall in Staffordshire (the seat belonging
to the B. of Lichfield) on the 25. Sept. 1554.

In like manner was such another supplicate made for Gamaliel Clifton Doctor of
Decrees, Canon of Windsore and the Kings Chaplain, but no appearance there is
that he was really incorporated. He was afterward Dean of Hereford, and dying
in 1541, had for his successor in that Deanery, if I mistake not, Dr. Hugh
Curwyn, who before had Preached zealously for the Kings divorce from Queen
Catherine.

An. Dom. 1522.
An. 14. Hen. 8.
Chancellor the same.

Commiss. Dr. Benger.

Proct. Thomas Canner of Magd. Richard Crispyne of Or. Coll.


Which Proctors, tho elected about Michaelmas, yet they took not their places
till 27. Oct. following, occasioned by a controversy that happened in the
election of them. See Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 248.

Bach. of Arts.
Mar. 31. John Beconsau of New Coll. the famed Grecian of his time.

May 27. George Cotes of Ball. Coll. -- He was afterward B. of Chester.

Jul. 21. David Talley or Tolley the noted Grammarian of St. Mary's hall.

Seventy in all, or more, were admitted, and about 22 supplicated for the said
Degree, who were not admitted.

This year was a supplicate made for George Carew (of Broadgates hall as it
seems) to have the Degree of Bach. of Arts conferred on him, but whether he was
really admitted, having spent about 4 years in the University, it appears not.
This Person being the younger Son of a Baron, (descended from the Carews of
Pembrokshire) retired afterward to the royal Court, and married, but soon
after burying his Wife to his great grief, traveled beyond the Seas, and
improved his knowledge as to Men and Manners very much. After his return, he
took holy Orders, was made Archdeacon of Totness, and if I mistake not, either
Prebend or Canon of Exeter. In 1552 he was constituted Dean of Bristow in the
place of one John Whiteheare, who, in the year before, had succeeded William
Snow the first Dean; and in the beginning of July 1555 was made Preb. of
Ilfarcomb in the Church of Salisbury. In the beginning of Aug. 1556 he was made
Preb. of Netherbury in Ecclesia in the same Church; and in the same year,
notwithstanding he had been deprived of the Prebendship of Barton in the Chapter of
Wells, an. 1554, (1. and 2. of Ph. and Mar.) yet he was made Preb. of
Dultingcote in the same Church, on the resignation of William Thynne, and
double beneficed in the Dioc. of Wells during the Reign of Queen Mary. On the
27. of Oct. 1558 he became Chaunter of the Church of Salisbury, and in 1559
(Qu. Elizabeth being then in the Throne,) he was made Dean of the Queens
Chapel, Dean of Windsore, Dean of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, and about that time Master
of the Savoy Hospital. In 1560 he became Dean of Bristow again, upon the going
away of Hen. Jolliff, who had enjoyed it most of Qu. Mary's Reign, and about
the same time was made Dean of Exeter and Rector of Silverton in Devon. In 1561
he gave up his Deanery of Chapter Chapter and was succeeded therein by Thomas Sampson a
Nonconformist. In 1572 he resigned the Deanery of Windsore, with a Canonry in
that Church, being then succeeded in the former by Will. Day Bach. of Div. and
in 1580 he resigned the Deanery of Bristow, wherein he was succeeded by John
Sprint; but when he resigned that of Exeter, I cannot tell. He finished this
mortal life in 1585 aged 85 and was buried in the Church of St. Giles in the
fields near London, leaving then behind him a Son named George, afterward Earl
of Totness, and another named Peter, a Knight.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 21. Richard Parker a compounder, or one that paid double, or treble fees
for his Degree, as having a temporal estate, or a rich Dignity, or Dignities.

Feb. 4. John Fox Archdeacon of Winchester -- On the same day he was also
admitted Bach. of the Can. Law. See more among those following.

Besides these two, were about 22 admitted; among whom was Thomas Day of Alls.
Coll. who was afterward constituted the second Canon of Osney, when first
founded by K. Hen. 8. and in few years following was by him made the first
Canon of the third Prebendship of Chapter Church, at what time Osney was translated
thereunto. He died in Feb. 1567, and was buried on the 22. of the same month in
the Cathedral of Chapter Chapter

Six also, or thereabouts supplicated for the said Degree, that were not
admitted this year.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Jul. 10. Henry Morgan -- He was afterward Bishop of St. David's.

Feb. 4. John Fox Archdeacon of the Dioc. of Winchester and Preb. of Roscombe
in the Church of Salisbury. -- I take him to be the same John Fox who was
afterward made Fellow of C. C. Coll. by the Founder thereof. For in the
Catalogue of Scholars and Fellows of that house made by Rob. Hegge, (whom I
have mentioned among the writers under the year 1629.) I find one John Fox a
Londoner born, to be put in Fellow there 1523, being then, or about that time
Archdeacon of Surrey, as the said Catalogue tells us. As for Fox
beforementioned, who was Bach. of Can. Law, being nearly related to Fox Bishop
of Winchester, became Archdeacon of that place in 1519 upon the resignation of
one Hugh Ashton, and he upon the resignation of John Frost 1511, and he upon
the resignation of Rob. Frost, 1502, who succeeded Dr. John Morton that was
afterward Archb. of Canterbury.

Besides these two were about 18 admitted, among whom was Antho. Draycot,
besides six or more that supplicated.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 28. Nich. Goldwell. Quaere.

Feb. 10. Rich. Corren or Curwyn -- See among the D. D. 1531.

20. Nich. Cracher or Kratzer a Bavarian -- See among the Incorporations
following.

Besides which, were 25 more admitted, and about 4 that supplicated.

Within the compass of this year were three Acts celebrated in St. Mary's
Church, viz. the first on the last of March, wherein stood nineteen, the second
on the 21. July, wherein stood nine, and the third on 23. March, wherein stood
twelve, Masters of Arts.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 4. Fa. Richard Saleherst Dionys. Dalyance Robert Glastenbury Benedictines.


21. Rich. Thornden a Benedictine Monk -- He was afterward Suffragan Bishop of
Dover.

26. John Ramsey a Canon regular -- This Person who is some years
beforementioned among the Bach. of Arts, was afterward Prior of the Coll. of
Canon regulars in Oxon, commonly called St. Mary's Coll.

Jul. 17. Rich. Mawdley or Mawdleu Archdeacon of Leycester. -- See among the D.
of D. 1529.

Six or more were besides them admitted, and 12 that supplicated.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
June 23. John Olyver -- In Feb. 1532 he succeeded Dr. John Hygden in the
Deanery of the Coll. founded at Oxon. by K. Hen. 8. and dying in Doctors
Commons at London in the month of May, or thereabouts, an. 1552, lest much of
his substance to pious uses. On the 2 of June the same year, (he being then
dead) Leonard Bilson succeeded him in the Prebendship of Teynton Regis with
Yalmeton in the Church of Salisbury.

John Feyter of Alls. Coll. was admitted the same day.

John Trego^well sometimes of Broadgates, afterward Principal of Vine, hall
alias Peckwaters Inn, was admitted also the same day (June 23.) -- He was an
eminent and learned Man in his profession, and therefore was employed to be
Proctor for K. Hen. 8. in that long and costly cause of his divorce from Qu.
Catherine; wherein showing himself very diligent, was by him Knighted, and for
an inconsiderable sum of money, had settled on him and his heirs for ever the
rich demesne and site of the mitred Abbey of Milton alias Middleton for
Benedictine Monks in Dorsetshire. He gave way to fate in the latter end of the
year 1564 (7. Elizab.) and was buried in the Church there.

Doct. of Can. Law.
June 23. Father John Burton a Canon Regular, Prior of St. ^rideswydes
Monastery in, afterward Abbat of Osney near to, Oxford.

John Prynne a Secular Chaplain was admitted the same day --. He was afterward
Subdean and Can. resident. of Lincoln, and dying 29. Apr. 1558, was buried in
the Cathedral Church of Lincoln.

Anthony Draycot lately Principal of White hall (involved afterward within the
limits of Jesus Coll.) and of Pirye hall adjoining, was admitted also the same
day -- In 1542 he was made Archdeacon of Stow in the place of Edward Darbye
sometimes of Linc. Coll. deceased, and in the year following Archdeacon of
Huntington in the place of Dr. Richard Gwent deceased. He was Chancellor for a
time to Dr. Longland Bish. of Linc. and to Dr. Ralph Bayne Bish. of Lichfield,
in which Offices he acted much against the Protestants, as John Fox in his book
of Acts and Monuments of the Church etc. will tell you. In the beginning of Qu.
Elizabeth's Reign he was committed Prisoner to the Fleet, and suffered much upon
account of Religion. Nich. Saunders tells In Visib. Monarch. edit. 1592. lib.
7. page 666.
us that one Draycot Archdeacon of York, was ejected from that Dignity, or left
it of his own accord in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth, but I find no such Man
in my Catalogue of Archdeacons of that place, which is punctually made from the
registers of the Church of York.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 3. Fath. Peter Lee a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict.

This year Jun. 2. Rowland Philips M. of A. supplicated for the Degrees of
Bach. and Doctor of Divinity, and was, as it seems, admitted. Soon after, by
the power of the Archbishop of Canterbury he was thrust in Warden of Merton
College. He was now Vicar of Croyden in Surrey, one of the Canons of Paul's, a
famous and notable Preacher and a forward Man in the Convocation of the Clergy,
an. 1523, in acting and speaking much against the payment of a Subsidy to the
King.

Incorporations.
May 2. George Henneage Bach. of the Canon Law of Cambridge, Archdeacon of
Oxford and Chaplain to John Bishop of Lincoln. -- With him it was then
dispensed that he might Reg. Congreg. H. fol. 81. a.
uti palliis ac sumptuoso omni vestitu, pellibus ac serico pertinent. In Apr.
1521 he was installed Archdeacon of Oxford on the death of Christoph. Vrswyke,
in 1528 he became Dean of Lincoln on the death of John Constable, who dyed 15.
July in the same year, and in 1542 Archdeacon of Lincoln upon the attainder of
Richard Pates, I mean him who was afterward B. of Worcester. This G. Henneage
died in 1549 and was buried in the Cath. Chapter of Linc. near to the tomb of Mr.
Sim. Fotherbie, sometimes Chanc. of that Church, directly before the image of
the Virgin Mary without her Chapel. In the Archdeaconry of Line. succeeded
Nich. Bullyngham in Sept. 1549. and the same year succeeded John Tailor D. D.
in the Deanery.

Feb. 18. Nich. de Burgo a Minorite, Bach. of Divinity of the University of
Paris -- He was an Italian born, did succeed Dr. Tho. Brynknell in the reading
of Card. Wolsey's Divinity Lecture, lately erected in this University: And when
the matter of the divorce of K. H. 8. from Qu. Catherine was in agitation in
the University, he showed himself so forward for it, that the Women of Oxon did
not only scold at him publicly, but threw stones after him as he passed along
the street. Whereupon complaining of their rudeness, thirty of them were the
next day imprisoned in Bocardo where they continued 3 days and as many nights.
I find one Nicholaus Italus to be Sub-commissary of this University in Aug.
1534. whom I take to be the same with Nich. de Burgo beforementioned, a very
learned Man of his time.

Feb. 19. Nich. Cracher or Kratzer Bach. of Arts of Colen and Wittenburgh.

In the month of May one John Tailor Dr. of Decrees and of the sacred Canons
beyond the Seas, having been lately incorporated at Cambridge, supplicated for
incorporation in this University, which being granted, he was, as it seems,
taken into the bosom thereof -- This Person who was Archdeacon of Derby and
Bucks. and had been Rector of Sutton Colfield in Warwickshire was Clerk of the
Parliaments that sat in 1515. (7. Hen. 8.) and prolocutor of the Convocation
of the Clergy that was dissolved 21. Dec. the same year. In which Parliaments
and Convocation, arose those most dangerous seditions between the Clergy and
Seculars concerning several Ecclesiastical Liberties. In 1528. the said Dr.
Tailor, who had been employed in several Embassies beyond the Seas, succeeded
Thomas Hanyball in the Mastership of the Rolls, and dying in 1534, was
succeeded in that office by Thomas Cromwell. This Dr. Tailor who was a learned
Canonist, and a Statesman, was born (being the Son, I suppose, of a Tailor) in
a poor Cottage at Barton, in the Parish of Tatinhills in Staffordshire, and
being the eldest of the Tremelli, which his Mother had at one birth, were by
command of the King, to whom they were presented See in The natural history of
Staffordshire written by Dr. Robert P^ot, cap. 8. page 277. 296.
as he rode in hunting in that Country, carefully educated in good Letters.
Afterward in gratitude to the place that gave him birth, he built a fair
Chapel upon, or near, the site where the Cottage stood. In his rectory of
Sutton Colfield succeeded George Henneage beforementioned.

An. Dom. 1523.
An. 15. Hen. 8.
Chancellor, the same.

Commiss. Tho. Moscroff or Musgrave M. D. now, or lately, Fellow of Merton Coll.

Proct. Tho. Canner again Edm. Campion Apr. 19.


The Senior was soon after preferred to be one of the first Canons of Cardinal
Coll. (of which he became Subdean 1527.) and the other who was of Linc. Coll.
had a Dignity soon after conferred upon him.

Grammarians,
Mar. 14. Jam. Davenport a Secular Chaplain.

One Joh. Wooddys another Sec. Chapl. supplicated to be admitted to inform, but
whether he was so, it appears not.

Bach. of Arts.
Dec. 15. Richard Pates or Patys of Corp. Chapter Coll. -- He was afterward
through several preferments Bishop of Worcester.

Besides him were about 52 admitted, many of which were afterward Prebendaries
and Canons, and but four who supplicated.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Oct. 27. Petrus Garsias de La^ M. of A. of the University of Parmuse, and
about this time a Lecturer or Canon of Cardinal Coll. in Oxon. was then
admitted Bach. of the Civil Law.

Feb. 8. John Lawrence of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward made Archdeacon of
Wiltshire, upon the deprivation of John Pollard, 10. Aug. 1554. being the
second year of Qu. Mary. He died in 1568, having before been deprived of his
Archdeaconry. See in an. 1578. among the Doctors of Law.

Feb. ult. Tho. Lloyd of Alls. Coll. -- He was about this time Chauntor of St.
David.

John Price of the same Coll. was admitted on the same day -- See in 1532.

Besides these, were 4 admitted in the Civil, and about as many in the Canon,
Law. Four also supplicated for the former, and as many for the other.

Mast. of Arts.
March 9. John Sheyne -- Perhaps the same Sheyne an Irish Man who wrote a book
De republica. See among the Writers in Rich. Shaghens, an. 1570.

Besides him were 24 admitted, among whom John Tooker, Rich. Champion and John
Pierson Canons of Cardinal Coll. were of the number, and about 3 that
supplicated.

Bach. of Physic.
Jul. 21. Will. Freeman M. of A. -- The same day he was admitted to practice.
See under the year 1526.

Bach. of Div.
Ten at least were admitted, among whom were Robert Wratton, Richard Mychell,
Robert Norbury, etc. Benedictine Monks, Thomas Krikham a Minorite, Nicholas
Cartwright, Anthony Mo^^neaux, etc.

Among these must not be forgotten William Hyberden (of Exeter Coll. as it
seems) who was admitted 23. Nov. having been before, as it is said in the
public register, Bach. of the Canon Law. He was in these times, and especially
after, a most eminent Preacher, a Person of great devotion and of devout
fasting, and being a most zealous Bigot for the Church of Rome; did, while he
was beneficed in, or near, Bristow, make it his sole employment to preach
against the heretics, as they were in his time so called, viz. Luther,
Melancthon, Zwinglius, John Fryth, William Tindall, Hugh Latimer, etc. When
King Ed. 6. reigned, he withdrew, and continued silent as much as he durst, but
when Queen Mary came to the Crown, he made it his sole employment to ride about
the Country and Preach in every Church, that he approached, against them. See
more of him in John Fox his book of Acts and Monuments of the Church, under the
year 1555, where you will find him called by him by the name of Hubberdin an
old Divine of Oxford.

Seven also there were that supplicated for the said Degree of Bach. of Div.
among whom were William Basyng a Benedictine, Father Philip Davyes a Dominican,
William Swadell of the same Order, etc.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Jan. 29. William Cuffold of New Coll. a learned Canonist. Not one besides was
admitted, nor one that supplicated.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 24. Fr. John Mawdley or Maudlyn a Dominican or Preaching Friar.

June 17. Fr. Richard Cromer an Austin Friar -- He is styled in his admission
Compositor that is a Compounder, because he paid double, or treble, fees for
his Degree, being then, as it should seem, a rich Dignitary.

Feb. 7. Nich. de Burgo a Minorite -- He is mentioned in the Incorporations in
the beforegoing year.

Incorporations.
Oct. 26. Johan. Lud^vicus Vives LL. D. beyond the Seas, was then incorporated,
being this year a Lecturer in Oxon. as I have told you among the Writers, under
the year 1544.

In the same month of Oct. Richard Wolman Doctor of Decrees of Cambridge and an
Archdeacon, supplicated to be incorporated, but whether his supplication was
granted it appears not. See more in the Incorporations 1531.

In the beginning of March one William Throckmorton LL. D. beyond the Seas,
supplicated also to be incorporated; which was granted simpliciter. In the
Chancel of the Church at Shottsbrook in Berks. is an Epitaph for the said
Throckmorton, wherein he is styled Gardianus istius Ecclesiae. Which Church was
a Collegiat Church, and valued at the suppression of religious places in the
Reign of K. Hen. 8. to be worth 33. l. 18 s. 8 d. per an. He died 12. Jan. 1535
and was there buried.

About this time studied in Oxon Simon Grynaeus, being then 30 years of age at
least: At which time, but especially afterward, he was well skilled in the
Latin and Greek tongues, in Philosophy and the Mathematick disciplines; and
therefore beloved of Erasmus, who honorably mentions him in his In lib Epist.
26. Epist. 39.
Epistles. Theod. Bibliander tells (...) Communi omnium linguarum.
us that he really thinks that in him, Christian piety, all virtues and the
muses had taken up their habitation. He has written several books, the titles
of most of which, you may see in the Bodleian Catalogue, and died in the prime
of his years 1541.

An. Dom. 1524.
An. 16. Hen. 8.
Chancellor, the same.

Commiss. Tho. Musgrave M. D.

Proctor. Edw. Leighton of Cardinal Coll. Philip Dale of Exet. Coll. Apt. 6.


The Senior of which Proctors was made the ninth Canon of the College at Oxon
founded by K. Hen. 8. an. 1532.

Grammarians.
Aug. 1. Tho. Lyonhyll Feb. 15. John Moreton Will. Gower. Sec. Chapl.


The said three Persons were admitted to inform in the faculty of Grammar.

Bach. of Music.
Apr. 3. Will. Chell a Secular Chaplain.

Henry Young a Student in Music supplicated for that Degree 25. of Feb. but
was not, as I can yet find, admitted.

Bach. of Arts.
May 30. Nich. Vdall of C. C. C. -- See among the writers under the year 1552.

Jun. 20. John Fitzjames of Mert. Coll. afterward of St. Albans hall. -- He
was of the same Family, of which Jam. Fitzjames (mentioned under the year 1516)
was, and by the name and title of John Fitzjames M. of A. was admitted
Archdeacon of Taunton; and Prebendary of Milverton in the Church of Wells, on
the death of John Redmayne, 22. May 1554.

Jul. 19. Richard Turner, -- Whether the same who was of Magdalen College, I
know not. This Richard Turner took not the Degree of Master, if the public
register says right. See among the writers under the year 1558.

Jul. 27. John Helyar of C. C. College, a good Grecian and Hebritian.

Feb. 6. Owen Oglethorp of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Carlisle,
etc.

About 50 were admitted, and about 15 supplicated that were not admitted.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Aug. 1. Thom. Elyot (of St. Mary's hall.)

Jan. ult. John Twyne. -- Who on the same day was admitted Bach. of the Canon
Law.

Five were admitted in the Canon, and 15, (besides Elyot and Twyne) in the
Civil Law, and five in each supplicated, who were not admitted this year.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 27. Tho. Wode -- Whether he be the same Thomas Wood, whom John Fox
reports to have been elected Bishop of a certain See in England a little before
Qu. Mary dyed, an. 1558. I know not.

Feb. 12. John Helyar of C. C. C. beforementioned. -- See among the writers
under the year 1537.

Feb. 21. John Robyns John Mason of Alls. Coll.


Only twelve more were admitted, and about four supplicated.

Bach. of Div.
Four only were admitted to, and eleven or more supplicated for, that Degree,
whom I cannot find admitted this or some years after. Among them were. (1)
William Sandwych a Benedictine Monk afterward Warden of Canterbury College in
Oxon. (2) Robert Carter of Magdalen College about this time Steward of the
Household of Cardinal Wolsey and afterward Canon of the College of King Hen. 8.
in Oxon. (3) Oswald Benson Minister of the House of St. Robert near to
Knaresborough, of the Order of the Holy Trinity.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
June ult. Edward Carne or Kerne now or lately Principal of Greek hall in St.
Edwards Parish -- He was the Son of Howell Carne of Cowbridge in
Glamorganshire, by his Wife Cicely Daugh. of William Kemys of Newport; and
lineally descended from Thomas Le C^rne second Son of Ithyn King of Gwent. --
He was a wise Man, learned in the Civil Law, and afterward Knighted by the
Emperor Charles 5. In 1530 I find him the Kings Orator at Rome to remonstrate
to his holiness that the King was not bound by the Law to make his appearance
either by Person, or by proxy in the Court of Rome, according to a citation
which was coming to him for his appearance in the matter of his divorce from
Queen Catherine. In the Reign of Queen Mary (who valued him) he was Ambassador
there for her, as also for Queen Elizabeth, but when the Pope was stirred with
anger, upon the resolution of the last, to expel his power from England, he
commanded Camden in Annal. Reg. Elizab. sub an. 1559.
Sir Edward Carne to lay down his Office of Ambassador, and to take upon him
the Government of the English Hospital at Rome. Yet, as it is thought by some,
this crafty old Knight did voluntary choose his banishment, out of a burning
zeal to the Roman Catholic Religion, and eagerly desired to continue there,
(though sent for to come home by the Queen) rather than return to his Country
which was then ready to be overspread with Heresy, as he called it. He died at
Rome on the 14 of the Call. of Febr. according to the account there followed, in
1561 (about which time the Abbat of Martinego the Popes Nuncio was denied
entrance into England) and was buried there in the Church belonging to the
Monastery of St. Gregory in Coelo. He was always accounted the last Ambassador
of the Kings of England to the Pope, till Roger Earl of Castlemain was sent
thither by King James 2. an. 1687.

Jim. ult. Richard Gwent of Allsouls College, Principal or Chief Moderator of
Canon Law School situated near St. Edwards Church. -- He was about this time
Archdeacon of Brecknock, afterward of London, (in the place, as it seems, of
one William Clyffe,) Dean of the Arches, and at length in 1542 Archdeacon of
Huntingdon, upon the promotion of William Knight to the Sea of Bath and Wells.
He gave way to sat in 1543 being then Archdeacon of two places at least London
and Huntingdon) and was buried in the middle of St. Paul's Cathedral in London.
This Person who was a Welsh Man born, was well known to John Leland the
Antiquary, who, in his Encomia illustrium and eruditorum virorum in Anglia,
does highly celebrate him, by the name of Richard. Ventanus Juridicus for his
virtues and learning.

Feb. 13. Henry Morgan about this time Principal of St. Edwards hall, situated
in the Churchyard of St. Edward and near to Canon Law School. -- He was
afterward Bishop of St. David.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Mar. 10. Richard Muge or Mugg of Allsouls College -- He was now beneficed and
dignified in the Church, and was accounted by all that knew him a learned
Canonist.

Doct. of Div.
Not one was admitted this year, nor one supplicated for the said Degree, only
Richard Stubbs or Stubbys Master of Arts, Bachelaur of Divinity and Master of
Balliol College.

Incorporations.
May... William Middleton Doct. of the Civ. Law of the University of Lovaine.

June...Richard Brynckley a Minorite or Franciscan Friar, Dr. of Divinity of
Cambridge, and, as our public register says, General Minister of the
Minorites throughout England. -- His supplication, which was granted
simpliciter, and his incorporation, are set down in the said register under
this year (1524) yet perusing Cambridge At the end of the first Edition of
Antiq. Britan. Ecclisia etc. by Matthew. Parker Archb. of Cant.
tables containing the names of such who were admitted Doctors of that
University, he is put down there, under the year 1527, as being then admitted
D. of D. In the said Generalship or Provincialship he succeeded Dr. Henry
Standish, (whom I have mentioned among the Writers) and was succeeded by Steph.
Baron a Cambridge Man, Confessor to K. Hen. 8. and an eminent Preacher of his
time.

This year, but the day or month appears not, was a Supplicate made for one
Rowland Lee Doctor of the Canon Law of Cambridge, to be incorporated into that
degree; but whether he really was so, I cannot justly tell, his Incorporation
having perhaps been neglected to be registered. This Roll. Lee was the Son of
Will. Lee of Morpeth in Northumberland, Treasurer of Barwick, by Isabel his
Wife, Daughter and Heir of Andr. Trollop Knight. who, after he had been educated in
Academical Learning in S. Nicholas Hostle in Cambridge, became first
Chancellor to Dr. Jeffr. Blythe Bishop of Lichfield, and afterward Prebendary
of Corburgh in that Church. At length, for the several Services which he had
done to please the unsatiable desire of K. Hen. 8. (one of which was the
marrying him to the Lady Anna Bulleyne) was rewarded with the Bishopric of
Lichfield: to which being elected by the Name and Title of Roll. Lee Decretorum
Doctor, Canonicus and Prebendarius Eccles. Cath. Lichf. was consecrated
thereunto 19 Apr. 1534, and on the 8 of May following received Pat. 26. Hen. 8.
p. and*
the Temporalities belonging thereunto. In the year following he was made
President of the Marches of Wales, and dying at Shrewsbury 24 Jan. 1543, was
buried there. He had a Brother named George, Dean of S. Chadds in Shrewsbury,
who dying without issue, as his Brother the Bishop did, the Sister of them
named Isabel, Wife of Rog. Fowler of Staffordshire, became Heir to them both.

An. Dom. 1525.
An. 17 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Musgrave.

Proct. Anthony Sutton of Magd. Coll. John Tooker lately of Exeter, now of
Cardinal, Coll.

Bach. of Arts.
July 17. Robert Talbot of New Coll. -- He was afterward an eminent Antiquary.

Besides him were about 68 that were admitted, and about 10 that supplicated;
several of whom were afterward Dignitaries in the Church.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
October. ult. Robert Dobell. -- See more among the Bachelaurs of Can Law
following.

Bach. of Can. Law.
July 11. Arth. Bokeley or Bulkley, of New Inn as it seems. -- He was admitted
Doctor the next day, as I shall anon tell you, and was afterward Bishops of
Bangor.

Oct. ult. Robert Dobell. -- He is sometimes written Dovell and Davel, and
therefore I take him to be the same with Robert Dovell or Davell who occurs
Archdeacon of Northumberland, an. 1531, being then, or soon after, LL. D. In
the said Archdeaconry succeeded Will. Carter (written sometimes Carther) D. of
D. of Cambridge, collated thereunto 3 Nov. 1558; and him Will. King M. A. of
Kings Coll. in Cambridge (afterward Bach. of Div. Prebendary of Canterbury,
and in 1573 Canon of Windsore;) but the year when, I cannot tell; and him also
Ralph Lever M. A. collated thereunto 21 Aug. 1566.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 31. Walt. Buckler of Mert. Coll. -- See among the Bach. of Div. in 1534.

July 6. Thomas Robertson, now a great Villifyer of the Questionists in this
University.

Feb. 3. George Cores now as it seems of Magd. Coll.

8. Thomas Raynolds lately of Merton, now of Cardinal, Coll. -- See under the
year 1536.

Rich. Coxe of Cardinal Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was afterward
Bishop of Ely.

March 5. John Bekynsau of New Coll.

Besides these, were about 42 Masters admitted this year.

Bach. of Physic.
Apr. 4. John Blyss M. of A. of Merton Coll. -- I shall mention him anon among
the Doctors.

Nov. 14. George Owen M. of A. of the same Coll. -- See among the Doctors in
1527.

Bach. of Div.
May 31. Father Will. Kendall a Benedictin Monk.

Jan.... Anth. Dunstan of the said Order. -- He was afterward Prior of Glouc.
Coll. in the Suburb of Oxon, and at length Bishop of Landaff.

Jan.... Fath. Tho. Bennet Rob. Gale Benedictines.


Which four Monks had a little before opposed publicly in the Divinity School.

There were eight more that were admitted this year, (among whom Edw. Kyrkby
and John Stockland, Cistercians, were two, and Tho. Hull, an Austin Friar, a
third) and three or more that supplicated for the said degree, of whom Edw.
Staple was one, Mar. 9. who afterward was Bishop of Me^^h in Ireland.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 12. Edm. Bonner of Broadgates Hall. -- He was afterward Bishop of London.

Nov.... Rich. Foxford -- He was afterward Chancellor and Vicar Genesis to Dr.
Stokesley Bishop of London, and as John Fox says In the Act. and Mon. of the
Church, under the year 1533.
a cruel Persecutor and common Butcher of the good Saints of God, meaning many
poor Protestants in the Dioc. of London, an. 1530, 31, and 32, whom he either
condemned, or troubled, or made them abjure. He tells us also, that by a
Judgment from God he died suddenly about 1533, as he was sitting in his Chair,
his belly being burst and his guts falling out before him.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Jul. 12. Arth. Bokeley or Bulkley before mentioned.

13. Hugh ap Rice or Price. -- He was afterward Prebendary of Rochester,
Treasurer of the Cath. Chapter of S. David, etc. By his Will dated 8 Aug. 1574, and
proved the last day of the same month, he bequeathed threescore pounds per an.
to Jesus Coll. in Oxon, conditionally that he might have the name of Founder of
it. In the Margin of the said Will, are his Arms painted, viz. Gules a Chevron
Ermine between three flower de Lise or, which are not the Arms that that Coll.
now give, or own, tho the Society acknowledged him to be their Founder.

Besides these two, were two others that supplicated for the said degree,
namely John Worthyall lately Principal of New Inn and Thomas Parker: the last
of which, tho I find him not admitted, yet about this time I find In Offic.
Armorum in lib. C. 10. fol. 96.
him written Decretorum Doctor, Collegiorum de Stafford and de Tomworth
Decanus, etc. In 1522 he became Chancellor of the Dioc. of Worcester in the
place of Dr. John Bell, who had succeeded Dr. Tho. Hanyball in that Office
1518, and afterward was made Chancellor of the Church of Salisbury, in the
place of one Edward Farmer; which Dignity he keeping to the time of his death,
was succeeded by Rog. Townsend in the beginning of Sept. 1538, but Townsend
dying soon after, John Edmonds was collated thereunto 29 Oct. following.

Doct. of Physic.
Apr. 5. John Bliss of Merton Coll. -- He was a learned Physician and
Astronomer, as I have before told you under the year 1507.

Doct. of Div.
May 8. John Thornall or Thornbill a Minorite or Gray Friar.

June 1. John Loysche M. A. and Bach. of Div.

27. Will. Rashley a Dominican or Black Friar.

Jul. 3. John Cottysford Rector of Linc. Coll. -- Afterward Can. of the Coll.
at Oxon founded by K. Hen. 8.

Martin Lindsey of the said Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was a
learned man, and died on the second of March 1554.

Jul. 13. Tho Ware of Oriel Coll. -- Afterward Provost thereof. He has this
Character given of him by a learned George carltonus in Vita Bern. Gilpin.
Edit. 1628. p. 32.
person, Vir, and vita and eruditione clarissimus. I find another Thom. Ware.
who was not a sec. Priest as the former was, but a Monk of the Cistercian
Order, and sometimes a Student in S. Bernard's Coll in the North Suburb of
Oxon. Afterward he became the last Abbat of Flaxley in Glocestershire (in the
place of Will. Beawdley) and living to see his House dissolved, and himself and
his Brethren turned out thence, he retired to Aston Rowant near to Them in
Oxfordshire, where spending the remaining part of his days in devotion and
retiredness, gave way at length to Fate, in a good old Age, an. 1546, whereupon
his Body was buried in the Yard belonging to the Church there.

Nov. 9. Rog. Edgworth of Oriel Coll.

Will. Gryce M. A. and Bac. of Div. was admitted the same day. -- He died in
1528.

For the said Degree of D. D. supplicated (1) Anth. Molymeaux of Magd. Coll.
(2) Rob. Tailor Bac. of Div. (3) John Cabull or Cable Bac. of Div. and Abbat of
Newham, as the Register says, perhaps the same with John Capul a Dominican who
supplicated for the degree of Bac. of Div. in 1524, and (4) Rich. Stokys M. A.
and Bac. of Div.

Incorporations.
Jul. 12. Tho. Courthop B. of A. of Cambridge.

Oct.... Rob. Sherton D. D. of the said University, and about this time Master
of S. John's Coll. there, and Almoner to Qu. Catherine. In 1527 he became Canon
of Windsore in the place of Jeffry Wrenn deceased; and dying in 1535, Dr. Sim.
Haynes Master of Queens Coll. in Camb. (who was afterward Dean of Exeter)
succeeded him in the Canonry.

Nov. 5. John Clerk John Friar Godf. Harman. M. of A. of Cambr.


These three came to Oxon to be preferred in Cardinal Wolsey's Coll. but they
proving violent Lutherans, as Cox and Fryth (whom I shall anon mention) did,
were forced to leave that College. John Friar was, upon account of Religion,
committed Prisoner to the Master of the Savoy, where he did much solace himself
with playing on the Lute, having good skill in Music; for which reason, a
Friend of his would needs commend him to the Master, but the Master answered,
Take heed, for be that plays is a Devil, because he is departed from the
Catholic Faith. Afterward he was set at liberty, and traveling beyond the
Seas, he returned to that Religion wherein he was educated, was made Doctor of
Physic, and after his Return, he settled in the Parish of S. Martin Outwich in
Bishopsgate street in London, where dying in the Winter time, an. 1563, was
buried in the Church there. He, with Hen. Sumner and Richard Coxe, had been
bred in Kings Coll. in Cambridge* and were esteemed excellent Scholars; but as
for Florentius a Dominican, John Akers, and Mich. Drumm, who came with them, I
know nothing, only the two last took the degrees in Arts here, and Drumm one in
Divinity.

Dec. 7. Hen. Sumner Rich. Coxe Will. Betts Joh. Fryth Winmer Allen B. of A. of
Cambr.


These also came to Oxon to be preferred in Card. Wolsey's Coll.

March 9. Edw. Staple M. A. of Cambr. now of Card. Coll.

Mar. 3. Edw. Wotton M. A. of this University and Doct. of Phys. of an
University beyond the Seas, was then incorporated Doct. of Phys.

Mar.... John Allen LL. D. beyond the Seas. -- He was afterward Archbishop of
Dublin.

An. Dom. 1526.
An. 18 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Musgrave again: to whom Dr. Roper was substitute.

Proct. Simon Ball of Mert. Coll. Austr. Thomas Byrton lately of Magdalen, now
of Cardinal, Coll. Bor. April 11.


Grammarians.
Dec. 8. George Astley. Whether he was admitted to inform only, or Bach. of
Gram. it appears not.

Not one beside him was admitted, either Bach. or to inform; nor one in Music.

Bach. of Arts.
June 26. Edm. Wolf one of the jun. Canons of Card. Coll. -- He had before
spent two years in Study in the Univ. of Cambr.

Jul. 2. Tho. Key or Kay about this time of Alls. Coll. -- He is mentioned
among the Writers under the year 1572.

Besides these two were about 37 admitted.

This year, but the month or day I know not, was a Supplicat made in behalf of
one Tho. Winter to be Bach. of Arts; but whether he was admitted, I cannot, in
all my searches, find. This Tho. Winter who was Nephew (or rather not. Son) to
Cardinal Tho. Wolsey, had several Dignities conferred upon him before he was of
Age, by the means of the said Cardinal: among which was the Archdeaconry of
York, or of the West Riding of Yorkshire, on the death of Hugh Ashton, in which
he was installed 31 August 1523, being about that time Chancellor of the
Church of Sarum in the place of one William Wilton: also the Deanery of Wells,
in the place of Dr. William Cousin sometimes Fellow of Kings College an. 1525;
and upon the death of Thomas Dalby, (which was in January the same year) he had
not only the Provostship of Beverley conferred upon him, but also the
Archdeaconry of Richmond; in which last he was installed 24 of Mar. the same
year, etc. This Tho. Winter, with several others, after they had been
maintained in the Schools at Oxon by the Cardinal, were also by him maintained
in the University of Paris, to obtain, if possible, proficiency in such Arts
and Sciences which our Universities in England could not yield. The Governor or
Tutor to Tho. Winter was Tho. Lupset of Corp. Chapter Coll in this University, to
whom, as also to Winter, the Cardinal would write that the said Winter should
study the Dunces Logic Questions, meaning, I suppose, the Logic Questions of
John Dunse. In the Schools at Paris I find him conversant in 1528, and what
degree, or degrees, he took there, I cannot tell. Sure I am, that about the
time of the Cardinals fall, he gave up all or most of his Dignities; for about
1530 Dr. Richard Wolman succeeded him in the Deanery of Wells; and in December.
1529, Will. Knight LL. D. succeeded in the Archdeaconry of Richmond, and Edw.
Lee in the Chancellourship of Sarum in Feb. following. As for the Archdeaconry
of York, he keeping it till 1540, then resigned it; whereupon Tho. Westby, Bac.
of Div. was installed therein 26 June the same year; and whether he continued
to be the last Provest of Beverley, I cannot in truth tell. The Arms, with
which he sealed, did very much resemble those of Cardinal Wolsey, as it appears
in the Office of Arms.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
July 2. William Petre of Alls. Coll.

Feb.... Rob. Geffry. -- In 1531 he entered himself into the Soc. of the
Brethren of the Order of S. Austin the Hermit.

Bach. of Can. Law.
July 2. David Pole or Poole of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Peterborough.

Will. Petre before mentioned, was admitted Bach. of the Canon, just after he
had been admitted Bach. of the Civil, Law. -- See more under the Doctors of the
Civil Law, an. 1532.

Mast. of Arts.
June 27. John Pollard -- This person, who was afterward at least twice
Proctor of the University, became Archdeacon of Wiltshire on the death of Edw.
Finch, 15 Jan. 1538, and Prebendary of Husborne and Burbach in the Church of
Salisbury on the death of Hen. Iden, 25 Sept. 1556, etc.

Nov. 9. John Pekyns of Exeter Coll. -- The Records of that House says, that
he was Proctor of the University, Canon of Westminister, Bach. of Div. and a
Dignitary, etc.

Feb. 25. Alexand. Belsire of New Coll. -- He was afterward the first Canon of
Osney, the first Canon of the fourth Prebendship of Chapter Chapter and the first
President of S. John's Coll. but whether Bach. of Div. it appears not in our
Registers that are in the latter end of K. Hen. 8. and all the time of K. Ed.
6. very imperfect.

Besides these three were about 23 admitted, and about 5 that supplicated,
among whom Nich. Vdall of C. C. Coll. was one.

Bach. of Div.
June 10. Fath. Will. Basyng a Benedictine.

26. John Holyman of New Coll.

Fath. Rich. Talley a Cistercian, was admitted the same day. -- One David
Talley I have mentioned under the year 1508.

28. Frat. Edm. Bricot a Minorite.

Jul. 3. Fath. Job. Lawerne or Lorne a Ben. Monk of Worcester, afterward one
of the first Prebendaries there. He died 1551. Besides the said John Lawerne I
find another of both his names, who was a Benedictin also, a Monk of Worcester,
educated in Philosophicals and Theologicals in Gloucester Coll. within this
University; and at length was Doctor of Divinity. He has written (1) Actus
contra quatuor peccata, (2) Benedictiones and laudationes in vesperiis Oxon,
(3) Variarum rerum Epistolae, and (4) Quaedam chromice. All which I have seen
bound together in one Vol. with this note following at the end, Expliciunt
lectiones ordinariae Mri. Joh. Lawerne S. page Professoris, editae and public
lectae in Scholis Theologiae Oxon. an. dom. 1448 and 49.

Feb. 18. Fr. Edw. Baskervyle a Minorite. -- He was afterward Guardian of the
Coll. of Minorites or Franciscans in the South Suburb of Oxon.

Besides these were about 8 admitted, and 10 at least that supplicated.

On the 12 of June this year Will. Knight M. A. supplicated the ven.
Congregation to be admitted Bach. of Div. and the next month supplicated to
proceed in the same Faculty; but whether either of them were granted, it
appears not. This Will. Knight I take to be the same with him who was elected
probat. Fellow of Mert. Coll. in 1503, and not Will. Knight who was a Civilian
of New Coll. and afterward Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Jan. 28. John Voysey or Veysey.

For the same degree John Southwode did supplicate, but was not admitted this
year.

Doct. of Physic.
Jul. 7. Will. Freeman. -- He was afterward Fellow, Censor, and at length
President of the College of Physicians at London.

Doct. of Div.
June 11. Roger Dyngley of Alls. Coll. -- He was Chaplain to K. Hen. 8. and had
two, or more Dignities in the Church.

Feb. 27. Fr. John Perrot (sometimes written Porret) a Minorite, Guardian or
Prior of the Coll. of Minorites or Franciscans, commonly called Gray Friars, at
Bostom in Lincolnshire. -- I find one John Perrot to have succeeded Martin
Collyns in the Chantorship of York in Oct. 1503. a little before which time (in
Sept.) the said Collyns became Treasurer of the Church there, on the death of
Hugh Trotter D. D. who had been also Provost of the Church at Beverley. But the
said John Perrot being a sec. Priest, must not be understood to be the same
with him who was a Minorite.

Feb. 27. Fr. Thom Kyrkham a Minorete, Guardian of the Coll. of Minorites at
Doncaster in Yorkshire. -- He was afterward a very zealous man against the
Divorce of King Hen. 8. from Q. Catherine.

Besides these three, were but two that supplicated to be D. D. viz. Rob.
Carter of Magd. Coll. and John Tychmersh a Cistercian of S. Bernard's Coll.

Incorporations.
May...Nic. Bradbridge M. of A. of this University, and D. of D. beyond the
Seas. -- See more among the Doct. of Div. in 1508.

June...Will. How Bishop of Orense in Spain, D. of D. beyond the Seas, and 16
years a Student in this University, was then incorp. D. of D.

Jun. 26. Thom. Forster Bac. of Arts of this University, Master of Arts of
Cambridge, and Bac. of Div. of Lovaine in Brabant, was then incorp. B. of D.

Feb.... Rich. Warham Doctor of the Civil Law of the University of Orleans in
France. -- He is styled in one of our Reg. Congreg. H. fol. 1* 4. b. 17^. b
Registers Archdeacon of Canterbury; but he that enjoyed that Dignity now, was
Will. Warham, and therefore there is a mistake in the Christian name.

An. Dom. 1527.
An. 19 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same, viz. Dr. Tho. Musgrave; but he dying in Exeter Coll. this
year, about the latter end of Aug. or beginning of Sept. (having made several
Supplicates in the Congregation of Regents in the beginning of July going
before, in order to the taking the degree of D. of D.) Martin Lyndsey D. D. and
Fellow of Linc. Coll. officiated in his turn till the beginning of Mich. term,
and then he giving up that employment, John Cottysford D. D. of Linc. Coll.
became Commissary by the designment of the Chancellor, and took his Oath 7.
Dec. following.

Proct. Arth. Cole of Magd. Coll. Rich. Lorgan of Oriel Coll. May. 7.


Bach. of Gram.
March ult. John Skerow or Sherow or Skyrou, so many ways I find him written
was then admitted Bach. of Grammar. -- In 1538. in Oct. I find him by the name
and title of John Sherow Bach. of Grammar to be a Candidate for the Degree of
Bac. of Arts, but whether he was admitted it appears not.

In Dec. this year John Parr or Party supplicated to be admitted to inform, but
not granted. See in 1528.

Bach. of Arts.
Ap. 5. Richard Smyth John Ramridge of Mert. Coll.


The former was afterward an eminent writer, and other Dean of Lichfield, as I
shall elsewhere tell you.

May 21. Rich. Taverner of Cardinal Coll. -- I have mentioned him among the
writers, under the year 1575.

Rich. Sherrey of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day -- He is also mentioned
among the writers an. 1550.

Jan. 16. Tho. Goldwell -- He was afterward B. of St. Asaph.

In all about 62, who were this year admitted.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Feb. 18. Will. Bennet -- I take this Person to be the same Will. Bennet who
became Archdeacon of Dorset upon the consecration of John Stokesley to the Sea
of London, 20. Dec. 1530, and the same who about that time was constituted the
Kings Orator to go to Rome to expedite the matter of Divorce from his Consort
Qu. Catherine. I find him there in 1532, as by the dates of his letters sent
thence to the English Court, appears: And in the year following, being dead,
Edward Fox (who was afterward Bishop of Hereford) succeeded him in his
Archdeaconry, 24. Nov. 1533. See another W. Bermet among the Bach. of Arts, an.
1512. and another among the Doctors of Div. 1535.

Feb. 18. John Pope of Alls. Coll. -- In 1554 he became Archdeacon of Bedford
upon the promotion of Gilb. Bourne to the Sea of Bathe and Wells, and about
that time was made Residentiary of Linc. Cathedral. In Sept. 1558 he was put in
Warden of Alls. Coll. by Cardinal Pole Archb. of Cant. upon the resignation of
Seth Holland; but never came to the Coll. for admission. He died at Lincoln on
the eleventh of Nov. following, and was buried in the Nave of the Cathedral
there. In his Wardenship succeeded Dr. John Warner a Physician, in the latter
end of Nov. 1558, he having been Warden before, but left it in the Reign of Qu.
Mary; and in his Archdeaconry of Bedford succeeded Mich. Dunnyng LL. D. of
Cambridge and Chancellor of the Diocese of Norwych, and him (who enjoyed it
but a little while) Rich. Barber LL. B. of Oxon, 14 March 1558.

Feb. 18. Hugh Coren or Curwyn -- He was afterward Archb. of Dublin in Ireland.

19. Walter Wryght -- See more among the Doct. of Law an. 1540.

Besides these, were about 15 that were admitted, and 6 that supplicated.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Twenty two were admitted this year, among whom Reynold Barnysley a Bened. Monk
was one, Jul. 8. Thaddaeus Raynold a Sec. Chapl. another Feb. 18. who, if I
mistake not, was an Irish Man, and several Welsh Men besides.

Thirteen also at least supplicated for the same Degree, who were mostly
Secular Chaplains. Some of which were afterward admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 5. John Marlow or Merlow of Mert. Coll. -- He was afterward Treasurer of
the Cath. Chapter of Wells and Canon of the Kings Chap. of St. Stephen within the
Palace of Westminister. He died in the beginning of Oct. 1543. See among the
Bach. of Div. in 1542.

Feb. 14. David Tolley of St. Mary's hall.

One and twenty Masters were admitted this year, according to the public
register, yet 37 stood in several Acts celebrated in the said year.

Bach. of Physic.
Jul. 8. Simon Ball M. A. Humph. Blewet M. A. of Mert. Coll.


Both these were learned Men, and the last a writer, as I shall hereafter tell
you.

For the said Degree supplicated John de Lapeys M. A. of an University beyond
the Seas, and John Mason M. A. of Allsouls Coll. who was afterward a Knight
and a Man of note, as I have told you under the year 1521. but whether they
were admitted, it appears not.

Bach. of Div.
May 29. Frater Anth. Papudo or Papodo a Portugues by nativity, and a Minorite
by profession.

Jun. 4. Father Will. Sandwych a Benedictine -- He was afterward Guardian or
Warden of Canterbury Coll. in Oxon.

27. Fa. Tho. Levett a Benedictine.

Feb. 27. Fa. Rich. Gorton a Ben. and Bach. of Arts.

Nine more were admitted, and about 15 there were that supplicated for the said
Degree, among whom John Hylsey was one, afterward Bishop of Rochester.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Nov.... David Pole or Poole of Alls. Coll.

Febr..... John Pain Principal of New Inn, and Moderator or Principal of Civil
Law School in St. Edwards Parish.

Two also there were that supplicated for the said Degree, viz. Hen. Russell
Bach. of the Civil Law, and Thom. Breewood or Brerewood Bac. of the said
faculty of Alls. College. Which last was about this time Canon of Exeter,
afterward (about 1536) Archdeacon of Barnstaple, and Chancellor to the Bishop
of Exeter.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Nov.... Dav. Pole or Poole beforementioned.

Jan.... Hen. White -- He was afterward Principal or chief Moderator of Can.
Law School, and is sometimes written Praelector Cathedrae juris Canonici.

One Will. Cleyton Bachelaur of Decrees supplicated to be admitted Doctor of
the Canon Law, but he was not admitted this year.

Doct. of Physic.
Feb. 13. Thom. Gwynne of Alls. Coll.

George Owen of Mert. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- This Person was born
in the Dioc. of Worcester, was admitted Fellow of Merton Coll. in 1519;
afterward he was Physician to K. Hen. 8. Fellow of the Coll. of Physicians at
London, Physician to K. Edw. 6. and Qu. Mary; and dying of a malignant and
Epidemical Fever 10. Oct. 1558 was buried in the Church of St. Stephen in
Walbroke, London. His memory is celebrated among the learned Men of his time by
John In Principum and cru^itorum in Aug i^ Virorum (...), Tr^ph^is, etc. Land.
1589. p. 96.
Leland the Antiquarian-poet, and by John In (...) Land. 1573. p. 45. 4^.
Parkhurst Bishop of Norwych his Fellow collegiat. One of his descendants of
Godstow near Oxon. whose Christian name I do not yet know, was condemned to
dye, 17 May 1615 for stiffly maintaining that a Prince may be removed out of the
way by death or otherwise, if lawfully excommunicated by the Pope.

Doct. of Div.
Feb. 10. The ven. Father John Newbolt a Benedictine Monk -- One Tho. Newbolt
was Abbat of Evesham next before Clement Lychfield, whom I have mentioned under
the year 1501.

Nine this year appears to have supplicated to be Doctors of Divinity, among
whom were Anth. Dunstan a Benedictine Monk of Westminster and Prior of
Gloucest. Coll. in the suburb of Oxon. (See more in the year 1538.) Rich.
Thornden, who was afterward Suffragan Bishop of Dover, Rog. Otteford Bac. of
Div. and a Benedictine, John Tybbys a Cistercian, etc.

Incorporations.
Jul. 8. Will. Armsted M. of A. beyond the Seas.

Feb. 7. Jam. Blyth Bach. of Div. beyond the Seas (sometimes of this
University) was then incorp. Bac. of Div. -- See among the Doctors of Div.
1535. He was installed Canon of Windsore in the place of Christoph. Plummer
deprived by attainder, 25. of Aug. 1536, and had other Dignities; and dying in
1546. he was buried in St. Georges Chap. at Windsore.

An. Dom. 1528.
An. 20. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. John Cottysford.

Proct. John Belletory Chapl. of Mert. Coll. Walter Buckler Fell. of the said,
and Canon of Cardinal, Coll. elected Apr. 22.


Grammarians.
Nov. 5. Christoph. Haldesworth a Secular Chaplain.

One Tho. Myttons an instructor of Youth at Banbury in Oxfordshire, and John
Parry a Secular Chapl. did supplicate to be admitted, but whether they were so,
it appears not.

Bach. of Arts.
May 16. John Standish of Brazen. Coll. -- He was soon after of Corp. Christi.

Jul. 15. Gilb. Bourne -- He was afterward of Alls. Coll.

Will. Bradbridge or Brodbridge of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Jul. 24. John Parkhurst.

Nov. 5. Rich. Moryson.

Jun. 24. Will. Pie of Oriel Coll.

All which were afterward either Writers or Bishops, Besides them were about
50 admitted this year, and about 20 that supplicated, who were not admitted.

Bach. of Law.
Six were admitted in the Canon, and eight in the Civil, Law. Nine or
thereabouts supplicated to be graduated in the former, and about 7 in the
other, but not one of them, can I yet find, was afterward a Bishop, Writer, or
a Dignitary.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 14. John Done of C. C. C. -- He was a noted Grecian, Greek reader of
that house, and afterward Dean of the Kings Chapel, and well dignified.

About thirty were admitted this year; and about eleven that supplicated to be
Masters, but were not admitted.

Opponents in Div.
Jun, 18. Father Will. Beawdley Abbat of Flaxley of the Cistercian Order, in
Glocestershire.

Jul. 3. Fa. Will. Harford or Hartford of the Order of St. Benedict. -- He was
about this time an Abbat or a Prior.

These two I cannot find to be admitted Bach. of Div. which usually follows
opposition in that faculty, and therefore I have put them here.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 26. Fa. John Byle or Byley, or Beyley a Benedictine, and about this time
an Abbat.

Jul. 15. Tho. Canner now of Cardinal, lately of Magd. Coll. -- In 1532 he was
made the eighth Canon of the Coll. of K. Hen. 8. founded on that of Card.
Wolseys, (of which he had been made the first Canon by the Cardinal) and in
1542 he was admitted Provost of the Free-Chappel of St. Nicholas under Hampden
in the Dioc. of Wells, and had other Dignities bestowed on him.

Edw. Leyton or Leighton was admitted the same day -- This Person did about
this time solely give himself up to please the unlimited humor of the King, as
another of his Surname did about the same time. See in the year 1506.

17. William Tiesham of Mert. Coll.

Jul. 18. Fath. Thom. Essex Feb. 20. Fa. Humph. Webley March 11. Fa. Will.
Bennet of the Order of St. Benedict.

Which three Fathers were now either Abbats or Priors.

March 11. Fa. Tho. Spark a Benedictine Monk -- He was now, or soon after,
Prior of a certain cell, as it is mentioned in the public register of this
time, wherein it is further added that in 1529 he was about to leave the
University cum pannis suis to go to the Monastery at Durham.

Fa. John Else a Dominican was adm. this year, but the day or month appears not.

Besides these, were four more admitted, and eight at least that supplicated,
of whom John Bekinsau of New College was one.

Doct. of Civil Law.
Jun. 25. Thomas Baggard originally of New Inn, afterward one of the first
Canons of Cardinal College. -- In 1535 he became Chancellor of the Diocese of
Worcester, in the place of one Dr. Thomas Parker, and in the 33 Hen. 8. Dom.
1541, he was named the very first Canon or Prebendary of the first stall in the
Church of Worcester by the King, when he changed the Prior and Monks of that
place into a Dean and Canons. He died in 1544, and was succeeded in his
Chancellourship and Prebendship by Rob. Johnson LL. Bach. whom I shall mention
elsewhere.

Jul. 13. Rob. Hunt a Secular Chaplain and Principal or Supreme Moderator of
Civ. Law School in St. Edwards Parish, Oxon.

Feb. 26. Thom. Barret of New Inn -- He was soon after Principal of the said
Inn, and in 1540 became Canon of Kings Coll. or the Coll. founded by K. Hen. 8.
on the site of that of Card. Wolsey.

One John Hewys LL. Bac. who had practiced the said faculty in the Court of the
Lord Cardinal, (Wolsey) supplicated to be Doctor of the Civ. Law, but occurs
not admitted. I take this Person to be the same with Dr. Hewes, who was a
forward Man in examining Protestants that were to suffer upon account of
Religion in Queen Mary's Reign.

Doct. of Can. Law.
Feb. 17. John Southwode Fellow of Wykeham's Coll. near Winchester, and Canon
residentiary of Wells -- He died and was buried at Wells.

26. John Read sometimes of New Coll. now Fellow of Wykeham's Coll.
beforementioned -- I have spoken of another John Read in the year 1507.

One Robert Woodward Warden of Alls. Coll. occurs Doctor of Decrees this year,
but when he was admitted, it appears not. Will. Cleyton also (mentioned in
1527) who had practiced the Canon Law several years in the Court of the Lord
Cardinal (Wolsey) supplicated to be admitted Doctor of that faculty, but occurs
not admitted.

Doct. of Div.
Jun. 28. Fa. Reb Basyng a (...) He was about this time an Abbat or Prior

There also supplicated for the said Degree Fa. William Thryske Abbat of
Fountains in Yorkshire, Fa. Rich. Gloucester a Benedictine, and as I think an
Abbat, Tho. Marshall, etc.

Not one incorporation this year, only that of Rich. Port M. A. of Cambridge
Apr. 2. which is all I know of him.

An. Dom. 1529.
An. 21. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Cottysford.

Proct. John Warner of Alls. Coll. Tho. Duke of New Coll. Ap. 7.


The Senior of which Proctors, was, after he had been 7 weeks in his office,
admitted to the reading of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates.

Bach. of Arts.
Dec. 3. John Shepreve or Shepry of C. C. Coll. now in great esteem for his
sufficiencies in the Greek and Hebrew tongues.

13. John White of New Coll. -- He was afterward successively B. of Linc. and
Winchester.

Forty eight more, or thereabout, were admitted, and but six that supplicated
for the said Degree, who were not this year admitted.

Bach. of Civil Law.
March 3. Henry Cole of New Coll. -- I have spoken largely of him among the
Writers.

Besides him were but ten Bachelors of the Civil Law admitted, and but one that
supplicated for that Degree.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Apr. 2. John Salysbury -- I take him to be the same who was afterward Bishop
of the Isle of Man. Qu.

Dec. 2. Will. Thomas -- See among the Writers under the year 1554.

Fifteen in all were admitted this year, and about nine there were that
supplicated, who were not admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 13. Owen Oglethorp of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Carlisle.

Jun. 21. John Akers a Can. of Card. Coll. -- He was sometimes of the University
of Cambridge, where he was esteemed a learned Man, etc.

Besides these two, were about 25 admitted, and but six that supplicated for
the said Degree, among whom were Robert Talbot of New Coll. afterward a
learned and judicious Antiquary, Thom. Goldwell, afterward B. of St. Asaph,
and Leonard Cox the learned Schoolmaster of Reading in Berks.

Bach. of Physic.
Jun. ult. John Warner M. A. Fellow of Alls. Coll. and one of the Proctors of
the University was admitted Bach. of Physic, and at the same time was licensed
to practice the same faculty. -- He was a learned Man of his time, but has
published nothing, and a great intruder into Ecclesiastical Benefices and
Dignities, as I shall tell you elsewhere.

Opponents in Div.
May 7. Father John ap Rice a Cistercian, and Abbat of Stratmarkell in the
Dioc. of St. Asaph. -- He was now resident in St. Bernards Coll. where he
obtained his knowledge in Divinity, but whether he was admitted to the reading
of the Sentences which usually follows opposition in Divinity, it appears not.
The other two Fathers that opposed with him were admitted, as I am now about to
tell you.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 28. Fath. Rich. Horte or Heart Dec. 17. Fat. Thom. Bylond Can. Regulars.

Both which were about this time either Abbats or Priors.

For the said Degree (to which but 4 in all were admitted) supplicated at least
nine, among whom were Fath. John Hayward a Can. regular, (the same, if I
mistake not, that fitted for the University Father Rob. Persons the Jesuit, as
I have before told you) Fath. Thomas Richmond a Cistercian Monk, Fa. Jo. Wygge
an Austin Friar, etc.

Doct. of Law.
Not one in the Canon, or Civ. Law was admitted, or did proceed this year.

Doct. of Div.
Dec. 16. John Moreman of Exeter Coll. -- This Person who was very learned in
his time, and has (as it is thought) written several matters of his faculty,
but lost, was born at Southole in Devon, and after he had left his Coll. became
Vicar of Mayhanet in Cornwall; where, with much labor, he taught the
Parishioners to say the Lords Prayer, Belief, and 10 Commandments in the
English tongue, about the latter end of the Reign of K. Hen. 8. being the first
of all that did so in that Country. He was afterward as it is said, Dean of
Exeter, and being (...) to the B. thereof, was (as John Fox In his Acts and
Monumments of the Church, under the year 1554.
says) made Bishop of that place after his decease. This Coadjutorship was in
Oct. 1554 as he says; but how he could succeed the then Bishop (who was Dr.
Voysey) I cannot yet perceive. Voysey died in 1555, and Dr. Moreman died at
Mayhanet, before Oct. 1554.

Feb. 1. Fath. Edm. Brycot a Minorite or Franciscan. -- One Brycot was a famous
Philosopher of Oxon, as his Books show, but his Christian name I think was
Thomas. This Brycot was the same, if I mistake not, with Dr. Biycot Parson of
Hadham See more of him in J^. Fox his Book of Acts and Mon of the Church, etc.
under the year 1554.
in Hertfordshire in the Reign of Qu. Mary.

17. Fr. Tho. Charnocke a Dominican or Black Friar.

24. Rich. Mawdley or Mawdlen Archdeacon of Leicester. -- This person who was a
zealous and frequent Preacher against the Lutherans died in 1530, whereupon
Steph. Gardener Dr. of the Civ. Law of Cambridge. succeeded him in that
Archdeaconry, in the latter end of March 1531; but he keeping it but till Sept.
following, was then succeeded in that Dignity by Edw. Fox, who was afterward
Bishop of Hereford.

24. Will. Mortymer. -- He was soon after Margaret Professor of this University.

Mar. 15 Rob. Cook. -- He, with Mortymer, Moreman, and Mawdlen, before
mentioned, were zealous Enemies against the Kings Divorce from Qu. Catherine
this year.

Incorporations
Nov. 17. John Hopton a Dominican or Black Friar, D. of D. of the University of
Bononia, was incorporated by these words spoken by the Commissary from the
Chancellour's Chair, Pater Johan. nos admittimus te and incorporamus ad standum
in eodem gradu and statu, quo stetisti Bononiae: ac concedimus facultatem
legendi, disputandi reliquaque faciendi, quae spectant ad Doctoris statum in
illa facultate incorporati, etc. See more in the year 1532.

Feb. 19. Leonard Cox Bach. of Arts of Cambridge. -- Afterward he supplicated
for the degree of Master, as it is before told you.

Mar. 15. Reb. Aldridge M. of A. and Bach. of Div. of Cambridge, was
incorporated B. of D. -- See among the Doctors of Div. in the year following.

An. Dom. 1530.
An. 22 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. Warham Archbishop of Cant.

Commiss. Dr. Cottysford, with his Deputy Dr. Lyndsey.

Proct. John Warner Thomas Duke again May 4.


Which Proctors were continued in their places by the command and Letters of
the Lord Cardinal, directed to the chief Members of the University.

Gram.
May 12. George Corney was admitted to inform, etc.

Hen. Tapper, who had partly studied in this, and partly in the Univ. of
Cambridge, supplicated to be admitted; but whether he was so, it appears not.

Bach. of Arts.
Mar. 30. Will. Chedsey of C. C. Coll.

July 13. Fath. Hen. Bagwell a Canon regular of the Order of S. Austin. of S.
Mary's Coll. was then admitted B of A.

1^. Hugh Weston of Linc. Dec. 12. John Hoker of Magd. Feb. 16. Will. Harrison.
-- Quaere. Coll.

Rob. Record was adm. the same day, but of what House he now was, unless of
Alls. Coll. I know not.

All which, except Bagwell, were afterward Writers.

Six and fifty Bach. of Arts or thereabouts, were this year admitted, and about
eleven there were that supplicated for the said Degree, that were not the same
year admitted.

Bach. of Law.
Apr. 2. John Salysbury. -- In the year before going he was admitted Bach. of
the Can. Law.

Twelve, or more, were this year admitted in the Canon, and about eleven in the
Civil, Law; and thirteen or more supplicated for the degree of the former, and
but two for the latter.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 15. Rich. Smythe John Ramridge of Mert. Coll.


Dec. 12. Tho. Key or Cay of Alls. Mar. 10. Richard Sherrey of Magd. Coll.

Mich. Drumm Canon of Cardinal Coll. was admitted the same day.

These, except Ramridge and Drumm, were afterward Writers. Ramridge was
afterward Dean of Lichfield, as I shall tell you in another place; and Drumm,
who had been formerly of Cambridge, was esteemed a learned young man there.

Bach. of Divinity,
May 13. Fath. Steph. Merley or Marley Rog. Bell Benedictines.


June 22. Fath. John Dunster a Canon regular.

Oct. 15. Fath. John Slatery a Dominican.

Mar. 4. Fath. Edm. Wetherden or Metberden, a Benedictin.

Five besides these were admitted, and 13 at least that supplicated for the
said Degree, among whom Tho. London a Cistercian was one, John Okeley a Carme
another, and Will. Jerome a Benedictin a third, but were not admitted.

Doct. of Law.
Not one was admitted this year either in the Canon, or Civil, law; and but one
in the Canon Law that supplicated to be Doctor, whose name was Will. Draper LL.
B.

Doct. of Physic.
Jul. 15. Humph. Blewet of Mert. Coll. -- This person, who was a learned
Physician and Astronomer, was born in the Dioc. of Hereford, wrote a Book De
peste evitanda, but never printed; and dying several years after at Calis in
France, was there buried.

Doct. of Div.
Mar. 26. John Holyman sometimes of New Coll, now a zealous Preacher against
the Lutherans, and a stiff Agitator against the Kings Divorce from Q Catherine.
-- He was afterward Bishop of Bristol.

Apr. 3. Rob. Aldridge, who in the year before was incorporated B. of D. was
then admitted or licensed to proceed. -- He was afterward Bishop of Carlisle.

Incorporations.
John Heryng Bac. of Law, and now or lately Fellow of Alls. Coll. and Doct. of
the Civ. Law of an University beyond the Seas, was incorporated; but the
particular time when, I know not -- In 1543 he became Prebend of East Harptrey
in the Church of Wells by the Attainder of Rich. Pate or Pates.

Simon Matthew Bach. of Div. and Fellow of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, was about
the same time also incorporated, but the day or month I know not. This person,
who was born at Byggleswade in Bedfordshire, and about this time a godly
Residentiary of Paul's Cathedral and Vicar of Prescott, preached many learned
Sermons against the Pope, one or more of which were afterward published in
print.

An. Dom. 1531.
An. 23 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Cottysford again.

Dr. Hen. White Principal of Can. Law School, is styled by the name of
Commissary 5 June this year.

Proct. John Pollard Geo. Cotes of Magd. Coll. April 19.


Grammarians.
June 4. Nich. Badock Jul. 10. Rich Fletcher Jan. 30. Rog. Ford sec. Chaplains.

Which three were admitted to inform in that Faculty, and John Richardys
supplicated.

Bach. of Mus.
June... James Northbroke a secular Chaplain.

In the same month supplicated for that degree one Tho. Tailor a sec. Chuplain
also; but whether admitted, I find not.

Bach. of Arts.
June 23. James Brokes of C. C. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Gloucester.

Jan. 23. Armigell Wade or Waad of Magd. Coll. as it seems.

Feb. 5. Patrick Walsh. -- He was afterwarhs Bishop of Waterford and Lismore in
Ireland.

In all about 50, besides ten at least that supplicated, who were not admitted.

Doct. of Music.
Dec.... Joh Gwyneth or Gwynneth a secular Priest, who had spent twelve years
in the Praxis and Theory of Music, and had composed all the Responses of the
whole year in Division-Song, and had published many Masses in the said Song,
supplicated that these his labors might enable him to be admitted to the
Praxis of Music. -- This being granted conditionally that he compose one Mass
against the Act following, supplicated again that whereas he had spent 20 years
in the Praxis and Theory of Music, and had published three Masses of five
parts, and five Masses of four, as also certain Symphona's, Antiphona's, and
diverse Songs for the use of the Church, he might be permitted to proceed in the
Faculty of Music; that is, be made Doctor of that Faculty; which desire of his
being granted, conditionally that he pay to the University, on the day of his
Admission, 20 pence, he was forthwith licensed to proceed. See among the
Writers under the year 1557.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
May 8, Joh. S^orie of Henxsey Hall. -- See among the Doct. 1538.

Dec. 4. Rowland Merick. -- He was afterward Bishop of Bangor. Besides these
two, were but four more, who were admitted in the said Faculty, and but one
that supplicated.

Bach. of Can. Law.
About 20 were admitted, among whom Rob. Fynch, who is written Subdecanus, was
one, Rich. Hallsall, a secular Chaplain and Compounder for his Degree, another;
and some Welsh men.

Five also supplicated for the said Degree, of whom the senior was Jeffrey
Leyson Bach. of the Civ. Law, and three more of that Degree.

Mast. of Arts.
June 26. Thomas Goldwell.

July 11. John Standish of C. C. Coll.

The first was afterward a Bishop, and the other a Writer.

Besides these were about 20 who were admitted, and but three that supplicated
for that Degree.

Bach. of Phys.
Feb.... David Tolley M. of A. of S. Mary's Hall -- This learned Physician
supplicated for the Degree of Doctor of his Faculty in 1533, but was not, as I
can yet find, admitted or licensed to proceed.

Bach. of Div.
July 13. Hen. Williams of C. C. Coll -- On the 28 Sept. 1535 he was admitted
Prebendary of Osbaldwick in the Church of York, and on the 20 Sept. 1537, Canon
of Windsor, (in the place of Rob. Aldridge promoted to the Sea of Carlisle)
being about that time also Canon of the Collegiat Church at Southwell in
Nottinghamshire, Canon of the Kings Coll. in Oxon, and Rector of West Ildesley
in Berks. His Canonry of the said Coll. at Oxon he lost when K. Hen. 8. was
about to convert it into a Cathedral, an. 1545. in consideration of which, he
had given to him an yearly Pension of 20 l. per an. during his life. As for
Windsore, York, and Southwell, as also the Prebendary of Bedmynstre and
Radeclyve in the Church of Sarum, (to which he was collated in Jan. 1534, in
the place of Edw. Powell D. D.) he was deprived of them in the time of Q. Mary
an. 1554, either for being married, or that he was a zealous Protestant, or
both.

Jul. 17. Fath. John Tyndall a Carme or White Friar.

Oct. 2. Fath. Tho. Kampswell or Kamyswell a Benedictin Monk. -- He was the
last Prior of the Monastery of the Benedictines at Coventry.

Nov. 29. Fath. Tho. Adreston or Aderston Jan. 20. Fath. Donat Machive Austin
Friars.

22. The venerable Tho. Marshal a Compounder. -- In 1554 he was made Archdeacon
of Lincoln in the place of Nich. Budlyngham; in which Dignity he was succeeded
by John Aylmer of Elmer M. A. an. 1562. One Tho. Marshall supplicated in 1528
to be Doct. of Div. but him I take to be a Dominican.

Feb. 1. Fath. Laurence Seymore Subprior of the Coll. of Carmes in the North
Suburb of Oxon.

Mar. 16. John Robyns M. A. of Alls. Coll.

Besides these, were ten more admitted; among whom Fa. Matthew Devins a
Cistercian of S. Bernard's Coll. was one; and about nineteen that supplicated
for the said Degree; of which number, Fa. Rich. Bruerne, a Benedictin, was one,
and John Gibbys, a Carme, another.

One Fath. John Savage. an Austin Friar, was admitted this year to oppose in
Div. but whether admitted Bach. of that Faculty, it appears not.

Doct. of Law.
Not one, either in the Canon, or Civil, Law, was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Oct. 10. Fath. Rich. Thornden. sometimes written Thornton, a Benedictin
Guardian Warden of Canterbury Coll. in Oxon. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Dover.

Jan. 17. Rich. Coren or Corwyn Canon of the Kings Coll. in Oxon, and of the
Kings Chapel of S. Stephen at Westminister. -- He was made Archdeacon of
Oxford in the place of Dr. Nic. Wilson, 1534, and died about the latter end of
1542.

23. Anthony Molineaux of Magd. Coll.

Mar. 12. Fa. Edw. Baskervyle. -- He was about this time Guardian of the
Franciscans Coll. in the Suburb of Oxon.

Besides these, who were licensed to proceed, did supplicate for the said
Degree Tho. Byrton B. D. lately a Canon of Card. Coll. and Rich. Criyspyne M.
A. of Oriel Coll.

Incorporations.
Oct.... Stephen Gardener Doct. of the Civ. Law of Cambridge. -- He was now
Bishop elect of Winchester, and had lately returned from his Embassy to Rome,
to expedite the King's Divorce from Qu. Catherine, being then Secretary to the
King, and commonly called by the name of Dr. Stephens. He was a learned man and
of excellent parts, a great Statist, and a Writer of many Books, which are
printed. I have seen one or more Letters written to him, while he was at Rome,
by Card. Wolsey, who stiling him by the name of Mr. Stevens, desires him and
his Colleagues to spare no labor and cost to obtain for him the Papacy, for
the settlement of the state wherein the Church and all Christendom does at
present stand, as also the state of this Realm and of the Kings secret matter,
(meaning the Divorce from Qu. Cath.) which if it should be brought to pass by
any other means than by the Authority of the Church, I account this Prince and
Realm utterly undone, etc. (an. 1529.) Many of the Letters written by this Dr.
Gardener to the King, Cardinal Wolsey, and others, are subscribed by the name
of Stevens and Stephens.

Oct.... John Bell Archdeacon of Gloucester and Doct. of the Civil Law beyond
the Seas. -- He was afterward Bishop of Worcester.

Oct.... Rich. Wolman Dean of Wells, Doct. of Decrees, as the public Register
under the year 1523 tells us, and Dr. of the Civil Law of an University beyond
the Seas, as the said Reg. under this year says, was incorporated Doct. of the
Civ. Law. In 1532 he was made Canon of Windsore in the place of Dr. James
Denton (mentioned under the year 1505) being then styled Consiliarius regius,
and dying in the Summer time, 1537, at which time he left several Legacies to
the Church of Wells, and to Clavering (in Essex) was buried in the Cloister
belonging to the Coll. of S. Stephen within the Palace of Westminster. In his
Deanery succeeded Tho. Cromwell Secretary to K. Hen. 8. and in his Canonry one
Rich. Arche, of whom will be mention made under the year 1537.

William Knight Archdeacon of Richmond, and Doctor of Law beyond the Seas. --
He was afterward Bishop of Bathe and Wells.

Oct.... Ed. Lee D. of D. beyond the Sea, and Archbishop elect of York.

These five persons who were incorporated, were not then present in the
University, but were deplomated, or had sent to each of them a Writing under
the University Seal, to attest that they had the consent of the Commissary and
Regents that they were embodied or incorporated.

Oct. 29. John Chamber Doctor of Physic beyond the Seas, was then
incorporated. -- A Certificate of it was sealed with the University Seal 16
Nov. following, and forthwith sent to him. This person, who had been Fellow of
Mert. Coll. did, after he had taken the Degree of M. of A. travel into Italy
1502, studied Physic at Padua, and there took the Degree of Doctor in that
Faculty. After his Return he became the Kings Physician, and (with Lynacre and
Victoria) Founder of the Coll. of Physicians at London. In 1510 he became Canon
of Windsore, and in 1524 he was made Archdeacon of Bedford, being then Preb. of
Comb and Harnham in the Church of Sarum. In 1526 he was elected Warden of
Mert. Coll. and about the same time was made Dean of the Kings Chapel
dedicated to the blessed Vergin Mary and S. Stephen, within the Palace of
Westminster; the Cloister of curious Workmanship adjoining to which, he did
not only build, but did give to it the said Chapel, and the Canons belonging
thereunto for ever, certain Lands, which he afterward, upon the dissolution,
saw taken into the Kings hands. Afterward he was made Treasurer of Wells, was
double beneficed in Somersetshire and Yorkshire, and without doubt had other
Dignities. He died in 1549, whereupon his Canonry was bestowed on Otwel
Holinshead, and his Archdeaconry on Gilb. Bourne, who was afterward Bishop of
Bathe and Wells. As for his Wardenship of Mert. Coll. he resigned in 1545 and
his Treasurership of Wells in May 1543, in which last succeeded John Marler,
sometimes Prior or Master of the House or Hospital of S. John Bapt. in Wells.
There was another John Camber equal in time almost with the former, who was
Bishop of Peterborough, and died in 1556, as I have among the Bishops told you.

An. Dom. 1532.
An. 24 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. Will. Warham Archb. of Canterbury, but he dying in
the month of August, Dr. John Cottysford his Commissary resigned his Office,
with the badges thereof, into the hands of the Proctors 26 of the said month,
and they likewise into the hands of the senior Theologist Dr. Rich. Thornden of
Canterbury College; who according to the manner was to be Cancellarius natus.
At length K. Hen. 8. granting to the University power to elect a Chancellor
(their Liberties and Privileges being now in his hands) the Members thereof
chose Dr. John Longland Bishop of Lincoln on the first day of the Term
following, according to the King's desire.

Commiss. John Cottysford D. D. for the former part of the year under Archb.
Warham. Will. Tresham D. D. lately of Merton, now Canon of the Kings, Coll.
was Commissary for the other part of the year.

Tresham was designed by the new Chanc. Dr. Longland, and entered on his
Commissaryship on the 15 of Oct. On which day he had the badges of his Office
beforementioned delivered into his hands.

Proct. William Selwood of New Coll. William Pedyll of Mert. Coll. April 9.


Gram.
Oct. 18. Christoph. Wynnington.

For to inform also, supplicated Patr. Growte, Humph. Victor, and John Dowbyn,
but they occur not admitted.

Bach. of Arts.
Feb. 17. Rob. Ward of Merton Coll. a noted Philosopher.

Besides him were admitted 55, and about 15 there were that supplicated, among
whom Will. Baldewyn was one, mentioned among the Writers under the year 1564.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Ninteen at least were admitted, among whom were (1) John C^ttrel, whom I shall
mention among the Doctors in 1542. (2) Tho. Young; not the same who was
afterward Archb. of York, but another. See among the Bach. of Civ. Law 1537.
(3) Rich. Wylson. (4) Roger Willyams, of which two, I know nothing; and (5)
Will Jeffrey, of whom I shall make large mention among the Doctors of LL. 1540.

Five also there were that supplicated, who were not admitted this year.

Bach. of Can. Law.
June 19. John Lylford a Benedictin Monk.

July 8. John ap Rice or Price a sec. Chapl.

Feb. 15. Maurice Gryffyth. -- I take him to be the same mentioned among the
Bach. of Div. this year.

Besides these were about 24 admitted, and about 21 that supplicated, among
whom Will. Luson Bach. of the Civ. Law beyond the Seas was one, the same Will.
Luson perhaps who occurs Archdeacon of Caermerthen in the Diocese of S. David
1571.

Mast. of Arts.
June 6. Will. Bradbridge or Brodbridge of Magd. Coll.

Jan. 14. Hugh Weston of Linc. 29. Gilb. Bourne of Alls. Feb. 19. John
Parkhurst of Merton Coll.

Three of which were afterward Bishops, and two were Writers.

Besides them were about 40 that were admitted, and but four that supplicated
for the said degree, that were not adm.

Opponents in Divinity.
May 13. Thomas Macy or Massy a Can. regular and now Prior of the Coll. of
Canon regulars called S. Mary's Coll. in Oxon. -- He was afterward Bach. of
Div. but omitted in the Register.

Eight besides him were admitted to oppose, among whom were John Nottyngham a
Minorite, and Walt. Bower a Benedictin but were not now or after admitted Bach.
of Div.

Bach. of Div.
June 27. John Palsgrave. -- See afterward in the Incorporations.

Jul. 5. Maurice Gryffyth or Griffyn a Dominican. -- He was afterward Bishop
of Rochester.

Dec. 7. Fa. John Tybbys a Benedictin.

Nine besides were admitted, (of which number were John Doove or Dove, and John
Gibbys, Carmes; Rich. Knight a Dominican, Walt. Sutton and John Kingston,
Benedictines; and Rob. Roberdsoryge a Bernardine) and about 29 there were that
supplicated for the said Degree, among whom were (1) John Helyar of C. C. Coll.
(2) George Brown an Austin Friar, afterward Archb. of Dublin. (3) Fath. Simon
Clerkson a Carme. (4) Fath. John Cardmaker a Minorite, who had spent 16 years
here and at Cambridge in Logic, Philosophy, and Divinity; but whether admitted,
it appears not. This Cardmaker did about the time of the dissolution of Abbeys
1535, preach very freely against the Power of the Pope, and afterward was made
Prebendary of Wells. In the Reign of K. Ed. 6. he took to him a Wife, and had
by her a Female Child, and became a Reader in Paul's, where his Lectures were so
much offensive to the Romans Cath. Party, that they abused him to his face, and
with their knives would cut and haggle his Gown. About that time he was made
Chancellor of the Church of Wells by the name of John Tailor alias Cardmaker*
and was looked upon there and at London as the most zealous Minister to carry
on the work of Reformation. At length when Qu. Mary came to the Crown he was
deprived of his Spiritualities, and imprisoned in the Fleet, was had before the
Bishop of London and the Spiritual Power, to know whether he would recant his
Heresy as they called it, but he stiffly denying it, and therefore condemned to
dye, he was burnt in Smithfield 30 May 1555, as John Fox in his Book of Acts
and Mon. of the Church will tell you.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 5. Hugh Coren or Curwyn. -- He was afterward Archb. of Dublin, and
Bishop of Oxon.

Jan 24. John Barber of Alls. Coll. -- He was an Advocate in the Court of
Arches, and died at Wrotham in Kent about the beginning of the year 1549.

Will. Petre of Alls. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- This worthy Person
was Son of John Petre a rich Tanner of Torbryan in Devenshire, and was
originally of Exeter Coll. Thence he was elected Fellow of Alls. Coll. in 1523,
and afterward became successively Principal of Peckwater's Inn, one of the
Visitors of Religious Houses when they were about to be dissolved, Master of
the Requests and a Knight, Secretary and one of the Privy Council to K. Hen. 8
and Ed. 6. Sub-Treasurer, afterward Treasurer, to K. Ed. 6. of the first
Fruits and Tenths, Secretary of the Privy Council to Q. Mary, in whose time he
was Chancellor of the Order of the Garter, and at length of the Privy Council
to Q. Elizabeth. He died 13 Jan. 1571, and was buried in the Church of
Ingerston in Essex on 11 Feb. following. The learned Cambden (...)
says, that he was a man of approved Wisdom and exquisite Learning, and not so
much memorable for those honorable Places and Offices of State which he bare,
and for his oftentimes being sent in Embassage to foreign Princes as for that
being bred and brought up in good Learning, he well (...) of Learning in the
University of Oxford, and was both pitiful and bounteous to his poor Neighbors
about him, and of Ingerston where he lies buried.

Jan. 24. Griffyn Leyson Principal of S. Edwunds Hall near S. Edw. Church. --
He with John Oliver Dr. of the Civ. Law, were employed in the matter of
depriving Steph. Gardener of his Bishopric of Winchester: and in the time of
Qu. Mary wheeling about, he became a Justice of Peace, and High Sheriff of
Caermerthenshire, when Rob. ^errar Bishop of S. David's was burnt an. 1555; at
which time suffering not the said Bishop to speak his mind when he was at the
Stake, (as John Fox (...)
tells us) died about half an year after, when he would have spoke himself, but
could not.

One George Throgmorton LL. B. did supplicate to be admitted to the said
degree, but was not.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 5. Rich. Langrigg or Langrish. -- He was originally of Mert. Coll. and
from being Fellow ehere, he became one of the Canons of Cardinal Coll. Chaplain
to Wolsey Archb. of York, and afterward to Dr. Lee his Successor in that See.
In 1534 he became Archdeacon of Clievland in the place of Dr. Will. Clyffe
promoted to the Chantorship of York; and dying in 1547, he was succeeded in the
said Archdeaconry by Dr. Jo. Warner.

Joh. Hopton a Dominican, was admitted the same day. -- This person tho
incorporated D. of D. in 1529, yet he was now licensed to proceed, and
accordingly stood in the Act celebrated three days after his Admission. See
more among the Bishops under the year 1558.

July 28. Will. Tresham lately of Merton, now Canon of the Kings, Coll. in Oxon.

John Travyshe M. of A. and B. D. was adm. Doct. the same day.

This year also Fa. Rich. Hylsey a Dominican, and Simon Atkyns M. A. and B. of
D. supplicated to be Doctors of the said Faculty. The former was afterward
admitted, but neglected to be put in the Register, the other was not.

Incorporations.
June 1. Jam. Turbervyle of New Coll. D. of D. of another University. -- He was
afterward Bishop of Exeter.

June 19. Joh. Palsgrave Feb.... Will. Leighton M. A. of Cambr.

July...Rob. Wakefeld B. of D. of Cambridge, now Canon of the Kings Coll. at
Oxon.

Nov.... Fa. John Hurleston or Huddleston a Carme, Bach of Div. of the
University of Colen.

In the month of June this year supplicated Rich. Croke D. of D. of Cambridge,
and about this time Canon of the Kings Coll. in Oxon, to be incorporated in
that degree; which Supplication, tho not at that time granted, yet afterward
he was incorporated.

An. Dom. 1533.
An. 25 Hen. 8.
Chanc. John Longland D. D. and Bishop of Lincoln, sometimes Fellow of Magd.
Coll.

Commiss. in chief was Will. Treshan D. D.

Proct. John Pekyns of Exeter Coll. Owen Oglethorp of Magd. Coll. Apr. 3.


Grammarians.
June...Gilb. Saywell Jan.... Jehn Best. Schol. of Gram.

These two were admitted to inform in Grammar: Qu. Whether Jo. Best was not the
same person who in 1560 was made Bish. of Carlisle, for in these days, and
after, several of the Bishops were originally Pedagogues.

Bach. of Arts.
July 20. John Man of New Coll. -- He was afterward Warden of Mert. Coll. and
Dean of Gloucester, as I have told you among the Writers under the year 1568.

July 20. Thomas Talbot Rich. Caldwell or Chaldwall of Brasnose Coll.

Feb. 15. John Clerk -- Quaere.

Sixty two in all were admitted this year, and but six that suppl.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
July 13. Joh. Wymesley or Wymsley of Broadgates Hall. -- He was made
Archdeacon of London by his Brother Dr. Bonner Bishop of that City, in the
place of Dr. Rich. Gwent deceased, an. 1543, and was present in the Convocation
of the Clergy 1 Mari. c, Dom. 1553, in which Convocation he did speak an
Oration that was soon after made public.

About nine besides him were admitted, and but three there were that
supplicated for the said degree.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Nov. 27. Donatus Riane a public Reader of the Canon Law in New Inn. -- A
learned Irish (...)
Author in his enumcration or Writers and learned men of Ireland, tells us
there were two Brethren of Oxford whose Sirnames were Riane, and that one of
them was a good Civilian, and the other a Mathematician, but mentions nothing
of their Writings. This Donatus therefore I take to be the Civilian, and Daniel
mentioned under the year 1556, to be the Mathematician. See in the year 1514.

Besides him were six admitted, and eight at least that supplicated for the
said degree.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar.... John Shepreve or Shepery of C. C. Coll.

Apr.... Will. Pie of Oriel. -- He was afterward Dean of Chichester.

Jan. 30. Joh. White of New Coll. -- He was afterward B. of Wint.

Mar. 19. Thomas Young. -- Perhaps the same who took a degree in the Civ. Law
1537, as I shall tell you in that year.

Besides these, were but fourteen admitted, and about eight that supplicated
for the said degree, that were not this year admitted.

Opponents in Divinity.
Mar. 31. Fath. Rob. Kynner alias Bate a Monk of the Order of S. Bernard. now
of S. Bernards Coll. -- He was the last Abbat of Smite in Warwickshire, of the
Cistercian Order. In the year before he supplicated for the degree of Bach. of
Div. tho he had not opposed; and whether he was admitted this, or in any other
year following, it appears not in the Reg.

Mar. 31. Fath. May. 29. Fath. Tho. Kyngeswood Rich. Green Ralph Wobourne. of
S. Bernards Coll.


These three Fathers who were Monks of the Order of S. Bern. were not adm.
Bach. of Div. which is the reason I put them here.

Nov. 29. Fr. John Wyllyams a Minorite.

Bach. of Div.
May 29. Fa. Rob. Comb a Bernardine or Cistercian Monk, now Provisor of S.
Bernards Coll. in Oxon.

Oct. 14. Rob. Ferrar a Can. reg. of S. Mary's Coll. -- He was afterward
Bishop of S. David.

Mar. 7. Fa. Tho. (sometimes written Will.) Todde a Bened. Monk.

11. Fa. Andr. Alton of the same Order, and about this time Prior of the Monks
living in Gloucester Coll. in the Suburb of Oxon.

20. Thomas Goldwell M. A. -- He was afterward B. of S. Asaph.

Besides these, were six more admitted, and about 16 that supplicated, among
whom were Fr. John Arthure and Fr. Edw Reyley, Minorites, Fath. Tho. Wethamsted
and Fa. John Langport, Benedictines; Fr. Joh. Joseph and Fr. Joh. Bacheler,
Minorites; the last of which was Subgardian of the Franciscan Coll. in Oxon.

Not one Doct. of Can. or Civ. Law, nor one Doct. of Physic was admitted this
year.

Doct. of Div.
Neither in Divinity, only John Bellytory M. A. of Mert. Coll. and John Wylson
Bach. of Div. supplicated for that degree. -- One Rich Board also M. of A. of
this University and Doct. of Div. of Paris, did supplicate to be absent from
Exequies, Masses, Processions, etc.

An. Dom. 1534.
An. 26 Hen. 8.
Chanc. Dr. Lengland Bishop of Lincoln, with whom it was dispensed by the
Regents, that he might, if he please, remain in his Office for term of life.

Commiss. Dr. Tresham, styled sometimes Vicechancellor.

Proct. Dunstan Lacy of Linc. Coll. John Howell or ap Howell of Alls. Coll.

Which Proctors were elected on the first day of Easter Term: but Lacy dying in
the month of Sept John Poller or Paulet (I know not whether he be the same with
John Polla^d who was Proctor in 1531) succeeded by the Kings Authority, and
served out the remaining part of the year.

Bach. of Arts.
Dec. 19. Seth Holland -- See more under the year 1538.

Jan.... Tho. Chester -- He was afterward Bishop of Elphine in Ireland.

Forty two more were admitted, and about nine that supplicated.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 3. John Price of Broadgates Hall. -- Perhaps he may be the same with John
Price who is mentioned among the Writers under the year 1554.

Fourteen in all were admitted, and but three that supplicated who were not
admitted this year.

Bach. of Can. Law.
May 17. Rob. Evans. -- He was about this time Dean of Bangor, but when he was
admitted thereunto I find not. One Rowland Thomas LL. D. was Dean of that
Church in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, and died in January 1586; but
whether he was immediate Successor to R. Evans I know not.

Nine in all were admitted, and about twelve that supplicated for the said
degree; among whom were William Ayllesbury a Can. regular of the Monastery of
Arrouvise in the Diocese of Arr^^ in France.

Mast. of Art.
June 19. Nich. Vdall 28. Will. Chedsey Mar. 17. Patrick Walsh. of C. C. Coll.

The two former were Writers, the other was afterward a Bish. in Ireland.

The number that were admitted this year, were in all 25 at least, besides
about six that supplicated who were not admitted.

Bach. of Phys.
Three this year supplicated for the said degree, of which, two, as it seems,
were admitted, viz. Will. Pie of Oriel Coll. who was afterward a learned
Divine, and a Dean, and Job. D^tyn of Exet. Coll. which last, tho he has
written nothing, yet he was a learned man, and a Benefactor to Learning, by
giving a House and Land to his Coll. situate and being in the Parish of Bampton
in Oxfordshire, (of which place he was one of the Vicars) and many choice Books
to their Library, as I have told In Hist. and. Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. l. ^. p.
(...).
you elsewhere. He was beneficed in Cornwall. Devonshire, Somersetshire, and
Oxfordshire, and was also Canon of the Cath. Chapter at Exeter.

Bach. of Div.
Mar. 27. George Cotes or Cootes of Magd. Coll.

June 25. Walt. Buckler originally Fellow of Merton, afterward Canon of
Cardinal, College, was then admitted Bach. of Divinity, tho not in priestly
Orders. -- The Person who was second Son of John Buckler of Cawsay in
Dorsetshire, and had been lately a Student in the University of Paris, was
afterward promoted by the King to be a Canon of his Coll. in Oxon founded on
that of the Cardinal, and about the same time was by him sent about State
Affairs to Paris, which he performed with good liking to the said King. In the
first of Ed. 6. he received the honor of Knighthood, and when Qu. Elizabeth
came to the Crown, he was made one of her Privy Council. He died at Fairford in
Glocestershire, having married the Widow of Sir Edward Tame Knight, Lord of
that Manor, and was buried in the Church there. Over whose Grave tho there be
no Inscription, (notwithstanding, as I remember, there is a Monument for him)
yet his (...) p. 23. 45, etc.
contemporary in Mert. Coll. named Jo. Parkhurst, has perpetuated his Memory
by certain Epigrams.

Jan. 16. Fr. Will. Brown a Minorite. -- One Will. Brown become Prior of
Monk-Bretton in the Dioc. of York, about 1523, but I take him not to be the
same with the Minorite.

29. Guy Etton, Eton or Eaton, a Minorite or Franciscan or Gray Friar. -- In
the Reign of K. Ed. 6. he was Archdeacon of Gloucester; but when Qu. Mary came
to the Crown, he left that Dignity and certain Spiritualities, and went with
his Companion and Friend John Jewel into Germany, and lived as an Exile at
Strasburgh; from whence returning in the beginning of Qu. Elz. he was restored
to his Archdeaconry, and kept it to 1571, and after. He is styled by a learned
L^ur. Humfredus in Vit. (...).
Author Vir pius and cruditus.

Feb. 26. Fa. Tho. Wellys a Benedictine. -- He seems to be the same with Tho.
Wellys a Ben. who supplicated for the degree of Bach. of Div. in 1514. This
Tho. Wellys was afterward Prior of Gloc. Coll.

Besides these, were about seven more admitted, among whom Rich. Ewer was one,
afterward one of the first Prebendaries of Worcester, Rich. London a
Benedictine another, and Tho. Thomson a Franciscan a third.

There were also about eight that supplicated, among whom was Tho. Clerk a
Monk of the Cistercian Order; but whether he was admitted, I cannot find.
Perhaps he may be the same Tho. Clerk who from being the last Abbat of S.
Werburgh in Chester (of the Benedictine Order, from which the Cistercians have
their rise) was made the first Dean of the Cath. Chapter of Chester.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jun. 30. John Vacham, formerly, as I conceive, of Alls. College, which is all
I yet know of him.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 9. Rich. Lorgan sometimes Fellow of Oriel Coll. afterward Principal of
S. Mary's Hall, now Divinity Reader of Magd. Coll. was then admitted D. of D.
but did not proceed till 1535.

John Hurleston or Huddleston a Carme, did supplicate for the degrees. of Doct. but
I cannot find him admitted. See among the Incorp. in 1533.

Incorporations.
Jul. 20. George Brown a Friar of the Order of S. Austin, and Doct. of Div. of
another University, was then incorporated. -- He was afterward Archbishop of
Dublin.

About this time the famous Ralph Gualter of Zurich studied in Oxon, for the
sake of Libraries and scholastical Company. Afterward he became an eminent
Theologist of the reformed Persuasion, and Author of many Books.

An. Dom. 1535.
An. 27 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. Edm. Shethor of Alls. C. John Pollet again. elect. 1st day of East.
Term.


Which Proctors, especially the senior, having received diverse Affronts from
the Townsmen, were, with their Retinew, forced to walk in the streets day and
night, armed. And when the said Shethor was going out of his Office, it was
decreed by the Members of the Univ. that in case he should be any ways vexed or
molested by the Oppidans, he might (...) Univ. (...) fol. 12. ^.
defend himself at the Univ. charge.

Grammar.
Sept. 21. Ralph Smalepage.

Feb. 26. Ralph Smyth a Sec. Chapl.

Both which were admitted to inform in Grammar.

Bach. of Music.
Jul. 12. Thom. Mendus a Secular Chaplain, was then admitted to the reading of
any of Musical books of Boethius.

One Tho. Bryghtwyn a Secul. Chapl. did supplicate for the said Degree, but
whether he was admitted it appears not.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 5. Edw. Quemmerford an Irish Man. -- He is reported by a Writer of his
Country to be a learned Man, as indeed he was, considering the time he lived
in, as other Authors also till us. One Nich. Quemmerford I have mentioned among
the Writers, but what this Edward has written I cannot yet find.

About 41 were admitted this year, and about 10 that supplicated who were not
admitted.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 12. Henry Siddall -- He was afterward Canon of Chapter Chapter in Oxon. and in
the Reign of Edw. 6. a great admirer and follower of Pet. Martyr, a turner
about in Qu. Mary's Reign, and a returner in that of Qu. Elizabeth, such was
the mutability and poor spirit of the Man. See more among the Doctors of Div.
in 1552. and 1558.

Besides him were seven admitted, of whom Richard Plunket a Secular Chapl. was
one, and nine that supplicated for the said Degree, but were not admitted.

Bach. of Can. Law.
Apr. 24. John Man a Sec. Chapl. and Fellow of New College. -- Not the same
with him who was admitted Bath. of Arts 1533. but another.

Jul. 12. Henry Siddall beforementioned.

Besides these two were seven also admitted, and but two that supplicated.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 10. John Hoker of Magd. Coll.

Jul. 1. Jam. Brokes of C. C. C. -- Afterward B. of Gloc.

Besides these two were about 27 admitted, among whom August. Cross of Exet.
Coll. was one, afterward Fellow of Eaton Coll. and a rich Dignitary.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 23. Fath. Rob. Joseph a Benedictine Monk -- In the year 1537 I find him
to be Prior of Gloucester Coll. in Oxon. and in 1538 it appears that Thom.
Wellys succeeded, being the last of the Priors of that Coll.

Jul. 1. Fath. Humph. Cherytey Nov. 3. Fath. Nich. Andrews John (sometimes
written Thom.) Adelston John Neott. Benedictines.


Feb. 12. Owen Oglethorp President of Magd. Coll.

Besides these, 8 more were admitted, and about 13 that supplicated who were
not this year admitted; among whom were Fath. Will. Pond an Austen Friar, Fa.
Hugh Glasyer a Minorite.

Not one Doctor of the Can. or Civ. Law was admitted this year.

Doct. of Physic.
Jul. 5. John Warner of Alls. Coll. -- In the year following he was made Warden
of the said Coll being about that time the public Professor of Physic in the
University, and in 1541. or thereabouts he became one of the first Prebendaries
of Winchester. In 1547 in July he was made Archdeacon of Clievland in the place
of Dr. Rich. Langrigg or Langrish deceased, and afterward became Archdeacon of
Ely in the room of Dr. John Boxall, but the year when, I cannot tell. In 1559
(1. Eliz.) he being then Preb. of Vlfcomb in the Church of Sarum, was made Dean
of Winchester in the place of Dr. Edm. Steward, and dying in his house in
Warwick Lane in London, 21. March 1564 was buried in the Chancel of the Church
of Great Stanemere in Middlesex. In his Wardenship of Alls. Coll. Rich. Barber
LL. D. succeeded, in his Archdeaconry of Clievland, (which he resigned about an
year before his death) one Christoph. Malton M. A. was installed in Apr. 1564.
in his Archd. of Ely. (which also he had resigned) one Rob. Wisdom of
Cambridge a good Lat. and English Poet of his time, and one that had been an
Exile in Qu. Mary's Reign, succeeded, but the year when I cannot justly say;
and in his Deanery of Winchester followed Franc. Newton D. D. an. 1565. As for
Rob. Wisdom beforementioned, who was also Rector of Settrington in Yorkshire,
died in 1568.

Jul. 5. John Gaynes (sometimes written Jaynys) M. A. and Bac. of Phys. was
then adm. being the same day on which Dr. Warner was admitted.

One Will. Cool M. A. and B. of Phys. supplicated to be adm. Doctor of that
fac. but was not.

Doct. of Div.
May 8. James Blythe the Kings Chaplain. -- See among the Incorporations, an.
1527.

Jul. 5. Fa. Edward Hynmersh or Inmarsh a Benedictine -- He was lately Warden
or Guardian of Durham Coll. in Oxon, and now Chancellor to Cuthb. Tonstall B.
of Durham.

Jul. 5. Fa. Will. Bennet Roger Bell Benedictines.


Feb. 17. Owen Oglethorp of Magd. Coll. was then adm. D. of D. having but 5
days before been admitted B. D.

John Hastyngs of the Kings Coll. and Anth. Sutton, both Masters of Arts and
Bach. of Div. supplicated to be admitted Doctors of the said fac. but were not,
this year.

An. Dom. 1536.
An. 28. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same Commiss. the same as in the year 1534.

Proct. Will. Wetherton of Magd. Coll. Will. Pie of Oriel Coll. May 5.


Bach. of Arts.
May 29. Alexand. Nowell of Brasenose Coll.

Jul. 5. John Harley of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward B. of Hereford.

12. Ralph Skynner of New Coll. -- Whether he took the Degree of M. of A. or of
any other faculty in this University, I cannot in all my searches find: Yet
when he was elected Warden of New Coll. in the beginning of May 1551, he is
said to be M. A. In 1560 March 5. he was installed Dean of Durham in the place
of Rob. Horn promoted to the Sea of Winchester, and dying in 1563 was
succeeded by Will. Whittingham, to whom the Queen gave it (notwithstanding she
had promised it to Dr. Tho. Wilson) on the 19 Jul. the same year.

Feb. 27. John Harpesfeild of New Coll. -- He was afterward a grand zealot in
the times of reformation for the R. C. cause.

Besides these four, were about 30 more that were admitted, besides about 7
that supplicated.

Bach. of Law.
Jun.... Will. Binsley of New Coll. was then admitted Bach. of both the Laws --
After he had resigned the Vicaridge of Adderbury in Oxfordshire 1554, he became
about that time Chancellor to D. Pole Bishop of Peterborough and Archdeacon of
Northampton, in which last Dignity he was succeeded by one Nich. Sheppard
Master of St. John's Coll. in Cambridge, about 1571. This Binsley is reported to
have been a persecutor of Protestants in Queen Mary's Reign while he was a
Chancellor: And that after Qu. Elizah. came to the Crown he was
notwithstanding that, made Archdeacon of Peterborough, etc.

Mar. 22. Rich. Read of New Coll. -- See among the Doctors in 1540.

Besides these two, were but two more that were admitted, and but three that
supplicated, that were not admitted; among whom Donatus Tayge an Irish Man was
one.

Not one was admitted in the Canon Law, nor one that supplicated: For Religious
houses being about this time dissolved, there occurs not the third or fourth
part of Bachelaurs of the Can. or Civ. Law (especially the former) as before.

Mast. of Arts.
For the same reason but eleven Masters were admitted this year, five of whom
were of Merton Coll. and but two that supplicated, who were not admitted.

Bach. of Div.
May 13. Rich. Smyth of Merton Coll. now the Kings Professor of Divinity.

Jun. 28. Tho Raynolds of the same Coll. -- See afterward among the Doctors
this year.

Mar. 9. Father James Procter a Monk of that Order of St. Bernard alias
Cisteaux and Archdeacon of Dorset, in the place of Edw. Fox) who studied now in
St. Bernards Coll. in Oxon, was then admitted. -- He was afterward made Canon
of the Kings Coll. in Oxon, where abiding till 1545, at which time the said
Coll. was to be converted into a Cathedral, he had in recompense for it 20 l.
per an. paid unto him out of the Exchequer. Afterward being made Prebendary of
Salisbury, was at length, about the year 1579, nominated by Qu. Elizab. to
succeed John Devereux in the Sea of Fernes in Ireland; but he dying before his
consecration thereunto, Hugh Allen B. of Down and Co^nor was translated to
that See.

Fa. Anth. Clerk a Monk of the said Order, and of St. Bernards Coll. was
admitted the same day.

Fa. Edward Manchester another Monk of the same Order and Coll. was then also
admitted. -- When his Monastery was dissolved he returned to his old Surname
again, which was Pedley, and in 1538 I find him in a poor condition, as the
other Fathers of the same Order probably were.

Two more were admitted, and six that supplicated for that Degree, who were not
admitted; among whom were Fr. John Lyllyng a Minorite.

Doct. of Civil Law.
October. 11. Will. Coke or Cook of Alls College, now Rector or Warden of
Elmeley in Kent. -- In 1537 I find him by the name of Will. Coke LL. D. to be
Principal or Chief Moderator of the Civ. Law School in St. Edwards Parish, and
in 1548 Judge or General Commissary, or custos of the Prerogative Court of
Canterbury. I take this Dr. Cook to be the same with him, who was zealous in
examining Protestants about matters of faith, when they were brought before the
Bishop of London; as you may see in the Acts and Mon. of the Church under the
year 1558. and elsewhere.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 5. John Hastyngs sometimes of University, now Canon of the Kings, Coll.
in Oxon.

Thom. Raynolds of Merton, sometimes one of the Canons of Cardinal, Coll. was
admitted the same day. -- He was afterward Warden of Merton Coll. Residentiary
of Exeter, Dean of Bristow for a time, an. 1553, and Dean of Exeter in the year
following, on the death of Dr. John Moreman. This Person being learned, and
Chaplain to Queen Mary, she therefore nominated him to succeed Rob. Parfew
alias Warton in the Episcopal See of Hereford, but she dying before he received
consecration thereunto, was not only put aside by Queen Elizabeth, but by her
committed to custody in the Prison called the Marshalsea in Southwark, where he
died about 24. Nov. 1559.

Jul. 5. Nich. Cartwryght M. of A. and Bach. of Div. -- In the Reign of K. Ed.
6. he was a great admirer of Pet. Martyr and his Doctrine, and about that time
was made Master, or Schoolmaster, of the House or Hospital of St. John Baptist
joining to Banbury in Oxfordshire. In the Reign of Qu. Mary he was commanded to
dispute with Hugh Latymer in the Divinity School, before he was to sacrifice
his life in the flames, an. 1554, yet spoke as little as could be; and two
years after, he was deprived of a benefice in the Dioc. of Lichf. and Cov. He
died and was buried at Banbury beforementioned, about 1558.

Jul. 5. John Huchenson Matthew Wyttalls Masters of Arts and Bach. of Div.


George Cotes of Magd. Coll. was adm. the same day -- Soon after he was Master
of Balliol Coll. and at length Bishop of Chester.

Rich. Smyth of Mert. Coll. mentioned before among the Bach. of Div. was also
admitted the same day -- Afterward, in the times of reformation, he was
esteemed the chief pillar of the R. Cath. cause.

At the same time one John Vine M. A. and Bach. of Div. supplicated to be
Doctor of that fac. but was not admitted.

Incorporations.
Not one was really incorporated, only several supplicated in Order to it, as
(1) Ralph Small M. A. of an University beyond the Sea, who also supplicated in
the year following for incorporation. (2) John Belfield B. A. of Cambridge, who
being 8 years standing in that University, supplicated this year also to be M.
of A. (3) Joh. Crayford D. D. of Cambridge -- See more in 1546.

An. Dom. 1537.
An. 29. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Tresham.

Proct. Hugh Weston of Linc. Coll. Tho. Knight of Linc. Coll. Apr. 11.


Bach. of Arts.
May 3. Rich. Bertue or Bertie of C. C. Coll. -- He afterward married with
Catherine the sole Daughter and Heir of William Lord Willoughby of Eresby, (the
Widow of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk) became Possessor of the great estate
belonging to that title, and Father of Peregrine Lord Willoughby of Eresby,
ancestor to Bertie Earl of Lindsey and Bertie E. of Abendon.

Feb. 18. Morgan Philipps or Philip Morgan of Oriel Coll. commonly called
Morgan the Sophister.

23. Rob. Paulet -- One John Paulet sometimes of Oxon occurs Dean of the Island
of Jernesey.

28. Tho. Hardyng of New Coll.

In all about six and thirty, besides ten or more that supplicated for that
Degree.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 2. John Coke a Secular Chaplain and a Student in the Cesarean Laws here,
and at Cambridge, for three years or more -- This Person is not to be
understood to be the same with John Coke or Cook, who occurs a little before
this time Abbat of Osney, as some have taken him to be so; which is the reason
that I make now this note of him.

Feb. 17. Tho. Young a Sec. Chaplain, now, as it seems, of Broadgates hall. --
He was afterward Archbishop of York.

Rob. Weston of Alls. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- See among the Doctors
of the Civ. Law in 1556.

Will. Dalby of the said Coll. was also adm. the same day. -- He was afterward
Chancellor of the Diocese of Bristow, whence he was ejected upon account of
Religion in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth, as Nic. Saunders tells (...)
Monarch edit. 1592. p. 6^0.
us.

Feb. 17. Benedictus Guarsius, sometimes written Ballasarus Gwarcius. Quaere.

Besides these, was only Arth. Pytts of Alis. Coll. admitted; and one Hugh
Whytford who supplicated for the said Degree.

Not one was admitted in the Canon Law, nor one supplicated, for the reason I
have before told you, under the year 1537.

Mast. of Arts.
May 11. John Powle or Bowl of Alls. Coll. -- This Person who was Canon of
Windsore in the time of Ed. 6. is reported by a certain (...) in (...).
Decanorum and (...). Winds. MS. pene^ (...) A. W.
writer to have been lately Prior of Merton in Surrey, and that dying at
Windsore 15 Aug. 1558 was buried there.

Rich. Reeve of Alls. Coll. was adm. the same day -- He was afterward the
first Prebendary of the ninth Prebendship of Westminster an. 1560, Canon of
Wandsore in 1561 and the Queens Chaplain. This Person is remembered by John Fox
in his book of Acts and Monuments of the Church, to have been the noted
Schoolmaster of Berchamstede in Hertfordshire, and that for his zeal to
protestancy, he was brought into some kind of trouble in the Reign of Qu. Mary.
He died in 1594, leaving behind him the Character of a religious and learned
Man; whereupon Cuthbert Bellot M. A. succeeded him in his Prebendship, and
Alex. N^well Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral in his Canonry.

Feb. 13. John Man of New Coll. was then admitted Master being the same whom I
have mentioned under the year 1533.

In all 39 or thereabouts.

Bach. of Div.
Dec. 3. Fath. Feb. 8. Fa. John Warham. Rob. Nettleham Will. Lyncolne
Benedictines.


15. Will. Haynes of Oriel Coll. -- He was afterward Provost of that College,
Fellow of Eaton, the third Canon of Osney, and the first of the first Canonry
or Prebendship of Chapter Chapter in Oxon. Some report that he was also Dean of Exeter,
but false, for 'twas Simon Heynes that enjoyed that Dignity.

Four more were admitted, and about 7 there were that supplicated for the said
Degree, among whom John Crayford a Minorit^ was one, who had spent several
years in study both here and at Cambridge, Rob. Wellys M. A. and Fellow of
Eaton Coll. another, and Thom. Massy a Canon regular a third; which last was
Prior of St. Mary's Coll. in Oxon and was about this time adm. Bach. of
Divinity, but neglected to be registered by the public scribe.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jan. 18. Richard Lyell of Alls. Coll.

Roll. Merick about this time of New Inn was adm. the same day -- He was
afterward Bishop of Bangor.

For the same Degree supplicated one Rich. Arche LL. B. but was not admitted.
In 1526 I find him to be Principal of Broadgates hall by the name of Rich.
Archer, and now (1538) to be the Kings Chaplain and Canon of Windsore. On the
28. Dec. 1551. he was made Treasurer of the Church of Salisbury on the death of
Matthew Wotton, who had succeeded in that Dignity one Tho. Stevens.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 13. Father William Todde a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict of Durham
Coll. as it seems, and a Monk of Durham, was then adm. Doct. of Div.

Not one besides was admitted, nor one supplicated for that degrees.

Incorporations.
May... Christop. Massyngberd LL. Bach. of Cambridge and Chanc. of the Church
of Linc. -- Afterward he supplicated to the licensed to proceed in the Laws,
but whether he was so, it appears not. In 1543 he succeeded Dr. Anth. Draycot
in the Archdeaconry of Stow, and dying 8. March 1553 was buried in the middle
of the Isle on the South side of the Choire belonging to the Church of
Lincoln. Whereupon John Aylmer or Elmer succeeded in that Dignity, but before
he had enjoyed it an year, was deprived of it, being then the first year of Qu.
Mary, and one John Harrison was put into his place, 1554.

This year on the 19. July the rev. Father Anthony Brocke or Brockbey
(sometimes written Brorbe) a Franciscan or Gray Friar, well read in Divinity
and learned in the Greek and Heb. tongues, sometimes a Student in St. Mar.
Magd. Coll. Oxon, suffered death by hanging, for speaking against the Kings
proceedings in extirpating the Popes power and demolishing of religious houses.
I put this observation under the year of his death because that he, being
reported by T^o. ^ouchier in Hist Ecclesiastica de Martyr^ fratrum (...) etc.
edit. Ingolstad, 1583. part. 2. fol. 15. b.
one to be a Licentiat in Divinity, and by Franc. a S. (...) in Hist. (...)
Frotrum Minorum, etc. edit. (...) 1665. Sect. 15. p. 4. (...) 60.
another a Professor of Divinity, of this University, I cannot find any such
thing in our public registers, which are imperfect in several years before
this time, especially in the year 1517.

An. Dom. 1538.
An. 30. Hen. 8.
Chancellor the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. Rich. Arderne of Magd. Coll. Thomas Roberts of Oriel Coll. May 8


Which Proctors were elected then (as it is said) by the public Suffrages of
those whom it concerned to give, as if an equal power of suffraging in such
elections did not now pertain to all Masters.

Bach. of Arts.
May 17. John Fox of Brasenose Coll. -- He was afterward of that of St. Mary
Magdalen, and the noted Martyriologist.

Feb. 15. George Etheridge John Morwen of C. C. C.


In all about 41 besides 14 or thereabouts that were candidates for the said
Degree, but not admitted this year.

Only two this year were admitted Bach. of the Civ. Law, and but 4 in the next.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 12. Rich. Caldwell of Brasenose Coll. -- He was afterward an eminent
Physician.

20 Seth Holland of Alls. Coll. -- In 1555 or thereabouts, he became the third
Prebendary of the second stall in the Cath. Chapter of Worcester in the place of
John Compton alias Teale Bach. of Div. and sometimes Chaplain to K. H. 8. and
in the same year he was elected Warden of Alls. Coll. In 1557 about Michaelmas
he was made Dean of Worcester in the place of Philip Haford or Hawford alias
Ballard (who had been the last Abbat of Evesham in Worcestershire) and about
the same time became Rector of Bishops Cleeve in Glocestershire, upon his
resignation of the Rectory of Fladbury. In Oct. or Nov. 1559 he was deprived of
his Deanery; whereupon John Pedder Bach. of Div. one of the Frankfort exiles in
the time of Qu. Mary was installed in his place 27. Dec. the same year. Holland
was afterward committed Prisoner to the Marshalsea, where he died in the
second year of Qu. Elizab.

Mar. 18. James Curthopp of C. C. Coll. -- In 1546 he became the first Canon of
the sixth stall in Chapter Chapter Cathedral Oxon, and about the beginning of Qu. Mary
he succeeded Gerard Carleton D. D. in the Deanery of Peterborough, who in 1543
had succeeded in that Dignity Franc. Abre B. D. the same Abre I mean, who, from
being the last Prior of Northampton* was made the first Dean of Peterborough,
an. 1541. James Curthopp died 19. July 1557, and was buried in the Isle next
adjoining on the North side, to the choire of the Cathedral of Chapter Chapter He was
one of the examiners of John Philpot the Martyr in certain matters of Religion,
before the time of his suffering.

Besides these three, were but eight Masters admitted, if the register says
right; and in but one Act celebrated this year, on 29. July, were only four
Doctors of Divinity, and one in the Laws that proceeded, the Masters being
reserved till the Act following, which was on the last of March 1539.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 8. Frat. John Byllynge a Minorite.

May 9. Fath. Rob. Dalton John Tewtie Nich. Marley Benedictines.


May 31. Fat. Philip Action Rog. Whalley Rich. Hayles Cistercians alias
Bernardines.


The first of which last three, was about this time Provisor of St. Bernards
Coll. in the North suburb of Oxon.

Jul. 13. John Done of C. C. C. -- I have made some mention of him under the
year 1528.

14. Fa. Hugh Glasier a Minorite.

Jul. 23. Fath. Tho. Bid Will. Ambrose Benedictines.


Two more were also admitted, and but two there were that supplicated for that
Degree, among whom, Hen. Stretsham a Minorite, who had spent several years
here, and at Cambridge, in Logicals, Philosophicals, and Theologicals, was one.

After the Abbeys were dissolved, in 1535. 36. etc. I find very many Monks and
other religious Persons, who had pensions allowed them out of the Exchecquer,
to retire to the University, and to such places therein, that were nurseries
for them, as Canterbury Coll. Gloucester Coll. Durham Coll. St. Bernards, St.
Mary's, etc. which were full of them; where they continued till they were worn
out, or had gotten Benefices.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Apr. 8. John Story Principal of Broadgates hall. -- He was about this time
Principal or Chief Moderator of the Civil Law School in St. Edwards Parish. and
was the only Doctor of his faculty, that was admitted this year.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul. 13. John Toker M. of A. of Exeter Coll. -- Of him the public register
says thus. -- Licentiatus erat ad incipiendum Julis 13o, quo die admissus erat
ad le turam libelli aphorismorum Hypochratis: Et sic evenit quod una and eadem
hora fit Bacralauceus and Doct. in Med. Which shows that the words cumulavit
Gradus, were not at this time in use.

Doct. of Div.
Jun. 27. The reverend Father Anthony Dunstan alias Kitchen Abbat of Eynsham in
Oxfordshire, now lodging in Gloucester College, was then licensed to proceed in
Divinity. -- He was afterward Bishop of the rich See of Landaff.

Jul.... Fath. Rich. Gorton Humph. Cheritye John Clerk Benedict. Monks.


Incorporations.
Jul. 13. John Clerk a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict and Bach. of Div. of
Cambridge, was then incorporated Bach. of Divinity. -- About the same time he
was licensed to proceed in that faculty, as I have before told you, and on the
29. of the same month he accordingly stood in the Act then celebrated, by the
name of Father Jo. Clerk.

An. Dom. 1539.
An. 31. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. Longland Bishop of Lincoln

Commissary the same, viz Dr. Tresham.

Proct. Will. Smyth of Brazen. Coll. Bor. John Stoyt of Mert. Coll. Austr.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr.... Will. Hugh of C. C. Coll.

Jun. 9. Hen. Bull Jul. 7. Tho. Cooper of Magd Coll.

Feb. 24. Bernard Gilpin of Qu. Feb.... John Watson of (Allsouls) Coll.

Three of these were afterward Writers, and two were Bishops. About 32
Bachelaurs were admitted this year, besides about 10 who were Supplicators or
Candidates.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 27. Rob. Ward the noted Philosopher and Disputant of Merton College.

Besides him were about 19 that were admitted this year* among whom were
several who were afterward Dignitaries, as William Brown of Mert. Coll. who
was Preb. of Wells, Thom. Arden Preb. of Worcester, etc.

Opponents in Div.
Dec. 20. Fath. George Clyffe Tho. Maynsford John Matthew. (Benedictines.)


23. Fath. Ralph Ryckmansworth a Benedictine.

Jan. 21. Peter Langrish -- He was soon after made one of the first Canons of
Winchester.

These I set down, because (1) They were not afterward according to custom
admitted Bach. of Div. and (2) That they are the last Opponents who are
mentioned in our public registers.

Bach. of Div.
May 3. The venerab Father Henry Man Prior of the Carthusians in the Monastery
of Shene in Surrey. -- See afterward among the Doctors.

Hugh Weston Rector of Linc. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- Two years
before he supplicated to be Bach. of Physic.

Jun. 11. Fath. John Feekenham lately a Benedctine Monk of Evesham Abbey, now
or about this time of Glouc. Coll. in Oxon. -- See among the Doct. of Div. 1556.

17. Will. Bradbridge of Magd. Coll. -- See more in 1565.

Jul. 3. Fath. John Este a Benedictine.

Besides these, were 4 more that were admitted, and about eleven that
supplicated; among whom were Father Stephen Baylye, Fath. John Salter, Fath.
Rich. Ramsey alias Hallyng, Fat John Holywell alias Palmer, all Benedictines;
and Tho. Robe^tson the famous Grammarian. As for Fa. Ramsey, he, by the name of
Rich. Hal^yng alias Ramsey S. T. P. was admitted Vicar of Wellow in
Somersetshire 1546 and had one or more Dignities in the Church.

Not one Doctor of Law or Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
May 12. The ven. Fath. Hen. Man Prior of Shene in Surrey was then licensed to
proceed in Divinity. -- He completed that Degree in an Act celebrated 7. July
following, and was afterward Bishop of the Isle of Man as I have told you
already among the Bishops.

Dec. 23. Rich Brown M. A. and Bach. of Div.

Jan. 12. Hugh Weston beforementioned, Rect. of Linc. Coll.

Incorporations.
I find a supplicate made in the behalf of one John Hardyman a Doctor of
Divinity of Cambridge that he might be incorporated in the same Degree, but
whether really he was so, I know not. He ran with the mutable times of K. Hen.
8. Ed. 6. and Qu. Mary, and being in show a zealous Protestant in the beginning
of Qu. Elizab. was by her made the first Canon of the second stall in the
collegiat Church of Westminster, in the year 1560. About which time being well
known among the Puritanical Party (who began to show themselves betimes) he was
made their instrument to break down the Altars, and to deface the ancient
utensiles and ornaments of the Church of Westminster. For which, upon
complaint, he was deprived by the Queens Commissioners for causes
Ecclesiastical, an. 1567.

An. Dom. 1540.
An. 32. Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. Lewis Reynold of Magd. Coll. Bor. John Man of New Coll. Austr. Apr. 9.


Elected by the titles of Northern, and Southern, on the first day of Easter
term, being the last Proctors that occur so distinguished in our registers.

Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 19. Tho. Bickley Rob. Crowley of Magd. Coll.


Jun.... John Heron of Alls. Coll.

Oct. 20. John Proctor of C. C. Coll.

Ralph Robinson of the same Coll. was admitted on the said day. -- This Person
who was a Lincolnshire Man born, did translate into English, with notes added
in the margin, the Vtopia of Sir Thom. More -- Land. 1557. oct. etc. Whether he
took the Degree of Master of Arts (in order to which he supplicated in Apr.
1544) it appears not, or that he translated, or wrote any other things. There
has been another of both his names who was a writer, but lived an hundred
years after this, and was of Cambridge.

Oct. 20. John Jewel Tho. Greenway C. C. Coll.


Feb. 4. Christop. Goodman of Brazen. Coll.

Will. Downham of (Magd. Coll.) was admitted the same day. -- He was afterward
B. of Chester.

Feb.... John Pullayne of New Coll.

Sixty and two in all, were admitted, and about 12 that were candidates for the
said Degree, who were not this year admitted.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jun. 12. Rich. Barber of Alls. Coll -- On the 14. of March 1558. he was
installed Archdeacon of Bedford in the place of Mich. Dunnyng LL. D. of
Cambridge, and on the 24. Dec. 1560, he was installed Archdeacon of Leycester
upon the resignation of Tho. Robertson the Grammarian. In the beginning of 1565
he was elected Warden of Alls. Coll. and the next year, he was created LL. D.
as I shall tell you when I come to that year. His Wardenship he gave up in
1571, and about the same time the Archd. of Bedf. in which last he was
succeeded by Will. Read. As for Leycester he kept it to his dying day, and
then was succeeded by Hugh Blythe Bach. of Div. of Cambridge and Canon of
Windsore, an. 1589.

David Jews was admitted the same day. -- See among the Doct. of Civ. Law in
1548.

Besides these two, were about 14 admitted, and 3 that supplicated.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 4. Baldwyn Norton John Harley of Magd. Coll.


The first was afterward a rich Dignitary in the Church, and the other a
Bishop.

10. Alexand. N^well of Brazen. Coll.

Besides which three, were about 24 admitted.

Bach. of Div.
May 26. George London a Benedictine.

Sept. 20. John Hoker of Magd. Coll.

Six more were admitted, and at least 12 were candidates for the said Degree,
but were not then admitted, among whom John Standish was one, now of Brasen^se
but formerly of C. C. C.

Doct. of both the Laws.
Jul. ^. Walt Wryght now or lately Principal of Peckwaters Inn -- In the
beginning of 1543 he was made Archdeacon of Oxon in the place of Dr. Rich.
Cor^n deceased, was afterward Master or Perfect of Durham Coll. in the
interval, between its dissolution and conversion into Trin. Coll. Canon of
Winchester and several times Commissioner and Visitor of the University. He
died in Exeter Coll. 10. May an. 1561. (being then Preb. of North Grantham in
the Church of Sarum) and was buried in the nave of St. Mary's Church in Oxon.
Whereupon John Kennall LL. D. succeeded him in his Archdeaconry, being the
second that bore that office after Oxford was made an Episcopal See. A certain
Author, (...) p. 690.
who by many is accounted erroneous, tells us that this Doctor Wryght did take
occasion in a Sermon preached in Oxon, after Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown,
to make several reflections on the Popes Supremacy, and falling accidentally on
the words of St. Paul to the Ephesians -- And he gave some, Apostles, and some,
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, he told the auditory, to obtain
favor from them, you see here is not a word of the Pope -- After Sermon,
instead of going to dinner to refresh himself, he was took suddenly with a
sickness, and thereupon took his bed and dyed about 8 days after. This seemed
very remarkable among the R. Catholics, because the said Wright was not only
one of Cardinal Poles Visitors of the University of Oxon. in the time of Qu.
Mary, but also took all occasions then, to express his zeal for the R. Cath.
Cause. I have made mention of this Dr. Wright, in several places in Hist. and
Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 267. b. 276. a. 279. a. 283. a. lib. 2* p. 422.
a. b. etc.

Jul.... Will. Geffry lately Principal of St. Edwards, now Principal of
Broadgates, hall -- On the 20 of March 1553 (1o. Mariae) he became Chancellor
of the Church of Salisbury, on the deprivation of Hen. Parry, and about the
same time Chanc. to the B. of that place. You may read much of him in the Acts
and Mon. of the Church, etc. written by J. Fox, in the story of Jul. Palmer,
under the year 1556. and in that of Rich. White, under 1558. in which year Dr.
Will. Geffry dying, Cardinal Pole bestowed the said Chancellourship on an
eminent Scholar called Dr. Thom. Heskins in October. 1558. who keeping that
Dignity till Aug. 1559. Hen. Parry was restored. Whereupon Dr. Heskins went
beyond the Seas with other Romans Catholics and wrote The Parliament of Christ,
etc. concerning the Sacrament, impugned in a Sermon. by Jo. Jewel. Antw. 1565.
fol.

Jul.... Rich. Read of New Coll. -- He was an able Civilian of his time, valued
by K. H. 8. (who dubbed him a Knight after his return from Bulloigne in 1544)
was a Visitor of the University in the Reign of Ed 6; and dying in 1579 became
a Benefactor (...) both the Colleges of Will. of Wykeham.

Jul.... John Smyth.

Jul. -- Hen. Cole of New Coll. -- See among the Doct. of Div. in 1554.

Not one Doct. of Phys. was admitted this year, nor any Person admitted to
practice that fac. or surgery, only Felix Pontanus, a Forreigner, as it
seems.

Doct. of Div.
May 4. James More sometimes Provost of Oriel Coll. now a Dignitary in the
Church.

For the said Degree supplicated Rob. Wellys Bach. of Div. (mentioned among the
B. of Div. 1537) and Will. Sandwych B. of D. a Benedicline Monk, and now, or
lately Warden or Guardian of Canterbury College in Oxon; but whether these two
were admitted, it appears not.

An. Dom. 1541.
An. 33 Hen 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. Roger Bromhall of New Coll. John Wyman of Magd. Coll. as it seems.

Which Proctors were elected 23. Apr. from the company of Non-regents, by
virtue of the Kings Letters sent from Greenwych.

Bach. of Arts.
July 24. John Mullyns or Molens of Magd. Coll. -- He is mentioned at large
among the Writers.

Feb.... John Longland of Brazen. Coll. -- This Person who was a Salopian born,
was made Archdeacon of Bucks. on the death of Rich. Layton or Leighton LL. D.
who was made Archdeacon in 1534 after the death of Dr. John Tailor mentioned
under the year 1522. This John Longland who was nearly related to Dr. Longland
B. of Linc. was suspended of his Archdeaconry in the beginning of Qu Mary and
Rich. Porter succeeded.

Admitted in all about 62, besides several that supplicated, among whom
Valentine Dale was one.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
July 24. Hugh Jonys or Jones -- He was afterward Bishop of Landaff.

Oct. 24. Nichol. Bullyngham of Allsouls Coll. -- He was afterward
successively B. of Lincoln and Worcester.

In all 7.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 5. John Harpe^field Mar. 15. Tho. Hardyng of New Coll.

Mar. 4. Edm. Marvyn of C. C. C. -- This Person who was a Hampshire Man born, I
take to be the same with Mar^inus who was Archdeacon of Surrey in the time of
Qu. Mary, and ejected Vid. (...) Saunders De (...). Monarch, edit. 1592. lib.
7. p. 666.
thence in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth.

21. Bernard Gilpin of Qu. 22. Morgan Philipps of Oriel Coll.

In all about 44, some of which were afterward inferior Dignitaries in the
Church.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 14..... Brown -- I take him to be the same Person, who, by the name of
John Brown Bach. of Div. was made Can. of Windsore in the Reign of Qu. Mary,
and the same Brown who succeeded W. Barlow B. of Chichester in a Canonry of
the first stall in the Collegiat Church of Westminster, an. 1565, where he died
and was buried, in 1584.

May 15. Will. Devenish or Denis lately Fellow of Mert. Coll. now Provost of
Qu. C. -- In the Reign of Ed. 6. he became Can. of Windsore*

Dec.... George Clyffe, lately called Father Clyffe of the Order, as it seems,
of St. Benedict.

Six in all were adm. this year, (among whom Geo. Nevill a sec chap. was one)
and but two that supplicated for that Degree.

Not one Doct. of Law or Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 31. Rich. Boreman.

Aug. 2. Joh. Standist now, as it seems, of Brasn. Coll.

Oct. 3. Joh. Joseph lately a Minorite or Gray Friar.

Incorporations.
Oct. 19. John ap Harry or Parry Master of Arts of the University of Caen in
Normandy. -- See among the Doctors of Law in 1542.

In the month of July, I find a Supplicate made for one Roger Haskham to be
incorporated M. of A. as he had stood at Cambridge; but whether he was
incorporated, I find it not to stand in the Register, having been probably
neglected, as things of that nature (when the Supplicates are set down) have
frequently been done. I take this person to be the same with Reg. Ascham who
was born at Kirby wiske in Yorkshire, an 1515, educated in S. John's Coll. in
Cambridge, where he attained to great excellency in the Latin and Greek
Tongues, took the degree of M. of A. in that University 1537, and was a great
Tutor, and did much good by his admirable Learning there. This Person, by the
way I must let the Reader know, was a passing good Orator, had a great faculty
in writing Greek. Lat. and Engl. Epistles, which were not only excellent for
matter, but for the neatness of the handwriting, adorned with Illumination,
which we now call Limning, in the margin. And being the best of all Scholars in
his time for those matters, he was entertained, as an Instructor in them, by
Prince Edward, the Lady Elizabeth, and the two Brothers Henry and Charles Dukes
of Suffolk. In 1544 he succeeded John Cheek in the Oratorship of the University
of Cambridge, which he performed to the wonder and applause of all; and in the
Reign of Ed. 6. he accompanied Sir Rich. M^rysine in his Embassy to the Emperor
Charles 5. where continuing about three years, (in which time he became
acquainted with many learned men, among whom John Sturmius was one) he returned
upon the news of the death of K. Ed. 6. from whom he had not only received an
annual Pension in his absence, but also the gift of the Latin Secretariship: so
that at the present being destitute of convenient maintenance and Friends, was,
by the endeavors of the Lord Paget and Dr. Steph. Gardener Bish. of
Winchester, made Secretary of the Latin Tongue to Qu. Mary. In 1554 he married
one Margaret H^w, by whom he had a considerable Portion; yet notwithstanding
that and his Place, he lived and died not according to his condition, being
given to Dicing and Cock-fighting. After Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown, he
was not only continued in his place of Secretary, and made Tutor to her for the
Greek Tongue, but also by her favor was installed Prebendary of Wetwang in the
Church of York (by the deprivation of George Palms LL. D.) on the eleventh day
of March 1559. This Person whose Memory is celebrated to this day among learned
men for Oratory, Poetry, and the Greek Tongue, has written (1) Toxophilus: the
School or partitions of Shooting, contained in two books, written 1544 etc. --
Land. 1571, qu. As in his later days he delighted much in Dicing and
Cockfighting, so in his younger, while at Cambridge, in Archer^, wherein he
much excelled. (2) The Schoolmaster: or, a plain and perfect way of teaching
Children to understand, write, and speak the Latin Tongue. etc. in two Books.
Land. 1570 and 1589, qu. (3) A report and discourse of the affairs and state of
Germany and the Emperor Charles his Court, during certain years while he was
there. printed in qu. (4) Familiarium Epistolarum libri tres, etc. Land. 1577,
78. oct. (5) Quaedam poemata, printed with the Epistles. (6) Apol. contra
missam and ejus praestigias, etc. printed about 1577, in oct. This eminent
Scholar R. Ascham died ^d. Grant in Orat de Vit. and Ob. Reg. (...), Edit. 1577.
on the 30 of Dec. 1568, and was buried, without any funeral Pomp, on the 4 of
Jan. following* in the church of S. Sepulcher without Newgate, London, leaving
behind him this character by a learned Gul. Camden in Annal (...) sub an 1568
person, that he inter primes nostrae nationis literas Latinas and Graecas
stylique puritatem cum eloquentiae laud excoluit.

An. Dom. 1542.
An. 34 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. John Estwyke of Mert. Coll. Will. Pie of Oriel again.

Elected in the beginning of Easter Term by the Suffrages of the Doctors and
Heads of Colleges and Halls.

Bach. of Arts.
May 16. Tho. Neale of New Coll. now in much esteem for his great knowledge in
the Greek Tongue.

Nov. 16. Henry Pendleton of Brasn. Coll.

In all about 27, and but two that supplicated for that degree, who were not
admitted.

Bach. of Law.
Five this year were admitted Bachelaurs of the Civil Law, and but two there
were that supplicated for that degree. One of them was named Will. Copinger, a
Civilian of New Coll. but whether he was really admitted, I find not. This
Person who was a Londoner born, I take to be the same who was afterward a
Servant to Dr. Steph. Gardener B. of Winchester, and Bearer of the Great Seal
before him while he was Lord Chancellor. After Gardiner's Death, which happened
in 1555, he became one of the Benedictine Monks of Westminster, where
continuing till Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown, was soon after committed
Prisoner to the Tower of London, where, as one (...) Fox in his Book of Acts
and Mo^. etc. under the year 1558.
says, falling mad, died in a short time after. I find another Will. Copinger
who was M. of A. of this University long before the other man's time, who in
his Works in MS. (which are in Ball. Coll. Library, and therefore thought by
some Joh. pit in Append. nom. 2^. etc.
to have been of that House) did show himself to be a very pious Divine, and a
Pronouncer of the men of this World to be vain, in whom the knowledge of God
reigns not. He wrote (1) De vitiis and virtutibus, lib. 1. The beginning of
which is Vani sunt omnes homines, etc. (2) Sacramentale quoddam, and other
things, which has made his name famous to Posterity. When he lived, or in what
Kings Reign he was renowned for his Learning, I cannot tell neither does Bale
himself know.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 12. Simon Bell^stre. -- He was about this time Archdeacon of Colchester,
(occurring by that Title 1545) but whether he succeeded Rob. Aldridge or Hugh
Weston in that Dignity, I know not Besides him, were but eleven more that were
admitted.

Bach. of Div.
June 19. Will. Cheadsey of C. C. Coll. -- Afterward President of that House,
and a Writer.

Three more were admitted, and three there were that supplicated for the said
Degree among whom was John Marlow or Merlow of Mert. Coll. mentioned under the
year 1527.

Doct. of both the Laws.
Oct. 18. Joh. Cottrell of New Coll. -- This Person who was lately Principal of
S. Laurence Hall (involved afterward within the limits of Jesus Coll.) in the
Parish of S. Michael, was now Archdeacon of Dorset, in the place of one Will.
Skipp, who occurs Archd. of that place in 1537. He the said Dr. Cottrell was
afterward Vicar General to Paul the first Bish. of Bristol, did succeed Pol.
Virgil in the Archdeaconry of Wells. an. 1554 or thereabouts, being the first
year of Qu. Mary, at which time Virgil was in Italy among the living. In the
same year also* he was made Prebendary of Tymberscombe in the Church of Wells,
Vicar General to Gilbert Bishop of that place, and at length Prebendary of
Fordington and Writhlington in the Church of Sarum. He died about the month of
Feb. in 1575, and was buried in the Cath. Chapter at Wells.

Oct. 18. John Croke of New Coll. -- He was now an eminent Advocate in the
Court of Arches, and about this time dignified in the Church.

Doct. of Div.
July 6. John Ramridge of Mert. Coll. -- He was made Dean of Lichfield in the
beginning of Qu. Mary's Reign, in the place of one Rich. Willyams, deprived for
having married a Widow in the Reign of K. Edw. 6. But the said Ramridge leaving
England without any compulsion in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth being much
troubled in mind upon a foresight of the alteration of Religion* he went into
Flanders, where in wandering to and fro in great discontent, he met with
Thieves, who first robbed, and afterward murdered, him.

Only two supplicated for the said Degree this year. viz. Will. Wetherton M. A.
and Bach. of Div. and Edw. Sepham M. A. and Student in that Faculty, but were
not now, or after, admitted.

Incorporations.
Apr...Nich. Grimoald Jul. 19. Laur. Nowell B. of A. of Cambr.

Nov. 8. George Dogeson or Dog^on Chantor of Wells and M. A. of the University
of Paris, was then incorp. M. of A. Which being done, he was incorporated Bach.
of Div. as he had stood in the said University of Paris.

An. Dom. 1543.
An. 35 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. John Estwyke Will. Pie again.


Elected the first day of Easter Term.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 12. Tho. Godwyn of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Bathe and
Wells.

Dec. 14. Will. Johnson of Alls. Coll. -- The Cat. of Fellows of that House
says that he was afterward Dean of Dublin, and Bishop of Mead in Ireland:
whereupon recurring to the Commentary of Irish Bishops written by Sir James
Ware, I could find no such Person; nor Dr. Johnson of Christ's Coll. in
Cambridge, who is reported by In his Hist. of Cambridge. sect. 6. p. 91.
Th. Fuller the Historian to be Archb. of Dublin.

Feb. 20. Tho. Bentham (of Magd. Coll.) -- He was afterward Bish. of Lichfield
and Coventry.

In all about 35, besides about 7 who were Supplicators or Candictates for the
said degree of Bac. of Arts.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jan. 4. Nich. Harpesfield of New Coll.

Mar.... John Plough.

The former was afterward a zealous Writers for the Romans Catholic, the other
for the Protestant, Cause.

Besides these two, were about twelve more admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 6. Joh. Fox Hen. Bull Tho. Cooper Will. Dounham of Magd. Coll.


The two last of which were afterward Bishops.

At the same time was one John Redman or Redmayne of Magd. Coll. admitted. But
whether this be the same John Redman who was afterward Archdeacon of Taunton,
or another mentioned under the year 1508 and 1524, or a third mentioned among
the Writers an. 1551, I cannot justly say.

June 6. Will. Hugh. 20. George Ethoridge John Morwen of C. C. Coll.


Feb. 21. Joh. Pullayne Mar. 18. Laur. Nowell 24. Nich. Grimoald In all thirty
nine. of New Brasn. Mert. Coll.



Bach. of Div.
June 30. Gilb. Bourne of Alls. Coll.

Nov. 21. John Somer. -- He was Can. of Winds. in the time of Qu. Mary, where
he died, 1573.

Tho. Slythurst was admitted the same day. -- He was made Canon of Winds. and
the first President of Trin. College, in the time of Qu. Mary; of which being
deprived in the beginning of Qu. Eliz. was committed Prisoner to the Tower of
London, where he died about 1560.

Feb. 8. Will. Pie of Oriel College, now one of the Proctors of the University.
-- In 1534 he seems to have been admitted Bach. of Physic.

Besides these were ten more admitted, and five that supplicated; among whom
was William Peryn one, lately a Dominican or Black Friar, who was, I suppose,
admitted, because in a Book or Books which he soon after published, he writes
himself Bach. of Div.

Doct. of the LL.
Jul. 2. John ap Harry or Parry. -- He was soon after Principal of Broadgates
Hall* and seems to be the same John ap Harry who was Successor to Gilb. Smith
in the Archdeaconry of Northampton. This Dr. Parry died in the beginning of
1549, and was buried in the Chancel of the Church of Castor in Northamptonshire.

John Williams lately Principal of Broadgates Hall, was admitted the same day.

Doct. of Div.
June 1. Philip Broad about this time a shagling Lecturer of Divinity in this
University. -- He was afterward a Prebendary of the Church of York beneficed
in the Diocese thereof, and died in 1551. or thereabouts.

John Robyns the Astrologer and Mathematician, sometimes Fellow of Alls. Coll.
and now Canon of Windsore, did supplicate that he might be admitted to proceed
in Divinity; but whether he was admitted it appears not. -- Rich. Cox also, a
D. of D. of Cambridge, did supplicate that he might sit and take a place among
the Doctors of Divinity. (tho it was unusual and out of order) as being not
incorporated. See in the year 1545.

Incorporations.
This year, or thereabouts, John Cheek of Cambridge was incorporated, but in
what degree, unless in that of Master of Arts, I cannot justly tell, because of
the imperfectness of the Registers. He had studied before for some time in this
University, and was now one of the Canons of Kings Coll. in Oxon. I mean of
that College founded by K. Hen. 8. on that of Card. Wolsey, which continued
from the year 1532 to 1545, at which time he was about to translate the Sea of
Oxon from Osney to his said Coll. intended then by him to have it known by the
name of Christ Church, which was effected accordingly in the year following.
When the said Kings Coll. was dissolved by Hen. 8. in the beginning of the year
1545, he allowed most of the then Canons yearly Pensions in lieu of their
Canonries, and to Jo. Cheek who was then Tutor to his Son Prince Edward, he
allowed six and twenty pounds, thirteen shillings, and four pence. He was
afterward a Knight, and most famous for his Learning, expressed in his
Introductio Grammatices, his Book De ludimagistrorton officio, in another De
pronunciatione Linguae Grae^^c, and in many more, besides Translations; the
Catalogue of which, (mostly taken from Baleus) you may see at the end of Sir
John Cheeks Life, written by Ger. Langbaine, put by him before a Book written
by the said Cheek. entit. The true Subject to the Rebel, or the heart of
Sedition, etc. Oxon. 1641. qu. This Sir John Cheek died at Land. in the house
of Pet. Osbourne Esquire; a great Comforter of afflicted Protestants, in the month
of Sept. 1557, and was buried in the Church of S. Alban in Woodstreet within
the said City.

An. Don. 1544.
An. 36 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. Nich. Alambrygg of Alls. Coll. Will. Smyth of Brasn. Coll. again.

Elected about the Ides of May.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 7. In an Act then celebrated Will. Fitzjames Dean of We'ls was adorned
with the degree of Bachelaur of Arts, wearing then the Gown and Habit of a
Compounder, that is, one who compounds or pays double or treble Fees for his
Degree, which is usually done by rich Dignitaries. In the year following he was
admitted into Commons in Exeter Coll. and allowed to take place among the
Fellows of that Society. He succeeded in that Dignity Tho. Cromwell Secretary
of State, an. 1540, and was succeeded by John Goodman 1548.

John Hopkyns was admitted the same day. -- He is supposed to be the same John
Hopkyns who had a hand in turning into English meetre several of David's Psalms.

Nov. 3. Rich. Edwards of C. C. Coll.

Jan. 12. Roch. Harford of Mert. Coll. -- Whether he took a higher degree in
this University, it appears not. While he was Bach. of Arts he was Archdeacon
of S. David's, which he keeping for some years, was at length made Archdeacon of
Hereford. At the time of his death he gave Lands to Mert. Coll. situate and
being within the Town of Walton near to Tewkesbury in Glocestershire.

Besides these four were 56 admitted.

In the month of June this year supplicated for the Degree of Bach. of Arts one
Will. Walker a Priest, but whether he was admitted it appears not. In Dec. 1554
he was made Succentor of the Cath. Chapter of Salisbury, in which Dignity he was
succeeded by one Hen. Brither in the beginning of 1561.

But 4 Bach. of the Civ. Law were admitted, the encouragement for that
Profession being now much decayed.

Mast. of Arts,
Apr. 8. Edmund Daniel of Mert. Coll. -- See in the year 1556.

June 13. Christoph. Goodman of Brasn. Coll.

25. John Heron John Proctor John Watson of Alls. Coll.


The last of which was afterward Bish. of Winchester.

Oct. 18. Hen. Pendleton of Brasn. Coll.

Jan. 28. Tho. Greenaway of C. C. Coll. -- This Person who was a Hampshire man
born, was Author of Vita Richardi Fox C. C. C. Oxon. fundatoris breviter
descripta, an. 1566. The beginning of which was, Richardus Fox familia satis
splendida, etc. It Is a Manuscript, kept to this day in the Archives of C. C. C.
Libr. He was afterward Bach. of Div. as it is said, tho his Admission is
neglected to be registered, and at length President of the said Coll. He died at
Heyford Purcells in Oxfordshire, being then Rector of that place, in August
1571, and was buried in the Church there.

Jan. 28. John Jewel of C. C. C.

Besides these 8, were about 24 admitted, and several who supplicated, among
whom Ralph Robinson of C. C. Coll. was one, mentioned under the year 1540.

Bach. of Div.
June 14. James Brokes of C. C. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Gloucester.

Two more who were of Brasn. Coll. were admitted, (namely Will. Smyth and Tho.
Typping) and three there were that supplicated for the said Degree.

Not one Doctor of the Civ. Law, or LL. was admitted, or supplicated, only one
Rob. Raynold of New Coll. and not one in Physic, or Divinity, only in the last
Will. Pie of Or. Coll. whom I have formerly mentioned.

Incorporations.
Mar. 11. Andr. Davyson Bac. of Arts of Cambridge, afterward M. of A. beyond
the Seas, was then incorporated Master of Art.

An. Dom. 1545,
An. 37 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. Long and Bishop of Linc.

Commiss. the same, viz. Dr. Tresham.

Proct. John Stoyt of Mert. Coll. again. Simon Perrot of Magd. Coll.

Bach. of Arts.
June... James Neyland. -- See among the M of A. 1548.

July... Will. Whittyngham of Brasn. Coll. -- He was soon after of Alls. Coll.
and at length the unworthy thy Dean of Durham.

Jul.... John Piers of Magd. Coll. -- He died Archbish. of York.

Oct.... Tho. Hyde of New Coll.

James Bicton was admitted in the same month. See among the Mast. of Arts an.
1547.

The Admissions this year come in all but to about 32.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Nov.... Valentine Dale of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Dean of Wells. See
more among the Incorporations in 1552.

Besides him were only three more admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
June... Tho. Bickley of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Chichester.

.... John Molens or Mullyns of the same Coll.

Besides these two, 25 more were admitted, and some that supplicated who were
never admitted.

Bach. of Physic.
.... George Ethryg or Etheridge of C. C. Coll.

.... Rich. Master of Alls. Coll. -- See more among the Doctors of this Faculty
under the year 1554.

.... John Throwley Bach. of Divinity, lately a Monk of the Order of S.
Benedict, was then admitted Bach. of Physic.

Bach. of Div.
.... Matthew Smyth the first Principal of Brasn. Coll.

For the said Degree supplicated Patrick Walsh, who was afterward Bish. of
Waterford in Ireland; Will. Bocher afterward President of C. C. Coll. and John
Smyth afterward Provost of Oriel; which three were without doubt admitted but
neglected to be registered by the public Scribe of the University. As for
Smyth, he was engaged in a Dispute with Hugh Latimer in the Divinity School 18
Apr. 1554.

Doct. of LL.
Jan.... John Fuller of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Prebendary of Ely,
Chancellor to the Bish. thereof, and Master of Jesus Coll. in Cambridge. You
may read of him in the Acts and Mon. of the Church, written by John Fox, under
1555.

In the same month Nich. Bullyngham of Alls. Coll. did supplicate for the said
Degree, but was not admitted. See among the Incorporations 1566. Also Rob.
Weston of the same Coll. See in ann. 1556, among the Doct. of Law.

Not one Doct. of Physic was adm. this year.

Doct. of Div.
Nov.... Will. Cheadsey of C. C. Coll. -- He was now Chaplain to Dr. Bonner
Bish. of London, who was his Promoter to several Dignities in the Church.

Another Person was also admitted Doctor, but his true Name is omitted in the
Register.

Incorp.
Jun.... Rich. Coxe M. of A. of this University, afterward D. D. of Cambridge,
and now Dean of Osney near Oxford, was then incorporated D. of D. as he had
stood at Cambridge.

An. Dom. 1546.
An. 38 Hen. 8.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same.

Proct. John Smyth of Oriel Coll. Simon Perrot again.

Elected the first day of Easter Term, the senior being then, as it seems,
Bach. of Divinity.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul.... Justinian Lancaster of C. C. Coll. -- Whether he took the degree of M.
A. it appears not. Afterward he was made Archdeacon of Taunto^ in
Somersetshire, in the place, I suppose, of John Fitzjames deprived, an. 1560.

.... Michael Reninger, commonly called Rhanger of Magd. Coll..... John Cox of
Brasn. Coll. -- I find one of both his names to have made several Translations
into the English Tongue, as (1.) An Exhortation to the Ministers of Gods word
in the Church of Christ, Land. 1575. written by Henr. Bullinger. (2.) A
Treatise of the word of God, written against the traditions of men, Land. 1583.
oct. written by Anth. Sade^ll, etc. But whether the said Translations were made
by the aforesaid John Cox of Brasn. Coll. or another John Cox who was a Student
of C. C. 1555, I cannot yet resolve you.

.... The Wylson of Brasn. Coll. a Yorkshire man born. -- See in the year 1516
and 1553.

In all about 36.

Not one Admission in the Law or Laws is this year registered.

Mast. of Arts.
.... Tho. Neale of New Coll. now eminent for the Hebrew as well as for the
Greek Tongue.

.... Leonard Bilson lately of Mert. Coll. as it seems, now the learned
Schoolmaster of Reading in Berks. -- This person who was Uncle to Dr. Tho.
Bilson B. of Winchester, had several Dignities in the Church, of which a
Prebendship of Winchester was one.

... Will. Johnson of Alls. Coll. -- He is reported to be afterward Bishop of
Mead in Ireland. See in the year 1543.

The Admissions of Masters being not registered by the Scribe, I can only say
that only 10 stood in the Act celebrated 11 Jul. this year.

The Admissions of Bach. of Div. are omitted in the Reg.

Not one Doct. of Law or Physic was adm. this year.

Doct. of Div.
June.... James Brokes of C. C. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Gloc. as I
have before told you.

Incorporations.
June... John Crayford D. of D. of Cambridge. -- He was originally of Queens
Coll. in that University; from whence being ejected, he went to Oxon, was
elected Fellow of Vniv. Coll. an. 1519. incorporated M. of A. in 152^. as I
have before told you in that year, became Proctor of Camb. in the year
following, and in 1523; he was made one of the Canons of Cardinal College.
Afterward leaving Oxon, he went to Cambridge the third time, swhere he
commenced D. of D. an. 1535, and was soon after Vicechancellor of that
University. In October. 1544. he became Chancellor of the Church of Salisbury on
the death of John Edmunds, being then Prebendary of North Aulton in the said
Church; and in the middle of July 1545, he was collated to the Archdeaconry of
Berkshire on the death of Rob. Audley. On the 17 of March following, he was
collated to the Prebendship of Chermister and Bear in the Church of Sarum, upon
the resignation of George Heneage; and in Sept. 1546 (he having been newly
incorporated D. of D. as it is before told you) he was elected Master of Vniv
Coll being then also Prebendary of Winchester. He concluded his last day soon
after; whereupon Henr. Parry succeeded him in the Chancellorship of Sa^um, in
Sept. 1547, and in the Mastership of the said Coll. one Rich. Salveine M. A. As
for his Archdeaconry, which he before had resigned, did succeed him therein
Will. Pie, 7 Oct. 1545.

An. Dom. 1547.
An. 1 Ed. 6.
Chancellor the same, namely John Longland D. of D. and Bish. of Lincoln, but
he dying on the 7 day of May this year, Rich Coxe D. of D. and Dean of Chapter Chapter
in Oxon, was, tho at London, by a solemn Decree of the University elected in a
Convocation (not in a Congregation of the Regents according to the ancient
manner) on the twenty first day of the said month, Dr. Hugh Weston in the mean
time being Cancellarius natus. The 22 of July following the said Chanc. coming
to Oxon, was (...) Coll. Magd. B. fol. (...).
received with the public Congratulation of the Vicechancellour, Doctors,
Proctors, and other Members of the University at Magdalen Coll. near to the
East Gate of the City, where being present also Dr. Oglethorpe the President,
with the Fellows of that House, Mr. Tho. Hardyng, the Kings Professor of the
Hebrew Tongue, delivered an eloquent Oration before him; which being done, he
was conducted to his Lodging at Chapter Chapter

Vicechanc. or Commiss. Walter Wryght L. L. D. sometimes Principal of
Peckwaters Inn, now Head or Governor of Durham Coll. and Archdeac. of Oxford,
designed to the Office of Vicechanc. by Dr. Coxe about S. John Baptist's time.

Proct. Edm. Crispyne of Oriel Hen. Baylie of New Coll.


Elected a little after the new Chancellor had taken his place, the senior
being then six years, and the other five years, standing in the degree of
Master; which was not altogether according to the order of K. Hen. 8. made
1541, appointing that the Proctors should be elected from the senior Masters,
of eight years standing at least. These two Proctors were afterward eminent
Physicians in the time they lived, and the senior died in the latter end of the
year (in March) 1549.

Bach. of Gram.
Edward Pendleton the famous Schoolmaster of Manchester in Lancashire, was
admitted to the reading of any Book of the Faculty of Grammar, that is, to the
degree of Bach. of Grammar; but the day or month when, is not set down in the
public Register, now very much neglected.

Bach. of Arts.
Humph. Lhoyd or Lhayd, now or soon after of Brasnose Coll.

Julius Palmer of Magdalen Coll -- This person was elected Probationer Fellow
of the said Coll. 25. Jul. 1549, and true and perpetual Fellow in the year
following. In 1553 he left his Fellowship, and what became of him after, John
Fox in his Book of The Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. will tell you at large
among the Martyrs that stood up and died for the Protestant Religion, under the
year 1556.

This year also was admitted Bach. of Arts one Barthelmew Green, but whether
the same with Bartier (that is little Barthelmew) Green who suffered Martyrdom
for the Protestant Cause an. 1556, as you may see at large in the Book of Acts
and Monuments of the Church, under that year. I cannot justly say. John Fox who
has written his story; tells you that he was educated in the University of
Oxon, and afterward in the Inns of Court.

Thirty and one Bachelaurs were admitted this year.

Bach. of Law.
Tho. Randall or Randolphe of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Principal of
Broadgates Hall, and a frequent Ambassador in the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth.

Besides him, I find but one more admitted, the Register, as I have told you
before, being much, or in a manner altogether, neglected.

Mast. of Arts.
Thomas Godwyn Thomas Bentham of Magd. Coll.

They were afterward Bishops.

Richard Edwards William Whittyngham of Chapter Chapter

The former was lately of C. C. Coll. and now in much esteem for his Poetry;
the other was lately of Alls. Coll. but not as yet known to have any eminence
in him.

James Bicton of Chapter Chapter now Dean of Kilkenny in Ireland. -- He died in 1552,
and was buried in the Cathedral of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

Christop. Malton (of Chapter Chapter also as it seems) -- On the 3 of April 1564, he
was installed Archdeacon of Clievland in the place of Dr. John. Warner
resigning, and dying in the latter end of the year (in March) 1569, was
succeeded by Ralph Coulton M. of A. and Prebendary of York, afterward Bach. of
Div.

Bach. of Div.
Jul.... Rich. Bruerne of Linc. Coll. -- He was afterward Hebrew Professor of
this University, Canon of Chapter Chapter and of Windsore, Fellow of the College at
Eaton, of which he was elected Provost, about 1561, but soon after ejected. He
died about the latter end of April 1565, and was buried in the Chapel of S.
George at Windsore. John Leland numbers In Cygn. Cant.
him among the learned men of his time, and says, That he was Hebraei radius
chori.

Several other Bachelaurs of Divinity were admitted this year, but not
registered, among whom Rich. Turner of Magdalen College was one.

Not one Doct. of Law was admitted this year.

Doct. of Physic.
Feb.... Tho. Hughes or Hewes of Mert. Coll. -- He was afterward Physician to
Qu. Mary, and one of the College of Physicians at London. He died at London in
the Month of August 1558, and was a Benefactor to the College which had given
him Education.

Edmund Crispyne of Oriel Coll. lately a shagling Lecturer of Physic, now one
of the Proctors of the University, did supplicate to be licensed to proceed in
Physic. Also Henry Bayli^ the other Proctor, did in like manner do so, and
were without doubt licensed, (tho not registered so to be) because I find them
afterward to be written and styled Doctors of Physic.

Not one Doctor of Divinity was admitted or licensed this year.

Incorporations.
Feb.... Pet. Martyr Doct. of Div. of the University of Padua, was then
incorporated Doct. of Div. -- He was this year designed by the King to read a
Divinity Lecture in the University, which he accordingly began to do in the
beginning of the next year.

One Edward Bank and John Chaundler were incorp. Bachelaurs of Arts, but of
what University they had been, is not set down; which is all I know of them.

An. Dom. 1548.
An. 2 Ed. 6.
Chanc. Dr. Rich. Coxe Dean of Chapter Chapter

Vicechanc. Dr. Walt. Wryght.

Proct. John Redman of Magd. Coll. Thomas Symons of Mert. Coll. adm. 20 April.


Bach. of Arts.
The Admissions of Bachelaurs and Catalogue of Determiners being this year
omitted by the Registrary, I cannot give you the Names of any who were
afterward Bishops, Writers, etc. only David de la Hyde, whom I have mentioned
among the Writers, an. 1580.

Bach. of Law.
Maurice Clenneck was admitted, but the day or month when, appears not. -- He
was afterward elected to the Episcopal See of Bangor, but Queen Mary dying
before his Consecration thereunto, he fled beyond the Seas; and what became of
him there, I have told you already in Arthur Bokely among the Bishops, under
the year 1555.

Mast. of Arts.
James Neyland of Alls. Coll. -- This person who was Fellow of that House, and
an Irish man born, is reported by one of his Rich. Stanyhurst in Descript.
(...) cap. 7
Countrymen to be a learned Physician.

John Boxall of New Coll. -- He was afterward Dean of Chichester, Windsore,
etc. and a man of note in the Reign of Queen Mary.

Besides these two, were but nine more stood in the Act celebrated this year 16
July. The Admissions of them and many other are omitted in the Register.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
David Jews of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward the first Principal of Jesus
Coll. Judge of the High Court of Admiralty, Master of S. Catherines Hospital
near to the Tower of London, one of the Masters of the Chancery, and of her
Majesty's Requests. He died on Monday 27 April 1584, in the Coll. called
Doctors Commons at London; whereupon his Body was conveyed to Abergavenny in
Monmouthshire, where it was buried on the 24 of May following in the North
Chancel of the Church there, under a fair Tomb, erected by him while living,
which yet remains as an Ornament to that Church.

Doct. of Div.
Richard Beisley of Alls. College. -- The day and month when he was licensed to
proceed, is omitted. One of both his names was an Exile in Queen Mary's Reign.

Incorporations.
Christopher Tie Doct. of Music of Cambridge. -- This person who seems to be a
Western man born, was now one of the Gentlemen of the Chapel belonging to K.
Ed. 6. and much in renown for his admirable skill in the theoretical and
practical part of Music. The Words of several of his Divine Services and
Anthems, are in a Book entit. Divine Services and Anthems usually sung in the
Cathedrals and Collegiate Choires in the Church of England. Land. 1663. oct.
collected and published by Jam. Clifford Petty Canon of Paul's, sometimes
Chorister of Magdalen College in Oxon. We have also some of his Compositions
among the ancient Books in the public Music School, of six parts, but long
since with others of that time, antiquated, and not at all valued. He also
translated into English Meeter The Acts of the Apostles, with notes to sing
each Chapter by. printed 1553, in oct.

An. Dom. 1549.
An. 3 Ed. 6.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. the same.

Proct. Leonard Lyngham of Brasn. Rich. Hughes of Magd. Coll.


Bach. of Arts.
James Calfill of Christ Church.

Will. Good of Corp. Chapter Coll. -- He was afterward a Jesuit.

Hieronimus Philippides of Chapter Chapter

Alan Cope Lawr. Humphrey of Magd. Coll.

Both which were afterward noted Writers.

John Abulines an Helvetian of Chapter Chapter -- He is the same, I suppose, who is
written, but false, Johannes ab Vlmis.

The Admissions, and names of the Determiners, are omitted this year, by the
carelessness of the public Scribe, and therefore the number of them is
uncertain.

Bach. of Law.
Will. Awbrey of Allsoules College. -- He was afterward successively Principal
of New Inn, the Kings Professor of the Civil Law in this University, Judge
Advocate of the Queens Army at S. Quintins in France, Advocate in the Court of
Arches, one of the Council of the Marches of Wales, Master of the Chancery,
Chancellor to John Archbishop of Canterbury throughout his whole Province, and
lastly, by the special favor of Queen Elizabeth, he was taken to her nearer
Service, and made one of the Masters of Requests in Ordinary.

What other Bach. of this Fac. were admitted, I find not, for they are not
inserted in the Register. Four occur that supplicated, who, I presume, were
admitted; among whom Joh. James or Jamys, was one, who was afterward one of
the first Fell. of S. John's Coll. and on the 24. of March 1563 succeeded Thom.
Curteys in the Subdeanery of Salisbury, and he Rob. Elyot in Dec. 1561.

Mast. of Arts.
Michael Renniger Arth. Saul of Magd. Coll.

Both afterward Exiles for their Religion in the time of Queen Mary. Of the
first I have made mention among the writers, an. 1609. The other, Arthur Saul,
became Prebendary of Bedmynster and Radclive in the Church of Sarum (which is a
Residentiary) in January 1559, and had other Dignities, besides benefices
conferred upon him. One of both his names was Author of The famous game of
Chesse-play lately discovered, and all doubts resolved, etc. Land. 1614. oct.
dedicated to Lucy Countess of Bedford. Whether this Ar. Saul who writes himself
Gent. was descended from the former, I cannot justly say it.

Thom. Hyde of New John Piers of Magd. Coll.

The former was afterward an Exile for the R. Cath. Religion, in the time of
Queen Elizab. the other was an Archbishop in her Reign.

The admissions of Masters are also omitted this year, but the number of those
that stood in an Act celebrated in Sept. comes to 23.

Bach. of Physic.
James Neyland of Alls. Coll. -- Others were admitted, but are not inserted in
the register.

Bach. of Div.
Jul.... Bernard Gilpyn of Queens Coll. -- This Person who was born of an
ancient and gentile Family at Kentmeire in Westmorland, became a poor serving
child of the said Coll. in 1533. aged 17 or thereabouts, and about the time
that he proceeded M. of A. he was made Fellow thereof, being then esteemed a
good Disputant in Logic and Philosophy, and well read in the Greek and Hebrew;
in which tongues, he was instructed by his contemporary Thomas Neale of New
Coll. who was afterward Heb. Prof. of this University. About that time his
eminence in learning was such, that he was made choice of to be one of the
first Masters to supply Chapter Chapter when first founded for a Dean, Canons and
Students by K. Hen. 8. But continuing there not long, was at length taken
thence, and by the care and charge of his Mothers Uncle Dr. Cuthb. Tonstall
Bishop of Durham, he was sent to travel, and while he continued in the
University of Paris, he did him some service in correcting and printing one of
his books, as I have elsewhere told you. After his return he conferred on him
the rectory of Esington, with the Archdeaconry of Durham annexed, about 1556;
but in whose room or place I cannot tell, unless in that of one Will. Franklin
Bach. of Decrees and Chancellor of Durham, who occurs Archdeacon of Durham
1531. After he was settled at Esington, he preached much against the vices,
errors, and corruptions of the times, to the great displeasure of some of the
neighboring Ministers, who were then R. Catholics. But his desire being to
part with those troublesome places, as too much for one Man to keep (as he
pretended) he was presented to the rich rectory of Houghton in the Spring in
the county pal. of Durham, where being settled, his Preachings were so frequent,
and in other places as well remote, as near thereunto, that he was commonly
called The Northern Apostle. His alms were also so large, frequent, and
constant, that he was usually called The common father of the poor. In his
Archdeacony of Durham succeeded John Ebden Bach. of Div. sometimes Proctor of
the University of Cambridge, who had it given to him by Qu. Elizabeth, while
the Sea of Durham was void, 22. May 1560; a little before which time, Gilpyn
had a congedeslier sent to him to be elected Bishop of Carlisle on the death of
Owen Oglethorp, but refused it. Soon after he erected a Grammar School at
Houghton, and bestowed 460 l. to buy Lands to endow it for a Master and Usher.
Which, with other Moneys and Lands given for that purpose by Joh. Heath of
Kepier Esquire; the School was settled in 1572 or thereabouts. To conclude, this
worthy Person having his life written and published by one George (...) Bishop
of (...).
of his Scholars, I shall now say no more of him only that he died on the 4.
March 1583 aged 66 and was buried in the Church at Houghton, and that by his
will dated 17. Oct. 1582, he left half of his goods to the poor of that place
and the other half in exhibitions upon Scholars and Students in Oxon, viz. Mr.
Rich. Wharton, Mr. Steph. Copperthwaite, George Carleton (afterward B. of
Chich.) Ralph Ironside born in Houghton beforementioned (Father to Gilbert
Bishop of Bristow an. 1660) Evan Airay, Hen. Airay (afterward Provost of Qu.
Coll.) Will. Cayrus, Franc. Risley, Tho. Collinson, etc. He has written
several things, but has nothing extant, only A Sermon before the King and
Court at Greenwich, on the first Sunday after Epiph. an. 1552, on Luke 2. from
verse 41. to 48. Land. 1581. oct. there again 1630. qu.

Not one Doctor of Law, Phys. or Divinity can I find to have been admitted this
year, for the reason before specified.

An. Dom. 1550.
An. 4 Ed. 6.
Chanc. the same.

Vicech. Dr. Walt. Wryght, but he giving up his office according to the
Edwardin statutes in the beginning of Michaelmas term, Dr. Will. Tresham of Chapter
Chapter who before, had often been Commissary, was elected, according to a certain
form, into his place.

Proct. Rog. Elyott of Alls. Tho. Frynde of New Coll.


Bach. of Music.
Tho the public register of this time is very imperfect, as having been
neglected by one who was afterward deservedly turned out of his place, yet it
appears therein (tho very obscurely) that one Joh. Merbeck or Marbeck Organist
of St. Georges chap. at Windsore did supplicate for the Degree of Bach. of
Music, but whether he was admitted it appears not, because the admissions in
all faculties are for several years omitted. All therefore that I can say of
him, is, that he was an eminent Musician of his time as well for the Theory, as
practical part, of Music, as may be seen in a book of his composition, intit.
The book of Common Prayer noted. Land. 1550. qu. besides diverse compositions
that are not extant. As for other books that he wrote and published relate to
Divinity, and matters against the Pope, among which are (1) A concordance of
the Bible, etc. Land. 1550. fol. etc. (2) The lives of holy Saints, Prophets,
Patriarchs, etc. Land in 4o. (3) The ripping up of the Popes fardel. Ibid.
1581. oct. (4) Book of notes and common places, with their exposition, etc.
Ibid. 1581. qu. (5) Examples drawn out of Holy Scripture, with their
application: Also a brief conference between the Pope and his Secretary,
wherein is opened his great blasphemous pride. Ib. 1582. oct. (6) Dialogue
between youth and old age, wherein is declared the Persecution of Christ's
Religion, since the fall of Adam, hitherto. Land. 1584. oct. John Fox in his
book of Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. does speak largely of this John
Merbeck, if not too much, in the first edition thereof, wherein he made him a
Martyr while he was living, which has administered a great deal of sport among
the R. Cath. writers, as Alan Cope, Rob. Persons, etc.

Bach. of Arts.
William Allyn or Alan of Oriel Coll. -- He was afterward a Cardinal and an
Archbishop.

Will. Overton John Bullyngham of Magd. Coll.

Both afterward Bishops in England.

Pet. White of Oriel Pet. Morwyng of Magd. Coll. etc.

The admissions of Bachelaurs ad Lecturam, and of those ad Determinandum, being
omitted by the public Scribe this year, the just number therefore is unknown.

Mast. of Arts.
The number of Masters that were admitted, I cannot tell because record is
defective. However the number of those that stood in the Comitia, held 8. Sept.
is fifteen, among whom are James Dugdale afterward Master of Vniv. Coll. and
Will. Norfolk of Oriel, afterward Princ. of St. Mary's hall and one of the
first Prebendaries of Worcester.

Bach. of Div.
John Jewel of C. C. John Harley of Magd. Coll.

Both afterward Bishops, and the first a very learned Man.

Paul French of Alls. Coll. -- In 1560 he became Canon of Windsore and about
that time Preb. of Canterbury. He died 1. Nov. 1600. and was buried at Windsore.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
John Gibbons lately of Alls. Coll. now Principal of New Inn, was admitted this
year, but the day or month is not set down. -- He was afterward a Member of
Doctors Commons, and died at London in the Parish of St. Faith the Virgin,
about the beginning of the year 1581.

Not one Doctor of Phys. or Divinity can I find admitted, or licensed to
proceed this year.

An. Dom. 1551.
An. 5 Ed. 6.
Chanc. the same.

Vicehanc. Owen Oglethorpe D. D. President of Magd. Coll. who being several
times absent this year, Rich. Martial Bach. of Div. of Chapter Chapter and John Warner
Doct. of Phys. of Alls. Coll. officiated for him.

Proct. Will. Martial of Mert. Coll. Pet. Rogers of Chapter Chapter

Bach. of Arts.
George Savage of Chapter Chapter -- See more in the year 1574.

Harbert Westphaling of the same house -- He was afterward B. of Hereford.

James Bell of C. C. Coll. -- In the latter end of May 1556, he, as a
Somersetsh. Man born, was elected Fellow of Trinity Coll. but whether he be the
same Jam. Bell, who suffered death by hanging at Lancaster, for being a Romans
Priest. in Apr. 1584; or James Bell a Translator of several books into English
I cannot tell. This last was a zealous Protestant and translated (1) A treatise
touching the liberty of a Christian. Land. 1579. oct. written in Latin by Dr.
Mart. Luther. (2) Sermon of the Evangelical Olive. written by Jo. Fox. See more
in Jo Fox among the Writers, an. 1587. (3) The Pope confuted. Written by the
said Fox; see there again (4) Answer apologetical to Hierome Osorius his
slanderous invective. Land. 1581. qu. Begun to be written in Lat. by Dr. Walt.
Haddon, but finished by John Fox beforementioned.

The admissions, and names of Determiners are omitted this year, and therefore
you are not to expect the just number of Bachelaurs that were admitted.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Nich. Saunders of New Coll. -- He was afterward a zealous R. Catholic, and a
forward and indefatigable writer in defense of the Religion he professed.

Mast. of Arts.
Humph. Lhoyd or Lhuyd of Brasnose Coll. -- He was afterward in much esteem
for his great knowledge in British antiquities.

The admissions of Masters are this year omitted; yet the number that stood in
the Act or Comitia celebrated 6. of July, is 21. The Junior of which called
Ralph Treiver of Chapter Chapter was, with the approbation of the Vicech. and whole
congregation admitted into the School of the Physicians (or entered on the
Physic line) in Jan. 1552.

Bach. of Div.
John Morw^n of C. C. Coll. -- This Person did, about this time, upon a fight
of the decay of the fac. of Div. enter himself on the Phys. line, but whether
he continued in it I cannot tell.

John Harpesfield of N^w Coll.

Christoph. Goodman of Chapter Chapter sometimes of Brazen. Coll.

John Molens or Mullins of Magd. Coll.

Hen. Pendleton of Brasnose. Coll.

Not one Doctor of Law, Physic or Divinity was admitted or licensed to proceed
this year; as it appears in the imperfect register of this time.

Incorporations.
Rob. Johnson LL. Bach. (of Cambridge as it seems) was incorporated Bach. of
both the Laws, but the day or month when, appears not. In 1544 Jul. 10. he was
installed Prebendary of the Church of Worcester in the place of Tho. Baggard
LL. D. deceased, and in the same month, as it seems, was made Chancellor of
the Diocese of Worcester; which had been held by the said Baggard. In the Reign
of K. Ed. 6. he kept both those places, though wrote privately against Jo. Hoper
B. of Gloucester and Worcester; in 1555 Feb. 22. (tertio Mariae Reg.) he was
installed Prebendary of Stillington in the Church of York, and in Jul. 1558 he
was collated by Nich, Archb. of York to the rectory of Bolton Percy in
Yorkshire, on the death of Arth. Cole President of Magd. Coll. but enjoyed it
for a short time. This Person who was esteemed learned and well read in the
Theological faculty, did write a book against Hoper beforementioned, but did
not publish it. After his death, which happened in 1559, the book came into the
hands of one Henry Joliff or Jolliff Bach. of Div. sometimes Proctor of
Cambridge, afterward Rector of Bishops Hampton in Worcestershire, one of the
first Prebendaries of Worcester, and in 1554 Dean of Bristew in the place of
Tho. Rainolds promoted to the Deanery of Exeter. I say that the said Jolliff
having the book in his hands, carried it with him beyond the Seas, when he fled
there upon the alteration of Religion in the beginning of the Reign of Qu.
Elizabeth, and settling for a time at Lovaine, did correct, put some additions
to, and publish, it, under his and the name of Rob. Johnson with this title.
Responsio sub protestatione facta ad illos articulos Johannis Hoperi Episcopi
Vigorni^e nomen gerentis, in quibus a Catholica fide dissentiebat: (...) cum
quibusdam confutationibus ejusdem Hoperi, and replicationibus reverendiss. in
chapter pat. Steph. Gardineri Episc. Winton. tunc temporis pro confessione fidei in
carcere detenti. Antwerp. 1564. in a thick oct. dedicated by Joliff to Philip
K. of Spain, acknowledging not only his favors showed to him in England. while
he was King there, but also at Lovaine. Whether Rob. Johnson the original
Author died at Worcester, or York I know not, or Joliff at Lovaine: Sure I am
that the last died in 1573; for on the 28. Januar. in that year, a commission
In the reg. of Administrations, in the (...) near St. Paul's Cathedral,
beginning on the first day of Jan. 1571. fol. 42. a.
issued out from the Prerogative Court of Canterbury to one Will. Secrs a
Stationer of London, to administer the goods, debts, chattels, etc. of Hen,
Joliff Clerk, late Dean of Bristow, who died in parts beyond the Seas, etc. I
find another Hen. Joliff, in whom Dr. John White Bishop of Winton took See in
John Whytes (...) etc. Land. 1553. fol 95.
much delight for his towardliness and great virtues; but he was a youth, and
dying 19. Aug. 1548 must not be understood to be the same with Hen. Joliff
beforementioned, who also wrote against Nich. Rydley; nor Rob. Johnson of Alls.
Coll. who was admitted Bach. of Law 1552, or thereabouts, to be the same with
him that was the original Author of Responsio, etc.

About this time Abr. Ortelius of Antwerp spent some time in study, in the
condition of a Sojourner, within this University. Afterward he became a most
admirable Cosmographer, the Ptolomey of his time, and the ornament of the
learned World. He died in 1598.

An. Dom. 1552.
An. 6. Ed. 6.
Chanc. the same, viz. Dr. Rich. Coxe, to whom it was granted by the venerable
congregation this year, Jul. 19, that whereas he was about to resign his office
of Chancellor within a short time, he should never after be burdned with the
office of Vicechancellour. The 14. Nov. following he resigned it, and on the
18, the congregation of Regents and Non-regents elected according to their new
statutes Sir John Mason Knight, sometimes Fellow of Alls. Coll. lately
Ambassador for K. H. 8. into several Foreign Countries and now Dean of the
Cath. Chapter at Winchester.

Vicechanc. or Prochanc. James Brokes D. D. of C. C. Coll. for the first part
of the year, and Rich. Martial D. D. of Chapter Chapter for the other part, being
elected in Convocation Prochanc. 3. oct. In his absence Dr. Tresham officiated,
and is sometimes styled Procancellarius.

Proct. The Spencer of Chapter Chapter Maur. Bullock of New Coll.

Both elected on the day before the Call. of October.

Bach. of Arts.
Jun.... John Rastell Oct. 4. Walt. Baylie of New Coll.

Both afterward writers, and the last an eminent Physician.

About 26 were admitted this year, one half of which are omitted in the
Register.

Bach. of LL.
Ellis Heywood of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward a Jesuit and a writer.

Griffyth Willyams of New Coll. -- In 1554 he became Chancellor of the Dioc.
of Worcester, in the place of Rob. Johnson resigning; and whether he be the
same Williams who was Chancellor to the Bishop of Gloucester about the same
time, (remembered by Joh. In his book of (...) Acts and (...). of the Church,
etc. under the years 1556. and 58.
Fox for his strange, fearful, and sudden death which befell him in 1558, after
Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown, and therefore esteemed as a judgment on him
for condemning a blind boy to be burnt, in 1556) I cannot justly tell you. In
1557. Will. Turnball LL. Bac. succeeded Griffyth Willyams in the
Chancellourship of Worcester.

In the public register, which is very imperfect in the beginning of this
year, it partly appears that one John Body supplicated to be admitted Bach. of
LL. See in the year 1554.

Mast of Arts.
Alan Cope Lawr. Humphrey of Magd. Coll.

Hieron. Philippides Joh. Abulines, or ab Vlmis of Chapter Chapter

Whether either of these two last, was a writer I cannot yet tell. Qu.

Will. Good of C. C. Coll.

Jam. Calfill John Bavant of Chapter Chapter

The last of the said Masters was afterward one of the first Fellows of St.
John's Coll. and the first Greek reader there. He was Tutor in the said house to
Edm. Campian and Greg. Martin; but upon the alteration of Religion leaving the
Coll, and his Country, was made a To. Cath. Priest, and afterward was one of
those that endured a tedious imprisonment in Wisbich Castle in Cambridgshire
upon account of Religion.

Twenty Masters stood in the Act celebrated 18. July this year, but how many
were admitted, it appears not in the register.

Bach. of Div,
Thom. Hardyng of New Coll. Thom. Bickley. Tho. Bentham of Magd. Coll.

The two last were afterward Bishops.

Gilbert Burnford -- In 1554 he had the Chancellourship of the Church of Wells
granted to him under the Seal of the Bishop and Chapter thereof. But when he
craved admission thereunto in 1560, he was denied, because he refused the oath
of Supremacy. For the same reason he was deprived of the Prebendary of
Hasilbere in that Church, and of a rectory in the Dioc. of Wells.

Note that whereas always before this time, when any Bach. of Div. was
admitted, he was registered as admitted ad lecturam libri sententiarum, so now
during the Reign of K Ed. 6. they are registered as admitted ad lectionem
Paulinarum Epistolarum: And this year those that were admitted, are registered
as admitted ad ena^rationem Epistolarum Apostolicarum in ipsis comitiis hoc
anno, viz. 18. Julii.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Hen. Jones of Alls. Coll. -- This Person was one of the learned Doctors of the
Civ. Law, whom Qu. Elizabeth consulted concerning the matter of Lesley Bishop
of Ross, who, while he was Ambassador from Mary Qu. of Scots to Qu. Elizabeth,
consulted and promoted a Rebellion against her. See in Camdens Annalls of Qu.
Elizab. under the year 1571. This Dr. Jones died in, or near, Doctors Commons,
about the beginning of Feb. in 1591, and was buried, as it seems, in the Church
of St. Bennet near to Paul's wharf in London.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Rich. Martial of Chapter Chapter -- Soon after he was made Prebendary of Winchester,
and Dean of his Coll. by the intercession of the Lord Arundell (to whom he was
Chaplain) made to the Queen. In the Reign of K. Ed. 6. he seemed to be a great
Reformer, and retracted what he zealously had held in the Reign of K. Hen. 8.
After the death of K. Ed. 6. he returned to his former opinions, and was more
zealous for the Cath. cause than before: But when Qu. Elizab. succeeded, he
absconded for a time, and went from place to place. At length being taken and
conveyed to London, retracted again in hopes of being settled in his Deanery of
Chapter Chapter which might have been, had he behaved himself moderately in the Reign
of Qu. Mary. Afterward, as it is said, he went into Yorkshire, where he died
obscurely. In his Deanery succeeded G. Carew, as I have told you before, under
the year 1522.

Hen. Pendleton of Brasn. Coll. was also admitted this year and stood, with
Martial, in the Act that followed.

Henr. Syddall LL. B. and Canon of Chapter Chapter who had studied sacred letters for
18 years, did this year supplicate that he might put on, or be honored with,
the cap of Doct. of Divinity. This desire of his was granted conditionally that
he be inaugurated and dispute in Divinity in the next Act that should follow.
But whether he was so, or did dispute, it appears not in the public register,
or in the Catalogues of Inceptors.

Incorporations.
Nov. 12. Brian Baynes Bach. of Arts of Cambridge -- The next year he proceeded
in the said faculty, being then a member of Chapter Chapter which is all I know of him.

Nov...Valentine Dale of Alls. Coll. Doctor of the Civ. Law beyond the Seas,
(at Oreleans I think) seems to be incorporated in that month, because he had
supplicated more than once for that Degree -- He was afterward Master of the
Requests, Dean of Wells, 1574, and about that time Ambassador to the French
King upon the calling home of Sir Franc. Walsingham to be Secretary of State,
etc. He died in his house near St. Paul's Cathedral 17. Nov. 1589. and was
buried in the Parish Church of St. Gregory near to the said Cathedral, leaving
behind him a Daughter named Dorothy, who being coheir to her Father, was
married to Sir John North, Son and Heir to Roger Lord North.

Dec. 2. Walter Haddon President of Magd. Coll. in Oxon. and Doctor of the
Civil Law at Cambridge. -- This Person who was a Buckinghamshire Man born, and
educated in Grammar learning in Eaton School, was chose Scholar of Kings Coll.
in Cambridge, an. 1533, where arriving to great eminence in the Civil Law was
made the Kings Professor of that faculty in the said University, and much
esteemed for his eloquence and learning, especially by Leland who (...) etc.
Land. (...)
calls him Heveddunus. Afterward, being a Man much addicted to reformation, he
was by virtue of several letters written by the King in his behalf, elected,
tho contrary to statute, President of Magd. Coll. where he continued about an
year; and then learning it to prevent expulsion, sheltred himself in private
during the Reign of Qu. Mary. After Qu. Elizabeth came to the Crown he was made
one of her Masters of Requests, and by her employed in one or more Embassies.
His works are (1) A sight of the Portugal Pearl, in answer to the Epistle of
Hieron. Osorius entit. A Pearl for a Prince. This book which was written in
Latin, I have not yet seen, only the translation of it into English, made by
Abrah. Hartwell, an. 1565. in tw. (2) Lucubrationes. Land. 1565. qu. collected
and published by Tho. Hatcher of Kings Coll. in Cambridge. These Lucubrations
consist of Orations and Epistles. Among the Orations is that De obitu Mart.
Buceri. and among the Epistles is that De vita and obitu fratrum Suffolciensium
Henrics and Caroli Brandon. (3) Poemata. Land. 1567. qu. collected also and
published by the said Hatcher (4) Contra Hieron. Osorium. ejusque odiosas
insectationes pro Evangelicae veritatis necessaria defensione, responsio
apologeti^^. Land. 1577. qu. This book was began and carried on by him more
than half: Afterward coming into the hands of John Fox, was by him finished
and published, and at length translated into English by Jam. B^ll. (5) Poematum
lib. duo Land. 1592. oct. Before which Poems is printed the life of Wal^.
Haddon. Whether these two books contain his Poems beforementioned I cannot
tell. I remember I once saw them, but dreaming not in the least of any future
mentioning Dr. Haddon, I throw'd them aside after I had taken the title,
otherwise I should have spoken more of him. He gave way to fate 21. January
1571 (leaving then behind him the Character of Orator d^lcis and foecundus,)
and was buried on the 25. of the same month in the Gray friars Church, now
called Chapter Chapter within the City of London. Over his grave was soon after a comely
monument erected; which, with the Church it self, was consumed by the dreadful
conslagration that happened in the said City in the beginning of Sept. 1666.

This year Jul. 20. the public Registrary or Scribe of the University, was
deprived of his place for neglecting to set down and enter in the common
register the Acts of Congregations for several years behind.

An. Dom. 1553.
An. 7. Ed. 6.
An. 1. Mariae.
Chanc. the same, viz. Sir Joh. Mason Knight.

Vicehanc. or Prochanc. Dr. Martial again, now Dean of Chapter Chapter Dr. Walt.
Wryght occurs also Prochanc. this year Apr. 4. and Dr. Will. Tresham (who was
about the same time a Prisoner in the Fleet) commissary Nov. 6. But these two,
I presume, were only Deputies.

Proct. Thom. Spencer Maur. Bullock again


Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 15. Jasp. Heywood (of Mert. Coll.) -- He was afterward a noted Jesuit.

Oct. 11. John Wolley -- See among the Masters 1557.

Dec. 1. Tho. Palmer of Brazen. Coll. -- See also among the Masters in 1556.

Feb. 1. Rich. Barnes of Br. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Durham.

March... John Rogers of Qu. Coll. -- Quaere.

Admitted in all this year 52.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
...Rich. Green of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Chancellor of the Diocese
of Glouc.

Oct. 30. Tho. Darbyshire of Broadgates hall -- He was afterward Chanc. of
Dioc. of London.

Rob. Johnson of Alls. Coll. was also, as it seems, admitted this year, but not
to be understood to be the same R. Johnson whom I have mentioned in 1551.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 8. Will. Overton of Magd. Coll.

14. Dav. de la Hyde of Me^t. Coll.

15. Hugh Evans of Brazen, Coll. -- I take him to be the same Hugh Evans who
occurs Dean of St. Asaph, in 1571.

Nov. 27. Tho. Wylson -- whether he be the same with Tho. Wylson of Brasn.
Coll. who was admitted B. of A. in 1546. as I have under that year told, I
cannot assure, you. I find one Tho. W^lson Bach of Div. and Preb. of Worcester
to have succeeded John Pedder in the Deanery there, in May 1571; who dying 10.
July 1586, was buried in a little isle, commonly called the Deans Chapel,
joining to the choi^e of the Cath. Chapter at Worcester, having before married
Dorothy Daughter of Rob. Banister Esquire. Whether this Tho. Wylson (whom I cannot
find among the number of our Bachelaurs of Div.) be the same with Tho. Wylson
of Brasn. Coll. mentioned under the year 1546, I cannot yet tell.

Admitted 24.

Not one Bach. of Div. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
June... Thom. White of New Coll. -- This Person who was now Prebendary of
Winchester, was elected Warden of his Coll. in the month of Sept. this year,
being then a zealous Man for the Romans Cath. Religion. In Sept. 1557 he
succeeded Will. Pie in the Archdeaconry of Berks. and in Aug. 1571 Hen. Parry
in the Chancellourship of the Church of Sarum, having before been Preb. of
Vlfcomb in that Church. He died 12. June 1588 and was buried in the choir
belonging to the Cathedral there.

Jun.... John Kennall -- He was afterward Canon of Chapter Chapter Chancellor of
Rochester, Archdeacon of Ox^n, in the place of Dr. Wat. Wryght deceased, an.
1561. and Canon residentiary of the Cath. Chapter at Exeter; where dying in 1591,
Joh. Drewry LL. D. succeeded him in the Archdeaconry of Ox.

Jul.... Tho. Stempe of New Coll. about this time Prebendary of Winchester --
Afterward he became the eleventh Warden of W. of Wyk^hams Coll. near
Winchester, in the place of Dr. John Boxall. He died 9. Feb. 1581 and was
buried in the Chapel belonging to the said College: in whose Epitaph there,
it is said that he was Legum, S. Theologiae Musicesque laud clarissimus.

Oct. 30. Nich. Harpesfield of New Coll.

Not one Doct. of Phys. or Div. was admitted this year.

Incorporations.
Will. Mowse or Moss Dr. of the Civ. Law of Cambridge, was incorporated this
year, but the particular time when, I cannot find. -- He was of Trin. hall in
that University, was this year the Kings Professor of the Civ. Law in this of
Oxon, but whether in his own right, or in that of Dr. Will. Awbrey, is yet to
me uncertain* On the first of March 1560 he was installed Prebend of Botevant
in the Church of York, being at that time Master of the aforesaid hall, and
dying in 1588, became a considerable benefactor to that house.

Andr. Perne D. of D. of Cambridge, was also this year incorporated, but the
day or month when, appears not. -- He was educated in Peter house, whereof he
was Fellow, and Master; and in 1557 was made the second Dean of Ely in the
place of Rob. Styward, who died 22. Sept. the same year. This Dr. Perne who is
reported to have been a mutable (...).
Man in his Religion, and of a facetious nature, yet a great Mecaenas of
learning, died at Lambeth in Surrey 26. Apr. 1589, and was buried in the
Chancel of the Parish Church there; whereupon John Bell D. of D. succeeded him
in his Deanery. You may read many things of this Dr. And. Perne in the book of
Acts and Monuments of the Church, etc. under the year 1557. written by John
Fax; wherein you will find him a zealous Man for the Cath. cause in the Reign of
Qu. Mary. One of both his names who was M. of A. and sometimes Fellow of
Katherine hall in Cambridge (afterward Minister of Wilby in Northamptonshire)
was a frequent Preacher before the Members of the Long Parliament, that began
at Westminster an. 1640, ran with those times, and published several Sermons. I
find another And. Perne LL. D. sometimes an Inhabitant of Westwratting in
Cambridgshire, who died in 1680.

An. Dom. 1554.
An. 1/2 Mariae.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. John Warner Doct. of Phys. and Warden of Alls. Coll. was designed
by letters from the Chancellor.

Proct. Tho. Coveney of Magd. Coll. Christop. Hargrave of Linc. Coll.

Which Proctors taking their places on the nones of April, Maur. Bullock, and
Gilb. Mounson of Chapter Ch (substitute to Mr. Spencer) receeded.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 4. Will. Barker (of Magd. Coll.) -- One of both his names translated into
English. An exhortation to his kinsman to the study of the Scriptures. Land.
1557. oct. written by St. Basil the Great. Whether he be the same with the
Bach. of Arts, Quaee.

Anth. Russh of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Jul. 11. John Body -- One of both his names supplicated to be admitted Bach.
of the Civil Law, an. 1552, which I take to be the same with this who was Bach.
of Arts, but not the same who was executed at And^ver in Hampshire, an. 1583
for denying the Queens Supremacy over the Church of England. See more in these
Fasti, among the Masters of Arts, an. 1575.

Jul. 16. Tho. Atkyns -- He was elected Bachelaur-Fellow of Mert. Coll. this
year, in whose Cat. or Alb. of Fellows, this addition is put to his name, --
Fuit procurator generalis regius apud Wallos, and Reginae Elizabethae a
consiliis ibidem, and ad audiendum and determinandum malefacta cujuscunque
generis justitiarius, etc. He was born in the Dioc. of Worcester, but took no
higher Degree in this University.

Mar. 13. John Bridgwater (Aquep^ntanus) either now of Brasnose Coll. or of
Heart hall -- He was afterward a learned Jesuit.

Admitted 48.

Doct. of Music.
Apr. 21. John Shepherd who had been a Studen^ in Music for the space of 20
years, did then by his Dean supplicate the ven. congregation that he might be
licensed to proceed in that faculty, that is to be admitted Doctor of Music;
but whether he was admitted, or stood in any Act following it appears not in
our registers. The words of some of his Church services are made public in The
Divine Services and Anthems usually sung in Cathedrals, etc. Land. 1663. oct.
collected and published by James Clifford, as I have told you under the year
1548. I have seen some of his compositions of six parts in six MS. Books,
remaining at this day in the Archives of our publ. Music School, containing
Church Music or Anthems and certain Songs.

Mast. of Arts.
But 13 were admitted this year, among whom Will. Allyn or Alan of Oriel Coll.
was one, afterward a Cardinal and Archb. as I have before told you; and Sextus
Quaterman of New Coll. another.

In an Act celebrated 16. July, were 19 that stood, of whom the said Allyn was
junior, whom we usually call Junior of the Act, who with the Senior, perform
exercise in the name of the rest of the Masters.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 7. Arthur Cole of Magd. Coll. sometimes Cross-bearer to Cardinal Wolsey,
now Fellow of Eaton Coll. and Canon of Windsore was adm. to the reading of the
Sentences by Dr. O. Oglethorp Dean of Winds. in a certain Chamber belonging to
his Lodgings there, by power and authority given to him for that purpose by Dr.
Rich. Smyth Provicechancellour of the University. -- This Mr. Cole had his
grace granted in order to the taking of that Degree in 1545, and in 1555 he
succeeded the said Dr. Oglethorp in the Presidentship of Magd. Coll.

Jul. 5. John Boxall of New Coll. -- He was now Archdeacon of Ely, and Warden
of the Coll. near Winchester, etc.

Besides these two, were but 3 more admitted this year.

Doct. of Civil Law.
Jul. 13. Tho. Huyck of Mert. Coll. -- He died at London 1575, having a little
before been made the first and original Fellow of Jesus Coll. to which he was a
Benefactor.

Rob. Raynold of New Coll. was licensed to proceed the same day. -- He was now
Fellow of Wykehams Coll. near to Winchester, Prebendary of Linc. and
Chichester, and about 1557, Master of the Hospital of St. Cross near to Winton.

Will. Awbrey of Alls. Coll. was admitted also on the same day. -- See before,
under the year 1549. A Person he was of exquisite learning and singular
prudence and therefore mentioned with honor by Thuanus and others. He was born
in Bricknockshire, particularly, as I conceive, at Cantre, wrote diverse things,
but not printed; among which are several letters to his Cousin Dr. John Dee
concerning the Sovereignty of the Seas, (some of which I have seen) and dying
23. Jul. 1595 was buried within the Cath. Church of St. Paul in London.
Afterward there was a Mon. with his bust set over his grave, which, with the
Cathedral it self was consumed in that dismal conflagration which happened in
that great City in the beginning of Sept. 1666.

Doct. of Physic.
May 9. Rich. Master of Alls. Coll. -- On the 14. of March 1562 he was
installed Prebendary of Fridaythorpe in the Church of York, being about that
time Physician of the Chamber to Qu. Elizabeth. His eldest Son George Master
settled in the Abbey at Cirencester in Glocestershire, where his posterity yet
remains. Another Son named Robert was Doctor of the Civ. Law in 1594, as I
shall tell you when I come to that year.

Rich. Caldwell or Chaldwall lately of Chapter Chapter but originally of Brasnose Coll.
was admitted the same day.

Thom. Francis of Chapter Chapter was also admitted the same day -- After this Person
had taken the Degree of M. of A. he applied his studies to the Theological
faculty, but the encouragement thereof being in these days but little, he
transferred himself to the School of Physicians, and with the consent and
approbation of Dr. Wryght the Vicechancellour, was entered on the Physic line,
4. Aug. 1550. In the year after, I find him supplying the place and office of
the Kings Professor of Physic, being, I presume, only Deputy for Dr. John
Warner, and on the 9. Mar. 1553 he was admitted Bach. of Phys. In 1561 he
succeeded Hugh Hodgson in the Provostship of Qu. Coll. and was afterward
Physician to Qu. Elizabeth and much respected by her.

Jul. 14. John Symings or Symmings -- In what Coll. or Hall educated, I know
not. Sure I am that he was one of the Coll. of Physicians in London, where he
was in great practice; and dying in his house in Little St. Barthelmew in
Smithfield. 7. July 1588, was buried in the Church in the Spittle there.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 20. John Harpesfield Jul. 13. Thomas Hardyng of New Coll.

Both zealous and stout Champions for the Romans Cath. cause.

Jun. 20. It was then granted to Hen. Cole LL. D. of New Coll. that he might
have the Degrees of Bach. and Doctor of Divinity conferred upon him, without
any disputations or exercise done for the same.

Incorporations.
Certain Doctors of Div. of the Univ. of Cambridge having been commanded by
their Chancellor Dr. Steph. Gardener Bishop of Winchester to go to Oxford, and
there to join themselves with other. Doctors and learned Men of that
University, to dispute with Archb. Cranmer, Bish. Rydley, and B. Latimer
concerning matters of Religion, did accordingly come to Oxom. 13. of Apr. this
year, and taking up their quarters at the Cross-inn near to Quatervois, were
the next day incorporated. The names of them are these.

John Young D. D. Master of Pembroke hall and Vicechancellour. -- He was a
learned Man, and is styled by some Writers Joh. Giovanus.

John Seton or Seaton D. D. of St. John's Coll. in Cambridge and Prebendary of
Winchester. -- He was now famous in that University for the brief and
methodical book of Logic which he had composed for the use of junior Scholars.

Rich. Atkinson D. D. Provost of Kings Coll.

Will. Glynne D. D. Master of Queens Coll. and now or lately Archdeacon of
Anglesie. -- In 1555 Sept. 8. he was consecrated Bishop of Bangor within the
Cath. Chapter of St. Paul in London, and died a little before Qu. Mary.

Tho. Watson D. D. Master of St. John's Coll. and Chaplain to Gardener B. of
Winchester. -- In 1553 Nov. 18. he was instituted Dean of Durham by Dr.
Tonstall B. thereof, on the deprivation of Rob. Horn, and in Aug. 1557 he was
consecrated B. of Linc. From which See being removed by the authority of
Parliament in the beginning of Q. Eliz. as being an enemy to reformation, and
the Qu. Supremacy over the Church, was committed Prisoner to several places and
kept in durance in and near London for about 20 years. At length in the year
1580, he, and Jo. Fekenham, being sent Prisoners, with others, to Wisbich
Castle in Cambridgshire, continued there to the time of his death. He was
buried in the Chapter belonging to the Town of Wisbich 27. of Sept. an. 1584. In
his younger years he was given much to Poetry and making of Plays and gained
great commendations for his Antigone out of Sophocles by the learned Men of his
time; who have farther avowed that as George Buchannans Tragedy called Jepthe
have among all Tragedies of that time, been able to abide the touch of
Aristotle's precepts, and Eu^ipides Examples: So has also the Tragedy of this
Tho. Watson called Absalon which was in a most wonderful manner admired by
them, yet he would never suffer it to go abroad, because See (...) boo^ (...)
in locis paribus, Anapestus is twice or thrice used instead of Jambus. In his
elder years, being then of a sour disposition as one The Author of (...)
Justice in England, printed the second time 1563.
says, and ^arned in deep Divinity, but surly with an austere gravity, as
another (...)
tells us, published several matters of Divinity, among which were Two Sermons
of the real Presence, before Qu. Mary, on Romans 12. 1. etc. Land. 1554. oct. and
Wholesome and Cath. Doctrine concerning the seven Sacraments, etc. Land. 1558.
qu. This Book consists only of Hemilies.

Cuthbert Scot D. D. Master of Christ's Coll. and Prebendary of York. -- He was
afterward Bish. of Chester.

Thomas Sedgwyke D. D. the Queens Prof. of Div. in Cambr.

Alban Langdale D. D. of S. John's Coll. in Cambr. -- In 1556, he being then
Parson of Buxted in Sussex, was made Archdeacon of Jews on the death of one
Dr. Breisley, and about the same time Prebendary of A^pleford in the Church of
York. In the beginning of Qu. Eliz. he was deprived of those, and other,
Dignities, (1) Because he had behaved himself zealous in the Reign of Q. Mary,
in carrying on the Romans Catholic Cause against the Protestants. (2) Because he
denied the Queens Supremacy over the Church. He lived afterward many years a
constant Member of the Church of Rome, but when or where he died, I cannot
tell. See more of him in Nich. Ridley page 78.

An. Dom. 1555.
An. 2 Mariae.
An. 3 Mariae.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Rich. Smyth D. D. sometimes Fellow of Mert. Coll. now Canon of Chapter
Chapter and one of Qu. Mary's Chaplains, was admitted to his Office in Apr. this
year. Dr. Martial occurs also Vicechancellour 16 Oct. at what time Rydley and
Latimer were burnt in Canditch; for then, if I mistake not, Dr. Smyth preached
to them when they were at the Stake.

Proct. Will. Norfolk of Or. Coll. Jam. Gervys of Mert. Coll. elect. 14 Apr.


Bach. of Arts.
Nov. 14. Rich. Shaghens of Ball. Coll.

Jan. 11. Edw. Cradock of C. C. -- See among the D. D. an. 1565.

Feb. 13. Hen. Bedell of C. C. Coll. -- One of both his names was Author of A
Sermon exhorting to pity the poor, on Psalm. 41. Land. 1571. oct. and of
another, if not more, which I have not yet seen. Whether the same with Hen.
Bedell the Bach. of Arts who was born in Oxfordshire, I know not.

This year Apr. 26. John Woolton of Brasn. Coll. (afterward Bishop of Exeter)
supplicated for the Degree of Bach. of Arts; but whether he was admitted it
appears not, or that he determined in the Lent following.

Adm. 33.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
June 26. John Calverley of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Archdeacon of
Rochester in the place of John Bridgwater, about 1574, and dying in 1576, he
was succeeded by Dr. Ralph Pickover of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

Besides Calverley, were five admitted, and three or more that supplicated for
the same Degree.

Bach. of Decrees.
Apr. 3. Will. Laly or Lawley of New Inn. -- He was afterward Archbish. of
Tuam in Ireland.

John Linch of New Inn also, as it seems, was admitted the same day. -- He was
afterward Bishop of Elphine in Ireland.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 26. John Rastell of New Coll. -- He afterward gained to himself an
eminent name, especially among those of his Profession, for his Writings
against Joh. Jewel.

Jul. 12. Harbert Westphalyng of Chapter Chapter

26. Pet. White of Or. Coll. -- He was afterward much celebrated by his
Scholar Rich. Stanyhurst for his Learning.

Adm. 29.

Bach. of Phys.
Mar. 28. Tho. Coveney of Magd. Coll. -- See among the Doctors in 1559.

June 17. Tho Godwyn of the same Coll. -- He afterward applied his Studies to
Div. and at length became B. of Bathe and Wells.

Mar. 13. Giles Wale etc.

Eight in all were admitted this year.

Bach. of Div.
Nov. 14. Joh. de Villa Garcia or Garcina, lately of Lincoln College, now
Divinity Reader of that of Magd -- He was commonly called Friar John, and by
Protestant Writers Johannes Fr^^erculus. See among the D. of D. 1558.

He was the only person that was admitted Bach. of Div. this year. Two or more
there were that supplicated for the said Degree of whom Will. Cholwell M. A.
was one; who being learned and a zealous man for the R. Cath. Cause, was
designed by certain of the Queens Commissioners, on the 8 Call. May 1554, to
preach concerning various matters which were controverted in Qu. Mary's Reign.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Feb. 17. Thomas Darbyshire of Broadgates Hall, now Canon of Paul's, Chancellor
of the Diocese of London, and Archdeacon of Essex. -- In the beginning of Qu.
Elizabeth he was deprived of his Spiritualities, whereupon Tho. Cole (who had
been Dean of Salisbury, as it is (...)
said, in the time of K. Ed. 6. and afterward an Exile in the time of Qu.
Mary) succeeded him in his Archdeaconry, who kept it to the time of his death,
which was in the beginning of the year 1571. After Darbyshire was deprived, he
went beyond the Seas, and at length entered himself into the Society of Jesus,
and became a noted person among the Romans Catholics. He had great skill in the
Scriptures, and was profound in Divinity: he catechized also many years
publicly at Paris in the Latin Tongue, with great concourse and approbation of
the most learned of that City. Whether he wrote any thing I find not as yet,
only that he died in a good old Age at Pont a Mousson in Loraine an. 1604. (2
Jac. 1.) While he was Chanc. of London he had much to do in examining
Heretics, as they were then called, that were brought before Bishop Bonner
about matters of Faith.

Doct. of Physic.
Jul. 22. John Howell of Alls. Coll.

He was the only person that was admitted or licensed in that Faculty.

Not one Doct. of Div. was admitted or licensed to proceed this year.

Incorporations.
Jul. 1. Thom. Martyn of New Coll. Doctor of the Civ. Law of the University of
Bourges in France, was then incorporated in the same Degree.

Oct. 1. John White Bishop of Lincoln, D. of D. of another University.

Nov. 14. Peter de Sotho D. D. of an University in Spain, was also
incorporated, being then a Reader and Instructor in this University to undo the
Doctrine which Pet. Martyr had founded there in the time of K. Ed. 6. as I have
told you among the Writers. under the year 1563. page 109.

Jan.... John Thirlbye Bish. of Ely, and Doct. of the Civ. and Can. Law of
Cambridge, was incorp. in that month. -- He had been sometimes Fellow of
Trinity Hall in that University.

Whereas it is affirmed by some that Barthelm. Carranza of Miranda, a Spanish
Friar of the Order of S. Dominick, (afterward Archbishop of Toledo) was a
Reader about this time in Oxon, and supposed to be incorporated also with Pet.
de Soth^, I can find no such matter in the public Register of this time, or
elsewhere, tho there is no doubt but that he was in Oxon for some time, and
abode there as a Stranger.

An. Dom. 1556.
An. 3 Mariae.
An. 4 Mariae.
Chanc. the same, viz. Sir John Mason Knight. but he resigning by his Letters read
in Convocation 26. Oct. the most noble Reynold Pole sometimes of Magd. Coll.
now Cardinal of S. Mary in Cosmedin, or in Schola Graeca, in Rome, Legate a
Latere in this Kingdom, and soon after Archbishop of Canterbury, was elected
into his place on the same day.

Commiss. Dr. Will. Tresham; who continuing in his Office till Nov. Tho.
Raynolds D. of D. Warden of Mert. Coll. and Dean of Exeter, was then designed
Commissary or Vicechancellour, by the Chancellours Letters dated the sixth of
the said month, during only his pleasure; by virtue of which he took his place,
and had for his Deputy Dr. Rich. Martial Dean of Chapter Chapter

Proct. Hen. Wotton of Chapter Chapter Tho. Davye or Davys of New. Coll. elect. 15 Apr.


But Hen. Wotton being chose Greek Reader, and Fellow of C. C. Coll. 14 of Aug.
(the Fellows of which Coll. are disenabled by their Statutes from taking upon
them the Procuratorial Office) Will. Allyn or Alan M. of A. of two years
standing and Fellow of Oriel Coll. was elected into his place the same day, and
served out the remaining part of the year.

Bach. of Arts.
June 5. Rob. Poyntz of New Coll. -- He was afterward a zealous Writer for the
Romans Cath. Cause.

Jul. 6. Rob. Vauce of Brasn. Coll. -- Whether he be the same with Rob. Vaulx
who translated into English Andr. Hiperius his Two common places, in the first
of which he shows The force that the Sun and Moon have over men, and in the
second Whether the Dev^^ have been the shewers of magical Arts, etc. Land.
1581. oct. I know not. Quaere. One Rob. Vaux was Bach. of Div. of Exeter Coll.
1594.

Pet. Levens of Magd. Coll. was adm. the same day. -- He was afterward an
eminent Physician.

Dec. 2. Tho. Stapleton of New Coll. -- A flout Champion in defense of the Romans
Cath. Cause.

Feb. 23. Christop. Johnson Joh. Four. of New Coll.


Both afterward Writers, the first in Phys. the other in Divinity.

John Hannington of New Coll. was adm. the same day. -- This person who was
born at Tadley in Hampshire, and John Plankeney a Native of Forsthill alias
Foresthill near to, and in the County of Oxon, (who became perpetual Fellow of
New Coll. in 1560) were both learned, of good natural parts, and very hopeful
young men, one in Philosophy and the other in the Civ. Law. But because they
were zealous Papists, or as John Fox says, blinded with Papistry, the just
Judgment of God therefore, In his Acts and Mon. of the Church, etc. under the
year 1558.
as he adds, fell upon them, that is to say, that Hannington, who had been
Pupil to John Martial (who wrote of the Cross) was drowned in a Well about
Rome, or as some say, about Padua; and Plankeney drowned himself about Rewley
near Oxon, an. 1566. (he should have said 1565.) and both were taken up with
Crucifixes about their necks.

Admitted in all 49.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 8. John Martial of New Coll. -- Afterward he became noted for his
Writings against Dr. Jam. Calfill.

Besides him, were five admitted this year, of whom Rich. Edmunds and Geo.
Catagree of the same House were two, and Arth. Dak^ns another.

Bach. of Decrees.
Aug. 12. Daniel Rain. -- So is he written in his Admission; but in his
Supplication for that Degree, Dona^dus Ryane, being then, as I suppose, a
Member of New Inn. See more in the year 1533. He was the only person that was
admitted Bach. of Decrees this year.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 20. John Bridgwater, (Aquepontanus) of Brasn. Coll.

27. Walt. Baylie of New Coll.

Jul. 6. John Rogers of Queens Coll. Quaere.

Dec. 17. The Palmer of Brasn. Coll. -- He was this, or the year following,
made one of the primary Scholars of S. John's Coll. and at length Principal of
Gloucester Hall. He was an excellent Orator, and the best of his time for a
Ciceronian Style. He collected several matters from Cicero, which coming to the
view of the learned Camden, he judged them very fit to be printed. This Th.
Palmer, after he had left his Principality, had a considerable Estate given to
him in Essex; but he being a zealous Romans Catholic, suffered much in his
Person and Estate for Religion sake, and therefore numbered by those of his
Profession among the Confessors for the Cause in the time of Qu. Elizabeth.

Dec. 17. Rich. Mulcaster of Chapter Chapter

March 10. Rich. Barnes of Bras. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Durham.

Admitted 27.

Bach. of Physic.
This year Tho. Cooper M. A. and Master of the Free School joining to Magd.
Coll. great Gate, did supplicate the ven. Congregation, that whereas he had
studied Philosophy 12 years, and Physic five, he might be admitted to the
reading of any Book of the Aphorisms of Hypocrates. Which being, as it seems,
granted in Oct, did practice Physic in Qu. Mary's Reign. But when Qu.
Elizabeth came to the Crown. he returned to his Divinity, and at length became
Bishop of Winchester.

Bach. of Div.
July 23. Tho. Neale of New Coll.

29. Laurence Vaus, Vaux or Vaulx, sometimes of C. C. Coll. now Warden of the
Coll. at Manchester.

Six Masters of Arts did supplicate this year to be admitted to the same
Degree, but were not: Among them Edmund Daniel lately Fellow of Merton Coll.
was one, who was now Prebendary of Worcester and Dean of Hereford; in the first
of which he succeeded Gilb. Bourne, and in the other Dr. Hugh Coren or Curwyn.
In 1559 he was deprived of the said Dignities; whereupon his Prebendship was
bestowed on Rob. Avise M. A. and his Deanery on Joh. Ellis, as it seems, who in
Nov. 1570 became Preb. of Worcester.

Another who supplicated for that Degree was Nich. Smyth of New Coll. now
Fellow of Wykeham's Coll. near Winton, and afterward Fellow of that at Eaton
near Windsore.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 8. Reb. Westen of Alls. Coll. -- He had formerly been Principal of
Broadgates Hall, and Deputy Professor of the Civ. Law (while he was Bach. of
that Faculty) for Dr. John Story, but now Dean of the Arches, and Chancellor
of Exeter. Afterward he became (as it seems) Dean of Wells, and at length one
of the Lords Justices of Ireland; and for six years Lord Chancellor of that
Realm. He was so learned judicious, and upright in the Court of Judicature all
the time that he was Lord Chancellor (I speak this from his Epitaph) that no
Order or Decree that he made, was ever questioned or reversed. He paid his last
debt to Nature 20 May 1573, and was buried in S. Patricks Church at Dublin.
Over his Grave is a noble Monument yet remaining.

This Dr. Weston was the only Doctor of his Fac. that was licensed to proceed
this year, at which time was such a scarcity of Doctors of the Civil Law in the
University, that there was a dispensation passed the House, that Tho.
Darbyshire an Inceptor in that Faculty, might undergo the place of Doctor in
the Depositions of the said Dr. Weston.

Not one Doctor of Physic or Div. was admitted, or licensed to proceed this
year; Will. Wryght Bac. of Div. and Master of Ball. Coll. did supplicate to
proceed, but was denied.

Incorporations.
June 5. Rich. Mulcaster B. of A. of Cambridge. -- Soon after he took the
Degree of Master, as I have before told you, and at length became a noted
Writer of his time.

Jul. 21. Nicholas Ormanet Doctor of the Civ. Law of Padua, now one of the
prime Visitors appointed by Cardinal Pole Legate a latere, to visit this
University, was then incorporated. -- John Fox in his Book of Acts and Mon. of
the Church, etc. under the year 1557, tells us, that he was the Pope's Datary,
but false; for at this time I find him thus written, Nich. Ormanettus Patavinus
Archipresbyter plebis Bodolesini Viennensis dioc. He had been recommended to
the Service of the said Cardinal by Pope Julius 3. who had an especial esteem
for him; and being a Visitor, and an haughty person, as the Protestants
esteemed him, he thought it not fit to be presented, and stand bare before the
Commissary or Vicechanc. for Incorporation; and therefore it was agreed upon by
the Members of the House, that he should be diplomated; by virtue of which he
was also made Doctor of the Canon Law. By some of the reformed Party now (1556)
remaining in the University, he was esteemed a supercilious man, and
intolerably arrogant, but by the Romans Cath. severe, pious, and prudent. He
afterward sat in the Council at Trent, was made Bish. of Padua by Pope Pius
5. an. 1570, in which See sitting 7 years, died full of praise, and in a good
old Age.

Nov. 12. Arthur Yeldard M. A. of Cambr. -- He was afterward made the second
President of Trin. Coll.

Creations.
May... John Fekenham sometimes of Gloucester Coll. now either Dean of S. Paul's
Cathedral, or Abbat of Westminster, had the Degree of Doct. of Div. conferred on
him, without any Exercise performed for the same. -- At the same time, he being
absent, it was granted by the venerable Regents and Non-Regents, that either
Dr. Will. Cheadsey, Dr. John Harpesfield. or Dr. Rich. Smyth, might carry to,
and give, him the Ensigns or Badges of his Doctorship.

An. Dom. 1557.
An. 4 Mariae.
An. 5 Mariae.
Chanc. Card. Reynold Pole Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. or Commiss. Dr. Tho. Raynolds before mentioned, who holding his
Office till about 16 December. Tho. White LL. D. and Warden of New Coll.
succeeded by virtue of the Chancellours Letters, dated 10 of the same month;
which Office he was to keep no longer than it pleased the Chancellor.

Proct. Fran. Babyngton of Alls. Coll. Will. Allyn again elected 18 Apr.


Of the senior Proctor I shall speak among the Doct. of Div. an. 1559; of the
other I have spoken already among the Writers.

Bach. of Arts.
Oct. 30. Will. Pomerell of New Coll. -- He was afterward numbered by his
Countrymen of Ireland among the learned men of that Country. See more of him in
Rich. White among the Writers, under the year 1612. page 324.

Dec. 14. Tho. Gressop of Alls. Coll. -- See among the Masters under the year
1561.

John Neale of Exeter Coll. was adm. the same day. -- He was elected Rector of
his Coll. while he was Bach. of Arts, an. 1560, such then was the scarcity of
Masters in that, and other, Houses.

Admit. 31.

Mast. of Arts.
July 1. Rob. Newton of Exeter Coll. -- He was elected Rector of the said house
on 17 Oct. following, and afterward became the second perpetual Rector.

John Wolley of Mert. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- This person, who was
a Shropshire man born, was elected probat. Fell. of that House in 1553, and
about the time of his proceeding in Arts, studied the Civ. and Can. Law, but
took no Degree in either in this University. In Nov. or Dec. this year, he
traveled beyond the Seas, where he improved himself much as to Learning,
knowledge of Men and Manners. After the death of Roger Ascham, which happened in
1568, he became Latin Secretary to the Queen; and in 1569 he was made
Prebendary of Compton-Dundo in the Church of Wells. In 1578 he was made Dean of
Carlisle (tho a Layman) on the death of Sir Thomas Smyth, and in 1589
Chancellor of the most noble Order of the Garter. In 1592 he was made a
Knight, and about the same time one of the Privy Council to her Majesty, being
then a person most eminently perspicuous for his Learning, Piety, Integrity,
Goodness, and Gravity. He died at Pyrford in Survey (where he had an Estate) in
the latter end of Feb. or beginning of March. an. 1591, whereupon his Body was
buried in the middle of the Chancel behind the high Altar of S. Paul's
Cathedral. Over his Grave was, soon after, laid a flat stone with an
Inscription thereon, under which also Sir Franc. Wolloy his Son and Heir,
sometimes of Merton Coll. also, was buried an. 1611, as also Elizabeth Widow of
Sir John. All whose bodies were removed in 1614, and buried between S. George's
Chapel and that of our Lady, within the Precincts of the said Cathedral, and
had a very goodly Tomb with a large Inscription on it, erected over them;
which was, with the Cathedral it self, consumed in the dreadful Fire that
happened in London in the beginning of Sept. an. 1666.

Admitted 18.

Bach. of Div.
Only one was admitted this year. viz. Hen. Henshaw alias Heronshaw of Magd.
Coll. Dec. 3. -- In the next year he was elected Rector of Linc. Coll.

There were also but two that supplicated for the said Degree, one of which was
named Will. Ely of Brasn. Coll. who was made the second President of that of S.
John, by the Founder thereof, an. 1559. In 1563 or thereabouts, he was removed
from that place for maintaining the Pope's Authority, and not the Queens, over
the Church of England: whereupon leaving Oxon, lived many years obscurely,
having, if I mistake not, entered into some religious Order beyond the Seas.
Afterward being seized upon for a Seminary, he was committed to the common
Prison at Hereford, where remaining, several years, died an aged man an. 1609.
being then accounted by those of his persuasion, a most holy Confessor. What I
have farther to observe of him is this, that when Archb. Cranmer was brought to
the Stake to be burnt at Oxon. he took leave of some of his Friends standing
by, and seeing this Will. Ely among them, went to stake him by the hand, but he
drawing back, said, It was not lawful to salute Heretics and especially such
an one that had falsely returned unto his Opinions that he had forsworn, etc.

Not one Doctor of Law, Physic, or Divinity, was admitted this year.

An. Dom. 1558.
An. 5 Mariae.
An. 6 Mariae.
An. 1 Elizab.
Chanc the said Cardinal Pole; but he dying on the 18 of Nov. Dr. Will. Treshan
became Cancellarius natus, continuing in that Office till 24 Jan. following, at
which time Hen. Fitzalen Earl of Arundel, High Steward of the University, was
chosen by the Suffrages of all the Electors, and on the 6 of Feb. a Codicil of
his Election was sealed and sent to him.

Commiss. the same, who was lately Canc. natus, viz. Dr. Will. Tresham,
designed to that Office by Letters from the new Chancellor, dat. 24 Febr. to
continue therein till the Feast of S. Michael following.

Proct. Alan Cope of Magd. Coll. Walt. Baylie of New Coll. elected 20 Apr.


Gramm.
Jul. S. John Bedo an eminent Grammarian, who had publicly instructed Youths
in Grammar for four years in this University, was admitted to inform and
instruct in that Faculty.

Bach. of Arts.
Nov. 18. Tho Brasbridge of Alls. Coll.

Dec. 12. John Merick of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of the Isle of
Man

Besides these two, were about 63 more admitted, but none of them can I yet
find, that were afterward Bishops, Writers, or eminent Dignitaries in the
Church.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
July 9. Tho. Dorman Rob. Lougber of Alls. Coll.


Of the last see in the year 1564.

Feb. 21. Owen Jews, or Jews Owen of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Cassana in Italy.

Dev. de la Hyde of Merton, and Alan Cope of Magd. Coll. who had studied the
Civ. Law five years, supplicated to be admitted, but were not.

Admitted 14.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 10. Jasp. Heywood lately of Merton Coll. afterward a Jesuit.

20. Anth. Rush of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward a Writer and a Dean.

Dec. 5. Leonard Stopes of S. John's Coll. -- In the year following he either
left his Fellowship of the said Coll. or else was ejected; and going beyond the
Seas, was made a Priest, much about the same time that Ralph Windon another
ejected Fellows of that House was made a Priest also. Afterward they both came
into England, were taken and committed to custody in Wisbich Castle in
Cambridgeshire, where they endured a tedious Imprisonment, and therefore
accounted by those of their persuasion, Confessors. Contemporary with them, was
one Thom. Bramston alias Brimston a young Fellow of the same Coll. who with
leave from the Founder thereof, lived with John E^kenham Abbat of Westminster;
but upon the alteration of Religion which was made soon after, he went beyond
the Seas, and was made a Romans Cath. Priest. Afterward he returned into
England, was taken and committed to custody in Wisbich Castle, where we find
him 1595. Afterward being set at liberty, lived beyond the Seas, to about the
year 1608.

Admitted 39.

Bach. of Phys.
Feb. 6. Tho. Phaer. -- See among the Doct. of this Fac. following, 21. Walt.
Baylie of New Coll.

They were both learned Physicians, and were also admitted then to practice.

Admitted 6.

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 5. John Piers of Magd. Coll.

9. Franc. Babington of Alls. Coll. -- See among the Doct. of Div. an. 1559.

But two more, besides the said two, were admitted, and three there were that
supplicated; one of whom was called Frat. Anton Reschius or Raschius, who for
the space of twelve years had studied Divinity in Paris and Oxford. His Grace
was granted simplicity in July, but whether he was ever admitted it appears
not. He was one of the Friars that was appointed by public. Authority to undo
the Doctrine that P. Martyr and others had settled in the University in the time
of K. Ed. 6. and is the same if I mistake not, whom John Fox. in his book of
Acts and M^n. of the Church, does call Friar Richard in his Discourse of the
burning of Archb. Cranmer at Oxon.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul 8. Thom. Powell. -- On the second day of (...) he was admitted Archd. of
Worcester in the place of (...), and resigning in 1579, was succeeded by (...)

Thom. Keymis or Keymish was admitted the time day.

Doct. of Phys.
Mar. 10. Thom. Phaer -- The same who took the Degr. of Bach. of Phys. on the 6
of Feb. going before.

For the same degree also, did supplicate Rich. Slythurst M. A. and Bach. of
Physic, but was not admitted, or licensed to proceed.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 6. Fr. Joh. de Villa Garcia or Garcina the Kings public Professor of
Div. in this University. -- This person who was now very forward in promoting
the Romans Cath. Cause in this University, (being authorized by public
Authority) was born at a Town in Spain called Garcia or Garcevile, and being
from his Childship much addicted to Letters, he was while a Boy, received
among, and instructed by, the Dominicans or Black Friars in his own Country; so
that in a short time profiting much under them in several sorts of Learning,
especially in Divinity, he took the Degree of Bach. of that Faculty in the
University of Valladolid, he being then a Member of S. Gregory's Coll. there.
Afterward upon the performance of certain Exercise for the said Degree in this
University, had it conferred upon him, as I have told you, under the year 1555;
and this year being licensed to proceed, stood in an Act celebrated in S.
Mary's Church on the 11 of July. This is the person, who with Hen. Syddal Canon
of Chapter Chapter a very inconstant man in his Religion, took great pains in
persuading Archb. Cranmer to recant his Opinions, when he was condemned to be
burnt at Oxon, and the same who has this character given of him by one (...)
living in his time in this University. -- Pr^elegit autem nostra memoria
Frater Johannis Hispanus scientissimus, cum 27 non excesserat annos; Platonis
autem disciplinacum cyclopedian absolvisset: tum apud Philosophos Oxonienses
Platonicam and Aris telicam. mysticam and sacram professus est. etc. Whether he
has published any Books I cannot tell. Sure I am, that after Qu. Elizabeth
came to the Crown he returned to the Country from whence he came, leaving then
behind him the character of a most subtle Philosopher and Theologist.

This Friar was the only person that was admitted D. of D. this year; and but 3
there were that supplicated for the said Degree, among whom were Baldwyn Norton
Bath. of Div. and Divinity Reader of Magd. Coll who the next year became
Prebendary of Langtoft in the Chapter of York.

Creations.
Jul. 8. John Boxall Bach. of Div. of New Coll. now Secretary of State to Qu.
Mary, Dean of Windsore, etc. was, tho absent, actually created Doct. of Div. by
a Certificate, or as we now call it a Diploma, sent to him under the Seal of
the University.

An. Dom. 1559.
An. 1 Elizab.
An. 2 Elizab.
Chanc. Hen. Fitzalan Earl of Arundel, who resigning his Office 12 June this
year, Sir John Mason one of the Queens Privy Council, was elected Chancellor
again, 20 of the same month; in which Vacancy Dr. Tresham was Canc. natus.

Commiss. Dr. Will. Tresham, in one years space twice Cancellarius natus, who
continuing in his Office till Michaelmas, Dr. John Warner of Alls. Coll.
succeeded, as it seems, by Election, mention being made of his Resignation.

Proct. John Day of Magd. Coll. Edw. Bramborow of New Coll. elected 5 Apr.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 17. Tho Owen either of Chapter Chapter or Broadgates Hall.

Rich. Bristow was admitted the same day.

May 8. Leonard Fitzsimons of Trin Coll.

30. Rich. White of New Coll. -- The same who afterward wrote himself in the
Titles of his books Ricard. Vitus Basingtochius.

Jun. 5. Lawr. Tomson Nov. 27! Tho. Kingsmill of Magd. Coll.

Feb. 19. Will. Sheperey of C. C. Coll. -- The same who afterward wrote himself
in the Title of a learned book which he published Guliel Scepraeus. Adm. 50.

Mast. of Arts.
Dec. 14. Joh. Watkyns of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Proctor of the
University and Dean of Hereford. See among the Bach. of Div. 1569.

Feb. 16. Pet. Morwyn or Morwyng of Magd. Coll.

In the said month of Feb. did supplicate for the said Degree Pet. Levens of
the same Coll. but whether admitted it appears not: however in his Book intit.
The path way to health, he writes himself M. of A. of Oxon. Adm. 18.

This year was but one Bach. of Law admitted, and but three that supplicated.
As for Physic not one was adm. Bach. or supplicated in that Faculty.

Bach. of Div.
Dec. 18. Will. Bocher or Butcher President of C. C. C. -- He was the only
Bach. of that Fac. who was admitted this year. Soon after he left his
Presidentship, being in animo Catholicus, and retiring to his small Cure at
Dounsbourne Militis near Cirencester in Glocestershire, lived there obscurely
many years. At length giving way to fate, was buried in the Church there on the
first of Nov. 1585.

Not one Doct. of Law was admitted this year.

Doct. of Phys.
Nov. 27. Thomas Coveney President of Magd. Coll. -- He was deprived of his
Presidentship by the Bishop of Winchester in his Visitation of that Coll. 25
Sept. 1561, either for being not in sacred Orders, or for that he was a R.
Cath. and refused the Oath of Supremacy. Howsoever it is, sure I am that he was
admitted Prebendary of Lyme and Halstock in the Church of Salisb. in Jul. 1563.

For the said Degree supplicated Job. Dotyn of Exeter Coll. whom I have
mentioned under the year 1534, and James Good M. A. and Bach. of Phys. whom I
shall mention in the next year.

Doct. of Div.
Dec. 9. Francis Babyngton Master of Ball. Coll. -- This person who was
originally of Alls. Coll. did proceed M. of A. in an Act celebrated 16 Jul.
1554, was elected one of the Proctors of the University 18 Apr. 1557, admitted
Bach. of Div. in July 1558, Master of Ball. Coll. 5 Sept. 1559. D. of D. 9 Dec.
this year, as before it is told you, Commissary or Vicechanc. of the University
21 May, Rector of Linc. Coll. in August, and Margaret Professor about the
latter end of, 1560. Which sudden and quick Promotions are not to be attributed
to the deserts of the Person, but to the emptiness of the University at this
time, to the want of Theologists to perform Offices, and that any one, in a
manner, proceeded as he or they pleased.

An. Dom. 1560.
An. 2 Elizab.
An. 3 Elizab.
Chanc. Sir John Mason, Knight.

Commiss. Franc. Babyngton D. D. designed by the Chancellours Letters dated 21
May, Dr. Warner having then, or before, resigned.

Proct. Rob. Leech of Chapter Chapter Tho. Scot of Trin. Coll. elected 24 April.


Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 23. Edm. Bunney of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward eminent for the Books
which he published.

Nov. 28. Edm. Campian Greg. Martin of S. John's Coll.


Both afterward stout Champions for the Romans Cath. Cause.

Jan. 27. Edm. Raynolds of C. C. Coll. -- See more among the Masters of Arts
1564.

Adm. in all 47.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Eight this year were admitted, of whom Thom. Tookey of Alls. Coll. was one,
afterward Canon of the Cath. Chapter at Carlisle. Two or more of the others were
also Dignitaries.

Mast. of Arts.
May 27. Rob. Pointz. John Fowler of New Coll.


28. Rich. Shaghens of Ball. Coll.

June 26. John Pratt of Brasn. Coll. now Archdeacon of S. David's and a
Compounder for his Degr.

Admitted 19.

Bach. of Div.
Mar. 27. Will. Stock of S. John's Coll. -- This person, who was a
Herefordshire man born, was originally of Brasn. Coll. from whence, for his
great proficiency in Learning, he was taken by Sir Tho. White and made one of
his first Fellows of S. John's Coll. After he had been admitted Bach. of Div.
he was made by the said Sir Thomas the first Principal of Gloucester Hall, and
in 1563 the third President of the said Coll. which place he resigning in the
year after, was made Principal of the said Hall again; where continuing about
ten years, left it of his own accord: and after the conferring on him several
Benefices (if not a Dignity or two) which he changed for others, (such was the
rambling of his mind) died notwithstanding in a mean condition, (yet always in
animo Catholicus) about 1607. One Will. Stocker was Proctor of the University
in 1566, but he was Fellow of Alls. Coll.

Jul. 15. Thom. Langlie Bach. of Arts of Cambridge, and Canon or Prebendary of
Winchester, was then admitted. -- He never took the degr. of M. of A.

Five there were that supplicated for the said degr. but were not admitted,
among whom Tho. Sampson was one, soon after Dean of Chapter Chapter

Doct. of Civ. Law.
May 26. James Jervys or Jervays Warden of Merton Coll. lately Principal of
Broadgates Hall.

For the said Degr. did supplicate Franc. Alford M. of A. of Chapter Chapter but was
not this, or in any other, year following admitted. He had been Bach. of Arts
of Cambridge.

Doct. of Phys.
June 26. James Good of New Coll. now one of the Fellows of the Coll. of
Physicians at London.

Simon Ludford who had been adm. Bach of Phys. of this Univ. in 1553, and
afterward permitted by the said Coll. of Physicians to practice Physic in
London, was licensed to proceed the same day.

Not one Doct. of Div. was adm. this year.

Incorporations.
Jul. 30. Will. Masters M. of A. and Fellow of Kings Coll in Cambridge. -- He
was afterward the eloquent Orator of that University, in which Office he had
occasion to speak several Speeches, one of which uttered before Qu. Elizabeth
in 1564, I have seen, which shows him to have been a man of parts. One Will.
Master LL. D. principal Official of the Consistory Court belonging to the
Bishop of Norwich, died 2 Febr. 1589, and was buried in the Cath. Chapter at
Norwych. Whether he be the same with the Orator I know nor.

On the same day were incorporated also Geo. Alsop, Joh. Lakyn, Edw. Barret,
Nich. Abithell, George Blythe, and Ralph Lever, Masters of Arts of the sald
University; also one Elder another Master, but whether he be the same with Tho.
Elder who was elected Scholar of C. C. Coll. in this University an. 1542. or
Joh. Elder who published The copy of a letter sent into Scotland of the
arrival, and landing, and marriage of the most noble Prince Philip Prince of
Spain to the most excellent Princess Mary Qu. of England, solemnisated in the
City of Winchester, etc. dated 1 Jan. 1555, and printed about that time in oct.
I know not. Quaere.

Oct. 14. The venerable Mr. Rich. Read M. of A. of Cambridge, was then
incorporated, conditionally that he read his Ordinaries, or pay to the
University ten shillings.

An. Dom. 1561.
An. 3 Eliz.
An. 4 Eliz.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Babyngton now Rector of Linc. Coll.

Proct. Oliver Wythyngton of Brasn. Coll. Humph. Hall of Alls. Coll. elect. 16
Apr.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 24. Will. Wood. -- One of both his names wrote A form of catechizing,
consisting in Questions and Answers, with observations thereon, etc. Land.
1581. oct. Whether the same, I cannot tell, See another Will. Wood in 1578.

Jul. 18. Dan. Rogers. -- In the next month he took the Degree of M. A.

Dec. 15. Will. Lambard. -- He is not the same who wrote The perambulation of
Kent, etc. an. 1570, which note.

Jan. 24. Nich. Smyth Archdeacon of Salop. -- I have mentioned another Nich.
Smyth among the Bach. of Div. an. 1556.

Admitted 40.

Mast. of Art.
Aug. 1. Dan. Rogers before mentioned -- He was afterward a most accomplished
Gent. as I have told you among the Writers.

Jan. 14. Tho. Gressop of Alls. Coll. -- He translated into English, A treatise
containing a declaration of the Popes usurped Primacy. Land. 1560. oct. written
in Greek above 700 years since by Nilus Archb. of Thessalonia. What other
things he has translated or written I cannot tell.

23. John Potts of Mert. Coll. -- He was according to the Records of that House
Insignis philosophus and medicus satis peritus.

Christop. Johnson of New Coll. was admitted the same day.

24. Nich. Smyth Archd. of Salop -- He accumulated his Degrees and compounded.
Adm. 19.

Bach. of Div.
Nov. 11. Will. Alley Bishop of Exeter.

Dec. 12. Jam. Calfill John Hill Harb. Westphaling of Chapter Chapter


The said John Hill became Canon of Westminster in the place of Alex. Nowell
resigning, an. 1561 or thereabouts, and was dignified elsewhere in the Church.

Besides the said four Persons, were but two more admitted this year.

Not one Doct. of Law or Physic was admitted or licensed to proceed.

Doct. of Div.
Nov. 11. Will. Alley Bishop of Exeter beforementioned, who accumulated the
Degrees in Div.

One Hugh Sewell Bach. of Div. and Canon of Carlisle did supplicate the ven.
Congregation for that Degree, but I cannot find him admitted.

An. Dom. 1562.
An. 4 Elizab.
An. 5 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same, viz. Dr. Babyngton, now the Lady Margarets Professor, the
statutes of which lecture, tho they allow not the Professor to bear the Office
of Commissary or Vicechanc. yet the members of the University were forced now
to dispense with them, because there were few or none capable of that lecture
at this time, occasioned by the fewness of Theologists, and emptiness of houses
of learning in the University. Dr. Babyngton gave up his Commissaryship in the
beginning of Michaelmas term, and Thom. White LL. D. Warden of New Coll.
succeeded.

Proct. Rog. Marbeck or Merbeck of Chapter Chapter Rog. Gifford of Mert. Coll. elect.
8. Apr.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 8. Tho. Marshall of Linc. Coll. -- He was afterward a learned Jesuit.
See among the Writers in Will. Harrys, an. 1602. p. 274.

Jun. 25. Miles Windsore of C. C. C.

Oct. 22. John Argall Will. James of Chapter Chapter


The last of which was afterward Bishop of Durham.

29. Rob. Napier of Exet. Coll. -- He was afterward chief Baron of the
Exchecquer in Ireland and a Knight.

Jan. 14. Tho. Cogan Rob. Garvey of Or. Coll.


Feb. 13. Rich. Forster of Alls. Coll.

20. Nich. Quemmerford a learned Irish Man.

Admitted 51.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Nov. 14. Will. Bleythyn -- He was afterward Bishop of Landaff.

Philip Jones was adm. the same day -- See among the Bach. of Arts in 1582.

Eight in all were admitted, and six supplicated.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 26. Rich. Bristow of (Chapter Ch.) now in great renown for his Oratory.

John Merrick of New Coll. was admitted the same day -- He was afterward
Bishop of the Isle of Man, as I have before told you.

Admitted 31.

Bach. of Physic.
But two were admitted, of whom Hen. Wotton of Chapter Chapter was one, afterward an
eminent Physician, and five that supplicated for the said Degree, the first of
which was Madern Wisebecke a French Man, who had studied Physic 20 years.

Bach. of Div.
June 10. Lawrence Humphrey President of Magd. Coll. and the Queens Professor
of Divinity.

Not one besides him was admitted, yet four there were that supplicated for the
said Degree; among whom Will. Downham Bishop of Chester was one, but not
admitted, and Oswald Emerson another.

Doct. of Civil Law.
Jul. 7. John Griffyth of Allsouls Coll. Principal of New Inn and the Queens
Professor of Civil Law. -- Which last office he enjoyed four years while he was
Bach. of that faculty.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 10. Lawrence Humphrey beforementioned. -- He had a month before been
admitted Bach. of this faculty, and two years before that time, the Queens
public Professor of Divinity in this University, he being then only Master of
Arts.

For the said Degree supplicated Rich. Bruerne lately the Queens Hebrew
Professor, and Will. Downham beforementioned, but they were not admitted.

An. Dom. 1563.
An. 5 Eliz.
An. 6 Eliz.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Tho. White.

Proct. Tho. Walley of Chapter Chapter Rog. Gifford of Mert. Coll. again. elect. 21.
Apr.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 22. Joh. Garbrand of New Coll.

May 13. Tho. Allen or Alan George Blackwell of Trin. Coll.


Jun. 17. Will. Raynolds of New Coll.

Jul. 26. Thom. Bodley of Mert. Coll.

Feb. 11. Tob. Mathews of Chapter Chapter

Mar. 24. George Coryat of New Coll.

Admitted 55.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Mar. 27. Andrew Kingsmyll of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward a Calvinistical
Writer.

May 21. Rich. Madox -- See among the M. of A. 1575.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 26. John Hancock of Mert. Coll. -- He was now esteemed by the Academians
to be a Person of an acute judgment in Philosophy, an excellent Grecian and
Hebrician. Afterward he was a godly and sincere Preacher of the word of God.

May 4. Leonard Fitzsimons of Trin. Coll. a learned Irish Man.

8. Oliver Whiddon of Exeter Coll. -- He succeeded Rich. Bristow in his
Fellowship of that house, an. 1573, he being then, or soon, after Archdeacon of
Totness in Devonshire.

Will. Apsland of Alls. Coll. was adm. this year, but the time when, appears
not -- He was afterward one of the Chaplains to Qu. Elizabeth, and Master of
the Hospital (...).
called the Savoy in the Strand near London.

Admitted 30.

Bach. of Phys.
Jun. 23. Rog. Gifford of Mert. Coll. now one of the Proctors of the University
-- See among the Doctors of Phys. 1566.

For the said Degree supplicated Hierom. Raynolds M. A. now, or lately, one of
the learned Fellows of C. C. C. -- I have made mention of this Person elsewhere.

Bach. of Div.
Only two were admitted, of whom Arth. Yeldard President of Trin. Coll. was
one, and three that supplicated, who were never admitted. Their names are John
Sherbourne, Will. Chamberlayne. and Tho. Pyrrye, all Masters of Arts.

Not one Doct. of Law was admitted, or licensed to proceed.

Doct. of Physic.
May...Henry Baylie 21. Walt. Baylie of New Coll.

The last was now the Queens public Professor of Medicine in this University.

Not one Doct. of Div. was adm.

Incorporations.
This year in July, as it seems, was a supplicate made for one W. Butler of
Cambridge to be incorporated, but in what Degree, whether in that of M. of
Arts, or Bac. of Physic, I know not. I take him to be the same Will. Butler,
who, tho not Doctor of Physic, was the most eminent Physician of his time, and
as much resorted to for his great knowledge in Physic, as any Person that
lived before him, and had been more, did he not delight to please himself with
fantastical humors. He died on the 29. of Janua^. in the year 1617 and in that
of his age 83, and was buried on the South side of the Chancel of St. Mary's
Church in Cambridge. Over his grave was soon after erected a comely Monument in
the wall with his bust to the middle, and an inscription underneath, part of
which runs thus. Gulielmus Butlerus Clarensis Aulae quondam socius, medicorum
omnium quos pr^esens aetas vidit facile princeps, hoc sub marmore secundum
Christi adventum expectat, and monumentum hoc privata pietas statuit, quod
deburt publica. Abiviator, and ad tuos reversus, narra te vidisse locum in quo
salus jacct.

Creations.
Mar. 29. Austin Brodbridge sometimes Fellow of New Coll. was then actually
created Master of Arts at London by Will. Brodbridge, (afterward B. of Exeter)
by virtue of a Commission under the Seal of the University, directed to Hugh
Turnbull D. D. Thomas Stempe, Rob. Raynold Doctors of the Laws, Will Brodbrige
beforementioned, and Will. Langford Masters of Arts, to be done by any one of
them. This Austin Brodbridge, who had been an Exile at Strasburgh in the Reign
of Qu. Mary, was now beneficed in the Church, and afterward became Prebendary
of Ferdington and Writhlington in the Church of Sarum, by the death of one
Rich. Basing 1566. This Person, tho he had been before this creation but Bach.
of Arts, yet by his Dean he supplicated first to be Bachelaur of Divinity, and
afterward to be Doctor.

An. Dom. 1564.
An. 6/7 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, viz. Sir John Mason Knight, but he resigning by his Letters
dat. 26. Dec. Rob. Dudley Earl of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Master of the
horse, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and of St. Michael, one of
the Queens Privy Council, and Master of Arts, as it is said, of this University,
was elected Chancellor on the last day of the same month.

Commiss. Dr. Tho. White; whose office ending with the Chancellourship of Sir
Jo. Mason, John Kennall LL. D. and Canon of Chapter Chapter was chosen by Suffrages in
a scrutiny on the last of December.

Proct. Rog. Marbeck of Chapter Chapter again. Joh. Watkins of Alls. Coll. elect. 12.
Apr.


The senior of which Proctors was this year elected Orator of the University,
being the first of all, after that office was made standing or perpetual.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 18. Tho. Twyne of C. C. Coll. -- He was afterward an eminent Physician.

Jun. 19. John Lister -- See among the Bac. of Arts an. 1571.

Jul. 24. Thom. Doylie of Magd. Coll.

Dec. 11. John Underhill of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Oxon.

16. John Field -- See among the Writers under the year 1587.

Jan. 26. Will. Harrys Rich. Knolles of Linc. Coll.


Feb. 1. Will. Barlow of Ball.

Rob. Hutton was admitted the same day. -- One Rob. Hutton translated from Lat.
into English, The sum of Divinity, drawn out of the holy Scriptures, very
necessary for Curats and young Students in Divinity. Land. 1567 oct. Whether
the same with Rob. Hutton Bach. of Arts (who took no other Degree in this
University) I know not.

Feb. 1. Ralph Warcupp of Chapter Chapter

Admitted 61. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Ten were admitted, among whom Laurence Twyne of Alls. Coll. was one, an
ingenious Poet of his time.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 14. Arthur Atey of Mert. Coll. -- He was afterward Orator of the
University, Principal of St. Albans hall, Secretary to that great and popular
Count Robert Earl of Leicester, and after his death became a favorite to
another popular Person called Robert Earl of Essex; in whose treasons being
engaged in 1600, was forced to abscond and withdraw himself for a time. In the
beginning of K. James 1. he had the honor of Knighthood conferred upon him,
and dying in 1604 was buried in the Church of Harrow on the hill in Middlesex.

Jul. 3. Edm. Campian Greg. Martin of St. John Coll.


Oct. 20. Tho. Brasbridge Lawr. Tomson Thom. Kingsmill of Magd Coll.


Nov. 20. Edm. Raynolds of C. C. Coll. -- This Person who was a moderate
Romanist, gained to himself a great name by a public disputation had with his
younger Brother John, held before Robert E. of Leycester, an. 1584. See Hist.
and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 300. 301. He died 21 Nov. 1630. aged 92, and
was buried in the Chancel of the Church at Wolvercote near Oxon. where he had
an estate, which he left to his Sisters Son named Matthew Cheriton Esquire.

Feb. 3. Christoph. Wharton of Trin. Coll. -- This Person who was a Yorkshire
Man born, did soon after leave his Fellowship of that house, his Country and
Friends, and went to Douay where he was made a R. Cath. Priest. Afterward he
returned, and officiated as a Seminary, being esteemed among those of his party
a very godly Man. At length being taken and imprisoned, was, for being a R.
Cath. Priest, and denying the Queens Supremacy, executed at York, 28. March
1600.

14. Edm. Bunney of Magd. soon after of Mert. Coll.

Admitted 39.

Not one Bach. of Div. was adm. this year.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Feb. 14. John Lloyd of Alls. Coll. -- He was about this time Judge of the
Admiralty.

Rob. Lougher commonly called Loffer of Alls. Coll. was admitted on the same
day. -- He was now Principal of New Inn, was soon after the Queens Professor of
the Civil Law, and Chancellor of Exeter. In May 1577 he was constituted
Official of the Consistory of Edwin Archb. of York, and his Vicar General in
spirituals, being then a Civilian belonging to the Arches. He died in the
beginning of June 1583 leaving behind him a Son named John.

Not one Doct. of Phys. or Div. was admitted this year.

Incorporations.
Feb. 20. Rob. Johnson M. A. of Cambridge, was then incorporated, being the
very next day after the Act had been celebrated -- This Rob. Johnson who was
Son of Maurice Johnson Alderman of Stanford in Lincolnshire, was afterward
Bach. of Div. and twice made Prebendary of Rochester, which he twice resigned.
In 1570 he was installed Prebendary of Norwych, which Dignity he resigning,
Griffith Toy M. A. of Jes. Coll. in Oxon succeeded, an. 1575. In 1572, he
became Canon of Windsore in the place of Joh. Brown Bac. of Div. and in 1591
he was made Archdeacon of Leycester in the place of Hugh Blythe Can. of
Windsore resigning; being about that time honorary Fellow of Jesus Coll. in
Oxon. He founded two Grammar Schools in Rutlandshire, one at Vphingham and
another at Okeham, two Hospitals also in the same County, (which he endowed)
four exhibitioners in Sydney Coll. in Cambridge, to come from the said
Free-schools, and was a benefactor to the weekly Preachers at St. Paul's Cross
in London. He died on the first of Aug. 1625, being then or lately Rector of N.
Luffenham in Rutlandshire. In 1560 one Edm. Johnson Schoolmaster of St.
Anthonies in London became Canon of Windsore, and then by little and little (as
one (...)
observes) followed the spoil of St. Authonies Hospital. He first dissolved the
choire, conveyed away the plate and ornaments, then the bells, and lastly put
out the Almes-men from their houses, allowing them portions of 12 d. per week,
which also in short time vanished away. This I thought good to let the reader
know, because the Author here quoted, having reported these matters to be done
by one Johnson, have caused some to think them done by Reb. Johnson
beforementioned.

Creations.
Feb.... Thom. Young Archbishop of York, who was admitted Bachelaur of the Civil
Law, an. 1537, being then of Broadgates hall, was by power granted by the ven.
Congregation of Regents 13. Feb. this year, actually created soon after (at
London as it seems) Doctor of his faculty by Dr. Dav. Jews and Doctor Tho
Huyck.

An. Dom. 1565.
An. 7/8 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, viz. Rob. Dudley Earl of Leycester, etc.

Commiss. Dr. Kernnall, elected by scrutiny in a Convocation, on the 25. Feb.

Proct. Thom. Garbrand alias Herks of Magd. Coll. John Merick of New Coll.
elect. 2. Mar.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 7. Christoph. Perkins -- In what Coll. or Hall this Person was educated I
know not: Sure I am that he leaving the University abruptly without completing
his Degree by Determination, went beyond the Seas, and having spent some time
in one of the new erected Seminaries, entered into the society of Jesus, and
lived among them in good repute for his learning. At length upon the coming to
Rome (under the name of a Traveller) of Mr. William Cecill (afterward Earl of
Exeter) Grandson to Will. Lord Burleigh, there were whisperings in the English
Coll. of doing him some mischief, in revenge for what his Grandfather had done
in apprehending several Priests and putting them to death, yet they came to
nothing. Whereupon Perkins possessed him with fears, and took upon him to
direct him what to do and how tobehave himself: And when Mr. Cecill had seen
Rome and the Monuments thereof, Perkins did conduct him out of the City; and
being a Man of a very great understanding, and Mr. Cecill therefore delighting
much in his company, he persuaded him to accompany him to England. Afterward
they came together, and Mr. Cecill recommending him to his Grandfather for a
wise understanding Man, and one that had taken much care of him at his being in
Rome, and withal having been a Jesuit, he was now reconciled to the Church of
England, the Lord Burleigh did thereupon precure for him the Deanery of
Carlisle, which had been before possessed by Sir John Wolley, and about the same
time procured of the Queen that he should be employed into Germany, to make
answer in the Queens name to the complaints of the Hanse-towns about their
customs* to the Emperor, an. 1595. After his return, tho it was the desire of
the said Lord Burleigh that he should live at Carlisle and follow the Ministry
and nothing else, yet he lived in London, and being brought into the
acquaintance of Dr. Bancroft Bishop of that place, that Doctor did make use of
him both for his discovery beyond the Seas, and likewise upon other occasions.
In 1600 he with the said Doctor and Joh. Swale, were as Delegates or
Ambassadors, sent by the Queen to Embden to parley with the Delegates of
Denmark concerning matters of traffic, etc. and Perkins performed his part
well as to that matter. Soon after by the said Bishops endeavors he became
substitute to Sir Dan. Done Master of the Requests, who, by reason of his age,
could not well attend that place; and when he died he became Master in his own
right and a Knight. About that time George Duke of Buckingham who was in great
favor with K. Jam. 1. Sir Christopher thought that his only way to rise higher
was to be married to one of his Relations: Whereupon tho he had vowed
Virginity, he took to Wife his Mothers Sister, yet with this condition, that
she should not expect that he should pay old debts, to which she made answer,
that she would expect none. Afterward Buckingham hearing of the said vow,
detested him and made a resolution that he should rise no higher. Afterward
out of a revenge, Sir Christopher made his estate over to a Servant of his that
was childless and in a deep consumption; and he dying within a few months after
Sir Christopher, (who departed this mortal life in the month of Aug. 1622.) the
said Servant left most of the estate to the Lady. I have been credibly informed
(...) in his Review of the Court of K. (...) by Sir A. W. MS. (...)
by a good Author that the said Sir Christopher had a hand in contriving and
drawing up the Oath of Allegiance, while he was intimate with Dr. Bancroft. In
the Deanery of Carlisle succeeded the said Sir Christopher Dr. Franc. White
afterward Bishop of that place.

Apr. 14. Will. Burton of New Coll.

June 2. Tho. Coventry Fellow of Ball. Coll.

The last of the said two, was afterward Fellow of the Inner Temple, Sergeant
at Law, a Knight, and one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, and a
Judge in the time of Jam. 1. He was Father to Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal.

Jan. 14. Henr. Savile of Mert. Coll.

23. Hugh Lloyd of New Coll.

Admitted 45.

Bach. of Law.
Five were admitted, and four supplicated, but not one of them appears yet to
me, to have been either a Bishop or Writer.

Mast. of Arts.
Feb. 13. John Argall Will. James of Chapter Chapter


The last of which was afterward Bishop of Durham.

John Bereblock of St. John's Coll. was admitted the same day -- He was
afterward Fellow of Exeter Coll. and most admirably well skilled in the art of
Delineation, and drawing the description of places; some of which are extant,
particularly that of the City of Rochester; at which place, or near it, he was
born.

Admitted 14.

Bach. of Div.
Oct. 29. Edw. Cradock of Chapter Chapter now Margaret Professor. -- A certain (...) in
his last volume of (...), Printed 15^7. p. 1874. etc.
Author tells us that he was a learned Man, and a Writer, yet in all my
searches I could never see any of his books.

Dec. 17. Thom. Godwyn Dean of Chapter Chapter lately of Magd. Coll.

Feb. 15. Rich. Tremayne of Exeter Coll. -- He was afterward of Broadgates
hall, the seventh Vicar of Mayhenet in Cornwall and Treasurer of the Cath. Chapter
at Exeter.

16. Will. Overton of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward a Bishop.

Adrian Hawthorne of the same Coll. was admitted on the same day, being then
Principal of Magd. hall. -- On 25. Nov. 1568, he was admitted to the
Chancellourship of the Church of Wells, having about that time one or more
benefices in that Diocese; and dying in the latter end of 1576, in Feb. as it
seems, Rog. Goad D. D. and Provost of Kings Coll. in Cambridge was admitted
into his place of Chancellor on the 7. March, in the same year.

Edw. Andleser was adm. this year, but of him I know nothing.

Not one Doctor of Law or Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Dec. 17. Tho Godwyn Dean James Calfill Harb. Westphalyng Canons of Chapter Chapter



Edward Cradock mentioned before among the Bachelaurs of Divinity, was admitted
the same day.

Feb. 15. Rich. Tremayne beforementioned, who accumulated. John Piers of Magd.
Coll. Dean of Chester. Arthur Yeldard President of Trin. Coll.

16. Will. Overton of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Lichfield and
Coventry.

On the 26. Mar. Will. Bradbridge Dean of Salisbury, supplicated for the said
Degree, but was not admitted. He was afterward Bishop of Exeter. Also John
Molens Archdeacon of London, Jan. 23, but him neither can I find admitted.

Incorporations.
May.... Rich. Cheyney Bach. of Div. of Pembr. Hall in Cambridge, and Bishop of
Gloucester -- See more among the Creations.

Feb. 21. Gregory Garth Bac. of Div. of Cambridge.

George Wyther M. of A. of 4 years standing in the said University, was
incorporated on the same day -- In 1570 he became Archdeacon of Colchester on
the death of James Calfill, had other spiritualities and wrote and published (1)
Laymans Letters, delivering unto them such Letters as the Holy Ghost teaches
them in the word by things sensible. Land. 1585. (2) View of the marginal notes
of the Popish Testament, translated into English by the English Fugities,
Papists, resiant at Rheimes in France. Land. 1588. qu. with other things, as
it is probable, which I have not yet seen. Another of both his names lived an
100 years after, and was a Poet; whom I shall hereafter in his proper place
remember.

Will. Fulke M. A. of three years standing in the said Univ. of Cambridge, was
also then (Feb. 21.) incorporated -- This learned Man who was born in the City
of London, bred Fellow of St. John's Coll. and at length became Master of Pemb.
Hall, in the said University, was, when young, a good Philosopher, and when
elder in years a pious and solid Divine as his works show; the titles of all,
or most, of which, you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford Catalogue. He died
Margaret Professor of Cambridge 28. Aug. 1589.

Cyprean de Valera M. of A. of three years standing in the said University, was
also then incorporated -- He was a Spaniard born, left his Country for Religion
sake, spent all or most of his time in England and wrote in Spanish (1)
Institution of Christian Religion, or the interpretation of Calvin's
institutions (2) The reformed Catholic. (3) Of the lives of the Popes and
their doctrine. (4) Of the Mass. (5) A swarm of false miracles, wherewith Mary
de la Visitation, Prioress of the Annuntiada of Lisbon deceived very many, etc.
The three last, were written in Spanish about 1588. and the second edition of
them came out with amendments and additions by the Author, an. 1599. oct.
Translated into English by John Golburne a Prisoner in the Fleet -- Land. 1600.
qu. He also published the Bible in Spanish, printed the second time at
Amsterdam 1602. fol.

Owen Owen M. A. of two years standing in the said University was then also
(Feb. 21.) incorporated.

All these except the first, were incorporated after the solemnity of the Act
had been concluded.

Creations.
Mar. 26. It was granted by the venerable Congregation that John Jewel Bishop
of Salisbury, should, tho absent, be actually created Doct. of Div. by a
certain Graduate to be assigned by the Commissary. -- This was accordingly done
at London, but the day when, appears not.

May 1. It was likewise granted that Rich. Cheyney the present Bish. of
Gloucester, should have the Degree of D. of D. conferred on him, by a certain
Graduate, etc. -- This also was accordingly done after he had been incorporated
Bach. of Div. but the day when, and place where, appears not, He was originally
a R. Catholic, but in the beginning of Qu. Mary a disputer against the Mass
and real presence in the Convocation of the Clergy then held, for which he
absconded. In the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth he was an See A view of 10 public
disputations, published by Robert (...), cap. 4. p. ^4.
incliner to Zuinglianisme, and at length was a Lutheran. See more among the
Bishops, in Jam. Brokes, an. 1559.

An. Dom. 1566.
An. 8/9 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same by virtue of the aforesaid election.

Proct. Will. Leech of Brasn. Coll. Will. Stocker of Alls. Coll. elect. 24. Apr.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 5. Lancelot Salkeld of Qu. Coll. -- One of both his names became the last
Prior of Carlisle, in the place of Christoph. Slay, 24. Hen. S. Dom. 1532, or
thereabouts, and afterward the first Dean of Carlisle when the Prior and Canons
Regular were turned into a Dean and Canons Secular by K. Hen. 8. In the time of
Ed. 6. he was ejected, restored in the beginning of Qu. Mary and ejected again
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth. But Lancelot Salkeld B. of A. must not be
taken to be the same with the other, because later in time. His successor in
the said Deanery in the time of Ed. 6. and beginning of Qu. Elizabeth, was Sir
Tho. Smythe, as I have told you among the Writers, under the year 1609.

Apr. 6. Will. Wygges of St. John's Coll. -- He afterward left his Religion and
Country, went beyond the Seas and was made a R. Cath. Priest. Afterward
returning into England, was seized on, and committed to custody in Wisbich
Castle; where, upon some quarrel that followed between him and one of the
Gentlemen, (that were Papists and Prisoners there) he was, as a certain In
(...) S. Joh. Bapt. Oxon. Script. per Christop. (...).
note informs me slain, tho elsewhere it appears (...).
that he was only beaten by one Bluet a Jesuit. In 1582 you will find one Will.
Wygge who was a Martyr for the Romans Catholic cause.

John Smith of St. John's Coll. was admitted the same day.

Jun. 25. Dan. Bernard of Chapter Chapter -- See among the D. of D. 1585.

Jul. 3. Will. Blandie of New Coll.

Jul. 5. Edw. Smith of Brasn. Coll. -- One Edw. Smith translated into English A
discourse touching the tranquillity and contentation of the mind, etc. Land.
1592. qu. written by Joh. de L'espine: whether the same with him of Br. Coll. I
cannot tell. Quaere.

Jul. 5. Rob. Hoveden of Alls. Barthel. Chamberlain of Trin. Oct. 10. Tho.
Bilson of New Coll.


Jan. 17. Joh. Shert of Brasn. Coll. -- He was afterward a Schoolmaster in
London, and much resorted to for his excellent way of teaching; but being a R.
Cath. in his heart, left his Country and went to Douay, where he studied
Divinity. Thence he went to the English Coll. at Rome, where he was made a
Priest, and being sent into the Mission of England lived for some time in his
own Country of Cheshire. At length being taken and imprisoned, was, for being a
Priest and denying the Queens Supremacy, hanged, drawn and quartered at London,
28. May 1582.

Jan. 17. Tho. Clerk of Br. Coll. -- See in 1586.

Mar. 22. Jews Jones -- He was afterward Bishop of Killaloa.

Admitted this year 103.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Aug. 19. Thom. Buckley of Alls. Coll. -- He was now much in esteem among the
Academians for his Poetry, but being given to libelling was forced to leave the
University.

On the 30. of Apr. Joh. Rugge, who for the space of 6 years had studied the
Civ. Law in upper Germany, did supplicate for the Degree of Bach. of that fac.
but whether he was admitted it appears not. In 1575 he was made Archdeacon of
Wel^s in the place of Dr. Joh. Cottrell deceased, in 1576, he became Can. or
Preb. of the fifth stall in the collegiat Chapter of St. Peter in Westminster, on
the death of Tho. A dridge (who, if I mistake not, was also Master of Corp. Chapter
Coll. in Cambridge) and dying in 1581 (being then beneficed in the Dioc. of
Wells) was buried in the Cath. Church at We^ls near to the body of the said Dr.
Cottrell. As for the said A dridge, he was made Preb. of the seventh stall in
the said Church, in the place of one Joh. Pory, an. 1573. But being deprived
for notorious nonconformity, was, upon his repentance, and reconciliation made
to the Church, admitted Preb. of the fifth stall, in the place of Rich. Alvey
the first Preb. thereof, an. 1576, but died in the same year.

Admitted 7.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 25. Tob. Matthew of Chapter Chapter

Jul. 5. Tho. Cogan Rob. Garvey Tho. Bodley of Me^t. of Oriel Coll.



Hen. Bedell was then also admitted, and is, I presume, the same with him
mentioned under the year 1555.

Dec. 19. Miles Windsore of C. C. Feb. 25. John Garbrand of New Mar. 22. Rich.
Forster of Alls. Coll.

Admitted 50 or thereabouts.

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 8. John Bullyngham of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Gloucester.

Mar. 18. Tho. Cooper of Magd. Coll. about this time Dean of Chapter Church in Oxon.

22. Tho. Bernard Canon of Chapter Chapter -- He had suffered much in the Reign of Qu.
Mary for being a Protestant and a married Man, but restored to what he had lost
in the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth. He had a Brother named John Bernard educated
in Cambridge, and afterward a zealous Person for reformation, who in the Reign
of Qu. Mary wrote Oration pia, religiosa, and sol^tii plena, de vera animi
tranquillitate. Which coming after his death into the hands of his Brother
Thomas beforementioned, was by him published at Land. 1568. in a large quarto,
and by him dedicated to Pet. Osburne Remembrancer of the Treasury of the
Exchecquer. See more in Hist. and Antiq Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 261. a.

For the same Degree did Will. Whittingham M. of A. and Dean of Durham
supplicate, but whether he was admitted, it appears not.

Admitted 5.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 3. Edm. Merick of (Vniv. Coll.) now, or about this time Archdeacon of
Bangor and Prebendary of Lichfield.

Doct. of Div.
Mar. 18. Tho. Cooper beforementioned who accumulated the Degrees in Divinity.

On the 17. of Feb. William Whittyngham beforementioned, who, that day had
supplicated for the Degree of Bach. of Divinity, did also supplicate for that
of Doctor, but it does not appear that he was admitted to either.

Incorporations.
In the beginning of Sept this year Qu. Elizabeth being entertained by the
Oxonian Muses, these Cambridge Men following were incorporated on the sixth day
of the same month.

Tho. Bynge Master of Arts and Fellow of Peter house in Cambridge -- He was
lately Proctor of that University, afterward Orator in the place of Will.
Master, Master of Clare Hall and the Kings Professor of the Civil Law in the
said University.

Thom. Beacon M. of A. and Fellow of St. John's Coll. in the said Univ. -- He
was afterward Orator and Proctor thereof, was made Prebendary of Norwych in
Jan. 1574 and Chancellor thereof in the year following.

Ruben Sherwood M. of A. and Fellow of Kings Coll. -- He was afterward Proctor
of the said Univ. Schoolmaster of Eaton, Doct. of Phys. and a noted
practitioner of that fac. for several years in the City of Bathe, where he died
1598, leaving behind him the character of a good Scholar and an eloquent Man.

Tho. Preston M. of A. and Fell. of Kings Coll. -- He acted so admirably well
in the Tragedy of Dido before Qu. Elizabeth, when she was entertained at
Cambridge, an. 1564, and did so gentilely and gracefully dispute before her,
that she gave (...) or his continuator in the (...) year 1553.
him 20 l. per an. for so doing. He was afterward Doctor of the Civil Law and
Master of Trin. Hall in that University.

Five more of the said University were then incorporated Masters of Arts also,
among whom Edw. Stanhop was one.

On the same day, Sept. 6. were these Doctors following incorporated.

Thom. Wilson Doct. of the Laws beyond Sea, incorporated at Cambridge, was now
incorporated also at Oxon. -- He was a Lincolnshire Man born, elected Scholar
of Kings Coll. in Cambridge in 1541, where he afterward was Tutor and Servant
to Henry and Charles Brandon Dukes of Suffolk. Afterward he was one of the
ordinary Masters of the Requests, Master of St. Catherines Hospital near to the
Tower of London, Ambassador into the Low Countries in 1577, and in 1579. Feb.
5. had the Deanery of Durham conferred upon him by the Queen, (void by the death
of Will. Whittyngham) he being then Secretary of State and Privy Counselor to
her. While he enjoyed the Office of Secretary, he became famous for three
things. (1) For quick dispatch and industry. (2) For constant diligence, and
thirdly for a large and strong memory. He has written. (1) Epistola de vita
and obitu duorum fratrum Suffolciensium Henrici and Caroli Brand^n. Land. 1552.
qu. It Is set before a book of verses made on their deaths by several Scholars
of Oxon and Cambridge. All which he collecting together, did publish them, and
by an Epistle of his composition, dedicated them to Hen. Gray Duke of Suffolk.
(2.) The Art of Rhetoric. Printed 1553, 60. 67. etc. qu. (3) The rule of
reason, containing the art of Logic. First printed in the Reign of K. Ed. 6.
afterward at Land. 1567. qu. (4) Discourse upon usury. Land. 1572. qu. much
commended by Dr. Laur. Humphrey In Vita Joh. (...) edit 1573. p. 2^^ etc.
the Queens public pref. of Div. in Oxon He also translated from Greek into
English, The three Orations of Demosthenes chief Orator among the Grecians in
the Olynthians. Land 1570. with other things which I have not yet seen. He gave
way to fate in 1581, whereupon his funeral was celebrated 17. June the same
year in St. Catherines Church in East-Smithfield, near to the Tower of London.
The Male issue which he left behind him, begotten on the body of Anne Daugh. of
Sir Will. Winter Knight, settled at Sheepwash in Lincolnshire, where the name
did lately, if not still, remain. Dr Tob. Matthew did not succeed him in the
Deanery of Durham till August 1583.

Rob. Forth or Ford LL. Doct. of the said Univ. of Cambridge. -- Of whom I know
no more.

Rob. Huick M. of A. of this University, and sometimes Fellow of Merton Coll.
afterward Doctor of Phys. of Cambridge, and Fellow of the Coll. of Physicians
at London, and Physician to the Queen, was then (Sept. 6.) incorporated Doct.
of Phys. in the house of Barthel. Lant, by the Commissary and two Proctors.

John Robinson Doct. of Div. of Cambridge, sometimes a member of Pembroke Hall
there, now President of St. John's Coll. in this University, was also then
incorporated -- In 1574 May 31. he was installed Archdeacon of Bedford, in the
place, as it seems, of Will. Rod, and about 1576 he succeeded John Aybner or
Elmer in the Archdeaconry of Lincoln; of which Church he was about that time
made Chauntor.

Oct. 11. Nich. Bullyngham LL. D. of Cambridge and now Bishop of Lincoln, was
then incorp. LL. D.

16. Edw. Eglionbie M. A. and Fellow of Kings Coll. in Cambridge -- He was now
esteemed a good Grecian, and Latin Poet, was afterward a Justice of Peace in
Warwickshire; and drawing the Pedigree of Qu. Elizabeth, dedicated it to her,
for which she gave (...) 1536.
him 5 l. per an. out of her lands for ever.

26. John Porie Doct. of Div. and Master of Corp Chapter College in Cambridge. --
One John Pory sometimes of Gonevill and Caius College in Cambridge did
translate and collect A Geographical History of Africa, written in Arabic and
Italian by John Leo a More, born in Granada and brought up in Barbary. -- Land.
1600. fol. What relation there was between this John Pory and the other who was
Doct. of Div. I know not; nor whether he be the same John Pory M. A. who was
installed Canon of the seventh stall in the Church of Westminster, on the
resignation of John Hill, an. 1568.

Mar. 22. George Ackworth LL. D. and sometimes Orator of Cambridge, was
incorporated in that Degree -- He has published. (1) Oration in restitutione
Buceri and Fagii. Printed 1562. oct. (2) Prolego^^n^n lib. 2. de visibili
Monarchia contra Nich. Sanderi Monarchiam Land. 1573. qu.

Creations.
Aug. 27. Rich. Barber Bach. of the LL. and Warden of Alls. Coll. was then
actually created Doctor of the Laws in an upper Chamber belonging to him as
Warden, by Dr. Will. Awbrey and Dr. Rob. Longher, by virtue of a Commission
directed to them from the ven. Convocation. -- See more among the Bach. of Law,
an. 1540.

Edw. Atslow M. of A. and Fellow of New Coll. was actually created Doct. of
Phys. the same day, in the house of Dr. Hen. Baylie situated in the Highstreet
leading to the Quadrivium, by Dr. Thom. Francis and him the said Dr. Baylie by
virtue of a Commission, etc.

Rob. Barnes Bach. of Phys. sometimes Fellow of Mert. Coll. was also actually
created Doctor of that Faculty in the same place and on the same day, by virtue
of a Commission, etc.

Aug. 30. Roger Gifford Bach. of Physic, sometimes Fellow of Merton College,
now, or lately, Fellow of that of Allsoules, was actually created Doct. of that
Fac. by Dr. Walter, and Henry Baylie, in the house of the said Henry, by virtue
of a Commission, etc. This Doctor Gifford was afterward President of the Coll.
of Physicians at London, and Physician to Qu. Elizabeth.

Note that the aforesaid four persons were created, because they were appointed
by the Convocation to dispute before Qu. Elizabeth when she was to be
entertained by the Academians in the beginning of Sept. this year.

After she had been entertained, these noble Persons following, with others of
quality, were actually created Masters of Arts, on the 6 day of the said month
of Sept. viz.

Edward Vere Earl of Oxford. -- He was Son of John Vere Earl of the said place,
who dying in 1562, left this his Son Edw. a vast Estate, which he afterward
squandred, for the most part, away, upon some distaste taken against his Wives
Father Will. Lord Burleigh L. Treasurer of England, who refused to endeavor,
when it laid in his power, to save the life of his beloved and entire Friend
Thomas Duke of Norfolk for what he was charged with relating to Mary Queen of
Scots. This most noble Earl of Oxon was in his younger days an excellent Poet
and Comedian, as several matters of his Composition, which were made public,
did show, which, I presume, are now lost and worn out. All that I have yet seen
are certain Poems on several Subjects, thus entit. (1) His good name being
blemished, be bewayleth. (2) The complaint of a Lover wearing black and tawnie.
(3) Being in love he complains. (4) A lover rejected complains. (5) Not
attaining to his desire, he complayneth. (6) His mind not quietly settled be
complayneth thus; with many such like things, that were highly valued in their
time. He gave way to fate in a good old age 24 June 1604, and was, as I
conceive, buried by the body of his Father, at Earls Colne in Essex.

Will. Haward or Howard Baron of Effingham, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen. --
He was Son of Thomas, the second Duke of Norfolk, by Agnes his second Wife,
dau. of Hugh Tilney, and Sister and Heir to Sir Philip Tilney of Boston in
Lincolnshire, Knight.

Tho. Butler Earl of Ormond. -- This person is one of the Ancestors of the
present Duke of Ormond, was now in great favor with Qu. Elizab. and by her
employed several times in matters of concern relating to Ireland, especially in
that of quelling the Rebellion there, made by some of his house, as Sir Edm.
Butler, Pierce and Edw. his Brethren.

Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick. -- He was the eldest Son that survived of Joh.
Dudley Duke of Northumberland, (beheaded for High Treason in the Reign of Qu.
Mary) and elder Brother to Rob. Dudley Earl of Leicester, Chanc. of this
University.

Hen. Lord Strange Son of Edw. Earl of Derby. -- He became Earl of Derby after
his Fathers Death, an. 1572.

Edw. Stafford Joh. Sheffield Barons.

The first of these two Barons was the true heir of the Staffords Dukes of
Buckingham, and is Ancestor to John Howard the present Viscount Stafford. The
other, Joh. Sheffield, died in 1568. leaving then behind him a Son of about two
years of age named Edmund, who was created Earl of Mulgreve or Mulgrave by K.
Chapter 1. in the first year of his Reign.

Sir Will. Cicill Secretary of State. -- He was afterward Lord Burleigh, and
Father to Tho. Earl of Exeter, Rob. Earl of Salisbury, and Edw. Vicount
Wimbleton.

.... Rogers Controller. -- What his Christian Name was, I cannot yet tell.

Sir Franc. Knollis Knight, Captain of the Halbertiers.

Sir Nich. Throcinorton Knight, a wise and stout man, lately leiger Ambassador
in France, and about this time chief Butler of England and Chamberla^ne of the
Exchequer. -- He died suddenly in Leycester House in the Parish of S. Clement
without Temple bar, London, on Monday 12 Feb. 1570. Whereupon his body was
carried to his house in the Parish of Chree Church near Algate; where resting
till the 21 day of the said month, was then buried in the Parish Church there.
See more of him in Camdens Annals of Qu. Elizab. under the year 1570.

John Tomworth or Tamworth Esquire; of the Privy Council to the Queen. -- The same
who in 1564 had been sent to Mary Qu. of Scots to interceed with her for the
readmission of some of her Lords that had been against her Marriage with Henry
Lord Darnley. This Jo. Tomworth had spent much of his youth in traveling
beyond the Seas.

These Nobles, and persons of Quality before mentioned, were, I say, actually
created Masters of Arts, in a Convocation held Sept. 6. in the public Refectory
of Chapter Church, in the presence of Robert Earl of Leycester Chancellor of the
University, Dr. Kennall Commissary, Dr. Laur. Humphrey, both the Proctors, etc.
the Queen being then about to leave Oxon.

Sept.... Thom. Randolphe Bach. of the Civ. Law, sometimes Principal of
Broadgates Hall, had leave, tho absent, to be created Doctor of his Faculty:
but whether he was created it appears not.

Oct. 11. By virtue of a Commission from the prime Members of the University,
then bearing date and sealed, directed to Dr. Lawr. Humphrey the Queens
Professor of Divinity, were these five Bishops following made Doct. of Divinity.

Oct. 30. Joh. Parkhurst Will. Downham Tho. Bentham Rich. Davies Joh. Best
Bishop of Norwych. Chester Lich. and Cov. S. David. Carlisle.



All which were actually created (Oct. 30.) in the House of one Steph. Medcalf
at London, in the presence of Will. Standish public Notary, and Registrary of
the University, Thomas Roberts, John Pratt Archdeacon of S. David, Walt. Jones
Archdeacon of Brecknock (afterward Canon of Westminster in the place of Dr.
Matthew Hutton) and Thom. Huet Chantor of S. David.

Oct.... Edward Earl of Ru^land was actually created Master of Arts (at London.)

Feb.... Will. Smyth one of the Clerks of the Queens Council, was also created
M. of A. (at London.)

An. Dom. 1567.
An. 9 Eliz.
An. 10 Eliz.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Tho. Cooper D. D. Dean of Chapter Chapter elected 26 March Proct. Adam Squyre
of Ball. Coll. Henr. Bust of Magd. Coll. elected 9 Apr.




Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 18. John Chardon of Exeter Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Down and
Connor in Ireland.

Jun. 7. Rich. Stanyhurst of Vniv. Coll.

Jul. 12. Thom. Williams. -- See among the Writers under the year 1600.

Oct. 10. John Case the Philosopher of S. John's Coll.

Dec. 16. Edward Lord Russell, (of Vniv. Coll.) eldest Son of Francis Earl of
Bedford. Adm. 46.

Bach. of Law.
Dec. 9. Michael Maschiart of New Coll.

Besides him, were 9 admitted; but not one of them was afterward a Bishop or
Writer.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 21. Tho. Allen or Alan George Blackwell of Trin. Coll.


Thom. Ford was also admitted on the same day. -- This person who was Fellow of
Trin. Coll. and a Devonian born, did soon after leave the University, Country,
and Friends, went to Doway, and became a R. Cath. Priest and Bach. of Divinity.
Afterward being sent into the Mission of England, was taken and imprisoned,
and at length executed at Tybourne near London 28 May 1582.

Jun. 4. Will. Raynolds of New Coll.

20. Jo. Field. -- See among the Writers under the year 1587.

Jul. 9. Franc. Bunney of Magd. Coll. -- He is mentioned at large among the
Writers p. 355, but the Printer has set his name Bunne for Bunney.

Oct. 17. Nich. Bond of the same Coll. -- This person I set down here, not that
he was a Writer, but to distinguish him from Nich. Bownd, whom I shall mention
among the Incorporations, an. 1577.

Thom. Come of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- In the latter end of
the year (in March) 1588, he became Archdeacon of the East riding of Yorkshire
upon the resignation of John Mey (who some years before had been promoted to
the Sea of Carlisle) and he upon the death of Martin Parkynson Bach. of Div. in
Aug. 1569.

Oct. 30. Rob. Fletcher of Mert. Coll. -- One of both his names has made
several Translations as (1) The Song of Solomon, into English Verse, etc. Land.
1586 in tw. to which he added Annotations. (2) Of the introduction to the love
of God; out of English prose into English verse, Land. 1581. oct. etc. Whether
he be the same with him of Mert. Coll. I cannot tell, unless I could see the
said Translations, which I have not yet done. As for the said Rob. Fletcher of
Mert. Coll. who was a Warwickshire man born, he was for several misdemeanors
turned out from his Fellowship of that House, in June 1569, whereupon, being
out of employment for the present, he was soon after made Schoolmaster of
Taunton in Somersetshire, and at length became a godly Minister and Preacher of
the Word of God.

Joh. Tatham of Mert. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was afterward
Rector of Linc. Coll.

Adm. 43.

Bach. of Div.
Only one was admitted this year, viz. John Withyns of Brasn Coll. which is all
I know of him.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Apr. 10. Hen. Berkley of New 21. Will. Constantine of Alls. Coll.

Jul. 4. Joh. Belly Provost of Oriol Coll. -- He was afterward Chancellor of
the Diocese of Lincoln, and one of the Masters of the Chancery.

Tho. Sammon of Alls. Coll. was admitted the same day.

7. Rob. Leech of Chapter Chapter Chancellor of Chester.

Doct. of Physic.
Jul. 12. Henry Wotton of Chapter Church. -- See more of him in Edward Wotton among
the Writers, under the year 1555. p. 78.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 7. John Bullyngham of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Gloucester.

Incorporations.
Jul. 9. Robert Horn Doct. of Div. of Cambridge, and now Bishop of Winchester,
was incorporated Doctor in the house of Congregation, and took the Oath
requisite to be taken by such that are incorporated. -- He was the Son of John
Horn, Son of Will. Horn of Cletor in Copland, in the County of Cumberland,
educated in S. John's Coll. in the aforesaid University, made Dean of Durham in
Nov. 1551, was an Exile for his Religion in 1553, returned in the beginning of
Qu. Elizabeth, an. 1558, restored to his Deanery in the year following, and in
1560 he was made Bish. of Winchester. He has written An answer made to a Book
entit. The declaration of such scruples and stays of Conscience touching the
Oath of Supremacy, as Mr. Jo. Fekenham by writing did deliver unto the said L.
Bishop with his Resolutions made thereunto. Land. 1566, qu. and also A preface
to Calvin's two sermons, one against Idolatry, the other to suffer persecution,
etc. He died on the first of June 1579, and was buried in his Church at
Winchester near the pulpit. I find another Rob. Horn to be a Writer and
Publisher of several books relating to Divinity, but he was a Minister of God's
Word at Ludlow in Shropshire, in the Reigns of Jam. 1. and Chapter 1.

Jul. 15. Rich. Howland M. of A. of Cambridge. -- This person being the Son of
Rich. Howland of London by his Wife Anne Greenway of Clay in Norfolk, was
baptized (at London I think) 26 September 1540, afterward educated in Peter
House, of which he was Fellow, made Master of Magd. then of S. John's, College
in Cambridge, and at length Bishop of Peterborough, as I have elsewhere told
you.

An. Dom. 1568.
An. 10 An. Elizab.
An. 11 An. Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Dr. Cooper, designed to that Office by the Chancellours Letters, with
the consent of Convocation, 3 May.

Proct. Jam. Charnock of Brasn. Coll. Edm. Campian of S. John's Coll. elect.
18. Apr.


I find another Edm. Campian who was Fellow of Trin. Coll. in 1563, and
proceeded M. of A. 1567.

Gramm.
Jul. 10. Thom. Ashbroke a Scholar of, or a Student in, Grammar for twenty
years, styled in the Register Ludimagister Vxelli, was admitted to instruct in
Grammar. -- He is the last of all that occurrs admitted to instruct Youths in
Grammar, in our Records.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 5. Adam Hill May 31. Rob. Persons of Ball. Coll.

Tho. Heth of Alls. Coll. was adm. the same day.

Jul. 9. Rob. Gwinne.

Oct. 15. John Rainolds Nov. 18. Meridith Hanmer of C. C. Coll.

John Chamber of Merton College was admitted the same day.

Feb. 12. John Norden of Heart Hall.

16. Franc. Trigge of Vniv. Coll.

Mar. 23. Thom. Cottam of Brasn. Coll. -- This person who was a Lancashire man
born, left Oxon soon after, and taught a Grammar School at London. Afterward
he went to Rome, where he studied Divinity, thence to Rheimes, where he was
made a Priest, and at length into England to serve those of his profession; but
being taken at his arrival in the Haven, at, or near to, Dover, in 1580, was
imprisoned, tormented and tortured See Card. Will. Alans book called A sincere
or modest defense etc. or An answer to the libel of English justice etc. p. 11.
for about two years; in which time he was received into the Society of Jesus.
At length, being not to be prevailed with to take the Oath of Supremacy, he was
executed at Tyburne, with others of his persuasion, 30 May 1582.

March 24. George Petty of Chapter Chapter

Admitted 102.

Bach. of Law.
Only five were admitted this year, and three that supplicated for the said
Degree, among whom James Charnock Proct. of the University was one.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 10. Thomas Twyne of C. C. Coll. -- See more in the year 1593.

Nov. 3. John Underhill of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Oxford.

Admit. 27.

Bach. of Div.
Only one admitted, namely Will. Cole of C. C. Coll. afterward Dean of
Lincoln, and five that supplicated for the said Degree, among whom Edm. Campian
one of the Proctors was one.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 14. Vincent Den of Alls. Coll. Official of Canterbury.

John Langford of the same house, was admitted on the same day, being about
this time Chancellor of the Diocese of Worcester. He died about the beginning
of Nov. in 1579, and was buried in the Cath. Church at Worcester. -- He did
succeed in that Office, as it seems, one Will. Turnbull LL. B. and was
succeeded by Dr. Rich. Cousin the eminent Civilian, by the favor of Dr. Joh.
Whitgift Bish. of Worcester.

Doct. of Phys.
March 9. Oliver Wythyngdon of Brasnose Coll. now or soon after, Dean of
Battle in Sussex. -- He died in 1590, and was buried in the Church of S. Peter
in the East in Oxon.

Not one Doct. of Div. was admitted this year.

Incorporations.
Apr. 19. Will. Hughes Bach. of Div. of Cambridge, -- He was afterward Bishop
of S. Asaph.

Henry Haward or Howard M. A. of Cambr, was incorporated the same day, -- This
Hen. Howard who was second Son of Henry Earl of Surrey the learned among the
Nobility, and the most noble among the learned, was born in the County of
Norfolk, educated in Kings Coll. afterward in Trinity Hall, traveled beyond
the Seas, and became a very learned Gentleman, a man of excellent wit and
fluent eloquence. It is observed, that tho he was not respected by Qu.
Elizabeth, yet he wrote a learned Book entit. An apology for the government of
Women; which is in MS, in Bodley's Library, given thereunto by Ralph Radcliff
Town Clerk of Oxon 1621. He was afterward for his great Learning and Prudence,
so much esteemed by K. Jam. 1. that he was by him advanced to great places and
honors, among which was the Earldom of Northampton; and dying 15 June 1614,
was buried in the Church or Chapel belonging to Dover Castle, he having been
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. In his life time he published a Book entit. A
defensative against the poison of supposed Prophecies, Land. 1583, afterward
revised and published in 1620. fol. In 1609 he succeeded John Lord Lumley in
the High Stewardship of this University.

May...Elize Bomlie Doct. of Phys. of Cambridge.

Jul. 13. Will. Livyng Bach. of Div. of the same University.

Leonard Cassembrotus or Cassenbrotius LL. D. of Orleans, was incorporated the
same day. -- He was descended from Leon. Cassenbrotius a learned man of Bruges,
who lived in the time of Erasmus Roterd.

Creations.
Apr. 19. Thom. Haward or Howard Duke of Norfolk, Knight of the Order of the
Garter and Earl Marshal of England, was actually created Master of Arts in a
certain Chamber where he lodged in the house of Thom. Furse, commonly called
the Bear Inn in Allsaints Parish. He was beheaded on Tower hill 2 June 15
Eliz. for endeavoring to marry Mary Qu. of Scots without leave or license from
Qu. Eliz.

Aug. 2. Sir Henry Sidney Knight of the Garter and Lord Deputy of Ireland, was
created Master of Arts in the place where he lodged in Chapter Chapter (I think in the
Deans Lodgings) at which time he solemnly promised to observe the Privileges
and Liberties of the University. -- I have made large mention of him among the
Writers p. 180. nu. 232.

An. Dom. 1569.
An. 11 Elizab.
An. 12 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same, viz. Dr. Thom. Cooper now Dean of Gloucester, but upon what
account, whether by a new Election made by the Masters, his Office was
prorogued, it appears not. At this time the Chancellor took upon him to
nominate the Commissary, (which now began to be called Vicechancellour) merely
by the great power he took upon himself.

Proct. Thom. Bereblock of Ex. Coll. Thom. Bodley of Mert. Coll. Apr. 20.


Bach. of Arts.
Dec. 1. Henry Holland of S. John 's Coll.

Jonas Meredith of the same Coll. was admitted on the same day. -- He was a
Bristow man born, was afterward a R. Cath. Priest, and a Prisoner in Wisbich
Castle See in Ro^. Persons brief (...) in desence of Ecclesastical
S^bordination in England, (...)
in Cambridgeshire, for stiffly defending the Jurisdiction of the Pope. He was
expelled S. John's Coll super statutum quod tueretur Reum (so are the words in
the Register belonging to that house) and, as it is supposed, did afterward
publish certain matters in defense of his Religion.

Jan.... Hen. Cotton of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Exeter.

Mar. 11. Joh. Rogers of (Mert. Coll.)

Admit. 92.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 11. George Coryat of New 8. John Smith of S. Joh. Oct. 21. Tho. Doylie of
Magd. Coll.

Nov. 21. John Howlet of Exet. Coll. -- He left his Fellowship of the said
house before he stood in the Act to complete his Degree, went beyond the Seas,
was made a Jesuit, and had one or more Books put out under his name. See among
the Writers in Rob. Person, under the year 1610. p. 306.

Adm. 36.

Bach. of Div.
But two admitted, (Philip Biss being one) whom I shall mention in 1580, and
two that supplicated, of whom Joh. Watkyns of Alls. Coll. (Son of Watkin
Howell) was one. -- He was afterward Dean of Hereford, in the place, as it
seems, of Joh. Ellis, and died in the month of May 1594.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 6. Arthur Bedell of Christ Church. -- He was a very learned Civilian of
his time.

Doct. of Physic.
Nov. 21. Thomas Jesopp of Mert. Coll. -- He died at Gillyngham in Dorsetshire
about the beginning of 1616, having been before a Benefactor to his College.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 14. Will. Hughes (mentioned in the Incorporations an. 1568.) was admitted
or licensed to proceed in Divinity.

Jan. 16. Thom. Bickley Warden of Merton Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Chichester.

An. Dom. 1570.
An. 12 Elizab.
An. 13 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, viz. Robert Earl of Leicester.

Commiss. Dr. Cooper, designed to that Office as the rest of his Successors
were, by Letters from the Chancellor, dated May 5. He became Bish. of Lincoln
about the latter end of this year.

Proct. Arth. Atie of Mert. Coll. Tho. Glasier of Chapter Chapter Apr. 5.


Bach. of Arts.
May 30. Rob. Temple -- See among the Bach. of Div. under the year 1588.

June 25. Thom. White of Magd. Hall.

Oct. 17. Thom. Worthington of Brasn 23. Tho. Spark of Magd. Nov. 15. Rich.
Turnbull of C. C. Dec. 9. Thom. Holland of Ball. Coll.

13. Simon Wisdom of Gloc. Hall.

Jan. 29. Job. Field.

In the month of June, Will. Camden supplicated for the degree of Bach. of
Arts, having spent four years in the University in Logicals, but was not
admitted. See in the years 1573 and 1588.

Adm. 119.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Apr. 26. Will. Say of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Chancellor of
Winchester.

Nov. 24. Hugh Lloyd of New Coll.

Dec. 5. Randal Catherall. -- After he had left the University he settled in an
obscure Village called Oddington alias Addington, near to Bister in
Oxfordshire; where, by a natural Genie advanced with great Industry, he became
an eminent and expert Antiquary. His voluminous Collections from diverse Leiger
books, concerning Monasteries, especially in these parts, and of Genealogies
and Heraldry, were much used by Dr. Robert Sanderson, afterward Bish. of
Lincoln, who did transcribe many things from them for his use, which I have
seen. But where those Collections are now, I cannot yet learn. This Mr.
Catherall, who was descended from those of his name living at Horton in
Cheshire, was buried in a little Vault under the Chancel of the Parish Church
of Oddington before mentioned, 9 June 1625.

Admitted 9.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 8. Cuthbert Main of S. John's Coll. -- Soon after he left the Nation,
went to Doway in 1572, and was promoted there to the degree of Bach. of
Divinity: Afterward he was sent into the mission of England, and settled for a
time in his native Country of Devonshire. In 1577 he was taken, and on the 29
of Nov. the same year, he was hanged drawn, and quartered at Lanceston in
Cornwall, being then accounted by those of his Profession, the first Martyr of
the Seminaries. You may read more of him in Cardinal Alans book called A
sincere and modest defense etc. or An answer to a libel of English justice,
etc. p. 2. also in Camdens Annals of Qu. Eliz. under the year 1571.

Henr. Shaw of the same Coll. was admitted on the same day. -- He afterward
went beyond the Seas, changed his Religion, was made a Priest, and returning
into England, was taken and committed to custody in Wisbich Castle, where, with
several others, he endured a tedious Imprisonment, and therefore by those of
his profession accounted a Confessor.

Apr. 25. Thom. Bilson of New 28. Rob. Hoveden of Allsoules 30. Hen. Savile of
Merton. Coll.

Jul. 4. Will. Harrys Rich. Knolles of Linc. Coll.


Dec. 4. Barthelmew Chamberlayne of Trin. Coll.

Adm. 53.

Bach. of Physic.
Dec. 14. Christopher Johnson of New Coll. now the learned Master of Wykehams
School near to Winchester.

Three besides were admitted, but not one of them was a Writer*

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 10. Edm. Bunney of Mert. Coll.

Besides him were but two more admitted.

Not one Doct. of Law or Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul.... John Withyns of Brasnose College.

Incorporations.
In the month of Jaly was a Supplicate made in the ven. house of Congregation
for Edm. Freke Dr. of Div. of Cambridge to be incorporated; but whether he was
really so, I cannot yet find. -- Those things that I am to observe of him are,
that he was an Essex man born, had all his Acad. Education in the said Univ. of
Cambr. was made Canon of Westminster in 1564, in the place of Will. Downham,
and about the same time Archd. of Canterbury. In 1565 he was made Canon of
Windsore, and on the 10 of April 1570 he was installed Dean of Rochester in the
place of Walt. Philipps the first Dean deceased. In the year following, Sept.
18, he was made Dean of Salisbury upon the promotion of Will. Bradbridge to the Sea of Exeter; but before he had been settled in the said Deanery, he was made
Bishop of Rochester, being then, as one Math. Parker in the first Edit. of
Antiq. Britan. Eccles. in (...).
says, Vir pius, doctus atque gravis. Afterward he was translated to
Worcester, where he was a zealous Assertor of the Church Discipline.

An. Dom. 1571.
An. 13 Eliz.
An. 14 Eliz.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. Lawrence Humphrey D. D. President of Magd. Coll. and Dean of
Gloucester, Apr. 2. by virtue of Letters from the Chanc. dat. 28 March.

Proct. Anth. Blencow of Or. Coll. Edm. Fleetwood of Mert. Coll. Apr. 26.


Bach. of Arts.
Mar. 28. Ezechias Fogge. -- He translated into English Comfort for the sick,
in two parts. The first for such that are visited with sickness, the second to
make men willing to dye. Land. 1574. in tw.

Nov. 22. Ralph Sherwyn of Exet. Coll.

Dec. 1. Rich. Madox. -- See among the M. of A. 1575.

Jan. 17. Job. Lister.

Feb. 20. George More. See among the Masters 1573.

27. Edw. Grant. -- He was afterward the learned Schoolmaster of Westminster.

Mar.... Tho. Leyson of New Coll. now esteemed a good Latin Poet.

Adm. 84.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 24. Hen. Cotton of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Salisbury.

Besides him were but 16 Masters admitted, tho 102 Bach. of Arts were admitted
three years before.

Bach. of Phys.
But one admitted, and five supplicated, among which last Tho. D'oylie of Magd.
Coll. was one, whom I have mentioned among the Writers, under the year 1603.

Bach. of Div.
Mar. 10. Will. James of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Bishop of Durham.

Five there were that supplicated for the said Degree, of whom Tobie Matthew was
one, but not admitted till 1573.

Not one Doctor of Law admitted this year.

Doct. of Phys.
June 23. Christopher Johnson of New Coll.

Rob. Bellamie of S. John's Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was
afterward Master of the Hospital at Shirebourne near to the City of Durham.

26. Martin Colepeper of New Coll. -- He was afterward Warden of that College,
Dean of Chichester in the place, as it seems, of Dr. Anth. Russh deceased, an.
1577. and Archdeacon of Berks. upon the death of Dr. Tho. White; 16 June 1588.

Not one Doct. of Div. was admitted this year, nor any there were that
supplicated to be admitted, only Joh. Angelus Bach. of Arts, who had his Grace
granted for it six years before.

Incorporations.
Feb. 1. Henry Beaumont Bach. of Arts of the University of Cambridge. -- This
person who was descended from the noble Family of the Beaumonts in
Leicestershire, was, about the beginning of Nov. going before, elected Fellow
of Alls. Coll, as a Founders Kinsman, his Mother being of that Family. He was
afterward Dean of Peterborough and Windsore, as I shall tell you under the
year 1616.

An. Dom. 1572.
An. 14 Elizab.
An. 15 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same, May 29.

Proct. Anth. Blencow Edm. Fleetwood again.


Continued in their Offices by a decree in Convocation, 17 March 1571.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 11. Rob. Coke or Cook of Brasn. Coll.

Jul. 12. Hen. Robinson of Qu. Christop. Bagshaw of Ball. Coll.


The first of which two last, was afterward Bishop of Carlisle.

15. Joh. Drusius of Mert. Coll. the most noted Critic and Linguist. Dec. 2.
Will. Wilkes of the same Coll.

9. Joh. Hudson. -- See among the Masters of Arts, an. 1575.

15. Joh. Prime of New Coll.

Jan. 31. Miles Smith of Brasn. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Gloucester.

Feb. 20. Thom. Wilkes of Alls. Coll. -- This person who was a Sussex man born,
and Fellow of the said Coll. was two years after Secretary to Dr. Valentine
Dale Ambassador from Qu. Elizab. to the K. of France. While he continued in
that Country he showed more than ordinary civility to the King of Navarr and
the Duke of Alenson, (afterward of Anjow) when they were committed to custody
by the Qu. Mother of France for plotting secretly to remove her from the
Government. For so it was, that he comforted them in the Queen of England's
name, promising them, that she would omit no opportunity to help and relieve
them. Of this civility the Qu. Mother of France having notice, prosecuted
Wilkes so much* that he was fain to withdraw himself into England, where she
also followed him with letters of complaint; insomuch that he was sent back
into France and there humbly craved pardon Camden in Annal. Reg. Elizab. an.
1574.
of the Qu. Mother. However the King of Navarr not unmindful of the consolation
he gave him, did, when he came to be King of France, honor him with the degree
of Knighthood, when he saw him in Normandy twenty five years after. In 1577
Wilkes was sent Ambassador to Spain, and upon his return thence, was about the
beginning of 1578 sent to Don John of Austria. In 1593 he was sent into France
to know if the then French King was reconciled to the Church of Rome, and in
1598 he was sent into France again, with Sir Robert Cecil Secretary of State to
Qu. Eliz. and John Herbert Master of the Requests, but so soon as Wilkes
landed, he died there.

March 3. David Powell. -- Afterward the Welsh Antiquary.

4. Rich. Meredyth. -- He was afterward a Bish. in Ireland.

In Apr. this year supplicated for the degree of Bach. of Arts Edw. Rishton of
Brasn. Coll. but whether he was admitted, it appears not.

On the 5 Dec. also, the Principal and Fellows of Brasn. Coll. gave leave to
Law. Johnson one of their Society, to take the degree of Bach. of Arts in the
University, with certain conditions to be by him performed; but whether he took
the said degree, it appears not. Afterward he went to Doway, and studied
Philosophy and Divinity; thence to Rheimes, where he was made a Priest: At
length being sent into the mission of England in Feb. 1579, changed his name to
Lawrence Richardson, because he was the Son of Rich. Johnson of Lancashire, but
being soon after taken and imprisoned, was executed at Tybourne 30 May 1582.

Adm. 84.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 27. John Chardon of Ex. Coll. Edw. Grant

The last was the same who was adm. Bach. of Arts 1571.

29. Mardochey Aldem of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward a Physician as well as
Divine, became Canon of Windsore in 1607, in the place of Joh. King sometimes
Fellow of Peter House in Cambridge, and about that time Fellow of Eaton Coll.
He died in 1615, and was succeeded in the said Canonry by Dr. John King of
Mer^. Coll. Nephew to the former John.

May 12. Franc. Trigge of Vniv. 17. Jo. Rainolds of Corp. Chapter Coll.

Jun.... Meridith Hanmer of Corp. Chapter Adam Hill of Balliol John Case of S.
John's Coll.


Jul. 11. Hen. Usher of Vniv. Coll. -- He was afterward Archbishop of Armagh.

Dec. 2. Rob. Persons of Ball. Coll.

Feb. 26. John Norden of Heart Hall.

Mar. 17. Joh. Lane of C. C. Coll. -- He soon after resigned his Fellowship of
that House, traveled with Fa. Persons the Jesuit, entered into the Society of
Jesus, and died with great opinion of Holiness in the University of Complutum
in Spain, an. 1578.

Adm. 61.

Bach. of Div.
Four were admitted, of whom Joh. Chandler Prebendary of Winchester was one,
Jan. 22. and nine supplicated for the said Degree, among whom were (1) John
Oxenbridge, but whether the same with Dr. Oxenbridge who was committed to
custody in Wisbich Castle with Dr. Tho. Watson Bishop of Linc. Dr. John
Fekenham sometimes Abbat of Westminster, Dr. Young, etc. an. 1580, I cannot
tell. (2) Thom. Kinges^ill of Magd. Coll. remembered before among the Writers,
and (3) Jeffry Downs M. A. of Cambridge, not that Jeffr. Downs (Tutor to John
Bale) who became Chancellor of the Church of York in Aug. 1537 in the place of
Henry Trafford D. D. deceased, but another of the same University, who was a
learned man.

Not one Doct. of Law, Physic or Divinity was admitted this year.

Incorporations.
March 28. James Wats M. A. of the University of Lovaine.

Jun.... Petrus Pitheus a Licentiate in the Civil Law of the University of
Bourges in France, was incorporated Doctor of the same Faculty. -- He was at
this time a Sojournour in Oxford for the sake of Study and Converse, and
afterward became famous for his exact knowledge in all Antiquity,
Ecclesiastical History, Laws, etc. All the great men of his time did make
honorable mention of him in their respective books, and some did dedicate their
Writings to him, and his Brother Francis Pitheus, as the Lights of France.
Thuanus does very much In 1 part. tom. 5. Historiarum, l. 117.
commend, and at length concludes thus of, him, that In the Civil Law of the
Romans, he came to that height, that it might be justly said of him, and his
famous Master Cujacius, hunc discipulo praeripuisse, ne primus Jurisconsultus
esset, illum praeceptori, ne solus, etc. Many of his works are mentioned in the
Oxford Catalogue.

Jul. 1. Hen. Usher Bach. of Arts of Cambridge. -- He soon after took the
degree of Master* as I have told you before.

14. Felix Lewys LL. Bach. of Doway.

15. Rich. Fietcher four years standing in the degree of M. of A. at Cambridge.
-- He was a Kentish man born, as it is said, bred in Bennet, commonly called
Corp. Christi, Coll. in Cambridge, became Dean of Peterborough in 1583, and was
present with Mary Queen of Scots when she suffered death at Foderinghey in
Northamptonshire, in the month of Febr. 1586. At which time being the person
appointed to pray with, and for, her did persuade her to renounce her Religion,
contrary to all Christianity and Humanity (as it was by many then present so
taken) to her great disturbance. In 1589 he was made Bish. of Bristow, there
being then many leases to be past in that Bishopric, and about that time Bish.
Almoner. Whereupon Thomas Nevill D. D. of Cambridge succeeded him in the
Deanery of Peterborough, an. 1590. From Bristow he was translated to Worcester,
and soon after to London. At length he took to him a second Wife (a very
handsome Widow) called the Lady Baker, Sister, as it is said, to George Gifford
the Pensioner. At which Marriage the Queen being much displeased, (as she was
at the marriage of all the Clergy) he died discontentedly by immoderate taking
of Tobacco, on the 15 Godwin in lib (...) est De (...) Angliae, in London.
of June 1596, and was buried before S. George's Chapel within the Cathedral
Church of S. Paul. He had a Brother named Giles Fletcher, a Kentish man born
also, as it is said, bred in Eaton School, elected Scholar The continuator of
T^o. Hatchers Cat. of Prove. Fell. and Scholars of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, MS.
sub an. 1565.
of Kings Coll. in Cambridge 1565, where he became a learned Man, an excellent
Poet, and Doctor of the Laws. Afterward he was sent Commissioner into
Scotland, Germany and into the Low Countries, Ambassador to Russia, was made
Secretary to the City of London and Master of the Requests. At length he wrote
and published The History of Russia, etc. Or Of the Russian Commonwealth. Land.
1591. oct Which book was quickly suppressed, lest it might give offense to a
Prince in amity with England. Afterward it was reprinted in tw. an. 1643, etc.
This Dr. Gil. Fletcher died in the Parish of St. Catherine in Colemanstreet in
London, in the month of Feb. 1610, and was buried, I presume, in the Chapter of St.
Cath. there; leaving then behind him a Son of both his names, Bach. of Div. of
Trin. Coll. in Camb. equally beloved of the Muses and Graces; who died at
Alderton in Suffolk, an. 1623. He left also behind him another Son named
Phinees Fletcher of Kings Coll. in the same University, where he was accounted
an excellent Poet. Afterward he was beneficed at Hilgay in Norfolk, and
became Author of several books; among which, one is entit. A Fathers testament
written for the benefit of his particular Relations. Land. 1670. oct. at which
time the Author had been dead several years. The titles of two other books
written by him you may see in the Bodleian Catalogue.

Rob. Bennet of three years standing in the Degree of M. of A. of Camb. was
also then (July 15.) incorporated -- This Person, who was of Trin. Coll. in the
said Univ. was afterward Chaplain to Will. Lord Burleigh L. Treasurer of
England, Master of the Hospital of St. Cross near to Winchester, was installed
Dean of Windsore 24. March 1595, sworn Scribe or Registrary of the most noble
Order of the Garter, on the Feast of St. George 1596, and at length on the 20.
of Feb. 1602. he was consecrated Bishop of Hereford, as I have told you before
among the Bishops in Harb. Westphaling, numb. 157. In the Deanery of Windsore
succeeded Dr. Giles Tomson a little before Qu. Elizabeth's death, and in the
Mastership of the Hosp. of St. Cross, (which was designed by the Queen for
George Brook Brother to Henry Lord Cobham) K. James at his first entry into
England, gave it to Mr. James Hudson, who had been his Agent there during part
of the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth. But Hudson being a Layman and therefore not
found capable of it, Sir Tho. Lake, for some reward given to him to quit his
interest therein, prevailed with the King to give it to his Brother Arthur
Lake: Whereupon George Brook being discontented, it put him upon plotting with
his Brother, Raleigh and others; for which afterward he suffered death.

Thom. Staller or Stallard M. A. of Camb. was also then incorporated -- He was
afterward D. of D. and Archdeacon of Rochester, as I shall tell you among the
Doctors of Div. an. 1591. and 1605.

Besides the aforesaid three Masters (Fletcher, Bennet and Stallard) were 10
more of Camb. incorporated, among whom John Langworth was one, whom I shall
mention elsewhere.

Jul. 17.... Holland Bach. of Div. of the said Univ. -- His Christian name, tho
not set down, yet, as it seems, 'twas Thomas.

An. Dom. 1573.
An. 15 Elizab.
An. 16 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Commiss. the same, viz. Dr. Humphrey.

Proct. John Tatham of Mert. Coll. Edm. Lillye of Magd. Coll. Ap. 1.


Bach. of Arts.
Ap. 1. Jam. Bisse Joh. Thornborough of Magd. Coll.


The last of which was afterward Bishop of Worcester.

27. John Lilye of Magd. Coll.

Jul. 3. Tho. Lovell -- See in the year 1577.

7. Tho. Rogers of Chapter Chapter

Jan. 14. John Williams, afterward of Alls. Coll.

Rich. Hooker of C. C. Coll. was admitted the same day.

28. Tho. Lister -- See more among the Masters, an. 1576.

Feb. 3. James Ley Will. Massy of Br. Coll.


Of the last, see more in 1586 among the Bach. of Div.

4. John Bond of New Coll. -- Eminent afterward for his critical learning.

Edw. Habington or Abington was admitted the same day -- Whether this Person,
who seems to have been of Exeter Coll. was the same Ed. Habington who suffered
for being engaged in the treasons of Mary Qu. of Scots, I cannot tell. See in
Tho. Habington among the writers, an. 1647.

17. Hen. Rowlands -- He was afterward Bishop of Bangor.

19. Rich. Hackluyt of Chapter Chapter

In the month of March, Will. Camden who had studied Logic for 4 years,
supplicated for the Degree of Bach. of Arts; but occurs not admitted. See in
the year 1588.

This year also, Will. Gifford then or lately of Linc. Coll. did make the like
supplication, but was not admitted. He was afterward Archb. of Rheimes.

Admitted 172. or thereabouts.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 19. Thom. Williams -- Qu. whether the Welsh critic.

Jul. 1. Thom. White of Magd. Hall.

31. Joh. Gibson -- One of both his names was Author of A Catechism. Land.
1579. oct. Also of The sacred shield of all true Soldiers. Printed 1599. in
oct. etc. Whether the same with Jo. Gibson M. of A. I cannot tell.

October. 7. John Chamber. 8. John. Drusius the Belgic critic Ralph Gualter Son
of Ralph of Merton Coll.


Jan. 21. Rich. Turnbull George More of C. C. Coll.


One George More who was a Minister and Preacher of Gods word wro^ and
published, A true discourse concerning the certain possession and dispossession
of seven Persons in one family in Lancashire. Printed 1600 in oct. at which
time he had been a Prisoner in the Clinke about two years, for bearing witness
to, and justifying the said, matters. Whether he be the same with him, who was
M. of A. I cannot tell. Another George More I have mentioned among the writers.
page 418.

Admitted 71.

Bach. of Phys.
Jun. 10. Rich. Forster of Als. Coll. -- See among the Doctors of Physic this
year.

In July, Joh. Banister was admitted to practice Physic having originally been
a Student in this University.

Bach. of Div.
Oct. 10. Joh. Elmer or Aylmer, now an Archdeacon and a Justice of the Peace,
as the public Register tells us.

Michael Renniger of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Dec. 10. Tob. Matthew President of St. John's Coll.

Jan. 26. Hen. Withers. -- In 1569 he was incorporated M. of A. as he had stood
at Cambridge, etc.

Admitted 6.

Doct. of Civil Law.
Oct. 13. Michael Maschiart 15. Will. Smyth of New Coll.

The first was Poeta sui saeculi princeps, as a learned Author styles him.

John Chippyngdale of Alls. Coll. was admitted on the same day, being then
accounted by the generality an eminent Civilian.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul. 2. Randall Trevor.

Rog. Marbeck or Merbeck of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day -- He was the Son
of John Merbeck Organist of Windsore, (whom I have mentioned in these Fasti,
an. 1550) and the first standing or perpetual Orator of the University.
Afterward he was Canon of Chapter Church, Provost of Oriel and the chief Physician
belonging to the Queen. He died in July, or thereabouts, in 1605, and was
buried, as I conceive, in the Church of St. Giles without Cripplegate, London,
for in that Parish he died. See more of him in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 47. a. and page 257. a.

Jul. 2. Thom. Wanton of Merton Coll.

Rich. Forster of Alls. Coll. was admitted the same day -- This Person who was
Son of Laurence, Son of Will. Forster of the City of Coventry, is styled by a
most learned Author Camden in Annal. Reg. Jac. 1. MS. sub. an. 1616.
Nobilis Mathematicus, but whether he has published any thing, I cannot yet
find. He died at London 27. March 1616 to the great reluctance of all those
that knew the profound learning of the Person.

Doct. of Div.
Oct. 10. Joh. Elmer or Aylmer, who accumulated the Degrees in Divinity -- He
was afterward Bishop of London.

Michael Renniger of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He also
accumulated.

Jan.... Will. Cole President of C. C. C. -- He succeeded Dr. Jo. Rainolds in
the Deanery of Lincoln, an. 1598. and dying in 1600 was succeeded by Laur.
Staunton.

Besides these, were five that supplicated for the said Degree, most of which
were afterward admitted.

An. Dom. 1574.
An. 16 Elizab.
An. 17 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Dr. Humphrey, without any nomination or designation to that office
this year. The name of Commissary was now omitted, and that of Vicechancellour
only used.

Proct. John Bust of Chapter Chapter Rich. Barret of Or. Coll. Apr. 20.


Bach. of Arts.
Mar. 30. Thom. Smith of Chapter Chapter

Jul. 13. William Middelton.

Dec. 10. Will. Leigh of Brasn. Coll.

17. Martin Heton Rich. Eedes Will. Watkinson of Chapter Chapter


The first of which last three, was afterward Bishop of Ely.

This year supplicated for the Degree of Bach. of Arts one George Snavenburgh
or S^avenburgh of Chapter Church a Baron of Sweden, aged 20, but whether he was
admitted, it appears not.

For the said Degree supplicated also one Barthelmeus Clerk of Magd. Coll. but
was not then admitted. -- This Person, who was a Northamptonshire Man born, I
here set down, least some unwary reader hereafter might take him to be the same
Barthelem. Clerk, who became Scholar of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, an. 1554,
afterward Proctor of that University, Dean of the Arches and a wise and
eloquent Man. He has written De Curial^ sive Aulico. printed at Land. about
1571. in oct. being about that time favored by Thom. Sackvill Lord Buckhurst,
and another book intit. Fidelis servi, subdito infideli responsio, una cum
errorum and calumniarum quarundam examine quae continentur in septimo libro de
visibili Ecclesiae Monarchia a Nicholao Sandero conscripta. Land. 1573. qu. He
was living in 1593.

Admitted 112.

Mast. of Arts.
May 18. Joh. Philippus de alto saxo. Franc. Puccius Florentinus.

June...Tho. Spark of Magd. Coll.

Jul. 2. Ralph Sherwyn of Exeter Coll.

24. Tho. Banks -- He is the same, I suppose, who published A Sermon against
bad Spirits of malignity, malice and unmercifulness on Luke 6. 37. 38. Land.
1586. oct. I find another Tho. Banks who writes himself metaphorically
Piscator, sed vere Theologus and mere Praeco Evangelicus, who published Concio
ad clerum jamdudum Cantabrigiae habita, in Luc. cap. 5. ver. 10. Land. 1611. qu.

Admitted 49.

Bach. of Phys.
Mar. 31. Thom. Cogan of Oriel Coll.

He was the only Bach. who was admitted; besides whom, only one occurs that
supplicated, namely Thom. Twyne of C. C. Coll.

Bach. of Div.
May 27. Lewis Sweit of Alls. Coll. -- He was about this time Archdeacon of
Totness, in the place, as I conceive, of Oliver Whiddon.

Two more besides him were admitted, and nine there were that supplicated for
the said Degree, of whom some were not at all admitted in this University, as
John W^olton a Student in Divinity, afterward Bishop of Exeter, Tho. Cole, and
Tho. Brasbridge of Magd. Coll. and Nich. Marston of Chapter Chapter now Residentiary of
Exeter, Brother to Will. Marston of the same house LL. D. and Chantor of the
said Church of Exeter, who died in Nov. 1599.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jun. 28. Will. Jones Vicar General to the Bishop of Bathe and Well^, and
double or treble beneficed in the Diocese thereof.

Felix Lewys sometimes of Heart Hall, afterward made Bach. of the LL. at Doway,
now Principal of New Inn, was admitted the same day. -- He afterward lived in
the City of Bristow, and died beyond the Seas in 1591.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 22. Will. James Master of Vniv. Coll. -- He was afterward a Bishop.

May 27. Tob. Matthew President of St. John's Coll. -- Afterward an Archbishop.

Geffry or Griffith Lewys now Prebendary of Worcester, in the place of Tho.
Wilson promoted to the Deanery of that Church, was admitted the same day. -- In
1577 he was installed Canon of the sixth stall in the Collegiat Chapter of St.
Peter in Westminster, in the place of one Walt. Jones M. A. (who had succeeded
in that Dignity Dr. Matthew Hutton after he was made Dean of York, an. 1568.)
In 1594 he became Dean of Gloucester in the place of Anth. Rudd promoted to the Sea of St. David, and dying in 1607, Tho. Morton succeeded him in that dignity,
being the same most worthy Person, who was afterward Bishop of Durham. I have
seen a Copy of the will of this Dr. Lewys, made 5. Feb. 1606, and proved 16.
July 1607, wherein he desires that his body might be buried either in the Cath.
Chapter of Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, or in Westminster, in all which Churches
he had Dignities.

July 23. John Sprint of Chapter Chapter (originally of C. C. Coll.) was then admitted.
-- He was now Prebendary of Winchester, Residentiary of Salisbury, and a Person
famed for an excellent Preacher. In Feb. 1577, he succeeded Giles Lawrence in
the Archdeaconry of Wiltshire, who, I suppose, resigned; in 1580, he succeeded
George Carew in the Deanery of Bristow, (in which City, or near it, he was
born, being the Son of John Sprint an Apothecary of the said place) and in the
beginning of Feb. 1583, he was made Treasures of Salisbury. He died in the
latter end (in Feb.) of 1589, and was succeeded in the said Deanery by Dr.
Anth. Watson, the same who was afterward Bishop of Chichester.

Incorporations.
May 17. Griffith Toy Bac. of Arts of Cambridge -- He was now a Member of Jesus
Coll. in Oxon. and soon after made M. of Arts of this University and Prebendary
of Norwych.

Jun.... Hector Viellius Bach. of Arts of the Univ. of Caen in Normandy.

Feb. 6. George Savage Bach. of the Civ. Law of the University of Lovaine in
Brabant -- He was originally a member of Chapter Church, and was now Archdeacon of
Gloucester in the place of Guy Eaton; but was not, I presume, the same G. Savage
who was half Brother to Dr. Bonner B. of London, and Chancellor of Chester.

Thom. Willoughby Bach. of Div. of (Cambridge) was incorporated, but the day or
month when, I cannot yet find. -- This year June 23, he was installed the third
Dean of Rochester in the place of Dr. Edm. Freke, and was succeeded in that
dignity by John Coldwell M. D. of St. John Coll. in Cambridge, installed
therein 7. Januar. 1585. He was afterward the first married Bishop that sat
in the Cath. Chair of Salisbury.

In Apr. this year one Rich. Wills a Mast. of A. of Mentz in Bavaria
supplicated for incorporation, but was not admitted. See among the writers
under the year 1574.

An. Dom. 1575.
An. 17 Elizab.
An. 18 Elizab.
Chancellor the same.

Vicechanc. the same without any nomination or election.

Proct. John Underhill of New Coll. Hen. Savile of Mert. Coll. Apr. 13.


Bach. of Arts.
May 17. Julius Caesar of Magd. Hall. -- He was Son of Caesar Dalmarius of the
City of Trevignie in Italy, Doctor of Physic, and Physician to Qu. Mary and
Qu. Elizabeth, Son of Pet. Maria Dalmarius of the said City Doctor of Laws, but
descended from those of his name living at Frejus or Cividad del Friuli in the
confines of Italy. See more in 1583.

Jul. 5. Giles Tomson of Vniv. Coll. -- He was afterward of Alls. Coll. and
Bishop of Gloucester.

Jan. 27. Rich. Jews -- See among the Bach. of Div. in 1584.

Feb. 19. Edw. Hobie of Trin. Coll.

29. Edw. Transham or Stransham of St. John's Coll. -- This Person who was born
in Magd. Parish in the Suburbs of Oxon, left all he had and went to Doway in
1577. Where, after he had spent some time in the study of Philosophy and
Divinity in the English Coll. he was made a Priest. Afterward he went into the
mission of England, and for a time continued in Oxfordshire. At length being
taken, imprisoned and condemned, suffered death at London, with one Nich.
Woodfen another Priest, 21. Januar. 1585, aged 30 or thereabouts.

Admitted 109.

Bach. of Civ. Law.
Jun. 30. Thom. Emerford or Hemerford -- He afterward left the Church of
England, and went to the English Coll. at Rome, where being made a Priest,
returned into his own Country; but being taken and imprisoned, was executed at
Tyburn, with John Mundin and others, 12. Feb. 1582.

Three more besides him were admitted, and six there were that supplicated for
the said Degree; among whom Rob. Garvey a learned Irish Man was one.

Mast. of Arts.
June 1. John Lilye of Magd. Rich. Meredyth of Jesus Coll.


The last of which was afterward Bishop of Leighlin in Ireland.

3. John Hudson of Broadgates Hall. -- He was afterward Vicar of Patcham in
Sussex and Author of A Sermon at Paul's Cross on Heb. 10. 19. Land. 1584. oct.
and perhaps of other matters.

20. Henry Robinson of Qu. Coll.

21. Christoph. Bagshaw Tho. Holland Of Ball Coll.


27. John Thornborough of Magd. Coll.

Nov. 25. Rich. M^dox or Maddock of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Proctor of
the University and Author of A learned and godly Sermon, to be read of all Men,
but especially for all Mariners, Captains, and Passengers, which travel the
Seas. Preached at Waymouth, and Melcomb Regis, in the County of Dorset. 3. Oct.
1581, on Matthew. 8. 23. 24. 25. Printed in oct. at London, but when, it appears
not. It was published after the Authors death by one Thom. Martin, who being
unacquainted with his Christian name, sets him down in the title by the name of
John Madox, tho no such Person appears to have been ever Fellow of Alls. Coll.
In 1563, one Rich. Madox was admitted Bach. of Law, and another in 1590, but
they are both different, and different from Rich. the Divine, who was M. of A.

Feb. 1. John Body of New Coll. -- The next year he was removed from his
Fellowship for being a Papist; whereupon going beyond the Seas, he took upon
him Priestly Orders, and returning into England in the condition of a Seminary,
was taken and imprisoned and at length executed at Andever in Hampshire, for
denying the Queens Supremacy over the Church of England, an 1583. He was born
in the City of Wel^s, was well versed in the Civil Law, and esteemed by those
of his opinion a learned Man. See more of him in Card. Will. Alans book entit.
A sincere and modest defense, etc. or An answer to a Libell of English justice,
etc. p. 5. and in Concertatio Ecclesiae Cath. in Anglia, etc. printed 1594. p.
293. etc. I find another John Body, who in 1552 supplicated for the Degree of
Bach. of Civ. Law, and another who was admitted Bac. of Arts 1554. and a third
to that of Master, an. 1562. Whether they were one and the same Person, I
cannot tell, or whether several.

Tho. Leyson of New Coll. was admitted the same day (Feb. 1.)

Admitted 75.

Bach. of Phys.
Thom. Williams of Mert. Coll. was admitted this year, but the day or month
when, appears not. -- He is styled in the records (...)
of that Coll. vir in art medica multum diuque versatus, and doctus and
peritus medicus.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 13. John Nutter -- Whether he was the same John Nutter who suffered death
at Tyburne, 12. Feb. 1582 for being a R. Cath. Priest and denying the Queens
Supremacy, I know not. Quaere.

Jul. 8. Thom. Spark of Magd. Coll. -- He was now Chaplain to Thomas Bishop of
Lincoln and a famous Preacher, as the public register says.

Feb. 14. Thom. Summaster of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Archdeacon of
Cornwall.

John Leach of Exeter Coll. was admitted the same day; being about this time
Canon of Exeter, and of some other Church. -- One John Leech published a Sermon
entit. The train Soldier, preached before the Society of the Captains and
Gentlemen that exercise Arms in the Artillery Garden, 20. Apr. 1619 on Heb. 12.
4. Land. 1619. oct. but this John Leech must not be understood to be the same
with the former.

Ten in all were admitted this year, besides 7 that supplicated for the same
Degree.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Dec. 5. Rob. Whitmore.

Thom. Randolph mentioned among the creations, under the year 1566, did
supplicate for the Degree of Doct. of the Civ. Law, in June; yet he appears not
admitted. He was afterward made Doct. of that faculty in another Country, when
he performed one of his Embassies, as it seems. Quaere.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul.... John Watson of Alls. Coll. who had studied Physic for 20 years, was
admitted Doctor of that faculty -- He was afterward Bishop of Winchester.

Not one Doctor of Divinity was admitted this year.

Incorporations.
A supplicate was made for one Hugh Blythe Bach. of Div. of Kings Coll. in
Cambridge to be incorporated, but whether it was granted, it appears not. In
1572, he was installed Canon of Windsore in the place of George Carew made Dean
of that Chapel, (he being about that time Schoolmaster of Eaton) and in 1589
he succeeded Dr. Rich. Barber in the Archdeaconry of Leycester. In this last
dignity he was succeeded by Rob. Johnson a great benefactor to learning, an.
1591, and dying in 1610 (he being then Doct. of Div.) was succeeded in Windsore
by Thom. Frith of Alls. Coll. in Ox^n.

An. Dom. 1576.
An. 18 Eliz.
An. 19 Eliz.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Dr. Lawr. Humphrey, but he resigning, the Chancellor by his
letters designed for his Successor Dr. Harbert Westphalyng Canon of Chr. Chapter
who accordingly was admitted 23. June.

Proct. John Underhill Henry Savile again.


Which Proctors were continued in their Offices at the special request of the
Chancellor, May 12. without any election by suffrages in a scrutiny in
convocation.

Bach. of Arts.
Dec. 17. Steph. Gosson of C. C. Jan. 21. John Harmar of New Feb. 16. John
Doderidge of Exeter Coll.

The last was afterward a famous common Lawyer.

Admitted 122.

Bach. of Law.
Three were this year admitted, but not one of them do I find to have been a
Bishop, Writer, or Dignitary.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 23. Sim. Wisdom of Gloucester Hall.

26. Miles Smith of Brasn. Coll. -- He was afterward a Bishop.

Thom. Lister was admitted the same day -- One of both his names was a Jesuit,
and wrote a book (...)
to prove that the Secular Priests in custody at Wisbich Castle in
Cambridgeshire were schilmaticks, about 1595, having been incited to it by
several abuses received from them in their libels.

Jul. 3. John Rogers of (Mert.) Edw. Hobie of Trin Coll.


6. Tho. Rogers of Chapter Chapter Dav. Powell of Jes. Coll.

Oct. 29. John Prime of New Jan. 21. Rob. Coke of Brasn. Coll.

Admitted 55.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 10. John Read of St. John's Coll. -- He died in Apr. 1587. being then
Prebendary of Westminster, (which he obtained on the deprivation of Dr. John
Hardyman, an. 1567. by the endeavors of Sit Will. Cecill, who was afterward
L. Burleigh) and was buried in St. John's Coll. Chapel.

Jul. 3. Barthelm^w Chamberlain of Trin. Coll.

Besides which two, were 7 admitted.

On the 4. July Petrus Regius a French Man M. of A. of 12 years standing in the
University of Paris, now an Exile for his Religion, and a Catechistical
Lecturer in this University, supplicated that he might be admitted Bach. of
Div. and that the exercise to be performed for it, might be deferred till
Mich^elmas Term following, because he shortly after designed to return to his
native Country. But the Regents, upon mature consideration, returned this
answer, that he might take the said Degree when he pleased, conditionally that
he perform all exercises requisite by the statute before he take it.

On the same day Giles Gualter M. of A. of 8 years standing in the University
of Caen (another Exile, as it seems) did supplicate under the same form; but
whether either of them was admitted, it appears not.

Doct. of Civ. Law.
Jul. 3. Griffith or Griffin Lloyd Principal of Jesus Coll. -- He was
afterward the Kings Professor of the Civil Law and Chancellor to the Bishop
of Oxford. He died in Doctors Commons, 26. Nov. 1586, and was buried two days
after in the Church of St. Bennet near to Pauls-wharf, in London.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 10. Adam Squyre Master of Ball. Coll. -- This Person who was a learned
but fantastical Man, married the Daughter of Dr. Jo. Elmer Bishop of London, by
whose favor he was made Archdeacon of Middlesex, but when, I cannot tell.

Apr.... John Bold of C. C. Coll. -- In the year 1578. Sept. 25. he was
collated to the Archdeaconry of Northumberland by Dr. Barnes Bishop of Durham,
on the resignation of Mr. Franc. Bunney, who some years before had succeeded
Mr. Ralph Lever in that Dignity. After Dr. Bold had resigned it, Ralph Tonstall
M. A. was collated thereunto 29. Oct. 1581, but who succeeded him, the register
of the Church of Durham, which is deficient, tells us not till Bishop Neyles
time, who collated to the said Archdeaconry Gab. Clerk DD 7. Aug. 1619. upon
the resignation of Dr. John Craddock. See more among the Masters of Arts, an.
1612.

Jul. 6. Pet. Lozillerius Villerius a French Man, Doctor of the Civil Law and
Divinity of an University in his own Country, was then admitted to proceed in
Divinity, and three days after did complete that Degree by standing in the Act
then celebrated. -- He was an Exile for his Religion, lived in Chapter Chapter for some
time, but whether he read a lecture, or taught privately, as other Exiles did,
I know not. Sure I am he was a learned Man, and had newly corrected and set
forth Beza's New Testament in Greek.

Incorporations.
June 5. Tho. Hakeluyt M. A. of Cambridge.

22. Will. Smyth M. of A. of the same University -- I take this to be the same
Will. Smyth who was afterward Master of Clare Hall, Chaplain to Qu. Elizabeth,
Vicechanc. of the said University, an. 1603, Chaplain to K. Jam. 1. and at
length Provost of Kings Coll. to which he was elected 22. Aug. 1612. He died
26. March 1615, and became a considerable benefactor to the said College.

Jul. 10. Humph. Tindall M. A. of the same University -- He was afterward
Master of Queens Coll. there, and became the fourth Dean of Ely in the place of
John Bell D. D. who died 31. Oct. 1591 aged 61. The said Tindall was descended
from the ancient and gentile family of his name living in Norfolk, and dying
12. Oct. 1614 aged 65 was buried in the Cath. Chapter at Ely.

July 11. Peter Baro D. D. of Cambridge -- This learned and worthy Divine was
born at Estampes in France, left that Country upon account of Religion, came
into England for refuge, settled in Cambridge by the endeavors of Dr. Andr.
Perne, and being afterward of Trin. Coll. succeeded Dr. John Still in the
Margaret Professorship of that University, and read there several years to the
great liking of many. At length the Calvinistical Party disgusting certain
matters, (which they looked upon as hetrodox) vented by him in his readings and
prints, viz. in his Comment on Jonah and his book De Fide, one of them named
Lawrence Chadderton had a contest with him. Their objections were (1) That in
his readings upon Jonah, he taught the Popish Doctrine of the cooperation of
faith and works to justification; which, tho in terms a little changed, yet the
Doctrine was one and the same in effect. (2) That he labored to make Men
believe that the reformed Churches Doctrine, was not so differing from Popish
Doctrine, but that by distinctions they might be reconciled, and therefore
concluded that both professions might be tolerated. And thirdly that in his
said readings he taught that the Heathen may be saved without the Faith of the
Gospel, and other strange matters, which they looked upon as damnable errors,
etc. Besides also, as they observed, that after many years, wherein he had
sundry ways hurt the sincerity of the Doctrine, he brought the Popish Schoolmen
into credit, and diminished the honor of the learned Writers of that age.
Since which time the course of studies in Divinity, and the manner of preaching
has been much changed in that University by some, who have followed that vain,
and left the study of sound Writers (as they style them) and apply themselves
to the reading, as they father add, of popish, barbarous, and fantastical
Schoolmen, delighted with their curious questions and quiddities, whereby they
draw all points of Christian faith into doubts, being the highway not only to
Popery but to Atheism, etc. For these, I say, and such like matters, he was,
by the zealous travel of some of the Brethren in the said University, removed
from his place of Margaret Professor, about the year 1596, not without the
consent of Dr. Whitgift See more of this matter in (...) ^ook intit.
Observations on the History of (...) Esquire. Land. 1656 p. 73.
Archb. of Canterbury. For so it was, and they could not be beaten out of it,
that they thought, that as a certain Spaniard named Ant. Corranus was brought
to, and settled in, Oxon. purposely to corrupt the true Doctrine; so Pet. Baro a
French Man was for Cambridge, which last, is nevertheless reported in the
following age by a high Church of England Idem in (...), etc. printed 1650. p.
(...).
Man that tho he was a Forreigner by birth, yet be better understood the
Doctrine of the Church of England, than many of the Natives, his contemporaries
in the University of Cambridge, etc. His writings are these. (1) In Jonam
Prophetam praelectiones 39. (2) Conciones tres ad clerum Cantabrigiensem
habitae, in templo B. Mariae. (3) Theses, publicae in Scholis peroratae and
disputatae. Which Theses being only two, were translated into English by John
Ludham with these titles. First Gods purpose and decree takes not away the
liberty of man's corrupt will. The second, Our conjunction with Christ is
altogether spiritual. Both printed at Land. 1590. in oct. (4) Precationes,
quibus usus est author in suis praelectionibus inchoandis and finiendis. All
which were published at Land. 1579. fol. by the care and labor of Osmund Lake
Bach. of Div. and Fellow of Kings Coll. in Cambridge who viewed and corrected
them before they went to the press. This Osm. Lake, by the way I must tell you,
had been Proctor of that University, was afterward Vicar of Ringwood in
Hampshire and a publisher of several books, (besides others which he wrote, that
are not yet extant) among which are A probe Theological, or the first part of
the Christian Pastors proof of his learned Parishioners faith. Land, 1612. qu.
He died in 1621 leaving then behind him the character of a learned Man. As for
the other works of Pet. Baro they are these. (5) De praestantia and dignitate
divinae Legis, lib. 2. printed 1586. oct. (6) Tractatus in quo docet
expetitionem oblati a mente boni and fiduciam ad fidei justificantis naturam
pertinere. (7) Summa trium sententiarum de praedestinatione etc. Hardrov. 1613.
oct. printed with the Notes of Joh. Piscator, Disquisition of Franc. Junius,
and Prelection of Will. Whittaker. (8) Special treatise of Gods providence, and
of comforts against all kind of crosses and calamities to be fetched from the
same; with an Exposition on Psalm. 107. (8) Four Sermons. The first on Psalm.
133. 1. 2. 3. The sec. on Psalm. 15. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. etc. After this Author Peter
Baro had been removed from Cambridge, he went to London, lived and died in
Crouched Friars, and was buried in the Church of St. Olaves in Hartstreet. At
whose inte^ment the Bishop of London ordered the most eminent Divines and
Ministers in that City, to be present. The Baro's or Barons as they are by some
called, who do now, or did lately live at Boston in Lincolnshire, and at Kings
Lynn in Norfolk, are descended from him.

Jul. 11. Walt. Travers M. of A. of Cambridge, was then incorporated in the
same Degree -- This Person had received his Academical education in Trin Coll.
in the said University, and afterward traveled to Geneva, where he became
acquainted with Beza; and at his return took the Degree of Bach. of Div. Soon
after he went to Antwerp, where he was ordained Minister according to the
Presbyterian way, and returning again into England, he became Lecturer in the
Temple while Mr. Rich. Hooker was Master; between whom certain differences in
Religion happening, Travers was discharged of his place by the Archbishop:
Whereupon by the endeavors of Dr. Adam Loftus Archb. of Dublin, he was made
Provost of Trin. Coll. there an. 1594. But he keeping that place not long, he
returned into England, and lived diverse years, as it is said, very obscurely,
but where I cannot tell. Sure I am that one Walt. Travers succeeded Joh.
Salkeld in the Vicaridge of Wellington in Somersetshire, an. 1635, but whether
the same, it is doubtful. Among several things that this W. Travers has
published, is Declaration of ecclesiastical discipline out of the word of God,
and of the declining of the Church of England from the same. Genev. 1580. oct.
It is also extant in latin, but that I have not yet seen. The other things
that he has written you may mostly, if not all, see in the Oxford or Bodleian
Catalogue.

On the 4. of July was a supplicate made that Tho. Norton M. of A. of Cambridge
might be incorporated, but whether he was, it appears not. Had this
supplication been made in 1560, I should have taken him to be the same Tho.
Norton, a famous Poet of his time, whom I have mentioned among these Writers in
Tho. Sternhold, an. 1549, and in Tho. Sackvile an. 1608.

An. Dom. 1577.
An. 19 Elizab.
An. 20 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Will. Cole. D. D. President of C. C. Coll. was admitted to his
office 13. July.

Proct. John Glover of St. Joh. Coll. Tho. Dochen of Magd. Coll. Apr. 17.


Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 17. Erasmus Dreyden -- The first of his Surname that settled in
Northamptonshire (descended from the Dreydens of Staffhill or Staffle in
Cumberland) was by profession a Schoolmaster, and being learned, and well
acquainted with Erasmus of Roterdam, that Person was Godfather to one of his
Sons; which is the reason that that Christian name descends among the family of
the Dreydens in that County; some of whom have gloried in it, in my hearing.

June 12. George Peele of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward an eminent Poet.

25. Tertullian Pine of St. John's Coll. -- Whether he took a higher Degree in
this University, it appears not; for traveling beyond the Seas, he was made
Doctor of the Laws in the University of Basil; whence returning, he was
installed Archdeacon of Sudbury in the Dioc. of Norwych 20. July 1591, in the
place of Dr. Jo. Still of Cambridge. After Pine, Cuthb. Norrys D. D. was
installed 6. Oct. 1599, and after his death Theophilus Kent, 31. Dec. 1621.
Some years after Kents death, Anth. Sparrow D. D. of Camb. was installed 7.
Aug. 1660, who being promoted to the sea of Exter Dr. John Spencer of the said
Univ. succeeded, an. 1667.

Jul. 1. John Davies of Gloc. Hall -- Afterward an eminent Mathematician.

8. Tho. Lodge of Trin. Coll.

Oct. 29. Charles Turnbull John Spenser of Corp. C. C.


Dec. 4. Will. Gager of Chapter Chapter Feb. 6. Edw. Hutchins of Brasn. Mar. 22. Will.
Warford of Trin. Coll.

Anth. Shirley of the same Coll. of the Holy Trin. was then also admitted. --
See another Anth. Shirley among the Bach. of Arts, an. 1581. who was a Sussex
Man born, but this of Trin. Coll. was a native of Oxfordshire.

Admitted 124.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 29. John Williams of Alls. Rich. Hooker of C. C. Coll.


May 17. Will. Greenwich of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Archd. of Salop,
and died an aged Man in Apr. 1631.

Jun. 25. Will. Wilkes of Mert. Jam. Bisse of Magd Will. Massy of Brasn. Coll.


27. Rich. Hackluyt of Chapter Chapter Hen. Rowlands of New Coll.

Jul. 3. Tho. Lovell. -- Whether he be the same Tho. Lovell who wrote A
Dialogue between cust^m and verity concerning the use and abuse of dancing, and
minstrelsie. Land. in oct. about 1589. I know not.

Feb. 18. Julius Caesar of Magd. Hall. -- See among the Doctors of Civ. Law
1583.

Admitted 116.

Doct. of Law.
Nov. 23. Tho. Glasier of Chapter Chapter -- In 1578, he was elected Rector of Exeter
Coll. and dying 9. Mar. 1591. was succeeded in that Rectory by Dr. Thom.
Holland.

Not one Doctor of Phys. or Divinity was admitted, not any to the reading of
the sentences but one.

Incorporations.
May. 23. Tho. Bowsfield Bac. of Arts of Pembr. Hall in Cambridge -- In the Act
following he proceeded Master of his faculty in this University, became
Principal of St. Edmunds Hall in 1581, and the year after Prebendary of
Grimston and Yatmister in the Church of Sarum.

Jul. 9. Sim. Harward Bach. of Arts of another University.

Rich. Remyngton M. A. of Cambr. was incorporated the same day* In 1582. Inn.
8. he was collated to the Archdeaconry of Clievland upon the death of Ralph
Coulton Bac. of Div. (which happened 8. May going before, aged 55) and some years
after, (about 1598) he became Archdeacon of the East Riding of Yorkshire, in
the place of Tho. Cole; whom I have mentioned before, under the year 1567. In
Clievland succeeded, upon his resignation, one Rich. Bird, collated thereunto
21. of March 1588. and in the East Riding, Marmaduke Blaxton, as I shall tell
you elsewhere.

Jul. 9. Anthony Rudde Bach. of Div. of Cambr. was also then incorporated. --
He was of Trin. Coll. in that University, was afterward D. of D. and in 1584
he became Dean of Gloucester in the place of Lawr. Humphrey, who four years
before had been promoted to the Deanery of Winchester. In 1594 June 9. he was
consecrated Bishop of S. David (being then accounted a most admirable Preacher)
and died 7 March 1614, having before published four, or more, Sermons. He had a
Son of both his names, who was a Commoner of Magd. Coll. in this University in
1603.

Jul. 19. Nich. Bownde M. A. of the said University. -- He was afterward D. of
D. beneficed at Norton in Suffolk, and famed for several things that he
published in his life time. Among which are (1) Sabbatum veteris and novi
Testamenti; or the true doctrine of the Sabbath, held and practiced of the
Church of England, both before and under the Law, etc. This book was first
published, as one (...) in his (...) etc. lib. 9. (...) 1595.
observes, in 1595, and was the first of that nature which first saw light, and
occasioned the observation of the Lords day more solemnly to be kept, which
before was not. Whereupon his Doctrine was opposed by several persons, of whom
Tho. Rogers was one, as I have elsewhere told you. (2) The holy exercise of
fasting, etc. in certain Homilies or Sermons, etc. Land. 1604. oct. dedicated
to his great Lord and Patron Dr. John Jegon B. of Norwych. (3) A storehouse of
comfort for the afflicted in spirit set open in 21 Sermons. Land. 1604. qu. The
two first are on the title of Psalm 20, To him that excels; the rest are on
the six first Verses of the said Psalm. (4) Unbelief of S. Thomas the Apostle,
laid open for believers, etc. printed 1608, oct. with other things which I have
not yet seen.

Nov.... John Delabere sometimes of Chapter Chapter and Bach. of Phys. of this
University, afterward Doct. of the same Faculty at Basil in Germany, was then
incorporated Doct. of Phys. -- He was afterward Principal of Gloc. Hall.

Feb. 18. Nich. Goldsborough M. A. of Cambridge. -- He was incorporated also
Bach. of Div. in 1597.

An. Dom. 1578.
An. 20 Eliz.
An. 21 Eliz.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Martin Colepeper Doct. of Phys. and Warden of New Coll. was adm.
Jul. 15. being the next day after the Act was ended.

Proct. Ralph Smyth of Magd. Clem. Colmer of Brasn. Coll.


They were elected in Congregation 9 Apr.

Bach. of Arts.
May 14. Matthew Gwinne of S. Joh. Coll.

Jul. 12. Rob. Hues (Husins) of S. Mary's Hall, lately of Brasn. Coll.

Nov. 12. Leonard Hutten Tho. Ravis Joh. Howson of Chapter Chapter


The two last were afterward Bishops.

Nov. 12. John Terry of New Dec. 9. Rich. Kilbye of Linc. Coll.

Jun. 28. Walter Warner. -- One of both his names was an eminent Mathematician
in the Reigns of K. Jam. and Chapter 1. as I have elsewhere told you.

Jun. 28. Will. Wood Will. Wilkenson of Brasn. Coll.


See another Will. Wood in 1561. As for Will. Wilkinson. I find one of both his
names to be Author of A confutation of certain articles delivered to the family
of Love, etc. Land. 1579, oct. and of A godly treatise of the exercise of
Tasteng, etc. Land. 1580, oct. but him of Brasn. Coll. I take to be too young
to be an Author, he being this year about 20 years of age. See another Will.
Wilkinson an. 1593.

Feb. 26. Thom. Gibson. -- See among the Masters 1580.

Rich. Parks of Brasn. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Mar. 17. Tho. Bentham of Mert. Coll. -- See among the Masters of 1581.

Adm. 107.

Bach. of Law.
Jul. 2. Henry Dethick M. of A. was admitted Bach. of Law, being now
Chancellor of the Diocese of Carlisle. -- About this time also he succeeded one
Edw. Threlkeld LL. D. in the Archdeaconry of Carlisle, who had been collated
thereunto 10 Eliz. Dom. 1567-8. the same Threlkeld I mean who had been Fellow
of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, and the same who was so much admired in that
University, for his excellent Knowledge and Eloquence, that he was thought to
use the help of some good Genius. When he gave up the Chancellourship of
Carlisle he was Chancellor of the Diocese of Hereford, where he became highly
valued for his profession. In the year 1581 I shall make farther mention of
Hen. Dethick, who was a man of Learning also, but far beneath Threlkeld.

Beside Dethicke were six Bach. of Law adm. this year, among whom Joh. Drewry
was one. See in 1584.

Mast. of Arts.
May 2. Martin Heton Rich. Eedes Will. Watkinson of Chapter Chapter


5. Sim. Harward of New 29. Will. Leigh of Brasn. Coll.

Jun. 17. Thom. Smith of Chapter Chapter

July 4. Giles Tomson of Vniv. Coll. -- He was afterward of Alls. Coll. and a
Bishop.

Adm. 52.

But two Bach. of Div. were admitted this year, of whom Edm. Lillye of Magd.
Coll. was one, afterward Master of Ball. Coll.

Doct. of Law.
Oct. 13. Rich. Percye of Chapter Chapter -- He died 10 Nov. 1598, (after he had been
20 years Commissary to the Archbish. of York) and was buried in the Church of
Settrington in Yorkshire, of which he became Rector in 1591, in the place of
Ralph Tomson D. D.

Feb. 12. Giles Lawrence of Alls. Coll. and Greek Professor of the University.
-- He was a Glocestershire man born, was admitted Scholar of C. C. Coll. with
his individual Friend John Jewel an. 1539, and in 1542 was elected prob.
Fellow of that of Allsoules. On the 18 Sept. an. 1564 he became Archdeacon of
Wilts, on the deprivation of one John Lawrence (whether his Father or Uncle I
know not) being then in great esteem for his learning. A certain (...) in
Epist. (...). ad (...). an. 1575.
Author of no mean fame, tells us, that this Dr. Lawrence was the light and
ornament of this University, that he was brought up and nourished in the bosom
of Pallas, and that into him, as also into Barthelmew Dodington, the ornament
of Cambridge, Nature, and unwearied Industry, had infused and placed, all the
Greek Treasures and Riches imaginable. I have been informed that he has
written and published several Books, but such I have not yet, in all my
searches, seen; nor do I know any thing else of him, only that in the time of
Queen Mary he was Tutor to the Children of Sir Arthur Darcey living near the
Tower of London, and that he was in being in 1584.

Feb. 23. Robert Salisbury of Jesus Coll. -- He was a younger Son of Sir John
Salisbury of Lewenie in Denbighshire Knight, and Uncle to Sir John Salisbury of
the same place, who died 1613; which is all I know of him.

Doct. of Phys.
Nov. 12. Henry Bust of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward superior Reader of
Lynacre's Phy^. Lecture, practiced his Faculty many years in Oxon with great
repute; and dying in his house in S. Aldates Parish, was buried in the Church
belonging thereunto, 17 Feb. 1616.

Doct. of Div.
July 10. Edw. Chapman of Cambridge. -- See among the Incorporations following.

12. Rich. Creke of Magd. Coll.

Jan. 19. John Barefoot of C. C. Coll. Chaplain to Ambrose Earl of Warwick. --
In 1581 he became Archdeacon of Lincoln in the place of Dr. John Robinson
(mentioned among the Incorporations an. 1566) and dying in 1595, was succeeded
in that Dignity by Rich. Cleyton D. D. collated thereunto 29 August the same
year. After Cleyton followed John Hills D. D. Master of S. Catherins Coll. or
Hall in Cambridge, who was collated to it 21 Sept. 1612. He died in 1626,
(about the month of Sept.) and was buried in the Chancel of the Church at
Horsheath in Cambridgeshire, where there was, if not still, a Monument in the
Wall, over his grave.

Jan. 19. Barthelmew Chamberlayne of Trin. Coll.

Edmund Bunney of Mert. Coll. did supplicate for the said Degree in February,
but was not admitted.

Incorporations.
July 7. Edward Chapman Bach. of Div. of Cambridge. -- He was soon after
admitted Doctor, as I have before told you.

14. William Whitaker or Whittaker Bach. of Divinity of the said University. --
This famous Divine for Learning and Life, was born at Holme in the Parish of
Burnd^ey in Lancashire, initiated there in Grammar learning, taken thence by
his Uncle Alexander Nowell Dean of Paul's, and by him maintained in his house,
and put to the Free School there. At eighteen years of age he was sent to Trin.
Coll. in Cambridge, took the Degrees in Arts, and the first thing that made him
known for his excellency in the Gr. Tongue, was the turning his Uncles
Catechism into that Language. Afterward being famous for Theology, he was made
the Kings Professor in that Faculty, and stood up in defense of the Protestant
Religion and Church of England against Edmund Campian, Nicholas Saunders,
William Rainolds, Robert Bellarmine, Thomas Stapleton, etc. At length having
much impoverished his weak Body by continual study, even at that time, when the
Question was so rise among the Divines (...) in Ann. 1. Reg. (...) an. 15^5.
Whether a true and justifying faith may be lost, he was freed from this Body
of flesh, and lost his life, having left behind him the desire and love of the
present times, and the envy of Posterity, that cannot bring forth his parallel.
He gave way to Fate 4 December an. 1595, aged 47, and was buried in the Chapel
belonging to S. John's Coll. in Cambridge, of which Coll. he had several years
before been Master. His Works are printed in Latin in two folio's at Genev.
1610.

July 15. G^vase Babington M. of A. of the same University of Cambridge. -- He
was a Nottinghamshire man born, was Fellow of Trinity Coll afterward Chaplain
to Henry Earl of Pembroke, Treasurer of Landaff, and successively Bishop of
Landaff, Exeter, and Worcester. He published several Books of Div. which were
all printed in one Volume in fol, Land. 1615, and go under the name of his
Works. He died in the year 1610, at which time he enriched the Library
belonging to the Church at Worcester, with many choice Books.

Brute Babington B. of A. of this University, was incorporated the same day: so
also was

William Cotton M. A. -- This person who was Son of John Cotton Citizen of
Lond^n, third Son of Richard, eight Son of John Cotton, or Coton of Humpstable
Ridware in Staffordshire, was partly educated in Guildford School in Surrey,
afterward in Queens Coll. in Cambridge, and took the usual Degrees. Some years
after he became Archdeacon of Lewis, Canon residentiary of S. Paul's Cath.
Church, and at length Bishop of Exeter. He died at Silverton in Devon. 26
August 1621, and was buried on the south side of the Choire or Presbytery of
the Cath. Church at Exeter. One William Cotton Fellow of Magd. Coll. in Oxon,
was admitted M. of A. in June 1577, but what relation there was between him and
the Bishop, I cannot tell.

This year also, Sept. 1. Edward Stanhope Doct. of the Civ. Law of Trinity
Coll. in the said University, did supplicate in a Convention called simile
primum, that he might be incorporated in the said Degree, which, tho granted
simpliciter, yet it appears not that he was incorporated. He was afterward a
Knight, Chancellor to the Bishop of London, and Vicar General to the Archb. of
Canterbury. He paid his last debt to Nature on the sixteenth day of March an.
1608, and was buried near to the great north door within the Cathedral Church
of S. Paul in London. He was Brother to John Lord Stanhope of Harrington.

An. Dom. 1579.
An. 22 Elizab.
An. 22 Elizab.
Chanc. the same. viz. Robert Earl of Leicester.

Vicechanc. Tobie Matthew D. D. Dean of Chapter Chapter July 14.

Proct. Will. Zouch of Chapter Chapter Isaac Vpton of Magd. Coll.

Elected in Congregation 29 April.

Bach. of Arts.
May 16. Robert Abbot of Ball. Coll. -- Afterward a deep Divine and Bishop of
Salisbury.

19. John Philipps. -- The same, I think, who was afterward B. of the Isle of
Man.

June 3. Robert Sackvile of Heart Hall. -- See among the Masters following.

Oct. 16. Edwyn Sandys of C. C. William Tooker Roger Hacket of New Coll.



22. Edward Philipps of Broadgates Jan. 14. Henry Perry of Gloucester Hall.

26. John King of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Bishop of London.

Feb. 12. Thomas Hariot of S. Mary's George Carleton of S. Edm. Hall.


The first of which two was afterward an eminent Mathematician, and the other
a Divine and B. of Chichester.

17. Isaac Colfe of Broadgates Hall.

March 9. Lawr. Hyde of Magd. Hall. -- He was afterward a Knight. and Attorney
to Queen Anno the Consort of King Jam. 1.

Thomas Savile was admitted the same day. -- See among the Masters, an. 1584.

Admitted 128, or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Eight were admitted, of whom Gervase Carrington was one; who in 1576 had been
installed Prebendary of Worcester, on the resignation of Arth. Dudley M. of A.

Mast. of Arts.
June 3. Robert Sackvile of Heart. Hall. -- He was now three years standing in
the University, and was, in honor to his noble Race, admitted Bach. and Master
of Arts in one and the same Congregation. On the 13 of July following, he was
Senior of the Act then celebrated, and in 1608 succeeded his Father in the
Earldom of Dorset.

July 6. George Peele of Chapter Chapter

9. Hen. Smith of Heart Hall. -- See among the Masters in 1583.

10. John Bond of New Coll.

Thomas Hethe or Heath of Alls. Coll. was adm. the same day.

Adm. 75.

Bach. of Div.
May 4. Hieronim. Schlick Count of Passan or Passaun, Lord in Weiskirden and
Slackenward, who had studied two years in the University of Prague, and five in
Lips where he professed Divinity, and twice in one year elected Rector of the
Univ. of Marpurg, was then admitted to the reading of the Sentences, or, as
'twas now called, to the reading of any book of S. Paul's Epistles, that is, to
the degree of Bach. of Divinity. -- This the Members of the University did
readily grant, not only because he was an honorable person, but also for that
his Parents and Relations had suffered much in the Smalcaldic War for their
zealous profession of the Gospel, and also that the Count had been trained up
in good Arts, as well as in Divinity.

June 24. Thomas Bilson of New John Rainolds of C. C. Coll.


Besides these three, were but three more admitted.

Doct. of Law.
Jul.... John Day of Magd. Coll. -- He became Vicar Genesis to the B. of Bathe
and Wells, an. 1587.

He was the only person who was admitted Doctor of his Faculty this year.

Not one Doct. of Phys. was adm. this year.

Doct. of Div.
March 27. Ralph Tomson of Brasn. Coll. -- He was now one of the Chaplains to
the Queen, and dying 18 Aug. 1591, was buried in the Church of Settrington (of
which he was Rector) in Yorkshire.

Apr.... Robert Dorset Canon of Chapter Chapter -- In the beginning of this year (1579)
he became Dean of Chester in the place of Rich. Langworth or Longworth D. D. of
Cambridge deceased, who before had succeeded Dr. Jo. Piers, but the year when,
I cannot tell. This Dr. Dorset, who was also Rector of Ewelme in Oxfordshire,
died 29 May 1580, and was buried in the Church there; whereupon one Tho.
Madesley or Modesley succeeded him in his Deanery.

July 3. John Langworth of New Coll. -- This person who was Son of Lancelot
Langworth of Kertlebury in Worcestershire, was installed Prebendary of
Worcester in the place of Richard Longworth before mentioned, an. 1579, was
afterward Prebendary of Canterbury, and in 1588, Feb. 4. was admitted
Archdeacon of Wells, but in whose place I cannot tell, because from the death
of John Rugg Archdeacon of Wells, which happened in 1581, to the year 1587, the
Register of that Church is wanting or defective. In the said Archdeaconry of
Wells succeeded him one Steph. Nelson, but when, unless in the year 1610, I
cannot tell, and in his Prebendary of Worcester John Hanmer, an. 1614.

John Woolton who became Bishop of Exeter this year, did, in the month of May,
supplicate for the degree of D. of D. but whether admitted or diplomated, I
find not.

Incorporations.
May...Edward Grant or Grant Bach. of Div. of Cambridge, and chief Master of
Westminster School.

June...John Langworth Bach. of Div. of the same University. -- In the month
following he was admitted Doct. of his Faculty, as before I have told you, and
proceeded as a Member of New Coll. in the Act that followed.

July 14. Eubu^e Thelwall Bach. of Arts of Trin. Coll. in the said University.
-- He was afterward Master of Arts of this University, Counselor at Law,
Master of the Alienation Office, one of the Masters of the Chancery, a Knight,
and at length Principal of, and an especial Benefactor to, Jesus College in
Oxon. He died 8 Oct. 1630, aged 68 years, and was buried in the Chapel
belonging to that Coll.

Godfrey Goldsborough Bach. of Div. of Cambridge, was incorporated the same
day. -- This person who had been Fellow of Trin. Coll. in that University, was
installed Archdeacon of Worcester, in the place of Dr. Thomas Powell resigning,
15 July 1579, (he being then Prebendary of Caddington in the Cath. Church of S.
Paul) and on the 12 August 1581 was installed Prebendary of the Church there,
in the place of John Bullyngham promoted to the Sea of Gloucester. At length,
upon the death to the said Bullyngham, he became Bishop of Gloucester, an. 1598,
(at which time he had license to keep his Preb. of Worcester in commendam) and
dying 26 May 1604, was buried in a little Chapel on the North side of a fair
large Chapel at the East end of the Choire of the Cath. Church at Gloucester.
Over his Grave was soon after a raised or Altar-Monument erected, with the
proportion of a Bish. in his Pontifie (...) lying thereon, with this
Inscription, Aureus, and Fulvo nomen sortitus ab auro,
Hac Goldisburgus nunc requiescit humo.
Scilicet orta solo pretiosa metalla parente
In matrem redeunt inveterata suam.


He left behind him two Sons, John and Godfrey, and other Children, as I
conceive, besides a Brother named John.

Richard Wood Bach. of Div. of the same University, was incorporated the same
day, July 14. -- He was afterward Doctor of his Faculty, and became Can. or
Preb. of Westminster in the place of John Read deceased, in the month of May
1587.

John Keltride M. A. of the same Univ. was also then (July 14.) incorporated in
the same degree. -- Whether he be the same with John Keltridge who wrote
Exposition or Readings on the Lords Prayer, on Luke 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. as also A Sermon at the making of Ministers, on 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. printed
at Land. 1578, as also of a Sermon against the Jesuits, on Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Land.
1581. qu. I cannot tell. Quaere.

Creations.
Feb. 12. Richard Barnes M. of A. of this University* and Bach. of Div. of
Cambridge, now Bishop of Durham, was actually created Doctor of Divinity by
certain persons appointed by the Members of the University, but whether at
London, or elsewhere, it appears not.

An. Dom. 1580.
An. 22 Elizab.
An. 23 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Arthur Yeldard D. D. President of Trin. Coll. July 13.

Proct. Rob. Crayne of Ball. Coll. Tho. Stone of Chapter Chapter

Elected in Congregation 13 Apr. The junior was afterward Parson of Warkton in
Northamptonshire, and a great promoter of Presbytery. He died there 1617.

Bach. of Arts.
June 13. Rob. Wright of Trin. Coll. Sabin Chambers of Broadgates Hall. Hen.
Cuffe of Trin. Coll.

The first of these three was afterward Bishop of Lichfield, the other a
Jesus, and the last an eminent Grecian.

Jan. 13. Francis Godwin of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward successively B. of
Landaff and Hereford.

Feb. 3. John Rider of Jesus Coll. -- He was also afterward a B. in Ireland.

17. Will. Hubbocke lately of Magd. Hall, now of C. C. Coll.

Admitted 103.

Mast. of Arts.
June 15. Will. Gager of Chapter Chapter

March 10. Thomas Gibson of Queens Coll. originally, as it seems, of that of
Mert. -- One of both his names has published A fruitful Sermon preached at
Okeham in Rutlandshire, on 1 Cor. 9. 16. Land. 1584, in oct. Whether the same
with him who was Master of Arts, I cannot tell. Another Tho. Gibson also I
find, who published The blessing of a good King, in eight Sermons, etc. Land.
1614, oct. whether he was of Oxon I know not.

Mar. 16. Chacles Turnbull John Spenser of C. C. Coll.


Adm. 49.

Not one Bach. of Phys. was this year admitted, only three supplicated for that
degree.

Five Bach. of Div. were admitted, yet not one of them can I mention according
to the method that I follow.

Doct. of Law.
July 20. Daniel Done of Alls. Coll. now Principal of New Inn. -- He was
afterward Dean of the Arches, Master of the Requests, one of the Commissioners
appointed by Q. Elizabeth to treat with the Danes at Bremen, an. 1602, a
Knight, and one of the two first Burgesses elected by the Univ. of Oxon, after
the Members thereof were empowered to send Burgesses to Parliament, an. 1603. He
died 15 Sept. 1617. One of both his names was M. of Arts and a Minister, Author
of A subpoena from the Star Chamber of Heaven, Sermon. at Paul's Cross 4 Aug.
1622, on Luke 3. 9. Land. 1623. oct. and perhaps of other things.

Not one Doct. of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
June...Steph. Townsend of Chapter Chapter

July 8. Philip Bisse of Magd. Coll. -- He was now Archdeacon of Taunton, in
the place of Justin Lancaster, and Subdean of Wells, in which first Dignity he
was succeeded by Matthew Sutcliff LL. D. in January 1585. This Dr. Bisse, who
was Son of Rich. Bisse of Stokeland in Somersetshire, was an especial
Benefactor to Wadham Coll. by giving thereunto 2000 Books valued at 700 l.

John Brownyng of Cambridge was admitted the same day.

July 15. Edmund Lilly lately of Magd. Coll. and about this time Master of that
of Balliol. -- He was an excellent Divine, universally read in the Fathers, all
whose Opinions he would reckon up upon any question at Divinity disputations in
Ball. College; and that with such volubility Balliosergus etc. per Hen. Savage,
p. 116.
of language, and rivers of eloquence, as made all covet to hear him, and his
very enemies to admire him. On the last of Nov. 1591 he was made Archdeacon of
Wiltshire, but whether in the place of Dr. John Sprint who died in the latter
end of 1589, I know not. He the said Dr. Lilly was buried in the Church of S.
Mary the Virgin in Oxon, 12 Feb. 1609.

Nich. Bond of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- This person who was
now Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen, became Canon of the fifth Stall in S.
Peter's Church at Westminster on the death of John Rugge, an. 1582, and in the
beginning of 1590 was elected President of the said Coll. he being then Rector
of Alresford in Hampshire. In the said Prebendship he was succeeded by Will.
Robinson D. D. Rector of Bingham in Nottinghamshire, (Brother by the Mothers
side to Dr. Will. Laud) who was installed therein 5 of March an. 1607, and in
his Presidentship succeeded John Harding D. of D.

Jan. 24. Thomas Bilson of New Coll. -- He was afterward successively B. of
Worcester and Winchester.

Incorporations.
July 12, being the next day after the Act, were fifteen Cambr. Masters
incorporated, among whom Rich. Clayton and Will. Smyth, were two; but whether
either of them were afterward a Bishop, Writer, or man of note, I cannot ye
find.

Jan. 26. Alexander Hume M. of A. of S. Andrews in Scotland. -- See more of him
in Adam Hill among the Writers, an. 1594. nu. 275.

March 6. John Hottoman a French man, Doct. of the Civ. Law of the University
of Valence. -- One John Hotman was Preb. of Sarum. See in Will. Camden among
the Writers, an. 1623.

Albericus Gentilis an Italian, Doct. of the Civ. Law of the Univ. of Perugia,
was incorporated the same day.

On the 8 July supplicated to be incorporated one John Keeper Mast. of Arts of
the University of Lovaine, but being a suspected Papist, he was put aside.

An. Dom. 1581.
An. 23 Elizab.
An. 24 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Will. James D. D. Master of Vniv. Coll. Jul. 13. In his absence
Oliver Wythyngton Doct. of Phys. and Dean of Battle in Sussex supplied his
place.

Proct. Rob. Crayne again Rich. Maddock of Alls. Coll. Apr. 5.


The junior of which Proctors renouncing his Office, because he was about to
travel into remote parts, (in order to which he supplicated the Convocation
that he might have a faculty granted to him to preach the Word of God
throughout the whole World) Mr. Hen. Beaumont of Alls. Coll. became his Deputy.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 6. John Lloyd of New Coll. an excellent Grecian.

June 29. Oxen Wood. -- See among the Masters of Arts an. 1584.

July 7. Jeremy Corderoy of S. Alb. Hall.

Oct. 25. Henry Parry Will. Fulbeck of C. C. Coll.


The first of which two last, was afterward B. of Worcester.

Nov. 18. John Smith of S. John's Coll. -- Both his names being common, I must
therefore tell you, that he was the same who afterward wrote on the Lords
Prayer and the Creed.

Rich. Field of Magd. Hall was adm. on the same day.

Dec. 16. Will. Pilsworth of Magd. Hall. -- He was afterward a Bishop in
Ireland.

Jan. 19. John Mil^ard. -- See among the Masters 1584.

Jan. 30. Richard Fowns William Sutton of Chapter Chapter


Feb. 8. Anthony Shirley of Heart Hall. -- He was afterward of Alls. Coll. and
a famous Traveller.

21. Peter Allibond of Magd. Hall.

Admitted 117.

Bach. of Law.
Apr. 6. Charles Pinner of New Coll.

Not one besides him was this year admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 12. Ralph Stanford of Oriel Coll. -- In the year after, upon pretense of
being weary of the Heresy (as he called it) practiced in the University, he
left his Fellowship of the said house, went to the English Seminary at Rheimes
in France, where he was made a Priest.

May. 29. Emanuel Barnes of Magd. Coll. -- He was Son of Dr. Rich. Barnes
Bishop of Durham, was afterward D. of D. of the University of Basil in
Germany, and eminent for his learning.

July 4. John Davies of Gloucester Hall.

8. Edward Hutchins of Brasn. Coll.

Dec. 1. Thomas Pett of Mert. Coll. -- He was expelled that house for not
taking the Oath of Supremacy, and afterward going into Ireland, became a Judge
there.

Jan. 3. Leonard Hutten Thomas Ravys John Howson of Chapter Chapter


Admitted 89.

Bach. of Phys.
Jan. 15. Fabianus Niphus or Fabiand a Nipho an Italian.

Not one besides him was this year admitted.

Bach. of Div.
July 1. Rob. Hoveden Warden of Alls. 5. Meredith Hanmer of C. C. 7. John
Vnderhyll Rector of Linc. Nov. 15. John Chardon of Exeter Coll.
Dec. 11. Thom. White of Magd. Hall. March 22. John Thornborough of Magd. Coll.
Adm. 11.

Doct. of Law.
June... Will. Prytherd (or Prichard) of Jesus Coll.

For the degree of Doct. of Law supplicated Hen. Dithick Bach. of Law,
Archdeacon of Carlisle, and now or lately Chancellor of the Diocese belonging
thereunto; but whether he was admitted I cannot yet find. In his
Chancellourship of Carlisle succeeded him George Dethick M. A. and in his
Archdeaconry George Warewyck, but the time when, I cannot yet find; nor could
my Friend Mr. Hugh Todd Canon of Carlisle tell me, tho no man more than he is
conversant among the Registers and Records of that Church.

Doct. of Phys.
July 11. John Barefoot of New Coll. Thomas Hall of Broadgates Hall.

Will. Done M. A. and Bach. of Phys. supplicated to be Doctor of the said
Faculty in Feb. but was not admitted. -- See in the next year.

Doct. of Div.
July 1. Rob. Hoveden of Alls. Coll. -- He accumulated.

Thomas Spark of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day.

7. John Vnderhyll of Linc. Coll. -- He accumulated.

March 13. James Cottingtom of Trin. Coll. -- He was afterward (if not at this
time) Archdeacon of Surrey and Chauntor of the Church at Wells. He died in the
latter end of 1605, and was succeeded in his Archdeaconry by Dr. Arth. Lake,
and in his Chauntorship by Rich. Boughton.

Besides these, were four that supplicated for the said degree, among whom were
Thomas Summaster of Alls. Coll. and John Chandler.

Incorporations.
July 11. Lancolot Andrews M. A. of Cambridge. -- He was of Pembr. Hall in
that University, and lately one of the honorary or tituler Scholars of Jesus
Coll. in this University. Afterward he became Master of the said Hall, Doct of
Div. and Prebendary of Westminster in the place of Dr. Richard Bancroft
promoted to the Sea of London, an. 1597, Dean of the said Church of Westminster
in the room of Gabriel Goodman deceased, 1601. Soon after he was made Bishop of
Chichester, then of Ely, and at length on the 22 Feb. 1618, was translated to
Winchester. He died in Winchester House in Southwark 26 Sept. 1626, and was
buried in the Parish Church of S. Savior there. Several Authors having made
mention of this worthy person, I shall forbear to speak any farther of him,
only say this, that he was the most eminent Divine of our Nation in his time.

William Pembertom M. A. of the said University, was incorporated on the same
day. -- This person who was second Son of Hen. Pemberton of Moreton in Ch^shire
Gent. was afterward Parson of High Ongar in Essex, Doctor of Div. and a
Publisher of several Sermons; among which are (1) The godly Merchant, preached
at Paul's Cross, on 1 Timothy 6. 6. Land. 1613. oct. (2) Sermon on Deuteronomy. 1. 16. 17.
Land. 1619. oct. He died 10 March 1622, and was buried in the Chancel of his
Church at High Ongar.

In the same month of July was a Supplicate made for one Will. Temple M. of A.
of Cambridge to be incorporated, but whether he was so, it appears not. -- He
was the same person who was Fell. of Kings Coll. in that University, afterward
Master of the Free School in the City of Lincoln, Secretary to Sir Philip
Sidney when he received his Deaths Wound at Zutph^n, and after his death to
Will. Davison one of the Secretaries of State, and at length to Rob. ^ of Essex
Earl Marshal of England: whom, if I mistake not, he served while he was Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland. In 1609, he, upon the importunate Solicitations of Dr.
James Usher, accepted of the Provostship of Trinity Coll. near to Dublin; after
which he was knighted, and made one of the Masters of the Chancery in Ireland.
He has written (1) Pro Maldupetti de unica methodo defensione contra
Diplodophilum commentatio. Land. 1581, oct. (2) Nonnullarum ^ Physicis and
Ethicis quaestionum explicatio pro Petro Ramo contra a Lieblerum. (3.) Epistola
de Rami dialectica ad Johannem Piscatorem Argentinensem. (4.) Analysis Anglica
triginta psalmorum a primo scilicet ad tricesimum primum. Land. 1611. oct. He
gave way to fate an. 1626, or thereabouts, aged 72, and was buried in the
Chapel belonging to the said Coll. of the Holy Trinity, leaving then behind
him the Character of a person of great piety and learning.

An. Dom. 1582.
An. 24 Elizab.
An. 25 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Rob. Hoveden D. D. Warden of Alls. Coll. July 12.

Proct. Robert Cook of Brasn. Coll. John Brown of Chapter Chapter

The day when they were elected, appears not because of the imperfectness of
the Registers.

Bach. of Arts.
March 28. Simon Press of Broadgates Hall. -- He was afterward Minister of
Egginton in Derbyshire, and published A Sermon concerning the right use of
things indifferent, on 1 Cor. 8. ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. Oxon 1597, oct. What
other things he has published I know not.

April 31. Geo. Abbot of Ball. Coll. -- He was afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury.

July 4. John Buckridge of S. John's Coll. -- He was made Bishop of Ely in 1627.

10. Tim. Willys of S John's Coll. -- He was afterward ejected from his place
in that House for certain Misdemeanors, but getting soon after into the favor
of Qu. Elizabeth, he was by her diploma made a Doctor Bullatus (of the Laws I
suppose) and by her sent Ambassador into Muscovy.

Nov. 15. Ralph Winwood lately of S. John's, now of Magd. Coll. -- See more
among the Masters, an. 1587.

Rob. Tinley of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day.

March 18. Philip Jones. -- One of both his names was Author of Three Sermons
on Jam. 1. 9, 10. Land. 1588, oct. Whether written by him, or by Philip Jones
who was admitted Bach. of the Civ. Law an. 1562, or by a third Phil. Jones,
who, as a Bristol man born, and a Member of Chapter Chapter was matriculated in 1581,
aged 18, I know not.

Adm. 152.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 30. Will. Warford of Thin. May 4. Matthew Gwinne of S. Joh. Coll.

June 18. John Harmar John Terry of New Coll.


July 2. Rich. Kilbye of Linc. Coll.

4 Isaac Colfe of Broadgates Hall.

Oct. 12. Will. W^gge of New Coll. -- One Will. Wygge, sometimes called Way,
was executed for being a Seminary, and denying the Oath of Supremacy, at
Kingston in Surrey, on the first day of October. 1588. Whether the same with him
who was M. of A. I know not. I have mentioned another Will Wygge or Wygges
under the year 1566.

Feb. 6. Edw Philipps of Broadgates Hall.

7. Rob. Abbot of Ba^l Coll.

15. John King of Chapter Chapter

Mar. 23. Hen. Perry of Gloc. Hall.

Adm. 60.

Bach. of Div.
July 5. John Garbrand of New 10. Hen Robinson of Queens 13. Thomas Holland of
Balliol Coll.

Feb. 19. Dav. Powell of Jesus Coll. Joh. Argall of Chapter Chapter Adm. 10.

Doct. of Law.
July 5. Will. Merick of New Coll. Chancellor of Bangor, etc.

Clement Colmer of Brasn. Coll. Chancellor of the Diocese of Durham, was
admitted the same day.

Miles Lee and Rich. Bellyngham both Bachelaurs of the Civ. Law. did supplicate
for the said degree, but were not admitted.

Doct. of Phys.
July 5. Anthony Aylworth of New Coll. the Kings Professor of Physic, and
Physician to Queen Eliz. -- He died 18 Apr. 1619, and was buried in New Coll.
Chapel.

21. Will. Done of Exeter Coll.

Doct. of Div.
July 5. William Souch or Zouch of Chapter Chapter -- On the 14 of Feb. 1583, he became
Chauntor of Salisbury on the resignation of Tobie Mathews D. D.

John Garbrand of New Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He accumulated the
degrees in Divinity.

Meredith Hanmer of C. C. Coll. was also admitted the same day.

On the 2 Apr. Tho. Blague a Student in Divinity, and one of the Chaplains in
Ordinary to the Queen, supplicated for the said degree of Doct. of Div. but
whether admitted, it appears not. -- In 1591, Feb. 1. he being then D. of D.
and about that time Master of Clare Hall in Cambridge, was installed Dean of
Rochester in the place of John Coldwell M. D. (promoted to the Sea of
Salisbury) and in 1604, or thereabouts, he became Rector of Bangor upon the
Translation of Dr. Rich. Vaughan from Chester to London. He died in October.
1611, and was succeeded in his Deanery by Rich. Mi^bourne D. D. who was
installed in that Dignity on the 11 Dec. the same year. This Dr. Blague has
published certain Sermons; one of which was preached at the Charterhouse, on
Psalm. 1. ver. 1, 2. Land. 1603. qu. and perhaps other things. He had a Son
named John Blague who in his Fathers life time was a Commoner of (...) College.

Incorporations.
Tho the Incorporations of the Cantabrigians are this year omitted, yet there
was a Supplicate made for one William Lewyn Doct. of the Civ. Law (sometimes,
as it seems, of Christ's Coll. in Cambridge) to be incorporated, but whether he
was so, I cannot yet discover. He was one of the ordinary Masters of the high
Court of Chancery, Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, Chancellor of
Rochester, Commissary of the Faculties, and one of her Majesty's high
Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical. He died 15 April 1598, and was buried,
not in his Chapel (belonging to his house) within the Church of Otteringden in
Kent, which he in his life time designed, but in the Parish Church of S.
Leonard in Sho^editch in the County of Middiesex. He left several Sons behind
him, of whom Justinian was one, who was afterward a Knight, and died about 8
July 162^. In the Judgeship of the Prerogative Court succeeded John Gibson LL.
D.

An. Dom. 1583.
An. 25 Elizab.
An. 26 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, viz. Robert Earl of Leycester.

Vicechanc. Thom. Thornton Bach. of Div. and Canon of Chapter Chapter Jul. 11. He was
actually created D. of D. the day following by Dr. Humphrey.

Proct. Tho. Leyson of New Coll. Rich. Eedes of Chapter Chapter

Elected in Convocation 10. Apr. at which time Edw. Hobie M. A. and Hen. Jervys
Bac. of Div. were Scrutators.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 30. Franc. Hicks or Hykes of St. Mary's Hall, now in great esteem for his
knowledge in the Greek tongue.

29. George Cranmer of C. C. Jun. 19. Hen. Airay of Qu. Coll.

Dec. 16. John Pelling of Magd. Coll. -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1597.

Hen. Jacob of St. Mary's Hall was admitted the same day.

Jan. 17. Hen. Bright lately of Brasnose, now of Balliol, Coll. -- See more
among the Masters 1586.

Feb. 5. John Dove Rich. Parry Nath. Torporley of Chapter Chapter


Parry was afterward a Bishop, and Torporley an eminent Mathematician.

6. Charles Butler 7. John Strading of Magd. Hall.

28. Griffith Powell of Jesus 29. John Shaw of Queens Coll.

Admitted 169.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. ult. Sabin Chambers of Broadgates Hall.

May 3. Henry Smith of Heart Hall, lately of Lincoln Coll.

Jun. 1. Will. Tooker Rog. Hacket of New Coll.


5. Edwyn Sandys of C. C. Jul. 5. John Ryder of Jesus Coll.

Marmaduke Blaxton of Queen Coll. was admitted the same day -- On the 25. Nov.
1615, he was collated to the Archdeaconry of the East Riding in Yorkshire, on
the resignation of Rich. Remyngton; which place he resigning, being then a
Dignitary in the Church of Durham, an. 1625, John Cousin Bach. of Div. of
Cambridge (who married his Daughter) was collated thereunto in Sept. the same
year. This Dignity Dr. Cousin kept till he was promoted to the Sea of Durham,
and then Clement Bretton succeeded an. 1660, and him Rob. Hitch D. D. an. 1662.

Dec. 12. Rich. Martin of Bradgates Hall. -- He was not the same with Rich.
Martin, who was afterward Recorder of London, but another of little, or no,
note.

Mar. 6. Francis Godwin of Chapter Chapter

Admitted 67.

Bach. of Physic.
Jul. 8. Thomas Leyson of New Coll. one of the Proctors of the University.

Will. Clarkson supplicated for that Degree, but was not admitted.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 3. Martin H^ton of Chapter Church.

27. Johan. Barnardus a Moravian, who had studied Divinity for 10 year in
certain Academies in Germany, was then admitted Bach. of Div. -- He had studied
also and had taken commons for about 3 years before this time, in University,
Coll. and after he had left it, he went into Scotland to visit the Universities
there.

Dec. 17. William Wilkes of Mert. Coll.

But two more besides the said three were admitted.

Doct. of Law.
July 9. Francis Bevans of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Principal of New
Inn and of Jesus Coll. and Chancellor to Dr. Westphaling Bishop of Hereford;
in which City dying in the beginning of 1602, was buried in the Cath. Chapter there.

October. 14. Isaac Vpton of Magd. Coll.

Mar. 5. Julius Caesar of Magd. Hall, was then admitted, and not incorporated.
-- In the beginning of 1581, he was created Doctor of the said Law in the
University of Paris, and had Letters testimonial for it, under the Seal of that
University, dated 22. Apr. 1581, wherein he is styled Julius Caesar alias
Dalmarius, Dioc. London* in Anglia, filius excellentissimi in Art. and Med.
Doctoris Caesaris Dalmarii, in Vniversitate Paris, etc. This Julius Caesar who
was also Doctor of the Canon Law, was afterward Master of the Requests, Judge
of the Admiralty in the time of Qu. Elizabeth, a Knight, Chancellor and
Under-Treasurer of the Exchecquer, Master of the Rolls, and Privy Counselor
to K. James and K. Chapter 1. He gave way to fate at the Rolls in Chancery Lane,
16. April. 1636, and was buried in the Chancel of Great St. Ellens Church in
Bishops-gate-street in London, near to the grave of his Father beforementioned,
Caesar Dalmare or Athelmer, who was buried there in 1569. See among the Bach.
of Arts in 1575.

Not one Doct. of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 11. David Powell of Jesus Coll. -- He was now in great repute for his
profound knowledge in British antiquities.

Incorporations.
Jul. 9. Stephen Egerton M. of A. of Cambridge -- This Person who was a zealous
Puritan in his time, and Preacher at the Black Friars in London, wrote and
published (1) A Lecture (taken by charactery) on Genesis 12. 17, 18, 19, 20. Land.
1589. oct. (2) Brief method of catechizing, wherein are handled these four
things, etc. Land. 1594. oct. etc. (3) Doctrine of subjection to God and the
King, etc. Land. 1616. oct. (4) Description of uncomeliness, on Prove. 11. verse.
12. (5) The boaring of the Ear; containing a discourse of our preparation
before hearing, and of our demeanor in hearing, on Luke 8. 18. Land. 1623.
oct. (6) Comforts to strengthen the weak in faith. Printed 1630. oct. He also
enlarged the second edition of a book entit. A help to true happiness, or a
brief and learned exposition of the main and fundamental points of Christian
Religion. written by Paul Baine sometimes Preacher of the word at St. Andrews
in Cambridge. Printed in tw. and also set forth The practice of Christianity,
or an Epitomy of Mr. Roger's seven treatises, made by Nich. Byfield; with
other things which I have not yet seen. He died in 1621. or thereabouts.

Dec. 16. Rich. Coxe Bach. of Arts of Christ's Coll. in Cambridge -- In the year
following he proceeded M. of A. as a member of Gloucester Hall, and is the same
Rich. Coxe as it seems, who wrote and published A Catechism. Land. 1591. oct.
and if I am not mistaken one, or more, Sermons.

Creations.
Apr.... Marmaduke Middleton Bishop of St. David, and much deserving of the
Church of Ireland, was actually created Doct. of Div. of Dr. Humphrey and both
the Proctors.

Jul. 12. Thom. Thornton Vicechanc. of this University, Canon of Chapter Church in
Oxon. of Worcester and Hereford, of which last place he was also Chauntor, and
about this time Master of Ledbury Hospital in Herefordshire, was actually
created D. of D. -- He surrendered up his last breath on the 15. April an. 1629.
aged 88. and was buried on the twentieth day of the same month in the Chancel
of the Parish Church of Ledbury. Over his grave was a handsome monument set up
for him in the North wall of the Chancel, with a large inscription thereon;
wherein it is said that he was born at Harrew on the Hill in Middlesex, that he
was purioris Latini Sermonis Author primarius, that he was a benefactor to the
poor People of Ledbury Hospital, that he adorned and repaired the Library at
Hereford, and enriched it with books, that he was a common refuge for young
poor Scholars of great hopes and parts, and tutor to Sir Philip Sidney when he
was of Chapter Chapter etc. -- To which I add, that he was also Tutor to the Learned
Will. Camden Clarenceaux K. of Arms.

An. Dom. 1584.
An. 26 Elizab.
An. 27 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. John Vnderhyll D. D. Rector of Linc. Coll. Jul. 16.

Proct. Thom. Smith of Chapter Chapter Rich. Mercer of Exet. Coll. Apr. 29.


Bach. of Arts.
Nov. 12. Francis Bradshaw of Magd. Coll -- See among the Doctors of Div. 1607.

28. Richard Latewar of St. John Coll.

Feb. 1. Hen. Salesbury of St. Alb. Hall. -- Since the life or character of
this Person was printed, which you may see in p. 226. number. 265. I find that he
was of the Family of the Salesburies of Dolbelider (in Denbighshire) and that
after Joh. David Rhese (whom he styles Vir ingenio felix -- literarum ac
linguarum cognitione insignis) had published his Cambro -- Brytannicae
institutiones and rudimenta, he wrote and published Grammatica Britannica in
usum linguae studiosorum Juccincta methodo and perspicuitate facili
conscriptae. Land. 1593. oct. dedic. to Henry Earl of Pembroke; which is all I
know of him yet, only that he was living at Denbigh in that year.

9. John Randall of Trinity, afterward of Lincoln, Coll.

Mar. 15. Sim. Wastell of Qu. Coll.

Admitted 93, or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Apr. 31. John Favor of New Coll.

Jul. 10. Pet. V^erheile sometimes written Varahi^ius Burgensis. Belga; which
is all I know of him.

Rich. Meredith of New Coll. did supplicate for the said Degree. Jul. 1. but
was not admitted. -- See among the Bach. of Divinity 1606.

Admitted 4.

Mast. of Arts.
May 25. John Philipps of St. Mary's Hall. -- He was the same who took the
Degree of Bach. of A. 1579, and the same, as it seems, who was afterward
Bishop of the Isle of Man.

30. Will. Fulbeck of Gloucester Hall, lately of C. C. Coll.

June 2. Rich. Field of Magd. Hall.

3. Jerem. Corderoy lately of St. Alb. Hall.

Jun. 22. John Milward of Broadgates Hall, lately of Chapter Chapter -- One John
Milward D. D. Chapl. to K. Jam. 1. was, among other things Author of Jacobs
great day of trouble and deliverance, Sermon. at Paul's cross 5. Aug. 1607, upon
his Maj. deliverance from Gowries treasons, on Jerem. 30. 7. Land. 1610. qu.
Whether he be the same with John Milward M. of A. who was a Derbysh. Man born,
I know not. He that was D. D. and an Author, died on the Kal. of Aug. 1609, and
the next year the Sermon was published by his Brother Matthew Milward.

Jul. 6. Owen Wood of Jesus Coll. -- He was afterward made Dean of Armagh in
Ireland, (by the favor, as I suppose, of Rob. E. of Essex while he was a
Lieutenant of that Kingdom, in whose treasons he was engaged 1600) and an
especial benefactor to his College. One of both his names was a practitioner in
Physic, and wrote An alphabetical book of Physical secrets, as also A small
treatise of the judgment of Vrines: Both printed at Land. 1632. and 39. oct.

Jul. 7. Rob. Wright of Trin. Coll.

Jan. 18. Tho. Savile of Merton Coll. -- This Person who was younger Brother to
Sir Hen. Savile, did afterward travel into various Countries beyond the Seas,
whereby he improved himself much in several sorts of learning. After his
return, he was by his Brothers endeavors made Fellow of Eaton Coll. near
Windsore; where being noted for his excellencies, caused Rich. Mountague Fellow
of that house to In his preface to his Diatribe upon the first part of the
Hist. of Tithes.
number him among the great Philologers of this nation, and to be equal with
the learned Camden, unfortunate Hen. Cuffe, Rich. Thompson, old Andr. Downs,
etc. to all whom he was well known especially to the first, as by many learned
Letters written between them, appears. This Tho. Savile died in his Proctorship
of the University 12. Jan. 1592, and was buried in the choire of the Church or
Chapel of Merton College, where I find Reg. second. Act. Coll. Mert. p. 129.
this character of him. -- Fuit Sidus lucidissimum, qui apud suos and exteros
literarum and virtutis fama ac morum urbanitate perce^ebris, etc. I find
another (I cannot say the same) Thom. Sav^le, whom Camden calls In his
preliminary discourse to the Brigant^s, alias Yorkshire.
his right learned friend, an. 1582. and a third who writes himself Gentleman,
Author of (1) The Prisoners conference, handled by way of dialogue between a
Knight and a Gentleman being abridged of their liberty. Land. 1605. oct. (2)
The raising of them that are fallen, etc. Land. 1606. qu.

Jan. 20. John Lloyd of New Coll.

Feb. 20. Will. Sutt^n of Chapter Chapter

Admitted 87.

Bach. of Div.
May 10. Richard Jews -- He was Author of a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross,
intit. Isaac his testament, etc. on Genesis 21. ver. 1. to the 10th. Oxon. 1594.
oct. dedicated to Sir Hen. Vnton of Wadley in Berks. Knight, and no doubt of
others, but such I have not yet seen.

Jun. 22. John Prime of New Coll.

Jul. 6. Rich. Eedes of Chapter Chapter

15. Rob. Cook of Brasn. Coll.

Feb. 1. Miles Smith of Chapter Chapter

Admitted 13.

Doct. of Law.
Mar. 17. John Drewry of Linc. Coll. -- In 1592, he succeeded Dr. John Kennall
in the Archdeaconry of Oxford, and dying in the Cathedral close at Chichester
(where he had a Dignity) 9. June 1614, was succeeded by William Bridges Son of
Dr. Bridges Bishop of Oxon, as I shall elsewhere tell you. This Dr. John Drewry
was near of kin (if not Son) to Will. Drewry Doct. of the Civil Law and
Commissary or Master of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury, who died in the
latter end of 1589, and to Sir Will. Drewry of West^n in Oxfordshire Knight,
sometimes Lord Justice of Ireland, who died 1579.

Not one Doct. of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 6. John Walsall of Chapter Chapter

15. Rob. Chaloner of the same house, a compounder -- In 1589, he was installed
Canon of Windsore, being then double beneficed at least, and tho not eminently
learned, yet he was a promoter and encourager of it by founding a Free School
at Agmondesham commonly called Amersam in Bucks. and by giving 20 l. per an.
for the maintenance of a Divinity Lecture in Chapter Chapter or for three poor Scholars
for their exhibition to be chosen out of Amersam, (of which place he was
Rector) or out of Goldesborough or Knaresborough in Yorkshire, at one of which
places he was, as it is said, born.

Jul. 15. Thom. Holland of Ball. Coll. -- He was afterward the learned
Professor of the Kings Lecture of Div.

Hen. Ledsham of Mert* Coll. (a compounder) was admitted the same day.

March. 8. Tho. White of Magd. hall. -- He was afterward Canon of Chapter Chapter

This year Camillus Cardonius a N^opolitan, Son of a Baron, and a Student in
Gloucester hall aged 40, did sue after a Degree to be conferred upon him, but in
what faculty, it appears not.

Incorporations.
May...Rich. Vaughan M. A. of Cambridge. -- He was a Caerna^vanshire Man born,
educated in St. John's Coll. in Cambr. and afterward was successively Bishop of
Bangor, Chester, and London: During which time he was accounted an excellent
Preacher and a pious liver.

Jul. 14. Thom. Bradd^ck M. A. of the said University -- He was Fellow of
Christ's Coll. and afterward Bach. of Divinity, and translator of Jewell's
Defense of the Apology, as I have told you in John Jewel among the Writers,
an. 1571.

Nathaniel Cole M. A. of Cambr. was incorporated the same day -- He was
afterward Proctor of the said University, Minister of Much Parrington near
Harlow in Essex, and at length of St. Leonards Bromley on the backside of
Stratford-bow in Middlesex. He has published. (1) The godly Man's assurance of
his own Salvation. Land. 1615. qu. (2) Preservatives against sin, or bow to
live and not sin, etc. Land. 1618. qu. (3) The Christians welcome to the Court
of Heaven, etc. a Sermon. Land. 1625. qu. and other things which I have not
seen.

Edw. Scambler M. A. of the same University, was incorporated on the same day
-- One E. Schambler Vicar of R^e in Sussex and a member of Peter house in
Cambr. wrote and published A Medicine proved for a desperate conscience, printed
at Land. in oct. whether written by Edward Scambler M. of A. or Edmund Scambler
who was afterward Bishop of Peterborough and Norwich, I cannot tell. Quaere.

Andrew Willet M. of A. of Cambr. was also then (Jul. 14.) incorporated, being
in a congregation after the conclusion of the Act -- He was born in Ely in
Cambridgshire, educated in Christ's Coll. succeeded his Father Mr. Thom. Willet
in a Prebendship of Ely, and in the Parsonage of Barley in Hertfordshire,
published diverse books, the titles of most of which you may see in the Bodleian
or Oxford Catalogue, and dying 4. Dec. 1621. was buried in the Chancel of the
Church at Barley.

An. Dom. 1585.
An. 27 Elizab.
An. 28 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, viz. Robert Earl of Leycester, who going into the Low
Countries this year, deputed Sir Tho. Bromley Knight, Lord Chanc. of England to
execute the office of Chancellor of the University, 5. December.

Vicechanc. Edmund Lilye D. D. Master of Balliol College. July 16.

Proct. Tho. Singleton of Br. Coll. John Bennet of Chapter Chapter Apr. 21.


Bach. of Music.
June 26. Nathaniel Giles -- See more of him in an. 1622. He was Father to
Nath. Giles D. D. whom I shall mention under the year 1625.

Jul. 14. Matthew Godwyn -- whether he has published any matters relating to
the fac. of Music, I know not.

Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 17. Alexander Cook of Brasnose, afterward of University, College.

Oct. 27. Hen. Wilkinson of Queens Coll. -- He was afterward Fellow of Mert.
Coll. and Author of The Debt-book, etc.

Feb. 1. Rich. Eaton of Lincoln Coll. -- See among the Bachelaurs of Divinity
in 1599.

Admitted 128. or thereabouts.

Mast. of Arts.
Ap. 3. Hen Parry of C. C. Coll. Rich. Fownes of Chapter Chapter

Jun. 3. Will. Hubbocke of C. C. 10. John Smith of St. John's 14. George
Carleton of Merton Coll.

Jul. 6. Peter Allibond of Magd. hall.

8. Richard Parks of Brasn. Dec. 17. George Abbot of Ball. Coll.

Admitted 67.

Bach. of Div.
June 21. Erasmus Web of Alls. Coll. -- In 1589, he was made Archdeacon of
Buckingham, in the place of him, who if I mistake not, succeeded in that
Dignity one Richard Porter, deprived about 1560, and on the 30. Sept. 1590, he
was installed Canon of Windsore in the place of William King Bach. of Div. and
Prebendary of Canterbury deceased. He died 24. March 1613, and was buried at
Windsore; whereupon his Archdeaconry was bestowed on Rob. Newell Bac.
(afterward D.) of Div. and his Cano^^y on Dr. Tho. Sheafe of Cambridge.

Jun. 21. Thom. Pie of Merton Coll.

Admitted 10.

Doct. of Law.
July 13. Gabriel Harvey M. of A. of Cambridge (where he obtained his grace
this year to proceed in the Civil Law) was then admitted Doctor of the Civ. Law
here. -- He performed certain exercise in this University for the said Degree,
and stood in the Act to complete it, 11. Jul. 1586. This Person who made a
great noise in his time, was born at Saffron-walden in Essex, and tho his
Father was a Rope-maker as Thom. Nash a great scoffer, and his Antagonist tells
(...).
us, yet he had rich kindred and was nearly allied to Sir Thom. Smith the great
Statesman in Qu. Elizabeth's Reign. His first Academical breeding was in Christ's
Coll. in Cambridge, where, in short time, he made great proficiency to the
wonder and amazement of his Tutor. Afterward he became Fellow of Trinity hall,
and so excellent and learned an Orator and Poet, that books of those faculties
were dedicated to him. Afterward he was Proctor of that University, and at
elder years he applied his studies to Astrology, wherein he became eminent,
and wrote, as it is said, Almanacks, much in esteem in the Reign of Qu.
Elizabeth. His other works are (1) Rhetor, sive 2. dierum oration de natura,
art and exercitatione Rhetorica. Land. 1577. qu. (2) Ciceronianus, vel oration
post reditum, habita Cantabrigiae ad suos auditores. Land. 1577. qu. (3) XAIPE,
vel gratulationum Valdenensium libri quatuor. Land. 1578. qu. in Lat. verse. (4)
Smithus, vel Musarum Lachrymae, pro obitu honoratiss. viri, etc. Thomae Smith
Eq. aur. Majestatisque regiae Secretarii. Land. 1578. qu. (5) A new letter of
notable contents: with a strange sonnet entitled Gorgon. Land. 1593. qu. (6)
Pierces superarrogation: or, a new praise of the old ass. A preparative to
certain larger discourses, entit. Nashes S. fame. Land. 1593. qu. with Letters
and Sonnets before and after the said book, made upon the Author Harvey by
several Poets of that time (7) An advertisement for Pap-hatchet, and Martin
Marprelate; printed with the former book, with other things, wherein he
tramples much upon Rob. Green the Poet, which I have not yet seen. This Dr.
Gab. Harvey was esteemed an ingenious Man and an excellent Scholar, but 'twas
his, and his Brother Rich. Harvey's ill luck to fall into the hands of that
noted and restless buffoon Tom. Nash in his Apology of Pierce penniless, and
Have with you to Saffron-walden. In both which books, they are laden with all
the scurrilities imaginable, as being according to Toms words, false prophets,
weather-wizards, Fortune Tellers, Poets, Philosophers, Orators,
Historiographers, Mountebanks, Ballad-makers, etc. The reader is to know that
'twas not this Gabriel Harvey that made a raised causey of three miles long
near to Cambridge, as the learned Camden In Britan. in Le^s.
tells us, but Henr. Harvey LL. D. Master of Trinity hall, Son of Rob. Harvey
of Stradbroke in Suffolk; which Henry died in the Wintertime in 1584, leaving
behind him a Nephew and Heir called Jews Harvey of Eye in the said County,
Father of Robert Harvey Fellow of the said hall of Trinity, Doctor of the Laws
of Cambridge and Doct. of Physic of Padua. In my searches I find one Gabriel
Harvey LL. D. of Saffron-walden in Essex to die unmarried in 1630 (6. Car. 1.)
which, if the same with him beforementioned, who was the Writer (as I think he
was) then was he at least 85 years of age when he died, if not 90.

Doct. of Physic.
Jul. 8. Christopher Atkinson of Trin. Coll.

Richard Radcliff lately of Merton Coll. now Principal of St. Albans hall was
admitted the same day. -- He died 18. Jan. 1599, after he had practiced his
faculty many years in this University, and was buried in the Church of St.
Peter in the East, in Oxon.

Doct. of Div.
Jun. 21. Hen. Gervace of Merton Coll.

Jun.... Rob. Condall or Cundall of Brasn. Coll. a Compounder. -- In 1577, he
was made Archdeacon of Huntingdon in the place of Dr. Joh. Bullyngham, but who
succeeded him in that Dignity, I know not, unless Matthew Gifford M. A. who
occurs Archdeacon 1612.

Jun..... Daniel Bernard Canon of Chapter Chapter -- He was Son of Tho. Bernard
mentioned among the Bach. of Divinity, an. 1566. and dying about the Month of
Sept. 1588. was buried in the choire belonging to the Cathedral of Chapter Chapter I
have seen a Lat. Sermon of his entit. De obedientia erga Principes and
Prefectos, in Tit. 2. 3. printed 1587. which is all, I presume, that he has
published.

Jun.... John Rainolds of C. C. Coll.

Jun.... Martin Heton Canon of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Bishop of Ely.

Jun.... Rob. Rowles of New Coll. a Compounder.

William Wilkes of Merton Coll. was admitted in the same month.

Jul. 14. Will. Powell of Magd. Coll. -- In 1578 he was made reader of Divinity
in St. Paul's Cath. Chapter and was afterward Archdeacon of Bathe, and Canon
resident. of Wells. He died on the 12. of March, or thereabouts, an. 1612. and
was buried in the choire of the Cath. Chapter at Wells; whereupon Tim. Rivett or
Revet D. D. succeeded him in his Archdeaconry.

Incorporations.
Jul. 2. James Summers who was made M. of A. of St. Andrews University in
Scotland, an. 1565, was incorporated in the same Degree. -- Tho. Dempster in
his Scotorum scriptorum nomenclatura, at the end of his Apparatus ad Historiam
Scoticam, does make no mention of this Jam. Summers (born at Edinburgh) as a
Writer, tho he was a learned Man; and therefore I can say no more of him only
this, that he living many years in Oxon near to Magd Coll. died there, and was
buried in the Church of St. Peter in the East, 30. Aug. 1610.

Jul. 11. John Dod M. of A. of Cambridge -- He was a Cheshire Man born,
educated in Jesus Coll. in that University, afterward a learned and godly
Divine, successively Minister of Hanwell in Oxfordshire, Fenny-Drayton in
Leycestershire, Canons Ashby and Fausley in Northamptonshire, tho for a time
Tho. Fuller in (...) of English in C^^shire.
silenced in each of them. He is commonly called the Decalogist, as having,
with Rob. Cleaver another Puritan, written An exposition on the ten
commandments. He has also published several Sermons, as the Oxford Catalogue
informs you, and dying at Fausley in 1645 aged 86 was there buried.

Philemon Holland M. of A. of the said University, was incorporated on the same
day -- He was now, or at least lately, of Trinity Coll. in that University, was
afterward Doct. of Physic and Schoolmaster for many years in the City of
Coventry, and esteemed the Translator general of his age. He died 9. Febr. aged
85, an. Dom. 1636. and was buried in the choire of the great Church at
Coventry. Among the translations which he made, Camdens Britannia was one,
wherein he has put many things that were not written by Camden.

John Harrison M. A. lately of Kings Coll. in the said University, was
incorporated the same day -- In 1581 he became the chief Master of St. Paul's
School, in London, being then a great Antiquary for Coins. One of both his
names was made Archdeacon of Stow in the place of John Aylmer or Elmer
deprived, an. 1554.

Rob. Williamson Bach. of Div. of the same Univ. was incorporated on the same
day.

One John Nowell Doct. of Phys. of Leyden did supplicate to be incorporated,
27. June, but whether he had his option, it appears not.

An. Dom. 1586.
An. 28 Elizab.
An. 29 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, with his Deputy Sir Tho. Bromley Knight, (styled Chancellor
also) July 30.

Vicechanc. Daniel Bernard D. D. Canon of Chapter Chapter nominated by the
Deputy-chancellour (whose Chaplain he was) Jul. 8.

Proct. Will. Watkinson of Chapter Chapter Giles Tomson of Alls. Coll. Apr. 14.


Bach. of Music.
July 9. John Bull who had practiced the ^ac. of Music for 14 years was then
admitted Bach. of Music. -- This Person who had 2 most prodigious hand on the
Organ and was famous throughout the religious world for his Church Music, (the
words of some of which are See in a book intit. (...) Services and Anthems
usually sung in the Cathedra's and (...) in the (...) England Collected by J^^.
Coff^rd -- Land. 1663. p. 56. 137. (...). etc:
extant) had been trained up under an excellent Master named Blithman Organist
of Qu. Elizabeth's Chapel, who died much lamented in 1591. This Blithman
perceiving that he had a natural genie to the faculty, spared neither time nor
labor to advance it to the utmost. So that in short time he being more than
Master of it, which he showed by his most admirable compositions, played and
sung in many Churches beyond the Seas, as well as at home, he took occasion to
go incognito into France and Germany. At length hearing of a famous Musician
belonging to a certain Cathedral, (at St. Omer as I have heard) he applied
himself as a Novice to him to learn something of his faculty, and to see and
admire his works. This Musician, after some discourse had passed between them,
conducted Bull to a Vestry, or Music School joining to the Cathedral, and
showed to him a Lesson or Song of forty parts, and then made a vaunting
challenge to any Person in the world to add one more part to them, supposing it
to be so complete and full, that it was impossible for any mortal Man to
correct, or add to, it. Bull thereupon desiring the use of Ink and ruled paper,
(such as we call Musical Paper) prayed the Musician to lock him up in the said
School for 2 or 3 hours. Which being done, not without great disdain by the
Musician, Bull in that time, or less, added forty more parts to the said Lesson
or Song. The Musician thereupon being called in, he viewed it, tried it, and
retri'd it. At length he burst out into a great ecstasy, and swore by the great
God that he that added those 40 parts, must either be the Devil or Dr. Bull
etc. Whereupon Bull making himself known, the Musician fell down and adored
him. Afterward continuing there and in those parts for a time, became so much
admired, that he was courted to accept of any place or preferment suitable to
his profession, either within the Dominions of the Emperor, King of France, or
Spain. But the tidings of these transactions coming to the English Court, Qu.
Elizabeth commanded him home. See more of him under the year 1592.

John Mundy another eminent Musician, now, or after, one of the Organists of
her Majesty's Chapel, was admitted Bachelaur also the same day. -- See more of
him in 1624. One Will. Mundy was also a noted Musician and has composed
several divine Services and Anthems, but him I find not, to be graduated in
this University, or elsewhere.

One Benjam. Hamm a Student of Music supplicated to be Bac. of that fac. in
January; which was granted conditionally that he compose a choral hymn of eight
parts before the Passover following. About the same time, he supplicated for
the Degree of Bach. of Arts, which was denied.

Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 10. Charles Sonibanke of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Doct. of Div. 1607.

Jul. 13. Rich, Middleton of Jesus Coll. -- This Person who took no other
Degree in this University, I take to be the same with Rich. Middleton, Son of
Marmaduke Middleton Bishop of St. David, and about this time Archdeacon of
Cardigan. One Rich. Middleton Chaplain to Charles Prince of Wales, has written
and published (1) The Key of David. Land. 1619. in a thick tw. Before which is
his picture with a ruff, and a great beard. (2) The heavenly progress. Land.
1617. in tw. (3) The card and compass of life containing many passages fit for
these times, etc. Land. 1613. oct. Whether this Rich. Middleton the Writer, be
the same with Rich. Middleton the Bach. of Arts and Archdeacon of Cardigan, I
cannot well tell. Quare.

Oct. 11. Rowland Searchfield of St. John's Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of
Bristow.

12. Edw. Gee lately of Merton, now of Linc. Coll.

Oct. 12. Rich. Brett Christop. Sutton of Linc.

19. John Budden of Trin. Nov. 9. Alex. Gill of C. C. Coll.

The last was the Senior of both his names, and afterward Master of St. Paul's
School.

D^cemb. 14. Sam. Slade -- See among the M. of A. 1593.

Dec. 17. John Sanford of B^llio^, afterward of Magd. Coll.

Jan. 27. Franc. Mason -- Afterward worthily characterized to be Vindex
Ecclesiae Anglicane.

30. Nich. Fuller of Heart hall.

Feb. 15. Lew. Thomas Edw. Bree-word of Bras. Coll.


John Day of St. Alb. hall, afterward of Oriel Coll. was admitted the same day.

16. Anthony Benn of Broadgates hall -- He was afterward Recorder of London
and a Knight.

17. Bernard. Adams of Trin. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Limrick in
Ireland.

23. Tho. Clerk of Broadgates hall -- Whether this Person, who was a Warwick
hire Man born, was the same Tho. Clerk who was a Seminary Priest of the Coll.
at Rheimes, but afterward returned to the Church of England, and recanted in a
Sermon at Paul's Cross, 1. Jul. 1593 (which Sermon was printed at London 1594.
in oct.) or the same Tho. Clerk who wrote The life and death of M. Pet. Kempe
(printed about the same time) I know not. See another Tho. Clerk who was
admitted Bach. of Arts in 1566.

Admitted 179.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 20. John Buckridge of St. John's Coll.

Jan. 4. Rich. Parry of Chapter Chapter

Laur. Keimis of Ball. Coll. was adm. the same day. -- This Keimis who was a
Wilts. Man born became afterward companion in travel and counselor in design
to the renowned Knight Sir Walt. Rawleigh; but whether he gave any assistance
to the composure of his history, is very doubtful. In 1595 when that Knight
undertook to gain a golden mine in Guiana, this Keimis was one of his chief
Captains and Conductors in that expedition, but being unfortunate in his
undertakings, and therefore very much blamed by Rawleigh, he, out of a deep
reluctance, pistol'd (...) 1. written by Arth. Wilson -- Land. 1653.
himself in his Cabin in Rawleigh's Ship, in the Summer time in 1618, after he
had viewed, and traveled through, the remotest parts of the world.

Jun. 15. Henry Airay of Queens Coll.

Jul. 6. Henry Penry lately of Cambridge, now of St. Albans hall.

8. Hen. Jacob of St. Mary's hall.

Jan. 27 Henry Bright of Ball. Coll. -- He was afterward Master of the Kings
School at Worcester (in which City he was born) for 40 years together, and
Prebendary of the Church there for the last 7 years of his life. He had a most
excellent faculty in instructing youths, in Lat. Gr. and Hebrew, most of which,
were afterward sent to the Universities, where they proved eminent to
emulation. He was also an excellent Preacher, was resorted to far and near, and
dying 4. March 1626 was buried in the Cath. Chapter at Worcester. The posterity of
this Hen. Bright do live now in gentile fashion in Worcestershir.

Mar. 16. John Dove of Chapter Chapter

Admitted 65. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 4. W. ^. Massy of Brasn. Coll. -- He was born in Cheshire, and was at
this time (...) to Sir Edm. Trafford of Trafford in Lancashire. He has
published A Sermon preached at Trafford in Lancashire at the marriage of a
Daughter of Sir Edm. Trafford Knight 6. Sept. 1586, on Psalm. 128. 1. 2. Oxon.
1586. oct. Two years alter he was removed from his Fellowship, and perhaps did
publish other things.

Will. Leigh of Brasn. Coll. was adm. the same day.

Admitted 8.

Doct. of Law.
Jul. 4. Anthony Blencow Provost of Oriel Coll.

Not one besides him was this year admitted.

Not one Doct. of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 14. John Chardon of Exeter Coll.

Jul. 9. Nich. Balgay of Magd. Coll. -- In 1583 he became Prebendary of
Netherhaven in the Church of Salisbury, and in May 1589 Subdean thereof in the
place of Tho. Dillworth. Both which Dignities he resigning to the famous Mr.
Rich. Hooker, he became Master of the Temple in the said Mr. Hooker's place
1591.

Incorporations.
Jul. 11. Lawrence Staunton M. of A. of Cambridge. -- In 1601 he succeeded Dr.
Will. Cole in the Deanery of Lincoln, which dignity he keeping till 1613, was
then succeeded by Roger Parker D. D. after he had been 14 years Chantor of the
Church there. The said Dr. Parker died 29. Aug. 1629 aged 71. and was buried in
the Cath. Chapter at Lincoln; whereupon his Deanery was bestowed on one Anth.
Topham.

Simon Robson M. of A. of the said University, was incorporated on the same day
-- In the year 1598 the said Robson being then D. D. succeeded Dr. Anth. Watson
in the Deanery of Bristow, and dying in May or June 1617 was buried in St.
Augustines Church there; whereupon Dr. Edw. Chetwind was elected Dean in his
place, 16. of June the same year.

Thom. Atkinson Bach. of Div. of Cambr. was incorporated also the same day --
He was afterward D. of D. Subdean of St. Paul's Cathedral, and died in Apr.
1616.

Besides him, were 13 Bachelaurs of Div. of Cambr. incorporated, of whom I know
nothing as yet.

There was also a supplicate made in the house of Congregation that Thom. Leg
Doctor of the Civ. Law of Cambr. might be incorporated, but whether he was
really so, I find not -- He was a Norwich Man born, was first of Trinity, and
afterward of Jesus, College in Cambridge: in both which houses he had the name
and repute of one of the best in England for composing Tragedies, witness his
Destruction of Jerusalem, and Life of King Rich. 3. which last was acted with
great applause in that University. He was afterward made the second Master of
Gonvill and Caius Coll. was a Doctor in the Court of Arches, one of the Masters
of the Chancery, the Kings Law Professor, and twice Vicechanc. of Cambridge. He
died in July 1607. aged 72, and was buried, as I conceive, in the Chap.
belonging to the said Coll. to which he was a benefactor.

An. Dom. 1587.
An. 29 Elizab.
An. 30 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Francis Willys D. D. constituted by the Chancellor now in England,
July 17. on which day he was admitted D. of D.

Proct. George Dale of Oriel Coll. John Harmar of New Coll. Apr. 26.


Bach. of Music.
Oct. 20. Rob. Stevenson who had studied the faculty of Music 33 years, was
then admitted Bach. of Music -- On the same day he was admitted Bach. of Arts,
but did not complete that Degree by Determination in the Lent following, which
is all I know of him.

Bach. of Arts.
May 31. Will. Westerman of Gloc. hall.

Jun. 27. Rich. Jefferay of Magd. Coll. -- See among the Masters 1590.

28. John Aglionby Rich. Crackanthorpe of Qu. Coll.


Nov. 7. John Vicars of Magd. Coll. Quaere. -- One of both his names of
Broadgates hall was admitted M. of A. Jul. 1. this year.

Nov. 29. Tho. Hutton Hen. Price of St. Jo. Coll.


On the eleventh of March Clement Edmonds of Alls. Coll. did supplicate for the
said Degree, but was not admitted this year.

Admitted 117.

Bach. of Law.
Jun. 15. Henry Marten of New Coll. -- He is to be mentioned at large among the
Writers in the 2. vol. of this work.

Two more were admitted to, and three that supplicated for, the said Degree.

Mast. of Arts.
June 22. Sam. Fox of Magd. Coll. -- See at the end of John Fox among the
Writers, under the year 1587.

Ralph Winwood of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- This memorable
person who was the Son of Richard Son of Lewis, Winwood sometimes Secretary to
Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, was born at Ainhoe in Northamptonshire,
elected probationer Fellow of Magd. Coll. an. 1582, and in 1590 took the degree
of Bach. of Civ. Law. See more in that year.

Rob. Tinley of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day.

June 28. Charles Butler of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward publicly known by
a book of Rhetoric that he published, and other things.

Adm. 69.

Bach. of Div.
July 6. Rich. Potter of Trin. Coll. -- He was afterward Prebendary of
Worcester, and Father of an ingenious Son named Francis, Author of the
Interpretation of 666, etc. whom I shall remember among the Writers, under the
year 1678.

Will. Watkinson of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day.

17. Francis Willys of S. John's Coll. -- See among the Doct. of Div. this year.

Adm. 7.

Doct. of Law.
June 17. Will. Wood of Alls. Coll. -- This eminent Civilian died in the
beginning of the year 1605, and was buried in the Chapel of Tallin in the Isle
of Anglesey, in which Isle he was born, leaving Issue behind him William, and
Owen, Wood. etc.

Feb. 13. Francis James of Alls. Coll. -- He was younger Brother to Dr. Will.
James Bishop of Durham, was Chancellor of the Diocese of Wells and Bristol,
and afterward of London, one of the Masters of the Chancery, and Judge of the
Court of Audience of Canterbury. He died in the beginning of 1616, and was
buried, I presume, according to his Will, in the Parish Church of Barrow in
Somersetshire, in the upper end of that Isle, which was formerly the Church or
Oratory for the Nunns, sometimes living at that place, and is now belonging and
appertaining to the Lord of the Manor of Minchin-Barrow.

Will. Bird of Alls. Coll. was admitted, or licensed, the same day. -- This
person who was Son of Will. Bird of Walden in Essex, was afterward principal
Official and Dean of the Arches, a Knight, and Judge of the Prerogative Court
of Canterbury, in the place, as I conceive, of Sir John Bennet Knight. He died
without issue, and was buried in Chapter Chapter within Newgate in London, 5 Sept.
1624, leaving behind him a Nephew of both his names, whom I shall mention in
1622.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
July 17. Francis Willys Canon of Bristow (of which City he was a Native) and
President of S. John's Coll. -- On the eleventh of June this year, he was
installed Dean of Worcester, having that Dignity conferred upon him in the year
before, on the death of Dr. Tho. Wilson, and dying 29 Oct. 1596, was buried in
a little Isle joining to the south side of the Choire of the Cath. Church at
Worcester, near to the grave and monument of Dr. Wilson beforementioned. In
his Presidentship, which he resigned in 1590, succeeded Ralph Huchenson, and in
his Deanery Dr. Rich. Eedes of Chapter Chapter as I have elsewhere told you.

An. Dom. 1588.
An. 30 Eliz.
An. 31 Eliz.
Chanc. Robert Earl of Leycester, who dying 4 Sept. Sir Christop. Hatton Knight
of the Garter and Lord Chancellor of England, was by the major part of the
Academians elected into his place on the twentieth day of the same month. In
the vacancy between Death and Election, there was no Cancellarius natus as
formerly, only the Vicechanc. this year mentioned, who before had been
nominated by the Earl of Leycester. It is to be noted, that at the Election of
Hatton, Robert Earl of Essex a popular and ambitious person, was his
Competitor, (having been incorporated M. of A. in April going before, as I
shall anon tell you) thinking, that if he might have obtained the said place of
Chancellor, he might be as powerful among the Gown-men, as among the Gentlemen
of the Sword. But he being generally looked upon as a great Patron of the
puritannical Party, and consequently, if he had obtained it, he might do as
much mischief in his Office, as the Earl of Leycester had done before, he was
therefore, (especially upon the commendations to the University of Hatton by
Dr. Whitgift Archb. of Canterbury) laid aside.

Vicechanc. Martin Heton D. D. Canon of Chapter Chapter July 10.

Proct. Tho. Ravis of Chapter Chapter Matthew Gwinne of S. Joh. Coll. Apr. 17.


Bach. of Music.
July 8. Thomas Morley one of the Gentlemen of her Majesty's Royal Chapel. --
This person, tho he had not so excellent a hand on the Organ as Bull had, yet
his Compositions were admirable in their time, as (1) Consonets or little short
songs to three Voices, Land. 1593. qu. (2) The first book of Madrigalls to four
Voices, Land. 1594, qu. (3) The first book of Ballets to five Voices, Land.
1595. in a large qu. (4) Madrigalls to five Voices, Land. 1595, in a large qu.
(5) Introduction to music. Land. 1597, etc. in a thin fol. This last Book,
which shows the Author to have been admirably well skilled in the theoretick
part of Music, has afforded some matter to Christop. Simpson when he composed
his Compendium of Music, but more to the Author of An introduction to music,
Land. 1655, etc. oct. published by John Playford a Seller of musical Books and
Paper, near the Inner Temple Gate, Land. and a practitioner in Music, who, as
I have been informed, had the assistance of Charles Pidgeon of Greys Inn in the
drawing it up. The said Morley also has composed Divine Services and Anthems,
the words of some of which are In James Ch^fford Collection of Divine Services
and Anthems usually s^^g in (...) etc. Land. 1663. oct. p. 45. 125. 185.
published; and also collected and published Madrigalls, the triumphs of
Oriana, to five and six Voices, composed by diverse Authors. Land. 1601, qu.
Among which Authors Tho. Morley is one, Michael Est, Joh. mundy, Joh, Hilton,
Rich. Carlton, Tho. Hunt, Edw. Johnson, George Marson, etc. all Bachelaurs of
Music, were others; which last was nearly related to Simon Marson a Servant to
Sir Thom. Mounson in the time of K. Jam. 1. and a good Musician, as you may see
(...) in The Court and character of K. James. Land. 1650, in (...) p. 106, 107.
elsewhere. The said Thomas Morley had been bred up under the most famous
Musician Mr. Will. Bird, one of the Organists belonging to Queen Elizab. I
mean the same Bird who was Author and Composer of Graduallia, seu cantionum
sacrarum: quarum aliae ad quatuor, aliae vero ad quinque and sex voces editae
sunt. Land. 1610. qu. in 6 Vol. Also of several Divine Services and Anthems in
English, the words of which are extant, and of a most admired Composition of
forty parts; but this last is not yet extant. I say by this Byrde's endeavors
the said Morley became not only excellent in Munck, as well in the theoretical
as practical part, but also well seen in the Mathematics, in which Bird was
excellent.

July 3. John Dowland one of the Gent. of her Majesty's Royal Chapel, was then
also with Tho. Morley adm. Bach. of Music. -- He enjoyed the same place also
when King James 1. came to the Crown, being then esteemed a most admirable
Lutinist; about which time an Anagram was made on his name (Johannes Doulandus)
running thus, annos, ludendi hausi. He was the rarest Musician that his Age did
behold, and therefore admired by foreign Princes, among whom the King of
Denmark was one, who being infinitely taken with his playing, when he was in
England to visit his Sister the Queen, an 1606, took him with him at his return
to Denmark; where, as it is supposed, he died. He has among other things
written Necessary observations belonging to Lute-playing. Land. 1610, in a thin
fol. printed with Variety of Lute lessons, published by his Son Rob. Douland, a
most excellent Lutinist also; who, before (while his Father was absent) had
been trained up to the Lute by excellent Masters at the care and charge of Sir
Tho. Mounson beforementioned. The said Rob. Douland published also of his own
composition A musical banquet. Land. 1610. in a thin fol. and The pilgrims
solace for three and four parts, etc. which was composed by him, as it seems,
and not by his Father.

Bach. of Arts.
May 6. John Hoskyns senior of New Coll.

June 12. Sam. Burton of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Masters an. 1591.

Jan. 13. Matthew Slade of S. Albans Hall.

Henry Wotton of Queens Coll. supplicated in June for the degree of Bach. of
Arts, but I cannot find him admitted, or his name among the Determiners in the
Lent following.

Adm. 114. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Feb.... Henry Cromwell Fellow of S. John's Coll. -- This person who was third
Son of Sir Henry Cromwell of Hinchinbrook in Huntingdonshire Knight. I put not
down here as a Writer, or learned man, but only that he was a noted Gent. of
his Country, had a fair Estate at Vpwood there, was a Justice of Peace and
Uncle to Oliver Cromwell Lord Protector of England. See among the Bach. of Law,
an. 1599.

Adm. 14.

Mast. of Art.
Dec. 23. Rich. Latewar of S. Joh. Jul. 2. Alexand. Cook of Universe. Feb. 20.
Henr. Cuffe of Mert. Coll.

In the month of June Will. Camden Bach. of Arts of Chapter Chapter supplicated by his
Dean or Censor, that whereas it was 16 years since he took the degree of Bach.
of Arts, three solemn Lectures pro forma. performed by him, might be sufficient
for the taking the degree of Mast. of Arts; which desire of his was granted
conditionally that he should stand in the Act following; but his Admission and
Inception occurs not. Here you see is mention made that he was Bach. of Arts;
which, if true, (for no such matter occurs in the Register of that time) then
must that Will. Camden mentioned under the year 1573, be the same person who
was afterward known by the Title of Clarentius, and surnamed The learned. See
more among the Creations an. 1612.

Admit. 64.

Bach. of Div.
July 4. Robert Temple M. A. of Magd. Coll. -- He has published A Sermon
concerning the abuses of the Church, preached at Paul's Cross on 1 Cor. 14. 1.
Land. 1592, he being then Chaplain to John Bishop of London. What else he has
written or published, I know not, nor any thing besides, only he was an
Oxfordshire man born.

Adm. 4

Doct. of Law.
Jul. 9. Hugh Lloyd of New Coll.

He was the only person admitted Doctor of his Faculty this year.

Not one Doct. of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 4. Thom. Mountfort a Compounder. -- This worthy Doctor who was Son of
John Mountfort of the City of Norwych, was now, or about this time, Prebendary
of Harleston, and Residentiary of the Cath. Chapter of S. Paul, as also Prebendary
of Westminster; in which last Dignity he succeeded one Thomas (whom some call
John) Brown an. 1584. He died in London 27 Feb. 1632, and was buried in the
Chancel of the Parish Church of Tewing in Hertfordshire; whereupon one Gabr.
More, sometimes Chaplain in the House of George Villiers the first Duke of
Buckingham of his name, succeeded him in Westminster. but who in the Residentiaryship
in S. Paul's I cannot yet tell. He left behind him a Son named John Mountfort D.
of D. and Rector of Austie in Hertfordshire; who being a most zealous man for
the Church of England, suffered much in the time of the Rebellion raised by the
Long Parl. against K. Chapter 1. was cast out of his Benefice of Austie by the
Committee of Religion in 1643, as you may see in that diabolical Pamphlet
entit. The first Century of scandalous and malignant Priests, etc. pr. 1643.
qu. p. 13. and lost other Spiritualities. The said Dr. Tho. Mountfort had also
another Son named James, who succeeded his Father, as it seems, in the Rectory
of Tewing before mentioned; who also being a zealous man for the Church of
England, was thrown out of Tewing by the said Committee, as you may see in the
said Phmphlet, p. 10.

Jul. 4. Thom. Pie of Mert. 9. John Prime of New Coll.

Incorporations.
Apr. 11. Rob. Devereux Earl of Essex and Master of the Horse to Queen
Elizabeth, was incorporated M. of A. as he had stood at Cambridge, being then
accounted one of the best Poets among the Nobility of England, and a person
adorned with singular gifts of Nature. -- This Incorporation was the better to
capacitate him to be Chancellor of this University, when that honorable
Office should become void, as it shortly after did. He had received his
Academical Education in Trinity Coll. in Cambridge, under the tuition of Dr.
John Whitgift, afterward Archb. of Canterbury, and has written (1) Advice to
Reger Earl of Rutland in his travels, MS. the beginning of which is, My Lord, I
hold it a principle in the course, etc. This MS. which I have in my Library,
was, if I am not mistaken, printed in a Book entit. Profitable instructions,
describing what special observations are to be taken by Travelers in all
Nations. Land. 1633. oct. said in the title to be written by Robert Earl of
Essex, Sir Philip Sidney, etc. (2) His apology against those which falsely and
maliciously tax him to be the only hinderer of the peace and quiet of his
Country, written to Sir Anth. Bacon; which piece had such esteem among men,
that they thought that nothing could be more honorably uttered, nor more to
the Writers praise, so far as belongs to a noble Orator, than it. (3) Letters
to Qu. Elizabeth and Lord Howard, etc. MS. in bib. Bod. (4) His speech and
prayer at the time of his Execution, printed at the end of Dr. Will. Barlow's
Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, 1 Mar. 1600. Land. 1601. oct. with other things
which I have not yet seen. He left behind him (when beheaded in 1600) a Son of
both his names, educated in this University, whom I shall mention elsewhere.

Apr. 11. Abraham Hartwell M. of A. of Cambr. was also then incorporated. -- He
was Fellow of Kings Coll. in that University, afterward Amanuensis to John
Archb. of Canterbury, a Traveller, and at length Rector of Tuddyngton in
Bedfordshire. He has written (1) Regina literata, seu narratio de regina
Elizabetha, carmine, Land. 1565. oct. (2) Report of the Kingdom of Conge a
region in Africa, printed 1597, qu. and translated from french into English.
(4) A true discourse upon the matter of Martha Brossier of Romantin, pretended
to be possessed by a Devil. Land. 1599. qu. See another Translation made by him
in Walt. Haddon, mentioned in these Fasti, an. 1552.

July.... Robert Green M. A. of Cambridge, was also then incorporated. -- He
was at this time a pastoral Sonnet-maker and Author of several things which
were pleasing to Men and Women of his time. They made much sport, and were
valued among Scholars, but since they have been mostly sold on Ballad-mongers
stalls. The Titles of some of them are these, (1) Euphues his censure to
Philautas. Land. 1587. qu. (2) A quip for an upstart Courtier: or, a dispute
between Velvet breeches and Cloth breeches. Land. 1592. qu. (3) His mourning
Garment given him by repentance at the funerals of Love. One Edition of this
book was printed at Land. 1616. qu. (4) His groats worth of wit bought with a
million of repentance, etc. Land. 1617. qu. second Edit. The first Edit. was
printed after his death. and has at the end of it his Epitaph in six Stanzaes.
(5) Thee^^s falling out, true men come by their goods, or the Belman Lady
Fitzwaters Nightingale. Several times printed. (7) His nusquam sera est: or, a
treatise deciphering those particular vanities that hinder youthful Gentlemen
from attaining to their intended perfections. Several times printed. (8) The
history of Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay. (9) Greens Ghost haunting Cunny
Catchers. One Ed. of which was printed at Land. 1626. qu. Other trifles he has
extant, which he wrote to maintain his Wife, and that high and loose course of
living which Poets generally follow. He assisted also Thom. Ledge in the
composure of several Plays, as I have told you in my discourse of that person
among the Writers, under the year 1625. He wrote against, or at least reflected
upon, Gabriel Harvey in several of his Writings; whereupon Harvey being not
able to bear his Abuses, did inhumanely trample upon him when he lied full low
in his grave, even as Achilles tortured the dead body of Hector. This R. Green
died about 1592, of a Surfeit, taken by eating pickled Herrings, and drinking
with them Rhenish Wine. At which fatal Banquer Tom. Nash his Contemporary in
Cambridge was present, who in his Apology of Pierce Penniless does make
excellent sport with him and some of his Works. I have seen a witty Comedy
called Greens Tu quoque, or the City Gallant, not penned by the said Green, but
by one John Cook Gent. published by Thomas Heyword, an. 1622. and another
entit. Planetomachia; or, The first part of the general opposition of the seven
Planets, etc. Land. 1585. qu. said in the Title to be written by R. Green, but
whether the same R. Green the Poet, I cannot tell.

On the eleventh day of the said month of July supplicated to be incorporated
one Joh. Osbourne Doct. of Physic of Leyden; whose Grace being granted
simpliciter, I therefore think that he obtained his Option.

Creations.
When Robert Earl of Essex was incorporated, these persons following (who had
formerly been partly educated in this University) were actually created Masters
of Arts, Apr. 11. Which Creation, was usually called the Essexian Creation,
because done upon his account.

Thomas Lord Clinton, Son of the Earl of Lincoln.

Sir John Norris Knight. President of Mounster in Ireland, second Son of Henry the
first Lord Norris, and one now celebrated among the famous Captains of our
Nation. He died discontented, as being not rewarded according to his worth, an.
1597, or thereabouts.

Sir Robert Sidney Knight, younger Brother to Sir Philip Sidney. -- This Sir R.
Sidney was afterward the first Earl of Leycester of his name, who dying at
Penshurst in Kent 13 July 1626, was there buried.

Sir Hen. Norris Knight. younger Brother to Sir John before mentioned, who died of
a wound, about the same time and place that his Brother Sir Thomas did; which
Sir Tho. was also President of Mounster.

Sir Philip Boteler Knight.

Rob. Carew Fulke Grevil Francis Darcie Esquires.

Of Fulke Grevil, who was afterward Lord Brook, I have spoken at large among
the Writers, under the year 1628.

An. Dom. 1589.
An. 31 Elizab.
An. 32 Elizab.
Chanc. Sir Christoph. Hatton Knight. who, by the death of Robert Dudley Earl of
Leycester, became also High Steward of the Univ. of Cambridge.

Vicechanc. Nich. Bond D. D. President of Magd. Coll. Jul. 16.

Proct. John Harding of Magd. Coll. John King of Chapter Chapter Apr. 29.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 12. Will. Thorn of New Coll. June 25. Sebast. Benefeild of C. C. Coll.

July 12. George Benson of Queens Coll. -- See more among the Doctors of Div.
an. 1607.

Nov. 5. Clem. Edmonds of Alls. Coll.

Dec. 1. Tho. Frith of Magd. Hall, afterward of Alls. Coll. -- See among the
Bachelaurs of Divin. 1605.

17. Edmund Griffyth of Brasn. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Bangor.

Feb. 11. John Tapsell. -- See among the Doct. of Div. 1617.

Adm. 104.

Bach. of Law.
June 30. Will. Gager July 6. John Bennet of Chapter Chapter

See more among the Doctors of the Civ. Law this year.

In the month of April this year Edwyn Sandys of C. C. Coll. did supplicate for
the degree of Bach. of Law, but was not admitted.

Adm. 10.

Mast. of Arts.
June 9. George Warwick of Qu. Coll. -- He was afterward Archdeacon of
Carlisle, in the place, as I suppose, of Hen. Dethick.

18. Christoph. Sutton of Linc. 21. Griffith Powell of Jes. Coll.

27. John Budden of Gloc. Hall, lately of Trin. Coll.

July 4. Rich. Brett Joh. Randall of Linc. Coll.


11. George Cranmer Dec. 5. Alexand. Gill. of C. C. Coll.

Adm. 74.

Bach. of Phys.
Nov. 4. John Case the noted Philosopher of S. John's Coll. Besides him was only
one admitted, and another licensed to practice Medecin.

Bach. of Div.
July 6. Thomas Ravis of Chapter Chapter

Mar. 21. Giles Tomson of Alls. John Spenser of C. C. Coll.


Adm. 8.

Doct. of Law.
Apr. 30. Hen. Manning of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Chancellor of the
Dioc. of Exet. and died in 1614.

Jun. 30. Will. Gager of Chapter Chapter -- He accumulated the Degrees in the Civ. Law.

Joh. Estmond of New Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was now Principal
of N^w Inn.

Jul. 6. John Bennet of Chapter Chapter -- He was lately one of the Proctors of the
University, afterward Vicar Genesis in Spirituals to the Archb. of York,
Prebendary of Langtoft in the Church of York Chancellor to Qu. Anne, a Knight,
and Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury. In the beginning of 1617 he
was sent Ambassador to Bruxelis to question the Archduke in behalf of his
Master the King of Great Britain concerning a late famous Libel wrote and
published, as 'twas supposed, by Erycius Puteanus, who neither (...).
apprehended the Author, nor suppressed the Book, until he was solicited by
the Kings Agent there only interdicted it, and suffered the Author to fly his
Dominions. Afterward, in 1621, the said Sir Joh. Bennet was, for bribery,
corruption, and exaction in his place of Judge of the Prerogative, first
committed to custody (...).
to the Sheriff of London, then to prison, afterward fined 20000 l. and at
length deprived of his place of Judicature, till such time that he had restored
what he had unjustly taken away. He died in the Parish of Christ Church in
London. in the beginning of 1627, and was buried, I suppose, in the Church
there.

July 11. Thomas Crompton M. A. of Merton Coll. -- His Grace had before been
denied, because he was suspected to have something of a Papist in him; but
afterward making a protestation of his Religion according to the Church of
England in a solemn Congregation of Regents, he was permitted then (July 11.)
to proceed. He was afterward a Knight, Judge of the Court of Admiralty, and
one of the first Burgesses that the Members of this University chose to sit in,
after they had been empowered to send them to, Parliament. He died in the latter
end of 1608, having before, as I conceive, been engaged in the Earl of Essex
his Treasons.

Doct. of Phys.
June 30. John Bentley of Chapter Church.

Nov. 4. Joh. Case of S. John's Coll.

Both which accumulated the Degrees in Physic, and were learned men.

Doct. of Div.
July 6. Rich. Eedes of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Dean of Worcester, as I
have before told you among the Writers.

Creations.
June 16. Sir Charles Blount Knight. -- He was originally of this University, was
afterward Earl of Devonshire, and dying in 1606 left behind him a natural Son
named Montjoy Blount, created Earl of Newport in the Isle of Wight by K.
Charles I. which Montjoy dying in S. Aldates Parish in Oxon. 12 Feb. 1665, was
buried in the south Isle joining to the Choire of the Cathedral of Chapter Church,
near to the Grave of Will. Lord Grandison, the King, with his Court, having
about that time left Oxon; to which place, he before had retired, to avoid the
Plague raging in London.

Sir Charles Danvers Knight. was actually created M. A. the same day. -- He was
afterward beheaded on Tower hill near London for being deeply engaged in the
Earl of Essex's Treasons, an. 1601.

Sept. 17. Ferdinando Lord Strange. -- He was soon after Earl of Derby, and
dying in the flower of his Youth, not without suspicion of poison, on the 16 of
Apr. 1594, having enjoyed his Earldom but for a little time. was buried near to
the body of his Father in a Chapel joining to the Church of Ormeskirke in
Lancashire.

Sept. 17. Sir George Carew Knight. -- He was afterward Earl of Totness. Sir John
Spencer of Althorp in Northamptonshire Knight.

All which were actually created Masters of Arts.

An. Dom. 1590.
32 Elizab.
33 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Will. James D. D. Dean of Chapter Chapter Jul. 16, who in 1581 had
undergone the same Office.

Proct. Jasp. Colmer of Mert. Coll. Jeh. Evelegh. of Exet. Coll. Apr. 29.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 13. Tho. Bastard of New Jul. 9. Joh. Davies of Queens Coll.

George Carew of Exeter Coll. was admitted the same day. Quaere.

Dec. 14. Thom. Cooper or Couper of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1600.

Feb. 5. Sam. Page Rob. Burhill Joh. Barcham of C. C. Coll.


The two last I shall mention among the Writers in the second Volume.

Feb. 5. Matthew Lister Lionel Day of Oriel Coll.


Of the first you may see more among the Incorporations an. 1605, and of the
other, who was originally of S. Albans Hall, among the Bach. of Div. 1608.

10. Lancelot Bulkley of Brasn. Coll. -- He was afterward Archbishop of Dublin
in Ireland.

Adm. 133.

Bach. of Law.
May 2. John Owen of New Coll. the Epigrammatist.

Feb. 2. Ralph Winwood of Magd. Coll. -- This person whom I have mentioned
among the Masters in 1587, was Proctor of the University two years after, and
traveling beyond the Seas, returned an accomplished Gentleman. In 1607, June
28. he received the honor of Knighthood at Richmond, was sent Ambassador into
the Low Countries soon after, made Secretary of State 29 Mar. 1614, being the
very (...).
day that Sir Tho. Lake was made a privy Counselor, which place of
Secretaryship was obtained for him by Carr Earl of Somerset, purposely, as it is
(...).
said, to use him as a tool for his own designs. This Sir Ralph Winwood died 27
October. 1617, and was about three days after buried in a Vault under part of
Little S. Barthelmews Church in London, leaving then behind him a Son and Heir
named Richard Winwood Esquire. afterward of Ditton Park in Bucks; who dying there
without issue, at about 80 years of age, 28 June 1688, his Estate, which was
considerable, went to Ralph Son of Edward Lord Mountague Earl of Boughton by
Anne his Wife, Sister to the said Richard Winwood.

Adm. 13.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 30. Nich. Fuller of Heart Hall.

June 23. Edw. Gee of Brasn..... Rowland Searchfield of S. Joh. Coll.

July 1. Job. Aglionbie Rrch. Crakanthorpe of Qu. Coll.


4. Hen. Wilkinson Franc. Mason of Mert. Coll.


6. Samuel Vetablus a French man of Oriel Coll. who had studied Philosophy for
four years in the University of Basil, and two elsewhere, was then admitted M.
of A. which is all I know of him.

9. Edward Breerwood of Brasn. Coll.

10. Rich. Jefferay of Magd. Coll. -- This person who was a Wiltshire man born,
and Fellow of that Coll. published The Son of God's entertainment by the Sons
of men, Sermon. at Paul's Cross 7 Oct. 1604, on John 6. 11, 12. Land. 1605. qu.
and perhaps other things.

Jan. 21. Bernard Adams of Trin. Coll.

Feb. 19. Thom. Wenman of Ball. Coll. -- He was afterward public Orator of
this University, and tho an excellent Scholar, and able enough to honor the
World with the issue of his Brain, yet he would leave nothing behind him in
Writing, because that whatsoever he had left, would have fallen short of his
Perfections, inasmuch as the best part of an Orator dies with him.

Adm. 83.

Bach. of Div.
July 9. Rog. Hacket of New Coll.

Dec. 17. Will. Huchenson of S. John's Coll. -- He occurrs Archdeacon of Cornwall
1605.

Edward Hutchins of Brasn. Coll. supplicated for that degree, but was not
admitted.

Adm. 9.

Doct. of Law.
July 14. John Weston M. A. of Chapter Chapter -- This person who was the only Son of
Rob. Weston Chancellor of Ireland (mentioned in these Fasti, an. 1566.) was
soon after made Canon of Chapter Chapter where he died 20 July 1632.

George Dale M. A. of Oriel Coll. now Principal of S. Mary's Hall. -- He died
26 Nov, 1625, and was buried in the Church at Fifield near Abendon in Berks,
where he had lived many years.

Dec. 17. Thom. Edwards of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Chancellor to the
Bishop of London and a great Benefactor to Bodlies Library, and to that of Chapter
Chapter

Doct. of Phys.
Jun. 17. Will Clarkson a Student in Phys. of Broadgates Hall. -- In the Act
celebrated 13 July following, he was completed in that Degree, (with Dr. Jo.
Case) as a Member of S. John's Coll.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 6. Hen. Robinson Provost of Queens Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Carlisle.

July 9. Adrianus, or Hadrianus a Saravia, was then admitted among the Doct. of
Div. -- See in the Incorporations following.

14. Owen Glynne of Lincoln Coll.

Incorporations.
Jul. 9. Hadrianus a Saravia, D. D. of the University of Leyden. was then
incorporated in that degree, and admitted among the Doctors of that Faculty. --
He was born at Hedin in Artois, educated in all kind of literature in his
younger years, especially in several Languages, which made him so famous, that
he was invited to Leyden, where he began to profess Divinity, an. 1582, at
which time he had studied and well considered the controverted points
concerning Episcopacy and Sacrilege. Soon after he became Preacher to the
French Church there, where he continued about five years, and then went into
England, where, after he had exercised himself in some petite or pedagogical
Employments for a time, he was made Prebendary of Canterbury, and became well
known to the famous Mr. Rich. Hooker Parson of Bishops-Bourne in Kent. In 1601,
July 5. he was installed Canon of Westminster in the eleventh Stall or
Prebendship, on the promotion of the learned Doct. Lanc. Andrews to the Deanery
of the said Church; at which time Saravia was in great esteem for his learning.
While he continued at Canterbury he had a just occasion given him to declare
his judgment concerning Episcopacy and Sacrilege, unto his Brethren the
Ministers of the Low Countries, which was excepted against by Theodore Beza and
others: against whose Exceptions he rejoyned, and thereby became the happy
Author of several Tracts in Latin, especially three, viz. De diversis
ministrorum Evangelii gradibus, etc. Land. 1590, qu. and in the year following
were printed at Land. in English under these Titles, viz. (1) Of the diverse
degrees of the Ministers of the Gospel. (2) Of the honor which is due into
Priests and Prelates of the Church. (3) Of Sacrilege and the punishment
thereof. He soon after also put out another concerning Christian Obedience to
Princes; the writing of which was occasioned by a certain Book published by a
learned Jesuit called James Gretzer. All his Works were collected together, and
printed in one Vol. by the Company of Stationers of London, an. 1611, most of
which you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford Catalogue. It is now to be
observed, that when in a time of Church Tumults, Beza gave his reasons to the
Chancellor of Scotland for the abrogation of Episcopacy in that Nation, partly
by Letters, and more fully in a Treatise of a threefold Episcopacy (which he
calls divine, humane and satanical) this Doctor Saravia had by the help (...)
Land. 1670. p. 96.
of Dr. Joh. Whitgift Archb. of Canterbury such an early discovery of their
Intentions, that he had almost as soon answered that Treatise, as it became
public, and therein discovered how Beza's Opinion did contradict that of
Calvin, and his Adherents, leaving them to interfere with themselves in point
of Episcopacy. At length, after he had taken considerable pains in translating
the Bible, appointed by K. James in the beginning of his Reign, he died at
Canterbury 15 Jan. 1612, aged 82. Whereupon his body was buried in the
Cathedral Church there, near to that of Catherine Dallez his first Wife (who
died 2 Feb. 1605 in the 45 year of her Marriage) and soon after had a Monument
put over his Grave by Margaret W^its his second Wife. In his Canonry of Westminster.
succeeded Gabr. Grant Son of Edw. Grant sometimes Master of the School there,
but who in his Prebendship of Canterbury, or of Gloucester, (where he was also
Prebendary) I know not.

Feb. 12. Thom. Muriel M. of A. of Cambridge. -- In the year 1621, Dec. 30. he
was installed Archdeacon of Norfolk, as I have elsewhere told you; and dying
about the beginning of Oct. 1629, was buried, as I presume, at Hildersham (of
which he was Minister) in Cambridgeshire. Thomas Myriell sometimes Preacher of
God's Word at Barnet in Middlesex (in the time of K. Jam. 1.) afterward Rector
of S. Stevens in Walbrook, London, and a publisher of certain Sermons between
the year 1610 and 1625, must not be taken to be the same with Tho. Muriel.

Mar. 22. Fines Moryson M. A. of Cambr. -- He was a Lincolnshire man born, was
Fellow of Peter House in that University, and Brother to Sir Richard Moryson
Vicepresident of Mounster. After he had taken his Masters degree he studied the
Civil Law, and in 1589, being then 23 years of Age, he obtained license of the
Master and Fellows of his House to travel. Presently after leaving the
University, he went to London to follow such Studies that were fit to enable
him in his course of Travels; and afterward going to Oxon, was incorporated M.
of A. as I have told you before. On the 1 May 1591, he took ship at Liegh
distant from London 28 miles by land and 36 by water, and after he had rambled
about many parts of the World for 8 years, returned, and went into Ireland
1598. and became Secretary to Sir Charles Blount Lord Lieutenant of that Realm.
After his death, which happened about 1614, were published his Travels, entit. An
Itinerary containing his ten years Travels through the twelve Dominions of
Germany, Bohmerland, Sweitzerland, Netherland, Denmark, Poland, England,
Scotland, and Ireland Divided in three parts. Land. 1617, in a thick fol. It
was first written in Latin, and afterward translated by him into English.

There were also four more Cantabrigians incorporated, among whom Robertus
Hemmingius M. A. was one, Feb. 23.

Creations.
July 14. Sir Will. Hatton Sir Hen. Vnton Joh. Fitzjames Esquire. Knights.


The first was Son to the Sister of Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor of
England, and being Heir to the said Sir Christophes, did change his name from
Newport to Hatton.

The second, who had been of Oriel Coll. I have mentioned among the Writers,
under the year 1595.

The third, who was of the ancient Family of the Fitzjames of Somersetshire,
was originally also of this University, which is all I know of him.

An. Dom. 1591.
An. 33 Elizab.
An. 34 Elizab.
Chanc. Sir Christoph. Hatton, who dying 20 of Nov. this year, certain Members
of the University, especially those of the Puritanical Party, were for Robert
Earl of Essex before mentioned, now in great favor with the Queen; and others
for Tho. Sackvile Lord Buckhurst. At length upon the receipt of Letters from
the Queen in favor of Buckhurst, the Academians elected him 17 Dec. following.
See more in the Incorporations this year.

Vicechanc. Dr. James again, designed by Chancellor Hatton, 16 July.

Proct. Rich. Branch of Chapter Chapter Joh. Lloyd of New Coll. Apr. 16.


Which Proctors, with several Doctors and others, went to London, to admit the
Chancellor to his Office, being the first Admission out, or without the
limits, of the University, that I have yet met with.

Bach. of Arts.
Mar. 27. Tho. Storer of Chapter Chapter now in much esteem for his Poetry.

Apr. 16. Rob. Moor June 4. Arth. Lake of New Coll.

The former was adorned with variety of Learning, the other was afterward a
Bishop.

Jul. 2. Will. Hind of Queens Coll. -- Afterward a learned Nonconformist.

9. Walter Wylshman of Exeter Coll. afterward of Broadgates Hall.

Jan. 16. Rich. Haydock of New Feb. 7. Gerard Massy of Brasn. Coll.

Of the last you may see more among the Doctors of Divinity, an. 1608.

Adm. 116.

Mast. of Arts.
May 20. Will. Westerman of Oriel Coll. lately of Gloc. Hall.

June 15. Samuel Burton of Chapter Chapter -- He became Rector of Dry Marston in
Glocestershire seven years after this time, afterward Archdeacon of Gloucester,
and at length Justice of the Peace for that County. He has published A Sermon
preached at the general Assizes in Warwick, 3 March, being the first Friday in
Lent 1619, on Romans 1. 4. Land. 1620. qu. and perhaps other things. He died 14
June 1634, was buried in the Chancel of the Church of Dry Marston before
mentioned.

Jun. 21. Tho. Hutton Henr. Price of S. Joh. Coll.

Jul. 8. Nathan. Torporley of Brasn. Nov. 30. Joh. Day of Oriel Feb. 26. Joh.
Hoskyns sen. of New Coll.

Adm. 56.

Bach. of Div.
Mar. 27. Henr. Rowlands of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Bangor.

Apr. 27. Leonard Hutten Jul. 2. Joh. King of Chapter Chapter

Adam Hill of Ball. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Nov. 15. Soh. Smith of S. Joh. Coll.

Adm. 15.

Not one Doctor of Law or of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 2. Tho. Hyde of Ball. Coll. -- On the fourteenth of June 1588, he became
Chancellor of the Church of Salisbury, on the death of Dr. Tho. White, (having
before been Prebendary of Ilfracomb in the said Church) and dying in Nov. 1618,
was succeeded in his Chancellourship by Dr. Franc. Dee, who was afterward B.
of Peterborough.

Ralph Pickover of Chapter Chapter was adm. the same day. -- On the 5. of July 1576, he
was installed Archd. of Rochester in the place of Joh. Calverley deceased, and
in 1580 he succeeded Dr. Rob. Dorset in a Canonry of Chapter Chapter In an. 1582 he
became Archdeacon of Salisbury, but whether he was Dean of that Church (as I
have told you in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Ox. lib. 2. p. 259. b. upon false
information) it appears not. In his Archdeaconry of Rochester, which he
resigned, was installed Th. Staller D. D. 5 Jul. 1593, and to his Archdeaconry
of Sarum (which he kept to the day of his death) was collated Will. Barlow, on
the 12 of March (being four days after the death of Pickover) an. 1614. This
person Pickover is commended for a learned man, for a good Greecian, Hebritian
and a frequent Preacher. See in the said Hist. and Antiq. lib. 2. p. 260. a.

Adam Hill of Ball. Coll. was adm, the same day, July 2. -- He accumulated, as
Pickover did.

Incorporations.
Jul. 13. George Downham M. A. of Cambridge -- He was Son of Will. Downham
Bishop of Chester, was educated in Christ's Coll. in Cambridge, of which he
became Fellow about 1585, afterward a great Aristotelian, a follower of Ramus;
and at length Bishop of Londonderry in Ireland; where dying in 1634 Apr. 17.
was buried in the Cath. Church there. The Catalogue of all or most of his works
you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford Catalogue.

Besides him were 15 Cantabrigians incorporated Masters of Arts on the same
day, being the next, after the Act had been concluded, but not one of them, can
I yet find, who was afterward a Writer, Bishop, etc.

On the same day also Will. Halke an English Man of the same University, who
had had the Degree of M. of A. conferred upon him in the University of St.
Andrew in Scotland, an. 1590, (Andr. Melvin being then Rector) was also
incorporated in this University.

Oct. 22. Will. Paddie of St. John's Coll. in this University, lately made Doct.
of Phys. in the University of Leyden, was incorporated in the same Degree. --
He was afterward Physician to K. Jam. 1. a Knight, eminent for his practice in
that faculty, and President, if I mistake not, of the Coll. of Physicians in
London. See more among the Incorporations, an. 1600.

Jan 6. or thereabouts, Thom. Sackvile M. A. of Cambridge and Chancellor of
this University, was incorporated in his Lodgings at London by certain Offices
appointed by the Venerab. Convocation. -- He was originally of this University,
as himself confesses in his Letters sent thereunto, dat. 21. March following,
running partly thus. -- I am given by common report to understand that contrary
to your own statutes, etc. very few retain the old Academical habit, which in
my time was a reverend distinction of your Degrees, etc. The place wherein he
studied, was, as is supposed, Heart hall, but took no Degree before he left us.
See among the Writers, an. 1608.

An. Dom. 1592.
An. 34 Elizab.
An. 35 Elizab.
Chanc. Tho. Sackvile Lord Buckhurst Knight of the Garter, afterward Lord
Treasurer of England.

Vicechanc. Dr. Nich. Bond President of Magd. Coll. Jul. 13.

Proct. Tho. Savile of Mert. Coll. Ralph Winwood of Magd. Coll. Apr. 5.


But the Senior Proctor dying at London 12. January, Mr. Richard Fisher of
Mert. Coll. succeeded 15. of the same month.

Bach. of Music.
Jul. 7. Giles Farnabie of Chapter Chapter who for 12 years had studied the fac. of
Music, was then admitted Bach. of Music. -- This Person who was of the family
of Farnaby of Truro in Cornwall, and near of kin to Tho. Farnaby the famous
Schoolmaster of Kent, was an eminent Musician, and Author of Cansonets to four
voices, with a song of eight parts. Land. 1598. qu. dedicated to his Patron
Ferdinando Heabourne Grome of her Majesty's privy chamber. What other things he
has published, I find not.

Rich. Read who had studied the musical faculty 22 years, was admitted the same
day. -- He has composed certain Church Services, and other matters for
instruments, which are scattered in several books.

George Waterhouse of the Queens Chapel, who had spent there several years in
the practical and theoretical part of Music, supplicated for the Degree of
Bachelaur, but was not, as I can find, admitted.

Bach. of Arts.
May 5. George Andrew of Magd. hall -- Afterward Bishop of Ferns and Leighlin
in Ireland.

27. Nich. Hill of St. John's Coll. -- Afterward an eminent Chemist.

30. Henry Savile of Mert. Coll. commonly called Long Harry Savile.

Jun. 26. Pet. Smart of Chapter Chapter -- He is to be remembered among the Writers in
the 2. vol. of this work.

George Ferebe of Magd. Coll. was adm. the same day. -- See among the Mast. of
Arts, an. 1595.

Oct. 25. Rich. Deane of St. Albans hall, lately of Merton Coll. -- He was
afterward Bishop of Ossorie in Ireland.

27. Rob. Bagnold or Bagnall of Chapter Chapter -- This Person who took no higher
Degree in this University was matriculated as a Staffordshire Man born 1589
aged 18. and is the same, as I suppose, with Rob. Bagnall, who was afterward
Minister of Hutton in Somersetshire, and Author of The Stewards last account,
in five Sermons on Luke 16. 1. and 2. L^nd. 1622. qu.

Dec. 16. Thom. Allen an eminent Grecian.

Feb. 9. Tho. Floyd of New Inn.

21. Sirach Hilton of Oriel Co^l. Son of Will. Hilton Baron of Hilton.

Admitted 122.

Mast. of Arts.
Jul. 5. Edm. Griffith of Brasn. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Bangor.

Jan. 18. Will. Thorn 22. Benj. Heydon of New Coll.

The first of which was afterward Dean of Chichester and a Writer, and the
other Dean of Wells.

Admitted 100.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 6. Will. Sutton of Chapter Chapter Rob. Wright of Trin. Hen. Parry of C. C. Coll.


Jun. 5. John Lloyd of New Coll.

14. Rich. Field of Magd. hall.

Nov. 20. John Buckridge of St. John's Coll.

Adm. 11.

Doct. of Law.
Jun. 5. John Favor Franc. Betts Hen. Marten of New Coll.


The last was now Official to the Archdeacon of Berks.

Jul. 11. Evan Morice of Alls. Coll. -- He was about this time Vicar Genesis in
spirituals and principal Official of the Episcopal consistory of Exeter. He
died 1605 leaving behind him a Son named William Morice, afterward a Knight
and Principal Secretary of State to K. Chapter 2. as I shall tell you at large
among the Writers in the 2. vol. of this work.

Doct. of Phys.
Aug. 17. Tho. Do^hym of Magd. Coll. -- In 1604. Nov. 4. he was elected
superior Lecturer of Lynacres lectures on the death of Dr. Rob. Barnes, and
dyed 29. Jan. following.

Doct. of Div.
July 14. George Clerk of Magd. Coll. -- He was a learned Divine, but has not
published any thing.

Incorporations.
Jul. 7. Edw. Gibbons Bach. of Music of Cambridge was then incorporated in the
same Degree -- He was now, or about this time, the most admired Organist of the
Cathedral Church at Bristow, was Brother to the incomparable Orlands Gibbons
whom I shall mention elsewhere, and Brother also to Ellis Gibbons, who has
several compositions in The triumphs of Oriana, mentioned before in Tho.
Morley. As for this Edward Gibbons, he made several compositions in his
faculty, some of which I have seen in the Musical Library reposed in the
public School of that profession in Oxon.

John Bull Doct. of Music of the said Univ. of Cambridge, and one of the
Gentlemen of her Maj. Chapel, was incorporated the same day, Jul. 7. -- This
is the same Person who was admitted Bach. of Music of this University, an.
1586, as I have told you under that year, and would have proceeded in the same
place, had he not met with clowns and rigid Puritans there that could not
endure Church Music. He was afterward the first Music lecturer of Gresham
Coll. at London, and one of three (Will. Bird and Orlando Gibbons being the
other two) that composed and published a book intit. Parthenia; or, The
maydenhead of the first Music that ever was printed for the Virginals. Printed
at London in fol. but not said when, either in the title, or at the end. The
book contains 21 lessons printed off from copper cuts, and was the prime book
for many years that was used by Novices and others that exercised their hands
on that Instrument. There is no doubt but that this Dr. Bull has published
other things, besides the making of very many compositions to be sung and
played; which being thrown aside upon the coming out and publication of others
by other hands, have been since in a manner lost, such is the fate of Music,
as well as of Poetry. After the death of Queen Elizab. he became chief Organist
to K. James 1. was so much admired for his dexterous hand on the Organ, that
many thought that there was more than Man in him. At length being possessed
with crotchets, as many Musicians are, he went beyond the Seas and died, as
some say, at Hanborough; or rather, as others who remembered the Man, have said,
at Lubeck His picture hangs at this day, at the upper end of the public Music
School in the University of Oxon.

Jul. 11. Nich. Gibbons M. A. of Cambridge -- One Nich. Gibbens or Gibbons has
published Questions and disputations on Genesis. printed 1602. qu. which some
call An exposition on Gene^is. Whether the same with him, who was incorporated,
I cannot yet tell -- Qu^ere.

William Alabaster M. A. of the same University, was incorporated on the said
day. -- He was bred in Trin. Coll. in that University, was the rarest Poet and
Grecian that any one age or nation has produced. Afterward he attended, as
Chaplain, on Robert Earl of Essex in Cadiz voyage, where he changed his
Religion and wrote Seven Motives for what he had done, answered by one John
Racster an. 1598 and by Roger Fenton the year following. But upon some
discontent taken from the Romans Party, he returned to the Church of England, and
was made Prebendary of St. Paul's Cath. in London, D. of D. and Rector of
Tharfield in Hertfordshire. He has written (1) Roxana, Tragedia; admirably
well acted more than once, in Trin. Coll. hall in Cambr. and was soon after
published full of faults contrary to the Authors mind: Whereupon he took great
pains to correct and amend it. Which being done, 'twas printed to the Authors
mind at Land. 1632. oct. (2) Lexicon Pentaglotton, Hebraicum, Chaldaicum,
Syriacum, Talmudico Raabinium. Land. 1637. fol. The titles of other books of
his writing, you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford Catalogue. He also began to
describe in a Latin Poem, intit. MS. sometimes in the hands of (...).
E^isaeis, the chief transactions of Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, but left unfinished
at the time of his death, which happening about the beginning of Apr. 1640. was
buried according to the discretion of his dear friend Nich. Bacon of Greys Inn
in Holbourn near London, whom he made his sole Executor. Rich. Her. rick the
Poet in his Hesperides does highly celebrate Alabaster for his elaborate works.

Aug. 19. Hen. Wriothsley Earl of Southampton, M. of Arts of Cambridge. -- He
was afterward deeply engaged in the treasons of his entire friend Robert Earl
of Essex, and therefore by his Peers he was condemned to dye, but by the favor
of the Queen he was saved. When K. James 1. came to the Crown he was restored
by Parliament, was made Knight of the Garter, and Captain of the Isle of Wight
and of Caresbrook Castle. He died in the Netherlands, an. 1624, and was buried
at Tichfield in Hampshire by the bodies of his Ancestors.

Dec. 18. Thomas D'oylie of Magd. Coll. in Oxon. Doctor of Physic of the
University of Basil in Germany.

Creations.
Aug. 19. Will. Somerset of Magd. Coll. in this University eldest Son of Edward
Earl of Worcester, was actually created Mast. of Arts.

These Persons following were created Mast. of Arts 27. Sept. while the Queen
was in Oxon, being then entertained by the University.

Edward Earl of Worcester. -- He was afterward Master of the Horse to K. Jam.
1. and Knight of the Garter.

Geo. Clifford E. of Cumberl. -- He was an excellent Mathematician, a great
Navigator, and one that did more prodigious things at Sea, (to the great
impoverishment of his estate) than any Subject of this Realm had done before.
He died 30. Oct. 1605, and was buried at Skipton in Craven in Yorkshire by his
ancestors.

Hen. Herbert E. of Pembroke, Knight. of the most noble order of the Garter and
President of the Council in the Marches of Wales. -- He died 1601, and was
succeeded in the Earldom of Pembroke by his Son and Heir called William,
afterward the most noble Chancellor of this University.

Sir John Wingfield Tho. Coningsby Will. Knollis Knights.


The last of which, who had been formerly of Magd. Coll. was afterward Earl of
Banbury.

Michael Stanhop Esquire; -- He was Brother to John Lord Stanhop of Harrington.

Tho. Knevet Esquire; -- He was afterward, as it seems, Lord Knevet of Escricke.

Edward Darcey Joh. Stanhop Will. Pointz Rich. Brakenbury Esquires.

Thom. Lake Esquire; -- This Gentleman who was born at Southampton, was bred a
Scholar, and afterward was taken into the service, in the condition of an
Amanuensis, of Sir Franc. Walsingham Secretary of State, by whom being
commended to Qu. Elizabeth, he read to her French and Latin. A little before
her death, she made him Clerk of her Signet; and after her death he was chosen
by this state into the place to attend K. Jam. 1. from Barwick, who afterward
made use of his present service in some French affairs, and conferred upon him
the honor of Knighthood. After Sir Rob. Cecills time, the place of Secretary,
was joined in two Principals; and not long after he was one of them, and so
continued with honorable esteem of all Men; until that malice and revenge, two
violent passions, overruling the weaker sex, concerning his His Wife was named
Mary, eldest Daughter of Sir Will. Ryther L. May or of Land.
Wife and Daughter, involved Aul. (...). or an answer to the Court and Char. of
K. James, printed at Land. 1650. p. 100.
him into their quarrel, the chief and only cause of his ruin.

Anth. Ashley -- He made additions for the use of English Men to The mariners
mirror, etc. written in Dutch by Luke Wagener of Ein. husen; set forth in
English by the said Ashley in two parts, adorned with variety of Sea-charts and
Mapps -- printed at London in fol. 1588-89. and dedicated to Robert Earl of
Leycester from St. James. One Sir Anth. Ashley Knight was a courtier in the
Reign of K. Jam. 1, and tho then a hater of Women, yet he was induced to marry
one of the Family and Relations of George Duke of Bucks, which administered
mirth to the Courtiers. Whether this Sir Authony be the same with the former I
know not. Qu.

Hen. Noell Esquire; -- He was younger Brother to Sir Andrew Noell of
Leycestershire, was one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to Queen Elizabeth, a Man
of excellent parts, and well skilled in Music. He died in the latter end of
Feb. 1596, and was by the command of Qu. Elizabeth (who had an especial respect
for him,) buried in St. Andrews Chapel within the Precincts of the Abbey
Church at Westminster.

In a convocation celebrated the same day after dinner (for the former
creations were made in a Convocation held in the morning) were these following
Persons actually created Masters of Arts also, viz.

Monsieur Beauvoys La Noude Ambassador from the King of France to the Queen of
England.

Monsieur Mauditor or Manditor.

Sir Edward Stafford an English Knight.

An. Dom. 1593.
An. 35 Elizab.
An. 36 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Dr. Edm. Lillye again, July 17.

Proct. Will. Aubrey of Chapter Chapter Rich. Latewarr of St. Job. C. Apr. 26.


Bach. of Music.
Feb. 25. Arth. Cock Orgainst of the Cath. Chapter at Exeter. Matthew Jeffrye Vicar
choral in the Church at Wells.

Their Graces were then passed, and no doubt there is but that they were
admitted. Some of the compositions of Arth. Cock I have seen in our public
Music School; and certain divine Services and Anthems were composed by one
Jeffrye, the words of which are In a book intit. Divine Services and (...) etc.
Land. 1663. (...)
extant, but whether by this Matthew, or George Jeffrye, who were both eminent
Musicians, I cannot tell.

Bach. of Arts.
May 21. Peter Bowne of C. C. Coll.

June 20. Nathaniel Brent of Mert. Coll.

Feb. 6. Joh. Marston of Brasn. Coll. -- Qu. Whether not the same Person who
was afterward the celebrated Comedian.

Feb. 6. Rob. Wakeman 8. Joh. Denison of Ball. Coll.

Jam. Mabbe of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day.

March 16. Joh. Davies of Jesus Coll. -- Afterward a reviver of the Welsh
Language.

As for Brent and Mabbe, they are to come among the Writers in the second vol.

Admitted 117.

Bach. of Law.
Jul.... Griffith Powell of Jesus Coll. the eminent Philosopher and Disputant,
was then, tho M. of A. of 4 years standing, admitted Bach. of Law.

Besides him, were but three more admitted, of whom Tho. May of St. John's Coll.
was one, Jan. 17.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 3. Sebastian Bonefeild of C. C. Coll.

June 19. Tho. Cooper of Chapter Chapter

28. Lancelot Bulkley lately of Brasn. C. now of St. Edm. hall -- He was
afterward Archb. of Dublin.

Jul. 4. Jo. Parentius a Forreigner of Chapter Chapter who had studied two years in the
University of Caen, five at Paris, and three at Oxon, was then admitted. --
One, or more of his Surname were learned Men and Writers, but whether this John
was a Writer, I cannot tell.

Oct. (14.) Clem. Edmonds of Alls. Coll.

Jan. 30. Sam. Slade of Mert. Coll. -- This Person who was a Dorsetsh. Man born
and Fellow of the said Coll. became afterward a famous Traveller throughout
most parts of the World, was employed by Sir Hen. Savile to procure what
fragments he could of St. Chrysostom, in order to have them compared and
published: And while he was at Venice, he became acquainted with that noted
Person (famous for his speaking and writing pure Greek) called Gabriel, Archb.
of Philadelphia, who finding Slade to be admirably well skilled in the said
Language, he communicated to him some rare manuscript Fragments of St.
Chrysostoms Greek works. Which being by him well approved, were conveyed into
England to Sir Henry. In his further travels also (for he was in Greece a
considerable while) he met with other fragments; and was so useful in bringing
to light a true copy of the works of the said Author, that the said Sir Henry
could not but acknowledge with due commendations, what he had done in that
matter. See in the eighth vol. of St. Chrysostom. works published by Sir Henry,
page 215. 920, etc. This Mr. Slade, who was elder Brother to Matthew Slade,
whom I have mentioned among the Writers an. 1614, died in the Isle of Zant near
Peloponesus, in his return from his travels, before the publication of St.
Chrysostomes works, and was there buried.

Adm. 72.

Bach. of Phys.
Jul. 10. Thom. Twyne M. of A. of C. C. Coll. in Oxon, afterward a Student for
some years in Cambridge, was then admitted Bach. of Physic. -- He took the
Degree of Dr. of that faculty at Cambridge, as I have before told you among the
Writers.

17. Matthew Gwinne of St. John's Coll. -- See among the Creations ^ollowing.

Besides these two, who were the only Men admitted this year, were two admitted
to practice, of whom Jo. Woolton M. A. and Fellow of Alls. Coll. was one, Son
of Joh. W^olton Bish. of Exeter.

Bach. of Div.
Nov.... Joh. Dove Feb. 11. Franc. Godwin of Chapter Chapter
Mar. 4. Rob. Abbot George Abbot of Ball. Coll.


Rich. Parry of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day -- All these except the
first, were afterward Bishops.

Adm. 15.

Doct. of Law.
Jul. 10. Will. Wilkinson of Cambridge -- He was about this time Chancellor of
the Diocese of Salisbury, and died about the latter end of Oct. 1613.

Not one Doct. of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 6. Leonard Tailor. of C. C. Coll.

Mar. 23. Tho. Aubrey of Chapter Chapter -- He accumulated the Degrees in Divinity.

Incorporations.
July 10. Francis Meres M. A. of Cambridge -- This Person who was the Son of
Tho. Meres of Kirton in Holland in the County of Lincoln, was about this time
a Minister and Schoolmaster, and afterward Author of a noted School-book
called Wits Commonwealth. part the second. Land. 1598. oct. The first part was
put out by N. L. He has also published Gods Arithmetic. Sermon. on Eccles. 4.
9. Land. 1597. oct. and Sinners guide, or the whole regiment of Christian life,
etc. printed 1614. qu. etc. and translated into English, The devotions of Lewis
of Granada. Land. 1598. oct. Which is all I know of him, only that he was
Grandfather to Rob. Meres D. D. and Chancellor of the Church of Lincoln.

Jul. 10. Gilbert Bourne Doct. of the Laws of the University of Orleance -- He
was Nephew to Gilb. Bourne sometimes Bishop of B. and Wells, being Son of his
Brother Rich. Bourne of Wyvelscombe in Somersetshire, which is all I know of
him; only that his Testimonial for his Degree in the said University, dated in
a Congregation celebrated there, 8. June 1583 was subscribed by Maximilian de
Cobham, Tertullian Pine Doct. of the Civil Law (lately of St. John's Coll. in
Oxon) George Talbot, Giles Wroughton, Nich. Wilson, and George Manwaring,
Englishmen; that also he was Vicargeneral to the Bishop of B. and Wells, and
dying in December. or thereabouts, an. 1595 was buried in the Cath. Church of St.
Andrew in Wells, near the body of his sometimes Wife.

Jan. 28. Joh. Pilkington M. A. of Cambridge, of whom I know no more -- One of
both his names who was Bach. of Divinity, was collated by his Brother Jam.
Pilkington Bishop of Durham, to the Archdeaconry thereof, upon the resignation
of Joh. Ebden, 5. Dec. 1563, and dying 16. Sept. 1581. was buried in the
Cathedral Church at Durham. Who succeeded him in that Dignity, the registers of
that Church, which are imperfect, show not.

In July this year was a supplicate made in the ven. congregation for one W.
L'isle M. of A. of Cambridge to be incorporated in the said Degree, but whether
he was really incorporated, it appears not. I take him to be the same with
Will. L'isle, who, after he had been educated in Eaton School, was admitted
into the society of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, an. 1584. And after he had
continued some years in the Degree of M. of A. left his Fellowship because he
had Lands fallen to him at Wilburgham in Cambridgshire. He became afterward a
rare Antiquary, one of the Esquires extraordinary of the Kings body, and
published A Saxon treatise concerning the old and new Testament, written about
the time of King Edgar (700 years ago) by Aelfricus Abbas, thought to be the
same that was afterward Archb. of Canterbury, etc. Land. 1623. qu. published
from an ancient Copy in Sir Rob. Cottons Library, with a large and learned
Epistle to the Readers, set before it by the said L'isle. To this book he added
these things following (first found out by Joh. Josselin servant to Matthew
Archb. of Canterbury, which had been printed in oct. by Joh. Day in the Reign
of Qu. Elizab.) (1) A testimony of Antiquity showing the ancient faith in the
Church of England, touching the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord,
etc. It Is the same with A Sermon of the paschal Lamb (on Easter day) and of the
sacramental body and blood of Christ, etc. Before which is a large and learned
Pref. (of about 16 leaves in oct.) written by the said Josselin, and reprinted
by L'isle. (2) The words of Aeilfric Abbot of St. Albons and also of Ma^^sbury,
taken out of his Epistle written to Wulfine Bishop of S^yrburne, etc. (3) The
Lords Prayer, the ^reed and ten Commandments in the Saxon and English tongue.
This W. L'isle died in 1637, and was buried, as I presume, at Wilburgham
beforementioned.

Creations.
Jul. 17. Matthew Gwinne M. A. of St. John's Coll. in Oxon, who had studied
Physic ten years, was then actually created Doct. of Physic by virtue of two
Letters of the Chancellor of the University for that purpose.

Sept. 24. The most illustrious hero Pre-Johannes de la Fri, Eques,
Charnotensis, so he is written in the public Reg.) Ambassador from the King
of France to the Queens Majesty of England.

Nichol. Ruffus Dominus St. Aubin Ludovic. Baro D'Orbee. created the same day.

Which three Nobles, were actually created Masters of Arts, and were with great
civility treated by the Heads of the University.

An. Dom. 1594.
An. 36 Elizab.
An. 37 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. the same viz. Dr. Lillye to continue in the said office till the
Chancellor otherwise please.

Proct. Hen. Foster of Brasn. Coll. Hen. Cuffe of Mert. Coll. Apr. 10.


Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 5. Tobias Matthew of Chapter Chapter -- He was Son of Tob. Matthew who was
afterward Archb. of York; and after he had taken the Degree of M. A. he became
a Jesuit, and at length a Knight, as I shall tell you at large in the 2d. vol.

22. Will. Burton of Brasn. Coll. -- He is to be remembered also in the 2. vol.

Jul. 1. Will. Laud of St. John's Coll. -- He was afterward Archib. of
Canterbury.

Dec. 11. Edm. Deane of Merton Jan. 27. Tho. Thomson of Qu. Feb. 22. Hayward
Townshend of St. Mary's hall. Coll.

Thom Ireland of Linc. Coll. was admitted the same day -- See among the Doct.
of Div. an. 1611.

28. Alexander Spicer of Exeter Mar. 1. Will. Vaughan of Jes. Coll.

7. Thom. Cheast of Oriel Coll. -- See among the Masters, an. 1598.

Adm. 195.

Bach. of Law.
Jul. 1. James Whitlock of St. John's Coll.

Jul. 12. Franc. Clerk or Clarke.

Besides these two, were 4 more admitted, and two that supplicated, who were
not admitted this year.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 16. Tho. Fryth of Alls. Coll.

May 13. Tho. Storer of Chapter Chapter

Jul. 2. Will. Hind of Qu. Coll.

3. Walt Wylshman of Broadgates, lately of Exeter. Coll.

Dec. 12. Rob. Burhill Joh. Barcham of C. C. Coll.


Jan. 15. Rob. Moor of New Coll.

Adm. 7^.

Bach. of Div.
May 16. George Carleton of Mert. Jun. 27. Joh. Williams of Alls. Jul. 2. Rich.
Latewarr of St. Joh. Coll.

4. Will. Tooker of New Dec. 16. Hen. Ayray of Qu. Coll.

Adm. ^1.

Doct. of Law.
Jul. 9. Christopher Helm of Merton Coll. -- In 1618 he became Chancellor of
the Dioc. of Worcester in the place of Barnabas Goch or Gough Doct. of Law,
(being about that time Rector of Bredon in the said Diocese) in which office he
was succeeded by Jam. Littleton Bach. of Law, an. 1628. The said Goch or Gough
did succeed Tho. Wood LL. D. an. 1610. and Wood, Rich. Cousin the eminent
Civilian, an. 1598. but whom Cousin succeeded in 1578, or thereabouts, I cannot
tell.

Dec. 10. Rob. Masters of Alls. Coll. -- He was about this time Principal of
St. Albans hall, and afterward Chancellor of the Dioc. of Rochester, and of
the Dioc. of Lichfield and Coventry. He died 10. Jul. 1625. aged 63, and was
buried in the Cath. Church of Lichfield.

Jan. 25. Edward Spurroway of Alls. Coll.

On the sixth of July Ralph Winwood M. of A. and Bach. of the Civ. Law of Magd.
Coll. supplicated to be admitted Doct. of the faculty, but whether admitted, it
appears not.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul. 1. Barthelmew Warner of St. John's Coll. -- He was afterward the Kings
Professor of Physic, and superior reader of Lynacre's Lecture. He was buried
in the Church of St. Mary Magd. in the North suburb of Oxford, 26. January
1618, as I have else where told you.

Doct. of Div.
Jun. 25. Rich. Lewys of Exeter Coll.

July 4. Francis Cox Will. Tooker of New Coll.


Henry Ball of New. Coll. also, was admitted the same day, being about this
time Archdeacon of Chichester* (...) He died in the beginning of the year 1603.

Jul. 4. Miles Smith of Brasn. Coll. -- The same who was afterward Bishop of
Gloucester.

Incorporations.
Jul. 9. Hen. Nevill M. A. of Cambridge Son and Heir of Edward Nevill Lord
Abergavenny.

Rich. Milbourne M. of A. of Qu. Coll. in the same University was incorporated
the same day -- On the eleventh of December. 1611 he was installed Dean of
Rochester in the place of Dr. Tho. Blague deceased, and in July 1615 he being
promoted to the Sea of St. David, Rob. Scot D. D. was installed Dean, 13. of
the same month; of whom by the way I desire the reader to know that he was born
at Banston in Essex, was originally a Fellow of Trin. Coll. in the said
University and afterward Master of Clare hall, and esteemed by those that knew
him a learned Man. He died in Winter time (in December I think) an. 1620. and
was succeeded in his Deanery by Dr. Godf. Goodman.

Jul. 9. Joh Racster M. A. of Cambridge -- He was Author of a certain book
entit. The seven planets or wandering motives of Will. Alabasters wit,
retrograded and removed. Land. 1598. qu. and perhaps of other things.

Joh. Hull M. of A. of Cambr. was incorp. the same day -- He was of Gonvill and
Caius Coll. in that University, was afterward Bach. of Div. and a Preacher of
Gods word at Cork in Ireland. He has written and published (1) St. Peter's
Prephecy of these last days. printed 1610. qu. (2) Christ's proclamation to
Salvation. Land. 1613. oct. (3) Exposition on a part of the Lamentations of
Jeremiah, etc. Land. 1618. qu. etc.

Jul. 9. Richard Kilby M. A. of the said University.

The number of Cambridge Masters who were incorporated on that day comes to 30.

Creations.
On the ninth of July, being the day after the Act had been finished, these
following Persons were actually created Mast. of Arts.

Sir Joh. Hungerford Knight.

Anthony Hungerford Esquire.

Rich. Baker Esquire -- He was afterward a Knight and Author of that Chronicle
that goes under his name.

Joh. Ask Will. Monson Esquire.

A proposal was made in the ven. house of Convocation this year, that the
Degree of M. of A. should be bestowed on the honorable Sir Will. Russel Knight,
the designed Lord Deputy of Ireland, but whether it was accordingly conferred
upon him, it appears not, because it stands not in the register -- He was the
fourth Son of Francis Earl of Bedford, and was with his brethren brought up in
Magd. Coll. Oxon at the feet of Dr. Lawr. Humphrey. Afterward he traveled
through France, Germany, Italy, Hungary, and other Countries; and upon his
return he spent not his time idely in the Court, but painfully in the labors
of the Camp, following the wars in Hungary, in France, Ireland and the Low
Countries, where he left many notable proofs of his valor and wisdom, being
strenuus miles and prudens imperator. In Aug. this year he was made L. Deputy
of Ireland; which place he executed with great valor and wisdom for 3 years.
Afterward he was made Lord Russel of Thornhaw in Bucks. and dying in Sept. was
buried 16. of the same month at Thornhaw, an. 1613.

An. Dom. 1595.
An. 37 Elizab.
An. 38 Elizab.
Chanc. the same viz. Thom. Lord Buckhurst.

Vicechanc. Dr. Li^ye again, by virtue of the Chancellors former letters.

Proct. Rob. Tinley of Magd. Coll. Will. Pritchard of Chapter Chapter Apr. ult.


Bach. of Mus.
Jul. 11. Franc. Pilkington of Linc. Coll. -- Some of his compositions I have
seen, and I think some are extant. He was Father or at least near of kin to
Tho. Pilkington one of the Musicians belonging sometimes to Qu. Henrietta
Maria; who being a most excellent Artist, his memory was celebrated by many
Persons, particularly by Sir Aston Cockaine Baronet, who has written In his
(...) etc. Land. 1^58. oct. p. 113. number. 43. etc.
his funeral Elegy and his Epitaph. The said Tho. Pilkington died at
Wolverhampton in Staffordshire aged 35, and was buried there in the times of
rebellion or usurpation.

Feb.... Richard Nicholson Organist of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward the
first public professor of the Musical Praxis in this University, and was
Author of several Madrigales, one or more of which, you may see in The Triumphs
of Oriana, mentioned before in Thom. Morley, and died in 1639.

Bach. of Arts.
May 3. Tho. James Tho. Lydyat of New Coll.


Jul. 2. Dudley Carleton of Chapter Chapter

5. Joh. Rawlinson of St. John's Dec. 16. Rich. Lloyd of Oriel Coll.

Jun. 22. Hen. Mason of Brasn. Coll. afterward of C. C.

Feb. 3. Rob. Fludd or de Fluctibus of St. John's Coll. -- Afterward an eminent
Rosacrusian.

13. Gabriel Powell of Jesus Coll.

14. Will. Cheek of Magd. hall.

16. Joh. Eaton of Trin. Rich. Moket of Brasnose, afterward of Allsouls Will.
Chibald or Chiball of Magd. Coll.


19 Edw. Chetwind Rich. Carpenter of Ex. Coll.


Mar. 6. Joh. Sprint of Chapter Chapter

Theodore Goulson was admitted this year, but neglected to be registered.

As for Lydyat, Lloyd, Mason and Eaton, there will be mention made of them in
the 2. vol.

Adm. 128.

Mast. of Arts.
May 3. Arthur Lake of New 27. Joh. Sanford of Magd. Coll.

Jun. 30. Hen. Savile Rich. Deane of St. Alb. hall.


Jul. 7. Joh. Ravens of Qu. Coll. -- In 1607, he became Subdean of Wells and
Prebendary of Bishops Compton in that Church.

9. Pet. Smart of Chapter Chapter

George Ferebe of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day -- He was afterward
Minister of Bishops Cannings in Wilts. one of the Chaplains to K. Jam. 1. and
Author of Life's farewell, Sermon at St. John's in the Devises in Wilts, 30. Aug.
1614 at the funeral of John Drew Gent. on 2. Sam. chapter 14. ver. 14. Land. 1615.
qu. This Person who was a Glocestershire Man born and well skilled in Music,
did instruct diverse young Men of his Parish in that faculty, till they could
either play or sing their parts. In the year 1613 Qu. Anne the royal Consort of
K. Jam. 1. made her abode for some weeks within the City of Bathe, purposely
for the use of the waters there. In which time he composed a song of four
parts, and instructed his Scholars to sing it very perfectly, as also to play a
lesson or two, (which he had composed) on their wind-instruments. On the
eleventh of June the same year, the Queen in her return from Bathe did intend
to pass over the Downs at Wensdyke within the Parish of Bishops-Cannings: Of
which Ferebe having timely notice, he dressed himself in the habit of an old
Bard, and caused his Scholars (whom he had instructed) to be clothed in
Shepherds weeds. The Queen having received notice of these People, she with her
retinue made a stand at Wensdyke; whereupon these Musicians drawing up to her,
played a most admirable lesson on their wind-instruments. Which being done,
they sang their lesson of four parts with double voices, the beginning of which
was this.

Shine, O thou sacred Shepherds Star

On silly Shepherd swaynes, etc.

Which being well performed also, the Bard concluded with an Epilogue, to the
great liking and content of the Queen and her company. Afterward he was sworn
Chaplain to his Majesty, and was ever after much valued for his ingenuity.

Oct. 31. Rich. Haydock of New Feb. 5. Thom. Floyd of Jesus Coll.

Adm. 51.

Bach. of Div.
Jan. 20. James Bisse of Magd. Coll.

Besides him were only four more admitted, but not one of them was afterward a
Writer, or Bishop, etc.

Not one Doctor of Law or Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Oct. 10. Thom. Ravis of Chapter Chapter

Nov. 6. Hen. Caesar alias Athelmare or Adelmare lately of Ball. Coll. (where
to this day are certain Lodgings called from him Caesar's Lodgings) now of St.
Edm. hall, was then admitted or licensed to proceed -- This worthy Doctor, who
was the third Son (Sir Julius Caesar being the first, and Sir Thomas one of the
Barons of the Exchecquer the second) of Caesar Dalmarius a Doctor of Physic,
became Preb. of Westminster in the stall of Dr. Rich. Wood in the month of
Sept. 1609, and Dean of Ely in the place of Humphrey Tindall deceased, an.
1614. where dying 27. June 1636. aged 72, was buried on the North side of the
Presbytery of the Cath. Church there. He gave to Jesus Coll. in Cambridge two
Fellowship of 12 l. per an. apiece, and five Scholarships of 5 l. per. an.
conditionally that the Fellows and Scholars be elected from the Kings
Freeschool at Ely, etc.

Nov. 10. Rog. Hacket Joh. Lloyd of New Coll.


Jan. 20. James Bisse of Magd. Ralph Ravens of St. John's Coll.


The first of these two accumulated.

30. Francis Godwin of Chapter Chapter Joh. Baber of Linc. Feb. 14. Henry Parry of C.
C. Coll.


Incorporations.
Jul. 15. Rich. Stock M. A. of Cambr. -- He was born in the City of York,
educated in St. John's Coll. in Cambr. was afterward Minister of Alhallows in
Breadstreet in London for the space of about 32 years, a constant, judicious,
and religious Preacher, a zealous Puritan and a reformer of profanations on the
Lords day. He has written and published several things, among which are (1)
Doctrine and use of repentance to be practiced by all. Land. 1610. oct. (2)
Sermon at the funeral of John Lord Harrington Baron of Exton, etc. at Exton in
Rutlandsh. on the last of March 1614. on Micah 2. ver. 1. 2. Land. 1614. oct.
(3) Commentary on the Prophecy of Malachy. Land. 1641. fol. Sam. Torshell is
esteemed the half Author of it. (4) Stock of divine knowledge, etc. Land.
1641. qu. (5) Truths Champion, etc. He gave way to fate (...)
20. Apr. 1626, and was buried in the Church of Allhallows before mentioned.

Hen. Withers D. of D. of Cambr. was incorporated the same day.

Creations.
Oct. 1. Alex. Nowell Dean of S. Paul's Cathedral and Principal of Brasn. Coll.
was actually created Doctor of Div. in the house of Convocation.

An. Dom. 1596.
An. 38 Elizab.
An. 39 Elizab.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Tho. Ravis D. D. Dean of Chapter Chapter Jul. 17.

Proct. Abel Gower of Oriel Coll. Roll. Searchfeild of S. Joh. Coll. Apr. 21.


Bach. of Arts.
May. 8. Josias White of New Coll.

24. Fran. Gorge of Chapter Chapter -- He was the eldest Son of the Marchioness of
Northampton named Helen, the Widow of Will. Parr Marq. of Northamption, who had
married Sir Tho. Gorge of Wilts Kinght.

Jun. 16. Joh. Bancroft of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Bishop of Oxon.

July 8. Rich. Carpenter Sim. Baskervile of Ex. Coll.


Of the last you may see more among the Doctors of Physic an. 1611.

14. Joh. Hanmer of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of S. Asaph.

Dec. 2. Robert Bolton of Brasn. Coll.

Jan. 29. Henry Tilson of Vniv. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Elphine in
Ireland.

Jan. 31. Franc. Rous Charles Fitz-Geffry
Feb. 3. Degory Whear of Broadgates Hall.

23. George Calvert. of Trin. Coll.

H. Tilson will be at large remembered among the Bishops, and Rouse and Whear
among the Writers in the second Vol.

Admit. 133.

Doct. of Music.
Jul. 10. Robert Stevenson Bach. of Music, was licensed to proceed in the said
Faculty, but whether he did proceed or stood in the Act this, or the next year,
it appears not -- See more in 1587.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 29. Thom. Morris of S. Mary's Hall, an Esquires Son, and a Berkshire man
born of an ancient Family, was then admitted M. of A. but whether ever he took
the degree of Bach. of that Faculty, it appears not. -- I find one Tho. Morris
M. of A. to be Author of An apology for Schoolmasters, etc. Land. 1619. oct.
who, I presume, is the same who had put out Digesta scholastica in gratiam
puerorum edita, etc. Oxon. 1617. oct. with the two letters of T. M. only, and
the Arms of the University of Oxon, put in the Title Page. Whether Tho. Morris
M. of A. be the same with T. M. of Oxon, and both the same with Thom. Marrice
of S. Mary's Hall before mentioned, I must leave it to the Reader to judge.

March 5. Peter Bowne of C. C. Coll.

Adm. 53.

Bach. of Physic.
Tho none were this year admitted Bachelaurs of Physic, yet several were
admitted to practice it, among whom was a certain Millaneese called Scipio
Balsam of Magd. Coll. one, Dec. 17. and Joh. More sometimes of Vniv. Coll.
another.

Bach. of Div.
Mar 26. Alex. Cook of Vniv. June 23. Rob. Tighe of Magd. Coll.

The last was lately incorporated M. of A. -- See in the Incorporations
following.

Jul. 7. Rich Kilbye of Line. Dec. 4. Joh. Spot of S. Joh. Coll.

The last of which was about this time Canon of Exeter.

Adm. 18.

Not one Doct. of Law or Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Mar. 31. Edm. Watts of Brasn. Joh. Bourne of Trinity. Arth. Aubrey of S. Joh.
Coll.


The said Joh. Bourne was now Treasurer of the Cath. Church of Wells, which
Dignity he resigning, Rob. Wright D. D. of Trin. Coll. was admitted thereunto
21 Dec. 1601.

July 7. Rich. Kilbye of Linc. Coll. who accumulated. Joh. Dove of Chapter Chapter

9. Joh. Perin of S. Joh. Coll. Greek Professor of the University. -- He was
afterward Canon of Chapter Church.

Nov. 22. Rob. Abbot of Ball. Coll.

Dec. 7. Rich. Field of Qu. Coll. sometimes of Magd. Hall.

Feb. 5. Rich Latewar Joh. Buckridge of S. Joh. Coll.


Mar. 11. Joh. Harding of Magd. Coll. Hebrew Professor of the University. -- He
was afterward President of that Coll.

Incorporations.
Apr. 9. Francis Covert. LL. D. of Leyden. -- He died at Chalden in Surrey 1609.

June 21. Rob. Tighe M. A. of Cambr. an excellent Linguist.

Jul. 1. Rich. Thomson M. A. of the same University. -- This learned person who
was a Dutch man born of English Parents, and educated in Clare Hall, is styled
by a noted (...) in Hist; (...) etc. Land. 1674. p. ^01*
Presbyterian The grand propagator of Arminianism, and by (...) in his (...)
etc. Land. 1630. qu. at the end, (...).
another A deboist drunken English Dutchman who seldom went one night to bed
sober. Yet a noted writer Rich. Montague in his Pref. to his (...) on the first
part of the Hist. (...), etc. Land. (...). 1.
who knew him well tells us, that he was a most admirable Philologer, that he
was better known in Italy, France and Germany, than at home. He has written
(1) Elenchus refutationis Torturae Torti pro reverendiss. Episcopo Eliense,
adversus Matinum Becanum. Land. 1611. (2) Diatriba de amissione and
intercessione gratiae and justificationis. Lugd. Bat. 1618 and 18. oct. and
other things One of both his names, was, as a M. of A. of Cambr. incorporated
in this University 1593, which I take to be the same with this.

Jul. 9. Joh. Sherwood Doct. of Phys. of the University of Rheims. -- He was
about this time an eminent practitioner of his Faculty in the City of Bathe,
being much resorted to by those of the Romans Cath. Religion, he himself being of
that profession. He died in Feb. 1620, and was buried in the Church of S. Pet.
and Paul in that City.

Thom. Playfere D. of D. of Cambridge, was incorporated the same day. -- He was
a Kentish man (...).
born, educated in S. Joh. Coll. in Cambr. of which he was Fellow, and
succeeded Pet. Baro in the Margaret Professorship of that University about
1596, at which time he was esteemed a person of great Eloquence and fluency in
the Latin Tongue. The titles of several of his Works (which were collected into
one Volume) you may see in the Bodleian Catalogue. He died in the latter end of
the year (in Jan. or Feb.) 1608. and was buried in S. Botolph's Church in
Cambridge.

Creations.
Apr. 2. Georg. a Missinbuck Ambassador to the Queen of England from the
Lantgrave of Hassia, was actually created Master of Arts in the Convocation
house; and at the same time was with great civility treated by the chief Heads
of the University.

An. Dom. 1597.
An. 39 Eliz.
An. 40 Eliz.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Dr. Tho. Ravis again, July 14.

Proct. Joh. Purkhurst of Magd. Coll. Rich. Trafford of Mert. Coll. Apr. 6.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 12. Joh. White of New Coll. -- He was afterward known by the name of the
Patriarch of Dorchester.

37. Aegeon Askew of Qu. May 9. Rob. Vilvaine of Exet. Coll.

12. Rog. Matthew of Qu. Coll. -- See among the Masters an. 1600.

27. Rob. Barnes of Magd. Coll. -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1610.

Jun. 4. Edmund Coffin of Exeter Coll. -- He was an excellent Greecian, and
afterward Schoolmaster of Saltash in Cornwall for 40 years; in which time he
sent many Scholars to both the Universities, especially this of Oxon. One Edw.
Coffin a Devonian and a learned man, was entered into the Society of Jesus in
England, an. 1598, and educated, as I have been informed, in the English Coll.
at Rome.

Jul. 15. Isaac Wake the noted Orator.

Oct. 20. Theophilus Higgons of Chapter Chapter

Nov. 5. Will. Lo of S. Alb. Hall.

Dec. 5. Michael Boil Joh. Sandsbury. of S. Joh. Coll.


The first of which two, was afterward a Bishop in Ireland.

Feb. 25. George Wall of Brasn. Coll. -- See in the year 1616.

Joh. White, Rob. Vilvaine, and Th. Higgens, are to be remembered at large in
the next Vol.

Adm. 129.

Bach. of Law.
Oct. 29. James Cook of New Coll.

Nov. 22. Oliver Lloyd of Alls. Coll. -- See among the Doct. of Law 1602.

But one more besides these two, was admitted this year.

Mast. of Arts.
July 2. Joh. Tapsell Thom. Allen of Mert. Coll.


5. Tobias Matthew of Chapter Chapter

6. Rob. Wakeman of Ball. Nov. 5. Alex. Spicer of Ex. 16. Will. Vaughan of Jes.
Coll.

Adm. 55.

Bach. of Div.
June 6. Henr. Perry of Jesus Coll. sometimes of Gloc. Hall. Rich. Brett of
Linc. Coll. was admitted the same day.

30. Roll. Searchfield Thom. Hutton Hen. Price of S. Joh. Coll.


July 7. Hen. Wilkinson Franc. Mason of Mert. Coll.


12. Joh. Aglionby Rich. Crakanthorpe of Queens Coll.


Dec. 15. Rob. Tinley Rich. Boughton of Magd. Coll.


On the 6 March 1605, the said Boughton was admitted Chauntor of the Cath.
Church of Wells in the place of Jam. Cottington deceased.

Mar. 13. John Pelling of Magd. Coll. -- He was a Ministers Son of Wilts, and
published A sermon. of the providence of God, on 1 Pet. 5. 7. Land. 1607. qu. and
perhaps other things.

Admit. 20.

Doct. of Law.
July 9. Will. Aubrey of Chapter Chapter -- He was a learned Civilian, but has
published nothing.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
May 9. Rob. Inkforbie of Magd. Will. Vaughan Geor. Abbot of Ball.
Ralph Kettle of Trin. Coll.


The last of which was soon after President of his College.

July 2. Thom. Singleton Princ. of Brasn. Robert Wright of Trin. John Williams
of Alls. Coll.


The last of which was now Margaret Professor of this University.

Nov. 16. Rich. Parry of Chapter Chapter

Incorporations.
On the twelfth of July, being the next day after the Act had been celebrated,
were about twenty Cantabrigians incorporated in several Faculties, among whom
were these following.

Joh. Bridgman Bach. of Arts. -- See in the Incorporations, an. 1600.

Joh. Boys M. of A. -- I find two of both his names who were at this time
Masters of Arts, viz. Joh. Boys fourth Son of Tho. Boys of Eythorne in Kent, by
Christiana his Wife, Dau. and Coheire of Joh. Searle; who being educated in
Clare Hall, was afterward Doct. of Div. and Dean of Canterbury in the place of
Dr. Charles Fotherby who died 29 Mar. 1619. This J. Boys who died at Eythorne
before mentioned (the place of his Nativity) a little after K. Charles 1. came
to the Crown, was famous for his Sermons, Expositions, and Postills written by
him; the Titles of which you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford Catalogue. The
other J. Boys who was a Suffolk man born, and Andr. Downe's Scholar, was Fellow
of S. Joh. Coll. in the said University, afterward Prebendary of Ely, and
Parson of Boxworth in Cambridgeshire, an excellent Greecian, Divine, and one of
the Translators of the Bible, an. 1604. He wrote certain notes upon Chrysostom,
put out by Sir Hen. Savile, who styles him ingeniosissimus and doctissimus
Boysius, and his Notes doctissimas ejus observationes; and other things, by
some taken to be written by the former J. Boys. Which of these two was
incorporated M. of A. this year, I know not. We have had one Joh. Boys, an
Esquires Son of Kent, a Student in University Coll. 1594. Another elected
Fellow of Alls. Coll. 1604, who was afterward Bach. of Law; and a third who
took the degree of Bach. of Arts as a Member of Qu. Coll. an. 1606, but not one
of these can I yet find was a Writer.

Roger Gostwyke M. A. of Kings Coll. in Cambr. -- He was afterward Bach. of
Div. Chaplain to Dr. Martin Heton Bishop of Ely and Rector of Sampford Courtney
in Devonshire. Among several things that he has published I have seen these,
(1) The anatomy of Anan^as; or, God's censure against Sacrilege. Cambr. 1616.
(2) Brief commentary upon Psalm. 83 concerning the same Subject. Printed there
the same year. (3) The truth of tithes discovered, or the Churches right
maintained and defended, etc. Land. 1618, etc. One Roger Gostwick Rector of
Sampford Courtney before mentioned lived to about the year 1655, whether the
same with the former, I cannot tell.

James Sp^ght Bach. of Div. -- He has one or more sermons in print.

Benjamin Carier Bach. of Div. -- He was the son of Anthony Carier a learned
and devout Preacher, who caused this his son to be strictly educated in the
Protestant Religion, and afterward in Academical literature in the said
University of Cambr. where he became Fellow of C. C. Coll. and a noted Scholar
and Preacher. About the time that K. James 1. came to the Crown, he proceeded
in his Faculty, published one or more Sermons, became Chaplain to him, and one
of the first Fellows of Chelsey College, founded by Dr. Matthew Sutcliff. But
being then very unsettled in his Religion, he changed it for that of Rome, left
the Nation and went to Liege in Germany; where, after some time of continuance,
he wrote A missive to his Maj. of Great Britain K. Jam. containing the motives
of his conversion to Cath. Religion. etc. Liege 1614. oct. and at the same time
A letter of the miserable ends of such as impugn the Cath. Chapter print. 1615. qu.
But before Midsummer day in the said year 1614 (12 Jam. 1.) he concluded* his
last day, putting thereby a period to the great imaginations that men of
Learning had of him and his worth, and to the expectation of other Books to be
published. In 1649 were printed two Impressions of the said Missive in oct.
said in the Title to be printed at Paris, but in truth at London, with a large
Preface, and marginal Notes, to it by N. Strange a Romans Cath. At the end of the
said Preface are the names of some who had lately then been Ministers, or
University men, in England and Scotland that had been converted to the Church
of Rome. Those of Oxon are these, Hugh Paulin de Cressy of Mert. Coll. Hen.
Janson LL. D. of Alls. Coll. afterward a Baronet, but a poor one God wot, Tho.
Read L. L. D. of New Coll. Will. Rowlands sometimes of Ex. Coll. afterward
Minister of S. Margarets in Westminster, Will. Joyner alias Lyde M. A. of Magd.
Coll. Pet. Glue of Ball. Coll. etc.

An. Dom. 1598.
An. 40 Eliz.
An. 41 Eliz.
Chanc. the same, viz. Tho. Lord Buckhurst.

Vicechanc. Tho. Singleton D. D. Principal of Brasn. College, July 18.

Proct. Edw. Gee of Brasn. Hen. Bellyngham of New Coll.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 27. Rob. Pink of New July 8. Rob. Johnson of Magd. 12. Thomas Winniff of
Exet. Coll.

The last of which was afterward Bishop of Linc.

Oct. 30. Thom. Baughe of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Masters an. 1601.

Nov. 15. Thom. Overbury of Qu. Dec. 14. Geor. Warburton of Brasn. Coll.

Of the last you may see more among the Doctors of Div. created 1636.

Feb. 1. Tobie Venner of S. Alb. Hall.

16. Will. Higford of C. C. Coll.

Winniffe, Venner, and Higford, are to be remembered at large in the second Voll.

Adm. 111.

Mast. of Arts.
June 26. Will. Laud of S. Joh. July 4. Thom. Thompson of Qu. 6. Rich. Lloyd of
Linc. lately of Oriel 8. Rob. Fludd of S. Joh. Coll.

Thom. Cheast of S. Mary's Hall, lately of Oriel Coll. was admitted the same
day. -- He has published (1) The way to life, sermon. at Paul's Cross, on Amos 5.
6. Land. 1609. qu. (2) The Christian pathway, Sermon. at Paul's Cross, ult. June
1611, on Ephesians. 5. 1. Land. 1613. qu. and perhaps other things.

Oct. 17. Jam. Mabb of Magd. Coll.

20. Rich. Fitzherbert of New Coll. -- He was afterward Archdeacon of Dorset;
by which Title he occurs in 1640.

31. Nath. Brent of Mert. Coll.

Nov. 7. Rich. Carpenter Edw. Chetwind of (...). Coll.


Feb. 5. Tho. James Tho. Lydyat of New Coll.


19. Will. Chibald or Chiball of Magd. Coll.

Adm. 88.

Bach. of Div.
May 29. Christoph. Sutton June 28. Joh. Randall of Linc. Coll.

Jul. 19. Will. Bradshaw of Vniv. Coll. lately M. of A. of Balliol -- I set him
down here, not that he was a Writer, but to distingtuish him from another of
both his names, who was sometimes Fellow of Sidney Coll. in Cambridge, and
afterward a writer and publisher of several Theological Tracts, the titles of
some of which you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford Catalogue.

Not one Doct. of the Civ. Law was admitted.

Doct. of Phys.
Dec. 7. Joh. Gifford of New Coll. -- He accumulated the Degrees in Physic,
did afterward practice in London, and was one of the College of Physicians. He
died in a good old age, in 1647 and was buried in the Parish Church of
Hornchurch in Essex near to the body of his Wife.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 8. Thomas Maxfield of St. Edmunds hall -- He accumulated the Degrees in
Divinity, was about this time dignified in the Church, and dying about 1604 was
buried at the upper end of the Chancel of the Church at Ash in Kent, of which
Church he was Rector.

Incorporations.
Jun. 7. Thom. Ridley Doctor of the Civil Law of Cambridge -- This learned
Person who was the Son of Thomas, Son of Lancclot, Son of Nicholas Ridley of
Willymonds Wyke in Northumberland Esquire; was born in the City of Ely, educated in
Grammar learning in Eaton School near to Windsore, in Academical in Kings Coll.
in Cambridge, of which he was Fellow. Afterward he became Schoolmaster of
Eaton, one of the Masters of the Chancery, a Knight, Chancellor to the B. of
Winchester, and Vicar General to George Archb. of Canterbury. He was a general
Scholar, wrote A view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, and dying 23. of
January 1628 was buried on the 27. of the same month in the Parish Church of
St. Bennet near to Paul's wharf in London.

Jul. 8. Sam. Heron D. of D. of the same University, was then incorporated
Doct. of that faculty -- He was Fellow of Trinity Coll. in Cambridge, and dying
about the latter end of the year 1615 was buried either in the Chap. belonging
to that Coll. or in the Chancel of Market Fankenham in Norfolk, where he had
some cure. A Person of eminent note who writes himself Samuel Hieron was born
at, or near to, Epping in Essex educated in Eaton School, elected Scholar of
Kings Coll. 1590, where, while he was Bach. of Arts, he became eminent for his
Preaching. About that time he had a pastoral charge conferred upon him by Mr.
Hen. Savile Provost of Eaton College, but the Church of Modbury in Devonshire,
soon after falling void, he was presented thereunto by the Provost and Fellows
of Kings Coll. where being settled he was much admired, and resorted to, for his
practical way of preaching. While he continued there he published several
Sermons; which, with many others lying by him, he remitted into one volume,
printed at London with certain Prayers at the end, an. 1614. fol. He died at
Modbury in 1617 aged about 45 and was buried in the Church there. After his
death, many of his Sermons and Lectures, that had not before seen the light,
were collected together by one Rob. Hill, (whom I shall mention among the
Incorporations 1604) who causing them to be printed in fol. 1620, are known by
the name of the Second vol. of Mr. Sam. Hierons works. These things I thought
good to let you know, to the end that what was written by Sam. Hieron might not
be attributed to Sam. Heron.

Jul. 10. Roger Manors Earl of Rutland, M. A. of the said Univ. of Cambridge --
He was an eminent Traveller and a good Soldier, was afterward sent Ambassador
by K. Jam. 1. to the King of Denmark, and dying 26. June 1612. was buried at
Botsford in Leycestershire.

Jul. 11. Edw. Aubrey Joh. Bladworth Christop. Wyell Bac. of Law of Camb.


Joseph. Hall M. of A. of the same Univ. was then also incorporated -- In 1611.
Oct. 30. he was collated to the Archdeaconry of Nottingham upon the promotion
of Dr. Joh. King to the Sea of London, and in Dec. 1616 he became Dean of
Worcester in the place of Dr. Arth. Lake promoted to the Sea of Bathe and
Wells. He was afterward first the most learned and religious Bishop of Exeter,
and afterward of Norwych.

Laurence Bend Doct. of Div. of the said Univers. was also then (Jul. 11.)
incorporated.

Creations.
On the tenth of July, these Knights and Esquires following were actually
created Masters of Arts, with one Lord.

(Thomas) Lord Burgh.

Sir Christoph. Blount Knight. -- He was beheaded on Tower Hill, an. 1601 for being
deeply engaged in the treasons of Robert Earl of Essex.

Anthony Pawlet Francis Knollis Knights.

The last was Son of Sir Franc. Knollis mentioned among the Creations, an.
1566, and among the Writers, an. 1596. He was sometimes a Commoner of Magd.
Coll. and was now valued for his learning by Dr. Joh. Rainolds.

Rob. Osbourne Rob. Digby Rob. Vernon Esquires.

About this time Abraham Scultetus was a Sojou^nour in Oxon, and much favored
by both the Abbots, George and Robert. He was afterward a most eloquent
Preacher, a learned Divine and Author of several books, which show him to have
been profound in Divinity, Antiquity, and Ecclesiastical History. He died at
Embden in E. Frislandt 24. Oct. 1626. and was there buried.

An. Dom. 1599.
An. 41 Eliz.
An. 42 Eliz.
Chancellor the same.

Vicechanc. Dr. Tho. Thornton again, Jul. 16.

Proct. Will. Osbourne of Alls. Coll. Franc. Sidney of Chapter Chapter Apr. 18.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 24. Barnab. Potter of Qu. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Carlisle.

Jun. 18. Anth. Duck Jul. 8. George Hakewill of Exet. Coll.

23. Brian Twyne Tho. Jackson of C. C. Coll.


Oct. 25. Norwych Spackman of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Masters an. 1602.

Thom. Broad of St. Alb. hall was admitted the same day.

Jan. 29. Barthelm. Parsons of Or. 31. Joh. Prideaux of Exeter Coll.

The last of which was afterward Bishop of Worcester.

Feb. 2. Joh. Meredyth of St. Mary's hall lately of Oriel Coll. -- He was the
eldest Son of an Esquire of Sussex, but whether the same with Joh. Meredyth who
was afterward Doct. of Phys. of another University, and at length Subdean of
Chichester (an. 1622.) which he resigned 10. Oct. 1627 and retired to his cure
of Bedhampton in Hampshire, where heart-broken and purse-broken he soon after
died, I know not. Sure it is that John Meredyth who was Subdean of Chichester,
wrote and published (1) The sin of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, on Heb. 10.
16. Land. 1622. qu. (2) The judge of heresies, one God, one Faith, one Church,
out of which there is no salvation. Land. 1624. qu.

As for Potter, Duck, Hakewill, Twyne, Parsons and Prideaux, their lives and
characters are to come into the second vol. of this work.

Admitted 111.

Bach. of Law.
Jul. 2. George Russell of St. John's Coll. -- This Person who was a Londoner
born, was afterward Bursar of the said house, but retaining in his hands the
College money which he received as Bursar without paying it to the Persons who
supplied it with necessaries, slipped away incognito, went beyond the Seas,
changed his Religion and became Pensioner to the Archduke of Austria and a Man
of note in his Dominions.

Philipp Cromwell of St. John's Coll. was admitted the same day -- He was the
fifth Son of Sir Hen Cromwell of H^nchingbro^k in Huntingdonshire, Uncle to
Oliver Cromwell sometimes Lord Protector of England. This Philip Cromwell who
was a Knight, was Father, by Mary his Wife, (Dau. of Sir Hen. Townsend Knight)
to Thomas Cromwell a Major of a Regiment of Horse under K. Chapter 1. in the time
of the grand rebellion, and to Oliver Cromwell a Colonel under his Kinsman
Oliver Cromwell beforementioned, when he went as General into Ireland to quell
the Royal Party, an. 1649, (in which year he died) and to Philip Cromwell a
Commander in the Parliament Army, slain at Bristow.

Adm. 7.

Mast. of Arts.
May 21. Joh. Bancroft Joh. Sprint of Chapter Chapter


Joh. Rawlinson of St. John's Coll. was admitted the same day.

Jul. 5. George Andrew of Magd. hall. -- He was afterward a Bishop in Ireland,
as I have before told you.

Jan. 17. Josias White of New Coll.

Adm. 73.

Bach. of Div.
June 14. Edm. Griffith of Brasn. Coll.

Jul. 5. Rich. Eaton of Linc. Coll. -- He was about this time Pastor of Great
Budworth in Cheshire (in which County he was born) and has published A Sermon
at the funeral of Tho. Dutton of Dutton Esque who yielded to nature 28. Dec.
1615, on Psalm. 90. ver. 12. Land. 1616. qu. and perhaps other things, Quaere.

Adm. 5.

Doct. of Law.
Jun. 23. Barthelm. Jesop of Magd. Coll. -- This Person who was fourth Son of
Walt. Jesop of Chilcombe in Dorsetsh. Gent. was a learned Civilian, and about
this time Chancellor to the Bishop of Sarum. He lived and died a single Man
21. July 1620 and was buried in Christ Church near Newgate in London.

27. Zachar. Babington of Mert. Coll. who accumulated -- He was about this time
Chancellor to the Bishop of Lich. and Coventry, and died 1614 or thereabouts.

Jul. 6. Edmund Pope of Al^souls Coll. -- He was about this time Chancellor to
the Bishop of Rochester, and afterward Surrogate to the Judge of the
Prerogative Court of Canterbury. He died in the Parish of St. Botolph without
Aldersgate, London, an. 1630.

James Baylic of Alls. Coll. also, admitted the same day being about this time
Chancellor to the Bish. of Hereford.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 2. George Ryves of New Coll. Prebendary of Winchester -- In Dec.
following he was elected Warden of the said Coll. and dying on the last of May
1613 was buried, as I conceive, in the Chapel belonging thereunto.

6. Giles Robinson of Queens Coll.

Incorporations.
July 5. ^eonard Maw M. A. of Cambridge -- He was Fellow of Peter house, and
afterward Master thereof, Master of Trin. College, Prebendary of Wells, Doct.
of Div. Chaplain to Pr. Charles, (on whom he waited when he was in Spain to
Court the Infanta) and at length Bish. of B. and Wells upon the translation of
Dr. Laud to London, but enjoying that office for a little while, died at
Chiswick in Middlesex 2. Sept. 1629; whereupon his body was buried there on the
16 day of the same month. He was the Son of Sim. Maw of Wrendlesham in Suffolk
Gent. by Margery his Wife, Dau. and Coheir of Thom. Wyld of Yorkshire and Alice
his Wife, Dau. and Heir of Joh. Jaye of Suffolk.

Robert Tounson M. of A. of the said University, was incorporated on the same
day -- He was about this time Fellow of Queens Coll. there, was afterward
Doctor of Divinity, Dean of Westminster in the place of Dr. George Mountaigne
promoted to the Sea of Lincoln, an. 1617; and at length Bishop of Salisbury:
to which See he was consecrated at Lambeth by the Archbishop, and his
Assistants Lincoln, Rochester and Chester, on the 9 of July 1620. He died in a
mean condition on the 15 of May 1621, and was buried on the South side of the
long isle, over against St. Edmunds Chapel in St. Peter's Church, within the
City of Westminster, leaving then behind him a Widow named Margaret and fifteen
Children. After him succeeded in the Sea of Salisbury Dr. John Davenant the
Head or Master of Queens Coll. in, and Margaret Professor of, the University of
Cambridge; who was consecrated on the 18. of Nov. 1621, having received (...)
Annal. R. Jac. 1. MS. sub an. 16^1.
a command from the King that he should not take to him a Wife. He departed
this mortal life on the 20 of Apr. 1641, and was buried in the South isle
joining to the Cath. Chapter of Salisbury.

Hen. Butts M. of A. and Fellow of Corp. Chapter Coll. in Cambridge, was
incorporated also on the same day (Jul. 5.) and afterward succeeded Dr. Sam.
Walsall in the Headship of that House -- He has written Diets dry dinner,
consisting of eight several courses, (1) Fruits, etc. Land. 1599. oct. See more
of this Hen. Butts in Dan. Price among the Writers, an. 1631.

Jul. 10. Peter Turner Doct. of Phys. of Heidleberg 28 years before this time
(afterward incorporated at Cambridge, where he had his first education) was
incorporated in this University, as he had stood at Heidleberg and Cambridge --
He was the Son of Dr. Will. Turner sometimes Dean of Wells, whom I have
mentioned among the Writers, under the year 1568; and dying on the 27 of May
1614 aged 72 years, was buried in the Chancel of the Church of St. Olaves in
Hartstreet, London, leaving then behind him several Sons of whom Samuel was
one, and Peter another, as I shall tell you elsewhere. One Mistress Anne
Turner, the Widow of a Doctor of Physic had an especial hand in the poisoning
of Sir Tho. Overbury; for which she was executed at Tybourne, an. 1615. whether
she was the second Wife and Widow of this Dr. Peter Turner, I know not.

Oct. 30. Rich. Pilkington M. of A. of Cambridge.

Creations.
June...Hen. Cotton Bishop of Salisbury, sometimes Master of Arts of Magd.
Coll. was actually created Doctor of Divinity at Salisbury by Dr. Edm. Lillye
Vicechancellour, Dr. Tho. Holland the Kings Professor of Divinity, and both the
Proctors (with the Superior Beadle of Divinity attending them) by virtue of a
Commission from the Vicechancellour, dated 2 of June 1599.

An. Dom. 1600.
An. 42 Elizab.
An. 43 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, viz. Tho. Lord Buckhurst.

Vicechanc. George Abbot D. D. Master of Vniv. Coll. Jul. 15.

Proct. Nich. Langford of Chapter Chapter Laur. Humphrey (Son of Laur.) of Magd. Coll.
Apr. 2.


Bach. of Music.
Jul.... Henry Porter of Chapter Chapter -- Some of his compositions I have seen, but
none of them, I think, are extant. He was Father to Walt. Porter sometimes
Gentleman of the royal Chapel of King Chapter 1. and Master of the Choristers at
Westminster, author of Mottets of two voices for Treble, or Tenor and Bass,
etc. to be performed to an Organ, Harpsycon, Lute or Bass-viol. Land. 1657.
fol. The words of some of the Mottets are taken out of the learned* Poet George
Sandys his Paraphrase on the Psalms of David. This Person who had been
patronized in his endeavors by Sir Edw. Spencer, was after his ejectment from
his office in the beginning of the grand rebellion, exhibited to in his old age
by Edw. Laurence Esquire.

Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 5. Rob. Harris of Magd. hall.

17. Rob. Mandevill of Qu. Coll.

Jul. 4. David Jenkins of St. Edm. hall -- Afterward the famous Welsh Judge.

7 Humph. Lynd Will. Piers of Chapter Chapter


The last of which was afterward Bish. of B. and Wells.

10. Joh. Dunster of Magd. Oct. 14. Will. Twysse of New Dec. 4. Isaac Singleton
of Brasn. Coll.

Of the last you may see more among the Masters, an. 1604.

Dec. 11. George Brown of St. Joh. Coll. -- He soon after changed his
Religion, went beyond the Seas, and I think was made a R. Cath. Priest.

Feb. 8. Dabridgcourt Belchier of Chapter Chapter -- This Person who was the eldest Son
of Will. Belcher of Gillesborough in Northamptonshire Esque translated into
English, Hans Beer-pot his visible Comedy, of see me and see me not. Acted in
the Low Countries by an honest company of Health-drinkers Land. 1618. qu. Which
translation was made at Vtrecht, in 1617, about which time he wrote several
Poems and made other translations, but whether published, I cannot tell. He
died in the Low Countries in 1621.

As for Rob. Harris, D. Jenkins, Will. Piers, and Will. Twysse will be large
mention made in the second vol. of Writers, and Bishops.

Adm. 115.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 5. Joh. Hanmer Rich. Moket of Alls. Coll.


Jun. 4. Theoph. Higgons of Chapter Chapter

14. Will. Lo of St. Alb. 10. Degorie Wheare of Broadg. hall
17. Aegeon Askew Rog. Matthew of Qu. Coll.


The last of which, who was a Warwickshire Man born, has published The flight
of time, on Job 9. 25. -- printed 1634. qu. and perhaps other things.

July 4. Joh. Denison of Ball. Coll. Charles Fitz-Geffry of Broadgates hall.

8. Theodore Goulson of Mert. 11. Rob. Vilvaine of Exet. Coll.

12. Dudley Carleton of Chapter Chapter

Jan. 16. Joh. White of New Coll.

Adm. 89.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 14. Edw. Gee of Brasn. Coll.

Thom. Cooper of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day -- He was a Londoner born,
became Student of Chapter Chapter from Westminster. School an. 1586, was about this time
beneficed at, or near, Oundle in Northamptonshire, and was Author of The
Worldlings adventure, etc. in two Sermons, at the visitation of the Free
Grammar School at Oundle in Northamptonshire, on Matthew. 16. 26. Land. 1619. qu.
One of both his names and an Oxford Man, was Author of Nonae Novembris
aeternitati consecratae, etc. Oxon 1607. qu. written in verse and prose, but
whether by the former Tho. Cooper, I cannot justly say, because he does not
write himself in the title Bach. of Div. as in the former book. Besides these
two Tho. Coopers, were two more of the same time also, and Writers, (besides
Tho. Cooper B. of Winchester) but whether both of them were of Oxon, I cannot
tell.

June 27. Rich. Pilkington of Qu. Jul. 16. Will. Thorn of New Dec. 14.
Sebastian Benefield of C. C. Coll.

Admitted 44.

Doct. of Law.
Feb. 4. Jam. Hussee of New Coll. -- He was afterward Principal of Magd. hall,
Chancellor to the B. of Salisbury, a Knight by the favor of K. Jam. 1. and
dying at Oxford of the plague on the eleventh of July 1625 was buried late at
night without any solemnity or company (only by two that carried his Corpse) in
the Chancel of St. Mary's Church in Oxon.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 14. Leonard Hutten of Chapter Chapter

Jun. 17. Hen. Airay John Aglionby of Qu. Coll.


Jul. 7. Rich. Brook Nathan. Dod compounders of Chapter Chapter


10. Rob. Tinley of Magd. Coll.

Incorporations.
Jul. 4. John Bridgman M. of A. of Cambridge -- He was afterward D. of D.
Master of Magd. Coll. in that University, Chaplain to K. Jam. 1. by whose
favor he became Rector of the rich Church of Wigan in Lancashire, in January.
1615, Bishop of Chester, in 1618. and in June 1621 Rector of Bangor, which he
held in Commend. with his Bishopric. He was Father to Sir Orlando Bridgman
Knight and Bt. sometimes Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and a sufferer in some
measure for the cause of his Maj. K. Chapter 1. He died in Teddington or Tuddington
in Middlesex, in in Summer time 1674.

9. Gedeon da Man or Montmartin Son of a Noble Man, and Master of Arts of
Cambridge.

Wolfgangus Mayer M. A. of the said University, was incorporated on the same
day. -- He was Grandson by the Mothers side to Martin Bucer.

10. Jerem. Ratcliffe D. D. of Cambridge.

John Down Bach. of Div. of the said University was incorporated the same day
-- He was educated in Emanuel College, the members of which presented him to
the Vicaridge of Winsford in Somersetshire, where he continued for a while.
Afterward he became Rector of Instow in Devonshire, where he died and was
buried, about 1631. Ten of his Treatises (the first of which is A Treatise
concerning the force and efficacy of reading) were published after his death by
Dr. George Hakewill his neighbor -- Oxon. 1633. qu. with a funeral Sermon
before them, preached by the said Doctor, containing many things in behalf of
the Author and the said Treatises, as also an Epi^^le by Dr. Hall Bishop of
Exon, wherein are several Encomiums of the Author.

11. Will. Paddie Doct. of Phys. of Leyden -- He stands in the public register
as twice incorporated; see in the year 1591. He was esteemed one of the prime
Physicians of his time, and was highly valued by the chief Men of his faculty,
especially by Sir Theodore de Mayerne. He gave way to fate in December. 1634. and
was buried in St. John's Coll. Chapel. Oxon where is a large Epitaph over his
grave.

Edw. Ratcliff Doct. of Phys. of Cambr. was incorporated the same day.

15. Rob. Williamson Richard Neile D. D. of the same University.


The last of these two Doctors of Div. was one who passed through all Degrees
and Orders in the Church of England, and thereby made acquainted with the
conveniences and distresses, incident to all conditions. He served the Church
as Schoolmaster, Curate, Vicar, Parson, Master of the Savoy, Dean of
Westminster in the place of Lanc. Andrews promoted to the Sea of Chichester,
(in which Dignity he was installed 5. Nov. 1605.) Clerk of the Closet to both
Kings (Jam. 1. and Chapter 1.) successively, Bishop of Rochester 1608, (with which
he kept his Deanery in Commendam) Lichfield and Cov. two years after, Lincoln
1613, Durham 1617. Winchester 1628, and lastly in 1631 Archbishop of York, in
which honor he died 31. Oct. 1640 (being but three days before the Long
Parliament began) and was buried in St. Peter's Church in Westminste^. He was
born of honest Parents in Kingstreet in the City of Westminster (his Father
being a Tallow Chandler) and educated in the College School there; whence being
elected into St. John's Coll. in Cambridge, made great proficiency in Academical
learning. Afterward entering into Orders, he became, after some petite
employments, Chaplain to Sir Will. Cecill. L. Burghley and to Rob. his Son
afterward Earl of Salisbury, who put him into the road of prefement. Many good
offices he had done to the Church and Churchmen in his attendance at the
Court, crossing See in the (...) written by (...).
the Scots in most of their suites for Ecclesiastical preferments, which
greedily and ambitiously they hunted after, whereby he drew on himself the
general hatred not only of the Scots, but scotizing English. He died as full of
years, as he was of honors, an affectionate Subject to his Prince, an
indulgent Father to his Clergy, a bountiful Patron to his Chaplains, and a true
friend to all who r^l^ed upon him. These things tho generally known, yet
inveterate Prynne spares not to (...), 1646. p. 531.
call him a Popish and Armi^ian Prelate, a persecutor of all Orthodox and Godly
Ministers, a preferrer of popish Arminian Clergy men, with a great deal of such
stuff, not here to be mentioned. He is supposed to be Author of a book intit.
Spalato's shiftings in Religion, written against Marc. Ant. de Dominis Archb.
of Spalato, and of other matters. Qu^re.

Jul. 16. Randolph Ba^low M. of A. of Cambridge -- I take him to be the same
with Ranulph Barlow Master of Arts of Pembroke hall in that University,
afterward Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of Winchester in the place of Mich.
Renniger deceased, 1609. and Archb. of Tuam in Ireland. 1629.

Rich. Senhouse M. A. of the same University, was incorporated the same day --
He was the Son of Rich. Senhouse of Alnborough hall in Cumberland, was Fellow
of St. John's Coll. in the said University, installed Dean of Gloucester in the
place of Dr. Laud, promoted to the Sea of St. David, 13. Dec. 1621, and shortly
after became Bishop of Carlisle. He died in the beginning of the year 1626. (2.
Car. 1) leaving then behind him the character of an excellent Preacher.

Theophilus Field M. A. of the same University, was also incorporated with
Senhouse -- He was Son of John Field mentioned among the Writers, under the
year 1587, was educated in Pemb. hall, consecrated Bishop of Landaff 10. Oct.
1619, and thence was translated to Hereford and soon after died. He has
written A Christian preparation to the Lords Supper, printed 1624. in oct.
besides several Sermons and other things.

Rob. Newell. M. A. of the same Univers. was also then incorporated with
Senhouse -- This Person who was half Brother to Dr. Rich. Neile
beforementioned, became Archd. of Buckingham in the beginning of the year 1614,
Prebendary of the ninth stall in the collegiat Church of St. Peter at
Westminster, in the place of one Cuthb. Bellot, an. 1620, and was afterward,
or about the same time, Treasurer of Chichester, Canon of Lichfield, Subdean of
Linc. and Preb. of Durham. He died (at Winchester I think) in 1643 and was
succeeded in his Prebendship of Westminster by Gilb. Wimberley D. D. and in his
Archdeaconry by Giles Thorn D. D. but who in his other Dignitaries I cannot
yet tell.

At the same time was incorporated M. of A. one John Owen, whom I take to be
the same with John Owen, who was bred in Jesus Coll. in Cambridge, and
afterward Bishop of St. Asaph -- Besides the said four Masters of Arts who
were incorporated 16. July, were incorporated one and twenty more.

This year also was incorporated Joh. Hone Doct. of the Civil Law of Cambridge,
but the month or day when, appears not, neither for John Cowell Dr. of the same
faculty for whom there was a supplicate made, which being granted simpliciter,
there is no doubt but that he was incorporated. Of him I desire the reader to
know that he was a Devonian born, was elected from Eaton School to be Scholar
of Kings Coll. in Cambridge an. 1570. and was made Proctor of the said
University an. 1586. Afterward he became Master of Trinity hall there, the
Kings Professor of the Civil Law, Vicechancellour, Doctor, as it is The
continuator of Tho. Hatchers Cat. of Provosts, Fellows and (...) of Kings Coll.
in (...). MS.
said, of the Arches, and Vicar General to Dr. Bancroft Archb. of Canterbury.
His writings are (1) Institutiones juris Anglicani ad methodum institutionum
Justiniani compositae. Cantab. 1605. oct. etc. (2) The Interpreter: or book,
containing the signification of words, etc. Cambr. 1607. qu. etc. afterward
printed in fol. But several passages therein, relating to the Kings
Prerogative, giving offense, because in some cases, he says it is limited, the
said book was called in, and on the 26. March 1610. there was published an
(...) in Annal. R. Jac. 1. MS. an. 1610.
edict against it. This being the reason, as most Scholars think, I cannot be
of the same opinion with one (...) in his Court and (...) James printed 1650.
in oct. p. 191.
(no friend to the memory of King Jam. 1.) who tells us that in the said
Interpreter, it is said that that King took not the usual Oath all Kings are
bound unto, at their coronation, etc. One John Cowell or Covell LL. D. became
Prebendary of Timbrescombe in the Church of Wells, upon the deprivation of Joh.
Faber, an. 1554. temp. Mariae 1. but what relation there was between him and
the former I know not.

An. Dom. 1601.
An. 43 Elizab.
An. 44 Elizab.
Chanc. the same, viz. Thom. Lord Buckhurst.

Vicechanc. George R^ves D. D. Warden of New Coll. Jul. 17.

Proct. George Benson of Qu. Coll. Gerard Massey of Brasn. Coll. Apr. 22.


The junior was afterward nominated Bishop of Chester, (...) died before
consecration.

Bach. of Arts.
Jul. 1. Dudley Digges of Universe. Coll. -- He was afterward Master of the
Rolls.

6. John Ferebe or Ferriby of Magd. hall. -- See among the Masters 1606.

10. Dan. Price of Exet. Coll.

Oct. 23. Nathan. Canon of St. Mary's hall.

Nov. 3. Sam. Brown of Alls. Coll.

Jan. 26. Francis Windebank of St. John's Coll. -- He was the eldest Son of Sir
Tho. Windebank of Haines hill in the Parish of Hurst in Berks. Knight,
(sometimes one of the Clerks of the Signet) and became intimately acquainted
with Dr. Will. Laud while he studied in the said Coll. of St. John; by whose
endeavors, when Bish. of London, he obtained for him of his gracious Master K.
Chapter 1. the secretaryship of State, in the place of Sir Dudley Carleton Viscount
Dorchester deceased; to which office he was sworn 15. June 1632, and about that
time received the honor of Knighthood. Afterward he became See the (...) of
the life of Will. L^nd. printed 164^. p. 19.
ungrateful to his promoter, and much hated by the Puritan for his high acting
in his office. Which being by that Party made notorious, several articles were
drawn up against him, and presented to that unhappy Parliament which began at
Westminster 3. Nov. 1640. Whereupon flying beyond the Seas, wrote a Letter to
the Lord Chamberlain in his own defense, dat. at Calais XI. Jan. 1640, which
was soon after printed. When K. Chapter 1. retired to Oxon, after Edghill battle,
Sir Francis returned into England, went to, and endeavored to speak with, his
Majesty, but his Maj* refusing to have any communication with him, he went
beyond the Seas again, and died at Paris 1/11 Sept. 1646. Among the Sons he
had, Sir Thomas Windebank the eldest, was one, who was of the Privy Chamber to
His Majesty, and another called Colonel Franc. Windebanke Governor of
Blechingdon house in Oxfordshire; who for surrendering it to Col. Oliver
Cromwell upon first summons about the 24. Apr. 1645, was shot to death in
Broken hayes near Oxon; whereupon his body was buried in one of the Chancels of
the Church of St. Mary Magd. in the North suburb of that City, on the third of
May following.

Feb. 11. Sam. Turner of St. Mary's hall -- See among the Masters 1604.

13. Daniel Fairclough Joh. Bery or Bury George Web of C. C. Coll.


The last of which was afterward Bishop of Limerick in Ireland.

Canon, Fairclough, Bury and Web will be mentioned in the second vol.

Admitted 177

Mast of Arts.
May 17. Thom. Winniff of Exeter Coll.

Jun. 20. Thom. Baughe of Chapter Chapter -- He published a Sermon entit. A Summons to
judgment, on Job 31. 14. Land. 1614. qu. and perhaps others, which is all I
know of him, only that he was a Cheshire Man born, and that in seeking after
the Rectory of the Church of St. Sepulcher in London, found a sepulcher
therein, (being buried there) on which his pleasant friend Tho. Freeman the
Poet has an In his Poems called Run and a great cast, being the second part of
his Epigram^, printed (...). Epigr. 97.
ingenious Epigram.

25. Mich. Boil Joh. Sandsbury of S. Joh. Coll.


Jul. 1. Henry Tilson of Vniv. 10. Robert Johnson of Magd. Jan. 21. Robert Pink
of New Coll.

Adm. 86.

Bach. of Physic.
Not one was admitted to the said Degree, only some to practice Physic, among
whom were

Nov. 28. Henr. Savile M. A. Edm. Deane B. A.

Both originally of Merton Coll. now of St. Albans hall.

Bach. of Div.
Dec. 17. Joh. Howson of Chapter Chapter

Besides him were but 4 admitted, among whom Ralph Ironside of University Coll.
was one, Father to Dr. Gilb. Ironside who became Bishop of Bristow, an. 1660.

Doct. of Law.
Feb. 4. Sampson Hussee of New Coll. -- He was Brother to Jam. Hussee mentioned
in the year before.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Dec. 17. John King John Howson of Chapter Chapter


The last of which accumulated; and both were afterward Bishops.

Feb. 15. Charles Ryves of New Coll.

Incorporations.
Apr. 6. Rob. Dallyngton M. of A. of Cambridge -- He was born in
Northamptonshire, educated in Pembroke hall, of which he was Greek-Scholar, and
after became (...). Ful^r in his (...) of England, in Northamptonshire.
a Schoolmaster in Norfolk: where having gained some money, he traveled all
over France and Italy, was exact in his observations, and after his return,
became first Secretary to the Earl of Rutland, then one of the Privy Chamber to
Prince Charles, Master of the Charter House (into the School at which place he
brought the custom of Chapter verses or versifying on passages of Holy
Scripture) and at length a Knight. He has written (1) A survey of the great
Dukes state in Tuscany, an. 1596. Land. 1605. qu. (2) A method for travel,
showed by taking view of France, as it stood in the year 1598. printed at Land.
in qu. (3) Aphorisms Civil and Military; amplified with authorities, and
exemplified with history, out of the first quarterne of Fr. Guicciardine. Land.
1615. fol. and other things, as it is probable, which I have not yet seen. He
died in the latter end of the year 1637, and was buried in the Church or
Chapel belonging to the Charter house. By his will In the (...) Office near
St. Paul's Cathedral, in reg. L^e Qu. 24.
dated 25. Apr. 1636 and proved 1. March 1637 he gave to the poor People of
Geddington in Northamptonshire (the place of his nativity) 300 l. for the
buying of an annual pension of 15 l. per an. for their relief. At which place
in his life time, he built a Free School, and was a benefactor in other
respects.

July 16. Walt. Curle M. of A. of Cambridge -- This Person who was born at
Hatfield in Hertfordshire, was now Fellow of Peter house in the said
University, was promoted first in the Church by the Cecillian Family,
afterward he became Chaplain to His Majesty, Doctor of Divinity, Dean of
Lichfield in June 1621, upon the death of Dr. Will. Tooker, Bishop of Rochester
in 1627. upon the translation of Buckridge to Ely, translated thence to B. and
Wells in 1629, upon the death of Dr. Maw, and thence to Winchester upon the
removal of his Patron Dr. Neile to York, being about that time made Lord
Almoner. Afterward he suffered much for the Kings, and his own, cause, was
among the Royalists when they were besieged in Winchester, whence marching in
safety after its surrender for the use of the Parliament, lived retiredly at
Subberton in (Hampshire) till the time of his death, which happened in the Spring
or Summer time, an. 1647 leaving then behind him a Widow named Elizabeth and
certain Children. All that I have yet seen, which goes under his name is A
Sermon preached at Whitehall, 28. Apr. 1622, on Heb. 12. 14. -- printed in qu.

Rich. Boil M. A. of the same University, was incorporated on the same day --
He was afterward Archbishop of Tuam in Ireland.

Richard Parker another M. of A. of that University, was also then incorporated
-- Whether he be the same R. Parker who was bred in, and became Fellow of,
Caius College, and Author of Sceletos Cantabrigiensis, MS. I cannot justly say,
or the same Richard Parker who was second Son of John Parker, first Son of
Matthew Parker Archb. of Canterbury, (which Richard was born at Cambridge 20.
May 1577) I cannot also tell. Quaere.

On the same day also were 13 more Masters of that University incorporated,
among whom Miles Spencer One Miles Spencer was Doctor of the Laws and
Chancellor of (...), who dying about the ninetieth year of his age, was buried
in the Cath. Chapter there.
was one, and Andrew Perne another, the same, I suppose, who was Proctor of
Cambridge 1616. See before in these Fasti, an. 1553.

Aug. 7. Will. Barlow Doct. of Div. of the said University, was also then
incorporated in the said Degree -- He was born of, and descended from, the
ancient and gentile family of the Barlows of Barl^w in Lancashire, was about
this time Fellow of Trinity hall in the said University, became Prebendary of
Westminster in the place of Dr. Edw. Grant deceased, Dean of Chester in 1603,
upon the death of Joh. Nuttall, and in 1605 Bishop of Rochester; from whence
being translated to Lincoln, sat there to the time of his death, and kept his
Prebendship in Commendam with it. He has written and published several things,
the Catalogue of all, or most of which, you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford
Catalogue. By his will Ibid in reg. (...).
which I have seen, proved 13. Oct. 1613 (for in that year he died) he desires
to be buried in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, if he dye near it, or in the
collegiat Church at Westminster if he dye there, and to have such a tomb over
his grave that may resemble that which Dr. Good (Goodman) Dean thereof set up
for himself in the Church of Westminster. He was a considerable benefactor to
St. John's Coll. in Cambridge, as it there appears, being Founder of the London
Fellows and Scholars of that house. I have made mention of another Will. Barlow
and his works among the Writers, an. 1568. and of a third an. 1625.

Casparus Thomannus one of the Pastors or Teachers of the School at Zurich (of
which City his Grandfather by the male line had born the office of Praetor)
having been recommended by the Professors, Teachers, and Ministers of the
Church and School there, to live among, and receive an exhibition from, the
Oxonians, an. 1599, did spend several years there, and occurrs one of the first
Persons that was entered a Student in the public Library, when first opened for
use. He was a learned Man, and read a Lecture in the University, but his
education having been mostly at Geneva, did, with other strangers of the like
breeding, so corrupt the Students with their calvinistical Doctrine that it was
many years before it could be rooted out.

An. Dom. 1602.
An. 44 Elizab.
An. 45 Elizab.
Chanc. Thomas Lord Buckhurst.

Vicechanc. John Howson D. D. Canon of Chapter Chapter Jul. 15.

Proct. Daniel Pury of Magd. Coll. Walt. Bennet of New Coll. Apr. 14.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 13. William Weelks of New Coll. was then admitted Bach. of Music -- What
he has composed or published I know not: sure it is that Thom. Weelks who was
at this time Organist of W^kehams Coll. near to Winchester did publish (1)
Madrigals to 3. 4. 5. and 6. voices. Land. 1597. in a large qu. Which being the
first fruits of his labors he dedicated them to his singular Patron George
Philpot Esquire. (2) Ballatts and Madrigals to five voices, with one to 6. voices.
Land. 1598. qu. (3) Madrigals of six parts, apt for the viols and voices. Land.
1600. qu. besides compositions in The triumphs of Oriana, printed 1601, Hymns
and Anthems to be sung in Cathedrals and Collegiat Churches; the words of which
may be See in the book entit. The divine Services and Anthems usually sung in
the Cathedrals and Coll^giate (...) in the Church of England. collected and
published by (...) -- Land. 1663. oct.
elsewhere seen, and other compositions which are remitted among the books
reposited in our pub. Music School at Oxon. Quaere whether the Scribe or
Registrary of the University, has not set down William, for Tho. Weelks.

Bach. of Arts.
May 7. Tho. Anyan lately of Linc. Coll. ^ow of that of Corp. Christi. -- See
among the Doctors of Div. 1614.

Jun. 8. Benjam. Culme of St. Alb. hall -- See among the Masters, an. 1605.

Jun. 25. Franc. James of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1612.

26. Rice or Rees Prichard of Jes. Coll.

30. Jam. Rowlandson Lancelot Dawes of Qu. Coll.


J^n. 30. Tho. Aylesbury Rich. Corbet Rob. Burton alias Democritus junior Hen.
Byam of Chapter Chapter


Of the first of these last four, you may see more among the Masters, an. 1605.

Dec. 13. Joh. Warner of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward B. of Rochester.

Prichard, Dawes, Byham and Warner, are to be mentioned in the other vol. of
Writers and Bishops.

Admitted 156.

Bach. of Law.
Jul. 8. Joh. Budden of Magd. Coll.

Besides him were only 3 admitted, and one incorporated named Joh. Crook.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 29. George Hakewill of Exeter Coll.

May 18. Arth. Duck of Heart hall.

Jun. 6. Norwich Spackman of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Proctor of the
University, Chaplain to James Bishop of Bath. and Wells and the publisher of A
Sermon before the King at Whitehall, on Matthew. 9. 13. Land. 1614. qu. and
perhaps of other things; which is all I know of him, only that he was a
Worcestershire Man born.

30. Barnab. Potter of Queens Jul.... Rob. Bolton of Brasn. 7. Tho. Broad of
St. Alb. hall. Coll.
Feb. 22. Isaac Wake George Gerard of Mert. Coll.


The last of which was afterward Master of Suttons Hospital called commonly
the Charter House.

Admitted 71.

Bach. of Phys.
June 14. Rich. Haydock of New Coll.

Besides him was only one more admitted, viz. Joh. Cheynell of C. C. Coll. and
six admitted to practice.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 8. Will. Goodwin of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Doctors of Divinity
following.

Jul. 8. Will. Westerman of Oriel Coll.

Adm. 14.

Doct. of Law.
July 8. Joh. Budden of Magd. Coll. -- He accumulated.

Oliver Lloyd of Allsouls Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was afterward
Chancellor of Hereford, and in 1615 became Canon of Windsore. Which last
dignity he changed for the Deanery of Hereford with Dr. Rich. Mountag^e of
Kings Coll. in Cambridge, an. 1617. This Dr. Lloyd died in the City of Hereford
in 1625. whereupon Dr. Dan. Price succeeded him in the said Deanery.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 20. Joh. Spenser of C. C. Coll. -- He was afterward President of that
house.

June 8. Will. Goodwin of Chapter Chapter who accumulated -- In 1590 I find this Person
to be Subalmoner to Qu. Elizabeth, well beneficed in Yorkshire, and Prebendary
of York. Also in 1605. Oct. 25. I find him collated to the Chancellourship of
the Church of York, on the death of Mr. Will. Palmer, as also to another
Prebendship in that Church and a Rectory in the said Diocese. In 1611 he became
Dean of Christ Church, and afterward Archdeacon of Middlesex, and dying on the
eleventh of June 1620. aged 65 was buried in one of the North isles joining to
Chapter Chapter choire. He has published A Sermon before the King at Woodstock 28.
Aug. 1614, on Jer. 1. 10. Oxon. 1614. qu. and perhaps other things. Quaere.

Roger Bradshaw of Jesus Coll. the Kings Chaplain, was admitted the same day.

14. Will. Swaddon of New Coll. -- On the 10. of Nov. 1610. he was admitted
Archdeacon of Worcester on the resignation of John Johnson D. D. and dying 2.
Aug. 1623 was buried, (as I suppose) in that North isle of the Cathedral Church
of Worcester, which adjoyns to the Parlor of the Senior Prebend. In his
Archdeaconry succeeded Hugh Lloyd D. D. who was admitted thereunto 18. Aug. the
same year, and dying in 1629, Edward Thornborough M. A. second Son, by the
first Wife, of Dr. John Thornborough Bishop of Worcester, succeeded, being
admitted to it 3. Aug. 1629.

Rob. Newman of New Coll. was admitted D. D. the same day, (Jun. 14)

Jul. 8. Charles Langford Giles Tomson of Alls. Coll.


The first of these two was now Dean of Hereford, in which Dignity he did
succeed, if I mistake not, John Watkins (who died about the middle of May 1594)
and was succeeded by Dr. Rich. Mountague, as I have before told you among the
Doctors of Law this year. The other Doctor, Giles Tomson, was installed Dean of
Windsore on the 2. of March this year, and afterward was made Bishop of
Gloucester, as before, among the Bishops, I have told you.

Jul. 8. Giles Thorn of New Coll. John Williams of Chapter Chapter

The first of these two last was now Dean of Chichester, and the other
dignified in the Church. One of both his names I have mentioned among the
Writers under the year 1613. and another I shall mention in these Fasti, an.
1608. sub tit. Incorporations.

Incorporations.
Apr. 30. Will. Turner M. A. of Cambridge -- See among the Doct. of Physic
1608.

Jun. 23. Humph. Leech M. A. of the same University -- He was originally of
Brasn. Coll. and was about this time Chaplain of Chapter Chapter

July 3. Ralph Hulton Doct. of Phys. of Cambr.

15. Will. Wheatly Bach. of Arts of Christ's Coll. in the said University. -- He
was now a member of St. Edm. hall in this of Oxon.

Jul. 15. Martin Day Phineas Hodson Dan. Dyke Jacob. Godscaleus M. of A. of
Cambr.


The first of these last four, (Mart. Day) was afterward Doct. of Div.
Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty, Rector of St. Faiths Church in London and
Rector of Stoke near Launceston in Cornwall. In his life time he published
Monument of Mortality, etc. containing four treatises. -- printed in oct. and
after his death, which happened 1628 were published several Sermons of his under
these titles (1) Doomesday; or a treatise of the resurrection of the body,
delivered in 22 Sermons, on 1. Cor. 15. Land. 1636. qu. (2) Corinths
collection, or the Saints of Jerusalem, in seven Sermons on the 1. Cor. 16. the
first nine verses. -- printed with the former, and all dedicated to Dr. Josoph
Hall, sometimes an intimate friend of the Author.

The second, Phineas Hodson, was afterward D. of D. and in 1611. Sept. 26. was
collated to the Chancellourship of the Church of York, upon the resignation of
Dr. Will. Goodwin mentioned before among the Doctors of Divinity. He died at,
or near, York, about the latter end of 1646. whereupon his Chancellourship
lying void till the restoration of K. Chapter 2. Christopher Stone M. A. succeeded,
being installed therein 24. Oct. 1660. This Dr. Hodson has published The Kings
request, or David's desire, etc. Sermon. on Psalm. 27. 4. Land. 1628. qu. and
perhaps other things. Quaere.

The third, Dan. Dyke, was, as it is said, born in Hertfordshire, in a town
called Hemstede, of which his Father was Minister, was an eminent Preacher,
wrote several things, as the Oxford Catalogue will tell you, among which is his
book Of the deceitfulness of man's heart, published after his death by his
Brother Jerem. Dyke of Sydney Coll. an. 1614.

The fourth and last, Jac. Godscaleus, I take to be the same with James
Godskal, Author of The Kings Medicine against the plague, for the year 1604. --
Printed 1604. in oct. which is all I know of him as yet.

Jul. 15. Andr. Bing Bach. of Div. of Cambr. -- He was Fellow of Peter House or
St. Peter's Coll. in the same University, afterward D. of D. and Hebrew
Professor thereof. See more in the Incorporations 1612.

Oct. 25. Tho. Lodge Doct. of Phys. of the University of Avenion.

About 27 Cambridge Men were incorporated this year in several faculties.

An. Dom. 1603.
An. 1. Jac. 1.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Dr. George Abbot again, Jul. 23.

Proct. Christop. Dale of Mert. Coll. William Laud of St. Joh. Coll. May 4.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 16. Thom. Boys of Alls. Coll. -- He has composed ^^rtain Church
services, which is all I know of him.

Bach. of Arts.
May 12. Hannibal Gamon of Broadgates hall.

July 1. Rob. Gentilis of Jes. Coll. Son of Alberic Gent.

5. Rich. Tillesley of St. John's Coll.

9. John Hales of C. C. Coll. afterward of Morton, and at length of Eaton,
Coll.

Dec. 12. Edm. Gunter of Chapter Chapter

13. Will. Heal of Exeter Coll.

Jan. 19. John Ball of Brasn. Coll. -- See another of both his names among the
Bach. of Arts, an. 1608.

Feb. 15. Edw. Evans of Chapter Chapter

As for Gamon, Gentilis and Hales they will be mentioned in the next vol.

Adm. 126.

Bach. of Law.
Mar. 29. John Basire a French Man who had studied the Civ. Law 12 terms in
this University, and 7 years in France and Germany, was then admitted.

Jul. 5. Will. Juxon of St. John's Coll. -- In his last days he became
Archbishop of Canterbury.

8. Eizo Tiards of Jesus Coll. -- He accumulated, as I shall tell you anon.

Adm. 6.

Mast. of Arts.
May 11. Henry Mason of C. C. Joh. Prideaux of Exet. Coll.


Jun. 30. George Warburton of Brasn. Coll. -- See among the Doctors of Div.
1636.

July 7. Will. Piers of Chapter Chapter Tob. Venner of St. Alb. hall John Eaton of
Trin. Coll.

Tancred Leill or Lelius of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day -- He was a
learned Dane, which is all I know of him.

9. Thom. Jackson Brian Twyne of C. C.
Barthel. Parsons of Oriel Coll.


Adm. 46.

Bach. of Div.
July 7. Rob. Burhill Joh. Barcham Mar. 12. Sam. Page of C. C. Coll.


Admitted 14.

Doct. of Law.
July 8. Eizo Tiarda of Jesus Coll. who accumulated the Degrees in the Civ. Law
-- He was born of, and descended from, a gentile Family living in Groeningen in
Germany.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
May 2. John Childerley of St. John's Coll. -- While he was a junior Fellow of
that house he became Preacher to the English Merchants trading at Stood, and
after his return became successively Chaplain to Richard Archb. of Canterbury,
and afterward to George his successor, Rector of St. Mary de Wolnoth in
London, of S. Dunstans in the East, and of Sheinfield or Shemfield in Essex. He
was in his time a very eminent and frequent Preacher and learned Divine, but
blind by age and continual labor several years before his death:
Notwithstanding which, he suffered much in the time of the rebellion, and was
outed of St. Dunstans by the restless Presbyterian, and whether he kept
Sheinfield to his last I cannot tell. He died very aged in 1645 (being then 66
years since his first coming to St. John's Coll.) and was buried either in the
Chancel of St. Dunstan, or in that of Sheinfield, beforementioned.

July 7. Nich. Higgs of Ball. Coll. -- He was about this time Rector of Higham
in Somersetshire; where, or near it, he dyed 1631.

Incorporations.
May 23. Laurence Whittaker M. A. of Cambridge -- This Person who was a
Somersetshire Man born and an ingenious Poet, was afterward Secretary to Sir
Edw. Philipps Master of the Rolls, and a Burgess in several Parliaments,
particularly in that which began 3. Nov. 1640. being then a Burgess for
Okehampton in Devonshire. He died 15. Ap^. 1654 aged 76, and was buried in the
Church of St. Giles in the fields near to London. He was much admired by Tho.
Coryat the traveller; in the dishing out of whose Odcombian banquet, he had a
considerable hand, an. 1611. being numbered among the Poets of that age.

Jul. 12. Will. Knight M. A. of the same University -- I take him to be the
same with (...). Knight of Ar^ington in Sussex a Divine, who wrote A concordance
Axiomatical; containing a survey of Theological propositions with their reasons
and uses in holy Scripture. Land. 1610. fol. and the same perhaps who
published, Mundus alter and idem, sive terra australis, etc. written by Joseph
Hall, who was afterward Bishop of Norwych.

Francis Dee M. A. and Fellow of St. John's Coll. in Cambr. was incorporated the
same day -- He was the Son of David Dee of Shropshire, (who is said to be
Rector of Great St. Bartholomews Church in London) and he the great Grandson of
the Great Bid Dee, of an ancient Family in those parts. Afterward he took the
Degree of D. of D. being then Minister of Allhallows in Lumbardstreet in
London, was Chancellor of the Church of Salisbury, and in 1630 was made Dean
of Chichester. In 1634 Apr. 9. he was elected Bishop of Peterborough, and on
the 28. May following he was installed by proxy, being then esteemed a Person
of a pious life and conversation, and of very affable behavior. He died (after
he had been twice married) on the eighth day of October. 1638, and was buried at
the upper end of the choire belonging to the Cathedral Church at Peterborough,
near to the Episcopal seat. A little before his death, he gave to the Master
and Seniors of St. John's Coll. beforementioned, the impropriat Parsonage of
Pagham in Sussex, (held by lease of the Cathedral Church of Canterbury) for the
maintaining of two Fellows and two Scholars therein for ever, the Scholars to
be elected out of Peterborough School.

John Pocklington M. A. and Fellow of Pembr. hall in Cambr. was also then (Jul.
12.) incorporated -- He was afterward D. of D. Rector of Yeldon alias Yevelden
in Bedfordshire, Vicar of Waresley in Huntingdonshire, Prebendary of
Peterborough, and in 1639 Canon of Windsore in the place of Tho. Sheafe
deceased, being also about that time Chaplain to His Maj. Chapter 1. This is the
Person who among other books, published Altar Christianum, etc. Land. 1636.
and Sunday no Sabbath, etc. Land. 1637. Which last, being no other than a
Sermon preached at Ampthill in Bedfordshire at the B. of Lincolns Visitation,
17. Aug. 1635, was much brought up by, and taken into the hands of, young
Students, who usually read it at their common fires, and according to their
dispositions it was liked or disliked. But both being in an high manner
disgusted by the Puritans, they, who had the chief sway in the long Parliament
that began 3. Nov. 1640, ordered them both on the tenth of March following to
be publicly burnt by the common executioner in both the Universities, and in
the City of London. About that time they deprived the Author of all his
spiritualities beforementioned, and would have proceeded father as to other
punishment, but he being in a manner heart-broken, prevented their fury by
death, which happened (at Peterborough I think) in the Winter time 1642.

Josephus Barbatus a Native of Memphis in Egypt was conversant about this time
with the Oxonian Muses. He could speak French and Ital. very readily, but most
of all the Arabian tongue, which was natural to him, and therefore recommended
by the Archb. of Canterbury to the Vicechanc. to read a lecture of it to the
Academians. He has written one or more things in that language, which were
acceptable to the learners of it.

An. Dom. 1604.
An. 2. Jac. 1.
Chanc. Thom. Lord Buckhurst, created this year Earl of Dorset.

Vicechanc. Joh. Williams D. D. Principal of Jesus Coll. and reader of the
Margaret Lecture, July 14.

Proct. Will. Ballow of Chapter Chapter George Darrell of Alls. Coll. Apr. 18.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 14. John Daniel of Chapter Chapter -- Some of his instrumental compositions, we
have remaining in the public School of that faculty.

Bach. of Arts.
May 8. Hen. Whistler of Trinity Jun. 10. Franc Kinaston of Oriel Jul. 20.
Gabr. Richardson of Brasn. Coll.

Oct. 23. Nathaniel Pownoll of Chapter Chapter

26. Sim. Birckbek of Queens Dec. 12. Tho. Baylie of Magd. Coll.

Jan. 23. Rob. Sanderson Thom. Hayne of Linc. Coll.


The first of these two last, was afterward the learned and religious Bishop
of Lincoln.

Feb. 4. Rich. Capell of Magd. Coll.

All which Bachelaurs except Pownoll, are to be mentioned at large as Authors
in the next volume.

Adm. 180.

Mast. of Arts.
March 27. John Dunster of Magd. Coll.

May 1. Isaac Singleton of Alls. Coll. -- This Person who was nearly related to
Dr. Thom. Singleton Principal of Brasn. Coll. (of which house he was originally
a Commoner but now Fellow of the said Coll. of Alls.) has published The
downfall of Shelna, together with an application to the bloody Gowry of
Scotland, in two Sermons at St. Mary's in Oxon, on Isay 22. 15. Land. 1615. qu.
and perhaps other things. In 1622 I find him Chancellor of the Dioc. of
Carlisle, and some years after to be collated to the Archdeaconry of that place,
in the room of Robert Wrigt, who had been collated thereunto in 1621. he being
then only Bach. of Arts. In 1640 Isaac Singleton occurs by the title of
Archdeacon of Brecknock, but afterward was deprived of that and other
spiritualities, which is all I know of him, only that he was a Londoner born.

May 22. Dan. Price of Exet. Jun. 12. Will. Twysse of New Coll.

26. Will. Wheatlie of St. Edm. hall.

Oct. 22. Sam* Turner of S. Albans Hall. -- This person who was the Son of Dr.
Pet. Turner mentioned before among the Incorporations under the year 1599, by
Pascha his Wife, Sister of Hen. Parry Bishop of Worcester, was originally of S.
Mary's Hall, afterward for a time of C. C. Coll. but now of S. Albans Hall
before mentioned, and as a Member thereof did complete his degree of Master in
an Act celebrated 8 Jul. 1605. Afterward he traveled and became Doct. of
Phys. of an University beyond the Seas; and whether after his Return he
practiced that Faculty in Dorsetshire, I am not certain. Sure it is, that he
was several times chosen by the men of Shaftsbury in that County to serve as a
Burgess for them in several Parliaments, particularly in that called 1625,
wherein he showed himself what he was, of a bold Spirit and able Elocution in
assaulting the Kings great Minion George Duke of Bucks, as the main cause of
diverse infirmities in the State, being very uncouth Language to a Princes ears;
the particulars of which you may In the (...) etc. written by (...) L'estrange,
printed (...) an. 1656, second (...) p. 24, 25. (...) an. 16^5.
see elsewhere. For the Parliament which began at Westminster 3 Nov. 1640, he
was elected again for the same place, but being soon after fully satisfied what
desperate courses the Members thereof took, he left them, and retiring to his
Majesty at Oxon, sat in the Parliament there, 1643, and so consequently was a
shater of Sufferings then incident to Royalists. I have seen diverse of his
Speeches in MS. but whether made public I cannot tell. He died in 1647, or
thereabouts, leaving then behind a natural Son of both his names, and the
character of a man of very loose principles.

Adm. 65.

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 6. Will. Laud of S. John's Coll.

Jan. 18. John Burbadge of Linc. Coll. a rich Dignitary in the Church. -- He
was nearly related to Rich. Burbadge of the Parish of S. Leonard in Shoreditch
near London; which Richard, who is styled by the learned In (...) Jac. Reg. I.
MS. (...) an. 16^9.
Camden to have been alter Roscius, died 9 March 1618.

Feb. 22. Robert Wakeman of Balliol Coll.

On the second day of March this year, Gabriel Powell Bach. of Arts of S.
Mary's Hall, who had studied Divinity nine years, supplicated for the degree of
Bach. of Div. but whether his desire was granted it appears not. I have made
large mention of him among the Writers under the year 1607.

Adm. 12.

Not one Doct. of Law, Phys. or Divinity, was admitted this year.

Incorporations.
July 10. Rob. Hill Bach. of Div. of Christ's Coll. in Cambr. -- He was about
this time Parson of S. Barthelmew near to the Exchange in London, was
afterward D. of D. and always esteemed a learned man and a good and painful
Preacher. He has written (1) Life everlasting: or the true knowledge of one
Jehovah. Cambr. 1601. oct. (2) The path way to prayer and piety, etc. Land.
1613. oct. (3) A Communicant instructed, etc. printed 1617. oct. with an
Exposition on the Lords Prayer, and other things which I have not yet seen. See
more among the Incorporations an. 1598. This Dr. Hill died in 1623, and was
buried near to the Body of his Wife in the Chancel of the Church of S.
Barthelmew before mentioned. One Rob. Hill was Parson of Tredington in the
Dioc. of Worcester, an. 1604, but him I take to be different from the former.

I find only five Masters of Arts of Cambridge to be incorporated this year,
and two Bach. of Div. of whom Rob. Hill the Writer before mentioned was one.

Daniel Plancius a Belgian born, was this year a Sojourner in the Univ. for the
sake of the publ. Library, and did soon after publish several Books which
showed him a learned man; one of which was answered and animadverted upon by
Heribert Ross-weidus and Rob. Swertius.

Joh. Drusius also was a Sojourner, not in a private House, but in Gloc. Hall;
who being admirably well skilled in the Hebrew, Chalday, and Syriack Tongue,
was recommended to the chief Heads of the University to read those Tongues
either privately or publicly. He soon after removed to Chapter Chapter and, as a
Member thereof, took a degree in Arts, as I shall tell you in the year
following.

An. Dom. 1605.
An. 3 Jac. 1.
Chanc. Thom. Earl of Dorset.

Vicechanc. Dr. George Abbot again, July 16.

Proct. Rich. Fitzherbert of New Coll. Joh. Hanmer of Alls. Coll. April 11.


Bach. of Arts.
June 11. Walt. Raleigh of Magd. Coll. -- Many year after his death were
published by Dr. Sim. Patrick Dean of Peterborough his Works entit. Reliquiae
Raleighanae.

20. Hen. Jack^on of C. C. Coll.

27. Sam. Fell of Chapter Chapter Pet. Turner

Oct. 21. Hen. Rogers of Jes. Coll.

23. Joh. Ley of Chapter Chapter

Dec. 17. Joh. Andrews of Trin. Coll.

Feb. 26. Franc. Stewart of Chapter Chapter Son of the Earl of Murray, and of kin to
his Maj. James 1. -- See more in the year 1616, among the Creations.

Joh. Drusius of Chapter Chapter Son of the learned Critic Joh. Drusius, was admitted
the same day.

28. Sampson Price of Heart Hall, lately of Exet. Coll.

Of Raleigh, Jackson, Fell, Turner, Rogers and Ley, will be large mention made
in the second Vol.

Adm. 190.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 17. Daniel Fairclough commonly called Featley of C. C. Coll.

24. Benj. Culme of Linc. Coll. lately of S. Albans Hall. -- He was the Son of
Hugh Culme of Molland in Devonshire, and going afterward into Ireland, became
at length D. of D. and Dean of S. Patricks Church near Dublin, where he was
accounted a learned man and an excellent Preacher and Theologist. But he being
forced thence by the Rebellion that broke out in 1641, went into England, lived
several years in a retired condition at Mudghill near to Lidiard St. John's in
Wiltshire; where dying in October an 1657, aged 76, was buried in the
Churchyard of Lidiard before mentioned. Over his Grave was soon after an
Altar-tomb erected, with a large Inscription thereon, wherein it is said he died
21 October.

May 16. Joh. Bery or Bury of Balliol, lately of Corp. Christ. Coll.

Jun. 16. James Rowlandson Lancelot Dawes of Qu. Coll.


9. Thom. Aylesbury of Chapter Chapter -- This Gentleman who was a Londoner born, was
second Son of Will. Aylesbury by Anne his Wife, Daughter of Joh. Poole Esquire,
and from Westminster School became a Student of Chapter Chapter 1598. After he had left
the University he became Secretary to Charles Earl of Nottingham Lord High
Admiral of England and to George Duke of Bucks, his Successor in that great
Office. By the endeavors of which last, he was made one of the Masters of the
Requests, and Master of the Mint, (being about that time a Baronet) which
places he keeping till the grand Rebellion broke out in 1642, he adhered to the
Cause of K. Chapter 1. and in 1649, when all things were in a Confusion as to the
Royal Party, he retired with his Family to Antwerp in Brabant, where continuing
till 1652, he removed to Breda, and dying in 1657, aged 81, was buried in the
great Chnrch there, leaving behind him a Son named William, of whom I shall
speak elsewhere, and a Daughter named Frances, the Wife of Edw. Hyde of Pirt^n
in Wilts, since made Earl of Clarendon. These things I mention because the said
Sir Tho. Aylesbury was a learned man, and as great a Lover and Encourager of
Learning and learned men, especially of Mathematicians (he being one himself)
as any man in his time.

June 9. Rich. Corbet Rob. Burton Hen. Byam of Chapter Chapter


12. Joh. Warner of Magd. 23. George Webb of C. C. Jul. 3. Sam. Brown of Alls.
Coll.

Dec. 16. Edw. Abbot of University Coll. -- In the year 1616, Jan. 13. he was
admitted Chauntor of the Church of Wells, in the place of Rich. Boughton,
sometimes of Magd. Coll. in this University; and dying in 1634, Sebastian Smith
M. A. of Chapter Chapter was admitted to that dignity on the 9 of March the same year.

Will. Boswell of Ball. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- This person who was
afterward Chaplain to John Earl of Bristol, with whom he traveled to Spain, I
set down here, to distinguish him from another Will. Boswell whom I shall
mention in these Fasti under the year 1608.

Feb. 27. Hannibal Gamon of Broadgates Hall.

Adm. 98.

Bach. of Phys.
May 16. Robert Fludd or de Fluctibus M. A. of S. Joh. Coll. did accumulate the
degrees of Physic, as a Member of Chapter Chapter as I shall tell you anon.

Not one Bach. of Phys. besides him was this year adm.

Bach. of Div.
May 16. Joh. Harmar Arth. Lake of New Coll.
Rich. Fownes of Chapter Chapter

Nov. 12. Tho. Frith of Alls. Coll. -- He was a Kentish man born, was
afterward Warden of the Church at Elmeley in his own Country; and Canon of
Windsore an. 1610, in the place of Hugh Blythe sometimes Fellow of Kings Coll.
in Cambr. deceased. He has written in Latin, A Catalogue, or (rather) History
of the Deans and Canons of S. George's Chapel within the Casile of Windsore.
It commenceth at the foundation of that Chapel an. 1348, and reaches to the
end of 1628, and afterward continued to these times by George Evans a Canon of
the said Chapel, and others. An Original of this MS. I once saw in the hands
of Dr. Tho. Barl^w Bishop of Lincoln, whence I took a Copy, and have made use
of it in this present Work, as Elias Ashmole Esquire; had done before me in his
Institutions, Laws and Ceremonies of the Order of the (...). Land. 1672. fol.
and Dr. Pet. He^yn before him, in his (...) of St. George of Cappadicia. Land.
1631. 33. qu. This Tho. (...) who was a most judicious and industrious man, and
to whom the Coll. at Windsore is much indebted, died in the latter end of the
year (in Feb.) 1631, and was buried in the Chapel of S. George before
mentioned, near to the body of his sometimes Wife named Elizabeth, Sister to my
Father Thom. a Wood Bach. of Arts and of the Civ. Law of this University of
Oxon. which Eliz. died more than 4 years before her Husband.

Joh. Rawlinson of St. John's Coll. was admitted the same day.

Admitted 22.

Doct. of Law.
June 17. Hugh Barker of New Coll. -- He was about this time Chancellor of the
Dioc. of Oxon, afterward Dean of the Arches and President of the Civilians
Coll. at London. He died in 1632, and was buried at the upper end of New Coll.
Chapel. See his Epitaph in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 151 152.

Doct. of Physic.
May 16. Robers Fludd beforementioned, now in great repute for his admirable
knowledge in Chimistry, and afterward for the voluminous writings which he
published.

Doct. of Div.
May 16. Joh. Harmar Arth. Lake of New Coll.
Rich. Fownes of Chapter Chapter

All which accumulated the Degrees in Divinity.

Rowland Searchfield of St. John's Coll. was admitted the same day.

Jun. 13. Richard Brett of Linc. Coll.

July 4. Thom. Sanderson of Ball. Coll. -- On the 1. of Aug. 1606. he was
installed Archdeacon of Rochester in the place of Thomas Staller D. D. and was
succeeded in that Dignity by Dr. Richard Tillesley.

July 4. Benj. Heyden of New Will. Hill of Ball. Coll.


The first of these two last, became Dean of Wells in the place of one John
Herbert, an. 1602, and dying in 1607 was succeeded by Rich. Meredith.

Incorporations.
May 8. Sam. Bird M A. of Cambridge -- One Sam. Byrd sometimes Fellow of Bennet
Coll. in that University, afterward a Minister in Ipswich, has published
several books, among which are (1) A friendly dialogue between Paul and Demas,
wherein is disputed how we are to use the pleasures of this life. Land. 1580.
in tw. (2) Lectures upon the eleventh chapt. of the Hebr. and upon the 38.
Psalm Land. 1598. oct. (3) Lectures on the eighth chap. of the second epist.
to the Cor. Land. 1598. oct. etc. Whether this Sam. Byrd the Author, be the
same with Sam. Bird who was incorporated M. of A. and had been entered a Student
in the Bodleian Library in Dec. 1604. I must leave it to the reader to Judge.

May 15. Matthew Lister Doct. of Phys. of the University of Basil in Germany --
He was born at Thornton in Craven in Yorkshire, was bred Fellow of Oriel Coll;
afterward be became a Retainer to Mary the incomparable Countess of Pembroke,
(whose estate he managed for her best advantage) Physician to Qu. Anne the
royal Consort of K. Jam. 1. Physician in ordinary to K. Char. 1. from whom he
received the honor of Knighthood at Oatlands 11. Oct. 1636, and at length
became President of the Coll. of Physicians in London and one of the prime
Physicians of the Nation. He died at Burwell near Lowth in Lincolnshire, about
1657 aged 92, and was there, I suppose, buried. Nearly related to him, or at
least of the same Family* were Edw. Lister Doctor of Phys. a Native of
Wakefield in Yorkshire, who died at London, (where he had practiced many years)
27. Mar. 1620, and Jos. Lister his Brother Doct. of Physic of the City of
York. Martin Lister also of the Royal Society, who had the Degree of Doct. of
Phys. conferred upon him by the members of this University, an. 1683 is his
great Nephew, and when a youth was bred up under him.

Jul. 6. James Fitch D. D. of Cambridge -- He was Prebendary of the Cath. Chapter
of Christ and the blessed Virgin Mary at Rochester, and died in July 1612.

9. John Bowls M. A. of Trin. Coll. in the said University -- See among the
Incorporations 1615.

Patrick Young (Patricius Junius) M. of A. of the University of St. Andrew in
Scotland, was incorporated the same day, and was afterward a Sojourner in this
University. -- He was a Scotch Man born, and the most eminent Grecian of his
time. -- Ho^o ad literaturae omnis, duntaxat Gracae, beneficium natus, as a
most learned (...).
Critic says. He was about this time keeper of His Majesty's Library at St.
James; with the help of which he published Versio and no^^ in Clementis
epistolam ad Remanos. Oxon. 1633. qu. and Catena Graecorum Patrum in Librum
Job. Land. 1637. in Gr. and Lat. written by N^cetas Heracle^. It must be now
known that an Alexandrian Copy of the whole Bible in a Greek MS. was sent by
Cyril Patriarch of Constantinople to K. Chapter 1. about 1628, containing the
Septuagint translation of the Old Testament, and the Greek text of the New,
together with St. Clements two Epistles to the Corinthians, joined at the end.
Which two were somewhat imperfect, as being in shattered and torn parchments,
and the first had been in vain sought after near a thousand years in the West,
as a late (...) to his edit. of St. (...).
Author says. This Alexandrian Copy of the Bible was wrote about the time of
the first Nicene Council (says the said late Author, tho another Dr. Br.
Wal^^^ in (...) note before his edition of (...) on part of this (...).
tells you about 1200 years ago) in great characters by the hand of Thecla a
noble Egyptian Woman; who, as some say, had been a Scholar of the Apostles and
afterward a Martyr. Which, with the help of other ancient copies, particularly
with a MS. in University Coll. Library, entit. Octoteuchus, two Greek MSS.
translated into Arabic, in the Bodlcian Library, and an ancient MS. formerly
in that of Sir Robert Cotton, (but lost in the hands of a French Man, to whom
it was lent) the said Pat. Young did promise to publish, with notes added
thereto, and accordingly had compared the said copy with the others above named
to the 15 Chapt. of Numbers, and no farther, if Dr. Br. Walton says lord.
right. The effect of this undertaking being much expected, and desired by
learned Men, especially beyond the Seas, certain Brethren of the Presbyterian
persuasion were very zealous with the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, to
have the business encouraged. Whereupon, in the latter end of the year 1645,
they sent to the house of Mr. Pat. Young to desire him to go forward with the
work, and an ordinance was read for printing and publishing of the said
Testament of the Septuagint translation. At which time also John Seldom and
Bulstrode Whitlock did undertake the printing of it, but what hindered them in
going on with the work, I find not. In 1649 P. Young (who had sided with the
Presbyterians) left his place of Library keeper to the King, the books there
being mostly embezell'd; whereupon the said Whitlock succeeding, Young
continued still a sojournor at Bromfield in (Essex) where, I think, he died,
an. 1652, for in Sept. that year his next relation administered. Afterward Dr.
Walton beforementioned printed Youngs notes and annotations, with his own
continuation of collations in the sixth vol. of his Polyglot Bible, and Dr. Jo.
Fell the first Epistle of St. Clement from Youngs edition, and Latin
translation, with some short running notes added thereunto. -- Oxon. 1669. in
tw. In 1638. Young put out Expositio in Cant. Canticorum, in qu. written by
Gilb. Fo^iot Bishop of London in the time of Hen. 2. and was one of the three
(Gottefridus Vendelinus and Joh. Bapt. Cotelerius being the other two) who
interpreted S. Clements two Epistles to the Corinthians -- Land. 1687. oct.
After his death, all, or most of his Greek and Latin MSS. collected and
written with his own hand, came into the possession of Dr. John Owen Dean of
Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

Oct. 21. Daniel Calendar M. A. of St. Andrew in Scotland.

These Persons following were incorporated while K. James 1. was entertained at
Oxon. Aug. 30.

Alexander Serle LL. Bach. of Cambridge -- To whose name is this added in the
public register -- ad causas and negotia ecclesiastica, civilia, maritima, and
forinseca Procurator regius generalis.

Thom. Howard Earl of Suffolk Rob. Cecill Earl of Salisbury M. A. of Cambr.

The first of these two Counts was afterward Lord Chamberlain of the Kings
household, L. Treasurer of England after Cecill, Knight of the Garter and
founder of the stately house called A^dley Inn near to Walden in Suffolk. He
died in 1626 and was buried at Walden. The other (To. Cecill) who was Son of
Will. Lord Burleigh was now Chancellor of the Univ. of Cambridge, afterward
Lord Treasurer of England, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter. He
died in 1612, and was buried at Hatfield in Hertfordshire.

George Thomson M. A. of St. Andrew in Scotland -- He was born in that City,
and afterward became Pastor of the reformed Church at Chastegneraye in France.
He has written several books, among which are (1) De pompa in Jac. 1. introit^
in Londinum Sylva. Land. 1604. oct. (2) Vindex veritatis adversus Lipsium, lib.
2. Land. 1606. oct. (3) Quatre harmonies sur la Revelation. print. 1607. oct.
(4) La Chasse de la Best Roman, etc. Rochel 1611. oct. etc. Tho. Dempster in
his Apparatus ad Historiam Scoticam, has two George Thomsons that were
Writers, viz. George Thomson a Priest, an. 1595, and George Thomson a Heretic,
(as he calls him) an. 1599, which last, I presume is our Author, who was
incorporated at Oxon, and the same whom Joh. Dunbar a Scot does celebrate for
his learning in his book Edit. in oct^^o 1616. cent. 6. (...).
of Epigrams.

George Ruggle M. of A. and Fellow of Clare hall in Cambridge -- One Ruggle of
the said hall was Author of that celebrated Comedy called Ignoramus, acted
before K. Jam. 1. at Camb. 8. Mar. 1614. Whether the same with George, I cannot
yet affirm.

.... Craig a Scot, Doctor of Phys. of the University of Basil -- This is all
that appears of him in the public register. So that whether he be the same
with Dr... Craig the Kings Physician, who died in Apr. 1620 I know not; or
whether he be Joh. Cragg Dr. of Phys. Author of a MS. intit. Capnuraniae seu
Comet. in (...) sub^mationis refutatio, written in qu. to Tycho Brahe a Dane, I
am altogether ignorant. One Dr. Joh. Cragg was buried in the Church of St.
Martins in the Fields near London, about 1653.

Barnab. Gouge, Goch or Gooche Doct. of the Civ. Law of Cambr -- He was about
this time Master of Magd. Coll. in that University, afterward Chanc. of the
Dioc. of Worcester, and died at Exeter. where he had an office or dignity, in
the latter end of 1625. One of both his names translated into English The
p^pish Kingdom, or Reign of Antichrist. Land. 1570. qu. written in Latin verse
by Tho. Naogeorgius, and Four books of husbandry, Land. 1586. qu. written in
Lat. by Conr. Heresbachius, and something of Palengenius. But this translator,
if I mistake not, was Barnab. Gooche of Albin (...) or Alvingham in
Lincolnshire, Grandfather to Barnab. Gooche, living there in 1634 and after.

John Hammond Doct. of Phys. of Cambridge -- He was now Physician to Prince
Henry, and Father to Henr. Hammond, afterward the learned and celebrated
Theologist.

Creations.
Jun. 28. Henry Rowlands Bach. of Div. and Bishop of Bangor was actually
created Doctor of that faculty.

Aug. 13. Hen. Ashworth of Oriel John Cheynell of C. C. Coll.


These two who were eminent and learned Physicians, were then actually created
Doctors of Physic, because they were designed by the Delegates, appointed by
Convocation, to be Opponents in the disputations to be had before the King at
his entertainment by the Muses in the latter end of the said month of Aug.

John Gourden (Gordonius) of Balliol Coll. was created D. of D. the same day,
(Aug. 13.) because he was to dispute before the King his kinsman. -- After his
disputation was ended he had his Degree completed by the Kings Professor of
Divinity, purposely (not that there was a necessity of it) to show unto His
Majesty the form of that Ceremony. This noble Person was born in Scotland of
the house of Huntley, was instructed in his youth in the Schools and Colleges,
as well in Scotland as in France, in liberal Arts and Sciences, and in the
knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew Languages and other Orientals. Afterward he
was Gentleman of three Kings Chambers in France, viz. Charles 9. Hen. 3. and 4,
and while he was in the flower of his age, he was there assailed with many
corruptions, as well spiritual as temporal, and in many dangers of his life,
which God did miraculously deliver him from. At length K. James the first of
England did call him into England, and to the holy Ministry, he being then 58
years of age, and upon the promotion of Dr. John Bridges to the Sea of Oxon in
the latter end of 1603 he made him Dean of Salisbury in Febr. 1604. He has
written (1) Assertiones Theologicae pro vera verae Ecclesiae nota, quae est
solius dei adoratio; contra falsae ecclesiae creaturarum adorationem. Rupell.
1603. oct. (2) England and Scotlands happiness in being reduced to unity of
Religion under K. James. Land. 1604. qu. (3) Orthodoxo-Jacobus and Papa
apostaticus, etc. Land. 1611. qu. (4) Anti-Bellarmino-tortur, sive Tortus
retortus and Juliano papismus, etc. Land. 1612. qu. (5) Of the ceremonies of
the Church of England. Land. 1612. qu. besides Sermons and other things. He
departed this mortal life in (August) 1619, and was, I suppose, buried in the
Cathed. Chapter at Salisbury; whereupon Dr. John Williams succeeded him in the
Deanery of that place about the 10. of Sept. and installed in the middle of
Oct. following. To Sir Rob. Gourden of Sudderland, who married his only
Daughter and Heir named Lucy, he left his MSS. of his own composition, written
in Latin and English, desiring him that the English may be published in
Scotland, and the Latin beyond the Seas, to the end that the great pains that
he had taken about them may not be lost.

These Noble Men, Knights and Esquires following were actually created Masters
of Arts, on the 30. of August, the King being then in Oxford.

The illustrious Prince Esme Stuart Duke of Lenox, near of kin to the King
James 1. of England -- He was Father to Lodowick the first Duke of Richmond of
his name.

Henry de Vere Earl of Oxford. -- He was Son of Edw. de Vere called by some the
Poetical Earl of Oxford, and died at the Siege of Breda in the Netherlands, an.
1625.

Henry Percy the most generous Count of Northumberland, a great encourager of
learning and learned Men, especially Mathematicians; who, as others, have in a
high manner celebrated his worth. -- He died 5. of Nov. 1632, and was buried in
the Church at Petworth in Sussex.

Robert D'Evereux Earl of Essex, now a young Nobleman of Merton Coll. -- See
more in the year 1636.

Will. Herbert Earl of Pembroke, the very picture and Viva effigies of
Nobility, a Person truly generous, a singular lover of learning and the
professors thereof, and therefore by the Academians elected their Chancellor
some years after this. -- His Person was rather Majestic than elegant, and his
presence, whether quiet or in motion, was full of stately gravity. His mind was
purely heroic, often stout, but never disloyal, and so vehement an opponent of
the Spaniard, that when that match fell under confideration in the latter end
of the Reign of K. Jam. 1. he would sometimes rouse to the trepidation (...) in
his (...) of the Reign of K. Chapter 1. under the year 1630.
of that King, yet kept in favor still; for His Majesty knew plain dealing (as
a jewel in all Men so) was in a Privy Counselor an ornamental duty; and the
same true heartedness commended him to K. Chapter 1.

Philip Herbert his younger Brother, now Earl of Montgomery -- He was quite
different in nature from the aforesaid William, being a Person esteemed a very
frequent swearer, and one so intolerably choleric, quarrelsome, and offensive
while he was Lord Chamberlain to K. Chapter 1. that he did not refrain to break
many wiser heads than his own. Mr. Thomas May the translator of Lucan, and
afterward Historian to the Long Parliament, felt the weight of his staff;
which, had not his office, and the place (being the Banqueting House)
protected, it might have been a question, whether ever he would have struck
again. See more of him in Will. Herbert among the writers, under the year 1630.

William Cecill Viscount Cranbourne, Son of Robert Earl of Salisbury. -- He
was, after the death of his Father, Earl of Salisbury and Knight of the Garter,
and lived to 1668.

John Bridges Bishop of Oxon, sometimes of Pembroke hall in Cambridge, and
lately Dean of Salisbury, upon the promotion of Dr. John Piers to the Sea of
Rochester, was then also created -- He was now famous for the several books
that he had published, the titles of some of which you may see in Bodlies or
Oxford Catalogue. He died on the 26. March 1618, and was buried in the Church
of Marsh-Balden, or Balden in the Marsh near to, and in the County of, Oxford,
as I have (...) Antiq Vniv. Oxon. lib. 2. p. 291.
elsewhere told you. He was Doctor of Divinity, and therefore, I presume, the
Registrary of the University, should have put him among such that were
incorporated this year, and not among the Creations of Masters of Arts.

Theophilus Howard Baron of Walden, Son and Heir of Thomas Earl of Suffolk --
He was afterward Earl of Suffolk and Knight of the honorable Order of the
Garter. He died 3. June 1640, and was buried in the Church at Walden
beforementioned.

Charles Howard Baron of Effingham Son of Charles Earl of Nottingham. -- He was
afterward Earl of Nottingham.

Thomas West Lord La War, commonly called Lord de la Ware.

Gray Brugges or Bridges Lord Chandois -- He was commonly called King of
Cotswould, because of his numerous attendants when he went to Court. He died at
the Spaw in Italy 1621.

Will. Compton Lord Compton -- He was afterward the first Earl of Northampton
of his name, and dying 14. Jun. 1630, was buried by his ancestors in the Church
at Compton in the hole in Warwickshire.

Edward Bruce Master of the Rolls, and Baron of Kinloss in Scotland. -- He died
14. Jan. 1610 aged 62 years, and was buried in the Chapel of the Rolls in
Chancery Lane, London. He was Father to Thomas Earl of Elgin in Scotland and
Baron of Whorlton in Yorkshire; as I shall tell you elsewhere.

.... Erskeine a noble Man of Scotland -- Perhaps he was the same with Sir James
Erskeine Knight of the Bath, Son to the Earl of Mar, or with Alex. Erskeine,
who was after his Fathers death Viscount Fenton in Scotland, and died in the
beginning of the year, 1633.

Sir Hen. Nevill Knight -- He was afterward Leiger Ambassador at Paris, being
the same, I think, of Billingbere in Berks, who died about the later end of
June 1629.

Sir Tho. Chaloner Knight, sometimes a Commoner of Magd. Coll. now Tutor to
Prince Henry.

William Herbert John Egerton (afterward Earl of Bridgwater) Valentine
Knightley John Ramsey a Scot Knights.

Sir Roger Aston Knight. -- He was the natural Son of John Aston Gentleman,
second Son of Rich. Aston of Aston in Cheshire, had all his breeding in
Scotland, which made some to take him to be a Scot born, was originally the
Barber to K. James 1. while he was King of the Scots, as a libellous Sir Anth.
(...) in his Court and (...) printed 1650. p. ^.
Author tells you, though from record it appears, that he was Groom of the
Bedchamber, to him, and belonged to it in the time of that Kings Father and
Grandfather. He was a plain honest Man, and therefore beloved by that King, who
often entrusted him as a Messenger to carry letters from him to Qu. Elizabeth.
At length being made Master of the Great Wardrobe to K. Jam. 1. while King of
England, departed this mortal life 23. May 1612. and was buried 28. of the said
month in the Church at Cranford in Middlesex.

Sir Patrick Murray a Scot -- The same, I think, who was of Elibanke in
Scotland, and afterward Knight and Baronet of that Kingdom.

Sir Thomas Mounson Knight and Baronet. -- He was of the ancient Family of
those of his name in Lincolnshire, had been Commoner of Magd. Coll. and was
about this time Master of the Armory, and Master Faulconer to His Majesty, and
in truth such an one, as no Prince in Christendom had the like. Afterward he
was twice brought to his trial, upon deep suspicion of having an hand in the
poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, but at length, with much ado, came off clear.
He was a Person of excellent breeding, was a great lover of ingenuity,
especially of Music (having himself good skill in it) and a Patron to the
Professors thereof.

Thom. Cornwallis Franc. Castilion Gilb. Kniveton Rolls Kniveton George
Chaworth Edw. Grevill Davi'd Foulis Knights.

The last of which, who was a Scot, was afterward made a Baronet, and is
ancestor to those of his name living at Inglebie in Yorkshire.

Will. Fleetwood Will. Bowyer Hen. Capell Geor. More Knights.

The first of these last four, was knighted in 1603, and therefore not to be
taken for Will. Fleetwood Recorder of London, who had been dead some years
before. The last, George More, I have already mentioned at large among the
Writers.

John Digby Esquire; sometimes a Commoner of Magd. Coll. afterward Earl of Bristow
-- I shall mention him at large among the Writers in the second vol. of this
work.

Levine Monk Gabr. Dowse Will. Lilsley Edm. Dowse Anth. Abington Will. More
Geor. Calvert Esquires.

While the said Nobles, Knights and Esquires were created, Roger Earl of
Rutland, Edward Earl of Somerset and Henry Howard E. of Northampton, who had
formerly been created and incorporated Masters of Arts, did sit among the
venerable Masters in Convocation and gave their suffrages.

This year in the month of Aug. Henry Prince of Wales, the Peoples darling and
the delight of mankind, eldest Son of K. James 1. was matriculated a member of
this University, as a member of Magd. Coll. at which time John Wilkinson Bach.
of Div. and Fellow of the said Coll. had the honor to be nominated his Tutor:
I mean that Wilkinson, who most ungratefully sided with the Rebels, that took
up arms against the younger Brother of the said Prince, K. Charles 1. of ever
blessed memory.

An. Dom. 1606.
An. 4. Jac. 1.
Chanc. the same, viz. Thomas Earl of Dorset.

Vicechanc. Henry Airay D. D. Provost of Queens Coll. Jul. 17.

Proct. Simon Baskervyle of Exet. Coll. James Mabbe of Magd. Coll. Apr. ult.


Bach. of Arts.
May 20. Thom. Sutton of Queens Coll. Rich. Nicholls of Magd. Hall.

Jun. 3. Thom. Willis of St. John's Coll.

30. Mich. Wigmore of Magd. hall, afterward Fellow of Oriel Coll.

Oct. 31. Leonard Digges of Vniv. Coll.

Nov. 24. Will. Dickinson of Mert. Coll. -- See among the Bach. of Div. in 1619.

Jan. 24. Will. Spark Tho. Godwin of Magd. Coll.


Feb. 10. Charles Somerset of Magd. Coll. was then admitted Bac. of Arts in
Convocation -- He was Son to Edward Earl of Worcester, and was afterward made
Knight of the Bath at the creation of Henry Prince of Wales.

13. Will. Jewel of Exeter Coll. -- See among the Masters, an. 1609.

Tho. Willis and Tho. Godwin are to be mentioned in the second vol. Adm. 188.

Bach. of Law.
June 27. John Hoskins junior of New Coll. -- He was afterward a Divine and an
eminent Preacher.

Besides him were but four more admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 10. Thom. Bastard of New Coll.

Jul. 2. Edm. Gunter of Chapter Chapter

3. Will. Heal of Exet. Coll.

5. Joh. Ferebe or Ferriby of Magd. hall. -- One of both his names, who was
Minister of Thoydon-Gernon in Essex, wrote and published a book intit. A
discourse showing that they only ought to preach who are ordained Ministers,
etc. Land. 1652. qu. But Ferriby of Magd. hall who was a Glocestershire Man
born, I take not to be the same with the Writer, as being much before him in
time, but rather to be the same John Ferriby who was beneficed in
Glocestershire, and at Poole in North Wiltshire; where dying 2. May 1662, was
buried in the Chancel of the Church there. Over whose grave was soon after a
stone laid, with an inscription thereon, wherein he is styled Theologus tam
studio. quam exercitio insignis.

March 13. Edw. Evans of Chapter Chapter Adm. 102.

Bach. of Div.
Nov. 19. Rich. Meredith of New Coll. -- This Person who was born in the City
of Bathe, was admitted perpetual Fellow of New Coll. in 15^8, left it about six
years after, and through certain preferments succeeded at length Dr. Benj.
Heydon in the Deanery of Wells, an 1607. He has published a Sermon on Micah 6.
4, 5, 6. -- printed 1606. qu. and perhaps other things, which I have not yet
seen. He died 15. Aug. 1621, and was buried on the 17 of the same month on the
South side of the choire of the Cath. Chapter at Wells. He was succeeded in that
Deanery by Dr. Ralph Barlow, as I shall elsewhere tell you.

Dec. 15. Edw. Chetwynd of Exeter Coll.

Adm. 10.

Not one Doctor of Law or Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 17. Rich. Crakanthorpe of Queens Oct. 30. Will. Fisher of Oriel Coll.

March 16. Gerrard Williamson of Chapter Chapter

Incorporations.
Apr. 8. Theodore de Mayerne, or Mayernius Turquettus, or Theodore Turquettus
de Mayerne, born of Protestant Parents at Geneva, (who hardly escaped the
Parisian Massacre) Doctor of Physic of the University of M^ntpellier, lately
of the Council to the K. of France, as to matters of Physic, now Physician to
the Queen of England, was incorporated with more than ordinary solemnity Doctor
of the said faculty. -- He was Baron of Aubon or A^bon in France, (being Son of
Lewis de Mayerne a French Writer) was afterward chief Physician to K. Jam. 1.
by whom he was sent in the beginning of the Year 1618 into France, about
matters of concern, but being suspected to come there purposely to disturb
affairs, was commanded Camden in Anna. R. Jac. 1. MS. sub an. 1618.
by the Councillours belonging to the King of that Country, to depart the
Kingdom forthwith. In 1624 Jul. 14. he received the honor of knighthood at
Theobalds, and was afterward Physician to K. Chapter 1. and his royal Consort
Henrietta Maria. He has written in French (1) Medicinal counsels and advices.
(2) A Treatise of the Gout. Both put into Latin and published by Theoph. Bonet
Doct. of Physic. See more in Dr. Thom. Sh^rley in my discourse of Anth.
Sherley among the Writers, under the year 1630. and in Dr. Tho. Moufet, an.
1590. (3) Excellent and well approved receipts and experiments in Cookery, with
the best way of preserving, etc. printed 1658. in tw. (4) Prax^os in morbis
internis praecipue gravioribus and chronicis Syntagma, etc. Land. 1690. oct.
with his picture before it, aged 82, published by his Godson Theod. de Vaux.
From the experiences also of the said Sir Theod. Mayerne, and from those of Dr.
Chamberlain and others, was written a book entit. The complete Midwife's
practice, etc. printed several times in oct. Before he came into England he
wrote Apologia, etc. Rupel. 1603. oct. and perhaps other things. He paid his
last debt to nature in the beginning of the year (about 26. March) 1655, and
was buried 30. of the same month in the Chancel of the Church of St. Martin in
the Fields near to London, by the bodies of his mother, first Wife, and five of
his Children; at which time, Thom. Hodges a Presbyterian Divine and Minister of
Kensington in Middlesex. preached his funeral Sermon; in the conclusion of
which, he spoke much in prais^ of Sir Theodore, who left behind him a Widow
named Isabella, and a rich Daughter called Adriana de Mayerne Baroness of
Aubon, afterward married to a French Marquess of Mountpellion. Over his grave
was soon after a fair Monument put, with a flourishing, and high flown Epitaph
thereon, which for brevity sake I shall now pass by, and only tell you, that
Quercitan and several famous Men of France and Germany did make honorable
mention of him near 60 years before his death.

Jul. 10. Sam. Walsall Bach. of Div. of Cambridge -- He was afterward Doct. of
that faculty and Master of C. C. C. commonly called Bennet Coll. in that
University on the death of Tho. Jegon. He has published The life and death of
Jesus Christ, Sermon. before the King at Royston in Esaias 53. 4. Land. 1615. in
oct. and other things as it is probable, but such I have not yet seen. He died
in the Summer time, an. 1626, and was buried in the Chap. of that Coll.

12. Thom. Morton D. D. of the same University -- He was of St. John's Coll. and
through various promotions became at length the most learned and religious
Bishop of Durham. His life is at large written by John Barwick D. D. printed at
London 1660. qu. to which I refer the reader.

14. Tho. Sheafe D. D. of Cambridge -- He was Son of Tho Sheafe of Cranbroke in
Kent, was bred Fellow of Kings Coll. in that University, where he had the
repute of a good Scholar, was installed Canon of Windsore 29 March 1614, being
about that time Rector of Welford in Berksh^re, and beneficed at another place
in that County. When he was about 80 years of age, he wrote Vindiciae
senectutis, or, a plea for old age, etc. Land. 1639. oct. Which being
published, the Author soon after died, viz. 12. Dec. 1639. Whereupon his body
was buried in St. Georges Chap. at Windsore. He left behind him a Son named
Grindall Sheafe, sometimes Fellow of Kings Coll. beforementioned, afterward D.
of D. Vicar of Col^shall and Horstead in Norfolk, Archdeacon, Canon and
Prebendary of Wells, and had other preferments in the Church. From which,
raking and scraping a great deal of wealth together, (for he troubled himself
not with learning or the encouragement thereof) it had redounded much to his
honor and name to have left it to the Church, which he did not, but to
Lay People and Servants, who cared not for him, only for pelf-sake. He died 28.
Apr. 1680, and was buried in the Cathedral Church at Wells: Whereupon his
Archdeaconry was bestowed by the Bishop on Charles Thirlby Vicar of St.
Cuthberts Church in Wells, his Canonry on Henry Dutton Bachelaur of Divinity,
sometimes of Corp Chr. Coll. in Oxon. and his Prebendary, commonly called the
Golden Prebendary on Edward Waple Bachelaur of Divinity of St. John's Coll. in
the said University.

Thomas Erpenius born at Gorcome in Holland studied in this University in the
condition of a Sojournor about this time, but how long his stay was here, I
cannot tell. He was admirably well skilled in the Oriental tongues, the Hebrew,
Chaldee, Arabic, Syriack, Aethiopick, Persian and Turkish. He is celebrated
throughout the whole Christian World, as the restorer of the Arabic tongue,
and died at Leyden in the flower of his Age, an. 1624.

An. Dom. 1607.
An. 5 Jac. 1.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Joh. King D. D. Dean of Chapter Chapter Jul. 17.

Proct. Nath. Brent of Mert. Coll. Joh. Tolson of Oriel Coll. Apr. 15.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 11. Thom. Tomkins of Magd. Coll. -- This eminent and learned Musician was
Son of Thom. Tomkins Chauntor of the Choir at Gloucester, descended from those
of his name of Listwithyel in Cornwall, educated under the famous Musician Will.
Bird, and afterward for his merits was made Gentleman of his Majesty's Chapel
Royal, and at length Organist, as also Organist of the Cath. Church at
Worcester. He has composed (1) Songs of three, four, five, and six parts,
printed at London in qu. but not said when. (2) Musica deo sacra and ecclesiae
Anglicanae; or, Music dedicated to the honor and service of God, and to the
use of Cathedrals, and other Churches of England, especially of the Chapel
Royal of K. Chapter 1. in ten books, etc. when first printed I cannot tell. (3)
Divine Services and Anthems, the words of which are published by James Clifford
in his Book entit. Divine Services and Anthems usually sung in the Cathedrals
etc. Land. 1663 Oct. (4) A set of vocal Church Music of four and five parts.
MS. given to Magd. Coll. Library in Oxon, by Jam. Clifford before mentioned,
where they yet remain in the Archives thereof; and also has Compositions in
the triumphs of Oriana, published by Tho. Morley 1601. qu. He was living after
the grand Rebellion broke out, but when he died I cannot justly tell you. He
had a Son named Nath. Tomkins Bach. of Div. of Oxon, who was Prebendary of
Worcester from the Month of May 1629 to the 21 of Oct. (on which day he died)
an. 1681, as also several Brethren, among whom were (1) Giles Tomkins a most
excellent Organist, and Organist of the Cath. Chapter at Salisbury, who died about
1662. (2) Joh. Tomkins Bach. of Music, who was one of the Organists of S.
Paul's Cathedral, and afterward Gentleman of the Chapel Royal, being then in
high esteem for his admirable knowledge in the theoretical and practical part
of his Faculty. At length being translated to the celestial choir of Angels on
the 27 Sept. an. 1626, aged 52, was buried in the said Cathedral. (3) Nich.
Tomkins one of the Gentlemen of the privy Chamber to his Majesty Charles 1. who
was also well skilled in the practical part of Music, and others, but their
order according to seniority I cannot tell.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 21. Hugh Robinson of New Coll.

23. Tho. Prior of Broadgates Hall. -- See among the Mast. of Arts 1611.

Joh. Seller of Oriel Coll. was admitted the same day. -- See more of him among
the Masters 1610.

Jul. 8. Edw. Chaloner of Magd Coll.

Oct. 17. Joh. Reading of Magd. Hall.

20. Arth. Hopton of Linc. Joh. Wild of Balliol. Coll.


Of the last of these two see more among the M. of A. an. 1610.

Dec. 9. Edw. Seimour of Magd. Coll. Son of Edward Lord Beauchamp. Son of Edw.
Earl of Hertford.

Will. Seimour of the same College, younger Brother to the said Edward, was
admitted the same day. -- This William Seimour was afterward Earl and Marquess
of Hertford, Chancellor of this University, and at length Duke of Somerset. He
died 24 Oct. 1660.

Feb. 1. Roger Manwaring of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of S. David.

5. Tho. Hobbes of Magd Hall. -- He was afterward the famous Philosopher and
Mathematician of Malmsbury.

25. Giles Widows of Oriel Coll.

As for Robinson, Reading, Manwaring, Hobbes and Widows, there will be a
large mention made of them in the other Volume of this Work.

Adm. 154.

Bach. of Law.
Apr. 21. Joh. Reinolds of New Dec. 16. Arth. Duck of Alls. Coll.

Besides these two, was but one more admitted this year.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 12. Sim. Birckbek of Queens Coll.

18. Nathan Pownoll of Chapter Chapter Rich. Tillesley of S. Joh. Coll.

Jul. 8. Tho. Baylie of Magd. Oct. 20. Rob. Sanderson of Linc. Dec. 14. Rich.
Capell of Magd. Coll.

Adm. 101.

Bach. of Physic.
June 1. Rich. Andrews of S. Joh. Coll.

28. Edm. Dean of S. Alb. Hall.

Besides these two, was but one more (Will. Barker of S. Mary's Hall) admitted.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 23. Rich. Moket of Alls. Joh. Denison of Ball. Coll.


Jul. 9. Mich. Boil of S. Joh. Joh. Bancroft of Chapter Chapter Coll.


Which two last were afterward Bishops.

18. Will. Gilbert of Magd. Coll. -- Whether he be the same Will. Gilbert who
was afterward D. of D. and Minister of Orset in Essex (where he died about
1640.) I know not.

Adm. 8.

Doct. of Law.
Jan. 14. Thomas Gwynne of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward, or about this
time, Chauntor of the Church of Salisbury (as the cat. of the Fellows of that
Coll. tells us, but falsely) and Chancellor of Landaff. He was a Benefactor to
Jesus Coll. in Oxon, as you may see In (...) and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib* 1. p.
317. b.
elsewhere, and lived, if I mistake not, till the Reign of Oliver Protector.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul. 4. Will. Barker of S. Mary's Hall. -- He was a learned Physician, but
whether he has published any thing, I know not.

Doct. of Div.
July 8. Will. Wilson of Mert. Coll. -- In 1584 he became Canon of Windsore in
the place of Dr. Will. Wickham promoted to the Sea of Lincoln, being about that
time Chaplain to Edmund Archb. of Canterbury. Afterward he became Prebendary
of Rochester and Rector of Clyve or Cliffe in Kent. He died 14 May 1615, aged
73, and was buried in the Chapel of S. George at Windsore, near to the Body of
his Father, and not in the Cath. Chapter at Rochester near to the Bodies of his
sometimes Wives, Isabel and Anne.

Charles Sonibanke of Chapter Chapter -- This person who was a Salopian born, and
originally of S. Mary's Hall, was now Canon of Windsore, Rector of Hasely in
the County of Oxon, and possessor of the Donative of Wrotham in Kent. I have
seen a Sermon of his intit. The Evenuchs conversion, preached at Paul's Cross on
Acts 8. 26, 27, 28, etc. Land. 1617, qu. And what else he has published I know
not. Quaere. He died on the 12 Oct. 1638, and was buried in the Chancel of the
Church at Haseley before mentioned.

Jul. 8. Rich. Pilkington of Queens Coll.

Francis Bradshaw of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was born of a
gentile Family in Bucks, was a Dignitary in the Church, and has written
certain matters of Divinity, as some Ancients of his Coll. have told me, yet
all that I have seen which he has published, is only a Sermon intit. The
Worlds wisdom, or, the Politicians religion, on Psalm. 14. 1. Oxon. 1598, oct.

July. 8. Matthew Davies of New Coll. -- He was Brother to Sir Joh. Davies, whom
I have mentioned among the Writers under the year 1626.

George Benson of Queens Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was about this
time Canon residentiary of Hereford, and Parson of Rock in Worcestershire,
Author of A Sermon at Paul's Cross. on Hosea 7. from ver. 7. to 12. Land. 1609.
qu. and perhaps of other things, but such I have not yet seen. He was born of a
gentile Family in Westmorland, was Fellow of Qu. Coll. Proctor of the
University, and died (at Rock I think) about 1647.

Jan. 14. Geor. Darrel of Alls. Coll. -- This Person who was Brother to Sir
Marmaduke Darrel Cofferer of his Majesty's Household, was installed Canon of the
sixth Stall in the Collegiate Church of Westminster, on the 8 of June this
year, in the place of Dr. Griff. Lewys deceased; and dying on the last of Oct.
1631, Pet. Heylyn Bach. of Div. was nominated to succeed him the next day, and
accordingly was installed on the 9 of Nov.

Incorporations.
May 16. Thom. Bell M. of A. of Cambr. -- One of both his names had been a Romans
Catholic, afterward a Protestant, and a Writer and Publisher of several Books
against the Papists from 1593 to 1610, and after, as the Oxford Catalogue will
partly tell you. Quaere whether the same.

July 14. Patrick Kinnimond M. A. of the University of S. Andrew in Scotland.
-- He was afterward benificed in Dorsetshire.

Anth. Cade M. A. of Cambr. was incorporated the same day. -- He has published
A justification of the Church of England Land. 1630. qu. and certain Sermons,
as the Oxford Catalogue will tell you.

Rob. Abbot M. A. of the same University, was incororated the same day. -- He
was afterward Vicar of Cranbrook in Kent, a sider with the Presbyterians in
the Rebellion which began in 1642, was Minister of Southwick in Hampshire, and
at length of S. Austin's Church in Watling street near S. Paul's Cath. in
London; where, after he had been tumbled and tossed to and fro, enjoyed himself
quietly for some years in his old Age. He has written and published several
things, among which are (1) Four Sermons, etc. Land. 1639, oct. dedicated to
Walter Curle Bishop of Winchester, (to whom he had been Servant) who then
exhibited to his two Sons, one at Oxon, and another at Cambr. (2) Trial of our
Church for sakers, etc. on Heb. 10. 23. Land. 1639, oct. (3) Milk for Babes, or
a Mothers Catechism for her Children. Land. 1646. oct. (4) Th^ee Sermons,
printed with the former book. (5) A Christian Family builded God, or directions
for Governors of Families, Land. 1653. oct. At which time the Author was two
years above the great climecterical year. Other things he has also published
(among which is, Be thankful London and her Sisters, Sermon on Psalm. 31. 21.
Land. 1626. qu.) which for brevity sake I shall now omit.

Creations.
Jul. 14. The most noble John Kennedi a Knight of the illustrious Family of the
Earls of Cashills in Ireland, was then actually created Master of Arts.

An. Dom. 1608.
An. 6 Jac. 2.
Chanc. the same. viz. Thomas Earl of Dorset; but he dying the 19 Apr. Dr.
Rich. Bancroft Archb. of Canterbury succeeded in the Chancellourship on the 22
of the same month. -- He was born at Farnworth in Lancashire in Sept. 1544, Son
of Joh. Bancroft Gent. by Mary his Wife, Daughter of Joh. Curwyn, Brother to
Dr. Hugh Curwyn Archb. of Dublin; and after he had been severely trained up in
Grammatical Learning, he was first placed in Christ's, and soon after removed to
Jesus, Coll. in Cambridge. Afterward by the endeavors of his said Uncle Dr.
Curwyn, he became, when young, Prebendary of the Cath. Chapter at Dublin; but the
Uncle removing, and dying soon after, he was made Chaplain to Dr. Cox Bishop of
Ely, who gave him the Rectory of Teversham in the Country of Cambridge. Being
thus put into the road of preferment, he was admitted Bach. of Div. 1580, and
five years after Doctor. About which time he put himself into the Service of
Sir Christoph. Hatton Lord Chancellor of England, by whose recommendations he
was made Prebendary of Westminster, in the place of Mr. Joh. Wickham, an. 1592,
from whence he had the easier passage to S. Paul's in London, of which Cathedral
he was Treasurer.

Vicechanc. Dr. King again, Jul. 17.

Proct. Edw. Vnderhyll of Magd. Coll. Joh. Hamden of Chapter Chapter Apr. 6.


Bach. of Music.
Dec. 13. Will. Stonard Organist of Chapter Chapter in Oxon. -- He has composed
certain Divine Services and Anthems, the words of one, or more, of which are
published in the Collection of Divine Services and Anthems put out by Jam.
Clifford an. 1663. We have also some of his Compositions in our public Music
School at Oxon, sent by Walter Porter to his Kinsman Joh. Wilson Doct. of
Music, and the public Professor of the praxis of that Faculty in Oxon, to be
reposed and kept for ever in the Archives of the said School. In the Organists
place of Chapter Chapter succeeded Edward Low of Salisbury about 1630, who was
afterward public Professor of the musical praxis in this University, and
Author of Short directions for the performance of Cathedral Service, printed at
Oxon in oct. an. 1661. The second Edition of which came out at the same place
in 1664, with a review, and many useful Additions relating to the Common
Prayer, by the same hand. This Mr. Low, who was judicious in his profession,
but not graduated therein, died on the 11 of July 1682. whereupon his Body was
buried at the upper end of the Divinity Chapel, joining on the north side of
the Cathedral of Chapter Chapter near to the Body of Alice his sometimes Wife, Daughter
of Sir Joh. Peyton the younger of Dodington in the Isle of Ely, Knight.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 13. Joh. Harrys of New Coll.

16. Charles Croke of Chapter Chapter -- See among the Doct. of Div. an. 1625.

20. Will. Lewis of Heart Hall, afterward Fellow of Oriel Coll. -- See among
the Creations 1627.

31. Rich. Gove of Magd. Hall.

June 2. Gilb. Ironside of T^in. Coll. -- He was afterward Bish. of Bristow.

James Martin of Broadgates was admitted the same day. -- See among the Masters
1611.

6. Joh. Wall of Chapter Chapter

Jul. 7. Edward Bagshaw of Brasn. Coll.

9. Joh. Barlow of Heart Hall.

Oct. 14. Isaac Colf of Chapter Chapter

Nov. 19. Gilb St^akes of Heart Hall. -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1646.

Jan. 25. Sam. Smith Will. Greenhill Accepted Frewen of Magd. Coll.


The last of which three was afterward Archb. of York.

Feb. 16. Hen. Lord Clifford Baron of Skypton, eldest Son of the Earl of
Cumberland, was then admitted Bach. of Arts, as a Member of Chapter Chapter -- After
this man's time, studied in the same house Hen^y Clifford, Son of Francis Earl
of Cumberland; who, by the various Copies of Verses that he wrote (but whether
published I know not, obtained the character of the best of Poets among the
Nobility. He was afterward Earl of Cumberland; and dying on the 11 of December.
1643, was buried by his Ancestors in a Vault under the Church of Sk^pton in
Craven in Yorkshire.

Feb. 16. Nich. Guy of Heart Hall. -- See among the Masters, an. 1611.

1^. Rich. Eedes of Brasn. Coll. -- One of both his names, who was a
Warwickshire man born, and afterward the Presbyterian Curat of the rich Church
at Cleve in Glocestershire, has written Christ exalted and Wisdom justified;
or, the Saints esteem of Jesus Christ, as most precious, handled, etc. Land.
1659. oct. besides one or more Sermons, which he before had published. Whether
the same with him of Brasnose, Quaere.

17. Joh. Ball of S. Mary's Hall, lately of Brasn. Coll.

20. Thom. Howell of Jesus Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Bristow.

23. Will. Slatyer of Brasn. Coll.

As for Harrys, Gove, Ironside, Wall, Bagshaw, Greenhil, Frewen, Howell and
Slayer before mentioned, will be large mention made of them in the second
Volume of this Work, or elsewhere.

Adm. 213, or thereabouts.

Mast. of Arts,
May 1^. Henr. Whistler of Trin. Coll.

May 30. Sam. Fell Joh. Ley of Chapter Chapter
Henr. Rogers of Jes. June 2. Walt. Raleigh of Magd. Coll.


6. Sampson Price of Heart Hall, afterward of Exeter Coll.

July 7. Gabriel Richardson of Brasn. Mar. 18. Hen. Jackson of C. C. Coll.

Admitted 98, or thereabouts.

Bach. of Div.
June 1. Lionell Day, Fellow of Balliol, sometimes of Oriel, Coll. was then
admitted. -- He was younger Brother to John Day mentioned among the Writers,
under the year 1627, was Rector of Whichford near to Brailes in Warwickshire,
and Author of Concio ad Clerum, habita Oxonii, die Martis post Comitia, an.
dom. 1609. in Luc. 22. 31. Oxon. 1632. qu. besides other things, as it is said,
but such I have not yet seen. He died in 1640, and was buried in the Chancel of
the Church of Whichford before mentioned.

June 30. Joh. Davies of Lincoln, sometimes a Student in Jesus, College.

Jul. 7. Thom. Peacock of Brasn. Coll. -- He was a Cheshire man born, and Tutor
to the famous Rob. Bolton; the Author of whose Life does much celebrate the
said Peacock for his learning, and great sanctity of life and conversation. He
was buried in S. Mary's Church in Oxon, 7 Dec. 1611.

13. Joh. Sandsbury of S. John's Coll.

Besides these four, were 24 more admitted, among whom Nich. Simpson of C. C.
Coll. was one, and Rich. Colfe of Chapter Chapter another; both Accumulators.

Doct. of Law.
Apr. 16. James Cook of New Coll. -- He was the only Doctor admitted this year.

Doct. of Phys.
June 1. Rich. Andrews of S. Joh. Coll. -- He had improved himself much in his
Faculty in his Travels beyond the Seas, which afterward made him highly
esteemed among learned men and others.

Will. Turner of Ball. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was a Londoner
born, and was Master of Arts of Cambridge, in which degree being incorporated
with us, an. 1602, entered himself into Balliol Coll. (having before spent some
years in foreign Academies in the study of Phys.) and as a Member of that Coll.
he was admitted to practice his Faculty, 13 July 1604. After he had been
admitted Doctor, he retired to London, became one of the Coll. of Physicians,
and eminent for his practice. One Will. Turner Doct. of Phys. wrote a Pamphlet
entit. Ad nobilem Britannum, or an abstract of Englands Royal Peers. When
written I cannot tell; sure I am, 'twas printed at London in 1641. qu. Whether
this Will. Turner be the same with the former of Ball. Coll. I cannot justly
say, nor whether he was one of the Sons of Dr. Pet. Turner mentioned among the
Incorporations, an. 1599. yet that he was descended from William, Father of the
said Dr. Peter Turner, it is not to be doubted.

Doct. of Div.
May 12. Sebast. Benefield of C. C. June 1. Joh. Lea of S. John's Coll.

The last of these two, who was of the gentile Family of the Leas or Lees of
Quarendon in Bucks, and of Dichley in Oxfordshire, was Chaplain to the most
noble Knight Sir Hen. Lea, was beneficed in the said Counties, and dying about
1609, was buried in S. John's Coll. Chapel; to the adorning of which, he was an
especial Benefactor. He gave also many Books to that Coll. Library.

Rich. Thornton Canon of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day. -- In the beginning
of Sept. an. 1611, he became Prebendary of Worcester in the place of Gervace
Carrington deceased; and dying 1 Jan. 1614, was buried in the Cath. of Chapter Chapter
in Oxon.

Jun. 6. Will. Laud Joh. Rawlinson of S. Joh. Rob. Wakeman of Ball. Coll.




25. Edw. Wickham of Ball. Coll. now Prebendary of Winchester, and Archdeacon
of Dorset. -- This person who was of the Family of the Wickhams of Swacliff
near Banbury in Oxfordshire, died in 1620 or thereabous, and was, if I mistake
not, buried in the Chancel of the Church of Storington in Sussex, near to the
Bodies of his Father and Mother. In his Archdeaconry succeeded, as I suppose,
Rich. Fitzherbert.

Thom. Higgons of Ball. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was Father to
Sir Tho. Higgons of Grewell in Hampshire.

30. Nich. Simpson of C. C. Coll. who accumulated. -- He was now Prebendary of
Canterbury, where dying in 1609, left behind him a Son named John, who was
afterward D. of D. and Preb. of the same Church, and dying 1630, aged 51, left
behind him a Son named Nicholas, who also was Prebendary there. This last, who
was of C. C. Coll. in Oxon, died 22 Aug. 1680. aged 56, and was buried in, or
near the graves of his Father and Grandfather in the Cathedral Church of
Canterbury. Over their Sepulchers was a stone soon after put, with an
Inscription thereon, which for brevity sake I now pass by.

Rich. Colfe of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day. -- He was now Prebendary of
Canterbury, and dying 7 Oct. 1613, aged 63, being then Subdean of that Church,
was buried therein 3 days after, at which time Thomas Wilson, a Member thereof,
preached his Funeral Sermon, entit. Christ's farewell to Jerusalem, on Luke 23.
27, 28, 29, etc. To which a Testimony is added concerning the said Rich. Colfe,
of his great piety and learning.

June 30. Joh. Brown of Vniv. Christop. Sutton of Linc. Tho. Alleyn of C. C.
Coll.


July 7. Tho. More 12. Will. Leonard of Exet. Coll.

Mar. 11. Gerard Massy of Brasn. Coll. -- He was afterward nominated Bishop
of Chester, but died before consecration.

14. David Ellis of Jesus Coll.

These two last accumulated the degrees in Divinity.

Incorporations.
May 30. Rich. Butler Bach. of Div. of Cambr. -- He was formerly of S. Joh.
Coll. in Oxon, and now Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, which is all I yet
know of him.

Jun. 14. Christop. Musgrave Bach. of Arts of Cambr. -- One of both his names
was about this time a Carthusian at Liege in Germany, and afterward wrote
Motives and reasons for his secession and dissevering from the Church of Rome.
Land. 1621. qu. But this last I cannot affirm to be the same with him who was
Bach. of Arts, because he says, that before he seceeded from the Church of
Rome he had been a Carthusian Monk for the space of twenty years.

David Owen M. of A. of Clare Hall in the same University, was incorporated the
same day. -- He was afterward Bach. of Div. and Chaplain to John Ramsey Lord
Viscount Hadington, afterward D. of D. and Chaplain to the said person when he
was Earl of Holderness. He has written and published (1) The concord of a
Papist and Puritan for the coercion, deposition, and killing of Kings. Cambr.
1610. qu. (2) Anti-Paraeus, sive determinatio de jure regio, habita
Cantabrigiae in scholis Theologicis, 19 Apr. 1619 contra Davidem Paraeum
caeterosque reformatae religionis Antimonarchos. Cantab. 1632. oct. What other
things he has published I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he
was born in the Isle of Anglesey.

July 8. Will. Eire (Eierus) Doct. of Phys of Leyden.

Will. Cavendish M. of A. of Cambr. Son and Heir of Will. Lord Cavendish, was
incorporated the same day, in the house of Convocation. -- He was afterward
the second Earl of Devonshire of his name.

12. Walt. Curle M. A. of Cambr. was incorporated again. -- See among the
Incorporations an. 1601, and in 1636.

Eliazer Hodson M. A. of the same University, was incorporated the same day. --
See among the Incorporations 1615.

Joh. Williams M. A. of Cambr. was also then incorporated. -- This noted
person, who was the Son of Edmund Williams of Conway, commonly called
Aberconway, in Caernarvanshire (by his Wife Mary Daughter of Owen Wynn of
Eglarsnache) the sixth Son of William Williams of Cogh-Williams, was educated
in S. Joh. Coll. in the said University, of which he was Fellow. Afterward he
became Chaplain to Thomas Lord Egerton Lord Chanc. of England, and in 1611-12,
one of the Proctors of the University of Cambridge, in which Office he gave so
noble and generous Entertainment as well in scholastical Exercises as in
edibles and potables, to the Spanish Ambassadors, conducted thither by his
Patron the Lord Chancellor, that when they took their leaves of him, the
Chancellor, with the approbation of the Ambassador, told him that he had
behaved himself so well in his Entertainment, that he was fit to se^ve a King
and that he would be glad to see him as welcome at the Court, as they were in
the University. About that time he had several Benefices conferred upon him, of
which the Rectory of Waldgrave in Northamptonshire was one, Dinam and Grafton
two more, a Residentiaryship in the Church of Lincoln, one or more Prebendships
therein, and the Office of Chauntor; besides a Prebendship in the Church of
Peterborough, and a Donative in Wales. Afterward he was made sacerdotal Rector
of the Savoy, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, and on Sept. 10, an. 1619.
Dean of Salisbury in the place of Dr. Joh. Gourdon deceased: Whereupon giving
up the Savoy, upon his Majesty's desire, it was by him conferred on Camb. in
Annal. R. Jac. 1. MS. sub. an. 1619.
M. Ant. de Dominis Archbishop of Spalato; and at the same time 'twas ordered
that an yearly pension should be by him (Williams) paid to the famous Pet. du
Moulin a French Protestant, who a little before had fled into England upon
account of Religion. About that time, he, by the favor of George Duke of
Buckingham, was made a privy Counselor to his Majesty, and upon the promotion
of Doct. Rob. Tounson to the Sea of Salisbury, had the Deanery of Westminster
conferred upon him, in which he was installed 10 July 1620: Afterward the
Deanery of Salisbury was conferred upon Dr. Joh. Bowls of Cambridge, as I shall
elsewhere tell you. In the month of July 1621, he was nominated Bishop of
Lincoln on the Translation of Dr. George Mountaigne to the Sea of London, and
about the same time was made L. Keeper of the great Seal by Buckingham's
Endeavors. On the 9 Oct. following he proceeded to Westminster Hall, as L.
Keeper, but without (...)
pomp and on the 11 of Nov. was consecrated Bishop of Lincoln in the collegiate
Church of S. Peter at Westminster, by the Bishops of London, Worcester, Ely,
Oxford, and Landaff; and about that time his Majesty gave him leave to keep
Westminster in commendam. It was then observed by many, that as Sir Nich. Bacon
had before received the Great Seal from a Clergyman, (Nich. Heath Archb. of
York) so a Bishop again received them from his Son Sir Francis, at which the
Lawyers did fret, to have such a Flower pulled out of their garden. But as for
the further addition to the story, that Williams was brought in by Buckingham
to serve such turns as none of the Laity could be found bad enough to
undertake, as a libellous (...)
Author reports, we must leave it to knowing men to be Judges of it. After K.
Chapter 1. came to the Crown, he was continued a privy Counselor for a time, but
Buckingham being then in great favor with that Prince, caused the Seal to be
taken from him in Oct. 1625, as having neglected, and been very ungrateful to,
him; and in the beginning of Feb. following, when that King was crowned, he was
set aside from administering Service at that Ceremony, as Dean of Westminster,
and Dr. Laud Bishop of S. David's, and Preb. of Westminster. (who before had received
several schoolings and affronts from Williams while L. Keeper) officiated in
his place. Further also, lest he should seek revenge against Buckingham for
what he had done unto him, he, with the Earls of Some^set, Middlesex, and
Bristow, (all of an inclination, tho not all of a plume) were interdicted the
Parliament House. Hereupon Williams grew highly discontented, sided with the
Puritan, and finding the King to decline in the affection of his People, he
fomented (...)
popular discourses tending to his Majesty's dishonor, so long, until at
length the incontinence of his Tongue betrayed him into Speeches, which
trespassed upon Loyalty: for which words, they having taken vent, he was
questioned by a Bill in the Star Chamber, 4 Car. 1. dom. 1628. But the
information being somewhat lame and taken up with second-hand Reports, the
Accusation lay dormant till about 1632, when it was revived again. And the
purgation of B. Williams depending principally upon the testimony of one John
Pregian Registrary of Lincoln, it happened that the Febr. after, one Elizab.
Hodson was delivered of a base Child, and laid it to this Pregian. The Bishop
finding his great Witness charged with such Infamy, conceived it would
invalidate all his Testimony, and that once rendered invalid, the Bishop could
easily prognosticate his own ruin. Therefore he bestirs himself amain, and tho
by order of the Justices at the public Session at Lincoln, Pregian was charged
as the reputed Father, the Bishop by his Agents, Pawel and Owen, procured that
Order suppressed, and by subornation and menacing of, and tampering with
Witnesses, did at length in May 10 Car. 1. procure the Child to be fathered
upon one Bohun, and Pregian to be acquitted. After this he being accriminated
in the Star Chamber for corrupting of Witnesses, and being convicted by full
proof on the 11 of July 1637 he received this censure, that he was to pay ten
thousand pounds fine to the King, to be imprisoned in the Tower of London
during his Majesty's pleasure, and to be suspended ab officiis and beneficiis.
In 1640, Nov. 16. he was released from the Tower, and became the Idol for a
time of both Houses, (having since his fall closed with the Puritan) and who
then should be in daily conference with him but Edward Bagshaw a Parliament man
for Southwark, and afterward Will. Prynne, two zealous and bigoted Puritans;
whose Counsels were chiefly to pull down Laud Archbishop of Canterbury,
Wentworth Earl of Strafford, Heylyn of Westminster, and other Royalists. On the
12 Jan. following, he preached before the King, and pleased the Puritan very
much, as being zealous for the Sabbath, and against the Book for Sports; yet
toward the conclusion said that the discipline of Geneva, and Cornaries Diet,
were fit for none but Beggars and Tradesmen. Afterward, it was observed by
many, that he declined daily in the peoples favor, who took him then not to be
the same man as they did before. In 1641 he was by his Maj. favor, purposely
to please the Puritan then dominant, translated from Lincoln to York, and soon
after was in the head of the Bishops when they made their Protestation against
the House of Lords in behalf of themselves; for which being imprisoned in the
Tower again, continued there eighteen weeks. At length being with much ado
released, he retired to the King at Oxon, where he provided himself with a
Commission, and Instructions what to do when he went farther. Afterward he
went into his own Country, repaired his Castle at Aberconway, fortified it, and
spared not any cost or labor to make it teneable for his Majesty's Service.
But then his Majesty and privy Council suspecting that he would not be faithful
to him, they put a Commander therein, and in a manner thrust the Archb. out.
Whereupon taking these matters in high disdain, he retired to his house at
Pentryn or Penryn, not far from Aberconway, which he fortified; and having
gained the favor of the Parliament, put a Garrison therein, and declared for
them. Afterward obtaining some Forces from one Mitton a Parliamentarian
Colonel in those Parts, went forthwith and set upon Aberconway Castle, took it
and kept it to his dying day in his own possession. This was in the latter end
of 1645, at which time the Kings Cause did daily decline, as the Archbishop did
in the minds of the Royalists, who, for these his Actions, spared not to style
him a perfidious Prelate, the shame of the Clergy, and the Apostate Archbishop
of York, whereas while he was in his greatness, he was characterized to be a
person of a generous mind, a lover and encourager of learning and learned men
(he himself being very learned) hospitable, and a great Benefactor to the
public, yet always high and proud, and sometimes insolent, and to have
pharisaical Leaven in him. His works are (1) A sermon of apparel before the
King and Pr. at Theobalds, 22 Feb. 1619, on Math. 11. 8. Land. 1620. qu. (2)
Sermon. before the Lords, Land 1623. qu. (3) Sermon. at the funeral of K. James, on
1 Kings 11. 41, 42, 43. Land. 1625. qu. (4) Perseverantia sanctorum, etc. on
Job 42. 12. -- pr. 1628. qu. (5) Letter to the Vicar of Grantham, etc. pr.
1636. qu. answered by Dr. Pet. Heylyn in his Coal from the Altar, etc. (6) Holy
table, name, and thing, more anciently used under the New Testam. than that of
an Altar. pr. 1637, which is a reply to the Coal from the Altar, etc. Whereupon
Heylyn came out with a rejoinder, called Antidotum Lincolniense, etc. as I
shall tell you more at large when I come to him in the 2 Vol. of this Work. (7)
Annotationes in vet. Testam. and in Ephesios. Cantab. 1653, oct. published
under the name of Johan. Eboracensis, by which, I presume, is meant John
Williams. He has also published one or more Sermons which I have not seen, and
has also extant Parliamentary Speeches and Letters of State. In 1671 was
printed at London in octavo, A manual: or, three small and plain Treatises,
viz. 1. of Prayer, or active, 2. of Principles, or passive, 3. of Resolution,
or opposite, Divinity. Translated and collected out of ancient Writers for the
private use of a most noble Lady, to preserve her from the danger of Popery. In
the Title page it is said to have been written by John Archbishop of York, yet
certain Authors who lived and wrote after his death, are therein quoted; which
are unadvisedly done by another hand. At length this Archb. dying in the house
of the Lady Mostyn at Glodedd near Aberconway, on the 25 of Mar. 1649 was
buried, I presume, at Aberconway. There is extant a Latin Apology for this Dr.
Williams Archb. of York, written in good Latin by Joh Harmer M. A. sometimes of
Magd. Coll. in Oxon, to Lambert Osbaldeston a great Creature of the said Archb.
in which are many things, that are true, inserted. But the Reader is to know,
that the said Harmer, who sometimes taught in the College School at
Westminster, had often participated of the generosity of Archb. Williams; and
when afterward he became Greek Professor of the Univ. of Oxford, he was
esteemed a Parasite, and one that would do any thing below him to gain a little
money or a meals-meat.

Jul. 12. Math. Wren M. of A. of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, was then
incorporated in the same degree. -- I have spoken largely of him elsewhere.

Will. Boswell M. A. of Jesus Coll. in the said University, was incorporated
the same day. -- He was afterward Proctor of that University, Secretary to Sir
Dudl. Carleton while ordinary Ambassador to the States of the United Provinces,
and afterward Resident or Leiger Ambassador there himself; in which capacity
he was knighted by the Lord Hor. Vere of Tilbury, and other Commissioners,
named in his Majesty's Letters Patents, in the Army of the said States at
Bockstal near Balduck in Brabant, 25 July 1633. He was a learned man, a great
encourager of Learning, zealous for the Church of England, faithful in the
execution of his Embassy, and highly valued by eminent persons. He died much
lamented in 1647.

Joh. Squire M. A. of Jesus Coll. in the same University, was also then
incorporated -- He was afterward Vicar of S. Leonards Shoreditch in Middlesex,
a zealous and orthodox Preacher, and therefore respected by Dr. Laud Archb. of
Canterbury. But when the Puritan or Presbyterian brake into an open Rebellion,
he was one of those many godly Ministers that suffered by Imprisonment,
Sequestration, Plundering, and I know not what. He has written Lectures, being
an Exposition of the first part of the second Chapter to the Thessalonians,
proving the Pope to be Antichrist. Land. 1630, qu. and also published several
Sermons, the Titles of most of which you may see in the Bodleian or Oxford
Catalogue. Pray be pleased to see more of him in that vile Pamphlet called A
century of scandalous, malignant, Priests, etc. printed 1643, qu. page 25.

Joh Preston M. A. of Queens Coll. in Camb. was also then incorporated. -- He
was afterward Doct. of Div. Master of Emanuel Coll. in the said University, a
perfect Politician, and the Patriarch of the Presbyterian Party. The Titles of
most of the Sermons and Treatises which he has written and published, you may
see in the said Catalogue, and the actions of his life, written and published
by one that was his Pupil, named Tho. Ball of Northampton, who tells you, that
he died 20 Jul. 1628, and that he was buried in the Church at Fawsley in
Northamptonshire.

An. Dom. 1609.
An. 7 Jac. 1.
Chanc. Rich. Bancroft D. D. Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. the same, viz. Dr. J. King, July 14.

Proct. Charles Greenwood of Vniv. Coll. Joh. Flemmyng of Exet. Coll. Apr. 26.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 28. Edw. Littleton of Chapter Chapter

May 2. Joh. Heath of New Coll. the Epigrammatist.

6. Brian Duppa Edw. Boughen of Chapter Chapter


The former of which two, was afterward B. of Winton. June 22. Tho. Dugard of
Chapter Chapter -- Quaere.

26. Christop. Wren of S. Joh. Coll. -- See more among the Bach. of Div. 1620.

Jul. 7. Nathan. Grenfield of S. Edmunds, lately of Gloc. Hall. -- See among
the Masters 1612.

Oct. 14. Edward Cotton Percival Burrel of Chapter Chapter


Of these two you may see more among the Masters, an. 1612.

Dec. 7. Mich. Oldsworth of Magd. Hall, afterward of Magd. Coll. -- See also
among the Masters, 1614.

Feb. 10. Anth. White of Chapter Chapter -- You may see more of him among the Masters,
an. 1612.

13. Ralph Robinson of Linc. Coll. -- This person I set down here, not that he
was a Writer, but to prevent an unwary Reader hereafter to take him to be the
same Ralph Robinson who was born at Heswall in Wirrall in Cheshire, an. 1614,
bred in Catherine Hall in Cambridge, where he continued till 1642, at which
time he sided with the Presbyterians, and afterward became Minister of S. Mary
de Wolnoth in London, and a Publisher of several theological matters favoring
of Presbytery. He died 15 June 1655, and was buried in the Chancel of his
Church before mentioned, on the north side of the Communion Table, under the
stone called Mr. Buckminsters stone.

E. Littleton, Br. Duppa, and Edw. Boughen before mentioned, will be spoken of
at large in the 2 Vol. of this Work.

Adm. 181.

Bach. of Law.
I find but five were admitted, among whom Jo. Boys of Alls. Coll. was one; and
one that supplicated, named Jam. Mabbe of Magd. Coll. of whom will be large
mention made in the second Volume.

Mast. of Art.
June 20. Joh. Hales of Merton 21. Tho. Willis of S. John's Jul. 6. Tho. Sutton
of Queens Oct. 11. Tho. Godwin of Magd. Coll.

27. Josias Bird Chaplain of Alls. Coll. -- He was lately incorporated Bach. of
Arts, as in the Incorporations following you may see: afterward he became
Chaplain to Alice Countess Dowager of Derby, Wife of Tho. Lord Ellesmere, and
the publisher of Loves peereless paragon; or the attributes and progress of the
Church, Sermon. at S. Mary's in Oxon, and at Harfield in Middlesex, on Cant. 2.
10. Oxon. 1613. qu. and perhaps of other things.

Nov. 9. Will. Spark of Magd. 17. Will. Jewel of Exet. Coll.

The last of these two did translate from French into English The golden
Cabinet of true Treasure, containing the sum of moral Philosophy. Land. 1612.
oct. What other things he has translated, or what he has written, I know not,
nor any thing else of him beside, only that he was a Gentleman's Son of
Devonshire, and that he became a Sojournour of Exet. Coll. an. 1603. aged 17.

Adm. 97.

Bach. of Div.
Dec. 14. Rob. Bolton of Brasn. Feb. 22. Tho. Thompson of Qu. Coll.

Will. Lo of S. Alb. Hall did supplicate for the same degree, but whether he
was admitted, it appears not.

Adm. 11.

Doct. of Law.
June 28. Alexander Sheppard of Jesus Coll. -- He was a learned Civilian, but
what he has published I know not.

Doct. of Physic.
Jun. 26. Thom. Johnson of Oriel Coll. -- He was buried in S. Mary's Church in
Oxon 16 Nov. 1621; but whether he was Author of a Book which goes under the
name of Dr. Johnson entit. Practica medicinae de aegritudinibus capitis. Land.
1602. qu. I cannot justly say. See another Thom. Johnson M. D. in these Fasti
in the 2 Vol. an. 1643.

Doct. of Div.
June.... Rich. Mocket of Alls. Coll.

July.... Walt. Bennet of New Coll. -- In Sept. 1608, he became Chauntor of the
Church of Salisbury, on the death of Dr. Will. Zouch; and on the 7 of March
1609 Archdeacon of Wilts. on the death of Dr. Edm. Lilly. In his Chauntorship
succeeded Hen. Cotton, as I shall tell you in these Fasti, an. 1610, and in his
Archdeaconry one Tho. Leach 15 Nov. 1614.

19. Rob. Clay of Mert. Coll. -- He afterward succeeded Dr. Joh. Favor in the
Vicaridge of Halyfax, and dying in 1628, left by will (...).
to the said Coll. 100 l. for two Sermons yearly to be preached to the
University, (as Dr. Bickley had formerly given to them) to be preached by a
Yorkshire Man, if any such be Fellow, or Chaplain of that College, who in his
Prayer is to mention Dr. Clay sometimes Vicar of Halifax as the founder of
those Sermons.

Jan. 24. John Bancroft of Chapter Chapter a Compounder. -- He was soon after Master of
University Coll.

Incorporations.
Apr. 29. Thom. Wharton eldest Son of Philip Lord Wharton was incorporated M.
of Arts. as he had stood at Cambridge. -- He was Father to Philip Lord Wharton,
who openly appeared in arms against K. Chapter 1. an. 1642. And many years after
he was made one of the Privy Council to K. Will. 3.

May 4. Josias Bird Bach. of Arts of Cambridge -- He was now of Alls. Coll.
under the inspection of his kinsman or uncle Dr. Will. Bird.

Jun. 12. Hipocrates D'othon or Othen Doct. of Phys. of the Univ. of
Montpellier -- He died 13. Nov. 1611 and was buried in the Church of St.
Clements Danes without Temple Bar, within the liberty of Westminster.

Jul. 11. Will. Gonge M. A. of Cambridge -- He was a Native of Stratford bow in
Middlesex, was educated in Kings Coll. of which he was Fellow, afterward he
was Doct. of Div. and the pious and learned Preacher of the Church in the
Blackfriers in London, where in his time he was accounted the Father of the
London Ministers, that is, of such, who were put in by the Authority of the
rebellious Parliament in 1641, 42. etc. He was one of the Assembly of Divines,
was a good Text-man, as his Whole armor of God, Exposition (...).
of the Hebrews, Exposition of the Lords Prayer, and other learned works (the
titles of some of which you may see in Oxf. Cat.) show. He is often honorably
mentioned by Voetius, Streso and other outlandish Divines; and was always
accounted by the Puritan eminent for his humility, patience, and faith: He died
12. of Dec. 1653 and was buried in the said Church of the Blackfriars on the
16 of the said month, aged 79 or thereabouts.

John Richardson M. A. of the same University was incorporated the same day --
One Joh. Richardson was educated in Eman* Coll. was afterward D. D. Master
first of Peter house, then of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge, and Vicechancellour of
that University. This Person, who had a hand in the translation of the Bible,
appointed by King Jam. 1. died about the beginning of 1625 and was buried in
Trin. Coll. Chapel. Another John Richardson, who was D. D. succeeded Dr. Walt.
Balcanquall in the Deanery of Rochester, and died in Apr. 1636, and a third
John Richardson I find, who, from being D. of D. of Dublin, was made Bishop of
Ardagh in Ireland: Which Bishopric he being forced to leave upon the rebellion
that broke out in that Kingdom, an. 1641, retired to London, where he died in
1654. Whether any of these three, were the same with John Richardson the
incorporated Master of Arts, I cannot now justly tell.

Jul. 11. Abrah. Dickonson D. D. of Cambr. was also then incorporated in that
faculty.

An. Dom. 1610.
An. 8. Jac. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Rich. Bancroft Archb. of Canterburry, but he dying 2. Nov. Thom.
Egerton Baron of Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England, and one of the Kings
Privy Council, was chosen into his place the next day, and on the tenth, was
installed in the Bishop of Durhams house at London.

Vicechanc. Dr. Jo. King again, Jul. 14. at which time the Chancellours letters
being read for his election, 'twas ordered that the Heads of Colleges and Halls
should at all times be ready and diligent to assist the Vicechanc. in his
government of the University, especially in matters of Religion, for the
suppressing of Popery and Faction, etc. The said Dr. King was soon after Bishop
of London.

Proct. R^b. Pink of New Coll. Sam. Radcliffe of Bras. Coll. Apr. 17.


Bach. of Music.
July 11. Thomas Bartlet of Magd. Coll. -- He has several compositions in
Music in MS. but whether extant I cannot tell.

On the 26. of Apr. Richard Deering, did, as a member of Christ Church
supplicate for the Degree of Bach. of Music, and had his desire, as it seems,
granted (tho not registered) because in matters of his composition which were
soon after by him made extant, he entitles himself Bach. of Music. -- This
Person who was born of, and descended from, a right ancient Family of his name
living in Kent, was bred up in Italy, where he obtained the name of a most
admirable Musician. After his return he practiced his faculty for some time in
England, where his name being highly cried up, became, after many entreaties,
Organist to the English Nuns living in the Monastery of the blessed Virgin Mary
at Bruxells. At length after the Marriage of K. Chapter 1. he was made Organist to
his Royal Comfort Henrietta Maria, with whom he continued till she was forced
to leave England by the Presbyterian outrages in the time of the grand
rebellion. He has written (1) Cantica sacra ad melodiam Madrigalium elaborata
senis vocibus. Antwerp 1618. qu. divided in six volumes, according to the
voices. In the title of this book he write, himself Richards Deringus Bac. Mus.
(2) Cantica sacra ad duas and tres voces composita, cum Basso continuo ad
Organum. Land. 1662. etc. published by John Playford, and by him dedicated to
Hen. Maria the Queen Dowager, the Author (who was always a Romans Catholic)
having been dead about 4 or 5 years before. A second set was published in the
year 1674 entit. Basso contiruo, cantica sacra; containing Hymes and Anthems
for two voices to the Organ both Lat. and English, composed by Rich. Deering,
Christopher Gibbons, Ben. Rogers, Matthew Lock, and others. Printed in fol.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 26. Will. Page of Balliol, afterward of Allsouls, Coll.

27. Hen. Welstede of Broadgates hall -- See among the Masters, an. 1612.

3^. Christoph. Potter of Queens June 14. Rob. Skinner of Trin. Coll.

21. Nich. Gray of Chapter Chapter

28. Griffin Higgs of St. John's Jul. 5. Nath. Carpenter of Exet. Coll.

Nov. 6. Will. Strode of Broadgates hall. Quare.

Dec. 13. Tho. Nevill of Trin. Coll. -- He was the eldest Son of Sir Hen.
Nevill Knight (...) of Abergavenny.

17. Christoph. White of Chapter Chapter

Jan. 24. Humph. Sidetham of Exeter, afterward of Wadham, Coll.

28. Gilbert Wats of Linc. Coll.

Jasp. Fisher of Magd. hall, afterward of Magd. Coll. was admitted the same
day.

Of all these Bachelaurs, only Nath. Carpenter, Christoph. White and Jasp.
Fisher have been largely mentioned in this vol. among the Writers. As for the
others that are Writers, they are to be mentioned in the next vol.

Admitted 183.

Mast. of Arts.
May 15. Edward Chaloner of Magd. Coll. afterward of Alls.

June 22. John Reading of Magd. hall.

26. Hen. Cotton of Brasn. Coll. a Compounder -- This Person, who was the Son
of Dr. Hen. Cotton B. of Salisbury, became Prebendary of Fordington and
Writhlington in the said Church, on the death of Dr. Will. Zouch, 29. Sept.
1608, Preb. of Bytton on the death of Meredith Morgan, 4. Dec. 1612, Chauntor
thereof by the death of Dr. Walt. Bennet 30. July 1614, and at length
Prebendary of Highworth in the said Church of Sarum by the death of Dr. Pet.
Lilye, on the eleventh day of March following. He died in 1622, and was
succeeded in the Chauntorship by Dr. Humph. Henchman, afterward B. of Sa^um.

Jul. 4. Joh. Wild of Ball. Coll. -- This Person who was the eldest Son of
Serj. Geo Wild of Droitwich in Worcestershire, was about this time a Student
in the Inner Temple, of which he became Lent reader 6. Car. 1. afterward
Sergeant at Law, and Lord chief Baron of the Exchecquer in the time of the
rebellion. This was the Person who drew up the Impeachment against the Bishops,
and by him sent to the H. of Lords, an. 1641. being the prime manager in that
affair, and what he wrote as to that matter, was afterward printed He was the
same also who, upon the command, or rather desire, of the great Men sitting at
Westminister, did condemn to death at Winchester one Capt. J^hn Burley for
causing a drum to be beat up for God and K. Chapter at Newport in the Isle of
Wight, in order to rescue his captived King, an. 1647. For which act, (after
Burley had been executed at Winton, on the 10. Feb. the same year) he received
1000 l. out of the privy purse of Derby-house. About the same time also he
received another 1000 l. (as 'twas then confidently affirmed) for the
acquittance of Major Rolph who had a design to murder or poison the said King;
so 'twas all one to him whether he hung or hung not, so he got the beloved
pelf. After Oliver came to the Protectorship, he retired and acted not, but
when the Rump Parliament was restored after Richards deprivation, then was he
restored to the Exchecquer, and after K. Charles 2. returned, lived about 9
years in a retired condition. At length giving way to fate at Hamstede near
London, his body was buried at Wherwell in Hampshire, which is a Lordship
belonging to Charles Lord de la War, who married Anne Dau. and Heir of the
said John Wild.

Jul. 5. Joh. Seller or Sellar of Oriel Coll. -- One of both his names has
published Five Sermons -- Land. 1636. oct. and other things. Whether the same
with him of Oriel, who was a Ministers Son of Glocestershire, I cannot tell,
unless I could see the said Sermons. Nor do I know anything to the contrary,
but that he may be the same with John Seller of C. C. Coll. a Ministers Son of
Kent, who was admitted Bach. of Arts 18. Feb. 1611. and Master 2. Jul. 1614.
This last John Seller being a learned Man, Mr. Rich. James, (whom I have
mentioned among the Writers 1638.) numbered him among his learned acquaintance,
and therefore wrote diverse Epistles to him.

Jan. 23. Hugh Robinson of New Coll.

Bach. of Physic.
Apr. 30. Theodore Goulson M. of A. of Merton Coll. -- He was the only Bach. of
Phys. that was admitted this year. See among the Doct. following.

Bach. of Div.
Mar 27. Tho. Winniffe Geor. Hakewill of Ex. June 21. Josias White of New 25.
Brian Twyne Thom. Jackson Henry Masen of Corp. Chapter Coll.







July 5. Barnab. Potter of Qu. Coll. Will. Piers of Chapter Chapter

Which two last were afterward Bishops.

6. Rob. Barnes of Magd. Coll. -- This Person who was Son of Joseph Barnes
Printer to the University of Oxon and Fellow of the said Coll. of St. Mary
Magd. became afterward Minister of Greys in Oxfordshire, by the favor of
William Viscount Wallingford, and published A Sermon preached at Henly at the
visitation, 27. Apr. 1626, on Psalm. 9. 16. Oxon 1626. qu. besides a collection
of Verses made on the death of Will. Son of Arth. L. Gray of Wilton.

Admitted 26.

Doct. of Law.
Apr. 30. Francis Alexander of New College, Prebendary of Winchester.

June 21. Tho. Ryves of the same Coll. -- He is to be remembered among the
Writers in the 2. vol.

Doct. of Phys.
Apr. 30. Theodore Gouls^n of Merton Coll. -- He accumulated the Degrees in
Physic, being now much in esteem for his knowledge therein.

Doct. of Div.
June 11. Ralph Barlow of C. C. C. originally of Oriel, and afterward of New
Coll. was then admitted D. of D. in the quality of a Compounder -- In Sept. an.
1621. he succeeded Rich. Meredith in the Deanery of Wells, and dying there, was
buried in the Cathedral 27. July 1631. Whereupon Dr. George Warburton Dean of
Gloucester succeeded him in that Dignity.

13. Francis Kerrie of Ball. Coll. a Compounder -- He was now Canon
residentiary of Hereford.

June 13. Job. Best July 5. Silvan. Griffith of Chapter Chapter

Which two were Compounders, the last being Archdeacon of Hereford.

6. John Parkhurst Will. Langton of Magd. Coll.


The first of these two last, was afterward Master of Balliol, and the other
President of that of St. Mary Magd. Coll.

Incorporations.
Apr. 18. John Done sometimes of Heart hall, now M. of A. of Cambridge, was
then incorporated in that Degree -- On the 17. of the same month, he
supplicated to proceed in the faculty of Arts, and to have all exercises
requisite to perform for that Degree, be omitted. The reason was, as it is said
in the public register, quod huic Academiae maxim ornamento sit, ut ejusmodi
viri optime de reipublica and ecclesia meriti gradibus Academicis insigniantur,
etc. The next day, he, with one John Porye M. A. of Cambridge were
incorporated, as the said register tells us, tho in another place therein, it is
said he was admitted to pr^ceed, yet stood not in the Act following to complete
that Degree.

24. Ralph Cudworth Bach. of Div. of Cambridge -- He was afterward D. of D.
Rector of Aller in the Dioc. of B. and Wells etc. where he died (as it seems)
either in Aug. or Sept. 1624. Another of both his names, a Presbyterian, and a
Writer, was bred in Eman. Coll. was afterward Master of Clare hall, D. D.
Hebrew Professor, etc. in the said University.

July 6. James Meddous or Meadows (Meddusius) D. of D. of the University of
Basil in Germany -- He was a Cheshire Man born, had formerly studied Arts and
Div. in the University of Heidelberg, was now Chaplain to Peregrine Lord
Willoughby, and afterward to His Majesty K. Jam. 1. What he has written I
cannot justly say: Sure I am that he has translated from high Dutch into
English, A Sermon preached before Frederick 5. Prince Elector of Palatine and
the Princess Lady Elizabeth, by Abrah. Scultetus Chaplain to his Highness, on
Psalm. 147. 1, 2, 3. etc. Land. 1613. oct. and perhaps other things, but such I
have not yet seen.

10. John Norton Bach. of Arts of Cambridge -- The two names of this Person
being common, I cannot therefore say that he was the same John Norton who was
Minister of the Church of New England, Author of Responsio ad Guliel. Apollonii
Syllogen, ad componendas controversias in Anglia. Land. 1648. oct. and other
things. One John Norton was Proctor of Cambridge after this time.

Griffin Williams M. of A. of the same University, was incorporated the same
day -- He was sometimes of Chapter Chapter in this University, was afterward a
frequent Writer, and Bishop of Ossorie in Ireland, and therefore is to be
remembered at large in the next vol.

Henry Thurcross M. of A. of the said University also, was then (Jul. 10.)
incorporated -- He was collated to the Archdeaconry of Clievland in the Dioc.
of York, in the place of John Philipps promoted to the Sea of Sodor or the Isle
of Man, on the second day of Aug. 1619. Which Dignity he resigning 1635 was
succeeded by Timothy Thurcross Bach. of Divinity.

Jan. 22. David Foulis M. A. of Glascoe in Scotland -- He is styled in one of
the registers Colintoni Comarchi filius. See another of both his names in these
Fasti, an. 1605.

Lud^vicus Capellus or Cappellus a young French Man of great hopes, became a
Sojournor in the University in the beginning of this year, and in the month of
Feb. did answer publicly in Disputations in Divinity, in the School allotted
for that faculty, and about the same time gave books to the public Library. He
was afterward an eminent Hebrician, Tutor to the famous Sam. Bochartus, and
Author of diverse most excellent books, as you may see in the Oxford Catalogue:
Among which are his Critica Sacra, much commended by Hug. Grotius. This L^d.
Capellus was living at Saumor in France, an. 1656, and perhaps some years after.

An. Dom. 1611.
An. 9. Jac. 1.
Chanc. Tho. Lord Egerton Baron of Ellesonere.

Vicech. Dr. Tho. Singleton Principal of Brasn. Coll. the same who had been
Vicech. 1598.

Proct. Norwych Spackman of Chapter Chapter John Dunster of Magd. Coll. Apr. 3.


Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 10. Franc. White Tho. Freeman of Magd. Coll.


Of the first of which two, you may see more among the Masters 1614.

19. Henry King John King Rich. Gardener of Chapter Chapter


The two first of these three, were the Sons of Dr. John King Bishop of London.

Oct. 12. Mich. Jermin Rich. Jeames of C. C. Coll.


Nov. 4. William Nicolson of Magd. 12. Hugh Lloyd Sam. Yerworth of Oriel Coll.




The first of these last three, was afterward Bishop of Gloucester, and the
second of Landaff.

26. George Jay Edw. Terry of Chapter Chapter


Of the first of these last two, you are to expect a farther account among the
created Doctors of Div. an. 1660.

Dec. 16. Tho. Vicars of Qu. Coll.

Jan. 29. Immanuel Bourne of Chapter Chapter

Feb. 15. H^zekiah Woodward of Ball. Coll.

18. Rich. Spencer Edw. Spencer of C. C. Coll.


Both the Sons of Rob. Lord Spencer, which is all I know of them, only that
Richard was afterward M. of A.

As for Gardener, Jermin, Nicolson, Lloyd, Yerworth or Jeruvorthius, Terry,
Bourne and Woodward, beforementioned; I shall speak more at large in the 2.
vol. of this work.

Admitted 218.

Bach. of Law.
Between the ending of one register and beginning of another, which happened this
year, not one Bachelaur of Law occurs admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 18. John Wall of Chapter Chapter

20. Jam. Martin of Broadgates hall -- This Person, who was a German born, has
published The Kings way to Heaven, on 1. Sam. 12. 23, 24. Land. 1615. oct. and
had then, as he says, ended his work against Baronius, but what that was, he
tells us not, neither in truth can I yet tell. He was intimate with the learned
Doctor Prideaux, and was then (being 58 years of age) Master of Arts of both
the Universities in England.

June 4. Isaac Colfe of Chapter Chapter

Jul. 1. Nich. Guy of Heart hall. -- He was a Hampshire Man born, and has
published Pieties Pillar, fun. Sermon. for Mrs. Elizab. Gouge, on Joh. 11. 26.
Land. 1626. in oct. and perhaps other things. Qu^ere.

4. Rich. Gove of Magd. hall. 5. Rog. Manwaring of Alls. Nov. 13. Will. Sla^yer
of Brasn. 28. Michael Wigmore of Oriel Jan. 23. John Harris of New Coll.

Feb. 12. Thom. Prior of Broadgates hall -- He was afterward Prebendary of
Gloucester and the Author of A Sermon at the funeral of Miles late Bishop of
Gloucester, preached in the Cath. Chapter of Glouc. 9. Nov. 1624, on 2. Tim. 1. 12.
Land. 1632. fol. put at the end of certain Sermons penned by the said Miles
Bishop of Gloucester. What other things the said Prior has published I know
not, nor any thing else of him, only that he was a Ministers Son of
Glocestershire, and that dying in 1634 he left behind him a Son named
Ch^istoph. Prior of Ball. Coll. of whom you may see more among the creations of
Doctors of Div. an. 1642.

March 9. Peter Turner of Mert. Coll.

Admitted 105.

Bach. of Phys.
Jun. 20. Sim. Ba^kervile Rob. Vilvaine of Ex. Coll.


Besides these two, were only two more admitted, viz. Edward Lapworth of Magd.
Coll. and Tho. Cloyton of Ball. C.

Bach. of Div.
May 6. John Prideaux Dan. Price of Ex. Coll.


28. Barthelm. Parsons of Or. June 10. John Lee of Alls. Coll.

The last of which two, became Treasurer of the Church of Salisbury in the
place of Dr. Tho. White deceased, 29. Apr. 1624, and dying there in 1634, was
succeeded in that Dignity by Edward Davenant, 19. Nov. the same year.

Jun. 25. Rich. Carpenter Jews Bailey of Ex. C.


27. John Day of Oriel Nov. 14. John Gianvill of Ball. Coll.

This last Person has written Articuli Christian fidei quam ecclesia
profitetur Anglicana, versu (quoad ejus fieri potuit) expressi facillimo. Oxon.
1613. qu. in 6 Sh. What he has written besides, or whether he took any Degree
in Arts in this University, I know not. He was living in 1614 in which year he
gave several books to the Bodleian Library.

Admitted 24.

Not one Doct. of Law was admitted this year.

Doct. of Phys.
Jun ^0. Edw. Lapworth of Magd. Sim. Baskervile of Exet. Tho. Clayton of
Balliol Rob Vilvaine of Exet. Coll.


All which did accumulate the Degrees in Physic. As for Lapworth he was
afterward the first Reader of the Lecture of Not. Philosophy founded by Sir
Will. Sedley. and dying in the City of Bathe (where he usually practiced in the
Summer time) 23. May 1636, as I have somewhere before told you, was buried in
the great Church there dedicated to St. Pet. and St. Paul. The second Sim.
Baskervile, was now in great esteem for his admirable knowledge in Medicine,
(as before he had been for his humanity and philosophy) was afterward knighted
by K. Chapter 1. and dying 5. July 1641 aged 68 years, was buried in the Cath. Chapter
of St. Paul in the City of London. The third, T. Clayton, was soon after the
Kings Professor of Phys. in this University, and at length the last Principal
of Broadgates hall and the first Master of Pembroke Coll. The last, R. Vilvaine
being afterward a Writer, I shall mention him at large in the 2. vol.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 10. Tho. Ireland of Linc. Coll. -- This Person who was afterward
Prebendary of York and Southwell, has published one or more Sermons as (1)
Sermon. on Ecclesiastes 8. 2. -- Pr. 1610. qu. etc. Another of both his names and
time was a common Lawyer of Greys Inn, and a Knight, and the abridger in
English of Sir Jam. Dyer's Reports. -- pr. 1651. and of the Eleven books of
Reports of Sir Edward Coke. -- pr. 1656. But whether this last (Tho. Ireland)
was originally of Oxon, I cannot yet tell.

June 6. Samuel Page of C. C. 20. John Denison Rich. King of Ball. Coll.




July 2. Christoph. Hook of Magd. Mich. Boil of St. John's Geor. Hakewill of
Ex. Coll.


Incorporations.
July 5. Thom. Spackman Doct. of Phys. of Cambridge -- He has written and
published A declaration of such grievous accidents that commonly follow the
biting of mad dogs, together with the cure thereof. Land. 1613. qu* and perhaps
other things. Qu^re.

9. John ^^wers M. of A. of Cambr. -- He was a Norfolk Man born, was bred
Fellow of Queens Coll. in the said University, was afterward D. of D. Chaplain
to William Earl of Northampton, (who conferred upon him the benefice of
Castle-Ashby in Northamptonshire) Dean of Peterborough in the place of Dr.
Will. Piers promoted to the Episcopal See thereof, an. 1630, and on the 8. of
Mar 1638 was installed Bishop of that place. After the Long Parliament began,
he was one of the twelve Bishops who drew up a protestation against all such
Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations, which should be done in
their absence from the 27. Dec. 1641 to be null and of no effect, etc.
Whereupon he with the said Bishops were committed Prisoners to the Tower, where
they continued above four Months. Afterward being released, Towers retired to
the King at Oxon, and continued there till the surrender of that garrison for
the use of the Parliament, and then most of the Royal Party being put to their
shifts, he went to Peterborough, where dying in an obscure condition 10.
Januar. 1648, was buried the day following in the Cath. Church of Peterborough.
In the year 1660 were four of his Sermons published in octavo, one of which was
preached at the baptism of James Earl of Northampton, and another at the
funeral of William Earl of that place.

July 9. Anth. Sleep Master of Arts of the same University -- This Person who
was a member of Trinity Coll. was so excellent an Orator, that he gave K.
Jam.... occasion several times to say that Is. Wake Orator of the Vnive sity of
Oxon had a good Ciceronian style, but his utterance and matter was so grave,
(...) when he spoke before him he was apt to sleep, but Sleep the Dep^ty Orator
of Cambr. was quite contra^y, for he never spoke but kept him awake, and made
him apt to laugh.

Isaac Bargrave M. A. of the same University was incorporated the same day. --
This learned Gentleman was the Son of Robert Bargrave of Bridge in Kent, was
afterward D. of D. Chaplain to Prince Charles, Pastor of St. Margarets Church
in Westminster, afterward Chaplain to that Prince when he became King, and
about 1625 was made Dean of Cante^bury in the place of Dr. Joh. Boys. He has
published several Sermons, the titles of three of which, are in the Oxford
Catalogue, and dying in 1642 was succeeded by Dr. Geor. Eglionby.

July 9. Thom. Westfield Bach. of Div. of Cambr. -- He was a Native (...). in
his (...) of England in Cambridgshire.
of the Parish of St. Mary in the City of Ely, was educated in Grammaticals
there, in Academicals in Jesus Coll. in the said University, of which he was
made successively Scholar and Fellow. Afterward he became Curat or Assistant
to Dr. Nich. Felton while he was Minister of St. Mary le Bow in Cheapside,
Rector of Hornsey near, and of Great St. Bartholmew in, London, Archdeacon of
St. Albans, and at length (in 1641) advanced to the Sea of Bristow; where dying
25. June 1644. was buried in the Cathedral at the upper end of the isle joining
to the Choire on the North side. After his death were published of his
composition. (1) Englands face in Isreal's glass, eight Sermons on Psalm. 106.
19. 20. etc. -- printed 1646. qu. They were published again afterward. with
others added to them. (2) White robe, or surplice vindicated, in several
Sermons; -- pr. 1660. 63. in oct. etc.

John Pocklington Bach. of Div. of Pemb. hall in Cambr. was incorporated in
that Degree the same day -- See more among the Incorporations, an. 1603.

Thom. Bonham Doctor of Phys. of the same University, was incorporated the same
day* July 9. -- There is a book going under his name, which is thus entitled.
The Surgeons Closet: or, an Antidotary Chirurgical, fornished with variety
and choice of Apophlegms, balmes, bathes, etc. Land. 1630. qu. The greatest
part whereof was scatter'dly set down in sundry books and papers of the said
Dr. Bonham; afterward drawn into method and form, as now they are, (in the
said book) by Edward Poeton of Petworth, Licentiat in Physic and Surgery,
late, and long servant to the aforesaid Dr. B^nham.

Nov. 11. Franc. Kinaston M. A. of Cambridge, lately of Oriel Coll.

Mar. 9. Will. Young M. A. of Aberdeen in Scotland, now a Student in Lincoln
Coll.

In the latter end of this year one Matthew Evans a Gentleman of London, well
skilled in the Hebrew, Greek, Lat. and Vulgar tongues, sojourned in the
University, purposely to complete certain writings lying by him, for the
benefit of the learned republic. etc. Thus in the license, granted to him by
the ven. congregation, in order to his admission into the pub. Library. But
what writings they were that he was about to finish with the help of the said
Lib. I know not, nor any thing else of the Man.

An. Dom. 1612.
An. 10. Jac. 1.
Chanc. the^ same.

Vicechanc. the same July 28.

Proct. Tho. Seller of Trin. Coll. Rich. Corbet of Chapter Chapter Ap. 22*


The junior of which was afterward Bishop of Oxon and Norwich.

Bach. of Arts.
May 5. Richard Steuart of Magd. hall, afterward of Alls. Coll.

14. Rob. Weld^n Barten Holyday of Chapter Chapter


July 1. Jerem. Stephens Vivian Molineux of Brasn. Coll.


The last of these two who was Son of Sir Rich. Molineux of Sefton in Lanc. and
Visc. Molineux of Marybourgh in Ireland, traveled afterward into several
foreign Countries, was at Rome, where, (tho puritanically educated under the
tuition of Sam. Radcliff of Brasn. Coll) he changed his Religion, returned a
well bred Man, was (...), and in the grand Rebellion suffered for the royal
cause. (...) translated from Spanish into English A treatise of the difference
betwixt the temporal and eternal. Land. 1672. oct. written originally by
Eusebius Nieremberg, S. ^.

Feb. 8. Will. Thomas of Bras. Coll.

Of about 198 Bachelaurs of Arts that were admitted this year, I only find the
aforesaid five Persons (Molineux being excepted) who were afterward Writers,
as in the other volume you shall see at large.

Bach. of Law.
Nov. 16. Robert Gentilis of Alls. Coll. Son of Aubrey Gentilis -- Besides him
(who will be mentioned also in the next vol.) were only three more admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
May 5. Gilb. Ironside of Trin. Coll.

14. Edw. Boughen Gabriel Clarke of Chapter Chapter


The last of these two, I take to be the same Gabr. Clarke who was collated to
the Archdeaconry of Northumberland by Dr. Neile Bishop of Durham, upon the
resignation of Dr. John Craddock, 7. Aug. 1619. Which G. Clarke, (who is styled
D. D. in the Registers of the Church of Durham) became Archdeacon of Durham by
the same hand, on the death of Will. Moreton Bach. of Divinity, in the
beginning of Sept. 1620.

Tho. Dugard of Chapter Chapter was adm. the same day -- Quaere.

23. Sam. Smith Accepted Frewen of Magd. Coll.


June 30. Percivall Burrell of Chapter Chapter -- This Person who was originally of
Heart hall, and afterward Preacher at Suttons Hospital called the Charter House
near London, published Suttons Synagogue, or the English Centurion, Sermon. on
Luke 7. part of the 5. verse. Land. 1629. qu. and perhaps other things.

Jul. 2. Edw. Cotton of Chapter Chapter a Compounder -- He was Son of Will. Cotton
Bishop of Exeter, and was about this time Archdeacon of Totness in the Dioc. of
Exeter. He departed this life in 1647 whereupon his Archdeaconry continuing
void till the restoration of K. Charles 2. Franc. Fulwood D. D. then succeeded.

9. Thom. Hayne of Linc. Tho. Howell of Jesus Will. Greenhill of Magd. Coll.


Jan.... John Heath Hen. Welstede of New Coll.


The last of these two, who was now Chaplain, as I conceive of New Coll. but
lately of Broadgates hall, was the same Welstede who wrote and published The
cure of a hard heart -- printed 1624. 5.

Mar. 5. Nathaniel Grenfeild of St. Edm. hall. -- He was afterward Preacher at
Whitfield in Oxfordshire, and the writer and publisher of The great day; or a
Sermon setting forth the desperate estate and condition of the wicked at the
day of Judgment, on Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17. Land. 1615. oct. and perhaps of other
things. Quaere.

18. Anthony White Chaplain of C. C. Coll. -- He was afterward Vicar of
Wargrave in Berks. and the writer and publisher of (1) Truth purchased, on
Prove. 23. ver. 23. (2) Error abandoned, on Jam. 1. 16. -- Both which were
preached at St. Mary's in Oxford, and were printed at Oxon. 1628, and dedicated
by the Author to his Patron Sir Hen. Nevill of Billingbere.

Admitted 110.

Bach. of Div.
July 9. Will. Bridges Will. Twisse of New Coll.


The first of these two, who was Son to Dr. John Bridges Bishop of Oxon, was,
by his Fathers endeavors, made Archdeacon of that Diocese, in June 1614, (he
being then one of the Fellows of Wykehams Coll. near Winchester) which dignity
he holding to the time of his death, was succeeded by Barten Holyday of Chapter Chapter
before the year 1626.

July 9. Franc. James H^n. Byam of Chapter Chapter


Of the first you may see more among the D. of D. an. 1614.

Admitted 22.

Doct. of Law.
Jun. 30. Nathaniel Harris of New Coll. -- He died at Blechingley in Surr^y
1625.

Basil Wood of Alls. Coll. -- He was about this time Chancellor of St. Asaph
and of Rochester.

July 9. Arthur Ducke Dec. 7. Charles Caesar of Alls. Coll.

The last who was a younger Son of St. Julius Caesar Master of the Rolls, was
afterward a Knight, Judge of the Audience, and Master of the Faculties.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jun 30. John Prideaux John Whetcomb of Exet. Coll.


July 2. Will. White of Trin. Coll.

16. John Brooks of Vniv. Coll. -- He was about this time Canon residentiary
of York, and in Apr. 1615 became chauntor thereof, in the place of Hen. Banks
D. D. who had been admitted thereunto in Apr. 1613 on the death of John Gibson
LL. D. and Knight, which happened 28. Feb. 1612. As for the said Brokes he died
23 March 1616. aged 49 and was buried in the Cath. Chapter at York.

Janu. 27. John Abbott of Ball. Coll.

Incorporations.
June 30. George Ramsey a Scot, was incorporated M. of A. as he had stood
elsewhere.

On the 14. Jul. being the day after the public Act had been celebrated, these
Cantabrigians following were incorporated.

July 14. Henry Burton M. A. -- This Person who made a great noise and
disturbance in his time, was born in an obscure town called Birdsall in
Yorkshire, educated in St. John's Coll. in the said University, afterward was
Tutor or Master to the Sons of Robert Lord Carey of Lepington, (whose Lady was
Governess to Pr. Char. when a Child) sole officer (which some call Clerk) in
the Closet of Pr. Henry; and after his death to the said Prince Charles,
removed from his Service when that Prince became Kings for his pragmaticalness
and impudence in demonstrating by a letter, which he presented to the said
King, how popishly affected were Dr. Neile and Dr. Laud his continual
attendants. About that time he being made Minister of St. Matthews Church in
Friday-street in London, his Sermons which he preached there (some of which he
afterward published) savouring of nothing else but of schism, sedition, and
altogether against His Majesty's Declaration, he was for so doing, and
especially for publishing two-virulent Pamphlets not only brought before the
Council Board, but several times into the High Commission Court, for what he
had said and done, and afterward imprisoned, fined, degraded, deprived of his
benefice, pillorized with Prynne and Bastwicke, lost his ears, condemned to
perpetual imprisonment in Lancaster Goal first, and afterward in the Castle in
the Isle of Guernsey. From which last place being released by the members of
that Parliament which began at Westminster 3. Nov. 1640, was (with Prynne and
Bastwick) brought home in triumph to the great contempt of justice, was
restored to his benefice and well rewarded for his losses. The titles of
several of his books you may see in the Oxford Catalogue, and some that are not
there, I shall here set down, viz. (1) The Law and the Gospel reconciled
against the Antinomians. printed 1631. qu. (2) The sounding of the two last
Trumpets; or Meditations on the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Chapters of the
Revelations. Land. 1641. qu. (3) Relation of Mr. Chillingworth. This I have not
yet seen. (4) A Narration of his life (viz. of H. Burton) etc. Land. 1643. qu.
(5) Parliaments power for Laws in Religion. printed 1645. oct. (6) Conformities
deformity, etc. pr. 1646. the Author being then 67 years of age. Afterward
seeing what strange courses the great Men at Westminster took, he grew more
moderate, notwithstanding he was an Independent, and lived, as I conceive, till
they took off his old Masters Head.

Rich. Franklin M. of A. -- I take this Person to be the same with R. Franklin,
who was Bach. of Divinity, Minister of Elsworth in Cambridgshire and Author of
Tractatus de tonis in Lingua Graecamca, etc. Land. 1630. oct.

Thomas Walkington Bach. of Div. -- He was afterward Doctor of that faculty,
Minister of Fulham near London and the writer and publisher of Rabboni; Mary
Magd. tears of sorrow and solace, preached at Paul's cross, on Joh. 20. 16.
Land. 1620. oct. and of another Sermon on Ecclesiastes 12. 10. etc.

John Gostlyn or Goslyn Doct. of Physic -- He was born in the City of Norwych,
educated in Caius Coll. was afterward Proctor of Cambridge, Master of the said
Coll. and twice Vicechancellour of that University. He had the repute of a
general Scholar, an eloquent (...) in his W^rthies of England in Norwich.
Artist and one that was admirably well skilled in Physic, of which faculty he
was the Kings Professor in the said University. He died in Oct. or Nov. 1626,
and was buried near to the body of his worthy Friend and Patron Dr. Leg, in
the Chapel of the said Coll. of Caius, to which he was a very considerable
benefactor. One of his Surname was Author of Aurifodina Linguae Galliae.

Alexander Bound D. of D. -- He was sometimes of Kings Coll. was afterward
Vice-provost of Eaton and Rector of the rich Church of Petworth in Sussex;
where, as also in Cambridge, he was esteemed a godly, learned and religious Man.

Andrew Bing D. of D. -- On the 12 May 1606, he was collated to the subdeanery
of York, upon the resignation of one Hen. Wright, (who, when he was M. of A.
succeeded Edmund Bunny in that Dignity, an. 1575.) and on the 13 Apr. 1618, he
was installed Archbdeacon of Norwych in the place of Tho. Jegon D. D. who died
in the latter end of 1617, being then Master of C. C. Coll. in Cambridge and
Patron of the Parsonage of Sibell Henningham in Essex; where, if I mistake not,
he the said Jegon was buried.

Which Cantabrigians I say, viz. H. Burton, R Franklin, T. Walkington, J.
Gostlym, A. Bound, and A. Bing, were incorporated in their respective degrees,
on the 14 July before mentioned.

Will. Conway Doct. of Phys. of Caen in Normandy, was incorporated the same day.

Jan. 14. John Balcanquall M. A. of Edinburgh. -- He was a Scotch man born, was
now Fellow of Exeter Coll. and afterward Rector of Tatinhills in
Staffordshire, where he died about the latter end of 1646, which is all I know
of him, only that he was after this year Bach. of Div.

March 18. Philibert Vernatti Doctor of both the Laws of the University of
Leyden. -- One of both his names was afterward a Baronet in Scotland, and
another, who was a Knight, has a Relation of making Ceruss, in the
Philosophical Transactions, numb. 137. an. 1677.

Creations.
Oct. 30. Francis More Esquire. sometimes of S. Joh. Coll. in this University, now
an eminent Professor of the municipal Laws, was actually created Mast. of Arts
in the house of Convocation. He is mentioned at large among the Writers, an.
1621.

In the latter end of this year, Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Prince
Elector of the Empire, and afterward King of Bohemia, (who had lately married
Princess Elizabeth the only Daughter of K. Jam. 1.) came to visit the
University, where being sumptuously entertained, was pleased with his own hand
writing to matriculate himself a member of the University (sub tit. Aed. Chr.)
with this Symbol, Rege me Domine secundum verbum tuum.

An. Dom. 1613.
An. 11 Jac. 1.
Chanc. Tho. Lord Egerton.

Vicechanc. Dr. Singleton again, Jul. 24.

Proct. Anth. Richardson of Qu. Coll. Vincent Goddard of Magd. Coll. Apr. 14.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 8. Martin Pearson. -- He was afterward Master of the Choristers of S.
Paul's Cathedral, while Joh. Tomkins was Organist, and a composer of certain
Church Services and Anthems. He died about the latter end of Dec. 1650, being
then an Inhabitant of the Parish of S. Gregory near to the said Cathedral, and
was buried in S. Faiths Church adjoining. Whereas most Musicians dye obscurely
and in a mean condition, this died so rich, as to leave to the poor of Marsh in
the Parish of Dunnington in the Isle of Ely, an hundred pounds to be laid out
for a purchase for their yearly use.

May...John Amner Organist of the Cath. Church of Ely, and Master of the
Choristers there. -- He has composed and published Sacred Hymns of three,
four, five, and six parts for Voices and Viols. Land. 1615. qu. as also certain
Anthems; the words of one of which, are in James Clifford's Collection,
mentioned before in the year 1548.

Bach. of Arts.
May 13. Joh. S^ull of Mert. Coll. -- See among the Masters 1616.

Jun. 17. Tho Goffe Benj. Cox Rich. Parre of Brasn. Coll. of Chapter Chapter


The last of which was afterward Bishop of the Isle of Man.

Jul. 8. Owen Morgan or Morgan Owen of New Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Landaff.

Jul. 8. Will. Foster of S. John's Franc. Potter of T^in. Coll.


Oct. 21. George Singe of Ball. Coll. -- He became Bishop of Cloyne in Ireland,
1638.

26. Tho. Randol of Brasn. Nov. 15. Tho. Stafford of Exet. Coll.

Of the first of these two last you may see more among the Bach. of Div. 1624.
and of the other in my discourse of George Carew among the Writers, under the
year 1629.

18. Will. Lucy of Trin. Dec. 1. Joh West of Magd. 17. Jam. Howell of Jes. Coll.

The first of these last three, was afterward Bishop of S. David's, and the
second, was Son of the Lord de la War.

Feb 9. Jo. Angel 10. Alex. Huish of Magd. Hall.

The last of these two was afterward one of the original Scholars of Wadham
Coll. and a Writer of note.

Feb. 17. Bevill Grenevil of Exeter Coll. the eldest Son of a Knight. was then
admitted not only Bach. of Arts, but about the same time the senior Collector
of the Bachelaurs that determined this year. -- He was afterward a Knight, and
much famed for his exemplary Loyalty to K. Chapter 1. in the beginning of the
Rebellion, which was raised by a prevalent Party (Presbyterians) in the two
houses of Parliament, an. 1642. He was killed in his Majesty's Service at
Lansdowne near Bathe, 5 July 1643, leaving a Son behind him named John,
sometimes a Gent. Com. in Gloc. Hall. made the first Earl of Bathe of his name,
by K. Chapter 2. Soon after Sir Bevil's death, came out a Book of Verses made by
several Oxonians, wherein you will find much of his Worth and Gallantry. He had a
Brother named Sir Rich. Grenevill, who had received some Education in this
University, was afterward a stout maintainer of the Kings Cause in the said
Rebellion, was High Sheriff of Devon. 1645, and Author of A narrative of the
affairs of the West, since the defeat of the Earl of Essex, at Lestithiell in
Cornwall, an. 1644. in 3 sheets in qu.

Feb. 17. Henry Carey of Exeter Coll. the eldest Son of a Knight, was also then
admitted Bachelaur, and the junior Collector. He was afterward Earl of
Monmouth, and a frequent Translator of Books, as I shall hereafter tell you.

Thom. Carey of the same Coll. was admitted on the same day. -- This Themas,
who was younger Brother to the said Henry Carey, was born in Northumberland
while his Father Sir Robert Carey was Warden of the Marches toward Scotland,
proved afterward a most ingenious Poet, and was Author of several Poems
printed scatter'dly in diverse Books; one of which, beginning Farewell fair
Saint, etc. had a vocal Composition of two parts set to it by the sometimes
famed Musician Henry Laws. Upon the breaking out of the Rebellion in 1642, he
adhered to his Majesty, being then of the Bedchamber to, and much esteemed by
him. But after that good King had lost his head, he took it so much to heart,
that he fell suddenly sick, and died before the expiration of the year 1643,
aged 53, or thereabouts. Soon after his Body was buried in a Vault (the burying
place of his Family) under S. Joh Bapt. Chapel within the precincts of S.
Peter's Church in Westminster.

Mar. 3. Will. Pemble of Magd. Coll.

As for Cox, Parr, Morgan, Potter, Singe, Lucy* Howell, Angel, and Huish, will
be large mention made in the other Volume of this work, or elsewhere.

Adm. 189.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 28. Nath. Carpenter of Exet. Coll.

June 10. Nich. Gray of Chapter Chapter

July 8. Christop. Potter of Qu. Dec. 3. Humph. Sydenham of Wadham Jan. 27.
Giles Widows of Oriel Coll.

Jasper Fisher of Magd. Hall was admitted the same day.

Adm. 102.

Bach. of Phys.
March ult. Tobias Venner of S. Albans Hall. -- Not one besides him was
admitted this year.

Bach. of Div.
June 17. Thom. Powell of Bras. Coll. -- He has published A Sermon preached at
S. Mary's in Oxon, on Exodus 28. 34. Oxon. 1613. qu. and perhaps others, or else
certain Theological Tracts, which is all I know of him, only that he was a
Caernarvanshire man born.

Jul. 8. Will. Symonds of Magd. Dan. Faireclough of C. C. Coll.


Nov. 25. Rich. Tillesley of S. Joh. Dec. 1. Joh. Warner of Magd. Coll.

Adm. 13.

Doct. of Law.
Apr. 28. Joh. Hosk^ns of New Coll. -- He was commonly called John Hoskins
junior, as I have among the Writers told you.

Doct. of Phys.
June 21. Dan. Price Lew. Bailey of Ex. Coll.


Jul. 8. Will. Symonds of Magd. Coll. who accumulated.

Nov. 9. John Flemmyng Warden of Wadham Coll. formerly Fellow of that of
Exeter, and about this time one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

29. Will. Ballow of Chapter Chapter -- He died in Dec. 1618.

Dec. 1. George Carleton of Mert. Coll. Joh. Wilkinson of Magd. Hall.

The last of the said two Doctors was now Principal of the said Hall of S. M.
Magd. and afterward was President of Magd. Coll. but has published nothing.
One John Wilkinson has written An Exposition of the 13 chapt. of the
Revelations of Jesus Christ. Printed privately in 1619. qu. The publisher of
which tells us, that it was the purpose and desire of the Author of the said
Book to have published his judgment of the whole Book of the Revelation, but
through the malice of the Prelates, (as he adds) who diverse times spoiled him
of his goods and kept him many years in prison, he was prevented of his
purpose. He tells us also, that after his death some of his Labors coming into
the hands of his Friends in scattered and imperfect papers, they labored with
the help of others, that heard him declare his judgment therein, to set forth
the said little Book or Treatise. Whether this Joh. Wilkinson was of Oxon. I
cannot yet tell, neither whether he was the same Joh. Wilkinson M. of A. who
became Rector of Babcary in Somersetshire, in Apr. 1587. Another Joh. Wilkinson
was a Lawyer of Bernards Inn near London, who has published A treatise
collected out of the Statutes of this Kingdom concerning the Office and
Authority of Coroners and Sheriffs. And another entit. An easy and plain
method for the keeping of a Court Leet. Both printed in 1620, etc. in oct.
Whether he was ever bred in any University, I know not: sure I am, one Rob.
Wilkinson was, who applying his study to Divinity, proceeded in that Faculty,
(at Cambr. I think) was Rector of S. Olaves in Southwark, and a publisher of
several sermons, as the Oxford Catalogue will tell you. He died in the year
1617.

Incorporations.
Apr. 3. Christianus Rumphius Doctor of Philosophy and Physic, chief and
principal Physician to Frederick 5, Prince Elect. of the Palate. and to the
illustrious Lady Elizabeth daughter of K James 1. of England, was incorporated
Doctor of Phys. as he had stood at Basil and Heydelberg, in the house of Sir
Joh. Bennet Knight situated in Warwick lane within the City of London, by
virtue of a Commission from the Vicechancellour, directed to the said Sir Joh.
Bennet. Joh. Spenser D. D. President of C. C. Coll. Tho. Clayton Doctor of
Phys. and others.

The Incorporations of the Cantabrigians are this year omitted by the public
Scribe.

Creations.
Mar. 30. Will. Hakewill of Lincolns Inn Esquire; sometimes a Student in Ex^ter
Coll. was then actually created M. of A. being the very next day after his
Kinsman Sir Tho. Bodley was buried. -- I shall make large mention of this
Hakewell in the second Vol. of this Work, or elsewhere.

It was then granted by the ven. Convocation, that Will. Camden Clarenceaux
King of Arms, who had served as an Herald at the burial of the said Sir Tho.
Bodley, might be created M. of A. but for what reason he was not, unless his
refusal, as I have elsewhere told you, I cannot tell.

Laurence Bodley M. of A. Canon residentiary of the Cath. Chapter of Exeter, and
chief Mourner at his Brothers (Sir Tho. Bodley) Funeral, was actually created
D. of D. the same day, as a member of Chapter Church.

July 1. John Walter sometimes of Brasn. Coll. now of the Inner Temple, and
Counselor for the University of Oxon, was created M. of A. -- He was
afterward Attorney to Prince Charles, Sergeant at Law, a Knight and chief
Baron of the Exchequer. He died 18 Nov. 1630, aged 67, and was buried in a
little Vault under a north Isle (which he before had built) joining to the
Church of Wolvercote near Oxon, where at this day is a splendid monument over
his grave for him and his two Wives. David Walter Esquire; one of the Grooms of the
Bedchamber to K. Chapter 2. and Lientenant General of the Ordinance, was his second
Son; who dying at London 22 Apr. 1679, was buried in the same Vault with his
Father on the 30 of the same month.

Aug. 7. It was then granted by the ven. Convocation, that Sir Tho. Flemmyng
Lord Chief Justice of England, might be created M. of A. but whether it was
effected, it appears not.

Feb. 21. Sir Joh. Doderidge Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench,
was created M. of A. in Sergeants Inn in London.

A young man named Jacob Aretius, who styles himself Germano-Britannus, studied
now in Oxon, and published (1) Primula veris: seu Panegerica ad excellentiss.
Principem Palatinum. This he calls Eidyllium. (2) In augustiss. gloriosiss.
Regis Jacobi inaugurationem carmen seculare, etc. written in Greek, Lat. Dutch,
Ital. and Engl. (3) In nuptias illustriss. principis Frederici and Elizabethae,
Maletemata. Which three things were printed at Land. 1613. qu. He has also
Lat. Verses extant on the death of Prince Henry, and perhaps other things.

This year also studied in the University Rob. Spotswood and Rob. Murrey Scots.
Of the first I shall speak at large elsewhere, as also of the other, if he be
the same with Sir Rob. Murrey who was afterward President of the Royal Society.

The most learned also Isaac Casaubon was entered a Student in Bodlies Library
as a Member of Chapter Chapter in the month of May this year, but died soon after to
the great loss of learning. He was a great Linguist, a singular Grecian, and an
exact Philologer.

An. Dom. 1614.
An. 12 Jac. 1.
Chanc. the same.

Vicech. William Goodwin D. D. Dean of Chapter Chapter Jul. 15.

Proct. Jenkin Vaughan of Alls. Coll. Sam. Fell of Chapter Chapter

Bach. of Arts.
May 23. Will. Jemmat of Magd. Coll.

28. Christoph. Davenport of Magd. hall, who for one year and three months had
studied in Trin. Coll. near Dublin -- This Person who was no Writer, as I can
yet learn, yet I set him down, lest posterity take him to be Christoph.
Davenport, who was now (1614) a Student in Merton Coll. I mean the same
Davenport, afterward known by the name of Franc. a Sancta Clara, and
celebrated among Men of his persuasion, and by many Protestants too, for his
elaborate books that are extant, as you shall further see in the next vol. of
this work.

June 16. Tho. Turner of St. John's Coll. -- See among the Creations in 1633.

28. John Flavell of Wadh. 30. Edm. Wingate of Qu. Coll.

Jul. 4. Will Stafford of Chapter Chapter -- See in the year 1617, under the title of
Creations.

7. Richard Thornton of Linc. Oct. 29. Christop. Tesdale of New Coll.

Of the first of these last two you may see more among the Masters 1617. and of
the other in 1618.

Nov. 4. Tim. Woodroffe of Ball. Dec. 15. John Harmar of Magd. Coll.

17. Hen. Ramsden of Magd. hall, afterward of Linc. Coll.

Feb. 1. Rich. Toogood of Oriel Coll.

Five of these Bachelaurs, namely Jemmat, Wingate, Woodroffe, Harmar and
Toogood, will be remembered at large in the next Volume, or elsewhere.

Admitted 187.

Bach. of Law.
June 30. Richard Zouche of New Coll. -- He was afterward the great Ornament
of the University for his singular knowledge in the Civil and Canon Law, as you
shall fully understand in the 2. vol. of this work.

Besides him were but four more admitted this year.

Mast. of Arts.
May 5. Richard Spencer of C. C. Coll. Son of Robert Lord Spencer.

28. Brian Duppa of Alls. Jun. 25. Rob. Skinner of Trin. 30. Hugh Lloyd of
Oriel Jul. 2. Will. Page of Ball. afterward of Alls. Coll.

5. Michael Oldsworth of Magd. Coll. -- He was afterward elected a Burgess to
serve in several Parliaments for Sarum and old Sarum, and tho in the grand
rebellion he was no Colonel, yet he was Governor of Old Pembroke and
Mountgomery, led him by the nose, as he pleased, to serve both their turns. He
had a share with his Lordship out of the office from which Sir Henry Compton
was ejected in the time of the said Rebellion, worth 3000 l. per an. was keeper
of Windsore Park, one of the two Masters of the Prerogative Office, and made
(...) old cause (...) unfolded, etc. Land. 1660. oct. p. (...).
the Bailiff of Westminster give him 50 l. per an. to continue him there.

Jul. 5. Franc. White of Magd. Coll. -- He afterward published, Londons
Warning by Jerusalem, Sermon. at Paul's Cross on Midlent Sunday 1618, on Micah 6.
9. Land. 1619. qu. What other things he has made public I find not, nor any
thing else of him, only that he was a Gentleman's Son of London. I find another
Franc. White who was D. D. of Cambridge, afterward Chaplain in ordinary to K.
James 1. Dean of Carlisle, and at length Bishop of Ely; the Titles of whose
Works you may see in the Oxford Catalogue, and among them the Sermon before
mentioned, as if it had been his. Also a third Franc. White (a Lawyer as it
seems) who became well read in the ancient Histories and Laws of our Nation,
Author of a book entit. For the sacred law of the land. Land. 1652. oct. But
whether he was of this University, I cannot yet tell.

July 6. Edw. Terry of Chapter Chapter

July 7. Gilb. Wats of Linc. Coll. Hen. King Joh. King Rich. Gardener of Chapter Chapter


Jan. 24. Rich Steuart of Alls. Mich. Jermin Rich. James of Corp. Chapter Coll.



Adm. 108.

Bach. of Phys.
July 12. Peter Bowne of C. C. Coll.

Not one admitted besides him, and but one that supplicated for the said
degree, viz. Rich. Berry of Linc. Coll. but whether admitted this, or in any
year following, I know not. He died in June 1651, and was buried by the name of
Dr. Rich. Berry.

Bach. of Div.
May 5. Rob. Harris of Magd. Hall.

16. Tho. James of New Coll. Rob. Burton of Chapter Chapter

June 8. Jam. Rowlandson of Qu. Coll.

July 5. Rob. Moor of New Coll. a Compounder.

Adm. 19.

Doct. of Law.
Oct. 13. John Hawley Principal of Gloucester Hall, formerly Fellow of S. John's
Coll.

Mar. 23. Nich. Darrel of New Coll. -- He was about this time Prebendary of
Winchester, where dying in Oct. 1629, was buried in the Cath. Chapter there near to
the body of his Wife Jane.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul. 12. Peter Bowne of C. C. Coll. -- He accumulated the Degrees in Physic.

Doct. of Div.
May. 16. Edward James of Chapter Chapter Thom. James of New Coll. Brethren.


The last of which accumulated: And to both I have seen several learned
Epistles written by their Nephew Rich. James of C. C. C. who has also written
the Epitaph of the first, who died some years before Thomas.

30. John Simpson of C. C. C. -- He was about this time Prebendary of
Canterbury. See among the Doctors of Div. 1608.

June 8. Will. Westerman of Oriel Adam Wilson of Qu. Coll.


The last of which two, died at Nutfield in Surrey (of which place I think he
was Rector) in the beginning of 1634.

27. Will. Piers of Chapter Chapter

July 5. Nich. Love of New Coll. -- He was at this time Chaplain to his
Majesty, Warden of Wykehams Coll. near to, and Prebendary of, Winchester; where
dying about 1630 was buried in the Chapel belonging to the said Coll.

Rob. Moor of New Coll. who accumulated, was admitted the same day.

John Charlet of Oriel Coll. was also admitted the same day -- He was now
Prebendary of Worcester, and dying in 1640, Herb. Croft D. D. succeeded him in
that Dignity.

Theodore Price was admitted as a member of New Coll. on the same day also --
He was originally Chorister of Alls. Coll. afterward Fellow of Jesus, now
Principal of Heart hall and about this time Subdean of Westminster, Prebendary
of Winchester; and afterward (as it is said by some) Master of the Hospital of
St. Cross. He gave way to fate 15. Dec. 1631, and was buried at Westminster;
whereupon Dr. John Williams Dean of that place called together the Prebendaries
of the Church, and took great pains to make the World suspect that he died a
Romans Catholic, only to raise a scandal on his enemy Bishop Laud who had
commended him to the King for a Bishopric in Wales. A rigid and inveterate
Presbyterian tells ^wofd^ Prynne in his Canterburies Doom, etc. printed 1646.
p. 355.
us, that the said Dr. Land did endeavor to promote him to a Welsh Bishopric,
but was opposed by Philip Earl of Pembroke, so Dr. Morg. Owen Here you (...)
out as to time, for (...) was not made Bishop of Land^ff till 16^9 which was
eight years after Dr. Price his death.
was preferred in his stead. This Price lived a professed, unpreaching Epicure
and Arminian, and died a reconciled Papist to the Church of Rome, having
received extreme unction from a popish Priest, etc. Thus Prynne; yet the Church
Too* ^^^er in his Church History, etc. lib. 11. Sect. 17.
Historian tells us that Dr. Williams beforementioned did much endeavor to
make him Archb. of Armagh, but denied by the Duke of Bucks, without any mention
made of Dr. Laud his endeavors. But so it was that Dr. Williams being a great
favourer of the Puritan or Presbyterian, Prynne therefore made no mention of
him, but laid all upon the score of Laud,

July 5. Robert Say Will. Twysse of New Thom. Wyatt of Oriel Coll.




6. Thom. Anyan President of C. C. Coll. who accumulated -- This Doctor who was
born at Sandwych in Kent, and had lately been Chaplain to Egerton Lord Keeper,
published (1) A Sermon preached at St. Mary's Church in Oxon. 12. Jul. 1612;
being the Act Sunday, on Psalm. 1. 3. Land. 1612. qu. (2) Sermon preached at St.
Mary Spittle 10. Apr. 1615. on Acts 10. 34. 35. Oxon. 1615. qu. In the year
1619, he being then one of his Majesty's Chaplains, he was made Prebendary of
Gloucester, and afterward being found unfit to govern a College, because he was
a fosterer of faction, he resigned his Presidentship and was made Prebendary of
Canterbury; where dying 1632, was buried in the Cath. Chapter there.

Francis James of Chapter Chapter stood in the Act this year to complete his Doctorship
in Divinity, but when he was admitted, it appears not in the public register.
-- He was now in great esteem for several Specimens of Latin Poetry which he
before had made, especially for his Poem, published in 1612, entit. Threnodia
Henricianarum Exequiarum. Sive Panolethria Anglicana, etc. He was near of kin
to Dr. Tho. James mentioned before, and among the Writers under the year 1629,
was about this time Preacher or Read. at the Savoy in the Strand near London,
and, as it seems, a Preacher at St. Matthews in Friday Street. At length
departing this mortal life in 1621, was buried, (I think) at Ewbu^st in Surrey.

Incorporations.
July 7. Franc. Barrough lately of Eman. Coll. in Cambridge, now of St. John's
in Oxon, was incorporated either Bach. or Master of Acts.

9. Augustine Lindsell M. of A. and Fellow of Clare hall in Cambridge -- He was
born at Bumsted in Essex, was bred Idem in the Worthies of England in Essex.
Scholar and Fellow in the said Hall, where he became well studied in Greek,
Hebrew and all antiquity. Afterward he succeeded Dr. Walt. Curle in the
Deanery of Lichfield 1628, Dr. Will. Piers in the Episcopal See of
Peterborough, (to which he was elected 22. Dec. 1632) and being translated
thence to Hereford, in (December) 1633 upon the translation of Dr. Juxon to
London, died at his Palace in Hereford 6. Nov. 1634. whereupon his body was
buried in the Cath. Church there. He was a Man of very great learning, of which
he gave sufficient evidence to the Church by setting forth that excellent
edition of Theophylact upon St. Paul's Epistles.

Thomas Goodwin M. A. of the said University, was also then (July 9.)
incorporated as it is said in the public register; but if he be the same
Person whom I shall mention among the creations an. 1653. I should rather think
that he was incorporated Bach. of Arts.

Sam. Buggs was incorporated M. of A. the same day -- See more of him among the
Writers in John King, an. 1638.

July 12. Edmund Wilson Doctor of Phys. of Kings Coll. in Cambridge and Fellow
of the Coll. of Physicians in London -- On the 18. Dec. 1616. he was installed
Canon of Windsore on the death of Dr. Rich Field, but because he was not
ordained Priest within a year following, he was deprived of his Canonry and Dr.
Godfrey Goodman succeeded, being installed 20. Dec. 1617. This Dr. W^^son who
was Son of Will. Wilson mentioned among the Doctors of Divinity, under the year
1607, and had practiced his faculty several years in Windsore, died in the
Parish of St. Mary le Bow in London about the beginning of Oct. 1633, at which
time, or before, he gave many books to Lincoln Coll Library in Oxon.

Thomas Horsmanden D. D. of the said University of Cambridge, was incorporated
the same day.

July 14. Lancelot Langhorne Bach. of Div. of Cambridge -- He was now Parson of
St. Martins Church within Ludgate, London, and had published Mary sitting at
Christ's feet; Sermon at the funeral of Mrs. Mary Swain, the Wife of Mr. Will.
Swain, at St. Botolphs without Aldersgate, on Luke 10. 42. Land. 1611. oct.
and perhaps other things. He died about the beginning of November this year
(1614) and was buried, I presume, in his Church of St. Martin beforementioned.

Mar. 23. Philip King M. A. of the same University -- Another of both his names
was of this University, as I shall tell you in these Fasti an. 1618. and 1645.

This year Charles de Beauvais of the Isle of Guernsey, a young Man most
conversant in the study of learned arts, was entered a Student in Bodies
Library, but whether he was matriculated as a member of any Coll. or Hall, it
appears not. He is the same Chapter de Beauvais without doubt, who was afterward
Author of (1) Dedisciplinis and scientiis in genere: and de recto ordine quo
sunt in Scholis and Academiis docendae, etc. (2) Recta delineatio disciplinae
Vniversalis, seu primae Philosophiae; itemque Logicae. Which two were printed
at Land. 1648. in oct. (3) Exercitations concerning the pure and true, and the
impure and false religion. Land. 1665. oct. at which time the Author was Rector
of Witheham in Sussex.

An. Dom. 1615.
An. 13. Jac. 1.
Chanc. Thom. Lord Egerton.

Vicechanc. Dr. Will. Goodwin again, July 17.

Proct. Hugh Dicus of Brasn. Coll. Richard Baylie of St. John Coll. Apr. 19.


Bach. of Arts.
May 4. John Bailey of Exet. Coll.

5. Steph. Geree of Magd. Hall.

July 5. Cornelius Burges of Wadh. 7. Charles Herle of Exeter Nov. 9. Francis
Gough of New Coll.

The last was afterward Bishop of Limerick in Ireland.

Dec. 13. James Lamb of Brasn, College, afterward of St. Mary's Hall.

Feb. 5. Thom. Twittie of Oriel 6. Thom. Paybody of Merton Coll.

Of the first of these last two, you may see more among the Bach. of Div. 1633,
and of the other, among the Masters of Arts, an. 1624.

7. John Brian of Queen Coll. -- I know not yet to the contrary but that he may
be the same John Brian who published a funeral Sermon called The virtuous
Daughter, on Prove. 31. ver. 29. Land. 1636. qu. etc. and perhaps other things.
Quaere.

26. Alexander Gill (Son of Alexander) lately of Trin. Coll. now of Wadham, and
afterward of Trinity again.

Five of these Bachelaurs, namely Geree, Burges, Herle, Lamb and Gill, will be
mentioned at large elsewhere.

Admitted 203.

Bach. of Law.
June. Tho Merriot John South John Crook of New Coll.


The first, who will be mentioned in the next volume; was a good Latinist and
Orator. The second was afterward the Kings Professor of the Greek tongue and
at length, (upon the death of Dr. Tho. Hyde.) Chauntor of Salisbury, 24. Sept.
1666. He died at Writtle in Essex (of which place he was Vicar) in August 1672,
and was buried in the Church there; whereupon his Chauntorship was conferred on
Dr. Dan. Whitbye of Trin. Coll. As for the last, John Crook, he was afterward
Fellow of the Coll. (...) Winchester, Prebendary of the Cathedral there, and
Master of the Hospital of St. Mary Magd. near to that City.

Admitted 9.

Mast. of Arts.
May 3. Jerem. Stephens of Brasn. 20. Will. Nicholson of Magd. Coll.

Jun. 15. Rob. Weldon Barten Holyday of Chapter Chapter


17. Will. Thomas of Brasn. Tho. Vica^ of Qu. 27. Griff. Higgs of Mert. Coll.



Admitted 106.

Bach. of Div.
July 13. Sampson Price of Exeter Coll.

Nov. 23. Edm. Gunter Samuel Fell Hen. Whistler of Trin. of Chapter Chapter Dec. 1.
John Hanmer of Alls. Coll.




March 4. Fredericus Dorvilius of Exeter Coll. -- He writes himself
Aquisgranensis natione, and Palatinus educatione, being at this time a
Sojournour in the said Coll. for the sake of Dr. Prideaux the Rector, whom he
much admired.

Adm. 15.

Not one Doctor of Law was admitted this year.

Doct. of Physic.
July 3. Clement Westcombe of New Coll. who accumulated the Degrees in Physic
-- He was about this time held in great value for the happy success in the
practice of his faculty in, and near the City of, Exeter, where he died in 1652
or thereabouts.

Doct. of Div.
Mar. 27. Sam. Radcliff Principal June 17. John Barnston of Brasn. Coll.

The last of which who was now Chaplain to Egerton Lord Chancellor of England,
was about this time Canon Residentiary of Salisbury, and afterward a
Benefactor to learning, as I have told (...) Antiq. V^iv. Oxon, (...)
you elsewhere. He lived to see himself outed of his spiritualities, and dying
30. May 1645 was buried, as it seems, at Everton in Wilts.

Jun. 27. ^arnab. Potter of Queens July 6. John King of Merton Coll.

The last of these two was installed Canon or Preb. of the twelfth and last
stall in the Collegiat Church at Westminster, on the death of Dr. Will. Barlow
Bish. of Linc. an. 1613, and this year (1615) Nov. 23, he became Canon of
Windsore in the place of Mardoche Aldem deceased. He died 7. Aug. 1638, and was
buried in the Chapel of St. George at Windsore.

Dec. 1. John Hanmer of Alls. Coll. -- See more among the Creations in the year
following.

Feb. 27. Jasper Swyft of Chapter Chapter

March 14. John Barcham of C. C. 21. John Davies of Lincoln Coll.

Incorporations.
July 11. Will. Spicer Bach. of Law of Cambridge -- See among the
Incorporations 1618.

Abraham Gibson M. A. of the said University, was incorporated the same day;
and again on the 15. July 1617. -- This Person who was afterward Preacher to
the Temples in London, has published (1) The Lands mourning for vain swearing,
Sermon on Jerem. 23. 10. Land. 1613. oct. (2) Christianae-polemica; or, a
narrative to War, Sermon. at Wool-church in London before the Captains and
Gentlemen of exercise in the Attillery-garden, on Judge. 7. 18. Land. 1619. oct.
and not unlikely other things. He was afterward D. of D. and dying in, or
near, one of the Temples, was buried near to the Communion Table in the Chancel
of the Church belonging to the said Temples, 5. Januar. 1629.

July 11. Godfrey Goodman Bach. of Div. of Cambridge -- See more of him among
the Bishops in Miles Smith, an. 1624.

Samuel Purchase Bach. of Div. of the said University was incorporated the same
day -- This worthy Divine, who is by some styled our English Ptolemy, was born
in the County of Essex, either at Dunmow or Thacksted, but in what Coll. or
Hall in Cambridge educated, I cannot yet tell. After he had left the University
he became Minister of Eastwood in Rochford hundred in his own Country, but
being desirous to forward and prosecute his natural Genie he had to the
collecting and writing of voyages, travels, and pilgrimages, left his cure to
his Brother, and by the favor of the Bishop of London got to be Parson of St.
Martins Church within Ludgate. He has written and published (1) Pilgrimage:
or, relations of the world, and the religions observed in all ages, and places
discovered from the Creation to this present, etc. in 4 parts. Land. 1614. fol.
second edit. and there again 1626. fol. (2) Purchase his P^^grims; in 4. volumes
or parts, each volume containing 5 books. Land. 1625. fol. (3) Purchase his
Pilgrim. Microcosmus or the history of Man, etc. Land. 1619. oct. (4) The Kings
tower, and triumphant arch of London. pr. 1623. oct. By the publishing of which
books he brought himself into debt, but died not in prison as some have said,
but in his own house, (a little while after the King had promised him a
Deanery) about 1628. aged 51. What other things he has published, besides a
Funeral Sermon on Psalm. 39. 5. printed 1619 in oct. I know not, and therefore
be pleased to take this character given of him by a learned In biblio^h^ca Joh.
Boss^rdi.
Person, which may serve instead of an Epitaph. Samuel Purchase, Anglus,
linguarum and artium divinarum atque humanarum egregie peritus, Philosophus,
Historicus, and Theologus maximus, patriae ecclesiae antistes fidelis; multis
egregiis scriptis, and in primis orientalis, occident alisque Indiae vastis
voluminibus patria lingua conscripta celeberrimus. One Samuel Purchase A. M.
has published A theater of political flying Insects, etc. Land. 1657. qu.

July 11. John Wood Rob. King John Bowls D. D. Cant.


The first of these three died in the Parish of St. Dionise Backchurch in
London, being Minister, as it seems of that place, an. 1624. and the last, who
was a Native of Lancashire, and Fellow of Trinity Coll. in the said University,
became Dean of Salisbury in the latter end of July an. 1620, upon Dr. John
Williams his being made Dean of Westminster. At length upon Dr. Walt. Curle's
translation to the Sea of D. and Wells. he became Bishop of Rochester in 1630,
and dying in an house situated on the Bank side in Westminster, 9. October. 1637
was buried in St. Paul's Cathedral. He has extant Concio ad clerum, in Act.
cap. 15. 4. -- printed 1631. qu. and perhaps other things. Quaere.

Jan. 2. Eleazer Hodson Doct. of Phys. of Padua -- He was afterward eminent
for his practice in the City of London, where he died (in the Parish of St.
Stephen in Colemanstreet) about the latter end of 1638. His Brother Phineas
Hodson I have mentioned in the Incorporations under the year 1602

Joh. Radolphus Stuckius and Jo. Waserus both of Zurich, were this year
Students in the University. Afterward they became learned Men and Writers, as
I shall tell you in the second Vol. in my discourse of Dr. John Prideaux.

An. Dom. 1616.
An. 14. Jac. 1.
Chanc. Tho. Lord Egerton created this year Viscount Brackley, but he voluntary
resigning his office of Chancellor of this University on the 24. Jan. William
Earl of Pembroke, Knight of the Garter, Chamberlain of the Kings Household,
etc. was unanimously elected into his place 29 of the same month.

Vicechanc. Arth. Lake D. D. Warden of New Coll. July 17.

Proct. Robert Sanderson of Linc. Coll. Charles Croke of Chapter Chapter Apr. 10.


Bach. of Music.
July 4. John Vauter of Linc. Coll.

John Lake of New Coll. had his grace granted for the Degree of Bach. of Mus.
but whether he was admitted it appears not; Or, that he, or Vauter, have made
any public compostions in their faculty.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 19. Nich. Hunt of Exet. June 19. John Speed of St. Joh. Coll.

One Nich. Hunt has several things extant, who being, I presume, the same with
the former, is hereafter to be mentioned at large.

26. Anth. Faringdon of Trin. Jul. 3. Jo. Allibond of Magd. Coll.

Of the last of these two you may see more among the created Doctors of Div.
an. 1643.

5. John Langley of Magd. hall.

Oct. 24. Charles Robson of Qu. Coll. -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1629.

26. Bruno Ryves of New, afterward of Magd. Coll.

Will. Price of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day -- See among the Masters 1619.

Nov. 4. John Doughtie.

Dec. 14. Rob. Grebby of New Coll. -- See more among the Masters of Art, 1619.

Jan. 29. Will. Hayes of Magd. hall -- See among the Bach. of Div. 1627.

Feb. 28. John Gee of Exet. John Thorie of Magd. Coll.


Of the last of these two, you may see more among the Incorporations, an. 1627.

As for Faringdon, Langley, Ryves and Doughtie, you are to expect large mention
of them hereafter.

Admitted 223.

Mast. of Arts.
April 19. Rich. Parre of Brasn. Coll.

June 4. Morgan Owen of Heart Hall.

12. Immanuel Bourne of Chapter Chapter George Singe of Ball. Coll.

20. Tho. Goffe of Chapter Chapter

21. John Scull of Lincoln, lately of Mert. Coll. -- He has published Two
Sermons on Math. 10. 16. printed 1624. qu. being the same person, as it seems,
who was afterward Rector of Shinfold in Sussex, where he died in 1641.

26. Franc. Potter of Trin. Coll.

July 5. John Angel of Magd. Hall.

De^. 17. Alex. Huish of Wadham Coll.

Feb. 25. Will. Jemmat of Magd. Hall, lately of Magd. Coll.

Adm. 117.

Bach. of Phys.
..... Francis Anthony Olevian of Gloucester Hall, was admitted; but the day or
month when, appears not. -- He was a German of the Palatine of the Rhine, and
had studied ten years in the faculty of Physic in the Universities of
Heidelberg, Mountpelier, Paris, and Oxon. He afterward practiced his Faculty
(being licensed by the University) at Blandford Forum in Dorsetshire, where he
died in 1642; but whether he has written or published any thing, let the
Physicians seek.

Bach. of Div.
May 15. Sim. Birckbek Thom. Sutton of Qu. Coll.


June 4. Tho. Godwin of Magd. July 10. George Wall of Brasn. Coll.

The last was about this time beneficed in his native Country of
Worcestershire, and afterward published A sermon at the Archbishop of
Canterbury his Visitation metropolitical, held at Allsaints in Worcester by Dr.
B^ent his Grace's Vicar General, 3 June 1635. on 2 Cor. 5. 20. Land. 1635. qu.
and perhaps other things. Qu^ere.

Dec. 13. Henr. Rogers of Jes. Coll.

Besides these, were 13 more admitted, of whom Joh Flavel of Broadgates Hall
was one, and Evan Morgan of Linc. Coll. another, both Compounders.

Not one Doctor of Law or Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 18. Joh. Warner of Magd. Coll.

May 11. Joh. Hamden of Chapter Chapter

15. Tho. Holloway of Ball. Coll.

June 13. Sam. Clark of Magd. Hall, a Compounder. -- He had a son of both his
names of University Coll. an. 1635, but neither of them, as I can yet find,
were Writers, which I thought fit to let the Reader know, because there have
been several Samuel Clarks that have been Authors, as (1) Sam. Clark of Merton
Coll. whom I shall mention in the second Volume of this Work. (2) Sam. Clark
sometimes Minister of S. Bennet-Fink in London, born at Wolstan in
Warwickshire, 10 Oct. 1599, being of the same Family with those of Willoughby
in that County, (as Sam. Clark the Compounder before mentioned was) afterward
a severe Calvinist, and a scribbling Plagiary, as his Works (mostly the lives of
Presbyterian Divines) show; a Catalogue of which, you may see in one of his
books entit. The lives of sundry eminent persons in this later age. In two
parts, 1. of Divines, 2. of Novility, etc. Land. 1683, fol. before which is a
canting narrative of his own life. He died at Thistleworth or Istleworth in
Middlesex 25 Dec. 1682. (3) Sam. Clark of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, who
published certain matters in 1649, and after, etc.

Jun. 25. Will. Kingsley of Alls. Coll. 26. Joh. Flavell of Broadgates Hall
July 4. Hen. Seward of Brasn. Coll. Compounders.

The first of these three, was at this time Archdeacon of Canterbury, and died
about the beginning of the year 1648. The second was a Dignitary, and Rector of
Tallaton in Devonshire, where he died in 1623. Another of both his names was a
Writer of Wadham Coll. as you may see among the Writers, an. 1617, and a third,
who was a Devonian born, and Son, or at least near of kin to him of Tallaton,
has published several things, (some of which are mentioned in Joh. Flavell of
Wadh. Coll.) and was living diverse years after the Restoration of K. Chapter 2.
but whether he was of the Univ. of Oxon I cannot yet tell. Jo. Flavell of
Tallat^n had a Son named Thomas who was Bach. of Arts of Trin Coll. in this
University, afterward Vicar of Mullian and Rector of Great Ruan in Cornwall,
also Prebendary of Exeter, and died 1682, aged 77 years.

9. Edw. Gee of Brasn. 15. Edw. Chetwynd of Exet. Oct. 23. John Moseley of
Magd. Nov. 7. H^nr. Beaumont of Alls. Coll.

The last of which was a Compounder, being at this time Dean of Peterborough
and Canon of Windsore. In 1622, May 18. he was installed Dean of Windsore in
the room of Marc. Anton. de Dominis, who in Feb. going before had left England.
This Dr. Beaumont died 30 June 1627, and was buried in S. George's Chap. there,
on the right side of the grave of Tho. Danett one of his Predecessors in that
Deanery. See more in the Incorporations, an. 1571.

Feb. 10. Rich. Carpenter Joh. Standard of Ex. Coll.


Both of these were learned men, and so taken to be by Dr. Joh. Prideaux, as I
have elsewhere told you. Dr. Standard was afterward a Justice of Peace for
Oxfordshire. (being Lord of Whithill) and dying 16 Dec. 1647, aged 66, was
buried in the Churchyard at Tackley in the said County.

Incorporations.
Apr. 24. Tho. Farnabie M. A. of Cambr. sometimes of Merton Coll. in this
University, and afterward the eminent Schoolmaster of Kent. -- I shall mention
him at large in the second Volume of this work.

Jul. 2. Ralph Rand M. A. of S. Andrew in Scotland.

9. Joh. Hacket M. A. of Trin. Coll. in Cambr. -- About this time he wrote a
Latin Comedy called Loiola, -- printed at Land. 1648. in oct. was afterward D.
of D. Parson of S. Andrews Church in Holbourn near London, Chaplain to K.
Charles 1. Residentiary of S. Paul's, and a great sufferer in the time of the
Rebellion. At length after the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. to whom he was
Chaplain in ordinary, he became Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, to which
being consecrated at Lambeth 22 Dec. 1661, sat there to the time of his death,
28 Oct. 1670, aged 79. Afterward came out under his name Christian
Consolations, taught from five heads in Religion. printed 1671 in tw. and A
century of Sermons etc. Land. 1675, fol.

Rob. Farsereus or Faisereus M. A. of Lovaine, was incorporated the same day.

Jan. 14. Edw. Kellet M. A. of Kings Coll. in Cambr. -- He was at this time
Rector of Ragborough and Crocombe in Somersetshire, and afterward Canon
residentiary of Exeter. His Writings speak him a learned man, some of which are
(1) Miscellanies in Divinity, in 3 books, etc. Camb. 1633, fol. (2) The
threefold supper of Christ in the night that he was betrayed. Land. 1641, fol.
besides Sermons, of which one is entit. A return from Argier, preached at
Minhead in Somersetshire 16 Mar. 1627, at the readmission of a relapsed
Christian into our Church, on Gal. 5. 2. Land. 1628, qu. This was preached in
the morning of the third Sunday in Lent, and in the Afternoon preached Dr. Hen.
Byam on the same occasion* but not on the same subject. He the said Kellet was
a sufferer, if I mistake not, in the time of the Rebellion, which began 1642.

Febr. 20. Joh. Foxeroft Bach. of Arts of Cambr. -- See more among the Masters
in the year following.

This year was a Supplicate made for one John Hayward LL. D. and
Historiographer of Chelsey Coll. near to London, to be incorporated in the same
Faculty, but whether he was really so, I cannot tell. -- In the year 1619 he
received the honor of Knighthood from his Majesty at Whitehall, being then
accounted a learned and godly man, and one better read in Theological Authors
than in those belonging to his own profession. The Titles of all or of most of
the Books that he published, you may see in the Oxford Catalogue. As for those
of History which he has published, the phrase and words in them were in their
time esteemed very good; only some have wished that in his History of Hen. 4.
he had not called Sir Hugh Lynne by so light a word as Mad-cap, tho he were
such; and that he had not changed his Historical style into a Drammatical,
where he induces a Mother uttering a Woman's passion, in the case of her Son.
This Sir Joh. Hayward ended his days in his house in the Parish of Great S.
Barthelmew in London, on Wednesday 27 June 1627, and was buried in the Church
belonging to that Parish. You may see more of him in Camdens Annals of Qu.
Elizab. under the year 1601, where you will find him punished by a tedious
Imprisonment for an unseasonable Edition of one of his books.

Creations.
Jul. 9. Francis Stewart of Chapter Chapter (Knight of the Bath) one of the Sons of the
Earl of Murrey, was actually created Master of Arts. -- He was a learned
Gentleman, was one of Sir Walt. Raleigh's Club at the Meremaid Tavern in Friday
street in London, and much venerated by Ben. Johnson, who dedicated to him his
Comedy called The silent Woman. He was a person also well seen in marine
Affairs, was a Captain of a Ship, and, as I have been informed by those who
remember him, did bear the office for some time of a Vice. or Rear, Admiral.

Nov. 13. John Hanmer of Alls. Coll. was then actually created D. of D. as the
Register says; which was, as I suppose, no more than the completion of that
degree, which should have been done in the Act preceding, had he not been
absent.

In the latter end of Aug. this year, Prince Charles came honorably attended to
the University, and after he had been entertained with Ceremonies and Feasting
suitable to his Dignity and Merit, he was pleased with his own hand writing to
matriculate himself a Member of the said University, Aug. 28. with this Symbol
or Sentence, Si vis omnia subjicere, subjice te rations. To say no more, he was
afterward a King of great Religion and Learning, but unfortunate.

An. Dom. 1617.
An. 15 Jac. 1.
Chanc. William Earl of Pembroke, sometimes of New Coll.

Vicechanc. Dr. Will. Goodwin again, Jul. 17.

Proct. Franc. Grevill of Mert. Coll. Joh. Harrys of New Coll. Apr. ult.


Bach. of Arts.
May 10. Christop* Harvey of Brasn. Coll,

23. Joh. Seager of S. Mary's Hall.

Oct. 17. Pet. Heylyn of Magd. 23. Will. Tipping of Qu. Coll.

Nov. 23. Joh. Atherton of Gloucester Hall, afterward of Linc. Coll. and the
unfortunate Bishop of Waterford in Ireland.

27. Gilbert Sheldon of Trinity Coll. afterward Fellow of Alls. and at length
Archb. of Canterbury.

Feb. 10. Robert Blake of Wadham Coll. -- This right valiant person having
taken no higher degree in this University, I must therefore make mention of him
in this place. Born therefore he was at Bridgwater in Somersetshire, being the
Son and Heir of Humphrey Blake of that place Gent. but descended of the ancient
Family of the Blakes of Blanchfield in the said County. In the beginning of
Lent Term an. 1615, he being then about 15 years of age he was matriculated in
the University as a Member of S. Albans Hall, about which time standing for a
Scholarship of C. C. Coll. with Rob Hegge and Rob. Newan, was put aside,
whether for want of merit or friends, I cannot tell. While he continued in the
said Hall, he was observed by his Contemporaries to be an early riser and
studious, but withal he did take his pleasure in Fishing, Fowling, etc. and
sometimes in stealing of Swans. Before the time came when he was to take a
degree in Arts, he translated himself to his Country men in Wadham Coll. and as
a Member of that House, he did stand for a Fellowship of Merton Coll. with
Alex. Fisher, John Doughtie, Edw. Reynolds, John Earl, etc. an. 1619, but
whether it was for want of Scholarship, or that his person was not handsome or
proper, (being but of stature little) which Sir Hen. Savile then Warden of that
Coll. did much respect, he lost it, continued in Wadham Coll. without the
taking of any other degree, and in 1623 wrote a Copy of Verses (...)..... Oxon.
16^4.
on the death of the learned Camden. Afterward he went into his own Country,
where he lived in the condition of a Gentleman, but always observed to be
puritancially inclined. In 1640 he was chosen a Burgess for Bridgwater to serve
in that Parliament which began at Westminster 13 Apr. 1640, but missing that
Office in the same year when the Long Parliament began on the 3 Nov. following,
he sided with the Presbyterian, took up arms for the Parliament soon after,
received a Commission from the Members thereof to be a Captain of Dragoons; and
afterward being made Governor of Taunton, was made a Colonel. Which Town, as
also afterward Lyme, he defended with great Valor against several famous and
forcible Sieges of the Kings Army under the command of Prince Maurice and
George Lord Goring. At length the War being in a manner terminated, the worth
of this inestimable great Commander (being so esteemed by those of his party)
was taken notice of by the Parliament: whereupon they resolved that it should
not lie hid at home, but show it self abroad, and therefore he was made first
one of the Commissioners of the Navy, then one of the Lord Wardens of the
Cinque Ports, and at length about 1649 one of the Generals at Sea: At his
entrance into which office, he pent up Prince Rupert in the chief Port of
Portugal, and hunted him from Sea to Sea, till he had reduced those Ships with
him, which before had revolted from the Parliament. In the beginning of the
year 1651 he reduced the Isle of Sci^ly to the Parliament Service, and on the
25 Nov. following, he was elected one of the Council of State, being then in
great repute with Oliver. In 1652, Sept. 5. he sorely beat the French Fleet,
and at that time, there being a Quarrel between the two Republics, England and
the United Provinces, he and his Fleet were worsted in the Downs by Van Tromp
the Dutch Admiral and his Fleet, 29 of Nov. following; but on the 18 of Febr.
following that, on which day happened a most terrible Sea-sight betwixt them
again, near to the Isles of W^ight and Portland, the Dutch were in a woeful
manner worsted. Ever after, Blake continued a fortunate Vindicator of his
Countries Privileges, from the encroachments of insulting Neighbors, a
victorious Enemy of the Spaniard, and was highly valued of all, even the
Royalist. The last part, and the most desperate attempt that he ever acted in a
Sea-blood, not that I shall now take notice of his daring piece of service at
Tunis against the Turks, an. 1655) was against the Spaniards at Sancta Cruz, in
Apr. 1657, which made him as terrible as Drake had been before to them, there
being less difference betwixt the same and report of their actions and
exploits, than in the sound of their names: For there, with 25 sail, he fought
(as 'twere in a ring) with seven Forts* a Castle, and 16 Ships, many of them
being of greater force than most of those Ships Blake carried in against them:
yet in spite of opposition, he soon calcined the Enemy, and brought his Fleet
back again to the Coast of Spain full fraught with honor. But what Commander
is able to repel the stroke of death? This is he that does conquer the
Conquerours, and level the honors of the mightiest Monarchs with the meanest
Captains: there is no withstanding his force, for all must fall: Blake himself
was compelled to strike the top-sail and yield, for in his return home, he gave
up the Ghost in the Ship called the George the Admiral as it entered into
Plymouth Sound, on Friday the seventeenth of August, an. 1657, aged 59,
occasioned by the Scurvy and Dropsy which he had contracted by his seasaring.
The next day his body was imbowelled, and closed in a sheet of lead, and the
bowels were interred in the great Church at Plymouth. He was a man wholly
devoted to his Countries Service, resolute in his undertakings, and most
faithful in the performance of them. With him, Valor seldom mist its reward,
nor Cowardice its punishment. When news was brought him of a metamorphosis in
the State at home, he would then encourage the Seamen to be most vigilant
abroad; for (said See The full view of the (...) and actions of O^. Cromwell.
printed 1600. in (...), page 31^.
he) It Is not our duty to mind State affairs, but to keep foreigners from
fooling us. In all his expeditions, the Wind seldom deceived him, but most an
end stood his friend, especially in his last undertaking at S. Cruze in the
Canary Islands. To the last, he lived a single life, never being espoused to
any, but his Countries, Quarrels. Soon after his death and embalming, the body
was conveyed by Sea to Greenwych House, where it remained for some time. From
thence it was conveyed by Water on the 4 of Sept. following with all due
solemnity and honor in a barge of state cove^ed with Velvet, adorned with
Escocheons and Pencils, accompanied with his brothers and diverse of his
kindred, relations and servants in mourning, together with Oliver's Privy
Council, the Commissioners of the Admiralty and Navy, the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of London, the Field Officers of the Army, and diverse other persons of
honor and quality, in a great number of barges and wherries covered with
mourning, marshaled and ordered by the Officers of Arms who directed and
attended the solemnity. In that order they passed to Westminster bridge, and at
their landing proceeded in the same manner through a Guard of several Regiments of
foot Soldiers of the Army, wherein he had been a Colonel in many eminent
Services. And so proceeding from the New Palace Yard at Westminster to the
Abbey, was interred in a Vault, made on purpose, in the Chapel of King Hen. 7.
In that place it rested till the 12 Sept. 1661, and then by virtue of his
Majesty's express Command sent to the Dean of Westminster, to take up the
bodies of all such persons which had been unwarrantably buried in the Chap. of
Hen. 7. and in other Chapels and places within the collegiate Church of S.
Peter in Westminster since the year 1641, and to bury them in some place in the
Churchyard adjacent: His body, I say, was then (Sept. 12.) taken up, and with
others, buried in a pit in S. Margarets Church yard adjoining, near to the
backdoor of one of the Prebendaries of Westminster; in which place it now
remains, enjoying no other monument, but what is reared by his Valor, which
time it self can hardly deface. At the same time were removed the bodies of (1)
Col. Rich Deane sometimes one of the Admirals at Sea for the Republic of
England, who was killed in a Sea Fight between the English and Dutch (which
last were worsted) that happened the 2 and 3 of June 1653. (2) Col Humph
Mackworth one of Oliver's Council, who was interred in Hen. 7. Chapel with
great solemnity 26 Dec. 1654. (3) Dr. Isaac Doris^aus. (4) Sir Will. Constable
of Flamburgh in Yorkshire, one of the Judges of K. Chapter 1. sometimes Covernour
of Gloucester, and Colonel of a Regiment of Foot; who dying 15 June, was buried
in K. Hen. 7. Chap. 21 of the same month an. 1655. (5) Col. Joh. Meldroma a
Scot who received his deaths wound at Ailresford in Hampshire. (6) Col.....
Buscawen a Cornish man. (7) Col. Edw. Popham one of the Admirals of the Fleet
belonging to the Parliament; who dying of a Fever at Dover 19 Aug. 1651, was
buried the 24 of Sept. following, in S. Joh. Bapt. Chapel. His body, after it
was taken up, was not buried in the said pit, but carried elsewhere (into the
Country I think) by some of his Relations, yet his monument was permitted to
stand by the intercession of some of his Ladies friends, with the stone,
wherein the Epitaph was insculp'd, to be turned. (8) Will. Stroude or Strode a
Parliament man, and one of the five Members demanded by K. Chapter 1. (9) Thom May
the Parliamentarian Historian. These with the bodies of Will. Strong and Steph.
Marshall sometimes Members of the Assembly of Divines (the last of which was
buried in the south Isle of the Church 23 Nov. ^655) and of several Women also,
and others, were re-buried in the pit before mentioned, on the 12 and 14 of
Sept. 1661. But after this long digression let us return to the remaining part
of the Admissions.

Feb. 13. Rob. Hegge of C. C. Coll.

Mar. 22. Jonas Mountague of Mert Coll. -- This person who was a Berkshire man
born, became a Student in the said College 1604, aged 18, but before he took a
Degree, he was called away by Sir Hen Savile to drudge for him in his Edition
of S. Chrys^stom's Works. Afterward Sir Henry procured for him the Usher's
place in Eaton School, and afterward the degree of Bach. of Arts. One Rich.
Mountague Fellow of Kings Coll. in Cambridge (who became Bishop of Norwich in
1638) was employed by the said Sir Henry to correct Chrysostom in Greek before
it went to the Press at Eaton, (about which time Mountague was Fellow of the
said Coll.) but how nearly related Jonas was to this Richard Mountague, who was
a Ministers Son, I know not.

As for Harvey, Segar, Heylyn, Tipping, and Shelden before mentioned, will be
large mention made elsewhere.

Admissions in all come to 225.

Bach. of Law.
Dec. 10. Rich. Steuart Will. Skinner of Alls. Coll.


The last was afterward Chancellor of Hereford. Besides him and Steuart, were
only two admitted this year.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 23. Rich. Thornton of Linc. Coll. -- This noted Preacher who had newly
been elected Fellow of that house, in a Lincolnshire place, became about the
year 1626 Rector of Rowghton in the same County, and afterward published The
Egyptian Courtier, two Sermons before the University at S. Mary's Church in
Oxon, on Genesis 40. 23. Land. 1635. qu. I have made mention of another Rich.
Thornton in these Fasti 1608.

Jun. 23. John Flavell of Wadham Coll. Tim. Woodroff of S. Alb. Hall, lately of
Ball. Coll.

25. Joh. Bailey of Exeter 28. Joh. Harmar of Magd. Coll.

30. Benj. Cox of Broadgates Hall.

Jul. 6. Will. Foster of S. John's Coll.

Oct. 29. Joh. Foxcroft of Magd. Hall. -- He was afterward Minister of Gotham
in Nottinghamshire; where he continued a puritanical Preacher several years. At
length closing with the Presbyterians when they grew dominant in 1641, he was
chosen one of the Assembly of Divines two years after. So that residing mostly
in London in the War time, (upon pretense of being molested by the Cavaliers at
Gotham) became a frequent Preacher there. He has published The Good of a good
Government, and well grounded peace, Fast Sermon before the H. of Commons on
Isay 32. 1. 2. Land. 1646. qu. and perhaps other things. Quaere.

Jan. 21. Henry Ramsden of Magd. Hall.

Feb. 4. Rich. Toogood of Oriel Coll.

13. Joh. Atkins of S. Edm. Hall. -- Whether he took the degree of Bach. of
Arts, I cannot yet find; however it appears, that one of both his names,
entitled Master of Arts, was admitted Rector of North Perrot in Somersetshire,
in the beginning of May 1618, who published The Christians Race, etc Sermon. on
Heb. 12. part of the first and second Verse, Land. 1624. qu. and not unlikely
other things. We have had several of both his names, but before him in time,
yet never took the degree of M. of A.

Adm. about 105.

Bach. of Div.
May 8. Rich. Corbet of Chapter Chapter

19. Rob. Sanderson of Linc. 30. Edw. Chaloner of Alls. Coll.

Jun. 18. Hen. Jackson Jul. 11. George Webb of C. C. Coll.

Adm. 24.

Doct. of Law.
Jul. 11. John Cradock of New Coll. a Compounder, and now much in esteem for
his great knowledge in the Civil Law.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul. 16. Ralph Baylie of New Coll. -- He was afterward an eminent
practitioner in the City of Bathe, where he lived many years in good repute,
and dying in 1645, was buried at Widcombe near that City.

Doct. of Div.
May 8. Will. Osbaldeston George Hamden Rich. Corbet of Chapter Chapter


The last of which accumulated the degrees in Divinity.

.... Rich. Lloyd of Linc. Coll. -- He was about this time dignified in Wales,
and dying at Ruabon in Denbighshire (of which place I think he was Minister)
about 1642, was buried there.

Jun. ult. Samps. Price of Exet. July 7. Rich Tillesley of S. Joh. Joh. Tapsell
of Mert. Coll.



This Joh. Tapsell who was the Son of Rob. Tapsell, was born at Garsingdon near
to, and in the County of, Oxon, about the beginning of Febr. 1571, admitted
prob. Fellow of the said house of Merton, an. 1593, took the degrees in Arts,
being then accounted a most excellent Disputant and Orator, and a person of
prodigious memory. In 1599, Jul. 9, he according to the Statute of his Coll.
did publicly dispute and speak speeches against the opinion of Aristotle
(which the said Satute styles varying) in the common Refectory of that house,
on these three Th^ses, (1) Juvenis est idoneus auditor moralis philosophiae.
(2) Probanda est in seen verecumdia. (3) Bonus a malo per dimidiam vitae partem
differt. Which Speeches being esteemed most admirable in their kind, and of a
Ciceronian style, were upon the desire of many of the Auditors, printed in an
octavo vol. but in what year I know not; for few Copies being printed, I could
never see one. He was afterward a Lecturer in the City of York, and at length
in London, where he died about 1630.

July 9. John Holt 12. Dan. Featley of C. C. Coll.

The first of these last two, was Prebendary of Westminster, and afterward
President of the said Coll. of C. C. He died 10 Jan. 1630, and was buried in
the Church of S. Peter at Westminster: whereupon Dr. Lodowick Weems or Wemmys
succeeded him in his Prebendship. As for the other, Dr. Featly alias
Fairclough, will be large mention made of him in the second vol.

Dec. 16. Francis Gibbons of Chapter Chapter -- He died in the Parish of S. Cross (of
which he was Parson) near to Shrewsbury, in 1639, or thereabouts.

Incorporations.
July 14. Arthur Lake M. A. of Cambridge. -- He was Son, if I mistake not, to
Sir Tho. Lake one of the Secretaries of State.

These following Masters of Cambr. were incorporated on the 15 July, being the
next day after the Act had been concluded.

Thomas Goad Mast. of Arts of Kings Coll. -- He was afterward Chaplain to
Archb. Abbot, Rector of Hadley in Suffolk, Doct. of Div. Prebendary of
Canterbury, etc. a great and general Scholar, exact Critic and Historian, a
Poet, Schoolman and Divine. This person who was Son of Dr. Roger Goad Provost
of Kings Coll. before mentioned, died in the year 1636, or thereabouts. Another
Tho. Goad was Doctor of the Laws, and the Kings Professor of that Faculty in
Cambridge, who died about the beginning of 1666. Of one Tho. Goade see in the
Pamphlet entit. A Century of scandalous, malignant Priests, etc. p. 27.

Benj. Laney M. of Arts. -- He was the fourth Son of a wealthy Merchant of
Ipsu^ych named Joh. Laney Esquire; who sparing nothing that might advance his
education, took him from School, and caused him to be admitted a Student in
Christ's Coll. in Cambr. Where making great proficiency in his studies, was
removed to Pembroke Hall, of which he became Fellow, and contemporary there
with Ralph Brownrig. Afterward he was made Master of that house, Doct. of Div.
Vicechancellour of the University, Chaplain in ordinary to K. Chapter 1, Prebendary
of Winchester, and about the same time of Westminster, in the place of Lambert
Osbaldeston deprived an. 1638, and afterward (upon the restoration of
Osbaldeston by the Long Parliament) in the place of Griffith Williams, an.
1641. Soon after, he was outed of his Mastership of Pembroke Hall for his
Loyalty, and about that time did attend in his Majesty's Service in the Treaty
at Vxbridge, being then esteemed a learned Divine. Afterward when his Majesty
Chapter 2. was in exile, he did in a most dutiful manner attend him, and for
several years after suffered great calamity, as innumerable Royalists did. Upon
his Majesty's return to his Kingdoms, he was restored to his Headship, and in
recompense of his sufferings, he was first made Dean of Rochester, in the place
of Dr. Tho. Turner, in which Dignity he was installed 24 of July 1660, and soon
after had the Bishopric of Peterborough conferred upon him, (with liberty to
keep his Mastership in commendam) to which he received Consecration in the
Abbey Church of S. Peter at Westminster, on Sunday December. 2. an. 1660.
Afterward, upon the death of Dr. Rob. Sanderson, he was translated to Lincoln,
and on the death of Dr. M. Wrenn, to Ely; where he sat to the time of his
death, in the latter end of 1674. Five of his Sermons preached before the King,
were printed in 1668 -- 9. And after his death were published his Observations
on a letter about liberty and necessity, etc. Land. 1676, in tw. which Letter
was written to the Duke of Newcastle by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury.

Rich. Holdsworth M. A. of S. John's Coll. -- This most eminent and loyal person
was a Native of Newcastle upon Tyne in Northumberland, where, for some time, he
was educated in Gramaticals; afterward being sent to the said Coll. he made
wonderful proficiency in Arts and Theology, became successively Divinity
Professor of Gresham Coll. (being about that time D. of D.) Master of Emanuel
Coll. several times Vicechancellour of Cambridge, Archdeacon of Huntingdon in
the place of Dr. Owen Gwynn Master of S. John's Coll. before mentioned
deceased, an. 1633, (which Dignity Gwynn had conferred upon him in 1622 upon the
resignation of Dr. Laud) and at length upon the grant of the Deanery of Durham
to Dr. Christopher Potter in the latter end of 1645, had the grant of the
Deanery of Worcester made unto him, having in the beginning of the grand
Rebellion refused the Bishopric of Bristow. But the principles of this
reverend Doctor being wholly orthodox, he suffered therefore very much during
the miserable condition which the Members of the Long Parliament had brought
this Kingdom to, lost most, if not all, his Spiritualities, was several times
imprisoned, yet afterward being at liberty he attended his Majesty in his
disconsolate and afflicted condition at Hampton Court and in the Isle of Wight.
At length, after he had seen him crowned with Martyrdom, he surrendered up his
pious soul to him that gave it on the 22 Aug. 1649. Whereupon his body was
buried in the Church of S. Peter le poor in London; of which Church he had
been Minister till the violence of the Presbyterians forced him thence, an.
1642. After his death were published some of his Works, viz. (1) Valley of
vision in 21 Sermons. -- printed 1651. qu. (2) Praelectiones Theologicae
habitae in Collegio Greshamensi apud Londinenses. Land. 1661. fol. which last
book was published by Dr. Pearson his Nephew, who has set an account of his
life before that book.

Henry Burton.

Abraham Gibson.

Of these two, who were incorporated Masters again, I have made mention among
the Incorporations, in an. 1612 and 1615.

Will. Isaacson M. A. -- He was afterward D. of D. Rector of S. Andrews Church
in the Wardrobe in London, and of Wodford in Essex; but whether he has
published any thing, I know not. He was younger Brother to Henry Isaacson the
Chronologer, sometimes Amanuensis to Dr. Andrews Bishop of Winchester, Son of
Rich. Isaacson Sheriff elect of London, who died 19 Jan. 1620, and he the Son
of Will. Isaacson of Sheffield in Yorkshire, by Isabel his first Wife. This
Hen. Isaacson, by the way I must let the Reader know, was born in the Parish of
S. Catherine Coleman in London, in Sept. 1581, but what Academical Education he
received, I cannot yet tell. Sure it is, that he arrived to great knowledge in
Chronology, as his large book of that subject, does sufficiently attest; and
dying about the 7 of December. 1654, was buried in the Church of S. Catherine
Coleman before mentioned, having before been a considerable benefactor to the
poor of that Parish.

Will. Beale M. A. of Pemb. Hall. -- See among the Incorporations, an. 1645.

Dan. Horsmanden M. A. -- He was afterward D. of D. and Rector of Vlcomb in
Kent, and accounted by his Contemporaries a learned man; but he being a zealous
person for the Church of England, and a high Loyalist, was thrown out of his
Living by the Committee of Religion, an. 1643, as you may see in the Pamph.
entit. The first century of scandalous, malignant priests, etc. p. 36, 37* He
lost other Spiritualities, and suffered much for the Kings Cause during the
time of the Rebellion.

Humphrey Henchman M. A. -- This loyal and religious person who was Son of Tho.
Henchman of London Skinner, and he the Son of another Thomas of Wellingborough
in Northamptonshire, (in which Country his name and family had for several
generations before lived) was afterward D. of D. Chauntor of Salisbury, on the
death of Hen. Cotton, in January 1622, and Preb. of South Grantham in the same
Church, an. 1628. After the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. he was nominated Bishop
of that place, upon the translation of Dr. Duppa to Winchester. Whereupon being
consecrated in the Chapel of K. Hen. 7. within the Abbey Church of S. Peter in
Westminster 28 Oct. 1660, sat there three years, and then upon the translation
of Dr. Sheldon to Canterbury, he was translated to London in Sept. 1663. About
that time he was made Bishop Almoner, and died, as it seems, in the month of
October. an. 1675. He was for his wisdom and prudence much valued by K. Chapter 2.
whose happy escape from the battle at Worcester, this pious Prelate did
admirably well manage, especially when his Majesty came in a disguise near
Salisbury. He was born, as I have been informed, within the Parish of S. Giles
Crippl^gate, London, and educated in Clare Hall in Cambridge, of which he was
Fellow.

Arthur Jackson M. A. -- Afterward he was a frequent and puritanical Preacher,
and sided with the Presbyterians when the Rebellion began, an. 1642. About
which time he was Minister of S. Michael Woodstreet in London, where I find him
in 1649. He has written Expositions on various parts of the Scripture, as (1)
An help for understanding the holy Scriptures, the first part, being an
exposition upon the five books of Moses, viz. Genesis Levit. Numb. Deuteronomy. etc.
Camb. 1643. qu. (2) Annotations on the remaining part of the Old Testament,
viz. J^sh. Judges, Sam. Kings, Chron. Ezra, Nehem. Esthe^, the second part. (3)
Annotations on the five poetical looks of holy Scripture, viz. Job, Psalms,
Prove. Eccles. and Cant. Land. 1658. Besides several other things, which for
brevity sake I now omit. See more of him in Chapter Love among the Writers an. 1651.

The said Masters of Arts, viz. Th. Goad, Ben. Laney. R. Holdsworth, Hen.
Burton, Ab. Gibson, W. Isaason, W. Beale, Dan. Horsmanden, H. Hen^hman, and A.
Jackson were incorporated, as I have before told you, 15 July, as they had
stood before at Cambridge. Besides them were about 27 more incorporated, (of
whom Sam Carter was one) but not one of them being then, or after, men of note,
as I can yet find, are here omitted. On the same day also, one Rob. Newton M.
A. of the Univ. of S. Andrew in Scotland, was incorporated, of whom I know no
more.

Creations.
March 5. Will. Stafford a Student of Chapter Chapter was actually created Master of
Arts in the Congregation house by virtue of a dispensation obtained in that of
Convocation, on the second day of the said month. -- This person who was a
Norfolk man born, and nobly descended, was a Member of the House of Commons for
a time, and wrote a little thing (as I have been informed by those that knew
him) entit. Reasons of the War etc. which I suppose is the same with a Pamphlet
entit. An orderly and plain narration of the beginning and causes of this War;
with a conscientious resolution against the Parliament side. printed 1644, in 3
sheets in qu. He died at Thornborough in Glocestershire (where he had a
plentiful Estate) about the year 1683, and in the ninetieth year of his age,
leaving behind him a Son named John, Father of Rich. Stafford, lately Bach. of
Arts of Magd. Hall, Author of Of happiness. etc. Land. 1689. qu.

An. Dom. 1618.
An. 16 Jac. 1.
Chanc. William Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. the same again, July 17.

Proct. Daniel Ingo^l of Qu. Coll. ^ch. Drope of Magd. Coll. Apr. 15.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 20. San. Hoard of S. Mary's Hall.

May 8. Meric Casaubon (Son of Isaac) of Chapter Chapter

June 9. Will. Paul Tho. Laurence of Alls. Coll.


The first of these last two, was afterward Bishop of Oxon.

10. Thom. Co^man of Magd. 12. Alexand. Griffith of Ha^t Hall.

The last did not take the Degree of M. of A. till 1631.

18. Hen. Blount of Trin. Coll.

July 2. Joh. Pointer of Bras^. Coll. -- He was matriculated, and took the
degree of Bach. of Arts, as an Esquires Son. Afterward departing without any
other degree, became a puritanical Preacher, and acquainted with Oliver
Cromwell; who, when Protector, gave him a Canonry of Chapter Chapter in Oxon, as a
reward for the pains he took in converting him to Godliness, i.e. to canting
Puritanis^ and Saintism. After the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. he was ejected,
and living many years after in Oxon in a retired and studious condition, died 2
Jan. 1683, aged 84 or thereabouts; whereupon his body was buried at the lower
end of the north (...) joining to the Church of S Peter in the Baylie, Oxon.

Oct. 15. Humph. Chambers of Vniv. Edw. Reynolds of Mert. Coll.


The la^t was afterward Bishop of Norwich.

Dec. 3. Ph^^ip King of Chapter Chapter a younger Son of Dr. King B. of London. -- See
among the created Doctors of Div. 1645.

15. Will. Lyford of Magd. Coll.

17. Rob. Bedingfield 19 George Morley Rob. Gomersall Zouch Townley of Chapter Chapter



Of the first of these last four, you may see more among the Doctors of Div.
1630, and of the last, among the Masters of A. 1621.

Jan. 27. John Geree of Magd. Hall.

Feb. 3. Matthew Griffith of Gloc. Hall, lately of Brasn. Coll.

4. Thom. Swadlin of S. Joh. Coll.

All these Bachelaurs except Bedingfield and Townly, are to come into the
second Vol. of this Work, or elsewhere.

Adm. 223.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 20. Cornel. Burges May 20. Tho. Lushington of Linc. Coll.

The last of these two, who was originally of Broadgates Hall, but had not
taken the degree of Bach. of Arts, will be mentioned in the second Vol.

Jun. 9. Will. Pemble of Magd. Hall.

10. Christop. Tesdale of New Coll. -- He was afterward Minister of
Husborne-Tarrant in Hampshire, one of the Assembly of Divines, and a Preacher
before the Long Parliament. He has published, Jerusalem, or a vision of
peace, Fast-sermon 28 Aug. 1644* before the House of Commons, on Psalm. 122. 6.
Land. 1644, qu. and perhaps other things, which is all I know of him, only that
he was an Abendon man born.

10. Charles Herle of Exeter 12. Thom. Twittie of Oriel. Coll.

27. Franc. Gouge of S. Edm. Hall.

This year Francis Little of Chapter Chapter was admitted, but the day or month when,
appears not. He afterward published some of the posthumous Works of Dr. Tho.
Sutton, as I have elsewhere told you, and was himself a learned man. He was the
Son of Franc. Little sometimes Mayor of Abendon in Berks. who in the year 1627
wrote a leiger book containing a short account of the Monastery of Abendon, an
account of the Hospital of the brotherhood of the Holy Cross there, and of
several matters relating to Abendon.

Adm. 131, or thereabouts.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 8. Will. Lo of Mert. Coll. sometimes of S. Alb. Hall.

Jul. 6. Tho. Marler of Trin. Coll. -- In 1625. Jun. 27, he was made Archdeacon
of Salisbury, and dying in 1643, was succeeded in that Dignity by Will.
Buckner, 7 Aug. the same year.

Nov. 3. Joh. Harrys of New Coll.

24. Joh. Wall of Chapter Chapter

Feb. 5. Nathaniel Canon of S. Mary's Hall.

Adm. 19.

Doct. of Law.
June 25. Charles Twysden of Alls. Coll. -- He was soon after Principal of New,
Inn, and at length Chancellor of Lichfield and Coventry.

Doct. of Phys.
Jun. 25. Andr. Byrd of Merton Coll. George Raleigh of New Inn.

The first of these practiced his faculty at Reading in Berks, where dying in
1636 was interred in St. Laurence chapter there. The other, in Oxford, where he was
much in repute till the time of his death, an. 1623 or thereabouts.

Doct. of Div.
June 8. Will. Lo of Mert. Coll. a Compounder and Accumulator.

25. Simon Jux Rich. Etkins of Chapter Chapter


The first of these two who was a Compounder, was about this time Rector of St.
Olaves in Southwark, where he died about the beginning of the year 1631.

Edmund Jackson of St. John's Coll. -- He was now beneficed in Kent by the
favor of Dr. Buckridge Bishop of Rochester, to whom he was Chaplain.

July 10. Thom. Oats of Magd. Coll. -- This learned Doctor who was at this
time domestic Chaplain to Will. Earl of Pembroke Chancellor of the
University, became Canon of Windsore in the place of Dr. Rob. Chaloner
deceased, being at that time one of the Kings Chaplains; and soon after, if not
then, Prebendary of S. Paul's Cathedral in London. He died and was buried at
Windsore, an. 1623.

14. Evan Vaughan of Jesus Coll.

16. Roger Bates of Trin. Coll. a Compounder. -- He was at this time Chaplain
in Ordinary to K. James. 1. as he was afterward to K. Chapter 1. and much in
esteem for his excellent preaching. On the 20. of May 1630, he was collated to
the Prebendship of Lyme and Halstock in the Church of Sarum, upon the
translation of Dr. Walt. Curle from the Sea of Rochester to Bathe and Weils,
and in the year following, in the Month of December. he was made Prebendary of
Westminster in the place of Dr. Theodore Price deceased, being about that time
a Justice of the Peace of Middlesex and the liberties of Westminster. He died
at his House in Milford-Lane, without Temple Bar, on the 15 of March 1633 and
was buried in the Chancel of St. Clements Danes in the Strand near London.

March.... Rich. Astley Warden of Alls. Coll.

Incorporations.
June 18. James Wats M. A. and Fellow of Magd. Coll. in Cambridge -- He was
afterward Minister of Wodnesborough in Kent, and published The controversy
debated about the reverend gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving the holy
communion. Land. 1621. qu. and perhaps other things. Qu^re.

July 1. Sam. Balcanqual. M. A. of Edinburgh in Scotland.

On the 14. of the said month, being the next day after the conclusion of the
Act, these Cantabrigians following were incorporated.

Will. Wats M. A. of Cains Coll. -- This admirable Critic and Divine, who was
born near to Lion in Norfolk, did afterward travel into several Countries and
became Master of diverse Languages. At his return he was made Chaplain to King
Chapter the first, Doct. of Divinity, Minister of St. Albans in Woodstreet within
the City of London, afterward Chaplain under the Earl of Arundel General of
the Forces in the Scotch expedition, an. 1639 and Prebendary of Weils. But
being sequestered from his Benefice in London, plundered, and his Wife and
Children turned out of doors, and himself forced to fly when that City was in
the height of its rebellion 1642. he retired to His Majesty, served under
Prince Rupert when his Majesty raised Forces in his own defense, and was
present with him in all the battles that he fought with the Parliamenteers, and
many times when that Prince made his desperate attempts on that Party. Upon the
declining of the Kings cause, (a little before which time he was made
Archdeacon and Residentiary of Wells, as I have been informed) he stuck to the
said Prince when he served his Majesty on the Seas, upon the revolt of certain
English Ships from the Parliament, and was with him when he was blocked up in
the harbor at Kingsale in Ireland, where being overtaken with a distemper
which no Physic could cure, surrended up his Soul to the Almighty, and was
buried there in the latter end of the year 1649, as I was many years since
informed by his Widow, the Daughter of Mr.... Vaughan Minister of Ashted in
Surrey, Brother to Dr. Rich. Vaughan sometimes B. of London. This Dr. Wats, who
is several times honorably mentioned by Vossius (...) etc. lib. 2. cap. 16. and
(...).
by the title of doctissimus and clarissimus Watsius, and qui optime de
Historia meruit, etc. had an especial hand in Sir. Hen. Spe^^^ans Glossary;
corrected, added considerable notes to, and published, Matthew Paris his
Historia Major, an. 1640. He wrote also (1) The History of Gustavus Adolphus (2)
Mortification Apostolical, etc. Land. 1637. wherein justifying the use of
canonical hours, gave great offense to the Puritan. (3) Treatise of the
passions (4) Treatise of the surplice, not extant; besides several Sermons. He
also translated into English. St. Augustines confessions. Land. 1631. in a
thick oct. illustrated by him with certain marginal notes; and from French into
English The Catholic Moderator, which I have not yet seen. He also published
the several numbers of News-books in the English tongue (more than 40)
containing the occurrences done in the Wars between the King of Sweden and the
German. All published before the Civil Wars of England began.

John Lynch M. A. -- He was afterward Chaplain to the Bishop of Salisbury,
Parson of Herietsham in Kent and the writer and publisher of The Christian
Passover, Sermon. at St. Paul's, on Wednesday in Easter Week, 1637. on 1. Cor. 5.
7. S. Land. 1637. qu. and perhaps of other things. Quaere.

Walter Balcanqual Bach. of Div. of Pembroke hall. -- This learned Scot who was
now Chaplain to His Majesty, became (...).
Master of the Hospital called the Savoy in the Strand near London on the 16.
Dec. 1617, which place he giving up soon after, it was conferred (...). an.
1618.
on Marc. Ant. de Dominis Archb. of Spalato (who came into England upon account
of Religion 16. Dec. 1616.) on the 23. of April 1618. in which year the said
Balcanqual was sent to the Synod of Dort to represent the Church of Scotland,
and with him went Th. Goad of Cambridge in the place of Dr. Joseph Hal^ Dean of
Worcester, indisposed. In Feb. 1621. the said Marc. Ant. being weary of the
Kings favor and benevolence extended to him. left England; whereupon
Balcan^ual was restored to the Savoy again, and on the 12. March 1624. he was
installed Dean of Rochester, (being then D of D.) in the place of Godfrey
Go^dman promoted to the Sea of Gloucester. In 1639 May 14, he was installed Dean
of Durham in the place of Dr. Rich. Hunt, who had succeeded in that rich
Dignity Sir Adam Newton Knight and Baronet a Layman. Soon after the grand
rebellion breaking out, Balcanqual was forced from his Mastership of the Savoy,
plundered, sequesrred and forced to fly by the impetuous Presbyterians, an.
1642. so that retiring to His Majesty at Oxon, did afterward shift from place
to place for security. At length flying for the safety of his life to Chirk
Castle in Denbighsh^e, died there in a very cold season, on the day of the
Nativity of our Savior, an. 1645. The next day his body was buried in the
Parish Church of Chirk, and some years after had a noble monument set over his
grave (the inscription on which was made by Dr. John Pearson) by a most worthy
Royalist named Sir Tho. Midd^eton of Chirk Castle, who dying in 1660 aged 79
was also buried in the said Church. In Jan. following (1645) Dr. Christoph.
Potter Provost of Qu. Coll. in Oxon obtained of his Majesty the grant of the
said Deanery of Durham, but he dying in the beginning of March following,
without installation, his Maj. conferred it upon Will. Fuller D. D. of
Cambridge, who dying in 1659 Dr. John Barwick of Camb. was installed in that
Dignity 1. Nov. 1660. Dr. Balcanjual has written and published (1) The honor
of Christian Churches, Sermon. at Whitehall before the King, on Matthew. 21. 13.
Land. 1633. qu. (2) Sermon. preached at St. Ma^ies Spittle on Monday in Easter
w^ek 14. Apr. 1623, on Psalm. 126. 5. Land. 1634. qu. and also drew up The
Declaration of K. Chapter 1. concerning the late tumults in Scotland; with a
particular deduction of the seditious practices of the Covenanteers, out of
their own foul Acts and Writtings. Land. 1639. fol.

John Whiting D. D. -- He was at this time a Minister in London, where he died
about 1624.

David Owen D. D. -- See among the Incorporations, an. 1603.

Martin Day D. D. -- See among the Incorp. 1602.

Which Cambridge Men I say, viz. W. Wats, I. Lynch, W. Balcanqual, John
Whiting, D. Owen, M. Day, and at least 20 more were incorporated on the 14. Jul.

Will. Spicer a Devonian born and Doctor of the Laws of the Univ. of L^yden,
was incorporated the same day.

Oct. 12. Lionel Sharp D. D. lately of Kings Coll. in Cambridge -- He had
before been Chaplain to the Earl of Essex, in whose treasons he was engaged)
and afterward to Henry Prince of Wales, and was now, or lately, Rector of
Malpas in Cheshire, Minister of Tiverton in Devon. and Archdeacon of Berks,
which Dignity, was conferred upon him, 9. Nov. 1605, upon the death, as I
suppose, of Dr. Martin Colepeper. He has published (1) Oration funebris in
honorem Henrici Walliae Principis, propriam atque intimam ejus effigiem
pr^ferens, etc. Land. 1612. in 3 sh. in qu. (2) Novum fidei symbolum, sive de
novis, etc. Land. 1612. qu. (3) Speculum papae i.e. viva and expressa
Antichristi effigies etc. Printed there the same year. These two last were
translated into English under this title A looking glass for the Pope; wherein
he may see his own face, the express image of Antichrist. Together with the
Popes n^w Creed, etc. in two Dialogues. -- Land. 1623. qu. He has also
published Certain Sermons, of which one is on 1. Kings 10. ver. 9 -- printed in
oct. 1603. He died in 1630, and was succeeded in the Archdeaconry of Berkshire
by Edward Davenant, 26. January the same year. You may see more of this Dr. L.
Sharp in Joh. Hoskins among the Writers, an. 1638. and in Cabala: Mysteries of
State; printed 1654. p. 255, and 257.

An. Dom. 1619.
An. 17. Jac. 1.
Chanc. Will. Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. John Prideaux D. D. Rector of Exeter College July 17.

Proct. Christoph. Wrenn of St. John's Coll. Brian Duppa of Alls. Coll. Apr. 7.


Bach. of Music.
Richard Emot of Brasn. Coll. who had been a Student in the faculty of Music
for 20 years, supplicated for the Degree of Bachelaur in that faculty; but
whether he was admitted, it appears not (perhaps upon neglect) in the register.
-- This Person, who was Son, or near related to Will. Emot sometimes Fellow of
Brasn. Coll. and afterward Vicar of Einsham near Oxon (where he died and was
buried in Feb. 1584) lived mostly in the City of Wells, and had, as I conceive,
some place in the Cathedral there. He has made several compositions in Music
for voices and instruments, but whether any of them were ever made public I
cannot tell. One Richard Brown was admitted Vicar Choral and Organist of We^ls
an. 1614. which place he keeping till 1619. one John Okever succeeded, and
therefore, I presume the said Emot was never Organist of Wells in his own right.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 24. Philip Nigh of Magd. hall.

May 12. Tho. Atkinson of St. John Coll. -- See more among the Bach. of Div.
1630.

June 9. Will. Pinke of Magd. hall.

20. Will. Strode of Ex. Quaere. July S. John Earl of Mert. Coll.

The last of these two was afterward Bishop successively of Worcest^r and
Salisbury.

Oct. 19. Rich Heyrick of St. Jo. Rich. Byfield of Qu. Coll.


21. George Stinton of Ball. Coll. -- See among the Masters 1622.

Nov. 3. Will. Evans of St. Mary's Hall. -- See among the Bac. of Div. 1635.

25. Nathaniel Simpson John Lewgar H^n. Gellibrand of Trin. Coll.


Dec. 11. John Oliver, lately of Merton, now of Magd. Coll. -- See more among
the Doctors of Div. 1639.

Jan. 19. Edw. Stanley of New 24. Hen. or Harry Marten of Un. Coll.

Feb. 3. Joh. Maynard of Qu. 8. Edm. Sta^nt^n of C. C. Coll.

The first of these two last was a Compounder, and afterward of Magd. hall.

Of all these Bachelaurs, none but Atkinson, Pinke, Stinton, Evans, and
Gellibrand are mentioned in this work.

Adm. 252. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Apr. 8. Joh. Ryves of New Coll. -- He was afterward Prebendary of Winchester,
became Prebendary of Gillingham Major in the Church of Salisbury, on the death
of John Jessop, 1. March 1625. and Archdeacon of Berks. on the resignation of
Edw. Davenant, 20. Nov. 1634. He died 19 Aug. 1665 and was succeeded in his
Archdeaconry by Dr. Peter Mews of St. John's Coll. in Oxon.

Besides this Joh. Ryves, were but two admitted Bach. of Law this year.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 24. Joh. Langley of Magd. hall.

27. Lambert Osbaldeston of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward made Master of the
College School at Westminster, in the place of Dr. John Wilson, and Prebendary
of the tenth stall in the Church there, in the place of Dr. Christoph. Sutton
deceased. By his industry he did improve his Scholars to as great eminency of
learning, as any of his predecessors did: Insomuch that he had, as it is (...)
reported, above 80 Doctors in the three great faculties, in the two
Universities, that did gratefully acknowledge their education under him, before
the grand Rebellion broke out. But so it was, that he having been much favored
and patronized by Dr. Williams Dean of Westminster. and B. of Linc. did always stick
close to, in his controversies had between, him and Dr. Laud Archb. of
Canterbury, for which he suffered in some measure, especially after he had been
found guilty of certain libellous passages in a letter written by him to the
said Williams, wherein he styles Laud, the little Vermin, the Vrchin and Hocus
pocus. For which being called into question in the Star Chamber, and found
guilty, he lost his Spiritualities, was fined 5000 l. and sentenced to have his
ears tacked to the Pillory in the presence of his Scholars. Which last sentence
he avoided by a seasonable withdrawing himself from Westminster, an. 1638.
Afterward he was restored by the Long Parliament, and suffered for a time to
keep his Prebendship, when all the rest of the Prebendaries were turned out.
But then seeing what mad courses the members of the said Parliament took,
favored His Majesty's cause, and in some measure suffered for it, lived
retiredly during the interval, and dying in the beginning of October. 1659 was
buried on the 7 of the said month, in the large South isle of St. Peter's Church
in Westminster. He was a learned Man, but whether he has published any book or
books, I know not, nor any thing else of him, only that he was the Son of
Lambert Osbaldeston of the Parish of St. Olaves in Southwark near London, who
died an. 1622.

June 5. Rob. Grebby of New Coll. -- This Person who was a Lincolnshire Man
born, was one of the Chaplains of the said Coll. and afterward, as it became a
true Scholar, spent all his time in reading and writing, especially in Divinity
and Philosophy, in which last he was a great Sceptick. He wrote much in both,
and had his labors perused by his learned acquaintance, yet none of them, tho
thought fit, were ever published. I find it reported by a certain Author (...)
that one Master Silo (whom Mr. Odo de Ceriton or Seryton, who lived in 1181,
styles (...)
Serlo) a Master of the University of Paris and Professor of Logic, had a
Scholar there, with whom he was very familiar: Which Scholar being excellent in
the art of Sophistry, spared not all occasions, whether on festival, or other,
days, to study and improve it. This Sophister being very sick, and almost
brought to deaths door, Mr. Silo earnestly desired him, that after his death,
he would return to, and give, him information concerning his state, and how it
fared with him. The Sophister dying, he returned soon after with his hood
stuffed with notes of Sophistry, and the inside loyned with flaming fire, and
told him, that that was the reward which he had bestowed upon him for the
renown that he had before obtained for his Sophistry. But Mr. Salo esteeming it
a small punishment, he stretched out his hand toward him, on which a drop or
spark of fire falling, 'twas pierced through with terrible pain. This passage
the Defunct or Ghost beholding, told him with a faint voice, that he need not
be amazed at that small matter, for he was burning in that manner all over. Is
it so? says Silo; then in very truth I know what I have to do. Whereupon
resolving to leave the World, and enter himself into Religion, called his
Scholars about him, and took his leave of, and dismissed, them with these
metres. Linquo coax (...)
ranis, cras (...)
va^^que (...)
vanis,
Ad Logicam pergo, que mortis non timet (...)
ergo.
Sed quorsum haec?
you will say, or to what end do you tell this old story? Then give me leave to
make answer thus. This Mr. Grebby having been always dubious of the immortality
of the Soul of Man, did some years before his death, make a contract with two
of his acquaintance of the same mind, that he that died first of the three,
should make known to either of the other two, his then state or being. Grebby
therefore dying first, his resemblance shortly after appeared in the night time
in the Chamber of Joh. Good Bach. of Div. and Fellow of Ball. Coll. (commonly
called Tutor Good) who was one of the other two that had made the contract; and
opening his curtains, said to him with a trembling and faint voice,

Sors tua mortalis, non est mortale quod opto.

Afterward the resemblance vanished, and was, tho much wished for again, seen
no more. At the same time the other Person, who was sometimes Chaplain of New
Coll. but then living at his Benefice near Oxon, had a dream that the said
resemblance did appear to Good, and that the doubt seemed to be resolved, which
I have heard him several times very confidently report; yet he being a reputed
Banterer, I could never believe him in that, or any thing else. It Is true that
Good who was a Scholastical, retired and melancholy Man would sometimes tell
these passages, but with great shinels, unless to his Philosophical
acquaintance; most of whom seemed to be well satisfied with, and some to
believe, them. This Mr. Grebby (commonly called Father Grebby) who had read and
written so much, till he was almost blind, yet always cheerful and in a
contented condition, died in 1654 (in the spring time I think) aged 60 or more,
and was buried in the North Cloister of New Coll. near to the door leading into
the tower, and the monumental inscription of Pet. Woodgate. At which time being
present a considerable number of his Philosophical acquaintance, (for he
usually delighted in such, tho never so young or mean,) was an eloquent oration
delivered from a Pew set near to his grave, by Rob. Matthew LL. B. (afterward
Doctor) a great admiter of the learning and virtues, of him the said Grebby.
From this digression, which many will laugh at, let us proceed to the rest of
the admissions.

June 9. Bruno Ryves of Magd. Coll.

21. Will. Price of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward the first moral Philosophy
Reader after the Lecture had been founded by Dr. Tho. White, and the writer and
publisher of Oration fanebris habita Oxoniae 22. Apr. 1624. in Laudem Doctoris
White lecturae moralis Philosophiae apud Oxonienses fundatoris. Oxon. 1624. qu.
It Is at the end of a book of verses intit. Schola Moralis Philosophiae Oxon in
funere Whiti pullata; mostly made by the Students of Magd. hall, of which house
Dr. White was originally a member. Another Will. Price I find who was Bach. of
Div. and a publisher of certain Sermons and Divinity tracts, in the time of K.
Jam. 1. and Char. 1. but whether he was of this University, I cannot yet tell.

Nov. 9. Alex. Gill of Trin. Coll.

Dec. 11. Jam. Lamb of St. Mar. hall.

Adm. 130.

Bach. of Div.
June 26. Robert Pink of New Jul. 1. Gilbert Ironside of Trin. 8. Gabr.
Richardson of Brasn. Accept. Frewen of Magd. Coll.



Nov. 24. Will. Dickenson of Mert.

The last of these five who was now Chaplain to Will. Earl of Pembroke,
published The Kings right, briefly set down in a Sermon before the Judges of
Assize held in Reading for the County of Berks. 28. Jun. 1619, on Psalm. 75. 7.
Land. 1619. qu. and perhaps other things; which is all I know of him only that
he was Son of Thom. Dickinson a Servant of Eaton Coll. near Windsore, and now
Rector of Appleton neat Abendon in Berks.

Dec. 8. Rob. Johnson of Magd. Coll.

Adm. 33.

Doct. of Law.
Apr. 8. Richard Zouch Richard Clarke of New Coll.


Both which, especially the first, were eminent Civilians. One Will. Clerk LL.
D. an Advocate in the Court of Arches, died about the month of Aug. 1655, but
whether he was ever of Oxon, I know not as yet.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
May 12. Rich Parker of S. Mary's hall.

June 15. John Wilson of Chapter Chapter who accumulated -- This Person who was born in
the City of Westminster, was about this time Master of the College School
there, having a faculty more than ordinary in instructing youth. In October. 1623
he was installed Canon or Preb. of the third stall in the Church of Weston. in
the place of Dr. John Fox, who in the year 1606 had succeeded one Percival
Wyburne a Nonconformist, after he had enjoyed the said stall 44 years, without
seldom or never wearing a hood and surplice. Afterward Dr. Wilson became
Prebendary of Rippon, and Dean thereof, (in the place of Anth. Higgins Bach. of
Divinity) Prebendary of Lincoln, Vicar of Burston, and Rector of Bedall in
Yorkshire. He died on the 19 Feb. 1634, and was buried in the Church of S.
Peter in Nottingham. One of both his names (Job. Wilson) was a Preacher of the
word at Guilford in Surrey and wrote Some helps to faith showing the necessity,
etc. Land. 1625. oct. and another (perhaps the same) who published Zaccheus
converted, Sermon. or Expos. on 19 Luke from ver. 1. to 10. Land. 1631. oct.
besides several other things. Whether he was of this University, I cannot yet
tell.

June 15. Henry Watkins of Chapter Chapter

16. Henry Hook of Qu. Coll. a Compounder. -- On the 30. June 1617, he was
collated to the Archdeaconty of York, or the West Riding of York, on the death
of Rog. Aeroid D. D. which Dignity he resigning, Hen. Wickham M. A. was
collated thereunto, 20. Mar. 1623. On the 19. Mar. 1623 the said Hook was
collated to the Chantorship of York, on the death of Dr. Jo. Favor; in which
Dignity he had for his successor Richard Palmer Bach. of Div. admitted
thereunto 23. Apr. 1624, and he (who dyed on the place) George Stanhop D. D. in
the beginning of Nov. 1631.

June 18. Tho. Clifford of Exet. Coll.

23 Sam. Fell Tho. Isles Joh. Brikenden of Magd. Coll. of Chapter Church.
Compounders.




Dec. 25. Rich. Clewet of Or.

26 Rob. Pink of New Will Smith Warden of Wad. Coll.


The last of which was afterward Prebendary of Worcester and Rector of the
rich Church of Tredington in that County.

July 5. Thom. Winniff of Ex. Nov. 6. Edw. Chaloner of Alls. Coll.

Incorporations.
Many Cambridge Men were incorporated on the 13. of July, being the day after
the conclusion of the Act, of which these following were some.

Andrew Agar Bach. of Law.

Theophilus Wodenote M. A. -- He was born at Lank^nhorne about 6 miles distant
from Launceston in Cornwall, being the Son of Thom. W^denote descended from an
ancient Family in Cheshire; educated in Grammaticals in Eaton School near
Windsore, in Academicals in Kings Coll. in Cambridge, of which he became
Scholar 1608. Afterward he was M. of A. Bach. of Divinity, Rector of
Lankenhorne beforementioned, (after the decease of his Father, who also had
been Fellow of the said Coll.) and a writer of several books; among which are
these (1) Observations upon the history of Nabal and Abigail, 1. Sam. 25. --
printed 1623. Oct. (2) Good thoughts in bad times. It Is a manual, and 'twas
written at Broad Chalk in Wi^ts. while he absconded in the house of a near
relation of his, (Vicar of that place) being then obnoxious to arrests. (3)
Hermes Theologus: or, a divine Mercury, new descants upon old records. Land.
1649. in tw. (4) Eremicus Theologus: Or, a sequestered Divine his aphocismes:
or, breviats of speculation, in two centuries. Land. 1654. oct. etc. When he
died, or where he was buried, I know not; nor any thing to the contrary but
that he did live to be restored in 1660 to what he had lost for his loyalty
during the time of the grand rebellion.

Robert Sibthorpe M. A. -- He was afterward Bishop of Kilfenore in Ireland,
and at length of Limerick, an. 1642. He died in Apr. 1649, and was buried in
the Parish Church of St. Werburge in Dublin.

Granado Chester M. A. -- He was afterward D. D. and dignified in the Church.

Edward Davenant M. A. -- In Feb. 1623 he was collated to the Prebendship of
I^fracomb in the Church of Salisbury, and upon the death of Lienel Sharp, to
the Archdeaconry of Berkshire. In 1634 Nov. 19. he was collated to the
Treasureship of the Church of Salisbury. upon the death of Job. Lee, which he
kept to the time of his death 12. of March 1679. Afterward succeeded Dr. Tho.
James as I shall tell you in the next volume.

Richard H^nt. M. A. -- One of both his names was installed Dean of Durham, in
the place of Sir Adam Newton Knight and Baronet, 29. May 1620. Whether the same
with him, who was incorporated M. of A. is doubtful.

Gilb. W^mberley M. A. -- I have made mention of him before.

Which seven Persons were, I say, incorporated 13. July.

Dec. 1. Patrick Saunders Doct. of Phys. of the University of Franek^r in
Westfriesen -- He afterward practiced his faculty in the Parish of Great St.
Hellens in London, where he died about 1637.

A proposal was made much about the Act time for one Thomas Bateson Bach. of
Music, to be incorporated, but whether he, was really so or no, I cannot tell.
In the beginning of the Reign of K. Ja^. 1. I find him Organist of the Cath.
Church of Christ in the City of Chester, and now (1619) Organist and Master of
the Children of the Cathedral Church of the blessed Trinity called Christ
Church in Dublin; where, as I suppose he took the Degree of Bach. of Music. He
was a Person esteemed very eminent in his profession, especially after he had
published The first and second part of English Madrigales to 3. 4. 5. and 6.
voices. The first part was printed at Land. 1604, and the second there, 1618,
both in qu. One (...) Jewit Bach. of Music of Dublin, who had been bred up
under Orlando Gibbons, did succeed him in the Organists place of Chapter Chapter who
enjoying it but a little while. Ben. Rogers of (...) succeeded him, 1639. Soon
after the rebellion breaking out in Ireland, Jewit went into England, and was
made Organist of Winchester, where he lived in good esteem for his skill in his
profession, and soon after died.

Creations.
July 19. Benjamin Johnson the Father of the English Poets and Poetry, and the
most learned and judicious of the Comedians, was then actually created Master
of Arts in a full House of Convocation.

An. Dom. 1620.
An. 18. Jac. 1.
Chanc. the same, viz. William Earl of Pembroke.

Vicech. Dr. Prideaux again, July 21.

Proct. Matthew Osbourne of Wad. C. Samuel Smith of Magd. C. Apr. 18.


But the junior Proctor dying 17. June, Tho. Fox of the said Coll. succeeded
him on the 20. of the said month.

Bach. of Arts.
May 5. Tho. Blake of Chapter Chapter Obad. Sedgwick of Magd. hall.

11. Will. Haywood of St. John's Thom. Hicks of Balliol Coll.


June 15. Thom. Case of Chapter Chapter

21. Thom. Bradley of Exet. 28. Will. Chillingworth of Trin. Coll.

Jul. 5. Will. Gilbert of Linc. Coll. afterward of Gloc. hall. -- See more
among the Masters 1623.

Oct. 17. Edward Leigh of Magd. Sam. Newman of St. Edm. Hall.


19. Nathaniel Holmes, lately of Magd. hall now of Exeter College, (afterward
of the said hall again, a mutable Man and of diverse Religions in the time of
Rebellion) was then admitted B. A.

Nov. 9. Will. Crompton of Brasn. 28. Anth. Fawkner of Wadh. Jan. 22. Will.
Prynne of Oriel Will. Sherley of Chapter Church. Coll.



Of the last, you may see more among the Bach. of Div. 1631.

Feb. 1. Eliot Farley of Ball. Coll. -- This Person who was a Worcestershire
Man born, and bred under Mr. Henry Bright in the Kings School at Worcester, did
leave Ball. Coll. before he was Master of Arts, and crossing the Seas became a
Priest in the Church of Rome, and at present (1661) he is said to be the chief
favorite of the Pope, and in likelihood to be the next Cardinal, as a Writer
(...)
of no great credit tells us, who calls him Elias Farley.

All these except Hicks, Gilbert, Fawkner and Sherley, will be mentioned in the
second vol. or elsewhere.

Admitted 281.

Mast. of Arts.
March 28. Anthony Faringdon of Trin. May 3. John Speed of St. John's 10.
Christopher Harvey of Brasn. Coll.

28. Joh. Seager of St. Mary's hall. Gilb. Sheldon of Trin. Jul. 1. Pet. Heylyn
of Magd. Coll.



Jan.... Sam. Hoard of St. Mary's hall.

March 17. Rob. Hegge of C. C. Coll.

Admitted 134.

Bach. of Phys.
Apr. 17. Sam. Smith of Magd. Coll. -- In the latter end of the same month he
was admitted the junior Proctor. Besides him, were two more admitted, who will
be mentioned among the Doctors this year, two also admitted to practice
Physic, and two Surgery, of wh^m one was called Jacob Van Otten, the same I
suppose with Jac. Otten who was a Student in Physic in this University, for
the sake of the public Library an. 1604 and after.

Bach. of Div.
May 11. Nathan. Carpenter of Exet. June 2. Christop. Wrenn of St. John's Coll.

This last Person who was younger Brother to Dr. Matthew Wrenn Bishop of Ely,
was afterward made domestic Chaplain in the Kings Family, Dean of Windsore,
(in which Dignity he was installed 4. April 1635.) and on the 22. of the said
month he was constituted and sworn Scribe or Registrary of the most noble order
of the Garter. About that time he was made Dean of Wolverhampton in
Staffordshire, and in November. 1638, he was presented to the rich Rectory of
Haseley in Oxfordshire, but whether he took the Degree of Doctor of Divinity in
this University, it appears not. He died at Blechingdon in the said County, in
the house of Mr. William Holder Rector thereof (who had married his Daughter)
29. May 1658. and was buried in the Chancel of the Church there. Dr. Edward
Hyde of Cambridge succeeded him in the Deanery of Windsore, but died before His
Majesty's restoration, as I have told you elsewhere.

June 28. John Conant lately Fellow of Exeter Coll. now Rector of Limington in
Somersetshire. -- He was afterward one of the Assembly of Divines and the
writer and publisher of The woe and weal of Gods People: Fast Sermon before the
House of Commons 26. Jul. 1643. on Jer. 30. 7. Land. 1643. qu. and of another
on Lament. 3. 31. 32. printed the same year in qu. but this last I have not yet
seen or any thing else of his extant.

July 18. Caesar Calendrinus of Exet. Coll. -- He was by birth a German, by
profession a puritanical Theologist, and being a learned Man, was beloved of
the famous Dr. Usher, who took him with him into Ireland, and there, as it is
said, preferred him. In my searches I find one Caesar Calendrinus of the Parish
of St. Peter Le poor in London; who dying there in 1665, left behind him a Son
named John: But whether this Caes. Call. be the same with the former, who was
Bach. of Div. I cannot tell. I find also one Caesar Cald^rinus to be Author of
Dictionariolum sive Thesauri linguae latinae, and omnium a vocibus latinis
incipientium Dictionariorum compendium, etc. Venet. 1649. oct. but this Person
must not be taken for the same with C. Calendrinus, because their names differ,
and that the last was born in the territory of Verona.

19. Christoph. White of Chapter Chapter

March 9. Christoph. Potter of Qu. Coll.

Admitted 20.

Not one Doctor of Law was admitted this year.

Doct. of Phys.
May 23. Dan. Oxenbridge of Chapter Church. Francis Banister of Trin. Coll.

Both which accumulated the Degrees in their faculty.

Doct. of Div.
May 12. Thomas Sutton of Qu. 23. Edw. Brunker of Wad. Coll.

Jun. 26. Anth. Morgan Principal of St. Albans hall, formerly Fellow of
Magdalen Coll.

Dec. 18. Richard Hall of Alls. Coll.

Incorporations.
May 28. Thomas Rhead (Rhaedus) M. of A. of Aberdene in Scotland. -- He had
before been a Student in this University, and this year published Paraphrisis
Psalma 104. Land. 1620. in oct. and about the same time, as it should seem,
Epist. ad Episcopum Roffensem in oct.

Alex. Rhead M. of A. of the same University was incorporated the same day. --
One Alex. Rhead was Proctor of the University of Cambr. four years before this
time, whom I take to be the same Person who was afterward Minister of Yeatley
in Hampshire, where he died about 1628. I shall make mention of another of both
his names among the Creations following.

June 6. Festus Hommius D. D. of the University of Leyden was incorporated in
that Degree. in a meeting called Simile primo, or Assimilatio parva, held at
six of the Clock in the morning, Hommius then having on his legs a green pair
of stockings, and a habit not altogether proper for his profession. He was at
this time a Divine of great note in the Low Countries, and had lately been
Scribe at the Synod of Dort. The occasion of his coming into England, with the
Catalogue of the books he wrote, John Meursius will In (...), lib. (...). p. ^07*
tell you. He was born at Hielsem in the territory of Leenwerden in
Westfriesen, and dying 5. July 1642 aged 66 years and six months, was buried at
Leyden in the Church of St. Peter, (as I conceive) having been Past^r of that
Church forty, and Rector of the College there twenty years.

June 26. Peter Chamberlayne Doct. of Phys. of the University of Padua. -- He
has written (1) The poor man's Advocate: or Englands Samaritan, etc. Land.
1649. qu. (2) Vindication of public artificial Bathes, and other things; and
from his Papers was published The accomplished Midwife, etc. printed with cuts
in 1673. in oct. Afterward it was enlarged by others and several times
published. One Tho. Chamberlain who was called and written Doct. of Phys. did
practice his faculty in the Parish of St. Gregory in London, and died, as I
think, in Mark-lane 1666, but whether he was ever of the Univ. of Oxon. I
cannot yet tell.

Jul. 7. Henry Briggs M. A. John Bainbridge Doct. of Phys. of Cambr.


Of the first I have spoken largely among the Writers, under the year 1630, and
of the other I shall (God willing) make mention in the 2. Vol. of this work.

July 11. Will. Jackson M. A. of the same University. -- Perhaps he may be the
same Will. Jackson, who was now Term-Lecturer at Whittington Coll. in London,
and who before had published The Celestial husbandry: or, the tillage of the
Soul, Sermon. at Paul's Cross 25. Feb. 1615, on Osea 10. 12. Land. 1616. qu.

Thomas Whitfield M. of A. of the said University, was incorporated on the same
day. -- I take this Person to be the same Tho. Whitfield who was afterward
Minister of Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, Author of (1) (A refutation of the
loose opinions and licentious tenets, wherewith those Lay-preachers which
wander up and down the kingdom, labor to seduce the simple People. Or, an
Examination of the erroneous Doctrines of Thomas More late a Weaver in Wells
near Wisbich in his book [The Universality of Gods free grace to mankind] Land.
1646. qu. (2) Full answer to the Arminian tenets concerning election,
redemption, conversion and perseverance. printed there the same year. (3)
Discourse of the Liberty of conscience, etc. Land. 1649. qu. (4) The righteous
man's rejoicing. Or, a treatise tending to show the nature of true joy, whence
it arises, and to whom it belongs, etc. Land. 1649. in tw. (5) Extent of
divine providence, etc. print. 1651. qu. (6) Doctrines of Arminianisme and
Pelagianisme stated. Print. 1652. qu. (7) Persuasive to peace amongst the sons
of peace, etc. pr. 1655. in tw. and other things. This Thomas Whitfield being a
Person that ran with the times of the interval, removed to the rectory of
Bugbrook in Northamptonshire, where a neighbor of his named Tho. Pierce
animadverted upon one or more of his books, as I shall hereafter tell you. He
had a Son named John Whitfield M. A. and sometimes Fellow of Jesus Coll. in
Cambridge, afterward Rector of Bugbrook beforementioned, and a publisher of
one or more Sermons. I find one Thomas Whitfield admitted Bach. of Arts, as a
member of Magd. hall 4. May 1631, and another of Heart hall 9. February the same
year, but what relation they had to the former Thomas, I know not.

July 11. John Johnson D. D. of Cambr. -- One of both his names and D. of D.
also, was admitted Archdeacon of Worcester 24. Nov. 1598. in the place of Godf.
Goldsborough promoted to the Sea of Gloucester. Which Archdeaconry the said
Johnson resigned an. 1610. Qu. whether the same.

July 12. Rich. Evans D. D. of the University of St. Andrew of Scotland.

Creations.
May 18. Thom. Grent of New Coll. was actually created Doctor of Phys. -- He
was afterward famous for the making of artificial Bathes, and discovering
those that were natural, but wanted money to make them fit for use.

29. Alexander Rhead or Read (Reidus) a Scotch Man was actually created Doctor
of Phys. in the house of Convocation by virtue of the Letters from K. James 1.
for that purpose -- This learned Scot who was afterward one of the Coll. of
Physicians in London, and a Brother of the Company of Barber-chirurgions, has
written and published (1) A description of the body of Man by artificial
figures, representing the members, etc. Land. 1616. oct. (2) Chirurgical
Lectures of tumors and ulcers. Land. 1635. qu. (3) Treatise of the first part
of Surgery, which teaches re-unition of the parts of the body disjoynted.
Land. 1638. qu. (4) Treatise of the muscles of the body of Man. Land. 1637. qu.
All which, except the first, were reprinted in 1650. qu. the Author being then
dead, after he had practiced his faculty about 50 years. (5) The manual of
Anatomy; or, the dissection of the body of Man. etc. in 6. books -- Land. 1638.
in tw. I think it is the same which some call his Epitome of Crookes Anatomy.
(6) Approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases of the body of Man. when
printed I know not. In his last Will he bequeathed 200 l. to the Marischal
College in Aberdene, in which house, I presume, he had been educated, and all
his books to the Library there.

Nov. 4. A young Man named Will. Moyle, the eldest Son of an Esquire was
created M. of A* in Convocation -- He was then sent to the chief members of
this University by Francis Viscount Verulam with his learned book (Instauratio
magna, I think) to be presented from the Authors to the public Library.

In the month of September this year came into England the famous Theologist
named Daniel Tilenus, and published at London his Paraenesis ad Scotos
Genevensis disciplinae Zelotas. He settled in Oxon for a time for the sake of
the public Library, but whether he was incorporated in any Degree, or created
(which some have avouched) it appears not in the public register.

An. Dom. 1621.
An. 19. Jac. 1.
Chanc. William Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Will. Piers D. D. Canon of Chapter Chapter and Dean of Chester, July 20.

Proct. Matthew Style of Exe^. Coll. Nichol. Baylie of C. C. Coll. Apr. 11


The last of which was the first of his Coll. that even bore the office of
Proctor.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 20. Sam. Fancet of Qu. Coll. -- See among the Masters of Arts 1624.

25. John Maynard of Exet. June 8. Pet. Wentworth of Ball. Coll.

Of the last you may see more among the Doctors of Divinity 1633.

12. Joh. Tombs of Magd. Hall.

14. George Newton of Exet. Hen. Glemham of Trin. Coll.


The last of which was afterward Bishop of S. Asaph.

Morgan Godwin of Chapter Chapter afterward of Pembr. Coll. was adm. the same day. See
among the Incorporations an. 1642.

Jul. 6. Joh. Angel of Magd. Hall. Joh. Greaves the Linguist.

Oct. 17. James Cranford of Ball. Coll.

Nov. 20. Joh. Gumbleden Dec. 6. Will. Strode of Chapter Chapter

Jan. 31. Will. Streat of Exet. Feb. 22. Jam. Eglesfield of Qu. Coll.

Of the last you may see more among the Masters, an. 1625.

27. Joh Ellis of Heart Joh. Arnway of S. Edm. Hall.


28. Joh. Leycester of Brasn. Oliv. Whitby of Trin. Joh. Trapp of Chapter Chapter Coll.


Of Whitby, you may see more among the Masters, an. 1624. Mar. 1. Shackerlie
Marmion of Wadh. Coll.

As for Maynard, who was afterward Sergeant at Law, Tombs, Godwin, Newton,
Glemham, Angel, Greaves, Granford, Gumbleden, Strode, Streat, Ellis, Arnway
and Trapp, will be mention at large made in the second Vol. of this Work, or
elsewhere.

Adm. 280.

Bach. of Law.
Apr. 18. Will. Merick of New Coll. -- He was afterward a Knight, and Judge of
the Prerogative, as I shall hereafter tell you.

Besides him, were only three more admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
May 16. Tho. Laurence June 1. Will. Paul of Alls. 11. Joh. Atherton of Linc.
Coll.



12. Joh. Geree of Magd. Hall.

14. Will. Lyford of Magd. Coll.

June 14. Meric Casaubon Zouch Tewnley George Morley Rob. Gomershal of Chapter Chapter


As for Townley, he was a Lancashire man born, or at least extracted from an
ancient Family of his name in that Country, and now (1621) esteemed a noted
Orator and Philosopher. He has written and published Oration in memoriam
clariss. viri Gul. Camdeni, Lecturae Historicae apud Oxonienses fundatoris,
etc. Oxon. 1624. qu. set before a book of Lat. Verses intit. Camdeni Insignia.
What else he has published I know not, nor any thing besides, that is
memorable of him, only that he was several times Deputy-Orator of this
University.

Jun. 21. Tho. Tyro of S. Edm. Hall. -- One of both his names was a boon and
jolly Blade in the time of Qu. Elizab. as it appears by his Roaring Megg
planted against the walls of melancholy. Land. 1598. qu. and his Epistolae,
which shows him to have been a Scholar, but whether of this University, I know
not as yet.

Jul. 6. Humph* Chambers of Vniv. Coll. Thom. Colman of Magd. Hall.

Oct. 17. Joh. Gee of Ex. Coll.

Adm. 123.

Bach. of Physic.
Tho not one was admitted this year, yet three were admitted to practice. viz.
Rich. Gardener of Broadgates Hall, Edw. Dawson of Lincon Coll. and Sam. Bave a
German of Chapter Church. Which last was commonly called Dr. Bavey of Bathe, where
he was in great practice to the time of his death.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 19. Rob. Skinner of Trin. 25. Ale^and. Harry of Ex. Coll.

Of the last you may see more in what I shall say of Will. Hicks among the
Writers in the second Vol. an. 1659.

May 11. Tho Baylie of Magd. 12. Will. Page of Alls. Coll.

Mar. 8. Tho. Wilson of Mert. Coll. a Compounder. See more among the
Incorporations, an. 1645.

Adm. 20.

Doct. of Law.
Nov. 27. Will. Steed Mart. Aylworth of Alls. Coll.


The former of which was about this time Official of Canterbury. Dec. 12. Will.
Juxon President of S. Joh. Coll.

Not one Doctor of Physic was this year admitted.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 2. Paul Godwin Rob. Robotham Tho. Godwin. of Chapter Chapter Joh. Hughes of C. C.
Coll. Of Magd. Coll. Compounders.


Paul and Tho. Godwin were the Sons of Dr. Franc. Godwin Bishop of Hereford,
and Robotham and Hughes were his Sons in law, having married two of his
Daughters. The last of which was benificed in Herefordshire, where he died
about 1648.

Mar. 21. Joh. Tolson Provost of Oriel Coll.

Incorporations.
Jun. 16. George Snell D. of D. of the University of S. Andrew in Scotland.

These Cambridge men following were incorporated on the 10 of July, being the
next day after the conclusion of the Act.

Michael Honywood M. of A. -- He was afterward D. of D. and in 1660 was made
Dean of Lincoln in the place of Anthony Topham who died in the rebellious
times. This Dr. Honyword died about 12 Sept. 1681, and was, as I suppose,
buried in the Cathedral there. Whereupon Dr. Dan Brevint su^ceeded him in his
Dignity.

Will. Brough M. A. of Christ's Coll. -- I shall speak at large of him among the
Incorporations of Doctors of Div. an. 1645.

Christopher Dow M. of A. -- He was afterward Bach. and Doct. of Div. much
favored by Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury, (whose Creature and Champion he was)
and by him promoted to several ecclesiastical Benefices. He has written (1) A
discourse of the Sabbath and Lords day, wherein etc. Land. 1636. qu. second
Edit. (2) Innovations unjustly charged upon the present Church and State, or an
answer to the most material passages made by Mr. Hen. Burton in his book entit.
An Apology of an Appeal, etc. Land. 1637. qu. with other things very offensive
to the Puritan, who held the Author to be a rank Arminian.

George Walker Bach. of Div. -- This learned person was born at Hawkeshead in
Fournifalls in Lancashire, educated in S. Joh. Coll. in the said Univ. of
Cambr. where he was esteemed an excellent Logician, Orientalian and Divine. He
was about this time Chaplain to Dr. Felton Bishop of Ely, and Minister of S.
John the Evangelist in Watlingstreet in London, where he was ready upon all
occasions to encounter with any learned Cath. Priest. On the last of May 1623,
was a set and solemn disputation between him and one that went by the name of
Smith; at which being present a great Auditory, it was published for the
satisfaction of both parties, with this Title, The sum of a disputation between
Mr. Walker Pastor of S. Joh. the Evang. etc. and a popish priest calling
himself Mr. Smith but indeed Norris. printed 1623. qu. Which Norris was a D. of
D. and a publisher of several little popish Pamphlets about the same time. In
the year following he the said Walker had to do with Fath. Joh. Fisher the
Jesuit, as being Dr. Dan. Featley's second, and thereupon published Fishers
folly unfolded; or, the vaunting Jesuits challenge answered. Land. 1624.
Afterward when our Author Walker, who was a severe Puritan, beheld the
profanation of the Lords day, he preached against it, and other Practices and
Opinions, which procured him trouble, and two years imprisonment, as it is said.
After the Long Parliament began, he preached against the King and his
Followers, and published several things, which before he was not permitted to
do, among which were (1) Socinianism in the fundamental point of justification
discovered and confuted, etc. Land. 1641. oct. (2) The doctrine of the holy
weekly sabbath, etc. Land. 1641. etc. In the year 1643* he was chosen one of
the Assembly of Divines, preached sometimes before the Members of Parliament,
and had his Sermons made public, one of which is ent. Fast-sermon before the
House of Common^ 9 Jan. 1644, on Psalm 58. 9. Land. 1645. qu. He has also
other things extant, as, God made visible in all his works, etc. pr. 1641. qu.
etc. which for brevity sake I now pass by, and only tell you, that he died in
1651, aged about 70, and was buried in his Church of S. John before mentioned.

Edw. Martin Bach. of Div. -- He was afterward Doctor of that Faculty,
domestic Chaplain to Archb. Laud, and Rector of Houghton Conquest in
Bedfordshire, and of Dunnington in Cambridgshire; but being a zealous man for
the Church of England, was turned out of those livings by the Committee of
Religion, as you may largely see in that infamous libel ent. The first Century
of scandalous malignant Priests, etc. p. 41. He lost other spiritualities, and
suffered much for the Kings Cause, notwithstanding he was a godly and learned
man. All that seems bad of him, you may see in Canterburies Doom, published by
Will. Prynne, an inveterate enemy to Prelacy, good order in the Church,
Arminianism, or any thing that looked that way.

Foulk Robarts Bach. of Div. -- In Feb. 1616 he became Probendary of Norwich on
the death of Hugh Castleton, which he held to the time of his death in the
interval or broken times. He has written (1) The revenew of the Gospel is
tithes due to Ministry of the word, by that word in Tim. 1. 5. 18. Cambr.
1613. qu. (2) Gods holy house and service described according to the primitive
form thereof. Land. 1639. qu. and other things as it is probable. In 1660, Aug.
21. one George Kent M. of A. was installed Prebendary of Norwych in the place
of the said Foulk Robarts, who had been dead some years before.

Samuel Broke or Brook D. D. and about this time Master of Trinity Coll. -- He
was afterward Archd. of Coventry, and wrote an Arminian Treatise of
predestination, which he communicated to Dr. Laud Bishop of London, an. 1630,
(so says Prynne in Canterburies Printed at Land. 1646. p* 167.
Doom) and about the 16 of Sept. in the year following, he departed this mortal
life. He had an ingenious Brother named Christop. Brook, a Yorkshire man born,
who after he had left the University (whether this, or Cambridge, I cannot yet
tell, notwithstanding several of his Surname and time have studied in
University Coll.) he settled in Lincolns Inn, purposely to advance himself in
the municipal Law, where he became known to, and admired by, Joh. Seldom, Ben.
Johnson, Mich. Drayton, Will. Brown, George Withers and Joh. Davies of
Hereford, especially after he had published An Elegy consecrated to the never
dying memory of Henry Prince of Wales. Land. 1613. qu. In the year following,
he being then a Bencher, was elected Summer Reader of his House, became a
Benefactor to the Chapel there, and wrote another book ent. Eglogues; dedicated
to his much loved friend Mr. Will. Brown of the Inner Temple. Land. 1614. oct.
He has also Verses put before the first part of Britannia's pastorals, penned
by the said Brown, also before a poetical piece called The legend of Great
Cromwell, written by Mich. Drayton. and had a considerable hand in dishing out
The Odcombian Banquet, an. 1611. Later in time than the former (give me leave
to divert my self) I find another Christop. Brook who married a daughter of
the famous Mathematician Will. Oughtred, having been by him before initiated in
Mathematics. Afterward he became a maker and framer of mathematical
Instruments, and the publisher of (1) A new Quadrant of more natural, easy,
and manifold performance, than any one heretofore extant. pr. in 1649, in 2
sheets in oct. having been the invention of Oughtred. (2) The solution of all
sphaerical Triangles, b^th right and oblique, by the planisphaere, etc. Oxon.
1651. oct. This Chr. Brook being known to the ingenious and learned Dr. Joh.
Wilkins Warden of Wadham Coll. had a Servants place of that House worth 30 l.
per an. conferred upon him by that Doctor purposely to encourage his Ingenuity.
What else he has published I know not, nor any thing of him besides, only that
dying in his house near Wadham Coll. was buried in the Cloister belonging
thereunto, situated and being between the Chapel and the Library, an. 1665.

Edward Kellet D. D. of Kings Coll. -- See before, among the Incorporations an.
1616. where you will find the Titles of some of the books that he has published.

All which Cantabrigians, were, I say, incorporated on the 10 of July.

Aug. 30. Andrew Rivet D. D. of the University of Leyden in Holland, was
solemnly incorporated in that degree, and taken into the bolom of the
University, in a Convocation then held: at which time he gave several Books to
the University Library. -- This Rivet who received his first breath at St.
Maixent in the Province of Poictou, was a learned and godly Divine, has very
well expounded Genesis, the Prophetical Psames and Hosea; and has written
learnedly against the Papists in his Catholicus Orthodoxus, and against
Grotius. He is styled by a learned Cariss^^. de Imputat. primi peccat^, cap. 17.
Author Vir clarissimus, and nunquam satis laudatus, Gallicae Belgicaeque
ecclesiae micantissimum lumen, etc. The Titles of most of his books are in
Oxford or Bodlies Catalogue. See more of him in Athenae Batavae, written by
John Meursius, lib. 2. p. 320.

Creations.
Aug. 1. Joh. Keeling a Counselor of the Inner Temple, and a person well read
in the municipal Laws of England, was then actually created M. of A. in the
house of Convocation. Whether he was the same with John Keeling a Staffordshire
man, who was matriculated as a Member of Brasn. Coll. an. 1593 aged 17, I know
not. One of both his names was after the Restoration of King Chapter 2. made (...)
Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, and at length L. Chief
Justice. He died in the beginning of the year 1671.

Nov. 24. Richard Wats of Oriel, styled in the common Register Vir omni humana
literatura and bonarum artium cognitione feliciter instructus, was actually
created M. of Arts. -- He was entered in the public Library as a Student in the
municipal Laws.

Feb..... James Baylie a Scot, now of Exeter Coll. who 14 years before this
time was made M. of A. of the University of Glascow, and 8 years since,
Bachelaur of the Laws of the University of Anjou in France (where he performed
not only his exercise for that degree, but also for the degree of Doctor of
that Faculty) was actually created Doctor of the Laws of this University, Dr.
Zouch the Kings Professor of that Faculty then executing his office in the
solemnity. -- He was now Tutor to James Earl of Arran a Noble man of Exet.
Coll. afterward Duke of Hamilton. I find one James Bail^ie M. of A. and a Scot
born, to have published Spiritual Marriage; or, the Union between Christ and
his Church, Sermon. at Westminster on Hosea. 2. 19. Land. 1627. qu. But his name
being written different from the former, I cannot say he had any relation to
him.

Baldwinus Hamaeus a learned German, was admitted a Student into the public
Library. -- See among the Incorporations an. 1629. So also was Tho. Gardener of
the Inner Temple Esquire; afterward Recorder of London, a Knight, his Majesty's
Solicitor General, and eminent for his knowledge in the Municipal Law. He died
in October. 1652, and was buried, as I conceive, in the Church at Cudesd^n near
Oxford, in which Town he had an Estate. Qu.

An. Dom. 1622.
An. 20 Jac. 1.
Chanc. the same.

Vicechanc. Dr. Will. Piers again, Jul. 17.

Proct. Griffin Higgs of Mert. Coll. Rich. Steuart of Alls. Coll. May 2.


Bach. of Music.
May 17. Will. Heather, or Heyther.

At the same time Orlando Gibbons did supplicate for the same degree, but
occurs not admitted. See more of him and of Heather among the Doctors of Music
following.

Bach. of Arts.
June 27. Will. Morice of Exet. Hen. Hibbert of Brasn. Oct. 22. Nich. Darton of
Ex. Nov. 28. Edw. Pocock of C. C. Coll.


Dec. 4. Edw. Corbet of Mert. Coll. -- See among the created Doctors of Div.
1648.

6. John Sedgwick of Magd. Hall, lately of Qu. Coll.

9. Joh. Strickland of Qu. 11. Hen. Hammond of Magd. Feb. 17. Joh. Marshan of
S. Jo. 18. Rob. Codrington of Magd. 19. George Hughes of Corp. Chr. Coll.

Charles Gibbs was admitted the same day.

All these will be largely mentioned elsewhere.

Adm. 257, or thereabouts.

Doct. of Music.
May 17. Will. Heather or Heyther, who accumulated the degrees in Music. --
This person who was born at Harmsworth in Middlesex, near Colebrook in Bucks*
was now one of the Gentlemen belonging to his Majesty's Chapel, and so great
an encourager of his Faculty, that soon after he founded the Music Lectures
(Theory and practick) in this University, as I have In Hist. and Antiq. V^iv.
Oxon. l. 2. p. 44. b.
elsewhere told you. He died in the latter end of July 1627, and was buried on
the first of Aug. in the broad or south Isle joining to the Choir of S. Peter's
Church in Westminster. See more of him in Nath. Giles following.

Jul. 5. Nathaniel Giles Bach. of Music, was then licensed to proceed in that
Faculty. -- In 1607 he supplicated the venerable Congregation of Regents to be
admitted Doctor; which desire of his was granted conditionally that he compose
a choral Hymn of 8 parts to be publicly sung in the Act wherein he should
proceed; but for what reason he did not perform that obligation, I cannot
justly say. Sure I am, that in the Act this year, wherein he proceeded, were
certain Questions appointed to be discussed between him and Dr. Heather before
mentioned, which being pro forma only, and not customarily to be done, were
omitted. The Questions were (1) Whether discords may be allowed in music?
Affirm. (2) Whether any artificial Instrument can so fully and truly express
music as the natural Voice? Negat. (3) Whether the practick be the more useful
part of music or the theory? Affirm. This Dr. Giles who was noted as well for
his religious life and conversation (a rarity in Musicians) as for the
excellency of his Faculty, was born in, or near to, the City of Worcester, was
one of the Organists of S. George's Chap. at Windsore and Master of the Boys
there; afterward one of the Organists of the Chapel Royal to K. Chapter 1. and
Master of the Boys thereof, was famous for his compositions of Divine Hymns and
Anthems; the words of some of which, are remitted into a Book entit. Divine
Services and Anthems sung in the Cathedrals and collegiate Choires in the
Church of England, published by Jam. Clifford an. 1663, oct. He the said Dr.
Giles died about the year 1635, and was buried in one of the Isles joining to
S. George's Chap. before mentioned.

On the 17 of May Orlando Gibbons one of the Organists of his Majesty's
Chapel, did supplicate ^^e venerable Congregation that he might accumulate the
degrees in Music; but whether he was admitted to the one, or licensed to
proceed in the other, it appears not. However the Song of 6 parts or more,
which was performed in the Act for Will. Heather, was composed by him, as one
or more eminent Musicians then living have several times told me. This Orlando
who was accounted one of the rarest Musicians and Organists of his time, has
extant A set of Madrigals of five parts for voices and viols, had also a hand
in Parthenia, mentioned before, under the year 1592, and composed Several
divine Services and Anthems; the words of which are in Jam. Clifford's Book
before mentioned, besides admirable Compositions that are printed in several
Books of Music. At length being commanded to Canterbury to attend the
solemnity of the Nuptials between K. Chapter 1. and Henrietta Maria a Daughter of
the King of France (in order to which he had made vocal and instrumental
Compositions) died there of the Smallpox to the great reluctance of the Court,
on the day of Pentecost, an. 1625. Afterward was a monument erected over his
grave in the body of the Cathedral there, with an Inscription thereon,
beginning thus: Orlando Gibbonio Cantabrigiae inter musas and musicae nato,
sacrae R. Capellae Organistae, sphaerarumque harmoniae digitorum pulsu aemulo,
cantionum complurium quaeque dum non canunt minus quam canuntur c^nditori, etc.
From which monument, set up at the charge of Elizabeth his Widow, who gave
instructions what to be inscribed thereon, but not the time of his age, we are
given to understand that the said Orlando Gibbons was born at Cambridge, yet
the Reader is to know that one Orlando Gibbons was baptized in S. Martins
Parish in the City of Oxford 25 December. 1583, which some have been pleased to
take to be the same that was afterward the famous Organist; who, as those that
knew him have told me, was not quite 45 years of age when he died. But to let
these scruples pass, as also another Orlando Gibbons M. A. of Cambridge, who
was incorporated at Oxon an. 1607, I shall go forward.

Mast. of Arts.
May 9. Philip Nigh Will. Pinke of Magd. Hall.


The last was afterward of Magd. Coll.

Jun. 26. Joh. Maynard of Magd. Hall, a Compounder.

Jun. 26. Rich. Heyrick of S. Joh. Joh. Lewgar of Trin. Coll.


Jul. 4. Geor. Stinton of Ball. Coll. -- He was the eldest Son of an Esquire; was
born, and educated in Grammar Learning, in the City of Worcester, and after he
had taken the degree of M. A. he became Vicar of Claynes in the Bishop of
Worcester's gift, and Rector of Speechley, both near to the said City. He has
published A Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Worcester, in the time
of the pestilence, on 1 Kings. 8. ver. 37, 38, 39. Oxon 1637. oct. and has
written others fit for the press, which go from hand to hand to this day. He
died at Speechley about 1654, and was buried in the Church there.

Joh. Biddle of Ball. Coll. was adm. on the said 4 of July; but whether he ever
took the degree of Bach. of Arts in this University it does not appear in the
public Register. -- I set this J. Biddle down here, to distinguish him from
another of both his names, (a grand Socinian and Arrian) whom I shall at large
mention in the second Vol. but whether he has published any thing I cannot yet
tell. One John Beadle M. of A. Minister sometimes of Barnstone in Essex, wrote
The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian, presented in some Meditations
upon Numb. 33. v. 2. Land. 1656, oct. Which Author, I presume, was of
Cambridge. See more of him in an Epist. to the Reader before the said Journal,
written by Joh. Fuller Minister of S. Martin Ironmonger lane, wherein he speaks
much of the said Author.

Oct. 29. Rich. B^field of Qu. Coll.

Dec. 11. Matthias Turner of Broadgates Hall, lately of Balliol Coll. -- He was
an excellent Philosopher, had great skill in the Oriental Languages, and wrote
(as he himself professed) all his Sermons, which he preached, in Greek.

Jan. 23. Tho. Hieks of Ball. Coll. Obadiah Sedgwick of Magd. Hall.

Feb. 21. Tho. Blake of Chapter Chapter

Adm. 141.

Bach. of Div.
May 10. Thomas Vicars of Queens Coll.

Besides him were admitted 8 more, but not one of them was a Writer or Bishop.

Doct. of Law.
Jul. 4. Will. Bird of Alls. Coll. -- This learned Doctor who was Son of Thom.
Bird of Littlebury in Essex, Brother to Sir Will. Bird, (mentioned before,
under the year 1587.) was afterward Custos or Master of the Prerogative Court
of Canterbury, and died in the latter end of 1644. One Will. Bird has written
The magazine of honor: or, a treatise of the several degrees of the Nobility
of this Kingdom, etc. which was afterward perused and enlarged by Sir John
Doderidge, as I have in him told you before, among the Writers. But what
relation this Will. Bird had to the former, I know not.

Doct. of Phys.
May 27. Rich. Spicer of Exet. Coll. who accumulated the degrees in Medicine.
-- He was afterward an eminent Physician in London, where he died in the
beginning of the year 1640.

Doct. of Div.
June 27. Tho. Jackson Christop. Green of C. C. Coll.


The first is largely mentioned elsewhere, the other, who was also a learned
and godly man, was now Prebendary of Bristow, where dying 5 March 1658, aged
79, was buried in the Yard belonging to the Cath. Chapter there.

Jul. 1. Thom. Benson of Chapter Chapter Joh. Harrys of New Coll.

Incorporations.
On the 9 of July, being the day after the conclusion of the Act, were these
Cantabrigians following incorporated, being part of the number of about 24 that
were taken into the bosom of this University.

Charles Lord Stanhope of Harington M. of Arts.

Timothy Thurscross M. A. -- Afterward being Bach. of Div. he was installed
Archdeacon of Clievland in the place of Hen. Thurscross resigning, 16. Nov.
1635. And afterward resigning that dignity, Joh. Neile Bach. of Div. was
installed therein 27 Oct. 1638, I mean the same Neile who was made Dean of
Rippon in the place of Dr. Joh. Wilkins promoted to the Sea of Chester One Tim.
Thurscross D. D. died in the Parish of S. Sepulcher in Land. in November. or
thereabouts, 1671, which perhaps may be the same with the former. Quaere.

Thom. Aylesbury M. of A. -- See among the Incorporations 1626.

Will. Fenner M. A. of Pembroke Hall. -- He was afterward Bach. of Div. and
exercised his Ministry for a time in Staffordshire. At length upon the
invitation of the Earl of Warwick, he became Rector of Rochford in Essex, where
he was much admired and frequented by the puritannical party. He gave way to
fate in 1640 or thereabouts, aged 40, and had several theological Tracts of his
writing published after his death by Tho. Hill, (whom I shall anon mention) the
Titles of most of which you may see in Oxford Catalogue, but more in that
publised by Will. London a Bookseller, an. 1658.

Thom. Hill M. A. of Eman. Coll. -- He was afterward Rector of Tychmersh in
Northamptonshire, one of the Assembly of Divines, a frequent Preacher before
the Long Parliament, Master of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge in the place of Dr.
Tho. Comber ejected, and Vicechancellour of the said University. He has
published several Sermons, as (1) The trade of truth advanced, preached before
the H. of Commons at a Fast 27 Jul. 1642, on Prove. 23. ver. 23. Land. 1642. qu.
(2) Militant Church triumphant over the Dragon and his Angels, Sermon. before
both Houses 21 Jul. 1645, on Rev. 12. 11. Land. 1643. qu. (3) The reason for
Englands self-reflection; an extraordinary Fast-sermon 13 Aug. 1644 before the
two Houses, on Haggai 1. 7, 8. (4) The right separation encouraged, Fast-serm.
before the H. of Lords, 27 Nov. 1644, on 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. Besides others, as
also his Best and worst of Paul; an Exercise in Trin. Coll. in Cambr. printed
1648, and his collecting into one quarto Vol. several of the theological Tracts
of the aforesaid Will. Fenner, printed at Land. 1651. You may see more of him
the said Th. Hill in Anth. Tuckney's Sermon at his Funeral, with an account of
his Life and Death, printed in 1654, in oct. Besides this Dr. Tho. Hill, was
another also, who was Minister of Brodfield in Suffolk, and died there in the
Winter time 1638, but has nothing extant, as I can yet see: and a third Dr.
Tho. Hill you may see in my discourse of Dr. George Abbot among the Writers,
an. 1633. number. 612.

Thom. Thorowgood M. A. -- He was afterward Bach. of Div. Rector of Grymston
in Norfolk, and one of the Assembly of Divines. Among several things that he
has published are (1) Jews in America; or, probabilities that Americans are of
that race, etc. Land. 1650. qu. (2) Moderation justified, etc. Fast-serm.
before the H. of Commons 26 Dec. 1644, on Phil. 4. 5. Land. 1645. qu. etc.

All which Cantabrigians with many more, besides 13 Bachelaurs of Arts, were
incorporated on the 9 Jul. before mentioned.

Feb. 28. Thom. Freaer or Friar Doct. of Phys. of the University of Padua. --
He was at this time a practitioner in the City of London, and dying in the
beginning of 1623, about two months after his Incorporation, was buried in the
Parish Church of S. Botolph, in the tomb of his Mother lately deceased; but in
which of the Churches of S. Botolph in London, it is not said.

Creations.
Apr. 12. Francis Whiddon of Exeter Coll. and a Devonian born. was actually
created M. of A. -- He was afterward Minister of Morton Hampsted in his own
Country, and published A golden topaze; or, a heart-jewel: namely a conscience
purified and pacified by the blood and spirit of Christ; on Heb. 13. 18. Oxon.
1656. oct. he being then conformable to the men in Authority and Power. What
other things he published, I find not.

Jul. 1. Joh. Leigh of Brasn. Coll. was actually created M. of A. in the house
of Congregation. -- 'Twas four years since he took the degree of Bach. of Arts,
in which time he had Reg. Univ. Oxon. N. fol. 145. ^.
studied in several transmarine Universities, and had obtained such admirable
knowledge in all humane learning, and especially in Philosophy, and other Arts,
that he was esteemed by the venerable Regents most worthy of the degree of M.
of Arts.

Sam. Bochartus of Roan in Normandy became a Sojourner this year in the
University, and was entered a Student in the public Library in the beginning of
Lent Term: with the help of which and other Libraries, he laid the foundation
of most rare Books which he afterward published. His Geographia sacra has
made him famous in the learned World, as also his Hierozoicon; for both which,
eminent Authors do in an high manner celebrate his name. He was Pastor of the
Protestant Church at Caen in Normandy, where he died in 1667. being ever
esteemed a great lover of the Church of England.

An. Dom. 1623.
An. 21 Jac. 1.
Chanc. Will. Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Dr. Piers again, Jul. 21.

Proct. Joh. Smith of Magd. Coll. Will. Oldis of New Coll. Apr. 23.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 12. Hugh Davys of New Coll. Organist of the Cathedral Church at Hereford.
-- He was eminent for the various Compositions of Church Music that he had
made, which is all I know of him, only that he died about 1644.

Bach. of Arts.
Jun. 18. Hen. Tozer of Exet. 23. John Price of Jesus Coll.

Whether the last was afterward the learned Critic, who studied about this
time in Oxon, is, as yet, doubtful.

Jun. 26. George Griffith George Eglionbie of Chapter Chapter


The first of these two was afterward Bishop of S. Asaph, the last Dean of
Canterbury, as I shall tell you among the Doctors of Div. an. 1634.

June 29. Hugh Cressy or Hugh Paulin de Cressy.

Oct. 29. Will. Erbury Feb. 6. Arth. Salway of Brasn. Coll.

Of the last, you may see more among the Masters, an. 1626.

7. John Hoffman of Exet. Coll. -- See among the Bachelaurs of Div. 1634.

Joh. Bird of Mert. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- Whether he be the same
with Joh. Bird, who was afterward Schoolmaster in the City of Gloucester and
Author of Grounds of Grammar Oxon. 1639. oct. I cannot lay to the contrary. He
that was Bach. of Arts was an Oxfordshire Man born, and had been originally of
St. Edm. hall.

All which Bachelaurs except Eglionbie, Salway, Hoffman and Bird, will be
mentioned in the 2. Volume of this work, or elsewhere.

Adm. 233. of thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Apr. 24. Alexander Hyde of New Oct. 11. Nathan. Brent of Mert. Coll.

The first was afterward Bishop of Salisbury, the other was now Warden of
Merton Coll.

Besides these two were only two more admitted.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 2. Edmund Staunton of C. C. May 26. Nathan. Simpson Hen. Gellibrand of
Trin. Coll. Coll.




Will. Gilbert of Glouc. hall was admitted the same day -- He was the younger
Son of an Esquire; in Derbyshire and was now esteemed by his contemporaries a
general Scholar and a rare Man. One of both his names has certain Sermons
extant, one of which is a Funeral Sermon on 1. These. 4. 18. printed 1649. qu.

Jun. 18. Edward Leigh Nath. Holmes Anth. Fawkner of Jes. Coll. of Magd. hall.


Jun. 26. Thom. Case of Chapter Chapter

July 10. Will. Crompton of Brasn. Oct. 16. Edw. Stanely of New Feb. 6. Hen.
Glemham. Mar. 16. Will. Chillingworth of Trin. Coll.


Admitted. 157.

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 3. Thom. Goffe of Chapter Chapter

10. Gilbert Wats of Linc. Dec. 13. Nich. Vignier of Ex. 17. Will. Sclatyer of
Bras. Coll.

Admitted 11.

Doct. of Law.
Oct. 11. Nath. Brent Warden of Merton Coll. who accumulated the Degree in Law.

Not one Doctor of Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jul. 18. Tho. Worrall of Brasn. Rob. Barcroft of Co. Chr. Coll.


Oct. 14. Paul Hood Rect. of Linc. Joh. Wall of Chapter Church.

Dec. 17. Josh. Aisgill of Co. Chr. Will. Sclatyer of Bras. George Webb of Co.
Chr. Coll.


The last saving one, viz. Solatyer accumulated and compounded.

Incorporations.
May 7. Samuel Baker M. of A. of Christ's Coll. in Cambridge. -- He afterward
became a puritannical Preacher in London, and much followed; but being taken
off from those courses, was made household Chaplain to Dr. Juxon Bishop of
London and a creature of Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury. About which time being
Rector of St. Mary on the hill and of St. Christophers in Land. where his
preaching was much applauded by some, become Prebendary of St. Paul's Cathedral.
On the 20. of Sept. 1638, he being then D. of D. was installed Canon of
Windsore, on the death of Dr. John King sometimes Fellow of Merton Coll. but he
being soon after made Prebendary of Canterbury. he resigned his Canonry, and
Tho. Broume Bach. of Div. of Chapter Chapter in Oxon was installed therein 28. May
1639. This Dr. Baker, who was a great Licencer of Books, but publisher I think
of none, gained a great deal of Envy from the Puritan for his partiality in
that office; for which and his great respect to the tenets of Arminius, he was
in the beginnig of the rebellion ^^s^vanted and imprisoned, and at length
deprived of his Spiritu^^^.

Thomes Harste M. of A. of the said University was incorporated the same day.
-- He was afterward D. of D. Chaplain to K. Chapter 1. and Minister of (...) (in
Lincolushire) He has published The descent of (...), the Magistrates patent
from Heaven, Sermon at Lincoln Assizes, 13 March 1636. on Genesis 9. 6. Land.
1637. qu. and other things, as I conceive. Quere.

On the 14 of July, after the conclussion of the Act, these Cambridge Men
following were incorporated.

Joh. Harding M. of A. -- One of both his names who had been a Dominican or
Black friar, did speak A recantation Sermon in the Gatchouse at Westminster 30.
July 1620, on Psalm. 119. 71. Land. 1620. qu. containing Motives why he left the
Church of Rome. Whether he be the same with the former who was M. of A. I know
not.

Thomas Scot M. A. -- One of both his names also, who was Bach. of Div. of the
said University, and a Preacher in the City of Norwych, has several things
extant, as the Oxford Catalogue tells you; but he is not to be taken for the
same who was M. of A. because, if I mistake not, the Bach. of Div. died 1624.
aged 45.

Thom. Edwards M. of A. -- He was afterward a Minister of Gods word, a zealous
Puritan and in the beginning of that rebellion raised by the Presbyterians, an.
1642, did, with his Wife, Children, Estate, and all that was dear to him,
imbark in the same Ship with them, showed himself most zealous for the cause by
preaching, praying, and stirring up the People to stand for them: Also by going
out in Person, and lending money to carry on the War. He has written (1)
Reasons against the Independent Government of particular congregations, etc.
Land. 1641. qu. Answered the same year by a Woman called Catherine Chidley. (2)
Antipologia: or an answer to an Apologetical narration of Mr. Goodwin, Nigh,
Sympson, Buroughs and Bridge, members of the Ass. of Divines. Land. 1644. qu.
etc. (3) Gangraena: or, a catalogue and discovery of many of the errors,
heresies, blasphemies, etc. acted in England in these four last years. As also
a particular narration of diverse stories, remarkable passages, letters, etc.
Land. 1645. qu. there again the second time 1646. qu. The second and third
parts of the same book came out in 1646. qu. (4) Treatise against Toleration.
Land. 1647. qu. the first part. The other parts, if any, I have not yet seen.
He has also written, if I mistaken not, Of the particular visibility of the
Church. Also A Treatise of the Civil power in Ecclesiasticals, and of
suspension from the Lords Supper, which three were published in qu. an. 1642.
44.

Will. Fairfax who had been incorporated M. A. in 1622 was incorporated again
this year in the same Degree. -- He was afterward D. of D. Rector of the
Parish Church of St. Peter in Cornhill within the City of London, and Vicar of
East-Ham in Middlesex. Of both which, he was deprived by a Committee of
Parliament, (after he had been plundered, imprisoned in Ely-house and the Ships,
and his Wife and Children turned out of doors) an. 1642-3. You may read more of
him in that most scandalous Libell entit. The first century of scandalous and
malignant Priests, etc. printed 1643. qu. p. 7.

Sam. Hildersham Bach. Anthony Shert Doct. of Div.

All which with many others were incorporated on the 14. July as it is before
said.

Aug. 4. Ferdinando Texeda Bach. of Div. of the University of Salamanca in
Spain. -- He had been a Monk in the said Country, but left it and his Religion,
came over to the Church of England, and at length receeding to Oxon was not
only incorporated, but found relief among the Scholars thereof. He has
written, Texeda retextus: or, the Spanish Monk, his bill of divorce against the
Church of Rome. Land. 1623. qu. It contains the chief motives of his
conversion, and it is probable it was an Usher to other of his labors.

Oct. 14. Nich. Vignier M. of A. of Saumaur in France. -- He afterward took
the Degree of Bach. of Div. in the year following.

Creations.
July 18. George Berkly Baron of Berkles, Moubray, Segrave and Bruce, Knight
also of the Bath, was actually created Master of Arts. -- This most noble
Person (who had been sometimes of Chapter Ch.) died in 1658, leaving then behind
him a Son named George, created Earl of Berkley by K. Chapter 2.

Anthony Stafford sometimes a member of Oriel Coll. was created M. of A. the
same day. -- I shall mention this Person among the writers under the year 1641.
or elshewhere.

Sam. Thomas of Brasn. Coll. was created Bach. of Arts on the same day also,
which is all I know of him.

An. Dom. 1624.
An. 22. Jac. 1.
Chanc. William Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Dr. Prideaux again, July 26.

Proct. Daniel Escote of Wadh. Coll. Rich. Hill of Brasnose Coll. Ap. 7.


In the election of which Proctors, was the greatest canvas, (as 'twas thought)
in the memory of Man. There were four Candidates for the two places, viz. Henry
Warner of St. John's Coll. who had 229 voices, Philip Parsons of the said house,
247. Hill beforementioned, 253, and Es^^te 255. For the taking of the
Suffrages, given partly by Country Parsons, Carats, Schoolmasters, etc. who
were Masters of Arts of the University, and had been invited thereunto for a
time, the scrutiny continued till after 9 of the clock at night. In the year
1626 was a greater Canvas than this, there being then 1078 voices given on all
Sides.

Bach. of Arts.
May 11. Joh. Dawson of Chapter Chapter

June 5. Will. Denton of Magd. hall.

10. Rich. Allen of Balliol, afterward Fellow of Pembr. Coll.

Will. Berkley of Mert. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Nov. 6. John Davis of St. Edmunds, afterward of Magd, hall. -- See among the
Masters 1628.

Dec. 2. Thom. Brown of Chapter Chapter

15. Hen. Beesley Steph. Goffe of Mert. Coll.


Of the last of these two, you may see more among the Creations an. 1636.

Jan. 22. Roger Turner Feb. 17. Joseph Caryl of Ex. Coll.

Of the first of these two last, you may see more among the Masters an. 1627.

19. Sam. Kem of Magd. Rich. Owen of Oriel Coll.


22. Christop. Elderfield of St. Mar. Thomas Ford of Magdal. Hall.


25. Isaac Ambrose of Brasn. Will. White of Wadh. Joh. Fairclough of Alls. Coll.


26. Joseph Henshaw of Magd. Hall. Franc. Davies of Jes. Coll.

The first of these two last was afterward Bishop of Peterborough, the other
of Landaff.

All these Bachelaurs except Jo. Davis will be mentioned in the 2. vol. of this
work, or elsewhere.

Admitted 268.

Doct. of Music.
July 2. John Mundy Bach. of Music and Organist of his Majesty's Chapel
within the Castle of Windsore, was then licensed to proceed in that faculty. --
On the 12 of the same month he solemnly proceeded as a Member of Chapter Chapter in the
Act then celebrated, being in high esteem for his great knowledge in the
Theoretical and Practical part of Music. He has published Songs and Psalms
composed into three. 4. and 5. parts. Land. 1594. in large quartoes, has
composed several Church Services and Anthems, the words of some of which you
may see in James Cliffords Collection of Divine Services and Anthems, etc. and
has Madrigales in The triumphs of Oriana. He gave way to fate in 1630 and was
buried in the Cloister joining to St. Georges Chapel at Windsore
beforementioned.

Bach. of Law.
Nine this year were admitted, but not one of them was afterward a Writer or
Bishop. Some of them, were afterward Doctors and dignified, as I shall tell
you elsewhere.

Mast. of Arts.
Ap. 16. Will. Haywood of St. Joh. Coll. Joh. Tombs of Magd. Hall.

May. 8. Thom, Paybody of Merton Coll. -- He has written An Apology for
kneeling in the Act of receiving the blessed Sacrament. printed 1629. qu. which
is all I yet know of him.

June 2. Joh. Arnway of St. Edm. hall.

10. William Streat of Exet. Jam. Cranford of Ball. Coll.


17. Will. Strode Joh. Trapp of Chapter Chapter


23. George Newton of Exeter July 5. Shakerley Marmion of Wadh. Coll.

9. Sam. Faucet of Qu. Coll. -- He published A seasonable Sermon for
troublesome times, on Psalm. 25. 22. -- printed in qu. but when I know not, nor
any thing else of the Author, only that he was a Londoner born.

Dec. 2. Olives Whithy of Heart hall, lately of Trin. Coll. -- This Person who
was a Bedfordshire Man born and a great admirer of Will. Chillingworth, has
published A Sermon on Hosea 6. 1. 2. -- Printed 1637. qu. and perhaps other
things. Quaere.

Admitted 166.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 22. David Primerose of Exet. Coll. -- There will be large mention made of
him in the 2. volume.

June 2. Robert Sibthorpe of Linc. 1^. Richard Part of Brasn. July 1. Hugh
Lloyd of Jes. 3. Nathan. Norrington of Exet. Coll.

The last of which was now esteemed one of the best Disputants in Oxon,
especially against the Remonstrants, as it partly appears in his Epitaph See
Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. lib. 2. p. 102. b.
in Exeter Coll. Chapel running thus. Vbi, hic, quis? p^oh dolor!
Remonstrantium malleus Norringtonus; sat est.

7. Richard James of Co. Chr. Joh. Randol of Brasn. Coll.


The last published A Sermon preached at St. Mary's in Oxon. 5. Aug. 1624, on
Mark 3. 25. Oxon. 1624. qu. which is all I yet know of his works, or of the
Author, only that he was a Sussex Man born.

Admitted 25.

Doct. of Law.
July 3. Thom. Bennet Rich. Steuart of Alls. Coll.


The first was younger Brother to Sir Joh. Bennet of Dawley in Middlesex,
Father to Henry Earl of Arlington.

23. Rob. Mitchill of Exeter Coll.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
May 7. Theoph. Gale of Exet. June 2. Rob. Sibthorpe of Linc. 7. Morgan James
of Jesus July 3. Francis Mansell of Alls. Coll.

The first was about this time either Prebendary or Canon of Exeter. The second
accumulated the Degrees in Div. as I shall at large tell you when I come to
speak of him in the 2. vol; and the last who had been Principal of Jesus Coll.
was upon the death of Sir Eub. Thelwall made Principal again of the same house,
as I have elsewhere told (...) He was nephew, (...)
you.

Incorporations.
June 5. Matthias Pasor M. of A. of the University of Heidelburg.

On the 13. of Jul. being the next day after the conclusion of the Act, were
these Cambridge Men following incorporated.

Steph. Nettles M. of A. of Queens Coll. -- He was afterward Bach. of Div. and
Author of An answer to the Jewish part of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes. Oxon.
1625. qu. Dedicated to Dr. John Prideaux the Kings Professor of Div. in the
University of Oxon.

Richard Peck M. of A. -- He was afterward Minister of Columpton in Devon, and
published Christ's Watchword, occasioned on the funeral of the truly reverend
Mr. Laur. (...).
Bodley late Fellow of Exeter Coll. in Oxon, and Rector of Clist-Hidon in
Devon. Sermon. on Mark 13. 37. Land. 1635. qu. Besides this he has at least four
more Sermons extant, as (1) Sermon. on Hosea 10. 12. -- printed 1632. qu. (2)
Sermon. on Matthew. 13. 37. (3) Sermon. on James 5. 9. pr. 1632. qu. etc.

Robert Cotesford M. A. -- He was afterward D. of D. and Rector of Hadleigh
and Monks Ely in the County of Suffolk: of both which places he was deprived by
a Committee for Religion appointed by Parliament, an. 1643. At which time and
after he suffered much for the Royal cause. You may see more of him in the
wicked Libel entit. The first Century of scandalous, malignant Priests, etc. p.
8.

Thomas Campion M. of A. -- One of both his names was an admired Poet and
Musician in the Reign of K. Jan. 1. and has had the honor to be named by the
Learned Camden with Spencer, Sydney, Drayton and other the chief of our English
Poets. In Oxford Catalogue you may see the titles of some of his books, and
among them Songs on the untimely death of Pr. Henry, pricked out to the Lute or
Viol by Joh. Coprario. Which Coprario by the way, I would have the reader to
understand, was not a forreigner, but an English Man, born, who having spent
much of his time in Italy, changed his name from Cooper to Coprario (by which
last he was so called in Italy) being in his time much admired for his
composition of Fancies of various parts. As for the said Thomas Campion the
Poet I take him to be too soon for Tho. Campion M. of A. of Cambridge.

Joh. Farmery LL. D. -- He was about this time Chancellor of the Dioc. of
Lincoln, was Burgess for the City of Lincoln to sit in that Parliament which
began at Westminster 13. Apr. 1640. and died in 1647. One Joh. Farmery Bach. of
Div. succeeded Dr. Tho. Spark in the Archdeaconry of Stow in Apr. 1582, whom I
take to be Uncle to the former, who was Son of Will. Farmery of Heapham in
Lincolnshire.

Francis Foxton Will. Lincoln D. of D.

All which, were, I say, incorporated 13. July, being of the number of 35. at
least who were then taken into the bosom of this University.

Oct. 11. Lancelot Lowther Bach. of Arts of Trin. Coll. near Dublin. -- One of
both his names was admitted M. of A. as a member of Oriel Coll. 21. Jan. 1616.

July 27. Mich. Jermin D. of D. of Leyden in Holland. -- He was lately of C. C.
Coll. in this University.

Aug. 25. This right honorable and most excellent Antonius Rusaeus Marquess of
Fiat. Lord of Cheliy and Lengimeau, etc. Privy Counselor to the most
Christain King of France, chief Master of the said Kings Horse, Master of the
Mines within the said Kingdom, and Embassdor extraordinary from the said most
Christian King to the King of England, was incorporated Master of Arts: with
which Degree he had lately been adorned at Cambridge.

The right honorable Robert Rich Earl of Warwick, Baron of Lieghs, Knight of
the Bath, etc. was incorporated M. of A. to which Degree he was lately admitted
at Cambridge. -- He afterward sided with the Parliament in the time of the
grand Rebellion, and was their Admiral at Sea for a time.

Sir Gaspard d'Algre Knight, Count of Beau-voir, Baron of Vivroux, La Croste,
Baffie, St. Desire, S. Marcel, Cornusset, Parnassout, Bruges, Sauset, Captain
of 50 Chevaliers by the ordination of the most Christian King, was also
incorporated in the same degree, to which he had been lately admitted at
Cambridge.

Sir Jews Lewknore Knight, Master of the Ceremonies to King Jam. 1. and M. of
A. of Cambridge. -- Whether he be the same Lew. Lewknore who translated from
Spanish into English The resolved Gentleman, printed 1594 in qu. and other
things, I know not. See more in these Fasti, among the Creations, an 1636.

Monsieur Jam. des Chempes, Orator of the most Christian King, was also
incorporated M. of A. as he had formerly stood in the Univ. or Academy of
Dividon (Dividonensis.)

All which honorable persons were incorporated with Anton. Rusaeus before
mentioned, on the 2^ Aug.

Jan. 18. Gilb. Primerose M. of A of the University of S. Andrew in Scotland.
-- See more among the Creations following.

19. Ranulph Adams a Sect, Bach. of Arts of the said University.

Feb. 24. Joh. Viccars Bach. of Arts of Cambridge, now a Commoner of Linc. Coll.

Creations.
Aug. 25. The honorable James de la Mariniere Baron of Montmartin, Gruchy,
Borrivet, le Vignies and Guhebert, Ordinary Prefect of the Horse belonging to
the most Christian King, was actually created Master of Arts.

Will. Brown of Exeter Coll. had leave then given to him to be actually
created M. of A. but 'twas not put in execution till 16 Nov. following. -- He
is styled in the public Register, Vir omni humana literatura and bonarum
artium cognitione instructus. This person is the celebrated Poet whom I have
mentioned among the Writers, under the year 1024. number. 516.

Peregrin Langford had then also the degree of M. of A. given to him, when he
would be pleased to come to the University for it. -- On the 11 of Dec.
following, he supplicated the ven. Congregation (being then absent) that his
Creation might be deferred till Trinity Term following; but whether he was then
created, it appears not.

Jan. 18. Gilb. Primerose mentioned before among the Incorporations, was
actually created D. of D. in the house of Convocation (just after he had been
incorporated) by virtue of the Reg. Convocat. N. fol. 199. b.
Letters of the Chancellor of this University, wherein is contained a large
testimony of his singular probity and great learning, and that he had spent
twenty years in the study of Theology, backed by recommendations from the King
in consideration of his learning and worth. He was a Scotch man born, had been
one of the French Preachers of the Protestant Church at Bourdeaux in France,
but now of the French Church in London, and Chaplain in Ordinary to the King.
In 1628, Jul. 21, he was installed Canon of Windsore in the place of Dr. John
Buckridge, promoted to the Sea of Ely, (for he had kept that dignity several
years in commendam with Rochester) which place he keeping till his death, Mr.
Hugh Cressy sometimes of Merton Coll. was designed by his Majesty to succeed
him, but was never installed because he afterward changed his Religion. This
Dr. Primerose has written many things, as you may see in the Oxford Catalogue,
among which are (1) Jacob's vow, opposed to the vows of Monks and Friars,
Bergerac 1610. oct. in 4 Tomes or Vol. All which were written in good French,
and the first Vol. containing two books, was translated into English by John
Bulteel a Minister. -- Land. 1617. qu. (2) La Trompette de Sion, etc. Bergarac
1610. oct. in 18 Sermons; translated into Latin under this Title, Tuba Sionis,
seu Exhortatio ad poenetentiam and jejunium. Dantsic. 1631. oct. (3) The
righteous man's evils and the Lords deliverances. Land. 1625. qu. in 9 Sermons.
(4) The Christian man's tears and Christ's comforts: Fast-sermon 7 Oct. 1624 on
Matthew. 5. 4. and on Luke 6. 21. Land. 1625, in two parts, in tw. (5) The table
of the Lord; whereof 1. The whole service is the living bread, etc. Land. 1626.
oct. in 3 Sermon. etc. He paid his last debt to nature in his house in Chisell
street near the Artillery Yard in the Suburbs of London, in Oct. or Nov. 1642,
leaving then behind him several sons, viz. (1) James Primerose Doctor of
Physic. (2) David Primerose Minister of the French Church at Roan in Normandy.
(3) Stephen, who was born 1606 Jan. 12 new style: who after he came to age
always rejected his Fathers counsel, and would never follow any calling.
Afterward he became a presumptuous and vain glorious person, tho very
ignorant; did precipitate himself into diverse and damnable Heresies, would
abuse his Father at his own Table in the presence of his elder Brother and
others, and would several times tell him that Jesus Christ was come to put
division between Father and Children, etc. upon which account his Father left
him nothing in his Will but six pence. (4) John Primerose born 24 Nov. 1608,
who had spent so much money at Paris, London, and in the Low Countries, that he
could give him no more in his Will.

Joh Durie a Scotch man became a sojourner in the University, in the month of
July this year, for the sake of the public Library, but how long he continued
there, I cannot tell. He afterward traveled into various Countries beyond the
Seas, especially through most parts of Germany, where he visited the chief
recesses of the Muses, and by long continuance spoke the German Tongue so well
and fluent, that many English men after his return took him to be a German
Native. He was by profession a Divine, was in Orders and a Preacher; but
whether he took them according to the way of the Church of England, which he
always scrupled* it does not appear. He was a great pretender toward the
making of a reconciliation between the Calvinists and Lutherans beyond the
Seas, or as he himself used to say, For the making and settling a Protestant
union and peace in the Churches beyond the Seas, etc. In which work he received
encouragement Canterburies Doom, printed 1646. p. 539.
from Archb. Laud, tho Pry^n^ his inveterate Enemy says Teid. p. 541.
not, but found so small encouragement from him, that he often complained thereof
to his friends. You may be pleased to see more of these matters, and of various
Transactions of the life of the said Durie in a Letter written by him to his
ancient Acquaintance Sam. Hartlib Esquire; who published it (when the said Durie
fell into the displeasure of the Presbyterians for showing himself false to
them in several respects) with this Title, The unchanged, constant, and
single-hearted Peacemaker drawn forth into the World: Or, a Vindication of Mr.
Jo. Dury from the aspersions cast upon him in a nameless Pamphlet called. The
time-serving Proteus, and ambidexter Divine, uncased to the World; wherein etc.
Land. 1650, in three sheets in quarto. Upon the turn of the times occasioned by
the Presbyterians, an. 1641, he sided with them, was one of the Preachers
before the Long Parliament, the members of which appointed him one of the
Assembly of Divines, and took from them several places of Employment.
Afterward he sided with the Independents, took the Engagement, as he had the
Covenant before, and all other Oaths that followed, till his Majesty's
Restoration 1660; at which time, and after, he was living. He has written and
published about twenty Books and Pamphlets; among which are (1) Consultatio
Theologica super negotio pacis Ecclesiast. Land. 1641. qu. (2) Epistolary
discourse to Tho. Goodwin, Ph. N^e and Sam. Hartlib. Land. 1644, etc. qu. This
being written against Toleration, was answered by H. Robinson. (3) Of
Presbytery and Independency, etc. print. 1646. qu. (4) Model of Chapter government.
print. 1647. qu. (5) Peacemaker the Gospel way. print. 1648. qu. (6)
Seasonable discourse for reformation, Land. 1649. qu. published by Sam.
Hartlib. (7) Considerations concerning the Engagement. print. 1650. This being
answered, Dury came out with a Reply. (8) The reformed School. Land. 1650, in
tw. published by S. Hartlib. (9) Supplement to the reform. School. Land. 1651.
in tw. published by the said Hartlib. (10) The reform. Library keeper. Land.
1650. in tw. To which is added Bibliotheca Augusta sereniss. Princ. D. Augusti
Ducis Brunovicensis and Luneb. quae est Wolferbyti. (11.) Earnest plea for
Gospel-Communion. Land. 1654. qu. (12) Summary platform of Divinity. pr. 1654.
etc.

An. Dom. 1625.
An. 1 Car. 1.
Chanc. Will. Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Dr. Prideaux again, Jul. 19.

Proct. Nich. Brooks of Oriel Coll. Sam. Marsh of Trin. Coll. Apr. 27.


Bach. of Arts.
May 5. Gervase Warmstrey Jun. 22. Hen. Elsynge Will. Hemmings of Chapter Chapter



Jul. 6. Gasper Hicks of Trin. Rob. Cross of Linc. Nov. 22. Thom. Masters of
New 24. Henry Savage of Ball. Dec. 16. Christopher Airay of Qu. Coll.



Feb. 6. Nich. Gibbon 9. Hen. Parker of S. Edm. Hall. Rich. Jones of Jesus 13.
Tho. Washbourne of Ball. Coll.





14. Nath. Stephens Edw. Hyde John Lisle of Madg. Hall.


15. Mich. Hudson Guy Carlton of Qu. Coll.


The last was afterward Bishop of Chichester.

All which will be mentioned at large elsewhere.

Adm. 256.

Bach. of Law.
Only six this year were admitted, the senior of whom was Rich. Basset of
Lincoln Coll. a Compounder.

Mast. of Arts.
March 28. Joh. Viccars of Linc. Coll.

Apr. 29. Joh. Ellis of Heart Hall.

May 21. Will. Claybroke of Ball. Coll. -- This person who was the second Son
of an Esquire; left Oxon soon after, changed his Religion, went beyond the Seas,
and became Canon of some of the hither parts of France of Flanders, as I have
been Vide Bal^^fergum, or a Comment on the Foundation and Founders of Ballio^
Coll. p. 118.
informed.

June 23. George Hughes of Pembr. lately of C. C. 25. Joh. Strickland of Qu.
30. Henry Hammond of Magd. July 5. John Marsham of St. Joh. Coll.

July 2. Joh. Lee of Ball. Coll. -- He was afterward one of the first Scholars
of Pembroke Coll. at its first foundation, where, as at Balliol, he was an
indefatigable Student, and of proficiency answerable. He wrote an interlude,
but never acted or published, and has a Lat. Speech in Ibid. p.
print, which is all I know of him, only that he was Son of Joh. Lee of Abendon
in Berks. and educated in the Free School there.

July 7. Joh. Sedgwick Joh. Angel of Magd. Hall.


James Eglesfield of Qu. Coll. was admitted the same day. -- He was afterward
Vicar of Chewton in his native Country of Somersetshire, and Author of A
heavenly hymn to the King of Heaven, Sermon on Mark 7. 37. Land. 1640. oct.
the Author being then dead. What else was published under his name I know not,
nor any thing else him only that he was a Ministers Son and a learned Man.

Admitted 156.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 1. Griffin Higgs of Mert. Elizeus Burges of St. Joh. Coll.


The last was now Archdeacon of Rochester in the place of Rich. Tillesley
deceased.

May 19. Hen. King Joh. King of Chapter Chapter


June 28. John Davenport of Magd. hall.

July 1. Brian Duppa 2. Rog. Manwaring of Alls. 8. Francis Potter of Trinity
Coll.



Admitted 19.

Doct. of Law.
Mar. 31. William Skinner of Alls. Coll. Chancellor of the Dioc. of Hereford.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
May 19. Hen. King Joh. King Canons of Chapter Chapter


Both the Sons of Dr. King sometimes B. of London, and Accumulators and
Compounders.

26. Edw. a Meetkirke of Chapter Chapter Hebrew Professor of the University and about
this time Prebendary of Winchester.

June 20. Charles Croke of the same house, an Accumulator and Compounder. -- He
was at this time Rector of Amersham alias Agmundesham in Bucks. and Fellow of
Eaton Coll. and afterward the writer and publisher of A sad memorial of Hen.
Curwen Esquire; only Child of Sir Patr. Curwen of Warkington in Cumberland Baronet,
who died 21. Aug. 1638. aged 14 and was buried in the Church of Amersham in
Bucks: Sermon. on Job 14. 2. Oxon. 1638. qu. at which time the Author was
Chaplain to K. Chapter 1. What other writings he has published I know not, nor any
thing else of him, only that he was born in Oxfordshire, and that he was a
younger Son of Sir Joh. Croke of Chilton in Bucks, one of the Justices of the
Kingsbench.

July 1. Brian Duppa 2. Roger Manwaring of Alls. Coll.

Both which accumulated the Degrees in Divinity.

8. Thomas Horn of Mert. Nath. Giles of Magd. Coll. Compounders.


The first became Canon of Windsore in Oct. 1616. in the place of Dr. Edm.
Nuttal sometimes Fellow of Clare hall in Cambridge deceased; and dying on the
seventh of the Ides of Nov. 1636. aged 60, was buried in St. Georges Chap. at
Windsore. The other (Dr. Giles) became also Canon of the said Chapel, in the
latter end of 1623, and in the latter end of 1626, Prebendary of Worcester in
the place of Hen. Bright deceased. He died in the time of the grand rebellion.

Incorporations.
The plague raging this year in London, and therefore the Act put off, few
incorporations occur. However those that are, take as they follow.

July...Tho. Brown Bach. of the Laws of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge. Quaere.

6. Edm. Prideaux M. A. of the same University. -- This Person, if I am not
mistaken, was the same, who, in the times of Usurpation, was Commissioner of
the great Seal, and by ordinance did practice within the Bar, as one of the
Kings Council, and after that was made Attorney General, and Postmaster for
all the Inland-letters. From which employments gaining a vast estate, left at
the time of his death, 19. Aug. 1659 an incredible mass of gold (as the
credible report then went) besides Lands of very great demesness.

July 12. Lodovic. Rouseus Doctor of Phys. of the University of Leyden in
Holland.

Dec. 13. John Verneuil M. of A. of the Univ. of Mountalbon in France, now or
lately of Magd. Coll.

Feb. 11. Thom. Levet, (of York Diocese) a Licentiat of the Civil Law in the
Univers. of Orleance, was incorporated Bach. of the same fac.

March 24. Edward Hayward M. of A. of Cambridge. Quaere.

Creations.
Jan. 26. John Hassall or Halsall a Student in Divinity, sometimes Bach. of Law
and Fellow of New Coll. had then leave given to him by the venerable
Convocation that he might be actually created Doctor of the said faculty, when
he pleased to accept of that Degree, but the day when he was created, appears
not. In the letters commendatory of the Chancellor of this Univ. (Will. Earl
of Pembroke) written to the members thereof, are these matters mentioned of the
said Hassall. -- He has been a diligent and faithful preacher of the word of
God in the Low Countries, and has gotten a singular good reputation with the
English in those parts, having been particularly favored and cherished by the
Count Palatine and the Lady Elizabeth his most Royal spouse. -- He was, when my
self was a Student in the University, a hopeful Scholar, and of special note in
the same house with me, etc. The Letters also of Sir Horatio Vere written in
his behalf to the University say also thus. -- He has not only gained a
singular good report for his abilities, but for his pious and sweet
conversation and esteem among us; meaning his Soldiers and Volunteers in the
Low countries, where the said Sir Horatio was a Commander of a Regiment, sent
to join with the united Princes in Germany. The said Dr. Hassall was installed
Dean of Norwych (in the place of Dr. Edm. Suckling) on the 15. July 1628; which
Dignity he obtained by the endeavors of the Lady Elizabeth beforementioned. He
died and was buried at Creak in Norfolk in the times of Usurpation, and was
succeeded in his Deanery, after the restoration of K. Charles 2. by Dr. Joh.
Croft of Allsouls College, Brother to William Lord Croft.

An. Dom. 1626.
An. 2. Car. 1.
Chancellor William Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Will. Juxon LL. D. President of St. John's College, July 22.

Proct. Hopton Sydenham of Magd. C. Dionys. Prideaux of Ex. C. Apr. 19.


Bach. of Music.
July 24. John Frith of St. John's Coll. -- Some of his compositions and Anthems
I have seen, but whether extant, I cannot tell.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 28. George Bate of St. Edm. Oct. 21. Giles Workman of Magd. Philip Hunton
of Wadh. Hall. Nov. 20. Calybute Downing of Or. Coll.




25. Hen. Wilkinson of Magd. hall commonly called Long Harry.

Dec. 4. Rich. Napier of Wadh. Jan. 30. Edw. Hinton of Mert. Coll.

Of the first of these two last, I shall make larger mention among the created
Doctors of Phys. an. 1642, and of the other among the created Doctors of Div.
an. 1649.

June 30. Joh. Prichet of St. Edm. hall, lately of Queens Coll. -- He was
afterward Bishop of Gloucester.

31. Henry Edmondson of Qu. Thom. Brown of Pemb. Coll.


The last of these two, was the first Man of note that was admitted to a
Degree, as a member of Pembroke Coll. He was afterward an eminent Physician,
Vertuoso, and Knight.

Feb. 1. Franc. Cheynell of Mert. Coll. Joh. Biscoe of New Inn.

All which will be mentioned at large hereafter.

On the 15. of March Sir Charles Howard of Chapter Chapter had his grace granted for
Bach. of Arts, but whether admitted, it appears not. -- I take him to be the
same Sir Chapter Howard who was lately made Knight. of the Bath, and after the death of
his Father became Earl of Berkshire. He died about the beginning of the year
1679.

Adm. 272. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Of nine Bachelaurs of Law, that were admitted this year, I cannot find one of
them that was afterward a Writer, or Bishop, or of any eminent place in the
Church.

Mast. of Arts.
March 28. Edw. Pococke of C. C. Apr. 28. Hen. Tozer of Exeter May 4. George
Griffith of Chapter Chapter Coll.

June 27. Rob. Codrington of Magd. July 6. Arthur Salway of Brasn. Coll.

The last was afterward Minister of Severne-stoke in his native Country of
Worcestershire, and has published Halting stigmatized: Fast Sermon before the
House of Commons 25. Oct 1643. on 1. Kings 18. 21. Land. 1644. qu. and perhaps
other things. Quaere.

Feb. 26. Tobias Crispe of Ball. Coll. -- He is to be numbered among the Writers
in the 2. Vol. of this work.

Admitted 134.

Bach. of Phys.
Of Six Bachelaurs of Phys. that were admitted this year, I can not find one
that was afterward eminent. Besides them, were two Students in that faculty
adm. to practice viz. John Speed of St. John's, and Thom. Nourse of Lincoln
Coll. both afterward eminent Physicians.

Bach. of Div.
May 6. John Morris Chaplain of Alls. Coll. -- See more of him among the
Doctors of Div. an. 1634.

Besides Mr. Morris, were 10 more Bachelaurs admitted, of whom I cannot as yet
give any account.

Not one Doctor of Law was admitted this year, nor one in Physic.

Doct. of Div.
Dec. 14. Walt. Coningsbi^ of Exeter Coll.

16. Accepted Frewen President of Magd. Coll. a Compounder.

Feb. 17. Christopher Potter Provost of Queens Coll.

Incorporations.
July 7. Edm. Layfield Bach. of Div. of Cambridge. -- He has published The
Souls solace: Fun. Sermon. on Psalm. 73. 25 -- printed 1632. qu. And if he be the
same Layfield who had been Chaplain to Geor. Earl of Cumberland in his travels,
he was Author of A large relation of Port Ricco voyage, which is inserted in
the fourth Vol. of Sam. Purchase his Pilgrims, printed at Land. 1625. p. 11. 55.
One John Layfield D. D. had a hand in translating the Bible in the beginning of
K. Jam. 1. but he, you must know, was Fellow of Trin. Coll. in Cambridge, and
afterward Parson of St. Clements Church without Temble-bar near London, where
he died in 1617.

July 10. Thom. Aylesbury Bach. of Div. of the same University. -- He has
published (1) Sermon. preached at Paul's cross, 2. June 1622, on Luke 17. 37.
Land. 1623. qu. (2) Treatise of the comfession of sin, with power of the Keys,
etc. printed 1657. qu. (3) Diatribae de aeterno divini beneplaciti ciroa
creaturas intellectuales decreto, ubi patrum consulta, etc. Cantab. 1659. qu.

Edward Alston Doct. of Phys. of the said Univ. of Cambridge was incorporated
on the same day. -- He was afterward a Knight and President of the Coll. of
Physicians at London. He died in the Parish of Great St. Helens in Land. in the
Winter time, 1669.

July 24. James Usher Archb. of Armagh and Primate of all Ireland, was
incorporated Doct. of Div. as he had stood in the Univ. of Dublin. -- This was
done while he lodged in Jesus Coll. purposely to peruse certain MSS. in the
Public Library and elsewhere. In a Convocation held 10. March 1644. certain
Doctors and Masters were by the Vicechanc. and Proctors appointed to take care
and see that his Effigies should be engraven on a copper plate, with an Elogium
under it, be prefixed to his Annotations on Ignatius his Epistles, then
printing in Oxon. It was also then ordered that he said plate should be
engraved at the charge of the University, and in the name thereof. The Elogium
which was afterward by their appointment made, runs thus Jacobus Vsserius,
etc. James Usher Archb. of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, the most skilful of
Primitive antiquity, the unanswerable defender of the Orthodox Religion, the
maul of errors, in preaching frequent, eloquent, very powerful, a rare example
of an unblameable life.

Rob. Pink Vicechanc.
But this inscription, with the Effigies, was not put before the said Book, but
before that De To. Eccl. Symbolo Apost. Land. 1647. and some others since.

Jan. 31. Nich. Andrews was, with Rich. Andrews, (both Masters of Arts of
Cambridge, incorporated here, as they had stood there. -- Nich. Andrews was
afterward Doct. of Div. Rector of Guilford and Vicar of Godalmine in Surrey;
where showing himself a zealous Man for the Church of England, and a great
Loyalist, was turned out of his livings by the Committee of Religion, appointed
by the Long Parliament, an. 1643. He is mentioned in The first Century of
scandalous, malignant Priests, p. 8.

Feb. 1. Tobias Crispe Bach. of Arts of Cambridge, now of Ball. Coll. -- See
before, among the Masters of Arts this year.

Creations.
July (22) Joh. Chudleigh Bach. of Arts of Wadham Coll. the eldest Son of Sir
George Chudleigh of Alston in Devonshire Baronet, was created Master of Arts,
he being a little before elected a Burgess to serve in Parliament.

Nov. 20. Leonard Digges Bach. of Arts of University Coll. in Academiis
transmarinis bonarum artium studiis diu versatus (as the public register
says) earumque cognitione optime excultus, was actually created Master of Arts.

On the 27. of Dec. this year Edward Michelbourne a Gentleman's Son of
Hampshire, originally a Commoner of St. Mary's hall, and afterward for many
years of that of Gloucester, was buried in the Parish Church of St. Thomas the
Martyr in the W. Suburb of Oxford, aged 62 or thereabouts. -- The reasons why I
set him down here are (1) Because he took no Degree, being a Romans Catholic,
otherwise I would have put him in that year wherein he took a Degree (2)
Because he was the most noted Latin Poet of his time in the University, as
diverse copies of his composition printed in several books, show; which if put
together, would make a Manual. (3) That the Poets of his time did mostly submit
their labors to his judgment before they were made public, particularly
Charles Fitz-Geffry, who dedicates his Assaniae to him.

Rich. Broughton a Sojournour in Oxon. was entered a Student into the public
Library on the 19. of June this year, under the title of a Minister of Gods
word. This Person who had formerly studied in Oxon. to gain materials for the
publishing of certain books, was born of gentile Parents at Great Steukley in
Huntingdonshire, (but descended of an ancient Family of his name living at
Broughton Tower in Lancashire,) Sent when young to Rheimes in France, where
passing his course among the English, became a good Philosopher and Theologist,
and well skilled in the Greek and Heb. tongues. Afterward, he being made
Priest, was sent into the Mission of England, continued there many years in
good repute for his religion, learning, experience, and public spirit: For
which he was thought to be the fittest Person to be chosen Assistant to the
Archpriest, that had been then lately appointed by his holiness the Pope. He
has written (1) Apologetical Epistle. (2) Moderate answer to a most
calumniating Libel, which endeavors to prove that a Romans Catholic cannot be a
good Subject. (3) Continuations of the Cath. Apology made up out of Protestant
Authors. (4) Ecclesiastical History of Gr. Britain deduced by ages, or
centuries, from the nativity of our Savior, unto the happy conversion of the
Saxons, etc. Doway 1633. fol. Tho it is a rapsodie, and a thing not well
digested, yet there is a great deal of reading showed in it. It Is said in the
title to be the first Tome, as if another was to follow. (5) True memorial of
the ancient, most holy and religious estate of Great Britain, flourishing with
Apostles, Apostolical Men, Monasteries, religious Rules and Orders, in great
number, in the time of the Britains, and Primitive Church of the Saxons, etc.
printed 1650. oct. published by G. S. P. (6) Monasticon Britanicum: Or, a
historical narration of the first founding and flourishing state of the ancient
Monasteries, religious Rules and Orders of Great Britain, in the times of the
Britains and Primitive Church of the Saxons, etc. Land. 1655. oct. This Book I
have, the title of which running almost verbatim, as the former, (which I have
not yet seen) makes me to guess, that it is in many things the same. Quaere.
This industrious Author, who probably has written other matters died in a good
old age, on the fifteenth of the Kal. of Febr. an. 1634, and was buried near to
the bodies of his Father and Mother and other of his relations in the Church of
Great Steuckley beforementioned. Over his grave was soon after a Mon. with an
inscription thereon, put, wherein he is styled Presbyter Anglus, innocentia
morum Angelicus. Majorum prosapiam, quorum ipse nemini impar sacra functione
long superavit, and claro virtutum ingenitarum praeconio perennavit, etc.
Antiquariorum sui saeculi exquisitissimus, Ecclesiasticoruns Monumentum,
aurifodinam, haereditatem omni thesauro pretiosiorem, raro scientiss. virorum,
sed optabili exemplo, posteris reliquit, etc.

An. Dom. 1627.
An. 3. Car. 1.
Chanc. Will. Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Dr. Juxon again, July 19.

Proct. Hugh Halswell of Alls. Coll. Franc. Hyde of Chapter Chapter Apr. 4.


Upon the resignation made by the said Proctors of their office 22. Apr. 1628.
Mr. Will. Hyde and Mr. Isaac Tailor were Procuratores nati till the 13. of June
following, the controversy of electing Proctors being not till that time
finished. See more in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 330. b. 331. a.

Bach. of Arts.
June 1. Joh. Webberley of Linc. Coll. -- See among the Bachelaurs of Div. in
1640.

11. Sam. Fisher of Trin. Coll. afterward of New Inn, and of all religions in
the time of the grand rebellion.

Rog. Lorte of Wadham Coll. (the Poet) was admitted the same day.

July 3. Rich. Chalfout of New Inn, afterward of Linc. Coll. -- See more among
the Bach. of Div. 1637.

Oct. 23. Joh. Archer of Exeter 25. Robert Maton of Wadh. Coll.

Feb. 18. Rob. Randolph of Chapter Chapter -- This Person, who took no higher Degree in
this University, was a most ingenious Poet, as several of his copies of verses
printed in various books show. He collected together the Poems, Plays, and
other matters of his Brother Tho. Randolph the celebrated Poet of his time, as
I have before told you. This Rob. Randolph who was first Vicar of Barnetby, and
after of Donnington in Holland in Lincolnshire, was buried in the Church at
Donnington 7. July 1671. aged 60 or thereabouts.

21. Hen. Carpenter Sam. Austin of Exet. Coll.


27 Joh. Aris of Magd hall. -- See among the Masters 1630.

As for Fisher, Lorte, Archer, Maton and Carpenter, they are to be mentioned at
large hereafter.

Adm. 240. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
But seven were admitted this year, of whom Morgan Godwin of Pemb. Coll. was
one, Edw. Lake whom I shall anon mention, another, and a third called Oliver
Lloyd of Alls. Coll.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 17. Rich. Allen of Pemb. Coll.

June 1. Thom. Ford of Magd. Hall.

2. Hen. Beesley Steph. Goffe of St. Alb. Hall.


2. Tho. Brown of Chapter Chapter Joseph Caryll of Ex. Coll.

July 2. Christop. Elderfield of S. Mary's Hall.

6. Reg. Turner of Exet. Coll. -- This Person who was afterward beneficed near
Southampton, and the place of his nativity, has published The userers plea
answered, in a Sermon preached at Southampton 18. Jul. 1633. on Matthew. 25. 27.
Land. 1634. qu. and another on 2 Kings 11. ver. 12. -- Printed in 1661. qu. and
not unlikely others.

Mar. 14. Francis Davies of Jes. Coll.

Adm. 131. or thereabouts.

Not one Bach. of Physic was admitted this year.

Bach. of Div.
June 2. Alex. Huish of Wadh. 16. Cornel. Burges of Linc. 21. Hugh Robinson of
New 27. Alexand. Gill of Trin. Coll.

July 5. Will. Hayes of Magd. hall. -- He was the same Person who had published
The Lawyers Looking glass, Sermon. at S. Mary's in Oxon, at the Assizes 7. Jul.
1624, on Either 1. 15. Oxon 1624. qu. Whether he wrote or published any thing
else, I know not, not do I know any thing of him besides, only that he was a
Hampshire Man born, and that he was afterward Rector of Skilgate, and at
length, in 1635 Rect. of Orchard, both in Somersetshire.

July 6. Thom. Lashington of Pemb. Coll.

Adm. 27.

Doct. of Law.
June ult. Matthew Nicholas of New Coll. -- This Person who was afterward Can.
resident of Salisbury, became Dean of Bristow on the death of Dr. Edw. Chetwynd
an. 1639. and in 1642 was made Canon of the fifth stall in the Collegiat Church
of St. Peter in Westminster on the death of Dr. William Robinson, Brother, by
the Mothers side, to Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury. Of which Dignities being
deprived in the time of the rebellion, became after his Majesty's restoration
Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral in London. In Bristow succeeded Dr. Hen. Glemham of
Oxon, an. 1660, and in St. Paul's, Dr. Joh. Barwick of Cambridge, elected
thereunto 15. Oct. 1661. To this Dr. Nicholas his piety and moderation, the
Church was as much beholding, as the State was to his elder Brother Sir Edw.
Nicholas. The former died 15. Aug. 1661, the other on the first of Sept. 1669.
aged 77, and was buried in Horsley Church in Surrey, where there is a fair
monument, with a large inscription thereon, over his grave. By the way I desire
the reader to know that the said Sir Edward was born at Winterbourne-Earles in
Wiltshire, where his name is, or at least has been, ancient and gentile, that
he had his education in this University, and afterward in the Royal Court,
where he became at length Secretary of State to K. Chapter 1. and afterward a
sufferer for his cause, and an Exile with his Son Chapter 2. After the restoration
of the last, he continued in the office of Secretary, but then growing ancient,
he resigned it in Oct. 1662. At which time his Majesty in consideration of his
fidelity, constancy, and affection to his and his Fathers service, did freely
offer to make him a Baron, but Sir Edward, according to his wonted candor and
modesty, (after he had most humbly returned his thanks) besought his Majesty
therein to spare him. A Gentleman of both his names wrote An apology for the
honorable nation of the Jews, and all the Sons of Israel. Land. 1648. in qu.
What relation he had to the said Sir Edward, I know not.

Jun. ult. Will. Merick Will. Griffith of New Coll.


The former was afterward Judge of the Prerogative Court for the Province of
Canterbury, eminent for his great learning and abilities, as also for his
loyalty and affection to his Majesty K. Chapter 2. and to his glorious Father, both
at home and beyond the Seas. Upon which account he was sent for to the Court,
8. Nov. 1661. and had the honor of Knighthood conferred upon him in his
Majesty's Bedchamber. He died in the Winter time an. 1668. and was succeeded in
his Judgship by Dr. Leolin Je^kins. The other, Will. Griffith was Chancellor
of the Diocesses of St. Asaph and Bangor.

July 21. Charles Tooker of Oriel Jan. 14. Gilb. Jones of Allsouls Coll.

The first of these two last died at Abendon in Berks, an. 1660, the other was
about this time Chancellor of the Dioc. of Bristow.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
June 16. Cornelius Burges of Linc. 21. Hugh Robinson of New 25. Vincent Peirse
of Pemb. Coll.

Which three Doctors did accumulate the Degrees in Divinity.

27. George Byrom of Brasn. July 4. Rich Puliston of Wad. Feb. 21. Ant.
Saunders of Vniv. Coll.

The first of these last three was now beneficed in Cheshire, and had for
several years served K. Jam. 1. and K. Chapter 1. both as Commissioner of the
Peace, and a Commissioner of the High Commission for causes Ecclesiastical.

Incorporations.
On the 10. of July being the next day after the conclusion of the Act, were 59
Cantabrigians incorporated in several faculties, the names of some of which
follow.

Rich Stern Bach. of Div. of C. Christi Coll. -- This most worthy and loyal
Person who was Son of Sim Stern of Mansfield in Nottinghamshire, (descended
from those of his name in Suffolk) was afterward D. of D. Master of Jesus
Coll. and Chaplain to Archb. Laud; with whom he was present on the Scaffold,
when he was to be beheaded, purposely to administer comfort to him. But before
that time, he had been imprisoned by the endeavors of Oliver Cromwell a
Burgess for the Town of Cambridge in the Long Parliament, for being very
instrumental in conveying the plate belonging to several Colleges and Halls in
Cambridge to his Majesty then at York, and thereabouts: I say being hurried up
to London with other Doctors, was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where by
permission he attended the said Archbishop. About that time he was ejected his
Mastership of Jesus Coll. lost all he had, suffered in an high manner for his
loyalty, and lived obscurely during the interval. At length, upon his Majesty's
restoration, he was nominated by him Bishop of Carlisle; whereupon being
consecrated thereunto in the Abbey Church of St. Peter at Westminster, on the
second day of December. an. 1660. sat there till the death of Dr. Frewen Archb.
of York, and then being elected to succeed him in that See 28. Apr. 1664 was
enthronized on the 10. of June following, in the Person of Dr. Edmund Diggle a
Dignitary of that Church. This Dr. Stern has written. (1) Sermons or a
Comment. on 103 Psalm. -- Printed 1649. oct. (3) Summa Logicae, partim ex
optimis quibusque autoribus tum antiquis tum recentioribus collecta; maxim
autem ex usu and ad usum comparata, exemplis omnium genorum abunde illustrata.
Land. 1686. oct. and, as it is probable, other things. This worthy Archb. died
about 23. June 1683 and was buried in the Cath. Church of York. Afterward
succeeded Dr. Joh. Do^ben, as I shall tell you elsewhere.

Joh. Burges Doct. of Phys. and Parson of Sutton Colfield in Warwickshire, was
also then incorporated. At which time liberty was allowed to him by the ven.
congregation that he might study in the public library, being then a
conformist to the Ch* of England. He paid his last debt to nature on the last
day of Aug. 1635 aged 72. or thereabouts, and was buried in the Chancel of
Sutton Colfield, in the same vault where the body of his then late Wife Dorothy
was buried. He has, written An apology to the Bishop of Lincoln, etc. answered
by Dr. Will. Covell, an. 1606. Also The Popes deadly wound resolving the
controversies between us and them. pr. in qu. and other things, as the Oxford
Catalogue will tell you. See more of him in Tho. Wilcocks among the writers, an
1599.

George Stanhop John Partenton D. D.

As for the other Persons of Cambridge who were incorporated on the said day
(July 10) I know no great matter of them, and therefore I shall proceed to
speak of others who were afterward incorporated.

July 11. John Thorie, Thorius or Thoris Doct. of Phys. of the Univ. of Dublin.
-- He was Son of Ralph Thorius a Physician, and had formerly been Bach. of Arts
of Magd. Coll.

Rich. Hawley Doct. of Phys. of Leyden in Holland was incorporated the same
day. -- He was now or lately Fellow of Merton College.

October. 25. Francis Glisson M. of A. of G^nvil and Caies Coll. in Cambridge. --
This learned Gentleman who was second Son of William Glisson of Rampisham in
Dorsetshire; and he the second Son of Walt. Glisson of the City of Bristow, was
afterward Doct. of Physic, the Kings public Professor of that faculty in the
said University, Candidate of the Coll. of Physicians at London, an. 1634,
Fellow the year after, Anatomy reader in the said Coll. 1639, practiced Physic
at Colchester during the time of the rebellion, where he was present when the
generous Royalists of Kent were besieged 1648. and after. In 1655 he was chosen
one of the Elects of the said College and afterward was President thereof for
several years. He has written (1) Prolegomena Anatomica. (2) Anatomia Hepatis.
(3) Do Lymphae-ductibas. All which were several times printed, and once at
Amsterdam 1659. in tw. (4) De natura substantiae energetica, sewde via vitae,
etc. Land 1672. qu. (5) Deventriculo and intestinis, etc. Land. 1677. qu. and
was one of the three (Geo Bate and (...) Regem^rter being the other two) who
wrote De Rachitide, sive morbo puerili, qui vulgo the Rickets dicitur. Land.
1650. oct. The discovery also of the Capsula communis or Vagina Portae is owing
to him, who has likewise given us certain notes for the more easy
distinguishing of the Vena cava, Porta and Vasa fellea in excarnating the
Liver. Further also he has See in the Epist. dedic. to Dr. Charles (...) book,
entit. The Royal Coll. of (...) established by Law, etc. Land. 16^6. qu.
given such an excellent account of Sanguification (discharging the Liver from
that office) and proved it by so good arguments, and clear experiments, that
few have since doubted the truth thereof. This worthy Doctor, to whose learned
Lucubrations and deep disquisitions in Physic, not only Great Britain, but
remoter Kingdoms owe a particular respect and veneration, died much lamented in
the Parish of S. Bride alias S. Bridget in London in Oct. or Nov. 1677.

Dec. 15. Edward Lake lately Bach. of Arts of Catherine Hall in Cambridge, was
incorporated in the same degree. -- On the 24 Jan. following he was admitted
Bach. of the Civil Law as a Member of S. Albans Hall.

This year was a supplicate made for one Hen. Jacie M. of A. to be
incorporated, but whether he was so or not, I cannot find. I take him to be the
same with Henry Jessie alias Jacie a Preachers Son, who was born at West Rowton
in the north Riding of Yorkshire 3 Sept. 1601, and who in 1618 became Pensioner
of S. Joh. Coll. in the said University. Whence, after he had taken one degree
in Arts, he was invited to live in the house of Brampton Gourdon of Assington
in Suffolk Gent. Father to Joh. Gourdon a Burgess in the Long Parliament that
began 1640, (nominated one of the Judges to sit on K. Chapter 1. but was not
present when Sentence was passed) and to two others of that name who were
Recruiters in that Parliament. In which house being settled, he studied Physic
as well as Divinity. After he had commenced M. of A. which was in 1626, he
preached privately in the Neighborhood, and distributed practical Books among
the Brethren. Afterward he removed to several places, but was not permitted to
tarry long in any, because he was zealously averse to Conformity. At length in
1645 he repaired to London, where he joined himself to the Congregation, of
which Mr. Hen. Jacob and Mr. Joh. Lathorp had been Pastors, where he continued
25 years, not without several disturbances, especially before the grand
Rebellion broke out. He has written (1) A catechism for Children. The Answers
in which were wholly in the words of the Scripture. (2) The Scripture-Kalendar
in use by the Prophets and Apostles, and by our Lord Jesus Christ, explaining
the Accounts, Measures, etc. This was first printed in 1645 and afterward came
out with several Additions to the time of his Majesty's Restoration 1660, and
perhaps after. (3) The exceeding riches of grace advanced in the conversion of
Mrs. Sarah Wight. Land. 1647. oct. (4) Storehouse of provision for resolving
cases of conscience, etc. Land. 1650, in tw. (5) Description and explanation of
268 places in Jerusalem and the suburbs thereof, with a large map. printed
1653, qu. (6) The lords loud call to England: being a true relation of some
late, various and wonderful Judgments, or handy-works of God, by Earthquake,
Lightning, etc. Land. 1660. in six sheets in qu. This Book begins with certain
matters relating to Oxon, which being very false, the Reader cannot otherwise
but judge the rest so to be. In 1661 came out an imposture of a most damnable
design called Mirabilis annus, or the year of prodigies and wonders, etc. and
in 1662 the first and second part of Annus mirabilis secundus, and probably
other parts, but such I have not yet seen. When these came out, which were
advanced by several hands, it was verily supposed that Henry Jessie had a
principal share in them. (7) Miscellanea sacra: diverse necessary truths
seasonably published, etc. printed 1665, in oct. (8) A looking-glass for
children: being a narrative of Gods gracious dealings with some little
children. Land. 1674, oct. He has also written a Pref. or commendatory Epistle
before Joh. Grayles Modest vindication of the doctrine of conditions in the
covenant of Grace, etc. and other little things besides his own Experiences,
which I have not yet seen. At length paying his last debt to nature 4 Sept.
1663, being then accounted the Oracle and Idol of the faction, was on the 7 of
the same month laid to sleep with his Fathers in a hole made in the Yard
joining to Old Bedlam near Morefields in the Suburbs of London, attended with a
strange medley of Fanatics (mostly Anabaptists) that met upon the very point
of time, all at the same instant, to do honor to their departed Brother. Some
years after came out a short account of his life and death etc. but full of
ridiculous and absurd Cantings; to which is annexed An Elegy on Mr. Will.
Bridge. Which Bridge had been sometimes Fellow of Emanuel Coll. in Cambridge,
was afterward a Presbyterian, one of the Ass. of Divines, and the independent
Minister of Yarmouth in Norfolk. He died a Nonconformist in 1670. See more of
Hen. Jessie in Jos. Caryl, in the other Vol. of this work.

Creations.
May 25. Robert Lord Dormer of Wenge, lately of Exeter Coll. was actually
created Mast. of Arts. -- He was afterward the first Earl of Caernarvan of his
name, and taking up Arms in defense of his Majesty K. Chapter 1. had the hard fate
to be killed near Newbury in Berkshire 20 Sept. 1643. See among the created
Doctors of Law in 1642.

William Lewis M. of A. and lately Provost of Oriel Coll. was actually created
Doct. of Div. on the same day, by virtue of his Majesty's letters dated 9 of
the same month, running partly thus -- William Lewis an ancient Master of Arts,
who has spent diverse years both at home and abroad in the study of Divinity.
-- We, out of our experience of his diligence and ability of some affairs of
weight, wherein we have in foreign parts employed him, being to use his person
in some further service, wherein we think him fit to be continued, and graced
with the degree of Doct. of Div. etc. we therefore require you to create and
admit him Doctor, etc. This person who was born in Merionithshire, was elected
from Heart Hall (of which he was Commoner under the government of Theodore Price
his Uncle) into the Society of Oriel College, an. 1608, being then Bachelaur of
Arts. Afterward proceeding in that faculty, he took holy Orders, and tho a
junior Master in his College, yet by a faction, and majority of Welsh men, got
the Provostship of that place in 1617. But being too young for that office, and
not able to conceal his amors (which were much aggravated See Lew. du Moulin
his Patronut bona fidei in causa Puritan^rum contra Hierarchos Ang^ae etc.
Land. 1672 in specun. contra D^r^llum, p. 61. See also in Canterburies Deom in
the Index for Lew^s and elsewhere.
by the Puritans) he abruptly left it and went beyond the Seas in his Majesty's
Service. After his return he became Chaplain to the Duke of Buckingham, with
whom being to go beyond the Seas ^or the relief of Rochel, was actually created
D. of D. as before it is told you. After his return from that unhappy
Expedition, he drew up from his notes A general relation of a Voyage to The
under the command and conduct of the Duke of Buckingham. The beginning of which
is, Though the variety of the occurrents of this action might furnish argument
enough of a just story, etc. This I have seen in a folio MS. of 18 sheets or
more, but whether ever printed, I know not. Afterward he was made Master of
the Hospital of S. Cross, and Prebendary of Winchester; which, with other
preferments, losing in the time of the Rebellion, he fled beyond the Seas, and
suffered much for the royal cause; while, in the mean time, his Sons were
gained to the Church of Rome. After his Majesty's return an. 1660, he was
restored to what he had lost, and dying within the Hospital of S. Cross before
mentioned, 7 July 1667, was buried in the Chapel there, under, or near, the
high Altar.

Dec. 31. Richard Napier lately Bach. of Arts of Wadham Coll. was created
Master of that Faculty in the House of Convocation, by virtue of the
Chancellours Letters, which say that he is a kinsman of the Duchess of
Richmond, and a person well deserving in all that is necessary in a Gentleman
and a Scholar.

I have made mention of him before, and shall again among the created Doctors
of Physic, an. 1642.

An. Dom. 1628.
An. 4 Car. 1.
Chanc. William Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Accepted Frewen D. D. President of Magd. College, July 24.

Proct. Rob. Williamson of Magd. Coll. Rob. Lloyd of Jesus Coll. June 13.


Which Proctors were named by the King, as I have elsewhere told you: For
certain new Ordinations being transmitted to the University by the Chanc.
thereof in the month of Apr. for the election of the Proctors, the Academians
could not after their usual way meet together for the election of them, many
Parsons, Curats, and Schoolmasters having already resorted from several parts
of the Nation, nay some from Wales, to elect Lloyd. Whereupon no small tumult
arising in the University, the election of new Proctors was prorogued till such
time that the Controversies therein were equally composed. At length after all
parties were satisfied, it was reputed unlawful for the Masters to nominate any
to the procuratorial office, but the aforesaid Candidates Williamson and Lloyd.
Which being the sentence of the King and Chancellor, that ancient custom of
choosing Proctors by suffrages in scrutiny vanished and came to nothing, and
another new form of Election was introduced, as I shall the next year show.

Bach. of Arts.
June 21. Will. Sedgwick of Pemb. Coll.

Jul. 3. Tho. Warmstry Oct. 11. Joh. Gregory of Chapter Chapter

The last was the most curious Critic of his time.

14. Edm. Vaughan of C. C. Coll.

21. Tho. Good of Ball. Coll. Rich. Busby Jasp. Main of Chapter Chapter


24. Will. Burton of Qu. Coll. afterward of Gloc. Hall.

Nov. 13. John Oxenbridge of Magd. Hall.

Dec. 13. John Goughe commonly called Goffe, lately of Merton, now of Magd.
Coll.

Feb. 5. George Bathurst of Trin. Abrah. Woodhead of Vniv. Coll.


Of the first of these last two, you may see more among the Bach. of Div. 1640.

7. Tho. Hall of Pembr. 12. Franc. Roberts of Trin. Obadiah Grew of Ball. Coll.



Which three last were zealous Presbyterians in the time of the grand Rebellion.

Feb. 12. Edm. Chilmead of Magd. Coll. afterward of Chapter Chapter

14. Tho. Horn of Magd. Hall. Mirth Waferer of Merton Coll.

All which Bachelaurs, except Bathurst, will be mentioned as Writers in the
next Vol. or elsewhere.

Adm. 255.

Not one Bach. of Law was admitted this year.

Mast. of Arts.
May 10. Rob. Cross of Linc. 13. Edw. Layfield of S. Joh. 15. Gasper Hicks of
Trinity Coll.

As for Layfield, he was afterward Archdeacon of Essex, in the place, as I
conceive, of Dr. Geor. Goulman, which Doctor dying on the first of Jan. 1633,
was buried in the Chancel of the Church of Cheshunt in Hertfordshire. About the
same time Layfield became D. of D. but not by admission or creation of this
University, and Vicar of Allhallowes Barkin near to the Tower of London, where
continuing till the grand Rebellion broke out in 1642, was then, for his
Loyalty, and for his being favored by Dr. Laud, pursevanted, imprisoned in Ely
house and in the Ships, sequstred, plundered, and afterward forced to fly.
When K. Chapter 2. returned to his Dominions, he was restored to his Vicaridge and
Archdeaconry, and had other preferments, as I conceive* bestowed on him, of
which one was a Prebendship of S. Paul's Cath. Chapter He was buried in the said
Church of Allhallowes 10 Aug. 1680. Whereupon Mr. Tho. Turner of C. C. Coll.
Oxon, one of the Sons of Dr. Th. Turner sometimes Dean of Canterbury, was
installed in his Archdeaconry in January following.

Jun. 25. Nath. Stephens of Magd. Hen. Parker of S. Edm. Hall.


Jun. 25. Thom. Washbourne of Ball. Rich. Brown Joh. Greaves Charles Gibbes of
Mert. Will. White of Wadham Coll.




As for Rich. Brown who was Fellow of Mert. Coll. he was afterward a
Traveller and Doctor of the Laws, but of what University I cannot yet tell.
After his return, he became one of the Gentlemen of the privy Chamber to K. Chapter
1. and Clerk of the Council. In 1640 he was employed by his Majesty to go to
Henry Frederick Prince of Aurange or Orange, about the marriage of the Princess
Mary to the Prince his Son; as also to the Queen of Bobemia and the Prince
Elector, an. 1641, to hinder that Prince his coming over into England at the
then juncture of affairs, with promise to take into his consideration the
concern of the Palatinate and other matters of state. In the same year the said
R. Brown was sent to Paris, where he continued Resident in the Court of France
for K. Chapter 1. and Chapter 2. to the French King Lewis the 13, and his Son Lewis 14,
till the Restoration of his Majesty an. 1660. In which time, which was 19
years, I find these things following to occur relating to him. (1) That diverse
important matters of state were transacted by him with those great Ministers
Cardinal Richlieu and Mazarine. (2) That many advantages were offered him by
the Usurpers of England to be false to his Masters, but he resisted them. (3)
That he did to his great expense, but more to his everlasting glory, keep up in
the large house which he hired at Paris, the public Service and Liturgy of the
Church of England, whither his Maj. Chapter 2. and then Duke of York did constantly
resort. From whence diverse Ministers of the Church of England (Exiles for their
Loyalty) had many disputes with the R. Catholics and others concerning the
visibility of their Church, which they then kept up, while it was ecclipsed in
England. (4) That he was employed by his Maj. Chapter 1. to carry the George and
Garter to Bernard Duke of Espernon. (5) That he did negotiate about the Queens
portion; out of which, he had, I think, 1000 l. which, with 200 l. more, was
all he touched in the said 19 years, whilst he spent of his paternal Estate
much more than that yearly, during his abode at Paris. (6) That on the first of
Sept. 1649 he was created a Baronet (being the first that K. Chapter 2. made) by
virtue of a dormant Warrant sent to him by Chapter 1. dated 1 Febr. 1643; and on
the 19 of the said Sept. he received the honor of Knighthood at St. Germans
from his said Maj. Chapter 2. he being then also Clerk of the Council to him. In
1660 he returned into England with his Majesty, and did execute the said Office
for some time. But years then coming on, he resigned it, and retired to
Charlton in Kent, where he spent the remainder of his time in a pleasant
retiredness and studious recess. At length giving way to fate in a good old Age
on the 12 of Febr. 1681, was buried according to his desire in the Churchyard
at Deptford, close to the Wall of the Church, where is a black Marble
ballastred over his body. On the other side of the Wall in the Church lies
buried his Father Christop. Brown Esquire; who died in March 1645 aged 70 years,
and his Grandfather Sir Rich. Brown Knight, a younger Son of an ancient Family
at Hitcham in Suffolk, seated afterward at Horsley in Essex; who being a
Student in the Temple, was by Robert Dudley the great Earl of Leycester taken
into the service of the Crown; when he went Governor of the United
Netherlands, and was afterward by Qu. Elizab. made Clerk of the Greencloth. In
which honorable office he also continued under K. James 1. until the time of
his death; which happened in May 1604 aged 65 years. The before mentioned Sir
Rich. Brown Grandson to this last Sir Richard, lest behind him a Daughter
named Mary, who being his Heiress, was several years before married to the
learned Vertuoso Joh. Evelyn of Says-court in the Parish of Deptford Esquire; in
which house, or at least in that Parish, Sir Richard was born; as also three
folio's of his dispatches, several Letters, some in cipher, etc. as well from
his Maj. Chapter 1. at Oxon, as from his Royal Conso^t, and other great persons.

Jun. 27. Ge^v. Warmstrey Rich. Hemmings of Chapter Chapter


July 8. Oliver Thomas of Heart Hall. -- The time when he took the degree of
Bach. of Arts, appears not, nor when, or of what house he was matriculated. And
therefore all that I can say of him is, that he was afterward, perhaps now,
beneficed in Shropshire, that he wrote and published a book in Welsh entit.
Carwry Cymru etc. printed 1630 or thereabouts, and that dying at Felton in that
County So I have been informed by Dr. Much. Roberts sometimes Principal of
Jesus Coll. his contemporary
was there buried. In the year 1647, one Oliver Thomas Minister of Oswestry,
did subscribe among other Ministers of Shropshire to the lawfulness of the
Covenant; who, I suppose, is the same with the former.

Jul. 11. Rich. Jones of Jesus Coll.

Jan. 22. George Bate of S. Edm. Hall.

29. Christop. Ayray Guy Carlton Mich. Hudson of Qu. Coll.


March. 19. Joh. Price of Jesus Coll.

This year Jun. 25. Joh. Davis of Magd. Hall, sometimes of that of S. Edm, was
licensed to proceed Master of Arts, and accordingly completed that degree in
the Act following; which being all I know of him, he therefore is not to be
taken to be the same with Joh. Davis M. of A. afterward Lecturer of Christ
Church in London, and at length Pastor of a Congregation in Dover, Author of,
Heaven and Earth shaken: A treatise showing h^w Kings, Princes, and their
Government, are turned and changed by Jesus Christ, etc. Land. 1656. oct. For
this Joh. Davis the Author was originally of Cambridge, where he took the
degrees in Arts, and afterward siding with the Faction, was first a
Presbyterian and took the Covenant, afterward an Independent and took the
Engagement; for which he stickled in his Lectuers at Chapter Chapter At length being
discovered by the then godly Party to be every way fit to carry on the trade of
Faction, he was translated to Dover, where he kept a Conventicle in a noted
Brewhouse by the Rear, and soon after was made Chaplain to the Castle there by
Col. Tho. Kelsey then Governor, and preached constantly at S. James Church,
tho he was no settled Incumbent, Where continuing officiating till after the
Kings Return, he was then outed, and afterward kept a Conventicle in S. James
street in Dover, where he continued to the time of his death, which was about
1663.

Adm. 149.

Bach. of Phys.
I find but three admitted this year, of whom John Speed a learned Physician of
S. Joh. Coll. was one, Jun. 20.

Bach. of Div.
May 7. Rich. Lloyd of Oriel Coll.

Jun. 14. Meric Casaubon of Chapter Chapter

Nov. 11. Jerem. Stephens Gilb. Sheldon Rob Gomershall of Chapter Chapter of Alls. Coll.


Mar. 13. Will. Paul Tho. Lawrence of Alls. Coll.


Adm. 28.

Doct. of Law.
Mar. 26. David Lloyd of Alls. Coll. -- He was about this time Warden of Ruthin
in Denbighshire, Prebendary of Chester, and afterward Dean of S. Asaph in the
place of Andr. Morris sometimes Chaplain of Alls. Coll. This Dr. Lloyd died
about two years after the Restoration of K. Charles 2. having, for his sake
and his Fathers, suffered much in the time of Rebellion.

Jul. 8. Franc. Baber of Trin. Coll. Rich. Heart of S. Albans Hall.

The said Dr. Baber was afterward Chancellor of the Dioc. of Gloc. for 39
years together, who dying 17 of June 1669, aged 69 years, was buried in a
little Chapel on the south side of the Cho^^ belonging to the Cath. Chapter at
Gloucester.

Doct. of Phys.
Mar. 26. Will. Taylour of S. Joh. Jun. 20. Joh. Saunders of Oriel Joh. Speed
of S. John's Coll.



Which two last accumulated the degrees in Physic.

Jul. 3. Sam. Bave or Bavo of Chapter Chapter -- This person who was Son of Franc. Bave
of Colen in Germany, became eminent for his practice, first in the City of
Gloucester, and afterward in Bathe; where dying in 1666, aged 80, was buried
in the great Church there dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul.

Doct. of Div*
Jul. 7. Rob. Adams of New 9. Thom. Prichard of Jes. Tho. Chafyn of Exet. Joh.
D^wle of Jesus Coll.



Incorporations.
Jun. 19. Daniel Gotereus Bach. of Arts of Cambr. -- In his supplicate for
Incorporation, he is written Gotzer.

20. Philip Parsons Doct. of Phys. of Padua in Italy. -- He was now, or lately
Fellow of S. John's Coll. in Oxon, and afterward Principal of Heart Hall.

Jul. 10. Edm. Randolphe Doct. of Phys. of Padua. -- He was sometimes a Member
of University Coll.

11. George Douglas a Scot, M. of A. of Aberdene.

On the 15 July, being the next day after the Act, were these Cambridge men
incorporated.

Will. Spurstow Bach. of Arts (so he is written in the Register) was then
incorporated. -- This person who was the Son and Heir of Will. Spurstow Citizen
and Mercer of London, but originally descended from the Spurstows of Spurstow
in Cheshire, was afterward M. of A. grand Presbyterian, one of the five
Smectymni, (Steph. Marshal, Edm. Calamy, Tho. Young and Matthew Newcomen being
the other four) one of the Ass. of Divines, Minister of Hackney near London, a
Preacher before the Long Parliament, Master of Catherine Hall in Cambr.
(wherein he had been educated) in the place of Dr. Ralph Brownrig, and Doctor
of Divinity. He has published (1) Englands pattern and duty in its monthly
Fasts, Sermon to both Houses of Parliament 21 July 1643. on 1 Samuel 7. 6. Land.
1643. qu. (2) Englands eminent judgments caused by the abuse of Gods eminent
mercies. Thansgiving Sermon. before the H. of Lords, 5 Nov. 1644 on Ezra 9. 13,
14. Land. 1644. qu. (3) Fast. Sermon. before the H. of C. 24 Jun. 1646. This I
have not yet seen, nor other Sermons on several occasions, as one at the
Funeral of Mr. Will. Tailor, printed 1661. qu. another on the Lady Viner etc.
(4) Wells of salvation opened, discovering the nature, preciousness, usefulness
of Gospel promises, and rules for right application of them. Land. 1655. 59.
oct. (5) Practical Treatise of the excellency and right use of the Gospel
promises, Land. 1658. (6) Spiritual Chemist or six Deeads of divine
meditations. Land. 1666. 68. oct. etc. In the year 1662 he was ejected from his
benefice at Hackney for Nonconformity; where, and in the neighborhood, he
lived (exercising his parts in private among the brethren) till his death,
(which was at Hackney as I conceive) in Jan. or Feb. 1665.

Edward Rainbow Bach. of Arts of Magd. Coll. in Cambr. -- He was afterward M.
of A. Master of that Coll. 1642, Doct. of Div. four years after, and in 1650
was ejected from his Mastership. Afterward he enjoyed two livings successively
without examination by the Tryers, and in 1660 being restored to his
Mastership, was soon after made Dean of Peterborough upon the promotion of Dr.
Joh. Cousin to the Sea of Durham, and in Nov. 1662 Vicechancellour of Cambridge.
In 1664, Jul. 10, he was consecrated Bishop of Carlisle in K. Hen. 7. Chap. at
Westminster, where sitting about twenty years, gave way to fate in his Palace
called Rose Castle near Carlisle, 26 March 1684, aged 76 years or thereabouts.
On the first of April following he was interred in the Yard belonging to the
parochial Church of Dalston, under the Chancel Wall; at which time Mr. Thom.
Tully one of his Lordships Chaplains and Chancellor of the Diocese of Carlisle
preached his Funeral sermon. This Dr. Rainbow having been originally of C. C.
Coll. in this University, I shall in my other Vol. of this Work speak more
largely of him.

Thom. Ball M. A. -- I take this person to be the same Thomas Ball who was born
in Shropshire, first of Queens, under the tuition of Dr. Joh. Preston, and
afterward Fellow of Emanuel, Coll. in Cambr. Minister of the Gospel in
Northampton, and a publisher of several books, as (1) The life of Dr. Joh.
Preston. (2) Pastorum propugnaculam: or, the pulpits patronage against the
force of unordained usurpation and invasion, in four parts. Land. 1656. qu.
etc. He was buried at N^rthampton 21 June 1659, aged 69 years or thereabouts.
At which time his intimate acquaintance Joh. Howes M. of A. (sometimes of Eman.
Coll.) Rector of Abbington near N^rthampton preached his Funeral sermon:
wherein were several matters delivered in commendation of Mr. Ball.

R^b. Creyghton or Chrichton M. of A. of Trin. Coll. -- This person who was
born in the north parts of Scotland, was educated in Westminster School, and
thence elected into the said College 1613, took the degrees in Arts, and became
Orator and Greek Professor of Cambridge. In 1632, Dec. 17. he was installed
Treasurer of the Cathedral Church at Wells, having been collated thereunto by
Geor. Archb. of Canterbury, upon the then vacancy of the Sea of B. and Wells;
in which Vacancy Dr. Rob. Wright, who kept the said Treasureship in commendam
with the Sea of Bristow, was translated to Lichfield, and thereupon forced to
give up that Dignity. In 1637 he became Dean of S. Burians in Cornwall, in the
place of To this Rich. Murray was near of kin a certain Gent. of quality named
Mungo Murray Servant to King (...) 2. in his Exile, who dying at Antwerp in the
times of U^^^^ation, was buried a^ midnight in a poor Cloister there, by Dr.
George Morley an Exile for his Loyalty, at which Ceremony the Earl of Dysart
his Kinsman was present.
Rich. Murray a Scot deceased, and about that time Doctor of Divinity, and
beneficed in Somersetshire. In the beginning of the Rebellion he suffered then
and afterward very much for the Royal Cause, retired to his Majesty at Oxon,
became one of his Chaplains, afterward an Exile with K. Chapter 2. to whom being
Chaplain at the Hague, preached very liberally before him against the
Presbyterians, and the Murderers of K Chapter 1. After his Majesty's return he
became Dean of Wells, (the grant of which he had before) and being then also
Chaplain to the King, he would freely preach before him against the Vices of
the times, which was well taken by some, tho sneared at by others. In 1670,
Jun. 19, he was consecrated B of Bathe and Wells at Lambeth in the place of Dr.
Will. Piers deceased; at which Ceremony assisted the B. of London in the place
of his Grace the Archb. of Canterbury, with the Bishops of Winchester and Ely.
This Dr. Creyghton was a learned man, as it appears by his translation from
Greek into Latin, and illustration with excellent notes, of a book entit.
Concilii Florentini exactissima narratio, etc. written by Sylvest. Sguropulus.
Hag. com. 1660, fol. dedicated to K. Chapter 2. which being animadverted upon by
Leo Allatius a Jesuit, Creyghton came out with an Answer. He has also one or
more Sermons extant, and dying 21 Nov. 1672 aged 79 or thereabouts, was buried
in a Chapel joining to the Cathedral Church of Wells. Over his Grave was soon
after erected a fair tomb of Alabaster with his Effigies at length, in his
pontificalia, lying thereon, and on the wall over it, is a large inscription,
part of which runs thus; Robertus Creyghton etc. Natus Dunecaledoniae in
boriali Scotia, per patrem Thoman ex antiquis R^veniae Toparchis: per matrem
Margaretam Stuart Johannis Jacobidae filiam, ex illustriss. familia Stuartorum
comitum Atholiae, Johannis secundi Scotiae regu a trarre pronepos etc. Frances
the Widow of this Dr. R. Creyghton, who was Daughter of Will. Waldrond Esquire;
died on the third of the Kal. of Nov. 1683, aged 68, and was buried near to the
said tomb: over whose grave was a monument, with a large Inscription thereon,
put at the charge of Rob. Creyghton her Son, Chauntor and Canon of Wells,
Doctor of Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, and Author of The
vanity of the Dissenters plea for their separation from the Church of England.
Sermon on 1 Cor. 1. 10. Land. 1682. qu.

Robert Sheringham M. of A. of Gonvil and Caies Coll. -- This learned
Gentleman, who was, if I mistake not, a Cambr. man born, was ejected, or at
least left his Fellowship of that House in 1643, and afterward retiring to
London for a time, went thence into Holland; where he taught the Hebrew and
Arabic Tongues to young men at Roterdam, and in other places. After the Kings
return in 1660, he was restored to his Fellowship, and lived in a very retired
and studious condition, being then esteemed a most excellent Linguist,
especially for the Oriental and Gothic Languages, as also admirably well
versed in the original Antiquities of the English Nation, as it fully appears
in his book De Anglorum gentis origin disceptatio, etc. Cantab. 1670, in a
large octavo, and in his translation from Hebrew into Latin, with an
illustration by Commentaries, of a Talmude book called Joma, wherein are
several matters treating of Sacrifices. -- Land. 1648, in qu. He has also
published Two sermons preached as S. Mary's Church in Cambridge. Land. 1647,
qu. Also The Kings Supremacy asserted. printed 1660, in qu. and other things.
He died of an apoplectical fit, which caused him to fall on the fire in his
Chamber in Caies College in the Winter time an. 1677.

Nich. Bernard M. of A. -- He was at this time Chaplain to the learned Dr.
James Usher Primate of Ireland, from whom he had received his Ordination in S.
Peter's Church in Drogheda, an. 1626. Afterward he was made by him Dean of
Ardagh (some say of Kilmore) and entrusted in making useful Observations and
Collections for him. In the time of the Rebellion in Ireland, he being then
Doctor of Divinity, he suffered much, and was often in danger of his life. At
length having lost all there, he returned safe into England to attend on his
Lord, became Rector of the rich Church of Whitchurch in Shropshire, by the gift
of the Earl of Bridgwater, Chaplain to Oliver Lord Protector, one of his
Almoners, and Preacher to the Society of Greys Inn. After the Kings
Restoration in 1660, being possessed with just doubts concerning the
settlement of Ireland, he refused to return to that Country to take possession
of his Deanery, and perhaps of a Bishopric. Whereupon he continued at
Whitchurch before mentioned to his dying day. He has written (1) The penitent
death of a woeful sinner: or, the penitent death of John Atherton late Bishop of
Waterford in Ireland, who was executed at Dublin 5 December. 1640, with some
Annotations on several passages. Land. 1641, qu. 42, oct. (2) Sermon preached
at the burial of Joh. Atherton the next night after his Execution, 5 December.
1640, in S. John's Church in Dublin, on Acts 26. part of the 17 verse and all
the 18. Land. 1641, quart, 42, octav. (3) Letter from the siege of Drogheda to
a friend in Dublin, 7 Jan. 1641. (4) The whole proceedings of the Siege of
Drogheda in Ireland. Land. 1642. qu. To which is added an Appendix concerning
other occurrences fallen out since. He was present all the time during the said
siege, and was several times in jeopardy of his life. (5) Dialogue between Paul
and Agrippa, on Acts 26. 17, 18. -- printed 1642. in oct. (6) Farewell sermon of
comfort and concord preached at Drogheda, on 2 Cor. 13. 11. -- printed 1651, in
octav. There was another Farewell sermon preached, but that I have not yet seen.
(7) Life and death of Dr. James Usher late Archb. of Armagh etc. in a sermon at
his funeral at the Abbey at Westminster, 17 Apr. 1656, on 1 Samuel 25. 1. Land.
1656. oct. To which are added some enlargements. (8) The judgment of the late
Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland, concerning, first the extent of
Christ's death, secondly of the sabbath, etc. Land. 1657. Whereupon Dr. Pet.
Heylyn came out with an Answer to it called Respondet Petrus. (9) Several
Letters between him and Dr. Heylyn. See more in Dr. Heylyn among the Writers in
the 2 Vol. of this work, under the year 1662. (10) Devotions of the ancient
Church in seven pious Prayers, with 7 administ. etc. printed 1660, in oct. (11)
Clavi trabales: or, nails fastened by some great Masters of Assemblies,
confirming the Kings Supremacy and Church Government under Bishops, etc. Land.
1661. qu. See more in Dr. Rob. Sanderson, among the Writers in the 2 vol an.
1662. With other books he has written or published I know not, nor any thing
else of him, only that he died and was buried at Whitchurch, in the winter
time, an. 1661. leaving behind him a Son named James.

Nathan. Bernard M. of Arts. -- Among my searches I find one Nathaniel Bernard
to be Lecturer of St. Sepulchers in London, an. 1629, who for uttering certain
words in his prayer before Sermon at Antholines, concerning the Queen, was
brought See in Canterburies D^^me, p. 362. 363.
into the High Commission Court: Also for preaching against his Majesty's
Declaration, at St. Mary's Church in Cambridge 6. May 1632, and using certain
dangerous expressions therein, was suspended, excommunicated, fined, and
committed to the New-prison near to London, where he continued several months,
etc. It does farther appear also that one Nathaniel Bernard was beneficed in
Essex, but in the beginning of the grand rebellion in 1642 he was sequestered
from his calling and charge there, by several Committees sitting at
Westminster, banished from his dwelling and society of his Wife and Children,
and they turned out of doors, etc. Whereupon retiring for safety to Oxon,
published A looking-glass for rebellion, Sermon preached 16. June 1644. in St.
Mary's Church in Oxon. before the two Houses of Parliament, on 1. Sam. 15. 23.
Oxon. 1644. qu. Whether these two are the same, or whether he that was the
Author of the Looking-glass for rebellion, was Author of the Mystery of the
incarnation, being a Sermon. on John 1. ver. 14. printed 1648. in qu. I know not,
or whether the same who was incorporated M. of A. beforementioned. I find one
Dr. Nathaniel Bernard to have died beyond the Seas in 1656, whom I take to be
the same with him, who was Author of the Looking-glass, etc.

Richard Culmer M. of A. -- This busy Man I find was born in the Isle of
Thanet in Kent, educated in Grammar learning in the City of Canterbury, and in
Academical in Magd. Coll. in Cambridge. Afterward he became Minister of
Goodneston in his own Country, was suspended ab officio and beneficio for
refusing to read the book of sports on the Lords day. For which usuage being
much provoked, he became a bitter enemy to Archbishop Laud, to the Cathedral at
Canterbury, and to all the prelatical Party in the beginning of the rebellion
raised and carried on by the disaffected Party. About that time he became
Minister of Harbledowne in Kent, and if I mistake not Vicar of St. Stephens
near to Canterbury, in the place of Mr. John Gouge ejected thence for refusing
the Covenant. And least he should not be esteemed as zealous a Brother for the
cause as any then in being, he published a most vile Pamphlet intit. Cathedral
news: or, Dean and Chapter news from Canterbury. Land. 1644. qu. In which,
heaping up all that he could rake together against the Cathedral of Canterbury,
Archbishop, Dean, Canons and other Officers belonging thereunto, had immediately
two answers from Oxon. one in a Pamphlet intit. The razing of the record, etc.
Oxon. 1644. in two sh. and half in qu. and in another called, Antidotum
Culmerianum: or, animadversions upon a late Pamphlet, entit. Cathedral news
from Canterbury, etc. Oxon. 1644. qu. in 5 sheets. In which last is set down
many actions of Culmers life, his demeanor while he was in the University of
Cambridge, and in the Country, his refractoriness; impudence, covetousness,
unnaturalness, etc. and what not that the Author thereof, who was a most
generous Loyalist and who knew him, could put together to display him to the
World. There also goes under the said R. Culmers name The Ministers hue and
cry: or, a true discovery of the insufferable injuries, robberies, etc. acted
against Ministers, etc. Land. 1651. qu. in 3. sh. as also Lawless tithe robbers
discovered who make tytherevenew a Mock-maintenance, etc. Land. 1655, besides
other things which I have not yet seen. After the Kings restoration, he
continued so zealous in his opinion, as to engage (for so it was notoriously
suspected) in that hellish plot for which Thomas Venner, Rog. Hodgkin, etc.
Anabaptists and Fiftmonarchy-men suffered in Colemanstreet in London 9. Jan.
1660. But the spirit of the Man being as well known as his face, he was taken
posting up from Canterbury to London, riding upon Chattam hill. Whereupon being
committed for a time, he, among several examinations, was asked why he brake
down those famous Windows of Christ Church in Canterbury? to which he answered
he did it by order of Parliament; and being asked why in one window, (which
represented the Devil tempting our Savior he brake down Christ, and left the
Devil standing? he answered he had an order to take down Christ, but had no
order to take down the Devil. Whereby was understood that those plotting
brethren did mean when they intended to set up King Jesus, to pull down Christ.
This Richard Culmer who was commonly called in Kent, Blew Dick of Thanet,
because he wore blew in opposition to black, which he hated, lived several
years after, and dying (but when I know not) was buried in the Parish Church of
Monkton in the said Isle of Thanet.

Ralph Brownring Doct. of Div. -- This learned and most religious Person was
born at Ipswich in Suffolk, was bred Scholar and Fellow of Pembroke hall in
Cambridge, became afterward Prebendary of E^y, Master of, Catherine hall in
the said University and Archdeacon of Coventry in the room of Dr. Sam. Brook.
In 1641 he was made Bishop of Exeter (to the liking of all good Men) upon the
translation of Dr. Joseph Hall to Norwych, but the Episcopal function being
soon after silenced, he became, (after some years spent in the family of Tho.
Rich. Esquire; afterward a Baronet) Preacher to the Temples in London, where being
settled according to his desire with all conveniences, surrendered up his pious
Soul to him that gave it, 7. Dec. 1659. Whereupon his body was buried in the
Church belonging to the said Temples on the 17. day of the same month, at the
charge of the Templers, who also put a very fair monument over his grave. Dr.
John Gauden preached then his funeral Sermon, and at the end of it printed a
short account of his life; which is mostly remitted (without acknowledgment)
into a book intit. Memoires of the lives, etc. published by Dav. Lloyd This Dr.
Brownrig has two volumes of Sermons extant, whereof the second contains 25,
and both 65, Sermons.

All which Cambridge Men, viz. Spurstow, Rainbow, Ball, Creyghton, Sheringham,
Nic. and Nath. Bernard, Culmer and Dr. Brownrig, were among many others of the
University of Cambridge incorporated on the said 15. of July. Afterward these
following were incorporated this year.

Oct. 27. Maurice Williams Doct. of Phys. of Padua in Italy. -- He was the Son
of Lewis Williams of the Diocese of London, was educated in Oriel Coll. of
which he became Fellow in 1620. Afterward resigning it in 1631. settled in
London, was Fellow of the Coll. of Physicians, a Knight and eminent for his
practice in that faculty. He died in his house within the Parish of St. Anne
Blackfriers in London, in the beginning of the year 1658 and was there (I
suppose) buried.

Nov. 6. Rob. Hall Bach. of Arts of Cambridge, now of Exeter Coll. -- He was
Son of Dr. Joseph Hall Bishop of Exeter, and was admitted M. of A. of this
University in Feb. following. See among the created Doctors of Div. an. 1643.

Mar.... James Primerose M. of A. of the University of Bourdeaux and Doct. of
Phys. of Mountpelier, was incorporated Doctor of Physic. -- This learned
Doctor, who was Son of Dr. Gilb. Primerose mentioned before under the year
1624. was born in the City of St. Jeand' Angely in the Province of Xantoigne in
France, and afterward lived and practiced his faculty at Hull in Yorkshire;
where, and in most parts of that Country, he was esteemed an eminent Physician.
He has written and published several books, the titles of some of which follow
(1) Exercitationes and animadversiones in Librum Gulielmi Harvaei de motu
cordis and circulatione sanguinis. Land. 1630. and Lugd. Bat. 1639. qu.
Answered by one Roger Drake Doct. of Phys. of Cambr. Son of Rog. Drake a
Cloathworker of Breadstreet in Land. (2) Academiae Monspeliensis descripta,
ejusdem laurus Monspeliaca. Ad Thomam Claytonum apud Oxomienses Regium
professorem. Oxon. 1631. qu. (3) De vulgi in medicina erroribus, lib. 4. Land.
1638. in tw. etc. Translated into English by Rob. Witty Doct. of Phys. of
Hull. Land. 1651. oct. Before which translation are several copies of verses in
praise of it made by certain Poets of Hull and in the neighborhood, among whom
Andrew Marvel is one (4) Aphorismi necessarii, nec non quaestiones quaedam ad
doctrinam medicinae acquirendam perutiles, etc. Theses receptissimae, etc.
Lugd. Bat. 1647. qu. Dedicated to Dr. Tho. Clayton. (5) Ars pharmaceuticae de
eligendis and componendis medicinae, etc. Amstel. 1651. in tw. (6) Enchiridion
medicum practicum de morbis communibus, part. 2. Amstel. 1654. in tw. printed
before in oct. in 1650. (7) De mulierum morbis and symtomatis, lib. 5. Roterd.
1655. qu. (8) Destruction fundamentorum Vop Fortunat. Plempii. Roterd. 1657. qu.
(9) De febribus, lib. 4. Rot. 1658. qu. and has also written Animadversions on
Joh. Walaeus, which I have not yet seen.

Creations.
Jan. 20. Henry Jacob educated in the Low Countries under Tho. Erpenius the
famous Critic, was actually created Bachelaur of Arts by virtue of the Letters
of the Chancellor of this University, written in his behalf. -- He was soon
after elected Probationer-Fellow of Merton College, and is hereafter most
deservedly to be inserted among the Writers in the 2. vol. of this work.

An. Dom. 1629.
An. 5. Car. 1.
Chanc. William Earl of Pembroke.

Vicechanc. Dr. Accepted Frewen again, July 17.

It must be now observed that whereas the elections of Proctors had hitherto
been made by public canvassing, it pleased the Kings Majesty to make them
private and domestic. And that he said office might be equally distributed
through every Coll. according to an Arithmetical proportion, a cycle of 23
years, was by command of the King made. Which, while it revolves, shows how
each Coll. (from whence the Proctors are yearly to be taken) is to join till
the year 1720 and after, and how many courses each College has therein. Which
cycle being remitted into the statutes by the Kings authority, and afterward
published in a sheet of Paper, together with such Statutes that belong
thereunto, the factious elections by canvassing, or public solicitations for
suffrages (which oftentimes proved pernicious to the University) were now (not
too late) expired. The first Proctors of the said cycle, called by some the
Caroline Cycle were these.

Proct. Thom. Atkinson of St. Joh. Coll. Will. Strode of Chapter Chapter

Presented to their Offices in Convocation, 15. Ap.

Bach. of Music.
July 18. Matthew White of Chapter Chapter -- And the same year took the Degree of
Doctors as I shall anon tell you.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 16. Will. Burt of New 30. Edm. Gayton of St. Joh. Coll.

Of the first of these two, I shall speak at large among the Creations in an.
1658.

May 12. Allan Blane Rich. Stannix of Qu. Coll.


June (10) Henry Ireton of Trin. Coll. -- He was afterward Son in Law to
Oliver Cromwell and Commissary-general in the Army of Thomas Lord Fairfax. He
will be at large mentioned elsewhere.

Oct. 27. Clement Barksdale of Merton Nov. 4. Thomas Powell of Jesus Coll.

The first of these last two was afterward of Glouc. hall and a frequent
Writer.

20. Rob. Price of Chapter Church. -- He was afterward Bishop of Ferns and
Leighlin in Ireland.

Jan. 23. Humphrey Lloyd of Oriel Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Bangor.

28. John Wells of Gloc. hall. Quaere.

All the said Bachelaurs except the last, will be mentioned at large elsewhere.

Adm. 240. or thereabouts.

Doct. of Mus.
July 18. Matthew White of Chapter Chapter who accumulated the Degrees in Music. -- He
has composed certain Anthems to be sung in Cathedrals, the words of one or
more of which are published by Jam. Clifford in his collection beforementioned.

Mast. of Arts.
May 9. Nich. Gibbon of St. Edm. hall.

Jun. 11. Tho. Masters of New Coll. Joh. Prichett of St. Edm. Hall. Tho. Brown
of Pemb. Coll. Hen. Wilkinson Giles Workman of Magd. Hall.



July 9. Rob. White of Vniv. Coll. -- One of both his names occurs Archdeacon
of Merionith, an. 1640. whether the same I know not.

Jul. 10. Hugh Cressy Will. Berkley Joh. Reynolds of Mert. Coll.


The last of these three, who was Chaplain of the said Coll. was installed
Archdeacon of Norwich in the place of Will. Gery Mast. of Arts, 25. May 1668.
Which Dignity was conferred upon him by his Brother Dr. Edw. Reynolds Bishop of
that City. The said Gery was M. of A. of Cambridge, and I think the same who
was Author of Spiritual Gleanings, etc. and of other things.

Nov. 24. Hen. Savage of Ball..... Philip Hunton of Wadh. Coll.

Adm. 150. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Physic.
Mar. 1. George Bate of St. Edm. Hall.

Besides him was admitted only one more, named Henry Herne of Pemb. Coll.

Bach. of Div.
June 13. Pet. Heylyn of Magd. Coll.

July 10. Charles Robson of Qu. Coll. -- He was lately Preacher to the Company
of English Merchants at Aseppo, and wrote and published News from Aleppo written
to T. V. (Tho. Vicars) Bach. of Div. and Vicar of Cokfield in Sussex. Land.
1628. in 3. sh. in qu. and perhaps other things. On the 4. May 1632, he was
presented by the University of Oxon to the Vicaridge of Holme Cultram in his
native Country of Cumberland, and, if I mistake not, was the same Charles
Robson who was made Preb. of Stratford in the Church of Sarum, 28. May 1633,
which he kept till 1639.

July 30. William Spark of Magd. Dec. 17. Anth. Faringdon of Trin. Coll.

Jan. 16. Obadiah Sedgwick of Magd. Hall.

Admitted 22.

Not one Doctor of Law or Phys. was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
July 9. Edward Burton of Magd. Coll. one of his Majesty's Chaplains; who
accumulated the Degrees in Divinity.

Incorporations.
This year John French M. A. and Fellow of Merton College was elected public
Scribe or Registrary of the University, who being a careless Man (tho a good
Scholar) and more fit for another, than that, employment, has omitted
throughout all his time the Incorporations of the Cantabrigians at the
conclusion of the Act, having had sometimes 40, at other times 50 and more
incorporated at that time, in several degrees and faculties. Those therefore
that I find, you shall have as they follow.

May 21. Joh. Faber Bach. of Arts of Cambr. -- He proceeded Master of that
faculty as a member of Exeter Coll. soon after.

July 4. James Friar M. of A. of the University of Basil in Germany.

Oct. 10. Joh. Stanley Bach. of Arts of Cambr. -- In the next month he took the
Degree of M. of A. as a member of St. Albans Hall, which is all I know of him.

Nov. 14. Gilford Slingsbie M. A. of St. Andrews Rob. Jackson B. A. of
Edinburgh in Scotland.


Feb. 4. Baldwin Hamey (Hamaeus) Doct. of Physic of Leyden in Holland was then
incorporated. -- In the year following he was admitted candidate of the College
of Physicians at London, afterward Fellow, Censor, Anatomy Reader, Elector,
Register and Consiliarius (but never President) of the said College. He has
certain Theses of the Quinsie in (...) Lugd. Ba^. 16. ^. q^
print, and is styled by those of his faculty Musarum and Apollonis deliciae.
This Person, who was Son of Baldwin Hamey alias de Hame Doctor of Phys. of
Bruges in Flanders, by Sarah his Wife Dau* and Heir of Pet. Oeyles of Antwerp
Merchant, died on the 14. May 1676 aged 76. years and was buried in the middle
Isle or Nave of the Church of Chelsey St. Luke near London.

Feb. 27. Griffin Higgs made D. of D. of the University of Leyden in Holland
about three weeks before this time, was also then incorporated. -- He was
afterward Dean of Lichfield.

This year, but the day or month appears not, was incorporated Doctor of Div.
one Hen. Wickham of Kings College in Cambridge. -- He was Son of Will. Wickham
Bishop of Winchester, was now Archdeacon of York or of the West Riding of
York^hire, (which Dignity he had obtained in the latter end of 1623, on the
resignation of Dr. H. Hook) and Residentiary of the Church there, besides
Prebendary of Southwell, Chaplain in Ord. to K. Char. 1. and Rector of two
Churches in Yorkshire. In his Archdeaconty succeeded Dr. Rich. Marsh, who was
afterward Dean of York.

Creations.
Oct. 10. Edm. Manwaring Bach. of Law and a Civilian belonging to the Kings
Council in the North parts of England, was actually created Doctor of the said
faculty. He was originally of Allsouls Coll. and as a member thereof took the
Degree of Bach. of that fac. 1605. Afterward he was Chancellor of Chester,
and Father to Sir William Manwaring, Sergeant Major to Col. Francis Gamuls
Regiment in 1643 against the Forces raised by the Parliament against K. Chapter 1.

Nov. 12. Thom. Dacres an Esquires Son of Exeter Coll. was actually created M.
of Arts, being then about to go with his Majesty's Ambassador into Foreign
parts.

March 6. Raphael Throckmorton of Chapter Chapter was created M. of A. -- See among the
created Doctors of Div. in 1660.

An. Dom. 1630.
An. 6. Car. 1.
Chanc. William Earl of Pembroke; who dying 10. Apr. (as Mr. Tho. Allen of
Gloc. Hall had several years before predicted) Will. Laud D. of D. someti^^^
President of St. John's Coll. now Bishop of London, was elected into his place
the 12. and confirmed the 28. day of the same month.

Vicechanc. William Smith D. of D. Warden of Wadham Coll. July 17.

Proct. Ralph Austen of Magd. Coll. Hen. Stringer of New Coll. Presented Apr. 7.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 10. Edw. Fisher of Brasn. June 3. Joh. Eedes of Oriel George Kendall of
Ex. Coll.



June 3. Hen. Jeanes Will. Durham of New Inn.


14. Hen. Hunt of Pembr. Coll.

30. Lorenzo Carry of Ex. Coll. Son of Hen. Viscount Falkland, and younger
Brother to Lucius.

July 8. Oliver St. John of Trin. Coll. -- This Person who was Son of Sir Joh.
St. John of Lyd^ard Tregose in Wilts, I set down here, not that he was a Person
afterward eminent, but only to distinguish him from Oliver St. John, Son of
Oliv. St. John of Caishoe in Bedfordshire Esquire; (descended from the Family of
the Earl of Bullingbrook) educated in Catherine Hall in Cambridge, afterward
in Lincolns Inn, where he was a Counselor of note, especially after he had
shown his parts in arguing the case of Ship Money in behalf of Joh. Hamden Esquire;
who refused the payment of it, an. 1637. In the year 1640, he was chosen a
Burgess for Totnes in Dev^nshire to serve in the two Parliaments that began
that year; wherein showing his activeness, and readiness in speaking against
several abuses, he was first made Solicitor, and afterward Attorney General,
purposely to mollify his humor and to make him have a good opinion of the
Kings cause. But all God wot operated little or nothing in him, as having been
possessed to the contrary by O. Cromwell, whose kinswoman Elizabeth (Daughter
and Coheir of.... Cromwell of Vpwood in Huntingdonshire) he had before taken to
his second Wife. So that proceeding very zealously against the Prerogative and
all that looked that way, was made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, was
sent Ambassador into the Netherlands, an. 1652, he being then commonly called
Cromwells Dark-lanthorn, Chancellor of the University of Cambr. etc. and
signally antimonarchical till the usurpation of Oliver Cromwell; yet
notwithstanding was one of the Lords of the other house. After his Majesty's
restoration, (he being excepted to certain forfeitures which the Parliament
then declared) he retired to an estate at Long Thorp in Northamptonshire, which
he before had purchased, and resided mostly there till the time of his death,
which happened on the last of Dec. 1673, aged 75 years or thereabouts. He has
Several speeches, Arguments of Law, and other things extant.

July 24. Thomas Barlow Gerard Langbaine of Qu. Coll.


The first of these two was afterward Bishop of Lincoln.

Oct. 26. Joh: Hulett of New Inn.

Dec. 16. Thom. Granthan of Heart Hall. Quaere. Edward Gee of Brasn. Jan. 19.
Will. Stamp 27. John Toy of Pemb. Coll.



Feb. 1. Lis^ibon Long of Magd. Hall. -- This Person who was the eldest Son of
Will. Long of Stratton in Somersetshire Esquire; went afterward to one of the
Temples, become a Barrister, sided with the rout in the time of the rebellion,
made Master of the Requests, and Recorder of the City of London in the Reign of
Oliver, from whom he received the honor of Knighthood, 15. Dec. 1656. He
afterward supplied the place of Speaker in the absence and indisposition of
Chaloner Chute Esquire; in the months of Febr. and March. an. 1658, but Long being
taken with a sudden disease in the last of those two months, died on the
sixteenth day thereof, and Chute died not till the 14. Apr. 1659. As for Long
he was esteemed by the Men of those times a Person of great integrity in the
profession of the Law, and for his particular affection to the service of
Oliver Protector and to the Commonwealth.

Feb. 11. Tho. Widows of Magd. Tim. Tailor of Qu. Coll.


17. Rich. Kentish of Heart Hall. -- I take him to be the same Rich Kentish who
published a Sermon on Ephesians. 5. 2. -- Printed 1649. qu.

19. Thomas Greaves of C. Christi Mar. 3. Nich. Monk of Wadh. Coll.

The last of which was afterward Bishop of Hereford.

All these Bachelaurs (some few excepted) will be largely mentioned in another
volume.

Adm. 212. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
July 1. Will. Sandbrook of Gloc. Hall.

Nov. 15. Rich. Napier of Alisouls Coll.

16. Will. Burton of Gloc. Hall, lately of Qu. College.

Admitted 19.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 15. John Barret of St. Edm. Hall. -- This Person I here set down not that
he was a writer, but only to distinguish him from another of both his names and
time, who was educated in Emanuel Coll. in Cambridge, and afterward became a
Presbyterian Divine, and Minister of St. Peter's Church in Nottingham, where
continuing till his Majesty's restoration, was then suspended for refusing to
read the Common Prayer, and his living sequestered. Afterward* being a
Nonconformist, he kept Conventicles in those parts, and lived to 1682, and
after. He has written several things as (1) The Christian temper, etc. (2)
Treatise of the two Covenants, etc. (3) Fifty Queries seriously propounded to
these that question infants right to baptism. (4) Few notes upon T. G's (Thom.
Granthams) Antiqueries, etc. as also several things against Dr. Edw.
Stillingfleet.

Apr. 15. Will. Davis of Ball. Coll. -- Another of both his names of Gloc. hall
was admitted M. of A. on the 3. Jun. following, but which of then became
Archdeacon of Bath in Dec. 1643 (for one Will. Davis M. A. and Vicar of Chard
was then admitted to that Dignity) I know not.

June 8. Joh. Aris of Magd. hall. -- He was afterward Rector of Middle Cleyden
in Bucks and published The Reconciler, Sermon preached before the Communion, on
Matthew. 5. 23. 24. Land. 1651. qu. which is all I know of him, only that he was
a Glocestershire Man born.

10. Rob. Maton of Wadh. 22. Rich. Owen of Oriel 30. Hen Edmonds^n of Qu. July
9. Sam. Austin of Ex. Coll.

Nov. 19. Sam. Fisher of New Inn.

Adm. 160. or thereabouts,

Bach. of Phys.
Only five were admitted this year, and one to practice that faculty, but none
of them were afterward writers.

Bach. of Div.
May 12. Them. Atkins^n Will. Haywood of St. Joh. Coll.


The first of these two, who was a Londoner born, was afterward Rector of
South-warnborough in Hampshire, which he exchanged with Dr. Pet. Heylyh for the
rectory of Islip near Oxon, an. 1638. I have seen of his composition (1) Andrei
Melvini Anti-Tami-cunicategoria; written in Saphicks, and Melvinus delirans, in
Iambicks. But whether either of them are printed, I cannot tell. He was buried
in St. John's Coll. Chapel 6. Feb. 1638. after he had enjoyed Is^ip but few
months.

June 15. Sam. Hoard of St. Mary's Hall.

22. Rich. Gardener of Chapter Chapter

July 8. Tho. Howell of Jesus Dec. 7. Joh. Bailey of Exet. Feb. 22. Humph.
Chambers of Vniv. Coll.

Admitted 29.

Doct. of Law.
Jun. 30. Will. Boswell of Wadh. Will. Dillon of New Jonath. Brown of Gloc.
Hall. Coll.


The first of these three, who was a learned Civilian, was afterward High
Sheriff of Oxfordshire (about 1652) and dying unmarried, 5. Apr. 1678 aged 79
years, was buried in Allsaints Church in the City of Oxon, near to the grave of
his Father Will* Boswell, sometimes Alderman of the said City. The last was
afterward Dean of Hereford in the place of Dr. Dan* Price deceased, Preb. of
Westminster, in the room of Dr. Rog. Bates, in the latter end of 1633, Minister
of St. Faiths in London, (from which he was sequestered by the Presbyterians in
the time of the rebellion) and rector of Hertingfordbury in the Dioc. of
London. He was an excellent Preacher and a Person much reverenced by all, (even
his enemies) for his ecclesiastical aspect. He died in the latter end of 1644
or thereabouts; whereupon Dr. Herb. Croft, who had married his Daughter Anne,
succeeded him in the Deanery of Hereford.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jun. 22. Hannibal Potter of Trin. John English of Balliol Coll. Rich. Gardener
Joh. Stubbins Jam. Marsh of Merton Coll. of Chapter Chapter




The last was afterward Archdeacon of Chichester and Rector of St. Dunstans in
the West, London, where he died in 1643. In which year his Archdeaconry was
conferred upon Dr. H. Hammond.

July 5. Henry Locket of Linc. Tho. Howell of Jesus Dec. 7. Joh. Bailey of Ex.
Coll.


The two last accumulated.

Jan. 21. Rob. Bedingfield of Chapter Chapter -- He had before published A Sermon.
preached at Paul's cross 24. Oct. 1624. on Romans 6. 23. Oxon. 1625. qu. and, as
it is probable, others; which is all I know of him, only that was a Suffolk Man
born, elected from Westminster* School a Student of Chapter Chapter 1614, and that he died at
Newton in Cambridgeshire, (of which I think he was Rector) in the year 1651.

Incorporations.
July (8) Job Paterson M. of A. of the University of St. Andre^^ in Scotland,
as the pub. Reg. says. -- He was now a Student in this University, and was
afterward Bishop of Ga^loway in his own Country.

July...Hugh Symmes Doctor of Physic of Leyden in Holland.

Oct...John Hurne M. of A. Edinburgh in Scotland. -- Whether he be the same
Joh. Hurne who wrote and published The history of the Jews deliverance out of
Babylon, etc. in ten Sermons upon Psalm. 126. Land. 1622. qu. I know not.

This year was incorporated, for at least was a supplicate made for that
purpose) one Thomas Tailor Doct. of Div. of Christ's Coll. in Cambridge, who was
at first, if I mistake not, a Preacher at Watford in Hertfordshire, afterward
at Reading in Berks, and now, this year, Pastor of Aldermanbury in London;
where, as-also by most of the Ministers in that City, he was esteemed an
illuminated Doctor, excellent in following and opening an Allegory. The first
thing that made him known to the World was his Commentary on the Epistle of St.
Paul written to Titus. Cambr. 1612. qu. etc. From which time to 1635 were
several Sermons, expositions, etc. published under his name, the titles of most
of which you may see in the Oxford Catalogue. He was also Author of The use of
the Law, which some call The rule of the Law, answered by one Rob. Town an
Antinomian, in his book entit. The assertion of Grace. He died about the
beginning of the year 1632, and was buried in the Church of St. Mary
Aldermanbury. See more in Will. Jemmat among the writers, in the other Vol.

Ephraim Vdall was entered a Student in the public Library in the beginning of
July this year, but how long he continued there, or whether he was originally
of this University, I cannot yet tell. This Person who was gathering materials
toward the publishing of a book or books, I take to be the same Ephraim Vdall
who was now, or at least shortly after, Parson of St Austins in the Old
Exchange, near St. Austins Gate in London, a Man of eminent piety exemplary
conversation, profound learning and indefatigable industry, by preaching a
Lecture at his own Parish every Tuesday in the afternoon, and if I am not
mistaken every Sunday before the first Sunday in the month, a preparatory
Sermon to the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Besides all this he was
esteemed a Man of an affable, courteous and peaceable conversation among his
neighbors. In a word he was a Man of their own vote, viz. of the Puritans or
Presbyterians, and was (without profanation be it spoken) a shining and burning
light. But when he found himself mistaken in the ends and intentions of the
Heads of the rebellion that broke out in 1641. and 42, when he saw that the
zeal of some did degenerate into madness and frenzy, and that the endeavors
of others (under the pretense of reformation) was to bring in Anarchy and
Sacrilege, he published a learned Tract called by a certain (...)
Author (notwithstanding P. Heylyn published a book with the same title) A coal
from the Altar: And another learned book entit. Noli me tangere. Or a thing to
be thought of printed 1641. qu. Against Anarchy he also declared himself for
Episcopacy, and the established Liturgy, and published another book entit.
Communion comeliness. Wherein is discovered the convenience of the Peoples
drawing near to the table in the sight thereof, when they receive the Lords
Supper. etc. Land. 1641. qu. In which book, by many impregnable arguments, he
proves a high convenience, if not a necessity, for that most laudable custom
of having railes about the Lords Table. So that this Person being discerned by
the faction to be a friend to the Protestant Religion, established in the
Church of England, was looked upon as their enemy, and was by them branded with
Popery or as popishly affected. Yet his former reputation in the City bore him
up against the obloquy of private discontent for a time. At length when they
came openly to defy their Sovereign, (the Lords anointed) it was a fit time to
silence and remove Mr. Vdall; for neither Dr. Gouge his Church in the
Blackfriars, or Mr. Jo. Goodwins in Colemanstreet were half so full before the
Long Parliament began, as Mr. Vdalls had been since. First therefore they
plunder his house, take away his Library and Household stuff, then remove him
from the execution of his Ministry, and sequester the profits thereof, for a
Levite of their own. Afterward they sought to commit him to Prison, tho aged
and very weak and infirm in body, and at length carried his aged and decrepid
Wife out of her doors by force, and set her in the open street to shift for her
self. This most pious and meek Man, who had been favored in his Ministry by
the Vincents of Stoke-Dawbernon in Surrey Baronets, has written other things,
among which is, The good of peace; Sermon on Psalm. 29. 11. Land. 1642. qu. He
surrendered up his most pious and devout Soul to God, about the latter end of
May 1647, at which time he desired that his body might be buried in the Chancel
of Allhallows in Honey-lane in Cheapside in Land. unless the Parishioners of
St. Austin, desire to have the disposing of it. In a most unworthy (...)
Pamphlet entit. The first century of scandalous, malignant Priests, etc.
print. 1643. I find these matters of Ephraim Vdall, viz. that he has affirmed
that the great reformers of the Church now are Hypocrites; and has made,
framed and published a book, intit. Noli me tangere, without license, charging
the Parliament with Sacrilege, in endeavoring to abolish Episcopacy, and to
take away the Lands of Deans and Chapters, to amend therewith the maintenance
of preaching Ministers; and that thereby they have brought a national sin on
the Land, as was formerly done by them in taking away Monasteries, etc. For
which, and other passages in the said book, he was thrown out of his rectory by
the blessed Parliament, as it was then called.

An. Dom. 1631.
An. 7. Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Will. Land Bishop of London.

Vicechanc. Dr. Smith of Wadh. Coll. again, July 16.

Proct. Atherton Bruch of Bras. C. John Doughty of Mert. C. Apr. 20.


Which Proctors being removed from their places by the Kings command in the
month of August (as I have told (...)
you at large elsewhere) were elected for the remaining purt of the year.

Mr. Joh. Earl of Mert. Coll. Laur. Washington of Brasn. Coll. Presented 26.
Aug.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 8. Will. Child of Chapter Chapter -- He was now one of the Organists of his
Majesty's Chapel at Windsore, having before been one of the Gentlemen thereof.
I shall speak more largely of him in the year 1663.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 27. Thom. Wood Will. Aylesbury of Chapter Chapter


The first of these two, was afterward Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry.

30. George (...) of Exeter Coll. -- He was afterward Bishop of Chester.

June 20. Rich. Allein of St. Alb. Oct. 20. Walt. Bushnell Joh. Wilkins Nich.
Clagett of Mert. of Magd. Hall.



Dec. 10. Daniel Whitby of Brasn. Jan. 17. Dudley Digges of Vniv. Feb. 9.
Christop. Fowler of Magd. Coll.

The last of which was afterward of St. Edm. Hall.

Mar. 22. Anth. Sadler of St. Edm. Hall.

24. Joh. Shaw of Brasn. Will. Rowland of Ex. Coll.


All these will be mentioned at large elsewhere.

Admitted 249.

Bach. of Law.
Oct. 11. Tho. Read of New Coll. -- See more of him among the Doctors of this
faculty, an. 1638.

Besides him were 18 admitted, among whom, Will. Dowdeswell of Pemb. Coll. was
one, often commended by Sir Tho. B^owne the Physician for a learned Man, and
Franc. St Barbe of Ball. Coll. another. Tho. Heath of Alls. Coll. was also
admitted the same year, but whether he was afterward Doctor of his faculty of
this Univ. I cannot tell. When Dr. Sheldon became Archbishop of Canterbury he
was made (if I mistake not) Controller of his Family, and a Knight, but after
the said Archb. death he retired to Stoke near Guilford in Surrey, and died in
the beginning of the year 1680.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 30. Thom. Warmstry of Chapter Chapter

May 4. Will. Sedgwick of Pemb. Coll.

Jun. 18. Rich. Busby Jasp. Main of Chapter Chapter Joh. Oxenbridge of Magd. Hall.


22. Joh. Gregory of Chapter Chapter 25. Joh. Gough or Goffe of Magd. 30. Thom. Good of
Ball. Coll.

Oct. 17. Mirth Waferer of St. Albans Hall, lately of Merton Coll.

Nov. 10. Abraham Woodhead of Vniv. Dec. 10. Edm. Chilmead of Magd. Alex.
Griffith of Heart Hall. Coll.


Jan. 24. Allan Blane Rich. Stannix of Qu. Coll.


27. Edm. Vaughan of C. C. C.

Admitted 128.

Bach. of Phys.
Six Bachelaurs of Physic were admitted this year, of which Nich. Lamie a
French Man of Pemb. Coll. was the junior; who, before this time, had spent 7
years in the study of the said faculty in the University of Caen in Normandy.
There was also one admitted to practice Physic, and another Surgery named
Will. Manowrier a French Man, who in the public register is styled Dominus de
Pratis.

Bach. of Div.
March 30. Nathan. Simpson of Trin. Coll.

Apr. 21. Christopher Newstead of St. Alb. Hall.

May 12. Will. Lyford of Magd. Coll.

June... Will. Sherley of Chapter Chapter -- This learned Divine who was a Dorsetshire
Man born, became Rector of Huish Comb flower in the Dioc. of Wells, upon the
promotion of Dr. Joh. Atherton to the Sea of Waterford in Ireland, in Feb.
1636, and about the same time beneficed in his own Country. He is Author of The
excellency of the order of the Church of England under Episcopal Government:
set forth in a Sermon at the Visitation at Blandsord, an. 1640, on 1. Cor. 11.
34. Land. 1662. qu. Published by Rich. Harris of the Inner Temple after the
Authors death.

June... Henry Glemham of Trin. Coll. Joh. Tombs of Magd. Hall.

Dec. 10. Will. Strode of Ch* Chapter

Admitted 27.

Doct. of Law.
Francis Gerard John Gervais of Alls. Coll.

They were admitted in Hillary term, but the day and month when, are omitted.

Doct. of Phys.
July 21. William Ford of Pembr. Coll.

Doct. of Div.
May 18. Tho. Mason Tho. Westley of Magd. Coll.


The last of these was Rector of Chart in Kent, and preacher at the Savoy in
the Strand near London; where dying in Apr. 1639 was buried in the Chancel of
the Church there.

May 26. John Hodges of Lan^. March 10. Will, Paul of Alls. Coll.

Incorporations.
Jim. 30. Constantine Jessop Bach. of Arts of Trinity Coll. near Dublin. -- I
shall make farther mention of him elsewhere.

July 7. Thom. Clavering M. of A. (but of what University it is not set down)
was then incorporated in the same degree.

8. Rob. Spark M. of A. of Aberdene Mar. 1. Joh. Ramsey, M. of A. of S.
Andrews in Scotland.

One Dr. Rob. Spark and Joh. Ramsey, were afterward Publishers of several
Sermons; but whether the same with the two former, I cannot tell.

This year Thom. Randolphe the most celebrated Poet of Cambr. was incorporated
M. of A. but the day or month when, appears not. -- I have made mention of him
at large among the Writers, under the year 1590.

Joh. Pell also a Graduat of the same University, was incorporated, but in what
degree, whether in that of Bachelaur, or Master of Arts, it appears not. --
This person, tho I have several times occasionally mentioned in this Work. yet
I shall take liberty to be more large upon him now. He was the Son of Joh.
Pell, and he of another John, descended from those of his name in Lincolnshire,
where they seem to be of ancient extraction. His first breath was drawn at
Southwy^ke in Sussex, (of which place his Father was Minister) on S. David's
day, an. 1610, and his Grammar learning received in the Free School (then newly
founded) at Stenning a Market Town in the said County. At 13 years of age he
was sent to Trin. Coll. in Cambridge, being then as good a Scholar as some
Masters of Arts in that University: and tho he understood Lat. Gr. and Hebr.
well, yet he never stood at an Election of Scholars and Fellows of that house.
He was of a strong and good habit of body, and therefore using Recreations
seldom or never, he plied his studies while others played. About two years
after he had taken the magisterial degree, he married, and understood then,
besides the said three Tongues, Arab. Ital. French, Spanish. High and Low
Dutch. In Dec. 1643 he took a Journey to Amsterdam, and was there made
Professor of the Mathematics next after Mart. Ho^tensius, where his learned
Colleague Ger. Jo. Vossius, (as he testifies de scientiis Math. c. 10.) heard
him with admiration read his public Lectures upon Diophantus; by whom likewise
he is styled a person of various erudition, and a most acute Mathematician. And
in 1646 the Prince of Orange called him to be public Professor of Philosophy
and Mathematics in the Schola illustris at Breda, founded that year by his
Highness. While he continued there, William Lord Brereton was sent by his
Grandfather George Earl of Norwych to be his Scholar, and became a good
proficient, especially in Algabra, to which his Genius most inclined him, and
carried it on to his dying day; which happening on the 17 of March 1679 (he being
then a chief Member of the Royal Society) was buried in the Church of S. Martin
in the Fields within the City of Westminster, leaving then behind him the
Character among the Vertuosi of a very good Algebrest, and an excellent
Musician, having composed several things of that faculty. In 1652 J. Pell
returned into England, and two years after Oliver Lord Protector sent him Envoy
to the Protestant Cantons of Switzerlandt, where he chiefly resided at Zurich.
He was sent with the Title of Ablegatus, but afterward he had order to
continue there under the Title of Resident: and by that Title he was known till
hi^ Return into England a little before Oliver's death, an. 1658; at which time
it was vulgarly known among the Royalists, that in the said Employment he had
acted nothing to the injury of the Church of England. After his Majesty's
Restoration he took holy Orders from Dr. Sanderson B. of Lincoln, had procured
for him by Dr. Sheldon B. of Land. the Parsonage of Fobbing in Essex an. 1661,
and two years after the Parsonage of Lainden with the Chapel of Bartelsdon
annexed, in the same County. After the said Bishop was translated to Canterb^^y
he became one of his Chaplains, being then Doct. of Div. and expected soon
after to be made a Dean, but being not a person of activity, as others, who
mind not learning, are, could never rise higher than a Rector. The truth is, he
was a shiftless man as to worldly affairs, and his Tenants and Relations dealt
so unkindly with him, that they cozened him of the profits of his Parsonages,
and kept him so indigent, that he warned necessaries* even Paper and Ink, to
his dying day. This learned and curious person has written (1) Controversia
cum Christiano Longemontano de vera circuli mensura. Amst. 1647. qu. (2) An
Idea of Mathematics Land. 1651. in tw. written to Sam. Hartlib Esque and
printed at the end of The reformed School written by Jo. Dur^e. It was before
printed in Engl. and Lat. (3) A Table of ten thousand squa^e numbers, namely of
all the square numbers between O* and an hundred millions, and of their sides
or roots, which are all the whole numbers between O and ten thousand. With an
appendix concerning the endings, or last figures of all square numbers. Land.
1672, fol. etc. He has also succinctly and clearly demonstrated the second and
tenth book of Euclid, which is in MS. in the (...) of the Lord Brereton in
Cheshire, as also Archimedes his (...) and the greatest part of Diophantus his
six books of Arithme^^k Which last is done more and better, than was before
done by a certain French man. Both which are in the aforesaid Library. He also
published a little Anonymous Exercitation concerning Easter; and at the
instance of Sir Charles Scarborough did demonstrate the proportion of the
Diameter to the Circumference, and shows the (...) why (...) did use those two
numbers. The (...) written in High Dutch by Rhonnius sometimes (...) is mostly
also his (Dr. Pell's) His (...) is also extant, and a Letter relating to the
(...) Hamburgh by (...) He was the first Inventor of that excellent way or
method of the marginal working in Algebra, and was a great advancer of some
things pertaining thereunto, and the mathematical Faculty. At length after he
had spent his last days in great obscurity, and had been once or twice cast
into Prison for debt, (with shame be it spoken to the great Virtuosi of this
age) died in Diet street in the Parish of S. Giles in the fields near London,
in the house of one Mr. Cothorne a Reader in the Church there, on Saturday 12
Dec, 1685, and was buried by the charity of Dr. Rich. Busby Schoolmaster of the
Coll. School at Westminster. and Dr. Joh. Sharp Minister of the said Church of S.
Giles, in the Vault under part of the said Church, commonly called the Vicars
or Rectors Vault. His Books and, Papers came after his death into the hands of
the said Busby; among which is the last thing that he wrote, The Tables (which
are, (according to his promise in the last line of his printed Tables of
squares) drawn up and finished; and which Sir Cyrill Wych when President of the
Royal Society, did license for the Press. There only wants a leaf or two for
the explanation of the use of them, which his death has prevented. See more in
Tho Branker among the Writers in the second Vol. an. 1676.

Creations.
Dec. 17. Edmund Wright of Chapter Chapter was actually created Master of Arts in the
house of Congregation; which is all I know of him.

Georg. Alberti of Wad. Coll. was created Mast. of Arts the same day; which is
all I know of him also, only that he had been lately a Student in the
University of Heidelberg in Germany, and that he was forced to leave that
place, because of the Wars in that Country.

An. Dom. 1632.
An. 8 Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud. Bishop of London.

Vicechanc. Brian Duppa D. D. and Dean of Chapter Chapter Jul. 19.

Proct. Rich. Chaworth of Chapter Chapter Joh. Meredith of Alls. Coll. April 11.


Bach. of Arts.
April 26. John Warner Rich. Hayter Joh. Charlton of Magd. Hall.


The last of these three, who was Son of Rob. Charlton Esquire; was born in London,
and much about the time that he took the degree of B. of A. was entered a
Student of Lincolns Inn, of which he became a Barrister and a Counselor of
some note. After the Restoration of K. Chapter 2. an. 1660, he was created
Sergeant at Law, and in the year following being elected a Burgess for Ludlow
in Shropshire to serve in that Parliament that began at Westminster 8 of May,
was made Deputy for Sir Geffry Palmer Chief Justice of Chester, by the name of
Job Charlton of Ludford in Herefordshire Esque and in October. the same year
(1661) was made the first Judge of the Council of Wales and Marches of the
same. In 1662, he being then a Knight, was made Chief Justice of Chester, and
on the 5 February 1672 he was elected Speaker of the House of Commons in the
place of Sir Edw. Turner Knight. At which time he spoke two Speeches to his
Majesty and Parliament upon his admission to that Office, which were soon after
printed in folio papers. On the 15 of the said month, he gave up the said
honorable office, under pretense of indisposition of body: yet a certain (...)
Writer tells us, that he (whom he calls a dull welsh Judge) had 500 l. per an.
for giving it up; at which time succeeded Edw. Seymour Esquire. In the latter end
of April 1680, he was constituted one of the Justices of the Common Pleas:
whereupon his Chief Justiceship of Chester was conferred upon Sir George
Jeffries, Recorder of London. Afterward he was made Chief Justice of Chester
again, and was living in 1688, and perhaps may be still, being a great friend
to the Chapter of England.

May 12. Will* Thomas of Jesus Coll. -- He was afterward B. of Worcester.

June 7. John Bishop of Ball. Coll. -- See among the Masters an. 1635.

11. Joh. Owen of Qu. 21. Charles Hoole of Linc. Tho. More of Mert. Coll.


July 5. Henry Killigrew of Chapter Chapter Franc. Goldsmith of S. Joh. Coll.

Oct. 20. Hen. Bignell of S. Mary's Hall. Hen. Bridgman of Oriel Coll.

The first of these two was originally of Brasn. Coll. the other was afterward
of the same Coll.

25. Will. Air of Magd. Hall.

Dec. 4. George Ashwell of Wadh. Randal Sanderson of Qu. Coll.


Of the last of these two you may see more among the Masters in 1636.

Feb. 27. Franc. Woodcock of Brasn. Coll.

All which, except J^b Cha^lton, I. Bishop and R. Sanderson, will be mentioned
at large elsewhere.

Adm. 198.

Bach. of Law.
Nov. 9. Rob. Price of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Bishop of Fernes and
Leighlin in Ireland.

27. Will. Fuller of St. Edm. Hall. -- He was also afterward a Bishop in
Ireland, and at length Bishop of Lincoln.

Besides these two, were admitted nine more, among whom were Giles Sweit of St.
Mary's Hall, Justinian Lewin of Pemb. Coll. and John March of St. Edmunds Hall,
which last I take to be the same Joh. March who afterward published several
things of the common Law. Qu.

Mast. of Arts.
May 8. Constantine Jessop of Jesus Coll.

June 5. Clem. Barksdale of Glouc. Hall. Thom. Powell of Jes. Coll.

26. Franc. Roberts of Trin. July 5. Obadiah Grew of Ball. Coll.

Admitted 152.

Bach. of Phys.
But two were this year admitted, of whom Thomas Simpson of Chapter Chapter was one,
and one admitted to practice in the same faculty.

Bach. of Div.
May 2. Joh. Gumbleden of Chapter Chapter

9. Thom. Wetherell Joh. Strickland Joh. Ellis of Jes. Coll. of Qu. Coll.


The first of these three (Th. Wetherell) who was a Cumberland Man born, and
eminent for his knowledge in the Greek tongue, wrote Radices Linguae Graecae,
which are put at the end of one of the editions of Jo. Riders Dictionary. One
Tho. Wetherell Bac. of Div. published five Sermons in 1635. But he is not the
same with the former, as the Seniors of Queens Coll. tell me.

June 30. Bruno Ryves of Magd. July 6. Joh. Lewgar of Trin. Coll.

Oct. 23. George Griffith of Chapter Chapter

Feb. 23. Alex. Gross of Exet. Coll.

Besides these were nineteen more admitted, of whom Thom. Cook of Brasn. Coll.
was one, being then accounted a most learned Divine. He was after the
restoration of K. Chapter 2. made one of the Vicars of Bampton in Oxfordshire, and
Archdeacon of that part of Shropshire which is in the Diocese of Hereford, in
the place, as it seems, of Dr. Morgan Godwin. You are now to understand, that
one Tho. Cook Bach. of Div. wrote a book entit. Episcopacy asserted as it now
stands established in our Church and Commonwealth, etc. Land. 1641. qu. Which
Th. Cook having been bred, as I conceive, in Cambridge, and afterward
beneficed in the East parts of England, he is not to be taken to be the same
with the former of Brasnose, who afterward See in Hist. and Antiq. Univ. Oxon.
lib. 1. p. 341. ^.
was a Covenanteer, and never lived in those parts, or, tho very able,
published any thing. He died 6. Apr. 1669. aged 73, and was buried in the
Church at Bampton: whereupon his Vicaridge and Archdeaconry were conferred on
Steph. Philipps M. of A. of Brasnose, who married his only Daughter and Heir.

Doct. of Law.
June 30. Giles Sweit of St. Mary's Hall, lately of Oriel College accumulated
the Degrees in the Civil Law. -- He was afterward Principal of St. Albans
Hall, Dean of the Arches, and a Knight; and dying 13. Sept. 1672. was buried
the 18. day of the same month in the Church of Barnelmes in Surrey.

July 4. Alexander Hyde Edward Mottershead of New Coll.


Doct. of Phys.
July 4. Thomas Simpson of Chapter Chapter who accumulated the Degrees in Physic. --
He was a learned Physician, but whether he has published any thing I cannot
tell.

Doct. of Div.
June 2. Rob. Burhill of C. C. 21. Tho. Lushington of Pemb. 25. Sam. Seward of
Linc. 30. Roll. Chedell of Jesus Coll.

The two first of these were Writers, and the last an Accumulator.

Incorporations.
Apr. 17. Joh. Macubie a Scot, Master of Arts of the University of St. Andrew
in Scotland.

May...John Chamberlayne M. A. of Cambr.

October.... James Morecraft Bach. of Arts of St. Leonards Coll. in the said
University of St. Andrew.

March 13. Sir Will. Fleetwood Knight, controller of Woodstock Park in
O^fordshire, (Brother to Sir George Fleetwood a Baron of Sweeden) was
incorporated Mast. of Arts as he had stood at Cambridge.

In the latter end of this year (the day, or month occurs not) were
incorporated Peter the Son of Rob. Salmon of Essex and John Kirton, both
Doctors of Physic of the University of Padua. Of Peter Salmon I know nothing,
only that a Doctor of his Surname died at London in Nov. 1675: whom I take to
be the same with Dr. Rob. Salmon Author of Synopsis Medicinae, etc. and other
things. As for Kirton he spent most of his time afterward in Italy, assisted
Sir Robert Dudley Duke of Northumberland (to whom he was Physician) in his
Chimical operations, and was living in Florence, where he was much resorted to
for his practice, in June 1673, aged 70 years or more.

About the same time also (in Jan. I think) one Alexander Gross M. A. of
Cambridge was incorporated, and soon after took the Degree of Bach. of Div.

Creations.
March 13. John Oxenstierne a noble Sweed, Baron of Kemetso, Lord of Fiholme
and Tydoon, being adorned with a scarlet gown and hood, and presented in
Convocation by the said Sir Will. Fleetwood, was actually created Master of
Arts with great observance and solemnity. -- He was the Son of grave John
Oxenstierne now Ambassador to the King of England from his Father Axel
Oxenstierne the grand Chancellor and General-director of the Sweedish affairs.

Gustavus Horn another noble Sweed Lord of Kamhas and Purkala, being adorned
with scarlet as the former was, and presented by the said Sir Will. Fleetwood,
was actually created M. of A. in the same Convocation.

When the Vicechancellour was to admit these two Nobles, he openly spoke these
words to the large auditory. Gradum ambiunt Magistri in artibus duo nobiles
juven^s, quorum alterius pater, alterius patruus, pro aris and focis, pro
religione, pro liberate, denique totius Germaniae, tanquam duo fulmina bel^i,
in terrorem domus Austriae jamdiu emicuerunt. They were very nobly treated,
while they continued here, had rich gloves presented to them in the name of the
University, and testimonials of their Degree very fairly written and adorned,
with the seal of each, put into a silver box.

An. Dom. 1633.
An. 9. Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud Bishop of London, who, in Sept. this year, became Archb. of
Canterbury.

Vicechanc. Dr. Br. Duppa again, Jul. 23.

Proct. Tho. White of C. C. Coll. Freeman Page of Ex. Coll. May 2.


Bach. of Mus.
July 5. John Okever of New College, Organist and Vicar choral of the Church of
Wells. -- He has composed several Aires of 2 and three parts for the Violin
and Viol, which, I think, are extant. He succeeded in the said Organists place
one Rich. Brown, an eminent Musician, 16. Feb. 1619.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 12. Paul Vicount Bayning of Chapter Chapter -- He was Son of Paul late Vicount
Bayning of Sudbury, and dying at Bentley-hall in Essex, on the eleventh of June
1638, was a little Pamphlet soon after published intit. Death repealed by a
thankful memorial sent from Chapter Chapter in Oxon. celebrating the noble deserts of
the right hon. Paul late Vicount Bayning, etc. printed ^t Oxon 1638. in qu. The
chief Poets that had a hand in it, were, Will. Strode Orator of the University,
Will. Burton alias Democritus Junior, Will. Cartwright, Rich. West, Rob. Meade,
H. Greisley, John Fell, Mart. Llewellin, etc. all Chapter Chapter Men.

May 11. Joh. Priaulx of Magd. Hall, afterward of Merton College.

14. Nich. Lockyer of New Inn. Hen. Glue of Ball. Coll.

The last was afterward a Minister, changed his Religion for that of Rome, was
made Priest, and known to some by the name of Peter Glue.

16. Abrah. Wright of St. John's Coll.

28. Thom. Gilbert of St. Edm. Oct. 24. Nath. Newbury of Magd. Hall.

Of the last you may see more among the Masters, an. 1636.

Nov. 19. Andrew Dominick of Trinity, afterward of Pembroke, Coll. -- See more
among the Creations of Doctors of Divinity an. 1661.

Jan. 14. Rich. Samwaies of C. C. Coll.

Feb. 4. Rob. Levinz of Linc. Coll. -- See among the Creations of Doctors of
Law, an. 1642.

11. John Bishop of Heart hall. -- See among the Masters 1635.

All which Bachelaurs, except Bayning, Glue, Newbury and Bishop will be
mentioned elsewhere.

Adm. 243. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
June 25. John Blencow of St. John's Coll. -- This Person who had been elected
Scholar of the said Coll. from Merchant Tailors School, did afterward publish
St. Michaels combat with the Devil, Sermon. on the 9. verse of St. Judes
Epistle. Land. 1640. qu. and perhaps other things.

Besides him were admitted eight Bachelaurs of the same faculty, among whom was
Will. Stone of St. Edm. Hall, afterward Principal of New Inn, and a most
excellent Preacher and Canonist, but not to be understood to be the same Will.
Stone who was Author of The institution of the Passover. pr. 1622, and of one
or more Sermons.

Mast. of Arts.
May 9. Geor. Kendall of Ex. Edm. Gayton of St. Joh. Coll.


14. Henry Jeanes Will. Durham of New Inn.


Jun. 27. Thomas Barlow Gerard Langbaine of Qu. Coll.


July 1. Franc. Cheynell of Mert. 3. Joshua Tooker of Exet. Coll.

The last became Archdeacon of Barnstaple about 1663.

4. Joh. Hulett of New Inn. Tho. Horn of Magd. Hall.

Oct. 23. Nich. Monk of Wadh. 24. William Stamp of Pemb. Dec. 17. Thom.
Widows of Magd. Jan. 17. George Hall of Exet. Coll.

Adm. 196. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Phys.
Six were admitted this year, of whom Charles Bostock of Chapter Chapter was the first,
but whether any of them were writers I find not. On the 3. March, Tho. Trapham
was licensed to practice surgery, and accordingly did practice that Art in
these parts for some time. See more among the Bachelaurs of Physic an. 1649.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 3. Rich. Washington of Vniv. Coll. -- He became the eighth Provost of
Trin. Coll. near Dublin in Ireland, upon the resignation of Will. Chapel, on
the first of Aug. 1640. After the rebellion broke out in that Country he
retired to Oxon again, and was readmitted to his Fellowship of Vniv. Coll. by
the Master and Fellows thereof, an. 1644, submitted to the Parliamentarian
Visitors, an. 1648, and was the only Man of the old stock that was then left
therein. Afterward going to London for a time, died in Fetter, alias Feuter,
lane near to Fleetstreet, an. 1651. (in the Summer time) whereupon his body was
buried in St. Dunstans Church in the West.

Apr. 13. James Smith of Line. June 17. Nath. Holmes of Exet. Coll.

July 3. Tho. Twittie of Oriel Coll. -- This Person who was a Ministers Son of
Worcestersh. became a Student of the said Coll. of Or. an. 1611. aged 17 years,
and after he had taken the Degrees in Arts, became successively Schoolmaster of
Evesham in his own Country, Minister of St. Laurence Church there, Vicar of
North Leigh in Oxfordshire beneficed afterward again in his own Country, and
at length became Minister of Kingston upon Thames in Surrey. He has published
(1) Ad clerum pro forma, concio habita in templo B. Mariae Oxon 13. Mar. 1634,
in 1. Pet. 3. 8. Ox. 1640. qu. (2) The Art of Salvation, Sermon at St. Mary's
in Oxon on. Acts 6. 30. 31. -- Printed 1643. qu. He died at Kingston
beforementioned, in the latter end of the year 1667, and was there buried.

July 10. George Hughes of Pembr. Nov. 7. Rich. Toogood of Oriel Coll.

9. Joh. Sedgwick of Magd. Hall.

Jan. 28. Hen. Hammond of Magd. Coll.

Admitted 24.

Doct. of Law.
Jun. 3. Will. Nevill of M^rt. Coll. Tho. Temple of St. Edm. Hall.

The first of these two was Chancellor of Chichester, and both the Sons of
Knights.

27. Joseph Martin of Wadham Coll.

Doct. of Physic.
Jun. 21. Edw. Dawson of Line. Anton. Salt^r of Exet. Coll.


Both which were eminent Physicians of their time and age.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 3. Hen. Glemham of Trin. 13. Peter Heylyn of Magd. June...Rich. Down of
Ex. Coll.

July 16. Rich. Baylie President of St. John's Coll. -- On the 7. of Feb. 1627.
this Dr. Baylie who was then Bach. of Div. and one of the Kings Chaplains, as
also a Dignitary in the Church of St. David, was collated to the Archdeaconry
of Nottingham upon the promotion of Dr. Jos. Hall to the Sea of Exeter. Which
Dignity he resigning, was succeeded by Dr. Will. Robinson, (Brother by the
Mothers side to Dr. Will. Laud Archb. of Cant.) who was installed therein 25.
of May 1635: At which time Dr. Baylie was Dean of Salisbury, in the place of
Dr. Edm. Mason, whom I shall anon mention in the Incorporation. He died in a
good old age at Salisbury, (after he had suffered much for his loyalty to K.
Chapter 1.) on the 27. of July 1667, and was buried at the upper end of St. John's
Coll. Chap. on the right side of the grave of Dr. Will. Juxon sometimes Archb.
of Cant. In the year 1662, he built a little Chapel at his own charge (and not
at that of St. Joh. Coll. as, by a mistake, is elsewhere In Hist. and Antiq.
Univ. Ox. lib. 2. p. 312.
told you) situat and being on the North side of the said Chapel of St. John's,
with a vault underneath. In which Chapel, was soon after his death, a stately
Monument erected, with the Effigies of him the said Dr. Baylie lying thereon,
curiously engraven in alabaster from head to foot, and much resembling him in
his last days. One Richard Baylie sometimes Minister of Crawley in Sussex, wrote
The Shepherds star, or Ministers guide. Conc. ad Cler. in Apoc. 1. 16. Land.
1640. qu. At which time, the Author, as it seems, was dead. But where he was
educated, being quite different from the former, I know not.

July 16. Thomas Lawrence of Alls. Pet. Wentworth of Ball. Coll.


The first of these two, was afterward Master of Balliol College, and Margaret
Professor of this University. The other who was an Esquires Son of
Northamptonshire and Fellow of the said College of Balliol, was afterward made
Dean of Armagh by Tho. Earl of Strafford Lord Deputy of Ireland. But when the
rebellion broke out in that Kingdom, he lost all, and fled into England; where
living obscurely till the restoration of K. Chapter 2. refused to return to his
Deanery, or be made a Bishop there, and accepted only of the rectory of Haseley
in Oxfordshire. He died in the City of Bathe 22. July 1661. aged 60 years, and
was buried in the Church of S. Pet. and S. Paul there, on the north side of the
stately tomb of Dr. James Mountague sometimes Bishop of the said City. In his
Epitaph engraven on a brass plate, fastened to a plain white stone laying over
his grave, he is thus charactarized. Patriciorum proles, doctrinae maritus. --
Summus Hyberniae Decanus, Angliae Praeconum Primas, etc. One Peter Wentworth
who was Rector of Much Bromley in Essex and Chaplain to Thomas Lord Darcie,
has published A Sermon on Psalm. 2. 10. 11. Land. 1587. in oct. and is the
same, if I mistake not, who wrote An exhortation to Qu. Elizabeth, and discourse
of the true and lawful successor. printed in 1598. oct. But whether he was of
this University, I cannot yet find, or whether he took any Degree, or was
incorporated.

July 19. John Elly of Merton Coll. who accumulated. -- In 1623. he was made
Canon of Windsore in the place of Dr. Thomas Oats deceased.

20. Thom. Walker Master of Vniv. Coll. and Pre^. of Litton in the Church of
Wells.

Oct. 7. Arth. Wingham of St. Joh. Feb. 27. Hugh Williams of Jes. Coll.

This Dr. Williams who was Father to Sir Will. Williams of Greys Inn Baronet,
and several times Speaker of the House of Commons, was now, or afterward,
beneficed at Kantrisant in the Country of Anglesie, where he died in 1670.

Incorporations.
May 9. Jam. Howson M. of A. of Cambridge.

Oct. (24) Will. Hatton Doctor of Physic of the University of Padua.

Sam. Bispham a Lancashire Man born, and Doct. of Phys. of the University of
Leyden in Holland, was incorporated about the same time. -- Afterward he
practiced his faculty in London, where he died in 1664.

Feb. 6. David Cunningham M. of A. of the Univ. of Glascow in Scotland. -- He
had lately received holy orders from James Spotswood Bishop of Clogher, in the
Church of Clogher in Ireland.

This year was a supplicate made for one Edmund Mason D. of D. to be
incorporated, but whether he was really so, it appears not. All that I can say
of him is, that he was Tutor to Prince Charles, that he became Dean of
Salisbury 20. March 1629, on the promotion of Dr. John Bowl or Bowls to the Sea of Rochester, and dying in his house in Petty-France in the City of
Westminster, on the 24. of March 1634 was buried in the North cross part of the
Abbey Church of St. Peter, near to the Convocation House.

Creations.
Apr. 1. Thomas Turner Bachelaur of Divinity lately Fellow of St. John's Coll.
and now one of his Majesty's Chaplains, was actually created Doct. of Divinity,
being by his Majesty's command to go with him in the next month into Scotland.
-- This worthy Doctor, who was Son of Thomas Turner of Heckfield in Hampshire,
Alderman and Mayor of Reading in Berkshire, was born in the Parish of St. Giles
within the said borough, and admitted Scholar of St. John's Coll. in 1610, being
their put under the tuition of Mr. Will. Juxon, who was afterward Archbishop
of Canterbury. After he had entered into holy orders, he became a practical
useful Preacher, which he kept up to the very last, and was much resorted to by
those, whose principles were orthodox. Afterward he was made domestic
Chaplain to Bishop Laud, Chaplain in ordinary to King Char. 1. Canon
residentiary of St. Paul, and Dean of Rochester, in the place of Dr. Hen. King
promoted to the Sea of Chichester; in which Dignity he was installed 26. Feb.
1641. Soon after he was sequestered from his Church of St. Olave in Southwark,
plundered, carried thence Prisoner by a Party of Horse, and at length forced to
fly to save his life. In 1643 he had the Deanery of Canterbury bestowed on him
by his Majesty, on the death of Dr. George Eglionby; so that he constantly
adhering to the cause of his Master in the worst of his calamities,
particularly at Hampton Court, and afterward in the Isle of Wight, suffered
afterward great misery himself during the times of Usurpation, which he bore
with a good courage, being then, as always before, esteemed a great exemplar of
humility, most Christian simplicity, and of most fervent zeal to the Church.
After the restoration of King Charles 2. he contented himself only with those
spiritualities which he before had lost for his loyalty, and dying on the
eighth day of October. 1672 aged 81 or thereabouts, was buried on the 17 of the
same month within the Cathedral Church of Canterbury. At which time Dr. Peter
du Moulin preaching a funeral Sermon, did speak honorably of the Person that
then laid dead before him; to which Sermon, being extant, I refer the reader.
He the said Dr. Turner has published A Sermon preached at Whitehall, on Matthew.
9. 13. Land. 1635. qu. and perhaps other things, but such I have not yet seen.
He left behind him several Sons (which he had by his Wife Margaret, Daughter of
Sir Francis Windebanke Knight, sometimes Secretary of State to King Charles 1.)
of whom Francis was one, now Bishop of Ely.

Apr. 3. Rich. Doughtie Fellow of Alls. Coll. was actually created M. of A.
which is all I know of him.

An. Dom. 1634.
An. 10. Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Will. Land Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. Rob. Pinke D. of D. Warden of New Coll. July 26.

Proct. Herbert Pelham of Magd. Coll. John Warren of Wadham Coll. Apr. 16.


Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 18. Thom. Gawen 24. George Kendall of New Coll. Inn.


June 18. Josias How of Trin. Coll. -- See among the created Bachelaurs of Div.
an. 1646.

20. Rob. Waring 21. Hen. Gregory of Chapter Chapter

Of the last of these two, you may see more among the Masters, an. 1637.

July 8. John Maplet of Chapter Chapter

July 9. Ralph Brideoake Nov. 11. Matthew Smalwood of Brasn. Coll.

The first of these last two was afterward Bishop of Chichester. 20. Rich.
Harwood of Magd. Hall.

Jan. 15. Hen. Janson of Ball. afterward of Allsouls, Coll.

24. Hen. Hall of Lincoln Christopher Merret of Oriel Coll.


The first of these two was afterward Bishop of Killala and Achonry in
Ireland. The other was afterward of Gloucester Hall and an eminent Physician.

Feb. 6. Nathan. Heigmore of Trin. Job. Fountain of C. C. Coll.


The last of these two was originally of Linc. Coll. See more among the Masters
of Art in 1637.

Feb.... Will. Tailor of Magd. Hall.

All these Bachelaurs, except Henry Gregory, will be mentioned elsewhere.

Admitted 216. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Nineteen were admitted this year, among whom George Wild of St. John's Coll.
was one, Feb. 7. afterward Bishop of Londonderry in Ireland, as I shall tell
you at large in the next Volume.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 24. Tho. Wood of Chapter Chapter

29. Rich. Allein of New Inn, lately of St. Alb. Hall.

Jun. 11. John Wilkins Nich. Clagett Walt. Bushnell of Magd. Hall.


The first of these there was afterward Bishop of Chester, as I should have
told you under the year 1631, and Clagett had before, been of Mert. Coll.

14. Tim. Tailor late of Qu. Coll. now of St. Mary's Hall.

June 28. Dan. Whitby of Brasn. July 2. Joh. Toy of Pemb. Coll.

Oct. 29. Christoph. Fowler of St. Edm. Hall.

Dec. 5. Will. Rowland of Exet. Coll.

Jan. 29. John Warner Rich. Hayter of Magd. Coll.


Feb. 5. Will. Thomas of Jes. Coll.

Admitted 150.

Bach. of Phys.
Oct. 10. Will. Denton of Magd. Hall. -- Besides him were five more admitted,
(the first of whom was John Dixon of Gloc. hall, and the last John Aubrey of
Magd. Coll.) but not one of them was afterward a Writer.

Bach. of Div.
Mar. 26. John Hoffman of Exeter Coll. -- He was the Son of John Hoffman a
Merchant of Elsentia in the Palatinat of Germany, was about this time Rector of
Wotton near to Wodstock in Oxfordshire; which place he kept during the time of
the rebellion, being himself a Presbyterian, and published The Principles of
Christian Religion in 30 questions and answers. Land. 1674. oct. and perhaps
other things, but such I have not yet seen. He died soon after and was buried
at Wotton beforementioned.

June 26. Edm. Staunton of C. C. Coll.

Admitted 12.

Doct. of Law.
July 5. George Ryves of Alls. 23. Tho. Heath of Merton Coll.

The last of these two, was about this time Chancellor of Peterborough, where
continuing till that office was annulled and all matters relating to the Church
tending to ruin, he went beyond the Seas, changed his Religion for that of
Rome, and lived ever after, especially in his last days, in so great poverty at
Gant in Flanders, that he was mostly sustained by the alms of the Monastery of
English Nuns there, and partly by the contribution of some charitable Persons
in that town. He died on the second day of Febr. 1680. according to the account
there followed, and was buried by the charity of others (having nothing of his
own) in the Parish Church of St. Nicholas near to the said Monastery.

Doct. of Phys.
Oct. 10. Will. Denton of Magd. hall. -- He accumulated the Degrees in Physic,
and was the only proceeder in his faculty this year. He is now living in
Convent-garden near Land. 1690.

Doct. of Div.
Mar. 26. Morgan Win of Alls. Coll. -- In the beginning of Dec. 1629. he
became Archdeacon of Lincoln, but in whose room I cannot tell, for between the
death of Dr. John Hills which happened in 1626, to Nov. 1629 that Dignity was
enjoyed by one, as yet unknown to me. This Dr. Win who was Rector of Scotter
in Lincolnshire died (and was buried at Scotter as it seems) an. 1644.
Whereupon Raphael Throckmorton succeeded him, an. 1645.

May 10. John Morris Hebrew Professor of the University and Canon of Chapter Chapter
sometimes Chaplain of Alls. Coll.

14. Anth. Clopton of C. C. Coll. June 25. Gilb. Sheldon of Alls. Coll.
Compounders.

26. Edm. Staunton of C. C. C. -- He accumulated the Degrees in Divinity.

July 1. Thom. Leigh Rich. Parr of Bras. Coll.


The first of these two was a Compounder, the other was afterward Bishop of
the Isle of Man.

5. Will. Page of Alls. Coll.

10. Edw. Willimot of Magd. Hall.

26. George Eglionby of Chapter Chapter -- This Person who was sometimes Master of
Westminster School, and afterward Tutor to Geor. the young Duke of Buckingham,
was made Canon or Preb. of the twelfth stall in St. Peter's Church in
Westminster, on the death of his Uncle Dr. John King, an. 1638, Dean of
Canterbury in the place of Dr. Isaac Bargrave deceased, an. 1642 and dying in
the beginning of Nov. 1643 was buried on the eleventh of the same month in the
Isle joining on the South side of the Choire of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

Nov. 4. Geor. Griffith of Chapter Chapter

Incorporations.
May 4. Robert Bostock D. of D. of the University of St. Andrew in Scotland. --
This Robert Bostock who was originally of Trin. Coll. in Oxon, was installed
Archdeacon of Suffolk, in the place of Dr. Rob. Pearson deceased, on the fourth
day of Feb. an. 1639, and dying soon after, Richard Mileson M. of A. succeeded.
Dr. Bostock also was Canon residentiary of Chichester, where dying in Nov.
1640, was there buried.

July... Roger Goodiere Will. Goddard John Hodge Doct. of Phys. of Leyden Padua
Mountpelier in Holland. Italy. France.





In the Reign of K. Jam. 1. lived in London one Will. Goddard a fantastical
Poet, (among the Templers a sit seems) Author of (1) A mastiff whelp with other
ruff-Island-like curs, from among the Antipedes alias London, in 85 Satyrs (2)
Dogs from the Antipedes, in 41. Satyrs. -- Both printed at London in qu. in the
Reign of K. Jam. 1. But these I cannot say were made by Will. Goddard, who was
afterward Doct. of Phys.

Oct. 21. John Ellis D. D. of the University of S. Andrew, lately of Jesus
Coll. in Oxon.

Jan. 29. Joh. Spencer Doct. of Phys. of Leyden.

One Rich. Lloyd M. of A. of Cambridge, was incorporated this year, but the
day, or month, when, I know not, nor any thing else of him.

An. Dom. 1635.
An. 11 Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. Dr. Pinke of New Coll. again, Jul. 22.

Proct. Joh. Edwards of S. Joh Coll. Guy Carleton of Qu. Coll.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 23. Will. Creed of S. Joh. Jan. 4. Anth. Hodges of New Coll.

Of the last of these two you may see more among the Masters, an. 1638.

16. Rich. Whitlock of Magd. Hall, afterward of Alls. Coll.

July 4. Franc. Bampfield of Wadh. Obadiah Walker of Vniv. 11. Thomas Smith of
Queens Coll.



The last was afterward Bishop of Carlisle.

Oct. 15. Joh. Godolphin of Gloc. 20. Nath. Hardy of Magd. Rich. Hook of New
Inn Hall.



One Rich. Hook M. of A. and Minister of Lowdham in Nottinghamshire has
written The laver of regeneration, and the cup of salvation, in two treatises
concerning Baptism and the Lords Supper, etc. Land. 1653. Whether this Rich.
Hook, who has also one or more Sermons extant, besides the said book, be the
same with Rich. Hook of New Inn who was a Northamptonshire man born, but not
M. of A. of this University, I cannot yet tell. One Rich. Hook Vicar of Halyfax
in Yorkshire, is Author of The Nonconformists Champion, etc. pr. 1682. oct.

Oct. 23. Obadiah How Nov. 28. Hen. Wilkinson jun. of Magd. Hall.

Dec. 3. Rob. Carry Jun. 19. Rich. Burney of C. C. Coll.

All these, except Hodges and Hook, will be mentioned elsewhere.

Adm. 234.

Bach. of Law.
Nine were admitted this year, but not one of them was afterward a Writer or a
Bishop.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 15. Will. Cartwright of Chapter Chapter Joh. Bishop of Ball. Coll.

One John Bishop was Author of The survey of Man, on Job 14. 10. -- printed
1652. qu. and perhaps of other things. Whether this Joh. Bishop be the same
with Joh. Bishop of Ball. Coll. M. of A. before mentioned, or the same with
another Jo. Bishop who was Bach. of Arts of Heart Hall and a Wiltshire man born,
I cannot tell unless I could see The survey of man* which I have not yet done.

May 12. Humph. Lloyd of Oriel Coll.

Jun. 4. Will. Air of Magd. Hall.

16. Joh. Michel of Qu. Coll. Esquire; a Compounder, which is all I know of him.

27. George Ashwell of Wadh. John Owen of Queens Coll.


Oct. 15. Dudley Digges of Allsoules, lately of Vniv. Coll.

Jan. 19. Edward Gamage of S. Edm. Hall. -- I take him to be the same Gamage,
who was afterward Archdeacon of Land^ff, in which dignity he was succeeded by
Dr. George Bull an. 1686.

Adm. 128.

Bach. of Physic.
Seven were admitted, of whom Steph. Bridges of C. C. Coll. was the senior, and
Leonard Traherne of Pemb. Coll. was the junior, but not one of them can I yet
find, that was then, or afterward a Writer.

Bach. of Div.
June 6. Will. Evans of S. Mary's Hall. -- He had before this time published
The translation of the book of nature into the use of grace, Sermon on Romans 12.
4, 5. Oxon 1633. qu. Which is all I know of him only that he was living in 1660.

8. Edw. Stanley of New Jul. 22. Joh. Gauden of Ward. Coll.

Dec. 12. Joseph Henshaw of Magd. Hall.

Adm. 7.

Doct. of Law.
Jun. 13. George Riddell or Riddle of Qu. Coll.

Dec. 8. James Littleton of Alls. Coll. -- When he was Bach. of Law he
succeeded Dr. Christop. Helm in the Chancellourship of the Diocese of
Worcester, and dying in the times of Usurpation, was succeeded in that office
by Tim. Baldwin LL. D.

Oliver Lloyd of Alls. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Not one Doctor of Physic was admitted this year.

Doct. of Div.
Jun. 8. Edward Stanley of New Dec. 8. John Littleton of Jes. Coll.

The first of these two accumulated the degrees in Divinity.

Incorporations.
Jun. 16. John Bugges a Londoner born, and Doctor of Phys. of Leyden.

Jun.... Matthew Thoris M. of A. of Franaker in Westfriezen. -- This person who
was formerly of Pemb. Coll. was also a Londoner born, and Son of Mich. Thoris,
which is all I know of him.

Jul. 10. Joh. Silvius Kentigern. Moravius.

These were both Scots and Masters of Arts of the University of S. Andrew.

July.... Will. Day M. A. of Cambridge. -- He was a Native of Windsore in
Berks, and being educated in Eaton School, was thence transplanted to Kings
Coll. in the said University. Afterward he became Minister of Mapledurham near
Henley in Oxfordshire, and Author of An exposition of the book of the Prophet
Isaiah. Land. 1654, fol. and of other things.

Oct. 20. Jeremiah Tailor M. A. of Cambr. soon after Fellow of Alls. Coll. --
He will be at large mentioned in the other Volume.

30. Joh. Munlossius M of A. of Bordeaux in France.

This year was incorporated Master of Arts John Milton, not that it appears so
in the Register, for the reason I have told you in the Incorporations 1629, but
from his own mouth to my friend, who was well acquainted with, and had from
him, and from his Relations after his death, most of this account of his life
and writings following. (1) That he was born in Breadstreet within the City of
London, between 6 and 7 a clock in the morning of the ninth of December. an.
1608. (2) That his Father Joh. Milton who was a Scrivner living at the Spread
Eagle The Arms tha^ J^h. Milton did use and seal his Letters with, were Argent
a spread Eagle with two heads gules, legged and break'd sable.
in the said street, was a Native of Halton in Oxfordshire, and his Mother
named Sarah was of the ancient Family of the Bradshaws. (3) That his
Grandfather Milton whose Christian name was John, as he thinks, was an
Under-Ranger or Keeper of the Forest of Shotover near to the said Town of
Halton, but descended from those of his name who have lived beyond all record
at Milton near Halton and Them in Oxfordshire. Which Grandfather being a
zealous Papist, did put away, or, as some say, disinherit, his Son, because he
was a Protestant, which made him retire to London, to seek, in a manner, his
fortune. (4) That he the said John Milton the Author was educated mostly in
Paul's School under Alex. Gill senior, and thence at 15 years of age was sent to
Christ's Coll. in Cambridge, where he was put under the tuition of Will.
Chapel, afterward Bishop of Ross in Ireland, and there, as at School for 3
years before, 'twas usual with him to sit up till midnight at his book, which
was the first thing that brought his eyes into the danger of blindness. By this
his indefatigable study he profited exceedingly, wrote then several Poems,
paraphrased some of David's Psalms, performed the collegiate and academical
exercise to the admiration of all, and was esteemed to be a virtuous and sober
person, yet not to be ignorant of his own parts. (5) That after he had taken
the degrees in Arts, he left the University of his own accord, and was not
expelled for misdemeanors, as his Adversaries have said. Whereupon retiring to
his Fathers house in the Country, he spent some time in turning over Latin and
Greek Authors, and now and then made See in Jo. Milton's book (...) Edit. Hag.
C^m. 1654. p. 61. etc.
excursions into the great City to buy books, to the end that he might be
instructed in Mathematics and Music, in which last he became excellent, and
by the help of his Mathematics could compose a Song or Lesson. (6) That after
five years being thus spent, and his Mother (who was very charitable to the
poor) dead, he did design to travel, so that obtaining the rudiments of the
Ital. Tongue, and Instructions how to demean himself from Sir Hen. Wotton who
delighted in his company, and gave him Letters of commendation to certain
persons living at Venice, he traveled into Italy, an. 1638. (7) That in his
way thither, he touched at Paris, where Joh. Scudamoure Vicount Slego,
Ambassador from K. Chapter 1. to the French King, received him kindly, and by his
means became kuown to Hugo G^otius, then and there Ambassador from the Qu. of
Sweden; but the manners and genius of that place being not agreeable to his
mind, he soon left it. (8) That thence by Geneva and other places of note, he
went into Italy, and through Legorne, Pisa, etc. he went to Florence, where
continuing two months, he became acquainted with several learned men, and
familiar with the choicest Wits of that great City, who introduced and admitted
him into their private Academies, whereby he saw and learned their fashions of
literature. (9) That from thence he went to Sena and Rome, in both which places
he spent his time among the most learned there, Lucas Holsteinius being one;
and from thence he journied to Naples. where he was introduced into the
Acquaintance of Joh. Bapt. Mansus an Italian Marquess (to whom Torquatus Tassus
an Italian Poet wrote his book De amicitia) who showed great civilities to him,
accompanied him to see the rarities of that place, visited him at his Lodgings,
and sent to, the testimony of his great esteem for, him, in this Distich, Vt
men's, forma, decor, facies, mos, si pietas sic.
Non Anglus, verum hercule Angelus ipse fores.


And excused himself at parting for not having been able to do him more honor,
by reason of his resolute owning his (Protestant) Religion: which resoluteness
he using at Rome, many there were that dated not to express their civilities
toward him, which otherwise they would have done: And I have heard it
confidently related, that for his said Resolutions, which out of policy, and
for his own safety, might have been then spared, the English Priests at Rome
were highly disgusted, and it was questioned, whether the Jesuits his
Countrymen there, did not design to do him mischief. Before he left Naples he
returned the Marquess an acknowledgment of his great favors in an elegant copy
of Verses entit. Mansus, which is among the Latin Poems. (10) That from thence
(Naples) he thought to have gone into Sicily and Greece, but upon second
thoughts he continued in Italy, and went to Luca, Bononia, Ferrara, and at
length to Venice; where continuing a month, he went and visited Verona and
Millan. (11) That after he had shipped the books and other goods which he had
bought in his travels, he returned through Lombardy, and over the Alps to Geneva,
where spending some time, he became familiar with the famous Joh. Deodate D. D.
Thence, going through France* he returned home, well fraught with Knowledge and
Manners, after he had been absent one year and three months. (12) That soon
after he settled in an house in S. Brides Churchyard near Fleetstreet in London,
where he instructed in the Lat. Tongue two Youths named John and Edw. Philips,
the Sons of his Sister Anne by her Husband Edward Philips: both which were
afterward Writers, and the eldest principl'd as his Uncle. But the times soon
after changing, and the Rebellion thereupon breaking forth, Milton sided with
the Faction, and being a man of parts, was therefore more capable than another
of doing mischief, especially by his pen, as by those books which I shall anon
mention, will appear. (13) That at first we find him a Presbyterian and a most
sharp and violent opposer of Prelacy, the established ecclesiastical Discipline
and the orthodox Clergy. (14) That shortly after he did set on foot and
maintained very odd and novel Positions concerning Divorce, and then taking
part with the Independents, he became a great Antimonarchist, a bitter Enemy to
K Cb. 1. and at length arrived to that monstrous and unparalled height of
profligate impudence, as in print to justify the most exercable Murder of him
the best of Kings, as I shall anon tell you. Afterward being made Latin
Secretary to the Parliament, we find him a Commonwealths man, a hater of all
things that looked toward a single person, a great reproacher of the
Universities, scholastical degrees, decency and uniformity in the Church. (15)
That when Oliver ascended the Throne, he became the Latin Secretary, and proved
to him very serviceable when employed in business of weight and moment, and did
great matters to obtain a name and wealth. To conclude, he was a person of
wonderful parts, of a very sharp, biting and satirical wit. He was a good
Philosopher and Historian, an excellent Poet, Latinist, Grecian and Hebritian,
a good Mathematician and Musician, and so rarely endowed by nature, that had he
been but honestly principled, he might have been highly useful to that party,
against which he all along appeared with much malice and bitterness. As for the
things which he has published, are these, (1) Of Reformation, touching Church
Discipline in England, and the causes that hitherto have hindered it, etc. Land.
1641. qu. At which time, as before, the Nation was much divided upon the
Controversies about Church Government between the prelatical party, and
Puritans, and therefore Milton did with great boldness and zeal offer his
judgment as to those matters in his said book of Reformation. (2)
Animadversions upon the Remonstrants defense against Smectymnus. Land. 1641.
qu. Which Rem. defense was written (as it is said) by Dr. Jos. Hall Bishop of
Exeter. (3) Apology against the humble Remonstrant. This was written in
vindication of his Animadversions. (4) Against prelatical Episcopacy. This I
have not yet seen. (5) The reason of Church Government; nor this. (6) The
doctrine and discipline of divorce, etc. in two books. Land. 1644-45, qu. To
which is added in some Copies a translation of The judgment of Mart. Bucer
concerning divorce, etc. It must be now known, that after his settlement, upon
his return from his Travels, he in a months time courted, married, and brought
home to his house in London, a Wife from Forsthill lying between Halton and
Oxford, named Mary the Daughter of Mr. -- Powell of that place Gent. But she,
who was very young, and had been bred in a family of plenty and freedom, being
not well pleased with her Husbands retired manner of life, did shortly after
leave him and went back in the Country with her Mother. Whereupon, tho he sent
diverse pressing invitations, yet he could not prevail with her to come back,
till about 4 years after when the Garrison of Ox^n was surrendered (the nighness
of her Fathers house to which having for the most part of the mean time hindered
any communication between them) she of her own accord returned and submitted to
him, pleading that her Mother had been the chief promoter of her frowardness.
But he being not able to bear this abuse, did therefore upon consideration,
after he had consulted many eminent Authors, write the said book of Divorce,
with intentions to be separated from her, but by the compromising of her
Relations the matter did not take effect: so that she continuing with him ever
after till her death, he had several Children by her, of whom Deborah was the
third Daughter, trained up by the Father in Lat. and Greek, and made by him his
Amanuensis. (7) Tetrachordon: Expositions upon the four chief places in
Scripture, which treat on marriage* on Genesis 1. 27, 28. etc. Land. 1646. qu. (8)
Colasterion: A reply to a nameless answer against the doctrine and discipline
of divorce, etc. printed 1645. qu. Upon his publication of the said three books
of Marriage and Divorce, the Assembly of Divines then sitting at Westmirster
took special notice of them, and thereupon, tho the Author had obliged them by
his pen in his defense of Smectymnus and other their Controversies had with the
Bishops, they impatient of having the Clergies jurisdiction (as they reckoned
it) invaded, did, instead of answering, or disproving what those books had
asserted, cause him to be summoned before the House of Lords: but that House,
whether approving the Doctrine, or not favoring his Accusers, did soon dismiss
him. To these things I must add, that after his Majesty's Restoration, when
the subject of Divorce was under consideration with the Lords upon the account
of John Lord Ros or Roos his separation from his Wife Anne Pierpont eldest
Daughter to Henry Marquess of Dorchester, he was consulted by an eminent Member
of that House, as he was about that time by a chief Officer of State, as being
the prime person that was knowing in that affair. (9) Of Education, written or
addressed to Mr. Sam. Hartlib. In this Treatise he prescribed an easy and
delightful method for the training up of Gentry to all sorts of Literature,
that they might at the same time by like degrees advance in virtue and
abilities to serve their Country, subjoyning directions for their obtaining
other necessary or ornamental Accomplishments. And to this end that he might
put it in practice, he took a larger house, where the Earl of Barrimore sent by
his Aunt the Lady Rannelagh, Sir Thomas Gardener of Essex, to be there with
others (besides his two Nephews) under his Tuition. But whether it were that
the tempers of our Gentry would not bear the strictness of his discipline, or
for what other reasons I cannot tell, he continued that course but a while.
(10) Areopagetica: A speech for the liberty of unlicensed printing, to the
Parliament of England. Land. 1644. qu. written to vindicate the freedom of the
Press from the Tyranny of Licensers, who for several Reasons deprive the
public of the benefit of many useful Authors. (11) Poemata: quorum pleraque
intra annum aetatis vigesimum conscripsit author, etc. Land. 1645. oct. (12) A
mask. -- printed 1645. oct. (13) Poems, etc. -- printed the same year. Hitherto
we find him only to have published political things, but when he saw, upon the
coming of K Charles 1. to his Trial, the Presbyterian Ministers clamorously to
assert in their Sermons and Writings the privileges of Kings from all
accountableness, or (to speak in the language of that time) Non-resistance and
Passive Obedience to be the Doctrine of all the reformed Churches (which he
took to be only their malignity against the Independents who had supplanted
them more than for any principles of Loyalty) he therefore to oppose that
Thesis (which as he conceived did encourage all manner of Tyranny) did write
and publish from diverse Arguments and Authorities. (13) The tenure of Kings and
Magistrates: proving that it is lawful, etc. to call to account a Tyrant or
King, and after due conviction to depose and put him to death, etc. Land. 1649
-- 50. qu. Soon after the King being beheaded to the great astonishment of all
the World, and the Government thereupon changed, he was, without any seeking of
his, by the endeavors of a private acquaintance, who was a member of the new
Council of State, chosen Latin Secretary, as I have before told you. In this
public station his abilities and acuteness of parts, which had been in a
manner kept private, were soon taken notice of, and he was pitched upon to
elude the artifice (so it was then by the Faction called) of Eikon Basilice.
Whereupon he soon after published (14) Iconoclastes in answer to a book entit.
Eikon Basilice, the portrature of his sacred Majesty in his solitudes and
sufferings. Land. 1649 -- 50. qu. ib. 1690, oct. which being published to the
horror of all sober men, nay even to the Presbyterians themselves, yet by the
then dominant party it was esteemed an excellent piece, and performed
answerably to the expectation of his Wit and Pen. After the Return of King
Charles 2. this book was called in by Proclamation, dated 13 Aug. 1660, at
which time the Author (who a little before had left his house in Petty France
which had a door going into S. James's Park) absconded, for fear of being
brought to a legal Trial, and so consequently of receiving condign Punishment.
At the same time also, was called in a book of John Goodwin then lately a
Minister in Colemanstreet in Land. entit. The Obstructors of Justice: written
in defense of the Sentence against his Majesty Charles 1. At which time also
the said Goodwin absconded to prevent Justice. Soon after the publication of
Iconoclastes, Salmasius a Professor in Holland, who had in a large Treatise not
long before, maintained, as it is said, the parity of Church Governors against
Episcopacy, did publish Defensio rogia, pro Carolo 1. Rege Angliae, wherein he
justified several matters, as Milton conceived, to the contradiction of his
former book. Whereupon he wrote and published (15) Pro populo Anglicano defensio
contra Claudii Anonymi alias Salmasii defensionem regiam. Land. 1651. fol. said
to be written in more correct Latin than that of Salmasius. While Milton was
writing the said book, his sight began to fail him, and before it was fully
completed, one of his eyes did absolutely perish. In the month of June the
same year (1651) the said book was burnt at Toulouse by an arrest from the
Parliament, under the Government of the Duke of Orleans* And in Sept. following
it was the usual practice of Marchm. Nedham a great crony of Milton, to abuse
Salmasius in his public Mercury called Politicus, (as Milton had done before
in his Defensio) by saying among other things that Christina Qu. of Sweden had
cashiered him her favor, by understanding that he was a pernicious parasite,
and a promoter of Tyranny. After his Majesty's Restoration, this book also was
called in by the same Proclamation before mentioned. But so it was, that in
1652, a certain book entit. Regii sanguinis clamor, etc. being published,
Salmasius was highly extolled in it, and Milton had his just Character given
therein. The nameless Author of which being for a considerable time sought out,
but in vain, by Milton, he at length learned by certain Ministers of State sent
to the Republic of England, (who would sometimes visit him as a learned man)
that it was written by one Alex. More formerly a Professor and Minister at
Geneva, then living in Holland. Whereupon he published (16) Pro populo
Anglicano defensio secunda, contra infamem libellum Anonymum, cui titulus,
Regii sanguinis clamor ad coelum adversus patricidas Anglicanos. Land. 1654,
and at Hag. Com. the same year, in oct. Upon the writing of this book, the
Author Milton lost the other eye; and tho to his charge he used many means, yet
he could never recover either of his eyes. This book entit. Reg. sang. clam.
etc. tho written by Dr. Peter du Moulin Prebendary of Canterbury, as it
afterward well appeared, yet Milton upon the reports before mentioned, could
not be convinced to the contrary, but that it was written by the said More, and
therefore not only abused him in his Answers, but by his friend Nedham in his
Politicus, whereby the reputation of that learned person was severely touched.
(17) Pro se defensio contra Alex. Mornum Ecclesiaste, libelli famosi, cui tit.
Regii sanguinis clamor, etc. Land. 1655, oct. In this book he is exceeding
bitter against Morus, and pretends to give a true history of his notorious
Impurities both at Geneva and Leyden, and an account of his own particular life
to vindicate himself from what, as he thought, was scurrilously said of him by
Morus. At the end of the said book, the Author Milton added Ad Alex. Mori
supplementum responsio. About the time that he had finished these things, he
had more leisure, and time at command, and being dispensed with by having a
substitute allowed him, and sometimes Instructions sent home to him from
attending his office of Secretary, he began that laborious work of amassing out
of all the classick Authors both in prose and verse a Latin Thesaurus, to the
emendation of that done by Stephanus; also the composing of Paradise lost, and
of the framing a Body of Divinity out of the Bible. All which, notwithstanding
the several troubles that befell him in his fortunes, he finished after his
Majesty's Restoration. But to go on with the Cat. of his Books according to
time, take these as they follow, (18) Treatise of civil power in ecclesiastical
causes, etc. Land. 1659. in tw. (19) Considerations touching the likeliest
means to remove Hirelings out of the Church. Land. 1659. in tw. (20) Ready and
easy way to establish a free Commonwealth, and the excellencies thereof
compared with, etc. Land. 1659, in two sheets and an half in qu. This being
published in Feb. the same year, was answered by G. S. in his Dignity of
Kingship. (21) Brief notes upon a late Sermon titled, The fear of God and the
King, etc. Land. 1660. qu. See more in Matthew Griffith among the Writers, an.
1665. (22) Accedence commenced Grammar, etc. pr. 1661. in oct. (23) Paradise
lost: a Poem in 10 books. Land. 1669. qu. pr. in fol. with cuts, an. 1688. (24)
Paradise regained: a Poem in four books. Land. 1670. qu. pr. in fol. with cuts,
an. 1688. (25) History of Britany from the first traditional beginning,
continued to the Norman Conquest. Land. 1670, qu. This History when it first
came abroad, had only the reputation of the putting of our old Authors nearly
together in a connex'd story, not abstaining from some lashes at the ignorance,
or I know not what, of those times. (26) Artis logicae plenior institutio ad
Petri Rami methodum concinnata. Land. 1672 in tw. (27) Of true Religion,
Heresy. Schism, Toleration, and what best means may be used against the growth
and increase of Popery. Land. 1673. qu. (28) Poems, etc. on several occasions,
both English and Latin, etc. composed at several times. Land. 1673-4. oct.
Among these are mixed some of his Poems before mentioned, made in his youthful
years. (29) Epistolarum familiarium lib. 1. Land. 1674. oct. (30) Prolusiones
quaedam Oratoriae in Coll. Christi habitae. printed with the familiar Epistles.
(31) Literae Pseudo senatus Anglicani, Cromwellii, re^iquorum perduellium
nomine ac jussu conscriptae. printed in 1676, in tw. (32) Character of the Long
Parliament and of the Assembly of Divines. Land. 1681. in 2 sheets in qu. In
which book is a notable account of their Ignorance, Treachery, and Hypocrisy.
(33) Brief History of Musc^via and of other less known Countries, lying
eastward of Russia as far as Cathay, etc. Land. 1682. oct. (34) The right of
the People over Tyrants. printed lately in qu. These, I think, are all the
things that he has yet extant: those that are not, are The body of Divinity,
which my friend calls Id^a Theologiae, now, or at least lately, in the hands of
the Authors Acquaintance called Cyr. Skinner, living in Mark lane London, and
the Latin Thesaurus in those of Edw. Philipps his Nephew. At length this great
Scholar and frequent Writer dying in his house at Bunhill near London in a fit
of the Gout, but with so little pain, that the time of his expiring was not
perceived by those in the room, on the ninth or tenth day of November. 1674, was
buried in the grave of his Father (who died very aged about 1647) in the
Chancel of the Church of S. Giles near Cripplegate, London. See more of him in
Sir Walter Raleigh among the Writers numb. 458. He was of a moderate Stature,
and well proportioned, of a ruddy Complexion, light brown hair, and had
handsome features, yet his eyes were none of the quickest. When he was a
Student in Cambridge he was so fair and clear, that many called him the Lady of
Christ's Coll. His deportment was affable. and his gate erect and manly*
bespeaking courage and undauntedness. On which account he wore a sword while he
had his sight, and was skilled in using it. He had a delicate tuneable voice,
an excellent ear, could play on the Organ, and bear a part in vocal and
instrumental Music. The Estate which his Father left him was but indifferent,
yet by his frugality he made it serve him and his. Out of his Secretaries
Salary he saved 2000 l. which being lodged in the Excise, and that bank failing
upon his Majesty's Restoration, he utterly lost that sum. By the great Fire
which happened in London in the beginning of Sept. 1666, he had a house in
Breadstreet burnt, which was all the real Estate that he had then left. To
conclude, he was more admired abroad, and by Foreigners, than at home; and was
much visited by them when he lived in Petty France, some of whom have out of
pure devotion gone to Breadstreet to see the House and Chamber where he was
born, etc.

Creations.
Jun. 16. Henry Bridgman of Brasnose, lately of Oriel, Coll. was actually
created Master of Arts. -- He was afterward Bishop of the Isle of Man.

Jul. 30. David Smart of Heart Hall was actually created Master of Arts, which
is all I know of him.

An. Dom. 1636.
An. 12 Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. Rich. Baylie D. D. President of S. John's Coll. and Dean of
Salisbury, Jul. 22.

Proct. Tho. Brown of Chapter Chapter John Good of New Coll. April 27.


Bach. of Arts.
May 3. John Good Will. Walwyn of S. Joh. Coll.


Of the last you may more among the Bach. of Div. 1647.

Rich. West of Chapter Chapter was admitted the same day. -- See among the created
Doctors of Divinity in Dec. 1660.

5. Edm. Gregory of Trin. 24. Christop. Bennet of Linc. Coll.

June 30. Rob. Wickins of Chapter Chapter

Jul. 3. George Laurence of New Inn.

5. Tho. Holyoake of Qu. Coll.

Oct. 15. Benj. Wells of S. Albans, afterward of S. Mary's Hall, and at length
of Alls. Coll.

20. Jerem. Turner of S. Edm. Hall.

Nov. 14. Edmund Ludlow of Trin. Coll. -- This person who was born at Maiden
Bradley in Wilts, did upon the breaking out of the Rebellion side with the
Presbyterians, became a Colonel, Governor of Wardour Castle in his own
Country, one of the prime Officers in the Parliament Army, and at length sat,
as one of the Judges when K. Chapter 1. was condemned to dye. Afterward he went
into Ireland, where he was Lieutenant General of the Army appointed by the
Parliament, and Lord Deputy for a time upon the death of Ireton. In the time of
Oliver he was a Major General, a grand fanatic, and a zealous favourer of all
such who were anti-monarchical; but upon a foresight of the Kings Restoration
he fled into a strange land to avoid the halter* was at Losanne with Goff,
Whaley, Fare, when Lisle was killed there in Aug. 1664, and soon after, as
'twas then said* he, with his Wife, retired to Zurich. He was the Son of Sir
Hen. Ludlow of Maiden Bradley before mentioned Knight, elected a Knight for his
Country to serve in that Parliament which began at Westminster 3 Nov. 1640,
where he showed himself an enemy to the King and his party, and dying at Maiden
Bradley 1660 or thereabouts, was there buried. By Letters dated at London 19 of
Sept. 1689, I was informed that the said Edm. Ludlow, who had lived several
years in Switzerlandt, was daily expected at Westminster, with four Deputies
from the Cantons, to make an Offer to his Majesty K. Will. 3. to raise men in
that Country for his service. How true this is I know not; yet sure I am, that
the said Ludlow was then in London, and that his being there being notoriously
known, an Address was presented to his Majesty from the House of Commons on the
7 of Nov. following or thereabouts, by the hands of Sir Edward Seymour a Member
of Parliament, that he would be pleased to put out a Proclamation for the
apprehending of Col. Ludlow attainted for the Murder of K. Chapter 1. etc.
Whereupon Ludlow hastening away (as soon as he heard of the motion of an
Address) to the sea side, lay almost a Fortnight before he could be
accommodated with a good Wind, and then returned to Switzerlandt in the year of
his age 74 at least. In the beginning of March 1690, was published a pernicious
Pamphlet entit. A Letter from Major Genesis Ludlow to Sir E. S. (Seymour)
comparing the Tyranny of the first four years of K Charles the Martyr with the
Tyranny of the four years reign of the late abdicated King James 2. occasioned
by reading Dr Pelang's lewd Harangues upon the 30 of January, being the
Anniversary or general madding day. Amsterd. alias Land. 1691, in 4 sheets in
qu. Written as a Preface to a larger work to come, to Justify the Murder of
King Charles 1. not by the said Ludlow, but by some malevolent person in
England. Much about which time was published under Joh. Milton's name The right
of the people over Tyrants; such is the liberty, since the late Mutation,
allowed to the Press.

Jan. 15. John Birkenhead of Oriel, afterward Febr. 11. Henry Birkhead of
Trin. afterward of Alls. Coll.

March 9. Joseph Brookbank of Brasn. 17. Hen. Vaughan of Jesus, lately of Oriel
Coll.

All which Bachelaurs, except Ludlow, will be mentioned elsewhere.

Adm. 233.

Bach. of Law.
Jun. 18. Hen. Janson of Ball. Coll.

Jul. 3. John Godolphin of Gloc. Hall.

Besides these were sixteen more admitted, and two created, but not one of
them, can I yet find, was afterward a Writer, or Bishop.

Mast. of Arts.
Jun. 25. Nathaniel Newbury of Magd. Hall. -- He was afterward Minister of
Ludenham in Kent, and published The Yeomans Prerogative, Sermon. on 2 Chronicles.
chap. 26. ver. 10. Land. 1652. quarto.

30. Charles Gataker or Gatacre of Pemb. Coll. lately of the University of
Cambridge.

Jul. 5. Randall Sanderson of Qu. Coll. -- This person who was a Westmorland
man born, Fellow of the said Coll. and afterward Rector of Weyhill in
Hampshire, and for many years Prebendary of Salisbury, has written and
published, An explication of the following direction for the reading of the
Bible over in a year. Also An explanation to the necessary use and practice
thereof. Both printed in one sheet of paper in qu. He died at Weyhill, and was
buried there, about 1680.

July 7. Charles Hoole of Linc. Thom. Hunt of Pembr. Coll.


8. Edw. Gee of Brasn. Jan. 24. Hen. Hall of Linc. Mar. 3. Rich. Samwaies of C.
C. Coll.

Adm. 136.

Bach. of Phys.
Jun. 30. Christop. Merret of Glouc. Hall.

Besides him were seven more admitted, of whom Nath. Chamberlain of Pembr.
Coll. was one, which is all I know of him.

Bach. of Div.
Apr. 1. Tho. Washbourne of Ball. Coll.

Jun. 25. Herbert Croft of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward B. of Hereford, and is
this year (1690) living.

Jul. 8. Edw. Pocock of C. C. 23. Tim. Woodroff of Ball. 28. Hen. Tozer of
Exeter Coll.

Adm. 18.

Doct. of Law.
May 31. Sam. Gardener of New Coll. was admitted, being then accounted a
learned Civilian.

Doct. of Phys.
Jul. 7. Valentine Broadbent of Magd. Coll.

15. Sim. Owen of Heart Hall, who accumulated the degrees in Physic.

Doct. of Div.
Nov. 18. Thom. Godwin of Magd. Mar. 9. Alexander Gill of Trin. Coll.

Incorporations.
March 26. Assuerus Regimorterus, Londino-Anglus, Doct. of Phys. of the Univ.
of Leyden in Holland, was incorporated Doctor of the same faculty. -- This
person who was educated in School learning under the famous Tho. Farnabie, has
extant, Disputatio publica de febribus intermittentibus. Lugd. Bat. 1635. qu.
had a hand in a treatise De Rachitide, etc. Land. 1650. oct. and has written,
as I have been informed by one or more Doctors of his Faculty, Principia
medicinae. He lived and practiced in Limestreet in London during the Reign of
Oliver. One of both his names lived at North^reake in Norfolk, and died in
1671, who perhaps was Son of the said Dr. Regimorter. Qu.

Aug. 31. Walt. Curle Bish. of Winchester Math. Wren Bish. of Norwich D. D. of
Cambr.


Of these two I have made mention at large before.

CREATIONS.
Aug. 13. Robert Skinner Bishop elect of Bristow, lately Fellow of Trin. Coll.
and Chaplain in ord. to his Majesty Chapter 1. was diplomated, or actually created
D. of D. by a Diploma then dated under the Seal of the University.

The King, Queen, and their respective Courts having been entertained this year
by the University on the 29 and 30 of August, it was his Majesty's pleasure
upon his leaving the University, which was the 31 of the same month, that there
should be a Creation in several faculties. Whereupon the names of those that
made suit to be actually created, being given into the hands of the Chancellor
by one of the Secretaries of State, was a Convocation celebrated on the same
day in the Afternoon, wherein were actually created two Bachelaurs of Arts, two
Bach. of Law, five and forty Masters of Arts, ten Bachelaurs of Divinity, three
Doctors of the Civ. Law, three Doctors of Physic, and one and twenty Doctors
of Divinity. The names of some who were so created are these,

Bach. of Arts.
Frederick Sagittarie a German of Queens Coll. Son of Fred. Sag. of Heregord in
the Palatinat. -- He was afterward a created Doct. of Phys. of this
University, and practiced his faculty in Dorsetshire.

John Kingsmyll of Trin. Coll. Son of Sir Hen. Kingsmyll of Sidmanton in
Hampshire Knight.

Mast. of Arts.
Prince Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhyne and Duke of Bavaria, second Son of
Frederick Prince Elector of the Empire and King of Bohemia, by Princess
Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of James 1. King of England, was the first person
that was actually created Master of Arts. -- He was afterward an heroic
General under his Uncle K. Chapter 1. when the Civil Wars began in England, an.
1642, a Knight of the Garter, Earl of Holderness, and Duke of Cumberland. He
gave way to fate (after he had performed great Exploits at Sea against the
Dutch) 29 Nov. 1682, aged 63 or thereabouts, and was buried in a Vault on the
south side of the Chapel of K. Hen. 7. at Westminster, leaving then behind him
a natural Son usually called Dudley Rupert, begotten on the body of one of the
Daughters of Hen. Bard Vicount Bellomont: which Dudley, styled in Prince
Ruperts last Will and Test. Dudley Bard, was educated in Grammar learning in
Eaton School, being then a modest and meek-temper'd Youth, as was by all there
observed. But he being not much made for Learning, he was bred to Arms, (I
think under Sir Jonas Moor) at the Tower, and after the Prince's death, went
into the Palatinate to look after a Legacy and a great House left him there,
and in Germany, and was, as it is said, kindly received by the Prince Palatine.
Soon after going to the Siege of Buda, he was killed in a desperate Attempt
made by some English Gentlemen there, upon a breach made in the Walls or
Fortifications of that City, in July or Aug. 1686. At which time his signal
Valor being expressed, tho scarce twenty years of age, his loss was much
lamented. Pr. Rupert had also a natural Daughter commonly called The Lady
Ruperta, begotten, as I have been informed at the Office of Arms, on the body
of one Mrs. Margaret Hewes.

James Steuart Duke of Lenox in Scotland, afterward of Richmond in England,
sometimes a Student in Trin Coll. in Cambridge. -- He was slain in the Battle
at Keinton commonly called Edghill fight 23 Oct. 1642, and was buried at the
upper end of Chapter Chapter Choire in Oxon.

Will. Seymour Earl of Hertford. -- He was afterward Duke of Somerset. See
more among the Bachelaurs of Arts, under the year 1607.

Rob. D'evreux Earl of Essex, who in the year 1605 had been created M. of A.
was now actually created again. -- He was afterward made Lieutenant General of
his Majesty's Army when he went his Expedition against the Scots, an 1639, Lord
Chamberlain of his Household, and soon after (such was the mutability of the
man) Captain Ceneral of the Army raised by the Parliament against the King. He
has Several letters extant written to the Speaker and Parliament during the
time that he bore that Office. He died 14 Sept. 1646, and was buried in S.
Paul's Chapel (northward of the Capella Regum) in the Abbey Church of S. Peter
in Westminster.

Thomas Howard Earl of Berks. -- He afterward suffered much for the Cause of
K. Chapter 1. and dying 16 July 1669, was buried in the Abbey Chapter at Westminster.

Thom. Bruce Earl of Elgin in Scotland. -- He was afterward made a Baron of
England by the Title of Lord Bruce of Whorlton in Yorkshire, and departed this
life 21 Dec. 1663, leaving then behind him a Son named Robert, created Earl of
Aylesbury in Bucks. by K. Chapter 2. who dying on the 19 of October. or thereabouts,
an. 1685, (he being then Lord Chamberlain to the household of K. Jam. 2.) was
buried at Ampthill in Bedfordshire where if I mistake not, the body of his
Father had been interred. He was a learned Person, and otherwise well
qualified, was well versed in English History and Antiquities, a lover of all
such that were Professors of those studies, and a curious collector of MSS,
especially of those which related to England and English antiquities. Besides
also he was a lover of the regular Clergy, as those of Bedfordsh. and Bucks.
know well enough.

Henry Spencer of Magd. Coll. eldest Son of William Lord Spencer Baron of
Wormleighton. -- This Henry was afterward Earl of Sunderland, and taking part
with K. Chapter 1. when he was opposed by his rebellious Subjects, was slain in the
Battle at Newbury in Berks 20. Sept. 1643. whereupon his body was carried to
Braynton commonly called Brinton in Northamptonshire and there buried.

George Lord Digby of Magd. Coll. the eldest Son of John Earl of Bristow.

William Lord Craven of Trin. Coll. -- He was afterward Earl of Craven, and is
now (1690) living.

Will. Herbert of Exet. Coll. a younger Son of Philip Earl of Pembroke.

Henry Coventrie Bach. of Arts and Fellow of Alls. Coll. Son of Thom. Lord
Coventrie Keeper of the great Seal. -- See among the Bachelaurs of Law, an.
1638.

Rich. Lovelace a Gentleman Commoner of Gloc. Hall. -- Afterward eminent for
his valor and poetry, as I shall tell you either in the next Vol. or elsewhere.

Hen. Jacob the curious critic of Merton Coll.

Ralph Brideoak^ of New Coll. sometimes a Student in that of Brasn. -- He was
afterward Bishop of Chichester.

Frederick Schl^de of the Palate. in Germ.

Nich. Oudart Esquire; -- This Person who was born at Mechlin in Brabant, and
brought from beyond the Seas by Sir Henry Wotton (who afterward trusted him
with his domestic Affairs) studied Physic, of which faculty he was Bachelaur,
as I shall tell you among the Creations under the year 1642. About which time
he became Secretary to Sir Edw. Nicholas one of the Secretaries of State at
Oxon, and afterward attending King Charles 1. in the Treaty in the Isle of
Wight, an. 1648. lived for some time obscurely. At length he became Secretary
to the Princess of Orange, then Latin Secretary to William Prince of Orange,
and of his Council; in which capacity I find him in 1669. and afterward Latin
Secretary to King Charles 2. He paid his last debt to nature in, or near to,
Whitehall about the day of the nativity of our Savior, an. 1681. One Nich.
Oudart of Bruxells who was official of Mechlin, died 1608, whom I take to be
Father or Uncle to the former.

Paul Becker of the Palatinate.

George Kendall of New Inn.

Joh. Suatosius, etc.

Bach. of Div.
Sam. Keme or Kem of Magd. Hall. sometimes of Magd. Coll.

Mark Zeiglier of Exeter Coll. who entitles himself Archipalatinus. -- He was a
learned Man, and whether he has published any thing I cannot justly tell. He
became a Sojournor in the University 1623.

Doct. of Law.
Sir Dudley Carleton of Holcombe in Oxfordshire Knight. -- He was soon after
made one of the Clerks of the Council, and whether Secretary of State, as an
Author Will. Sanderson in his Hist. (...) the year 1641.
of no good credit tells us, I cannot tell. See more of him in Sir Dudley
Carleton among the Writers, under the year 1631. number. 519.

Sam. Henton or Hinton. -- He died at Lichfield in 1668.

Will. Turner of Wadham Coll. -- He was now, or soon after a Civilian of
Doctors Commons, and in the time of the rebellion he sided with those that were
uppermost. In the middle of Jan. 1659 he was appointed by the Rump Parliament
then newly restored by General Geor. Monk, one of the Judges of the Court of
Admiralty and of the Court for Probat of Wills, Dr. Walt. Walker and Mr. W.
Cawley being the other two. And after his Majesty's restoration he became
Chancellor of Winchester, a Knight, and Advocate to the Duke of York: He died
at Richmond in Surrey, as I conceive, an. 1670.

At the same time that these were created Doctors of the Civil Law, was a
proposal made in the Convocation that Sir John Finet Knight, Master of the
Ceremonies, should be also created, or at least diplomated Doctor of the said
faculty, but whether he was really so, it appears not in the public register.
However what I have to say of him, shall be briefly this, viz. (1) That he was
the Son of Rob. Finet of Soulton near Dover in Kent, Son and Heir of Thomas,
Son and Heir of John Finet of Siena in Italy, (where his name is ancient, who
came into England in the quality of a Servant to Cardinal Laur. Campegius Legate
a latere from the Pope) by his Wife, the Daughter of one Mantell, sometimes a
Maid of honor to Qu. Catherine the Royal Consort of K. Hen. 8. (2) That the
said John Finet was always bred in the Court, where by his wit, innocent mirth,
and great skill in composing songs, he pleased K. Jam. 1. very much. (3) That
he was sent into France an. 1614. about matters of public concern, and in the
year after he received the honor of Knighthood at Whitehall; about which time
he was made Assistant to the Master of the Ceremonies, with reversion of that
place. (4) That upon the death of Sir Lewis Lewknore Master of the Ceremonies,
he had that office conferred upon him 12. March 1626, being then in good esteem
with his Majesty King Charles 1. (5) That he wrote Fineti Philoxenis: Some
choice observations touching the reception and precedence, the treatment and
audience, the punctilio's and contests of foreign Ambassadors in England. Land
1656. oct. Published by James Howell and by him dedicated to Philip Lord
L'isle. (6) That he translated from French into English, The beginning,
continuance and decay of Estates, etc. Land. 1606. qu. Written originally by R.
de Lusing. And lastly that dying 12. July 1641 aged 70 years, was buried in the
North side of the Church of St. Martin in the Fields, within the City of
Westminster, by the body of Jane his sometimes Wife, daughter of Henry Lord
Wentworth of Nettlestead in Suffolk, Sister to the Earl of Cleevland.

Doct. of Phys.
Peter Turner of Mert. Coll. lately Geometry Professor of Gresham Coll. now the
Savilian Professor of Geometry in this University.

John Carter of Magd. Hall. -- He was afterward a practitioner of his faculty,
near to Chancery Lane in Land.

Gaspar Hopfius of the Palate. in Germany.

Doct. of Div.
George Warburton of Brasn. Coll. was the first and senior Theologist that was
actually created Doct. of Div. -- He was a Cheshire man born of an ancient
Family, had been Chaplain in Ord. to K. Jam. 1. and afterward to K. Chapter 1. was
installed Dean of Gloucester (after Dr. Tho. Winniff's removal to the Deanery of
St. Paul's) on the eleventh of June 1631, and on the 25. of Aug. (or
thereabouts) following, became Dean of Wells, on the death of Ralph Barlow. He
has published King Melchizedek, Sermon. at Court at East-hamstead 2. Sept. 1623.
Land. 1623. qu. and whether any thing else, I cannot yet tell. In 1640 he went
to London to attend the Convocation of the Clergy that began with the Long
Parliament, and dying in Drury Lane in the month of Dec. or thereabouts, an.
1641, was succeeded in his Deanery by Dr. Walt. Rawleigh.

James Hena or Hannay a Scot.

Walt. Raleigh of Magd. Coll. -- He was admitted to the Deanery of Wells 13.
January 1641.

Edw. Burby of Linc. Coll. -- He was now Prebendary and Archdeacon of
Winchester; which Dignity was before enjoyed by Ranulph Barlow D. D. of
Cambridge.

George Gillingham of Pemb. Coll. -- He was at this time one of his Majesty's
Chaplains, and on the 2. Nov. 1639 was installed Canon of Windsore in the place
of Dr. Joh. Elly deceased. He had other preferments, and died 16. Dec. 1668,
being then Rector of Chalton in Hampshire.

Daniel Escott Warden of Wadham Coll.

Rob. Sanderson of Linc. Jam. Rowlandson of Qu. Morgan Owen of Jes. Coll.

The first of these three was afterward Bishop of Lincoln, and the last,
Bishop of Landaff.

Samuel Marsh of Trin. Coll. sometimes one of the Proctors of the University,
and at this time Preb. of Roscombe in the Church of Sarum.

Steph. Goffe or Gough of St. Albans Hall, lately of Mert. Coll. -- This Person
who was Son of Steph. Goffe the puritanical Minister of Stanmer in Sussex,
traveled into the Low Countries after he had taken his Masters Degree, and
became Chaplain to the Regiment of Col. H. Vere, whereby he gained good
acquaintance and experience, which wound him at his return so much into the
favor of Hen. Jermyn (afterward Earl of St. Alban) that he was made one of
the Kings Chaplains, by which title he was created Doctor of Divinity, and
afterward employed in the quality of a minor Agent and Envoy into France, then
into Flanders, Holland and other Countries, etc. In the time of the rebellion
he also acted much for his Master in several Countries beyond the Seas, and did
him great Service, but when he saw the English Church ruined and Monarchy
declining, he changed his Religion for that of Rome, and was thereupon taken
into the society of the Oratorians at Paris, an order very famous there, tho
but little known among us. The brethren whereof having liberty to improve their
particular estates (for things are not common among them, as with other orders)
he grew rich upon the stock which he had formerly gathered together by his
endeavors, whereby he was in capacity sometimes to do courtesies for his
exiled Countrymen. Abrah. Cowley the Prince of Poets, was, while at Paris,
preferred and placed by him (tho the story is perverted) in the Family of the
said noble Henry, then Lord Jermyn: Through whose heroical bounty he was
afterward designed to the Mastership of the Savoy, but by certain enemies to
the Muses, was deprived of it. Afterward Henrietta Maria the Queen Mother to
whom Goffe was Chaplain, committed to the said Goffs care the tuition of the
natural Son of K. Chapter 2. known then by the name of James Crofts* afterward
Duke of Monmouth; with whom continuing till he was about nine years of age, was
taken from him and committed to the care of a Gentleman called The same, as
(...), with T^o. Ros^ who was Library Keeper to his Majesty (...).
Rose or Rosse who after his Majesty's restoration went Secretary to Henry
Coventry Esquire; in his Embassy into Sweeden. This Doctor Goffe who was esteemed
by some a learned Man and well read in the Fathers, and therefore respected by
Gerard Jo. Vossius and others, died in the house of the Fathers or Brethren of
the Oratory situated in the street called St. Hour at Paris on Christmas day
according to our account an. 1681. aged 76 or thereabouts, and was buried in
the Chapel belonging to that house. What writings of his are published,
besides Nine Latin Epistles to the learned Ger. Jo. Vossius, and his
Negotiations taken by the Rebels at the battle at Sherburne in Yorkshire
(which, with George Lord Digby's Cabinet and other things, were published at
Land. in qu. 1646.) I know not. He had a younger Brother named John Goffe who
was a true Son of the Church of England, as I shall tell you among the Writers
under the year 1661. and another called William, originally a Salter (or a
Hatter as some day) in London, who closing with the Presbyterians in the time
of the Rebellion, became a Colonel, great with Oliv. Cromwell, one of the
Judges of King Char. 1. and a member of the other house, that is one of Olivers
Lords. See more in the Fasti an. 1649. among the Creations.

Rich. Marsh of the University of Cambridge, lately Chaplain to Archb. Laud,
afterward to his Maj. Chapter 1. -- He was now Prebendary of Hustwayt in the
Church of York, and soon after Vicar of Halyfax in the room of Hen. Ramsden
deceased. In Nov. 1644. he had the Deanery of York conferred upon him, on the
death of Dr. Job. Scot, who died in the Kings bench Prison in Southwark. At
which time his Majesty being at Oxon, Dr. Pet. Heylyn endeavored by his
friends to obtain that Dignity, but was put aside. After his Majesty's
restoration, he was elected 17. of Aug. and installed 20. of the same month,
an. 1660. and dying 13. Oct. 1663. aged 78, was buried near to the grave of
Matthew Hutton sometimes Archbishop of York, in the South Isle joining to the
Cath. Church there. In his Deanery succeeded Will. Sandcroft D. D. of
Cambridge, installed therein 26. Feb. 1663, who being removed to the Deanery of
St. Paul's Cathedral in London, Dr. Rob. Hitch of the same University succeeded
in Dec. 1664. Dr. Marsh has one or more Sermons extant.

Edw. Morton lately M. of A. of Kings Coll. in Cambridge, now Rector of Sefton
in Lancashire, Chaplain to the Lord Keeper and Prebendary of Chester. -- He was
born of an ancient Family at Morton in Cheshire, and was Father to Dr. Will.
Moreton Bishop of Kildare in Ireland.

Samps. Johnson of Magd. Coll.

Thomas Whittington Thomas Manwaring of Brasn. Coll.

Meric Casaubon Edw. Thornborough of Chapter Chapter

The last of these two was Son of Dr. Jo. Thornborough Bishop of Worcester, was
now Archdeacon of Worcester; who dying in 1645 Will. Hodges Bach. of Div. of
Oxon, was admitted in his place 30. of May the same year.

Mich. Read of Linc. Will. Haywood of St. Jo. Coll.

Laur. Pay of Chapter Chapter

These were all the Doctors of Divinity that were then created. Afterward
these noble Persons were created in Oct. following.

Oct. 14. The most illustrious and high born Prince Christianus Landtgrave of
Hassia, Count in Catzenellebogen, Dieza, Ziegenhain and Nidda, was diplomated
Master of Arts.

The most illustrious and high born Prince Ernestus Brother of Christianus
beforementioned, Landtgrave of Hassia, and Count in the same Countries, was
dipl. M. of A. the same day.

The most noble and valiant Winandus a Polhelme, Lord in Rozenhall, Counselor
to the illustrious Prince of Hassia and Prefect of the Hall, was also dipl. M.
A. the same day.

Charles Lodowick Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Prince Elector of the Empire,
etc. the eldest Son of Frederick K. of Bohemia, did with his own hand
matriculate himself a member of this University, 30. Aug. 1636. being then
entertained by the Heads thereof, with his Uncle K. Chapter 1. At the same time Pr.
Rupert and several of the English Nobility were also then matriculated. Dr.
Laud in his Diary says that the said Chapter Lodowick was then (with his younger
Brother Rupert) actually created M. of Arts, yet no such thing appears in the
public register, or in any other record, of the University.

An. Dom. 1637.
An. 13. Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. Dr. Rich. Baylie again, July 29.

Proct. Dan. Lawford of Oriel Coll. Job. Gilsson of Trin. Coll. Apr. 19.


Bach. of Arts.
May 13. Joh. Riland of Magd. Oct. 19. Sam. Bolton of Line. Coll.

Of the last you may see more among the created Doctors of Div. an. 1661.

Oct. 19. John French of New Inn. Tho. Weaver of Chapter Church.

24. Marchamont Nedham of Alls. Coll. Will. Harvey of Glouc. Hall.

One of both the names of the last, (Will. Harvey) who took no higher Degree in
this University, has several Sermons and other things extant: And one Will.
Harvey who writes himself M. of A. and late Vicar of Odyham in Hampshire has
written A treatise concerning the baptizing of Infants, etc. Land. 1647. in one
sh. or more. Whether either of these two be the same with him of Gloc. Hall, I
cannot tell, except I could see all the Sermons and other things, that have
been published under the name of Will. Harvey.

Dec: 15. Sam. Fisher of Magd. Coll. -- One of both his names who has been
mentioned in these Fasti, an. 1627. and 1630, is to be hereafter mentioned at
large in another vol. And this whom I take to be afterward a Covenanteer and a
Writer, is to obtain a place also therein, or elsewhere.

Jan. 18. Philip Taverner of Ex. 27. Rob. Ding^ey of Magd. Coll.

Feb. 3. Matthew Fowler of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Author of Totum
hominis, or the whole duty of Man, Sermon. on Prove. 24. 21. Printed 1662. qu. and
perhaps of other things, which is all I know of him, only that he was a
Staffordshire Man born.

Mar. 2. Joseph Sedgwick of Magd. Hall. -- He was afterward M. of A. and
Fellow of Christ's Coll. in Cambridge.

All which except Harvey and Fowler, will be largely mentioned elsewhere.

Admitted 195. or thereabouts.

Bach. of Law.
Seven only were admitted, of which John Nourse of Magd. Coll. was the Senior.
Apr. 1. but not one of them was afterward a Writer or Bishop.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 22. Abrah. Wright of St. John's Coll.

26. Rob. Waryng of Chapter Chapter

Jun. 15. John Grayle Rich. Harwood of Magd. Hall.


July 13. Edward Greaves of Alls. Coll. -- The time when he took the Degree of
Bach. of Arts, occurs not.

Sept. 9. Hen. Gregory of Chapter Chapter -- This Person who was admitted in
Convocation, the Vice Chancellor made then this honorable mention of him in
his supplicate thus. Supplicat vobis rei quamplurime juvenis Henr. Gregory Art.
Bac. ex Aed. Christi, ripa hac ad pedes viri Gamaliele politioris enutritus, in
cyclo literaturae, sicut in legibus ille instructissimi: cujus sub auspiciis
juvenis hic Duci Eboracensi a primis literis imbibendis adest, ut cum tanto
Domino matrique Academiae vacare non possit, veniam etiam ab honoratiss.
Cancellario, and a Collegiorum and Aularum Praefectis impetravit, singulari
hujus domus dignatione ad gradum magistri in artibus promoveatur, etc. This
Hen. Gregory, who was younger Brother to John Gregory the Critic, and both the
Sons of John Gregory of Amersam in Bucks, was admitted necessary Regent on the
7. of Oct. following, and became afterward eminent for his learning.

Oct. 19. John Fountain of C. C. Coll. -- This Person who was Son of Will.
Fountain of Seabroke in Bucks and originally of Linc. Coll. was about this
time a Barrester in one of the Inns of Court, his time going on there, as in
the University, stood afterward a Neuter at Land. when the predominant Party
in the Parliament House were raising a Rebellion. Afterward he receeded to
Oxon. and showed himself a great Royalist, but when he saw that the Kings cause
declined, he came in to Rainsborough a Colonel on the Parliament side, in Apr.
1646, and afterward retiring to London, struck in with the Usurpers, and was
by Oliver made Sergeant at Law in Nov. 1656. In Jan. 1659 he, with Sir Tho.
Widdrington and Serj. Tyrrell, were made Commissioners of the great Seal, and
after his Majesty's restoration, he was made Sergeant at Law again 1660. This
is the Person who was commonly called Turn-coat Fountain, Author of a certain
Letter, or discourse, mentioned among the Writers in Rich. Steuart, under the
year 1651. He died in the Parish of St. Clements Danes within the liberty of
Westminster, in May, or June 1671.

Feb. 21. Nathaniel Heighmore of Trin. Coll.

Adm. 110. or thereabouts.

Not one Bach. of Physic was admitted this year.

Bach. of Div.
June 12. Thomas Brown of Chapter Chapter

July 6. Rob. Cross of Linc. Elias Wrench of Co. Chapter Coll.



13. Nich. Simpson

The last you may find mentioned among the Doctors of Divin. in these Fasti,
an. 1608.

Nov. 8. Hen. Savage of Ball. Dec. 15. Rich. Chalfont of Linc. Coll.

The last of these two has published A Sermon at a public fast before the
House of Commons at Oxon, 10. May 1644, on Jerem. 44. 10. Oxon. 1644. qu. Which
is all, I think, that goes under his name.

Admitted 19.

Doct. of Law.
June 30. Justinian Lewyn of Pembr. Coll. -- He was afterward Judge-martial of
the Army under Thomas Earl of Arundell, in the Scotch expedition, 1639, and
after that one of the Masters in ordinary of the High Court of Chancery and a
Knight. He was Son of Will. Lewyn of London, and Nephew to Sir Justinian,
mentioned among the Incorporations, an. 1582.

July 10. John Worsley of Chapter Chapter

Doct. of Phys.
July 7. George Bate of St. Edm. Hall. -- A most celebrated Physician of his
time.

Doct. of Div.
June 23. Rob. Rainsford of Wadh. 28. Nathaniel Holmes of Exet. Coll.

July 4. Matthew Bemet of St. Mary's 6. Adam Ayray Principal of St. Edm. Hall.

8. Nathaniel Goulson of Trin. Nov. 22. Hen. Rogers of Jes. Coll.

Incorporations.
July 10. Thom. Brown lately M. of A. of Pemb. Coll. now Doct. of Phys. of the
University of Leyden in Holland, was then incorporated Doctor of that faculty.

Nov. 4. Michael Boil Master of Arts of Trin. Coll. near Dublin. -- He was
afterward Bishop of Cork, Cloyne and Ross, Archb. of Dublin, Chancellor of
Ireland, and at length Archb. of Armagh.

Januar. 26. Martin Westcomb Bach. of Arts of the University of Toulouse in
France.

Two Bachelaurs of Arts of Qu. Coll. in Cambridge named Nich. Frost and Tho.
Lee were incorporated this year, which is all I know of them, only that the
first proceeded M. of A. in the year following, as a member of Ball. Coll.

This year among several Cambridge Men that were incorporated Masters of Arts,
must not be forgotten John Cleaveland the Poet, not that it appears so in the
public register, but from the relation of a certain Person who was then a
Master of this University. -- This Mr. Cleaveland, who was the Vicars Son of a
Market Town called Hinkley in Leicestershire, was born there, and in the same
town received his Grammatical education under one Mr. Rich. Vines a zealous
Puritan; where obtaining a perfection in Lat. and Greek learning was sent to
Christ's Coll. in Cambridge; and in short time proving an exquisite Orator and
pure Latinist, was preferred to a Fellowship of St. John's Coll. in the said
University; and as the delight and ornament of that house he continued there,
about nine years, and from his Oratory became an eminent Poet. At length upon
the eruption of the Civil War, he was the first Champion that appeared in verse
for the Kings cause against the Presbyterians; for which, and his signal
Loyalty, he was ejected thence. Whereupon retiring to Oxon the Kings head
quarter, lived there for a time, and was much venerated and respected not only
by the great Men of the Court, but by the then Wits remaining among the
affrighted and distressed muses, for his high Panegericks and smart Satyrs.
From Oxon he went to Newark upon Trent, where he was so highly valued by all,
especially by the then most loyal and generous Sir Rich. Willis Baronet the
Governor of that Garrison for his Majesty, that he was made Judge Advocate and
continued there till the surrender thereof for the use of the Parliament,
showing himself a prudent Judge for the King and a faithful Advocate for the
Country. Afterward being imprisoned at Yarmouth, where he continued in a
lingering condition, and with little hopes of relief, drew up an Address to
Oliver Cromwell written in such towering language and so much gallant reason,
that upon his perusal of, he was so much melted down with it, that he forthwith
ordered his release. Afterward he retired to London, where finding a generous
Mecaenas settled in Greys Inn in Holbourne and became much admired, if not
adored, by all generous loyalists and ingenious Men. He has written (1) Poems.
Land. in oct. there again with additions 1651. oct. and several times after.
(2) Characters. (3) Orations. (4) Epistles, etc. Several times also printed. At
length an intermitting fever seizing him, brought him to his grave in the
Church of St. Michael Royal, commonly called College-hill Church within the
City of London, on the first day of May 1658. Soon after were published several
Elegies on him, particularly that entit. Upon the most ingenious and
incomparable Musophilist of his time Mr. John Cleaveland. A living memorial of
his most devotional Brother and cordial mourner. Printed at London on the broad
side of a sheet of paper, an. 1658. 'Twas written by his Brother Phil.
Cleaveland, who tells us there that the said John Cleaveland. died 28. April
1658. I have another Elegy lying by me entit. An Elegy upon the death of the
most excellent Poet Mr. John Cleaveland. Printed also on one side of a sheet of
paper, in May 1658. It was written by Francis Vaux a Servitour of Queens Coll.
in Oxon, of about 3 years standing, the same who printed A Poem in praise of
Typography; which is all I know of him, as having taken no Degree in this
University.

An. Dom. 1638.
An. 14. Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud Archb. of Cant.

Vicechanc. Accepted Frewen D. D. President of Magd. Coll. and Dean of
Gloucester.

Proct. Edw. Corbet of Mert. Coll. Joh. Nicolson of Magd. Coll. Apr. 4.


Bach. of Music.
July 5. Rob. Lugge Organist of St. John's Coll. in this University. -- He
afterward went beyond the Seas, changed his Religion for that of Rome, and was
at length, as it is said, made Priest. Several vocal compositions for the Church
go under his name.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 7. Anth. Palmer of Ball. Jam. Brown of Oriel Coll.


11. Will. Hughes of New Inn. Robert Mead Hen. Greisley Will. Towers of Chapter Chapter


Job. Hinkley of St. Alb. 20. Edw. Chamberlayne of S. Ed. Hall.

May 29. Sam. Harding of Exet. Coll. Job. Osborne of New Inn.

June 23. Job. Biddle of Magd. July 3. Franc. Moore of Gloc. Hall.

The last of these two, I take to be the same Person who was Author of A
Funeral Sermon, etc. on Luke 8. 5. printed 1656. qu.

Oct. 13. Tim. Baldwin of Ball. 30. Jam. Baron of Exet. Coll.

Of the last of these two you may see among the created Bac. of Div. an. 1649.

Dec. 3. Miles Smith of Magd. 4. William Hill of Mert. Jan. 24. George Rogers
of Line. 29. Daniel Whistler of Trin. Coll.

Feb. 1. Thom. Greenfield of Pemb. Coll. -- See among the Masters, an. 1641.

12. Tho. Jones of Oriel, afterward of Mert. Coll.

Most of these Bachelaurs, who were all afterward Writers, will be mentioned
in the next volume or elsewhere.

Admitted 224.

Bach. of Law.
June 26. Hen. Coventrie of Alls. Coll. -- This honorable Person who was the
only Bach. of Law that was admitted this year, was a younger Son of Thomas Lord
Coventry Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and was, as it seems, before
the grand rebellion broke out Chancellor of Landaff. Afterward suffering much
for his Majesty's Cause, was after the restoration of K. Chapter 2. made one of
the Grooms of his Bedchamber, in December. 1661. and in May 1667, he, with
Denzill Lord Holles, went Ambassadors extraordinary from his Majesty of Great
Britain to Breda to consummate a certain Treaty there. In Sept. 1671, he went
Ambassador to Sweden (having been an Envoy extraordinary there, in 1664) at
which time he gave his helping hand to the breaking of the Triple-league, and
on the 3. July 1672. he was sworn Principal Secretary of State, in the room of
Sir Joh. Trever deceased. Which honorable office he keeping till his body was
much broken with business, to the beginning of the year 1680, resigned it with
his Majesty's leave, and retired for health sake to Enfield for a time.
Whereupon the place of Secretary was bestowed on Sir Liolin Jenkins Knight. At
length Mr. Covencry giving way to fate in his house situated in the H^ymarket
near to Charing Cross in Westminster, 5. Dec. 1686, aged 68 years or
thereabouts, was buried in the Church of St. Martin in the Fields: which is all
I can speak of him for the present, only that he was a native of London.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 7. Franc. Bampfield of Wadh. 11. Anthony Hodges of New Coll.

The last of these two, who was Chaplain of that College, became a florid
Preacher in Oxon, during the time that the King and Parliament were there, and
in June 1646, a little before the garrison of that place was surrendered to the
Parliament, the Degree of Bach. of Div. was given to him by the venerable
Convocation, in consideration of several noted Sermons that he had preached
before the Royal Court. But so it was that he never took that Degree, or had
any thing conferred upon him, as others had, only the Vicaridge first of
Comn^re, (which he soon after left) and afterward the rectory of Wytham near
Abendon in Berkshire. He has translated from Greek into English The Loves of
Clitophon and Leucippe, a most elegant History written in Greek by Achilles
Tatius. Oxon. 1638. oct. in 7. books. There were two impressions of this
translation made in that year, and in one of them are commendatory copies of
verses made by several Poets of the University, namely among the rest, by
Richard Lovelace of Gloc. Hall, Franc. James M. A. of New College, John Metford
B. A. of St. Edm. Hall. etc. Mr. Hodges has published nothing else, tho very
able he was in many respects to do it. For those that were his acquaintance,
knew him to be a most admirable Philologist, a Man of a great memory, and well
versed in several sorts of learning; but being delighted to please himself in a
juvenile and banting way among junior Masters, could never be courted to set
pen to paper for that purpose. He died in his lodging without the Turl-gate of
Oxon, 13. Jan. 1685. aged 72 years or thereabouts; and was buried in the
remotest part of the yard, joining on the north side, to the Church at Wytham
beforementioned, and not near his sometimes Wife in the Church, because she had
been dishonest to him.

Apr. 11. Will. Tailor of Magd. Hall.

20. Martin Westcombe of Ex. 23. Obadiah Walker of Vniv. Coll.

The first of these last two I have mentioned among the Incorporations, an.
1637.

26. Edw. Gray of Chapter Chapter Esquire; a Compounder.

May 26. Obadiah How Hen. Wilkinson jun. of Magd. Hall.


June 27. Nath. Hardy of Heart lately of Magd. Nov. 7. Thomas Gilbert of St.
Edm. Hall.

Jan. 24. Christoph. Bennet of Linc. Feb. 23. Rob. Carry of C. Chr. Coll.

Admitted 143.

Bach. of Phys.
Only two admitted, viz. Hugh Barker of S. Mary's Hall, and Jos. More of Pemb.
Coll. Which is all I know of them, only that More accumulated, as I shall tell
you anon.

Bach. of Div.
Nov. 16. Henry Wilkinson Sen. of Magd. Hall.

Dec. 4. Jasp. Fisher of Magd. Rich. Owen of Oriel Mar. 15. Joseph Crowther of
S. Jo. Coll.



Admitted 14.

Doct. of Law.
May 8. Thomas Read Jam. Masters of New Coll.


The first of these two was afterward a great Royalist, and by his Majesty was
nominated Principal of Magd. Hall, upon the flight of Wilkinson to the
Parliament. Afterward he changed his Religion for that of Rome, lived beyond
Sea, and wrote, as I have been told, certain matters against Dr. Edw. Boughen. I
shall mention him upon that account elsewhere.

May 29. Will. Child of Alls. Coll. -- He was afterward one of the Masters of
the Chancery and a Knight.

June 13. Edward Alderne of Exet. Coll. -- He was afterward Chancellor of the
Diocese of Rochester, where he died in the beginning of 1671.

Doct. of Phys.
June 15. Joseph More of Pemb. Coll. -- He accumulated the Degrees in Physic.

July 5. Thomas Bond of Chapter Chapter

Doct. of Div.
June 26. Hugh Lloyd of Jesus July 6. Matthew Styles of Exet. Coll.

The first was afterward Bishop of Landaff: The other was now an eminent
Minister in London, an excellent Grammarian and Casuist, and one that had
gained great knowledge and experience by his travels into several parts of
Italy, particularly at Venice, when he went as Chaplain with an Ambassador from
England an. 1624. In 1643 he was nominated one of the Assembly of Divin^s, but
whether he sat among them I know not, because he was forced by the giddy
faction about that time to resign his cures at St. George in Botolph-lane and
St. Gregory near Paul's, in London.

Will. Strode Canon of Chapter Chapter and Orator of the University was admitted the
same day.

July 7. Andr. Read of Trinity. Dec. 4. Jasp. Fisher Jan. 26. Hopton Sydenham
of Magd. Coll.


Mar. 1. Thom. Temple of Linc. Coll. -- See among the Incorporations following.

7. Hen. Hammond 15. Sam. Barnard Thom. Buckner of Magd. Coll.



The first of these last three, was now Rector of Penshurst in Kent, the
second, Vicar of Croyden in Surrey, and afterward the Author of A Funeral
Sermon, on Ezekiel. 24. 16. Land. 1652. qu. who dying in 1657 was buried in the
Chancel of the Church of Farlegh in Surrey, of which place he had for some time
been Rector, which is all I know of him only that he was a Berkshire Man born,
and had in his younger days been accounted a good Greek and Lat. Poet. The last
(Buckner) was about this time Prebendary of Winchester and dying in 1644, was,
I presume, according to his desire buried at the foot of his Uncle Mr. Adam
Buckner in the Chancel of the Church at Merstham (in Surrey.)

Incorporations.
May 30. Nathaniel Wright sometimes M. of A. of Cambridge, afterward Doct. of
Phys. of Bourges in France, was incorporated Doct. of Phys. -- What he has
extant besides his Theses de pluritide vera, printed 1635 in qu. I know not. He
was afterward one of the Coll of Physicians, and Physician to Oliver Cromwell
when he was sick in Scotland, an. 1650. 51.

June 30. John Done sometimes of Chapter Chapter afterward Doctor of the Laws of the
University of Padua in Italy, was then incorporated in the same Degree. -- He
was the Son of Dr. John Done sometimes Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral, by his
Wife Anne Daughter of Sir George More of Loseley in Surrey, was elected a
Student of Chapter Chapter from Westminster School an. 1622. and had all the advantages
imaginable tendered to him to tread in the steps of his virtuous Father; but his
nature benig vile, he proved no better all his life time than an Atheistical
Buffoon, a Banterer, and a Person of over free thoughts; yet valued by K. Chapter
2. He has published certain matters written by his Father, and several
frivolous trifles under his own name; among which is The humble petition of
Covent Garden against Dr. John Baber a Physician, an. 1661. He died in the
Wintertime an. 1662. and was buried under, or near, the standing dial situat
and being in the yard, at the West end of St. Paul's Church in Covent Garden. On
Feb. 23. an. 1662 was published or printed his fantastical and conceited will,
on a broad side of a sheet of paper, wherein the humor of the Person may be
discovered. There is no doubt, but that he was a Man of sense, and parts;
which, had they been applied to a good use, he might have proved beneficial in
his generation.

July 5. John Nicholaus Vaughan a Cambra-Britaine, sometimes of Jesus Coll. in
this University, afterward Doctor of the Laws of Padua, was also then
incorporated, having spent 10 years in the study of that faculty. He was the
Son of Joh. Nich. Vaughan Esquire.

10. John Brownlowe sometimes of Brasnose Coll. afterward of St. Mary's Hall,
and at length (in 1631) Doctor of Physic of Leyden, was then taken into the
bosom of this University.

Oct. 12. Daniel Brevint of the Isle of Jersey, Master of Arts of the Univ. of
Saumare in France.

16. Antonius Aubertus Master of Arts of the University or Academy of Deinse.
[Deia Augusta Vocuntiorum] The said Degree was conferred upon him there on the
Ides of September. 1619.

Nov. 7. George Ent Doctor of Physic of Padua. -- This learned Person who was
the Son of Josias Ent, was born at Sandwich in Kent, 6. Nov. 1604, educated in
Sydney Coll. in Cambridge, was, after he had been doctorated, Fellow of the
Coll. of Physicians at London, eminent for his practice during the times of
Usurpation, afterward President of the said College and at length had the
Degree of Knighthood conferred upon him by King Charles 2. He has written (1)
Apologia pro circulatione sanguinis contra Aemilium Parisanum. Land. 1641. oct.
Wherein he has learnedly defended Dr. William Harvey against the said
Parisanus, and rendered a very rational account concerning the operation of
purging Medicines, etc. (2) Animadversiones in Malachiae Thrustoni M. D.
diatribam de respirationis usu primario. Land. 1679. oct. before which is his
picture in a long periwig. What other things he has published, I cannot tell,
nor any thing else of him, at present, only that he dying 13. October 1689, was
buried in a Vault under part of the Church of St. Laurence in the Jewry, within
the City of London.

Dec. 6. Charles Vane Mast. of Arts of Saumaure. -- He was a Cadet of the
knightly Family of the Vanes of Fairelane in Kent; and being nearly related to
Sir Hen. Vane, closed with the Faction, and in 1650 was sent Agent into
Portugal by the Parliament of England.

Jan. 19. Thom. Temple Bach. of Div. of Linc. Coll. sometimes M. of A. and
Fellow of Trin. Coll. near to Dublin, was then incorporated Bach. of Div. --
The said degree he took there 18. June 1630, and in the beginning of March
following he was licensed to proceed in this University, as it is before told
you. This person, who was Brother to Sir Joh. Temple Knight, Master of the
Rolls, and one of his Majesty's Privy Council in Ireland, continued not long in
Linc. Coll. for upon the turn of the times in 1641, I find him in London to be
a forward Preacher, and about that time Minister of Battersea in Surrey,
afterward a frequent Preacher before the Members of the Long Parliament, and
one of the Assembly of Divines; which is all I know of him, only he has
certain Sermons in print which he preached before the said Members; one of
which is entit. Christ's government in and over his people, before the H. of
Com. at their Fast 26 Oct. 1642, on Psalm. 2. 6. Land. 1642. qu.

Creations.
Apr. 11. John Juxon an Officer belonging to the Lord Treasurer (qui ad cubitum
summi totius Angliae Thesaurarii a computis est, as the Register has it) was
declared Bach. of the Civil Law by a Diploma then read and sealed. -- He was
nearly related to Dr. Juxon Bishop of London and Lord Treasurer of England.

Philip Warwick Secretary to the Lord Treasurer (qui ad cubitum etc. ab
epistolis est, as in the said Reg.) was also diplomated Bach. of the Civ. Law
the same day. -- This noted person who was Son of Thom. Warwick Organist of the
Abbey Church of S. Peter in Westminster, and he the Son of Thom. Warwick of
Hereford, descended from the Warwicks or Warthwykes of Warwick in Cumberland,
was born in the said City of Westminster, educated in Eaton Coll. School near
Windsore, and was for a time Chorister at Westminster. Afterward he traveled
into France, and was much at Geneva under the instruction and good counsel of
Deodatus the famous Divine. Thence returning into his native Country, with many
accomplishments, became Secretary to the Lord Treasurer before mentioned, one
of the Clerks of the Signet, and in 1640 was elected a Burgess for the Town of
Radnor in Wales, to sit in that Parliament which began at Westminster 3 Nov.
the same year. But perceiving soon after, what desperate courses the Members
thereof took, he retired to his Majesty, was with him at Oxon, and sat in the
Parliament there, an. 1643, at which time and after, he had his Lodging in
University Coll. and his Counsel much relied upon by his Majesty. Afterward he
was one of the Commissioners to treat with those appointed by Parliament, for
the surrender of the Garrison of Oxon an. 1646, and in 1648 he did attend his
Majesty in his disconsolate condition in the Isle of Wight. In the times of
Usurpation, he was involved in the same troubles, as all Loyalists were; but
after his Majesty's Restoration, being then fixed in the Clerkship of the
Signet, he became Secretary to Thomas Earl of Southampton Lord Treasurer of
England, in which place he acted so much, and so dexterously, that he, being
then a Knight, was usually called Sir Philip the Treasurer. This person tho he
has published nothing, yet he has left behind him several things fit for the
Press, among which are (1) Memoirs or reflections upon the Reign of K. Chapter 1.
in fol. (2) Of Government as examined by Scripture, Reason, and the Law of the
Land: or, true weights and measures between Sovereignty and Liberty. fol. etc.
He was esteemed by those that knew him to be a person of a public spirit,
above the riches and preferments of the World, and to be just in all his
Actions, and needed not therefore that Character which a certain nameless
Author The Author of (...), etc. printed 1677. p. 1^.
gives of him thus, that he never lies more than when he professes to speak the
sincerity of his heart. He died on the 17 of the Call. of Feb. 1682, aged 74
years, and was buried in the Church at Chiselherst in Kent, where he had an
Estate. I have seen an Epitaph made on him by Dr. Tho. Pierce, Dean of
Salisbury, the first part of which runs thus, Cavesis tibi viator, ne legens,
lugeas: nam cujus fidem veriverbio Carolus primus celebravit, (Carolusque
secundus expertus est.) Nec majora quidem nec plura de se dici voluit. Vir
coelo natus, bonorum in terris desiderium, optimus very aestimator, aequi
b^nique tenacissimus Philippus Warwick, etc. His ^on and Heir was Philip
Warwick Esquire, sometimes Envoy extraordinary from his Majesty to the King of
Sweeden, who returning post thence, to the Court at Newmarket, in order partly
to take the last breath of his Father, died suddenly of an Apoplexy there in
his bed, on Monday the 12 of March 1682.

The before mentioned Tho. Warwick, Father to Sir Philip, was also one of the
Organists of the Royal Chapel belonging to K Chapter 1. and was so admirably well
skilled in the theory part of music, that he composed a Song of forty parts,
for forty several persons, each of them to have his part entire from the other.
This Song was performed before his Majesty about the year 1635, by forty
Musicians, mostly belonging to his Majesty, and by some, to certain Churches,
among whom Ben. Rogers of Windsore was one.

Apr. 17. Joh. Maplet of Chapter Chapter was then actually created Master of Arts,
being about to take a journey to his Uncle in Holland. -- He is hereafter to be
remembered as a Writer.

July 4. Hen. Killigrew of Chapter Chapter was actually created Master of Arts. -- He
is to be numbered hereafter among the Writers of this University.

Theodorus Vchtmannus of Groaning was this year (in July) entered a Student in
the public Library, where he studied the supreme Faculty. He was afterward
Professor of the Hebrew Tongue at Leyden, and a publisher of several books.

An. Dom. 1639.
An. 15 Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. Dr. Frewen again, Jul. 13.

Proct. Edw. Fulham of Chapter Chapter Rob. Heywood of Brasn. Coll. Apr. 24.


Bach. of Music.
Jul. 5. Will. Ellis lately Organist of Eaton Coll. near to Windsore, now of S.
John's Coll. in Oxon. -- He has some small things of his faculty extant, as
Rounds, Catches, sacred Hymns and Canons for Voices, which you may partly see
in a book entit. A choice Collection of Catches, Rounds, and Canons for three
or four Voices. Land. 1652, etc. oct. collected and published by John Hilton
Bach. of Music, sometimes Organist of S. Margarets Church in Westminster, and
Clerk of the Parish belonging thereunto. This Mr. Ellis died in Magd. Parish in
the north Suburb of Oxon, and was buried in the Churchyard there, in the latter
end of the year 1680.

Bach. of Arts.
May 2. Christop. Love of New Inn.

16. Joh. Jackson of Gloc. Hall. -- This person who was a Cornish man born, is
not to be understood to be the same with that Jo. Jackson M. of A. of
Cambridge, as it seems, born at or near Hathornewait in the Forest of
Over-Wiersdale in Lancashire, beneficed in Essex, and Author of several tracts
of practical Divinity, as of (1) A taste of the truth as it is in Jesus,
consisting of ten questions and answers, etc. Land. 1648. oct. (2) Directions
for private Worship of God, etc. printed there the same year: besides diverse
Sermons published in 1641 and 42, etc.

Jun. 13. Rich. Parr of Exet. Coll. Gilb. Coals Will. Bew of New Coll.


The last was afterward Bishop of Landaff.

15. Thom. Manton of Heart Hall, lately of Wadh. Coll.

Joh. Nelme of Magd. Hall was admitted the same day. -- See among the Masters,
an. 1642.

19. Hen. Bennet Tho. Willis of Chapter Chapter


Of the first of these last two, you may see more among the created Doctors of
Law, an. 1663. The other was afterward an eminent Physician.

Jul. 4. Tho. Lamplugh Tho. Tullie John Dale of Qu. Coll.


The first of these three was afterward Archb. of York, the other two,
Writers, and the last afterward of Magd. Coll.

5. Joh. Corbet of Magd. Hall.

12. Joh. Maudit of Exet. Coll. -- See among the Masters, 1642.

24. Will. Russell of Lincoln Nov. 19. Sam. Aneley of Queens Dec. 10. Walt.
Blandford of Wadh. Coll.

The last of which three, was afterward Bishop of Worcester.

Jan. 18. Thankful Owen of Exeter, afterward of Lincoln, Coll. -- See among
the Masters in 1646.

23. Will. Scroggs of Pemb. Coll.

All which Bachelaurs, except Jackson, are to be mentioned among the Writers,
and in the Fasti, in the 2 Vol. of this Work, or elsewhere.

Adm. 217.

Bach. of Law.
Six were admitted this year, of whom Joh. Nicholson of Magd. College, lately
Proctor of the University, was one; and John Wainwright of Alls. Coll. another.
Both which were Chancellours after the Restoration of K. Chapter 2.

Mast. of Arts.
Apr. 29. Will. Creed of S. Joh. Coll.

May 2. George Lawrence of New Inn.

13. Benj. Wells of S. Mary's Hall, afterward of Alls. Coll.

16. Tho. Holyoake of Qu. Coll. Rob. Wickens of Chapter Chapter

July 4. Hen. Vaughan of Jes. 5. Thom. Gawen of New Feb. 5. Joh. Riland of
Magd. 22. Ralph Button Joh. Priaulx of Mert. Coll.




The last, saving one, was made afterward, by the Parliamentarian Visitors,
Orator of the University, and Canon of Chapter Church.

Adm. 135.

Bach. of Phys.
But three were admitted this year, of whom Edw. Lenton of Magd Hall was one,
and John Edwards of S. John's Coll. Reader of the Not. Philosophy Lecture
another.

Bach. of Div.
Jul. 4. Nich. Gibbon of S. Edm. Hall. Rich. Stannix of Qu. Coll.

Dec. 17. Tho. Good of Ball. Feb. 6. Noel Spark of C. C. Coll.

The last was a most excellent Latinist and Grecian, a most curious Critic in
all kind of Learning, and admirably well versed in the Fathers, yet never
published any thing. His Epitaph you may see in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon.
lib. 2. p. 244. b.

Edm. Vaughan of C. C. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Adm. 18.

Doct. of Law.
Jun. 13. Tho. Lloyd of S. Joh. 25. Herbert Pelham Jul. 5. Joh. Nicolson of
Magd. Coll.


The last who accumulated, was after his Majesty's Restoration made
Chancellor of the Dioc. of Glcc.

Doct. of Physic.
Jun. 14. Joh. Edwards of S. John's Coll. -- He accumulated the degrees in
Physic, being at this time, as I have before told you, Natural Philosophy
Professor.

19. Thom. Clayton of Pemb. Coll. -- He was afterward the Kings Professor of
Physic, Warden of Merton College and a Knight.

Jul. 5. Joh. Aubrey of Magd. Nov. 24. Bridstock Harford of Linc. Coll.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 29. John Oliver of Magd. Coll. -- This person who was a Kentish man born,
and originally of Mert. Coll. was afterward successively Demi and Fellow of
that of Magd. where his eminence in Learning and orthodox Principles in
Religion being conspicuous, he was taken into the Service of Dr. Laud Archb. of
Cant. and by him made his domestic Chaplain, and promoted in the Church; but
losing all in the time of the Rebellion, he was elected President of his Coll.
in Apr. 1644, upon the advancement of Dr. Frewen to the Sea of Lichfield. In
the latter end of 1647 he was turned out of his Presidentship, by the Committee
of Lords and Commons for the reformation of the University of Oxon, and in the
beginning of the next year, by the Visitors themselves in their own proper
persons. So that afterward living obscurely and in great hardship, wanted the
charities which he before bestowed on the poor and the public, being in a
manner the object of charity himself. On the 18 of May 1660, which was about a
fortnight before his Majesty's Return, he was by the Authority of Parl.
restored to his Presidentship, and on the 22 of the said month he took
possession thereof, being the first of all Loyal Heads that was restored to
what they had lost in this University. Soon after he was by his Majesty's
favor nominated Dean of Worcester, in the place of Dr. Rich. Holdsworth, who
died 1649; in which Dignity being installed 12 Sept. 1660, kept it to the time
of his death; which happening 27 Oct. 1661, was buried in Magd. Coll. Chapel.
This most learned, meek, and pious person, was strangely desirous to leave this
World, tho few alive had then such temptations to stay in it. That little which
he had got since his Majesty's return, he gave to pious uses, either to the
poor, or reparation of Churches, viz. S. Paul's, Winchester (of which he was
Prebendary) Worcester, and to his Coll. To which last his two immediate
Predecessors Wilkinson and Goodwin, who were thrust in by the Parliament and
Oliver for their Saintship and zeal to the blessed Cause, gave not a farthing,
but raked and scraped up all that they could get thence, as the rest of the
Saints then did in the University. Dr. Oliver left also a Legacy sealed up in a
paper to Sir Edw. Hyde then Earl of Clarendon and Lord Chanc. of England,
sometimes his Pupil while he was in the University, for upon his motion it was
that he was made Dean of Worcester, and Legacies to his Nephews, Niece (who had
been kind to him in his wants) and Servants. There was some affinity between
him and Tho. Oliver an eminent Physician and Mathematician, (educated, as I
conceive, in Cambridge) a practitioner of his Faculty at S. Edmunds Bury, where
he died and was buried in 1624. The Titles of his Works you may see in the
Oxford Catalogue.

May 9. Thom. Wykes of S. Joh. 17. Aaron Wilson of Queens Coll.

The last was now Archdeacon of Exeter, in which Dignity he was succeeded by
Edw. Young D. D. who occurs Archdeacon 1660.

Jun. 25. Bruno Ryves of Magd. Coll.

Jul. 2. Joseph Henshaw of Magd. 4. Nich. Gibbon of S. Edm. Hall. Hall.

That last of which accumulated.

5. Walt. Clark of Magd. Nov. 29. Will. Hobbs of Trin. Coll.

Incorporations.
June 13. Will. Mostyn M. of A. of S. John's Coll. in Cambr. -- One of both his
names occurs Archdeacon of Bango^ in 1640. and whether he succeeded in that
Dignity Edw. Hughes D. D. Rector of Woughton in Bucks, who died in Oct. 1633, I
cannot yet tell.

Rob. Lesley a noble young man of great hopes, Son of Henry Bishop of Down and
Connor, and M. of A. of Aberdene in Scotland, was incorporated the same day. --
The degree of Bach. of Arts was conferred upon him in the University of Dublin
23 March 1636, and that of Master at Aberdene 16 July 1638.

Jul. 2. Rob. Price Doct. of the Laws of Dublin. -- He was afterward Bishop of
Ferns and Leighlin in Ireland.

9. Edward Lane M. of A. of Cambridge. -- This person, who was educated in
Paul's School, and afterward in S. John's Coll. in the said University, became
Vicar of Northstrobury in Essex by the favor of the Lord Keeper Coventry 1630,
and was thence removed by the same hand to the Vicaridge of Spersholt near to
Rumsey in Hampshire. He has written Look unto Jesus: or, an ascent to the holy
mount, to see Jesus Christ in his glory, etc. Land. 1663. qu. and Mercy
triumphant: the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow bounds which have
been put to it by Dr. Lewis du Moulin, in his most antichristian book called
Moral reflections on the number of the elect, etc. Land. 1680. qu. In which
year the Author Ed. Lane was living at Spersholt. The said Book was reprinted
in the year following, with this title. Du Moulin's reflections reverberated,
being a full answer to a pamphlet, entit. Moral Reflections on the number of
the elect, together with several arguments about Transubstantiation, not in any
Author yet. To which is added, An answer to Mr. Edm. Hickeringil's scurrilous
piece, styled, The second part of naked truth.

Will. Gorton Bach. of Div. of the University of S. Andrew in Scotland, was
incorporated the same day. -- He was now Vicar of Lower Gitting in
Glocestershire.

Jul.... Thom. Mocket Mast. of Arts of Cambridge. -- He was educated in Queens
Coll. in that University, was about this time Minister of Holt in Denbighshire,
and afterward of Gildeston or Gildesden in Hertfordshire. He has published
certain Sermons, and Christmas, the Christians grand feast: its original,
growth, and observation: Also of Easter, Whitsontide, etc. Land. 1651. qu.
besides other things.

Jul.... Edm. Calamy Bach. of Div. of Cambridge. -- After he had left that
University he became a Preacher in S. Edmundsbury in Suffolk, where, as a
certain Sober sadness or, Historical Observations upon the proceedings,
pretenses, (...), of a preva^ing (...) in both (...), etc. (...) 1643. qu. page
3.
Anonymus observes, he complied with Bishop Wren the Diocesan, preached
frequently in his surplice and hood, read prayers at the rails, bowed at the
name of Jesus, and undertook to satisfy and reduce such as scrupled at those
ceremonies. Thus the said nameless Author; yet Calamy himself says (...) 1646.
page 9.
that while he continued there, he never bowed to* or toward, the Altar, never
read the book of sports, never read prayers at the high Altar, and that he
preached against Innovations, etc. But so it was, let he himself say what he
will that after he had continued 10 years at that place, and had complied, as
is before mentioned, Robert the puritanical Earl of Warwick usually said He
would be lost if he were not taken off* and so removed him to Rochford in
Essex: where continuing till the Long Parliament began in Nov. 1640, removed
thence to London, and became Minister of S. Mary Aldermanbury. About which time
the Presbyterian growing dominant, he became a great Evangelist of the new way,
encouraged the people to Rebellion, was one of those that joined in making
Smectymnus, which was the first deadly blow in England given to Episcopacy (as
diverse thought) that had happened for many years before. His house also in that
Parish, was a receptacle then for all Presbyterian Ministers, and there was the
Remonstrance framed against the Prelates, and all or most things hatched to
carry on the blessed and beloved Cause. At that time he was a frequent Preacher
before the Members of the Long Parliament, and he was the first that did openly
defend before a Committee of Parliament, that our Bishops were not only not an
order distinct from Presbyters, but that in Scripture a Bishop and a Presbyter
were all one. Afterward he was made one of the Assembly of Divines, took the
Covenant, to which he closely stuck ever after; and was not wanting on all
occasions to carry on the Cause, whereby he gained to himself not only a name
and repute among the Brethren, but also wealth, which was the chief thing he
looked after. After his Majesty's Return in 1660, there were ^ome offers in
private made to him of a Bishopric, conditionally that he would conform, but
made delays, thinking to enjoy that honorable Function as to be altered by the
Kings Declaration about ecclesiastical affairs, and to be used according to
that Declaration, and not according to the ancient Laws and Customs of the Land
and Church. Wherefore he being uncertain whether the Kings Declaration would
stand, or pass into a Law, he delayed to see the certainty; and when he saw
that the Declaration was dead, and Prelacy was as 'twas before, he utterly
refused it. So that continuing in the said Cure of S. Mary Aldermanbury till S.
Bartholomew's day in 1662, he was then ejected for Nonconformity.
Notwithstanding which, he preached soon after in the said Church on a Sunday,
and on the 28 of Dec. following, when then, among other dangerous passages, he
said the Ark of God was lost, and the glory was departed from Israel. For which
his contempt to the then late Act of Parliament for Uniformity, he was by
virtue of the L. Mayor's Mittimus committed Prisoner to Newgate on the 6 Jan.
1662, where continuing for some time, Dr. Rob. Wild the Presbyterian Poet made
and published a Poem on his Imprisonment, as did the Author called Hudibras.
Most of the things that he has written and published are Sermons: seven of
which at least, were preached before the Long Parliament, as (1) Englands
looking glass, before the House of Commons at their solemn Fast 22 Dec. 1641,
on Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. Land. 1642. qu. (2) Gods free mercy to England, before
the House of Commons at their solemn Fast 23 Feb. 1641, on Ezekiel. 36. 32. Land.
1642. qu. (3) The Noblemans pattern of true and real thankfulness, at a solemn
Thanksgiving 15 Jun. 1643, on Josh. 24. 15. Land. 1643. qu. (4) Englands
antidote against the plague of Civ. War, before the House of Commons at their
Fast, on Acts 17. latter part of the 13 verse. Land. 1645. qu. (5) An
indictment against England because of her self-murdering divisions, before the
House of Lords at their Fast 25 Dec. (Christmas day) 1644, on Math. 12. 25.
latter part. Land. 1645. qu. etc. Afterward he published The great danger of
Covenant refusing and Covenant breaking, etc. preached before the L. Mayor,
Sheriffs, Aldermen, Ministers, etc. of London, on 2 Timothy 3. 3. Land. 1646. qu.
Sermon. at the funeral of Sam. Bolton; another before the L. Mayor, called The
monster of self-seeking anatomized; five Sermons entit. The godly man's ark; or
a city of refuge in the day of his distress, printed several times in tw. The
eighth Edition of which was printed at Land. 1683. The first Sermon was
preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizab. Moore, to which are added her Evidences
for Heaven; and the other four were preached on several occasions. Another
Sermon. to the native Citizens of London called The City remembrancer, in oct.
Sermon at the funeral of Rob. Earl of Warwick, an. 1658. Sermon at the funeral
of Simeon Ash an. 1662, and about the same time A farewell Sermon when he was to
leave S. Mary Aldermanbury, etc. He has also written A just and necessary
Apology against an unjust invective, published by Mr. Hen. Burton in a late
book of his entit. Truth still Truth, though shut out of doors, etc. Land.
1646. qu. Also The art of divine Meditation, in oct. and A leading case, etc.
At length having lived to a fair age, gave way to fate in October. 1666, being
soon after the grand Conflagration of the City of London, which hastened his
end, but where buried, unless within the precincts of the Church of S. Mary
Aldermanbury, which a little before was consumed by the said Fire, I cannot yet
tell. He left behind him a son named Benjamin, afterward D. of D. a loyal
person, excellent preacher, and a zealous man for the Church of England. Of
Edm. Calamy see more in Jos. Caryl in the other Vol.

Jul. 10. Thom. Fleetwood Doctor of the Laws of Padua. -- He was now, or
lately, of Alls. Coll.

Oct. 12. George Hammond Scholar of Trin. Coll. near to Dublin, and Bach. of
Arts there.

Nov. 9. Dudley Loftus of Trin. Coll. before mentioned, was incorporated Bach.
of Arts, as he had stood there; which degree was conferred upon him in that
University (Dublin) 19 Jan. 1637.

Dec. 17. Richard Roll Bach. of Arts of Cambr. -- He was now of Gloc. Hall,
but originally of New Inn, which is all I know of him.

March 16. Edw. Harrison Bach. of Arts of S. John's Coll. in Cambridge.

Creations.
Jun. 14. Joh. Birkenhead of Oriel Coll. was declared Master of Arts, and
admitted to the degree in the Congregation house, by virtue of the Diploma of
the Archb. of Canterbury, dated 5 October. 1639. I shall make mention of this
person at large in the second Volume of this Work.

An. Dom. 1640.
An. 16 Car. 1.
Chanc. Dr. Laud Archb. of Canterbury.

Vicechanc. Christop. Potter D. D. Provost of Queens Coll. and Dean of
Worcester.

Proct. Peter Allibond of Linc. Coll. Nich. Greaves of Alls. Coll. Apr. 15.


But the senior dying in the Parish of S. Bride in London about the beginning
of Feb. Will. Watson of the same Coll. was within few days after elected into
his place, and admitted according to the Caroline Cycle.

Bach. of Music.
July 9. Arthur Philipps Organist of Magd. Coll. and public Professor of the
musical Praxis of this University. -- Afterward; upon the change of the times,
and a perfect foresight of the ruin of the Church, he changed his Religion for
that of Rome, and became Organist to Henrietta Maria Qu. of England. From whose
service being dismissed, he returned into England, and was entertained by a Roman
Catholic Gent. called Caryll of Sussex, He has made several vocal
compositions of two and three parts, which have been tried and commended by
several great Masters of Music; but whether any of them are extant, I cannot
yet tell. One Pet. Philipps an English man and Organist to Albert the Archduke
of Austria, has composed and published Madrigals for eight voices. Antwerp
1599. qu. dedicated to Sir Will. Stanley a Colonel of a Regiment of English and
Walloons. To which Peter Philipps, Arthur before mentioned was nearly related,
if not descended from him.

Bach. of Arts.
Apr. 22. Humph. Brook of S. John's Coll.

June 4. Henr. Stanhope of Exeter Coll. Son of the Earl of Chesterfield.

George Jolliff of Pembr. afterward of Wadham, College, was admitted the same
day.

11. Sim. Ford of Magd. Hall.

July 7. Martin Llewellin of Chapter Chapter

Oct. 24. John Fell Rich. Allestrie of Chapter Chapter


Nov. 3. Will. Joyner of Magd. Coll.

6. George Strading of Jesus, afterward of Allsoules, Coll. -- See among the
created Doct. of Div. 1661.

10. Philip Stephens of S. Alb. Hall. -- See among the Doct. of Phys. an. 1633.

Feb. 9. Will. Jackson of Magdalen, afterward of Brasnose, Coll. a noted
Grammarian.

All which Bachelaurs, except Stanhope, will be at large mentioned elsewhere.

Adm. 181.

Bach. of Law.
May 19. Rich. Whitlock of Alls. Coll.

21. John Manley of Magd. Hall. -- He afterward, as it seems studied the
common Law, and became eminent therein.

Besides these two, were nine more admitted, among whom Joh. Hall of S. Alb.
Hall was one, a younger Son of Dr. Jos. Hall Bishop of Exeter.

Mast. of Arts.
Mar. 28. Joh. Goad of S. Joh. Jun. 18. Sam. Fisher of Magd. Coll.

Jun.... Joh. Bachler or Bachiler of Gloc. Hall. -- He is not to be understood
to be the same with Joh. Bachiler Author of Golden sands, etc. Land. 1647, The
Virgins pattern, etc. Land. 1661. oct. and of several Sermons, because he was
bred in Emanuel Coll. in Cambridge.

31. Tho. Weaver of Chapter Chapter

Jul. 9. Joh. French of New Inn.

Oct. 20. Dudley Loftus of Vniv. Nov. 3. Will. Dingley of Magd. Coll.

Jan. 16. Will. Hughes of New Inn.

Mar. 6. Edw. Chamberlayne of S. Edm. 22. John Hinkley of S. Albans Hall.

Adm. 108.

Bach. of Phys.
July 18. Edw. Greaves of Alls. Franc. Goddard of Exet. Coll.


Whether the last was afterward a Writer, I cannot tell. The first I am sure
was.

Bach. of Div.
Jun. 20. Francis Davies of Jesus Coll. Jul. 7. George Bathurst of Trin. COll.
The last of these two, who was Fellow of the said Coll. and a Native of
Garsingdon near to Oxon, has extant Oration funebris in obitum desideratiss.
viri Thomae Alleni Coll. Trinit olim socii, and Aulae Glocestrensis 62 annos
commensalis. Land. 1632* qu. He was afterward engaged in his Majesty's
Service, was a Defendant within the Garrison of Farringdon in Berks. where he
died of a wound in the thigh, about 1644.

9. John Webberley of Linc. Coll. Jan. 30. Tho. Masters of New Coll.
The first of these two, who was the Son of Thom. Webberley of East-Kirbey in
Lincolnshire, was now esteemed by all a high flown Socinian, and afterward a
desperate Zealot for the Kings cause in the time of the grand Rebellion. He had
translated into English several Socinian books; some of which he had published
without his name set to them: and others which were laying by him, were taken
out of his study by the Parliamentarian Visitors, an. 1648, in which year he
suffered much for his Loyalty by Imprisonment first, and afterward by
Expulsion. See in Hist. and Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. lib. 1. p. 405. a. b. etc.

Adm. 16.

Doct. of Law.
July 2. Rich. Chaworth of Chapter Chapter -- He was afterward Vicar General to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, a Knight, Chancellor of Chichester and London. He
died and was buried at Richmond in Surrey in June or July 1673.

Rouland Scudamore of Brasn. Coll. was admitted the same day.

Oct. 17. Thom. Hyde of New Coll. -- He was a younger Son of Sir Laur. Hyde of
Salisbury Knight, was about this time Chancellor of that place, and at length
Judge of the High Court of Admiralty. He died in 1661.

Doct. of Phys.
Jun. 9. Charles Bostock of Chapter Chapter -- Not one besides him was licensed to
proceed this year.

Doct. of Div.
Apr. 18. Herbert Croft of Chapter Chapter

Jun. 25. Hen. Croke of Brasn. Coll.

26. Sebastian Smith of Chapter Chapter -- He was now, or lately, Prebendary of
Peterborugh, and Chauntor of the Church of Wells, to which last he was admitted
on the death of Edw. Abbot, 9 of March 1634, and at length became Canon of Chapter
Chapter in Oxon.

Jul. 2. Will. Evans of Qu. Coll. now Prebendary of Hereford.

Nov. 28. Rob. Neulin President of C. C. Coll. -- He was ejected from his
Presidentship in 1648, was restored in 1660, and dying 5 March 1687, aged 90
years or more, was buried in C. C. Coll. Chapel.

Incorporations.
Jul. 14. Thom. Stanley M. of A. of Cambridge. -- This Gentleman who was the
only Son of Sir Tho. Stanley Knight, was born at Cumberlow in Hertfordshire,
educated in Grammatical learning in his Fathers House under one Mr. Will.
Fairfax, in Academical in Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, in the quality of a
Gentleman Commoner; where he became a very early proficient in several sorts of
polite learning. In the times of Usurpation he lived in the Middle Temple,
where he advanced his knowledge much by the Communication of his Kinsman Edw.
Sherburne Esquire; then lately returned from his Travels, became much deserving of
the Commonwealth of Learning in general, and particularly honored for his
smooth air and gentle spirit in Poetry, which appears not only in his own
genuine Poems, but also from those things which he has translated out of the
ancient Greek, and modern, Italian, Spanish, and French, Poets. His writings
are (1) The History of Philosophy, containing those on whom the Attribute of
Wise was conferred. Land. 1655. fol. in three parts, with Stanley's Picture
before them. The second Vol. was printed in 1656. fol. containing five parts,
making in all eight parts: And at the end of the said second Vol. is The
doctrine of the Stoics, in two parts. The third Vol. of the said Hist. of
Philosophy was published in 1660. fol. contained also in several parts. All
which parts, illustrated with Cuts, were reprinted 1687, fol. (2) History of
Chaldaick Philosophy, etc. Land. 1662. (3) Poems. Land. 1651. oct. dedicated to
Love; some of which, (and not others in his Translations) had, if I am not
mistaken, musical Compositions set to them by John Gamble in his book entit.
Airs and Dialogues, to be sung to the Theorbo-Lute or Bass Viol. Land. 1651.
fol. Which J. Gamble, by the way I must let the Reader know, was bred up in the
condition of an Apprentice under a noted Master of Music called Ambrose
Beyland, was afterward a Musician belonging to a Playhouse, one of the Cornets
in the Kings Chapel, one of the Violins to K. Chapter 2. and a Composer of Lessons
for the Kings Playhouse. (4) Translation of, with Annotations on, Europa, (in
the Idyll. of Theocritus) Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils. Land. 1649. oct. To
the second Edition of which, he added the Translation of, and Notes on,
Anacreon, Bion, Kisses by Secundus. printed 1651. oct. (5) Version of, and
Commentary on Aeschyli tragoediae septem cum scoliis Graecis omnibus,
deperditorum Drammatum fragmentis. Land. 1664. fol. He also translated into
English, without Annotations (1) Aurora Ismenia and The Prince, written by Don
Juen Perez de Montalvan. Land. 1650. second Edit. (2) Oronta the Cyprian
Virgin, by Signior Girolamo Preti. Land. 1650. second Edit. (3) A Platonic
discourse of love, written in Ital. by Joh. Picus Mirandula. -- printed 1651.
oct. (4) Sylvia's Park, by Theophile, Acanthus complaint, by Tristan, Oronto,
by Preti, Echo, by Marino, Loves Embassy, by Boscan, The Solitude, by Gongora.
-- All printed 1651. oct. etc. This learned Gent. Tho. Stanley died in his
Lodgings in Suffolk street in the Parish of S. Martin in the Fields in the City
of Westminster, 12 Apr. 1678, and was buried in the Church there. He left
behind him a Son of both his names, educated in Pembroke Hall in Cambridge,
who, when very young, translated into English Claud. Elianus his Various
Histories.

Jul..... Thomas Philipot of Cambridge was incorporated after the Act time, as
a certain private note tells me, but in what degree, unless in that of Master
of Arts, I cannot yet find. -- He was the Son of John Philipot of Kent, (Herald
of Arms by the title of Somerset) by Susan his Wife only daughter and heir of
Will. Glover, Brother to that most skilful Genealogist Robert Glover Somerset
Herald, was educated in Clare Hall, commenced M. of A. and was by those that
well knew him, esteemed a tolerable Poet when young, and at riper years well
versed in matters of Divinity, History and Antiquities. He has extant under
his name (1) Elegies offered up to the memory of Will. Glover Esquire; late of
Shaldeston in Bucks. Land. 1641. qu. (2) A congratulatory elegy offered up to
the Earl of Essex, upon his investiture with the dignity of Lord Chamberlayne.
Land. 1641. qu. (3) Poems, Land. 1646. oct. (4) Villare Cantianum: or, Kent
surveyed and illustrated. Land. 1659. and 1664. fol. To which is added, An
historical Catalogue of the High Sheriffs of Kent, by John Philipot the Father,
who indeed is the true Author of Viliare Cantianum. (5) The Cripples complaint:
a Sermon. printed 1662. qu. (6) The original and growth of the Spanish Monarchy,
united with the house of Austria. Land. 1664. oct. (7) Antiquitas Theologica
and Gentilis. Or two discourses. The first concerning the original of Churches,
and their direct and collateral endowments: the second touching the Religion of
the Gentiles, etc. Land. 1670. in tw. (8) Historical discourse of the original
and growth of Heraldry. pr. 1672. oct. (9) Self-homicide-Murther: or, some
Antidotes gleaned out of the Treasuries of our modern Casuists and Divines
against that horrid and reigning sin of self-murder. Land. 1674. qu. He has
written and published other things which I have not yet seen (among them is The
life of Aesop, in English) and died in 1684, or thereabouts.

Jul. 15. Will. Blake Doct. of the Civ. Law of Padua. -- This Will. Blake who
was now, or lately, Fellow of Wadham Coll. as also Brother to Rob. Blake
General at Sea in the Reign of Oliver, died at Bridgwater in Somersetshire 1667.

Nov.... Isaac Basire D. of D. of Cambridge. -- This learned Doctor who had
that degree conferred on him there, in July this year, and is styled in the
public Register of this time Vir doctissimus -- ingenii and doctrinae
ornamentis praeditus, was born in the Isle of Jersey, and was about this time
one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, and soon after Archdeacon of
Northumberland in the place of Ever Gower Bach. of Div. who had that dignity
conferred on him about 1640 by the ceasing of Will. Flathers Bach. of Div.
collated thereunto 24 Nov. 1636. In the time of the Rebellion Dr. Bafire fled
to Oxon, adhered to his Majesty's cause, preached frequently before him and the
Parliament there, and was an equal sharer in afflictions with other Loyalists.
About the year 1646 he left the Nation and traveled into remote Countries,
purposely to propagate the Doctrine established in the British Church, among
the Greeks, Arabians, etc. as to the Island of Zante near Peloponesus, thence
to Morea, where the Metropolitan of Achaia prevailed with him to preach twice
in Greek, at a meeting of some of the Bishops and Clergy. From thence, after he
had traveled through Apulia, Naples and Sicily, (in which last place he had
been once before) he embarked for Syria, where, at Aleppo he continued some
months, and had frequent Conversation with the Patriarch of Antioch. From
Aleppo he went to Jerusalem, and so traveled all over Palestina. At Jerusalem
he received much honor, both from the Greeks and Latins: from the last he
procured an entrance into the Temple of the Sepulcher, at the rate of a Priest.
Afterward returning to Aleppo, he passed over Euphrates, and went to
Mesopotamia. Thence to Aleppo again, and at length to Constantinople in 1653;
in which year he designed to pass into Egypt, to survey the Churches of the
Cophties there, and to confer with the Patriarch of Alexandria, as he had done
with three Patriarchs besides, partly to acquire the knowledge of those
Churches, and partly to publish ours, quantum fert status. Afterward he went
into Transylvania, and was entertained by Prince George Rogoczi (or Rogotzi)
the second, Prince of that Country, by whom he was entrusted with the Chair in
the Divinity School. After the Return of King Charles 2. to his Dominions, he
took his leave of that Country, then in broils, returned into England, took
possession of his Archdeaconry, and was made Prebendary of Durham: which
Dignities he kept to his dying day. He has written (1) Deo and ecclesiae
sacrum. Sacrilege arraigned and condemned by St. Paul, Romans 2. 22. Oxon.
1646. qu. Land. 1668. oct. (2) Diatriba de antiqua ecclesiae Britannicae
liberate. Brugis 1656. oct. The MS. of which being found in the Cabinet of
John Lord Hopton after his decease, by Rich. Watson an exiled Theologist for
his loyalty, was by him published at Bruges. Afterward the said Watson
translated it into English, and put it out under this title The ancient liberty
of the Britannick Church, and the legitimate exemption thereof from the Roman
Patriarchate, discoursed in four positions. Land. 1661. oct. Dedicated by the
said Watson by his Epistle dated from Caen in Normandy 12. Aug. 1660. to Sir
Rich. Brown Clerk of the Privy Council to his Majesty of Great Britain, he
supposing then that Basire the Author had been dead in Transylvania. Three
chapters or positions of which, were selected from a Latin MS. written by F.
John Barnes of the order of St. Benedict, as I have elsewhere told you. (3)
Letter to Sir Rich. Brown Resident at Paris for his Majesty of Great Britain
relating his travels and endeavors to propagate the knowledge of the doctrine
and discipline, established in the Britannick Church among the Greeks,
Arabians. etc. dated from Pera near to Constantinople 20. July 1653, and
printed at the end of The ancient Liberty of the Britannick Church, etc. (4)
History of the English and Scotch Presbytery, etc. printed 1659. 60. oct. (5)
Oration privata, boni Theologi (speciatim concionatoris practici) parts
praecipuas complectens. Land. 1670. in half a sh. in oct. (6) The dead man's
real speech; Sermon. on Heb. 11. 4. at the funeral of Dr. John Cousin late Bishop
of Durham, 29. Apr. 1672. Land. 1673. oct. (7) A brief of the life and
dignities, of the benefactions and principal actions, etc. of Dr. John Cousin
late Bishop of Durham. Printed with the former, together with An appendix of
his profession and practice, and of his last will concerning religion. This Dr.
Basire, who, without doubt, has published other things, paid his last debt to
nature in a good old age, on the twelfth day of October. 1676, and was buried in
the Cemetery belonging to the Cathedral of Durham, near to the body of an
ancient servant that had lived many years with him, and not by that of his Wife
in the Cathedral. In his Archdeaconry succeeded Will. Turner Rector of Stanhope
in the County Palate. of Durham, M. of A. (afterward D. D.) and sometimes
Fellow of Trin. Coll. in Oxon, a younger Son of Dr. Tho. Turner, sometimes Dean
of Canterbury.

Jan. 14. Joh. Regius (King) Londino-Anglus, Doctor of Phyf. of the University
of Leyden in Holland, was then incorporated. Which Degree was conferred upon
him in the said Univ. 1638.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
PAradise Lost in twelve Books by John Milton with Cuts in Folio.

A Geographical Dictionary, representing the present and ancient Names of all
the Countries, Provinces, remarkable Cities, Universities, Ports, Towns,
Mountains, Seas, Streights, Fountains, and Rivers, of the whole World; their
Distances, Longitudes and Latitudes, with a short Historical account of the
same and their present state; to which is added an Index of the Ancient and
Latin Names, by Edmund Bohun Esquire; the Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged,
together with several useful Maps not in the former Edition.

Dr. Busby's Greek Grammar, newly reprinted with amendments.

History of the Council of Trent, in 8 Books by Father Paul in Folio.

Bishop Sandersons Sermons Folio.

A Critical History of the Text of the New Testament, wherein is firmly
established the truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of the Christian
Religion is laid, by Richard Simon Priest 4to.

The life of that most Illustrious Prince Charles 5. late Duke of Lorraine, and
Bar. Generalissimo of the Imperial Armies, rendered into English from the Copy
lately printed at Vienna, written by a Person of Quality, and a great Officer
in the Imperial Army.

The Morals of Confucius a Chinese Philosopher, who flourished above Five
hundred years before the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, being one
of the most choicest pieces of learning remaining of that Nation.

The art of practical measuring easily performed by a two foot Rule, which
slides to a foot, on which is the best measure of round Timber the common way;
also the true measure of round, square, or other Timber, or Stone, Boards,
Glass paving, Painting, Wainscot, etc. Gauging of Casks, and Gauging and
Inching of Tuns, containing brief instructions in Decimal Arithmetic, the best
way of using the Logarithms according to Mr. Townley, the use of a new Diagonal
Scale, of a 100 parts in a quarter of an Inch, applied to Gunters Chain; and
lastly some useful directions in Dialling not hitherto published by Henry
Coggeshall Gent.

An account of the proceedings of the Right Reverend Father in God Jonathan
Lord Bishop of Exeter, in his late Visitation of Exeter College in Oxford, the
Second Edition, to which is added the censure of the University of Oxford upon
the Naked Gospel.

A defense of the proceedings of the Right Reverend the Visitor and Fellows of
Exeter College in Oxford, with an answer to 1. the Case of Exeter College
related and vindicated. 2. The account examined. The reason of Mr. Bays
changing his Religion considered in a Dialogue in three parts.

The second part of Mr. Wallers Poems containing his alteration of the Maids
Tragedy, and whatever of his is yet unprinted, together with some other Poems,
Speeches, etc. that were printed severally, and never put into the first
Collection of his Poems.

A Vindication of Mr. James Colmer, Bachelor of Physic and Fellow of Exeter
College in Oxford, from the calumnies of three late Pamphlets. 1st. A Paper
published by Dr. Bury 1689. 2. The account examined. 3. The Case of Exeter
College related and vindicated; to which are annexed the Authentic Copies of
the Affidavits relating to that affair.

A discourse sent to the late King James, to persuade him to embrace the
Protestant Religion, by Dr. Sam. Parker late Lord Bishop of Oxford; to which
are prefixed 2 Letters the first from Sir Leolin Jenkins on the same subject,
the 2. from the said Bishop with the discourse, all printed from the original
Manuscript Papers.

TABLE or INDEX TO Athenae and Fasti Oxonienses.
A.
ABbot Edw. page 792. 901. George 333. 500. 511.629. Maurice, 527. Rob. 365.
366. 415. 499. 621. 800. 801.
Abel Tho. 47 Abington or Habington Edw. Tho. 735. 88 Ab^e Franc. 691 Abulines
Jo. 702. 706 Ackworth Geo* 726 A^^osd Rog. 835 Adams Bern. 625 Aglionby or
Eglionby Jo. 303. Edw. 726 Airay Hen. 341. 481. See Ayray. Akers Jo 678
Alabaster Will. 233. 768 Alan, see Allen. Alaskie or Laskie Alb. 244. 313. 492
Alberti Geo. 872 Alcock Tho. 654 Alexander Franc. 809 Aldem. Mardoc. 734. 821
Alderne Edw. 893 Aldridge or Aldrich Rob. 22. 79. 80. 583. 679. 680. Tho. 725
Algre Gasp. 849 Allen Jo. 31 Allen Tho. 86. 397. 514. 413. 420. 420. 459. 466.
492. 493. 572. Will. 169. 234. 235. 236. 237. 616 Alley Will. 127. 598. Rog.
127 Allibond Pet. 448. 900. Rich. 448 Allyn* see Allen. Allysbury Will. 685
Al^wyck Will. 556 Alsop Bern. 34 Alston Edw. 853 Al^on Andr. 685 Alvey Rich.
262. 725 Amama Sext. 449 Ambrose Luke 338 Ammonius Andr. 14. 137. 641. 563
Amner Joh. 815 Anderson Edm. 281. 369 Anderton Laur. 498. 480 Andrews Jo. 470.
Lanc. 476. 538. 751. 765. 783. Nich. 853. Rich. 802 Angelus Chr. 526 Anthony
Franc. 428. Jo. ib. Char. ib. Antoninus and his Itin. 87 Antonius Nich. 56
Anwykyll Jo. 16 Anyan Th. 810 Apsland Will. 720 Aquepontanus Jo. See
Bridgwater. Arche Rich. 138. 682. 690 Archer Sim. 504. Rich. 690 Arden Will.
662 Aretius Jac. 817 Argall Jo. 284. Rich. ibid. Aris Jo. 867 Arnold Will. 659
Arthur Malac. 657 Arundell Jo. 75. 76. 552 Ascham Rog. 695 Ash Sim. 543
Ashbrook 729 Ashdowne Jo. 643. 644 Ashley Ant. 769 Ashmole 16. 114 Ashton Hugh
673. 645 Ashworth Hen. 795 A^kew Aeg. 282 Asser Men. 356. 412 Astley Rich. 369
Aston Hug. 645. Rog. 796 Ascough Will. 638 Atey Arth. 721 Athequa Geo. 560
Atherto Jo. 632 Atkyns Th. 709. Jo. 827 Atkinson Rich. 710. Tho. 758. b. alias
760. 867. 868 Atslow Edw. 727 Atwater Will. 58. 562 Aubertus Ant. 894 Audley
Edm. 566. Rob. 636. 700 Aukland Jo. 651 Austin Sam. 472 Awbrey Will. 702. 710.
777 Awood or a Wood Rich. 433. Tho. 793 Aylesbury Th. 853 Aylisbury Th. 390.
391. 493. 792 Aylmer or Elmer Jo. 681. 690. 726. 736. 756. b. alias 758.
Theoph. 223 Aylworth Ant. 752 Ayray Mart. 267
B.
BAber Franc. 860 Babington Brute 745. Franc. 717. 719. Gerv. 498. 745. 602.
Zach. 780 Babthorpe Rob. 658 Bachler or Bachiler Joh. 900 Bacon Fr. 452. 534.
Nich. 139. 769 Baconthorp Jo. 295 Bailye Rich. 537 Baggard Tho. 677. 705
Bagnall Rob. 767 Bagnold Rob. 767 Bagshaw Edw. 480. 804. Christ. 426 Bagwell
Hen. 679 Bainbridge Chr. 556. 557. 564. 568 Baker Aug. 515. Geo. 632. Joh. 36.
77. Rich. 531. Sam. 845 Balborow Will. 650 Baldwin Franc. 174. Will. 113 Bale
Jo. 60. 61. 67. 68. 70. 94. 99. 125. 174. 493. 345 Bale Rob. 4 B^les Pet. 249
Baley Walt. 224. 225 Balgay Nich. 262. 758. b. alias 760 Ball Hen. 772. Joh.
542. 543. 655. Tho. 861 Ballard Phil. 638. 691 Balsam Scip. 775 Bancroft Rich.
632. 723. 751. 801 Joh. 632. 633 Banger Rich. 660 Banks Jo. 507. Tho. 737. Hen.
814 Banister Jo. 195. alias 197 Barbatus Jos. 790 Barber Jo. 683. Rich. 675.
687. 693. 739. 104. 727 Barcham Joh. 389. 418. 542 Bard Dudl. 886 Bardney Rich.
5 Barefoot Jo. 744 Barker Hug. 793. Will. 709. 800 Barklay Alex. 71 Balcanquall
Jo. 815. Sam. 831. Walt. 807. 831 Bargrave Is. 812. 878 Barlow Jo. 496. 638.
Ranulph 301. 783. 888. Randolph or Ralph 783. 797. 809. Tho. 397. 421. Will.
121. 269. 310. 352. 403. 421. 476. 538. 571. 573. 597. 598. 694. 761. 766. 786
Barnard Sam. 894 Barnardus Jo. 753 Barnes Barnab. 299. ^man. 750. Jo. 180. 473.
Jos. 259. Rich. 606. 607. 706. 747. Rob. 19. 81. 809 Barret Jo. 867. Rich. 433.
742. Tho. 677 Baro Pet. 740. 741 Baron Mil. 579. Steph. 42. 670 Barons Will.
553 Barrington Alex. 158 Barrough Fr. 819 Barrow Hen. 229. 387. Thom. 638 Barry
536 Barnston Joh. 821 Barthlet Rich. 647. Tho. 647. 807 Bartue Rich. 689
Barwick Jo. 798. 832. 855 Basing Rich. 721 Basire Is. 789. 902. 903 Baskervyle
Ed. 674. 681. Sim. 811 Bastard Tho. 367 Bate Rob. 685 Batts Rog. 830. Will.
383. 442. 292 Bateson Tho. 835 Bathe Will. 338 Bathurst Geor. 493. 900
Batmanson Jo. 23. 24 Bavant Jo. 706 Bave Sam. 860 Baughe Tho. 785 Baylie Hen.
700. 701. Jam. 841. Ralph 827 Rich. 875. 876 Bailey Jam. 781. 841. Joh. 472.
473. Lew. 485. 628. Tho. 486. 487 Baxter Rich. 263. 344 Baynes Brian 707
Baynham Jam. 23 Bayning Paul 874 Beacon Tho. 348. 726 Beadle Jo. 83 Beale Will.
522. Tho. 647 Beaumont Franc. 447. Hen. 733. 823. Joh. 446. 447. Tho. 568. 638.
Will. 646 Beauvois Cha. 820 Beawdley Will. 672. 677 Beccatell Lud. 93 Bid Ven.
255 Bedell Arth. 731. Hen. 711. 725. Tho. 643. 647 Bedingfield Rob. 868 Bedo
Joh. 715 Beecher Will. 398 Beel or Beal Th. 647. 569 Beeth Will. 2 Beisley
Rich. 702 Bekinsau Jo. 98 Belchiam Th. 185 Belchier Dabr. 782 Bele or Beel Th.
569 Bell Jam. 187. 704. 707. Joh. 584. 672. 682. 740. Rich. 553. Tho. 800
Bellamy 169. Rob. 733 Bellestrye Sim. 696 Bellot Cuthb. 690. Hugh 595 Belly Jo.
233. 729 Belsire Alex. 91. 674 Benefield Seb. 467. 468 Benese Rich. 112. 660
Benlowes Edw. 418 Benn Anth. 374 Bennet Christop. 219 Joh. 763. Rob. 600. 616.
735. Tho. 642. 848. Walt. 806. 808. Will. 559. 652. 675 Benson Geor. 800. Osw.
669 Bentham Tho. 603 Bear Rich. 640 Bereblock Jo. 723 Berkley 846. Gilb. 598
Bernard Dan. 755. b. alias 757. Joh. 725. Nath. 863. Nich. 632. 862. Rich. 258.
Tho. 725 Bertie or Bartue Rich. 689 Bertram the Priest 62. 513 Best Joh. 593.
599. 684 Beyland Ambr. 901 Bevans Franc. 753 Bexwick Hugh 562 Bickley Tho. 613.
614 Bicton Jam. 701 Biddle Jo. 843 Billingsley Hen. 284. 285. Rob. 285 Bilney
Tho. 21 Bilson Leon. 666. 699. Tho. 237. 264. 343. 344. 394. 417. 619 Binsley
Will. 608 Bird Joh. 845. Jos. 806. 807. Rich. 629. Tho. 651. Will. 443. 468.
759. 768. 843 Birkenhead Jo. 899 Birket Geor. 325 Bisse Jam. 295. Phil. 749
Bishop Jo. 879. Will. 622. 366, 414. 415 Bispham Sam. 876 Blackwell Georg. 325
Blagrave Dan. 317. Joh. ibid. Blague Tho. 752. 753 Blake Walt. 554. Will. 902.
Rob. 825. 826 Blandie Will. 147 Blaxton Marm. 742. 753 Blewet Humpi. 680
Bleythyn Will. 607 Blondevill Tho. 276 Blount Cha. 763. Chr. 420. 779. Mountjoy
763 Bliss Jo. 645 Blyth Hugh 693. 722. 739. Jam. 676. Jeff. 556. Joh. 551. 557
Bochart. Sam. 844 Bocher Will. 714 Bocking Edw. 653 Body Jo. 709. 739 Bodley
Josias 328. Laur. 817. Tho. 326. 327. 410 Bokeley Arth. 582. 583. Bold Jo. 740
Bolen Will. 79 Boleyne Geo. 385. See Bulleyn Bolton Edm. 452. Rob. 479. 480.
Sam. 481 Bond Den. 323. Hen. 433. Joh. 321. 322. 323. Laur. 779. Nich. 228. 749
Bonett Theoph. 472 Bonham Tho. 812 Bonner Edm. 123. 124. 125. 597 Booker Joh.
114 Board Andr. 60. 61 Bosgrave Jo. 180 Bosphorus Jo. 651 Bostock Rob. 878
Boswell Will. 276. 792. 805. 868 Boteler Jam. E. of Orm. 376. Tho. 381. 727.
Rob. 158 Both Cha. 559. Jo. 552. Laur. 552 Bouchier Tho. 185 Boughton Rich.
777. 792 Bourchier Jo. 29 Bourne Gilb. 128. 598. 675. 682. 713. 771. Joh. 775
Bournford Gilb. 102. 706 Bowen Walt. 132 Bownde Alex. 814. Nich. 743 Bowl or
Powle Jo. 690 Bowls Jo. 804. 822 Bowne Pet. 418 Bowsfield Th. 742 Boxall Jo.
57. 128. 129. 151. 687. 708. 716 Boil Jo. 621. Mich. 631. 891. Rich. 622. 631.
786 Boyse Jo. 397. 777. 812. Tho. 788 Brabourne Theoph. 333 Bradbridge Austin
122. Nich. 563. 647. 674. Will. 602. 723. 732 Braddock Tho. 135. 755. Bradford
Jo. 12. 78. 79. 106. 192 Bradshaw Franc. 800. Hen. 9. Will. 778 Bramston or
Brimston Th. 715 Brant Seb. 71 Brasbridge Tho. 185 Breewood Tho. 676 Breerwood
Tho. 676 Breisley 711 Brent Nath. 394. 398 Brentius Jo. 109 Brereton Will. 871
Brerewood Ed. 332. 333. Rob. 332. 333 Brett. Rich. 479. 517 Bretton Clem. 753
Bretturgh Cath. 530 Brian Fr. 49. Joh. 820. Math. 513 Briant Alex. 167 Bridge
Will. 857 Bridges Gray 796. Jo. ibid. 228. Will. 755. 813 Bridgman Hen. 884.
Jo. 481 Bridgwater 239. 711 Bridlington Tho. 574 Brien Theod. 567 Brigham Nic.
99 Briggs Hen. 469 Bright Hen. 757. b. alias 759. Tim. 346 Brimston or Bramston
Tho. 715 Brynkley Rich. 670 Brynknell Tho. 13. 646 Brinsley Jo. 16 Brisson
Barn. 409 Bristow Rich. 168 169 Brither Hen. 698 Broad Tho. 511. 333 Brockbey
Ant. 185. 690 Brodbridge Aust. 721 Broad Phil. 697 Brograve Jo. 517 Broke or
Brroke Christop. 419. 474. 840. 841: Hen. 648. Rob. 88. Sam. 840. Tho. 648.
Brokes Jam. 101. 592 Bromyerd Jo. 161 Bromwych 645 Brook George 735. Joh. 414.
Ralph 349. 411 Brook Lord, see Grevill Brooks Joh. 814 Broughton Hugh 394.
Rich. 854 Brounfleet Will. 590 Brown Anth. 119. 139. 149. Ed. 74. Geor. 580.
782. Humph. 120. Joh. 651. 694. 722. Rob. 291. Jonath. 868. Rich. 859. 832.
Sam. 487. 488. Tho. 329. 349. 412. 636. 852. 891. Will. 419. 686. 849 Brownlow
Joh. 894 Brownrig Ralph 863 Browswerd Jo. 193. 194 Bruce Edw. 796. Rob. 234.
886. Tho. 886 Bruen Joh. 457 Bruerne Rich. 701 Bruggs Gray 796 Brycot 679
Buchanan Geo. 45 Buckfast Arn. 659 Buckland Ralp. 317. 318 Buckler Walt. 686
Bulkley Tho. 725 Buckner Tho. 894. Will. 830 Buckridge Jo. 476. 597. 628
Budden Jo. 382 Buggs Sam. 526. 820 Bull Geor. 879. Hen. 146. Jo. 756. b. alias
758. 768 Bulkley Th. 242 Bulleyn Geor. 147. Hen. 147 Bullyngham Nich. 601. 610.
667 681. Joh. 714. 755. b. alias 757 Bunbury (...) 447 Bunney Edm. 307. 364.
365. 395. 658. 815. Franc. 355 Burbadge Rich. 791. Will. ibid. Burbanke Will.
137 Burby Edw. 888 Burgeis Jo. 662 Burges Eliz. 392. 851 Burges Jo. 261. 530.
533. 856 Burgo Nich. 667 Burbill Rob. 303 Burley Jo. 808 Burnet Gilb. 163
Burrell Perciv. 813 Burton Edw. 865. Hen. 442. 539. 814. 899. Joh. 659. 666.
Rob. 534. 646. Sam. 406. 442. 766 Will. 67. 69. 286. 287. 493 Bury Arth. 3
Buscawen 826 Bush Paul 89. 90. 91. 587 Bust Hen. 744 Butcher Will. 717 Butler
Edm. 579. Will. 720. Butts Hen. 478. 671. Will. 661 Byard Lib. 615 Byfield
Nic. 333. 402. Rich. 333 Bygod Franc. 39 Bynge Andr. 788. 815. Tho. 726 Byrch
Will. 130 Byrchensaw Maur. 650. 656 Bird Andr. 830. Joh. 81. 585. 649. 654.
Will. 641. 760 Byrom Georg. 856 Bysse Rob. 655
C.
CAde Anth. 800 Caesar Hen. 774. Jul. 738. 753 Calamy Ben. 897. Edm. 898. 899
Caldwell or Chaldwell Rich. 179 Calender Dan. 794 Calendrinus Caes. 837 Calfill
Jam. 127. 128. 250 Calverley Jo. 711. 766 Calvert Georg. 483. 484 Cambrensis
Girald. 270 Camden Will. 70. 87. 88. 341. 408. 409. 410. 760 Campian Edm. 164.
165. 241. 258. 279. 306. 625. 706 Campian Tho. 848 Can Joh. 543 Cannal Hugh 629
Canner Th. 677 Cantlow Joh. 641 Capell Rich. 405 Capellus Lud. 810 Caranza
Barth. 712 Cardmaker Jo. 683 Cardonius Camillus 756 Care Hen. 460 Carew Georg.
128. 451. 452. 665. 737. 764. Rich. 384. Tho. 283. 384 Carey Geor. 173. Hen.
816. Tho. 816 Carrier Ben. 777. 778 Carleton Dudl. 482. 483. 887. Geo. 278.
440. 627. Gerard. 691. Hen. 442 Carlisle Christop. 111 Carmacan Men. 559 Carne
Rich. 670 Carpenter Jo. 385. Nath. 440. 441. Rich. 438. 439. 440 Carre Rob.
330. 463. 464 Carryll Jo. 149 Carrington Gerv. 802 Carter Jo. 888. Rob. 646.
669. Will. 671 Cartwright Christ. 486. Jo. 321. Nich. 689 Carve Tho. 452
Carver Jo. 644 Carry Ant. 503. Hen. 500. 501. 503. Lucius 500. 501. 502. 503.
Lettice 503 Casaubon Is. 817. Mer. 244 Case Jo. 257. 259 Castle Tho. 651. 654.
Will. 599 Catheral Randall 731 Cavendish Will. 809 Caverell Phil. 415 Cawley
VV. 887 Caxton Will. 53 Cay Jo. 18. 68. 99. 589. See in Key Cecill Rob. 733.
794. Will. 140. 237. 309. 722. 727. 796 Celsus Max. 107 Chadderton Laur. 441.
Will. 602 Chalfout Rich. 891 Chaloner Edw. 422 Rob. 755. Tho. 103. 115. 229.
339 Chamber Jo. 277. 278. 564. 585. 682 Chamberlain Barth. 224. Geor. 224.
Pet. 837. Rob. 544. 545. 546. Tho. 837. Will. 546. Chambers Humph. 517. Rob.
352. Sab. 381 Chamney Maur. 159. 160 Champney Ant. 394 Chandler Jo. 734 Chapman
Geor. 289. 509. alias 519 Chard Tho. 576. 642. 645. Chardon Jo. 271. 615 Charke
Will. 263. 306 Charles I. King 262. 486. 824 Charles Lod. Count Pal. 889
Charlet Jo. 819 Charlton Joh 872 Chaucer Jeff. 52. 99 Chawney Maur. 159. 160
Chaundler Tho. 175 Chaworth Rich. 901 Cheadsey Will. 104 Cheast Tho. 778 Cheek
Jo. 65. 66. 69. 70. 111. 697. Will. 334 Chempes Ja. 849 Chester 835. Tho. 606
Cheston Steph. 79 Chetwind Edw. 529. 530. 758. b. alias 760. 855. Joh. 251.
497. Will. 275 Cheynel Jo. 795 Cheyney Edw. 557. 565. Rich. 164 166. 592. 593.
724 Chibald Jam. 544. Will. ibid. Chichley Hen. 175 Chidley Cath. 846 Child
Will. 869. 893 Childerley Jo. 789 Chillingworth Will. 501. 502 Chippingdale Jo.
736 Chracher Nich. 64. 455 Christian Landg. of Hassia. 889 Christopherson Jo.
128. 599 Cholwell Will. 711 Churchyard Tho. 118 Chute Walt. 523 Clapham Dav. 64
Clara S. Franc. 439. 589 Clark Gabr. 813. Sam. 823 Clay Rob. 414. 806. 807
Claybrook Will. 850 Claymond Jo. 52. 645 Clayton Tho. 260. 811. 897 Cleaver
Rob. 756. b. alias 758 Cleavland Jo. 891. Phil. 892 Clement Joh. 138. Vinc. 548
Clennock Maur. 583. 702 Clear Dav. 158. Nich. 158 Clerk Barth. 250. 737.
Franc. 249. 250. Gabr. 740. George 768. Joh. 70. 71. 570. 578. 655. 692. Tho.
553. 584. 757. b. alias 759. Will. 834 Cleybroke Will. 137 Cleyton Rich. 744.
Rob. 648. Will. 677 Clifford Ann 380. Hen. 802. Geor. 769. Jam. 702 Clifton
Gam. 665. Will. 657. 658 Clyffe or Clyve Mich. 46. Will. 647. 648. 584. 684
Clynne Jo. 449 Clopton Ant. 260 Cluver Jo. Sig. 407. Philip 406. 407 Cobbie
Will. 63 Cock Arth. 770 Cockaine Ast. 447. 536 Cockys or Cocks Jo. 645 Coffin
Edm. 776. Edw. ibid. Cogan Th. 292 Cogley Geor. 10 Coke Edw. 310. 431. 689
Coldwell Jo. 738. 752 Cole Arth. 705. 709. Hen. 82. 128. 155. Nath. 756. Tho.
137. 712. 728. Will. 153. 289. 736. Colepeper see Culpeper. Colet Jo. 6. 7. 10.
14. 641 Coley Hen. 16 Colf Is 227. Rich. 803 Colfox Tho. 651 Col^eton Jo. 512
Collter Geor. 130 Collingwood Ralph 642 Collins Sam. 538 Collyns Lanc. 648.
Mart. 638. 674 Colmer Clem. 752 Colomesius Paul. 482 Coloniensis Pet. 653
Coloribus de Jo. 19 Combach Jo. 404 Comb Rob. 685 Comber Tho. 844 Comerford
Edm. 554 Compton Will. 796 Compton alias Teale Jo. 691 Conant Jo. 837 Condall
Rob. 755. b. alias 757 Congalau Tho. 554 Conner Eug. 616 Constable Jo. 12. 63.
667. Hen. 13. Will. 826 Conway Will. 815 Cook Alex. 490. Geor. 629. Jam. 316.
Joh. 11. 762. Rob. 337. 679. Tho. 873. Will. 658. 688. 689 Cooper Tho. 57. 123.
193. alias 195. 228. 257. 609. 713. 782 Cootes Geor. 582 Cope Alan. 157. 171.
Ant. 65. Mich. ibid. Will. ibid. Copinger Will. 695. 696 Copley Tho. 133 Corbet
286 Corbet Edw. 366. Rich. 489. 511. 518. 630. Corderoy Jer. 299 Coren or
Corwyn Rich. 597. 681. See Curwyn. Cornbull Hen. 566 Cornish Tho. 71. 555
Cornwallis Chapter 523. Tho. ibid. Corranus Ant. 221. 239. 741 Corro de Ant. See
Corranus. Cort Th. 185 Coryate Geor. 286. Tho. 358. 359. 360. etc. Corvini a
family 286 Coryndon Jo. 561 Corwyne Phil. 613 Cousin Jo. 541. 601. 753. 813.
Rich. 730. 772. Will. 673 Cotes Geor. 582 Cotesford Rob. 848 Cotta Joh. 438
Cottam Tho. 729 Cottington Jam. 751. 777 Cottysford Jo. 672 Cotton Edw. 813.
Hen. 619. 781. 806. 808. Rob. 245. 410. 444. 452. Will. 745 Cottrel Jo. 10.
696. 725 Covell Will. 262. 533 Coveney Tho. 717 Coventry Hen. 887. 892. Tho.
534. 723 Coverdale Mil. 153. 483 Covert. Franc. 776 Coulton Ralph 701. 742
Courcey Edm. 561 Courriers Mont. 50 Courtney Pet. 557 Cowell Jo. 784 Cowley
Abr. 501. 888 Cowper Will. 264 Cox Jo. 699. Franc. 46. Leon. 8. 48. 49. Rich.
93. 103. 107. 161. 590. 606. 663. 673. 697. 699. 700. 706. 754. Will. 45.
Cracanthorpe Rich. 417. 418 Cradock Ed. 723. Joh. 740. 827 Cragg Jo. 794 Craig
469. 794 Cranmer Edm. 171. Geo. 265. Tho. 101. 111. 572. 578. 715 Crashaw
Will. 460 Craven Will. 887 Crayford Jo. 83* 664. 700 Creagh Dav. 551
Cressacre Edw. 573 Cressy Hug. 470. 778. 849 Creswell Jo. 335 Creyghton Rob.
861 Crispyne Edm. 700. 701 Critopylus Metrap. 634 Croke Chapter 851. Joh. 696. 820.
Rich. 85 Croft Herb. 399. 868 Crombleholme Sam. 11 Cromer Rich. 668 Crompton
Tho. 763 Cromwell Hen. 760. Oliv. 323 Phil. 780. Tho. 61. 677. 682. 698 Crosley
Tho. 560. 574 Crowley Rob. 63. 96. 190. 191 Crump Th. 239 Cudworth Ralph 809
Cuff Hen. 266. 396 Culme Ben. 792 Culmer Rich. 863 Culpeper or Colepeper Mart.
228. 258. 465. 733 Cundall Rob. 755. b. alias 757 Cunningham Dav. 876 Curiander
Abel. 341 Curl Walt. 386. 786. 819. 830 Currey Jo. 166 Curteis Rich. 597. Tho.
703 Curthop Jam. 104. 128. 691 Curwyn Hug. 597. 665. 681. 713 Cuthbert St. 154
D.
DAcres Tho. 866 Dakyn Jo. 564. 663 Dalby Tho. 637. 689 Dale Geor. 764. Val.
237. 699. 707 Dallington Rob. 785 Dalison Chapter 435 Dampmartin Cath. 106 Daniel
Edm. 713. Jo. 790. Sam. 379. 380 Darby Edw. 635. 636. 666 Darbyshire Tho. 125.
712. 713. Will. 125 Darrel Geor. 800. Joh. 326. 626. Nich. 818 Davel Jo. 671
Davenant Edw. 409. 832. 833. 835 Davenport Chr. 817 Davies Elian. 432 Davies
Jo. 252. 377. 419. 420. 430. 431. 432. 456. 519. alias 505 Hugh 844. Math. 276.
800. Ric. 160. 605. 606. Will. 867. Davyson Andr. 698 Day Joh. 436. 437. 746.
Lionel 802. Mart. 788. Tho. 232. in Marg. 665. 666. Will. 123. 165 388. 395.
605. 665. 880 Deane Edm. 513. Hen. 551. Rich. 608. 826 Dee Franc. 465. 597. 789
Deering Rich. 807 Dekker Tho. 536 Delabere 743 Denison Jo. 447. Steph. ibid,
Den Vinc. 730 Dense Philip 641 Denton Jam. 642. 647. 682. Will. 878 Despagne
Joh. 486 Dethick Geor. 751. Hen. 743. 751 Devenish Will. 694 Devereux Rob. 184.
609. 759. 761. 795 Dickenson Will. 834 Digby Geor. 887. 889. Jo. 461. Ken. 493
Digges Dud. 421. 465. 515. 527. Leon. 142. 520. alias 510. 853 Dillon Tho. 571
Dingley Rog. 674 Dobell Jo. 671 Dobson 260 Dochyn Tho. 768 Dod Jo. 756. b.
alias 758 Doderidge Jo. 412. 442. 443. 817 Dodington Barth. 744 Dogeson Geor.
696 Doke Rich. 659 Dolben Dav. 628 Doleman Nich. 307. 308. 309. 310. 311
Dominis de Marc. Ant. 417. 418. 803. 823. 831 Donallan Nehem. 613 Done Dan.
723. 749. Jo. 419. 474. 475. 538. 809. 897 Done Joh. 677 Dorman Tho. 149. 272
Dormer Rob. 419. 857 Dormer Hibern. 131 Dorset Rob. 746. 766 Dorvil Fred. 821
D'othen Hyp. 807 Dotyn Jo. 686 Dove Joh. 315. 368. Tho. 596. 597 Dovel Joh.
651. 671 Doughty Jo. 396 Dow Christ. 333. 840 Dowdeswell Will. 870 Douglas Gaw.
562 Dowland Jo. 760. Rob. ibid. Dowling Thad. 8 Down Jo. 783 Downs Andr. 397.
Jeff. 607. 734 Downham Geor. 767. Joh. 408. Will. 601. 602. 732 Downing Call.
517 D'oylie Tho. 275 Draycot Anth. 614. 666. 667. 690 Drewry Jo. 708. 755
Dreyden Erasm. 742 Drumm Mich. 679 Drusnus Jo. 339. 403. 791 Ducher Gilb. 86
Duck Rich. 659 Dudley Ambr. 727. Edm. 6. Rich. 640. Rob. 119. 150. 166. 307.
721 Duditius Andr. 93 Dugdale Will. 12. 70. 319. 412. 504 Duke Geor. 393 Dunbar
Jo. 345. 378 Duncon Jo. 503 Dumyng Mich. 675. 693 Duns Jo. Scot. 8. 9. 637. 673
Dunstan Ant. 595. 676 Dunster Jo. 334 Durie Joh. 165. 849. 850 Dutton Hen. 798
Dyer Jam. 13. 168 Dyke Dan. 788
E.
Earl Jo. 396 Eaton Ant. 648. Guy 686. 738 Rich. 780 Ebden Jo. 79. 300. 703.
771 Ede Rich. 643 Edgworth Rog. 101. 102 Edmonds Clem. 401. Jo. 672. Tho. 402
Edmonds alias Weston 426. 505. 626 Edwards Chapter 160. Rich. 117. 118. Tho. 764.
846 Eedes Rich. 279. 351. 802 Egerton Steph. 754. Tho. 354. 381. 807 Eglesfield
Jam. 851 Eglionby Edw. 726. Geor. 812. 877. 878 Eire Will. 803 Elder Tho. 718
Elderton Will. 174 Eliot Geor. 165. See Elyot Elizab. Queen. 118 Ellis Jo. 713.
731. Will. 896 Elly Jo. 888 Elmer Jo. 610. 611. Theoph. 610 Elwaies Gerv. 331.
419 Ely Humph. 277. Will. 715 Elyott Jo. 464. 465. Rob. 703. Tho. 57. 168. 232
Emerford or Hemerford Tho. 321. 738 Emot Rich. 832 Emson Rich. 7 Ent Geor. 894
Erasmus Rot. 7. 13. 38. 54. 85. 572. 655 Erdeswick Samp. 275. 363 Ernestus
Lundg. of Hassia 889 Erpen Th. 798 Erskine 798. Tho. 370 Essex Jo. 657. See
D'evereux Estmond Jo. 763 Estwick Nich. 480 Etheridge Geor. 52. 191 Etton Guy
686 Evans Edw. 343. Hug. 708. Lew. 141. Matthew. 812. Rich. 838. Rob. 685 Will.
879 Everard Jo. 313 Eynon Gruff. 103
F.
FAber Jo. 866 Fairfax Rob. 94. 652. Will. 846 Farley El. 836 Farmery Jo. 351.
848 Farmer Edw. 672 Farnaby Giles 767. Thom. 824 Farser Rob. 824 Faucet Sam.
847 Faunt Arth. 199. 198 Fauntleray Will. 644 Favor Jo. 413. 414. 835 Fawkner
Antb. 517 Featly Dan. 292. 442. 513. 514 Febure Nich. 373 Feckenham Jo. 93.
155. 177. 179. 592. 714 Field Joh. 95. 96 Fell Jo. 634. 794 Will. 560. 579
Felton Jo. 132. Nich. 476. 812 Fenne Jam. 321. Joh. 240. 320. Rob. 321 Fenner
Will. 843. Dudl. 172. 173 Fenton Rog. 768 Ferdinandus Gond. 14. Philip. 253
Ferebe Geor. 774. Joh. 797 Ferrar Rob. 591. 595. 596. 594. 580 Ferrers Edw.
113. Georg. 103. 152. Hen. 503. 504 Ferys Rich. 654. 662 Fetherston Rich. 46
Fich Tho. 9 Field Jo. 188. Rich. 343. 349. 350. 399. Theoph. 189. 783. 629
Fihely Don. 5. Maur. 8. 555 Filby Jo. 512 Finch Ed. 469. 641. 673. Hen. 425.
Joh. 425. 507. Will. 587 Finet Jo. 887 Finglas Tho. 158 Fish Sim. 23. 33 Fisher
Alex. 396. Christop. 554. fasp. 528. Joh. 34. 40. 159. 320. 321. 477. 487. 558.
Rob. 553. Sam. 889 Fisher alias Musket Greg. 512 Fitch Jam. 793 Fitzalan Hen.
715 Fitsgeffry Cha. 516 Fitzgerald Maur. 566 Fitzherbert Ant. 43. Joh. 44.
Nich. 324. Tho. 310. 393. 394. 537. 538 Fitzhngh Geo. 12 Fitzjames Jo. 66. 658.
669. 699. 765. Rich. 564. 565. Will. 698. Fitzsimons Hen. 394. 495. Leonard 158
Flavell Jo. 358. 823 Flemmyng Jo. 320. 816. Walt. 819 Fleshmonger Will. 654
Fletcher Gises 734. 735. Joh. 447. 509. alias 519. Rob. 728. Rich. 57. 734.
Phin. 735 Fleetwood Hen. 506. Tho. 229. Will. 176. 229. 796. 873. 874 Florio
Jo. 379. 423 Floyd Joh. 353. Thom. 277 Fludd Rob. 504. 509. alias 519. 520
Foliot Gilb. 794 Ford Tho. 728. Rob. 726 Forest Edm. 648. 654. Joh. 42. 185.
Will. 94. Tho. 484 Forman Sim. 420 Forset Ed. 288 Forster Rich. 64. 736. Tho.
674. Will. 504. 521. 629 Fortescue Jo. 410 Foster Sam. 433 Fotherby Char. 777.
Mart. 621. Sim. 638 Fowlis Dav. 810. 796. Hen. 75 Fountain Jo. 889 Fowler Joh.
152. 250 Fowns Rich. 426 Fox Edw. 559. 560. 675. 679. 688. Joh. 29. 76. 103.
185. 186. etc. 488. 309. 590. 591. 592. 665. 666. 834. Rich. 41. 568. 569. Sam.
188. Foxcroft Jo. 827 Foxford Rich. 671. 672 Francis Jo. Jo. 191. Th. 710
Franklin Rich. 814. Will. 703 Frederick Count Pal. 815 Freke Edm. 591. 612.
732. 738. Freeman Tho. 11. Will. 674 French Jo. 865. Paul 704 Fri de la Jo. 771
Frith Jo. 852. Tho. 739. 792 Friar Jo. 99. 672. Tho. 844 Fryth Jo. 29. 30. 33.
38. 43. 83 Fulbeck Will. 274 Fulford Will. 566 Fulk Will. 163. 166. 169. 170.
194 alias 196. 236. 343. 724 Fuller Jo. 193. 699. Nich. 403. 404. 405. Tho. 11.
476. 492. Will. 832 Fullonius Will. 48 Fulwell Vlp. 189. 190 Fulwood Franc. 813
Forth or Ford Rob 726 Fykes Tho. 594
G.
GAger Will. 291. 313. 617 Gale Tho. 11 Galeon Will. 6 Gallen Matthew. 254 Galway
Christop. 177 Gam or Game Jo. 639 Gamage Edw. 879 Gamble Jo. 901 Gantlin Will.
690 Garboys Jo. 661 Garbrand Jo. 194 Garcia villa Jo. 711. 716 Gardener Geor.
42. 600. Rich. 383. Steph. 76. 108. 117. 124. 175. 559. 679. 681. 682. 684.
705. Tho. 841 Garnet Hen. 325. 412. Garret Tho. 658 Garsias Pet. 668 Garvey
Joh. 613. Rob. 159 Gascoigne Geor. 49. 150. 151 Gataker Cha. 501. Tho. 488
Gauden Joh. 262. 263 Gaudy Franc. 281 Gaunt Hen. 560 Gaydon Nich. 158 Gee Edw.
310. 377. Jo. 427 Geffry Will. 694 Gellibrand Hen. 521. 522 Gentilis Alb. 314.
315. 531. Matthew. 314. 316. Rob. 315. Scip. 185. 314 George Jo. 649 Geree Jo.
405 Gery Will. 865 Ghest Edm. 591. 599. 6^2. Gibbon Jo. 240 Gibbons Christop.
808. Edw. 768. Ellis 768. Franc. 827. Joh. 704. Nich. 768. Orl. 768. 842 Gibson
Abr. 821. Joh. 736. 814. Tho. 108. 749 Giffard or Gifford Geor. 387 Gifford
Joh. 410. 778. Matthew. 755. b. alias 757. Rog. 727. Will. 191. 250. 453. 454.
735 Gilbert Will. 656 Gilbert Rich. 576. Will. 276. 421. 565. 568. 644. 800.
845 Gilby Ant. 153. Nath. 842. 851 Gill Alex. 512. 513 Gillingham Geor. 888.
Will. 647 Gilpin Bern. 220. 441. 593. 703 Giovannus Joh. 710 Glanvill Jo. 811
Glasier Tho. 742 Glemham Char. 108 Glisson Franc. 856 Glover Rob. 319 Glue Pet.
778 Glynn Joh. 544 Glynne Maur. 651. Will. 583. 710 Goad Rog. 614. 723. Tho.
827 Goch or Gooch Barn. 772. 794. See Gough. Goddard Will. 4. 878 Godwin Franc.
319. 348. 409. 496. 497. 629. Morg. 497. Tho. 607 Godmersham Will. 642 Godskall
Jam. 788 Goffe or Gough Franc. 630. John 889. Steph. 888. 889. Tho. 398. 458.
Will. 889. See Gough Goldesborough Geff. 7^6. Nich. 743 Goldesburg Joh. 293.
369 Golding Arth. 184. 401 Goldwill John 233. Tho. 166. 586. 605. 644 Gollop
Gibbs 286 Gomersall Rob. 519. alias 509 Gooch Barn. 772. 794. See Goch Good Jo.
833. 834 Goodfield 650 Goodman Christoph. 153. 154. 272. 273. Gabr. 269. 294.
409. 751. Godfrey 409. 622. 623. 629. 773. 820. 821. 831. Hugh 617. John 641.
698 Goodrick Tho. 558 Goodwin Jo. 522. 882. Tho. 517. 820. 897. Will. 358. 787.
788 Gorge Franc. 775 Gorton Will. 777 Goseman Ded. 416 Gosson Steph. 256
Gostlyn Jo. 814 Gostwick Rog. 777 Gotereus Dan. 860 Gough John 179. Will. 807.
See Goffe G^^^son Ellen 488. Theod. ^88. Gourdon Jo. 795. 803 Grandison Jo. 71
Grant Edw. 269. 329. 410. Henr. 269 Gray Rich. 649. Will. 63^. Greaves Jo. 470
Grebby Rob. 83 Green Barth. 700. Christop. 843. Ed. 429. Rob. 424. 761. Rich.
7^8. Sim. 638 Greenway Tho. 698 Greenwood Ich. 387. Will. 535 Grenfield Nath.
813 Gregory Hen. 889. Joh. 659 Grenevil Bevil 815. Rich. 816 Grent Tho. 838
Gressop Tho. 718 Grevil Fulk 182. 183. 272. 410. 413. 444. 445. Rob. 445. 446
Gray Jane. 610. Rich. 41. Will. 334 Griffin Jo. 64. Ralp. 289 Griffith Edm.
330. 631. Joh. 64. 719. Manr. 590. Will. 855. See Gryffyth Grimald or Grimoald
Nic. 121. 140 Grocyn Will. 13. 32. 85 Grostest or Grosthead Rob. 5. 145 Gruter
Jam. 413 Gryffyth or Gruffyth Jo. 659 Grynaeus Sim. 97. 6^9 Gualo Britan. 295
Gualter Giles 740. Ralph 142. 148. 686 Guest Edm. 591. 599. 612 Guidott Tho.
494 Guillim Jo. 389 Gundamore Count 371 Gunter Edm. 333. 432. 433 Gunthorp Jo.
562 Gunton Sim. 319 Guy Arn. 659. Nic. 810 Gwent Rich. 659. 666. 670. 684 Gwinn
Math. 420. 437. 438. 771. Rob. 227. Tho. 8^0 Gwynn Owe^ 828 Gwynneth Jo. 83.
680
H.
HAak Theod. 470 Habington or Abington Edw. 735. Tho. 88 Haddock Geor. 321
Hacket Jo. 412. 509. alias 519. 824. Rog. 398 Haddon Walt. 98. 162. 705. 707
Hakebourne Jo. 636 Hakeluyt Oliv. 350. Rich. ibid. Hakewill Geo. 624. Will. 817
Hall Joh. 455. 456. Jos. 424. 779. 875. 881. Rich. 489. R. 118. Tho. 400 Hales
Joh. 475. 528 Hales or Hayles 82. 139. Christ. 140 Halgate or Holgate Rob. 560
Halsay or Halsey Th. 562 Halke Will. 767 Hallesworth Rob. 654 Hamm Ben. 757. b.
alias 759 Hamey Bald. 841. 866 Hamilton Patr. 30 Hammond Jo. 795 Hamp^on Jo.
652 Hancock Jo. 720. Tho. 561 Hanmer Joh. 627. 628. 824. Mer. 278. 279. 306
Hannay Jo. 888 Hannington Jo. 713 Hanyball or Hannyball Tho. 570. 584. 654.
667. 672. Hanworth Hug. 636 Hardyman Jo. 692 Harding 589. Joh. 776. 846. Tho.
133. 135. 138. 149. 700 Harford Rich. 698 Hariot Tho. 390. 391. Harley Jo. 9.
587 Harman Godfr. 31. Joh. 581. 582 Harmar Jo. 332 Harpesfield Joh. 124. 151.
599. Nich. 157. 151. 152. 222 Harrington Jam. 3. 570. 573. 657. Joh. 251. 125.
497 Harry ap Joh. 695. 697 Harris Nath. 813. Tho. 559. Will. 274 Harrison Jo.
316. 351. 610. 690. 756. b. alias 758. Will. 11. 189 Harsnet Sam. 505. 601. 626
Heart Will. 170. 171 Heart Jo. 242. 662 Hartley Will. 165 Hartlib. Sam. 384. 85^
Hartwell Abr. 761. Rob. 85 Harvey Gabr. 173. 376. 755. b. alias 757. 762. Hen.
755. b. alias 757. Joh. 174. 655. Rich. 173. 174. 239. Rob. 755. b. alias 757.
Tho. 241. 401. Will. 889. 894 Harward Sim. 296 Hassall or Halsall Jo. 852
Hastings Franc. 311. Jo. 4 Hatcher Tho. 707 Hatton Christop. 196. alias 1^8.
223. 246. 759. 560. Will. 765 Hausted Pet. 196. alias 198. 422. 423 Haward or
Howard Hen. 730. 797. Tho. 730. Will. 727. See Howard. Haward Jo. 305 Hawarden
Jo. 186 Hawes Steph. 5 Hawford Phil. 638. 691 Hawkins Will. 265 Hawley Rich.
856 Hawthorne Adrian 723 Haydock Rich. 257 Hayes Will. 855 Hayman Rob. 494
Haynes Sim. 672. Will. 690 Hayward Jo. 678. 824 Heal Will. 314 Heath Joh. 343.
702. Nich. 76. 593. 603. 604. Rob. 374. 507. Tho. 173. 174 Heather Will. 842
Heerboord Andr. 405 Hegge Rob. 455 Helm Christ. 772. Will. 405 Helyar Jo. 41
Hemerford or Emerford Tho. 321. 758 Hemming Rob. 765 Hena Joh. 888 Henchma^
Humph. 808. 820 Hendon Rob. 506 Heneage Gone. 594. 601. 700 Henly Andr. 372
Henry 6. K. of Engl. 643 Hen. Prince of Wales. 798 Hennin Ant. 224 Henshaw or
Heronshaw Hen. 714 Herbert Hen. 185. 769. Joh. 733. 793. Phil. 466. 795. Will.
60. 466. 795. 822. 887 Heron Jo. 63. Sam. 779 Heronshaw Hen. 715 Heart Jo. 568
Heryng Joh. 68 Herydans Will. 87 Heskyns Tho. 694 Heslyngcon Will. 664 Heth Jo.
702. Thom. 173. 174. See Heath. Heton Geor. 617. Mart. 499. 616. 617 Hewes or
Hughes Tho. 701. See Hughes. Hewys Joh. 643. 677 Heyden Benj. 793. 794.
Christop. 278 Heylyn Pet. 333. 486. 487. 502. 792. 804. 805. 862. 867. 869
Heywood Ellis 34. 140. 251. Jasp. 34. 118. 157. 251. Joh. 116. 117. Tho. 762
Hickeringil Ed. 898 Hicks Franc. 469. Tho. ibid. and in 507 Hide Tho. 250
Hieron Sam. 779 H^gen Jo. 113. 114 H^gens Joh. 297. 343 Higgs Griff 866. Nich.
789 Higgons Theoph. 353. Thom. 803 Higgins Anth. 834 Hildesley Jo. 44. 575 Hill
Jo. 719. 726. Nich. 312. 313. Rob. 649. 791. Tho. 499. 844. See Hill. Hill R.
118 Hill or Hilley Rich. 643 Hills Jo. 744. 878 Hilsey Jo. 44. 575 Hilton
Strack 767 Hind Sam. 457. Tho. ibid. Will. 291. 456 Hitch Rob. 753 Hobbes Tho.
391. 558. 828 Hobert Hen. 448 Hobson Tho. Hoby Edw. 353. 424. Phil. 117. 178.
Tho. 117 Hodges Will. 889 Hodgeskyn Jo. 588 Hodye Humph. 286 Hodson El^az. 822.
Phin. 788 Hoffman Jo. 878 Hogeard Mil. 96 Hoker Jo. 53 Holbeach alias Rands
Hen. 577. 638 659. Laur. 40 Holbrook Will. 400 Holcot Will. 135. 144 Holdsworth
Rich. 828. 897 Hole Jo. 559 Holgate Rob. 577 Holgyll Will. 648 Holland Abr.
425. Hen. 424. 425. Hugh 498. 626. Jos. 444. Philem. 411. 735. 736. b. alias
758. Seth 675. 691. Tho. 320 Holles Denz. ^9^ Holinshed O^well 682. Ralph 189.
270. 319 Holt Jo. 7. 8. 350. 569. 827. Nich. 8 Holtigena Jo. 7 Holway Jo. 641.
656 Holwell Jo. 636 Holyday Bart. 364. 813 Holyman Jo. 91. 587. 680
Holyngbourne Rob. 644. 647 Hommius Fest. 837 Hone Jo. 784 Honywood Mich. 840.
Rob. 638 Hoper see Hooper. Hopkins Jo. 62. 63. Will. 62 Hood Paul 385 Hook Hen.
414. 835. 866. Rich. 879 Hooker Jo. 270. Rich. 262. 265. 270. 283. 335. 462.
741. 758. b. alias 760 Hooper or Hoper Jo. 75. 76. 124. 178. 705. 580 Hopton
Arth. 336. Joh. 589. 590. 679. 684. Ralph 337 Horde Edm. 650. 654 Horman Will.
15. 16. 22. 31 Horn Gustav. 874. Jos. 427. Rob. 104. 136. 154. 178. 179. 255.
592. 609. 654. 688. 710. 729. Tho. 851 Horsmanden Dan. 828. Tho. 820 Horion
Joh. 650 Hoskyns Jo. 477. 522. 523 Hotman Jo. 409 Hottoman Jo. 73^ Hoveden Gil.
177. Rob. 344. 422 Houghton Jo. 24. 159. 489 How Joh. 568. Will. 567. 568
Howard Chapter 796. 852. Hen. 49. 50. 730. Theoph. 796. Philip. 238. Tho. 730. 794.
886. Will. 727. See Haward. Howill Tho. 637 Howden Jo. 650 Howlend Rich. 596.
729 Howlet Jo. 306. 731 Howman Jo. 177 Howson Jo. 291. 303. 481. 482. 628.
Hubbock Will. 281 Hubberden Will. 668 Hubert Franc. 501. Rich. ibid. Huchenson
Will. 764 H^ddleston Jam. 735. Joh. 684. 686. 737. Rand. 121 Hudson Bened. 137.
Jam. 735. Jo. 738 Hues Rob. 390. 489. 490 Huet Tho. 728 Hugh Will. 62 Hughes
Edw. 898. Jo. 840. Rob. 489. 490. Tho. 701. Will. 393. 615 Hull Jo. 773 Hume
Alex. 750. 868. Joh. 868 Humphrey Laur. 52. 54. 126. 193. alia^ ^95. 590. 7^0.
743 Humpston Rob. 615 Hungerford Ant. 435. 436. Edw. 436 Hunnys Will. 118 Hunt
Rich. 357. 831. 835. Rob. 677 Huntingdon Jo. 82 Hurlock Jo. 403 Hurst Tho. 845
Hussee Jam. 782. Samps. 785 Hutchins Edw. 452. 453 Hutton Leon. 488. 489 Hutton
Math. 644. 737. Rob. 721. Tho. 532 Huycke Rob. 729. Tho. 709 Hyberden Will. 668
Hyde de la Dav. 157 Hyde Edw. 836. 897. Laur. 745. Tho. 766. 820. 901 Hygden
Brian. 644. Joh. 85. 654. 666 Hygins Ed. 650 Hill Ad. 238. Alb. 99. Rich. 552
Hynmersh Edw. 653. 688
I.
JAckson Arth. 829. Edm. 829. Hen. 263. 264. 291. 292. 335. 468. Joh. 896. Tho.
539. 540. Will 837 Jacob Hen. 344. 394. 395. 857. 864. Jam. 15. Pol. ibid.
James 1. King of Engl. 13. 184. 258. 262 James Franc. 357. 759. 819. Joh. 702.
Rich. 524. 525. Tho. 1. 458. 459. 461. 506. 514. 532. 835. Will. 356. 357. 621
Jane Tho. 547 Ja^son Hen. 778 Iden Hen. 673 Jefferay Rich. 764 Jeffry Math. 770
Jegon Jo. 600 Jennings Will. 123 Jenison alias Frevil Rob. 513 Jermin Mich. 440
Jervys Jam. 718 Jessie Hen. 857 Jessop Barth. 780. Constant. 871. Joh. 833.
Tho. 731 Jewel Jo. 67. 132. 133. 134. 138. 139. 149. 155. 163. 178. 193. 235.
255. 262. 265. 599. 724 Jewel Will. 806 Jewit Rand. 835 Imurily Jo. 562 Incent
Jo. 643. 653. 654 Innocent or Incent Jo. 643 Inge Hug. 20. 569. 652 Ingmethorp
Tho. 520. alias 510 Johnson Ben. 518. 519. 835. Christop. 100. 251. 324. Edm.
722. Franc. 394. Joh. 788. 838. Laur. 166. 733. Rob. 508. 509. 677. 705. 706.
707. 722. 739. Sam. 78. Tho. 806 Joliff Hen. 508. 665. 705 Jones Freem. 150.
Gilb. 856. Hen. 665. 508. 705. 706. 707. Joh. 104. 514. Rich. 11. Walt. 728.
737. Will. 543. 544. 737. Phil. 752. Lew. 629. Hug. 600 Jorden Edw. 495 Joseph
Rob. 178. 688 Josselin Joh. 588. 771 Joyner Will. 778 Ireland Tho. 168. 811
Ireton Hen. 869 Ironside Gilb. 78. Ral. 703. 785 Isaacson Hen. 828. Will. ibid.
Izack Rich. ^94 Junius Patr. 793 Jux Sim. 830 Juxon Will. 498. 629. 630. Joh.
895
K.
KEchin Ant. 599 Keeling Jo. 841 Keep Hen. 411 Keeper Jo. 750 Kedermyster Rich.
24. 59 Keimis Laur. 757. b. alias 759 Kelley Edw. 226. 243. 244 Kellison Math.
394 Kelke Rog. 351 Kelton Arth. 60 Keltride or Keliridge Jo. 746 Kennall Jo.
693. 708. 755 Kennedi Jo. 801 Kent Theoph. 741 Kerne Edw. 670 Kerovan Steph.
616 Keth Will. 96 Key Tho. 59. 67. 136 Kidwelly Jo. 650 Kilbye Rich. 357. 385
Killigrew Hen. 896 King Edw. 618. Hen. 526. Joh. 284. 388. 389. 409. 476. 526.
622. 734. 779. 526. 821. Phil. 820. Will. 671. 756. See in King. Kingsmyll
Andr. 125. 126. 192. Tho. 283 Kingsley Will. 823 Kinnimond Patr. 800 Kirkby
Rich. 642 Kirkham Tho. 674 Kirkman Franc. 288 Kirton Jo. 874. Rob. 585 Knevet
Hen. 115. 116. Tho. 769 Knight Will. 577. 673. 674. 682. 789 Knightly Rich. 311
Knolles Rich. 310. 664. Tho. 657. 658. 660 Knollis Franc. 248. 727. 779. Hen.
248. Will. 248. 769 Knox Jo. 149. 153. 273 Krach Nich. 64. See Cracher Kratzer
or Cracher Nic. 455. See Cracher Kyte Jo. 575 Kynton Jo. 36 Kynner Rob. 685
King Rob. 585. 586. 644. 660 Kynwellmersh Ant. 150. Franc. 150. 151. 118
L.
LAncaster Just. 699. Tho. 138 Lane Edw. 898. Joh. 734 Laney Ben. 828 Lake
Arth. 280. 430. 735. 751. 779. 827. Edw. 857. Osm. 741. Tho. 764. 769 Laly
Will. 613 Lambard Will. 718 Lamie Nich. 870 Lamphire Jo. 397 Langbaine Ger. 2
Langdale Alb. 78 605. 711 Langford Charl. 788. Joh. 730. Pereg. 849 Langhorne
Lanc. 820 Langley Tho. 717 Langrigg or Langrish Pet. 692. Rich. 684 Langton
Rob. 26. 550. 551. 638. 641. Tho. 25. 548. 550 Languet Hub. 182 Langworth Joh.
628. 746. Rich. 746 Lanket Tho. 57. 231 Lapeis Jo. 675 Lapworth Edw. 19. 811
Latewar Rich. 268 Lathorp Jo. 857 Latymer Hug. 21. 43. Will. 25. 56 57. 124.
128. 655 Laud Will. 2. 350. 417. 476. 507. 633. 634. 629. 749. 783. 804. 814.
819. 833 Laurence Gil. 135. 737. 744. Jo. 668. 744 Law or Low Rob. 662 Lawerne
Jo. 674 Laws Hen. 374. 816 Lawson Will. 296 Laybourne Rog. 562 Layfield Edm.
853. Edw. 859. Joh. 853 Layton Rich. 644. 647 Lea Cromw. 270. Jo. 802 Ledsham
Hen. 414 Lee Edw. 53. 577. 640. 673. 682. Joh. 811. 835. 851. Geor. 671. Roll.
670. 671. Rich. 410 Leech Humph. 457. Joh. 739. Rob. 729 Leff Jo. 662 Leg Tho.
758. b. alias 760. Will. 634 Legh Ger. 147 Leigh Edw. 291. 529. Joh. 844. Will.
530 Leighten Edw. 669. 677. Richard 644 Leill Taner. 789 Leland Jo. 67. 68.
etc. 411 Lesley Jo. 119. 140. 149. Rob. 898 L'estrange Ham. 486. 534. Rog. 460
Levens Pet. 192 Lever Ral. 355. 671 Lever Tho. 852 Levison Rich. 287 Jews Dav.
702. Griff. 737. Owen 612. Rich. 755. Tho. 356 Lewis Fell. 737. Will. 436 857.
858 Lewknore Lew. 849 Lewyn Justin. 891. Will. 752 Ley Jam. 448. Joh. 333
Leyburne Joh. 238. Will. 433 Leycester Joh. 291. 528 Leyson Joh. 562 Leyson
Griff 684. Joh. 562. Thom. 295. 296. 562 Lhuyd Humph. 74. 129. 196. alias 198
Lilly Edm. 749. 806 Lilye Geor. 96. Will. 7. 11. 14. 15. 21. 22. 103. 104. Pet.
15. 808 Linch Joh. 617. Roll. 616 Lindsell Aug. 386. 597. 629. 819. 820 Line
Cuthb. 410 Lister Edw. 793. Jo. 156. Mart. 793. Matthew. ibid. Tho. 740 L'isle
Arn. 462. Joh. 349. Will. 771 Little Franc. 408. 831 Littleton Jam. 772. 879
Lock Matthew. 808 Lodge Tho. 424 Loftus Dudl. 899 Logan Jo. 390 Lombard Pet. 131.
219. 409 London Jo. 137. 660 Long List. 867 Longland Joh. 58. 59. 97. 577. 581.
649. 682. 694. 700 Longworth Joh. 746. Rich. ibid. Lorgan Rich. 686 Low Edw.
801 Low or Law Rob. 662 Love Christ. 456. Nich. 819 Lovell Tho. 658. 742
Lovelace Rich. 887 Lougher Rob. 115. 722 Lowth Joh. 388 Lowther Lanc. 848 Lloyd
Dav. 860. Evan. 158. Geor. 615. Griff. 740. Hug. 268. 269. 788. Humph. 74. 129.
196. alias 198. Joh. 269. 276. 722. Lodow. 118. 329. Oliv. 627. 787. Rich. 827.
Tho. 668 Lozillerius Pet. 740 Ludlow Edm. 884 Lugge Rob. 892 Lupset Tho. 28.
672 Lupton Tho. 306 Lorne Joh. 674 Luson Will. 683 Luther Mart. 19. 31. 34. 37.
46. Lychfeld Clem. 637. 638 Lydiate Tho. 461 Lydgate Jo. 6 Lylie Jo. 256
Lynacre Tho. 17. 18. 19. 32 Lynch Jo. 831 Lynd Humph. 62. 513 Lion Will. 621
Lyte Hen. 293. 294. Tho. 533 Lytherland Will. 664
M.
MAchel Roll. 550 Macraih Matthew. 554 Mackworth Humph. 826 Macy or Massy Tho.
683. 690 Madesley Tho. 746 Maddock or Madox Jo. 738. 750 Madox. See Maddick
Magnus Tho. 161. 662. 663 Magwire Nich. 8. 555 Mahew Rich. 565 Mahon Jam. 560
Maihew Edw. 347 Major Jo. 45. 46 Makeril Tho. 645 Mallet Franc. 660. Jam. 646
Malton Chr. 687. 701 Malyn Will. 11 Malverne Will. 657 Man Ged. 783. Hen. 584.
599 Manchester Edw. 688 Mandevill Rob. 375 Manering Tho. 513 Manditor 770
Manley Jo. 900 Manning Hen. 763 Mannours Edw. 728. Rog. 779. 797 Manrique Pet.
335 Manset Fr. 848 Manwaring Edw. 866 Maplet Jo. 896 Marbeck or Merbeck Jo. 91.
94. 704. Rog. 736 March Jo. 872 Mariniere Jam. 849 Marlo Chr. 288 Marlow Jo.
675 Marler Jo. 682. Tho. 421. 830 Marprelate Mart. See in Joh. Penry Marsh Jam.
868. Rich. 522. 866. Sam. 888 Marshall Cuthb. 579. Steph. 826. Tho. 118. 274.
434. 681. 719 Marston Jo. 299. 770. Nic. 737. Will. 737 Marten Anth. 108. Hen.
656 Martial Jo. 250. Rich. 707 Martill Jo. 177 Martin Edw. 541. 840. Greg.
165. 169. 706. Jam. 810 Martino S. Leand. 514 Martin Rich. 374. 753. Tho. 60.
174. 175. Will. 350 Martyr Pet. 72. 100. 104. 106. 110. 111. 701 Marvyn Edm.
694 Mary Queen 100. Countess of Pembroke 380. 183. 219 Masciart Mich. 256 Mason
Edm. 876. Franc. 393. 394. 533. 757. b. alias 759. Joh. 50. 248. 669. 675. 706.
Nich. 84. Rob. 506 Massy Ger. 803. Will. 757. b. alias 789. Tho. 683. 690
Massyngberd Chr. 610. 690 Massinger Phil. 447. 536. Walt. ibid. Master Rich.
710 Masters Rob. 772. Will. 718 Masterson Rich. 158 Master Rich. 655 Matthew
Rob. 834. Sim. 670. Tob. 123. 279. 280. 356. 588. 625. 772 Mauditor 770 Maw
Leon. 781 Mawdley or Mawdlen Rich. 636. 666. 679 Maxfield Th. 779 May Edw. 365.
Tho. 795. 826. Will. 155. 271. Mayer Wolfg. 783 Mayerne Theod. 798 Mayhew Rich.
557: 559. 639. 640. 663 Maynard Jo. 639 Main Cath. 732. Jasp. 475 Mayow Rich.
559 Meagh Will. 578 Meara Edm. 381. Derm. 381. 655 Meetkirk Edw. 385. 851
Meddows Jam. 809 Meighen Rich. 458 Meldrum Jo. 826 Mellis Joh. 85 Melton Will.
19 Melvil 476 Merbeck, See Marbeck Meredith Joh. 780. Jonas 731. Ric. 614. 798.
809 Meres Franc. 771 Merlow Jo. 675 Morenda Cath. 107 Merick Jo. 600. 615.
Will. 752. 855 Merrick Gell. 245. 595 Roll. ibid. Messynger Roll. 646 Metcalf
Nich. 590 Mews Pet. 833 Mey Jo. 564. 728 Miagh or Meagh Will. 578 Michel Tho.
644 Michelbourne Edw. 853. 854 Middleton Rich. 757. b. alias 759. Tho. 509.
alias 519. 536. 831. Will. -- 246 Milbourne Rich. 773 M^ldenham Tho. 659 Milson
Joh. 326 Mileson Rich. 878 Milton Jo. 373. 880. 881. 882. etc. Milward Joh. 755
Missenbuck Geor. 776 Modena Rinald 557 Mocket Tho. 898 Moket Rich. 368 Molineux
Viv. 813 Molyns Joh. 222. 368 Monson Will. 287 Montmartin Gid. 783 Moor Rob.
535 More Alice 33. Cressac. 34. 35. Edw. 659. Franc. 392. 393. 815. Gabr. 761.
Geor. 418. 419. 736. Marg. 33. 34. 36. Sir Tho. 13. 18. 32. 75. 144. 159. 525.
Thom. 35. 298. Will. 103. 576. 659 Moreman Joh. 678. 679. 689 Moreton Joh. 547.
548. 549. Nich. 163. Will. 548. 813 Morgan Hen. 591. 670. Joh. 552. 553. Mer.
808. Rob. 632. Will. 519. alias 509. 615 Morley Geor. 344. Tho. 759. 760. Rich.
610. Morris Evan. 768. Will. ibid. Morris Tho. 775 Morris Andrew 860. Joh.
327. 878 Morton Edw. 889. John 635. 666. Tho. 310. 346. 417. 499. 628. 737.
798. Will. 25. Mortymer Will. 679 Morysine Rich. 81 Moryson Fynes. 765 Morwen
John 67 Morwent Robert 661 Morin or Morwing Peter 156. 185 Moscroff Thomas 664
Moseley Humphrey 156 Moss William 708 Mostyn William 898 Moulin Lew. 486. in
Marg. 898. Peter 803. 877. 883 Mounson Thomas 796 Mountague James 280. 430.
619. Jonas 826. Richard 396. 442. 787. 788. 826. 627. Walter 502 Mountaigne
Geo. 622. 626 Mountfort James 761. John ibid. Tho. ibid. Mowse William 708
Moyle William 838 Mugg Richard 670 Muscaster Richard 316. 512 Mullady William
613 Mullins John 222 Mundy George 847. John 757. b. alias 759 Mundyn John 286
Munloss John 880 Muriel Tho. 394. 765 Murray Pat. 796. Rich. 861 Murrey Robert
817. Tho. 398 Musgrave Chr. 803. Thomas 664 674 Mush John 426 Musket alias
Fisher Greg. 427 Mylls Fr. 126 Miles Thomas 67 Myllyng Thomas 566 Myriell
Thomas 765
N.
NAbbes Thomas 311 Naileheart John 639 Nangle Peter 157 Napier Robert 719.
Rich. 858 Nash Thomas 229. 755. b. alias 757. 762 Neale John 714. Tho. 219.
220. 416. 703 Neckham Rog. 660 Nedham Mar. 460. 882 Neile John 843. Rich. 409.
569. 626. 783. 814 Nelson Stephen 746 Neper John 469 Nettles Stephen 848 Nevill
Alex. 50. 289. 587. Christ. 523. Hen. 773. 796. Tho. 587. 734. 808 Newbolt
Thomas 676 Newbury Nath. 885 Newland John 639 Newell Robert 755. b. alias 757.
784 Newstead Christoph. 388 Newton Ad. 356. 831. 835. Fra. 606. Rob. 714. 829.
Tho. 16. 69. 194. 288. 289 Neylan Dan. 616 Neyland James 702 Nicolls John 172.
173 Niccols Aust. 482. 543. Rich. 342. 343 Nicholas Pet. 652 Nicholson Jo. 897.
Rich. 773 Nightingale Tho. 19. 656 Nikke Rich. 573. 574. Will. 574 Nipho Fab.
260 Noble Jo. 650 Noell Hen. 769 Nook Rob. 657 Norden Jo. 382 Norman Joh. 94.
651 Norrington Nath. 847 Norris Cuthb. 742. Hen. 762. Joh. ib. Norton 132
Norton Baldw. 716. Joh. 809. Sam. 513. Tho. 63. 72. 108. 121. 272. 297 Noude
Beav. 770 Nowell Alex. 66. 150. 156. 163. 165. 271. 719. 744. 775. Joh. 756. b.
alias 758. Laur. 146. 147 Nowers Alex. 389 Noy Will. 506 Nuce Tho. 289 Nugent
Will. 158 Nutburne Will. 220 Nuttall Jo. 786 Nutter Jo. 739 Nuttall Jo. 786
O.
Oats Tho. 830 Ochine Bern. 82. 106 Oglethorpe Owen 593 Okever Jo. 832. 874
Oldesworth Mich. 818. Oldham or Owldham Hug. 561 562 Oleven Rich. Ep. 551
Olevian Ant. Franc. 823 Oliver Joh. 666. 654. 684. 897. (...). 897. Ormanet
Nich. 714 Ortelius Abr. 705 Orton Joh. 650 Osbaldeston Lamb. 454. 805. 828. 833
Osborne Franc. 267. 268. Peter 725 Osullevan Phil. 163. 164 Othen Hyp. 807
Oudart Nich. 887 Overall Jo. 272. 601 Overbury Tho. 184. 330. 331 Overton Tho.
571. Will. 123. 299. 616 Oughtred Will. 469 Oxenbridge Joh. 734 Oxestierne Joh.
874 Oxford University 1. its antiquity 356 Owen Dav. 555. 803. Joh. 400. 523.
628. 784. 794. Lew. 250. 612. Morg. 819. Ow. 724. Rich. 592. Rog. 255 Owen Ow.
724
P.
PAde Raym. 26. 97. 137 Paddie Will. 767. 783 Page Rich. 648. Sam. 469. Will.
648 Paget Ephr. 357. Eusebius. ib. Paice or Pace Joh. 28. Rich. 25. 26. 38. 40.
70. 575 Pain Pet. 295 Palmer Jul. 700. Rich. 835. Tho. 713. Geo. 695 Palms
Geor. 695 Palsgrave Joh. 48 Panke Jo. 380 Papudo Ant. 675 Parentius Jo. 770
Parfey Rob. 583 Parker Hen. 45. 46. 295. 639. Matthew. 98. 123. 175. 220. 393.
588. 589. Rich. 665. 786. Rob. 394. Rog. 758. b. alias 760. Tho. 672. 677.
Will. 657 Parkhouse Joh. 642 Parkurst Joh. 52. 132. 141. 142. 273. 600
Parkinson Math. 564. 728 Parks Rich. 295 Parry Hen. 352. 519. alias 509. 621.
694. 708. Rich. 294. 330. 409. 622. W. 471 Parry or ap Harry Jo. 695. 697. 700
Parsons Phil. 861 Parsons or Persons Rob. 79. 164. 187. 224. 236. 240. 304.
305. etc. 365. 426. 460 Pasor Matthew. 440 Paterson Jo. 868 Pates Rich. 79. 593.
594. 644. 667 Patrick Sim. 130. 791 Paybody Jo. 847 Pain Joh. 554. 676 Paynell
Tho. 111. 112 Paul Joh. 689. Will. 634 Pavy Hugh 557 Peacock Tho. 480. 802
Pearson Matthew. 815. Rob. 878 Pearson Dr. 828. 831 Peck Tho. 400. Rich. 848
Pedder Jo. 691. 708 Pedley Edw. 688 Peele Geor. 260 Peers Walt. 642 Pekms Jo.
674 Pelham Hen. 435. Will. 434 435 Pell Jo. 391. 871 Pelican Conr. 108 Pelling
Jo. 777 Pembroke Mary Countess of 183. 219. 380 Pemble Will. 405 Pemberton
Will. 751 Pendergast 177 Pendleton Edw. 700. Hen. 105 Penkethman Jo. 337
Pennant Edw. 592. 664. Joh. 664. 665 Penniewick Andr. 536 Penry Joh. 562 Penny
Joh. or Marprelat 227. 228. 230 Penticost Roll. 655 Pe^yr Nich. 644. 661
Percevall Joh. 2^^. 6^7 Percy Alg. 490. Hen. 390. 391. 795. Rich. 744 Periam
Will. 287 Perin Jo. 776 Perkyns Chr. 722. Will. 366. 415 Perne Andr. 708. 709
Perot Jo. 18 Perrot Jam. 515. Joh. 674. Rob. 656 Perry Hen. 252 Persons Rob.
See Parsons. Peryn Will. 84. 697 Pet Th. 750 Peto Will. 650. Will. or Pet. 587.
597 Peter or Petre Hen. 657 Peter's Hug. 263 Petre Will. 683 Petreus Hen. 405
Petrucci Ludov. 387. 388 Petty Geor. 194 Phayer Th. 102 Philippides Hier. 702.
706 Philipot Jo. 902. Tho. ibid. Philipps Arth. 900. Edw. 276. 881. Hen. 37.
Joh. 629. 630. 755. 810. 881. Morg. 148. 149. 235. 592. Pet. 900. Roll. 566.
656. 667. Steph. 873. Walt. 732 Philpot Jo. 79. 319. 411 Pickover Ralp. 411.
421. 766 Piers Jo. 490. 611. 612. 746. Will. 812 Pierce Th. 895 Pilkyngton
Franc. 773. Jam. 590 John 771. Rich. 478. 479. Tho. 773 Pilsworth Will. 630
Pine Tertul. 742 Pinke Will. 463 Pinner Charl. 252 Pinson Joh. 552 Plaisted Jo.
12 Plankney Jo. 713 Playfere Th. 776 Plough Jo. 96 Plowden Edm. 176 Plummer
Christ. ^76 Plunket Edw. 177. Ol. ib. Pat. 176. 177 Pitheus Pet. 734 Pits Arth.
508. Joh. 345. 346. and errors in his book ibid. Plancius Dan. 791 Pocklington
Jo. 790 Poeton Pet. 812 Pointer Jo. 829 Pointz Fr. 54. Rob. 118. 119 Pole or
Poole Dav. 596. Ol. 648 Pole Edw. 566. Hug. 645. Reno. 52. 82. 92. 93. 96. 100.
587. 656 Pollard Joh. 668. 673. Len. 81 Pomerel Will. 324 Ponet Joh. 175
Pontanus Felix 694 Pope Joh. 599. 548. 675 Popham Joh. 229. 292. 293. 369. Edw.
826 Pordage Sam. 336 Porter Hen. 781. Rich. 694. 756. Walt. 781. Will. 651. 656
Portu de Maur. 8. 555 Pory Jo. 725. 726 Possevin Ant. 181 Poteman Will. 566
Poticary Tho. 273 Potkyn Pet. 650 Potts Joh. 199. 718 Potter Rich. 759. Christ.
828. 831 Pound Tho. 191 Powell Dav. 74. 130. 196. alias 198. Ed. 46. 681. Gabr.
294. 394. 791. Griff. 383. Tho. 245. 716. 746. 816 Powle Jo. 690 Pownoll Nath.
312 Pratt Jo. 717 Pregian Jo. 804 Press Sim. 751 Preston Jo. 805. Tho. 726
Price Doctor 632 Price 486 Price Dan. 468. 477. 478. 787. 868. Hen. 266. Hug.
672. Samp. 468. Theod. 819. Will. 413 Prichard Humph. 304 Prideaux Edm. 851.
Jo. 386 Prime Jo. 247 Primerose Dav. 849. Gilb. ibid. Jam. 864. Joh. 849.
Steph. ibid. Prinne. See Prynne Prior Tho. 811 Prise or Price Jo. 73. Rich. 74
Prit a Minister 592 Proctor Jo. 80. Jam. 688 Prows Jo. 644 Prynne Hen. 8. Jo.
643. 666. Will. 109. 496. 497. 515. 539. 804 Puccius Franc. 223. 225 Puckring
Joh. 229 Pullayne Jo. 115. 128 Pulton Ferd. 362 Purchase Sam. 821. 822 Purefoy
Humph. 69. Tho. ibid. Pursell 561 Pursglove Rob. 604. 605 Puttenham 184 Pie
Tho. 303. Will. 83. 697. 700. 708 Pygot Th. 553 Pyning Hen. 93
Q.
QVarr Jo. 651 Quaterman Sext. 709 Quemmorford Edw. 687. Nich. 154
R.
RAcster Jo. 768. 773 Radcliff Edw. 73. Ralph ibid. Rich. 755. b. alias 757
Rainbow Edw. 861 Rainolds Edm. 234. 235. 721. Hier. 234. Jam. 235. Joh. 184.
221. 233. 242. 248. 289. 290. 261. 313. 314. 335. 343. 351. 417. 418. Tho. 289.
505. 583. 689. 705. 712. Nich. 235. Will. 233. 234. 454 Raleigh Carew 374.
Georg. 830. Walt. 150. 369. 370. etc. 390. 607. 791 Ramsey Geor. 814. Joh. 653.
666. 692. 871 Ramridge Jo. 696 Ramsden Hen. 522. Hug. 414 Randall Joh. 399
Randol Jo. 847. 848 Randolph Edm. 861. Rob. 196 alias 198. 854. Tho. 195. alias
197. 196. alias 198. 240. 637. 728. 739 Rand^ Hen. 577 Rascius or Rescius Ant.
716 Rastall Jo. 38. 115. Will. 38. 43. 114. 115. Wenef. 114. 115 Rastell W. 112
Rateliffe Edw. 783. Jer. ibid. Ravens Jo. 774 Ravis Jo. 467. Tho. 617 Rawley or
Raleigh Walt. 150 Rawlins Hen. 645. Rich. 563. 573 577 Rawlinson Jo. 475. 476
Rawson Rich. 86 Raynolds Jo. 573. Rob. 710 Read Jo. 740. 746. Tho. 286. 778.
893. Rich. 694 Reading Jo. 492 Record Rob. 84 Reeve Rich. 690 Read Jo. 646.
677. Rich. 718 Redman Jo. 65. 66. 647. 669. 697. Walt. 562. Will. 600
Regimorter Ass. 885 Regius Pet. 740 Rhead Alex. 392. 837. 838. Rich. 461. 767.
Tho. 837 Reinolds Jo. 336 Remyngton Rich. 742. 753 Renniger Mich. 300. 783
Repingdon Phil. 295 Repps Will. 21 Rescius or Rascius Ant. 716 Reuter Ad. 440
Reyner Clem. 473 Reynolds Edw. 394. 396. 865. John 865 Rhead Alex. 392. 837.
838. Rich. 461. 767. Tho. 837 Rhese Jo. Dav. 296. 304 Rhese Jo. 73 Rian Dan.
713. Dermit. 655. Donat. 684 Rice ap Hugh 672 Rice Jo. 678 Richard the 3. King
of Engl. 13 Rich Rob. 848 Richardson Jo. 807. Laur. 734 Rider Jo. 495. 628
Ridley Mar. 421. Tho. 779 Risden Edw. 180 Risdon Ed. ibid. Rishton Edw. 163.
179. 180 Ritwise or Rightwise Joh. 11. 15 Rivet And. 841 Rivet or Revet Tim.
755. b. alias 757 Roburts Fulk 840 Roberti Jo. 594 Roberts Jo. 75. Will. 664.
632 Robertson Tho. 15. 103. 104. 693 Robins Jo. 86. 697 Robinson Jo. 726. 744.
Hen. 620. Nich. 595. Ralph 34 693. 806. Will. 749 875 Robsert. Amey 166 Robson
Cha. 865. Sim. 614. 758. b. alias 760 Rachfort Sim. 10 Rod Will. 693. 726
Rogers 727 Rogers Ben. 808. 835. Dan. 199. Franc. 587. Jo. 156. Rich. 403. 587.
Tho. 341. 342 Rokeby Joh. 564. Will. 563. 564 Roos Brian 650 Rondell Phil. 167
Rosdell Chr. 76 Roper Joh. 30. Will. 33. 36. 37 Ross Alex. 372. Thom. 889
Rossaeus Will. 234 Royse Joh. 301 Rotheram Th. 547 Rouse Franc. 442 Rowland
Tho. 655. Rich. 427 Rowlands Hen. 620 Rowlands Will. 778 Rowlandson Jam. 528
Rowley Will. 313. 437. 536 Rudd Ant. 608. 737. 743. Rudyard Ben. 466. 523
Ruffus Nich. 772 Rugge Jo. 725. 749. Will. 574 Ruggle Geor. 794 Rumphius
Christ. 817 Runcorn Tho. 664 Rupert Pr. 886. Dudl. ibid. Runcorne Tho. 664
Rusaeus Ant. 848. Lud. 851 Russell Edw. 728. Geor. 780. Joh. 548. Will. 773
Russh Ant. 148. 733 Ruthall or Rowthall Th. 161. 565 Rycaut Paul 311 Rycks Jo.
39 Rydge Rich. 661 Rydley Nich. 78. 90. 154. 582. 705 Ryngsted Tho. 656 Rytoner
Hen. 638 Ryves Georg. 781. Jo. 833
S.
SAckvyle 258 Sackvyle Chapter 297. Rob. 745. Tho. 113. 297. 766. 767 Sadler Vinc.
416 Sagittary Fred. 886 Saintgeorge Hen. 319. 414 Saintjohns Ol. 866. 867
Saintmartin Leon. 514 Sall de la Joh. 456. See Jo. Hall. Salcot Jo. 572
Salisbury Hen. 226. 754. Will. 120 Saling Will. 640 Salisbury Joh. 151. 599.
678. Rob. 744. Tho. 246 Salkeld Jo. 397. 398. Lanc. 302. 724 Salley or Sawley
Mil. 560 Salmon Pet. 874. Rob. ib. Salwey Ger. 177 Sampson Rich. 103. 642. 643.
665. Tho. 126. 153. 192. 193 Sanders Lanc. 106 Sanderson Rand. 885. Rob. 2.
Tho. 392. 793 Sandwych Will. 669. 676. 694 Sandyford or Sandford Rog. 636
Sandys Ed. 265. 462. 463. Geor. 501. Mil. 520. alias 510 Sanford Jo. 461
Sansbury 302. 303 Saravia Adr. 403. 765 Sarmiento Ded. 371 Savage Geo. 123. 728
Savelle a family. 286 Savile Hen. 355. 356. 395. 396. 397. 514. Joh. 285. 286
Saunders Hug. 637. Nich. 162. 180. 272. 482. Patr. 835 Saul Arth. 703 Sawley
Mil. 560 Saywell Will. 540 Scambler Edm. 596. 600. 756 Schlick Hierom. 745
Schouldham Rob. 651. 656. 657. Scory Ed. 564. Joh. 583. 584. 590. 591. Silv.
584 Scot Cuthb. 711. Reyn. 257. 258. Rob. 773. Tho. 547. 589. 846 Scudder 529
Scull Jo. 823 Scultet Abr. 222. 499. 779 Seaman Will. 542 Searchfield Roll. 622
Securis Joh. 158 Sedgwick Tho. 711 Sedlie 258. 624 Segar Will. 482 Seimore Edw.
799. Will. 799. See Seymour. Seintgerman Chr. 47 Sellar or Seller Jo. 868.
Will. 470 Seldom Joh. 245. 255. 413. 462. 627. 794 Selling Will. 640 Selwood
Jo. 640 Senh^^^e Rich. 620. 621. 783 Serle Alex. 794 Seton or Seaton Joh. 710
Sever Hen. 553. Will. ibid. Sewell Hugh 719 Seymoure Ed. 71. 72. 884. Will. 886
Shackspeare Hug. 637 Shaghens Rich. 131 Sharp Lion. 523. 832. 835 Shaw Hen.
732. Jo. 414 Shaxton Nich. 190. 643 Sheafe Grind. 798. Tho. 790. 798 Sheffield
Joh. 727. Will. 556. 557 Sheine 131. Joh. 668. See Sheyne Sheth Elias 131 Shjoy
Will. 551 Sheldon Raph. 319. 364. 491. 549. 604 Sheldon Gilb. 369. Ed. 399.
Raph. 319. 364. 491. 549. 604 Sheppard Alex. 806. Joh. 94. 709. Nich. 688.
Will. 369 Shepery Jo. 51^ 142 Shepreve Jo. 51 Sherburne Edw. 331. 901
Sherebourne Rob. 10. 573. 574 Sherley Ant. 471. 742. Rob. 471. 472. Tho. 472.
Will. 870 Sherlock Geo. 158 Sherrey Jo. 63 Sheringham Rob. 862 Sherewood Rob.
22. Rub. 726 Sherow Jo. 675 Shert Jo. 725 Sherton Rob. 672 Sherwood Jo. 776
Sherwyn Ralp. 166 Shingleton Rob. 56 Shirbourne Jo. 648 Shirley Ant. 742
Shirwood Jo. 566 Sibbes Rich. 542 Sibthorp Rob. 835 Siddall Hen. 685. 707. 716
Sidney Hen. 180. 181. 730. Phil. 49. 182. 183. Rob. 762. Mary 606. See Pembrok.
Silvester Jos. 378 Silvius Jac. 158 Simeon Jeff. 570 Simpson Chris. 760. Joh.
803. 819. Nich. 803 Singleton Is. 790 Sinews or Sinewse Will. 553 Sixesmith
Tho. 333 Sixtinus Joh. 650 Skeleton Jo. 20. 21 Skevyngton Tho. 572 Skerow Jo.
675 Skinner Cyr. 883. Ral. 104. 153. 688. Rob. 886. Will. 851 Skuish Jo. 23
Skypp Jo. 560. Will. 696 Slade Math. 337. 338. Sam. 770 Sleep Ant. 812
Slythurst* Th. 697 Smectymnus 861. 898 Smith Ed. 725. Joh. 247. 251. 259. Hen.
231. Math. 64^. Mil. 345. 416. 417. 490. 622. Nich. 713. 718. 719. Rich. 100.
107. 108. 110. 175. 622. Sam. 383. 836. Seb. 792. 901. Tho. 11. 66. 155. 301.
302. 724. Will. 555. 594. 635. 637. 644. 728. 740. 835. Smyth see Smith Snell
Geor. 840 Snoden or Snowden Rob. 620 Snow Will. 665 Solme Tho. 57 Somer Joh.
697 Somerset Hen. Marq. of Worc. 486. 487. Char. 797. Edw. 769. Will. ibid.
Some or Soame Rob. 227. Tho. 57. 121 Somner Will. 147 Sonibanke Chapter 800 Sotho
Ludov. 110. Pet. 109. Pet. Maj. 110. Sou^h Will. 752 South Jo. 820 Southwell
Nath. 243 Southern Tho. 642 Southwood Jo. 662. 677 Soul Jo. 6 Spackman Norw.
787. Tho. 811 Spark Noel 897. Rob. 871. Th. 290. 343. 328. 351. 352. 533. 576.
677. Will. 470. 517 Sparrow Ant. 742 Speckington Will. 569 Speed Jo. 260. 537.
Sam. 537 Speght Th. 320 Spelman Henr. 39. 452 Spencer Edm. 185. Hen. 887. Mil.
786. Th. 21 Spenser Jo. 263. 292. 335 Spicer Alex. 434. Rich. 843. Will. 832
Sprint Jo. 405. 406. 481. 614. 665. 737. 749 Spotswood Rob. 817 Spurstow Will.
861 Squire Ad. 740. Jo. 805 Stafford Edw. 727. 770. Hen. 88. Rob. 386. 569.
Rich. 829. Tho. 452. Will. 829 Staller or Stallard Tho. 735. 766 Stambridge
Jo. 7. 16. 659. Tho. 17. 562. 659 Standard Jo. 320. 530. 824 Standish Ed. 80.
Hen. 24. 36. 80. 670. Jo. 80. Rich. 81 Stanford Ral. 730 Stanhop Edw. 726. 745.
Geor. 835. Mich. 769 Stanley Jam. 557. 558. 637. 646. Hen. 727. Tho. 599. 659.
901. 902 Stanyhurst Rich. 375. 428 Stanywell or Stonywell Jo. 579. 637. 639
Staple Edw. 580. 671 Stapleton Tho. 179. 253. 254. 262. 482 Staunford Will. 86
Staunton Laur. 758. b. alias 760 Stemp Tho. 195. alias 197. 708 Sterke Jo. 636
Stern Rich. 856 Sternhold Tho. 62 Stephens Jer. 39 Steuart Jam. 886 Stevens
Tho. 103. Dr. 134 Steukley Lew. 371 Stevenson Rob. 758. alias 760. 775. Steward
Edm. 663. 687 Stewart Esm. 795. Fr. 792. 824. Rich. 532. Styles Math. 893. 894
Still Jo. 608. 742 Stillington Rob. 566 Stinton Geor. 843 Stock Rich. 774.
Will. 718 Stocker Will. 718 Stokes Dr. 82 Stokes Rich. 393 Stokeslie Jo. 54.
575. 652. 675 Stonard Will. 801 Stone Chr. 788. Tho. 749. Will. 875 Stonywell
Jo. 637. 639 Stopys or Stopes Rich. 664. 715 Storer Tho. 280 Story Jo. 60.
131. 636 Stork Jo. 636 Stow Jo. 53. 320 Stradling Edw. 296. 290. ^^^* 304. Jo.
300. 429 Stransham Edw. 738 Straytbarret Jam. 581 Stretsham Hen. 691 Strong
Will. 826 Stroud or Strode Will. 826 Stubbes Laur. 654 Stuckins Ralp. 108.
822 Studley Joh. 289 Summer Hen. 673 Summers Jac. 756. alias 758 Summaster Th.
739 Sutcliff Math. 443 Sutton Chr. 412. 454. Dav. 158. Hen. 643. Tho. 407. 408
Suavenburgh Geo. 737 Swaddon Will. 269. 788 Swawell Tho. 638 Sweit Gil. 873.
Ol. 737 Swinburne Her. 386 Swinnerton Tho. 75 Sydeuore Rich. 640 Sydenham Geor.
645 Sylvester Edw. 634. Rob. 579. 604 Sylva de Gosem 123 Symings or Symmings
Joh. 710 Symonds Will. 334 Sympson Tho. 873
T.
TAlbot 177. 243. Rob. 87. 88. Tho. 88. 319 Talley Dav. 649 Talot Rich. 650
Tanfeild Laur. 501 Tapsell Jo. 827 Turlton 174 Tate Fran. 348. 349. 412. Zouch
349 Tutham Joh. 728 Tavern^^^ Jo. 94. Rich. 143. 144. 271. Rog. 145. 146. 346
Taler Jo. 100. Rob. 110 Tailor alias Cardmaker Jo. 102 Tailor Jo. 588. 667
Tailor Hibern. 131. Rob. 463. Tho. 868. Will. 260 Taylour Franc. 499. Will.
649 Temple Rob. 761. Tho. 895. Will. 751 Tenison Phil. 394 Terry Joh. 435
Tesdale Chr. 83^ Texeda Ferd. 845 Thelwall Eub. 746 Theyer Joh. 95 Thirlby Chapter
798. Joh. 712 Thomannus Casp. 786 Thomas Lew. 381. Roll. 685. Will. 74
Thompson Geor. 794. Rich. 622 Thornden or Thornton Joh. 559. 586. 639. 666
Thorndyke Herb. 391 Thorie Joh. 239 Thorie or Thorius Jo. 856 Thoris Math. 880
Thorius Rog. 422. 423 Thorn Gil. 784 Thornborough Edw. 788. 889. Gilb. 628.
Joh. 397 Thornton Rich. 802. 826. Tho. 409. 754. See Thornton. Thorowgood Tho.
844 Thorp Joh. 453 Threlkeld Edw. 743 Throckmorton Nich. 74. 727. Will. 668
Throwley Joh. 699 Thruston Malac. 894 Thrysk Will. 664. 678 Thurcross Hen.
629. 810. 843. Tim. 810. 843 Thuanus Aug. 410 Thynne Chapter 296. Franc. 319. Tho.
53. Will. 52. 53. 665. Tiarda Eizo 789 Tighe Rob. 358 Tilenus Dan. 838
Tillesley Rich. 391. 793. 851 Tindall Humph. 740. 774 Tinley Mart. 352. Rob.
ibid. Todd Hugh 751 Toker Jo. 691 Tolley Dav. 14. 66. 681 Tomkins Gil. 799. Jo.
ib. Nath. ib. Nic. ib. Tho. ib. Tomson Gil. 788. 618. Laur. 297. 298. Ralp.
744. 746. Rich. 776. Tho. 378 Tomworth Jo. 727 Tomstall Cuthb. 25. 65. 97. 590.
703. Ralph. 414. 740 Tooker Chapter 856. Jos. 875. Will. 147. 385. 786. Tookey
Tho. 717 Torporley Nath. 390. 484. 485 Torriano G. 423 Torshell Sam. 775
Townley Zou. 412. 839 Tounson or Tonson Rob. 621. 781 804 Towers Jo. 539. 812.
Rob. 413 Townsend Chapter 477. Hayw. 274. 287. Rog. 672 Toy Griff. 722. 738 Tracy
Rich. 83. Will. ibid. Trafford Hen. 607 Traheron Barth. 105 Transham Edw. 738
Trapham Th. 875 Travers Walt. 741 Tregonnwell Jo. 666 Tremayne Rich. 723
Tresham Franc. 282. Will. 126 Trent Council 109 Trever Rich. 487 Trevier
Ralph 705 Trigge Fr. 283 Triplet Tho. 501. 502 Trotter Hugh 674 Troutbeck Rob.
481 Trussell Jo. 380 Tuckney Anth. 844 Turbervile Geor. 240. 241. Jam. 594
Turnbull Cha. 282. Rich. 280. Will. 706. 730 Turner Franc. 877. Math. 843. Pet.
781. 888. Rich. 91. 669. 802. Rob. 258. 259. Rog. 855. Sam. 791. Tho. 828.
Will. 120. 121. 802 Turpin Rich. 50 Twyne Brian 416. 489. Joh. 88. 160. 161.
329. Laur. 329. Tho. 118. 329. 103. 129. 161 Twiss Dr. 539 Tie Christop. 94.
702 Tylen Will. 64 Tyndale Will. 73. 38 Tynmouth Jo. 566 Tyro Tho. 839 Tyrrell
890
V.
VAchan Rog. 642 Valentine Fr. 660 Valera Cypr. 724 Vane Cha. 895 Vannes Pet.
14. 26. 136. 137. 186. 716 Vavasor Will. 637 Vauce Rob. 712 Vaughan Edw. 573.
Jo. Nic. 894. Rich. 752. 756. Rob. 519. alias 509. Rog. 641. Will. 450. 451.
Vaus or Vaulx Laur. 130 Vaulx Rob. 712. Laur. 130 Vaux Fr. 892 Vchtman Theod.
896 Vdall Ephesians. 868. Jo. 229. Nich. 72. 73 Vere Edw. 118. 183. 727. Hen. 795
Vernatti 819 Vernon Geor. 332 Verstegan Rich. 427. 428 Vetablus Sam. 764 Vicars
Jo. 536. 400. 758. b. alias 760. Tho. 375. 442. 449 Vicary Tho. 449 Victoria
Ferdin. 662 Vignier Nich. 483 Villa Garcia Jo. 711. 716 Vincent Aust. 349. Tho.
416 Virgil Pol. 68. 73. 411. 638. 639. 696 Vives Jo. Lud. 55. 668 Vivian Th.
554 Vlmis ab Jo. 702. 706 Underhill Jo. 395. 609 Universe. of Oxon. 1 Vowell Jo.
270 Union Hen. 246 Vrswyke Christop. 10. 641. 544. 547. 557. 667 Usher Hen.
617. Jam. 254. ^73 316. 375. 440. 853. Rob. 630
W.
WAde Arm. 120. Will. ibid. Wadsworth Jam. 538 Wake Arm. 491. Is. 292. 491. 812
Wakefeld Rob. 22. 27. 39. 51. Tho. 50 Wakeman Rob. 461. 578 Wales Hen. Prince
of 797 Wall Geor. 823. Will. 652. 661 Walker Geor. 840. Joh. 566. Rog. 612.
648. Walt. 887 Wallashe Tho. 639 Walkington Tho. 814 Waller Jo. 63 Wallis Jo.
446 Walpole 538 Walpoole Hen. 241 Walsall Sam. 781. 798 Walsingham Fr. 184
Walsh Jam. 157. Pet. 602. Nich. ibid. Will. 601. Rich. 158 Walter Jo. 817. Dav.
ibid. Walton Is. 264. 475. 532 Waple Edw. 798 Warbington Rob. 583. See Parfey.
Warburton Geor. 809. 888 Warcup Ral. 281. 287 Ward Rob. 90. Will. 91 Wardboys
Jo. 661 Ware Jam. 165. Tho. 672 Warewyck Geor. 751. 762 Warford Will. 298
Warham Rich. 674. Will. 571. 643. 682 Warmington Will. 328 Warner Barth. 19.
260. 772^ Joh. 675. 678. 684. 687. 701. Walt. 390. 391. 485. 743 Warwick Phil.
895. Tho. ibid. Waser Jo. 822 Washbourne Tho. 427 Washington Rich. 875 Wastell
Sim. 414 Wasyn Tho. 640 Water Jo. 576 Waterhouse Geo. 767 Watkyns Joh. 731. 788
Watkinson Will. 189 Wats Jam. 734. 831. Rich. 841. Tho. 299. Will. 831 Watson
Ant. 614. 728. Edw. 650. Joh. 193. alias 195. 606. Rich. 902. Tho. 100. 104.
190. 231. 701 Waynflete Will. 175 Web Eras. 756. Will. 656 Webley Humph. 583
Webster Rich. 350 Weever Jo. 245 Wedell Ral. 660 Weelks Tho. 786. Will. ibid.
Weldon Ant. 497. 624 Wellesley Walt. 576 Wellington Joh. 643 Wells Joh. 522
Wells or Wellys Tho. 650. 655. 656. 662. 686 Welstede Hen. 813 Wendy Tho. 277
Wenman Tho. 419. 764 Wentworth Pet. 876. Tho. 837. 523 West Nich. 558. Reyn.
568. Tho. 870 Westcombe Clem. 821. Mart. 544. 891 Westcote 516. 517 Westby Tho.
675 Westfield Tho. 812 Westerman Will. 333 Weston Edw. 504. 505. Joh. 764. Hug.
93. 115. 125. Rob. 131. 713. 764. Will. 505 Westphaling Herb. or Harb. 123.
272. 280. 615 Wetheral Will. 657 Wetherell Tho. 873 Wharton Chr. 721. Geor. 16.
Phil. 807. Tho. ibid. Wheatley Will. 528. 529 Wheeler Jonas 632 Whetcomb Jo.
320. 530 Whiddon Fr. 844. Ol. 169. 720. 737 Whitby Dan. 820. Ol. 847 White
Anth. 813. Chr. 515. Franc. 333. 723. 818. Math. 864. 865. Rob. 394. Tho. 413.
415. Writhl. 394 Whitehead Hug. 654. See Whithead. Whiteheare Jo. 665 Whitfield
Jo. 838. Tho. 837. 838 Whitgift Dr. 741 Whithead Dav. 135. See Whytehead.
Whithalk Nich. 146 Whiting Joh. 832 Whitlock Bulst. 491. 794. Jam. 490. 491
Whitmay Andr. 577 Whittaker Laur. 789. Will. 135. 165. 234. 254. 303. 343. 744
Whitynton Rob. 21. 31. 653. See Whittingdon. Whittingdon Rob. 7. 15. 16. Whitty
177 Whittyngham Will. 63. 73. 152. 153. etc. 688. 725. 726 White Hen. 676.
Joh. 100. 101. 128. 155. 324. 592. Pet. 219. Rich. 177. 323. 324. 428. Tho. 84.
170. 194. 708. 733. 766 Whytehead Mathemat. 285 Whytford Rich. 51 Whyting Rich.
51 Wickham Edw. 802. Hen. 835. 866. Will. 609. 610. 800. See Wykeham. Wicliff
Jo. 459 Widdrington Tho. 890 Wigmore Mich. 386 Wilcocks Hen. 636. Joh. 647.
Tho. 261 Wild Rob. 898. Will. 464. See Wild. Willet Andr. 295. 348. 756
Williams Griff. 706. 810. Hen. 681. Hu. 876. Joh. 330. 400. 401. 534. 788. 795.
803. 804. 819. 822. 828. Ma^r. 864. Rich. 643. Rog. 245. Tho. 266. 739 Willis
Franc. 279. 759. Rich. 89. 188. Tim. 752. Tho. 381 Wilks Tho. 733. Will. 298
Wilkins Geor. 437. Joh. 498. 843. Wilkinson Joh. 797. 816. 897. Rob. 817. Will.
743. 771 Willoughby Tho. 738 Wills Rich. 143 Wilson Ad. 819. Aaron 898. ^dm.
350. 820. Joh. 630. 801. 833. 834. Nich. 24. 681. Rich. 143. Tho. 153. 625.
688. 726. 803. See Wylson. Wilton Will. 673 Wimberley Gilb. 784 Winchcomb
Abbey, the Regist. of it 25 Windebank Fr. 784. 785 Windon Ralph 715 Windsore
Mil. 118. 416 Winefrid St. 605 Wingfield Rich. 97 Winter Tho. 54. 137. 577.
645. 673. Will. 74 Winwood Ralph 482. 759. 764. 772. Rich. 764 Wisdom Rob.
687. Sim* 407 Withals Joh. 141 Wodenote Theoph. 835 Woddesbury Will. 659
Wodyngton Tho. 653 Wolcombe Rob. 329 Wolley Fr. 714. 715. Joh. 714. 722 Wolman
Rich. 643. 668. 673. 682 Wolsey Tho. 7. 280. 569. 570. 571. 146. 673. 681. 682
Wood Bas. 814. Joh. 822. Mich. 94. in marg. 97. in marg. 124. Tho. 722. Owen
755. Rich. 746. 774 Wood a Rich. 433. Tho. 793 Woolton Joh. 230. 231. 609. 746.
770 Worsley Will. 561. 574 Worthington Tho. 169. 240. 433 Wotton Anth. 443.
758. b. alias 760. Brian 78. Ed. 77. Hen. 78. 398. 474. 530. 531. 712. Nich.
607. 644. Rich. 77 Wraughton alias Turner Will. 121 Wraxhall Rich. 649. 662
Wrenn Christ. 836. Jeff. 649. 672. Math. 628. 630 Wright Hen. 815. Nath. 894.
Rob. 861. Walt. 693. 700. 708. Will. 714 Wriothsley Hen. 769 Writhioley Will.
83 Wyatt Rich. 18. Tho. 49. 50 Wyche Pet. 311 Wyburne Percival 834 Wygges
Will. 724. 752 Wyke Will. 648 Wykeham Will. 123 VVylde Jo. 808 VVylshman
Walt. 367 VVylson Rich. 561. Thom. 708. 737 VVymesley Jo. 123. 125 VVynde Rob.
651. 662 VVynne Morg. 878 VVyrley Will. 275. 363 VVystow Humph. 649 VVyther
Georg. 724 VVythers Joh. 654 VVythington Ol. 730
Y.
YArford Joh. 558 Yeldard Arth. 714 Yeates Jo. 443 Yelverton Christop. 151. Chapter
464. Hen. 151. 277. 463. 464. 534 Yetswiert Nicas. 199 Yloop 118 Ynge or Inge
Hug. 565 Ynglish Jo. 590 Young Edw. 898. Jo. 454 Young Jo. 509. alias 519. 567.
591. 644. Patr. 793. Tho. 595. 722. Will. 812 York Roll. 237. Will. 661
Z.
ZEigler Mark 887 Zouch Rich. 817. Will. 625. 752. 806. 807
FINIS.

