Numb. 36. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday August
26. to Monday September. 3. 1660.
Westminster.
THe Ambassador Extraordinary from Denmark, having been three days nobly
entertained upon his Majesty's account at Sir Abraham William's house in the
Old-Palace-yard Westminster, was on Saturday last in the afternoon fetched
thence to Whitehal, by diverse Lords, with about 20. Coaches, where his Majesty
under a rich Canopy of State; in the midst of the chief Nobility (his Majesty's
Royal B^^d of Pensioners being placed along the Ravles)* was pleased to give
him Audience in the Banqueting House. The Ambassadors Speech was in Latin, and
chiefly imported (...) Congratulation from the King of Denmark his Master,
touching his Majesty's happy Restoration to his Crown and Kingdoms, which was
very well liked by his Majesty, who after a short yet affectionate Reply to the
Ambassador, showed much of Royal favor to him and his Retinue, giving the chief
of them his Royal hand to kiss. The Ambassador afterward addressed to their
Hignesses the Dukes of York and Gloucester, wishing a lasting settlement to both
the Royal Families of England and Denmark. To which the Dukes likewise returned
him a very affectionate answer, with expressions of their Respects and
Friendship to his Majesty of Denmark. Which done, the Ambassador was conducted
back by the before mentioned and other Lords, to Sir Abraham William's house,
where he was magnificently entertained at Supper, and at night went to his own
Lodgings, taken up for him in Bedford street.

Riga in Liesland, July 10.
The Duke of Courland having been magnificently treated by our Governor and
Magistrates, departed hence the seventh of this month with all his Family and
Retinue to go for Libaw; he was met and received by the way by a Captain, in
the head of a Troop of 300 horse.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
Veritas Inconcussa, or a most certain Truth ascertained, That King Charles the
first was no man of Blood, but a Martyr for his People. By Fabian Philips Esquire.
Sold by William Place at Graies-Inn-Gate.

The Bowels of Tender Mercy, Sealed in the everlasting Covenant: As also the
Treasures of Grace, etc. By Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick

The Drinking of the Bitter Cup: Or the hardest Lesson in Christ's School,
learned and taught by himself, Passive Obedience, by John Bri^sley, Minister of
the Gospel at Great Tarmouth. Both sold by Joseph Cranford at the Castle and
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Beatitudes, or a Discourse upon patt of Christ's Sermon on the M^unt. By
Thomas Watson, Minister at St. Stevens Walbrook. Sold by Ralph Smith at the
Bible in Cornhil, near the Old Exchange.

Manaductio or a Leading of Children by the hand through the Principles of
Grammar by James Shirley.

An Epistle written and presented to his Majesty by Arise Evans who yet lives.
Both sold by Richard Lownds at the White Lion in Pauls-Church-Yard.

His Grace the Duke of Albemarle etc. is by the special favor of His Majesty
declared Lord Lieutenant of the Kingdom of Ireland.

Elsenore, July 21.
The Swedish forces are transported from this place almost day and night, and
it is hoped, that before this night, they will be all gone.

It is advertised from Breslaw in Silesia, that some Officers were there
arrived out of Transylvania, having been but three days upon their journey, who
relate, that all Transylvania except two places, had put themselves under the
protection of the Great Turk, to enjoy their free exercise of religion under
him, but the young Prince Ragotzi has submitted himself to the Emperors
protection.

Hull.
His Majesty having been pleased to Constitute the Lord Belasyse Lord
Lieutenant of the East Ryding in Yorkshire, his Lordship summoned the Country
to appear before him at Beverley the 13. of this instant August, together with
his Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, and chief Constables; where
being met, they gave order for the raising the Trained B^n^s, being 3000. men,
into three gallant Regiments, Commanded by Sir Francis Boynton, Sir John
Hotham* and Mr. Wharton, as Colonels; and Sir Robert Hilliard Commands the
Horse. These will all muster (in Bodies) before his Lordship within fifte^n
days after their Harvest is over; the example whereof will be of great
consequence to other Counties, toward the settlement of the Ancient Legal way
of Trained Bands for the security of the Kingdom.

From Argileshire in Scotland Aug. 13. 1660.
Here is very much rejoicing at the Imprisonment of the Marquess of Argile: for
though this Country bears his name, there are too many Families which he has
endeavored to ^^ine; the woeful experience whereof will be evidenced by the
Clandowgals, Clan Leans, Mac Donnals, and Mac Waughtons, besides the unnatural
and unhumane usage of many hundred poor souls sent by him into the Island of
Jura, where they all perished. Whether he has practiced murder, and taking
possession, you will hear ere long: I assure you that thousands are glad of
what is done, who, although you yet have not their hands in this Letter, yet
neither hands nor hearts will be wanting to preserve his Majesty's peace in
Argileshire against all opposers whatsoever.

Whitehall.
His Majesty was pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood on Lieu. colonel
John Jackson of Harraton in the County of Durham, as a present mark of his
Royal favor for his loyal services and sufferings in the Wars.

Westminster.
Col. Francis Windham (who so nobly held out Dunster-castle for his Majesty)
being lately chosen Burgess for Milburn Port in the county of Somerset, now
sits in the House of Commons; and among all those hundreds of Members that fit
there, not any has served his Majesty with more fidelity and success than that
Gentleman, especially at such times when others forsook him, and his Majesty
had most need of friends, which we need not tell you was in his Majesty's great
and wonderful escape after the battle at Worcester.

And since we mention escapes, we cannot forget the Noble and valiant Lord
Inchequin, who on Friday last the 24. instant, came to London to finish his
redemption from the Turkish slavery, where his Son is left as Pledge till his
Ransom be accomplished.

His Excell^ncy the Duke of Albemarle has reinforced his late Order to the
Commissary-general of the Musters and his Deputies, to take care that no
Officers or Soldiers be mustered in any dead place, or any other way vacant.

Edenbrough August 21.
Major General Morgan (in pursuance of his Excellencies Orders) with eight
Companies of his Regiment, is removed from Haly-Rood house in Edenbrough (a
place famous for the King of Scotlands wonted M^nsion) to Leith Citadel:
Lieut. Col. Joseph Wittar, his Lieut. Col. Commands Sterling Castle with two
Companies of the Major Generals Regiment. Orders are sent to seven Companies of
Col. Daniels Regiment to march to Air in place of Col. Robsons. Two Companies
of Col. Daniels Regiment, and two of Col. Mau's are sent to St. Johnstons,
Commanded by Lieut. Col. Richardson. And by this time I presume you desire to
know how many Garrisons and strong Holds of Scotland are reserved in the
possession of the English: which are, The Citadel of Leith. The Citadel of
St. Johnstons. The Citadel of Air. The Citadel of Innerness. Sterling
Castle. Dunbarton Castle. Dunstafnal Castle, and Dower Castle.


The Earl of Glencarne now Lord Chancellor of Scotland is expected here at
Edinburgh to morrow, and is to be attended hither very honorably, many persons
of quality citizens and others to a very great number being already gone to
meet him.

To this news from Edinburgh we may add, that General Middleton is made his
Majesty's Commissioner.

Lord Craford Lindsey Treasurer. Earl of Cassiles Justice General. Earl of
Lauderdale principal Secretary of State. Sir John Fletcher his Majesty's
Advocate. Sir Archibald Primrose Clerk Register. Mr. Gilbert Stuart, Lion King
at Arms.
Since those excepted out of the Act of Oblivion, who were committed to the
Tower on Saturday last, having sat as Judges on his late Majesty, these
following (who also were such Judges) are sent to the same place, viz. Sir
Hardress Waller Col. James Temple Col. Scroope Col. George Fleetwood Alderman
Tichborn Mr. Garland Mr. Heveningham Col. Owen Roe Col. Harvey Col. Potter Mr.
Main Mr. Millington.


His Majesty this day August 29. went to the Parliament and gave his Royal
assent to these 5 Acts. viz.

1. An Act for Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings. 2. An Act for Restraining
the taking of Excessive Usury. 3. An Act for a Perpetual Anniversary
Thanksgiving on the twenty ninth day of May (the day of his Majesty's Nativity
and Restoration) 4. An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and
Oblivion. 5. An Act for a speedy Provision of Money to pay off and disband all
the Forces of this Kingdom, both by sea and land, (commonly called, the Act for
Poll-money.)
At the passing of which Acts his Majesty made a most gracious Speech, which
that none of his Majesty's good Subjects may want the happiness to peruse, we
here give you an exact Copy.

My Lords and Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
I Have been here some times before with you, but never with more willingness,
then I am at this time: And there then be few men in the Kingdom, who have
longed more impatiently to have these Bills passed, than I have done to pass
them; and I hope they will be the Foundation of much Security and Happiness to
us all.

I do very willingly pardon all that is pardoned by this Act of Indemnity, to
that time which is mentioned in the Bill; nay, I will tell you, that from that
time to this day, I will not use great severity, except in such cases where the
malice is notorious, and the Public Peace exceedingly concerned; but for the
time to come, the same discretion and conscience which disposed me to the
clemency I have expressed, which is most agreeable to My Nature, will oblige Me
to all rigor and severity, how contrary soever it be to my Nature, toward
those who shall not now acquiess, but continue to manifest their Sedition and
dislike of the Government, either in action or words. And I must conjure you
all (my Lords and Gentlemen) to concur with me in this just and necessary
Severity; and that you will in your several Stations be so jealous of the
Public Peace, and of my particular Honor, that you will cause exemplary
Justice to be done upon those who are guilty of seditious Speeches or Writings,
as well as those who break out into seditious Actions: And that you will
believe those who delight in reproaching and traducing My Person, not to be
well affected to You, and the Public Peace. Never King valued himself more
upon the affections of his People, than I do; nor do I know a better way to
make my self sure of your affections, than by being just and kind to you all:
And whilst I am so I pray let the world see that I am possessed of your
affections.

For your Pole-Bill, I do thank you as much as if the Money were to come into
My Own Coffers; and wish with all my Heart, that it may amount to as great a
sum as you reckon upon: If the work be well and orderly done, to which it is
designed, I am sure I shall be the richer by it in the end; and upon My word,
if I had wherewithal, I would My self help you, so much I desire the business
done. I pray very earnestly, as fast as Money comes in, discharge that great
burden of the Navy, and disband the Army as fast as you can; and till you can
disband the rest, make a provision for their support.

I do conjure you, as you love Me, let me not hear the noise of Free quarter,
which will be imputed to my want of Care and Government, how innocent soever I
am; and therefore be sure you prevent it.

I am so confident of your affections, that I will not move you in any thing
that immediately relates to My Self, and yet I must tell you, I am not richer,
that is, I have not so much money in my Purse, as when I came to you. The truth
is, I have lived principally ever since upon what I brought with me, which was
indeed your money; for you sent it to me, and I thank you for it. The weekly
expense of the Navy, eats up all you have given me by the Bill of Tonnage and
Poundage. Nor have I been able to give my Brothers one shilling since I came
into England, nor to keep any Table in my House, but what I eat my self. And
that which troubles me most, is, to see many of you come to Me to Whitehall,
and to think that you must go some where else to seek your Dinner.

I do not mention This to You, as any thing that troubles Me, do but take care
of the Public, and for what what is necessary for the peace and quiet of the
Kingdom, and take your own time for My own particular, which I am sure you will
provide for, with as much affection and franckness, as I can desire.

Hi^ M^j^sty, in memory of that great Service done to the Crown in the days of
his Royal Father, as well as since his Majesty began his Reign, by that wise
and most honorable Personage Thomas Earl of Southampton, has made his
Lordship, Lord High Treasurer of England.


Books lately Printed and Published.
THE LEAGUE ILLEGAL, Wherein the Solemn League and Covenant is seriously
Examined, Scholastically and solidly Confuted; for the right informing of weak
and tender conscience, and the undeceiving of the Erroneous. Wri^t^n long since
in Prison by DANIEL FEATLY, D. D. never till now made known to the world.

VOTIVA TABULA, or A Solemn Thanksgiving, offered up to God, the Mighty
Protector of Kings, for the wonderful Protection and happy Restoration of ou^
Gr^ci^us Sovereign CHARLES the Second. Delivered in two Sermons, by ^ames
Warwell, R^ctor of Boxford in Suffolk; and Dedicated to His MAJESTY.

A SURVEY OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC DOCTRINE. 1. Of the worshipping of Saints and
Angels. 2. Of the Invocation of Saints and Angels. 3. Of the worshipping of
Images. 4. Of Justification by Works. 5. Of the merit of good Works. 6. Of
Purgatory. 7. Of Real Presence. 8. Of Communion in one kind. Asserted in a late
Book Entitled Scripture Mistaken. Written by M. Spencer a Jesuit. Answered
by H. Fern, D. D. Mast. of Trin. Col. in Cambridge, and one of H^s Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordina^y.

All three sold at the Angel in Ivy-Lane.

The White Robe: or The Surplice Vindicated, as a most ancient and decent
ornament of the Ministry. Together with a Discourse on Psalm. 45.7. wherein is
proved, That Kings and no other can properly be said to be the Lords Anointed.
Being several Sermons preached by the late Reverend Father in God Dr. Thomas
W^stfield, Bishop of Bristol, and sometimes Preacher at S. Bartholomew the
Great in London. Sold by Sam. Speed, at the Sign of the Printing Press in S
Paul's Churchyard.

A Caveat against Seducers: As it was preached by R. Standfast, M. A. and Actor
of Christ-Church in Bristol. Whereunto are annexed the Blindmans Meditations.
By the same Author. Sold by H. Mortlock at the Phaenix in S. Paul's Church yard.

L' ESTRANGE His Appologie: with a short view of some late and remarkable
Transactions, leading to the happy settlement of these Nations, under the
Government of our Lawful and Gracious Sovereign CHARLES the Second.

Jews in America, Or, Probabilities that those Indians are Judaical, made more
probable by some Additionals to the former Conjectures. By Thomas Thorowgood,
S. T. B Norfolciensis.

The Plague of Athens, which happened in the second year of the Peloponnesian,
VVa^ Made English by Tho. S^eat.

All three sold by H. Broom at the Gun in Ivy-lane.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A New Post having been settled lately at Amsterdam for England, We are desired
to give notice, That the long complaints and great prejudice Merchants
sustained by the stow Transport of Letters between England and Holland, engaged
Mr. Vander Heyden to take notice of their going round about by Antwerp, and
that the Hamburgh and Italian Letters were twice as long upon the way as was
needful Therefore on the 22. of June last, he began from Amsterdam to bring
Letters to London in three or four days, and since from Hamborough in six, and
from Italy in eleven days, which before was never practiced, to the great
satisfaction and contentment of the Merchants (who have already found the
advantage of it* their Letters being come three of four weeks upon every
Tuesday, and the last week upon the Monday) as by a general Certificate signed
by many of them it appears; [Those only in the Hague, which is much wondered
at, showing a dislike of that establishment and endeavoring to hinder it.] And
whereas the German and Italian Letters us^d to lie at Antwerp three or four
days before they began their so tedious passages, he has taken care that from
Amsterdam they go away immediately after receipt; and if the Merchants do
(...), he will engage to send the said Letters twice a week. The said Vander
Heyden ha^^ t^eated with the Postmaster General in England, who by his
Majesty's (...) has agreed to that enterprise. The P^cqu^t-boat that carr^es
his Letters go^th from Dover to Sluice every Saturday about three a clock in
the afternoon, and takes in Passengers, for whom he has all the ^onvenient
accommodation.

Having giv^n you th^s foregoing Advertisement in our last, We hear since (...)
from Holland came to London (...) the said n^w P^st, (...), and were
^ist^^but^d betimes next morning, to the great (...) of the Merchants, it
having been calm all Sunday (...) things, and the (...) hear likewise that
those of the (...), who at first opposed that se^^^ement are now ^om^ng in,
beginning already to send their Letters that way.

Venice, the 31 of July, 1660.
We are informed by the last Letters from Candia, that the Turks had
dis-imbarqued 400. horse, and 2000. Foot, to put them for a Garrison in Canea,
intending to draw out the former Garrison to be employed somewhere else, by
express orders from the Bashaw General of the Forces of this Kingdom: They have
likewise caused 600. men to enter into Retimo, and reinforced the Garrisons of
other place, which they hold in those parts, upon notice given them, that the
Venetian Generalissimo Morosini, had resolved to lay siege to the
beforementioned City of Canea, with so much the more hopes of a happy success,
as our Forces have already seized on the Avenues, through which the Ottomans
could receive any succor. The same Letters intimate, that the said
Generalissimo was as yet at Cerigo, whence he had wrote to Prince Alme^ic, to
hasten the joining of their forces, that so they might with the better
resolution, execute the Enterprise agreed upon, for which all things were put
in good order. By Letters from Dalmatia, we hear, that the Infidels in those
parts were retired from Clin^, to repass the Mounts, bu^ that he who commanded
them, gave out, that the chief V^ster had ordered a party of those Forces which
are in Transylvania, to go and besiege Cataro, which had obliged the Proveditor
General Cornaro to use his best endeavors for securing that place against all
attempts, although it be very probable, that this is only a device of the
Turks, to h^nder the march of those Forces which this Republic is a sending
into Candia.

Francfurt. 15. July.
The Deputies of the Dukes of Ne^burg and Brunswick, are arrived in this City,
where others more are expected to resolve either on a continuation or
dissolution of the Assembly that is kept here, which the Emperor endeavors
to remove to Ratisbone, in expectation of a general Diet of the Empire, which
most part of the Princes of Germany wish for.

Presbourg in Hungaria, July 29.
It is confirmed by Letters, that the Count of Serin is retreated from before
Canischa, not by order from the Emperor, as some Letters reported, but upon
intimation given him, that 5000. Turks were upon their march, whom the General
Ali Bashaw had drawn out of his Army to relieve the above mentioned place. We
are likewise credibly informed, that the lurks are withdrawn from the Confines
of Tearadin, notwithstanding they had above 6000. men before that place: and
that the Palatin of Hungaria marched toward those parts with ten thousand men,
to reinforce the Garrison. We hear, that Prince Barchai is carefully kept in
the Turkish Army, and that the General has order not to release him, till he
has restored those ^/500 Florens which he leavied upon the States of
Transylvania.

Warsovia in Poland, Aug. 1.
We are advertised here* that their Majesty's of Poland arrived on the 26th.
last past at Cassimiers, and that they were expected at Leopolis on the 12. of
this Month: A Courrier from the Polish Army has lately brought news to the
Court of a second defeat given to the Muscovites in Ukrain by the Lord Potozky,
Field-Marshall of Lithuania; reporting moreover, that the Tartar Cham had
pursued the Muscovites as far as Kiow, and pressed the King of Poland to cause
his Canon and Infantry to march on to attaque these people together with the
Rebellious Cossacks, who have taken their shelter in diverse strong places, not
daring to keep the field any longer. We hear likewise, that Ours have made
themselves masters of Korno, one of the strongest places in Lithuania, lying
betwixt the Rivers of Niemen and Vitia, as also of Grodna, situated on the
first of the before mentioned Rivers, having put fire to the Castle, to chase
the Muscovites thence; and lastly of the Mount of Lisegura from which they
easily batter the Castle of Vilna, which the Muscovites defend with much
obstinacy. In the mean time the Polonian General CZarnecky, that he may not
want action, sends constantly Parties abroad, who make their excursions as far
as Smolersko without the least opposition; and so soon as he receives those
Troops, his Majesty gives him hopes of, he resolves to enter Muscovia, where,
it is believed, he will not meet with much resistance, if General Lubomirsky
take his march (for which he prepares himself) toward Kiow, there to make a
diversion.

From Bremen the 5th. of August.
Those jealousies which this City conceived, touching some design the Swedes
should have against its privileges, are now most ceased, upon notice given
from Stockholm, that the Government there had declared exactly to observe what
was agreed on in the year 1654. betwixt the Crown of Sweden and this City, by
the interposition of the States General of the United Provinces* and it is said
that the people of Bremen are so far from having any thoughts of war, that they
have rather declared an extraordinary joyfulnes for the peace, and the
restoring of a good understanding between the two Northern Crowns, and the
States General of the United Provinces.

Edinbrough, Aug. 25. 1660.
On wednesday the 22. of August, the Earl of Glencairn, Lord Chancellor of
Scotland, came into this City honorably attended by about 1000. Horse. The
Major General, Colonel Daniel, and Colonel Disne the English Commissioners,
with several Field-Officers, and two Troops of the Major Generals Regiment of
Horse, went to Massleborough to meet his Lordship, and attended him thence to
the House designed for his Lordship in this C^ty. At his coming in to
Edenborough, the Earl of W^nton ^ode on his right hand, and Major General
Morgan on his left: He was guarded from the Watergate to the Nether-Bow, by
the Major Generals Regiment of Foot. The Lord Chancellor being come, the
Committee of three Estates (according to the late Proclamation) sat on
Thursday, Aug. 23. and information being given of some Remonstrating Ministers
that were at Robert Symson, the Collectors house; Orders were sent to Captain
Newman in Edinborough Castle, to command thence 20. Musketeers to Symson's
house, who found the Ministers subscribing a Paper tending to the disturbance
of this Kingdom. The Ministers were carried Prisoners to Edinborough Castle:
Their names are Mr. James Guthrie, Minister of Sterling. Mr. Robert Trayle,
Ministers of Edinborough. Mr. John Strivling, Ministers of Edinborough. Mr.
Alexander Moncreif, Minister of Sc^oney. Mr. John Semple, Minister of Carffern.
Mr. Thomas Ramsey, Minister of Foulden. Mr. Gilbert Hall, Minister of
Kirkliston. Mr. John Scot, Minister at Ornham. Mr. George Nairne, Minister at
Brunt Island. Mr. John Murray, Minister of Maffin Parish. James Kirk, Lord of
Soudaywell.


Whereupon the Lord Chancellor with the Committee of the Th^^e Estates, the
very next day set forth this following Proclamation.

GOD Save the KING.
A Proclamation by the Committee of Estates convened by His Majesty's special
Authority, against unlawful Meetings and seditious Papers. At Edinburgh,
August 24. 1660.
THe Committee of Estates in obedience to His Majesty's Proclamation being met,
and taking to their serious consideration the goodness of God, who in his great
mercy has restored the Kings Majesty to the Exercise of His Royal Government;
And withal, considering His Majesty's great care of, and affection to this His
Majesty's Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, in Calling and Authorizing the said
Committee of Estates to Meet; And they finding it their duty to prevent all
unlawful Meetings, which may tend to the prejudice of His Majesty's Service, or
may again involve His Majesty's good Subjects into new Troubles; Have thought
it fit in His Majesty's Name and Authority, to prohibit. And by these Presents
do prohibit and discharge all unlawful and unwarrantable Meetings or
Conventicles in any place within this His Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland,
without His Majesty's special Authority; And likewise all seditious Petitions
and Remonstrances, under what pretense s^ ever which may tend to the
disturbance of the Peace of this Kingdom, or alienating and debauching the
affections of His Majesty's Subjects from their due obedience to His Majesty's
lawful Authority, and that under all highest pai^s. And for this effect,
appoints all Sheriffs of Shires, and Magistrates of Burghs to be careful within
their respective Bounds, that no such pernicious and dangerous meetings be
permitted, but that they be timeously prevented, hindered, made known and
discovered to the Committee of Estates. And ordain these presents to be
forthwith Printed, and Published at the Market cross of Edinburgh, and the Head
Burghs of the respective Shires within this Kingdom, that none pretend
ignorance hereof.

Signed in the Name, and by Warrant of the Committee of Estates. GLENCARNE
Chancellor. I. P. D. Com.


After which was set forth another Proclamation commanding that no Disorders or
Insolences be committed by any person whatever within this Kingdom upon any of
the English Nation, under all highest pain, after which they adjourned till
Tuesday following.

White Hall.
His Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the Honor of Knighthood upon
Herbert Perrot, Esquire, a worthy Member of the House of Commons, serving in
Parliament for the Borough of We^bly, in the County of Herreford.

On Thursday last that accomplished Personage George Earl of Bristol,
entertained His Majesty at his own house with a Supper, with whom was Their
Royal Highnesses the Dukes of York and Gloucester, attended by the Marquess of
Ormond, and other Persons of Honor.

On Friday the Lords had a Conference with the Commons, wherein Their Lordships
acquainted the Commons with His Majesty's Message for an Adjournment from the
eighth of September to the sixth of November next.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


