Numb. 27. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order of the late Council
of State From Monday June 25. to Monday July 2. 1660.
From Bury in Lancashire.
AMongst all the public expressions of Joy every where manifested at his
Majesty's happy Proclamation, though the Weekly News book made no mention of
it, I have not heard the Ceremony was more solemnly or handsomely managed any
where, then by us; which (^o the credit of the Gentleman I cannot but speak it)
was Mr. Lightfoot our Ministers contrivance; who during these hazardous times
constantly owned his Maj^sties cause; said though ma^y with the world ^an
round, he still persisted to be homo quadratus, and as often as the least
opportunity seemed to favor his inclination he publicly made profession of
his Loyalty to his Sovereign; wi^^^ss his bold and frequent mention of his
present Majesty (...) in his public prayers in Sir George B^o^h^ Expedition,
for which he suffered the deprivation of his Benefice.

I had not insisted so long upon this Gentleman's gallant carriage, had he not
been eminently both active and passive, as the Scene varied, for the same
Interest; and were not a large share of the loyal expressions in the ensuing
Narrative justly due to him. In short, the ceremony was so splendid, sumptuous,
and regular, that it will almost seem incredible that a place comparatively so
little, should equal many more considerable Towns; and that our Minister having
satisfied his duty in Divine offices, (and which is more, the expectations of
so numerous ^n appearance of Gentry) should prove so ingenious a Master of
Ceremonies: For though many more hands and purses went to the managing of that
affair, yet we were beholding to our Ministers head for much of the
contrivance. And as there was cause of an universal joy, so there were large
manifestations almost of a general resentment of it, and effects truly worthy
of so noble a cause; the Country-Gentlemen, neighboring Clergy, and Soldiers
both foot and horse, each in their several stations being very cheerful and
forward to perform the office of Auxiliaries upon so good an occasion, and
mutual emulation did provoke all of them to outvie each other in expressions of
a hearty obedience to so grateful commands. After the ceremonies in proclaiming
his Majesty were ended, we caused a Crown which was all that day carried before
us, to be placed on the top of a Red cross erected over the Town-^^ll, where it
now remains; and then feasted all the Gentry which came to see the solemnity,
the Waits with loud music ushering in the solemnity; and we gave the Irish
Brigade which quarter in our town, a sum of moneys, and distributed others to
the Ringers, Garland and Bonfire-makers, and also bestowed the Kings colors on
all the horse and foot, and in fine such rude expressions as Bells, Guns and
Bonfires could afford, were abundantly during that day (and the Fires continued
fourteen days and nights after) and the next day the joy was shown by all the
women in the parish, who spent it in dancing and other monuments.

From Stockholm, May 10.
The 23 Instant, about eleven a clock at night, the corpse of the late deceased
King, was brought hither, at the light of above 400 Torches, and very
magnificent Pomp. There went first a great number of Horsemen, after whom
marched the said Kings Guards; then the Marshall of the Kingdom, the Count of
Levenhaupt, the Deputy of the Nobility, and all the Senators. Then came the
Chariot upon which was the Corpse covered with a large cloth of black Velvet,
whereof the Corners were borne by 4 Gentlemen of the deceased Kings
Bedchamber, many H^lb^rd^ers being round about it, each of them with a Taper
of White Wax, immediately after marched the young King, with Prince Adolphe his
Uncle; and last of all the Queen Regent his Mother, accompanied by all the
Court Ladies; the Corpse having been conducted through this City, was deposited
in the Church of the Castle, there to remain until it be transported to Upsal,
which is the place where it is to be buried.

From Vienna, June 5.
The 2 Instant, an Express arived here from Pressbu^g, who confirmed the bloody
battle lately fought between Prince Ragotzy and the Turkish Forces, about
Hermst^^t, but with a success much different from what we heard before The sad
Prince had five ^orses killed under him, and lost most of his Infantry and all
his B^ggag^: so that there is no hope now that he can maintain himself by
force, in the possession of Transylvania, and much less that he can recover the
good will or the Grand Seignior who has refused to accept of the offer he made
to him of 500000 Rixdollers yearly, and to j^yn his Forces to the Turkish Army,
for the execution of the said Grand Seigniors designs against Hungary; which
has incensed against him his Imperial Majesty, that it is reported he has
refused him the investiture of some Ba^^wicks he holds in those parts. The
Leavys are continuing thoroughout the Hereditary Dominions; and as soon as any
number of them are completed, they are presently sent away toward the
Kingdom of Hungary, to keep the Turks in awe, who do continue their
devastations, although the Bashaw of Bu^a has sent again to give assurance to
the Emperor, that the Sultan does desire to live in good correspond^nce with
him; and that very suddenly an Ambassador would be sent to renew the alliance
betwixt the two Empires H^s Imperial Maj^sties departure for Stiria has been
put off till the 20 Instant, because of the indisposition of the Archduke
Leopold, who is to accompany him in that journey. In the mean time his Majesty
has given Audience to the Envoy of the Tartars, who took his leave of him,
and departed laden with presents; and the Investiure has been given to to the
Deputies of H^lstein for the Lands their Master the Duke does hold of the
Empire.

Konigsbergh June 7. 1660.
By Letters from Mittaw we have, that the Nobility of Curland has nominated
two of the chiefest of their body, to go and meet the Duke their Prince, and
accompany him hither, where great preparations are a making for his reception,
and that the Swedish forces were beginning to remove the Quarters, and leave
that Country, marching toward (...).

Plensburg 15 June 1660.
The Governor of Tonningen having received the news of the conclusion of the
Treaty between Swedland and Denmark, on the 13 instant, caused thanks to be
publicly returned to God for it, and all his Ordnance to be (...) off. The
same day all the Danish ships retired to Gluckstad, by order of the Count
Eberstain, who likewise removed his forces from about this place, which thereby
is now free from the blocking up which has so long anoyed it.

Berlin 13 June 1660.
The Elector of Bramdenburgh has ordered a public Thanksgiving to be kept
throughout all his dominions for the Peace, which now proves to be general,
and for the happy restoration of the King of England, to whom we heir he has
sent Monsieur Polnitz his Master of the Horse, who, we hear* has orders to
propound unto his Majesty the marriage betwixt the Prince Radzivill with the
Princess of Orange. Our forces are yet in their former Quarters, but ^s they
are like to be hereafter useless, his Electorall Highness has caused most of
them to be disbanded.

Lubeck June 18. 1660.
The Letters from Copenhagen being not yet arrived, we cannot hear any thing
concerning the execution of the last Treaty, but only we are informed that the
Swedes were beginning to transport the Booty they had in Zealand, and that their
German forces had received orders to retire into the places of the
Archbishopric of Bremen, Pomerania and Mecklburgh, and that the rest was to be
transported into Swedland. And that in consequence of the subscription of the
peace, the Swedish Admiral, who was abord Vice Admiral Ruyters Ship, had leave
to go and kiss the hands of the King and Queen of Denmark at Copenhagen, where
great rejo^cings were made, but greater were yet preparing, for the said Peace.

From Edinburg June 19. 166^.
Out of the affection I have for you, I have with every convenience ^^q^^^ted
you with what passes here worthy of your Knowledge or observation and at this
time especially, I have made hold to borrow a few minutes from the public
solemnities to give you that in brief which we are celebrating wi^h that
splendour and affection and unfeigned token^ of joy, that the like has not been
seen before in this Nation; for great and wonderful is the Lords work of
deliverance in that day, when we expected to be overturned with c^nfus^^^ and
covered with desolation.

The Magistra^^ of this City and our Pre^by^ry, bring most sensible of (...)
great mercy received, did appoint this the day of their public thanksgiving to
God for his signal love and kindness showed to them in investing our most
gracious Sovereign with his T^roane of England and Ireland, and for restoring
him to his Government ove^ this h^s ancient N^tion, that for twenty hundred ye^^
(...), unle^ the Scep^er of his Royal ancesto^^ and have given notice of this
their resolution to all the Burghs and Presbyter^es of Scotland, desiring their
concurrence That ^s the cause is so their joy may be universal; Our Ministers
(...) then Sermons with so much fervency and passionat expressions delivered
what great kindenes the Lord had f^r^n^, in restoring to us our good King, that
it has not been observed that at any time their exhortations have been
entertained with such attention, and so plentiful tears by their Auditory. The
English Officers of State and War, observed the Thank giving with no less joy
and devotion after Sermon, and after we had all dined together, we all marched
from the Councell^^-house to the Cross, in this ^o^, the Town Council in their
Gowns, with their Trumpets s^u^ing before them, went first; then two B^lles
before the English Commissioned and Officers, and two behind them went next:
The Provost all alone before the Scotch Nobility and Gentry that are in Town,
and two ^ui^ies with the Dean o^ God and The^aurer followed after; their Guards
near six hundred Cit^zens in com^ly apparel, armed with Swords and Partisans,
the Cross was covered with artificial Vi^s laden with Grapes, both good ^^are^
w^ne* plenti^uly springing out from all its Channels, on its Heads a Bacchus
best^^di^ng a Horsh^ad, with two or three Satyrs, d^d with then ^mick gestures
and jests, en^ertain the beholders, ^ little below the Cr^ within a Ra^, was
erected a ^cuff^ld six foot high, on which was pl^d a large Table covered with
a rich Banquet, served up in gl^ss, and representing diverse forms and devices:
As His ^ajesties Arms, the Arms o^ the City, and diverse Exotic ^r^es were
raised, laden with their Leaves and Fruits, etc. the Table being surrounded
with above one hundred persons of eminency. The Music and breaking of Glasses
were seconded by three g^neral Vollies of the Horse and Foot, who recei^ed an
handsome answer from the great Guns of the Castle, Citadel and Sh^ps in the
Road, and all were ^o^oed by ^oyful Acclamations of the people.

After this the forces drew off, affording the civilities of view to the
people, amongst whom the dishes and banquet were hurled, and so arose and
marched down to the Pi^zzo of the Palace of Holy: o^ house, first the
Comm^^ioners next the Mayor General with his Army, and af^ them the City
^agistrates with their guards; whence after the muskets had ^luted the^ there
w^^h h^vers vollies and had received a return from the great guns of the
Castle, citadel and sea as f^rmerly they marched back again quite thorough the
City (...) to the Castle-hill from whence eve^rie o^e apart return (...) spend
the rest of the evening with their friends in m^rth and m^^uall Joy and
entertainements. But now begin the Bells and the Fireworks, therefore I must be
gone to assist in the dances of our Magistrates and citizens about the
bonfires, and on my knees to remember the health of my Sovereign, and his royal
(...), and the prosperity of his Excelleny and all those Heroes and Nobles who
have been instrumental, or do rejoice wish us in this our great deliverance and
happiness.

Whitehall.
His Sacred Majesty, our of a sense of the high deferes of Col. John Covert of
Slaugham in the county of Sussex, (who formerly served in the Army of his late
Majesty of ever blessed memory with much courage and fidelity, and ^ath since
that, notwithstanding the cruelty of his enemies, and their per^ecuring of him
for continuing his allegiance to his present Majesty, still remained unshaken
i^ his resolutions to perform his duty, for which he was by Oliver Cromwell
imprisoned in the Tower) was graciously pleased first to Knight him, and then
give him a Patent for Barone^.

His Majesty conferred the honor of Knighthood on William Poultney, a person
that ever had a great civility for all that were for the Royal cause, and a
loyal heart for his Majesty's service.

Col. Roger Mostyn is made Gentleman of the privy^chamber to his Majesty to
enjoy all privileges, etc.

On Monday, the right honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury presented to his Majesty
an Address of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of Worcester, entitled,

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Adddress of the Nobility and
Gentry in the County of Worcester.

The Address was subscribed, Tho. Windsor, Tho. Coventry, Will Russell, and
above fifty (...)* His Majesty returned them his hearty thanks telling them he
was well assured of their loyalty and affection, and should ever have a good
esteem of them.

One Pain, formerly a Messenger of Oliver Cromwell, is secured; there beng
information against him, that he was the Executioner of that execrable murder
of his late Majesty.

On Monday, Sergeant Atkins, a person of known integrity and great learning in
the Law, sat Baron of the Exchequer.

It being prohibited by the House of Commons, upon the miscarriage and abuses
of some idle Pamphleters* that any of the Votes of that House should be printed
without special Order, the Reader is desired to excuse us, if in obedience to
them we cannot yet give him so full satisfaction.

Books from the Office of Intelligence having formerly given you an account
that Mr Scot one of the late pretended High Court of Justice for trial of his
late Majesty was brought to Westminster; I must confess, though enquired of by
many, I could not give satisfaction therein, being tender to gainsay any thing
I did not well know especially in a matter concerning Mr. Scot, with who in the
Pamphleret formerly kept such const^nt intelligence, till meeting with a mere
notation of his, I was informed that he was at Brussels, where he had rendered
himself ^o Sir Henry de V^* till his Majesty's pleasure should be further known
concerning him, laying himself now at last at the feet of his Majesty's mercy
as his only security.

Naples May 29.
Ten ships, whereof six do belong to the Princ^ of Montesarchio his Squadron,
we^r from hence this we^, with the 2000 Napolitan ^oot, that were in our
Arsenal, commanded by Don Emanuel Caraffa, their Master of camp, and a German
Regiment of about 1000 Soldiers, who are all to be transported into Spain. They
do also carry thither a great quantity of Provisions and Ammunitions for the
War against Portugal.

Madrid June 2.
We hear by Letters from Cadiz, that our Fleet was gone from thence the
Fourteenth of the last month; consisting is two Men of War, laden with silver,
and twenty four laden with Merchandises. We have heard likewise, that the
Portugais, to the number of 500 horse and 2000 foot, with two small Field
pieces, had under (...) something upon Ale^gais, but that they were stoutly
repulsed by the Garrison, and the Inhabitants of that place* and the Governor
of (...) Rodrigo being gone (...) their relief with the (...), had so hot^g
charged the Enemies as they were retiring, that he killed 200 of them, and took
100 Prisoners. The States of both the Castilles have been summoned against the
15. instant.

Rome June ^.
This week Prince Ludovisio went from hence to take shipping at Civitta
Vecchia, upon the Captain Galley of the Duke of (...), which is to carry into
Arragon.

Genoa June 12.
The Seventh instant, the Sieurs Francesco Maria Lomellino, Gio Butista Giovo,
and Giaccomo Maria Garbarino were elected Senators, and the Sieurs Pietro Maria
Gentile, and Francesco Maria Spinola Procurators, for the Supreme Government of
this Common wealth for two years.

Turin June 19.
The 17 instant, this Court went from hence for Frone, where they are to
remain, during the great heat of Summer. The two Foot Regiments whom his Royal
Highness has given to the Venetians, are likewise gone from Trin, to go down
upon the Po to Venice.

The Governor of Milan has demanded leave to ra^s^ here a Regiment of Horse of
500 men to serve against Portugal, under such Officers as his said Highness
will be pleased himself to appoint.

St. John de Luz, June 21. 1660.
Two days before the departure of the Court from hence, the Count of
Fuensaldagne arrived here with a fine equipage, having eight Coaches, each with
six horses, three Litters, twenty four Mules with Coverts of Crimson Velvet,
imbroidered with gold and silver, two hundred horses all gallantly furnished,
thirty pages, and many footmen, all in rich clothes, laced with gold and silver
lace. The Duke of Crequi was sent to complement him from the King and Queen,
and afterward was carried to his audience, where the Duke of Espe^non put on
his hat as soon as that Ambassador covered himself, which caused the Dukes of
So^ssons and Armagnac to absent themselves from that ceremony. The King
expressed to the said Ambassador his great satisfaction of the Queen, and that
he was much beholding to the King his Brother, his Uncle, and his
Father-in-law, for bestowing on him that Princess. From thence the Ambassador
went to the Queen Mother, where at first having covered himself, he ^ood ba^e
during all the rest of the time of his audience, afterward he went to see the
Queen. The King entertained him at night with a Spanish Comedy, where he had a
place under the Canopy, three places lower then Monsieur the Kings Brother: All
the time of the Comedy the King did nothing but whisper to the Queen. I has
been observed by the whole Court, that the King and Queen are extremely fond
one of the other, and can hardly part. It is reported, that the first thing the
Queen asked of the King, has been, that she might always go with him
wheresoever he should go either to any journey, or to hunt, assuring his
Majesty that she may very well follow him on horseback. She has sent back
again all the Spanish Ladies that came along with her into France, except only
two Maids of Honor, Chamber maid, a Dwarf, and two other Servants. The King
having asked of her Majesty whom of the servants she would keep; she answered,
she would keep none except his Majesty would give her leave.

St. Sebastian, June 21. 1660.
Don Lewis d' Aro is to go from hence this day for Madrid. We hear that his
Catholic Majesty intends to send the Marquess of Constans to congratulate the
King of England for his happy restoration, and that he has designed the Baron
of Battevil to be Ambassador Extraordinary to the said King. We hear from
Flanders that all the Spanish Forces that were in the Garrisons and places, and
such as were under the pay of the Flemish, amounting to fifteen or sixteen
Regiments, both horse and foot, were commanded to draw about Mardike; it is not
known whether it be upon an intention to disband them, or for some other design.

Marseilles, June 22. 1660.
The 16 instant, the Chiaux of Tunis lately returned hither from the Court,
went away with his Majesty's Deputy, who is sent about the liberty of the
French Slaves. The twenty, the Switzers remaining here, were drawn out to
quarter beyond the Port, by the order of the Duke of Mercoeur, who went
yesterday for Aix. A Bark lately come from Barbary does relate, that twenty Men
of War from Algier, having met with a Merchant Ship of ours going toward the
Levant, have taken her, and made slaves all the men that were aboard of her.

Cah^rs the same date.
M. Sevin our Bishop, since his return from Toulouse, where he was gone to be
sworn to his Majesty, has wholly applied himself to the holding of a Synod
here. The 17 instant, he caused the funeral ceremonies to be performed in his
Cathedral for his Predecessor. There were present to the ceremony all the
Corporations of this City, and most part of the Nobility and Gentry of Q^ercy,
with above eight hundred Churchmen, Secular and Regular. The Bishop of
Montauban made the Funeral Sermon with great applause.

Bourdeaux, June 24 1660.
The 21 instant, the Duke of Espernon, Governor of this Province, being
arrived here to give the necessary orders for the reception of the Court, was
received upon the Port, with the noise of our Artillery, by our Jurates, in
whose name the Count d' Estrades our Major, made a speech to him. He was after
complemented in his own house by the Deputies of the Parliament, and of the
Court of Aids, and by the Treasurers of France, the Senechal, and the other
Corporations of this City, who has expressed much joy for his return. The 23,
their Majesty's having received the first respects of our Jurates, by their
Deputies at Bazas, and of the Parliament, by theirs at Langon, arrived here
yesterday upon a very gallant boat they had taken about Cadillac. At their
lighting, the Duke of Espernon, followed by abundance of Nobility, presented
them the Jurates, and after their speeches, the Keys unto t^^ Queen, by order
of the King. Their Majesty's were conducted afterward through the streets
richly hung, and at the noise of the Canons to their lodgings, where all the
Corporation, presented also by the Duke of Espernon, waited upon their
Majesty's this day, and made them their submissions. The 21, about four a clock
in the morning, we were much affrighted here by an Earthquake, which caused
some stones to fall down from one of our Steeples. We have heard that the sune
has happened about the same time in several places hereabouts.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that some unworthy person ha^h so
mangled that Excellent Poem that was lately set forth (called Iter Boreale) by
a Rural pen (as the ingenious Author was pleased to (...) himself) you may know
it by the Effigy of the Lord General Monck affixed with it in the same leaf,
tending to the wrong of the Author, and the abuse of the buyer, by taking here
a line or two, and there a line or two, and forward and backward in a confused
manner, so that the sense of the Author is (as much as in him lies) totally
perverted.

Advertisements of Books.
The Extravagant Shepherd; or the History of the Shepherd Lysis, an
Anti-Romance, in fourteen books; written originally in French, now made
English, and published the second time. To be sold by Thom^s Basset in St.
Danstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet.

Celestial Amitles, or a Soul sighing for the love of her Savior, by Edward
Rey^^ll.

The benefit of affliction, by the same Author.

An Advice against Libertinism, showing the great danger thereof, and exhorting
all to zeal for the truth, by the same Author. All three sold by Abel Roper at
the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.

Confirmation and Restau^ation the necessary means of Reformation and
Reconciliation, for the healing of the corruptions and divisions of the
Churches, submissively but earnestly ^endered to the consideration of the
Sovereign Powers, Magistrates, Ministers, and People etc. By Richard Baxter, an
unworthy Minister of Christ, that longs to see the healing of the Churches.
Sold by Joseph Cranford at the Castle and Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

There is now Published that long expected and much admired Piece, Entitled,
The World Surveyed: or, The Famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc, or,
White of Marscilles; who from the age of 14 years, to 78. traveled through
most parts of the World; Containing a more exact description thereof, then has
hitherto been done by any other Author. The whole Work enriched with many
authentic Histories. Originally written in French, and falt^fully rendered
into English. By F. B. Gent

Aminta, The famous Pastoral. Written in Italian by the Exquisite P^n of the
admired Poet Signor' Torquato Tass^s; and Translated into English Verse, by
John Dancer, with diverse other Poems. Both Printed for John Starkey at the
Miter in Fleet Street, betwixt the Middle Temple Gate, and Temple Bar.

The Character of Italy, or the Ireland Anatemized by an English Chyr^ugion*

The Character of Spain, or an Epitemie of their Virtues and Vices. Both sold
by Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhil.

All Tenants for Lives, or for Years, which ^old of the Bishops, or D^^ns, and
Chapters, are desired to meet on Tuesdaies and Saturdaies, at eight of the
clock in the morning, at the Sign of the Leg at Westminster, in the
Palace-yard, to consider of their respective interests.

A smooth black dog, less then a Greyhound, with white under his breast,
belonging to the Kings Majesty, was taken from Whitehall the eighteenth day of
this instant June, or thereabout. If any one can give notice to John Ellis, one
of his Majesty's Servants, or to his Majesty's back-stairs, shall be will
rewarded for their labor.

Whereas Tho. Rawlins, chief Graver of his Majesty's Mint and Seals, by reason
of his sufferings occasioned by graving of a Seal for his late Majesty of ever
blessed memory, has not kept any certain lodgings; these are therefore to let
all know that are in any office, that have seals from his Majesty, that they
must p^ss by Warrant to him, and that at present he lives in Long Acre, next
door to the Pestle and Mortar, but shall speedily remove to the Mint within the
Tower of London. Tho. Rawlins, chief Graver to his Majesty.

Amsterdam, June 24. 1660.
The 21 instant, the Royal Princess having been entertained with rich Presents
by the Chamber of the East India Company, went away from hence toward Harlem.
The affairs of the Prince her Son go on very well in our Provinces, the States
of Zealand having appointed Commissioners to draw a List of the charges and
places formerly possessed by his Predecessors, and settle all things again as
they were in 1651.

By Letters from Edinborough of the 21, we have this further account of the
solemnity, That the Major General, after his remembrance of his Majesty to the
Earl of Seaford, fired the great Cannon called Monnce Megg (a Cannon never
fired but on extraordinary occasions) after which followed all the Guns in
Edinborough Castle, Leith Citadel, and the ships in the Road. A plentiful
Largess was bestowed amongst the Soldiery to heighten them in their joys;
about fifteen hundred bonfires were made on Arthurs Seat, one of forty load of
coals, and at the Major Generals door one almost as big. After this was variety
of fireworks, some burned in the water, other flew in the air, two Castles
firing one against the other, then several sorts of boxes thrown into the air,
and falling in several shapes, which with diverse others, gave great content to
the spectators.

My Correspondent there did further inform me, that what he writ concerning
Major Abernthey, was too greedily taken up bp him from a brisk report that
was raised by some ill people, and desires it may be amended in the next
Print, which for his and the Readers satisfaction I have done accordingly. As
for Major Aberin, my friend of the Intelligence Office, has not yet told me
where he lives, till which time I must desire that Gentleman's pardon.

As for what concerns Captain Roll, I confess I had such a paper left at my
house, and so subscrib^d, as he puts in his Pamphlet, but whether Mr. Calmady's
hand or no I know not; I shall suddenly endeavor to wait upon him, and on
Thursday next in Publicus will give a faithful account of it.

For the rest of his pitiful foolery, to those that know me, I need make no
Apology, to those that do not, it will be enough to tell them, that I never
(...) any thing of this sort till entreated to it, for a just vindication of
his Excellency, and his Army, to give faithful intelligence of their
transactions, which were at that time so basely and falsely represented here by
the Pamphleteers then in being. His Excellency was pleased then to send me
several of his papers to commit to the Press, which when known to the world,
any sober discreet man may judge with what cautiousness and design I must
behave my self, with what reluctance to my self I was forced sometimes to
imitate this very fellow (I m^an no further, though then in writing) to free my
self from the inquisi^ion of his prying Master, who employed such busy
instruments to entrap men; how could I then safely represent the m^mb^^s that
desired a Free Parliament, if not in a disguize, which however was necessary
should be done to balance those things he so often foisted in, and crowded week
after week into his books, such as his Dare-bones Petition, and that pretended
to be the Waterm^^s, which suspicion might not a naked simplicity have cast
upon the Master I wrote for? This though his s^^d^owness cannot reach, wise men
have though meritorious, and in consideration of my service, the late Council
of State ordered me one day i^ the week (...) be the intelligence, and none
else on the same day, which I must tell my G^ntleman I think of as sufficient
power, as to the writing of (...) I confess I have never yet seen his power,
but because the Gentleman in some of his former papers has (...) I knew it,
I Will tell him my opinion of it, that he may have paper to keep a (...) to give
information of mone^ to be laid ou^ in B^ina^ia, or where a (...) with ^^st
security venture ^o have his corns (...), w^ the R^^earcher liv^s, (...) is to
be let on the B^^e-side, where young m^n and old M^rrons (...), and that
bargains are made to be the^e* bu^ how this entitles (...); I leave it to
himself to discount. (...) is by Neth^^mizing (...), they are hi^ Tides that
honor him; he (...) made like (...) of Offal, had he not crept into his Livery,
he might have gone threadbare (...) this time, and ye I do not say he
Nedhamizes, cloth him in purple, and he will pass but so the same creature
still. The Maxim in this is true, Corruption u^ius est generati^ alterius, Sir
Politic would be, might have been diviller to his Godfather, for surely he
gave him his name; but no wonder if he be irseverent to him, that showed so
much ingratitude to his late Patron. I will not trouble my self any more with
his impe^tinencies, as to what he can say of me in relation to my writing, I
think him soberly answered, for his follies slightly.

Whitehall.
On Thursday, being the day appointed for the Thanksgiving for his sacred
Majesty's restoration, in his Majesty's pass^ge between the Guard-chamber, and
his Closet, stood a person near up to the wall with a drawn sword under his
cloak, which was not for some time discovered; but his Majesty passing to the
Closet, George Charnock, Sergeant at Arms, casting his eye about for the
security of his Majesty's person, discovered the glittering of the Sword, and
thereupon presently with his Mace seized on the person, took from him the said
naked sword, and upon view found the same to be a short sword, back ^ilted,
hacked half way down from the point, a weapon fit for a dangerous design, but
by the care and prudence of that Gentleman, his Majesty's faithful servant, all
intended mischief was prevented, the person secured, and his Majesty informed
thereof by the Right Honorable and truly Noble Lord, the Earl of Pembroke, and
the party remains under examination.

Friday. His Majesty with his two Royal Brothers, the Dukes of York and
Gloucester, with several of the Nobility and Gentry, went to Copt-hall, where
they were highly treated by the Earl of Middlesex.

On Saturday his Majesty, with their Royal Highnesses his Brothers, his
Excellency, with diverse of the Nobility and Gentry, were highly entertained at
P^ehampton.

From his Excellencies Quarters at the Cockpit.
On Monday his Excellency granted a Commissi^n to Major Richard Fincher, to be
Major to Col. Nortons Regiment at Portsmouth. Also a Commission to Captain
Potts, son to Sir John Potts, to be a Captain in the same Regiment.

Sir John Men's having a Patent from his Majesty to be Governor of Deal
Castle, his Excellency ordered the present Governor forthwish to surrender it
to him.

William Bing Esquire having a Patent for Weymouth Castle, his Excellency ordered
the p^^sent Governor forthwith to surrender it to him.

His Excellency has by Commission given the Command of the Regiment which was
lately Col. Hackers, to Francis Lord Hawley, Viscount Duncann^n. He has
^ikewise given a Commission to Sir Chichester Wrey, to be Major of that
Regiment, to Sir Francis Vincent Baronet, Sir Thomas Sinkeley, James Muddifor^,
and (...) She^rard, to be Captains in the same Regiment.

On Friday his Excellency sat in the House of Commons, and (...) his leave of
them, having such Honors conferred on him by his Majesty, as puts him in an
high^ capacity.

Major Abr. Holmes, Timothy Clare, Nicholas Lockyer, R Jones, Anth Spinach, and
(...) Gregory Captains, Commissary Everard, Lievt. Hendly Lieutenant Geff, and
one Corporal Brown, formerly committed to the custody of the Marshal-General,
and being no Officers in this present Army, were on Saturday by his
Excellencies Order discharged of their imprisonments; upon giving security to
be (...) and loyal Subjects to our Sovereign Lord the King, and not to disturb
the public peace of his Majesty's Kingdoms.

London.
The Artillery Company meeting on Tuesday the 26 of June, 1660. at a general
Court then held in the Artillery yard, did unanimously make choice of his
Highness the Duke of York to be their Commander in chief, and made choice of
twelve of the Court of Assistants, to acquaint his Highness therewith, and
desire his acceptance. On Saturday the 30th of June, the Lord Lucas, Sir John
Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, their Deputy President, with Col. Shepherd,
and others of the Assistants accordingly, went to Whitehall, to attend his
Highness, and being commanded by him to come into his Bedchamber, the L. Lucas
acquainted the Duke that these Gentlemen of the Artillery Company were come to
tender their services unto his Highness, and to acquaint him what they had done
in reference to his Election to be their Commander in chief; then Col. Shepherd
was desired to declare the mind of the Company, which he did in these words
following: May it please your Highness,
WE are commanded by the Artillery Company to acquaint you, that at our General
Court your Highness was with one heart and one hand freely chosen to be our
Commander in chief; but we durst not have so presumed, had we not known that
your Highness was a Lover of Arms in general, and that in the year 1641. you
manifested so much love to that Company in particular, that you honored us so
far, as to enter your self to be a member of it; and is being the ancient
custom of our Company still to have liberty to make choice of one of the
members of it to be our Commander, we do humbly pray your Highness will pardon
our boldness, and be pleased to own us as your own Company, and to accept of
our earnest request to be our Commander in chief, and we shall be ready to
yield obedience to your Highness Commands.

And humbly pray for the increase of your Highness prosperity and happiness.




Upon which motion his Highness did very lovingly accept of it, and them, and
promised they should still continue their ancient privileges and customs, and
he would be ready to do what he could for them: Then he asked what number they
might be, it was answered, about four hundred or five hundred, and that they
hoped they should be above three hundred in Arms on Thursday next to attend
him, and if they were commanded, should be ready to wait upon him that very day
at Whitehall* and when the Company was drawn up, they should deliver unto him
their leading staff, according to custom: To which he replied, He would accept
of it, and returned them hearty thanks.

On Friday the 29th, a Committee of Aldermen and Common Council went to invite
the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council to dinner with them at Guild Hall,
July 5. the day appointed by his Majesty, which they were pleased accept of:
They likewise made a particular invitation to the Lord Chancellor, and several
other persons of Honor, which they were pleased to accept. His Sacred Majesty
in consideration of the eminent services and constant loyalty of Sir John
Robinson Knight and Baronet, Alderm^n of London, made him Lieutenant of the
Tower, which on Friday he took possession of.

To morrow Doctor Reynolds is to preach before his Majesty in his Chapel at
Whitehall.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Thomas Newcomb, 1660.


