Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, A Preservative against Popery, etc.

Febr. 2: 1687. Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiepisc.
Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

A Preservative AGAINST POPERY: Being some Plain DIRECTIONS TO Unlearned
PROTESTANTS, How to Dispute with Romish Priests.

THE FIRST PART.

By WILL. SHERLOCK, D.D. Master of the Temple.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. M DC LXXXVIII.

A PRESERVATIVE AGAINST POPERY.
The Introduction.
WHile so many Learned Pens are employed to such excellent purpose, in
answering the Writings, and confuting the Doctrines and Practices of the Church
of Rome, I cannot but think it a very useful Work to give some plain Directions
to those, who are Unlearned, who have neither Time to Read, nor Money to Buy,
nor Abilities to Understand more Learned Controversies. Our Divines indeed have
taken great care to write short Tracts, with great Plainness and Perspicuity,
and with as little unnecessary show of Learning as may be, to fit them the
better for Unlearned Readers; and they have had, by the blessing of God,
wonderful Success; Popery was never so generally understood, as it is at this
day; the meanest Tradesmen can now dispute against Popery with sufficient Skill
and Judgment, and need not be beholding to the prejudices of Education to
secure them: and therefore my business shall not be at present downright to
state any one Controversy between us, and the Church of Rome, but to direct
our people, how to secure themselves against the Attaques of our Roman
Adversaries, to check their conferring and disputing humor, or to baffle them.
I shall reduce all into as plain a Method and as short a compass as I can, and
show.

First, How to stop them at the beginning of their Dispute.

Secondly, Give some Rules about the Topics, from which they dispute, such as
Reason, Scripture, and the Authority of the Ancient Fathers and Writers of the
Church.

Thirdly, How to answer some of their most popular pretenses, such as the
Uncertainty of the Protestant Religion, the Misrepresentations of Popery, etc.

Fourthly, To give some short Directions as to particular Controversies.

CHAP. I. How Protestants may prevent Disputing with Papists.
NOw I do not by this mean, that they should always avoid their company, and
run away from them wherever they meet them, which is very ill Manners; though
it is not advisable neither to court such acquaintance, or to make them our
Intimates, when neither the obligations of Nature, nor other Civil or Political
Reasons make it necessary; for Conversation many times prevails more than
Arguments can do, and will as soon corrupt Men's Faith, as Manners.

Nor do I mean, that Protestants should obstinately refuse to discourse with
Papists when they meet them; to hear what they have to say for themselves, and
to give a Reason for their own Faith; this is not agreeable to Protestant
Principles, to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good; and yet
this ought to be done with great prudence and caution too; for there are a sort
of perverse Disputers, who are to be avoided according to the Apostolic
Precept, if any man teach otherwise and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strife
of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmizing, perverse
disputing of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing, that
gain is godliness, from such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.

Men of weak judgments, and who are not skilled in the Laws of Disputation, may
easily be imposed on by cunning Sophisters, and such as lie in wait to deceive:
The Church of Rome is very sensible of this, and therefore will not suffer her
people to dispute their Religion, or to read Heretical Books, nay not so much
as to look into the Bible itself; but though we allow all this to our people,
as that which God not only allows, but requires, and which all considering men
will allow themselves, whoever forbids it; yet we do not allow them to be
perpetual Seekers, to be always doubtful of their Religion, to be like children
tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine. And therefore the liberty of
Judging and Inquiring, which we allow, is only that they may understand the
true Reasons of their Faith, and be well grounded in it, which Men may be, who
are not able to answer every cavilling objection; but it is an abuse of this
liberty, when men have itching ears, and hearken after all Novelties of
Opinions, and grow wanton and Seeptical Disputers; and therefore it is very
consistent with that liberty, which Protestants allow, to advise Christians to
be very careful, how they, hearken to such, as Preach any new Doctrine, which
they have not been taught, that the weak in Faith and knowledge, should not
venture upon doubtful Disputations: that they should not be hasty to question,
what they have believed, nor to give heed to new Doctrines; that they should
not rely on their own understanding in these matters, but when they meet with
any difficulties, should consult their Spiritual Guides, not to be finally
determined by their Authority, as the Church of Rome requires, but to hear
their Reasons, and what Answers they can give to such difficulties, as they
themselves cannot answer: with such cautions as these, we dare venture our
people to hear and read, and enquire, as much as they please, and have not
found yet, that our Roman Adversaries have been able to make any great
impression upon such honest and prudent Inquirers. But that which I intend at
present is of another nature, to teach our people a way to make these men sick
of Disputing themselves, to make them leave off those Impertinent and noisy
squabbles, with which they disturb all company they come into: and this is no
such mighty secret neither, as may be expected, but is very plain and obvious
at the first proposal.

For when you are assaulted by such troublesome Disputers, only ask them,
whether they will allow you to judge for yourselves in matters of Religion; if
they will not, why do they trouble you with Disputing? for the end of Disputing
is to convince, and you cannot be convinced, unless you may judge too: would
they Dispute with a stone, that can neither hear, nor understand? or would they
make a Speech to convince a Horse, that he is out of his way, and must take
another Road, if he would return home? and do they not talk to as little
purpose, and spend their breath as vain upon a man, who can hear indeed, and
understand somewhat, but must not follow his own understanding? if they say,
that you must judge for your selves, ask them, whether this be the Doctrine of
their Church, that private men may judge for themselves? whether this do not
resolve our Faith into a private Spirit, which they say, is the Protestant
Heresy, and the foundation of Protestant uncertainty? if they once open this
gap to Heretics into the Church, there is great danger, that more will run out
at it, than will come in; and it is well if the Church itself stays behind;
for what becomes of the Church of Rome, if all their glorious Cant of the
Infallibility of Church, and Popes, and General Councils, be at last resolved
into a private Spirit! while these men go about to Dispute Heretics into their
Church, they unavoidably give up the Cause of the Church, and of Infallibility,
which is the way to Dispute a great many good Catholics out of it, who are
kept there only by the power of a blind and implicit Faith. Here then let our
Protestant fix his foot, and not stir an inch, till they disown Infallibility,
and confess, that every man can and must judge for himself in matters of
Religion, according to the proofs, that are offered to him. For will a wise man
Dispute with one, who, he knows, banters him all the while? who appeals to his
private judgment (as all men do, who dispute with one another) and at the same
time cries down this private Spirit as the cause of Schisms, and Heresies, and
Blasphemies, and every thing that is evil: no man of any spirit, but will scorn
to dispute with one, who intends only to put a trick on him, and to out wit him
if he can; and in truth it is no more to endeavor to dispute a man into
Popery, when the Fundamental Principle of Popery is, that we must not Reason
and Dispute, but believe; that we must take our Faith upon the Authority of the
Church, without asking any questions about it. There are two or three things,
which may be answered to this.

1. That though Disputing be not a proper way for Papists to take, yet it is
the only way, that can be taken with Protestants, who are all for Disputing,
and will believe nothing without a Reason, and therefore Protestants ought not
to blame Papists for Disputing, unless they would be good Catholics without
it. Now in answer to this, I have something to say to Papists, and something to
Protestants.

1. As for the Papists, what necessity soever they be in of Disputing, I desire
to know with what face they can reproach Protestants with adhering to their own
private judgments, when they themselves are such zealous Disputants, which is
an Appeal to every private man's judgment: if ever they make any Converts, they
must be beholden to men's private judgments for it, for I think men cannot
change their Opinions without exercising a private judgment about it; and I
suppose when they dispute with men to make them Papists, they intend to convert
them by their own private judgments. Now what difference is there between men's
using their private judgments to turn Papists, or to turn Protestants: one
indeed may be false, and the other true, but private judgment is private
judgment still, and if it be so great a fault for men to use their own private
judgments, it is as great a fault in a Papist, as it is in a Protestant. So
that at least as to Converts, the Church of Rome has no advantage in this
particular over Protestant Churches; some by the exercise of their own Reason
and judgment go over to the Church of Rome, and some to the Church of England;
some are disputed into Popery, and some into Protestantism: and therefore for
the sake of their beloved Converts, and their beloved Disputations, they ought
to be more favorable to a private Spirit: The truth is, by Disputing with
Heretics, they give up their Cause, and confess, that in all Disputes of
Religion, there lies an Appeal to every man's private Judgment and Conscience;
and should they lose this point by their Disputing, all the Converts they make,
cannot recompense such a loss.

2. As for Protestants, though they have no other way to satisfy themselves,
or to convince others, but by Reason and Discourse; yet this is no reason why
they should Dispute with those men who disown the judgment of Reason, as a
private Spirit. For why should I Dispute with any man who uses such Arguments
to convince me, as he himself does not think a sufficient Reason of Faith? Ask
then one of these Disputers, who alleges Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity, to
prove any Doctrines of the Romish Faith; Do you, Sir, believe
Transubstantiation, the Worship of Images, the Invocation of Saints, Purgatory,
Mass for the Dead, upon the bare Authority of these Scriptures and Fathers, you
have produced for them? If these Doctrines were not Defined by the Church,
should you think these Arguments sufficient to prove them? or could you
suppose, the Church had Defined the contrary, should you think the Arguments
good still? In short, can any Reason, any Authority of Scripture, or Fathers,
be any Foundation for a Divine Faith, but only the Authority of the Church? He
that says, they can, is no Papist; and he that says, they cannot, confesses,
that he uses such Arguments, as he himself does not build his Faith upon: If
you will believe them, you may; but though you do, you are no sound Believer,
without resolving your Faith solely into the Authority of the Church. And, I
think, he must love Disputing well, who will Dispute with such men as these;
and those must have a good degree of assurance, who will be troublesome with
their Disputes, after such a discovery. The end of Disputing, I suppose, is
either toconvince, or to be convinced: but should you Answer and baffle all
such a man's Arguments, if he be modest, it may be he may blush a little, but
is not to be moved; for his Faith, after all, is not built upon these
Arguments, but upon Church Authority: and it is to no purpose for you to suffer
your self to be convinced by these Arguments, for it will not make you a good
Catholic, without resolving your Faith wholly into the Authority of the
Church. It is certainly a very surprising thing for a Protestant to be disputed
into Popery; for as soon as he is converted, he must renounce the very means of
his Conversion: He must use his own Judgment to turn Papist, and as soon as he
is turned, he must renounce his own Judgment, and confess it to be of no
Authority: Now though it may be such a private Judgment as leads a man to
Popery, may as well deserve to be renounced, as any; yet it is an odd kind of
contradiction, to renounce our own private Reason and Judgment, and yet to own
our Conversion; methinks such men should renounce their Conversion too at the
same time they renounce their Reason: for if their Conversion be good, it is a
sign their Judgment was so; but if their Judgment be not fit to be trusted,
methinks this should make them question their Conversion: And therefore they
should either maintain the Reputation of their Judgment and Conversion
together, and then they cannot be good Catholics, while they adhere to their
own Judgment, or they should renounce them both together: nay, they must not
only renounce their own Judgments, as soon as they are Converted, but they
must renounce the Authority and Validity of those very Arguments whereby they
are Converted, whether from Scripture, Reason, or Fathers; they must confess,
that these Arguments are not a sufficient Foundation for a Divine Faith,
without the Authority of the Church; for it is a dangerous thing to allow any
Authority to Scripture or Fathers, without the Church, for that may make men
Heretics; and yet, I suppose, when Heretics are converted by these Arguments,
it must be the force of the Arguments, and not the Authority of the Church,
which converts them, unless they believed the Authority of the Church before
they were converted; and that was a little to early for it. Now methinks when
Protestants turn Papists, as they pretend, from the conviction of their own
Reason and Judgment, and as soon as they are converted, are taught, that there
is no relying upon their own Judgment, and that the Reasons whereby they were
converted, are not good in themselves without Church Authority; if it were
possible for them ever to use their Reason more after such a change, it would
certainly make them disown their Conversion; which, it seems, was the effect of
a very fallible Judgment, and very uncertain and inauthentick Reasons.

2. There is another pretense for these Disputes, which may seem to answer this
difficulty, that the intention of these Disputes, is only to lead you to the
Infallible Church, and set you upon a Rock; and then it is very natural to
renounce your own Judgment, when you have an Infallible Guide. Our own Judgment
then must bring us to the Infallible Guide, and when we have found him, we have
no farther use for our own Judgment. I answer,

1. Should we grant this, it puts an end to all the particular Disputes of
Religion between us and the Church of Rome: We may Dispute on about an
Infallible Judge, but they cannot, with any sense, Dispute with us about the
particular Articles of Faith, such as Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, the Worship of Images, and the like; for these are to be learnt only
from the Church, and cannot be proved by Scripture or Fathers, without the
Authority of the Church. And if they would confess this, they would save us,
and themselves, a great deal of trouble: For why should they be at the trouble
of writing such Arguments, or we to answer them, when they themselves confess,
that the Arguments are not good, unless they be confirmed by the Churches
Authority? I confess, I have often wondered to see such Volumes of
Controversies written by the Roman Divines, for I could never imagine to what
end they are writ. Is not their Faith wholly resolved into the Authority of the
Church? what need Reasons and Arguments then, which cannot work Faith in us?
Either these Arguments are sufficient to confirm the Articles of their Faith
without the Authority of the Church, or they are not: If they are, then there
is no need of Infallibility, since all the Articles of Faith are confirmed by
such Reasons, as are a sufficient Foundation for Faith without it: And thus
they give up all their Arguments for an Infallible Judge, from the necessity of
such a Judge. If they be not, of what use are they? does the Decision of the
Church need to be confirmed by such Arguments? If they are not good Arguments
without the Authority of the Church, they can no more give Authority to the
Church, than an Infallible Church can want any Authority, but its own: Are they
to convince Heretics? but how if Heretics should confute them? If they be not
in themselves good Arguments, they may be confuted; and they know, by sad
experience, that there are Heretics, as they call them, who have Wit and
Learning enough to confute, what is to be confuted; and if they fall into such
hands (which has been their hard fate of late) they are sure to be confuted:
And, I doubt then, they had better have let them alone; for the Catholic Cause
may suffer much in the Opinion of the World, when all their Arguments are
confuted. All then that they can design by such Arguments, is to impose upon
the Weak and Ignorant, when Learned Men are out of the way, which is no very
commendable design; and that design will be spoiled too, if Unlearned Men do
but learn to ask them the Question, Whether they build their Faith upon such
Arguments? For then they must either quit the Authority of their Church, or the
strength of their Arguments: The first reduces them to Protestant Uncertainty,
for then they have no other Foundation for their Faith, than Protestants have;
which resolves it self into the Reasons and Arguments of Faith: The second puts
an end to Disputing about these matters; for no man needs answer any Arguments,
which the Disputant himself acknowledges not to be good.

2. There is nothing left then for Dis^utation, and the Exercise of our private
Reason and Judgment, but the inquiry after an Infallible Judge. And here also,
before you dispute, it will be necessary to ask them, Whether the belief of an
Infallible Judge, must be resolved into every man's private Judgment? whether it
be not necessary to believe this with a Divine-Faith? and whether there can be
any Divine Faith without an Infallible Judge? Certainly if ever it be necessary
to have an Infallible Faith, it is so to be infallibly assured of an Infallible
Judge, because this is the Foundation of all the rest: for though the Judge be
Infallible, if I be not infallibly assured of this, I can never arrive to
Infallibility in any thing; for I cannot be more certain, that his
Determinations are Infallible, than I am, that he himself is Infallible; and if
I have but a Moral assurance of this, I can be but morally assured of the rest;
for the Building cannot be more firm than the Foundation is: and thus there is
an end to all the Roman Pretenses to Infallibility. Now if we must believe the
Infallibility of the Church, or Pope of Rome, with an Infallible Faith, there
is an end of Disputing; for no Reasons or Arguments, not the Authority of the
Scripture it self, without an Infallible Judge, can beget an Infallible Faith,
according to the Roman Doctors: For this reason they charge the Protestant
Faith with Uncertainty, and will not allow it to be a Divine, but Humane Faith,
though it is built upon the firmest Reasons, the best Authority, and the most
express Scripture that can be had for any thing; but because we do not pretend
to rely on the Authority of a Living Infallible Judge, therefore, forsooth, our
Faith is Uncertain, Humane, and Fallible: and this, they say, makes an
Infallible Judge necessary, because without him we have no Infallible Certainty
of any thing.

Now if nothi^^ but an Infallible Judge can be the Foundation of an Infallible
Faith, then it is to no purpose to dispute about such a Judge; for Disputing is
nothing else but weighing Reason against Reason, and Argument against Argument,
or Scripture against the pretense of Scripture; but whoever gets the better of
it this way, no Reasons, or Arguments, or Scripture Proofs can beget an
Infallible Certainty, which is necessary in this case; and therefore this is
all lost labor, and they do but put a trick upon you, when they pretend to
dispute you into the belief of an Infallible Judge; for they themselves know,
and must confess, if you ask them, that the best and must convincing Arguments
cannot give us an Infallible assurance of this matter; and yet unless we are
infallibly assured of an infallible Judge, it is all to no purpose.

3. I can think but of one thing more, that can be said in this cause, viz.
that it is manifestly unreasonable not to grant to the Church of Rome, that
Liberty which all men and Churches challenge, to dispute for themselves, and
against their Adversaries: for when two men, or two Churches differ in matters
of Faith, there is no other way to end the Controversy, but by disputing it
out; whereas this Discourse will not allow them to dispute, nor any Protestants
to dispute with them.

In answer to this, I grant, that the Charge is in a great measure true, and
shows the absurdity of that Church and Religion, but does not disprove the
reasonableness of this method. If men will embrace such a Religion as will not
admit of disputing, it is their own and their Religions fault, not the fault of
those men who will not dispute with them. Now a Religion which leaves no room
for the exercise of Reason and private Judgment, leaves no place for Disputes
neither; for how shall men dispute, who must not use their own Reason and
Judgment? They ought not to dispute themselves, if they be true to their own
Principles; and no man ought to dispute with them, who will not be laughed at
by them, and by all the World: For to dispute without Reason, is a new way of
disputing, (though it is the only thing that can justify the Romanists, and
our late Disputants have been very careful to observe it;) and to dispute with
Reason, is to use our private Reason in Religion, which is Protestant Heresy.
Infallible men ought not to dispute, for that is to quit their Infallibility;
and fallible men are very unwise to dispute with them, because no good can come
of it: for Reason can never confute their infallible Adversaries, nor make
themselves infallible Believers.

But for the better understanding of this, I have two things to say. 1. That
Papists may dispute against Protestant Heresies, as they call them, but cannot
dispute for their own Religion. 2. Protestants may dispute against Popish
Doctrines, and to vindicate their own Faith, but cannot reasonably be disputed
into Popery.

1. That Papists may dispute against Protestant Heresies, but cannot dispute
for their own Religion: And the reason of this difference is plain, because
Protestants allow of Reason and Discourse in matters of Religion; and therefore
they may be confuted, if good Reasons can be produced against them: And here
the Romanists may try their skill; but the Religion of Rome is not founded on
Reason, but on Infallibility; and therefore is not the subject of a Dispute,
because the truth and certainty of those Doctrines, is not resolved into the
Reasons of them. They ought to allege no other ground of their Faith, but the
Infallibility of the Church; and they ought not to dispute about this neither:
but those who will believe it may, and those who will not, may let it alone,
because Infallibility is not to be proved by Reason; for Reason proves nothing
infallibly, and therefore cannot give us an infallible certainty of the
Churches Infallibility.

But you will say, if they have other Arguments for the truth of their Faith,
besides the Infallibility of the Church, why may they not urge those other
Reasons and Arguments to convince those, who will not own the Churches
Infallibility? I answer, Because whatever other Reasons they have, their Faith
is not resolved into them; and therefore it is not honest in them to urge those
for the Reasons of their Faith, which are not the Reasons why they believed:
For let me ask them, Suppose they may have very good Reasons for some of their
Doctrines, do they believe them merely because they are reasonable? If they say
they do, then they believe just as Protestants believe; and there is no need of
Infallibility, when men believe nothing but what is reasonable; and it is pity
that so good a thing as Infallibility should serve only to support an
unreasonable Faith.

Let me ask them again, Can they have a sufficient certainty, that these
Reasons are good, without an infallible Judge? If they can, then the Faith of
Protestants, which is grounded upon rational Evidences, may be very certain
too, though it be not infallible; if they cannot, then their Reasons are none,
since the very certainty of them is resolved into an infallible Authority; and
therefore they are no certain Reasons, that is, not such as a man may rely on,
when they are separated from Infallibility; and consequently they ought never
to be urged apart from Infallibility, because they themselves do not think them
good Reasons, that is, not a sufficient foundation of Faith alone: and then I
know not why they should be urged at all; for Infallibility can stand by it
self, without the support of any Reasons.

I ask them again, Would they reject those Doctrines which they think they can
prove by such evident Reasons, did they see those Reasons as evidently
confuted? If they would not, then it is plain, they do not believe them for the
sake of those Reasons; for if they did, they would reject them, when all their
Reasons were confuted: They only impose upon the World with a pretense and
flourish of Reason, and set up a Man of Straw for Protestants to shoot at; but
whatever becomes comes of their Reasons, they have a safe Retreat into
Infallibility.

If they believed any Doctrine because it is reasonable, if they will be true
to themselves, they ought to reject all Doctrines, which are unreasonable, or
contrary to Sense and Reason: He who believes for the sake of Reason, can never
believe against it; for if Reason makes a thing credible, then what is
unreasonable is incredible too; and we may as reasonably dis-believe what is
confirmed by Reason, as believe what Reason contradicts: and therefore it is
not very modest to hear men talk of Reason in any case, who can believe such an
absurd and unreasonable Doctrine as Transubstantiation.

Now whatever Opinion Protestants have of Reason, Papists ought not to pretend
to it, because their Faith has nothing to do with Reason: it is a Reproach to
an infallible Church and infallible Faith, to need the supports of Reasons. And
the truth is, those who will have nothing to do with Reason, Reason commonly
has as little to do with them, but owes them a Shame, whenever they pretend to
her; and therefore they had as good let her alone.

2. Protestants may dispute against Popish Doctrines, and to vindicate their
own Faith, but they cannot reasonably be disputed into Popery. When Papists
allege Scripture, Reason, or humane Authority for any Doctrines of their
Religion, Protestants, who allow of the use of Reason in Religion, may examine
and confute them: when Papists dispute against Protestant Doctrines,
Protestants are concerned to vindicate their own Faith, or to renounce it; but
if a Protestant understands himself and his own Principles, all the Disputes in
the World can never make him a Papist. For to be a Papist does not signify
merely to believe Transubstantiation, or the Worship of Saints and Images, and
suchlike Popish Doctrines; but to resolve our Faith into the Infallible
Authority of the Church, and to believe whatever the Church believes, and for
no other reason, but because the Church teaches it. This is the peculiar and
distinguishing Character of the Church of Rome, which divides it from all other
Churches and Sects of Christians; and therefore our late Popish Writers are
certainly in the right, to endeavor to bring the whole Controversy to this
issue; not to dispute about particular Doctrines, which follow on course, when
once you believe the Church to be Infallible; but to persuade men that the
Church is Infallible, and that the Church of Rome is that Infallible Church.
Now I say, no understanding Protestant can be disputed into this kind of
Popery, and that for two plain Reasons. 1. Because no Arguments or Disputations
can give me an infallible certainty of the Infallibility of the Church. 2.
Because it is impossible by Reason to prove, that men must not use their own
Reason and Judgment in matters of Religion.

1. No Arguments can give me an infallible certainty of the Infallibility of
the Church. The great Motive to any man to forsake the other Communions of
Christians, and to go over to the Church of Rome, is to attain an Infallibility
in Faith, which is a wonderful good thing, if it were to be had; but though the
Church of Rome were Infallible, and I should be convinced that there were some
reason to think so, yet unless I can be infallibly assured of it, my Faith is
still as fallible as the Protestant Faith is; and I am no nearer to
Infallibility in the Church of Rome, than in the Church of England. For as I
observed before, unless I can have an infallible certainty of the Infallibility
of the Church, I can have no Infallibility at all: Though the Church were
infallible in all her Decrees, I can never be infallibly certain of the truth
of her Decrees, unless I be infallibly certain that she is Infallible. It is a
known Rule in Logic, that the Conclusion must follow the weaker part, and
therefore it is impossible to infer an infallible Faith from the fallible
Belief of the Churches Infallibility.

And yet the best Reasons in the World (which is all that disputing can do, to
offer Reasons for our Faith) cannot give us an infallible certainty, because
Reason it self is not an infallible Principle, at least the Church of Rome
dares not own, that any man's private Reason and Judgment is infallible; for
then Protestants may set up for Infallibility as well as Papists. No man, by
Reason and Argument, can arrive at a greater Certainty than Protestants may
have, and yet no man can arrive at greater certainty in the way of disputing,
than Reason and Argument can give him; and then a Popish Convert, who is
reasoned into the belief of Infallibility, though he has changed his Opinion,
yet has no more Infallibility now, than he had when he was a Protestant.
Protestants, without an Infallible Church, may have all the Certainty that
Reason and Argument can give them; and a Convert has no greater Certainty (if
he have no more than what Disputing could give him) for his Infallible Church:
And how is it possible then, that a reasonable man can be disputed out of the
Church of England into the Church of Rome, upon such vain hopes of a more
infallible certainty? for let him go where he will, if he be lead to Rome it
self by his own fallible Reason and Judgment, (which is the only Guide he has
in disputing) he will be the same fallible Creature that ever he was. But to
represent this the more familiarly, let us hear a short Conference between a
sturdy Protestant, and a new Convert.

Prot. O, my old Friend! I am glad to meet you, for I have longed to know what
change you find in your self, since you are become an Infallible Believer.


Conv. I find, Sir, what I expected, very great ease and satisfaction of mind,
since I am delivered from all doubtful Disputes in such an important
concernment as the salvation of my Soul, and have a firm and sure Rock to trust
to, such an Infallible Church as cannot err it self, nor mis-guide me.


Prot. This, I confess, is a very great advantage; and therefore as we have
been formerly of the same Church and Communion, I would be glad to keep you
company also in so advantageous a change. Pray therefore tell me, how you came
to be so infallibly persuaded of the Infallibility of your Church.


Conv. With all my heart; and I shall be very glad of such company: and indeed
there are such powerful Reasons for it, as I am sure must convince so free and
ingenuous a mind, as you always carry about with you. For Christ has promised
to build his Church upon St. Peter, and that the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it --


Prot. Hold, good Sir! Reason! Are you got no farther than Reason yet? Will
Reason ever make a man infallible? I have considered all the Reasons that are
used to this purpose, and know what to say to them, if that were our business;
and the truth is, I have a great deal of unanswerable Reason, to stay where I
am; and am a little surprised, to think that you, or any man, should leave the
Church of England for want of Reason, or go to the Church of Rome for it: and
therefore pray tell me the Secret, for there must be something else to make
Converts, besides Reason.


Conv. Then I perceive you take me for a Knave, who have changed my Religion
for base secular Ends, without Reason.


Prot. You know that best; but that was not my meaning: but the reason of my
Question was, because you changed for an infallible Faith. Now if you rely
still upon Reason, I don't see how your Faith is more infallible than mine: for
I am as confident, as you can be, that I have as good Reasons for my Faith, and
in my opinion much better, than you have for yours.


Conv. I beg your pardon for that: I rely upon the Authority of an Infallible
Church, you trust to your private Reason.


Prot. And I beg your pardon, Sir: for I rely on the Authority of Scripture,
which is as infallible as your Church.


Conv. But you rely on your own Reason for the Authority of Scripture, and
those particular Doctrines you draw from it.


Prot. And you rely on your own Reason and Judgment, for the Infallibility of
your Church, and consequently of all the Doctrines of it; and therefore your
infallible Faith is as much resolved into your own fallible Judgment, as the
Protestant Faith is: so that the difference between us is not, that your Faith
is infallible, and ours fallible; for they are both alike, call it what you
will, fallible or infallible; but the Dispute is, whether your Reason and
Judgment, or ours, be best: and therefore if you think your Reason better than
ours, you did well to change; but if you changed your Church, hoping to grow
more infallible by it, you were miserably mistaken, and may return to us again:
for we have more rational Certainty than you have, and you have no more
infallible Certainty than we. You think you are reasonably assured that your
Church is infallible, and then you take up your Religion upon trust from your
Church, without, and many times against Sense and Reason, according as it
happens; so that you have only a general assurance of the Infallibility of
your Church, and that no greater than Protestants pretend to in other cases,
viz. the certainty of Reason and Argument; but have not so much as a rational
assurance of the truth of your particular Doctrines: that if you be mistaken
about the Infallibility of your Church, you must be miserably mistaken about
every thing else, which you have no other evidence for. But now we are in
general assured, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and in particular are
assured, that the Faith, which we profess, is agreeable to Scripture, or
expressly contained in it, and does not contradict either Sense or Reason, nor
any other Principle of Knowledge. So that we have as much assurance of every
Article of our Faith, as you have of the Infallibility of your Church; and
therefore have at least double and trible the assurance that you have. But if
you know the Reasons of your Conversion, I desire to know of you, What made you
think, that you wanted Certainty in the Church of England?


Conv. Because with you every man is left to his own private Reason and
Judgment, the effects of which, are very visible in that infinite variety of
Sects among you, which shows what an uncertain thing your Reason is, that so
few judge alike of the power and validity of the same Reasons.


Prot. And were you not sensible at the same time, that you were left to your
own Reason and Judgment, when you turned Papist? Are you not sensible, that men
do as little agree about your Reasons for Infallibility, as they do about any
Protestant Reasons? Do not I know the Reasons alleged by you for the
Infallibility of your Church, as well as you do? And do we not still differ
about them? And is not this as much an Argument of the uncertainty of those
Reasons, which make you a Papist, that they cannot make me a Papist, as the
dissent of Protestants in other matters, is of the uncertainty of their
Reasons? Could you indeed be infallibly assured of the Infallibility of your
Church, I grant you would have the advantage of us, but while you found your
belief of Infallibility upon such an uncertain Principle, as you think Reason
is; if certainty had been your only aim, you might as well have continued in
the Church of England, as have gone over to Rome.


This abundantly shows what a ridiculous thing it is for a Protestant to be
disputed out of his Church and Religion, upon a pretense of more infallible
certainty in the Church of Rome: Were they indeed inspired with an infallible
assurance, that the Church of Rome is Infallible, there might be some pretense
for this; but an Infallibility which has no better foundation than men's private
Reason, and private Judgment, is no Infallibility, but has all the same
uncertainties, which they charge on the Protestant Faith, and a great deal
more, because it is not founded upon such great and certain Reasons.

The plain truth is, men may be taught from their Infancy to believe the Church
Infallible, and when they are grown up, may take it, without examination, for a
first and self-evident Principle, and think this an infallible Faith: but men
who understand the difference between the evidence of Reason and Infallibility,
can never found an infallible Faith on Reason, nor think that a man who is
reasoned into the belief of the Infallibility of the Church, is more infallible
in his Faith, than a Protestant is: And such a man will see no reason to quit
the Church of England, for the sake of an infallible Faith; for though they had
an infallible Guide, yet Reason cannot give them an infallible assurance of it,
but can rise no higher at most than a Protestant certainty.

2. It is impossible also by Reason to prove, that men must not use their own
Reason and Judgment in matters of Religion. If any man should attempt to
persuade you of this, ask him, Why then he goes about to dispute with you about
Religion? whether men can dispute without using their own Reason and Judgment?
whether they can be convinced without it? whether his offering to dispute with
you against the use of your Reason, does not prove him ridiculous and absurd?
For if you must not use your Reason, why does he appeal to your Reason? And
whether you should not be as ridiculous and absurd as he, if by his Reasons and
Arguments you should be persuaded to condemn the use of Reason in Religion?
Which would be in the same act to do, what you condemn, to use your Reason when
you condemn it. If you must not use your Reason and private Judgment, then you
must not by any Reasons be persuaded to condemn the use of Reason; for to
condemn is an act of Judgment, which you must not use in matters of Religion.
So that this is a point which no man can dispute against, and which no man can
be convinced of by disputing, without the reproach of self-contradiction.

This is an honorable way of silencing these troublesome and clamorous
Disputants, to let them see, that their Principles will not allow of Disputing,
and that some of their Fundamental Doctrines, which they impose upon the World,
are a direct contradiction to all Disputes, for the very admitting of a
Dispute, confutes them; and the meanest man may quickly say more in this Cause,
than their greatest Disputants can answer.

CHAP. II. Concerning the several Topics of Dispute.
SECT. I. Concerning Arguments from Reason.
2. THe next Direction relates to the Topics from which they Dispute; which
are, either Reason, Scripture, or the Authority of the ancient Fathers and
Writers of the Christian Church; for the infallible Authority of Popes, or
General Councils, is the thing in dispute between us, and therefore can prove
nothing till that be first proved by something else.

1. To begin then with Reason: Now we do allow of Reason in matters of
Religion; and our Adversaries pretend to use it, when they think it will serve
their turn, and rail at it, and despise it, when it is against them.

Not that we make Natural Reason the Rule or the Measure of our Faith; for to
believe nothing but what may be proved by Natural Reason, is to reject
Revelation, or to destroy the necessity of it: For what use is there of a
Revelation, or at least what necessity of it, if nothing must be revealed, but
what might have been known by Natural Reason without Revelation; or at least
what Natural Reason can fully comprehend, when it is revealed? But though we
believe such things, when they are revealed by God, which Natural Reason could
never have taught us, and which Natural Reason does not see the depths and
mysteries of; and therefore do not stint our Faith, and confine it within the
narrow bounds of Natural Reason; yet we use our Reason to distinguish a true
from a counterfeit Revelation, and we use Reason to understand a Revelation;
and we Reason and Argue from revealed Principles, as we do from the Principles
of Natural Knowledge: As from that Natural Principle, that there is but one
God, we might conclude, without a Revelation, that we must Worship but one God:
so from that revealed Doctrine of one Mediator between God and man, we may as
safely conclude, that we must make our Applications, and offer up our Prayers
and Petitions to God, only by this one Mediator; and so in other cases.

Now to direct Protestants how to secure themselves from being imposed on by
the fallacious Reasoning of Roman Priests: I shall take notice of some of the
chief faults in their way of Reasoning; and when these are once known, it will
be an easy matter for men of ordinary understandings, to detect their
Sophistry.

1. As first, we must allow of no Reason against the Authority of plain and
express Scripture: This all men must grant, who allow the Authority of
Scripture to be superior to Natural Reason; for though Scripture cannot
contradict plain, and necessary, and eternal Reasons, i. e. what the universal
Reason of Mankind teaches for a necessary and eternal truth; yet God may
command such things, as we see no Natural Reason for, and forbid such things as
we see no Natural Reason against; nay, it may be, when we think there are
plausible Reasons against what God commands, and for what he forbids: But in
all such cases a Divine Law must take place against our uncertain Reasonings;
for we may reasonably conclude, that God understands the Reasons and Natures of
things, better than we do.

As for instance, when there is such an express Law as, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: No reason in the World can
justify the Worship of any other Being, good or bad Spirits, besides God,
because there is an express Law against it, and no Reason can take place
against a Law. The like may be said of the second Commandment, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing which is in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth, thou
shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. Which is so express a Law against
Image Worship, that no Reason must be admitted for it. No man need to trouble
himself to answer the Reasons urged for such Practices, for no Reasons ought to
be allowed, nor any Dispute admitted against such express Laws.

This, I suppose, all men will grant: but then the difficulty is, What is an
express Law? For the Sense of the Law is the Law; and if there may be such a
Sense put on the words, as will reconcile these Reasons with the Law, we must
not say then, that such Reasons are against the Law, when, though they may be
against the Law in some sense, yet they are consistent with other senses of the
Law; and it is most likely, that is the true sense of the Law, which has the
best reason on its side.

It must be confessed, there is some truth in this, when the words of the Law
are capable of different senses, and reason is for one sense, and the other
sense against reason, there it is fit, that a plain and necessary Reason should
expound the Law: but when the Law is not capable of such different senses, or
there is no such reason as makes one sense absurd, and the other necessary, the
Law must be expounded according to the most plain and obvious signification of
the Words, though it should condemn that, which we think, there may be some
reason for, or at least no reason against; for otherwise it is an easy matter
to expound away all the Laws of God. To be sure all men must grant, that such
Reasons as destroy the Law, or put an absurd or impossible sense on it, are
against the Law, and therefore must be rejected, how plausible soever they
appear: As for instance, Some there are, who to excuse the Church of Rome from
Idolatry in Worshipping Saints, and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, positively
affirm, that no man can be guilty of Idolatry, who Worships one Supreme God; as
a late Author expressly teaches: As for the Invocation of Saints, Reasons for
Abrogating the Test, p. 133.
unless they Worship them as the Supreme God, the Charge of Idolatry is an idle
word; and the Adoration it self, which is given to them as Saints, is a direct
Protestation against Idolatry, because it supposes a Superior Deity; and that
supposition cuts off the very being of Idolatry. Now, not to examine what force
there is in this Reason, our present inquiry is only, How this agrees with the
first Commandment, Thou shall have none other Gods before me? before my Face,
as it is in the Hebrew: Which supposes an acknowledgment of the Supreme God,
together with other Gods; for otherwise, though they Worship other Gods, they
do not do it before the Face of God, while they see him, as it were, present
before them: to worship other Gods in the presence of the Supreme God, or
before his Face, as that Phrase signifies, is to worship them together with
him; and therefore this is well expressed by the Septuagint, by (...) besides
me; which supposes that they Worshipped him too. And our Savior expounds this
Law by, Matthew. 4. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. So that
this Reason, That there can be no Idolatry, where the Lord Jehovah is
Worshipped as the Supreme God, contradicts the very letter of this Law.

How then does this Author get rid of the first Commandment? Truly by laying it
all aside: for he gives this as the whole Sense of the first Commandment, That
God enjoins the Worship of himself, Ibid. p. 80.
who, by his Almighty Power, had delivered them from their Egyptian Bondage.
But is this all that these words, Thou shall have no other Gods before me,
signifies? The Worship of God indeed is supposed in them; but the express words
of the Law, are not for the Worship of the Lord Jehovah, but against the
Worship of any other Gods, before him, or besides him: But according to our new
Expositor, this is no part of the Law, though according to the express words,
it is the principal, if not the whole meaning of it.

If this Argument be good, viz. That Idolatry is nothing else, but the Worship
of other Beings besides the Lord Jehovah, as Supreme Gods, then other Gods, in
this Commandment, must signify other Supreme Gods; and then the Commandment
runs thus: Thou shall have no other supreme Gods before me. Now this is a very
absurd sense, because it supposes, that men may Believe and Worship more
Supreme Gods than one; for if there can be but one Supreme God, and by Gods in
the Commandment, be meant Supreme Gods, then it is absurd to forbid any man to
have other Supreme Gods, because no man can acknowledge two Supremes: It should
have been, Thou shall not have any other God besides me, not Gods: For though
it had been possible for them to have acknowledged some other God to be
Supreme, and rejected the Lord Jehovah from being Supreme, yet they could not
have other Supreme Gods. But it is evident, that God here forbids the Worship
of a Plurality of Gods, of other Gods; and therefore they could not all be
Supreme Gods.

But suppose it had been any other God in the single number, yet to understand
this of a Supreme God, is very absurd; because there is no other supreme God,
but the Lord Jehovah, and those who worship but one Supreme God, worship him,
and none else. For a supreme God is not to be pointed at, is not to be
distinguished by his Person or Features, as one man is distinguished from
another: indeed a Prince may properly say to his Subjects, You shall own none
but me for your King, because they know his Person, and can distinguish him
from all other men. But the Jews never saw God, nor any likeness or similitude
of him; they were not acquainted with his Person, nor could they distinguish
him from other Gods, by any personal Characters; they knew him only by his
Notion and Character of the Supreme Being, who made the World and all things in
it, and brought them by a mighty hand out of the Land of Egypt. Now does it
not found very strange, that the Supreme God, who is known only by this
Character, that he is Supreme, the great Creator and Sovereign Lord of the
World, should make a Law, that we should worship no other Supreme God but
himself; when it is absolutely impossible, that he who worships a Supreme and
Sovereign God, should worship any other God but himself* because he alone is
the Supreme God; and therefore those who worship the Supreme God, under this
Notion as Supreme, worship him, and no other Being. So that if we will make
sense of it, the meaning of the first Commandment is plainly this: Thou shall
not give Divine Honors to any other Beings, as to inferior Gods, as the
Idolatrous Practice of the World now is, which worships a great many things for
Gods; but thou shall worship only one Supreme and Sovereign Being, the maker
and Sovereign Lord of the World, which is I my self, the Lord Jehovah, who
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. When the
Supreme God commands us to worship himself, the meaning must be, that we pay
our Worship and Adorations to a Supreme Being, considered as Supreme; and he
who worships such a Supreme Being, worships the true God, whom we can
distinguish from false Gods only by this Character, that he is Supreme: And
when this Supreme Being forbids us to worship any other Gods, it must signify,
that we must worship nothing which is not Supreme, not that we must not believe
that which is not Supreme to be the Supreme God; which would be ridiculous
Nonsense, to command them not to own that Being for the Supreme God, which they
know not to be Supreme.

But it may be said, that the Heathens did worship some Beings, who were not
the Supreme God, as Supreme, as this Author tells us, they did the Sun, though
no body told him so, that I know of; for Macrobius, whom he cites in this
Cause, does not say, that they worshipped the Sun as Supreme God, though he
says that most of the Gods they worshipped did signify the Sun: But suppose
the Sun were the chief Object of their Worship, and looked on as the greatest
and most principal God, this does not prove that they worshipped it as the
Supreme God: for these are two very different things to be worshipped as the
chief God, which such a People have, and to be worshipped under the Notion of
Absolutely Supreme. Some Pagan Idolaters might worship a Creature as their
chief and greatest Deity, and might call it their great, their greatest God,
because it is the greatest God they have; their King and Prince of Gods, as Mr.
Seldom tells us, they called the Sun, as being the chief Planet who directed
and governed the Influences of the rest, not as the Maker of the World, as this
Author asserts: But those who direct their Worship to a Supreme and Sovereign
Being, considered as absolutely Supreme, infinite in all Perfections, the Maker
and Governor of the whole World, can under this Notion worship no other but
the Lord Jehovah, because there is no other Supreme God but he. Which shows
that the first Commandment is so far from forbidding the Worship of other
Supreme Gods, besides the Lord Jehovah, that to make sense of it, these other
Gods must be expounded not of Supreme, but inferior Deities; and it is so far
from being the Notion of Idolatry, to worship other Supreme Beings* besides the
Lord Jehovah, that it is Nonsense to suppose it. The true Notion of Idolatry in
the first Commandment, is to worship some Inferior Beings, together with the
Supreme God: It is a grosser sort of Idolatry, when men wholly neglect the
Worship of the Supreme God, and worship some Creature for their greatest and
chiefest God; and it is worse still, when men worship bad Spirits, than when
they worship good Spirits, together with the Supreme God: but it is evident
this Law condemns the Worship of any Inferior Beings, though we do also
worship the Supreme God.

I shall give but one Instance more of this nature, and that is, the second
Commandment, which in such express words forbids the Worship of all Images, of
what kind or nature soever. Now whatever Reasons men may imagine there are for
the Worship of Images, they can be of no force against an express Law: And if
these words be not express, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image,
etc. I despair of ever seeing an express Law* For had God intended by this Law
to forbid the Worship of any Images, under what notion or respects soever, I
would desire to know what more significant and comprehensive words could have
been used to have declared his mind, unless he had expressly rejected those
false Interpretations, which the Patrons of Image Worship have since invented,
but were never thought on at that time.

The same Author, Ibid. p. 30.
whom I have so often mentioned, having expounded the first Commandment only to
a positive sense, not to forbid the Worship of other Gods, but only to command
the Worship of the Lord Jehovah, expressly contrary to the very letter and plain
sense of the Law; agreeably to this, he makes the second Commandment only to
forbid the Worship of Idols or false Gods, and not that neither, unless they
take them for the Supreme Deity. His words are these:

In the next place, he forbids them the Worship of all Idols, i.e. as himself
describes them, the likeness or similitude of any thing that is in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the Earth. A plain and
indeed a logical definition this, that Idolatry is giving the Worship of the
Supreme God to any created, corporeal, or visible Deity, or any thing that can
be represented by an Image, which nothing but corporeal Beings can, and to
suppose such a Being the Supreme Deity, is the only true and proper Idolatry.
Now let any man judge, whether this be not such a gloss as utterly destroys the
Text.

As for his Worship of Idols, there is no such word in the Law, but Images,
Likenesses, Similitudes; but yet I will not dispute about this, for an Idol
does not only signify a false God, but the Images either of false Gods, or
false and corporeal Images of the true God. For the Idols of the Heathens, 135
Psalm. 15.
as the Psalmist tells us, are silver, and gold, the work of men's hands; which
can relate to nothing but Images and Pictures: for corporeal Deities, which
were made by God, are not the work of men's hands.

Now Idolatry, he says, is giving the Worship of the Supreme God to any
created, corporeal, or visible Deity, or any thing which can be represented by
an Image, which nothing but corporeal Beings can. Now how plain and logical
soever this definition of Idolatry be, there is not a word of it in the Text.
That forbids not the Worship of any created, corporeal, or visible Deity,
(which is forbid in the first Commandment) but only the Worship of Images, the
likeness of any thing in Heaven, or Earth, or in the Water under the Earth. Now
an Image differs from the thing whose Image it is. And it is a very strange
Exposition of the second Commandment, which forbids nothing else but the
Worship of Images, to take no notice of the Worship of Images as forbid in it.
According to this gloss upon the Law, a man may worship ten thousand Images and
Pictures, so he do not worship any visible and corporeal Deity, and not break
this Commandment; which I think is not to give the sense of the Law, but to
expound it away.

But how does the Worship of corporeal and visible Deities, and nothing else,
appear to be forbid by this Law, which mentions nothing at all but the likeness
of things in Heaven, and Earth, and Water? Why, our learned Author imagines
that no Images can be made, but only for corporeal and visible Deities, because
nothing but corporeal Beings can be represented by an Image: which Conceit is
worth its weight in Gold; for it evidently proves, that there are no Pictures
of God the Father, nor of the Trinity, in the Church of Rome, because they are
not corporeal Deities, and therefore cannot be represented by an Image: so
miserably have all Travelers been mistaken, who tell us of a great many such
Pictures, and not very decent ones neither. There can indeed be no Picture or
Image to represent the likeness and similitude of an incorporeal God, but yet
the visible parts of Heaven and Earth, and the visible Creatures in them, may
be represented by Images, and the Images of such visible things may be made the
symbolical representations of invisible and incorporeal Deities; and such
invisible and incorporeal Deities may be worshipped in the likeness and
similitude of corporeal things; and then I am sure to forbid the Worship of
Images may signify something more than merely to forbid the Worship of some
visible and corporeal Deities; for it may signify the Worship of invisible and
incorporeal Deities, by visible Images. But I perceive he imagined, that when
God forbad them to make and worship the likeness of any thing in Heaven, in
Earth, or in the Waters under the Earth, he only forbad the Worship of those
Beings, whose likeness or Images they made; whereas all men know, that those
very Idolaters who worshipped these glorious parts of the Creation, did not
represent them in their proper likenesses and figures; and that those who
worshipped invisible and incorporeal Beings, did it by material and visible
figures: which plainly proves, that when God forbad the Worship of Images, he
had not respect merely to visible and corporeal Deities, but forbad
Image Worship, whether they were the Images of visible and corporeal, or of
invisible and incorporeal Deities.

Our Author durst not say (as the Roman Advocates do) that God in the second
Commandment only forbids the Worship of Images as Gods; which is such glorious
Nonsense, that he could not digest it: and therefore he supposes, that God does
not forbid the Worship of Images at all, but only of such corporeal Deities as
may be represented by Images; which is a more gentile way of discarding the
second Commandment, than to leave it out of their Books of Devotions. But if he
will stand to this, he condemns the Popish Worship of dead Men and Women, for
they are corporeal Deities; nay, of Christ himself, considered as a man, who
might be represented by an Image or Picture. And thus I doubt he has done the
Church of Rome no kindness at all: for this is a Demonstration against the
Worship of Saints, and the Virgin Mary, because they are created, corporeal,
and visible Beings, who may be represented by Images; and he has thought of an
Argument against Images, which neither the Scripture, nor the Church of Rome,
know any thing of: The Church of Rome thinks it a good Argument for the Images
of Christ, and the Saints, and the Virgin Mary, that they are representable by
Images and Pictures; and therefore there can be no hurt in such Images: And the
Scripture perpetually urges that Argument against Images, that the Deity cannot
be represented by an Image; but neither of these Arguments are good, if our
Author's Notion be good: For then to worship such corporeal Beings, as may be
represented by Images, is to worship corporeal Gods, which is Idolatry. And
there is no danger in the Images of an incorporeal Deity, which cannot
represent the God for which they are made; for whatever the Image be, this is
not to worship a corporeal God, since we know him to be incorporeal, and
therefore it is not Idolatry.

But he has one Salvo still to excuse those from Idolatry, who worship even
corporeal Gods, (for he speaks not a word of worshipping the Images of any
Gods) that they are not Idolaters, unless they worship such corporeal Gods,
supposing them to be the Supreme Deity; whereby he explains what he means by
giving the Worship of the Supreme God to any created, corporeal, or visible
Deity; viz. to think such a God to be the Supreme God, is to worship it as
Supreme. And thus those who worshipped the Sun, not thinking him to be the
Supreme God, but the chief Minister of Providence under the Supreme God, with
reference to this Lower World, as most of the Sun-Idolaters seemed to do, were
not Idolaters. Nay, very few of the Philosophers, though they worshipped their
Country Gods, were Idolaters, because they either did not believe them to be
any Gods, or at least not to be the Supreme; as it is certain Socrates, and
Plato, and Tully, and many others did not.

But it is plain, that to worship the Supreme God, is not merely to suppose him
to be Supreme; for St. Paul tells us, that there were some, who knew God, but
did not worship him as God; and therefore there is an external and visible.
Worship, which is due to the Supreme God, as well as the belief, that he is
Supreme: And if this Worship which is due to the Supreme God, be given to any
Being which we our selves do not believe to be Supreme, we are Idolaters; and
then though we do not believe the Gods we worship to be Supreme, any kind or
degree of Religious Worship, (or which is used as an Act of Religion, not as
common and civil Respects) is Idolatry. This Commandment brings it as low as
merely bowing to an Image, and then I doubt no other Act of Religious Worship
can escape the Charge of Idolatry.

But though it is not my business to pursue this Author, I cannot pass over the
very next Paragraph, where he observes, Though there may seem to be two sorts
of it, (this Idolatry in worshipping corporeal Beings) first either to worship
a material and created Being, as the Supreme Deity: Or secondly, to ascribe any
corporeal form or shape to the Divine Nature, yet in result, both are but one;
for to ascribe unto the Supreme God any corporeal form, is the same thing as to
worship a created Being, for so is every corporeal Substance. Which is a very
wonderful Paragraph: for thus some of the Ancient Christians, who believed God
to be Corporeal, (as Tertullian himself did) but yet did not believe that he
was created, but that he created all things, were as very Idolaters, as those
who Worshipped the Sun or Earth: And I would gladly know, who those men are,
who ascribe unto the Supreme God, a Corporeal form, and yet think, that he was
Created. I am apt to think they differ a little in their Philosophy from our
Author, and did believe that a Corporeal Supreme Deity might be uncreated; and
then, I suppose, there may be some difference also between their worshipping a
Corporeal Created, and a Corporeal Uncreated God, at least if men's Belief and
Opinions of things makes a difference, as this Author must allow; for, if I
understand him, to Worship a corporeal Being, without believing it to be
Supreme, does not make them Idolaters, but if they believe it Supreme, it does;
and by the same reason, tho to Worship a Supreme Corporeal Created Deity (if
that be not a contradiction) be Idolatry, yet to Worship a Corporeal, which
they believe to be an uncreated Deity, is no Idolatry: For though I believe
with our Author, that all corporeal Beings are Created, yet, I suppose, those
who believed God to be Corporeal, did not believe, that every thing, that is
Corporeal, was Created.

So that the first and second Commandments are very plain and express Laws, the
one forbidding the Religious Worship of all inferior Beings, corporeal or
incorporeal, with or without the Supreme God, or forbidding the Worship of all
other Beings but the Supreme God; the other forbidding the External and Visible
Worship of any material Images and Pictures: And though I am certain, there can
be no good Arguments to justify such Practices as are forbid by these Laws,
yet no Christian need trouble himself to answer them, for be they what they
will, it is a sufficient answer to them, to say, That they are against an
express Law.

2. Another Rule is, in matters of Faith, or in such things as can be known
only by Revelation, Not to build our Faith upon any Reasons, without the
Authority of Scripture. That this may be the better understood, I shall briefly
show what these things are, which can be known only by Revelation, and
therefore which every Protestant should demand a plain Scripture Proof for,
before he believes them, whatever Reasons are pretended for them: As,

1. Whatever depends solely upon the will and appointment of God, which God
might do, or might not do, as he pleased. In such cases our only inquiry is,
What God has done? And this can be known only by Revelation; for Reason cannot
discover it, because it depends not upon any necessary Reason, but on the free
and arbitrary appointment of God: as St. Paul tells us, That as no man knows
the things of a man, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
but the spirit of man, that is in him; so no man knows the things of God,
but the spirit of God: That is, as no man can tell the secret thoughts and
purposes of a man, nor how he will determine himself in matters of his own free
choice and election: so what depends purely upon the will of God, is known
only to the Spirit of God, and therefore can be made known to us only by
Revelation.

Many such things there are in dispute between us and the Church of Rome, which
depend so entirely upon the Will of God, that they may be, or may not be, as
God pleases. As for instance,

No man, nor company of men, can be Infallible, unless God bestow Infallibility
on them; for Infallibility is not a natural Endowment, but a supernatural Gift;
and therefore no Reason can prove, the Bishop of Rome, or a General Council to
be Infallible. God may make them Infallible, if he pleases, and if he pleases,
he may not do it: and therefore our only inquiry here is, What God has done?
And this can be known only by Revelation.

Thus that the Church of Rome only, and those Churches that are in Communion
with her, should be the Catholic Church, and the Bishop of Rome the
Ecumenical Pastor, and the Center of Catholic Unity must depend wholly upon
Institution, for nothing but the Will and Appointment of God, can give this
Pre-eminence and Prerogative to the Church and Bishop of Rome, above all other
Churches and Bishops. No Reason then can prove this without plain and express
Scripture to prove such an Institution.

Were there nothing in Scripture or Reason to prove, that the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is not a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead, yet
no Reason can prove, that it is: For the virtue and acceptance of a Sacrifice,
entirely depends upon the will and appointment of God, at least so far, that no
Sacrifice can be Propitiatory without it: And therefore there can be no other
proof, that the Mass is a propitiatory Sacrifice, but the declaration of God's
Will and Institution, that it shall be so.

2. Those things also can be proved only by Scripture, which are done in the
other World, which is an unknown and invisible State to us, any farther than
the Scripture has revealed it: and men may more reasonably expect to find out,
by the power of Reason, what is done every day in China, or the most remote and
unknown parts of the Earth, than what is done in the other World. And then
there are a great many things wherein you must reject all pretenses to Reason,
any farther than it is supported by plain and evident Scripture. As to give
some instances of this also:

1. No Reason can prove, that there is such a place as Purgatory, for that is
an invisible place in the other World; if there be any such place, no man
living ever saw it; and then how can any man know, that there is such a place,
unless it be revealed? To attempt to prove, that there is such a place as
Purgatory, merely by Reason, is just as if a man, who had some general notion
of an Inquisition, but never had any credible information, that there actually
was any such place, should undertake to prove, by Reason, that there is and
must be such a place as the Inquisition; though he would happen to guess right,
yet it is certain his Reasons signified nothing; for some Countries have the
Inquisition, and some have not; and therefore there might have been no
Inquisition any where, how strong soever the Reasons for it might be thought to
be. We may as well describe, by the power of Reason, the World in the Moon, and
what kind of Inhabitants there are there, by what Laws they live, what their
Business, what their Pleasures, and what their Punishments are, as pretend to
prove, that there is a Purgatory in the next World, for they are both equally
unknown to us; and if Reason cannot prove that there is such a place as
Purgatory, nothing else which relates to Purgatory, can be proved by Reason.

2. Nor can we know what the State of Saints in Heaven is, without a
Revelation, for no man has been there to see: the State of the other World is
such things as neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered
into the Heart of man to conceive. And then I cannot understand how we should
know these things by Reason.

The Church of Rome teaches us to Pray to Saints, and to fly to their Help and
Aid: And there are a great many things which a wise man would desire to know,
before he can think it fit to pray to them; which yet it is impossible to know,
without a Revelation: as, Whether the Saints we direct our Prayers to, be in
Heaven? Which is very fit to be known, and yet can certainly be known but of a
very few of that vast number, that are worshipped in the Church of Rome; the
Apostles of Christ, and the Virgin Mary, we have reason to believe are in
Heaven, and we may hope well of others, but we cannot know it: No man can see
who is there, and bare hope, how strong soever, is not a sufficient foundation
for such a Religious Invocation of unknown Saints, who, after all our
persuasions that they are in Heaven, may be in Hell, or at least in Purgatory,
where they want our Prayers, but are not in a condition to interceed for us.

Thus it is very necessary to know, what the power and authority of the Saints
in Heaven is, before we pray to them; for it is to no purpose to pray to them,
unless we know they can help us. The Council of Trent recommends to us the
Invocation of Saints, as of those who reign with Christ in Heaven, and
therefore have power and authority to present our Petitions, and procure those
Blessings we pray for. And if I could find any such thing in Scripture, it
would be a good reason to pray to them; but all the Arguments in the World
cannot prove this without a Revelation: they may be in Heaven, and not be
Mediators and Advocates.

Thus, whatever their power and authority may be, it is to no purpose to pray
to them, unless we are sure, that they hear our Prayers; and this nothing but a
Revelation can assure us of; for no natural Reason can assure us, that mere
Creatures, as the most glorious Saints in Heaven are, can hear our soft, nay
mental Prayers, at such a vast distance, as there is between Heaven and Earth.

Such matters as these, which Reason can give us no assurance of, if they be to
be proved at all, must be proved by Scripture; and therefore as the pretense of
proving these things by Reason is vain, so no Protestant should be so vain, as
to trouble himself to answer such Reasons.

But you will say, The Papists do pretend to prove these things by Scripture. I
answer, So far it is very well; and I only desire our Protestant to keep them
to their Scripture Proofs, and to reject all their Reasons; and then let them
see, what they can make of it. As for Scripture-Proofs, they shall be
considered presently.

3. More particularly you must renounce all such Reasons, as amount to no more
than some May-bes and Possibilities; for what only may be, may not be, and
every thing that is possible, is not actually done. As for instance: When you
ask these men, How you can be assured, that the Saints in Heaven can hear our
Prayers? They offer to show you by what ways this may be done: They may see all
things in the Glass of the Trinity, and thereby know all things, that God
knows. Which is but a may-be; and yet it is a more likely may-be, that there is
no such Glass as gives the Saints a comprehensive view of all that is in God.
Well, but God can reveal all the Prayers to the Saints, which are made to them
on Earth. Very right! we dispute not God's power to do this, but desire to
know, Whether he does it or not; and his bare power to do it, does not prove
that: But the Saints in Heaven may be informed of what is done on Earth, by
those who go from hence thither, or by those Ministering Angels who frequently
pass between Heaven and Earth: but this may not be too; and if it were, it
would not answer the purposes of Devotion: for in this way of intercourse the
News may come too late to the Saints, to whom we pray, for the Saints to do us
any good: As, suppose a man pray to the Virgin Mary in the hour of Death, or in
a great Storm at Sea, the man may be dead, and Ship wrackt before the Virgin
knows of his Prayers, and may carry the first news of it into the other World
himself. Such kind of May-bes and Conjectures as these, are a very sorry
Foundation for an Infallible Church to build her Faith on.

4. You must reject also all such Reasons in Divine and Spiritual things, as
are drawn from Earthly Patterns. A considering man would a little wonder, how a
Papist should so punctually determine what is done in the other World, without
speaking with any one who has seen it, and without having any Revelation about
it, as I have already observed; but whoever considers many of their Arguments,
will soon find that they make this World the Pattern of the next, and reason
from Sensible to Spiritual things.

Thus the true Foundation of Saint-worship is, that men judge of the Court of
Heaven by the Courts of earthly Princes: The most effectual way to obtain any
Request of our Prince, is to address our selves to some powerful Favorite; and
they take it for granted, that all Saints and Angels in Heaven are such
Favorites, and can obtain whatever they ask; and therefore they pray very
devoutly to them, and beg their Intercession with God and their Savior.
Especially in earthly Courts the Queen Mother is supposed to have a powerful
influence upon the young Prince her Son; and therefore they do not doubt but
the Virgin Mary, the Mother of Christ, can do what she pleases with her Son;
And since it is generally observed, that Women are more soft, and tender, and
compassionate, than men, they hope to gain that by her Intercession, which He,
who died for them, would not grant without it; and therefore they beg her to
show her self to be a Mother, that is, to take the Authority of a Mother upon
her, and command her Son. Thus Princes and Great Men love to have their
Pictures set up in public places, and to have all civil Respects paid to them,
which redounds to the honor of those whose Pictures they are; and therefore
they imagine that this is as acceptable to Christ and the Saints, as it is to
Men; as if the other World were nothing else but a new Scene of Sense and
Passion.

Mankind is very apt to such kind of Reasonings as these; and indeed they can
have no other, when they will undertake to guess at unseen and unknown things:
But if there be any difference between the Court of Heaven and Earth, if pure
Spirits, who are separated from Flesh and Sense, have other Passions and
Resentments than Men have, that is, if we must not judge of spiritual things by
Sense, of the Government of God by the Passions of men, then such Reasonings as
these may betray us to absurd and foolish Superstitions, but are a very ill
foundation for any new and uncommanded Acts of Worship.

5. Never admit any Arguments merely from the usefulness, convenience, or
supposed necessity of any thing, to prove that it is. As for instance: A
Supreme Ecumenical Bishop, and an Infallible Judge of Controversies, are
thought absolutely necessary to the Unity of the Church, and certainty of
Faith, and confounding of Schisms and Heresies. If there be not a Supreme
Pastor, there can be no Unity; if there be not an Infallible Judge, there can
be no certainty in Religion; every man must be left to his own private
Judgment, and then there will be as many different Religions, as there are
Faces. Now if I thought all this were true, (as I believe not a word of it is)
I should only conclude, that it is great pity that there is not an Universal
Pastor and Infallible Judge instituted by Christ; but if you would have me
conclude from these Premises, Ergo, there is an Universal Bishop and Head of
the Church, and an Infallible Judge of Controversies, I must beg your pardon
for that; for such Arguments as these do not prove, that there is such a Judge,
but only that there ought to be one, and therefore I must conclude no more from
them. Indeed this is a very fallacious way of Reasoning, because what we may
call useful, convenient, necessary, may not be so in it self; and we have
reason to believe it is not so, if God have not appointed what we think so
useful, convenient, or necessary: which is a truer and more modest way of
Reasoning, than to conclude that God has appointed such a Judge, when no such
thing appears, only because we think it so useful and necessary, that he ought
to do it. These Directions are sufficient to Preserve all considering
Protestants from being imposed on by the fallacious Reasonings of Papists.

SECT. II. Concerning Scripture-Proofs.
2. LEt us now consider their Scripture-Proofs, though it is not choice, but
necessity, which puts them upon this Trial: When they have good Catholics to
deal with, a little Scripture will serve the turn, but Heretics will be
satisfied with nothing else; and therefore in disputing with them, they are
forced to make some little show and appearance of proving their Doctrines by
Scripture; but they come very unwillingly to it, and make as much of a little,
as may be. The truth is, there is Evidence enough, that they have no great
confidence in the Scripture themselves, and therefore do not deal honestly and
fairly with poor Heretics, when they make their boasts of Scripture.

For did they believe that their Doctrines which they endeavor to prove from
Scripture, were plainly and evidently contained in them, why should they deny
the People the liberty of reading the Scriptures? If the Scriptures be for
them, why should they be against the Scriptures? The common Pretense is, that
those who are unlearned, put very wild senses upon Scripture, and expound it by
their own fancies; which in many cases indeed is too true: but why should the
Church of Rome be more afraid of this, than other Protestant Churches? If they
think the Scripture is as much for them, as we think it is for us, why dare not
they venture this as well as we? We are not afraid men should read the
Scripture, though we see what wild Interpretations some put on them, because we
are certain we can prove our Faith by Scripture, and are able to satisfy all
honest men, who will impartially study the Scriptures, that we give the true
sense of them; and if they believed, they could do so too, Why do they avoid
this trial, when ever they can? For though they admit People to dispute from
the Scripture in England, where they cannot help it, yet they will not allow
them so much as to see the Scriptures in Italy or Spain, where they have power
to hinder it: Nay they themselves do in effect confess, that the peculiar
Doctrines and Practices of their Religion, wherein they differ from all other
Christian Churches, cannot be proved by Scripture. And therefore to help them
out, where the Scripture fails, they fly to unwritten Traditions, which they
make of equal authority with the Scriptures themselves; which they would never
do, were they not convinced, that the Scriptures are not so plain on their
side, as to satisfy any man, who has not already given himself up to the
Church of Rome with an implicit Faith.

And therefore, before you enter into any debate about the sense of any
particular Texts of Scripture, and their way of proving their particular
Doctrines from Scripture, ask them two Questions, without a plain Answer to
which, it is to no purpose to dispute with them out of Scripture.

Ask 1. Whether they will allow the Holy Scriptures to be a complete and
perfect Rule of Faith; that no Christian ought to receive any Doctrine for an
Article of Faith, which cannot be proved from Scripture? This to be sure they
must not allow, unless they will reject the Council of Trent, which gives as
venerable an Authority to Tradition, as to Scripture it self: Since then they
have two Rules, Scripture and Tradition; when they pretend to dispute from
Scripture, it is reasonable to know of them, whether they will stand to
Scripture, and reject such a Doctrine if it cannot be plainly proved out of
Scripture: For if they will not stand to this, they give up their Cause, and
there is no need to dispute with them: For why should I dispute with any man
from Scripture, who will not stand to the determination of Scripture? We
Protestants indeed do own the Authority of Scripture; and what we see plainly
proved out of Scripture, we must abide by: which is reason enough for us to
examine the Scripture-proofs which are produced by our Adversaries. But it is
sufficient to make them blush, if they had any modesty, to pretend to prove
their Doctrines from Scripture, when they themselves do not believe them merely
upon the Authority of Scripture, and dare not put their Cause upon that issue;
which gives a just suspicion, that they are conscious to themselves, that their
Scripture-proofs are not good, and should make Protestants very careful, how
they are imposed on by them. To dispute upon such Principles as are not owned
on both sides, can establish nothing, though it may blunder and confound an
Adversary; it is only a trial of Wit, where the subtilest Disputant will have
the Victory; and it is not worth the while for any man to dispute upon these
terms.

This is not to reject the Authority of Scriptures, because the Papists reject
it, which no Protestant can or will do, but it is an effectual way for men, who
are not skilled in Disputations, to deliver themselves from the troublesome
Importunities of Popish Priests, when learned men, who can detect their
Fallacies, are out of the way. Let them but ask them, Whether all the peculiar
Doctrines of the Church of Rome can be proved by plain Scripture-evidence? If
they say, they can; then they must reject the necessity of unwritten
Traditions, and acknowledge the Scripture to be a complete and perfect Rule of
Faith. A point, which I believe, no understanding Priest will yield. If they
say, they cannot; ask them, With what confidence they pretend to prove that
from Scripture, which they confess is not in it? Why they go about to impose
upon you, and to persuade you to believe that upon the Authority of Scripture,
which they themselves confess, is not, at least not plainly, contained in
Scripture.

2. Ask such Disputants, who allege the Authority of Scripture to prove their
Popish Doctrines, How they themselves know what the sense of Scripture is, and
how you shall know it? For it is a ridiculous undertaking to prove any thing by
Scripture, unless there be a certain way of finding out the sense of Scripture.
Now there can be but three ways of doing this, either by an infallible
Interpreter, or by the unanimous consent of Primitive Fathers, or by such
Humane means as are used to find out the sense of other Books.

I. If they say, we must learn the sense of Scripture from an infallible
Interpreter: Tell them, this is not to dispute, but to beg the Cause. They are
to prove from Scripture, the Doctrines of the Church of Rome; and to do this,
they would have us take the Church of Rome's Exposition of Scripture. And then
we had as good take her word for all, without disputing. But yet,

1. They know, that we reject the pretenses of an infallible Interpreter: We
own no such infallible Judge of the sense of Scripture. And therefore, at
least, if they will dispute with us, and prove their Doctrines by Scripture,
they must fetch their Proofs from the Scriptures themselves, and not appeal to
an infallible Interpreter, whom we disown: Which is like appealing to a Judge
in Civil matters, whom one of the contending Parties tlhinks incompetent, and
to whose Judgment they will not stand; which is never likely to end any
Controversy: and yet they cannot quit an infallible Interpreter, without
granting, that we may understand the Scriptures without such an Interpreter;
which is to give up the Cause of Infallibility.

2. One principal Dispute between us and the Church of Rome, is about this
infallible Interpreter; and they know, that we will not own such an
Interpreter, unless they can prove from Scripture, that there is such an one,
and who he is. The inquiry then is, How we shall learn from Scripture, that
there is such an infallible Interpreter? that is, who shall Expound those
Scriptures to us, which must prove that there. is an infallible Interpreter? if
without an infallible Interpreter we cannot find out the true sense of
Scripture, how shall we know the true sense of Scripture, before we know this
infallible Interpreter? For an Interpreter, how infallible soever he be, cannot
interpret Scripture for us, before we know him; and if we must know this
infallible Interpreter by Scripture, we must at least understand these
Scriptures, which direct us to this infallible Interpreter, without his
assistance. So that of necessity some Scriptures must be understood without an
infallible Interpreter, and therefore he is not necessary for the
Interpretation of all Scripture: And then I desire to know, why other
Scriptures may not be understood the same way, by which we must find out the
meaning of those Texts which direct us to an infallible Interpreter? There are
a hundred places of Scripture, which our Adversaries must grant, areas plain
and easy to be understood, as those: And we believe it as easy a matter to
find all the other Trent-Articles in Scripture, as the Supremacy and
Infallibility of the Bishop of Rome. If ever there needed an infallible
Interpreter of Scripture, it is to prove such an infallible Interpreter from
Scripture; but upon this occasion he cannot be had, and if we may make shift
without him here, we may as well spare him in all other cases.

3. Suppose we were satisfied from Scripture, that there is such an infallible
Interpreter, yet it were worth knowing, where his infallible Interpretation is
to be found; for if there be such an Interpreter who never Interprets, I know
not how either they or we shall understand Scripture the better for him: Now,
have either Popes or General Councils given us an authentic and infallible
Exposition of Scripture? I know of none such: all the Expositions of Scripture
in the Church of Rome, are writ by private Doctors, who were far enough from
being infallible; and the business of General Councils, was not to expound
Scripture, but to define Articles of Faith: and therefore we find the sense of
very few Texts of Scripture Synodically defined by any General Council; I
think, not above four or five by the Council of Trent. So that after all their
talk of an infallible Interpreter, when they undertake to expound particular
Texts, and to dispute with us about the sense of them, they have no more
Infallibility in this, than we have; for if they have an infallible
Interpreter, they are never the better for him, for he has not given them an
infallible Interpretation, and therefore they are forced to do as Protestants
do, interpret Scripture according to their own skill and understanding, which,
I suppose, they will not say, is infallible.

But you will say, though the Church has not given us an infallible
Interpretation of Scripture, yet she has given us an infallible Exposition of
the Faith, and that is an infallible Rule for expounding Scripture. I answer,
there is a vast difference between these two: for our dispute is not about the
sense of their Church, but about the sense of the Scripture; we know what
Doctrines their Church has defined, but we desire to see them proved from
Scripture: And is it not a very modest and pleasant proposal, when the dispute
is, how their Faith agrees with Scripture, to make their Faith the Rule of
expounding Scripture? Though, I confess, that is the only way I know of, to
make their Faith and the Scriptures agree; but this brings the Scriptures to
their Faith, does not prove their Faith from Scripture.

II. As for Expounding Scripture by the unanimous consent of Primitve Fathers:
This is indeed the Rule which the Council of Trent gives, and which their
Doctors swear to observe; how well they keep this Oath, they ought to consider.
Now as to this, you may tell them, that you would readily pay a great deference
to the unanimous consent of Fathers, could you tell how to know it; and
therefore in the first place you desire to know the agreement of how many
Fathers makes an unanimous Consent: for you have been told, that there have
been as great variety in interpreting Scripture among the ancient Fathers, as
among our modern Interpreters; that there are very few, if any controverted
Texts of Scripture, which are interpreted by an unanimous consent of all the
Fathers. If this unanimous Consent then signify all the Fathers, we shall be
troubled to find such a Consent in expounding Scripture; must it then be the
unanimous Consent of the greatest number of Fathers? This will be a very hard
thing, especially for unlearned men to tell Noses: we can know the Opinion
only of those Fathers who were the Writers in every Age, and whose Writings
have been preserved down to us; and who can tell, whether the major number of
those Fathers who did not write, or whose Writings are lost, were of the same
mind with those whose Writings we have? and why must the major part be always
the wisest and best men? and if they were not, the consent of a few wise men,
is to be preferred before great numbers of other Expositors.

Again, ask them, whether these Fathers were Infallible or Traditionary
Expositors of Scripture, or whether they expounded Scripture according to their
own private Reason and Judgment: if they were Infallible Expositors, and
delivered the Traditionary sense and interpretation of Scripture, it is a
little strange, how they should differ in their Expositions of Scripture, and
as strange how private Doctors and Bishops should in that Age come to be
Infallible, and how they should lose it in this; for now Infallibility is
confined to the Bishop of Rome, and a General Council. If they were not
Infallible Expositors, how comes their Interpretation of Scripture to be so
sacred, that it must not be opposed? Nay, how comes an Infallible Church to
prescribe such a fallible Rule of interpreting Scriptures? If they expounded
Scripture according to their own Reason and Judgment, as it is plain they did;
then their Authority is no more sacred than their Reason is; and those are the
best Expositors, whether Ancient or Modern, whose Expositions are backed with
the best Reasons. We think it a great confirmation of our Faith, that the
Fathers of the Church in the first and best Ages did believe the same
Doctrines, and expound Scripture in great and concerning points, much to the
same sense that we do; and therefore we refuse not to appeal to them, but yet
we do not wholly build our Faith upon the Authority of the Fathers; we forsake
them where they forsake the Scriptures, or put perverse senses on them; and so
does the Church of Rome too, after all their boast of the Fathers, when they
contradict the present Roman Catholic as they do very often, though I believe
without any malicious design, because they knew nothing of it.

However, ask them once more, whether that sense which they give of those Texts
of Scripture, which are controverted between us and the Church of Rome, be
confirmed by the unanimous consent of all the ancient Fathers: whether, for
instance, all the ancient Fathers did expound those Texts, Thou art Peter, and
on this Rock will I build my Church, and feed my Sheep, etc. of the personal
Supremacy and Infallibility of Peter and his Successors the Bishops of Rome?
Whether they all expounded those words, This is my Body, of the
Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the natural Flesh and
Blood of Christ? and those words, Drink ye all of this, to signify, Let none
drink of the Cup but the Priest who consecrates? and so in other Scriptures. If
they have the confidence to say, that all the Fathers expounded these and
suchlike Scriptures, as the Doctors of the Church of Rome now do, tell them,
you have heard and seen other Expositions of such Scriptures cited from the
ancient Fathers by our Divines, and that you will refer that cause to them, and
have it tried whenever they please.

III. There is no other way then left of understanding Scripture, but to
expound it as we do other Writings; by considering the signification and
propriety of words and phrases, the scope and context of the place, the reasons
of things, the Analogy between the Old and New Testament, and the like: When
they dispute with Protestants, they can reasonably pretend to no other way of
expounding Scripture, because we admit of no other; and yet if they allow of
this, they open a wide Gap for all Heresies to come into the Church; they give
up the Authority of the Church, and make every man his own Pope, and expose
themselves to all the senseless Rallery of their admired Pax Vobis. By this
they confess, that the Scripture may be understood by Reason, that they can
back their Interpretations with such powerful Arguments, as are able to
convince Heretics, who reject the Authority of an Infallible Interpreter; and
then they must unsay all their hard Sayings against the Scriptures, That they
are dark and obscure, dead Letters, unsenced Characters, mere figured Ink and
Paper; they must recant all their Rallery against expounding Scripture by a
private Spirit, and allowing every man to judge of the sense of it, and to
choose what he pleases: for thus they do themselves when they dispute with
Heretics about the sense of Scripture; and I am pretty confident, they would
never speak against Scripture nor a private Spirit more, if this private Spirit
would but make us Converts; but the mischief is, a private Spirit, if it have
any tincture of Sense and Reason, seldom expounds Scripture to a
Roman Catholic sense.

So that in truth it is a vain, nay a dangerous thing for Papists to dispute
with Protestants about the sense of Scripture; for it betrays the Cause of the
Church, and vindicates the Scriptures and every man's natural Right of judging
from the Usurpations and Encroachments of a pretended Infallibility: but yet
dispute they do, and attempt to prove their Doctrines from Scripture. And
because it is too large a task for this present Undertaking, to examine all
their Scripture-Proofs, I shall only observe some general faults t^y are guilty
of, which whoever is aware of, is in no danger of being imposed on by their
Pretenses to Scripture: and I shall not industriously multiply Particulars, for
there are some few palpable mistakes, which run through most of their
Scripture-Proofs.

1. As first, many of their Scripture-Proofs are founded upon the likeness of a
word or phrase, without any regard to the sense and signification of that word
in Scripture, or to the matter to which it is applied: As for instance, There
is not a more useful Doctrine to the Church of Rome, than that of unwritten
Traditions, which are of equal Authority with the Scriptures; for were this
owned, they might put what novel Doctrines they pleased upon us, under the
venerable name of ancient and unwritten Traditions. Well, we deny that there
are any such unwritten Traditions, which are of equal Authority with the
Scripture, since the Canon of Scripture was written and perfected, and desire
them to prove that there are any such unwritten Traditions. Now they think it
sufficient to do this, if they can but find the word Tradition in Scripture;
and that we confess they do in several places: for Tradition signifies only the
delivery of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which we grant was not done perfectly
in writing, when those Epistles were written, which speak of Traditions by
word, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
as well as by Epistle. But because the whole Doctrine of the Gospel was not
written at first, but delivered by word of mouth, does it hence follow, that
after the Gospel is written, there are still unwritten Traditions of equal
Authority with the Scripture? This is what they should prove; and the mere
naming of Traditions in Scripture, before the Canon was perfected, does not
prove this: for all men know, that the Gospel was delivered by word of mouth,
or by unwritten Tradition, before it was written; but this does by no means
prove, that there are unwritten Traditions, after the Gospel was written. To
prove this, they should show us where it is said, that there are some
Traditions which shall never be written, that the Rule of Faith shall always
consist partly of written, partly of unwritten Traditions.

Thus we know how zealous the Church of Rome is for their Purgatory-fire,
wherein all men, who are in a state of grace, or delivered from the guilt of
their sins, must yet undergo that punishment of them, which has not been
satisfied for by other means. As profitable a Doctrine as any the Church of
Rome has, because it gives great Authority to Sacerdotal Absolutions, and sets
a good price upon Masses for the Dead, and Indulgences: and yet the best proof
they have for this, is that Fire mentioned, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15. Every man's
work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by fire, and the fire shall declare every man's work of what sort it
is. -- If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss: but he himself
shall be saved, but so as by fire. Now here is mention of fire indeed; but how
does it appear to be the Popish Purgatory? Suppose it were meant of a material
fire, though that does not seem so proper to try good or bad Actions, a true
and Orthodox or Heretical Faith, yet this fire is not kindled till the day of
Judgment, which is eminently in Scripture called the day, and is the only day,
we know of in Scripture, which shall be revealed by fire, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 7, 8. So that here is nothing but the word fire, applied to another Fire,
than St. Paul ever thought on, to prove a Popish Purgatory.

Thus they make Confession to a Priest ordinarily necessary to obtain the
Forgiveness of our sins; and have no better Scripture-Proofs for it, but that
we are often commanded to confess our sins, sometimes to God, and sometimes to
another, but never to a Priest.

They have made a Sacrament of Extreme Unction, wherein the sick Person is
anointed for the Forgiveness of sins; and though a Sacrament ought to have the
most plain and express institution, both as to the matter, and form, and use,
and end of it, yet the only Proofs they produce for this, is the Disciples
working miraculous Cures by anointing the sick with Oil, 6 Mark 13, which
methinks is a little different from the Sacrament of extreme Unction, which is
not to cure their sickness, but to forgive their sins; and St. James his
Command, Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; 5 Jam.
14, 15.
and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Where anointing
with Oil, joined with servent Prayer, is prescribed as a means of restoring the
sick person to health again; and therefore is not the Popish Extreme Unction,
which is to be administered only to those who are dying: And though St. James
adds, And if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him; yet, 1. This
is not said to be the effect of Anointing, but of the servent Prayer: and 2.
This very Forgiveness of sins does not refer to a plenary Pardon of sins in the
other World, but signifies the removal of the visible and sensible punishments
of sin, in restoring the sick person to health again. That though such sickness
was inflicted on him for his sins, and possibly were the effects of
Church Censures, which in those days were confirmed and ratified by bodily
punishments, yet upon his reconciliation to the Church, and the Prayers of the
Elders, and the ceremony of Anointing, he should be restored to health again,
which was an external and visible remission of his sins, and should be a
plenary pardon, if he brought forth the true and genuine fruits of repentance:
This is very natural, and very agreeable to the scope and design of the Text,
and differs as much from the Popish Extreme Unction, as their greatest
Adversaries could wish. Such kind of Proofs as these, are merely the work of
fancy, and imagination, and can impose upon no man who will but attend to the
different use and signification of words.

2. Another grand fault our Roman Adversaries are guilty of is, that their
Scripture-Proofs are always very lame and imperfect, that is, that they never
prove their whole Doctrine from Scripture, but only some little part of it:
They draw very fine and artificial Schemes, and if they can find some little
appearance in Scripture to countenance any one part of it, they take that for a
Proof of the whole. As for instance:

Thus they tell us, that Christ made Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and the
Head of the Universal Church, his own Vicar upon Earth; and that the Bishops of
Rome, who are St. Peter's Successors, succeed not only to his Chair, but to all
the Rights and Prerogatives of St. Peter; and therefore the Bishop of Rome also
is the Head of the Church, the Ecumenical Pastor, who neither wants St.
Peter's Keys nor Sword. This is a very notable point, if it were well proved;
but as I observed before, this being a matter of pure institution, which
depends wholly upon the Will of God, it can be proved only by Scripture: How
much then of this do they pretend to prove from Scripture? Why, they will prove
by Scripture, that St. Peter was the Prince of the Apostles, because Christ
said unto him, Thou art Peter, and on this Rock will I build my Church: and I
will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and seed my Sheep: which
indeed are lamentable Proofs, for the same Power was given to all the Apostles,
20 John 21, 22, 23. Then said Jesus unto them, Peace be unto you, as my Father
sent me, even so send I you, all of you; and therefore not one in subjection to
another, but all with equal Power: and when he had said this, he breathed on
them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whosoever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them; and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained:
Accordingly on the day of Pentecost the Holy Ghost fell on them all, they were
all endowed with the Gift of Tongues, and Miracles, and Prophecy; they all had
the same Infallible Spirit, and therefore needed no superior Head over them:
They were to be separated into all parts of the World, where they could have no
Communication with each other, and therefore could have no Universal Head. The
History of the Acts of the Apostles gives not the least intimation of any such
Superiority, which either St. Peter challenged, or the other Apostles paid him;
which are strong Presumptions against such a Supremacy of St. Peter: and I
suppose they themselves will grant, that all the rest of the Apostles were as
Infallible as he.

But suppose we should grant them, that St. Peter was the chief of the
Apostles, and had a kind of Primacy not of Government, but Order, how do they
prove from Scripture, that the Bishop of Rome succeeds in all the Rights and
Prerogatives of St. Peter? for unless this be proved, whatever Prerogative St.
Peter had, it signifies nothing to them: and yet this cannot be proved, but by
institution; for though Christ had bestowed a Primacy on S. Peter, yet unless
he expressly grant it to his Successors too, nay to his Successors in the Sea of
Rome, his Pramacy, as being a Personal Prerogative, must die with his Person:
As a Prince may grant a Priority to Persons in the same Office and Power, may
make a first Colonel, or a first Captain, but if these men to whom the
Precedence is given, die or are removed, those who succeed in their Office and
power, to the same Regiment or Company, do not therefore succeed to their
Priority too; for this did not belong to their Office, but to their Persons:
and the King may give the Priority again to whom he pleases, or appoint them to
succeed in course, according to their admission into such Offices. And by the
same reason the Primacy of the Roman Bishops, who are St. Peter's Successors,
does not follow from the Primacy of St. Peter, unless they can show, that
Christ has given them the Primacy also, as well as St. Peter; and this must be
proved from Scripture, because it is matter of Institution, and no Arguments in
the World can prove any thing, which depends solely upon an Institution,
without proving the Institution: But this the Roman Doctors never pretend to,
for they know, that there is not one word in Scripture about it; and nothing
but the Authority of Scripture can prove a Divine Institution. So that could
they prove the Primacy of St. Peter from Scripture, they prove but half their
point, and that the most inconsiderable half too, for it does them no good. And
therefore when they make a great noise about St. Peter's Primacy and
Prerogatives, never trouble your selves to dispute that point with them, which
is nothing to the purpose; but require them to prove, from Scripture, that the
Bishop of Rome, as St. Peter's Successor, is appointed by Christ, to be the
Supreme Ecumenical Bishop, and the Prince of all Bishops. And if you stick
here, as in reason you ought, there is an end of that Controversy.

Thus there is nothing the Church of Rome makes a greater noise about, than
Infallibility, though they are not agreed where to place this Infallibility,
whether in the Pope or a General Council: But let it be where it will, this
being a matter of Institution, must be proved by Scripture: how then in the
first place do they prove the Pope to be Infallible? That they think is very
plain, because Christ says, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. But how does this
prove, that the Bishop of Rome is Infallible? For here is not one word of the
Bishop of Rome. Yes, this proves St. Peter to be infallible, who was afterward
Bishop of Rome, and therefore all his Successors are infallible too. Now that
St. Peter was infallible, as all the other Apostles were, we readily grant;
though, I think, this Text does not prove it: But does this prove the Bishop of
Rome's Infallibility? Just as St. Peter's Primacy proves the Pope to be the
Ecumenical Primate: They themselves must grant, that an infallible Apostle may
have a fallible Bishop for his Successor; or else they must either deny, that
the rest of the Apostles, as well as St. Peter, were infallible, or they must
grant, that all the Apostles Successors, that is, all the Bishops, who
succeeded any of the Apostles in their Sees, must be as infallible as the
Bishops of Rome, who succeeded St. Peter; and then there will be so much
Infallibility, that it will be worth nothing: If then there be not a natural
and necessary entail of Infallibility upon the Successors of infallible
Apostles, they must show us an express Institution, which makes the Successors
of Peter at Rome infallible. And let our Protestant demand this, before he owns
the Infallibility of the Pope of Rome, and then, I believe, they will not think
him worth Converting.

Thus as for those who place Infallibility in a General Council, demand a
Scripture Proof of it, that they would produce the General Council's Charter
for Infallibility: This they cannot do; but they say the Church is infallible,
and the General Council is the Church Representative, and therefore a General
Council must be infallible too. So that here are several things for them to
prove, and to prove by Scripture too; for there is no other way of proving
them, before they can prove the Infallibility of General Councils: As, 1. That
the Church is infallible. 2. That a General Council is the Church
Representative. 3. That the Church Representative, is that Church to which the
promise of Infallibility is made. And then they might conclude, that a General
Council, as being the Church Representative, is infallible. Now instead of
proving every particular of this by Scripture, (as they must do, if they will
prove by Scripture, that General Councils are infallible) they pretend to prove
no more than the first of the three, that the Church is infallible; and that
very lamely too, as may appear more hereafter: and then they take all the rest
for granted, without any proof: which is just as if a man, who in order to
prove his Title to an Estate, is required to prove, that this Estate did
anciently belong to his Family, that it was entailed upon the Heir Male, that
this entail was never cut off, nor the Estate legally alienated, and that he
alone is the true surviving Heir; should think it enough to prove only the
first of these, that the Estate did anciently belong to his Family; which it
might have done, and yet not belong to it now, or if it did still belong to it,
he may not be the true Heir.

Thus if we consider, what it is they teach about Purgatory, we shall quickly
perceive, how little it is, they pretend to prove of it: they tell us, that
there is a Purgatory-fire after this life, where men undergo the punishment of
their Sins, when the fault is pardoned: that the Church has power, out of her
stock of Merits, which consists of the supererogating Works of great and
eminent Saints, to grant Pardons and Indulgencies to men while they live, to
deliver them from several thousand Years punishment, which is due to their Sins
in Purgatory; that the Souls in Purgatory may be released out of it by the
Prayers, and Alms, and Masses of the living; which is the very life and soul of
this Doctrine of Purgatory: Now of all this, they pretend to prove no more from
Scripture, but that there is a Purgatory-fire after this Life; and how they
prove it, you have already heard: But that either Penances or Pilgrimages, and
other extraordinary Acts of Devotion, while we live, or the Pope's Pardons and
Indulgencies can either remit or shorten the pains of Purgatory; or that the
Prayers and Alms of our living Friends, or Masses said for us by mercenary
Priests, can deliver us out of Purgatory, which we are principally concerned to
know, and without which, Purgatory will not enrich the Priests, nor the Church;
this they never attempt, that I know of, to prove by Scripture: whether there
be a Purgatory or not, in it self considered, is a mere speculative point, and
of no value: But could they prove, that the Pope has the Keys of Purgatory, and
that Alms and Masses will deliver out of Purgatory; this were worth knowing,
and is as well worth proving as any Doctrine of the Church of Rome, for there
is nothing they get more by. But if you will not believe this, till they
produce a Scripture Proof of it, you may let them dispute on about the place of
Purgatory, and keep your Money in your Pocket. Thus it is in most other cases,
if you take their whole Doctrine together, and demand a Proof of every part of
it, and not take a Proof of some little branch of it, for a Proof of the whole,
you will quickly find, that they will not be so fond of disputing, as some of
them now are.

3. Another way our Roman Adversaries have of proving their Doctrines from
Scripture is, instead of plain and positive proofs, to produce some very remote
and inevident consequences from Scripture, and if they can but hale a Text of
Scripture into the premises, whatever the conclusion be, they call it a
Scripture Proof. There are infinite instances of this, but I can only name some
few.

Thus they prove the perpetual Infallibility of the Church, because Christ
promises his Disciples to be with them to the end of the world, 28. Matthew. 20.
which promise cannot be confined to their persons, for they were to die long
before the end of the World, and therefore must extend to their Successors.
Suppose that, and does Christ's being with them, necessarily signify, that he
will make them Infallible? Is not Christ with every particular Church, with
every particular Bishop, nay with every particular good Christian, and must
they all be Infallible then?

Thus Christ promises that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his
Church; Ergo, the Church is Infallible; for if Error and Heresy prevails
against the Church, the Gates of Hell prevail against it: And I add, if Sin and
Wickedness prevail against the Church, the Gates of Hell prevail against it;
Ergo, the Church is Impeccable, and cannot Sin; which is to the full as good a
consequence as the other: And therefore the Gates of Hell prevailing, can
neither signify the mere prevalency of Errors or Sin in the Church, but such a
prevalency as destroys the Church; and this shall never be, because Christ has
promised it shall never be; and it may never be, though the Church be not
Infallible; and therefore this does not prove Infallibility.

Thus they prove there is such a place as Purgatory, where Sins are forgiven
and expiated, because our Savior says, That the sin against the Holy Ghost,
shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, Matt. 12.
32. and therefore there are some Sins which are forgiven in the next World,
because there is a Sin which shall not be forgiven there. Now not to consider
the ordinary use of such Phrases to signify no more, than it shall never be,
without distinguishing between what is to be done in this World, and what in
the next; nay, not to consider how contrary this is to their own Doctrine of
Purgatory, that men who go to Purgatory have all their Sins already forgiven,
though they must suffer the punishment of them there; which how absurd soever
it is, yet shows, that Purgatory is not a place of forgiving Sins; and
therefore cannot be meant by our Savior in those words: yet supposing all they
would have, that there shall be some Sins forgiven in the next World, which are
not forgiven in this; How does this prove a Popish Purgatory, where Souls
endure such torments as are not inferior to those of Hell it self, excepting
their duration? That some Sins shall be forgiven in the next World, I think,
does not very evidently prove, that men shall be tormented, it may be for
several Ages, in the Fire of Purgatory.

Thus they prove the necessity of Auricular Confession to Priest, from the
power of Judicial Absolution. Christ has given the Priest power to forgive
Sins, and hereby has made him a Judge, to retain or remit Sins, to absolve and
inflict Penances. Now a Judge cannot judge right, without a particular
knowledge of the Fact, and all the circumstances of it; and this the Priest
cannot know without the confession of the Penitent: and therefore as Priests
have authority to absolve, so a Penitent, who would be absolved, must of
necessity confess. But now I should think it a much better consequence, that
the Priest has not such a judicial authority of Absolution, as requires a
particular confession of the Penitent, because Christ has no where commanded
all men to confess their Sins to a Priest, than that the Priest has such a
judicial Authority, and therefore all men must confess to a Priest: for though
our Savior does give power to his Apostles to remit and retain Sins, yet those
words do not necessarily signify a judicial Authority to forgive Sins, or if
it did, it may relate only to public Sins, which are too well known without a
private confession; or however, it is not the particular knowledge of the Sin,
with all the circumstances of it, but the marks and characters of true
Repentance for public or secret Sins, which is the best rule and direction
whom to absolve; and therefore there is no need of a particular confession to
this purpose.

But the Sophistry of this is most palpable, when they draw such consequences
from one Text of Scripture, as directly contradict other plain and express
Texts. Thus because St. Peter tells us, That there are many things hard to be
understood, in St. Paul's Epistles, which they that are unlearned and unstable
wrest, as they do also the other scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.
16. From hence they would conclude, that People ought not to be allowed to read
the Bible: as if St. Peter had intended to forbid them to read those Epistles,
which St. Paul had written to them; nay, to read this very Epistle which he
himself now sent to them. For these Epistles which were sent to the Churches,
that they might be read by them, make a considerable part of the New Testament,
which the People must not be allowed to read now. But setting aside this, this
consequence, that the People must not read the Bible, is directly contrary to a
great many other Texts, which expressly command them to read, and search, and
study, and meditate on the Laws of God, and the Holy Scriptures, as every body
knows. I confess it amazes me to hear men argue at this rate: when they cannot
produce any one Text which forbids People to read the Scriptures, and there are
a great many express commands, that they should read the Scriptures, they think
it sufficient to oppose against all this Authority, a consequence of their own
making, and a very absurd one too, and call this a Scripture Proof.

I would not be thought wholly to reject a plain and evident consequence from
Scripture; but yet I will never admit of a mere consequence to prove an
Institution, which must be delivered in plain terms, as all Laws ought to be;
and where I have no other proof, but some Scripture-consequences, I shall not
think it equivalent to a Scripture Proof: if the consequences be plain and
obvious, and such as every man sees, I shall not question it; but remote, and
dubious, and disputed consequences, if we have no better evidence, to be sure
are a very ill foundation for Articles of Faith. Let our Protestant then tell
such Disputants, that for the Institution of Sacraments, and for Articles of
Faith, he expects plain positive Proofs: that as much as the Protestant Faith
is charged with uncertainty, we desire a little more certainty for our Faith,
than mere inferences from Scripture, and those none of the plainest neither.

4. Another false pretense to Scripture-proofs is, to clap their own sense upon
the words of Scripture, without any regard to the use and propriety of words,
to the circumstances of the place, to the reason and nature of things; and to
call this a Scripture Proof of their Doctrine, when their Doctrines do not
naturally grow there, but are only engrafted by some cunning Artists, upon a
Scripture-stock. I shall give you only one instance of this, their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

As for Transubstantiation, they teach, that the Elements of Bread and Wine are
converted into the natural Flesh and Blood of Christ, which was born of the
Virgin Mary: That after Consecration there is nothing of the substance of Bread
and Wine, but the Accidents subsist without a substance: That the natural Body
of Christ his Soul and Divinity, are present under the species of Bread; nay,
that whole Christ, Flesh and Blood, is under the species of Bread, and in every
particle of it, and under the species of Wine, and every drop of it: That the
Body of Christ is not broken, nor his Blood shed in the Sacrament, but only the
species of Bread and Wine, which are nothing: That it is only this Nothing
which we eat and drink in the Sacrament, and which goes down into our stomachs,
and carries whole Christ down with it. Now this Doctrine founds so very harsh,
is so contrary to all the Evidence of our Senses, and has so many Absurdities
and Contradictions to Reason, that it ought to be very plainly proved from
Scripture in every part of it: for if a man might be persuaded to renounce his
Senses and Reason to believe Scripture, yet it ought to be equally evident to
him at least, that Scripture is for it, as it is, that Sense and Reason is
against it: and yet there is not one word in Scripture to prove any one part of
this Doctrine of Transubstantiation; neither that the natural Flesh and Blood
of Christ is in the Sacrament, nor that the substance of Bread and Wine does
not remain after Consecration, nor that the Accidents of Bread and Wine, such
as color, smell, taste, quantity, weight, subsist without any substance, or
subject to subsist in. These are such Paradoxes to Sense and Reason, that they
ought to be very well supported with Scripture, before they are received for
Articles of Faith, or else our Faith will be as very an Accident, without any
substance, as the sacramental species themselves are. But though they have no
Text which proves the least Tittle of all this, yet they have a Text whereon
they graft this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, viz. This is my Body, which
they say, signifies every thing which they teach concerning Transubstantiation;
but then I hope they will prove that it does so, not expect that we should take
it for granted, because they say it. Now, not to insist upon those Arguments,
whereby our Divines have so demonstratively proved, that Transubstantiation, as
explained by the Church of Rome, cannot be the sense of This is my Body, my
advice to Protestants is to put them upon the proof, that this is the sense of
it, which in reason they ought to prove, because there is not one word of it in
the Text; and I shall only tell them what Proofs they ought to demand for it.

Now I suppose all men will think it reasonable, that the Evidence for it,
should at least be equal to the Evidence against it, though we ought indeed to
have more reason to believe it, than to dis-believe it; or else we must hang in
suspense, when the Balance is equal and turns neither way. Now I will not
oppose the Evidence of Sense and Reason, against the Authority of Scripture;
for I will never suppose that they can contradict each other: and if there
should appear some contradiction between them, I will be contented at present,
without disputing that point, to give it on the side of Scripture; but I will
oppose the Evidence of Sense and Reason against any private man's, or any
Churches Exposition of Scripture: and if that Exposition they give of any Text
of Scripture, as suppose, This is my Body, contradict the Evidence of Sense and
Reason, I may modestly require as plain proof, that this is the meaning of the
Text, as I have, that such a meaning is contrary to all Sense and Reason: for
though Sense and Reason be not the Rule and Measure of Faith, yet we must use
our Sense and Reason in expounding Scripture, or we may quickly make a very
absurd and senseless Religion.

Now this shows us what kind of Proof we must require, that Transubstantiation
is the Doctrine of the Gospel, viz. as certain Proof as we have, that
Transubstantiation is contrary to Sense and Reason. And therefore,

1. We must demand a self-evident Proof of this, because it is self-evident,
that Transubstantiation contradicts Sense and Reason. Every man, who knows what
the word means, (which I believe men may do, without being great Philosophers)
and will consult his own Senses and Reason, will need no Arguments to prove,
that Transubstantiation contradicts both. Now such a Scripture Proof, I would
see for Transubstantiation, so plain, and express, and self-evident, that no
man, who understands the words, can doubt whether this be the meaning of them;
I mean, a reasonable, not an obstinate, wilful, and skeptical doubting. Now I
believe, that our Adversaries themselves will not say, that This is my Body, is
such a self-evident Proof of Transubstantiation; I am sure some of the wisest
men among them have not thought it so, and the fierce Disputes for so many Ages
about the interpretation of those words, proves that it is not so: for men do
not use to dispute what is self-evident, and proves it self without any other
Arguments. Now it is very unreasonable to require any man to believe
Transubstantiation against a self-evident Proof, that it is contrary to Sense
and Reason, without giving him a self-evident Proof, that it is the Doctrine of
Scripture; which is to require a man to believe against the best Reason and
Evidence.

2. We must demand such a Scripture Proof of Transubstantiation, as cannot
possibly signify any thing else; or else it will not answer that Evidence
which we have against Transubstantiation? for Sense and Reason pronounce
Transubstantiation to be naturally impossible; and therefore unless it be as
impossible to put any other sense upon Scripture than what signifies
Transubstantiation, as it is to reconcile Transubstantiation to Sense and
Reason, there is not such good Evidence for Transubstantiation, as against it.
Were the Scripture-Proofs for Transubstantiation so plain and evident, that it
were impossible to put any other sense on the words, then I would grant, that
it is as impossible for those who believe the Scriptures to disbelieve
Transubstantiation, as it is for those, who trust to their own Sense and
Reason, to believe it. Here the difficulty would be equal on both sides, and
then I should prefer a Divine Revelation (if it were possible to prove such a
Revelation to be Divine) before natural Sense and Reason; but I presume, no man
will say, that it is impossible to put another, and that a very reasonable,
interpretation upon those words, This is my Body, without expounding them to
the sense of Transubstantiation.

Our Roman Adversaries do not deny, but that these words are capable of a
figurative, as well as of a literal sense; as when the Church is called the
Body of Christ, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, it is not meant of
his natural, but his mystical Body: and thus when the Bread is called the Body
of Christ, it may not signify his natural, but sacramental Body, or his Body
to all the ends and purposes of a Sacrament. Now if there be any other good
sense to be made of these words, besides Transubstantiation, there cannot be
such a necessity to expound them of Transubstantiation, as there is not to
expound them of it; for I do not reject Scripture, if I deny
Transubstantiation, when the words of Scripture do not necessarily prove it,
but I renounce Sense and Reason, if I believe it. Now though I were bound to
renounce my Sense and Reason, when they contradict Scripture, yet sure I am not
bound to deny my Sense and Reason, when they do not contradict Scripture; and
Sense and Reason are never contrary to Scripture, nor Scripture to them, when
the words of Scripture are capable of such an interpretation as is reconcilable
both to Sense and Reason: In such a case to expound Scripture contrary to Sense
and Reason, is both to pervert the Scripture, and to contradict Reason without
any necessity. An unlearned man need not enter into a large Dispute about
Transubstantiation; let him but require his Adversary to give him as plain
Evidence, that Transubstantiation is the Doctrine of the Gospel, as he can give
him, that it is contrary to Sense and Reason, and the Dispute will quickly be
at an end. It had been very easy to have given more instances under every
head, and to have observed more false ways of expounding Scripture, which the
Doctors of the Church of Rome are guilty of; but these are the most obvious,
and therefore the best fitted to my design to instruct unlearned men; and I
must not suffer this Discourse, which was at first intended much shorter than
it already is, to swell too much under my hands.

SECT. III. Concerning the Ancient Fathers and Writers of the Christian Church.
THough Learned men may squabble about the sense of Fathers and Councils, it is
very unreasonable, that unlearned men should be concerned in such Disputes,
because they are not competent Judges of it; and yet there is nothing which our
Roman Disputants make a greater noise with; among Women and Children, and the
meanest sort of People, than Quotations out of Fathers and Councils, whom they
pretend to be all on their side. Now as it is a ridiculous thing for them to
talk of Fathers and Councils to such People, so it is very ridiculous for such
People to be converted by Sayings out of the Fathers and Councils: I confess,
it has made me often smile, with a mixture of pity and indignation, at the
folly of it; for what more contemptible easiness can any man be guilty of, than
to change his Religion which he has been taught out of the Scriptures, and may
find there if he pleases, because he is told by some honest Priest, (a sort of
men who never deceive any one) that such or such a Father, who lived it may be
they know not where nor when, and wrote they know not what, has spoke in favor
of Transubstantiation, or Purgatory, or some other Popish Doctrine.

And therefore let me advise our Protestant, who is not skilled in these
matters, when he is urged with the Authority of Fathers, to ask them some few
Questions.

1. Ask them, How you shall certainly know what the Judgment of the Fathers
was? and this includes a great many Questions, which must be resolved, before
you can be sure of this: as, how you shall know that such Books were written by
that Father, whose name it bears? or that it has not been corrupted by the
ignorance or knavery of Transcribers, while they were in the hands of Monks,
who usurped great Authority over the Fathers, and did not only pare their
Nails, but altered their very Habit and Dress, to fit them to the modes of the
times, and make them fashionable? How you shall know what the true meaning of
those words are, which they cite from them? which the words themselves many
times will not discover, without the Context: How you shall know that such
Sayings are honestly quoted, or honestly translated? How you shall know whether
this Father did not in other places contradict what he here says? or did not
alter his opinion after he had wrote it, without writing public Recantations,
as St. Austin did? Whether this Father was not contradicted by other Fathers?
And in that case, Which of the Fathers you must believe?

You may add, That you do not ask these Questions at random, but for great and
necessary Reasons: for in reading some late English Books both of Protestants
and Papists, you find large Quotations out of the Fathers on both sides; that
some are charged with false Translations, with perverting the Fathers sense,
with mis-citing his words, with quoting spurious Authors, as it seems many of
those are which make up the late Speculum, or Ecclesiastical Prospective-glass;
to name no more. Now how shall you, who are an unlearned man, judge of such
Disputes as these? What Books are spurious or genuine? whether the Fathers be
rightly quoted? and what the true sense of them is? For my part, I know not
what Answer such a Disputant could make, but to blush, and promise not to
allege the Authority of Fathers any more. It is certain, in such matters,
those who are unlearned, must trust the learned; and then, I suppose, an
unlearned Protestant will rather trust a Protestant than a Popish Doctor, as
Papists will rather trust their Priests that Protestant Divines; and then there
is not much to be got on either side, this way: For when a Protestant shows an
inclination rather to believe a Popish than a Protestant Divine, he is
certainly three quarters a Papist beforehand.

Indeed unlearned Protestants, who are inquisitive and have time to read, have
such advantages now to satisfy themselves even about the sense of Fathers and
Councils, as it may be no Age before ever afforded: There being so many
excellent Books written in English, as plainly confirm the Protestant Faith,
and confute Popery, by the Testimonies and Authorities of ancient Writers; and
such men, though they do not understand Latin and Greek, are in no danger of
all the Learning of their Popish Adversaries: and any man who pleases, may have
recourse to such Books, and see the state of the Controversy with his own
Eyes, and judge for himself; but those who cannot do this, may very fairly
decline such a trial, as improper for them. For,

2. Let our Protestant ask such Disputers, whether a plain man may not attain a
sufficient knowledge and certainty of his Religion, without understanding
Fathers and Councils? If they say he cannot, ask them, how many
Roman Catholics there are that understand Fathers and Councils? Ask them, how
those Christians understood their Religion, who lived before there were any of
these Fathers and Councils? Ask them again, whether they believe that God has
made it impossible to the greatest part of Mankind, to understand the Christian
Religion? For even among Christians themselves, there is not one in an hundred
thousand, who understands Fathers and Councils, and it is morally impossible
they should: and therefore certainly there must be a shorter and easier way to
understand Christian Religion than this, or else the generallity of Mankind,
even of professed Christians, are out of all possibility of Salvation. Ask them
once more, whether it be not a much easier matter for a plain honest man to
learn all things necessary to Salvation, out of the Scriptures themselves,
especially with the help of a wise and learned Guide, than to understand all
Fathers and Councils, and take his Religion from them? Why then do they so
quarrel at Peoples reading the Scriptures, and put them upon reading Fathers
and Councils? I suppose they will grant, the Scriptures may be read a little
sooner than so many Voluminous Fathers, and Labbe's Councils into the bargain;
and, I believe, most men, who try, will think, that they are more easily
understood; and therefore if Protestants, as they pretend, can have no
certainty of the true sense of Scripture* I am sure there is much less
certainty to be had from the Fathers: A short time will give us a full view of
the Scriptures, to read and understand all the Fathers, is work enough for a
man's life: the Scripture is all of a piece, every part of it agrees with the
rest; the Fathers many times contradict themselves and each other: and if men
differ about the sense of Scripture, they differ much more about Fathers and
Councils. That it is a mighty Riddle, that those who think ordinary Christians
not fit to read the Scriptures, should think it necessary for them to
understand Fathers and Councils; and yet they are ridiculous indeed to dispute
with every Tradesman about Fathers and Councils, if they do not think they
ought to read and understand them.

The sum is, such Protestants as are not skilled in Book-learning, may very
reasonably tell these men, who urge them with the Authority of Councils and
Fathers, That they do not pretend to any skill in such matters, and hope it is
not required of them, for if it be, they are in an ill case: the Holy
Scriptures, not Fathers and Councils, is the Rule of their Faith; if they had
read the Fathers, they should believe them no farther, than what they taught
was agreeable to Scripture; and therefore whatever Opinions any of the Fathers
had, it is no concern of theirs to know, if they can learn what the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles was, without it: learned men may dispute about these
things; and they have heard learned Protestants affirm, that the Church of Rome
can find none of her peculiar Doctrines in the Writings of any of the Fathers
for the first three hundred Years; and its certain, if this be true, all the
later Fathers are of no Authority to establish any new Doctrine; for there was
no more Authority in the Church, to bring in any new Doctrines after three
hundred Years, than there is at this day.

Unlearned men may very honorably reject all dispute about Fathers and
Councils (though learned men cannot, and indeed need not,) for if they are not
bound to read Fathers and Councils, I think, they are not bound to understand
them, nor to dispute about them; and it is very unadviseably done, when they
do: for it is past a Jest in so serious a matter, though otherwise it were
comical enough for men to be converted by Fathers and Councils, without
understanding them.

CHAP. III. How to Answer some of the most popular Pretenses urged by Papists
against Protestants.
SECT. I. 1. Concerning the Uncertainty of the Protestant Faith.
OUr Popish Adversaries of late, have not so much disputed, as fenced; have
neither downright opposed the Protestant Faith, nor vindicated their own, but
have betaken themselves to some tricks and amusements, to divert and perplex
the Dispute, and to impose upon the ignorant and unwary. One of their principal
Arts has been to cry out of the Uncertainty of the Protestant Faith. This every
body is nearly concerned in; for there is nothing wherein certainty is so
necessary, and so much desired, as in matters of Religion, whereon our eternal
State depends. This has been often answered by Protestants, and I do not intend
to enter into the merits of the Cause, and show upon what a firm and sure
bottom the Protestant Faith stands: this is a Cavil easily enough exposed to
the scorn and contempt of all considering men, without so much trouble:

For 1. Suppose the Protestant Faith were uncertain; How is the cause of the
Church of Rome ever the better? is this a sufficient reason to turn Papists,
because Protestants are uncertain? does this prove the Church of Rome to be
Infallible, because the Church of England is Fallible? must certainty
necessarily be found among them, because it is not to be found with us? is
Thomas an honest man, because John is a Knave? These are two distinct
questions, and must be distinctly proved. If they can prove our Faith
uncertain, and their own certain, there is reason then to go over to them; but
if they cannot do this, they may, it may be, persuade men to renounce the
Protestant Faith, but not to embrace Popery. Ask them then, What greater
assurance they have of their Faith, than we have of ours? If they tell you,
their Church is Infallible; tell them, that is another question, and does not
belong to this dispute. For the Infallibility of their Church, does not follow
from the Uncertainty of our Faith; if they can prove their Church Infallible,
whether they prove our Faith uncertain or not, we will at any time change
Protestant Certainty for Infallibility: And if they could prove our Faith
uncertain, unless they could prove their own more certain, (though we bate them
Infallibility) we may cease to be Protestants, but shall never turn Papists.

2. Ask them, What they mean by the uncertainty of the Protestant Faith? For
this may signify two things: either, 1. That the Objects of our Faith, are in
themselves uncertain, and cannot be proved by certain Reasons: Or 2dly, That
our Persuasion about these matters, is uncertain and wavering. If they mean the
first, then the sense is, that the Christian Religion is an uncertain thing,
and cannot be certainly proved; for this is the whole Protestant Faith: We
believe the Apostles Creed, and whatever is contained in the Writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and this is all we believe: And I hope, they will not
say these things are uncertain; for then they renounce the Christian Religion,
and Infallibility it self cannot help them out: for Infallibility cannot make
that certain, which is in it self uncertain: an infallible man must know things
as they are, or else he is mistaken, and ceases to be infallible; and therefore
what is certain, he infallibly knows to be certain, and what is uncertain, he
infallibly knows to be uncertain: for the most certain and infallible knowledge
does not change its Object, but sees it just as it is: And therefore they must
allow the Objects of our Faith; or the Protestant Faith, as to the matter of
it, to be very certain, and built upon certain reason, or else their infallible
Church can have no certainty of the Christian Faith.

If they mean the second thing, that we have no certain persuasion about what
we profess to believe: This is a great abuse to Protestants, as if we were all
Knaves and Hypocrites, who do not heartily and firmly believe what we profess
to believe: and a Protestant, who knows that he does very firmly and steadfastly
believe his Religion, ought to reject such a Villainous Accusation as this, with
indignation and scorn. Indeed it is both impudent and silly for any man to tell
a Protestant, that his Faith is uncertain, (as that signifies an uncertain and
doubtful Persuasion) when he knows and feels the contrary; and no body else can
know this but himself: In what Notion then is the Protestant Faith uncertain?
what can Faith signify, but either the Objects of Faith, or the internal
Assent and Persuasion? The Objects of our Faith are certain, if Christian
Religion be so, that is, they have very certain Evidence: our Assent and
Persuasion is very certain, as that is opposed to all doubtfulness and
wavering: And what certainty then is wanting to the Protestant Faith?

When they you hear any of these men declaiming about the uncertainty of the
Protestant Faith, only ask them, What they mean by the Protestant Faith?
whether the Articles of your Faith, that they are uncertain, or the Act of
Faith, your internal Assent and Persuasion? If they say, they mean the Act of
Faith: Tell them, that it is a strange presumption in them to pretend to know
your Heart; that you know that best your self, whether you do firmly and
steadfastly believe your Religion; and to give them satisfaction in that point,
you assure them, that you do: As for the Objects of your Faith, or what is you
believe, tell them, you are a Member of the Church of England, and embrace the
Doctrine of it, and there they may find your Faith both as a Christian, and as
a Protestant; and may try their skill on it, when they please, to prove any
part of it uncertain, and you are ready to defend it. This is a plain and fair
Answer, and I believe you will hear no more of them.

For as for their common Argument to prove the uncertainty of the Protestant
Faith, That there is a great variety of Opinions among Protestants, and that
they condemn one another with equal confidence and assurance: Ask them, How
this proves your Faith to be uncertain, either as to its Object, or as to its
Assent? May not what you believe, be very certainly true, because some men
believe the contrary? Tell them, you do not place the certainty of what you
believe, upon any man's believing, or not believing it, but upon the certain
reasons you have to prove it; and therefore if they would convince you, that
what you believe is not certain, they must disprove your Reasons, not merely
tell you, that other men think it false or uncertain, and believe otherwise:
Thus does it prove, that you give an uncertain and doubtful Assent to what you
profess to believe, because other men are very fully persuaded of the contrary?
Pray tell them, that you do not build your Assent upon other men's Persuasions,
but upon the Reasons of your Faith, and while they are unshaken, you shall
believe as you do, and with the same assurance, whoever believes otherwise.

There are two things indeed, which this Argument proves, but they signify
nothing to weaken the Protestant Faith.

1. That all the Doctrines which are professed by some Protestants, are not
certain; for some of them must be false, when there are contradictory Doctrines
maintained and professed by several Sects of Protestants; but then no man, that
I know of, ever said, that all Protestant Doctrines were certain, which I hope
does not hinder but that some Protestant Doctrines may be certain; and then the
Doctrines of the Church of England may be certain, though some other Communions
of Protestants have erred.

2. This Argument proves also, that men who are mistaken, may be very
confidently persuaded of their mistakes, and therefore the confidence of
persuasion does not prove the certainty of their Faith; and I never heard any
man say that it did: But I hope this does not prove that a man, who is certain
upon evident Reasons, must be mistaken too, because men, who are certain
without Reason, may mistake.

And yet this very Argument, from the different and contrary Opinions among
Protestants to prove the uncertainty of the Protestant Faith, signifies
nothing, as to our Disputes with the Church of Rome: For ask them, what they
would think of the Protestant Faith, were all Protestants of a mind? Would
their Consent and Agreement prove the Certainty of the Protestant Faith? Then
the Protestant Faith, in opposition to Popery, is very certain; for they all
agree in condemning the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome; and thus
I think they get nothing by this Argument: for if the Dissentions of
Protestants proves the uncertainty of their Faith, as to such matters, wherein
they differ, then by the same Rule their Agreement in opposition to Popery,
shows their great certainty in such matters: And this I suppose is no great
Inducement to a Protestant to turn Papist.

SECT. II. Concerning Protestant Mis-representations of Popery.
THis has been another late Artifice of our Roman Adversaries to amuse ignorant
People with a great noise of Mis-representing: That Protestant Divines have
painted Popery in such horrid shapes, as to disturb the Imaginations of People,
and to beget an incurable Aversion in them against Popery, without
understanding what it is. I shall not now dispute this matter over again: There
has been so much of late said of it, and this Pretense so shamefully baffled,
in answe^ both to the Representer, and to Monsieur De Meaux's Exposition, that
I am apt to think, they themselves could be very glad that it had never been
mentioned, or could now be forgot; and therefore referring the inquisitive
Readers to those late Books, wherein they will find this Controversy fairly
stated, I have some few things to add, which are plain and obvious to every
body; and that both with reference to the Probability of this Charge, and to
the Consequences of it.

First, As to the Probability of this Charge. Now, 1. Ask them, Whether the
first Reformers charged the Church of Rome with such Doctrines and Practices as
they were not guilty of? We have not, that I know, of, increased our Charge
against the Church of Rome in this Age; if there has been any difference, we
have rather been more favorable and candid in our Censures of some of their
Doctrines, than the first Reformers were. Now is it likely that the first
Reformers should charge the Church of Rome wrongfully? No man can be a
Mis-representer, but either out of ignorance or design; which of these then can
we, with any Probability, charge the first Reformers with?

As for Ignorance, is it a probable thing, that Luther, Melancthon,
Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Bucer, Calvin, or to come to our own English
Reformers, that Archbishop Cranmer, and others, who had all been Papists
themselves, should be ignorant what was taught and practiced in the Church of
Rome? It is now thought in this very Cause a very considerable Proof, that
Protestants do Mis-represent Papists, because some Papists deny such Doctrines
and Practices as Protestants charge them with; and, say they, can you think
that Papists do not understand their own Religion better than Protestants do?
Now though this may be made a Question, and I am very apt to think, that
compare the Learned and the Unlearned Protestants and Papists together, there
are more Protestants than Papists, who understand Popery; and not only
Experience verifies this, but there is a plain reason why it should be so;
because it is the Principle of Protestants, that they must neither believe nor
disbelieve any thing, without understanding it; but an implicit Faith in the
Church governs the unlearned Papists, and many of those who should be learned
too.

But let that be as it will, this Argument signifies nothing to our first
Reformers: for if Papists may be presumed to understand their own Religion, the
first Reformers, who were all educated in Popery, might be as well presumed to
understand what Popery then was; and therefore there can be no reason to
suspect that they Misrepresented Popery out of Ignorance.

Nor is it more probable, that they should Mis-represent Popery out of Interest
and Design: for if they were conscious to themselves, that Popery was not so
bad as they represent it to be, why should they themselves have set up for
Reformers? and what hope could they have, that at that time, when Popery was so
well known, they should persuade the World to believe their Mis-representations?

Was it so desirable a thing for men to bring all the Powers of the Church and
Court of Rome upon themselves, merely to gratify a Mis-representing humor? Do
these men remember what our Reformers suffered, for opposing Popery? the loss
of their Estates, their Liberties, their Lives, all the Vengeance of a blind
and enraged Zeal? And did they undergo all this with such constancy and
Christian patience, only for the sake of telling Lies, and raising scandalous
Reports of the Church of Rome? We think it a very good Argument, that the
Apostles and first Preachers of Christianity were very honest men, and had no
design to cheat the World, because they served no worldly Interest by it; but
cheerfully exposed themselves to all manner of Sufferings in Preaching the
Gospel: and why does not the same Argument prove our first Reformers to be
honest men, and then they could not be wilful Mis-representers?

Nay, if we will but allow them to have been cunning men (and it is evident,
they did not want wit) they would never have undertaken so hopeless a design,
as to run down Popery merely by Mis-representing it; when, had their Exceptions
against Popery been only Mis-representations of their own, all the World could
have confuted them: had the first Reformers been only Mis-representers, can we
think, that they could have imposed upon such vast numbers of Men, Learned and
Unlearned, who knew and saw what Popery was? They were no Fools themselves, and
therefore could not hope to impose such a Cheat upon the World.

2. Ask them again, How old this Complaint is, of Protestant
Mis-representations of Popery? how long it has been discovered, that Popery has
been thus Abused and Misrepresented? were the first Reformers charged with
these Mis-representations by their Adversaries in those days? did they deny,
that they gave Religious Worship to Saints, and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, to
Images and Relics? did they cry out of Mis-representations, when they were
charged with such Doctrines and Practices as these? or did they defend them,
and endeavor to answer those Arguments which the Reformers brought against
them? And yet methinks if Popery had been so grossly Misrepresented by the
Reformers, this would as soon have been discovered by the Learned Papists of
those days, as by our late Representer; but it is most likely they did not then
think Popery so much Misrepresented, for if they had, they would certainly
have complained of it: So that the high improbability of the thing, is a
sufficient Reason to Unlearned Protestants, to reject this Charge of Protestant
Mis-representations of Popery, as nothing else but a Popish Calumny against
Protestants; and to conclude, that if Popery be Misrepresented now, it is
only by themselves, and that is the very truth of the Case.

Secondly, Let us consider this Charge of Mis-representations in the
Consequences of it: It would a little puzzle a man to guess, what service they
intend to do the Church of Rome by it. For,

1. By complaining of such Mis-representations of Popery, they plainly confess,
that those Doctrines and Practices, which we charge the Church of Rome with,
are very bad, and fit to be rejected and abhorred of all Christians. This the
Representer himself confesses, and is very Copious and Rhetorical upon it. Now
this is of mighty dangerous consequence; for if it appears, that we have not
Misrepresented them, that the Doctrines and Practices we charge them with, are
truly the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, then by their own
confession, Popery is a very bad Religion, and to be rejected by Christians:
Then there was a very just reason for our Separation from the Church of Rome,
and we are no longer either Schismatics or Heretics; and if the Cause be put
upon this Issue, we need desire no better Vindication of the Church of England:
for if they cannot prove us Heretics or Schismatics, till they can prove us
Mis-representers, I believe, we are pretty secure for this Age.

2. These men, who complain so much of Mis-representing, endeavor to make the
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, look as like Protestant Doctrines, as possibly
they can, as if there were little or no difference between them: Now methinks
this is no great reason for a Protestant to turn Papist, that the Popish Faith
is so much the better, the nearer it comes to the Protestant Faith. The truth
is, the chief Mystery in this late Trade of Representing and Mis-representing,
is no more but this, to join a Protestant Faith with Popish Practices; to
believe as Protestants do, and to do as Papists do. As to give some few
instances of this in the Papist Misrepresented and Represented.

The Papist Represented, believes it damnable to Worship Stocks and Stones for
Gods, to Pray to Pictures or Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, or any other
Saints. This is good Protestant Doctrine: but then this Papist says his Prayers
before an Image, Kneels and Bows before it, and pays all external Acts of
Adoration to Christ and the Saints, as represented by their Images; though it
is not properly the Image he honors, but Christ and his Saints by the Images.
Which is downright Popery in Practice.

Thus he believes it is a most damnable Idolatry, to make Gods of men, either
living or dead. Which is the Protestant Faith: but yet he prays to Saints, and
beggs their Intercession, without believing them to be Gods, or his Redeemers;
which is Popery in Practice.

He believes it damnable, to think the Virgin Mary more powerful in Heaven than
Christ. Which is Protestant Doctrine: but yet he prays to Her ostner than
either to God or Christ, says ten Ave-Maries for one Pater Noster; which is a
Popish Devotion.

He believes it unlawful to commit Idolatry, and most damnable to Worship any
Breaden God. Which is spoke like a Protestant; but yet he pays Divine Adoration
to the Sacrament, which is done like a Papist. And thus in most of those thirty
seven Particulars of the double Characters of a Papist Misrepresented, his
great Art is to Reconcile a Protestant Faith with Popish Practices.

So that this new way of Representing Popery, is no reason to a Protestant to
alter his Faith, because, it seems, they believe in many things just as we do;
but, I think, it is a very great reason for a Papist to alter his Practice,
because a Protestant Faith and Popish Worship do not very well agree. Those who
would not make Gods of Stocks and Stones, of dead Men and Women, had certainly
better not Worship them, which is the most certain way not to make them Gods;
and those who think it such damnable Idolatry to Worship a Breaden God, in my
Opinion, are on the safer side not to Worship the visible Species of Bread in
the Eucharist. Let but our Protestant observe this, That when they would
Represent Popery most favorably, they either say what Protestants do, or
something as like it, as they can, and he will see no reason, either to change
his Faith or his Practice.

The END.
Books lately Printed for Will. Rogers.
THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto.

An Answer to a Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants: And
containing a particular Examination of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of
Condom, his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in the Articles
of Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, occasioned by that Discourse.
Quarto.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Difference, between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply; in which are laid open some of
the Methods, by which Protestants are Misrepresented by Papists. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
first Part: Wherein an Answer is given to the late Proofs of the Antiquity of
Transubstantiation, in the Books called, Consensus Veterum, and Nubes Testium,
etc. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, the
Second Part: Wherein the Doctrine of the Trinity is showed to be agreeable, to
Scripture and Reason, and Transubstantiation repugnant to both, Quarto.

An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's Second Part, in the first
Dialogue, between him and his Lay-Friend.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality:
With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation; in a Book that came lately from Oxford.

Sermons and Discourses, some of which never before Printed: The Third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson Dean of Canterbury, Octavo.

A Manual for a Christian Soldier, Written by Erasmus, and Translated into
English, Twelves.

A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book; whereby one (who has a good
Voice and Ear) may without other help, learn to Sing true by Notes. Designed
chiefly for, and applied to, the promoting of Psalmody; and furnished with
Variety of Psalm-Tunes in Parts, with Directions for that kind of Singing.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By
John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury, in Octavo, Price Three Pence.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In Octavo. Price Three Pence.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began, as it appears by
the Advices given to Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own. With
a Preface leading to the matter of the Book. Quarto.

A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

The Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the Furious
Assaults of Mr. I. S. in his second Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues. Quarto.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benj. Calamy, D.D. and late
Minister of St. Lawrence-Jury, Land. Jan. 7th, 1685/6. By W. Sherlock, D. D.
Master of the Temple.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In
Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters. By William Sherlock, D. D. Master of
the Temple.

Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, The Second Part of the Preservative against
Popery.

May 3. 1688. Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiepisc.
Gant. a Sacr. Domest.

The Second Part OF THE Preservative AGAINST POPERY: Showing how Contrary
POPERY is to the True Ends OF THE Christian Religion. Fitted for the
INSTRUCTION OF Unlearned PROTESTANTS.

By WILLIAM SHERLOCK, D.D. Master of the Temple.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. M DC LXXXVIII.

Part II. THE PRESERVATIVE AGAINST POPERY.
CHAP. IV. Some Directions relating to particular Controversies.
THose who would understand the particular Disputes between us and the Church
of Rome, must of necessity read such Books as give the true State of the
Controversy between us, and fairly represent the Arguments on both sides; and
where such Books are to be met with, he may learn from a late Letter,
Entitled, The Present State of the Controversy between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome, Or an Account of Books written on both sides. But my
present Design is of another nature, to give some plain and easy Marks and
Characters of true Gospel Doctrines; whereby a man, who has any relish of the
true Spirit of Christianity, may as certainly know Truth from Error in many
cases, as the Palate can distinguish Tastes. There are some things so proper to
the Gospel, and so primarily intended in it, that they may fitly serve for
distinguishing marks of true Evangelical Doctrine: I shall name some of the
chief, and Examine some Popish Doctrines by them.

SECTION 1. Concerning IDOLATRY.
1. ONE principal intention of the Gospel, was more perfectly to extirpate all
Idolatry; 1 John 3. 8.
For this purpose the son of God was manifested to destroy the works of the
devil, that is, not only all Sin and Wickedness, but the very Kingdom of
Darkness; that Kingdom the Devil had erected in the world, the very Foundation
of which was laid in Idolatrous Worship.

To this purpose Christ has expressly taught us, that there is but one God, and
has more perfectly instructed us in the nature of God: 1. Joh. 18.
For no man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten son, who is in the
bosom of the father, he has declared him. Ignorance was the Mother of Pagan
Idolatry, because they did not know the true God, they Worshipped any thing,
every thing, for a God; and therefore the most effectual course to cure
Idolatry, was to make known the true God to the world: for those men are
inexcusable who know the true God, and Worship any thing else. Though indeed
according to some men's Divinity, the knowledge of the true God cures Idolatry,
not by rooting out Idolatrous Worship, but by excusing it; by making that to be
no Idolatry in a Christian, who knows God, which was Idolatry in a Heathen, who
did not know him: for if (as some say) none can be guilty of Idolatry, who
acknowledge one Supreme Being; then the Heathens, when once they were
instructed in the knowledge of the one true God, might have Worshipped all
their Country Gods, which they did before, without being guilty of Idolatry;
which is, as if I should say, that man is a Rebel, who through mistake and
ignorance owns any man for his Prince, who is not his Prince; but he, is no
Rebel, who knows his lawful Prince, and pays Homage to another, whom he knows
not to be his Prince.

And therefore our Savior confines all Religious Worship to God alone: Mat. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: It is his
Answer to the Devil, when he tempted him to fall down and worship him, but he
gives such an answer as excludes all Creatures, not only bad but good Spirits,
from any share in Religious Worship: Our Savior does not deny to worship him
merely because he was the Devil, (though that a man may do without the guilt of
Idolatry, who knows him to be the Devil, if those men are in the right, who
allow nothing to be Idolatry, but to worship some Being for the Supreme God,
who is not Supreme; for then you may worship the Devil without the guilt of
Idolatry, if you do not believe him to be the Supreme God) but our Savior's
reason for not worshipping him was, because we must Worship none but God. Which
is as good a reason against the worship of the most glorious Angel, as of the
Devil himself: Nay, our Savior denies to worship him, though the Devil made no
terms with him, about the kind or degrees of Worship: He does not require him
to offer Sacrifice to him, (which is the only Act of Worship the Church of Rome
appropriates to the Supreme God) but only to bow down before him, as an
expression of Religious Devotion; he did not demand that degree of Worship,
which the Church of Rome calls Latria, and appropriates to the Supreme God:
nay, he confesses that he was not the Supreme God, for he does not pretend to
dispose of the Kingdoms of the World in his own right, but says, they were
given to him, and he had power to give them to whom he pleased; in which he
acknowledges, that he had a Superior, and therefore could not in the same
breath desire to be owned and worshipped as the Supreme. But our Savior denies
to give him this inferior degree of Worship, and thereby teaches us, that no
degree of Religious Worship must be given to any Being, but the Supreme God.

And because Mankind were very apt to worship inferior Demons, as believing
them to have the care of this lower World, and that it was in their power to do
great good to them, to answer their Prayers, and to mediate for them with the
Superior Deities, or with the Supreme God, if they believed one Supreme, which
appears to be a received Notion among them: to prevent this kind of Idolatry,
God advances his own Son to be the universal Mediator, and the Supreme and
Sovereign Lord of the World; that all Mankind should make their Addresses and
Applications to him, and offer up their Prayers only in his Name; that in him
they should find acceptance, and in no other name. Which was the most effectual
way to put an end to the Worship of all inferior Deities, and Creature-Patrons
and Advocates; for when we are assured, that no other Being can Mediate for us
with effect and power, but only Christ, it is natural to Worship no other
Mediator but him, who being the eternal Son of God, may be worshipped without
danger of Idolatry. Thus St. Paul tells us, That though the Heathen world had
Gods many and Lords many, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6.
yet to us there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ: One
Supreme and Sovereign Deity, and one Mediator between God and men.

Now this being so apparently one end of Christ's coming into the World to
Suppress the Idolatry of Creature-Worship, and to confine all Religious worship
to one Supreme Being, in opposition to the many Gods of the Heathens, and to
teach us to make our Applications to this one God by one Mediator, in
opposition to the worship of inferior Deities; can any man imagine, that the
worship of Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, can be any part of the
Christian Religion? For how dear soever they are to God, they are but his
Creatures, and if Sovereign Princes will not receive their greatest Favorites
into their Throne, much less will God.

If God under the Gospel dispensation has taken care to prevent the Worship of
inferior Beings, by appointing his own Son to be our only Mediator and
Advocate, can we imagine, that he ever intended we should offer up our Prayers
to other Mediators? If he had liked the Mediation of Creatures, would he have
given his own Son to be our Priest and our Mediator? Whatever fair pretenses
may be made for this, it apparently contradicts the Gospel Dispensation; for if
we must own but one God, he alone must be worshipped; if we have but one
Mediator, we must offer up our Prayers only in his Name and Intercession. The
Religious Worship of Creatures is Idolatry, and if God intended to root
Idolatry out of the World, by the Gospel of Christ, he could never intend to
set up the Worship of Saints, and the Virgin Mary, which though it have not all
the aggravations of Pagan Idolatry, yet is Creature-worship.

Thus we know, how fond the Heathens were of material Images and Pictures, to
represent their Gods as visibly present with them; and to receive Religious
Worship in their stead: not that they did believe their Gods to be Corporeal,
or that their Corporeal Images were proper Likenesses of their Gods, in which a
late Author places the whole of Idolatry, which I confess was agreeable enough
to his design, to find out such a Notion of Idolatry, as it may be no Persons
in the World were ever guilty of, and then he might excuse, whom he pleased
from Idolatry: But the Heathens were not such great Sots, as this account makes
them, as the Learned Founder of all Anti-Catholick, Dr. Stillin. Defense of the
Discourse concerning Idolatry.
and Antichristian Principles (as this Author is pleased to style a very great
man, whose Name will be Venerable to future Ages) has abundantly proved. But
they wanted some material Representations of their Gods, in which they might as
it were see them present, and offer up their Petitions to them, and court them
with some visible and sensible Honors. Now to cure this Idolatry, though God
would not allow any Images or Pictures for Worship, yet by the Law of Moses he
appoints them to build an House or Temple for himself, where he would dwell
among them, and place the Symbols of his Presence; there was the Mercy-seat,
and the Cherubims covering the Mercy-seat, and there God promised Moses to meet
with him, and to commune with him from between the two Cherubims, which are
upon the ark of the testimony. 25 Exodus 22.
Now this was a Symbolical Representation of God's Throne in Heaven, where he
is surrounded with Angels, as we know, the Holy of Holies itself was a Figure
of Heaven; and therefore the Jews, when they were absent from the Temple,
prayed toward it, and in the Temple (as is thought) toward the Mercy-seat, as
the place of God's peculiar Residence; as now when we pray, we lift up our eyes
and hands to Heaven, where God dwells: So that under the Law God had a peculiar
place for Worship, and peculiar Symbols of his Presence, but no Images to
represent his Person, or to be the Objects of Worship: I know some Roman
Doctors would fain prove the Cherubims to have been the Objects of Worship, and
which is more wonderful, a late Bishop of the Church of England has taken some
pains to prove the same, and thereby to justify the Worship of Images in the
Church of Rome; Reasons for abrogating the Test, p. 124, etc.
and before I proceed, I shall briefly Examine what he has said in this Cause.

One would a little wonder, who reads the Second Commandment, which so severely
forbids the Worship of Images, that God himself should set up Images in his own
Temple as the Objects of Worship; and a modest man would have been a little
cautious, how he had imputed such a thing to God, which is so direct a
contradiction to his own Laws. That the Cherubims were Statues or Images,
whatever their particular Form was, I agree with our Author, and that is the
only thing I agree with him in: For,

1. That they were Sacred Images set up by God himself, in the place of his own
Worship, Ibid. p. 127.
I deny. For the Holy of Holies, where the Ark was placed, and the Mercy-seat
over the Ark, and the Cherubims at the two ends spreading their Wings, and
covering the Mercy-seat, was not the place of Worship, but the place of God's
Presence. The place of Worship is the place wherein men worship God; now it is
sufficiently known, that none of the Jews were permitted to go into the Holy of
Holies, nor so much as to look into it, and therefore it could not be the place
of their Worship: the Holy of Holies was the Figure of Heaven, and therefore
could be no more the place of Worship to the Jews, than Heaven now is to us,
while we dwell on Earth. The High Priest indeed entered into the Holy of Holies
once a year, with the Blood of the Sacrifice, 9 Heb. 21, ^2.
which was a Type of Christ's entering into Heaven with his own Blood, and yet
the Priest went thither not to Worship, but to make an Atonement; which I take
to be two very different things; however if you will call this Worship, it has
no relation to any Worship on Earth, but to what is done by Christ in Heaven,
of whom the High Priest was a Type. And this, I think, is a demonstration, that
the placing of Cherubims to cover the Mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies, does
not prove the lawful use of Images in Temples or Churches, or in the Worship of
God on Earth; if it proves any thing, it must prove the Worship of God by
Images in Heaven, of which the Holy of Holies was a Figure; and if any man can
be so foolish as to imagine that, let them make what they please of it, so they
do but excuse us from worshipping God by Images on Earth.

2. That these Cherubims were the most solemn and sacred part of the Jewish
Religion; that nothing is more remarkable in all the old Testament, than the
honor done to the Cherubims, that an outward worship was given to these
Images, as Symbols of the Divine presence, that the High Priest adored these
Cherubims once a year, as this Author asserts, I utterly deny; and he has not
given us one word to prove it.

For the Cherubims were so far from being the most solemn and sacred part of
the Jewish Religion, that they were no part at all of it, if by Religion he
means Worship; for there was no regard at all had to the Cherubims in the
Jewish Worship; and it is so far from being remarkable in the Old Testament,
that there is not the least footstep or intimation of any honor at all done to
the Cherubims: There is nothing in Scripture concerning them, but the command
to make them, and place them at the two ends of the Mercy-Seat; and that God is
said to dwell between the Cherubims, and to give forth his Oracles and
Responses from that place: but I desire to learn, where the Jews are commanded
to direct their Worship to or toward the Cherubims? where the High Priest is
commanded to adore the Cherubims once a year? or what Protestant grants he did
so, as this Author insinuates?

He supposes the Cherubims to have been the Symbols of Gods presence, and his
representations, P. 130.
and that the Jews directed their worship to them as such, and that is to
worship God by Images, or to give the same Signs of Reverence to his
Representations, as to himself: but how does it appear, that the Cherubims were
the Symbols of Gods presence? God indeed is said to sit between the Cherubims,
and he promised Moses to commune with him from between the Cherubims, but the
Cherubims were no Symbols of Gods presence, much less a representation of him:
if any thing was the Symbolical presence of God, it was the Mercy Seat, which
was a kind of Figurative Throne, or Chair of State; but the Cherubims were only
Symbolical representations of those Angels, who attend and encompass Gods
Throne in Heaven, and were no more representations of God, or Symbols of his
presence, then some great Ministers of State are of the King; as this Author
himself acknowledges, when he makes the four beasts in the Revelations ( Rev.
4.6, 7. Page 127.
) which stood round about the Throne, to be an allusion to the representation
of the immediate Divine Presence in the Ark by the Cherubims; if he had said to
the Cherubims covering the Mercy Seat, which was his Figurative Throne, and
where he was invisibly present, without any visible Figures or Symbols of his
presence, he had said right: for the Cherubims which covered the Mercy Seat,
were no more Symbols of Gods Presence, than the four Beasts, which stood before
the Throne, are the presence of God; or then some great Courtiers or Ministers
of State, who attend the King, are the presence of the King; They attend the
King, where ever he is, and so may be some sign of his presence, but are not a
symbolical presence, as a Chair of State is. But it seems our Author imagined,
that the Cherubims were such Symbols of Gods presence, and such representations
of him, as Images were of the Pagan Gods, and therefore might be worshipped
with the same signs of reverence, as God himself was; according to Thomas
Aquinas's Rule, that the Image must be worshipped with the same Worship, which
is due to the Proto-type, or that Being whose Image it is, which is such old
Popery, as Monsieur De Meaux, and the Representer cry shame of; well, But how
does he prove, that any Worship was directed to these Cherubims? I can find no
proof he offers for it, but David's Exhortation (as he calls it) to the
People,(...) Page 130.
to honor the Ark (he should have said worship) (...), bow down to, or worship
his Footstool, for it, or he, is holy. Now suppose this did relate to the Ark,
What is that to the Cherubims? When but four Pages before, he tells us, that
the Ark is called God's Footstool, and the Cherubims his Throne; How then does
David's Exhortation to worship the Ark, which is God's Footstool, prove that
all their Worship, must be directed to the Cherubims, which are his Throne? It
is pity, that great Wits have but short Memories.

And yet I fancy, our Author would have been much troubled to prove the Ark to
be meant by God's Footstool; for the Ark was in the Holy of Holies, which was a
figure of Heaven; and neither the Heaven, nor any thing in it, but the Earth,
is in Scripture called God's Footstool; and the Psalmist expressly applies it
to Zion, and to the Holy Hill, which, I will not prove, 99 Psalm 2, 9.
was not the Ark.

And this I suppose is a sufficient confutation of his Exposition of the words,
To bow down to, or worship his footstool; for I believe he did not think that
Mount Zion, or the Holy Hill, was the object of worship, or the symbol of God's
presence; but there God was present, and that was reason enough to worship at
his footstool, and at his holy hill; as our English Translation reads it.

But now suppose the Jews were to direct their Worship toward the Mercy-seat,
which was covered with the Cherubims, where God had promised to be present; how
are the Cherubims concerned in this Worship? The worship was paid only to God,
though directed to God, as peculiarly present at that place; which is no more,
than to lift up our Eyes and Hands to Heaven, where the Throne of God is, when
we pray to him: I grant, that bowing to, and bowing toward any thing, as the
Object of Worship, is the very same, as this Author observes; and therefore had
the Jews either bowed to or toward the Cherubims, as the Objects of their
Worship, as the Papists bow to or toward their Images, they had been equally
guilty of Idolatry, and the breach of the second Commandment; but when bowing
To signifies bowing to an object of Worship, and bowing toward signifies
bowing to this Object of Worship, only toward such a place, where he is
peculiarly present, this makes a great difference; and this was all the Jews
did at most, if they did that; they bowed to God toward the Mercy-seat, where
he dwelt, without any regard to the Cherubims or Mercy-seat, as the Object of
Worship, which was as invisible to the Jews then, as the Throne of God and the
Angels in Heaven are now to us; and we may as well say, that those who lift up
their eyes and their hands to Heaven, when they pray to God, worship the
Angels, who incircle his Throne, because they know that the Angels are there;
as say, that the Jews worshipped their invisible Cherubims, because they knew
that the Cherubims were there: For is there any necessity that the Jews must
worship whatever they knew, was in the Holy of Holies, because they worshipped
God toward that place, any more than there is, that we must worship whatever
we know to be in Heaven, when we direct our Worship to God in Heaven?

Men, I grant, may worship an unseen Object, for so we all worship God, whom we
do not and cannot see; but it is a good argument still, that the Cherubims were
not intended by God for the Objects of Worship, because they were concealed
from the Peoples sight; for I believe the World never heard before of
worshipping invisible Images: The original intention of Images, is to have a
visible Object of Worship; for an invisible Image can affect us no more than an
invisible God; and if our Author had consulted all the Patrons of
Image Worship, whether Pagan or Popish, he would have found most of the reasons
they allege for this Worship to depend on sight, and therefore whatever he
thought, are all lost when a man shuts his eyes. A man who directs his worship
to an Image, may be an Idolater in the dark, and with his eyes shut; but as
blind as Idolaters are, there never had been any Image Worship, had their
Images been as invisible as their Gods; and therefore sight has more to do in
this matter, than our Author was aware of.

But it seems the High Priest once a Year did see these Cherubims, and adore
and worship them. But this is another mistake: for the Jews did believe, that
the High Priest never saw the Cherubims or Mercy-seat, even when he went once a
Year into the Holy of Holies; and they have great reason for what they say,
since God expressly commanded, That when he went into the Holy of Holies, he
should take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before
the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within
the veil: And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the
cloud of the incense may cover the mercy-seat, that is upon the testimony, that
he die not, 16. Levit. 12, 13. which shows that the Cherubims and Mercy-seat
were to be covered with a Cloud of Incense, and to become as invisible to the
High Priest within the Veil, as to the People without it.

But suppose the High Priest did see the Cherubims, when he entered within the
Veil, I have one plain Argument to prove that he did not worship them, not only
because no act of Worship was commanded him when he went into the Holy Place,
but because as the Holy of Holies was the figure of Heaven, and the Cherubims
the types of Angels, who stand about the Throne of God; so the High Priest
entering into the Holy of Holies, was the type of Christ ascending into Heaven
with his own Blood; and therefore the High Priest must do nothing in the Holy
of Holies, but what was a proper figure and type of what Christ does in Heaven:
and then he must no more worship the Cherubims, which covered the Mercy-seat,
or the Typical Throne of God, than Christ himself, when he ascended to Heaven,
was to worship the Angels, who stand about the Throne.

So that notwithstanding God's command to make two Cherubims, and to place them
at the two ends of the Mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies, all Image Worship was
strictly forbid by the Law of Moses; and God has provided the most effectual
remedy against it by the Incarnation of his Son: Mankind have been always fond
of some visible Deity, and because God cannot be seen, they have gratified
their Superstition by making some visible Images and Representations of an
invisible God: now to take them off from mean corporeal Images and
Representations, which are both a dishonor to the Divine Nature, and debase
the minds of men, God has given us a visible Image of Himself, has clothed his
own eternal Son with Humane Nature, who is the brightness of his Father's
glory, and the express image of his person, 1. Hebr. 3. And therefore St. John
tells us, That the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth, 1 John 14. And for this reason when Philip was desirous to see the
Father, Show us the Father and it suffices; Christ tells him, that the Father
is to be seen only in the Son, who is his visible Image and Glory; Jesus says
unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not seen me
Philip? He that has seen me, has seen the Father, and how say thou then,
Show us the Father? 14 John 8, 9. This was one end of Christ's Incarnation,
that we might have a visible Deity, a God Incarnate to represent the Father to
us, who is the living and visible Image of God; and there could not be a more
effectual way to make men despise all dead material Representations of God,
than to have God visibly represented to us in our own Nature.

It is true, Christ is not visible to us now on earth, but he is visible in
Heaven, and we know, he is the only visible Image of God, and that is enough to
teach us, that we must make and adore no other. He is as visible to us in
Heaven, as the Mercy Seat in the Holy of Holies was to the Jews, and is that
true propitiatory of which the mercy seat was a Type and Figure, 3 Romans 25. Him
has God set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood(...) the
Mercy-seat, as that word is used, 9 Heb. 5. He is the natural Image of God, and
his Mercy-seat, or Presence and Throne of Grace, he is his visible Image, though
he cannot be seen by us, for the Typical Mercy Seat in the Holy of Holies, did
praefigure, that his residence should be in Heaven, and therefore invisible to
us on earth, but there we may see him by Faith, and there he will receive our
Prayers, and present them to his Father.

Now then to sum up this Argument: since it was one main design of Christ's
appearance, to root all the remains of Idolatrous Worship out of the world, is
it credible, that the Worship of Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary; the
worship of Images and Relics, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome,
should be any part of Christian Worship, or allowed by the Gospel of our
Savior? If Creature-worship, and Image Worship were so offensive to God, here
is the Worship of Creatures, and Images still, and therefore all the visible
Idolatry, that ever was practiced in the world before: All that they can
pretend is, that they have better Notions of the Worship of Saints, and Angels,
and Images, than the Heathens had: but whether they have or no, will be hard to
prove: The Pagan Philosophers made the same Apologies for their Worship of
Angels, and Demons, and Images, which the Learned Papists now make, and
whether unlearned Papists have not as gross Notions about their Worship of
Saints and Images, as the unlearned Heathens had, is very doubtful, and has
been very much suspected by learned Romanists themselves: But suppose there
were some difference upon this account, can we think, that Christ, who came to
root out all Idolatrous Worship, intended to set up a new kind of
Creature-Worship and Image Worship in greater pomp and glory than ever, and
only to rectify men's Opinions about it? Suppose the Idolatry of
Creature-Worship and Image Worship, does consist only in men's gross Notions
about it; yet we see under the Law to prevent and cure this, God did not go
about to rectify their Opinions of these things, but absolutely forbids the
Worship of all Images, and of any other Being but himself, which methinks he
would not have done, had there been such great advantages in the Worship of
Saints, and Angels, and Images, as the Romanists pretend: and when God in the
Law of Moses forbad all Creature and Image Worship, can we think, that Christ
who came to make a more perfect Reformation, should only change their Country
Gods into Saints and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, and give new names to their
Statues and Images? Which whatever he had taught about it, instead of curing
Idolatry, had been to set up that same kind of Worship, which the Law of Moses
absolutely forbad, and condemned as Idolatry.

When God to cure the Idolatrous Worship of inferior Demons, as their
Mediators and Advocates with the Supreme God, sent his own Son into the World
to be our Mediator, can we think, that he intended after this, that we should
worship Angels, and Saints, and the Virgin Mary, as our Mediators? When God has
given us a visible Image of himself, his Eternal and Incarnate Son, whom we may
Worship and Adore, did he still intend, that we should worship material and
sensible Images of Wood or Stone? By the Incarnation of his own Son, God did
indeed take care to rectify men's mistakes about Creature-Worship, and to cut
off all pretenses for it: Those who pleaded that vast distance between God and
men, and how unfit it was, that Sinners should make their immediate approaches
to the Supreme God, and therefore worshipped inferior Demons as middle Beings
between God and man, have now no pretense for this, since God has appointed his
own Son to be our Mediator: Those who worshipped Images as the visible
Representations of an invisible God, have now a visible Object of Worship, a
God Incarnate, a God in the nature and likeness of a Man; and though we do not
now see him, yet we have the notion of a visible God and Mediator to whom we
can direct our Prayers in Heaven, which is satisfaction enough even to men of
more gross and material Imaginations, without any artificial and senseless
Representations of the Deity: And was all this done, that men might worship
Creatures and Images without Idolatry? or rather was it not done to cure men's
inclinations to commit Idolatry with Creatures and Images? Whoever believes
that the Gospel of our Savior was intended as a Remedy against Idolatry, can
never be persuaded, that it allows the Worship of Saints and Images; which if
it be not Idolatry, is so exactly like it in all external appearance, that the
allowance of it does not look like a proper cure for Idolatry.

SECT. II. Concerning the great Love of GOD to Mankind, and the Assurances of
Pardon and Forgiveness which the Gospel gives to all Penitent Sinners; which
are much weakened by some Popish Doctrines.
2. THe Gospel of Christ was intended to give the highest demonstration of
God's Love to Mankind, and the greatest possible Security to all humble
penitent Sinners, of the Forgiveness of their Sins: Hence the Gospel is called
the Grace of God, and the Gospel of Grace, as being a Dispensation of Love and
Goodness; and therefore whatever lessens and disparages the Gospel Grace, can
be no Gospel-Doctrine. As to consider this particularly.

The Gospel magnifies the Grace of God in giving his own Son for us: God so
loved the world; that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, 3 John 16. In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 4.9, 10. And St. Paul assures us, that this is such a glorious
manifestation of God's love, as will not suffer us to doubt of any other
expressions of his Goodness: He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? 8 Romans
32. So that the Gospel of our Savior gives us much higher demonstrations of
God's love and goodness, than either the Light of Nature, or the Law of Moses
did. Love is the prevailing Attribute of God under the Gospel Dispensation, For
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1
John 4.16.

Thus the Gospel of Christ gives a humble Penitent as great assurance of
Pardon, as his own guilty Fears can desire; for Repentance and Remission of
Sins is preached in the Name of Christ: He has expiated our Sins by the
Sacrifice of his Death, God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us, much more then being justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him; for if when we were enemies we
were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we
shall be saved by his life, 5 Romans 8, 9, 10. For as he was delivered for our
Offenses, so he was raised again for our Justification; And him has God
exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance unto Israel, and
remission of sins. 1 John 2.1, 2.
So that if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is able to save all them to the uttermost, that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, 7 Heb. 25. These are
the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and therefore nothing can be a
Gospel-Doctrine, which weake^s or overthrows them. Let us then examine the
Popish Doctrine of Purgatory, and the Invocation of Saints and Angels as our
Mediators with God, and see how they are reconcilable with the Gospel-notion
of God's love, and that security it gives us of Pardon through the Merits and
Intercession of Christ.

1. Let us consider the Doctrine of Purgatory, which is but the outward Court
or Region of Hell, where the Punishments are as severe as in Hell itself, only
of a less continuance; and yet as short as they are, they may last many
hundred, nay thousand Years, unless their Friends and the Priests be more
merciful to them, or they themselves have taken care before Death to pay the
Price of their Redemption. This is a barbarous Doctrine, and so inconsistent
with that mighty Love of God to penitent Sinners, as it is represented in the
Gospel of Christ, that it is not reconcilable with any notion of Love and
Goodness at all; you may call it Justice, you may call it Vengeance, if you
please, but Love it is not, or if it be, it is such a Love as no man can
distinguish from Hatred: for my part I declare, I do not desire to be thus
loved; I should rather choose to fall into nothing, when I die, than to endure a
thousand Years torments to be happy for ever; for Humane Nature cannot bear the
Thoughts of that: And is this, that wonderful Love of God to Sinners, which is
so magnified in the Gospel, to torment those, who are Redeemed by the Blood of
Christ, some hundred or thousand Years in the Fire of Purgatory, which is not
cooler than the Fire of Hell?

The Light of Nature, I confess, never taught this, for Mankind never had any
Notion of such an outrageous Love; they always thought, that the Love of God
consisted in doing good, not in damning those, whom he loves, for so many Ages:
And if this be all the Discovery, the Gospel has made of the Love of God, we
have no great reason to glory in it. He who can believe, that God, who so loved
the World, as to give his only begotten Son for the Redemption of Sinners, will
torment a penitent Sinner so many Years in Purgatory, till he has either
endured the punishment of his Sins himself, or is released by the Charity of
his Friends, or the Masses of some Mercenary Priests, deserves to lie in
Purgatory, till he thinks more honorably of the divine goodness, and be
convinced, that it is no such extravagant commendation of the love of God, to
send penitent Sinners to Purgatory.

There are two extravagant Notions whereon the Doctrine of Purgatory is
founded, which overthrow all the natural Notions men have of Goodness, and
destroy all the hope and confidence of the most penitent Sinners in the
goodness of God. As,

1. That God may forgive Sins, and yet punish us for them; for no man can go
into Purgatory according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, whose Sins are
not already forgiven: but though his Sins are forgiven, he must make
satisfaction for that temporal punishment, which is due to them, either in this
World, or in Purgatory: Now how reconcilable these two are, to forgive, and to
punish, let all mankind judge. I believe, very few men think, they are
forgiven, when they are punished; for that which all men desire should be
forgiven them, is the punishment, they have deserved. What is it, men are
afraid of, when they have sinned? is it not, that they shall be punished for
it? What is it men desire, when they desire Pardon? is it not, that they may
not be punished? And is it any comfort to a Malefactor to be pardoned, and to
be hanged? Does any man boast of his love and kindness, or take any comfort in
it, who freely forgives him, but exacts the payment of the Debt, or the
punishment of his fault? And if this be so contrary to the very notion of
goodness and forgiveness among men, how comes it to be the notion of goodness
and forgiveness in God? How comes that to be love and goodness, which the
Sinner receives no benefit by? for love and goodness, I think, signifies to do
good; or if this be goodness, let those take comfort in it that can.

If it be said, that it is an Act of goodness to exchange the eternal
punishment of Hell, which is due to sin, into the Temporal punishment of
Purgatory, I grant, this is something, but only ask, whether it would not have
been a more perfect expression of love and goodness, to have remitted the
Temporal Punishment also of, it may be, some thousand years Torment in
Purgatory? whether this might not have been expected under a dispensation of
the most perfect love? and from that God, who sent his only begotten Son into
the World to save Sinners? Whether those sins are perfectly forgiven, which
shall be avenged, tho not with Eternal, yet with long Temporal Punishments in
the next World? Whether any man thinks himself perfectly forgiven, who is
punished very severely, though not absolutely according to his deserts? And
consequently, whether the Doctrine of Purgatory be not a very great diminution
of the Love of God, and the Grace of the Gospel? And whether that can be a true
Gospel Doctrine, which represents the Love of God, much less then the Love of a
kind and good man, who when he forgives the Injury, forgives the whole
Punishment of it? Nay, Whether that can be a Gospel Doctrine, which represents
the Love of God less than infinite? and I suppose an infinite Love may forgive
true Penitents the whole Punishment of their Sins; and then there is no need of
Purgatory.

2 ly. In Purgatory, God does not only punish those, whom he has pardoned, but
he punishes for no other reason, but punishment-sake. For thus the Roman
Doctors tell us, that the Souls in Purgatory, are in a state of Pardon, and in
a state of Perfect Grace; and they suffer the pains of Purgatory, not to purge
away any remains of Sin, or to purify and refine them, and make them more fit
for Heaven, but only to bear the punishment due to Sin, for which they had made
no satisfaction, while they lived. Now I dare boldly affirm, this is
irreconcilable with any degree of Love and Goodness: to make any Punishment
just, it must have respect to the guilt of sin, to make it an act of goodness,
it must be intended for the reformation of the sinner; but when sin is
pardoned, the guilt at least is taken away, and therefore such punishments can
have no relation to guilt; and when the sinner is in a perfect state of Grace,
and needs no amendment, such punishments can have no respect to the good and
reformation of the sinner, and therefore such punishments are neither just nor
good, and this is the exact notion of Purgatory; and methinks we should
consider, whether this agrees with that account the Gospel gives us of the love
and goodness of God: should a Prince have a Jayl of the same nature with
Purgatory, where for several years he torments those whom he pretends to have
pardoned, and who are grown very good men, and good Subjects, and need no
correction, or discipline, I believe all the World would laugh at those, who
should call this, love and goodness, pardon and mercy. Hell is very
reconcilable with the goodness of God, because it is prepared only for those,
who are the Objects of a just, a righteous Vengeance, and a very good God may
be very just; but Purgatory can never be reconciled with the superabundant
goodness of God to sinners, through Jesus Christ, unless men think it a great
kindness to suffer the pains of Hell for several Months, Years, or Ages for no
reason, which makes it either just or good to suffer them. So that a Popish
Purgatory is inconsistent with the belief of God's great Love and Goodness to
sinners, in Jesus Christ, and destroys the hope and confidence of sinners: for
if they may lie in Purgatory for some thousand years, as they may do,
notwithstanding the Love of God, and the Merits of Christ, if the Pope, or the
Priests, or their Money be not more merciful unto them, they have no great
reason to glory much in the Goodness of God, though they should go to Heaven at
last: so that our Protestant need not dispute much about Purgatory: let him
only ask a Popish Priest, How the Doctrine of Purgatory can be reconciled with
that stupendous Love of God declared to penitent sinners, in his Son Jesus
Christ? for it is a contradiction to the Notion of Goodness among men, to
inflict such terrible punishments in mere Grace and Love, even when the sin is
pardoned, and the sinner reconciled, and no longer in a state of Discipline and
Trial.

Secondly, The Doctrine of Purgatory destroys, or weakens, that Security the
Gospel has given Sinners of their Redemption from the Wrath of God, and the
just punishment of their Sins. One great Security, is the Love of God declared
to the World by our Lord Jesus Christ, but if the Love of God to penitent
Sinners, who are Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, be consistent with his
tormenting them in Purgatory so many thousand years, as you have already heard,
it will be a very hard thing to distinguish such Love from Wrath, and a Sinner,
who is afraid of so many thousand years punishment, can take no great comfort
in it: but besides this, the Doctrine of Purgatory destroys men's hope and
confidence in the Merits and Intercession of Christ, and in the express
promises of Pardon and Remission of Sins in his Name.

1. It destroys men's hopes in the Merits of Christ, and the atonement and
expiation of his Blood; For if the Blood of Christ does not deliver us from the
punishment of Sin, what security is this to a Sinner? Yes, you will say, Christ
has Redeemed us from Eternal, though not from Temporal Punishments, and therefore
penitent Sinners have this security by the expiation of Christ's Death, that
they shall not be eternally Damned: This I know the Church of Rome teaches; but
I desire to know, How any man can be satisfied from Scripture, that Christ by
his Death has delivered us from Eternal Punishments, if he have not delivered
us from Temporal Punishments of Sin in the next World? I thankfully
acknowledge, and it is the only hope I have, that the Gospel has given us
abundant assurance of the expiation and atonement made for Sin by the Blood of
Christ; but what I say is this, that if these Texts which prove our Redemption
by the Death of Christ, do not prove, that Christ has redeemed us from the
whole punishment due to Sin in the next World, they prove nothing, and then we
have not one place of Scripture to prove, that Christ by his Death has redeemed
us from Eternal Punishments; which is enough to make all Christians abhor the
Doctrine of Purgatory, if it destroy the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ.
As to show this briefly:

The hope and security of Sinners depends upon such Scripture expressions as
these: that Christ has died for our sins, that he has made atonement for sin,
that he is a propitiation through faith in his blood, that he has redeemed us
from the curse of the law^ being made a curse for us: that remission and
forgiveness of sins is preached in his name; that by him we are justified from
all those things, from which we could not be justified by the Law of Moses,
that being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ; that we are reconciled unto God, and saved from wrath by him. Now I
desire to know, Whether all these expressions signify, that for Christ's sake,
and through the atonement and expiation of his Blood, a penitent Sinner shall
be delivered from the punishment due to his sins? If they do not signify this,
how is a Sinner secured, that though his sins are pardoned, and he is
justified, and reconciled to God, and redeemed from the Curse of the Law, and
saved from Wrath, he shall not after all this be damned for his sins, since
^^^t is the punishment of sin, which it seems is not removed, when the sin is
pardoned, and the Sinner justified and reconciled to God? If these expressions
do not signify taking away the punishment of sin, I desire one Text of
Scripture to prove, that a Sinner, who is pardoned and justified, shall not
undergo the Eternal Punishment of his sins. If to be pardoned and justified,
etc. does signify to be delivered from the punishment of sin, I desire to
know, How a sinner, who is pardoned and justified, can be punished for his
sins? that is, How a sinner, who is released from the Punishment of his sins,
should be bound to suffer the punishment of his sins in Purgatory?

Our Roman Adversaries do indeed distinguish between the Temporal and Eternal
Punishment of Sin; the Eternal Punishment of Sin, they say, Christ has made
satisfaction for, and that is removed by his Death, that no penitent Sinner
shall be Eternally damned; but a Sinner must make satisfaction for the Temporal
punishment of Sin himself, either in this World, or in Purgatory: and
consequently that forgiveness of Sins, signifies the remission of the Eternal
Punishment of sin, but not of the Temporal: now I shall not put them to prove
this distinction from Scripture, which is a very unreasonable Task, because
there is nothing in Scripture about it; but yet I would gladly be secured, that
I shall be saved from Eternal Punishments; and therefore I would gladly know,
how forgiveness of Sins, and our Redemption from the Curse of the Law,
signifies our deliverance from Eternal Punishments, if they do not signify our
deliverance from the Punishment of our sins? And how they can signify our
deliverance from the punishment of our sins, if notwithstanding this we must
suffer the punishment of our sins in Purgatory? If they signify, that we shall
not be punished for our sins, then indeed they may signify, that we shall not
be Eternally Punished; but they cannot signify, that we shall not be Eternally
punished, unless they signify that we shall not be punished, and therefore not
in Purgatory neither; if that be the Punishment of sin. The truth is, this is a
very senceless distinction between the Temporal and Eternal Punishment of sin:
for I desire to know, Whether the Temporal Punishment be not the Punishment of
sin? be not the Curse of the Law? if it be, then forgiveness of sin, if it
remits the Punishment, remits the Temporal Punishment, for that is the
Punishment of sin; then our Redemption from the Curse of the Law, redeems us
from Purgatory, for that is the Curse of the Law too, if you add, and from
Death, for that is the Curse of the Law too, and yet those who are redeemed and
justified, die still; which shows the fallacy of this Argument, for it seems
Redemption from the Curse of the Law, does not signify our Redemption from the
whole Curse, for then a justified Person must not die, since bare dying is part
of the Curse. I answer, this had certainly been true, had not the necessity of
dying been expressly excepted out of this Redemption; for in Adam all die, and
it is appointed (by a Divine Decree) for all men once to die, and could they
show, where Purgatory is excepted too, then I would grant, that those who are
redeemed from the Curse of the Law might fall into Purgatory, if that be any
comfort to them: and yet the case is vastly different between Death and
Purgatory: for though Death be the Curse of the Law, yet we may be delivered
from Death as a Curse and Punishment, without being delivered from the
necessity of dying: and thus good men are redeemed from Death: for their Sins
are expiated and pardoned, and then the Sting of Death is gone; for the sting
of death is sin, and therefore when our Sins are pardoned, Death cannot sting
us, can do us no hurt; because it does not deliver us over to Punishment, but
transplants us into a more happy State. The fears of Death are conquered by the
promises of Immortal Life, and Death itself shall at the last day be swallowed
up in Victory, when our dead Bodies shall be raised immortal and glorious, so
that though good men still die, yet they are redeemed from the Curse of the Law,
from Death itself as a Curse and a Punishment. But the Popish Purgatory is a
place of Punishment, and nothing but Punishment; and therefore is not
reconcilable with the remission and forgiveness of sin.

Again I ask, Whether there are two kinds of Punishments due to sin, Temporal
and Eternal, of such a distinct nature and consideration, that the Promise of
forgiveness does not include both? Nay, that God cannot forgive both; that only
the Eternal Punishment can be forgiven, but the Temporal Punishment must be
satisfied for, or endured by the Sinner: if this were the case indeed, then I
would grant, the Promise of forgiveness could extend only to Eternal
Punishments, because God can forgive no other; and the forgiveness of Eternal
Punishment, does not include the forgiveness of the Temporal Punishment. But if
the Curse of the Law be Eternal Death, and all other Punishments, which can
properly be called the punishment of sin (for Correction and Discipline is not
the Wrath of God, and the Curse of the Law) are only parts of the Curse, and a
partial execution of it; if the only thing, that makes Sinners obnoxious to
Temporal Punishments is, that they are under the Sentence of Eternal Death,
which God may execute by what degrees he pleases; then to forgive Eternal
Punishment must include the forgiveness of Temporal Punishments, as parts or
branches of it. As suppose there were a Law, that no man should suffer any
Bodily Punishments, but such a Malefactor as is condemned to die, but when the
Sentence of Death is past upon him, it should be at the Prince's pleasure to
defer the Execution of this Sentence, as long as he pleased, and in the mean
time to inflict all other Punishments on him, whatever he pleased; in this Case
to Pardon the Sentence of Death, would deliver such a man from all other
Punishments too, which by the Law are due only to that man, who is under the
Sentence of Death: and in such a Constitution for any man to say, that the
Prince's Pardon extends only to Life, but does not excuse from Whipping and
Pilloring, and perpetual Imprisonment, would be to make the Pardon void, since
no man by the Law can suffer those other Punishments but he who is Condemned to
Die, and therefore he who is pardoned the Sentence of Death, in consequence of
that is pardoned all other Punishments too.

Thus it is here, the original Curse against sin was, in the day, that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, which by the Gospel of Christ is
expounded of Eternal Death, and there is no other threatening in all the Gospel
against sin, but Eternal Death; and therefore all other Punishments are
inflicted by Virtue of this Law, and consequently he who is delivered from this
Curse of the Law, from Eternal Punishments, is delivered from the whole
Punishment due to sin; unless they can find some other Law in the Gospel,
besides that which threatens Eternal Death, which obliges a Sinner to
Punishment.

Again, since they acknowledge, that Christ by his Death has delivered us from
Eternal Punishments, I do not think it worth the while to Dispute with them,
whether those Sufferings and Calamities, which good men are exposed to in this
World, may properly be called Punishments, or only Correction and Discipline;
but I desire to know, Why they call Purgatory, which is a place of Punishment
in the other World, a Temporal Punishment? for this is an abuse of the Language
of Scripture, which makes this World Temporal, and the next World Eternal, as
St. Paul expressly tells us; the things, which are seen, are temporal, but the
things, which are not seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18. And therefore Temporal
Punishments signify the Punishments in this World, but the unseen Punishments,
as well as the unseen Rewards, of the next World are Eternal: which is a
demonstration, that there is no Purgatory, unless it be Eternal, and then it is
but another Name for Hell, and therefore the State of the next World is called
either Life or Death, eternal life, or eternal death: those who believe in
Christ shall never die, 11 John 25, 26. Now I desire to know the difference
between Living, and Dying, and Perishing in the next World; for bad men do not
cease to be, nor loose all sense in the next World, no more than good men; and
therefore Life can only signify a state of Happiness, and Death a state of
Misery, which is much worse than not being: now if good men must not perish,
must not die, but live, in the next World, they must not go to Purgatory, which
as much perishing, as much dying, as Hell, though not so long; but if they must
never die, never perish, they must never suffer the pains of Purgatory, which
is a dying and perishing, that is, a state of Torment and Misery, while they
continue there.

Let us then see how a Papist, who believes a Purgatory-fire in the next World,
wherein he shall be tormented (God knows how long!) for his Sins, can prove
that a penitent Sinner shall not be eternally damned: Oh! says he, Christ has
died for our Sins, and made atonement for them, and we are pardoned and
justified through Faith in his Blood; and what then, may we not still be
punished for our Sins? If not, what becomes of Purgatory? If we may, prove,
that we shall not be eternally damned for Sin, which is the proper punishment
of it: For if to be pardoned and justified, signify to be delivered from
punishment, it signifies our deliverance from the whole punishment of Sin,
since the Scripture does not limit it: if they do not signify our deliverance
from punishment, then we may be eternally punished for Sin, though we are
pardoned and justified.

But we are redeemed from the curse of the Law, and saved from wrath. But if
such a man may go to Purgatory, why not to Hell? Or if the Curse of the Law,
and the Wrath of God be in Hell, but not in Purgatory, though the torments are
equally great, why may not he lie for ever in Purgatory, as well as a thousand
Years, with this comfort, that though he be infinitely tormented, yet it is not
the curse of the Law, nor the wrath of God.

Well, but Christ has promised, That those who believe in him, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life: And that proves that the pains of Purgatory
cannot be for ever, for then Christ could not make good his promise of
bestowing everlasting Life on them: so I confess one would think, and so I
should have thought also, that when Christ promised, that such Believers should
not perish, and should never die, that he meant, such men should not go to
Purgatory in the next World; but if falling into Purgatory be not perishing,
and not dying, it may be everlasting life too. for ought I know, and then the
pains of Purgatory may be eternal.

Whoever would not forfeit all the assurance the Gospel has given us, of our
Redemption from Hell, and a glorious Immortality, must reject the Popish
Doctrine of Purgatory, as a flat contradiction to all the gracious Promises of
the Gospel: for Hell, or an eternal Purgatory, is as reconcilable with the
Promises of Forgiveness and immortal Life, as the Popish Purgatory is.

2. This Doctrine of Purgatory destroys our hope and confidence in the
Mediation and Intercession of Christ, and that for these two plain reasons: 1.
As it represents him less merciful and compassionate; And 2. less powerful,
than the wants and necessities of Sinners require him to be. For

I. After all that is said in Scripture of his being so merciful and
compassionate an High Priest, a Sinner who hears what is told him of Purgatory,
could wish him a great deal more compassionate than he is: for it is no great
sign of tenderness and compassion to leave his Members in Purgatory-fire, which
burns as hot as Hell. Could I believe this of our Savior, I should have very
mean thoughts of his kindness, and not much rely on him for any thing: We
should think him far enough from being a merciful and compassionate Prince, who
can be contented to torture his Subjects for a year together; and it is a
wonderful thing to me, that when a merciful man cannot see a Beast in torment
without relieving it, it should be thought consistent with the mercy and
compassion of our Savior, to see us burn in Purgatory for Years and Ages. To
be sure this destroys all our hope in him in this World; for why should we
think, he will be concerned what we suffer here, who can contentedly let us lie
in Purgatory, to which all the calamities and sufferings of this life are mere
trifles? O Blessed and Merciful JESU! pardon such Blasphemies as these. For

II. If he be compassionate, he must want Power to help us; and that destroys
the hope of Sinners as much as want of Compassion. It must be want of Will or
Power in him, that he does not deliver us from Purgatory as well as Hell: and
if he want Power to deliver us from Purgatory, for my part I should more
question his Power to deliver from Hell, for that is the harder of the two: if
his Blood could not expiate for the Temporal punishment of Sin, which the
Merits of some Supererogating Saints, or the Pope's Indulgence, or the Priests
Masses can redeem us from, how could it make expiation for Eternal punishment?
If his Interest in the Court of Heaven will not do the less, how can it do the
great? There is no Doctrine more irreconcilable with the perfect Love and
Goodness of God, and the Merits and Intercession of our Savior, which are the
Fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel, which is a Dispensation of Love and Grace,
than this of Purgatory, and therefore we may safely conclude, that this is no
Gospel-Doctrine.

2. Let us now examine the Doctrine of Invocation of Saints and Angels as our
Mediators with God, and see whether it does not disparage the Grace of the
Gospel, the Love of God, and of our Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ, to
penitent Sinners. Now a very few words will decide this matter.

1. With respect to God; now can that man believe, that God is so very gracious
to Sinners for the sake of Christ, who seeks to so many Advocates and Mediators
to interceed for him with God. To imagine that we want any Mediator to God, but
only our High Priest, who mediates in Virtue of his Sacrifice, is a reproach to
the Divine Goodness. The Wisdom and Justice of God may require a Sacrifice, and
a High Priest to make Atonement for Sin, but Infinite Goodness needs not any
Entreaties, and mere Intercessions to move him. A truly good man, who knows a
proper Object of his kindness, needs not to be asked to do good. The use of
such Advocates and Mediators among men, is either to recommend an unknown
Person to the favor of the Prince, or fairly to represent his cause to him,
which has been misrepresented by others, or to procure favor for an
undeserving person, or among equal Competitors, to procure some one to be
preferred; this is all the use of Intercession among men* for a good, and wise,
and just Prience, will do what is wise, and just, and good, not only without
Intercessors, but against all Intercessions to the contrary. Now I suppose no
man will say, that God wants Mediators and Advocates upon any of these
accounts; for he knows every man, understands perfectly his cause, will never
be persuaded by any Intercessions to show kindness to unfit Objects, that is,
to impenitent Sinners; and his Goodness is so unconfined, and so extensive to
all, that there can never be any competition for his Favor; and therefore to
multiply Advocates and Mediators to God, must argue a great distrust of his
Mercy and Goodness, which a kind and good Prince would take very ill of us.

God indeed has commanded us to Pray for one another in this World, as he has
to pray for our selves; but this is not by way of Interest and Merit, as the
Church of Rome pretends, the Saints in Heaven pray for us, but by humble
Supplications, which is very reconcilable with the goodness of God, to make
Prayer a necessary condition of granting Pardon and other Blessings we want:
but as the use of Prayer for our selves, is not to move God merely by our
importunities to do good to us, for we must pray in Faith, that is, with a
humble assurance and confidence that God will hear us, which includes a firm
Belief of his readiness to grant, what we pray for; so neither are our Prayers
for others to move God by our interest in him, that is, they are not the
Intercessions of Favorites, but of humble Supplicants.

There was great reason why God should make Prayer the condition of our
receiving, though he wants not our importunities to move him, because there are
a great many excellent Virtues exercised in Prayer; such as great sorrow for
Sin, great humility of Mind, faith in God's Promises, the acts of Love, and
affiance and trust in God, and a constant dependence on his Grace and
Providence for all spiritual and temporal Blessings: and there was great reason
why he should command us to pray for others, though he wants none of our
Intercessions for them; because it is a mutual exercise of Charity, of Love to
our Brethren, and Forgiveness to our Enemies, and is a mighty obligation to do
all other acts of kindness; for those who know it to be their Duty to pray for
one another, will think themselves bound to do good to one another also: This
becomes those, who live and converse together in this World, because it is a
great instrument of Virtue, and that is a reason why God should encourage the
exercise of it by promising to hear our Prayers for each other.

But as far as mere goodness is concerned, the Gospel represents God as so very
good to Sinners, that there is no need of any Intercessor for them: For God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life, 3 John 16. This was an act of
goodness antecedent to the Incarnation and Death of Christ, and the highest act
of goodness that God could manifest to the World, and therefore secures us of
God's love and goodness to Sinners without a Mediator and Advocate; for that
love which provided a Mediator for us, was without one, and proves, that it was
not for want of goodness, or that he needed entreaties, that he gave his Son to
be our mediator. And therefore hence S. Paul proves, how ready God is to bestow
all good things on us: He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things, 8 Romans 32.
And our Savior himself represents the goodness of God, by the tenderness and
compassion of an earthly Parent: If ye then being evil (that is, less good than
God is) know how to give good things to your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him, 7 Matthew. 11. especially
in the Parable of the Prodigal, where our Savior describes the goodness of God
to Sinners, by that passion and joy wherewith the Father received his returning
Prodigal; nay, he assures his Disciples, that there was no need of his own
Intercession to incline God to be good and kind to them: At that day ye shall
ask in my name, and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you,
for the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and believed that
I came out from God, 16 John 26, 27. God is so infinitely good, that he needs
no Mediators or Intercessors to incline him to all acts of goodness; but as he
is the wise and just Governor of the World, he requires a Sacrifice for Sin,
and a High Priest to make Atonement for it, and to interceed in virtue of the
Sacrifice. Such a Mediator Christ is, who alone is both our Sacrifice and our
Priest, and therefore our only Mediator; not to incline God to be good, for
that he was before, infinitely good, or else he had not given his Son to be our
Sacrifice and our High Priest, but to make Atonement for our Sins, and thereby
to reconcile the exercise of God's goodness with his wisdom and justice in
Governing the World. Such a Mediator and High Priest does not lessen the Divine
goodness, for the intention of his Mediation is not to make God good and kind,
but to make it wise and just in God to do good to Sinners; but all other
Mediators in Heaven, whose business it is by Prayers, and Entreaties, and
Interest, and Favor to incline God to be good to such particular persons as
they interceed for, is a real disparagement to the Divine goodness; as if he
would not be good unless he were conquered by Entreaties, and over ruled by the
prevailing Intercessions of some great Favorites: and yet such Mediators as
these the Saints, and Angels, and Virgin Mary are, if they be Mediators at all;
and therefore to pray to them as to our Mediators, argues such a diffidence and
distrust of God's goodness, as does not become the Gospel of our Savior; this
can be no Gospel Doctrine, because it is irreconcilable with that account the
Gospel gives us of the Love of God.

2. Nor is it less injurious to the Love of our Savior, to fly to the Prayers
and Aids of Saints, and Angels, and the Virgin Mary her self. I shall not now
dispute, what encroachment this is upon the Mediatorship of Christ, to make our
Addresses and Applications to other Mediators; but whoever does so, must either
think that Christ wants Interest with God, without the joint Intercession of
Saints and Angels, or that he wants Kindness to us, and either will not
interceed for us at all, or will not do it unless he be prevailed with by the
Intercession of Saints, or the Entreaties or the Commands of his Mother. I
suppose they will not pretend, that he wants power to do, what we ask of him,
when he himself has assured us, That whatsoever we ask of the Father in his
name, he will give it us, 15 John 16. 16 John 23, 24. Does our Mediator then
need other Mediators to interceed with him for us? What! he who became man for
us? who lived a laborious and afflicted life for us? who loved us so, as to
give himself for us? who is a merciful and compassionate High Priest, and
touched with a feeling of our infirmities, being in all things tempted like as
we are, yet without Sin?

What a change does this make in the whole Gospel? Had not the Church of Rome
found out some better security for Sinners, in the Mediation of Saints, and
Angels, and the Blessed Virgin, what a hopeless State had we been in? For all
that the Gospel tells us is, That God in great love and goodness to Sinners,
sent his Son to be our Savior; and that we might have the greater assurance of
his pity and compassion for us, he became Man, Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of
our Bone; and not only so, but submitted to all the weaknesses and infirmities
of our Natures, to the greatest shame and reproach, to the sharpest pains, and
the most infamous Death, that he might the better know, what our temptations
and sufferings are in this World, and might be more sensibly affected with our
condition in all our sufferings: This one would have thought, should have given
the greatest security to Sinners of his readiness to help them, who did and
suffered all this for them; and this is the only security which the Gospel of
our Savior gives us. But it seems Christ is not merciful and pitiful enough;
his Virgin Mother has softer and tenderer passions, and such an interest in
him, or authority over him, in the right of a Mother, as some of them have not
without Blasphemy represented it, that she can have any thing of him; and thus
they suppose the other Saints to be much more pitiful than Christ is, and to
have interest enough to protect their Supplicants, or else it is not imaginable
why they should need or desire any other Advocates. Now let any man who
understands the Gospel, and finds there how the love of Christ is magnified,
not only in dying for us, but in his being a merciful and compassionate
High Priest, that this is the only hope of Sinners, That if any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who is also a
propitiation for our sins, think the Invocation of Saints, as our Patrons and
Advocates, to be a Gospel-Doctrine, if he can.

SECT. III. Concerning the Nature of Christian Worship.
3. ANother manifest design of the Gospel, was to reform the Worship of God,
not only by extirpating Idolatry, but by purging it from all Pagan and Jewish
Superstitions, and to appoint such a Worship as is more agreeable to the Nature
both of God and Man. And whoever will take the pains to compare the Worship of
the Church of Rome, with that Worship which our Savior has prescribed in the
Gospel, will easily discover how unlike they are. Let us then consider what
Christ has reformed in the Worship of God, and what kind of Worship he has
prescribed to his Disciples.

I. What he has Reformed in the Worship of God; and that may be comprehended in
one word, he has taken away all that was merely External in Religion. By which
I do not mean that our Savior has forbid all External Acts of Worship, or such
External Circumstances as are necessary to the decent and orderly performance
of Religious Worship, which the nature and reason of things requires under all
Dispensations of Religion; but that he has laid aside all such External Rites
as either were, or were thought to be in themselves Acts of Religion, and to
render such Worshippers very acceptable to God. A great many such Rites there
were in the Pagan Religion, and a great many in the Jewish Worship of God's own
Institution, and a great many more which the Tradition of the Elders, and the
Superstition of the Scribes and Pharisees had introduced.

We know the Jewish Worship consisted of External Rites; in their Temple, and
Altars, and Sacrifices, and Washings, and Purifications, in New Moons and
Sabbaths, and Festival Solemnities, in Consecrated Garments and Vessels for the
Service of the Temple, in distinction of Meats, etc. the very External
observance of these Rites, were Acts of Religion, and necessary to make their
Worship acceptable to God; and the wilful and presumptuous neglect or contempt
of them, was punished with Death.

Now our Savior has abrogated all these Jewish Rites, and has Instituted
nothing in the room of them, excepting the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, which are of a very different Nature and Use, as we shall see
presently: He did not indeed, while he was on Earth, blame the Observation of
the Law of Moses, which till that time was in full force, and which he observed
himself, but he blamed the External Superstitions of the Pharisees, in washing
Cups and Platters, and making broad their Phylacteries, and thinking themselves
very righteous persons, for their scrupulous observation even of the Law of
Moses, in paying Tithe of Mint and Cummin, etc. while they neglected the
weightier matters of the Law, judgment, mercy, and faith, 23 Mat. 23. But when
our Savior was Risen from the Dead, and had accomplished all the Types and
Shadows of the Law, then the Apostles with greater freedom opposed a Legal and
External Righteousness, and though they did for a time indulge the Jews in the
Observation of the Rites of Moses, yet they asserted the Liberty of the Gentile
Converts from that Yoke, as we may see in the first Council at Antioch, and in
St. Paul's Disputes with the Jews, in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians,
and elsewhere. And indeed whoever considers the Nature of the Christian
Religion, will easily see, that all those ends, which such External Rites
served either in the Jewish or Pagan Religion, have no place here, and
therefore nothing that is merely External can be of any use or value in the
Christian Worship. As to show this particularly.

1. There is no expiation or satisfaction for sin under the Gospel, but only
the Blood of Christ, and therefore all External Rites are useless to this
purpose. 3 Romans 23.
Him and him only God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood. Death was the punishment of sin, and Death is the only expiation of it;
and none else has died for our sins but Christ alone, and therefore he only is
a propitiation for our sins; and yet we know, how great a part both of the
Pagan and Jewish Religion was taken up in the expiation of sin: all their
Sacrifices to be sure were designed for this purpose, and so were their
Washings and Purifications in some degree, and many other voluntary Severities
and Superstitions, this being the principal thing they intended in their
Religious Rites, to appease God and make him propitious to them; since then
Christ has made a full and complete satisfaction and atonement for sin, and
there is no expiation or satisfaction required of us, all external Rites for
expiation and atonement can have no place in the Christian Worship, without
denying the atonement of Christ, and this necessarily strips Christian Religion
of a vast number of external Rites practiced both by Jews and Heathens.

2 ly, Nor does the Gospel admit of any legal Uncleanness and Pollutions,
distinction between clean and unclean Meats, which occasioned so many Laws and
Observances both among Jews and Heathens; so many ways of contracting legal
Uncleanness, and so many ways to expiate it, and so many Laws about Eating and
Drinking, and such Superstition in Washing Hands, and Cups, and Platters, but
our Savior told his Disciples, Not that which goes into the mouth defiles
the man, but that which comes out of the mouth, 15 Matthew. 11, 17, 18, 19, 20.
this defiles the man. For whatsoever enters into the mouth, goes into the
belly, and is cast out into the draught, but those things, which proceed out of
the mouth, come forth from the heart, and they defile the man. For out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witnesses, blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man; but to eat
with unwashen hands, defiles not a man. And this also delivers Christian
Religion from all those Rites and Observances, which concerned legal cleanness,
which were very numerous.

3 ly, Nor is there any Symbolical Presence of God under the Gospel, which puts
an end to the legal Holiness of Places and Things. God dwelt among the Jews in
the Temple at Jerusalem, where were the Symbols and Figures of his Presence: it
was God's House, and therefore a holy place, and every thing that belonged to
it had a legal Holiness: for the Holiness of Things and Places under the Law,
was derived from their relation to God, and his Presence: this was the only
place for their Typical and Ceremonial Worship, whither all the Males of the
Children of Israel were to resort three times a year, and where alone they were
to offer their Sacrifices and Oblations to God: the very place gave Virtue to
their Worship and Sacrifices, which were not so acceptable in other places;
nay, which could not be offered in other places without sin, as is evident from
Jeroboam's sin, in setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel for places of
Worship, and the frequent Complaints of the Prophets against those, who offered
Sacrifices in the High Places; and therefore the Dispute between the Jews and
Samaritans was, which was the place of Worship, whether the Temple at Jerusalem
or Samaria: but Christ tells the Woman of Samaria, that there should be no such
distinction of places in the Christian Worship: Woman believe me, the hour
comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship
the father. -- But the hour comes and now is, 4 John 21, 23.
when the true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and in truth. Not
as if the Father should not be Worshipped, neither at Jerusalem nor Samaria;
but that neither the Temple at Jerusalem nor Samaria, should be the peculiar
and appropriate place of Worship; that God's Presence and Worship should no
longer be confined to any one place; that the Holiness of the place should no
longer give any value to the Worship; but those who worshipped God in spirit
and in truth, should be accepted by him, wherever they worshipped him. Such
Spiritual Worship and Worshippers, shall be as acceptable to God at Samaria as
at Jerusalem, and as much in the remotest Corners of the Earth, as at either of
them: for God's Presence should no longer be confined to any one place, but he
would hear our devout Prayers from all parts of the World, wherever they were
put up to him, and consequently the Holiness of places is lost, which consists
only in some peculiar Divine Presence, and with the Holiness of places, the
external and legal Holiness of things ceases also: for all other things were
Holy only with relation to the Temple, and the Temple Worship. For indeed God's
Typical Presence in the Temple, was only a Figure of the Incarnation: Christ's
Body was the true Temple where God dwelt: for which reason he calls his Body
the Temple, Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up in three days: And the
Apostle assures us, that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in Christ Bodily,
(...) really and substantially, in opposition to God's Typical Presence in the
material Temple: and therefore when Christ was come, who was the true Emmanuel
or God dwelling among us, and had by his Incarnation accomplished the Type and
Figure of the Temple, God would no longer have a Typical and Figurative
Presence.

I will not quarrel with any man, who shall call the Christian Churches, and
the Utensils of it, holy things; for being employed in the Worship of God, they
ought to be separated from common uses, and reason teaches us to have such
places and things in some kind of religious Respect, upon the account of their
relation, not to God, but to his Worship; but this is a very different thing
from the Typical Holiness of the Temple and Altar, and other things belonging
to the Temple, and there are two plain differences between them, the first with
respect to the cause, the second with respect to the effect: the cause of this
legal Holiness, was God's peculiar Presence in the Temple, where God chose to
dwell as in his own House, which Sanctified the Temple, and all things
belonging to it: the effect was that this Holiness of the Place Sanctified the
Worship, and gave value and acceptance to it: the first needs no proof, and
the second we learn from what our Savior tells the Scribes and Pharisees. Woe
unto you,-ye blind guides, which say, whosoever shall swear by the temple it is
nothing, but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor;
ye fools and blind, for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple, that
sanctifies the gold? 23 Matthew. 16, 17, 18, 19.
And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing, but whosoever swears
by the gift, that lies upon it, he is guilty: ye fools and blind, for whether
is greater, the gift, or the Altar that sanctifies the gift? So that it seems,
there was such a Holiness in the Temple and Altar, as conveyed a Holiness and
Sanctity to other things, even to the Oblations and Sacrifices, which were
offered there. But now whatever Holiness there is in Christian Churches and
Oratories, they are sanctified by the worship, that is performed there, not the
worship sanctified by them. It is the Assembly of Christians themselves, that
is the Church, the House, the holy and living Temple of God, not the building
of Wood or Stone wherein they meet: God and Christ is peculiarly present in the
Assemblies of Christians, though not by a Figurative and Symbolical Presence,
and thus he is present in the places, when Christians meet, and which are
Consecrated and Separated to Religious Uses, and there is a natural Decency in
the thing, to show some peculiar Respects to the places, where we solemnly
Worship God; but the presence of God is not peculiar to the place as it was
appropriated to the Temple of Jerusalem, but it goes along with the Company and
the Worship; and therefore the place may be called Holy, not upon account of
its immediate relation to God, as God's House, wherein he dwells, but its
relation to Christians, and that Holy Worship, which is performed there; and I
suppose every one sees the vast difference between these two: and thus all that
vast number of Ceremonies, which related to this external and legal Holiness of
Places, Vessels, Instruments, Garments, etc. have no place in the Christian
Worship, because there is no Typical and Symbolical Presence of God, and
consequently no such legal Holiness of places and things, under the Gospel.

4 ly, Nor are material and inanimate things made the Receptacles of Divine
Graces and Virtues under the Gospel, to convey them to us merely by Contract
and external Applications; like some Amulets or Charms, to wear in our Pockets,
or hang about our Necks. There was nothing like this in the Jewish Religion,
though there was in the Pagan Worship, but under the Gospel Christ bestows his
holy Spirit on us, as the principle of a new divine Life, and from him alone we
must immediately receive all Divine Influences and Virtue, and not seek for
these heavenly Powers in senceless things, which can no more receive, nor
communicate Divine Graces to us, then they do Wit and Understanding to those
who expect Grace from them; For can Grace be lodged in a rotten Bone, or a
piece of Wood; or conveyed to our Souls by perspiration in a kiss or touch?

5 ly, The Christian Religion admits of no External or Ceremonial
Righteousness. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature, and obedience to the commandments of God, 5
Matthew. 20.
and faith which works by love: The great design of the Gospel, and of all
our Savior's Sermons, being to make us truly holy, that we may be partakers of
the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption, which is in the world through
lust. There is nothing our Lord does more severely condemn, than an External
and Pharisaical righteousness, which consisted either in observing the External
Rites of the Law of Moses, or their own Superstitions received by tradition
from their Forefathers, and expressly tells his Disciples, except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Now this cuts off every thing,
which is External in Religion at a blow, because it cuts off all hopes and
relyances on an External Righteousness, and I believe men will not be fond of
such Superstitions, when they know, they will do them no good.

6 ly, And hence it appears, that there can be no place for any thing, that is
external, in the Christian Religion, but only for some foederal Rites; such as
the two Sacraments of the Gospel are, Baptism and the Lords Supper; the first
of which is our admission into the new Covenant, the second the exercise of
Communion with Christ in this Gospel Covenant. And such Rites as these are
necessary in all Instituted Religions, which depend upon free and voluntary
Covenants: for since Mankind has by sin forfeited their natural right to Gods
favor, they can challenge nothing from him now, but by promise and Covenant;
and since such Covenants require a mutual stipulation on both sides, they must
be transacted by some visible and sensible Rites, whereby God obliges himself
to us, and we to him; but these being only the signs or seals of a Covenant,
are very proper for a Religion, which rejects all External and Ceremonial
Righteousness and Worship: for it is not our being in Covenant with God, nor
the Sacraments of it, that can avail us, without performing the conditions of
the Covenant, and therefore this does not introduce an External Righteousness.

Now whoever has such a Notion and Idea of the Christian Worship as this, (and
let the Church of Rome confute it if she can) will easily see without much
Disputing, how unlike the Worship of the Church of Rome is to true Christian
Worship.

For whoever only considers, the vast number of Rites and Ceremonies in the
Church of Rome, must conclude it as Ritual and Ceremonial a Religion as Judaism
itself; the Ceremonies are as many, more obscure, unintelligible, and useless;
more severe and intolerable, then the Jewish Yoke itself, which St. Peter
tells the Jews, neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear; it is indeed
almost all Outside and Pageantry, as unlike the Plainness and Simplicity of the
Gospel Worship, as Show and Ceremony can make it.

It is true, external and visible Worship, must consist of external Actions;
and must be performed with such grave and decent circumstances of time and
place, and posture and habit, as become the Solemnity of Religious Worship;
this Reason and Nature teaches, and this the Church of England prudently
observes, whose Ceremonies are not Religious Rites, but decent Circumstances of
Worship, few in number (as the necessary Circumstances of Action are but few)
and Grave and Solemn in their use: but this is not to place Religion in any
thing, that is external, but only to pay an external Homage and Worship to God,
which differ as Worshipping God in a Decent Habit, differs from the Religion of
Consecrated Habits and Vestments; or as praying to God with an audible Voice,
differs from placing Religion in Words and Sounds which we do not understand,
or as Kneeling at receiving the Sacrament, differs from a Bodily Worship of the
Host in bowing the knee.

But though the bare number of external Ceremonies, which are always the Seat
of Superstition, be a great corruption of the Christian Worship, yet the number
of them is the least fault of the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome; as will
appear, if we consider a little their nature.

For 1. Most of their external Rites are professedly intended as Expiations and
Satisfactions for their Sins. This is the Doctrine and Practice of the Church
of Rome, that notwithstanding the satisfaction made by Christ, every Sinner
must satisfy for his own Sins, or have the satisfaction of other men's applied
to him, out of the Treasury of the Church, by the Pope's Indulgences: this is
the meaning of all external Penances in Whippings, Fastings, Pilgrimages, and
other superstitious Severities; their Backs, or their Feet, or their Bellies
must pay for their Sins, unless they can redeem them out of their Pockets too:
now it is plain, that these are such external Superstitions, as can have no
place in the Christian Religion, which allows of no other expiation or
satisfaction for Sin, but the Blood of Christ.

2 ly, Those distinctions between Meats, which the Church of Rome calls
Fasting, (for a Canonical Fast is not to abstain from Food, but only from such
Meats as are forbid on Fasting Days) can be no part of Christian Worship,
because the Gospel allows of no distinction between clean and unclean things,
and therefore of no distinction of Meats neither: for meat commends us not to
God, 1 Cor. 8. 8. The Church of Rome indeed does not make such a distinction
between clean and unclean Beasts, as the Law of Moses did, and therefore is the
more absurd in forbidding the eating of Flesh, or any thing that comes of
Flesh, as Eggs, or Milk, or Cheese, or Butter, on their Fasting Days, which is
to impose a new kind of Jewish Yoke upon us, when the reason of it is ceased.
For there is no imaginable reason why it should be an Act of Religion merely to
abstain from Flesh, if Flesh have no legal uncleanness; and if it had, we must
all turn Carthusians, and never eat Flesh; for how should it be clean one day,
and unclean another, is not easy to understand. I am sure St. Paul makes this
part of the Character of the Apostasy of the latter days, that they shall
Command to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving of them, which believe and know the truth. For every creature of
God is good, and nothing to be refused if it be received with thanksgiving. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5.
For it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. And let no man judge you
in meat or drink, -- wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of
the world, why as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances:
touch not, taste not, handle not, 2 Col. 16' 20, 21, 22.
which all are to perish with the using, after the Commandments and Doctrines
of men?

And yet, though they do not own the legal distinctions between clean and
unclean things, their Consecrations would persuade one, that there were
something more than a mere legal uncleanness in all Creatures, viz. that they
are all possessed by the Devil and wicked Spirits; for when they Consecrate
Salt and Water to make their Holy Water, they first exorcise both the Salt and
Water to cast the Devil out of them: and if such innocent Creatures are
possessed, I doubt none can escape; which has made me sometimes wonder, that
they durst eat any thing before it was first exorcised, for fear the Devil
should take possession of them with their meat. It is certain, if the Christian
Religion takes away all such distinctions between Meat and Drinks, the mere
abstaining from Flesh can be no part of Christian Worship, much less so
satisfactory and meritorious as the Church of Rome pretends, when such
Abstinence is appointed as a satisfactory Penance.

3 dly, As for the Religion of Holy Places, Altars, Vestments, Utensils, the
Church of Rome has infinitely outdone the Jewish Laws: instead of one Temple
at Jerusalem, they have thousands to the full as Holy and Sacred as that, as
may appear from their Rites of Consecration. Though herein, I confess, they
differ, that the Temple of Jerusalem was only God's House, and that alone made
it a Holy Place, because God was there peculiarly present; but the Popish
Churches derive their Sanctity, not so much from the presence of God, (for then
they would be all equally Holy) as from some great and eminent Saint, who is
peculiarly Worshipped there. It is a great argument of the opinion men have of
the Holiness of any place, to go in Pilgrimage to it, not merely in Curiosity,
but Devotion; as if either going so far to see the place, were in itself an act
of Religion, or their Prayers would be better heard there, than if they prayed
at home: Thus they travel to Jerusalem to visit the Holy Land and the
Sepulcher, and this may be thought in honor of our Savior who Lived, and
Died, and was Buried there: but otherwise I know not any Church or Chapel,
which the most devout Pilgrims think worth visiting merely upon the account of
God or Christ: The several Churches or Chapels of the Virgin, especially those
which are the most famed for Miracles, or the Churches where the Relics of
some great and adored Saints are lodged, have their frequent Visits, for the
sake of the Virgin, or of the Saints; but without some Saint Churches lose
their Sacredness and Veneration, which I suppose is the reason why they always
take care of some Relics to give a Sacredness to them, without which no
Church can be Consecrated; that is, its Dedication to the Worship of God,
cannot make it Holy, unless some Saint take possession of it by his or her
Relics.

This, I confess, is not Judaism, for under the Jewish Law, all Holiness of
things or places was derived from their relation to God; now the Names, and
Relics, and wonder-working Images of Saints and the Blessed Virgin, give the
most peculiar and celebrated Holiness; and whether this be not at least to
ascribe such a Divinity to them, as the Pagans did to their Deified Men and
Women, to whom they erected Temples and Altars, let any impartial Reader judge.
Those must have a good share of Divinity, who can give Holiness to any thing
else.

But since they must have Holy Places, and something to answer the Jewish
Superstition, who cried, The Temple of the LORD, the Temple of the LORD, I
cannot blame them for making choice of Saints to inhabitate their Churches, and
sanctify them with their presence, since under the Gospel God is no more
present in one place than in another: He dwelt indeed in the Temple of
Jerusalem by Types and Figures, but that was but a Type of God's dwelling in
Humane Nature: the Body of Christ was the true Temple, as he told the Jews,
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up; which he spoke of
the Temple of his Body: And now Christ is ascended into Heaven, there is no
Temple on Earth; and therefore if they will have Temples, they must have the
Temples of Saints, for the Presence of God is now no more confined to a House,
than his Providence is to the Land of Judaea, as it was in a very peculiar
manner, while the Temple stood there. God dwells not on Earth now, as he did
among the Jews, but his Presence, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ, is removed into
Heaven, and therefore he has no House on Earth to answer to the Jewish Temple,
as the Ancient Fathers asserted that the Christians had neither Temples nor
Altars: The Christian Church indeed is a holy and living Temple, wherein the
Holy Spirit dwells, but that is built not with Stones or Brick, but of living
Saints; and therefore the Holiness of Places, and Altars, and Garments, etc.
which makes up so great a part of the Roman Religion, is a manifest Corruption
of the Simplicity of the Christian Worship. The Jewish Temple made that Worship
most acceptable to God, which was offered there, because it was a Type of
Christ, and signified the acceptance of all our Prayers and Religious Services,
as offered up to God only in the Name of Christ; but to think that any place is
so Holy now, that the bare visiting it, or praying in it, should bestow a
greater holiness upon us, and all we do, should expiate our Sins, or merit a
Reward, is no better than Jewish or Pagan Superstition.

4 hly, That the Church of Rome does attribute Divine Virtues and Powers to
senseless and inanimate Things, is so evident from that great Veneration they
pay to the Relics, and those great Virtues they ascribe to them, from their
Consecrations of their Agnus Dei, their Wax-candles, Oil, Bells, Crosses,
Images, Ashes, Holy Water, for the Health of Soul and Body, to drive away evil
Spirits, to allay Storms, to heal Diseases, to pardon Venial, and sometimes
Mortal Sins, merely by kissing or touching them, carrying them in their hands,
wearing them about their necks, etc. that no man can doubt of it who can
believe his own eyes, and read their Offices, and see what the daily Practice
of their Church is. Whoever has a mind to be satisfied about it, needs only
read Dr. Brevint's Saul and Samuel at Endor, Chap. 15. These things look more
like Charms than Christian Worship, and are a great Profanation of the Divine
Grace and Spirit; indeed they argue that such men do not understand, what Grace
and Sanctification means, who think that little Images of Wax, that Candles,
that Oil, that Water and Salt, that Bells, that Crosses, can be sanctified by
the Spirit of God, and convey Grace and Sanctification by the sight, or sound,
or touch, or such external applications. Christ has given his Holy Spirit to
dwell in us, which works immediately upon our minds and rational powers, and
requires our concurrence to make his Grace effectual to cleanse and purify our
Souls, and to transform us into the Divine Image; the grace of the Spirit is to
enlighten our Minds, to change our Wills, to govern and regulate our Passions,
to instruct, to persuade, to admonish, to awaken our Consciences, to imprint
and fix good thoughts in us, to inspire us with holy desires, with great hopes,
with divine consolations, which may set us above the fears of the World, and
the allurements of it, and give greater fervor to our Devotions, greater
strength to our Resolutions, greater courage and constancy in serving God, than
the bare powers of Reason, though enforced with supernatural Motives, could do.
This is all the Sanctification the Gospel knows, and he who thinks that
inanimate Things are capable of this Sanctification of the Spirit, or can
convey such Sanctification to us by some Divine and Invisible Effluviums of
Grace, may as well lodge Reason, and Understanding, and Will, and Passions in
senseless matter, and receive it from them again by a kiss or touch. To be sure
men who know what the Sanctification of the Spirit means, must despise such
Fooleries as these.

5 ly, That all this encourages men to trust in an External Righteousness, is
too plain to need a proof; and therefore I shall not need to insist long on it.

For 1. such External Rites are naturally apt to degenerate into Superstition,
especially when they are very numerous: The Jewish Ceremonies themselves, their
Circumcision, Sacrifices, Washings, Purifications, Temple, Altars, New Moons
and Sabbaths, and other Festival Solemnities, were the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and a cloak for their Hypocrisy and great Immoralities,
though they were never intended by God for the justification of a Sinner. For
such External Rites are so much easier to carnal men, than to subdue their
Lusts, and live a holy and virtuous Life, that they are willing to abound in
such External Observances, and hope that these will make Expiation for their
other Sins; and therefore when the Typical use of these Ceremonies was
fulfilled by Christ, the External Rites were Abrogated, that men might no
longer place any hope or confidence in any thing which is merely External: And
therefore that Church which fills up Religion with External Rites and
Ceremonies, were there no other hurt in it, lays a Snare for Men's Souls, and
tempts them to put their trust in an External Righteousness, without any regard
to the Internal Purity of Heart and Mind.

Especially 2. when such External Rites are recommended as very acceptable to
God, as satisfactions for our Sins, and meritorious of great rewards; and this
is the use they serve in the Church of Rome, as you have already heard. They
assert the necessity of Humane Satisfactions; And what are these satisfactory
Works wherewith men must expiate their Sins? The principal of them are
Fastings, that is abstaining from Flesh, and other Acts of Penance, as
Whippings, Pilgrimages, and some Bodily severities, or Prayers, that is saying
over such a number of Ave-Maries; or Alms, that is to pay for Indulgencies, or
to purchase Masses for themselves, or their Friends in Purgatory, or to found
some Religious Houses, or to enrich those that are; which are much more
satisfactory and meritorious than common acts of Charity to the Poor: All which
men may do, without the least sorrow for Sin, without any true devotion to God,
without mortifying any one Lust. They mightily contend for the Merit of Works;
but what are their Meritorious Works? Whoever reads the Lives of their
Canonized Saints, will easily see what it was that made them Saints: their
Characters are usually made up of some Romish Superstitions, of their Devotions
to the Virgin Mary, and their familiar Conversations with her, the severities
of their Fasts, and other external Mortifications, their frequenting the Mass,
the great numbers of their Ave-Maries, pretenses to Raptures and Visions, and
such wild Extravagancies as made them suspected of Madness, while they lived,
and Canonized them for Saints, when they were dead: Other things may be added
to fill up their Stories, but these are the glorious Accomplishments,
especially of the more Modern Saints: for no man must be a Saint at Rome, who
is not a famous Example of Popish Superstitions.

Monkery is thought the most perfect State of Religion among them, and has even
Monopolized the Name, for no other persons are called the Religious, but those
who belong to one Order or other: And wherein does the Perfection of Monkery
consist? 1. In the Vows of Caelibacy, Poverty, and Obedience to the Superiors
of their Order, which are all External things, no Virtues in themselves, and
very often the occasion of great Wickedness. 2. In the strictest Observance of
the External Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion; of Masses, and Ave-Maries,
and Fastings, and Penances, and many of them would be glad, if they could go
Pilgrimages too. These things are in perfection in their Monasteries and
Nunneries, with such additional Superstitions as are peculiar to particular
Orders. As for other true Christian Virtues, they may as soon be found without
the Walls of the Monastery, as within.

Now when such External Rites and Observances shall be judged Satisfactions and
Expiations for Sin; shall be thought the most highly meritorious, shall be made
the Characters of their greatest Saints, and the most perfect state of
Religion; I cannot see how any true thorough-paced Romanist, can aim at any
thing but a Ceremonial Righteousness.

Indeed the true reason why any thinking men are so fond of an External and
Ceremonial Righteousness, is to excuse them from true and real Holiness of
Life: all men know that if they mortify their Lusts, they need not afflict
their Bodies with Fastings, and other severities: that if they have their
Conversation in Heaven, they need not travel in Pilgrimages to Jerusalem or
Loretto; that if they take care to obey the Laws of the Gospel, they need no
satisfactions for their Sins, nor no works of Merit or Supererogation, which
are nothing else but meritorious and supererogating satisfactions; for all men
know, that in the Offices of Piety and Virtue, they can never do more than is
their Duty; and therefore as nothing can be matter of Merit, which is our Duty,
so the true intention of all Merits and Works of Supererogation, are to supply
the place of Duty, and to satisfy for their Sins, or to purchase a Reward,
which they have no title to, by doing their Duty; but a good man, who by
believing in Christ, and obeying him, has an interest in his Merits, and a
title to the Gospel-Promises of Pardon and Eternal Life, needs none of these
Satisfactions, Merits, or Supererogations. Now would any man who believes that
he cannot be saved without mortifying his Lusts, be at the trouble of Whippings
and Fastings, etc. not to mortify his Lusts, but to keep them, and to make
satisfaction for them? Would any man travel to Jerusalem, or the Shrine of any
Saint, who believes he shall not be forgiven, unless he leaves his Sins behind
him, which he might as well have parted with at home? The true notion of
Superstition is, when men think to make satisfaction for neglecting or
transgressing their Duty, by doing something which is not their Duty, but which
they believe to be highly pleasing to God, and to merit much of him: Now no man
who believes that he cannot please God without doing his Duty, would be so fond
of doing his Duty, and doing that which is not his Duty, nor pleasing to God,
into the bargain.

3. And yet these meritorious and satisfactory Superstitions are very
troublesome to most men, and though they are willing to be at some pains rather
than part with their Lusts, yet they would be at as little trouble as possibly
they can; and herein the Church of Rome, like a very indulgent Mother, has
consulted their ease; for one man may satisfy for another, and communicate his
Merits to him: and therefore those who, by their Friends or Money, can procure
a vicarious Back, need not Whip themselves; they may Fast, and say over their
Beads, and perform their Penances and Satisfactions by another, as well as if
they did it themselves; or they may purchase Satisfactions and Merits out of
the Treasury of the Church, that is, they may buy Indulgencies and Pardons; or
it is but entering into some Confraternity, and then you shall share in their
Merits and Satisfactions. This is an imputed Righteousness with a witness, and
I think very External too, when men can satisfy and merit by Proxies.

4. And I think it may pass for an External Righteousness too, when men are
sanctified and pardoned by Relics, Holy Water, Consecrated Beads, Bells,
Candles, Agnus Dei's, etc. And how unlike is all this to the Religion of our
Savior, to that purity of Heart and Mind the Gospel exacts, and to those means
of Sanctification, and methods of Piety and Virtue it prescribes? Whoever
considers what Christian Religion is, can no more think these Observances
Christian Worship, than he can mistake Popish Legends for the Acts of the
Apostles.

II. Let us now consider what kind of Worship Christ has prescribed to his
Disciples: And the general account we have of it 4 John 23, 24. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him: God is a
spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. Now
there are three things included in this description of Gospel Worship: 1. That
we must Worship God under the Notion of a Pure and Infinite Spirit. 2. That we
must Worship him under the Character of a Father. 3. That we must Worship him
with the Mind and Spirit.

First, We must Worship God under the Notion of a Pure and Infinite Spirit, who
has now confined his peculiar Presence to no place, as he formerly did to the
Temple at Jerusalem; for this was the present Dispute, Whether God would be
Worshipped at the Temple at Jerusalem, or Samaria; as I observed above: In
opposition to which, our Savior tells the Woman, that God is a Spirit, and
therefore not confined to any place; he is everywhere, and present with us
everywhere, and may be worshipped everywhere by devout and pious Souls: that
though for Typical Reasons he had a Typical and Symbolical Presence under the
Jewish Dispensation, yet this was not so agreeable to his Nature, who is a
Spirit, and therefore he must not now be sought for in Houses of Wood and Stone.

And indeed the Reformation of the Divine Worship must begin in rectifying our
Notions and Apprehensions of God; for such as we apprehend God to be, such a
kind of Worship we shall pay him; as is evident from the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Pagan Worship, which was fitted to the Nature and History of their Gods;
for where there are no Instituted Rites of Worship, all mankind conclude, that
the Nature of God is the best Rule of his Worship, for all Beings are best
pleased with such Honors, as are suitable to their Natures, and no Being can
think himself Honored by such Actions as are a contradiction to his own Nature
and Perfections.

Now if God will be Worshipped more like a pure and infinite Spirit under the
Gospel, than he was under the Law; if this be the fundamental Principle of
Gospel Worship, that God is a Spirit, and must be Worshipped as a Spirit, I
think it is plain, that nothing is more unlike a pure Spirit, then a material
Image; nothing more unlike an infinite Spirit, which can have no shape or
figure, then a finite and figured Image, made in the likeness of a man, or of
any thing in Heaven and Earth; nothing more unlike an infinite Spirit, which is
Life, and Mind, and Wisdom, than a dead and senceless Image; and if under the
Law, where God suited his Worship more to a Typical Dispensation than to his
own Nature, he would not allow of the Worship of Images, much less is this an
acceptable Worship to him under the Gospel, where he will be Worshipped as a
pure Spirit, for there is nothing in the World more unlike a Living, Infinite,
Omnipotent, Omniscient Spirit, than a little piece of dead senceless figured
Gold or Silver, Wood or Stone, whatever shape the Carver or Engraver please to
give it, since God has none. Now would any man, who understands this, that God
is a Spirit, and will under the Gospel be Worshipped as a Spirit, should he go
into many Popish Churches and Chapels, and see a vast number of Images and
Pictures there, and People devoutly kneeling before them, suspect that these
were Christian Oratories, or this Christian Worship, unless he knew something
of the matter before? For there you shall find the Pictures of God the Father,
and the ever Blessed Trinity, in different Forms and Representations; the
Pictures of the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints and Martyrs devoutly Adored
and Worshipped, and would any man guess, that this were to Worship God as a
pure and infinite Spirit? A Spirit cannot be Painted, and then to Worship God
as a Spirit, cannot signify to look upon any Representation of God, when we
pray to him, which to be sure cannot give us the Idea of an infinite Spirit. He
who Worships God as a Spirit, can have no regard to Matter and Sense, but must
apply himself to God as to an infinite Mind, which no man can do, who gazes
upon an Image, or contemplates God in the art and skill of a Painter; for to
pray to God in an Image, and in the same thought to consider him as a pure and
infinite mind, is a contradiction; for though a man, who believes God to be a
Spirit, may be so absurd, as to worship him in an Image, yet an Image cannot
represent a Spirit to him, and therefore either he must not think at all of the
Image, and then methinks he should not look on an Image, when he worships God,
for that is apt to make him think of it; or if he does think of the Image,
while his mind is filled with such gross and sensible representations, it is
impossible in the same act to address to God, as to a pure invisible, and
infinite Spirit. Which shows how unfit and improper Images are in the Worship
of God; for they must either be wholly useless, and such as a man must not so
much as look or think on, (which is very irreconcilable with that Worship,
which is paid to them in the Church of Rome) or while he is intent upon a
Picture or Image, his mind is diverted from the contemplation of a pure and
infinite Spirit, and therefore cannot, and does not Worship God as a Spirit.

And the same is true of the Images of Saints and the Blessed Virgin: for
though to makes Pictures of Men or Women, is no reproach to the Divine Nature,
since they are not the Pictures or Images of God, who is a Spirit, but of those
Saints, whom they are intended to represent, yet if all Christian Worship be
the Worship of God, it is evident, that the Worship of Images, though they be
not the Images of God, but of the Saints, can be no part of Christian Worship,
because God must be Worshipped as a Spirit, and therefore not by any Image
whatsoever.

Now the Church of Rome will not pretend, that the Worship of Saints and their
Images, is a distinct and separate Worship from the Worship of God, but to
justify themselves, they constantly affirm, that they Worship God in that
Worship, which they pay to the Saints and their Images; for they know, that to
do otherwise, would be to terminate their Worship upon Creatures, which they
confess to be Idolatry, since all Religious Worship must terminate on God; and
therefore should they give any Religious Worship to Creatures distinct and
separate from that Worship they give to God, it were Idolatry upon their own
principles.

Now if they Worship God in the Worship of Saints and their Images, then they
Worship God in the Images of Saints, and that I think is to Worship him by
Images: the Worship of a pure infinite and invisible Spirit will admit of no
Images, whether of God or Creatures, as the Objects or Mediums of Worship.

But it may be said, that this is to graft our own Fancies and Imaginations
upon Scripture; for though Christ does say, that God is a Spirit, and must be
Worshipped in Spirit, he does not say, that to Worship God in Spirit is not to
Worship him by an Image; but to Worship God in Spirit, in our Savior's
Discourse with the Woman of Samaria, is not opposed to Image Worship, but to
confining the Worship of God to a particular place, such as the Temple at
Jerusalem and Samaria was; as I observed above. Now to this I answer:

1. To Worship God as a Spirit, does in the nature of the thing signify this;
for to Worship God by any material or sensible Representations is not to
Worship God as a Spirit; for an infinite Spirit cannot be represented by
matter, nor by any shape and figure, because it neither is material, nor has
any figure.

2. If God will not have his peculiar Presence confined to any place under the
Gospel, much less will he be Worshipped by Images and Pictures, for it is not
such a contradiction to the nature of an infinite Spirit, to show himself more
peculiarly present in one place than in another, as it is to be Worshipped by
sensible Images and Pictures. Though God fills all places, there may be wise
Reasons, why he should confine the Acts of Worship to some peculiar place, and
such Typical Reasons there were for it under the Law, but there never can be
any Reason, why a Spirit should be Represented and Worshipped by an Image,
which is such a contradiction and dishonor to the nature of the Spirit; and
therefore when God confined his Symbolical Presence to the Temple at Jerusalem,
yet he strictly forbad the Worship of Images, and much less then will he allow
of Image Worship, when he will not so much as have a Temple.

3. For we must observe farther, that what our Savior here says, God is a
Spirit, and will be Worshipped in Spirit, is not a particular Direction, how to
Worship God, but a general Rule to which the nature of our Worship must be
conformed, and therefore it is our Rule, as far as the plain Reason of it
extends. Under the Law they were not left to general Rules, but God determined
the particular Rites and Ceremonies of his Worship himself; for under the Law
God had not so plainly discovered his own nature to them, as he has done by his
Son in the Gospel. For no man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten
son, who is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him. And therefore the
nature of God was never made the Rule of Worship before. Tho God was as much a
Spirit under the Law, as he is under the Gospel, yet this was never assigned as
a reason against Image Worship, that God is a Spirit: but either that they saw
no Likeness or Similitude in the Mountain, when God spoke to them, 4 Deuteronomy. 15,
16. or that he is so great and glorious a Being, that nothing in the World is a
fit Representation of him: To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness
will ye compare unto him? -- It is he that sits upon the circle of the
earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, 40 Isa. 18. etc.
that stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent
to dwell in, etc. But that God is a Spirit, who has no shape and figure, is a
much better Argument against Image Worship, than all this; but this God had not
so plainly declared to them; and if God forbad the Worship of Images, when he
thought fit to give no other reason for it, but that he had never appeared to
them in any Likeness or Similitude, or that he was too great to be Represented;
we our selves may now judge, how unfit it is to Worship God by an Image, since
our Savior has declared, that he is a Spirit, who has no Likeness or Figure,
and that now he expects to be Worshipped by us as a Spirit, and therefore
without any Image or sensible Representation.

4. And yet some Learned men think, that our Savior in these Words, had as
well respect to the Worship of God by Images, as to his Worship in the Temple:
for that he had respect to the Object as well as Place of Worship, is evident
from what he adds, ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, 4 John
22.
for salvation is of the Jews; wherein he informs the Woman, that though she
inquired only of the place of Worship, the Samaritans were guilty of a greater
fault than setting up the Temple at Samaria in opposition to the Temple at
Jerusalem, viz. in a false Object, or an Idolatrous manner of Worship, they
Worshipping a Dove as the Symbol and Representation of God: and thus to Worship
God in Spirit, is expressly opposed to Worshipping God by Images.

5 ly, However this comes much to one; for if God being a Spirit his Worship
must not be confined to any place or Symbolical Presence; then he must not be
Worshipped by an Image, for an Image is a Representative Presence of God, or of
the Saints; for the use of Images is to represent that Being whom we Worship as
present to us: and therefore if men consider what they do, they go to Images,
as to Divine Presences, to Worship. Images, which are set up in Churches and
Chapels for the Worship of God, or of the Saints, are confined to places, and
make those places as much appropriate and peculiar places of Worship, as the
Jewish Temple was, excepting that the Temple was but one, and they are many.
Heathen Temples were the Houses of their Gods, or of their Images, which were
the Presence of their Gods; and if we must not appropriate the Presence of God
to any place, then we must not Worship him by Images, which are of no use but
to represent God as sensibly present, with the Image, or in the place, where
the Image is. If God be better Worshipped before an Image, than without one,
then the Worship of God is more confined to that place, where an Image is, than
to those places, which have no Images. I cannot see how to avoid this, that if
God must be Worshipped by Images, than there must be appropriate places of
Worship, viz. where the Image is, if there be no appropriate places of Worship
under the Gospel, like the Temple at Jerusalem, then God must not be Worshipped
by Images; for an Image must be in some place, and if God must be Worshipped
at, or before his Image, then that is the proper and peculiar place of Worship,
where his Image is; nay, though the Image be not fixed to any place, but be
carried about with us, yet if we must Worship God by Images, the Image is not
only the Object, but makes the place of Worship, for there we must Worship God,
where his Image is, if we must Worship him before his Image. It is impossible
to separate the Notion of Image Worship, from the Notion of a peculiar and
appropriate place of Worship; for the Image determines the place, as the
Presence of the Object; does and as under the Gospel we may Worship God any
where, because he is an infinite Spirit, and fills all places, and is equally
present with all devout Worshippers, wherever they Worship him: So where the
Image is Consecrated for a Divine Presence, it is not only the Object, but the
peculiar place of Worship, because God is peculiarly present there, or more
acceptably worshipped there, than where there is no Image. So that if a
peculiar and appropriate place of worship be contrary to the notion of an
infinite Spirit, the worship of Images is much more so, for besides that they
are gross and corporeal representations of a Spirit, they are Divine Presences
too, and appropriate places of worship.

Secondly, As God must be worshipped under the notion of a Spirit, so under the
character of a Father: as our Savior expressly tells us; The hour comes and
now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and truth,
for the Father seeks such to worship him, 4 John 23.
and therefore he taught his Disciples to pray, Our Father which art in heaven.
Under the Law God was worshipped as a King, and that not so much as the King of
the whole world, but as in a peculiar manner the King of Israel. The Lord
reigns, let the people tremble, he sits between the Cherubims (in his
Temple at Jerusalem) let the earth be moved. The Lord is great in Zion, 99
Psalm. 1, 2.
and he is high above all people. But under the Gospel the peculiar character
of God is a Father, and that not only as he is the maker of all men, and so the
Father of all, but as he is the Father of Christ, and in him the Father of all
Christians. Now this makes a vast difference in our worship, from what is daily
practiced in the Church of Rome. For,

1. When we pray to God as our Father, we must pray to him as dwelling in
Heaven: as our Savior teaches us to say, Our Father, which art in Heaven. For
as a Father, Heaven is his House and Habitation; in my Fathers House are many
mansions, that is, 14 John 2.
in in Heaven, which is his House as a Father, as the Temple at Jerusalem, was
his Palace considered as the King of Israel; and this is one reason our Savior
intimates, why the presence of God shall no longer be confined to any
particular place or Temple, because he shall be worshipped as the universal
Father, not as the King of Jury; Now when he is to be worshipped as a Father
from all parts of the world, he must have such a Throne and presence to which
all the World may equally resort, and that can be no other then his Throne in
Heaven, whither we may send up our Prayers from all Corners of the Earth; but
had he confined his Presence to any place on Earth, as he did to the Temple of
Jerusalem, the rest of the World must have been without God's peculiar
Presence, could have had no Temple nor place of Worship, but at such a distance
that they could never have come at it: for though God fills all places, it is a
great absurdity to talk of more Symbolical Presences of God than one: for a
Symbolical Presence confines the unlimited Presence of God to a certain place
in order to certain ends, as to receive the Worship, that is paid him, and to
answer the Prayers, that are made to him; and to have more than One such
Presence as this, is like having more Gods than One.

So that all our Worship under the Gospel, must be directed to God in Heaven;
and that is a plain argument, that we must not Worship God in Images on Earth,
for they neither can represent to us the Majesty of God in Heaven, nor is God
present with the Image to receive our Worship there: if God must now be
Worshipped as dwelling in Heaven, it is certain there can be no Object of our
Worship on Earth; for though God fill all places with his Presence, yet he will
be Worshipped only as sitting on his Throne in Heaven; and then I am sure he
must not be Worshipped in an Image on Earth, for that is not his Throne in
Heaven. This the Mercy-seat in the Holy of Holies was an Emblem of; for the
Holy of Holies in the Jewish Temple, did signify Heaven, and the Mercy-seat
covered with Cherubims, signified the Throne of God in Heaven, whither we must
lift up our Eyes and Hearts when we pray to him: for though it is indifferent
from what place we put up our Prayers to God, while we have regard to the
External Decency of Religious Worship, yet it is not indifferent whither we
direct our Prayers; for we must direct our Prayers to the throne of grace, 4
Heb. 16.
if we would obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Now the
Throne of Grace is only in Heaven, whither Christ is ascended to make Atonement
for us; for he is the true Propitiatory or Mercy-seat: And therefore if to
direct our Prayers to God, to his Picture or Image, or to the Images of the
Virgin Mary, or any other Saints, did not provoke God to jealousy, yet it
would do us no good, unless such Images are God's Throne of Grace, for all
other Prayers are lost, which are not directed to God on his Throne of Grace,
where alone he will receive our Petitions. If a Prince would receive no
Petitions but what were presented to him sitting on such a Throne, all men
would be sensible how vain a thing it were to offer any Petition to him
elsewhere. And yet thus it is here: A Sinner dare not, must not approach the
Presence of God, but only on his Mercyseat and Throne of Grace; for any where
else our God is a Consuming Fire, a Just and a Terrible Judge: now God has but
one Throne of Grace, and that is in Heaven, as the Mercy-seat was in the Holy
of Holies, which was a Type of Heaven; thither Christ ascended with his Blood
to sprinkle the Mercy-seat, and to cover it with a Cloud of Incense, which are
the Prayers of the Saints, as the High Priest did once a Year in the Typical
Holy Place. Which is a plain proof, that all our Prayers must be immediately
directed to God in Heaven, where Christ dwells, who is our true Propitiatory
and Mercy-seat, who has sprinkled the Throne of God with his own Blood, and has
made it a Throne of Grace, and where he offers up our Prayers as Incense to God.

2. To Worship God as our Father, signifies to Worship him only in the Name and
Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ: for he is our Father only in Jesus Christ,
and we can call him Father in no other Name. By the right of Creation he is our
Lord, and our Judge, but he is the Father of Sinners only by Adoption and
Grace, and we are Adopted only in Christ: so that if Christian Worship be the
Worship of God as a Father, then we must pray to God in no other Name, but of
his own Eternal Son: The Virgin Mary, though she were the Mother of Christ, yet
does not make God our Father; and then no other Saint, I presume, will pretend
to it: which shows what a contradiction the Invocation of Saints is to the
Nature of Christian Worship, and how unavailable to obtain our requests of God.
If we must Worship God only as our Father, then we must Worship him only in the
Name of his Son, for he owns himself our Father in no other Name; and if he
will hear our Prayers, and answer our humble Petitions only as a Father, then
he will hear only those Prayers which are made to him in the Name of his Son:
How great Favorites soever the Blessed Virgin and other Saints may be, if God
hear Prayers only as a Father, it is to no purpose to pray to God in their
Names, for he hears us not.

3. To Worship God as a Father, signifies to pray to him with the humble
assurance and confidence of Children: 8 Romans 15.
This is the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. For because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, 4 Gal. 6.
crying Abba Father. A dutiful Son does not question his Father's good will to
him, nor readiness to hear and answer all his just requests, he depends upon
the kindness of his Father, and his interest and relation to him, and seeks for
no other Friends and Favorites to recommend him: And upon this account also
the Invocation of Saints is a contradiction to the Gospel Spirit of Prayer, to
that Spirit of Adoption, which teaches us to cry Abba Father; for surely those
have not the hope, and assurance, and (...) of Children, who dare not go to
their Father themselves, but must send their Petitions to him by the hands of
Favorites and Intercessors. To pray to God in the Name of Christ, is only to
pray to him as Sons, for it is in his Name only that he owns us for Sons; and
this is the true Spirit of Adoption, in the Name and Mediation of Christ, to go
to God, as Children to a Father; but to pray to him in any other Name, how
powerful soever, is not to go to him as a Father, but as to our Lord and King,
who must be Addressed to by the Mediation of some great Favorites. To pray to
God in any other Name, which does not make us his Sons, is to distrust our
Relation to him, as our Father in Christ; and this is contrary to the Spirit of
Adoption, which teaches us to call God Father, and gives us that assurance of
his Fatherly goodness to us in Christ, that we need and desire no other
Advocates.

Thirdly, To Worship God in Spirit, is to Worship him with our Mind and Spirit;
for that is most agreeable to the Nature of God, who is a Spirit. God cannot be
Worshipped but by a reasonable Creature, and yet a Beast may Worship God as
well as a Man, who Worships without any act of Reason and Understanding, or
devout Affections. To pray to God without knowing what we say, when neither our
Understandings nor Affections can join in our Prayers, is so absurd a Worship
of a pure Mind, that Transubstantiation it self is not more contrary to Sense,
than Prayers in an unknown Tongue are to the Essential Reason and Nature of
Worship. I suppose no man will say, that to pray to God, or praise him in words
which we do not understand, is to Worship God in Spirit, unless he thinks that
a Parrot may be taught to pray in the Spirit: What difference is there between
a man's not speaking, and speaking what he does not understand? Just so much
difference there is between not praying, and praying what we do not understand:
and he honors God to the full as much, who does not pray at all, as he who
prays he knows not what, and, I am sure, he affronts him a great deal less:
However, if Christian Worship be to worship God in Spirit, Prayers in an
unknown Tongue, in which the Mind and Spirit cannot be concerned, is no
Christian Worship.

SECT. IV. Concerning the Reformation and Improvement of Humane Nature, by the
Gospel of CHRIST.
4. ANother principal end and intention of the Gospel, was to cure the
Degeneracy of Mankind, and to advance Humane Nature to its utmost Perfection:
for as Man fell from his original Happiness, by falling from the purity and
integrity of his Nature, so there was no restoring him to his lost Happiness,
much less no advancing him to a more perfect state of Happiness, not to an
earthly, but to an heavenly Paradise, without changing and transforming his
Nature, and renewing him after the Image of God. And therefore our very
entrance into Christianity, is a new Birth: Except a man be born of water, 3
John 5, 6
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God: That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. And such
a man is called a new Creature; and a Christian Life is a newness of Life, and
living after the Spirit, and walking after the Spirit: and this new Nature is
the Divine Nature, the Image of God, 8 Romans 1.
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, 4
Ephesians. 24. 3 Colos 10.
which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him.

So that there are two things, wherein this new Nature consists, Knowledge, and
Righteousness, or true Holiness, and I doubt it will appear, that the Church of
Rome is no great Friend to either.

I. Knowledge: Now I suppose neither the Church of Rome, nor any one for her,
will pretend that she is any great Friend to Knowledge: She is so horribly
afraid of Heresy, that she endeavors to nurse men up in Ignorance of their
Religion, for fear they should prove Heretics; and indeed she has some reason
for it: for the Church of Rome was never so Triumphant as in the most ignorant
and barbarous Ages; but as Knowledge broke in upon the World, so men turned
Heretics apace.

If there be any knowing Papists (and it would be very hard, if there should be
none) they are not beholding to their Church for it, which deprives them of all
the means of Knowledge: for she will not allow them to believe their Senses,
which is one way of knowing things, and the most certain we have: and yet she
commands us to believe Transubstantiation, which no man can do who believes his
Senses: and if I must not believe my Senses in so plain a matter, as what is
Bread and Wine, I know no reason I have to believe them in any thing, and then
there is an end of all Knowledge, that depends on Sense; as the proof of the
Christian Religion itself does: for Miracles are a sensible proof, and if I
must not trust my Senses, I cannot rely on Miracles, because I cannot know,
whether there be any such thing as a real Miracle.

The Church of Rome also forbids men the use of Reason in matters of Religion,
will not allow men to judge for themselves, nor to examine the Reasons of their
Faith, and what knowledge any man can have without exercising his Reason and
Understanding, I cannot guess; for to know without understanding sounds to me
like a contradiction.

She also denies Christians the use of the Bible, which is the only means to
know the revealed Will of God: and when men must neither believe their Senses,
nor trust their Reason, nor read the Scripture, it is easy to guess what
knowing and understanding Christians, they must needs be.

But it may be said, that notwithstanding this, the Church of Rome does
Instruct her Children in the true Catholic Faith, though she will not venture
them to judge for themselves, nor to read the Scriptures, which is the effect
of her great care of them, to keep them Orthodox: for when men trust to their
own fallible Reasons, and private Interpretations of Scripture, it is a great
hazard that they do not fall into one Heresy or other: but when men are taught
the pure Catholic Faith without any danger of Error and Heresy, is not this
much better, then to suffer them to reason and judge for themselves, when it is
great odds, but they will judge wrong.

Now this would be something indeed, did the Church of Rome take care to
Instruct them in all necessary Doctrines, and to teach nothing, but what is
true, and could such men, who thus tamely receive the dictates of the Church,
be said to know and to understand their Religion. How far the Church of Rome is
from doing the first, all Christians in the world are sensible but themselves,
but that is not our present dispute; for though the Church of Rome did instruct
her people into the true Christian Faith, yet such men cannot be said to know
and understand their Religion; and to secure the Faith by destroying knowledge,
is a direct contradiction to the design of the Gospel, which is to make men
wise and understanding Christians. For no man understands his Religion, who
does not in some measure know the reasons of his Faith, and judge whether they
be sufficient or not; who knows not how to distinguish between Truth and Error,
who has no Rule to go by, but must take all upon trust, and the credit of his
Teachers; who believes whatever he is told, and learns his Creed, as School
boys do their Grammar, without understanding it: This is not an active, but a
kind of passive knowledge; such men receive the impression, that is made on
them, as wax does, and understand no more of the matter; now will any one call
this the knowledge and understanding of a man, or the Discipline of a Child?

But suppose there were some men so dull and stupid, that they could never rise
higher; that they are not capable of inquiring into the reasons of things, but
must take up their Religion upon trust; yet will any man say, that this is the
utmost perfection of knowledge, that any Christian must aim at? is this the
meaning of the word of God dwelling in us richly in all wisdom? 3 Col. 16.
is this the way to give an answer to any one, who asks a reason of the hope
that is in us? the perfection of Christian knowledge is a great and glorious
attainment; to understand the secrets of God's Laws, those depths and mysteries
of wisdom and goodness in the economy of Man's Salvation; to see the Analogy
between the Law and the Gospel, how the Legal Types and ancient Prophecies
received their accomplishment in Christ, how far the Gospel has advanced us
above the state of Nature, and the Law of Moses; what an admirable design it
was to redeem the world by the Incarnation and death and sufferings and
intercession of the Son of God; what mysteries of Wisdom and Goodness the
Gospel contains; the knowledge of which is not only the perfection of our
understandings, but raises and ennobles our minds, and transforms us into the
Divine Image: These things were revealed, that they might be known, not that
they should be concealed from the world, or neglected and despised; but this is
a knowledge, which cannot be attained without diligent and laborious inquiries,
without using all the reason and understanding we have, in searching the
Scriptures, and all other helps which God has afforded us.

Now if Christian Knowledge be something more than to be able to repeat our
Creed, and to believe it upon the authority of our Teachers, if the Gospel of
our Savior was intended to advance us to a true manly knowledge, Christ and
the Church of Rome seem to have two very different designs, our Lord in causing
the Gospel to be wrote and published to the world, the other in concealing it as
much as she can, and suffering no body to read it without her leave, as a
dangerous Book, which is apt to make men Heretics; for it is hard to conceive,
that the Gospel was written, that it might not be read, and then one would
guess, that he by whose authority and inspiration the Gospel was written, and
those by whose authority it is forbid to be read, are not of a mind in this
matter.

1. This I think in the first place is an evident proof, that to forbid
Christian people to read and study and mediate on the word of God, is no Gospel
Doctrine, unless not to read the Bible, be a better way to improve in all true
Christian knowledge and wisdom, than to read it: for that is the duty of
Christians, to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; this was one great end of publishing the Gospel to the world, to
enlighten and improve men's understandings, as well as to govern their Lives;
and though we grant, men may be taught the principles of Christian Religion, as
Children are, without reading the Bible, yet if they will but grant, that
studying and meditating on the holy Scriptures, is the best and only way to
improve in all true Christian knowledge, this shows how contrary this
prohibition of reading the Scriptures is to the great design of the Gospel, to
perfect our knowledge in the mysteries of Christ.

2 ly. This is a mighty presumption also against Transubstantiation, that it is
no Gospel Doctrine, because it overthrows the very Fundamental Principles of
Knowledge, which is a direct contradiction to the design of the Gospel, to
advance Divine Knowledge to the utmost perfection it can attain in this world.

Whoever has his eyes in his head must confess, that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is contrary to Sense; for were our senses to be Judges of
this matter, they would pronounce the Bread and Wine after Consecration, to be
Bread and Wine still; and therefore what ever reason there may be to believe it
not to be Bread and Wine, but Flesh and Blood, yet it must be confessed, that
our Faith in this matter contradicts our sense; for even Roman Catholic Eyes
and Noses and Hands, can see and feel and smell nothing but Bread and Wine: and
if to our senses it appears to be nothing but Bread and Wine, those who believe
it to be the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, believe contrary to what they
see.

Thus there is nothing more contrary to the natural notions we have of things,
than the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: for if this Doctrine be true, then the
same individual body of Christ is in Heaven at the right hand of God, and on
ten thousand Altars, at a great distance from each other on earth, at the same
time. Then a humane Body is contracted into the compass of a Wafer, or rather
subsists without any dimensions, without extension of parts, and independent on
place.

Now not to dispute, whether this be true or false, my only inquiry at present
is, whether this do not contradict those natural notions all men have of the
properties of a Humane Body: let a man search his own mind, and try, whether he
find any such notion of a Body, as can be present at more places than one at
the same time: a Body that is without Extension, nay that has parts without
Extension, and therefore without any distinction too: for the parts of an
Organical Body must be distinguished by place and situation, which cannot be,
if they have no Extension; a Body, which is present without occupying a place,
or being in a place: if we have no such natural notion of a Body, as I am sure
I have not, and I believe no man else has, then let Transubstantiation be true
or false, it is contrary to the natural notions of our minds, which is all I am
at present concerned for: Thus let any man try, if he have any notion of an
accident subsisting without any substance, of a white and soft and hard
nothing; of the same body, which is extended and not extended, which is in a
place, and not in a place at the same time: for in Heaven, I suppose, they will
grant, the Body of Christ fills a place, and has the just dimensions and
proportions of a Humane Body, and at the same time in the Host the very same
body is present, without any extension; and independent on place; that is, the
same body at the same time is extended and not extended, fills a place and
fills no place, which, I suppose, they mean by being Independent on place; now
is and is not, is a contradiction to natural Reason, and I have no other
natural notion of it, but as of a contradiction, both parts of which cannot be
true. Let us then briefly examine, whether it be likely, that
Transubstantiation, which contradicts the evidence of sense, and the natural
notions of our Minds, should be a Gospel Doctrine, considering the Gospel as
the most Divine and excellent Knowledge, and most perfective of Humane
understandings. For,

1. This Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is so far from perfecting our
Knowledge, that it destroys the very Principles of all Humane Knowledge: All
natural knowledge is owing either to Sense or Reason, and Transubstantiation
contradicts both, and whoever believes it, must believe contrary to his Senses
and Reason, which if it be to believe like a Catholic, I am sure, is not to
believe like a man; if the perfection of knowledge consist in contradicting our
own Faculties, Transubstantiation is the most perfect knowledge in the world;
but however, I suppose no man will say, that this is the natural perfection of
knowledge, which overthrows the most natural notions we have of things: and yet

2. All supernatural Knowledge must of necessity be grafted upon that which is
natural; for we are capable of revealed and supernatural Knowledge, only as we
are by nature reasonable Creatures, and destroy Reason, and Beasts are as fit
to be preached too as Men: And yet to contradict the plain and most natural
notions of our minds, is to destroy Humane Reason, and to leave Mankind no Rule
or Principle to know and judge by. No man can know any thing, which contradicts
the Principles of Natural Knowledge, because he has only these natural
Principles to know by; and therefore however his Faith may be improved by it,
he forfeits his natural Knowledge, and has no supernatural Knowledge in the
room of it: For how can a man know and understand that which is contrary to all
the natural Knowledge and Understanding he has? There may be some revealed
Principles of Knowledge super-added to natural Principles, and these things we
may know to be so, though we have no natural Notion of them, and this perfects,
because it enlarges our Knowledge; as the Knowledge of three Divine Persons
super-added to the natural Belief of one Supreme God; which does not overthrow
the belief of one God, but only acquaints us, that there are three Divine
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, which, whatever difficulty there may be in
apprehending it, yet overthrows no natural Notion: this is an improvement of
Knowledge, because we know all we did before, and we know something more, that
as there is one God, so there are three Persons, who are this one God; and
though we have no natural Notion of this, how three Persons are one God,
because we know no distinction between Person and Essence in Finite Beings, yet
we have no natural Notion, that there cannot be more Persons than one in an
Infinite Essence; and therefore this may be known by Revelation, because there
is no natural Notion against it. But now I can never know that which is
contrary to all the Principles of Knowledge I have; such men may believe it,
who think it a Virtue to believe against Knowledge: Who can believe that to be
true, which they know to be false? For whatever is contrary to the plain and
necessary Principles of Reason, which all Mankind agree in, I know must be
false, if my Faculties be true, and if my Faculties be not true, then I can
know nothing at all, neither by Reason nor Revelation, because I have no true
Faculties to know with: Revelation is a Principle of Knowledge as well as
Faith, when it does not contradict our natural Knowledge of things, for God may
teach us that which Nature does not teach; and thus Revelation improves,
enlarges, and perfects Knowledge: in such cases Faith serves instead of natural
Knowledge, the Authority of the Revelation instead of the natural Notions and
Idea's of our Minds; but I can never know that by Revelation which contradicts
my natural Knowledge; which would be not only to know that, which I have no
natural Knowledge of, which is the knowledge of Faith, but to know that by
Revelation, which by Reason and Nature I know cannot be; which is to know that,
which I know cannot be known, because I know it cannot be:

So that Transubstantiation, which contradicts all the evidence of Sense and
Reason, is not the Object of any Humane Knowledge, and therefore cannot be a
Gospel-Revelation, which is to improve and perfect, not to destroy Humane
Knowledge: I can never know it, because it contradicts all the Notions of my
Mind; and I can never believe it without denying the truth of my Faculties, and
no Revelation can prove my Faculties to be false; for I can never be so certain
of the truth of any Revelation, as I am, that my Faculties are true; and could
I be persuaded, that my Faculties are not true, but deceive me in such things,
as I judge most certain and evident, then I can no more believe them as to any
Revelation, than I can as to their natural Reasonings, for the same Faculties
must judge of both, and if the Faculty be false, I can trust its judgment in
neither.

3 ly, The Doctrine of Transubstantiation destroys all possible certainty, what
the true sense and interpretation of Scripture is, and thereby overthrows all
supernatural Knowledge. The Scripture we know is Expounded to very different
and contrary Senses, and made to countenance the most monstrous and absurd
Doctrines; Witness all the ancient Heresies which have been Fathered on the
Scriptures. Now what way have we to confute these Heresies, but to show, either
that the words of Scripture will not bare such a sense, or at least do not
necessarily require it; that such an Interpretation is contrary to Sense, to
Reason, to the natural Notions we have of God, and therefore is in itself
absurd and impossible? But if Transubstantiation be a Gospel-Doctrine, I desire
any Papist, among all the ancient Heresies, to pick out any Doctrine more
absurd and impossible, more contrary to Sense and Reason, than the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is; and then it is no Argument against any Doctrine, or any
Exposition of Scripture, that it is absurd and impossible, contrary to Sense
and Reason, for so Transubstantiation is; and if we may believe one absurd
Doctrine, we may believe five hundred, how absurd soever they be: And then what
defense has any man against the most monstrous Corruptions of the Christian
Faith? Is this the way to improve Knowledge, to destroy all the certain marks
and characters of Truth and Error, and to leave no Rule to judge by? If the
design of the Gospel was to improve our Minds by a knowing and understanding
Faith, Transubstantiation, which overthrows the certainty both of natural and
revealed Knowledge, can be no Gospel-Doctrine.

3. The Authority of an infallible Judge, whom we must believe in every thing,
without examining the reasons of what he affirms, nay, though he teaches such
Doctrines as appear to us most expressly contrary to Sense, and Reason, and
Scripture, is no Gospel-Doctrine, because it is not the way to make men wise
and understanding Christians, which is the great design of the Gospel, for to
suspend the exercise of Reason and Judgment, is not the way to improve men's
Knowledge: an infallible Teacher, and an infallible Rule do indeed mightily
contribute to the improvement of Knowledge; but such an infallible Judge, as
the Church of Rome boasts of, can only make men ignorant and stupid Believers:
For there is a vast difference between an infallible Teacher, and an infallible
Judge, which few men observe, at least have not well explained; for an
infallible Teacher is only an external Proponent, and while men only teach and
instruct, how infallible soever they are, every man is at liberty to use his
own Reason and Judgment; for though the Teacher be infallible, he that learns
must use his own Reason and Judgment, unless a man can learn without it: But
now an infallible Judge is not contented to teach and instruct, which is an
appeal to the Reason of Mankind, but he usurps the office of every man's private
Reason and Judgment, and will needs judge for all Mankind, as if he were an
Universal Soul, an Universal Reason and Judgment, that no man had any Soul, any
Reason or Judgment but himself: for if every man has a private Reason and
Judgment of his own, surely every man must have a right to the private exercise
of it; that is, to judge for himself; and then there can be no such universal
Judge, who must be that to every man, which in other cases his own private
Reason and Judgment is, which is to un-Soul all Mankind in matters of Religion.
And therefore though there have been a great many infallible Teachers, as Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, yet none ever pretended to be
infallible Judges, but the Church of Rome; that is, none ever pretended to deny
People a liberty of judging for themselves, or ever exacted from them an
universal submission to their infallible Judgment without exercising any act of
Reason and Judgment themselves. I am sure Christ and his Apostles left People
to the exercise of their own Reason and Judgment, and require it of them; they
were infallible Teachers, but they did not judge for all Mankind, but left
every man to judge for himself, as every man must and ought, and as every man
will do, who has any Reason and Judgment of his own: but an infallible Judge,
who pretends to judge for all men, treats Mankind like Bruits, who have no
reasonable Souls of their own.

But you will say, this distinction between an infallible Teacher and an
infallible Judge, is very nice and curious, but seems to have nothing in it;
for does not he who teaches infallibly, judge infallibly too? And must I not
submit my private Judgment, which all men allow to be fallible, to a public
infallible Judgment, which I know to be infallible? If I know that I may be
deceived, and that such a man cannot be deceived, is it not reasonable for me
to be governed by his Judgment, rather than my own? I answer, All this is
certainly true as any demonstration, but then it is to be considered, that I
cannot be so certain of any man's Infallibility, as to make him my Infallible
Judge, in whose Judgment I must acquiesce, without exercising any Reason or
Judgment of my own: and the reason is plain, because I cannot know that any man
teaches infallibly, unless I am sure that he teaches nothing that is contrary
to any natural or revealed Law. Whoever does so, is so far from being
Infallible, that he actually errs; and whether he does so, I cannot know,
unless I may judge of his Doctrine by the Light of Nature, and by Revelation:
and therefore though there may be an Infallible Teacher, there never can be any
Infallible Judge, to whom I must submit my own Reason and Judgment, because I
must judge of his Doctrine my self, before I can know that he is Infallible.

As for instance, when Moses appeared as a Prophet and a Lawgiver to the
Children of Israel, there was no written Law, but only the Law of Nature; and
therefore those great Miracles he wrought, gave authority to his Laws, because
he contradicted no necessary Law of Nature: but had any other person at that
time wrought as many Miracles as Moses did, and withal taught the Worship of
many Gods, either such as the Egyptians, or any other Nations worshipped at
that time, this had been reason enough to have rejected him as a false Prophet,
because it is contrary to the natural Worship of one Supreme God, which the
Light of Nature teaches.

When Christ appeared, there was a written Law, the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, and all the Miracles he wrought could not have proved him a true
Prophet, had he contradicted the Scriptures of the Old Testament; and therefore
his Doctrine was to be examined by them, and accordingly he appeals to Moses
and the Prophets to bear testimony to his Person and Doctrine, and exhorts them
to search the Scriptures, which gave testimony to him: and how the Miracles he
wrought gave authority to any new Revelations he made of God's Will to the
World, since he did not contradict the old. The Law of Nature, and the Laws of
Moses, were the Laws of God; and God cannot contradict himself: and therefore
the Doctrine of all new Prophets, even of Christ himself, was to be examined,
and is to be examined to this day, by the Law and the Prophets; and therefore
though he was certainly an Infallible Teacher, yet men were to judge of his
Doctrine, before they believed him; and he did not require them to lay aside
their Reason and Judgment, and submit to his Infallible Authority, without
Examination.

So that all this while, there could be no Infallible Judge to whom all men
were bound to submit their own private Reason and Judgment, and to receive all
their Dictates as divine Oracles, without Examination; because they could not
know them to be such Infallible Teachers, till they had examined their Doctrine
by the Light of Nature and the Law of Moses: and we cannot to this day know
that Moses and Christ were true Prophets, but in the same way.

Since the writing of the New Testament, there is a farther Test of an
Infallible Teacher, if there be any such in the world; that he neither
contradicts the Light of Nature, nor the true intent of the Law of Moses, nor
alter or add to the Gospel of Christ; and therefore there can be no Infallible
Judge, because be he never so Infallible, we can never know that he is so, but
by the agreement of his Doctrine with the Principles of Reason, with the Law
and the Prophets, and with the Gospel of Christ; and therefore must examine his
Doctrine by these Rules, and therefore must judge for our selves, and not
suffer any man to judge for us, upon a pretense of his Infallibility.

Could I know that any man were Infallible, without judging of his Doctrine,
then indeed there were some reason to believe all that he says, without any
inquiry or examination; but this never was, never can be: and therefore though
there may be an Infallible Teacher, there can be no Infallible Judge to whom I
must submit my own Reason and Judgment, without asking any Questions. Which by
the way shows, how ridiculous that Sophism is, The Church has not erred,
because she is Infallible, when it is impossible for me to know she is
Infallible, till by examining her Doctrine by an Infallible Rule I know, that
she has not erred.

And the truth is, it is well there can be no Infallible Judge; for if there
were, it would suspend and silence the Reason and Judgment of all Mankind: and
what a knowing Creature would Man be in matters of Religion, when he must not
reason, and must not judge? just as knowing as a man can be without exercising
any Reason and Judgment. And therefore not only the reason and nature of the
thing proves, that there can be no Infallible Judge, but the design of Christ
to advance humane Nature to the utmost perfection of Reason and Understanding
in this World, proves that he never intended there should be any: for to take
away the exercise of Reason and private Judgment, is not the way to make men
wise and knowing Christians; and if Christ allows us to judge for our selves,
there can be no Infallible Judge, whose Office it shall be to judge for us all.

4 ly. To pretend the Scripture to be an obscure or imperfect Rule, is a direct
contradiction to the design of the Gospel to improve and perfect Knowledge: for
if the Scripture be so obscure in the essential matters of Faith and Christian
knowledge, that we cannot have any certainty what the true sense and
interpretation of it is, without an Infallible Judge, then the Scriptures
cannot improve our knowledge, because we cannot know what they are, we cannot
understand their meaning, and therefore can learn nothing from them.

Yes you will say, we may know their meaning, when they are expounded to us by an
Infallible Judge: though the Scriptures are so obscure, that we cannot
understand them without an Infallible Judge, yet we may certainly learn what
the sense of Scripture is from such a Judge.

Now in answer to this, I observe, that though such an Infallible Judge should
determine the sense of all obscure Texts of Scripture, (which neither the Pope
nor Church of Rome have ever done) yet this would not be to understand the
Scriptures, or to learn from the Scriptures, but only to rely on this
Infallible Judge for the sense of Scripture: To understand the Scriptures, is
to be able to give a reason, why I expound Scripture to such a sense, as that
the words signify so, that the circumstances of the place, and the context and
coherence of the words require it; that the analogy of Faith, and the reason
and nature of things, will either justify such an interpretation, or admit no
other: and an Expositor, who can thus open our Understandings, and not only
tell us what the sense of Scripture is, but make us see, that this is the true
sense and interpretation of it, does indeed make us understand the Scripture.
Thus Christ himself did, when he was risen from the dead, He opened their
understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures, 24 Luke 45. But to
be told that this is the true sense of Scripture, and that we must believe this
is the sense, though we can see no reason why it should be thus expounded, nay,
though all the Reason we have tells us, that it ought not to be thus expounded,
no man will say, that this is to understand the Scriptures, but to believe the
Judge: No man can learn any thing from a Book, which he does not and cannot
understand; and if men neither do nor can understand the Scriptures, it is
certain, they can learn nothing from them: an Infallible Judge would teach as
well without the Scriptures as with them, and indeed somewhat better, because
then no man could have a pretense to contradict him; and therefore if this be
true, the holy Scripture deserves all those contemptible Characters which the
Romanists have given it; for it is so far from improving and perfecting our
knowledge, that it self cannot be known, and therefore is good for nothing. So
that the obscurity of the Scripture makes it wholly useless to the great ends
and purposes of the Christian Religion, viz. to improve and perfect the
knowledge of Mankind in the necessary and essential Doctrines of Faith, and
therefore this can be no Gospel-Doctrine, because it makes the Gospel it self,
considered as written, of no use.

Thus if the Scripture be an imperfect Rule, as the Romanists affirm, that it
does not teach us the whole mind and will of God, but that we must learn even
some necessary Doctrines of Faith from unwritten Traditions, which no body has
the keeping of but the Church of Rome: This I say contradicts the great design
of the Gospel, which is to improve and perfect knowledge; for an imperfect Rule
of Faith is, I think, as bad as no Rule at all, because we can never trust it.

If you say, that though the Scripture in it self be an imperfect Rule, yet we
have a perfect Rule, because the defects of the Scripture are supplied by
unwritten Traditions; and therefore we have the whole Gospel and all the
Christian knowledge delivered down to us, either in the written or unwritten
Rule. I answer,

1. If the Scriptures be an imperfect Rule, then all Christians have not a
perfect Rule, because they have not the keeping of unwritten Traditions, and
know not what they are, and never can know what they are, till the Church is
pleased to tell them; and it seems, it was a very great while, before the
Church thought fit to do it. For suppose that all the new Articles of the
Council of Trent, which are not contained in Scripture, were unwritten
Traditions, fifteen hundred years was somewhat of the longest to have so
considerable a part of the Rule of Faith concealed from the World; and who
knows how much of it is concealed still, for the Church has not told us, that
she has published all her unwritten Traditions; there may be a Nest-egg left
still, which in time may add twelve new Articles to the Trent-Creed, as that
has done to the Apostles Creed.

So that if the Scripture be an imperfect Rule of Faith, the Church never had a
perfect Rule, till the Council of Trent; for a Rule which is not known, is none
at all, and no body can tell whether our Rule be perfect yet: whether some more
unwritten Traditions may not start up in the next Age to make our Faith more
perfect, than the Council of Trent it self has made it. Now if the design of
the Gospel was to instruct men in all divine knowledge, can we think that our
Savior has given us such an imperfect Rule, as needs to be supplied by
unwritten Traditions in every Age? especially when we consider that some of the
greatest Mysteries and most useful Doctrines of the Christian Religion, (if the
Church of Rome be in the right) were not written, or so obscurely, that no body
could find them in the Scriptures, till they were discovered by the help of
unwritten Traditions; such as the Supremacy of the Pope, the Infallibility of
Popes and General Councils, the Worship of Images, the Invocation of Saints,
and the great Glory and Prerogatives of the Virgin Mary, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, Indulgences, the Sacrament of Penance, etc. as necessary Doctrines
as any that are recorded in Scripture, and the denial of which makes us all
Heretics and Schismatics, as the Church of Rome says. Though thanks be to
God, as far as appears, we are no greater Heretics and Schismatics, than the
Apostles were, unless they are excused for not knowing these necessary Articles
of Faith, and we are Heretics for denying them, since the Church of Rome in
the Council of Trent has decreed and published them.

2. These unwritten Traditions cannot supply the defects of a written Rule,
because they are of uncertain Authority, and therefore not the Objects, much
less the Rule, of a certain Faith and Knowledge. What is not written, but said
to be delivered down from Age to Age by oral Tradition, and kept so privately,
that the Church of God never heard of it for several hundred years, can never
be proved but by Miracles, and they must be more credible Miracles too, than
the School of the Eucharist, and the Legends of the Saints furnish us with; and
yet I know of no better the Church of Rome has. It is impossible to prove, that
a private Tradition cannot be corrupted; it is unreasonable to think that any
thing which concerns the necessary Articles of Faith or Rules of Worship,
should be a private and secret Tradition for several Ages. Miracles themselves
cannot prove any Tradition which is contrary to the written Rule, and the
Catholic Faith of Christians for several Ages, as several of the
Trent-Doctrines are; nay, no Miracles can prove any new Article of Faith, which
was never known before, without proving that Christ and his Apostles did not
teach all things necessary to salvation; which will go a great way to overthrow
the truth and certainty of the Christian Faith: for Miracles themselves can
never prove, that Christ and his Apostles taught that which the Christian
Church never heard of before; which is either to prove that the whole World had
forgot what they had been once taught, which I doubt is not much for the credit
of Tradition, or that the Church for several Ages did not teach all that Christ
taught, which is no great reason to rely on the teachings of the Church; or to
prove against matter of fact, that Christ and his Apostles taught that, which
no body ever heard of, and I do not think a Miracle sufficient to prove that
true, which every body knows to be false, or at least do not know it to be
true, though they must have known it, if it had been true.

And does not every body now see, how improper unwritten Traditions are, to
supply the Defects and Imperfections of the written Rule? for they can never
make one Rule, because they are not of equal Authority. A Writing may be proved
Authentic, an obscure unwritten Tradition cannot: and can any man think, that
Christ would have one half of his Gospel written, the other half unwritten, if
he intended to perfect the knowledge of Christians: for they cannot have so
perfect a knowledge, because they cannot have so great certainty, of the
unwritten, as they have of the written Gospel. Writing is the most certain Way
to perpetuate Knowledge, and if Christ intended, that his Church in all Ages
should have a perfect Rule of Faith, we must acknowledge the perfection of the
written Rule. The truth is, I cannot but admire the great artifice of the
Church of Rome, in preaching up the Obscurity and Imperfection of the
Scriptures, for she has hereby put it into her own power, to make Christian
Religion, what she pleases; for if the Scriptures be obscure, and she alone can
infallibly interpret them; if the Scriptures be imperfect, and she alone can
supply their defects by unwritten Traditions, it is plain, that Christian
Religion must be, what she says it is, and it shall be, what her interest
requires it to be. But whether this be consistent with our Savior's design in
publishing the Gospel, or whether it be the best way of improving the knowledge
of Mankind, let any impartial man judge.

5 ly. An Implicit Faith, or believing as the Church believes, without knowing
what it is we believe, can be no Gospel-Doctrine, because this to be sure
cannot be for the improvement of knowledge. Some of the Roman Doctors think it
sufficient, that a man believes as the Church believes, without an explicit
knowledge of any thing they believe; but the general opinion is, that a man
must have an explicit belief of the Apostles Creed, but as for every thing
else it suffices, if he believes as the Church believes, without knowing, what
the faith of the Church is: that is, it is not necessary men should so much as
know, what the new Articles of the Trent Faith are, if they believe the
Apostles Creed, and resign up their Faith implicitly to the Church.

Now this is a plain confession, that all the Doctrines in dispute between us
and the Church of Rome, are of no use, much less necessary to salvation; for if
they were, they would be as necessary to be known, and explicitly believed, as
the Apostles Creed: and I cannot imagine, why we Heretics, who believe the
Apostles Creed, and understand it as orthodoxly as they, may not be saved
without believing the new Trent Creed; for if we need not know what it is,
there seems to be no need of believing it; for I always thought, that no man
can, and therefore to be sure no man need, believe, what he does not know. So
that it seems, we know and believe all things, the explicit knowledge, and
belief of which, by their own confession, is necessary to salvation, except
that one single Point of the Infallibility of the Church of Rome: believe but
that, and ye need believe or know nothing more but the Apostles Creed, and yet
go to Heaven as a good Catholic: which makes an implicit Faith in the Church
of Rome, as necessary as Faith in Christ is.

But if the intent of the Gospel was to improve our Knowledge, then Christ
never taught an implicit Faith, for that does not improve Knowledge: and if
the Faith of the Church of Rome, excepting the Apostles Creed, which is the
common Faith of all Christians, need not be known, then they are no
Gospel-Doctrines, much less necessary Articles of Faith, for Christ taught
nothing, but what he would have known; and though the knowledge of all things,
which Christ taught, is not equally necessary to salvation, yet it tends to the
perfecting our knowledge, and Christ taught nothing which a man need not know;
which I think is a reproach to meaner Masters, and much more to the eternal and
incarnate Wisdom.

Secondly, The improvement and perfection of Humane Nature consists in true
Holiness and Virtue, in a likeness and conformity to God, and a participation
of the Divine Nature: and this is the great end of the Gospel to advance us to
as perfect Holiness as is attainable in this life: Christ indeed has made
expiation for our sins by his own Blood, but then this very Blood of Atonement
does not only expiate the guilt of sin, but purges the Conscience from dead
works, that we may serve the living God: for no Sacrifice, not of the Son of
God himself, can reconcile an impenitent and unreformed Sinner to God, that is,
can move God to love a Sinner, who still loves and continues in his sins; which
an infinitely holy and pure being cannot do: Indeed the expiation of sin is but
one part of the work of our Redemption; for a sinner cannot be saved, that is,
cannot be advanced to immortal life in the Kingdom of Heaven, without being
born again, without being renewed and sanctified by the holy Spirit, after the
Image and likeness of God. For this new Nature is the only Principle of a new
immortal life in us; an earthly sensual mind is no more capable of living in
Heaven, than an earthly mortal body. In both senses flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, neither can corruption inherit incorruption.

The Church of Rome indeed has taken great care about the first of these, and
has found out more ways of expiating sin, and making satisfaction for it, than
the Gospel ever taught us; whether they are so effectual to this purpose, let
those look to it, who trust in them: but there is not that care taken to
inculcate the necessity of internal holiness and purity of mind, and one would
easily guess there can be no great need of it in that Church, which has so many
easy ways of expiating sin.

The true character of Gospel-Doctrines is, a Doctrine according to Godliness,
the principal design of which is to promote true goodness; all the Articles of
the Christian Faith tend to this end, to lay great and irresistible obligations
on us to abstain from every sin, and to exercise our selves in every thing that
is good, as we have ability and opportunity to do it: and therefore all
Doctrines which secretly undermine a good life, and make it unnecessary for men
to be truly and sincerely virtuous, can be no Gospel-Doctrines. That there are
such Doctrines in the Church of Rome, has been abundantly proved by the late
Learned and Reverend Bishop Tailor in his Disswasive from Popery; which is so
very useful a Book, that I had rather direct my Readers to it, than transcribe
out of it: My design leads me to another method; for if I can prove that the
Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome naturally tend to evacuate the
force of the Gospel it self, to make men good and holy; every one will easily
see that that can be no Gospel-Faith and Worship, which sets aside the Gospel
it self.

The whole Doctrine of the Gospel either consists of the Rules of Holiness, or
of the Motives and Instruments of it; for the Articles of the Christian Faith
are all of them so many Motives to a good life: let us then consider how the
Faith and Worship of the Church of Rome has made void the Gospel of our
Savior, as the Pharisees made void the Law of Moses by their Traditions.

1. Let us begin then with the Gospel-Rules of Holiness. It would be an endless
thing here to take notice of the loose Determinations of their famed and
approved Casuists, of their Doctrine of probable Opinions, of the direction of
the intention, by which means the very Laws and Boundaries of Virtue and Vice
are in a great measure quite altered; and it may be this would only make work
for the Representer, and furnish out a fourth part of the Papist
Misrepresented, if we venture to tell the World what has been the avowed
Doctrines of their great Divines and Casuists. But whether such Definitions be
the Doctrine of their Church or not, I am sure they are equally mischievous, if
they be the Doctrines of their Confessors who have the immediate direction of
men's Conscience. Those who have a mind to be satisfied in this matter, may find
enough of it in the Provincial Letters, the Jesuits Morals, and Bishop Taylor's
Disswasive. It sufficiently answers my present design to take notice of some
few plain things, which will admit of no dispute.

I have already shown what a great value the Church of Rome sets upon an
external Righteousness, which is much more meritorious than a real and
substantial Piety and Virtue. Now let any man judge whether this be not apt to
corrupt men's notions of what is good; to persuade them that such external
observances are much more pleasing to God, and therefore certainly much better
in themselves, than true Gospel-Obedience, than Moral and Evangelical Virtues;
for that which will merit of God the pardon of the greatest immoralities, and a
great reward, that which supplies the want of true Virtue, which compensates
for sin, and makes men great Saints, must needs be more pleasing to God, than
Virtue it self is: and if men can believe this, all the Laws of Holiness
signify nothing, but to let men know, when they break them, that they may make
satisfaction by some meritorious Superstitions.

Thus the Doctrine of venial sins, which are hardly any sins at all, to be sure
how numerous soever they are, or how frequently soever repeated, cannot deserve
eternal punishments, is apt to give men very slight thoughts of very great
Evils: For very great Evils may come under the notion of venial sins, when they
are the effects of Passion and Surprise, and the like. Indeed this very
Doctrine of venial sins is so perplexed and undermined, that the Priest and the
Penitent may serve themselves of it to good purpose: I am sure this distinction
is apt to make men careless of what they think little faults, which are
generally the seeds and dispositions to much greater; such as the sudden
eruptions of Passion, some wanton thoughts, an indecorum and undecency in words
and actions, and what men will please to call little venial sins, for there is
no certain Rule to know them by: so that while this distinction lasts, men have
an excuse at hand for a great many sins, which they need take no care of; they
are not obliged to aim at those perfections of Virtue, which the Gospel
requires; if they keep clear of mortal sins, they are safe, and that men may
do, without any great seize in Virtue; which does not look very like a
Gospel-Doctrine, which gives us such admirable Laws, which requires such great
circumspection in our Lives, such a command over our Passions, such
inoffensiveness in our Words and Actions, as no Institution in the World ever
did before. Whatever corrupt men's Notions of Good and Evil, as External
Superstitions, and the distinction between Venial and Mortal Sins is apt to do,
is a contradiction to the design of the Gospel, to give us the plain Rules and
Precepts of a perfect Virtue.

Secondly. Let us consider some of the principal Motives of the Gospel to a
Holy Life, and see, whether the Church of Rome does not evacuate them also, and
destroy their force and power.

Now 1. The Fundamental Motive of all, is the absolute necessity of a Holy
Life; that without holiness no man shall see God, for no other Argument has any
necessary force without this. But the absolute necessity of a holy life to
please God, and to go to Heaven, is many ways overthrown by the Church of Rome,
and nothing would more effectually overthrow the Church of Rome, than to
re-establish this Doctrine of the absolute necessity of a good life. For were
men once convinced of this, that there is no way to get to Heaven, but by being
truly and sincerely good; they would keep their Money in their Pockets, and not
fling it so lavishly away up Indulgencies, or Masses; they would stay at home,
and not tire themselves with fruitless Pilgrimages, and prodigal Offerings at
the Shrines of some powerful Saints, all external, troublesome and costly
Superstitions would fall into contempt; good men would feel, that they need
them not, and if bad men were convinced, that they would do them no good, there
were an end of them, for the only use of them is to excuse men from the
necessity of being good.

But this is most evident in their Doctrine about the Sacrament of Penance,
that bare Contrition with the Absolution of the Priest, puts a man into a state
of Salvation; I do not lay it upon Attrition, which is somewhat less than
Contrition, though the Council of Trent, if I can understand plain words, makes
that sufficient with the Absolution of the Priest; but because some men will
unreasonably wrangle about this, I shall insist only on what is acknowledged by
themselves, that Contrition, which is only a sorrow for sin, if we confess our
sins to a Priest, and receive absolution, puts us into a state of Grace: now
contrition, or sorrow for sin, is not a holy life, and therefore this Doctrine
overthrows the necessity of a holy life, because men may be saved by the
Sacrament of Penance without it, and then I know no necessity there is of
mortifying their Lusts: for if they sin again, it is only repeating the same
remedy, confessing their sins; and being sorry for them, and receiving
absolution, and they are restored to the favor of God, and to a state of
salvation again. Nay, some of their Casuists tell us, that God has not
commanded men to repent, but only at the time of death, and then contrition
with absolution will secure their salvation, after a whole life spent in
wickedness, without any other good action, but only sorrow for sin: and if men
are not bound by the Laws of God so much as to be contrite for their sins, till
they find themselves dying, and incapable of doing any good, all men must
grant, that a holy life is not necessary to salvation.

2. More particularly. The love of God in giving his own Son to die for us, and
the love of Christ in giving himself for us, are great Gospel Motives to
Obedience and a Holy Life; but these can only work upon ingenuous minds, who
have already in some measure conquered the love of sin; for where the love of
sin prevails, it is too powerful for the love of God; but the holiness and
purity and inflexible justice of the Divine Nature is a very good argument,
because it enforces the necessity of a holy life; for a holy God cannot be
reconciled to wicked Men; will not forgive our sins, unless we repent of them,
and reform them: which must engage all men, who hope for pardon and forgiveness
from God, to forsake their sins, and reform their lives: but the force of this
Argument is lost in the Church of Rome by the judicial absolution of the
Priest: for they see daily the Priest does absolve them without forsaking their
sins, and God must confirm the sentence of his Ministers, and therefore they
are absolved, and need not fear, that God will not absolve them, when the
Priest has; which must either destroy all sense of God's essential holiness and
purity, and persuade them, that God can be reconciled to sinners, while they
continue in their sins, or else, they must believe, that God has given power to
his Priests, to absolve those, whom he could not have absolved himself: To be
sure it is in vain to tell men, that God will not forgive sinners, while they
continue in their sins, if they believe the judicial authority of the Priest to
forgive sins; for they every day absolve men, who do not forsake their sins,
and if their absolution be good, God must forgive them too; and thus the
holiness and inflexible justice of God loses its force upon good Catholics to
reform their lives; and therefore were there no other arguments against it, it
is not likely that the judicial absolution of the Priest, as it is taught and
practiced in the Church of Rome, should be a Gospel-Doctrine.

3. The Death and Sacrifice of Christ is another Gospel-Motive to Holiness of
Life; not only because he has now bought us with his own Blood, and therefore
we must no longer live unto our selves, but to him, who died for us; but
because his Blood is the Blood of the Covenant, and the efficacy of his
Sacrifice extends no farther than the Gospel Covenant, which teaches us to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. That is, no man can be saved by the Blood of Christ, but
those who obey the Gospel, which obliges all men, who hope to be saved by
Christ, to the practice of an universal righteousness.

This the Church of Rome seems very sensible of, that none but sincere
Penitents, and truly good men can be saved by the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross; which gives no hope to Sinners, who do not repent of their sins and
amend their lives; and therefore she has found out a great many other ways of
expiating Sin, which give more comfort to Sinners. The Sacrifice of the Mass
has a distinct virtue and merit from the Sacrifice upon the Cross; it is a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead, to expiate especially the
sins of those, for whom it is particularly offered; and thus those sins which
are not expiated by the Death of Christ upon the Cross, are expiated by the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and that by the bear opus operatum, by the offering this
Sacrifice of the Mass itself, without any good motion in the person for whom it
is offered: and thus the Sacrifice of the Mass destroys the virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice upon the Cross, to oblige men to holiness of life; for though none
but sincere and reformed Penitents are pardoned by the Sacrifice of the Cross,
the Sacrifice of the Mass will expiate the sins of unreformed Sinners, and then
there is no need to reform our lives. Thus I am sure all men understand it, or
they would never put their confidence in the Mass-Sacrifice; for if it does no
more for us than Christ's Death upon the Cross, it might be spared, for it
gives no new comforts to impenitent Sinners.

They are very sensible, that holiness of life is necessary to entitle us to
the Pardon and Forgiveness purchased by the Death of Christ; but then the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Humane Penances, and Satisfactions, and Merits, and
Indulgences, seem on purpose contrived to supply the place of Holiness of Life;
for no body can imagine else what they are good for. Christ has by his Death
upon the Cross, made a perfect Atonement for the sins of all true penitent and
reformed Sinners; and therefore a true Penitent, who according to the terms of
the Gospel, denies all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and lives soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, needs no Expiation but the Death
of Christ: Will they deny this? by no means! They grant, that all our sins are
done away in Baptism, merely by the application of Christ's Death and Passion
to us; and therefore the Death of Christ is a complete and perfect satisfaction
for all Sin, or else Baptism, which derives its whole virtue from the Death of
Christ, could not wash away all sin: What use can there be then of the new
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, of humane Satisfactions, and Merits, and
Indulgences? Truly none but this, that when our sins are expiated by the Death
of Christ, and the pardon of all our sins applied to us in Baptism, the Gospel
exacts a holy life from us, and therefore men forfeit the baptismal Pardon of
their sins by the Blood of Christ, unless they either live very holy lives, or
make some other satisfaction for their not doing so: And for this purpose the
Sacrifice of the Mass, humane Penances, and Satisfactions serve. It will not be
unuseful, nor unpleasant to draw a short Scheme of this whole matter, which
will explain this great Mystery, and make it intelligible, which now appears to
be nothing but nonsense and confusion.

Christ then has made a perfect Atonement and Expiation for sin; this is
applied to us at Baptism, wherein all our sins are forgiven; and while we
continue in this state of Grace, we cannot be eternally damned, though we may
be punished for our sins, both in this World and Purgatory. But every mortal
sin puts us out of the state of Grace, which we were in by Baptism, and till we
be restored to the state of Grace again, we must be eternally damned, because
we have no right to the Sacrifice and Expiation of Christ's Death: the only way
in the Church of Rome, to restore us to this state of Grace, is by the
Sacrament of Penance, and the Absolution of the Priest, which restores us to
the same state which Baptism at first put us into, and therefore very well
deserves to be thought a Sacrament: And thus we recover our interest in the
Merits of Christ's Death, and therefore cannot be eternally damned for our
sins; but still it is our duty to live well, for the Death of Christ does not
excuse us from Holiness of Life, which is the condition of the Gospel; and
therefore if we are in a state of Grace, and thereby secured from eternal
damnation, yet if we live in sin we must be punished for it, unless we can find
some other expiation for sin, than the Death of Christ upon the Cross, which
still leaves us under the obligations of a holy life, and therefore cannot make
such an Expiation for sin, as shall serve instead of a holy life: Now here
comes in the Sacrifice of the Mas, Humane Penance, Satisfactions, Indulgencies;

For the sacrifice of the Mass, as I observed before, does not serve the same
end, that the Sacrifice of the Cross does: the Sacrifice of the Mass is a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead; But what sins is it a
Propitiation for? For such sins for which men are to satisfy themselves; that
is, for all sins the eternal punishment of which is remitted for the Sacrifice
of the Cross. This is evident from their making the Sacrifice of the Mass a
propitiatory Sacrifice for the dead; that is, for the Souls in Purgatory, who
suffer there the temporal punishments of sin, when the eternal punishment is
forgiven: the Souls in Hell are capable of no Expiation, and therefore an
expiatory Sacrifice for the dead, can be only for the Souls in Purgatory, and
that is for the temporal punishment of sin, for which the Sacrifice of the
Cross is no Expiation; and the Mass is in no other sense made a Sacrifice for
the living than for the dead; and therefore is not to expiate the eternal, but
the temporal punishments of sin, as appears from hence, that the saying Masses,
or hearing Masses, or purchasing Masses, is reckoned among those Penances men
must do for the Expiation of their sins, and yet they can, by all they do, only
expiate for the temporal punishment of sin; and therefore Masses for the living
are only for the Expiation of those temporal punishments of sin, for which the
Sacrifice of the Cross made no Expiation. And I shall be so civil at present,
as not to inquire, how the Sacrifice of the Cross, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, which are the very same Sacrifice of the Natural Body and Blood of
Christ, come to serve such very different ends: that when Christ was Sacrificed
upon the Cross he expiated only for the eternal punishment of sin; when
Sacrificed in the Mass, only for the temporal. I need add nothing to prove,
that Humane Penances, Satisfactions, Merits, Indulgencies, are only to expiate
temporal punishment of sin, because it is universally acknowledged. Now if
these temporal punishments be only in lieu of Holiness and Obedience which the
Gospel requires to entitle us to the Expiation of Christ's Death upon the
Cross, as I have already shown; then it is evident to a demonstration, that the
Church of Rome has overthrown the Death and Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross,
considered as an argument of a holy life, by setting up the Sacrifice of the
Mass, Humane Penances, Satisfactions, Merits, Indulgencies, instead of the
Gospel-terms of obedience and holiness of life.

4. The Intercession of Christ for us, at the right hand of God, is another
powerful motive to Holiness of Life: It gives all the encouragement to true
penitent Sinners, that can be desired; For if any man sin, 1 John 2.2.
we have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, who is also a
propitiation for our sins. But then Christ mediates only in virtue of his
Blood, that is, only upon the terms and conditions of the Covenant of Grace
which was sealed by his Blood; that is, he mediates and intercedes only for
true penitent sinners; which obliges us, as we hope to be heard by God, when we
pray in the Name of Christ, truly and heartily to repent of all our sins, and
to live a new life.

This the Church of Rome also seems very sensible of, that Christ of his own
accord will not intercede for impenitent and unreformed sinners; that he who is
the great Example and the great Preacher of Righteousness, will not espouse the
Cause of incorrigible sinners, who are very desirous of pardon, but hate to be
reformed; and therefore they seem to think it as hopeless a thing to go
immediately to a holy Jesus, as to appear before the Tribunal of a just and
righteous God, without a powerful Advocate.

For this reason they have found out a great many other Advocates and Mediators
a great deal more pitiful and compassionate than Christ is, who by their
interest in him, or their great favor with God, may obtain that pardon which
otherwise they could not hope for; such as the Virgin Mary, who is the Mother
of Christ, and therefore, as they presume, has as great interest in and
authority over him, as a Mother has over her Son; besides those vast numbers of
meritorious Saints, whose Intercessions cannot but prevail for those sinners
whose Cause they undertake.

And that this is the true reason of their Addresses to Saints and the Virgin
Mary, though they will not speak out, is evident to any considering man: For
will they say, that Christ, who became man for us, who suffered and died for
us, who was in all things tempted like as we are, yet without sin; who did and
suffered all this on purpose that he might be a merciful and compassionate High
Priest, and might give us the highest assurance of his tenderness and
compassion for us. I say, can they suspect that such a High Priest will not
undertake to plead our Cause, if we be such as according to the terms of the
Gospel, it is his Office to interceed for? No Christian dare say this, which is
such a reproach to our common Savior, who has bought us with his own Blood;
and therefore no Christian who thinks himself within the reach and compass of
Christ's Intercession, can need or desire any other Advocate: but those who are
conscious to themselves of so much wickedness, that they cannot hope the holy
Jesus will intercede for them for their own sakes, have reason to procure some
other Favorites to intercede for them with their Intercessor; and to
countenance the matter they must recommend it to the practice of all
Christians, and more than so, make it Heresy to deny it. There is but one
Argument I know of against this, that any man should be so stupid as to think
that the Intercession of the Virgin Mary, or the most powerful Saints, can
prevail with our Savior to do that, which according to the Laws of his own
Mediation, they know he cannot and will not do: and this I confess I cannot
answer, but yet so it is. And thus the Intercession of Christ is made a very
ineffectual Argument to make men good; for though Christ will intercede for
none but true Penitents, the Church of Rome has a great many other Advocates
that will, or at least she persuades people that they will.

5. Another great Gospel-Motive to a holy life, is the hope of Heaven, and the
fear of Hell. As for the hope of Heaven, that is no otherwise a Motive to
holiness of life, but upon a supposition of the necessity of Holiness, that
without holiness no man shall see God; but this you have already heard, is
overthrown by the Church of Rome: and if men may go to Heaven without holiness,
I know no need of it for that purpose in this World.

But Hell is a very terrible thing, to be condemned to endless and eternal
torments with the Devil and his Angels; but then the Doctrine of Purgatory does
mightily abate and take off this terror: for though Purgatory be a terrible
place too, not cooler than Hell it self, yet it is not eternal; and men, who
are mightily in love with their sins, will venture temporal punishments, though
somewhat of the longest, to enjoy their present satisfactions: especially
considering how many easy ways there are for rich men to get out of Purgatory;
those who have money enough to buy Indulgences while they live, and Masses for
their Souls when they die, need not lie long there, if the Priests are not out
in their reckoning: and yet it is so easy a thing for a good Catholic to get
into Purgatory; especially if he take care frequently to confess himself, and
receive absolution, or do not die so suddenly as to be surprised in any mortal
sin, that Hell seems to be very little thought of, or feared in the Church of
Rome. Now I desire no better Argument, that all these are not Gospel-Doctrines,
than that they destroy the force of all those Arguments the Gospel uses to make
men good; that is, they are a direct contradiction to the Gospel of Christ.

6. I shall name but one Motive more, and that is the Examples of good men; 12
Heb. 1.
To be followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises;
that being encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses, we should lay aside
every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and run with patience
the race which is set before us. Now this is a powerful Argument, because they
were men as we are, subject to the same temptations and infirmities; and
therefore their Examples prove, that Holiness is a practicable thing; that it
is possible for men to conquer all the difficulties of Religion, and all the
temptations in this life; and many times in them we see the visible rewards of
Virtue in great peace of mind, great assurances of the divine favor, great
supports under all adversities, and such a triumphant death, as is a blessed
presage of a glorious Resurrection.

But now in the Church of Rome, if there be any great and meritorious Saints,
as they call them, their extraordinary Virtues are not so much for Imitation as
for a stock of Merits. The more Saints they have, the less reason other men
have to be Saints, if they have no mind to it, because there is a greater
treasury of Merits in the Church to relieve those who have none of their own.
The extraordinary Devotion of their Monasteries and Nunneries, (for so they
would persuade the World, that there is nothing but Devotion there) is not for
Imitation, and it is unreasonable it should, because no body sees it; and it is
impossible to imitate that recluse life, without turning the whole World into a
Monastery: but these Religious Societies furnish the Church with a stock of
Merits, out of which she grants Indulgencies to those, who are not very
religious; and it is plain, that if one man can merit for twenty, there is no
need, there should be above one in twenty good. Herein indeed the Members of
the Church of Rome, have the advantage of all other Churches, (especially if
they enter themselves into any religious Confraternity, to partake in the
Merits of the Society) that others can merit for them; and then if we can share
in the Merits of the Saints, we need not imitate them: a Church which has
Saints to merit for them on Earth, and to intercede for them in Heaven, if she
can but maintain and propagate a Race of such meriting Saints, (which is taken
care of in the Institution and Encouragement of Monastic Orders and
Fraternities) may be very indulgent to the rest of her Members, who do not like
meriting themselves. So that the principal Motives of the Gospel to Holy Life,
as appears in these Six Particulars, lose their force and efficacy in the
Church of Rome, and certainly those cannot be Gospel-Doctrines, which destroy
the great end of the Gospel to make men Good.

3 ly, Nor do the Gospel-means and Instruments of Holiness and Virtue escape
better in the Church of Rome: as will appear in a very few words.

Reading and Meditating on the Holy Scriptures, is one excellent means of
Grace, not only as it informs us of our Duty, but as it keeps a constant warm
sense of it upon our Minds, which nothing can so effectually do, as a daily
reading of the Scripture, which strikes the mind with a more sacred authority,
than any Humane Discourses can do: but this is denied to the People of the
Church of Rome, who are not allowed to read the Scriptures in the Vulgar
Tongue, for fear of Heresy, which, it seems, is more plain and obvious in the
Scripture than Catholic Doctrines: but they should also have considered,
whether the danger of Heresy or Sin be the greater; whether an orthodox faith
or a good life be more valuable; and if denying the people the use of the Bible
be the way to keep them orthodox, I am sure it is not the way to make them
good; True Piety will lose more by this, than the Faith will get by it.

Thus constant and servent Prayer, besides that supernatural grace and
assistance it obtains for us, is an excellent moral instrument of holiness: for
when men confess their sins to God with shame and sorrow, when with inflamed
Devotions, they beg the assistances of the Divine Grace, when their souls are
every day possessed with such a great sense awe and reverence for God, as he
must have, who prays devoutly to him every day; I say, it is impossible such
men should easily return to those sins, which they have so lately confessed,
with such shame and confusion and bitter remorse; that those who so
importunately beg the assistance of the Divine Grace, should not use their best
endeavors to resist Temptations, and to improve in Grace and Virtue, which is
a profane mockery of God, to beg his assistance, that he will work in us, and
with us, when we will not work: that those who have a constant sense and
reverence of God, should do such things, as argue, that men have no fear of God
before their eyes.

But this is all lost in the Church of Rome, where men are taught to Pray they
know not what, and when men do not understand their Prayers, it is certain such
Prayers cannot affect their minds, what other good soever Latin Prayers may do
them; and thus one of the most powerful Instruments of Piety and Virtue is
quite spoiled by Prayers in an unknown Tongue, which can no more improve their
Virtue than their Knowledge.

Sorrow for Sin is an excellent Instrument of true Repentance, as that
signifies the reformation of our Lives; for the natural effect of Sorrow is,
not to do that again, which we are sorry for doing; but in the Church of Rome,
this contrition, or sorrow for sin, serves only to qualify men for absolution,
and that puts them into a state of grace, and then they may expiate their sins
by Penances, but are under no necessity of forsaking them.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, besides those supernatural conveyances of
Grace, which are annexed to it, by our Savior's Institution, is a great Moral
Instrument of Holiness; it representing to us the Love of our crucified Lord,
the Merit and Desert of Sin, the Virtue of his Sacrifice to expiate our Sins,
and to purge our Consciences from Dead Works, and requiring the exercise of a
great many Virtues; an abhorrence and detestation of our Sins, great and ardent
Passions of Love and Devotion, firm Resolutions of Living to him, who Died for
us, Forgiveness of Enemies, and an Universal Love and Charity to all Men,
especially to the Members of the same Body with us; but in the Church of Rome
this admirable Sacrament is turned into a dumb show, which no body can be
edified with, or into a Sacrifice for the living and the dead, which expiates
Sin, and serves us instead of a Holy Life, as I observed above.

External Mortifications, and Severities to the Body, Fastings, Watchings, hard
Lodging, etc. are very useful Instruments of Virtue, when they are intended to
subdue the Flesh to the Spirit, and to wean our Minds from Sensual Enjoyments;
but when they are intended to satisfy for our Sins, not to kill them; to
punish our selves for our sins, that we may commit them more securely again,
this is not a means to break vicious Habits, and to conquer the love of Sin,
but only to conquer the fear of committing it.

This is enough to show, how far Popery is from promoting the great design of
the Gospel to improve and perfect Humane Nature and Holiness, and were there no
other Argument against it, this were sufficient to me to prove, That it cannot
be the Religion of the Gospel of Christ.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 27. line 10. for great, read greater. p.37.l.5.f. when, r. where. l.23.f.
contract, r. contact. p.40.l.27.f. should it, r. it should. p.79.l.22.f.
undermined, r. undetermined. p.80.l.3.f. corrupt, r. corrupts. l.22.f. up, r.
upon. p.91.l.22.r. in knowledge and holiness.

Books lately Printed for W. Rogers.
THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented; in
Answer to a Book, entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto.

An Answer to a Discourse, entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery, Quarto.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer.
Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity, and Transubstantiation, compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; 1 st and 2 d Part. In two Dialogues, between a
Protestant and a Papist. Quarto.

An Answer to the Eighth Chapter of the Representer's Second Part.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith. By a Person of Quality:
With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English
Reformation.

Sermons and Discourses: The Third Volume. By Dr. Tillotson, Dean of
Canterbury. 8o.

A Manual for a Christian Soldier, Written by Erasmus.

A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book.

A Book of Ciphers, or Letters Reverst: Price bound 5 s.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By
Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. In Octavo. Price 3 d.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In Octavo. Price 3 d.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began.

A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

The Reflecter's Defense of his Letter to a Friend: In Four Dialogues.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry: in which the Bishop of Oxford's
true and only Notion of Idolatry is Considered and Confuted.

The Protestant Resolved: or, a Discourse, showing the Unreasonableness of his
Turning Roman Catholic for Salvation. Second Edition.

The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation Demonstrated.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Benj. Calamy, D.D.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In
Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters.

A Preservative against Popery; being some Plain Directions to Unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. The First Part. The Fourth
Edition.

These three last by William Sherlock D.D. Master of the Temple.


