Numb. 32. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday July
30. to Monday August 6. 1660.
THere is none that can be ignorant of Englands Joy for his Majesty's happy
re^^^^. It has been the general contest of all people, to strive to outdoe
each other in their solemnities. Though our Books were a long time crowded with
what was done in this, or that place, yet were we forced to omit many, (as
Halifax, Warwick, etc.) not because they were any way inferior to others in the
expressions of their affect^ons, but to avoid the importunities of such as
daily throng to us. None of these (I hope) will blame us, if we pay that
Civility to a Foreigner, which we denied to our Countrymen; we being in this
somewhat more obliged to them, as doing that for love, which we were bound to
in duty. Take therefore this following Relation, as we received it by a Letter
from --

Heidelbergh, July 7.
THe solemn day appointed by his Electoral Highness for a public Thanksgiving
and rejoicing for the happy Return of His Majesty of Great Britain to his
Kingdoms, being come, viz. Tuesday last, it was celebrated here in this manner.
First his Highness and the whole Court left off their mourning habit that day
(which they wore before, and since resumed, for his late Majesty of Sweden, and
the deceased Electress Dowager of Brandenburgh) to make the day and action the
more joyful in every regard; at 8 of the clock his Highness came down from his
palace, attended with a Noble and well-ordered Retinue, to the great Church,
where choice music was heard in several parts thereof, and the 21. Psalm was
sung by the whole Congregation, which was followed by an eloquent Sermon out of
2 Samuel 19.14, 15. (a Text appointed then for the whole Palatinate, together
with a set form of prayer to give thanks for the mercy celebrated.) Sermon
being ended, Te Deum etc. was sung most solemnly, with Organs and all sorts of
musical instruments: The Church was so thronged, and the joy so great and
general, as if the Palatinate were but then restored, or their Peace but now
sealed and like to be settled. After this Divine service (and the like in the
rest of the Churches here) his Highness returned with a greater Train up to his
Palace, having invited diverse Lords and Gentlemen, strangers and others, who
were Princely entertained there, and his Majesty's health, long life and reign,
as also the health and happiness of both the Queens, the most illustrious Dukes
of York and Gloucester, the Princesses Royal, etc. were with hearty
apprecations cheerfully remembered, and sounded forth from thence all over the
City, without the least offense or scandal to any. In the afternoon his
Highness came down again into the City, to partake also of the Peoples civil
rejoycings, He having caused a very artificial Mount, beset seemingly with
Orange trees, to be raised near the Townhouse, diverse Youths Satyr-like
running tumbling and sporting thereon, while a Fountain thence ran with white
and red wine for three or four hours together; and from another place great
quantities of manchets (to make up a complete beverage with the wine) were
flung among the multitude by one Mr. Sandys, an English Gentleman servant to
his Highness. The Prince Elector himself also, and the young Prince, out of a
Balcony scattered some gold and silver upon the throng, which caused notable
pastime. One condemned to die, was likewise pardoned and released, having taken
the advantage of the day, and begged his life for King Charles the Second's
sake, which his Highness immediately granted. In the evening between nine and
ten, his Highness went up again, when on a sudden the towers of the Palace,
Castle and City, the River and the Hills begin to show their artificial lights
and fires, and the young Electoral Prince first himself fired some of his own
small ordnance, from a Battery upon the hill behind the garden, which served as
a warning to them at Manhlin and Frankindal to be in readiness with theirs,
five or six hours journey distant: Thereupon the Soldiery first in several
bodies began their vollies; after which from three other Batteries 30 Canons
played in order, and discharged thrice one after another; and those upon the
hills could plainly see, and partly hear the exact answers piece for piece, as
it were, from the said places, which yielded much pleasure to the observers,
but especially by Firework from the top of a Tower in the Palace, in which you
might see the Name of Charles II. and then that of the Prince Elector, as with
letters of gold in the air; besides the Fireballs, Darts, Rockets, the variety
and greatness of Bonfires, and all manner of sportful Representations, till
after midnight, all emulating one another who should most testify the
largeness of their devotion and affection. And that which gave the more luster
to the celebration of this Festival, was, that though for some days immediately
before and after, there fell a great deal of rain here, this whole day proved
as serene and fair for such a Jubilee, as heart could wish, and accordingly
doubled the joy and satisfaction of all.

By a letter written to her Majesty of Bohemia of the same date and place,
recounting most of the foregoing passages; there is also mention made of a
Letter the Prince Elector had received that very day from the Duke of
Wittenburg, showing how much he did partake of his Highness joy, and intended
Festival upon his Majesty's account of Great Britain, being sorry he could not
celebrate it on the same day, though he was resolved to set a day apart for all
his country, joyfully to solemnise so great a mercy, and so auspicious a
restoration. The Prince of Kassaw Dillenberg had the like intent and purpose;
the City of Worms, Spire, Landaw etc. had celebrated it already; the Press at
Heidelburg labored with learned Speeches, and Poems, the better to perpetuate
the remembrance of the day, and the blessed occasion of it; the City had been
so full of strangers from Hailbron, Franckfort, Strasburg etc. yea even from
parts of Helvetia upon the bruit of what was intended, that it had the
resemblance of an Inauguration or coronation time. At Franckfort, the conflux
of people and the general joy was so great, that no body there remembered the
like, since her Majesty's marriage.

Paris the 30 of July S. N.
Saturday last the Queen mother was at Mass in the Church of Notre Dame, from
whence she came to the Castle of Vicennes, and dined there with the King. On
Monday the Cardinal was very ill of the Gout and Gravel, but by virtue of some
remedy which was given him, he voided two stones, since which he has been
pretty well. The King visits him every day with great care, and so does the
Queen Mother; Prayers are made in all Churches for his recovery, which now only
is expected, to appoint the day for the Queens entrance, for which preparations
are still made, and with much industry continued. To make the Show the more
splendid, the Citizens are daily assembled in all the parts of this Town, to
exercise and train them up in Arms.

Some days since the Abbot Fantoni, Envoy Extraordinary from Poland, had
audience with the King, whom, in his Masters name, he gave thanks for those
good offices his Ambassadors had done concerning the peace with Sweden and
Poland, and afterward Complemented his Majesty touching his Marriage: He had
likewise audience given him by the Queen Mother, the young Queen, the Duke of
Anjo^, and Cardinal Mazarini, with whom, it is said, he had also a conference
touching the present War with the Muscovites.

From the Castle of Vicennes of the same date.
The King and Queen are daily here, expecting the day of their entrance at
Paris, and the recovery of the Cardinal, for whose present indisposition the
whole Court seems to be troubled. The young Queen having a mind to divert
her self, and to see the fashion of Paris went incognito in Mademoiselle
d'Orleance her Coach on Monday last, toward this City; but the noise of her
coming being bruited all over the Town, the people ran to meet the coach with
such a multitude, that her Majesty was forced to return back. And because she
had still a desire of seeing Paris, she went thither yesterday unknown,
accompanied by Monsieur the Duke of Anjou, where by the way she saw the Queen
Mother at Val de grace their Majesty's went together to the Louvre, and thence
they visited the Cardinal* and so returned to Vicennes. A Courrier is lately
dispatched hence for Spain, to carry the news of some evident marks taken
notice of, that the Queen is with child.

Whitehall.
On Monday last his Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the honor of
Knighthood on a young Swedish Nobleman, Baron Conrad Gyllenstierna.

We have not of late any mntion of Meilitary Affairs, which being at the
present a matter of great importance as to the safety of the Kingdom and
preservation of the quiet of the people, we shall now be somewhat the more large
in giving you an account of the Officers of the Army lately settled in command.
And first we shall begin to give you a List of those not formerly mentioned in
the Lord Viscount Mordant his Regiment, viz. Hartigill Broon Captain Tho:
Higgins capt. Francis Arundel Lieut: Philip Ers Ensign Thomas Pride Capt: James
Smith Capt. Nath: Harison Capt. James Gerrard Lieut: Rich: Gwyn Capt. Rowlenson
Lieut. Anthony Hastings Ensign.


Next we shall acquaint you with some little alteration in Col. Tho: Reads
Regiment, where Peter Pike, late Captain Lieut: has the company that was
captain Belchams, who is removed from that command, John Curtis capt: Lieut:
Morris Brown Ensign to captain Pike in the place of Robert Read; Francis
Everard, Lieutenant to capt. George Everard, William Jones Ensign. We shall now
show you how the Regiment of horse that was Unton Crokes, is disposed of, viz.
Dan Oneale of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Colonel of the Regiment: William
Basset, Son of Sir Richard Basset, Governor of Cardiffe castle, Capt. Lieut.
Sir John Stevens Major: Lord Mandevil, eldest Son of the Earl of M^n^hester,
Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's household, Capt. of the Troop late Capt.
Whethams, Lord Windsor capt. Nicholas Armerer capt. one of his Majesty's
Esquires, commands the Troop late capt. Gascoignes. (...) Bartue, Second Son of
the Earl of Lindsey, Captain of that which was Col. Upcotts Troop. That
Regiment that was Col. Tho: Sheffeilds, is commanded by the Right Honorable
Earl of Ossorie, eldest Son of the Marquis of Ormond, and Tho. Sheffeild is his
Lieutenant Colonel.

Having thus far showed you the settlement of the Army, now take an account of
some Garrisons, where we shall first begin with

Earl of Portland Governor of the Isle of Wight, and all the Garrisons and
Ports therein.

Humphrey Turney Captain of Comes Castle.

Barnaby Burleigh (brother to that valiant Burleigh that was murdered in the
Isle of Wight) Governor of Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight.

William Lord Sandys Governor of Portland, Weymouth, and Sandfoot Castle.

With these we will take in George Rawleigh Captain-Lieutenant to the Right
honorable the Earl of S. Albans in the Island of Jersey.

Though these persons and others entrusted with Commands in the Army, are of
greater fidelity then to be suspected in the least of disloyalty, yet too much
care cannot be taken for the safety and security of his Majesty's Kingdoms; and
to this purpose, several Commissions are granted under the Great Seal of
England, to persons of known integrity and loyalty, to administer the oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy to all the Officers and Soldiers, particularly to
Buller, a Member of this present Parliament, and Major of his Highness the Duke
of York's Regiment, to see that duty performed by the Officers and Soldiers of
the said Regiment; as also another Commission to Jeremiah Smith, to see the
same done in Sir John Cloberies Regiment, of which he is Major.

Commissions under the Great Seal are likewise issued out to the several
Muster-masters in Ireland, to administer the said Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance to all the Officers and Soldiers within the Precinct of their
Musters.

Care is likewise taken for settling the Militia in such hands as may be most
serviceable to his Majesty, and satisfactory to all that wish the peace of the
Nation.

Letters from Edenbrough of the 26 July, inform us that the English
Commissioners there, have sent up such Soldiers as were in the Hospital at
Edenbrough, to London, to be further provided for: as likewise, that they have
released several Prisoners, some that were driven in by a storm at Kelkowbery,
and there taken, belonging to Cap. Patrick Tailor, in the ship called the St.
Ann of St. Sebastian, as also above 20 others that were taken by his Majesty's
Frigate called the Greyhound. They give us no other account of the Lord
Warriston, than that they have yet no Intelligence of him, though a hundred
pound Sterling is assured to any one that shall bring him.

For the Legal dispatch of Ecclesiastical matters, Dr. Chawworth was by the
Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, elected Vicar General above a Fortnight since.

From Hamborough, July 17.
The Danish forces which at their last muster were found to be about 4000 lie
as yet still in their old quarters, and it is not likely that any of them
should be disbanded, since it is constantly reported, that more are to be
entertained; neither do the Imperial and Brandenburgs forces stir from their
quarters, however the Governor of Gottorp has given his Highness the Duke of
Holstein hopes to surrender that place to him very suddenly.

Advertisement.
WHereas upon his Majesty's happy arrival, by his Majesty's and the general
approbation, several Officers of the late King (of ever Blessed and Glorious
Memory) assembled themselves to testify their Affection in such capacity as
their Misfortunes had reduced them to; and having then that honor and happiness
to be conducted to their appointed Station by the truly Noble Sir John Stawell,
Knight of the Bath, and that neither their Affection nor Loyalty may dye, they
unanimously invite, all their Fellow Sufferers, whose honor has been equally
concerned with them, to enter their names at Mr. Coffins house near the Rose
Tavern, that such his Majesty's faithful Subjects, may complete the List of
Loyalty, lately presented the Lord Marquis of Ormond, by Mr. Richard Littell,
and that no time may be lost, all commission Officers are desired to repair
with their Certificates to the said Mr. Coffins, near the Rose Tavern in
Covent Garden, where in Fourteen days time they may be Enlisted.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
Tuesday night, July 31. 1600. at Waudown-green in the Parish of Fullham in the
County of Middlesex, the Lock of a Stable door was opened, and a large
land-Spaniel Bitch stolen out: She was almost all white, 2 small red spots in
her forehead in the white, her ears almost all red having a little white mixed
in the red; on her right shoulder a large cross cut close to the skin, and with
Whelp* If any bring tidings of her to the; Crow^s in St Paul's Churchyard,
London, they shall receive 40 shillings for their pains.

A White Spaniel Bitch (called Duce) with a red Ear and a red spot on her right
Side* belonging to his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, was lost ^ast February. He
that shall bring her to any Officer of the A^my shall receive five pounds for
his pains. If any Officer shall receive information of her, he is desired to
give notice of it to his Grace at the C^ckpit.

Gentlemen, Be pleased to take notice* That those so famous Lozanges or
Pectoraly approved for the cure of Consumptions, Coughs Catarrhs, Ast^ma's,
Ploarsness, and all other diseases incident to the Lungs, and a Sovereign
Antidote against the Plague, and all other contagious diseases, and
obstructions of the Stomach, are only made and to be had of Mr Th^ophi^us
Buckworth on Mi^e-^nd-green. And for more convenience to those that live remot^
quantities of them seal^d up with his Coat of Arms are l^ft constantly at the
house of Mr Richard Lowndes at the sign of the White Lion near the Little North
door of St Paul's Church, Mr Henry Scile over against St Du^stans Church in
Fleetstreet* Mr William Milward at Westminster Hall gate, Mr John Place at
Furnivals Inn gate in Holb^^^, Mr Robert Horn at the Turks-head near the
Entrance of the Royal-Excha^g^, Booksellers, and no others.

To all Ministers, Churchwardens, Constables, Head-boroughs, and all other
Officers whom i^ may concern.
WHereas there happened a great l^ss by fire at the Town of Faken^am in the
County of N^^ff^lk upon the Eleventh day of Apri^ 1659. to the value of 5081.
l. And upon Petiti^n of the poor Inhabitants to ^is Majesty, it has pleased
the King with the ad^ice of His Counsel to grant His Gra^ious Letters Patents
under the Great S^al for a ^oll^cti^n to be made in certain Counties of
England, bearing date at W^stminst^r the Fourth day now of J^ly last past.

Since which time, some idle Vagabonds* and Rogues have stole or gained* Copy,
and have induced some Printer to print the sa^e, and are gone into some parts
of the Cou^ties with those Papers, and have caus^d sums to be c^llected, as at
Putne^ and Bams near London. Therefore it is ^esired, That if any person
whatsoever shall come to any pl^ce with any such B^ief not having the (...)
S^^l, that he or they may be apprehended and carried before a Justice of the
Peace, to answer to his or their Offen^e, no Bail to be taken for them: He
that takes them or any of them shall have Twenty shillings for his pain^,
besides what charges he is out, to be paid at the House of Mr Hugh L^w at the
White-Har^ in Botolph lane near Billingsgate in London. August 6. 1660.

In some of the Prints last Monday, there was a mistake of the Act of
Poll-money, for the Act of Sewers.


Venice, July 2.
They write from Dalmatia, that the Bashaw of Bo^sina having drawn his Forces
near Cliss^, to spoil and waste the Country thereabouts, and to burn the
Suburbs of that place, had been for five days together in such a manner
disordered by the continual playing of Cannons, and the strong sallies in (...)
by the Morlacks out of that Town, that he was forced to (...) those parts, and
to leave behind him a great number of his men, taking his march toward
Schenico, which (...) threatened to attaque, so soon as those places of (...)
some Forces which he expected from (...) to him. Those who are retired from
(...) with some recruits of horse and foot, destroying the Cou^t^y with fi^e
and sword, and exercising the greatest cruelties upon the poor people,
especial the Morlacks. From Corsu it is advertised, that in pursuance of an
Order from the Senate, those o^ the ordinary Militia of the three Islands had
made strong in roads upon the Turks, and that a great party should likewise be
sent for Candia, there to serve for Soldiers and Pioneers. From Zara we
understand, that twelve Turkish Vessels being come to infest the Gulf, the
Proveditor Grimanni falling upon them with three Galleys and four Brigandines,
had taken one of them, and dispersed the rest. A little before the same
Proveditor knowing that there were ten Galiots of the Turks abroad at Sea, to
enter upon the Coast of Dalmatia, and to join with other Vessels thereabouts
upon a considerable enterprise, he chased them with his Galeass, and three
other Gall^es. They write from Candia, that a squadron of the Vene^ian Fleet
had taken a Turkish Vessel by Barbary, and besides three other small Vessels
laden with Rice and poudred flesh, and a pinnace laden with Ammunition for
Canea. Information is brought, that the Galleys of Malta, with those of the
Pope's and of Tuscany, being past by the Isle of Zante, had taken their couse
toward Candia, to join with the Venetian Armada.

Dito July 11.
Letters from Candia intimate, that the courage of the Turks there began to be
much abated, in regard the Commonwealth of Venice was now vigorously assisted
by the other Christian Princes, viz. their Majesty's of Spain and France, etc.
which had caused some of the Turkish Officers and Soldiers to come over for
Candia, relating that there was great scarcity of provision at Canea; wherefore
our General Bembo had sent part of his Fleet thither, to hinder that no
provision might be brought in there. Our Armada and the City of Candia are as
yet well provided with all manner of necessaries. It is likewise reported, that
those Turks which lay about Candia, are retreated back to Canea.

Whitehal.
His Majesty having June 22. received a congratulatory Letter from the Prince
Elector Palatine, which was brought by that worthy Gentleman Christopher Clos
of Keyembergh, Captain of his Highness Life guard of Horse; he had audience,
and was kindly received by His Majesty, who told him he would take care to
render an answer to the Prince Elector Palatine, which was done with such
dispatch, that August 2. he set forward on his journey.

Tho. Sumptner Alderman, and Mr Nicholas Sudell of the Common Council of
Preston in Lancashire, being favored with the company of Sir George Booth, Sir
Robert Binglosse, Sir Ralph Ashton. Sir Gilbert Ireland, and Colonel West,
presented his Majesty a surrender of a Fee-farm Rent purchased by that Town for
the preservation of their Liberties in the late time of distraction. Take their
own words.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most obedient subjects, The Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses
of your Borough and Town of Preston in Amoundernesse in the County Palatine of
Lancaster, do most humbly make this public Representation of our joyful and
thankful acknowledgement of that universal happiness and satisfaction which God
has brought us, in the repossession of the Throne by your most excellent
Majesty; of which happy revolution, as we cannot but see the present
administration of the most eminent righteousness, by reason of the indubitable
and inviolably Sacred Title of your Majesty, and the comfortable hopes that are
bound up therein, of future security and satisfaction to all good men, through
that famous prudence, piety, and sweetness of your most excellent disposition,
and Royal spirit, so we do in all humility assure your Majesty, of our unfeigned
fidelity and affection to your Sacred Person, Crown, and Government, from our
fealty and allegiance, from which no powers or pretense shall withdraw us; and
for the support whereof in its full security, splendor, and establishment, we
shall freely sacrifice the dearest things, of liberty, life, and fortune.

We must confess, in those invasions made upon authority in these unhappy
times, which have had so deep a reflection upon all the comforts of your Sacred
Majesty, we find our selves involved, in the procurement thereof, by the
contribution of our particular sins and failings; and therefore do humbly
prostrate our selves before your Royal Grace, as being well assured, that your
people shall not more desirously implore, then your Majesty impart your
Princely pardon, and knows how to consider the necessities and temptations of
the times that we have lived under. We do therefore humbly pray your most
Excellent Majesty to receive this Borough Town and Incorporate Body, into your
Royal Favor and Protection, and to be a support and preservation to such just
Liberties and Privileges as have been granted to them by your Royal
Predecessors of blessed memory, and not to suffer any consideration of such
fatal accidents of War as have fallen out in this place, or any mis-report
thereof, to deprive us of that persuasion of our loyalty in your Majesty's
thoughts, which we shall endeavor to preserve for ever, by the utmost
contribution of our all to the service and devotion of your Crown and
Government. And whereas through the exigency of the late times* your foresaid
subjects were enforced for the preservation of this place from being invaded
upon in those rights granted to us by your Royal Predecessors, to purchase of
those that pretended to have authority to dispose thereof, the Fee-farm Rent of
fifteen pounds per an^um due from this Town to your Majesty; We do now in all
humility, freely and cheerfully surrender and resign the same into your
Majesty's hands, with all Title or Right which may any way be claimed or
pretended to the same, humbly beseeching your most Excellent Majesty to accept
thereof, as also of the whole contents of this our most submissive
Congratulation and Address, which as the unanimous cheerful act of each of us,
we have caused to be Sealed with the Common Seal of this Borough, and Signed
by our Mayor, for and in the name of the whole Gommonalty, the 13 of July, in
the twelfth year of your Majesty's Reign over England, Scotland, France and
Ireland.

His Majesty was pleased to accept it with expressions of his affections to
that Town, and those Gentlemen that came with them.

Books lately Printed and Published.
(...), or the Loyal Subjects Exultation for the Royal Exiles Restoration; in
the Parallel of King David and M^phibes^^th on the one side, and our Gracious
Sovereign King CHARLES, and His loving Subjects, on the other. By Simon Ford,
Minister of All Saints Church in Northamp^on. To be sold by Samuel Gellibrand
at the sign of the Golden Ball in St Paul's Churchyard.

Sions Hallelujah: Set forth in a Sermon preached before the Right Honorable
House of Peers, in the Abby-Church of Westminster, on Thursday June 28. being
the day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for His Majesty's safe Return.
By Tho. Hodges, Rector Ecclesiae de Kensington.

(...)* Gods great Demonstrations and D^mands of Justice, Me^cy and Humility,
Set forth in a Sermon preached before the Honourab^^ H^use o^ Commons, at their
Solemn Fast, before their Sitting, April 30. 1660. B John Gauden, D.D

An ANSWER to a Quakers seventeen Heads of Queries, containing in them seventy
seven Questions. Wherein sundry Scriptures out of the Prophets and Apostles are
cleared: The maintenance of Ministers by Tithes is by Scripture fully
vindicated: Several Cases of Conscience are resolved: Several Points of
Christian Religion are confirmed: Parochial Churches, and the Practices of some
things in these our English Churches are thoroughly justified: The Grand
Antichtist, with the Heretical Antichrists are decyphered and Parallelled. By
John Bewick Minister of the Gospel, and Rector of the Parish Church of Stanhop
in Weredale in the County of Durham.

All three sold by Andrew Crook at the sign of the Green-Dragon in St Paul's
Churchyard.

Thomas Clifford and Thomas Chaff Esqs; Members of Parliament, accompanied by
Mr Christofer Maynard, and Mr Gilbert Eveleigh Aldermen of the Borough of
Totnes in the County of Devon, presented an Address to his Majesty, with an
hundred pieces of Gold in a Gold-wrought Purse. The Address follows: To the
KING's most Excellent Majesty.
(...) humble Address of the Town and Borough of Totnes in the County of Devon.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THe rejoicings of our hearts, for the eminent appearing of the hand of God for
your Majesty in such late miraculous revolutions, by overturning and
overturning and overturning, even until he had as it were with his own finger
chalked out a path for your Majesty's happy Restoration to your Fathers
Throne, cannot be confined within our own breasts. We therefore humbly crave
leave to express our Congratulations, to offer the inwardness of our hearts for
your Majesty's concerns* and to profess our ready obedience to your Royal
Scepter.

Though we are of the least among the Tribes, yet will we boast (as we may our
antiquity) our entire Loyalty with the chiefest; of which there was lately a
clear testimony, when this County, within which we are, appeared for and
demanded a Free Parliament (which was also a leading case to the rest of the
Kingdom, and was then the likelyest way for your Majesty to acquire your
Rights, and we our own Privileges) we then were so far engaged as to resist
even unto blood, two of our Inhabitants lo^sing their lives in the dispute.

And as an Evidence of our still constant and affectionate Fidelity, we
likewise tender by the hands of our Representatives a free and willing
Offering, though but a small one, such another as we presented to your Majesty
when you departed from us in the year 1646. when we could no longer protect
you, but your prevailing enemies hunted you as a Partridge on the mountains.
The general decay of Trade since your Majesty's most unfortunate absc^sion from
us has disabled us from greater performances at present; but we are now in hope
of enlivening and quickening beams from your Majesty's gracious return, that may
have also influence even on foreign Commerce and Trafique, and cause it again
to flourish, by which we may be empowered more amply to express our affections:
A peace with Spain we suppose will much conduce to the effecting of this.

Pardon we humbly beseech your Majesty our presumption in mentioning these
particulars, we shall forbear all other, and acquiesce with confidence in your
Majesty's pious proceedings and determinations in the settlement both of Church
and State, and that they may tend to the honor of God, your prosperous Reign
here, and everlasting glory hereafter, shall ever be the prayer of

(Sacred SIR) Your most loyal and obedient Subjects.




This being after a short Speech made by Mr Clifford read to his Majesty, he
received it graciously, giving them assurance of his especial care to encourage
foreign Commerce, and vouchsafed them the honor of his hand.

(...) our last, you have this alteration in the Army. (...) Duke of Buckingham
is Colonel of the Regiment (...) ^olonel Gibbons. Arthur Arscot Capt.
Lieutenant, (...) Washington Lieut. Col. Henry Norwood Major, John (...) Capt.
Edward Barham Capt. Tho. Paulden Capt. Hampden Capt.

With these we will join three other Companies of the same Regiment, which
being constant to his Excellency, and appearing with him in Scotland, have not
had the least change, viz.

John Waller Capt. Barth. Henderson Lieut. William Knight Ensign.

William Richardson Capt. Joseph Clunn Lieut. William Pearson Ensign.

Ios. Horsley Capt. Phineas Brook Lieut. Well Ensign.

The Letters from Scotland tell us nothing of Import, save only that Capt.
Kiffin late Collector of the Shire of Air, is committed Prisoner to Edinburgh
Castle.

Though there has been great industry used for the apprehending of several
persons by the Black Rod, yet they keep themselves so private, that besides
those formerly mentioned, none has yet been taken but Colonel Croxton.

We have formerly acquainted you, That His Majesty would not touch any after
the times formerly mentioned for the Evil, till further notice was given; And
now lest any one should put himself to an unnecessary expense in attending that
Cure, we are again commanded to tell you, That His Majesty will touch no more
till about Michaelmas, of which we shall give you timely Advertisement.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


