Numb. 36 Mercurius Publicus, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence: WITH
The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For Information
of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday August 30. to Thursday
September. 6. 1660.
Amsterdam, August 21.
THe Post of Osnabrug reports, that about six days since some of the Garrison
of Munster, after they had been very merry the night before, made a Sally out
of that City, when they were yet half drunk, taking in a small Fort which the
Bishop had caused to be raised for the blocking up of the Place, and putting
some men in it to maintain it; But as they returned back to the City, the
Bishops Horse ^ell in upon the rear of them, and killed about thirty men, among
whom one of the Burgomasters was found. The Bishop had caused some of the
Citizens that were killed, to be hanged up.

A Letter from Major Robert Holmes, Commander of the Heneretta, sent unto Baron
Battavella in Spain.
My Lord,
BEing appointed by comm^nd from His Royal Highness the Duke of York, to wait
on Your Excellency with one of His Majesty's Ships, the King of Great Britain,
I think it fit to let Your Excellency know* That I am safely arrived upon the
Coast, and intend to Anchor at Gatharia Road, where I hope to hear from you,
and in order thereunto have sent my Ketch, to bring Your Excellencies commands.
I did intend to put in to Passage; but finding the entering of the Harbor so
narrow, I dare not venture with a Ship of this concernment without Your special
Order; and if Your Excellency think not this place convenient, be pleased to
appoint any other, and I shall immediately set sail toward it, if wind and
weather will permit. The enclosed Letters were given me by Count Constang, and
Monsieur de Ovietta: I shall humbly beg Your Excellencies pardon for not
waiting on you with them my self.

My Lord, Your Excellencies most affectionate and humble Servant, Robert Holmes.
From on Board the Heneretta, off of Cape Martin Chegoe, Aug. 8. 1660.

Edinbrough, Aug. 25. 1660.
On wednesday the 22. of August, the Earl of Glencairn, Lord Chancellor of
Scotland, came into this City honorably attended by about 1000. Horse. The
Major General, Colonel Daniel, and Colonel Disne the English Commissioners,
with several Field-Officers, and two Troops of the Major Generals Regiment of
Horse, went to Mussleborough to meet his Lordship, and attended him thence to
the House designed for his Lordship in this City. At his coming in to
Edinborough, the Earl of Winton rode on his right hand, and Major General
Morgan on his left: He was guarded from the Watergate to the Nether-Bow, by
the Major Generals Regiment of Foot. The Lord Chancellor being come the
Committee of three Estates (according to the late Proclamation) sat on
Thursday, Aug. 23. and information being given of some Remonstrating Ministers
that were at Robert Symson, the Collectors house; Orders were sent to Captain
Newman in Edinborough Castle, to command thence 20. Musketeers to Symson's
house, who found the Ministers subscribing a Paper tending to the disturbance
of this Kingdom. The Ministers were carried Prisoners to Edinborough Castle:
Their names are Mr. James Guthrie, Minister of Sterling. Mr. Robert Trayle,
Ministers of Edinborough. Mr. John Strivling, Ministers of Edinborough. Mr.
Alexander Moncreif, Minister of Scooney. Mr. John Semple, Minister of Carffern.
Mr. Thomas R^msey, Minister of Foulden. Mr. Gilbert Hall, Minister of
Kirkliston. Mr. John Scot, Minister at Ornham. Mr. George Nairne, Minister at
Brunt Island. Mr. John Murray, Minister of Maffin Parish. James Kirk, Lord of
Soudaywell.


Whereupon the Lord Chancellor with the Committee of the Three Estates, the
very next day set forth this following Proclamation.

GOD Save the KING.
A Proclamation by the Committee of Estates convened by His Majesty's special
Authority, against unlawful Meetings and seditious Papers.
At Edinburgh, August 24. 1660.
THe Committee of Estates in obedience to His Majesty's Proclamation being met,
and taking to their se^ou^ consideration the goodness of God, who in his great
mercy has restored the Kings Majesty to the Exercise of ^is Royal Government;
And withal, considering His ^^jesties great care of, and affection to this His
Majesty's Anc^ent Kingdom of Scotland, in Calling and Authorizing the said
Committee of Estates to Meet; And they finding it their duty to prevent all
unlawful Meetings, which may tend to the prejudice of His Majesty's Service, or
may again involve His Majesty's good Subjects into new Troubles; Have thought
it fit in His Majesty's Name and Authority, to prohibit, And by these Presents
do prohibit and discharge all unlawful and unwarrantable Meetings or
Conventicles in any place within this His Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland,
without His Majesty's special Authority; And likewise all seditious Petitions
and Remonstrances, under what pretense soever which may tend to the disturbance
of the Peace of this Kingdom, or alienating and debauching the affections of
His Majesty's Subjects from their due obedience to His Majesty's lawful
Authority, and that under all highest pains. And for this effect, appoints all
Sheriffs of Shires, and Magistrates of Burghs to be careful within their
respective Bounds, that no such pernicious and dangerous meetings be permitted,
but that they be timeously prevented, hindered, made known and discovered to
the Committee of Estates. And ordain these presents to be forthwith Printed,
and Published at the Market cross of Edinburgh, and the Head Burghs of the
respective Shires within this Kingdom, that none pretend ignorance hereof.

Signed in the Name, and by Warrant of the Committee of Estates. GLENCARNE
Chancellor. I. P. D. Com.


After which was set forth another Proclamation commanding that no Disorders of
Insolences be committed by any person whatever within this Kingdom upon any of
the English Nation, under all highest pain, after which they adjourned till
Tuesday following.

White Hall.
His Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the Honor of Knighthood upon
Herbert Perrot, Esquire, a worthy Member of the House of Commons, serving in
Parliament for the Borough of Weobly, in the County of Herreford.

On Thursday last that accomplished Personage George Earl of Bristol,
entertained His Majesty at his own house with a Supper, with whom was Their
Royal Highnesses the Dukes of York and Gloucester, attended by the Marquess of
Ormond, and other Persons of Honor.

On Friday the Lords had a Conference with the Commons, wherein Their Lordships
acquainted the Commons with His Majesty's Message for an Adjournment from the
eighth of September to the sixth of November next.

Hamburgh, Aug. 25.
The Danish Ambassadors who lately arrived here out of Holland, are this day
gone by land for Denmark. The Imperial Field-Marshal Montecuculi, is daily
expected here. Two days ago arrived here from Sweden, the Pa^sgrave of
Su^zhach, and the Prince of Anha^; they intend to stay here some few days, to
wait on the Queen of Sweden, and then to return into Germany. The confederate
Forces are now at last broke up in Holsten, being appointed to quarter this
night at Rensburgh, and to morrow at New Minister; and those 600 horse which
were said to continue in Holsten, are likewise to withdraw on the 21 instant,
and to follow after the rest. The Imperial horse which were quartered in
Meklenburg, are already drawn together in order to their speedy march out of
that country, and the Foot is to follow them within a fortnight. The
Ratifications of peace with the Emperor, Sweden, Poland, and Brandenburg, are
mutually exchanged and delivered at Danzick, on the sixth and eighth courant,
and Elbing is to be delivered up to the King of Poland on the 14. of this
month. What other place will be given for it to the Elector of Brandenburg, is
not yet certainly known; Field-Marshal Schack is made a Senator of the Kingdom
of Denmark, and Major General Eggerick is appointed Governor of Copenhagen.
The Parliament in Sweden is to Assemble on the 21 of September. and the
Ceremonies of the late Kings Funeral are to be performed in the month October
following; which when done, several Embassies are to be dispatched thence for
England, France, Holland and other places.

Vienna, 25. Aug.
Letters which the last Post from Gratz, intimate, that his Imperial Majesty
was to proceed on his journey for Carin^hia and ^rain at the beginning of the
next month, accompanied only with few of his Court, and resolved to go so far
as Triest on the Adriatic Sea coast, where the V^netians are a preparing of
several Nav^l divertisemen^s and curiosities, to entertain his Majesty; which
it so, then his Majesty's return would not he so sudden as otherwise was
expected. The Venetians pursue their Lev^e^ in these parts, with much
eagerness, and get a number of good Soldiers of the Bava^ian dis-banded Forces
into their service. The Estates of Nether- Austria are to Assemble here the
next week: We are advertised from Hungaria, that the Count of Serin, upon Order
from his Imperial Majesty, has withdrawn his Forces from the Fort of Canischa.

Venice, August 6.
Two of our Galleys, with many armed B^^kes, are lately arrived at Ancona; the
Turkish Pirates upon information hereof, retreated out of the Gulf with their
Booty: But others are since gone to the Isle of Elba, where they have plundered
the Town of Piumbino, and carried away many slaves, together with the Nuns of
the Cloister in that place. The Turks having received a supply of 4^0 horse in
Canea, they have so far made their approaches to the City of Candia, that they
begin to annoy it with slinging of fire into it; But ours, to relieve the
place, have drawn their Forces together about Cerigo. Here arrived lately a
Turkish Gally, which was mastered by 170 Slaves, who all had their liberty and
a piece of money given them.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Due way of Composing the Differences on Foot, Preserving the Church.
According to the Opinion of Herbert Thorndike: Sold by John Martin, James
Allestry, and Thomas Dicas, at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Hague, September 20. S. N.
The Lords States of the Province of Zealand, to the number of twenty six,
having been fetched up with several Coaches to their audience with the Lords
States of Holland, Monsieur Adri^n Vet, Pensioner of the States of Zealand,
made a very eloquent and large Speech, wherein he remonst^ated to them, those
motives and reasons which induced his Principals to settle and establish the
Government of these Provinces upon their ancient Foundation, under a Lieutenant
or Captain Admiral General, for which trust they had nominated his Highness the
Prince of Orange, according to their resolution taken on the seventh of this
month, desiring the States of Holland would be pleased to concur with them
therein: In order whereunto, a conference is to be held b^tween the Deputies of
those two States, to endeavor a joint condescension to, and ratification of
the premises. What the result of it will be, a short time must discover. There
is no certainty yet of the Ambassadors going hence for England, and it is
thought that they can hardly have their dispatch these six weeks.

An Extract of the Resolution taken by the Lords States of the Province of
Zealand on Saturday the seventh of August, S. N. concerning his Highness the
Prince of Orange.
We the Lords States of Zealand having most seriously and deliberatively ^n
diverse Sessions considered of the ^enor of the fourth Article touching their
Conventions, and the respective eminent charges heretofore successively held by
their Highnesses the P^^^ces of Orange of immortal memory; and nearly
reflecting on what by these conjunctures of times and affairs ought principally
to be observed, as tending to the greatest honor, welfare and service, as well
of this S^ate in General, as of this Province in particular: we do once more
declare it to be our judgment and opinion (as we have done several times
heretofore) that to the beforementioned end and purpose, the Chief management
of the public Concern must be invested and entrusted with certain Eminent men
and persons of Quality and Extraction, in pursuance of those several
Remonstrances, and Resolutions vigorously set forth in the beginning of the
troubles and afterward, as well by the States General, as the respective
Provinces. And although the misfortune of many intricate occurrences happening
in these late years, after the decease of his Highness Prince William the
second, in these, as well as in the Neighboring Countries was a great hindrance
and could not well allow, that such a Resolution as was necessary and much
wished for, touching the appointment and Election of such a chief and certain
person, for the Government, should have its desired effect; yet finding, that
by Gods Gracious and unserchable Providence, those unhappy distractions and
troubles are ceased, and taking notice of a more favorable Constitution of
affairs and opportunities as to the whole Christian world in general, and these
Provinces in particular, which to the redress and resettlement of the State
ought to be neglected, and consequently reassuming our beforementioned wholesome
Intention of Electing one person or other qualified, who most worthily and with
the most confidence could be entrusted with the chief Government of this State
in General, and of this Province in particular; We the said Lords States of
Zealand can find no person of more Credit, worth or respect then his Highn^ss
the present Prince of Orange, he being not only the offspring of those
Princes, who with the hazard of their Estates and blood have laid the
foundation of this Commonwealth, and by their excellent and courageous conduct
purchased so honorable and glorious a Liberty, which to the Admiration of all
the whole world we at present enjoy; But being likewise by blood, affinity and
Alliances annexed to the greatest and mightiest Princes of Christendom, by whom
this State in its troubles and necessities has been principally supported, and
whose friendship and Confederacies for the time to come will be of most concern
to us; considering also his Princely Qualities and Virtues wherewith God
Almighty has been pleased to indow his Highness from his very Infancy, very
well agreeing with the Government and Humor of these Nations, who seem to take
a special pleasure and wel-liking of them, and to promise to themselves much
Happiness, Blessing and prosperity; and finally regarding, that the said Prince
has a fair Estate, and large Possessions in most part of the Provinces of this
State, and particularly in that of Zealand, whereby it can be maintained, that
before all others, he is mainly interessed to endeavor the preservation and
welfare of this State. We therefore, being solemnly summoned and assembled, as
is usual, upon this present Subject, have resolved and determined, out of the
alleged and other weighty respects and reasons, with a general and unanimous
consent to declare;

1. That the Prince of Orange, in behalf of this Province, together with the
other Confederates of the Assembly of their High and mighty Lordships the
States General, shall be chosen and nominated Captain and Admiral General of
the United Netherlands, with a convenient Commission and Instructions to be
agreed and concluded upon between the several Provinces, and a yearly revenue
of 100000 Gilders for his maintenance, to be levied upon the States account,
and to begin from the time the Commission is issued out.

2. To which purpose, certain Deputies are to be appointed by this assembly, to
repair to the assembly of the Lords States General, to tender to their
Lordships this point of electing a Governor, and with the best reasons to
procure their consent, and a speedy effect of it.

3. That a tender of the charge of Governor, Captain and Admiral-general of
both the Provinces, be presently made to his Highness the said Prince of
Orange, with a convenient Commission and instructions to be issued out without
delay, to which the Lords States of Holland are to be required to give their
concurrence, that so in regard of their common interests, and according to
ancient practice, this affair may be determined pari passu, and with joint
advice; and that a Commission be drawn and sealed, as it was done in the year
1647.

4. Yet in case this appointment of the Prince for the abovementioned places
should not take effect with the Lords States General, and the States of
Holland, contrary to the expectation, wish and good intention of this assembly,
that then, upon a full report of their Deputies concerning their negotiation,
this Assembly will take care, and order affairs so, as may most tend to the
honor, welfare and service of the country.

5. It is the unanimous consent of the said Lords States of Zealand, that the
beforementioned Prince of Orange shall not exercise those eminent charges of
General and Admiralship, till his Highness come to be eighteen years of age;
which charges (during his minority) are not to be executed by any under the
name of Lieutenant, but remain as now they are, which two conditions are to be
expressly inserted in the beforementioned Commission.

6. That presently by an unanimous consent and appointment of all the Members
assembled, the dignity and place of the First Noble shall be presented to the
Prince, he being the most conspicuous and qualified Nobleman of this Province;
yet upon such clauses, restrictions and precautions, as the same dignity has
been heretofore conferred upon the Princes of Orange of immortal memory,
without diminution or prejudice of the privileges of this Province, and other
the several Members of this State.

7. Upon the conferring of such charges, Honors and preheminences on the said
Prince, all possible care and order shall be taken for his Highness Education
and Breeding, as may best befit his Princely person and Illustrious Family.

8. That his Highness shall be allowed at the 16. year of his age, to have
access to the Council of State, according as it was practiced by his Highness
Grandfather Prince Frederick Henry, that so his Highness may be instructed in
the Fundamental Laws and Maxims, and the Ancient and Renowned Government of
these Countries, and the better learn the humor and inclinations of his good
people and Countrymen.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
Phil-Anglus: Some sober inspections made into the carriage and consults of the
late long Parliament: whereby occasion is taken to speak of Parliaments in
former tim^s, etc. With some reflexes upon Government in general. With some
Prophetic Paragraphs. By James Howel Esquire. Sold by W. Palmer at the Palm Tree
near St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.

Five Seasonable Sermons Preached before eminent Auditories, and Dedicated to
the Kings Majesty, by Paul Knell, Master in Arts of Clare-Hall in Cambridge,
sometime Chaplain to a Regiment of Curassiers in his late Majesty's ^rmy. Sold
by John Place at Furnivals Inn-Gate in Holborn.

Advertisement.
IF any man can give notice of a light Dun Mare with a bald face, and four
white feet, black mane and tail, a lock of white hairs in her tail, about seven
years old, and about fifteen hand high, that was taken out of a Stable in Coal
Yard on Thursday August 30. by a young man about 27. years of age, brown hair,
somewhat l^ng, of a pale complexion and round face, with a plaster on the left
check. If any one apprehend him, and give notice at the Red Lion in Cambridge,
the Cro^s Keys in St Edes, or the Holy Lamb on the backside of St. Clements,
they shall have five pound for their pains.

STolen the second of September, out of a Dining Room in Holborn, one large
Looking Glass set in an Ebony frame, a Landscape being drawn at the tom of the
glass, with a Shepherdess, a ^am^, a G^at, and several other figures, there
being a slaw at the top of the Glass, as also two Turkey Carpets, the one three
yards long, and two yards and a half wide, or thereabouts; the other two yards
and a half long, and a yard and a half wide, or thereabouts. If any one give
notice thereof to ^r. Arnold a Grocer, at the Tobacco-Roll and Sugar Loaf next
to Grais-Inn-Gate in Holborn, they shall have ^^^ty shillings for their pains.

ON Saturday l^st run away from the Lord Rich: Christophilus Cornaro, a Turk
Christened: A French youth of 17 or 18 years of age, with flaxen hair, little
blew eyes, a mark upon his lip, and another under his right eye; of a fair
complexion, one of his ears pierced, having a Pearl-coloured Cloth suit, trimmed
with scarlet and blew Ribbons, a Coat of the same color, with silver Buttons,
his name Jacob David. Give notice to the Lords Lodging at the 3 Fishes in New
^reet in Covent Garden, a Cooks shop, and good satisfaction shall be given.

Advertisements.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, That his Majesty's Printers having
published the Act of Free and General Pardon, Indempuity and Oblivion, in a
more contracted Form then ordinary, that it might be of small price; yet
notwithstanding some persons have not only presumed to Re-print the same, to
their very great detriment, but have also committed several gross faults, as in
Page 5. they have left out (any of) Page 7. l. 11. (or Acquittances) Page 8.
li. 19. (the day) li. 43. (Majesty's) left out. Page 12. (of) left out, and (or
persons) too much; besides these Errata there are very many other Mistakes,
which ought not to pass in a thing of so great consequence. This stolen false
impression may be known, by being printed in three sheets, not of the known
Letter for Acts, whereas the right is Five sheets; All Persons therefore, who
desire a true Copy of the Act of Indemnity, are advised to beware of that
false imperfect Three sheets, which will but deceive the Buyer.

RIchard Verney Esquire of Alaxst^n in Leicestershire, about a for might since los^
a Lanner from that place, she has neither Bells nor Varvels; she is a wh^^^
Hawk, and her long feathers and sarscels are both in the blood. (...) give
tidings thereof to Mr Lambert at the golden Key in Fleetstreet, they shall have
forty shillings for their pains.

THe But end and the Lock of a Gunn, commonly called a ^taff Gunn, being
dutch-worke, and fitted to its Barrel, with a Screw, within few such ^s of the
touchhole, was lost between London and Barnet on Tue^day 21 August: if any one
do bring it to Sir Eliab Harveys House in Breadstreet, he shall have twenty
shillings for his pains.

LOst on Sunday night last, out of the King Meadows near Kingston upon Thames,
in the County of Surrey one brown bay Mare three years old and upward, having a
white star in the forehead, a white snip upon the nose, and a little white on
one of her hind-feet, about 14 hands high, in good flesh. Also a bright bay
Mare, between 14 and 15 handfuls high, about 9 ye^rs old, a white streak down
the face, a white foot behind, and the near ^^^e of the other hind-foot, but
meanly in flesh. If any give not^ce to Henry Mudhets at the three Pigeons in
Kingston a^oresaid; or to Mr. Bedson a Tailor in New Street in Covent Garden,
they shall have forty shillings for their pains.

On Monday the third instant, the Accusation against. Col. Robert Worden was
taken into consideration by his Majesty sitting in full Council, where was read
a large Attestation under the hands of Sir George Boo^h and the greatest part
of the Baronets, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen of the County Palatine of
Chester, declaring that they ever found the said Col. Worden in all his
Majesty's concernments, not only faithful, but so industrious and prudent, as
that no Person would be more acceptable for their future Trust. Upon
consideration whereof, and that several Lords of the Council affirmed, that in
the time of the late Tyrannical Government, the said Colonel was highly
instrumental to advance his Majesty's interest, and that by their communication
with him, their Lives and Fortunes had been in his power; expressing their
esteem of him as of a Worthy and Loyal Person, his Majesty declared that He did
fully acquit him from the accusation and and imputation he had suffered under,
and that He esteemed him a very honest and Loyal Person, and would accord^ngly
admit him into his former favor. In earnest whereof his Majesty has given him
the honor of his hand, and his Highness the Duke of York has gladly received
him into his Service, as formerly, to the joy of many worthy and valiant
Persons, who had long known the Colonels courage and loyalty, and were sorry a
mistake in others should be get any suspicion upon a Person so highly deserving.

Westminster.
And now we can tell News which all the good subjects of three Kingdoms will
rejoice at; how that great Instrument of sedition and Firebrand, Hugh Peter's,
is close prisoner in the Tower of London. The particulars take impartially
thus. On Friday last intelligence was given that Peter's privily lurked about
Southwark; whereupon Sir Edward Nicholas his Majesty's principal Secretary of
State, sent two Messengers of his Majesty's Chamber in ordinary to apprehend
him: That night they entered the house where he lay, which was one Broad's a
Quaker in S. Thomas parish, whose daughter Mrs. Peach then l^y in. The
Messengers searched, but missed Hugh Peter's, who (according to his custom) had
crept into bed to the young woman, where the Messengers modesty forbad their
search; she having been delivered but two days before. There lay Hugh; and the
Messengers finding a private passage out of that into the house of another
Quaker called John Day the Cobbler, (thus Quaking runs from house to house;)
they searched there also: In the interim Peter's escaped from childbed, leaving
behind him his Cane with a R^pier in it, a small pocket-Bible, and a gray
Cloak, (for possibly now he was in his Frock.) But on Sunday last about six at
night, in a place called the Maze, in the same parish near Hors-way Down, at
Nathanael Mun a Tape-weavers house, Hugh Peter's again lay in. The Messenger Mr.
Wickham coming to the door, found it not locked nor latch'd, but kept fast by
the Tape-weavers wife, (how faithful that sex are to Peter's!) who thrust her
back to the door, till the Messengers strength proved Mrs. Mun was the weaker
vessel, and suddenly running up stairs, found that door also kept fast like the
other: 'tw^s Hugh himself, whose shoulder at the door put the Messenger hard to
it, for Peter's now thought he thrust for his life. But the Messenger
encouraged, in hopes 'twas Peter's, whose strength failed, as his fe^r
increased, at last the door flew open, where Hugh Peter's was found (a true
Quaker) trembling after an incredible manner: Yet now (in his wonted way of
confidence) he stiffly denied himself to be Peter's, but said his name was
Thompson (perhaps Hugh the son of Thomas) threatening the Messengers with an
Action at Law for offering to ^ffirm he was Hugh Peter's; and therefore refused
to go down with the Messenger, till Mr. Arnold (servant to Mr. Blagge of his
Majesty's Bedchamber) Mr. Hopkins a good neighbor, and Mr. Harris the honest
Constable came up the stairs, who all expressed much diligence and heartiness
in assisting the Messenger. And yet after all, he refused to come down (still
wondering they would think him Peter's,) so as they began to force him down, and
then he promised to go along, but first, said he, give me leave to gather up my
spirits; whereupon he called for Drink, and drank two quarts (two full qu^rts)
of small Beer, for the House had no strong. Then Hugh desired he might speak
privately with Mris. Mun, which they denied, unless he would speak in their
hearing; after which he said, I will go, but I beg for the Lords sake that you
call me not Mr. Peter's, for, s^id he, if it be known that I am Hugh Peter's,
the people in the street will stone me. At last out he came, but suddenly
stepped in again, saying, I must speak privately with the woman of the House, (a
woman was his chief Confident) and now they had some tugging to fetch him back,
in which struggle, feeling his skirts hard, they unrip^ them, and found five
pieces of Gold and some Silver Medals, and out of his pocket they took his
Alm^nack, for which he struggled more than for his Bible. Thence they forced
him to the Constables House, where they sent for his Landlord Broad (an old
Accuser of honest men) who being absent, his Son-in-law Peach, (whose happiness
it was that his Wife had been but (...) days delivered) came in his stead, who
being asked if he knew that Cloak, Cane, and Gloves, answered, that they
belongd to that Gentleman; pointing to Peter's. But Hugh still with his wonted
mode^^y denied it, name and ^ll; though soon (forgetting himself) he unawares
put on the Gloves, and said, they were his own; and then without more trifling
they brought him to the Tower, and delivered him into the custody of the worthy
Lieutenant Sir John Robinson (in the blood of whose Uncle, that ever-renowned
William late Archbishop of Canterbury, Hugh Peter's was elbow deep, and go^ the
Archbishops Library of most choice Books, as well as his Majesty's Library at
St. James's) which he has now turned to a pocket Bible and an Almanac. All
this while, and at the Tower also, Hugh averred his name was Thomson, and
denied himself to be Peter's though there his Cousin Mr. Birch the Wardour knew
him and called the man by his name; til at last in private to Sir John Robinson
he confessed who he was, and then (with most ingenious modesty) acchsed the
Messenger and the rest for taking and bringing him to the Tower by the name of
Thomson. So that he who before threatened an Action against those who offered to
call him Hugh Peter's, does now accuse them for calling him Thomson. This is St.
Hugh, who when our Glorious Sovereign was led to Martyrdom, fell so he^vy upon
his righteous soul, blaspheming him upon his then Text ( Psalm. 149. To bind
their Kings in Chains, etc.) and may now make himself the Title of his own Book
(called Good work for a good Magistrate) where among many other, he has these
six motions.

1. That Paul's Church may be pulled down to pave Thamestreet. 2. To d^stroy
Colleges, since there are none in the Gospel, page 4. (for Hugh was expelled
one.) 3. That Physicians should take small fees, page 33. (What was Hugh's
disease?) -- 4. That Adultery should be punished with a merciful heart page 52.
(and not like Butchers.) 5. That all unmarried maids be put to spin, (to
prevent the best use of hemp.) 6. That all Records in the Tower might be burned
-- But the Records still are safe in the Tower, and so is Hugh Peter's, where
now we leave him.

Last Monday morning about eleven of the clock, that notorious John Harris
(commonly called Major Harris) was executed in Leadenhallstreet, over against
the Merchants house where he committed the Burglary by a forged Warrant in the
Lord High Chancellors name. This is that Harris who h^d been Conductor to
Oliver Cromwels Forces, and a frequent false Witness against his Majesty's good
Subjects.

On Sunday last his Majesty went to Greenwich to refresh himself for some few
hours in that Yaugh which was presented to him from Amsterdam; which Yaugh or
Pleasure-Boat will scarce be equalled by any in these parts of Christendom.

On Tuesday ( September 4.) the Lord Roberts Nobly entertained his Majesty with
a supper at his house at Chelsey.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho: Newcomb 1660.


