Numb. 30. Mercurius Publicus, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence:
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday July 19. to
Thursday July 26. 1660.
Whitehal.
HIs Majesty since his Return having touched for the Evil near 1700 persons,
and there being at present above 1000 more in London come from several Parts
attending for the same, his Majesty is graciously pleased so dispatch all that
are already come, and (for several weighty reasons) resolves to defer the rest
to a more seasonable opportunity.

We are therefore by His Majesty's Command to give notice hereof, That none of
his good Subjects may engage themselves (till further Order) ^an chargeable and
unnecessary Iourneys. And we are further to give notice, That all from the
Countries now attending in London the Cure of the Evil, do repair to Mr. Knight
his Majesty's Chyrurgion, who lives in great Bridges-street at the Sign of the
Hare in Covent Garden, on Tuesday and Thursday next being the 24. and 26. of
this instant July, when and where they shall receive Tickets for the Wednesday
and Friday, which two da^s his Majesty is pleased to set apart for this so
pious and charit^^le Work.

St. Iago de la Vego in the Island of Iamaica, April 7.
The Negro's (of whom we daily reduce some to obedience) being taken, become
our good friends, and serviceable to us in what they are capable: Colonel Tyson
was lately commanded ^orth with eighty Officers and soldiers, and twenty one
Negro's (who are very dexterous in catching the enemy after they are beaten*
who after a tedious march over the mountains, found Don Christopher lying in a
Morross with 133 in Arms with him* commanded by an old Soldier of Spain, who
had double pay allowed him, and was to succeed the Spanish General; in our
fa^ling on, this Major received a wound by a Lance in his belly, of which he
died in two hours; but their General Don Christopher being too nimble for us,
saved himself by flight. The Officers which were took prisoners, and the
Commissioners that came in to treat for their General, confessed there were
about sixty Officers and Soldiers slain. Thence the Party marched to the
Chererose at the Sea side, in order to the seizing a ship which the Spaniards
had formerly taken from us, and did now monthly supply them with provisions
from Cuba, such as Cassader bread, sweetmeats, Chocolates, and other
conveniences. The security of this Vessel was so well managed by Scouts, that
there was no taking her by Land without them: We therefore first lay in wait
for the Scouts, whom when we had took in several parties, and made our own, in
eleven days time we took the ship, with twenty Officers and Soldiers in her.

And now (according to promise) we give you a List of his Highness the Duke of
Yorks Regiment, whereof very many, if not most (by the pleasure of his
Highness, (as well as his Grace the Lord General) are still continued in their
place, whom therefore we shall only name.

Sir Allen Apsl^y (a gentleman of known merit for his intellectuals, as well as
his courage and loyalty, which have made him eminently of his Majesty's
household) is Captain Lieutenant to his Highness. Henry Slingsby (we need only
to tell his sir name, in testimony of his loyal^^) is Coronet. George Court^^y
Quartermaster. Thomas Viscount Falconberge is Colonel under his Highness, and
Captain of a Troop. Charles Be^l^ssys Lieutenant. John B^llassys Coronet. John
Woodward Quartermaster. Anthony Buller (formerly a Colonel in the West Indies)
is a Captain. Rich. Dounton Lieutenant. Hugh Stukely Coronet. Allen Wharton
Quartermaster. Thomas Heward, son to the Earl of Berkshire (as well pleased to
command one of his Highness Troops as formerly his own Regiment, wherein he
never expressed the least want of skill or courage.) Hugh Bradshaw Lieutenant.
Edward Sanders Coronet. Christopher Hull Quartermaster. Captain John Sydenham
(son to Sir Ralph Sydenham, who has manifested his courage in France as well
as England) commands a Troop. William Noy Lieutenant. George Collingwood
Coronet. Tho^^^ Cooper Quartermaster. Sir John Talbot (a Member of this present
Parliament, as well as of that Noble house of Shrewsbury) commands one of his
Highness Troops. Rich. Beke Lieutenant, Bacon Coronet, Nic. Lampon
Quartermaster.
Next be pleased to take a List of the Officers of his Highness the Duke of
Glocester's Regiment.

His Highness Troop is commanded by M. Phil. Howard, son to the Earl of
Berkshire. Simon Musgrave (we need not tell you what family he i^ of) is
Coronet, Francis Moore is Quartermaster. Sir Ralph Knight (one whose name
became his Honor, upon his Majesty's happy return, wherein his endeavors were
very useful) is Colonel, Tho. Bourne Lieutenant, Rich. Hooker Coronet, Ralph
Dawe Quartermaster. Phil. Pri^^e (very eminent for his manhood) is Major,
William Hodgkinson Lieutenant, Ant. Mitchell Coronet, Christ. Mallock
Quartermaster. Tho. Co^lson, Captain, Ed Austin Lieutenant, Robert Brownlow
Coronet, James Crafis Quartermaster. Henry Ogle Captain, Tho. Ogle Lieutenant,
Tho. Ogle Coronet, Lancelot S^rut^^^ Quartermaster. William Goodwin (who has
done good service both at Sea and Land) is Captain. Sir Hugh Middleton (son of
Sir William Middleton) imprisoned and plundered by the Rump, not ambitious of
great command, but to do his Majesty and his Highness service is Lieutenant.
John Ball a Coronet, Fran Su^ley Quartermaster.
Wi^h these Regimen^s we will take in the Castle of St. Mawes in Cornwall, now
under the command of Sir Richard Vivi^n Gent. of the Privy Chamber to his
Majesty, a person that has remained unshak^n in his loyalty in the midst of
all his sufferings.

We can give you but a thin account of Persons committed to Custody since our
last: For the Black-rod has but one Prisoner more whose name is Partington,
not Portington, who was so courageous and loyal in his Majesty's service,
especially at Pontefract, and other places in the north.

This day was presented to his Sacred Majesty an Address from the Governors
and Commanders of the Castle of the ancient City of Chester.

To his most Excellent Majesty, King CHARLES the Second, our most gracious
Sovereign.
The humble Address of the Officers in the Castle of Chester, in the name of
themselves, and of the Soldiers of that Garrison.
WIth such a thankful acknowledgement of the goodness of God in settling your
Sacred Majesty on the Throne of your Ancestors, as becomes good Christians and
loyal Subjects, we renew in these rude lines the humble tendry of our bounden
duty, wherein we continue to own your most Excellent Majesty for our undoubted
Sovereign Lord and King, hereby seconding our first actings, wherein we, as
soon as other Garrisons, freely yielded our selves to follow (as duty did bind
us) the Noble example of his Excel^ency the Lord General, under whose
auspicious conduct that great breach our sins had made, is happily made up
again: And your Majesty having given us so many signal tokens of your admirable
virtue and goodness in your gracious Declaration set forth before you came into
your Kingdoms, your pious Proclamation against Debauchery, and virtuous
deportment since you came into your Imperial City, we find so much cause to
believe that you will become another I^siah, in restoring the Worship of God,
settling the Church in peace after so long a time as she has sit mourning with
torn garments upon her, as our hearts rejoice in expectation to see such a
complete settlement of peace and truth, as the Laws of God, and the good Laws
of the Land require, hoping that a due restraint will be put to profaneness,
superstition, and libertinism. Lastly, we shall not by the grace of God recede
from our bounden duty, but remain your Majesty's loyal Subjects and faithful
Soldiers, manifesting upon all occasions our readiness to hazard our lives for
the maintenance of your Royal Person, Crown and Dignity, expressing our selves
alwa^es your Majesty's most loyal Subjects and obedient Servants.

R. Venables. I^. Io^^ie. Tho. Baskervile. John Weader. Henry Moore.



But in Scotland are committed Sir James Steward Provost of Edinborough, of
whose good deeds we never told you, and fear we never shall; and Sir John
Che^sley, whom 'twas easier to make a Knight than make him good. These two were
the eminent Remonstrants against his Majesty, but have thousands to remonstrate
against them, now they are in Edinborough Castle.

There are more to be committed if they did not disappear, though some have the
forehead to approach the Court in England, of which number is the Lai^d
Swinton, one of Oliver Cromwell's Counselors and Judges, who of late
(forsooth) would needs turn Q^aker, and has reason to be so in earnest, since
he is now apprehended and committed to the Gate House.

Hamburgh July 13.
To morrow the Imperial Forces are to march out of Holstein, and (as is
reported) to have their quarters assigned them, yet for some time, in the
Dukedoms of Meklenburg and Pomerania, until they receive farther Order. They
write from Lubeck, that the Castle of Cronenburg in Sealand was to be restored
to Denmark this week without fail: The Hollands Admiral was as yet taken up
with the transportation of the rest of the Swedish Forces, for Schonen, and it
was ^oped, that all Se^land would be very suddenly cleared of all the Swedes.
Letter; from Riga intimate, that in the City of Muscovia there happened a
sudden and unexpected Fire, which consumed about 6000 Houses. The Victory
obtained by the Poles against the Muscovites is confirmed from man places, and
reported to the best advantage on the Polish side. I^ is said, that at Berge in
Norway, there are likewise (through carelessness) 600. Houses, burn down to the
ground.

From Dalmatia, June 17.
Although the Turks did Fately leave this Country, under pretense that they
were forced to retire themselves for the maintenance of their Mahomet, which
gave us some hope that we should be rid of these troublesome guests; yet now we
find ourselves quite deceived, in regard the Turks have not only faced about,
and with an addition of 12000. men, above their former number, as well Horse as
Foot, over run this whole Country without opposition, but dare also to venture
an approach to the fortified places and Cities of Zara, Sebenico, and Spal^^ro,
putting not only to the sword all they met with, but destroying all Houses and
Villages with fire, with these threats, that their Ordnances and Artillery is
suddenly to follow after them, which when come, they intend to employ to reduce
these fortified Cities. But they being well provided against all hostile
attempts with men Ammunition and Victuals, they need not in the least ^ear the
menaces of the Turks, however we must expect with patience, what attempts they
shall make against us.

Vienna June 30.
This day was seven-night, his Imperial Majesty arrived safely at G^ath, with
his whole Court, and was received by some thousands of Horse and Foot of the
chief of that Country, all accourred in brave Liveries, many hundreds of Canons
being discharged at his Majesty's entrance, and magnificent Arches o^ Triumph
erected; there were also most ^^re Flieworks, and artificial Conduits prepared,
out of which Clacer and Whitewine ran in abundance. The Duke of M^^^n met his
Imperial Majesty some Leagues off, and accompanied him at his entrance.

Grath, July 6.
Yesterday the Ceremonies of doing homage to his Imperial Majesty, were
performed with the usual solempnities in this place; But his Majesty has not
been able to appear in public with the States of the Country by reason of
continual rains, whether or no his Majesty will inust on his Journey toward
Carinthia and Craine, is as yet undetermined. It seems the resolution thereof
does depend on the event of the present Hungarian tranfactions. Since the
Imperial General de Souches passed the River of Theies, and advanced nearer the
Turks, they are retreated.

Rome, June 26.
The Mayor of Majorca Signeur Raphael della Grossiera, 58 years of age, has
lately been elected in the place of the deceased Great-Master of Malta. The
differences betwixt the Vice roy of Naples, and the Archbishop of that place,
Cardinal Filomarini, are composed by the endeavors of the Spanish Ambassador
here resident, whom the Pope has given audience. But the Vicar of the
Archbishop, who laid the excommunication on the said Viceroy against the
Cardinals consent, is to be deposed.

Presburg in Hungaria, July 11.
I am informed from Cascha^ of the 3. instant, that ours have put a Garrison
into K^llo, Prince Barchai gives out, that he cannot surrender Sacmar, except
he should thereby expose his native Country to eminent danger and utter ruin.
The Turks are no ways inclined to subject that place to the Emperor. The
Grand Vizier of Buda has been accused at the Ottoman Court, whence having
lately received a Halter (the accustomed present for offenders) he now
endeavors to save himself by flight. The Princess Ragotzky is now at Patack,
where the Count Ladislaus Ragotzky, with many Noblemen and Ladies, give her
their attendance, they labor also to have provision made for the Forces of his
Imperial Majesty, which she condescends unto.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
The Fourth Volume of Clelia, that Excellent Romance. Written by Monsieur De
Scudery. Sold by Humphrey Moseley at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and Tho: D^ing at the George in Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstans Church.

A Congratulatory Poem on the Miraculous and Glorious Return of Charles the
Second. By Alexander Broom.

God save the King; or a Sermon of Thanksgiving, for His Majesty's happy Return
to His Throne. By William Walwyn, B. D. and sometimes Fellow of St. John's
College of Oxon.

Jews in America, or, Additional Probabilities, that those Indians are
Judaical. By Tho. Thorowgood, S. T. B. One who subscribed the Vindication
suffered by the Engagement, never addressed to any of the usurping Powers.
There is promised to it, an accurate discourse of Mr. Elliot in New England,
touching the origination of those Nations.

(...). Or, the true Pourtraiture of His Sacred Majesty Charles the Second. In
three Books; beginning from His Birth, 1630. unto this present year, 1660.
Wherein is interwoven a complete History of the High born Dukes of York and
Gloucester. By R. F. Esquire an Eyewitness. All four sold by Henry Broom at the Gun
in Ivy-lane.

A brief Introduction to the skill of Music. The third Edition enlarged. Sold
by John Playford at his shop in the Inner Temple-gate.

Advertisements.
JUly 22. 1660. stolen from Mr. Edward Sandford of Nortonmandile in the County
of Essex, a white Gelding, between fifteen and sixteen hands high, about eleven
years of age, the hair off upon all four feet, just above the Hoof, a little
sweld upon the left Leg behind. If any can bring tidings thereof to Mr. Henry
Johnson Chyrurgeon, in Aldersgate Street, or to the owner at his House in
Nortonmanlile aforesaid, they shall be well rewarded for their pains.

MOst excellent and approved Dentrifices to secur and cleanse the Teeth, making
them white as Ivory, preserves from the Toothach; so that being constantly
used, the parties using it, are never troubled with the Toothach: It fastens
the Teeth, sweetens the Breath, and preserves the Gums and Mouth from Cankers
and Imposthumes; and being beaten to powder, and drunk in Wine, or any other
drink, is a good remedy for any Flux or Lask. Invented and made by Robert
Turner, the only Author of them, and are only to be had at the House of
Thomas Rookes, Stationer, at the Holy Lamb at the East End of St. Paul's Church,
near the School, in Sealed Papers.

Because it is likely you will have some false report of a mutiny of the prisoners
in Norwich the 18. of July last, be pleased to take this Relation from one who
was present.

According to the custom of the Sheriffs Court in Norwich, Sheriff Lawrence
sent for some prisoners over to answer to Actions. The prisoners entered a
Combination, abused the Jailer, rescue their fellows: (pretending 'twas a
Custom against Law) declaring they would make it a free Goal: The Sheriff goes
himself, and seeing no reason or fair means would prevail, (and his partner
Sheriff Wise being absent then at London, goes to Mr. Mayor and the
Magistrates, complains of a Mutiny and Rio, (hoping by that means to reduce
them, or have a more firm ground to use rigor, if need should be.) The
Magistrates not very willing to meddle, being a business more proper to the
Sheriffs; yet at length they send for four of the chief: Their answer is, They
will not come, nor be trepanned by Mr. Mayor. The Sheriff is required to go
himself for them; which he does, but Orders privately some Files of
Musquettiers to fall in close after him. Those four, with some other, betake
themselves to a strong Vault, and grow resolute: but at length the prisoners
propound, to draw off the Soldiers, and refer their main point to Counsel, and
if Law, they would submit. The Soldiers thought that Demand so reasonable, as
they scrupled to assist, and became Intercessors; whereupon it was agreed:
There were also some other desperate parties of prisoners in other rooms, The
Sheriff informs the Mayor and Court (then sitting) what was done; the Counsel
determines against the prisoners, but they fall from their promise of appearing
to answer.) The Sheriff propounds then to return and fall on them, and either
fire upon them with powder and small shot, or else (rather) to smother them out
with wet Hay: This the Magistrates would not approve, but wave it at present.
Some two or three days after, the prisoners fearing new matters against them,
grew high, secure the Jailer, and take away the Keys; the Sheriff forthwith
requires aid of the Citizens, but most of them slipped away: But with some few,
and part of a band of Soldiers, resolve (after Proclamation) to break open the
prison door, and at the same time scale two Garden walls on the back side of
the prison; but the Mayor and Justices coming in the mean while, after some
mutual messages, and promise of favor to their chief Captain (one Godfrey,) he
opens the prison door, and comes forth; whereupon the rest yielded.

The Reader may take notice, That after several mature Debates concerning this
Summer Assizes, His Majesty was graciously pleased to set forth a Proclamation
the 23 of this instant July, wherein, out of his Princely care that his loving
Subjects may have timely notice of the alterations of the days, has declared
the several Prefixions given in by His Majesty's Justices for holding the
Assizes in the several Circuits, as hereafter follow; viz.
Surrey, Monday the Third of September, at Kingston upon Thames. Sussex, Friday
the Seventh of September, at East-Greenstead. Kent, Tuesday the Eleventh of
September, at Maidstone. Essex, Monday the Seventeenth of September, at
Chelmsford. Hertford, Friday the One and twentieth of September, at Hertford.
Bucks, Thursday the Eigh^h of August, at Alisbury. Bedford, Monday the Third of
September, at the Town of Bedford. Huntingdon, Wednesday the Fifth of Sept. at
the Town of Huntingdon. Cambridg, Thursday the ^ixth of September, at the
Castle of Cambridg. Suffolk, Monday the Tenth of September, at Bury St.
Edmonds. Norfolk, Saturday the Fifteenth of September, at the Castle of
Norwich. City of Norwich, The same day at the New-Hall of the City of Norwich.
Berks, Tuesday the Fourth of September, at Reading. Oxon, Friday the Seventh of
September, at Oxford. Gloucester, Wednesday the Twelfth of September, at
Gloucester. City of Gloucester. The same day at the City of Gloucester. Monmouth,
Monday the Seventeenth of September, at Monmouth. Hereford, Thursday the
Twentieth of September, at Hereford. Worcester, Tuesday the Five and twentieth
of September, at Worcester. City of Worcester, The same day at the City of
Worcester. Salop, Friday the Eight and twentieth of September, at Bridgnorth.
Stafford, Wednesday the Third of October, at Stafford. Lancaster, Thursday the
Thirtieth of August, at Lancaster. Westmerland, Thursday the Sixth of
September, at Appleby. Cumberland, Monday the Tenth of September, at Carlisle.
Northumberland, Friday the Fourteenth of September, at the Castle of Newcastle
upon Tine. Newcastle upon Tine, The same day at the Guild Hall of the same
Town. Durham, Tuesday the Eighteenth of September, at Durham. York Monday the
Four and twentieth of September. at the Castle of York. York City, The same day
at the Guild Hall of the same City. Southampton, Monday the Third of September,
at the Castle of Winchester. Wilts, Wednesday the Fifth of September, at New
Salisbury. Dorset, Monday the Tenth of September, at Dorchester. City of
Exeter, Thursday the Thirteenth of September, at the Guild Hall of the City of
Exeter. Devon, The same day at the Castle of Exeter. Cornwall, Wednesday the
Fifteenth of September, at Lanceston. Somerset, Tuesday the Fifth and twentieth
of Sept. at the City of Bath. City of Bristol, Saturday the Nine and twentieth
of September, at the Guild Hall of the City of Bristol. Northampton, Tuesday
the Fourth of September, at the Castle of Northampton. Rutland, Friday the
Seventh of September, at Okeham. Lincoln, Monday the Tenth of September, at the
Castle of Lincoln. City of Lincoln, The same day at the City of Lincoln.
Nottingham, Saturday the Fifteenth of September, at Nottingham. Town of
Nottingham, The same day at the Town of Nottingham. Derby, Tuesday the
Eighteenth of September, at Derby. Leicester, Friday the One and twentieth of
September, at Leicester. Town of Leicester, The same day at the Town of
Leicester. City of Coventry, Monday the Four and twentieth of September, at the
City of Coventry. Warwick, Tuesday the Five and twentieth of September, at
Warwick.
July 19.
This day the Borough of Plymouth, as an expression of their unfeighned joy for
his Majesty's happy restoration, presented by the hands of the Right
Honorable Sir William Morris, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of
State, and Governor of Plymouth, Sergeant Maynard Recorder, Edm. Vowell, Sam.
Trellany Esquires, and Timothy Alsop Alderman, an honorable present of plate,
which for the largeness of the pieces, and curiosity of the work, was a noble
present, and was received very graciously by his Majesty: Amongst the rest was
a Fountain carved with rare Art and curious Figures, out of which perfumed
water was cast up twenty foot high, and had at the top thereof a curious
Perfuming box, which at the same time issued forth perfumed fire. His Majesty,
with several persons of Honor, was pleased to entertain himself with the sight
of it.

At the same time the City of Exeter, by the said Sir William Morris, Tho.
Bampfied Esquire Recorder, Simon Snow Alderman, and Thomas Westlake Town-Clark, as
a pledge of their Congratulation of His blessed Restoration, and an earnest of
their hearty affections, did present his Majesty with several parcels of rich
plate to a very considerable value for the mass thereof.

All the persons of both Corporations had the honor of his Majesty's Hand.

Sergeant Maynard having declared the affection of the said City and Borough in
a most elegant pithy Speech, to which his Majesty manifested a particular
application, the Sergeant being better heard here then when he forced his
entrance into the House of Commons (after two months seclusion) when those
horrid Regicides fell upon that bloody debate, where the Sergeant by Cromwell
was diverse times demanded to the Bar, as unable to bear the strength and force
of the Sergeants Arguments, when he pleaded so admirally for the Life of the
King.

July 24. 1660.
This day, some of the Clergy of the County of Lincoln, in the Name of the
rest, being brought into the Royal Presence by the Earl of Manchester,
presented an Address to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, which His Majesty was
graciously pleased to accept with several expressions of favor to the
Presenters, giving them also the Honor to kiss His Hand.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The most humble Address of the Ministers
in the County of Lincoln.
Most dread Sovereign,
AMong all the great calamities which God most justly for our sins has brought
upon us, since the first commencing of our national distractions, none have
made so deep impressions of real sorrow upon our hearts, as the barbarous
inhumanity Acted upon your Royal Father of blessed memory, by certain wicked
and deceitful men: The remembrance of which, as it does renew our utmost
abhorrency of the Act, so of all those Jesuitical Principles, which under any
pretense whatsoever, have any tendency to the deposing, and much more the
murder of Kings.

After the loss of the best deserving King the world could then boast of, which
was attended with the voice of blasphemy uttered by our enemies against the
true Religion, because some who did profess it, had stained her beauty with
their bloody hands. Gall was added to our wormwood by the forced exile of your
Majesty, during whose absence abroad, we could hardly think our selves to be at
home.

But God who comfort those who are cast down, gave us hope in the wonderful
preservation of your Majesty at Worcester, yea many supplications made for you
by your faithful people, and establishment of your Royal heart with his grace,
to resist and overcome a great crowde of Temptations both on the right hand and
on the left, by holding fast the true Ancient, Catholic and Apostolical Faith
once delivered unto the Saints. These things were to us as the dawning of the
day of Salvation, which God after a dark night of confusion, has now (not by
an ordinary working of Providence) caused to shine upon us. And we have cause
to believe that he who has subdued the power of the Enemy, will also subdue
their hearts; that as your Majesty's return has been accompanied with the
cordial desire and joy of the most of your subjects; so your reign will be with
the great love and full satisfaction of all. And this our confidence is more
increased by your Majesty's gracious, charitable and healing Declaration of the
first of May, and your early Proclamation issued against vicious, debauched and
profane persons. For which, as we are always bound to praise God, so we do
with all humble thankfulness, acknowledge your majesty's special grace and
Princely favor. And whatsoever our earnest prayers to God, exhortations to our
hearers, and dutiful subjection may possibly contribute to the happiness of
your sacred person and government; we shall with all alacrity and faithfulness
perform, beseeching him by whom Kings reign, to increase your graces, preserve
your health, prolong your days, and establish the Crown upon your head.

It was presented by the hands of the Reverend and most Learned Doctor
Saunderson His Majesty's Professor of Divinity at Oxon, accompanied with that
worthy Gentleman Sir Thomas Meeres, and several of the Orthodox and Loyal
Clergy, viz.

Mr. Will. Lincoln. Mr. Edw. Dixe. Mr. Cha. Woodward. Mr. Geo. Cuthbert. Mr.
Joh. Coope. Mr. Joh. Merryweather. Mr. Edw. Ask^w. Mr. Edw. Boteler. Mr. Joh.
Nailoe. Mr. Jeremy Vasin. Mr. Will. Dale. Mr. Robert Alington. Mr. Hen.
Vaughan. Mr Andrew Arnold. Mr. Tho. Tro^t, etc.
And about 200. more, whom (only for brevities sake) we omit.


The Gentlemen of the Artillery Company, having appointed yesterday (the 24. of
July) for an extraordinary Exercise of Arms in the Artillery ground, His
H^ghness the Duke of York (their Commander in Chief) having notice thereof,
came thither about four of the Clock in the afternoon, and first passing
through the Front of the Body (who were Four hundred completely habited) to a
Tent prepared for his Highness, he they on Foot marched to the Head of them,
where that most valiant and most learned John Lord Lucas (after an Elegant
short Speech on his knees to his Highness) presented him with the Leading-staff
of the Company, whereupon the Drums beat, with a very loud Acclamation of the
Gentlemen in Arms. After silence was commanded, his Highness was pleased to
declare, how willingly he accepted of their offer, and would maintain all their
Privileges; then (throwing off his Cloak) he commanded them to march, himself
on foot before them; and having led them about the ground, and drawn them up,
he went to the Tent door, where he sat whilst the Company marched by, pleased
to see such a gallant Company. After that, they divided into two Bodies, the
one commanded by the Lord Lucas, and the other by Major General Sir Edward
Massey; the great Guns playing, they immediately fell to skirmish, first by
Forlorn, afterward in several figures. At His Highness departure, several
Volleys were given. After his departure, the Bodies being joined, the Lord
Lucas acquainted them, That a Gentleman, a Member and Well-wisher of the
Company, had presented to them a Silver Partizan; for which (in the name and
behalf of all) his Lordship gave the Donor thanks.

24 July, 1660.
This day Joseph Pain Esquire Major of the City and County of the City of Norwich,
and Thomas Rant, and William Barneham, Esquires, Members of Parliament for the
said City; Christopher Jay Esquire Alderman Thomas Wise, one of the Sheriffs,
Thomas Johnson, Alderman, Francis Norris, Robert Bendish, Gent. and Thomas
Baleston, Town Clerk, and diverse other Citizens of the said City, were brought
into the presence of His Majesty, by the Lo^d Howard and Sir Horatio Townsend,
accompanied with Sir John Holland, Sir Philip Woodhouse, Sir Ralph Hare, and
Sir William Doyley, with diverse other Esquires and Gentlemen in the County of
Norfolk; where the Major, and the rest of the Citizens, presented His Majesty
with the Resignation of the Fee-Farm Rents of the said City, under the Common
Seal of the said City, amounting to One hundred thirty and two pounds eighteen
shillings and three pence yearly, and One thousand pounds in Gold, as a
testimony of their thankfulness to God for His Majesty's safe return to the
Government of His Kingdom, and of their loyalty and faithfulness to Him. And
His Majesty gave them a gracious reception, and was pleased to confer the Honor
of Knighthood upon the said Thomas Rant and Joseph Pain, and gave the Honor of
His hand to all that Company; and promised His constant Favor and Protection to
the said City.

Since the last, Col. Cook (who formerly kept the Office of
Treasurers-Remembrancer of the Exchequer) is come under the Black Rod; but we
forbear to say any thing of him, or any, who willingly surrender themselves.

We are daily asked what is done in Scotland, by some who are troubled, that all
is at quiet, and because it is so, themselves sweat to beget pretty Tales of
the Presbytery, Covenanters, etc. as if there were no difference betwixt 1640.
and 1660. But twenty years will not make some men wiser. You (ever for their
sakes) we will say and speak truth, That His Majesty has given Admittance and
Audiance to those Personages, and others from Scotland, who came from Court
highly satisfied with admiration of His Majesty's Wisdom, Justice, and
Affection to His People. And if you hear any speak otherwise, know them so such
as wish it so, because it is faelse: They take liberty to talk, but those that
scribble or print it, ere long may repent.

London, Printed by J: Macock, and Tho. Newcomb, 1660.


