Numb. 35. Mercurius Publicus, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence:
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday August 23. to
Thursday August 30. 1660.
Westminster.
HIS Excellency the Lord General Monck being Lord Lieutenant of his own Native
County of Devon, has nominated and chosen diverse Noble Gentlemen of known
Honor and Loyalty to His Majesty, to be Deputy Leivtenants of that County.
Their Commisons are all Sealed, who need no other Commendation but to tell this
news, viz.

Sir Edward Seymour Barronet. Sir Hugh Pollard Barronet. Sir Peter Prideaux
Baronet. Sir John Northcot Baronet. Sir John Davy Baronet. Sir Courtney Pool
Baronet. Sir William Courtney Baronet. Sir Edmond Fowel Baronet. Sir John
Chichester of Hull Knight. Sir Thomas Stukley Knight Arthur Basset Esquire.
John Rolls Esquire Francis Drew Esquire Walter Young Esquire
We have formerly acquainted you how the respectiv^ Regiments of the Army in
England have been disposed* and now we shall tell you in what hands His Majesty
has entrusted the Garrison of Dunkirk, wherein are four good Regiments, three
of Foot, and one of Horse, viz.

Edward Harley, Col. and Captain, Governor of Dunkirk. Peter Sainthil
Lieutenant. William Fleetwood Lieut. Col. and Capt. Thomas Ingram Lieutenant.
Arthur Colliot Ensign. John Hinton Major and Captain, Richard Woodw^rd
Lieutenant John Ewbank Ensign. Francis Conway Captain, John Green Lieutenant
William Grant Ensign. Roger Cotes Captain, Edward Emmes Lieutenant, William
Grant Ensign. Edward Righton Captain, Richard Baker Lieutenant, Abraham Davies
Captain, John Turpin Lieutenant William Carter Ensign. John Muse Captain,
William Beech Lieutenant. Christopher Monck Captain, Edward L^yton Lieutenant,
Henry Iackson Ensign. Francis Bromich Captain, James Ralph Lieutenant William
Jones Ensign: Henry Gargran Q. M. and Marshal Genesis W^l^er Scot Chyrurgeon.
William Lloyd Tower Major. Henry Lillingstone Col. and Captain. William
VVittaker Lieutenant. Thomas Mitchel Ensign. Thomas Heynes Lieut. Col. and
Capt. Thomas Young Lieutenant. Ralph Walker Ensign. Geo. Clinton alias
Fiennes Maj. and Cap. John Sherrard Lieutenant. Alexander Crawford Ensign.
Robert Fitz-VVilliams Capt. John Southern Lieut. George Fitz-Williams Ensign.
Robert Smith Captain. Robert Landy Lieutenant. James Stopford Ensign. Peter
Pogson Captain. Herbert Boar Lieutenant. William Terry Ensign. Samuel Brook
Captain. Robert Muschamp Lieutenant. Robert Mylevis Ensign. William Wandes
Captain. Lewis Powel Lieutenant. Lawrence Fellow Ensign. Henry Middleton
Captain. Robert Lawreson Lieutenant. Thomas Brewerton Ensign. John Cook
Captain. William Clinton alias Fiennes Lieut. Richard Withers Ensign. (...)
Harrison Chaplain. Robert Farendit Chyrurgeon. John Curtis Q. M. Roger Alsop
Colonel and Captain. John Graham Lieutenant. Edwin Bates Ensign. Maurice
Kingwel Lieut. Col. and Capt. John Giles Lieutenant. Thomas Gryffes Ensign.
John Withers Major and Captain. Francis Dukes Lieutenant. John Brooks Ensign.
Thomas Chapman Captain. Edward Pope Lieutenant. Thomas Withers Ensign.
Nathaniel Catham Captain. Richard Flemming Lieutenant. William Hussy Ensign.
(...) C^ap^ Capt. Robert Gr^ss^ Lieutenant. Anthony ^almer Ensign. Humphrey
A^^erton Capt. Thomas Basset Lieutenant. Thomas Blackat Ensign. John Turner
Captain. Francis Hinton Lieutenant. William Potham Ensign. Francis Annesley
Captain. James P^mtruge Lieutenant. Richard Line Ensign. Rice Powels Captain.
(...) Day Lieutenant. Alexander Young Ensign. John Wilkinson Chyrurgeon.
Nicholas T^m Q. M. Fra. Pockley Physician to the Garrison. Robert Harley
Colonel and Captain. John Grant Lieutenant. Henry Willoughby Cornet. George
Penny Q. M. Tobias Bridges Major and Captain. (...) Hargrave Lieutenant. John
Brown Cornet. Mat. Wayne Q. M. Oliver Nicholas Captain. Thomas Stackhouse
Lieutenant. Thomas Bernardiston Cornet. (...) Laughorne Q. M. James Halsey
Captain. Robert Brodnax Lieutenant. Peter Pawlyn Ensign. Theodore Russel Q. M.
Edward Wood Captain. George Bret Lieutenant. William Ashenhurst Cornet. Samuel
Sharp Q. M. (...) Flower Cap^ Lt. to Col. Ed. Harley. Edward Talbot Cornet.
On Thursday the 23 of this Instant August, Frederick Van Alefeldt, Ambassador
Extraordinary from His Majesty of Danemarke, came to London, with a very noble
retinue; his Servants in very rich Liveries: Sir Charles Cottrel His Majesty's
Master of the Ceremonies, with several Coaches of the chief Nobility, went to
meet him, and conducted him to Sir Abraham William's House, at the Palace in
Westminster.

You have heard heretofore how Commissions under the Great Seal were issued
forth, impowring several Officers of the Army to administer the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance to the respective Officers and Soldiers of each
Regiment: In performance of which duty the said Officers have been very
diligent, particularly in His Excellency the Lord Generals Regiment of Horse,
where Major Johnson (who so prudently prevented the betraying of Berwick to
Lambert) and Cap. Symnel showed now as much readiness, as they had formerly
Valor, in advancing with Cap. Wilmot so daringly to Morpeth in Northumberland,
with four Troops. These two riding from Troop to Troop, found all the Officers
and Soldiery as willing to take the Oaths as they to administer, one only
Trooper in the whole Regiment dissenting.

The like care was used in administering the said Oaths to His Excellencies
Regiment of Foot, where also but one only Soldier dissented. In Col.
Hubblethorn's Regiment of Foot only one dissented. In Col. Litcot's but one
only. In Col. Read's but one; and in Sir Ralph Knight's Regiment of Horse but
one; where we cannot but take notice of the equal care of all these faithful
Officers, that in each Regiment there should be but one dissenting; and that
the prudence of them all has been so great, in entertaining Soldiers in such
distracted times, where there is but one in each Regiment, and not one Officer
in any. And you cannot but observe how fair and freely those Officers have
dealt, that such as had any the least scruple against those most just and legal
Oaths, had yet liberty (without any force or threats) to express their
dissents, and yet after all this fifting and winnowing, there was not seven men
in six Regiments but did most cheerfully take the said Oaths, and those six,
common Soldiers (for Officers none) who were Dissenters, were found upon
examination to be Forraigners, and Roman Catholics.

Colonel Charles Fairfax has likewise returned an account of the readiness of
all his Officers and Soldiers in taking the said Oaths: The manner of the
Return (which is the Form used in such cases) was thus, viz.

Commissio in Cancellaria pro Sacramentis praestandis Officiariis and militibus
sub Regimine Caroli Fairfax Colonelll.

Retorn. sine dilatione. Sealed and Endorsed C. FAIRFAX. John Rogers. Bailly.
For His Majesty's Service.


But since we are upon an Account of administering the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, we must not conceal a particular sent us from Cooper in Scotland
August 14. where the said Oaths were freely taken by the four Troops of the
Lord Viscount Falkland's Regiment in Falkland, and not the least question or
scruple made by any, except only one in Major Morgan's Troop, who being absent
when the rest took those Oaths, upon his return was informed by his
Fellow Soldiers that they had all taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and that he was called for. Whereupon he said, I have an hair in my
throat, that I cannot swallow, but instantly fell stark mad, and ran roaring
and crying up and down; four men could scarce rule him; in which sad condition
he continued three days, and then died most miserably. A sufficient caveat for
all who heretofore so easily swallowed so many new oaths, to be now punished by
scrupling at an hair, though in their most just and undoubted Allegiance.

Saturday, Aug. 25.
His Excellency to ease the burden and charge of the Nation, this day did
dispatch express Orders to the several Regiments of the Army, to take in no
more Officers or Soldiers in place of any vacant by death or otherwise.

And now (after so many conferences and debates by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament) it has pleased God that the Act of Indemnity which His Majesty
has so often pressed and called for, is so near perfection, that it is verily
believed 'twill suddenly be published to the world in Print.

In pursuance whereof that worthy and faithful Sir John Robinson, Knight and
Barronet, His Majesty's Leivtenant of the Tower of London, received into his
custody seven of those who sat as Judges on the life of His late Majesty, viz.
Colonel Wait, Colonel Temple, Colonel Robert Lilburn, (...) Smith of
Leicestersheir, Esquire Colonel Henry Martin, (...) Carey, Esquire Colonel Downs.

These seven were committed this evening to the Tower, (where more of the same
Order are expected on Monday next) what their fate hereafter will be we cannot
sufficiently affirm, but are certain that at present they are in nobler custody
then His Majesty's best Subjects when in the same place.

Lisbone, Aug. 10. S. N.
After the three days rejoycings, of which formerly I gave you an account; the
King gave order for Touros Reales, in English, the Royal Bull baiting to be
performed by the principal of the Nobility. The Conde, the Torre is nominated
for the first of those who are to ride. This sport is to continue nine days
with all the solemn pomp possible. The Mast in the middle of the Pallace-yard,
where this Festival is to be celebrated, is to bear the Flag of England, to put
all spectators in mind that all this is performed in token of joy for his
Majesty of England his Restoration to his Hereditary right, where you may see
how this people who were so exact in their mourning for the execrable murder
of the Father, do express their joy for the good fortune of his Son. The
English Factors here are preparing something to express likewise their joy, but
do expect the arrival of their Consul before they perform it.

A Relation of the manner of the Reception of the King and Queen of France into
Paris, on the 16th of August, S. N.
The Militia's ordered to give their attendance at the Reception of their
Majesty's of France, being drawn upon the 13 current in a great Plain, not far
from the Castle of Vincennes. The King went thither to take a view of all the
several Batalions, which were ranged in no less good order by the President of
Guenegaud their Commander in chief, than they appeared richly accoustred, as
well as those who were commanded by other Officers; each one striving to out do
the other, in appearing with as much gallantry as possible, to show themselves
to so great a Monarch, and to be seen by that Illustrious and Accomplished
Princess, who did them the honor to come and to take a view of them. Their
Majesty's being accompanied by all the Lords and Ladies of the Court in decent
manner, a company of Musketeers armed and Light-horsemen went before, and
brought up the Rear of them in such an orderly method, that the whole Body did
extraordinarily please the people which came from the City to behold it. The
25. being St. Louys day, the Queen Mother, attended by the Prince of Conde, the
Duke of Enguyen, the Prince of Conty, many Ladies of great quality, and most
part of the Prelates who made up the Assembly of the Clergy, went to the Church
of the Jesuits in St. Anthonie's street, to hear a Panegyric touching the
King, held there by the Abbot of Tonnere with much Eloquence and a general
Applause.

The 26th. day of Augoest being appointed for the Reception of their Majesty's,
about seven a Clock in the morning the King came on Horseback from the Castle
of Vincennes, to a most stately Throne raised at the end of the Suburbs of St.
Anthony, whither the Queen also presently after came in a sumptuous Chariot,
Their Majesty's seated themselves in a Chair of State under a rich Canopy with
gold Fringes, as were the rest of the Ornaments of this Theater. On his
Majesty's right hand, there stood the Chancellor of France, the Duke of
Bovillon High Chamberlain behind him, next to whom the Count of Treme Captain
of the Guardes, and by him, next to whom the Count of Treme, Captain of the
Guards, and by him the Duke of Crequi, Chief Gentleman of the Chamber took
their places; behind the Queen stood the Duchess of Navailles, her Majesty's
chief Lady of Hono^, and the Countess of Bethune, the Lady of her Attire: On
the (...) were placed Mademoiselle, and the rest of the daughters of Orleans,
Al^^son a^ Valois, the Princess of Co^de, and all the other Princesss and
Ladies. Monsieur was next to the King, with the Prince o^ Conde, the Duke of
Enguyen, and the Prince of Conti and other persons of quality of the Court,
placed upon the several degrees of the Royal Throne, at the end whereof were
his Majesty's Guards, with a hundred Swisses all along the Rails, and without
all the Citizens in their Arms, standing filewise to this very Town. Presently
after came the several Parishioners, who when they had in passing by saluted
their Majesty's, were followed by the University, the Rector whereof
complemented their Majesty's; after them came the several Companies of the
City, who delivered their sense by the Provost of Marcants; those of the Courts
of Justice, in whose behalf the Lieutenant of civil affairs made a Speech, and
then came the Souveraen Companies, to wit, those of the Court of Moneys, of the
Court of Aids, of the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament, the chief
whereof being received at the foot of the Throne by the Seurs of Rodes and
Saintot, Great Master, and Master of the Geremonies, and presented by the Seur
of Plesses, Guenegaud, Secretary of State, delivered likewise their
Complements. Which done, their Majesty's being retired through a Gallery, into
a house that was prepared near the Throne, the Company of the Provost of the
Isle began their march, followed by threescore and twelve Muses of his
Eminencies, covered with very rich coverings, with their Querries, Officers,
Gentlemen and Guards, all in a very handsome and orderly equipage, together with
ninety mules of his Majesty's, and the Officers of the great and little
Stables. Next to them went the Secretaries of the King, and the Masters of
Requests, led on by the Ushers of the Chain, the Controllers-General, and the
great Auditors of the Chancery, the four Ushers with their silver-gilt M^ces,
who went before a white Mare, (which carried a small box of silver-gilt, with
the seals of France in it on her back, richly dressed and clothed with a cloth
of Velvet of violet color, imbroidered with flowers de Luces of Gold, the four
corners whereof were bore up by the four Chaufe cires ^^oot. Th^n came the
Chancellor of France in his robe and cassock of cloth of gold, mounted on a
brave horse clothed with the same staff, having on each side of him his Pages,
and a great number of Footmen in violet-coloured L^very of Velvet laced with
gold lace, after whom fol^owed some ^f his Domestics, the Kings Musketeers,
the Lighthorsemen, the Exempts and Guards of the Provost* del' Hostel, the
Marquess of Souches leading them up, and a ^reat number of Lords excellently
well mounted: the Marquess of Vardes brought up the hundred Suisses, then came
the Heralds at Arms, the great Master of the Artillery, several Marshals of
France* all in a splendid equipage, and next the C^unt of Harcourt M^ster of
the horse, carrying the Royal Sword before his Majesty, who now seemed more
gallant and lovelier on this occasion, then heretofore in all his famous
Conquests; he had on his side six Gentlemen of the Horse, at his right hand the
Duke of Bovillon his High Chamberlain, after came the Duke of Tremes, Captain
of the Guards, the Duke of Crequi, chief Gentleman of his C^amber, and the
Sieur of Bellingen, chief Master of the little tables. Next to them went
Monsieur alone, who by his good mien and rich equipage, was easily known; after
him came the Prince of Conde, the Prince of Conty, and the Duke of Enguien, all
excellently well accoutred; and after them the C^unt of Soissons, with a great
many other Lords; the Hand of the Gentlemen-Pensioners, and the Pages of the
Queens Chamber, who went immediately before the Princess seated in a Chariot of
Triumph, attended on one side by the Duke of Guise, with the other Princes of
the house of Lorrain, and on the other by the Count of Fuenseldagne wherein was
Mademoiselle and the three Princesses her Sisters; next, the second Coach, with
other Ladies: after them came the Kings Lifeguard and Horsemen, and last of
all the Officers of the Hawks, who ended this long and numerous Cavalcade.

Their Majesty's being arived at the Gate of St. Anthony, which was stately
adorned, and where the several Companies of the Town staid for them, the
Provost of the Merchants presented them with two Canopies of Cloth of Gold;
That of the King, was supported by the Sieurs Le Vieux and Bodequ^n Sheriffs,
with the two first Guards of the Company of Drapery; that of the Queens was
carried by the Sieurs Prevost and du Jour, Sheriffs, with two other Guards of
the same company. Thence they proceeded on their march through the street of
St. Anthony, where the Queen Mother had taken up her place at that fair House
of Madam de Beauvais, where there was likewise the Queen of England, with the
Princess her Daughter, his Eminency, the Princess Palatine, and a number of
other Ladies of great quality: Then they marched through the street of
Tisserandery, L'Hostel de Ville, Le Pont Nostredame, Le March Neuf, La Place
Dauphine and Pont Neuf, until they came to the Louvre. There being in all these
pa^ts most sumptuous Arches of triumph erected, and filled with people, who by
their redoubled acclamations, showed their joyfulness to behold so excellent
and perfect a Princess.

Their Majesty's went yesterday to Nostredame, where they found assembled the
Chancellor of France, the Parliament, the Chamber of Accounts, and the Court of
Aids, with the Companies of the City, and after they were received and
complemented there by the Dean of the Church, they heard the Te Deum sung with
a particular solemnity, befitting the presence of these two great Objects of
our public joy. There were likewise present Monsieur, the Prince of Conde, the
Duke of Enguien, and the Prince of Conty, Mademoiselle, the Princess of Conde,
and all the other Lords and Ladies of the Court; the Clergy, the Popes Nuntio,
the Count of Fuenseldagne, the Ambassadors of Venice and Savoy, and so many
other persons of quality: So that there was never a more numerous and more
splendid Assembly seen here before.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed nd Published.
Veritus Inconcussa, or a most certain Truth ascertained, That King Charles the
First was no man of B^ood, but a Martyr for his people. By Fabian Phillips Esquire
Sold by Williom Pl^ce at Gray's Inn Gate.

The Bowels of Tender Mercy Sealed in the Everlasting Covenant; as also the
Treasures of Grace, etc. By Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick.

The r^^king of the Bi^ter Cup; or the hardest Lesson in Christ's School,
learned and taught by himself, Passive Obedience, by John Brinsley, Minister of
the G^spel at Great Yarmouth.

Both sold by Joseph Cranford at the Castle and Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Beatitudes: Or a Discourse upon part of Christ's famous Sermon on the
Mount. By Thomas Watson, Minister of the Word at Stephens Walhrook in the City
of London. Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange, 1660.

Manaductio, or a Leading of Children by the hand through the principles of
Grammar. By James Shirley.

An Epistle written and presented to His Majesty, by A^ise ^^an^ who yet
live^h. Both sold by Richard Lownds at the White Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

An Advertisement.
GEntlemen, You are desired to take notice, That Mr. Th^ophilus Buckworth, who
for some years past permitted, and gave directions to his Brother Mr. Edmond
Buckworth, to make and expose to sale, for the public good, those so famous
Lozanges or Pectorals, approved for the cure of Consumptions, Coughs, Catarrhs,
Asthma's, Hoarsness, Strongness of Breath, Colds in general, Diseases incident
to the Lungs, and a sovereign Antidote against the Plague, and all other
contagious Diseases, and obstructions of the Stomach, does now himself (being
the Author and first compounder of them) make them at his House on Mile-end
Green. And for more convenience of the people, constantly leaves them sealed
up with his Coat of Arms on the papers, with Mr. Rich. Lowndes (as formerly) at
the sign of the White Lion near the little North door of Paul's Church, Mr.
Henry Seilt over against Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, Mr. William Milward at
Westminster Hall-Gate, Mr. John Place at Furnivals-Inn Gate in Holborn, and Mr.
Robert Horn at the Turks-head near the entrance of the Royal Exchange,
Booksellers, and no others.

This is published to prevent the designs of diverse Pretenders, who counterfeit
the said Lozenges to the disparagement of the said Gentleman, and great abuse
of the People.

Advertisements. August 22. 1660.
THat then there came to the House of Mr. William Grove of Grove, in the Parish
of Wanting, in the County of Berks, seven horsemen (pretending themselves to be
Soldiers) with Ho^sters and Pistols most of them being in Gray Sui^s and Coats,
two of them in sadder colored coats then the other, one of which had no boots,
but only white boot hose tops, one of their Horses being an Iron Gray, one
other having a br^wn bay Mare, but cut-maned and ri^ged, and the others horses
being bay, who pretending to search the house for Co^^et Joyce, and accusing
Mr. Grove of High Tre^^^, by virtue of an Order (as they pretended from the
Lord General robbed the House, and took away threescore and ten pounds in money,
some ^ieces of Gol^, and a Wedding Ring, and afterward took the said Mr. Grove
and his Son, pretending they must have them to London, and carried them toward
Oxford, into a place called Bagly wood, and having them there dismounted them,
and took from them a Gray Mare, of about twelve pounds price, being cut maned,
having one Jaw thicker, and hanging down somewhat lower then the other, about
Fourteen hand and a hall high, and one I^on gray g^l^ Colt, about three years
old and a quarter, of about ^en pound price, being a very handsome Colt, with
Bridles and Saddles, and about twenty shillings in money, and bound them and
left them in the wood I any one shall seize and secure any of the said persons,
or the Mare and Colt so taken away, let them give o^ send notice to the said Mr
Grove aforesaid, or to John Coombes at the Windmill in St. Pauls-Church-yard,
and they shall be well rewarded.

Whitehall.
His Majesty was pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood on Lieu. colonel
John Jackson of Harraton in the County of Durham, as a present mark of his
Royal favor for his loyal services and sufferings in the Wars.

Westminster.
Col. Francis Windham (who so nobly held out Dunster-castle for his Majesty)
being lately chosen Burgess for Milburn Port in the county of Somerset, now
sits in the House of Commons; and among all those hundreds of Members that fit
there, not any has served his Majesty with more fidelity and success than that
Gentleman, especially at such times when others forsook him, and his Majesty
had most need of friends, which we need not tell you was in his Majesty's great
and wonderful escape after the battle at Worcester.

And since we mention escapes, we cannot forget the Noble and valiant Lord
Inchequin, who on Friday last the 24. instant, came to London to finish his
redemption from the Turkish slavery, where his Son is left as Pledge till his
Ransom be accomplished.

His Excellency the Duke of Albemarle has reinforced his late Order to the
Commissary-general of the Musters and his Deputies, to take care that no
Officers or Soldiers be mustered in any dead place, or any other way vacant.

Edenbrough August 21.
M^jor G^neral Morgan (in pursuance of his Excellencies Orders) with eight
Companies of his Regiment, is removed from Haly-Rood house in Edenbrough (a
place famous for the King of Scotlands wonted M^nsion) to Leith Citadel:
Lieut. Col. Joseph W^^tar, his Lieut. Col. Commands Sterling Castle with two
Companies of the Major Generals Regiment. Orders are sent to seven Companies of
Col. Daniels Regiment to march to A^re in place of Col. Robsons. Two Companies
of Col. Daniels Regiment, and two of Col. Mau's are sent to St. Johnstons,
Commanded by Lieut. Col. Richardson. And by this time I presume you desire to
know how many Garrisons and strong Holds of Scotland are reserved in the
possession of the English: which are, The Citadel of Leith. The Citadel of
St. Johnstons. The Citadel of Air. The Citadel of Innerness. Sterling
Castle. Dunbarton Castle. Dunstafnal Castle, and Dower Castle.


The Earl of Glencarne now Lord Chancellor of Scotland is expected here at
Ediuburgh to morrow, and is to be attended hither very honorably, many persons
of quality citizens and others to a very great number being already gone to
meet him.

To this news from Edinburgh we may add, that General Middleton is made his
Majesty's Commissioner.

Lord Craford Lindsey Treasurer. Earl of Cassiles Justice General. Earl of
Lauderdale, Principal Secretary of State. Sir John Fietcher, his Majesty's
Advocate. Sir Archibold Primrose, Clerk Register. Mr. Gilbert Stuart, Lion King
at Arms.
Since those excepted out of the Act of Oblivion, who were committed to the
Tower on saturday last, having sat as Judges on his late Majesty, these
following (who also were such Judges) are sent to the same place, viz. Sir
Hardress Waller Sir James Temple Col. Scroope Col. George Fleetwood Alderman
Tichburn Mr. Garland Mr. Heveningham Col. Owen Row Col. Harvey Col. Potter. Mr.
Main Mr. Millington.


His Majesty this day Aug. 29. went to the Parliament, and gave his Royal
Assent to these five Acts, viz.

1. An Act for confirmation of Judicial proceedings. 2. An Act for restraining
the taking of excessive Usury. 3. An Act for a perpetual Anniversary
Thanksgiving on the 29 of May (the day of his Majesty's Nativity and
Restoration.) 4. An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion.
5. An Act for a speedy provision of Money to pay off and disband all the Forces
of the Kingdom both by Sea and Land, (commonly called, The Act for
Poll-money.)
His Majesty in memory of that great service done to the Crown in the days of
his Royal Father, as well as since his Majesty began his Reign by that wise and
most Honorable Personage Earl of Southampton, has made his Lordship Lord High
Treasurer of England.

(...)


