Numb. 29 THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday July 9.
to Monday July 16. 1660.
From Paris, July 10.
The 5 instant Mademoiselle de Alencon and de Valois, returned hither from the
Court, we hear that their Majesty's are expected to morrow at Amboyse, and are
to come two days after to Fontanebleau, there to remain until all things are
ready for their reception, which will be one of the magnificent entries that
ever was made to any King, as may be judged by the great and sumptuous
preparations that are a making on all sides, wherein our Inhabitants do busy
themselves with an incredible diligence and care, that they might as soon as
possible have the honor to receive that wonder of Queens, who being the first
fruit of our Peace, we doubt not but that we shall enjoy all the good and
necessary effects of it for the happiness and felicity of the people. In the
mean time, as every one, by a commendable emulation, does strive to testify
his Zeal in so illustrious an occasion, the 8 instant a running at the ring was
performed at the Academy of Messiers de Mesmon and de Coulon, by several
Gentlemen, who being the gallantest of this Kingdom and very well mounted,
showed their Dexterity therein for carrying of the Prize, which was a rich
Diamond given by the Count de Rower a Gentleman of Piedmont; the which was done
in the presence of a very noble company, who were afterward entertained with a
sumptuous Collation. The Marquis of Constans, Nephew to the Baron of Batteville
came to this City going for England, from his Catholic Majesty, to complement
the King of England about his happy restoration.

From Poitiers, July 3.
The Court is expected this night at Lusignan, and to morrow in this City,
where all is preparing for the reception of their Majesty's.

Milan June 26. 1660.
The Duke of Savoys forces lent to the Republic of Venice passing upon the Po
through this State, the Duke of Sermonesa our Governor has published a
Proclamation, forbidding, under very great penalties, to give any assistance or
relief to such soldiers as shall runn away from their colors. And until the
Express does return which he has sent to Naples to hasten the money he is to
receive from thence, he has delivered his orders for the Estapes for part of
the Forces of the Milanez that are to be shipped at Final and to pass into
Spain against the Portugal.

Old Aberdeen, July 2. 1660.
As Soon as the good news came to us of his Majesty's restoration, the Masters
and Members of the Kings College in this University of Aberdeen, did testify
their joy by singing of Psalms, ringing of Bells, Bonfires, and such other
jolli^ies as are usual; but knowing that they were not only tied to his Majesty
as their lawful Sovereign King, but also by a nearer relation, as being only
Patron of that House, they thought it incumbent on them, to give a more full
testimony of their real joy and praise to God for bringing home their Patron:
and therefore did a second time, being accompanied with the Provost, Bailiffs,
and Council of Aberdeen, Sheriff and Commissar, with the Ministers and
Students, with many other Gentlemen, go to the great Church, which was of old
the Cathedral of Aberdeen, and there reverently hear their own Minister Preach
a learned Thanksgiving Sermon, with great contentment to all the hearers. After
Sermon they all came by way of Procession from the Church to the College,
singing Psalms: Then one of the Professors of Divinity made an Oration in the
common School. The Magistrates of Aberdeen, with all other persons of quality,
were set in the middle of the Court near to the Fountain, before a Theater hung
all about with the Hangings which King James the fourth bestowed upon the
College, with other ornaments and Garlands, and Crowns of flowers of all
sorts; the Picture of the King was in the middle, and upon his left hand his
Excellency General Monk, because the speakers had in their Orations something
to speak as to them: the stairs about, the windows, and all the Court below,
were so full of spectators, that I thought there had scarcely been so many
people in the parts about us. Upon this Theater were set all the Masters and
Students in order in their Gowns. In the first place the Principal prayed and
praised God, and did show the hearers, that there were five young men,
Students, to speak in that place one after another: which was accordingly done;
and indeed they did it very gravely and reverently. The subject of their
Oration was as follows: The first spoke of the great happiness which Scotland
enjoyed under Kings since the days of Fergus the first, until the time of the
late troubles. The second spoke of the miseries the Nations suffered by the
late Kings Murder, the present Kings removal from his just Rights and
Dignities. The third spoke of the praises due to his Excellency for restoring
the King to his Kingdoms. The fourth spoke of the great happinesses, and many
favors bestowed upon the University by Kings, and of the losses sustained by
the interruption of Kingly Government. The fifth had a gratulatory Oration for
the Kings return. After they had ended, there was a Latin Hymn of about eighty
lines, very harmoniously and cheerfully sung, and at the end of every fourth
line, Vivat Rex Carolus, vivat. It is incredible to know how joyful the people
of all ranks were, who were present: the people of this poor Town did testify
their unspeakable joy all the night with Bonfires, ringing of Bells, playing on
Musical Instruments, and dancings, yet without the least debauchery of
drinking; such an influence has his Majesty's sobriety upon the people. All
things were so carried, as best showed their real duty to his Majesty, and good
discipline of this place. Much of the honor of this (though all were active
enough) is due to that truly learned Dr. More, Professor of Medicine here.

From Rochel, July 3.
The 29 of the last month, the King with Cardinal Mazarine and some other
Grandees, arived at Bourage, and the next day his Majesty went to dinner in the
Castle of O^^on, and afterward went to see the ships that were in the River of
Sendre, and returned about night to Bourage.

Heidelbergh, June 23. 1660.
We are much rejoiced here to understand of the good agreement between the King
and Parliament, desiring the continuance of Gods blessing upon them; and to
that purpose, his Electoral Highness has appointed a day of thanksgiving to be
kept through his whole land, July 3. and after the Sermons, here, and at
Frankendal, and Cau^, all the c^nnon to be shot off, and all the citizens and
soldiers to do the like with their muskets.

From the Hague, June 29.
The Lord Frederick van Alefe^t of Se^guard, Counselor of State, and
Deputy Governor of the Dukedoms of Sleswig and Holstein, to his Majesty the
King of Denmark, goes in quality of Extraordinary Ambassador of the said King,
to congratulate his Majesty of Great Britain, and is already on his way hither,
intending to take shipping at the Brill or Flushing, as soon as wind or weather
shall serve; so that you may expect him in England with^n few days.

Westminster July 5.
On Monday, Sergeant Tyrell (...) to the Common Pleas Bar by Sergeant Glanvile
and (...) Littleton; where being come, the Lord Chancello^ (...) the reasons
that induced his Sacred Majesty to make ^oise of him to be one of the Justices
of that Court; to which when Sergeant Tyrell made a modest reply, speaking of
his unfitness amongst so learned men to undertake so great a charge, etc. the
Lord Chancellor caused the Patent to be read; after which the Sergeant being in
Court, he first took the oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, and then the oath as
Justice of that Court; which being ended, the Lord Chancellor went away,
leaving the Sergeant to act in his place as one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas.

On Tuesday, the Lord Chancellor sitting in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
Sergeant Turner came to the Bar of that Court. The Lord Chancellor laid down
the reasons why his Majesty was pleased to call him to be Baron of his Court of
Exchequer, in that he had been unbiassed and constant in his Judgment, and had
acted nothing prejudicial to his Majesty, or contrary to his trust, etc. After
a reply in excuse of himself, his Majesty's Parent to const^tute him one of the
Barons of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, was rea^, and being afterward
sworn in Court, he sat as one of the Barons of the said Court.

White^^ll, July 7.
This day His Majesty conferrell the place of Lord Almoner on that most Pious
and Reverend, Brian, Lord Bishop of Salisbury, who was his Majesty's ^utor when
he was Prince of Wales.

His Majesty was pleased to restore that ancient Honor of the Dominion and
Government of the Isle of Man, to the Right honorable Charles Earl of Derby,
which has been kept from that Noble Family ever since the murder of the Noble
and valiant James Earl of Derby: A Family that for their loyalty and fidelity
to the Crown have suffered as deep as any of his Majesty's Subjects of this
Nation. Great care is also taken by the Earl of Derby for settling the
Church Government both in Doctrine and Discipline, as it has been formerly
accustomed in that Island.

Also William Lord Craven is made Governor of the castle of Shrewsbury, in
which County his Lordship has ample Revenues, which till now without the least
pretense or color of Justice have been detained from his Lordship, but now are
restored to him with all Arrears; and his Lordships Deputy Governor is Sir
William Whitmore Baronet, a family that have suffered very much for their
Loyalty and Allegiance.

The Lord Charles Howard, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, is
also made Governor of Carlisle.

That Loyal Gentleman, sir Richard Basset, is made Governor of Cardiff Castle.

Sir Jordan Crosland, who from the beginning of these Wars, did his Majesty
such good service in the North, is now made Governor of Scarborough Castle.

Col. Tho. Blague, who so long kept the Castle of Wallingford when Governor
thereof (being one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber) is now made
Governor of Yarmouth and Langher Point.

Captain William Lennard, a Gentleman of a Noble Family, and tried courage, is
made Governor of the Forts of Tilbury and Gravesend.

Cap. Increased Collins, having a former Patent from his late Majesty, and
continuing Loyal, is now confirmed by his Majesty, Governor of Moats Bulwark.

Major Waterhouse, a person of whose courage and fidelity his Majesty
understands so much, is now Deputy Governor of Garnsey.

Letters are lately sent down to Scotland to Judge Moscley, and the other
English that were Commissioned as Judges there, to forbear to act any further
in their former capacity, and to repair into England.

And now (after all these Castles and Commands bestowed on persons of Honor and
Loyalty) be pleased to take notice, That the Marquis of Argile, the Marquis o^
A^trim, Sir Arthur Hesilrig, and Sir Henry Vane are Arrested of High Treason,
and committed close prisoners to the Tower of London* When Sergeant Ch^r^ock
went to apprehend the Marquis of An^r^m, he was denied entrance; but the
General beforehand having furnished him with three files of Musketeers, he
forced two doors, and found the Marquis sitting on his bed side, 'twas about
two of the clock last Sunday morning. The Sergeant civilly offered him to rest
there all night, where he would g^ve h^s attendance: The Marquis afterward
went to bed; but upon consideration rose again, and was conveyed privately to
the Tower. The Marquis of Argyle was got through the Inner chamber and
Presence, intending: as he says) to have spoken with his Majesty, but was soon
observed, and upon information, a Warrant was granted to apprehend him. In his
passage through Cheep-side, he desired he might go and speak with an Eminent
Learned Minister at Ald^rmanb^ry Sergeant Charneck told him. That his Lordship
might send for that, or any other Minister to the Tower, but at present he
could not permit him thither. We could tell you many observable particulars of
this Marquis, but at present may it suffice to acquaint you, That this was the
day whereon formerly his Lordship in a friendly manner had invited the Lord of
Mac-Nachton, to his House to Dinner, and there seized upon him with much less
civily then the Sergeant did his Lordship; but Mac-Nachton seeing him-life in
danger, sound means to escape, and is still alive to receive the reward of his
Loyalty and Valor, being the last Commander that bore Arms for the King in
Scotland, and (in the judgment of all parties) a person of as high merit and
excellent Conduct, as any Gentleman of that Nation.

We have not room to insert more particulars of the two Knights, Sir Arthur and
Sir Henry* but must conclude with a desire, that you would consider how of all
persons in England, Scotland and Ireland* these 4 were the grand instruments of
the fouer different Intereste, and till now could never meet together.

There are other Prisoners committed to the Black-Rod, whose names with more
particulars you may have in the next.

From Rome, June 14.
Cardinal Carbarigo having received the Cardinals hat of the Pope in a public
Consistory, has been magnificent^y treated by the Cardinal Patron, with the
Cardinal Man^ni, Dom Mario and Dom Augustino. There have been great rejoycings
at the Christning of the young Prince Borglese, whose Father kept that day an
open table, and gave abundance of Alms. Cardinal Bandinelli is gone for his
Legation of the Rom^^g^e, and Mr de Bo^compagne, Archbishop of Bonoma, has
taken possession of his place of Magiordome to the Pope, who seems to be
willing to excommunicate the Vice Roy of Naples, because of the imprisoning of
Cardinal Filomarinis two Nephews, who have been sent by him into Spain; but the
business begins to incline to some way of accommodation. We are yet uncertain
whether Queen Christeana shall go for Swedeland. We hear from Naples that
great rejoycings were made there for the Peace between the Emperor and the
Swedes, the Poles and the Elector of Brandenbu^g.

Turin June 26 1660.
This day our Court is to remove from Front to go to the Castle belonging to
the Count Philip d' Aglie, and from thence to the pleasure house of Madame
Royal.

Toulouse 28 June 1660.
We have had here (...) ^n Earth quake, which extended it self to the very
Pyr^nean Mountains, and overthrew many houses. We he^re that in Bearne it has
dried up the Mineral Springs. We hear likewise that Belyer and the Seau^d
Urgel, were delivered to the Spaniards the 22 instant, and Ros^t and Cap de
Quires upon the 26. The Spaniards have put some additional men in Figuiers
whereas the report goes they intend to build a Royal fore. Monsieur d' Orvill,
formerly Governor of Puycerda is likewise fortifying of Livia, which is one of
the villages of Cerdagne remaining in the hands of the French.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
The Memoires of the Duke of Rohan: Or, a Faithful Relation of the most
remarkable Occurrences in France; especially concerning, those of the Reformed
Churches there. From the death of Henry the Great until the Peace made with
them in June, 1629. Together with diverse Politic Discourses upon several
occasions. Written originally in French, by the Duke of Rohan, and now
Englished by George Bridges of Lincolas-Inn Esquire Sold by Gabriel Bedel and
Thomas Collins at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet.

The Clerk of Assize, Judges Marshal, and Crier; being the true manner and form
of the proceedings at the Assizes and General Jail-deliver, both in the Crown
Court, and Nisi Prius Court, and the right ways of entering of all Pleas,
Verdicts, Judgments, and Orders in either of the said Courts. By T.W. And also
the Law of Charitable Uses.

Both sold by Timothy Twyford within Inner Temple Gate.

A Brief View of the late Troubles and Confusions in England, begun and
occasioned by a prevailing Faction in the Long-Parliament, from the year 1640.
unto this present year 1660. By William Younger Gent.

Stem^na Sacrum. The Royal Progeny delineated, and with some Notes explained,
showing His Sacred Majesty's Royal and Lawful Descent to His Crown and
Kingdoms, from all the Kings that ever reigned in this Nation; with a Stem
annexed, setting sorth the Norman, the Saxon, the British, and the Scottish
Line. By Giles Fleming Rector of Waddingworth, in the Diocese and County of
Lincoln.

Both sold by Robert Gibbs, at the Ball in Chancery Lane.

The Pastor and the Clerk: Or, a Debate (Real) concerning Infant Baptism,
together with some Retractions of the Author, and Repentings, in reference to
the late Civil and Ecclesiastical Changes. By John Ellis.

A Dying Fathers Living Legacy, to his Loving Son. Both sold by Elisha Wallis
at the Gilded-horse-shooe in the Old-Bailey.

God save the King: A Sermon Preached at Lyme-Regis, at the Proclaiming of His
most Excellent Majesty, (...) Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King Defender o^ the Faith, etc. By Ames Short, M. A. (...) there. Sold
by William R^ybould at the Unico^n in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Fourth Volumn of Clelia, that Excellent Romance. Written by Monsieur d^
Sc^^ery. Sold by Humphr^y Moseley at the Princ^'s (...) in St. Paul's Church
yard, and Tho. Dri^g at the George in Fleetstreet, near St Dunstans Church.

Hamburgh, July 10.
No news from Coppenhagen or Sealand, Field-Marshal Wrangle is arived at
Stralsund again. He was going for Sweden, but an Express met him at Sea with
Orders out of Sweden, for his return. The Imperialists lie still in their
quarters, they have lately demanded quarters in the four Lands here of this
Town. The Swedes mustered their forces the last week in the Dukedom of Breme,
which were about 7 or 8000 men. There is a Report, as if they intend to go for
Munster, the Town being said to call them to their assistance: There is now
open war between the Bishop and Town of Munster.

They write from Dantzick, that Czarneski has beaten the Muscovites.

Elsenor, 26 June.
The Head-quarter is removed from Roskield to this place, where all Generals
and chief Officers of the Army are assembled; they have received intimation
from the Court of Sweden, what his Majesty intends to do with this Army, viz.
To disband a great part of them upon payment of their arrears. The Princes of
Sultsback, Birchenfield, and Darmstat, are this day gone for Sweden; but by the
way between this and Helsinbergh they were entertained by the Hollands Admiral
de Ruyter in his ship, with great magnificence and shooting off his Canon. The
Ratification of the peace was brought hither out of Sweden last Sunday night.
Admiral de Ruyter will employ all his Vessels to transport the soldiers, which
now will be done very suddenly.

Warsovia, July 3.
Here is extraordinary great rejoicing over the Victory obtained against the
Moscovites; some say there are 12000 of the Enemy killed upon the place. The
chief General Kowansky saved himself with the flight only, with 100 horse, who
is strongly pursued, and it is verily believed he will be overtaken. Another
General of theirs Szerbati is taken Prisoner, and General Junowa slain. The
said Szerbati being brought in to our General Czarnecky, his presence said, our
Czar has brought me into this sad condition, who would not take our advice*
and it is to be feared he seeks his own utter ruin. This Szerbati with many
German Officers being taken prisoners, are upon the way to be conveied hither
with all the Colors taken, whereof the Szar his own color is blew, imbroidered
with Gold and Pearls.

Ours have taken of the Enemy all their Baggage, Ammunition and 40 great pieces
of Ordinance, besides great store of Provision which was distributed among the
Soldiers. We hope by this Victory, the siege before Lackowiz which was begun
by the Muscovites almost half a year ago, will now be raised.

Out of Ukrania, they relate that our General Wihowsky should have been beaten
by the rebellious Cossaks, but of this there is no certainty as yet. His
Majesty intended to go for Dubno the 12 of this month, to be near to Lithuania
and Ukrania.

From Stetin, July 8.
The Imperial Forces in Pomerania and Mechlenburg do still lie in their old
quarters, but are ready for a March upon the first order they shall receive.
They have already been Mustered, and got a months Pay besides Clothes.

Amsterdam, July 10.
At Utreckt, some differences are fallen out betwixt the Ministers and the
Magistrae about the disposing of the Church lands; The Ministers having the
common People on their side, the Magistrate got privately some Soldiers into
the Town for their protection, since which all is quiet again.

An Advertisement of a Book newly Printed and Published.
The World Surveyed: Or, the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc, or
White of Marse^ll^s; who from the age of Fourteen years, to Threescore and
eighteen, Traveled through most parts of the World. The whole work enriched
with many Authentic Histories. Originally written in French, and faithfully
rendered into English by F. B. Gent. Sold by John Starkey at the Miter, near the
Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet.

Advertisements.
WHereas by Commission from His most Sacred Majesty under His Great Seal of
England, bearing date the Fifth of this instant July; as also by His Majesty's
Letters Patents, dated the Eleventh following. Sir William Throckmorton was
constituted and appointed Knight-Marshal of His Majesty's Household, and Court
of Marshalsey: He the said Sir William Throckmorton does declare, That for the
ease of His Majesty's Subjects in their due Proceedings in the said Court of
Justice, that the Fees payable upon every Arrest, shall be abated Two shillings
and six pence; and that for the future preventing those high Misdemeanors and
Corruptions, which have been committed by several subordinate Officers, or
Counterfeit-pretenders to that Court, to the great vexation and oppression of
His Majesty's good people.

That he the said Knight-Marshal, as Judge in the said Court, will frequently
appear therein, to hear and receive all Grievances and Complaints that can be
presented against any of the Officers or Counterfeits as aforesaid; and then
and there to inflict most exemplary punishment according to Law, upon all
transgressors or offenders whatsoever.

MOst excellent and approved Dentrifices to scour and cleanse the Teeth, making
them white as Ivory, preserves from the Toothach; so that being constantly
used, the parties using it, are never troubled with the Toothach: It fastens
the (...), sweetens the Breath, and preserves the Gums and Mouth from Cankers
and Imposthumes, and being beaten to powder, and drunk in Wine, or any other
drink, is a good remedy for any Flux or Lask. Invented and made by Robert
Tur^er, the only Au^hor of them, and are only to be had at the House of
Thomas Rocks, Stationer, at the Holy Lamb at the East End of St. Paul's Church,
near the School, in Sealed Papers.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
MASORAH, Critica Divina: A Synoptical Directory on the Sacred Scriptures,
distributed into four Parts. 1. Of the Canons of Scripture, Old and New. 2. Of
the Translations of Scripture, Auogtophical and Apographical. 3. Of the
Interpretations of Scripture, Literal and Mystical. 4. Of the Authorities of
Scripture, Divine and Ecclesiastical. The First Part Dedicated to his Majesty,
by Ferdinando Parkburst, (...). Printed by Tho. Newcomb.

Solomon's* blessed Land, A Sermon upon Eccles. 10.17. Preached before an
Extraordinary Assembly at Newark upon Trent, May 29 1660. Being the Birthday
of Our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, King of England, etc. By Samuel
Brunsel, Rector of Bingham in Nottinghamshire. Sold by Henry Seile over against
St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.

The Death of Charles the First lamented, with the Restoration of Charles the
Second congratulated: Delivered in a Speech at Wellington, May 17. 1660. By
William Langley* Sold by Richard Lownds at the White-Lyon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and Simon Gape next to Hercules Pillars in Fleetstreet.

An Advertisement.
THe best and noblest guilt Skins for Patens, for Creatio^s, Charters, for
Corporations, Grand Commissions, Commissions to foraign Kingdoms, etc. And
likewise the best and noblest skins in black and white for all manner of other
Patents, Pardons, and Royal Grants, to be passed under His Majesty's great
Seal; and also for Recoveries, and other Exemplifications, are sold by George
Tomlyn in Leather-lane in Holborn, Henry Twyford in the Middle* Temple, and
John Bellinger in Cliffords-Inn Lane in Fleetstreet.

An Advertisement to all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Attor^^es,
Sollicitors, Clerks, Sergeants, Bailiffs, etc.
ALl sorts of Blank Bonds, with Conditions for payment of money at a place
certain, and without; Counterbonds for money, and Bonds for performance of
Covenants, for Arbitraments with Umpire and without Umpire; for Appearances in
any Court of Record, Counterbonds upon the same, Replevins, and Bonds upon
Replevins, Bailiffs Bonds to the Sheriffs for their true performance of their
Offices, Bills of Sale, Bonds of Redemption, General Releases, Licenses for
Alehouses. All sorts of Sheriffs Warrants upon mean Process, County Court
Warrants, etc. Warrants for Justices of the Peace, Indentures of
Apprenticeship. And also the best and fairest pieces of Text, and slouriing for
Letters Patents, Fines* Recoveries, and o^ her Exemplifications. Are to be sold
by John Bellinger in Cliffords-Inne-lane Fleetstreet, London.

And by him is also to be sold, That most incomparable piece of Court hand,
which (of it self alone, without other Master) is completely fitted to teach
^ll Clerks, and others, perfectly and exactly to write the same hand, and to
read ancient Records, and abreviate words.

Westminster.
The Guards at last are discharged from their attendance on the two Houses of
Parliament; who being now upon the performance of their duty to his Majesty, as
Loyal Subjects, and the true service of their Country in their Representatives,
need no other security, then the hearts and affections of the people.

Whitehal.
The Regiment that was lately Col. Streaters is now conferred upon the Right
Honorable John Lord Belasis, who by his wounds and imprisonments has
sufficiently testified his Honor and Loyalty to His Majesty.

His Lieutenant Colonel is that gallant Gentleman, Colonel Anthony Gilby.

His Major is Col. John Streater, who so resolutely attempted the Pass near
Daventry, when Col. Lambert was taken.

Lieut. Col. George Welden and Robert Smith, are two of his Captains.

Col. Charles Fairfax, though very aged, was never known to do any thing
unbefitting a Soldier; and for his eminent service in the late happy Change,
and particularly at Hull, has not only a continuance of his Regiment, but for
ever an 100 l. per annum out of the Customs of Hull.

Col. Edward Harloe, Eldest Son of Sir Robert Harloe, is now Colonel of a
Regiment of Foot, Captain of Horse, and Governor of Dunkirk.

His Brother Major Robert Harloe, is now Colonel of a Regiment of Horse in
Dunkirk, a person whose abilities are not unknown as a Member of Parliament, or
of the Army.

Major Tobias Bridges has well merited to continue still Major of the same
Regiment.

By the next you will have a particular account of the Regiment of his Highness
the Duke of York.

On Monday, July 16. His Majesty and His two Royal Brothers, with diverse Lords
and Personages of Honor were entertaind by Sir William Waele at his house in
Throckmotton-street. This is that Sir William Wale that entertained his Grace
the Duke of Albemarlie, when it was agreed the Secluded Members should be
admitted to resit; for which, and other late services, he has obtained to be
Purveyor of His Majesty's Wines.

If the City knew her own happiness, they may now see the difference betwixt
the presence of a King, and the tyranny of an Usurper, where the known Laws and
the established Religion, are not causes of Plunder and Imprisonment, and there
is no strife betwixt the City and the Country, but who shall show most duty to
the King.

We have not told you of any places of Civil Jurisdiction conferred by his
Majesty upon any of his good Subjects, contenting our selves to let you know
how the Militia and Army Offices have been disposed, as the thing of more
present consideration and necessity; however we dare promise you when the List
and Settlement of the Army is all finished to give you upon occasion an account
how Officers in his Majesty's Household, in Courts of Judicature, as well as in
other places are filled and supplied.

WHereas in some Prints there is mention made of the manner of the Reception of
Monsieur Pelnitz, and particularly, that he was conducted to audience in his
Majesty's own Coach; we must inform the Reader, That it was not his Majesty's
Coach, but the Coach of the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household.

On Wednesday the 18 instant, the Earl of St. Albans went to Gravesend, and so
forward on his Voyage toward France. What is the cause and purport of his
journey, we need not tell you.

His Majesty notwithstanding all discouragements by the (...) weather, and the
multitude of sick and infirm people, abated not one of his accustomed number,
but touched full Two hundred that had the Evil; an high Conviction of all such
Physicians, Chirurgions, or Apothecaries, that pretend self-preservation, when
the languishing Patient requires their assistance.

More prisoners are committed to the Black Rod, particularly (...) Acton (his
Christendom we know not) who is notorious enough by the name of Acton,
Postmaster of Basingstoke; with whom also are Capt. John Griffith and Capt.
Edward Alcock, who, we may safely swear, are unknown to us by their virtues.

Major Waring is committed thither also. This is the Son of the old Cash-keeper
Waring, and Brother-in-law to Major Salway. This Major Waring will find better
usage at the Black-Rod, then he gave to the Gentlemen of Shropshire, where he
was Oliver Cromwell's Triennial Sheriff (Pardon us for calling him Sheriff, who
rather was the Jailer of that County) and was the best Representative of the
Committee of Safety, whose Confident he was.

The last of the prisoners is Col. Henry Bradshaw, eldest brother to that
Monster John Bradshaw, whom we scorn to honor so much as to rail at, if it were
manners to rail at the Devil.

And while we mention the name of Bradshaw, we can tell you, That His Majesty
has given leave unto Henry Williams alias Cromwell of Ramsey, in the County of
Huntingdon Esquire to leave out the Alias Cromwell.

It is therefore desired, you would take notice, That this Mr. Henry Williams
is Grandchild to Sir Oliver Williams, and son to Col. Williams a Commander in
His late Majesty's Army, to whom, only with his family, this favor is granted;
and (to deal clearly) in those black days of the Protectordom, this Gentleman
was not only civil to all, but made it his endeavor to assi^^ and relieve all
honest and loyal persons. It is his due, and it were best to deny it.

London, Printed by J: Macock, and Tho. Newcomb, 1660.


