Numb. 24. Mercurius Publicus: COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence,
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order of the Council of State. From
Thursday June 7. to Thursday June 14. 1660.
Thursday, June 7. 1660.
THis day the Petition of diverse Lords, Knights Gentlemen, of the six Counties
of Northwales, (from whence during all the time of the late Usurpation of the
Government, no public Address or Petition was ever made) was presented to his
Majesty by the Noble Lord, the Lord Viscount Bulkley, accompnied by the persons
who subscribed the same; which Petition was as follows:

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of diverse Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, Inhabitants of
the six Counties of Northwales, whose names are subscribed,
Shows,
THat your Petitioners during the Vicissitudes of eighteen years troubles,
having suffered as much and repined as little as any part of your said
Majesty's Realm have done, do now esteem it the glory of their first public
Address that it is to your Majesty the most Gracious of Princes.

Excess of joy has often struck men dumb; but we who now carry our hearts in
our mouths, may as well live and not breathe, as not profess our selves
enlivened by your Majesty's return unto us: That having bin the end of our
constant prayers, is now the fruition of those longing hopes which rendered our
sufferings tolerable, and preserved us to this time to pray for your Majesty's
long and happy Reign.

And as your Majesty has attained the possession of your Crowns, by the
glorious conquest of an Heroic patience, so shall we humbly endeavor to
follow your Princely example, by so far disowning all (even just) Animosities
as shall we hope in a peculiar sense render us your Majesty's most obedient
subjects.

Yet we deny our selves the least harsh or revengefull thought for those
Oppressions we so long and signally have layn under, we are not able to digest
the detestable and horrid murder of your Royal Father, our once most Gracious
Sovereign, in averting the guilt of whose blood all are concerned, who have no
mind to draw it upon themselves.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, That not only such of those
principally engaged in that execrable murder, as to your Majesty and the
honorable Parliament shall seem men's, be forth with delivered over to public
Justice: But that also such others as concurred therein, or procured and prom^^
etitions to bring on that horrid Trial, or other Addresses to own the same (and
have not since given early testimony of their unforced repentance) may be
diligently taken notice of, and disabled to bear any office of trust Civil or
Military in your Majesty's Realm, that so the lives of your Majesty's most
loyal subjects may no more come into the cruel hands of Blood thirsty men.

Lord Powys, Lord Herbert, Lord Bulkley, Sir Thomas Hammer, Sir Jo. Salisbury,
Thomas Bulkeley Esquire William Herbert Esquire Sir Evan Lloyd, Sir John Owen, Sir
Roger Mostyn, Sir John Carter, John Hammer, Richard Wyn, John Bodvell, Will.
Griffith, Nicholas Bagnol Esquires, John Middleton, John Nanney, Will.
Hampheries, Richard Broughton, Col. Rich. Lloyd, Will. Ravenscroft, William
Glynn, Henry B^lkley, Col. Hugh Wynn, Hen. Conway, Piers Lloyd, Robert
Williams, Eubale Thetwal, Tho. Crachley, Sir Charles Lloyd, Robert Davies
junior, Col. Roger Mostyn, Will. Bold, Edmund Metrick, Lewis Lloyd, Tho.
Gravesnor, Ph^l. Egerton, Col. Tho. Ravenscroft, Robert Whitley, Griff.
Bodurda, Edward Bereton, John Do^ben, Evan Vaughan, Robert Broughton, Rich.
Middleton, Hugh Roberts, Rich. Wynn, Ken. Eaton, Nic. Bailey, Hen. Jones, John
Price, Hugh Pennant, Francis Manley, Will. Hill, Edward Price, Col. Io.
Robinson, Hugh Bodurda, Will. Williams, Owen Hughes, Robert Price, Hugh
Maurice, John Lloyd, Tho. Weave, Will, Par^y, Tho. Wynn, John Williams, Oliver
Broughton Esquires, Tho. Baker, John Llyod, Tho. Williams, Hugh Williams,
Arthur Trevor, Col. Roger VVhitley, John Parry, Trevor Lloyd, Edward Pennant,
Tho. Vaughan, Io. Griffith, Col. Fran. Trafford, Lewis, Lewis, John Lloyd,
Will. Humphreys, Hugh Meredith, Robert Challenor, Price Devereux, Somerset
Fox, Maurice Piges, Richard Hughes, Anthony Challonor, Richard Price, William
Vaughan, Geo. R^venscroft, Trevor Lloyd, Will. Jones, Robert Griffeth Esquires.

The Petition being presented as aforesaid, his Majesty was G^^^iously pleased
to tell the Petitioners. That he was sufficiently satisfied of their loyalty to
the King his Father, and sensible of their sufferings for him And was also
pleased to assure them of his special Grace and Favor.

White Hall.
On Wednesday the sixth instant, the B^liffs, Burgesses, and commonalty of the
Town of Ipswich, accompanied by M. Sicklem^r^, Captain Sparrow, Mr. Keen, and
diverse other Gentlemen, attended his Majesty, and presented him with six
hundred pieces of gold from the Town of Ipswich, which his Majesty was
graciously pleased to accept.

The same day the Earl of Cleaveland brought about two hundred Gentlemen, many
of them Officers formerly serving under him, the others Gentlemen that rid in
his troop to meet his Majesty to kiss his Majesty's hand, who kneeling down in
the m^tted Gallery, his Majesty was pleased to walk along, and give every one
of them the honor to kiss his hand, which favor was so highly resented by
them that they could no longer stifle their joy, but as his Majesty was walking
out (a thing, though unusual at Court) they brake out into a loud shouting.

On Thursday Mr. VVall^p, the Deputy, Steward and Burgesses of the City of
Westminster in their Gowns, being conducted by Mr. Gerard, a member of
Parliament for that City, waited upon his Majesty, and presented a Petition,
wherein they desired that his Majesty would be graciously pleased to bestow the
Office of Lord High Steward of Westminster on his Excellency the Lord General
Monck M. Gerard made a short speech to his Majesty, leaving it to the Steward
to enlarge, who delivered himself so rhetorically, and with such due and awful
respect to Majesty, that he has deservedly gained a very high reputation in
the Court, his Majesty returned a most gracious answer, and afforded to a^l of
them the honor to kiss his hand.

Thursday, June 7.
This day was published a Proclamation by his Majesty, to summon the persons
therein named, who sat, gave Judgment, and assisted in that horrid and
detestable murder of his Majesty's Royal Father of blessed memory, to appear
and render themselves within fourteen days after the publishing of that his
Majesty's Royal Proclamation, to the Speaker or Speakers of the House of Peers
or Commons, the Lord Mayor of the City of London, or the Sheriffs of the
respective Counties of England or Wales, and that no person harbor or conceal
them, under misprision of Treason.

The Persons Names are:

John Lisle, William Say, Esquires, Sir Hardresse Waller, Valentine Wauton,
Edward Whalley, Esqs; Sir John Bourchier Knight, William Heveningham Esquire Isaac
Pennington Alderman of London, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert
Millington, Edmund Ludl^w, John Hutchinson, Esquires; Sir Michael Livesay
Ba^onet, Robert Tichbourn, Owen Roe, Robert Lilburn, Aaria^ Scro^pe, John Okey,
John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, John Carew, Miles Corbet, Henry
Smith, Thomas Wogan, Edmund Harvey, Thomas Scot, William Cawley, John Downs,
Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, John Dixw^l, George
Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas
Wait, Esquires.

To which are added these other persons, as being also deeply guilty of that
most detestable and bloody Treason, viz. John Cook, employed as Solicitor;
Andrew Broughton and John Phelos, employed as Clerks; and Edward Dendy, who
attended as Sergeant at Arms.

This day the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Faulkland, (one of the
Citizens in Parliament for the City of Oxon) did present to his sacred Majesty
the loyal and dutiful affections of that ancient City, which they have always
borne to his Majesty, and also to his late royal Father, and in particular did
present an Instrument under the common seal of the said City, whereby they did
most cheerfully undertake for ever hereafter to pay to his Majesty the ancient
see-farm rent due from the said City, which they were necessitated to purchase
from the late usurped powers, for a considerable sum of money; all which his
Majesty did most graciously accept from them, and did then vouchsafe the honor
to the Mayor, and diverse worthy members of that City there present, to kiss his
Royal hand, graciously declaring that he would always vouchsafe his particular
grace, favor, and protection to that ancient and loyal City.

The same night his Majesty was graciously pleased to honor the General with
his company at Supper at the Cockpit; before supper he conferred the honor of
Knighthood on Colonel John Clobery, who had deserved so well in his constant
adhering to his Excellency, and prudent mannagement of affairs for the happy
restoring of his Majesty to his people. After supper, his Excellency
entertained his Majesty with several sorts of Music.

On Friday his Majesty went to Hampton Court, about five in the morning,
returned about eleven, and then touched many that had been troubled with the
Evil. At three of the clock in the afternoon, his Majesty gave a meeting to the
Parliament in the Banqueting House, and having heard Mr. Speaker, returned a
most gracious Answer. His Majesty was pleased to sup this night with the Lord
Cambden at Kensington.

On Saturday the Knights of the shire for Sommerset, a County that have
sufficiently manifested their constant loyalty to his sacred Majesty, as well
by their early actings of late (giving presidents to others to do those things
that tended to the bringing in of his Majesty) as their former fidelity,
delivered a Petition subscribed by many of the Nobility and Gentry of that
County to his Majesty, wherein after they had expressed their hearty joy for
the happy restoration of his Majesty, they humbly desired that his Majesty
would be pleased to take care for the settling of the Church, in such manner as
it was in the time of his Royal Grandfather and Father of ever blessed memory.

At the Generals Quarters at the Cockpit.
Several Addresses from several Regiments of the Army to his Majesty,
expressing their great joy for his Majesty's happy restoration, and an
assurance of their loyalty were early delivered to his Excellency, though
formerly forgot to be mentioned, viz. his Excellencies own Regiment of foot,
Col. Fairfax his Regiment, and the Irish Brigades.

On Friday night his Excellency presented to his Majesty the addresses of the
Regiments in Scotland, viz. that of Col. Morgans Regiment of horse, and
subscribed also by the Judges Commissioners of Excise and Customs, and most of
the considerable civil officers, Col. Daniels Regiment, Col. Clarks, Col. Hughs
and Co. Miles Man's.

The Commissioners from Ireland, viz. Sir John Clotwerthy, Sir John King, Major
Aston, and Major Rawden, who were here some time since, the Lord Broghil, Sir
Paul Davies, Sir James Barry, Sir Thco. Jones, Sir Morris Eustace, Arthur Hill,
Audley Merrin, and Rich. Kennady Esquire lately come, will suddenly make address to
his Majesty, having brought with them bills for the twenty thousand pound for
his Majesty, and such other sums as the Convention ordered. Sir Charles Co^t
cannot yet be (...) spared, though chosen one of the Commissioners, there
having been lately ^ome li^de c^^est in Ireland, which his presence will easily
awe.

Dunkirk, June 1. The Offend Pirates do dolly snap some of the English Vessele^
an house was unhappily blown up with three barrels of Gunpowder, occasioned by
making of fireworks, but one child killed.

Edinburgh. Major Aberin, that was Deputy Governor of Edinborough Castle, when
Cromwell went into Scotland in 1656. lately hanged himself, Tho. VViclch
walking upon the Peer at Leith was threwn into the Sea.

The Covenant is very much pressed in all parts, and great hopes they have of
enjoying their former freedom. London.

Ellis and Puckle that conveyed away Miles Corbit, taken at Y^rmou^^, and one
Parson Titham at Cochester, were brought to London on Saturday, and remain in
the custody of the Sergeant at Arms.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council have taken the oath of Allegrance
and Supremacy.

The East India Company have he spoke plate to the value of 3000 l. to be
presented to his Majesty.

A Spirit was lately apprehended and carried to the Guard at the Tower, for
drawing away soldiers, whom after he had debauched, he put into ships to be
transported, but after four dai^s imprisonment he was released.

Thursday June 5. At the House of Commons.
The House resumed the debate concerning the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity,
and resolved, that Andrew Broughton, John Cook, and Edward Dendy, being persons
deeply guilty of the murder of the late Kings Majesty, be excepted but of the
said Act as to life and estate.

They likewise ordered, that Hugh Peter's and Cornet Joyce be forthwith sent she
into custody.

Resolved, that the House does declare that they do in the name of themselves
and the Commons of England, lay hold on his Maj^^^es gracious pardon, mentioned
in his former Declaration, with reference to the excepting of such as shall be
excepted in the Act of Pardon, and accordingly a Declaration was prepared and
agree^ unto* and a further Resolve made that the Members of this House which
are of his Maj^sties Privy Council, do acquaint his Majesty with the Resolves
of the House, and desire of his Majesty that he would be pleased to appoint
when and where this House shall wait upon him.

The House took likewise into their consideration the Bill for preserving the
P^^viledges of Parliament, and confirming the Fundamental Laws, which was read
and committed.

Friday, At the House of Commons.
Mr. Den^ill Holl^^, a Member of the House, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy-Councells, made a Report, that he had attended his Majesty
according to their Order, with the Resolves of the House, declaring that they
laid hold on his Majesty's gracious pardon mentioned in his former Declaration,
and that his M^j^sty had appointed to give them a meeting at three of the clock
in the afternoon, at the banqueting house.

The Committee that attended his Highness the Duke of Glocesser, to give him
the thanks of the House for the affection he had expressed in his Letter to
them, reported, that the Duke did very kindly accept it, and assured them of
the continuance of his respect to them and that it should be his study still to
declare it to them.

The House appointed a Committee to consider of the Queens Jointure, and to
consider of a way to procure a present supply for her Majesty, and report the
same.

The House ordered the Ordinance of Assessment, and the Action putting in
execution the powers in that Ordinance, to be forthwith printed and published.

They likewise ordered that all those sums of money that the City of London
has advanced upon that Ordinance, be forthwith paid out of such money as shall
be raised out of that Assessment, and that the Chamberlain of London, who is
Treasurer, do so the same paid accordingly.

Resolved, that twenty; and no more, besides such as are already excepted, of
^ite as Judges upon the Trial of the late Kings Majesty of blessed memory,
shall be excepted out of the general Act of pardon and ob^ivion, to suffer such
penalties or forfei^ures, not extending to life, as shall be thought fit to be
inflicted on them by an Act to pass for that purpose.

Saturday.
Upon a report from the Committee of Privileges and Elections, the House
resolved, that Mr. Secretary Morris, and Mr. Trelaw^^y, are duly elected, and
ought to sit as Members of Parliament for that Borough.

Mr. Speaker informed the House, that Mr. William Heveningham, one of his late
Majesty's Tryers, had rendered himself to him according to his Majesty's
Proclamation, and that he put him into the hands of the Sergeant at Arms, till
the further pleasure of the House was known concerning him; whereupon it was
resolved, that he still remain in the custody of the Se^jeant, till further
order.

Upon reading the humble Petition of Adrian Scroop, it was ordered, That upon
the payment of a years value of his estate, he shall not be excepted in the
general Act of pardon, as to any part of his estate that is properly his o^^,
and which he has not purchased of, on does belong unto the public.

The Petition of Francis Lassells was read, and it was resolved, that he be
discharged from being any longer a Member, incapable of any office or place of
public trust, and that he pay one years value of his estate, upon payment
whereof he shall not be excepted as to any part of his estate that is properly
his own, etc.

The Petition of Colonel Hutchinson, was read, expressing much hearty sorrow,
and it was resolved that he be discharged from being further a Member,
incapable of any office, and not to be excepted out of the Act of pardon.

Resolved, that the Lord Gray of Groby be not excepted out of the Act of pardon:

Colonel Dove's Petition was read, and referred to a Committee.

The Petition of Sir Gilbert Pickering was read, and it was resolved, that he
shall be excepted, as to the penalties and forfeitures not te^ching to life, to
be inflicted by an Act to be provided for that purpose; as also Thomas
Challoner, James Chil^^^or, Sir James Harrington, Lord Monson, John ^ry, Tho.
Lis^er, Sir Henry Mildm^y, and Mr. John Phelps, Miles Corbet, John Okey, Robert
Lilburn, Sir Mich. Livesey, Sir William Constable, Jr. Blackston, Isaac
Penvington, Sir Tho. Malevorer, Sir Jeba Danvers, Sir Hardress Waller, William
Goff, Edw. Whaley, Isaac Ewers, Sir Jo. Bourchier, Edmund Ludlo^, William
H^veningh^m, William Puref^y, Gilbert Millington, Henry Martin, Robert Tichb^,
Richard Deane, John Carew, O^en Row, Colonel VValt^^, James Temple, Peter
Tem^le, French Allen, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas VV^ite, Simon Meyne, Tho. Andrews
Alderman of London, Geo. Fleetwood, Augustine Garland, William Gawley, Tho.
H^r^on, John Downs, Vincent Potter, Nich. Love, Jo. Dixwell, Tho. Hammond, Sir
Gregory Norton, Percerine Pelham, Humphrey Edwards, Henry Smith, John Venus
Edmund Harvey, Tho. VVogan, Jo. Al^ned (...) Moore and John Hewson.

Resolved, that the Sergeant at Arms do such non Mr. Wallop to appear on Monday
next.

THe Reader is to take notice that something was put into the last Publicus,
concerning the entertainment of his Majesty at Rochester, without the knowledge
or privity of the Intelligencer, it being formerly otherwise represented by him.

Rome May 17.
The Popes Galleys are gone from Civittavecchia, with three of the Duke of
Florence, for the assistance of the Venetians. The said Duke has given order
for raising a Foot Regiment for Dalmatia, a great many Frenchmen, most of those
that were prisoners at Naples are listing themselves there, two hundred of them
are arrived here.

The Queen Christina of Swedeland is making ready to go about the beginning of
the next month, to give some orders about her own Affairs, and is to return
again hither.

Cardinal Grimaldi is arrived here, and lodged in the Palace Mazarin, Cardinal
Mancini having yielded to him the best lodgings. They say he comes to speak to
the Pope of the business of Comadico and Correggio, mentioned in the Forty two
Article of the Peace, and that he brings the blew ribbon to the Duke of
Bracciano from the King of France. The Cardinal Azolini and Pio, are said to
take the French party. The business of the Carmelites is composed, the Pope
having released the Provincial of Provence.

Mr. Epidio Cardin^l Mazarines Agent, is gone to Naples to treat about some
private business with the Vice Roy.

St. John de Luz, June 1.
Y^sterday at the fourth Conference, the two chief Ministe^s signed the Treaty
for regulating of the limits of Rousillon, whereby the V^guery at Constans, the
County of Carol, and 35 villages of Cerdagne are to remain to the French.

After the Conference, the Cardinal Mazarin gave a sumptuous collation to Don
Jews D'Haro and his retinue, with a fine consort of Voices, and all kind of
musical Instruments, that played two hours together, during which, many French
and Spanish Songs were sung, both striveing to show their joy of the reunion of
the two Crowns. Several Expresses are sent to cause the French Garrisons to go
out of Roses, Cap de Quieres, Belver and Seau d'Urgel, and to put those places
in the hands of the Spaniards. Several Barks have been sent from the harbor of
Aid to carry to that of Vendres in Languedoc, the Artillery, Ammunitions, and
provisions that are in those places. The Regiment of Champagne that was in
Roses, is commanded to go into the Bur^onois, those of Harcourt, French Anjou,
of the Galleys, Va^llac, Estissac, Coign^c and Guienne to Perigueux, Sarlat and
Bergerac. To morrow the King of Spain is expected at Fontarabia, where the next
day the marriage is to be celebrated. The fourth the Duke of Crequi is to carry
the Presents. The fifth the first enterview is to be between the Queen and the
King of Spain. The seventh the two Kings are to meet. The eighth the Infanta is
to be delivered into the hands of the Queen her Aunt. The tenth the marriage is
to be consummated. The twelfth the Court is to go for Bordeaux, from whence the
King is to go to Roch^l with the Cardinal, and meet the two Queens at Poitiers,
to be together at Fontainebleau the fifteenth of July, where the promotion of
the Knights of the order of the King is to be made.

Paris June 11.
Though by Letters from St. John de Luz, we have an account of the several days
appointed for the Ceremonies of the Kings marriage, yet we hear not yet that
any of them be accomplished, and the Marquis de Valavoir, who came from Court
the third instant, such that no day was yet certainly appointed for that. The
Government of Champagne has been bestowed by the King on the Count of
Soissons; that of Bourbonois on the Moquis d'Humieres, and that of A^guesmor^es
on the Marquis of Var^es,

His Majesty has made a present of 55000 crowns to the Marquis of Richelieu,
which are to be put in the ha^^s of Mounsieur le ^ellier, to see them well
disposed.

St. Sebastian, the same date.
The 27 of the last month, the Infanta was above an hour upon a Belconi, in the
Street where the Procession passed, and was seen there, with great satisfaction
by all the French that were present.

The King of Spain is to go to morrow with that Princess to Fontarabia, and
from thence to the Isle, where the two Courts will meet.

Luxemburgh the same date.
The 25 of the last month there was a great fire at Arlon, which continued all
the next day, and consumed 240 houses, besides the Parish Church, and the
Covent of the Carmelits, but the fire was quenched by the resolution of some
Officers of the Garrison, when it was come already within half a foot of the
Powders, which would have spoiled the whole Town.

Pontoise June 10.
The fourth instant the general Assembly of the Clergy of France begun to sit
here, with the usual Ceremonies in such occasion.

Another from St. John de Luz, June 2.
The 27 of the last month, their M^jesties performed their Devotions at the
Church of St. John, and assisted to the Procession with Monsieur the Kings
Brother, Madammoiselle, and the two Princesses her Sisters, the Bishop of
Bayonne having officiated in the presence of many other Prelates. In the
afternoon the King sent the Marquis de Saucourt to complement the King of Spain
and the Infanta, who received him very favorably. The 31. the Cardi^al Mazarin
and Don Jews D'Haro had a f^urth conference, where they happily ended the
remaining difficulties, so that all is now ready for the Kings marriage, the
King of Spain having sent word, that without fail he will be to morrow at
Fon^a^abi^, to see the first ceremony celebrated there on the Thursday
following, and the next day after will repair to the Isle of the conference,
where this court will be the fifth instant. After which the new Queen will be
brought either for the consummation of the Solemnity, on the sixth, in the
Church of St. John, which is prepared for that end.

Stockholm, May 13.
This day the Corpse of our late deceased King arrived here, being accompanied
by our young King, the Queen, and all the Senators and Grandees of the Kingdom,
and was deposited in the Cathedtal church, until all things be made ready for
his funeral. Among other preparations that are making for the same, a Coffin
all of silver curiously wrought, with the representations of all the warlike
exploits and achievements of the said King, is preparing, which will be worth
above 6000 l. sterling. The 4000 men lately levied here, have been lately
mustered, and expect nothing but the orders for their march.

Elsenore, May 15.
Since the taking of the ten Swedish ships by the Hollanders, the Mediators
have not given any v^sit to the Dutch Commissioners, nor received any from
them; and these seem to be somewhat perplexed how to palliate that affair. The
said Mediators have written a Letter to the said Commissioners about it, but
received no answer upon it. They offered to carry the said ships into a Danish
harbor, to have them there adjudged lawful prize; but the King of Denmark has
hindered it, not being willing to meddle with that business, which he does not
account to be just. The Queen of Denmark has given order for preparing a
stately Banquet, where at she intends to invite all the Mediators and
Commissioners, to have occasion therein to reconcile the Dutch with the rest of
them.

Hague, June 11.
Prince Palatine Rupert came hither lately, thinking to have met here the King
of England, but he was gone before, therefore he went back to his Quarters,
having had leave to he absent only for Twelve days. The Princess Royal is going
to Amsterdam with the Prince of Or^nge her Son, where they are to be gallantly
entertained by the Magistrates of that place.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
The History of His Sacred Majesty, CHARLES the Second, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, De^ender of the Faith, etc. begun from the
horrible murder of his Royal Father of happy memory, and continued to this
present year 1660. Sold by Henry Eversden at the Greyhound in S. Paul's
Churchyard. The price, Eighteen pence.

The Charges issuing forth of the Crown-Revenue of England, and Dominion of
Wales. With the several Officers of His Majesty's Courts, Customs, Households,
Houses, Castles, Towns of War, Forts, Bulwarks, Forests, ^arks, Chases, with
their several Fees and A^lowances, according to the ancient Establishment of
the Kingdom. And also the valuation of he Bishops and Deans Lands, with the
Tenths paid out of the same. By Captain Lazarus Haward. Sold by M. Wright at
the sign of the Kings Head in the Old Bailey.

An Advertisement.
LOst from Newbery, on Thursday the 7 of June inst. One Bay-Gelding about 15
hand high, all paces, a blemish on the near eye, and a small gall on the near
side of his back. One Black Nag, with the sign of former Farcy on the far side
and breast, and a little star in the face, about 13 hand, only trot and gallop.
One Bay-Mar^ without white, about 12 hand, with a short crooked nose, trot and
gallop. If any one can give notice where they are, or any two or one of them,
to Mr. Tho. Glashrook at Brooks-wharf near Queen-Hithe, London, they shall have
20 s. for the three, or 10 s. If not all.

WHereas it is printed in a Book from the Office of Intelligence, that Luke
Robinson was discharged the House, for being one of the Judges of the late
King. This is to inform. That he was none of the Judges, nor named in the Act
for Trial of the King.

A White Greyhound Bitch, belonging to his Excellency, was lately lost from the
Cockpit. If any one bring her thither, he shall be well rewarded for his pains.

From the Isle of the Conference June 4. S. N.
Last Wednesday the 2 Instant about 7 a clock at night the King of Spain, with
the Infanta and all the Grandees of his Court arived at Fon^^rabia, many
Trumpets sounding before hi^, and at the noise of all the Canon and the shot of
the Musketeers of that place, who gave fire above an hour together. In the
mean time the said King went into the Castle of that Town, prepared before for
his reception and hung with very rich Hangings, Till 9 of the clock his Majesty
and his Noblemen refreshed themselves, being extremely weary of their long
March, in a very rainy day. About that time his Majesty called all his Grandees
to him, and in their presence demanded of the Infant^ her Renunciation to the
Crown of Spain, which she very willingly ^^re under her hand, I know nothing of
consequence transacted there, besides that night. Yesterday the 3 Instant his
Catholic Majesty came to the Infanta's Lodgings to let her know that she was
to be married that day, desiring her to be ready about eleven clock to go wi^h
him to the chief Church of that place. About one a clock in the afternoon the
Bishop of Pampolune having been informed that the King of Spain was coming,
took upon him Pontifical Habits, and the Cross and the Pastoral Hook being
carried before him, the Music going before, he came to the Church door, to
receive his Majesty, who at the same time alighting from his Co^ch, was
conducted by the said Bishop (the Infanta being at his left hand, both under a
Canopy with Curtains on all sides, but that which looked toward the Alter) The
King and the Infanta were no sooner upon their Knees, but the Bishop began a
little or low Mass, which was very simple, very low and a very short one,
during which the Bishop of Frejus took his place by the Patriarch of the
Indias, being both respective witnesses for their respective Princes. The Mass
ended, the Bishop put off his Priestly Garments and took on the Episcopal
Robes, and coming down from the Alter, drew near to the Canopy under which the
King of Spain and the Infanta were; all this while Don Jews D'Aro was behind
the Canopy, but then coming near, and having made a very low obe^^ence to the
sai^^ King and the Infanta, as Ambassador for the most Christian King, he
presented to the Bishop the proxy he had of the said King to marry the Infanta,
which being read publicly and accepted of the Infanta f^ll to the King her
Fathers feet, where after many reciprocal Tears for their near separation: that
Princess assured him of her constant and perpetual submission, and demanded hi^
Blessing, which he gave her with many kisses, which notwithstanding his manly
resolution, drew again a flood of Tears from his eyes.

Then the said Infanta having given her consent to the mar^iage, as well as Don
Jews d'Aro, in the most Christian Kings name, after the usual words pronounced
by the Bishop, the said Don Lewis put on a rich ring upon the Infantas finger,
and the rest of the ceremonies being ended, the King of Spain looking how upon
his Daughter as upon a Foreign Queen, gave her the right hand, and conducted
her to the Coach. There was a costly Dinner prepared, the particulars hereof
you may have fully hereafter, but I cannot omit what I hear for certain, that
the King of France came there incognito, and was very much made of by the King
of Spain, who assured him of his resolution for a perpetual peace and amity,
for a token of which he gave him his Daughter, the preciousest Jewel of his own
eyes, and after their ^^tual Oaths for the performance of what they were agreed
before, toward that peace and Amity, in such a solemn manner as the like is
not to be found recorded, the most Christian King retired. Mademoiselle was
there also incognito, and very much made of, though no notice taken of her
Quality.

This day, the Queen Mother, with Mounsieur the Kings Brother went to the
Palace of the Conference, whether the King of Spain is to bring the Queen his
Daughter, himself incognito. To morrow and the two next days, the two Courts
are to meet again. The personal marriage is to be made, on Monday or Tuesday
next, and Thursday the whole Court is to return toward Paris. I must not omit
that these two days there will many several private visits between the two
Kings and the Queens, besides the public (...) and that the new Queen will be
brought hither on Monday next at night.

We have a particular accounts of all the Jewels bestowed on the Infanta by the
most Christian King; being very considerable and large we must ^ea^e or the
next.

Monday, June 11. at the House of Commons.
It was resolved, That Dr. Reynolds be desired to carry on the work of
Thanksgiving before this House on Thursday come fortnight, the 28. of this
instant June, (being a day set apart to return thanks to the Lord for his
Majesty's safe return to his government and people) at S. Margarees
Westminster.

Resolved, That the Lord General take care that the Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance be administered to all the Officers and Soldiers of the Army. That
the Lord High Admiral of England do take care that it be administered to the
Commanders and Mariners of the Fleet.

That his Majesty be desired to issue forth a Proclamation, requiring all to
take the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, that are enjoined by Law so to do.

The House reassumed the debate of the Bill of Indemnity and Oblivion, and
rea^ the Letter of Robert Wallop Esquire; as also the humble Petition of
Charles Lord St. John.

Resolved, that Robert Wallop be discharged from being a Member of this House,
and une^, able of bearing any office of public trust in the Nation; and that
he be committed into the custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending the House.

Resolved, That Luke R^binson Esquire be discharged from being a Member of this
House.

R^solved, That Sir Henry Vane be one of the Twenty to be excepted out of the
General Act ^f Indempni^y and Oblivion, to suffer such pains, penalties and
forfeatures (not extending to life) as shall be thought fit to be inflicted by
an Act hereafter (...) be ma^e for that purpose.

Res^lved, That William Len^hal Esquire be one of the Twenty to be excepted out of
the General Act of ^nde^nits and Ob^ivion, etc.

Tuesday, June 12.
The House ordered now Writs ^o ^ssue for the election of Burgesses for the
respective places following, viz.

A new Writ to issue f^rth or the election of a Burg^ss for Tiverton in com
D^von. Mr. Bampfield having waved the election thereof, to serve for Exe^er.

A new Writ for a Burgess to serve for VVhi^church in com. Southton. in the
place of Robert Wallop Esquire discharged from being a Member of this House.

Another for Nottingham ^ow, in the place of Col. John Hutchinson discharged.

Another for North-Allerton, in the place of Francis ^assels discharged.

Resolved, That the Bill for Sal^s be taken into consideration on Friday next.

Resolved, That the Bill for Ministers be taken into consideration on Saturday
next.

The Bill for ^oll-money was read the first time.

The petition of several in slavery under the Turks, was read and referred to a
Committee.

Resolved, That the sad condition of the Lord Inchequin and his Son now
Captives under the Turk, he repre^^nted to his ^ajesty, and that his Majesty be
desired that some effectual course be taken for their redemption.

The House resumed the debate upon the Bill of Indempn^^y and Oblivio^, and
ordered (...) William^^^^ion be one of the Twenty to be excepted, and to suffer
such pain^, penalties and forfeitures (not extending to life) as shall be
thought fit to be inflicted on him by an act h^^ enter to be made for that
purpose*

A Petition of Mr^. Love was read*

Wednesday, June 13. at the House of Lords.
Letters Patents from His most Sacred Majesty; constituting Sir Orlando
Bridgman Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Speaker of the House of Lords in
the absence of the Lord Chancellor, were read and agreed unto; whereupon the
Lord Chancellor going away, Sir Orlando performed that office.

At the House of Commons.
The House resumed the Debate concerning the Bill of Indemnity and Oblivion,
and Ordered that Oliver St. John Colonel Sydenham Alderman Ireton Colonel
Disbrow Sir Arthur Hesilrigge
be of the Twenty to be excepted, etc.

Whitehall.
On Monday May 11. the King of Swedens Plenipotentiories had a gracious
Audience of His most Sacred Majesty.

On Tuesday several Swedish Lords waited on His Majesty, and were graciously
received.

The same day his Excellency presented an Address from Col. Yaxley Robinsons
Regiment to His Majesty, which could not sooner be sent up, in regard that
Regiment quarters about the farthest parts of Scotland, and is much dispersed.

Col. Phaire, Col. Huncks Mr. Cook, and one Hulet, against whom evidence was
given in Ireland, that he cut off His late Majesty's head, were according to
Order brought prisoners to town.

Sir William Salkeld was lately sworn of the Gentlemen of the King Privy
chamber in ordinary. And besides these formerly mentioned, the Marquis of
Hertford and General Montague received the honor of the most Noble Order of the
Garter.

The Lords sent a message to the Commons, desiring their concurrence to a
Petition to be presented to His Majesty from both Houses for publishing His
Majesty's late Proclamation against debauched and profane persons, throughout
the Kingdom, which the Commons agree unto

Mr. Speaker informing the House, that Mr Meyne, Col. Wait, and Col Temple,
three of His late Majesty's Judges, had rendered themselves to him according to
the Proclamation, and that he had committed them to the Sergeant at Arms, the
House approved of their commitment.

London, Printed by John Macock and Tho: Newcomb, 1660.


