Numb. 33. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday August
6. to Monday August 13. 1660.
WE shall begin this week with acquainting you with His Majesty's most Gracious
Letter and Declaration to all Bishops, Deans, Prebendaries. etc. in behalf of
poor Vicars and Curats, who want sufficient maintenance, which Letter we the
rather here communicate, because by another hand it crept into the world by an
imperfect Copy before it was published (as of right it ought) by His Majesty's
own Printers.

CHARLES R.
AS nothing is more in Our desires then to provide that the Church of England
under Our Reign, might be furnished with a Religious, Learned, Sober, Modest
and Prudent Clergy, so we are ready to give encouragement to their labors and
study in their several degrees and stations, that they may give check to all
Profaneness and Superstition, and as zealously affect to remove all scandals
and reproach from them and their Callings, conceiving therefore a competent
maintenance to be a necessary encouragement: And that all other persons who
have power to dispose of Tithes, may be invited to cherish Learned and Godly
Ministers We do resolve, That because whore Tithes have been appointed for the
support of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Collegiat Churches and Colleges: And
other single persons that have not taken due care to provide and ordain
sufficient maintenance for the Vicars of their respective places, or for the
Curats where Vi^arages were not endowed, to settle for the future some good
addition and increase on such Vicarages and Curats places. Our Will therefore
is, That forthwith provision be made for the augmentation of all such Vicarages
and Cures, where your Tithes and profits are appropriated to you and your
successors, in such manner that they who immediately at^^nd upon the performance
of M^nisterial Offices in every Parish, may have a competent portion out of
every Rectory impropriate to your See. And to this end our further Will is,
That no lease be granted of any Rectories or Parsonages belonging to your See,
belonging to you or your successors, until you shall provide that the
respective Vicarages or Curats places, where are no Vicarages endowed, have so
much Revenue in Glebe, Tithes, or other emoluments, as commonly will amount to
80 l. per annum, or more if it will bear it, and in good form of Law, settle it
upon them and their successors, and where the Rectories are of small value, and
cannot permit of such proportions to the Vicar and Curat, Our will is, That one
half of the profit of such a Rectory be reserved for the maintenance of the
Vicar or Curat. And if any Leases or grants of such so enamed Rectories have
been made by you since the first day of June last past, and you did not ordain
competent Augmentation of the Vicarages or Cures in their respective places,
Our will is, That out of the Fines which you have received, or are to receive,
you do add such increase to the Vicar and Curat, as is agreeable to the Rates
and Proportions formerly mentioned.

And our further will is, that you do employ your Authority and power, which by
Law belongs to you as ordinary for the Augmentation of Vicarages, and
stipends of Curates, and that you do with diligence proceed in due form of
Law, for the raising and establish^ng Convenient maintenance of those who do
attend holy duties in Parish Churches; and if any Prebendary in any Church (the
Corpse of whose Prebend consists of Tithes) shall not observe these our
Commands, then we require you, or the Dean of the Church to use all due means
in Law, where you or he has power to compel them, or that otherwise you report
to the Bishop of the Diocese, where the said Corpse does lie, that they may
interpose his Authority for fulfilling this our Order; and if any Dean, or Dean
and Chapter, or any that holds any dignity, or Prebend in the Cathedral
Church do not observe these out Commands, that you call them before you, and
see this Our will be obeyed; And if you or any Bishop do not your duty, either
in their own grants, or seeing others to do it, then We will that upon
complaint, the Arch Bishop of the Province see all performed according to this
Our Declaration, Will and Pleasure: And whereas there are diverse rural
Prebends, where the Vicarages are not sufficiently endowed, we require you to
see these Our Commands be fully observed by them. And we do declare our Will
and Pleasure in all the particulars fore cited to be that if you or any of your
successors, or any Dean, or Dean and Chapter, of that our Cathedral Church, or
any other person holding any Office, Benefice, or Pretend in the same, do or
shall refuse or omit to observe these our Commands, we shall judge them
unworthy of our future favor, whenever any preferment Ecclesiastical shall
be desired by them from us.

And lastly Our Will and Command is, that you and your Successors at or before
the first day of October in every year, render an account to the Archbishop of
(...) how these our Orders and Commands are observed, That the Archbishop
afterward may represent the same unto us.

By his Majesty's Command. EDWARD NICHOLAS.


Whitehal*
August 8. 1660. This day Tho: Tompkins and Herbert Perrot Esqs; elected
Burgesses to serve in Parliament, for the Borough of Weebly in the County of
Hereford, having taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, were admitted
into the House of Commons.

This day his Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the Honor of Knighthood
on John Stapeley a Member of Parliament for Lewis in Sussex, a Person that has
given sufficient evidences of his Loyalty, by his early appearing in the
several Engagements that tended to the settling of his Majesty in his Kingdoms.

The same day the Mayors and Bailiffs of his Majesty's Cinque Ports, two
ancient Towns, humbly applied themselves to his Highness the Duke of York, Lord
Chancellor and Warden of the Cinque Ports in this their humble Petition.

To the most Illustrious James Duke of York, Lord High-Admiral of England, Lord
Warden, Chancellor and Admiral of the Cinque ports, two ancient Towns and their
members: The humble Petition of the Mayors, etc.
Shows,
THat next unto that never to be forgotten mercy of restoring your Petitioners
the Breath of their nostrils and Joy of their lives, His Sacred Majesty their
gracious Sovereign, your Petitioners are filled with joy in the sense of their
extraordinary favor which His Majesty has been graciously pleased to confer on
your Petitioners in granting your Highness the office of Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, etc.

Whereby so great a door of hope is opened to your Petitioners, that in their
own thoughts they seem to be in actual possession of their ancient, but of late
infringed Liberties and Privileges, and dare not let a dist^ustful thought
su^prise their spirits, but hope that by the interposition of your Highness
with his Majesty (which they humbly pray of your Highness) his Majesty will be
pleased to confirm and renew unto your Petitioners the Charters of the
Cinque Ports two ancient Towns and their members, granted, confirmed and
renewed by his Majesty's noble Progenitors; and also that his Majesty will be
graciously pleased to give speedy and effectual relief to your Petitioners in
the several grievances in the Schedule thereunto annexed.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.


His Highness having received their Petition, was pleased to introduce them to
his Majesty, where being come, they presented his Majesty their humble
Congratulation and Address, viz.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Congratulation and Address of your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects,
the Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurates and Commons of your Majesty's Cinque Ports two
ancient Towns, and their members, in Brotherhood and Guestling assembled, 24
July 1660. in the 12. year of your Majesty's most happy reign.
Shows,
THat with all possible gratitude, we do adore the wise and gracious Providence
of Almighty God, in the peaceable restoration of your Sacred Majesty, to the
exercise of your Kingly Government, within all your Majesty's Dominions and
Territories, and as we do upon the bended knees of our hearts, offer up our
sincere thanks to God for the same, so we earnestly implore your Sacred Majesty
to receive this our Address (though but an Evening Obligation in respect of
others (the accustomed time of our Convention not sooner happening) as the
effect of that Duty, Loyalty and Subjection, which we acknowledge by the Laws
of God, Man and Nature, to owe and yield to your Majesty, and we do take the
humble boldness; to assure your Majesty, that in the midst of the greatest
defection from your Majesty's Government, our hearts were never tainted with so
great disloyalty, as by any Address o^ Application whatsoever, to testify our
Assent to any Government imposed upon us, but faithfully retained (though
forced to lie hidden in their own ashes) those lively sparks of Loyalty, Love
and Affection toward your Majesty, as our only Supreme Sovereign, which by
your Majesty's happy return and presence do enliven all our hearts, and break
forth into flames, never to be extinguished, but to be daily revived and
renewed in our Supplications at the Throne of Grace, for your Majesty's
preservation, and long and happy reign over us, which is, and shall be the
incessant prayer of etc.

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats and Commons
of the Cinque Ports, etc.


His Majesty was pleased to receive this Address with many gracious expressions
of his Royal favor and Princely intentions to confirm unto them the ancient
Privileges they enjoyed under his Majesty's Predecessors, with what else might
be desired conducible to common good.

We shall now proceed according to our usual custom, to give you a further
account of the disposing of the Army, looking upon it as a matter of great
import, and that which (as our own experience has taught us) is either the
support or ruin of a Kingdom.

We shall therefore go on with that Regiment of which we told you Thomas Earl
of Ossory was Col. and Tho. Sheffeild Lieut. Col. in whose company Martin
Clifford is Lieut. and Weems Ensign.

Sir James Smith Major, Tho. Potter Lieutenant, George Philiskirke Ensign.
Rober Sheffield Capt. James Walworth Lieut. Robert Sheffield Ensign. Henry
Crisp Capt. John Peel Lieut. John Tailor Ensign. John Northcot Captain. James
Halybread Ensign. William Herbert Captain. John Thompson Lieut. Edward Bayley
Ensign. Hampden Capt. Robert Manscrike Lieut. Edmond Sheffield Captain of the
company late Captain Hookers. Dawning Capt. of the company that was Captain
Burrels.
Next we shall acquaint you with the Lord Widderingtons Regiment.

William Lord Widderington Coll. and Governor of Berwick. Tho. Mayer Captain
Lieutenant. Christopher Blont Ensign. John Mayer Lieut, Col. and Deputy
Governor of Berwick. William Mayer Lieutenant. Moses Smith Ensign. Peter
Banaster Major. William Geary Lieut. Adam Edwards Ensign. Jeremiah Tolhurst
Capt. and Governor of Newcastle. Henry West Lieutenant. Matthew Dowling Ensign.
Edward Villers Esquire, Captain and Governor of Tinmouth. (...) Honywood Lieut.
Richard Dobson Ensign. Edward Widderington Esquire Captain. William Bufton
Lieutenant. George Jones Ensign. Jonathan Atkins Esquire Captain. William Woodvile
Lieutenant. (...) Might Ensign William Elmes Captain. Thomas Bradley
Lieutenant. Richard Smith Ensign. William Dike Captain. Thomas Lover
Lieutenant. Hen. Iackson Ensign. Christopher Orde Captain. Henry Shell
Lieutenant. Aaron Smith Ensign.
There are besides these, other Regiments in the Army disposed of to such
Persons, who have by their actings and sufferings for his late Majesty of
blessed memory, made such proof of their loyalty and courage, that no doubt can
be made but that by their settlement the Army will be so modelled as may be
most for the service of his Majesty, and the peace and quiet of the Kingdom.
Such are the Right honorable the Earl of Cleveland, and others, of whose
Regiments we shall give you an account in the next.

A Commission under the great seal of England was issued forth, impowering Dr.
Barrow and his Deputy to administer the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to
the Soldiery in Scotland.

By Letters from Scotland we are informed, that that Kingdom is generally well
satisfied, and express their great joy for the happy restoration of his
Majesty to his people, by whose gracious concessions they are in great hopes to
enjoy their ancient Rights and Privileges in as great measure as ever they had
formerly.

The Letters from Ireland say, that the people there remain in a very quiet and
peaceable posture; That those Persons to whom the management of affairs there
is entrusted, do carry on business with such prudence and moderation, as gives
a check to all spirits; yet that they are in daily expectancy of a Lord
Lieutenant or Lord Deputy.

There is no question but by this time they have heard how His Majesty has
been pleased to appoint the Lord Roberts to execute that great Trust, which
doubtless will give as great satisfaction to the people there, as their
Commissioners here, who look upon that Election as the greatest happiness that
could befall that Kingdom.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
Sir Kenelm Digby's Sympathetical Powder prepared by Promethian fire, curing
all green wounds in a short time, that come within the compass of a Remedy; As
also the Toothache infallibly, is to be had at M. Nathaniel Brooks, at the
Angel in Cornhill, and at M. Samuel Speeds at the Printing-Press in St. Paul's
Churchyard, Booksellers.

A Narrative of the Proceedings of the Commissioners appointed by O. Cromwell^
for ^^jecting scandalous and ignorant Ministers. Sold by R. Clavell at the
Stagshead in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

Rotterdam, August 3. 1660.
This week most part of the Soldiery employed in His Majesty of Denmarks
service from the States of the United Provinces, are returned from thence.

They write from Amsterdam, That one Sir Balthazar Gerbier, a Gentleman who
formerly lived in England, having for some years lately treated with diverse
Merchants there, about discovering of some rich Island lying toward the West
Indies (for the place he still concealed, except to the chief undertakers) at
length after some proofs of some Ore brought from thence, prevailed so far, as
in August last 1659. he was set ou^ by diverse Merchants with three Sail of
Ships for the said discovery, together with diverse of the Adventurers that went
personally the Voyage; but whether failing of his Design, or not being able to
perform the same, some commotions rising in the Fleet, he had a daughter of his
in the encounter unfortunately sl^^n, and himself brought back prisoner to
Amsterdam; the undertakers being at a great loss by the same.

Hamburg July 31.
The Imperialists and Brandenburgers lie as yet still in their Quarters, it is
believed that they are to march about the twelfth of the next month, but six
hundred men are to stay in Holstein. Letters of the 25. current from Copenhagen
mention, that Cronenburg was delivered to the Danes, and that the Swedes had
quirted Zealand. Christ^na Queen of Sweden is expected here at the end of this
week. The King of Denmark is likewise expected at Glu^stat the next week.
Monsieur Sidney one of the English Commissioners at the Treaty of Peace in the
Sound, is lately arrived a^ ^ubeck, and intends to be here in a day or two, Sir
Robert Honywood is gone in a Frigot from Elseneur for England.

Hague, August 4.
Cronenburg is delivered up to his Majesty of Denmark, and all the Swedish
Forces are drawn out of Zealand, which causes the State, of these Provinces to
send order to the Fleet in the Sound to repair hither with all possible speed.
We do not as yet hear that any of those places held in Pomerania, Mecklenburg
and Holstein by the Imperialists and Brandenburgers, are surrendered. It is
said, That the Embassies extraordinary from this State for Spain and France,
will be dispatched about the latter end of this month.

Amsterdam, July 27.
The Danish Ambassadors at the Hague, took their solemn leave of the States
General on Monday last, and intend to be gone thence to morrow. The differences
raised by some Ministers at Utrecht, is composed in its first rise, by
banishing two of the chief Ministers, Te^ling and van der Velde: Another,
Doctor Voet^us, had like to have been sent away with the two others, but that
he was saved by two Voices.

Hamburg, of the same Date.
It is certainly reported, That the Imperial and Bran^^^burgs Forces in
H^lstein have received Order for their ^^rch, yet with this proviso, That
Gottorp, Apenrade, and Tunderen shall continue their Garrisons, and six hundred
men remain in the Country; but how soon they will begin their march, is not
certainly known. The Imperialists in Mecklenburg give out, that they are
likewise to leave their Quarters there shortly, but in rega^d they have laid a
Contribution on the Country for two months longer, it is believed they intend
not so suddenly to sti^. The Elector of Brandenburg has given order, that
Demm^^ in Pomerania shall be restored the 30. current. The Ratifications of
Peace from the Emperor, Sweden and Brandenburg, are arrived at Dantzick some
days since, but that from Poland has been hitherto delayed, by reason of its
coming by water from Warsovia, which yet is daily expected. Memem, a strong
place in Prussia, is wholly consumed by fire which there unexpectedly happened,
nothing beinng saved but some Ammunition and provision. Letters this day from
Sealand intimate, that Cronenburg was delivered up to the Danes on the
eighteenth instant, out of which Castle there marched four Companies of Swedes,
consisting of five hundred select men, and five Companies of Danish Dragoons
seven hundred strong, took possession of that place; most of the Swedish Forces
are transported out of Zealand. In Sweden preparations are made for the Funeral
of the late deceased King but a certain day whereon that Ceremony is to be
performed, is not yet prefixed. The Danish Ambassador Seastedt, having been
disparcht at Stockholm with good content and satisfaction, prepared to be gone
for Copenhagen the fifteenth of this month.

Munster, July 30.
The Deputies of the States General of the United Provinces are arrived here,
taking their way through the Bishops Leaguer; when they came in sight of the
Leaguer, they were welcomed with the noise of the great Cannon, but at their
passing by toward this City, they were fetched back by a Troop of Horse, where
they were stayed in the Leaguer till the next day, and then departed
hitherwards. We hope ere long to be reconciled with our Bishop: But in the
mean time we made lately a Sally, and plundered a ^^^non's house driving away
some Horses, and other (...) we could light on.

Utrecht, July 23.
Upon examination of the matter which lately caused the mutiny among the Vulgar
here, there was on Thursday last (by the Magistrates of this place) a Paper
insinuated to the chief Authors thereof, Mr Teeling and Vander Velde,
intimating to them, that before six of the clock that afternoon they should be
gone out of this City, and within twenty four hours out of this Province; which
order they instantly obeyed, all being very quiet and appeased.

Hamburg, July 28.
Our last Letters from Copenhagen mention, that the Swedes had quitted
Cronenburg, on the 18. current, and that the Danes had put a Garrison into the
Castle of about six hundred men, which are to be commanded by Field-Marshal
Schack. The Swedish Soldiers were most gone out of Sealand, and the Hollands
Vice Admiral de Ruyter had received Orders from his Superiors to return for
Holland with all possible speed. It is reported, that the Earl Corfitz
Uh^^feld, who for some high Misdemeanour was kept under custody by the Swedes,
had made his escape in a Ministers apparel, and was come to Copenhagen, where
by a Letter he had discovered himself to the King, who had given him liberty to
come to Court, and make his Innocence appear. It is believed the Imperial and
Brandenburgish Forces will begin their march out of Holstein very suddenly, but
yet that they are not to quit Meklenburgh and Pomerania, till the Swedes have
surrendered Elbingen and Prussia, the which will be suddenly effected, after
once the Ratification of the Peace is come from Poland, which was daily
expected at Dantzick.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
A white Spaniel Bitch (called Duce) with a red Ear and a red spot on her right
side, belonging to his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, was lost last February. He
that shall bring her to any Officer of the Army shall receive five pounds for
his pains. If any Officer shall receive information of her, he is desired to
give notice of it to his Grace at the Cockpit.

Whitehall.
His Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood upon
Alderman Thomas Viner, an eminent worthy Member of the City of London* a Person
of known civility in his Behavior, unblemished in all his dealings, and of
good affection to His Majesty, whereof His Majesty has had many and particular
assurances through all the violent changes of the late disorders, wherein he
would never be tempted to any place of profit, or to buy one penny worth of the
Estate belonging to King, Queen, Church, or any Loyal Subjects, formerly called
Delinquents; but has been a faithful lover of his Country in the worst times
and always (especially of late) very instrumental in His Majesty's happy
Restoration.

That most Valiant and N^ble Personage the Earl of Cleveland, commanding now
the Regiment whereof Arthur Eveling was Colonel, several alterations have been
thought fit to be made.

Of his Lordships own Company, Captain Richard Bruges (we need not say what
Family he is of) is Captain Lieutenant, and John Luke Esquire, his Ensign.

Arthur Evelin, formerly Colonel, now Lieutenant Colonel. Gervase Handstaffe
Leivtenant. William Slanckforth Ensign. Dennis Pepper Major. William Carpenter
Leiutenant. Benj. Walters Ensign. Major Isaac Troughton has the Company late
Captain Cobbs. Lewis Harding Leivtenant. John Bernardiston Ensign George
Lisson Captain of the Company late Captain Wisdoms. Will^am Sanderson
Leiutenant. Thomas Palmer Ensign. William Walton Captain. Thomas Walton
Leivetenant. Thomas Dawson Ensign. Thomas Ward Captain. Robert Sa^nderson
Leivtenant. Edward Haukshaw Ensign. Brent Ely Captain. William Turner
Leivtenant. Matthew Duty Ensign. William Sadlington Captain. Moses Linager
Lieutenant. Edmond Howson Ensign. John Drake Captain. (...) Harrison
Lieutenant. Stephen Gumbal Ensign. Tho Crawley Chaplain. Tho. Paley
Surgeon.
His Majesty having nominated the Lord Mordaunt Lord Lieutenant for the County
of Surrey, the Noble Gentry of that loyal County, whom his Lordship has named
his Deputies, are so forward, as that the chief Officers following are already
settled.

For the four Troops of Horse, whereof one his Lordship himself commands as
Captain, Sir John Maynard Lieutenant. Sir William Moore Corner. Sir Daniel
Harvey, Captain. Adam Brown Esquire, Captain Nicholas Carew, Esquire, Captain.


One Regiment of Foot to be raised in Southwark, is commanded by Sir Edmund
Bowyer as Colonel.

Another Regiment of Foot to be raised in the whole County, commanded by Sir
Robert Parkhurst, one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Privy Chamber.

Laurence Smith Esquire, Lieutenant Colonel. Christopher Buckle Esquire, Major.
John Holden Esquire, Captain. George Vernon Esquire Captain. Abraham Cullen
Esquire, Captain. Roger Clark Esquire, Captain. George Turner Esquire Captain.
James Miller Esquire, Captain. Peter Q^inelb Esquire, Captain. John Barthelemew
Esquire, Captain Lieutenant.
Hull, Aug. 2.
This day the Lord Bell^ssis as Governor, and Colonel Gylby as Leivtenant
Governor, entered Hull; Their entertainment was thus. The (...) of Hull this
morning, sent one of their best Ships to receive his Lordship at Barton with
two Alderman aboard (...) furnished with all variety of wines and provision^
(...) Ship not getting up that ^ide, his Lordship came in a Barton Boat to
Hull, where he was received (after firing the Guns from the South Block house)
by the Mayor and his Brethren, the old Governor willingly delivering the keys
of the Town to his Lordship, they all marched along with him till he came to his
Lodging, the Soldiers being in two files, one on each hand him all the way;
there, he was entertained by the Mayor with a Speech, in which he told his
Lordship how glad they were that His Majesty had put his Town of Hull, into the
hands of so Honorable a Person, that they hoped their Privileges should not
only be permitted to them, but much corroborated; he spoke much in the
commendation of the old Governor Colonel Fairfax, (as indeed well he might,
the Colonel being a Noble Gentleman of great affection to His Majesty, whereof
His Majesty has given signal approbation) and concluded with a Protestation of
fidelity to His Majesty, and obedience to his Lordship as his Governor; to
every of which particulars, his Lordship returned him so satisfactory an
Answer, that I think there was none there, but believed his Lordships words;
after this there was great plenty of wine, a Banquet, several Volleys of small
shot, and so they parted, with this observation made by some of them, that it
was the same day twelve month ( viz. the 2. of August) that his Lordship was
brought prisoner into the same place.

Saturday, Aug. 11.
In pursuance of His Majesty's gracious Speeches and Messages for expediting
the Act of Indemnity, The Honorable House of Peers desirous to give a
dispatch (with as much speed as a business of that importance would permit)
this day sent down the said Bill to the House of Commons.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


