Numb. 35. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday August
20. to Monday August 27. 1660.
Edinburgh, Aug 14.
WE are sorry we must begin this week with unwelcome news from Scotland, where
the Spotted-Feaver begins to rage in Struther and Falkland; four Troops being
quartered there are ordered to remove thence because of the present mortality,
there being already diverse both of the Soldiers and Inhabitants dead of that
disease. This is all the bad news that Scotland at present can afford, the
People there being in deep quiet, and (for ought the wisest can discern) are
like so to continue, notwithstanding the pretty tales invented at London
concerning Scotland, as some (no question) in Scotland concerning London.

Since our last News from the Army, be pleased to take this account of two
Regiments belonging to two persons of Honor; the first is that Regiment, which
formerly belonged to Col. Herbert Morley, and is now commanded by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Peterborough, whose Capt. Lieutenant is Benjamin
Ruddierd, and his Lieutenant Colonel is that Loyal Gentleman Sir John Ogle.

Captain Robert Gosse Lieutenant William Farley Major Thomas Watson Lieutenant
Filibert Vernatti Ensign Thomas White Captain Francis Archer Lieutenant Martin
Haward Ensign Edward Haward Captain Thomas Adams Lieutenant Gilbert Micher
Ensign (...) Mordant Captain William White Lieutenant Nicholas Sheppard Captain
Henry Cullingham Lieutenant John Child Ensign Cuthbert Carre Captain Henry
Eastern Ensign Sir Edward Richards Captain William Greenaway Lieutenant
Richard Bannister Ensign John Height Captain George Salter Lieutenant William
Gellabrown Ensign
And the other Regiment which formerly belonged to Col. Pury, is now conferred
on Henry Lord Herbert, whose Captain Lieutenant is, Tho: Nawfan Nathaniel Cole
Ensign Thomas Pury Lieutenant Colone* John Matthews Lieutenant Edward Charleton
Ensign Tho: French Major John Thomas Lieut: Alexander Coats Ensign Col. Roger
Whitley, who has done and suffered sufficie^^^^ for his Majesty, is Captain to
Captain Phillips late C^^pany, and Captain Griffantius Phillips Lieutenant.
Thomas Barnes Ensign William Coats Captain (...) Boon Lieut: Robert Dashfield
Ensign Thomas Willward Capt. (...) Jeanes Lieutenant (...) Compton Ensign John
Grove Captain Thomas Jackson Lieutenant Arnold Whiffin Ensign Edward Winter
Captain of Capt. Ellis late Company. (...) Witterne Lieutenant Henry Lester
Capt. to Capt. Greens late Company. John Green Lieut. Tho: Drake Ensign Richard
Badeley Surgeon Jenkin David Quartermaster and Marshal. Richard Basset Capt.
of William Neast his Company. Gabriel Holmes Lieutenant Luke Thomas Ensign


From Argileshire in Scotland, Aug. 13. 1660.
Here is very much rejoicing at the Imprisonment of the Marquess of Argile: for
though this Country bears his name, there are too many Families which he has
endeavored to ruin; the woeful experience whereof will be evidenced by the
Clandomgals, Clan Leans, Mac Donnals, and Mac Waughtons, besides the unnatural
and unhumane usage of many hundred poor souls sent by him into the Island of
Jura, where they all perished. Whether he has practiced murder, and taking
possession, you will hear ere long: I assure you that thousands are glad of
what is done, who, although you yet have not their hands in this Letter, yet
neither hands nor hearts will be wanting to preserve his Majesty's peace in
A^gileshire against all opposers whatsoever.

Hull.
His Majesty having been pleased to Constitute the Lord Belasyse Lord
Lieutenant of the East Ryding in Yorkshire, his Lordship summoned the Country
to appear before him at Beverley the 13. of this instant August, together with
his Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, and chief Constables; where
being met, they gave order for the raising the Trained B^n^s, being 3000. men,
into three gallant R^giments, Commanded by Sir Francis Boynton, Sir John
Hotham, and Mr. Wharton, as Colonels, and Sir Robert Hilliard Commands the
Horse. These will all muster (in Bodies) before his Lordship within fifteen
days after their Harvest is over; the example whereof will be of great
consequence to other Counties, toward the settlement of the Ancient Legal way
of Trained Bands for the security of the Kingdom.

Saturdry August 18. 1660,
This afternoon his Royal Highness the Duke of York was pleased to bring with
him the Duke of Gloucester, the Duke of Albemarle, and several other persons of
Honor, to the house of his Servant Captain Edmond Warcupp in Durham Yard, to
accept the entertainment of a Collation.

After so many Changes of Officers in several Regiments, you may now take a
List of all the Officers in his Excellencies own Regiment, both Horse and Foot,
wherein there is no mutation, his Grace having chosen such approved Officers as
require no alteration.

George Monck Duke of Albermarle etc. Captain General of all his Majesty's
Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland, Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, his
Captain Lieutenant is,
John Paynter Ralph Butcher Ensign Ethelbert Morgan Lieut: col. and captain.
Tho: Goodwin Lieut: Richard Rewcastle Ensign. Francis Nichols Major and Captain
John Saunders Lieut: John Cobb Ensign John Miller Captain Adjutant Gen^ral
Robert Cooper Lieut: Edward Basenet Ensign. William Downs captain William
Underhill Lieut: Michael Adderses Ensign Robert Winter Capt: James Hubbard
Lieut: John Clerk Ensign Tho. Mansfield captain John Rook Lieut: Daniel Court
Ensign John Collins captain John Harrison Lieut. Tho. Figg. Ens. John Peter's
Capt. William Brangman Lieu. William Mac^erith Ens. John Mottlow Capt. Tho.
Feiges Lieu. John ^alder Ens. John Price Chaplain Nich. Predy Chyrurgion Rich.
Collins Quartermaster and Marshal.
His Excellencies Regiment of Horse.
Philip Wilkinson, Capt. Lieu. John Maynard Cornit. Nicholas Hudson
Quartermaster Tho. Johnson Major. John Cogan Lieut. Joh. Smith Cornet. Tho.
Aldy Quartermaster. Tho. Symnall Capt. Tho. Roper Lieut. Tho. Gallant Cornet.
Hugh Whittle Q. m. Ant. Nowers Capt. Walter Partridge Lieut. Dan. Smith Cornet.
Benjamin Sergeant Q. m. Peter Wilmot Capt. William Grout Lieut. Daniel Dalton
Cornet. Joseph Hurandal Q. m. John Paddon Capt. Tho. Buller Lieut. John Britain
Cornet. Obadiah Boole Q. m. Tho. Reeves Chyrurgion.
Yesterday (August 21.) the Gentlemen of the Artillery-ground for the City of
London, having invited their Highnesses the Dukes of York and Gloucester, they
were accordingly entertained with the Duke of Buckingham, at Merchant Taylers
Hall. Sir John Robinson Lieut. of the Tower of London, leading them thither
from St. Paul's Church, where they had a Sermon.

His Grace the Duke of Albermarle etc. is by the special favor of His Majesty
declared Lord Lieutenant of the Kingdom of Ireland.

His Grace the Duke of Alhemarle has sent Letters by His Majesty's command to
the English Commissioners in Scotland to cease any further acting as
Commissioners after the 22 of this instant August, the Government of Scotland
being to be reduced to its ancient course.

His Excellency notwithstanding his constant abode at Court, has as constant a
watch and eye upon his Majesty's Army, and therefore taking notice that some
Officers are too often absent from their Commands, whereby the wonted
discipline of the Army will in time be much impaired, and several incident
disorders committed by Soldiers in the absence of their Commanders, has for
prevention thereof sent Orders to the Commissiary General of the Musters to
take care that no Troops or Companies be mustered, where two
Commission-Officers are not present, who upon examination have not continued at
their respective charges; whereof we are commanded to give notice, that no
Officer may pretend ignorance.

His Excellency has given express order, that no new men Officers or Soldiers
be taken into any Troop or Company, or continued (be they of never so ancient
standing) that have not or shall not take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
to his Majesty; wherein his Excellency is resolved to take strict account,
being informed that some new Officers and Soldiers are privately listed who had
not taken the said oaths; the several Mustermasters being to pass none but
such, whom they are assured have taken the said oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance.

From Candia, July 16.
The Bashaw Governor of Canea, perceiving the time to draw nigh that a siege
would be laid to this place, he has caused all the Arms to be taken away from
the Inhabitants, fearing lest they might keep secret Intelligence with the
Venetians; H^ has likewise shipped away many little and unserviceable persons.

From Montpellier, August 7.
This Town having received the Kings orders for a Thanksgiving day to be held
here concerning the happy consummation of his Majesty's marriage, the Te Deum
was sung in the presence of all the Companies, and the Marquess our Goevrnor;
who, more particularly to demonstrate his Joy and Zeal, having presented
himself at night before the Citadel, with a number of lighted Torches of White
Wax and accompanied by the Magistrates, Consuls and Gentry of this place, with
the noise of a great many Drums, Hoboy^ and Violins, put fire to an Artificial
Firework composed of five Towers, which was burned, upon one of which there was
represented, Discord, which was burned by Mars, coming from one side with
thunder and lightning, until a Cupid who descended from one of those towers,
put likewise fire with a torch to the other side. All which was done with the
noise of the great canon from the citadel, and guns discharged by the
Garrison-soldiers and citizens ranged in four Battalions. At last he caused at
his own charge to be distributed among the people above 2000 medals of gold and
silver, on which was the effigies of the King, with other devices touch^ng the
marriage, and to the honor of his Eminency. He bestowed afterward another
Firework on the Ladies before his house, with a very costly collation, whilst
every one of the common sort of people took his share of those fountains of
wine t^a^ ran at the door of his lodging, and drank healths to their Majesty's.
In short, the Governor omitted nothing that might render this ceremony most
splendid, to which our Consuls likewise contributed what possibly they could
devise, making a gallant Cavalcada in their scarlet robes, through all the
streets, with a largess of all sorts of sweet meats for the people.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
A New Post having been settled lately at Amsterdam for England, We are desired
to give notice, That the ^ong complaints and great prejudice Merchants
sustained by the sl^^ Transport of Letters between England and H^^land, engaged
one Mr. Vander Heyden of their going round about ^y Antwerp, and that the
Hamburgh and Italian ^^tters were twice as long upon the way more then was
needful. Therefore on the 22. of June last, he began from Amsterdam to bring
Letters to London in three or four days, and since from Hamborough in six, and
from Italy in eleven days, which before was never practiced, to the great
satisfaction and contentment of the Merchants (who have already found the
advantage of it their Letters being come three or four weeks upon every
Tuesday, and the last week upon the Monday) as by a general Certificate signed
by many of them it appears; [Those only in the Hagu^, which is much wondered
at, showing a dislike of that establishment and endeavoring to hinder it.] And
whereas the German and Italian Letters used to lie at Antwerp three or four
days before they begun their so tedious passages, he has taken care that from
Amsterdam they go away immediately after receipt; and if the Merchants do
a^si^e it, he will engage to send the said Letters twice a week. The said
Vander Heyden has treated with the Postmaster General in England, who by his
Majesty's consent has agreed to that enterprise. The Pacquet-boat that carries
his Letters go^th from Dover to Sluice every Saturday about three a clock in
the afternoon, and takes in Passengers, for whom he has all the convenient
accommodation.

WE are desired to give notice, that William Hall about seventeen years old, is
run away from his Master Major Dennis, and has taken with him the sum of
twenty nine pounds. He is in Footmans habit of gray Serge, edged with red,
brown hair curled, not very long, and of a pale complexion. If any can give
notice of him, they may leave word with Mr. Samuel Mearn His Majesty's
Bookbinder, in little Britain, and they shall be thankfully rewarded.

We have formerly acquainted you how the respective Regiments of the Army in
England have been disposed; and now we shall tell you in what hands His Majesty
has entrusted the Garrison of Dunkirk, wherein are four good Regiments, three
of Foot, and one of Horse, viz.

Edward Harley, Col. and Captain, Governor of Dunkirk. Peter Sainthil
Li^utenant. William Fleetwood Lieut. Col. and Capt. Thomas Ingram Lieutenant.
Arthur Colliot Ensign. John Hinton Major and Captain. Richard Woodw^rd
Lieutenant John Ewbank Ensign. Francis Conway Captain, John Green Lieutenant
William Grant Ensign. Roger Co^es Captain, Edward Emmes Lieutenant, William
Grant Ensign. Edward Righton Captain, Richard Baker Lieutenant, Abraham Davies
Captain, John Turpin Lieutenant William Carter Ensign. John Muse Captain,
William Beech Lieutenant. Christopher Monck Captain, Edward Leyton Lieutenant,
Henry Iackson Ensign. Francis Bromich Captain, James Ralph Lieutenant William
Jones Ensign. Henry Gargran Q* M. and Marshal Genesis W^l^^r Scot Chyrurgeon.
William Lloyd Tower Major. Henry Lillingstone Col. and Captain. William
VVittaker Lieutenant. Thomas Mitchel Ensign. Thomas Heynes Lieut. Col. and
Capt. Thomas Young Lieutenant. Ralph Walker Ensign. Geo. Clinton alias
Fiennes Maj. and Cap. John Sherrard Lieutenant. Alexander Crawford Ensign.
Robert Fitz-VVilliams Capt. John Southern Lieut. George Fitz-Williams Ensign.
Robert Smith Captain. Robert Landy Lieutenant. James Stopford Ensign. Peter
Pogson Captain. Herbert Boar Lieutenant. William Terry Ensign. Samuel Brook
Captain. Robert Muschamp Lieutenant. Robert Mylevis Ensign. William Wandes
Captain. Lewis Powel Lieutenant. Lawrence Fe^low Ensign. Henry Middleton
Captain. Robert Lawreson Lieutenant. Thomas Brewerton Ensign. John Cook
Captain. William Clinton alias Fiennes Lieut. Richard Withers Ensign. (...)
Harrison Chaplain. Robert Farendit Chyrurgeon. John Curtis Q. M. Roger Alsop
Colonel and Captain. John Graham Lieutenant. Edwin Bates Ensign. Maurice
Kingwel Lieut. Col. and Capt. John Giles Lieutenant. Thomas Gryffes Ensign.
John Withers Major and Captain. Francis Dukes Lieutenant. John Brooks Ensign.
Thomas Chapman Captain. Edward Pope Lieutenant. Thomas Withers Ensign.
Nathaniel Catham Captain. Richard Flemming Lieutenant. William Hussy Ensign.
(...) Coape Capt. Robert Gross Lieutenant. Anthony Palmer Ensign. Humphrey
Atherton Capt. Thomas Basset Lieutenant. Thomas Blackat Ensign. John Turner
Captain. Francis Hinton Lieutenant. William Potham Ensign. Francis Annesley
Captain. James P^mtruge Lieutenant. Richard Line Ensign Rice Powels Captain.
(...) Day Lieutenant. Alexander Young Ensign. John Wilkins^n Chyrurgeon.
Nicholas T^m Q. M. ^ra. Pockley Physician to the Garrison. Robert Harley
Colonel and Captain. John Grant Lieutenant. Henry Willoughby Cornet, George
Penny Q. M. Tobias Bridges Major and Captain. (...) Hargrave Lieutenant. ^ohn
Brown Cornet. Mat. Wayne Q. M. Oliver Nicholas Captain. Thomas Stackhouse
Lieutenant. Thomas Bernardiston Cornet. (...) Laughorne Q. M. James Halsey
Captain. Robert Brodnax Lieutenant. Peter Pawlyn Ensign. Theodore Russel Q. M:
Edward Wood Captain. George Bret Lieutenant. William Ashenhurst Cornet. Samuel
Sharp Q. M. (...) Flower Cap^ Lt. to Col. Ed. Harley. Edward Talbot Cornet.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Gentlemen,
BE pleased to take notice, That those so famous Lozanges or Pectorals approved
for the cure of Consumptions, Coughs, Catarrhs, Asthma's, Hoarsness, and all
other diseases incident to the Lungs, and a Sovereign Antidote against the
Plague, and all other contagious diseases, and obstructions of the Stomach, are
only made and to be had of Mr Theophilus Backworth on Mile-and-green. And for
more convenience to those that live remote, quantities of them sealed up with
his Coat of Arms are left constantly at the house of Mr Richard Lowndes at the
sign of the White Lion near the Little North door of St Paul's Church, Mr Henry
Scile over against St. D^^stans Church in Fleetstreet. Mr William M^lward at
Westminster Hall gate, Mr John Place at F^^nivals Inn gate in Halborn, Mr
Robert Horn at the Turks-head near the Entrance of the Royal Exchange,
Booksellers, and no others.

Manuductio, Or, A leading of Children by the hand through the Principles of
Grammar, By Ja: Shirley. Sold by Richard Lowndes, at the White-Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

Mint Contemplations in better times, By Thomas Fuller, ^. D. Sold by John
Williams at the sign of the Crown in St. Paul's Church yard,

Five several Sermons, Preached before eminent Auditori^^, and Dedicated to the
Kings Majesty* By Paul Knell, Master in Arts of Clare-Hall in Cambridge,
Sometimes Chaplain to a Regiment of Curiasiers, in His late Majesty's Army.
Sold by John Place at Furnivall, Inne-gate in Hollborn.

An Admonition, moving to Moderation, Holding forth certain Brief Heads of
wholesome Advice to the late, yet immoderate Pary; By John Gaul, Minister of
Great Stoughton, in the Country of Huntington. Sold by Henry Broom, at the Began
in Ivy-lane.

A Vindication of the Ancient Laturgie of the Church of England; By Henry
Hammond. D. D. Written by himself before his death. Sold by Austin Rice at the
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

On Thursday the 230 this Instant August, Frederick Van Alefeldt, Ambassador
Extraordinary from His Majesty of D^n^marke, came to London, with a very noble
retinue; his Servants in very rich Liveries: Sir Charles Cottrel His Maj^st^es
Master of the Ceremonies, with several Coaches of the chief Nobility, went to
meet him, and conducted him to Sir Abraham William's House, at the Palace in
Westminster.

You have heard heretofore how Commissions under the Great Seal were issued
forth, impowring several Officers of the Army to administer the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance to the respective Officers and Soldiers of each
Regiment: In performance of which duty the said Officers have been very
diligent, particularly in His Excellency the Lord Generals Regiment of Horse,
where Major Johnson and Cap. Symnel showed now as much readiness, as they had
formerly Valor, in advancing so daringly to Morpeth in Northumberland, with
four Troops, when they prevented Lambert's Party from seizing the Town of
Berwick: These two riding from Troop to Troop, found all the Officers and
Soldiery ^s willing to take the Oaths as they to administer, one only Tro^per
in the whole Regiment dissenting.

The like care was used in administering the said Oaths to His Excellencies
Regiment of Foot, where also but one only Soldier dissented. In Col.
Hubblethorn's Regiment of Foot only one dissented. In Col. Litcot's but one
only. In Col. Read's but one, and in Sir Ralph Knight's Regiment of Horse but
one; where we cannot but take notice of the equal care of all these faithful
Officers, that in each Regiment there should be but one dissenting; and that
the prudence of them all has been so great, in entertaining Soldiers in such
distracted times, where there is but one in each Regiment, and not one Officer
in any. And you cannot but observe how fair and freely those O^ficers have
dealt, that such as had any the least scruple against those most just and legal
Oaths, had yet liberty (without any force or threats) to express their
dissents, and yet after all this sifting and winnowing, there was not seven men
in six Regiments but did most cheerfully take the said Oaths, and those six,
common Soldiers (for O^ficers none) who were Dissenters, were found upon
examination to be Forraigners, and Roman Catholics.

Colonel Charles Fairfax has likewise returned an account of there diness of
all his Officers and Soldiers in taking the said Oaths: the manner of the
Return (which is the Form used in such cases) was thus, viz.

Commissio in Cancellaria pro Sacramentis praestandis Officiariis and militibus
sub Regimine Caroli Fairfax Colonelli.

Retorn sine dilatione. Sealed and Endorsed C. FAIRFAX. John Rogers. Bailly.
For His Majesty's Service.


But since we are upon an Account of administering the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, we must not conceal a particular sent us from Cooper in Scotland
August 14. where the said Oaths were freely taken by the four Troops of the
Lord Viscount Falkland's Regiment in Falkland, and not the least question or
scruple made by any, except only one in Major Morgan's Troop, who being absent
when the rest took those Oaths, upon his return was informed by his
Fellow Soldiers Soldiers that they had all taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and that he was called for. Whereupon he said, I have an hair in my
throat, that I cannot swallow, but instantly fell stark mad, and ran roaring
and crying up and down; four men could scarce rule him; in which sad condition
he continued three days, and then died most miserably. A sufficient caveat for
all who heretofore so easily swallowed so many new oaths, to be now punished by
scrupling at an hair, though in their most just and undoubted Allegiance.

Saturday, Aug. 25.
His Excellency to ease the burden and charge of the Nation, this day did
dispatch express Orders to the several Regiments of the Army, to take in no
more Officers or Soldiers in place of any vacant by death or otherwise.

And now (after so many conferences and debates by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament) it has pleased God that the Act of Indemnity which His Majesty
has so often pressed and called for, is so near perfection, that it is verily
believed 'twill suddenly be published to the world in Print.

In pursuance whereof that worthy and faithful Sir John Rob^nson, Knight and
Barronet, His Majesty's Leivtenant of the Tower of London, received into his
custody seven of those who sat as Judges on the life of His late Majesty, viz.
Colonel Wait, Colonel Temple, Colonel Robert L^lburn, (...) Smith of
Leicestersheir, Esquire Colonel Henry Martin, Carey, Esquire Colonel Downs.

These seven were committed this evening to the Tower, (where more of the same
Order are expected on Monday next) what their fate hereafter will be we cannot
sufficiently affirm, but are certain that at present they are in nobler custody
then His Majesty's best Subjcts when in the same place.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


