Numb. 31. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING Sum of F^^raign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now (...) Agitation in England, Scotla^^ and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday July
23. to Monday July 30. 1660.
Elsenore July 7.
THe Swedish Commissioners in this place are now daily employed, to see the
rest of their Soldiers transported hence. Many Officers have got their
discharge upon payment of their Arrears, so that they seem to be well satisfied
therewith, and content is likewise given to the Common Troopers that are
disbanded. From Stockholm of the Thirtieth last past, it is certified, that the
English Ambassador Sidney had audience on the 28. of that month, and withal
taken his leave. His Majesty has presented him with a chain of Gold, and a
precious picture case, set round with two Rows of Diamonds, having within the
Pictu^e of his late Majesty of Sweden; and the same night the said Ambassador
was entertained with a magnificent Supper in the Kings Garden. I understand
that the like Present is to be given to the French Ambassador; there is shortly
a person of Quality to be appointed to go in an Embassy Extraordinary for
England, to congratulate his Majesty's happy restitution to his Crown and
Kingdoms.

The Reader may take notice that after several mature Debates concerning this
Summers Assizes, his Majesty was graciously pleased to set forth a Proclamation
the 23 of this instant July, wherein, out of His Princely care that His loving
Subjects may have timely notice of the alterations of the days, has Declared
the several Prefixions given in by His Majesty's Justices, for holding the
Assizes in the several Circuits, as hereafter folllow, viz.
SVrrey ss. Monday the third of September at Kingston upon Thames. Sussex,
Friday the seventh of September, at E^st-Greenste^d. Kent, Tuesday the Eleventh
of September, ^t Maidstone. Essex, Monday the Seventeenth of September at
Chelmsford. Hertford, Friday the One and twentieth of September at Hertford.
Bucks, Thursd^y the eighth of August at Aylesbury. Bedford, Mond^y the third of
September, at the Town of Bedford. Huntingdon, Wednesd^y the fifth of Sept. at
the Town of Huntingdon. Cambridge, Thursday the sixth of Sept. at the Castle of
Cambridge. Suffolk, Monday the Tenth of September. at Bury St. Edmonds. Norf^lk,
Saturd^y the fifteenth of Sept. at the Castle of Norwich. City of Norwich, The
same day at the New-hall of the City of Norwich. B^rks, Tuesday the fourth of
September at Reading. Oxon, Frid^y the Seventh of September at Oxford.
Glo^cester, Wednesd^y the Twelfth of September at Gloucester. City of
Gloucester, The some day at the City of Gloucester. M^nmouth, Monday, the
Seventeenth of September at Monmouth. Hereford, Thursd^y the Twentieth of
September at Hereford. Worcester, Tuesd^y the Five and Twentieth of Sept. at
Worcester. City of W^rcester, The same day at the City of Worcester. Sal^^,
Frid^y the Eight and twentieth of September at Bridgnorth. S^^ff^rd, Wednesd^y
the Third of October at Stafford. Lan^^ster, Thursd^y ^he Thirtieth of August
at Lancester. W^stmorland, Thursday the sixth of September at Appleby.
Cumberland, Monday the Tenth of September at Carlisle. Northumberland, Frid^y
the Fourteenth of September at the Castle of Newcastle upon Ty^e. Newcastle
upon Tyne, The same day at the Guild Hall of the same Town. Durham, Tuesday the
Eighteenth of September at Durham. York, Monday the Twenty fourth of September.
at the Castle of York. York City, The same day at the Guild Hall of the same
City. Southampton, Mond^y the Third of September at the Castle of Winchester.
VVi^^s, Wednesday the Fifth of September at New-Salisbury. Dorset, Monday the
Tenth of September at Dorchester. City of Exeter, Thursday the Thirteenth of
September at the Guild Hall of the City of Exeter. Devon, The same day at the
castle of Exeter. Cornwall, Wednesd^y the Fifteenth of September at Launceston.
Somerset, Tuesday the Twenty fifth of September at the city of Bath. City of
Bristol, Saturday the Twenty ninth of September at the Guild-h^ll of the city
of Bristol. Northampton, Tuesday the Fourth of September at the castle of
Northampton. Rutland, Friday the Seventeenth of September at Okeham. Lin^^l^,
Monday the Tenth of September at the castle of Lincoln. City of Lincoln, The
same day at the city of Lincoln. Nottingham, Saturday the Fifteenth of
September at Nottingham. Town of Nottingham, The same day at the Town of
Nottingham. Derby, Tuesd^y the Eighteenth of September at Derby. Leicester,
Friday the Twenty one of September at Leicester. Town of Leicester, The same
day at the Town of Leicester. City of Coventry, Monday the 24th. of September
at the city of Coventry. Warwick, Tuesday the Five and Twentieth of September
at Warwick.
July 19.
This day the Borough of Plymouth, as an expression of their unfeigned joy for
his Majesty's happy Restoration, presented by the hands of the Right Honorable
Sir William Morris, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State. and
Governor of Plymouth, Sergeant Maynard Recorder; Edward Vowel, Samuel Trellany,
Esqs; and Timothy Alsop Alderman, an honorable Present of Plate, which for the
largeness of the pieces, and curiosity of the work, was a Noble Present, and
was received very graciously by his Majesty: Amongst the rest was a Fountain
Ca^ved with rare art, and curious Figures, out of which, Perfumed Waters were
cast up Twenty foot high, and had at the top thereof a curious Perfuming Box,
which at the same time issued forth Perfumed Fire. His Majesty, with several
persons of Honor was pleased to entertain himself with the sight of it.

At the same time the City of Exeter, by the said Sir William Morris, Tho.
Bampfield Esquire Recorder, Simon Snow Alderman, and Thomas Westlake Town Clerk, as
a Pledge of their Congratulations of his blessed Restoration, and an earnest
of their hearty affections, did present His Majesty with several parcels of
rich Plate, to a very considerable value for the Mass thereof

All persons of both Corporations had the Honor of his Majesty's Hand, Sergeant
Maynard having declared the affection of the said City and Borough in a most
elegant Speech, to which his Majesty manifested a particular Approbation, the
Sergeant being better heard here than when he forced his entrance into the
House of Commons (after two months Seclusion) when those horrid Regicides fell
upon that bloody debate, where the Sergeant by Cromwell was diverse times
demanded to the Bar, as unable to bear the strength and force of the Sergeants
Arguments when he pleaded so admirably for the life of the King.

July 24. 1660.
This day some of the Clergy of the County of Lincoln, in the name of the rest,
being brought into the Royal presence by the Earl of Manchester, presented an
Address to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, which his Majesty was graciously
pleased to accept, with several expressions of favor to the presenters, giving
them also the honor to kiss his hand.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The most humble Address of the Ministers
in the County of Lincoln.
Most Dread Sovereign,
AMong all the great calamities, which God most justly for our sins has
brought upon us, since the first commencing of our National distractions, none
have made so deep impressions of real sorrow upon our hearts, as the barbarous
Inhumanity ^cted upon your Royal Father of blessed memory, by certain wicked
and deceitful men; the remembrance of which, as it does renew our utmost
abhorrency of the Act, so of all those Jesuitical Principles, which under any
pretense whatsoever have any tendencie to the Deposing, and much more the
Murder of Kings.

After the loss of the best deserving King the world could then boast of, which
was attended with the voice of Blasphemy uttered by our enemies against the
true Religion, because some who did profess it, had stained her beauty with
their bloody hands; Gall was added to our Wormwood, by the forced Exile of your
Majesty, during whose absence abroad, we could hardly think our selves to be at
home.

But God who comfort those who are cast down, gave us hope, in the wonderful
preservation of your Majesty a^ Worcester, the many supplications made for you
by your faithful people, and establishment of your Royal heart with his grace,
to resist and overcome a great crowd of temptations both on the right hand and
the left, by holding fast the true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolical Faith,
once delivered unto the Saints. These things were to us as the dawning of the
day of Salvation, which God after a dark night of Confusion, has now (not by
an ordinary working of Providence) caused to shine upon us. And we have cause
to believe, that he who has subdued the power of your Enemies, will also
subdue their hearts; that as your Majesty's Return has been accompanied with
the cordial desire and joy of the most of your Subjects, so your Reign will be
with the great love and full satisfaction of all. And this our confidence is
more increased by your Majesty's gracious, charitable, and healing Declaration
of the First of May, and your early Proclamation issued against vicious,
debauched, and profane persons; for which, as we are always bound to praise
God, so we do with all humble thankfulness acknowledge your Majesty's special
grace and Princely favor. And whatsoever our earnest prayers to God,
exhortations to our hearers, and dutiful subjection may possibly contribute to
the happiness of your Sacred Person and Government, we shall with all alacrity
and faithfulness perform; beseeching him by whom Kings reign, to increase your
graces, preserve your health, prolong your days, and establish the Crown upon
your head.


It was presented by the hands of the reverend and most learned Doctor
Sanderson, his Majesty's Professor of Divinity of Oxon, accompanied with that
worthy Gentleman Sir Tho. Meeres, and several of the Orthodox and Loyal Clergy,
viz. Mr. William Lincoln, Mr. Edward Dixe, Mr. Charles Woodward, Mr. George
Cuthbert, Mr. John Coope, Mr. John Merryweather, Mr. Edward Askew, Mr. Edward
Boteler, Mr. John Nailor, Mr. Jeremy Vasin, Mr. William Dale, Mr. Robert
Alington, Mr. Henry Vaughan, Mr. Andrew Arnold, Mr. Tho. Trot, etc. and about
two hundred more, whom (only for brevities sake) we omit.

The Gentlemen of the Artillery Company, having appointed yesterday the Twenty
fourth of July for an extraordinary Exercise of Arms in the Artillery ground,
His Highness the Duke of York, (their Commander in chief* having notice
thereof, came thither about four of the Clock in the afternoon, and first
passing through the Front of the Body (who were Four hundred completely
habited) to a Tent prepared for his Highness, he then on Foot marched to the
Head of them, where that most valiant and most learned John Lord Lucas (after
an Elegant short Speech on his knees to his Highness) presented him with the
Leading-staff of the Company, whereupon the Drums beat with a very loud
Acclamation of the Gentlemen in Arms. After silence was commanded, his Highness
was pleased to declare, how willingly he accepted of their offer, and would
maintain all their Privileges; then (throwing off his Cloak) he commanded them
to march, himself on foot before them; and having led them about the ground and
drawn them up, he went to the Tent-door, wh^re he sat wh^lst the Company
marched by, pleased to see such a gallant Company. After that they divided into
two Bodies, the one commanded by the Lord Lucas, and the other by Major-Gen.
Sir Edward Massey; the great guns playing, they immediately fell to skirmish,
first by Forlorns, afterward in several figures. At his Highness departure,
several Vollies were given. After his departure, the Bodies being joined, the
Lord Lucas acquainted them, That a Gentleman, a member and welwisher of the
Company, had presented to them a Silver-Partizan, for which (in name and behalf
of all) his Lordship gave the Donor thanks,

July 24. 1660.
This day Joseph Pain Esquire Major of the city and county of the city of Norwich,
and Thomas Rant and William Barneham Esquires, Members of Parliament of the
said city, Christopher Jay Esquire Alderman, Thomas Wise one of the Sheriffs,
Thomas Johnson Alderman, Francis Norris, Robert Bendish Gent. and Tho: Ba^eston
Town Clerk, and diverse other Citizens of the said city, were brought unto the
presence of his Majesty by the L. Howard L. Richardson and Sir Horatio
Townsend, accompanied with Sir John Holland, Sir Philip Woodhouse. Sir Ralph
Hare, Sir William Doyley, with diverse other Esquires and Gentlemen in the
county of Norfolk; where the Mayor and the rest of the Citizens presented his
Majesty with the resignation of the Feefarm-rents of the said city, under the
common seal of the said city, amounting to One hundred thirty and two pounds
eighteen sh^llings and three pence yearly, and One thousand pounds in gold, in
a Crimson velvet purse, with the word Norwich imbroidered in Gold upon it, as a
testimony of their thankfulness to God for his Majesty's safe return to the
government of his Kingdoms, and of their loyalty and faithfulness to him. And
his Majesty gave them a gracious reception, and was pleased to confer the honor
of Knighthood upon the said Thomas Rant and Joseph Pain, and gave the honor of
his hand to all that company, and promised his constant fav^r and protection to
the said city.

Since the last, Colo^el Cook (who formerly kept the Office of Treasurers
Remembrancer of the Exchequer) is come under the Black Rod; but we forbear to
say any thing of him, or any who willingly surrender themselves.

We are daily asked what is done in Scotland, by some who are troubled that all
is at quiet, and because it is so, themselves sweat to be^et pretty tales of the
Presbytery, Covenanters, etc. as if there were no difference 'twixt 1640. and
1660. But twenty years will not make some men wiser. Yet (even for their sakes)
we will say and speak truth, That his Majesty has g^ven admittance and
au^ience to those Personages and others from Scotland, who came from Court
highly satisfied with admiration of his Majesty's wisdom, justice, and
affection to his people. And if you hear any speak otherwise, know them for
such as w^sh it so, because it is false: They take liberty to ^all^ but those
that scribble or print it, ere long may repent.

His Majesty has given leave unto Henry Williams, alias Cromwell, of Ramsey in
the County of Huntingdon Esquire to leave out the alias Cromwell. It is therefore
desired you would take notice, that this Mr. Henry Williams is Grandchild to
Sir Oliver Williams, and son to Colonel Williams a Commander in his late
Majesty's Army, to whom only (with his family) this favor is granted: And (to
deal clearly) in those black days of the Protectordom, this Gentleman was not
only civil to all, but made it his endeavor to assist and relieve all honest
and loyal persons. It is his due, and 'twere base to deny it.

From Hamborough, July 17.
The Danish forces which at their last muster were found to be about 4000 lie
as yet still in their old quarters, and it is not likely that any of them
should be disbanded, since it is constantly reported, that more are to be
entertained; neither do the Imperial and Brandenburgs forces stir from their
quarters, however the Governor of Gottorp has given his Highness the Duke of
Holstein hopes to surrender that place to him very suddenly. The Bishop of
Munster has solicited for aid at the Emperors, and the Elector of
Brandenbourgs Court against the City of Munster, but whether or no he is likely
to obtain it, the next shall inform you. That City makes all possible
preparations for her defense, and relieth on the assistance of the States
General of the united provinces, in case the controversy be not ended by an
amicable composition. His Electoral Highness of Bavaria has already disbanded
half of his new raised forces, and the Elector of Mentz does likewise begin to
discharge some of his Soldiers; it being believed, that the Dukes of Brunswick
and Lun^nburg with the other Princes will suddenly follow the example of the
former. His Imperial Majesty has sent orders to those forces that lie
quartered in Silesia, to remove thence, and to march into Hungaria; it being
supposed that those which now are in Holstein and Mecklenburgh are to take up
their quarters in Silesia. The Turks have not proceeded far in Transylvania,
but yet seem to be willing to fall out with the Emperor, pretending they are
only sent to assist the new Prince of that Country; wherefore his Imperial
Majesty has likewise given a strict charge to his General de Souches, to
attempt no hostility against the Turks, but to keep himself within the terms of
defense. The defeat of the Muscovites is again confirmed by Letters from
Prussi^; and it is certified thence, that the Ratification of the Peace lately
made with Sweden, is arrived there from Poland. From Sealand we have nothing
worth the communication.

Madrid, June 24
By a Courrier dispatched from Valladolid, we were informed yesterday morning,
that his Catholic Majesty is as yet in perfect health, and will be here on
Saturday next. We hear from Barcelone that the Prince Ludovisio arrived there
the 20 of this month, to take possession of his Viceroyship of Arragon. News
being brought that his Highness Don John de Austria was somewhat indisposed, the
Queen has sent the Duke of Montalto to Aranguez to visit him, and the
principal Physicians of this City are likewise gone thither by order from her
Majesty, to take care of his health. They write from Portugal, that the
Portuguez with five hundred Horse, and two thousand Foot, together with two
Field pieces, had attaqued Alcaginis, but the Garrison (seconded by the
Inhabitants) had so well received them, that they were forced to retreat with
great loss and confusion, and in their retreat, they rencountred the Governor
of Cridad Rodrigo, who coming to relieve the place, charged the enemy with such
a fury, that he put them quite to the rout, leaving two hundred dead upon the
place, and above one hundred prisoners. In the mean time preparations are made
to invade Portugal with three Armies, consisting of about forty thousand Horse
and Foot.

Venice, July 6.
Prince Almeric of M^dena is here as yet, but prepares to be going to the
Levant, to command the French succor, which having taken some refreshment in
Sicily, was arrived at Candia, and was thence gone by the way of Cerigo to join
with our Naval Forces, and to keep a Council of War. We understand from
Dalmatia, that the Turks continue to make havoc there, which has obliged our
Senate to take a resolution of sending the Troops of Savoy that way, which are
a coming to assist this Commonwealth.

Dantzick, July 9.
The Duke of Courland arrived at Riga the twentieth of the last past, where he
was honorably received, in order to his being restored to his Dukedom. The
Treaty of peace concluded at Oliva between the Pole and Swede, is unanimously
ratified by all the Senators of Poland at Warsovia, who rendered solemn thanks
to the King, Queen, and Monsieur de l' Ombres, Ambassador of France, for their
care and pains taken in this particular. This Crown is resolved with all
possible force, to continue the War against the Muscovites, and the Polish
Commissioners sent to the Frontires of Muscovia to treat with them, are
returned without effecting ought. The King is to go in person into the Field,
with all his Nobles, and all the Forces of Poland and Lithuania are commanded
to march.

P. S. Just now news is brought that G^neral Czarnecki with the assistance of
the ^artars, has totally beaten and ruined the Muscovian A^my near Grodno,
consisting of fifteen thousand men, whereof seven thousand were killed upon the
place: And that the Tartars and Cossacks had invaded Muscovia, the Poles having
in the mean time by a Stratagem surprised Bichow, a place of great importance.

Paris, July 17.
The Prince of Conde and the Duke of Longueville (...) turned hither from Court
the 13. instant, which Court came the same day to Fontainbleau, as one of the
fairest places to be chosen near this City for divertisement of so charming a
Queen, who now is expected here with much longing, and will be received with
all possible magnificence, for which daily preparations are made. Letters from
St. Sebastian certify, that three Adventurers of Os^end had engaged with, and
taken a Vessel, the Admiral of the Turks, mounted with forty six pieces of
Canon, and having three hundred and fifty Turks on board, which Vessel they
have brought up to a safe place. The Baron of Bareville has received his
Instructions from the King of Spain, to go Ambassador Extraordinary for
England.

Paris, 24 July,
Their Majesty's having on the 19. current, left Fountainblew, came to dinner
at Vaux to the house of the Overseer of the Finance; and thence to Soysi, the
President Baillent his house, where the King and Queen stayed till next day,
and then returned to Vincennes. The Queen Mother accompanied by Monsieur and
the Princess Palatine, came the same day, viz. the 19. instant, to this City,
where her Majesty alighting out of her Coach, was received by the Prince of
Conde, the Duke of Longueville, and all the Lords and Ladies that are here. The
day following, her Majesty went to Val de Grace, the 21. to Vincennes, in
company of the Queen of England, and the Princess her daughter, which she took
up at the Palace Cardinal; on the 22. being the feast of St. Magdalen, she
paid her Devotions in the Church of the great Convent of Grey-Friers, which
she continued at Val de Grace, and at the Carmelites; she came afterward to
the Palace of Orleans to visit Madam, where she was met on the Stone-walk, and
received by Mademoiselle of Orleans, and her Sisters, Monsieur gave her
likewise a visit at his return from Vincennes, where the King and the Queen
take such pleasures and divertisements, as so sweet a place affords, which they
are not to leave until all things be finished, which are a preparing here for
the reception of so great a Princess. On the same day, his Eminency finding
himself somewhat better of his late indisposition at Fontainblew and Vincennes,
came likewise from this last place to this City, at his own Palace, there to
rest himself a little of his long and painful travels.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THese are to give notice, That some day this week, H^s Majesty lost from
Whitehall a Sp^niel Dog of the largest size, of a bright red color, with a
white face, a^^i^^g about his Neck; and that i^ any person has taken him up,
or can bring tidings of him, he should forthwith re^urn him to His Majestys
assuring himself a good reward.

On Friday the 27 July, betwix^ 7. and 8. at night, on the Road between
Kensington and Knightsbridge, were stolen a large gray d^ped Guiding about
fif^een hands high, more white on the near shoulder toward the N^ck then in
any part of the b^dy, som^hing cloudy on the face, long tail, little or no
foretop comes seven, and h^^h a^l his paces with a thin mane, much worn a^ay on
the With^rs.

Also a brown Bay G^lding without any white, exc^pt saddle spots something
lowback'd a very large walk, wherein he st^addles much b^hinde, tr^^ts and
gall^ps excellently well, a small racking pac^; taken from a little boy by a
pale faced young man, whitish hai^, hanging lanck, a gray suit with block
trimming, a plai^ leather black belt, only emb^oydered, n^ hair on his face,
sl^^der bodies, and an indiff^^en^ sta^ure.

The other a thick sh^rt stubb^d ^ellow, round ^ac^d, ruddy complexion, dark
brown hair and eye brows, with a sad gray sui^, (...) person can b^^ng tidings
to M. Roger Higgs in Woodstreet near the Bo^ling A^^^y in Westminster, he shall
be well rewarded for his pains.

A (...) of Acco^n^s belonging unto Andrew Woodhouse, lost about a forenight
since. I^ any one bring tidings thereof to M. Camfe^ld at the three Golden
Hea^ts in Cheapside, (...) to M. Cart at the Red Lion without B^sh^p^gat^, they
shall receive content f^r (...) pai^s.

There has been lately a Pamphlet reprinted, printed Anno 1640. (and not in
1642. as this has it) entitled, The Bish^p of A^magh 's direction to the
H^use of Commons concerning the Lyturgie and episcopal Government, etc. The
Arch-bish^p disc^aimed it, and upon his Petition, it was suppre^ed by Order
upon the House of Lords ^64^. which I have thought fit by this to give notice
of, h^w he is and has been injured by it, being none of his.

N. B^rnard. Advertisements of Books.
Justice Restored or a Guide for his Majesty's Justices of Peace, both in
Sessions, and (...) of Sessions, according to the ancient Laws of the Kingdom.
By J. H. Gent. With directions for Clerks of the Peace. Printed for H. Twyl^^d,
(...), and J. Place, and are to be sold at their Shops.

The Book of Common Prayer for the use of Churches and Families in Folio. The
Book of Common Prayer for Bibles in Quarto, Octavo, and Tw^lves. The B^^k of
Common Prayer, of the best Print, in 24. All to be sold by John Stark^y, at the
Miter in Fleetstreet, betwixt the Middle Temple Gate, and Temple Bar.

Whitehall.
We have already given you an account how highly the Nation of Scotland is
satisfied; We shall now present you with the state of Affairs in Ireland,
wherein it will be very considerable to look into the affections of the Arm,
which we shall offer you in their own words, as they were presented in an
Address to his Majesty, by the Right Honorable the Lord Broghil, viz.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Officers of
your Majesty's Army in and near Dublin in Ireland.
NOthing can in degrees so fully proportion our sorrow for the murder of your
Royal Father, as our joy for your Restoration; It Is your Majesty's Glory, and
our satisfaction, that God has effected it without blood; the world sees it is
the day of his power, the people are so willing in it, none as men but must say
it is wonderful in our eyes, and none as Christians but will say it is the Lords
doings.

Your Majesty's Gracious Declaration and Letters to the Parliament, have not
only prevented, but granted our chiefest desires, and we owe you our most
sincere and humble acknowledgment, as much for the manner of giving as for the
gift, in this we are safe, in that we are happy.

Your Majesty desires nothing more then to act your clemency, and we desire
nothing more then not to appear unworthy of it.

God has prese^ved you a broad in your person, and which we know is dearer to
you, in your Religion, signal evidences whereof we have already received, for
no other Tree could produce such fruit.

All your subjects virtually are in Parliament* and by Parliament you do
graciously promise to be advised, your Majesty could not grant more, nor your
People ask more.

And to manifest you will Rule by Example as well as Precept, you decline being
your own Judge in your deepest concernments: Your Royal Fathers Murderers
could not desire a greater favor, nor your Parliament a greater trust; neither
could your Majesty more sensibly and graciously let the body of your people
know, you esteemed them innocent of that sin then by leaving it to them to
punish.

You do not only observe your Laws your self, but you freely pardon all your
subjects that have broken them; To be just is what all Kings ought to be, but
to be merciful is what our King is; the best of our former Princes appeared
worthy of the Crown, but after they wore it, your Majesty has done so before,
the providence of God having taught you to reign over your self, before you
reigned over your Kingdoms, out of which you were put by violence, but you are
restored by consent, by which through mercy we now live to see more then hopes
of that which we have so long thirsted after, an happy and full agreement
between King and people, toward the ataining whereof, we can truly say,
neither our prayers, nor our endeavors in our respective stations have been
wanting, nor through the goodness of God shall they cease, till what is so
happily begun be completed.

Your Majesty should have earlier received this Tribute of our Loyalty and
affection, but that we stayed till this time to assure you which now we presume
to do, that generally the Officers and Soldiers in this your Army, have not
only joyfully proclaimed your Majesty's Royal undoubted right to your three
Kingdoms, but with their hands have subscribed the same; and we are confident,
if your service require it, would do the like with their bloods against all
opposers.

We have nothing can Apologize for the confidence of this duty, but that out of
the abundance of the heart, the mouth will speak, which in all humility we hope
will obtain both your Majesty's belief, and your pardon for

Your Majesty's most humble and most faithful Subjects and Servants. Signed by
the Lord Broghil, Sir Charles C^ot, and all the Officers in and near Dublin.


Thus you see how the Soldiery are inclined to His Majesty's service. Not is
there any doubt to be made of the general consent of the whole Kingdom of
Ireland, who have expressed so much loyalty to His Majesty, and toward whom
His Majesty has shown so much care and tenderness, in declaring the Right
honble L. Roberts to be His Deputy there; which the Commissioners of that
Nation look upon no^ ^n^y as the highest point of prudence in His Majesty, but
as an especial Act of Grace and Favor to that Kingdom, he being a person so
fitly qualified both for his Wisdom and Integrity for the management of so
grand an Affair.

On Thursday the 26. instant, the poor and small Inland Corporation of Eye in
the County of Suffolk, did by the hands of Thomas Dey and Francis Cheney Gent.
Members of the said Corporation (who with Sir George Reve Knight, and Charles
Cornwallis Esquires, Members of Parliament for that place, were conducted to
His Majesty by Sir Frederick Cornwallis Knight and Baronet, Treasurer of His
Majesty's household) present His Majesty with one hundred pounds in Gold. Though
this seem in it self but smal^, yet if we look upon the place, we may justly
judge their Loyalty to be great, and if we consider the sum, with the abilities
of the Inhabitants, little, if at all inferior to the largest Presents. His
Majesty was graciously pleased to accept it, gave them thanks, and assured them
of his favor to their Corporation.

This day the Lord Edward Montague, who commanded the Fleet when they received
His Majesty and His two Royal Brothers, being for this and other eminent
services created by His Majesty Earl of Sandwich, Viscount Hinchinbrook, and
Lord Baron of St. Needs, took his place in the House of Peers.

To these we shall add some other Ti^les of Honor and Offices which His
Majesty has likewise conferred on this honorable Person; and then we must
tell you, that besides his Command at Sea under his Highness the Duke of York,
Lord High Admiral, that he is Knight of the most Noble Order of the Gar^er,
Master of His Majesty's great W^rdrobe, one of the Commissioners of His
Majesty's Treasury, and one of His Maj^sties most honorable P^ivie Council.

Here give us leave to acquaint you. That his Majesty was pleased to conf^r the
honor of Knighthood on William Tredenham a Member of Parliament, for St. Mawes
i^ Cornwel, as likewise to grant the favor of his hand to Major John
Blackmore, who was introduced to his Majesty by his Excellency.

On Friday his Majesty was pleased to go to the House of Peeks, and to make a
pr^cious Speech for the speedy passing of the Bill o^ Indemnity and Oblivion,
whe^^in his Majesty acquainted them how a^ his first coming ^o them, he did
both by Himself, and the Chancellor, recommend to them and the House of
Commons, the speedy dispatch o^ that Act, how since by a particular Message he
pressed the House of Commons to hasten that work, and di^ by Proclamation
publish to the whole Kingdom, wi^h what impatience he expected that Act should
be presented to him for his A^^ent, as the most reasonable and solid,
foundation of (...) and security; how he thought the House of Commons too long
about it, and (...) before would not have them guilty of the same dela^,
thanking God that he had the same Inten it n^ and Resolutions which he had a^
Breda and th^n reading what he then said viz.

And to the end that the F^ar of punishment may not enga^e any, Conscious to
themselves of what is p^ssed to a p^rseverance in Guilt for the future, by
opp^sing the Quic^ and Happiness of their Country in the Restoration both of
King, Peers and People, to their Just Ancient and Fundamental Rights: We do by
these Presents Declare, That We do grant a Free and General Pardon which We are
ready upon demand to p^ss under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our Subjects,
of what degree or quality soever who, within forty days after the publishing
hereof shall lay hold upon this Our Grace and Favor, and shall by any Public
Act declare, their doing so; An that they return to the Loyalty and Obedience
of good Subjects, (ex^^p^ing only such persons as shall hereafter be excepted
by Parliament.) Those only excepted, let all Our loving Subjects, how faulty
soever rely upon the Word of a King, Solemnly given by this present Declaration
That no Crime whatsoever committed against Us or Our Royal Father, before the
Publication of this, shall ever rise in judgment, or be brought in Question
against any of them, to the loast endammagement of them, either in their Lives,
Liberties or Estates, or (as far forth as lies in Our Power) so much as to the
Prejudice of their Reputations, by any Repr^ach or term of Distinction from the
rest of Our best Subjects, We d^siring and Ordaining, that henceforward all
Notes of Discord, S^p^ration and Difference of Parties be utterly Abolished
am^ng all Our Subjects, whom We invite and Conjure to a perfect Union among
themselves under Our Prot^ction, for the Resettlement ^f Our Just Rights, and
theirs, in a Free Parliament; By which upon the Word of a King, We will be
advised.

His Majesty then ^d^ed, That if they did not then join with him in
extinguishing the fear which keeps the hearts of m^n awake and apprehensive of
safety and security, they would keep him from performing his Promise. His
Majesty thanked them for their justice to those that had been the imm^diate
Murderers of his Father, and assured them he never thought excepting any
other. Many other Arguments his Majesty was graciously pleased to make use of,
desiring and co^juring them again and again, that laying ^l^ particula^ Anim^
f^ies aside, they would pass that Act without any other exceptions, then of
those who ^e^e immediately guilty of the Murder of his Father.

On Saturday the 28. The truly Honorable, and perfect Pattern of Loyalty,
Marquis of Ormond, being created and ^^mmoned by Writ from his Majesty, as Earl
of Brecknock, took his place in ^he H^use of Peers.

H^ving in our former sh^et acquainted you with the times and places of the
Circuits, we shall now give you the names of the Judges.

Judges for ^he West Circuit, are Justice Foster and Justice Tyrrill, of the
Common Pleas.

The home Circui^, Lord Chief Baron and Serjern Waller.

Oxford Circuit, are Justice Mallet of the Kings Bench, and Baron Turn^r.

N^r^h Circuit, are Justice Twisden of the King Bench, and Sergeant Barnard.

Northampton Circuit, are Baron Atkins and Sergeant Earl.

Norfolk Circuit, are Justice Hyde of the Common Pleas, and Sergeant Archer.

The same day his Sacred Majesty went to the House of Peers, and gave his Royal
Assent to (...) A^ts following viz. An Act for Continuing the Excise. An Act
for T^^^age and Pounlage; An Act for Commissioners of Sewers.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


