SEVERAL SERMONS UPON THE Fifth of St. Matthew; Being Part of CHRIST's SERMON
On the Mount.

By ANTHONY HORNECK, D.D. Late Preacher at the Savoy.

The SECOND Volume. Completing the Chapter.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. School.

THE Texts of the Sermons IN THIS SECOND VOLUME.
SERMON XVI. ST. Matthew the Fifth, Verse 15. Neither do Men light a Candle,
and put it under a bushel; but on a Candlestick, and it gives Ligth to all
that are in the House. Page 1. SERMON XVII. Verse 16. Let your Light so shine
before Men, that others may see your good Works; and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven. p. 16. SERMON XVIII. Verse 17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law and the Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. p.
35. SERMON XIX. Verse 18. For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth
pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled. p. 53. SERMON XX. Verse 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach them, shall be
called great in the Kingdom. p. 73. SERMON XXI. Verse 20. For I say unto you,
that except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. p. 91.
SERMON XXII. Verse 21, 22. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time,
thou shall not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the
Judgment. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother without
a Cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment; and whosoever shall say to his
Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council; but whosoever shall say,
thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell Fire. p. 119. SERMON XXIII. Verse 23, 24.
Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest, that thy
Brother has ought against thee; Leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go
thy way; first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come, and offer thy Gift.
p. 139. SERMON XXIV. Verse 25, 26. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, while
thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the Adversary deliver thee to
the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into
Prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till
thou have paid the uttermost farthing. p. 161. SERMON XXV. Verse 27, 28. Ye
have heard that it has been said by them of old time, thou shall not commit
Adultery; but I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his Heart. p. 179. SERMON
XXVI. Verse 29, 30. And if thy right Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee; for it is profitable for thee, that one of thy Members should
perish, and not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell. And if thy right
Hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for
thee, that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy whole Body should
be cast into Hell. p. 195. SERMON XXVII. Verse 31, 32. It has been said,
Whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give her a Writing of Divorcement.
But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving for the
cause of Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery; and whosoever Marries her
that is Divorced, commits Adultery. p. 213. SERMON XXVIII. Verse 33. Again, ye
have heard, that it has been said by them of old time, thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. p. 273. SERMON XXIX.
Verse 34, 35, 36. But I say unto you swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for
it is Gods Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by
Jerusalem, for it is the City of the Great King; neither shall thou swear by
thine Head, because thou can not make one Hair white or black. p. 309.
SERMON XXX. Verse 37. But let your Communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more than these comes of Evil. p. 329. SERMON XXXI. Verse 38, 39.
Ye have heard, that it has been said, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth. But I say unto you, that ye resist not Evil, but whosoever shall smite
thee on thy right Cheek, turn him the other also. p. 349. SERMON XXXII. Verse
40, 41. And if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let
him have thy Cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a Mile, go with
him twain. p. 385. SERMON XXXIII. Verse 42. Give to him that asks thee; and
from him that would borrow of thee, turn thou not away. p. 401. SERMON XXXIV.
Verse 43. Ye have heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor,
and hate thine Enemy. p. 417. SERMON XXXV. Verse 44. But I say unto you, Love
your Enemies, Bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. p. 434. SERMON
XXXVI. Verse. 45. That you may be the Children of your Father which is in
Heaven; for he makes the Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends
Rain on the Just and Unjust. p. 459. SERMON XXXVII. Verse 46, 47. For if you
love them which love you, what Reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the
same? And if ye salute your Brother only, what do you more than others? Do not
even the Publicans so? p. 479. SERMON XXXVIII. Verse 46, 47. For if ye love
them which love you, etc. p. 501. SERMON XXXIX. Verse 48. Be ye therefore
perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. p. 527.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Worthy Author, has likewise left Sermons of the Sixth, and Seventh
Chapters of St. Matthew's Gospel; Completing our Blessed Savior's Sermon on
the Mount, making an excellent Body of Divinity. Which will be suddenly Printed
Uniform to this Volume.

SERMON XVI. ON THE Fifth of St. Matthew.
VOL. II.
St. Matthew. Chapter v. Ver. 15. Neither do Men light a Candle, and put it under a
Bushel; but on a Candlestick, and it gives Light to all that are in the House.


HAD I consulted Brevity, I might have handled the 13, 14, 15, and 16 th,
verses together, because they all speak of the same Subject, viz. The Exemplary
Lives of Christians: But being willing to examine the Emphasis of every
Expression, I have resolved to treat of these distinctly. As our Savior has
compared his true Followers to the Salt of the Earth, with respect to their
Reforming others; To the Sun, or Light of the World, with respect to their
Enlightening and Enlivening others; To a City set on an Hill, with respect to
their free and open Profession of their Principles, and acting accordingly;
which was the Subject of our last Discourses: So here he goes on, and adds one
Comparison more, viz. That of a lighted Candle; the use of which is to give
Light to them that are in the House. Neither do Men light a Candle, etc.

Though the Subject seems to be in a manner exhausted, by the preceding
Discourses; yet I shall so order the matter, that I may either more clearly
explain what I have hinted before, or allege something agreeable to the
Similitude.

What Venerable Bede observes upon this Passage, That he puts his Candle under
a Bushel, who obscures the noble Light of the Doctrine of the Gospel, by his
covetousness, and greediness after the Profits of the World: And, That he sets
it on a Candlestick, who so submits to God, that the power of the Gospel, like
Oil, swims a top; and pleasing the flesh, is the least of his Concerns: And
what the same Author adds concerning our Savior, That he lighted a Candle when
he irradiated and inflamed the dark Lanthorn of humane Nature with his
Divinity; and placed this Candle, his Divine Power, in the Candlestick, his
Church; and that the Candle, the Gospel, could not be put under a Bushel, i. e.
confined to the Jewish Commonwealth, but was to give light to the whole World:

These, I say, are pious Allusions, rather than the direct and natural sense of
the Words; or if they relate to the Sense, they are but a small part of it, or
rather Inferences from the scope and drift of our Savior's coming into the
World, than an Explication of the Words, which enforce the Duty of being
Exemplary in our Lives; a Duty strangely neglected, and which cannot be urged
too often. I shall therefore enquire, with Relation to the Text,

I. How we cover and hide the Light of our Piety and Goodness.

II. What Injury we offer (by doing so) to God and Man.

III. What the Advantages are of letting the Light of our Piety shine to those
that are round about us.

I. How we cover and hide the Light of our Piety, and Goodness; and this is
done,

1. When we content our selves with the Name of Christians, and do nothing that
does properly belong to Christians, as Christians. What it is that constitutes
a Christian, Christ has told us; and you have often heard it: It is Mat.
16.24. If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross, and follow me. How do we deny our selves, when we indulge our natural
Desires and Affections; connive at that which we should restrain; give our
selves leave to think, and speak, and do, what our Flesh suggests to us,
without curbing those Inclinations; or do not subject our Appetites, our
Thoughts and Words, and Desires, and Actions, to the Government and Will of
God? Is this denying our selves, when we let loose the Reins of our inordinate
Lusts, to Pride, to Covetousness, to Wrath, to Uncleanness, to Slandering and
Abusing our Neighbors? etc. Do we take up our Cross, when we take it ill, that
God sends Afflictions upon us? Repine and murmur when we are corrected; are
impatient under the Rod, and look upon the Scourge as our greatest Enemy? Do we
follow Christ when his Example moves us not, when his Meekness and Humility
make no Impressions upon us, when his delight in doing Good, and his
compassionate Temper charms us not into Imitation? And if we do none of these
things, and yet call our selves Christians, do we not hide the Light, which
that Name imports, under a bushel? Do not we obscure it; do not we cover it; do
not we keep it from shining forth? What! will the Name bear us out? will the
Title make us Favorites? Do we believe that God is pleased with those that
have the Name that they live, and are dead? What! A Christian, and Cheat, and
Lie, and Dissemble, and commit a Thousand Abominations? A Christian, and do
things as contrary to the Nature of Christianity, as Light is to Darkness? Are
not these perfect Absurdities? And yet Men will Glory in the Name alone.

2. We hide it when we suffer the Honors, Pleasures, and gay Things of this
World to obscure it. Do not you see how Tares, how Thistles, and Briars, and
Thorns, cover and hide the Wheat, the good Corn that grows among them? that is
the Emblem of our hiding the Light of Goodness and Piety. There is an admirable
Seed sown in our Hearts by the great Husbandman, God blessed for evermore;
Light is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the upright in Heart, Psalm.
xcvii. 11. He sows it by the Word, and there fall into the Soul good Motions,
excellent Inclinations, Christian Dispositions, Sparks of the Coal from the
Altar; which are ready to break forth into a light Fire: But here come the
Riches, the Pleasures, the Cares of this Life, and beat these Inclinations
back, will not suffer them to advance into Fruits, and Works; and if here and
there a little Virtue, like an Ear of Corn, peeps forth, the force and power of
it is hid, and darkened by the Locusts of Worldly Lusts. And is not this hiding
the Light, when thou have an Inclination to do Good, and a carnal worldly
Reason presently discourages thee? When thou have some Thoughts of paying thy
Devotion to God, and Company, and some little impertinent Business can divert
thee from thy Purpose: When thou have a good mind to Reprove thy Neighbor for
his notorious Faults, and thoughts of thy worldly Interest, and fear of losing
his Favor, stops the good Intent: When thou purposest to mind thy Salvation
with greater seriousness, and the sweetness of gain, and profit; and the
Opinion and Censures of Men cool or damp that desire: Is not this hiding the
Light of our Piety and Goodness?

3. We hide it, when we suffer it to be put out, or darkened by Temptations.
The Devil is watchful, and the Evil Spirits that are about us, are very busy,
and do what they can to hinder our good Thoughts and Desires, from breaking out
into suitable actions. Many Men could find in their hearts to break off their
Sins by Repentance, and to forsake their Evil Courses: They have Twitches
within, and Stings in their own Consciences; and this Day they will set about
it, and the next Week, or the next convenient Opportunity they will do it. But
here Temptations come in; either, That it is time enough to do it hereafter; or,
The present Circumstances they are in, will not yet permit it; or, It Is too
early to torment themselves about their future State; and therefore they will
consider a little more of it: If they were in another Condition of Life, it
would do well enough; but there is some danger in going about it, without great
deliberation. When such Temptations as these put by the nobler Checks within:
When the Voice of these drowns the Voice of that inward Witness: When Men find
Piety working within, and ready to be delivered; and then suffer such
Temptations to Strangle the Babe in the Birth; what is all this, but hiding the
Light? Is not this Drawing a Curtain before it, that it may not be seen? Is not
this shutting it up in a Dark-Lanthorn, when it should be set on a Candlestick?

4. We hide it, when in times of Danger we dare not own it. And now behold,
says the Apostle, Acts xx.22, 23, 24. I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem,
not knowing the things that shall befall me there; saving that the Holy Ghost
witnesses in every City, saying, that Bonds and Afflictions abide me. But none
of these things move me, neither count I my Life dear unto my self, so that I
might finish my course with Joy. This is the Language of a Christian, the Voice
of a Man who beholds him that is invisible. But when with Peter in the
High-Priest's Hall, thou deniest thy Master; when with Demas, in time of
Persecution, thou forsakest thy Pious Companions, and embracest this present
World; when for fear of Disgrace, and being ill-spoken of, thou dare not
Profess what thou know; when thou dare not stand in the Evil Day; when
Piety is out of Fashion, or is not the Custom of the Place thou art in, and
therefore forbearest to practice it; when for fear of the Scribes and
Pharisees, for fear of being put out of the Synagogue, thou neglectest the
Command of God: Surely this is hiding the Light, not setting it upon a
Candlestick, that it may give Light to all that are in the House.

Obj. But some Men will say here: Is not this the Case of the present Ministers
of the Church of England? who formerly have been so Zealous for Passive
Obedience and Non-resistance; and now the Times being changed, and there being
some danger in professing that Principle, they have no Courage to meddle with
that Pious Doctrine; and is not this hiding the Light?

Sol. 1. What some Men do and think, must not be looked on as the result of the
Church's Doctrine.

2. Personal Faults must not, cannot be charged upon the Church.

3. What Laymen do, must not presently be laid to the Charge of Clergymen.

4. Though Passive Obedience and Non-resistance are the Doctrines of our
Church, yet they must not be understood without any Limitation at all.

5. Our present Case being very difficult, and having some Circumstances in it
which are not usual, and perhaps never happened before, we must not wonder to
see Men differing in their Opinions concerning it: And therefore

6. If charitable Constructions of the Actions of our Neighbors are necessary,
they must be so more than ordinary, in a Case where both Parties have much to
plead for themselves; and therefore though the Case be not altogether the same,
yet let the Apostle's Rule be our Direction, Romans xiv.3. Let not him that
eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats not, despise
him that eats.

7. It may not be fear of Danger that makes us forbear speaking of this
Doctrine. There may be several Reasons why Men of Learning forbear it: As (1)
Because there is not that occasion now to practice it, that once there was. (2)
Those that think themselves obliged to be subject to the Powers God has placed
over them, may in Prudence wave it, because they would give no just Offense.
(3) Other Lessons may be thought more necessary. In a word, in all difficult
Cases, let us judge charitably; and not presently call it Covetousness, or
Interest, or Apostasy, when the Action will bear a more favorable
Interpretation.


8. Before ye judge any particular Persons, consult those very Persons at whose
Proceedings you are offended; upon what ground they do it; and do not condemn
them before you know their Reasons.

9. Let not every supposed Fault in others, discourage you from Religion. It Is
a sign it hangs very loose about you, if a mistaken Action of others can make
you quit it. I shall conclude this particular with Romans xiv.17, 19. For the
Kingdom of God is not Meat, and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for Peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another. But let us enquire

II. What Injury we offer (by hiding our Light) to God and Man?

1. This is a tacit accusing of God, as if he had given us no Light at all. He
that does not make use of the Gift God has given him, appears to others as if
he had received none; and his neglect to improve it, is so far a denial of it.
And what Ingratitude is this? What a false Accusation of God? Has not God
washed thee with the Water of Baptism? Has not he bestowed his Holy Spirit on
thee? Has not he vouchsafed thee the Light of his Gospel? Has not he given
thee large and plentiful means of Grace? Has not he set Examples before thee
in Scripture, and in the World? Has not he surrounded thee with Motives, and
Incentives, and Encouragements? And all that thy Light, thy Goodness, thy
Seriousness, and Love to God might shine forth, and give Light to those that
are in the House? And then has God given thee nothing? Has not he watered thy
Ground, and caused Manna to rain upon thy Field? And after all, can thou
complain that he has not visited thy Earth with his Showers? He has! He has!
But whilst thou live and actest as if he had given thee nothing, do not
thou accuse him that he has neglected thy Soul, and given thee no Kid to make
merry with thy Friends? And if thou chargest God with Unkindness, when he has
been miraculously kind, do not thou offer Injuries and Indignities to him?

2. Thou do not believe his Promises, but chargest them with Falsehood; and
therefore art injurious to him. For can we say we believe his Promises, when we
will not let the Light of our Piety shine before Men? Do thou believe that
Godliness is great gain, having the Promises of this Life, and that which is to
come, and yet art afraid to lay thine Hand to the Plow? In Temporal Concerns,
if thou believe such a Man will make thy Fortune, and enrich thee with a
considerable Estate, do not thou endeavor to please him? And what! Do thou
believe that God will reward thy Godliness with Crowns, and Scepters, and
Diadems, and Power, and Majesty, and Dominion, and Triumphs over Hell and
Devils; and with a Sea of Glory, and Bliss, and Felicity; and can nothing of
all this stir thee up to let the Light of it break forth, and shine, and dazzle
considerate Spectators? If thou believe not his Promises, why do thou
profess the belief of them? If they cannot move thee to Piety, to Goodness, to
a strict Conversation before Men, how can thou be said to believe them?

Ay, but I see not the Blessings promised.

Do not thou believe there is a God though thou see him not? And can not
thou believe the Blessings he has promised, though thou seeest them not? The
Reasons for the one are as convincing as the other. In a word, Believing God's
Promises is to venture upon that Piety to which the greatest Blessings are
promised. And therefore, not letting thy Light shine before Men, it is a sign
thou do not believe his Promises; and not to believe his Promises, is either
to suppose that he has made no such Promises; or to think if he has made any,
they are not true. And what an injury this is to God, judge you, to whom God
has given Reason, and Wisdom, and Understanding, to know that Heaven and Earth
shall sooner perish, than one jot or one tittle of his Word shall fail?

3. It is an injury to Men too. For by not letting the Light of your Piety
shine forth, you hinder others from the Ways of God. Men are led by Example, if
you have an aversion from the Ways of Righteousness, will not this tempt others
to have an aversion too? If you offer the Blind and the Lame, will not others
imitate you? If to serve God be a weariness to you, will it not be so to
others? It is true, God may restrain them from following your example; but if
he does not, is not this the natural consequence of it? It was very well said
of St. Chrysostom, There would not be a Heathen left in the World, if we all of
us labored to be Christians indeed; and strictly obeyed the Counsels, and
Admonitions of the Gospel; if being affronted, we did suffer it; if we did not
render evil for evil; if being cursed and abused we did bless; if we rendered
good for evil. There is hardly any Man would be such a Brute, as not to apply
himself to the Fear of God, (whose Precepts cause such an admirable Temper) if
all of us showed the same Zeal for the Gospel.

But when we, like Gallio, care for none of these things, we make others as
careless as our selves; We especially, whom the meaner sort look upon as better
Bred, and more Knowing; and having had the advantage of Education. For this is
the common Language: Such a Man is a Scholar, he can Read and Write, and has
the Bible at his Fingers Ends: If that Man believed these things were
necessary, he would certainly practice them: But making no Conscience of them,
why should I, who am not learned, and know not so much as he does? So that this
must needs be a manifest injury to Men; for we make others regardless of Piety,
while we our selves do not place that Light on the Candlestick of our Lives and
Conversations, that it may give Light to all that are in the House. But

4. This is not all; for hereby we do not only hinder them from the Ways of
Piety, but we encourage them in Evil; we harden others in their Sins; help them
to be miserable; see them perishing, and promote their Ruin. Though we may not
be so bad as others, yet in not being so good as we might be, and ought to be,
we confirm them in their Opinion, that what they do is harmless. And thus we
turn Fiends and Devils, teach others to Sin, and prompt them to be Children of
Perdition. Our evil Actions are unhappy Schoolmasters, to instruct others in
the Art of Sinning. We destroy Souls; and instead of being helpers of their
Faith, we are helpers to hasten their Damnation. And if this be not a signal
Injury done to Men, I know not what we can call Injury. But it is time I should

III. In the last place show you, What the Advantages are of letting this Light
of our Piety shine forth before Men.

And though this be properly the subject of the next Verse, yet something of it
I will mention by way of preparation for the Discourse I intend upon that
Exhortation of our Savior.

1. Are not we fond of Peace of Conscience? Do not we talk of it? Do not we
commend it? Do not we say all the kind things of it? Do not we prize it in
those that have it? Do not we hear Men upon their Deathbeds wish for it? If it
be so precious a thing, why, this is the way that leads to it; even this
letting the Light of our Piety shine forth. How often have you heard that
Saying of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World. Ay, this is
the Spring, the Fountain, the Root, the Vein, from which Peace of Conscience
flows. It can no more arise from a sinful, carnal, sensual Life, than
Olive-berries can grow upon a Thorn-bush. The Light of Piety, causes Light in
the Conscience; this makes it easy, and lightsome under all Burdens, and gives
a cheerful merry Heart under the sharpest Dispensations of Providence. All the
Joys of Sinners and Hypocrites are not to be compared with it; for they die
when the Body dies; and fill the Soul with Horror. But Peace of Conscience
survives the mortal Part, and leaps, and skips, and mounts with the Soul, into
the boundless Ocean of Eternity.

2. Would you see and taste how sweet and gracious God is? Why this setting the
Light of your Piety on a Candlestick, that it may enlighten all that are round
about you, is the way to it. God can never appear truly Sweet to that Soul that
has an Aversion from his Service. It is impossible that he should look amiable
and charming to that Eye, that delights in beholding Vanity. It is the Holiness
of God that makes him sweet and amiable to the Soul: And how can that Soul
delight in his Beauty, that sees no Beauty in Holiness?

We wonder not that many Men stare, and wonder, and think we tell them Stories,
and Romances, when we speak of the admirable Sweetness of God, which a Soul
enlightened from above, is sensible of; as well may a Horse understand the
Study of the Mathematics, as He apprehend how sweet and amiable God is, that
rushes into Sin as the Horse rushes into the Battle. But notwithstanding all
this, there is such a thing; and the Soul, whose pious Life shines before Men,
feels, and sees, and tastes how sweet, and charming, and lovely, God, the best
of Beings, is. Sweet beyond Roses, sweet beyond Perfumes, sweet beyond
Comparison, sweet to Admiration, sweet to Ecstasy.

And now I should add, after all, that this letting the Light of your Piety
shine forth, is the way to engage others, (what in you lies) to Praise God. But
that must be the subject of my next Meditation. However, because it is very
pertinent to my purpose, I will add that which must be the beginning of my next
Discourse, Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good
works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven. I shall conclude with a
word or two to those that intend this Day to partake of the Blessed Sacrament.

3. Think what a Feast, what Consolation the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
will be to you, if you let your Light break forth and shine. How cheerfully may
you come to this Holy Table; where you may expect that the Lord Jesus the Son
of God, will meet you, and communicate himself to you; and make the Union
between him and you closer, the Friendship greater, the Correspondence more
endearing, the Agreement sweeter, the Reconciliation surer, and the Application
of his Promises firmer, and more comfortable! You bear his Name before Men, and
he will write his Name, and the Name of God on your Foreheads, and enter your
Names in the Book of Life.

Christians! Let the Light of your Piety shine forth, etc. and behold the
Sacrament is the Treasury-chamber, where you are to receive your Reward. What
Reward? Even a Reward which the unhappy Spirits in Hell would give ten thousand
Worlds for, if they had them; even forgiveness of your Sins, and being washed
in the Blood of the everlasting Covenant: Heaven, Eternal Life is consigned
into your hands; and Christ enters at it, even into Bonds and Obligations that
you shall inherit it, when your Race is run. And thus the Sacrament proves to
you the Suburbs of Heaven; the Antichamber to the Mansions of Glory; and in
this outward Court (if I may so call it) you receive Assurances, that e're long
you shall be admitted into the very Palace of him who dwells in Light
inaccessible; and surely this must be a great encouragement to let your Light
shine forth before Men.

SERMON XVII.
St. Matthew. Chapter v. Ver. 16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that others may
see your good Works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven.


WHAT is sweeter than Light? and what is more amiable than Goodness? Goodness,
the Image of the Almighty, the Similitude of the Living God, the Transcript of
the Divine Nature! Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain, in comparison of
it; and all the Glories of this present World fall short of it. God loves it,
and Angels love it, and Men that imitate them, or desire to be like them,
cannot but love it. God is Goodness it self, and therefore must necessarily
love it: Angels, of all Creatures are the most perfect; and as Perfection is
the Object of their Love, so must Goodness; for Goodness is Perfection. Men
that long after Happiness, cannot but long earnestly after it; for there is no
true Happiness without Goodness. If there be any rational Creature that is not
enamored with Goodness, it is because they do not see its Charming Rays. To
the Blind-man, the Sun himself is invisible; so is Goodness, and all the
Glories which encircle its Head, to him in whom the God of this World has
blinded the Eyes of his Understanding: Goodness is Light; and the better a Man
is, the more Splendid he is; and consequently, the greater is the Glory that
shines in and about his Soul; a Glory which God delights in, and Angels prize;
and which sheds blessed Influences on all that are round about us: And
therefore Christ had reason to exhort; Let your Light so shine before Men, that
they may see your good Works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

Having already told you, That by Light is meant Goodness, I need not spend any
Time in Explication of the other Terms and Phrases of the Text, which may
easily be understood; That which will be most edifying, will be to resolve the
Words into these following Propositions:

I. A Christian must not stop at a low degree of Piety, Let your Light so
shine; So, i. e. to that degree.

II. Our good Works do not shine, except Men see them: Let your Light so shine,
that they may see your good Works.

III. Where our good Works are any way considerable, Men will certainly take
notice of them. This is also implied in this Saying, That Men may see, i. e.
They will certainly see and take notice, therefore let your Light so shine that
they may see your good Works.

IV. The great end of our letting our good Works shine before Men, must be, to
endear Religion to others, and to make them Glorify God; That they may see
your good Works, and Glorify, etc.

V. One great Motive to let the Light of our good Works shine before Men, is
this consideration, That God is our Father, which is in Heaven: That they may
see and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

I. I begin with the first, viz. That a Christian must not content himself with
a low degree of Piety; Let your Light so shine, i. e. To that degree. What the
meaning of this expression is, you may plainly guess by the parallel place,
John iii.16. God so loved the World. Whereby we all understand a very high
degree of Love; and indeed the words in the Text are so express; and the
antecedent Passages have so near a relation to them, that we can believe no
less, then that they do import what is hinted in the Proposition.

There is nothing more common among Men that profess Christianity, than to
content themselves with very ordinary degrees of Godliness; and if they are
once arrived to such a pitch of negative Virtue, that they are not scandalous,
or do not commit Sins which make them a byword, a hissing, a Proverb, or the
talk of their Neighbors; they look upon themselves as tolerable Saints; and
therefore take no farther care to improve their Talents, or to bless their
Souls with richer Graces.

But surely, this is an Argument, that either you do not rightly understand
what Religion is; or, that a fatal Laziness, the Scurvey of the Soul, has
overrun all your Faculties: And to cure your selves of that Distemper, I
beseech you examine your selves, Whether the stop you make, be agreeable to the
frequent Commands of the Gospel, to grow in Grace, to add to our Faith Virtue,
to grow strong in the Lord, to abound more and more, in Faith, in Love, in
Patience? And, Whether a Man may not be in a state of Nature, and in an
unregenerate Condition still, who is come no farther yet, than a bare freedom
from clamourous, and notorious Sins. I suppose you look upon some Heathen
Philosophers, who arrived to some degrees of Morality, such as Socrates, Plato,
Cicero, Seneca, etc. as natural Men; and that, notwithstanding the Progress
they made in Virtue, they were still without the Pail of Grace, and the Precint
of Christ's Kingdom; and if so, judge ye whether you are passed from Death to
Life, when you go no farther than they, or perhaps not so far as they.

Grace is a state of Life, which consists in Progress; and if Goodness be
Light, as our Blessed Master styles it, it must go on like the Sun, unto a
perfect day. He that does not desire to be better, surely was never very good;
and he cannot be said to desire it, that does not endeavor after it. If you
find Sweetness, or Consolation in that degree of Goodness you are arrived to,
is not that a motive to go on from Virtue to Virtue? In Temporals, a little
Gain tempts you to aim at a greater. He that is easy, desires to be easier. He
that is rich, desires to be richer; not that I approve of this desire, but this
is the Temper of Mankind. Nay, in some cases it may be lawful, but here I am
sure it is necessary. True Goodness is comfortable, even in the lowest degree of
it; Comfort is the natural result of it; and therefore I say, having already
felt and received something of Satisfaction from those small beginnings of
Goodness which you allow are in you; is not this an Encouragement to go on to a
higher pitch? Are you afraid of too much Comfort? Or is that you have felt so
contemptible, that you despise all that you can promise your selves for the
future. If it were little, or no bigger than Elijah's Cloud, no bigger than a
Man's hand, that is a very pregnant Reason, why you should endeavor to enlarge
and make it greater. There is scarce a vicious Man, but has something of
Goodness, that lies mingled with all his filthiness, and superfluity of
naughtiness; and behold, even that grain of Gold, as little as it is, supports
the Wretch against all the Terrors of his Conscience; and keeps him from
sinking under the load and burden of his Sin. I do not tell you how justly,
but of the matter of fact; and the use I make of it, is this; If so small a
quantity of Goodness is so great a Cordial, what must a greater Portion, and
proportion be? This is an Eternal Rule, True Virtue causes Sweetness, for all
her Paths are Peace; and that sweetness we taste, is a just incentive to long
for a greater degree; as a Person, that tasting of a Dish agreeable to his
Palate, desires a fuller Enjoyment of it; and thus we give People opportunity
to see what we do; which brings in the second Proposition;

II. Our good Works cannot be said to shine, except Men see them; Let your
Light shine, that Men may see your good Works: When Men see that you are
Compassionate, and tenderhearted, officious, and kind, and faithful, and
willing to help; and that you love your Neighbors as your selves. When they
see, That you are just in all your Dealings, just to your Word, just to your
Promises, just in your Traffic and Commerce, and faithful in all you
undertake; when they see that evil Company cannot draw you to unlawful Games,
or to Intemperance in Eating and Drinking, or to mispending your Time; and that
you are resolute to obey God more than Man; when they see you make Conscience
of what Christ Commands, and that you express your love to God in such Acts, as
Flesh and Blood are against, and your carnal Interest would hinder you from;
when they see that pleasing God is the work of your Life, and that you can
comfort your selves in your Tribulations, with the things that are not seen;
and that you are not fond of the great things of this World, but modest, and
temperate, and sober, and thankful for the Mercies you enjoy. In this case your
good Works do shine indeed, and Men see them; and is not this a more glorious
sight, than to see Croesus in his Throne; or Cleopatra in her Vessel richly
guilt, and her Sails of Silk; or Solomon in all his Glory? For what was all
that Glory, but Paint, and show, which perished? But good Works are lasting
Beauties, they tarnish not, they fade not, they follow the Votary after Death,
go along with him to Heaven, for their good Works follow them, Rev. xiv.13. And
there is reserved for them an Inheritance undefiled, and incorruptible.

You are to convince the World, that you are fully resolved to enjoy the
Pleasures at the right hand of God; but how will you convince them, except they
see you fight the good sight, and resist Temptations, and do as the Primitive
Saints did? Is that convincing them, when they see you do things, and venture
on Actions, which God protests shall exclude you from the Kingdom of Heaven?

Your good Works must be seen, else you have reason to suspect them of
Sophistication. It is impossible to be truly Religious, and to hide it from
Men, if we live among Men: We may as well keep Fire from casting a heat, as
Goodness from being seen, if it be genuine. An invisible Religion is no
Religion; for Religion is nothing but Love, even a fervent Love, which will
discover its Motions, and its Flames, and all Waters cannot quench them, and
Men cannot but perceive it. If there appears nothing without, nothing that
looks like Love, or Religion, if nothing is to be seen, all is but a Pretense;
and the Treasures we boast of, imaginary, and no better than the Riches Men
think they are possessed of in a Dream, when Fancy is playing in a slumber.
There is no doubt on it, if good Works are to be seen, Men will behold them, and
take notice of them; which calls us to consider the third Proposition:

III. If our good Works be any way considerable, Men will take notice of them.
This is also limited here, That others may see your good Works; for this is
grounded upon a Supposition, for they will certainly observe and take notice.
No doubt they will, not only those who have been enlightened, and have tasted of
the good Gift of God, but even those who are Strangers to the Life of God. Even
a Herod will take notice of St. John's Austerity, and Integrity; and a Festus,
an Agrippa, of St. Paul's Zeal; and a Heathen Centurion, of the admirable
Behavior of Jesus of Nazareth; for Men have Reason, and are inquisitive, and
will compare Actions, with the Rules they have heard of; most Men know more
than they do, and most Men give a shrewd guess at the right way to Salvation;
and can tell, whether such and such Endeavors are agreeable to the Path of
Life; and will take notice, whether they be or not: But except these good Works
be considerable, few Men will think them worth their Cognizance; and that which
will make them so, are these six Ingredients.

1. Great Patience under Injuries. This looks very magnificent in the Eyes of
Men of Judgment; David's being unconcerned at Shimei's reviling; the Apostles
entreating, when they were defamed; St. Stephen's Praying for his Enemies, when
they stoned him; this makes Men stare, when Injuries cannot discompose us, and
Affronts cannot make us step out of the Road of Patience; and we can bare up
under Contempt and Dishonor, without Grief, or Passion, or Revenge, and look
to the Example of Jesus, and like him return Blessings for Cursings; this even
astonishes carnal Men, and to be sure must look lovely in the Eyes of good Men.

2. Great Acts of Charity; such Acts especially, as those of Christ to Malchus,
who came to apprehend him, and whose Ear he cured; and such as we read of in
Ecclesiastical History, of the Christians of old, who did good to those that
hated them; and attended those, when sick, who a little before had plotted
against their Lives. Acts, free from Interest and Design; Acts which show,
nothing could put us upon them, but Religion and Conscience: Acts frequent too,
and continued without weariness of well-doing: These even fix the Eyes of the
most stupid Creatures, upon the Person that performs them; and indeed nothing
is sooner taken notice of, than such Acts as these, because there is Divinity
in them; and such strokes of the Goodness of Heaven appear in them, that Men
behold them almost whether they will or not.

3. Great Temperance in Clothing, Eating, Drinking, and Recreations: In these,
most People who are Rich, and Great, or abound in worldly Goods, are very apt
to exceed, even those, who seem to be no ill Christians. And therefore, where
self-denial appears in all these, and a Person, who has both Ability, and
Opportunity, and Temptations to go beyond the Rules of Modesty, and Gravity,
and Sobriety in all, or any of these, gives Demonstration, that something
unseen bears the sway within; and that he commands his Appetite, and keeps
under his Body, and brings it into Subjection. This, as it is an Argument of
self-Conquest, so Men will certainly take notice of it.

4. Great Modesty and Sobriety in Discourse, when our Speech is always with
Grace, seasoned with Salt; when none hears us speak ill of others; when no
corrupt Communication proceeds out of our Mouths, but that which is Good, to
the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the Hearers. When nothing
drops from our Lips, that looks like filthy Talking, or foolish, and obscene
Jesting; but on the contrary, we take care to let something fall, whereby
others, who are present, may be built up in their most Holy Faith; this is so
remarkable a thing, that Men will be sure to take notice of it.

5. An unshaken, steady, and even Piety, which changes not with the changes of
Conditions; and is the same at Sea, and on the Shore; abroad, and at home; in
the Camp, and in the City; in a fair, and in a cloudy Day; in a word, which
neither the Humor of the Age, nor the Example of our Friends, nor all the
Revolutions of public Affairs can alter, or destroy. As all things unusual
attract the Eyes of Spectators to the Piety we speak of, being a thing out of
the common Road, there is no question to be made of it, but Men will take
notice of it!

6. Joy in Tribulation: To see Men, with the Apostles, depart from the Council,
rejoicing because they were counted worthy to suffer Shame for the Name of the
Lord Jesus; to see them rejoice, when they fall into diverse Temptations; to
see, that neither a miserable Life, nor a dreadful Death approaching, can make
them forbear rejoicing in their God, and in the hopes of Eternal Life; to see
them flourish like Palm Trees, and that all the weight which Providence lays
upon them, cannot crush their Hope, and Confidence, and Rejoicing in him, who
is altogether lovely: This is too bright, too shining a Virtue, not to be taken
notice of by understanding Men.

And these are the Noble, the Great, the Generous, Heroic Acts which will make
Men take notice of you; and say, that God is among you indeed. Let others be
known by their Liveries, and Coaches, and Pages, and Lacquies; you who are
Christians, must be known by such Acts as these. I do not deny, but most of you
do some outward overt Acts of Religion, such as coming to Church, and kneeling,
and hearing, and joining with the Congregation; but let me tell you, that one
Act of self-denial will go farther than all these external Services; which, God
knows, are too often, no more than Formalities. Little sprinklings of Devotion,
mingled with much Rubbish of Sin and Vanity, are lost in that Crowd; and will
make no great Impressions on the Eyes and Hearts of those, who behold you: But
such Acts as these shine bright, and spread abroad their Luster; and will even
force men to confess, That the Love of God is shed abroad in your Hearts.
Indeed this must be the great end, in letting the Light of your good Works
shine before Men, that others may glorify God; which puts us in mind of the
fourth Proposition.

IV. The great end we must propose to our selves, in letting the Light of our
good Works shine before Men, must be this; to endear Religion to others, and to
make those that see them, glorify God: That others may see your good Works,
and glorify your Father.

Men glorify God by seeing our good Works, when,

1. They are converted by that sight; when those good Works work upon them, and
work their Hearts into consideration of their ways, and work so powerfully upon
them, that they can resist the motives to Repentance, and a serious change of
Life, no longer. So it was with those, who beheld the good Works of our
Savior, John x.42. John xi.41. And so it was with those Husbands, who were won
by the chaste, and meek, and quiet Behavior, and Conversation of the female
Sex, 1 Pet. iii.2. In this not only appears the wonderful power of God, who
makes our good Works subservient to the subduing of the Fortresses of Iniquity
in others; but when those, who before dishonored, abused, despised, and
undervalued the Author of their Being, and well-being, now come to esteem, and
love, and admire him; and esteem his Precepts above thousands of Gold and
Silver: What is this, but glorifying God?

2. When by our good Works, which shine before Men, others take occasion to
praise, and bless God for the Grace they beheld shining in us; as the Disciples
did, when they heard that the Gentiles had received the Gift of Repentance unto
Life, Acts xi.18. And as those Strangers did, St. Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. ix.13.
who glorified God for the professed Subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, which
they beheld in the Corinthian Christians: For as it is by the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that we do bring forth fruits meet for Repentance; so when that
Grace which works so powerfully in us, produces Praise of Gods Glory in those
who behold it, it cannot be otherwise, but God is glorified by our good Works.

3. When others are, by what they see in us, encouraged to praise God for their
own Mercies. The good Works which shine in us, are not only Treasures which
enrich our own Souls, but Remembrancers too, to put others in mind of what God
has done for them; and of the Mercies they enjoy; and of the Graces of Gods
Spirit, which are bestowed on them, and animate them to a holy fruitfulness.
Other Men's Defects and Blemishes, such as Blindness, Lameness, Crookedness,
Poverty, Misery, etc. are to put us in mind of our Mercies, much more the
Mercies which others enjoy as well as we: And when the spiritual Blessings we
enjoy, prove a Glass, in which others behold the same Blessings Gods bountiful
hand has bestowed on them; and to raise Hallelujahs, Gratitude, and
Thanksgivings in them: Or, if by beholding the good Works, which shine in our
Lives, they become sensible of their own spiritual Wants; and come to see how
far short they fall of the Perfection which is in us; and thereupon grow
importunate with God, for the same degree of Faith, and Love, they spy in our
Conversation; and begin to use the proper means in order to it; this surely is
glorifying God, when they see our good Works.

4. When others take occasion, by the good Works they behold in us, to spread
Religion, and Goodness, and use their Talents to make others conformable to the
Rule of the Gospel, as those pious Christians did, we read of, Acts xi.19. who
taking Example by what they saw the Apostles do, to propagate the Faith of
Christ; in this Case our good Works prove Incentives to others to exhort those
who are afar off, to draw nigh to God; and thus the Glory of God pleads when
our shining and burning Lamps convey Fire into other Men's Hearts; which makes
them communicate the Light they feel to as many as have Faith to be healed of
their Infirmities.

And these, Beloved Hearers, are the Ends you must propose to your selves in
letting your Light, even the Light of your good Works, shine before Men; Ends
great and fit for Christian Philosophers: These are Royal Ends, and therefore
not unbecoming those, who by their Profession are Kings and Priests to God: The
greater a Person is, the higher ought his End and Design to be. A Christian is
a Person highly exalted; and therefore the End we speak of being High and
Masculine, is to be the Object of his Thoughts. And now give me leave to ask
you, Is not this Work, and this End, the most proper Task of Persons, who have
renounced the Devil and all his Works? You have all done so; and all the
Evasions and Excuses you can make, cannot dissolve the Obligation, to let your
Light shine thus, and for this End. May so much Good be done, by letting the
Light of your good Works shine before Men? Is it certain, that by doing so, you
put your selves in a capacity of Converting others, of engaging the Praises of
others for your selves and them, and of encouraging them to promote the Honor
and Glory of God; and shall you and I stand idle in the Marketplace? What if
no Man has hired us; Is not the excellency of the Work enough to make us run
into the Vineyard? Nay, there is a Penny to be earned by it; a Penny at Night
when you die; a Reward which will be all Light, all Glory, all Splendor; to be
sure, an infinite Recompense for all your Labors. Behold, you are permitted to
aim at Glory in all your good Works; not at your own Glory, not at your own
Praise; but at the Glory of God; even that others may Glorify God: And do but
think what a satisfaction it will be to you in the last Day, when you shall
hear the Confessions of those who were illuminated, edified, and comforted by
your good Works; when you shall hear them say, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, for giving me an opportunity to be acquainted with such a
Saint; and to know the Conversation of such a holy Man, of such a holy Woman,
and to see the Light of their good Works; for by that sight my Soul was
inflamed. Hence it was that I received the first Sparks of Grace, and the Seed
of God; and hence flowed all that Happiness I now enjoy.

The Satisfaction that must naturally issue from such a Confession, is not to
be expressed, it will be so great: And that is it the Apostle aimed at, when he
said to the Thessalonians, 1 These. ii.19. What is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? Are not ye even in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ? for ye are
our glory, and joy.

And now what shall I say more, to oblige you to let the Light of your good
Works shine before Men? Yes, there is one Motive more, and the Text suggests
it; and with that the last Proposition.

V. That one great Motive to let the Light of our good Works shine before Men,
is this Consideration, That God is our Father which is in Heaven, That others
may Glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

How sweet, how charming is the Motive? What! Not let your Light shine before
Men, when

1. A Father speaks to you; a Father who will deal gently with his Children,
will overlook many accidental Failings and Infirmities, will not proceed
against you according to the Rigor of his Justice, knows how to remember Mercy
in the midst of his Anger, and will consider more the Sincerity, than the
Perfection of your good Works. Say not therefore, my good Works have Spots in
them; every thing I do has so much Frailty and Imperfection in it, that God
will never accept of my Endeavors; and therefore I may as well let them alone,
as apply my Mind to them; for it will be much to the same purpose.

What! Christian, harbor such Thoughts of a Father, who is all Love, all
Mercy, all Kindness to those that fear him; to those that do their best to
please him; that do not wilfully and obstinately offend him, and rejoice before
him with trembling? Can a Father reject, or forget such Children? What if they
be weakly and sickly, is it likely he will turn them out of Doors, or cast them
away from his Presence? Is it not more agreeable to a Father's Name and Nature,
to help their Faith, to cherish their Hope, to strengthen their Love, and to
supple and establish their Charity?

2. Remember he is your Father. He is so to Angels, who are therefore called
the Sons of God, Job i. but he is yours too; not only theirs, but you that
dwell in Tabernacles of Clay may very justly call him so: Nay, yours in a
special manner; not only because he gives you a Natural Life and Being, and
watches over you Night and Day, but yours by giving a Son for you, his only
Son, his Eternal Son; yours, reconciled to you by that Son, even by the Blood
of his Cross. And have not you reason to please such a Father? Can such a
Father leave or forsake you? May not you very justly be confident, that such a
Father will assist you, strengthen you, bestow his holy Spirit upon you, and
enable you to let the Light of your good Works shine before Men? What! Can such
a Father Command any thing that is unreasonable; or that is not fit for you; or
which is against your Interest? What! such a Father to call to you! Let your
Light shine, etc. and can you refuse to do it?

3. Remember, it is your Father which is in Heaven! In Heaven; not that Heaven
holds or imprisons him; but there he manifests his Glory, his Goodness, his
Perfection, his Beauty, in a special, in a very eminent manner.

In Heaven! What a Condescension must this be, to be so concerned for your good
Works! A Father, your Father, so great a Father! A Father that dwells on high,
to humble himself, and stoop to look upon your good Works, and withal declare
his willingness to accept of them; surely this is self-denial infinite: For him
that is higher than the Heaven, Higher than the Highest; Higher than the
greatest Potentates, to vouchsafe a favorable Aspect to your good Works;
surely this must, this should (one would think) prevail with many of you, who
retain some Sense of your Duty. Nay, and he is therefore said to be in Heaven,
to let you see where you shall be, and whither you shall go when you leave this
World, having let the Light of your good Works shine before Men; even into that
Heaven, where himself is adored by Angels, and all the Morning Stars sing
together; where his own infinite Felicity fills all that are about his Throne
with Joys and Ravishments unspeakable. And therefore, suffer this word of
Exhortation, and let your Light so shine before Men, that others may see your
good Works, and Glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

SERMON XVIII.
St. Matthew. Chapter v. Ver. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.


CHRIST having in the foregoing Discourse, opened and laid down the true Nature
of the Christian Religion; what it imports, and what Qualifications it
challenges, and what Temper it requires; and told us, that a Christian is a
Person Humble, and concerned for his own, and other Men's Sins; Meek, and
earnestly desirous of high degrees of Holiness; Merciful, and kind, and Pure in
Heart, and of a peaceable, and peacemaking Disposition; and Patient under
Injuries; and in his Affliction comforting himself with the Rewards of Heaven,
and the Blessings of Eternity; and ready to do good, and profitable, and
useful, both to the Souls and Bodies of other Men: I say, having laid down
these Characters as Essential to a Christian, to a Disciple of the Holy Jesus;
He now goes on, not only to let his Disciples see how much of the Old Religion
he intended to adopt into his own, which he was going to publish, but to
enforce the Duties he had mentioned from the Law and from the Prophets;
showing, that in prescribing the aforesaid Rules and Directions, he was so far
from contradicting the Law and the Prophets, that he spoke their Sense and
Meaning; and that this was not to call them away from an Esteem and Veneration
of the Law and the Prophets, but to increase it; and that what the Law and the
Prophets had but obscurely hinted, he was come to explain more largely, and to
deliver more clearly, and to press with greater Motives and Arguments. Think
not that I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets; I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill.

In the Explication of which Words, these four Things do naturally offer
themselves to our Consideration:

I. What the Law and the Prophets are.

II. What it was that raised a Suspicion, or made People think and fear, That
Christ came to destroy the Law and the Prophets.

III. How it appears, That he came not with that intent.

IV. How he fulfilled the Law and the Prophets.

I. What the Law and the Prophets are.

1. By the Law and the Prophets are meant the Doctrine contained in the Books
of the Old Testament, called by various Names in Holy Writ; sometimes the Law
in general, Joh. x.34. sometimes Moses and the Prophets, Luke xvi.31. sometimes
the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, Luke xxiv.44. sometimes the
Scripture, Joh. v.39. sometimes the Book of the Lord, Isai. xxxiv. 16.
sometimes the Law and the Prophets, as here, because this Book consists, not
only of the Law given by God to Moses, on Mount Sina, for the Instruction and
Edification of the Jewish People; but the Writings of other Men also, Men
inspired by the Holy Ghost, who writ either in a Historical, or Dogmatical, or
Prophetical way, strictly so called, by way of foretelling things to come; even
as the Spirit of God, which governed their Thoughts and Pens, thought fit to
dictate to them, for the use of the Church, or Gods People.

The Law of Moses, is as it were, the Text; the other Books are in the nature
of Comments. They are called, the Law and the Prophets; not as if the Law were
not written by a Person inspired; but the Law is named distinctly, either
because the Law had some peculiar marks of Divinity in it, as appears from the
circumstances of its Publication; or because it was written by a Prophet of a
higher Order; and such was Moses, Exodus xxxiv. whose Prophetic Office God does
distinguish from that of other Persons, moved by the Holy Ghost; or because the
principal part of the Books of Moses, the Ten Commandments, are said to be
written by the Finger of God; which gives the Law a special Privilege; so that
both the Law and the Prophets came from God; only the Law had something more
Majestic than ordinary in it, and therefore deserves to be named by it self.

This Law of Moses consists of Commands of a very different Nature. Some are
the result of natural Justice and Equity; of the Eternal Law imprinted on the
Souls of Men; of the Law of Nature, or of right Reason, and Deductions from the
common Notions of God, and of his Perfections, and the Relation we stand in
toward him, and toward one another; the summary whereof is the Decalogue, or
the Ten Commandments.

Another sort of Commands in that Law, relates to the outward manner of Gods
Worship, and to external Ceremonies, to Gifts and Sacrifices, and Meats, and
Drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances imposed on the Jewish
People, until the time of the Reformation, Heb. ix.9, 10. And these Commands
are purely positive, depending altogether upon the Will and Pleasure of the
Lawgiver; and therefore alterable, and mutable, as Occasion, and Time, and
Necessity, and the Reason of things, etc. require; and this is commonly styled
the Ceremonial Law.

A third sort has Relation to Policy and Government, made up partly of Rules
issuing from natural Justice and Equity; partly of Constitutions, such as the
Nature and Temper of the People, and the Situation of the Country, and the
Neighborhood of the Nations, who dwelt round about them; and the danger of
being infected by them, and the Circumstances they were in, did suggest;
commonly called the Civil or Judicial Law.

2. These three sorts of Commands, given by God to Moses, made up the Digests,
the Pandects, or the Body of the Jewish Law; and that is it that is commonly
understood by that known and frequent Expression in Scripture, especially the
New Testament, the Law; it is written in the Law, or the Law says, etc. even
the complex of all these Laws, given, at the Command of God, by Moses, to the
Jewish People; and as such they did particularly oblige the People of the Jews:
As any of them related to natural Justice and Equity, the Obligation reached
all Mankind, but not under the Notion of the Jewish Law: Considered therefore
as collected into one System, one mingled with another, they concerned the then
People of God, separated from the World; and to whom he vouch-safed his
Oracles, viz. the Posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Jews and Proselytes.

3. This Law did chiefly exact an external Obedience; and he that lived so,
that no Man could reprove, or tax him with Prevarication, or an open
Transgression, was counted Righteous. The Intention and secret Purposes, and
inward Love, or spiritual frame, though it was required too, yet it was not so
severely exacted; nor the omission so rigorously punished, as under the Gospel.
At least, this was the vulgar Error of the Jews, which overspread the whole
Nation for many Generations, that the inward frame, whatever accomplishment it
might be, was not absolutely necessary to Salvation, or to make the Service
pleasing to God: And so much even St. Paul confesses of himself, considered
before he was a Christian, Phil. iii.6. he looked upon himself as an eminent
Saint, because he was, touching the Law, blameless; none could say, black was
his Eye; and upon this account it was called a Law of Works, Romans iii.27.
because the Jews laid the stress of Religion upon the outward Performance; or,
because God, to encourage their Piety, was not wanting to reward even those,
who externally observed this Law, with temporal Remunerations; or because the
outward Work secured them against temporal Penalty. Thus much of the Law.

4. The Prophets, who were extraordinary Messengers, and Ministers, sent from
God, to explain the Law, the Moral especially; and to rectify the Errors of
the Priests and People, with respect to their outward Performances; to denounce
Gods temporal Judgments to the Guilty, and to represent to them the glorious
days of the Gospel, or Messiah; having delivered and preached to the People,
what God bid them say; writ down their Discourses and Visions, at least, the
sum of them, in Books, and Volumes; which, by Gods special Providence, have
been preserved unto this day, and are to be seen in the Bible. And these are
the Prophets here spoken of; the Cause by an usual Metonimy, being put for the
Effect; the Prophets and Writers, for the Books and Writings of the Prophets.
But not to insist any longer upon this Point, let us

II. Consider, What it was, that raised a Suspicion; or gave People occasion to
think, that Christ was come to destroy the Law and the Prophets; for so much is
implied in this saying, Think not.

1. Christ reproving the great Masters of Learning, and the chief Pillars of
the Law, as they were counted, even the Scribes and Pharisees; this raised a
jealousy in them. You have an account of these Reprehensions, not only in the
Chapter before us, but more particularly, Mat. xxiii. These Men being guilty of
gross Hypocrisy, and deluding the People with a show of Sanctity; and thereby
hindering them from solid Goodness. Christ, who came to reform the World,
thought himself obliged to chastise these proud and obstinate Men; who, being
unable to bear the lancing of their Wounds, finding their Sores touched to the
quick, set the People on, and persuaded them, that Christ came to destroy the
Law and the Prophets; and considering the Power and Authority they had with the
People, it was no hard matter to make them believe it; and the Argument looked
plausible, and weak Understandings were apt enough to infer, that he must needs
intend a destruction of the Law and Prophets, when he showed so little respect
to those, who sat in the Chair of Moses, and claimed an uninterrupted
Succession from the ancient Interpreters of the Law and Prophets.

2. Christ speaking against the received Traditions of the Jews, was another
cause. The Pharisees had mingled very strange Traditions with the Law of Moses;
these Traditions, which were nothing but humane Inventions, they pretended were
delivered to Moses by word of Mouth on Mount Sina, and so propagated by the
Elders to their Posterity. And these they made of equal necessity with the
written Law. What these Traditions were, you may see, Matt. xv.6. and Mark
vii.3. nor was it hard to prevail with a superstitious People, to believe what
they said, and giving Faith to these Traditions; and possessed with an Opinion,
that they were Divine; it was natural enough to suspect, that Christ, who in
his Discourses did frequently inveigh against these Traditions, as Additions
invented by the Scribes and Pharisees, and their Predecessors; and as things
unworthy of God, and dishonorable, and sinful; that Christ instead of
preserving, came to destroy the Law and the Prophets.

3. The same may be said of the false Glosses and Interpretations, the Scribes
and Pharisees put upon the Law of Moses, which Christ did accuse of Falsehood,
and Folly, and Impiety. This also gave great Offense. A Specimen of these false
Glosses, we have in this Sermon of Christ, and Matt. xxiii.16, 18. Whosoever
shall swear by the Temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the Gold
of the Temple, he etc.

To us that live and walk in the Light, these Glosses seem ridiculous; yet did
the People swallow them as Oracles, and received them with Faith Divine, as
well as the Law. So great a Power has Ignorance mingled with blind Zeal; just
as the Papists believe in gross, without chewing or considering, what the
Church believes, so they; and the one does not believe his Church more
infallible, than they did the Scribes and Pharisees: Hence it came to pass,
that Christ finding fault with these Glosses, they suspected Christ had
dangerous designs, no less than destroying the Law and the Prophets.

4. The same suspicion was also caused by Christ's endeavoring to reclaim the
People from resting upon outward Ceremonies, and Observances; and to lead them
to a more Rational, Internal, and Spiritual Worship. The People through
Instigation of the Pharisees, were so wedded to the Opinion, that the outward
Task, or outward Formalities of Religion, without the Internal, Spiritual
Frame, were either meritorious of Gods Favor, or in themselves pleasing to
God; that because Christ attempted to unsettle them in that Devotion, so
pleasing to the Flesh, and which they thought was the very intent of the Law of
Moses, they thought Christ came to destroy the Law of Moses and the Prophets.
But,

III. How does it appear, that Christ did not come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets?

1. He himself observed the Law, and acted according to the Precepts and
Instructions, and Injunctions of it; not only the Moral, but even the
Ceremonial and Judicial Law; for his Business and Employment was to fulfill all
Righteousness, Matt. iii.15. and upon that account, he is said to be made under
the Law, Gal. iv.4. nor could he have been a true High Priest without doing so,
Heb. vii.26. As to the Moral Law, he himself challenges the Jews to tell him,
wherein he acted against the least tittle of it, John viii.46. As to the
Ceremonial, he was circumcised the eighth day, observed the Sabbath, eat the
Passover, kept the Festivals of the Synagogue, etc. And as to the Judicial,
none could charge him with breaking of it; so far from it, that when the
Collectors came for Tribute Money, for the use of the Temple, rather than not
obey the Rulers, who had sent them, he would work a Miracle, and ordered Peter
to go to Sea, and take a Fish, where he should find a piece of Money, and give
it for Peter and himself, Matt. xvii.24.

2. Not only himself observed it, but he bid others observe it too, Matt.
xix.17. when the young Man asked him, What good thing he should do to inherit
Eternal Life? he directs him to the Commandments of the Law: Nay, in the
Ceremonial part of it, while the Economy of it lasted, he advises others to
observe it; and therefore when he had cleans'd a Leper, the next thing he
advises him to do, is to go and show himself unto the Priest, and to offer the
Offering which Moses had Commanded, Matt. viii.4.

3. Upon all occasions, he has commended the Law and the Prophets; and
asserted their Divine Original, and Consonancy with the Will of God, as Matt.
vii.12. Matt. xxii.40. Matt. xxiii.23. Add to all this,

4. He proved his own Doctrine out of the Law and the Prophets; even all that
he did. Luke xxiv.44. The Resurrection of the dead, Luke xx.37. His own
Resurrection, Luke xxiv.26, 27. His Commission to preach the Gospel, Luke
iv.21. The Truth of his Testimony, John viii.17, 18. His Divinity, John x.34,
35. And surely, he that observed the Law himself, exhorted others to observe
it; asserted the Divinity of it, and proved his own Doctrine out of the Law and
the Prophets, could not possibly be said to come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets. But,

IV. How did Christ fulfill the Law and the Prophets? I am not come to destroy,
but to fulfill.

1. By making it the Rule of his Actions, as I have hinted already; it is true,
he was charged sometimes with breaking the Sabbath, and therefore with
Violation of the Law; but all considerate Men may see, this was unjustly
imputed to him; for the Law, though it did forbid all servile Works upon the
Sabbath, yet it did not prohibit works of Necessity and Charity; and such was
his healing the Paralytick, and the Man whose Hand was withered, the Blind, and
the Woman, who had had a Spirit of Infirmity eighteen years, etc. and therefore
this could be no breach of the Law.

2. The Ceremonial Law particularly he fulfilled, not only by submitting to the
Rubric of it while he lived; but by making good what was intended by it. The
Ceremonial Law was only to bind the Jews while their Republic lasted, and
perhaps was imposed upon them by way of punishment, for the sin of the Golden
Calf. Besides, it pointed at the Spiritual Worship; the Messiah was to teach
his Followers, which accordingly he did: As it enjoined Sacrificing, so it
represented the Sacrifice, himself was to offer to God for the sins of Mankind,
for these very Jews to whom that Law was given; Their Circumcision represented
our Baptism, their Passover our Eucharist: He fulfilled all this, by answering
God's intent in it: So that he did not destroy this Law, but the nature of it
was such, that it could not but fall upon the account of its Imperfection. It
being all Shadow it ceased in course, when the Substance was come.

3. He fulfilled it; not only by rescuing it from the false Glosses their
Superstitious Teachers had put upon it, but by giving a more perfect Rule of
Life: That River was swallowed up in the Sea of Goodness that came along with
him. He that distills Wine into an excellent Spirit, or turns the courser Metal
into Gold, does indeed cause the meaner Material, to lose it self in a nobler;
but he does not properly destroy it, no more than a Drop of Water is
annihilated by mixing with a rich Cordial. What was good and excellent in the
Law of Moses he retained, and what he did retain he resin'd and sublimed, and
advanced into Rules more excellent, and therefore fulfilled it; the rather,
because the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did,
by the which we draw nigh to God, Heb. vii.19.

4. He fulfilled it, by confirming and establishing the principal design of it.
The end of the Law of Moses was to make Men good, for which reason it is called
Spiritual, Romans vii.14. for its design was to oblige Men, to love God with all
their hearts, and with all their minds, and with all their strength, Deuteronomy.
vi.5. and to love their Neighbors as themselves, Levit. xix.18. upon these two
Pillars the Law and the Prophets are said to hang, Matthew. xxii.37, 38, 39. But
whatever the intent of God was in that Law, we see very few among the Jews
answered that end and design, for want of sufficient helps, which the Messiah,
was to afford, and therefore this was a Schoolmaster to lead them to Christ,
and a motive to long after him.

The Law was clothed with Terrors and Threatenings, which caused the Spirit of
Fear; but the Messiah was to give them the Spirit of Adoption; and accordingly
Christ fulfilled it by giving larger supplies, whereby they might be able to
act according to the intent of it, such as, offering Pardon for sins past,
pouring out his Spirit upon men in a more plentiful manner, and setting Eternal
life before them, etc.

5. He fulfilled the Prophets particularly, by doing and suffering what the
Prophets said, He as the Messiah was to do and suffer, and that is the reason
why, when Christ did do or suffer any thing, it is so often added, that it
might be fulfilled, what was spoken by the Prophet.

In a word, There were Four things in the Law and in the Prophets, which Christ
fulfilled. 1. The Promises and Predictions. 2. The Precepts of the Moral Law by
interpreting them to better purposes. 3. The Precepts of the Ceremonial Law, by
performing what was prefigured by them. 4. The Sanctions of the Law, by
changing Temporal into Eternal punishments; and He fulfilled the Law and the
Prophets, by his Doctrine, Practice and Command.

Inferences.
I. See here the fate of sincere, upright, impartial and conscientious
Reformers. Christ came to reform the Jews, who were overrun with Error and
Superstition, and yet behold they give out, that he came to destroy the Law and
the Prophets. What Christ did was nothing, but reducing the Law and the
Prophets to their true, genuine and ancient luster and splendour, and setting
them in their own light; yet so ungrateful was that Generation, that they
nickname all this, destroying the Law and the Prophets; This came purely from
the Devil's Malice, who to put a stop to the progress of Goodness and of the
Kingdom of God, prompted his Instruments and Agents, to blacken the Noble
attempt with hard and dreadful Names, the most likely way to fright people from
submitting to it.

It was so in the beginning of our Reformation, when our Governors and
Spiritual Pastors began to look more narrowly into the Errors and Corruptions
of the Church of Rome, and resolved to rectify what was amiss, and contrary to
the Word of God: All the dreadful Imputations the Church of Rome could invent,
were made use of to hinder the glorious Work: The Reformers were traduced as
dealing with the Devil, their Doctrine was called New, and Strange, and
Antichristian, never heard of in the World before, nay, styled Blasphemy, and
Arianism, and Manicheism, and Mohometanism, and what not?

It is so still, even in private Reformations. Let a person break loose from
the Devil and his evil Companions, and by a secret impulse of God's Spirit
betake himself to a life Spiritual and conformable to the Rules of the Gospel,
presently Men's Tongues are let loose against him, especially if accidentally he
be guilty of some little Imprudencies: These are straitway aggravated, and his
whole design charged with Baseness and Hypocrisy, and he is either become a
Fanatic, or mad, or proud, or ill-natured, or bad Company, or something that
may render him odious.

But this must be no discouragement to a person that knows, that this has been
an old stratagem of the Devil, as old as the Fall of Adam, when he put false
Interpretations upon God's Prohibitions, and accused even God himself of Envy
and Ill Nature; What! Could God say indeed, ye shall not eat of this Tree? He
knows that that very moment ye eat of it ye will be wise, and knowing and
omniscient like himself; and therefore forbids you this delicate Food. He that
will be saved, must break through all these Cobwebs, and esteem the reproach of
Christ greater Riches, than all the Treasures of the World.

II. Though the end of the Law and the Gospel are one and the same, yet still
there are remarkable differences, which discover the excellency of the one
above the other. 1. The Author of the Law is God, speaking by Moses; the Author
of the Gospel is the same God, but speaking by his Son. 2. The Law of Moses
revealed much, the Gospel much more, especially with respect to the
Incarnation, and Life, and Death, and Resurrection of Christ Jesus. 3. The Law
was the shadow of good things to come, the Gospel the truth and substance of
them. 4. The Law caused Fear, the Gospel produces Love, and hence arise two
different Spirits, the Spirit of Fear, and that of Adoption. 5. The Law
promised Temporal Blessings, the Gospel Eternal; and though something of
Eternal Life was revealed to those under the Law, yet it was truly manifest to
those under the Gospel. 6. The Law was a Heavy burden, the Gospel an easy
Yoke. 7. The Law was our Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ; The Gospel is the
Mark the Law did aim and point at. 8. The Law reached the Jews only, the Gospel
all Mankind. 9. The Law, as to the ritual part, was Temporary; the Gospel
Eternal. 10. The Law had great Imperfections; the Gospel was a most perfect
Discipline. 11. The Law discovered the Will of God, and helped to make People
sensible of their Sins, and Transgressions of Gods Commands; the Gospel
Administers Grace to perform and do them. 12. The Law converted but few; the
Gospel made innumerable Proselytes: Yet after all, as I said, the Law and the
Gospel are the same in Substance; both contain the Will of God; they have the
same Author, press the same Duties; both Center in Christ; both are intended to
make Men Holy, and Spiritual, and ready unto good Works; only the Gospel sets
things in a greater Light, and ministers stronger Motives, and nobler
Encouragements; so that the Law is not contrary to the Gospel, nor does the
Gospel abolish, but Establish it. The Law, especially the Moral, contains the
same Duties in substance, the Gospel does; and therefore is still as obligatory
as the Gospel. Want of Faith made People careless of the Observance of it; and
want of Faith has the same unhappy Effects under the Gospel: And therefore the
Apostles Exhortation was very seasonable, and ought to be taken notice of by
every one of us, Heb. iv.1, 2. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left
us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it; for
unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them; but the word preached
did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it.

III. Christ came to fulfill the Law and the Prophets; so must we fulfill the Law
of the Gospel; for what he did here, was for our Example, as St. Chrysostom
notes. As he fulfilled the Law and the Prophets, so our business is to fulfill
that Gospel, which the Law and the Prophets pointed at: In a word, this is the
Law we are to live by. He that looks upon the Lives of Men, that profess the
Gospel, would be apt to think, that this Law was given only for Formalities
sake; so little of the Power of it is to be seen in their Conversation. If the
Behavior of Men, who call themselves Christians, were the measure of our
Judgment, we might conclude, the Gospel stands for a Cipher, which signifies
very little; or if it signifies any thing, declares rather Gods wishes, that
things were at a better pass, and that we were such Persons as that Law
describes, than Arguments of Gods peremptory Will, that we must, and shall be
obedient, or else be miserable, and buried in the Ruins of Eternity.

Thus things stand, and one would think, you believe that your Resoluteness not
to mind the Injunctions of the Gospel, is your Security against the Terrors of
its Threatenings: But could this lessen the Authority of the Law, or make an
Alteration in the Obligation; or could it prevail with the Lawgiver to give
over pressing Obedience, as a thing that is not to be effected, and in vain to
urge, something might be said for their refusal. But these are Dreams, and
feverish Fancies; and you will find the woeful and wilful mistake, when it is too
late. This Law you are bound to lay before you, as much as the Law of the Land;
nay, more than that, as it is of greater Concernment. In this you are to study
Day and Night; and by this Law your Thoughts, Desires, Speeches, Actions, and
your outward and inward Man are to be governed; let Men say of you what they
will; let them commend, or discommend you, slander or praise you, still you are
to remember, you have to deal with a Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to
destroy.

The Gospel gives ease it is true, and frees you from Burdens; but it is from
the load of the Ceremonial Law, not from the Obligations of the Natural, Moral,
and Eternal Law, of which the Gospel is the most perfect System. Therefore so
speak, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty; and
whatever your Business, Calling, Employment, and Condition be, remember there
is a time coming, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with all
his mighty Angels, to take Vengeance on those, who have not obeyed the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom be Glory, and Dominion, for Ever, and Ever.

SERMON XIX.
St. Matt. Chapter v. Ver. 18. For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth
pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled.


THose, who endeavor to prove from this place, that the present Hebrew
Character is the same with that which was in use in Christ's time; and
consequently, that no change of Letters has been introduced by Ezra, but that
the Character the Jews use at this day, is the same with that which Moses made
use of, when he writ the Law; and all because Christ here represents the Letter
Jot, as the least in all the Alphabet; and as a thing that had always been so:
I say, those who endeavor to prove so much from this place, do indeed, oblige
the curious World; but that is not my Business now. A Preacher's design is
different from the Critics, and our Work is not so much to make Men Learned,
as to make them Good. And though we are to inform their Understandings too, yet
what Light we give to that Intellectual Frame, it is with an intent to rectify
the Actions, to mend the outward and the inward Man; to destroy the body of
Sin; and to overthrow the Power and Dominion of natural Corruption.

But this on the by; that which will be more Edifying to you, will be to put
you in mind, that Christ, in the preceding Verse, had removed, and baffled a
grand Objection, which was in those days made against his charitable Attempts
to reform the World. The Jews were mighty Admirers of the Law of Moses, and the
Prophets; yet so brutish were they grown, that never any thing was more abused,
than they had the Law and the Prophets; which Abuses, when Christ, as became
him, went about to rectify, and reform, they suspected no less, than that he
was going to reverse the Law and the Prophets, (so dangerous, so sottish a
thing is Prejudice) This Objection, I say, Christ had answered in the preceding
Verse; and I have already treated largely of that Controversy. What our great
Master has begun, he prosecutes in the Verse before us, asserting the
Divinity, and Perpetuity of the Law and Prophets; For verily I say unto you,
till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from
the Law, till all be fulfilled.

Though in saying so, he does not mention the Prophets; yet in naming the Law,
he names, and aims at them too, there being nothing more common in the New
Testament, than by the Law, to understand the whole System of the Jewish
Religion; or all the Books of the Old Testament; the Writings both of Moses,
and the Prophets, which succeeded him; partly because the Law is the principal
part of that Sacred Volume; partly because all that the Prophets have said,
even all the remarkable things, they speak of, are vertually contained in the
Law of Moses.

I might divide the Words into a Preface, or Preamble; Verily I say unto you;
and the Maxim or Truth Christ delivers; Till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot,
etc. But this I conceive needless; you will understand the words as well, and
better too, I am sure to your greater Edification, if I resolve them into
certain Propositions, which are plainly hinted in the Text.

I. The whole Economy of the Gospel lies hid in the Law, and in the Prophets.

II. There is nothing in the Old Testament, relating to the Affairs of the
Gospel, or the Time of the Messiah, but has been, and shall certainly be
fulfilled to the least tittle of it.

III. The Scriptures, or the Word of God, will last to the Worlds end.

IV. Heaven and Earth shall certainly pass away.

V. Gods Veracity is unchangable, and sooner shall Heaven and Earth perish,
than what God has said in his Word, shall fail.

I begin with the first;

1. The whole Economy of the Gospel lies hid in the Law, and the Prophets; for
Christ was here delivering the Law of the Gospel. To assure the Jews, that he
came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, he tells, that his Doctrine and
Discipline, was nothing but a fulfilling of the Law, and the Prophets; and if
so, then certainly the whole must be contained in the Law, and in the Prophets.
This the Apostle is so sure of, that he does not only tell us, that Christ is
the end of the Law, Romans x.4. but peremptorily affirms, that the Gospel was
preached to the Israelites in the Wilderness, the time when God gave the Law,
Heb. iv.

2. And to this purpose he tells us, 1 Cor. x.1, 2, 3, 4. Moreover Brethren, I
would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under the
Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all baptized into Moses, i. e.
into the Faith of Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea; and did all eat the same
spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual Drink, for they drank of
that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ: And
particularly of Moses, who was the glorious Instrument by whom God gave the
Law; we read, that he esteemed the Reproach of Christ, greater Riches, than all
the Treasures of Egypt, Heb. xi.26. which he could not have done, if he had
been a Stranger to the Knowledge of the Mystery of Christ; no doubt he had it,
for so we read, Joh. v.46. If ye had believed Moses, you would also have
believed me, for he wrote of me; but if you believe not his Writings, how shall
you believe my Words? So that it may be truly said, as it is, Heb. xiii.8.
Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; only in the Old Testament he
was veiled, in the New that Veil is taken away; there a Cloud covered him, here
he appears in his Meridian Brightness; there the Mount on which he was seen was
encompassed with Mists and Darkness. Here he is seen on Mount Tabor
transfigured, and his Garments shining. The difference betwixt the Saints of
the Old Testament, and those of the New, is not, that the latter believed in
Christ, the former did not; but as we believe in Christ, who is to come, so
they did in Christ, who was to come; and they had reason, for the Virtue of his
Sufferings and Merits was retroactive; and like a mighty Stream, spread it self
backward and forward; and like the Mystical Creatures, Rev. iv.6. were full of
Eyes before and behind. And could we unfold all the Riddles of the Ceremonial
Law, we should see the Gospel Mysteries lie very orderly in those Shells; and
discover the admirable Foetus, even all its Parts, and Members, and Lineaments
in those Membranes.

And therefore we have no new Religion, but a Religion, as old as Paradise; the
same Religion that Adam, and Abel, and Enoch, and Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and Moses, etc. professed: And we believe that through the Grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they; as it is said, Acts xv.11.
And we say no other things than those which the Prophets and Moses did say
should come, that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead; and should show Light unto the People, and unto the
Gentiles, Act. xxvi.22, 23.

They worshipped one Great, Eternal, Independent, and All-sufficient Being,
Creator of Heaven and Earth, Neh. ix.6. And so do we. They believed, there was
a wise, overruling Providence, that managed, and governed, and disposed all
for the good of Gods Children, Psalm. cxlvi.7, 8. And so do we. They believed,
there was a Necessity for a Savior, and Mediator, betwixt God and Man, to bear
our Sins, and to expiate our Transgressions, Isai. 53.4, 5, 6. And so do we.
They believed there was a future Judgment, and that the dead would certainly
rise again, and be obliged to give an Account of all their Actions, Eccles.
xii.14. Dan. xii.2. And so do we. They worshipped God without Images, and
external Representations, (I speak of the true Israelites, not of those, who
corrupted themselves with Idolatry.) Exodus xx.14. And so do we. In their
Prayers they went directly to God, without seeking to Saints, or Angels, to
mediate for them, Psalm. l.15. And so do we. They believed that confessing our
Sins to God, and forsaking them, is the readiest way to get Mercy and Pardon,
Prove. xxviii.13. And so do we. Their public Prayers were in a Tongue known,
and understood by the People, Ezr. viii.6. And so are ours. That People were
not only permitted, but commanded to read the Scriptures diligently, Deuteronomy.
vi.7, 8. And so are we. They had two Sacraments; and so have we. Their
Circumcision admitted them into the Church, and made them visible Members of
it, Genesis xvii.10. So does our Baptism. In their Passover, by eating of a
roasted Lamb, they remembered their deliverance from Egypt, and the Angels
passing over their Houses, to save them from Destruction; and in eating, they
said of the roasted Lamb, This is the Passover, Exodus xii.27. So in our
Eucharist, by feeding on Bread and Wine, we remember the great deliverance of
Mankind, from the Power of the Devil, by Christ Jesus; and of the Bread we eat,
we say, This is the Body of Christ. They believed, that without a practical
Love to God, and unfeigned Charity to our Neighbor, none could please God,
Deuteronomy. vi.5. Lev. xix.18. And so do we. They believed nothing was necessary to
Salvation, but what God had clearly revealed to be so, Deuteronomy. xii.32. And so do
we.

And therefore those who accuse our Religion of Novelty, are either blinded
with Prejudice, or besotted with stupid Ignorance. There never was but one, and
there is but one, and there never shall be but one true Religion in the World;
and the Religion which Christ and his Apostles, and Moses and the Prophets
agree in, is that true Religion: And the same may be said of the different
Religions among Christians, that, which all or most of the different Christian
Churches do agree in, is most likely to be the true Religion, seeing that,
which all or most of them do agree in, is most agreeable to the Doctrine of the
Law, and of the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles.

That Christ and his Apostles do exactly agree with Moses and the Prophets;
besides, what has been alleged already, is evident also from this,

II. That there is nothing in the Old Testament relating to the affairs of the
Gospel, or the time of the Messiah, but has been, and shall certainly be
fulfilled to the least tittle of it.

Which is the second Proposition I am come to speak to. The fulfilling Christ
speaks of, having respect to the Gospel Doctrine he was going to deliver, the
Observation must needs be the result of what Christ says here. Jot is a Hebrew
Letter, answering to our i, and is the very least of all the Letters of the
Hebrew Alphabet, and looks like a Comma, or Point, or Tittle. What Gulielmus
Postellus says, that this Letter has three Points in one, and that
consequently it is an Emblem of the Trinity in Unity, and of the Unity in
Trinity, as being a matter of Fancy, I lay no stress upon. But what Christ
says here of the Letter jot is purely proverbial, to show, that as the jot in
the Alphabet is the least Letter, so there is nothing so minute or little in
the Law or Prophets, which relate to Christ and the Gospel, but it is and shall
certainly be fulfilled and accomplished.

1. If we examine the things that have been fulfilled already, we cannot but
admire the exactness of the completion. Let Us take a view of some Instances.

The Messiah was to be the Son of a Woman that had known no Man, the Son of a
Virgin, Isai. vii.14. Accordingly Christ Jesus was so, Matthew. i.22, 23. He was
to break the Devil's Power, according to Genesis iii.15. Accordingly Christ Jesus
did so, for by death he destroyed him that had the power of Death, Hebr. xi.14.
He was to appear in the World, when the Scepter was departed from Judah, Genesis
xlix.10. And Christ Jesus did so, Matthew. ii.1. He was to be God as well as Man,
Isai. ix.6. Accordingly Christ Jesus was so, Romans i.3, 4. He was to be a
Priest, Ps. cx.4. Christ Jesus was so, Heb. vi.20. He was to be a Prophet,
according to Deuteronomy. xviii.18. Christ Jesus was so, Joh. iv.19. He was to be a
King, Psalm. xi.6. Christ Jesus was so, Joh. xviii.37. He was to suffer, and to
make his Soul an offering to God for the Sins of the World, Isai. liii.10.
Christ Jesus did so, Heb. ix.14. The Gentiles were to be called by him, and
became part of his Flock and People, Isai. lx.3. Accordingly they were
miraculously converted by Christ Jesus, and became Votaries of the Gospel, Acts
xv.14. The Messiah was to rise again, and to spread the knowledge of the true
God all the World over, Isai. liii.9. Accordingly the Gospel was preached to
every Creature that is under Heaven, Gal. i.23. Even the minute circumstances
of Christ's Sufferings and Death, and Burial and Resurrection, as they were
foretold in the Old Testament, so they were fulfilled in the New; such as his
drinking Gall and Vinegar; their parting his Garments, and casting Lots upon
his Vesture; his being crucified with Thieves and Malefactors; the care that
was taken, that not a Bone of him should be broken; his lying in a rich Man's
Grave, etc. All these, and a thousand things of this nature, spoken of
concerning the Gospel times, in the Law and in the Prophets, were most
punctually fulfilled, and particularly the Types of the Ceremonial Law, which
were so many prefigurations, and obscure hints and characters of the Glory,
which should after be revealed in the Gospel.

2. By what has been fulfilled, we may very safely and rationally infer, That
the rest of the things which have not yet been, will certainly be fulfilled in
their due time: Such are the lofty Prophecies of the great Unity of the Church
of Christ, Isai. ii.4. and xi.6. the Spiritual, yet visible splendor and
largness of it, Isai. lx.19. of the Temple which Ezekiel spoke of, Chap. xl,
xli, xlii, etc. of the Conversion of the Jews, Ezekiel. xxxvii.26, 27. of
Antichrist, and the state of Christ's Church under him, and the consequences of
it in Daniel, and in other places, etc. If such abundance of things in the Law
have been already fulfilled, no doubt the rest will all be fulfilled.

And this shows, That both the Old and the New Testament, and the Books and
Writings thereof, are of God: For as the New Testament contains the things that
are fulfilled, and the Old, the things that were to be fulfilled, so it must
necessarily follow, that he that could foretell such things, and after he had
foretold them so many hundred years before, was able to fulfill them could be
nothing, but God himself, it being impossible for any Creature either to
foretell, or fulfill things so abstruse and out of the common reach of the wisest
part of Mankind.

And since the Scriptures are of God, with what Reverence ought we to entertain
them, with what Seriousness to read them, with what Attention to peruse them,
and with what Strictness to obey them! When the Letters and Messages of
Sovereign Princes are so venerable and precious with us, how dear ought the
Oracles and Messages of God to our Souls, be to us! surely, dearer than
thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm. cxix.72, 127. And one great thing that
ought to make them so dear to us is this, That they will last till Heaven and
Earth pass. Which brings in the

III d Proposition, That the Scriptures, and the Word of God will last to the
Worlds end, even till Heaven and Earth do pass away, for till then, one jot or
one tittle of the Law shall not pass away. Indeed, when the World is at an end,
there will be no need of Scripture; for the Scriptures are given to direct Men
here on Earth, how to obtain Eternal happiness; and while Mankind, and
Christians particularly, abide in this Valley of Tears, the Scriptures are
profitable for Correction, for Reproof, for Doctrine, that the Man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work; and upon this account,
they are sufficient to make Men wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy iii.15, 16. But
when this lower World, and the Inhabitants of it shall be removed or taken
away, there will be no Inhabitants to be instructed, at least we have no
Revelation that there will be any, and consequently the means of Instruction
will be insignificant.

If we take a view of the great Day of Judgment, and the People that will then
appear before the Judge, we find they either will be good or bad, either Sheep
or Goats; the Sheep, as we are told by him, who must be the Judge, Matthew.
xxv.46. will enter into Life everlasting, where they shall see darkly no more,
no more through a Glass, and therefore not through the Glass of Scripture, as
here they do, but face to face: They will know all that is in the Scripture,
and infinitely more. The Scriptures then will be of no use to them, they will
be taught immediately of God, and behold all things in their highest
perfection. The Divine Essence and Glory will enlighten them, and teach them,
and instruct them, and make them glad for ever and ever. The Scripture, as it
is said of the Law, is our Schoolmaster to lead us to Eternal glory. When we
are got to our Journeys end we have no need of this Guide, of these
Leading-strings, or of that Schoolmaster. The Scriptures are our staff and our
comfort in the House of our Pilgrimate, Psalm. cxix.54. when that Pilgrimage
cease, the Staff will be useless, and we shall be Travelers no more, but
inhabit and fix there, where we shall go out no more, Rev. iii.12.

Who the Goats are, that stand at the left hand of Christ, and where they will
be, and whither they will be sent, and what will become of them we all know;
for they shall go into Everlasting punishment, says our Savior, Matthew.
xxv.46. Nor will these have any need of Scripture, to teach, to instruct, to
exhort, to reprove and to direct them, how to save themselves; for they will be
cast into a Prison, from whence there is no going out, till they have paid the
uttermost Farthing. In that day God will have another way to teach them, even
by Torments and Miseries, and sad experiences. They will be past Repentance and
Obedience, and all possibility of Conversion, and will be determined to evil.

So that the Scriptures are intended only as our Teachers, while this World
lasts, and while the Sun and Moon continue their courses, God will preserve
this precious Book. He that preserved it so many hundred years already in
despite of Fire and Flames, and the rage of Enemies and Persecutors, who would
feign have banished, abolished and exterminated it out of the World: And that
very Preservation shows, He will continue these Instructions to Mankind till
the Heavens be no more, and the Earth does melt away.

How great is God's care of our Souls, who from age to age preserves this
Treasure to us? Neither Wars nor Exiles, neither Plague, nor Sword, nor Famine,
nor all the changes, mutations and revolutions in the World, have been able to
destroy this Treasure. Therefore while we are here, and have the use of it, let
us consult it upon all occasions; let us run to this Shop for Medicines and
Remedies, when our Souls are sick, and when our outward Man is in trouble;
whatever state we are in, whether Prosperity or Adversity be our lot, this
Scripture will direct us how to behave our selves, and how to order our
Conversation. Let Us cheerfully make it a Lanthorn to our feet and a Light to
our paths, and we cannot go amiss; we cannot stumble, we cannot walk in
darkness, and we shall be able to stand when Heaven and Earth do pass away;
which leads me to the Fourth Proposition:

IV. Heaven and Earth will certainly pass away. This is plainly supposed here,
in this saying, Till Heaven and Earth pass: And the manner how they will pass
away St. Peter has left upon Record, 2 Pet. iii.7. But the Heaven and the
Earth, which are now by the same Word, are kept in store, reserved unto fire
against the day of Judgment; and more fully, ver. 10. But the day of the Lord
will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth
also, and the works that are therein, will be burnt up. The same he repeats
ver. 12. which is conformable to what the Stoics, either from the light of
Nature, or from Tradition gathered would be; and to what Josephus says of
Adam, That he prophesied, the World should be destroyed first by Water, and
afterward by Fire.

But then, as it is ver. 11. of the aforesaid Chapter, seeing that all these
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought you to be in all Holy
Conversation and Godliness? Whether the Christians in St. Peter's time
believed, that the day of Judgment was at hand, and that it should be upon them
in that Age, is not my business to enquire Now. That which makes the
Exhortation seasonable at all times, even at this day, is the uncertainty of
the time of Christ's coming to Judgment; and whether this day of Judgment may
come in this Age, or in the next, as it is probable it is not far off,
especially if the old saying of R. Hillel be true, That the World shall
continue two Thousand Years before the Law, two Thousand under the Law, and two
thousand under the Messiah; but as I said, whether it will be this year, or
next, is not material; but this I am sure of, that the day of our death is the
most uncertain thing in the World; and as Death finds us, so will the Great
day. And since the day of our death is so uncertain, the Inference drawn from
the uncertainty of the day of Judgment, will also fit the uncertainty of the
day of our death.

It Is a marvelous thing, how Men delay their Holy Conversation, and Godliness,
even till Death comes, and surprises them. I know this is a very common Theme,
but how can we forbear to speak of it, when we see, that Men instead of
mending, run deeper and deeper into the Gulf, young, and old.

Death comes! Lord! How unprepared does it find most Men! How few can welcome
it! How few can, with Simeon, rejoice at its coming! I know Pain, and extremity
of Misery, makes many Men long for it, but that alone is no rational ground,
while that Holy Conversation and Godliness is wanting. We all dread an
unprepared death, and we pray against it! We think sometimes in a serious fit,
how sad it would be with us, if it should be our case: And yet how few arm
themselves against its Terrors, and dreadful Consequences? The Day, the Hour,
is very uncertain; and we see Men are caught and snatched away before they are
aware, yet we take no warning; still we wait for a convenient Season, for a
fair Opportunity; and when we have got in the World what we would have, when we
have settled our Affairs on such a Basis or Foundation once; and when our
Condition is better, and our Circumstances more favorable, then we'll set
about that seriousness which becomes Candidates of Eternity. God sees our
Folly, and pities us; for he sees how we fool our selves. He calls, and
entreats us to redeem the time. O that we were wise, and would consider our
latter End! Heaven and Earth must pass away, and we must pass away; therefore
this I say, Brethren, nay, the Apostle says so, 1 Cor. vii.19. It remains, that
they that have Wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though
they wept not; and those that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they
that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not
abusing it; for the fashion of this World passes away.

Indeed, that which ought to make us reflect very seriously on all this, is,
that the Word of God is unchangable; which calls me to the last Proposition:

V. Sooner shall Heaven and Earth perish, than the least tittle of Gods Word
shall fail. In this Sense the Words and Expressions used in the Text, are
sometimes taken; so that here is a double Asseveration, which makes the Truth
Christ delivers here, the weightier. 1. Verily I say unto you. In the Original
it is Amen, which the Jewish Interpreters of the Old Testament affirm to be an
Oath, and that is a very immutable thing. 2. Till Heaven and Earth pass, i. e.
Sooner shall these be hurled into their former Chaos, and Confusion, than the
least tittle of his word shall prove false. And if so, then the Threatenings and
Promises of the Gospel, and of the Law of God, will undoubtedly be fulfilled.

And I beseech you Beloved Hearers! Consider what the Veracity of Gods
Threatenings and Promises does import. If the Promises of the Gospel will
certainly be fulfilled, why cannot the wonderful Rewards promised, prevail with
you to fulfill the Conditions, upon which those Rewards are promised? God
promises Eternal Life upon patient continuance in Well-doing; the Kingdom of
Heaven upon striving against Sin, and conquering Temptations; and a Crown of
Glory to those who keep under their Bodies, and bring their sensual Desires
into Subjection: Upon these Terms, and no other, the great Felicity is
promised. Will any of you after all these Protestations of God, promise himself
this Happiness upon other Terms and Conditions: What then becomes of Gods
Veracity? If God be true to his Word, then those who come not up to these
Terms, cannot enjoy the Bliss spoken of; If God saves Men upon other Terms, he
cannot be true to his Word, and then how can he be God? To these Absurdities
Men reduce themselves, when they promise themselves Heaven without any regard
to the Conditions upon which God does promise it. It Is God that must bestow it,
the same God that has promised it; and since he will bestow it only upon these
Terms, Why Christians, why will ye feed your hopes with Air, and Wind, and
Vanities? Is it possible that God will prove false? Is it possible that he will
depart from his Word? I am sure you cannot think so, if you will consider it in
cool Blood? And shall the World, and your present Gain and Profit, blind you
into Ruin?

The same must be said of the Threatenings of the Gospel. Take but a serious
View of them: God protests, for you believe the Scripture to be the Word of
God, That no unrighteous Person shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Neither
Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Covetous, nor Extortioners, nor Drunkards, nor
Lascivious, nor Quarrelsom, nor Envious, nor Malicious Persons, nor Men that
mind Earthly Things altogether, shall enter into that Glory. The Scripture is
full of these Protestations. Is there any of you here, that is guilty of any of
these Sins, and yet do ye hope to be happy? It Is true, you will say none can be
so, that continues in these Sins; but I hope I shall leave them all before I
die. But why Man? Do thou know when thou shall die? Have not Thousands and
Thousands hoped so, and yet been mistaken? Away with these deluding hopes.
There is Death in the Pot. There is Ruin and Destruction, and Plague and Hell,
and Misery in these Fancies, and Imaginations. God must be true to his Word;
and it is not all your Cries at last, Lord, Lord open to us, that will help you,
or reverse your doom. Heaven and Earth shall sooner Perish, the Sun shall
sooner fall from his Orb, and all the Stars of Heaven drop out of their
Sockets, sooner than God will prove a Liar. Let the Truth of the living God
prevail with you, and be persuaded to act like reasonable Creatures. Nothing
proclaims your unreasonableness more, than to think God will save you, whether
you act according to his Word or no. Therefore whatever the World, or your
Flesh, and Appetite, may suggest, that God will not be so severe as he has
said he will; remember that he who has conquered Death and Hell, has
protested, Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. Amen.

SERMON XX.
St. Matthew. Chapter v. Ver. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach them, shall be called great
in the Kingdom of Heaven.


THere is nothing more agreeable to Christianity, than Liberty; and yet there
is nothing more contrary to it. If by Liberty be meant a freedom from all
sinful Courses, from the Power of Corruption, from the Bondage of the Devil;
and after all, from those tedious external Washings, Purifications, Sacrifices,
and distinctions of Meats, and Drinks, etc. so usual, so famous, so strictly
required of the Jews under the Mosaic Law; to this Liberty Christianity is a
Friend, a Patron, and Defender; and this is of the very Essence of our
Religion. But if by Liberty be understood Licentiousness; and that which should
be a modest Virgin, is drawn and represented in the looser habit of a Strumpet;
and Men fancy they are, and cannot be free, except they have Elbow-room in Sin,
and may gratify their Senses, and carnal Desires as they please: If this be
the notion of Liberty, Christianity is a professed Enemy to it, and declares an
Eternal War against it. It is a very wilful and notorious mistake, to think
Christ came to free us from Obedience; or that he descended from Heaven, to
loose us from the Bonds of our Duty; so far from it, that he came to require it
upon greater Motives; and enjoined it with greater Sanctions; pressed
Observance not only of the greater, but lesser Commands; and in case of
failure, declared that we shall find we have a God to deal with, who will not
be mocked; for so it is in the Text, Whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the
least, etc.

To give you the sense of these words.

1. By the Commandments here spoken of, are meant the Commands and Precepts
delivered and laid down by Christ in this Sermon on the Mount, both those that
go before the Text, and those that follow after it; and therefore it is
emphatically said, these Commandments, i. e. These I am now delivering to you,
and which lie so much out of the common road of Practice, that few believe they
are concerned in them.

2. They are called little Commandments, and the least, not that any Command
of God in Scripture is so in it self, or in the nature of a Trifle; but because
they were so in the Opinion of the Scribes and Pharisees, and the People of
that Age; who either called the Commandments of the Ceremonial Law, the
greatest; and those of the Moral, the least; or if they allowed the Title of
great Commands to any part of the Moral Law, it was to such Commands as forbid
the more scandalous, and barbarous Sins. i. e. Thou shall do no Murder. This
they called a great Commandment; but thou shall not be angry with thy Brother
without Cause, nor revile him, nor abuse him, nor give him ill Names, and
opprobrious Language, etc. These they called little, and the least Commands;
Counsels rather than Commands; the Omission of which they thought would be no
way prejudicial to the Eternal Welfare of their Souls.

3. To break these little or least Commandments, and to teach Men so, was the
Sin of the Pharisees; who not only neglected these Commands of God themselves,
but taught others too, not to discompose themselves about the neglect of them,
as long as they kept close to the bigger Commands, such as Sacrificing,
Circumcision, frequenting the Passover, putting on their Phylacteries, etc. or
such as enjoined forbearance of the Overt Acts of some notorious Sins,
Adultery, Fornication, Perjury, Stealing, etc. And to break these Commandments
is to slight them, to disregard them, to act contrary to them, and wilfully to
do what they forbid, or wilfully to omit what they do enjoin.

4. To be called, or to be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; though this
Phrase, Matthew. xi.11. is used to describe a Person that is an Infant, a Babe, a
Novice, a young beginner in Christ's Religion, who is sensible, and knows
indeed, that Christ's Kingdom is a spiritual Kingdom, but knows it in a very
low degree; and is therefore said to be greater in some respect, than St. John
the Baptist, who from the vulgar Error of his Country, seemed to cherish some
relics of that Opinion, that the Messiah was to appear with External Pomp and
marks of Authority. But though this be the meaning of that Phrase there, yet
what is a Comparison in that Place, is a Threatening here; and therefore
requires another Sense: And it being spoken with Allusion to breaking these
least Commandments, and by way of Retaliation, that as they sinned in that
which was the least, so they should be rewarded with being the least in the
last day; it must necessarily be as much, as being excluded from the Kingdom of
Heaven: Whether by the Kingdom of Heaven we understand the Kingdom of Grace, or
the Kingdom of Glory. And though the Church be sometimes called the Kingdom of
Heaven, as Matthew. xiii. Yet even in this Sense the Threatening will appear to be
dismal enough; for the meaning will be, that such a one as breaks these least
Commandments, will be, can be no true, no living Member of the Church of
Christ; and if so, he can be no Heir of the Kingdom of Glory. And hence it is,
that St. Chrysostom renders the word least, by no body, or nothing, i. e. He
shall be nothing in the Kingdom of Heaven; and will be a very despicable,
contemptible Creature, when Christ shall come in Glory.

5. And from hence it will be easy to guess, what must be the import of the
Promise that is added here: But whosoever shall do and teach them, the same
shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. i. e. He that shall make
Conscience of these least Commandments, and (though the World count them
little and inconsiderable, and looks upon them as things of no moment,) shall
have and bear an equal respect to these, the same he does to those Commands
which are acknowledged to be greatest; and shall teach Men to do so, not only
in his Discourses and Colloquies, but in his Practice and Example, he shall be
truly great, greater than this World can make him; greater than the greatest
here on Earth; even great, and high, and honorable in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Having thus acquainted you with the Sense, I must do what I can to enforce
this great and weighty Truth; and this I cannot do better, than by making the
following Addresses to your Souls.

1. This Text overthrows and breaks the neck of that loose Principle, that in
order to Salvation, it is sufficient to avoid only gross, notorious, scandalous
Sins. How can it be sufficient, when Christ protests here, Whosoever shall
break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

It Is a mavelous thing to see what Schemes of Divinity Men erect to
themselves, that they may with greater Security, and Satisfaction, wallow in
the Mire; and please the World and the Flesh. I know not whether the Popish
distinction of Sins into Mortal and Venial, has contributed to this Error; but
sure I am, that in abundance of things, which are not very agreeable to the
Rule of the Gospel, which yet, Custom and Education, and the humor of the Age,
has made either necessary or convenient, the Expedient Men find out, is this,
that they are trivial, little, inconsiderable Faults, whereby the dreadfulness
of them soon disappears; and this done, they practice and commit them without
Terror, or Regret, or Concernment; and their Consciences do not at all boggle
at them; especially while the fair Weather of their Health, and Pleasure, and
Ease, and Strength, and Liberty, and Plenty, lasts: And of this Nature are most
of the things Christ takes notice of, in the Discourse succeeding the Text; and
whereof we shall have occasion to treat more largely in the sequel: Such as
secret Envy, Hatred, Grudges, Malice in our Heart against our Neighbor;
abusive Language, calling him by ill Names, mincing of Oaths, needless
Asseverations, lascivious Thoughts, Desires, Words, Expressions, Passions,
Affections, Touches, Kisses, Looks, Glances, keeping ill Company, and complying
with their Follies; neglect of several Acts of Charity, and self-denials;
sinister Ends and Intentions in religious Actions, mistrust of Gods Providence,
Discontentedness, loving the World better than God, etc.

That these are Sins, is evident, because they are forbid; yet you cannot but
know how they are overlooked, as inconsiderable Failings; nor do the generality
think they lose their Reputation, and Character of good Men, by not watching
against them, or by suffering them to go and come as there is occasion. While
they commit no Sins that send them to Goals, and Prisons, or bring them to the
Gallows; or while they keep free from Sins which the Hectors and Deboshees of
the Age do wallow in, they take themselves to be tolerable Saints; and look
upon the other Deformities of their Souls, as things of no moment; and while
they are guilty of no Crimes that make them Infamous, and can charge themselves
with nothing that is very bloody, they have no melancholy Thoughts about the
Garment spotted by the Flesh; and may be, make matter of Sport and Laughter of
that which has cost considerate Men many Tears, and mournful Accents.

There is no doubt, but there are greater and lesser Sins, and some have
greater Malice in them, and are attended with greater bruitishness and
stupidity; with higher degrees of boldness and insolence, and are more
immediately levelled against the Nature of God than others: But though in this
respect some are greater, some lesser, yet if we consider the tremendous God,
who is offended by that which we call a little Sin, it will appear in other
Colors; for either it is forbid, or it is not; if it be not forbid, it must be
either lawful, or indifferent; if it be forbid, it is forbid as much as
Adultery or Blasphemy. And can any Sin be little, that is an Affront to a Great
and Infinite Majesty? Can that be little, which is injurious to Gods Power,
makes War with his Mercy and Goodness, abuses his Patience, diminishes his
Glory, and wrongs his Perfection and Holiness? Can that be little, which
disfigures the noblest Workmanship of God, our immortal Souls; fills them as it
were with Scabs, and fullies their Beauty and Splendour? Can that be little,
which manifestly hinders our progress in a spiritual Life, stops the Stream and
Current of the Divine Grace and Influence, and disposes to Damnation?

Could we play the fool, as they do in the Church of Rome, and tell you, that
these lesser Sins may be purged away by a little Holy Water; by the Bishops
Blessing, by smiting the Breast, and the bare saying of a Pater noster, by a
general Confession, etc. You might think then, there is no great matter in
them; but if they require a serious Repentance and Reformation as well as other
Sins, who can make light of them? Were there nothing in them, but that they
dispose the Soul to greater Sins, and to a loose, careless sort of Religion,
this would be discouragement enough; for all the World knows, that no Man grows
perfectly wicked on a sudden, but by degrees they go on to more dareing
Impieties: Know ye not that a little Leaven, leavens the whole lump? Says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. v.6. And Behold how great a matter a little Fire kindles, says
St. James, Chap. III.5. And does not Experience tell us, (to use the words of a
certain Divine) how an unchaste Thought assented to, soon welcomes Delight;
Delight, Consent; Consent, Action; Action, Custom; Custom, Habit; Habit,
Perseverance; Perseverance, an obduracy of Heart; which (without God's
miraculous Providence interposes) leads to final Impenitence.

A Man may avoid scandalous, great, and clamorous Sins, such as Murder,
Adultery, Cursing, Blasphemy, Theft, Extortion, Profaneness; etc. and yet all
this while have not one grain of true Love to God; for all this he may do
merely out of regard to his Ease, and temporal Interest; and if you consider
what St. Paul protests, that if any Man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be
Anathema, Maranatha, Cursed, and for ever Cursed, 1 Cor. xvi.22. What
satisfaction can that Man enjoy within, that notwithstanding his shunning some
scandalous Sins, has not any tolerable assurance, that he loves God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ? If you love him, you must keep his Commandments; and if Love
obliges you to keep one, why not another? Do not they all come from the same
Lawgiver? Are not they all delivered with the same Seriousness, and by the
same Authority? Who makes them to differ? Who told you, you may observe one,
and not another? Where are the distinguishing Marks, to discern, which is to be
practiced, and which is not? Does not the same Spirit run through all? In a
word, if you love God to any purpose, you will not only dread crying Sins, but
even those which looser Men make no great matter of; and it is certain, that
Soul is not yet truly converted, that does not seriously watch against evil
Thoughts, Desires, Passions, Affections, etc. (for these are usually counted
lesser Sins,) as well as against greater Abominations. And therefore,

You may easily perceive, that we are not to break a Command of our dear Lord
and Master, because it seems little, or because the World esteems it so. What
has the World to do with my Religion? Does God govern himself by the Verdict
of the World, and sensual Men? What if Men, who have no right Apprehensions of
God, make nothing of corrupt Communications, must I be guided by their Example?
Can any Commandment, that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, be termed little?
Might not we as well say, that God spoke in jest? If God commands me to follow
Righteousness, Faith, Charity, and Peace, with all them that call on him out of
a pure Heart, and to flee youthful Lusts, shall I neglect this Command, because
the World makes a pish of it? Has the Great God of Heaven and Earth thought
fit to send his Son into the World to tell me, that private Revenge is
unlawful; and conforming to the World in their Vanities, and Fooleries, and
Revellings, and Extravagancies, is displeasing to him; and my covetous Thoughts
and Desires are offensive to his Holiness, and have not I all the reason in the
World to stand in awe of his Command, though a thousand wicked Men say, it is
either needless, or impracticable? How can a Divine Command be little, that
concerns Men's Immortal Souls? Is there any thing greater in this World, than
the good and welfare of their precious Souls? Does God tell me such a Sin
(though it seems never so small in the Eyes of the World) will help to kill my
Soul, and is Ingratitude to him, in whom I live, and move, and have my Being;
and shall I venture upon it? God forbid. Yea, let God be True, but every Man a
Liar; as it is written, that thou might be justified in thy saying, and be
clear when thou judge, Romans iii.4.

II. Let none of you wonder at Christ's peremptory Determination here,
Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so,
he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. You Will say, What! break
but one of these Commandments, and one of the least, and be damned! Where then
is the Grace of the Gospel! What becomes then of the vast. Treasures of Mercy,
which came in with Jesus Christ? At this rate our Yoke is heavier than that of
the Jews. Marvel not my Brethren, the greater the Grace is, the greater will be
the Account; the greater the Mercy, the greater will be the Reckoning. And yet
this ought to be no discouragement to any of us; for the meaning is, not that
every surprise, or accidental Failing, or breaking one of these Commands
against our Will, or before we are aware, or after we have used all possible
Watchfulness, excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven; for then no Flesh could be
saved. But he that wilfully breaks one, and makes a Trade of it, knows, or
hears God's Will in that particular, and yet will not be persuaded to do it;
and teaches others too, either by his Discourse or Example; neglects such a
Command, and feels no Remorse, knows the Judgment of God, that they which
commit such things, are worthy of Death; and not only does the same, but has
pleasure in them that do them; as it is said, Romans i.32. That Is the Man, who
shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven. And do not you think there is a
great deal of Justice in all this? What! For a Man first to disregard an
express Command of Christ, and then, that he may not think himself obliged to
it, to call it little, and inconsiderable, and so to neglect it; and after all,
prompt others to do so too; Is not this a manifest contempt of God's
Sovereignty, and Mercy, and Love, and Charity, in Christ Jesus? Does not this
look like Enmity against God? Is not this a sign of a secret Hatred and
Indignation against the ways of God? Is not this an Argument of Obstinacy and
Stubbornness? Does not this infer want of Sense, and want of Fear? And would
you have God save a Man that does not fear him? Would you have him receive Men
into the Kingdom of Heaven, that do not only not think it worth while to obey
him in so small a matter, (small in their own account, and therefore surely the
easier) but encourage others to do the like? Does not this argue a delight in a
sinful sensual Life? And what! Do you think God will let a Man or Woman in at
the Gates of Glory, that looks upon the Prophet as mad, because he bid him do
so small a thing, Wash in the River Jordan seven times, that he may be clean?

God measures our Actions by our Hearts; and if the Heart be averse from him,
or from the ways of Righteousness, Is such a Person fit to sing with Angels, to
triumph with Martyrs, and to sit and rejoice with Souls, that loved God with
all their Hearts, and with all their Minds?

Ay, but to break one of these least Commandments, and to teach another to do
so, What great Matter is there in that? My Friends, He that breaks one, will
break another, and is in a Disposition to offend against more: He will never
stop there, one Sin engages him into the Practice of another; and if he
propagates the Evil too, and like a rotten Sheep, infects others, does not that
one Folly discover a Heart, that has no Desire, no Inclination to take
Christ's Yoke upon him; and loath, unwilling, backward to entertain Christ upon
his own Terms; and is this following him in the Regeneration? And he that does
not follow him in the Regeneration, How shall he be able to sit with him in his
Throne? And this puts me in mind of another Observation.

III. That he that lives ill, teaches another to live ill too. He that shall
break one of these least Commandments, and teach Men so, etc. In order to be
excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, it is not necessary a Man should get into
a Pulpit, and there proclaim that it is lawful to lie, to cheat, to defraud, to
sing filthy Songs, to break obscene Jests, to hate our Neighbor, or to return
Evil for Evil; this needs not: Thy Actions, Christian! spread the Poison, and
teach the next Man thou meetest withal, to do as thou do; for in breaking
such a known Command of the Gospel, and being unconcerned, What can thy fellow
Christian think, but that thou approvest of it? And, supposing thou approvest
of it, if the Grace of God restrains him not, he soon begins to think, that
what is lawful for thee, may be lawful for him; and thus he learns of thee,
though thou do not open thy Lips to him. There are few Men so bold, as in
their Words, and Speeches, to defend and justify things directly contrary to
the Will of God in the Gospel; but you do mischief enough to the Souls of Men,
by your evil Practices. The Mutes, among the Turks, teach by their Gestures;
much more may Men be taught by Actions; especially where there is already a
Disposition to embrace that which is Evil. Physicians and Naturalists talk of
transplanting Diseases from Men into Beasts; nay, some go so far, as to
prescribe ways to transfer Distempers from Men into Herbs and Plants. Whether
it be so, I enquire not; but sure I am, that the Diseases of the Soul are, and
may be transplanted and conveyed from one Man to another, even by evil
Practices; and this is teaching and making Proselytes to Hell, and to the
Kingdom of Darkness, the readiest way to be excluded from the Kingdom of
Heaven; which will give me occasion,

IV. To represent to you, what it is to be the least, or to be excluded from
the Kingdom of Heaven. Fancy you saw a poor miserable Man starving with hunger,
and so placed, that directly over against him he could see the richest Banquet,
the most delicate Dishes; huge plenty of Victuals of all sorts, the Company
eating their fill, and satiating themselves with all the Variety that Earth,
and Sea, and Air can yield; and the poor Wretch that is over against this
Company, but a few paces removed from them, unable to get the least Morsel of
Bread, ready to tear his own Flesh from off his Shoulders; and yet in an utter
impossibility to get so much as the Crumbs that fall from those Rich Men's
Tables. Do not you think this would be as great a Torment as can well be
imagined? Why, this is the Emblem of being the least, or excluded from the
Kingdom of Heaven.

The Soul, that is so unhappy as to miss of it, will see Abraham a far off, and
Lazarus in his Bosom; be ready to perish, ready to burst; see all the Glory and
Joy of blessed Creatures before his Eyes, the Delicates, the Dainties, the
Pleasures, the Festivals, the rich Entertainments they enjoy and swim in,
passing before him, and yet not able to touch, not able to reach the least
Extremity of all, though his Soul be big with ten thousand desires after them.
What a Torment, what a Plague, what a Vexation must this be? What Grief, what
Sorrow, what Anguish must this cause? And if this must continue to Eternal
Ages, what Tongue is able to express the Torment?

And can you after all this, call any of the Commandments of the Gospel little
ones, and break them, and pass by them as if they did not belong to you; and
tempt others to do so too, when this is the high way to be excluded from the
Kingdom of Heaven? But

V. Are there no Ambitious Men here? Are there none among you that desire to be
Great? Have none of you a mind to be preferred and exalted to eminent Places?
You must be either very mortified, or very dull, if Greatness can make no
Impression upon you. Preferment! What is there that is more hunted after? How
do many break their Sleep, and fall into Discontent, and Vexation, because they
cannot be advanced? What waiting at Court? What cringing, what bowing to Great
Men? What running to this Friend, and to the other Friend? What Flattery, what
Dissembling, what Compliances are used, and all to be Great?

Behold! We can tell you a way to be Great; greater than Caesar, or Pompey, or
Alexander; greater than all the Kings or Rulers of the Earth. Great! Where? Not
at Court, not in the Camp, or Army: Not in Church-Dignities or Preferments; but
great in the Kingdom of Heaven. And is not the Kingdom of Heaven a more lofty,
and more spacious Empire than the whole Roman Monarchy, in all its greatest
Extent and Glory? It Is true, we cannot show you this Kingdom, we cannot make it
visible to your Eyes; but we can tell you that St. Paul saw it, and Christ did
enter into it; and he that has power to dispose of all the Glories of it, has
sent us to tell you, That you may be great, and he will make you so; great as
Angels, great as the Worthies of God; greater than Kings, greater than all the
Princes of the Earth; greater than all the proud things which make so great a
noise in the World now; and all this, if you will close with his Desires; and
both do, and teach the Commandments Christ recommends to in his famous Sermon.

Little they may seem, and contemptible they may appear in the Eyes of the Men
that have their portion in this Life. But as little as they may seem to be,
your Conscientious and Impartial Respect to them all, to the least as well as
to the greatest, shall exalt you; exalt you far above all the Glory and
Splendour of this World; raise you from the Dunghill, take you out of the Dust,
and set you with Princes, even with the Princes of God's People. If you are
great already, this shall make you greater.

Lay up therefore these Commandments in your Hearts, and in your Souls; bind
them for a Sign upon your Hands; let them be as Frontlets between your Eyes;
teach them your Children; speak of them when you sit in your Houses, and when
you walk by the way; when you lie down, and when you rise up: Assure all those
you Converse with, that these Commandments are Life, and Peace, and Rational,
and Equitable, and Just, and Necessary, and Health to the Soul; Foretasts of
Happiness, and Prefaces to an endless Glory. Thus do, and thus teach; Teach by
your Discourses; teach by your Actions; teach by your Example: So Noah taught
the unbelieving World, by building an Ark, to the saving of his House, to save
themselves from the Wrath to come: So do you, and build upon the Word of the
Son of God, That you shall be great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

SERMON XXI.
St. Matt. Chapter v. Ver. 20. For I say unto you, That except your Righteousness
shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no
case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


A Preface, or Introduction, will be needless. It Is enough, that these Words
are part of Christ's Famous Sermon on the Mount: The Method I, shall observe in
handling them, shall be this following; to Enquire, and Consider,

I. Who these Scribes and Pharisees were.

II. What their Righteousness was, and wherein it consisted.

III. How, and in what our Righteousness is to exceed their Righteousness.

IV. The danger, if we do not, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

I. Who these Scribes and Pharisees were.

1. The Pharisees. You have often heard of Three Famous Sects among the Jews,
when Christ appeared in the World, the Pharisees, the Essenes, and the
Sadducees.

The Pharisees were an Order of Men, who distinguished themselves from the
Vulgar, by certain Austerities and Mortifications, and a seemingly preciser way
of Living; yet they conversed, and lived in Citiess and Towns, and were so far
from avoiding, that they seemed to affect Places where there was a great
Concourse of People.

When they began, or, who was the first Founder of them, is uncertain; but it is
probable, the Institution of the Nazarites of old, Numb. vi.2. and the Order of
the Rechabites afterward, Jerem. xxxv.2. or the strictness of the Hasideans,
might give occasion to this peculiar way of living, though the Votaries, in
progress of time, deviated and degenerated from those sober Patterns; and, as
it was with Monkery in the Christian Church, improved, or, rather abused, the
preceding, pious, and well-meant Self-denials, into Superstition.

The Essenes were a kind of Hermits, who chose to dwell in the Country, as far
from Crowds as they could; and, though they had Procurators in Cities, and
populous Places, to receive and entertain those of their Sect, whose Occasions
led them to pass that way, yet their chief abode was in a Wilderness, not far
from Jericho; from whence, as they grew in number, they dispersed themselves,
and planted Colonies in other Places. These were a modester and soberer sort of
People, and studied self-denial too, but to better and greater Purposes than
the Pharisees; and therefore possibly it is, that Christ passes no censure upon
them, because their Service for the most part was reasonable, and in their
Morals, they came very near the Christian Institution; and it is likely; that
most of them turned Christians afterward, being so well qualified, and (...),
prepared for that excellent Discipline; and this might give occasion to
Eusebius, and others, to think, Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 16.17.
that the Essenes, Philo speaks of, were Christian Asceticks.

The Sadducees were Sensualists, and Epicureans, and denied the Being of
another World; pretended indeed to keep close to the Letter of the Law of
Moses, rejected Traditions, and derided the Pharisees, who were great Admirers
of it; but were Men loose, and profane, debaucht and cruel, a Temper agreeable
enough to their Principle; which was, That Men die like Beasts, and that there
is no Resurrection of the Dead; though it must be confessed, that these Impious
Tenets took not much with the common People, the Persons who espoused these
Doctrines, being chiefly Men of great Estates, and Dignities, who are apt,
without very great Circumspection, from an over-admiration of Things Present
and Visible, to be drawn into contempt of Things Invisible and Enternal.

To return to the Pharisees, the Men the Text speaks of; This Order was
subdivided into Seven Sects, who all obliged themselves to several sorts of
Austerities; too tedious to be told here; and so taking, it seems, were these
External Rigors, that there were Women Pharisees, as well as Men Pharisees.

The Name Pharisee, is as much as a Separatist, for so the Pharisees were,
separating themselves from the rest of Mankind, by an affected Piety, which
passed for great strictness in that Age, and gave occasion to the Apostle, to
say, That before his Conversion, he lived after the strictest way of the Jewish
Religion, a Pharisee, Act. xxvi.5.

2. The Scribes; These were in the Nature of Secretaries, Vide Lightf. in
Matthew. ii.4.
or Clerks, or Public Notaries to the Sanhedrin, or Great Council of the Jews;
which Council, in those Days, consisting of Sadducees and Pharisees; these Two
Factions had their distinct Secretaries, or Notaries, as appears from Act.
xxiii.9. The Scribes, or Advocates, who were of the Pharisees side, having
entirely addicted themselves to their Cause and Service, were of the same
Opinion with the Pharisees in all things; stiffly maintaining their Doctrines,
Principles, and Traditions, and being commonly Men of Learning, were in equal
esteem with the Pharisees; the rather, because what the Pharisees boldly and
proudly asserted, the Scribes endeavored to prove from Records, and Monuments
of Antiquity, and such Writings, as they judged proper for their purpose: I
know some think, they were the Elders of the Sanhedrin, and the Chief
Expositors of the Law; but if we compare the Account, the Scripture gives of
them, with what the Talmudists say of them, they seem to have been such Men, as
I have described them; nor did their Office, and Learning debar them from being
Interpreters of the Law, Maldon. in c. 2. Matthew.
but qualify them rather for that Employment. In a word, What the Canonists
are and have been of late Years to the Pope, the same were the Scribes to the
Pharisees, defending their pretended Rights and Privileges, and Authority and
Traditions, with all the Zeal, and Passion, as is common to Men who designedly
espouse an Interest or Faction; and indeed one Egg is not liker another, than
Pharisaism, and Popery are, as were an easy Matter to prove in several
Instances, but that I have more material Things to tell you. Let us go on
therefore, and

II. Consider, What their Righteousness was, and wherein it consisted.

And to understand the Mystery of it, I shall in the first place, represent to
you the Particulars of their Righteousness, as they are Recorded by the
Evangelists; and then show, wherein it was defective, that we may be the better
able to distinguish, and see, how our Righteousness is to exceed theirs.

1. The Particulars of their Righteousness; and they were these following. They
gave Alms, Matthew. vi.2. They prayed, Matthew. vi.5. and prayed very long, Matthew.
xxiii.14. They fasted, and when they fasted, disfigured their Faces, and looked
ruefully, Matthew. vi.16. They fasted two days in a Week, Luc. xviii. 12. They
praised God, and gave him thanks for his Mercies, Luc. xviii. 12. They were no
scandalous Offenders, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, Luc. xviii. 11. They
were very ready to resolve Cases of Conscience, Matthew. xxiii.16. They taught
the Doctrine, and maintained the Law of Moses, Matthew. xxiii.2, 3. They
Garnished, Adorned, and Beautified the Sepulchers of the Prophets of old,
Matthew. xxiii.29. They had a great Veneration for the Traditions of their
Church, Marc. vii.2, 3, 4. They were very punctual in paying Tithes, or the
tenth part of the Fruits of the Earth, that fell to their share, Matthew.
xxiii.23. They carried their Phylacteries about with them, wherever they
went, which were certain pieces of Parchment, wherein were written some
Sentences, or Sections of the Law, particularly of Exodus xii. and xiii. and
Deuteronomy. vi. and xi. and these they tied to their Wrists and Foreheads, and made
them very broad, Matthew. xxiii.5. They were often Purifying and Washing
themselves, not only their Hands and Wrists, (...), as Theophylact speaks, up
to the Elbow, but their whole Bodies too, especially, when they came from the
Marketplace, being fearful, lest some filthiness, contracted by converse,
should stick to them, Mark, vii.3. They took great pains to make Proselytes,
and Converts to their Religion, for they compassed Sea and Land to do it,
Matthew. xxiii.15. They were so strict, or so nice rather, that they were afraid
of touching a Person, who was counted an open, and scandalous Sinner; would not
only not Eat with him, but not so much, as Touch him, which was the reason, why
the Pharisee, in whose House Christ dined, found fault with our Savior, for
suffering himself to be touched by a Woman, who had been a notorious Sinner,
Luc. vii.39. And this is the account the Scripture gives of them.

St. Epiphanius adds, that many of them would Vow very strict Chastity, and
Abstinence from the Partners of their Beds, some for Four years, some for
Eight, (...). Epiph. l.1. adv. Haer. (...). Epiph. Ibid.
and some for Ten. They were very watchful against all Nocturnal Accidents, and
partly to prevent them, and partly to awake the sooner to Prayer, they would
Sleep upon Boards not above nine Inches broad, that falling or rolling off from
those Boards on the Ground, they might go to their Devotion; some would stuff
their Pillows with Stones and Pebles, and some would venture even upon Thorns;
for that purpose. Besides their Tithes, they separated their First Fruits, and
the Thirtieth and Fiftieth part of their Incomes to Pious Uses; and, as to all
Vows, and Sacrifices, no Persons were more punctual to pay or discharge them,
than they.

This was the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. All this looks well,
and has a very good Gloss. And one would wonder at first sight, how Christ
could find fault with these Performances. One would think, that in stead of
blaming, he should have commended them for so doing: How many Thousands are
there in the World, that do not do half so much in Matters of Religion; and
some would look upon themselves as extraordinary Saints, if they came up to
what the Scribes and Pharisees did; so far are they from dreaming of going
beyond them.

But have not You seen some counterfeit Pearls, so Artificiously contrived,
that the ignorant Spectator has taken them for truly Oriental? Have not you
seen some curious Limner, draw Infects and Butterflies, with that Life, that
one would take them for living Animals? The same may be said of the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. As specious, as glorious as it
looked, it was perfectly or the Nature of the Glowworm, and shined bright in
that dark Night of Ignorance, but viewed by Daylight was nothing but a
squallid Worm, a mere Skeleton of Devotion; which leads me,

II. To show You the Defects of their Righteousness, and they will appear from
the following Particulars.

1. They laid the Stress of their Devotion upon the Opus Operatum, the bare
Outward Task and Peformance, without any regard to the Inward Frame; very
indifferent whether their Minds at the same time were seasoned with a due sense
of God's Greatness, and their own Imperfections: Just as the People of the
Church of Rome at this Day will say so many Credo's, so many Pater Noster's, so
many Ave Maria's, and fancy, they have done admirably well, when they have
absolved their Task, though their Minds, or Thoughts all the while, like the
Evil Spirit in Job, have been wandering to and fro in the Earth: And I wish, too
many, who profess themselves, Members of the best Church in the World, I mean,
the Church of England, did not split their Vessel against this Rock; I am sure,
the Scribes and Pharisees did: They made no account of the inward Frame, but
rested in the Shell, and thought God would be pleased with the slaying of a
Bullock, or Lamb, or He-Goat; and they measured the Goodness of their Prayers
by their Length and Number more, than by the great Sense they had of the
Shekinah, or Divine Presence, whereas an humble and devout Mind in the
Religious Service, was the thing God required at their Hands, Mat. xv.8.

2. They were very Zealous for the Ceremonial part of Religion, but very
reguardless of the Moral, and more Substantial part of it; hot as Fire, for the
one, cold as Ice, with respect to the other. The neglect of a Ceremony, angered
them more, than the omission of a sober, and pious Conversation; much as the
Greeks at this Day look upon breaking a Fast of the Church, as a more heinous
Crime, than Killing, or Murdering a Man, and to this purpose Christ tells the
Pharisees, Mat. xxiii.22, 23. Woe to you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, who
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel: Ye pay Tithe of Mint, and Cummin, and
Anise, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and
Faith.

3. They were abominably selfish in all their Religious Undertakings, for, all
their Works they do to be seen of Men, says our Savior, Matthew. xxiii.5. This
was the Worm that corrupted their Alms, their Prayers, their Fasts, their
Self-Denials, their Mortifications, and all they did, even a design to advance,
and promote their Profit, Interest and Credit, and to gain the Applauses, and
Admirations of Men, and though they made long Prayers, yet it seems, it was to
devour Widows Houses, Matthew. xxiii.14. Their very Doctrins were suited to their
Profit and Interest, As Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Private Masses,
Indulgences, Auricular Confession, etc. in the Church of Rome are invented to
aggrandize the Honor and Profit of the Priest, so the Tenants, they held, were
accommodated to their Gain and Lucre, for they taught the People, that there
was greater Holiness in the Gold of the Temple, than in the Temple, and greater
Sanctity in the Gift upon the Altar, than in the Altar it self, thereby to
oblige the People, to bring Gold, and Gifts into the Temple, whereby the
Priests, who were of the Order of the Pharisees, sucked no small advantage,
Matthew. xxiii.16, 17.

4. They took care to purify the outward Man, but took none to cleanse the
Heart and the Soul. Such Acts of Piety and Devotion, as were stately, and
favored of Pomp, and served to attack the Eyes of Spectators, they were for;
and of this Nature were all their External Severities, and Rigors, and
Revenges, they used upon themselves. But, as to Mortifying their inward Pride,
and Rancour, and Hatred, and Malice, and Covetousness, and love of the World,
they were so great Strangers to it, that they did not think it part of their
Religion, which makes Christ tell them, Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that
which is within the Cup and Platter, that the outside of them may be clean
also: Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye are like unto whited
Sepulchers, which appear fair unto Men, but within are full of Rotten Bones;
even so ye appear outwardly Righteous unto Men, but within, are full of
Covetousness, Matthew. xxiii.26, 27.

5. Though they owned, professed, and taught the Law of Moses; yet in effect,
they preferred their wild and fantastic Traditions before it. Not to mention
their common Proverb, That the Words of the Scribes, i. e. of their
Traditionary Divines, were more Lovely than the Words of the Law; where it was
so, that the Law, and the Tradition clasht, they Interpreted the Law by the
Tradition, not the Tradition by the Law, and hearkened more to the Dictate, and
Suggestion of a groundless and whimsical Tradition, than to an express Text of
the Written Word of God; as is evident from what Christ tells them, Matthew.
xv.3. Why do ye Transgress the Commandment of God, by your Tradition, for God
Commanded, saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother; and, he that Curses Father
and Mother, let him die the Death; but ye say, Whosoever shall say to his
Father, or to his Mother, though ready to Starve and Perish, for want of
Necessaries, it is Corban, it is a Gift, I have Dedicated it to the Temple, by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and Honor not his Father, or his
Mother, he shall be Free. Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of no
effect, by your Tradition.

Indeed, where Men invent new Doctrins and Articles of Faith, there the good
Old Word of God will do them no Service, but they are forced to make, and run
to Traditions, and broken Cisterns which can hold no Water.

6. To Sum up all. They were very severe and strict in keeping some
Commandments of God, but very supine and negligent as to others. They hated
Extortion, but were Malicious to a Prodigy; they would not be Drunk, but were
abominably Proud; they were for giving Alms to People of their own Sect, but
looked upon it as Sinful, to relieve a poor Samaritan: They were for strictness
of Life, before People, and Spectators, but loose and wicked in Secret; they
abhorred Adultery, but were Slaves to Ambition and Vainglory; they bound heavy
burdens on other Men's Soldiers, but would not touch them with one of their
Fingers, and while they pressed a severe observance of the Sabbath Day, forgot,
they were to rest from Sin, and Envy, as well as from servile Labor, Matthew.
xii.12, 13, 14.

Indeed this was one of their pernicious Traditionary Principles, That if a Man
or Woman were but industrious in the Practice of any one Command of God, though
they neglected the other Precepts, that service was sufficient to entitle them
to a (...) to the Portion of the Blessed in another World. To be short, they
served God at the best, by halves, were quick-sighted as Eagles, in spying out
other Men's faults; but blind as Moles in discovering their own, and while they
divided their Affections, betwixt God and the World, allowed the World the far
greater share.

These were the Distempers and Diseases of the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and how we are to exceed them, is the third particular, I am to
speak to.

III. Except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees; and how, or, in what Things we are to exceed them, is soon
guessed at; for it is evident from the preceding Discourse, that it must be in
Sincerity, in Simplicity, in Humility, in Charity, and in Universality of
Obedience.

1. In Sincerity, in being that within, which we seem to be without. Christ is
not against external Devotion, has no dislike of an outward Profession, never
declared against decent external Ceremonies; but he requires, we should be
Devout and Serious within, as well as without, and take care that what we do
without, do arise from a sense of God within; and that a relish of Spiritual
Things in the Soul within, do put us upon Devotion without; that the Heart and
the Lips, and the Hands, be all of a piece; and moreover, that we use the same
diligence to Mortify our inward Lusts, which we use to restrain our selves
from evil Actions in Company, or, in the presence of Men. In a Word, that we do
not only pretend to Religion, but Practice it; not only talk and dispute, and
entertain our selves with Speculations, and Discourses of it, but Live up to
the Holy Rules of it; not only make Profession of it, but show out of a good
Conversation, our good Works with Meekness of Wisdom, as it is said, Jam.
iii.13.

2. In Simplicity, and having pure and holy Ends in our Religious Actions, and
particularly in our Religious Severities, and Self-Denials, Ends suitable to
the Holiness of God, and the Edification of our Neighbors; in a Word, Ends
Rational, and such as may be justified before God and Man. This is part of the
single Eye, we read of, Matthew. vi.22. Indeed, the Ends and Designs of Actions,
make a strange alteration in their Worth and Value, render them either Good or
Bad, either Commendable or Abominable, either Sacrifices of Righteousness, or,
Sacrifices of Fools. Christ is so far from discouraging his Followers from
Religious Self-Denials and Severities, that his Doctrine and Discipline presses
nothing more, insomuch, that the greater Your Self-Denials are, the better
Christians You are. But, the right end, is the thing our Master presses, and
insists upon. Fast and Pray, and continue in Prayer a long time, spend whole
hours in it, if Your Strength, and Sense, and Affections will serve; give Alms,
and give very liberally; deny Your selves in a Thousand Vanities, the World
doats upon; Mortify Your Bodies in a decent manner, but take heed of secret
hopes of Meriting by all this, and of secret Designs, either to promote Your
Worldly Profit and Interest, or to gain the Commendations and Admiration of
Your Neighbors, or, to make God amends for some Sins, You are loath to part
withal. Have no Worldly Ends in all this, but let a Sense of Your Duty, and
Your Gratitude to God, and an earnest desire to Crucify the Flesh, to die to
the World, to imitate the Saints of Old, to encourage Your Selves in a
Spiritual Life, and to prepare for Heaven and Happiness. Let these be the
Principles and Motives that put You upon all this, and You will undoubtedly
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.

3. In Humility; not only in having a just Sense of our Errors, and many
Infirmities, which render us unworthy to appear before God, without the
Assistance and Intercession of a Mediator; not only in abhorring our selves for
those many defects, which cleave to our best Services; not only in accusing our
selves before the All-seeing Eye, as Wretched, Naked, Poor, Blind and
Miserable, from a Sense of his Infinite Majesty and Purity; but also in having
low and humble Thoughts of our Religious Performances, acknowledging that by
the Grace of God, we are what we are, and that by the Influence of that Grace,
those Performances are wrought, and confessing from the Heart, when we have
done all that we are Commanded to do, that we are unprofitable Servants, and
have done no more, than what was our Duty to do, Luke xvii.10. This humble
Temper the Scribes and Pharisees were very great strangers to, who looked upon
their Religious Services, as Things which God was obliged in Honor, and Equity
to look upon and Reward; Pride, Self-Conceitedness, and Self-Admiration,
mingling with almost all they did; and they did not, would not know, what a
contrite and humble Heart meant, and what it was to lie low before God, with a
deep Sense of their Unworthiness, and of the great Imperfection of their
Services; and though they Fasted often, yet that was not so much to arrive to
an humble Sense of their Corruptions and Infirmities, as to increase their
Merits, and to do Things which might Challenge Gods kinder Inclinations; and
this was the Rock against which these Men stumbled: And, as they were
unacquainted with true Humility toward God, so they understood not, what it was
to condescend to Men of low Estate. In Humility therefore we are to exceed
them; in Humility toward God and Man; for, as there is nothing that separates
more betwixt the Creator and the Creature, than Pride and Self-Conceitedness,
for which Reason, God is said to behold the Proud afar off, so nothing unites
Heaven and Earth, God and the Soul, more than Humility; for thus says the High
and Lofty One, who inhabiteth Eternity, I dwell in the High and Holy Place,
with him also, that is of a contrite, and humble Spirit, Es. lvii.15.

4. In Charity, or, a compassionate Temper toward all sorts of distressed
Persons; I say, all sorts, for that of the Pharisees was narrow and sneaking,
and confined to People of their own Sect. I need not tell you, that Charity
consists not only in giving Alms, that is but one part of it; nay, it may happen
so, that it may not be so much, as a part of it, according to the case St. Paul
puts, 1 Cor. xiii.3. where he makes it possible, for a Man to bestow all his
Goods to Feed the Poor, and yet to have no Charity. Had Almsgiving been all the
Charity, that was necessary to Salvation, the Scribes and Pharisees had been
considerable Men, for they were free and liberal enough of their Purses toward
Men of their own Party; but Charity is a larger and nobler Virtue; if it be of
the true Eagle kind; an unfeigned Love of God is the cause of it, and the
effect is ever answerable to the Beauty which produces it. St. Paul has given
so genuine a Character of it, 1 Cor. xiii. that it is impossible to mistake the
Nature of it, except Men be wilfully Blind. It extends its Arms not only to all
sorts of Objects, whether Friends or Foes, whether Relations or Strangers, but
as far as it is Ability reaches, and opportunity offers it self to all sorts of
Distresses: It does not only Feed and give Drink, and Cloth and Visit, but
Admonish too, and Reprove, and Teach, and Entreat, and Counsel and Advise, and
help and assist, and sometimes Correct and Punish. It embraces Enemies, and
like the wounded Earth, receives even those that cut, and dug it, into its
Bosom; and like the kind Balsom Tree, heals those, that made Incisions upon it.
It Judges favorably of Pious Heathens, much more of Pious Christians, tho
differing from it in Opinion; it Damns none, whom God has not Damned; in a
Word, it works no Evil to its Neighbor, but, is ready unto every good Word and
Work. And in this Charity, we are to exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees.

5. In Universality of Obedience; or, in making Conscience of the several
Commands of the Gospel, of one, as well as of another, Joh. xv.14. Then, we
exceed them, without any danger of being overmuch Righteous, when at the same
time, that we are fervent for Circumstances in God's Worship, we are not
forgetful of the substantial part of Religion, when we do not let our Public
Devotion justle out our private, nor the private the public; when we do not
make the Practice of one Precept, an argument to justify our neglect of
another, nor excuse our not doing Good, by our not committing of Evil, but are
impartial in our Obedience, and cheerfully submit, not only to the gentler, but
harder Injunctions of the Gospel, not only to such as are agreeable, but to
those also, which are contrary to our natural Temper and Inclination.

The Pious Christian will not easily get the better of the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, except his Obedience becomes larger, and spreads more
than theirs. Had these Men carried on their Obedience to that Extent, I speak
of, as St. Paul, a Pharisee, and the Son of a Pharisee afterward did, there
would not have been greater Men in the World than they; and the Proverb, which
was unjustly made concerning them, would not have been altogether False, viz.
If there were but two Men to be Saved, the one would be a Scribe, the other a
Pharisee.

And these are the particulars in which our Righteousness is to exceed that of
the Scribes and Pharisees. If it does not, we shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Danger, and the Last Part, which will deserve our
Examination.

IV. The Danger. Except Your Righteousness shall exceed the Rigteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

This Word, one would think, should rouse every Soul here present, and put us
all upon a serious Inquiry, Whether our Righteousness does actually exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees: If it does not, we hear our Doom.
And can any Man think, Christ was very serious in saying so, without being
concerned, how to prevent, and escape that fatal Exit? All Ye, that have any
Care of your Salvation, and believe another World, and know, what the Terrors
of the Lord mean, and what it is, not to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
Awake, awake, (why should you not, when Your Great Redeemer calls?) and take
this Threatening into serious Consideration. Either it will be fulfilled, or
not: If it will not be fulfilled, where is Christ's Veracity? If it be, where
is Your Security?

I say unto You; Thus the Commination begins; which shows, the Thing is firm,
and like the Laws of Medes and Persians, unalterable. Our Master, even He whom
we believe to be God, as well as Man, has spoke the Word. He that is Truth it
self, has said it, and thus it must be, nor will all the Entreaties of Men and
Angels oblige him to depart from his peremptory Declaration.

You that hear, and now read all this, cannot pretend Ignorance, that you did
not know the dreadful Consequence of this Neglect. We suggest, we intimate so
much to you; we pull you by the Sleeve, we proclaim these Words in your Ears,
as poor, as mean, as inconsiderable Creatures, as we are; I would to God, they
might sink into your Hearts! We beg of You, to lay aside your Divertisements,
and your Businesses for a while, and allow this Threatening some Attention of
Mind.

If you go no farther in your Righteousness, than these unhappy Men did, not
all your Cries at last, Lord, Lord, open to us; Not all your Tears, and Calls,
Lord, have Mercy upon us! Not all your Arguings, and Pleadings with God; Not
all your dying Groans, not all your mournful Accents, will open the Kingdom of
Heaven to you. If you go no farther than these Men, by this Rule of Christ, you
must inevitably be Miserable, and all your Wealth and Grandeur and Estates and
Relatives, cannot help you: If you go no farther, you sink into a State of
Hypocrisy, and I need not tell you, that the Portion of Hypocrites, is a very
sad Portion, for it is to be cast into outward Darkness, where there is Howling
and Gnashing of Teeth, so says your Master and mine, Matthew. xxiv.51.

In speaking to You, I speak to Christians, even to Men, who believe, that to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, is beyond all the Bliss, that this, or Ten
Thousand Worlds do afford; and, that not to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
is to be Wretched and Miserable, Odious and Contemptible, beyond Expression,
and to Groan in Torments to Eternal Ages: This is the Notion You have of these
Things, as You own Your selves Christians. Men, Fathers and Brethren, do you
believe the Prophets? Do you believe the Apostles? Do you believe the Son of
God, that came into the World to save Sinners? I know you believe, and surely
this is Motive sufficient to suffer the Word of Exhortation.

If therefore any of you have hitherto laid the stress of your Devotion, upon
the External Task, and been Strangers to the inward frame of Mind, which is in
the sight of God of great Price: If you have been Zealous for small, little,
inconsiderable Things in Matters of Religion, and have wilfully neglected the
more Substantial and Self-Denying part of it: If you have been Selfish in your
Acts of Piety and Righteousness, and been Devout and Good, for Worldly Ends
more than from a Sense of your Duty: If you have taken some care to Purify
your outward Man, from Clamorous and Scandalous Sins, and have been careless of
rectifying what is amiss within you, even of subduing that immoderate Love of
the World, and Pride, and Revengeful Thoughts and Desires, and Anger, and
wrathful Temper, and other secret Sins, which do so easily beset you: If you
have thought it your Duty, to observe some of the greater Commandments of the
Gospel, and made no Conscience of the lesser. All this Fabric must be pulled
down, undone and unravelled, and you must turn over a new Leaf, and apply your
selves to a true Gospel Life and Temper; else, there is no entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Flatter not your selves with the Merits and Sufferings, and Death of Christ
Jesus, for poor Sinners. I grant, I own, this is a very Glorious, and
comfortable Truth, and there is no sincere Believer, but confesses to thy
Praise and Glory, O Blessed Jesu! That there is no Name under Heaven given,
whereby Men may be Saved, but thine alone. But still it is this exceeding the
Scribes and Pharisees in their Righteousness, that must give you a Title to the
benefits of the Death of Jesus Christ: By this the Pardon of your Sins, which
was purchased by that Death, must be sued out, and applied, and rendered
comfortable to your Souls; and, if the Death of Christ does not kill in you
that Hypocrisy and Partiality, which made the Righteousness of the Pharisees
defective, that Death cannot, will not, profit you.

All the Christian World knows, that the design of Christ's dying for Sinners,
was, That they which Live, should not henceforth Live unto themselves but unto
him, that Died for them, and rose again. They are the express Words of the Holy
Ghost, 2 Cor. v.15. and it is as certain, that you cannot Live unto him, that
Died for you, except your Righteousness be a Righteousness without Guile, and
therefore beyond that of the Scribes and Pharisees.

I suppose you are sensible, that Christ cannot contradict himself; when he
spoke these Words, He knew he was to Die for Sinners, yet to these Sinners, for
whom he was to Die, he protests, Except your Righteousness shall exceed, etc.
And therefore certainly, the Mercies of his Death cannot clash with our Duty;
and whosoever means to enjoy the Benefits of that Death, must Die to the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and a Righteousness more Rational,
an Evangelical Righteousness must Live in him, even that which St. Paul speaks
of, Phil. iii.9. And that is the Life of God, as it is called, Ephesians. iv.18.

If we are to exceed these Men in their Righteousness, we must do more than
they did, and if we do more, can we do less, than what has been hinted in the
preceding Particulars of Sincerity, Simplicity, Humility, Charity, and
Universality of Obedience? For these Qualifications rectify what was amiss in
the Righteousness of these Men, and set us in the right way, from which those
Self-Conceited Men deviated, and wandered in a Wilderness of Vulgar Errors.

Should any of you be so Unfortunate, (what I say here, is nothing but a plain
and easy Comment upon the Commination of the Text) I say, should any of you be
so unfortunate, as to come before the Gate of the Kingdom of Heaven, and be
denied entrance there; how like a Thunderbolt would this strike you! And yet I
see not, how it is possible to prevent it, if these Words of Christ make no
impression upon you, or do not oblige you to go beyond these Men in their Acts
of Devotion and Piety.

Their Righteousness was an External, Mechanical, starcht kind of
Righteousness; it was not Free, not Natural; and they took no care to reform
their Thoughts, Desires, Lusts, Affections, and such Things as Human Laws take
no notice of; and it is to be feared, that this is the Disease of too great a
number of Christians: Nay, Thousands there are, which do not come up to so
much, as the Negative Virtues of the Scribes and Pharisees: They were no
Drunkards, no Swearers, no Whoremongers, no Adulterers, and yet, how many that
profess themselves Illuminated by the Gospel of Christ, are so, and worse than
so? And if even those, who do not exceed the Righteousness of these Men, shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, how shall those, that are not so good as
they? And but that Unbelief, and Stupidity reigns so much in the Hearts of Men,
certainly here is enough to fright them from the Carnal Life they lead.

There stands before the Gate of the Kingdom of Heaven, an Angel with a Flaming
Sword, as much, as there did before the Gate of Paradise, to keep out all
those, who voluntarily choose Death before Life, and do not you choose Death
before Life; when you had rather forfeit your share in the Kingdom of Heaven,
than exceed the Scribes and Pharisees in their Righteousness?

Surely it must be a dismal and deplorable Condition, when Men have flattered
themselves all their Life time, with hopes of entering into the Kingdom of
Heaven, to find themselves at last thrust out, and may not this be the
condition of some of you? And is not the very possibility of it enough to
oblige you to Purify and Cleanse your Righteousness, and to take care, that
none of the Leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees stick to it?

Here on Earth, Men Fight for a great Estate, and venture Fortune, Friends,
Interest, Honesty, Life, and all: Strange! The Kingdom of Heaven should lie
under that Misfortune, that Men must be entreated to enter into it, and yet
will not be prevailed with after all to enter. Yes, you will say, we all are very
ready to enter into it, were it not for the hard Conditions that are required:
and do you really think the Conditions so hard? Would you think them so, if you
lay Howling in Eternal Flames? Certainly, nothing would seem hard then, and why
should it seem so now, when it is evident and apparent, you are in danger of
those Flames?

Behold! God is ready and willing, to succor, to assist, to support, and to
strengthen you, that your Righteousness may Triumph over the Righteousness of
these Hypocrites. The same Spirit, the same Grace, the same Influences, the
same Assistances, he has afforded to St. Paul, to St. Peter, to Lydia, to
Martha, to Mary, to Magdalene, to the Jaylour, to the Penitent Publican, to
Zachaeus, to others, the same he offers to you all. But then, if these kind
Offers be slighted and rejected, and a Farm, a Yoke of Oxen, or some thing
worse be preferred before it, it is not God so much, that deprives you of the
Kingdom of Heaven, as you your selves. Were you actually possessed of this
Kingdom of Heaven, you would wonder at the Folly and Madness of Men, who can
complain, that the Conditions are hard, when such a Glory, such a Bliss, such a
Kingdom is to be had, a Kingdom for which the Apostles, and the Primitive
Believers, whose Faith, and Constancy, we Admire, forsook Father and Mother,
and Lands, and Houses, and all that was dear to them in this World. I could
give you such a Description of that Kingdom, as should make all the Glories of
this World look pale, and dim, and dark, in Comparison of it: But I forbear.

Were such Considerations as these, made use of in the cool of the Day, I mean,
when your Thoughts are cool and composed, and the Grace of God upon your
Endeavors earnestly implored, they would inspire you with Courage Invincible,
to go not only beyond Heathens and Philosophers, but beyond Scribes and
Pharisees in Righteousness, and in the serious Exercises of Virtue and
Self-Denial.

It Is possible, you may not remember all the Motives, I have given you, but one
thing you will be able to Remember, which contains all that I have said, and
that is the Text, and therefore I repeat it once more, Except your Righteousness
shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no
case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

SERMON XXII.
St. Matthew. Chapter v. Ver. 21, 22. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old
time, Thou shall not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the
judgment:

But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his Brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of the Council; but whosoever shall say, thou Fool,
shall be in danger of Hell fire.


FAlse Teachers without doubt are very dangerous Men. The Murderer kills the
Body, these the Soul; and by the false Doctrines they Sow in Men's Heads and
Minds, they not only obstruct their Salvation, but lead them into Perdition:
Indeed if the Errors be light and trivial, the hurt that is done is not great;
and while the erroneous Doctrine reaches no farther than Speculation, it can
deserve no very severe Censure; but when it spoils and sullies the Worship of
God, or proves an impediment to the faithful discharge of our Duty to God and
Man, Poison is not so prejudicial to the outward, as such Opinions are to the
inward Man, and the better part. And such were the erroneous Doctrines of the
Scribes and Pharisees: Blending the Traditions of their Fathers with the Law of
God, and entertaining both, with an equal Faith and Veneration; they made an
odd kind of Divinity, i. e. Contradictions.
and quite perverted the design of Religion, which was to make Men universally
good. This was particularly visible in the notion they had of the sixth
Commandment, which they interpreted to the carnal advantage, and worldly
Interest of their People, teaching them, that if they did but use that Care and
Circumspection as not to kill a Man, they did not only answer the design of the
Lawgiver, but would prevent the Penalty annexed, and their being taken notice
of by the Magistrate, and punished accordingly; but as for Wrath, and Malice,
and reproachful Language, whereby Murder and such bloody Practices are too
often occasioned and promoted, these they told them were things not forbid in
the primary Intention of the Law of God, and consequently they need fear no
Punishment. To which preposterous Exposition our Savior opposes his Divine
Authority, proves the gloss of their Elders upon the sixth Commandment to be
false; and shows, That what they thought did not deserve so much as a temporal
Judgment, God would punish with eternal Vengeance, if not forsaken, or repented
of betimes: Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
kill, and whosoever shall kill, shall be, etc.

This is a Text upon which Critics and Learned Men have bestowed many
excellent Observations, because the words relate to some ancient Customs of the
Jews, in their Judicial Proceedings against Malefactors and others: But as I do
not think it proper to entertain you with Curiosities, so if there be need of
making use of any of those Observations, I shall do it no farther, than they
serve to elucidate some of the obscurer Passages of the Text, and make way for
the practical Points I shall insist upon for your Edification.

As to the Sense of the Words, it is briefly this:

1. Whether we render the Expression in the Original, (...), It has been said
by them of old time, or to them of old time, as some Translations read it, the
difference is not very material: for as by those of old time are meant either
the ancient Masters of Tradition, who lived some hundred years before that
time; or the Ancestors of the Jews, to whom those Masters of Tradition
pretended to deliver an oral Exposition of the Law of Moses; so if we read, by
them of old time, the meaning is, You have heard that it has been delivered,
and said by the ancient Masters of Tradition: And if we render it, to them of
old time, the sense is, You have heard it delivered to your Ancestors and
Forefathers, by those ancient Masters of Tradition. I restrain, you see, this
Passage to Tradition; for though the Sense of it is to be found in the Law of
Moses, yet the Maxim, as it is related by our Savior here, is not expressed
there neither with that Connection: And therefore I conceive the ancient
Expositors of the Law contracted what Moses had said, into this Motto,
Whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.

2. What is said here of Killing, is meant of killing a Man, and has respect
to the sixth Commandment, Thou shall do no Murder. By which Law, as the killing
of Beasts for Man's use could not be intended, nor destroying venomous and
noxious Animals, nor executing of Malefactors by order of the Magistrate, nor
depriving Men of their Lives in a just and lawful War, but an unjust depriving
a Man of his Life; so there was a punishment suitable annexed to the breach of
that Law; which Punishment was to be ordered and inflicted by the Magistrate;
and so far as the Law of God given by Moses went, all was right, and just, and
reasonable; but here the Masters of Tradition had made a Distinction, that if a
Man had hired another to kill his Neighbor, or had let loose a wild Beast upon
him, whereby he died, the Magistrate was not to inflict the Punishment of Death
upon him, but he was to be left to the extraordinary Judgment of God; but if he
killed him in Person, either by a Sword, or by a Stone, or by some other
Weapon, then the Magistrate was to execute the Penalty appointed by the Law of
Moses, upon him; but this was not all, for they taught moreover, that though a
Person who killed another was liable to capital Punishments, yet the Wrath, the
Anger, and the Malice that prompted him to it, was a thing that deserved no
Punishment, and therefore this was not a thing to be feared; and here came in
Tradition, which mis-interpreted the Law of Moses, though it stands to Reason,
that he who forbids a Sin, at the same time does forbid the occasion of it, and
all such things as do naturally lead to the Commission of it.

3. Our Savior, to show that Wrath, and Anger, and Malice, and reproachful
Language, were liable to Punishment, as well as Murder, and that God would
certainly lash them, as well as the greater Enormities, takes notice of several
degrees of unjust Wrath and Anger. The first is a sudden Effervescence, or
Boiling up of the Blood, or some violent Agitation and Commotion of the
Passions upon a frivolous occasion; and therefore adds (...) without sufficient
Cause, which though it be not in some Copies, yet must necessarily be
understood here; not denying but that Anger in some Cases may be lawful, but
showing withal, that if the occasion of the Anger be slight and trivial, and
the Anger even in a lawful Cause be excessive, and going beyond its just
Bounds, it provokes God's heavy Displeasure.

But then if this secret Anger within, or the first boiling over of the Blood,
proceeeds farther to contemptuous Words, and that a Man in Wrath and Malice
gives his Neighbor reproachful Language, despising and undervaluing him, by
using Expressions and Names, which wound his Reputation, intimated by the Word
Rakah, i. e. vile and worthless Wretch; though I am apt to believe that an
angry and threatening noise and posture is chiefly meant by that Word in this
Case, the Sin rises higher, and becomes greater, and consequently deserves a
severer Judgment; but then, if this Anger mounts higher yet, and from an angry
threatening Posture and Noise, which betrays Wrath and Indignation, it proceeds
to the calling our Neighbor Fool, i. e. wicked and reprobate Wretch, deserving
the eternal Anger both of God, and all good Men, which is the meaning of the
Word Fool, in the Proverbs of Solomon; as the Sin becomes more heinous by this
Aggravation, so the Punishment of it in the other World will be greater yet.

4. What our Savior says here of a certain Gradation of Punishments due to
the several Lusts, and degrees of Wrath and Anger, Judgment, Council, Hell
Fire, must be understood of Penalties in the next World, yet with allusion to
the degrees of Punishment among the Jews in this Life. Now among the Jews,
there were three degrees of public Infamy, according to the nature of the
Punishment inflicted on Men for their Crimes, and the more public the
Punishment was, the greater was the Infamy. If an Offender were brought before
the Court of Three and twenty, which was an inferior Court of Judicature
called here, being guilty of the Judgment, and there condemned, he was
infamous, and a great Disgrace it was to him, but in a lower degree: If he were
brought before the Sanedrin, or the Great Council of the Nation, consisting of
LXX Elders, in the nature of our Parliament, and by them adjudged to Death, the
Infamy and Disgrace was greater: Yet if, lastly, a Man were condemned to be
burnt in the Valley of Hinnon or Tophet, where all the Trash and Filth of the
City of Jerusalem, the Garbage and dead Carcasses were burnt, and where
anciently they offered their Children to Moloch, and where a perpetual Fire was
kept to consume all things that were offensive and nauseous, and which by the
Jews themselves was looked upon as an Emblem of Hell Fire, the Infamy was
greatest of all: According to these degrees of Infamy here on Earth, Christ
shows there will be degrees of Punishment for the several degrees of unjust and
unlawful Anger, in the other World; for most certainly this Threatening cannot
be understood with respect to this Life, there being no such thing inflicted
upon Men, for Anger and reproachful Names, on this side the Grave; and whereas
the Jews were generally afraid chiefly of Punishments in this Life, Christ
thought sit to acquaint them and us, that we had far greater reason to be
afraid of the Punishments in the next, as more dreadful and more grievous than
any they could fear here on Earth. And this is the meaning of the Commination
in the Text, Whosoever, etc.

From the Words thus explained, arise these following Truths:

I. Antiquity is no warrant for erroneous Doctrines and Practices.

II. Murder is a Crime, which the Magistrate must by no means suffer to go
unpunished.

III. Wrath and Anger without a just Cause, has its degrees, and according to
the degrees of the Sin, the Punishment in the next World will be proportionable.

1. Antiquity is no warrant for erroenous Doctrines and Practices.

The Scribes and Pharisees here pretended, that what they taught and practiced
concerning the sixth Commandment, was delivered to them by them of old Time.
But our Savior shows, that this pretense could be of no use to them, but
rather betrayed than covered their Nakedness.

Error pleads Antiquity as well as Truth; and though nothing be more ancient
than Truth, for it is from Eternity, and before ever Error appeared in the
World, Truth had the universal Monarchy, yet Error is as ancient as the Fall.
As soon as the Apostate Angels forsook their Habitation and Integrity together,
Error began to show it self, which soon spread it self through the habitable
World; when Man, tempted by the Devil, consented to his false Principles, and
went astray from the center of his Happiness. No doubt, Antiquity is venerable,
but it must be in a good Cause, and where Truth and that join together, the
Argument is persuasive, and may be called invincible. But a thing is not
therefore true because it is ancient, nor does it command Assent, because of
its uncommon Pedigree. Sin and Error lose little of their Deformity by
appealing to ancient Times, and an Error is so much the worse, by how much it
defends it self by the Practice of former Ages.

Idolatry, and all the Vices in the World, may shelter themselves under this
Roof; and there is no Villainy so great, but Men may find a President two or
three thousand Years ago. The Priests of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, called
the Wicker-image of that Goddess (...), fallen down from Jupiter, merely
because it was ancient; and the Temple having been seven times ruined, and
built up again, and this Image still preserved, was to them an Argument that
this Worship must be lawful. Indeed, at this rate, a Man might even defend
Sodomy with the Romish Archbishop Joannes Casa, because it was practiced in the
Cities which God destroyed with Fire and Brimstone, and the Jews would have had
a good Plea for their Adoration of the Queen of Heaven, because their Fathers
had been used to it.

This very Argument makes the Allegations of the Roman Church from Antiquity
ridiculous, and they might as well espouse the Heresies of Ebian and Cerinthus,
because they lived in and about the Age of the holy Apostles. When God has
given a Standard of Truth, that must be the Rule whereby Truth and Error must
be concluded; and when that says a thing is true, it is not its being revived,
or taught but Yesterday, that can make it false; and whatever is contrary to
that Form of sound Words, must be Erroneous and False, though it were as old as
the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram. The Worship of Images is not
therefore lawful, because Irene a superstitious Woman 900 Years ago, got a
company of illiterate and passionate Men together, who decreed it in a Council;
nor is Sedition and Disobedience to Magistrates therefore justifiable, because
Gregory II. Pope of Rome, in the eighth Century, shook off the Authority of Leo
Isaurus, his Emperor. And therefore let none of you plead for any Sin because
it is the fashion, nor allow themselves in Actions offensive to God's Holiness,
because it has been the Custom of the Country to do so for many Ages. This
will be but a poor defense in the last Day to allege, that you followed the
sinful Practices of your Ancestors, or to say it was unmannerly to depart from
that which was done before you for many Generations. To be sure, Men were good
before they were bad, and there was a Golden Age before that of Iron took place
in the World; and therefore if Antiquity be a motive, nothing can challenge
your Embraces more than Righteousness, and dominion over your Appetite and
Passions, for that was in the World before Mankind knew what it was to depart
from the living God.

Murder is as ancient as the time of Cain; yet no civilized Nation under the
cope of Heaven will allow of it, because of its Antiquity: So far from it, that
in all Countries it is ordered to be punished with the Death of the insolent
Creature: Which calls me to the

II. Observation, That Murder is a Crime which a Magistrate must by no means
suffer to go unpunished; for it has been said, Thou shall not kill, and
whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the Judgment. The Substance of this
has been said by Almighty God, as well as by them of old time; and so far as
God has said it, it is a Law unalterable. Murder is a truly crying Sin, for
the Voice of thy Brother's Blood cries unto me from the ground, says God, Genesis
IV.10. This is a Crime which Nature it self trembles at; and yet we see there
are Wretches and Monsters, who can steel and harden their Consciences against
the Horror of it: But God thunders against it from Heaven; and because the
Crime is so great, he has made a Law, and given it to all Mankind, That whosoever
sheds Man's Blood, by Man, i. e. by the Magistrates, shall his Blood be shed,
Genesis ix.6. Nay, if a wild Beast tears a Man, who is going about his lawful
Occasions, in pieces, though an irrational Creature, God will strike that Beast
dead, because it killed Sanctius his Animal, a nobler, and more sacred Fabric.
So tender is God of the Life of Man, nor would he suffer his Tabernacle or
Sanctuary to be a refuge for such a barbarous Wretch. The Horns of the Altar
could not save the Offender, and from the very Temple he was to be dragged to
the Gallows, or place of Execution. The whole Country comes to be defiled by
the horrid Crime, where it goes unpunished; and that Magistrate makes his Soul
black with Guilt, that connives at the inhumane Action; or out of respect to
Greatness, or Rank, or Quality, pardons the intolerable Extravagance: Where
this remains unpunished, when known, a Nation falls under the Curse of God; and
whatever Judgments befall them, an Ounce of the unpunished Murder, as the Jews
say of the Sin of the Golden Calf, may be said to be an Ingredient of their
Calamity.

We have a Distinction in our Law betwixt Mans-Slaughter and Murder; A
Distinction, which I wish did not too often cover that Bloody Crime, which
ought to be avenged by public Justice. The Word of God knows no such
Distinction; and though it provides for Chance-medly, and gives pardon to the Man
that unawares, and without any intent to kill, proves the occasion of another's
Death; yet this is nothing to that Act, which Wrath and Anger, whether sudden,
or premeditate, does produce to the Horror of the Creation.

Neither does the Law of the Gospel, nor the Law of Moses in this case before
us, reverse the Law of Nature; and God is so resolute, that the Magistrate
shall punish such Offenders with Death, that where they do not, himself
sometimes takes the Sword in hand, and executes the presumptuous Destroyer of
his Image: Nay, many times makes the Wretch that did the Fact, and escapes the
Magistrates Sword, his own Executioner: Alphonsus Diazius, a Spaniard, and a
Roman Catholic, having killed his own Natural Brother for turning Protestant,
for which he received the Praises and Applauses of considerable Men in the
Church of Rome, haunted and hunted at last by the Furies of his own Conscience,
desperately hanged himself at Trent, de callo Mulae suae, says the Historian,
upon the Neck of his own Mule.

It Is true, there are those, who guilty of such Crimes, do yet escape the
revenging Arm of God and Man here, but the more terrible will be their Cup of
trembling hereafter: and God lets some, like stall'd Oxen, grow fat on this
side the Grave, that with greater Terror they may fall a Sacrifice, when they
die, to hellish Furies. Nor can Duels and single Combats upon an Affront
received, and Challenging one another to fight, be excused from sharing in the
Heinousness of this Guilt; for whatever fine Names, and plausible Descriptions,
the Law of Honor may have made of such Actions; he that kills another in a
Duel, though he gets a Pardon of his Prince, will be Arraigned in the last day
among the Murderers, who shall have their Portion in the Lake which burns with
Fire and Brimstone.

I do not deny, but that in the dark Times of Popery such Combats have been
allowed of, and public Prayers have been said for success in such Duels, but
what Credit can a Cause receive from Ages, in which to understand Greek was a
Crime, and Hebrew next to Heresy? We need not wonder, that Babylon the Mother
of Harlots should permit such things, whose Garments have been died Red with
the Blood of the Saints of God, and which has Tricks and Ways to Canonize
Assassins, to consecrate Murder, and to Christen Massacres, Services of
Religion. To call upon you to take heed of having a hand in Blood, were to
discourage you from drowning or poisoning your selves, or running a Sword into
your own Bowels, for indeed this is no better, and whatever varnish may be put
upon it, it is precipitating your selves headlong into the Gulf of Perdition.
There is in this Sin, all that can aggravate a Deed; it is to raise a Hell in
your Bosom, and the thing it self speaks so much abomination, that to name the
Sin, is to give you a thousand Arguments against it. But then that ye may not
be under any temptation to this Sin; let bitterness, and wrath, and anger be
put away from you with all Malice, which leads me to the third Proposition:

III. That Wrath and Anger without a just Cause have their Degrees, and
according to them, the Punishment in the next Life will be proportionable, For
whosoever shall be angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in danger
of the Judgment; and whosoever shall say to his Brother Raca, shall be in
danger of the Council; but whosoever shall say thou Fool, shall be in danger of
Hellfire.

That some anger is lawful, is evident, from hence, because Christ himself was
angry, and very angry sometimes, and so were the Apostles; and we are permitted
to be so, but with this Caution, be angry and sin not, i. e. so as not to Sin,
Ephesians. iv.26 So that all Anger is not a mark of Damnation. But then when the
Author and Captain of our Salvation, Christ Jesus, and his Holy Apostles were
angry, it was only against Sin, and out of a Zeal to Virtue, and when Men were
obstinate and would not be persuaded to do their Duty, and a Sense of God's
Glory kindled the fire of their Passion; in which Case to be angry is a
Perfection, and to be passionate, a Christian accomplishment; provided still
that the bounds of that Anger be observed, and it is heat do not turn into
Wildfire; that it be not attended with unseemly Expressions, nor accompanied
with furious Gestures and Actions. I do not deny but a Man may be angry with
his Servant, a Father with his Children, and a Master with his Scholars, and
proceed even to Correction; but then it must be, because they neglect their
Duty, or will not hearken to wholesome Admonitions, and when gentler Addresses
will do no good; and the Anger must be more upon the account of their Sin, than
out of any Desire to revenge; and it must be an Anger mingled with Pity and
Compassion, and which ends in Prayer for the Offenders; and it must be free
from Fury and reviling Language: And being kept within these Bounds, I find no
fault with this Anger. But this is not the Anger my Text speaks of, and against
which Christ levels his Commination here, for that is Anger without sufficient
Cause, even Anger, because our worldly Interest is not promoted, as we
expected, or because our Honor and Reputation is touched, or because
something, which gratifies our Lusts, is withheld from us, or because our vain
Desires are not cocker'd and flattered, or because such a Person has not given
us the Title and Respect we looked for, or because we cannot digest a Reproof,
or because we are crossed in our Designs, or because such a Man is not of our
Opinion, or because he will not conform to our Humor. These are the things
which commonly provoke to Passion; and this Anger, the farther it goes, the
worse it grows; if from Thoughts and secret Grudges, it proceeds to
contumelious, reproachful, and reviling Language, to calling the party ill
Names, Fool and Rogue, and Villain, and Rascal and Knave, and Cheat, and
Hypocrite, and such other Titles, as Modesty will not suffer us to Name, it
becomes greater; and if from Words and Expressions it goes farther yet, even to
Actions of Revenge, and settles in Hatred, in Rancour, and inveterate Malice;
it then shuts out the Righteousness of God, and lets in the Devil, and invites
evil Spirits to come and Lodge in that House, and the last Estate of that Man
grows worse than the first.

And is not this the Case of abundance of you? Do not you see something in this
Glass that is very like you, and resembles your Temper? And do but consider,
what weakness, what impotency of Reason, and Spirit you betray and discover by
such doings? Is not this an inlet to confusion and every evil work, Jam.
iii.16. Is this the Christian Spirit? Is this to know, what manner of Spirit
you are of? Is this treading in your Masters steps? Is this following his
Example, Who when he was reviled, reviled not again? Dare you appear before the
Son of Man in the last day with such a Disposition of Soul, never yet seriously
repented of? Is this to resist the Devil? Is this to purify your Hearts? Have
you so learned Christ? Is this to be Children in Malice, as you are bound to be
by your Profession? Is this to crucify the Flesh with the Affections and
Lusts, upon the least Provocation, presently to be in a huff, presently to let
your Tongues loose, and to break forth against your Brethren in Language fitter
for Turks and Indians, than for Christians? Is this to be meek as Doves? Is
this to Love one another with a pure Heart fervently? Is Hellfire nothing but
painted Flames? Has our great Master threatened it, and do we make light of it?
Can you seriously reflect upon this Commination, and be unconcerned? And is not
this threatening a Call to Repentance? What a Mercy is it, that God will accept
of a sincere Repentance after such Provocations? But how can you repent of your
Passion, if you do not mortify it? How can you mortify it, if you do not
conquer it? How can you conquer it, if you do not strive? How can you strive,
if you do not use the proper means and weapons God has appointed in the
Gospel? How can you profess sorrow for this Sin, when you fall wilfully into
the same Sin again? Do you call a Mock-Repentance, godly Sorrow! Or do you take
that to be Repentance which is separated from actual Reformation?

Ecclesiastical History tells us of two Bishops that fell out, and proceeded
even to reviling Language, and so parted; toward night one of them sent the
other word, Brother, the Sun is going down; with that, the angry Man remembered
St. Paul's saying, Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath, and made haste, and
found out his offended Brother, and fell on his Neck and kissed him. The
Pythagoreans, though Heathens, did the like, for if they had quarreled one
with another in the day time, they would not go angry to Bed, but shak'd Hands
before Sunset. Did Heathens do so, and shall Christians be strangers to this
Practice? Flatter not your selves with this, that you kill no body in your
Anger, so did the Pharisees, but must ye therefore act against the Law of
Reason and Religion, because you do not run stark Mad? Do you own your selves
Disciples of the Lord Jesus, and will not you believe what he says in the
Text? Has he peremptorily forbid you all Bitterness and Wrath, and speaking
evil one of another, and will not you obey him? Does he assure you, that it
renders you obnoxious to Hellfire; and do not you think, what if I should fall
into that Fire in my Anger? Are you sure you shall not? Has God told you, that
he will not strike you dead in a Fit? Do not you express all that is terrible by
Hellfire? And is not the possibility of falling into it, a sufficient Defense
against this inordinate Passion? Do you hope for Christ's Rewards, and will you
deprive your selves of them by your wilful Disobedience?

Did you go about mortifying that bitterness of Spirit, like Men in good
earnest; how could ye fail of Success? Did ye pray fervently against it, watch
against it, chide your selves frequently for it, shun the occasions of it,
check it when ye find it rising, set before you the Danger and believe it: Call
to mind the meekness of your great Master, and the wonderful Patience of the
Holy Apostles in their private Injuries, how could your undertakings miscarry?
Does Anger according to Solomon's Verdict, rest in the bosom of Fools, and do
you take your selves to be wise Men for it? O be better advised, and if the
Mercy, the Patience, the Clemency, the Compassion of God toward you, cannot
melt down your angry, your wrathful Constitution; stand in awe however of your
Ruin, of your everlasting Ruin, and remember who it is that said and protested,
and will Act according to his Protestation, Whosoever shall be angry with his
Brother without a Cause, etc.

SERMON XXIII.
St. Matt. Chapter v. Ver. 23, 24. Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar,
and there remembrest, that thy Brother has ought against thee; Leave there thy
Gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come, and offer thy Gift.


THE Religion of the Pharisees did not expire with that Sect; though the World,
a great part of it, is Christian, yet abundance of us, not only Papists, but
Protestants too, are mere Pharisees still, I mean with respect to this piece of
Religion, viz. Bribing God as it were with Devotion, or some external Service,
in hopes he will give us leave to enjoy those Lusts and sinful desires we are
loath to quit, and part with: This is pure Pharisaism, to think, or to hope,
that a Sacrifice will atone for the Pride we cherish; that a Fast will expiate
the ill Nature we indulge; that giving Alms will satisfy for the Malice we
harbor; that such a number of Prayers will cover the secret Grudges we
entertain; or that such a piece of Self-denial and Mortification will oblige
God to connive at our Unwillingness, to pardon Injuries. This is to make our
Duties a shelter for our Sins, and to look upon God as some soft and easy
Deity; who, so he be Honored in one thing, is contented to be Dishonored in
another, and so he has but a Pepper-corn, or some small rent of Respect paid
him, gives Men leave to prosecute their evil Inclinations as they please.

This vulgar Error Christ confutes in the Text, and whereas the Pharisees
thought that Sins for which the Law of Moses inflicted no external Punishment,
by the Hand of the Magistrate, particularly, Rancour, Hatred, Malice, and
Unwillingness to forgive, or to be Reconciled, might be expiated by Gifts, and
Sacrifices, and Oblations, and consequently required no Reformation; since God
would pass them by if a Gift, though never so small were brought, and by the
Priest in the Name of the Offerer, laid upon the Altar: Christ to show the
Vanity and Folly of that Conceit, assures them and us, that God is pleased more
with Mercy, than with Sacrifice; with pardoning Injuries more than with Gifts,
and with real Charity more than with the costliest Oblations; Therefore if thou
bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought
against thee; leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled unto thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

The Sense of which Words will appear in this following Proposition.

If we have given just occasion of Offense to our fellow Christians, we must
not think that God will accept of our Devotion, though never so Costly; whether
Public or Private, till we are reconciled, or have reconciled our selves to
our offended Neighbor.

I say, if we have given just occasion of Offense; for that is the meaning of
our great Master here when he says, if thy Brother has ought against thee,
which is not to be understood of other Men's picking Quarrels with us, or
bearing a Spleen, or Hatred to us without a just Cause, for so Christ and his
Apostles, and the best Men have been used in all Ages, but if our Brother or
fellow Christian have ought against us, that he can justly charge us with, as
an Offense given to him; in that Case, if we should not think of it, till we
come to the very Altar of Gods House, our Devotion, if we mean to have it
accepted, must be forborne, or it is offered in vain, till a Reconciliation be
sought or made.

I apply what is said here of bringing our Gift to the Altar, to any Devotion,
whether it be Prayer, or receiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist, or
Consecrating part of our Estate and Goods to God's Service, etc. For though
Christ in saying so, alludes to the Practice and Custom of the Jews offering
their Gifts, their Sheep, their Turtles, their Pigeons, etc. upon the Altar,
the holiest place in the Tabernacle, or Temple of Jerusalem, yet since by
bringing a thing, or coming to the Altar of God, is some times meant Divine
Worship in general, as Malach. ii.13. Psalm. xxvi.6. the Phrase may justly be
understood of the Public Worship of God, nay any sort of Divine Worship,
whereby we intend to express our respect to God, whether Public or Private;
and that want of Reconciliation in case we have offered a signal Injury to our
fellow Christians, either in Word or Deed, renders the Gift, or Devotion, we
offer unpleasing, or unacceptable, will appear from the following
Considerations.

1. Because the Devotion is offered from an impure Heart; want of
Reconciliation, I mean a wilful want or neglect of it supposes a Heart full of
Rancour and Malice, and secret Grudges against the Person whom we are at
Variance with, or whom we have offended; and in this case David's saying holds
true; If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not leave me, Psalm.
lxvi.18. Shall God, whose Purity is great, and astonishing, and infinite,
accept of an Oblation, which has so impure a Foundation? Can we imagine God is
so fond of Services, as not to regard the Heart, which is and ought to be the
principal Agent in the Service? He that scorned the Blind and the Lame offered
to him in Sacrifice, will he be pleased with such blind and lame Devotion? It
is not the bare Flower, (as beautiful as it is Colors may seem to be) that God
is delighted with, if the Soil on which it grows be a Dunghill. No,

Let Us not flatter our selves, that the Building we erect, will be taking in
the Eyes of the great Architect, while the Foundation is rotten. A Heart that
cherishes Malice, is the impure Root, that sheds poison on the Plant it
produces; and that can cause no odoriferous Scent in Heaven. He that has
protested, that an evil Heart is abomination to him, will he relish the Water
which comes from that bitter Spring? He that has told us, that the pure in
heart shall see him, and none but they, will he admit that Devotion into his
gracious Presence, which comes from a bottom, where Toads and Serpents crawl?
He that delights in nothing so much as in a Heart sincere, and upright, will he
be fond of Hypocrisy? What is Hypocrisy? Is it not seeming to be good, when we
are not? And is not Devotion, coming from a Heart unwilling to be reconciled to
our fellow Christian, an appearance of Goodness; while love to our Brethren,
the principal Ingredient which must make it so, is wanting?

2. Such Devotion is a perfect Contradiction. The Soul, that is a Stranger, or
an Enemy to Reconciliation, and yet offers Services of Devotion to God,
pretends to obey him by those Services, and yet at the same time disobeys him,
by being unwilling to be reconciled. Does a Fountain at the same place send
forth bitter water and sweet? says St. James, chapter iii.11. Of the Samaritans we
read, 1 Kings, xvii.33. That they feared the Lord, and served their own Gods.
They sacrificed to the Great Jehovah, and to Devils, and their Worship was
divided betwixt God and Belial; betwixt Dagon and the Ark; betwixt the Temple
of God, and Idols. And is not Devotion, from a Heart unwilling to be
reconciled, a Worship much like theirs? At once to obey God, and to disobey
him; at once to honor, and to affront him; at once to worship, and to
blaspheme him? To build with one hand, and to pull down with another: At the
same time to please God, and to offend him; to please him with Devotion, and to
offend him with neglect of Charity? Is God a God of Order, and will he be
pleased with Contradictions? May it not justly be said to such among you, as
Elijah to the Israelites? 1 Kings, xviii.21. How long halt you between two
Opinions? If the Lord be God, then follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.
But to think to oblige both, is to reconcile Fire and Water, Light and
Darkness, Heaven and Hell, and things that have the greatest Antipathy one to
another.

3. God is the God of Love, and will he accept of a Devotion coming from a
Heart that has no Love? Can there be Love there, where there is no
Reconciliation? Can Charity be there, where the Man will not be Friends with
his offended Brother? It was indeed said in Commendation of that Roman, that
having lived so many years with his Mother, he was never reconciled to her; but
the meaning was, that they had never quarrelled; never fallen out; so there was
no need of any Reconciliation. But here we speak of Offenses given and taken,
and a wilful neglect of Reconciliation, must necessarily argue want of Love;
and can God love that Service, in which there is nothing agreeable to his
Nature? Behold how good, and how pleasant a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in Unity, says David, Psalm. cxxxiii.1. It is pleasant to Men, and
pleasant to God. He loves to see it, there is harmony in it; and can that
Devotion make Music in Heaven, which runs upon jarring, and Discord, and
Animosities, and Dissentions? God is Love, and where should Love dwell, but in
a Heart that loves? A Heart that does not, is no Seat, no Place, no Mansion, no
Habitation, no Tabernacle for the God of Love to rest in. The Spirit of love
flees from such a House. There must be a similitude of Tempers. For God to
dwell in a Heart where Hatred lodges, would be as unseemly a thing, as for a
King to choose a Dungeon for his Habitation. I love them that love me, says the
Eternal Wisdom, Prove. viii.17. He that is unwilling to be reconciled to his
offended Neighbor, cannot love God; and God cannot love him, nor his Service;
for if the Man does not love his Brother, whom he has seen, how shall be love
God, whom he has not seen? 1 John iv.20.

4. Such Devotion, coming from a Heart loath to be reconciled, is a plain
attempt to put a cheat upon the great God of Heaven; for such a Man hopes, God
will be so dazzled with his Devotion, that he will overlook the Malice that is
glowing in his Heart. He hopes, that God will be so taken with the external
Service he lays at his feet, as not to take notice of the abomination that
lurks within. Will you put out the Eyes of these Men, said Corah, and Dathan,
Numb. xvi.14. And may it not be said to such, Will you put out the Eyes of
Almighty God? Do you think to blind him, that sees by Night, as well as by Day?
Do you hope to deceive him that searches the Hearts and the Reins? Is it a
small thing to you to affront him, and would you cheat him too? Do you think to
lull him asleep with your Devotion, that he may not mind the Leprosy which
infects your Souls? Is he a Man, that you think to impose upon him? Or, a Being
so weak, that it is possible to gull him into approbation of your Services? See
what Absurdities Men run into, when they hope, that some external Acts of their
Piety will cover the multitude of their Sins. Strange Men! Do not you own, that
God sees the very Secrets of your Hearts; and do you hope to hide your secret
Malice from his All-seeing Eye? Do you hope to make the Sepulcher so white,
that he shall not spy the rotten Bones that lie concealed there? Do you think
to make the Grass so thick, that the Snake which lies underneath, shall escape
the piercing Eye of his Omniscience?

Understand this, ye brutish among the People, and ye Fools, when will ye be
wise, He that planted the Ear, shall not he hear? He that formed the Eye, shall
not he see? Psalm. xciv.8, 9.

INFERENCES.
To draw some Inferences from the Premises.

I. What I have said, is no discouragement to external Duties. No! Your Gifts
must be brought to the Altar, and God must be worshipped, and honored, and
adored: God; your Relation to him, and your Interest requires it.

God, the Author of your Being: Has he made you Creatures, and rational
Creatures; Creatures, capable of understanding Glory and Excellency above all
created Beings; and shall not he have your Homage, even the Homage of Prayer
and Praises, and acknowledgment of his Authority? He that spoke you into Being,
has not he power to command you? Has not he power to prescribe Rules, how you
are to worship him? And dare you deny him that service, which your entire
dependence upon his Charity does challenge at your Hands?

Do not you acknowledge him, as the All-seeing, the All-knowing, the Almighty,
the All-wise, the most Perfect, the most Holy, the most Blessed, the most Happy
Potentate; the King Immortal, Invisible, and who inhabits Eternity; and does
not his Incomprehensible Excellency deserve Love, and Delight, and Admiration,
and Adoration, and suitable Expressions of Duty and Respect?

Do you own him for your greatest Benefactor, and the rich Fountain from which
all things come, that make you Rich and Healthy and Easy, and Blessed and
Glorious both in this World, and in that which is to come, and can you do less
than apply your selves to Prayers and Supplications, and devout Humiliations
before the Throne of his Glory? Do you look upon him as the inexhausted Spring
of Bounty and Mercy and Compassion? Do you own all this, and shall you think
much of bowing the Knee before him, and breaking forth into Celebrations of his
wonderful Works? Nay have not you found it very Comfortable to do so, to tread
his Courts, and to worship him in the Beauty of Holiness? If you have not, ask
those, who feel and find, that one day in his Courts is better than a Thousand
in the Tents of Wickedness, where Plenty flows, and Sensuality abounds, and
that they had rather be Door-keepers in the House of their God, than to divide
the Spoil with the Rich, and with the Great? Do you take all this to be Fancy
only; or do you think that these are only Symptoms of brainsick and melancholy
Men? If so, whence is it, that such Men find comfort, when the profane Herd can
find none? Whence is it, that such Persons can rejoice in Tribulations, under
which the careless Sinner faints and sinks, and casts away his Hope?

Look abroad and see who has greater Comforts, greater Peace, and greater
Consolation, (Consolation I mean, that is solid and lasting, and can resist
Storms, and weather the greatest Brunts) than those who Love and Admire, and
Adore and Worship him, who lives forever and ever?

This therefore is certain, that God must be Worshipped, and Devotion and
external Service must be paid him, whether it be Fasting, or Alms, or Prayer,
or Praise, or a thankful remembrance of the Death of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament. But then I add, that our taking notice of the Faults and Errors
which some of you commit in these Religious Services, is no just Discouragement
to the faithful performance of these Services. Are we therefore your Enemies,
because we tell you the Truth? Is it not Kindness in us, to show you the Rocks
you are to shun? Is it not Charity in us to acquaint you, in what manner these
Services are to be performed? Do not you find fault with your Servants and
Children if they do not things according to your Mind? And do not you tell them
of it, that they may amend and do better? And is not our Intent, and Design the
same? Would ye offer Devotions to God which vanish in the Air? Would not you
have your Adorations of him useful and profitable to you? and if so, then we
tell you by the Word of the Lord, that without Charity they are nothing worth;
and did ye speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, nay could ye pray like
Angels, and have no Charity, ye would be no better than sounding Brass, or
atinkling Cymbal; and though ye had all Faith, so that you could remove
Mountains, and have no Charity, ye are nothing; and if ye bestowed all your
Goods to feed the Poor, and gave your Bodies to be Burnt, and have no Charity,
it would profit ye nothing, 1 Cor. xiii.1, 2, 3. That Is the first.

II. Let none of you entertain high and lofty Conceits of your Religious
Services, because they are called Gifts; when thou bring thy gift to the
Altar. If they are called Gifts, it is not their intrinsic Worth or Merit, that
is the cause; but it is God's infinite Goodness and Mercy, that is pleased to
call that a Gift, which is our bounden Duty; and they are called Gifts, not as
if we might choose, whether we will offer them or not, but to let us see, with
what Freedom, Alacrity, and Cheerfulness, they ought to be performed.

That which makes a Gift very pleasing to the Person, who receives it, is the
Candor, the Ingenuity, the Cheerfulness, the Alacrity, the readiness of the
Giver. I will freely Sacrifice unto thee, says the Royal Prophet, Psalm. live.6.
Dragged Services he does not care for, and Devotions offered to him with an
unwilling Mind, are a Smoke in his Nostrils. But the Votary that comes
cheerfully to his Altar, that with a good Will worships him, that runs to his
Duty, that goes to it as if he were going to a Banquet with Joy, and secret
Exultation, and like him Psalm. cxxii.1. is glad when they say unto him, let us
go into the House of the Lord, that is the Person upon whom his Eyes are open
for Good, that is the Man, whom he sees coming as he did the Penitent Prodigal,
when he was yet afar off, the good Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran,
and fell on his Neck, and Kissed him. Such Services have Love at the Root; Love
that constrains, that forces, that compels the Soul to advance toward the
Throne of Grace and Mercy. Such Services God meets with Euges, with Applauses,
with Approbations; such Services he calls Gifts, such he Honors with that
glorious Title, not to make us Proud but to encourage us to our Duty. But the
Man, who values his Religious Services, as if he did God a greater Kindness by
them, than he does to himself, and looks upon it as a Favor, that he will
express his Respect to God in Devotion, or fancies God reaps some great
Advantages by them, or performs them more because it is his Duty, than because
it is his Choice, more because he does not think himself safe without it, than
because he delights in it, more to satisfy his unruly Conscience, than his
Pleasure; or in a manner angry, because God has obliged him to the Drudgery of
Devotion; all such Persons have odd, sinister, preposterous Notions and
Apprehensions of God, and mistake the Nature of their own Felicity; the World
has the Ascendent of them, and something here below is dearer to them than
their God. In a word, let every Soul, that approaches to pay her Duty to God,
remember that God loves a cheerful giver.

III. See here how heinous this Sin is, I mean this Rancour, Hatred, Malice in
our Hearts to our Neighbors, whom we have offended, and Unwillingness to
forgive, or to be Reconciled to them; I say, see here how heinous the Sin is,
since no Gift can prevail with God to pass it by. It is very true my Friends,
Not all the Gold and Silver you have, not all the Alms you give, not ten
thousand Rams, not a thousand Rivers of Oil, not all the external Services you
offer to him, or lay upon his Altar, will move him to overlook it. Therefore if
thou bring thy Gift unto the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has
ought against thee; leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift.

Aristippus and Aeschines were both Heathens, yet hear what they did. Being at
Variance for some time, Aristippus of his own accord goes to Aeschines his
Enemy, and tells him, shall not we be Reconciled, till we become the Table-talk
of all the Country? Aeschines replied, I would very gladly been at Peace with
you. Remember therefore said Aristippus, that I the Elder and the better Man,
have first sought unto you. You are so, says Aeschines, not only the Elder,
but the better Man, for I began the Quarrel, and you the Reconciliation.

These things many of us can hear and read; many of us that call themselves
Christians, Disciples of Christ, Children of the Revelation, Children of Light;
and that vowed Obedience to God, over and over, and yet they blush not to see
themselves outdone by Heathens. Notwithstanding all this they can carry
plumbeas iras, as the Comedian speaks, leaden and lasting Wrath and Hatred in
their Hearts; and though they have given occasion to the Variance, and been the
Beginners of that Distance, which is between them and their Neighbors, yet
will not be persuaded to forgive, or to be reconciled. Or if they be sometime
by the Endeavors of some Charitable Friend forced into a Reconciliation, yet
that Friendship is, to use Menander's Phrase, Lupina Amicitia, a Wolflish kind
of Friendship, which lasts for a little while, and then the Sore breaks out
again. And yet such Men shall say their Prayers, and go to Church, and
sometimes receive the Holy Sacrament, when a Place, or Office, or Employment,
or some such carnal Reason puts them upon it; a Profanation so great, that it
is almost in vain to argue with such Men out of the Gospel, for they have not
common Principles of Morality, they throw down the Bounds of Nature, how shall
the Gospel overrule them! Yet that they may be without Excuse, I must a little
reason the Case with them. Tell me then ye Men, that name the Name of Christ,
and dishonor and disgrace it by your uncharitable Temper, is it nothing to you
that God has declared himself your Enemy? Has not he declared himself your
Enemy, when he has protested he will not forgive you, and has not he
Protested so, when he has told you over and over in his Gospel, in that Gospel
which you pretend to believe, that except ye forgive your Neighbors their
Trespasses, and from your Heart too, he will not forgive you? Do but read these
Texts, Matthew. vi.11. Matthew. xviii.31. Marc. xi.25, 26. How do you forgive them
when ye will not be Reconciled to them? or do you call that Forgiveness and
Reconciliation, when after pretenses of Agreement you speak ill of the other
party again, and invent a thousand Excuses to evade the Obligation of a true
brotherly Reconciliation, either that you will do them no hurt, or that you
will not meddle with them, or that you will let them alone, if they let you
alone, etc. And is this Forgiveness, does this look like Reconciliation? Have
you read the Gospel, and can you call it so? If God be not Reconciled to you,
if this Gospel be true, you must be Miserable, and fall into the Hands of
Tormentors; and God will not be Reconciled to you, except you Reconcile your
selves to your Brethren, who have ought against you. And when shall this
Reconciliation be? What, upon a Deathbed? A Deathbed! Go then and cry to the
Gods whom ye have served, and let them deliver you if they can. Is it likely
God will have any thing to do with you then, when all the Charms of his
Mercies, and entreaties could not prevail with you to be Reconciled before?
Again, to what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices? to what purpose do
ye pray? for if you spread forth your Hands toward Heaven, he will hide his
Eyes, and when ye make many Prayers he will not hear, for your Hearts are full
of Rancour and Bitterness. And how dare you in the Holy Sacrament look the Lord
Jesus in the Face, that Jesus who died for you that were his Enemies, that
Jesus who sought unto you when you had affronted God, and wronged your own
Souls, that Jesus who came from Heaven to seek you, and laid down his Life to
rescue you from the Power of the Devil, that Jesus who suffered the bitterest
Torments to move his Father to forgive you ten thousand Talents: I say, how
dare you look him in the Face, who have no Compassion for your fellow Servants?
Can you hope for any Mercy from him at such a time, when you do obstruct that
Mercy by your uncharitable Spirit? Ay but this seeking to be Reconciled is so
Ungentile a Thing, you will say, it makes a Man look ridiculous among People of
the better Sort, to entreat a Person to be Reconciled when a Man can live
without him, and has no need of him. A wonderful Argument! And does not the
neglect of this Reconciliation, make you look far more ridiculous in the sight
of God! Will it not provoke him to laugh at your Calamity, and to mock when
your Fear comes! And have not you a fine Religion, that makes you more afraid
of the Opinion, and Censures of Men, than of the Wrath of the living God? Ay
but I have endeavored to Reconcile my self to the Person whom I have offended,
but he will hearken to no Terms of Peace. If thou have, thou have delivered
thine own Soul, provided thou did it unfeignedly, with Sincerity, with
Humility, with bowels of Compassion, and from a Sense of the Love of God.

But now that I am talking of Sincerity, it will be necessary to represent to
you the manner of this Reconciliation, that in case any be wrought upon by this
Discourse, they may not mistake their Measures.

1. Then according to the hint given in the Text, Here must be a Remembrance, a
Calling to Mind, and Recollecting our selves, whether we have given any of our
Neighbors, either lately or formerly any just Offense; and that which makes
this Recollection necessary, is this, because we are apt to forget and to
overlook Quarrels which are past, and consequently to overlook the Endeavors
we ought to use in order to a Reconciliation.

2. Strict enquiry must be made if there is or has been any Variance betwixt
us and our Neighbors; and this enquiry must be impartial, rather favoring our
Neighbors Cause than our own; who it was that began the Quarrel, who gave the
first ill Word, the first Blow to the Friendship, the first Provocation, the
first Injury, and who kindled the Fire first. After it is once kindled, there
are mutual Injuries offered, and the offended party provokes the other by
Opposition, therefore an impartial Enquiry must be made, whether we gave the
first Occasion of the Breach, and if once we find we did, we may justly charge
our selves with all the evil which ensued upon it, and run and leave no Stone
unturned to reconcile our selves to our fellow Christians; for without it no
Prayers, no Gifts, no Sacramental Vows can be acceptable.

3. If the Party whom we have offended live at Distance, that we cannot speak
to him nor send to him, then the Reconciliation must be made in our Wills and
Minds, and with appeals to the Omniscience of God: Lord! Thou know I love my
offended Brother, and that the desire of my Soul is after Peace with him: And
after this we may come and offer our Gift; yet with this Proviso, that if
afterward we meet the offended Party, and with an Opportunity to manifest this
Reconciliation in Words and Behavior to our offended Neighbor, we must not be
wanting in the larger Expressions of it.

4. If in the Offense given there has been any Wrong done to our Neighbors
Goods or Estate, the Reconciliation must be begun with Restitution, without
which, if we are able to compass it, all Endeavors of Reconciliation are vain.
Where no hurt has been done to the Possessions of our offended Brother, the
Practice of St. James' Rule is sufficient, James v.16. Confess your Sins one to
another. Which Confession our Savior bids us express by saying, I repent, Luc.
xvii.4.

5. The ordinary method of this Reconciliation is intimated by our Great Master
the Lord Jesus, Matthew. xviii.15. First we our selves are to Address to our
offended Neighbor; if that attempt proves ineffectual, then one or two must be
desired to join with us in the Entreaty: If they cannot prevail with him, then
the Church must be told of it, i. e. principal Men of the Society, we are
Members of; Men of Probity, Gravity and Sincerity; and if he refuse to hear
them too, then he is to be looked upon as desperate, as a Heathen and Publican.
So that,

6. If the Party offended be entreated to be Reconciled, the Person who has
given the Offense being penitent and craving Pardon, it is as much as his Life
is worth, if he forgives not his penitent Brother. Nay, if the Party which gave
the Offense should out of Stubborness forbear seeking a Reconciliation, after
we have waited some time to see whether he will be sensible of his Error, and
seek to be at Peace with us; if we see he minds it not, we our selves, who are
the Persons Offended are in some measure bound to seek a Reconciliation; not
only because I told you just now, that some Heathens have done it, but chiefly
because God seeks to the Sinners to be reconciled to him, even to the Party
offending, and we are to be followers of God, as dear Children, Ephesians. v.

7. Even Superiors are concerned here if they have offended their Inferiors,
there being but one way to Heaven, and in Matters of Duty, the Prince is
equally obliged with the Beggar, for God is no respecter of Persons. And here I
could give you a notable Instance in one of our own Kings, who having accused
his Servant wrongfully, and charged him with Perfidiousness and Treachery,
finding afterward, that he had wronged him, sent for him, and being come the
King fell upon his Knees, and formally begged of him to forgive him, and would
not rise off of his Kees, till the Servant had given him a formal Absolution.

8. This Reconciliation must not be slight and superficial, not merely
Negative, which consists in doing no hurt to the Person, we are Friends with;
but there must pass besides, mutual Prayers one for another, real Acts of Love,
of Kindness and Charity; and the Peace begun, must be preserved to the best of
our Skill and Power, and this is the true Nature of Reconciliation.

And now, whatever Difficulties there may be in the beginning, sure I am, that
when we have Conquered our selves, and our rugged Temper, and embraced him that
was our Enemy before, nothing can be sweeter; and upon this Peace flows in the
Peace of God, and our Prayers become sweet, and all our Devotions and Religious
Services become sweet and refreshing, and effectual and comfortable; and our
Hopes of Pardon from God become Solid and Rational, and afford true Content and
Satisfaction, and our very Deathbed becomes soft, a Bed of Down, and a Bed of
Roses; for now the Conscience is easy and free from the Burden, that lay upon
her, and presages our lying forever incircled in the Arms of him, who is all
Love, all Mercy, all Goodness, all Compassion: To whom be Glory forever. Amen.

ADDENDA.
IN this Sacrament particularly, you bring your Gift to the Altar; not only
your Alms, and Prayers, and Praises, but you pretend to present your Souls and
Bodies living Sacrifices to God: And is it likely these Gifts will be accepted
there, when there is a Root of bitterness in your Heart? Is this the way to
procure the Smiles of Heaven? Is it not rather the way to procure the Frowns of
God? to be sent away with a Curse, even with the Curse inflicted on the Man
that came to the Marriage Feast without a Wedding Garment? Hither you come to
receive Pardon, and to secure your Everlasting Salvation; but have not you
read, 1 John III. That he that hates his Brother, is a Murderer, and we know,
that a Murderer has not Eternal Life in him?

SERMON XXIV.
St. Matthew. Chapter v. Ver. 25, 26. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, while thou
art in the way with him; lest at any time the Adversary deliver thee to the
Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison:
Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence till thou have
paid the uttermost Farthing.


THese words are an Appendix to those, which went before; they contain the
Sanction which is intended to enforce the Duty of being reconciled to our
offended Brother, when Quarrels and Differences have risen betwixt us. Laws
lose their force, without a Penalty annexed; and though one would think it was
Punishment enough to threaten, as Christ does in the preceding Verse, that
without Forgiveness and Reconciliation, our Devotions are not, will not, cannot
be pleasing to God, nor find acceptance in his sight; which was the subject of
our last Discourse: Yet these words contain a Communication of something more
dreadful, which shall undoubtedly be inflicted on the Person that neglects to
renew that Love, and Charity, which has been broken by Quarrels, by Wrath, and
Malice, and Offenses given to our fellow Christians.

To apprehend the true design of them, you must know, that our Savior having
in the four preceding Verses assured us of the greatness of the Sin of
inordinate Anger, and reproachful Language, and unwillingness to forgive, or to
be reconciled to those, whom we have offended, goes on in the Text, prosecuting
the Subject he has begun: And that none might complain of Gods rigor and
severity in casting a Man, for an angry word, or reviling Expression into Hell
Fire, shows by what degrees God proceeds to the Execution of that Sentence, not
only in avenging, virulent, and angry Expressions, and Names, and Titles, but
uncharitableness, and backwardness to be reconciled to our Brethren, to whom we
have given just occasion of Offense.

First, God offers Mercy, and is willing to accept of our timely Repentance;
and thereupon to reverse the Judgment threatened: If we fall out with our
Brethren, he will not presently take the forfeiture, and bid the Executioner,
the roaring Lion, seize upon us, but gives and allows time for Repentance and
Reformation, upon which he is willing to be Friends with us. But if we delay
that Repentance, and change, and forbear or neglect to be reconciled to God and
Man, his Patience then will turn into Severity and Vengeance.

For, as among Men, he that comes to terms with his Antagonist, and agrees with
his Adversary quickly, yields betimes, and does not stubbornly stand out
against a Man more potent than himself, finds Favor, and Mercy, and kind
Usages; but if he be obstinate, and inflexible, he is without any more ado,
brought before the Judge, and by him condemned, and delivered to the Officers
of Justice, and by them thrown into Prison, where he must lie, and perish, and
never think to come out, till all the Debt be paid. So God is gentle, and
gracious, and will not refuse him, that betimes acknowledges his Folly, which
he has committed, in yielding to the Temptation of the Devil, and the Flesh,
when they tempted him to uncharitable Language and Behavior. If by his Actions
and Endeavors to be reconciled, and to be Friends with his offended Brother,
and to live in Love and Peace with him for the future, he agrees with God, who
is highly concerned in the Offense; he will find very favorable Dealings at
his Hands: But if these actual Demonstrations of Charity be delayed, and the
Man care not for the love of God, and his offended Neighbor, is intractable
and obstinate in his Grudges, and secret Hatred and Malice, and scorns to
return to his Duty, God then will judge and doom that Man to Prison, even to
Hell, where nothing, neither Men, nor Angels, can deliver him; where he must
abide till all his Scores be paid off, i. e. for ever.

This is plainly the meaning of our Savior in the Text; so that what is said
here is a Similitude taken from judicial Proceedings, used among Men, against
their knavish Debtors, that are able to pay and will not. The Application to
the present Purpose being very easy, it is not mentioned, but is in effect the
same with the Paraphrase I have given in the Premises.

Before I go any farther, I must necessarily resolve a Case, which lies in my
way, and to which the Text gives occasion, viz. Suppose I have occasion to
throw my Neighbor into Prison for Debt, or some other Misdemeanour, must I
forbear to do it for fear of giving him any just Offense; or if I have done it,
must I in order to be Reconciled to him, let him out again, perhaps to the
undoing of my Family?

I Answer, 1. That it is not altogether unlawful to throw a Man into Prison for
Debt, or some other great Misdemeanour, is evident partly from the Practice of
the Jews in the Text, not condemned by our Savior, partly from the Public
Good, which would be very much Prejudiced without it, and partly from the
Circumstances of the Person we have sometimes to deal with, which may be so,
that it is better for his Soul and Body, to be sent to Prison than to go free,
not only because he is thereby kept from doing further Mischief to his
Neighbors, but because the Place he is confined to, may be a means to bring
him to a serious Sense of his Spiritual Condition. For though there are
Persons, who are hardened by Affliction and Danger, yet where there is any
Ingenuity left, Affliction is the most likely means to make a Man come to
himself again. Yet,

2. This throwing Men into Prison for Debt is not a thing to be done Rashly,
nor in Anger, nor by way of Revenge, nor because others do it, nor or a trivial
inconsiderable Debt; in all which Cases it is certainly Sinful and Unlawful;
but upon very mature Deliberation, and when all gentler means are Vain, when
the Person is very Vicious or Obstinate, and will not pay what he ows, though
he be able to do it. To throw a Christian into Prison, who is fallen to decay,
not through Vice, but by Providence, whose conversation is Harmless and
Blameless, and who forbears Payment, not because he is humorsom, and will not,
but because he is not able, this is Barbarous, and can never be reconciled to
the Rules of the Christian Religion; in this Case a Man gives just Offense to
his Neighbor, and must be reconciled, which cannot be done, except he lets the
Prisoner go free, confesses his Fault to him, and exercises Compassion to his
Fellow Servant.

3. From a Man's being offended at what we do to him, it does not always
follow, that therefore we have given him just Offense; for we may do our Duty,
and he be offended at it, which must not be therefore forborne, because he
complains at the Injury done him by that Duty; as in the case of Reproof,
seizing a common Thief, or Malefactor, etc. But then we give a just Offense
when we do that to our Neighbor, which the Law of Nature, or of Revelation
forbids to be done to him; and consequently in Prisoning a wicked Man for Debt,
however he may storm at it and complain of Wrong, is no just Offense given,
since the Law of Nature and Scripture does not absolutely forbid it, and the
Common Good which the Law of Nature has respect to, sometime requires it; so
that if a Person Vicious and Brutish, and Covetous, and Illnatured, Base and
Selfish, who is able to pay, and will not, and deals Fraudulently and
Deceitfully, be cast into Prison, it is no Breach of Charity, provided still,
that it is not Anger or Malice, or Revenge, or delight in Men's Misery, or some
other base sinister End and Design, that is the cause of our taking this
rougher Way; but love to Justice, intent to reform the Offender by Affliction,
and care to prevent his continuance in Sin, and doing hurt to others, etc. And
if there be no Breach of Charity, there needs no Reconciliation.

It Is granted, the Law of the Land allows you to Arrest any Man, that is
indebted to you, whether he be able to pay or not: But may it not be said in
this Case, as Christ to the Pharisees in the Law of Divorce; for the hardness
of your Hearts, the Law permits it? but still it does not hinder you from
showing Mercy. The Law of the Land contradicts not the Law of the Gospel, nor
was it ever intended to draw Men off from their Duty to God, and to their
Neighbor; and since Charity is the great Gospel Duty, we must think our selves
obliged more by what the Gospel commands, than by what the Law of the Land
permits; and though it be a kind of Charity, to punish Malefactors, yet every
Debtor comes not into this Number; nor must those to whom it is an Affliction
not to be in a Condition to satisfy their Creditors, be confounded with the
Wicked, that borrows and pays not again.

This being Premised, I shall consider what Use we are to make of these Words
of our Savior; and this will soon appear, if you will attend to the following
Observations:

I. While a Man keeps, or maintains Hatred and Malice to his Neighbor in his
Heart, God is his Adversary.

II. To agree with God betimes is our wisest Course.

III. God deals very gently with us, before he lets us feel the heaviest Stroke
of his Vengeance: He both calls to Repentance, and gives time for it.

IV. Delay of true Repentance provokes God to proceed to very severe, nay to
the severest Courses of Vengeance.

V. Hell is a Prison from which there is no coming out, till all the Debt be
paid.

I begin with the First.

I. While a Man harbors Hatred and Malice in his Heart to his Neighbor, God
is his Enemy-or his Adversary. So much is evident from the Similitude here
used, where what is said of an Adversary among Men, is referred to God; as such
a Person deals with a perfidious Debtor here on Earth, so God will deal with
the Uncharitable, and Persons who will not be Reconciled to their offended
Brethren.

Till Affliction and Trouble comes, very few People will believe that God is
their Adversary: Indeed when a great Loss befalls them, or some painful Disease
seizes upon them, or a Distemper that very much discomposes and disturbs their
Minds, hangs about them, or some other Disaster, unforseen, and unlooked for,
happens, then God from whom the Affliction comes, is looked upon as an
Adversary, and Men are apt to believe he is angry with them; but while
Prosperity lasts, and that Sun continues to shine upon them, and Ease and
Plenty are their Companions, and like officious Servants wait upon them; then
God is a Friend, and they will have him to be so sometimes, whether he will or
not. But as Gods Favor and Hatred are not to be measured by outward Accidents,
not by outward Want, or Plenty, so it is certain it may infallibly be known,
whether God be our Friend or Adversary by our Obedience or Disobedience to his
Holy Commands, let our outward Condition be what it will. So that if you live
in Disobedience to his express and peremptory Commands, it is a never-failing
Sign, that God is your Adversary, though you wash your Feet in Butter, and the
Rocks pour you out Rivers of Oil; though your Oxen be strong to labor, and
your Sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousand in your Streets; and
particularly, if no Argument, no Motive, no enforcive drawn either from the
Word of God, or from your Spiritual and Eternal Interest; or from the Examples
of Holy Men, or from the reason of the Thing can prevail with you to be
Reconciled to your Brethren, with whom you are fallen out; it is as sure as any
Oracle in the Bible, that God is your Adversary.

Perhaps such an Adversary you like very well, that Crowns you with temporal
Blessings, and lets you enjoy what your Flesh desires, and fills your Bellies
with hid Treasures. These are the Things you are fond of, and you desire to be
punished with such outward Conveniences and Accommodations. And indeed, if
this Life were all you have to look after, the Argumentation or Inference would
not be amiss. But did not Dives live as Calmly and as Plentifully as you can
do, and yet when his Body dropped from him, and was Buried, the Man, the unhappy
Man felt what it was to have God for his Adversary. The very Plenty he formerly
enjoyed, became now an Ingredient of his bitter Potion, and he felt the Might
of his Adversary's Hand, his former Prosperity was so far from being a Sign,
that God was his Friend, that it gave Evidence, that he was his Enemy; and he
that had formerly looked upon him as the Fountain of Mercy, now found him to be
a Spring indeed, not flowing with Milk and Honey, but with Fire and Brimstone;
so that upon the whole Matter it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of
the living God, Heb. x.31.

And therefore certainly, to agree with him betimes must be our wisest Course;
which is the

II. Proposition, I am to speak to. Agree with thine Adversary quickly. Agree
with God! Who would have any Difference with him? Who can grapple with him? Who
can resist him? Who can make his Party good against him? Poor feeble Clay!
Shall it rise against the Porter, who has Power to make of it a Vessel of
Honor, and Vessel of Dishonor?

Agree with him! The Greatness, the Majesty, the Excellency of God, one would
think should be Motive great enough to labor to be at Peace with him! To be at
Peace with him, is to be at Peace with our Consciences, and with him, who has
promised to make all our Enemies to be at Peace with us, and can make all the
Elements to be at Peace with us, so that the Sun shall not smite us by Day, nor
the Moon by Night; so that the Air shall not infect us, nor the Water drown us,
nor the Fire burn us, nor the Earth swallow us up. But then, how can we agree
with him, except we walk with him? Except we be of the same Mind with him? Can
we say, we agree with him, when God and we draw different ways? When he bids us
walk in the Light, and we walk in Darkness? When God bids us do one Thing, and
we do another? When God commands us to live in Love, and we maintain and
harbor Hatred and ill Will to our fellow Christians? when God enjoins us to
take to the strait Way, and we venture upon the Broad? Is this Agreement when
he bids us harken to the Motions of his Spirit, and we are guided by the
Suggestions of the World, and the Devil? And yet this Agreement will signify
little, except it be timely, and while we are in the Way with him. To be sure
to delay that which God would have us apply our selves to presently, does not
look like Agreement. To run those Hazards which God would have us prevent, is
nothing but Contradiction. And what is it that God would have us agree with him
in, without delay? Why it is in all the Virtues and Graces, whereof Christ has
shown us an Example, and particularly in agreeing with our Neighbors, if we
have any Difference with them. If we agree with them, we agree with him. And
why should we delay it? Have we a Lease of our Lives? Do we know how long we
shall continue here? Do not we see how uncertain every thing is, and shall we
build upon Uncertainties, which in Temporal Concerns we count Folly, and can it
be Wisdom in the greater concerns of our Souls? And is this a suitable return
for the Patience God exercises toward us? And this calls me to examine the

III. Proposition, that God deals very gently with us, before he lets us feel
the heaviest stroke of his Vengeance, he not only calls to, but give us time
for Repentance. This is also intimated by these Words, Agree with thine
Adversary quickly while thou art yet in the way with him, i. e. while he allows
thee time to come in, and agree with him, which must necessarily have relation
to Gods Patience, and the Time he gives for Repentance.

He might strike the Drunken Man dead in the midst of his Cups, and send the
Swearer immediately into that Hell, by which his Tongue is set on Fire, and
dispatch the choleric Man in his Rage and Fury; send the Adulterer, Fornicator
and Lustful, (even before their Lust is satiated) to keep Company with Devils,
and bid Lucifer arrest the Proud and Covetous, as they are going up the Hill.
But behold, he bears with you, spares you, cuts not down the barren Trees, as
soon as they appear unfruitful, but prunes them, digs about them, and waters
them with the Rain of Heaven; and by this Patience, he calls to Repentance.
This we are assured of by the Apostle, Romans vi.4. Thus he hangs out the white
Flag, the Flag of Peace before the Red or Black be shown, the certain Sign of
utter Ruin and Destruction.

And Oh! the Blindness of poor Sinners, that will not understand what this
Patience of God means, that will not see in it his Endeavor to prevent their
Misery! To what purpose is your Reason, if from Gods forbearing to punish you,
you do not infer his earnest desire to save you? Shall his Patience make you
worse, or his Forbearance harden you? As soon as you begin to cherish any Sin,
you are Children of Death, for the Wages of Sin is Death, Romans vi.23. and these
Wages God might immediately pay you. But behold, what a merciful God you have
to deal withal! He that might immediately send you to the Place of Execution,
waits to be gracious: He stops the destroying Angel, that is drawing out his
Sword against you; and that is the reason why you are not consumed in an
instant: And will you make that an Argument of Gods Approbation of your Sin,
which is a most powerful Call to forsake it? What Stupidity is this, to make
such an Interpretation of Gods Goodness! Is it possible God can encourage any
Man to Sin, or to continue in the ways of Death, who takes upon him all the
Passion, and Grief, and Sorrow of a disconsolate Father, to let us see what a
trouble it is to him, if we do so? And if it be impossible, his Silence and
Forbearance to punish you, must necessarily be an Invitation to wash your Heart
from Uncleanness. Why will you play with his Patience? You play with it when
you delay your Repentance; and what the Consequence of this delay is,

The Fourth Proposition will tell us; viz. Delay of True Repentance, provokes
God to proceed to very severe, nay, to the severest courses of Vengeance. For
as it is with Men, when they will not agree with their Adversaries quickly,
while they are in the way with them, the Adversary delivers them to the Judge,
the Judge to the Officer, and the Officer casts them into a Dungeon. So God,
when this serious Repentance is delayed, and in despite of all his Entreaties
and Beseechings, put off, as a thing neither necessary, nor convenient, seeing
the Sinner incorrigible, he orders him, without any further delay, to be
delivered to the Tormentors. Though this is spoken particularly with respect to
those counterfeit Christians, that harbor Wrath and Malice in their Hearts,
and will not be persuaded to forgive, or to be reconciled to those they are at
variance with, yet it is the Method God takes in all other Sins; if Mercy
cannot win them, Justice must force them into a sense of their Duty; if
Kindness and Gentleness cannot charm and melt, the Wrath of the Living God
shall fright and astonish, and drive to Despair. And O ye Sons of Men! Why will
ye provoke your Father in Heaven, to deal with you, as with hardened
Malefactors? Will you tempt him to send Scorpions, and fiery Serpents among
you, when he designed nothing but Rods to correct you? Why will ye pull down
that Vengeance upon you, which God was willing to lay by, and to keep locked up
in his Magazenes of Thunder? The longer you delay your Repentance, the more you
hasten his Vengeance. What Is the Reason, that God calls away so many, and
summons them to Judgment, before they have seriously considered, why they did
come hither? Is it not, because they have abused his Mercy, trespassed upon his
Patience, delayed their change of Life, and no Kindness, no Love, no Clemency,
no Compassion will melt them into Remorses, Compunctions, and the Pangs of
Regeneration? And how dreadful must their Condition be, when called away, to
give an account of their turning the Grace and Patience of God into Wantonness?
Who shall plead for those, who have slighted Mercy, baffled the Entreaties of
God, stopped their Ears against the Beseechings of the Almighty, and hardened
their Heart against his endearing Solicitations? O my Soul, come not thou into
their Secret, unto their Assembly; mine Honor, be not thou united.

Immediately upon their Death, God proceeds to a severe Discipline, and now the
Torments begin, and the Artillery of Heaven is brought forth against them. They
made God their Adversary in their Life time, who would fain have been their
Friend. They were even fond of having him for their Enemy, and now they begin
to feel the effects of their Folly; for what can be the issue of Gods Severity
against them, but being thrust into Prison, from whence they are not to come
out, till they have paid all? This Prison is Hell, and that calls me to the
last Proposition.

Hell is a Prison, from which there is no coming out, till Men have paid all
their Debts.

Hell! A very unpleasant Theme to speak of! Yet it is better to speak of it,
than to feel it; to discourse of it, that Men may save themselves from the
Terror of it, than drop into it. Hell! And is there such a thing? The Atheist,
and the Man of Pleasure, is loath to believe it; and he has reason, for if he
should, it would spoil his Mirth, he would sin with trembling, and his
Sensuality would be uneasy. But in despite of all the Arguments, such
brutish Men allege against this place of Torments, which they are loath to
feel, there is a Hell, and ^^ere must be one; and every impenitent Soul shall
find it by sad Experience, whether they will or not. There is one, abundance of
Sinners feel it before they dye; and the dreadful Fire begins to burn in their
Consciences. There must be one. Can there be a Government without Goals, and
Prisons, and Dungeons? And is God the Governor of the World, and shall his
Government alone, be without Places to tame obstinate Offenders? There are few
so senseless, but are content to believe, there is a Heaven, and an Eternity of
Joy, and they wish for it: I would fain know, how they come to believe there is
a Heaven? Is it not because the Gospel faith so? And does not the same Gospel
say, there is an Everlasting Punishment, a Worm that dies not, and a Fire that
is never quenched? Did Christ speak Truth in one place, and not in another?
Behold ye Men, who cherish Wrath, and Malice, and Hatred, and cannot be
persuaded to forgive, and reconcile your selves to those, whom ye have
offended, and who have offended you; for against you, the Text is particularly
levelled: Behold the dismal Dungeon you must lie in! It is not laughing at it,
will excuse you; nor making a mock of it, will secure you against the horror of
it. You are Debtors to God, and will not discharge that Debt by Repentance, and
turning to God. The place we speak of, is the Prison, (Oh that you would
prevent your danger!) where you shall lie, and mourn, and howl, and fill the
hollow place with your Shreeks and Lamentations. Here ye are not like to pay
your Debts, for you will increase your Scores daily; your Torments will tempt
you to speak ill of God, and that will still make your Debt more dreadful. In a
word, from hence there is no going out, till you have paid the uttermost
farthing; and that is never. You may fancy with Origin, that this Debt will be
paid in a thousand Years. Suppose the Torment were to last but so long, and
that that was all that is meant by Everlasting Punishment; Is the Misery, or
Pain of a thousand years a thing to be made light of? Ye that are not able to
endure the Toothache twenty four hours together, how will ye be able to bear
the weight, the infinite weight of the Wrath of God, a thousand years?

Suppose it were to last but a hundred years, Would a Man of Consideration, for
the Enjoyment of a few sensual Pleasures for twenty, thirty, or forty years,
run the hazard of a hundred years Misery? Before I would do it, I would, if
possible, outlive a Saint, out-fast a Hermit, out-pray a Monk, and go beyond
a Turkish Dervise, or an Indian Brahmin, in Self-denial, and Mortification. But
after all, the Temporary Punishment of Hell, is but an imaginary thing; What if
some over-charitable Men have thought so, will their Opinion stand against the
current of the Word of God, which over and over says, the Torment shall be
Eternal? Oh! that this were laid to the Heart by every Soul here present! To
sit for ever howling in a Dungeon, for ever! Without any hopes of Release! To
feel something that is painful, and piercing, and astonishing, like Fire, like
outward Darkness, like gnashing of Teeth, and to feel it for ever; what Man,
that believes, and seriously thinks of it, can be so profane, as to refuse him
that speaks from Heaven; and after all these Descriptions of Hell, where Wrath
and Malice shall be punished to the purpose, keep and cherish those evil
Spirits in his Bosom? The very possibility of falling into such a Prison, is
enough to put a Man upon a serious Study, how to be wise unto Salvation: How
then should the certainty of it work upon us all! I feel a kind of Horror upon
my Spirits, while I talk of it; and that even forces me to stop, and conclude
with the Prayer, or Petition of our Litany. From all Evil and Mischief, from
Sin, from the Crafts and Assaults of the Devil, from thy Wrath, and from
Everlasting Damnation, Good Lord deliver us.

SERMON XXV.
St. Matt. Chapter v. Ver. 27, 28. Ye have heard, that it has been said by them of
old time, thou shall not commit Adultery; but I say unto you, that whosoever
looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already
in his Heart.


LUST and Revenge proceed from the same Cause: That which makes Men revengeful,
makes them lustful; Wrath and Concupiscence have the same Father, and Original,
even a hot, fiery Temper, and Constitution, heightened by ill Company, nourished
by high Fare, cherished by Intemperance in eating and drinking, and increased
by Luxury. And because these two Sins are so near of kin, they are joined in
the Decalogue, or the Moral Law of Moses; one immediately follows the other;
and the Law against Adultery is subjoined to that of Murder, the effect of
Wrath and Revenge, as the other is of Lust and Lasciviousness. And in this
Order our Savior treats of these two Sins in his Sermon on the Mount. What
Precepts he has given, what Injunctions, what Warnings, what Cautions, what
Admonitions, what Sanctions about inordinate Wrath, and Anger, and Hatred, and
Malice, reproachful Names, and Titles, and Expressions, and unwillingness to
forgive, and to be reconciled, ye have heard already, this having been the
subject of diverse preceding Discourses.

As the Scribes and Pharisees by their Explications and Traditions, had
corrupted the sixth Commandment, and introduced monstrous Errors and Abuses
among the Jewish People; so they dealt with the seventh levelled against
Adultery, which they restrained to the outward Act, not concerning themselves
much about Lasciviousness or adulterous Thoughts, Desires, Lusts, Affections,
etc. Nor did they teach the People their Duty, as to these Particulars. And
because the ancient Masters of Tradition had delivered the Law against Adultery
with these Glosses, Christ quotes that Commandment not in the usual Style, it
is written, but with this Circumscription, ye have heard that it has been said
by them of old time, i. e. Your Ancestors, who lived when Religion was low, and
Corruptions and Abuses crept into their Worship and Devotion, have taught you,
that the outward Act of Adultery is the great thing you are to dread, and to be
afraid of; and with this partial Sense they have handed down to you this
Command of God, Thou shall not commit Adultery. But I say unto you, that
whosoever looks on a Woman, to Lust after her, has already committed Adultery
with her in his Heart. For the understanding of which words, I shall enquire,

I. In what sense Christ speaks here of Adultery.

II. I shall consider the Justice of this Verdict, or the reasonableness of
this Censure, That whosoever looks on a Woman, has already committed with
her Adultery in his Heart.

III. Whether, notwithstanding all this, there is not some difference betwixt
Adultery in the Heart, and the outward Act, as to the heinousness of it.

1. In what sense Christ does speak here of Adultery. Adultery properly is a
violation of the Marriage Bed, when either one, or both of the married Parties
commit Folly in Israel, either with a Person married to another, or with one
that is not married? But as (...) in the Hebrew, and (...) in the Greek, which
we render Adultery, is of a larger Extent and Signification; and imports not
only Adultery in the strictest sense, but Fornication too; which is either a
single Persons being joined to a common Harlot, or violating the Chastity of a
Person of civil Education; and indeed any Carnal Conjunction, or mixture to
fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, out of the compass and Bond of Matrimony: So in
all probability Christ aims farther, and means more by this word, than a bare
Violation of the Marriage Bed; not only because he intends in this Sermon to
give us a perfect Rule to walk by, but because the Jews in that Age restrained
not only the Law against Adultery, but even that against Fornication, and other
Mixtures, and Carnal Conjunctions not Matrimonial, whether Incestuous or
otherwise, to the outward Act only; as if in matters of Uncleanness, that only
was chiefly forbid, and deserved God's Anger and Indignation, and the
consequent of it, Damnation.

And therefore the reason, why Christ makes mention of Adultery only, is not,
because the Jews in those times looked upon single Fornication as a trifling
Sin, or Peccadillo; No! The Pharisees, though bad enough, yet were not so bad
as to allow of, or connive at Fornication; for the Law of Moses had made
express Proviso's against it. There shall not be a Whore of the Daughters of
the Children of Israel, says God, Deuteronomy. xxiii.17. Thou shall not prostitute
thy Daughter to cause her to be a Whore. Levit. xix.20. And when, particularly
the Daughter of a Priest, had committed Whoredom, she was to be burnt with
Fire, Levit. xxi.9. Moreover, whoever had defloured a Virgin, no Slave, no
Foreigner, but one of the Stock of Abraham, whether Servant, or other, he was
obliged to marry her, Exodus xxii.16. a Law so reasonable, that even the
Heathens, the Athenians transcribed it into their Pandects, or Statute Book.
And when the Father of the Maiden thus vitiated, would not consent to her being
married to the Person who had abused her, the Person who had humbled her was to
give the Maiden whom he had defloured, a Dowry, as if he had been actually
married to her. And when in one day three and twenty thousand fell, i. e. were
slain by an Angel, the Apostle says, it was for Fornication, 1 Cor. x.8. Nay,
if a Virgin had suffered her self to be defloured before Marriage, and the
Crime was found out after she was Married, she was to be stoned to Death, Deuteronomy.
xxii.21.

So that I say, the reason why Christ does make mention only of Adultery in the
Text, is not because the Jews then looked upon Fornication as a trivial and
inconsiderable Fault, but he finds fault with their sinister Interpretation of
the Law of God; even because they confined the Prohibition of Adultery,
Fornication, Incest, and other practical Lewdness, and carnal Pollutions, to
the outward Act only; and looked upon adulterous and lewd Desires, Lusts,
Passions, Affections, etc. as things of no Moment; and which might easily be
expiated by Sacrifices, and other cheap Devotions, such as Lustrations,
Purifications, etc. And here comes in Christ's Censure, that the very Desires
in the Heart after this forbidden Fruit, were as bad as the outward Act it
self. The

II d. Part I am to speak to. Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her,
has already committed Adultery with her in his Heart. To understand the
reasonableness of this Censure, we are to note,

1. That the bare looking on a Woman, is not sinful; for as Tertullian
observes, a Christian may look safely on a Woman, whose Heart is blinded, or
hardened against Lasciviousness. The bare Looks cannot well be avoided, it is
one end for which our Sight was given; that we might look one upon another: But
it is the abuse of the Eyes and Looks, that is forbid. It Is true, through the
Eyes the Poison is conveyed to the Heart, according to the old saying, Oculi
sunt in amore Duces, the Eyes are the Guides in Love; but still this depends
upon a Man's choice, whether he will make his Eyes Windows to let in wholesome, or
infectious Air. St. Peter speaks of Eyes full of Adultery, 2 Pet. ii.14. but
it is meant of Eyes that are first corrupted by the Will. Where a Christian does
Oculum metu temperare, temper and moderate, and curb, and restrain his Eye with
a holy Fear, and Watchfulness, he may look upon the greatest Beauty without
danger, says Tertul. And therefore,

2. It is added, Whosoever looks after a Woman to lust after her, etc. So
that if the Looks cause secret, lewd Purposes, Desires, and Lusts, and
Affections in the Mind and Will, the Adultery, or Fornication is actually
committed in the Heart, though the outward Act is, and may be impeded or
hindered by Circumstances, and occasional Causes, which fall out cross. I need
not tell you, that what is said here of looking on a Woman to lust after her,
is not to be understood of the chaste Desires of Persons lawfully married, one
after another; for Marriage is Honorable, and the Bed undefiled; but
Whoremongers, and Adulterers God will Judge, Heb. xiii.4. And to avoid
Fornication, let every Man have his own Wife, and every Woman her own Husband,
says St. Paul, 1 Cor. vii.2. And drink Water out of thine own Cistern, and
running Waters out of thine own Well. Let thy Fountain be always blessed, and
rejoice with the Wife of thy Youth; and let her be unto thee as the loving
Hind, and as the pleasant Roe, and be thou always ravished with her Love, Prove.
v.15, 17, 18. But the Sin here aimed at, lies in the secret Wishes, Will,
Purposes, Lust, and Desires after Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, and
forbidden Mixtures: And therefore, if the Observation of the Jews be true, that
Ahab, and Zedekiah, mentioned Jer. xxix 21. were the Persons who attempted the
Chastity of Susanna, are charged with downright Adultery, because they intended
it, though they could not compass it; as we see, Jer. xxix.23. And he that
purposes to solicit a Woman to that which God counts Abomination; or wishes to
enjoy the dangerous Love of the Person which has no Matrimonial Relation to
him; or whose Desires Languish, because he cannot gratify his base Lust, which
his wicked Mind desires; or who feeds himself with impure Imaginations, with
obscene Pictures and Images of the Person upon whom his Heart is set; all these
are secret Adulterers, and Fornicators, and must expect the Wrath of God, the
Anger, the Indignation, the Fire, the Brimstone, and the Portion of Misery
designed for Adulterers, and Fornicators, who are outwardly so.

3. That this is a very just Sentence, and that he is justly charged with the
guilt of Adultery, and Fornication, and Lewdness, who Wills, or Wishes, or
Desires it, whatever Notion they are represented under, is evident from hence,
because the Will is the principal Agent in the Action; so that if the Will
consents, the Man consents, and it is as much as if he had done the unlawful
Act; which is only impeded, or hindered from being executed by certain
Circumstances which fall out cross. I very much question, whether the outward
Acts of Fornication and Adultery would be Sins at all, if it were not for the
Will. It Is this gives the Act the tincture of Hell. Before the outward Act, the
Malice, and the Turpitude of the Sin is already completed, though the Act be
hindered by accidental Causes from being consummated. And this is no new
Doctrine; the very Heathens saw the reasonableness of it; and to this purpose
several excellent Sayings might be alleged here out of Aristophanes, Seneca,
Juvenal, Ovid, and others, were it necessary; and though humane Laws lay no
Penalty upon the Will, because they are no competent Judges of it, nothing
falling under the Cognizance of the public Magistrate, but Overt Actions; yet
with respect to God, who sees the Heart, the Sin is the same; and he that
would, or has a mind to commit Adultery, Fornication, Lewdness, whatever Names
he may give his Desires and Lusts, is the Person who has committed all these,
because all that was in his power to do toward it, he has done, i. e. his
Will, Consent, and Desire do concur to the Sin, though an Opportunity of
finishing the Sin outwardly be wanting: And God counts such a Person an
Adulterer, and Fornicator, and lewd Man, though his Neighbors at the same
time, who know nothing of his secret Sins, may count him Honest, and Sober, and
Innocent. The Romans punished a Vestal Virgin, who had vowed perpetual
Chastity, with Death, because she did once merrily in Company, say, that it was
a pretty thing to Marry; because by saying so, she discovered her Desire, and
Will to break her Vow. I do not justify that piece of Rigor, but only mention
it, to prove, that the very Light of Nature discovered to Heathens and Pagans,
that the Desire, and Will to commit a Sin, was a complete Sin, so far as the
inward Man could make it; and consequently deserved the same Punishment. This
leads me to discourse of the

III d. Particular, viz. Whether notwithstanding all this, there be not a very
great difference betwixt the internal Consent, and the outward Act, as to the
heinousness of the Sin.

To this the Answer is, that Sins as to the Substance may be the same, yet
Circumstances may make the Sin more heinous than it would have been without
those Circumstances. He that hates his Brother, is a Murderer, says St. John,
1 John iii.15. Yet there is no doubt, be that besides that Hatred does actually
deprive him of Life, is a greater Sinner, and the Sin becomes more black and
dreadful. So it is in Adultery and Fornication, and Incest, and Carnal
self-pollutions, and other Lewdnesses. He that wishes, or wills it, or purposes
it, or feeds himself with filthy Images of any of these Sins, commits a Sin of
the same Nature, and Complexion, that he does, who to the inward Formation of
it, adds the outward Act; but still, the outward Act, aggravates it, and gives
it a deeper Dye, because of the Scandal it gives, and the greater hurt it does,
in that another Person is made a Partner of the Folly, and dragged with him
into Hell, and the Sinner goes as far in it as he can. So that though, as to
the degrees of the Heinousness of the Sin, there is a difference betwixt the
internal Consent, and the outward Act; yet the Sin is the same in Substance,
and therefore must be supposed to participate of the same Punishment which is
threatened to Adulterers, Fornicators, etc. though according to the degrees of
the blackness of the Crime, the Punishments in the other World will be
proportionable.

INFERENCES.
1. Here we see how necessary Solomon's Rule is, Prove. iv.23. Keep thy Heart
with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of Life. The Heart being
guarded, the whole Man is safe. If that be left Defenseless, the whole Man lies
open to the Devils Power. In the Heart or Mind Sin first takes Root, and then
if not checked, it presently spreads and diffuses it self into the outward Man,
and brings forth fruit unto Death. Keep Sin out of the Heart, and you keep it
out of the Body; for from within, from the Heart proceed evil Thoughts,
Murders, Adulteries, Covetousness, etc. says our Savior, Marc. vii.21. When
Sin first offers it self to the Mind and is rejected; as soon as it does make
its first Appearance, the purity of the Soul is preserved. We cannot hinder the
Motions and Suggestions of the Devil from approaching or assaulting our Minds,
and an impure Thought, may jog the Mind; but if the Mind do immediately oppose
the Enemy, as soon as it comes before the Gate of the House, its Forces are
broke and disordered, and they can never make head, or insinuate into the
Affections; our Savior therefore charges us to cleanse the inside of the Dish,
and Platter, that the outside may be clean also. And indeed a Man or Woman
cannot be truly said to stand in awe of God, that do not watch over their
Hearts; and resist the first Assaults of Sin, and though I will not deny, that
restraining the outward Act, upon the account of it is Odiousness and Danger,
may be called part of the fear of God, yet it is but a very imperfect Fear,
till the Heart comes to detest the first Suggestions. In the Sin of unlawful
Lust, this is particularly to be observed; and he that means to get the Mastery
of a lascivious Temptation, must be concerned, and tremble upon the first
Insinuations of it, and the dangerous Spark as soon as thrown in must be shaken
out of their Bosom. Lust in some Persons is naturally stronger, than it is in
others, and its Motions more violent in one Man than in another; where it is
so, greater care must be used; but still the chief Remedy is, to beat off the
first Images and Representations of it. My Text gives me occasion to speak here
of the proper Remedies whereby this Sin may be cured; but because the two next
Verses treat of these Receipts, I shall reserve the Discourse of such
Medicines, till that Occasion.

2. If impure Thoughts are so dangerous, what then must be obscene Expressions,
and filthy Jesting, and amorous Songs, and talking of things which a modest
Person must blush at? And yet, how fashionable are such Discourses grown? And
styled Wit, and Salt, and ingenious Repartees! A true Christian is a very chaste
Creature, and he counts it but a pitiful Piece of Self-Denial, to forbear the
outward Acts of Adultery, or Fornication, or Sins of that Nature! His Chastity
appears in his Words and Expressions too: Nay, he goes farther than that, and
will not suffer a Lustful Thought to lodge in his Breast, and then, how should
he allow himself Liberty in Discourses and Speeches, which entrench upon the
Rules of Gravity and Modesty? He that is a stranger to this Watchfulness over
his Words, may call himself a Christian; so we call a Picture a Man, but he had
need go to School again, and learn which be the first Principles of the Oracles
of God, and among these he will find these two necessary Rules, Ephesians. iv.29. Let
no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouths; but that which is good to
the use of Edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the hearers; and Ephesians.
v.3. But Fornication, and all Uncleanness and Covetousness, let it not be once
named among you, as becomes Saints, neither Filthiness, nor foolish Talking,
nor Jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of Thanks.

3. Give me leave to Suggest to you, that there is a Spiritual Adultery, which
many of us, who perhaps detest Carnal Adultery, as they do Toads and Serpents,
may be very guilty of. And this as well as the Sin of the Flesh, excludes from
the Kingdom of Heaven, and it is no other than inordinate Love of the World, or
such a Love of the World, which makes us neglect our Duty to God, and to our
own Souls. To this purpose St. James, Jam. iv.4. Ye Adulterers, and
Adultresses, know ye not, that the Friendship of the World is emnity with God,
and whosoever will be a Friend of the World, is an Enemy of God? We are Married
to Christ Jesus. He is our Bridegroom, and our Husband, who bought us with his
Blood, and made us his own by the dearest thing imaginable, by laying down his
Life for us. And there is none that knows how Love, Affection and Fidelity, and
seeking one another Happiness are the indispensable Duties of married Persons,
but must grant, that these Qualifications must necessarily be required of us,
with respect to our Lord and Master, and Husband, Christ, who has not failed
to do his Part, but has loved us, discovered his Faithfulness to us, and
sought our Happiness even to Astonishment. If we make not the same returns, or
pay that Love and Fidelity to the World, to the Riches and Pleasures of this
Life, which are due to him, as our Husband, we become Adulterers and
Adulteresses, and the love of the Father is not in us, 1 John xi.16.

Carnal Adultery is a crying Sin, one of the blacker sort: A Sin so heinous,
that the Primitive Church, especially the African would give no Pardon for it,
no though the Offendour were never so Penitent; nor admit him to their Public
Prayers, and Communion. Such dreadful Apprehensions had they of this Sin, if a
Person fell into it after Baptism. Indeed it is a Violation of the most sacred
Institution of God, and making a Separation there, where God has commanded the
greatest Union. It is a manifest Violation of that Faith, which was given to
each other before God, and the elect Angels, and the whole Congregation. It is
an Injustice attended with Profanation of God, in whose Name the Parties were
joined together; there is Theft, there is Robbery in it, for one of the Parties
is not only Robbed of his, or her right, but of the greatest Jewel, which is
Peace, and content of Mind. It is a Profanation of the greatest Mystery of our
Religion, even the Union of Christ, and his Church, which is represented by
Marriage. And if the Conscience in the guilty Person awakes on this side the
Grave, it will fill the Soul with very great Horror, kindle Hell fire in her
Bosom, as a presage of the Flames, that will shortly, (if God's Mercy does not
interpose,) be her Portion in the other World.

So heinous a Sin is Carnal Adultery. And shall we make nothing of Spiritual
Adultery? Which must necessarily be as dreadful; as the Person whom we are tied
to, is more excellent, the Wrong, that is done to him greater, and his Arm more
powerful to revenge our Treachery. In the two standing Sacraments of the
Church, we own this Marriage, and profess we are united to God in a Matrimonial
Bond, that we are joined to Christ Jesus, and that we will be Faithful to him,
beyond all Persons whatsoever: Love nothing like him, Honor and Reverence him
as our Head, and suffer our selves to be guided by him. If we neglect all this,
care not for so great a Person, are taken with Trifles more than with his Love,
and espouse those Sins which his Soul does hate; if we leave him in Adversity,
forsake him in the time of Danger, comply with the World, and had rather part
with a good Conscience, than with our Ease and Profit, and Advantages in the
World; Is this Matrimonial Love? Is this being faithful to the Husband of our
Souls? Is not this breaking the Bond, and dissolving the Tie, and divorcing our
selves from him, who loved us, and washed us with his own Blood? And will not
this Perfidiousness make him break out in the Language of a disconsolate
Husband, I am broken with their whorish Heart, which has departed from me,
Ezech. vi.9. Well; a Christian that is sensible of the Unreasonableness of such
Perfidiousness, I am sure will take another Course, and submit himself heartily
and willingly to the Savior of the Body, Christ Jesus, and like a loving
dutiful Wife be subject to him in the fear of God, and that is the way to share
in all his Benefits, even in the Benefits mentioned, Ephesians. v.25. Husbands love
your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church.

SERMON XXVI.
St. Matthew. Chapter v. Ver. 29, 30. And if thy right Eye offend thee, pluck it out,
and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee, that one of thy Members
should perish, and not that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell. And if thy
right Hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable
for thee, that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy whole Body
should be cast into Hell,


THese Words relate either to all the Precepts that go before, or to the
Command, or Prohibition immediately preceding; either to all the Rules, and
Lessons, and Virtues, which we have already treated of, such as Humility,
Meekness, Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, purity of Heart, Peaceableness
and Peacemaking, exceeding the Scribes and Pharisees in Righteousness, leading
an Exemplary Life, etc. or to the Law and Command which prohibits harboring
Adulterous, and impure Desires, Intentions, and Lusts, even that whosoever
tooketh on a Woman to Lust after her, has already committed Adultery with her
in his Heart.

The Words of the Text are Metaphorical, or Hyperbolical to be sure, cannot be
understood in a literal Sense; for though it has happened so, and Providence
sometimes has so ordered it, for reasons great and weighty, that some good Men
have had their right Eyes pulck'd out by others, and their right Hands cut off
by Enemies, by Tyrants and Persecutors, yet to think that Christ would command
his Followers to pluck out their own right Eye, and cut off their own right
Hand, be Butchers and Executioners upon themselves, practice that Inhumanity
upon their own Bodies, and go beyond the Priests of Baal, who only cut and
hackt their Flesh, till the Blood gushed out, this seems not at all agreeable
with the design of him, who came to save that which was lost, and has charged
us not to hate our own Flesh, but to cherish it, as a Servant, that the Soul
may be the better for those kind Usages shown to her Minister.

And therefore the meaning of our Savior must needs be this: If thy right Eye
offend thee, or if thy right Hand offend thee, i. e. If these parts of thy Body
administer occasion to Sin, if looking upon an Object, or touching it causes,
or is apt to cause evil Thoughts, and impure Desires, Lusts and Designs within
thee, pluck out, and cut off the Occasions of that Evil. Forbear looking that
way as much as if thine Eyes were plucked out, and avoid touching that Object,
as much as if thy Hands were cut off; it is better for thee, that thou enter
into Life with one Eye, or maimed, or that one of thy Members should perish, i.
e. Its better for thee, that thou should miss that Satisfaction, which thine
Eye gave thee, and thy Hand prompted thee to, than with that Satisfaction to be
cast into Hell.

So that these Words are a Metaphor taken from Surgeons, who in a Gangrene cut
off a Limb, a Hand or Foot, or an Arm, to preserve the other Parts; and cause
one to perish, that the other may continue whole and untainted.

This is at least part of our Saviors meaning here: But as I told you, the
Words relate not only to unlawful Lust, showing how that is to be cured; but to
all the preceding Precepts and Virtues, and therefore something more must be
intended by them; and that you may see the full extent of them, I shall
comprehend it, as near as I can in these three Propositions.

I. Virtue and Watchfulness against Sin, is of that mighty Consequence, that if
it were not otherwise Attainable, it were worth loseing an Eye, or a Limb to
get it, rather than be cast into Hell, for want of it.

II. To attain to a truly Spiritual Life, or to root up Habits of Sin, if
gentler Means will not do, a Christian must apply himself to a more painful
Discipline.

III. To avoid, or to be rid of unlawful Lust, whether Adulterous, or other
impure Desires, a Christian must give not the least Encouragement to the Sin by
Actions that feed it, nor cherish any thing that provokes to it.

I. Virtue and Watchfulness against Sin, is of that mighty Consequence, that if
it were not otherwise Attainable, it were worth loseing an Eye, or a Limb to
get it, rather than be cast into Hell for want of it. This is as little as we
can draw from our Savior's words; and there is none so weak, but will be able
to infer from them, that so much at least is supposed in these Expressions; If
thy right Eye, or thy right Hand offend thee, etc.

Whatever Opinion the World may have of Virtue and Watchfulness against all
sorts of Sin, God has other thoughts of it, and judges the Attainment so
necessary, that he holds it Advisable rather to endure any thing, and to run
any Hazard of the Body, than go without it. And indeed all wise and good Men,
who have any lively Apprehensions of the reason of the Thing, are and have been
of the same Opinion; not only Christians, but even the Heathen Philosophers had
an Insight into this Truth. There is a remarkable saying of Seneca to this
Purpose. Projice quae Cor tuum laniant, quae si aliter extrahi nequirent, Cor
ipsum cum illis evellendum erat, i. e. Throw away those base Lusts, which war
against thy Soul, which if there were no other way to cure it, were worth
pulling out the very Heart with them. Nay, some of these Philosophers have
actually deprived themselves of the use of some considerable Members of their
Bodies, for the study of Philosophy; and its hard if the study of Piety should
not deserve as much, if it were so, that it were to be procured no other way.

Virtue and Watchfulness against Sins are of infinitely greater Value than all
outward Advantages whatsoever; and since we ordinarily part with things of a
lesser, for those of greater worth, seems it to you so hard a Bargain, to part
with an Eye or Limb, for a greater Blessing? The loss of an Eye or Limb is
nothing to the loss of a Soul? He that loses either of these, if he be Virtuous
and Holy, and Watchful against Sin, may yet enter into Life; but he that is
destitute of this Watchfulness, can never enter in with all his Parts about
him. The loss of an Eye or Limb cannot hurt the Soul; for all that loss, the
Soul may be Happy, and Blessed and Glorious, and a Favorite of Heaven; and he
that loses an Eye or a Limb upon the account of Righteousness, shall have that
Eye, or that Limb restored to him in a more splendid manner in the Resurrection
of the Just, so that he shall be no loser by it; whereas he that is a stranger
to this Watchfulness here, can never have it restored to him in the last Day,
for as the Tree falls so it shall lie, and he that continues filthy here shall
continue so till Doomsday.

Add to all this, that Hell is so tremendous a Torment, that if a Man had any
lively Notions of it, he would suffer any thing rather, the Rack, the Gibbet,
the Wheel, and the Bull of Phalaris, than venture falling into that Misery. I
grant very few Men consider what it means; which is the reason why they are
frighted with it less, than with a Fire in a Chimney; but that must be ascribed
altogether to the want of thinking, which we see makes Men even so brutish
here, that they venture upon Actions, which lead them to the Gallows. If Hell
be really such a Fire as the Gospel describes it, as undoubtedly it is, a
thinking or considerate Man will dread it infinitely more, than cutting off a
Limb, or pulling out an of Eye; the loss of these is Sport to that Fire.

When Nahash the Ammonite, 1 Samuel xi.2. proposed to the Men of Jabesh Gilead,
that he would take them under his Protection, if he might thrust out their
right Eyes, and lay the Punishment as a Reproach upon Israel, the distressed
Men, if no help had come from above, were content to suffer that Pain and
Misery to avoid his greater Barbarities; and therefore that Man must have no
Sense, no Reason, I am sure no Faith, that being in danger of being cast into
Hell for want of this Watchfulness, should not choose a lesser Evil before a
greater, and prefer a momentary Pain, before one Endless and Eternal.

But blessed be God, this Watchfulness against Sin is attainable without
plucking out the right Eye, and cutting off the right Hand in a literal Sense;
even by great Industry, and Courage, and striving, and taking pains with our
selves. And yet even this will not take with some of you.

If this Watchfulness against Sin might be had without Labor, without Trouble,
without searching and trying your ways, without Examination, without
Circumspection, without fervent Prayer, without meditating on the Love of God,
and the Charity of our Lord Jesus Christ, its like many of you would be
contented to embrace it; but these are perfect Impossibilities, and
Contradictions; and when you can hope for a good Crop of Corn from a Field
which you never Sowed, and look for Fire out of a Flint, when you never strike
it, and expect a rich Return from the Indies, when you never ventured any
thing: In a Word, when you can hope for Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of Thistles;
then you may also hope to arrive to this holy Watchfulness without Industry.

All this I mention, to let you see what a Value you are to set upon this
Watchfulness against Sin; if you do not, you will never go about it like
Persons concerned; for what we do not value, we mind not. What Is the Reason
that so many Thousands rush into Sin, as the Horse rushes into the Battle? They
watch not, they have not that (...), as the Greek Fathers call it, that
advertency of Mind, which is requisite, and they have it not, because they do
not value it. Did you value it, you would leave no Stone unturned to be Masters
of it, and that which ought to make you value it, is this, that God in the Text
says, it is of that Consequence, that its worth plucking out your right Eye,
and cutting off your right Hand rather than to continue destitute of it. But I
hasten to consider the

II. Proposition, viz. That to attain to a truly Spiritual Life, or to root up
Habits of Sin, if gentler Means will not do, a Christian must apply himself to
a more painful Discipline. This is also very plainly intimated in the Text,
which though it requires not a real plucking out of the Eyes, and cutting off
the right Hand, yet the Expressions here used, do import some painful Labor,
which is to be done in order to arrive to those excellent Virtues and
Qualifications, which Christ requires in the preceding Verses.

This was very wholesome Doctrine in the Primitive Ages, when Men entertained
very high Thoughts of a Spiritual Life; and the strange Self-Denials they
practiced, the Mortifications they used, and their acting contrary to the
Humors, Customs and Fashions of the World, shows their Belief, that such a
Life was not to be had without such a Discipline. In the Age we live in, Men
have found another way of Mortifying themselves, an easier and softer Way, and
they hope to mortify their Luxury in the midst of all the variety of Dishes,
which can tempt a lawless Appetite, and they hope to mortify their Pride by
allowing themselves in all the vain Dresses the World does invent, and to
mortify their Anger by resenting the least Affront or Injury that is offered
them, and to mortify their Wantonness, by pampering their Bodies, and giving
themselves all manner of Liberty, in Talking, Jesting, Fooling, and to mortify
their Covetousness, by grasping as much as they can, and their Love to the
World, by making the vainest Persons their Patterns; and they hope after all to
arrive to purity of Heart, by sitting in Alehouses and Taverns; an admirable
way to a truly Spiritual Life.

St. Paul took a quite different Method, for he arrived to it by Weariness, by
Painfulness, by Watchings often, by Fasting often, by Hunger and Thirst, by
Cold and Nakedness, 2 Cor. xi.27. By keeping under his Body, and bringing it
into subjection, 1 Cor. ix.27. By much Patience in Afflictions, in Distresses,
in Tumults, in Imprisonments; by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by
the Holy Ghost, by going through good Report, and evil Report, by Honor and
Dishonor, etc. 2 Cor. vi.4, 5, 6, 7. And though all this seems a painful Way,
yet Love made it easy; Love to the Lord Jesus, a mighty Love, a fervent Love, a
Love which made him count all things Dross and Dung, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ.

To root up a Habit of Sin, whether of Anger or Pride, or Covetousness, or Love
of the World, or Intemperance, etc. is not to be done by cold Wishes, or a
spiritless customary Devotion; and to get the Soul refined into the Life of
God, a Life of Meekness and Patience, and Zeal and Courage, and rellishing
things Spiritual, and delighting in them; there is required great curbing of
Affections and Self-Denials in things which Custom, Fashion and a sickly Age
counts Harmless and Innocent.

In Persons, who are come up to a Habit of a Spiritual Life, the gentler Means,
such as Prayer, Resolution, a conscientious use of the means of Grace,
Meditation, Consideration, etc. may serve to maintain and preserve what, with
some Labor, they have attained to. And some excellent Tempers there are, which
by a secret influence of Gods Spirit, are naturally inclined to Goodness, and
in such the gentler Means may do much. But such happy Tempers are not very
common. Some there are, so fickle, so inconstant, and so unsteddy, that
whatever good Desires they may have, the next Temptation carries them off
again, makes them relapse, and their Goodness proves a Morning Dew: And such
certainly stand in need of stronger Corroboratives. And Experience teaches us,
how Habits of Sin, the Effects of Custom, and the Practice of many years, mock
all tender touches; and therefore, certainly here, some more painful Discipline
must be used; such as Fasting, Severities, doing things irksome, troublesome,
and uneasy to the Body; great self-denials in Diet, in Apparel, in Company, in
Talking, in Mirth and Recreation, large Alms, doing much good, etc.

These strangely advance a spiritual Life, especially if joined with those I
call gentler Means; and as painful as this may seem to Flesh and Blood at
first, the Discipline will become sweet and easy, when the Soul perceives the
glorious Effects of it.

And, O! that you would but try, and venture upon this severe Course. There are
Treasures in it, of Joy, of Comfort, and Satisfaction; and you will find, how
your Sins will abate; how your Corruptions will decrease, and your evil
Inclinations will become less troublesome; you will find how everything will
thrive under it, and what a strengthening it will be to your Faith and Hope,
and Love, and Charity; and how all these Graces will grow and swell, and become
large and fruitful.

Some of you, I am confident, have been striving against Lust, and other Sins;
you have prayed, you have resolved, you have meditated, etc. Yet you find, you
fall into the same Sins again. Here must be some fault, either your Prayers are
not fervent, or your Resolutions are not strong enough; or some more painful
Discipline must be used; some Austerities, whereby the Body is subjugated, and
made obedient to the Spirit; for the more the Body is pinched and denied in its
Satisfactions, the better does the Soul thrive. I grant these Austerities have
been abused by Pharisees, and by some Votaries of the Church of Rome, into
Superstition; so is Wine, and stronger Spirits, which make some drunk, but are
a Cordial to others; but a modest and humble use of them cannot but be very
beneficial, in order to the Life we speak of.

This is a very tempting Subject, and I could dwell upon it a little longer,
but that I have something more to explain, viz. the

III. Proposition, That to avoid, or to be rid of unlawful Lust, or adulterous
and impure Desires, Wishes, and Inclinations, a Christian must not give the
least Encouragement to the Sin, by Actions which will feed it; nor cherish any
thing that will provoke to it: And of this Nature is the right Eye in the Text,
and the right Hand, the one by looking, the other by touch or contrectation.
These must be forborne, and totally abandoned, where they are apt to cause the
least disorder in the Mind; for these are the Fuel that feed the impure Fire;
and it stands to reason, the Youngster that feeds his Eyes with the charming
Looks of the Minion, or Idol he adores, and puts his Hand into the Bosom of his
Mistress, may as well hope to cure himself of a Fever by a Draught of cold
Water, as cure himself of his Lust by that means.

Though Marriage be the great Remedy against Adultery, Fornication, and all
other unlawful Lusts and Desires of the Flesh, and a Remedy prescribed by God
himself; yet all Persons are not under those Circumstances, which may make a
Married state fit for them.

Some, though they have not made a Vow, yet are resolved, or minded to continue
in a Virgin State, and to imitate the Great Apostle, and High Priest of their
Profession, Christ Jesus, as in the Primitive Church thousands of Men and Women
made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. that they might attend
the Lord without distraction, and be able to do more good, they denied
themselves not only in all sinful Lusts, but in Marriage too, not out of any
ill Opinion of that State, but by way of Mortification, and voluntary
Abstinence; and because they thought a single Life spent in the Service of God,
and in doing good, a higher degree of Christian Perfection.

Others are under the Yoke of Service, and tied by the Law of the Land, and
their own Indentures, and Oaths and Promises not to Marry, before the time of
their Service be ended: Others there are, whom Poverty, and want of means to
maintain a Family, keeps from entering into that Condition; and others for other
Reasons, are obliged to abstain from it. Now all such Persons may justly be
supposed to be liable to Temptations of unlawful Lusts; and therefore such may
stand in need of Counsel, and Advice, how to keep themselves Chaste, and
Innocent, from the Garment spotted by the Flesh. Nay, there is Chastity to be
observed in a Married State. Adulterous Lusts and Desires are dangerous, as the
fall of a Thunderbolt, and burn into the nethermost Hell. And such also fall
under the direction of Preservatives.

These Preservatives are various, and they either regard the Mind, or the
Actions. As they have respect to the Mind, Consideration, I mean that which is
serious, and attentive, must be used; and a Christian must take time to ponder
and reflect, how great, how dreadful, how heinous, how dangerous the Sins of
Adultery, Fornication, Lasciviousness, and Uncleanness are; for they exclude
from the Kingdom of Heaven, alienate the Love and Favor of God from the
Offender, and kindle his Everlasting Wrath and Indignation, Galat. v.19, 20,
21. Besides, he that commits Fornication, Sins against his own Body, he is
injurious to that Body which was purchased and bought for Christ's Service;
makes a Beth-aven, a House of Impiety, of that which should be a Bethel, a
House of God, and violates the Sanctity of that Tabernacle, which was dedicated
to the Worship of him who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, makes the
Members of Christ, the Members of a Harlot, and profanes the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, for so his Body is, and for that use it was intended, as we see, 1 Cor.
vi.17, 18. Not to mention, how by these Sins of Impurity, the Understanding is
darkened, the Light of God is obscured, and the Life of Religion turned out of
doors; how Adultery was punished with Death by the Law of Moses, as much as
Murder; which shows the heinousness of the Offense, and what Judgments have
been inflicted on Men, and Nations, from time to time, even in this present
Life, as forerunners of greater Plagues in another World; such Topics the
Understanding must six upon; and except this be done, all other Means and
Preservatives will be in vain; for if these Sins be shunned, it must be upon
rational Grounds; and its impossible the dread of these Sins should be
Rational, except the Mind takes these Arguments into Consideration.

The things that are to be done, in order to be rid of these unlawful and
forbidden Lusts, and joined with these Considerations, are these following:

1. We know, how much Idleness, and want of Employment, helps to feed these
Lusts; and therefore this must be watched against; it was this which
precipitated the Inhabitants of Sodom into those Lusts, which procured their
Ruin and Destruction. Ezech. xvi.49.

2. Drunkenness and Gluttony, and Pampering the Body, do manifestly administer
Fuel to the Flame, and therefore these must be renounced, Jer. v.7.

3. Whatsoever feeds the Sin, must be removed; and of this Nature are,
immodest, and obscene Discourses, and Communications, against which the Ears
must be stopped, or the Company avoided, where such Discourses are familiar and
frequent, Ephesians. v.3, 4. Add to all this, reading obscene Books, and Pamphlets;
Books of Love Tricks, such as Romances, Plays, and other Fooleries, which are
nothing but Incentives to Lust; and so are your promiscuous Dancings and
Revelings after luxurious Meals; and seeing of Stage Plays, where these Lusts
are represented in taking shapes, and all other things, which the Enemy of
Mankind has invented to drown Men in Perdition. But after all, our Savior's
Rule in the Text, must be conscientiously observed: Look off from the Object
that is apt to shoot an evil Desire into your Minds, or has done it several
times, when your Eyes have taken Liberty to behold such things. Avoid the sight
of them, as you would do the Eyes of a Basilisk: Let your Eyes be as useless
that way, as if they were plucked out, as if you had none; as if you were
blind, and could not see. Do not touch, do not handle, do not lay your Hands
upon those parts which are apt to raise the Spirit of Uncleanness in you. Let
your Hands be as useless to you in that point, as if they were cut off. The
same may be said of your Feet. Come not near the House of the Person, who is
apt to bewitch your Souls; keep out of her Company that is like to delude you,
and may give occasion to dangerous Thoughts and Desires. Let your Feet be as
useless to you in going to such Places, as if they were cut off. If after all
this, the Lust be stubborn, and will not yield to the Obedience of Christ, the
ancient Severities and Austerities, I mentioned in the preceding Proposition,
must be made use of; and the Body must be used coursely, not only in Diet, but
in Clothes, and Apparel, and by other Punishments voluntarily inflicted upon
your selves, whereof I could give you such Instances out of Antiquity, as would
possibly exceed your Belief, though I doubt not, but there is Truth in them.
And when the Fuel is withdrawn, the Fire will go out.

St. Chrysostom takes notice, that our Savior's Command here, is easy. It
would have been more severe, if so be he had commanded us to stand near the
Fire, and take heed we be not singed, or burnt; to keep Company with incentives
to Lust, and yet to feel no disorderly Motions in the Soul. Indeed, what he
enjoins here, is so far from being unreasonable, that he commands nothing but
what the Light of Nature has taught the very Heathens to observe.

And, if after all, the danger of being cast into Hell, can make no Impressions
upon us, or make us forbear what our Master says, will be the undoing of us,
most certainly we know not what that Punishment is, and will not know it, nor
indeed do we believe it. I confess, I would have you do what Christ says is
necessary, upon a Principle of Love; but if your Tempers are so stubborn, that
Love cannot melt you into a cheerful Compliance with your Masters Will, you
have reason to fright your selves with the danger of that Fire, which shall
never be quenched.

In a word, do any thing to save your selves from this untoward Generation.
Sins as dear as the right Eye, as precious as the right Hand, will fall and
die, if they be brought to feel that Fire; I mean, by attentive Thinking, and
Meditation. I doubt not, but the unhappy Creatures, to whose share the future
Torment falls, wish, and will wish, that they had plucked out their right Eye,
and cut off their right Hand, rather than have come into that place of Torment.
Oh! how they will curse the Day, the Time, the Place, when and where they
committed their Lewdness and Impurities; nay, the Eye that deceived them into
those Lusts; and the Hand that tempted them to Sin; and would God be so kind,
as to free them from the Prison they groan in, upon condition that they should
pluck out both their Eyes, and cut off both their Hands, they would thank him
for the Favor, and think their Judge wonderfully Merciful, to agree to such
soft and reasonable Terms.

The present Satisfaction is the Lime-twig, that keeps People under the power
of Sin, and Satan. But were that Hell, we speak of, set out in its native
Colors, and compared with that Satisfaction, you would scorn it, as much as
you do the most loathsome Animals. To enjoy the present Satisfaction of Sin,
and yet to escape Hell, are things inconsistent, and in Divinity impossible;
therefore that Satisfaction must be quitted; or if Death should arrest you in
that Satisfaction, the other will certainly take place: All which makes our
Savior's Discourse here very rational and equitable; If thy right Eye offend
thee, pluck it out, etc.

SERMON XXVII.
St. Matt. Chapter v. Ver. 31, 32. It has been said, whosoever shall put away his
Wife, let him give her a Writing of Divorcement. But I say unto you, that
whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, causes
her to commit Adultery; and whosoever Marries her that is Divorced, commits
Adultery.


WHEN Christ, the Son of Righteousness appeared in this Vale of Misery, the
World was so corrupt, that the attempt to reform, etc. would have frighted the
wisest, the most valiant, any Society of Men, any Man, but him, who had
Omnipotence to back him.

To say nothing of the Heathen Nations, who had been suffered to walk in their
own ways, and therefore no wonder if they sunk into all the dreadful Vices
mentioned, Romans i. The Jews, to whom pertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and
the Covenant, and the Promises, and the giving of the Law, whose were the
Fathers, and of whom Christ came after the Flesh; and of whom one would have
expected a Purity answerable to their Mercies and Encouragement: These, though
they had made a shift to renounce Idolatry, yet had so vitiated and polluted
all the Articles of Divinity, and all the Rules of Morality, that it required a
strength greater than that of Hercules, to purge that Augaean Stable. You have
seen already their various Violations of things Sacred, and Divine; and the ill
favored Interpretations they put upon the Law against Murder, and the other
against Adultery. The same Liberty, or Licentiousness they practiced or made
use of in the matter of Divorces, or putting away their Wives; and in doing so
they grounded themselves upon a Text of the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxiv.1, 2.
where Moses permits Men in certain cases to separate themselves from their
Wives, and in order thereunto, to give them (...) a Bill to certify that
Separation, or a Writing of Divorcement; which Text our Savior alleges, and
admits of, does not deny that such a thing was permitted under the Law, but
partly to show, that they wilfully depraved and perverted the Sense and Design
of that Law; and partly to intimate, that his Doctrine, and the Blessings which
came along with it, required greater Strictness and Severity of Life. He
proves, that the Lawfulness of Divorcements, which they extended to Causes and
Cases of their own making, was to be restrained only to Fornication, and
Adultery; and whoever took greater Liberty in Divorcing himself, would involve
himself in very great Evils, and Mischiefs. It has been said, Whosoever shall
put away his Wife, let him give her a Writing of Divorcement. But I say unto
you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving in the case of Fornication,
causes her to commit Adultery; and whosoever Marries her which is Divorced,
commits Adultery.

This is no Contradiction to the Law of Moses, but raising an imperfect into a
more perfect Law, which became him who was the end of the Law; for the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did.

To treat of these Words to your Edification, I shall

I. Enquire into the Nature of that Law of Moses, concerning Divorcements.

II. Why Christ forbids, and abolishes Divorcements in the Jewish Sense.

III. Why Fornication, or Adultery is a just Cause of Divorcement; and whether
that be the sole and only cause, that justifies such a Separation.

IV. Whether the Woman has an equal Right; and in case of the Husband's
Adultery, may Divorce her self from her Husband, as well as the Husband from
the Wife, in case the fault lies in her.

V. Whether this Divorcement may be made by their own Authority, without the
Advice and order of the Magistrate.

VI. Whether after such a Divorce, the innocent Party, or both Parties may
Marry again.

VII. How he that puts away his Wife, causes her to commit Adultery.

VIII. How he that Marries her that is put away, commits Adultery.

And when all these Particulars are explained, I shall close up the Discourse
with suitable Directions, how such Divorces, and all Desires after them, may be
prevented.

1. Let Us enquire into the Nature of the Law of Moses concerning these
Divorcements. It has been said, says our Savior, Whosoever shall put away
his Wife, let him give her a Writing of Divorcement. I doubt not, but the
Scribes and Pharisees said so, to justify their unlawful Divorcements; and what
they said, it is like, was with respect to this Law of Moses; our Savior in all
probability, spoke it with respect to both. This Law concerning Divorcements,
you have, Deuteronomy. xxiv.1, 2. where we read, When a Man has taken a Wife, and
Married her, and it come to pass that she find no Favor in his Eyes, because
he has found some Uncleanness in her; then let him write her a Bill of
Divorcement, and give it in her Hand, and send her out of his House; and when
she is departed out of his House, she may go and be another Man's Wife.
Concerning which Law, I observe these following Particulars.

1. That Moses did not, for the ease of his People, invent this Law of his own
Head, which seems to have been the Opinion of Origin, and St. Ambrose; for
though the Pharisees, treating of this very point, asked our Great Master, Why
did Moses Command us to give a Writing of Divorcement, Matthew. xix.7. Yet since
all the Scripture of the Old Testament is of Divine Inspiration, 2 Timothy iii.16.
of which Old Testament this Law is part, it is evident that Moses being the
great Minister of God, by whom he delivered his Oracles, and faithful in all
his House; did and could, and would deliver nothing, as a standing Law for the
Jewish Church, but what God gave him order for, or as he was moved by the Holy
Ghost, as St. Peter says of all the Writers of the Old Testament, 2 Pet. i.21.
And therefore whenever Moses is Quoted in the New Testament, the meaning is,
God speaking by Moses, and consequently this Law is derived from God.

2. We need not wonder that God should give such a Law concerning Divorces, or
make them in some cases Lawful; for as he is the Author of Matrimony, so he
might have enlarged the Bounds of it, if he had pleased. And therefore that he
relaxed the Law and Constitution of it in the Cases of Polygamy and Divorce to
the Jewish People, can be no Disparagement to his Holiness. For since it was in
his Power to institute the State of Matrimony, no doubt he had also Power in
certain Cases, and for certain Reasons, to dispense with the Strictness of it,
this being none of the fixed and eternal Laws, which are in their own nature
Immutable and Unchangable, but depended upon the Lawgiver's Will and Pleasure,
not to mention that this was to teach all wise Governors to suit their Laws as
far as they can do it with safety to the Temper of their People.

3. The course of Divorce allowed of in the Law, is said to be this, if the
Wife find no favor in her Husbands Eyes, because he has found some
Uncleanness in her; where, by Unlceanness cannot be meant Fornication and
Adultery; for the Adulteress was to be stoned to Death, Deuteronomy. xxii.22. compared
with Joh. viii. Nay, if the Husband did upon good Grounds, but suspect his Wife
guilty of Adultery, he had his remedy, by obliging her to drink the Waters of
Jealousy, Numb. v.27. And therefore by this Uncleanness some understand either
the Leprosy, or the Vice of Drunkenness or Witchcraft, or a very quarrelsome
Temper, or some other incorrigible Vice; but the Words in the Original are
(...) which is as some great immodesty in Words or Actions; a Sin less than
Adultery and Fornication; yet which (not stopped,) might lead to the greater
Sins. And in this case God gave them leave to dismiss their Wives. But such was
the vicious humor of that Nation, that in progress of time, sheltring
themselves under this Command, they turned off their Wives for trivial
Offenses, and upon very slight Occasions; I would name some of them, but that
they are too Ridiculous to be mentioned. And therefore the Pharisees, coming to
our Savior about this Question, ask him, Is it lawful for a Man to put away
his Wife for every Cause? This was the common Practice, though the better and
the wiser Men doubted of it.

4. Whatever liberty this Law gave, the Divorcement was permitted rather than
commanded, and the Words infer an Impunity rather than a Duty. A Jew was not
bound to put away his Wife, by virtue of this Law; but was Connived at, if he
did it, and secured against Punishment from the Magistrate. This Law did not
hinder the Man from dwelling with his Wife, notwithstanding the Faults I have
mentioned; but if he would not live with her, he was to give her a Writing of
Divorcement.

5. This Writing of Divorcement was a formal Dismission of the Wife under the
Husband's Hand and Seal; or a full Discharge from the Husband's Power and
Authority, and Jurisdiction and Obligation to provide for her, or to take care
of her; and if we may believe the Jews, the Form of it was this.

I such a One, the Son of such a One, such a Day of the Week, such a Day of the
Month, such a Year after the Creation of the World, in such a Place, or City or
Town have freely, voluntarily, and without Compulsion dismissed, rejected, and
repudiated such a Person, the Daughter of such a One, and have given a Bill of
Divorcement into her Hand, and given her Leave and Power, and accordingly she
has leave to Marry with whom she thinks fit according to the Constitution of
Moses, and the Children of Israel.

The reason of giving this Bill of Divorcement in St. Austin's Opinion, was

1. That in the Writing of this Bill, the Husband's Anger might have time to
cool, and he consider what a Rashness it was to put her away, and whether there
was sufficient cause for this Severity.

2. That things might be done according to Law, and that he who had put away
his Wife, might not afterward be able to demand her again.

3. That she might be empowered to Marry again; for which Power she had this
Bill, or Certificate to show; a Bill which declared that she was fully
discharged from her former Husband.

So much I thought fit to observe concerning this Law of Moses.

But let us go on, and

II. Enquire, why our Savior did forbid and abolish these Divorcements in the
Jewish Sense. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife, etc.

The Reasons are these following.

1. These Divorces of the Jews were arbitrary, Effects of a brutish, lawless
Will, mere actions of Revenge; and though Moses had given them leave to put
away their Wives, for less Causes, than Fornication or Adultery, yet they were
such Causes, as were arguments of great Turpitude and Scandal, and made the Man
not only very uneasy, but prejudiced him in his lawful Calling, and reflected
upon his Prudence and Reputation. But the Jews ventured to do it for any Cause
whatsoever, and of that Cause, themselves would be Judges, and therefore Christ
had reason to Abolish that Custom.

2. What liberty God gave them by Moses, as to these Divorcements, it was not
so much out of any respect to the intrinsic Goodness of the Thing, as to
prevent greater Evils. And therefore our Savior in plain Terms tells the Jews,
Matthew. xix.8. Moses for the hardness of your Hearts suffered you to put away
your Wives. The Jews were a surly humorsome, and ill-natured sort of People,
and to prevent their Murdering, Poisoning, Beating, or abusing their Wives, he
suffered these Divorcements; and that is it, that all wise Lawgivers ordinarily
do, to prevent a greater, they connive at a lesser Evil, the Peace and Nature
of the Government requiring so much. Even among our selves, and in the Land we
live in, several things are permitted, which Authority does not much approve
of. And accordingly these Divorces having been permitted during the Jewish
Economy, when the People and the Dispensation were weak, it was necessary,
when that Economy came to cease, those Divorces should cease too.

3. Christ came to reduce all, and Matrimony especially to the first
Institution; And therefore could do no less than Abolish all, that contradicted
the Primitve Rule. And accordingly he tells the Pharisees, Matthew. xix.4, 8.
Moses for the hardness of your Hearts suffered you to put away your Wives, but
from the beginning, it was not so. Have ye not read, thou he which made them in
the beginning, made them Male and Female, and said, for this cause shall a Man
leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife? wherefore they are no more
twain, but one Flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let no Man put
asunder; The Divorces which were practiced among the Jews and other Nations,
the Persians, the Greeks, the Romans; though as to the Romans, it must be
confessed it came in very late among them, for though there was no Law against
Divorcing, yet for 520 Years, there was no Example of Divorce among them; so
undecent did they take it to be; and therefore there are very few Writers, but
what condemn Cicero for putting away his Wife Terentia, with whom he had lived
many Years. These Divorces, I say practiced by the Jewish and other Nations,
were great Violations of the Primitive Institution of Marriage, and of the
Innocence and Perfection of Paradise. Christ's Province being to reintroduce
that Perfection and Innocence, and to establish it among his Followers, could
do no less than Abolish the abuses which corrupt Nature, and a more corrupt
Commonwealth had brought in: And this very argument makes Polygamy, or having
more Wives than one Sinful, because it contradicts the Primitive Institution,
which God indeed relaxed for a certain Time during the Infancy of the Church,
but Christ justly reduced to it is former Bounds and Limits under the Gospel,
which affords greater Helps and Motives to observe those Bounds, and shows a
better way how Men may be cured of the Hardness of their Hearts, than any
Discipline whatsoever.

And yet even under the Gospel, there is something that makes a Divorce lawful,
and that is, if one of the Married Parties proves guilty of Adultery; which
leads me to the

III. Enquiry, Why Adultery or Fornication is a just Cause of Divorce, and
whether this be the sole Cause, that justifies such a Separation. But I say
unto you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving in the case of
Fornication. And though St. Luke, and St. Mark do not mention this Exception,
yet we know, that one Evangilist must be explained by the other. The reason
that makes Divorcement in case of Adultery lawful, is this, because by
Adultery, the Bond of Matrimony is broken: What some say, that the right, or
Bond of Cohabitation is broken, but not the Bond of Matrimony, seems to be of
no weight; for the Words of Christ are very Express and Emphatical, Whosoever
shall put away his Wife, (...), saving in the Cause of Fornication. And
therefore certainly in the Case of Fornication, it is lawful to put her away,
which could not be lawful in that Sense the Jews understood Christ in, i. e. so
as to be permitted to Marry again, except the Bond of Matrimony had been broke
by the Fornication; for as by Matrimony Man and Wife are one Flesh, so by
Fornication, they are no more one, but the Person, who commits Lewdness,
becomes one Flesh with another; and though it is said, that what God has
joined together, let no Man put asunder, Matthew. xix.6. And though we read, that
a Woman which has a Husband, is bound by the Law to her Husband, so long as he
lives; yet this is to be understood of married Persons, who live in conjugal
Chastity; and while this is done, to be sure the Bond is not dissolved.

2. Christ having restrained the Lawfulness of such Divorcements to Fornication
and Adultery, it cannot be safe to invent more Causes. I will not deny, but
there are Sins, that in Heinousness may amount to the Sin of Adultery, yet it
must be dangerous to depart from the express Words of our Savior. The Civil
Law, or rather some Christian Emperors in the Civil Law allow of other Causes,
such as if the Wife be guilty of Witchcraft, or Murder, or of Men-stealing, or
of Violation of Sepulchers, or of Sacrilege, or if she harbor Thieves and
Robbers, or if she go to Feasts where lewd and wicked Persons meet, or to
Stage Plays, and public Shows, or lies out of the Husbands House at Night
against his Will, and without his Knowledge, if she practice Treason secretly
against the State, or if she treats of Marriage with another Man, while her
Husband is alive, or if she lay violent Hands on her Husband, etc.

Though all these are Crimes which should not be so much as named among
Christians; yet since Christ has excepted no Case, but that of Adultery, or
Fornication, that Christian walks most safely, that keeps to the Letter of the
Text. I grant, there may be other Causes, which may justify a Man and his
Wife's living asunder; but I dare not say, that by any other Sins, the Bond of
Matrimony is dissolved; because our Savior is silent.

IV. Whether the Woman has an equal Right, and may Divorce her self from her
Husband, in case he is guilty of Adultery, as well as the Husband from her, if
she be guilty.

1. Among the Jews this was not Customary or Lawful. The Husband might put away
his Wife, but the Wife could not put away the Husband, which is the reason why
Josephus takes notice of it, as a great piece of Insolence, that Salome a
Jewess separated her self from her Husband Costabar. But among the Romans, the
Wife had an equal Liberty. And in the Case before us, this seems to be very
Rational. For

2. If the Bond of Matrimony be dissolved by the Adultery of the Husband, as
well as it is by the Adultery of the Wife, the Woman in point of Conscience
must be at liberty to Divorce her self from her Husband, as well as the
Husband, to separate himself from her, if she be guilty. There is a parity of
reason, which I know is not to be stretched too far; but here is just Ground for
it. And though as to the Government of the Family, the Scripture gives the Man
a Preeminence, and a Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction over the Wife, yet as
to the Obligations to be true and faithful to one another, the Apostle makes
them equal, 1 Cor. vii.4. And in the case of Desertion, whereof I shall speak
in the Sequel, it is plain St. Paul gives the Woman, an equal Privilege, 1 Cor.
vii.15.

And indeed, if the Wife have not an equal Right, it must follow, that the
Husband's Adultery is a less Sin, than that of the Wife, which I suppose no
wise Man will grant. To this purpose it is, that Justin Martyr commands a
Christian Woman, who having a Husband, that lived in open Adultery, took the
Benefit of the Roman Law, and went from him, i. e. divorced her self from him;
and the reason why she did so, was that she might not become a partaker of his
Sin; yet it is added, that she did not do it, till several Means had been tried
to reclaim him from his Impiety.

Indeed this is very necessary on both sides, that where it is, that one of the
Parties is guilty of Adultery, all reasonable Means ought to be tried, to
convert the Sinner, him, or her, from the Errors of their Ways, before the
Separation; the rather because this Separation ought not to be made in Anger
and Revenge; but with Prudence and Charity; and though a Divorce in this case
be lawful, yet it is not so necessary that the Innocent Party is forbid to be
reconciled to the Guilty, if the Guilty do unfeignedly repent; and though its
granted the Bond of Matrimony is dissolved, i. e. the Right and the Obligation
to live together like Man and Wife be dissolved, yet I hope a Man or Woman may
decede from their Right, or give it up when a greater Good is to be promoted by
it.

I know some Divines both Ancient and Modern have been, and are of Opinion that
there is an absolute necessity for a Divorce in such Cases; the Council of
Eliberis particularly has a Canon, That if a Clergy-man's Wife commit
Fornication, and her Husband does not presently put her away, he shall be
denied the Communion all his Days, even upon his Deathbed.

But since God receives the worst of Sinners upon their true Repentance, it is
hard to think it should be a Crime in married Persons after such a Breach to
forgive one another, and to return to one another, upon a true Reformation; for
though it be permitted them to separate, if they will; yet they are not hindered
from exercising Charity one toward another. And if God is reconciled to the
vilest Wretches upon their serious Return, and takes them into his Bosom should
not we do so after the greatest Provocations, if true Repentance appears in the
Person, that has committed Folly; we that are to be Followers of God, Ephesians. v.1.

V. Whether these Divorces may be made by private Authority, without having
recourse to our Governors.

1. Among the Jews, it is certain it was not always necessary to make use of the
Magistrates Assistance; but the Husband was Judge in his own Cause, and might
give the Wife a Bill of Divorcement without making his Superiors acquainted
with it; for there is nothing said of it in the Law of Moses; though it is not
to be doubted but sometimes it was done before competent Judges; especially,
where there was a dispute about repaying of the Dowry, or part of the Goods,
the Wife had brought to her Husband, for in such Divorcements the Jews tell us
that part of the Dowry, or the whole was repaid, and if so, this alone was
enough to prevent the many Divorces which one may believe, would otherwise have
been in that Nation among a People projectae libidinis, as Tacitus calls them,
inclined to Wantonness and Lasciviousness.

2. We Christians serving the God of Order, and it being a Rule of our
Religion, that all things ought to be done Decently and in Order, it must
follow, that such Divorces, how just soever, must not be the mere Effects of
our Will and Pleasure, but so managed that others may not be Scandalized by our
Actions; And that is but agreeable to the general Rule of the Apostle, that we
are to provide things honest in the sight of all Men, Romans xxii. And
consequently such Divorcements are not to be made without the Consent and
Approbation of Public Authority, for without this, infinite Confusions would
arise, and wicked Men might abuse this Liberty into the greatest
Licentiousness. And as they that Marry, ought to Marry in the Lord, with the
Approbation and Benediction of the Minister of God, so it is Fit, that they who
in the case of Adultery, after that all Attemps of reforming the guilty Party
prove ineffectual, separate and are Divorced one from the other; I say it is
fit, it should be done before Persons, Wise, Judicious, and in Power, that they
may judge of the Justice of the Divorce, be satisfied in the Reasons of it, and
be able to give a good Account of it to others, and that the Doctrine of our
Savior, or our Religion be not Blasphemed or evil soken of. And when among the
Athenians, the Woman, who had a mind to be Divorced from her Husband, was
obliged to appear in Person before the Magistrates, and cite the Husband before
them, we that are Christians ought not to be Inferior to them in Prudence and
Discretion.

VI. Whether after such Divorcements the innocent Party, or both Parties may
Marry again.

Concerning this Question, there have been three Opinions for many Ages. Some
have thought, that it is unlawful for either Party to Marry again. Some that it
is lawful for the Innocent, others, that it is lawful for both Parties to
re-enter into the State of Matrimony. It was looked upon by many Christians as
lawful to Marry again after Divorces. In Tertullian's Time Origin, affirms,
Vid. Grot. in loc.
it was permitted by some Bishops in his Days. It was somewhat late indeed,
before the Councils of Eliberis, Arles, Orleans, and Venice, gave way to it;
but till the Council of Trent there was no considerable body of Men who
determined against it. The Greek Church at this Day, consents to the Practice
of it.

I am sensible, that all those who are of Opinion, that by Adultery the Bond of
Matrimony is not dissolved, will be against either Parties Marrying again after
such a public Separation; and I cannot but say, that is better, and an
argument of Self-Denial, Mortification, Continence, and true Repentance,
especially for the guilty Party to abstain not only from all unlawful Lusts,
but from Marriage too, and spend the remainder of his Life in Afflicting his
Soul for his Scandalous Offenses, if perhaps he may escape the Damnation of
Hell: Nor would it be less acceptable to God, for the innocent Party to decede
from her, or his Right, and to Consecrate themselves entirely to God, and his
Service. But if the Question be whether in point of Conscience, it be not
lawful to Marry again, I cannot but say, that it is, for any thing, I yet see
to the contrary, Especially.

1. For the innocent Party, for this is but the necessary Consequence of what I
asserted before, that by Adultery the Bond of Matrimony was dissolved; and if
dissolved, and a lawful Divorce follow thereupon, the innocent Party at least,
must be supposed to be at liberty to Marry again; for though Christ makes no
express mention of it, yet since it is certain, he allows of a Divorce in case
of Adultery or Fornication, and does not change the notion of Divorce, from
what the Jews understood by it, it must necessarily follow, that by it we are
to understand such a Divorce, as was usual in those Days, or in the Days of
Moses, with the necessary Circumstances and Consequences of it. Now a lawful
Divorce among the Jews included, or imported liberty to Marry again, as is
evident from the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxiv.1, 2. which I explained in the
Premises, where it is expressly said, that the Woman sent out of the House of
her Husband, with a Writing of Divorcement, may Marry another Man. Nor is it
just, the Guiltless should suffer for the Guilty; if the Guilty have been the
cause of this Misfortune, why should the Innocent be punished for it? It Is true
our Savior suffered, the just for the unjust, and we are to imitate him in the
greatest Instances of his Charity; but Christ's Suffering, the just for the
unjust was a thing of another Nature, very different from the Case before us,
and therefore is not applicable to it: Besides, Christ's Suffering, the
Innocent for the Guilty was for an universal Good, and in this Case a Christian
may, and ought to follow him, and suffer the same Way, if it may be for the
Good of Mankind; but this cannot be said of a forbearance to Marry after
Divorce; especially, if there be danger of burning, as the Apostle calls it, 1
Cor. vii.9. In this Case the Forbearance seems rather to tend to the hurt and
scandal of the Church, than to the Glory or Benefit of it.

Fabiola, a Person of Quality at Rome, a Lady of noble Extraction, being young
Married a Gallant of the Times, who proving Vicious, and living in Adultery, by
the persuasion of her Friends, she sends him a Bill of Separation, and Divorces
her self from him, and soon after Marries another. The Second Husband dying,
and it being her Fortune to converse with some Persons, who had a very mean
Opinion of second Marriages, and took occasion to aggravate to her the Crime of
Marrying again, while her first, though Adulterous, Husband was living,
frighted with the danger they told her she was in, she does Public Penance for
it in the public Church; in the Commendation of which, St. Jerome is very
Copious and Rhetorical; and according to his Account, none that ever underwent
a public Penance for Adultery, used greater Rigor and Severity upon
themselves, than she.

But though I am a great admirer of due Rigours and Severities in Matters of
Religion, yet to make a Sin of that which the Gospel has made none, and to do
Penance for that which the Scripture has not declared to be against the Will
of God, provided there were no other Sins mingled with the Action, seems to be
part of that overmuch Righteousness which Solomon finds fault with, Eccles.
vii.16. St. Jerome himself, who with great Flourishes relates the Story, though
he was no great Friend to second Marriages, yet in this case of Fabiola, dares
not say, that she ought to have left her second Husband, after she was divorced
from her first, because of his notorious Adulteries; and though he does not
approve of her second Marriage, yet he does in some Measure excuse it, because
there was some color for venturing upon it from the Gospel.

2. In the case of Desertion, the Apostle gives the Party deserted, leave to
Marry again, 1 Cor. vii.15. But if the Unbelieving depart, let him depart; a
Brother, or a Sister is not under Bondage in such Cases. The Dispute was,
Whether a Woman, that was a Christian, having a Husband who was a Heathen, or
Infidel, might live with him, if she could not convert him? The Apostle
answers, v.10, 11. Let not the Wife depart from her Husband; but and if she
depart, because of some heats betwixt them, let her remain unmarried, or be
reconciled to her Husband; so far the Apostle gives his Advice, if Quarrels did
arise betwixt the unbelieving Husband, and the believing Wife, about Religion,
if he did abuse, or heather, or led her an unquiet Life; but then, if the
difference rose higher, and the Husband should totally forsake her; suppose go
into another Country, and take no farther care of her, but leave her to shift
for her self; in that case says St. Paul, a Brother or a Sister is not under
Bondage, i. e. as very many Interpreters explain it, she is not under an
Obligation to continue unmarried, or she may Marry again: Upon this saying of
St. Paul, it was, that the Helvetian Divines grounded their Verdict in the case
of the Marquis Galeacie Caraccioli, whom they advised to Marry again, when his
Wife had deserted him; or which is all one, would not return to him, after
frequent Entreaties to that purpose. And its possible, this Conclusion of the
Apostle might give occasion to Constantine to enact a Law, That if a Woman,
after her Husband was gone from her, did not hear of him in four years, she
might Marry again. To which purpose we have a Law of our own, 1 Jac. I. That if
a Man or Woman being gone beyond the Seas, and one do not hear from the other
in seven Years, it shall be lawful for the Party that hears nothing of the
other, to proceed to another Marriage.

The Reason why I urge this Case of Desertion, is this; If it be lawful for a
Woman deserted by her Husband, or for a Man deserted by his Wife, upon the
account of Religion, though there be no Adultery in the Case, to Marry again;
much more must it be lawful for Persons, who part upon the account of Adultery,
and are lawfully divorced, at least for the innocent Party, to Marry again,
because Desertion is a less Crime than Adultery. Though Hermes, an ancient
Writer says, that Desertion is equal to Adultery; yet whatever likeness there
may be, there appears greater guilt in Adultery, than in the other; the rather,
because the Bond of Matrimony is more directly broke in this, than in the other.

It Is true, the Constitution of our Church is, that if Persons be divorced,
after Adultery, the respective Parties are obliged to enter into Bond, before
they are actually divorced, that neither of them shall Marry again, while the
other lives; but the reason of that is, because our Church fears the dangerous
Consequences of such Divorces, in respect of the Collusion that may be betwixt
the two Parties, who may be alike weary one of the other; and so a Gap might be
opened to great Licentiousness: So that I suppose, our Church would not be
against the innocent Party's Marrying again, if such Evils might be easily
prevented.

3. The greatest difficulty is about the Party guilty of Adultery, and who
gives occasion to the Divorce, whether they may Marry again. And here, if the
same Law were in use among us, which Moses gave the Jews, that the Adulterer,
or the Adulteress should be put to Death, or stoned: And were that Law duly
executed by the Magistrates, there would be no occasion for such Questions as
these. However, the Bond of Marriage be dissolved by the Adultery, as we proved
before, we cannot say, that it is absolutely unlawful, even for the guilty,
after a lawful Divorce, to Marry again; the Notion of Divorce among the Jews,
which we do not find our Savior Reverse, importing so much. There may be some
Reasons, which may make it lawful. But then,

1 st. As the Divorce is not to be made without the Knowledge, or Approbation,
or Consent of our Superiors, and Governors, whether Spiritual, or Temporal; so,
if a Divorce be obtained, and made, the guilty ought not to marry again, till
he shows sufficient Reasons to the same Governors, which may make it necessary;
for Men are apt to be very partial in their own Cause.

2 ly. Before Leave or Permission be given him, he ought to be exhorted, and
admonished by those, to whom that part belongs, to a deep Humiliation for his
scandalous Sin; and that Humiliation, and change of Life, and Exemplary
Conversation, ought first to appear, and by long Practice become habitual,
before Permission be given; that the Church of God, which has been
scandalized, may receive some Satisfaction.

3 ly. The guilty Party, if he will act Conscientiously, before he ever thinks
of Marrying again, ought

1. Earnestly to endeavor to prevent a Divorce, by reconciling himself to the
Innocent, by asking Pardon of the Party wronged, and by sincere and unfeigned
Promises of a future, steady, and invincible Chastity.

2. If the Innocent Party, for weighty Reasons, sues out a Divorce, and obtains
it, the guilty ought, by Mortification and Prayer, and an humble penitent Life,
labor after the Gift of Continence; and spare no Cost, no Hardship to attain
to it; and thus punish himself for his great and crying Sins, that he may be
delivered from the Wrath to come. But,

3. If after all convenient Ways, and Methods, and Trials used, he cannot
arrive to it, this seems to be the only Case, that may make his Marrying again
lawful, according to the general Rule of the Apostle, It Is better to Marry than
to burn, 1 Cor. vii.9.

VII. How he that puts away his Wife, causes her to commit Adultery.

1. We must note, that Christ here speaks of a Man's putting away his Wife,
though she has not been guilty of Adultery, for slight and frivolous Causes,
as the Jews used to do. In this Case, if the Woman thus put away, should be
prevailed with to Marry another Man, the Husband that put her away, without
sufficient Cause, unjustly, is the Cause of her committing Adultery; for as she
could not, by right, and ought not to have been put away for such Causes; so
these Causes, for which she is put away, do not dissolve the Contract, or Bond
of Matrimony; and consequently, by right, she is still the Man's Wife, who put
her away; and therefore, if through strong and surprising Temptations, she
should consent to Marry another Man, he that dismissed her is, in a great
Measure, the Cause of that Evil.

2. If a Person thus unjustly put away, should not Marry afterward, but be
tempted to prostitute her self, all the Evil she does, and the Adultery, she
upon this Dismission proves guilty of, will, a great part of it, be charged
upon the head of the Person, that in a humor put her away; it being here, as
with a Person, who should set or place another upon the Brow of a Hill, in a
dark Night, though he do not push or thrust him down, yet if he tumbles and
breaks his Neck, the Party that placed him there, may justly be said to be the
cause of his Fall and Ruin, because he exposed him to apparent Danger; as much
as David was guilty of murdering Vriah, by ordering the General of his Army to
set him in the Front of the Battle; where, without a Miracle, he could not
escape being killed. Even so here, the Command being given to Christ's
Followers, or to Christians, if a Christian puts away his Wife for a meaner,
and lower Cause than Adultery, he exposes her to great Temptations; and if,
through the Devils Temptation, she falls into Fornication and Adultery, himself
is guilty of that Adultery; and therefore causes her that is put away, to
commit Adultery.

VIII. How he that Marries her that is put away, commits Adultery.

1. In saying so, our Great Master confirms the ancient Law of God, Deuteronomy.
xxiv.3. where the Wife put away by her Husband, is peremptorily forbid to
return to the Husband that did give her a Bill of Divorce, and put her away.
She had Liberty indeed to Marry another; but if after his Death, or during his
Life, her former Husband should be desirous to Marry her again, this, God says
there, is Abomination, and Christ calls it Adultery: So that the words of the
Text, whosoever shall Marry her that is put away, commits Adultery, do establish
and ratify what God said of old to the Jewish People; He that puts away his
Wife, may not afterward, when another Man has known her, Marry her again; if
he does, he commits Adultery.

2. He that puts away his Wife, for a less or meaner cause than Adultery, does
not by that means, or voluntary Divorce, cancel the Marriage Bond, and the
legal Contract betwixt him and her. That Bond continues firm and indissoluble,
notwithstanding that Dismission; and therefore, he that Marries such a Person,
that is unjustly put away, Marries another Man's Wife, and consequently commits
Adultery. Under the Law, he that Married the Woman put away by her Husband, for
Causes God then allowed of, did not Sin, except the High Priest, who was forbid
to Marry any Woman that was Divorced. And under the Gospel, he that Marries her
that is put away legally, for Causes the Gospel allows of, cannot be said to
commit an Offense, especially if the Rules we mentioned before, be observed.
But he that Marries her that is justly put away, or divorced for Causes
frivolous, or not allowed of by the Gospel, and so Marries her, he has no
power, no right to Marry; even a Person, who, notwithstanding the Divorce, is
still the Wife of him that put her away, he certainly commits Adultery.

INFERENCES.
Having thus resolved the Queries, suggested by the Text, it is time I should
after all, add some wholesome Directions, whereby such Divorces, and all Desires
after them, may be prevented.

I. There is no better Antidote against such Mischiefs, than Love, mutual Love,
a true Conjugal Love; a Love grounded, not upon a bare satisfying the desires
of the Flesh, for that will be of no long continuance; but established upon the
lasting Principles of Duty, and fed by Pious Considerations. And they who
think, that no less Authority has joined them together, than God himself, and
intended, that this Union should be great, and withstand all Temptations of
Dissolution, except that of Death; and thought fit to represent by it the Love
of Christ to his Church; They who make these Considerations the Foundation of
their Love, will not be easily moved, to the desire of Separation.

Love in a married State being grounded only upon Beauty, and Riches, and other
external things, when these fade, Love will fade. Virtue, and the Fear of God,
and the Oath that is betwixt them, these must tie their Hearts together; and
where they do so, their Love, like a treble Cord, is not easily broken.

Love is the great Preservative of Happiness in a Married State; where that
reigns, no desires of Divorcement can find Entertainment. But then it must be
such Love, as the Apostle describes, 1 Cor. xiii.4, 5, 6, 7. that suffers long,
and is kind; that envies not, that vaunts not it self, that is not puffed up,
does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks no Evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth, bears
all things, believes all things, hops all things, and endures all things.
This Charity we owe to all that are of the Household of Faith, more or less;
much more to Persons of so near a Relation; who, besides the general
Obligations, as Christians, have bound themselves, Vowed and Promised before
God, and the Elect Angels, and the Congregation, to love one another with a
pure Heart, fervently.

Love is an Universal Medicine. If the Infirmities of one Party be invincible,
Love will bear with them; if vincible, Love will endeavor to reform them. If
Crosses happen, Love will administer Comfort, if Prosperity comes flowing in,
Love will exhort to Thankfulness; if Disputes arise, Love will appease them, if
Quarrels are broacht, Love will quench that Fire. If Misconstructions be made,
Love will rectify them, if Suspicions disturb the Mind, Love will reject them,
if Failings appear, Love will cover them, and whatever things are amiss in a
Family, Love will endeavor to cure them.

Where this Love decays, there the Good Angel, that should guard the House,
prepares for his departure. Where this Love is not maintained, Temptations
prevail, and Quarrels come, and Differences arise, and Persons are let loose,
and ill Thoughts do enter, and reproachful Language flies about, and the
Parties become uneasy, and Divorces are thought, of and being difficult to
compose according to Law, they are wished for, and desired; and if they cannot
be had, there Adulteries and Fornications, and a thousand Evils are
entertained, as woeful Experience shows; and thus the married State, becomes
bitter as Wormwood, which if Love had had the Management of it, might have been
sweet as the Morning Rose, fragrant as the Balm of Gilead, refreshing as
Evening Showers.

II. As unequal Yoakings are very often the causes of great Contentions, so
where they may be, they ought to be carefully shunned, and prevented. By being
unequally Yoaked, I do not mean only Inequality of Age, of Temper, of Rank and
Fortune, but marrying Persons of a different Persuasion in Matters of Religion;
for if one of the Parties be Zealous for the Religion he professes, he will
think himself bound in Conscience to draw the Partner of his Bed, into a
Partnership of his Religion; and if the other will not yield, there arise such
Flames of Discord sometimes, that Divorces and Separations, are not only
desired, but unjustly Endeavored and Practiced; and one party contrary to Law
and Reason, and Conscience, and Modesty leaves the other.

Of this we have too many Examples, not only where Protestants have married
Papists, but where Protestants have joined themselves to Protestants of
different Sentiments; not that the Differences among Protestants are of any
great Consequence, but where Pride, Passion, Ignorance or Prejudice turns
disputable Questions into Articles of Faith, and makes them Balls of
Contention, they shed a bad influence, even upon a married State. Indeed where
both Parties are of a gentle and charitable Temper, there is no great danger of
falling out about Religion; but as such Tempers are somewhat rare; so where
they are found, they may be Influenced by external Causes and Motives, which
may alter them; and though Promises are often made before Marriage, not to
molest one another in point of Religion, yet false Persuasion afterward that it
is their Duty to convert them, who are so nearly related to them, we see, has
prevailed with them to break all those Engagements.

Besides, in these unequal Yoakings, there cannot be that sweet, that mutual
Encouragement to Prayer and Praises, and other Acts of Devotion and Piety,
which ought to be betwixt such Relations; and though I doubt not, but it is
possible to Admonish one another to serve God faithfully in their own Way,
without Passion, or passing Censures one upon another; yet the Thoughts, that
one of them worships God in a forbidden Way, will still be an Impediment to
this faithful and Conscientious Exhorting one another duly. And therefore
though I cannot say, it is absolutely unlawful to marry a Person of a different
Persuasion in Matters of Religion; yet the Inconveniences are so great that he,
who duly Weighs and Ponders them before he enters upon that State, will think
himself obliged to arm himself against all such dangerous Mixtures and
Conjunctions.

III. There is nothing causes these Desires of Divorcements more than unhappy
and unfortunate Matches. And as such Matches are too often the Effects, either
of Rashness and Precipitation, or want of enquiring into the Temper and
Disposition of the Persons that are to make this near Relation, or of
Covetousness and Greediness after Fortune and Riches, and Money, or of nelecting
the advice of Parents and faithful Friends, or of a preceding vain and vicious
Life, which is punished very often with such uncomfortable Conjunctions, so
where the married State is embitter'd with many sad Ingredients, to prevent all
such Wishes and Desires of Divorcement, these following Considerations, and
Remedies, may be very useful.

1. Let it be considered, that though your Married State be full of grievous
Troubles, yet it does not, it need not hinder you from attaining Everlasting
Salvation. It Is true, People may make any State and Condition an Impediment to
Eternal Life; but there is no Necessity for it: Nay, in the Case before us, the
Troubles in a Married State naturally direct you to seek a better Country; and
if you are in a Capacity of enjoying God for ever, notwithstanding the Evils
which befall you, you have Reason still to Praise and Adore the Divine
Goodness; and since your Married State affords so little Comfort, To labor
hard to be made Partakers of Everlasting Consolations.

2. Let another Consideration be added to this, that as miserable as your
Married Condition is, this happens not, comes not to pass without a very
special Providence; God either orders it, or wisely permits it; corrects you
for great Purposes, and chastises you to let you see your Affections have been
misplaced; and must be set upon Objects and Beings more Sublime, more Adequate,
more Commensurate to your Immortal Souls, God and Heaven, and the Things unseen.

3. Under such a Providence the Soul must learn to be humble; to look upon her
Sins as Meritorious, and the Cause of this uncomfortable State; and accuse her
Carnal, Worldly, and Sensual Desires and Designs, as the Procurers of this
Misery; and improve the Dispensation into Repentance, and Self-Examination, and
Submission to the Will of God, and the Practices of Spiritual Devotions, and
Aspirations, and Breathings after Enjoyments of a nobler Nature.

4. In this Case the Divine Power and Goodness must be adored, to supply you
with Grace and Assistance suitable, that you may cheerfully bear the Injuries,
Indignities, and Crosses, that befall you in that State; and do not doubt, but
your Prayer, if strong and importunate, will draw Honey from the Rock, and Oil
from the Flint, and Blessings of great Value from him, who has declared
himself, a God, that hears Prayer.

5. Another Consideration will be very profitable, that God by such Crosses in
a Married State, teaches you Patience at home, that you may be the better able
to practice it abroad.

Thus the Philosopher said of his Angry and Unquiet Yoak-fellow, That he found
his Silence, under the Effects of her Rage and unquiet Spirit when he was at
home, proved very salutary and beneficial to him, when he was in Company
abroad; for by that means he was the better able to bridle his Passions when he
was provoked or affronted in Public.

And St. Chrysostom has this Observation upon it, It grieves me, that
Heathens are wiser than we, who are to imitate Angels; nay, God himself, in
Meekness and Patience.

Indeed we cannot imitate a more Excellent Pattern: He that is best able to
Revenge himself upon the Insolent Wretches that affront him, suffers most. Be
patient therefore, unto the coming of the Lord; Behold the Husbandman waits for
the precious Fruit of the Earth, and has long Patience for it, until he
receive the early and latter Rain: Be ye also Patient, Stablish your Hearts,
for the Coming of the Lord draws nigh, Jam. v.7, 8.

SERMON XXVIII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 33. Again, ye have heard, that it has been said by
them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the
Lord thine Oaths.


THE sense of these words, we have Levit. xix.12. but the Words themselves seem
to be a Paraphrase of the ancient Expositions of the Law among the Jews; upon
that Law in Leviticus, where it is, Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely,
neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God; which Words those ancient
Interpreters expressed (it is like) as it is in the Text, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; And that is the
thing aimed at in these words, Again ye have heard, That it has been said by
them of old time: And most certainly, he that forswears himself, swears falsely
by the Name of God; and he that does not perform unto the Lord his Oaths, or
performs not what he has Sworn and Promised to God and Man, profanes his Name
with a witness.

Or possibly, all that is said in the Old Testament against Swearing, was
contracted by the Learned Men of old Time into this Axiom or Sentence, Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but, etc.

Or, These words are a Comment made by the Ancestors of the Jews, upon the
Third Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Or, They relate to Numb. xxx.2. However it be, or whoever were the Authors of
this Saying, it must be confessed, that they spoke conformably to the Will of
God; and therefore these words are in effect a Divine Precept, and Obligatory
for ever, as much as a Command in the Decalogue; and though it was said so by
them of old Time, yet it is no more, than what the ancient of Days has said
over and over by Moses and the Prophets. And to discourse of this Subject
profitably, I shall enquire,

I. What an Oath, or taking an Oath, or, what Swearing is.

II. Whether an Oath, or Swearing, even in a modest, serious, judicial way be
lawful.

III. Why Forswearing our selves, or Perjury, or not performing unto the Lord
our Oaths is forbid, and wherein the virulency or heinousness of the Sin
consists.

IV. What the Ceremonies in taking an Oath in most Nations do import, and why
they are used.

V. Whether an Oath may in no case be broken.

I. What an Oath, or taking an Oath, or Swearing is. 1. Whether with Tully we
say, it is a Religious Asseveration; or with others, That it is a Religious
act, in which for the confirmation of a thing doubtful God is called in as a
Witness; or whether with the Inspired Writers, we call it, a binding of the
Soul with a band; or whether we define it to be a solemn appealing to God as a
Witness and Judge, the difference is not great, for all this is included in the
notion of an Oath, or Swearing; and when the Apostle, Heb. vi.16. says, Men
verily swear by the greater, meaning God, who is over all, the supreme Judge
and Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy; he points at all that I have
said, and intimates, That Men in an Oath do solemnly and religiously call God
to witness the Truth; or in case they swear falsely, or do not perform their
Oath, imprecate to themselves the heavy Judgments of God; and this is also the
import of that Saying, Deuteronomy. vi.13. where God directs the Israelites, that if
there be a necessity for their Swearing, That they should Swear by his Name.
And for this reason it is called, The Oath of God, or, The Oath of the Lord,
Exodus xxii.10.

2. To omit other Distinctions. An Oath is either Assertory or Promissory, i.
e. in an Oath we either assert and affirm the Truth of what is past, or of what
is present; or we Promise to say or do, or not to say or do a thing. The former
is commonly made use of in Courts of Judicature; the latter in Contracts,
Commerce, and Compacts. Of the former we have an Instance in the Woman
suspected of Adultery, who was to take an Oath, that she was not Guilty, Numb.
v.19. Of the other in Abraham's Steward, Genesis xxiv.9. in the chief Men and
Princes of Israel, swearing to the Gibeonites to protect them as their
Confederates, Josh. ix.15. and in others. The words of the Text, though they
include the Assertory, yet do chiefly relate to a Promissory Oath.

3. In every Oath a Man has to deal with two Parties, God and Man; with God,
as the searcher of Hearts, and the grand Witness; and with Man, for whose
Satisfaction and Acquiescence in the matter the Oath is taken, which shows the
difference betwixt an Oath and a Vow. In a formal Vow a Man addresses himself
directly to God, and God and he are the only Parties concerned; but in an Oath,
Man as well as God is made a Party; though the Obligation be the same in both,
which is the reason, why they are promiscuously used, Numb. xxx.2.

4. In every Oath a Man obliges and ties himself to the manifestation of the
Truth, whether the Oath be Assertory or Promissory; whether it be concerning
something past, or present, or to come; and therefore it is called, a binding of
the Soul, or Conscience, by a band, which a Man cannot escape or slip away
from, but he must leap into Hell, Numb. xxx.2. so that a Person Swearing is
bound to stand to what he has said, and to perform what his Lips have uttered;
and the Obligation rises not only from hence, because it is a voluntary Act and
Promise, without the performance of which he cannot be Just; but because he
engages the most Sacred Being in the Promise, and gives God for his Security;
God who has not only Power, but is concerned in justice to avenge the Perjury.
So much of the nature of an Oath. Let Us consider,

II. Whether an Oath, or Swearing, even in a modest, serious, and judicial way,
be lawful. 1. That taking an Oath is not unlawful in it self, is evident from
hence, because God himself has upon occasion used it. By my self have I sworn,
says the Lord, Genesis xxii.16. upon which Passage the Apostle makes this Remark,
Heb. vi.13. When God made Promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no
greater, he swear by himself; and again, Psalm. xcv.11. so I swear in my Wrath,
that they should not enter into my rest. And the like we find practiced by the
Angel of God, Dan. xii.7. who lift up his hand to Heaven, and swear by him that
lives for ever and ever.

Nor can it be absolutely unlawful, if we consider the end of an Oath, which is
a confirmation of the Truth, in things doubtful, where other Proofs and
Evidences fail.

The End being necessary in Humane Affairs, the Means, which is an Oath, must
at least be Lawful. And this will farther appear, from the nature of an Oath,
which contains nothing in it self unlawful. A Religious Act cannot be unlawful,
nor Confirmation of the Truth in things doubtful unlawful in it self, nor the
Invocation of the Divine Testimony unlawful; and if the Parts which make up and
constitute an Oath be not unlawful, an Oath cannot be unlawful. Add to all this
the consent of all Nations, which in other Cases, particularly in asserting the
Being of a God, is counted a considerable Proof; wherever any Civility or
orderly Government takes place, Men led by the Light of Nature, make use of an
Oath in doubtful Cases; to which universal Custom the Apostle alludes, in
saying, Heb. vi.16. For Men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for
Confirmation is to them an end of all strife.

2. That the use of an Oath was Lawful to the Jews, is so evident, that it
needs no Proof. The Patriarchs used it, Abraham, Genesis xiv.22, 23. Isaac, Genesis
xxvi.31. Jacob, Genesis xxxi.53. And Moses, by the Command of God, orders, that if
a Controversy did arise, that an Oath should decide it, Exodus xxii.11. It was
an express Command of God given to the Israelites, Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him, and shall swear by his Name, i. e. If there be occasion to
take an Oath, thou shall not swear by Idols, or by Heathen Deities, but by the
Name of thy God, who is Omniscient and Omnipresent, and will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Name in vain; and to this purpose it is, that the
Prophets give Directions, how the Jews should swear, in what manner, and with
what Limitations, as we see, Jer. iv.2. And Punishments severe and dreadful are
threatened to him, that despises his Oath, Ezekiel xvi.59. But,

3. The greatest Difficulty is, whether it be lawful for a Christian to take an
Oath, for not only Christ in the following Verse says, But I say unto you,
swear not at all; but we find the Primitive Christians were very cautious how
they ventured upon an Oath, they not only dreaded those vain and light Oaths so
common among the Children of the Devil, but they had a reluctance to Swearing
even on solemn and serious Occasions, thinking a Christian ought to be believed
upon his bare Word and Affirmation: And indeed many of the sober Heathens, by a
dictate of the Law of Nature, were strangely averse from all Oaths whatsoever;
insomuch, that Clinias the Pythagorean, when he might have escaped the Mulct or
Penalty of three Talents, which is about 8000 Pounds Sterling, if he would but
have Sworn, though there was no Temptation to a false Oath in the Case, yet
would not, and chose rather to submit to the Penalty, than wrong, as he
thought, his Conscience.

But it were to be wished, that all Mankind were so honest, that every Man's
Word were as good and as firm as the most solemn Oath; yet considering the
Corruption that has overspread the World, the Rules of Justice and
Righteousness, and the good of Mankind, make an Oath sometimes absolutely
necessary, because Justice and Equity, and the good of Societies cannot be
compassed without it.

As to Christ's saying, But I say unto you, swear not at all, I shall tell you
the sense and design of it, when I come to explain it in Order, and whatever
Strictness, not only many of the primitive Believers, but some Pious Heathens
have professed in this kind. It is certain, St. Paul, who could not but know
his Master's Mind, did upon extr^ordinary occasions make use of these Religious
Asseverations; for what are those Expressions of his we meet with, Romans i.9. 2
Cor. i.23. 2 Cor. xi.31. Gal. i.20. I call God for a Record upon my Soul, God
is my witness, Behold before God I lie not, I say, what are all these, but
solemn Oaths? and therefore it cannot be altogether unlawful for a Christian to
use them upon some Occasions; not to mention, that the Gospel does not reverse
the Law of Nature; and I have showed before, that the Law of Nature has taught
most civilized Nations to have recourse to them in things doubtful; and since
it was lawful, under the Law of Moses, I see no reason why it should not be so
under the Gospel, not only because Controversies and doubtful Cases will arise
as much now as formerly, but because an Oath was no part of the Ceremonial Law,
and consequently cannot be said to be abolished.

There is no doubt, things so solemn, so sacred, so serious as Oaths, ought to
be used but seldom; to make a Trade of it is the readiest way to Perjury: The
familiarity takes off from the solemnity of the thing, and then there is an
easy slip into Perjury: And therefore it may not be amiss here to prescribe
certain Rules and Limits, and to show when and where, and upon what occasions
an Oath, the taking of an Oath may be lawful.

1. When the Magistrate, or the Powers which are set over us by Providence, do
command it: This is the import of Exodus xxii.11. and this is part of that
Obedience we owe to our Superiors, who are Ministers to us for good, and do not
bear the Sword in vain. Among the Jews the Magistrate might command an Oath to
be taken, Numb. v.19, 21; and why not among Christians.

2. It must be in things doubtful, and where there is no other way to come to
any Certainty, but by an Oath, which even Men of a loose Life, if they have not
thrown off all Religion, will stand in awe of, according to what the Apostle
intimates, Heb. vi.16.

3. In a Thing of great Moment. They that make Men Swear about Trifles, as they
have no great sense of Religion, so they consider not the Nature and End of an
Oath. In Matters trivial, where the gain or loss of either side is
inconsiderable, all wise and good Men have ever looked upon pressing or taking
an Oath as unlawful, it being too sacred a thing to be used in Things mean and
contemptible. St. Paul made use of it, as we said before, but it was in Things
relating to God, and the Souls of Men, and the good of Christian Societies, 2
Cor. i.23.

The wiser Heathen thought it lawful in three Cases only: 1. If it were to
avoid Infamy and Disgrace, and consequently rendering ones self incapable of
serving the Public. 2. If it were to save a Man's Life, or to free him from
some considerable Danger. 3. If the good of the Community, or the common good
of the Country, Men are Members of, did require it. But in Money-businesses
between Man and Man, they thought it more Conscientious to be a loser, than
bring the Soul under the Obligation of an Oath; and let it be considered,
whether such Men, who exceed many Christians in strictness, will not be their
Judges in the last Day.

4. In taking an Oath great simplicity must be used, both in our Words and
Intentions. He that Swears to a thing which he either knows to be false, or
concerning which he is uncertain, whether it be true or not, deviates from this
Simplicity, and runs himself into the danger of Perjury; and so does he, who by
an Oath promises to do a Thing, which he either does not intend, or endeavor
to perform what he has sworn to perform. And of this Nature are all Mental
Reservations and Equivocations in Oaths, which is the reason, why the Prophet
requires us to Swear in Truth, Jer. iv.2. The Temporal Inconveniences that
attend the performance of a lawful Oath, do not make the Obligation less; and
therefore when David asks, Who shall ascend unto the Hill of the Lord, Psalm.
xv.1. he answers, ver. 4. He that swears to his own Hurt, and changes not, i.
e. He that after he has given his Oath finds the performance will be
prejudicial to his Interest, and yet will not alter the Word that is gone out
of his Lips. And this is agreeable to the simplicity we speak of.

5. If an Oath be taken, it must be in Things lawful, not forbidden, either by
the Law of Nature or by Revelation, i. e. the Revealed Will of God in the
Scripture; for this were to offer Things abominable to God, more abominable
than cutting off a Dog's-Neck, or sacrificing Swines-flesh, to make use of the
most Holy Thing, in things contrary to his Holiness. This would be to set God
against himself, to make him witness to our Impieties, and to get him to
Patronize what his purer eyes abhor. And therefore the Command is, that we are
to Swear in Righteousness, Jer. iv.2.

6. The Thing we Swear to do, must be Possible, and in our own Power, either
natural or adventitious, and coming from the Spirit of God. Impossibilities are
no part of the matter of an Oath, Bishop Sanderson.
whether they be natural Impossibilities, such as it is to turn a Blackamoor
White, or to make an Ox speak; or actual, as that a Man who is at London to
Day, should be the same Day at York; or in Law, as for a Mayor of a Town to
make an itinerant Judge, or a Baron, or Chancellor of the Kingdom, the Law
giving him no right. There needs no store of Arguments to prove, That such
Impossibilities are no Ingredients of an Oath, for they would make an Oath
ridiculous, and discover the Swearer to be a Fool.

7. An Oath must be taken with great Deliberation, being a thing of the
greatest Consequence, where the safety, and welfare, and interest of our
Immortal Souls are in a special manner concerned. We use this Deliberation in
lesser things, and therefore must not be omitted in a thing of that Weight and
Moment; which shows, That Children and Madmen, and Persons very like them, Men
in Drink, or in a Passion, are no fit Persons to take an Oath, because they are
not capable of mature Deliberation, while under these Circumstances, and
therefore we are enjoined and directed to Swear with Judgment, Jer. iv.2.

8. An Oath taken to Heretics and Infidels, to Enemies, to Turks, Jews, and
Heathens, even to the worst of Men, must inviolably be kept; as we see in the
Example of the Oath the Israelites took to the Gibeonites, Josh. ix.18. I will
not charge every Member of the Church of Rome with the contrary Doctrine and
Practice, especially as it relates to Heretics and Infidels; but certain it
is, that it was both the Doctrine and Practice of the Council of Constance, and
the Advice of Martin V. to Alexander, Duke of Lithuania, whom he exhorted to
break his Faith and Oath given to the Bohemian Protestants; and of Urban VI. to
Wenceslaus to do the like to Persons, who differed from the Church of Rome. If
such a Principle were part of Christ's Religion, it would not only contradict
the Law of natural Justice, which Christ came to establish, but were enough to
render Christianity odious to the sober sort of Mankind, who in this Case might
justly say, as he in the Case of Transubstantiation. Let my Soul be with the
Philosophers.

These are some of the principal Rules to be observed in taking of an Oath; if
there be any more, they shall be discoursed of in the Prosecution of the
Subject.

Let us go on and enquire,

III. Why Perjury or Forswearing our selves, or not performing unto the Lord
our Oath, is so strictly forbid, and wherein the virulency or heinousness of
the Sin consists. 1. It is Dishonesty in the highest degree, a most base
Treachery, and Perfidiousness, not only to Man, but to God. He that either
Swears falsely, or does not perform unto the Lord his Oath, deceives not only
Man, but does as much as in him lies to Cheat God, if it were possible; at
least he discovers his good Will to do it, though he is not able. He that Cozens
another with counterfeit Wares, or gives him a Stone for Bread, a Serpent for a
Fish, is not so great a Cheat, as the Perjured Creature, because the Person he
Affronts, and seeks to impose upon in this Case is infinitely greater. He
attempts at the same time to rob Heaven and Earth, God and Man of their due,
which is the performance of his Oath, a performance due to the Creator, and the
Creature, by all the Laws of Property, and a most solemn Contract; He gives
both God and his Neighbor Shells for Kernels, Husks for Dates, and Words for
Deeds, and Lies for Truths, and deceives his Neighbor, particularly in that
which all Mankind looks upon as Rational, to put the greatest Trust and
Confidence in, and there cannot be greater Dishonesty.

2. It Is playing with God, and deriding his Justice and Omniscience, for it is
as much as granting and denying these Attributes. The Swearer in taking an Oath
grants, that God is the searcher of Hearts, and a discerner of his Thoughts,
and Words, and Actions; and that he takes notice of them, and remembers them,
and yet by his nonperformance, acts as if all this were but Fable and Romance.
Who can read the Passage of the Soldiers without trembling, who Crowned our
Savior with Thorns, put a Reed in his Hand, bowed the Knee before him, and
cried, Hail King of the Jews. Such a mocking of God is Perjury, the Oath shows,
that the Perjured Man acknowledges all his great Attributes, and yet his
Behavior discovers, that he was in Jest, when he made that Confession; and
Dionysius, when he robbed Jupiter of his Golden Beard, did not mock that
fictitious Deity more than such a Man does the living God. He deals with him,
as if he were some Idiot or Heathen Idol, which has Eyes and sees not, Ears
and hears not; and how great must be this Impiety.

3. It Is profanation of the most sacred and the most serious Thing in the
World. An Oath is one of the highest Acts of Religion. It is a most solemn
Invocation of his Name, a most solemn declaration of his Excellencies and
Perfections, above all Created Beings, and a most solemn Appeal to him from all
Creatures whatsoever. This Opinion the very Heathens had of it, so that Perjury
is profaning the most solemn Worship of God, and Belshazzar was not guilty of
so great Profaneness in Drinking out of the Hallowed Vessels of the Temple, as
the Man who does not perform unto the Lord his Oath, for he profanes not
Vessels dedicated to his Service, but his glorious Name, and prostitutes it to
the contempt of Men and Devils.

4. It is a Sin next to Atheism, for there is very little difference betwixt
believing there is no God, and believing there is one, whose Omnisciencee and
revenging Eye deserves no regard at all. It is a Sin Man cannot well attain to,
till he has stupefied his Conscience, and says at least in his Heart or
Wishes, There is no God.

And what shall I say more. It is a Sin, which kills at one stroke. It does not
waste the Soul by degrees, as other Sins, but makes the Sinner a Child of Death
presently; so that if Death should arrest him immediately upon his Perjury, the
Man is miserable as Dives, unhappy as Judas, undone as Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, and must drink the Potion of the Sinners Cup.

It is a crying Sin, brings a Curse upon the Perjured Man and his Family.

It calls aloud for Vengeance, awakens the Divine Justice, and will not let it
be quiet, till it brandishes its Sword against the daring Sinner.

It makes a Man infamous and odious among Men, when it comes to be known.

It defiles the Land, where it goes unpunished, and helps to hasten the
intended Judgment upon a City or Nation.

It leads to other dreadful and clamorous Sins; for God withdraws his Spirit
from the Man who Affronts him thus, and he tumbles down lower and lower, and
becomes every Day more and more a Child of Hell, and of the Devil. It causes
mighty Terrors of Conscience even on this side Eternity; and God is so
concerned to Revenge the Profanation, that very often he stays not till the
Sinner drops into the burning Lake; but even here the Profane Creature must
feel his Vengeance. Zedekiah, for his Perjury to King Nebuchadnezzar is taken
Captive by his Army, and has his Eyes pulled out. Saul, for his Perjury to the
Gibeonites, is the ruin of seven of his nearest Relations. Uladislaus, for the
same Crime, loses the Battle, at a time when Victory seemed to smile upon him,
and all things to conspire to his Success. Michael the Greek Emperor's
Chamberlain, for this Sin is struck with an Epilepsy. Ludovicus Boso, for his
false Oath to Berengarius the younger is deprived of his Sight, and has
several of his Members cut off. Elfred, for his Perfidiousness to King Elstan,
falls down backward, and within three Days dies. Goodwin, Earl of Kent, upon
the same account is choked with a piece of Bread. Polymarchus, so heavy did
this Sin lie upon his Conscience, that he fancies he is bit at Night by a
Weezel, and then falls into those Terrors, that he lays violent hands upon
himself: Add to all this the Example of those three Men Eusebius speaks of, who
being witnesses against a Bishop, Narcissus by Name, wished that if they did
not swear true, one that Fire might consume him, the second that some Disease
and Torment might overtake him; the third, that he might lose his Eyes; all
which came to pass, as a Signal of God's being Witness, and Judge of their
Villainy.

IV. Whether an Oath may in no case be broken. I answer, since Oaths are not
all of the same Nature, we cannot say, that every Oath, whatever it be, must be
inviolably kept. For,

1. A Man may rashly and unpremeditately Swear to do a thing that is in it self
unlawful, as those Jews, Acts xxiii.12. and then certainly he is not obliged to
keep it; for all Obligation is to some Duty, and if the pretended Obligation be
to a thing sinful, it is no Obligation. The Man that Swears to do a thing
that is sinful commits a very great Offense against God; and if he should
perform it, the Offense would yet be greater; and therefore such an Oath must
be undone, for to keep it is sinful: It Is true, to break it is sinful too,
because it is a Profanation of the Testimony of God, but to keep it would be a
greater; and of two Evils, the greatest is to be avoided: Such a rash Oath was
that of David, 1 Samuel xxv.22. when he swore, that he would not leave so much as
a Dog alive that belonged to Nabal, because he returned a rude, uncivil Answer
to his Messengers; and of this nature are those Oaths which the Priests of the
Church of Rome make their Converts swear, when they have enticed them away from
the Protestant Churches. The Oath they Swear must needs be unlawful, because it
is to Swear in effect, That they will give Religious Worship to the Creature,
commit Idolatry, consent to the depriving of the People of the Cup in the
Eucharist, and believe against Scripture, Sense and Reason, and espouse Errors
which the Word of God condemns; all which is sinful; and therefore such an Oath
cannot be kept with a safe Conscience, no more than if a Man should swear, that
he will break open his Neighbor's House, or turn Highway-man, or commit
Fornication; What is usually objected in this case, that the Princes of the
Congregation in Joshua's Time, swore a Thing unlawful, and yet were obliged to
stand to what they had sworn to the Gibeonites. This I say has no great weight
in it; for how does it appear, that what they swore was unlawful? It Is true,
they were to make no Peace with the Inhabitants of Canaan, but destroy them;
but if we compare one Law with another, we shall find, that the Law of
destroying the Nations of Canaan, reached those chiefly, who after a solemn
proclamation of Peace, refused to submit to their Power, Deuteronomy. xx.10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. nor were they to make any League or Covenant with them, when
there was danger of imitating them in their Idolatry, Deuteronomy. xx.18. Exodus xxiii,
32, 33. which was not the case of the Gibeonites, who both submitted to their
Power, and the Laws of their Religion. So that whatever Inconveniency there
might be in this Oath taken to the Gibeonites, there was nothing unlawful in it.

2. It is possible, a Man may inconsiderately Swear that which is impossible
for him to perform, or which is not in his power to do; and all Casuists agree
in this, that there is no Obligation to Impossibilities, except what is
impossible at present, should afterward, upon alteration of Circumstances
become possible: As if a Beggar, in danger of being killed by another Man,
should swear, that by such a Day he will pay him an Hundred Pounds, knowing
himself not to be worth an hundred Shillings. In this case, as the Oath is
sinful, because a Man swears that which he knows is impossible for him to
perform, so there can be no Obligation to an impossibility.

3. A Person that Swears may be under the Power of a Superior, without whose
consent he should not have sworn; in which case, if the Superior will not allow
of it, the Oath cannot be kept, as God himself determines the case, Numb.
xxx.3. where he gives a Father and a Husband power to null the Obligation,
under which a Wife or Daughter has brought her self by an Oath, or Vow, which
should not have been made without the consent of those whom God has set over
them; yet with this Proviso still* that if the Father or Husband hearing of the
Oath say nothing to it, Silence implying consent, it shall stand in its full
Obligation; and this will hold in the case of a Subject, or a Son by way of
Analogy.

4. When Men Swear, the posture of Affairs, and the circumstances of the Person
to whom they swear may be very different from what they may be afterward; so
that if the state of Things, and the material circumstances of the Oath do
afterward change, because the Oath, when taken, had no respect to these new
material Circumstances, it ceases to oblige; and Casuists do commonly instance
in a Persons swearing to his Friend to put a Sword into his Hands by such a
time, if before, or by that time, the Person to whom the Oath is sworn should
be Distracted, the performance of the Oath cannot be thought necessary; or if a
Father should swear to his Son, to settle all his Estate upon him, if that Son,
after this, should attempt to Poison the Father, his Father cannot be thought
obliged to perform what he has promised; because when he made the Oath, he
considered him as an obedient towardly Child. In which material Circumstance
there being a Failure, the Obligation ceases.

5. In all Promissory Oaths, there are certain general Conditions and
Exceptions to be understood, though they are not expressed; such as, If God
permit, If the Lord will, or, If we live and do well, Jam. iv. so that an Oath
cannot be said to be broken, if by mere Providence a Man be hindered from
performing every part of it, as long as there is no Will or Intention to break
it; as if a Man should by Oath promise another to return such a Bond or Book,
or Chest by such a Day, if before that time he should be struck with an
Apoplexy, or be overtaken by a Fever, the Oath in this case cannot be said to
be broken, but must be interpreted according to the tacit Condition aforesaid,
though it was not expressed. It is so in other cases, as by Example, if a
Person should Swear or Vow to God to abstain from all Food and Drink such a
Day, or so many Days in the Week, though the Exception, except I fall Sick, or
should not be Well, etc. is not expressed, yet it is to be understood, and the
Oath in this Case, cannot be said to be broken, though by Providence the Party
is hindered from the Performance of it, according to his Purpose and Intention.

6. Where an Oath is founded in a certain privilege or prerogative, there, if
that privilege does actually cease, the obligation of the Oath taken to that
Person considered under that Notion, does actually cease to oblige, as suppose
a Man should swear to a Person in such an Office, that he will Assist him, and
Act under him to the utmost of his Power; if the Person in that Office does
either relinquish the Office, or is put out; or leaves it; or runs away from
it, so as not to be in a capacity to take care of it or to execute it, the
obligation of the Oath of Fidelity ceases, because it had respect to that
Office, and the Persons being or continuing in it.

7. An Oath so far as it clashes or interferes with an antecedent Obligation,
ceases to oblige, an Oath indeed obliges, and can super-induce a new
Obligation, where there was none before, but cannot destroy that which it
finds, or was in being before. And therefore an Oath taken to a Person, though
in a very high Station, that clashes with the antecedent Obligation we, have to
the community or public good, or humame Society, whereof we are Members, must
necessarily cease to oblige.

8. In all Conquests an Oath of Fidelity taken to the preceding Governor,
ceases to oblige, if we resolve to stay under the power of the Conqueror, who
by that Conquest gets a Right to the duty of the Oath taken to him, who was
before in power.

V. What the Ceremonies used in several Nations in taking of Oaths do import,
and why they are used.

The Answer is in general. Ceremonies in taking of Oaths have been used in most
Nations, to increase the reverence of an Oath, and to oblige those who swear to
be more cautious, and fearful of venturing rashly upon a thing so Sacred. The
ancient Phoenicians in taking an Oath, would hold a Lamb in one hand, and a
stone in another ready to strike the Lamb, to intimate their wishes, that God
might strike them dead, as they were ready to do that Lamb, if they did
forswear themselves. The old Romans upon the same occasions would take up a
Stone, and cast it from them, imprecating to themselves, that God might cast
them away, as they did that Stone, if they swear not that which was true. Some
Nations would light Torches, and hold them in their Hands while they took an
Oath, wishing that in case of Perjury, they might be consumed with Fire; others
would take a knife, and hold it to a pigs Throat, devoting themselves to the
Revenging stroke of Heaven in case of swearing falsely. Abraham made his
Steward swear to him by laying his Hand upon his Thigh, the place where the
Sword used to hang, as an item, that he should fall by the Sword, if he
performed not, what he had promised by Oath. Genesis xxiv.2. The Angel, Dan.
xii.7. lift up his right and left Hand to Heaven, when he swear, to show that
he engaged all the Power of Heaven against him, if the thing he confirmed were
not true. The Jews Jerem. xxxiv.18. in the Administering and taking an Oath slew
a Calf, and cut it asunder, and the Person that swear walked through the
dissected parts, to convince the Spectators, that he wished, God would cut him
asunder, if he broke the Covenant. The customs of other Nations I omit, and
shall only take notice of one in use among our selves, which is swearing upon a
Bible, and the import of that is, a tacit imprecation or wish, that if we swear
falsely, the Curses Temporal and Eternal contained in that Book, may light upon
us, which if it were considered well, it would make some Men more fearful of
swearing so often, as they do; and though the Sense and Design of the Words of
the Oath, we Administer in Judicial Courts, are great, yet it were to be
wished, that what is intended by the Words, and by the Ceremony used, were more
fully and more largely expressed, to make the ruder sort of People especially,
more sensible of that Act of Religion, they perform in taking of an Oath; And
possibly a great many Perjuries might this way be prevented, if the Expressions
were more Astonishing, and the Words more Dreadful, as in some Northern Nations
with lifting up three Fingers with respect to the Holy Trinity, they solemnly
Renounce all their share in the Happiness of another World in case of Perjury.

Inferences.
1. Though the obligations of an Oath may in some cases cease, because the Oath
may have respect to certain Conditions, Circumstances, and Constitutions, which
failing, the Obligation must fail too, or there may be some defect either in
the object or subject of the Oath, yet from thence it does not follow, that Man
can dispense with an Oath lawfully taken; for an Oath being taken to God, as
well as to satisfy Man, how can Man, poor Dust and Ashes, give away Gods
Right, to whom a Man obliges himself in an Oath? An Oath is matter of natural
Right, and therefore cannot be dispensed with at Humane Tribunals, and if such
Dispensations were admitted, there could be no Security of the thing promised
by Oath; Besides these Dispensations, would be giving away another Man's Right,
which is against the Rule of Common Justice and Equity.

The Bishops or Popes of Rome, who for several Ages have attributed to
themselves power to absolve Subjects of their Oaths of Allegiance to their
Princes, have in doing so, invaded God's Right and Prerogative, and given the
Considerate World too much occasion to think, that what is said of Antichrist,
2 Thessal. ii.4. is very applicable to that See; for his Character there is,
That he opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself, that
he is God.

And this Power of Dispensing with Oaths the Pope's Parasites do commonly place
in his Ecumenical Power and Authority, as he is Emperor of the whole World,
though how he came by it none can tell, except it be as Highway-men come by a
Man's Purse, by Fraud and Force.

Some to avoid the Sin of Blasphemy, upon which their Opinion borders, tell us,
that the Pope only declares, that the Oath in such Cases does not oblige,
because of some great Good which is impeded by it, or some great Evil which is
like to ensue upon the perpetuity of the Obligation: But they that know what
the Popes have done in these Cases, especially here in England, with respect to
our Kings and Queens, must needs conclude they intend something more by this
Absolving, than a bare Declaration; for the Style of their Bulls is Magisterial
and Authoritative, and they attribute the Fact to the plenitude of their Power;
and as if the sole Power were lodged by God in them, a Pride so great and
intolerable, that one would wonder Princes of a Refined Understanding, as some
are, nay, of common Sagacity, do not see the Cheat, and lash their Arrogance
into better manners.

I do not doubt, but an Oath of Allegiance may in some Cases cease to oblige,
if either there be an impossibility to perform it, or if the Prince dies, or
resigns his Crown, or runs away, and puts himself into an incapacity to Govern,
and to protect the Subject; or leaves the Subjects in a State of Anarchy and
Confusion, or to the Mercy of a Conqueror, because in these Cases the state of
Things is new, and far different from that Men were in at their Swearing this
Oath of Allegiance; but set aside these extraordinary Occurrences, which alter
the Obligation, to think that any Man can absolve from the Obligation of an
Oath of Allegiance, is to suppose a visible God here on Earth, which Title,
though given to the Pope, sometimes by the Canonists, yet every one may see
what fulsome Flattery it is, and if not downright, yet next to Blasphemy.

II. An Oath being so Solemn, so Sacred, so Serious, so Religious an
Obligation, we may justly wonder, how so Holy a Thing comes to be Profaned, as
it is in common Discourse and ordinary Communications. Indeed this Swearing in
common Discourse is a Sin that would puzzle a wise Man to give any thing like a
reason for, how a Sin so unreasonable, so unprofitable, and so horrid withal,
should yet be so much espoused by Men and Christians, and become so very
familiar, that Men play with Oaths as Boys do with Cherry-stones or Marbles. We
can give some account of Covetousness, and guess at the reason of Leachery, and
declare the Motives to Ambition; but why Men should delight in so great a
Profanation, and make so light of Oaths, whereby the greatest wrong is done to
God, and no good, no Advantage accrues to themselves, nay which themselves seem
to have some veneration for in a Court of Judicature; this, I say, is a
Mystery, and one of the Depths of Satan, as the Phrase is, Rev. 11.24.

Whether Men think that an Oath sets off their Passion better, and makes it
more terrible and impressive; or whether they fancy, that their Words and
Sentences have not their due Accents and Cadences without an Oath; or whether
they believe, that their Mirth and Jollity is not modish enough, except it be
accompanied with some Oath or other, or something like it; or whether it be
merely Custom, and a Sin, they play with for Companies sake, as they will drink
a Glass more than ordinary to satisfy the Importunities of Friends. No Sin
has been, or is more common, or more frequently committed than this; it has
been so heretofore. St. Chrysostom complains of it among the People of Antioch,
and we have reason to take up the same Complaint; other Sins have had their
Ebbings, and have sometimes abated of their violent Motion; but this has been,
and is still kept up, to the Grief of all Men, who are concerned for the
Affliction of Joseph. This shows what a mighty Power the Devil has yet among
the Children of Men, and how strangely his Kingdom lasts. Indeed, this is the
only satisfactory Reason, why Men dare venture upon Oaths in common Discourse.
The Devil reigns in them, and the Evil Spirit possesses their Souls, else they
durst not, they could not be guilty of so great a Profanation. The Guilt would
stare into their Faces, and fright them like a Ghost or Spectre, its shape is
so monstrous, were it not that the God of this World blinds their Eyes, and
darkens their Understanding, they durst not make God thus subservient to the
Devil. Do not they do so, when in their sinful Anger, or Mirth or Jollity they
bring in the Oath of God, and the Wounds and Death of Jesus, to make their Sin
more dreadful. There cannot be the least Dram of Grace, where this Custom
prevails, nothing of the Spirit of God, no sense of God, no Regeneration, no
Conversion, no Repentance, no Change of Life can be supposed in such a Man.
Here Darkness has its Empire, and Egyptian Night dwells here.

In vain do such Men plead Custom. An ill Custom may, and if you will be happy,
must be changed: There is no Impossibility, whatever difficulty may be in it,
if you will but observe the same Method you do in your Trades and Professions.
A Man cannot naturally Dance upon a Rope, yet by use and taking Pains, and
forcing his Body, and trying often, he learns to walk upon it, as steddily as
other Men do in their Chambers. Men are not born Carpenters and Painters, and
Joiners, and Carvers, yet what is difficult at first, becomes easy by use; and
why should it not be as easy to alter the Custom of Swearing, and to change it
into a facility of forbearing an Oath, if you, who are guilty of this Crime
were resolute and showed your selves Men and Christians, and would but do that
in Religion, which you do in your ordinary Apprenticeships.

Do but resolve to forbear a Meals-Meat or two, do but tie your selves to give
a Shilling or Half a Crown to the Poor every time an Oath slips from you; Do
but bind your selves in a solemn Vow to go five or six Miles on Foot; Do but
speak to your Friends, and beg of them to reprove you as often as you Swear; Do
any thing that is irksome to the Flesh, and punish your selves whenever you take
the Name of God in vain, and solicit the Grace of God, and pray earnestly for
its assistance, and the Conquest will be easy.

But if you will do nothing toward the abolishing of this Instance, or fancy it
will leave you of its own accord, you refuse to be healed, and your Damnation
is just. As ye loved Cursing and Swearing, so shall it come unto you, as you
delighted not in Blessing, so shall it be far from you: As you clothed your
selves with Cursing and Swearing, like as with a Garment, so shall it come into
your Bowels like Water, and like Oil into your Bones, Psalm. cix. 17, 18. And
the time will come, when God will swear in his wrath, if he has not done it
already, that ye shall not enter into his rest.

III. A Sacrament is as much as an Oath, and we have two standing Sacraments in
the Church, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, in which we take a Military Oath to
our General, to our God, to our Savior, to fight his Battles, to War against
Sin, to wrestle with Temptations, to subdue the disorderly Motions of the
Flesh, to stop our Ears against the blandishments of the World. If all of you
have not taken both these Oaths, I mean the Baptismal and the Eucharistical, I
hope the greater part of you have. Now, it has been said by them of old Time,
God has said it, and Christ has said it, and the Gospel says it; nay Nature
says, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths. In the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, your Oath is voluntary, you
cannot complain it is imposed upon you against your Will, and therefore you
have no excuse. You voluntarily call God to witness, and the great Savior of
the World, and all the Angels that stand round the Altar to witness, and all
the Congregation to witness, that you will be faithful to the Holy Trinity,
that God shall be your Governor, and Christ your King, and the Holy Spirit
your Guide, that you will resolutely depart from Iniquity, that Sin shall not
reign in you, that Corruption shall no longer have dominion over you, that you
will serve him who gave his Son to die for you, that you will conscientiously
obey him, who laid down his Life for you, and that you will submit to the
blessed Breathings and Motions of the Holy Ghost; and that as you are bought
with an inestimable Price, and are not your own, so you will behave your selves
like Persons who are entirely at God's disposal. Search your Hearts my Friends!
and examine your Lives: Are these Oaths observed? Are these Engagements kept?
Are these solemn Promises fulfilled? Do you make Conscience of the Stipulation?
If you do not, do you think God sits like an idle Spectator of your Perjuries?
What can keep you in awe if Oaths cannot? How desperate must your Condition be,
if after this solemn League and Pacification with God you wallow in your former
Sins again? How shall ye be cured of the Frenzy of Sin, if you will not be
tied by this treble Cord, where Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are called in as
Witnesses, and judges of your Treachery? How can God trust you again, if you
make a shift to break through these Fences, which one would have thought had
been Security enough against the wildest Beasts in Nature.

I counsel thee, that thou keep the King's Commandment, and that because of the
Oath of God, says Solomon, Eccles. viii.2. Christians, I counsel you all, that
you keep the Commandment of the King of Heaven and Earth, and that because of
the Oath of God; Thy Vows are upon me, O God, I will render Praises unto thee,
says David, Psalm. lvi.12. The Oath of God is upon thee, O Christian, thou have
Sworn, and promised to perform that Oath in the Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, thy Lips have said, or thy Heart has resolved, to keep his
Righteous Judgments, not to be sloathful in the business of Religion, but
fervent in Spirit, rejoicing in Hope, patient in Tribulation, continuing
Instant in Prayer, distributing to the necessity of Saints, given to
Hospitality, to bless them that curse you, to pray for them that despitefully
use you, and to tread in the steps of the Lord Jesus. If one Man sin against
another, the Judge will Judge him, but if a Man sin against the Lord, who shall
entreat for him? said Old Eli, 1 Samuel ii.28. In breaking your Sacramental
Oaths, you sin directly against the Lord, you profane the Sacrament, fling the
Holy Bread and Wine as it were upon a Dunghill, and cast those Pearls before
Swine; and who shall entreat for you. It Is true, there is an Intercessor that
sits at the right Hand of God, to intercede, but for whom does he do that kind
Office? Is it not for those that follow and obey him, that their imperfect, yet
sincere Obedience may be accepted? Men that despise the Oath of God, come not
within the compass of those powerful Intercessions, till a deep Remorse does
change them. I would stand upon Mount Gerizim, and dismiss you with a Blessing,
but the Anger of God against Perjury being so very great, to fright you from
the very Appearances of it, and to oblige you to perform unto the Lord your
Oaths, I must step over to Mount Ebal, and conclude with that Commination
denounced against Zedekiah, Ezekiel. xvii.18, 19. Seeing he has despised the Oath
by breaking the Covenant, (when lo be had given his Hand) and has done all
these things, he shall not escape. Therefore thus says the Lord God, as I
live, surely mine Oath, that he has despised, and my Covenant that he has
broken, even it will I recompense upon his own Head.

SERMON XXIX.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 34, 35, 36. But I say unto you swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne, nor by the Earth, for it is his
Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the Great King; neither
shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make one Hair white or
black.


SO strangely does corrupt Nature lean toward things forbidden, that if by God,
or by the Stings of Conscience driven from a strong Hold of a certain Sin, it
will then sculk and hide it self in Holes, and Caves, and Dens, for a while, at
least till the Storm be gone. If Men cannot enjoy the satisfaction of the whole
Sin, they will be content with half of it, and if that be denied them too,
they will seek to retain at least some little Portion of it, and being driven out
of Sodom, take shelter in some Zoar, in a word, do any thing rather than part
with all. When Pharaoh saw he must of necessity let the Children of Israel go,
he fell to making Bargains: The Men may go, but the Flocks and Children, and
the little ones shall stay behind. It is so with an unregenerate Man, that has
severe Checks and Convictions of Conscience upon him; He is spoiled for an open
Sinner, but is not made a Saint; is sensible he must not Sin, and yet has no
Courage to be a true Convert: He is content, such a dreadful Sin he has been
guilty of should go, but so fond is he of the Garment spotted by the Flesh,
that he will lay hold on the Skirts, and the little ones shall stay behind, if
he cannot have what he would have.

It was so particularly with the Jews in Christ's time; They were sensible that
Swearing in their common Discourses directly by the living God (...), which
Martial corruptly expresses by Anchialum: I say, being sensible, that Swearing
in their ordinary Communications by the living God, carried something of
Horror with it, was dreadful and heinous, and black, and an Insolence Great
and Abominable, and therefore were content, some of them at least, to forbear
it, but their Mouths being used to Swearing, something they must have in lieu
of it, and though they were willing to quit the greater Profanation, yet the
lesser they thought would do no harm, and therefore they Swear by Heaven, by
the Earth, by Jerusalem, and by their Heads, and other things of this Nature, a
Custom, which Christ does here peremptorily declare against, showing, that
whatever Palliations, Excuses, and Apologies they might make for it, it was as
bad, as Swearing by God himself; But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither
by Heaven, for it is Gods Throne, etc.

So that, 1. When Christ says, Swear not at all, the Words are not to be
extended to the utmost Latitude, they will bear, but the Universality must be
Restrained to the Subject Matter, and measured by our Savior's Hope and
Design, and by the Sins, he intends to reprove. When Christ, John x.8. tells
us, All that came before me were Thieves and Robbers, it is evident, this
general Expression must be restrained to those, who gave out, that they were
the Messiah, else St. John the Baptist, and all the Prophets of old must be
comprehended under the Notion of Thieves and Robbers. So when St. Paul says,
All things are lawful for me, 1 Cor. vi.12. It must necessarily be restrained
to things not forbid, else an Inference might be drawn from the Words, that St.
Paul thought, Lying, and Stealing, and Fornication was lawful for him. After
the same manner, the expression, I became all things to all Men, 1 Cor. ix.22.
must be understood of things indifferent, else it might be interpreted of his
becoming an Idolater to please Idolaters, and so here, Swear not at all, must
necessarily be Restrained to the Sins Christ intended to reprove, which were
the lesser Oaths, as they call' them, used in common Discourse, and in ordinary
Transactions, and Negotiations; so that Christ denies not, but that upon
extraordinary occasions, before Superiors, and at their Command, in a serious
and weighty Matter, a Difference may be ended, and a doubtful Truth confirmed
by an Oath, the lawfullness of which we proved in the last Discourse; But these
extraordinary occasions excepted, the Prohibition is Universal, Swear not at
all.

2. The Oaths Christ chiefly alludes to, and does so strictly forbid, were the
Oaths, which most of the Jews had used themselves to in their Discourses,
Dealings, and Communications, and had been Taught by the Pharisees to make
nothing of, or to look upon as Harmless, and such as inferred no Obligation of
performance: And there are two things that Christ reproves here. 1. Their using
any thing like an Oath in their ordinary Communications. 2. The particular
Oaths by any Creature, such as Heaven, and Earth, and Jerusalem, etc. That in
this Prohibition Christ did not mean taking an Oath in a judicial Court, when
the nature of the Thing, and Superiors require it, is evident, from hence,
because such Oaths, by Heaven, or Earth, or Jerusalem, etc. were never used
among the Jews, upon those public Occasions, for then they Swear by the Great
Creator of Heaven and Earth, as the Lord lives, God do so unto me, and more,
etc. and consequently this Prohibition must be understood of ordinary
Communications, as appears also from v. 37.

3. That which Christ intends to prove is this, that their excuses and
pretenses of not taking the Name of God in vain, when they Swear by Heaven and
Earth, and Jerusalem, etc. were impertinent and frivolous, for in Swearing by
the Creatures, they did in effect Swear by the Maker of them, and when they
Swore by Heaven, they Swore by the God whose Throne is in Heaven; when by the
Earth, their Oath was as injurious and offensive to God, as if they had Sworn
by him, whose Footstool the Earth is; when by Jerusalem, it was as bad as
Swearing by the Great King, God blessed for evermore, who had taken that City
into his peculiar Care and Protection; and when by their Heads, it was less
than Swearing by that God, whose Power and Goodness appeared in the smallest
things about them, such as the hairs of their Heads, which they had so little
command of, that they could not in the Root of it, turn a white one black, or a
black one white. This is the thing Christ declares to the Sinners of his time,
and the ground of his Assertion is plainly this, because in an Oath not
Pretenses, but the Nature and Import of the thing are considered by Almighty
God. Men always Swear by a greater, viz. a Supreme being. This is an Eternal
Rule, and whatever Trivial things may be brought, or put into an Oath, that
does not alter the Nature of it, which has still Relation to God, who is the
Creator of all the lesser Things Men Swear by, and is as much profaned by such
Oaths, as if they had particularly named him.

From the words thus explained, arise the following Observations, which I shall
run over with as much brevity, as the respective Subjects will bear.

Observations.
I. Here we see that changing a Sin, or making some Alterations of it, is not
leaving or repenting of it. The Sinners Christ had to deal with in this place
thought, they were safe enough, if they did but alter the Name of God in their
common Oaths, and changed it into that of a Creature, either Heaven or Earth,
or Jerusalem, or their Heads, yet that did not excuse them from the guilt of a
false or profane Oath; such are the Oaths we find used among the Papists, by
St. Mary, or by St. Paul, or by St. Peter, or by St. James, and of this Nature
are the wicked Oaths of Men among our selves, when they Swear by their Souls,
or by some thing that is not God.

The Crime is the same, whatever Alterations may be made in Names and Words,
and Phrases, and therefore, he that should be so silly, as to think he repents
of Swearing in common Discourse, because he does not mention God in his Oaths,
or Swears only by his Faith, or by his Troth, or by his Soul, or by something
meaner, and more frivolous, talks like a Changling, and is as far from
Repentance, as he is from the Kingdom of God, for Swearing by any thing that is
not God, is made so great a Crime in Scripture, that God seems to be in doubt,
whether he shall pardon it, Jerem. v.7. How shall I pardon thee for this, thy
Children have forsaken me, and Sworn (...) by that which is not God; nay, it is
called a forsaking of God, and then are these Oaths by the Creatures such light
things as Men make of them? away with this folly. The smaller the thing is, by
which you Swear, the greater is the Crime, the rather because ye ascribe that
to a Creature, which is proper only, and due to God, such as knowing the Heart,
being a Discerner of Secrets, and an Avenger of Falsehood. This being in the
intention of an Oath ascribed to that being, by whom the Oath is taken, all
these are in effect attributed to the Creature, by which Men Swear, and then,
besides the Profanation of the most sacred Thing, the Swearer commits
Idolatry; and is not this a Sin black, and to be abhorred by all that have any
sense of another Life? For an Oath relates to God, whatever the thing be,
that is named in it; The change of the Name does not alter the Nature of it, and
if it be unlawful to Swear, so much as by the Hairs of our Heads, how can it be
lawful to Swear by something of greater worth, than these Excrements.

As it is in common Swearing, so it is with other Sins. Because such a Man does
not invent downright lies concerning his Neighbor, and so spreads them abroad,
it does not follow, that he does not hate him. The change of the outward Act,
does not make a change in the nature of the Sin, and therefore if with delight
you speak evil of your Brethren, though it be no more, than what you have
heard, and designedly report it, to render them Ridiculous, or Contemptible, or
do them no good, when their necessities require it, or it lies in the power of
your hand to do it, it is Hatred and Malice, and Baseness and Unkindness still,
whatever alteration there may be in the manner of venting it.

So you may be guilty of Intemperance, by eating and drinking more than Nature
requires, or becomes a modest Person, though you are not Drunk, and be
notoriously guilty of Luxury by a constant indulging your Fancy, Appetite and
Love to the World, to the tickling and satisfaction of the Flesh, though with
Dives, you are not every day clothed in Purple, and fare Deliciously every
day, and guilty of Revenge by Word and Thought, though you do not break down
your Neighbors Hedge, nor Assault him when you meet him, with a Sword; and
guilty of unworthy receiving of the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, by
continuance in known Sins, though with some of the Corinthians you do not come
disguised, and disordered to this Feast, and guilty of Covetousness by being
greedy and anxious after the Riches of this World, though you are not quite so
sordid as some old Usurers, and of Fornication, by your Lustful Desires, and
Concupiscences, though you do not commit the outward Act; where a Sin has
several Branches shooting out of it is Trunk, there a Man repents not, till all
those dangerous Boughs be lopt of, nay, the Axe be laid to the very Root of the
evil Tree, and to the sinful inclination.

II. We see here, how want of Consideration is the cause that Men see not, or
are not sensible of the heinousness of their Sins. It was want of thinking,
that made the Men against whom my Text is levelled, fancy there was no harm in
their Swearing by Heaven and Earth, or by Jerusalem, etc. whereas a little
serious pondering of the thing, would have made them know, that all the while
they Swore by, and consequently abused that God in their common Discourses, to
whom Heaven and Earth had peculiar Relation.

There are abundance of Sins swallowed without chewing, which were they laid
open in their Native Colors, would appear big enough to choke the Conscience,
and be found Morsels, which have Death, and Eternal Misery in them, more
dangerous than the wild Herbs in the Pot, in the time of Elisha. Going to
Stage Plays, as they are ordered, and managed in this corrupt Age, seems to be
a harmless Recreation, at the worst, but a tolerable Infirmity; but if it be
considered, that it is making our selves partakers of other Men's Sins, that by
our presence we encourage an unlawful calling, that by going we expose our
selves to very dangerous Temptations, which in stead of running into, we should
flee, and shun, and are apt to laugh at that Profaneness, which should make us
weep, that hereby we harden others in their Impiety, and give scandal to weaker
Christians, that these Theatrical shows are inconsistent with the very design
of Christianity, which commands us not to conform to the World, and requires,
that filthiness, and foolish talking, and jesting, should not be so much as
named among us, Ephesians. v.3, 4. and bids us to be grave and modest and serious,
and shun the very appearances of Evil, that they are contrary to our Vow in
Baptism, and the Doctrine of the Cross, which enjoins us to mortify lightness
of Behavior, and to abstain from frothy and unsavory Discourses, and allows
no delight in sinful sights, etc.

If this were seriously considered, in stead of alluring, these plays would
fright; instead of enticing, they would discourage us from ever beholding such
shows, where God is so often affronted, and Religion derided, and Virtue
Ridiculed, and Gravity laughed at, and modesty looked upon to be a beggarly
qualification, and Vice represented in amiable colors.

Neglect of daily Self-examination in the Eye of the World, is an
inconsiderable fault, but if it were considered, that by this Neglect, our Sins
and Defects remain unknown to us, our Virtues thrive not, our Graces grow not,
and Blindness seizes upon our Understandings, and the greater and weightier
matters of the Law are omitted, and the Soul sinks into a form of Godliness,
and contents her self with Shows and Shadows of Devotion: I say, if this were
considered, the neglect would appear more heinous.

I Instance only in these particulars, but I would advise you to carry on the
Notion to other particular Sins and Neglects, you find your selves prone to,
and in doing so, you will see an absolute necessity of shuning many things, which
now you pass by without taking notice of, and of restraining your selves in
that, in which now you allow your selves very great Liberty. In a Word, most
Sins appear little till they come to be examined, and viewed by the Word of
God, and by the concomitant and consequent dangers, which attend them, not that
I would have any one think himself into despair, or make every Molehill a
Mountain, but I would entreat you so to consider your suspicious Words and
Actions, and Desires, that you may get just Apprehensions of your Faults, and
become more conformable to the Canons of Repentance, and the Rule of
Righteousness.

III. We see here since Heaven is said to be the Throne of God, with what
Reverence we ought to look up to Heaven, where God is seated as it were in his
Chair of State: The Phrase Christ makes use of is borrowed from Es. lxvi.1.
Thus says the Lord, Heaven is my Throne, the Earth is my Footstool, which
imports no confinement of God to a certain place, but is only a Metaphorical
Expression taken from great and mighty Princes and Potentates who appear in
Majesty, when sitting on their Thrones with a Footstool under them. So that all
these Sayings express only God's infinite Greatness and Excellency above all
his Creatures. In Heaven God gives the most visible and most conspicuous Signs
and Marks of his glorious Presence and Love; and therefore it is called his
Throne, and because there is a lesser manifestation of his Glory here on Earth,
it is called his Footstool, because there is less Art bestowed on that, than on
the Throne.

With what wonder ought we to look on that embroidered and bespangl'd Sky, that
lower Heaven, where so many Lamps, and Lights, and Stars do shine! Good Lord!
what Art, what Curiosity, what Order, what Harmony, what methodical Motions do
we see there! enough to justify David's saying, The Heavens declare the glory
of God, and the Firmament his handy work. If the outside be so gay, what must
be the inside! How justly may we admire God's Goodness, Wisdom, and Power! and
cry out with the Psalmist, How wonderful are thy Works, in Wisdom have thou
made them all!

But with what Astonishment and Joy together ought we to look upon the third
and the highest Heaven! where the true Pleasures are Spiritual, Great,
Infinite, and Everlasting! where God in a most eminent manner displays his
Glory to Angels and to glorified Saints, a place which we have hopes to come
to: If there were no other Promise made us, but that of bare seeing it, it were
enough to oblige Curiosity to do all that is possible to come to the sight of
it: How much more then are we obliged to do our utmost, when we are promised
not only to see, but to enjoy it too, even the Riches, the Splendour, and the
Luster of it; and how this is to be compassed I need not tell you, David having
done it to my hand; for having asked the Question, Lord, who shall ascend the
Hill of the Lord, or, Who shall dwell in his Holy Place, he answers, He that
walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and speaks the Truth in his Heart: He
that back-bites not with his Tongue, nor takes up a reproach against his
Neighbor, in whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned, but he honors them that
fear the Lord, etc.

IV. We see here what a mean Opinion we are to have of this Earth wherein we
dwell, since it is God's Footstool: It is God's Footstool, and it ought to be
ours too, i. e. As God has put it under his Feet, so should we put it under
ours, i. e. undervalue and despise it, not as it is God's Creature, but as it
tempts to seduce our Hearts from him who most justly claims them. Poor Mortals!
How do we dote upon this Globe! Creatures made for Heaven, and designed to be
Companions of Angels! How highly do we prize these Inferior Comforts! How fond
are we of this Dust! How enamored with the Minerals of Gold and Silver, which
God has hid in the Bowels of the Earth, to keep them from being admired. With
what eagerness do we bring them forth, and then fall down and worship them.
Where these grow, they say, nothing else will grow! It is so with an Earthly
Mind, where that Rules, no Grace, no Virtue, no Devotion thrives; yet this is a
Lesson which we will not understand, nor consider, how inconsistent the
fondness of this Earth is with our love to Heaven. We would enjoy both, and
lose neither; would take our fill of the good things of this Life, and of the
Comforts hereafter, though Abraham in the Mansions of Glory (and he should know
God's Mind) was of another Opinion, when discoursing to Dives rolling in
Flames; Son remember, that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy good things,
and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented, Luke xvi.25.

It Is true, we must live, and Converse, and endeavor after a livelihood here;
but is it therefore necessary to cling with our warmest Affections to it? Is it
therefore necessary to rejoice in it, as in our greatest Felicity? Is it
necessary to grieve for the loss of these outward Blessings, as if all our
Happiness were gone? Is it necessary to make them an impediment to our Duty, an
obstacle to Virtue, or a stumbling block in our way to the Mansions of Glory?
The Apostles were aware of these Excesses, and therefore they lay down Rules
for our deportment as to the comforts of this Life, St. Paul especially, 1 Cor.
vii.29. The time is short, it remains therefore, that those who have Wives, be
as though they had none, and those that weep, as though they wept not, and
those that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and those that buy, as though
they possessed not; and those that use this World, as not abusing it.

V. God is called a Great King here. He is so, greater than Herod, whose
Grandeur the Jews at that time admired, greater than the Roman Emperors, whose
Magnificence was cried up in those Days by all the World, greater than
Sennacharib, than Ahasuerus, than Nebuchadnezzar, than Darius, and all the
mighty Names which have filled the World with their Splendour: But why do I
mention these Bubbles? All Nations before him are but as the Dust of the
Balance, and as a drop in the Bucket; and if so, what a small pittance of that
little drop must the greatest Monarch be?

Is God so great a King, and is it not reasonable we should come before him,
when we come to pray to him, or to praise, him with the deepest Humility? and
as St. Bernard speaks, Conceive our selves to be entering into the Court where
the King of Kings sits on a bright and shining Throne, surrounded with an Host
of glorious Angels, and crowned Saints, as poor Worms crawling out of our
Holes, vile Frogs creeping out of our Mud, and approaching the Divine Majesty.

With such Thoughts let us appear before him, and whatever Greatness or
Magnificence we see and observe in Princes, and great Men here on Earth, let us
conceive something infinitely greater in God, which cannot be expressed. And if
his Greatness were duly represented to our Minds, and preserved in our Hearts,
how devoutly should we pray! how humbly should we beg! how reverently should we
adore him! how readily should we stand in awe of him! How circumspectly should
we walk! How diligently should we obey him! How afraid should we be of offering
him sleepy, careless, dull, and drouzy Devotions, the blind and the lame
Services, I mean, the unwilling, sick, and hypocritical, and such as our
Governors would scorn, and therefore God cannot but despise. For, Cursed be the
deceiver, which has in his Flock a Male, and Vows and Sacrifices unto the Lord
a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is
dreadful among the Heathen, Mal. i.14.

VI. See here, what poor, weak, and infirm Creatures we are, since we are not
able to make one Hair of our Heads white or black. One would think so small and
inconsiderable a thing should be within the reach of our Power; but it seems it
is not, and if we are not able of our selves to do the least, how shall we be
able to do the greatest thing, i. e. become wise to Salvation? So true is that
Saying of the Apostle, We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing
that is good, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. iii.5.

In natural, common, temporal, and ordinary Concerns, his help is absolutely
necessary, for Except the Lord build the House, they labor in vain that build
it, Ps. cxxvii.1, 2. How much more must this hold in Spiritual? And therefore,
Christian, since the Eyes of all do wait upon that God, that gives them their
Meat in due Season; behold the Rock from which thy Water of Life must flow. Thy
Faith is weak, go to him, and he will make it mount up with Wings, as Eagles.
Thy hope is faint, run to him, and he will give it Life and Spirit. Thy Love
wants Fire, address thy self to him, and he will inflame it. Thy Charity
languishes, apply thy self to him, and he will breathe Vigor and Activity into
it. Thy resistance of Temptations is feeble, follow him with fervent Tears and
Prayers, and he will make thee bold as a Lion.

Happy that Soul, that is truly sensible of her weakness; this sense will make
her breathe and pant after the Living God; When I am weak, then am I strong,
says St. Paul, 2 Cor. xii.10. i. e. when I am most sensible of my weakness,
God follows and blesses me with greater Strength. God loves to manifest his
Power in our Weakness, and the weaker we are, I mean so as to be sensible of
it, and make it a motive to earnest Prayer, the fitter we are for God's
fortifying Grace; For you see your calling Brethren, God has chosen the
foolish things of the World to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak
things of the World to confound the things, which are mighty, etc. 1 Cor. i.26,
27, 28. Hence arises the Glory of God's Grace, and that joyful acknowledgment
of St. Paul, and all good Men, By the Grace of God I am what I am: Every true
Believer finds this by Experience, and joyfully sings with the Royal Prophet,
as it is, Psalm. lxxxiv. 11, 12. The Lord God is a Sun, and a Shield, the Lord
will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will be withhold from those that
walk uprightly.

Blessed be God, who is both ready and willing, and has promised over and over
to give his enlightening, strengthening, sanctifying, comforting, and assisting
Grace to the hungry and thirsty Soul, that calls upon him in Truth. For this
Cause, as the Apostle did for the Colossians, Col. i.9, 10, 11. We will not
cease to pray for you all, and to desire, that you may be filled with the
Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding, that you may
walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God, strengthened with all Might, according
to his glorious Power, unto all long-suffering and patience with joyfulness.

SERMON XXX.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 37. But let your Communication be yea, yea, and nay,
nay, for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil.


CHRIST having in the foregoing Verses declared all Swearing, except it be in
Cases of very great Necessity, and Weight, and Moment, altogether unlawful, and
utterly condemned not only Swearing by the supreme Being in common Discourses,
but particularly Swearing by the Creatures, as a thing horrid and dreadful, and
not to be suffered among his Disciples, he proceeds, and lets us see, what
decency, modesty, sincerity, and simplicity, is to be observed in our
Communications, and Speeches, such especially as relate to Promises and
Bargains, and the ordinary Affairs of the World.

And whereas Men might object, that they had used themselves to Swearing in
their Discourses, and therefore could not leave it; he passes by that
Objection, as frivolous, and childish, and silly, and not worth taking notice
of, supposing, that he who has learned an evil Custom, if he will use the
proper Means, may unlearn it again; and to be sure will most heartily abandon
it, if he be a true Disciple of the Gospel, and seriously touched with a sense
of another Life, and the weight and importance of Christ's Doctrine.

Taking no notice, I say, of this common Objection, he peremptorily declares,
what he expects of his Followers, with respect to their Discourses, Speeches,
Answers, and Communications, and Colloquies with their fellow Christians; But
let your Communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than
these, comes of evil.

Where we have, First, A Precept. Secondly, The Reason of it. The Precept, But
let your Communication be yea, yea. The Reason, For whatsoever is more than
these comes of evil.

We begin with the Precept, and that imports three Duties. With respect to our
Speeches and Discourses, Constancy, Veracity, and Plainness.

1. Constancy, as it is opposed to Saying and Unsaying, in which sense we find
the Expression used by St. Paul, 2 Cor. i.17. When I therefore was thus minded,
did I use lightness; or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to
the Flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay; i. e. yea and
nay, lightness, fickleness, inconstancy, and unsteddiness in Promises, saying
one thing this Hour, and another the next.

2. Veracity, as it is opposed to Falsehood and Lying, and in this place also,
we find the Apostle uses this Phrase, 2 Cor. i.20. For all the Promises of God
are yea, and in him Amen unto the Glory of God by us, i. e. They are firm,
immovable, not so much as a shadow of Falsehood mingles with them; and Heaven
and Earth shall sooner sink, and be dissolved, than these Promises shall fail.

3. Plainness, as it is opposed to Oaths and strong Asseverations, which is the
thing directly aimed at by our Savior here, and has respect chiefly to our
Promises to Men, and imports, that we are to content our selves with bare
Negatives and Affirmatives, and such Affirmations, and Negations, that People
may depend upon them as much, as if we had confirmed them with an Oath: Not but
that, if the thing be Weighty, and of great Moment, some Asseveration may be
added, such as Verily, Amen, of a Truth I say unto you, as we see Christ
himself does in the Gospel, where the Souls, and the Salvation of Men are
concerned; but in ordinary Affairs, or things relating to our Business,
Calling, and Employment, Bargains and Negotiations; in all Discourses, and
Speeches, and Promises of this Nature, not only great Veracity, but bare
Affirmations and Negations are the Things which become us, as we are
Christians, and profess our selves Followers of the best of Masters.

So that, when it is said here, Let your Communication be yea, yea, and nay,
nay; the meaning is not, that in our Answers and Discourses, we must use no
Words whatsoever, but only yea and nay, according as the Question is which is
asked us. That Is contrary to Christ's Practice, and the Apostles Example, which
are the best Comment on the Text. No doubt we may Discourse with our Neighbors
as long as we think fit, and say as much as is needful to the purpose. But,

1. The general intent is to teach us, that to avoid greater Sins, we are to
shun the lesser. To avoid Swearing in Discourse, we must allow our selves in
nothing that comes to more than bare Affirmations and Negations.

2. It is to direct us, that in our Discourses we are to be calm, not to be
moved into a Passion, and from thence into Asseverations, and impertinent
Confirmations of what we say or promise.

3. It is to tell us, that we are to confine our selves to the Rule of
Plainness in all our Speeches and Discourses, and keep within the compass of
plain Affirmations and Negations, and take care, that our Discourses, what
length soever we think fit to allow them, be conformable to that Rule, without
mingling any thing of an Oath, or vehement Asseveration with it.

And this being the chief Subject of the command here given, it will be
necessary, I insist upon it, and enquire,

I. Into the Reasons, which make this plainness in our Speeches, Answers, and
Promises expedient and necessary.

II. Into the Causes, which move Men to act contrary to this Rule, and the
Vanity of them.

I. As to the Reasons, which make this plainness very necessary, they are these
following.

1. This is part of that Universal Simplicity, which is to run through all the
parts of our Life, and Behavior, and Deportment in the World. I suppose I need
not tell you that, when I speak of simplicity here, I do not mean simplicity in
a bad Sense, as it is used for childishness, want of understanding, or
foolishness; I grant, that even that true Simplicity, I am discoursing of, may
appear folly and want of Wit in the eyes of the World, but the best answer to
that Cavil is, that we must be such Children and Babes, if We mean to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; and it is a Man's Duty, that means to be wise unto
Salvation, to become a fool in the Opinion of the World, 1 Cor. iii.18.

By Simplicity therefore therefore I mean, want of Guile, and as we call it
downright Honesty, a temper without tricks, and sinister ends and aims, and
plain-heartedness, or a plain, honest endeavor to please God, and to do our
Duty without Subtle Evasions, and Distinctions, and cunning Devices to excuse
our selves, from what is incumbent upon us, and without Pomp and Ostentation.

Now it is evident, that an Universal Simplicity is required of us, 2 Cor. i.12.
where it is made the Foundation of our Peace and Joy, and Matthew. x.16.
particularly a Simplicity in our Dresses, 1 Pet. iii.1. A simplicity in our way
of living, 1 Timothy vi.8. A simplicity in our Diet, Philip. iii.19. A simplicity
in our Designs and Intentions, Matthew. vi.22. and if it must be Universal, it
must be in our Speeches, Answers, and Promises too. If it fail there, the
Simplicity is not uniform, the thread is not spun even, and things are not
answerable one to another; nay, the Tongue being the chief Member of our
Bodies, the best Member we have, as the Old Translation of the Psalms renders
the Word (...) Ps. cviii.1. If Simplicity should be wanting there, the frame
would look ill, and be defective in a principal part, and consequently
deformed. And that these bare Affirmations, and Negations are Arguments of
Simplicity, is evident from hence, because they are freest from mixture, not
compounded of things Heterogeneous, and therefore simple, and plain, and like
Christianity, which is the plainest and the honestest thing in the World.

2. If our Speech must be always with grace, seasoned with Salt, according to
the known Rule of our Religion, Col. iv.6. it is soon made out, that this
plainness must be necessary, for it has all the looks of grace. What is grace,
but converting our Souls and Bodies to those Uses, for which God has appointed
them? and who can deny, that these plain Affirmations and Negotiations are the
use, for which God intended our Tongues and the faculty of Speech, since God
always intends that, which is like to do most good, as this plainness certainly
does. Grace discovers it self in a holy watchfulness over our outward and
inward Man, and these plain Affirmations and Negations are an Argument of this
Watchfullness, and as grace makes a Man stand in awe of God, so this plainness
is a sign, that the Man is overawed by a Supreme being, whose Will he has a
greater regard to, than the Opinions of Men; so that if our Speech must be with
grace, this plainness must needs be part of that, wherein this grace is to be
expressed.

3. Hereby abundance of Sins are prevented, and several excellent virtues are
promoted. The particular Sins, which are prevented by it, are lying, and
equivocating, flattering, and dissembling, cheating, and scurrility, and
foolish jesting, pride, and wrath, loquaciousness, and garrulity, qualities,
which do very ill become a Person, who names the Name of Christ, and is to do
nothing, that is childish, and mean, and impertinent; and the Reason, why this
plainness is the way to prevent these Sins, is, because they are of a contrary
Nature, and incompatible with it, as Darkness and Light, and Fire and Water.
The Virtues it promotes, and preserves are Gravity and Justice, Veracity and
Modesty, Decency and Sobriety, Affability, Meekness, and Steddiness in
Goodness, for these are the effects of it, and this plainness if invincibly
maintained, runs out naturally into these Virtues; so that it becomes necessary
upon the account of profit, and interest. But,

4. The Reason, Christ urges in the Text, is as pregnant, as any we have
alleged; What is more than these, comes of evil. (...), which relates either
to (...) the Evil one, the wicked Adversary the Devil, or to (...) an Evil
Nature, or Evil Custom, or Sin in General.

1. If these strong Asseverations, whether Oaths, or other solemn Protestations
in common Discourses, proceed from the Devil, who instigates Men, and suggests
Arguments to use them, and who intends to debilitate, and weaken their graces
by this means, they cannot be good. It was a rash Question, Can any good come
out of Galilee. But here the Expostulation is more Just, Can any good come from
him who Sins from the from the Father of Lies and the Author of all Impiety? If
it proceed from the Devil, it must be naught, for he cannot, it is not in his
Nature to prompt to any thing that is pleasing to God; and if he should, it is
with an intent to deceive him another way.

2. If this were not, it proceeds however from an evil Temper of Mind; and
where Men are so fond of such strong Asseverations in common Discourses, it is a
sign, their Minds are not seasoned with a true sense of Gods Holiness, nor have
they that love to the Gospel they should have, and their Inclinations to Sin
are strong, though they may have made a shift to part with some things
scandalous, yet they are not willing to part with all that clashes with the
design of the Gospel, nor to follow Christ whithersoever he goes, which argues
a Root of bitterness at the Heart, though they do not, or will not perceive it,
or take notice of it, so that their Heart has a secret Aversion from an entire
conformity to Gods will.

3. It is an Argument, that an evil Custom prevails more with them, than their
Duty, and a vain humor of the Age they live in, has the ascendant of their
Piety. And consequently these Asseverations, whether Oaths or Solemn
Protestations in their ordinary Discourses, savouring of so much Evil, they
cannot but be sinful, and odious to God, and the plain Affirmations and
Negations in our Speeches, Answers, and Promises must be necessary, and tending
to the Peace and Satisfaction of our Consciences.

II. If we enquire into the Causes, that make Men act contrary to this Rule, we
shall find them many and various, but I shall confine my self to these two, as
the chief and principal.

1. Imaginary Danger. Men fancy abundance of Dangers, which they pretend they
shall incur by their nice watchfulness over their Words, and a precise
confining themselves to plain Affirmations, and Negations. One cries, Men will
not believe me, if I do not Protest and Vow, and use some such Expressions,
which may give weight to what I say; A miserable shift! if they will not
believe thee, surely they suppose thee to be a very ill Man, or they do not
take thee to be honest, or thou do give them occasion, and they have reason
to think, that thou art a Person light, and frothy, and vain, and perfidious;
and in this case, the best way to convince them of the contrary, is a blameless
Life. If they will not believe thee, let thy inoffensive Conversation show,
that thy Principles are good, and pious, and serious, and be sure upon all
occasions to perform, what thou promisest, and they will see there is no reason
to suspect thy Fidelity. Speak nothing but the Truth, and what thou art very
well assured of, and experience and the event of things will witness for thee,
that thou art an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile, and if after all,
they will not believe thee, thou have this comfort, that thou have acted
according to the Will of God, than which there is no greater comfort on this
side Heaven.

Another cries, Men will think it humor in me, and what if they do think so,
where lies the hurt? as long as thou art satisfied in thy Conscience, that it
is the fear of God, that keeps thee within the bounds of Christian Simplicity.
He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the Clouds shall
not reap, says the Wise Man, Eccles. xi.4. He that nicely regards the Opinions
of Men, will never become a good Man: A plain Text of Scripture must prevail
with a Man more than a thousand censures of his Neighbors; if not, He Will be as
far from the Kingdom of God, when he comes to die, as he was in his vigorous
State of Life.

Another cries, I shall be counted a Fanatic, or a Quaker; But as to that, I
am sorry that so pitiful a Sect, that turns Religion into Nonsense, should
have so much as the Name, and Reputation of coming nearer to the Rules of the
Gospel in this particular, than we, who have Divinity, and the Articles of the
Christian Faith, and the Duties of the Gospel so plainly, so distinctly, so
orderly delivered to us. But see, how Men fright themselves with Bugbears!
Suppose a Jew, or a Turk, or a Heathen should have something that is good in his
Religion, what should hinder me from following it, if it be agreeable to the
Word of God? Is it not our bounden Duty to think of, and to do whatever things
are True and Just, and Honest, and Lovely, and of a good Report, Phil. iv.8.
And let these things be found among the Brahmins and Indians, and People, that
never heard of the Gospel; they may, and ought to be Adopted into our Practice,
as long as they are conformable to the Holy Ghost.

Others are afraid of losing their profit, their Credit and their Interest, if
they should not do in this particular, as the rest of their Neighbors do: But
this is as Precarious a Principle as any of the rest, and he will have but
little reason to believe, that he belongs to Christ, or has any share in the
benefits of his Redemption, that loves the praise of Men more, than of God, or
prefers his Interest before the Safety of his Immortal Soul, especially when
Christ has so seriously told us, if any Man come to me, and hates not his
Father, and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and
his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke xiv.26. So that

2. The true cause is this, Men are unwilling to be true Christians, or
Christians altogether. Half-Christians they are, and, with Agrippa, almost
persuaded, but they will not go through with the Work. They love to play about
the Outworks, and about the suburbs of Religion, but they care not for entering
too far into the Holy Discipline. So much of Christianity as is consistent with
the Lusts of their Flesh, they are willing to embrace, but farther they dare
not, they will not go; and therefore when Religion comes to clash with an evil
Custom they have got, and which the World counts harmless, and which makes them
good Company, and Acceptable to Men, they bid Religion farewell, or they will
not see, nor understand that that part of Religion, which crosses that evil
Custom, is their Duty.

Inferences.
I. What I have said, relates not only to downright Oaths in common Discourses,
Speeches, Answers, Promises, but to all mincings of Oaths, and to those vulgar
Expressions, I Vow, I Swear, I Protest, I Will take my Oath on it, as I hope to be
Saved, etc. and to all gilding, or abbreviating of such Expressions, and
turning them to a more tolerable found, especially in matters frivolous, and
vain and impertinent. What do we think? Are things of this nature fit, do they
deserve to be confirmed with such Religious Affirmations? How can we use them,
with what Conscience can we venture on them, when the Text is so plain, But let
your Communication be, yea, yea, and nay, nay; for what is more than these
comes of evil. Will you plead, that you mean no evil by it? How does that
excuse you? might not a Papist say, I mean no Idolatry by Worshipping Saints
and Angels? It is not what you intend, but what is against the Will of God,
that is to be regarded in this case. Christ assures you, What is more than
these, comes of Evil. As harmless as these Asseverations seem, they are
Branches of an Evil Tree, suckers of an Evil Root; They betray a love to Evil
in the Soul; They discover a Heart ignorant of the Nature of the Gospel of
Christ, and therefore they must be left, and shunned, and watched against, for
they are sinful, and forbid, and contrary to the mind of God.

There is a fondness in most Men to be believed in what they say, and this
fondness they discover even in telling things, which they have only by
hearsay, and very often false, and that tempts them to these extravagant
Additionals, I have mentioned; and since that fondness is the occasion of it,
even that must be subdued and mortified.

It Is true, a Man ought to be desirous to be believed, but then it must be in
things, Serious and Weighty, and of Importance, and such as he has a Moral
assurance of, that they are true, and that desire must go no farther, than God
has allowed of. And since not only in things Trivial, and Complemental, and
telling of Stories, but also in ordinary Promises, Bargains, and Negotiations,
he has forbid these solemn Confirmations, and Protestations, as pleasing as
they may be to Flesh and Blood, and as Customary as they are, and as agreeable
as they are to the humor of the times, they must be forborne.

What Is the Reason, that we hear People say sometimes of a Man, that they will
take his Word for a Thousand pound, and that if such a one has said it,
they will believe it sooner, than they will do another Man upon his Bond. Is it
not, because they are assured of his Honesty, Sincerity, Piety, Constancy,
Veracity, and unfeigned Goodness? Is not this a mighty Commendation? Is it not
an excellent Character? And are not these fit Examples for us to follow? Does a
Principle of real Goodness, give a Man such Reputation among his Neighbors,
and is it not fit we should imitate these Patterns? We that stand so much upon
our Credit, why are we loath to venture upon that, which will procure us such
Credit not only with Men, but with God too?

Were we Christians indeed, and did Men see, that we live up to the Rules of
our Great Master without wavering, they would depend upon our Promises as much,
as they do upon other Men's Oaths, and more too; But when they see us
Treacherous, and Persidious, and Regardless of our Words, and that we take no
heed to our Ways, when they find that we pretend to Religion, and yet can be
Knaves; that we call our selves Children of God, and yet can Cheat and Defraud;
that we commend good Men, and talk well, and can undermine, and overreach
another in a Bargain, no wonder if they do Mistrust us: And then we run our
selves into a necessity of helping out our Want of Sincerity with
Protestations, and needless Asseverations; and thus by degrees we come to
venture upon Oaths, and to other Sins, and undo our Souls. Our Religion was
intended to make us the honestest Men in the World; and were we true to our
Principles, there would be no need of so many Bonds, and Obligations, and
Indentures, and Counterparts, and giving of Securities, and Solicitations to
second our Word, and Promises with Oaths and Vows, and Protestations, as now
there is. But all that can be said in this point, is this: If Men be truly
converted to the Laws of Christ, they will be Just and Honest, and Sincere, and
Upright, and Faithful, and True, and Invincibly so; if they are not, their
Conversion is Nonsense, their Regeneration a Fable, their Love to God a
Romance, their Repentance a fancy, and their Piety Paint, and Varnish.

II. We see here, that the Government of our Tongues, requires our special
Care. He that offends not in Word, is a perfect Man, says St. James. Jam.
iii.2. and able also to bridle the whole Body. It Is one great Lesson of our
Religion, to labor after Perfection, as appears by the frequent commands, 2
Cor. xiii.9. Hebr. vi.1. Jam. i.4. 2 Cor. xiii.11. and this Perfection is not
to be attained, except our Care and Watchfullness extend to our Speeches, and
Words, and Discourses, and Communications in Conversation; and how this Care is
to be expressed, I shall briefly show in the following Directions.

1. Let Us always propose to our selves a good end in Speaking, either to
rectify the Mistakes of others, or to Instruct, or to Counsel, or to Exhort,
or to Comfort, or to Reprove, or to Edify others, or to acquaint them with the
true Merit of the Cause, or to prevent frothy or impertinent Discourses. This
is part of that Discretion, which is made a good Man's Character, Psalm. cxii.5.
He that speaks with an intent either to be applauded for his Wit, or Learning,
or Piety, or to make the Company Laugh, or merely to trifle away the time, or
to provoke others to Wrath, etc. such a Person has no great Care of his
everlasting Concerns, and puts no Oil to his Lamp; and therefore if the
Bridegroom should come unawares, he will have Oil to buy when the Doors are going
to be shut.

2. Let Us speak Circumspectly, so that in our Discourses, neither God be abused
by Profaneness, nor Scripture undervalued by wrong Applications, nor our
Neighbor rendered contemptible by Calumny, nor our Souls wounded by Lying, nor
Religion blackened by misrepresentations, nor weak Christians scandalized by
immoderate Liberty, nor other Men hardened in their Sins by flattering
Compliances. To this purpose Solomon, Eccles. v.2. Be not rash with thy Mouth,
and let not thy Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God.

3. Let Us speak modestly of our selves especially, and of our Duties, and
Performances, and Accomplishments, and not only with respect to our selves, but
in regard of others too, when Kindnesses and Obligations, and admiration of
their Gifts prompt us to speak in their Commendation. There is great modesty
required, particularly when Inferiors speak to their Superiors, Disciples to
their Teachers, Servants to their Masters, Children to their Parents, and
Hearers to their Spiritual Pastors, Young Men to the Aged. This is part of that
Submission, and Subjection, and Humility, most earnestly pressed upon us, 1
Pet. v.5.

4. Let Us speak opportunely, suitably to the time and place we are in. A word
fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove. xxv.11.
Comfort is proper for the Afflicted, Reproof for the Obstinate, Admonition for
the Tractable, Instruction for the Ignorant, and Colloquies Divine and
Spiritual for the House of God; and when God sends the Sword, the Prophet asks
very justly, Should we then make Mirth? Ezekiel. xxi.10.

5. Let Us talk sparingly. In the multitude of Words there wants not Sin, but he
that refrains his Tongue is wise, Prove. x.19. A Man that talks much, had need
be a very accomplished Person, if he does not run out into something contrary
to Truth or good Manners. This Rule deserves to be observed so much the more,
because multitude of Words is made the Character of a Fool, Eccles. x.14.

6. Let Us use our selves to talk Piously. It is a commanded Duty, Ephesians. iv.29.
This is wanting in most Companies; nay, it is become a piece of Rudeness, and a
mark of ill breeding to talk of Jesus Christ, when People visit one another,
and that is one great Reason of the decay of Piety among us. St. Austin in his
Confessions tells us, that he and his Mother standing together, and looking out
of a Window into a Garden, fell a discoursing of the nature of the everlasting
Felicity in Heaven, and drawing Comparisons from the Herbs and Flowers, they
saw before them, and then running higher to the Contemplation of the Sun, and
Moon, and Stars, and reflecting on the far greater Glory in the higher
Mansions, they were so ravished with one another Discourses, that they forgot
they were on Earth. Indeed, till Men come to delight in such Discourses, they
have not yet received that Spirit, whereby we relish the things which are
freely given us of God.

These are some of those many Directions which might here be given. And to put
all this in practice, there are two things to be observed.

1. We must oblige our selves to do it, by all the Arguments which have power
to bind us. And among these a vigorous Resolution, and punishing our selves, if
we break it, may justly be said to be one of the most effectual Methods to
compass it.

2. As we know how Good Men have been concerned about this watchfulness over
their Tongues, so with them we must pray, and pray earnestly for the Divine
Assistance; for the Tongue is not easily tamed or reduced to good Order. God
must be interessed, and his Victorious Grace implored in the endeavor; and if
you want a form of Prayer to that purpose, David has given us one Psalm.
cxli.3. Set a watch, O Lord, before my Mouth, and keep the door of my Lips. I
conclude with St. James's remarkable Sentence, Jam. i.26. If any Man among you
seems to be Religious, and bridles not his Tongue, deceiving his own Heart,
that Man's Religion is vain.

SERMON XXXI.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 38, 39. Ye have heard, that it has been said, An Eye
for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth. But I say unto you, That ye resist not
evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other
also.


I Expect, that upon the reading of these words of our Savior, many of you
will be ready to reply, as the Men of Capernaum, when they heard Christ
discoursing of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, This is a hard Saying,
who can hear it? But not to mention, that Hardships are no Discouragements to
industrious Men from prosecuting their Designs, and that unwilling Minds will
be ever complaining of Difficulties, the true reason of such Complaints, is not
any internal difficulty of the thing it self, but want of a renewed and
sanctified Heart. That may appear difficult to one which is not so to another,
and sick Men may not be able to bear what vigorous and healthy Persons can. But
of this I shall have occasion to Discourse of more largely in the sequel.

As to the Text; Christ seems to contradict and oppose his Saying to the
Command of God, but he does not; He only shows what is better, and establishes
that which is better into a Law, but does not find fault with a Law of God's
making.

To make this appear,

I shall consider, I. What was said of old, and upon what Account. And,

II. What Christ says to us, that pretend to be his Followers.

I. What was said of old, and upon what Account. Ye have heard, that it has
been said, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth.

I do not doubt, but Christ quotes and repeats these words, not precisely, as
they are in the Law of Moses, but as the ancient Masters of Tradition; and from
them the Scribes and Pharisees had expressed, and contracted, and applied them
to the lawfulness of private Revenge. And therefore, Ye have heard, says our
Savior, that it has been said, i. e. by them of old Time, by the Learned
Doctors of the former Ages.

Indeed the Words are in the Law of Moses, only in that Fountain they are
larger and fuller than in the Stream, as delivered to the Jews by their
Ancestors. However, though Christ quotes these words, as the Saying of the
ancient Masters of Tradition, yet it is certain, that those ancient Doctors had
regard to the Law of Moses, for so we read, Exodus xxi.23. And if any mischief
follow, then thou shall give Life for Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand
for Hand, Foot for Foot, Burning for Burning, Wound for Wound, Stripe for
Stripe.

Concerning which Law I note,

1. That this was the most ancient way of punishing Offenders, especially
private Men, when they had offered any Injury to the Body of their Neighbor.
He that had unjustly hurt another in a certain Limb, or Part, suppose the Eye,
or Foot, or Hand, or Tooth, he was to suffer in that Part in which he had been
prejudicial to the other; and this was usual, not only among the Jews, but
among the ancient Greeks and Romans too; and it is probable they learned the use
of this Retaliation, from the Methods of God's Providence, which they observed
working after that manner, which makes Adonibezeck take notice, Judge. i.7.
Threescore and ten Kings with their Thumbs and right Toes cut off, have
gathered their Meat under my Table; as I have done, so God has required me.

2. In process of Time, by Example and Consent, it was agreed, that the Person
hurt should have Cost given him for the Damages he sustained, and the
Retaliation or Punishment in the same kind was changed into pecuniary Mulcts,
or so much Money, or so much in Goods, as was judged by wise Men to tantamount
to the Hurt done, was given to the Party Injured, if he complained; and thus
compensation was made. And yet,

3. This Law of God in Moses did not forbid the Jews Patience under Injuries.
Notwithstanding this Law, they might very lawfully suffer themselves to be
Hurt, without Contradiction or Revenge, which is the reason why Moses is
commended for his Meekness and Patience, when Aaron and Miriam murmured against
him. And David's Patience under Shimie's Revilings, Numb. xii.1, 2.
2 Samuel xvi.10. was not the least Jewel in his Crown; I mean, was one of the
most eminent Virtues of his Life. However,

4. This Law did not give the Jews liberty to exercise any private Revenge, i.
e. By virtue of this Law a Jew could not of his own accord wound him in the
Eye, or Foot, or Tooth, etc. who had wounded him in any of those Parts; But he
had liberty to go and accuse the Offender to the Magistrate, who was obliged to
do him Justice, and to retaliate the Injury upon the Offender; and therefore it
is said, Exodus xxi.22. That the Judges were to determine it. Add to all this,

5. That even to bring the Offender before the Magistrate, in order to have him
punished, was rather permitted than commanded, much like the Divorces we have
spoken of, to prevent a greater Evil, such as Murder, and excessive private
Revenges. Just as our Law permits Men to take Interest, Six per Cent. but for
all that a Man may choose whether he will take any Interest at all. This must
necessarily be so; for notwithstanding this Law, Patience under Injuries was a
Virtue still, even among the Jews, to whom it was permitted by their Law to
demand an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, or a Punishment in the same
kind.

Thus stood the Case among the Jews; And here lay their Crime: The permission
God gave them to demand Retaliation of the Magistrate, to prevent a greater
Evil, by the Instigation and Instruction of the Pharisees, they applied to the
lawfulness of private Revenge, and returning Evil for Evil, and made that a
Duty, which at the best was but a permission vouchsafed to Carnal Men, more
than to Spiritual, and would not understand, that the Eternal Law of Goodness
required nobler Actions.

Christ, who came to perfect Humane Nature, and to reduce things to the best
and primitive State, makes that Patience under Injuries, which was at least
lawful among the Jews a Duty, and what they might have done, he commands to be
done, which is the second thing to be considered.

II. What Christ says to us, who pretend to be his Followers. But I say unto
you, that you resist not Evil, i. e. the Evil Man that does you an Injury. But
whosoever shall smite thee on the right Cheek, turn to him the other also. In
which Precept,

1. Christ intimates, that the Law of Retaliation, An Eye for an Eye, etc. was
suited to the Jewish Economy, when the Church was in her Infancy; but that was
no just Obstacle to God's endeavors to lead Men to higher Perfection, and
consequently no contradiction to the Law he was going to deliver. And since not
resisting the Evil, or Injurious Man was better than Resisting, because it
showed greater Courage, it was convenient, that what is better should be chosen
by his Disciples, who had better Promises: Even in the Old Testament
Non-resistance was better than Resistance; and since it was necessary, that his
Followers should apply themselves to what was best, he injoins this
Non-resistance.

2. By saying so, he does not forbid defending our selves, in case we receive
an Injury, and showing Reasons why we are unjustly dealt withal, for he himself
did so, when he stood before the High Priest, and one of the Officers struck
him with the Palm of his Hand, John xviii.23. If I have spoken Evil, bear
witness of the Evil, but if Well; why smitest thou me.

Nor 3. Does Christ forbid speaking to others, to clear our Innocence to the
Unjust, or Injurious Man, for St. Paul being wrongfully accused of the Jews,
and upon the point of being killed, having been struck but just before, called
a Centurion to him, and desired him to bring his Sisters Son to the chief
Captain to vindicate his Innocence, and to Rectify his Mistakes concerning the
Aspersions, the Jews had cast upon him; Act. xxiii.17.

Nor 4. Does Christ forbid here (out of love to Justice, and out of Respect to
the Public Good) to Address our selves to the Magistrate in greater Injuries,
where Life, and Fortune are concerned, to complain to him, and entreat him to
bind the Offender to his good Behavior, and Restrain him from doing greater
Mischief, for St. Paul himself did so, by appealing unto Caesar, Act. xxv.11.
But

5. That which is directly forbidden here, is not only private Revenge, and
returning Evil for Evil, but even going to the Magistrates in case of lesser
Injuries such as Smiting on the Cheek, to have the wrong Revenged, and Punished.

And 6. That which is directly commanded here, is this, rather than return Evil
for Evil, to endure a greater Evil. Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right
Cheek, turn to him the other also, i. e. rather than strike him again that
strikes thee, offer to him the other Cheek also.

So that upon a Review of the whole, we find these three Duties enjoined us, as
we are Christians.

I. We are not to return Evil for Evil.

II. In lesser Injuries we are not presently to run to the Magistrate, to have
the Offender punished.

III. Rather than return Evil for Evil, we are to endure a greater Evil.

I. We are not to return Evil for Evil. This is not only the Language of the
Gospel, but the Language of the Law too; for Solomon, Prove. xxiv.29. gave
Counsel to this purpose, say not, I will do so to him, i. e. my Neighbor, as
he has done to me, I will render to the Man according to his Work; which
shows, that even in the old Testament, as I said before, it was counted a
nobler thing not to return Evil for Evil, than to return it; and that the
Retaliation Moses speaks of, was only permitted for the hardness of their
Hearts. The New Testament is so full of Commands of this Nature, and I may add
Examples too, that it is almost needless to mention any, however the principal
you will find, Romans xii.17, 20. Recompense to no Man Evil for Evil; Dearly
Beloved, Avenge not your selves; and 1 Pet. iii.8, 9. Be Pitiful, be
Courteous, not rendering Evil for Evil, nor Railing for Railing. And that which
makes this Precept very Reasonable, is this.

1. To render Evil for Evil, is to Sin for Companies sake, or to Sin, because
another Sins; we should count that Man a very strange Creature, that should
make himself sick, because another Man is so, or run Distracted, because
another is Mad, or Drown himself, because another is weary of his Life. The
Man, that does us an Injury, Strikes, Wounds, Abuses, Reviles us, or tells Lies
of us unjustly, no doubt is sick, his Soul is Distempered, he acts below his
Reason, and runs the hazard of Drowning in the Gulf of Perdition, and shall we
do so? He makes God angry with him, and wrongs not only us, but his own Soul
too, and are these things so Beautiful, so amiable, so Attracting, that we need
be fond of them?

It Is true, we are apt to flatter our selves, that what we do by way of Return
is no Injury, but a just Retribution, but these are childish Evasions; The
Actions are the same, the Wrath, the Anger, the Malice, the Spite is the same,
our departure from the Rule of Virtue is the same, and therefore the Sin must
be the same. So that in this case the blind leads the blind, and we know, what
the consequence will be, for both will fall into the Ditch.

2. This rendering Evil for Evil, is condemned by the very law of Nature, which
we learn best from Heathen Philosophers, who had no Revelation to direct them.
Aristotle and Cicero indeed make it just, and lawful to Revenge an Injury, or
to return Evil for Evil, but the Platonists generally, who had a greater
Insight into the Nature of Morality, and brought better minds to the study of
it, do look upon it, as a thing unworthy of a good Man, and they call it falling
into the same Distemper, and Disorder, that he is sick of, who does the Injury.
The Pythagoreans were of the same mind, and looked upon him, that returned the
Injury, as the worse Man of the two, because he discomposed himself for another
Man's folly, and wronged his own Innocence, and they laid it down as a maxim,
That to bite again, when we are bitten, was the quality of a Brute, or wild
Beasts, not of a good, or wise Man; And if it seemed so unreasonable to mere
Heathens, a Christian must be blind beyond imagination, that in all the light
he has, perceives not the Absurdity of it.

3. This is to invade Gods Right, for Vengeance is mine says he, I will Repay,
Romans xii.19. Had not God promised to Revenge our Wrongs, something might be
pleaded for our returning Evil for Evil. But God having taken that Province
upon himself, it must be strange Injustice, and Presumption to take that Power
out of his Hand, and the Man that returns Evil for Evil, does as good as say, I
will not stay till God Revenges my cause. I know not, whether he will or no.
It Is true he ha^h said, he will, but I cannot be sure of it. I will take the
opportunity, which offers it self, and (in despite of my Belief, that he will
see me Righted) be mine own Carver. I will take that Office upon my self, which
he is very slow, and loath to discharge, and I value not his Authority, and
what madness is this!

You Will say perhaps, since God works by Means, and makes use of the Magistrate
ordinarily, to Revenge Men's Wrongs, I may at least make use of that means, and
complain to them to have the Offender brought to condign Punishment; But as to
that, whatsoever may be lawful in greater Injuries, to be sure in lesser it is
not; which leads me to the second Proposition.

II. In lesser Injuries, we are not presently to run to the Magistrate to have
the Offender punished. We are not only not to Revenge our selves in this case,
but we may not run to those in Power, to have our Revenge that way gratified.
Whereas the Jews upon such occasions, did run to the Magistrates to have the
Offender punished with the loss of the same limb or part, in which he had
injured them, Christ to lead his followers to greater perfection, or to let
them see, what is the true import of the Law of Nature, commands not to resist
the evil Man, as the Jews of old did by demanding Eye for an Eye, etc. and he
intimates, what he means by a lesser Injury, even such as Smiting on the Cheek.

It Is true, at this Day, this is counted not only in Palaces, but in Stalls and
Shops, one of the greatest Injuries, and a box on the Ear is looked upon as the
most insufferable thing in Nature, and some Men, if they were sure to go to
Hell the next Moment, would not forbear returning the Injury, at least
Revenging themselves by means of the Magistrate. But mad Men are not sit Judges
of the reasonableness of a Law.

That this before us is so, is evident from hence.

1. To run presently to the Magistrate in lesser Injuries, is an Argument of a
very uncharitable Mind, of a Temper that will cover nothing with its softer
Mantle, but is fond of exposing its Neighbor's nakedness. Nay, such a Temper
acts the Reverse of the Qualities, and Operations of true Charity, mentioned 1
Cor. xiii.4, 5. for it knows not what long suffering means, it is kindness goes
out. It cherishes Envy, it is Rash, it discovers it is Pride, it is Behavior is
unseemly, it seeks altogether her own, it is easily provoked, it thinks Evil,
it rejoices in Iniquity, it believes the Worst, Hopes nothing, bears nothing,
endures nothing, and therefore it cannot be Charity, and without this, all a
Man does, is worth nothing.

2. It is a sign of great Impatience, and that neither the Precepts, nor
Examples of Patience recorded in Scripture for our Admonition, do work upon us,
and consequently, that we are Strangers, to bearing Tribulation; and a
Christian, that knows not how to bear Tribulation, is no Christian. Patience is
one of the corner-stones, on which our Religion is, and must be built, and if
the Foundation be destroyed, what security has a Man, that he is one of the
lively Stones whereof the Spiritual House is framed, Patience cements all the
other Virtues, Romans v.3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. i.6. It keeps them together, and they do
not break asunder; If that be lost, all the other Graces fall, and the Poet
says, if the Master be, Amisso, rupere fidem; if that come to any hurt, all the
rest do suffer Shipwreck.

3. By running presently to the Magistrate, in lesser Injuries, to be Revenged
on the Offender, we involve our selves in diverse Sins; such as misrepresenting
our Neighbors Faults, aggravating them beyond measure, and drawing others into
the same Error, delight in other Peoples misery, Rejoicing at their fall,
Animosity, secret Grudges, Malice, Hatred, Contempt of God, etc. So fruitful is
this Sin, that out of its Belly flow diverse impure Streams, a Trojan Horse,
that carries fatal Enemies in its Bowels, from which is nothing to be expected
but Confusion, and Desolation.

But this is not all, we are not only not to return Evil for Evil, not only
forbear running to the magistrate in lesser Injuries, but rather than return
Evil for Evil, submit to a greater inconvenience, which it the

III. Proposition. Rather than return Evil for Evil, we are to endure a greater
Evil. Whosoever Smites thee on the right Cheek, rather than serve him in his
kind, rather, than requite him after his way, turn to him the other also.

That this is the Sense, is plain from hence, because neither Christ, nor St.
Paul did turn the other Cheek to the Person that struck them, and therefore the
adversative Proposition must be understood comparatively, rather than return
the Injury, suffer a greater. Indeed there are Examples in Ecclesiastical
History, who according to the Letter of this Command, have turned the other
Cheek to the Smiter, so did Spiridion they say, so did an old Hermit in
Ruffinus, so did Paula, so did Eulogius, so did diverse Monks, if we believe the
Roman Legends; nay, so fond were some, that rather than not have an opportunity
of fullfilling this command literally, have provoked others to smite them on
one Cheek, that they might have an opportunity of turning to them the other
also; But this was part of that excessive Righteousness, whereof Solomon, Be
not overmuch Righteous, Eccles. vii.14. The true meaning of this Precept, is
that, which I have mentioned; And the reasonableness of this Rule will appear
from hence.

1. This is the best way to overcome the desire of Revenge. Herein lies the
Mystery of a Christians Conquest, that we may be able to endure something
that is irksom to Flesh and Blood, to endure something, that is more irksom, as
he, who had given a shilling to a poor Man, and repined at it, to overcome that
Temptation, went back, and gave him two. He that can endure a greater Injury,
no doubt will be able to endure a less. This is that policy, a Christian is to
make use of to Dissipate the Stratagems of the Devil; and he that applies
himself to this Method of resisting Revengeful Desires, has something to bear
witness, that he is become wise unto Salvation.

2. This is an excellent sign, that we have a huge command of our Passions, and
Affections. Were I to show a Christian in his Beauty, I would show him in this
dress, for he that is slow to Anger, is better than the Mighty, and he that
rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City, Prove. xvi.32. The mighty Men,
whose Names sound big, who have filled the World with Slaughters, and made
themselves masters of Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, Countries, have still been
Strangers to this command of their Passions. This command makes a Man a
Christian, for they that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with it is
Affections, and Lusts; and no doubt, he shows, that he has Crucified all
these, that rather than return Evil for Evil, endures a greater Evil.

3. This is the most likely Method, to make People admire, and fall in love
with Religion, which gives Men such power, and enables them to do, what Nature,
Art, and Philosophy, are not able to effect. We have a great instance of this
in a case not very unlike that, I speak of, in a pious Man in India, who
Preaching the Gospel to those Barbarians, as he stood in the Street discoursing
of Christ Crucified, an Indian full of Spite, and Spleen, having gathered what
filth and nastiness he could, came up to him, and spit full in his Face; The
good Man not at all concerned at the Affront, gently wiped away the Spittle,
and went on in his Discourse, not moved in the least with the injury, an Act so
Astonishing to that barbarous People, that abundance came in, and professed
themselves Proselytes of Christianity. There are so few Men in this Age, that
practice these stricter Precepts of our Religion, that that is one Reason, why
so few are Converted, or become Obedient to the Faith. Such extraordinary acts
of Patience under Injuries would make Sensual Men stand amazed at the mighty
Power of God in our Souls, and oblige them to yield their Members Servants of
Righteousness unto Holiness.

4. From hence flows the sweetest Peace and Satisfaction, even from hence, when
rather than return Evil for Evil, we are ready to suffer a greater Evil.
Self-denial is the Key that unlocks the hidden Treasures of Peace and Joy in
the Holy Ghost; Hence came that mighty Peace we find in the Holy Apostles and
their Followers, St. Paul tells us a very strange thing of himself, 2 Cor.
vii.4. I am exceeding joyful in all our Tribulation. This looks like the
greatest Paradox. What? rejoice in Chains, in Hunger, in Thirst, and Nakedness!
What? rejoice in Dungeons, in Prisons, in Distresses by Land and by Water! Is
it possible to rejoice in Persecutions, in being made the filth and
offscouring of the World? It had been something if he had said with Solomon,
Eccles. ii.4. I am exceeding joyful because I have made me great Works, built
me Houses, planted Vineyards, made me Gardens and Orchards, planted me Trees of
all kind of Fruits, made me Pools of Water to water therewith the Wood that
brings forth Fruit, and gotten me Servants, and Maidens, and had Servants born
in my House, and because I have great Possessions of great and small Cattle,
and have gathered Silver and Gold, and the peculiar Treasure of Kings, and have
gotten me Singers, and Women-Singers, etc.

These are the gaudy things that make the Children of Men merry and joyful, but
to talk of being exceeding joyful, under a very sorrowful scene of Misery, this
sounds as if the Apostle were besides himself. But no, the good Man was in his
Wits, his Reason strong and lively within him, and he felt what he said, and
what could be the Reason of this Joy. Why! It was Self-denial, and the greater
the Self-denial is, the greater is the Joy; and what greater Self-denial could
there be, than what he mentions, 1 Cor. iv.12.13. Being reviled we bless, being
persecuted we suffer it, being defamed we entreat, as if he had said, Rather
than return Evil for Evil, we are ready to suffer a greater Evil; Men in whom
sense and love of the World reigns must needs be unacquainted with this Joy.
But thus it is not with Persons who live by Faith in the Son of God. These both
taste it and feel it, and the reason is, because they tread in the Steps of
Christ Jesus, who, when he was reviled, reviled not again, and when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, 1 Pet. ii.23.

Inferences.
1. From these words it does not follow, that therefore the Office of the
Magistrate is needless, or that a Christian cannot lawfully and conscientiously
be a Magistrate. These words of our Savior are indeed alleged to prove it,
and the Objection runs thus. If we Christians are to endure Injuries patiently,
are not to demand Retaliation from the Magistrate, and rather than Revenge our
selves are to suffer a greater Injury; the Office of a Magistrate, which
consists chiefly in revenging Wrongs and Injuries, and in returning Evil for
Evil, is needless, nay dangerous, nor can a Christian conscientiously engage in
an Office, which obliges him to act contrary to the rule of Christ; for what
does the Magistrate but resist the Evil Man, and if he be not to be resisted,
how can a Christian safely execute or discharge that Office.

I answer. That this Precept of our Savior is given to private Christians, or
to Christians in a private Capacity, and not to Magistrates, will appear from
the following Particulars;

1. As Christ has no occasion here to talk of Magistrates, Christian
Magistrates, I mean, so it cannot be rationally supposed, that he prescribes
any Law to them. The Persons he speaks to were Disciples, invested with no
secular Authority; and though he speaks to all his Disciples, both those that
were then, and who were to succeed them, yet he considers them still in the
capacity of Christians, not as they are or may be entrusted with Power and
Authority for the Public Good, which respects must necessarily require other
Measures.

2. Christ did not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; but if he had
abolished the Office of Magistrates, or made it unlawful, he had destroyed a
considerable part of the Law of Moses, which does not only relate to
Magristrates, but makes the Office indispensibly necessary.

3. Christ came to explain and revive the Law of Nature, which Law requires
Peace and Order in a Commonwealth; and this not being to be had without
Magistrates, which may encourage those that do well, and punish the Evildoers;
it must follow, that Magistrates, as Magistrates, are not concerned in this
Precept.

4. How can this Text be levelled against the Power of Magistrates, when
Magistrates are the Powers Ordained of God, and Whoever resists that Power,
resists the Ordinance of God; Romans xiii.1, 2, 3.

5. There is no place in all the New Testament, which forbids a Christian to be
a Magistrate; nay, we have several Examples of Men, who were Magistrates
actually, and converted to Christianity; and yet neither quitted, nor were they
required to quit that Office after their Conversion, such were Nicodemus,
Joseph of Arimathea. Both the Centurions, Matthew. viii. and Act. x. and Sergius
Paulus, the Proconsul, Acts xiii. even the Soldiers in St. John the Baptist's
Time, Men who are the great Instruments of that Justice, which the Magistrate
sometimes executes, were not obliged to lay down their Military Girdle, or to
forsake their Station and Employment.

6. We are expressly commanded to pray for Kings, and those who are in
Authority, 1 Timothy ii.1, 2, 3. and the Reason is given, because God would have
all Men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, which shows, that
we are therefore to pray for Magistrates, especially if Infidels or Idolaters,
that they may be Converted, and that under them we may lead quiet and peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honesty; which End could not be obtained, if
immediately upon their turning Christians, they were obliged to lay down, or
divest themselves from their Office.

7. The Office of the Magistrate does not at all clash or interfere with the
Genius or Temper of the Gospel. For what is the Office of a Magistrate, but to
make wholesome Laws for Governing the People under their Power with suitable
Sanctions, and to defend their Subjects from Wrong, Violence and Mischief:
Neither of which acts are contrary to our Religion, not making Laws for
governing the People under their Charge; for the Gospel, as well as the Law of
Nature, permits every Master of a Family to make good Orders for those over
whom God has set him; and it would be strange, if Masters of a greater Family
might not have this privilege. God even in the New Testament has declared
himself to be a God of Order, and protests against Confusion; and since without
Magistrates and Laws, and Sanctions, it would be impossible to prevent
Confusion: He that allows of the End, must needs be supposed to allow of the
Means conducive to that End. In a word, without these Helps, Cities and
Commonwealths would be Dens of Thieves, and Pest-Houses rather than civilized
Societies; nor is defending their Subjects from Wrongs and Injuries, contrary
to the nature of the Gospel, which prescribes Justice and Charity, and who sees
not that the defense of the Subject from Wrongs and Injuries is founded upon
these two Cardinal Virtues. Even inflicting Penalties upon the stubborn and
obstinate, rests upon these Principles, so that the Office of the Magistrate
must necessarily be lawful and commendable. I grant, were the whole World
Christian, and did all Christians live up strictly to the Rules of the Gospel,
there would be no Quarrels, no Dissentions, no Wrongs, no Injuries, and
consequently there would be no need of Magistrates; but such a blessed State we
do not look for, till we come to Heaven, and till then there must be
Magistrates.

Nor does St. Paul, 1 Cor. vi.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. find fault with the Office of the
Magistrate, but with those who upon every light occasion, quarreled one with
another, and accused one another to the Magistrate, and particularly to the
Heathen Governors. Nay, the Apostle is so far from condemning the Office, that
he seems to advise them to erect (...), or Tribunals of Judgment among
themselves, to decide Controversies and Quarrels betwixt Man and Man, thereby
to avoid running to the Heathen Magistrates, whereby Christianity was like to
become contemptible.

So that all these Particulars being laid together, since God cannot be
supposed to contradict himself, this Precept of our Savior must concern only
Private Christians, and must be intended to direct them how they are to behave
themselves one toward another in their Conversation, but is not levelled against
the Power of Magistrates in a Christian Commonwealth, not but that even a
Magistrate may Sin against this Precept of our Master, if private Revenge
guides him in the execution of Judgment and Justice; but where he does the Duty
of a Magistrate, out of Love to the Public Good, there this Command cannot be
supposed to interfere with his Power and Authority.

II. Since the Precept of the Text is the standing Rule whereby Christ's
Disciples are to govern themselves, it is very necessary I should press it upon
you, who came hither on purpose, not only to hear, but, I hope, to do, what the
Lord your God requires of you, viz.

Not to return Evil for Evil.

Not to run in lesser Injuries ( such as a Blow, or smiting on the Cheek) to
the Magistrate, in order to have the Offender punished. And,

Rather than return Evil for Evil, to suffer a greater Evil, or, a greater
Injury.

But I foresee an Objection which is like to dash all that I can say, or
allege, in order to persuade you to a conscientious Observance of these Rules
of Holy Living.

Why should you urge this, (will some say) for the thing is impracticable?

Not practicable Sirs! It Is strange our great Master, in whom are all the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, should prescribe a thing that is not
Practicable. What, did not he know our Frames? Was he ignorant of what our
Shoulders would bear? Did not he consider the state and condition of our Souls?
I grant it is not practicable by Men, who will not step out of the common Road
of their carnal Interest, and Lusts, and sinful Inclinations. I grant, it is
not practicable by Persons who will not make use of the Means, and Motives, and
Enforcives, and Helps, which God affords to raise corrupted Nature into a
nobler Temper. I grant, it is not practicable by Persons who will do nothing
toward their own Happiness, that will be Naked, and Poor, and Blind, wretched
and miserable, in despite of all the Collyriums, and Eye-salves, and
Medicines, and Remedies, which are offered, and tendered to them for their Cure.

But when there are a Thousand Moral Arguments before you, and the Spirit of
God, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ are ready to give Life to those
Arguments in your Souls, when Heaven is willing to assist, and Omnipotence
offers to help you, to raise you from the Ground, and to inspire you with
Courage and Valor suitable, there to talk of the unpracticableness of these
Rules, is to blaspheme the Goodness of God, and with that unprofitable Servant
to accuse your Master, That he gathers where he has not strow'd, and reaps
where he has not sown. What should make it unpracticable? What? because Flesh
and Blood says it is so? Is not Flesh and Blood that which you are obliged to
fight against? What are all the Arguments that are brought against the
practicableness of it, but what are borrowed from the Opinion of the World,
because it is not customary to do so, it is not usual, or other Men do not mind
it.

And are these the mighty Reasons that satisfy your Conscience? Will you dare
to plead them in the last Day? Will not you blush to allege them before the
Searcher of all Hearts?

I shall be counted a Coward, says the Man of Honor, if I put up an Affront,
or do not return Evil for Evil. A wonderful Argument! an Argument which a
Philosopher would laugh at, and a Christian ought to scorn. Was there ever
greater Cowardice than this returning Evil for Evil? What? not dare to obey
your God, whom you confess to be greater than the greatest Monarchs of the
World? What? Not dare to consult the interest and welfare of your Souls above
that of Flesh and Blood? What? Not dare to maintain a good Conscience in
despite of all Opposition? What? afraid of transgressing a Punctilio of
Honor, when you run the hazard of Eternal Damnation? Is this your Courage to
be Slaves to a silly Lust, and to crouch to a base Temptation of the Devil? to
tremble at the Censures of Dust and Ashes, and to throw your selves headlong
into the gulf of Perdition? you will reply, Who says it is so dangerous? Why,
Christ says so, that Savior whom you pretend to Worship and Adore; for he has
prefixed this general Item to all the Commands in this Sermon, Whosoever shall
break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, i.e. make a
practice of it, and delight in it, he shall be called least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, i. e. he shall be nothing at all in that Kingdom. And is this your
Courage not to stand by your greatest Friend? Is not Christ your greatest
Friend? Has not he bought you with his Blood? Has not he laid down his Life
for you, to deliver you from the Wrath to come? When you return Evil for Evil
you forsake this Friend, you dishonor him, you abuse him; and is it Courage
not to dare to maintain the Cause of your dearest Friend? Is it not far greater
Courage to subdue a Passion, than to fall under the Power and Tyranny of it? Is
it not greater Courage to overcome the Evil with Good, than to be overcome with
Evil? Is it not more Heroic to assert the Honor and Glory of your Immortal
Souls, than to make them Drudges and Slaves to a brutish Inclination!

Who so fit to judge of Courage and Cowardice, as God infinitely Wise and
Knowing; and if he calls returning Evil for Evil, Cowardice, will you call it
Courage, and put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness? Does not he call
it Cowardice, when he looks upon it as a debasing of Reason, dishonouring your
Religion, wronging your Conscience, wounding your Souls, disgracing your
Profession, and Disobedience to him who has the greatest Right and Power to
command you?

A Bull or a Boar can kick him again that kicks him. And what? Is there not
greater Spirit in you, than there is in such pitiful Animals? Socrates, a
Heathen, when one gave him a Box on the Ear, replied merrily, What a strange
thing is it, that a Man cannot go abroad without putting a Helmet on! Can we
read this of Barbarians, and look upon our selves as civilized, who dare not
come up to their Virtue?

Had you rather be no Christians, than he counted Cowards. Has God exalted
your Natures above that of irrational Creatures, and is imitating Bears and
Tigers, the highest Dispensation you arrive to?

Another pleads, My Neighbors will count me a Fool, if I should not return
Evil for Evil, or rather than return an Injury suffer a greater: This is much
such a Plea as the former, and it must be confessed, that this is the Wisdom of
the Flesh; and see here how contrary this Wisdom is to the Wisdom of God, or to
the Wisdom of the Spirit!

What is Wisdom? Is it not to choose proper Means to attain the end? And will
you take the way to Hell, that you may get to Heaven? Is it not Wisdom to
foresee the Evil, and to hide our selves from it? Has not God declared his
Wrath and Indignation against this returning Evil for Evil; and is it your
Wisdom to run into the danger? What if Men should count you Fools for minding
the business of your Calling, or providing for your Families? Would you
therefore neglect doing so because of that Censure? And how come ye to despise
the Censures of Men in one Duty, and are afraid of doing it in another? Is not
forbearing to return Evil for Evil, Railing for Railing, ill Language for ill
Language, a Duty as much as providing for your Families? Is it not commanded as
much as laboring for a Livelihood? And if to Obey God more than Men be Wisdom,
where lies the Folly in being obedient to the Will of God in this particular?
Which is better, that God should count ye Fools; or that Men should do it? If
it be better Men should have such Thoughts of you than God, why cannot the
determination of God make you resolute to undervalue these nicknames of
malicious Persons? God will certainly look upon you as wise Men, if you are
tender of the welfare of your Souls. And since forbearing to return Evil for
Evil is a certain sign that you have a tender regard to the happiness of your
Souls, what hurt do ye receive by Men's calling you a thousand Fools? Men may be
mistaken, but God cannot; and if Men call ye Fools for obeying the Gospel, most
certainly they are mistaken; and will you be guided more by the inconsiderate
Talk of loose, rash, and carnal Men, than by the serious Resolution of that God
who is to be the Judge of quick and dead?

Ay, but if I do not return Evil for Evil, wicked Men will trespass upon my
Goodness. And what if they do? Is our Goodness the worse, because it meets with
frequent Trials? Is not this the way to strengthen, to confirm, and to
establish, and to perfect it? Let Patience have its perfect work, says St.
James i.4. If Men's trespassing upon our Goodness, is subservient to the
perfection of Grace, how can we be losers by it? Nay, does not the wicked Man
lose more by his repeated Injuries, than we by our repeated Patience? Does not
his Soul gather greater Guilt and Blackness by it, while our lasting and
continued Patience, makes our own brighter and more splendid? And how do we
know but our Patience under the first Injury may work upon the ill Man, and
oblige him to become Good by our Example, and fright him from attempting any
more? However, if it does not, it is I that gather the Roses, and the Briars and
Pricks fall to his share.

Once more, Is there not a Promise made to the Patient Soul, that God will stop
the rage of her Enemies? Do we believe this Promise, and shall not we trust God
for the pe^formance of it? And when he is ready to perform it to our
Satisfaction, shall we stop the Accomplishment by our uneasiness under the
Injury?

Ay, but still experience shows, that this Patience under Injuries, hardens the
insolent Man in his Sins. We grant it, but whose fault is it? not ours, but of
his own impenitent Heart, which indeed deserves our Pity and our Prayers, but
heaps no Guilt upon our Heads? Surely, we shall not be answerable for other
Men's boldness in their Sins; nor is our Patience a compliance with their Folly,
which is not intended to harden, but to melt them; and if like vicious
Stomachs, they turn that into Corruption, which was intended for their
Nourishment, they feed indeed, but not like Bees that gather Honey from the
Flowers they suck; but like Toads and Vipers that convert the Juice of wholesome
Herbs into Poison. But is this an Argument, that I must therefore inflame my
Soul with Wrath and Revenge, because the other swells with Venom?

So that all these Objections vanish; and that which seemed impossible,
appears, if viewed without these false Glasses, very practicable. No doubt it
is so, and may be made very easy too; and if you ask me how? the following
Rules will give you satisfaction.

1. By admiring the praise of God, above the praise of Men. It is recorded to
the eternal Shame and Disgrace of those chief Men and Rulers among the Jews,
who believed in Christ, yet durst not confess him; Cowards as they were, that
they loved the praise of Men more than the praise of God, Joh. xii.48. Men in
great Places and Dignities, this is their Temper; this is the Rule they go by;
let God praise and commend a Virtue never so much, if it meet not with the same
Applause among Men. If Men do count it disagreeable to the Punctilio's of
Honor, and the Air of the Court, and the Humor of the Age; or if it be not
good Manners, they carefully shun it; and to be sure, such Men will never come
up to the Rule of the Text.

But he that comes to a fixed and steady Resolution of esteeming the praise of
God above the praise of Men, that is the Person who is like to triumph over all
the Desires of Revenge.

And, O God! why should not we esteem thy Praise, thy Commendations and
Approbations beyond the Applauses of Mortal Men! Are not thy Commendations most
rational, most weighty, most unbiased, most true, and most durable? whereas
those of poor Mortals, how partial are they? how subject to Mistakes? how
uncertain, how weak, how transitory, how short, and how unprofitable in that
Day, when God shall judge the World in Righteousness!

He that esteems the praise of God more than the praise of Men, does not only
act like a true Philosopher, but has this satisfaction in himself, that he
lives by Faith, and not by sight, and will be able to Laugh when others shall
Howl in outward Darkness; so true is that Saying of the Apostle, 2 Cor. x.18.
Not he who commends himself, and we may add, Not he whom Men commend, is
approved, but whom the Lord commends.

2. By a firm persuasion, that without this Patience under Evil, or Injuries,
or Affronts, or reviling Language, we cannot be, and are no Christians; I say,
by a firm Persuasion, for most Men have general, slight, and imperfect Idea's
and Notions of the thing, but that will do no good. A firm Persuasion is,
convincing our selves thoroughly, by suitable, powerful Arguments, that we bear
the name of Christians in vain, and play with it, and make a mere formality of
it, except we heartily comply with our Master's Will in this particular. And if
the Soul be impregnated with this principle, and has a brisk and lusty Sense
of it, the Danger, or rather the Thoughts of it, will work through all
Obstacles and Impediments, and we shall make a shift to resist the importunate
desires of Flesh and Blood, which tempt us to return Evil for Evil.

3. By fixing the Eyes of our Understandings upon the future Reward and
Recompense. This is the great Engine whereby our base, slavish, and worldly
Fears must be removed; and till we have lively apprehensions of that Reward,
and are concerned about it, like Men in danger of losing the greatest Blessing;
the Opinions and Censures of the World will prevail more with us, than all that
Christ or any Apostle can say.

Till a Man does more vehemently desire to be happy in the other World than in
this, the Virtues which go against the Interest of Flesh and Blood will move
very heavily; and so will Patience under Affronts and Injuries. But the Soul
being chafed and heated with brisk and lively thoughts of that Heavenly
Country, and walking through that Holy City* which is above, and viewing the
Towers and Bullwarks of it, will break out into Holy Flames, which will consume
and burn up the Hay, and Straw, and Stubble of Carnal Reasons and false
Suggestions of the Flesh and the Devil, and frown the motions of Revenge into
Exile.

4. By quickening and raising our Love to God, into more than ordinary fervours.
Love dares do any thing, I mean, Love that has Fire in it, and burns clear upon
the Altar of the Heart. The great Reason, why you dare not venture upon these
harder Lessons is, because your Love to God is weak and faint, and like that of
green Wood, apt to expire. The Soul that sets God before her in all his Beauty,
and Glory, and Mercy, and Rewards, and Promises, till she loves him beyond what
the Eye does see, and the Hands can handle, gets the Victory, and this very
Command will not seem grievous to her. Love made the Lord Jesus give his back
to the Smiter; and Love will make you give the other Cheek to the striker; Love
will make you even rejoice, that you have something to lose for God; and that
you can do something that inclines his Favor to you. Love will carry you above
all the little Lime-twigs which are apt to catch and entangle your Souls. Love
will charm your Passions, tie up your Tongues, and hold your hands, that you
will not dare to return Evil for Evil.

5. Examples are encouraging things. And have not we very illustrious Examples
of this Patience under Affronts and Injuries in Moses, David, St. Paul, and of
other Apostles and Believers? Why should not we do as they did? Why should not
we free and extricate our selves from the Snares of the World, and press toward
the Mark as well as they? Was the way they walked in, good and safe? and shall
we be afraid to tread in their Steps? Did they understand the Will of God, and
can we follow better Patterns? We all conclude, they were saved by doing as
Christ directs in the Text, and shall we be fond of finding out a new way to
Salvation? It Is true, they were derided by the World for so doing; but have
they lost any thing by the Bargain? If they have been Gainers, why should not
we venture upon the reproach of Christ as well as they? Did they thrive and
prosper, and do well in the End, and arrive safe in the Harbor of Eternal
Rest; and can we do amiss, if we transcribe their Patience in our Lives and
Conversations?

6. By importunate Addresses to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God will be importuned, and that importunity shows we are in good earnest.
Let Us but beg and implore the Grace of God, as a hungry and thirsty Man does
beg for Meat and Drink, and try whether God will not open the Windows of
Heaven, and fill our Souls with Food convenient, with Grace, I mean, sufficient
for our purpose. God cannot deny himself, and having promised his Spirit upon
our strong and vehement Cries, he will Hear and Answer, and grant us our
Heart's desire, and the requests of our Lips; and the breath of Life will enter
into us, even the Spirit of Courage and Wisdom, which will throw down all
Imaginations, that exalt themselves against the obedience of Christ Jesus, and
we shall be able to do what he did, and bear what he bore, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, to whom be Glory
for ever.

SERMON XXXII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 40, 41. And if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and
take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also.

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a Mile, go with him twain.


IN these words our Savior prosecutes the Task he had begun in the foregoing
Verse, and continues pressing the great Doctrine of Christianity, of not
returning Evil for Evil. And as in the words preceding he had told us, how we
may arrive to a habit of Patience under Injuries, even by suffering a greater
Injury; so he now illustrates what he had said by two Instances more. And if
any Man will sue thee at the Law, etc.

The Precepts here given are so directly contrary to the Humor of the Age we
live in, that if a Man was to measure Religion by the modern Practice, he could
infer, or conclude no less, than that either no such Precepts were ever given,
or that Men have ceased to be Christians. This makes me often admire the good
Providence of God, that has preserved us these Oracles in Writing; for had
they been left to Tradition, and to Conveyance by word of Mouth, most certainly
Man (after the first Fervor and Piety had been over) would have wilfully
forgotten these Lessons, so contrary to the Dictates of Flesh and Blood; and we
should not have known whether any such Commands had ever been given by our
Savior.

But whatever contrariety there may be between these Rules, and our carnal
Inclinations and Appetites, it is rational to conceive, that Christ would never
have commanded all this, if he had not intended it should be put in execution:
And therefore it is impossible, that a Person should have any solid assurance
that he is a true Christian, who does not heartily endeavor to bring his Mind
and Will to submit, in these Particulars, to the Will of Christ. It Is true, a
Christian may not every Day have occasion to exercise this piece of
Self-denial, because the same Temptations recurr not every Day; but when he
has, he must let his Neighbor see, that the Grace of God, like Oil, swims on
the top, and is not to be Mastered by the false Suggestions of the Flesh and of
the Devil.

There are three sorts of Injuries Christ mentions here, in all which the same
Rule is to be observed,

1. The first, that which is offered to the Body of a Christian in the
preceding Verse, which I have already explained. He that shall smite thee on
the right Cheek, turn to him the other also.

2. That which is offered to his Property and Estate.

3. That which is offered to his Liberty. The Injuries levelled against our
Estates and Liberty, are comprehended in the words I have read unto you. And if
any Man will sue thee at the Law, or if any Man will by force take away thy
Coat, (the word (...) implies both) let him have thy Cloak also. And whosoever
shall compel thee to go a Mile, go with him twain. Two things must here be
premised, for the better understanding of the words.

1. That (like those of the preceding Verse) they are levelled against private
Revenge, and must be construed to the same sense. If any Man will sue thee at
the Law, and take away thy Coat, rather than quarrel with him, or cherish any
desire of Revenge, rather than sue him again the first opportunity, for
something of the same nature, let him have thy Cloak also. And whosoever shall
compel thee to go a Mile, rather than fall out with him, or put thy self into a
fit or Rage and Revenge; rather than oppose Force to Force, and take the same
advantage against him when stronger than he, go with him twain. So that these
two Commands (as well as the former) are Directions and Insinuations how we are
to overcome our revengeful Desires, and those violent Passions we are apt to
run into, when any Injury or Wrong is offered to us, i. e. by suffering more.

2. These Precepts are to be confined (as much as can be) to the Instances here
given, and to things that are parallel with them; not stretched to things of a
higher Nature, i. e. what is said here of not going to Law, must be understood
of not going to Law about a Coat or Cloak, or things like them; but must not be
presently accommodated to higher Concerns. And what is said of forcing a Man to
go a Mile, and going with him twain, rather than oppose Force to Force, must be
kept within those Limits, not extended to ten, twenty, or thirty Miles.

These two Observations being premised, I shall speak distinctly of the two
Commands; of the first more largely, of the other in fewer words, being only an
appendix to the former. And as to the

First, If any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him
have thy Cloak also. And here I shall I. Enquire into the Reasons of the
Precept. II. Whether it be permitted in any case to go to Law, or to defend
ones self by Law. III. If it be lawful, in some Cases, what Rules are to be
observed in the management of it.


I. The Reasonableness of this Precept. And if any Man will sue thee at the
Law, and take away thy Coat, let, etc.

1. This is an excellent way to preserve Peace and Charity; the Fuel being
taken away, the Fire must go out; the occasion of the Contention being removed,
not only by giving freely the Coat, but by adding the Cloak too, the quarrel
must cease. And as one said, An Ounce of Peace and Charity is worth a Pound of
Victory. For Peace is so lovely and amiable a thing, that we are obliged to
promote it by all means, 2 Thessalonians. iii.16. i. e. by all lawful means; and
surely, deceding from our Right is a lawful means. It Is true, in some Cases, by
quitting our Right, we prejudice the right of others; but this cannot be said
of so small a thing as a Coat (which is a Man's own to a Proverb) or a Cloak,
or something like it.

2. This is to show a good Example to others, and to teach them what they
should do. Our Actions are the best Schoolmasters, and as we see Men learn
from ill Example, so they may (I am sure ought to) learn from good ones. By not
hearkening to a Temptation of Injustice, by not defrauding a Child or ignorant
Person, by not speaking Evil of him that speaks ill of me, by being
Conscientious in my Duty, I teach another, and direct him how he is to govern
himself. This was the Method our great Master took; He taught nothing but what
he practiced himself. And indeed, all the Oratory which a Man uses to another
to persuade him to a Virtue, is insignificant, except his own Conscientiousness
in the thing leads the way. He that would sue us at Law for our Coat, if rather
than fall into a Passion with him, we let him have our Cloak too, we instruct
him how he is to behave himself to others, if the like should happen to him.
It Is true, he may not be so considerate, as to learn his Duty from our Example;
yet still our Intention in the Self-denial was good and commendable, and shall
not go without a Recompense; and the Person who would not learn his Duty from
what he saw in us, shall give an Account to God for his Untractableness and
Indocility.

3. This is an excellent way to prevent great Vexation both in our selves and
others. The Rage of the Enemy will not only be restrained by it, but hereby our
own quiet and ease will be promoted. To fill our Souls with Rage and Disorder,
upon such a force offered to us, is to punish our selves for another Man's
Weakness and Folly, and to increase the Trouble and Affliction which befalls
us. The loss of the Cloak or Coat was outward only; but if together with that
loss, I join the loss of quietness and calmness of Mind, I increase it, and
become my own Tormentor; and to the Injury that another does me, I add doing
Injury to my self, which is highly Irrational.

4. Hereby we do certainly glorify God, who is ever best glorified by our
Obedience, and conforming to his Will. Whatever the loss or inconvenience may
be that may happen to us upon the account of that Obedience. This is to glorify
him in our Souls and Bodies, according to the Rule, 1 Cor. vi.20. i. e. in our
Thoughts and Actions. For this is a manifest sign, that my Spirit stands in awe
of the Supreme Being, that his Law is in my Heart, and that my Mind is governed
by his Will. By resigning actually my Cloak to him that would take away my
Coat, here is an Action that brings Glory to God, and declares that God is in
me, and gives me Strength and Power to overcome the Flesh, and the sinful
Motions of it. And from hence arise not only Thanksgivings in my self, but all
good Men who see it will glorify God for my professed Subjection to the Gospel
of Christ, 2 Cor. ix.12, 13.

5. And this must needs endear God to us, and move him to have kind Thoughts of
us. Not that we deserve his Love by such an Act, but so gracious and
condescending he is, that upon decessions from our right for his Honor and
Glory, he is willing to look upon us with a very favorable Aspect. This is
Goodness that has some Substance in it. This looks like imitation of his
Goodness, who in his Dispensations decedes infinitely from his own right, for
our good. What was the giving of his Son, but a miraculous deceding from his
own right of punishing us according to our Deserts? And indeed, there is not an
act of Mercy to poor Sinners, but God decedes from his Right, even from the
right of his Justice. And when he who parts with his Cloak to him that would by
force of Law deprive him of his Coat, does express the goodness of God in so
lively a manner, that God (so great in Goodness) cannot but say as he did to
his People under Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. xxix.11. I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, thoughts of Peace, and not of Evil. But you will say, may not a
Man go to Law for his own, and may not a Man justly defend himself by Law, when
he is wronged by another? which leads me to the

II. Query, Whether it be in no case lawful for a Christian to go to Law with
his Brother, or defend his Right by Law, when wronged by another Man?

1. It is certain, that Humane Laws permit a great many things, which a Pious
Christian cannot in Conscience make use of; and which do not become him, as he
is a professed Disciple of such an humble self-denying Master as Christ Jesus.

Humane Laws, to prevent greater Evils in a Commonwealth, permit several
things which a Christian who is chiefly to be guided by the Law of Christ, does
wave, as having a greater Law in his Heart. And therefore, though Humane Laws,
or the Laws of the Land, permit you to go to Law with a Man that wrongs you,
yet that is not the strict measure of your Actions. Not that a Christian can
safely disobey the Laws of the Land he inhabits, when they do not clash with
the Law of God: But there is a great difference betwixt disobeying the Law of
the Land, and not making use of it upon all occasions.

2. Our Savior considered, and all reasonable Men must grant it, what Wrath,
what Malice, what Abusing, Slandering, Disparaging of our Neighbors, what
Partiality, what base Arts, what Tricks are made use of by Persons who implead
one another. How Lawsuits are prolonged to the loss of our Time, and Quiet,
and better Employments? What needless Charges Men involve themselves in to
their own Vexation and Discontent? And what a lasting Hatred is settled in the
Hearts of Antagonists by such Doings? And therefore, to prevent the occasions
of Evil, he forbids going to Law. And that Person that takes no care to shun
the occasions of Evil, can never be fit for the Kingdom of God. So that

3. In lesser Injuries, such as Men's taking, or offering to take from us by
force, a Cloak, or upper Garment, a thing which we can spare without any great
damage to our selves; he does absolutely forbid this Remedy, which is indeed
more than the Disease. Insomuch, that he who delights in going to Law upon
every trifling occasion, a small Sum of Money, or a thing amounting to the
Value of a Cloak or Coat, most certainly knows not, understands not the
Principles of that Religion he professes; but acts against them, and has no
sense of the Love Christ Jesus bore to him; and which ought to constrain him to
forbear any thing he has forbid.

4. Going to Law in any case is forbid, and unlawful, if desires of Revenge lie
at the bottom of the Suit. To revenge our selves is absolutely unlawful, and
let the Concern be never so great, if it be upon the account of Revenge, that
Revenge impoisons the Cause, though good in it self; and in a conscientious Man
stops and must put a stop to his Proceedings. I grant that Revenge in such
Lawsuits is seldom the only Cause, there being other Reasons, and those
perhaps lawful, intermixed with the revengeful desire; so in the crowd of
Reasons, Revenge is not taken notice of; which makes Men flatter themselves,
that it is not Revenge that puts them upon the Process. Yet where Revenge is
the principal Motive, whatever lesser Motive may mix with the Design, the
Lawsuit becomes unlawful, not before Men, but before God; for the Command is
express and peremptory; Avenge not your selves, Romans 12.19.

And yet after all, as strict as this Precept is, it does not forbid going to
Law in all cases whatsoever, which brings in the

III. Query. If it be lawful in some Cases, what those cases are; and what
Rules are to be observed in the management of it?

1. That there are Cases in which it may be lawful to go to Law, is evident
from hence, because the Precept speaks only of lesser Injuries; and therefore
it naturally follows, that in greater Concerns it may be lawful.

2. The Cases in which it may be lawful are such, upon which either our own, or
another Persons livelihood depends; particularly where Orphans and Widows are
wronged and abused; or the poor robbed and deprived of their due; or where the
neglect may inevitably involve the ruin of our Families and Relations, or
hinder us from doing that good in the World we might and would do. These are
Cases of great Weight and Concernment. For though the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
vi.7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to Law
one with another, why do ye not rather take wrong? Why do you not rather suffer
your selves to be defrauded. Yet this must necessarily be understood, either of
smaller Matters, about which they went to Law; or of their going to Law before
Heathens and Unbelievers; or of Personal Wrongs, when none was Hurt but the
Person himself by the Injury. In all which Cases, much is to be said for
Abstinence from Lawsuits. Yet,

3. When the Cause is great and weighty, and will warrant our going to Law, a
Christian is bound in Conscience to try whether the Controversy may not be
decided by Reference, by referring it to wise and impartial Men, who may judge
between Brother and Brother, as St. Paul expressly enjoins, 1 Cor. vi.5. Going
to Law must be looked upon as some high Chemical Medicines, never to be used
but in very desperate Cases, when all other Remedies fail. And even then, a
Christian is to walk very circumspectly, that his Footsteps do not slide. For,

4. Love of Justice must be the principal Motive; a Desire and Care that
neither we, nor our Fellow Christians may be wronged; that each may be
delivered from Mistakes, and from harboring hard Thoughts one of another. Here
neither Revenge, nor Vainglory, nor Humor, must be an Ingredient; but pure
Affection to Righteousness, and an honest Mind, and sincere endeavor to do
others as we would have others do unto us, Mat. vii.12.

5. In the prosecution of such a Lawsuit, the Offices of Christian Love and
Charity must be inviolably maintained. If that Bond of Peace be dissolved by
the Suit, the Lawsuit becomes unlawful. If Tricks, and little Arts, and
underhand Doings, and dealing Treacherously, or Fraud, or Deceit, or Lying, or
suborning of Witnesses, or any such unhandsom Practices intervene, and mix with
the Process on either side, the Process becomes sinful and unchristian, and God
is offended; and this is drawing Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, Isai. v.18. So
that in such Lawsuits, even then when the weight and importance of the Matter
makes them lawful, the exhortation of the Apostle must take place, Let
brotherly love continue, Heb. xiii.1.

6. After all this, the Party that loses the Suit must watch against
Discontent, Vexation, Animosity, and Fretting, and worldly Sorrow, for that
works Death, 2 Cor. vii.10. much less must the loser commence the Lawsuit
afresh, except the Case be very extraordinary; for this discovers a
quarrelsome, worldly, carnal Temper of Mind, and opens a gap to fresh Quarrels,
and Divisions, and Disagreements, which a Christian that is Conscientious,
cannot but think himself obliged to avoid; if he remembers how the Apostle
adjures him by the Mercies of God, above all things, to put on Charity, which
is the Bond of Perfectness, Col. iii.14.

With these Limitations and Circumscriptions, this dangerous Meat may be made
not only palatable, but wholesome. But if any think that the strict observance
of these Rules is a thing impossible; in that case, the best Advice that can be
given is, Not to go to Law at all; which is the surest side of the Hedge. For
as going to Law has abundance of Difficulties and Dangers in it, so to be sure
he Sins not, that wholly abstains from Law suits. This the Primitive Christians
considered; and therefore Athenagorus tells us, their Custom was, not to go to
Law with any that had taken any thing from them, and the very Heathens have
commended it. And now I proceed to the

Second Precept, Whosoever shall compel thee to go a Mile, go with him twain.

Having said so much to the first Case, I shall need to say but very little to
this. I shall only hint to you the reasonableness of this Precept also.

1. This is an excellent way of making a Friend of an Enemy, such Officiousness
is very charming; and if there be the least spark of good nature left in him,
this extraordinary Civility will blow the Coals, and turn it into the Fire of
Amity and Kindness. Whether it has this effect upon a turbulent Temper or no,
its tendency is to make a better Man of him. And what should not a good
Christian do, to convert a Sinner from the Error of his Ways? This is a very
likely means, and consequently ought to be used; and being a Means of God's
prescribing, we have the greater reason to hope for good Success.

2. Walking with such a Person another Mile, may administer occasion for good
and pious Discourses, which may have a very good effect upon a rough and
stubborn Temper; especially if the excellent temper of Christianity be
represented to him. How kind, how civil, how obliging it makes a Man; how it
takes away from him all sowreness of Spirit, and teaches him to do Good for
Evil, and to win Men by kindnesses. We know, Pious Discourses have wrought
sometimes upon Men strangely untractable; and who knows, but upon such a Man,
that shall compel us to go with him a Mile, such Discourses may make a very
great alteration to the saving of his Soul?

All that I shall say, by way of Application, shall be only these Items.

1. We use various Masters to teach our Children Civility, and to instruct them
how to behave themselves in Company. Let us teach them true Christianity, and
that will make them Civil, Courteous, Obliging, Friendly, and Affable beyond
all that Dancing-Masters, and Masters of Ceremonies can teach them; such
Masters may teach them to dissemble, to flatter, to observe the Punctilio's of
State and Honor; but Christianity will make them sincerely obliging, and kind,
and modest, and friendly, and instill into them the best Behavior and
Deportment.

2. All that Christ aims at in these Commands is, to overcome the Evil with
Good; himself did so. He healed the Ear of Malchus, and fed his Enemies with
Miracles of Mercy. To the Jews, who hated him, he was a mighty Benefactor; and
though they sought his Death, yet he purged their Country from Sins and Devils.
Whatever Injuries are offered us, either in our Name, or Goods, or Liberty, let
us ever remember what our Master has done before us, and say, I am a
Christian, and I must overcome Evil with Good.

3. If we mean to live up to the Rules here prescribed, let us raise our Hearts
into a vehement desire to imitate Christ in his Sufferings. St. Paul was fond
of this, and why should not we? That the Apostle was earnestly desirous after a
Fellowship in Christ' s Sufferings, you may read, Phil. iii.10. and till we get
such a vehement desire, these excellent Precepts of the Text will seem strange,
impertinent things to us. Look unto the Sufferings of Christ, and be enamored
with him, and firmly believe that Immortality that Christ has brought to
light; and then the difficulty which seems to be in those Commands will vanish.
I conclude therefore with 2 Timothy ii.11, 12. It is a faithful Saying, if we be
dead with him, we shall also live with him; If we suffer we shall also reign
with him.

SERMON XXXIII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 42. Give to him that asks thee; and from him that
would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.


THis Precept of our Master looks as if we were commanded to undo our selves,
to ruin our Families, and to make our selves Beggars, especially if it be
compared with St. Luke, Chapter vi.30. where it is, Give to every Man that asks
of thee.

At this rate, some will say, we may give all away, for there will not be
wanting Men and People that will ask; and if once it be known, that we are
Conscientious, and act according to this Principle, our Doors will soon be
crowded with People that shall ask, and borrow all we have.

In so wicked an Age, where People make no Conscience of repaying what they
borrow, what can a Man expect but Beggary and Poverty, if he must deny none
that will borrow of him? and at this rate none would be happier than those who
have nothing to lend or to give; because by this means they would escape, which
others cannot, even Men's Importunities.

But as great a Paradox as this may seem to be, it will appear from the sequel,
that there is nothing but Reason and Equity in it.

The Rule here laid down, consisting of two Parts, I shall divide and consider,
I. The Duty of Giving. II. That of Lending.


I. Of Giving. Give to him that asks of thee.

Before I come to open the Nature of this Duty, I must premise,

1. We are not to think, that we are to give at no time but when we are asked.
There may be very good Christians, whose Necessities we know, or upon Enquiry
may know, and who are loath to make them known; in which Case we are obliged to
prevent their asking, as Christ did the Man who had been Weak and Lame eight
and thirty Years, Will thou be made whole, said he, John v.6. before he knew
Christ intended him any kindness.

Giving is a Godlike thing. God is the great giver of every good and perfect
Gift, James i.17. And he ordinarily gives before we ask, and showers down his
Blessings before our Requests knock at the Gate of Mercy. And they must know
nothing of Christianity, that do not know their Profession obliges them to
imitate their Father which is in Heaven.

2. This Command, to give to him that asks us, must be compared with other
Precepts, and explained by them; for this is a standing Rule of Interpretation,
to compare Spiritual things with Spiritual, 1 Cor. ii.13. for we must ever
suppose, that God cannot contradict himself; the whole Scripture being given by
the same Spirit; this Spirit ever speaks things consistent with himself; and
therefore, if there be an Expression in one place that sounds harsh, it must be
softened and explained by another, in which there is no Obscurity, no Metaphor,
no Allegory; and accordingly, if we compare this Saying of our Savior with
what we read, 2 Thessalonians. iii 10. If any will not Work, neither shall he Eat, it
will soon appear, that this Precept does not oblige us to give to them who ask,
if Idle, and Lazy, and able to Work and will not; or spend what they get in
Riotous Living; and of this sort are many common Beggars, who are strong, and
vigorous, and of ability to Work with their own Hands, and to whom to give is
to encourage them in Idleness.

This being premised, I shall now consider the import of this Command; and it is
briefly this.

In general. It is to teach us, not to be Churlish, or Covetous, or
Ill-natured, or Hard-hearted to the Needy. It is intended to pull down that
base, earthly, and worldly Temper, which makes us Selfish and unconcerned about
the affliction of Joseph, Nabal-like, Shall I take my Bread, and my Water, and
my Flesh, that I have killed for my Shearers, and give it unto Men whom I know
not whence they be, 1 Samuel xxv.11. It is to oblige us to hearken to the
Complaints of the Necessitous, to give attention to their Cry, to hear
patiently what they have to say, not to turn away from them in a proud,
haughty, and undecent manner, as if their Requests were not worthy of our
regard, or as if we were too good to stand talking with such contemptible
Persons; or as if it were below our Rank, and Quality, and Station, to consider
what Persons, under such low Circumstances, propose to our charitable
Consideration. For suppose it were impertinent, yet it is part of Christian
Patience, to show our selves gentle and courteous, even to a weak and silly
Petitioner; not to mention, that it is a piece of Gratitude to God to bear with
such, it being an acknowledgement of his Goodness, which has given us a
greater Portion of Reason and Understanding, than to them.

That which is particularly enjoined here is,

1. To give cheerfully, for as we all know, God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor.
ix.7. To give grudgingly or unwillingly, or by force, or in Anger and Passion,
is a worm that spoils the Gift, and makes that which in another dress would
have been a sweet Odor, a very unacceptable Sacrifice; for though the needy
Brother be actually relieved by the Gift, yet the Giver can enjoy but little
comfort of it, since that which should have made it amiable and pleasing to God
is wanting. God does not so much regard what we give, as with what Heart we
give. A ready Mind, like a magnifying Glass, makes even a Cup of Water, given
to a Disciple of Christ, look great in the sight of God; whereas a richer
Donative coming from us with an unwilling Mind, looks mean and pitiful, and
like Objects seen through the wrong end of a Perspective, dwarfish and
inconsiderable.

2. Give with Simplicity, with holy, good and warrantable Ends, and with pious
Intentions. This is the Command Romans xii.8. And we shall soon be convinced of
the Necessity of it, if we consider how it fared with the Pharisees, whose
sinister ends and designs in giving Alms drew upon them the threatening Christ
speaks of, Matthew. vi.2. Verily they have their Reward. To glorify God with the
gift, to express our gratitude to the Donor of all we have, to testify our
Compassion to our Fellow Creatures, and Fellow- Christians in distress, to
discharge our Duty, and to express our Obedience to the Commands of our Master,
etc. These are Ends good and laudable, and which a good Man may take
satisfaction in; and I doubt not but we may lawfully have an Eye to the future
recompense in the Resurrection of the Just, as we may conclude from what Christ
says, Luke xiv.1, 2, 4. But to think to cajole the Almighty by the Gift, and
lull him into connivance at the Sins we are unwilling to part with, or to hope
for some temporal advantage by the Donation, or to be able to give no better
reason for our Giving, than because Persons of our Rank and Quality have done
the like. Such designs as they, are inconsistent with the Maxims of our
Religion, so its needless to tell you, they must be laid aside, when the
meanest Capacity may easily conclude so much from the Premises.

3. Give with Discretion; This is required, Psalm. xli.1. where we read, Blessed
is he that considers the Poor. In the Original it is (...) which imports
Wisdom and Discretion in the distribution of our Charitable Gifts, Men's
Necessities being various, some more urging, others more tolerable. Some are in
greater Want than others; the Rank, and Quality, and Station of some makes them
greater Objects than those who were born to a poor and mean Condition; some
grow providentially Poor, others through Debauchery and Idleness; some with
their Poverty are Sincere, and Good, and Religious, others retain their
Insensibleness of things Spiritual. Sometimes our very Parents and nearest
Relations crave our assistance, as well as Persons recommended to us by our
Friends and Acquaintance. All which Circumstances require Direction and
Prudence; which Virtue, though it be sometime made a Cloak for Covetousness,
yet is a Virtue still, and to be practiced by the best of Men, though it be
made a shelter under which wicked Men hide their Sin and Hypocrisy.

4. Give proportionably. Where God has given much, remember to give much too,
and let not Selfishness tempt you to call that little, which all your
Neighbors and understanding Men count a very large Portion. And that you may
be able to give much, abate abundance of things which are superfluous, and
serve for nothing but to Feed your Luxury. It Is impossible, that he who has
much, should give much, if he be resolved to have every thing that the Men of
the World have, even all the Fineries, and Gaudies, and Pomp, and Retinue, and
State, which other voluptuous Sinners rejoice in. If every one of us be to lay
up in Store for Charitable Uses, as God has prospered and blessed him in this
World, as we read 1 Cor. xvi.1, 2. Certainly we cannot satisfy our selves,
that we give as we ought, if we give not proportionably. And the best guide to
direct us in this proportion is Love. The more fervent our Love is to our
distressed Brethren, the more liberal we shall be. See how Love wrought upon
the Macedonians, for they went not only beyond proportion, but beyond their
power too, in giving relief to the Churches of Judaea, 2 Cor. viii.1.

5. Give to all sorts, not only to a Christian, but to a Heathen too, as there
is occasion; not only to a needy Relation, but to a distressed Stranger too;
not only to a a Friend, but even to an Enemy. The Jews were abominably partial
in their giving. To a Jew, one of their own Nation and Religion, they were
liberal, but a Samaritan they thought no proper Object of Relief; and therefore
would not do the common Offices of Humanity to them, or show them the least
Civility. Our Religion rests upon better Principles, and another Temper is
required of Christians. And that is the true import of that Command, Luke vi.30.
Give to every Man, or to all that ask of thee, i. e. to all sorts of Men,
confine not thy Charity to Persons of the same Faith, and Party, and Opinion,
but like God, disperse and scatter thy Profits on all, both good and bad,
whether just or unjust, and do not deny thy help, no not to Sinners and
Publicans.

These, without all peradventure, are the true Qualifications of Giving, but we
are not to think, that all the Duty required here is incumbent on the Giver. He
that does ask is to observe Rules, as well as the Giver, which, if he does not,
he makes himself incapable of receiving the Gift of the Giver.

1. Give to him that asks of thee, and is a proper Object of Charity. Of this
a hint was given before; and if any Necessitous Persons are excluded from being
Objects, they must be such as spend what is given them in Rioting and
Drunkenness, in Idleness and Laziness, and live useless and unprofitable in the
World. I know abundance of Covetous, Niggardly, and Narrow-hearted Christians
make this an excuse, and rashly Censure all that ask of them, as People Idle,
and delighting in the common Vices of the Age, that they may have some color
for their backwardness in Giving; but in Cases of this Nature we are not to go
by Guesses, and Fancies, and precarious Imaginations, but by our certain
Knowledge; and when we are ignorant of the manner and particulars of their
Lives and Conversations, our Judgment must be Charitable and Favorable; where
Experience and common Fame, and rational Evidences do convince us of their
dissolute way of Living, we may lawfully withold our Hands; for in this case,
we do not withold the Good from those to whom it is due, Prove. iii.27. the
Persons we speak of falling under another Notion, even of Men to whom
Correction, and Punishment, and the severity of a Prison is due, and whom to
lash into better Manners, is a very good act of Charity.

2. Give to him that asks, provided he does ask modestly. We are not by this
Precept bound to satisfy the unreasonable Desires of Men. It Is true, a Pound
may be too little for an Alexander to give, but a Talent on the other side may
be too much for a needy Person to ask. Our Savior here does not determine the
quantity, how much we are to give, nor oblige us to give whatsoever another
asks, but leaves the quantity to our Prudence and Direction. In giving to him
that asks, we are to consider our Ability, as well as the Merit and Need of
him that does ask; and so to Give, as not to be unjust to others, nor to wrong
those whom by Nature we are bound to do good to in the first place; the neglect
or omission of which makes us Infidels, 1 Timothy v.8. And so much of Giving.

II. The second Branch of our Savior's Counsel is Lending, From him that would
borrow of thee turn not thou away.

The general Drift of which Counsel is, for the most part, or ordinarily, to
lend our Neighbor such things as he stands in need of. Most Commands of this
Nature have respect to what ought to be the ordinary practice, supposing still
there may be extraordinary Cases wherein the thing may lawfully be superseded,
or suspended. A loose debauched Person, or a Person who I know will pervert the
thing I lend him, or he would borrow of me to very ill use. This Law does not
oblige me to lend him. But for the most part between Neighbor and Neighbor,
this ought to be the Rule. And the same may be said of a Person apparently
dishonest, whose Actions make us justly suspect, or give us just occasion to
believe, that he intends not to repay us again. I cannot think that such
Persons come into the number of the Borrowers Christ aims at: For no doubt our
Savior ties the Borrower to Honesty, as well as the Lender to Charity. So that
the import of this Command may be comprehended in these Particulars.

1. Do not think there lies no Obligation on you to lend to your Fellow-
Christians, who are in Streights and Necessities, and may by your Lending raise
themselves into a condition to live comfortably and honestly in the World. This
is an act of Christian Love and Charity, and such as we our selves may stand in
need of; and whatsoever you would have others do to you, do you the same to
them, according to the Rule, Mat. vii.12.

2. Do not tell them that would borrow of you, that you have nothing to Lend,
when you have it; for that would be to add Lying to your Uncharitableness,
which is both against the Nature of Christian Simplicity and Sincerity, and
against the express Law, Ephesians. iv.25.

3. Be willing to gratify your honest Neighbors in this request, when they
would borrow of you, and overcome that Uncharitableness, and mistrust of God's
Providence, or fear that you shall not receive your own again. For Flesh and
Blood is apt to raise such Objections, which must be subdued by that Spirit
which God has given you; If ye walk after the Flesh ye shall dye; but if ye
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body ye shall live.

4. From him that would borrow of thee do not turn away. Yet so as to consider
the Circumstances of the Person that would borrow of you. It is a wicked Man's
Character, to borrow and not to pay, Psalm. xxxvii.21. And when a Man is known
to be so, we may lawfully use Christian Prudence and Wisdom. When Men have the
reputation of Honesty, Sincerity, and Diligence, their Industry deserves to be
encouraged, and since Lending is an encouragement to them, they ought not to be
sent away with a refusal of their Request.

5. Lend not only to a Person of the same Religion, but to others also, God
gave a Law to the Jews, Deuteronomy. xv.8. Thou shall open thy hand wide unto thy
Brother, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he
wants. This the Jews restrained to their own Sect, and to their Friends; but
Christianity being a Profession of a larger Charity, if even a Person who is
not of the same Profession with you, would borrow of you, do not you turn away
from him; nay, if the Person were an Enemy; this is evident from what follows
in this Chapter, But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use
you, and persecute you.

6. Lend sometimes, even to Persons from whom you have no hopes of receiving
any thing again. Express your Self-denial, your conquest of the Flesh, your
Love to God, and your dependence upon his Providence. This is agreeable to the
Command given, Luke vi.35. Lend, hoping for nothing again. Not that this is to
be done at all times, and upon all occasions; but sometimes, in order to
overcome our love of this present World; especially when Persons are by
Providence, or by some extraordinary accident fallen into decay; and
particularly upon the account of a good Conscience: To this purpose, Luke
vi.34. See how ready God is to give to you, and to lend you what ye stand in
need of; and why so? Surely, that you should be ready to help others.

These are the particulars to which this Command has particular Relation; and
were Men truly conscientious, no doubt this Law would be sufficient to guide a
Christian in his Temporal Concerns; but the wickedness and persidiousness of
Men is grown great and extravagant, which has obliged Magistrates to enact
Laws to regulate this Lending, Borrowing, and Demanding what has been Lent,
and to permit Bonds and Obligations to secure the Lender of what he Lends to
another; which, though a Christian may in some Cases make use of, yet let us
remember, that we are not to make use of all the Ways and Means the Law of the
Land permits to prevent greater Evils. To keep on this side the Law, and as
near as we can, to conform to the Law of our Master Christ Jesus, is the safest
way. And whereas the Law of the Land admits to Arrest, and Imprison Borrowers
that do not repay, all that can be said in this Case is, He that shows most
Mercy is the better Christian.

Inferences.
All the Application I shall make of this Command is, to exhort you to real and
actual Charity one toward another. God gives you, that you may give to others;
and vouchsafes you means, that you may be able to assist and succor others in
their Needs. Labor earnestly to eradicate that root of bitterness, even
selfishness, which hinders you from doing many excellent Acts, which must adorn
your Profession.

It Is true, you are liable to be Cheated, but who is not? if your Charity and
Christian kindness be abused, you are not the first, nor will be the last that
are like to suffer in this kind.

We must look higher than this World, the Losses we meet with here will be
perfect Gain, if they lead us to secure the everlasting Inheritance.

The Precepts of our great Master are so ordered, and so laid, that the Love of
this World may be rooted out of our Hearts; and if this Love be truly
mortified, we are greater Gainers, than if we gained the whole World, and lost
our own Souls.

It is true, we would fain keep this present World, and all the enjoyments of
it, and enjoy the bliss of the next too; but he that goes by that principle,
reckons without his Host, and will find himself miserably mistaken, when he
comes to set his Accounts even with the Sovereign Judge of the World.

To meet with ungrateful and unreasonable Men, is no more than what our Master
and his Disciples have met withal; and to think we must fare better in this
World than they, is to mistake the end of our Vocation.

Let us do good, and rejoice in the doing of it, and be confident we shall be
no losers in the end; He is faithful who has promised, and he will perform it
too. It is but a little while that we are to continue here, and the great
Question in the last Day will be, not how Rich, or how great we have been here,
but whether we have made Conscience of the Rules our Master has left us.
Blessed are those Servants whom their Master when he comes shall find so doing.

Prosperity is so far from being a sign of God's Children, or of our
Reconciliation to God, that a Christian who enjoys much of it, has very great
reason to question his Spiritual Condition and Interest in Christ Jesus. Not
but that it is possible to be prosperous, and a true Servant of God; but where
there is one that is so, there are multitudes that drown themselves in
Destruction and Perdition.

I shall conclude with St. Paul's Saying, 1 Timothy vi.17, 18. Charge them that
are Rich in this World, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
Riches, but in the Living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy. That
they do good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to Distribute, willing to
Communicate.

SERMON XXXIV.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 43. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy.


FOR the right understanding of this Passage, these following things will
deserve Consideration.

I. By whom it was said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor and hate thine Enemy.

II. How agreeable this principle is to corrupt Nature.

III. How contrary to the Principles of Reason, and the design of Christianity.

IV. What is the true import of love to our Neighbor.

V. Whether in some sense it may not be a Duty to love our Neighbor, and hate
our Enemy.

I. By whom it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine
Enemy.

And most certainly,

1. It has not been said so by Almighty God in the Old Law; we have indeed a
Command, Levit. xix.18. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, but we read
no where, Thou shall hate thine Enemy; so far from it that there are express
Precepts against it, as Exodus xxiii.4, 5. When thou see thine Enemies Ox or
Ass going astray, thou shall freely bring him back to him again; and if thou
shall see the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden, and would
forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him. Besides, the Law God gave
the Jews, was never intended as a contradiction to the Law of Nature, it was to
be a help to the better Observance of it, but never designed to reverse it, or
any part of it; and we are certain the Law of Nature enjoins no such thing, but
Mercy rather than Hatred to an Enemy; and this is evident from hence, not only
because the Law of Nature bids us imitate God, who is kind to the Unthankful,
and to the Evil; but because we find, that the very Heathens, from the dictates
of this Law of Nature, have shown Mercy even to their greatest Foes, not only
by giving them decent Burial after Death, as Hannibal and others; but also by
exercising acts of Charity toward them while they were alive; and therefore,
God it could not be that said so, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine
Enemy.

And therefore,

2. If God did not say so, then the Men that said and taught so, must be the
same Men who had corrupted several other Laws of God mentioned in this Chapter,
and detorted them from their original Intent and Design, to accommodate them to
the sinful Humors of Men, and to the interest of the Flesh, even the Scribes
and Pharisees, and their Ancestors, the ancient Masters of the Oral Law, who,
by their Traditions, rendered the Law of God of none effect. I have observed
often in the preceding Discourses, what false Glosses and Interpretations these
Men did put upon the Sixth and Seventh Commandment, and the Law of Divorces and
Retaliation. In like manner, this Precept of loving their Neighbor, could not
escape their Sacrilegious Hands; for as their business was to make the Moral
Law of God as easy to the Flesh as they could; and as they had made several
Experiments of that Nature in others, so they dealt with this excellent Precept.

Indeed many of them in Christ's Days made no great Account of this Duty; for
when they spoke of the sum of the Law of God, they repeated part of the sixth
Chapter of Deuteronomy. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, and thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all
thy Might. This they said (taking no notice of the Precept of loving their
Neighbor) was the sum of the Law of God, and this they inscribed and writ
upon their Philacteries or Parchments they tied to their Wrists and Foreheads.

Which shows, that the Lawyer who came to Christ, to enquire of him, What he
must do to inherit eternal Life, Luke x.27. was more rational than the rest;
for when Christ asked him, how read thou; he answered, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Strength, and thy Neighbor as thy self. Upon which our Savior tells him, That
he had answered right or (...), as St. Mark has it, Mark xii.34.

So that set aside some few judicious, thinking Persons, the Scribes and
Pharisees in general pretending warrant from Tradition, had very slight and
slender Notions of loving their Neighbor; and though they granted, it was a
Command of God, and confessed their Obligation to obey it, yet they had made so
many restrictions of it, that in effect they had rendered it very
insignificant. For,

1. By the word (...) or Neighbor they understood a Friend, or a Person that
was kind to them, or had obliged them; the largest signification they would
allow of, was that of a Jew, or a Person of the same Tribe, and Kindred, and
Family, and Country, and Religion with them; insomuch, that they thought there
lay no Obligation upon them to be so much as Civil, and do the common Offices
of Humanity to a Samaritan or a Heathen, no not so much as to show him the way
to a Town, or to a Well of Water, if he was dry, or spent with Thirst.

2. From this narrow signification of the word Neighbor, they flattered
themselves, that if a Man had wronged, or done them an Injury, they were not
obliged to love him, or that they might lawfully hate him, because he was no
Friend, no Neighbor, no fit Person to be called so, and that they stretched
this even to Men of their own Religion, is evident from v. 46 of this Chapter,
and their ordinary Practice.

3. Because God had ordered their Forefathers to destroy the seven Nations of
the Land of Canaan, and to root out the Memory of Amalek from under Heaven,
Deuteronomy. xxv.19. They inferred, that they might lawfully hate all Nations that
were not of their Religion, a strange Inference this; for though God made them
the Executioners of his Wrath and Indignation, and intended them as
Instruments, whereby he meant to punish and remove those wicked Men; yet from
thence it followed not, that they were to hate them in ordinary Converse, or as
they had occasion to meet them accidentally, or about business. In a just
public War they were ordered to destroy them, and not as they appeared in a
private Capacity; nor was their Order to destroy them in a public War, a
sufficient Warrant for them to hate them at other times; no more than an
Executioner is bound to hate the Person he hangs up, or Beheads, or Executes by
order of the Magistrate; no more than a Soldier who Fights in the Field and
kills a public Enemy must needs be supposed to hate the Person he kills,
because he only executes the Command of his General.

Yet such ill Logicians they were, that from hence they inferred, 1. That all
Persons who were not of their Religion, were their Enemies. 2. That they might
lawfully hate them, and do those things against them, if they had a fair
opportunity, and could do it safely, whereby People commonly express their
hatred.

Thus the Pharisees taught them from Tradition, and these were the Men, even
the ancient Masters of Tradition, from which the Pharisees derived their
Pedigree, who perverted this Precept of loving their Neighbor, and by whom it
was said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy: A Maxim very
agreeable to corrupt Nature. And the

II. Thing I am to treat of, Its agreeableness to Humane Nature, appears

1. From hence; because corrupt Nature loves its ease, it hates to be
restrained. And this Maxim is so far from confining it, that it gives it
Elbow-room, and leave to follow its course and natural inclination. Take a
Person abstracted from the Sanctifying Grace of God, and that is a Stranger to
the transforming work of God's Spirit, if he may have his Will, thus he will
act, i. e. Love his Friend and hate his Enemy. This is that he would have, and
there the bias runs. Here is no need of any Self-denial, or swimming against
the Stream, no need of great Consideration, or Deliberation, or deep Thoughts,
it is as natural to an unregenerate Man, as sucking is to a Child. Other things
he cannot learn without taking Pains, such as Riding, Fencing, Painting,
Reading, Writing, etc. but this he learns without a Teacher, without going to
School, without Breeding, without the trouble of an Academy, as easily as he
does Aversion from Goodness, and backwardness to Virtue, and gratifying his
brutish Appetite. In a word, This loving his Friend, and hating an Enemy is no
painful work; and therefore very agreeable to corrupt Nature.

2. With this Principle a Carnal Man may justify all the ill Nature he
exercises in Converse, and all the ill Offices he does to his Neighbor, he may
excuse with this. That he loves his Friend, and hates his Enemy. Cain's angry
Looks, and Joab's secret Grudges, and Absalom's Malice, and Judas's Envy, and
the Pharisees Spleen, may all shelter themselves under this cover. With this
Maxim the vain Man can baffle all the checks of an unruly Conscience, put by
its Importunities, stop its Mouth, dash its Terrors, and silence its loud
Cries; and all this is very agreeable to corrupt Nature, and the Person who
teaches such pernicious Doctrines must needs be very welcome to wicked Men, and
his words, as a lovely Song of him that has a pleasant Voice, and that can
play well upon an Instrument. But how irrational this Principle is, how
contrary to the Rules of Reason, and the design of Christianity, as it deserves
Enquiry, so it is the

III. Particular I am to speak of. And here,

1. Reason tells us, that Man stands in such Relations, one Man to another,
Relations imparting Love, and Amity, and Kindness, that hating even of an Enemy
is inconsistent with those Relations. No Man ever yet hated his own Flesh; this
is an indubitable Principle of Reason. And now, let the Enemy we have be never
so inveterate, never so Malicious or Injurious, still he carries the same Flesh
and Blood about him that we do. The same Father made him, even God blessed for
evermore. We are Brethren, and God created us both after his own Image. The
same God maintains, feeds, and supports him that keeps our Souls in Life; and
though his hostile Acts may be very great, yet still this Consideration will
oblige us not to hate him. Not to mention, that Reason bids us prefer the
Interest of the Soul, before that of the Flesh. And it is evident, that by the
Enmity of others, our Souls are signal Gainers, as they have an opportunity to
exercise the noblest Virtue, which is Self-conquest. Caesar said, Tully uses to
forget nothing but Injuries; and Aristotle makes it the Character of a
magnanimous Man; and it was well observed of that Religious Man in the Lives of
the Fathers, That an Enemy does us a greater kindness than our Friends; and our
Souls thrive best when we have store of Enemies.

2. The design of Christianity is to raise, to polish, and to refine our
Natures, and to make us like God, and consequently hating an Enemy must be
contrary to this Design; for it does not only keep our Natures in a mean,
pitiful, base, and grovelling Condition, but makes us very unlike God, who lets
his Sun shine upon the Just and Unjust; and his Rain drop upon the Pastures of
the good and bad. It Is true, God does punish his Enemies, but not to mention,
that even this Punishment is an act of Charity, as it is an endeavor to
reclaim them from the Errors of their Ways, this he does not, till all other
means prove fruitless and ineffectual. However, to be sure, in this Life, on
this side Hell, in the midst of the execution of his Wrath and Vengeance, he
heaps innumerable Mercies upon them; and that is sufficient to prove what I
intend, that we are not to hate an Enemy, because the Kindnesses we owe him,
relate only to this present Life: And to this may be added, that the injurious
acts of an Enemy bear no proportion to the acts of Enmity we are guilty of
against God, and we would not have God hate us, notwithstanding those Acts, it
follows, that there is no reason for our hating an Enemy, upon the account of
the Injuries he does, or has done us. But this we shall have occasion to
discuss more largely in the following Verses.

Let Us go on and

IV. Enquire, What is the true import of loving our Neighbor. And,

1. As by a Neighbor in Scripture is meant every Man that stands in need of
our Help and Assistance, and of whose Help and Assistance we may stand in need,
as appears from the Parable of the wounded Man, Luke x.30. so Love to our
Neighbor imports a faithful discharge of all the Duties of the second Table;
which is the reason, that St. Paul affirms of this Love, that it is the
fulfilling of the Law, because love works no ill to his Neighbor, no ill to
Princes, no ill to Magistrates, no ill to Parents or Relations, no ill to High
or Low, Rich or Poor, no not to the meanest or poorest Creature, Romans xiii.8,
9, 10.

2. The measure of this Love is set down by God himself, Lev. xix.18. Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, which properly denotes not the same
degree of Love, but the same Sincerity; and that we are to make our Love to our
selves the Rule and Standard whereby we are to Love others, according to the
several degrees of their Relations, and the several degrees of Goodness which
appear in them; for, no doubt, we are to be kinder to a Father, than to a
Stranger, and more officious to a good Man, than to a bad one, yet so, that
neither the greatest Strangers, nor the worst of Men be altogether excluded
from our Kindness, or such acts of Kindness, which we might rationally expect
under the same Circumstances.

3. This Love to our Neighbor, implies not only abstinence from Wrongs and
Injuries, from dishonouring our Parents, from Murder, from Adultery, from
Stealing, Lying, bearing False-witness, and from Coveting our Neighbor's
Goods; but all those positive acts of Charity mentioned in 1 Cor. xiii.4, 5, 6,
7. and 1 Pet. xi.8, 9, 10. and Matthew. xxv.35, 36. And these acts must flow from
inward Compassion: For as the Spirit of Man is the principle of all Moral and
Spiritual Acts; so whatever acts of Love we exercise toward our Neighbor, they
must come from the Heart, and from a sense of our Duty, and of the Love of God;
and these acts must be so managed, that they become not accessory to other Men's
Sins; for it is no Love, to Love another into Sin, or sinful Compliances, which
is the reason, that the Apostle pressing this Peace, and Love to our Neighbor,
makes Holiness its inseparable Companion. Follow Peace with all Men, and
Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii.14. And this Love
is called the Royal Law, Jam. ii.8. not because the King of Kings gave it, but
because this Love to our Neighbor is the Queen of all Graces, and he that
excels in it Reigns and Rules over a Thousand Lusts and Temptations. But,

V. May it not be in some sense a Duty to love our Neighbor? and to hate an
Enemy. That which makes me take notice of this Point, is an Observation of
Origin, who says, This is very good Divinity, if by the Enemy we understand
the Devil. Though its certain, that our Savior in these words, does not
directly aim at this, yet it must be confessed, that in this sense, that loose
Principle of the Pharisees may bear a very good construction.

Indeed, the Devil is the greatest Enemy we are to hate. We have renounced him
in our Baptism, and we are sworn to that Hatred. Against him let us boldly vent
our Hatred, even against all his Works, and all his evil Suggestions, which way
soever they are presented to us, whether by the Flesh, or by the World, or by
Evil Men.

Here we need move no Scruples, no Cases of Conscience, how far we may lawfully
hate the Devil. We are to hate him with a perfect Hatred, and express it by
Trembling, and by abhorrency of all that is pleasing to him, or offensive to
God. It Is true, we see not the Devil, but we feel him, and whatever Evil
Thought, or Desire, or Motion appears in our Minds, let us firmly conclude, it
comes either directly or indirectly from that Enemy. To this Enemy no kindness
is to be shown. No League, no Peace, no Confederacy, no not so much as a Truce
is to be made with him; with him we are to wage War continually. He is no
Subject capable of making Peace with, for Peace with him is Enmity against God,
wounding our own Soul, destroying the peace of our Consciences, and descending
into the Chambers of Hell.

Inferences.
1. If we take a view of the Manners of Men in the Age we live in, one would
think, that the Pharisees are still alive, and instill the same Principle into
them, that they did into their Disciples in Christ's Days, viz. Love your
Friends, and hate your Enemies. For the Actions of Men are so exactly
conformable to this Rule, that if a Man were to measure Christ's Religion by
the Practices of his Followers, he might go near to infer, that Christ taught
this Doctrine as well as the Pharisees.

To hate an Enemy we look upon to be a very just and reasonable thing, and do
him all the ill Offices, as we have occasion; to speak Evil of him, to Reproach
him, to Calumniate him, to invent Lies of him, and to Report them too we
generally make so light of, that we wonder at the Man that offers to exhort us
to better Principles.

Among Heathens and Infidels this would not look very strange, among Men who
never heard of a Jesus, or of the Gospel, this might pass, though there is
something even in the voice of Nature which might teach them better things; but
among Christians, who talk, and sing, and speak every Day of God's loving them,
when they were his Enemies; this is a huge Paradox. Christ exercised the
greatest acts of Love toward us, in dying for us, when we were Enemies; we
confess it, and our Churches ring of these glad Tidings. How easy would be the
Inference!

Has God loved me when I was his Enemy, and shall I hate my Fellow-Christian,
because I look upon him as mine Enemy? Is this my acknowledgement of God's
Love? Is this to express my gratitude for his Goodness? Had God Compassion on
me when I was his Enemy, and shall I have none on mine? Was God's Love to me
intended as a Pattern for me to follow, and shall I overlook the Design, and
please my self in my Hatred and Ill Nature? I am moved by the Examples of great
Men, by the Examples of good Men, by the Examples of my ordinary Neighbors,
and shall the greatest Example, the Example of God, the Example of Christ Jesus
make no impression upon me?

How easy a matter were it to draw such Inferences from what we believe! and
what a damp would this be to our Hatred! And yet to see how careless, how
regardless we are of it, and in despite of this great Example, which we
commend, and magnify, justify our Animosities against those whom we look upon
to be our Enemies, would make a Rational Man conclude, and very justly too,
that whatever we pretend, or talk of, we do not believe that Christ died for us
when we were God's Enemies.

What? believe it, and have no sense of it! or if we have a sense of it, not to
gather our Duty from it! Would any Man think that we are of the number of those
Believers we read of Heb. xi.? Their Belief affected and wrought upon their
Hearts, and put them upon Heroic Actions; and as God had done by them, so they
did by others. This puts me in mind of the Justice of that Expostulation, and
the Proceedings we read of Matthew. xviii.32, 33, 34. Then his Lord, after he had
called him, said unto him, O thou wicked Servant, I forgave thee all that Debt,
because thou desiredst me: Should not thou also have had Compassion on thy
Fellow Servants, even as I had pity on thee? And his Lord was wroth, and
delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.
Do you make the Application.

II. Though the Law of Moses enjoined this Precept, To love our Neighbor as
our selves, yet the Gospel presses it much more, and in greater Instances too.

As by our Neighbors in the Gospel are meant, not only our nearest Friends and
Relatives, not only those who dwell near us, and about us; not only those of
the same Church and Religion with us, but all our Fellow Christians, and all
Persons who were redeemed with the Blood of Jesus, so our Love is to extend to
all these, and especially to them of the Household of Faith. To this purpose St.
Peter, Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood. Indeed, this Love to our Fellow-
Christians the Apostles press with more than ordinary Fervor. They lay the
stress of Religion upon it, and when they would describe Christians, who thrive
under the Showers and Irrigations of the Gospel, they say, That their Faith
grows exceedingly, and the Charity of every one toward each other abounds, 2 Thessalonians. i.3.

This was the distinguishing Character of the Primitive Believers, and their
Love one to another, their dear, their tender, their affectionate Love one to
another was taken notice of beyond any other Virtue whatsoever. They called
themselves Brethren and Sisters, and by the Brotherhood or Fraternity they
meant the Christian Church, as appears from Clemens Romanus. Their Hospitality,
their Candor, their Veracity, their Beneficence, were the wonder of all
Spectators.

Their tenderness to the Afflicted, to Prisoners, to Captives, to the Sick and
the Lame, to the Ignorant, and to their very Enemies was unspeakable, insomuch,
that Julian the Apostate saw there was no way to propagate Heathenism, like
that of imitating Christians in their Works and Labors of Love and Charity.

Hereby shall all Men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another;
and so it was in those purer Ages, and they were known more by their mutual
Love, than by their talking of Christ Jesus. How is this Character inverted at
this Day, and one may say, Hereby do all Men know who are Christians, even by
their hating one another. I know not which is the harder Task, whether Love to
God, or to our Neighbor. Sure I am, that many who pretend great love to God,
are strangely defective in their love to their Neighbors. What a stir do many
Men make about Religion, and yet make nothing of Slandering, Abusing, Deriding,
Undervaluing their Neighbors. My Brethren, Does a Fountain at the same place
send forth bitter Water and sweet? Indeed, none is so fit to love God dearly,
as he that does exercise himself very much in Love to his Neighbor. It Is true,
one must help the other, and Love to God must Influence that to our Neighbors;
but still, great acts of Love to our Neighbors are the best Preparatives for
high degrees of Love to God.

The Branches of this Love to our Neighbors are many and various, and he who
abounds in these acts of Love, gets a Holy assurance, that he is neither barren
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Lord! How do we confine our Love to little Sects and Parties? and from hence
comes that bitterness of Spirit of one Party against another; and how hard is
it to find a Christian of a truly Catholic Love and Charity?

When shall we be wiser! When shall that pristine Unity and Purity return? When
shall that admirable Spirit, which shined so bright in the primitive Believers
revive again? Lord! When shall thy Kingdom come, that the whole Multitude which
Believe shall be of one Heart, and of one Soul?

The Spirit, and the Bride say Come; and let him that hears say Come. Come thou
God of Love, thou Prince of Peace, thou lover of Concord and Unity, Come, Amen,
even so come Lord Jesu!

SERMON XXXV.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 44. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you.


MArcellinus writing to St. Austin, tells him, Vid. Lap. on 1 John 4.12. p. 492.
That the great Stumbling Blocks which lay in the way of the Heathens of his
Time, especially of the wittier sort, and hindered them from embracing
Christianity, were chiefly these three, the Incarnation of our Lord, the
meanness of his Miracles, which they thought those of Apollonius Tyanaeus did
equal, and the Prescriptions of the Text, Love your Enemies, bless them that
curse you, etc.

Not to meddle with their first and second Head, this last particularly they
could not digest, they looked upon it as obliging Men to work Miracles, and
thought it in a manner as easy to snatch a Man from the Embraces of the Grave,
as to receive an Enemy into their own. What! Love an Enemy? He might as well
have bid us swallow Poison, and take Toads and Vipers into our Bosoms. What!
Love a Man that has sought my Life? Caress a Wretch that has attempted to
ravish the pledges of my Love? Take him into my Arms that has endeavored to
snatch from me the dearest Blessings I enjoy? He might as well have bid us pull
up Mountains by the Roots, transplant Islands, touch the Sun with our Fingers,
and empty the Waters of the Ocean.

Indeed, this seems to be the highest step of Christianity, and he that is
arrived to an habitual observance of this Rule, may not unfitly be said to be
come to the top of the Mount of God. But still, whatever noise be made about
it, it implies no such Contradiction, as the Heathens and sensual Men did, or
may imagine. For,

1. Let us grant it is hard, but the harder the work is, the greater is the
Reward. He that gave this Command, understood what Reward was designed for the
Votary. No marvel if Heathens thought it strange who had but imperfect, and
broken, and uncertain Notions of another Life. If the Reward be proportioned to
the Difficulty we see Men refuse no Pains. What is daily practiced in Martial
or Warlike Exploits is a demonstration of it. The recompense Christ designed
for those who should cheerfully obey this Command, does not only equal, but
infinitely transcend the difficulty of the Task; and he that considers what is
promised, must confess, that the work is not worthy to be compared with the
grandeur of the Recompense, and therefore there is nothing unreasonable in the
Injunction.

2. Of all Men, those who are in love with any Vice, have no reason to talk
against this Precept; for they practice what they condemn, and do things as
unnatural as loving an Enemy can be supposed to be. Were it not for the lapsed
Condition of Man, and the depravation of our Faculties, Sin would be a very
unnatural thing to the Soul. The blessed Spirits, who have left Mortality, and
Things below, and recovered their primitive Integrity and Innocence, have as
great an antipathy to Sin, as Men here on Earth can have to a Toad; which
shows, that Sin is an Enemy to a rational Soul, and as contrary to right
Reason, as Darkness is to Light, or a Chronical Distemper is to Health; and
that it is agreeable upon no other account, than Cinders and Ashes, and Chalk
are to some Stomachs, because of their Corruption: So that a vicious Man really
loves his Enemy, nay, his greatest Enemy: He loves the Devil that prompts him
to it, that Devil whom at other times he does Abjure, and at whose Presence he
would tremble; he loves Damnation and Eternal Death; for so we read, Prove.
viii.36. And therefore of all Men, such Persons have no reason to speak against
this Rule as unreasonable.

3. What is commanded here has been done, as I shall show in the sequel; How
and which way, and by what means it has been done; how far the Grace of God
must concur, what Industry must be used, what Impediments are to be removed,
and how the whole concern is to be managed, I do not now enquire, but supposing
that it has been done, the Inference is Rational, that it may be done again.
It Is true, they were Saints and Holy Men who have done it; but since it is very
possible to be a Saint, and to arrive to a state of Holiness, it follows this
Precept is practicable, and far from being impossible. Nay,

4. It has been done with respect to some Acts at least, by natural Men, and
upon the account of Temporal Interest, either in a Bravado, or out of
Generosity, or to be talked of, and to have Glory of Men: Examples and Passages
of this Nature are frequent in History; and if it were possible to do it upon a
motive of Temporal Interest, why should it be thought impossible to be done
upon a greater Motive, even Men's eternal welfare? It is but changing the
Principle, which is the spring of Motion, and the shining Brass may become
Gold, the Counterfeit a real Virtue; and the Show may turn into Substance.

And having thus removed the grand Objection that lies against this Precept, I
now proceed to explain it.

I. The general Command. Love your Enemies.

II. The Branches or the Particulars of it. Bless them, etc.

I. The general Command. Love your Enemies. And here I must note,

1. That Christ does not speak here of a public, or professed, and open Enemy
of our Country or Nation that makes War upon us, and seeks the destruction of
the Community, or a subversion of the Government; for though there is an
Humanity to be shown even to a Public Enemy, by what the Prophet Elisha did to
the Host of Syria, when he had enclosed them in Samaria, the King of Israel
would have dispatched them with the Sword. No says the Man of God, Set Bread
and Water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their Master, 2
Kings vi.22. And we know, that even Heathen Nations have allowed decent Burial
to a public Enemy, when slain in Battle; yet these are not the Persons Christ
directly aims at in these words. Christ as he came not to reverse the Laws of
Government, nor prescribed a Model or Platform of it, but left Governments as
he found them, supposing them to be agreeable to the Law of Nature, and the
good of Mankind; so by this Precept he did not forbid Christian Kings and
Princes entering into a just Defensive War for the Security of their Country;
nor can it be imagined, that by this Rule he would oblige Magistrates and
Sovereigns so to Love the Public Enemy, as to let him Rage, and Ravage, and
Burn, and Plunder, without any Opposition.

This Precept being given to Christians, considered as they live and converse
together, we must conclude, that by the Enemies who are to be loved are meant
Enemies in a more private Capacity, such as we meet with in Conversation, and
in the Places and Stations we are in, whether they be High or Low, whether
Superiors, or Equals, or Inferiors. Nor,

2. Must we think that this Precept is given to Magistrates, with respect to
Malefactors and Public Offenders; as if by Virtue of this Command they were
not to punish them. This would be manifest Injustice to the Public Good, and
we may be very confident, Christ would not have us do Evil, that Good may come
out of it; nor obey one Precept at the expense of another.

Though a Magistrate, if he will act Conscientiously, ought to behave himself
as a Father who loves his Child when he does Chastise him, and therefore
Chastises him because he loves him; so Magistrates are to punish with Pity and
Compassion; and in private Injuries, where their Office is not concerned, they
are bound to Forgive, and love their Enemies as much as others, yet does not
this interfere with the necessary administration of Public Justice; not to
mention, that it is said in the Text, Love your Enemies; but a public
Malefactor or Offender is not properly the Magistrates Enemy, I mean no Enemy
to his Person or Fortune, or Relatives, but to the Law of the Land, and the
common Good; and therefore if the Magistrate does punish him, he does not
punish him as his Enemy, and therefore Sins not against this Precept, but as an
Enemy of the Commonwealth in general. It Is possible the Malefactor may be an
Enemy to the Magistrate, considered in other Circumstances; in which case, the
Magistrate is bound to exercise all the acts of Love here mentioned toward him,
and, notwithstanding these, punish him according to Law, and the Duty of his
Place and Calling. So that the Office of a Magistrate is not superseded by this
Command. Nor,

3. Does this Law of loving our Enemies forbid us reproving an Enemy for the
Sins he involves himself in by hating us; much less does it import, that we are
to love his Sins and Follies, or flatter him in his Undecencies and
Insolences. There is no doubt, we may lawfully tell him of his Faults in a
meek and rational way, and seek to reduce him to a better Temper; and in doing
so, we do nothing against that Love we owe him; so far from it, that it is an
Argument of Hatred not to Rebuke him, Lev. xix.17. Thou shall not hate thy
Brother in thy Heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not
suffer Sin upon him. Nor,

5. Does this Command import, that we are to make an Enemy our Bosom Friend; to
whom we are to unburden our selves, and make him acquainted with the Secrets of
our Souls. Friendship in this strict sense is Master of Discretion more than
Duty; nor is our Love to our Enemies prejudiced by not making them Friends in
this sense. Indeed, if by the Coals of Fire we heap upon their Heads, if by the
warmer kindnesses we show them, we melt them into a tractable and docible
Temper, and then prove occasions of their becoming new Men, we may, if we see
it convenient, raise our Love Unto a higher degree, even to that of Friendship,
and make him that was an Enemy, as our own Soul; but while he is an Enemy, he
is not a Subject capable of entering into the Bond of Friendship with him,
except by Friendship we mean the acts of Love, hereafter mentioned.

6. As an Enemy is a Person who cherishes a secret Spleen and Malice against
us in his Heart, and as occasion serves, vents and expresses it either in his
Words or Actions, either by Reviling or Abusing us, or doing Unkindnesses, or
attempting to Betray or Bespatter, or to Ruin and Undo us, in which sense
even a Husband, a Wife, and the nearest Relatives may be Enemies, so this Love
we owe them imports an inward Affection to them, even Bowels of Mercy and
Compassion, and a certain tenderness within. The acts whereby our Love to them
is to be expressed, must have some Root, and that Root must be the Heart, the
true seat of Love; and let no Man plead here, that Love arising from the
agreeableness of the Object, it is impossible there should be any real Love in
the Heart toward an Enemy, because of the disagreeableness of the Object to our
Temper, and Contrariety to our Humor and Interest; for though there may be no
agreeableness with respect to the Wrong he does, or has done us, yet there are
other Respects, and those more weighty, and of greater Concernment, in which a
likeness and similitude appear, and consequently a suitable Foundation for this
Love. For,

1. He is God's Creature, and so are we. 2. He is a Man, and so are we. 3. He
is a Neighbor still, nor does the Wrong he does us, deprive him of that
Relation. 4. May be he is a Christian too, and professes the same Faith, the
same God, the same Jesus, and the same Religion; all which Respects, make even
an Enemy an agreeable Object of our Love. Nay, his very Enmity does formally
dispose and qualify him for our Love; for the nature of Love is, That it is
not easily provoked, 1 Cor. xiii.5. And I need not tell you, that Men are not
provoked by Kindnesses, but by Injurious Acts; and these being the acts of an
Enemy, Love not being easily provoked by such acts, the Enemy must be a very
proper object of our Love.

But let us go on and consider,

II. The particular acts of this Love, or, whereby this Love is to be
expressed. And the first is,

1. Bless them that curse you. This is to give good Language for bad, kind
Answers for Revilings, praising the good that is in the Enemy, for his denying
that there is any in our selves, and gracious Wishes for his base and horrid
Imprecations. The Apostles did so, for being reviled, we bless; being defamed,
we entreat, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. iv.13. This looked great! What a lovely
excellent sight was this! How pleasing to God, how pleasing to Angels, how
pleasing to all rational and understanding Men! Do but take a serious view of
it, you your selves cannot but like it, approve of it, and commend it.

What harmony, what beauty, what sweetness, what evenness, what perfection must
there be in such a Soul! What a command over his Passions must we suppose in
such a Person! and can any thing look more stately and magnificent? And if
there be such beauty in it, why are not we enamored with it? Why should we
think much of it to cry, God bless you, when the Enemy cries, God damn you? Is
not the one as easily said as the other, and is there not far greater
satisfaction in the one than in the other? What if the brutish Man do curse us,
what hurt can his Cursing do us, while we do not answer him according to his
Folly? The Curse may fall on his own Head, but cannot singe a Hair of ours.

His ill Language, does it not look very odious in him, and does it change its
Face or Nature, if we use it by way of Retaliation? Can that be lovely in us,
which all Men take to be deformity in him? Does not the Enemy sin grievously
against God, when he does Revile or Curse us? And shall not we be concerned at
his Sin? How are we concerned, if we do not mourn for it? How do we mourn for
it, if we do not pity him? How do we pity him, if we do not endeavor to reform
him? How shall we reform him, except we show him a good Example? How can we
show him a good Example, if we do not let him see, that there is a better
Spirit in us? And how shall he be convinced of that, if we do not return soft
Answers for his rough and insolent ones, even Blessings for Curses? Such
Christian returns God blesses sometimes with Conversion of the Enemy, and
thinks himself concerned to reward the Self-denial with an extraordinary
Providence.

To this purpose Moschus tells us, That three Religious Men Traveling, and
losing their way, and thereupon belated, were forced to lie down on the Ground,
the Night coming on, and the Sky growing very dark. But so it happened, that
ignorantly they laid themselves down at the edge or corner of a Corn-field,
whereby they pressed a portion of Corn on the Ground. Early in the Morning the
Owner of the Field coming by, and seeing what was done, began to be in a
Passion, and cursed them bitterly, saying, You Religious Men? if you had had
the fear of God before you, you would not have done so. The innocent Men let
him run on, and then with all gentleness imaginable told him, Truly you say
right, if we had had the fear of God before us, we should never have done so.
The Man went on Cursing and Railing, and they still confessing their Faults,
and begging his Pardon, which at last so wrought upon the Choleric Man, that
he left his Oxen and his Fields, and gave himself up to God, and the Severities
of Religion.

2. Do good to them that hate you. This is to do acts of Beneficence to the
Enemy, to Cloathe him, to Feed him, to give him Drink, to Instruct him, to
Guide him, to Direct him, to Relieve him, to Assist him in his Necessities,
when he is in Want or Perplexity, or stands in need of our help. So did Christ
Jesus, for he healed the Ear of Malchus, who came out against him to apprehend
him, and what were all the Days of his Ministry among the Jews, but so many
Instances of doing good to his Enemies? even to those who called him all to
naught. So did the Apostles, so did the Primitive Believers. Their Enemies were
the Objects of their Tenderness, when they were Sick, or wanted their
Assistance, they watched with them, they visited them, they attended them, they
ran for them, they dressed their Sores, even then when they labored under the
Plague, and the Tokens of God's Anger.

The very Heathens saw, that this doing good for Evil was necessary to the
Perfection of Humane Nature, which made Phocion, when unjustly condemned by the
Athenians, being asked before his Death, whether he had any Command to his Son,
said, Go and tell him, that I charge him to forget the Injuries the Athenians
have done me.

But Instances of this Nature were very rare among the Heathens, and besides
their Principle was naught. But among the ancient Christians this was a very
common thing, and they strove to express their Religion by this Love. Eusebius
of Samosata, an Orthodox Bishop, dying of his Wound, which a furious Arrian
Woman had given him, by throwing a great Stone at his Head, made it his request
to the Magistrate of the Town, before he died, that the Woman might not suffer,
nor be any way molested for the Fact. Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, a Servant
of his having robbed him of a considerable Sum of Money, when that Servant
came afterward to be Sold for a Slave, the Bishop hearing of it, sent and had
him redeemed, and paid down the price of his Ransom. In a word, abundance of
such Instances there are in the Christian Church; and therefore Tertullian
makes this the proper Virtue of Christians, taught by no Religion in the World
besides. And if this be the Nature of our Religion, to do good to them that
hate us, how do we satisfy our selves without this Ornament of our Profession?
Why do we stand reasoning and disputing about the hardness of the thing, and do
not put our Hand to the Plough?

If this be our Religion, why are we loath to put it in practice? What! Do we
think it enough to be able to say, that there is such a Precept in the Pandects
of our Religion, in the Body of our Divinity, and take no farther Care? We take
our selves to be very much enlightened to what former Ages were, yet, for ought
we see, the Examples and Instances of doing Good for Evil, are not so frequent
now as they were in Ages laboring under greater darkness.

Our Chronicles tell us of Richard I. King of England, that when a Soldier, one
Gourdion, had purposely wounded him with an Arrow, of which he died soon after;
the Villain being taken Prisoner, the King sent for him, desirous to know the
reason of his barbarous Attempt, who very resolutely told him, that the reason
was, because the King had formerly killed his Father, and two of his Brothers,
which words so moved the King, that he not only pardoned and discharged him,
but ordered him a hundred Shillings. It was become a Proverb in Bishop
Cranmer's Time, That if a Man did do him a shrewd turn, he was sure to have
him for ever after for his Friend. And of St. Lewis the French King, we read,
that when a Woman had reviled and reproached him upon some acts of Government,
not very pleasing to the People, he commanded his Servants to carry her a
Reward, because she had given him an opportunity of exercising his Patience.

These Instances I mention, not to set off the Discourse, but to encourage you
to follow them. And let us but consider, which of the two is most likely to
afford Comfort upon a Deathbed, Revenge, or doing Good for Evil: I appeal to
the most Carnal Person here, whether he do not think the latter to be the most
reviving Cordial. A Cordial indeed! for this gives Confidence to the dying Man,
that God will do him good, for the Evil he has done against him, it being a
standing Rule, With what measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you again,
Luke vi.38.

3. Pray for them that persecute you, and despitefully use you. This is to
offer up our Supplications to God, our earnest Supplications, Desires, and
Repuests, that God would reform them, and pardon them, make them kind to us,
and turn their Hearts, and not lay their Sin to their Charge, but make it an
opportunity to Convert them, to bring them to a sense of their Duty, their
Danger, and the necessity of Holiness.

Thus our blessed Master prayed, Luke xxiii.34. Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do. Thus prayed St. Stephen, Acts vii.60. Lord lay not this
Sin to their Charge, and when he had said so, he fell asleep. Surely, this good
Man died in Charity. He gives a kiss of Peace to his Enemies, and with this
Olive-Leaf in her Mouth, his Soul flies away to Heaven.

Shall any of us, after all these Motives, be loath to pray for his Enemies?
Shall we plead, that such a Man's Malice, and Spite, and Affronts, and the
Injuries he has done us are so full of Venom, and carry those Aggravations
with them, that they are not to be put up. Are they greater than those which
were offered to Christ Jesus, or the Proto-Martyr? The greatest Injury that can
be done to a Man is, taking away his Life, for Skin for Skin, and all that a
Man has, he gives for his Life. Yet see, how thy Savior prayed for his
Crucifiers, for Men that did not only rob him of the comforts of Life, but put
him to the most painful, and most ignominious Death. St. Stephen all bruised
and torn with Stones, Streams of Blood running down from his Head and Face,
faint and languishing, and ready to expire, makes yet a shift to get upon his
Knees, and to pray for his Murderers.

Such Prayers God gives solemn Audience to, and blesses with Miracles of Mercy,
and the Enemies remembered in such Prayers receive considerable benefit. That
three Thousand Souls were Converted and pricked at the Heart by St. Peter's
Sermon, is justly believed to have been the effect of Christ's Prayer for his
Enemies. And the Father's generally tell us, that St. Stephen's Prayer was the
cause that St. Paul was Converted from a Persecuter, from a Blasphemer, to the
Faith, to Holiness, and to be a Preacher of that Doctrine, which before he
persecuted from City to City, and was exceeding mad against.

Such force have these Prayers for our Enemies, especially if coming from the
Heart: Nor must we content our selves with Prayers for our Enemies in general;
but Intercessions and Groans unutterable must be particularly for that Enemy,
that Man or Woman who has persecuted and despitefully used us, loaded us with
the blackest Calumnies, and offered the greatest violence to our Persons. These
must be named and specified in our Prayers, both Public and Private, and for
the Person who has been Injurious to us, our Supplications must be put up, not
only once and twice, but often, and importunately, and for ought we know, he
that went out from us an Enemy, may come home a Friend, a Friend to God and to
Religion, a Friend to our Persons and Concerns, a Friend to all that call on
the Name of the Lord Jesus.

And having thus represented to you the Commands of your Master, I may justly
expect, you should all with one Heart, and with one Voice, say as the
Israelites at the hearing of the Conditions of the Covenant, All that the Lord
our God has said, we will do. If this be not the effect, remember you go home
Enemies of God, and of Christ Jesus. There is no medium, you must either be
God's Friends, or his Enemies. If you are Friends, you will stick at nothing he
Commands you. Christ himself says so, Joh. xv.14. If his Commands be nauseous,
or grievous, or a burden to you, most certainly you love him not, and
therefore are not his Friends; and if not his Friends, what remains, but being
his Enemies; and can you sit down quietly under such a fearful Character,
especially when you read, and consider what you read, Luke xix.27. As for those
mine Enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither,
and slay them before me.

But how is all this to be done? We live in an Age wherein Men do scarce love
their Friends, much less their Enemies. Such Lovers are very rare, very few
Examples appear, and what encouragement is there to venture upon a Duty so
unpleasing, so distasteful to Flesh and Blood? However, the Duty looks fair and
lovely, and Reason says, it is a Perfection which deserves our Ambition and
Endeavor.

But how is this excellent Temper to be attained?

Why! easily enough, if you are not averse from wholesome Counsel; if besides
the tempting Reward that is before you, you are willing to be governed by the
following Directions.

1. Represent not an Enemy to your selves in those black Characters you usually
do. There are fairer and finer Colors in which he may be drawn, and make use
of these.

1. When ever a Person does you an Injury; look higher and believe, and
persuade your selves, the Almighty sent him, and Providence ordered it; and an
All seeing God had a hand in it. David did so when Shimei cursed him, and it
quieted him. He looked off from Shimei and saw God in the Calumny, not as the
Author of it, but as one that made use of it. He regarded Shimei as God's
Executioner, as the Instrument of his Displeasure, and the Rod of his Anger;
and what a Calm did this Consideration produce in his Soul, while Abishai's
Fingers itch'd to take off his Head.

2. Look upon the Enemy as thy Physician. He is intended to bring Salvation to
thy House. He is sent to cure thy Soul, and it will certainly appear and prove
so, if thou make his Wrongs and Malice an opportunity to reflect upon the
Wrongs and Injuries done to thy God, and repentest of them, and make thy
Peace with him. The Enemy is a preacher of Patience, a teacher of Submission, a
Schoolmaster that is to instruct thee in the Art of Humility, and resisting
Temptations. If thou improve his Snarlings and rude Assaults, make them
occasions and incentives to Prayer, to do good to his Soul and Body, thy Soul
will thrive, and thy Spirit grow healthy, and his Injuries will become Gems,
and Jewels, and Precious Stones, as that Holy Man said, whereby the Foe pelts
and drives thy Soul to Heaven.

3. Look upon the Enemy as blind, blind with Rage, and Fury, and Envy, and
Malice; and this will incline thy Heart to pity him. Who does not commiserate a
blind Man? And which is the greater blindness, Corporal or Spiritual? The poor
Wretch sees not how sweet and how gracious the Lord is, nor what the hope of
his Calling is, nor what the Riches of his Grace are. He has no sense of the
height, and breadth, and depth, and length of the Love of Jesus Christ. He sees
not the mighty Obligations that lie upon him to Love his Neighbor as himself,
and therefore he is Blind, and and if Blind he is miserable, and if miserable
will you add Misery to Misery, and hate him who is already in a deplorable
Condition. Nay, if he be miserable, does not he deserve your Prayers, your
Alms, and your Charity?

4. May be his Nature is not changed, he is not Converted, knows nothing of
Regeneration, nothing of the Sanctifying Grace of God, and will thou be angry
with him for acting according to his Nature? Why art not thou angry with the
Fire for barning the Stuff that is thrown into it? An unconverted Man acts
according to his Temper, and Interest, and Passion, according to his Nature, as
much as the Sun, and Rain, and Wind. These move not thine Anger, or thy Rage,
let them blow, and scorch, and wet, and why should the others acting according
to his Nature, stir up thy Wrath and Indignation?

2. There is a Promise, and a Promise which if believed, and relied upon, will
very much animate and encourage us to these acts of Love. It is, Prove. xvi.7.
If a Man's ways please the Lord, he will make his very Enemies to be at Peace
with him, we have no more to do but still to be followers of that which is
good, and God will turn and wind things for our advantage, and make an
alteration even in the Hearts of our Enemies, as great as we see in Esau, who
before had threatened Jacob with Death, and on a sudden by a secret invisible
Hand is forced to fall into his Brother's Embraces, and though this may not
always happen, yet the Promise will certainly be fulfilled in something greater
and better than is hinted in the letter.

3. Oblige your selves to this Love in the Holy Sacrament of Christ's Supper,
the fittest Time and Place to engage your selves to this Work. Though before we
come to this Ordinance, our endeavors must be strong and vigorous after the
Qualifications of the Text; yet the Sacrament of the Eucharist is both an
excellent Motive, and a very considerable help to fix and establish this Love
to our Enemies. Talk what you will, it is not Philosophy, nor conversing with
Men of this Age, nor being at Court, nor seeing Fashions, that will make you
Masters of this Love. No, the School of the Cross teaches this Self-denial, and
the Sacrament is that School. There a Crucified Savior, dying for his Enemies
is seen; and what were all his Prayers, and Tears, and Agonies, but kindnesses
to Enemies. These we contemplate in this Ordinance, at least, they come to very
little purpose that approach not with this Consideration. Here, to see his Love
and Charity spread and diffuse it self with all the acts of Love my Text speaks
of, and to believe all this must needs help to melt the Heart, and make us
willing to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to
pray for them which despitefully use us.

Let the Soul walk about the Cross and think. Behold the Son of God whom I have
promised to follow, and to imitate, even he who bleeds on the Cross, he blessed
me that had cursed him, did good to me that had hated him, and prayed for me
that had despitefully used him. If I am not like him, how shall I be washed
with his Blood! The Language of the Gospel is, that I must be conformable to
his Image, and changed into it, and tread in his Steps, if I mean to be
partaker of his Merits; and shall not I consider the importance of this Truth,
and contrive that the same Mind may be in me, which was also in Christ Jesus!

Thy Death, sweet Jesu, must do it. Thy Death must kill my Hatred and my Rages.
Thy Love must burn that dross away, and whenever my unruly Passions rise
against my Enemy, I Will t^row the whole weight of thy Love upon them, that they
may be crushed to Death, and expire.

I conclude with a Passage of St. John, and the rather, because he was the
great Preacher of this Love, and St. Jerome takes notice, that when he was very
old, and his Disciples came to visit him, still he would say, My little
Children love one another, and being asked, why he did repeat this so often, he
said, This is all, Love one another, as you ought to do, it is enough, you need
no more. I conclude, I say, with 1 John ii.9, 10, 11. He that says he is in
the Light, and hates his Brother is in Darkness, even until now. He that loves
his Brother, abides in the Light, and there is none occasion of Stumbling in
him. But he that hates his Brother is in Darkness, and walks in Darkness,
and knows not whither he goes, because that Darkness has blinded his Eyes.

SERMON XXXVI.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 45. That ye may be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven; for he makes the Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and
sends Rain on the Just and Unjust.


OUR Savior having in the two foregoing Verses endeavored to rectify the
wilful Mistakes of Men, the Jews especially, about loving their Neighbors, and
hating their Enemies, confuted their false Maxims and Notions, established a
standing Law among his Followers, and charged them, as they hoped for the
everlasting Kingdom he promised and proclaimed, to love their Enemies, to bless
them that curse them, to do good to them that hate them, etc. He lays down some
Motives and Arguments in the Text, which he thought would prevail with rational
and considerate Men, and such who had a serious sense of God and another Life,
prevail, I mean, if seriously thought of, and considered, and pondered in the
Heart.

It Is thinking that puts Men upon Action, and we see with what violence and
vehemence Men fall to work, if they apprehend in it something that is
profitable, or pleasant, or preservative from Evil; and indeed, in in so great
a work as loving our Enemies, and doing good to them that hate us, a work so
contrary to corrupt Nature, and the received Customs of Men, the motives must
not be surveyed slightly or superficially, but so regarded, that no Objection,
no Temptation of Flesh and Blood may stop or hinder the Votary from doing so;
Carnal Men may fancy, that no Motive can be strong enough to effect it; but if
it were so, our blessed Master would have been under a great Mistake, which is
impossible, yea, let God be true, and every Man a Liar. He knew they would
prevail, and no doubt they will prevail with Men who are ambitious of things
unseen, ambitious of the invisible future Glory, ambitious of being Children of
their Father which is in Heaven; for so we read, That you may be Children of
your Father which is in Heaven, for he lets the Sun rise upon the Evil and the
Good, and sends Rain upon the Just and Unjust.

Concerning the Phrases and Expressions of the Text, I have only this to
observe, That for (...) Children, some ancient Copies read (...), like your
Father which is in Heaven, which, it is probable, was at first only a Marginal
Note, and was afterward by the Transcribers put into the Text. However, the
sense is the same, and to be Children is to be like our Father which is in
Heaven.

In Heaven, not that he is confined to that place, for he is not far from every
one of us, Act. xvii.27. and The Heaven, even the Heaven of Heavens, cannot
contain thee, says Solomon, 1 Kings viii.27. And, whither shall I go from thy
Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy Presence? If I ascend into Heaven thou
art there; if I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there; if I take the Wings
of the Morning and dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea, even there shall
thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me, says David, Psalm.
cxxxix.7, 8, 9. yet he is in Heaven, because there is his Court, his Palace,
his Throne where he manifests himself in a most signal manner, and his Power,
Goodness, Mercy, Influences, are felt and dispensed there infinitely beyond
what is known here on Earth.

This is all I think necessary to observe concerning the Expressions used here.
The more material things may be resolved into these following Propositions.

I. Men are made Children of God, not born so.

II. The great design of the Gospel is to make us like God, like our Father,
which is in Heaven.

III. The greatness and vastness of God's Bounty is to be seen in his letting
the Sun rise upon the Evil and the Good, and sending Rain upon the Just and
Unjust.

I. Men are not born Children of God, but made so.

That you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, which shows,
there is something to be done, that they may become God's Children, and come
into the World with that Privilege. Indeed, if we consider God as the Original
Cause of all things, as in him we all live, and move, and have our being, and
as of one Blood he has made all Nations of Men, in that respect, he is the
Father of us all, and all are his Children, and born so. But I do not take the
Expression in that Lax signification here, but in a stricter sense; for
Children which God not only creates, but loves, whom he delights in as well as
give Reason and Understanding to, whose Names he writes in Heaven, and for whom
he designs the Everlasting Inheritance, whom he adopts in Christ Jesus, and
treats as his Friends and Favorites, and who are dear as well as related to
him; and to be sure Men are not born such Children, no more than a curious
Picture is the Product of the Garden or the Field.

Man is born like a wild Asses Colt, says Job xi.12. and according to the
Doctrine of our Church we are born in Sin, as David professes of himself, Psalm.
li.5. and are by Nature Children of Wrath, Ephesians. ii.2. and if either a new
Principle be not put into us, or that Principle be not improved, we become
Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. v.9. and Children of the Devil, 1 John iii.10.
Cursed Children, 2 Pet. ii.14. Strange Children, Hos. v.7. Foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in Envy and
Malice, hateful and hating one another. But after that the kindness of God our
Savior appears, not by preceding Works of Righteousness, which we have done or
which deserve it, but according to his Mercy he saves us by the washing of
Regeneration, and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost which he sheds on us
through our Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, Tit. iii.3, 4, 5. And thus we
become the Children of God. Baptism prepares us, the Word of God convinces us,
the Holy Ghost changes us, the Merits of Christ Jesus recommend us, our good
Works testify of us, the Grace of God accepts of us, and at last Heaven
receives us, and this is to be born of God, 1 John iii.9. or to be born from
above, John iii.3. or rather to be born again, and that not of corruptible, but
of incorruptible Seed, 1 Pet. i.23. So that there is a great deal more required
to make a Person a Child of God, than bare Nature or natural Gifts. Here Grace
is the chief Ingredient, even Grace scowring the Heart with supernatural
Motions, or with motions of Love, Grace manifested not only in Discourses, and
Speeches, and Answers, but Works and Actions, Divine and Spiritual, and
Edifying, and in the Eye of the World unreasonable, and contrary to the Rules
of good Manners.

From all which it clearly appears, that the Nature and Honor of a Child of
God does not depend upon the Ranks and Qualities of Men or outward Respects and
Privileges. No, the poorest Man is capable of it, as much as he that does
cloth himself with Purple; and he that feeds upon the Crumbs that fall from
Dives's Table may be a Child of God, as well as the greatest Prince, for God is
no respecter of Persons. And whoever believes in him, as he has revealed
himself in Christ Jesus, Honors, Respects, and Loves, Obeys, and Trusts, and
delights in him, as a good-natured Child is his Child, though with the Infant
Savior he should be forced to lie in a Manger, though his Bed were Straw, and
his Attendants Mules, and Horses, and Cows, and Oxen, and such homely Animals.

If ever any thing deserved our Care and Industry, and seeking and looking
after this, being a Child, or Children of God, deserves it. Indeed, an ordinary
diligence will yet procure this Privilege. There is the same earnestness
requisite here, which Solomon requires in getting Spiritual Wisdom, Prove. ii.3.
If thou cryest after it, and liftest up thy voice for it, if thou seek it as
Silver, and searchest after it, as for hid Treasures, the Gate of Mercy will
fly open, and God will admit you into the glorious Liberty of his Children, and
if Children then Heirs, Heirs of Heaven, and Coheirs with Christ, and all
things must work together for your good.

The right to Honor and Privilege, and title of a Child of God, is the
foundation of the greatest Joy, and a true sense of it does a Man more good
upon a Deathbed, than all the Drugs and Medicines which either India or Arabia
yield. It comforts and supports in Tribulation, in Anguish, in Persecutions, in
Crosses outward and inward, in Poverty, in Reproaches, in Contempt. It is an
Argument of God's infinite condescension, and gives the Soul a prospect of the
future Glory, and of her share in it, that let come what will she can stand
like a Rock at Sea, undaunted, undisturbed, unshaken, firm, and joyful, and
taking a view of the Port and Harbor of Life and Immortality. For behold what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God, therefore the World knows us not, because it knew him not.
Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be, but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, says St.
John, 1 John iii.12.

But then it is impossible to be like him hereafter, except we endeavor to be
like him here; and to make us so, is the great design of our Religion; which
brings in the

II. Proposition. That the great design of our Religion is to make us like God,
or like our Father which is in Heaven. That you may be the Children of your
Father, or like your Father, as some old Copies read it.

I know there have been various vain Pretenses of Men, of the Stoics of old
particularly, who boasted of their Philosophy, that it was able to make Men
like the Deity in Perfection; nay, their Vanity went so high, that they gloried
not only of their Wise Man's likeness, but equality with the Supreme Being; and
they were of Opinion, that their Wise Man might be as perfect as God Almighty,
and was not beholding to him that sits in Heaven for his Virtue. In a word,
Jupiter and their Wise Man were Fellows, and he enjoyed an equal right with him
who is over all. But what the Apostle says of the Heathen Sages in general,
Romans i.21. may be applied to the Stoics in particular; Because when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, they became vain in
their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkened, professing themselves
to be wise, they became Fools. So far were their Principles from making Men
equal with God, that they were not able to make them tolerably like him; and
all their Boastings and fantastic Conceits were mere Bubbles, which broke and
vanished with their own emptiness.

We have known Tyrannical Princes affect a likeness too; I mean a likeness to
God Almighty; particularly Nebuchadnezzar, of whom we read, Es. xiv.13, 14.
that He said in his Heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne
above the Stars of God. I will sit also upon the Mount of the Congregation, in
the sides of the North. I will ascend above the heights of the Clouds. I will
be like the most High. And to this purpose, Daniel told Belshazzar his Son, or
Grandson, Dan. v.19. God gave thy Father Nebuchadnezzar such Majesty, that
before him, as before a God, all People, Nations, and Languages trembled, and
feared, and like a God, whom he would be slew, and whom he would be kept alive,
whom he would be set up, and whom he would be put down: But these are nothing
but insolent Affectations of the Divine Grandeur, Follies, which Prosperous and
Tyrannical Princes are apt to fall into, through the Flatteries of their Slaves
and Parasites; a likeness this, which our Religion has nothing to do with.

There has been a Succession of Men for many Ages in the City built on seven
Hills, mere Cheats, and Fourbes, and Impostors, who have pretended such another
likeness; and that they have Power like God to root out and to pull down, to
destroy and to throw down, to build and to plant, as it is said, Jer. i.10. a
mere effect of intolerable Pride and Haughtiness, and the proper Character of
the Man of Sin, spoken of 2 Thessalonians. ii.3, 4. who exalts himself above all that
is called God, i. e. above all Kings and Emperors, so that he as God sits in
the Temple of God, showing himself, that he is God; a likeness this, than which
nothing is more contrary to the Rules of the Gospel and our Religion. Indeed,
there are few Sinners but what pretend a likeness and imitation of God; for
like God, they will take Vengeance on those who affront them, nay, rather than
there should be no likeness betwixt God and them, they will make God like
themselves, false to his Word, and who threatens without any intent to punish.
These things have thou done, says God, and I kept silence, and thou thought
that I was altogether such a one as thy self, Psalm. l.21.

I omit here the Gibberish and fantastic Conceits of Enthusiasts, and
Quietists, the Disciples of Jacob Behmen and Molinos, and the Indian Joquies,
who talk of such a likeness, that they pretend to be Deify'd and Absorbed by
the Divine Essence.

Such a likeness our Gospel does not teach, nor is this the intent of that
excellent Dispensation. The likeness our Religion aims at is contempt of the
Riches, Pomp, and Glory of the World, the very thing we promise in our Baptism,
and afterward think of no more: Admiring the Glory of Heaven, and of Holiness
above the outward Gaieties; Contempt of sinful Pleasures, hatred of Sin, even
of the least, and of the very appearances of Evil, Humility, and Goodness, and
Patience, and Mercy, and Charity, and doing good, and being kind even to our
Enemies.

To make us like God, like our Father which is in Heaven, in these Particulars,
is the true design of our Religion: Nor is this only an Essay, an Attempt, or
empty wish, but it really and actually effects all this in honest and well
disposed Minds, and to compass it,

1. Proposes to us an admirable Pattern, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who took
our Nature upon him, and did all this to let us see, that Men who are his
Followers, may arrive to this excellent Temper, and to these charming
Qualifications. And to encourage us to it,

2. It sets before us very excellent Examples, even those of the Holy Apostles
and Primitive Believers, who practiced all this through Christ that
strengthened them, and did it willingly, heartily, cheerfully.

3. It promises extraordinary Assistances, Helps, and Influences from above, to
enable us to arrive to this Likeness; Assistances, which may be had upon Groans
unutterable, and strong Cries, and importunate Solicitations.

4. It displays in lively Colors the eternal Reward, and Bliss, and
Recompense, which shall fall to the share of all those who heartily imitate
their Father in Heaven, in the aforesaid Particulars.

So that here you see your Task, as you are Christians, the Work you are called
to, even to be like your Father which is in Heaven.

We see how fond and ambitious Courtiers are to be like their Kings; nay, we
have known and seen, and read of some that have imitated their Princes, even to
ridiculousness, in their Lameness and Defects, and Thousands do in their Sins
and Vices. Nay, the Examples of Princes we see can make Men Good as well as
Vicious. You Will say, so would God's Example, if he could be seen, but he being
invisible, it works not. But though God be invisible, the effects of his
Providence are not; we see wicked Men, who are God's Enemies, they are not
destroyed, they live, and prosper, and Waters of a full Cup are wrung out to
them, which as it could not come to pass without God's Order and Providence, so
his Patience, Long-suffering, Meekness, Mercy, Charity, and Kindness even to
Enemies, is manifest in these Instances. Shall we call our selves Children of
this great King, and do nothing that is truly like our Father which is in
Heaven? It Is a wonderful mistake to think, that all our Religion is only to
make us just and honest in our Callings and Dealings, or to help us to abstain
from some grosser Vices. If this were all, what need was there of the
Incarnation of the Son of God? what need of all the cost and charges of
Miracles, and the visible descent of the Holy Ghost? what need of all the
mighty Manifestations of God we see, and read of, and pretend to believe?

No doubt, it is intended to make you greater Men than Heathens and Infidels,
greater, I mean, in Goodness. And if it does not, most certainly, you are
strangers to the Powers of it, and you have not yet learned the Truth as it is
in Jesus, you are got no farther yet than the Rudiments of it, and, like Oil,
it is not entered yet into your Bowels. It is not only to make you obedient to
Humane Laws, but to elevate your Souls above the ordinary level, that you may
by your Lives transcend those Laws, and do more than those Laws require.

We see the Vanity of Princes who affect the Title of Grand or Great. Why, your
Religion will make you truly so, if you take Courage to live up to the Holy
Rules of it, greater than all the mighty Conquerors, who while they have
conquered Cities, have continued Slaves to their Lusts and Passions.

Behold here is a just Object of your Ambition. What is greater than God? What
greater than your Father which is in Heaven? And in imitating him in the
Qualifications aforesaid, you will arrive to a Greatness Divine and Godlike, and
which will entitle you to the lofty Names Christ gives to them who follow him
in the Regeneration: For he makes them Kings and Priests to God and his Father,
Rev. i.6. And there is nothing can make us greater than being like him in
kindness, even to the unthankful, and to the Evil; for he makes his Sun rise on
the Evil and the Good, which leads me to the third Proposition.

III. Prop. The greatness and vastness of God's Bounty is to be seen in making
his Sun shine upon the Evil and the Good; and sending his Rain upon the Just
and Unjust. A Bounty infinite like himself, and not to be looked upon but with
admiration; and that

1. Upon the account of the Insolences of the Wicked, and Bad, and Unjust. To
see how God is affronted daily by Oaths, by Curses, by Blasphemies, by
Lewdness, by Perjuries, by Profaneness, Atheism, Hypocrisy, and by Sins, which
a good Man can scarce name without trembling; yet on these Wretches, whom, by
right, Hellfire should devour, his Sun does shine, and his Rain drops down.
His Sun warms them and revives them. His Rain enriches their Pastures. Instead
of Sunshine, he might bury them in Darkness; and instead of Rain to water their
Grounds, he might rain on them Fire and Brimstone, and a burning Tempest, even
the portion of the Sinners Cup.

It Is true, he will do all this at last, when the measure of their Impenitence
is fulfilled; but for the present his Light smiles upon them, and his Heaven
distills gentle Showers, to make their Land fruitful, and does not this show the
vastness of his Bounty?

2. Upon the account of his Power, it were as easy. Without all peradventure,
it were as easy to him to withold his Sun and Rain from the wicked, as it
was to enlighten the Land of Goshen, while the Egyptians were frighted with
thick Darkness; or as it was to dry up the Read-Sea for the Israelites, while
Pharaoh and his Host were drowned in the Waters; or as it was to keep the
Flames of the Furnace from burning the three Young Men in Daniel, those very
Flames which consumed the other Men, who were thrown into the Oven. But his
Mercy prevails above his Power, and that shows the greatness of it.

We must suppose God has some farther design in these Providence, than merely
to discover the profuseness of his Bounty.

1. One reason is to engage them to love him who is so kind to them. Love is so
natural, so rational a return for kindnesses, that all who are Munificent to
others do expect it; And how easy a matter were it, even for a wicked Man, who
is not irrecoverably stupid, to reflect when he lies basking in the Sun, or
lets in the splendour of that glorious Planet into his Rooms or Sees, how it
makes his Trees, and Plants, and Flowers grow, and how it gilds his Gardens and
his Fields; how easy, I say, were it for him to reflect, Whence comes this
Sunshine, do not these Rays descend from the Father of Lights, whose ways I
have derided, whose Words and Ordinances I have despised, and whose Precepts I
have laughed at? What Ingratitude is this? Would I use a Friend so? And what?
put these Indignities upon my best and greatest Friend? See how his love to me
shines in that glorious Sun, and shall I return hatred for his Love? The like
Reflections might easily be made upon the Blessing of the Rain. But I proceed:

2. It is to lead them to Repentance. The Sun which comforts the Evil Man, his
Body and his Grounds, is to put him in mind of his Duty, to warm his Soul with
serious Considerations, till they melt his Heart into Remorse and Compunction.
And the Rain, even the former and the latter Rain, is a Remembrancer, and
points at the shower of Tears he is to weep for his Sins and Offenses. So that
the Sun and Rain are Schoolmasters to lead him to Love and Repentance; and
that these are the Ends God has in these Dispensations, is evident from, Hos.
ii.8. Acts xiv.15, 16, 17. Acts xvii.27. And oh! that such of you as have
hitherto been careless Observers of these Ends, would be persuaded to make this
Rain and Sunshine the Ladder for your Thoughts to rise, and your Meditations
to ascend, and contemplate the infinite Goodness of God, who vouchsafes this
Sun and Rain; and in doing so, presents you with a powerful Motive to offer him
your reasonable Service, that the Sun of Righteousness may shine upon you with
healing under his Wings; and his warmer Mercies may come down upon you as
Showers upon the mown Grass.

As common as these Blessings are, they do not come by chance, but are Gifts of
the great Sovereign of the World; and if they be Gifts, the least they deserve
is acknowledgement; and how do we acknowledge them if we dishonor God by our
Sins? But this is not all; besides these, God has other Ends in vouchsafing
his Rain and Sunshine, even to the worst of Men, Ends in which the Pious, the
Serious, the Religious are particularly concerned. And,

1. It concerns us to admire the infinite Patience of God; his Patience to the
Stubborn and Obstinate, and his Kindness and Charity to them. Not only to see
and take notice of God in the Providence, but to extol his Munificence, to
praise, to adore, to magnify his universal Compassion, and to speak of his
wonderful Works, to sing of his Mercy, and to use this very Instance of Sun and
Rain, as an argument to unconverted Sinners, to persuade them to a
conscientious walking with God. Indeed, here is a large Field for our thoughts
to expatiate in, and to make useful Remarks on his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness.

2. It concerns us to imitate the Patience, and Kindness, and Charity of that
God, who makes his Sun rise upon the Good and Bad, and sends Rain upon the Just
and Unjust. This is the principal drift and design of our Savior in giving
these Instances, and it is to furnish us with Antidotes against Passion, and
Revenge, and Hatred, and Malice, and Uncharitableness, when we apprehend our
selves Wronged, or Injured, or unkindly dealt with; I say, it is to furnish us
with Antidotes against Passion and Revenge from the most obvious and familiar
Objects and Occurrences: So that whenever you are provoked to uncharitable
Thoughts, and to a strange Behavior to those who have wronged you, you need go
no farther than the Sun that shines upon your Heads, and the Rain you see
distill from the Clouds. Think this Sun shines upon the greatest of God's
Enemies, and does good to their Fields and Persons, and shall I feel no Warmth,
no Fire, no Flames of Compassion to my Adversary? The Rain that falls here is
God's Rain, and the Man that Curses him to his Face participates of the
Benefits of it; and shall I be in a Rage against the Man who has affronted me,
and withdraw my Charity from him? God does not, and why should I?

3. It concerns us seriously to reflect on what God designs to do for his dear
Children hereafter, and from the Blessings he bestows on the wicked here, to
argue what Treasures are laid up for Men of a better Temper. If God be so kind
to his very Enemies, what will he be to his Friends? If those that hate him
enjoy so much of his Bounty, what may those look for who love him? If his
Goodness be so great to his Foes, how great must be his kindness to his
Favorites?

Great indeed! How excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord, toward them that
fear thee, and put their trust in thee before the Sons of Men! They shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House, and thou shall make them
drink of the Rivers of thy pleasure! for with thee is the Fountain of Life, and
in thy Light we shall see Light.

This must needs be a very comfortable Consideration to all that by patient
continuance in Well-doing seek for Glory, Honor, and Immortality. Rain and
Sunshine, and the common Blessings of this Life, are not the proper Rewards God
intends you. These are Mercies designed chiefly for his Slaves and meaner
Servants. They are greater, richer, and nobler Blessings that are appointed for
his Friends and Children. Eye has not seen, and Ear has not heard, and Heart
cannot conceive what God has prepared for them that love him. Grieve not ye in
whom the fruits of the Spirit do appear, that God does not give you the
Blessings of his Left Hand, the Blessings of Men who have their portion in this
Life. If he should put you off with these, you would be miserable. The Joys
above, the triumphs of Paradise, the felicity of Angels, the festivals of
Heaven, the eternal Enjoyments of God, the everlasting rest, the endless
beatitude in your Father's House. These are the Portions of his Children. This
World indeed is inhabited by his Friends, but the greater part of those who
dwell in the Earth are his Enemies. Among these good Men live as Strangers and
Pilgrims, but they are higher, larger, and loftier Mansions, that are prepared
for them, and when their Earthly House of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved,
there will fall to their share a building of God, a House not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

SERMON XXXVII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 46, 47. For if you love them which love you, what
Reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye salute your
Brethren only, what do you more than others? Do not even the Publicans so?


LAws are best understood by the Preamble, because that gives an account of the
occasion, to these Words, by the preceding. Among the Rules of Holy Living,
prescribed by our Savior to his Disciples in this Chapter, that of loving our
Enemies, blessing them that curse us, and doing good to them that hate us, and
praying for them which despitefully use us, is most remarkable.

He was sensible Flesh and Blood would raise Objections against this Duty, and
therefore he backs it with Arguments great and powerful, to let us see how
equitable and reasonable it is.

In the preceding Verse he sets before us the Example of God, who receives
greater Affronts and Injuries, and Abuses from sinful Men, than one Man can
possible receive from another. And yet as ill as that Supreme Being is used, he
lets his Sun rise upon the Evil and the Good, and sends Rain upon the Just and
Unjust. The next Motive is taken from the nature of the Christian Discipline,
which transcends all other Religions in the World, and whose very design it is
to raise Men above the common level of Nature and Education; and consequently
requires greater degrees of Love and Goodness to Men, than natural Men,
Heathens, and Sinners, and Publicans usually pay; for if ye love them which
love you, what Reward have ye, do not even the Publicans the same; and if ye
salute your Brethren only, what do ye more than others, do not even the
Publicans so?

The Publicans here mentioned were Persons that sat at the receipt of Custom,
or received the Customs due to the Roman Emperors in Palestinae, from
Commodities Imported or Exported. Such a one was Matthew the Writer of this
Gospel, Matthew. ix.9. and Zachaeus, Luke xix.2. i. e. before they were
Converted; for though Tertullian will not allow, that any Jews were
Custom-House Men, or would suffer themselves to be employed in the receipt of
Customs, yet that in this Point he is under a very great Mistake, is evident
from the Examples of Matthew and Zacchaeus, who were both Jews, and of the
Stock of Abraham, Mar. ii.14. Luke xix.9.

It Is possible there might not be so many Jews of that Profession, as there
were Greeks or Romans, yet that even the Jews did sometimes court and accept of
these Employments, and personally discharged them, what has been alleged is as
good as Demonstration.

These Publicans were properly Gatherers or Receivers of the Customs, or a kind
of Under-farmers. For the Roman Government, under which the Jews at this Time
were, used to let the Customs of the several Countries under their Dominion to
Farm, or to be farmed by the Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of Rome. These
undertook to pay the Government a certain Sum for the Customs of such a
Country. And these Farmers had Officers under them, who either farmed the
Customs of them again, or were at the trouble of Gathering and Receiving them;
whereby they had great Opportunities, and were under very great Temptations to
Cheat and Exact upon the Merchants and others they had to deal with; and such
were the Publicans in the Text. And therefore they were commonly looked upon as
Extortioners, Unjust, Unrighteous, and Oppressors; and among the Jews
particularly they had so ill a name, that they were called Sinners by way of
eminency; and a Heathen and a Publican were with them convertible Terms. Nay,
the Pharisees seemed to exclude them from all hopes of Salvation, which was one
great reason, I suppose, why many of them, I mean of these Publicans, did so
readily close and join with Christ, when he preached to them Repentance, and
offered them the Kingdom of Heaven.

But though they were guilty of great Oppression and Extortion, and false
Accusation, and lived by it, and by that means lay exposed to other Vices, as
one Sin seldom goes alone; yet they were not so bad (those who were Jews
especially) as to neglect the common Duties of Religion, or the ordinary
Offices of Civility and Humanity, which makes our Savior say and affirm, that
they loved those who were loving and friendly to them, and saluted those who
were their Brethren and Acquaintance, and were civil to Men of their own
Religion.

This being premised, the Observations the Text affords, may be reduced to
these three Propositions.

I. Even wicked Men do and may perform the common Duties of Religion and
Morality.

II. Those who would be Christians indeed, must do more than Carnal Men in
Matters of Religion and Morality.

III. If they do not, they have no Reward.

I begin with the first, which imports, that even wicked Men do, and may
perform the common Duties of Religion and Morality, a truth plainly intimated
in the Text, for the Publicans were Men wicked and scandalous, who got their
Livelihood by Cheating, Lying, Defrauding, False-accusation, etc. It Is true,
there lay no necessity upon them to do so; for St. John the Baptist told some
of them who came to him for Advice, that they might continue in their Calling,
provided they would exact no more than was appointed them, Luke iii.13. But
greediness after Gain, and a desire to be Rich, temptted them to these Infamous
Sins. Notwithstanding all this, they were Loving, and Civil, and Kind, and
Courteous, to those who were so to them, and without all peradventure went into
the Temple, and joined with the Congregation; for so we read, Luke xviii.10.
And they asked their Neighbors, how they did, which is called saluting their
Brethren.

And indeed, our own Experience is sufficient witness of the truth of this
Observation: A Man who gives himself to Drinking, we see often is very Just in
his Dealings, and would not wrong a Child; another who is Choleric and
Passionate, a slave to Wrath and Anger when provoked, shall be very Charitable;
another that, may be, lives in Fornication and Uncleanness, shall be ready to
do kind Offices to Relations and others; and he who Cheats and Defrauds Men,
whether in Trade or otherwise, goes to Church, and says his Prayers, and may be
will venture upon the tremendous Ordinance of the Eucharist; and a very
debauched Person is very often very punctual to his Word, and true to his
Promises; all which is agreeable to what we read in Scripture; Ahab, as wicked
as he was, yet hearing Elijah's threatening, he rent his Clothes, and put
Sackcloth upon his Flesh, and Fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went
softly, 1 Kings xxi.27. The Jews, Jer. vii.9, 10. they Stole, they Murdered,
they committed Adultery, they Swore falsely, and burnt Incense to Baal, yet came
very orderly, and stood, and prayed before the Lord in the Temple, and were
very Zealous for the Church and Temple. Herod was a Person wicked, with a
witness; yet when John the Baptist reproved him, he did many things, observed,
and feared the Good Man, and had a very great Veneration for him; nay, and made
Conscience of his Oath, a sinful one, it is true, yet an Oath, Mark vi.20, 26.

Indeed, one would wonder how Vice and Virtue should lodge together in one
Breast, the rather because St. James says, Chap. iii.9. Can a Fountain at the
same place send forth bitter Water and sweet? yet we see nothing is more
common, and as the Samaritans, 2 Kings xvii.33. They feared the Lord, and
served their own Gods; so most wicked Men serve both God and the Devil, are
Votaries to the Prince of Darkness, and yet are willing to do something in
Religion and Morality; and the reasons of it are briefly these.

1. Conviction. Abundance of such Men are convinced, that Religion is
necessary, and that they are not safe without something of it. Whether it be,
that they think that little Devotion they have, will, like a Spell, keep the
Devil from hurting them; or whether they hope, that by that little sprinkling
of Morality, they shall compensate God, and make him amends for the Sins they
allow themselves; something of it they think is necessary. For though they make
a shift to stop the mouth of Conscience, yet, like an importunate Creditor, it
will dunn them; and therefore some show they must make of Religion, to satisfy
its importunity.

2. Its Interest. Many times that is the Cause of it. There happen to be Times
when Religion is in fashion; and we may remember when it was the way to get
Places and Preferments. Some worldly Advantages are sometimes to be got by it,
and it proves a security to their Places, or Trades, or Employments. Gehazi got
considerably by it; and being Officious, and Complaisant to his Devout Master,
the Syrian General presented him with Silver, and Raiments. Religion is a thing
pleasing to Good Men, even the very shadow of it; and where they see something
of Devotion, it is a Motive to converse, and deal with the Professors of it,
though some Vices be mingled with the Profession.

3. Care of their Reputation, in another Cause. As vicious as this Age is, a
Man very Vicious is a contemptible Wretch. If he have an Estate his Flatterers
and Dependants may fawn upon him, and cringe to him, but Men of Consideration
cannot but despise him in their Hearts. Something of Virtue and Goodness gives
a Man credit in the World, and his Neighbors do ordinarily show him more
respect than otherwise they would do. The praise of Men, as it is sometimes the
cause of denying Christ, so it is sometimes the cause of Confessing him, and
Honor, and Reputation, may make a Man at least seemingly Religious, when all
the Arguments of Eternity cannot work upon him.

4. Custom and Education is another prevalent Motive. This is as great an
Ingredient of those little shows of Religion and Morality in wicked Men as any;
and if some looser People were asked, why they come to Church, and say their
Prayers, and perform some other Duties of Religion, if they would answer
seriously, they could give no other Reason but this, because they have been
Educated into it, and it is the Custom of the Country, from which to vary would
be a little odd, and impertinent.

So that from what has been said, you may safely infer, and carry this Maxim
home with you, and think, and ruminate upon it, That the external Duties of
Religion, and a little smack of Virtue does not excuse or free a Man from the
Guilt of being wicked.

It is your living in a Sin which God has peremptorily forbid in his Word, and
cherishing, making much of it, and keeping it warm, that makes you wicked; and
all the external Services of Prayer, Hearing, coming to Church, etc. you pay to
God, cannot cover that Sin, or make you pure in his sight, who is of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity.

For that Sin you live in, makes you impure in the sight of God, and to the
Impure, and Defiled, is nothing Pure, Tit. i.15. That Impurity dashes all that
little Goodness which is in you. It drowns the acts of Devotion which you
perform. It is a Worm that kills all the seeming Virtues that grow about you,
i. e. makes them ineffectual.

That Sin you live in is maintaining Rebellion against God; and therefore all
your pretended Obedience is insignificant. It is presumption, and you will
maintain it, come what will of it; and how can God Almighty like any thing you
do? It is Enmity against God, and how can he be your Friend? It is like a
rotten Sheep, that infects the whole Flock. It is an Evil Root that sends up a
Bitterness into all the Boughs and Branches that grow from it.

It is true, God is a Lover of Goodness, but the Sin you live in makes all your
Goodness Counterfeit, and a Sacrifice, which is abomination to the Lord; that
very Sin you will not part with, impoisons that Morality, and those acts of
Religion you make a show of. That very Sin makes you Wicked, and the seeming
Goodness that is about you, cannot change the nature of it. Were it so, that an
Ounce of Goodness could counter-balance a whole Talent of Wickedness, much
might be said for blending and joining God and Belial; but we have not so
Learned Christ: And if he that wilfully offends in one, is guilty of all, it
cannot be that God will pass by that Sin we allow our selves in, for, and in
consideration of the acts of Morality and Religion we perform. It Is true, of
Charity it is said, that it shall cover a multitude of Sins, Jam. v.19, 20. but
the meaning is not, that the Charity or Alms of a wicked Man, shall blot out
the multitude of Sins he cherishes, but that the Charity which a good Christian
exercises in the Conversion of a Sinner, is a means whereby the Sinner is
brought to a true Repentance, and entitled to the Grace and Love of God in
Christ Jesus, which pardons all his Transgressions, and covers the multitude of
his Sins. All which shows, that a Christian must do more, which leads me to the
second Proposition.

II. Those who would be Christians indeed, must do more than carnal Men in
Matters of Religion and Morality. For if you salute your Brethren only, what do
you more than others? says our Savior here. Were the former Proposition duly
considered, this would be practiced better. It is a vulgar Error, That a little
Religion goes a great way. And were it believed, that Men escape not the brand
of wicked Men, by the Formalities of Religion they practice, while they espouse
some forbidden Lust or other, they would certainly do more than others. I am
very sensible of the great Mistakes that arise from comparing our selves with
others; but the reason of it is, because the Comparisons are not rightly made.
There are degrees of Wickedness and Impiety; and I know abundance think because
they are not quite so bad as others, they do more than others; and because they
do not run with others into the same excess of Riot, they take themselves to be
tolerable Saints. But such Comparisons are false as well as odious; and there
is nothing hinders Men more from a vigorous progress in Goodness, than these
preposterous Comparisons. All that can be inferred from another Man's being
more Wicked than we, is only this, that there are degrees of Sin; but not, that
I am therefore safe, because I am not come up to his Excess and Extravagance in
offending God. When our Savior therefore obliges us to do more than Heathens,
more than Carnal and Natural Men in matters of Religion and Morality, his
meaning is not, that all we are to study is, to be less vicious than they; for
though this in some sense may be true, yet considering the nature of the
Gospel, we must needs conclude, Christ in saying so had respect to the
following Particulars.

1. Since departing from Iniquity is made the Character of a Christian indeed,
2 Timothy ii.19. no doubt this is the Character too, which does distinguish him
from a Carnal Man; and he does more than they, if he actually departs from
every Sin forbidden by the Gospel, for then he ceases to be Carnal, and walks
after the Spirit, and as every Christian ought to be, becomes a new Creature,
and departing in his Affections from all Iniquity forbidden, he does more than
those who depart may be only from some Sins that would make them scandalous,
and securely allow themselves in others.

2. A Carnal Man, in Matters of Religion and Morality, acts for the most part
according to his natural Temper, Interest, Passion, and Appetite; in all which
Particulars we must do more than they, i. e. act contrary to all these. A
Carnal Man is naturally, may be, Envious or Malicious, he continues so, there
being no Principle in him to turn the Bias, we must do more than he; and if
our Temper be so, it must be subdued and overcome with Rejoycings at the Good,
and Parts, and Gifts, and Abilities, and Blessings of our Neighbors. It is a
Carnal Man's Interest to comply with his Potent Neighbors when they Curse, or
Swear, or Talk lewdly. As much as it may be our Interest to comply, we must
show our Dislike and Abhorrency. A Carnal Man his Passion provokes him to
bitter and reviling Language; whatever Inclinations to Passion we may have, no
such corrupt Communication must come out of our Mouths. A Carnal Man's Appetite
inclines him to Eat and Drink immoderately, and to crave every thing which is
pleasing to the Flesh, and which he has means to reach or come by. We must
prescribe Laws and Bounds to those Desires, and study Moderation, and
Temperance, and Modesty; and Decency, and then we do more than others.

3. In matters of Religion, what external Services a Carnal Man performs, our
Care must be, that our Hearts and inward Man be affected with them, that the
inside be Devout as well as the outside; and that the Mind perform it is part as
well as the Lips and Hands; and that an inward sense go along with the Devotion
we express without: A Carnal Man's Lips only pray, our Care must be to cry with
our whole Heart, Psalm. cxix. 145. and then we do more than others.

4. In matters of Religion, what a Carnal Man does out of sinister Ends, we
must do for ends great and laudable, and acceptable to God, ver. 9. A Carnal
Man receives the Holy Sacrament, may be, to satisfy the Law, and to secure his
Employ or Office, that is the principal motive of his Coming; and if it had not
been for such an occasion he had not come; our care must be to receive it with
an intent to enrich our Hearts and Lives with Faith, and Love, and Good Works,
and Courage against Temptations, and then we do more than others.

5. In matters of Religion, what a Carnal Man does partially, and by halves, we
must do with Integrity and Impartiality. This may justly be said of the
Religious Services and Moralities of a Carnal Man, all is done by halves. He
either does one Duty, and neglects another, or shuns one Sin, and wallows in
another; and even the Virtue he makes a show of, wants the better half, viz. a
true Principle of the Love of God. An equal and uniform Piety is that which is
most rational, and consequently most pleasing to God; and in this we are to do
more than others.

6. Particularly in Love, and acts of Charity and Kindness. A Carnal Man loves
those who love him, and is civil to those who are civil to him; and he very
rarely goes farther. Our care must be to do good to those that do not love us,
and to be civil even to those that are not so to us; and all this because our
Light, our Motives, our Rewards, our Revelations, and Encouragements exceed,
and go beyond what Publicans, and natural Men have, or ever had. And this is to
do more than others. However, if this account be not satisfactory, I am sure
the Inquisitive Christian may easily see and understand wherein he is to do
more than others, if he will but impartially read, and take a view of this
Chapter. For as the Precepts here given are levelled against corrupt Nature, so
to live up to these Rules is to do more than others, more than natural Men,
more than Publicans and Sinners.

And what I have laid down here, ruins that common Plea, Why should I do more
than others? Why? As your Circumstances and Conditions are various, so they
become Motives to do more than others. Because thou art a Christian, thou
ought to do more than others. Because the Son of God himself has come and
spoke to thee in his Gospel, therefore thou ought to do more than Heathens
and Infidels. Because thou enjoyest greater Mercies, and thine Eyes have seen
greater Deliverances than others, thou ought to do more than thy Neighbors,
whose Mercies are less, and whose Deliverances are not so astonishing. Because
thou live under richer means of Grace than others: Because thou have had
stronger and more powerful Motions of God's Spirit than others, therefore thou
ought to do more than others. Because thou make a greater Profession of
Religion than others, thou ought to do more than others.

Nay, thou have obliged thy self in thy Baptism, in the Eucharist, upon a
Sickbed, and on other occasions, to do more than others, to be sure, more than
thy carnal careless Neighbors do, that Hear, and Pray, and have some Virtues
mingled with their Vices.

You that have repented of a very lewd and flagitious Life, and been Converted
from the Power of Satan unto God, ought particularly to do more than others,
for you have sinned more than others, you expect more should be forgiven you;
you have formerly hated God more than others, and therefore ought to love him
more than others.

Ye who have more Time, more Leisure than others, you ought to spend more in
Religious Retirements than others.

Ye to whom God has given greater Means and Estates than others, ought to
express your Charity to distressed Christians in greater Instances than others.
In a word, The common Duties of Religion are to be distinguished from the
greater. The common are such as both the Light of Nature, and the Gospel
command, and which Infidels as well as we perform. The greater are those which
the Gospel does particularly bind upon the Consciences of Christ's Followers;
and these are the proper Tasks of Christians.

Upon a Deathbed thou cry'st, I thank God I have wronged no body. Do not even
Heathens and Philosophers the same. Thou rejoycest, thou please thy self with
this, that thou have been just the honest in all thy Dealings, do not even the
Brahmines and Indians the same? I do not deny, but these are good things; but
what is all this to Christianity, which is a higher Discipline, and a sublimer
Dispensation? What is all this to Faith in Christ Jesus, which is to purify
your Hearts, and to make Christ and his Precepts, and Promises, and Ordinances,
and the Benefits of his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and Intercession
sweet, and pleasant, and amiable to you?

We will allow, that you pay, and endeavor to pay every Man their own, that
you Lend, and Give, and are kind to your Friends, and who do, and are so to
you; and that you Wrong, and Abuse, and Injure no Man that let us you alone; but
in doing so, what do ye more than those who never heard of Christ? Has God
given you suitable Encouragements to do more than others, and will not Angels,
and good Men, and your own Consciences, cry shame upon you in the last Day,
because ye have not done more than others. Nay, it were well, if many of us did
but do so much as others, so much as honest Heathens do, so much as innocent
Barbarians do, who love those that love them; and are civil to those who are so
to them?

How many of us are there who are ungrateful, base, inhumane, uncivil,
unthankful to those who love them, and express their Love in various acts of
kindness to their Souls and Bodies? and if the Righteous be scarcely saved,
where will the Wicked and Sinner appear? But if all this will not prevail, I
must try one Motive more, which will lead me to the last Proposition.

III. If those who would be, or think themselves good Christians, do not more
than Carnal Men in Matters of Religion and Morality, they have no Reward. For
if ye love them which love you, what Reward have you? I need not tell you, that
Questions of this Nature are equivalent to Negatives, for this is a common way
of speaking in all Languages; so we ordinarily say, If you will not work, who
will take care of you? i. e. No body will. When I say we have no Reward, if we
do not more than others, I do not mean a Temporal Reward, for this is given
even to Hypocrites; and we may lawfully conclude, that the Temporal
Deliverances, Protections, and Preservations, which happen to wicked Men, came
upon them for some good thing, they have done, either in Religion or Morality,
or in promoting the Glory of God, which in all probability is the Reason why
the Mohammedan Religion, and particularly the Ottoman Empire has flourished so
long, because they have destroyed Idolatry in the World, and have done some
other Services to God's People.

It Is the everlasting Reward I treat of here; and our Savior aims at no less.
If we do not more than others, we shall have no greater Reward than others; if
we do more, our Reward will be greater.

And here, for your encouragement to do more than others, according to the
Rules before laid down, more than Carnal Men ordinarily do, who mingle some
acts of Religion and Morality with their wilful Sins, give me leave to propose
to you these following Considerations.

1. Then would ye be put off with a Temporal Reward? What? be put off with
this, when you hear a Pious David pray, to be delivered from Men, who have
their portion in this Life, Psalm. xvii.14. were there no other Life, when this
is ended, no marvel if a Temporal Recompense did content you. But when you
profess and own an approaching Eternity, to make a Temporal Reward only, the
object of your Hopes and Desires, is strangely Irrational. What! Content your
selves with Corn, and Wine, and Oil, when an everlasting Kingdom is to be had?
When you see the Crown of Glory glittering a-far off, which the eternal God
holds out to you as a Motive? What! Content your selves with Trash, when Gates
of Pearl, and a City of Gold is set before you?

2. When you come to lie upon a Deathbed, do not you desire an everlasting
Reward? No doubt ye do, your Ministers and your Neighbors hear you say so. But
how uncomfortable must be that Desire, when your Consciences shall fly in your
Faces, and tell you, that your Desires are groundless, that this is desiring
the End without the Means, and the Reward at Night, and the Favor of the good
Man of the House, when you have been loath to bear the heat and burden of the
Day.

3. If you do not more than others, is it not a certain sign that you do not
heartily believe an eternal Reward? What! Believe it, and do nothing for it?
Yes, something ye do, as much as some of your indifferent Neighbors do, but
that is the very thing Christ finds fault with, because you stop there, where
Men of no great sense of Religion stop. It Is true, all the doing in the World
cannot deserve this everlasting Reward; but since doing more than Publicans and
Sinners is the Condition to which God has annexed this eternal Reward, will
you neglect the Condition, without which you cannot be sure of that Reward?

4. When in the last Day ye shall see those excluded from the Kingdom of
Heaven, who were loath to step farther than their Friends and Acquaintance in
the way to Happiness, those particularly who thought it sufficient to be kind
only to those who were kind to them: Will not you wish that you had done more
than they? But what will Wishes signify in that Day, when the time of Sowing,
and Planting, and Working is past? Now you have an opportunity of showing your
extraordinary Zeal, and Love, and Fervor, and Charity, and endeavors to do
more than others.

Lay hold, and remember, we entreat you, in Christ's stead, to lay hold on the
present opportunity, and let the eternal Reward tempt you, the Reward invisible
indeed; but as sure, as certain, as infallible as the Great God, who has
promised it. Say not, this doing more than others is an endless thing; for at
this rate we must do more than every Man we see or hear of, or converse withal,
a thing enough to make a Man distracted with Religion. No my Friends, there is
no danger of that; the Persons beyond whom you are to go, are chiefly carnal,
careless, indifferent Men, who have a low Opinion of Religion, and do no more
in these Matters than is consistent with their Interest, and Honor, and
Reputation, and Ease, and Temper, and Profit, and Sensual Pleasures. Cross your
selves in all these, and do more than Flesh and Blood, and Nature, and Custom,
and Education would prompt you to; and as you excel others in Temporal and
Spiritual Advantages, labor still to do more than they, especially where you
see they are defective; and let all be done according to the Directions of the
Text, and this Chapter, not ceasing to implore God's powerful Arm; and the Time
will come, when you shall Sing, and Triumph, and Rejoice more than others, and
when others shall be Judged, Disgraced, Despised, and Rejected, you will sit on
Thrones judging the Tribes of Israel. Amen.

SERMON XXXVIII.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 46, 47. For if ye love them which love you, what Reward
have you? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if ye salute your Brethren
only, what do you more than others? Do not even the Publicans so?


I Thought I had done with these Words, but upon a review of the Text, there
appear several Things which will require our farther Disquisition and
Examination. Our Savior's principal Design in these Words, I think I have
sufficiently explained in the last Discourse; his principal Design, I say,
which is, to show, that in Matters of Love, Charity, Kindness, and Civility, we
are to do more than others, more than Heathens and Infidels, more than Carnal
Men, and according to the Rules and Measures of Analogy, I extended the Command
to other Collateral Duties of Religion and Morality.

But I find, that while I have pressed doing more than others, I have forgot to
urge some of you at least, to do so much as others; and while I have taught you
to go beyond Publicans and Carnal Men, I have overlooked the Duties and good
things supposed in the Text to be in Publicans, and Carnal Men, which are
loving those that love them, and being kind, and civil, and courteous to those
who are so to them, and doing good to those who do good to them.

Indeed, to recommend to you such Duties as these, seems to be a thing
altogether needless and superfluous, as needless as to teach People to Trade
one with another, or to Eat when they are Hungry, or to Drink when they are
Dry. But if we look abroad and consider the Christian World, as it appears to
us now, we shall find, that even these lesser Duties are trampled upon as well
as the greater; and as impossible as it may seem to be, not to love those who
love us, it will appear from the sequel, that there are not a few, even among
our selves, Christians such as they are, who break through the Obligation of
this Duty, and may be justly charged with wilful Omission and Neglect, even of
these common Offices which Nature, Custom, and Education teaches.

Indeed, it is a great disparagement to our Religion, at least to the
Professors of it, that they, who for the time they have lived in the Church,
should be able to digest the strongest Meat, should stand in need of Milk; the
those who should be able to teach others, should have occasion, or lie under a
necessity to be taught the common Principles of Heathen Divinity. But so it is,
and to that pass are things come, that we are forced to teach People the first
Rudiments of natural Theology; so incapable, or so unfit, are many to be
instructed in the higher Lessons of Christianity.

To love and do good to those, who love and do good to us, is a pure natural
Principle, and it looks a little impertinent to prove the necessity of it,
because it is a Point all Men take for granted; yet that I may not seem to
leave out any thing that should have been said, and for your fuller Conviction
and Satisfaction, I shall

I. Consider the reasonableness of this Principle.

II. Enquire what Persons they are who act against this natural Principle.

III. Examine what it is that makes Men sink so low beneath Publicans and
Heathens, and act against this Principle of Nature.

1. The Reasonableness of this Principle of loving, and doing good to those who
love and do good to us. And it will appear from the following Particulars:

1. Not to love those that love us, or not to be civil, kind, and courteous to
those who are so to us, tends to the Ruin and Destruction of Humane Society.
Mutual and reciprocal Kindnesses are the Solder of Humane Life, and without
these the World would soon become a Habitation of Savages; Trade and Commerce
would quickly cease, and the Condition of Mankind like the Leviathan's state of
Nature, become a state of perpetual War: This would increase Animosities, and
set at variance Father and Son, and the Daughter against her Mother, and the
Daughter-in-law against her Mother-in-law, and open a gap to infinite Quarrels
and Dissentions; for as nothing sowres our Spirits more than Unkindnesses from
those whom we have been kind to; so if this proceeded to an universal Custom,
Love and Charity would be destroyed, and with that the Peace and Order of
Commonwealths or Kingdoms. This would alienate Men's Affections one from
another, and this would proceed to Hatred, that Hatred to Revenge, that Revenge
to Destruction. In a word, this would breed the greatest Confusion in Families,
Cities, and Provinces, and nothing would be more miserable than the Children of
Men. In the worst of Times, when Vice and Impiety abounds, and triumphs, and
Religion is scorned and lies neglected. This Principle of loving those who love
us, does yet uphold Humane Societies; but were this Cement abolished or
abandoned, the whole Frame must fall into Disorder, and break into a shapeless
Chaos.

2. To love those who love us, is a dictate not only of Reason, but of instinct
too; and therefore Instances of it are to be found even in Beasts, and Brutes,
and irrational Creatures. I am not very apt to believe all Passages in History
concerning Beasts, and their wonderful Kindnesses to those who have been kind
to them, yet some are so well attested, that I cannot forbear giving credit to
them. Andronicus his Lion is Famous, and what Wolves, and Tigers, and Serpents
have done to the Holy Hermites of old, are things not to be slighted. However,
let us cast our Eyes upon what our own Experience does furnish us with; we all
know how wonderfully kind Dogs are to those who feed them and make much of
them; and there are such Examples of Fidelity and Love to their Masters, in
these Animals, that many a Man may blush to see himself outdone by those
despicable Creatures. Nay, Wild-Beasts are serviceable and obliging to those of
their own kind, that are so to them; so that not to love those who love us, is
to be worse than Beasts and Brutes, whom instinct, and the weight of sense
forces into this Duty.

Nay, 3. The Devils themselves are kind to those who are so to them. And
therefore one of them sent word to Croesus, who complained of his Unkindness,
after he had filled his Altar with frequent Incence, that he had no reason to
find fault with him for being unkind; for when he, i. e. Croesus, was to be
burnt by the order of Cyrus, he, i. e. the Devil, raised a Storm of Wind and
Rain, and put out the Fire; and it is probable he did so, if God gave him leave,
being the Prince of the Air; and therefore in a Capacity of making Alterations
and Changes in Wind and Weather.

However, his Kindness is very evident to those who do ordinarily serve him by
their Vices; for to require their faithful Service, he frights them not,
molests them not, perhaps not all the Days of their Lives, but feeds them with
pleasant Fancies, gives them opportunity to fulfill their wicked Desires, and to
accomplish their Lusts; and sometimes as we read of Pope Silvester II. helps
them to considerable Preferment. It Is true, these are dangerous Kindnesses, yet
they are taken for such by vicious Men; and it serves to prove, that the
Principle of the Text is observed by the Devils themselves; and then what a
strange Creature must he be who is defective in this Practice, seeing he is
worse than Beasts and Devils. And the thing being so very bad, one would think
none should be found at least among Christians, who can be charged with this
Guilt; but whether there be such Persons, will appear from the second
Particular.

II. What Persons they are who act against this natural Principle. And here,

1. What do ye think of refractary, unnatural, and untowardly Children, who
reward the tender Care of their Parents, their Love, and Tenderness, and
Indulgence, with contempt of their Advice and Admonitions, and running into
Rioting and Drunkenness, into Chambering and Wantonness, into Strife and Envy,
and taking Courses which tend to the undoing of their Souls and Bodies? Are
there no such Children? If there are none, what is the reason of the many daily
Complaints of this Nature? Whether there be any such among us at this present,
I know not, but if there were, I would show them their Faces in this Glass, and
let them see how ugly and deformed they look. I would call to them in the
Language of St. John the Baptist, O Generation of Vipers, why will not ye be
warned, to flee from the Wrath to come? A Generation of Vipers indeed, that
tear out the Bowels of those who gave you Life! Do not your Parents love you?
Do not they Maintain, and Feed, and Educate you in the fear of God? Do not they
entreat you to mind your everlasting Interest? Do not they encourage you to
Goodness, dissuade you from Vice, invite you to the House of God, to Prayer,
and to other Exercises, which will give you Peace in the End? Do not they
plead, and reason, and argue with you, and warn you not to undo your selves?
And is not this Love, and Tenderness, and Affection: But if you reject their
Holy Counsels, despise their Exhortations, and scorn their warmest
Expostulations, will run into Company, which is your bane, rush into
destruction, and venture into the Chambers of Death, is not this requiring
their Love with Hatred, their Kindness with Baseness, and their Charity with
the greatest Ingratitude? And is not this sinking below Publicans and Heathens;
for they love those that love them? Tell me not, that you love their Persons,
though you hate their Instructions; for what does Love to their Persons
signify, while you hate that wherein they do most of all express their Love,
and declare their Tenderness and Affection?

2. The same may be said of Hearers, with respect to their faithful Pastors and
Teachers; we admonish, we entreat, we reprove, we tell our People of their
Vices, and spare them not; we represent to them their Errors in their Native
Colors, and all that they may amend their Ways, and become Favorites of
Heaven: And is not this Tenderness, and Love, and Affection? What else can be
the reason of it? It is true, our Calling and Profession obliges us to say
something, but this we might do in general Terms, without rubbing their Sores,
or Lancing their Wounds, or breaking their Imposthumes. It Is Kindness therefore
that makes us tell them the Truth, and lay open their Defects, and assure them
of the Terrors of the Lord, and all that their Souls may live, and be blessed,
and glorious, and enjoy the future Glory. But yet we find, that some there are
who hate us for our Pains, call us Rash and Inconsiderate, and worse Names, and
bear a secret Spleen to us, because we are so plain and downright, and so free
in our Censures; and is not this hating those who love you? St. Chrysostom had
large Experience of these unkind Returns; and therefore in several of his
Homilies, he warns his Auditors, and exhorts them not to suffer their faithful
Teachers to be slandered or abused. Some of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. ix.11.
thought much of contributing to the maintenance of their Pastors; the Apostle
is surpised at it: What, says he, if we have sown unto you Spiritual things,
is it a great Matter, if we reap your Carnal Things? And he had reason to find
fault with this mean Spirit of theirs, as being contrary to this natural
Principle of loving those who love us.

3. The same may be said of all Persons who have been signally obliged by
others, and yet can hardly afford a good Word to those from whom they have
received such signal Kindness, but carried away by Faction or Interest, speak
Evil of them, and Revile them; would to God such Persons were as rare among us
as African Monsters are; but even of such ungrateful Wretches the Age we live
in gives us too many Instances. David complained of them long ago. Yea, mine
own familiar Friend, in whom I trusted, and who did eat of my Bread, has lift
up his Heel against me. Psalm. xxi.9. and could any thing be more base or
barbarous than for Herod to go about to kill Christ who had purged his Country
of Devils and Diseases, Luke xiii.31. And was it not a most Inhumane Attempt
for those very Soldiers, whose Lives St. Paul preserved from Shipwreck, to
consult to kill him with the rest of the Prisoners, Acts xxvii.42, 43. And it
seems this wicked Generation does last still. And what shall I say more, we
cannot without Grief, behold the many bold Offenses which are committed daily
against this Principle of Nature, even in those Relations, the very Name of
which speaks mutual and reciprocal Kindnesses, such as Husband, and Wife,
Brothers and Sisters, Masters and Servants, etc. who would suspect Unkindness
among those Relatives, to those especially who study and seek their Good, and
are more than ordinarily concerned to express their Love and Respect to them,
and in whose Mouth is the Law of Kindness; yet even in this Grass the Serpent
lies, and the Snake does hiss.

After all, the Rich and Great offend against this Law, such, I mean, as are
Morose, and Proud, and Self-conceited, and do not think a poor Neighbor, their
Brother in Christ, worthy of a civil Salutation, a Civility not denied by
Heathens and Publicans to the meanest of their Brethren; and of this nature are
those false Salutations and pretended Civilities of dissembling and Hypocrital
Men, such as Joab and others, whose Words are softer than Butter, but War is in
their Hearts; who seem indeed to love those who love them, but it is from the
Teeth outward, for they hate them within.

There needs no Gospel to condemn such bold and daring Sinners. The light of
Nature will serve to do it, though it is confessed, that the Gospel under which
they live, and which teaches them greater and better things, will help to
aggravate both their Sin and Punishment.

And this will justify our third Enquiry.

III. How Men come to sink so low, so much beneath Heathens and Publicans, as
to act against this natural Principle. And,

1. They have very weak, dull, and dark apprehensions of the worth and nature
of Christianity; and indeed, of any Religion; some Religion or other they must
profess; and since Providence lets them stumble upon the Christian, they
embrace it, but cansider not what it imports, how holy its Precepts are, how
rich its Promises, how ample its Advantages, how clear its Revelations, how
great its Excellencies, and how justly it requires greater Strictnesses than
either Judaism or Heathenism, or any other Religion in the World. This
Consideration would make them dread offending against the Law of Nature, and
make them ashamed to think, that they who are bound to do more than others,
should not do so much as others. These things being no Objects of their
Thoughts, they have a very low Opinion of the Religion they profess, and
therefore are not concerned nor frighted if they fall below the Grandeur of it,
lower than Heathens and Publicans, and consequently do not love those who love
them.

2. Their Lusts are stronger than their Religion. This natural Principle of
loving those who love them, is agreeable enough to their Reason and
Speculation; but some predominant Lust, either Avarice, or Ambition, or Pride,
or Envy, or Lasciviousness, or Delight in vain Company, or something their
sickly Desires crave, and which they fancy their reciprocal Love would hinder
them from, some such Lust, I say, reigning and domineering within it damps and
drowns that reciprocal Love they owe to those that love them. A Man is tempted
when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed, says St. James Chapter i.14.
As natural as it is to be kind to those who are so to us; yet if a Man gives
way to some violent Lust or Desire, and lets that have the upper-hand, it will
draw and force the Man away from the most easy, and most familiar, and most
rational Duty whatsoever.

Not to mention, that if the Party who is or has been kind, be defective in
one Act, if after nineteen Kindnesses he fail to do the twentieth: This shall
be thought by such Persons an Argument sufficient to justify their want of
reciprocal Love and Affection: But this shows the disingenuity of their Temper,
and that an Evil Spirit has taken Possession of their Hearts, and committed a
Rape upon the dictates of their Reason and Understanding. And thus Men come to
act against Principles which even Heathens and Publicans do observe.

Inferences.
I. I observe here, That Religion is not intended to make Men Clownish and
Uncivil. For our Savior in the Text supposes saluting our Brethren, to be not
only Lawful, but a natural Duty which God expects of Men as Men. Indeed, he
would have us do more than this comes to, and extends it even to Enemies, and
to Persons who have wronged, affronted, and abused us, but he does not deny the
lawfulness of it, but establishes this lower Duty, which even Heathens and
Publicans count reasonable.

And therefore that Sect which places Religion in forbearing all external
Salutations, sins against a natural Duty. The Gospel does not abolish, but
exalt all natural Duties, and sets them in a brighter Light; and that therefore
if saluting our Brethren, or Fellow- Christians be a natural Duty, it must be
much more a Christian Duty; so that the Spirit of the Hat, seems rather a
Spirit of Pride and Delusion, than the Spirit of God, which inclines the Soul
to Assability, Courteousness, and Civility, and Respect to Superiors. Nor must
the condescension of Superiors to the meanest Capacity, or their Humility, make
us lay aside the Respect we owe them; for this is to give occasion that the way
of Truth is Evil spoken of, and to bring an Evil report upon the good Land.
It Is true, in Christ, we are all equal, with respect to the Privileges and
Advantages that come by Christ, they being promised or tendered to all; but
that does not destroy the external Respect, Obeisance, and Civility we owe to
Persons of different Ranks and Qualities, or to Men whom Providence has raised
above the common level in Church or State.

I grant, the Men of this World will call that Clownishness when a good Man
will not drink with them, nor comply with their Sensualities, but reproves them
either for their Oaths, or other Sensualities. But that Clownishness, if it
must be called so, is a Duty. Notwithstanding this, we may preserve the respect
due to their Places and Elevations in the World, as we see in St.,Paul who,
though he did not comply with the Sins of Ananias the High Priest, and of
Festus the Governor, yet paid them the respect their Stations, and the Figure
they made in the World required.

II. The Text teaches us, how we are to aggravate our Sins in our confessions
to God. To commit Sins, which the very Heathens and Publicans condemn and
abhor, must needs be very dreadful in a Christian, because he Sins against the
very Principles of Nature. In the same manner, to neglect that which Heathens
and Publicans by the light of Nature do find and affirm, and observe as
necessary, must make the omission exceeding black in a Christian, because he is
without excuse. And therefore, if any of us have been unkind, disobliging,
ill-nanatur'd, cross, and surly, and morose to those who are kind, and loving,
and tender, and charitable to us, let us not make light of the Sin, which is so
much the greater, by how much it is condemned by Heathens and Publicans.

Christians, the Gospel obliges you to love your Enemies, and will not ye love
your Friends? Not to love your Enemies will bring the Wrath of God upon you;
how much more your not loving those who love you? The neglect of the more
difficult Task will make you miserable, and will not neglect of the easier
cover your Faces with Confusion? Intemperance, Drunkenness, Cheating,
Defrauding, Lying, Extortion, Profaneness, etc. are condemned by the very
Heathens, and will you (from whom greater Virtues are expected) defile your
selves with such Sins as these? The brighter the Light is, the greater is the
Sin; and therefore a Christian who lives under a higher Dispensation, if he
neglects that, which the lesser was sufficient to instruct him in, Sins with a
witness, for he Sins in the midst of Sunshine. In our Confessions therefore,
such Sins must be particularly deplored, as exceeding others in heinousness:
And O! let the greatness of the Sin fright us for ever from venturing upon the
like again; and let us bless God, that there is yet hopes of Mercy, and Virtue,
the Efficacy in the Blood of Jesus, to wash away Sins, which bring more than
ordinary Guilt upon the Soul.

III. Since it is so unnatural and irrational a thing not to love those who
love us, behold how irrational and unnatural a thing it must be not to love
God, who loves us, and has loved us into Miracles and Prodigies? Has not he
loved us? Dares any say, he has not? If he has not loved us, what do our
Praises signify? Why do we praise him, as it is in our Liturgy, for our
Creation, Preservation, and all the Blessings of this Life? Why do we publicly
and privately praise him above all things, for the Redemption of the World by
our Lord Jesus Christ; for the means of Grace, and for the hope of Glory? Are
not these signs of Love? Can there be greater Characters of his Love? Do not we
own, and confess, and acknowledge, that these are certain marks of Love?

But why, Christian, why art thou so unkind to that God who has loved thee
thus? He keeps thee, he watches over thee, he is thy Sun and thy Shield, thy
Shade on thy right Hand, daily and hourly he showers down Blessings upon thee,
and all the Evils that befall other Men, and which thou art preserved from;
it is he that preserves thee from them. But why so disrespectful to that God,
who incircles and crowns thee with loving kindnesses and tender Mercies? Art
not thou unkind to him when thou sin'st against him? Art not thou disrespectful
to him when thou wilfully do that which he protests in his Word is
abomination in his Eyes? What Iniquity do thou find in him, that a God so
tender and so kind cannot attract or charm thy Heart into reciprocal Love? Why
will thou suffer that Tongue of thine to vent it self in frothy and corrupt
Communications, which was given thee to sing his Praises? Why will thou
dishonor him with those Creatures which were intended for thy use and
refreshment? Why will thou make those Members of thy Body Instruments of
Unrighteousness, which were intended to be Instruments of Holiness? Why will thou make thy Soul a sink and sty of impure and noisome Lusts, which was
intended to be a Temple of the Holy Ghost? Why will thou make those Mercies
thou enjoyest Weapons to fight against him, which were intended as silken
Strings to lead thee to his Banqueting House, the Banner whereof is Love?

He draws thee with Cords of Love, (was ever greater gentleness used toward a
Child?) and can thou find in thy Heart to grieve such Bowels of Compassion?
Behold what manner of love the Father has shown to us, that we should be
called the Children of God; and is this your gratitude to make your selves
Children of Hell, and Heirs of Damnation?

There is that in the Love of God, which would be an Antidote against all Sins
whatsoever, had thou but Courage to remember that Love, and to set it before
thee in lively Characters. Joseph remembered God loved him, and he resolutely
resists the Charms of his Mistress; How can I, says he, commit this
Wickedness, and Sin against God? Christian, were the Love of God seriously
remembered and thought of, thou could not Sin. To offend him would go as much
against thee, as drinking Poison, or a draught of Gall and Wormwood.

We talk a thousand great Things of Love, what Power it has to charm rational
Souls. Sirs, God has given you rational Souls, and you are sensible there is
no Love so great, so amazing, so wonderful, as the Love of God to your Souls
and Bodies. I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, by the
Love of God, by the Charity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you present your
Souls and Bodies living Sacrifices, Holy and acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable Service. Amen.

SERMON XXXIX.
St. Matthew. Chapter V. Ver. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father, which
is in Heaven is perfect.


THat no Man may be offended at this Command of Perfection, which some think
utterly impossible on this side Heaven, and others do as vainly boast of, as if
they were arrived to it. Give me leave to tell you, that it is no unusual thing
in Scripture to meet with Exhortations of that Nature. It was God's Order to
Abraham, Genesis xvii.1. Walk before me, and be thou perfect; and it seems, it is
the design of the Gospel, and of the preaching of it, that we may present every
one perfect in Christ Jesus, Coloss. i.28. And to this purpose was the Prayer
of Euphrates for the same Colossians, That they might stand perfect and
complete in all the Will of God, Col. iv.12. And accordingly St. Paul entreats
treats the Corinthians to be perfect, 2 Cor. xiii.ii. And let us go on to
Perfection is the Advice he gives to the Hebrews, Heb. vi.1. And perfect Love
is expressly made a Duty, 1 John iv.18. and the Lord make you perfect is a
common apprecation used by the Apostles in the close of their Epistles; so that
the command of endeavoring after Perfection, is not among the (...), or the
Phrases which are mentioned but once in Scripture: All the question is, what is
meant by it.

There is an absolute Perfection which excludes all Spots, and Blemish, and
Defect, and has every thing that can be rationally wished or desired to render
it an Object of the greatest admiration; and in this sense, the Law of God Is
perfect, Jam. i.21. and according to this Notion God is Perfect who is all in
all: But this is not the Perfection Man is exhorted to; and though it be said
in the Text, Be ye perfect, even as your Father in Heaven is perfect; yet the
Particle as imports only a similitude, no equality, showing rather, that it is
our Duty to imitate our Heavenly Father, and to come as near the Original as
our Frailty will give leave, than that we are to do exactly according to the
measure of the fullness of God.

So that Perfection, when required of Men and Christians, is a limited
Perfection. By a perfect Person, the Holy Ghost sometimes means one who is very
excellent; so he who does not offend in word, is said to be a perfect Man, Jam.
iii.2. i. e. an excellent Christian, who is arrived to a high degree of
Self-conquest and Perfection. Sometimes a Perfect Man is one that is well
established in the Truth, to distinguish him from others who are weak in Faith,
as 1 Cor. ii.6. And this is to be comparatively Perfect, i. e. more Perfect
than others. Sometimes the Scripture styles them Perfect who are beginning to
be so, and strenuously endeavor after Perfection, as Phil. iii.15. Sometimes
to perfect a thing is to finish it, or to carry it on till it has all its
necessary Qualifications, as 1 Thessalonians. iii.10. and Jam. i.4. So that the
Perfection we are capable of amounts to no more than Sincerity, which is an
Evangelical Perfection, and such as God, for Christ's sake is willing to accept
of; and we are then perfect in Goodness; when no considerable Ingredient of a
Holy Life is wanting.

The words of the Text, Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father in Heaven is
perfect, relate either to the Duty immediately preceding, or to all the Virtues
and Self-denials pressed and recommended in this Chapter.

As they relate to the Duty immediately preceding, they import an impartial and
universal Charity; for the Duty Christ insisted upon but just before is being
civil, kind, and courteous, charitable, and doing good, not only to our
Friends, and Brethren, and Relations, and to the inoffensive, but to our Foes
and Enemies, and such as have wronged, and despitefully used us; And then the
meaning is, Be perfectly kind, and follow your Heavenly Father's Example who is
kind to Good and Bad, to Friends and Foes, both to his Children, and to
Strangers. If you Love your Friends only, your Charity is not perfect, but
wants the better half; you then complete it, and make it sincere and perfect,
when you express it not only to those who love you, but even to those that hate
you.

As the Command relates to all the Virtues in this Chapter, it imports, that we
are to be sincere and conscientious in the practice of them all, of one as well
as the other, as our Father in Heaven exercises all his Perfections for the
good of Mankind, and the whole Creation; and particularly for the good of those
that love him. And after all, we are to suppose, that Christ's design is to
teach us, not to content our selves with having begun well, but to go on to the
end well; for all this appertains to the Perfection enjoined here.

All that has been said may be resolved into this Proposition, That a
Christians perfection consists in a cheerful imitation of the Perfections of
his Father which is in Heaven. St. Paul, therefore very sensible of this Truth,
earnestly entreats the Ephesians to be Followers of God, as dear Children, Ephesians.
v.1.

Indeed, there are some Perfections in God, which we cannot, must not imitate,
such as his Omniscience, and being the searcher of all Hearts, his
Self-sufficiency, and dwelling in a Light inaccessible, and certain knowledge
of the Day and Hour of the last Judgment, and the number of his Elect, his
Immortality, Omnipotency, and being the Object of Religious Adoration. In these
we are to admire him, rather than imitate him.

And yet it is as certain, that he is to be imitated in his other Perfections,
such as,

1. His Charity and Beneficence to the Good and Bad, to Friends and Foes. It Is
true, the Mercies shown to both sorts are of a different Nature. And the Bad
have not all the Blessings which the Good enjoy. Yet both have experience of
his Acts of Charity. Our imitation of him in this Particular is chiefly aimed
at in the Text; and in my Explication of the preceding Verses I have again and
again pressed it upon you with very moving and powerful Arguments, even
saluting, and being kind, and doing good to those who despitefully use you, as
well as to your Friends, and such as never offended you, a Virtue this, which
cannot be inculcated too often; for there is nothing more universally
neglected, the greater part thinking, there lies no Obligation upon them to be
civil or kind to an Enemy, a Temper very different from that of the excellent
Virgin in Taulerus, who being asked, what way she took to arrive to that height
of Holiness, which appeared in her, answered, Those who were most offensive and
troublesome, and injurious to me, I have endeavored ^o Love with most ardent
Affection, and those who abused me most, and did me the greatest wrong; upon
them I have sometimes heaped the greatest kindnesses I was capable of, which I
should not have done, if they had not dealt so disingenuously with me.

St. Chrysostom, in his Homily upon these Words, is very smart upon those who
scorn to be civil to their Enemies, except their Enemies begin the Civility,
and salute them first. What Folly, says he, is it to expect, that thine Enemy
should salute thee first; if he does, thou get'st nothing by it; if thou
preventest him in these Civilities, thou carriest away the Crown. By preventing
his Salutations thou reapest Profit from his Pride; his Arrogance and
Haughtiness proves thy Glory. Thou blamest him because he does not salute thee
first; and art not thou to be blamed as much as he for not preventing his
Salutation? If he is to be blamed, why do thou imitate him in that, for which
thou find fault with him? We that are bound to suffer our selves to be
struck on the Cheek, and to go farther with an Enemy than we are constrained;
and to lose our Cloak, and Coat, and Garments, when we are abused, what hopes
of Mercy have we, if we will not so much as prevent an Enemy in the point of
Civility and Salutes? Thou say I shall be laughed at if I do so. Madman,
that thou may not be despised by Men, do thou offend thy God? That thy
Fellow Servants may not Jeer thee, do thou dishonor thy Creator and greatest
Benefactor? The more thy Fellow Creature despises thee for doing thy Duty, the
greater is thy Reward; for thou suffer'st that Contempt for God's sake; and let
me tell you, that it is greater and better to be despised for God's sake, than
to be honored and caressed by all the Princes of the World.

2. Another Perfection which requires our Imitation, is his Patience. See how
God bears with Sinners! See how loath he is to strike; see how unwilling he is
to afflict the Children of Men. They abuse him, and he lays by his Rod; they
wrong him, and he withholds his revenging Arm. St. James, to engage his
Auditors to Patience, sets the Examples of the Prophets before them, Jam. v.10.
But we have a greater Example to follow, even him that teaches his Prophets
Wisdom. Is God so Patient, and shall we burn with Rage and Revenge, immediately
upon an Injury that is offered to us. Is this to be like our Father which is in
Heaven? We would not have God deal with us in this manner: Foolish Creatures!
And shall we deal thus with our Brethren?

3. In his Veracity. God cannot lie, Tit. i.2. and we must not Lie. Wherefore
putting away Lying, speak every Man Truth to his Neighbor, Ephesians. iv.25. It is
our Duty upon several Accounts, but more particularly upon this, because our
Father in Heaven, whose Children we profess our selves to be, is a God of
Truth. How unlike God is that Man who talks deceitfully to his Neighbor, that
tells him one thing and means another? How contrary is this to the Temper of
our Father which is in Heaven, whose Promises are steady like Pillars of Brass;
and Heaven and Earth shall sooner perish, than the least tittle of his Promise
shall fail. When he says the Word, Men may as firmly depend upon it, as if it
were confirmed with Oaths. This must be our Example, and a strict Veracity must
attend our Speeches. He that in his Words has not a strict regard to Truth,
not only Deviates from the Temper of his Father which is in Heaven, but is like
the Devil, the Father of Lies; a likeness, from which Good Lord deliver us.

4. In his Purity. To this purpose is the standing Command, Be ye Holy as I am
Holy, 1 Pet. i.16. God is a hater of Sin, and so must we abhor that which is
evil, Romans xii.9. God is an Enemy particularly to all Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, and unlawful Mixtures; and so must we, For this is the Will of
God, even your Sanctification, that every one of you should know how to possess
his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor, 1 Thessalonians. iv.3, 4. And purity in our
Thoughts, Desires, Words, and Actions, is the surest sign that we belong to
him, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. For I will be Sanctified in
all them that draw nigh unto me.

And what shall I say more, God is a Lover of good Men, dwells with the Humble
and Lowly, prizes Holiness, and an active Faith, beyond all the Riches, and
Honors, and Grandeur of the World; esteems a Saint before the most potent and
unsanctified Wretch; condescends to Persons of the meanest Rank, executes
Judgment for the Oppressed, relieves the Fatherless and Widow, takes care of
the Stranger, pities them that are in Bonds, commiserates the Needy, comforts
the Afflicted, counsels the Stubborn, reclaims the Impenitent, encourages the
Pious and Serious, strengthens them that do stand, raises those that are
fallen; He heals the broken in their Heart, and binds up their Wounds; in all
which Particulars, our imitation of him becomes a necessary Duty. And this is
to be perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect. To imitate his
Perfection is our Perfection, a Duty necessary, because commanded; and some
other Reasons which make it so, are these following:

Reasons.
1. In this imitation we cannot be mistaken: Here we are sure we are in the
right: Were there danger of going astray, or falling into Waters, or running
upon Precipices, it would be some discouragement. God can do nothing that is
Evil. The Perfections which are in him, are undoubtedly good and right. Here is
no fear of a false Light, of an Ignis fatuus, of a false Teacher, of a
Barcacab, of a Deceiver. God can deceive no Man; it is against his Nature and
his Will. He is the fountain of Goodness. He is good and does good, and is a
guide to them that walk in darkness. Whatever he does must be praiseworthy and
commendable; and in following his Example, we cannot run into Bypath, into
Labyrinths, into dangerous Gulfs. He is Light, and in him is no darkness at
all; and therefore we have reason to walk in the Light, even as he is in the
Light, for in following that Light, we do, and cannot but do that which is Holy
and Just, and agreeable to the Rules of Wisdom and Righteousness, and which
will lead us into the ways of Peace, and Satisfaction, and Joy, and Comfort,
even to the still Waters, to the fountain of living Waters, whereof whoever
drinks shall never thirst again.

2. Our Interest, our Duty, our Life, our Breath, and Being, and all the
Mercies we enjoy, oblige us to love him; but how can we love him except we
imitate him. Love does naturally incline to imitation. The ancient Egyptians
are said to have a mighty veneration for their Kings, and that love so wrought
upon them, that they would imitate their Princes in their Halting, Lameness,
and such other Defects and Infirmities. The Persians had that love for Cyrus,
that they would even bow their Childrens Noses to make them Aquiline, or like
Bills of Eagles, because that of Cyrus was so. So did Alexander's Courtiers
hold their Heads on one side, because Alexander went so; and the Disciples of
Aristotle would go stooping out of Love to their Master who used that Posture.
If Love has that power with Men, that it constrains to imitate those whom they
love, even in their Blemishes, and that with Pain and Uneasiness, can we talk
of loving God, while our Love works in us no imitation of his Goodness,
Righteousness, Veracity, Mercy, Clemency, etc. than which nothing is more
profitable or edifying to our Souls, and in which our very Perfection consists.
Perfection is that which we very earnestly desire, and endeavor after in other
things, perfect Health, perfect Strength, perfect Liberty, etc. and is
perfection in Goodness no motive, no temptation?

3. It is certain, we are to tread in our Savior's steps. It Is this that makes
us Christians. We have vowed it, we have promised it, even to follow the Lord
Jesus; but how can this be done, except we imitate our Father which is in
Heaven. Christ himself did so. The Son can do nothing but what he sees the
Father do; for what things soever he does, these also does the Son likewise,
John v.19. He loved as God loved, and was merciful as God was merciful. In a
word, he was the express Image of his Person, not only of his Nature, but of
his Perfections too; and if this was our Savior's work, we cannot imitate that
Savior, except we endeavor to be perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is
perfect. But I shall press this no farther. There are several weighty
Inferences which may be drawn from the Premises for our Instruction, and I must
proceed to acquaint you with them.

Inferences.
I. From this Command of being Perfect it does not follow, that on this side
Heaven, we may arrive to a perfect freedom from all Sin, great and small, which
seems to have been the Doctrine of Pelagius, and his Disciple. Coelestius; and
if we may believe St. Austin and Cassian, they proceeded to that extravagance,
as to affirm, that all this might be done by the mere strength and force of
Nature. They do indeed allege, the Examples of Abel, of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and how God rewarded them with making them his Friends, and gave them
great Instances of his Love and Favor. But all that can be inferred from
thence, is only this, that he encouraged their Faith by gracious Recompenses,
as a Father does a Child otherwise faulty enough, upon some excellent act of
Obedience, but not that they were free from all Sin; there is not a just Man
upon Earth, that does good and sins not, says Solomon, Eccles. vii.20. and
the just Man falls seven times, i. e. Sins by surprise very often, and rises up
again, Prove. xxiv.16. we grant very readily what St. John says, 1 John iii.9.
That the regenerate cannot Sin, because the Seed of God remains in them; but if
we compare that Passage with other places of Scripture, the sense must
necessarily be this, That committing such Sins as worldly and sensual Men make
nothing of, is against their Temper and Inclination, as Joseph told his
Mistress, How can I commit this wickedness? They cannot sin wilfully, or with
delight, or allow themselves in any known Sin, nor sin impenitently. It Is true,
such Men are called Perfect, because they have a respect to all the
Commandments of God, and there is nothing remarkable in all the compass of
Virtue and Goodness, which they do not heartily endeavor after, and their
Sincerity is called Perfection; but still, that is no Argument, that therefore
they are not subject to accidental Slips and Failings, while they live among
Men, and converse with variety of Persons, which they expiate by a renewed and
daily Repentance, so that a Man may be a perfect Man, as the Sun is a perfect
Light; yet as that Luminary has its Spots, and is subject to be clouded, so
Righteous Men may have lesser Faults, and be subject to inadvertencies, and yet
be Perfect still.

II. It follows from the Premises, that both the Saying in the Text, and all
the other Oracles delivered in this Sermon, are Precepts, not Counsels, Duties
which every Christian is obliged to perform; not mere Heroic Actions, which
the Religious only, and those who have entirely dedicated themselves to God's
service, are obliged to mind, or to exercise themselves in the Church of Rome,
by making a distinction betwixt Counsels and Precepts, cuts the Sinews of a
Christian Life; and how pleasing soever this Doctrine may seem to Carnal Men,
in that it gives them hopes, that they may be excused from the severer and
weightier Duties of the Law; but that this Doctrine is false, particularly with
respect to the Oracle of the Text, and the rest in this Chapter, is evident
from hence, because Christ speaks to all his Disciples, and all that call
themselves Christians, own themselves to be so; and therefore all must fall
under the Obligation. And are not we all fond of being Children of our Father
which is in Heaven; and if the Children of God are obliged to these
Self-denials, can any of us excuse our selves from the Duty, since there are
none of us, but what are desirous to be honored with that Title.

I will not deny, but there are some Evangelical Counsels, which all are not
obliged to perform; of this nature is Celibacy, or a single Life, whereof
Christ speaks, Matthew. xix. But then these Counsels are so expressed, that we
may know they are no peremptory Commands to which all are obliged, as in the
preceding Instance of a single Life, Christ says, He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it, Matthew. xix.12. which differs very much from a
commanding Style; and besides, the Sayings in this Sermon of Christ are
enjoined upon pain of Damnation, and those who hear them, and neglect to do
them, whoever they be, great or low, Clergymen or Laymen, are called Fools,
and Miserable, and undone for ever.

III. We see here there is no standing still in Religion, but he that will be
saved must press on toward Perfection. It is very common with some Christians,
when they are come to such a pitch of Devotion, there to rest and grow secure,
and maintain that Formality, and think themselves sufficiently Religious. But
this must be a Mistake, and it is a sign they do not search their Hearts, nor
examine their Lives, nor compare their Behavior with the particular Rules of
the Gospel; which if they did, they would find, that there is always something
to reform, to amend, to rectify, and to set in order; something to remove, and
something to plant, something to meliorate, and something to dislodge; in a
word, that some other Virtues, besides those they have already, are to be
Objects of their Love and Delight.

That Person who contents himself with his being free from scandalous Sins,
stops there, and looks after no greater Perfection, most certainly disobeys the
words of the Text; for how does he endeavor after Perfection, that parts with
one Sin, and pleases himself with another; and with the Pharisee cries, I thank
thee, O God, that I am not as other Men, Unjust, Adulterous, etc. and all this
while allows himself in Pride, Arrogance, Censoriousness, and
Selfconceitedness: Not to go on in Religion, or not to perfect what is begun,
or not to proceed from Virtue to Virtue is to go backward: And he that is at a
stand, lies exposed to the Devils Temptations, for we are not ignorant of his
Devices. He that stands still will not be long before he goes backward, he is
next door to it; for this gives the Enemy a fair opportunity to lull him into a
Slumber, from whence he seldom awakes, till God calls upon him in a terrible
accent: Thou Fool, this Night thy Soul shall be taken from thee; and whose
shall be what thou have provided.

IV. Let Us earnestly labor after Perfection, and that none may ask what
Perfection is, It is no other, no less, no meaner Perfection, that what is
pressed in the Text: Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect.

This Perfection, to give a fuller account of it, relates, 1. To the kinds of
Graces. 2. To the degrees of Grace.

1. To the kinds of Graces. Endeavor after Perfection appears in nothing so
visibly, as in our serious endeavors after the several Graces which make up
the Wedding Garment spoken of in the Gospel, and the charming Ornament of
Christ's Spouse. Not only one, but all must appear very lovely in our Eyes. If
one seems amiable, and the rest are nauseated, the Heart is not right with God.
We must not content our selves with being liberal to the Poor and Needy, but
Meekness and Humility, and love of Enemies, and overcoming the Evil with Good,
must be as heartily espoused as the other. To this purpose is that Command of
St. Peter, 2 Pet. i.5. Add to your Faith, Virtue; unto Virtue, Knowledge; unto
Knowledge, Temperance; unto Temperance, Patience; unto Patience, Godliness;
unto Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and unto Brotherly-kindness, Charity, etc.
There is indeed a great stress on some particular Virtues, and particularly on
Almsgiving; and there are such lofty things said of it, that the unwary Reader
will be apt to think he need do no more in order to Salvation. But though God's
special favor and esteem of such a Virtue is set down, by way of Motive and
Encouragement; yet it is certain, it is no where said, that such a Virtue alone
will suffice, in order to eternal Happiness, and when the rest are enjoined
with as great severity as this, it must necessarily follow, that the rest are
equally necessary. The Pharisees indeed had an Opinion, that if a Man did
exercise himself in any one Command, though he neglected the rest, he would not
fail of a blessed Portion in the Life to come. But this plainly contradicts the
Christians Rule, which is, Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command
you, John xv.14. and it is to be feared, that where the Obedience is partial,
the Plant cannot be, or is not of our Heavenly Father's Planting. The Stoics
which held, that he who had one Virtue had all the rest, were so far in the
right, that he, who upon a good Principle, out of love to Goodness, applies
himself to one Virtue, is in a disposition to be Master of the rest, if he
pursues that Principle; but to think, that all the rest will fall in in course
to him, who by frequent acts shows, he is pleased with one, is what Experience
confutes, and Reason tells us cannot be, except the same Industry be used, to
attain to the rest that was used in the pusuit of that we have made a
considerable progress in.

2. This Perfection must be seen in the degree of those Graces we are possessed
of. A lower degree must be raised into a higher; Faith, which is like a Grain
of Mustardsee, must be advanced into a spreading Shrub; so must Hope, so must
Love, so must Charity, so must other Graces. The Acts must be improved into
Habits, and the tender Plant must become Robust, till it can bear the Injuries
of Wind and Weather. The beginnings of a Virtue are Encouragements to proceed
in it; he that does not, does not grow strong in the Lord, and consequently
does not endeavor after Perfection.

3. This Perfection reaches farther yet, even to doing of such things, as are
more perfect. There are diverse Actions which seem to have no great hurt in
them; and yet it is certainly a more perfect act to abstain from them. This is
to be observed particularly in Eating and Drinking, in Dressing and Clothing,
in Speeches, and Discourses, and Visits, in Conversation and Company, in Sports
and Recreations, etc. Such a Jest, eating of the other Dish, drinking the third
Glass, playing for Company's sake, such a gaudy Dress, etc. may seem harmless;
but it is greater Perfection to forbear them; so in doing good, it is many
times greater Perfection to do such an act of Charity than to forbear it. In
all which Cases a Christian who follows our Savior's Rule in the Text, will
have a special regard to what is more perfect; and therefore more pleasing to
God.

In such Particulars as these consists the Christian Perfection, which here we
are exhorted to labor after; but I can have but little hopes, that you will
exercise your selves toward this Perfection, except you were very resolute to
make use of the proper means, which are these following.

1. A mighty ambition after Spiritual things; as great an ambition to be truly
Good and Holy as others have to be rich and great in the World.

2. A vigorous consideration of the future degrees of Glory, according to the
progress you make here. He that meditates much of these degrees, will find in
himself a vehement desire after such degrees of Sanctity as the most perfect
Persons have attained to.

3. A fervent Love of the Lord Jesus, such a Love as we find in St. Paul, in
St. John, in Mary, the Sister of Martha, etc. a love which must rise from the
strong Impresses made upon the Soul by the Sufferings of Christ, and his Love
in descending from Heaven and dying for us.

4. A lively representation of what God has done for us, both in Spirituals
and Temporals; for this will mightily inflame the Soul, and put her upon doing
any thing which he delights in.

5. An attentive Consideration of the Title in the Text, where God is called,
Our Father which is in Heaven, an Epithet often repeated, and therefore often
to be thought of: If we are his Children, what should we do but imitate him,
that being the nature and duty of Children, that do not bear that name in vain.
He is in Heaven, this speaks his Greatness. We see how Great Men prevail with
us, to do things even contrary to our Inclination. And shall not he, who is the
greatest of all, Influence our Resolution to be Perfect, as he himself is
Perfect. Moreover, he is in Heaven, and from thence looks down upon us. It is
his condescension that he does so, and that condescension ought to be a Motive
to this Perfection. He looks down upon us to see how we improve our Talents; if
we do not, he notes our Guilt in his Book, where it will stand as a Witness
against us. And he is said to be in Heaven, to let us see the place, which we
are to be received into, if we be Perfect, and truly endeavor after it.
Thither he intends to draw us, to the same Kingdom where himself Reigns, and
where Christ our Head Reigns. And is this no Argument to stir us up to this
Perfection? I do not mention Prayer, as a means, because we still suppose, that
whatever helps we offer, all are insignificant without fervent Prayer. And
thus we have chalked out the way to Christian Perfection; a Perfection, to
speak properly, begun on this side the Grave, and which shall be perfected in
Heaven. And when that which is truly Perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away. I conclude with St. Peter's ardent wish, 1 Pet. v.10.
But the God of all Grace, who has called us to his Eternal Glory in Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. To him be Glory and Dominion for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
THe Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury: Containing Fifty four Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions.
Together with the Rule of Faith; being all that were Published by His Grace
himself, and now Collected into one Volume in Folio.

Several Sermons upon the Fifth of St. Matthew, being part of Christ's Sermon
on the Mount. By Dr. Horneck, late Preacher at the Savoy, the first Vol. To
which is added the Life of the Author, by Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and
Wells. In 8 vo.

A Demonstration of the Messiah: In which the Truth of the Christian Religion
is proved, especially against the Jews. Part I. 8 vo.

Twelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions. In 8 vo. Both by the Right
Reverend Father in God, Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

A Brief Exposition on the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments. To
which is added, the Doctrine of the Sacraments. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. And late
Master of Trinity College Cambridge. This on the Creed never before Published.

The Council of Trent no Free Assembly: more fully discovered by a Collection
of Letters and Papers of the Learned Dr. Vargas and other great Ministers, who
assisted at the said Synod in considerable Posts. Published from the Original
Manuscripts in Spanish, which were procured by the Right Honorable Sir William
Trumbal's Grandfather, Envoy at Brussels in the Reign of King James the First.
With an Introductory Discourse concerning Councils, showing how they were
brought under Bondage to the Pope. By Michael Geddes, LLD. and Chancellor of
the Cathedral Church of Sarum.

A Conference with an Anabaptist. Being a Defense of Infant Baptism. In 8 vo.
Price 12 d.

A Theological Discourse of Last Wills and Testaments. In 8 vo. Price 12 d.

A Discourse concerning a Deathbed Repentance, Price 6 d.

A Seasonable Vindication of the B. Trinity. Being an Answer to this Question,
Why do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity? Collected from the Works of the
Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Right Reverend Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of Worcester, Price 12
d.

A Method of daily Devotion, a Method of Devotion for the Lord's Day. Likewise
several small Books against Debauchery, Profaneness, Blasphemy, Cursing, and
Swearing, etc. 24 s. Price 2 d. each, and something cheaper to them that give
away Numbers.

All these by Dr. Asheton.

An Exposition on that most excellent Prayer in the Liturgy of the Church of
England, called the Litany. Wherein all or most of the Exceptions that have
been made against it, are fully Answered. 8 vo. Stich'd, Price 4 d.

Advice to Young Persons, relating both to Faith and Practice. Contained in
some plain Directions how to demean themselves. Together with some few Motives
to the Observation of what is here recommended. In 8 vo. Price 4 d.


