Numb. 28. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday July 2.
to Monday July 9. 1660.
Coppenhagen June 17.
THe Twenty second instant, the Swedes removed their Camp from before this
place, and slighted all their Fortifications. They have scattered in all the
small places round about us all the forces they had here, amounting to about
3500 Horse and Foot, and whilst they are busy about the execution of the other
Articles of the Treaty, the King of Denmark ^s preparing a great Fleet, to
transport out of this Island all the Swedish Militiaes, who are reported to
amount yet to above 10000 men. The two Ambassadors of the States General of the
United Provinces, and the English Ambassadors are gone to Stockholm, to
congratulate the Queen Regent of Swedland, upon the conclusion of that Peace;
and Mr. Hannibal Seested is likewise to repair thither with two Counselors of
State, of his Danish Majesty, to propound to her Majesty and to the States of
that Kingdom an Equivalent instead of the Isle of Bornholme, which by virtue of
the same Treaty, is to be restored within a years time to the Crown of
Swedland, the other Ambassadors of Holland having order to remain here, until
the Ratification of the said Treaty does come.

Dantzick June 19. 1660.
This week the Ambassador that was sent by the Emperor to be present at the
Treaty of Oliva, went away for Vienna, as did the Count of Koningsmark, upon
the advice he had that the Duke of Curland was reestablished in his Dominions.
It is thought that the said Count is gone to Warsow to conclude a strict
alliance between Swedland and Poland, for a conjunction of the Forces of both
the Crowns against the Muscovites, who are marching with a most potent Army,
which is to be commanded by the Grand Duke himself, which has obliged his
Polish Majesty to hasten the Diet, wherein a successor to the Crown is to be
nominated, and the most speedy means how to raise an Army of fourscore thousand
men, to be likewise debated. Our Magistrates have sent some Deputies to Warsow,
to demand the revocation of some new Impositions laid on all kind of
Merchandises and Wares; but although our commerce be exceedingly prejudiced by
it, there is so much the less likelihood of obtaining that demand, in regard
the moneys accruing by the said Impositions, are particularly designed for that
War, in case the States, upon their next meeting, do not find some other way
to get money for it.

Flensburgh, June 22. 1660.
The Danish Forces commanded by the Count Eberstein about Tonningen, having
received Orders to march toward Eyderstede, eight Companies of them are gone
into Gluckstadt, to reinforce the Garrison there, and the rest are to remain in
the County of E^nnembergh. The young Count ^on^ngsmark, who was detained
prisoner in Gluckstadt, is released, with General Horn and the other Swedish
prisoners.

Lubeck, June 25. 1660.
All things are making ready for the march of the Imperial Forces that are in
Pomerania and Mecklenburgh, as also for the removing of the Swedish Forces out
of Zealand, and the Isles of L^land, Falster and Moen. The Swedish Forces are
to be transported into Swedland, and into the Archbishopric of Bremen, and the
Imperial Forces to pass into Bohemia, from whence the Emperor does intend to
draw his Forces to be sent into Hungary. It is supposed that a Diet is to be
very suddenly called to make an alliance with the Princes of the Empire,
against the Grand Signior. The King of Denmark is likewise to repair very
speedily to Flensburgh, to give them the necessary Orders, and to reform his
Militia; but it is not thought he will disband his German Forces, which he
intends to make use of as occasion shall serve.

Wednesday, June 27.
This day the Mayor of S. Albans, accompanied with Mr. Foxwist the Recorder,
and some of the principal Burgesses his brethren, as the Representatives of the
said Corporation, made their humble Address to his Majesty, the Recorder making
a short and pithy speech by way of congratulation of his Majesty's happy
restoration to his Royal throne, and assurance of their loyalty and allegiance
to his Majesty, and presented him with a resignation of the Fee farm rent
purchased by the Corporation in his Majesty's absence, and the arrears incurred
in the mean time.

Which his Majesty was pleased graciously to accept, and to express his
acceptance thereof, and that the Corporation should, as occasion required,
participate of his Royal grace and favor.

I have as I acquainted you in my last, made enquiry into the business of
Captain Roll, which was contradicted in some late Pamphlets; but upon
discourse with Sir James Smith and Mr. Calma^y, I find that the said Captain
Roll was seized for speaking words, and that Mr. Calmady giving too much
credit to him that brought the Note, did in haste sign it.

Wednesday, Doctor Colladon Deputy from the Commonwealth of Geneva, having
presented unto his Majesty the Letters of the Lords Seyndies and Magistrates,
and of the Pastors and Professors of that place, congratulating his Majesty's
happy return and restoration to his Kingdoms: And demanded in their name of
his Majesty, the continuation of his Royal favor and good affection toward
them. His Majesty was pleased to return them thanks for the expression of so
cordial a respect, and to give the said Deputy a very gracious and acceptable
answer upon his demand.

His Majesty having been pleased to bestow a Grant for the Degree and Honor of
Baronet upon Nicholas Steward of Hartley Mawdit, in the County of Southampton
Esquire a Patent passed under the Great Seal of England, for conferring the said
Honor and Degree of Baronet upon the said Sir Nicholas Steward accordingly.

Whitehall.
On Monday last, Colonel Sir John Robinson, Alderman of London, and a Member of
this Parliament, was by his Majesty made Lieutenant of the Tower of London; an
action most acceptable not only to the City and Parliament, but indeed to the
whole Nation, the very Prisoners themselves being glad of his company.

The Kingdom having for a long time, by reason of his Majesty's absence, been
troubled with the Evil, great numbers have lately flocked for cure. His Sacred
Majesty on Monday last touched Two hundred and fifty in the Banqu^ting-house;
amongst whom, when his Majesty was delivering the Gold, one shuffled himself in
out of an hope of profit, which had not been strok'd; but his Majesty presently
discovered him, saying, This man has not yet been touched. His Majesty has
for the future appointed every Friday for the cure; at which time Two hundred,
and no more, are to be presented to him; who are first to repair to Mr. Knight
his Majesty's Chyrurgion, living in the Cross-guns in Russel street, Covent
garden, over against the Rose-Tavern, for their Tickets. That none might lose
their labor, he thought fit to make it known, that he will be at his ho^e every
Wednesday and Thursday from two till six of the clock, to attend that service:
And if any person of quality shall send to him, he will wait upon them at their
lodgings, upon notice given to him.

On Tuesday, his Majesty was pleased to be at supper with the Lord Berclay,
where he was very highly entertained.

His Majesty has been graciously pleased to make Sir William Compton Brother
to the Earl of Northamton, Master of his Majesty's Ordnance; Co^o^^l William
Leg Lieutenant of the Ordnance, Persons that have suffered with his Majesty in
all his Troubles: and Major Francis Nicols Surveyor of his Ordnance for his
faithfulness in adhering to his Excellency in all these late changes.

These following were restored to their Offices being formerly put out for
serving his Majesty, viz. Edward Sherborne to his place of Clerk to his
Majesty's Ordnance: Mr. Marsh to his place of Storekeeper, and Mr. Clarke
formerly Commissary General in his late Majesty's Army, to his place of Clarke
of the Deliveries.

His Majesty conferred on Mr. Hoar the Office of Comptroller of His Majesty's
Mint.

That the Soldiery may see the affection that his Sacred Majesty has for the
Arm;, he has been pleased to do them so much honor* as to take that Regiment
that was lately Col. Unton Crooks, for his own, which is now st^led The Royal
Regiment; what the names of the Officers are, you may see in the next. His
Highness the Duke of York has so far honored the Regiment of the Lord
Falconberg, as to own it, which is now called the Duke of Yorks Regiment, the
Lord Falconberg and the Officers being still continued.

From his Excellencies Quarters at the Cockpit.
His Excellency has been pleased lately to change some Officers, and dispose
their Commands to others. He has given the comm^nd of the ^roop* late Captain
Shermans in the Lord Viscount Falklands R^gim^nt, to Col. Henry Heylin.

The Troop that was late Captain Greenwoods in the same Regiment, to Capt. Tho.
Morley.

The Company late Major Waterhouses in Col. Daniels Regiment, to Capt. Leonard
Aizay.

His Excellency has likewise commissioned Major Adam Brown, br^ther to Sir
Ambrose Brown, to be Major of Sir Anthony Ashley Coopers Regiment, being about
to confer a greater honor on Major Harley.

Westminster.
Phinehas Pain that was lately Committed upon misinformaon given, that he was
the person that executed his late Majesty, is, upon Examination, discharged.

Naples the 5 of June 1660.
Our Vice Roy having received an express from the Spanish Ambassador residing
at Rome, sent to give him notice of the conclusion of the Peace of the Empire,
he caused presently the Te Deum to be s^^g for it, in the Church of St. James,
in the presence of all our Magistrates, and with the noise of all the Canons of
our Castles, and other tokens of joy ordinarily made use of on such occasions.

Madrid 9 June 1660.
The Order of our Lady of the mercy and redemption of the Slaves, having sent
some Deputys to Algier, about March last, namely some Friars of the Province of
Castille and Andalousia, they brought from thence, about the later end of the
last month 36^ Slaves, whom they had redeemed, and amongst others several
Moncks of the Orders of St. Dominick, St. Francis and St. Austin. And because
the money they carried for that purpose, was not found sufficient for redeeming
so great a number; Father Anthonio de Rigo remained as an Ostage, for the
performance of the fourth Vow of that Order. The preparations against Portugal
are continued every where, but the season being very much spent already, many
are of opinion that they will not be made use of this year.

Rome 12 June 1660.
Within these few days, Monsieur Boncompagno, Arch-B^shop of Bononia, arived
here, and having repaired to salute the Pope, he declared him his Magior-Dome.
The 5 instant Cardinal Barbarigo, being come to the Palace Quirinal, ^he
received there the Cardinals that from the Pope's own hand, after the usual
manner, and having been very sumptuously feasted by Cardinal Chigi, with
Cardinal Mancini, he began his visits of the College of Cardinals, by that of
Cardinal Barberin, the Sub-Deane of that College.

The 6. Cardinal Vecchiacelli, Bishop of Rietti, was consecrated in the new
Church by Cardinal Rospigliosi, assisted therein by Mr. Signi Archbishop of
Thessalonica, and Mr. Caraffa Archbishop of Patrasso. The same day, the young
son, of whom the Princess Borghese was lately delivered, was christened in the
church of S. Laurence, by Cardinal Chigi, in the Popes behalf, and named Marc
Antonio, John Maria, Joseph, Philip, Thomas, Nicholas, Francis, Dominick,
Bernardino, Gaspard and Caetan. The next day the Propositions were made for the
Bishoprics, and Cardinal d'Este propounded that of Beziers in France, for the
Abbot Bonzi.

Venice, June 22, 1660.
The 6. inst^nt, Te Deum was sung in our Cathedral church for the peace between
Swed^land, Poland, and their Allies. The same day, the Dowager Empress went
from hence for ^u^enburgh in S^iria, where she will expect the Duchess of
M^n^^^, her mother. Since the confirmation of the news of the defeat of Prince
Ragotsky's forces, 6000 men have been commanded to march with all speed toward
the frontiers of Hungaria, to join with the Imperial army, and order has been
given to the Commander in chief, to reinforce the chiefest garrisons, so that
they may hinder the progress of the Turkish army, who seem to have a design to
advance that way. But it is thought they will soon alter their resolutions, if
what we have heard by letters from thence prove true, that Prince Ragotsky
having gathered the remainder of his forces, has so resolutely fallen on the
Turkish army, in a narrow place, that 5 or 6000 of them were slain there, and
that he has regained most of the prisoners taken from him. In the mean while,
we are confidently informed, that that Prince not finding himself able to
oppose the forces that are pre^^^ing against him, without a very potent
assistance, has off^red unto the Emperor to put all the important places of
Transylvania into his hands, and wholly to renounce any engagement with the
Turkish Empire.

Regenspurgh, June 15.
The S. instant, the Cardinal of Osnabruck our Bishop had his Synod in this
place, where he found about 600 Churchmen of this Diocese, and ended it as he
had begun it, by a general Procession.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
There is now published that long expected and much-desired work entitled, The
second part of the Signal Loyalty and devotion of Gods true Saints and pious
Christians under the Gospel (especially in this our Island) toward their
Christian Kings and Emperors, whether Orthodox or Heteredon, virtuous or
vicious, Protestants or Papists, Protectors or Persecutors, ever since their
Kings and Emperors first became Christian, till this present, etc. By William
Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolus-Inne, and a member of this present Parliament,
which book is dedicated to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and sold by Edward
Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little-Prittain, where all the several works of
this learned and pious Author are to be sold.

The Grand Scipio, an excellent new Romance, written in French by Monsieur de
Vaumoriero, and rendered into English by G. H. Printed for H. Mosely, T. Dring,
and H Herringman, and are to be sold at their shops.

The third and last volume of the History of Philosophy, containing the lives
of Pythagoras, Democritus, Epicurus, and the rest of the Halick Philosophers.
Print^d for H. Mosel^y and T. Dring, and are to be sold at their shops a^ the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the George in Fleetstreet.

Private forms of Prayer fit for sid times; heretofore printed at Oxford, and
used (occasionally) upon days of solemn ^um^liation and fasting, in his late
Majesty's Roy^l Chapel of blessed and glorious memory; also a form of prayer
for the 30th of January, m^rnin^ and eveni^g* likewise prayers of intercession
for the use of such as mourn in s^cret; together with a co^lection of several
other prayers. Sold by William Not, at the White horse in St. Paul's Church yard.

Cromwell's bloody slaughterhouse; or his damnable designs laid and practiced
by him and his Negro's, in con^riving the murder of his sacred Majesty King
Charles the first, discovered by a person of honor. Sold by James Davis at the
Greyhound in St. Paul's Church yard. The price is 12 d.

The death of Charles the first lamented with the restoration of Charles the
Second congratulated; delivered (...) speech at the proclaiming of our gracious
King, as his Town of Wellington, May 17. 1660. By William Langley, late of
Lich^^eld, Minister now of Wel^ington, his Majesty's faithful, loyal subject.
Sold by Richa^d Lownd^s at the white Lion in St. Paul's Church yard, and Sym.
Gape, ne^t to Hercules Pillar in Fleetstreet.

The law of charitable use; wh^r^in the Statute of 43, Eliz. Chap 4. is set
forth and expl^i^ed; with directions how to sue out and prosecute Commissions
grounded upon that Statute. Also Pr^s^^ents Inquisitions, and Decrees, with
diverse Judgments, and Resolutions upon ^^^eptions and Appeals against Decrees,
and other proceedings upon the said St^tute by John Herne. Sold by Timothy
Twyford, ^s his shop within the ^aner-Temple-gate.

A Leather Portmanteau lost at Sittingburn or Rochester, when his Majesty came
thither, wherein was a suit of Camolet de Holland, with 2 little laces in a
seam, tight pair of white gloves, and a pair of Doc^ lether; about twenty yards
of sky-colored Ribbon twelve penny broad, and a whole piece of black Ribbon
ten penny broad; a cloth lead colored cloak, with store of linen, a pair of
shoes, slippers, a Montero, and other things; all which belong to a Gentleman
(a near Servant to his Majesty) who has been too long imprisoned and
Sequestered, to be now robbed, when all men hope to enjoy their own. If any can
give notice, they may leave word with Mr. Samuel Me^ne his Majesty's
Book-binder at his house in Little-Britain, and they shall be thankfully
rewarded.

Captain Edward Ranger Foot-post of Dover is restored to his place, having been
deprived thereof ever since the year 1648. for his Loyalty to his late Majesty,
and lodges at the Star on Fish street- Hill.

WHereas there is a Pamphlet lately published, with no name to it, wherein
amongst many accusations of several persons, Tho. Viner, Alderman of London
(being Sheriff of London when his Prince was murdered) is said to be then
present: This is to acquaint you, that it is a false aspersion, he being not
there when that horrid execution was done, but did declare his detestation of
so foul and vile an act.

And whereas the Pamphleteer further says, that the said Alderman Viner got
well by ordering the massy heaps of plate for the Mint, that is also false, he
never having the ordering of any of the Public massy heaps of plate for the
Mint, nor did he at any time finger one penny of the Publicks money.

Sir John VVitterong, who had disbursed several great sums of money upon many
of his Majesty's pictures, to preserve them from worse hands, did lately
present them all to his Majesty gratis.

Mr. Combs lately restored to his Majesty Land belonging to the Crown, which
he had purchased at a considerable value at Hemsted in Hertfordshire. The like
was done by the Town at the same time that had purchased the other part. His
Majesty was pleased to make Mr. Combs Steward thereof.

There is a particular List given unto his Majesty of the names of all such as
have bought his Majesty's Lands, and what they bought, whereby it may fairly be
expected that they will be as just to his Majesty as those honest Gent. of
Hertfordshire have been.

Hamburgh, June 17.
The Swede and Pole make themselves ready to fall on the Muscovite, who is much
distressed by the incursion of the Tartar, who falling into Russia, gave the
Muscovite a great overthrow, sacked and harras'd the Country, and carried away
many thousand slaves. On the other side the Cossacks are fallen in, destroying
all they meet with. The Muscovites that are hemmed in at Lochwith, it is thought
cannot get off without great loss, though the Muscovite dreins all his
Garrisons to make a body to relieve their Army there. The white Russians have
made a confederacy to join with the Pole against their Lord and Emperor of
Russia, as soon as the Pole shall march into the Field with a considerable
Army. The Polish General Carnetzky has defeated the Muscovy General Cowingzky,
and cut him off 7000 men, who is retreated with the rest toward the Wilda at
Lachowitz. There is a discourse here, that the Swede having yet his Fleet that
was kept in by Vice Admiral de Ruyter at liberty, will join with others at
Landscrown and Gottenburgh to infest Arch-Angelo and destroy the Muscovite
there. The Poles have taken Buckowa, which cost the Muscovites so many years
siege, so that Muscovy is now reduced to a very sad condition. They thirst
after peace, which if not granted them they threaten to cut their Governor
Nassorkin in pieces, and extirpate his whole Generation.

Bordeaux, June 29. 1660.
The 24 instant, the Queen made her devotions in the Covent of the Carmelites,
Nuns of this place, and the next day their Majesty's did the like in the Church
of Saint Andrew. The 25, all the Corporations of this place had their audience,
being conducted thereto by M. de Saintot, Master of the Ceremonies, and at
night there was a Spanish Comedy at Court, where the Count de Fuensaldagna and
all the other Grandees were present. The 26, the Townhouse gave to their
Majesty's the divertisement of a great fire-work erected before their Majesty's
lodgings. The 27, their Majesty's went aboard the great Boat presented to them
by our Jurates at Cadillac, and departed, our Cannon playing all that while,
with several volleys of the Kings Musketeers, who went before in two great
boats, and were followed in a third boat by his Majesty's Trumpeters. The boat
wherein were their Majesty's was drawn by three barks, in each of which were
twelve men rowing in blew coats, laced with silver lace, and the rest of the
Court followed in several other Boats, which made a little, but very pleasing
Fleet.

Whitehall.
On Wednesday the fourth of July, the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and capital
Burgesses of the corporation of Doncaster, in the County of York, having the
honor to be introduced to his Majesty by the Earl of Dunfreeze, Lord Castleton,
and Sir John Dawney, for a demonstration of their loyalty, duty and affection
to his Majesty, humbly presented by the hands of Thomas Bradford their Mayor, a
congratulatory Address, wherein they returned all possible thanks to Almighty
God, who had been graciously pleased to restore his Majesty to his people, and
his people to his Majesty's Government, engaging themselves to defend his
Majesty's sacred person and Government against all opposers, and therewith the
Mayor tendered a surrender of a Fee-farm rent of 74 l. 13 s. 11 d. ob* per
annum, an ancient Flower of the Crown, which being in these times exposed to
sale, they had redeemed out of other hands, and now joyfully restored them to
his Majesty, both which his Majesty was pleased very graciously to accept of,
and returned them thanks, with many particular expressions of affection and
favor to that Town. The same day Doctor ^yam, a person of great learning and
integrity, who attended his sacred Majesty in his troubles, as long as his age
did enable him to travel, was this day sworn Chaplain Extraordinary to his
Majesty.

On Thursday his Sacred Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, were
entertained by the City of London at Guild Hall; the unseasonable weather took
off much of the solemnity which was intended to be performed, so that his
Majesty went into London attended only by his own household guards, which
proceeded in this order, A^jutant General Miller rode before at some little
distance to make way, after whom went Sir William Throckmorton, now Knight
Marshal, his footmen and servants waiting on either side of him, before six
Trumpets, then a Kettle-Drum, another Class of seven Trumpets, six Maces, the
Heralds in rich coats, the pages and footmen, and next his Majesty's Coach with
six horses, guarded on both sides with his Majesty's Royal Band of Pensioners
(walking on foot with their pistols in their hand, under the Command of the
most noble and valient E. of Cleaveland their Captain) the Equires and several
of his Majesty's servants, next them came the Yeomen of the Guard, then the
Lord Chancellor in his Coach, the Duke of Buckingham in his, and so all the
Nobility in their order. The Speaker of the House of Commons in his Coach and
six horses, attended by a troop of horse that were upon their guard that day,
and after him the House of Commons in Coaches. In London several of the
pent-houses and windows were adorned with Tapestry, a lane made by the Liveries
of the several Companies, and many Pageants in the streets. In St. Paul's
Churchyard, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and several others of the City richly
accoutred met his Majesty, and from thence conducted him to Guild Hall. The
Gentlemen of the Artillery led by the most valient and learned John Lord Lucas,
at Cheapside opened to the right and left, and guarded both sides of the way
whilst his Majesty passed through. Being come to Guild Hall, Carpets were
spread from the Hall down to the Council Chamger for his Majesty to tread on.
Before dinner Sir William Wild the Recorder made a Speech to his Majesty,
declaring the great honor that his Majesty was pleased to bestow on them in
deigning formerly to send to them his most gracious Letter and Declaration, and
now to add to that kindness, by affording them his Royal presence, etc. At the
upper end of the great Hall, the Hosting toward the West was raised three
ascents, where was placed a Chair of State, and a rich Canopy, where his
Majesty and his two Royal Brothers dined, where his Majesty's servants, and
several Aldermen and Common-Council-men attended.

The House of Peers, and House of Commons dined at other tables in the great
Hall, attended likewise by Aldermen and Common-Council-men; at the sound of the
loud music the whole service was set on the Table, and during the whole dinner
time they were entertained with variety of music, both instrumental and vocal.

After dinner was a very costly banquet, and then an interlude, where a Rustic
was represented, to the content of his Majesty, and the rest of the spectators.

After this his Majesty retired him into a withdrawing room, where he was
pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood on Alderman Reynoldson, Mr. Cleyton,
the Chamberlain of London, and Colonel Player his son.

On Friday July 6. The Mayor and Citizens of the ancient City of Lincoln,
having drawn up an humble Address to his Majesty, together with a resignation
of their Fee-farm rent of 81 l. per annum under their Common Seal, did send the
same by Robert Marshal Esquire and William South Gent. unto Sir Tho. Meres and
John Monson Esquire who now serve in Parliament for the said City, which was this
day delivered.

After a Speech first made by Sir Tho. Meres unto his Sacred Majesty, in behalf
of the City of Lincoln, representing unto his Majesty how often and how much that
City had suffered in the late War, and how loyal and faithful the Citizens
thereof do continue unto his Majesty, and that as the want of his Majesty's
Government was their decay, so he being peaceably reestablished, they hope to
repair their lesses under his protection and favor, he delivered his Majesty
this Address.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
YOur Majesty's most obedient Subjects, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and
Commonalty of your Majesty's ancient City of Lincoln, do humbly prostrate
themselves before your Majesty, acknowledging that through the general
defection of your Majesty's Subjects in this your Kingdom from their
Allegiance, occasioned by the prevalency of the late pretended powers, they
were therein involved with tbe rest of your Majesty's Subjects; and therefore
do most humbly and submissively apply themselves, and lay hold on your
Majesty's most gracious Pardon, and through and under your Majesty's gracious
favor and clemency do with all humility, as a body incorporate, present to
your Majesty their sense and apprehension of Gods mercy to your Majesty's
Subjects (giving God the praise) that Divine Providence has not only
preserved your sacred person in the midst of many and eminent dangers, but
likewise has made restoration of your Majesty in peace to your Subjects, and
of them to their Allegiance to your most gracious Majesty, as their undoubted
Sovereign; next they present their hopes and prayers for prosperity and
blessings from Almighty God upon your sacred Majesty, and your Government over
them as their King, and beg your protection of their persons and estates by the
ancient and known Laws of your Kingdom, and your Majesty's aforesaid City of
Lincoln, and the incorporate body thereof do with all humble submission to your
Majesty acknowledge, that during the prevalency of the late pretended powers
over them, and the rest of your Subjects, to avoid the mischiefs and pressures
which in all probability might have occured, if the Fee farm due from your said
City had come into the hands and power of such as might have made use of the
purchase of it, to have inv^ded their privileges and interests. Your aforesaid
City upon the account of i^vitable necessity, and self-preservation, were
constrained to borrow the sum of seven hundred pounds, wherewith to purchase
the aforesaid Fee-farm of eighty and one pounds per annum.

Now may it please your most Excellent Majesty, your aforesaid Subjects, the
Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and Comonalty of the City of Lincoln, do hereby for
themselves and their Successors. Freely and humbly surrender and resign unto
your most Sacred Majesty, all the right and interest which they have or may
pretend to the said Fee-farm rent, by reason of the aforesaid purchase: And do
also humbly declare, That your said City will yearly render to your Majesty, as
your undoubted right and due, from time to time, as it becomes payable; and
will further with all readiness freely do or make a^y further Declaration or
public Act, as your Maje^ties Learned Council shall devise, for confirmation
of these presents, or contents of them.

And in testimony of the unanimous, full and free consent of the whole body
incorporate of your Majesty's said City, they have caused to be put to their
common Seal, the six and twentieth day of June, in the twelfth year of your
Majesty's most gracious Reign ov^^ England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.

His Majesty was pleased most graciously to receive the Address, with several
expressions of favor: and then Sir Tho. Meres did a second time humbly upon
his knee beseech his Majesty hereafter to vouchsafe his favor to that ancient
City; which his Majesty granted accordingly, and as an earnest thereof gave
them the honor of his Majesty's hand.

At his Excellencies Quarters at the Cock pit.
His Excellency makes it his whole business to settle the Army as may be most
to his Majesty's Service, and in order thereunto has removed several Officers,
and put others in their places. He has lately removed Capt. P^ase and Capt.
Charlit^n of Col. Alsop's Regiment belonging to the Garrison of Dunkirke, and
put Capt, Pope and Capt* Richard Powel in their places.

There is a very confident report that M. Scos, one that sat in the pretended
High Court of Justice, for trial of his late Majesty of everblessed memory, is
now Prisoner at Dunkirke.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


