Numb. 31. Mercurius Publicus, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence:
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday July 26. to
Thursday August 2. 1660.
Whitehal.
AMong a thousand other Observations which His MAJESTY'S Travels and
Afflictions have taught Him, one is, the Interest of this Island as to Fishing,
which His MAJESTY comprehends so perfectly, that as He needs no Council to
advise, so no Neighbor States or Nation but will find it; and this is one of
those infinite Blessings we enjoy in such a Prince (as unless we be stark
staring mad) will render us the most happy people under Heaven: For which
purpose has His MAJES^Y now sent a Letter to the Lord Mayor of London, a true
Copy whereof we here give you

CHARLES R. Right Trusty and Well beloved, We Greet you well,
WHereas Our Royal Father of Blessed Memory, did in the Year one thousand six
hundred thirty and two, Constitute and Establish a Society of Fishers, and
Declared, That He was resolved by all good occasions favorably to assist, and
graciously accept the forwardness of all those that should express their zeal
to His Majesty's Service in so general and public an Undertaking; It being
then Resolved and Concluded by His Majesty, that it was very honorable and
necessary for this Kingdom. Now that the true managing and most advantageous
prosecution thereof, is by experience discovered by Philip late Earl of
Pembroke and Montgomery and his Associates, who did cause sandry Fishing
Vessels to be provided and built, which employed many Families in making of
Nets and other provisions (o^e Vessel employing twenty Families in Work)
besides the breeding of Country youths to be made serviceable Mariners in short
time, as by the Book called The Royal Herring Buss Fishings, presented unto Us
does plainly appear. And whereas We are informed that the Nation does abound
with great numbers of poor Families and Vagrants, who for want of employment
are like to perish, unless some speedy care be taken for their relief; And that
the several Wards and Suburbs of this Our City of London and Hamlets adjacent,
are burdened with multitudes of poor people, not only which are born in the
said places, but such as come out of sund^y Countries to s^ek Relief: For
Redress whereof, We do hereby recommend unto the care of you Our Lord Major of
the said City, to advise with each Alderm^n, and cause his Ward-moot Inquest,
^o give in a particular of all the poor Inhabitants within his Ward what their
employment is, and how many are without employment, and present the same to the
rest of the Inhabitants to his Ward, with a Copy thereof, and excite them to a
free subscription for Ruising a Stock to buy Hemp and Cl^^^ards, to make
H^rring Fishing Nets, and Barrel, for the furnishing and fi^ting (...) Busse or
Fishing Vessel to belong to the said Ward, which will give all the Poor and
Vagrants employment, the said Ward husbanding the same to their best advantage.
The which We shall in like manner recommended all the Counties, Cities, and
Towns within our Dominions, whereby to make it a National employment for the
general gro^, and will give all fitting assistance unto the Undertakers for
their encouragement ^ That so when Provisions shall be made ready, and
Storehouses built in commodious places about the River of Thames (where
breaches have been made) and the like in the several Ports, Magazines may be
sitted with Nets, Cask, Salt, and all things in readiness, The Busses may all
go forth to Our Island of Sheetland as their Re^dezvous to keep together in
their Fishing, accor^ ing to certain Orders prescribed in the aforesaid Book;
and to take that Privilege of the Fishing Grounds, which belongs to Us before
all Nations whatsoever. And so we bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at our Court at Whitehall this 23. day of July, in the Twelfth Year of
Our Reign. By his Majesty's Command. Ed. Nicholas.


To Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved, the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, to
be communicated to the Court of Aldermen.
We have already given you an account how highly the Nation of Scotland is
satisfied; We shall now present you with the state of Affairs in Ireland,
wherein it will be very considerable to look into the affections of the Army,
which we shall offer you in their own words, as they were presented in an
Address to his Majesty, by the Right Honorable the Lord Broghil, viz.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Officers of
your Majesty's Army in and near Dublin in Ireland.
NOthing can in degrees so fully proportion our sorrow for the murder of your
Royal Father, as our joy for your Restoration; It Is your Majesty's Glory, and
our satisfaction, that God has effected it without blood; the world sees it is
the day of his power, the people are so willing in it, none as men but must say
it is wonderful in our eyes, and none as Christians but will say it is the Lords
doings.

Your Majesty's Gracious Declaration and Letters to the Parliament, have not
only prevented, but granted our chiefest desires, and we owe you our most
sincere and humble acknowledgment, as much for the manner of giving as for the
gift; in this we are safe, in that we are happy.

Your Majesty desires nothing more then to act your clemency, and we desire
nothing more then not to appear unworthy of it.

God has preserved you abroad in your person, and which we know is dearer to
you, in your Religion, signal evidences whereof we have already received, for
no other Tree could produce such fruit.

All your subjects virtually are in Parliament, and by Parliament you do
graciously promise to be advised, your Majesty could not grant more, nor your
People ask more.

And to manifest you will Rule by Example as well as Precept, you decline being
your own Judge in your deepest ^oncernments: Your Royal Fathers Murderers
could not (...) a greater favor, nor your Parliament a greater trust; neither
could your Majesty more sensibly and graciously let the body of your people
know, you esteemed them innocent of that sin then by leaving it to them to
punish.

You do not only observe your Laws your self, but you freely pardon all your
subjects that have broken them; To be just is what all Kings ought to be, but
to be merciful is what (...) King is; the best of our former Princes appeared
worthy of the Crown, but after they wore it, your Majesty has done so before,
the providence of God having taught you to reign over your self, before you
reigned over your Kingdoms, out of which you were put by violence, but you are
restored by consent, by which through mercy we now live to see more then hopes
of that which we have so long thirsted after, an happy and full agreement
between King and people, toward the ataining whereof, we can truly say,
neither our prayers, nor our endeavors in our respective stations have been
wanting, nor through the goodness of God shall they cease, till what is so
happily begun be completed.

Your Majesty should have earlier received this Tribute of our Loyalty and
affection, but that we stayed till this time to assure you which now we presume
to do, that generally the Officers and Soldiers in this your Army, have not
only joyfully proclaimed your Majesty's Royal undoubted right to your three
Kingdoms, but with their hands have subscribed the same; and we are confident,
if your service require it, would do the like with their bloods against all
opposets.

We have nothing can Apologize for the confidence of this duty, but that out of
the abundance of the heart, the mouth will speak, which in all humility we hope
will obtain both your Majesty's belief, and your pardon for

Your Majesty's most humble and most faithful Subjects and Ser^^^ts. Signed by
the Lord Bro^hil, Sir Charles C^ot, and all the Officers in and near Dublin*



Thus you see how the Soldiery are inclin^d to His Majesti^s service. Nor is
there any doubt to be made of the general consent of the whole Kingdom of
Ireland, who have expressed so much loy^lty to His Majesty, and toward whom
His Majesty has shown so much c^^e and tend (...), ^n declaring the Right
honble. L. Roberts to be His Deputy the^; which the Commissioners of that
Nation look upon not only as the highest point of p^udence in His Majesty, but
as an especial Act of Grace and Favor to that Kingdom, he being a person so
fi^ly qualified both for his Wisdom and Integrity for the management of so
grand an Affair.

On Thursday the 26. instant, the poor and small Inland Corporation of Eye in
the County of Suffolk, did by the hands of Thomas Dey and France Cheney G^nt.
M^mbers of that said Corporation (who with Sir George Revo Knight, and Charles
cornwallis Esquires, Members of Parliament for that plac^, were conducted to
His Majesty by Sir Frederick Cornwallis Knight and Baronet, Treasurer of His
Majesty's household) present His Majesty with one hundred pounds in Gold. Though
this s^em in it self but smal^, yet if we look upon the place, we may justly
judge their Loyalty to be great, and if we consider the sum, with the abilities
of the Inhabitants, little, if at all inferior to the largest Presents. His
Majesty was graciously pleased to accept it, gave them thanks, and assured them
of his favor to their Corporation.

The day the Lord Edward Montague, who commanded the Fleet when they received
His Majesty and His two Royal Brothers, being for this and other eminent
services created by His Majesty Earl of Sandwich, Viscount Hinchinbrook, and
Lord B^ron of St. Needs, took his place in the House of Peers.

To these we shall add some other Ti^les of Honor and Offices which His
Majesty has likewise conferred on this honorable Person; and then we must
tell y^u, that besides his Command at Sea under his Highness he Duke or York,
Lord High Admiral, that he is K^ight of the most Noble Order of the Gar^er,
M^ster of His Majesty's great W^rdrobe, one of the Commissioners of His
Majesty's Treasury, and one of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

Here give us leave to acquaint you That his Majesty was pleased to confer the
honor of Knighthood on William Tredenham a M^mber of Parliament, for St. Mawes
in Cornwel, as likewise to grant the favor of his hand to Major John
Blackmore, who was introduced to his Majesty by his Excellency.

On Friday his Majesty was pleased to go to the House of Peers, and to make a
gracious Speech for the speedy passing of the Bill of Indemnity and Oblivion,
wherein his Majesty acquainted them how at his first coming to them, he did
both by Himself, and the Chancellor, recommend to them and the House of
Commons, the speedy dispatch of that Act, how since by a particular Message he
p^essed the House of Commons to hasten that work, and did by Proclamation
publish to the whole Kingdom, with what impatience he expected that Act should
be presented to him for his Assent, as the most reasonable and solid foundation
of Peace and security; how he thought the House of Commons too long about it,
and therefore would not have them guilty of the same dela^, thanking God that
he had the same Inten^^ons and Resolutions which he had at Breda and then
reading what he then said, viz.

And to the end that the F^ar of punishment may not engage any, Conscious to
themselves of what is passed to a perseverance in Guilt for the future, by
opposing the Quiet and Happiness of their Country in the Restoration both of
King Peers and People, to their ^ast Ancient and Fundamental Rights: We do by
these Presents Declare, That We do grant a Free and General Pardon, which We
are ready upon demand to p^ss under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our
Subjects, of what degree or quality soever, who, within forty days after the
publishing hereof, shall lay hold upon th^^ Our Grace and Favor, and shall by
any Public Act declare their doing so; And that they return to the Loyalty
and Obedience of good Subjects. (exc^pting only such persons as shall hereafter
be excepted by Parliament.) Those only ex^^pted, let all Our loving Subjects,
how faulty soever rely upon the Word of a King, Solemnly given by this present
Declaration That no Crime whatsoever committed against Us or Our Royal Father,
before the Publication of this, shall ever rise in judgment, or be brought in
Question against any of them, to the l^ast endammagement of them, either in
their ^ives: Liberties or Estates, or (as far forth as lies in Our Power) so
much as to the Prejudice of their Reputations, by any Repr^ach or term of
Distinction from the rest of Our best Subjects. We d^siring and Ordaining, that
henceforward all Notes of Discord, S^paration and Difference of Parties be
utterly Abolished among all Our Subjects, whom We invite and Conjure to a
perfect Union among themselves under Our Prot^ction, for the Resettlement ^f
Our Just Rights, and theirs, in a Free Parliament; By which upon the Word of a
King, We will be advised.

His Majesty then added, That if they did not then join with him in
extinguishing the ^ear which keeps the hearts of men awake and apprehensive of
safety and security, they would keep him from performing his Promise. His
Majesty thanked them for their justice to those that had been the imm^diate
Murderers of his Father, and assured them he never thought excepting any
other. Many other Arguments his Majesty was graciously pleased to make use of,
desiring and co^juring them again and again, that laying al^ particular
Animosities aside, they would pass that Act without any other exceptions, then
of those who were immediately guilty of the Murder of his Father.

On Saturday the 28. The truly Honorable, and perfect Pattern of Loyalty,
Marquis of Ormond, being created and summoned by Writ from his Majesty, as Earl
of Brecknock, took his place in the H^use of Peers.

H^ving i^ our former sh^et acquainted you with the times and places of the
Circuits we shall now give you the names of the Judges.

Judges for the West Circuit, are Justice Foster and Justice Tyrrill, of the
Common Pleas.

The home Circuit, Lord Chief Baron and Serjean Waller.

Oxford Circuit, are Justice Mallet of the Kings Bench, and Baron Turner.

N^^h Circuit, are Justice Twisden of the Kings Bench, and Sergeant Barnard.

Northampton Circuit, are Baron Atkins and Sergeant Earl.

Norfolk Circui^, are Justice Hyde of the Common Pleas, and Sergeant Archer.

The same day his Sacred Majesty went to the House of Peers, and gave his Royal
Assent to these Acts following viz. An Act for Continuing the Excise. An Act
for Tonnage and Poundage; An Act for Commissioners of Sewers.

Elseneur July 14.
We are still very busy here (almost day and night) to transport the Swedish
Forces over into Schonen, and the endeavors of the Hollands Admiral de Ruyter,
is much to be commended, for assisting and helping the transportation, which if
it had not been for his Fleet, might possibly have been retarded yet a good
while. Last Saturday several Vessels with Foot soldiers arrived here from
Copenhagen, which are to be the Garrison of Cronenburg Castle, but they are not
yet landed, till the Castle be delivered up by the Swedes, which is conceived
will be done within a few days. Letters from Copenhagen intimate, that the
English Ambassadors will be here on Monday next, to take shipping for England.

Hamburgh, July 24.
The Armies hereabouts lie still in their Quarters, and the report is, that
they will suddenly break up, but as yet there but small appearance of it. Count
Koningsmarck has disbanded several Officers in the Dukedom of Bremen, and
reduces the Regiments. Cronenburg is not yet delivered to the Danes. The
Hollands Admiral de Ruyter is busy in transporting the Swedish Forces over
into Fuhnen. The Dantzick Post was robbed six leagues off this place, which
causes that no Letters are come this day.

Hague, July 31.
The business at Utrecht is not yet appeased, so as it was thought, but is
grown higher then formerly, insomuch as there has been this week three
companies more commanded thither to reinforce the former thither sent; and it
is to be feared much trouble may ensue upon this difference m^de between the
Ministers and the Magistrates there, the former whereof having begun the
trouble, it is thought may severely smart for it. Mijn Here Mycope who has been
long detained a Prisoner concerning Accounts belonging to the States, has now
his sentence for to pay 15000 gild. fine, defray all charges of Imprisonment,
and to answer at the Law all Suits that shall be brought against him by any
person he has wronged, M. Boshuysen and two more guilty of the same fact, have
all their goods and estates confiscated, and their persons for ever banished.

Advertisement of a Book newly Printed and Published.
Divine Efficacy without Humane Power. Opened in a Sermon Preached at St.
Margarets Church in Westminster, before the Right Honorable the House of
Commons, June 2. 1660. Being the day of solemn Thank giving for the Happy
Return of the Kings Majesty. By Edward Reynolds D. D. and Chaplai^i^ ordinary
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Sold by George Thomason at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Advertisements.
ALL Deputy Postmasters and Officers, that hold themselves concerned in the
Settlement of the Posts, in the several Stages of Plymouth road and Bristol
road, are desired to take notice, that an Agent is appointed by the Master of
his Majesty's Post Office who begins his journey toward Plymouth upon Thursday
the Second of August, to settle all the Posts in the several Stages upon that
road, who returns by B^istol, to settle all the Posts also upon that road.

GEntlemen, You are desired to take notice, That Mr. Theophilus Buckworth who
for some years past permitted, and gave directions to his Brother Mr. Edmond
Buckworth, to make and expose to sale for the public good, those so famous
Lozanges or Pectorals approved for the cure of Consumptions, Coughs, Catarchs,
As^^m^'s, Hoarsness, Strongness of Boc^th, Coins in general, D^seases incident
to the Lungs, and a sovereign An^^^o^e against the Plague, and all other
contagious Diseases, and obstructions of the Stomach. does now himself (being
the Author and first compounder of them) make them at his House on Mile-end
Green. And for more convenience of the people, constantly leaves them sealed
up with his Coat of Arms on the Papers with Mr. Richard ^owndes (as formerly)
at the sign of the White Lion (...) the Little North door of Paul's Church, Mr.
Henry ^ei^e over against Dunsta^s Church in Fleetstreet, M^. William Milward at
We^minste^* H^ll Gat^, Mr. John Pla^^ at Furni^^als-Inn Gate in Holborn, and
Mr. Robert Horn at the Turks head near the entrance of the Royal Exc^ange
Booksellers, and no others.

This is published to prevent the d^signs of diverse pretenders who counterfeit
the said Lozenges to the disparagement of the said Gentleman, and great abuse
the people.

ON Wednesday the 2^ of July was stolen out of Peekham f^^ld, thr^^ Miles off
London, a Sorr^ (...) ^^^teen hand s^^ high, having two Wall eyes, Bald faced,
four white feet, much white about him, having (...) sides ga^len with a
Pack-saddle, being a Bakers horse. If any person can bring tidings to Mr
Bellamy at the Plying horse in ^hames-street, near the Bride Foot, they shall
be well rewarded for their pai^^.

His Sacred Majesty gave his Royal assent to these Acts following: The Act for
Tonnage and Poundage; The Act for continuing the Excise till the 20. of August
1660. An Act for the present nominating of the Commissioners of Sewers; and An
Act for the restoring James Marquess of Ormond all his Honors, Manors, Lands
and Tenements in Ireland, whereof he was in possession on the 23. day of
October 1641. or at any time since.

Of these we shall give you some account, referring those that are desirous of
farther satisfaction, to the Acts printed at large by his Majesty's Printers.
In the first there is granted to his Majesty, of every Ton of French wine
brought into the Port of London by his Majesty's natural born subjects by way
of merchandise, 4 l. 10 s. and by strangers 6 l. If brought to any other Port,
by natural born subjects 3 l. by strangers 4 l. 10 s. Of every But or Pipe of
wines of the growth of Levant, Spain or Portugal, brought into the Port of
London by his Majesty's natural born subjects, 2 l. 5 s. by strangers 3 l. if
brought into any other Port, by a natural born subject 1 l. 10 s. by strangers
2 l. 5 s. Of every Acom of wine of the growth of Germany, brought into his
Majesty's Realm and Dominions by natural born subjects 20 s. by strangers 25 s.
There is also granted another Subsidy of Poundage, viz. of all goods exported
or imported by way of merchandise by any natural born subject Denizen and
Alien, of every 20 s. valued according to the Book of Rates ^2 d. and of every
20 s. value of any native commodity or manufacture wrought of native commodity,
carried out by any Merchant alien, 12 d. over above the 12 d. aforesaid,
excepting Old Draperies, Wines limited to pay Tonage, etc. in the Books of
Rates Custom-free.

There is likewise granted a further Subsidy to continue from the 24. of June
inclusively during his Majesty's life, for every short Woolen cloth not above
28 yards long, and 64 l. weight, exported by any natural born subject, of 3 s.
4 d. and of every Cloth of greater length and weight proportionably, and of
every short Cloth of lesser length and weight, accounting so much to a short
Cloth according to the Book of Rates 3 s. 4 d. if exported by strangers, 6 s. 8
d.

It is further enacted, That if any goods be put in a vessel to be exported, or
unshipp'd to be laid on land, Duties being unpaid, and no agreement for them in
the Custom-house, the goods shall be forfeited one moye^ie to his Majesty, the
other to him that seiseth or sueth for them.

It is further enacted, That if the goods of any Merchant born Denizen after
the said 24. of June, shall be taken by Pirates or perished at sea, during his
Majesty's life, the duties and Subsidies being formerly paid, and due proof be
made thereof, the same Merchant, his executors or administrators may ship so
much goods as were lost, without paying any thing for the same. And that every
Merchant Denizen that shall ship any goods in a Carrack or Gally, shall pay as
an Alien.

Provided notwithstanding, that all Herrings and Seafish taken on the sea by
his Majesty's subjects, may be transported out of this Realm in vessels of his,
Majesty's subjects, without payment of Custom, Subsidy or Poundage, during his
Majesty's life.

It is further enacted, that the Rates intended in this Act are those mentioned
in a book entitled, The Rates of Merchandise, subscribed with the hand of Sir
Harbottle Grimston Baronet, which book is to remain during His Majesty's life.

It is further enacted, that where the goods amount to the value of 5 l. or
more, no other fees shall be received than such as were taken in the fourth
year of the late King James, without further Authority of Parliament.

Provided that no person who betwixt the 24 of June and the 24 of July 1660.
has received or paid any duties or Customs according to the Rates used in
April 1660. shall be molested for such receipt or payment.

And it is declared that no person who has shipped any goods in the same time,
shall be liable to the payment of any other duties than such as were used in
April 1660.

It is likewise enacted, that it may be lawful to transport Ishn, Armor,
Bandileers, Bridle-Bits, Halbert-Heads and harpes, Muskets, Carbines,
Fowling-pieces, Pistols, Pike^eads, Sword or Rapier Blades, Saddles, Snaffles,
Stirrops, Calveskins dressed or undressed, Geldings, Oxen, Sheepskins dressed
without the Wool, and all Manufactures made of Leather, as also Gunpowder, when
the price does not exceed 5 l. the Barrel, Wheat when at 40 s. the quarter,
Rye, Beans and Pease at 24 s. the quarter, Barley and Malt at 20 s. the
quarter, Oats at 10 s. the Quarter, Beef at 5 l. a B^rrel, Porke at 6 l. 10
s. a Barrel, Bacon at 6 d. a pound, Butter at 4 l. 10 s. the Barrel, Cheese at
1 l. 10 s. the hundred, Candles at 5 s. a dozen pound at the Ports when they
are laden, any law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided that it be free for his Majesty notwithstanding this Act, to prohibit
at any time the transporting of Gunpowder, or any Arms or Ammunition.

It is further enacted, that besides the former Rates there shall be paid to
his Majesty, out of every Tun of Wine of the growth of France, Germany,
Portugal, or Mardera, 3 l. of other Wine 4 l, within 9 months after the
importing for which security shall be given; but if the same Wines shall be
exported within 12 months, the security he shall be discharged or if he has
paid money he shall be allowed at 10 per Cent for a year.

It is farther enacted, that after the 24 of July all Wines shall be discharged
from the Imposition of Excise.

It is further provided that the prize Wines ought not to pay or be charged
with any Custom, Subsidy etc.

In the Act for continuing the Excise, the Imposition of Excise is continued to
be collected and paid, as also arrears unpardoned to the Commissioners that now
Collect the same from the 24 of June inclusively 1660. to the 24 of August the
same year; provided all sorts of Oils, Wines, etc. imported after the 24 of
July 1661 be discharged from that duty.

In the Act for Commissioners of Sewers, It is enacted, that Commissions of
Sewers shall and may be directed at any time before the 23 of October next
ensuing, not after, according to the manner and form expressed in the Statute
of the 23 of King Henry the 8, as the Lord Chancellor Lord ComCommissioner of
the Treasury, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Lord Chief Baron of
the Exchequer and the Justices of either Bench or any 3 of them wket^of the
Lord Chancellor. to be one shall appoint and that they shall have full power to
execute as any Commissioners of Sewers ot any time before.

Advertisements.
REader, pray take notice, that in His Majesty's Proclamation lately set forth
for days of holding the Assizes in the several Counties of this Kingdom, there
is a great mistake for the day of holding the Assizes for the County of
Cornwall, which is there said to be Wednesday the Fifteenth day of September,
whereas it should have been Wednesday the Nineteenth day of September; of which
all persons may take notice.

THere was lost between Bishops gatestreet and Grayes-Inn, a black box, somewhat
square, wherein there were Parchments, written in Latin, Sealed. If any one
can give notice thereof to Mr. Skelion a Bookseller in Duck-lane, at the sign
of the hand and bible, he shall be well rewarded.

If any person have found a small Almanac of Gold smiths, bound in Blew
Leather, with gilt Leaves and Claspes, lost either in Whitehal or Westminster,
upon Saturday the twenty eighth of this Mouth; they are desired to leave it at
Mr. Charles Toveys house, an Apothecary at the sign of the Horshooe near the
New-Exchange, and they shall be rewarded for their pains.

Paris the 30 of July S. N.
Saturday last the Queen mother was at Mass in the Church of Notre Dame, from
whence she came to the Castle of Vicennes, and dined there with the King* On
Monday the Cardinal was very ill of the Gout and Gravel, but by virtue of some
remedy which was given him, he vo^ded two stones, since which he has been
pretty well. The King visits him every day with great care, and so does the
Queen Mother; Prayers are made in all Churches for his recovery, which now only
is expected, to appoint the day for the Queens entrance, for which preparations
are still made* and with much industry continued. To make the Show the more
splendid, the Citizens are daily assembled in all the parts of this Town* to
exercise and train them up in Arms.

Some days since the Abbot Fantoni, Envoy Extraordinary from Poland, had
audience with the King, whom, in his Masters name, he gave thanks for those
good offices his Ambassadors had done concerning the peace with Sweden and
Poland, and afterward Complemented his Majesty touching his Marriage: He had
likewise audience given him by the Queen Mother, the young Queen, the Duke of
Anjon, and Cardinal Mazarini, with whom, it is said* he had also a conference
touching the present War with the Muscovites.

From the Castle of Vicennes of the same date.
The King and Queen are daily here, expecting the day of their entrance at
Paris, and the recovery of the C^rd^nal, for whose present indisposition the
whole Court seems to be troubled. The young Queen having a mind to divert
her self, and to see the fashion of Paris, went incognito in Madamo^selle
d'Orlea^ her Coach o^ Monday last, toward this City; but the noise of her
coming being bruited all over the Town, the people ran to meet the coach with
such a multitude, that her Majesty was forced to return back. And because she
had still a desire of seeing Paris, she went thither yesterday unknown,
accompanied by Monsieur the Duke of A^^ion where by the way she saw the Queen
Mother at Val de grace, their Majesty's went together to the Louvre, and thence
they visited the Cardinal, and so returned to Vicennes. A Courrier is lately
dispatched hence ^or Spai^, to carry the news of some evident marks taken
notice of, that the Queen is with child.

Whitehall.
On Monday last his Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the honor of
Knighthood on a young Swedish Nobleman, Baron Conrad Gyllenstierna.

We have no^ of late made any mention of Millitary Affa^rs, which being at the
present a matter of great importrnce as to the safety of the Kingdom and
preservation of the quiet of the people, we shall now be somewhat the more large
in giving you an account of the Officers of the Army lately settled in command.
And first we shall begin to give you a List of those not formerly mentioned in
the Lord Viscount Mordant his Regiment, viz.

Hartigill Broon Capt. Tho: Higgins Capt. Francis Arundel Lieut. Phil. Er^
Ensign. Tho Pride Capt. James Smith Lieut: Nath. Harison Capt. James Gerrard
Lieut: Rich. Gwyn Capt. (...) Rowlenson Lieut: Antho: Hastings Ensign.

Next we shall acquaint you with some little alteration in Col. Tho. Reads
Regiment, where Peter Pike, late Capt. Li^utenant, has the Company that was
Capt: Belohams, who is removed from that command, John Curtice Capt. Lieut.
Marris Brown Ens^. to Capt. Pike in the place of Robert Read. Francis Everard
Lieutenant to Capt. George Everard, William Jones Ensign* We shall now show you
how the Regiment of Horse that was Vnton Crokes, is disposed of viz. Dan Oneale
of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Colonel of the Regiment, William Basset Son of Sir
Richard Basset Governor of Cardiffe Castle, Capt. Lieut. Sir John Stevens
Major* Lord Mandevil, eldest Son of the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of
his Majesty's household, Captain of the Tro^p l^te Capt. Whethams, Lord Windsor
Captain, Nicholas Armerer, Capt. one of his Majesty's Esquires, commands the
Troop late Capt. Gascoignes. Bartue, Second Son of the Earl of Lindsey, Captain
of that which was Col. Vpcotts Troop. That Regiment that was Col. Tho:
Sheffeilds, is now commanded by the Right Honorable Lord Osserie, eldest Son of
the Marquis of Ormond, and Tho: Shieffeild is his Lieutenant Colonel.

Having thus far showed you the settlement of the Army, now take an account of
some Garrisons, where we shall first begin with

Earl of Portland Governor of the Isle of Wight, and all the Garrisons and
Ports therein.

Humphrey Turney Captain of Comes Castle.

Barnaby Burleigh (brother to that valiant Burleigh that was murdered in the
Isle of Wight) Governor of Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight.

William Lord Sandys Governor of Portland, Weymouth' and Sandfoot Castle.

With these we will take in George Rawleigh Captain-Lieutenant to the Right
honorable the Earl of S. Albans in the Island of Jers^y.

Though these persons and others entrusted with Commands in the Army, are of
greater fidelity then to be suspected in the least of disloyalty, yet too much
care cannot be taken for the safety and security of his Majesty's Kingdoms; and
to this purpose, several Commissions are granted under the Great Seal of
England, to persons of known integrity and loyalty, to administer the oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy to all the Officers and Soldiers, particularly to
Buller, a Member of this present Parliament, and Major of his Highness the Duke
of York's Regiment, to see that duty performed by the Officers and Soldiers of
the said Regiment; as also another Commission to Jeremiah Smith, to see the
same done in Sir John Cloberies Regiment, of which he is Major.

Commissions under the Great Seal are likewise issued out to the several
Muster-masters in Ireland, to administer the said Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance to all the Officers and Soldiers within the Precinct of their
Musters.

Care is likewise taken for settling the Militia in such hands as may be most
serviceable to his Majesty, and satisfactory to all that wish the peace of the
Nation.

Letters from Edenbrough of the 26 July, inform us that the English
Commissioners there, have sent up such Soldiers as were in the Hospital at
Edenbrough, to London, to be further provided for: as likewise, that they have
released several Prisoners, some that were driven in by a storm at Kelkowbery,
and there taken, belonging to Cap. Patrick Tailor, ^n the ship called the St.
A^n of St. Sebastian, as also above 20 others that were taken by his Majesty's
Frig^t called the Greyhound. They give us no other account of the La^^d
Warriston, than that they have yet no Intelligence of him, though a hundred
pound Sterling is assured to any one that shall bring him.

For the Legal dispatch of Ecclesiastical matters, Dr. Chawworth was by the
Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, elected Vicar General above a Fortnight since*

London, Printed by John Macock and Tho: Newcomb* 1660.


