ARTICLES AGREED UPON AND GRANTED BY His Excelencie, and the Deputies of the
high and mighty Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, unto the
Clergy, Magistrates, Burgers, and inhabitants of the Town of Boisleduke, or
the Busse.

printer's or publisher's device NOLI ALTUM SAPERE

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1629.

ARTICLES, Agreed upon and granted by his Excellency, and the Deputies of the
high and mighty Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, unto the
Clergy, Magistrates, Burgers, and Inhabitants of the Town of Boisleduke, or
the Busse.
1. FIrst All offenses, injuries, and all acts and deeds committed betwixt
this Town and those of the United Provinces, both from the beginning of these
troubles, and civil commotions or wars, as also during this present Siege,
in what place, and in what sort or manner soever, whether in general or in
particular, as well within as without, they are, and shall be and remain,
pardoned, forgotten, and as never done; so that never any mention, molestation,
action, or inquisition by way or form of Justice, or otherwise, can be made or
instituted, either against such as are living, or against the Heirs of such as
are deceased, or their goods, respectively on both si^es

2. The Inhabitants of this Town are to behave themselves according unto the
commandments Laws and Proclamations of these Provinces; enjoying in the mean
time the liberty of conscience, as it is practiced every where. And all
religious persons and Churchmen are to be gone and withdraw themselves out of
this Town: But in the mean while they are to govern themselves also according
to the said Laws; and then they may carry away with them their moueables,
Images, Pictures, and all the Ornaments of their Churches.

The foresaid Ecclesiastical or Church-persons may enjoy during their life,
all their revenues and fruits of their goods, lying in places where
contribution is paid. But it is conceived and to be understood, that all the
Church-goods are to belong unto the high and mighty Lords, the States general,
that they may dispose of them either to the good of the Town, or otherwise.

4. The Nuns, and religious women may remain in the Town, during their life
time, being to be respectively nourished by the goods of their Cloisters: the
rest remaining wholly in the disposition of the high and mighty Lords the
States general: and the said Nuns shall be fitted with dwelling places, either
in their Couents or houses, or elsewhere.

5. There is also granted, that all the inhabitants of this Town, both
Ecclesiastical and religious persons, as also Seculars, and all such as are
gone away, and all others, whatsoever they be, either in or without charges, or
military administrations, or otherwise, of the King of Spain, or of the States
of Braband, or of this Town, respectinely, are to have free both their lives
and goods, both in general and in particular, insomuch as this is not contrary
to the former Article.

6. This Town, with the Burgers and inhabitants thereof, aforementioned,
as well spiritual and secular, is and shall be received and used by the high
and mighty Lords, the States general of the United Provinces, and the Lord
Prince of Orange, with all clemency and mildness, hereafter to live in amity,
friendship and concord with the other united Provinces and Towns, trading and
corresponding together, according to their ancient liberties, as it is
convenient.

7. The said high and mighty Lords the States general, and His Excellence are
to use and exercise within the said Town and Maiorie, the same being annexed
to the Town, such jurisdiction and right, as the Dukes and Dutchesses of
Braband have had there until this present time; and they are to use this Town
therein wholly, so as the other Towns and Cities of Braband are used.

8. This Town, and the Burgers and inhabitants thereof and of the liberties of
the said town, are to keep all their rights, customs, freedoms, liberties,
exemptions, and all other privileges, as well in general as in particular,
which from ancient time, and before the beginning of this town they have
enjoyed, both by Sea and Land, within and without the town, in Braband,
Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, upon the Rhine, and in other Provinces, places
and waters.

9. The government of the town, as well in the Courts of Justice, as in affairs
of Policy, is to remain in the hands of the Magistrate, and of the three
members of the town respectively; and no body is to be preferred, promoted, or
received unto the same, unless he he born in the said town, or he that has
been christened there, or such other persons as the Lords States shall find
good and fit to naturalize and qualify to that end: But with this condition,
that at and for this time, the Government in Justice and Policy, both of high
and inferior Magistrates, Officers, Governors, and other ministers, shall be
constituted and established by His Excellence, and the Deputies of the Lords
the general States.

10. This town is likewise to keep and to retain at her disposition and
administration, all the common and hereditary goods, rights and impositions,
fishings, toles, Customs, taxes for merchandises and wares, and all other
rights and revenues heretofore belonging to the same in the same manner as the
said town has enjoyed it, and had the dispositiou and administration thereof
until this time, as being so privileged and grounded by right: With this
condition nevertheless that the other members of the united Province do
receive thereby no prejudice.

11. This town is also to retain and keep all her own provisions that are
resting, both of victuals, materials, and all other common goods, liquids and
not liquids, to be dealt withal, sold or kept unto the profit and discharge of
this town, according to the disposition of the foresaid three Members; Except
all Pieces of Ordnance, Arms and other amunitions, which are to remain for
the service of the town, and not to be sold.

12. All Societies, Companies, Trades, or Corporations thereof, that for this
time are in the town, are there to remain, and to retain respectively their
Charters, orders and privileges, and withal their goods, both liquids and not
liquids, without respect to what end the same may be bought or gotten by the
said Trades, Societies or Companies, that they may be disposed of unto the
common profit, according to their own will and pleasure, by the Prouosts,
Officers, and Masters of every Company.

13. Within the Country of Holland, nor in any other Province of these United
Provinces, no body shall counterfeit or use the Arms of this town, nor the
Arms ensigns or marks of the trades or Companies thereof, to wit, of
Cuttlers, Pin and Needle makers, and many other handicrafts. But every one
shall keep and use his own mark, or of his town, where the ware shall be
made, and all such trades and handiworks. As also all dying and all new
Faires, that have been obtained and established during the time of these
troubles, are hereafter to cease within the Mayorie of this town; unless those
of the said Mayorie, being heard thereupon by the Lords the general States,
they be found so equitable, that there be made some other new order and
position concerning their Faires.

14. The Inhabitants of the Busse of Boisliduc, and all those of the Country
thereabout, dwelling in places that pay contributions, are to be treated and
used as all other good subjects and inhabitants of the united Provinces,
whether they dwell within towns, or without in the Country here and there.

15. As concerning all the rents and lawful debts, conconstituted, made, or
taken upon change, to be paid by the three Members of this Town, or their
Deputies as well during this Siege as before the same, whether there be some
Letters dispatched and sealed about the same, or none. The Magistrate of this
said town is to deliver up an estate of all, to be hereafter disposed of with
all equity by the said Lords the general States.

16. As concerning the payment of the said debts, and of other charges as may
fall upon the town, the Courts therein are to keep their wonted Sessions and
Sises, and aslo their impositions, and other means of the said town, as now
are ready at this present, and in custom, all which may be raised increased,
or diminished by the three Members, according to their privileges and
customs; but so, that thereby no prejudice do ensue upon such means, the
which the Common Cause may require to be levied, unto the profit and good of
the said Common Cause.

17. All Acts, Resolutions, Decrees, Orders, and Proclamations made by the said
three Members, or Magistrates, for as much as they shall not be contrary to the
State, or to the good of the United Provinces; As likewise all sentences given
by the Escherins, or Judges, upon rem indicatam: And moreover, all euictions of
goods, situated either within or without the Town and duly solemnized, are to
remain in their force an^ vigor; but so that the interessed party shall keep
hi^ right of appeal or reformation, if so it do please him

18. Those that now are, or have heretofore been o^ the Magistracy, are not
to be molested or troubled for the acts or orders by them given to pay or to
disburse any money or provision of the Town: Neither any Treasurers.
Receivers, or Paymasters to have paid or disbursed the said moneys or
provisions, nor to have made any account: And the said accounts made up by the
said Receivers and other Deputies of this town, shall not be subject to be
reviewed: As likewise all accounts made by the Treasurers of the Dominions, of
the States of Braband, Receiners of Licenses, Contributions, and
Fortifications, are to remain as they were, without trouble or search

19. The Government of the Table of the Holy Ghost, of the Great Hospital, of
the building of the Churches, of the houses of the Orphants, of leprous, of
bastards, of mad or Bedlam, and of all other particular foundations of
Hospitals, both of men and of women, and the election of the Pourueyors and
Rulers thereof, are to be made, established and conferred, in such manner as
hitherto the custom has been, according to the old privileges of the said
Town.

20 All proprieties, and masters of Mills, and Horse-Mills, and Milles to make
Oil, within this Town and the liberties thereof, that have been broken,
beaten down and spoiled, either by the Ordnance, or otherwise, during this
Siege, and by the Wars in the former time, may be again erected and built
up upon their old places and grounds, it being not necessary nor required to
obtain for the same any new Act or consentment, or to pay any new right
^au^^^^ely such as the said Mills have been bound formerly to pay, before they
were destroyed, unless they were employed in the service of the Country.

21. All secular persons, of what condition soever, being sworn unto or in
service of the King of Spain, or of this Town, or not; shall have freedom
and liberty, and it shall be free and permitted for every of them to withdraw
himself out of this Town with his Family and goods, presently after the
reddition of the same, and for the same end to cause to come Wagons, Carts,
Ships, and Boats, from the Towns and places of Braband, Holland, or also
neutrall parts, and neither their persons nor goods, nor those that shall
transport the same, shall be hindered, troubled, or harmed, by the Soldiers,
Fiscals, or other whatsoever: They shall also have no need to obtain or get
for the said purpose, any other consent, passeport or safe conduct.

22. Moreover, the said Burgers being gone out of the Town, and also those
that will remain therein, whether they have been sworn, or in service or
otherwise belonging to the King of Spain, or not, and their heirs
respectively, are to have the space of three years next ensuing, that in the
mean time they may sell, change, or otherwise put away, as they shall find
good, their goods, every where, as well in the Town, as in the liberties and
Mayories thereof; or else they may cause the said goods to be received and
administered by such as they shall appoint and think convenient. And if they
dye either within or without the said Town, during the said space of three
years, having made Testaments, or none, in that case their goods are to befall
to their heir as they shall have instituted or to their nearest kinsfolks
respectively.

And those that during the said three years, will go into the dominions or
Towns belonging to the said King of Spain, about their particular affairs
they shall have liberty to do the same four times in one year; but so that
they first give knowledge thereof unto the Governor, of whom they shall be
bound to take Passeport, the which he shall not deny unto them, unless he
have some important reasons to the contrary And at the end of the said three
years they may make their dwelling either in this Town, or in any neutrall
place that does pay contribution, where they shall enjoy the said liberty and
freedom to go and come, and to trade in all places, and likewise all other
Articles of this Treaty.

24. There shall be ordered or made no other Governor, or Lieutenant Governor
over this Town, but one of the House of Nassawe, or some other Lord of the
Low Countries.

25. The Garrison of this Town is to have no exemption of impositions, or
Subsidies, But is to bear like charges as the other inhabitants.

26. There shall be comprehended in this Treaty, all Citizens Burgers, and
inhabitants that now are absent, with their Wives and children, and all other
persons, both spiritual and temporal, that have withdrawn themselves.

All persons that are sick or hurt, and now in the great Hospital or in other
houses, both soldiers and others, may remain and stay there until they be
recovered and well; and a^terwards they may be gone or stay where they shall
l^ke best, and then they shall be furnished with Wagons or Carts, for
themselves and their baggage, without any let or hinderance.

All which Articles have been concluded, consented and agreed upon and granted
by his Excellency, and the Lords Deputies of the high and mighty Lords the
States General, unto the Ecclesiastical persons, the Magistrate, Burg^rs, and
Inhabitants of the said town, who have a^c^pted of the same by power and
virtue of their Procurations respectively.

In witness whereof, these presents have been signed at Vught, in the Camp
before the Busse, this 14. of September. 1629. stilo nouo. Signed, F. HENERY de
Nassau. F. Michael, Episcopus Buscoducensis. Ioannes Moors, Abbas Bernensis.
Ioannes Hermes, Deaconus Buscoducensis. R. van Verone. I. van Velde. R. van
Grieneuen* B. Loef van Sloot. Hen. Summers. Pet. Huberts* Heriald Heuvel.


THe General States of the United Provinces, having heard the report of their
'Deputies, after they had seen, read, and examined the aboue-set points and
Articles, have approved them upon mature deliberation, even as by these
presents the said General States do approve and avow the same, promising to
keep, and cause them to be kept, according unto their former tenor.

Given in the Camp before Boisleduc, or the Busse, this 14. of September. 1629,
stilo nouo.
It was Signed, HENRY. And lower it was written, By order from the high and
mighty Lords the States General. Signed, Corn. Mush.

FINIS.

