blazon of the City of London blazon of the City of London
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guildhald Ciuitatis London decimo sexto die
Decembris, anno regni Dom' nostri Iacobi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
and Hibern', Regis fidei defensoris etc. viz. Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae
decimo quinto, and Scotiae quinquagesimo primo, coram Georgio Bolles Maiore
Ciuitatis praed', Anthonio Benn Milite eiusdem Ciuitatis Recordatore, Thoma
Bennet Milite, Thoma Low Milite, VVillielmo Crauen Milite, Iohanne Iolles
Milite, Iohanne Leman milite, Sebastiano Haruie milite, Willielmo Cockaine
milite, and Francisco Jones milite and Aldermannis, Edwardo Barkham, Edwardo
Rotheram, Alexandro Prescot, Thoma Bennet iunior', Henrico Iay, Petro Proby,
Willielmo Gore, Iohanne Gore, Allano Cotton, and Cuthberto Hacket Aldermannis,
and VVillielmo Halliday and Roberto Johnson Aldermannis eiusdem Ciuitatis
Vicecomes, Necnon maiore part Communiariorum Ciuitatis praedict' de communi
Consilio eiusdem Ciuitatis existent' assemblant'. etc.
FOr the glory of God, and for the better ordering of the business that falls
incidently on the day of S. Thomas the Apostle, being this year the Lords
Sabbath: And to the end that for all future times, the business that has
heretofore been handled upon S. Thomas day, may give place whenever the said
day of S. Thomas shall fall upon the Sabbath day, Be it ordained and
established by authority of this common Council, That the Courts of Wardemote
within the City of London and the liberties thereof, heretofore usually houlden
upon that day, shall for this year be holden upon Monday next after the feast
of S. Thomas the Apostle now next coming: And shall for ever hereafter,
whenever the same feast shall happen to fall upon the Sabbath day, be holden
upon the Monday next after the same feast, and not upon the same feast day. Any
ordinance, custom or vsages to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And
it is further ordained, and established by authority aforesaid, That all
elections of Officers, and other acts and proceedings in any the Courts of
Wardemote within the said City and liberties to be holden upon Monday, as
aforesaid, shall be as sufficient, and of as great force, strength and effect,
as if the same elections, acts and proceedings, had been upon the ordinary day
of S. Thomas the Apostle.

London printed by Robert Young, Printer to this Hon: City. 1628.


