BY THE MAYOR.
WHereas the right honorable the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable privy
Council, having taken care to reform many abuses that have of late crept into
this City and places adjoining, as the excessive number of Tauernes, and the
eractions used in the immoderate prices of all sorts of provisions in
Ordinaries and Hosteries: and finding that the said abuse has appeared in
nothing more than in the excessive rates of Poultry of all sorts, being so
unreasonably enhaunsed by Poulterers and Higlers, that it is not only an
intolerable grieuance to his Majesty's Subjects, but the inconvenience thereof
does also deeply reflect upon his Majesty's household. Have signified the
express Command of his Majesty That the Lord Mayor and his brethren, the
Aldermen, should enter into serious consideration of that particular grieuance,
as a thing altogether insufferable, and should set such prices as they should
conceive to be fit for all small Acates and other provisions, and to set up the
same in public* Tables to the end that both Buyer and Seller may take notice
thereof: and also should vary them from time to time as they shall find just
cause. In obedience whereunto, the said Lord Mayor, by the advice of the said
Aldermen, for remedy and reformation thereof, has, upon mature deliberation,
set such rates and prices as seem meet and reasonable to be given and paid
for all sorts of Poultry and other small Acates, to be sold within this City
and Liberties thereof, and has commanded the same rates to be published and
set up in Tables, to the end and intent that all and every person and persons
may thereby have clear knowledge and understanding what the Poulterers and all
other person and persons ought justly to demand or take of them for their
Poultry, vended as aforesaid. Straightly charging and commanding every of the
said Poulterers and others, as aforesaid, that they or any of them do not at
any time or times hereafter demand, require or take any more or greater price
for their said Poultry, than is assessed and rated as aforesaid: And that no
manner of person or persons do in any wise pay more than after the same rates.
And also, that every person do obey and keep as well the said prices, as all
other prices that shall from time to time hereafter be set and appointed by the
said Lord Mayor for any provision of Victual whatsoever, upon pain of such
punishment to be inflicted upon the Transgressors, as according to the laws,
and their deserts shall be thought meet and requisite. Provided always, that
all manner of persons may from time to time buy Poultry at lesser and lower
prices, as they can furnish themselves.

Given at the Guild Hall the seventh day of January, Anno Dom. 1633.
God save the King.
Printed by Robert Young, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


