To the most Honorable Assembly the Commons house of Parliament.
The humble Petition of diverse Hott-pressers of London,
Most humbly
Showing that whereas Sir George Douglas Knight, has obtained a Pattent and
privy Seal from his Majesty, for and concerning the use of the Hott-presse.
And moreover some Hott-pressers of London have combyned themselves with the
said Sir George to give him 6 s. 8 d. out of every 20 s. they shall earne,
which is to be levied upon the Commonalty by their exhausting their prices for
work done, Conditionally that the said Sir George shall suppress your
petitioners from working. By this means your petitioners have been imprisoned
in Newgate 15. days by S. Robert Heath then Recorder of London,
notwithstanding he being a Counsel for Sir George Douglas against us, and no
bail would be taken, though offered, and their houses broken open, their
implements broken down, and their stuffes taken from them by violence, and yet
deteyned, and can have no Legal trial for them, notwithstanding these stuffes
were before pressed by the Deputies of Sir George, and are not with in the
meaning of the Statute 5. of Edward the 6. as we are advised by our Counsel
learned, by reason whereof your Petitioners have almost spent their whole
estates to their utter undoing of themselves, their wives and children, (they
being in number above 20. Families.) This being their only stay and means of
mayntenance.

They most humbly therefore pray that you would be pleased, to call for our
Petition already exhibited to this Honorable House, wherein our greevances are
more at large laid open, and to take such order for our releefes, as this
Honorable Assembly shall think fit.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray etc.


