The Prices and Rates that every particular person owes to pay for his fair
or passage, unto Watermen, or Whyrrymen from London to Grauesende, and likewise
from Grauesende to London, and to every commen landyng place, between the said
two places, and the rates and pryces also of an hole fare in a Whyrye, Tylte
Bote, or tide Bote, to and from any of the said places hereafter breyfelye
appears.
From London to Grauesend A Passenger in the common Bardge. ii d. In a Tylte
Boat with four ores..iiii.d. Item for the hole fare of a Whyrye to or fro
either of the said places. ii.s. Grenehyth^ and grayes Choroke. A passinger in
a tide boat so that there be twelve in number. i.d. The hole fare of a Tylte
boat with.iiii. ores and a steresman. vi.s And of a Whyrrye with two ores.
xx.d. Purflete. A passinger in a tide bote so there be ten in number. i.d The
hole fare of a tylt boat with four ores and a steresman. v.s A Whyrrey with
two ores. xviii.d. Raynam and Erythe. A passynger in the tide Boat. i.d. The
hole fare of a tylte boat with four ores and a steresman. v.s. And of a
Whyrrey with two ores. xvi.d Wolwich. A passinger in the tide Boat. i.d. The
hole fare of a Whyrrey with two ores. xii.d Grenewiche. The whole fare of a
whyrrey with ii. ores with the tide. viii.d And against the tide. xii.d. From
Ratlife to grenwich. The hole fare of a Whyrrey with ii. ores with the tide.
iiii.d. And against the tide. vi.d From london to Ratlife or lyme house. The
hole fare of a Whyrrey with two ores with the tide. iiii.d. And against the
tide. vi.d. From Lio^ key or. S. Olaues. The hole fare of a whyrrey with two
ores to.S Katerins or Radryffe or other places of like dystaunce. ii.d. A
commer into any boat by the way. No person that shall come a board of any of
the said boats by the way between London and Grauesend, shall pay for his
fare above the price before lymytted.


