THE ANSWER OF THE GOLD-BEATERS OF LONDON, TO THE Grieuances exhibited by the
Cutlers, Painters, and Booke-binders, against them and their Charter of
Jncorporation.
TO the first, for that by their Charter of incorporation, the importation of
beaten Gold and Silver is restrained: They answer, That the importation of
beaten gold and silver, wrought in papers is expressly prohibited by the statute
of 1. R. 3. cap. 12. And the same being base stuff, and deceitful, was only
used by Painters and Bookebinders: and such beaten gold and silver as Cutlers
use in their trade, was never imported from foreign parts, but made by the
Goldbeaters of London. If the Cutlers should use any of the imported gold or
silver, the same were against the intention of the said statute of 1. R. the 3.
Cap. 12. and also the statute of 5. Eliz. Cap. 7. made for the maintenance of
handicrafts and manuell trades, amongst which the trade of gold-beating is to
be numbered, for that the said foliate gold and silver is made only with the
labor of the single hand, by continual beating of foreign bullion with a
hammer of 18. pound weight.

To the second, for that they being under the number of 30. persons, have
obtained by the means of Mr. Doctor Eglisham, one of his Majesty's Physicians,
a Charter of incorporation unto themselves, for the sole making of gold and
silver foliate, and a proclamation prohibiting the importation of any such gold
into this kingdom: and that they have entered into agreement to pay and allow
unto Doctor Eglisham, and Sr Henry Bretton, sundry sums of money yearly for
procuring the said Charter: For answer thereunto they say, That the mystery of
gold-beating has been an ancient and settled trade, within this kingdom many
hundred years; as by ancient Records ready to be showed forth may appear. And
the said trade is of such use, as the same is not to be abolished, and
therefore it was lawful for them to procure a Charter of incorporation, for
good order and government of their trade, and to prevent frauds and deceipts,
as it has been done for other trades within the City of London. And for such
rewards or gratuities as they have given for procuring thereof, the same has
been out of their own estates, and no more then other trades upon their
incorporations have done. And deny all combination and confederacy or the
procuring of any proclamation.

To the third, wherein the Goldbeaters are charged to spend or consume of the
proper coins or bullion of this kingdom, in making of the said foliate three
or fourethousand pound per annu: For answer thereunto they say, That they spend
only foreign bullion to the value of two thousand five hundred pound, and no
more, wherewith, all England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, are served and
furnished: And that it is expressly provided by the Charter, that no English
coin or bullion shall be by them spent in making of the said foliate. And it
is also provided by the said Charter, That no free man of the said trade shall
beat any gold before he has entered into bond of sieve hundred pound, in the
Exchequer, not to spend or consume any english coins or bullion in the said
trade.

To the fourth, that the complainants, since the incorporation of the
Goldbeaters, are enforced to give higher rates and prices, then before they wre
wont to pay for the said foliate gold and silver. For answer thereunto they
say, That it is provided by the said Charter, that the same shall be sold at
such reasonable prices as the same was sold for 20. years past, having regard
to the raising of his Majesty's Standard, and the said complainants are served
with the same under the said rate. For then they paid for a hundred of gold,
13. shillings 4. pence, and for a hundred of Silver, 3. shillings 4. pence: at
which time the rate of the Standard, for gold was three pound the ounce, and
silver, five shillings two pence the ounce. And the rate of the Standard being
now for gold 3. pound 14. shillings 6. pence, and for Silver six shillings. The
complainants pay to the goldbeaters for gold, not above the rate of 15. s. the
hundred; and for silver not above 3. s. the hundred. And since the said
Incorporation the gold and silver foliate is more substantial, larger, and in
all points more sufficient, then is was in former times. And the said
Goldbeaters never threatened the complainants to raise the prices.

To the fifth, for that the Goldbeaters confine the sale of the said gold and
silver foliate to one place which they call their hall: For answer they say,
That it is provided by the said charter of incorporation, for the avoiding of
all base and deceiptfull stuff, that the same should be brought to the Hall of
the Goldbeaters, to be viewed, and there sold by the Wardens of the company for
the ease and benefit of his Majesty's subjects, that have occasion to use the
same, And the said Wardens do make no private gain to themselves.

To the Sixth, that since the obtaining of the said incorporation, the said
foliate gold and silver is made more thin and deceitful then the same was
before. For answer they say. That the gold and silver foliate made since the
said incorporation, is as large and thick and as pure substantial and
workmanlike as the same was at any time before, and for the pureness and
goodness thereof is without all exception.

To the seventh: Touching a supposed wrong done unto one Spencer, a
Gold-Beater, for troubling and arresting him, and for exhibiting a bill into
the Star Chamber against him, and some of the Complainants, for vexation sake.
For answer they say; That the said Spencer was the first, that drew the whole
Company to prosecute the obtaining of the said Charter, and was named one of
the Wardens in the said Charter, and took the Oath appointed by the said
Charter, and agreed to bear his ratable part of the charge of passing the
same, and afterward to bring in his ratable part for a general stock for the
whole Company, and also to attend at the Hall, with the rest of the Wardens, to
view such work as should be brought in by the Company, and to serve such as
came to buy gold and silver leaf: And according to his said agreement, he
became bound in several obligations, of five hundred pound a piece, to the
other five Wardens; and likewise the five Wardens, in the like bonds to him, to
perform the like agreements. Howbeit, when the Charter was passed, the said
Spencer, by the practice of the Complainants, denied to pay his ratable part of
the charge, of passing the Charter; or to bring in his rate for stock,
according to his bonds; or to give his attendance at the Hall, as the rest did,
and privately wrought base and deceitful stuff, mixed with copper, and would
have delivered the same into the Hall, for pure gold, which the rest of the
Wardens refusing, he thereupon (contrary to his said oath) brake from his
Company, vowing (as he had been the principal means to procure the Charter)
he would do his best to overthrow it. And the said Spencer, through the
abetment and encouragement of some of the said Complainants, did daily
endeavor, to draw diverse others of the Gold-beaters from their Company to join
with him: For which wrongs the Gold-beaters did, in a legal course, arrest the
said Spencer upon his bonds: And did likewise prosecute the said Bill in the
Star Chamber, against the said Spencer, and two of the said Cutlers and their
wives, for unlawful maintenance, practice, and confederacy, to destroy their
said trade: Whereunto the Defendants did put in a Demurrer, which depends in
reference.

To the eighth: That the said Charter, for incorporating the Gold-Beaters, is
in the nature of a Monopoly. For answer they say. That it cannot be denied,
but that the trade of the Gold-Beaters is very ancient, and of great use, and
therefore to incorporate the same, is very lawful and convenient. For the
general form of the Charter, the same is agreeable with the ordinary form of
Incorporations of other Trades in London, and every one of them may as well be
charged, with sauouring of a Monopoly, as this. If any clause in this Charter
be against the Law, or to the prejudice of the Subject, the same is void, and
does not bind. And the same (if any such be) may be reformed, by renewing of
the said Charter, and omitting such clause. But to dissolve the Incorporation,
and to leave the Trade without order and government, were utterly to destroy
the same.

Whereof the said Gold-Beaters do most humbly pray, that due consideration may
be had.

The ground of the Complainants grief is, by reason the Gold-Beaters are
incorporated, and not upon any other cause. For before their Incorporation, the
said rates and prices of Foliate Gold and silver, were unknown to his
Majesty's subjects. And the Gold-Beaters being but few in number, and their
dwelling uncertain, the Complainants buying the said Foliate gold and silver
of the Gold-Beaters, at base and low rates, did vent and sell the same in their
works, at double and treble the prices they paid, and thereby enriched
themselves, and impouerished the said Gold-Beaters. But since the
Incorporation, the prices of the said gold and silver Foliate, and the place of
the sale thereof being certain and known, the said Complainants do fear (as
there is just cause) that the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, and such
others, as shall use Foliate gold and silver, will make their own provision,
and see the same wrought. And thereby the excessive gains of the Complainants
be abated and brought down. All which shall be auerred upon oath unto this
honorable Assembly: For whose prosperity and honor the said Company of
Gold-beaters daily pray.


