The testament of Joseph which was translated out of Greek into Latyne by a
certain bishop of lyncoln called (by his Syrname) Grosthede, and into
English, by wyllyam Freloue.

Read this pretty and wholesome volume, that may theach the to fle from the
abominable sin of adultery.

Prynted by Rychard grafton and Edward whytchurch.

1530.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimend: in solum.



The prol^gue
How this book was found, and ca^ to light, and of what aucthoryte it is;
bryfely here after shall be declared. By cause the history is of the Iewys, it
apperyth the same to have been wrytyne in their proper tongue or language,
which is Hebrew and they being malyciouse against Christen people kept the
same secret many yeris that it should not come abroad, specially by cause of a
certain prophecy which is in the end touching the birth of Christ which is
greatly to their reprofe and shame. Thus after certain yeris the Greeks which
be great serchers for the scripture confess them selfs that they opteynyd it
and tra^slatyd it out of the Hebrew, and so it remainyd among the greeks many
yerys after, by cause there was very few found ye time which were expert in
both tounges: that is to say in the Greek and Latyne. Until such Season a
certain bishop of lyncoln here in England called Robert the Second and by his
Syrname Grosthed, which had herd hereof, being also that time named a man of
great fame and lernyn^^ sent forth his spies or messengers and commau^dyd
them to spare f^rno costs to search for such antique wrytynges. And in the
year of our Lord. M.cc.xlij. he opteynyd and translatyd the same out of the
Greek into the Latyne. which reprouyth vice and abhomynable adulterye, and
magnyfieth, a chaft life and matrymonye. All this is co^sonant unto god^^s
word according to his saying: he that is not against us is with us, this
causes me to thynk it to be of suffycyent aucthorite. Finally, it d^ h^^^
puerly set forth chaste matrymony and shewyth what grace and haboundance of
goodness commyth thereby that it should be enough to convert a pagayne from
abhomynable living, and to ensew the holly life of Joseph, whereof the hystory
following makyth mencyon, which Joseph was one of the.xij. patriarchs: and the
title or name of the whole book is called the Testame^tes of the said.xij.
patriarchs, which be full of the spyrite of Prophecye. I entende therefore to
translate moo of them with the permyssyon of God, if time and place shall give
occasyon. Now God him self which gyuythe light to all creatures has sent
this among his people as a myrroure to look in, according to his holly word
saying. Nothing is hydden that shall ^ot be made opyne.

If this volume being but the Testament of one of the patriarckes, shall be
thankfully received of the good reader. Then shall I if God permyt, do mine
endeavor that thou may have all the rest.




