The Liberty of the Manor of STEPNEY in the County of Middlesex, the Hamblets
and Liberties of the same, hereafter specified,
viz. Stepney Cleave-street, alias White-horse street Cock Hill All the Parish
of St. Paul's Shadwell New Gravel Lane Wapping Wall Ratcliff Highway The Par.
of St. George in the County of Middlesex Old Gravel Lane Pennington Street St.
John's Wapping Virginia Street Nightingal Lane, on the East Side East
Smithfield, from the Corner of Nightingal Lane Salt Peter Bank White's Yard
Blue-Anchor Yard Rosemary Lane Goodman's Fields, viz. White-lyon Street Chamber
Street Prescot Street Mansell Street Ayloffe Street Lemon Street Goodman's Yard
Lambeth Street White Chapel Mile-End Old Town Mile-End New Town Pettycoat Lane
Wentworth Street Christ-Church in the County of Middlesex Spittle-fields, with
the Market, and all the Streets thereunto belonging St. Leon. Shoreditch
Holywell Street Brick Lane Cambridge Heath Bethnal Green Old Ford Stratford and
Bow Cole-harbour Black Wall Poplar and North-str. Lymehouse Ratcliff.


The Extent of the said MANOR. Angel-and-Crown Tavern within
White-Chappel-Bars to Goodman's Yard in Goodman's Fields; thence to the
Rosemary Branch in Rosmeary Lane on the North-side to White-lyon-street and
Cable-street; and on the South Side in Rosemary-lane beginning at Blue-Anchor
Yard on to Nightingale-lane; on the East Side to the Hermitage-bridge, so on
the Riverside to Drying Pan Stairs, and so on the Riverside in Lower-Shadwell
to Cock-hill, thence to Ratcliff-Cross, thence to Noah's Ark, thence to
Lymehouse Hole, so on by the Riverside, including the Marshes to Cole-Harbour,
and on to Sir Henry Johnson's Yard, thence to the Copperas-house, etc. part of
Bromley, thence to Barebinder-lane, and so on to the Bird-in-Hand, and so on
the River Lee to the Bullyfant, thence to the upper-end of the Wickhouse,
thence to Grove-street, so on to Cambridge-Heath and to the Sign of the Nagg's
Head, so on to Shoreditch Churchyard, and so on to the Sign of the Jane Shore,
so on the East Side of Holywell-street to the Wisemen of Gotham, including all
the Courts, Lanes, Alleys, and Webb's Square on that side the Way, and the
other side of the Way on the West Side in Holy-well Street, from the Sign of
the Red Lion in Holy-well Lane, so on into Holy-well Street all that side of
the Way up to King's Head Court, the Court included, being over against the
Sign of the Wisemen of Gotham aforesaid, with all the Courts, Yards, and
Alleys including on the said West Side of the Way, thence to the Gate by the
Artillery Ground, so on to Smock-Alley, thence on Pettycoat-Lane on the
East Side, to the End of the Bars in White-Chapple.

THE LIBERTY AND MANOR abovementioned having been granted by King Edward the
Sixth, to the Lord Wentworth, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to be enjoyed by
them in as full and ample a Manner as the Bishop of London, by former Grants
from King Richard II, had enjoyed it before; which Grants recite diverse
Immunities, Privileges, and Emoluments to be enjoyed by the Lord of the said
Manor: And amongst others specified at large in the said Grants, all Fines,
Issues, Forfeitures, and Amerciaments of the Court of King's Bench, and all
other the King's Courts, Justices Itinerant, Justices of Assizes or
Jail-delivery, or any other Justices, Inquisitors; and also all Fines and
Amerciaments before the King's Clerk of the Market; and likewise the holding of
a Court Leet, or View of Frank Pledge within the said Manor, with all Fines
and Amerciaments arising out of the same; and the Goods and Chattels of all
Persons forfeited, residing within the said Manor being Outlawed, Waived,
Condemned, Fugitives, or Felons; and the Year day and Waste of their Lands and
Tenements, are for ever granted to the said Manor, together with all Post
Fines, Waifs, Estrays, and Deodands; and also the Lord, by the said Grants has
the Retorna Brevium, and Execution of all Attachments, Writs, Warrants, and
other Process whatsoever, out of any of the King's Courts to be executed within
the said Manor, and that the said Sheriff, nor any other Officer is not to
enter the said Liberty, to execute any Process within the same, but ought to be
directed to the Chief Bailiff of the said Liberty to be Executed.

WHEREFORE the present Lord of the Liberty, being resolved to keep up,
preserve, and maintain his Rights and Privileges belonging to the same, against
all Intruders; has thought fit to Print the most principal Places within the
said Manor, and the Extent thereof, as abovementioned; that no Officer
presuming illegally to enter the same, may be ignorant, and so are to take
Notice, that if any Officer, Bailiff, or Sergeant whatsoever, (except only such
as are appointed by the Chief Bailiff of the Liberty aforesaid) shall come
into, or enter upon the said Liberty, to execute any Process in Law whatsoever,
which of Right belongs unto the said Chief Bailiff of the said Liberty to
execute, such Officer, Bailiff, or Sergeant will be sued for doing the same.

THE Lord of the said Manor has appointed Burdyn Anderson, Gent. Chief
Bailiff of the same, who keeps his Office at White-Chappel Court, within the
said Manor.

TO WHOM all Attorneys at Law, or others who would have any Process to be
executed within the said Liberty, are desired to require a Mandavi Ballivo
thereupon from the Sheriff of Middlesex, viz. Ballivo Libertat. Manerii de
Stepney in Com' Middlesex, viz. Attachments, Warrants upon Mean Process, Ca.
Sa. and Fieri Facias, etc. which being sent to the Chief Bailiff's Office as
aforesaid, with proper Directions, will be carefully executed, and his Office
being open at all Hours, all Persons concerned will be readily answered.


