A TRVE RELATION BROVGHT BY THE Lord of Buisson, and sent by the French King
concerning the defeat of the Lord Soubizes army, his Majesty being there in
person.

With THE SVRPRISING OF THE Castle of Chaume about the sands of Psonne the 18.
of this present month of April. 1622.

Printed at Paris, By Frederick Morel the Kings ordinary Printer, by
authority, and now orderly translated.

THE SVRPRISING OF MONSIEUR Soubizes army, and the taking of the castle of
Chaume, the King being in the field in person.
THE King being departed from Nantes the twelfth of April, determined to lodge
the same night at a place called Vielle-Vigne, distant five leagues from the
same town: the next day his Majesty removed three leagues nearer his enemies.
The 14. day he appointed the general Rendezuous for his whole Army between
Aspremont and Comminquiers, befitting places for such a purpose, sending to the
Count de la Roch-foucalt to bring thither his forces also, and so unite them
with his Majesty's: but when his Majesty was advertised that the Lord de
Soubize was retired with his troops or army toward the Rendezuous of
Aspremont, consisting of five or six thousand foot, five hundred horse, three
pieces of great Artillery, and four field pieces of iron, he advanced forward
with a full resolution, and ardent desire to fight with him, and so came to a
village called Chalans: here he was advised by my Lord the Prince of Conde,
that seeing he had sent for the forces of the Count de la Roch-foucalt to join
with his troops, it were not amiss to attend the good hour of their coming
together. For the Lord Soubize and his army was lodged within an Island called
Rye, very difficult for access, and very dangerous to surprise, as having
only three or four straight passages for conduction, wherein two or three men
could but march in front.

The fifteenth day of the said month, the King was mounted by three of the
clock in the morning, and with his whole troops, set forward to the place,
where Count de la Roch-Foucalt, and all his forces attended the Kings
appointment, with whose pioners and soldiers, in his own presence, he raised
three several forts or skonces near the said Island, and near the place where
the enemy played most with the cannon and defended themselves.

But his Majesty all on fire, and resolved to go forward in his enterprise,
not regarding what the cannon could do, and less caring what the enemy durst
attempt, sent my Lord the Prince of Conde, with all the remainder of the
Infantery on foot, and some men of arms to enter upon the said Island: but you
must consider, that his Majesty had first appointed the Lord Marshall de
Vitry, with the Regiment of his guard to take possession of the place; with
whom were accomdanyed the Lords Z^met, and de Murillac Marshalls of the Camp,
who still kept near the said Marshall de Vitry, until he had entered the
Island, and taken up his lodging: then did they quarter themselves. Shortly
after, as you have heard, came Monsieur Prince de Praslin, with Bassompierre
the first Marshall of the field, whose authority and endeavors brought all the
rest of the horse to join with the said Regiment of the guard, who only were
first lodged within the Island: whereupon they prepared themselves readily and
with all diligence, to obey their Commanders, but could not do it so soon,
but they were discovered by the enemy, who sent out four hundred horse to set
upon the Prince of Condes forces before the army of the King could approach,
and unite themselves: which when the Prince of Conde perceived, and
apprehended, that they were resolute to fight, he retired himself a little,
and sent with all speed to advertise his Majesty what had chanced, and that,
if it pleased him, he might now advance forward with the rest of his army into
the Island; which the King presently and nobly accomplished, coming to the
place where my Lord the Prince was, and so the rest in a manner as soon
followed, where his Majesty was.

This performed, he took present order for two special things: the one was
to supply the wants of the soldiers with bread; for they had fasted long, and
so all that were near his person had a Donatiue out of his own store, or if
you will, his principal Baker, and the rest had a gratuity from other places:
the other was to quarter the horse within the Town of S. John de Mons, some
half a mile from thence, wherein he used such judgment and providence, that
he prevented many mischiefs. For he presently sent to the Count de la
Roche-foucalt, to abandon one part of his quarter, which the same day he had
taken possession of in the presence of his Majesty, and retire to the Town of
Saint Giles, making use of the same for the better refreshing of his wearied
troops, letting the enemy alone until better opportunity. But as this was a
doing, the skowtes advertised his Majesty, that the enemy prepared themselves
to retire to some better security by the Sea; which when the Tide went out,
they might well do, through Foords and Washes: But the King understanding
hereof, sent five hundred of the Regiment de la Bergerie, under the command of
Captain d'Escars, to guarde the places and passages.

Now you must consider, that his Maieiste had endured a tedious travel, and a
kind of a penance: For he was on horseback, from three of the clock in the
morning, to six at night, and never dismounted, by reason he was to pass
over a little Creek of the Sea, which he could not do, but at a low water,
nor was then to be done, until head had his forces together, and thus he was
enforced to watch for the Tide, which was not low enough till nine of the
clock at night, at which time the foot had a Rendezuous appointed, and a
watchword to attend, and the horse might easily find a way through the Foords
and known Washes of the place. But when it was considered, that the passage
for the foot was a quarter of a league from the Foordes of the horse, and that
the King, even in the midst of his iourny standing deep in the water, had
notice, that the foot could not yet go over, as having the Sea up to their
necks, he was advised by many not to make too much haste, nor pass with his
horse alone, lest the enemy might take advantage of the same, and set upon him
not fully provided.

Nevertheless his undaunted Majesty, uniting together his resolution with the
generosity of his spirit, and scorning to give way unto any difficulties in a
business of such importance, wherein a Princes word was engaged, commanded
forward, and finding the night to be very dark and obscure, welcommend the
opportunity, and all alone with his horse overcame the difficulty being five
hundred with the Volunteers, and others, and no more. For you must know, he had
left three hundred horse and fifty Carabines with Count de la Roche-foucalt, to
guarde the rear, and defend the carriages.

By this time was the hour approached that the foot might pass, who when
they had founded the channels, quickly adventured their persons, and made such
diligence and speed that they passed over in good order. For the Lords de
Bassompierre, and de Palsuna Frontenac Master of the Camp with the Regiment of
Navarre had the Van in this business, and used the discipline of Silence,
Patience, Travel and Obedience: then followed the Regiments of the Gurde, and
Normandy, and when they found the water but up to the girdle-sted, it was a
wonder to behold how soon they passed. For within one half hour they were
quickly embattelled near unto his Majesty, and drawn up so formally, that
the King commended both the Officers and the Soldiers, the one for their
martial knowledge, the other for their submission and readiness.

By that time all was done, the Sea returned, and the flood came in apace; so
that his Majesty had the Sea on his right hand, and this passage behind him,
whereby there was now no retiring, and the enemy must either fight, or yield;
which when the King understood, it is rather to be admired, then commended with
what courage and direction he proceeded: For when he saw the passages, over
which his foot came, being five hundred paces broad, all covered with water,
and apprehended the toil and labor they endured, being, as the Proverb is,
dropping dry, and weary, and wet in their Stations, he road in amongst them to
comfort them. When they again recollected themselves to cast up the Kings
accounts of his watchings all night, of his wearisornnesse, and travel, of the
danger, in which he hazarded his person, and of the example, which so many
Princes and Nobles gave them, they quickly recomforted themselves, and assured
their Captains, they would live and die with their King.

Whereupon his Majesty by break of the day marshalled his army in good order,
and concluded to fight, keeping the fields directly, which led to the Cross of
Vie, distant, or remote from Saint Giles by one arm of the sea, which was now
impassable. The enemy all this while was acquainted with what was done; and
although they seemed much danted and appalled at the Kings approach in such a
manner, and knew apparently, that his anger was so much exasperated against
them, that he determined their destruction; yet did they make good semblance,
and reasonable exposition. For Monsieur de Soubize, and his valiant Lieutenant
omitted nothing, wherein the office of a Commander was to be shown, and the
service of a soldier employed.

But all was in vain: For when the time came of their joining and charging
together, which was close to the passage directing to Saint Giles, the king
approached with that fury, and the Princes followed with such willingness, that
at the very first shocke, and push of pike, they began to stagger, which was
quickly entertained by his Majesty, and so both horse and foot poured many
volleys of short among them amain, and never left, till their foot were in a
manner defeated: for the most part of their horse perceiving the impossibility
of recovering the day, left the foot, and thought to retire to Rochell; which
when the other companies, not yet fought withal, perceived; they also made
means to escape: but the sea prevented their hastiness, being yet too low,
whereby his Majesty's forces followed them all over the strands, and had a
fearful execution, when they were thus put to rout. For although many of them
seeing this extremity threw down their arms, and submitted to mercy, and as
many mingled themselves with the kings forces by way of acknowledging his
sovereignty: yet were there slain outright 500. and diverse hundreds flying
into the Marshes and villages were soon put to the sword by the soldiers and
peasants.

There were also taken prisoners a thousand, withal the Masters of the camp,
Captains and Officers, many Colors or Ensigns surprised, their Canon was
violently seized on, three pieces of brass, and four of iron, their baggage
and carriages were intercepted; and in a word all that they had was spoiled,
disordered, and overthrown: yea Monsieur Soubize himself came into the hands
of the Count de la Roch-foucalt, but escaped upon a little nagge with much ado
with a 120. horse only, who came to Rochell, as sorrowful messengers of this
lamentable defeat, but they acquainted with the miseries, and accidents of
Fortune, and prepared to endure the stripes of affliction, wrapped up all
together in the bosom of sorrow, and put into the Catalogue of former losses,
and Gods indignation, who in his due time would make an end of their griefs,
and send them no doubt the comfort of reconciliation with their Prince and
Governor.

When the King had thus prevailed the same day or if you will the same night he
logded at Aspremont, whither one repaired to advertise him, that upon the
discovery of the enemies horses about the Foord of the Marshes; he had sent
fifty horse or Carbines to keep them play, amongst whom twelve advanced so
forward, being attended with the light horse, and followed with other men of
arms, and all upon the Bridle, that coming to an encounter, ten of their
enemies were taken, and the rest attempting to save themselves by flight, were
overtaken by the Pesants, and slain. This news brought with it a kind of
security, so that his Majesty might now take his rest with a little more
quietness, and the soldiers have the better refreshing, considering there
remained no apparent enemy to annoy them; and if any Alarums chanced, they
might quickly be accommodated, and fresh skouts, and per dues set abroad, the
ouer-wearied might the better take their repose.

While the King refreshed his Army and himself at Aspremont, he called a
Council of war to determine his proceedings; and because he perceived the
business of Rochel to be dangerous and difficult, he now desisted from so much
as a conference concerning it, and only went about the reducing of this Island
of Rye to his obedience: whereupon he sent the Count de la Roche-foucalt, to
besiege the Castle of Chaume, or at least to surprise it by Battery or
otherwise: he took with him three thousand soldiers, and made his other
provision suitable to such a business: the Castle it self was strong, well
furnished with soldiers, and now the better prepared, because of them which
escaped in the last defeat, and quartred themselves here round about: yet
nothing at this time prevailed against the Kings forces. For they gave so hot
an assault, and seconded one another in such a manner, that they not only
seemed more then they were, but encouraged one another to the preuayling: so
that though the enemy made for the time equal opposition, and might have
defended themselves, if they had not been thus terrified, and examinated: yet
at last in the midst of the fight it was taken about the eighteenth of
April, a hundred and fifty men slain, and four hundred surprised as
prisoners, of those which called themselves, and made, as it were, a new head
to intercept the battery, and prevent, as far as they could, the expugnation.

While this was doing against Chalme, the Lord de Buyers Lieutenant of the
foresaid Count understanding that Monsieur de Soubize was returned toward the
Island with the troops, that had escaped with him, made up against him, and
charged him only with thirty of the chiefest Gentlemen, who upon their
shrinking back, as mistrusting the kings forces to be nearer then they were,
took thirty of Soubizes company prisoners, and rerurned to the king with the
relation of the matter, who next day being the nineteenth of April drew out
all his army most Princely equipped and furnished, gloriously to behold, and
well marshalled for any enterprise, and this he did in the sight of Soubize,
who had retired himself to a place of security, by reason of the seas coming
in, so that for the time it was inaccessable: and for the time the king meant
only to show his greatness, and strike as it were a terror upon them, that
they might remember themselves, and return to his obedience.

This done, his Majesty resolved to march to Royan and withal expedition to
besiege it: for seeing he was abroad, he would now do some thing worthy of his
labor, pains, presence, travel, and the endurances of his army which by this
time increased, and was great and well appointed: for there accompanied him
many Princes and noble Lords: by name the Prince of Conde, the Count Soisons:
my Lord of Vendosme: the grand Prior, Duke de Fronfac, Duke de Retz, my Lords
the Marshals of Vitry, and of Prasluin, Monsieur de Scomberg, the Marquess of
Courtenan, the Marquess of Nesse, with many other Lords, and Gentlemen of
quality, who had not only done their deuoire in this iourny, but were ready
to spend their lives for his Majesty upon any occasion.

Frederick Morel, the Kings ordinary Printer has authority from his Majesty
to print this true Relation, which was sent from the King himself: with a
prohibition to all other Printers, neither to print this, nor things of the
like nature, without license, upon pain of forfeiting a hundred pound Paris,
and corporal punishment if it be proved, and he convicted.

Published and done this 21. of April 1622. Stylo nouo. Signed Dr. Bailleul.


