By the King. A Proclamation to repress all Piracies and Depredations upon the
Sea.
THe Kings MAJESTY being certainly informed through the manifold and daily
complaints made to his Highness, as well by his own Subjects as others, of the
continual Depredations, and Piracies committed on the Seas by certain lewd
and ill disposed persons; and finding that the ordinary proceedings held of
late times for the suppressing of these enormities and offenses, have wrought
less reformation then was expected: In his Princely care to preserve Justice,
as one of the maine pillars of his Estate, and for the speedier suppressing of
all such Piracies and Depredacious crimes, most hateful to his mind, and
scandalous to his peaceable government, and for the better continuance of
Amity with all other Princes and States; Has with the advice of his Privy
Counsel, for the speedy prevention or severe punishment hereafter of such
foul crimes and Piracies, Set down certain Articles hereunto annexed, which
his Highness commands all his Officers whom it may concern, of what degree
soever, to see duly executed, Wherein if any manner of person shall be found
culpable or wilfully negligent, contemptuous, or disobedient, His Majesty
declares hereby, that punishment shall be inflicted upon him or them with such
severity, as the example thereof shall terrify all others from committing any
so odious crimes, or contemptuous offenses.

FIrst, that no man of War be furnished or set out to Sea by any of his
Majesty's Subjects, under pain of Death and confiscation of Lands and Goods,
not only to the Captains and Mariners, but also to the Owners and
Victuallers, if the Company of the said Ship shall commit any Piracie,
Depredation or murder at the Sea, upon any of his Majesty's Friends.

Item, that if any person whatsoever shall upon the Seas take any Ship that
does belong to any of his Majesty's Friends and Allies, or to any of their
Subjects, or shall take out of it by force any Goods of what nature or quality
soever, he or they so offending shall suffer Death, with confiscation of Lands
and Goods, according to the Law in that case provided.

Item, that all Admiral causes (except the causes now depending before the
Commissioners for causes of Depredations) shall be summarily heard by the Judge
of the high Court of the Admiraltie, without admitting any unnecessary delay.

Item, that no appeal from him be admitted to the Defendant or Defendants in
causes of Depredation, either against the Offenders, or their Accessaries,
before or after the offense committed, or those in whose possession the Goods
spoiled are found, Unless first by way of provision, the sum adjudged be
paid to the Plaintiff upon Sureties to repay it, if the Sentence shall be
reuersed.

Item, that no Prohibition in such cases of Spoil and their accessaries or
dependances be granted hereafter.

Item, that no Ship or Goods taken from any his Majesty's friends, shall be
delivered by any other order then upon proof made in the said Court of the
Admiralty, before the said Judge or his Deputy, to the end that a Record may
be kept of all such Restitutions made to strangers, to serve when occasion
shall require.

Item, that every Viceadmirall is enjoined by this Proclamation (whereof he
shall take notice at his peril) to certify into the said Court of the
Admiralty every quarter of the year what man of War has gone to the Sea, or
returned home within that time, with any goods taken at Sea, or the procedue
thereof, upon pain to lose to his Majesty (by way of Fine) for every such
default forty pounds of current money of England, to be answered into his
Majesty's Receipt of the Exchequer, by Certificate from the said Judge of the
Admiralty under the great Seal of that Office, to be directed to the Lord
Treasurer and the Barons of the Exchequer.

Item, that all the Kings Subjects shall forbear from ayding or receiving of any
Pirat or Sea-Rouer, or any person not being a known Merchant, by contracting,
buying, selling or exchanging with them, or by victualling of them or any of
their company, whereby they or any of them shall be the more enabled to go or
return to the Seas to commit any Piracie or disorder, upon pain for so doing
to be punished presently, as the principal offenders and Pirates ought to be.

Item, that the Viceadmirals, Customers, and the other Officers of the Ports,
shall not suffer any Ship to go to the Seas before such time as they
respectively in their several Ports have duly searched and visited the same,
to the intent to stay such persons as apparently shall be furnished for the
Wars, and not for Merchandise or Fishing. And if there shall be any manner of
suspicion that the said person, though he shall pretend to trade for
Merchandise or Fishing, has, or may have an intent by his provisions or
furniture, otherwise then to use the trade of Merchandise or Fishing, that in
such case of suspicion the Officers of the Ports shall stay, and in no wise
suffer the same to pass to the Seas without good bonds by sufficient sureties
first had, to use nothing but a lawful trade of Merchandise or Fishing. And if
the said Officers shall suffer any person otherwise to repair to the Seas then
above is mentioned, they shall not only answer for any Piracies which any
such person shall chance hereafter to do upon the Seas, but shall suffer
imprisonment until the offenders may be apprehended, if they shall be living.
And generally his Majesty declares and denounces all such Pirates and Rouers
upon the Seas to be out of his Majesty's Protection, and lawfully to be by any
person taken, punished, and suppressed with extremity.

And whereas diverse great and enormous spoils and Piracies have been of late
time committed within the Straits of Gyblaltar by Captain Thomas Tomkins
Gentleman, Edmond Bonham, Walter Ianuerin, Mariners, and diverse other English
Pirates, and the Goods, Moneys and Merchandises brought into England by them,
have been scattered, sold, and disposed of most lewdly and prodigally, by the
means of their Receivers, Comforters and Abettors, to the exceeding prejudice
of his Majesty's good friends the Venetians, whom they have robbed, and to the
great displeasure of God, and dishonor of this State: His Majesty does
expressly command all Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Admirals, Viceadmirals
and their Deputies, and all other Officers of the Admiralty, and all Justices
of the Peace, Majors, Shiriffes, Bailiffes, Constables, and all other his
Officers and Ministers whatsoever, to use all care and diligence in the
inquiring, searching for, and apprehending of all such Pirates, their Receivers,
Comforters, and Abettors. And if they shall by their travails and cares find
any of them, to send them presently under safe custody to the common Gaoles of
Hampshire or Dorsetshire, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, till the
Lord high Admiral of England or his Lieutenant the Judge of the high Court of
the Admiralty shall dispose of them according to the Laws in that case
provided.

Given at his Majesty's City of Winchester the xxx. day of September 1603. in
the first year of his Highness Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of
Scotland the seven and thirtieth.
God save the King.
Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1603.


