By the King.
AS the Princely care and continual watch, which We have over the good of Our
loving Subjects, may in part appear, by the course which We have taken, for a
reuiew and consideration of many of our Statute Laws: wherein We were
desirous, that in stead of the multiplicitie of the same, and doubtfulnes that
may arise in the interpretation of them, (whereof some are worn out with time,
some unfit for execution by the change of times; and of others, some branches
only standing in force, and the rest repealed) some such new Laws may be
made, as shall be most necessary for the good of Us, and our people, and the
same more clear and plain to their vnderuanding whom it may concern, then
they have been or are in some cases; For the better preparation whereof (being a
work of so great labor) We have already caused our Privy Council, to make
choice of some discreet persons learned in the Law, not only to make
collections of them as they stand now in force, but to digest them into some
such orderly Method (imparting the same also to our learned Council) as Our
Judges may peruse their labors, before they be presented to the Parliament,
where Our meaning is, to leave them to such consideration and resolution, as
may produce the best effects for the public good, which is the only scope of
Our intention: So although We know that by the constitution of the frame and
policy of this kingdom, Royal Proclamations and Ordinances are not of equal
force, nor in the like degrees with our Laws; Yet having made some
observation, That the number of Proclamations is great, both of former times,
and of Our own, and that in diverse of them containing many politic and
necessary Commandments and Admonitions, (published at several times,
according to the variety of accidents, and tending only to the good of Our
people) there are some remaining, wherein Our directions were intended to be
but Temporary, some others set forth so nearly one upon another, (though to
one and the same end) some others that are not so clearly penned to the
capacity of the vulgar sort, but do, either carry some show of Ambiguitie or
contradiction, or may at least serve for a color to the ill disposed, to
neglect the same, and may give occasion to some others well affected, to omit
the performance, only by misunderstanding of Our royal pleasure therein. And
where We have also held it an office appertayning to Us, and as a power
unseparably annexed to our Crown and Royal Authority, and such as our
Progenitors, in the happiest times have used and exercised, to apply speedy,
proper, and convenient remedies (out of our Royal power) in all cases of
sudden and extraordinary accidents, and in matters so variable and irregular
in their nature, as are not provided for by Law, nor can fitly fall under the
certain rule of a Law; and yet may greatly import either the preservation and
good of Us and our people, or the public honor and ornament of Our Kingdom:
Forasmuch as We have also been given to understand, that there is observation
made, of some more general neglect in obeying Our Proclamations, then is fit
to be tolerated, We have likewise held it fit, not only to give order, for a
reuiew of such Proclamations as are passed formerly, but by the deliberate
advice of Our Privy Council, and for the reasons that are before mentioned,
to determine such of them, as are not now thought necessary, and convenient for
the public weal, and to alter and reform others, where We found cause.
Hereby requiring and commanding all our loving Subjects, more duly and readily
hereafter to apply their obedience to the rest, which We do leave now in
force, or shall hereafter set forth, according to the most necessary and
important occasions of this Estate.

And therefore whereas in the first year of our Reign, a Proclamation was set
forth touching the prices of Victuals within the Verge; And the like
Proclamation was set forth the tenth of July in the second year of our Reign;
And that we are given to understand, that such abuses may be for the most part
reformed, and the Offenders punished by the Law; We do declare both the said
Proclamations to be determined.

And whereas a Proclamation was set forth, bearing date the eleueuth day of
January in the first year of Our Reign, concerning the choice of Knights and
Burgesses of the Parliament, wherein were contained diverse politic and
necessary directions and admonitions, for caution and respect to be used in the
said Elections; Forasmuch as it did refer properly to the summons of the
Parliament now past long since; We do by these presents declare the said
Proclamation to be determined.

And whereas a Proclamation was set forth by Us, bearing date the eighteenth day
of June in the second year of our Reign, for the true winding and folding of
woolles; Forasmuch as the abuses (therein mentioned) are partly helped by the
Law, as it now stands, and if any thing be defective, it is more fit for a
remedy by Act of Parliament; We do by these presents determine the same.

And whereas there has bin set forth by us (taking light from the example of
our dear Sister Elizabeth,) four several Proclamations touching buildings
and Inmates in and about the City of London, greatly importing not only the
health, good estate, safety, and beauty of the said City, but likewise by an
infallible consequence, the universal weal and preservation of our Person,
Court, and Kingdom: We have thought fit for the better execution of the good
thereby intended, to draw all the said Proclamations into one brief and clear
form, which our Princely Resolution is to have hereafter straightly observed,
although We could wish that some things in that behalf might be further
considered by our Parliament, seeing the matter has been so often moved, and
never effected. And whereas We have also set forth diverse Proclamations
forbidding the making of Starch, wherein there may seem to be some ambiguitie;
We have thought fit to determine all the said Proclamations in that behalf,
minding to publish one other for the repressing of so great an enormitie.

We have also taken into our Princely consideration, the necessity of taking
some politic order against excess of Apparel, for the enlarging the vent of
Cloth, for furnishing of the Realm with serviceable Armor, for stay of
transporting of Our Treasure into foreign parts, against selling of Ships, and
for restraint and prevention of Depredations at Sea; Some of which points are
not at this time provided for, neither by Law nor Proclamation, and some other
are not so sufficiently and severely provided for, as the greatness of the
mischief requires. But because we are willing to make trial, whether the
remedies for these great enormities may not be reduced under some regular form
of Law, We have forborne for the present to give order in them by way of
Proclamation.

Given at Our Honor of Hampton Court the 24. day of September, in the eight
year of our Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Jmprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1610.


