And being above -- xxiijc. weight upon every hundred ijd. And for Seacoales
the Load xijd. 3 Item, From any the Wharfes aforesaid, To Smithfield bars,
Holborne bar, Temple bar, or any of the bars on the Northside of the City,
and places of like distance up the Hill with -- xviijC. weight, not exceeding
-- xxiijC. weight. For every Load xxijd. And going beyond the said places, the
Parties to agree with the Carrmen. 4 Item, From any the Wharfes aforesaid, To
Towerstreet, Gracechurchstreet, Bishopsgate within, Cornhill, and places of
like distance up the Hill with -- xiiijC. weight, not exceeding -- xviijC.
weight, In which may be included xx. pieces of Raisins, a load of Raisins of
the Sun, vj. bags of Pepper, vj. ordinary bags of Galls, iij. great bags of
Galls, vj. bales and barrels of Indico, vj. bales of Grograines, vj. ordinary
bales of Turkey silk, viij. bales of India silk, v. hogsheads of Cloves and
Tobacco, iiij. bales of Callicoes, iij. hogsheads of Wines, ij. chests of
Sugars; or any other goods of the like weight xiiijd. 7 Item, From London
bridge to the Bridgfoot westward, Old Swan, Coleharbour, the three Cranes,
Queenhithe, Broken wharfe, Paulswharfe, Puddle wharfe, the Wardrobe, and to all
other Places not exceeding the Poultry, Cheapside, Newgate market, for --
xiijC. weight, not exceeding -- xviijC. weight xiiijd. And for every load of
Seacoales xiid. And to all the places Northward of the Poultry, Cheapside,
Newgate market, Holborne bridge, and Fleetstreet, for -- xiiijC. weight, not
exceeding -- xviii C. weight xvid. 8 Item, from Towerstreet, Gracechurchstreet
Fanchurchstreet, Bishopsgatestreet within, Cornehill, and other places of like
distance, for every pack of xx. Clothes, for vi. bales of Clothes and Kersies,
vi. bales of Pepper, vi. barrels of Indico, v. hogsheads of Cloves, and for
other goods of like weight to the waterside xiid. And from Broadstreet,
Lothbury, Old-jury Bassishaw, Colemanstreet, Iremongerlane, St. Lawrence lane,
Milkstreet, Aldermanbury, Cheapside, Woodstreet, Fridaystreet, Breadstreet, and
other places of like distance to the waterside, for the like weight,
conditionally, that the Carrmen do load their own Carrs xiiijd. And if they
refuse to do the same, then but xiid.

1 Item, That it shall be free for all Merchants and others that have occasion
to use Carres, to choose what Carres they please, except such as stand for
Wharfe-worke, Crane-work, Shops, and Warehouses between Tower Wharfe and London
bridge, which are to stand in order, and to be taken in turn, in regard of the
narrowness of the passage in those places.

Item, For prevention of future damage to the Merchants, and suppressing of
unruly and disorderly Carremen, and for avoiding of danger by unruly horses, it
is thought fit, and so ordered by this Court, that the Company of Woodmongers,
shall have power, and be hereby authorized to nominate and appoint Streetmen,
(such as they shall think fit) to be Overseers of the said Carremen, to see
and take care, that Merchants and other Citizens goods be well and faithfully
carried and delivered at the rates and prices aforesaid, without any exaction,
hinderance, or disturbance; and that able persons, none under the age of
Eighteen years be employed to manage their Horses and Carres: And that such of
the Carremen as shall be found obstinate, and refuse to obey these Orders, may
receive condign punishment, according to the Laws and Orders of the said
Company. And that such of them as shall be disturbers, and occasion the breach
of the Peace be immediately brought before the Lord Mayor, or some other of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, to be punished according to the Law. And
all Constables and Officers within this City and Liberties, are required to be
ayding and assisting unto the said Overseers, in the lawful execution of their
duties.

Printed by Richard Cotes Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


