St. Paul and St. James Reconciled.

A SERMON Preached before the University of Cambridge, At St. Mary's Church, on
COMMENCEMENT-SVNDAY In the Afternoon, June 30. 1700.

St. JAMES. II. 24. Ye see then how that by Works a Man is justified and not by
Faith only. By Offspring Blackall, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Her Majesty.

The Fourth Edition.

London, Printed by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside. For the
Benefit of the Poor.

St. JAMES II. 24. Ye see then how that by Works a Man is justified, and not by
Faith only.
IF it was an usual thing to take two Texts to a Sermon, I Would subjoyn to the
Words which I have now read to you those in Romans 3. 28. (or some other Text of
some of St. Paul's Epistles to the same purpose.) Therefore we conclude that a
Man is justified by Faith; and I would read them both together, as the Theme or
Subject whereon I intend to discourse at this time.

For this is indeed my present Design; not to handle these Words of St. James
by themselves, that is, as laying down a Notion of Justification, to
appearance, contrary to what St. Paul teaches in that other Text: But to show
that St. Paul and St. James, though they differ in Words and Expressions, do yet
really both teach the same Doctrine; That neither does St. Paul, in excluding
Works from having any thing to do in our Justification, mean to exclude such
Works as St. James here declares to be necessary; neither on the other side
does St. James, in asserting the Necessity of good Works, together with Faith,
and as the effects of it, mean to attribute more to them than St. Paul does.

But before I proceed to show how these two Apostles may, as I think, be fairly
reconciled, it may not be amiss to premise this one thing, viz.

That if that Solution of this Difficulty, which I shall by and by propose,
should not seem clear and Satisfactory, and if we could not think of any other
way whereby these two Divine Writers, might to our Apprehension, be reconciled
together, and made to speak the same thing; it would nevertheless in that case,
be reasonable to stick to the Words of St. James, in their strict and most
natural Signification, and to suppose that St. Paul is to be interpreted by
him, rather than he by St. Paul, and consequently to take for granted, that the
Doctrine which we are here taught in express Words by St. James (viz. that
Works are necessary as well as Faith, to render us such as God will approve of
and justify at the last Day) is undoubtedly true, although we could not tell
which way St. Paul's Words might be fairly interpreted in the same Sense. This
I say appears reasonable upon several Accounts. As namely,

1. Because we have an express Testimony of Scripture, that in St. Paul's
Writings there are some things hard to be understood which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest -- to their own, Destruction. [2 Pet. 3. 16.] And
it is probable that those Places wherein he treats concerning Justification by
Faith only, may be reckoned in that Number. And this St. Augustine say expressly,
viz. That the chief Difficulty of all in St. Paul' s Epistles, is his so much
Commendation of that Faith, which he says does justify; by which ignorant Men
understanding nothing else but only an Assent of the Mind to the Truths of the
Gospel which indeed is the prime and most proper Nation of the Word to thence
infer, that a good Life is not necessary to justify and save a Man.

And indeed if St. Peter had not made this Observation concerning the Obscurity
of some of St. Paul's Writings, it is nevertheless no more than what every one
that reads the Bible must needs observe; viz. that the Epistles of St. Paul,
especially where he handles Controversy, are the hardest to be understood
(except perhaps the Prophesies that are not yet accomplished,) of any parts of
the New Testament.

And on the other side, it is no less obvious to be observed, that the Epistle
of St. James, and this Chapter of it in particular, is, to appearance very
plain and clear; and that, both in the Conclusion which it lays down, viz. that
we are justified by Works, and not by Faith only, and also in the Arguments
whereby this Conclusion is made good, from the 14th Verse of this Chapter to
the end.

Now if the Case be thus, as it plainly seems to be, nothing can be more
unreasonable than to interpret this Place of St. James by those of St. Paul,
that is a plain Place by an obscure one; and on the other side, nothing can be
fairer than when we meet with any crabbed or difficult Place in any Author, to
see whether his meaning be not elsewhere expressed more clearly, and if it be,
to conclude that the intricate Place at the same meaning with the plain one,
although we know not how well to reconcile the Words and Phrases thereof to it.

And this is the Case here: For though St. Paul and St. James were different
Writers, yet the Author of both their Epistles was the same, viz. the Holy
Spirit of God, by whose Inspiration they both wrote: Their Writings are
consequently both of them Parts of that one everlasting Gospel, by which God
will judge the World; and they do both of them contain (only in different
Expressions) the Articles of the same Covenant between God and us it is
reasonable therefore in this Case, to observe the same Method that we do in
other the like Cases, viz. to put such a Sense and Interpretation, on any
difficult or ambiguous Passage that we meet with any where therein, as to make
it agree to and consist with those other Passages in the same Book or Writing,
which seem to be more plainly expressed, and of the meaning of which there can
be less Dispute.

2. Another Reason why I think (if we could not easily reconcile St. Paul with
St. James) we ought rather to embrace the Literal Sense of St. James, than that
of St Paul, and to conclude with him that good Works are necessary to our
Justification and Salvation, as well a Faith is, because (as is observed by
several of the Ancients) this Epistle of St. James (as likewise the first of
St. John, the Second of St. Peter, and that of St. Jude) was written on purpose
to rectify the Mistakes that some had fallen into, through their
Misunderstanding of some of St. Paul's Writings. [v. Great. in Jam. 2. 21.]

Now if this be so, we may reasonably conclude, that St James designing this
Discourse of his concerning Faith and Works as a Commentary upon, or an
Explication of wat St. Paul had written before upon the same Subject, was very
careful to avoid all that Obscurity and Ambiguity of Expression, which had
occasioned the Writings of St. Paul to be so grossly misunderstood, and wrested
to such ill purposes, as St. Peter observes they had been by some ignorant and
perverse Men; and consequently that St. James uses the Words Faith and Works in
that Sense, which is most natural and obvious, in that Sense wherein Common
Readers were most like to understand them: Whereas St. Paul's Epistles I mean
those wherein he handles this same Subject) being written with another Design,
as I shall show bereafter, it may well be supposed that he, having in his
writting them an Eye to his main Design, (which was to show the Necessity of
embracing the Christian Faith, and the no Obligation that lay upon Christians
from the Ceremonial Law of Moses) was more careless in his other Expressions,
as not fearing that any Person, instructed in the Christian Religion, would
ever so grossly misunderstand and pervert his Words, as to think that be
intended to give Encouragement to a lewd and dissolute Life.

But this, nevertheless, some did think at least they pleaded St. Paul's
Authority for it, That if Men did but believe aright, it was no great matter
how they lived. Against these therefore our Apostle St. James sets himself in
this Chapter, and shows at large that Christianity did not consist only in a
true and orthodox Faith; that a bare Belief in Christ, or of the Truths of the
Gospel, without bringing forth Fruits in our Life and Conversation, answerable
to such a Belief, would be in no wise sufficient to justify or save us.

And that in writing this, he had an Eye to what St. Paul had written before
upon the same Subject, is farther probable, because he makes use of that very
Instance of Abraham to prove the Necessity of good Works together with Faith,
which St. Paul had before brought against the Jews, to show the sufficiency of
Faith alone without Works, that it, without those Ceremonial Observances, which
they would have pressed upon all other Christians, and which they laid more
stress upon, and did put more Confidence in, than in the weightier Matters of
the Law, Justice, Mercy and Fidelity.

This Epistle of St. James therefore being written after St. Paul's Epistles,
and so, very probably, with a Design to explain them where they had been
misunderstood; it is reasonable to take for granted, that what St. James here
plainly asserts, touching the necessity of good Works together with Faith, is
the Sense of St. Paul, although we could not easily bring St. Paul's Words to it.
Especially if it be considered farther in the Third Place.

3. That though this Epistle of St. James had been never written; nay, though there
had not been one plain Text in the whole Bible expressly asserting the
Insufficiency of a mere Belief, or of an empty fruitless Faith; yet we could
not understand those Passages of St. Paul, wherein he so much magnifies Faith,
and decries Works, in any other Sense than what St. James here plainly teaches,
without making those Passages in St. Paul to evacuate all the rest of the
Bible, and to contradict the whole Design of the Gospel.

For there is never a Page, hardly a Verse in the whole Bible, wherein the
Nature of that Covenant which God has made with Mankind is spoken of, which
does not either in express Words, or by plain Consequence contradict and
disapprove that wild Notion of being saved only by a bare Belief, tho we take
no care to lead our Lives suitable to our Belief.

Now this is the Method that we observe in the Reading of other Books; we
consider the Scope and Design of the whole, and judge of the Sense of
particular Passages with Reference to that: And if there be any single Passage
which we apprehend not the meaning of, or which, at the first Reading, seems to
have another Meaning than is agreeable to the Author's main Design, we build
nothing upon such a Passage, but wait a while to see if the Author will not
elsewhere explain himself: And if he does not, and if at last we cannot discern
how that Passage can, without somewhat straining the Words, be reconciled with
others; we conclude however, and take for granted, that the Author (if he
appears to be a Person of Judgment) is consistent with himself, and
consequently that in that Passage, however the Words of it may sound, he did
not mean to thwart and contradict all the rest of his Book.

An this is the Case here; for the Design of our Savior's coming into the
World was to make Men Holy; all that he did, and taught, and suffered, had a
tendency to effect this Design, and his whole Gospel is in a manner made up of
Precepts, and Exhortations, and Encouragement to Godliness and Virtue, and of
severe Threatenings against all manner of Sin, [ Rom, 1. 18.] The Wrath of God
is therein revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of
Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness: these things are plain and
undeniable; this is manifestly the Scope and Design of the whole Bible? And
therefore although some few Passages in St. Paul's Writings should in their most
obvious meaning seem to imply the contrary to this; it would be reasonable
however, to believe and assert the indispensible Necessity of an Holy Life,
together with an Orthodox Belief, rather than upon them alone to ground the
Doctrine, which, if true, would plainly evacuate all the rest of the Bible, and
perfectly thwart and contradict the whole Design of the Gospel.

And this I think a sure Ground for them to go upon who have not leisure to
study the point, or who after all their study, are not able clearly to discern
how these two Apostles may be fairly reconciled in their seemingly
contradictory Assertions, one saying, That we are justified by Faith, and the
other, That we are justified by Works, and not by Faith only.

Which Difference nevertheless I believe it is not so hard a Matter to
reconcile, as at the first sight it may appear to be; the seeming Contrariety
between them lying, as I suppose, only in their using in different Senses, the
Words Justify, Faith, and Works: Every one of which Words is capable of, and is
very often in Scripture used in different Senses. For,

I. As to the Word Justify, not to trouble you with the Etymology of it, which
is but an uncertain way of knowing the common Acceptance of a Word; nor yet
with the Sense which Heathen Writers have used the Word in, from whence we
cannot with certainty collect in what Sense the Sacred Writers do use it; it
may be sufficient to observe, That the most obvious and usual Signification
thereof in Holy Scripture, is, to receive to Mercy, to absolve and acquit from
former Transgressions. When God justifies a Man, it is by forgiving him his
Trespasses, and accepting, esteeming and rewarding him as a Righteous Person,
although he is not really and strictly such. And thus St. Paul himself seems to
expound the Word, in Rom 3. 25. Being justified freely by his Grace, through
the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. In which Text,
being justified, and having our Sins remitted, seemed to be used as Terms of
the same Signification. And the Psalmist, meaning to describe the Blessedness
of a justified Person, thus expresses it; Blessed are they whose Iniquities are
forgiven and whose Sins are covered, (Psalm 32. 1. 2) Blessed is the Man to
whom the Lord will not impute Sin. (Romans 4. 5, 6. 7, 8.) And indeed this is all
the Justification that Sinful Men, (and such all Men are) are capable of: For
being in truth Sinners, they cannot by a Just God, be acquitted as Innocent:
They can therefore be justified no other way but by having their Sins forgiven
them, and by being received to Mercy; for if God should enter into strict
Judgment with us, no Man living could be justified in his Sight, as the
Psalmist says, ( Psalm. 143. 2.)

To justify therefore, in the common Scriptural Notion of it is, to absolve
from Guilt, to discharge from Punishment; and accordingly it is frequently in
Scripture opposed to Condemnation, It is God that justifyeth, says the Apostle,
who is he that Condemns? (Romans 8. 33, 34,) And in another place, Being
justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath, through him. (Romans 5. 9.)

Now taking the Word in this Sense, there is a two fold Justification.

First, When we take upon us the Profession of the Christian Religion in
Baptism; for then our past Sins are forgiven us, then we are received into a
Covenant of Grace and Pardon.

But this is not a full Justification; for our Sins are not then clearly
pardoned and forgiven, because they may, after this be still imputed to us; and
so they will be, in case we afterward do either in Profession or in Works deny
that Faith, which we then take upon us. Our Second therefore, and our complete
and final Justification is not till the great Day of Judgment, when God will
for ever acquit from the Guilt, and free from the Punishment of all their past
Sins, all those who continued faithful to that Covenant, which they entered into
with God at their Baptism.

Supposing therefore at present that St. Paul and St. James do by Faith and
Works both mean the same things: Yet if they do not both speak of the same
Justification; if St. Paul, when he speaks of Justification by Faith, means the
First Justification, which is dispensed to us in Baptism; and St. James, when
he affirms, that we are justified by Works, and not by Faith only, means the
Second and Final Justification at the last Day; there is plainly no manner of
Contrariety between them. For it may be true, thunt in order to our being
admitted into the Covenant of Justification and Pardon nothing more may be
required, but only that we firmly believe and embrace the Christian Religion;
(and accordingly we may observe, that as previous Disposition to Baptism
nothing else seems to be required, but only that we should believe the Gospel.
and in Profession renounce our former Sins, according to that of St. Philip to
the Eunuch, Acts 8. 37. ( If thou believe with all thine Heart, thou may be
baptized;) and yet it may be true too, that our being put into a justified
state by Baptism, will in the event be no advantage to us, but rather only
increase our Condemnation, unless afterward we continue true and faithful to
that Profession which we then take upon us, and are careful to perform our part
of that Covenant which we then enter into with God. Now, I say, this last seems
to be what St. James affirms, and the first all that St. Paul teaches, at least
in many of those Places, where he says we are justified by Faith.

For that by the Justification which St. James speaks of, when he says We are
Justified by Works, and not by Faith only, he means our Final Justification at
the great Day, upon which that Salvation will immediately be bestowed upon us,
which at our Baptism was only promised and assured to us upon certain
Conditions, is evident, by his using Justification and Salvation, in this
Dispute, as Terms equivalent. For thus he expresses the Doctrine of the Text,
in the 14th Verse, where he first begius to handle the Subject; What does it
profit, my Brethren, if a Man say he has Faith and have not Works? can Faith
save him? It is plain, that he means the same thing there by being saved, that
does in the Text and other Verses of this Chapter, by being justified; and
consequently that by Justification, in this Discourse of his concerning Faith
and Works; he means that Final Justification, upon which Salvation is
immediately consequent.

And on the other side, that St. Paul in very many at least, if not in all
those Places wherein he attributes Justification to Faith only without Works,
means therefore only our first Justification, that is, our being admitted into
the Covenant of Grace, and being put into a justified state by Baptism, will, I
suppose, be no less evident, if these two things be considered.

1. That in many places he speaks of Justification as a thing past, which he
could not do if he had meant the same thing by Justification that St. James
does. For thus writing to the Corinthians, he says, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ye are, or ye
have been justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus: And Romans 6. 1. speaking of
himself and other Christians that were then living, and consequently not
finally justified in St. James's Use of the Word, he says, that being justified
by Faith they had Peace with God. And upon this he grounds their Hope that they
should also, if they continued in Faith, be finally justified by God at the
last Day, ver. 9. For if while we were Sinners Christ died for us, much more
then, being now justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath through him.

2. It may be also further observed, That in many places he expressly joins
Justification with Baptism, as an Effect or Concomitant of it; as in Tit. 3. 5,
7. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy
he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewiug of the Holy Ghost, --
that being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs according to the
Hope of Eternal Life; and in 1 Cor. 6. 11: Such were some of you; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, they were justified, it
seems, at the same time that they were washed, that is, at their Baptism, when
they openly and solemnly renounced those wicked Works which they had formerly
lived in, and took upon them the Profession of the Christian Faith.

Now therefore, if this be granted, which seems to be very probable, That St.
Paul generally means this by Justification, (viz. only our being admitted into
a State of Grace and Favor with God, at our Baptism, in which State if we
continue by persevering in Faith and Obedience, we shall at last be justified
and acquitted finally in the great Judgment;) it will be easy to understand all
those Places wherein he attributes this to Faith only, in a Sense very
agreeable to the Doctrine which St. James here teaches; it will be easy then to
understand what St. Paul means, Romans 4. 5. where he says, That God justifies
the Ungodly; then, I say, that Passage which has been thought the strongest,
will appear to be no Objection at all against St. James's Doctrine; the meaning
thereof being only this, That the Grace of God in Christ Jesus is so large, as
that he does not refuse even the vilest and greatest Sinners, but readily
accepts them to Favor, upon their Belief of the Gospel, and closing with the
Terms of it: And there will be then no difficulty at all in understanding how
Abraham was justified by Faith only, according to St. Paul, and how he was
justified by Works, that is, not by Faith only, as St. James expressly affirms
he was, at the 21st Verse of this Chapter. For the Case was thus: Upon his
giving a fall and hearty Assent to the Truth of the Divine Promises, he was
immediately received into God's Favor and Acceptance, even before the
Sincerity of his Faith has been actually tried by his Obedience: Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness, Romans 4. 3. so that
he was then in a justified state: And yet, if after this he had declined to
leave his Country, and his Father's House, or even to sacrifice his Son at
God's Command, he would by this Disobedience have fallen from that state of
Divine Favor, and not have been finally justified by God; but then all his
former (as well as his later sins, which had been once remitted to him, with a
temporary and conditional Remission, upon his first entering into the Covenant
of Grace, by Faith, (by virtue of which Remission, he was, while he continued
in the Covenant, a justified Person) would nevertheless have been imputed to
him, and he condemned for them, if he had afterward swerved from his Obedience.

In short therefore, the Justification which St. Paul generally speaks of, is
that whereby we are made Heirs of Salvation, as he himself explains it, in the
before cited Text Tit. 3. 7 That being justified by Grace we should be made
Heirs, according to the Hope of eternal Life: but the Justification which St.
James speaks of, is that by which we are actually admitted into the Possession
of this Inheritance. And therefore, though in order to the first Justification
nothing more be necessary but only that we close with, and accept of those
Terms of Reconciliation, which God offers to us: Yet in order to the Second
Justification, it is moreover necessary, that we should make good that Covenant
which we before entered into; or else, though we are already justified in St.
Paul's Sense, that is, are now already by our embracing and believing and
professing the Gospel, in such a Capacity and Likelihood of obtaining eternal
Life, as an Heir is of enjoying his Father's Estate; we shall never be
justified in St. James's Sense, that is, we shall never actually possess and
enjoy the Estate; but notwithstanding our present Heirship, shall at last be
cast off, and disinherited for our Disobedience. And this Observation
concerning the different Senses, wherein these two Apostles do sometimes use
the Word justify, may, I suppose, be alone sufficient to reconcile them in
most, if not in all those Passages wherein they seem to differ. But, II. The
Word Faith or Belief, which they do both use in treating of this Subject, is
likewise a Word capable of, and frequently in Scripture used in different
Senses; and I believe it may easily be made appear, that in those Places
wherein St. Paul attributes so much to Faith, wherein he is thought to declare
that that is the only Condition of our final Justification, and admittance into
the Promised Inheritance, he means quite another thing by Faith than St. James
does, when he says that that alone is not sufficient, even all that St. James
means by Faith and Works too. I will not trouble you now with all the
Significations, in which the Word Faith or Belief is used in Holy Scripture;
but shall take notice only of two, which I suppose most applicable to the Case
in Hand.

1. The First Sense of it which I shall take notice of, is that which indeed is
the most obvious and proper meaning of the Word; that is, when by Faith is
meant, An assent of the Mind to the Truth of some Revealed Proposition. And
this Sense St. James uses the Word: By that Faith, which being without Works,
he says, is not sufficient to justify or save us, he plainly means nothing
more than only a Belief of those Truths, which are revealed in the Gospel. And
the Case that he puts, in this, That a Man believe there is a God, and that
those things which he has revealed are true, and that all his Promises and
Threatenings shall be made good, but nevertheless takes no care to live well;
and in this case he says, that such a Faith as this is an empty dead Faith, and
that it will be of no real advantage to us, any more than it is to the Devil's,
who believe all these Truths as firmly as we can do, but without any Benefit to
themselves, because the Promises being not made to them, they are not thereby
incited to the doing of good. But the Promises are made to us, and therefore it
can hardly be conceived, it is scarcely to be supposed that any Man that firmly
believes all the Truths of the Gospel, and considers his own Interest therein,
should nevertheless allow himself in a wicked Life. Faith is naturally such an
active, lively, and working Principle, that it can hardly fail to show it self
by its Effects:

2. An for this Reason, Secondly, the word Faith, which most properly signifies
nothing but the Cause or Principle, is oftentimes in Scripture put to signify
both the Cause and the Effect too, that is, both a Belief of the Gospel Truths,
and also a Life led answerably to such a Belief.

And in this large and comprehensive sense it is clearly evident St. Paul does
use the word in diverse places, and especially in those Epistles where he treats
of Justification by Faith, as may appear from his oftentimes using of the Words
and Phrases instead of the single word Faith, For what he sometimes calls
Faith, he at other times in those same Epistles, calls the Law of Faith, and
the Obedience of Faith, (Romans 3. 27. 1. 5. 16. 26. And in Romans 10. 16. he most
clearly explains his own meaning to be, to include and comprehend Obedience in
the word Faith, whenever he attributes so much to Faith: But they have not all
obeyed the Gospel, for Esaias says, Lord, who has believed our Report? In
which words the same thing is plainly meant by obeying the Gospel, and
believing the Report of the Preachers of it; from whence it clearly appears,
That the Faith or Belief which he so much magnifies in that Epistle, is not an
idle, ineffectual Belief, but such a Faith as makes Men to be obedient.

Forasmuch therefore as the Faith which St. Paul speaks of, when he says we are
justified by Faith, includes in it all that St. James means by Faith and Works
too; it is plain, That though we suppose that they do both use the word justify
always in the same sense, there is not, however, any Contrariety in their
Doctrines, although one says that we are justified by Faith, and the other that
we are justified by Works and not by Faith only. But 3. There is also an
ambiguity in the word Works: and it is not improbable, (nay, I suppose I shall
make it very plain) that these two Apostles St. Paul and St. James in their
several Discourses upon the Subject of Justification, do likewise use this Word
in very different Senses; and that St. Paul, when he excludes Works, does not
mean the same by Works that St. James does, when he affirms that we are
justified by Works, and not by Faith only. And if St. James by Works, when he
affirms them to be necessary together with Faith, means those Works of Piety,
Justice and Charity, and other Moral Duties which are required in the Gospel;
as to any one that reads the former part of the Chapter it will be evident that
he does; and on the other side, if St. Paul, when he excludes Works, means by
Works only, either those materially good Works, which Men might do without the
Grace of the Gospel, or the Merit of good Works, or else those Ritual
Observances which were required by the Ceremonial Law of Moses: then, though
their Words and Expressions be different, yet their Sense may be the very same.
Now concerning this place in St. James, I think there can be no Dispute; he
plainly takes both Faith and Works in the most proper and usual acceptance of
the words: By Faith, when he affirms that Faith alone is not sufficient, he
plainly means a mere Belief of the Truths of the Gospel; and by Works, when he
affirms that they are necessary together with Faith, he plainly means such a
sort of Life and Conversation, as the Belief of the Gospel Truths is naturally
apt to produce, a Conversation becoming the Gospel of Christ: And both these he
affirms to be necessary, in order to our final Justification at the last day.
And on the other side, St. Paul, if at any time he speaks of the same
Justification that St. James does, means, by Faith, when he says we are
justified by that only, all that St James means by Faith and Works too (as has
been shown already) and by Works, when he says we are justified by Works, he
means only, either the Merit of good Works, or such Works as might be done by
unregenerate Men without the Grace of the Gospel* or else the Ritual
Observances of the Mosaical Law. And that he uses the Words in these Senses,
and does not mean to exclude from being a condition of our final Justification
that hearty Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel, which a firm Belief of the
Truths of it is naturally apt to produce, will further appear if these two
things be considered: 1. The occasion and design of those Discourses of St.
Paul, wherein Faith is so much magnified, and Works are set so light by: And,
2. The several Cautions that are here and there intermixed in those Discourses,
as it were on purpose to prevent our mistaking his meaning, and thinking that
we may be saved by Faith alone, without a good Life.

1. We may consider the Occasion and Design of those Discourses, of St. Paul,
wherein Faith is so much magnified, and Works are set so light by; and which
consequently do seem most to contradict the Doctrine here taught by St. James.
And I premise this first of all; That none of St Paul's Epistles seem to have
been written as if they were intended to comprehend the whole Christian
Religion; they rather suppose Christianity already planted in those Places, to
which his Epistles are directed. It was not consequently his Intention, in
every Epistle that he wrote, to teach all the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, and to lay again the foundation of Repentance from dead Works, and of
Faith toward God; Heb. 6. 1. for all this had been done before; those same
Apostles, by whose Ministry they had been converted and baptized, having also
then, (according to the Commission given them by Christ) taught them to observe
all things whatsoever our Lord had commanded. As such therefore the Apostle
considered the Persons to whom he wrote, viz. as true Disciples of Christ, as
Persons that had before been taught to obey as believe the Gospel; and so had
no fear upon him, that by his using the Word Faith or Works in an uncommon
Sense (and yet in such a Sense as the Controversy he was handling led him to
use them in) they to whom he wrote, would ever be in danger of embracing an
Opinion so contrary to the first Principles of the Christian Religion, as it
plainly was, to think that they might be saved only by believing, without
obeying the Gospel. The main design then I say, of most of St. Paul's Epistles,
I mean of the Controversial Parts of them, seems to be to furnish the
Christians to whom he wrote, with Answers to those Objections, which the
Enemies to Christianity, among whom they lived, did make against it. And most
of the Churches to which these Epistles were directed, were made up chiefly of
Gentile Converts, with whom nevertheless, there were some Jewish Converts also
intermixed; but the far greatest part of the Inhabitants of those places were
professed Jews or Gentiles, who, though both zealous, each for their own way, and
against each other, yet readily joined their Forces together as against a
common Enemy, to hinder the growth and spreading of Christianity. So that St.
Paul had three sorts of Adversaries to deal with; viz. the Gentiles, the Jews,
and the Judaizing Christians. The Gentiles; who had been long bred up under the
Institution of their Philosophers, and by their good and wholesome Precepts of
Morality, were in a good readiness and disposition to embrace the Gospel;
which, in general, commanded little more than they were taught before their own
Philosophers, only requiring a stricter and more perfect observance of those
Rules, and adding new Motives and Encouragemencs to it, from the plain
Revelation of a future state of Rewards and Punishments, of which, before the
coming of Christ, Men had but an obscure Notion, and very slender Assurance.
The main Objection therefore which these had to make against St. Paul, was,
that he took (as they thought) a great deal of pains to little purpose, in
going about to establish a new Belief, and a new Profession of Religion among
them, seeing that as to Practice they had been taught all the same things in
substance by their own Philophers; so that consequently they thought, he might
have spared his labor. They were of the mind of our Modern Deists, That
Natural Religion was so good and perfect, that it needed no Revelation to
Improve it. Against these therefore the Apostle proves the necessity of the
Christian Dispensation, and of Faith in Christ: Because though Men had been
taught well before, they had never practiced as they had been taught; that by
reason of the weakness of humane Nature, they had never lived up to what they
knew was their Duty; that therefore no Man was or could be justified in God's
sight, by the Law of Nature, or the first Covenant made with Mankind, which
required strict and unsinning Obedience; that consequently it was necessary to
believe in Christ, and to enter into that more gracious Covenant, which he by
his Blood had made, between God and us, whereby he had encouraged good Works
with better Promises, and offered to afford us divine strength and succor to
assist our Endeavors; by which Covenant of Grace in Christ (though indeed we
were still obliged to the same Duties which the Law of Nature had laid upon us)
we might be justified, which by the other we could not be; because that
required strict and unsinning Obedience, whereas this made allowance for the
weakness of Humane Nature, and left room for Repentance, if at any time through
carelessness or surprise we should come short of our Duty. And to show the
advantage of this Covenant made by Christ, and the impossibility of being
justified any other way, than by having our Sins remitted to us through Faith
in his Blood, seems to have been mainly designed by the Apostle in the former
part of his Epistle to the Romans, Now the first Covenant made with Mankind
being indeed a Covenant of Works, without Grace, therefore in opposition to,
and to distinguish this from that, he with good Reason, call this, sometimes
Grace, sometimes the Law of Faith, sometimes the preaching of Faith, and
sometimes barely Faith; which he says is the only way by which it is possible
for us to be justified, because our Nature is so corrupt and degenerate, that
we cannot perform perfect and and unsinning Obedience. But, 2. The Jews were
also as conceited of themselves as the Gentiles, and as unwilling to accept of
the Covenant made by Christ, because they trusted to be saved by the
Observation of the Law of Moses. And therefore the Apostle likewise, against
these, endeavors to show that they were Sinners as well as the Gentiles, and
stood in as much need of a Savior as they. And this he does in the four or
five 1st Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans; in some Passages of which
(especially in the first and second Chapters) he seems to have a peculiar
Respect to the Gentiles; and in other places to the Jews more especially, and
in some to both of them. And the sum of this Argument is this; That since all,
both Jews and Gentiles had sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, it was
therefore necessary that a Redeemer should come, to make atonement for their
past Sins, and to establish a new Covenant between God and Men; which he calls
Faith, or the Law or Faith, to distinguish it from the Law of Moses, which was
truly a Law of Works; and by this Covenant of Grace or Faith in Christ, which
was open and free for all to enter into, both Jews and Gentiles, he says, might
by justified, which they could not either of them be by the Law of Works, nor
the Jews any more than the Gentiles by the Ceremonial Law of Moses; that being
never designed by God as a Condition of Justification, as having only temporal
Rewards and Punishments annexed to it. Seeing therefore the Jews as well as the
Gentiles had broken the first Law given to Mankind, which required unsinning
Obedience, he says there was no means of Justification now left for either of
them, but by Faith in Christ, that is, by coming into that New Covenant which
Christ had established by his Death, and offered to us in the Gospel. But, 3.
Besides these two, the Apostle had also a third sort of Adverseries to deal
with, which did cost him as much trouble as either of the former; and they were
some who being born and bred Jews, had been converted by Christianity by the
Preaching of the Apostles, but nevertheless still retained such a great Likeing
and Veneration for Moses and his Law, that they thought they were yet bound to
observe it as much as ever; and not only so, but they would fain have forced
the same upon the Gentiles too, telling them that notwithstanding Christ, they
were bound to be circumcised as the Jews were, and to keep the Law of Moses,
and that otherwise they could not be saved. Against these therefore, the
Apostle proves at large, especially in his Epistle to the Galatians) that the
Law given by Moses was never designed to oblige the Gentiles, nor the Jews
neither any longer than till the coming of Christ; that that Law was, to the
Jews themselves, only a Schoolmaster to bring them into Christ, that is, to
prepare and dispose them to receive his more pure and heavenly Doctrine; that
therefore now, after the Revelation and preaching of the Gospel, that Law was
of no further use: And after that Faith is come, says he, that is after the
Gospel is preached, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster, Galat. 3. 25. That
the Ceremonial Law was made upon only of Types and Shadows, whereof Christ was
the Substance and that therefore the Substance being now one, they were to
cease; that the Ceremonial Law was given only to exercise the Jewish Nation for
sometime, and was then to give way to a better Law, the Law of Faith or
Evangelical Obedience; that Abraham himsel was justified by the same means and
method which is now propounded in the Gospel, by viz. by a lively Faith in the
Promises of God working in him a ready Obedience to whatsoever God required of
him, and that he was thus justified before he was circumcised, and therefore so
might they be too, without Circumcision, and such other Ritual Observances.

In the management of which dispute with these Judaizing Christians, the
Apostle calls the Christian Religion, as opposed to the Jewish, by the word
Faith, to distinguish it from the Observation of Moses's Law, which was called
Works, or the Works of the Law. And using the word in this sense; he says We
are justified by Faith, and by Faith only, that is, by the Faith and Obedience
of the Gospel; and that there is no need at all of Works, that is, of such
Works as were enjoined by the Ceremonial Law, which they laid such great stress
upon; for thus he often explains himself, expressly calling those Works which he
rejects, the Works of the Law, thereby plainly distinguishing them from the
Works of Evangelical Obedience, and clearly imitating that it was not his
intention to exclude these, though he did those. Thus the Apostle managed the
Controversy he was engaged in with these three Adversaries: And that his main
Design was to oppose one or other of them in all those Places wherein those
Passages are found which so much magnify Faith, and vilify Works (which are
especially the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians) will, I suppose, readily
appear to any one that shall attentively read them over; and I think it will be
impossible to make out the Context, or to show how those places do at all tend
to the carrying on these Designs, if we take the words Faith and Works in any
other Sense than I have before said St. Paul does use them in. But, Secondly,
That the Apostle St. Paul did not intend to exclude such good Works as St.
James here requires ( viz. Obedience to the Precepts of the Gospel) from being
necessary to our final Justification at the great day, will yet further and
more plainly appear if in a reading over those Epistles, we do but observe the
several Cautions that are here and there intermixed as it were on purpose to
prevent our putting such an Interpretation upon his Words. And first in the
Epistle to the Romans, in Chap. 2. Ver. 6. he tells us plainly, that God will
render to every Man according to his Works, Tribulation and Anguish upon every
Soul of Man that does evil; and Glory, Honor and Peace, to every Man that
works good: Which Passage would be very odly put in, in a Discourse wherein
he was proving the sufficiency of Faith alone for Justification, if thereby he
had meant such a Faith as might be without good Works.

But in the 13th Verse of that Chapter he contradicts that Opinion most
expressly: Not the Hearers of the Law, says he, shall be just before God, but
the Doers of the Law shall be justified. It seems then that St. Paul's
Justification by Faith only, was not a Justification without Works; the Faith
that he there speaks of, must needs therefore be such a Faith as includes Works
in it; The Doers of the Law shall be justified. And so again, Chap. 3. V. 21.
after he had said that both Circumcision and Uncircumcision must be justified
by Faith; and that they could not be justified any other way; that they might
not take Faith in such a narrow sense as to exclude good Works, he adds, Do we
then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; Yea, we establish the Law.
And to the same purpose again, Chap. 6. Ver. 1. What shall we say then? shall
we continue in Sin that Grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are
dead to Sin, live any longer therein? And again, Ver. 15. What then? shall we
sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid. And lastly,
(to name no more) in the 8th Chapter of that Epistle, Ver. 1. when he was come
to the Conclusion of this Controversy, having shown at large the insufficiency
of all other ways, and the absolute necessity of accepting the Gospel Truths,
in order to Justification, he goes on to show the Blessedness of those who
believed in Christ, in these words; There is therefore now no* Condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus: But then, left they should mistake him, and
think that a bare Belief in Christ, or the Profession of his Religion only, was
enough to entitle them to this Blessedness, he adds, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, The like Care he has also taken in his Epistle to
the Galatians where he handles this Controversy again, with a special respect
to the Jewish Law; where we may observe, that to prevent all Misunderstanding
of what he had delivered touching the sufficiency of Faith without Works, he
takes frequent occasion to declare his meaning to be, only to exclude the Works
of the Law, not the obedience of the Gospel. Particularly in the two last
Chapters he is very large in explaining what kind of Liberty he had been before
pleading for; Stand fast therefore, says he, in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. Galat.
5. 1. And what Bondage he meant, appears in the next Verse. Behold, I Paul say
unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christi shall profit you nothing; that
is, if you still trust to be saved by your Jewish Observances, you disclaim and
renounce the Covenant which Christ has made for you, and so can expect no
benefit from it; Whosoever of you, says he, are justified, that is, hope to be
justified, by the Law ye are fallen from Grace. For we, through the Spirit,
wait for the hope of Righteousness by Faith; We, that is, We Christians, no
less than you Jews, do wait for the Hope of Righteousness, that is, for a
Reward of our Righteousness: But then it is not such a Righteousness as yours,
a Righteousness consisting in the observation of Rites and Ceremonies, but
through the Spirit, that is, by a Spiritual Righteousness; and it is by Faith,
that is, it is such a Righteousness as is wrought in us by Faith, that is, by
our Belief of the Gospel of Christ. For says he, Ver. 6. in Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith; not any
Faith. but Faith which works by Love, or Faith which is made perfect by Love,
which words he repeats again in Chap. 6. Ver. 15. only instead of Faith putting
in another Word, not so ambiguous; In Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision but a new Creature. And the same Apostle
in another parallel place, in another of his Epistles, puts it out of all doubt
what he means in the first of these places, by Faith, when he expresses the
same by Obedience; Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision but the keeping
the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. And now by all that has been said. I
suppose, it sufficiently appears, that by Faith, St. Paul means something more
than only a bare belief of the Gospel Truths, when he makes it the sole
Condition of Justification; and that by Works, he does not mean Works of
Evangelical Obedience, when he excludes them from being necessary in order to
it: So that Paul does not, any more than St. James exclude such good Works as
are the natural Effects of a true, lively, and Christian Faith, from being
necessary together with Faith, in order to our full and final Justification at
the last day. And from all that has or been said, I think it appears, that St.
Paul and St. James agree very well together; which was the point that I
proposed to make good, St. James indeed says here, that Faith alone, or a bare
Belief of the Gospel, will not do without Works answerable to our Belief; Ye
see how that by Works a Man is justified and not by Faith only: St. Paul, on
the other side says, that we are justified by Faith: but though this manner of
Expression be different from, and in the Letter, seemingly contradictory to St.
James's meaning is plainly the same. He affirms, indeed, that we are justified
by Faith: but then as I have shown, he means the same thing by Faith, that St.
James does by Faith and Works too; he means such a Faith as a Abraham's was,
(for that is his Example as well as St. James's;) he means such a Faith as
however it is tried, approves it self by a ready Obedience, as Abraham's did:
and the Work which he rejects as useless and unnecessary, or as not sufficient,
are not such as Abraham's were, the Fruits of a lively Faith; but either mere
ritual Observances, or else such Works, as though materially good, are not done
out of a good and virtuous Principle. In a word, he opposes Faith, his
justfying and saving Faith, not to Evangelical Obedience; but either to
unsinning Obedience, by which none can be justified, because all are Sinners;
or to an Opinion of Merit, which there can never be any Ground for; or, lastly,
to the Rites and Ceremonies of Moses's Law, which Law, he shows, was not then
obliging, and so could not be the Condition of Justification.

The use we shall make of what has been said upon this Subject, is this; we
should be hereby incited to the diligent performance of that whole Condition
that (according to the Doctrine thaught by both these Apostles) is required of
us in order to Salvation; which is not only to believe in Christ, and to make
profession of the Christian Faith, but likewise to live as becomes the Gospel
of Christ, and to bring forth plenteously all the fruits of Righteousness. And
this likewise St. Peter teaches in his 2d Epistle, 1. 5, etc. with whose Words
I shall conclude; Beside this, giving all diligence add to your Faith Virtue,
and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, Brotherly kindness; and
to brotherly kindness Charity. For if these things be in you and abound, they
make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, But he that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot
see afar off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old Sins.
Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall: For so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant,
for the sake of the same our Lord Jesus Christ; To whom, etc.

FINIS.

