THere has bin a Printed Paper lately published under the Title of a
Declaration of Commissary General Bhar, for his vindication of diverse
dishonorable Calumnies, which he should have expressed, highly to the
prejudice of both Nations in sundry particalars, The proof of which, we leave
to those Honorable Persons, whose reputation is of that value, notwithstanding
the influence these barbarous lines has upon them, as scorns to admit any
comparison with the baseness of the subscriber.

In which Paper it is to be observed, That Commissary General Bhar, [in all
his actions like himselfe] whereas he should have vindicated his Honor by his
Sword [my Lord Denbigh having adorned him with all the Ornaments of a Pultrone,
as is to be seen under his hand and Seal, did send a Letter of complement to
the Earl, thinking his Lordship (having so prodigally affronted him before,
would have returned one Answer suitable to his Letter: but my Lord, truly Noble,
perfectly scorned it, and made his Major return him this.

Sir, the Earl of Denbigh bid me let you know, that what he spoke or wrote, or
shall speak or write, concerning you, he will Justify, avouch, and maintain.
This Major was neither Peer, nor Parliament man, so that Bhar might have put
him to it; since his pretense was, he could not challenge a Peer of the Land,
but it is well known, my Lord Denbigh is of such Gallantry, that he would wave
any Privilege what soever, for the reparation of the bleeding Honor of a
Gentleman.

In the end of his Declaration, he subjoynes as follows.

But of all these Calumnies and Lies in general, I am bound to say, that they
are invented, forged, and vented by men, ill affected to the common good; who
for sinister ends, endeavor to sow division, and to rend in sunder the happy
union of the two Nations, of which ravelling, some beginnings are already
discovered in diverse Commanders, who have laid down their Commissions, in his
Excellencies Army, upon no other ground, but that it stands not with their
Honor, to serve where the robber of their Nations honor is tolerated.
Observe; Bhar would not challenge a Peer, and yet here he renders himself so
considerable, that those whom he seares would question him guilty, are sowers
of Sedition, and Renters of the Union betwixt the two Kingdoms.

He accuses some Officers of ravelling, who for just reasons have laid down
their Commissions; and yet all this time his carriage to these Gentlemen has
been so submissively humble, that it can deserve no other Title but
Sycophanticall baseness.

He never had the courage to resent it, otherwise, then by stealing up a thing
called a Declaration (his Person that day being invisible) thinking thereby to
free himself of these just Titles, deservedly put upon him in the Earl of
Denbighes Letter, where he stands registered upon record, a most notorious
Pultrone, a base and unworthy way to cloak his Cowardice: As who would stab a
man behind, not daring to make appear any former resentment. But the Gentleman
is wise, he has chosen the best of two evils; Not knowing otherwise how to
avoid personal hazard, but by throwing himself in the hand of Justice, where
(he knows) we must leave him to his merited reward, which we doubt not time
will suddenly bring forth.

Colonel John Middleton. Colonel James Holburne. Captain Gilbert Carr.
Captain James Innes.



