AN ACT For Sale of the Goods and Personal Estate Of the late King, Queen and
Prince.

seal of the Commonwealth, composed of two juxtaposed blazons, one bearing the
image of St. George's cross, the other of an Irish harp

Vicesimo sexto Junii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament'.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet, at the Sign of the Golden-Dragon,
near the Inner Temple, 1649.

(...) or any of them, shall be inventoried and apprised, and shall also be
sold, except such parcels there, of as shall be found necessary to be reserved
for the uses of State; Be it therefore Enacted, and it is Enacted by this
present Parliament, and by the authority of the same, That John Humphreys and
George Withers of Westminster, Esqs; Anthony Mildmay, Ralph Grafton of Cornhil,
Michael Lampier, John Belchamp, Philip Cartwright of the Isle of Jersey, Sent,
Henry Creech, John Foach, David Powel, and Edward Winslow, Gentlemen, and
Citizens of London, shall be, and are hereby constituted and appointed Trustees
for the enquiring out, inventorying, apprizing and securing of the said Goods
and Personal Estate; and they, or any four or more of them, shall be, and are
hereby authorized, to repair to any and every house or place whatsoever, where
any of the said goods, or any part of the said Personal Estate does lie, and to
make or cause to be made, a true and perfect Inventory or Inventories thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, which they shall or may any way find out
or discover, and to make a just and equal apprizement of the same, and of every
part and parcel thereof, according to the true value thereof, as they in their
judgments and consciences shall think the same may reasonably and probably be
sold for; expressing in the said Inventory or Inventories, the several sums or
values at which the several parcels shall be apprized as aforesaid, and to
secure, or cause to be secured, the said goods, and every part and parcel
thereof, at such place or places, and in the hands and custody of such person
or persons as they shall find most fit and convenient, to prevent any spoil or
imbezlement thereof; of which Inventory or Inventories, with the several
Apprizements of the premises, the said Trustees, or any four or more of them,
shall make three Duplicates, certified under their hands and Seals, and
expressing the several places where, and the persons in whose Custody the
premises or any part thereof respectively are secured as aforesaid; and keeping
the Originals in the hands of such Clerk: Register as they shall think fit to
employ, shall within fourteen days after any such apprizements made, return and
send one of the said Duplicates to the Council of State, which shall be kept by
the Secretary thereof; and the other to the other Commissioners hereafter named
to be Contractors for sale of the said Goods, or to the Clerk-Register whom the
said Contractors shall employ for that purpose, which shall by him be Registered
and safe kept; and the third to the Treasurers hereafter mentioned, for the
Receipt of the moneys to be made by sale of the premises, which shall by them
be Registered and safe kept. And for the more effectual prosecution of this
Service, and better discovery of any concealment or imbezlement of the
premises, or any part thereof, Be it further Enacted, That the said Trustees,
or any two or more of them, shall be and are hereby authorized to administer an
Oath unto, and to examine upon Oath every such person or persons as they shall
find able to inform them, concerning any other person or persons chargeable
with, or accountable for the premises or any part thereof: And that the said
Trustees, or any four or more of them, shall be and are hereby authorized, by
warrant under their hands and Seals, to summon and call before them all and
every such person and persons, and the Executors or Administrators of any such
person or persons deceased, in whose hands, Charge or Custody they shall find,
or be informed upon Dath that any of the said goods or premises, or any Books
of Accounts or Writing concerning the same, now are or have been, or were at
any time since the beginning of the late King Charles his Reign, or who shall or
may be able to inform them concerning the premises, or any part thereof; and to
require every such person or persons to bring before them all such Books of
Accounts, and other Writing as he or they have in their custody or power, or
may lawfully come by concerning the premises or any part thereof; and in case
of any such persons refusal or neglect of obedience unto such first Warrant,
then by other Warrant under their hands and Seals, to send for such person or
persons in safe custody (unless the person be a Member of Parliament or of the
Council of State, in which case the Parliament or Council of State
respectively, is first to be acquainted therewith, to the end such person may
be ordered and made to appear, and do according to the such first Warrant as
aforesaid) and upon the appearance of any such person or persons as aforesaid
in safe custody, or otherwise, the said Trustees, or any four or more of them,
are hereby authorized to examine, and to require an account of every or any
such person or persons concerning the disposal of the premises, or any part
thereof, either upon Oath (Which they are hereby authorized to administer) or
else without Oath, as they shall see cause; and in case any such person or
persons shall refuse to answer, or give such account, being thereunto required,
then by Warrant under their hands and Seals to commit such Offender or
Offenders to Prison or safe custody, and him or them so to detain until he or
they shall answer and give such account as aforesaid; and in case any such
person or persons upon his or their own examinations, or other sufficient
evidence upon Oath, shall be found to have any of the said Goods or personal
Estate in his or their hands, custody or power, and shall detain, or shall
conceal, and refuse or neglect to produce and deliver the same to such person
or persons as the said Trustees, or any four or more of them shall order and
appoint, or else to have imbezled, purloyned or made away any part or parcel of
the premises, and shall refuse or neglect to bring or pay in to the Treasury
hereafter in this Act appointed, the full value thereof in money, as upon like
evidence as aforsaid the same shall be found to have been worth, when last
known to have been in his or their hands or custody, and as shall thereupon be
A warded and Ordered by the said Trustees (which they, or any four or more of
them are hereby authorized and enabled in such case to Award and Order) then
the said Trustees, or any four or more of them, are hereby authorized and
required to certify the name and case of every such Offender, with the full
value of the goods by him detained, concealed, imbezled, purioyned, or made
away as aforesaid, unto the Barons of the Exchequer, who thereupon are to take
order for the effectual levying of the full value so certified of the said
Goods so detained, concealed, imbezled, purloyned, or made away as aforesaid,
upon the Estate Real and Personal of every such Offender respectively; which
moneys so to be levied, the said Barons of the Exchequer are to cause to be
immediately paid over into the hands of the Treasurers hereafter mentioned for
the uses in this Act appointed; and in case upon such Inquiry, Information,
Examination, or other proceeding as aforesaid, any part or parcel of the said
goods or premises, be found out, produced and recovered in kind by the said
Trustees, they are then from time to time to proceed therewith, to the
inventorying, apprising and securing the same, and returning such Duplicates
thereupon as is before directed: And in case they find any part or parcel of
the premises do lie at such place and distance, as that they cannot
conveniently go to apprize the same where it lies, they may, and are hereby
authorized to take order for the true inventorying of the same, and for the
removing thereof to such other place as they shall find convenient, by the
hands of such person or persons as they shall think fit to employ therein, in
order to their more convenient apprising and disposing of the same, as is before
directed. And it is further Enacted, That the said Council of State, upon the
return of any such Duplicate unto them, as is before directed, from the said
Trustees, shall within fourteen days after such return, make choice of such
particulars of the premises therein contained, as they shall think fit, to be
reserved for the uses of State, not exceeding the value of Ten thousand pounds,
and send an extract and account thereof to the Contractors here after named
(who are thereupon to forbear any sale of such particulars, until further Order
from the Parliament: And the said Council of State are with all convenient
speed, to certify or make report to the Parliament, of such particulars as
they have so made choice of, to be reserved as aforesaid, to receive the
approbation, or disapprobation of the Parliament thereupon: And such of the
said particulars as the Parliament shall thereupon approve, to be reserved,
shall (upon a Warrant from the said Council) be delivered by the said Trustees,
or their Agents in whose Custody the same are secured as aforesaid, unto such
person or persons as the said council shall authorize and appoint to receive
the same, to be reserved for the uses of the State; and such of the said
particulars so made choice of, as the Parliament shall not approve to be
reserved, the said Council shall within seven days after such disapprobation
certify to the said Contractors hereafter named, who may and are thereupon to
proceed unto the sale thereof, as is hereafter directed; And the said Trustees,
or any four or more of them, shall be and are hereby authorized to make choice
of, and appoint a Clerk-Register, and such other Agents or Officers as they
shall think fit and find needful, for the better discharge of the Trust, and
dispatch of the Service hereby committed to them as aforesaid, and for their
own and their Agents and Officers pains and charges therein, shall have seven
pence in the pound allowed them out of all such moneys as shall be made by sale
of the said goods and premises, and out of the moneys to be received, raised or
levied for, and as the value of any part or parcel of the premises which they
shall find or discover to be concealed, detained, imbezled, purloyned or made
away as aforesaid, which allowance of seven pence per pound, shall be paid by
the Treasurers here after mentioned, unto the said Trustees, or to such person
or persons as they or any five or more of them shall from time to time appoint
to receive the same for their use, by warrant under their hands and Seals to
the said Treasurers directed; out of which allowance of seven pence per pound,
they are to satisfy all and every the Agents and Officers by them to be
employed in this service, and to defray all other charges of the same (except
for such Messengers or Officers as they shall employ, for the bringing or
keeping of any Offenders in safe custody as aforesaid; who for their pains and
service therein, are to have and take from every such Offender, such fees as
Messengers employed under the Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament usually
do, and lawfully may receive and take for Delinquents fetched or kept by them
in safe custody, by Order of Parliament respectively. And it is further Enacted
by the authority aforesaid, That Daniel Norman of the Isle of Jersey, Merchant,
John Hales of London Merchant, Clement Kinnersley, John Price, Henry Parre, and
William Allen, Gentlemen and Citizens of London, shall be, and are hereby
constituted and appointed Commissioners and Contractors for the sale of all and
every the said goods and premises, whereof such Duplicates of the inventorying
and apprizements thereof shall be certified and returned to them from the said
Trustees as aforesaid, except such parcels or particulars thereof as shall be
made choice of and approved as aforesaid to be reserved for the uses of the
State: And the said Contractors, or any three or more of them, are hereby
entrusted and authorized to sell all and singular the premises (except before
excepted) according to their best skill and judgment, to the best advantage
for the Commonwealth, and for the uses hereafter expressed; and for that
purpose, causing public notice to be given by the space of one week
beforehand or more, of the time and place when and where they intend to begin
to set to sale any part or parcel of the premises, and of the several
particulars then and there to be sold, they are accordingly to proceed to the
sale thereof; and are hereby authorized to treat with any such person or
persons who shall appear willing to buy, and to Contract with him or them for
every or any of the said particulars so set to sale, at the utmost price they
can obtain for the same, so as it fall not short of the apprizement made as
aforesaid, unless (upon further consideration thereof) the said Trustees, or
four or more of them, shall find cause, and agree to alter the same unto a
lower rate; and shall by writing under their hands and Seals certify such
alteration to the said Contractors, in which case the said Contractors may sell
any such particular or particulars at or above the rate or rates unto which the
apprizement shall be so altered respectively; and in such case the said
Trustees are also in like manner to certify the alteration or alterations so
made, both unto the Council of State, and to the Treasurers hereafter
mentioned; and of all and every the particulars sold and contracted for as
aforesaid, and of the buyers names and places of abode, and the prices agreed
upon respectively; and the said Contractors are immediately upon the Contract
to cause an Entry to be made in a Book, to be kept by their Clerk-Register for
that purpose, and to such Entry the buyers to subscribe their names
respectively, which Entry and Subscription shall make the bargain obliging on
both parts; and for further assurance thereof to the buyers (if it be by them
insisted on) the said Contractors, or any three or more of them, are to give a
Note under their Hands and Seals unto the several buyers respectively,
expressing the particulars by them bought, and the prices, and upon and
according to the Entries made as aforesaid, the said Contractors, or any three
or more of them, shall by writing under their Hands and Seals, from time to
time certify unto the said Trustees, and to the Treasurers hereafter mentioned
severally, an account of the particulars sold, with the buyers names and
prices, and day of sale respectively; and before delivery of any the
particulars sold unto the respective buyers, the said Contractors are to cause
the full price or prices agreed upon for the same, to be paid into the hands of
the Treasurers hereafter mentioned in this Act, unless they shall find cause
to give day for part thereof; in which case it is left to them so to do, so as
that part exceed not the moiety of the full price, and so as the day given
exceed not two months, and that sufficient security be taken by them for the
sum forborne, and upon payment of the full price agreed upon, or of one moiety
or more thereof, and such security taken as aforesaid for the remainder, the
payment being certified by the Treasurers, and the security by three or more of
the Contractors unto the said Trustees, they the said Trustees, or three or
more of them, shall give out their Order or Warrant, directed to the person or
persons in whose hands such particulars were secured by them as aforesaid, for
the delivery of such particulars unto the buyer or buyers respectively, or to
his or their assigns; and shall also make and deliver unto every such buyer or
buyers in writing under their hands and Seals, an Assignment of the said
particulars respectively, in the nature of a Bill of Sale, whereby the
propriety of the particulars so assigned, shall be fully bested in such buyer
and buyers respectively, and in his or their Assigns, by virtue of this Act;
And in case any person or persons, who shall have bargained with the said
Contractors as aforesaid for any of the premises, shall not within the space of
one month after the contract made and entered as aforesaid, effectually
prosecute his or their bargain, by paying the full price, or one moiety thereof
or more, and giving such Security for the remainder, as shall be insisted on by
the said Contractors, so as the default lie on the part of such buyer or
buyers, then every such buyer for such default, shall incur the penalty and
forfeiture of one fourth part of the sum of the price agreed on; which upon
certificate of such default, with the sum of the penalty, from three or more of
the said Contractors, under their hands and Seals, unto the Barons of the
Exchequer, the said Barons shall take order for the levying of the same to the
use of the Commonwealth, out of the Estate Real and Personal of such defaulter
or defaulters respectively, and every such defaulter shall also forfeit and
lose the benefit of his said bargain, and in such case after the space of seven
days from the expiration of the said months space next ensuing, the Contract;
and such default continuing, then the said Contractors, or any three or more of
them, may and shall proceed to a new sale of all and every such particulars
(concerning which such default is made) unto any other person or persons, as if
no sale thereof had before been made: But whereas diverse of the said goods and
premises are of such nature, as that though by reason of their Rarity or
Antiquity, they may yield very great prices in foraign parts, where such things
are much valued, yet for particular men's use in England, they would be
accounted little worth, and so yield no considerable price, if they should be
forthwith sold here, according to the foregoing directions: It is therefore
further Enacted and Provided, That for such particulars of the premises as the
said Contractors shall find to be of that nature, they or any three or more of
them may treat and agree with any Merchant Adventurer or Foreign Merchant,
about transporting such of the said goods into any Foreign parts where they
may be sold at the best rates, and either by immediate sale thereof to such
Merchants, to be by them transported and sold as their own (in which case the
Contractors may give such day or days for payment, as they shall find needful
and convenient, for the better improvement of the price) or else by hiring the
Transportation of such things into Foreign parts where they may best sell, and
there procuring them to be sold for this State, the said Contractors are left
to take the best course they can, according to their best skill and judgments,
to sell such things to the utmost advantage of the Commonwealth, although it be
in a way differing from that which is before in general directed for other
parts of the premises, Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. Provided always, That no such particulars of the premises be
sold to Merchants here, or transported into other parts, to be sold at any
rates lower then by the aforesaid apprizements they are valued at, and so as
the money for which they shall be so sold, be paid with all possible expedition
in to the same Treasury hereafter mentioned, for the use hereafter appointed:
And the said Contractors, or any three or more of them, shall be, and are
hereby authorized to choose and appoint a Clerk-Register, and such other
Officers or Agents as they shall think fit and find needful, for the better
discharge of the trust, and dispatch of the service hereby committed to them;
and for their own, and their Agents and Officers pains and charges therein,
shall have five pence in the pound allowed them out of all such moneys as shall
be made by sale of the said goods and premises, and out of the moneys to be
raised, levied and received for and as the forfeiture of any buyer or buyers,
making default as aforesaid in non performance of his or their bargain; which
allowance of five pence per pound, shall be paid by the Treasurer hereafter
mentioned unto the said Contractors, or to whom they or any three or more of
them shall from time to time appoint to receive the same for their use, by
warrant under their hands and seals to the said Treasurers directed; out of
which allowance they are to satisfy all and every the Agents and Officers by
them to be employed in this Service; and to defray all other charges of the
same (except for Transportation and Sale of such particulars as shall be sent
into any Foreign parts as aforesaid, to be there sold) the charges whereof
shall be allowed and satisfied out of the improvement of the price of such
particulars above what they would yield, if sold here. And it is further
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That Humphrey Jones, and John Hunt,
Gentlemen and Citizens of London, shall be and are hereby constituted and
appointed Treasurers for all and every such sum and sums of money as shall or
may be made, raised, levied and paid, by virtue of this Act, or any thing
therein contained; and shall receive and safe keep all such moneys, and issue
out the same for such uses, by such warrant, and according to such directions
as are in this Act appointed or prescribed, or shall further by authority of
Parliament be prescribed and appointed, and not otherwise; and of all the
moneys so received and issued out shall keep, and when there unto required by
authority of Parliament, shall render a just and true account, and faithfully
observe and perform all such things as by this present Act, or any thing
therein contained; and according to the true intent and meaning thereof, the
Treasurers of the moneys aforesaid, ought to do, observe and perform, and for
their pains and charges therein, and satisfaction of such Clerks or other agent
and assistants as they shall find needful to employ therein, shall receive and
have the allowance of two pence in the pound, out of all and singular the
moneys to be received and accounted for by them as aforesaid, which allowance
it shall be lawful for them out of the said moneys from time to time to detain
and keep, and the same shall be allowed upon account: And although most of the
Goods and Premises, having been of old belonging to the Crown, and not to the
persons of King, Queen or Prince, and now belonging to this Commonwealth, the
proceed upon the sale of them might justly be disposed of for public uses,
yet considering the many debts owing from the persons of the said King and
Queen, and from their said Son, contracted before the late Wars, and due unto
diverse persons that are not Delinquents, but have constantly adhered to the
Parliament, and suffered for the same, and many of them so necessitous, as that
their condition cannot bear the want of their said debts, The Parliament has
thought fit, and do hereby Ordain, That the moneys to be raised by sale of the
said goods and premises, shall be employed and disposed for and toward the
satisfaction of the debts aforementioned, and of such of them especially as
were contracted for necessary household expenses; which debts shall be paid out
of the moneys to be raised as aforesaid, as far as the same will go, in such
manner, and by such proportion, as by authority of Parliament shall be hereafter
directed. Provided always, That the sum of Thirty thousand pounds out of the
first moneys to be raised by such sale as aforesaid, shall by the Treasurers
aforementioned be issued and lent unto the Treasurer of the Navy, for supply of
the present uses of the Navy; and the said Trustees, or three or more of them,
shall direct their warrant or warrants for that purpose, unto the Treasurers
aforenamed; which said sum of Thirty thousand pounds, shall before the second
day of May, One thousand six hundred and fifty, be restored and reimbursed by
the Treasurer of the Navy, out of his receipts for the Navy, into the hands of
the Treasurers named in this Act, for the uses therein declared. And for the
better discovery and ascertaining of the sum, and several conditions of those
debts, for satisfaction whereof the said moneys are designed as aforesaid, Be
it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees, or any
four or more of them, shall be, and are hereby authorized and required to
receive such Informations and Accounts concerning the debts aforementioned, as
shall be tendered to them, or any persons concerned (whom they shall or may
examine upon oath, touching the truth and condition of the same) and also by
warrant under their hands, to call before them any such person or persons, who
have any books of Accounts or writings, or can give any further Information or
Evidence concerning the same, and them to examine upon oath touching the truth,
nature and ground of any the debts so informed of; and whether the same, or any
part thereof has been paid, and what remains due; as also to examine
concerning the conditions of the creditors, and time of the debts contracted,
and for what the same were respectively; and upon such examination, to make and
certify to the Parliament or ye Council of State, a true list and account, or
several lists and accounts of all such of the said debts as they shall find to
be of the condition aforementioned, expressing the several sums appearing due,
and for what and when Contracted, and whether the persons to whom the same
become due by assignment or otherwise, appear to be Delinquents or friends to
the Parliament; and whether they have lent or advanced any Money, Plate, horse,
Arms or furniture upon the Parliaments Propositions, before the 24 th day of
March, 1642. and whether they have constantly adhered to the Parliament, or
suffered for the same; and whether their condition be necessitous, so as they
cannot bear the want of their said debts; and of such debts, and to such
persons, the said Trustees are specially to make a distinct list and
certificate, as they shall find to have been Contracted for wages or sallaries
to Servants, or for other necessary provisions of Chamber, household or Stables,
to the end it may thereupon the better be determined, which of the said debts
shall be paid, in what order, and by what proportions; whereupon the Parliament
will determine and take order for the payment of such of the said debts as
shall appear most just and equal, as far as the proceed of the said goods will
extend.

Vicesimo sexto Julii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


