seal of the Commonwealth AN ACT Prohibiting Correspondence with CHARLES STVART
or his Party.
WHereas certain English Fugitives gathering themselves together in the parts
of Scotland, did heretofore perfidiously and traitorously Assist the Enemies
and Invaders of this Commonwealth, endeavoring with Foreigners and persons of
desperate condition, to bring a War upon their Native Country; and in order
thereunto, did set up for their Head Charles Stuart, calling him their King, who
had formerly been declared a Traitor to the Parliament and People of England;
And whereas afterward, to divert the sad Calamities thereby likely to ensue
within the bowels of this Land, It pleased the Lord to direct the Parliament of
this Commonwealth to send an Army into Scotland, and to afford them his
gracious Assistance and Blessing in so wonderful a manner, that a good part of
Scotland is become within the Power of this Commonwealth; and the said Charles
Stuart with his Accomplices, the Remainder of his Party, finding their own
weakness and disability to continue longer in that Country, are now fled into
England: For prevention therefore of the Mischiefs which may befall diverse of
the good People of this Nation, in case the said Fugitives be not timely
overtaken by the English Army; And to the end all persons may be further
warned, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England have thought fit to Enact
and Declare, and do hereby Enact and Declare, That no person whatsoever do
presume to hold any Correspondence with the said Charles Stuart, or with his
Party, or with any of them, nor give any Intelligence to them, or to any of
them, nor Countenance, Encourage, Abet, Adhere to, or Assist them or any of
them, nor do voluntarily afford or deliver, or cause to be afforded or
delivered to them or any of them, any Victuals, Provisions, Arms, Ammunition,
Horses, Plate, Money, Men, or any other Relief whatsoever, under pain of High
Treason. And the Parliament does hereby Command all persons to use their
Endeavors to hinder and stop the March and Passage of the said Charles Stuart
and his Party, and of every of them, and to Resist and Oppose them according to
such Orders and Directions as they shall receive from the Parliament, or from
the Council of State appointed by Authority of Parliament, or from the General
of the Forces of this Commonwealth, or from such other persons as shall be
thereunto Authorized by them or any of them. And it is further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That whosoever shall offend against this Act and
Declaration, shall or may be proceeded against by a Council of War, who are
hereby Authorized to hear and determine all and every the said Offenses; and
such as shall by the said Council be condemned to suffer Death, shall also
forfeit all his and their Lands, Goods and other Estate, as in case of High
Treason. Provided, That no person shall be proceeded against by any
Court Martial or Council of War for any Offense done against this Act, unless
such person be proceeded against, and convicted of such Offense within three
Months after such Offense committed. Provided, That this Act continue in force
till the First day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty one, and no
longer. Provided also, and it is hereby Declared, That any person or persons
who shall not be tried by a Court Martial or Council of War, for any Offense
committed contrary to this Act, shall and may at any time after the said three
Months, be proceeded against for such Offense, according to the Laws of this
Commonwealth, as if this Act had never been made.

Tuesday the 12th of August. 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.


