AN ACT To prevent The killing of Deer.
Be it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, And it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained, That if any person or persons shall from and after
the First day of August, 1651. kill, hurt, or take away any Red or Fallow-Deer,
in any Forest, Chase or Park, or other Enclosed Ground, within this
Commonwealth, without the consent of the Owner or person chiefly entrusted with
the custody thereof; or shall be ayding or assisting therein, and shall be
convicted thereof by confession of the Party, or by the Oath of one or more
credible Witnesses (before one or more Justices of the Peace, who are hereby
Empowered to Administer an Oath to that purpose) such person being prosecuted
for such Offense, within three Months after such Offense done, That then every
person so offending, shall forfeit for every such Offense the Sum of Fifteen
pounds, to be levied by way of Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of every
such Offender, by Warrant under the Justices Hand before whom such Conviction
shall be made; the one moiety of the said Fifteen pounds to be given to the
Informer, and the other moiety to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense
shall be committed; and for want of Distress, the Offender shall be committed
to Prison for Twelve months, without Bail or Mainprize. Provided, That where
any Offender shall be punishable by force of this Act, that he shall not be
prosecuted, nor incur the penalty of any other Law or Statute for the same
Offense.

Thursday, the 24th of July, 1651.
Ordered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.


