O. P.
blazon of the Commonwealth
By the Lord Protector.
A PROCLAMATION Declaring His Highness pleasure and command for putting in
execution the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances made against Jesuits and Priests,
and for the speedy Conviction of Popish Recusants.
WHereas it has been found by experience, that notwithstanding the strict and
severe Laws made and standing in force against Jesuits and Popish Priests, many
of them have presumed to resort into, and remain within this Commonwealth, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging, and do with great audacity exercise all
Offices of their profession, both saying Masses, and reconciling the People to
the Church of Rome, and by consequence seducing them from the true persuasion,
which all people ought to have of their duty and obedience to their Governors,
and holding Our Self obliged in duty and conscience to use all good means to
preserve the people from being corrupted in Religion, Piety and Obedience, to
keep them from being infected with Superstitious and Idolatrous opinions in
matters of Religion, which cannot be so surely performed as by keeping them
from the Ministers and Instruments of that infection, which are the Priests of
all sorts, Ordained in foreign Parts, by Authority prohibited by the Laws of
this Land, concerning whom therefore, We have thought it fit to publish this
open Declaration of Our purpose and intentions, that careful and diligent
search be made by all Our Officers and Ministers, and by all others to whom it
may appertain, for all Jesuits, Popish Priests and others, having taken Orders
by authority derived or pretended to be derived from the Sea of Rome, and that
wheresoever, and whenever they shall be found, they be apprehended and
committed to the Common-Goal of that County where they shall be found, there to
remain without Bayl or Mainprize, until by due Course of Law they shall be
tried and proceeded against. And we do hereby give notice to all whom it may
concern at their uttermost perils that the Harbourers, Receivers and
Maintainers of Jesuits, Popish Priests, and all such others as have received or
shall receive Orders, as aforesaid, shall be left to the due and ordinary
Course of Law. And We do expect and command, That all Our Judges, Justices of
the Peace, and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever, do put in full and
effectual execution the several Laws, Statutes and Ordinances now in force
against all and singular the persons aforementioned or intended.

And forasmuch as of late time there has been a great neglect in putting the
Laws in execution for convicting of Popish Recusants, by means whereof the
penalties imposed on such persons cannot be levied nor required, which has
been a great Encouragement to many to be seduced and misled to embrace and
entertain the dangerous, superstitious and idolatrous Doctrines of Popery; We,
by the Advice of Our Council, having taken into Consideration the great
Importance and Consequence to the State which such a remisness or connivance
may produce, have thought fit to Declare and Command, That the Oath commonly
called The Oath of Abjuration, and appointed by an Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament to be administered unto any person being of the
Age of One and twenty years, shall be by such persons as are therein and
thereby Empowered and Authorized to do the same, and the Ordinance concerning
the same be hereafter put in full and effectual execution: And because none may
pretend ignorance of what they are to do, or how they ought to demean
themselves, We have thought fit to express the Words of the said Oath, and the
Clauses in the said Ordinance relating thereunto, which are as follows, viz.
That all such persons as (being of the Age of Twenty one Years or above) shall
refuse to take the Oath hereafter expressed, which any two Justices of the
Peace, or the Major, Bailiff, or other Head-officer of any City or Town
Corporate shall have power to administer to any such person or persons, shall
forfeit as Papists within this and the former Ordinance, and Seizure and
Sequestration of Two third Parts of all their Goods and Estates real and
personal, and Sale of such Proportion of their Goods so seized and sequestered
shall be made, and their Rents and Estates disposed of in such manner and
proportion, and by such persons, as by the said Ordinance of Sequestration is
appointed for Papists: The Oath as follows;

I A. B. do Abjure and Renounce the Pope's Supremacy and Authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular; and I do believe
that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or in the Elements of Bread and Wine after Consecration thereof by any person
whatsoever; and I do also believe that there is not any Purgatory, and that the
Consecrated Host, Crucifixes or Images ought not to be worshipped, neither
that any worship is due unto any of them; and I also believe, that Salvation
cannot be merited by Works, and all Doctrines in affirmation of the said points
I do abjure and renounce, without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation or
secret Evasion whatsoever, taking the words by me spoken according to the
common and usual meaning of them: So help me God.

And Our further Will and Command is, That the persons herewith entrusted do
take due Care that the Oath before recited be tendered unto all persons that
shall be suspected to be Popishly affected, and that the Names of such as shall
refuse to take the said Oath, or being legally required shall neglect to attend
accordingly, be certified into Our Court of Exchequer under their Hands and
Seals, that so Proceedings be had and made against them and their Estates,
according to Law, and to the several Acts of Parliament and Ordinances made in
that behalf.

And we do again straightly Charge and Command all and singular Our Justices of
the Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, and all other Our Officers whom it may concern, to
minister the same Oath to all such persons, and in all such Cases, as by the
Law they are enabled, knowing that the meaning of the Law was not only to
Authorize them to do it when they would, and to forbear it at their pleasure,
but to require it at their hands as a necessary duty committed to them, and
imposed on them as persons of Chief Trust under Us for the good and safety of
the People.

Given at WHITE HALL the 26th of April, 1655.
Published by His Highness special Command.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. MDCLV.


