THE STATE MARTYROLOGIE. OR, INNOCENT BLOOD Speaking its Mournful TRAGEDY, In
the HISTORY of the late ANARCHY since 1648. to this present Time 1660.
portrait of James, Marquess of Montrose The undaunted Marquess of Montross



portrait of Arthur Lord Capell The Renowned Lord Capell



portrait of Charles II The high and Mighty Monarch CHARLES the second by the
Grace of GOD King of Great Britain France and Ireland Defender of the faith G:



portrait of James, Earl of Derby The valiant Earl of Darby



portrait of Dr John Hewitt The Reverend and truly Pious Doctor Hewitt



A List of some Worthy Persons Who have Suffered Violent Deaths for their
Loyalty to his Sacred Majesty KING Charles the Second.
DUke Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge, Henry Lord Rich, Earl of Holland. Arthur
Lord Capell; All three Beheaded in the Palace Yard Westminster, March 9th.
1649. Col. John Morris late Governor of Pontefract-castle, executed at York,
August 23. 1649. James Marquess of Montrosse Hanged on a Gallows 30 Foot high
at Edingburgh, his Head, Legs, and Arms set on several places. Colonel
Eusebius Andrews Beheaded on Tower Hill, August the 22d. 1650. Sir Henry Hide,
Beheaded near the Exchange London, March the 4th. 1650. James Earl of Derby
Beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire, October the 15th. 1651. Mr. John Gerbard,
Beheaded on Tower Hill, July the 10th. 1654. Mr. Peter Vowel, Executed at
Charing Cross, the 10th of July, 1654. Colonel Penruddock. Hugh Grove Esquire.
both Beheaded in the Castle at Exon, May the 16, 1655. Sir Henry Slingsby. The
Reverend and Pious, Dr. John Hewit, both Beheaded the 8th. of June, 1658.
Colonel Ashton, and John Betteley, both Hanged and Quartered, the first in
Tower street, the other in Cheap Side, and Edmund Stacy Hanged in Cornhill.
THe whole Intrigue and design of the Detestable and Horrid Murder of the
KING, with all its concomitant and succeeding passages of State, with which the
Counsels and contrivements of all the accomplices and partakers in that
abominable fact, have piec'd and patcht up their several forms of pretended
Government; are herein (as far as the best insight can take a view of it both
by the public, and some private papers) produced to the light: to the end
that monstrous Guilt which has so infamed our times and Nation, may be
palpably detected and imputed only to the parties engaged about, and
conspiring in it; to the discharge of the Kingdom from the wickedness of that
unparalle'ld Regicide.

It is past all question that Oliver Cromwell was principal, and the chief
accessory in complotting of it was Henry Ireton his Son in Law the then
Commissary General of the Army, Sir Gilbert Pickering was a great Privado, and
Sir Arthur Hasilrigge a choice instrument to the plot. the first Overt and open
Act of the Design to Olivers often dreamed of Sovereignty was the seizing of
his Majesty by Cornet Joyce at Holmeby; next the Armies Declaration to the
Parliament, (in pursuance of the Agreement of the People) for impartial
justice, then forceing the House of Commons and debarring the Lords from
sitting in their House, putting a Iuncto of Common Council upon the City; all
which pernicious and villainous courses meeting with a Degenerate sort of men,
and of mean Births and Fortunes still remaining in the lower House, who were
assured of making themselves by the spoils of the Church and State, when they
came to be sole Lords of them, quickly brought that sad and calamitous
parricide to maturity.

These irregular violent proceedings were delivered of a High Court of Justice,
more Exorbitant then any their former Actions; to make this up they pack
Commissioners, like Master, like Men, and with precious promises purchase
Bradshaw to be the impudent Mouth of their Lawless Court; the main Engineers
whereof were William Say, Augustine Garland, Gilbert Millington, both Sir Henry
Vanes, etc. This pretended formal Judicature being by such Diabolical
Machinations erected, they bring the KING to their BAR, and there against all
Law, Reason, and Humanity, (Duty, and Allegiance was lost before) condemn their
Liege Lord and Sovereign.

Immediately after the Barbarous Execution of his Majesty; they make an Act
against Kingly Government printed at large, Vote the Supreme power and
Authority to be and reside in the people thinking thereby to Collogue and
ingratiate with them, then fall they to their former Butchery, set their High
Court of Justice at work again with fresh Bloodhounds and a New President, for
Bradshaw was Lorded, and Scorned to do Journey work; and by that same power
Murder Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the renowned Lord Capell,
March 19. 1648. And make an Act to abolish the House of Peers.

Then they make an Act for an Assessement of 120000 per mensem to secure the
Liberties of the people, Declare themselves a Free State, and Commonwealth,
take off the KINGS Head from his Statue in the Royal Exchange, and by and by
after (as ashamed of their ridiculous malice) Remove the said Statue.

The next thing in order to the Establishment of their unmatchable Tyranny,
they endeavor Leagues with Foreign States, send over Dorislaus one that drew
up the Charge against KING, to the States of Holland; but the first night he
came to the Hague where the KING our present Sovereign then was, he was killed
by one Whitford a Scotchman, the like was done to Ascham another of their
Ministers sent into Spain; they send Richard Bradshaw the Kinsman of that
Belial President to the City of Hamborough maintain Intelligencers and Spies in
all the Courts of Christendom, and with the grand Seignior. The 22d of August
1650. thirsting after more blood, their High Court of Justice Condemns Colonel
Eusebius Andrews for receiving Commissions from the KING, and by a Committee
Sentenced Sir Henry Hide for being the KINGS Agent at Constantinople. And now
upon some Reasons of State the King of Spain acknowledges them for a Free
State, then they pick a quarrel with the Hollander in which they were
succesful: but their Usurped Tyrannical Dominion began to wain, when they
thought themselves settled and sure in the Saddle; for after the defeat given
to the KING at Worecster, their General purposed to rule the Roast himself, and
reap the fruit of his perjuries and time serving Declarations, to which purpose
he minded their Rumpships, of the General suspicion and grievance of the
people, as if they intended to perpetuate themselves in the Government: this
overture from him they promised to take into consideration, and to Lull him a
sleep (who was Restless in his Ambition) confer upon him all the Honors and
Respects imaginable, (though they had before gratifyed him largely out of the
Sales of Delinquents Estates, out of which they had raised vast sums to their
Exchequor.)

But all would not do, he had dreamed he should be a KING and he was resolved
to pursue such leading hopes to it as (his much celebrated) providence had so
fairly offered him. And it is here remarkable that he took the same advantage
by their intended indissolution to turn them out of doors, as they did to turn
the KING out by his Gracious Act of continuing the parliament till their own
pleasure; so justly was their ingratitude and baseness retaliated. This year
March 29, 1651. Brown-Bushel, beheaded under Tower Hill; and now so odious were
they to their own party by Olivers defaming of them to the Saints, that a
Council of Officers after a Humiliation and seeking of God, find it a duty
incumbent on their spirits to move the General to put a period to the present
parliament, this happened in April, 1653. Accordingly the General acquaints the
House with the proposals of the Army, and that the good people of the Nation
ought not longer to be delayed, or frustrated of the price of that blood and
treasure had been expended. Now the Rump began to stink, and found out what
their Mirmydon Oliver aimed at, and therefore to obviate his aspiring conceits,
they appoint a Committee to enform him that as the Nation stood, there was no
probability of asserting the good Old Cause without the continuance of the
parliamen^, that they would fill up their House immediately, and then proceed
to qualifications for new Elections, to which end they laid before him the
danger of the return of the Common Enemy (so they termed his now Majesty) and
that this would be the greatest Service could be done him, with sundry other
reasons, which when Oliver had laughed at, at a Conference with some twenty of
their Members, and acquainted them with his Resolution; he accompanied with
several chief Officers of his Army entered the House, where having Declared his
business, some by force, some through fear, some not without murmuring and
reluctance departed thence; And to set a fair Gloss on what he had done, and
give some satisfaction to the people (who were as glad of the change as
himself) he published a Declaration wherein he tells the people the same story
he had told as aforesaid to the parliament. And this was the first Comical
Scene of our troubles, to which the Kingdoms cried plaudite.

This Action as it made Cromwell the more acceptable to the sober part of
people, who were overjoyed to be any way rid of that accursed thing, so did it
highly conduce to his Designs in the minds and affections of the Phanatique
Crew, who were always the constant Votaries of the Army: from among these
therefore he picks up, and gathers a Congregation which he calls a Parliament,
in the interim erects a Council of State, and by a Letter of Summons in May
1653. they were convened at Whitehall. Monday June 4. 1653 their business was
after a short sitting to confer their power of Parliament upon Cromwell, (for
any pretense of right would serve turn that had the Authority of the SWORD) and
accordingly the major part did so, as they were bid, and by a thing called an
Instrument resigned their power into his hands. (Note that in this foolish or
Barebones Parliament, which consisted of 120, there were near 20 Rumpers.)

That Instrument begot another of 42 Strings or Articles, and by the Music of
this, Cromwell was made Lord protector, and on the 16. of December, 1653. he
was installed in Westminster Hall, in the Court of Chancery, President Lisle
administering him an Oath, to which Oliver lifting up his NOSE, and EYES, swore
devoutly and religiously, as he had used, in the presence of mine Heers the
Judges, and my Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen, who were invited to
the Solemnity. In requital whereof, they invited his Highness to dine with
them at Grocers-Hall, where he was magnificently treated in February following.
A Proclamation that all Writs should run in the name and style of the Lord
protector. An Ordinance to repeal the Act of Engagement, several Ordinances
touching the Administration and Government of Scotland. All this while he kept
square with the Cavalier, now it was time ( July 1654.) to think of a plot, to
that purpose he had a Secretary for his turn one Thurloe, formerly Judge St.
John's Man, he and his Emissiaries, Trepan Mr. John Gerard, and Mr. Vowell, as
guilty of conspiring with one Fox, about the protectors death, for which the
two first were Executed by Sentence of Lisle President of a new High Court of
Justice.

By this time he thought he was Radicated in the Government, and to try
^onclusions (for as long as the SWORD was in his hand he was safe enough) he
summoned a parliament in November which continued 5 Lunary months, wholly spent
in questioning the power that called them, and debating the Instrument; at the
dissolution of this parliament, OLIVER used these words, viz. This one thing I
speak advised before God, that this is my constant judgment, if this one thing
had been inserted, that this Government should have been and placed Hereditary
in my Family, I would have rejected it. And after, If this be of humane
structure and invention, and if it be an old plotting to bring things to this
pass, and that they are not the births of providence, then they will come to
nothing. Note, the Rump was too hard for Oliver this parliament, and spoiled
all his projects and designs upon it, this goes by the name of the Dumb
parliament, presently after follows the insurrection in the West.

But he had purposed to have money by Hook or Crook, (he had a little before
made peace with the Hollanders upon disadvantagious terms) he therefore by the
advice of Mazarine, falls out with the Spaniard, and a Fleet was sent to
conquer his West Indies, and dispossess him of his Mines; but he reapt nothing
from thence, but Loss, and Dishonor. A peace is concluded with Sweden, by the
management of Bulst. Whitlocke, one of his prime Engines of State, presently
after the French peace; so that there was no danger to him from abroad. Still
money was lacking, and Authority to obtain it from the people, and he saw that
he must either govern arbitrarily or precariously; Wherefore in 1656. he calls
another parliament, by which secluding the major, and Honester part, and by
corrupt Elections, he was declared to be protector, and accordingly vested by
Sir Thomas Widrington, Speaker. June 20. 1657. another House Voted and then the
parliament prorogued. Met again in a full House January after, and ready to
question him; he comes to the painted Chamber, and in a fury dissolves them.
And now he began to be cruel in earnest, and discovers the bloodiness of his
mind, Innocent Sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewit, etc. murdered by a High Court of
Justice. An English Army in Flanders take Mardike and Dunkirk. His daughter
Cleypoole dies. And on the 3d. of September, 1558. death summoned him to an
account, and put an end to his short and troublesome Domination and Rule.

Richard succeeds his Father, calls a parliament, dissolves it through the
threats of the Army, and Exit. Enter again Sir Rump, and out again and for
ever, whose exorbitant late wicked actions stinck so fresh yet every where,
that it will be irksome and loathsome to repeat them.

To Conclude, by the wisdom and unparalled Conduct of our Noble General, we
are hopefully arrived at a reestablishment of our Laws, Liberties, and
Religion, under the Government of his most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES the 2d,
whom God long, and long preserve. He was proclaimed, May 8. 1660.

London, printed by T. Creake and are to be sold by Edw. Thomas at the Adam and
Eve in Little-brittaine. 1660.


