THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE SUCCEEDING PARLIAMENT.
THE holy Ark of the Church and State having been so long and so highly tossed
under diverse tempestuous storms, threatening a Shipwreck; the insolent Mariners
found out a strange Expedient to preserve the almost foundred Ship, by throwing
the Pilot over board, that they themselves might sit at Stern; which they have
managed so ill, that the Ship had been long since sunk under their base and
unskilful Conduct, had not that Celestial Pilot by a strong hand most
miraculously protected her from the most dangerous Rocks and Sands, by whose
wise and powerful steerage (a Calm being made) I hope she will suddenly Anchor
in the Old and safe Haven. The late desperate Pilots, the new State-mongers
(the better to contrive their cursed Designs, and secure their guilty actions
from a future just account, and keep their ill-gotten Estates by the deluge of
Church and Crown) have sacrificed two of the most honorable Estates of
Parliament to the fury of their horried Avarice and Ambition, and by the
assistance of their Masters the Jesuits, under the specious titles of
Godliness, Liberty, and common Safety, have so far made themselves Saints, as
wholly to inherit the Land; which to effect, they have sacrilegiously profaned
whatsoever is sacred, and barberously murdered the King, and banished his
Royal Relations, pulled down the Reverend Fathers of the Church, killed the
Persons, and possessed themselves of the Estates of the most eminent men for
Religion and Loyalty; and in a word, have almost quite destroyed our truly
reformed Church, and heretofore flourishing Nation; so that there is no means
left us (under God) to settle the Church and State, but a full and free
Parliament, composed of the three Estates of the Kingdom, each complying with
other in a handsome correspondence, and regular subordination; the House of
Commons being commissioned ad inquirendum, the Lords ad deliberandum, and the
King ad determinandum de negotiis Regni: the several Acts of Parliament being
so many happy Results and Products of their mutual Counsels, which receive
their first conception, and imperfect delineation of parts from the contrivance
and deliberation of the two Houses, and afrerward Life, Liberty, and
perfection, from the Kings most excellent Majesty in the Signature of his Royal
Consent and Approbation. This most admired frame of Government (the Glory of
our own, and the Envy of foreign Nations) in which the several particular
Interests of the Kingdom are so handsomely involved in that public concern of
Parliamentary Government, which speaks a high satisfaction to all degrees of
Persons, who have their Affairs transacted by their own Delegates, both in the
presentment and redress of their Grievances, and the constitution of wholesome
Laws for the security of their lives and Fortunes, to which they have reason
most readily to submit in all due obedience, seeing they are enacted by their
own Representatives in Parliament: which that it may be rightly elected, I make
bold to present the Honorable City and Kingdom with these Qualifications. 1.
That no Person be Elected a Member of the succeeding Parliament that is an
Enemy to Kingly Government. 2. That none of the Sectaries may be Elected, who
are generally acted with Factious Jesuitical Principles inconsistent with the
Ancient Established Government. 3. That no Purchaser of Kings or Church, or
commonly called Delinquents Lands; or any Person that has an Office in the
Excise, Custom, or the like, be Elected, they being interessed Persons, and
obliged to maintain a Commonwealth, in opposition to the King and House of
Lords: two estates of Parliament according to its former legal Constitutions.


Now I have discharged my conscience to God and Man, in speaking my humble
Desires of a free and full Parliament, as the great concern to build up the
ruined Church, and repair the breaches of the decayed State, according to the
Ancient known fundamental Laws, to the Glory of God, and the happiness of the
Nation.

March.17. 1659

