By the Council of State. A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas the Council of State is given to understand, That diverse of the
English, and other of the People and Subjects of this Commonwealth have of late
received, and taken from, and under several Foreign Kings, Princes, Potentates,
or States, Sea Commissions, or Letters of Reprizal, Marque or Countermarque,
containing therein Powers to seize and surprise at Sea, or in Ports, Ships,
Vessels, and goods of such People and Countries as are therein named, and by
color thereof have gone forth to Sea with Ships and Vessels of War, and made
seizures and surprizals of Merchants, and other Ships, and goods, and disturbed
the Trade both of the People of these Nations, and of other Nations in
Friendship, Alliance, and Confederacy with this Commonwealth, whereof grievous
complaints do arise; The Council of State finding it necessary, according to
the trust reposed in them, to discourage and discountenance all such undue
courses, surprizals, and proceedings, and to put an absolute restraint on all
the People and Subjects of this Commonwealth, from receiving any such Foreign
Sea Commissions, from or under any Foreign Princes, States, or Potentates
whatsoever, or making any manner of use of any such already received; Do
therefore, and for prevention of all depredations, and undue surprizals at Sea,
or in Ports, by pretense or color of such Foreign Powers, or Sea Commissions,
and for the encouragement and security of Merchants Ships, and of the freedom
of Trade and Navigation, strictly enjoin and require all and every the people
and subjects of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging, that they, nor any of them, in their, or any
other name or names, directly or indirectly, do or shall receive, or take, or
make use of any Sea Commission whatsoever, or by what name soever called,
thereby to infest the Seas, or seize, or surprise any Merchants Ships, or
Goods, or other Ships, Vessels, or Goods whatsoever, or in any wise to hinder
or disturb the freedom of Trade, or free course of shipping or Navigation, and
do expressly forbid all and every the people and subjects of these Nations and
Territories, that neither under pretense of removing their habitations into any
other places, or subjecting themselves voluntarily to the obedience or
subjection of any Foreign Princes or States, nor under any other color
whatsoever (their Native subjection, as born within these Nations, Dominions,
and Territories, being a permanent and perpetual subjection upon them) they or
any of them do presume to violate, or infringe this Injunction, or to take,
receive, make use of, exercise, or put in ure by him or themselves, or any
others employed by or under them any Foreign Sea Commission, or Commissions
granted by, or derived from, or under any Foreign King, Prince, Commonwealth,
State, or Potentate whatsoever, for the seizing or surprising of Ships,
Vessels, or Goods at Sea, or in Ports, Creeks, Harbors, or places whatsoever,
nor any ways to infest the Seas, or hinder or disturb Trade or Navigation, or
the open and free passage thereof, under the pain and peril of being Arrested,
proceeded against, and punished in the Hitch-Court of Admiralty according to
the Rights of Nations, Laws of the Sea, and course of Admiralty: And the
Council of State do Will and Require the said Court of Admiralty to do speedy
Justice therein, and to inflict such penalties and punishments upon all and
every the Transgressors and Offenders in the premises as may by Law and the
course of the Sea, and of the Admiralty be Inflicted in such Cases, and to
cause the same to be duly Executed; and also to Order, Award, and Decree (and
that in the most Summary way that by the Rules of Justice may be) full and
plenary Restitution, Damages, and Reparation, to all and every the People, and
Friends, and Allies of these Nations, that shall by color or pretense of any
such Foreign Sea-Commissions, have any their Ships, Vessels, or Goods, seized,
surprised, imbrzelled, detained, or any ways indamaged, or their Course of
Navigation or Free-Passage upon the Seas, or from Port to Port disturbed or
hindered, or be in any manner of way dampuified or prejudiced: And whatsoever
Ships or Vessels they be belonging to any of the People or Friends, or Allies
of this Nation, that upon pretense of any such Foreign Sea-Commissions, bring
(though unduely) seized, or surprised, shall be either voluntarily or
otherwise, brought, or driven, or come into any Harbor, Creek or Port of these
Nations, the same shall presently by the Officers of, or in such Ports or
Harbors, or the next Officers that may seize the same, be seized, detained,
put under and into the Cognizance and Jurisdiction of the said Court of
Admiralty, without suffering or permitting any Bulk to be broken, or sale or
other disposition of all or any part to be made, but to be kept entire for the
said Court of Admiralty to do right and speedy Justice thereupon; and to make
such Orders, plenary Restitutions, and Reparations, for the good and benefit of
the People, and Friends, and Allies of these Nations, the true and first
Owners, or lawful Possessors of the said surprised Ships, Vessels, or Goods, as
by the Laws of the Sea and Admiralty, and Rights of Nations in such Cases may
be done; condemning the said undue Seizors and Spoylers, according to the
Exigence of Law, and putting the Laws in due Execution against them. And to the
end that this Proclamation may be openly known, and be obeyed, and take place,
and that none may pretend ignorance thereof, the Council of State do Order and
Command, That it be Printed; and Published by the Sergeant at Arms, and Sound
of Trumpet, at the Royal Exchange London, at the time of concourse of Merchants
there, and several Copies to be affixed upon the Pillars of the said Exchange
to be read and taken notice of by all concerned.

Friday, April 13. 1660. At the Council of State at Whitehall.
ORdered, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published.

April 26. WILLIAM JESSOP, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON, Printed by Abel Roper and Tho. Collins, Printers to the Council of
State.


