To the Honorable the COMMONS of ENGLAND assembled in Parliament at
Westminster.
The humble Petition of Ministers and other Inhabitants in and about London.
Humbly shows,
THAT in August last, in London-House a Lecture was happily begun for the
propagation of piety, and learning, in the discovery of the oriental Languages
(to this nation remaining but yet obscure) which hitherto has been elaborately
performed twice a week, since that time near fourscore Lectures in Latin, and
highly approved by those of greatest parts and learning that frequent the same:
And your Petitioners fearing least a work of this nature, for the advancing
such learning and Languages, should for want of maintenance and countenance
from Authority fall to the ground. And forasmuch as an estimate has been taken
of the necessary charge which is requisite for the maintenance of Professors,
and Students, as also for the erection of a Press, for those Languages for the
more effectual prosecution of the desired ends. And your Petitioners
considering Your Honors many Declarations, and that Reserve, which you have
with so much constancy still kept to be a support to a preaching Ministry and
learning, and being confident that a work of so public concernment for the
advantage of this and future ages will not want your due encouragement, and
assistance.

Therefore are your Petitioners bold to make this humble address to your
Honors, That if to your wisdoms this kind of learning, on which the clearer
knowledge of the sacred Scriptures, and our usefulness for the propagation of
the Gospel, to such as understand those languages, and their usefulness to us
so much depends, and is therefore in the present age so much esteemed by other
reformed Churches, shall also be judged useful for this Kingdom. Your
Petitioners hope that that which they have in readiness to offer, will be
sufficient to lay a good foundation to so blessed a work, and in such a manner
as is most facile and suitable to the nature of the thing. If Your Honors
shall deem it worthy of your consideration, And shall please to appoint a
Committee to receive the same from us.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Signed by about 40 Ministers, and 60
Citizens of quality.


