To His Highness my Lord Protector.
The humble Petition and Information of Godfree Goodman Bishop late of
Gloucester.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner does give your Highness most humble thanks, for your
gracious Reference to his former Petition, though such was his unhappiness that
it took no effect, which occasioneth him once again to be troublesome, and to
inform your Highness, That he was sequestered by the Committee of Plundered
Ministers, for his Tithes of the Parsonage of West-Ildesley in the County of
Berks; That for these seven years together he has suits in Chancery, and in
several Committees to recover his possession and arrears, wherein he has
spent much time, found much trouble and expense, and now was upon the point of
hearing, but in regard of your Highness Proclamation, which came forth the
third of this instant July 1655, that suits of such nature should cease; he
therefore desists, in his obedience to your Highness command, only he does
humbly crave leave, to appeal unto God, and under God to your Highness, for
Justice, this being his last and only refuge, and to that end I will make a
true relation of my Cause.

My private losses were such, as I think no man suffered more proportionably;
and when nothing was left but West-Ildesley, in my absence, having no summons
to appear, nor ever admitted to speak in mine own defense, I was sequestered, as
it may be supposed, by the false suggestions of Mr. Humfrey Newbery, who was
appointed to officiate the Cure. This Sequestration for a time he kept secret,
suffered me to pay all Contributions for billetting of Soldiers, and for
discharge of the Cure, which in effect did amount to the full value of the
Parsonage; and when the profits came in, then came Mr. Newbery with Soldiers,
and took the possession.

Now for acquitting my self, and to show my own innocence, I procured the
testimonials of the high Sheriff, most of the Justices, together with the
Governors of Castles and Towns, and from all the parts where I was known, and
had lived, (who send up Members to the Parliament, being six several places at
least) they did all testify my peaceable carriage, and that I had not offended
in these Wars; and the Committee for Sequestrations in the Country where I
lived did testify the same, and that I had paid all Contributions, which in
effect those Counties paid in lieu of Sequestrations.

Then it appears under the hand of Mr. Scobel Clerk of the Parliament, that I
was freed from Sequestrations by order of Parliament, and more particularly it
appears under the hand of Mr. William Lenthal Speaker of the Parliament, that I
was freed from the Sequestration of the Tithes of West-Ildsley. Upon the
Certificate of Major General Mitton, the Committee for Plundered Ministers, who
did formerly sequester me, were desirous to restore me, as may appear by their
several Orders; and in the interim they did allow me a fifth part, which Mr.
Newbery paid for two years, but ever after refused. All these Certificates and
Testimonials. I have the originals, and am ready to produce them and (God
knows) I cannot conceive, how it is possible that a man can have fairer proofs.

My humble suit is, That I may be put in possession by Soldiers, as I was
outed by Soldiers; and that I may recover the arrears unjustly detained; and
that I may enter upon the profits as Mr. Newbery did: And whereas it is said
that some of those Ministers who hold other men's Benefices by Sequestration,
have Petitioned your Highness to refer the Cause to some of your honorable
Council, to hear and determine according to Justice and equity; I do likewise
join with them in their Petition, that seeing there is much difference in the
several causes of Sequestration, and indeed a great difference between the
sequestring and sequestered Ministers, that men may not be left without remedy,
but that your Honorable Council, according to their own wisdom, and as God
shall direct, them, may determine the controversies.

I shall yet be bold to make one further motion in behalf of the Universities:
When Bishops did give holy Orders or Institutions into Benefices, they did ever
require the testimonials for their learning and behavior, from the University
or College where they were bred; and now that there is no further use of
Bishops, I desire that the Universities may not loose their right of giving
their testimonials, and do wish that none might receive holy orders, or be
admitted into Benefices, but such as should be recommended by the Universities
or College. But if your Highness should appoint some of the chief and most
eminent men who reside in the University, there publicly to admit Ministers,
and to give institutions (as by Law and their own privileges they do yearly
license some Preachers and present to the Benefices of convict Recusants, each
of the Universities having several Counties allotted them by Statute) it would
prevent divisions and Sects; it would make much for the honor of Ministers,
and procure much peace in the Church, when the persons so promoted shall be
less subject to exception.

July 9. 1655. And your Petitioner shall daily pray etc. GODFREE GOODMAN.


