C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A Letter from his Maty. King Charles IId.
To his Peers the Lords in ENGLAND. DIRECTED To our Right Trusty and Right Well
beloved Cosens the Peerage of our Kingdom of ENGLAND.
RIght Trusty and Right wel-beloved Cosens We greet you well;
After such amazements and assaults upon Our Patience, as no times of malice or
cruelty can parallel (not excluding those of Pharaoh and Herod, holding the
comparison to our humane condition;) After we have circumspectly measured the
madness of Our People with the raging of the Seas and noise of the waves, (the
extent of which comparisons none can reach but He who holds the waters in His
Fist, and weighs the winds in a Balance;) We are led to contemplate the Chaos
from whence God raised the goodly structure which we continunually behold.

And finding the Light to be the begnning of the Creation, We thought fit to
separate you from the present confusion fallen upon Our people, even you whom
Our Ancestors have clarified from the common sort, and therefore dignified,
that by your prudence the misguidings and wanderings of Our meaner Subjects may
be undeceived and reduced, who do now. (after the rash rejection of Our
glorified Fathers prophetique Admonitions) feel the fruits of their follies to
become their own ruin, beyond their wisdom and power to redeem.

How often We have visited them with Meekness and Clemency in our Messages and
Invitations from the Courts of Princes, whom, (for their only sakes, Our
Predecessors have made their enemies) even when their offered powers would have
enabled Us to correct Our most rigid Rebels, cannot by Us (without regret for
such enforcements) be remembered; Nor are Our Subjects themselves without a sad
sense of this, who, following their ambitious and avaritions blind Conductors,
are fallen into Laberinths of enmities with those Princes, whereout their
deepest subtleties cannot bring them.

Happily by your instructions they may learn the Truth of this from their
inconstant similitude the Seas, which for many hundred of years, have by the
Wisdom of our Ancestors their Princes, embraced them as their dearest Friends,
as well conveighing them with their Merchandise to the utmost parts of the
World, as also returning them with such fraights, as have made their Warehouses
the Magazines of other Countries, whereas at present (though they be the chief
Proprietors of the Worlds Food and clothing, and Navigation) even those Seas,
for want of a lawful Sovereignty, deny them further Tutelage; The Ports of
their ancient Allies refuse them Trade or Harbourage; And England which sat as
a Virgin Queen upon the Waters, is Deflored, Ravished, and carried Captive into
their Ports who formerly thought no Wealth too precious to woe her.

We say we look upon your Lordships shining as Tapors to our blinded Subjects,
and as Light-houses to their Unpiloted Rovings, which Office we consider to be
to you also a Dignity, formerly belonging to the Lamps of the Church, though
now they are under a Bushel; As for the giddy multitude we pity them with that
Christian Proverb, Eheu quam honest miserii erant, for by imitateing their
Superiors they think they do well.

When we behold the Robes of some men's Consciences, who visit us in Corporal
Rags (the best Purchases their Loyalty can make) we rest assured, that you who
have this Worlds Wealth and not the Privilege to use it, cannot enchain your
Noble Souls to such slavery; Nor is it our desire to invite you to violence,
but the Peace which we wish to your Bodies and Souls, we equally present in our
daily Prayers for you, together with the meanest of our Subjects, and seeing
your Christianity commands your Brotherly Love even to your most inferior
Neighbors, you cannot better testify the same, then by your example to bring
them into the Way of Truth, which they shall never find in the Paths of
Rebellion.

Again we call upon you our Peers, who cannot be unsensible that the Streams of
your own Honor must necessarily fail, when the Fountain which should feed
them is diverted; We advise yon to learn of the Hebrews, who after that absence
of their King David (more then seven times doubled by Our sufferings) grew to
contention for bringing home their persecuted Prince.

Nor are the opportunities difficult to your performance, there having been, in
these many years of Our pilgrimage, diverse assemblings of Our Subjects, which
still continuing, you may, if you please, impart unto them such provident
Instructions, as may return them to their ancient Duty and future welfare, the
after fruits whereof none of you need to doubt; if you reflect upon the
Felicities which all your Ancestors have enjoyed under the Raigns of Our
Predecessors; The inferior sort having always before them that formidable
affrightment of present beggary and continued want of Trade, so long as they
shall persist in disobedience to theirs and your injured and oppressed
Sovereign.

March. 20. 1659 C. R.

Printed for Charles Gustavus, in the year, 1660.


