blazon of the Commonwealth
By the Protector.
PROCLAMATION Commanding a speedy and due Execution of the Laws made against
the abominable sins of Drunkenness, profane Swearing and Cursing, Adultery,
Fornication, and other acts of uncleanness; For observing the Assize of Bread,
Ale, and Fuel; and touching Weights, and Measures; For setting the Poor on
Work, and providing for the impotent and aged poor, and punishing Rogues and
Vagabonds, taking Accounts of Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor; and
against disturbing of public Preachers, and profanation of the Lords day.

WHereas many good and wholesome Laws have been made and provided for the good
Government of the people of this Commonwealth, and for the suppressing and
preventing of many sins, disorders, abuses and deceipts, tending to the
dishonor of God, the scandal of Religion, and the prejudice and great wrong of
the People. But for want of zeal and care in the Officers and Ministers of
Justice, to whose Trust the execution thereof has been committed, there has
not been that due observation of those Laws, and the punishment inflicted upon
the Offenders, as is thereby provided; by reason whereof such ill disposed
persons have been hardened in their evil ways, and others the more bold and
encouraged to commit the like offenses in hove of impunity: His Highness the
Lord Protector desiring (according to the Trust reposed in Him for the public
Weal of these Nations) to use His utmost Power, That the Laws be duly executed,
Justice administered, Abuses punished, and the good and welfare of the People by
all good ways and means procured and preserved, Has by the Advice of His
Council, thought fit to Recommend the same unto the Judges, and other Officers
and Ministers of Justice, unto whom the due execution of the Law and Justice is
committed; And does therefore hereby Will and Require all the Justices of
Assizes in their several Circuits, to give in Charge, and to take especial
Care, that the Laws be duly executed, and particularly such Laws as are in
force, for the better suppressing and preventing the abominable Sins of
Drunkenness, Profane Swearing and Cursing, Adultery, Fornication, and the like
Uncleanness; the Laws and Statutes made touching the Assize of Bread and Ale,
the Assize of Fuel, touching Weights and Measures, for Setting the Poor on
work, the Providing for such as by reason of age or impotency are not able to
maintain themselves; for punishment of Rogues, Uagabonds calling themselves
Egyptians, and other Uagabonds or sturdy Beggars, and preventing the increase
of them, and duly taking Accounts of Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor,
for punishment of such as shall disturb public Preachers and Ministers in
their public Exercises, and such as shall profane the Lord's Day: And His
Highness, by the Advice of His Council, Does straightly Charge and Command all
Majors, Justices of the Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers who
are any way Entrusted with the execution of any of the Laws and Administration
of Justice, to use their utmost Care, Diligence and Endeavor within their
Counties, Cities, Towns, Liberties and Precincts, That all and every the Laws
whereby they are empowered, or with the Execution whereof they are Entrusted,
and more especially such as concern the several Matters aforesaid, be duly and
vigorously put in Execution, and the Offenders against the same effectually
prosecuted and punished, according to the said Laws. And His Highness does, by
the Advice of His said Council, also Require and Enjoin all the People of this
Commonwealth, to be aiding and assisting in Discovering of the Offenders, and
bringing them to condign punishment, as they tender the Glory of God, their own
good, and the good and welfare of this Commonwealth, which cannot be preserved
and supported without the due Observation of the Laws, and the Execution of
Justice for the Terror of evil doers, that others may see it, and fear, and not
dare to do the like. And His Highness does further Charge and Require His
Judges in their several Circuits to take an exact Account how these things have
been, and shall be from time to time observed, and what the success thereof
shall be; from whom His Highness will expect to be truly informed at their
Return out of their Circuits.

Given at White Hall the Ninth day of August, in the Year of Our Lord, One
thousand six hundred fifty and five.
Published by His Highness special Command.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1655.


