To the Right Honorable, The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: The
humble Petition of the Major, Magistrates, Ministers and Commons of the Town of
Plymouth, and others well-affected and desirous of the Peace of God to rule in
this Kingdom;
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners being conscious of their Solemn Engagement with you in
Protestation, Vow and Covenant before the Searcher of Hearts, and Judge of
Spirits, for Reformation according to Gods Word, Extirpation of Popery and
Prelacy, Restitution of Civil Rights and Liberties, Maintenance of the Just
Privileges of Parliament, and the Defense and Preservation of His Majesty's
Person and Authority in the Preservation and Defense of all the former, do
find themselves bound upon just grounds to make this recognition of their Duty
unto you at this time.

For first, knowing that this general Engagement was undertaken in order to
procure a just, holy and safe Peace, which God might own, We desire humbly to
mind you, as our selves desire sadly to consider, and to bear the iniquity in
bitterness of Soul before God, whether the breach of Covenant in retarding the
work of Gods house, and too much sparing Malignant wickedness against God and
man, have not provoked the Lord to keep this Peace far off from us.

Secondly, having seen strange actings of many, and (as we humbly conceive)
irregular pressing upon your Authority to Bias you several ways, formerly and
of late; and having heard of much Treachery of men in betraying their Trusts
both by Sea and Land, and of impetuous Petitions and unreasonable for a
Personal Treaty upon any terms, without due Satisfaction and Security given for
the effecting those necessary and just ends of the Covenant (which we are
consident many of those Petitioners have sworn also to the Almighty) and for
Cessation, and laying aside your Arms in such a time when the cruel and
Malignant Enemy is prepared to ruin you and the Kingdom, we are sensible that
these perverse workings must be grievous to you, and cause many obstructions to
the work of God in your hands, as well as to the Kingdoms Peace, which we are
confident God will require of those Authors.

Thirdly, considering that ye are of the same mould with us, though called of
God, and set up over us for good at this time, and that ye are subject to
discouragement, and to wax feeble by defections and oppositions of men, we that
are your weakest and lowest parts desire to be supplying to you what strength
the Lord gives in, who alone is the life of you and us: Whom that we may not
make our Enemy,

Your Petitioners for themselves, and in the name of many thousands, do humbly
pray you in the midst of all distractions, to be encouraged in the Lord, to
look strictly to the performance of the Solemn Covenant, as you have to the
making of it, that Gods work in establishing Religion and Government according
to his Word be hastened, That your bands be strong to do Justice early and
impartially among men, That you do not precipitate your Counsels and
Resolutions for a Treaty prejudicial to the end of our Covenant, at which God
should be angry: For as the Petitioners profess themselves to pray and long for
the Peace of our Native and Neighboring Kingdoms; yet such a Peace do we
desire, whereof God may be the Author, Rule and End, which alone will keep us
in true safety. And forasmuch as ye have engaged all the true hearted, godly
and well-affected in these Kingdoms to undertake with you to their Estates and
Lives, We humbly pray you faithfully to persevere in acting your Declarations
frequently made for their common safety, and notwithstanding specious pretenses
made by Petition, not to swerve from your first just Principles of our general
Covenanting with you to make God angry, and let in the common Enemy to spoil.
And furthermore our humble request is, seeing God has made this poor place and
people serviceable for the Kingdoms good, and preservation of your power
through your Supplies to them (for which we desire uncessantly to bless the
Lord) that still through your gracious influence it may be enabled to serve God
and you against the common Enemy by Sea and Land; and that such Authority may
be derived from you unto us, as may enable us to act again for our own and
Kingdoms Defense: In doing all which ye shall please God, encourage the hearts
of the faithful in the Land, strike fear on your enemies; The Lord of Hosts
himself shall be still your shield and great reward, but a terror and confusion
to and deceitful men.

So shall your Petitioners pray.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Petition be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
August 25. 1648.


