GOD SAVE THE KING.
At EDJNBVRGH the fifth day of February, one thousand six hundred forty and
nine years.
THE Estates of Parliament presently Conveened, in this second Session of the
second Trienniall Parliament, by virtue of an Act of the Committee of Estates,
who had Power and Authority from the last Parliament for Conveening the
Parliament, Considering, That, forasmuch as the Kings Majesty who lately
Reigned, is contrary to the Dissent and Protestation of this Kingdom now
removed by a violent Death; And that by the LORDS Blessing there is left unto
us a Righteous Heir, and lawful Successor, CHARLES Prince of Scotland and
Wales, now King of Great Britain, France and Ireland; We the Estates of
Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, do therefore most Unanimously and
Cheerfully in Recognisance and acknowledgment of his Just Right, Title, and
Succession to the Crown of these Kingdoms, hereby Proclaim and Declare to all
the World; That the said Lord and Prince Charles is by the Providence of GOD,
and by the Lawful Right of undoubted Succession and Descent, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, whom all the Subjects of this Kingdom are bound
Humbly and Faithfully to Obey, Maintain and Defend according to the National
Covenant, and the solemn League and Covenant betwixt the Kingdoms with their
Lives and Goods against all deadly, as their only Righteous Sovereign, Lord
and King.

And because His Majesty is bound by the Law of GOD, and Fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom to rule in Righteousness and Equity for the Honor of GOD, the
good of Religion, and the Wealth of His People: It is hereby declared, That
before He be admitted to the exercise of His Royal Power, He shall give
Satisfaction to this Kingdom in these things that concern the Security of
RELIGION, the Union betwixt the Kingdoms, and the Good and Peace of this
Kingdom, according to the National Covenant, and the solemn League and
Covenant, for the which end we are resolved with all possible expedition to
make our humble and earnest Addresses to His Majesty; For the Testification of
all which, We the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, publish this our due
Acknowledgement of His just Right, Title, and Succession to the Crown of these
Kingdoms at the Market Cross of Edinburgh with all usual Solemnities in the
like Cases, and Ordains His Royal Name, Portract and Seal to be used in the
public Writings and Judicatories of the Kingdom, and in the Mint-house, as was
usually done to His Royal Predecessors, and command this Act to be proclaimed
at all the Market Grosses of the Royal Burghs within this Kingdom, and to be
printed, that none may pretend Ignorance thereof.

GOD save, KING CHARLES, the Second.
William Scot, Cler. Parl.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY,
1649.


