OP
blazon of the Commonwealth
By the Protector.
A PROCLAMATION Giving notice that the remaining differences betwixt the
English and Dutch Merchants stand referred to Commissioners appointed on both
sides, who are to assemble at Amsterdam in Holland, the 20. of July 1655.
OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereto belonging, To all and singular the persons whom these
presents concern, Greeting. Whereas in the thirtieth Article of the Treaty
lately made and concluded betwixt Us, and the Lords the States General of the
United Provinces, it is Agreed, That Commissioners or Arbitrators be nominated
on both sides, Authorized and Empowered to examine and determine the losses and
injuries which either side alleges to have sustained from the other since the
year 1611. unto the eighteenth day of May 1652. old style; The particulars of
which were to be delivered in to the Commissioners so nominated, before the
eighteenth day of May 1654. Which time was afterward by mutual consent
enlarged to the thirtieth of the said Month; And if the said Commissioners
should not within three months space, to be accounted from the said thirtieth
day of May, come to an Agreement concerning the differences aforesaid, That in
such case the aforesaid differences be submitted to the Judgment and
Arbitration of the Protestant Cantons of Swisserland. Who should be desired to
take upon them that Arbitration, And appoint Commissioners empowered and
instructed to give final Judgment thereupon within six months next following
after expiration of the three months aforesaid. And whereas the Commissioners
on both fides have met in London and received sundry demands, delivered to them
within the time prefixed, and have examined and determined diverse of them,
according as is contained in an Award of the said Commissioners published under
their hands and Seals the thirtieth of August 1654. Did style: And whereas
several Demands and Differences, the particulars of which were delivered within
the time aforesaid, do yet remain undecided, which according to the said
Thirtieth Article ought to be remitted to the Protestant Cantons of
Swisserland, to the end they might be decided by such Commissioners as they for
that purpose should nominate and appoint; which Nomination and Appointment not
being by them made within the aforesaid Time of Six months, and it being
necessary that the said remaining Controversies and Demands be judged and
determined, and all appearance of Difference for the future removed, It was
further agreed and concluded betwixt Us and the Lords the States General of the
United Provinces, That all Demands delivered within the Time aforesaid, viz.
the Thirtieth of May One thousand six hundred fifty four, and not comprehended
and determined in the Award aforesaid, be referred and submitted to the
Judgment and Determination of the said Commissioners, or of such others who
shall hereafter be nominated and appointed on both sides; which Commissioners
shall assemble together at Amsterdam in Holland, instructed with the same
Powers as before, and shall proceed in the same order, manner and method to a
final Determination of all and singular the Differences and Demands aforesaid,
within Three Months after their first Meeting, which shall be upon the
Twentieth of July instant One thousand six hundred fifty and five, and that
public notice of the said Day be given to the people of either Commonwealth;
And whatever the said Commissioners shall Award and Determine within the said
Three Months, shall oblige both Parties, as appears by an Article agreed upon
betwixt Our Commissioners and the Ambassador of the Lords the States General,
and ratified as well by Us as the said Lords the States General, by Our
respective Letters Patents under Our Great Seals: To the end therefore all such
of the People of this Commonwealth, whose Claims and Demands for the said
Injuries and Losses by them sustained from the People of the United Provinces,
remain yet unsatisfied and undetermined, may be ready with their Proofs,
Writings and Evidences concerning the premises, to attend the said
Commissioners at the time and place appointed, that so they the said
Commissioners may be the better enabled effectually to proceed to a Final Award
and Judgment thereupon as appertains to Right and Justice, we have thought fit
to give public notice, as We do by these Presents, of the Day and Place
prefixed, to the intent the persons interessed may have timely knowledge
thereof, and prepare themselves accordingly.

Given at WHITE HALL this 12th day of July, 1655.
Published by His Highness special Command.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. MDCLV.


