By the Protector: A PROCLAMATION For perfecting the COLLECTION For relief of
The Protestant Inhabitants of the Valleys of Lucern, Angrona, etc.
WHereas His Highness from a deep Sense of the sad Calamities of the poor
Inhabitants of the Valleys of Lucern, Angrona, and others within the Dominions
of the Duke of Savoy (occasioned by their faithful Adherence to their
profession of the Reformed Religion) and from a Confidence that the Good People
of this Nation would (in this day of their Brethrens Trouble) manifest a
serious Sense of the Sufferings of their Fellow Members, professing the same
Faith and Hope, did in May last (by and with the Advice of the Council) publish
a Declaration, thereby inviting the People of England and Wales, to set apart
the Fourteenth of June last for a Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, and
seeking the Face of God on behalf of those oppressed Witnesses of Jesus Christ,
expressing withal His desire, that the People might then be stirred up to a
free and liberal Contribution for their Relief, to be made in such way and
manner as was set forth in certain Instructions thereunto annexed: And whereas
His Highness has received Information, That (although the People of many
Parishes and Congregations have with a liberal hand extended their Bounty, in
contributing largely to their Relief, yet) through the negligence of some, to
whom the dispersing of the said Declarations and Instructions to the respective
Parishes, was entrusted, the said Fast and Collection has been in many places
wholly omitted; To the intent therefore that those whose Hearts God shall stir
up, may not be deprived of so precious an Opportunity of Refreshing the Bowels
of the afflicted Members of Christ, His Highness (upon Advice with His Council)
does hereby recommend it to all the several Parishes and Congregations in
England and Wales, where the said Collection has not been made, that they
would improve this present Season of drawing out their Compassion on behalf of
their said distressed Brethren; As also to the Ministers of the said several
Congregations, to stir up the People thereof to a Free and Liberal Contribution
as aforesaid, and to pursue the way for Collecting and Paying in the said
Moneys prescribed in the said Instructions. And whereas several Sums of Money
already collected are not yet returned nor certified, according to the said
Instructions, His Highness does hereby Will and Require the several Ministers,
Churchwardens, and other persons employed about the said Collections, and the
several Justices of Peace, to whose hands any of the Moneys so collected have
been paid, speedily to return as well the Certificates as the said Moneys,
according to the purport of the said Instructions, that so those Ends which
have been propounded, and shall be faithfully prosecuted for employing the said
Moneys for the said Protestants Relief, may with more speed and advantage be
accomplished; On which Account His Highness doubts not, but all persons who
bear the Name of Christ, will (according to their several Concernments herein)
lay out their Interests and faithful Endeavors in this so pious, necessary and
honorable a Work, with Cheerfulness and Expedition.

Given at White Hall this 12th day of July, 1655.
Published by His Highness special Command.
LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1655.


