The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or
sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or pretended
to be derived from him or his Sea, against the said King, his Heirs or
Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience; I will
bear faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and
him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies
and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or their Persons, their
Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or Declaration or
otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies
which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any
person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof,
which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully administered unto
me, and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to
these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense
and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental
evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever: And I do make this Recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian. So help me God, etc.

Printed in the year of our Lord, 1660. July 2.


