By the Lord Protector.
WHereas the Enemies of the Peace of this Nation (notwithstanding the many
signal providence of God in frustrating of their former Counsels and Malicious
Designs) do appear still restless in their Attempts, to involve this
Commonwealth in blood and confusion. In Order whereunto diverse of them have
lately repaired to London, as well from beyond the Seas, as from several parts
of this Commonwealth. His Highness with the advice of His Council, has
therefore thought fit, and does hereby expressly Charge and Command, That for
the better discovery of persons ill-affected to the Peace of this
Commonwealth, the Constables of the respective Parishes within the Cities of
London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and the Lines of Communication,
do forthwith after the publication hereof, repair to the several Houses within
their respective Paris;hes, and require from the Householders a List of the
names of all such persons as now do, or did lodge in their respective Houses on
Friday night last, being the nineteenth of this instant May, or at any time
since, with their several qualities and conditions, and how long they have been
lodged there. And all and every the said Householders are accordingly to deliver
to the said Constables, or one of them, a true List of all such names upon
peril of being reputed and dealt withal, as Accomplices and Partakers in the
said Designs. Which Lists so delivered, the respective Constables of the
Parishes within the Cities of London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark,
and Lines of Communication, are within forty eight hours to deliver to the Lord
Mayor of London, and Bailiffs of Westminster and Southwark, respectively,
whereof the said Constables are not to fail at their utmost peril. And the said
Lord Mayor and Bailiffs are to return the Lists so to be by them received, to
his Highness Council at White Hall, immediately after the receipt thereof. And
his Highness does likewise strictly command and require, that no person or
persons whatsoever, lodging within the Lines of Communication, do change his or
their several and respective lodgings, or depart out of the said Lines for the
space of ten days after the date hereof, without a special License and Pass in
that behalf obtained from the Lord Mayor of the said City of London, or Bailiff
of Westminster or Southwark respectively, under their respective hands and
seals; which Pass the said Lord Mayor and Bailiffs of Westminster and Southwark
respectively, are hereby authorized to give to all such persons concerning whom
they shall be satisfied, that they have no ill intentions or designs against
the Commonwealth, and to none else. And if any such person shall presume to
depart out of the said Lines, within the said time, without license obtained as
aforesaid, it shall be reputed a Contempt of this his Highness Command, and be
punished according to its demerit. And the Lord Mayor of the City of London,
and Bailiffs of Westminster and Southwark respectively, are to cause this
Proclamation forthwith, after Publication thereof, to be sent to the several
Constables as aforesaid, and to require and demand from them an account of
their proceedings thereupon.

Given at White Hall the 23. of May, 1654.
London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to his Highness
the Lord Protector, MDCLIV.


