A WORD in due SEASON to the Ranting Royalists, and the Rigid Presbiterians. By
a Persdn wholly Disinteressed in any of the late, or present Factions.
READER, I thought good to give thee notice, that this is the true Copy of
this small Tract, the intent of the Author being more for the public good then
his own private gain; and whereas a Copy was intercepted by some
underhand-dealing of supposed friends (now published in a sheet and a half) it
is a false Copy, and by him disowned.

Gentlemen,
IT is too manifest, That, in the first War, some of you (...) Outrageous
Royalists) did more prejudice the KING your Master, then the Swords of his
Enemies; many of you brought more Scandal on Him, then their tongues; And as
Divines tell us, It was only Judas that Betrayed, nor Pilate that Condemned,
nor the Jews that Buffeted our Savior, but every presumptuous sinner acted,
and still acts his Part, in the Tragedy: so by Gods just Permission, and for
our deserved Punishment, your Exorbita^ces (I fear) conspired with the malice
of others, in bringing that sacred and innocent head to the Scaffold: What
odium brought you upon his Actions? What a jealousy upon his Counsels? Nay,
what contempt upon His Person and Authority? The worst of their Proceedings
from thence received, (I will not say, Justice) nor scarce Color; but sure I
am, that what pretense they had, they borrowed of you: Otherwise, his Innocence
fighting with Arms (Charity binds me to believe in his judgment) purely
defensive, and with frequent Solicitations pursuing Peace, would either have
prevailed with the Parliament for an Accommodation, or left them generally
condemned, as malicious Contrivers, and obstinate Continuers of the WAR,
whereby most of the good People of England, but especially of London, and the
Associated Counties, would soon have been undeceived, as they have since been
by late and woeful experience; for it is well known, that many (then) the
fiercest Zealots for our unhappy Reformation, never hated the Person of their
Sovereign, nor envied his just Power, but sincerely loved him, and heartily
embraced his Government; yet being first terrified by your threats, and
exasperated with your Provocations, were, afterward, by their factious
Teachers and Ringleaders, too easily cheated of their Loyalty, and led captive,
as it were, into mere Sedition, under the specious but State pretense of
removing evil Counselors, and rescuing his Majesty's Authority and Person (as
they were told) out of the hands of a desperate Crew, which abused his goodness
and facility: The truth whereof, does since evidently appear, by their frank
confession, hearty contrition, and late most effectual endeavors, with sober
and generous Actions, to cancel the memory of their former errors, and satisfy
the World (at least the judicious) they never sinned presumptuously; for
insolent and malicious Treason commonly fetters the soul, and ends in the
gangrene of a despairing and implacable Guilt; whereas, their desire to trust
that Prince, whom once they disobliged, savours, though of much Error at
first, yet now of more Ingenuity, and must be construed to proceed only from
such soundness of heart, and clearness of spirit, as by good men ought to be
highly cherished; and perhaps, far better esteemed, then the mere ostentation
of perseverance in pretended Loyalty, but real Animosity; Wherefore, Gentlemen,
in true friendship to you, (whom I would willingly, in part, excuse, upon the
score of your great suffering, and oppression, which transports even wise men)
but especially, in zeal of his service, whom we all profess equally to desire,
give me leave without offense, a little to expostulate with you.

Do you think it a small matter, That after a long consumption of our blood and
spirits in a civil War, or a Peace, more hostile then it, God has, at length,
miraculously afforded us a possibility of Settlement. That after a tedious
night of Egyptian darkness and bondage, God has given you a glimpse, and
indeed as yet, but a glimpse of hope, That you, as Englishmen, may as in due
time, with others, enjoy your birthright, (viz.) an Equal Protection and
Benefit of the Law; and will nothing, now, already, content you but absolute
Dominion, and to have all things prostrate at your feet? Is this a fitting
return of thankfulness to God, for your deliverance begun, or a probable means
of prevailing with him, to continue and perfect his mighty works? Have you so
soon forgotten your Sequestrations, Prisons, and Scaffolds? Can you remember no
sins of yours, that entitled you to those Punishments, or might modestly oblige
you, at least to confess the justice of God, in the unjustice of Men; but must
all your sufferings be imputed to meet supererogation and glorious Martyrdom?
Was it a Crime, unpardonable, in your adversaries, as you pretend, to rebel,
though many of them transgressed, more out of ignorance, then contempt of their
Duty; and is it no fault in you, who glory in being so Orthodox, to breath out
Violence, cherish your lusts, and steep your souls in Revenge? Are you of the
Nature of those Elements, and which, in our Provervial dialect, are good
Servants, but ill Masters, and which, if not confined, will drown and devour
all? Were you fatally designed either to be Slaves, or Tyrants, Gibeonites, or
Bahawes? Are you like those in Bedlam, not to be tamed but with hunger and
stripes? Can you imagine, the lofty pretenses of a Party, which has been so
often foiled, so long suppressed, so much suspected, will consist with the
satisfaction of others more considerable, the Settlement of the Nation, the
Exigence of Affairs? Or can you ever hope to carry it with a high hand by your
silly Rhodomontado's? Has not experience yet made you sensible, That the
People of this Nation, haying tasted the forbidden fruit, are now become
sinfully wise; That their eyes being indeed opened, but withal their natures
vitiated, and wills depraved, they are quite fallen from their primitive
innocence, so as I fear, the KING, if restored, must buckle to inconveniences,
and Reign, at least, for some time, rather as a Probationer then a Prince? Were
not some of you drinking your late Masters health, Whilst his Cause, nay,
perhaps, himself was bleeding his last? Have not you since served his Son, much
at the same rate, and with like success? Will you never learn to govern your
Passions, to allay your Cups, or turn, if not truly Virtuous, yet ordinarily
Discreet, so at least, as not to fall miserably into the the pity of your
Friends, the Scorn of your Enemies, and Obloquie of the People: That a
Righteous cause may no more be blasted with your Scandals, Party (which
certainly has no Peer for constancy, justice, and modesty) decimated, as it
were again in its reputation, for the Enormities, of a few who being (God be
thanked) of your number? Do you not know, how the KING disownes you, the People
dislike you, our Friends blush for you, and the Enemies of your quiet now make
use of your exorbitances or treasuries (a belief whereof your irrational
Ranting extorts from me) to obstruct a lawful and hapgy Settlement. And if
(which God in mercy prevent) now in this Crysis of our hopes, and fears,
through your folly and frenzy (I wish I could forbear to say, some of your
falsehood) the hands of true Englishmen should be weakened, the Factious
exasperated, the jealous alarmed (though falsely) the tender sprouts of Loyalty
nipped and discouraged, so that our hopes and endeavors should prove abortive,
and your poor Country return to its thraldom, would not the Present Age and
Posterity, have cause to curse you, more then any of our late Tyrants and
Taskmasters? And who indeed would then, be accounted such Traitors, and
firebrands, as you? However, think seriously, if you can, whether (you
persisting) the Nation (now enclin' to vomiting) will not spue you you out
amongst the Phanataticks, as a morsel, which if it were swallowed, can never be
digested, but must oppress nature, putrify in the stomach, and poison the
blood; in fine, a mere Faction, and an Extreme, no less nauseous and
dangerous, then the Rump it self.

And you my good Friends of the Presbyterian Party, know, that you are
generally distinguished into Two Classes, (viz.) Moderate and Rigid. You of the
first rank are by all sober men acknowledged, now, to be of the best sort of
Englishmen-men, not differing (materially at least? from the Moderate Royalist,
Generous Assertors of our Liberties, stout Oppugners of encroaching (and
consequently) Maintainers of Just Prerogative; above all, you are considered as
Persons, that will modestly acquiesce in Freedom of Parliament, the only cure
proper to our Distempers. For we suppose your Moderation, which to you was
natural, cannot but be greatly improved, by your Experience, since many, even
the Principal of you, having been for your Loyalty, Temper, forcibly excluded
from the Government, more then Eleven years, have thereby, had leasute to
reflect on Errors, to observe passages, and to design Expedients, without the
Partiality of Gamesters; Great reason therefore, we have, to promise our
selves, That you, who have not owely, with others, seen, and felt the fatal
consequences of the Swords interposing in our Laws, but more signally, in your
Persons, suffered those memorable insolences and indignities from Red-coats,
will be for ever most tenderly concerned for the honor of Parliaments, and
careful never to encourage, much less (under any pretense, how specious
soever) your selves to practice that Violence, which you have so justly and
notably branded in others, when exercised on you; And this honest Principle,
wherein the Sober Royalists shake hands with you, I take for the only basis,
upon which, we can possibly be settled.

But for you, of the other sort, (viz.) The Violent and Rigid, I must tell you
Plainly; You are esteemed, but a kind of Franticks, and very paltry ones; In
your Policy, Pedantick, in your Justice, Narrow and Mechanic, selvish in
Conversation, Waspish in Argument or Debate, Perverse in Business, Excencrick
in your Motions, and true to no Principle; You are observed not to walk by the
Golden rule of doing as you weuld be done to; nor think your selves concerned
in that Sacred precept, of doing no evil, that good may follow; Per fas, aut
nefas, and Flectere si nequeo superos, are no small part of your Decalogue.

Waving therefore the design of convincing your Judgments, as impertinent, if
not impossible, give me leave to acquaint you, That the Nation has hitherto
seen little of you to enamour then; That the most extravigant of Sectaries are
more grateful to us, then you, in regard they allow others the same freedom
they arrogate to themselves; That the Discipline of Geneva is every where
c^n^ured as a Government by Princes justly suspected and feared, by Nobility
scorned, acd by the People of England loathed; That it will never be settled
here, by fair means, nor surely, I hope by foul, or if it be, it must come like
Mahomet, with a Turkish Cimitar in its hand, and desolation at its heels: You
may therefore do well for our sakes, and your own, to desist from so hopeless
a pursuit, and content your selves with the Liberty of Christians and
Englishmen, contending for a Dominion, so distastful to all but your selves;
However I beseech you refrain your factious and unworthy Arts, in spreading and
fomenting those Calumnies, which your selves know to have no other ground then
the levity of a few Malcontents, no deeper root then the Tavern, not any
Reputation, but what you delight to give them, and which would vanish of their
own accord, like froth or bubbles, if you were not as ready to uphold, as
industrious to propagate discord; as the indiscretest Cavaliers are apt, (and
alas, too apt they are) to vent their follies.

Finally, You Church^en, whether of the Classical or Episcopal Judgment,
Remember you are Ministers of the Gospel, not of the State: For which purpose,
our pious Laws have provided you a peculiar Maintenance to depend on no man,
have both Sequestered you from Public Offices, and exempted you from Civil
duties: Thrust not then your Sickles into uny othea Harvest, Act not the parts
of Newes-mongers and Politicians; You no question struck the first stroke, for
our Statesmen turned not Preachers till our Preachers turned Statesman. It is,
surely, high time, you redeem the Credit, you have lost, whether as
Evangelists, Christians, or good Citizens; and stop their mouths, who have too
much color to Object, That your Blessings and Curses are like those of Balaam;
and that, indeed, you deliver not Christ's Ordinances, but your own Passions;
wherein, though, perhaps, you may not always ere in the Main, yet, commonly,
you transgress, in the measure.

London* Printed in the (...)* 1660*


