OP
blazon of the Commonwealth
By the Protector.
A PROCLAMATION Declaring that after the first day of August next, no further
use be made of any Letters of Marque, or Reprisal, granted unto any private
person.
WHEREAS heretofore, upon complaint of diverse Merchants, and other People of
this Commonwealth, that their Ships, Goods, and Merchandises had been taken,
and robbed at Sea, and their persons de^^^ned, and made Prisoners, and Justice
being sought that Restitution and Reparation might be had and made by the Power
and Authority of that Nation, whose Subjects had committed such Depredations,
and Piracies, and no Relief in such way being obtained, thereupon such persons
so spoiled became Suitors unto this State for Letters of Marque, and Reprisal,
against the Subjects of that State, who had committed such violence, and
unlawful acts upon them, to the end that thereby they might in some measure,
make satisfaction unto themselves, for the prejudice, and damage they had
sustained; and such Letters and Commissions having been accordingly granted,
for some time, such use was made, as that thereby the Enemies of this State
were in part weakened, and the people who had sustained damage were in a great
measure repaired, or satisfied. But His Highness being now certainly informed,
That sundry persons (perverting the true ends, and purposes for which such
Licenses and Commissions were granted) do, under color, and by pretense of
such their Commission, seize the Ships, and Vessels, of the people of such
Princes, and States, as are in amity with his Highness, which may put
discouragement, and disturbance upon trade, to the great damage, and dishonor
of his Highness, and the Commonwealth: His Highness thereupon, duly considering
the premises, and finding that the ordinary proceedings held of late times for
suppressing of their enormities, and offenses, has not wrought a Reformation
therein; Has (with the advice of his Council) in his care to preserve the
Justice and Commerce of this Commonwealth, and to take away all occasions that
may discourage or interrupt Trade, thought fit to publish, and does here by
declare, That for the immediate Prevention, or severe punishment hereafter of
such Misdemeanors, all Letters of Marque, or Reprisal, Licenses or Commissions
granted unto, or obtained by, any private person or persons upon pretense, or
by reason of any loss, or damage supposed to be sustained by such person or
persons, or upon any other ground, or pretense whatsoever, shall from, and
after the first day of August in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred
fifty five, be no longer or further made use of, but the same are hereby
revoked, and declared from the said first day of August to be void, and of no
effect. And his Highness further pleasure is, that whatsoever Ships, or Goods
shall, after the said first day of August, be taken by any private person or
persons by color of any such Letter of Marque or Reprisal, License, or
Commission whatsoever, the same shall be forthwith sequestered from the Takers,
to the use of the true Proprietaries, and shall be restored unto them, upon the
first claims and proofs of their properties, without any long or chargeable
Suit of Law. And the persons, that shall so take the same, shall be reputed,
and taken as Pirates, and both they, and all their accessaries, Maintainers,
Comforters, Abettors, and Partakers shall suffer death, as Pirates, and
accessaries to Piracie, with Confiscation of all their Lands, and Goods
according to the ancient Laws of this Nation. And his Highness does hereby
will, and require all the Officers of the Admiralty to see this Porclamation
duly executed; And all other Officers of this Commonwealth, to give their best
assistance to the Officers of the Admiralty, for the better execution thereof,
as they, and every of them, failing therein, will answer the contrary at their
peril.

Given at White Hall this 12. day of July 1655.
London, Princed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to his Highness, MDCLV.


