THE Wandering whore CONTINUED: A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Magdalena a Crafty Bawd,
Julietta an Exquisite Whore, Francion a Lascivious Gallant, And Gusman a
Pimping Hector.


Discovering their diabolical Practices at the Half-crown CHUCK-OFFICE.

With an Additional LIST of the names of the Crafty Bawds, Common Whores,
Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-walkers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners.

Delivered to the Publisher hereof by a late Hector, several deep Pyemen, and
decayed Gamesters amongst them.

Sine Cerere and Bacch^ friget Venus.

London: Printed in the Year 1660.

THE WANDERING WHORE CONTINUED.
Julietta. COme (sweet heart) will thou do-a-little, the fitt's come on me now,
I will show thee a pure pair of naked breasts, smooth Buttocks, Lovely and
ivory thighs whiter than untrod Snow, with the best red-lip't C -- in
Christendom; such as Europa never showed Jupiter, Orithya Boreas, nor Helena
Theseus, when they cornuted their husbands, nor at the Wrestling amongst the
naked Roman virgins.


Francion. You are huge merry methinks Julietta, the news and sight whereof
would tempt a saint especially such a one as I am, therefore lie down dear
heart and make my P -- rise, disclose thy curled, silvercolour'd turn-pikes and
perfumed Cabinet lies in thy valley sweeter than Violets; then lead me with thy
ivory fingers to it is fancy, where I will enter it is Port with a full spring
tide between thy bum's riding safe at Anchor within thy harbor.


Julietta. I am prepared to give you entrance with all your burden, (without
searching you with Customhouse Officer's) you need no other Transire but my
permission.


Francion. I like thy free and kind reception, although the enjoyment thereof
abate my affection thereunto, then have at all my deer, -- I Have done the
business with discretion, and spilt my Posset on thy beard and in thy belly,
with a total rout to P -- and stones.


Julietta. I had rather heard thee saying, I will kill thee with this kindness,
oh! how sweet would be the death, as once a seeming-holy sister said when a
long t -- Chyrurgion made her trump and trump again and again.


Francion. That makes me think of Baudy Martiall's verses.

Mentula longa placet, magna implet, parva titillat,
Sic facit officium mentula quaeque suum.
And this pleasant Frolic of a wanton fancy, O bone Girdruris, quam nocte tu
been ludis
Quoties enim ego trudo retrudis.
O deer Girdrure, how sweetly in the night
Thou sport'st with me, when we together fight.



Julietta. I know what pleases me best, and which displeases me most, for I am
not like the old E -- of E -- C -- unpentrable, or troubled with a narrow
passage, but like to Mal. Savory, who sitting in a public passage in a very
good habit and rich apparel about twilight, lay lamenting the loss of her
husband she never had, (though children several;) A kind hearted Gentleman
passing by, with little importunity treated her into a Tavern, where drinking
two or three pints of Canary, she related her distresses and distractions with
such cunning and counterfeit sighs and tears, that he became a great admirer
of her speeches, and condoler of her pretended miseries: But the night drawing
on, she press't with importunity to be gone, saying 'twas not usual for her to
be out at eight of the Clock: the Gentleman draws a very fair and large Watch,
telling and showing her it was not Seven, calling for more Sack, smuggling,
groping and hugging her between his arms and legs, till she very expertly got
it out of his pocket without present discovery, and then renewed her suit with
much importunity to depart; not so, said he, for I know your want is only a
Chamber Pot, which I will call for, and you shall, Dear Madam, make use of,
which being called for, was accordingly brought up by the Drawer, and carried
by her into another room, and made use of, in which interval she thrust both
Watch, Key, and string into her Commodity, making her return into the room,
drinking S^ck in a plentiful manner, continued in that way so long, that going
to enquire for his Watch, it was non est inventus, whereat he was somewhat
astonished and amazed, crying sweet heart thou have got my Watch. I beseech you
dear Sir, replied this rammish whore, harbor no such thought of me, nor take
me for any such person, rather send for some honest woman or women, and search
me stark-naked from top-to-toe, which was accordingly done, but the cheat
undiscovered, whereat (as he could not choose) he wondered, saying for the abuse
was done her, he would call for a pottle more and give it her in part of
Satisfaction, which was accordingly brought up, but before 'twas drunk out, an
all arum betrayed all, going Dub-a-Dub-a in her C -- at nine of the clock,
which so affrighted this female, she confess't her fault, fearing the devil
(who has right to them all) were about to take possession.


Francion. I remember how Jone Harman a running baud, and Nan. Robinson a
common whore, served a Sea Captain as he walked thorough Pye-corner near
Smith-field, where spying him all alone with a large load of money under his
arm; they drew-up close to him, and ask't if he would give or take, and pray
good Sir what a clock is it, how far do you go this way? if you will not give us a
pint of wine, we have a pint at your service, for I take you to be my
Countryman, with such stuff as this, they got him into a pimping-house, telling
them they had got a rum-cully, who as soon as he was entered a room he threw down
his bagg, and burden of 50 l. upon the Table before them, drinking Sack very
merrily and feeling the whores whibb bobs one after the other, till they drove
a bargain to play at heave-and-shove, as if it had been on shipboard, the
running baud standing Sentinel and doorkeeper to secure them in their sporting
from apprehension and interruption; whereupon he unhasp't his breeches, took up
her petticoates, smock and all, falling on to board this pinnace, which the
baud seeing in their postures of naked legs and bare breeches, she covered
them over with her apron, pretending an act of modesty; whilst she steals up
to the Table, up with the bag, leaving them close at their merriment, clearing
way with the summa totalis, leaving him a C -- for his Coin, nether of which he
ever fingered after.


Julietta. There Is my sister Frank Poulter (alias Ulls) who dived, and picked by
her own acknowledgment, nine pieces of Gold out of a Cullies pocket at one
clap, a bagg of Silver as long as her arm (almost) at another clap, and for
silver Hat-bands, Gold-rings, Watches or Rings in your Bandstrings she has
them infallibly, if you have them about you, therefore beware of your
Pick-pocket Whores, and make much of the honest Whores.


Francion. Well, since we have entered upon these discourses, bid Gusman bring
up a Quart of Sack with a dish of Anchovas, and then we will proceed further, and
I Will tell you how Cock Chambers lately served a puny Brewers Clark as he was
wandering in the fields for that purpose: she cast her eyes upon him, he, back
toward her, she speaks to him he accepts of her, and into a house (fit for
their purpose near the Windmills) they entered (with Dick Cartwright her friend
and Hector, after her three husbands who are now living) so that whilst he was
pying her, she picked six Pounds in a canvase bagg out of his pocket; leaving
him under pretense of pissing, a pledge for the reckoning, returning to her
constant rendezvous over against Moorgate, where she told out the money upon her
scarf, giving her pitiful Dick a new band (a halter had been more deserved)
and a pair of new shoes for his pains in the business, of whose abode, what
she is, whither she goes, or where he may light of her, this ignorant Puppy
knows nothing, but might of the publisher hereof.


Julietta. Mall. Tremain who stood three market days in the Pillory, and lay
in Newgate for pic^ing of pockets, and Trappanning of Merchants, subtly
served a Drapers man in Pauls-church yard, for after his picking up moneys on a
Saturday night, she picked him up in Cheapside, getting him into the
Star-tavern (a fit house for such stories) who whilst he was handing his P --
to her Placket, she got both her hands in his pockets, and after he had done
the business she caught him, grasp't him and held up her tail, bidding him
prithee love stay-a-little, stay-a-little longer, for her loving kindness was
coming toward him, and by that means foiled his cloy of above ten pounds,
afterward giving him a Cockle de-moy for his money, and a slip for the
reckoning: then there was a drunken Mariner who had received Threescore-pounds
of the Owners of a Ship for buying a Cable and Anchor, which was lost in Malt.
Crumwells bottom as he was sailing between Temple Bar and Ald-gate, to his
perpetual ruin and his whole family; as for your pitiful poor whores, such as
B^ss Whittle, Betty Blum, Black Betty, Nan Tailor, Mal. Rose, etc. who are
seldom out of the Marshals men's Cu^^^^y or Bridewel, if they are picked up at
nightime, they I not talk of drinking, but going into a corner or some by a
Ally, where they will be more certain (be you drunk or sober) of picking your
pockets, then you shall be of finding or putting a finger in their plackets.


Francion. Come speak here Cusman, bring up more Wine and Tobacco, bid
Magdalena appear before us, if she is not over-busy at her old trade, and bring
in Mrs. Glover, that I may know whether her pitiful, shifting, vapouring
husband got the palsy and trembling throughout his joints with overmuch
drinking, or too much knocking, and let Mrs. Snow be one of us (his neighbor,
who keeps a couple of hansom hackneyjades at the Postern gate) provided she
has layn-in the full time of her By blow she had lately by a Swaggerer since
the decease of her husband, and that By-blow be put out to nurse.


Gusman. I hav't in my hand Mounsieur, but for Magdalena she is hard put to it to
please a young Merchant in L -- street, who will not be contented with doing the
business, but will have half a dozen Girls stand stark naked found about a
Table whilst he lies snarling underneath as if he would bite off their
whibb-bobs, and eat them for his pains; another will needs shite in one of our
wenches mouth's (which is odd lechery) another who has brought rods in his
pockets for that purpose, will needs be whip't to raise lechery and cause a
standing P -- which has no understanding at all, and would quickly cool my
courage; a fourth would fayn be buggering some of our wenches, if the Matron
could get their consent, but had rather be dealing with smooth-faced Prentices.


Jul^etta What unseen and unheard off Monsters are here amongst you in England,
nay, in London all of ^^em, well might Flora Laurentia, Leana, and Faula be
^nno^z'd among the Romans for downright occupying, but these are such wretched
persons, guilty of such wicked Actions, they are not fit to be nominated, they
are surely old Devils, and young Saints.


Gusman. They are such as can pay any price for to sve their wickedness and
appetites and for the persons they have to deal with, they will endure any
annoyances, punishments or extremities to get money by it, in regard of their
poverty, which together with idleness, makes so many whores and dishonest women
amongst us.


Julietta. I must deal ingeniously with you, since I saw the last days List, I
admire how or which way, so many of the society are maintained by their
Lechery, and yet they are but a handful in comparison of those are yet to enter
themselves amongst us.


Gusman. I do not think that all my leaves and pages in folio, are able to
contain them, especially if the decayed Occupiers, and Deep Pyemen should be
put down; in which particular there is no great difficulty.


Julietta. If all their actions, names and places of abode were registered, they
could not be read over in Centuries of years, as for example, how Su. Leming
had Tabbies, Taffaties, Scarfes, etc. from out Ben. Rosses Cod-piece at the
white-horse in Paternoster Row, without paying for them, only he had a little
pying, and helped to a fresh bit in a time of need, and now and then a pint
bottle of Sack without paying for; How Butterfield the Wood-monger drunk out
two Loads of Faggots at Betty Lawrences; and lastly, how the Rules of the
Chuck-office are only profitable to Whores, Hectors and Trappanners, etc.


Francion. Well, I find no Motions to a second Rancounter with you, Julietta,
therefore for this time let the Reckoning be placed upon account, tell our next
days meeting, and I will stay to hear read the additional List to this.


A Perfect List of all the Crafty Bawds, Maiden-headsellers, Common Whores,
Night-walkers, Pick-pockets, Wanderers, Shop-Lifters, Foylers, Whippers, Kid
nappers, Decoyes, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners, and their usual Meetings.
Crafty Bawds and Maidenhead-sellers.
DAmrose Page P^^ss, Fotheringham at the Chack Office Mrs Mason, in
Horse-shoo-Ally in More-fields Mrs Farlo, in Pepper-lane by Gr^yes-inn. Mrs
Cater senier Betty Farmer, Tho. Beards, wife and saviges Mobb Pimp Allens,
wife, in Goodmans yards John Baker B^^ and Mal. Walsgrave in Dog and Bitch yard
Eleanor North, in Crosslane Abigail Littleton Graverer's in Morefields M^l
Pulver Prudence M^isters Frances Coleman Elizabeth Herbertson, in New Market
Mal Winter Grace Holland Rachel War in Dog-yard Nan Har^cock Jone Harman, a
running baud Frances Sands: Raggedstaff in Chiswel-street Wiggins, in Checquer
ally in white-cross-street Green-Lettice in the minories Mrs Crosbow, in the
minories Pimp Yopes wife Mrs Eaton, a Maiden-headseller on the Ditch-side near
Hoggsden Mrs Hughes, in Ram-ally M^l i e^o Mrs. Stone. Mrs. Creswel Mrs.
Garrish Mrs. Habbiger Turks head in Moorfields Mother Baker Su. Lemmon Mrs.
Whetston Mrs. George Mother Lockyer Mother Baxter Mrs. Arnol Mrs. Jo^es Mrs
Salmon Virginia, going to Hack ney Crow, white-crose-street Mrs Osbridg, Bedlam
Mrs ^letherel Mrs Waller, Thomaz in white Chapel Mrs Thomas, Stepney Jeremyes
and Services, Booths by Hackney rive^ Mrs Bull Mrs Halfpenny Mrs Harrison Three
Sugar-lov^^s in G^ub-street Ship, in long Ally turns Jones at the Cock in long
Acre Mrs Davies a Midwife Mrs Barber, a Midwife in Holborn Mrs Howard, in
Lincolns In-feild Mrs Hughes Mother Cunny The Cherry Garden Black Swan in St
Martins-Le-grand Mrs Brooks, Mile-end Hanna Hickman, Baud and Wh^re Margaret
Leech Margery Wilson Mrs Page, Old-street Ann Price Houkins, Baud Paskin^ at
the Armitage Margery Law^on Alice Hulburt Mrs Burges Joyce Ebbs Nel Yate Mrs
Wollaston Mrs Stockwel Mrs Lawton, by Hattonwall Mal Ledger Mrs Sadler Mrs
Gibbins Frank Tilt Jane Hayward Nan. Hens Bess Mundel keeps three
Baudy-houses in Dog and Bitch-yard Jacobs Well, in Jewenstreet Nan Evans Mrs
Jones in Cross-lane Mrs. Simpson The Last and Lion, in East-smith-feild. Mrs.
Saunders Mrs. Kemp Mrs. Abigail
Common Whores, Night-walkers, Pick-pockets, Wanderers and Shop-Lifters and
Whippers.
Mrs. Snow Nan Langsden Mrs Phaenix. near Jewen-street Mrs Farmer Betty Cater,
junior Bess Cox Jane Broithwait, Amy Butler, Shop-lifters Rebecca Wharton Tho.
Langley's mobb Nan Lidford Shoplifter Ursula Bunny Johanna White, a
buttock-whore Jone Horto^, alias Singleton Rebecca Tentch Marget Read Nan.
Welliams in Newgate marget Gladwel Grizel Conference alias Wood Nan Stanley
martha Chester mrs Debbenham, mrs. Clark-two cracktbrain'd whores mrs Smith, a
Bricklayers wife in whitechappel mrs Fletcher Bess Country mrs Ivcs mrs Holland
mrs ^ettice mrs Wells Betty Hyde mrs Elwick mrs Betty, at Crosbows Peg the
Seamans wife at mrs Crosbowes Ruth Shaw in morelane mal Crumwel alias Hyam Nan
Robinson Penelope mantle alias Fletcher Jane Johnson Thomz in Cobb, alias Day
Nan S^^cy Jane Powel Mrs ^^^ding Betty Edwards Betty Holly Mal. Nun Wealth Nan
M^l Avory Esther Clark Non Love Mrs. Warren Nell Gulliford Sarah and Nan Fullam
Betty Young Faith Clayton -- Cross Betty Orange Mrs. Curtes Betty Laurence Mrs.
Sberley the younger Mrs. Smith Jane Stamford Mrs. Spevcer Mrs. Taverner Mrs.
Marten Mrs Watson Mrs. Berry Mrs. Green Green Mall, alias Joan Godfrey Mall.
Chauney Betty Cox Mall Hegg Mall Horsfield Mall Savory Peg Williams Alice
Spilman Kate Hare Mall Tremain Mrs. Westover, Bandstring-seller to the Offices
in Chau^cery-lane Per Cross Nan Bret Ursula Higgins Betty White Betty Farmer
Margery Noble Jane Dixon Mall Peak Sarah Martin Nan Gl^scock Mrs Honor Queen of
Morocco Mrs Mate Toothless Betty Bess Goring Grizzel Wood Mrs. Holliland Mrs.
Diamond Mrs Cupid Mal Gray Nan Cooper Betty Cooper Mrs Ames Nan Wats Betty
Bates Betty Eton Mal. Bell Butter and Eggs Jane Thebey Mrs Owen Mal Fink Betty
Baxter Betty Gansford Black Betty Nan Tailor Neck Lunn Mrs Love Mrs Lote Bess
Whittle Bess Blunt Mrt Simmonds Betty Downs Luee Brook Nel Syder Mal Craford
Mal Bell Mrs Wood Mal Rose Mrs Flower poeky Frank Poulter, alias Ulls Faith
Anderton Dutch Whore Wilkis, a weavers Wife at Smock Ally-end Mrs Dawes Denues
wife in Shoreditch Mrs Swails maid Bess, Mrs Joy Mrs Bulls Daughters Mrs Bourn
a Scribes wife Mrs Tippit Shards wife in Dunning-Alley Mrs M^ils by the Curtain
Playhouse Su Hedge Jone Thorn at Newington butts Ensign Websters wife M^s
Harfed -- Robinson Woodst Compter Mr^ Sweetman Long-haird Mrs Spencer in
Spittle-fields Mrs Wroth, Grubstreet Mrs Phillips Peg Angel Greens Satchel --
Mall Rose Nan Rash Betty Knight Su Harris Nan Braithwait Boulrun the bailiffs
wife Will Martins wife Mrs Fransces, alias Mat. Robinson Pimp Hollilands Pockey
pug-nasty Mrs Spicer in Mobb-lane, alias Browns Mrs De-maroy Mrs Carr in
Rose-lane Mrs Bonsly Tanners wife Wheeler str. Mrs Dickenson Jane Glisson alias
Roberts Frank Evitt Tracyes wife Mrs Taverner Wheeler-street Frank Rigs, alias
Robinson, a thieving whore Betty Wilson -- King Sarah Price Kate Wilkinson
Grace Steel. Elizabeth Smith Betty Blunt Mary De-gret, Mobb to Tho. Crouch
Allice Jones Mall Cole Nan Low -- Fox Mary Paget Mrs Cadman Sarah and Joyce
Price Bess Cox Cock Birch Sarah Bostwed Jone Bonner Jone Bouden Nan Southern
Frank Palmer Silver-lac't Bess Frank Ouden Fair Rosamond Sugar-C -- a constant
wanderer and night-walker Mrs Dodman Peg Hodgson Nan Stephens Sarah Blades Mrs
Bliss Mrs Russel Mrs ^herman Mrs King a Sempstress.
Foylers, Kid-nappers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners.
ARmstrong Pets Pierce Savage Thom Beard Joseph Riches Thom Allein John Baker
Gravenor beyond Bedlamgate Will. Cox Lion Broithwait Tho Langley, Harry B^ily,
Ned Jervois, Peter Goodjeway, Tho. Orrel, Shop-Lifters and Foylers, Pimp
Singleton the extemporary poet Will Pease, an-extorting pimp in Long Acre, who
is burnt in the hand Ned Yope Roger Kiffner, with a Wen over his eye John
Pierson, by Hattonwall Tho Blackberry Jack Miller. Tim. Thornber, Newgate Birds
Demon a Hardy Hector. Fox Tho. Hurst Will Taverner Dick Cartwright George Clark
Barr^^ Holliland, a great Cheat Gladwin, an ignorant whelp Len. Lan^sden Tho.
Stern Bar Higgins Tho. Dodson Not Lummocks, Apoth Anniseed Robbin Will Nash.
Man. Middleton Frank Ashburn Jack Jones Wat. Gulliford Carter, Rabbit-seller
Dick de Lane Jo. Cocks Robin Thrower Tho. Rand Will. Merit Wat. Stainton.
Raymon, Trump-alley Cro^e Green by Newgate Harry Martin, Vintner Pimp Skipwith.
Ned Brooks Tracy a Hector Brown a Chyrurgion Ratford a Tro^per Tho. Player Ned
Traford Harry Bird Will Dossel Will U^^us Jack Daines ^aylor the Prigg Little
Taffy Sam Pink, a slovenly pimp James at Dog-yard Gundamore Shatterwait, scribe
Hopper Writing-master Winch the Nailer Jack Berry, and Jack Harris
Billiard-players Pimp Howard Fair Rosamonds pimp George Paskins, a Kid-catcher,
at the Crooked-billet at the Armitage Pimp Glover Jack Gould Jack Wallis Ralph
Ashington alias Shitten-arse, Grocer Tho. Ebbs Dick Stockwel Will Ledger Will
Sadler Wat. Gibbins Tho. Hayward C -- Jackson Pimp Sherman Hammond Will Gill
FINIS.
Advertisements.
Modest Reader,
SOme libidinous wretches out of despite to the design of the Publisher
hereof, and affection to the wicked Actors, concerned in the List, have
censured, condemned, insinuated, and suggested the intent hereof to be for
propagating of whoreing, and tempting Customers to go amongst them, instead of
destroying them: This the world may be assured of, that instead thereof, some
of them like rats have removed for fear of ruin, others have changed their
names, some thereby have been denied Licenses and thrust out of their parishes,
others have proffered gratuities to be obliterated: so that I say from Whores,
Harlots, and Varlets, good Lord deliver all honest men, and their

Eubulus.


One Holliland a Trappanning Rogue (who lately lay by London wall, as the
pretended husband of Mat. Robinson, alias Mrs. Frances a pitiful, pocky,
wheazing whore) carried away after two nights lodging, a flying-coat cost 3 l.
15 s. about afortnight before, who-ever leaves notice in writing, for Eubulus
at Dunkirk, close by where he may be apprehended, they shall receive half a
piece for their pains. One Frank Riggs a thieving whore lately borrowed (or
stole) some goods near the abovesaid place, who-ever leaves word for her
apprehension, shall receive a crown for their pains at the said place.

Farewell.

