Die Veneris, 23 Februarii, 1648. An Act concerning the Sequestration of
South Wales, and County of MONMOUTH.
WHereas the several counties of Southwales, viz. Glamorgan, Pembrook,
Carmarthen, Cardigan, Radnor, Brecon, and the county of Monmouth, were at the
beginning of these Wars under the command of the Kings Forces, and so continued
for many years; By which means the generality of the said counties, according
to several Ordinances made this present Parliament, are liable to Sequestration
for ayding and assisting the Forces raised against the Parliament: And whereas
there be in the said counties, diverse desperate Malignants that have
maliciously endeavored the subversion of Parliaments, and the Freedom of the
People; And there being also many persons that have been forced in some things
to comply with them, to preserve themselves and Families from spoil and ruin;
Now to the end some distinction may be made, whereby exemplary Justice may be
done on the most capital offenders, and the more moderate punishment be
inflicted on the lesser, now involved in a general guilt: The Commons assembled
in this present Parliament, taking the same into their consideration, Do hereby
Enact, and be it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by authority of the
same, in relation to the said lesser offenders, That a Fine be imposed on the
said several counties for their respective Delinquencies; viz. on the county of
Pembrook, 3500 l. On the county of Cardigan, 3000 l. On the county of
Carmarthen, the sum of 4000 l. On the county of Glamorgan, the sum of 3500 l.
On the county of Brecon, the sum of 2000 l. On the county of Monmouth, the sum
of 3000 l. On the county of Radnor, the sum of 1500 l. Which said sums are to
be paid by the said respective counties, in manner and form following; viz. The
first moiety amounting to the sum of Ten thousand two hundred and fifty pounds,
within ten weeks after the passing of this Act, and the moiety of the said Fine
being Ten thousand two hundred and fifty pounds of the said Fine, within ten
weeks next following the payment of the said first moiety, To be paid to the
Treasurers at Wars for the Army, who are hereby authorized to receive the same,
and any two of them to give Receipts under their Hands and Seals; which
Receipts shall be a sufficient Discharge to the said respective counties, for
payment of the said sums of money imposed on them by virtue of this Act for
their Delinquencies: And that the said moneys may be the better leavied, raised
and paid, and with most equality, according to the Estates and Delinquencies of
persons, and that the innonocent and well-affected may not be molested, Be it
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That Sir Erasmus Philips Baronet, Thomas
Horton, Henry Herbert, Michael Owldesworth, Thomas Wogan, William Herbert,
Bussy Mancell, Edward Prichard, William Jones, Thomas Morgan, Philip Jones,
Edmond Morgan, Rowland Dawkins, John Price, John Herbert, Edward Stradling,
Christopher Catchmay, Walter Cuney, William Barber, Edward Herbert, Silvanus
Tailor, Peter Price, Ralph Grundy, Henry Bowen, Roger Williams, Edward Games,
Henry Williams, William Fleming, Roger Lort, James Philips, Sampson Lort, James
Lewis, John Williams, Lewis Jones, John Danzy, William Watkins of Sheaphouse,
John Elliot, Griffith Lloyd, Esqs and William Sudgon Gent. be appointed
Commissioners for the several counties and places herein mentioned, who, or any
three of them, have hereby full power and authority to remove all obstructions
that may hinder the carrying on of the said work, and to supervise and regulate
proceedings to their best judgment, according to the true intent and meaning
of this Act: Provided, That no person well-affected, be Rated, or Taxed or
Compelled to pay any Rate or Tax toward raising the said Fines; But if any
Delinquent or person liable to Sequestration within the said counties, shall
refuse to pay his or their proportion toward raising the said Fines set on the
several counties by virtue of this Act, and according to the time therein
limited for payment of the same, he or they so refusing, are not to have any
benefit or immunity by this Act, but are left to be proceeded with according to
the Ordinance of Sequestrations. And it is further Enacted and provided, That
this Act shall not extend to discharge or pardon any person excepted from
pardon in the Propositions presented to the King at Hampton Court: Provided
also, This shall not extend to free or pardon for their several Delinquencies
against the Parliament, Edward Earl of Worcester, Lord of Bergavenny, Richard
Lord of Cherbury, Sir Trevor Williams Baronet, Sir Philip Jones Knight, Sir
George Probert knight, Sir Hugh Owen knight, Edward Kemys of Kemis, William
Morgan of Pencrigge, Henry Probert, Roger Williams of Kevenhiley, Esqs Thomas
Hughes of Lanvethrin, Major Lewis Thomas, James Jones of Llanvihangell
Lanternam, Gent. Of the county of Monmouth, Sir Charles Kemeis Knight and
Baronet, Sir John Awbrey knight, Sir Richard Basset knight, Sir Henry Stradling
knight, Sir Edward Thomas baronet, Miles Button, Humphrey Matthews, Henry
Mauncel, Thomas Stradling, Robert Thomas, John Thomas of Merthur of the county
of Glamorgan, Esqs Sir John Stepney Baronet, Sir Rice Rudd Baronet, Sir George
Vaughan knight, Henry Floid, Walter Floid, and Thomas Philips, Esquires: Of the
county of Carmarthen, Sir Walter Floid, Sir Francis Floid knights, and John
Floid of Crunrin, Esquires; Of the county of Cardigan, Herbert Price, Hoe
Games, John Jeffryes, John Williams of the park, John Herbert, Lewis Morgan,
Lewis Floid, Thomas Price, John Price, Sir Francis Fane Knight, Marmaduke Floid
Esquire William Floid, William Sanders, Gent. Of the county of Brecon, Mayor
General Laughorn, Col: Powel, Col: Poyer, John Barlow of Slebitch, Lewis Barlow
and William Philips, Esqs Of the county of Pembroke, Sir John Culpepper, Bryan
Crowther, Hugh Floid, Banyham Vaughan, Howel Floid, Esqs sir Edmond Sawyer Knight.
and Robert Martin, of the county of Radnor, Esquires: Provided also, this shall
not extend to free or pardon any Clergyman, that for scandal or delinquency is
sequestered, or liable to Sequestration. Provided, This shall not extend to set
at liberty any person that is a prisoner of War. Provided also, That this shall
not extend to make any person capable to bear Office in the Commonwealth,
contrary to any former Ordinances of Parliament, without the consent of
Parliament. Provided also, That such persons as are not worth Eight pounds per
annum, or One hundred pounds in Personal Estate, be not liable to pay toward
the said Fines imposed on the said several counties, but are hereby freely
pardoned and discharged for their said Delinquencies. And it is further Enacted
and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That all persons inhabiting in the
said counties of Glamorgan, Pembroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan, Brecon, Radnot, and
Monmouth, are hereby pardoned for any Delinquency or offense committed against
the Parliament, to the time of the passing of this Act, and are hereby fully
acquitted and discharged from all Sequestrations, or other molestations
whatsoever by reason thereof, and are to be restored to their respective
Estates; and are also to be discharged of all bonds and securities, entered into
to the Commissioners appointed by Ordinance of Parliament, bearing date the 19
of June, 1648. or any acting by or under them, for payment of any moneys by
reason of their said Delinquency (except such persons as are by this Act
excepted and provided against, and except such counties as shall not pay in
their said Fines according to the appointment of this Act.) And it is further
Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons within the
said counties, shall after the passing of this Act, contrary to his and their
duties, and to the disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom, raise any Forces
tending to the leavying of a new War, without authority of this present
Parliament, or Commission from the Lord General; or shall join with any such
persons or Forces, or shall be ayding or assisting to any Forces whatsoever,
contrary to the aforesaid authorities, he and they are hereby declared
Traitors, and incapable of any pardon, and their Estates confiscated to the use
of the Commonwealth: And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
power given to the Commissioners named in the said Ordinance of Parliament,
bearing date the 19 of June last, shall from henceforth extend no further, then
to the Sequestrations of such Delinquents Estates as are excepted in this Act.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.

London, printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West End
of Paul's. 1648.


